TEXT FLY WITHIN 
THE BOOK ONLY 


UNIVERSAL 
LIBRARY 


OU_ 160711 


AdVayd | I 
IWSdSAINA 


THE PRESOCRATIC 
PHILOSOPHERS 


THE PRESOCRATIC 
PHILOSOPHERS 


A 
CRITICAL HISTORY WITH A 
SELECTION OF TEXTS 


BY 
G.S. KIRK 


Fellow of Trinity Hall and Lecturer in Classics 
in the University of Cambridge 


& 
J. E. RAVEN 


Fellow of King’s College and Lecturer in Classics 
in the University of Cambridge 











«,.« , «8. < .€ .¢ 
εἰς [εχ 





CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1957 


PUBLISHED BY 
THE SYNDICS OF THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Bentlcy House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W.1 
American Branch: 32 East 57th Strect, New York 22, N.Y. 


© 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1957 


Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge 
(Brooke Crutchley, University Printer) 


To 
F. H. SANDBACH 


PREFACE 


This book is designed primarily for those who have more than a 
casual interest in the history of early Greek thought; but by trans- 
lating all Greek passages, and confining some of the more dctailed 
discussion to small-type notes at the end of paragraphs, we have 
also aimed to make the book uscful for those students of the history 
of philosophy or science who have no previous acquaintance with 
this important and fascinating field. 

Two points should be emphasized. First, wc have limited ourscope 
to the chief Presocratic ‘physicists’ and their forerunners, whose 
main preoccupation was with the nature (physis) and cohcrence 
of things as a whole. Morc spccialized scientific intcrests were 
simultancously developing throughout the sixth and fifth centuries 
B.c., especially in mathematics, astronomy, geography, medicine 
and biology; but for lack of space, and to some extent of evidence, 
we have not pursued these topics beyond the intcrests of the chicf 
physicists. We have also excluded the Sophists, whose positive 
philosophical contribution, often cxaggerated, lay mainly in the 
fields of epistemology and semantics. Secondly, we have not set 
out to produce a necessarily orthodox exposition (if, indecd, such 
a thing is conceivable in a field where opinion is changing so 
rapidly), but have preferred in many placcs to put forward our 
own interprctations. At the same time we have usually mentioned 
other interpretations of disputed points, and have always tried to 
present the reader with the main materials for the formation of his 
own judgement. 

The part of the book dealing with the Jonian tradition, in- 
cluding its forerunners and also the atomists and Diogenes (i.e. 
chapters τον, xvi and xvi), with the note on the sources, is by 
G. S. Kirk, while the part dealing with the Italian tradition, and 
also the chapters on Anaxagoras and Archelaus (i.e. chapters vi- 
XVI), are by J. E. Raven. The contributions of each author were of 
course subjected to detailed criticism by the other, and the planning 
of the book as a whole is by both. 

The scale of different sections of the book is admittedly rather 
variable. Where the evidence is fuller and clearer—particularly 
where considerable fragments survive, as for example in the case 


Vil 


PREFACE 


of Parmenides—-the commentary can naturally be shorter; where 
the evidence is sparser and more confusing, as for example in the 
case of Anaximander or the Pythagoreans, our own explanations 
must be longer and more involved. Chapter 1 in particular, which 
deals with a part of the subject which is often neglected, is perhaps 
more detailed in parts than its ultimate importance demands, and 
non-specialists are advised to leave it until last. 

Only the most important texts have been quoted, and those in 
an inevitably personal selection. For a nearly complete collection 
of fragments and testimonies the reader should turn to H. Diels, 
Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker (5th and later editions, Berlin, 
1934-54, edited by W. Kranz). This fundamental work is referred 
to by the abbreviation DK. Where a DK number (e.g. DK 284 12) 
is appended to the reference of a passage quoted in the present 
work, this means that DK, in the section referred to, quotes more 
of the passage in question than we do. DK references are omitted 
where less, or no more, of the text is given, and also in the case of 
fragments (where the fragment-number, always in Diels’ numera- 
tion, is the same as the number in the relevant B-section in DK). 
Where supplements occur in texts quoted, without further in- 
formation, they are usually by Diels, and reference may be made 
to the textual notes in DK. 

We are obviously indebted to many friends for suggestions and 
help; and also, as goes without saying, to previous writers likc 
Zeller, Burnet, Cornford, Ross and Cherniss. Many of these debts 
are recorded in the text. For typographical advice and assistance 
we are indebted to the printing staff of the Cambridge University 
Press. H. Lloyd-Jones and I. R. D. Mathewson read the proofs 
and made many valuable suggestions. Another outstanding con- 
tribution was made by I’. H. Sandbach, whose numerous acute 
and learned comments on the final draft were of the utmost value, 


and to whom, as an unworthy offering, we should like to dedicate 
this book. 

G.S.K. 
J.E.R. 
CAMBRIDGE 
May 1957 


Vill 


Preface 


Abbreviations 


CONTENTS 


Introductory Note: ‘The Sources for Presocratic Philosophy 


Chapter I 


XIII 


The Forerunners of Philosophical Cosmogony 


I. 


2. 


The naive view of the world 


Okeanos 


3. Night 


4. The Hesiodic cosmogony, and the separation of sky 


and earth 


5. Orphic cosmogonies 


6. Pherecydes of Syros 


THE IONIAN THINKERS 
‘Thales of Miletus 


Anaximander of Miletus 


Anaximenes of Miletus 


Xcenophanes of Colophon 


Heraclitus of Ephesus 


THE ITALIAN SCHOOLS 


Pythagoras of Samos 


Alcmaeon of Croton 


Pre-Parmenidean Pythagoreanism 


Parmenides of Elea 


Zeno of Elea 


Melissus of Samos 


Philolaus of Croton and Eurytus of Croton 


ΙΧ 


page vii 


ΧΙ 
I 


8 
10 
II 


19 


24 
37 
48 


CONTENTS 


THE POST-PARMENIDEAN SYSTEMS page 410 


Chapter XIV Empedocles of Acragas 320 
XV _ Anaxagoras of Clazomenae 362 
XVI Archelaus of Athens 395 

XVII The Atomists: Leucippus of Miletus and 
Democritus of Abdera 400 
XVITI Diogenes of Apollonia 427 
Selective Bibliography 446 
Index of Passages 451 
General Index 462 


ABBREVIATIONS 


The following abbreviations may be mentioned; others should be 
self-evident: 


AFP 
ANET 


CP 


CQ 
DK 


American Journal of Philology. 


Ancient Near Eastern Texts relating to the Old Testament, ed. 
J. B. Pritchard (Princeton, 2nd edition, 1955). 


Classical Philology. 
Classical Quarterly. 


Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 5th to 7th editions, by 
H. Diels, edited with additions by W. Kranz. (The 
6th and 7th editions are photographic reprints, 1951-2 
and 1954, of the 5th, with Nachtrage by Kranz.) 


John Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy, 4th cdition, 1930 (a 
reprint with corrections of 3rd edition, 1920). 


Nachrichten v. d. Gesellschaft zu Gottingen (Phil.-hist. Klasse). 
Journal of Hellenic Studies. 
Journal of Philology. 


Liddell and Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, 9th edition, 
1925-40, revised by H. Stuart Jones and R. McKenzie. 


. Rheinisches Museum. 


Scholium or scholiast. 
Sitzungsberichte d. preussischen Akademie d. Wissenschaft. 
Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta, ed. H. von Arnim (Leipzig, 


1903-5). 


References to the commentators on Aristotle (e.g. Simplicius and 
Alexander) are by page-number and line-number in the appro- 
priate volume of the Berlin Academy Commentaria in Aristotelem 


Graeca. 


INTRODUCTORY NOTE 


THE SOURCES FOR PRESOCGRATIC 
PHILOSOPHY 


A. DIRECT QUOTATIONS 


The actual fragments of the Presocratic thinkers are preserved as 
quotations in subsequent ancient authors, from Plato in the fourth 
century B.c. to Simplicius in the sixth century A.D., and even, in 
rare cases, to late Byzantine writers like John Tzetzes. The date of 
the source in which a quotation occurs is not, of course, a reliable 
guide to its accuracy. Thus Plato is notoriously lax in his quota- 
tions from all sources; he often mixes quotation with paraphrase, 
and his attitude to his predecessors is frequently not objective but 
humorous or ironical. The Neoplatonist Simplicius, on the other 
hand, who lived a whole millennium after the Presocratics, made 
long and evidently accurate quotations, in particular from 
Parmenides, Empedocles, Anaxagoras and Diogenes of Apollonia; 
not for the sake of literary embellishment, but because in his 
commentaries on the Physics and de caelo of Aristotle he found it 
necessary to expound Aristotle’s vicws on his predecessors by set- 
ting down their actual words. At times Simplicius did this at 
greater length than was essential because, as he tells us, a particular 
ancient work had become so rare. 

Aristotle, like Plato, gave comparatively few direct quotations, 
and his main valuc is as a summarizer and critic of earlier thinkers. 
Apart from Plato, Aristotle, and Simplicius, the following notable 
sources of verbatim extracts may be singled out for special mention: 

(i) Plutarch, the Academic philosopher, historian and essayist 
of the second century A.D., in his extensive Moral Essays made 
hundreds of quotations (often expanded, interpolated or partly re- 
worded by himself) from the Presocratic thinkers. 

(ii) Sextus ‘Empiricus’, the Sceptic philosopher and physician 
of the late second century A.p., expounded the theories of Aenesi- 
demus, who lived some two centuries earlier and himself relied to 
a great extent on Hellenistic sources. Sextus quotes many early 
passages bearing on cognition and the reliability of the senses. 


I I K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(iii) Clement of Alexandria, the learned head of the Catechetical 
school, lived in the second half of the second century A.D. and the 
early years of the third. A convert to Christianity, Clement 
nevertheless maintained his interest in Greek literature of all 
kinds, and used a wide knowledge and a remarkable memory 
to point his comparisons between paganism and Christianity 
with frequent quotations from the Greek poets and philosophers 
(chiefly in his Protrepticus and the eight books of Stromateis or 
Miscellanies). 

(iv) Hippolytus, bishop of Rome in the third century a.p., 
wrote a Refutation of all Heresies in nine books, which attacked 
Christian heresies by claiming them to be revivals of pagan philo- 
sophy. For example, the Noetian heresy was a revival of Heraclitus’ 
theory of the coincidence of opposites—a contention which 
Hippolytus attempted to substantiate by the quotation of no less 
than seventeen sayings of Heraclitus, many of them otherwise 
unknown. 

(v) Diogenes Laertius compiled, probably in the third century 
A.D., a trivial but from our point of view important Lives of 
Famous Philosophers in ten books. In his biographical and doxo- 
graphical notices, derived mainly from Hellenistic sources, he 
included occasional short quotations. 

(vi) John Stobaeus, the fifth-century a.p. anthologist, assembled 
in his Anthologium educative extracts from the whole range of Greek 
literature, but with special emphasis on ethical sayings. Many 
Presocratic fragments (notably of Democritus) are preserved by 
him, often in a somewhat impure form. Stobaeus’ main sources 
were the handbooks and compendia which proliferated in the 
Alexandrian period. 

In addition to the main sources noted above, quotations from 
the Presocratics occur here and there in many other ancient 
writers: in Stoics like Marcus Aurelius and eclectics like Maximus 
of Tyre; in Christian writers other than Clement and Hippolytus, 
for example in Origen; occasionally in Aetius (see B, 4, 5; direct 
quotations in Aetius are rare) ; in technical authors like Galen the 
doctor, Strabo the geographer and Athenaeus the anthologist of 
food and drink; and, not least important, in Neoplatonic writers 
from Numenius, Plotinus, Porphyry and Iamblichus (the last two 
of whom wrote on Pythagoras) down to Proclus and, of course, the 
invaluable Simplicius. 


SOURCES FOR PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHY 


To conclude these notes on the sources of direct quotations, it 
must be emphasized that the author of a direct quotation need not 
have seen the original work, since summarics, anthologies and 
compendia of every kind, produced in large numbers in the three 
centuries following the foundation of Alexandria, were regarded as 
an adequate substitute for most prose originals of a technical 
nature. 


B. TESTIMONIA 


(1) PLATO is the earliest commentator on the Presocratics 
(though there were occasional references in Euripides and Aristo- 
phanes). His comments, however, arc for the most part only casual 
ones, inspired, like many of his quotations, by irony or amusement. 
Thus his references to Heraclitus, Parmenides and Empedocles are 
more often than not light-hearted oditer dicta, and one-sided or exag- 
gerated ones at that, rather than sober and objective historical 
judgements. Provided this is recognized, Plato has much of value 
to tell us. One passage, Phaedo o6ff., gives a useful but brief survey 
of fifth-century physical preoccupations. 

(2) ARISTOTLE gave more serious attention to his philosophical 
predecessors than Plato had done, and prefaced some of his 
treatises with formal surveys of their opinions, notably in Meta- 
physics A. However, his judgements are often distorted by his view 
of earlier philosophy as a stumbling progress towards the truth 
that Aristotle himself revealed in his physical doctrines, espccially 
those concerning causation. There are also, of course, many acute 
and valuable criticisms, and a store of factual information. 

(3) THEOPHRASTUS undertook the history of previous philo- 
sophy, from Thales to Plato, as part of his contribution to the 
encyclopaedic activity organized by his master Aristotle—just as 
Eudemus undertook the history of theology, astronomy and mathe- 
matics and Menon that of medicine. According to Diogenes 
Laertius’ list of his works, Theophrastus wrote sixteen (or eighteen) 
books of Physical Opinions (or Opinions of the Physicists; the Greek 
genitive is Φυσικῶν δοξῶν) ; thesc were later epitomized in two 
volumes. Only the last book, On sensation, is extant in its greater part; 
but important extracts from the first book, On material principles, 
were copied down by Simplicius in his commentary on Aristotle’s 
Physics. (Some of these extracts Simplicius derived from lost com- 
mentaries by the important Peripatetic commentator Alexander 


3 I-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


of Aphrodisias.) In this first book Theophrastus treated the 
different thinkers in roughly chronological order, adding their 
city, patronymic, and sometimes date or mutual relationship. In 
the remaining books the order was chronological only within the 
main logical divisions. In addition to the general history Theo- 
phrastus wrote special works on Anaximenes, Empedocles, Anaxa- 
goras, Archelaus, and (in several volumes) Democritus. These 
have unfortunately perished; presumably Theophrastus went to 
greater pains to consult the original sources for these thinkers. 
From the available evidence, however, his judgements even on 
them were often derived directly from Aristotle, without much 
attempt to apply a new and objective criticism. 

(4) THE DOXOGRAPHICAL TRADITION. (a) Jés general nature. 
Theophrastus’ great work became the standard authority for 
the ancient world on Presocratic philosophy, and is the source 
of most subsequent collections of ‘opinions’ (δόξαι, ἀρέσκοντα 
or placita). These collections took different forms. (i) In close 
reproductions of Theophrastus’ arrangement each major topic 
was considered in a separate scction, the different thinkers 
being treated successively within each section. This was the 
method of Aetius and his source, the ‘ Vetusta Placita’ (see p. 5). 
(ii) Biographical doxographers considered dil the opinions of each 
philosopher together, in company with details of his life—supplied, 
to a large extent, by the febrile imaginations of Hellenistic bio- 
graphers and historians like Hermippus of Smyrna, Hieronymus of 
Rhodes and Neanthes of Cyzicus. The result is exemplified in the 
biographical medley of Diogenes Laertius. (111) Another type of 
doxographical work is seen in the Aiadoyai, or accounts of philo- 
sophical successions. Its originator was the Peripatetic Sotion of 
Alexandria, who around 200 B.c. wrote a survey of previous 
philosophers arranged by schools. The known thinkers were 
related to each other in a descending linc of master and pupil (here 
Sotion was extending and formalizing a process begun by Theo- 
phrastus) ; in addition, the Ionian school was clearly distinguished 
from the Italian. Many of the patristic doxographical summaries 
(notably those in Eusebius, Irenaeus, Arnobius, Theodoretus— 
who, however, also made direct use of Aetius—and St Augustine) 
were based on the brief accounts in the Succession-writers. 
(iv) The chronographer Apollodorus of Alexandria composed, in 
the middle of the second century B.c., a metrical account of the 


4 


SOURCES FOR PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHY 


dates and opinions of the philosophers. This rested partly on 
Sotion’s division into schools and masters, partly on the chronology 
of Eratosthenes, who had sensibly assigned dates to artists, philo- 
sophers and writers as well as to political events. Apollodorus 
filled in the gaps left by Eratosthenes, on very arbitrary principles: 
a philosopher’s acme or period of chief activity was assumed to be 
at the age of forty, and was made to coincide with the nearest of 
a number of major chronological epochs, for example the capture 
of Sardis in 546/5 B.c. or the foundation of Thurii in 444/3. 
Further, a supposed pupil was always made forty years younger 
than his supposed master. 

(b) Aetius and the ‘Vetusta Placita’. ‘Two extant doxographical 
summaries, closely resembling each other, were independently 
derived from a lost original—the collection of Opinions made by 
Aetius, an otherwise unknown compilator, probably of the second 
century A.D., whose name is known from a reference in Theo- 
dorctus. These extant summaries are the Epitome of physical opinions, 
in five books, which falsely claims to be by Plutarch; and the 
Physical extracts which appear in book 1 (for the most part) of 
Stobaeus’ Anthologium. (From the former, which was widely read, 
are derived notices in pseudo-Galen, Athenagoras, Achilles and 
Cyril.) Dicls in his great Doxographt Graect arranged these two 
sources in parallel columns as the Placita of Actius. This forms our 
most extensive, if not always our most accurate, doxographical 
authority. 

Actius’ work was based, not directly on Theophrastus’ history, 
but upon an intermediate summary of it produced, probably, in 
the Posidonian school in the first century B.c. This lost work was 
named by Diels the Vetusta Placita. In it Stoic, Epicurean and 
Peripatetic opinions were added to those recorded by Theo- 
phrastus, and much that was derived from Theophrastus was 
subjected to Stoic re-formulation. Actius himself added further 
Stoic and Epicurean opinions, as well as a few definitions and 
introductory comments. A direct use of the Vetusta Placita was 
made by Varro (in Censorinus’ de die natalt), and is seen also in the 
brief.doxography in Cicero, Academica priora τι, 47, 118. 

(c) Other important doxographical sources. (1) Hippolytus. The first 
book of his Refutation of all Heresies, the so-called Philosophoumena 
once attributed to Origen, is a biographical doxography containing 
separate accounts of the main philosophcrs. The sections on 


5 


PRESOCRATIG PHILOSOPHERS 


Thales, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Heraclitus, the Eleatics and the 
Atomists come from a trifling biographical summary and are of 
small value, unlike those on Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxa- 
goras, Archelaus and Xenophanes, which come from a fuller and 
much more valuable biographical source. At many points the 
comments of the second group are more detailed, and less inac- 
curate, than the corresponding ones in Aetius. (1) The pseudo- 
Plutarchean Stromateis. These short ‘Miscellanies’ (which must be 
distinguished from the Epitome, from Aetius, also ascribed to 
Plutarch) are preserved by Eusebius; they come from a source 
similar to that of the second group in Hippolytus. They differ in 
that they concentrate on the subject-matter of the earlier books in 
Theophrastus, those that dealt with the material principle, cosmo- 
gony, and the heavenly bodies; and they contain much verbiage 
and pretentious interpretation. However, some important details 
are preserved which do not occur elsewhere. (11) Duogenes 
Laertius. Apart from biographical details culled from many 
sources, some useful chronological data from Apollodorus, and 
deplorable epigrams from the pen of Diogenes himself, the opinions 
of cach thinker are usually set out in two distinct doxographical 
notes: the first (what Diogenes called the κεφαλαιώδης or sum- 
mary account) from a worthless biographical source like that used 
by Hippolytus in the first group, and the second (the ἐπὶ μέρους 
or detailed account) from a fuller and more reliable epitome like 
that used by Hippolytus for his second group. 

(5) CONCLUSION. It must be remembered that many writers 
who were independent of the direct Theophrastean tradition are 
known to have devoted special works to the early philosophers. For 
example the fourth-century-B.c. Academic, Heraclides of Pontus, 
wrote four books on Heraclitus, and so did the Stoic Cleanthes; 
while Aristotle’s pupil Aristoxenus wrote biographies which 
included one of Pythagoras. Allowance must be made, therefore, 
for the possibility of isolated non-Theophrastean judgements 
appearing in later eclectic sources like Plutarch or Clement; 
though most such judgements that we can recognize show signs, 
nevertheless, of Aristotelian, or of Stoic, Epicurean, or Sceptic, 
influence. Theophrastus remains the main source of information, 
and his work is known to us through the doxographers, through 
the quotations by Simplicius, and through the extant de sensu. 
From these it 1s evident that Theophrastus was strongly influenced 


6 


SOURCES FOR PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHY 


by Aristotle—who, as has been stated, did not aim, as Theo- 
phrastus should have done, at extreme historical objectivity. 
Theophrastus was no more successful than is to be expected in 
understanding the motives of an earlier period and a different 
world of thought; a further defect was that, once having extracted 
a general pattern of explanations, particularly for cosmological 
events, he tended to impose it, perhaps too boldly, in cases whcre 
he lacked full evidence—cases which seem to have been not 
infrequent. Thus it is legitimate to feel complete confidence in our 
understanding of a Presocratic thinker only when the Aristotelian 
or Theophrastean interpretation, even if it can be accurately 
reconstructed, is confirmed by relevant and well-authenticated 
extracts from the philosopher himself. 


CHAPTER I 


THE FORERUNNERS OF 
PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


In this long preliminary chapter certain ideas are examined which 
are not truly ‘philosophical’; they are mythological rather than 
rationalistic in context, but may nevertheless appear as significant 
preludes to the truly rational attempts to explain the world, attempts 
which began with Thales. 

We are not concerned here with pure mythology, but with 
concepts which, although expressed in the language and through 
the personages of myth, arc not mythopoeic in kind but are the 
result of a direct, empirical, non-symbolical way of thinking. ‘These 
quasi-rationalistic views of the world are most frequently concerned 
with its earliest history, starting from its actual birth or creation; 
for this way of thinking was incidental to the attempt (made most 
notably by Hesiod in the Theogony) to systematize the manifold 
deities of legend by deriving them from a common ancestor or pair 
of ancestors at the beginning of the world. Yet the active investiga- 
tion of the world’s ancestry, whcther mainly mythical as in Hesiod 
or mainly rational as in the Milesian philosophers, must have been 
carried on only by the few. The general structure of the present 
world, the common environment of experience, was of wider 
interest; and hcre a common, naive, extroverted but nevertheless 
partly mythical account seems to have been widcly accepted. It 
appears from time to time in Homer and is briefly described in §1. 
In §§2 and 3 two concepts are examined which were later credited 
with cosmogonical importance by the Greeks themselves, those of 
Okeanos and of Nyx (Night). §§4, 5 and 6 are concerned with 
three special accounts, all of primarily non-philosophical character 
but all treating of cosmogonical topics: first the Hesiodic Theogony, 
then the various cosmogonical ideas associated with Orpheus, 
finally (at greater and indeed somewhat disproportionate length) 
the intriguing but fragmentary views of Pherecydes of Syros. In 
the case of Night, and of Orphic cosmogony, the conclusions will 
be largely negative: little of direct significance for the development 
of Presocratic thought is revealed, although in view of constant 


8 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


assertions to the contrary it is as well to subject the evidence to a 
careful scrutiny. Pherecydes may have written his book no earlier 
than Anaximander, but its matter 1s likely to be in part traditional, 
and therefore not irrelevant to the state of cosmogonical speculation 
even before Thales. On some points reference will be made to the 
comparative mythology of earlier near-eastern cultures, especially 
Babylonian, Egyptian, and Hittite. There are strong similarities 
between some of the Greek theogonical and cosmogonical stories 
and the theogonical myths of the great river-civilizations and their 
neighbours; these similarities help to explain some details of Greek 
accounts down to and including Thales. Translations of the main 
non-Greek texts are most conveniently to be found in Ancient 
Near Eastern Texts relating io the Old Testament, ed. J. B. Pritchard 
(Princeton, 2nd ed. 1955), which will be referred to as Pritchard 
ANET. Useful summaries, both in the Pelican series, are H. Frank- 
fort and others, Before Philosophy, and O. R. Gurney, The Hittites. 

Nothing will be said in this chapter about the development of 
the concept of the soul. The Homeric idea of the psyche or breath- 
soul as an insubstantial image of the body, giving it life and 
surviving it in a wretched, bloodless existence in Hades, is too 
familiar to need description here. Rohde’s Psyche, E. R. Dodds’ 
The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley, 1951), or chapter 5 of 
Jaeger’s Theology of the Early Greek Philosophers (Oxford, 1947), give 
a good account of the popular, pre-philosophical idea of the soul. 
Pythagoras was possibly the first Greek explicitly to treat the soul 
as something of moral importance, and Heraclitus first clearly 
indicated that knowledge of the soul was relevant to knowledge of 
the structure of the cosmos. Yet the conception that the substance 
of the soul was related to aither, or to the substance of the stars, 
seems from fifth-century B.c. poetical contexts to have existed for 
some time already as part of the complex body of popular belicfs, 
alongside the distinct Homeric concept of a breath-soul. These 
antecedents will be summarized in the chapters on Thales, 
Anaximenes, Heraclitus and Empedocles (sce pp. 95 ff., 159 ff., 200, 
205 ff., 360). ‘The main object of the earliest deliberate efforts to 
explain the world remained the description of its growth from a 
simple, and therefore fully comprehensible, beginning. Matters 
concerned with human life seemed to belong to a different type of 
enquiry, in which the old inherited assumptions, though sometimes 

t American title: The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man. 


9 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


inconsistent, were still valid. It is with the derivation of the world as 
a whole, then, regarded as external to its human centre, that the rest 
of this chapter will be mainly concerned. It will nevertheless be 
seen that the world’s original state, and the method by which it 
diversified itself, were imagined anthropomorphically, in terms of 
a parent or pair of parents. This genealogical approach persisted 
even after the eventual abandonment by the Milesian philosophers 
of the traditional mythological framework. 


I. THE NAIVE VIEW OF THE WORLD 


The popular conception of the nature of the world, which can be 
traced mainly in scattered references in Homer, is roughly as 
follows. ‘The sky is a solid hemisphere like a bowl (//. 17, 425 
χάλκεον οὐρανόν, cf. Pindar NV. 6, 3-43; οὐρανὸν ἐς πολύχαλκον at 
Il. 5, 504, Od. 3, 2; σιδήρεον οὐρανόν at Od. 15, 329 and 17, 565. 
Solidity as wellas brightnessis presumably conveyed by these metallic 
epithets). It covers the round flat earth. ‘The lower part of the gap 
between earth and sky, up to and including the clouds, contains ἀήρ 
or mist: the upper part (sometimes called the οὐρανός itself) is αἰθήρ, 
aither, the shining upper air, which is sometimes conceived as fiery. 
At Il. 14, 288 (ἐλάτη) δι᾽ ἠέρος αἰθέρ᾽ ἵκανεν, ‘the fir-tree reached 
through the aer to the aither’. Below its surface, the earth stretches 
far downwards, and has its roots in or above Tartarus: 


1 Homer JI. 8, 13 (Zeus speaks) 
ἤ μιν ἑλὼν ῥίψω ἐς Τάρταρον ἠερόεντα 
τῆλε μάλ᾽, ἧχι βάθιστον ὑπὸ χθονός ἐστι βέρεθρον, 
ἔνθα σιδήρειαί τε πύλαι καὶ χάλκεος οὐδός, 
τόσσον ἔνερθ᾽ ᾿Αίδεω ὅσον οὐρανός ἐστ᾽ ἀπὸ γαίης. 
2 Hesiod Theogony 726 (Τάρταρον) 
TOV πέρι χάλκεον ἕρκος ἐλήλαται ἀμφὶ δέ μιν VUE 
τριστοιχεὶ κέχυται περὶ δείρην αὐτὰρ ὕπερθεν 
γῆς ῥίφαι πεφύασι καὶ ἀτρυγέτοιο θαλάσσης. 


The foundation of Tartarus is thus ‘brazen’ (and so firm, un- 
yielding) like the sky: the symmetry is reflected also in the equal 





x Or seizing him I will hurl him into misty Tartaros, very far, where is the deepest gulf 
below earth; there are iron gates and brazen floor, as far beneath Hades as sky is from earth. 


2 Around it [ Tartaros] a brazen fence is drawn; and all about it Night in three rows is 
poured, around the throat; and above are the roots of earth and unharvested sea. 


IO 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


distance between sky and earth’s surface, and earth’s surface and 
its foundations—for ‘Hades’ in the last line of 1 seems to be an 
illogical variant upon an original ‘earth’, as in Theogony 720 
τόσσον ἔνερθ᾽ ὑπὸ γῆς ὅσον οὐρανός ἐστ᾽ ἀπὸ γαίης (‘as far below, 
under earth, as sky is distant from it’). There was a certain vague- 
ness about the relationships of Hades, Erebos, and Tartarus, 
although Tartarus was certainly the lowest part of the underworld. 
The symmetry between underworld and overworld was not 
complete, of course: the floor of Tartarus was not normally con- 
ceived as hemispherical. A variant conception made the earth 
stretch downwards indefinitely: 


3 Xcnophanes fr. 28 (= 183) 

γαίης μὲν τόδε Treipas ἄνω παρὰ ποσσὶν ὁρᾶται 

ἠέρι προσπλάζον, τὸ κάτω δ᾽ ἐς ἄπειρον ἱκνεῖται. 

(Cf. Strabo 1, p. 12 Cas.) 

This is a later formulation, but again a popular rather than an 
intellectual one. There is no great difference in the underlying 
thought; the difference is mainly that the mythological geography 
is not used here. 

Round the edge of the carth-disc, according to the unsophisti- 
cated view, flowed the vast river of Okeanos. This concept was of 
considerable importance in pre-scientific Greek thought, and is 
discussed in the section which follows. 


2. OKEANOS 


(1) As the river surrounding the earth, and source of all waters 


4 Homer Jl. 18, 607 (Hephaistos) 
ἐν δὲ τίθει ToTapoio μέγα σθένος “Wikeavoio 
ἄντυγα πὰρ πυμάτην σάκεος τύκα ποιητοῖο. 
5 Homer I. 21, 194 (Zeus) 
τῷ οὐδὲ κρείων ᾿Αχελώιος ioopapizet 
οὐδὲ βαθυρρείταο μέγα σθένος ᾿Ωὡκεανοῖο, 
ἐξ οὗ περ πάντες ποταμοὶ καὶ πᾶσα θάλασσα 
καὶ πᾶσαι κρῆναι καὶ φρείατα μακρὰ νάουσιν. 





23 Of earth this is the upper limit which we see by our feet, in contact with air; but tts 
underneath continues indefinitely. 


4 He put on it the great might of river Okeanos, along the well-made shield’s outer rim. 


5 Him not even Lord Acheloos equals, nor the great might of deep-flowing Okeanos, 
from whom, indeed, all rivers and all sea and all springs and deep wells flow. 


II 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


6 Herodotus ιν, 8 tov δὲ ᾿ωὠκεανὸν λόγῳ μὲν λέγουσι (se. 
Ἕλληνες) ἀπὸ ἡλίου ἀνατολέων ἀρξάμενον γῆν περὶ πᾶσαν ῥέειν, 
ἔργῳ δὲ οὐκ ἀποδεικνῦσι. (Cf. also zd. m1, 21; Π, 23.) 


That Okeanos surrounds the circular surface of the earth, though 
not explicitly stated in the Homeric poems, is suggested in 4 (where 
the shield made for Achilles is obviously thought of as round), in 
9. and by some of the epithets applicd to Okeanos—especially 
&ydppoos, ‘ back-flowing’ (which probably mcans ‘flowing backinto 
itself’). Passages in Euripides and others as well as in Herodotus (6) 
show that the idea of a circular surrounding Okeanos was widely 
accepted; though occasionally in Homer, especially in the Odyssey, 
a looser usage, as the broad outer sea, had already begun to 
appear. 4 describes Okeanos as a river, and this too was a com- 
monly accepted view: references are frequent to the streams, poat, 
of Okeanos. As such, it was presumably composed of fresh water; 
and § (of which |. 195 was unwarrantably athetized by Zenodotus) 
describes it as the source of all waters, whether fresh or salt, 
which are enclosed within its orbit, on or under the earth. The 
idea that salt water is simply fresh water somehow flavoured by 
the earth was commonly held in the scientific period. 

The earth-encircling river differs from other elements of the 
popular world-picture in that it cannot be obviously based upon 
experience. The sky looks hemispherical and, to some eyes, im- 
penetrable; it is called ‘brazen’, therefore, and treated as ice-like 
or solid even by Anaximenes and Empedocles. The earth appears 
to be flat, and the horizon to be circular. Yet experience cannot so 
easily suggest that the ultimate horizon is bounded by a fresh- 
water river. Voyagers may have brought back reports of vast seas 
beyond the Mediterranean, but these would be salt. Springs 
bubbling up from the earth may suggest underground rivers, but 
these need not entail a surrounding river. ‘The possibility must be 
considered, then, that this particular conception originated further 
east, in the great river-civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia, 
and was somehow introduced into Grecce and given a specific 
Hellenic form. It will be seen (pp. gof.) that Thales’ idea of the 
earth floating on water was probably so borrowed; and the 
coincidences in detail between Greek versions of certain myths, 





6 They [the Greeks] affirm in words that Okeanos, beginning from the sun’s risings, 
flows round the whole earth, but they give no effective demonstration of this. 


I2 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


and Babylonian or Hittite versions, prove that conceptions not 
native either to the Aegean area, or to the proximate culture- 
centres of the Greek-speaking peoples before their entry into 
Greece, had embedded themselves in Greek thought even by the 
time of Hesiod (which we guess to be the seventh century B.c.), 
and probably much earlicr. These coincidences are briefly dis- 
cussed on pp. 33f. and 36f. In the second part of the present 
section on Okeanos, pp. 18f., the isolated Homeric references to 
Okeanos as origin of all things will also appear as a probable 
allusion to non-Greek mythological ideas. In Babylonian accounts, 
and in some Egyptian versions, the earth was regarded as drying 
out, or thrusting itself up, in the midst of the primeval waters." 
The development of such an idea is not surprising in Mesopotamia, 
where the land had indeed been formed from the marshlands 
between the two rivers; nor in Egypt, where the fertile land 
emerged each year as the Nile floods receded. The earth that 
emerges from an indefinite cxpanse of primeval water will still be 
surrounded by water. This docs seem to provide a plausible, though 
not a certain, motive for the formation of the Greek concept of 
Okeanos. In this popular devclopment of the primeval-water 
motif the earth is regarded as being solidly rooted, once it has 
emerged, and the indefinite waste of water (which seems always to 
have been conceived as having an upper limit, a surfacc) is con- 
tracted into a vast but not necessarily illimitable river. Thales, on 
the other hand, postulated a floating earth and so was not simply 
rationalizing the quasi-mythological Okeanos-interpretation.3 


1 Cf. the Babylonian Creation-epic, which originated probably in the 
2nd millennium B.c.: tablet I, 1-6 (Pritchard, Ancient Near Eastern Texts, 
6of.), ‘When on high the heaven had not been named, Firm ground below 
had not been called by name, Naught but primordial Apsu, their begetter, 
(And) Mummu-Tiamat, she who bore them all, Their waters commingling 
as a single body; No reed-hut had been matted, no marshland had 
appeared....’ (Trans. E. A. Speiser. Apsu and Tiamat were the male and 
female principles of primeval water. Sometimes, but perhaps not here, 
they represent fresh and salt water respectively.) For Egypt cf. e.g. the 
24th-century B.c. text from Heliopolis, AVNET p. 3: ‘O Atum-Kheprer, 
thou wast on high on the (primeval) hill....’ (The primeval hillock was 
the first patch of land to rise above the boundless waters; it was located in 
many different cult-centres, and is symbolized by the pyramid.) Also 
another version, from the Book of the Dead (in this form, latter part of 
and millennium): ‘I am Atum when I was alone in Nun; I am Re in his 
(first) appearances, when he began to rule that which he had made.’ 


13 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(Trans. J. A. Wilson. Atum was the creator-god worshipped at Heliopolis 
and equated with the sun-god Re. Nun is the primeval expanse of waters.) 


2 Okeanos has a further bank in the (probably late) underworld-episode 
in the Odyssey, and in Hesiod. 


3 In origin ᾿Οκεανός was perhaps a non-personal descriptive term, con- 
ceivably related to Hittite ‘uginna’, meaning ‘circle’, or Sanskrit 
‘a-cayana-h’, meaning ‘that which surrounds’. Its development as a 
mythological figure, as sometimes in Homer and Hesiod, must have been 
comparatively late; but for Thales it would represent the crude mytho- 
logical past. 

The encircling river was presupposed in the myth that the sun, 
after crossing the sky with his horses and chariot, sails in a golden 
bowl round the stream of Okeanos, to the north (as is probably 
implied by ‘the depths of night’ in 8), and so arrives back in the 
east just before dawn: 


7 Mimnermus fr. ro Diehl 
Ἠέλιος μὲν γὰρ πόνον ἔλλαχεν ἤματα πάντα, 
οὐδέ KOT’ ἄμπαυσις γίγνεται οὐδεμία 
ἵπποισίν τε καὶ αὐτῷ, ἐπεὶ ῥοδοδάκτυλος “Has 
᾿Οκεανὸν προλιποῦσ᾽ οὐρανὸν εἰσαναβῇ᾽ 
τὸν μὲν γὰρ διὰ κῦμα φέρει πολυήρατος εὐνὴ 
κοιίλη Ἡφαίστου χερσὶν ἐληλαμένη 
χρυσοῦ τιμήεντος, ὑπόπτερος, ἄκρον ἐφ᾽ ὕδωρ 
εὕδονθ᾽ ἁρπαλέως χώρου ἀφ᾽ Ἑσπερίδων 
γαῖαν ἐς Αἰθιότων, ἵνα δὴ θοὸν ἅρμα καὶ ἵττποι 
ἑστᾶσ᾽, ὄφρ᾽ "Hos ἠριγένεια μόλῃ᾽ 
ἔνθ᾽ ἐπεβήζσεθ᾽ ἑγῶν ὀχέων Ὑπερίονος υἱός. 
8 Stesichorus fr. 6, 1-4 Diehl 
᾿Αέλιος δ᾽ “Ytrepiovidas δέτας ἐσκατέβαινε 
χρύσεον, ὄφρα δι᾽ ᾿Ωκεανοῖο περάσας 
ἀφίκοιθ᾽ ἱερᾶς trot! βένθεα νυκτὸς ἐρεμνᾶς 
ποτὶ ματέρα κουριδίαν τ᾽ ἄλοχον ττάιδάς τε φίλους. 





7 Helios gained a portion of toil for all his days, nor is there ever any rest for his horses 
and himself, when rosy-fingered Dawn, leaving Okeanos, mounts the sky; for him does his 
lovely bed bear across the wave, hollow and fashioned by the hands of Hephaestus out of 
precious gold, and winged; swiftly does it bear him sleeping over the surface of the water, 
from the dwelling of the Hesperides to the land of the Aithiopes, where his swift chariot 
and his horses stand till early-born Dawn shall come; there does the son of Hyperion 
mount his car. 

8 Helios son of Hyperion descended into his golden cup, that, having passed over Okeanos, 
he might come to the depths of holy, dark night, to his mother and his wedded wife and his 
dear children. 


14 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


This detail is not mentioned in Homer.? In Egypt the sun was 
conceived as travelling from west to east in a ship, across the sub- 
terranean waters. This may or may not have been the origin of 
the Greek account; but the choice of a cup or bowl may be based 
upon the round shape of the sun itself, and suggests a more 
empirical and not wholly mythopoeic approach. In Heraclitus 
(227) the sun itself is described as a hollow bowl filled with fire, 
and there may have been a popular account of this kind which 
gave way to the more graphic conception of the sun as a 
charioteer. 
t The sun rises from Okeanos (e.g. Jl. 7, 422), but there is no suggestion of 
a vessel of any kind. Perhaps this was taken for granted; but it is also 
possible that the idea of the sun sailing round Okeanos is post-Homeric. 
At Od. το, 191 the sun goes under the earth, but this is a unique occurrence 
in a passage that bears signs of lateness. The stars in Homer bathe in 
Okeanos (e.g. Jl. 5, 6; 18, 489); they can hardly all have boats, and might 


be conceived as going through Okeanos and passing under the earth, 
though such details need not have becn visualized. 


(11) Okeanos as the source or origin of all things 


9 Homer 7. 14, 200 (repeated at 14, 301. Hera speaks) 
εἶμι γὰρ ὀψομένη πολυφόρβον πείρατα γαίης, 
Ὠκεανόν τε θεῶν γένεσιν καὶ μητέρα Τηθύν. ... 
10 Homer //. 14, 244 (Hypnos speaks) 
ἄλλον μέν Kev ἔγωγε θεῶν αἰειγενετάων 
ῥεῖα κατευνήσαιμι, καὶ ἂν ποταμοῖο ῥέεθρα 
᾿Οκεανοῦ, ὅς περ γένεσις πτάντεσσι τέτυκται 
Ζηνὸς δ᾽ οὐκ ἂν ἔγωγε Κρονίονος ἄσσον ἱκοίμην 
οὐδὲ κατευνήσαιμ᾽, ὅτε μὴ αὐτός γε κελεύοι. 


The preceding section outlined the usual account of Okeanos in 
Homer. In the present passages the description of Okeanos as 
origin of the gods (9) and of all things (10) is unique and un- 
expected. Nowhere else in Homer is Okeanos mentioned in terms 
remotely resembling these; and it is notable that outside the 
particular episode in which these two passages occur, the Διὸς 
ἀπάτη or Deception of Zeus by Hera (il. 14, 153-360 and 15, 








g For I am going to see the limits of fertile earth, Okeanos begetter of gods and mother 
Tethys.... 

10 Another of the everlasting gods would I easily send to sleep, even the streams of 
river Okeanos who is the begetter of all: but Zeus son of Kronos would I not approach, nor 
send to sleep, except that he himself so bid me. 


15 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


init.), there is almost nothing in Homer that can reasonably be 
construed as specifically cosmogonical or cosmological in content; 
that is, as going beyond the accepted outline of what has been 
termed the popular world-picture. Even in this episode there is 
not very much.? Indeed, there is little which might not be 
explained without introducing cosmological interpretations, if a 
slight oddity of expression is allowed. This might apply even to 
Okeanos: 9 and 10 could imply no more than that the river of 
Okeanos is the source of all fresh water (as in 5); water is necessary 
for life, therefore life must have originated, directly or indirectly, 
from Okeanos. This would not explain his parenthood of the gods 
in 9; but that could be a poetical extension. It would also involve 
limiting the application of πάντεσσι in ro to living creatures and 
plant-life, but again the same kind of poetic looseness might be 
presupposed. In any case the application of travteoot is in doubt; 
it might be taken to apply simply to the gods, as in 9, though 
without qualification its natural meaning 15 ‘all things absolutely’. 
It must be admitted, however, that the references, if so understood, 
would be pointlessly abbreviated and give a somewhat bizarre 
effect. 
1 Namely 16 (Night); 18 (division of the world between Zeus, Poseidon, 
Hades) ; Jl. 14, 203f., 274 (= 15, 225), 279 (the only Homeric references to 
Kronos, the Titans and Tartaros except for two important passages in 
bk. 8, Zl. 8, 139 ff. and 478 ff.) ; 77. 14, 271; 15, 471. (two of the four references 
in Homer to Styx as oath of the gods). The last two cases might be regarded 


as intrusions with Hesiodic affinities, though they are not derived from the 
Hesiodic poems that we know. 


To Plato and Aristotle, however, 9 and 10 certainly seemed to 
have some kind of cosmological significance: 


11 Plato Theaetetus 152E ...°Opnpos, (ὃς) eitrayv ‘ *Wkeavov Te 
θεῶν γένεσιν καὶ μητέρα Τηθύν᾽ πάντα εἴρηκεν ἔκγονα ῥοῆς τε 
καὶ κινήσεως. (Cf. also 14.) 

12 Aristotle Met. A3, 983b27 (following 87) εἰσὶ δέ τινες of καὶ 
τοὺς παμπαλαίους καὶ πολὺ πρὸ τῆς νῦν γενέσεως Kal TIp~TOUS 
θεολογήσαντας οὕτως οἴονται (sc. like Thales) περὶ τῆς φύσεως 








11 ...Homer, who by saying ‘ Okeanos begetier of gods and mother Tethys’ declared 
all things to be offspring of flux and motion. 


12 There are some who think that the very ancient and indeed first speculators about the 
gods, long before the present age, made the same supposition about nature (sc. as Thales); 


16 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


ὑπολαβεῖν: ὠκεανόν te yap καὶ Τηθὺν ἐποίησαν τῆς γενέσεως 
πατέρας καὶ τὸν ὅρκον τῶν θεῶν ὕδωρ, τὴν καλουμένην ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν 
Στύγα τῶν ποιητῶν τιμιώτατον μὲν γὰρ τὸ πρεσβύτατον, ὅρκος 
δὲ τὸ τιμιώτατόν ἐστιν. (Cf. also 17.) 


Plato in 11 and elsewhere is obviously not entirely serious in his 
treatment of Homer as forerunner of the flux-idea assigned to 
Heraclitus, so we cannot be surc of the precise value he attached to 
the Homeric Okeanos-passage. Aristotle, on the other hand, quite 
certainly took it as a significant anticipation of ‘Thales. The form 
of the argument about the Styx in 12 reminds us not always to 
accept Aristotle’s authority, as a historian of thought, without 
question; but later antiquity was persuaded through him to 
accept Okeanos and Tethys as representative of an early cosmo- 
gonical theory, since Eudemus adduced the same passage (obvious- 
ly following Aristotle in 12) in the Peripatetic history of theology. 


1 As we know from the disagreement of Damascius, the Neoplatonist 
writer: 13 Damascius de principiis 124 ...00 γὰρ ἀποδεκτέον Εὐδήμον 
λέγοντος ὅτι ἀπὸ ᾿ωὠκεανοῦ καὶ Τηθύος ἄρχεται (sc. “Ounpos). (See 19.) 
Cf. also Philodemus de pietate 47a (DK 385) and Athenagoras 18, p. 20 
Schwartz (DK 13813). 

It has often been assumed that there is another and earlier class 
of testimony for the cosmogonical importance of Okeanos, namely 
early Orphic poetry: 

14 Plato Cratylus 4028 ...@oTeEp αὖ “Ὅμηρος “ὠκεανόν τε 
θεῶν γένεσίν᾽ φησιν ‘Kal μητέρα Τηθύν᾽- οἶμαι δὲ καὶ Ἡσίοδος. 
λέγει δέ που Kal ᾿Ορφεὺς ὅτι 

᾿Οκεανὸς πρῶτος καλλίρροος ἦρξε γάμοιο, 

ὅς ῥα κασιγνήτην ὁμομήτορα Τηθὺν ὄπυιεν. 
15 PlatoTimaeus 40D-E ... πειστέον δὲ τοῖς εἰρηκόσιν ἔμττροσθεν, 
ἐκγόνοις μὲν θεῶν οὖσιν, ὡς ἔφασαν, σαφῶς δέ που τούς γε αὑτῶν 





for they wrote that Okeanos and Tethys were the parents of coming-to-be, and the oath of 
the gods water—that which by the poets themselves is called Styx; for what is oldest is 
most honourable, and the most honourable thing is used as an oath. 

13 ...for we must not accept it when Eudemus says that he [Homer] begins from Okeanos 
and Tethys. 

14 ...as Homer, again, says ‘Okeanos begetier of gods and mother Tethys’; and I 
think Hesiod too. Orpheus, too, says somewhere that ‘ Fair-streamed Okeanos first began 
the marriages, who wed Tethys, his sister by the same mother’. 

15 ...we must believe those who formerly gave utterance, those who were, as they said, 

offspring of the gods, and must, I suppose, have truly known their own ancestors: . . . Okeanos 


2 17 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


προγόνους εἰδόσιν"... . Fis te καὶ Οὐρανοῦ παῖδες ᾿Οκεανός τε καὶ 
Τηθὺς ἐγενέσθην, τούτων δὲ Φόρκυς Κρόνος τε καὶ Ῥέα καὶ ὅσοι 
μετὰ τούτων... .. 


But the Orphic verses of 14, though earlier than Plato’s middle 
life, need not be archaic (i.e. as early as the seventh or even the 
sixth century B.c.). In any case, the view which they express does 
not necessarily differ greatly from that of the Hesiodic Theogony— 
as Plato may have perceived. There, Okeanos, Tethys and the 
other Titans are born to Gaia and Ouranos at a comparatively 
late stage from the point of view of cosmogonical production, but 
it is in their generation that the regular reproduction, by bisexual 
means, of fully personal figures (as opposed to world-constituents 
like Tartaros or Pontos) begins. 15, in which ‘offspring of the 
gods’ shows that Plato is describing an Orphic view, indicates that 
according to one Orphic account Okeanos and Tethys were the 
parents of the Titans (including the theogonically vital pair Kronos 
and Rhea), and not their coevals as in the Theogony. That is 
probably another reason for πρῶτος in the Orphic verses of 14: 
Okeanos and Tethys are the first fully anthropomorphized couple 
(though Okeanos, of course, is very much a border-line case), and 
prior even to Kronos and Rhea. Hesiod had assigned less import- 
ance to Okeanos than might reasonably have been expected, 
especially in view of the well-known Homeric passages 9 and 10; 
so the Orphic versions presumably emended the Hesiodic account 
to the extent of putting Okeanos and Tethys one generation 
earlier than the Titans. Certainly there is no evidence here for 
assuming a peculiarly Orphic attribution of cosmogonical import- 
ance to Okeanos. 

The evidence does not prove (or even, it might be felt, suggest) 
that there existed in Greece at a comparatively early date a 
systematic doctrine of the cosmogonical priority of Okeanos. 
Hesiod gives no indication of it, and later suppositions seem to be 
based on the two unusual Homeric passages, which are left as the 
only direct evidence for any such cosmogonical theory. They might 
have meant no more than that water is essential for life, though 
this would be rather odd. It was seen under section (1) that the 
idea of an encircling river Okeanos may well have been adapted 


--- 


and Tethys were born as children of Ge [earth] and Ouranos [sky], and their children were 
Phorkys, Kronos, Rhea and their companions. ... 


18 





FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


from Egyptian or Babylonian beliefs. It was part of those beliefs, 
too, that the world originated from primeval water (see n. I on 
p. 13); the isolated Homeric passages could, then, be a reference 
to that basic near-eastern assumption, as Plutarch assumed in 70. 
The absence of any other such reference (at any rate until Thales) 
suggests that the Homeric ones were idiosyncratic—even, perhaps, 
pedantic; there are other indications that the composer of the 
episode in which they occur had special cosmogonical and theo- 
gonical interests. The concept of the encircling river had, of course, 
become assimilated in Greece at a far earlier date. 


3. NIGHT 
(i) In Homer 


16 Homer ll. 14, 258 (Hypnos speaks) 
ες «καί κέ μ᾽ ἄιστον ἀττ᾽ αἰθέρος ἔμβαλε πόντῳ (sc. Zeus) 
εἰ μὴ Νὺξ δμήτειρα θεῶν ἐσάωσε καὶ ἀνδρῶν" 
τὴν ἱκόμην φεύγων, ὁ δὲ παύσατο χωόμενός περ᾽ 
ἅτετο γὰρ μὴ Νυκτὶ θοῇ ἀπτοθύμια ἕρδοι. 


This is the only place in the Homeric poems where Night is fully 
personified. Again, as with the two special Okeanos passages, it 
occurs in the episode of the Deceit of Zeus; and again there is an 
unusual implication of special power or priority among the gods. 
Zeus’ respect for Night here is certainly strange, and quite un- 
paralleled in Homer and Hesiod. In view of later interpretations 
it might suggest that the poet of this episode knew somc story about 
Nyx as a cosmogonical figure. But the reference is an isolated one, 
and could be no more than a poetical development of the idea 
implicit in the phrase Νὺξ δμήτειρα θεῶν, ‘Night subduer of the 
gods’: even gods are overcome by sleep, hence even the virtually 
all-powerful Zeus hesitates to offend Night, the mother of sleep, 
lest she should subdue him on some unsuitable occasion. (It must 
be remarked, however, that he evidently had no hesitation about 
offending Hypnos himself, if he was prepared in the present 
passage to fling him out of heaven.) 





16 ...and he [Keus] would have cast me from the aither into the sea, out of sight, had 
not Night, subduer of gods and men, saved me; to her did I come in flight, and Ceus 
ceased, angry though he was; for he was in awe of doing what would be displeasing to 
swift Night. 


19 2-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(ii) An archate cosmogonical concept according to Aristotle 


17 Aristotle Met. N4, τορι Ὀ4 ...of δὲ ποιηταὶ of ἀρχαῖοι 
ταύτῃ ὁμοίως, ἧ βασιλεύειν καὶ ἄρχειν φασὶν οὐ τοὺς πρώτους 
οἷον Νύκτα καὶ Οὐρανὸν ἢ Χάος ἢ ᾿Οκεανόν, ἀλλὰ τὸν Δία. (Cf. 
Met. ΛΟ, 1071b27 οἱ θεολόγοι οἱ ἐκ Νυκτὸς γεννῶντες : also 1614. 
107248.) 

Aristotle thus accepted that there were poets and writers about the 
gods who put Night ‘first’, or who generated from Night. He may 
well have had the Homeric passage, 16, in mind; but this alone 
would hardly motivate his inclusion of Night, and it seems probable 
that he was thinking primarily of the post-Hesiodic cosmogonies, 
produced during the sixth and fifth centuries B.c., to be described 
under (111). Inthese, Night, which was produced ata very early stage 
(though not the first) in the Hesiodic cosmogonical account (24), 
and was classed with Gaia, Okeanos and Ouranos in other more 
casual references in the Theogony (20 and 106f.), is elevated to the 
first stage of all, either by herself or jointly with other substances, 
Air or Tartaros. It is natural that both Day and Night should come 
into being as soon as Sky and Earth have separated, to occupy the 
gap between the two." It is clear from Met. ΛΘ, 1071b27 that by 
TOUS πρώτους in 17 Aristotle meant ‘absolutely first’, not simply 
‘at an early stage’; though all the four figures mentioned are 
important in the Hesiodic account, and we have no knowledge 
of any cosmogony which gave absolute priority to Ouranos. 


t Among the offspring of Night in a subsequent passage of Hesiod, Theog. 
211ff., are the Μοῖραι and Νέμεσις. This might seem to suggest that Night 
had a primordial distributive capacity (since the idea of distribution under- 
lies both these personifications), in a διάταξις or assignment of parts of the 
cosmos to different gods. Such a distribution is mentioned in Homer 
(again associated with the Deceit of Zeus): 18 Homer IJ, 15, 189 

τριχθὰ δὲ πάντα δέδασται, ἕκαστος δ᾽ ἔμμορε τιμῆς" 

ἤτοι ἐγὼν (sc. Poseidon) ἔλαχον πολιὴν ἅλα ναιϊέμεν αἰεὶ 

παλλομένων, ᾿Αἰίδης δ᾽ ἔλαχε φόφον ἠερόεντα, 

Ζεὺς δ᾽ ἔλαχ᾽ οὐρανὸν εὐρὺν ἐν αἰθέρι καὶ νεφέλῃσι" 

γαῖα δ᾽ ἔτι ξυνὴ πάντων καὶ μακρὸς "Ὄλυμπος. 





17 ...the ancient poets similarly, inasmuch as they say that not the first figures have 
rule and kingship (Night and Ouranos or Chaos or Okeanos, for example), but Xeus.— 
(Those writers about the gods who generate from Night.) 

18 In three parts were all things divided, and each got his share of honour: I indeed 
gained the grey sea to dwell in for ever, when the lots were shaken, and Hades gained misty 
darkness, and Keus the broad sky among aither and clouds; but earth and tall Olympus 
belonged in common to all. 


20 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


So in Hesiod, Theog. 112f. and 88:1 ff. (the latter passage after the subjection 
of the Titans and the probably interpolated Typhoeus; cf. the division of 
the heavens by Marduk after the defeat of Tiamat in the Babylonian 
Creation-epic, ANET 67). Yet this happens at a relatively late stage in 
cosmogony; and Moira and Nemesis are probably associated with Night 
merely because, like her other children (Death, Grief, etc.), they can be 
regarded as baleful and intractable powers. 


(111) Nght tn cosmogonies assigned to Orpheus, Musaeus, Epimenides 
19 Damascius de principiis 124 (DK 1B12) ἡ δὲ παρὰ τῷ Περι- 
πατητικῷ Εὐδήμῳ ἀναγεγραμμένη ὡς τοῦ ᾿Ορφέως οὖσα θεολογία 
πᾶν τὸ νοητὸν ἐσιώπησεν... ἀπττὸ δὲ τῆς Νυκτὸς ἐποιήσατο τὴν 
ἀρχήν, ap’ ἧς καὶ Ὅμηρος, εἰ καὶ μὴ συνεχῆ πεποίηται τὴν 
γενεαλογίαν, ἵστησιν᾽ οὐ γὰρ ἀποδεκτέον Εὐδήμου λέγοντος ὅτι 
ἀπὸ ὠκεανοῦ καὶ Τηθύος ἄρχεται. ... 

20 Philodemus de pietate 47a (ὨΚ. 985) ἐν δὲ τοῖς εἰς ᾿Επιμενίδην 
(sc. ἀναφερομένοις ἔπεσιν) ἐξ ᾿Αέρος καὶ Νυκτὸς τὰ πάντα συστῆναι, 
ζὥσπερ Kal) Ὅμηρος (ἀποφαίγ)γνετ᾽ ᾿Οκεανὸν ἐκ Τηθύος τοὺς θεοὺς 
γεννᾶν.... (Cf. also 40.) 

21 Philodemus de pretate 137, 5 ἐν μέν τισιν ἐκ Νυκτὸς καὶ 
Ταρτάρου λέγεται τὰ πάντα, ἐν δέ τισιν ἐξ ἍΑιδον καὶ Αἰθέρος ὁ δὲ 
τὴν Τιτανομαχίαν γράψας ἐξ Αἰθέρος φησίν, ᾿Ακουσίλαος δὲ ἐκ 
Χάους πρώτου τἄλλα’ ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀναφερομένοις εἰς Μουσαῖον 
γέγραπται Τάρταρον πρῶτον {καὶ Ν)ύκτα. 

19 (on which see also pp. 4011) shows that Eudemus did not 
explain the priority of Night in the Orphic cosmogony as being 
dependent on the Homeric passage, 16. This was because he 
considered that Homer clearly assigned cosmogonical priority to 
Okeanos and Tethys (9, 10). Damascius here goes counter to 
Eudemus, and may mean to imply that the Orphic account was 
to some extent indebted to Homer.? But the crux of the matter 


19 The theology ascribed to Orpheus in Eudemus the Peripatetic kept silence about the 
whole intelligible realm. ..but he made the origin from Night, from whom Homer too 
(even though he does not describe the succession of generations as continuous) establishes the 
beginning of things; for we must not accept it when Eudemus says that Homer begins from 
Okeanos and Tethys.... 

20 In the verses ascribed to Epimenides all things are composed from Air and Night; as 
Homer, also, declared that Okeanos begets the gods from Tethys.... 

21 In some sources all things are said to come from Night and Tartaros, and in some 
from Hades and Aither; the author of the Titanomachy says they came from Aither, and 
Acusilaus says that the other things come from Chaos, which was the first; while in the 
verses ascribed to Musaeus it is written that Tartaros and Night were first. 





21 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


is the interpretation of 20 and 21. These passages indicate that 
there were poetical accounts, composed probably in the sixth 
century B.c., which made Night (in association with Aer or 
Tartaros, both conveying the idea of darkness) the origin of the 
world. Jf thcre was an ancient, non-derivative theory of Night as 
a genuine cosmogonical figure (as Aristotle in 17 suggests), as 
opposed to post-Hesiodic learned variants, then these passages are 
likely to be our surest evidence for it: but only if they themselves 
appear to be non-Hesiodic in character. This, however, they do 
not appear (to the present writer at least) to be. With the exception 
of ᾿Αήρ in ‘ Epimenides” the cosmic figures involved are all to be 
found in the Hesiodic cosmogony proper (24) ; and ᾿Αήρ, implying 
mist and darkness rather than the transparent stuff that we call 
‘air’, is an essential element of the Hesiodic description although 
it does not happen to achieve personification—thus in the second 
stage of production, before Night, comes ‘misty Tartaros’, Taptap& 
τ᾽ ἠερόεντα (Theog. 119). When we see from Damascius’ reference 
to ‘Epimenides’ in 40 that Night and ᾿Αήρ produce Tartaros, it 
begins to look as though this account is working strictly within the 
limits of the Hesiodic prototype. In fact this is not entirely true, 
because later in 40 an egg is produced—a non-Hesiodic and con- 
ceivably primitive device (see pp. 44-8). Nevertheless, the first 
stages do not appear to be unaffected by the Hesiodic version; this 
impression is even stronger with ‘Musaeus’3 and the other accounts 
mentioned in 21. Tartaros and Night belong to the second and 
third stages respectively of the Hesiodic cosmogony; they seemed 
to share the qualities which were sometimes assigned to Chaos 
itself, which was therefore suppressed—although Acusilaus of 
Argos (probably late sixth to early fifth century) retained the 
genuine Hesiodic order. 


1 Night is described in the Orphic Rhapsodies (see p. 40) as a figure of 
great importance, the near-equal and successor of Phanes-Protogonos. So 
22 Hermias in Plat. Phaedr. 247 α (Kern Orphicorum Fragmenta fr. 86, 1 f.) 
Πρωτόγονόν ye μὲν οὔτις ἐσέδρακεν ὀφθαλμοῖσιν / el μὴ NUE ἱερὴ μούνη. 
23 Proclus in Plat. Crat. 3968 (Kern fr. 101) (Phanes) σκῆπτρον δ᾽ 
ἀριδείκετον elo χέρεσσιν / θῆκε θεᾶς Νυκτός, (iv? ἔχῃ» βασιληίδα τιμήν. 





22 None gazed upon Protogonos [‘ First-born’| with their eyes, except holy Night 
alone. 

23 (Phanes) placed his famous sceptre in the hands of goddess Night, so that she might 
have the prerogative of rulership. 


22 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


According to 33, q.v., Night gave birth to Ouranos and Gaia: this seems 
to have been a secondary rebirth of some kind, see p. 40. The detail is not 
stressed, and in fact Phanes is the real creator-god; the relation of Night 
to sky and earth seems to be an incidental refinement. Another Orphic 
succession (Kern fr. 107) is Chaos-Okeanos-Nyx-Ouranos-Zeus. This, 
again, may merely imply a rearrangement of Hesiod in the light of Homer. 
Chrysippus, who is said to have ‘accommodated’ to Stoicism ideas 
ascribed to Orpheus and Musaeus, described Night as the first goddess 
(Chrys. ap. Philodemum fiet. 13, 16; 14, 18, DK2B14). 

2 On Epimenides see pp. 44f.: the hexameter cosmogony and theogony to 
which his name was later attached was probably not by him (as Philo- 
demus evidently suspected), but it may nevertheless have originated in the 
sixth century B.c. Damascius, too, stated that Aer and Night were 
Epimenides’ first principles, and gave Eudemus as his source for this (40). 
Philodemus, therefore, who must also have relied on Eudemus’ standard 
history of theology, provides in 20 an earlier confirmation of Damascius’ 
reliability. 

3 The name of Musaeus, the mythical disciple of Orpheus and eponymous 
author of oracle-literature, tended to become attached to any kind of 
other-worldly verses—including, evidently, a theogonical pocm like that 
assigned to Epimenides. The late sixth century B.c. is a plausible date for 
such a poem and such an ascription: compare the case of Onomacritus, 
who according to Herodotus vu, 6 (DK 28 20a) was banished from Athens 
by Hipparchus when, having been entrusted with the collection and arrange- 
ment of Musaeus’ oracles, he was found to have inserted a spurious one. 

4 Acusilaus was a genealogist who might well have given a summary, and 
of course unoriginal, account of the first ancestors; though some of the 
material assigned to him was later suspected. According to Damascius 
(DK 98 1) he made a limited rearrangement of the Hesiodic figures which 
came after Chaos; but he is almost entirely irrelevant to the history of early 
Greek philosophy, and scarcely deserves the space accorded him in DK. 


A new and important consideration may be introduced here. 
After the episode of the defeat of the Titans in the Theogony comes 
a series of passages (726-819) which have been widely recognized 
as additions to the ‘original’ text; they are in fact short variant 
descriptions of the underworld. These variants, or some of them, 
may of course be no later than the rest of the poem, though not 
composed for the place where they are now found. The probability 
is, however, that most of them were specially composed to 
‘improve’ on the integral references to the underworld. If this is 
the case they belong to the later part of the seventh century at the 
earliest, while the early sixth century seems a likelier period for 
their composition. Now in most of these variants Night is, quite 
naturally, given some prominence: see for example 2, where Night 
surrounds the ‘throat’ of Tartaros, and above are the roots of the 


23 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


earth (in itself probably a genuinely primitive conception). But in 
27 (q.v., with discussion on pp. 30f.) this conception is further 
developed, and the sources and limits of all things are located in 
the great windy gap which is probably a later specification of 
Chaos in line 116 (24); the halls of dark night are said to be in or 
around this χάσμα. It is easy to see that this trend of thought 
could lead to the elevation of Night to be representative of the 
original, inchoate state of things. In the original cosmogonical 
account (24) Night comes at an early and important stage; the 
tendency to rearrange the Hesiodic figures is already indicated for 
the sixth century (probably) ; Homer provided one piece of cryptic 
encouragement for a further elevation of Night; and added elabo- 
rations of the Hesiodic picture of the underworld tended to re- 
interpret Tartaros and Night as local forms of an originative Χάος. 
These factors provide motive enough for Aristotle’s judgement in 
17; and there seems to be little indication at present that the idea 
of an absolute priority of Night occurred early enough, or in a 
sufficiently independent form, to have had any effect on scientific 
cosmogonical thought. The isolated Homeric reference, 16, cannot 
be assessed with any ccrtainty: it may be simply a reference to the 
power of sleep, or it may be derived from a lost myth in which a 
personified Night had some special relationship to Zeus. 


4. THE HESIODIC COSMOGONY, AND THE 
SEPARATION OF SKY AND EARTH 


24 Hesiod Theogony 116 


Ἦ τοι μὲν πρώτιστα Χάος γένετ᾽, αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα 116 
Dai’ εὐρύστερνος, πάντων ἕδος ἀσφαλὲς αἰεί, 117 
Τάρταρά τ᾽ ἠερόεντα μυχῷ χθονὸς eUpuodeins,! 110 
15° Ἔρος, ὃς κάλλιστος ἐν ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι, 120 


λυσιμελής, πάντων δὲ θεῶν πάντων τ᾽ ἀνθρώπων 
δάμναται ἐν στήθεσσι νόον καὶ ἐπίφρονα βουλήν. 
ἐκ Χάεος δ᾽ Ἔρεβός τε μέλαινά τε Νὺξ ἐγένοντο᾽ 
Νυκτὸς δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ Αἰθήρ τε καὶ Ημέρη ἐξεγένοντο, 





24 Verily first of all did Chaos come into being, and then broad-bosomed Gaia [φαγί], 
a firm seat of all things for ever, and misty Tartaros in a recess of broad-wayed earth, and 
Eros, who is fairest among immortal gods, looser of limbs, and subdues in their breasts the 
mind and thoughtful counsel of all gods and all men. Out of Chaos, Erebos and black 
Night came into being; and from Night, again, came Aither and Day, whom she conceived 


24 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


oUs τέκε κυσαμένη ᾿Ερέβει φιλότητι μιγεῖσα. 125 

Γαῖα δέ τοι πρῶτον μὲν ἐγείνατο ἶσον ἑαυτῇ 

Οὐρανὸν ἀστερόενθ᾽, ἵνα μιν περὶ πάντα καλύτττοι, 

ὄφρ᾽ εἴη μακάρεσσι θεοῖς ἕδος ἀσφαλὲς αἰεί. 

γείνατο δ᾽ Οὔρεα μακρά, θεῶν χαρίεντας ἐναύλους 

Νυμφέων, αἵ ναίουσιν ἀν᾽ οὔρεα βησσήεντα. 130 

ἡ δὲ kal &tpuyetov πέλαγος τέκεν, οἴδματι θυῖον, 

Πόντον, ἄτερ φιλότητος ἐφιμέρον αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα 

Οὐρανῷ εὐνηθεῖσα τέκ᾽ "Wkeavov βαθυδίνην, 

Κοῖόν te Κρῖόν θ᾽ ὝὙπερίονά τ᾽ ᾿Ιαπετόν τε.. ..2 
1 Line 118, ἀθανάτων of ἔχουσι κάρη νιφόεντος ᾿Ολύμπου, is inorganic and 
quite inappropriate here, and has been omitted. It occurs in the medieval 
mss., but is absent from quotations by Plato (Symp. 1788) and ps.- 
Aristotle (IZXG 1, 975a11), as well as by Sextus Empiricus and Stobaeus. 
Line 119 was also omitted in these quotations (as, apparently, in the copy 
used by Zeno of Citium: SVF 1, 104—5), and a scholiast remarks ἀθετεῖται 
(‘it is marked as spurious’) ; yet it is quoted in its correct place by Chalcidius 
(in Tim. 122), who omitted 118. Plato’s continuation of 117 by 120 is not 
necessarily significant; he was solely interested in Eros, and quoted what 
was relevant to Eros and no more. The scholiast’s doubt, and post- 
Platonic omissions, may have originated in Plato’s omission; or the line 
may have been felt to be incongruous, having been added at the time 
when the variant descriptions of Hades accrued (p. 23). 


2 The list of Titans is completed in the lines that follow; Gaia’s subsequent 
offspring are patently non-cosmological. At 154 ff. comes the story of the 
mutilation of Kronos (32). At 211 ff. there is a reversion to the production 
of personified abstractions, e.g. by Night and Strife, but they have no 
cosmological significance. 


The author of the Theogony decided to trace back the ancestry of 
the gods to the beginning of the world, and 24 is his account of the 
earliest stages, in which the production of cosmic constituents like 
Ouranos (sky) gradually leads to the generation of vague but fully 
anthropomorphic mythical persons like the Titans. This poetical 
cosmogony, composed presumably at some time during the seventh 
century B.C., was not, however, invented by Hesiod: its occasional 
irrationality and reduplication of stages indicate that it is a 





and bore after mingling in love with Erebos. And Earth first of all brought forth starry 
Ouranos [sky], equal to herself, to cover her completely round about, to be a firm seat 
for the blessed gods for ever. Then she brought forth tall Mountains, lovely haunts of the 
divine Nymphs who dwell in the woody mountains. She also gave birth to the unharvested 
sea, seething with tts swell, Pontos, without delightful love; and then having lain with 
Ouranos she bore deep-eddying Okeanos, and Kotos and Krios and Hyperion and 
Tapetos.... 


25 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


synthesis of at least two earlier variant accounts. For example, 
Erebos (which may be of Hittite etymology), although there is 
some vagueness about it in Homer, must be locally related to the 
whole complex Gaia-Hades-Tartaros ("EpéBeogiv ὑπὸ χθονός at 
Theogony 669); yet it is produced a stage later than Gaia and 
Tartaros. It might be explained as a local differentiation, as 
Mountains and Sea (Pontos) are produced as local differentiations 
from Earth; but in that case it should naturally originate from 
Tartaros or Gaia and not from Chaos. It is grouped with Night, 
no doubt, because it shares a major characteristic (darkness), as 
Aither is grouped with Day. Generation is of opposites (e.g. of 
Aither and Day by Erebos—whose neuter gender does not inhibit 
parental activities—and Night), or of similars (Erebos and Night 
from Chaos, see p. 31), or of local differentiations. Some births, 
however, cannot be explained on any of these principles—notably 
that of Ouranos from Gaia. Again, there is inconsistency over the 
method of production. Eros is produced at the first stage of 
differentiation, presumably to provide an anthropomorphic, 
sexual explanation of subsequent differentiation. It is not, how- 
ever, consistently used. Gaia produces Pontos ‘without love’ at 
132; Night mates with Erebos at 125 but produces again ‘without 
sleeping with anyone’ at 213; Chaos at 123, and Gaia again at 
126, produce independently though Love is already in existence. 
Immediately after producing Pontos independently at 132, Gaia 
produces the more fully personalized Okeanos by mating with her 
son and consort Ouranos.* 


X In view of his cosmological importance as the surrounding river (§2) 
one would expect Okeanos to occur earlier, rather than later, than Pontos, 
which can properly be regarded as a detail of the earth. The production 
of Okeanos by Gaia and Ouranos may have a rationalistic motive, since the 
surrounding stream forms the point of contact between earth and the 
enclosing bowl of sky. 


‘First of all Chaos came-to-be’: the primacy of Chaos is 
remarkable, and a careful enquiry must be made into what Hesiod 
is likely to have meant by Χάος here. Three interpretations may be 
rejected immediately: (i) Aristotle (Phys. Δι, 208b29) took it to 
mean space. But this concept is much later than the Theogony, 
occurring first, probably, in Pythagoras, then more clearly in Zeno 
of Elea, and most clearly in Plato’s Timaeus. (ii) The Stoics 
followed Zeno of Citium (e.g. SVF 1, 103), who perhaps took the 


26 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


idea from Pherecydes of Syros (DK 7B 14), in deriving χάος from 
χέεσθαι and therefore interpreting it as what is poured, i.e. water. 
(iii) The common modern sense of chaos as disorder can be seen 
e.g. in Lucian Amores 32, where Hesiod’s χάος is interpreted as 
disordered, shapeless matter. ‘This, again, may be Stoic in origin. 

The noun is derived from γίχα, meaning ‘gape, gap, yawn’, as 
in χαίνειν, χάσκειν, etc. Of the certain uses of the word before 
400 B.C., one group simply refers to the cosmogonic Χάος of this 
passage (so Acusilaus in 21, Aristophanes Birds 693, Clouds 627); 
the other group has the special meaning ‘air’, in the sense of the 
region between sky and earth, the region in which birds fly (so 
Bacchylides 5, 27, Euripides fr. 448 (Nauck’), Aristophanes 
Clouds 424, Birds 1218). One may suspect that Bacchylides’ 
poetical and perhaps original use of the highly individual phrase 
ἐν ἀτρύτῳ χάει (as that in which the eagle flies—the free air, as 
opposed to earth or sea) was consciously imitated by Euripides and 
Aristophanes, either lyrically (Birds 1218) or as a convenient 
though not necessarily serious interpretation to be placed on the 
cosmogonical chaos of Hesiod. The evidence, then, does not point 
to an extensive use of χάος as the space between sky and earth, 
though such a use was certainly known. Here we must consider 
another instance of the word in the Theogony itself (in an episode 
which is possibly an expansion or addition, but which, even so, can 
hardly be later in date than the early sixth century): 


25 Hesiod Theogony 695 (Zeus hurls thunderbolts at the Titans) 
Ezee δὲ χθὼν πᾶσα Kal ᾿Οὐκεανοῖο ῥέεθρα 
πόντος T ἀτρύγετος᾽ τοὺς δ᾽ ἄμφεπε θερμὸς ἀυτμὴ 
Τιτῆνας χθονίους, φλὸξ δ᾽ αἰθέρα δῖαν ἵκανεν 
ἄσπετος, ὄσσε δ᾽ ἄμερδε καὶ ἰφθίμων περ ἐόντων 
αὐγὴ μαρμαίρουσα κεραυνοῦ τε στεροπῆς τε. 
καῦμα δὲ θεσπέσιον κατέχεν Χάος᾽ εἴσατο δ᾽ ἄντα 700 
ὀφθαλμοῖσι ἰδεῖν ἠδ᾽ οὔασι ὄσσαν ἀκοῦσαι 
αὕτως ὡς εἰ Γαῖα καὶ Οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς ὕπερθε 
πίλνατο᾽ τοῖος γάρ κε μέγας ὑπὸ δοῦτος ὀρώρει. . .. 





25 The whole earth boiled, and the streams of Okeanos, and the unharvested sea; 
and them, the earth-born Titans, did a warm blast surround, and flame unquenchable 
reached the holy aither, and the darting gleam of thunderbolt and lightning blinded the eyes 
even of strong men. A marvellous burning took hold of Chaos; and it was the same to 
behold with the eyes or to hear the noise with the ears as tf earth and broad heaven above 
drew together; for just such a great din would rise up.... 


27 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


There has been dispute about which region of the world is repre- 
sented by Χάος in line 700. Either (a) it represents the whole or 
part of the underworld: there is a parallel for this usage at 
Theogony 814 (28), in one of the added variants (see pp. 23f.); or 
(6) it represents the region between earth and aither. But (a) 
would be difficult: why should the heat penetrate to the underworld 
(the concussion of missiles does so at 681 ff., but that is natural and 
effective)? The Titans are not in the underworld, but on Mount 
Othrys (632); we have bcen told that the flash reaches the 
upper air, and it is relevant to add that the heat, also, filled 
the whole intermediate region. The following lines imagine earth 
and sky as clashing together—again, the emphasis is certainly 
not on the underworld. An objective judge would surely con- 
clude that Χάος at line 700 describes the region between earth 
and sky. 

In view of the basic meaning of χάος (as a gap, 1.6. a bounded 
interval, not ‘void’ or anything like that),t and of one certain fifth- 
century usage as the region between sky and earth, and of another 
use of the word in the Theogony in which the meaning is probably 
the same, serious attention must be paid to an interpretation pro- 
pounded most notably by Cornford (e.g. Principium Saptentiae 
194f.), that Χάος yévet’ in the first line of 24 implies that the gap 
between earth and sky came into being; that is, that the first stage of 
cosmogony was the separation of earth and sky. This would not be 
consistent with one existing and indubitable feature of the cosmo- 
gony, the postponement of the birth of Ouranos until a second 
stage, at lines 126f. (Production from Chaos, lines 123 ff., and 
from Gaia, 126ff., may take place simultaneously.) Apart from 
this peculiarity, the other conditions fit the proposed interpreta- 
tion: earth, with its appendage Tartaros, appears directly the gap 
is made; so does Eros, which in its most concrete form as 
rain/semen exists between sky and earth according to poetical 
references. It seems not improbable that in the Hesiodic scheme 
the explicit description of the formation of Ouranos has been 
delayed through the confused use of two separate accounts (a con- 
fusion which can be paralleled from other details of the scheme), 
and that it is implied in line 116 at the very first stage of cosmogony. 
The separation of sky and earth is certainly reduplicated in the 
Theogony, in a fully mythopoeic form, in the story of the mutilation 
of Kronos (32); though reduplication of accounts of a different 


28 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


logical character (quasi-rationalistic and mythopoeic) is easier to 

accept than reduplication on the same, quasi-rationalistic level. 
ΓΛ comparison has often been drawn between χάος and ginnunga-gap in 
the Nordic cosmogony. This gap (which, however, preceded the creation 
of the giant from whom earth and sky were made) has been taken to imply 
simply an indefinite empty space: but it is important to observe that in 
Snorri’s schematization it is conceived as being terminated by the realm 
of ice (Niflheim) to the north and that of fire (Muspellsheim) to the south. 
This certainly does not invalidate the supposition that χάος implies 
primarily a region of vast size, but secondarily and implicitly its boundaries. 


2 Not in Homer or Hesiod; most notably in 26 Acschylus fr. 44, 1-5 (from 
the Danaids) 

ἐρᾷ μὲν ἁγνὸς οὐρανὸς τρῶσαι χθόνα, 

ἔρως δὲ γαῖαν λαμβάνει γάμον τυχεῖν. 

ὄμβρος δ᾽ ἀπ᾽ εὐνατῆρος οὐρανοῦ πεσὼν 

ἔκυσε γαῖαν " ἡ δὲ τίκτεται βροτοῖς 

μήλων τε βοσκὰς καὶ βίον Δημήτριον. 


This idea of the rain actually fertilizing the earth may be of grcat antiquity. 


Cornford’s interpretation may be helped by the verb used to 
describe the first stage of cosmogony: not ἦν but yévet’, perhaps 
implying that Χάος was not the eternal precondition of a differen- 
tiated world, but a modification of that precondition. (It is out of 
the question that Hesiod or his source was thinking of the originative 
substance as coming into being out of nothing.) The conception 
that earth and sky were originally one mass may have been so 
common (sec pp. 32-4.) that Hesiod could take it for granted, and 
begin his account of world-formation at the first stage of differen- 
tiation. This would be, undoubtedly, a cryptic and laconic pro- 
cedure; and it seems probable that something more complicated 
was meant by Χάος yévet’ than, simply, ‘sky and earth separated ’— 
though I am inclined to accept that this was originally implicit 
in the phrase. The nature of the gap between sky and earth, after 
their first separation, may well have been somehow specified in the 
popular traditions on which Hesiod was presumably drawing. 
There was, conceivably, an attempt to imagine what would be the 
appearance of things when there was simply dark sky, and earth, 
and the gap between. Here we must turn for assistance to two of 
the variants (see p. 23) on the description of the underworld, 
appended to the Titanomachy in the Theogony. 








26 Holy sky passionately longs to penetrate the earth, and desire takes hold of earth to 
achieve this union. Rain from her bedfellow sky falls and impregnates earth, and she 
brings forth for mortals pasturage for flocks and Demeter’s livelihood. 


29 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


27 Hesiod Theogony 736 

ἔνθα δὲ γῆς Svogeptis καὶ Ταρτάρου ἠερόεντος 

πόντου τ᾽ ἀτρυγέτοιο καὶ οὐρανοῦ ἀστερόεντος 

ἑξείης πάντων πηγαὶ καὶ πείρατ᾽ ἔασιν 

ἀργαλέ᾽ εὐρώεντα, τά τε στυγέουσι θεοί περ, 

χάσμα μέγ᾽, οὐδέ κε πάντα τελεσφόρον εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν 740 

οὖδας ἵκοιτ᾽, εἰ πρῶτα πυλέων ἔντοσθε γένοιτο. 

ἀλλά κεν ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα φέροι πρὸ θύελλα θυέλλῃ 

ἀργαλέη δεινὸν δὲ καὶ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι 

τοῦτο τέρας’ Νυκτὸς δ᾽ ἐρεβεννῆς οἰκία δεινὰ 

ἕστηκεν νεφέλῃς κεκαλυμμένα κυανέῃσιν. 745 
28 Hesiod Theogony 811 (following a repetition of Il. 736-9, 
vide 27) 

ἔνθα δὲ μαρμάρεαί Te πύλαι Kal χάλκεος οὐδὸς 

ἀστεμφής, Pigno1 διηνεκέεσσιν ἀρηρώς, 

αὐτοφνής᾽ πρόσθεν δὲ θεῶν ἔκτοσθεν ἁπάντων 

Τιτῆνες ναίουσι, πέρην Χάεος τοφεροῖο. 


Of these, 27 is evidently an attempt to improve 726-8 (2), where 
Tartaros (perhaps its upper part) is said to be surrounded by 
Night, and above it are the roots of earth and sea. In πείρατ᾽ there 
is ἃ more exact reversion to the apparent sourcc of 2, 1.6. 71. 8, 
478-9, τὰ velata Treipad’. . .yains Kal πόντοιο : while πηγαί (there 
is no reference, of course, to the ultimate originative sources of all 
things, as certain ingenious men have thought) is introduced as 
being especially appropriate to the sea. 740ff. are a special and 
peculiar development of 720ff. 28, on the other hand, which follows 
a repetition of the first four lines of 27, begins with a slightly 
altered line (1. 8, 15) from the Homeric description of Tartaros 
(1), then with the ‘roots’ of 2, quite vague this time, and ends with 
the χάσμα μέγ᾽ of 740 repeated as Χάεος. Both passages contain 
inconsistencies and impossibilities, which indicate that they are 
somewhat superficial expansions by composers who were either 





27 There of murky earth and misty Tartaros and unharvested sea and starry sky, of all 
of them, are the springs in a row and the grievous, dank limits which even the gods detest; 
a great gulf, nor would ane reach the floor for the whole length of a fulfilling year, if one 
were once within the gates. But hither and thither storm on grievous storm would carry one 
on; dreadful is this portent even for immortal gods; and the dreadful halls of gloomy Night 
stand covered with blue-black clouds. 

28 There are gleaming gates and brazen floor, unshaken, fixed with continuous roots, 
self-grown; and in front, far from all the gods, dwell the Titans, across murky Chaos. 


30 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


careless or stupid; for example, it is difficult to be favourably 
impressed by the alteration of the reasonable idea that the roots of 
the earth are above Tartaros to the idea that the ‘sources and 
boundaries’ of earth, sea, sky and Tartaros are in Tartaros (27). 
What is interesting is the further description of Tartaros as a 
χάσμα μέγ᾽, a great gulf or chasm (cf. Euripides Phoen. 1605), full 
of storms and containing the halls of Night. In 28 this gulf is 
described as ‘gloomy Chaos’ (we need not concern ourselves with 
its peculiar geography, except to note that Chaos is not absolutely 
unbounded). This must contain a reference to the initial Χάος of 
line 116 (24), and it seems reasonable to suppose that the authors 
of these two additions understood the initial Χάος to be dark and 
windy, like Tartaros. This interpretation gains some support from 
the fact that in the original cosmogonical account Erebos and 
Night (both, presumably, gloomy) are produced from Chaos at 
the stage after the production of Gaia, Tartaros and Eros. 

The evidence seems to point to the following conclusion. For 
Hesiod’s source, at all events, the first stage in the formation of a 
differentiated world was the production of a vast gap between sky 
and earth. By Hesiod the emphasis is placed on the nature of the 
gap itself, not on the act of separation which produced it. The gap 
is conceived as dark and windy—dark, because aither and sun 
had not yet come into being, and windy, because this is the natural 
condition of the region (as can be perceived when one 15 away from 
shelter, e.g. on a high hillside). ‘The same kind of description 1s 
applied, quite naturally, to the lightless gulfs of Tartaros; and in 
additions to the original poem Tartaros is considered in terms of, 
or actually as a part of, the original gap.* 


t G, Vlastos (Gnomon 27 (1955) 74-5) finds 27 significant for the origin of 
Hesiod’s cosmogonical Χάος, and even suggests that it was from here that 
Anaximander got the idea of τὸ ἄπειρον. U. Holscher, too (Hermes 81 
(1953) 391-401), has completely rejected the Cornford interpretation, and 
takes Χάος to be a dark and boundless waste. He supports this by the 
assumption that a cosmogony, attributed to Sanchuniathon (a Phoenician 
said to have lived before the Trojan war) by Philo of Byblus ap. Eusebium 
P.E.1, το, is really of great antiquity, much older than Hesiod. According 
to the summary in Eusebius the first state of things was gloomy, boundless 
air and wind (χάος θολερόν, ἐρεβῶδες is one of its descriptions). When this 
‘passionately desired its own ἀρχαί᾽ (whatever that may mean) there was 
intermixture. Mot (some kind of slime) was produced, and became the 
sowing of creation. Now it is true that the discoveries at Ras Shamra and 
elsewhere have shown (a) that some motifs in Greek mythology originated 


31 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


long before Homer and Hesiod, and outside Greece; (δ) that Phoenicia 
had its own versions of myths about the early history of the gods, in the 
second millennium B.c., and was a meeting-place of cultures. It is also 
true that in the theogony attributed to Sanchuniathon, after the cosmo- 
gonical summary, there is one detail (a deity, Eliun, in the generation 
before Ouranos) which does not correspond with Hesiod and does 
correspond with the cognate Hittite account of the 2nd millennium (see 
pp. 36f.). But this may be a detail of the genuine and ancient local cosmo- 
gonical tradition, which could be incorporated at any date: it does not 
prove that every part of the whole farrago assigned to Sanchuniathon 
(Hermes Trismegistus and all) has any claim to incorporate ancient 
material. In particular, it does not even begin to suggest that the cosmo- 
gonical account is anything but what it appears to be, i.e. a Hellenistic 
eclectic pastiche of Hesiod and later cosmogonical sources (there is a 
possible mention of an egg). To use it as a means of interpreting Χάος in 
the Theogony, and of showing that the idea of an originative windy darkness 
was already established for Hesiod to assimilate, must be considered 
interesting rather than scientific. 


THE SEPARATION OF EARTH AND SKY IN GREEK 
LITERATURE 


29 Euripides fr. 484 (from Melanippe the Wise) 

κοὐκ ἐμὸς ὁ μῦθος ἀλλ᾽ ἐμῆς μητρὸς πάρα, 

ὡς οὐρανός τε γαῖά τ᾽ Tv μορφὴ μία" 

ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἐχωρίσθησαν ἀλλήλων δίχα 

τίκτουσι πιάντα κἀνέδωκαν εἰς φάος, 

δένδρη, πετεινά, θῆρας, οὕς θ᾽ ἅλμη τρέφει, 

γένος τε θνητῶν. 
30 Diodorus 1, 7, 1 (ὨΚ 68 Β 5,1) κατὰ γὰρ τὴν ἐξ ἀρχῆς τῶν 
ὅλων σύστασιν μίαν ἔχειν ἰδέαν οὐρανόν τε καὶ γῆν, μεμειγμένης 
αὐτῶν τῆς φύσεως: μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα διαστάντων τῶν σωμάτων ἀπ᾽ 
ἀλλήλων τὸν μὲν κόσμον περιλαβεῖν ἅττασαν τὴν ὁρωμένην ἐν αὐτῷ 
σύνταξιν... ..1 
21 Apollonius Rhodius 1, 496 

ἤειδεν δ᾽ ὡς γαῖα Kal οὐρανὸς ἠδὲ θάλασσα 

τὸ πρὶν ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι μιῇ συναρηρότα μορφῇ 





29 And the tale 1s not mine but from my mother, how sky and earth were one form; and 
when they had been separated apart from each other they bring forth all things, and gave 
them up into the light: trees, birds, beasts, the creatures nourished by the salt sea, and the 
race of mortals. 

30 For by the original composition of the universe sky and earth had one form, their 
natures being mingled; after this their bodies parted from each other, and the world took on 
the whole arrangement that we see in it.... 


31 He sang how earth and sky and sea, being formerly connected with each other in one 


32 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


veixeos ἐξ ὀλοοῖο διέκριθεν ἀμφὶς ἕκαστα᾽ 
ἠδ᾽ ὡς ἔμπεδον αἰὲν ἐν αἰθέρι τέκμαρ ἔχουσιν 
ἄστρα σεληναίη τε καὶ ἠελίοιο κέλευθοι. . ..? 


1 The cosmogony and anthropogony in this first book of Diodorus (who, 
shortly after this passage, quoted 29) were ascribed by Diels to Demo- 
critus. There is no mention of atoms, as Cornford noted; but some details 
of later stages may nevertheless come from the Μικρὸς διάκοσμος (p. 403 
and n.). The development of society is similar to that described by 
Protagoras in the Platonic dialogue. The whole account is eclectic, but its 
main features are of fifth-century origin and predominantly Ionian 
character; as such it may well embody traditional cosmogonical ideas. 


2 Orpheus is the singer. The cosmogony has nothing in common with 
special ‘Orphic’ accounts (§5): Apollonius would naturally put into 
Orpheus’ mouth the most primitive-sounding version that he knew. 


It has been suggested above that the implied, although not 
emphasized, first stage of the Hesiodic cosmogony was the separa- 
tion of sky and earth. That this idea was familiar enough in Greece 
is shown by 29-31. Only 29, admittedly, is even as early as the 
fifth century; but it is particularly important as explicitly describing 
the separation of sky and earth as being passed on from mother to 
child, i.c. as a popular and traditional account. No scientific 
parallel is known; though the idea may have been merged with 
specialized Ionian theories as in 30 and its continuation. 


SEPARATION IN NON-GREEK SOURCES 


The splitting of earth from sky is a cosmogonical mechanism that 
was widely used, long before the earliest known Greek cosmo- 
gonical ideas, in the mythological accounts of the great near-eastern 
cultures. (It isin fact common to many different cultures: cf., most 
notably, the Maori myth of the separation of Rangi (sky) and 
Papa (earth) by their constricted offspring, a close parallel to 32.) 
Thus a gloss from the end of the first millennium B.c. on the 
Egyptian Book of the Dead explains that ‘Re began to appear as 
a king, as one who was before the liftings of Shu had taken place, 
when he was on the hill which is in Hermopolis’ (ANET 4). Shu 
is the air-god which is sputtered out by Re and lifts the sky-goddess, 
Nut, from the earth-god, Keb. In the Hurrian-Hittite ‘Song of 
Ullikummi’ (ANET 125; Gurney, The Hittites, 190-4.) Upelluri, 





form, through destructive strife separated apart each from the other; and how stars, moon 
and the sun’s paths have forever in the aither a firm boundary.... 


3 33 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


a counterpart of Atlas, says: ‘When heaven and earth were built 
upon me 1 knew nothing of it, and when they came and cut 
heaven and earth asunder with a cleaver I knew nothing of it.’ In 
the Babylonian Creation-epic (iv, 137ff.; ANET 67) Marduk 
splits the body of the primeval water-goddess Tiamat and makes 
one half of it into sky (containing the celestial waters) and the 
other half into Apsu, the deep, and Esharra, the ‘great abode’ or 
firmament of earth. This is the first stage in the composition of the 
world as we know it, though a secondary stage in the far older 
history of the Babylonian pantheon. In another, later Semitic 
version, Genesis 1, the primeval waters are similarly divided: ‘ And 
God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and 
let it divide the waters from the waters. And God made the 
firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firma- 
ment from the waters which were above the firmament; and it was 
so. And God called the firmament Heaven.’ (Gen. i, 6~8.)? 


τ The opening words of the first chapter of Genesis, ‘In the beginning God 
created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form, and 
void’, are a confusing anticipation of what is to follow. The initial state is 
boundless, dark water; the first stage of differentiation is the separation of 
the waters into those of the sky and those of the earth. The anticipation in 
the initial summary provides a parallel for the reduplication involved in 
the Hesiodic cosmogony (p. 28). 


The separation of sky and earth was implied, therefore, in 
various non-Greek mythological accounts older than Hesiod. It 
will be seen in the next section that Hesiod’s description of the 
earliest generations of gods is a version of a basic near-eastern 
myth, which is also reproduccd in an extant Hurrian-Hittite form. 
There is nothing surprising, therefore, in the separation-motif 
appearing in Hesiod—whether implicitly in the quasi-rationalistic 
Χάος γένετ᾽ of the formal cosmogony, or more explicitly, but in 
fully mythopoeic guise, in the mutilation-story now to be 
considered. 


THE MUTILATION-MYTH IN THE THEOGONY 
32 Hesiod Theogony 154 
ὅσσοι yao Γαίης te καὶ Οὐρανοῦ ἐξεγένοντο, 
δεινότατοι παίδων, σφετέρῳ δ᾽ ἤχθοντο τοκῆι 





32 All that came forth from Gaia and Ouranos, the most dire of children, from the 
beginning were hated by their own begetter; and just as soon as any of them came into 


34 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


ἐξ c&oyiis’ Kal τῶν μὲν ὅπως τις πρῶτα γένοιτο 
πάντας ἀποκρύπτασκε, καὶ εἰς φάος οὐκ ἀνίεσκε, 
Γαίης ἐν κευθμῶνι, κακῷ δ᾽ ἐπετέρτπετο ἔργῳ 
Οὐρανός: ἡ δ᾽ ἐντὸς oTovayizeto Γαῖα πελώρη 


στεινομένη ᾿ δολίην δὲ κακήν τ᾽ ἐφράσσατο τέχνην. 160 
.. «εἷσε δέ μιν (sc. Κρόνον) κρύψασα λόχῳ " ἐνέθηκε δὲ χερσὶν 
ἅρπην καρχαρόδοντα, δόλον δ᾽ ὑπεθήκατο πάντα. 175 


ἦλθε δὲ Νύκτ᾽ ἐπάγων μέγας Οὐρανός, ἀμφὶ δὲ Γαίῃ 

ἱμείρων φιλότητος ἐπέσχετο καί ῥ᾽ ἐτανύσθη 

πάντῃ ὁ δ᾽ ἐκ λοχεοῖο πάις ὠρέξατο χειρὶ 

σκαιῇ, δεξιτερῇ δὲ πελώριον ἔλλαβεν ἅρπην 

μακρήν, καρχαρόδοντα, φίλου δ᾽ ἀπὸ μήδεα πατρὸς 180 

ἐσσυμένως ἤμησε, πάλιν δ᾽ ἔρριψε φέρεσθαι 

ἐξοπίσω... .. 
(The drops of blood fertilize Gaia and generate Furies, Giants 
and Melian nymphs; the severed parts fall into the sea, and 
from the foam Aphrodite is born.) 


The details of the present version suggest that Ouranos did separate 
from Gaia, in the daytime at least: but why in this case could not 
Gaia emit her offspring during his absence? It 1s probable that in 
other versions of the story Ouranos covered Gaia continuously (as 
Rangi covers Papa in the Maori myth), so that in a manner of 
speaking ‘sky and earth were one form’. There can be little doubt 
that this crude sexual account envisages, on another and less 
sophisticated plane, the same cosmogonical event that is implied 
first by Χάος γένετ᾽ and second by Γαῖα. . .éyeivato ἶσον ἑαυτῇ 
Οὐρανόν in the deliberate cosmogony of 24.7 


τ The most obvious parallel for the repetition in mythopoeic form of an 
event that has already been accounted for in a quasi-rationalistic and much 
more sophisticated summary is seen in Gencsis: the abstract Elohim of the 
first chapter is replaced by the fully anthropomorphic and much cruder 





being he hid them all away and did not let them into the light, in the inward places of 
Gaia; and Ouranos rejoiced over the evil deed. And she, prodigious Gaia, groaned within, 
for she was crowded out; and she contrived a crafty, evil device. ..she sent him [Kronos] 
into a hidden place of ambush, placed in his hands a jagged-toothed sickle, and enjoined on 
him the whole deceit. Great Ouranos came bringing Night with him, and over Gaia, 
desiring love, he stretched himself, and spread all over her; and he, his son, from his place 
of ambush stretched out with his left hand, and with his right he grasped the monstrous 
sickle, long and jagged-toothed, and swiftly sheared off the genitals of his dear father, and 
flung them behind him to be carried away.... 


35 32 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Jahweh of the second, and the vague ‘God created man in his own image’ of 
chapter i is repeated in a far more graphic and more primitive form in the 
second chapter, where Jahweh creates man out of dust and breathes life 
into his nostrils. (For man formed from clay cf. e.g. the Old Babylonian 
text ANET 99 col. 5, as well as the Greek Prometheus-myth.) 


That some of the contents of the Theogony are of non-Greek 
origin and of a date far earlier than Hesiod’s immediate pre- 
decessors is most strikingly shown by the parallelism between the 
Hesiodic account of the succession of oldest gods and the Hittite 
Kumarbi-tablet, of Hurrian origin and in its extant form dating 
from around the middle of the second millennium B.c.? In the 
Hittite version the first king in heaven is Alalu, who is driven out 
by the sky-god Anu (same root as Greek ouranos); Anu is deposed 
by the father of the developed gods, Kumarbi (equivalent to 
Kronos ‘father of the gods’). As Anu tries to escape into the sky 
Kumarbi bites off, and swallows, his member. On being told that 
he has become impregnated with the storm-god and two other 
‘terrible gods’, Kumarbi spits out the member, which impregnates 
the earth with the two other gods; Kumarbi cannot, however, rid 
himself of the storm-god, and eventually gives birth to him. With 
the help of Anu, it is evident, the storm-god (to whom the Greek 
equivalent is obviously the thunder-and-lightning god Zeus) 
deposes Kumarbi and becomes king in heaven. The similarities 
to the Greck myth are obvious: the succession sky-god, father of 
gods, storm-god is common to each; so is the emasculation of the 
sky-god by Kumarbi/Kronos, and the impregnation of earth by 
the rejected member. There are, of course, significant differences 
too: the Hittite version (like other near-eastern accounts) has a 
god, Alalu, before the sky-god; what K7yonos swallows 15 a stone (by 
mistake for the storm-god, Theog. 468ff.); and it is Rhea, not he, 
that bears the storm-god Zeus. It is thought that in the broken 
part of the Hittite tablet there may have been some reference to 
Kumarbi eating a stone, but this is uncertain. It should be noted 
that in Hesiod, also, the sky-god (with Gaia) helps the storm-god 
to survive. The Hittite version carries no implication that the 
emasculation of the sky-god was concerned with the separation of 
sky from earth; indeed, no earth-goddess is involved. This is an 
important difference, but it suggests, not that the Greek separation- 
motive had no 2nd-millennium archetype, but that the Greek 
version incorporates variants which do not happen to be found in 


36 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


the Hittite account. The Greek version was not derived specifically 
from the Hittite, of course: there was a widely diffused common 
account, with many local variants, of which the Hittite tablet 
gives one version and Hesiod another—a version, moreover, 
which had suffered the vicissitudes of transmission to a younger 
and very different culture. 


t For the Kumarbi-tablet see AVNET 120-1; Gurney, The Hittites, 190-2; 
R. Ὁ. Barnett, JHS 65 (1945) 100f.; H. G. Giiterbock, Kumarbi (Zurich 
1946), 100 ἢ; AFA 52 (1948) 23 ff. The ‘Song of Ullikummi’ (see pp. 33f.) 
records, on separate tablets, the further doings of Kumarbi while he is king 
in heaven; that sky and earth had been separated is plainly implied there. 


ἢ. ORPHIC COSMOGONIES 


Several variations in cosmogony were ascribed to ᾿᾽Ορφικοί, 
‘Orphics’. These might be described as people who, uniting 
elements from the cult of Apollo on the one hand (as Καθάρσιος, 
the purifier) and from Thracian reincarnation beliefs on the other, 
thought that the soul could survive if it were kept pure, and 
elaborated a partly individual mythology, with Dionysus as a 
central figure, to illustrate this theory. ‘The Thracian Orpheus, 
with his sexual purity, his musical powers, and his power of 
prophecy after death, represented the combination of the two 
elements. Orphic beliefs were recorded in sacred accounts, ἱεροὶ 
λόγοι. Now this description would certainly be true, say, of the third 
century B.c.; but there has been much controversy about how 
early there appeared a distinct class of people with well-defined 
and individual beliefs of this kind. W. K. C. Guthrie has a sober 
discussion of the subject in chapter x1 of The Greeks and their Gods 
(London, 1950): his view, which has many supporters, is that the 
Orphic doctrine was already set out in sacred books in the sixth 
century B.c. I. M. Linforth, however, in The Arts of Orpheus 
(Berkeley, 1941), analysed all the extant texts mentioning Orpheus 
and Orphics, and showed that, at any rate until 300 B.c., the 
description ‘Orphic’ was applied to all sorts of ideas connected 
with practically every kind of rite (τελετή). There were writings 
attributed to Orpheus, as indeed to Musaeus and Epimenides (see 
pp. 21ff.), as early as the sixth century B.c.; Herodotus knew of 
Orphics and Pythagoreans sharing a taboo in the fifth; Orphic 
oracle- and dispensation-mongers were familiar to Plato, and ‘so- 


37 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


called Orphic accounts’ to Aristotle. But the corpus of individual 
sectarian literature (of which descriptions of Hades, accounts of 
theogony and cosmogony, hymns, etc., are known to us) cannot 
for the most part be traced back earlier than the Hellenistic period, 
and in its present form mostly belongs to the Roman period. The 
inscribed metal sheets from graves in Magna Graecia and Crete, 
with instructions of an Orphic character for the soul of the dead 
man, again do not antedate the Hellenistic period. The conclusion 
to be drawn from the available evidence seems to the present 
writer to be, as Linforth held, that there was no exclusively Orphic 
body of belief'in the archaic period. However, Orpheus was then 
beginning to be treated as the patron saint of rites and ritual ways 
of life; and his name, like that of his legendary disciple Musaeus, 
became attached to theogonical literature of this period. Beliefs 
about reincarnation were becoming current in the Greek world, 
particularly in the west, and some adherents of these beliefs were 
calling themselves ’Opoikoi by the fifth century. The formation of 
an exclusive sect with a definite body of relevant sacred literature 
came later. 

In the present context, however, it is not necessary to try to 
establish a hypothesis on the Orphic question in general. The 
problem is primarily whether the cosmogonical ideas ascribed to the 
Orphics could have affected, or did affect, the development of 
philosophical thought in the sixth and fifth centuries. 

Some elements of Orphic cosmogony were obviously derived 
from the Hesiodic Theogony, which influenced nearly all sub- 
sequent mythological thought on the subject. Thus both Chaos 
and Night will be seen to have had considerable importance in 
Orphic contexts. These elements passed through the medium of 
late archaic accounts like those of ‘Epimenides’, ‘Musaeus’ and 
Acusilaus (p. 23 nn. 2-4), and became gradually embedded in an 
individual Orphic mythological complex. Other elements are 
almost certainly later in origin, and in some cases show awareness 
of the details of oriental cult and iconography." (This is a case of 
a learned adaptation of specific foreign information, not of the 
quite distinct process of the gradual assimilation of a widely- 
diffused general idea.) ‘There are many scholars, however (includ- 
ing e.g. Gruppe, Mazon, Nestle), who have nevertheless followed 
an ancient tendency to regard all beliefs described as ‘Orphic’, 
including these cosmogonical beliefs, as of great antiquity. The 


38 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


evidence set out below should demonstrate the subjective nature 
of any such tendency. The one unusual idea is that of the egg as a 
secondary theogonical mechanism. 


X Most conspicuously, Time, Χρόνος, as a primary cosmogonical figure 
may derive from the Iranian hypostatization <vran Akarana (unending 
time). But this Iranian concept finds its earliest testimony in a late 4th- 
century B.c. Greek reference, by Eudemus as reported in Chalcidius, and 
there is no reason to think that it was formulated as early as the Greek 
archaic period. ‘Time’ is a sophisticated cosmogonical concept in Plato’s 
Timaeus; it was also personified, probably as an etymology of Kronos, by 
Pherecydes of Syros as early as the sixth century, though probably not with 
a profound abstract significance (see n. 1 on p. 46 and n. 1 on p. 56). Its 
oriental derivation in the Orphic accounts is indicated by its concrete 
shape as a multi-headed winged snake. Such multipartite monsters, as 
distinct from simpler fantasies like centaurs and perhaps gorgons, are 
orientalizing in character, mainly Semitic in origin, and begin to appear 
in Greek art around 700 B.c. They were, of course, extremely popular as 
decoration during the seventh and the first quarter of the sixth centuries, 
(Minoan art, too, had had its monsters, mainly dog-headed deities and 
other relatively simple theriomorphic creations.) That the winged-snake 
form of Time is much later, in its Greek appearances, than the Orientaliz- 
ing period in art is chiefly suggested by the identification of an abstraction 
with such a form. This shows an acquaintance with rather complex 
oriental (especially Assyrian or Babylonian) modes of thought—something 
very different from the mere borrowing of a pictorial motif, or even the 
assimilation of a fully concrete myth-form. Such extravagances of the 
imagination evoked little sympathy in the Greek mind before the Hellenistic 
period. (It should be added, however, that some scholars see no objection 
to taking the winged-snake Chronos as archaic in date.) 


NEOPLATONIST ACCOUNTS OF ORPHIC COSMOGONIES 


The later Neoplatonists (fourth to sixth centuries A.pD.), and in 
particular Damascius, with their long schematic allegorizations of 
earlier mythological accounts, are the main source for Orphic 
versions of the formation of the world. These writers are more 
reliable than appears at first sight, since much of their information 
was derived from summaries of Eudemus’ great Peripatetic 
history of theology. In some cases fragments of late Orphic poetry 
can be adduced to confirm details of the Neoplatonic descriptions, 
which are tiresomely diffuse (and are therefore schematized in (ii) 
and (iii) below) and are expressed in the peculiar terminology of 
that school. Four different accounts of a cosmogony specifically 
named as Orphic are extant. 


39 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(i) Derivation from Night 
Damascius in 19 (q.v.) stated that according to Eudemus ‘the 
theology ascribed to Orpheus. ..made the origin of things from 
Night’. According to the Rhapsodies,' Night was the daughter of 
Phanes (see n. I on p. 22 and n. 3 on p. 41), himself descended 
from Chronos. She was given prophetic powers by Phanes, 
succeeded him as ruler, and seems somehow to have given birth 
for a second time to Gaia and Ouranos.? The secondary and 
repetitive nature of this production of sky and earth, and the 
obvious intention to make Phanes the ultimate creator of the world, 
suggest that Night’s cosmogonical priority (as distinct from her 
undoubted position as a venerable figure among the gods) is here 
mainly the result of the derivative and syncretistic character of the 
Orphic theogony. Eudemus’ judgement, however, is independent 
of these later developments, and must clearly be assessed in the 
light of Aristotle’s references (17) to writers about the gods who 
generated from Night. On pp. 20 and 24 it is concluded that these 
references are to sixth-century adaptations and elaborations of the 
Hesiodic Theogony, and that no earlier, autonomous doctrine is 
implied. ‘Two such elaborations are ascribed to Epimenides and 
Musaeus in 20 and 21; it was inevitable that similar systems should 
be associated also with Orpheus, if not in the sixth century B.c., 
then in the fifth or fourth. It appears probable that it was to this 
kind of derivative theogony that Eudemus referred. 
1 The so-called Orphic Rhapsodies (ἱεροὶ λόγοι ἐν ῥαψῳδίαις KS according 
to the Suda s.v. ’Opgevs), of which many fragments survive (Kern, 
frr. 59-235), mostly through quotation in Neoplatonist works, are a late 
compilation of hexameter verses of varying date of composition. None of 
them are certainly pre-Hellenistic and most are probably much later. 
Their name indicates their heterogeneous origin; it is significant that no 
author before the full Christian period seems to have heard of these verses, 
and it seems highly probable that their elaboration into an Orphic Iliad 
was not taken in hand until the third or fourth century a.p. Genuinely 


archaic beliefs might, of course, be embedded in some of these verses, late 
as they are in composition and collection. 


2 33 Orph. Rhaps. fr. 109 Kern (from Hermias) (Νύξ) ἡ δὲ πάλιν Γαῖάν 
τε Kal Οὐρανὸν εὐρὺν ἔτικτε / δεῖξέν τ᾽ EE ἀφανῶν φανεροὺς of τ᾽ εἰσὶ γενέθλην. 
But Phanes had already created Olympus, sun, moon and earth (frr. 80, 
96, 91-3, 04 Kern, from the Rhapsodies), and sky is also presupposed. 





33 And she [Night], again, bore Gaia and broad Ouranos, and revealed them as 
manifest, from being unseen, and who they are by birth. 


40 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


(ii) ‘ The usual Orphic theology’ in the Rhapsodtes 


34 Damascius de principis 123 (DK1B12) ἐν μὲν τοίνυν ταῖς 
φερομέναις ταύταις ρΡαψῳδίαις Ορφικαῖς ἡ θεολογία ἥδε τίς ἐστιν 
ἡ περὶ τὸ νοητόν, ἣν καὶ οἱ φιλόσοφοι διερμηνεύουσιν, ἀντὶ μὲν τῆς 
μιᾶς τῶν ὅλων ἀρχῆς τὸν Χρόνον τιθέντες. . . (the full description, 
for which see DK, is long, and is expressed in difficult Neoplatonic 
terms. The substance of it is here given schematically: 

2 Αἰθήρ 
Χρόνος 1» ᾧόνξ [or ἀργὴς χιτών, > Davns3 

\ Χάος or νεφέλη] [“«Μῆτις, 

’ Hoiketraios]) 





. .τοιαύτη μὲν ἡ συνήθης "OpgiKth θεολογία. 
1 Cf. 3§ Orph. Rhaps. fr. 66 Kern (from Proclus) Αἰθέρα μὲν Χρόνος 
οὗτος ἀγήραος ἀφθιτόμητις / γείνατο, Kal μέγα χάσμα πελώριον ἔνθα Kal 
ἔνθα. Syrianus (fr. 107 Kern) also gave Aither and Chaos as the second 
stage, but after ‘one and the good’ as first. The μέγα χάσμα is taken directly 
from Hesiod Theogony 740 (27). 
2 Cf. 36 Orph. Rhaps. fr. 70 Kern (from Damascius) ἔπειτα δ᾽ ἔτευξε 
μέγας Χρόνος αἰθέρι δίῳ / ὠεὸν ἀργύφιον. 
3 Phanes, connected by the Orphics with φαίνειν etc., is an exclusive 
Orphic development, of a comparatively late date, of the Hesiodic 
cosmogonical Eros (24). Winged, bisexual and self-fertilizing, bright and 
aithcrial, he gives birth to the first generations of gods and is the ultimate 
creator of the cosmos. 


(iti) The version of Hieronymus and Hellanicus 

37 Damascius de principiis 123615 (DK1B13) ἡ δὲ κατὰ τὸν 
Ἱερώνυμον φερομένη Kal Ἑλλάνικον (sc. "Opgikt θεολογία), εἴπτερ μὴ 
καὶ ὁ αὐτός ἐστι, οὕτως ἔχει" ὕδωρ ἦν, φησίν, ἐξ ἀρχῆς καὶ ὕλη, ἐξ 











34 In these Orphic Rhapsodies, then, as they are known, this is the theology concerned 
with the intelligible; which the philosophers, too, expound, putting Chronos in place of the 
one origin of all... 











J Aither 
(Chronos - egg [or shining tunic, - Phanes 
\ Chaos or cloud] [~ Metis, 
Erikepaios]) 


...Such is the usual Orphic theology. 
35 This Chronos, unageing and of imperishable counsel, produced Aither, and a great, 
mighty gulf here and there. 

36 Then great Chronos made in divine aither a silvery egg. 

37 The Orphic Theology which ts said to be according to Hieronymus and Hellanicus 
(if indeed he is not the same man) ts as follows: water existed from the beginning, he says, 
and matter, from which earth was solidified. ... 


41 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἧς ἐπάγη ἡ γῆ.... See DK for full description, of which a 
summary is given here: 


ὕδωρ Αἰθήρ 
Χρόνος ἀγήραος ---- Χάος 2 -»ᾧόν -» θεὸς ἀσώματο 
ὕλη > γῆ J (a winged, multi- Ἔρεβος (having wing: 
headed, bisexual and animal 
snake: also called heads) 


Heracles, and 
accompanied by 
᾿Ανάγκη and 
᾿Αδράστεια) 


I These authors cannot be identified with certainty. Damascius evidently 
suspected that they might be the same person, but more probably, for 
example, one was the epitomizer of the other. Hicronymus may be the 
author of Phoenician antiquities mentioned at Josephus Ant. 1, 94; a winged 
symbol for El-Kronos comes in ‘Sanchuniathon’, Euseb. P.E. 1, 10, 36 (see 
p- 31 n.). Hellanicus may have becn the father (2nd~1st cent. B.c.) of one 
Sandon, probably of Tarsus, an Orphic writcr mentioned in the Suda; this 
is much more likely than that he was the 5th-century B.c, Lesbian logo- 
grapher. 

2 ἐν τούτοις ὁ Χρόνος ᾧὸν ἐγέννησεν, says Damascius—i.e. in Aither, 
Chaos and Erebos. It is not explicitly stated that the ‘incorporeal god’ 
comes out of the egg, but he obviously does so: compare 38, and see next 
note for ἀσώματος. 


(iv) Athenagoras’ variant of (111) 

38 Athenagoras pro Christians 18, p. 20 Schwartz (DK1B13) 
εὐ ἦν yap ὕδωρ ἀρχὴ κατ᾽ αὐτὸν (sc. ᾿Ορφέα) τοῖς ὅλοις, ἀπὸ δὲ 
τοῦ ὕδατος ἰλὺς κατέστη, ἐκ δὲ ἑκατέρων ἐγεννήθη φῷον, δράκων 
προσπεφυκυῖαν ἔχων κεφαλὴν λέοντος, διὰ μέσου δὲ αὐτῶν θεοῦ 
πρόσωπον, ὄνομα Ἡρακλῆς καὶ Χρόνος. (So far this is almost 
identical with the version of Hieronymus and Hellanicus.) οὗτος ὁ 
Ἡρακλῆς ἐγέννησεν ὑπερμέγεθες ᾧόν, ὃ συμπληρούμενον ὑπὸ Blas 
τοῦ γεγεννηκότος ἐκ παρατριβῆς εἷς δύο ἐρράγη. τὸ μὲν οὖν κατὰ 





Water 


Unageing Chronos -> | Aither 
Matter -» Earth 


(...with Necessity + Chaos }-> Egg -» an incorporeal god 
and Adrasteia) Erebos 


38 .. . for water was the origin for the totality of things, according to him [ Orpheus], and 
Srom water slime was established, and from both of them was generated a living creature, 
a snake with a lion’s head growing on to it, and in the middle of them the face of a god, 
Heracles and Chronos by name. This Heracles generated a huge egg, which being completely 
filled by the force of its begetter burst into two through friction. So its top part ended up as 


42 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


κορυφὴν αὐτοῦ Οὐρανὸς εἶναι ἐτελέσθη, TO δὲ κάτω ἐνεχθὲν Ti: 
προῆλθε δὲ καὶ θεός τις δισώματος.: Οὐρανὸς δὲ Γῆ μιχθεὶς γεννᾷ 
θηλείας μὲν Κλωθὼ Λάχεσιν “Atpotrov...(a theogony of the 
Hesiodic type follows). 


t yn διὰ σώματος ms.; em. Lobeck, accep. Diels, Kranz; τρίτος ἤδη 
ἀσώματος Th. Gomperz.—In any case Phanes is meant. δισώματος and 
ἀσώματος are easily confused, and we cannot be certain that instances of 
the latter in the text of 37 are necessarily correct. δισώματος implies 
‘bisexual’ (which Phanes was): ‘incorporeal’, of a being described as 
having more than its quota of bodily attributes, and those of a very 
peculiar sort, is perhaps odd even in a Neoplatonist. 


Of these four types of Orphic-denominated cosmogony, (i) men- 
tions a first stage, Night, that does not occur in the others. Night’s 
importance in the Orphic pantheon probably depended, directly 
or indirectly, on modifications to the archetypal Hesiodic cosmo- 
gony and theogony. Eudemus may have known Orphic accounts 
similar to the earlier versions associated with Epimenides and 
Musacus. Much later, in one part of the heterogeneous Rhap- 
sodies, Night was given a specific cosmogonical function as a 
secondary parent of Ouranos and Gaia. This detail may be in- 
directly developed from archaic cosmogonical motifs, but it cannot 
be considered strong evidence for an archaic Orphic cosmogonical 
Nyx. (ii) 15 termed the usual Orphic account presumably because 
it more or less corresponded with the broad picture given in the 
late Rhapsodies. (111) is an elaboration of (11). It cannot, as it 
stands, be pre-Hellenistic: its fantastic concrete description of the 
abstract Chronos is a sign of late origin, or at Icast of late re- 
modelling. (iv) is quoted by a second-century Christian apologist 
of Neoplatonic leanings; it gives one significant detail, the splitting 
of the egg to form sky and earth, which is completely absent from 
the later Neoplatonic accounts. (111) and (iv) have a first stage, 
slime in one form or another, which is no doubt an eclectic 
philosophical-physical intrusion. It might conceivably be taken 
directly from Ionian systems like that of Anaximander, but is much 
more likely to have come from derivative Stoic cosmogony. 








Ouranos, and the underneath part as Ge; and a certain double-bodied god also came forth. 
And Ouranos having mingled with Ge begets, as female offspring, Clotho, Lachesis and 
Atropos.... 


43 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


THE EGG IN EARLIER GREEK SOURCES, NOT SPECIFICALLY 
ORPHIC 


39 Aristophanes Birds 693 (the chorus of birds speak) 
Χάος tv καὶ Νὺξ Ἔρεβός τε μέλαν πρῶτον καὶ Τάρταρος evpus, 
Γῆ δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ᾿Αὴρ οὐδ᾽ Οὐρανὸς ἦν ᾿Ερέβους δ᾽ ἐν ἀπείροσι κόλποις 
τίκτει πρώτιστον ὑπηνέμιον Νὺξ ἡ μελανόπτερος ᾧόν, 
ἐξ οὔ περιτελλομέναις ὥραις ἔβλαστεν Ἔρως ὁ ποθεινός, 
στίλβων νῶτον πτερύγοιν χρυσαῖν, εἰκὼς ἀνεμώκεσι δίναις. 697 
οὗτος δὲ Χάει πτερόεντι μιγεὶς νυχίῳ κατὰ Τάρταρον εὐρὺν 
ἐνεόττευσεν γένος ἡμέτερον, καὶ ττρῶτον ἀνήγαγεν ἐς φῶς. 
πρότερον δ᾽ οὐκ ἦν γένος ἀθανάτων πρὶν Ἔρως ξυνέμειξεν ἅπαντα᾽ 
ξυμμιγνυμένων δ᾽ ἑτέρων ἑτέροις γένετ᾽ Οὐρανὸς ὠκεανός τε 
καὶ Γῆ πάντων τε θεῶν μακάρων γένος ἄφθιτον. ὧδε μέν ἐσμεν 
πολὺ πρεσβύτατοι πάντων μακάρων. 
40 Damascius de principus 124 (ὨΚ 285; from Eudemus) τὸν δὲ 
᾿Επιμενίδην δύο πρῶτας ἀρχὰς ὑποθέσθαι ᾿Αέρα καὶ Νύκτα... 
ἐξ ὧν γεννηθῆναι Τάρταρον... .€€ ὧν δύο Τιτᾶνας... ὧν μιχθέντων 
ἀλλήλοις ᾧὸν γενέσθαι... .ἐξ οὗ πάλιν ἄλλην γενεὰν προελθεῖν. 


: The manuscript has δύο τινὰς, but Kroll’s emendation to δύο Τιτᾶνας 
(accepted by Kranz in DK) is indicated by the etymology implied in the 
Neoplatonist parenthesis that follows the disputed word, τὴν νοητὴν 
μεσότητα οὕτω καλέσαντα, διότι Er” ἄμφω “διατείνει᾽ τό τε ἄκρον Kal 
τὸ πέρας. The other omissions in the text as printed above are Neoplatonic 
paraphrases which throw no light on the interpretation. 


39 was written in 414 B.c. or shortly before. 40 lays claim to a still 
earlier date, but Philodemus in 20 evidently suspected the authen- 
ticity of the attribution of this verse theogony to Epimenides. ‘There 
was considerable doubt about Epimenides’ historical position, 








39 First of all was Chaos and Night and black Erebos and wide Tartaros, and neither 
Ge nor Aer nor Ouranos existed; in the boundless bosoms of Erebos black-winged Night 
begets, first, a wind-egg, from which in the fulfilment of the seasons ardent Eros burgeoned 
forth, his back gleaming with golden wings as he yielded to the whirling winds. Eros, 
mingling with winged, gloomy Chaos in broad Tartaros, hatched out our race and first 
brought it into the light. There was no race of immortals before Eros mingled all things 
together; but as one mingled with another Ouranos came into being, and Okeanos and Ge 
and the unfading race of all the blessed gods. Thus we are by far the oldest of all the 
blessed ones. 


40 Epimenides posited two fist principles, Air and Night...from which Tartaros was 
produced... from all of which two Titans were produced... from whose mutual mingling 
an egg came into being. ..from which, again, other offspring came forth. 


44 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


even in the fourth century B.c.: according to Plato he was active 
around 500 B.c., but Aristotle and the later tradition put him a 
century earlier (DK 3a1—5). His name became a focus for magical 
and mystical anecdotes, and cosmogonical views might well have 
been expected of him. The only thing we can say with certainty 
about the date of 40 is that it is pre-Eudemian; but in view of the 
proliferation of mythological accounts in hexamcters, concerned 
with genealogy and therefore liable to begin with a theogony, 
probably towards the end of the sixth century B.c., its content 
might be tentatively dated between then and the middle of the 
fifth century (see also nn. 1-3 on pp. 22f.). Thus an egg as an 
element in cosmogony, which is a typical feature of later Orphic 
accounts as recorded in the Neoplatonist tradition, 15 mentioned 
certainly near the end of the fifth century and probably before 
that. Were these earlier accounts specifically Orphic in character? 

There are no necessarily significant differences in the manner of 
production of the egg in the ecarlicr and in the later (definitcly 
Orphic) accounts. In the latter, Chronos (in a late and bizarre 
form) begets the egg in Aither or in Aither-Chaos-Erebos (36, 37). 
In 39 Night produces the egg in Erebos; in 40 it is begotten by two 
Titans—presumably Kronos (cf. §3?) and Rhea—who are them- 
selves the product of Air-Night and Tartaros. There is no mention 
of Chronos, of course, but Pherecydes of Syros (pp. 58f.) had 
probably already associated Kronos with Chronos, and there may 
be a connexion here with the later accounts:' see also §3 and 
discussion. There is a distinct similarity between what is produced 
from the egg in the birds’ account and in the later Orphic ver- 
sions: golden-winged Eros is an obvious prototype of the Orphic 
Phanes.? Yet most of Aristophanes’ bird-cosmogony is indubitably 
derived from the Hesiodic Theogony, with appropriate modifica- 
tions.3 Chaos, Night, Erebos and Tartaros are involved in the first 
stages of both accounts; only Earth is postponed in Aristophanes, 
to be produced (in some ways more logically) simultaneously with 
Sky. The egg is a ‘wind-egg’, of course, partly to make it more 
bird-like, partly because of the traditional windiness of ‘Tartaros 
(27). So Night, Chaos and Eros are all winged, because this 
is meant to be a birds’ cosmogony. It is a parody of a traditional 
type of cosmogony; yet the original of a parody must be recogniz- 
able, and while the Hesiodic elements are clear enough the egg is 
non-Hesiodic. Eminently suited to bird-generation as it is, the 


45 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


device is unlikely to have been invented by Aristophanes for that 
reason. It must have been familiar as a means for producing, not 
necessarily a cosmogonical figure, but at least an important deity 
like Eros. Possibly the birth of Helen from an egg is significant 
here: connected with a tree-cult perhaps of Mycenean origin 
(M. Nilsson, Gesch. d. griech. Religiont, 211 and 315), she is a ward 
and representative of Aphrodite-Eros in Homer. 


: The Kronos-Chronos identification was also made in Orphic circles: cf. 
e.g. Proclus in Plat. Crat. 3968 (Kern fr. 68). This does not imply that 
Pherecydes was an Orphic, or took his ideas from early Orphic sources 
(though the Suda reports, probably on account of these similarities, that he 
‘collected Orpheus’ writings’); rather it implies that the later Orphic 
eclectics used Pherecydes for source-material just as they used Hesiod and 
other early mythological writings. 


2 The language of the Rhapsodic account is indeed strongly reminiscent 
of Aristophanes: compare χρυσείαις πτερύγεσσι φορεύμενος ἔνθα Kal ἔνθα 
(sc. Φάνης), ‘Phanes...borne here and there by golden wings’ (fr. 78 
Kern), with line 697 of 39. ἔνθα Kal ἔνθα in the Orphic verse, as in 35, 
recalls Hesiod Theogony 742 (27), part of the description of windy Tartarus; 
Hesiod is the chief linguistic and formal model for the Rhapsodies. 

3 So also in 40 the first stage, Aer and Night, is evolved from Hesiod: see 
p. 17. Philodemus in 20 did not mention the egg in Epimenides. 


TENTATIVE CONCLUSIONS 


The evidence is too sparse to lead to a final decision whether there 
existed specifically Orphic cosmogonical accounts early enough to 
have affected Presocratic ideas. Yet it seems probable that dis- 
tinctively Orphic versions are not particularly early—earlier, say, 
than the fourth century B.c.; though the name of Orpheus, like that 
of Musaeus or Epimenides, may have been attached to fifth- or 
sixth-century theogonies. ‘The ideas inherent in extant reports are 
eclectic in origin (Hesiod and the developments of Hesiod being 
the chief source), but in their present formulation are Hellenistic 
at the earliest. The one conceivably early characteristic is the use 
of an egg formed in Erebos or Aither, from which comes a deity 
who arranges the later stages of cosmic evolution. This device 
occurs in an Aristophanic parody, also in a very vague summary of 
verses ascribed to Epimenides and perhaps not later than the first 
half of the fifth century. Yet there is no reason for considering the 
device specifically Orphic, simply because it occurs in later Orphic 
accounts which are demonstrably eclectic. Once the metaphor of 
animal generation had been applied to cosmogony, as it certainly 
was by the time of Hesiod, the egg became a plausible genetic 


46 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


device. It is surprising, indeed, that we do not hear more of it in 
early Greek contexts: Nilsson (Gesch. 1, 648) noted that the cosmic 
egg is a common feature in naive mythology in many parts of the 
world (though it does not, as it happens, occur in near-eastern 
contexts except occasionally in Egypt and dubiously in ‘Sanchu- 
niathon’). It could nevertheless have existed in Greece from quite 
early times as a folk-lore concept, which was excluded from many 
formal accounts because of its naive quality and finds its only 
analogue in a tendency to treat the developing world embryonic- 
ally. ‘Epimenides’ was attempting, without many natural ad- 
vantages, to improve on Hesiod, and might well have welcomed 
the device just because it was not Hesiodic; while Aristophanes 
found it obviously appropriate for a comic bird-cosmogony. The 
later Orphism did not shun oricntalizing noveltics like the 
description of Time as a winged monster, and would certainly 
have no inhibitions about the egg-motif. There is a serious possi- 
bility that Aristophanes, far from depending on a hypothetical 
early Orphic tradition, was himself used as a source by the founders 
of a special Orphic literature. 

One reason for doubting an early Orphic use of the egg-motif 
has been generally overlooked. If there were any such early use, 
one would expect later applications to be consistent with an 
earlier tradition, which in a sacred-book sect would be regarded 
as sacrosanct. Yet three quite different later uses are known. First, 
the egg simply produces Phanes (34, 37). Secondly, in 38 the 
upper part of the egg forms the sky, the lower part the earth; the 
equivalent of Phanes emerges too, and sky and earth then mate as 
in Hesiod or the popular tradition. The same interpretation 15 out- 
lined in Apion (early first century a.D.) ap. ps.-Clement Hom. v1 
(Kern fr. 56). Here the egg has a true cosmogonical function 
which can be paralleled from non-Greek myths. Thirdly, accord- 
ing to one extant source the Orphics used the arrangement of shell 
and skin (and presumably also of white and yolk) as an analogue for 
the arrangement of sky (outer heaven), aither and so on: 


41 Achilles Isag. 4 (DK13B12, Kern fr. 70) τὴν δὲ τάξιν ἣν 
δεδώκαμεν TH σφαιρώματι of Ὀρφικοὶ λέγουσι παραπλησίαν εἶναι 
τῇ ἐν τοῖς Mois: ὃν γὰρ ἔχει λόγον τὸ λέπυρον ἐν τῷ GOD, τοῦτον ἐν 





41 The arrangement which we have assigned to the celestial sphere the Orphics say is 
similar to that in eggs: for the relation which the shell has in the egg, the outer heaven has 


47 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


τῷ παντὶ ὁ οὐρανός, Kal ὡς ἐξήρτηται τοῦ οὐρανοῦ κυκλοτερῶς ὁ 
αἰθήρ, οὕτως τοῦ λεπύρον ὁ ὑμήν. 


This is, admittedly, a simile and not a cosmogonical device; it 
might be argued, also, that the formation of sky and earth from 
parts of the egg was just overlooked by the later Neoplatonists. 
Nevertheless it seems probable that there was considerable diver- 
gence in the use of the egg-motif, and that this divergence implies 
that no specific ancient Orphic tradition had been preserved. 
However, this special argument is less important than the general 
ones, from the eclectic nature of organized Orphism, which have 
already been adduced. 

Thus this inevitably complex survey reaches the negative conclu- 
sion that there was probably no such thing as Orphic cosmogony 
either before or during the Presocratic period. It has, however, 
revealed birth from an egg as an archaic theogonical, not cosmo- 
gonical, device (one which perhaps played some part in Pherecydes 
too, see p. 59). The regular Orphic accounts kept this theogonical 
function; although one probably late variant made the egg truly 
cosmogonical, as the actual material of the cosmos. 


6. PHERECYDES OF SYROS 


This Pherecydes was a mythographer and theogonist, and must be 
distinguished from the fifth-century Athenian genealogist of the 
same name, also from a later and less important Lerian.? Accord- 
ing to Aristotle he was not entirely mythological in his approach: 


42 Aristotle Met. N4, 1rog1b8 .. «ἐπεὶ of ye μεμειγμένοι αὐτῶν 
(se. τῶν θεολόγων) [καὶ] TH μὴ μυθικῶς ἅπαντα λέγειν, οἷον Φερεκύδης 
καὶ ἕτεροί τινες, τὸ γεννῆσαν πρῶτον ἄριστον τιθέασι, καὶ οἱ Μάγοι. 


1 F. Jacoby, Mnemosyne 13 (3rd series), 1947, 15 ff. has finally discredited 
Wilamowitz’s theory that ‘Pherecydes’ was a generic name attached to all 
early Ionian prose writing not specifically ascribed, as ‘Hippocrates’ 
became attached to all medical literature. The man of Syros and the 
Athenian were indeed carefully distinguished in many ancient sources, 
though not in all. 





in the universe, and as the aither depends in a circle from the outer heaven, so does the 
membrane from the shell. 

42 ...stnce the ‘mixed’ theologians, those who do not say everything in mythical form, 
such as Pherecydes and certain of the others, and also the Magi, make the first generator 
the best thing. 


48 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


DATE 


Pherecydes was active in the sixth century B.c., perhaps around 
the middle of it. Ancient authorities diverge: according to one 
tradition he was roughly contemporary with the Lydian king 
Alyattes (c.605-560B.c.) and the Seven Sages (conventionally dated 
around Thales’ eclipse, 585/4, or the archonship of Damasias, 
582/1); according to another, dependent on Apollodorus, his acme 
was in the 59th Olympiad, 544-541 B.c., and he was a contem- 
porary of Cyrus.t The Apollodoran dating thus makes him a 
generation younger than Thales and a younger contemporary of 
Anaximander. It fits in with the later Pythagorean tradition 
which made Pythagoras bury Pherecydes (p. 51), though this 
event was itself probably fictitious. None of these chronological 
traditions looks particularly historical, and we know that such 
synchronisms were assigned by the Hellenistic chronographers 
largely on a priort grounds. Yet interest in Pherecydes was certainly 
alive in the fourth century B.c. (a crucial era for the transmission 
of information about the archaic period), and the broad limits of 
dating, i.c. in the sixth century, are unlikely to be wrong. 

1 The early dating is seen e.g. in the Suda (DK 742) and in Diog. L. 1, 42 

(DK 9A 1, after Hermippus). The later dating appears e.g. in Diog. L. 1,118 


(after Aristoxenus) and 1, 121 (after Apollodorus)—see DK 74 1; alsoinCicero 
Tusc. 1, 16, 38 (DK 745), Pliny NV... vu, 205, Eusebius Chron. (DK 7412). 


PHERECYDES BOOK 

43 Diogenes Laertius1, 119 σῴφεται δὲ τοῦ Συρίου τό τε βιβλίον 
ὃ συνέγραψεν οὗ ἡ ἀρχή Ζὰς μὲν καὶ Χρόνος ἦσαν ἀεὶ καὶ Χθονίη... 
(for continuation see 40). 

44 Suda s.v. Pherecydes ἔστι δὲ ἅπαντα ἃ συνέγραψε ταῦτα" 
Ἑπτάμυχος ἤτοι Θεοκρασία ἢ Θεογονία. (ἔστι δὲ Θεολογία ἐν 
βιβλίοις T ἔχουσα θεῶν γένεσιν καὶ διαδοχάς.) 

45 Diogenes Laertius 1, 116 τοῦτόν φησι Θεόπομπος πρῶτον 
περὶ φύσεως Kal θεῶν γράψαι. Cf. Suda s.v. Pherecydes πρῶτον 
δὲ συγγραφὴν ἐξενεγκεῖν πτεφτῷ λόγῳ τινὲς ἱστοροῦσιν. 





43 There is preserved of the man of Syros the book which he wrote of which the beginning 
is: ‘as and Chronos always existed and Chthonie...’. 

44 Everything he wrote is as follows: Seven Recesses or Divine Mingling or Theogony. 
(And there is a Theology in ten books containing the birth and successions of the gods.) 
45 This man is said by Theopompus to have been the first to write on nature and the 
gods.—Some relate that he was the first to bring out a book in prose. 


4 49 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


According to 43 Pherecydes’ book (or what was taken for it) sur- 
vived in Diogenes’ time, the third century a.p. The opening words 
might be known well enough from the entry in Callimachus’ 
catalogue of the Alexandrian library (the patronymic, omitted 
here, was given shortly before as B&Bvos, “son of Babys’). ‘That the 
book survived the burning of the Library in 47 B.c. may be con- 
firmed by a longer quotation, §4; though this and othcr fragments 
could have survived through the medium of handbooks or antho- 
logies. The title is given in 44. Ἑπτάμυχος, ‘ (of) seven recesses’, 
seems to be the book’s true title ;* variants descriptive of the con- 
tents are added, as often, but are probably of later origin. The 
‘ten-volume theology’ is probably a confusion with a ten-volume 
work on Attic history (itself beginning, no doubt, from gods and 
heroes) ascribed to the Athenian Pherecydes in the lines that 
follow in the Suda. The precise reference of the cryptic and 
unusual title ‘(of) seven recesses’ is very obscure: see p. 58. 45 
exemplifies the widespread tradition that this was the earliest 
prose book. What Theopompus (fourth century B.c.) must actually 
have said is that Pherecydes first wrote about the gods 2n prose, as 
opposed to e.g. Hesiod. Prose annals were presumably recorded 
before Pherecydes, but he and Anaximander (whose book may 
have been roughly contemporary, and might possibly be assigned 
to 5417/6 B.c., p. 101) might well have been the first substantial 
prose writers to have survived; on the confusion over Thales as a 
writer see pp. 85f. 


1 It seems rash to accept ‘five recesses’, from §1, as the title, with Diels 
followed by Jaeger and others, on the sole strength of Damascius’ statement 
there that the divine products of Chronos’ seed, when disposed in five 
recesses, were called πεντέμυχος. Even if this is intended to give the title 
of the book, the five recesses mentioned just before provide a clear motive 
for writing five and not seven. 


HIS LIFE AND LEGEND 

(i) Lhe connexion with Pythagoras 

Many miracles were attributed to Pherecydes, e.g. predictions of 
an earthquake, a shipwreck, the capture of Messene. ‘These were 
variously located: in Sparta, near Ephesus, in Samos, in Syros, and 
so on. The difficulty is that the same miracles were also attributed 
to Pythagoras. Apollonius the paradoxographer, not certainly 
using Aristotle, said that ‘Pythagoras afterwards indulged in the 


50 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


miracle-working, tepatotroifa, of Pherecydes’ (259): and it was 
certainly accepted in the Peripatetic circle that when Pherecydes 
fell ill of louse-disease in Delos his disciple Pythagoras came and 
cared for him until his death (Diog. L. 1, 118, Diodorus x, 3, 4; 
DK 7a1 and 4). So Aristoxenus asserted, and Dicaearchus too 
according to Porphyry Vit. Pythag. 56. Porphyry also related (as 
quoted by Eusebius, DK 746) that according to the fourth- 
century B.c. writer Andron of Ephesus the miracles belonged 
properly to Pythagoras; but that Theopompus plagiarized the 
miracle-stories from Andron and, to disguise his theft, assigned 
them instead to Pherecydes and slightly altered the localities 
involved. Andron was far from critical, however, since he invented 
another Pherecydes of Syros, an astronomer (Diog. L. 1, 119, 
DK 7A1); and Porphyry’s explanation of the divergence is uncon- 
vincing. The confusion and disagreement which patently existed 
in the fourth century show that reliable details of the life of 
Pherecydes were lacking. If Pherecydes had been a sage of the 
type naturally to attract miracle-stories (as Pythagoras was), the 
connexion between two similar contemporaries would have been 
invented whether it existed or not; but apart from the feats other- 
wise attributed to Pythagoras, Pherecydes seems to have had little 
of the shaman or magician about him. It has been suggested that 
the whole tissue of legend might have arisen from a well-known 
fifth-century B.c. comment: 


46 Ion of Chios ap. Diogenem Lacrtium 1, 120 Ἴων δ᾽ ὁ Xids 
φησι περὶ αὐτοῦ (sc. Φερεκύδουλ ° 
(Fr. 4) ὡς ὁ μὲν ἠνορέῃ τε κεκασμένος ἠδὲ καὶ αἰδοῖ 
καὶ φθίμενος ψυχῇ τερπνὸν ἔχει βίοτον, 
εἴπερ Πυθαγόρης ἐτύμως ὁ σοφὸς περὶ πάντων 
ἀνθρώπων γνώμας εἶδε καὶ ἐξέμαθεν. 


As H. Gomperz maintained (Wiener St. 47 (1929) 14. 3), this prob- 
ably means no more than ‘If Pythagoras is right about the survival 
of the soul, then Pherecydes’ soul should be enjoying a blessed 
existence’. It might have been misinterpreted, even in antiquity, 
to imply a friendship between the two men, and have encouraged 
the transference to Pherecydes of stories about Pythagoras. 





46 Ion of Chios says about him [Pherecydes|: ‘Thus did he excel in manhood and 
honour, and now that he is dead he has a delightful existence for his soul—if indeed 
Pythagoras the wise learned and knew true opinions above all men.’ 


51 4-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Elaborate biographical accounts were invented on the slightest 
pretext, especially in the third and second centuries B.c. (see e.g. 
p. 183); even so one hesitates to suppose that the fourth-century 
controversy can have been founded on evidence so slight as Ion’s 
little encomium. Yet none of the evidence on this point looks at all 
convincing, and it is as well to preserve a certain scepticism about 
the relationship between the two men. 


(1) Alleged access to Phoenician secret books 


47 Suda s.v. Pherecydes διδαχθῆναι δὲ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ Πυθαγόραν 
λόγος, αὐτὸν δὲ οὐκ ἐσχηκέναι καθηγητήν, ἀλλ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ἀσκῆσαι 
κτησάμενον τὰ Φοινίκων ἀπόκρυφα βιβλία. (See also 61.) 


The assertion that Pherecydes was self-taught probably means no 
more than that no teacher could conveniently be supplied for him 
when his complete biography came to be written. That he used 
Phoenician secret books (an unlikely story indeed) is another 
piece of speculation of the type beloved by the biographical 
compilators. Yet it must have had some foundation, and may be 
based on apparently oriental motifs in his thought: he was later 
connected with Zoroastrianism (n. 2 on p. 65), and the battle of 
Kronos and Ophioneus, like that of Zeus and ‘Typhoeus in Hesiod, 
had some Phoenician affinities (p. 68). 


(iii) The solstice-marker 
48 Diogenes Laertius 1, 119 σῴφεται δὲ τοῦ Συρίου τό τε 
βιβλίον. . .(cf. 50)... σῴφεται δὲ καὶ ἡλιοτρόπιον ἐν Σύρῳ τῇ νήσῳ. 
49 Homer Od. 15, 403-4, with scholia 

νῆσός Tis Zupin κικλήσκεται, εἴ Trou ἀκούειϊς, 

"Optuyins καθύπερθεν, ὅθι τροταὶ ἠελίοιο. 
ὅθι τροπαὶ ἠελίοιο] ἔνθα φασὶν εἶναι ἡλίου σπήλαιον, δι᾽ οὗ σημαι- 
οὔνται τὰς τοῦ ἡλίου τροπάς (QV). οἷον ὡς πρὸς τὰς τροπὰς 














47 There is a story that Pythagoras was taught by him; but that he himself had no 
instructor, but trained himself after obtaining the secret books of the Phoenicians. 
48 There is preserved of the man of Syros the book. ..[cf. §0]...and there is preserved 
also a solstice-marker in the island of Syros. 
49 ‘There ts an island called Syrie—perhaps you have heard of it—above Ogygie, where 
are the turnings of the sun.’ 

Where are the turnings of the sun] They say there is a cave of the sun there, 
through which they mark the sun’s turnings (QV). As it were toward the turnings of the 


52 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


ἡλίου, 6 ἐστιν ἐπὶ τὰ δυτικὰ μέρη ὑπεράνωθεν τῆς Δήλου (BHQ).— 
οὕτως ᾿Αρίσταρχος καὶ Ἡηρωδιανός (Η). 


The implication in 48 that ἃ solstice-marker preserved in Syros in 
Diogenes’ time had belonged to, or been used by, Pherecydes must 
be approached with caution. (A solstice-marker is a device to 
mark the point at which the sun ‘turns’ on the ecliptic, at mid- 
summer or midwinter.) There seems to be some connexion with a 
cryptic couplet in Homer, 49. The scholia show that two alter- 
native interpretations of this couplet were known in Alexandria: 
either (a) ὅθι τροτταὶ ἠελίοιο describes Syrie (rather than Ortygic), 
and means that there was there a bearing-marker in the form of a 
cave; or (δ) the meaning is that Syric lies ‘above’, 1.6. north of, 
Ortygie, and also west of it, where the sun ‘turns’ in the sense of 
setting.t Both (a) and (b) improbably assume that Ortygie repre- 
sents Delos, and Syrie Syros (which lies some twenty miles slightly 
north of west from Delos). Now whatever the intended meaning 
of the Homeric phrase,3 there evidently was a sun-cave reported 
from Syros in the Alexandrian period, and this is presumably the 
form of marker that Diogenes referred to three or four centuries 
later. We hear of another type of natural solstice-marker from 
Itanos in Crete in the fourth century B.c., and such things must 
have been relatively common for calendar purposes. ‘The sun-cave 
in Syros cannot, it scems, have been the original motive of the 
Homeric reference, but it was nevertheless seized upon at a later 
date (and certainly, one would think, later than Pherecydes) in an 
attempt to explain the description in the Odyssey. Whatever its 
antecedents, it would as a matter of course have become associated 
with the island’s most notable inhabitant, Pherecydes. Although 
there is no other evidence that he was a practical scientist, many 
other sixth-century sages, especially the Milesians, were known to 
have had applied as well as theoretical interests; and it would be 
almost inevitable for an Alexandrian scholar, for instance, auto- 
matically to provide a historical association between the only two 
apparently scientific products of Syros—Pherecydes and the 
solstice-marker. Reluctant as one is, therefore, to disconnect such 
a pleasing device from such an intriguing man, extreme scepticism 
again seems desirable. 





sun, which is in the westward direction, above Delos (BHQ).-—So Aristarchus and 
Herodian (Ff). 


53 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


1 This sense of tpotraf is absolutely unparalleled and highly improbable, 
especially since tpotral ἠελίοιο are mentioned three times in the Hesiodic 
Works and Days, always meaning solstice. But (a), as well as (δ), is virtually 
impossible: for even though τροπαὶ ἠελίοιο can, and indeed does, mean 
‘solstice’ or ‘solstices’, it cannot conceivably in any kind of Greek mean a 
device (whether a cave or anything else) for marking or observing solstices. 


2 There were other actual Ortygias as well as Delos (to which the name is 
only applied in contexts which could have been affected by learned 
speculation on 49): notably the island forming part of Syracuse, and a 
precinct near Ephesus. *Optuyin means ‘of the quail’ (ὄρτυξ), and might 
be applied to any locality at which quails habitually rested in their 
migrations between Egypt and the north. A difficulty in identifying 
Ortygie with Dclos is that the two places are distinguished in the Homeric 
Hymn to Apollo (16); but the passage is suspect on other grounds. A far 
more serious difficulty, and one that has been widely ignored, is that of 
identifying Συρίη, with a short upsilon, with 2Upos, which has a long 
upsilon. The connexion of Syrie with Syracuse is also philologically 
improbable. Miss H. L. Lorimer (Homer and the Monuments 80 ff.) argued 
for Zup{n referring to Syria (which, she maintained, might have been 
naively taken for an island), and for tpotral meaning ‘sunrisc’, i.e. the 
east. But it seems impossible that Syria should be termed an island; and 
the Phoenicians would hardly have been conceived as spending a whole 
year trading with a place so near their own country (cf. Od. 15, 455). 


3 ὅθι τροπαὶ ἠελίοιο could describe either Syrie or Ortygie. Here an 
observation of Miss Lorimer’s is of great importance: the only other place in 
Homer where Ortygie is mentioned is Od. 5, 123, where Orion, having been 
carried off by Eos, is slain in Ortygie by Artemis. The implication is that 
Ortygie was the dwelling-place of Eos, the dawn, and therefore that it lics 
in the east. Miss Lorimer thought that solstices could not carry a directional 
meaning. But, since solstices would normally be observed at sunrise (by the 
bearing method), ‘where the summer solstice is’ would signify the general 
direction in which the sun rises at the summer solstice, namely north-east 
by east; while ‘where the winter solstice is’ would signify south-east by 
east. The summer solstice is the important one for record purposes, and 
the mention of the solstice, by itself, might naturally bring to mind the 
north-east by east direction. Thus the intention of the Homeric phrase is to 
indicate the general direction of this probably mythical Ortygie. It is 
worth adding that the dwelling-place of Eos was often conceived as being 
Aia, and that Aia was commonly identified with Colchis; and Colchis does 
in fact lie roughly north-east by east from the centre of the Ionian coast- 
line. 


THE CONTENTS OF PHERECYDES BOOK 


(i) The primeval deities; initial creation by Chronos; the recesses 


50 Diogenes Laertius 1, 119 owzetar δὲ τοῦ Συρίου τό τε 


βιβλίον ὃ συνέγραψεν οὗ ἡ ἀρχή᾽ (Fr. 1) Ζὰς μὲν Kal Χρόνος ἦσαν 





50 There is preserved of the man of Syros the book which he wrote of which the begin- 


54 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


ἀεὶ καὶ XBovin: Χθονίῃ δὲ ὄνομα ἐγένετο Γῆ, ἐπειδὴ αὐτῇ Zas γῆν 
γέρας διδοῖ. 

51 Damascius de principis 124 bis Φερεκύδης δὲ ὁ Σύριος Ζάντα 
μὲν εἶναι ἀεὶ καὶ Χρόνον καὶ Χθονίαν τὰς τρεῖς πρῶτας ἀρχάς. . . τὸν 
δὲ Χρόνον ποιῆσαι ἐκ τοῦ γόνου ἑαυτοῦ πῦρ καὶ πνεῦμα καὶ ὕδωρ... 
ἐξ ὧν ἐν πέντε μυχοῖς διῃρημένων πολλὴν ἄλλην γενεὰν συστῆναι 
θεῶν, τὴν πεντέμυχον καλουμένην, ταὐτὸν δὲ ἴσως εἰπεῖν πεντέκοσμον. 
52 Porphyrius de antro nymph. 31 .. .τοῦ Συρίου Φερεκύδου 
μυχοὺς καὶ βόθρους καὶ ἄντρα καὶ θύρας καὶ πύλας λέγοντος καὶ 
διὰ τούτων αἰνιττομένου τὰς τῶν ψυχῶν γενέσεις καὶ ἀπογενέσεις. 


Zas and Chronos and Chthonic ‘always existed’: this resolves the 
difficulty of creation ex nihilo. An analogous declaration is seen, 
some two generations later, in Heraclitus’ world-order, which no 
god or man made, but always was, and is, and shall be (220) ; also 
in Epicharmus fr. 1 (DK 23 81—probably genuine), where the 
case is explicitly argued. But already in the sixth century B.c. the 
divinity assigned to Anaximander’s ἄπειρον and Anaximenes’ air 
probably implies that these, too, had always existed. It is surprising 
to find this concept stated so explicitly, and in a theogonical 
context, at this rclatively early date. Yet the gods who always 
existed are probably conceived as original forms (by ctymology) 
of conventional figures from the traditional theogony; and one of 
them is ‘Time’, which might naturally be felt, without any deep 
abstract reflexion, to have been unborn. Thus Pherecydes was 
not trying to solve a logical difficulty about creation so much as to 
substitute a new first stage, dependent on etymology and particu- 
larly on a new understanding of Kronos the father of the gods, for 
the imprecise, if morc rationalistic, ‘Chaos camc into being’ of 
Hesiod. 

The names are unusual. Ζάς (accusative Z&vta) is obviously an 
etymological form of Ζεύς, and is perhaps intended to stress the 











ning is: “Kas and Chronos always existed and Chthonie; and Chthonie got the name of Ge, 
since Kas gave her Ge as a present [or prerogative].’ 

51 Pherecydes of Syros said that Zas always existed, and Chronos and Chthonie, as the 
three first principles. ..and Chronos made out of his own seed fire and wind [or breath] 
and water. . .from which, when they were disposed in five recesses, were composed numerous 
other offspring of gods, what is called ‘of the five recesses’, which is perhaps the same as 
saying ‘of five worlds’. 

52 ...when Pherecydes, the man of Syros, talks of recesses and pits and caves and doors 
and gates, and through these speaks in riddles of the becomings and deceases of souls. 


99 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


element 2a- (an intensive prefix), as in φάθεος, gar\s; though there 
is some possibility that the form Zas is intended to link the sky-god 
Zeus with the earth-goddess Ge, whose Cyprian form is τᾶ. 
Χθονίη, from χθών, is presumably intended to represent Earth in 
a primitive role, perhaps as the abode of chthonic daimons, and 
at all events with stress on the underparts of the earth. As for 
Χρόνος, it has been argued, notably by Wilamowitz, that the true 
reading must be Κρόνος: Kronos played an important part in 
Pherecydes’ theogony according to one extant fragment, 58, and 
‘Time’ is a surprisingly sophisticated cosmogonical concept for 
the sixth century B.c. But Xpdvos, which is widely supported in 
the sources, is almost certainly correct; the other two figures are 
etymologizing variants of well-known theogonical figures, and we 
naturally anticipate a similar case with the third figure. The 
substitution of Χρόνος for Κρόνος is just what we should expect 
here. It appears likely that by the later stages of the theogony the 
primeval trio assumed their familiar form as Zeus, Kronos and 
Hera.? That Pherecydes was addicted to etymologies emerges 
clearly from our scanty evidence: thus, in addition to the idio- 
syncratic derivations of names already discussed, Χάος was perhaps 
connected by him (as later by the Stoics) with χέεσθαι (p. 59 n.), 
and so interpreted as water; Rhea was called ‘Ph (ὈΚ 780), 
and perhaps connected with ῥεῖν etc.; Okeanos was called 
Ogenos (54); the gods called a table θυωρός, ‘watcher over 
offerings’ (DK 7B 12). 
τ Wilamowitz roundly declared that ‘Time’, as a cosmogonical god in the 
sixth century, was impossible. Certainly the abstraction implied in the 
χρόνον δίκη (Solon, see 113), or τὴν τοῦ χρόνου τάξιν (Anaximander, see 
112), is less startling in its implications, as are the Χρόνος ὁ πάντων πατήρ 
of Pindar Ol. 2, 17 and the hypostatized Time of tragedy; though the two 
last instances provide some parallel. The Iranian cosmogonical Time, 
Kvran Akarana, was introduced as a refinement of Mazdaism and cannot 
be assumed earlier than the fourth century B.c. (n. on p. 39), though the 
possibility of oriental influence in this respect cannot be entirely discounted. 
The Chronos of the late Orphic cosmogonies was presented in a Hellenistic 
shape, and cannot be taken as any kind of parallel or precedent for the 
sixth century B.c. The connexion of Kronos with Chronos was certainly 
made by later Orphics (cf. e.g. Kern Orph. Frag. fr. 68), but according to 
Plutarch (Js. Osir. 32) this was a common Greek identification: we cannot 
say whether or not Pherecydes was the originator. That he did intend to 
relate them is stated by Hermias and Probus (DK 7.4.9), probably after 


Stoic sources. In any event one should not exaggerate (as Wilamowitz 
did) the depth of abstraction, and of metaphysical content, implied by the 


56 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


presence of Chronos in §0. Pherecydes probably took the Kronos of 
legend, asked himself what the etymology was, and arrived at the obvious 
answer, Chronos or Time—a familiar and simple concept which is plainly 
somehow involved in cosmogony. 


2 Chthonie gets the name of Ge, Earth, at a subsequent stage, presumably 
when Zas presents her with the cloth embroidered with earth in 54. But 
at that point she apparently takes over the control and guardianship of 
marriages; this was Hera’s prerogative (as Γαμηλία) according to the 
general view, and in so far as Chthonie-Ge is the wife of Zas-Zeus she is also 
thought of as becoming Hera. (Demeter, who is much closer to Ge, was in 
charge of certain female activities, as Θεσμοφόρος, but not of marriage; 
she may, however, provide a connecting link.) Hera was probably not an 
earth-goddess in origin, but there are other isolated cases where she 
replaces Gaia; for example, she appears to be the mother of Typhaon in 
the Homeric Hymn to Apollo, 351f., also in Stesichorus (Et. Magn. 772. 
50); cf. 53, and Virgil Aen. tv, 166. 


Damascius in §1 is following Eudemus. Chronos makes fire, 
wind and water out of his own sced,' and this is implicd to take 
place at an early stage. The episode cannot be invented, though it 
would not be surprising if some details of it were distorted. One is 
reminded of Egyptian cosmogonical accounts in which the first 
world-constituents are produced by the onanism of a primeval 
god, notably that of Atum-Re mentioned in the Memphis theology 
(ANET 5); and also of the mutilation of Ouranos by Kronos in 
32, where certain mythological figures are begotten by Ouranos’ 
member and the blood from it. The idea that the human seed is 
creative, and therefore that a primary deity’s sced 1s cosmo- 
gonically creative, is neither surprising nor illogical. What is sur- 
prising here, however, is the things which are thus created: they 
smack of fifth-century four-element theory, earth being omitted 
because already accounted for in the very name of Chthonie-Ge. 
πνεῦμα looks suspiciously anachronistic, even though Anaximenes 
emphasized its importance at roughly this period (pp. 140ff.). 
These substances cannot have formed the raw material of later 
cosmic arrangement: for according to §1 what they produce is not 
a world but deities of some kind. In fact, I would suggest that the 
seed producing fire, wind (πνεῦμα) and water is probably a later 
rationalizing interpretation, perhaps Stoic in origin but based on 
the Aristotelian concept (itself to some extent indebted to Diogenes 
of Apollonia, cf. 619 jin.) that the human σπέρμα, seed, contains 
σύμφυτον πνεῦμα, innate breath, which is also described as being 
‘hot’ and aitherial (cf. e.g. Generation of animals B3, 736b33ff.). In 
accounts of early Stoic physiology, too, the seed is described as 


57 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


πνεῦμα μεθ᾽ ὑγροῦ (‘breath with moisture’, Arius Didymus on 
Zeno) and is associated with πνεῦμα ἔνθερμον, ‘warm breath’. It 
therefore scems probable that the three unexpected products of 
Chronos’ seed—fire, wind and water—are an intrusive later 
interpretation of the nature of the seed itself, and that originally it 
was Chronos’ semen itself that was placed in the recesses. As for 
these, the seven in the title as given in the Suda might be obtained 
by adding to the five recesses connected with Chronos in §1 the 
two other pre-existing deities Zas and Chthonie, the latter of 
which, certainly, had a local and indeed a recess-like connotation. 
Alternatively, all seven recesses could have been part of Chthonie: 
it is notable that the Babylonian world of the dead was conceived 
as having seven regions,” and in the myth of the Descent of Ishtar, 
Ishtar has to pass through seven gates (ANET 107f.); one thinks 
(though perhaps not significantly) of the doors and gates that 
Porphyry found in Pherecydes (52). 
I This seems, then, to be the first creation-act. But there is no essential 
conflict with 42, where τὸ γεννῆσαν πρῶτον must be Zas-Zeus: for it is 
Zas who first creates the parts of the world (§4), while Chronos produces 
theogonical, not cosmogonical, constituents. 
2 In the first eleven chapters of the Hippocratic treatise Περὶ ἑβδομάδων 
the world is divided into seven parts to correspond with the seven parts of 
the human body. Some scholars date this fragmentary and unattractive 
work in the sixth century Β.α. There scem to be no strong grounds for such 
an early date, and stylistically a late Hellenistic origin is far more probable. 
A possible clue to the production by Chronos from his own seed 
appears in the following neglected passage: 
53 = B in Homeri Il. 2, 783 Τυφωέος] φασὶ τὴν Γῆν ἀγα- 
νακτοῦσαν ἐπὶ τῷ φόνῳ τῶν Γιγάντων διαβαλεῖν Δία τῇ “Hog: τὴν 
δὲ πρὸς Κρόνον ἀπελθοῦσαν ἐξειπεῖν τὸν δὲ δοῦναι αὐτῇ δύο ad, 
τῷ ἰδίῳ χρίσαντα θορῷ καὶ κελεύσαντα κατὰ γῆς ἀποθέσθαι, ἀφ᾽ 
ὧν ἀναδοθήσεται δαίμων ὁ ἀποστήσων Δία τῆς ἀρχῆς. ἡ δέ, ὡς 
εἶχεν ὀργῆς, ἔθετο αὐτὰ ὑπὸ τὸ ΓΑριμον τῆς Κιλικίας. ἀναδοθέντος δὲ 
τοῦ Τυφῶνος Ἥρα διαλλαγεῖσα Διὶ τὸ πᾶν ἐκφαίνει ὁ δὲ κεραυνῶσας 
Αἴτνην τὸ ὄρος ὠνόμασεν. 





53 They say that Ge in annoyance at the slaughter of the Giants slandered Keus to Hera, 
and that Hera went off and told Kronos about this. He gave her two eggs, smearing them 
with his own semen, and telling her to store them underground: from them, he said, a 
daimon would be produced who would displace Zeus from power. And she in her anger 
put them under Arimon in Cilicia. But when Typhon had been produced, Hera had 
become reconciled to Zeus, and revealed everything; and Zeus blasted Typhon and named 
the mountain Aetna. 


58 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


This has to be used with caution: it may originate from the 
Pergamene editors of Homer (the first-hand scholia of B are anti- 
Aristarchean) and be based upon a genuinely ancient version, but 
it is in part eclectic, adding a Homeric element (Arimon) to those 
seen in 5th-century poetry (Pi. P.1, 16 ff., Aesch. Pr. 351 ff.). It 
could therefore be distorted in places by later Orphic developments 
(cf. 34, 37); although it is evidently not directly dependent on the 
Rhapsodies, since the eggs are placed not in the windy wastes of 
Aither or Ercbos (an essential element of the Rhapsodic account) 
but in Gaia. That Kronos not Chronos appears is not necessarily 
important (see p. 56). The notable thing is that Kronos im- 
pregnates two eggs (why two?) with his own seed, and that the eggs 
have to be placed underground, κατὰ γῆς, possibly in a recess of 
some kind—here, under a mountain. From the eggs, when ferti- 
lized by the seed, comes Typhon/Typhoeus, an analogue of 
Pherecydes’ Ophioncus (pp. 66ff.). There does seem to be a striking 
parallel with the cryptic mention of Chronos’ seed in 51; if so, it 
provides some confirmation of the speculation that some kind of 
theogonical figure or figures (“numerous other divine offspring’) 
came directly from Chronos’ sced.t It makes a faint possibility, 
too, that generation from an egg (but not of cosmological consti- 
tuents) occurred in Pherecydes (see pp. 44—-8)—though this device 
became so popular in Hellenistic and later accounts that it might 
well have been imposed on a simpler story. 
I Porphyry (cf. DK 787) mentioned people who took what he called τὴν 
ἐκροήν, in Pherecydes, to refer to semen; though they applied the same 
interpretation to Hesiod’s Styx and Plato’s Ameles. H. Gomperz (Wiener 
St. 47 (1929) 19 ἢ. 10) suggested that Chronos produced a generation of 
primeval deities from the ἐκροή, just as his later form Kronos did from 
Rhea; this would in fact fit in with the suggestion made above, that fire, 
wind and water are an intrusive gloss. The connexion of Rhea, called 
‘P# by Pherecydes (DK 789), with ἐκροή scems quite possible. A further 
but more remote possibility is that Chronos’ semen became primeval water. 
We are told in one source (Achilles Jsag. 3, DK.'781a) that Pherecydes, 
like Thales, declared the element to be water, which he called χάος 
(presumably deriving it from χέεσθαι, if the whole thing is not Stoic 
accommodation). The Suda, too, says that ‘he imitated the opinion of 
Thales’ (DK 7 A2) ; though Sextus, on the other hand, said that his principle 
was earth (DK7A10). Great penetration is not to be sought in these 
interpretations; but it does seem probable that Pherecydes understood 
Hesiod’s Chaos in a special sense, perhaps because of a specious etymology. 
The surviving fragments show that there was no question of water coming 


first; but the special interprctation of Chaos may have been connected 
with Chronos’ seed at a relatively early stage of cosmic development. 


59 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


The names listed by Porphyry in §52—doors and gates as well as 
recesses, pits and caves—again suggest that something more 
elaborate than mere depressions in the carth was in question; 
though this may be just mythological decoration. Porphyry’s 
interpretation, that these things were connected with the soul, is 
purely Neoplatonic and comes in a treatise in which every detail 
of the Cave of the Nymphs in the Odyssey is made to yield a similar 
psychic meaning. There is no good evidence for attributing any 
special interest in the soul to Pherecydes.* 

1 Cicero’s remark at Tusc. 1, 16, 38 (DK 7A5), that Pherccydes was the 
first to call human souls eternal, is probably caused by the attribution of 
Pythagoras’ ideas to his putative master; cf. the Suda, DK 7a2. A similar 
statement occurs in Aponius (DK 745); the addition that Pherecydes 
‘unum nobis de coelo spiritum, alterum credidit terrenis seminibus 
comparatum’ secms to mean mercly that the soul is aitherial, the body 
terrestrial, and not (as H. Gomperz and others have imagined) that 


Pherecydes postulated a double sfiritus. That the soul is connected with 
aither is a view he might conceivably have held: see p. 200 and note. 


(1) The wedding of Zas and Chthonie, and the embroidery of the cloth 


54 Grenfcll and Hunt Greek Papyri Ser. II, no. 11, p. 23 (3rd cent. 
A.D.) (DK 782) αὐγτῷ ποιοῦσιν τὰ οἰκία πολλά τε Kal μεγάλα. 
ἐπεὶ δὲ ταῦτα ἐξετέλεσαν πιάντα καὶ χρήματα καὶ θεράποντας καὶ 
θεραπαίνας καὶ τἄλλα ὅσα δεῖ πάντα, ἐπεὶ δὴ πάντα ἑτοῖμα γίγνεται 
τὸν γάμον ποιεῦσιν. κἀπειδὴ τρίτη ἡμέρη γίγνεται τῷ γάμῳ, τότε 
Ζὰς ποιεῖ φᾶρος μέγα τε καὶ καλὸν καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ (ποικίλλει Γῆν) καὶ 
᾿ωγηζςνὸν καὶ τὰ *W)ynvot {δώματα *** [00]. 2] βουλόμενος) γὰρ 
σέο τοὺς γάμους εἶναι τούτῳ σε τιζμῶν. σὺ δέ μοι χαῖρε καὶ σύνισθι. 
ταῦτά φασιν ἀνακαλυπτήρια πρῶτον γενέσθαι" ἐκ τούτου δὲ ὁ 
νόμος ἐγένετο καὶ θεοῖσι καὶ ἀνθζρώποιγ)σιν. 1 δέ μιζν ἀμείβεσται 
δεξαμζένη εὖ TO) φᾶζρος. ...ἢ 
: The attribution to Pherecydes, and the supplements οὗ (ποικίλλει... . > to 
(Sapata), are confirmcd by Clement of Alexandria Strom. νι, 9, 4, Φ. ὁ 
Σύριος λέγει" Ζὰς ποιεῖ φᾶρος... ᾽ὠγηνοῦ δώματα. Other supplements by 
Blass, Weil, Diels; text as in DK, except for alterations to the slightly 
erroneous record there of gaps in the papyrus. 








54 His halls they make for him, many and vast. And when they had accomplished all 
these, and the furniture and manservants and maidservants and everything else necessary, 
when everything was ready, they hold the wedding. And on the third day of the wedding 
Ras makes a great and fair cloth and on it he decorates Ge and Ogenos and the halls of 
Ogenos * ** ‘ for wishing [or some such word | marriages to be yours, I honour you with this. 
Hail to you, and be my consort.’ And this they say was the first Anacalypteria: from this the 
custom arose both for gods and for men. And she replies, receiving from him the cloth ***., 


60 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


The marriage is between Zas and Chthonie, as is confirmed by 
57. Zas declaration ‘desiring [or some such word] marriages to 
belong to you’ suggests strongly that Chthonie is here partially 
equated with Hera, the goddess of marriage (n. 2 on p. 57). The 
preparations are of a fairy-tale quality, and are carried out by 
unspecified agents. On the third day of the wedding festivitiest 
Zas makes a great cloth, decorating it with Ge (earth) and Ogénos 
(evidently Pherecydes’ name for Okeanos).?, He presents it to 
Chthonie: the gift of this representation of Ge seems to be what 
was referred to in §0, where Chthonie took the name Ge ‘since 
Zas gave her earth as a gift [or prerogative]’. With the cloth he 
also gives her Ogenos, which may be regarded as a part of the 
earth’s surface in the broad sense but is not a prerogative of 
Chthonie in the way that Ge is. Chthonie initially represents the 
solid substructure of earth rather than its variegated surface, Ge 
and Ogenos. Now the main question is whether the weaving or 
embroidering of earth and Okeanos is an allegory of an actual 
creation-act. It seems probable that it is; otherwise, what is the 
point of Zas undertaking this odd and unmasculine task—one very 
different, it may be noted, from Hephaestus’ decoration of the 
shield of Achilles in Jliad book 18? Not simply to symbolize the gift 
of Ge, and as a mythological precedent for the Anacalypteria, the 
Unveiling of the bride; there is this aetiological element in the 
story, as is explicitly stated, but the gift need not have been of this 
bizarre kind ifit had no morc significance than that of an Unveiling- 
gift.3 A more positive indication is provided in the following passage: 


§§ Proclus in Tim., 1, Ὁ. 54 Dichl ὁ Φερεκύδης ἔλεγεν εἷς “Epwta 
μεταβεβλῆσθαι τὸν Δία μέλλοντα δημιουργεῖν, ὅτι δὴ τὸν κόσμον ἐκ 
τῶν ἐναντίων συνιστὰς εἰς ὁμολογίαν καὶ φιλίαν ἤγαγε καὶ TauTO- 
THTA πᾶσιν ἐνέσπειρε καὶ ἕνωσιν τὴν δι᾽ ὅλων διήκουσαν. 

The whole of this from ὅτι δή onwards is palpably Stoic interpreta- 
tion, with a slight Neoplatonic colouring, and tells us nothing 
about Pherecydes. The first statement, however, that Zeus turned 
into Eros when about to create, must be based on something in 
Pherecydes. It suggests first that Zas did undertake some kind of 
cosmogonical creation, and secondly that he did so as Eros, or at 





55 Pherecydes used to say that Zeus had changed into Eros when about to create, for the 
reason that, having composed the world from the opposites, he led it into agreement and 
peace and sowed sameness in all things, and unity that interpenetrates the universe. 


61 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


least in some erotic situation. ‘This need mean no more than the 
liaisons and births of the Theogony; but that some particular 
description was envisaged is shown also by §7, in which a specific 
Eros exists between Zas and Chthonie.* This tells us clearly that 
Zas’ creation is concerned with an erotic situation between himself 
and Chthonie: the wedding itself may, therefore, be meant, and 
since we hear nothing of any offspring of cosmogonical relevance, 
while the depiction of carth and Okeanos (whether surrounding 
river, or sca in general) is the prelude to the consummation of the 
marriage and could well represent a cosmogonical act, we may 
provisionally accept that such is the case. 

1 The wedding ceremonics took three days in all, the final unveiling 

accompanied by gifts, and the consummation, taking place on the third: 

so Hesychius s.v., who put the ἀνακαλυπτήρια on the third day, though all 


other ancient authoritics (none of them early) imply that the whole 
ceremony took only one day. 


2 Ogénos (Ogénos in Lycophron and Stephanus of Byzantium) is an odd 
variant of ᾽Οκεανός, and is conceivably rclated to Akkadian uginna= circle. 
Pherecydes’ use of it is another indication of his preference for archaizing 
or etymological forms. 


3 A πέπλος was given to Harmonia by Cadmus at their wedding 
(Apollodorus mn, 4, 2), but we arc not told that it was decorated in any 
particular way, and Cadmus did not make it. Nor does there seem to be 
morc than an adventitious connexion with the ἱερὸς γάμος at Plataea (cf. 
Farnell, Cults, 1, 244), in which a statue carved from an oak-tree was 
dressed as a bride to represent Hera. 

4 Cf. the golden-winged Eros who is imagined as groomsman at the wedding 
of Zeus and Hera in the hymeneal song in Aristophanes, Birds 1737 ff. 


(iii) Lhe wenged oak and the cloth 

56 Isidorus (the Gnostic, 1st-2nd cent. a.p.) ap. Clement. Al. 
Strom. VI, 53, 5 (DK7B2) ...iva μάθωσι τί ἐστιν ἡ ὑπόπτερος 
δρῦς Kal TO ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ πεποικιλμένον φᾶρος, πάντα ὅσα Φερεκύδης 
ἀλληγορήσας ἐθεολόγησεν, λαβὼν ἀπὸ τῆς τοῦ Χὰμ προφητείας 
τὴν ὑπόθεσιν. 

57 Maximus Tyrius ΙΝ, 4 p. 45, 5 Hobein ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ Συρίου 
τὴν ποίησιν σκόπει καὶ τὸν Ζῆνα καὶ τὴν Χθονίην καὶ τὸν ἐν 
τούτοις Ἔρωτα, καὶ τὴν ᾿Οφιονέως γένεσιν καὶ τὴν θεῶν μάχην καὶ 
τὸ δένδρον καὶ τὸν πέπλον. 








σό ...that they may learn what is the winged oak and the decorated cloth upon it, all 
that Pherecydes said in allegory about the gods, taking his idea from the prophecy of Ham. 


47 But consider also the work of the man of Syros, and Las and Chthonie and the Eros 
between them, and the birth of Ophioneus and the battle of gods and the tree and the robe. 


62 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


We learn in §6 that the embroidered cloth (i.e. that given by Zas 
to Chthonie in 54) was somehow on a winged oak: this must be 
what ‘the trec and the robe’ refer to in §7. One modern sug- 
gestion (by H. Gomperz, Wiener St. 47 (1929) 22) is that the oak 
represents the frame of the loom on which Zas made the cloth. 
This involves taking ὑπόπτερος to mean simply ‘swift’, with total 
suppression of the concrcte wing-image; there is no parallel for 
such a use with a concrete subject. More serious, a loom could 
hardly be called an oak-iree, simply, even in a fantastic context. 
According to another interpretation (Diels, SB Ber. 1897, 147f.) 
the oak resembles the mast on which Athene’s peplos was carried 
in the Panathenaic procession. It is true that §7 uses the word 
πέπλον, and ‘winged’ might be explained as describing the cross- 
piece on which the robe was hung; but there is really no reason 
whatever for thinking of the Panathenaia, and to refer to the mast 
as an oak would be distinctly odd.t Both Diels and K. von Fritz 
(author of the article on Pherecydes in Pauly-Wissowa) believed 
that an allegorical version of Anaximander is also in question: the 
earth is shaped like a tree-trunk because it is cylindrical as in 
Anaximander (see 124); it is described as a tree because Anaxi- 
mander said that a sphere of flame fitted round air and earth like 
the bark round a tree (123); the earth is winged because it floats 
free in space (125); the embroidering of its surface 15 reminiscent 
of Anaximander’s map (pp. 103f.); and the treatment of Okeanos 
as an integral part of the earth’s surface is a new development 
found also in Anaximander. But none of these arguments is valid, 
let alone cogent: the shape of the earth cannot be represented by 
the shape of the trunk alone, which is not the only or even the 
most conspicuous part of an oak-tree; Anaximander’s bark round 
a tree is a simile; ‘winged’, if it is to be given an abstract connota- 
tion at all, should mean ‘swift-moving’ and not ‘floating’; 
Anaximander’s map had no known connexion with his cos- 
mology; and the tendency to integrate Okeanos with the 
inner seas is occasionally detectable even in Homer. Other 
alleged borrowings from Anaximander (Time, and γόνος“ 
γόνιμον) are no more convincingly in favour of an inter- 
pretation which von Fritz had the temerity to call ‘practically 
certain’. Further, there is little probability that a scientific ac- 
count should, in the archaic period, receive a nearly contemporary 
allegorization. 


63 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


I Diels, followed by e.g. Jaeger, Mondolfo and von Fritz, was ground- 
lessly impressed by the whole context (DK 785) of 60 below, where Origen 
reports that Celsus interpreted certain rites and mythological incidents as 
symbolizing the subjection of matter by god. Two passages in Homer, then 
Pherecydes’ description of Tartaros (60), and finally the Panathenaic 
peplos are so interpreted; the last is said to show ‘that a motherless and 
immaculate deity prevails over the boastful Earthborn’. Here the robe 
represents Athene, the cart (later ship) in which the pole supporting it was 
carried represents the Earthborn: such ancient speculations about this 
particular ritual were rather common. The interpretation is quoted as a 
separate instance, parallel of course to the Phcrecydes extract because 
adduced as another illustration of the same thesis; but there is nothing to 
suggest that Pherecydes should be interpreted in terms of the Panathenaia. 


The following interpretation is proposed as more probable than 
any of those described above. The oak represents the solidly fixed 
substructure and foundations of the earth (the ‘frame’ of the 
earth, Zeller suggested). Its trunk and branches are the support 
and roots of the earth. That the earth has roots is part of the 
popular world-picture (pp. 1of.), and a tree’s branches, in winter, 
appear as large inverted roots. That the roots of earth and sea were 
sometimes conceived as being above Tartarus, and that Tartarus 
itself could be imagined as a narrower pit bencath, is clearly 
shown by the important description at Theogony 726ff., already 
quoted as 2: ‘Around Tartarus a brazen fence is drawn; and all 
about it Night in three rows is poured, around the throat; and 
above are the roots of earth and unharvested sea.’ ‘The throat or 
neck that is Tartarus (or a part of it) corresponds with the trunk 
of the oak-tree, the roots which are above it correspond with the 
branches.t The oak is ‘winged’ partly, at least, because of the 
spreading, wing-like appearance of these same branches. On them 
Zas has laid the cloth embroidered with Earth and Ogenos: these 
represent the earth’s surface, flat or slightly convex, as indeed it 
appears to be. We cannot say whether Ogenos is conceived as a 
surrounding river or as the sea. The oak is specified because it 15 
associated more than any other tree with Zeus (cf. the prophetic 
oaks in his shrine at Dodona, Od. 14, 328), and because of its 
notable strength and the great spread of its branches. Thus 
according to the interpretation offered here Zas must have chosen, 
or magically grown, a broad oak as the foundation of the earth; or 
(following a suggestion by T. B. L. Webster) he summoned an oak 
from afar which magically flies to him, using its branches as 
wings. Zas then weaves a cloth, decorating it with earth and 


64 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


Okeanos, and lays the decorated cloth on the outspread branches 
of the oak to form the earth’s surface.? 


1 60 mentions Tartaros below the earth, which suggests that Pherecydes 
broadly accepted the popular world-picture, not the rationalized con- 
struction of Anaximander. The kind of world-tree postulated above must 
be distinguished from e.g. the Scandinavian world-tree Yggdrasil, whose 
branches form the heavens, not the support for the carth’s surface; though 
the roots of the tree are regarded as supporting the earth. 


2 A clue to the meaning of the winged oak and the cloth is apparently 
given by Isidorus’ comment in §6 that Pherecydes ‘took the supposition 
from the prophecy of Ham’. Unfortunately, little can be determined about 
this work. Harnack suggested that Ham in this context is a name for 
Zoroaster (Bidez and Cumont, Les Mages Hellénisés u, 62 n.); this identi- 
fication was occasionally made, cf. op. cit. 1, 433 τι, 49-50. Zoroaster was 
well established as a sage by the early Hellenistic period, and Aristoxenus 
had stated that Pythagoras visited Zoroaster in Babylon (294). Of the 
vast mass of pseudo-Zoroastrian literature produced in the Hellenistic 
epoch, there was a work On Nature in four books, and special accounts of 
the magical properties of stoncs and plants, as well as descriptions of 
Hades. The book on nature scems to have contained nothing of cosmo- 
gonical interest, but, like the rest, to have dealt with astrology, minerals 
and so on. A second wave of Zoroastrian literature was produced in the 
first two centuries A.D. by various Gnostic sects—in the Clementine 
apocrypha, by the Sethians, by the disciples of Prodicus. More of genuine 
Zoroastrianism (dualism of good and evil, importance of fire) was to be 
found in these works than in the earlier group. It is a question to which 
group Isidorus was referring; though the facts that Isidorus’ father 
Basilides inclined to Iranian dualism, and that the Ham-Zoroaster 
identification is probably first found in a Gnostic source, suggest that 1t was 
the later one. On the other hand Isidorus 15 less likely to have been taken 
in by a product of his own age. But in neither group can we detect any- 
thing which might have been regarded as a significant precedent for the 
winged oak or the embroidercd cloth; we cannot even assume that 
Isidorus was struck by the oriental character of Pherecydes’ allegory, 
since much of the Greek Zoroastrian literature was not oriental in origin 
or colouring. One cannot be certain that Pherecydes’ allegory had not 
itself been absorbed into some pseudo-Zoroastrian source, and so misled 
Isidorus. 


(iv) The fight between Kronos and Ophioneus 


58 Celsus ap. Origen. c. Celsum vi, 42 (DK 784) Φερεκύδην δὲ 
πολλῷ ἀρχαιότερον γενόμενον Ἡρακλείτου μυθοποιεῖν στρατείαν 
στρατείᾳ πιαραταττομένην καὶ τῆς μὲν ἡγεμόνα Κρόνον ζ(ἀπολδιδόναι, 
τῆς ἑτέρας δ᾽ ᾿Οφιονέα, προκλήσεις τε καὶ ἁμίλλας αὐτῶν ἱστορεῖν, 





48 Pherecydes, who lived much earlier than Heraclitus, related the myth that army was 
drawn up against army, and he gave Kronos as leader of one, Ophioneus of the other, and 


5 65 K&R 


ΡΕΕΒΟΘΒΑΤΙΟ PHILOSOPHERS 


συνθήκας τε αὐτοῖς γίγνεσθαι iv’ ὁπότεροι αὐτῶν εἰς τὸν ᾿ωγηνὸν 
ἐμπέσωσι, τούτους μὲν εἶναι νενικημένους, τοὺς δ᾽ ἐξώσαντας καὶ 
νικήσαντας, τούτους ἔχειν τὸν οὐρανόν. 
59 Apollonius Rhodius 1, 503 (following 31) 
(Ὀρφεὺς) ἤειδεν δ᾽ ὡς πρῶτον ᾿Οφίων Εὐρυνόμη τε 

“OKeavis νιφόεντος ἔχον κράτος Οὐλύμποιο. 

ὥς τε βίῃ καὶ χερσὶν ὁ μὲν Κρόνῳ εἴκαθε τιμῆς, 

ἡ δὲ 'Ῥέῃ, ἔπεσον δ᾽ ἐνὶ κύμασιν ᾿ΟὈκεανοῖο᾽ 

of δὲ τέως μακάρεσσι θεοῖς Τιτῆσιν ἄνασσον, 

ὄφρα Ζεὺς ἔτι κοῦρος ἔτι φρεσὶ νήπια εἰδὼς 

Δικταῖον ναίεσκεν ὑπὸ σπέος... .. 
60 Celsus ap. Origen. c. Celsum vi, 42 (ὨΚ 785) ταῦτα δὲ τὰ 
Ὁμήρου ἔπη οὕτω νοηθέντα τὸν Φερεκύδην φησὶν (sc. KéAcos) 
εἰρηκέναι τὸ (Fr. 5) Κείνης δὲ τῆς μοίρας ἔνερθέν ἐστιν ἡ Ταρταρίη 
μοῖρα᾽ φυλάσσουσι δ᾽ αὐτὴν θυγατέρες Βορέου “Aptruiai τε καὶ 
Θύελλα᾽ ἔνθα Ζεὺς ἐκβάλλει θεῶν ὅταν τις ἐξυβρίσῃ. 


Pherecydes evidently described in some detail an encounter 
between Kronos (probably derived from the primeval deity 
Chronos: see p. 56) and Ophioneus, the preliminaries of which 
appear in §8. This must form part, at least, of ‘the battle of gods’ 
in Maximus’ summary (§7). Ophioneus is obviously connected 
with ὄφις, snake, and is a snake-like monster of the type of 
Typhoeus in the Hesiodic Theogony (line 825, Typhoeus had a 
hundred snake-heads). The battle with Kronos is otherwise known 
from rare Hellenistic references, of which the description in 59 is 
the most important. There, Ophion (as he is there called) has a 
consort, the Occanid Eurynome, while Kronos is helped by Rhea. 
There are enough divergences to suggest that Apollonius is not 
merely copying Pherecydes,' and it seems that there was an old 








recounted their challenges and struggles, and that they made an agreement that whichever 
of them fell into Ogenos, these were the vanquished, while those who thrust them out and 
were victorious were to possess the sky. 

59 He [Orpheus] sang how first of all Ophion and Eurynome, daughter of Okeanos, held 
sway over snowy Olympus; and how by strength of hands the former yielded his lordship to 
Kronos, the latter to Rhea, and they fell in the waves of Okeanos; and the other two mean- 
time held sway over the blessed gods, the Titans, while Zeus, still a boy and still having 
childish thoughts in his heart, dwelt by the Dictaean cave.... 

60 (Celsus) says that with this interpretation of these Homeric lines in mind Pherecydes 
has said: ‘ Below that portion is the portion of Tartaros; the daughters of Boreas, the 
Harpies, and Storm, guard it; there Zeus expels whosoever of the gods behaves insolently.’ 


66 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


story, not mentioned in Hesiod, which formed part of the manifold 
lost mythology of Kronos and related his encounter with a 
monster. In Pherecydes the victor is to have possession of the sky 
(and so become, or remain, supreme god) ; according to Apollonius 
in §9 (supported by a scholion on Clouds 247) Ophion and 
Eurynome had already ruled on Olympus and were trying to repel 
a challenge. There may be a reference here to the concept of 
Okeanos and Tethys as the first gods (9, 10): Eurynome was a 
daughter of Okcanos,? and with Ophion may represent a second 
gencration replacing, somehow, that of Ouranos and Gaia. Yet in 
Pherecydes there is nothing to suggest that Ophioneus had cver 
ruled the sky; Maximus in §7 mentions ‘the birth of Ophioncus 
and the battle of gods’, which may suggest that Ophioneus was, 
like Typhoeus in Hesiod, an unsuccessful challenger for power; 
and Tertullian (de corona 7, DK 784) asserted that according to 
Pherecydes Kronos was the first king of the gods. Further, 
Pherecydes cannot have accepted the usual view, seen in Apollo- 
nius, that Zcus was a child in Crete during part of the reign of 
Kronos. The primeval Zas probably turned into Zeus (eus not 
Kas occurs in 60; though this could be duc to carelessness in the 
transmission), just as Chronos probably turned into Kronos, and 
this would scarcely be by the medium of a birth. In Pherecydes, 
as in the common version, Kronos-Chronos must have eventually 
been deposed by Zas, to be despatched below the earth (as in 
Homer, Jl. 14, 203f., and Hesiod). Unfortunately 60, which 
locates the ‘portion’ of Tartaros below, presumably, that of Gaia 
(rather than of Hades in the sense of J. 8, 16), does not mention 
Kronos; it seems to come from a description of the assignment of 
parts of the cosmos to different deities, which followed Zeus’ final 
subjection of his adversaries in Homer and Hesiod also. 


I Nor necd we believe that Apollonius was reproducing an ancient Orphic 
account. There is a great deal in this cosmogony and theogony as sung by 
Orpheus in the Argonautica that is not Orphic (see also 31 and ἢ. 2 on 


Ρ. 33). 
2 Also at Il. 18, 398ff.; Theog. 358. At Theog. 295ff. another Oceanid, 
Callirhoe, produced the snake-woman Echidna, who mated with Typhaon. 


The battle of Kronos against Ophion has obvious correspondences 
with that of Zeus against Typhoeus in the Theogony. ‘The whole 
Typhoeus episode seems to have becn interpolated into the 
Hesiodic poem; but this cannot have been long after the original 


67 5-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


composition, and is likely in any case to have been earlier than the 
date of Pherecydes. The cosmic fight with a snake-god is not, of 
course, exclusive to Greece, but is found all over the Near East 
long before Hesiod, in both Semitic and Indo-European contexts. 
Compare the fight of Marduk with the serpent-aided Tiamat in 
the Babylonian creation-myth (ANET 62ff.); the victory of the 
storm-god over the dragon [luyanka in the Hurrian-Hittite story 
of that name (ANET 125f.; Gurney, The AMittites, 181 fF.) ; and the 
nightly overcoming of the dragon Apophis by the Egyptian sun- 
god Re in his journey undef the earth (ANET 6-7). The battle 
between Zcus and Typhocus-Typhon (who was equated with the 
Egyptian Seth) was in later accounts, though not in Hesiod, 
located in Cilicia, especially on Mount Casius near the proto- 
Phoenician Minoan entrepét of Ras-Shamra/Ugarit. It clearly 
coincided with a local version of the sky-god and snake-monster 
motif, and this correspondence may have been the chief motive 
for the assertion that Pherecydes borrowed from the Phoenicians: 


6x1 Philo Byblius af. Eusebium P.E.1, 10,50 παρὰ Φοινίκων δὲ 
Kal Φερεκύδης λαβὼν τὰς ἀφορμὰς ἐθεολόγησε περὶ TOU Trap’ αὐτῷ 
λεγομένου ᾿Οφιονέως θεοῦ καὶ τῶν ᾿Οφιονιδῶν.2 


The earlier parallel of the Hesiodic Typhocus makes it unnecessary 
to suppose that Pherecydes was borrowing directly from an 
oriental source, and one may wonder whether the reference in the 
Suda (47) to his access to Phoenician secret books was based on 
anything more than the Ophioneus-Typhon comparison. 
t It is a question whether the ᾿Οφιονίδαι are literally ‘the children of 
Ophioneus’, or simply his army or supporters, cf. 58. If the former, one 


may compare the monsters born to Typhaon by Echidna at Theogony 306 ff. 
—though these are not involved in the Typhoeus episode. 


THE ORDER OF EVENTS IN PHERECYDES BOOK 


The extant evidence, reviewed in the preceding pages, presents us 
with a number of phases described by Pherecydes: (a) the three 
pre-existing deities; (>) the making by Chronos out of his own seed 
of things disposed in five recesses, which produce other generations 
of gods; (ο) the making of the cloth by Zas, the depiction on it of 
Earth and Ogenos, the wedding of Zas and Chthonie, and the 





61 From the Phoenicians Pherecydes, too, took his impulse, when he wrote about him 
whom he called the god Ophioneus, and the children of Ophioneus. 


68 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


presentation of the cloth, followed (9) by the spreading of it over 
the winged oak; (d) the battle between Kronos and Ophioneus; 
(e) the assignment of portions to different deities, perhaps implied 
in 60. 

Several incidents must have taken place about which we 
possess no information: for example, Chronos-Kronos was pre- 
sumably supplanted by Zas-Zeus, as in the common account, but 
Pherecydes’ views here are unknown. Another problem is the 
birth of Ophioneus mentioned in Maximus’ summary, §7: who 
were the parents? It seems unlikely that Zas and Chthonie were 
(although all mythological weddings have offspring, and we do 
not know the offspring of this particular one), since it must be 
assumed that the battle of Kronos and Ophioneus, the reward of 
which is possession of the sky, takes place either during or as a 
prelude to the rule of Chronos-Kronos, which seems to have pre- 
ceded the wedding of Zas and Chthonie and the assumed creation 
of earth and Okeanos. But a difficulty arises here. In the fight 
between Ophioneus and Kronos the loser is to be he who falls 
into Ogenos; but according to the creation-allegory interpretation 
Ogenos is made at the wedding of Zas and Chthonie, which should 
therefore precede and not follow the Ophioneus-fight. This diffi- 
culty applies to all reconstructions that make the weaving of the 
cloth a crcation-allegory: for Chronos’ mastery of the sky is 
suggested by all the other evidence (especially σὲ and the analogy 
of the Homeric-Hesiodic account) to have preceded the period of 
Zas’ activity. Either, therefore, Pherecydes was inconsistent in 
presupposing Ogenos before it had been formally created; or 
Ogenos existed before it was woven into or embroidered on the 
cloth; or Ogenos is not an original element in Celsus’ account of 
the Kronos-Ophioneus fight. The last of these hypotheses is not 
impossible. A somewhat different version of this encounter is 
known from the Hellenistic period, and is best seen in §9. There 
Ophion and his bride Eurynome, the daughter of Okeanos, ruled 
the sky, but were forcibly displaced by Kronos and Rhea and fell 
into the waves of Okeanos. Falling into Okeanos makes sense for an 
Oceanid and her consort; but in Pherecydes there seems to be no 
place for a female consort of any kind, let alone an Oceanid. It is 
possible, therefore, that Celsus or his source transferred into the 
Pherecydes version a detail from a rather different Hellenistic 
version, and adapted it to the known Pherecydean terminology. 


69 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Yet if Zas and Chthonie cannot jointly have produced Ophioneus 
after their wedding, 1t remains true that the earth-goddess 
Chthonic-Ge is the obvious parent for a snake (whose home is 
traditionally in the earth), just as Gaia is normally the mother of 
the snakeish Typhoeus. A liaison between Zas and Chthonie 
before their marriage (as suggested by Jl. 14, 296) would fit the 
order of 47: the passion of Zas and Chthonie, the birth of 
Ophioneus, the battle of gods, the tree and the robe (and, there- 
fore, the marriage). But there is no strong reason for assuming 
that Maximus set down these themes in the exact order in which 
they occurred in Pherecydes’ book; and the dramatic force of the 
description of the wedding, which has obvious literary pretensions, 
would undoubtedly be weakened if Zas and Chthonie had becn 
living together for ages beforehand. It seems more probable that 
if Ophioncus was the child of Chthonic the father, if any, was 
other than Zas. Here Chronos springs to mind. His seed was 
placed in ‘recesses’, presumably in the carth, according to §1; and 
there was a story, known only from §3 and not connected there 
with Pherccydes, that Kronos impregnated two eggs with his seed, 
gave the eggs to Hera to place underground, and so produced the 
snakish Typhoeus, to whom Ophioneus is similar. If this is the 
case, Chronos with Chthonie would produce Ophioneus and, 
perhaps, other monsters; Ophioncus would attack Chronos 
(already perhaps called Kronos) and be defeated; Zas in his turn 
would attack and overthrow Kronos, and would marry Chthonie, 
now to be called Ge and in some ways to become equivalent to 
Hera; in so doing he would create earth and sea as we know 
them (the existence of sky being somchow prcsupposed, perhaps 
implicit in Zas himself). How Zas subjected Kronos we do not 
know; it might be thought that Ophioncus was acting as his 
agent, but in view of §9 it must be assumed that Ophioneus was 
defeated and that Kronos was deposed by some other means. 
In this case the order of events might be: three pre-existing 
deities; Chronos rules the sky, plants his seed in Chthonie; 
birth of Ophioneus (with other chthonic creatures); Ophioneus 
challenges Kronos, but fails; Kronos somehow subjected by 
Zas; marriage of Zas and Chthonie-Ge-Hera, and creation of our 
world; apportionment of spheres, Zeus’ enemies in ‘Tartaros. 
But it must be emphasized that most of this is very speculative 
indeed." 


70 


FORERUNNERS OF PHILOSOPHICAL COSMOGONY 


t Plato probably had Pherccydes in mind in 62 Sophist 242 c—p μῦθόν τινα 
ἕκαστος φαίνεταί μοι διηγεῖσθαι παισὶν ὡς οὖσιν ἡμῖν, ὁ μὲν ὡς τρία τὰ ὄντα, 
πολεμεῖ δὲ ἀλλήλοις ἐνίοτε αὐτῶν ἄττα πῃ, τοτὲ δὲ καὶ φίλα γιγνόμενα 
γάμους τε καὶ τόκους καὶ τροφὰς τῶν ἐκγόνων παρέχεται... .. We cannot 
assume, however, that all the incidents mentioncd here are consciously 
derived from Pherecydes. 


CONCLUSION 


In spite of all uncertainties, Pherecydes is clearly a notable figure 
in the history of Greek cosmogonical speculation. As Aristotle 
implied (42), he combines the mythological approach with a more 
objective one. The assertion that three deities always existed 
implies a rational amendment to the traditional genealogical 
pattern; yet the method of creation pursued by Chronos is as 
crudely anthropomorphic as anything in Hesiod. The details of 
the allegory of the decorated cloth, if correctly interpreted, are 
part of the stock of pure myth; at the same time the allegory 
itself; which is of the highest intcrest both for its originality and for 
its beauty, shows that Pherecydes accepted the naive but not 
unempirical view of the structure of the world which was outlined 
in §1. His interest in etymology, and consequent handling of the 
first gods, is the first clear manifestation of a way of thinking 
conspicuous in Aeschylus and Heraclitus, and it evidently still 
impressed the Orphic eclectics of three and morc centuries later. 
Pherecydes was an individualist both in his handling of the 
traditional stories of the gods and in his use of uncommon motifs. 
There is practically no indication of special near-castern influence, 
except conceivably in the seven recesses. There is, however, one 
respect in which his narrative is closer to oriental accounts than 
to Greek ones. It is evident that in his book many incidents con- 
cerning the three pre-existing deities were related before the 
cosmogony proper (that is, the formation of earth and Ogenos) was 
reached. This may be compared with the Babylonian creation- 
myth, for cxample, wherc the splitting of Tiamat to form sky and 
earth comes only at the end of a long saga of the gods; and con- 








62 Each seems to me to tell us a kind of story, as though we were children, one saying that 
existing things are three, and that certain of them in some way fight with each other at times, 
and at times they become good friends and provide marriages and births and nurturings of 
their offspring.... 


71 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


trasted with the Hesiodic Theogony, where the cosmic constituents 
are produced almost immediately, and as the prelude to the 
history of the gods. But this may be simply because Hesiod, 
and not Pherecydes and the Babylonian cosmogony, is quasi- 
rationalistic. 

By no stretch of the imagination could the views of Pherecydes, 
or any of those described earlier in this chapter, be termed philo- 
sophical. They were, however, sometimes directed towards an 
explanation of the world as a whole, especially of how it came to 
be what it is; and they reveal on occasion a method not essentially 
different from that of Thales and the first Ionian philosophers, 
who are treated in the immediately following chapters. What gave 
these the title of philosopher was their abandonment of mytho- 
poeic forms of thought, of personification and anthropomorphic 
theistic explanations, and thcir attempt to explain the seen world 
in terms of its seen constituents. 


72 


THE IONIAN THINKERS 


It was in Ionia that the first completely rationalistic attempts to 
describe the nature of the world took place. There, material prosperity 
and special opportunities for contact with other cultures—with Sardis, 
for example, by land, and with the Pontus and Egypt by sea—were 
allied, for a time at least, with a strong cultural and literary tradition 
dating from the age of Homer. Within the space of a century Miletus 
produced Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes, each dominated by 
the assumption of a single basic material, the isolation of which was 
the most important step in any systematic account of reality. This 
attitude was clearly a development of the genetic or genealogical 
approach to nature exemplified by the Hesiodic Theogony and de- 
scribed in Chapter 1. After the great Milesians, however, the attitude 
was moderated or abandoned. Xenophanes is here treated among the 
Ionians (chapter v), but in fact he does not fit into any general 
category. Born and brought up in Colophon, and strongly aware of 
Ionian ideas (more so, apparently, than Pythagoras), he moved to 
western Greece and was only incidentally interested in the details of 
cosmogony and cosmology. In Ephesus, meanwhile, the individual- 
istic Heraclitus outstepped the limits of material monism, and, while 
retaining the idca of a basic (though not a cosmogonic) substance, 
discovered the most significant unity of things—a unity which he, too, 
assumed without question—in their structure or arrangement. Here 
there is a parallel with Pythagorean theories in the west of the Greek 
world. Pythagoreanism produced the reaction of Parmenides, and for 
a time the western schools were all-important; but the Ionian 
materialistic monism re-asserted itself, to a certain extent, in the 
compromises of some of the post-Parmenidean systems. 


73 


CHAPTER II 


THALES OF MILETUS 


DATE 


Traditionally the carliest Greek physicist, or enquirer into the 
nature of things as a whole (87), Thales predicted an eclipse 
which took place in 585 B.c. (76). He was presumably not active, 
therefore, much earlier than the beginning of the sixth century." 


t The eclipse took place in Ol. 48, 4 (585/4) according to Pliny, NV.H. ny, 
53 (DK11A5), who presumably followed Apollodorus; and a ycar or 
more later according to the Euscbian scheme (DK11A5). Modern 
calculations put it on 28 May 585 B.c., 1.6. in Ol. 48, 3. Tannery’s view 
that the eclipse predicted by Thales was that of 610 15 now rejected. 
Apollodorus according to Diogenes Laertius 1, 37-8 (DK 11 A1) put Thales’ 
birth in Ol. 35, 1 (640), his death in Ol. 58 (548-545) at the age of seventy- 
eight. There is a fault in the mathematics here: probably Ol. 35, 1 is a 
mistake, by the common confusion of € and 6, for Ol. 39, 1 (624). Apollo- 
dorus, then, charactcristically placed Thales’ death around the epoch-year 
of the capture of Sardis, his acme at the time of the eclipse, and his birth 
the conventional forty years earlier. This accords approximately with a 
different and slightly earlier dating authority: Demetrius of Phaleron, 
according to Diog. L. 1, 22 (DK 11A1), placed the canonization of the 
Seven Sages (of whom Thalcs was a universally accepted membcr) in the 
archonship of Damasias at Athens, 1.6. 582/1 B.c., the epoch-year of the 
first restored Pythian festival. 


NATIONALITY 


63 Diogenes Laertius 1, 22 (DK 11A1 init.) ἦν τοίνυν ὁ Θαλῆς, 
ὡς μὲν Ἡρόδοτος Kal Δοῦρις καὶ Δημόκριτός φασι, πατρὸς μὲν 
᾿Ἐξαμύον μητρὸς δὲ Κλεοβουλίνης, ἐκ τῶν Θηλιδῶν, οἵ εἰσι Φοίνικες, 
εὐγενέστατοι τῶν ἀπὸ Κάδμου καὶ ᾿Αγήνορος. . .ἐπολιτογραφήθη 
δὲ (sc. ᾿Αγήνωρ) ἐν Μιλήτῳ ὅτε ἦλθε σὺν Νείλεῳ ἐκπεσόντι Φοινίκης. 
ὡς δ᾽ οἱ πλείους φασίν, ἰθαγενὴς Μιλήσιος ἦν (sc. Θαλῆς) καὶ γένους 
λαμπροῦ. 





63 Now Thales, as Herodotus and Douris and Democritus say, was the son of Examyes 
as father and Cleobuline as mother, from the descendants of Theleus, who are Phoenicians, 
nobles from the line of Cadmus and Agenor...and he [Agenor] was enrolled as a citizen 
in Miletus when he came with Neileos, when the latter was exiled from Phoenicia. But 
most people say that Thales was a true Milesian by descent, and of high family. 


74 


THALES 


64 Herodotus 1, 170 (from 66) .... Θαλέω ἀνδρὸς MiAnoiou... 
TO ἀνέκαθεν γένος ἐόντος Φοίνικος... .. 
The story οἵ Thalcs’ Phoenician ancestry, barely mentioned by 
Herodotus in 64 (though 63 makes it appcar as though he had 
said more; the references in Douris and Democritus are otherwise 
unknown), was later much claborated, partly, no doubt, to support 
the common theory of the eastern origins of Greek science. If 
Thales drew the attention of the Milesians to the navigational 
value of the Little Bear, used earlier by Phocnician sailors (see 80), 
this would add to the force of Herodotus’ comment. The probabi- 
lity is that Thales was as Greek as most Milesians.* 
X Cf. 6§ Herodotus 1, 146... Μινύαι δὲ ᾽Ορχομένιοί σφι (sc. the Ionian 
colonists) ἀναμεμείχαται Kal Καδμεῖοι καὶ Apvortres....Thus Thales’ 
‘Phoenician’ ancestors were probably Cadmeians from Bocotia and not 
full-blooded Semites. His father, Examyes, seems to have had a Carian 


name. Herodotus went on to say that even the ostensibly purest Ionian 
families were mixcd by intermarriage with Carian women. 


PRACTICAL ACTIVITIES 


66 Herodotus 1, 170 χρηστὴ δὲ καὶ πρὶν ἢ διαφθαρῆναι ᾿Ιωνίην 
Θαλέω ἀνδρὸς Μιλησίου ἐγένετο (sc. ἡ γνώμη), τὸ ἀνέκαθεν γένος 
ἐόντος Φοίνικος, ὃς ἐκέλευε ἕν βουλευτήριον Ἴωνας ἐκτῆσθαι, τὸ δὲ 
εἶναι ἐν Τέῳ (Τέων γὰρ μέσον εἶναι ᾿Ιωνίης), τὰς δὲ ἄλλας πόλιας 
οἰκεομένας μηδὲν ἧσσον νομίφεσθαι κατά περ εἰ δῆμοι elev. 


67 Herodotus 1, 75 os δὲ ἀπίκετο ἐπὶ tov “AAuv ποταμὸν ὁ 
Κροῖσος, τὸ ἐνθεῦτεν, ὡς μὲν ἐγὼ λέγω, κατὰ τὰς ἐούσας γεφύρας 
διεβίβασε τὸν στρατόν, ὡς δὲ ὁ πολλὸς λόγος Ἑλλήνων, Θαλῆς 
οἱ ὁ Μιλήσιος διεβίβασε. ἀπορέοντος γὰρ Κροίσου ὅκως οἱ δια- 
βήσεται τὸν ποταμὸν ὁ στρατός (οὐ γὰρ δὴ εἶναί κω τοῦτον τὸν 
χρόνον τὰς γεφύρας ταύτας) λέγεται παρεόντα τὸν Θαλῆν ἐν τῷ 
64 ...of Thales, a man of Miletus... δοίη a Phoenician by ultimate descent.... 


65 ...Minyans from Orchomenus are mixed with them [the Ionian colonists], and 
Cadmeians and Dryopes.... 


66 Useful also was the opinion, before the destruction of Ionia, of Thales, a man of 
Miletus, being a Phoenician by ultimate descent, who advised the Ionians to have a single 
deliberative chamber, saying that it should be in Teos, for this was in the middle of Ionia; 
the other cities should continue to be inhabited but should be regarded as if they were demes. 
67 When he came to the Halys river, Croesus then, as I say, put his army across by the 
existing bridges; but, according to the common account of the Greeks, Thales the Milesian 
transferred the army for him. For it is said that Croesus was at a loss how his army should 
cross the river, since these bridges did not yet exist at this period; and that Thales, who was 


75 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


στρατοπέδῳ ποιῆσαι αὐτῷ τὸν ποταμὸν ἐξ ἀριστερῆς χειρὸς ῥέοντα 
τοῦ στρατοῦ καὶ ἐκ δεξιῆς ῥέειν, ποιῆσαι δὲ ὧδε: ἄνωθεν τοῦ 
στρατοπέδου ἀρξάμενον διώρυχα βαθέαν ὀρύσσειν ἄγοντα μηνοει- 
δέα, ὅκως ἂν τὸ στρατόπεδον ἱδρυμένον κατὰ νώτου λάβοι, ταύτῃ 
κατὰ τὴν διώρυχα ἐκτρατόμενος ἐκ τῶν ἀρχαίων ῥεέθρων, καὶ αὖτις 
παραμειβόμενος τὸ στρατόπεδον ἐς τὰ ἀρχαῖα ἐσβάλλοι, ὥστε 
ἐπείτε καὶ ἐσχίσθη τάχιστα ὁ ποταμὸς ἀμφοτέρῃ διαβατὸς ἐγένετο. 


Herodotus provides convincing evidence for Thales’ activities as 
statesman and engineer (also as astronomer, 76). Such versatility 
seems to have been typical of the Milesian thinkers, whom it 1s 
tempting to consider too exclusively as theorctical physicists. 
Thales, especially, became a symbol for ingenuity of a mathe- 
matical and geometrical kind: ἅνθρωπος Θαλῆς (‘the man’s a 
Thales’), says a character in Aristophanes (Birds 1009) of Meton 
the town-planner; and Plato (Rep. 600A) coupled him with 
Anacharsis. Herodotus, it is true, did not believe the story in 67 
about Thales diverting the river Halys, but he did not deny that 
this is the sort of thing Thales might have done. There probably 
were crossings over the Halys, but Crocsus’ army might not have 
found them: Herodotus was rightly cautious, although the grounds 
of his suspicion were not certainly correct. He went on to mention 
a variant account by which the river was totally diverted into a 
new bed; the story, therefore, may have been widespread. The 
circumstantial and restrained nature of the version of 67 suggests 
that it contained a kernel of truth. 


TRADITION OF A VISIT TO EGYPT 

68 Aetius1,3,1 Θαλῆς.. .φιλοσοφήσας δὲ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ἦλθεν els 
Μίλητον πρεσβύτερος. 

69 Proclus in Euclidem p. 65 Friedl. (from Eudemus) (DK 11411) 
Θαλῆς δὲ πρῶτον eis Aiyutrtov ἐλθὼν μετήγαγεν εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα 
τὴν θεωρίαν ταύτην (sc. τὴν γεωμετρίαν)... .. 








present in the army, made the river, which flowed on the left hand of the army, flow on the 
right hand also. He did so in this way: beginning upstream of the army he dug a deep 
channel, giving it a crescent shape, so that it should flow round the back of where the army 
was encamped, being diverted in this way from its old course by the channel, and passing 
the camp should flow into its old course once more. The result was that as soon as the river 
was divided it became fordable in both its parts. 


68 Thales... having practised philosophy in Egypt came to Miletus when he was older. 
69 Thales, having first come to Egypt, transferred this study [geometry] to Greece.... 


76 


THALES 


70 «=Plutarch de Is. et Osir. 34, 364D οἴονται δὲ καὶ “Ὅμηρον 
ὥσπερ Θαλῆν μαθόντα trap’ Αἰγυπτίων ὕδωρ ἀρχὴν ἁπάντων καὶ 
γένεσιν τίθεσθαι. 
It was the custom to credit the sixth-century sages (notably, for 
example, Solon) with visits to Egypt, the traditional fountain-head 
of Greek science. Thales as the earliest known Greek geomcter had 
a special reason for being associated with the home of land- 
measurcment." ‘The implication of 68 that he spent a considerable 
time there is unique and not persuasive. That he did visit Egypt, 
however, is possible enough: several of his achievements are quite 
plausibly located there (e.g. 813; sce also p. 86), and Miletus’ rela- 
tions with its colony Naucratis were so close as to make a visit by any 
prominent citizen, trader or not, perfectly feasible. The reference 
to Homer in 70 is, of course, to the Okeanos-passagcs 9 and 10: 
Plutarch knew that in some Egyptian mythological cosmogonics 
water played an essential part, and we shall in fact see (pp. gof.) that 
Thales probably derived his idea that the earth floats on water from 
earlier near-castern, and possibly Egyptian, mythological accounts. 

τ Cf. 71 Herodotus 11, 109 δοκέει δέ μοι ἐνθεῦτεν (sc. from re-mcasurement 

of holdings after the annual flood of the Nile) γεωμετρίη εὑρεθεῖσα eis τὴν 

“EAAGSax ἐπανελθεῖν. 

Further, Thales appears in Aetius as the holder of a theory 

about the flooding of the Nile which is one of three already 
recorded by Herodotus: 


72 Herodotus Π, 20 (there are two particularly improbable 
theories about the cause of the flood) τῶν 4 ἑτέρη μὲν λέγει τοὺς 
ἐτησίας ἀνέμους εἶναι αἰτίους TrAn vet τὸν ποταμόν, κωλύοντας ἐς 
θάλασσαν ἐκρέειν τὸν Νεῖλον. 

73 Aetius Iv, 1,1 Θαλῆς τοὺς ἐτησίας ἀνέμους οἴεται πνέοντας 
τῇ Αἰγύπτῳ ἀντιπροσώπους ἐπαίρειν τοῦ Νείλου τὸν ὄγκον διὰ 
τὸ τὰς ἐκροὰς αὐτοῦ τῇ παροιδήσει τοῦ ἀντιπιαρήκοντος πελάγους 
ἀνακότπττεσθαι. 


70 = They think that Homer also, like Thales, made water - principle and birth of all 
things through learning from the Egyptians. 

4% It seems to me that geometry was discovered from this source (sc. re-measurement of 
holdings after the Nile flood) and so came to Greece. 

72 Of these, one theory says that the Etesian winds are the cause of the river flooding, 
by preventing the Nile from running out into the sea. 

73 Thales thinks that the Etesian winds, blowing straight on to Egypt, raise up the mass 
of the Nile’s water through cutting off its outflow by the swelling of the sea coming against tt. 


77 











PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Aetius probably depends on a lost Peripatetic treatise, of which 
traces have survived in other sources (Diels Doxographi Graect 226f.) : 
therefore his information may be reliable and not, as is neverthe- 
less possible, a purely speculative ascription. If Thales did advance 
this theory then he may have seen the Nile himself; though it 
should be remembered that he could easily have got the relevant 
information (that the Etesian winds blow in Egypt too), and even 
the idea, from Milesian traders. 


ANECDOTES ABOUT THALES AS THE TYPICAL PHILOSOPHER 


74 Plato Theaetetus 174A . . «ὥσπερ Kal Θαλῆν ἀστρονομοῦντα, 
ὦ Θεόδωρε, καὶ ἄνω βλέποντα, πεσόντα εἰς φρέαρ, Θρᾷττά Tis 
ἐμμελὴς καὶ χαρίεσσα θεραταινὶς ἀπτοοσκῶψαι λέγεται, ὡς τὰ μὲν ἐν 
οὐρανῷ προθυμοῖτο εἰδέναι, τὰ δ᾽ ὄπισθεν αὐτοῦ καὶ παρὰ πόδας 
λανθάνοι αὐτόν. 

5 Aristotle Politics A11, τ25949. ὀνειδιφόντων γὰρ αὐτῷ διὰ 
τὴν πενίαν ὡς ἀνωφελοῦς τῆς φιλοσοφίας οὔσης, κατανοήσαντά 
φασιν αὐτὸν ἐλαιῶν φορὰν ἐσομένην ἐκ τῆς ἀστρολογίας, ἔτι 
χειμῶνος ὄντος, εὐπτορήσαντα χρημάτων ὀλίγων ἀρραβῶνας δια- 
δοῦναι τῶν ἐλαιουργείων τῶν τ᾽ ἐν Μιλήτῳ καὶ Χίῳ πάντων, ὀλίγου 
μισθωσάμενον ἅτ᾽ οὐδενὸς ἐπιβάλλοντος. ἐπειδὴ δ᾽ ὁ καιρὸς ἧκε, 
πολλῶν φητουμένων ἅμα καὶ ἐξαίφνης, ἐκμισθοῦντα ὃν τρόπον 
ἠβούλετο πολλὰ χρήματα συλλέξαντα ἐπιδεῖξαι ὅτι ῥᾷδιόν ἐστι 
πλουτεῖν τοῖς φιλοσόφοις ἂν βούλωνται, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ τοῦτ᾽ ἐστὶ περὶ ὃ 
σπουδάτουσιν. (Cf. also Diog. L.1,26(DK ττὰ 1), from Hieronymus 
of Rhodes, and Cicero Diz. 1, 49, 111.) 


Neither of these stories is likely to be strictly historical, even though 
they originated in the fourth century B.c. at the latest, before the 
great period of fictitious biography in the third and second 





74 ~«~«...just as, Theodorus, a witty and attractive Thracian servant-girl is said to have 
moched Thales for falling into a well while he was observing the stars and gazing upwards; 
declaring that he was eager to know the things in the sky, but that what was behind him 
and just by his feet escaped his notice. 


75 ‘For when they reproached him because of his poverty, as though philosophy were no 
use, it is said that, having observed through his study of the heavenly bodies that there would 
be a large olive-crop, he raised a little capital while it was still winter, and paid deposits on 
all the olive presses in Miletus and Chios, hiring them cheaply because no one bid against 
him. When the appropriate time came there was a sudden rush of requests for the presses; 
he then hired them out on his own terms and so made a large profit, thus demonstrating that 
it 1s easy for philosophers to be rich, uf they wish, but that it is not in this that they are 
interested. 


78 


THALES 


centuries. They well demonstrate how at a comparatively early 
date Thales had become accepted as the typical philosopher: 
though 74, one of the oldest versions of the absent-minded 
professor theme, would have had more point if applied to someone 
not so notoriously practical in his interests as Thales. The detail 
of the witty slave-girl is added to make the whole situation more 
piquant; possibly it is a vestige of a separate and mildly malicious 
joke at the philosopher’s expense. Plato liked making fun of the 
Presocratics, a truth frequently overlooked in the interpretation of 
certain less obvious passages. The story in 7§ may have gained 
currency, even before Aristotle, as a standard reply to the reproach 
of unpracticality implied in 74. It might have had a slight basis 
of truth (though Aristotle did not think so): details like the 
addition of Chios to Milctus are possibly too elaborate for the 
wholly invented anecdote. At all events, anyone reading this 
book might draw some consolation from such a clear and in- 
fluential formulation of one of the classical defences of abstruse 
studies. 


THE PREDICTION OF THE ECLIPSE, AND OTHER ASTRO- 
NOMICAL ACTIVITIES 


76 Herodotus 1, 74. διαφέρουσι δέ ogi (sc. Medes and Lydians) 
ἐπ᾽ ions τὸν πόλεμον τῷ ἕκτῳ ἔτει συμβολῆς γενομένης συνήνεικε 
ὥστε τῆς μάχης συνεστεώσης τὴν ἡμέρην ἐξαπίνης νύκτα γενέσθαι. 
τὴν δὲ μεταλλαγὴν ταύτην τῆς ἡμέρης Θαλῆς ὁ Μιλήσιος τοῖσι 
Ἴωσι προηγόρευσε ἔσεσθαι, οὖρον προθέμενος ἐνιαυτὸν τοῦτον ἐν 
τῷ δὴ καὶ ἐγένετο ἡ μεταβολή. 

77 Diogencs Lacrtius 1, 22 δοκεῖ δὲ κατά τινας πρῶτος ἀστρο- 
λογῆσαι καὶ ἡλιακὰς ἐκλείψεις καὶ τροττὰς προειτεῖν, ὥς φησιν 
Εὔδημος ἐν τῇ περὶ τῶν ἀστρολογουμένων ἱστορίᾳ᾽ ὅθεν αὐτὸν καὶ 
Ζενοφάνης καὶ Ἡηρόδοτος θαυμάφει. μαρτυρεῖ δ᾽ αὐτῷ καὶ ἩΗράκλειτος 
καὶ Δημόκριτος. 





76 In the sixth year of the war, which they [Medes and Lydians] had carried on with 
equal fortunes, an engagement took place in which it turned out that when the batile was in 
progress the day suddenly became night. This alteration of the day Thales the Milesian 
foretold to the Ionians, setting as its limit this year in which the change actually occurred. 
77 Some think he was the first to study the heavenly bodies and to foretell eclipses of the 
sun and solstices, as Eudemus says in his history of astronomy; for which reason both 
Xenophanes and Herodotus express admiration; and both Heraclitus and Democritus bear 
witness for him. 


79 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


78 Dercyllides ap. Theon. Smyrn. p. 198, 14 Hiller Εὔδημος 
ἱστορεῖ ἐν ταῖς ᾿Αστρολογίαις ὅτι Οἰνοπίδης εὗρε πρῶτος τὴν τοῦ 
τῳδιακοῦ λόξωσιν [Diels; διάφωσιν ms.| καὶ τὴν τοῦ μεγάλου 
ἐνιαυτοῦ περίστασιν, Θαλῆς δὲ ἡλίου ἔκλειψιν καὶ τὴν κατὰ τὰς 
τροπὰς αὐτοῦ περίοδον, ὡς οὐκ ἴση ἀεὶ συμβαίνει. 


The prediction of the eclipse must have been based on a long series 
of empirical observations, not upon a scientific theory of the true 
cause of eclipses. The cause was unknown to Thales’ immediate 
successors in Miletus and therefore, presumably, to him. If the 
contrary was implied by Eudemus in 78 (it is asserted by Aetius, 
e.g. W, 24, 1, DK 114174), then Eudemus was guilty of drawing a 
wrong conclusion from the undoubted fact of Thales’ prediction. 
The Babylonian priests had made observations of eclipses of the 
sun, both partial and total, for religious purposcs, at any rate since 
721 B.c.; and by the sixth century they had probably established 
a cycle of solstices (or less plausibly of lunations) within which 
eclipses might occur at certain points. It is overwhelmingly 
probable that Thales’ feat depended on his access to these 
Babylonian records; we know that many cultivated Grecks visited 
Sardis at this period,’ and relations with Ionia were naturally 
particularly close. Some scholars have argued that Thales’ 
information more probably came from Egypt, with which he had 
other contacts; but there is no evidence that sufficiently detailed 
observations, over a long enough period, were made and recorded 
by the Egyptian priests. Even on the Babylonian data it could not 
be predicted that an eclipse would be visible at a particular point. 
Priests were despatched to different parts of the Babylonian empire 
when a possible eclipse was due, and even within this large area 
the expected phenomenon was sometimes not visible. Further, no 
precise date could be predicted, only broad limits of time. ‘Thus 
Thales appears to have said that an eclipse was likely to occur 
within a certain year. It was pure chance that it happened on 
the day of the battle and so seemed especially remarkable, and to 
some degree a matter of luck that it was visible near the Ionian 
area at all. 








78 Eudemus relates in the Astronomy that Oenopides first discovered the obliquity of the 
Rodiac and the cycle of the Great Year, and Thales the eclipse of the sun and the variable 
period of its solstices. 


80 


THALES 
1 79 Herodotus 1, 29 ... ἀπικνέονται ἐς Σάρδις ἀκμαφτούσας πλούτῳ 


ἄλλοι τε of πάντες ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος σοφισταί... . καὶ δὴ καὶ Σόλων. ... 


2 Some scholars have felt a whole year to be too large a period, and have 
tried to restrict the meaning of ἐνιαυτόν in 76 to the summer solstice (by 
which the year-interval could be gauged); but there is no satisfactory 
evidence for such a usage. 


The information added by Eudemus in 77 and 78, that Thales 
predicted solstices and noted that their cycle is not always equal 
(by which is probably meant the slight variations in length of the 
solar seasons, as divided by solstices and equinoxes), is more 
straightforward. All that would be needed would be a rather long 
series of observations with a solstice-marker, a ἡλιοτρόπιον of 
some kind, such as was connected with Pherecydes (48), to mark 
the bearings of the sun at 115 most northerly and southerly points 
in the year—that is, the summer and winter solstices. Alternatively 
a gnomon or stable vertical rod, by which the length of the sun’s 
shadow could be exactly recorded, would suffice. ‘This was said by 
Herodotus to be a Babylonian invention (99), and its introduction 
was credited to Anaximander and not to Thales (96). However, 
measurement of shadows was certainly involved in the computation 
of the height of pyramids ascribed to Thales (p. 83), and one 
cannot be completely confident that the observation of the sun’s 
zenith by similar means was unknown to him. The technique 
seems obvious to us now, and might be thought to have occurred 
to anyone who had reached Thales’ by no means primitive stage 
of celestial observation. Diogenes (1, 24, DK11a1) added that 
Thales discovered the passage of the sun from solstice to solstice, 
and the relation of the diameter of sun and moon to their orbits. 
The former phrase is very vague, and might imply no more than 
the knowledge that the sun movcs between the tropics—which 
Thales obviously possessed. But it perhaps refers to the discovery 
of the inclination of the Zodiac, which Eudemus in 78 probably 
ascribed to Oinopides of Chios, over a century later; the assign- 
ment of detailed knowledge of the Zodiac to Thales and Pytha- 
goras in Aetius (Π, 12, 1, DK 11413¢) is also speculative (see also 
p. 103n.). Diogenes’ second piece of information is quite ana- 
chronistic, for Thales cannot have thought that the heavenly 
bodies had orbits, since they did not pass under the earth (which 





79 =~... there arrived at Sardis in this bloom of its wealth all the sages fromGreece. . .among 
whom came Solon.... 


6 SI K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


was not made free-swinging until Anaximander) ; at the most they 
had semi-orbits, and the ratio of diameter to celestial path would 
be twice that given. 
t The determination of this ratio was a recurrent problem in Greek 
astronomy, which might naturally come to be associated with the earliest 
known astronomer. The ratio suggested in Diogencs, 1/720th, implies a 


scxagesimal measurement of the circle of the ecliptic such as was adopted 
by the Babylonians: so A. Wasserstein, JHS 75 (1955) 114-16. Cf. Hdt. n, 


109 (99), also πὶ, 4. 


One further observation is attributed to Thales, again with a 
possible implication that he may be indebtcd to foreign sources: 
80 Callimachus Jambus 1, 52, fr. 191 Pfeiffer (DK 11432) 

οὐ ἦν yao ἡ νίκη 

Θάλητος, ὅς τ᾽ ἦν ἄλλα δεξιὸς γνώμην 

καὶ τῆς ᾿Αμάξης ἐλέγετο σταθμήσασθαι 

τοὺς ἀστερίσκους, 7 πλέουσι Φοίνικες. 
This is part of the apocryphal story of the cup (in some versions, 
tripod) which had to be presented to the wisest man living: Thales 
was the first, and in some versions also the final, choice, but he 
modestly sent it on to Bias, and he to others of the Seven Sages. 
The ‘little stars of the Wain’ are the Little Bear (cf. Aratus Phaen. 
39, with scholium); this constellation, because its revolution is 
smaller, provides a more accurate fixed point than the Great Bear 
or Wain as a whole (as opposed to the Pole star itself). σταθμᾶσθαι 
strictly means ‘to measure’, but sometimes, morc vaguely, ‘to 
mark out, define’ (2 on Pindar Ol. 10, 53). The probable meaning 
is that Thales defined the Little Bear, and drew the attention of 
Milesian sailors to its navigational usefulness. Diogencs Laertius, 1, 
23, interpreted the lines of Callimachus as meaning simply that 
Thales ‘discovered’ the Little Bear. Ionian sailors may previously 
have neglected it, since for all except long open-sea crossings the 
more conspicuous Great Bear was adequate. 

Thus the ἀστρολογία, the study of heavenly bodies, mentioned 
as characteristic of Thales by Plato (74) and Aristotle (75),? secms 
to have comprised the following activities: the prediction of 
eclipses, probably with the aid of Babylonian tables; the measure- 
ment of solstices and their variations, possibly undertaken in part 





80... . for the victory belonged to Thales, who was clever in judgement, not least because 
he was said to have measured out the litile stars of the Wain, by which the Phoenicians sail. 


82 


THALES 


for calendar-making purposes; and the study of star-groups, 
perhaps mainly as a navigational aid. 


1 Cf. also 77, where nothing is otherwise known of the references to Thales 
by Xenophanes, Heraclitus and Democritus. 


MATHEMATICAL DISCOVERIES 

81: Diogencs Laertius1, 27 ὁ δὲ Ἱερώνυμος Kal ἐκμετρῆσαί φησιν 
αὐτὸν τὰς πυραμίδας ἐκ τῆς σκιᾶς, παρατηρήσαντα ὅτε ἡμῖν 
ἰσομεγέθης ἐστίν. 

82 Proclus in Eucldem p. 352 Fricdl. (DK 11A20) Εὔδημος δὲ 
ἐν ταῖς Γεωμετρικαῖς ἱστορίαις εἰς Θαλῆν τοῦτο ἀνάγει TO θεώρημα 
(sc. that triangles having one side and its adjacent angles equal are 
themselves equal): τὴν yap τῶν ἐν θαλάττῃ πλοίων ἀπόστασιν δι᾽ οὗ 
τρόπου φασὶν αὐτὸν δεικνύναι τούτῳ προσχρῆσθαί φησιν ἀναγκαῖον. 


In 8x Hieronymus of Rhodes attributcs to Thalcs the simplest 
possible method of measuring the height of a pyramid. Thales 
might conccivably have learned this from the Egyptians; or it is 
not impossible that the pyramids werc mercly local colour, to fit 
the tradition of a visit to Egypt. Pliny (ΟΝ... xxxvi, 82, DK 11A21) 
gave the same account, but a more complex variant appears in 
Plutarch, Sept. Sap. Conv. 2, 147A (DK 11421), that the height of 
a pyramid is related to the length of its shadow exactly as the 
height of any mensurable vertical object is related to the length of 
its shadow at the same time of day. It is probable, though not 
certain, that Hicronymus is here dependent on his near-contem- 
porary Eudemus (whose book on the history of gcomctry and 
mathematics, as opposed to his history of astronomy, Diogenes 
himself does not appear to have used for Thalcs); if so, there is a 
probability that Thales used the simpler mcthod. On the other 
hand, the more complex one is based on an argument from similar 
triangles analogous to that ascribed to him by Eudemus in 82, 
as a means of measuring the distance of ships out at sea. Provided 
the height of the observer above sca level were known, this calcu- 
lation could be made with the aid of a primitive theodolite, two 
sticks (one as a sight-linc, the other as an approximate level-line) 





8x Hieronymus says that he [Thales] actually measured the pyramids by their shadow, 
having observed the time when our own shadow is equal to our height. 

82 Eudemus in the History of geometry refers this theorem to Thales; for the method 
by which they say he demonstrated the distance of ships out at sea must, he says, have 
entailed the use of this theorem. 


83 6-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


pivoting on a nail. It is to be observed that Eudemus only credited 
Thales with a knowledge of similar triangles on the a prion ground 
that he could not otherwise have performed this kind of calcula- 
tion. Yet a man may make an empirical use of a rudimentary 
angle-measurer without forming an explicit theory about the 
principles involved, and certainly without stating those principles 
as a geometer.' Three other theorems attributed to Thales 
by Proclus following Eudemus, in the same commentary as 
82 (DK 11A11),—circle bisected by diameter; angles at base of 
isosceles triangle are equal; vertically opposed angles are equal— 
are, again, probably just the neatest abstract solutions of particular 
practical problems associated with Thales. All this is very much a 
matter for conjecture: my own guess would be that Thales did gain 
a reputation with his contemporarics for carrying out various far 
from straightforward empirical feats of mcnsuration, without 
necessarily stating the geometry that lay behind them. This is 
perhaps confirmed by the fact that Thales’ Milesian successors 
sccm to have paid little attention to mathematical theory. 
t Burnet, EGP 45f., observed that a knowledge of the Egyptian segt ratio 
(a trigonometrical approximation) could have produced a solution of both 
problems. In view of the possibility of Thales’ acquaintance with Egypt, 
and his analogous use (it is assumcd) of an empirical Babylonian formula, 
this cxplanation can by no means be excluded.—Pamphile’s report in 


Diog. L. 1, 24. that Thales inscribed a right-angled triangle in a circle ‘and 
sacrificed an ox’ (cf. 281) is entertaining, if not convincing. 


WRITINGS 
83 Simplicius Phys. p. 23, 29 Diels Θαλῆς δὲ πρῶτος παρα- 
δέδοται τὴν περὶ φύσεως ἱστορίαν τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ἐκφῆναι, πολλῶν 
μὲν καὶ ἄλλων προγεγονότων, ὡς καὶ Θεοφράστῳ δοκεῖ, αὐτὸς δὲ 
πολὺ διενεγκὼν ἐκείνων ὡς ἀποκρύψαι πάντας τοὺς πρὸ αὐτοῦ. 
λέγεται δὲ ἐν γραφαῖς μηδὲν καταλιτεῖν πλὴν τῆς καλουμένης 
Ναυτικῆς ἀστρολογίας. 

84 Diogencs Laertius 1, 22 καὶ κατά τινας μὲν σύγγραμμα 
κατέλιπεν οὐδέν" ἡ γὰρ εἰς αὐτὸν ἀναφερομένη Ναυτικὴ ἀστρολογία 
Φώκου λέγεται εἶναι τοῦ Σαμίου. Καλλίμαχος δ᾽ αὐτὸν οἶδεν 








83 Thales is traditionally the first to have revealed the investigation of nature to the 
Greeks; he had many predecessors, as also Theophrastus thinks, but so far surpassed them 
as to blot out all who came before him. He is said to have left nothing in the form of 
writings except the so-called Nautical star-guide. 

84 And according to some he left no book behind; for the Nautical star-guide ascribed 
to him is said to be by Phokos the Samian. Callimachus knew him as the discoverer of the 


84 


THALES 


εὑρετὴν τῆς ἄρκτου τῆς μικρᾶς λέγων ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ιάμβοις οὕτως. .. 
[80, ll. 3-4], κατά τινας δὲ μόνα δύο συνέγραψε Περὶ τροπῆς καὶ 
᾿Ισημερίας, τὰ ἄλλ᾽ ἀκατάληπτα εἶναι δοκιμάσας. 

85 Suda s.v. (from Hesychius) (DK11Aa2) .. «ἔγραψε περὶ 
μετεώρων ἐν ἔπεσι, περὶ ἰσημερίας, Kal ἄλλα πολλά. 


These passages show that there was profound doubt in antiquity 
about Thales’ written works. It is plain, at all events, that there 
was no work by him in the Alexandrian library, except the dubious 
‘Nautical Star-guide’ (cf. also 98). Aristotle appears not to have 
seen any book by him, at least on cosmological matters; he was 
extremely cautious in ascribing opinions to him, using the expres- 
sions ‘deriving the supposition perhaps from...’, ‘the account 
which they say Thales gave’ (87, 86), and ‘from what they relate’ 
(9x). Aristotle was not necessarily conscientious in using original 
sources; Theophrastus, as a professed historian of earlier philo- 
sophy, should have been cohscientious (though he was not always 
so, in fact), but he evidently had little to add to Aristotle about 
Thales (except for the minor amendment implied by the con- 
jecture in 83 that Thales did have predecessors). Eudemus made 
some positive assertions about ‘Thales as geometer and astronomer 
(77, 78, 82), but we have seen on 82 that these werc somctimes very 
speculative; they were perhaps partly based on the quasi-legendary 
biographical tradition, and do not imply that Eudemus had seen 
written works by Thales. 

Diogenes’ doubt in 84 about the ‘Nautical Star-guide’ was 
shared by Plutarch, de Pyth. or. 18, 402E (DK 1181), who added 
that the work in question was in verse; we may thus conjecture that 
this was the verse work described by Hesychius in 85 as περὶ 
μετεώρων. Lobon of Argos (a disreputable stichometrist of the 
second century B.c.), according to Diog. L. 1, 34, said that ‘Thales 
wrote 200 hexameters. Only mild suspicion is expressed in 83, 
where any uncertainty implied by καλουμένης 15 perhaps restricted 
to the nature of the title. But this last sentence almost certainly 
contains Simplicius’ own judgement and not that of Theophrastus, 
the paraphrase of whom seems to end before λέγεται. Diogenes’ 








Little Bear, and wrote as follows in his lambs. . . [80, ll. 3-4]; while according to some 
he wrote only two works, On the solstice and On the equinox, considering the rest to 
be incomprehensible. 

ὃς ...he wrote on celestial matters in epic verse, on the equinox, and much else. 


85 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


information in 84, that the work was also ascribed to one Phokos of 
Samos, almost settles the matter: any astronomical work of archaic 
appearance might naturally be ascribed to Thales, but works 
actually by Thales would not be alternatively ascribed to men of 
comparative obscurity. It is possible that the ‘Nautical star-guide’ 
was a genuine sixth-century work similar to the hexamcter 
᾿Αστρολογία of Cleostratus of Tenedos (DK ch. 6) or the so-called 
Hesiodic ᾿Αστρονομίη (DK ch. 4): so Diels and others have 
assumed. It is also possible that it was a Hellenistic forgery. 
Diogenes in 84 is a little worried by Callimachus’ mention in 80 
of a particular nautical star-aid ascribed to Thales; but this need 
not have bcen described by Thales in writing. However, there 1s 
nothing inherently improbable in Thales having recorded such 
aids to navigation, a plausible cnough activity for a practical sage 
in a maritime centre: but it was probably not in the ‘Nautical 
Star-guide’ known to the Hellenistic world that he did so. The 
other works mentioned in 84, on the solstice and the equinox (only 
the latter in 85), are unlikely, from their similar contents, to have 
been separate books. Simplicius in 83, and those recorded in 84 
who thought that Thales Icft no book, evidently did not accept 
this work as genuine. Thales studied the solstices according to 
Eudemus in 77 and 78, and it would be on the ground of this 
known interest that such a work would be ascribed to him. Once 
again, however, it must be remembcred that observations of 
solsticcs and of star-risings and -settings were widely made in the 
archaic period, and also set down in verse, partly in the attempt to 
establish a satisfactory calendar: sce Cleostratus fr. 4 (DK6B4) 
and the Hesiodic Astronomy (DK 48 1-5). Observations about the 
Hyades and the setting of the Pleiades were also attributed to 
Thales (2 on Aratus 172, Pliny ΟΝ... xviu, 213; DK 11B2, 11418); 
the latter observation, incidentally, was accurate for the latitude of 
Egypt, not that of Grecce. 

The evidence does not allow a certain conclusion, but the 
probability is that Thales did not write a book; though the ancient 
holders of this view might have been misled by the absence of a 
genuine work from the Alexandrian library, and also by the 
apophthegmatic nature of the wisdom assigned to the Seven Sages 
in general. 


86 


THALES 
COSMOLOGY 
(1) The earth floats on water, which 1s in some way the source of all things 


3 


δό Aristotle de caelo B13, 2044. 28 οἱ δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὕδατι κεῖσθαι (sc. φασὶ 
τὴν γῆν). τοῦτον γὰρ ἀρχαιότατον παρειλήφαμεν τὸν λόγον, ὅν 
φασιν εἰτεῖν Θαλῆν τὸν Μιλήσιον, ὡς διὰ τὸ πλωτὴν εἶναι μένουσαν 
ὥσπερ ξύλον ἤ τι τοιοῦτον ἕτερον (καὶ γὰρ τούτων ἐπ᾽ ἀέρος μὲν 
οὐθὲν πέφυκε μένειν, GAA’ ἐφ᾽ ὕδατος), ὥσπερ οὐ τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον 
ὄντα περὶ τῆς γῆς καὶ τοῦ ὕδατος τοῦ ὀχοῦντος τὴν γῆν. 

87 Aristotle Met. A3, 983b6 τῶν δὴ πρῶτον φιλοσοφησάντων 
οἱ πλεῖστοι τὰς ἐν ὕλης εἴδει μόνας φήθησαν ἀρχὰς εἶναι πάντων 
ἐξ οὗ γὰρ ἔστιν ἅπαντα τὰ ὄντα, καὶ ἐξ οὗ γίγνεται πρώτου καὶ 
εἰς ὃ φθείρεται τελευταῖον, τῆς μὲν οὐσίας ὑπομενούσης τοῖς δὲ 
πάθεσι μεταβαλλούσης, τοῦτο στοιχεῖον καὶ ταύτην ἀρχήν φασιν 
εἶναι τῶν ὄντων, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὔτε γίγνεσθαι οὐδὲν οἴονται οὔτ᾽ 
ἀπόλλυσθαι, ὡς τῆς τοιαύτης φύσεως ἀεὶ σῳφομένης. .. δεῖ γὰρ 
εἶναί τινα φύσιν ἢ μίαν ἢ πλείους μιᾶς ἐξ ὧν γίγνεται τἄλλα σῷτο- 
μένης ἐκείνης. τὸ μέντοι πλῆθος καὶ τὸ εἶδος τῆς τοιαύτης ἀρχῆς 
οὐ τὸ αὐτὸ πάντες λέγουσιν, ἀλλὰ Θαλῆς μὲν ὁ τῆς τοιαύτης 
ἀρχηγὸς φιλοσοφίας ὕδωρ εἶναί φησιν (διὸ καὶ τὴν γῆν ἐφ᾽ ὕδατος 
ἀπεφαίνετο εἶναι), λαβὼν ἴσως τὴν ὑπόληψιν ταύτην ἐκ τοῦ πτάντων 
ὁρᾶν τὴν τροφὴν ὑγρὰν οὖσαν καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ θερμὸν ἐκ τούτου 
γιγνόμενον Kal τοὐτῷῳ τῶν (τὸ δ᾽ ἐξ οὗ γίγνεται, τοῦτ᾽ ἐστὶν ἀρχὴ 
πάντων), διά τε δὴ τοῦτο τὴν ὑπόληψιν λαβὼν ταύτην καὶ διὸ 
τὸ πάντων τὰ σπέρματα τὴν φύσιν ὑγρὰν ἔχειν τὸ δ᾽ ὕδωρ ἀρχὴ 
τῆς φύσεως ἐστὶ τοῖς ὑγροῖς. 











---- ---. - ----θ΄'οΘοὋἜὅ = se Aten 


86 Others say that the earth rests on water. For this is the most ancient account we have re- 
ceived, which they say was given by Thales the Milesian, that it stays in place through floating 
like a log or some other such thing ( for none of these rests by nature on atr, but on water )—as 
though the same argument did not apply to the water supporting the earth as to the earth itself. 


87 Most of the first philosophers thought that principles in the form of matter were the only 
principles of all things: for the original source of all existing things, that from which a thing 
first comes-into-being andinto which 115 finally destroyed, the substance persisting but changing 
in its qualities, this they declare is the element and first principle of existing things, and for this 
reason they consider that there is no absolute coming-to-be or passing away, on the ground that 
such a nature is always preserved. . . for there must be some natural substance, either one or more 
than one, from which the other things come-into-being, while tt is preserved. Over the number, 
however, and the form of this kind of principle they do not all agree; but Thales, the founder 
of this type of philosophy, says that it is water (and therefore declared that the earth is on 
water), perhaps taking this supposition from seeing the nurture of all things to be moist, and 
the warm itself coming-to-be from this and living by this (that from which they come-to-be 
being the principle of all things)—taking the supposition both from this and from the seeds 
of all things having a moist nature, water being the natural principle of moist things. 


87 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Our knowledge of Thales’ cosmology depends virtually completely 
on these two passages, with the cryptic addition of 91-93. Apart 
from Aristotle’s own criticism and conjecture, they assign two 
propositions to Thales: (1) the earth floats on water (like a piece 
of wood or something of the sort); (2) the ‘principle’ of all things 
is water (in Aristotle’s sense of ἀρχή as explaincd in the first half 
of 87, i.e. the original constituent material of things, which persists 
as a substratum and into which they will perish). (1) was profes- 
sedly known to Aristotle only indirectly, on the information of 
others; further, it is impossible to tell whether the supporting 
argument (solid things do not rest on air, but they do on water, 
therefore the earth floats on water) was also derived from the 
reports of Thales, or whether it was entirely supplied by Aristotle. 
His final objection, that Thales has solved nothing because he 
would still have to find something to support the water that 
supports the earth, shows how little Aristotle understood the 
probable nature of Thales’ way of thinking: Thales would almost 
certainly still accept the popular conception of the earth (or, in this 
case, its immediate support) stretching downward indefinitely, as 
in Homer (1), and still in Xenophanes (3) almost a century later 
than Thales. The probable dircct origin of Thales’ idea of the 
earth floating on water was from non-Greek mythological accounts 
(pp. 90f.); the device might have attracted him in part because it 
provided support for the earth, but it is by no means certain that 
Thales felt this to be a serious problem, and most improbable in 
any case that he worked out the theory for himself as a conscious 
answer to that problem. As for proposition (2), Aristotle evidently 
knew nothing beyond what he wrotc, since the reasons given for 
Thales’ choice of watcr are professedly conjectural (λαβὼν 
lows. ..). The first half of 87 is quoted to show the kind of analysis 
and terminology which Aristotle (and following him Theo- 
phrastus' and thus the subsequent doxographical tradition) 
applied to the early physicists or natural philosophers, the φυσικοί 
—those who, according to Aristotle, posited solely, or primarily, 
the first (material) of his four causes. His application of a single 
rigid analysis to his predecessors, while justly and usefully empha- 
sizing certain resemblances between them, is also a source of con- 
fusion. ‘Thus Thales’ ‘principle’ (in Aristotle’s sense) and Hera- 
clitus’ ‘principle’ (fire according to Aristotle) were clearly, for 
Thales and for Heraclitus themselves, very different kinds of thing. 


88 


THALES 


In fact, all we know about Thales’ views on water (apart from that 
the earth floats on it) is that, in a hearsay and probably much 
abbreviated and somewhat distorted form, they appeared to the 
not over-discriminating Aristotle to fit his own idca of a material 
ἀρχή. Yet it is possible, contrary to Aristotle’s automatic assump- 
tion, that Thales declared earth to come from water (i.e. to be 
solidified out of it in some way) without therefore thinking that the 
earth and its contents are somehow water, that they have any 
continuing relation to it (beyond the fact that the earth floats on 
water) except that of a man to his remote ancestors: for Thales, we 
may conjecture, was still to some extent influenced by the genea- 
logical view of cosmogony best exemplified in Hesiod (24). See 
further pp. o2f. 


t Theophrastus’ abbreviated account of Thales’ material principle is 
given by Simplicius, Phys. p. 23, 21 Diels (=Thcophr. Phys. Op. fr. 1), 
DK 11A13. It is a close parallel of Aristotle in 87, using in many parts the 
same phraseology. It adds one more conjectural reason for Thales’ choice 
of water, that corpses dry up (τὰ νεκρούμενα ξηραίνεται) : this perhaps 
came from Hippon (see next n.), who is probably credited with a similar 
argument in Anon. Lond. x1, 22 (DK 38411), 1.6. in a Peripatetic source. 
The addition occurs also in Aetius. 


The reasons conjectured by Aristotle in 87 for the importance 
attached by Thales to water as a constituent of things are mainly 
physiological.t From the analogy of his immediate successors we 
might have expected Thales to have adduced metcorological 
reasons, more conspicuously, in support of the cosmic importance 
of water. Yet we must beware of exaggerated generalizations like 
that implicd in Burnet’s view that sixth-century thinkers were 
almost exclusively interested in meteorological (in the strict sense, 
including astronomical) phenomena. It is undoubtedly true that 
the scientific study of medicine began in the fifth century B.c., and 
that analogies between the world and details of human structure 
become much commoner then. Yet chapter 1 has shown the strongly 
genealogical colouring of much pre-philosophical Greek specula- 
tion, and also the importance of the analogy of physiological 
reproduction. In the case of Thales there are reasons for thinking 
that his explanation of the world was influenced not only by this 
variegated traditional background of earlier Greek quasi-mytho- 
logical cosmogonical versions, but also by a specific cosmological 
idea derived directly, perhaps, from further east. 


89 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


¥ It seems more probable than not that Aristotle took them from Hippon 
of Samos (or of Rhegium, Croton, or Metapontium), who in the second 
half of the fifth century B.c. revived and modified the idea of water as 
constituent material of things. Hippon, whose intellect Aristotle did not 
admire, evidently had strong physiological interests. Cf. in particular 88 
Aristotle de an. A2, 405b1 τῶν δὲ φορτικωτέρων Kal ὕδωρ τινὲς 
ἀπεφήναντο (sc. τὴν ψυχήν), καθάπερ Ἵππων᾽ πεισθῆναι δ᾽ ἐοίκασιν ἐκ 
τῆς γονῆς, ὅτι πάντων ὑγρά καὶ γὰρ ἐλέγχει τοὺς αἷμα φάσκοντας τὴν 
ψυχήν, ὅτι ἡ γονὴ οὐχ αἷμα. Note that there is a good deal of conjecture 
in this, too. Against the assumption that Aristotle’s conjectured reasons 
for ‘Thales’ choice of water were derived from Hippon is that the additional 
reason given in Theophrastus (see previous notc) probably did come from 
Hippon, and might therefore have been expected to be included by 
Aristotle. 


2 As in 89 Heraclitus Homericus Quaest. Hom. 22 ἡ γὰρ ὑγρὰ φύσις, 
εὐμαρῶς els ἕκαστα μετατλαττομένη, πρὸς TO ποικίλον εἴωθε μορφοῦσθαι 
τό τε γὰρ ἐξατμιφζόμενον αὐτῆς ἀεροῦται, καὶ τὸ λετττότατον ἀπὸ ἀέρος 
αἰθὴρ ἀνάπτεται, συνιϑάνον τε τὸ ὕδωρ καὶ μεταβαλλόμενον εἰς ἰλὺν 
ἀπογαιοῦται διὸ δὴ τῆς τετράδος τῶν στοιχείων ὥσπερ αἰτιώτατον ὁ 
Θαλῆς ἀπεφήνατο στοιχεῖον εἶναι τὸ ὕδωρ. These reasons certainly stem 
from a Stoic source—there is much Stoic phraseology——and may well be 
entirely conjectural. According to Theophrastus, evidently, Thales used 
water and its products to explain carthquakes (90: this depends on the 
special conception that the earth rests on water), also winds and movc- 
ments of stars (Hippolytus Ref. 1, 1); but these would scarcely provide the 
reason for ‘Thales adopting the theory in the first place. 


The near-eastern origin of part of Thales’ cosmology is indicated 
by his conception that the carth floats or rests on water. In Egypt 
the carth was commonly conccived as a flat, rimmed dish resting 
upon water, which also filled the sky; the sun sailed cach day across 
the sky in a boat, and also sailed under the earth each night (not 
round it, as in the Greek Iegend, c.g. 7). In the Babylonian 
creation-epic Apsu and ‘Tiamat represent the primeval waters, and 
Apsu remains as the waters under the earth after Marduk has split 
the body of ‘Tiamat to form sky (with its waters) and earth. In the 
story of Eridu (seventh century B.c. in its youngest extant version), 





----ὀ -.----.-.... ee - - -----....-.-.. oe --.--..-.-.- - -πτοττ----- - - 





88 Of the cruder thinkers some actually declared it (sc. the soul) to be water, like 
Hippon; they seem to have been persuaded by the seed of all things being moist. In fact he 
refutes those whoa say that the soul is blood; because the seed is not blood. 


89 For motst natural substance, since it is easily formed into each different thing, is 
accustomed to undergo very various changes: that part of it which is exhaled is made into 
air, and the finest part is kindled from air into aither, while when water is compacted and 
changes into slime it becomes earth. Therefore Thales declared that water, of the four 
elements, was the most active, as it were, as a cause. 


go 


THALES 


in the beginning ‘all land was sea’; then Marduk built a raft on 
the surface of the water, and on the raft a reed-hut which became 
the earth. An analogous view is implied in the Psalms (where 
also Leviathan is an analogue of Tiamat), where Jahwch ‘stretched 
out the earth above the waters’ (136, 6), ‘founded it upon the 
seas, and cstablished it upon the floods’ (24, 2). Similarly ‘Techom 
is ‘the deep that lieth under’ (Gen. xlix. 25), ‘the decp that 
coucheth beneath’ (Deut. xxxiii. 13).t Against this profusion of 
parallel material, from the cast and south-cast, for the waters under 
the carth, there is no comparable Greck material apart from 
Thales. The naive Greek conception of a river Okeanos surrounding 
the earth (ch. 1§2) is not strictly comparable (for it is clear that 
there is no Okeanos under the earth), although it was probably a 
much earlier development, in a different direction, of the widcly- 
diffused near-eastern gencric concept of the earth rising in the 
midst of the primeval waters—a concept almost certainly not 
native to the Grecek-speaking peoples, whosc home before the 
migrations into the Greck peninsula lay far from the sca. Simi- 
larly, although the isolated references in Iliad book 14 (9 and 10) 
to Okeanos as origin of all things were also probably based upon 
the same near-castern concept, from a slightly different aspect, 
they contain no implication of the special idea that the earth floats 
on water, and so are unlikely to have been the origin of Thalcs’ 
assertion of this idea. For any more general contention that the 
earth came from, or is maintained by, water, Thales would no 
doubt be encouraged and gratified to have the apparently native 
Homeric precedents. Thus Thales’ view that the earth floats on 
water scems to have been most probably based upon dircct contact 
with near-eastern mythological cosmology. We have already seen 
that he had associations both with Babylonia and with Egypt. The 
idea that the carth actually floats upon water was morc clearly and 
more widely held in the latter of these countries; and the con- 
jecture might be hazarded that Thales was indebted to Egypt for 
this element of his world-picturc.? 


I These instances are cited by U. Holscher in his convincing discussion of 
Thales, Hermes 81 (1953) 385-91. Some of the material is treated in 
ch. 1, especially pp. 12 ff. For the idea of Nun, the Egyptian primeval 
ocean, supporting the earth, sce also the remarks of H. Frankfort, Before 
Philosophy 59 ff. and Ancient Egyptian Religion (New York, 1948) 114. 

2 This was, indeed, the opinion of later Greck critics about the origin of 


ΟΙ 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Thales’ ideas on water in general: cf. Plutarch in 70 (who was acquainted 
with the Nun-myth), and, less dogmatically, Simplicius de caelo 522, 14 
(DK 11A14). Both, however, are conjectural judgements. 


Thales evidently used the floating-earth idea to explain 
earthquakes: 


go Seneca Qu. Nat. m1, 14 (presumably from Theophrastus, through 
a Posidonian source): ait enim (sc. Thales) terrarum orbem aqua 
sustineri et vehi more navigii mobilitatequc eius fluctuare tunc 
cum dicitur tremere. 


The cosmological scope of the idea is, however, limited; and it 
seems reasonable to conclude from Aristotle’s information in 87 
that Thales also thought that the world originated from water, since 
this is implicit in the near-eastern mythologies and is stated in the 
Homeric Okeanos-passages which are thought to be based on those 
mythologics. Thales may have rationalized the idea from a Greek 
mythological form like the Homeric one; hc may also have been 
dircctly influenced (as he seems to have been for the special detail 
that the carth floats on water) by foreign, perhaps Egyptian 
versions. Even more uncertainty attaches to a problem that has 
already been foreshadowed: are we justified in inferring from the 
Peripatctic identification of Thales’ water as ‘material principle’ 
that he belicved the visible, developed world to be water in some 
way? This is the normal interpretation of Thales; but it is im- 
portant to realize that it rests ultimately on the Aristotelian 
formulation, and that Aristotle, knowing little about Thales, and 
that indirectly, would surely have found the mere information that 
the world originated from water sufficient justification for saying 
that water was Thalcs’ material principle or ἀρχή, with the 
implication that water is a persistent substrate. It must be empha- 
sized once more that no such development was necessary, and that 
it was not implicit in the near-eastern concepts which were ulti- 
mately Thales’ archetype. Thales might have held that the world 
originated from an indefinite expanse‘ of primeval water, on which 
it still floats and which is still responsible for certain natural 
phenomena, without also believing that earth, rocks, trees or men 
are in any way made of water or a form of water. There would be a 
remote ancestral connexion, no more. On the other hand Thales 





90 For he [ Thales] said that the world is held up by water and rides like a ship, and 
when it is said to ‘quake’ it is actually rocking because of the water’s movement. 


Q2 


THALES 


could have made the entirely new inference that water is the 
continuing, hidden constituent of all things. Certainly his near 
successor Anaximenes believed that all things were made of air 
(but he had thought of a way in which this could be so: air takes on 
different forms when compressed or rarefied), and it is invariably 
assumed that he was extending and refining a line of thought 
initiated by Thales. It would be imprudent entirely to reject this 
assumption, which goes back to Theophrastus and Aristotle. The 
physiological reasons instanced by Aristotle, that all living things 
depend on water for nourishment, that the sperm is moist, and so 
on, although conjectural, are of a kind that might well have struck 
Thales. With other indications (e.g. the Homeric statement that 
the surrounding Okeanos is the source of all springs and rivers, §) 
they could have led him to the conclusion that water, as well as 
being the cosmogonical source, is also involved in the very essence 
of the developed world. On the other hand, one must remain 
aware of the possibility that Aristotle was simply making his own 
kind of inference, in the absence of other information, from Thales’ 
belief that the world originated from water and that water still 
plays a major part in the cosmos by supporting the earth. 


1 Thales would have accepted Simplicius’ judgement (Phys. 458, 23, 
DK 11413) that water was, for him, ἄπειρον ; though for Thales this would 
mean ‘limitless’, i.c. of indefinite extent, and not ‘infinite’, and be a 
natural assumption rather than a consciously propounded theory. 
Simplicius was more seriously misleading in asserting (Phys. 180, 14) that 
Thales, like Anaximenes, generated by means of the condensation and 
rarefaction of his material principle. This is a purcly schematic judgement 
based on an over-rigid dichotomy in Aristotle (106). Theophrastus only 
found the device explicitly used in Anaximencs: see 145. 


Two things, then, have emerged from the present discussion: 
(i) ‘all things are water’ is not necessarily a reliable summary of 
Thales’ cosmological views; and (ii) even if we do accept Aristotle’s 
account (with some allowance, in any event, for his inevitably 
altered viewpoint), we have little idea of how things were felt to be 
essentially related to water. 


(ii) Even apparently inanimate things can be‘ alive’ ; the world 1s full of gods 


91 Aristotle de an. A2, 405a1g ἔοικε δὲ καὶ Θαλῆς, ἐξ ὧν 
ἀπομνημονεύουσι, κινητικόν τι τὴν ψυχὴν ὑπολαβεῖν, εἴπερ τὴν 
λίθον ἔφη ψυχὴν ἔχειν ὅτι τὸν σίδηρον κινεῖ. 





ΟἹ Thales, too, seems, from what they relate, to have supposed that the soul was something 
kinetic, if he said that the (Magnesian) stone possesses soul because it moves iron. 


93 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


92 Diogenes Laertius 1, 24 *ApiototéAns δὲ καὶ ἹἹπτπίας φασὶν 
αὐτὸν καὶ τοῖς ἀψύχοις μεταδιδόναι ψυχῆς, τεκμαιρόμενον ἐκ τῆς 
λίθου τῆς μαγνήτιδος καὶ τοῦ ἠλέκτρου. 

93 Aristotle de an. A5, 411a7 καὶ ἐν τῷ ὅλῳ δέ τινες αὐτὴν (sc. 
τὴν ψυχὴν) μεμεῖχθαί φασιν, ὅθεν ἴσως καὶ Θαλῆς φήθη πάντα 
πλήρη θεῶν εἶναι. 


The two passages from Aristotle’s de anima allow us to conjecture, 
but no more, about Thales’ vision of the whole world as somehow 
alive and animated. Aristotle himself was reporting second-hand 
evidence, and his statements are jcjune and cautious (although in 
ΟΙ εἴπερ nced not, and probably does not, express doubt, while 
ἴσως in 93 qualifies ὅθεν and not the assertion that follows). The 
concluding words of 93, ‘all things are full of gods’, occur also 
in Plato, in a probably conscious but unattributed quotation." 
92 cites the sophist and polymath Hippias as an earlier source than 
Aristotle for Thales’ attribution of motive power to Magncsian 
(magnetic) stone, to which is added amber, which becomes 
magnetic when rubbed. Presumably the addition 15 from Hippias, 
who may well have been Aristotle’s source here.? 


1 94 Plato Laws 10, 8998 ἔσθ᾽ ὅστις ταῦτα ὁμολογῶν ὑπομενεῖ μὴ 
θεῶν εἶναι πλήρη πάντα; The context deals with souls being called gods, 
but contains no explicit reference to Thales. It is quite in Plato’s style to 
introduce, rather laboriously, a familiar phrase to enlighten an unfamiliar 
argument of his own, without naming the author. His use of the words in 
question is important, in any case, because it shows that they are not 
simply an Aristotclian summary. They could (in direct speech) be a 
genuine quotation from Thales; they have a totally different appearance 
from the banal apophthegms hopefully assigned to Thales in Demetrius of 
Phaleron’s collection (ap. Stob. πὶ, 1, 172, DK 10, 3). Aristotle repeated 
them, with the substitution of ψυχῆς for θεῶν and without attribution, at 
G.A, [11, 762a21. 

2 Should we conccivably read ‘Hippon’ for ‘ Hippias’, cf. 88 ctc.? There 
is evidence of some confusion in later antiquity about the form of Hippon’s 
name (as there was considerable doubt about his city): he appeared as 
‘Hipponax’ in the sources for Aetius (DK 38414). But Hippias could have 
known and written about Thales, and in the present state of the evidence 
must obviously be accepted. 





92 Aristotle and Hippias say that he gave a share of soul even to inanimate [lit. soulless | 
objects, using Magnesian stone and amber as indications. 


93 And some say that it [soul] ἐς intermingled in the universe, for which reason, perhaps, 
Thales also thought that all things are full of gods. 


94 Is there anyone who will accept this and maintain that all things are not full of 
gods? 


94 


THALES 


All that Aristotle seems to have known in 91 was that Thales 
thought that magnetic stone possesses soul because it is able to 
move iron; but the further inference, that for Thalcs the soul was 
something motive, is clearly legitimate. Soul, whcther it was 
associated with breath, blood, or spinal fluid, was universally 
regarded as the source of consciousness and life. A man is alive, he 
can move his limbs and so move other things; if he faints, it means 
that his soul has withdrawn or become incapacitated; if he dies, it 
has become permancntly so, and the ‘soul’ that goes squeaking 
down to Hades in Homer is a mere shadow, becausc it is dissociated 
from the body and can no longer produce life and movement. It is 
a common primitive tendency to regard rivers, trees and so on as 
somehow animated or inhabited by spirits: this is partly, though 
not wholly, because they seem to possess the faculty of self-move- 
ment and change, they differ from mere stocks and stones. Thales’ 
attitude was not primitive, of course, but there is a connexion with 
that entircly unphilosophical animism. It should be noted, how- 
ever, that his examples are of a different order: magnctic stone 
looks as unalive as could be, and cannot move or changc itself, only 
a certain kind of external object. ‘Thus Thalcs appears to have made 
explicit, in an extreme form, a way of thinking that permcated 
Greek mythology but whose ultimate origins were almost pre- 
articulate. Now it is possible that our second piece of specific 
information, 93, is a generalization based on this very conclusion 
that certain kinds of apparently inanimate object are alive, possess 
soul, because they have a limited powcr of movement. ‘All things 
are full of gods’ : the chief distinguishing marks of the gods are 
that they arc immortal, they enjoy perpctual life, and that their 
power (thcir life-force, as it werc) is unlimited, it extends both 
over the animate and over the inanimate world. ‘Thus the assertion 
may well imply (since even apparently dead things like stone may 
possess soul of a kind) that the world as a whole manifests a power 
of change and motion which is certainly not even predominantly 
human, and must, both because of its permanence and because of 
its extent and variation, be regarded as divine, as due to the 
inherence of some form of immortal wuyn.? 


X Or of daimons, according to the paraphrase in Aetius after Theophrastus: 
95 Aetius1, 7, 11 Θαλῆς νοῦν τοῦ κόσμον τὸν θεόν, τὸ δὲ πᾶν ἔμψυχον 


95 Thales said that the mind of the world is god, and that the sum of things is besouled, 
95 








PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἅμα Kal δαιμόνων πλῆρες᾽ διήκειν δὲ καὶ διὰ τοῦ στοιχειώδους ὑγροῦ 
δύναμιν θείαν κινητικὴν αὐτοῦ. The juxtaposition of the two statements 
from Aristotle is not significant. The last sentence is Stoic in form and 
content; the first clause (Θαλῆς... θεόν), too, is entirely anachronistic, and 
probably due to Stoic reinterpretation. It was repeated by Cicero, NV.D. 1, 
10, 25, who added that god, as mind, made the world out of water. 
A considerable number of recognizably fictitious opinions, like this one, 
were attributed to Thales by puzzled or unscrupulous doxographers and 
biographers. Compare, perhaps, the 30,000 daimons of Hesiod Frga 252 ff. 


2 The claim by Choerilus of Iasus (g3rd—a2nd c. B.c.) and others, recorded 
in Diog. L. 1, 24 (DK 11A1), that according to Thales the soul was 
immortal, obviously arose as an illegitimate conclusion from this kind of 
argument, and is again due to Stoic perversion (primarily) of the type of 
95. ‘Uhales could have distinguished clearly between the human ψυχή and 
the divine life-force in the world as a whole, at the same time as implicitly 
recognizing their underlying connexion. 


The precise nature of Thales’ belicf that all things are full of gods 
is obviously not determinable. Even along the line of interpreta- 
tion suggested above there is one notable uncertainty: did Thales 
make the bold induction, from the observation about Magnesian 
stone and amber, that all apparently inanimate things really 
possess soul to some degree? Or was Burnet right in maintaining 
(EGP 50) that ‘to say the magnct and amber are alive is to imply, 
if anything, that other things are not’? Formally this is an 
illegitimate contention (since only a part of what Thales said is 
known), and in itself the fragmentary observation implics nothing 
either way. Nor docs the assertion that all things are full of gods, 
even if it is closely connected with the observation about magnetic 
stone, necessarily imply that the universal induction was made; 
for just as one can say in English ‘this book is full of absurdities’ 
without mcaning that every single thing in it is absurd, so πλήρης 
in Greek could mean ‘containing a great number of’, as well as 
‘absolutely filled out by’. A prior, it perhaps seems more probable 
that Thales meant that all things in sum (rather than each single 
thing) were interpenetrated by some kind of life-principle; although 
there would be many kinds of matter from which this life-principle, 
with its kinetic power, might be absent. The point was that the 
range of soul, or of life, was much greater than it appeared to be. 
Thales was giving an explicit and individual statement of a broad 
presupposition common to all the early physicists, that the world 





and full of daimons; right through the elemental moisture there penetrates a divine power 
that moves it. 


96 


THALES 


vas somehow alive, that it underwent spontaneous change, and 
what irritated Aristotle) that there was therefore no need to give 
iny special account of natural change. This presupposition is still 
;ometimes called “hylozoism’; but this name implies too strongly 
hat it is something uniform, determinable, and conscious. In fact 
he term applies to at least three possible and distinct attitudes of 
nind: (a) the assumption (conscious or not) that all things 
ibsolutely are in some way alive; (ὁ) the belief that the world is 
nterpenetrated by life, that many of its parts which appear 
nanimate arc in fact animate; (c) the tendency to treat the world 
4s a whole, whatever its detailed constitution, as a single living 
rganism. (a) 1s an extreme, but in view of the universalizing 
endency of Greek thought not an impossible, form of the general 
wresupposition; in a way it might be said to be exemplified by 
Xenophanes. Thales’ belief, it has been suggested, approaches 
sloser to (δ). (¢) is implicit in the old genealogical view of the 
world’s history described in chapter 1, which still persisted to a 
arge extent under the new rationalized form of philosophical 
sosmogony. Aristotle is seen at his most perspicuous in 118, whcre, 
»erhaps with Thales especially in mind, he shows himself aware of 
the possibility of this kind of attitude.? 
t ‘The spears in the Iliad (11, 574 etc.) which are ‘eager to devour flesh’, 
and other similar cases, are sometimes cited as an indication that the 
animistic view was an old one. Animism is, of course, as old as man 
himself, and it arises out of the failure to objectify one’s expcricnce of the 
outside world, a technique which requires some practice. The Homeric 


expressions are better described as a literary conccit, like the pathetic 
fallacy—a deliberate rejection of the technique. 


1ONCLUSION 


[Thales was chiefly known for his prowess as a practical astronomer, 
yeometcr, and sage in gencral. His prediction of the eclipse was 
srobably made feasible by his use of Babylonian records, perhaps 
»btained at Sardis; he also probably visited Egypt. His theory 
hat the earth floats on water seems to have been derived from 
1ear-eastern cosmogonical myths, perhaps directly; water as the 
yrigin of things was also a part of these myths, but had been men- 
ioned in a Greek context long before Thales. His development of 
his concept may in itself have seemed to Aristotle sufficient 
warrant for saying that Thales held water to be the ἀρχή, in its 
Peripatetic sense of a persisting substrate. Yct Thales could indecd 


7 97 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


have felt that since water is essential for the maintenance of plant 
and animal life—we do not know what meteorological arguments 
he used—it remains still as the basic constituent of things. Although 
these ideas were strongly affected, directly or indirectly, by mytho- 
logical precedents, Thales evidently abandoned mythic formula- 
tions: this alone justifies the claim that he was the first philosopher, 
naive though his thought still was. Further, he noticed that even 
certain kinds of stone could have a limited power of movement and 
therefore, he thought, of life-giving soul; the world as a whole, 
consequently, was somehow permeated (though probably not 
completely) by a life-force which might naturally, because of its 
extent and its persistence, be called divine. Whcther he associated 
this life-force with water, the origin and perhaps the essential 
constituent of the world, we are not told. The concluding word 
must be that the evidence for Thales’ cosmology is too slight and 
too imprecise for any of this to be more than speculative; what has 
been aimed at is reasonable speculation. 


98 


CHAPTER ΠῚ 
ANAXIMANDER OF MILETUS 


DATE, BOOK, AND SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITIES 

96 Diogenes Laertius 1, 1-2 (DK 12A1) ᾿Αναξίμανδρος Πρα- 
ξιάδου Μιλήσιος οὗτος ἔφασκεν ἀρχὴν καὶ στοιχεῖον TO ἄπειρον, OU 
διορίφων ἀέρα ἢ ὕδωρ ἢ ἄλλο τι... . εὗρεν δὲ καὶ γνώμονα πρῶτος 
καὶ ἔστησεν ἐπὶ τῶν σκιοθήρων ἐν Λακεδαίμονι, καθά φησι Φαβωρῖνος 
ἐν Παντοδαττῇ ἱστορίς,, τροττάς τε καὶ ἰσημερίας σημαίνοντα, καὶ 
ὡροσκοπεῖα κατεσκεύασε. καὶ γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης περίμετρον πρῶτος 
ἔγραψεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ σφαῖραν κατεσκεύασε. τῶν δὲ ἀρεσκόντων αὐτῷ 
πετοίηται κεφαλαιώδη τὴν ἔκθεσιν, 7 Trou περιέτυχεν καὶ ᾿Απολλό- 
δωρος ὁ ᾿Αθηναῖος ὃς καί φησιν αὐτὸν ἐν τοῖς Χρονικοῖς τῷ δευτέρῳ 
ἔτει τῆς πεντηκοστῆς ὀγδόης ὀλυμπιάδος (547/6 B.c.) ἐτῶν εἶναι 
ἑξήκοντα τεττάρων καὶ μετ᾽ ὀλίγον τελευτῆσαι (ἀκμάσαντά πη 
μάλιστα κατὰ Πολυκράτη τὸν Σάμου τύραννον). 

97 Sudas.v. ᾿Αναξίμανδρος Πραξιάδου Μιλήσιος φιλόσοφος συγ- 
γενὴς καὶ μαθητὴς καὶ διάδοχος Θάλητος. πρῶτος δὲ ἰσημερίαν 
εὕρε καὶ τροτὰς καὶ ὡρολογεῖα, καὶ τὴν γῆν ἐν μεσαιτάτῳ κεῖσθαι. 
γνώμονά τε εἰσήγαγε καὶ ὅλως γεωμετρίας ὑποτύτπωσιν ἔδειξεν. 
ἔγραψε Περὶ φύσεως, Γῆς περίοδον καὶ Περὶ τῶν ἀπλανῶν καὶ 
Σφαῖραν καὶ ἄλλα τινά. 





96 Anaximander son of Praxiades, of Miletus: he said that the principle and element is 
the Indefinite, not distinguishing air or water or anything else...he was the first to 
discover a gnomon, and he set one up on the Sundials (9) in Sparta, according to Favorinus 
in his Universal history, to mark solstices and equinoxes; and he also constructed hour- 
indicators. He first drew an outline of earth and sea, but he also constructed a (celestial) 
globe. Of his opinions he made a summary exposition, which I suppose Apollodorus the 
Athenian, also, encountered. Apollodorus says in his Chronicles that Anaximander was 
sixty-four years old in the second year of the fifty-eighth Olympiad, and that he died shortly 
afterwards (having been near his prime approximately during the time of Polycrates, tyrant 
of Samos). 

97 Anaximander son of Praxiades, of Miletus, philosopher, was a kinsman, pupil and 
successor of Thales. He first discovered the equinox and solstices and hour-indicators, and 
that the earth lies in the centre. He introduced the gnomon and in general made known an 
outline of geometry. He wrote On nature, Circuit of the earth and On the fixed 
stars and a Celestial globe and some other works. 


99 72 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(1) Date 

If Thales earned the title of the first Greek philosopher mainly 
because of his abandonment of mythological formulations, Anaxi- 
mander is the first of whom we have concrete evidence that he 
made a comprchensive and detailed attempt to explain all aspects 
of the world of man’s experience. He was younger than Thales, 
but probably not by much. Burnet (£GP 51) inferred from the 
latter part of 96 that the chronographer Apollodorus found definite 
evidence, perhaps in a summary version of his book, that Anaxi- 
mander was sixty-four in 547/6 B.c.; and that his death ‘soon 
afterwards’ was placed by Apollodorus in the next year, the epoch- 
year of the capture of Sardis. (The last clause of 96 is presumably 
a mistake: Polycrates did not come to power until ca. 540 B.c. and 
died ca. 522.) If this is so, then Thales and Anaximander died in 
the same Olympiad, and Anaximander was only fourteen years 
younger than Thales (n. on p. 74).1 Anaximander was called the 
‘successor and pupil’ of ‘Thales by Theophrastus (1034), also his 
kinsman, companion, acquaintance or fellow-citizen in the ἰδίου 
doxographical tradition. In most cases this kind of statement need 
only imply that the onc was thought to come from the same city as, 
and to be somewhat younger than, the other.? If there were fixed 
dates both for Thales (the prediction of the eclipse in 585/4) and 
for Anaximandcr (for the information that he was sixty-four in 
547/6 was presumably available also to Theophrastus), the a priort 
basis for Theophrastus’ conjecture would be a reasonable one. 


1 That Thales and Anaximander are not separated by the conventional 
Apollodoran 40-year interval (see next note) is in favour of 54.7/6 being a 
non-arbitrary date. It is true that, if Anaximander could be made the 
master of Pythagoras, then his birth should be eighty years earlier than the 
latter’s floruit (which Apollodorus placed in 532/1), and he would be very 
close to 64 (in fact 65) in 547/6. According to the evidence of Hippolytus 
(Ref. 1,6, 7, DK 12411) even Apollodorus was wrong by one year, since 
Hippolytus gives the birth-year as Ol. 42, 3 (610/9 B.c.) instead of ΟἹ. 42, 2. 
What is significant, however, is that Anaximander’s age was known for a 
particular year which was not his floruit and not necessarily that of his 
death, although it was close to his death. Further, no connexion of 
Pythagoras with Anaximander is known in the great majority of our 
sources (only in Porphyry V.P. 2, after the imaginative grd-century B.c. 
biographer Neanthes of Cyzicus, and in Apuleius, Florida 15, 20). Never- 
theless, the possibility cannot be entirely excluded that Apollodorus’ dating 
of Anaximander was arbitrarily hinged to his Polycrates-Pythagoras 
system. This might help to account for the last clause of 96. 


100 


ANAXIMANDER 


2 The arrangement of the early philosophers into ‘schools’, and into 
masters and pupils within these schools, was initiated by Theophrastus and 
systematically applicd in the Successions of Sotion, ca. 200 B.c. Apollodorus 
used the latter work, and normally assumed a 40-ycar interval in age 
between master and pupil. 


(1) Anaximander’s book 


The book-titles ascribed to Anaximandcr in 97, presumably from 
Hesychius, should be regarded with reserve. It was the custom 
with Alexandrian writers to supply titles, in the absence of definite 
evidence, to suit an early thinker’s known interests. ‘On nature’ 
was a Standard comprehensive title which tended to be assigned to 
all those whom Aristotle called φυσικοί, that is, to almost all the 
Presocratics.* That Anaximander certainly wrote a book of some 
kind is shown both by Theophrastus’ incontrovertible quotation 
in 103A, and possibly by Diogencs’ information in 96 that there was 
a ‘summary cxposition’, which he took to be by the philosopher 
himself. What Diogencs knew of may have been a later summary 
(produced cither by a pupil or, more probably, in the fourth 
century B.c. or later); or it may have been the original work, whose 
short, perhaps discontinuous, and apophthegmatic nature was not 
what was normally expected of a philosophical book.? Itis not clear 
whether it was from this source that Apollodorus determined the 
year in which Anaximandcr was sixty-four; it seemed probable 
to Diogenes, though that age is considerably greater than the 
average for authorship. The elder Pliny (NV.H. π, 31, DK 1245) 
stated that Anaximander discovered the obliquity of the Zodiac in 
this same Olympiad, the fifty-eighth; but the ascription of this 
discovery is probably false (p. 103n.), and Pliny pcrhaps merely 
misapplied Apollodorus’ dating. Diogenes’ term περιέτυχεν, “came 
upon’, might imply that the so-called summary exposition was a 
rarity in Apollodorus’ time. Theophrastus, almost two centurics 
before, had access to at least one original sentencc, but seems to 
have lacked full information about Anaximander’s originative 
substance. The possibility cannot be ignored that he, too, used a 
summary or handbook, partly at least in the form of a collection 
of excerpts, and one which concentrated on cosmology, anthro- 
pology and so on rather than on the nature of the parent-material. 
On the other hand, Anaximander himself might have offered little 
information on the originative substance. 


IO! 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


™ Cf. 98 Themistius Or. 26 p. 383 Dindorf (᾿Αναξίμανδρος) ἐθάρρησε 
πρῶτος ὧν ἴσμεν Ελλήνων λόγον ἐξενεγκεῖν περὶ φύσεως συγγεγραμμένον. 
Thales was thought not to have written a book, at any rate one of a general 
cosmological kind: see pp. 85ff. One of the objections to Περὶ φύσεως as 
a genuine sixth-century book-title is that φύσις is probably not used in the 
collective sense, ‘Nature’, before about the middle of the fifth century 
(cf. Kirk, Heraclitus, the Cosmic Fragments, 227ff.). Gorgias’ sardonic title 
Περὶ φύσεως ἢ περὶ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος implies that Περὶ φύσεως was common in 
his time, but no more than that. On the other hand, the addition of a word 
like χρημάτων or ἁπάντων to φύσεως would make the usage possible. The 
fact remains that Περὶ φύσεως was indiscriminately applied to any work of 
a vaguely physical nature: cf. e.g. pp. 166f., for Xenophanes’ poetry. 


2 We do not know how many words a papyrus roll is likely to have held 
in the sixth century B.c. The letters were probably large (papyrus should 
have been relatively cheap in Miletus, from Naucratis), and the total 
product quite short. See p. 266 for an estimate of the length of Parmenides’ 
pocm; and p. 366 and n. 2 for Anaxagoras’ book. 


(iit) Sctentific activities: (a) the gnomon 

Anaximander did not discover the gnomon, as 96 claims (the 
gnomon 15 a sct-square or any vertical rod whose shadow indicates 
the sun’s direction and height): compare 


99 Herodotus 11, 109 πόλον μὲν γὰρ Kal γνώμονα καὶ τὰ δυώδεκα 
μέρεα τῆς ἡμέρης παρὰ Βαβυλωνίων ἔμαθον οἱ Ἕλληνες. 

97 may be correct, nevertheless, in suggesting that Anaximander 
introduced the gnomon into Greece. We cannot be sure, however, 
that Thales did not use some form of the instrument (p. 81), and it is 
possible that Anaximander gained the credit by accident, or 
because his use of the gnomon was more conspicuous. No special 
discoveries involving its use were assigned to him which were not 
also assigned to Thales; but he may have gained notoriety by the 
incident referred to by Favorinus in 96. The statement that 
Anaximander set up a gnomon in Sparta ἐπὶ τῶν σκιοθήρων is 
mysterious. A oxid@npov (or σκιοθήρης) was a sun-dial, but the 
prepositional phrase cannot mean anything like ‘for a sun-dial’ or 
‘for the benefit of the sun-dials’, and the suggestion might be made 
that there was a prominence in Sparta later known as ‘the sun- 
dials’, from the gnomon or gnomons that existed there; ἐπί, then, 
would be local. ὡροσκοπεῖα in 96 and ὡρολογεῖα in 97 imply that 











98 (Anaximander) was the first of the Greeks whom we know who ventured to produce a 
written account on nature. 


99 The Greeks learned from the Babylonians of the celestial sphere and the gnomon and 
the twelve parts of the day. 


I02 


ANAXIMANDER 


the ground near the gnomon was calibrated so as to give the time 
of day, as well as the position of the sun on the ecliptic and so the 
season of the year. For another association of Anaximander with 
Sparta see ἢ. on p. 104.7 


t Pliny, ΝΗ. 1, 187 (DK 134142), held that it was Anaximenes who first 
demonstrated in Sparta the ‘horologium quod appellant sciothericon’, 
and who discovered the use of the gnomon. This is probably a mistake by 
Pliny, who tended to confound his facts in writing about early astronomy. 
He attributed the discovery of the obliquity of the Zodiac to Anaximander 
(p. τοι), but Eudemus in 78 probably assigned this to Oinopides. The full 
comprehension of the ecliptic doubtless belonged to the fifth century; that 
the sun moves from north to south and back was known much earlier— 
and certainly, for example, by Thales. 


(111) Sczentific activities: (b) the map 

100 Agathemerus 1, 1 ᾿Αναξίμανδρος ὁ Μιλήσιος ἀκουστὴς 
Θαλέω πρῶτος ἐτόλμησε τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐν πίνακι γράψαι" μεθ᾽ ὃν 
Ἕκαταῖος ὁ Μιλήσιος ἀνὴρ πολυπλανὴς διηκρίβωσεν, ὥστε θαυ- 
μασθῆναι τὸ πρᾶγμα. 

1or Strabo1, p. 7 Casaubon ... τοὺς πρώτους μεθ᾽ “Ὅμηρον δύο 
φησὶν ᾿Ερατοσθένης, ᾿Αναξίμανδρόν τε Θαλοῦ γεγονότα γνώριμον 
καὶ πολίτην καὶ Ἑκαταῖον τὸν Μιλήσιον. τὸν μὲν οὖν ἐκδοῦναι 
πρῶτον γεωγραφικὸν πίνακα, τὸν δὲ Ἑκαταῖον καταλιτεῖν γράμμα 
πιστούμενον ἐκείνου εἶναι ἐκ τῆς ἄλλης αὐτοῦ γραφῆς. 


These passages are obviously based on the same one statement by 
Eratosthenes, as is Diogenes’ remark in 96 that ‘ Anaximander first 
drew an outline of land and sea’. Diogenes’ addition, ‘but he also 
constructed a sphere’ (that is, a map of the heaven), is unsub- 
stantiated and, in the light of Anaximandcr’s theory of the 
heavenly bodies (pp. 135ff.), improbable. The general nature of 
his map may perhaps be inferred from the following passage: 


102 Herodotus tv, 36 γελῶ δὲ ὁρῶν γῆς περιόδους γράψαντας 
πολλοὺς ἤδη καὶ οὐδένα νόον ἐχόντως ἐξηγησάμενον " of ᾿ὠὨκεανόν 











100 Anaximander the Milesian, a disciple of Thales, first dared to draw the inhabited 
world on a tablet; after him Hecataeus the Milesian, a much-travelled man, made the map 
more accurate, so that 11 became a source of wonder. 

101: ...ratosthenes says that the first to follow Homer were two, Anaximander, who was 
an acquaintance and fellow-citizen of Thales, and Hecataeus the Milesian. The former 
was the first to publish a geographical map, while Hecataeus left behind a drawing believed 
to be his from the rest of his writings. 

102 I smile when I see that many have drawn circuits of the earth, up to now, and none 


103 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


τε ῥέοντα γράφουσι πέριξ τὴν γῆν, ἐοῦσαν κυκλοτερέα ὡς ἀπὸ 
τόρνου, καὶ τὴν ᾿Ασίην τῇ Εὐρώπῃ ποιεύντων ἴσην. 


It is a reasonable assumption that the (probably Ionian) maps 
referred to here resembled that of Anaximander as improved by 
his fellow-citizen Hecataeus; and therefore that Anaximander 
produced a circular plan in which the known regions of the world 
formed roughly equal segments. His empirical knowledge of 
geography was presumably based in part on seafarers’ reports, 
which in Miletus, as a commercial centre and founder of colonies, 
would be both accessible and varied. The philosopher himself was 
said to have led a colonizing expedition to Apollonia (the city on 
the Black Sea, presumably), cf. Aelian V.H. τα, 17 (DK 1243). 
Otherwise his only known foreign contacts are with Sparta." 
t Apart from the sun-indicator story in 96, Ciccro related (de divinat. 1, 50, 
112, DK 12A5a) that Anaximander warncd the Spartans to move into the 
fields when an earthquake was imminent. One 15 reminded of miraculous 
predictions assigned to Pherecydcs and Pythagoras (pp. 50f.); but as a 
citizen of Miletus, in the earthquake belt, Anaximander would have had 
special experience. The modern Thessalians, for example, know that an 
earthquake is immincnt when thc storks become agitated. At all events 


Anaximander seems to have visited Sparta, otherwise two scparatc 
anecdotes about him would hardly be located there. 


THE NATURE OF ANAXIMANDER’S ORIGINATIVE SUBSTANCE, 
TO ἄπειρον (THE INDEFINITE) 


Part of Theophrastus’ account of Anaximander’s originative 
material is preserved by Simplicius. It is disputed whether 
Simplicius derived this and similar doxographical extracts direct 
from a version of Theophrastus, or by the medium of Alexander’s 
lost commentary on the Physics; some extracts certainly came 
from this source. A more important question is whether Simplicius, 
or Alexander, was using the full edition of Theophrastus, or the 
two-volume summary, or an even shorter compendious account. 
The long surviving fragment on sensation, also in Simplicius, is on 
a very much larger scale than the extremely cursory extracts on 
the material principle, which suggests that they were derived from 
different versions of Theophrastus; the latter probably do not 
come from the complete edition. Hippolytus and the author of the 
pseudo-Plutarchean Stromateis also have doxographical summaries 





of them has explained the matter sensibly: they draw Okeanos running around the earth, 
which is drawn as though with a compass, and make Asia equal to Europe. 


104 


ANAXIMANDER 


of Anaximander; they follow Theophrastus less closely than does 
Simplicius, but provide confirmation and expansion at certain 
points. They also cover a greater range of subjects, some of which 
(c.g. Zoogony, astronomy) are dealt with at greater length than the 
question of the ἀρχή. Simplicius’ extract is printed in the left-hand 
column of 103, with the corresponding parts of the two subsidiary 
versions alongside. Briefer and less accurate versions of this doxo- 
graphy appear in 96 and in Actius (1, 3, 3, DK 12414). It should 
be remembered that the passages in 103 are versions of Theo- 
phrastus’ view of Anaximander; it will be seen that, so far as the 
material principle was concerned, he differed little from Aristotle, 
from whom somc of his phraseology is directly derived. He quoted 
one original sentence (bold type in 1034; see pp. 117f.); this need 
not imply that he had seen the whole of Anaximandcr’s book, as 
is almost invariably assumed. If he did see the whole, cither it was 
very obscure about the originative stuff or he was untypically obtuse. 


103 Versions of Theophrastus’ account of Anaximandcr’s 
originative substance: 


A. Simplicius Phys. 24, 
13; DK 12A9 


τῶν δὲ ἕν Kal κινούμενον 
καὶ ἄπειρον λεγόντων 
᾿Δναξίμανδρος μὲν Πρα- 
ξιάδου Μιλήσιος Θαλοῦ 
γενόμενος διάδοχος καὶ 
μαθητὴς 

ἀρχήν τε καὶ 
στοιχεῖον εἴρηκε τῶν 
ὄντων τὸ ἄπειρον, 


Α 


Of those who say that it 
is one, moving, and in- 
finite, Anaximander, son 
of Praxiades, a Milesian, 


the successor and pupil of 


Thales, 

said that the prin- 
ciple and element of exist- 
ing things was the apeiron 
[indefinite, or infinite], 


B. Hippolytus Ref. 1, 
6, 1-2; DK 12A11 


Θαλοῦ τοίνυν ᾿Αναξί- 
μανδρος γίνεται ἀκρο- 
ατής. ᾿Α, Πραξιάδου 
Μιλήσιος"... 


οὗτος μὲν 
ἀρχήν τε καὶ στοιχεῖον 
εἴρηκε τῶν ὄντων τὸ 
ἄπειρον, 





Β 
Now Anaximander was 
the disciple of Thales. 


Anaximander, son of 
Praxiades, of Miletus: 


he said that 
the principle and element 
of existing things was the 
apeiron, 


105 


C. Ps.-Plutarch Strom. 
2; DK 12A10 


... Avativavipov 
OdAntos Etaipov γενό- 
μενον 


τὸ ἄπειρον φάναι 
τὴν πᾶσαν αἰτίαν ἔχειν 
τῆς τοῦ παντὸς γενέ- 
σεώς τε καὶ φθορᾶς, 





C 


... Anaximander, who 


was the companion of 
Thales, 


said that the 
apeiron contained the 
whole cause of the coming- 
to-be and destruction of 
the world, 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


103 (cont.) 
πρῶτος τοῦτο τοὔνομα 
κομίσας τῆς ἀρχῆς. 


λέγει δ᾽ αὐτὴν μήτε 
ὕδωρ μήτε ἄλλο τι τῶν 
καλουμένων εἶναι στοι- 
χείων, ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέραν τινὰ 
φύσιν ἄπειρον, 
ἐξ ἧς 
ἅπαντας γίνεσθαι τοὺς 
οὐρανοὺς καὶ τοὺς ἐν 
αὐτοῖς κόσμους. 


ἐξ ὧν δὲ ἡ γένεσίς 


ἐστι τοῖς οὖσι, καὶ τὴν 


πρῶτος {τοῦτον τοὔνο- 
μα καλέσας τῆς ἀρχῆς. 
(πρὸς δὲ τούτῳ κίνησιν 
ἀίδιον εἶναι, ἐν ft} συμ- 
βαίνει γίνεσθαι τοὺς 
οὐρανούς.) 

. «οὗτος 
ἀρχὴν ἔφη τῶν ὄντων 
φύσιν τινὰ τοῦ ἀπείρου, 


ἐξ ἧς γίνεσθαι τοὺς 
οὐρανοὺς καὶ τὸν ἐν 
αὐτοῖς κόσμον. 


ταύτην 
δ᾽ ἀίδιον εἶναι καὶ 
ἀγήρω, ἣν καὶ πάντας 
περιέχειν τοὺς κόσμους. 
λέγει δὲ χρόνον ὡς ὧρισ- 
μένης τῆς γενέσεως 


ἐξ οὗ δή φησι τούς τε 
οὐρανοὺς ἀποκεκρίσθαι 
καὶ καθόλου τοὺς ἅπαν- 
τας ἀπείρους ὄντας κόσ- 
μους. 


ἀπεφήνατο δὲ τὴν φθο- 
ρὰν γίνεσθαι καὶ πολὺ 





being the first to introduce 
this name of the material 


principle. 


He says that 
at 15 neither water nor any 
other of the so-called 
elements, but some other 
apeiron nature, 


from 


which come into being all 
the heavens and the worlds 
in them. 


And the source of 
coming-to-be for existing 





being the first to use this 
name of the material 
principle. 

(In addition to 
this he said that motion 
was eternal, in which it 
resulis that the heavens 
come into being.) 


.. he said 
that the material principle 
of existing things was some 
nature coming under the 
heading of the apeiron, 
Srom which come into being 
the heavens and the world 
in them. 


This nature is 
eternal and unageing, and 
it also surrounds all the 
worlds. 


He talks of Time 
as though coming-to-be and 


106 


from which he says 
that the heavens are sepa- 
rated off, and in general 
all the worlds, being 
apeirous [innumerable]. 


He declared that destruc- 
tion, and much earlier 


ANAXIMANDER 


103 (cont.) 

φθορὰν εἰς ταῦτα yiveo- καὶ τῆς οὐσίας Kal τῆς πρότερον τὴν γένεσιν 

θαι κατὰ τὸ χρεών" φθορᾶς. ἐξ ἀπείρου αἰῶνος ἀνα- 
κυκλουμένων πάντων 
αὐτῶν. 

διδόναι γὰρ αὐτὰ 

δίκην καὶ τίσιν ἀλλή- 

λοις τῆς ἀδικίας κατὰ 

τὴν τοῦ χρόνου τάξιν, (λέγει δὲ χρόνον... .) 

TTOINTIKWTEPOIS οὕτως 

ὀνόμασιν αὐτὰ λέγων. 

(What follows is Simpl., 

not Theophrastus.) 


(i) Did Anaximander call the originative substance ἀρχήν 


Most modern critics think that Theophrastus named Anaximander 
as the first to have used ἀρχή (literally ‘beginning’ or ‘source’) as 
a special term for the originative substance. They infer this from 
πρῶτος τοῦτο τοὔνομα κομίσας τῆς ἀρχῆς in 103A, its equivalent 
in 1038, and one further context in Simplicius (Phys. 150, 23) 
where Anaximander is described as πρῶτος αὐτὸς ἀρχὴν ὀνομάσας 
τὸ ὑποκείμενον. Burnet, however (HGP 54 n. 2), maintained that 
what Theophrastus said was simply that Anaximander was the 
first to call the material principle (ἀρχή in its normal Peripatetic 
sensc) by the name τὸ ἄπειρον, without further qualification. This, 
indeed, is the obvious sense of the extract from Theophrastus, 
103A, while in 1038 τοῦτο has presumably dropped out by haplo- 
graphy before τοὔνομα. The other passage of Simplicius 15 more 
difficult: its most obvious meaning 15 ‘being the first to call the 
substratum of the opposites ἀρχή᾽, but Burnet explained it as 
meaning ‘being the first to name the substratum of the opposites 
as the material cause’ (that is, because according to Aristotle the 
opposites in Anaximander were specifically produced from the 





things is that into which existence and destruction coming-to-be, happen from 
destruction, too, happens were limited. infinite ages, since they 
‘according to necessity; are all occurring in cycles. 


for they pay penalty 


and retribution to each 

other for their injustice 

according to the assess- 

ment of Time’, (He talks of Time...) 
as he describes it in 

these rather poetical terms. 


107 


PRESOCRATIGC PHILOSOPHERS 


originative stuff). Burnet’s interpretation, while admittedly not 
the most apparent meaning of the clause in isolation, is certainly 
more relevant to the trend of Simplicius’ argument. Further, 
Theophrastus had used the word ἀρχή in his remarks on Thales 
as already reported by Simplicius (Phys. 23, 23, DK 11413), with 
no special note that Thales himself did not actually use this word— 
a note that would perhaps have been natural if Theophrastus had 
gone on to assert that Anaximander was its originator. It is 
possible, of course, that Simplicius misunderstood Theophrastus’ 
comment about ἀρχή and ἄπειρον. The whole question is of minor 
importance; it docs seem, however, that no technical use of ἀρχή 
by Anaximander was implied by Theophrastus—the use he referred 
to was of τὸ ἄπειρον. 


(1) What did Anaximander mean by τὸ &tte1pov? 

104 Aristotle Phys. [4, 203416 of δὲ περὶ φύσεως πάντες 
ὑποτιθέασιν ἑτέραν τινὰ φύσιν τῷ ἀπείρῳ τῶν λεγομένων στοι- 
χείων, οἷον ὕδωρ ἢ ἀέρα ἢ τὸ μεταξὺ τούτων. 


First, it is advisable to isolate the Peripatetic, and so also the 
doxographical, interpretation of τὸ ἄπειρον. Aristotle, curiously 
enough, mentioned Anaximander by name only four times, but 
made several probable references to his primary substance (e.g. 
111 fin.). There is little doubt that he took ἄπειρον in Anaxi- 
mander, and in the monists in general, to mean primarily 
‘spatially infinite’. This is suggested in 110. In 104, part of his 
discussion of the concept of infinity, Aristotle attributes some 
specific quality, presumably that of the intermediate in the case of 
Anaximander (pp. 110 ff.), to the material principles of all the 
φυσικοί who recognize the infinite. Theophrastus seems to have 
felt that Anaximander had given his primary substance a name 
which described its spatial property, but which said nothing 
except by implication (that it was not identified with any of the 
later ‘elements’) about its qualitative properties. Thus in 103 41.2, 
and in other such classifications, ἄπειρον means ‘infinite’; it is 
‘neither water nor any other of the so-called elements, but some 
other infinite nature from which come all the heavens. . «ἡ (Anaxi- 
mander’s heavens being infinite in number for Theophrastus).* 








104 All the physicists make the infinite a property of some other nature belonging to the 
so-called elements, such as water or air or that which is intermediate between these. 


108 


ANAXIMANDER 


1 The words ἑτέραν τινὰ φύσιν ἄπειρον seem to echo Aristotle’s radically 
different ἑτέραν τινὰ φύσιν τῷ ἀπείρῳ in 104; especially since the wider 
contexts of the two phrases have much in common. This superficial 
similarity of phraseology suggests that Theophrastus had made himself 
familiar with his master’s discussion of infinity in the Physics before he set 
about summarizing the theories of Anaximander. 


It is, however, uncertain that Anaximander himself intended 
TO ἄπειρον to mean precisely ‘the spatially infinite’. We may 
legitimately doubt whether the concept of infinity was appre- 
hended before questions of continuous cxtcnsion and continuous 
divisibility were raiscd by Mclissus and Zeno. ἄπειρον means 
‘without boundary, limit, definition’; this indefiniteness is spatial 
in early usages, as in the ἀπείρονα πόντον of Homer (Anaxi- 
mander’s ἄπειρον is presumably from ἄπειρος, of which ἀπείρων 
is a more poctical equivalent), and as in Xenophanes (3), who 
said that the earth went down és ἄπειρον, indefinitely, i.e. beyond 
the imagination or the concern of men. Now Anaximander 
certainly assumed the original stuff to have been indefinitely huge 
in extent; but he perhaps gave formal expression to this idea by 
saying that this stuff ‘surroundcd all things’ (110), and might not 
have felt this charactcristic (which must have becn assumed as a 
matter of course by Thales, see n. on p. 93) to be sufficiently 
remarkable to be applied as sole description, that is as ‘the 
spatially indefinite’. We might expect any such single description 
to refer first to the kind of substance, not to its commonly assumed 
vastness of extent. Thus Cornford (e.g. C.A.H. Iv, 542) and others 
have argued that τὸ ἄπειρον meant ‘that which is internally 
unbounded, without internal distinctions’, 1.6. that which is 
indistinct, indefinite in kind. There is no need to stress internal 
divisions,t but the general point seems not improbable: for 
Anaximander the original world-forming stuff was indefinite, it 
resembled no one kind of matter in the developed world. Yet 
no parallel early use of ἄπειρος in a certainly non-spatial sense 
can be cited, and this is in favour of retaining the interpretation 
‘spatially indefinite’. In any case the lack of positive identification 
was conspicuously implied. Either τὸ ἄπειρον mcant ‘the spatially 
indefinite’, and was implied to be indefinite in kind because it was 
not formally identified as fire, air, water or earth (to use Theo- 
phrastus’ terms of 103A); or Anaximander intcnded it to mean 
primarily ‘that which is indefinite in kind’, but naturally assumed 
it also to be of unlimited extent and duration—properties which, 


109 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


when expressed, would be expressed in terms of all-inclusiveness 
and divine immortality.? 


X Nor is it easy to accept Cornford’s suggestion that the ἄπειρον was 
conceived as circular or spherical, cf. ἄπειρον ἀμφίβληστρον at Aeschylus 
Ag. 1382, ἄπειρος of a ring in Aristophanes and Aristotle, etc. It is 
impossible to prove that any particular application of the word that was 
feasible in the archaic period was entirely absent from Anaximander’s 
mind ; but the intention seems to have been to deny any fixed determination. 


2 Cherniss, Aristotle’s Criticism of Presocratic Philosophy 377f., maintained that 
Anaximander meant ἄπειρον {τὸ πλῆθος, 1.6. ‘with an indeterminate 
number of internal divisions’. But in this case ἄπειρον would have to be 
expressly qualified by a word implying number, as in Anaxagoras frr. 1 


and 2 (495, 515). 


(iit) The Indefinite as an intermediate substance in Aristotle 


105 Aristotle de gen. et corr. B5, 822 410 ...OUK ἔστιν ἕν τούτων 
(sc. fire, air, water, earth) ἐξ οὗ τὰ πάντα᾽ οὐ μὴν οὐδ᾽ ἄλλο τί γε 
παρὰ ταῦτα, οἷον μέσον τι ἀέρος καὶ ὕδατος ἢ ἀέρος καὶ πυρός, 
ἀέρος μὲν παχύτερον καὶ πυρός, τῶν δὲ AeTITOTEPOV’ ἔσται γὰρ ἀὴρ 
καὶ πῦρ ἐκεῖνο μετ᾽ ἐναντιότητος᾽ ἀλλὰ στέρησις τὸ ἕτερον τῶν 
ἐναντίων: ὥστ᾽ οὐκ ἐνδέχεται μονοῦσθαι ἐκεῖνο οὐδέποτε, ὥσπερ 
φασί τινες τὸ ἄπειρον καὶ τὸ περιέχον. 

106 Aristotle Phys. Α4, 187a12 ὡς δ᾽ οἱ φυσικοὶ λέγουσι, δύο 
τρόποι εἰσίν. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἕν ποιήσαντες τὸ σῶμα τὸ ὑποκείμενον, ἢ 
τῶν τριῶν τι ἢ ἄλλο ὅ ἐστι πυρὸς μὲν πυκνότερον ἀέρος δὲ λεττό- 
τερον, τἄλλα γεννῶσι πυκνότητι καὶ μανότητι πολλὰ ποιοῦντες... .. 
οἱ δ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ ἑνὸς ἐνούσας τὰς ἐναντιότητας ἐκκρίνεσθαι, ὥσπερ 
᾿Αναξίμανδρός φησι καὶ ὅσοι δ᾽ ἕν καὶ πολλά φασιν εἶναι, ὥσπερ 
Ἐμπεδοκλῆς καὶ ᾿Αναξαγόρας: ἐκ τοῦ μίγματος γὰρ καὶ οὗτοι 
ἐκκρίνουσι τάλλα. 





105 ... here is no one of these things [ fire, air, water, earth] from which come all 
things; and certainly nothing else beside these, such as something half-way between air and 
water, or air and fire, being thicker than air and fire and finer than the others: for that will be 
air and fire, simply, together with contrariety; but one of the two opposites is a privation—so 
that it is impossible for the intermediate ever to exist in isolation, as some say the infinite 
[apeiron] and the surrounding does. 


106 Two types of explanation are given by the physicists. Those who have made the 
subsisting body one, either one of the three or something else which is thicker than fire and 
finer than air, generate the rest by condensation and rarefaction, making it into many... . 
But the others say that the opposites are separated out from the One, being present in it, as 
Anaximander says and all who say there are one and many, like Empedocles and Anaxagoras; 
Sor these, too, separate out the rest from the mixture. 


IIo 


ANAXIMANDER 


Aristotle, when listing various monistic theories of the φυσικοί, 
on a number of occasions speaks of a substance between the 
elements—normally betwecn fire and air or between air and 
water.t In three or four of these passages it looks as though 
Anaximander is meant as the proponent of an intermediate sub- 
stance, not because he 1s directly named but because the substance 
is implied to have been called simply τὸ ἄπειρον. In 105 the 
people who said that ‘the ἄπειρον and the surrounding’ existed on 
its own, in isolation from the elements, appear from the termino- 
logy (cf. 110) to be Anaximander and followers; see also 111, 
where the intermediate between water and air is said to ‘surround 
all the heavens, being boundless’. Now Aristotle in 104 declared 
that all the φυσικοί who envisaged it gave some specific description 
of the infinite (τὸ ἄπειρον) : we may ask what description Anaxi- 
mander was deemed by Aristotle, when he wrote those words, to 
have given, if not as an intermediate—which is, indeed, actually 
mentioned in that passage as a typical description. Were it not for 
one passage, namely 106, there would be no difficulty in accepting 
that Aristotle had Anaximander in mind in most, at any rate, of 
his references to an intermediate material principle. One of 
Aristotle’s most acute ancient commentators, Alexander of Aphro- 
disias, did in fact accept this; so, usually, did Simplicius. Yet in 
106, on the only possible interpretation, Aristotle placed the 
intermediate substance and Anaximander in opposed groups.? 
Various unenlightening guesses have been made about the 
historical author of the intermcdiate-substance theory; but a care- 
ful study of all Aristotlc’s references indicates that Anaximander 
was, after all, in his mind—although Anaximander in fact held no 
such theory. Aristotle evidently felt that Anaximander’s (for 
Aristotle) ‘infinite’ ἀρχή must have had some expressible relation- 
ship to the so-called elements; and there are some passages (e.g. 
107) in which he wrote simply of τὸ παρὰ τὰ στοιχεῖα, ‘that which 
is beside the elements’, not identifiable with any one of them, and 
not of τὸ μεταξύ or τὸ μέσον. By this formulation one possibility 
was that it was intermediate between two elements; another, that 
it was a mixture of them all. In 106 Aristotle seems to take the 
latter view;3 but he elsewhere considered the former possibility, 
and had arrived at the theoretical hypothesis of an intermediate 
(a hypothesis which he himself, of course, regarded as untenable: 
cf. 105) as a by-product of his reflexions on Anaximander. That he 


II! 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


had no explicit historical example in mind, however, is shown by 
his variation of the elements between which the intermediate came. 
My suggestion is, then, that Aristotle, puzzled about the nature of 
Anaximander’s ἄπειρον, thought that, if not an element, it must 
be either an intermediate or a mixture. Usually when he men- 
tioned an intermediate in lists of possible primary substances he had 
Anaximander in mind, though he also tended to add the inter- 
mediate indiscriminately to any such list for the sake of exhaustivity. 
Itisso added in 106, where, as the result ofa different type of critique, 
he applies the mixture-interpretation to Anaximander by name. 

t Apart from 104, 105, 106, 111, cf. Met. Αγ, 988a30; 989a14; 

Phys. A6, 189b1; 4, 203a18; GC B 1, 328b35. 

2 It might be argued that τὸ ἕν, the One, is common to both groups, 

therefore that Anaximander might occur in each. But the contrast is really 


betwecn those who retain the One as a substratum, and those who (like 
Anaximander) do not. 


3 That Aristotle could regard Anaximander’s &treipov as a mixture is 
shown for certain in 122. For a fuller discussion of the whole topic see 
Kirk, ‘Some problems in Anaximander’, CQ.N.S. 5 (1955) 24 ff. 


(iv) Why ‘the Indefinite’ and not a specific originative substance? 

1070 Aristotle Phys. [5, 204b22 ἀλλὰ μὴν οὐδὲ Ev Kal ἁπλοῦν 
εἶναι ἐνδέχεται TO ἄπειρον σῶμα, οὔτε ὡς λέγουσί τινες TO πταρὰ τὰ 
στοιχεῖα, ἐξ οὗ ταῦτα γεννῶσιν, οὔθ᾽ ἁπλῶς. εἰσὶ γάρ τινες οἱ 
τοῦτο ποιοῦσι τὸ ἄπειρον, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀέρα ἢ ὕδωρ, ὡς μὴ τἄλλα 
φθείρηται ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀπείρου αὐτῶν: ἔχουσι γὰρ πρὸς ἄλληλα 
ἐναντίωσιν, οἷον ὁ μὲν ἀὴρ ψυχρός, τὸ δ᾽ ὕδωρ ὑγρόν, τὸ δὲ πῦρ 
θερμόν ὧν εἰ ἦν ἕν ἄπειρον ἔφθαρτο ἂν ἤδη τἄλλα. νῦν δ᾽ ἕτερον 
εἶναί φασι ἐξ οὗ ταῦτα. 

108 Aristotle Phys. Γ4, 203b15 τοῦ δ᾽ εἶναί τι ἄπειρον ἡ πίστις 
ἐκ πέντε μάλιστ᾽ ἂν συμβαίνοι σκοποῦσιν... .ἔτι τῷ οὕτως ἂν 
μόνως μὴ ὑπολείπειν γένεσιν καὶ φθοράν, εἰ ἄπειρον εἴη ὅθεν 
ἀφαιρεῖται τὸ γιγνόμενον. 





107 But yet, nor can the infinite body be one and simple, whether it be, as some say, that 
which is beside the elements, from which they generate the elements, or whether it be 
expressed simply. For there are some people who make what is beside the elements the 
infinite, and not air or water, so that the rest be not destroyed by their infinite substance; 
Sor the elements are opposed to each other ( for example, air is cold, water moist, and fire hot), 
and if one of those were infinite the rest would already have been destroyed. But, as it is, 
they say that the infinite is different from these, and that they come into being from it. 
108 Belief in infinity would result, for those who consider the matter, for the most part 
from five factors... .further, because only so would generation and destruction not fail, if 
there were an infinite source from which that which is coming-to-be is derived. 


112 


ANAXIMANDER 


These passages present two possible motives for the postulation of 
the Indefinite as primary substance. The reason in 107—that the 
infinite primary substance, if identified with a specific world- 
constituent, would swamp the other world-constitucnts and never 
allow them to devclop—is assigned to those who posited an 
ἄπειρον substance ‘beside the elements’, i.e. not identical with 
any of them. When Aristotle used this formulation he usually, 
though not necessarily invariably, had Anaximander in mind 
(pp. 110ff.), and Simplicius in his comment on the passage (Phys. 
479, 33) ascribed this reason to Anaximander. On the other 
hand the totally different reason suggested in ro8—that an 
infinite source-material ensures that coming-to-be within the 
world shall not fail for want of material—is given as Anaximander’s 
by Aetius (1, 3, 3, DK 1244) and by Simplicius in one passage 
(de caelo 615, 15, DK 12A17). Aetius’ attribution suggests that 
Theophrastus applied the motive of 108 to Anaximander; but 
we cannot be sure that he did not apply that of 107 also, and 
in either case he was probably working from what Aristotle 
had said. 

Most modern critics have accepted 108 as giving Anaximandcr’s 
true motive, and many have rejected 107 as not (in spite of 
appearances) applying to Anaximander. Thus Cherniss called the 
argument in 107 ‘the peculiarly Aristotelian argument of the 
necessary equilibrium of contrary forces’. It is true that it 15 
expressed, naturally enough, in an Aristotelian form. But Anaxi- 
mander had postulated a comprehensive balance between opposed 
substances (see 112 with discussion), and might well have reasoned 
in some such way as this: ‘Thales said that all things originated 
from water; but water (which we sce in the form of rain, sea and 
rivers) is opposed to fire (the sun, the fiery aither, volcanoes etc.), 
and these things are mutually destructive. How then can fire 
have become such a prominent part of our world, if it were from 
the beginning constantly opposed by the whole indefinitely- 
extended mass of its very opposite? How, indeed, can it have 
appeared at all, for a single moment? The warring constituents of 
our world, then, must have developed from a substance different 
from any of them—something indefinite or indeterminable.’ 
(Aristotle’s interpretation of ἄπειρον as ‘infinite’ does not affect 
this issue.) 

As for 108, Aristotle himself pointed out its fallacy: 


8 112 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


109 Aristotle Phys. [8, 208a8 οὔτε yap, iva ἡ γένεσις μὴ 
ἐπιλείττῃ, ἀναγκαῖον ἐνεργείᾳ ἄπειρον εἶναι σῶμα αἰσθητόν: ἐνδέ- 
XETAL γὰρ τὴν θατέρου φθορὰν θατέρον εἶναι γένεσιν, πτεπερασμένου 
ὄντος τοῦ παντός. 

But this was precisely Anaximander’s view of physical change— 
that there is no wastage: opposed substances make retribution to 
each other for their encroachments (pp. 118ff.), and provided the 
balance is maintaincd all change in the developed world takes 
place between the same original quantity of separate, opposed 
substances. (It may be noted that 107 gives a reason for postu- 
lating a qualitatively indefinite primary substance, while 108 gives 
one for postulating a spatially indefinite, or infinite, substance; 
cf. pp. 108 ff.) 


(v) The Indefinite is all-enfolding and all-controlling(?), divine and 
immortal 


110 Aristotle Phys. Γ4, 203b7 -.. -τοῦ δὲ ἀπείρου οὐκ ἔστιν 
ἀρχή... «ἀλλ᾽ αὕτη τῶν ἄλλων εἶναι δοκεῖ, καὶ πτεριέχειν ἅπαντα καὶ 
πάντα κυβερνᾶν, ὥς φασιν ὅσοι μὴ ποιοῦσι παρὰ τὸ ἄπειρον ἄλλας 
αἰτίας οἷον νοῦν ἢ φιλίαν καὶ τοῦτ᾽ εἶναι τὸ θεῖον: ἀθάνατον γὰρ 
καὶ ἀνώλεθρον, ὥσπερ φησὶν ὁ ᾿Αναξίμανδρος καὶ οἱ πλεῖστοι τῶν 
φυσιολόγων. 

111: Aristotle de οαϑίο Γῆ, 303b10 ἔνιοι γὰρ ἕν μόνον ὑποτίθενται, 
καὶ τοῦτο οἱ μὲν ὕδωρ, οἱ δ᾽ ἀέρα, οἱ δὲ πῦρ, οἱ δ᾽ ὕδατος μὲν 
λετττότερον ἀέρος δὲ πυκνότερον᾽ ὃ περιέχειν φασὶ πάντας τοὺς 
οὐρανοὺς ἄπειρον ὄν. 

The assertion in 110 that the primary substance ‘enfolds all and 
steers all’ is assigned to those physicists who according to Aristotle 
postulated an infinite primary stuff but no separate cause of 








109 Nor, in order that generation may not fail, is it necessary for perceptible body to be 
actually infinite: for it is possible for the destruction of one thing to be the generation of 
the other, the sum of things being limited. 


110... .of the infinite there is no beginning... .but this seems to be the beginning of the 
other things, and to surround all things and steer all, as all those say who do not postulate 
other causes, such as mind or love, above and beyond the infinite. And this is the divine; 
Jor it is immortal and indestructible, as Anaximander says and most of the physical 
speculators. 


111 For some posit one substance only, and this some posit as water, some as air, some 
as fire, some as finer than water and thicker than air; which they say surrounds all the 
heavens, being infinite. 


114 


ANAXIMANDER 


motion—certainly, therefore, to the Milesians, Heraclitus, and 
Diogenes of Apollonia. ‘Steers all’ obviously reproduces Pre- 
socratic terminology, and the whole phrase ‘enfolds all things and 
steers all’ may form a single rhythmical unit. Anaximander, who 
is mentioned below in connexion with another phrase describing 
the same subject, and who is probably referred to in 111 in con- 
nexion with περιέχειν, could have been its author. 


t περιέχει is presumably genuine in Anaximencs fr. 2 (163), even if some 
of its context is re-worded; Anaxagoras (who is not in question in the 
Aristotelian passage) certainly used τὸ περιέχον in fr. (515). κυβερνᾶν, 
of the steering of cosmic constituents or events, occurs in Heraclitus fr. 41 
(230), Parmenides fr. 12, 3 (3§8), Diogenes of Apollonia fr. 5 (606). The 
two words could, of course, have been combined by Aristotle from 
different sources. 


It is not easy, however, to see what manner of control could be 
exercised on all things by Anaximander’s Indefinite. The Greek 
does not necessarily mean that the steering is due to the enfolding 
—both properties independently are natural ones for something 
conceived as divine—but it probably implics it. Again, the meta- 
phor of steering does not necessarily entail a conscious and intelli- 
gent agent, for the steering of a ship can be regarded as a purely 
mechanical process, with reference to changes of direction im- 
posed by the steering mechanism and not to the intentions of the 
navigator. Yet the archaic theomorphic, and thus to some extent 
anthropomorphic, conception of the primary stuff favours the 
assumption of purposeful action. Possible methods of control are 
the following: (1) by means of surrounding or enfolding: either 
(a) by preventing the further expansion of the differentiated world 
(‘all things’), or (ὁ) by making good the wastc involved in change 
in the world; (2) by being immanent in all things, or some things, 
and providing either (a) motive power or life-force, or (δ) a prin- 
ciple or rule or law of change; (3) by having initiated the world 
in such a way as to provide a continuing rule or law of change.— 
(1, 6) was implied in 108, but it was argued on pp. 113f. that this 
is unlikely to be valid for Anaximander; the same argument 
applies to (1, a). (2, a) would apply to Thales; (2, δ), rather 
than (3), to Heraclitus (pp. 188, 200). (2), as well as (1), seems 
unlikely for Anaximander, for the Indefinite clearly cannot have 
been imagined as immanent in the developed world, even in the 
way that Thales’ world was somehow interpenetrated with a divine 


1 8-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


life-substance: the Indefinite was probably so named because it 
was not identical with anything in nature. (3), however, could 
apply to Anaximander: it is feasible that the control exercised on 
all things was through the law of retribution between opposites, a 
law (or manner of behaviour) which was initiated when the first 
opposed substances appeared within the Indefinite and which still 
governs all change in the world. Nevertheless, it remains true that 
Aristotle could have had in mind someonc other than Anaxi- 
mander—Heraclitus, perhaps, or Diogencs of Apollonia—in the 
first part of 110, and particularly, perhaps, in the phrase ‘stcers all 
things’. 

The ascription of the idea of περιέχειν to the monists is repeated 
in 111: here again the infinite material suggests Anaximander, 
though it surrounds not ‘all things’ but ‘all the heavens’. This 
statement scems to have been taken up by Theophrastus (103), 
who evidently thought that it implied separate first heavens, each 
enclosing a separate world: sce pp. 121 ff. for the idea of innumer- 
able worlds. But Aristotle’s phrase could be due to his using 
οὐρανοί in a special sense, as the spheres of the sun, moon and stars 
(cf. de caelo Ag, 278b9); he might naturally apply his own analysis 
of the cosmos (bascd on the Eudoxan-Callippean scheme) to 
Anaximander, with his separate circles for the heavenly bodies 
(pp. 135ff.), and intend nothing more than one complex world. 

In the latter part of 110 we are told that the enfolding stuff ‘is 
the divine; for it is immortal and indestructible, as Anaximander 
says and most of the physicists’. It is legitimate to suppose that 
the words ‘immortal and indestructible’ were intended to belong 
to Anaximander himsclf, though othcrs said something similar. 
According to Theophrastus as reported in 1038, however, the 
phrase was ἀΐδιον καὶ ἀγήρω, which is a Homeric formula used of 
gods or their appurtenances, ‘eternal and free from old age’: so at 
Od. 5, 218 (to Calypso), ἡ μὲν γὰρ βροτός ἐστι, σὺ δ᾽ ἀθάνατος Kal 
ἀγήρως (cf. also 1. 2, 447). Short epic formulas often found their 
way into archaic prose, and it seems likely that this, rather than 
the somewhat repetitive equivalent in Aristotle, was the original 
form.* At all events Anaximander seems to have applied to the 
Indefinite the chief attributes of the Homeric gods, immortality 
and boundless power (connected in his case with boundless 
extent) ; it seems not improbable that he actually called it ‘divine’, 
and in this he was typical of the Presocratic thinkers in general. 


116 


ANAXIMANDER 


t Especially since the two words are applied to the structure of the natural 
world, in a description of philosophical contemplation, by Euripides 
(fr. gto Nauck’): ‘observing the unageing structure of immortal Nature’, 
ἀθανάτου καθορῶν φύσεως κόσμον ἀγήρω. 


(vi) The Indefinite is not in eternal motion, nor is it a mixture 


(These further points concerning the Indefinite are discussed 
under ‘Cosmogony’, pp. 126ff.) 


THE EXTANT FRAGMENT OF ANAXIMANDER 


112 Simplicius Phys. 24, 17 (repeated from 103A) ...étépav 
τινὰ φύσιν ἄπειρον, ἐξ ἧς ἅπαντας γίνεσθαι Tous οὐρανοὺς Kal τοὺς 
ἐν αὐτοῖς κόσμους. ἐξ ὧν δὲ ἡ γένεσίς ἐστι τοῖς οὖσι, καὶ τὴν φθορὰν 
εἰς ταῦτα γίνεσθαι κατὰ τὸ χρεών διδόναι γὰρ αὐτὰ δίκην καὶ 
τίσιν ἀλλήλοις τῆς ἀδικίας κατὰ τὴν τοῦ χρόνου τάξιν᾽, ποιητι- 
κωτέροις οὕτως ὀνόμασιν αὐτὰ λέγων. 


(i) Extent 


Simplicius is undoubtedly quoting from a version of Thcophrastus’ 
history of earlicr philosophy, and from the section on the material 
principle, περὶ ἀρχῆς. The concluding clause, a judgement on 
Anaximandcr’s style, shows that what immediatcly precedes is still 
a direct quotation. Thus κατὰ τὴν τοῦ χρόνου τάξιν, which many 
have held to be a Theophrastcan paraphrase of κατὰ τὸ χρέων, 
should provisionally be accepted as original.? διδόναι — ἀδικίας is 
certainly original, and well exemplifies the poctical style noted by 
Theophrastus. κατὰ τὸ χρεών, too, should probably be accepted 
as by Anaximander: χρεών retained a marked poetical colouring 
(except in the special usage χρεών ἐστι) until the expression Td 
χρεῶν became popular in the Hellenistic period as a circum- 
locution for death. It is the most plausible restoration in Heraclitus 
fr. 80, kat’ ἔριν καὶ χρεών (for χρεώμενα), to give a similar phrase 
to the one under discussion. The preceding words, ἐξ ὧν — εἰς 
ταῦτα γίνεσθαι, have been much disputed. The use of the 
abstracts γένεσις and φθορά, well established in Peripatetic but not 
(from the other extant evidence) in Presocratic vocabulary, 











112 ...some other apeiron nature, from which come into being all the heavens and the 
worlds in them. And the source of coming-to-be for existing things is that into which 
destruction, too, happens, ‘according to necessity; for they pay penalty and retribution to 
each other for their injustice according to the assessment of Time’, as he describes it in these 
rather poetical terms. 


117 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


suggests that these belong to Theophrastus. The sentiment, too, 
looks Peripatetic: it is a close restatement of one of Aristotle’s basic 
dogmas about the primary substance of the physical monists, ‘all 
things are destroyed into that from which they came-to-be’ 
(Phys. F 5, 204.633; cf. also 87 line 3). Theophrastus was given to 
quoting single words or phrases; thus he could have quoted the 
concluding phrase of a sentence, the rest of which he had para- 
phrased, in order to emphasize the connexion with the following 
sentence which he quotes in full. See further under ὃν. 


t Theophrastus certainly used similar phraseology himself, notably τάξιν 
τινὰ kal χρόνον ὡρισμένον (of Heraclitus). But this is very different from 
the bold personification of τὴν τοῦ χρόνον τάξιν. 


(ii) The meaning of the main assertion 

The context shows that Theophrastus regarded the quotation as 
appropriate to the view he had just attributed to Anaximander, 
that ‘all the heavens and the worlds in them’ came from the 
Indefinite. ἐξ dv...(the plural is generic) adds that, since they 
came from the Indefinite, they will also return to it ‘of necessity ; 
for they pay penalty and retribution to cach other... .’. It appears 
from the version of ps.-Plutarch, 103c, that by ‘the heavens and 
the worlds in them’ Theophrastus was referring to ἄπειροι 
κόσμοι, innumerable worlds. But there is a very strong objection 
to understanding the words quoted from Anaximander to refer to 
innumerable worlds coming-to-be from, and being destroyed into, 
the Indefinite. ἀλλήλοις shows that retribution 15 made mutually 
between the parties who arc the subject of the sentence. Can we 
really believe that the divine Indefinite commits injustice on its 
own products, and has to pay them recompense? This, surely, 15 
intolerable; but if so, then Theophrastus (who was not infallible 
in such matters of interpretation, any more than Aristotle) mistook 
the proper application of Anaximander’s dictum. It has long been 
observed that the things which commit injustice on each other 
must be equals, different but correlative; and that these are most 
likely to be the opposed substances which make up the differentiated 
world.? 


I (6. Vlastos, CP 42 (1947) 171f., following Cherniss, tried to show how 
the ultimate balance between opposites could be reconciled with the 
reabsorption of the world into the Indefinite: when this happens, he said, 
the opposites finally settle up accounts with each other (not with the 


118 


ANAXIMANDER 


Indefinite). But if the principle of justice applies in the present world, it 
is not easy to see how such a drastic change, affecting all its constituents, 
as the return of the world to the Indefinite could ever come about. 


(11) The opposites 

It will be seen later (120, 123) that the production of opposites was 
an essential stage of cosmogony for Anaximander; it is therefore 
reasonable to assume that they played an important part in the 
developed world. The interplay of opposites is basic in Heraclitus, 
who seems to have delibcrately corrected Anaximander by his 
paradox ‘strife is justice’ (fr. 80, 214). Anaximander is the first in 
whom the concept of opposed natural substances (which recurs in 
Heraclitus, Parmenides, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and in the 
Pythagoreans certainly as carly as Alcmaeon) clearly appears. 
Doubtless he was influenced by observation of the main seasonal 
changes, in which heat and drought in summer seem to be pitted 
against cold and rain in winter. ‘The constant interchange between 
opposed substances is explained by Anaximander in a Icgalistic 
metaphor derived from human society: the prevalence of one 
substance at the expense ofits contrary is ‘injustice’, and a reaction 
takes place through the infliction of punishment by the restoration 
of equality—of more than equality, since the wrong-doer is 
deprived of part of his original substance, too. This is given to the 
victim in addition to what was his own, and in turn leads (it might 
be inferred) to κόρος, surfeit, on the part of the former victim, who 
now commits injustice on the former aggressor. Thus both the 
continuity and the stability of natural change were motivated, for 
Anaximander, by means of this anthropomorphic metaphor. The 
main opposites in cosmogony were the hot substance and the cold 
substance—flame or fire and mist or air. These, with which are 
associated dryness and moisture, are also the main cosmological 
opposites, most notably involved in the large-scale changes in the 
natural world. They were probably isolated by Heraclitus (fr. 126) 
before ever they were elevated to the form of standard irreducible 
elements by Empedocles. Caution must be shown, to be sure, 
about the opposites in Anaximander: it is possible, for example, 
that the Peripatetics substituted their own more abstract formula- 
tions, the hot and the cold and so on, for much more concrete 
expressions by Anaximander himself. For him, the world may 
have been made up of substances which, while they each possessed 


11g 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


individual tendencies contrary to those of some of the others, need 
not have been formally described as opposites, that is, for example, 
as the hard and the soft; but simply as fire, wind, iron, water, man, 
woman and so on. 


(iv) ‘ The assessment of Time’ 


The concluding phrase of the quotation, ‘according to the assess- 
ment of Time’, elaborates the injustice-metaphor. What kind of 
assessment does Time make? The word τάξις suggests the ordaining 
of punishment by a judge or, more aptly, the assessment of tribute 
(as in the Athenian tribute-lists). In these cascs what is ordained 
or assessed is the amount of the punishment or payment; this can 
hardly be the primary purpose of Tzme’s assessment. ‘Time must 
presumably control the time-limit for payment; the amount would 
be fixed, as total restitution plus a proportionate amende. The idea 
of a time-limit is appropriate: the injustice of summer has to be 
made good within the roughly equal period of winter, that of night 
during the period of day, and so on. No uniform period can be 
meant: Time makes the assessment to mect the particular case. 
That the additional idea of inevitability is implicit in the remark- 
able personification of Time here may be indicated by the strikingly 
similar ‘trial conducted by Time’ in Solon, roughly a generation 
before Anaximander: 


113 Solon fr. 24 Diehl, lines 1-7 
ἐγὼ δὲ τῶν μὲν οὕνεκα ξυνήγαγον 
δῆμον, τί τούτων πρὶν τυχεῖν ἐπαυσάμην; 
συμμαρτυροίη ταῦτ᾽ ἂν ἐν δίκῃ Χρόνου 
μήτηρ μεγίστη δαιμόνων ᾿Ολυμπίων 
ἄριστα, Γῆ μέλαινα, τῆς ἐγώ ποτε 
ὅρους ἀνεῖλον πολλαχῇ πεπηγότας" 
πρόσθεν δὲ δουλεύουσα, νῦν ἐλευθέρα. 


Here Earth justifics Solon’s claim because with the lapse of time she 
has become free; that is what Time’s trial signifies. No pre- 
determined time-limit is intended here. Elsewhere in Solon, too, 
it is the inevitability of retribution that is stressed again and again; 





nee nee 


1132 Why did I cease before I gained the objects for whose sake I brought together the 
people? The great mother of the Olympian deities would be my best supporting witness for 
this in the court of Time—black Earth, whose boundary-stones, fixed in many places, I 
once removed; formerly was she enslaved, now is she free. 


120 


ANAXIMANDER 


so in Anaximander, we may infer, injustice must inevitably be 
punished, sooner or later in time—but here the periods, since they 
are those of the great seasonal changes, as well as other less 
important ones, must be supervised and assessed appropriately to 
each case. 


(v) The original of Theophrastus’ paraphrase 


It has been suggested on pp. 117. that ‘from what things coming-to- 
be is for the things that are, destruction also takes place into these’ 
may be a paraphrase by Theophrastus of something in Anaxi- 
mander which Theophrastus thought could be recast into the 
common Aristotelian formula. If that statement in Anaximander 
immediately preceded his dictum about the retribution of oppo- 
sites (as the transitional phrase κατὰ τὸ χρεῶν may suggest), then 
it too was presumably concerned with the behaviour of opposites 
in the developed world. One sentiment, I suggest, which Anaxi- 
mander might have expressed in this context, and which could 
have deceived Theophrastus in the way indicated, was that 
opposite substances pay recompense each to its own opposite and 
to no other; for example the hot substance to the cold, and not to 
the heavy or the hard. This is a necessary hypothesis for Anaxi- 
mander’s theory of cosmic stability, obvious to us but not so obvious 
then, since Heraclitus also cmphasized it for his own special 
purposes. The axiom may have been stated in terms so general, 
and possibly in a context so isolated, that Theophrastus was able 
to mistake its proper reference. 


INNUMERABLE WORLDS 
(i) Successive rather than coexistent 


Plural worlds of some kind were attributed to Anaximander by 
Theophrastus: ‘. . .some other substance of infinite spatial extent, 
from which come into being all the heavens and the worlds in 
them’ (103A). The fragment, about things paying to each other 
the penalty for injustice, was adduced as somehow relevant to this 
process; in this Theophrastus seems to have been mistaken 
(pp. 118ff.). In the doxographical versions of Theophrastus we 
learn that these plural worlds were ἄπειροι, i.c. infinite or in- 
numerable. There has been much controversy as to whether these 
innumerable worlds were successive in time (so that our world will 
eventually pass away, to be succeeded by another, and so on), or 


121 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


coexistent. Zeller supported the former interpretation, Burnet the 
latter; Cornford demonstrated the fallacy of many of Burnet’s 
arguments and reinstated the Zellerian interpretation in general 
favour (see CQ 28 (1934) 1ff., and Principium Sapientiae 177 fF.). It 
may be accepted that if Anaximander believed in innumerable 
worlds it was in a series of successive single worlds and not in any 
form of coexistent worlds: as Cornford argued, there is ‘nothing 
in the appearance of nature’ to suggest the latter (except the 
heavenly bodies, which, however, were described by Anaxi- 
mander not as worlds but simply as gaps in fire-filled circles of air: 
see pp. 135ff.). Nor, it may be added, was thcre any mythological 
or other conceivable motive or precedent which might have 
persuaded him to elaborate here an anti-empirical theory. 


(ii) But are even successive worlds plausible in Anaximander? 


I have elsewhere suggested (CQ N.S. 5 (1955) 28ff.) that Anaxi- 
mander may in reality have believed in no type of innumerable 
worlds; and this suggestion is further argued here. The reader 
should be aware that the generally accepted view is that he 
believed in a succession of single worlds, each being produced by 
and destroyed into the Indefinite. This is not unlike what Theo- 
phrastus believed, and it possesses a prima facie credibility. If it is 
true, it is still worth emphasizing what a remarkable idea this was. 

If coexistent worlds might be suggested to some people (though 
not, as it happens, to Anaximander) by the heavenly bodies, there is 
nothing whatever in ‘the appearance of nature’ to suggest successive 
worlds—successive separate worlds, that is (for such are clearly 
meant by both Theophrastus and his modern followers), as 
distinct from successive changes in the state of the one continuing 
world. These last are envisaged in the mythical catastrophes by 
fire and flood described in Plato’s Timaeus, 22c—E, and were to 
some extent suggested by natural phenomena; cf. pp. 139f. We 
may take it that the Milesians were trying to account for the 
world as they experienced it; their explanations were often fanciful 
and dogmatic, but were none the less attempts to account for 
observed phenomena. Now there was no reason whatever to 
assume that the world was going to be destroyed, or that if 
destroyed it would be succeeded by another—an idea equally 
foreign to the naive mythopoeic view (it was not suggested in any 
Greek mythological source) and to the empirical analytic view. 


122 


ANAXIMANDER 


It is true that the world may at times have been treated as a kind 
of living organism—but the life was the immortal life of the gods, 
who are born, as the world was born, but who live for ever. It 
would be entirely contrary to the whole mythical background of 
Greek thought, and to the dictates of common sense, to believe in 
a cycle of separate worlds; and their appearance in Anaximander 
is extraordinary. But to anyone already familiar with Empe- 
docles’ radical changes of the ogaipos (pp. 326ff.) and with the 
atomist theory of Leucippus and Democritus, of innumerable 
worlds coming-to-be and passing away throughout infinite space 
(pp. 409 ff.), and already perhaps prone to misinterpret Heraclitus as 
having postulated a succession of worlds (p. 202 n.), the oddity would 
not be conspicuous. Given a specific motive Theophrastus might, 
therefore, have made a false and anachronistic attribution. Such 
a motive, it is suggested, was provided by the atomists’ arguments 
for innumerable worlds, as succinctly and influentially re-stated 
by Aristotle. 


(iit) Atomist arguments applied by Theophrastus to Anaximander? 

114 Aristotle Phys. 4, 203b23 .. .διὰ γὰρ τὸ ἐν τῇ νοήσει μὴ 
ὑπολείπειν καὶ ὁ ἀριθμὸς δοκεῖ ἄπειρος εἶναι καὶ τὰ μαθηματικὰ 
μεγέθη καὶ τὸ ἔξω τοῦ οὐρανοῦ - ἀπείρου δ᾽ ὄντος τοῦ ἔξω, καὶ σῶμα 
ἄπειρον εἶναι δοκεῖ καὶ κόσμοι τί γὰρ μᾶλλον τοῦ κενοῦ ἐνταῦθα ἢ 
ἐνταῦθα; 


This passage gives the fifth and most important motive, according 
to Aristotle, for the development of a concept of infinity. The 
argument that if what is outside the heaven 15 infinite then body is 
infinite, and that if body is infinite then worlds are infinite, is 
derived from the atomists, of whom Aristotle was undoubtedly 
thinking here. But the infinite worlds are necessitated by the 
postulate of infinite body, whether or not this is in turn argued (as 
by the atomists) from infinite void. On this reasoning Theo- 
phrastus might have been impelled to assume that the first and 
most notable believer in infinite body (as he thought)—namely 
Anaximander—also posited infinite worlds. These worlds would 








114 ...through not giving out in our thought, both number seems to be infinite and 
mathematical magnitudes and what lies outside the heaven. But ἐξ what lies outside is infinite, 
body also seems to be infinite, and worlds too: for why should they exist more in one part 
of the void than in another? 


123 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


behave like the atomists’ in that they would be coexistent and also 
successive—that is, coming-to-be and passing away continually. 
The assumption that all innumerable worlds are of this kind 
appears to be made by Aristotle in the latter part of 118. If we find 
evidence that Theophrastus treated Anaximander’s worlds as both 
coexistent and successive, this will suggest strongly that he was 
applying atomistic reasoning to Anaximander. 


(iv) The doxographical evidence may suggest that Theophrastus applied 
atomist-type worlds to Anaximander 


If one turns to the doxographical sources for further elucidation of 
Theophrastus’ views, the evidence is found to be confused and to 
some extent corrupt. Thus one of our twin sources for Aetius 
(ps.-Plutarch; cf. Aetius n, 1, 3, DK. 12417) assigns innumerable 
worlds only to the atomists, while the other (Stobaeus) assigns 
them in addition to Anaximander, Anaximenes, Archelaus, 
Xenophanes(!), and Diogenes of Apollonia. Neither version can 
correctly represent Theophrastus: but both could have arisen from 
a gencralization of the atomistic arguments. There was a further 
confusion in Aetius (1, 7, 12, DK. 12417) between the innumerable- 
world hypothesis and the common opinion that the stars were gods. 
These confusions (which are seen also in Cicero) are unlikcly to 
have been caused by a simple statement in Theophrastus that 
Anaximander postulated successive worlds. Two important wit- 
nesses had quite definite views: 


115 Simplicius Phys. 1121, 5 of μὲν yap ἀπείρους τῷ πλήθει 
τοὺς κόσμους ὑπτοθέμενοι, ὡς of περὶ ᾿Αναξίμανδρον καὶ Aeukitrtrov 
καὶ Δημόκριτον καὶ ὕστερον οἱ περὶ ᾿Επίκουρον, γινομένους αὐτοὺς 
καὶ φθειρομένους ὑπέθεντο ἐπ᾽ ἄπειρον, ἄλλων μὲν ἀεὶ γινομένων 
ἄλλων δὲ φθειρομένων, καὶ τὴν κίνησιν ἀίδιον ἔλεγον... .. 


This comment on 114 is probably Simplicius’ own, and does not 
directly reproduce Theophrastus. Simplicius might, however, be 
expected to be influenced by the Theophrastean interpretation; 
though we cannot be sure that he was not misapplying the atomist 
arguments, as Cornford thought. Yct the same interpretation 








115 For those who supposed the worlds to be infinite in number, like the associates of 
Anaximander and Leucippus and Democritus and afterwards those of Epicurus, supposed 
them to be coming-to-be and passing away for an infinite time, with some of them always 
coming-to-be and others passing away; and they said that motion was eternal.... 


124. 


ANAXIMANDER 


appears in a source earlier than Simplicius, and one which is 
dependent on the Theophrastean tradition through a different 
channel (there is a confusion with Anaxagoras in the first part): 


116 Augustinus C.D. vi, 2 non enim ex una re sicut Thales 
ex umore, sed ex suis propriis principiis quasquc res nasci putavit 
(sc. Anaximander). quae rerum principia singularum esse credidit 
infinita, ct innumerabiles mundos gignere et quaeccumque in cis 
oriuntur; eosque mundos modo dissolvi modo itcrum gigni 
existimavit, quanta quisquc actate sua manere potuerit. 


Worlds coming-to-be and passing away throughout space (or the 
Indefinite) are surely intended here; ‘quanta. . . potuerit’ suggests 
an irregularity which is foreign to the idea of a sequence of single 
worlds, but which is essential to the atomistic conception. 
t A passage in Cicero (N.D. 1, 10, 25, DK12A17) which ascribes to 
Anaximander worlds rising and setting ‘longis intervallis’ might point in 


the same direction, though certainty is impossible because of the ambiguity 
of ‘intervallis’ (spatial or temporal?). 


Thus two sources independent of cach other, the onc indirectly 
(herc) and the other directly influenced by the tradition from 
Theophrastus, assigned atomistic worlds to Anaximander. Further, 
such an ascription by Theophrastus himself, of worlds both 
coexistent and successive, would at least provide a possible motive 
for the confusion between the two in some parts of the dependent 
doxographical tradition on Anaximander. 


(v) Further considerations against and for the hypothesis 


Two difficulties of this interpretation must be mentioned. 

(a) It is possible from 111 that Aristotle meant to attribute 
plural worlds to the monistic physicists in general: the infinite 
primary substance, they said, ‘surrounds all the heavens (ovpa- 
vous)”. To mect this, it was proposed on p. 116 that Aristotle was 
using οὐρανοί in his special sense of ‘celestial spheres’: he meant 
‘everything enclosed by the first heaven’ and (perhaps because of 
the analogy of Anaximandcr’s circles) expressed this concept in 
language appropriate to his own cosmology. Certainly in 110 the 








116 For he [Anaximander] thought that things were born not from one substance, as 
Thales thought from water, but each from its own particular principles. These principles 
of individual things he believed to be infinite, and to give birth to innumerable worlds and 
whatsoever arises in them; and those worlds, he thought, are now dissolved, now born again, 
according to the age to which each is able to survive. 


125 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


infinite primary substance is said to enclose simply ‘all things’, and 
there is no suggestion elsewhere in Aristotle of innumerable 
separate worlds before the atomists. 

(6) If Theophrastus thought that anyone who postulated 
infinite material should also postulate innumerable worlds like the 
atomists, why did Simplicius write in 150 (the continuation of 115) 
that Anaximenes, whose primary substance was described as 
infinite by Theophrastus and Simplicius, believed in successive 
single worlds? ‘The distinction from Anaximander is puzzling on 
any interpretation. But Heraclitus and Diogenes are mentioned 
as sharing the belief; Simplicius certainly ascribed successive 
worlds to Heraclitus, and he may have thought that Anaximenes 
should be classed with him, as a believer in a specific primary 
substance, rather than with Anaximander and the atomists, whose 
ἀρχή was undifferentiated. There is also a possibility that Anaxi- 
mencs does not belong here at all: see ἢ. on p. 151. Nevertheless 
these two pieces of evidence, puzzling as they are, cannot be 
regarded as neutralized. On the other side there were three special 
characteristics of Anaximander’s cosmology which might well have 
encouraged an innumerable-world interpretation: (1) the theory 
that the earth was surrounded by a number—perhaps an in- 
definite number—of rings of the cclestial bodics (pp. 135 ff-); 
(2) the theory that the earth was drying up, which was probably 
part of a wider theory of cycles of change on the earth’s surface— 
a succession of κόσμοι in the sense of local arrangements (pp. 139f.) ; 
(3) the potential ambiguity of the fragment known to Theo- 
phrastus. This fragment seems properly to have described the 
interaction of substances within the world, but Theophrastus mis- 
applied it to interaction between the world and the Indefinite. 
Thus (1) might help to suggest coexistent worlds, (2) and (3) 
successive ones. ‘heophrastus may have applied atomistic argu- 
ments and imposed upon Anaximander worlds that were both. 


COSMOGONY 
(1) ‘Eternal motion’ and vortex: are they relevant to Anaximander? 
117 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 6, 2 (from 1038) .. .κίνησιν ἀίδιον εἶναι, 


ἐν 7) συμβαίνει γίνεσθαι τοὺς οὐρανούς. 








117 ...motion was eternal, in which it results that the heavens come into being. 


126 


ANAXIMANDER 


118 Aristotle Phys. ΘΙ, 250b11 Πότερον γέγονέ ποτε κίνησις. . . 
ἢ OUT’ ἐγένετο οὔτε φθείρεται ἀλλ᾽ ἀεὶ ἦν καὶ ἀεὶ ἔσται, Kal τοῦτ᾽ 
ἀθάνατον καὶ ἄταυστον ὑπάρχει τοῖς οὖσιν, οἷον φωή τις οὖσα τοῖς 
φύσει συνεστῶσι πᾶσιν;.. ἀλλ᾽ ὅσοι μὲν ἀπείρους τε κόσμους 
εἶναί φασι, καὶ τοὺς μὲν γίγνεσθαι τοὺς δὲ φθείρεσθαι τῶν κόσμων, 
ἀεί φασιν εἶναι κίνησιν... ὅσοι δ᾽ ἕνα, (ἢ cel) ἢ μὴ ἀεί, καὶ περὶ τῆς 
κινήσεως ὑποτίθενται κατὰ λόγον. 
119 Aristotle de caelo B13, 295a7 ἀλλὰ μὴν εἴ γε ἔστι κίνησίς τις 
κατὰ φύσιν, οὐκ ἂν ἡ βίαιος εἴη φορὰ μόνον οὐδ᾽ ἠρέμησις" ὥστ᾽ εἰ 
βίᾳ νῦν ἡ γῆ μένει, καὶ συνῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον φερομένη διὰ τὴν 
δίνησιν. ταύτην γὰρ τὴν αἰτίαν πάντες λέγουσιν ἐκ τῶν ἐν τοῖς 
ὑγροῖς καὶ περὶ τὸν ἀέρα συμβαινόντων ἐν τούτοις γὰρ ἀεὶ φέρεται 
τὰ μείφω καὶ τὰ βαρύτερα πρὸς τὸ μέσον τῆς δίνης. διὸ δὴ τὴν γῆν 
πάντες ὅσοι τὸν οὐρανὸν γεννῶσιν ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον συνελθεῖν φασίν. 

1 (ἢ ἀεὶ» (Ross) is supported by the comments of both Themistius and 

Simplicius. The sense is that those who postulate one cternal world also 

postulate cternal motion; those who postulate one non-etcrnal world do 


not. Note that successive single worlds (which would require eternal 
motion) are not included in this analysis. 


Theophrastus evidently stated that the Indefinite was characterized 
by an eternal motion, which was somehow responsible for the 
innumerable worlds. He likewise attributed eternal motion to 
Anaximenes, presumably because, like Anaximander, Anaxi- 
menes did not specify anything that could obviously act as a cause 
of change. Aristotle frequently rebuked the monists for this very 
fault; but 118 shows that he could on occasion understand their 
ways of thinking better than his pupil Theophrastus. ‘There he 
considers an ungenerated motion which is ‘deathless’, which 
inheres in things as a kind of life. He was thinking of Thales, 





118 Did motion come into being at some time...or did it netther come-to-be nor is it 
destroyed, but did it always exist and will it go on for ever, and 1s 1t immortal and un- 
ceasing for existing things, being like a kind of life for all natural objects? . . . But all who 
say that there are infinite worlds, and that some of them are coming-to-be and others passing 
away, say that motion always exists. ..while all who say that there is one world, whether 
eternal or not, make an analogous supposition about motion. 


119 Yet if indeed there is some kind of natural motion, there would not be enforced 
motion only, or enforced rest; so that if the earth now stays in place by force, it also came 
together to the centre by being carried there because of the vortex. (For this is the cause that 
everyone gives, through what happens in water and in air: for in these the larger and 
heavier objects are always carried toward the centre of the vortex.) Therefore all who 
generate the heaven say that the earth came together to the centre. 


127 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


perhaps (p. 97); but the phrase ‘immortal and unceasing’ 
reminds one of the phraseology which he attributed to Anaxi- 
mander, among others, in 110: he probably realized, then, that 
for Anaximander change in the cosmos was bound up with the 
divinity, the power of life and movement, of the Indefinite. What 
Theophrastus had in mind as Anaximander’s ‘eternal motion’ 
was probably some more explicit, mechanical kind of motion like 
that of the atomists, who are mentioned indirectly in the latter 
part of 118; we have seen (pp. 123 ff.) that Theophrastus may well 
have grouped Anaximander with the atomists over the question of 
innumerable worlds. Some modcrn scholars (e.g. Burnet) have 
held that Anaximander postulated a confused agitation like the 
winnowing motion in Plato’s Timaeus; others (e.g. Tannery) have 
assigned a circular motion to the Indefinite. Both are equally 
unlikely. It is highly improbable that Anaximander himself ever 
isolated this question of motion; the Indefinite was divine, and 
naturally possessed the powcr to move what and where it willed. 
To define its propertics further would defeat Anaximander’s 
purpose. 

One often reads of a vortex or vortices in Anaximander. There 
is in fact no evidence for this apart from Aristotle in 119, a highly 
involved piece of a priort reasoning in which the reference of 
‘therefore’ at the beginning of the last sentence is unclear. But in 
any case Anaximander was certainly not in Aristotle’s mind when 
he wrote this passage; for shortly afterwards (125) Anaximander 
is distinguished from the majority of the physicists on the ground 
that his earth remained at the centre by equilibrium and not by 
conventional kinds of ‘force’. This distinction and the sub- 
sequent discussion come as an appendix to the discussion of vortex- 
action, which is no longer under consideration; thus it may be 
accepted that Aristotle was talking loosely in saying in 119 that 
“all who generate the heaven say that the earth came together to the 
centre’, if this implics more than accretion. Vortices are not asso- 
ciated in our doxographical sources with anyone before Empe- 
docles, though Aristotle’s generalization in 119 would surely have 
led Theophrastus to mention earlier occurrences, had he been able 
to find them. It is, nevertheless, just possible that what was 
separated off from the Indefinite in the first stage of Anaximander’s 
cosmogony was a vortex, see p. 132; what is quite out of the ques- 
tion is either that the whole Indefinite was in vortex-motion, or 


128 


ANAXIMANDER 


that the diurnal movement of the heavenly bodies is due to this 
cause (which would not suit the earth’s cquilibrium in 125). The 
tendency of heavy bodies to the centre is assumed in most early 
cosmogonies. This may have been due in part, as implied in 119, 
to the observation of vortex-action in everyday experience; but in 
part it simply reflected the obvious arrangement of the components 
of the visible cosmos. 


(ii) How did the opposites come from the Indefinite? 


120 Aristotle Phys. A4, 187a20 (from 106) oi δ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ ἑνὸς 
ἐνούσας τὰς ἐναντιότητας ἐκκρίνεσθαι, ὥσπερ ᾿Αναξίμανδρός φησι 
καὶ ὅσοι δ᾽ ἕν καὶ πολλά φασιν εἶναι, ὥσπερ Ἐμπεδοκλῆς καὶ 
᾿Αναξαγόρας: ἐκ τοῦ μίγματος γὰρ καὶ οὗτοι ἐκκρίνουσι τἄλλα. 

121: Simplicius Phys. 24, 21 (continuing 103A) δῆλον δὲ ὅτι τὴν 
εἰς ἄλληλα μεταβολὴν τῶν τεττάρων στοιχείων οὗτος θεασάμενος 
οὐκ ἠξίωσεν ἕν τι τούτων ὑποκείμενον ποιῆσαι, ἀλλά τι ἄλλο παρὰ 
ταῦτα: οὗτος δὲ οὐκ ἀλλοιουμένου τοῦ στοιχείου τὴν γένεσιν ποιεῖ, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀποκρινομένων τῶν ἐναντίων διὰ τῆς ἀιδίου κινήσεως. 


It is almost certain from the first sentence of 121 that Simplicius 
is no longer quoting ‘Theophrastus, but giving his own paraphrase 
of what he has just quoted. In the second sentence he partly 
depends on the analysis by Aristotle in 106. ‘There are two notable 
differences between his comment and the Aristotclian original: 
(a2) the opposites are separated out (ἐκκρίνεσθαι) in Aristotle, 
separated off (ἀποκρινομένων) in Simplicius; (4) Simplicius, but 
not Aristotle, said that the separation was due to the eternal motion. 
Now it has been argued by U. Hoélscher (Hermes 81 (1953) 258£f.) 
that Simplicius in the second sentence of 121 (as at Phys. 150, 22) 
is simply and solely enlarging on Aristotle, and reproduces no 
Theophrastean interpretation whatever; this passage, therefore, is 
not good evidence for Anaximander unless Aristotle is reliable in 
120. But, the argument continues, Aristotle was prone to read his 








120 But the others say that the opposites are separated out from the One, being present in 
it, as Anaximander says and all who say there are one and many, like Empedocles and 
Anaxagoras; for these, too, separate out the rest from the mixture. 

121 It is clear that he [Anaximander], seeing the changing of the four elements into each 
other, thought it right to make none of these the substratum, but something else beside these; 
and he produces coming-to-be not through the alteration of the element, but by the separation 
off of the opposites through the eternal motion. 


9 120 ΚΑΒ 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


own simple bodies, and two pairs of basic opposites, into every- 
thing, and he perverted Anaximander by substituting separating 
out for separating off from the Indefinite, thus making this into a 
mixture of opposites. Theophrastus attributed separating off to 
Anaximander, but of the innumerable worlds and not of opposites 
(ἀποκεκρίσθαι in 103 6); and this, according to Hélscher, was the 
proper application of the word. Against this ingenious theory the 
following points may be made. The mention of the eternal motion 
by Simplicius is Theophrastean and not Aristotelian in source 
(see 117); so, apparently, is his use of the verb for separating off. 
Therefore, while it is agrecd that he was not here quoting Theo- 
phrastus, he probably did have Theophrastus’ assessment of 
Anaximander in mind. Further, H6dlscher has not succeeded in 
convincingly destroying a most damaging piece of evidence, 
passage 123. This continuation of Ps.-Plutarch’s doxography in 
103 states that ‘the productive from the eternal of hot and cold 
was separated off at the beginning of this world’, and continucs 
with details of the cosmogony. This, though garbled, represents 
Theophrastus, and shows that Theophrastus accepted separation 
off from the Indefinite, and opposites, as involved in Anaximander’s 
cosmogony. Since the extant fragment (112) suggests that the 
world is still composed of opposites, it seems legitimate to accept 
from both Theophrastus and Aristotle that oppositcs were involved 
in cosmogony. 

Nevertheless, we may accept the warning about ἐκκρίνεσθαι in 
Aristotle: it seems quite likely that this is a distortion of ἀπο- 
κρίνεσθαι. And according to 123 what was separated off was not 
opposite substances (flame and mist) but something that produced 
them. This might have been a kind of seed, it might have been a 
vortex; there was perhaps a confusion in the tradition (see p. 133). 
At all events we have no right to assume with Aristotle that the 
opposites were in (ἐνούσας) the Indefinite, and were separated out 
of it; still less may we define the Indefinite as a mixture, as Aristotle 
undoubtedly did.t The Indefinite was not clearly defined and 
analysed by Anaximander; but this does not mean, of course, that 
he might not have been making it behave, in respect of its pro- 
ducts, in some way like a compound—either a mechanical 
mixture or a fusion.2 If the opposites arose directly from the 
Indefinite by being separated off, as Simplicius states in 121, then 
the Indefinite was being unconsciously treated as unhomogeneous; 


130 


ANAXIMANDER 


for separation off cannot simply imply the isolation of one part of 
the Indefinite, that part which becomes the world: it implies this 
and some change in the isolated part. If this change was not the 
appearance of opposites, but of something productive of them, 
then one might infer that the Indefinite was the kind of thing that 
contained, for example, sperms or embryos: but that still does not 
mean that Anaximander thought of it as being of a specific 
character. 


1 Cf. 122 Aristotle Met. Δι, 1069b20_ ... Kai τοῦτ᾽ ἐστὶ Td "AvaEaydpou 
ἕν (βέλτιον yap ἢ ὁμοῦ πάντα) Kal ᾿Εμπεδοκλέους τὸ μίγμα Kal ᾿Αναξι- 
μάνδρου, καὶ ὡς Δημόκριτός φησιν. If 120 is doubtful, this passage 
certainly attributes a mixture to Anaximander. This uscd to be thought 
very scandalous. 


2 As suggested by Cornford and by Vlastos (CP 42 (1947) 170-2). 
Theophrastus is quoted by Simplicius (§07) as saying that the mixture of 
all things in Anaxagoras could be regardcd as ‘one substance indefinite 
both in kind and in size’, and that he would resemble Anaximander— 
but whether in the idea of mixture is not clear. 


(iii) The actual formation of the cosmos 


122 Ps.-Plutarch Strom. 2 (continuing 103 cand 1244; DK 12410) 
φησὶ δὲ τὸ ἐκ τοῦ dudiou γόνιμον θερμοῦ τε Kal ψυχροῦ κατὰ τὴν 
γένεσιν τοῦδε τοῦ κόσμου ἀποκριθῆναι καὶ τινὰ ἐκ τούτου φλογὸς 
σφαῖραν περιφυῆναι τῷ περὶ τὴν γῆν ἀέρι ὡς τῷ δένδρῳ φλοιόν᾽ 
ἧστινος ἀπορραγείσης καὶ εἴς τινας ἀποκλεισθείσῃς κύκλους ὑπο- 
στῆναι τὸν ἥλιον καὶ τὴν σελήνην καὶ τοὺς ἀστέρας. (Continues 


αἱ 137.) 


This passage (supplemented, for the heavenly bodies, by Hippo- 
lytus in 127) is virtually our only authority for Theophrastus’ 
report of the details of the cosmogonical process in Anaximander. 
The Stromateis are usually less accurate than cither Simplicius or 
Hippolytus in reproducing Theophrastus (cf. 103); but it cannot 
be doubted that the present passage is based on him, and the 
citation of the bark-simile, which looks as though it is derived 





122 ...and this is the One of Anaxagoras (for this is a better description than ‘all 
things together’) and the mixture of Empedocles and of Anaximander, and what Democritus 
describes. 

123 He says that that whichis productive from the eternal of hot and cold was separated off 
at the coming-to-be of this world, and that a kind of sphere of flame from this was formed 
round the air surrounding the earth, like bark round a tree. When this was broken off and 
shut off in certain circles, the sun and the moon and the stars were formed. 


I31 9-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


from Anaximander himself, suggests that in places, at least, the 
passage follows Theophrastus fairly closely. 

Theophrastus had previously stated (103 A, B, c) that innumer- 
able worlds came out of the Indefinitc; the present passage 
describes the emergence of our world, and is unaffected by 
whether or not Anaximander accepted successive worlds. The 
phrase ἐκ τοῦ ἀιδίου, ‘from the eternal’, perhaps means ‘from the 
Indefinite’, which was described as immortal. ‘The productive 
from the cternal of hot and cold...was separated off’ is still 
difficult. γόνιμος (productive) was a favourite Peripatetic word, 
which usually retained some flavour, if only a slight one, of 
biological generation. In the fifth century, on the other hand, 
γόνιμος only occurs twice, in Euripides and Aristophanes—the 
latter usc being a weakened metaphor—cxcept for a special 
medical-technical use (of critical periods in discase; the biological 
meaning is almost suppressed) in the Hippocratic Visits. It seems 
unlikely, therefore, that itis an Anaximandrean word; and in view 
of occurrences of the word, especially in Plutarch, as a dead 
metaphor with no biological implications we cannot be sure that 
it was here intended to represent gencration of a biological kind, 
however remotely. This must be emphasized because of the 
popularity of Cornford’s suggestion that this stage in Anaximander 
corresponds with the production of a cosmogonical egg in ‘ Orphic’ 
accounts (on which sce pp. 41-8). It would not be surprising to 
find that Anaximander resorted to the old mythological medium 
of sexual generation to account for the most difficult stage in 
world-formation—the production of heterogeneous plurality out 
of a single source, and that, here, an Indefinite one. One would 
not, however, expect a crude and explicit device like the egg; and 
the evidence is not certainly in favour of any such sexual device, 
however metaphorical. A completely different suggestion was 
made by Vlastos (CP 42 (1947) 171 ἢ. 140), that TO γόνιμον was 
not a thing so much as a process. A vortex, for instance, might 
well account for the appearance of opposites; for the phraseology 
we may compare Democritus fr. 167, Sivov ἀπὸ τοῦ παντὸς 
ἀποκριθῆναι (‘a vortex was separated off from the whole’).? Yet 
why did Theophrastus not simply use the word δῖνος or δίνη to 
describe a process completely familiar to him, and one which 
would further have emphasized the resemblance of Anaximander 
and Anaxagoras (n. 2 on p. 131)? If he had used the word, we 


132 


ANAXIMANDER 


should not have this vague circumlocution in ps.-Plutarch. It is 
at least a possibility that Theophrastus himself was in doubt about 
this first stage, perhaps through lack of full information, and used 
a vague expression to cover himsclf; but he would not have 
invented an intermediary between the Indefinite and the opposites 
(which could have been morc easily produced, as in 120, directly), 
and judgement must be reserved on its character. 


1 Another possibility is that the whole phrase means ‘that which was 
capable from all time of producing...’. In this case we should expect 
ἐξ ἀιδίου, without the article. But the insertion of ἐκ τοῦ ἀιδίου between 
τὸ and γόνιμον, on the other interpretation, is almost as strange. In any 
case, the tortuosity of exprcssion is not immediately due to Anaximander, 


and the obscure meaning is not greatly affected cither way. 


2 That ‘separating off’ can be applied to the products of a vortex, as well 
as to the vortex itself, is demonstrated by Anaxagoras fr. 9 init., οὕτω 
τούτων περιχωρούντων τε Kal ἀποκρινομένων ὑπὸ Pins Te Kal ταχυ- 
τῆτος... (1μ656 things thus revolving and being scparated off by force 
and speed. ..’). 


The nature of the hot (substance) and cold (substance) thus 
cryptically produced appears from what follows: they are flame 
and air-mist (the inner part of which is assumed to have condensed 
into carth). The ball of flame fits closely round the air, as closely 
as bark grows round a tree; this can be the point of the simile, 
which does not necessarily suggest that the flame is annular (though 
the eventual shape of the carth is cylindrical, see 124). So far, 
then, something has been isolated in the Indefinite which produces 
flame and air-mist; earth condenses at the core, flame fits closely 
round the air. Now the ball of flame bursts, breaks up into circles 
which are enclosed by mist which has also expanded (cf. 127), and 
forms the heavenly bodies. From 134 and 135 we learn that the 
moist earth is dried by the sun, the remnants of the moisture being 
sea.” 

1 It is possible that 123 contains other signs of biological-embryological 
language, apart from the dubious γόνιμον. H. C. Baldry (CQ 26 (1932) 
27 ff.) pointed out that ἀπόκρισις was used in embryological treatises to 
describe the separation of the seed from the parent; φλοιός could be used of 
a caul, and was perhaps used in a similar sense by Anaximander—see 136; 
ἀπορρήγνυσθαι is sometimes used of a new growth detaching itself from 
the parent body (which it can hardly mean here, contra Heidel and Baldry). 
But none of these words has an exclusively embryological sense; they are 


common terms (except φλοιός, which most frequently means ‘ bark’) 
which would naturally be applied to both embryology and cosmogony. 


133 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


COSMOLOGY: THE PRESENT STRUCTURE OF THE WORLD 
(i) The earth 

124 (A) Ps.-Plutarch Strom. 2 (B) Hippolytus Ref. 1, 6, 3 
ὑπάρχειν δέ φησι τῷ μὲν σχή- | TO δὲ σχῆμα αὐτῆς (sc. τῆς γῆς) 
ματι τὴν γῆν κυλινδροειδῆ, | γυρόν, στρογγύλον, κίονος λίθῳ 
ἔχειν δὲ τόσουτον βάθος ὅσον | παραπλήσιον τῶν δὲ ἐπι- 
ἂν εἴη τρίτον πρὸς τὸ πλάτος. πέδων ᾧ μὲν ἐπιβεβήκαμεν, ὃ δὲ 
ἀντίθετον ὑπάρχει. 

125 Aristotle de caelo B13, 295b10 εἰσὶ δέ τινες of διὰ τὴν 
ὁμοιότητά φασιν αὐτὴν (sc. τὴν γῆν) μένειν, ὥσπερ τῶν ἀρχαίων 
᾿Αναξίμανδρος. μᾶλλον μὲν γὰρ οὐθὲν ἢ ἄνω ἢ κάτω ἢ εἰς τὰ πλάγια 
φέρεσθαι προσήκει τὸ ἐπὶ τοῦ μέσου ἱδρυμένον καὶ ὁμοίως πρὸς τὰ 
ἔσχατα ἔχον᾽ ἅμα δ᾽ ἀδύνατον els τἀναντία ποιεῖσθαι τὴν κίνησιν, 
ὥστ᾽ ἐξ ἀνάγκης μένειν. 





126 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 6, 3 (preceding 1248) τὴν δὲ γῆν εἶναι 
μετέωρον ὑπὸ μηδενὸς κρατουμένην, μένουσαν δὲ διὰ τὴν ὁμοίαν 
πάντων ἀπόστασιν. 
t ὑγρόν, χίονι mss.; κίονι Aetius m1, 10, 2 (ὨΚ 12.4.25). γυρόν (Roeper) is 
plausible for the impossible ὑγρόν : originally meaning ‘curved’ (e.g. of a 
hook, or of hunched shoulders), it came to meanalso ‘round’. otpoyyvaAov, 


then, may be an interpolated gloss, I have emended χίονι to κίονος, 
exempli gratia; the sense is not in doubt. 


The earth is shaped like a column-drum; men live on its upper 
surface. It is three times as wide as it is deep—a ratio which is 
analogous to the distances of the heavenly bodies (pp. 136f.). Its 
evident stability is explained in a new way which represents a 
radical advance on Thales’ idea that it floated on water (an idea 
revived and modified by Anaximenes, p. 153). What the earth is 
at the centre of, presumably, is the rings of the heavenly bodies, of 





124 (A) He says that the earth is cylindrical in shape, and that its depth is a third of 
its width. (B) Its shape is curved, round, similar to the drum of a column; of its flat 
surfaces we walk on one, and the other is on the opposite side. 


125 There are some who say, like Anaximander among the ancients, that it [the earth] 
stays still because of its equilibrium. For it behoves that which is established at the centre, 
and is equally related to the extremes, not to be borne one whit more either up or down or to 
the sides; and it is impossible for it to move simultaneously in opposite directions, so that it 
stays fixed by necessity. 


126 The earth is on high, held up by nothing, but remaining on account of its similar 
distance from all things. 


134 


ANAXIMANDER 


which the sun’s is the largest (127). Anaximander was not talking 
of the world as a whole, or saying that it was at the centre of the 
Indefinite, though he would doubtless have accepted this if the 
idea were put to him. At all events he completely broke away 
from the popular idea that the earth must be supported by some- 
thing concrete, that it must have ‘roots’; his theory of equilibrium 
was a brilliant leap into the realms of the a priori—one which he 
would not have been tempted to take, it might be suggested, if 
vortex-action had been applied in his cosmogony and was at hand, 
as it were, to explain the stability of the earth. 


(ii) The heavenly bodtes 

127 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 6, 4-5 τὰ δὲ ἄστρα γίνεσθαι κύκλον πυρὸς 
ἀποκριθέντα τοῦ κατὰ τὸν κόσμον πυρός, περιληφθέντα δ᾽ ὑπὸ 
ἀέρος (cf. 123). ἐκπνοὰς δ᾽ ὑπάρξαι, πόρους τινὰς αὐλώδεις, καθ᾽ 
οὗς φαίνεται τὰ ἄστρα᾽ διὸ καὶ ἐττιφρασσομένων τῶν ἐκπνοῶν τὰς 
ἐκλείψεις γίνεσθαι. τὴν δὲ σελήνην ποτὲ μὲν ττληρουμένην φαίνεσθαι 
ποτὲ δὲ μειουμένην πταρὰ τὴν τῶν πόρων ἐπίφραξιν ἢ ἄνοιξιν. εἶναι 
δὲ τὸν κύκλον τοῦ ἡλίου ἑπττακαιεικοσαττιλασίονα {τῆς γῆς, ὀκτω- 
καιϊιδεκαπγλασίονα δὲ Tov) τῆς σελήνης, καὶ ἀνωτάτω μὲν εἶναι τὸν 
ἥλιον, κατωτάτω δὲ τοὺς τῶν ἀπλανῶν ἀστέρων κύκλους. 

128 Actius π, 20, 1 ᾿Αναξίμανδρος (sc. τὸν ἥλιόν φησι) κύκλον 
εἶναι ὀκτωκαιεικοσατλασίονα τῆς γῆς, ἁρματείῳ τροχῷ παραπλή- 
σιον, τὴν ἁψῖδα ἔχοντα κοίλην, πλήρη πυρός, κατά τι μέρος 
ἐκφαίνουσαν διὰ στομίου τὸ πῦρ ὥσπερ διὰ πρηστῆρος αὐλοῦ. 
(Cf. Aetius π, 25, 1, DK 12422, for the moon.) 

129 Aetius 1, 21, 1 ᾿Αναξίμανδρος (se. φησὶ) τὸν μὲν ἥλιον ἴσον 
εἶναι τῇ γῇ, τὸν δὲ κύκλον ἀφ᾽ οὔ τὴν ἐκπνοὴν ἔχει Kal ὑφ᾽ OU 
περιφέρεται ἑπττακαιεικοσαπλασίω τῆς γῆς. 





127] = The heavenly bodies come into being as a circle of fire separated off from the fire in 
the world, and enclosed by air. There are breathing-holes, certain pipe-like passages, at 
which the heavenly bodies show themselves; accordingly eclipses occur when the breathing- 
holes are blocked up. The moon is seen now waxing, now waning according to the blocking 
or opening of the channels. The circle of the sun is 27 times the size of (the earth, that of) 
the moon {18 times); the sun is highest, and the circles of the fixed stars are lowest. 


128 Anaximander says the sun is a circle 28 times the size of the earth, like a chariot 
wheel, with its felloe hollow and full of fire, and showing the fire at a certain point through 
an aperture as though through the nozzle of a bellows. 

1290 Anaximander says that the sun is equal to the earth, but that the circle from which it 
has its breathing-hole and by which it is carried round is 27 times the size of the earth. 


135 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


130 Actius u, 16, 5 ᾿Αναξίμανδρος ὑπὸ τῶν κύκλων Kal τῶν 
σφαιρῶν ἐφ᾽ ὧν ἕκαστος βέβηκε φέρεσθαι (sc. τοὺς ἀστέρας φησίν). 


The sun and moon arc each an aperture in separate solid rings 
like the felloes of cartwheels. These rings consist of fire surrounded 
by air (regarded as concealing mist), and out of the single 
aperture in each of them fire emerges like air from the nozzle of a 
bellows; the similes of the cartwhcels and the bellows perhaps 
derive from Anaximandcr himsclf. Eclipses, and phases of the 
moon, are due to a total or partial blocking of the aperture; 
typically, no motive is given for this blockage. The aperture of the 
sun is the same size as the surface (presumably) of the carth (129)— 
a reasonable view contradicted by Heraclitus in fr. 3; the diameter 
of its wheel is twenty-scven times as great as this (twenty-eight 
times in 128). The moon-whccl is nineteen earth-diameters (or 
eighteen, presumably) across; the obvious lacuna in 127 has been 
filled after Actius 11, 25, 1, which gives the corresponding informa- 
tion to 128 for the moon, only adding that the circles of sun and 
moon lie obliqucly. The star-whcels (on which see below), 
although we are not told so, were presumably of nine (or ten) 
earth-diamcters, being ncarest to the carth (127 /in.). Thus 
Anaximander gave the structure of the world a mathematical 
basis, developing the assumption (seen already in Homer and 
Hesiod, cf. 1 with comment) that it is orderly and determinable. 
His proportionate distances may have influenced Pythagoras. 
t This larger figure (28x) cannot represent the distance from the outer, as 
opposcd to the inner, edges of the celestial circle if diameters are meant; 
for 2, not 1, should then be added to the multiple, to give 29x. If the 
radius and not the diameter were intended the figures given would hold: 
but ‘the circle of the sun is twenty-seven times that of the earth’ (127, 
128)—the earth whose ‘breadth’ is specified in 124—implies clearly 
enough that the diamcter is really meant. In that case the larger figure 
might represent the diameter from outer edge to outer edge, the smaller 
one that from points half-way between the outer and inner edges of the 


actual felloe of air—assuming, what seems reasonable, that the felloe is one 
earth-diameter thick. 


The stars present certain difficulties. (a) 127 fin. mentions the 
fixed stars as closest to the earth. Possibly, as Diels thought, there 
is another lacuna here and the planets were mentioned too. That 








130 Anaximander says that the heavenly bodies are carried by the circles and spheres on 
which each one goes. 


136 


ANAXIMANDER 


the fixed stars and the planets were at the same distance from the 
earth is perhaps implied by Aetius nu, 15, 6 (DK 12418), and is 
suggcsted by the series of proportionate distances: 1 (diametcr of 
earth)—x—18 (moon-ring)—27 (sun-ring). Here x, the missing 
distance, must be that of the stars and planets: it must be 9, to fit 
into the series, and there is no vacant number to allow a diffcrent 
distance for stars and planets. (b) 130 mentions both circles and 
spheres of the stars (while 127 has a circle of stars at the beginning, 
circles at the end). The two are incompatible; possibly a sphere 
for the fixed stars, rings for the planets were meant. But this is 
inconsistent with the argument that fixed stars and planets must 
be at the same distance from the earth; there would not be room 
for both a sphere and rings. Indeed a sphere, although the 
simplest explanation of the fixed stars, is impossible: the cosmo- 
gonical account (123) showed that a ball of flame broke up, or 
broke away from the mist round the carth, and was then shut into 
circles (obviously of air-mist) which composed sun, moon and 
stars. There is no possibility, lect alone any mention, of part of the 
sphere of flame remaining as a sphere after it had broken away. 
Thus it must be assumed that each star, including the plancts, has 
its own wheel; these wheels are equal in diameter and arc inclined 
on countless different planes. They do not obscure the sun and 
moon (cf. e.g. Homer //. 20, 444ff.; 21, 549). If their centre is the 
same as the centre of the earth, the circum-polar stars (which do 
not set) are unexplained—as they would be even by a sphere; and 
yet if their centres were at different distances up and down the 
earth’s axis, which could account for some stars not setting, their 
distance from the earth would not be, as we are told it is, the same. 
Perhaps Anaximander did not think of this difficulty. The move- 
ment of the sun on the ecliptic, the declination of the moon, and 
the wanderings of the planets were probably explained as due to 
wind (see 134 and 135); the east-to-wcst movements were due to 
rotation of the wheels (cf. φέρεσθαι in 130) in the planes of their 
circumferences. 


(iii) Meteorological phenomena 


13: Hippolytus Ref 1, 6,7 ἀνέμους δὲ γίνεσθαι τῶν λεπτοτάτων 
ἀτμῶν τοῦ ἀέρος ἀποκρινομένων καὶ ὅταν ἀθροισθῶσι κινουμένων, 














131 Winds occur when the finest vapours of the air are separated off and when they are 


137 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ὑετοὺς δὲ ἐκ τῆς ἀτμίδος τῆς ἐκ τῶν ὑφ᾽ ἥλιον ἀναδιδομένης ᾿ kotTpaTras 
δὲ ὅταν ἄνεμος ἐκπίτπτων διιστᾷ τὰς νεφέλας.Σ 
132 Aetius it, 3,1-2 (περὶ βροντῶν ἀστραττῶν κεραυνῶν πρηστή- 
ρῶν τε καὶ τυφώνων.) ᾿Αναξίμανδρος ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος ταυτὶ ττάντα 
συμβαίνειν “ ὅταν γὰρ περιληφθὲν νέφει παχεῖ βιασάμενον ἐκπέσῃ τῇ 
λετττομερείᾳ καὶ κουφότητι, τότε ἡ μὲν ῥῆξις τὸν ψόφον, ἡ δὲ 
διαστολὴ παρὰ τὴν μελανίαν τοῦ νέφους τὸν διαυγασμὸν ἀποτελεῖ. 
1332 Seneca Qu. Nat. π, 18 Anaximandrus omnia ad spiritum 
rettulit: tonitrua, inquit, sunt nubisictae sonus... (see DK 12423). 
1 ἐκ τῆς ἀτμίδος---ἀναδιδομένης Cedrenus; the mss. give an obviously 
corrupt reading (DK 1 p.84n.) which implies if anything that the exhalation 
is from the earth. A dual exhalation was imposed also on Heraclitus 
(p. 204 n.1); it was probably a refinement by Aristotle. Cedrenus (11th 


cent. A.D.) is sometimes correct: e.g. his éxt{wtov in 131 is shown by 132 
to be correct against mss. ἐμτγίπττων. 


These passages suggest that Anaximander shared in, and perhaps 
to a large degree originated, a more or less standard Ionian way of 
accounting for meteorological (in our sense) events. The chief 
elements of this scheme are wind, the evaporation from the sea, 
and the condensed masses of vapour which form the clouds. All 
testimonies on the subject are, of course, based on Theophrastus, 
whom we may suspect of not always resisting the temptation to 
supply ‘appropriate’ explanations, where none existed, of certain 
natural phenomena which he thought interested all Presocratics. 
The explanation of wind in 131 (cf. also Aetius m, 7, 1, DK 12424) 
is very involved; note that it is somehow due to ‘separation off’ of 
the finest part of air. Rain is caused by the condensation (presum- 
ably) of moist vapours evaporated by the sun; wind causes most 
other phenomena (132, 133), including, probably, the movements 
north and south of sun and moon (see 134, 135). The emphasis on 
wind, a product of air, might suggest partial conflation with 
Anaximenes; he gave the same explanation of lightning as 





set in motion by congregation; rain occurs from the exhalation that issues upwards from the 
things beneath the sun, and lightning whenever wind breaks out and cleaves the clouds. 
132 (On thunder, lightning, thunderbolts, whirlwinds and typhoons.) Anaximander says 
that all these things occur as a result of wind: for whenever it 1s shut up in a thick cloud 
and then bursts out forcibly, through its fineness and lightness, then the bursting makes the 
noise, while the rift against the blackness of the cloud makes the flash. 

133 Anaximander referred everything to wind: thunder, he said, is the noise of smitten 
cloud.... 


138 


ANAXIMANDER 


Anaximander, but in an appendix to 132 is distinguished as having 
cited a special parallel (oars flash in water; see 161). 


(iv) The earth 1s drying up 

134 Aristotle Meteor. B1, 353b6 εἶναι γὰρ τὸ πρῶτον ὑγρὸν 
ἅπαντα τὸν περὶ τὴν γῆν τόπον, ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ ἡλίου ξηραινόμενον τὸ 
μὲν διατμίσαν πνεύματα καὶ τροπὰς ἡλίου καὶ σελήνης φασὶ ποιεῖν, 
τὸ δὲ λειφθὲν θάλατταν εἶναι" διὸ καὶ ἐλάττω γίνεσθαι ξηραινομένην 
οἴονται καὶ τέλος ἔσεσθαί πτοτε πτᾶσαν ξηράν. 


135 Alexander in Meteor. p. 67, 11 (DK 12.4.27) (commenting on 
134) ...TaUTNS τῆς δόξης ἐγένετο, ὡς ἱστορεῖ Θεόφραστος, 
᾿Αναξίμανδρός τε καὶ Διογένης. 


Alexander in 135 must mean the attribution by Theophrastus to 
apply to the whole of 134, not merely to the last sentence, since a 
little later (commenting on Meteor. 355a22) he associates Anaxi- 
mander and Diogenes again with the idea that winds cause the 
turnings of the sun. (In paraphrasing 134 hc had become confused 
and described another theory.) It1s helpful to have Theophrastus’ 
attribution, although it must be noted that the only name men- 
tioned by Aristotle in connexion with the drying up of the sea is that 
of Democritus (Meteor. B3, 356b10, DK 68a100). Aristotle had 
previously mentioned (Meteor. A14, 352a17) that those who 
believed the sea to be drying up were influenced by local examples 
of this process (which, we may note, was conspicuous around sixth- 
century Miletus) ; he himself rebuked them for their false inference, 
and pointed out that in other places the sea was gaining; also, 
there were long-term periods of comparative drought and flood 
which Aristotle called the ‘great summer’ and ‘great winter’ in a 
‘great year’. 

1 Here Aristotle may be aiming particularly at Democritus, who thought 

that the sea was drying up and that the world would come to an end. Anaxi- 

mander need not have thought this any more than Xenophanes did; in 


fact Aristotle might have bcen rebuking Democritus in terms of the 
earlier cyclical theory.—There may well be a special reference to Anaxi- 





134 For first of all the whole area round the earth is moist, but being dried by the sun the 
part that is exhaled makes winds and turnings of the sun and moon, they say, while that 
which is left is sea; therefore they think that the sea ts actually becoming less through 
being dried up, and that some time it will end up by all being dry. 


135 ...of this opinion, as Theophrastus relates, were Anaximander and Dtogenes. 


139 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


mander in Aristotle’s words (Meteor. B2, 355a22) ‘thosc who say... that 
when the world around the earth was heated by the sun, air came into 
being and the whole heaven expanded...’ (cf. 123). 


It is clear that if Anaximander thought that the sca would dry 
up once and for all this would be a serious betrayal of the principle 
enunciated in the extant fragment (112), that things are punished 
for their injustice: for land would have encroached on sea without 
suffering retribution. Further, although only the sea is mentioned, 
it is reasonable to conclude that, since rain was explained as due 
to the condensation of evaporation (131), the drying up of the sea 
would lead to the drying up of the whole earth. But could our 
whole interpretation of the fragment as an assertion of cosmic 
stability be wrong; could the drying up of the earth be the prelude 
to re-absorption into the Indefinite? This it could not be, since if 
the earth were destroyed by drought that would implicitly qualify 
the Indefinite itself as dry and fiery, thus contradicting its very 
nature; and, in addition, the arguments from the form of the 
fragment still stand. The principle of the fragment could, however, 
be preserved if the diminution of the sca were only one part of a 
cyclical process: when the sea is dry a ‘great winter’ (to use 
Aristotle’s term, which may well be derived from earlier theories) 
begins, and eventually the other extreme is reached when all the 
earth is ovcrrun by sea and turns, perhaps, into slime. That this 
is what Anaximander thought is made more probable by the fact 
that Xenophanes, another Ionian of a gencration just after Anaxi- 
mander’s, postulated cycles of the carth drying out and turning 
into slime: see pp. 177ff. Xenophanes was impressed by fossils of 
plant and animal life embedded in rocks far from the present sea, 
and deduced that the earth was once mud. But he argued, not that 
the sea will dry up even more, but that everything will turn back 
into mud; men will be destroyed, but then the cycle will continue, 
the land will dry out, and men will be produced anew. For 
Anaximander, too, men were born ultimately from mud (136, 138). 
The parallelism is not complete, but it is extremely closc: Xeno- 
phanes may have been correcting or modifying Anaximander. 
Anaximander, too, was familiar with the great legendary periods 
of fire and flood, in the ages of Phacthon and Deucalion; impressed 
by the recession of the sea from the Ionian coast-line he might well 
have applied such periods to the whole history of the earth. 


140 


ANAXIMANDER 


ZOOGONY AND ANTHROPOGONY 

136 Actius v, 19, 4 ᾿Αναξίμανδρος ἐν ὑγρῷ γεννηθῆναι τὰ 
πρῶτα Za φλοιοῖς περιεχόμενα ἀκανθώδεσι, πτροβαινούσης δὲ τῆς 
ἡλικίας ἀποβαίνειν ἐπὶ τὸ ξηρότερον καὶ περιρρηγνυμένουν τοῦ 
φλοιοῦ ἐπ᾽ ὀλίγον χρόνον μεταβιῶναι. 

137 Ps.-Plutarch Strom. ἔτι φησὶν ὅτι Kat’ ἀρχὰς ἐξ ἀλλοειδῶν 
ϑῴων ὁ ἄνθρωπος ἐγεννήθη, ἐκ τοῦ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα δι᾽ ἑαυτῶν ταχὺ 
νέμεσθαι, μόνον δὲ τὸν ἄνθρωπον πολυχρονίου δεῖσθαι τιθηνήσεως᾽ 
διὸ καὶ κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς οὐκ ἄν ποτε τοιοῦτον ὄντα διασωθῆναι. 


138 Censorinus de die nat. 4.7 Anaximander Milesius videri 5101 
ex aqua tcrraque calefactis exortos csse sive pisces seu piscibus 
simillima animalia; in his homines concrevisse fetusque ad puber- 
tatem intus retentos; tunc demum ruptis illis viros muliercsque 
qui iam se alere possent processisse. 

139 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 6,6 τὰ δὲ 2a γίνεσθαι (ἐξ ὑγροῦ» 
ἐξατμιφτομένου [Dicls, -όμενα mss.] ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου. Tov δὲ ἄνθρωπον 
ἑτέρῳ φῴῳ γεγονέναι, τουτέστι ἰχθύι, παραπλήσιον κατ᾽ ἀρχάς. 
140 Plutarch Symp. vim, 7308 (ὨΚ 12. 40) διὸ καὶ σέβονται (se. 
Σύριοι) τὸν ἰχθῦν ὡς ὁμογενῆ καὶ σύντροφον, ἐπιεικέστερον ᾽Αναξι- 
μάνδρονυ φιλοσοφοῦντες: οὐ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἐκεῖνος ἰχθῦς καὶ 
ἀνθρώπους, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἰχθύσιν ἐγγενέσθαι τὸ πρῶτον ἀνθρώπους 
ἀποφαίνεται καὶ τραφέντας, ὥσπερ οἱ γαλεοί,; καὶ γενομένους 
ἱκανοὺς ἑαυτοῖς βοηθεῖν ἐκβῆναι τηνικαῦτα καὶ γῆς λαβέσθαι. 


136 Anaximander said that the first living creatures were born in moisture, enclosed in 
thorny barks; and that as their age increased they came forth on to the drier part and, when 
the bark had broken off, they lived a different kind of life for a short time. 


137 Further he says that in the beginning man was born from creatures of a different 
kind; because other creatures are soon self-supporting, but man alone needs prolonged 
nursing. For this reason he would not have survived if this had been his original form. 
138 Anaximander of Miletus conceived that there arose from heated water and earth 
either fish or creatures very like fish; in these man grew, in the form of embryos retained 
within until puberty; then at last the fish-like creatures burst and men and women who were 
already able to nourish themselves stepped forth. 

139 Living creatures came into being from moisture evaporated by the sun. Man was 
originally similar to another creature—that is, to a fish. 

140 Therefore they [the Syrians] actually revere the fish as being of similar race and 
nurturing. In this they philosophize more suitably than Anaximander; for he declares, not 
that fishes and men came into being in the same parents, but that originally men came into 
being inside fishes, and that having been nurtured there—like sharks—and having become 
adequate to look after themselves, they then came forth and took to the land. 


141 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


1: Emperius’ γαλεοί for the impossible mss. τταλαιοί is a brilliant emenda- 
tion based on another passage in Plutarch, de soll. an. 33, 982, where the 
shark is said to produce an egg, then to nurture the young inside itself until 
it is bigger; Aristotle had noted this at H.A. Ζιο, 565b1. But ‘like 
sharks’ may well be a parenthetical remark by Plutarch (note the case: 
nominative not accusative), who knew about them indirectly from 
Aristotle; he would naturally quote them as an illustration of Anaxi- 
mander’s idea. Nearly all scholars, however, have chosen to think that 
Anaximander knew about the embryology of sharks: so e.g. Burnet, 
Mondolfo, Rudberg. This seems unlikely. 


The first living creatures are generated from slime (elsewhere 
called Aus) by the heat of the sun: this became a standard account, 
and even Aristotle accepted spontaneous generation in such cascs. 
The observation behind the theory was perhaps that of mud-flies 
and sand-worms which abound in the hot sand at the edge of the sea. 
Yet the first creatures were not of that kind, but were surrounded by 
prickly barks—like sea-urchins, Cornford suggested. Aetius (136) 
seems to preserve special information about these first creatures, 
which presumably were prior to the fish-like creatures in which men 
were reared. The use of φλοιός here reminds one of the bark-simile 
in the cosmogonical account (123) ; both ball of flame and prickly 
shell brokeaway from round thecore (here περι- not ἀπορρήγνυσθαι)". 

The meaning of the concluding words of 136 is disputed ; but yeta- 
in new late-Greek compounds usually implies change rather than 
succession, and thesensceis probably that the creatures, emerged from 
their husks, lived a different life (i.e. on land) fora short time longer. 
Possibly Anaximander hadsomeconception ofthe difficulties ofadap- 
tation toenvironment. This would benomorestartling than hisintelli- 
gent observation that man (with nine months’ gestation and many 
years’ helplessness) could not have survived in primitive conditions 
without protection of some kind. This consideration led to the con- 
jecture that man was reared in a kind of fish—presumably because 
the earth was originally moist, and the first creatures were of the sea. 

Anaximander’s is the first attempt of which we know to explain 
the origin of man, as well as of the world, rationally. Not all his 
successors concerned themselves with man’s history (they were 
more interested in his present condition), and none surpassed him 
in the thoughtful ingenuity of his theories. Incomplete and some- 
times inconsistent as our sources are, they show that Anaximander’s 
account of Nature, though among the earliest, was one of the 
broadest in scope and most imaginative of all. 


142 


CHAPTER IV 
ANAXIMENES OF MILETUS 


HIS DATE, LIFE AND BOOK 


14x Diogenes Laertius u, 3 ᾿Αναξιμένης Εὐρυστράτου Μιλήσιος 
ἤκουσεν ᾿Αναξιμάνδρου, ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ Παρμενίδου φασὶν ἀκοῦσαι 
αὐτόν. οὗτος ἀρχὴν ἀέρα εἶπε καὶ τὸ ἄπειρον. κινεῖσθαι δὲ τὰ 
ἄστρα οὐχ ὑπὸ γῆν ἀλλὰ περὶ γῆν. κέχρηταί τε λέξει ᾿Ιάδι ἁπλῇ 
καὶ ἀπερίττῳ. καὶ γεγένηται μέν, καθά φησιν ᾿Απολλόδωρος, περὶ 
τὴν Σάρδεων ἅλωσιν, ἐτελεύτησε δὲ τῇ ἑξηκοστῇ τρίτῃ ὀλυμπιάδι 
(528-525 Β.6.). 
It may be doubted whether the chronographical tradition knew 
more about Anaximenes’ date than the statement of Theophrastus 
(143) that he was an associate of Anaximander. The Succession- 
writers would establish him in the next philosophical generation 
to Anaximander, and Eratosthenes, followed by Apollodorus, 
would choose a suitable epoch-year for his acme, 1.6. the age of 
forty. The obvious epoch-year was that of the capture of Sardis by 
Cyrus, 546/5 B.c. (=Ol. 58, 3; Hippolytus Ref. 1, 7, 9, DK 1347, 
gave Ol. 58, 1, perhaps by a textual error). This puts his birth 
around the acme of Thales, his death around the commonly-chosen 
age of sixty, and makes him twenty-four years younger than 
Anaximander. This is all quite hypothetical; but we may accept 
what seems likely from his thought, that he was younger than 
Anaximander; while his active life can scarcely have continued 
far into the fifth century (Miletus was destroyed in 494 B.c.).? 
The mss. of Diogenes in 141 reverse the position of περὶ τὴν Σάρδεων 
ἅλωσιν and τῇ ἑξηκοστῇ τρίτῃ ὀλυμπιάδι. Diels emended (as printed 
here). G. B. Kerferd points out (Mus. Helvet. 11 (1954) 117ff.) that if the 
capture of Sardis werc that of 498 3.c., and γεγένηται meant (as it 


certainly can, and perhaps should) ‘was born’ rather than ‘flourished’, 
then the ms, text could be correct if Anaximenes died at the age of 30 or 





141 Anaximenes son of Eurystratus, of Miletus, was a pupil of Anaximander; some say 
he was also a pupil of Parmenides. He said that the material principle was air and the 
infinite; and that the stars move, not under the earth, but round it. He used simple and 
unsuperfluous Ionic speech. He was active, according to what Apollodorus says, around 


the time of the capture of Sardis, and died in the 63rd Olympiad. 
143 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


less. This seems unlikely in itself and, if true, would probably have earned 
comment in our sources. Further, it is unlikely that Apollodorus would 
have ignored Theophrastus’ connexion of Anaximenes with Anaximander 
(who according to Apollodorus was dead by 528); or that he would have 
used two separate captures of Sardis as epochs (he certainly uses that of 
546/5). Further, Hippolytus (DK 1347) supports a floruit at or near 546/5. 


About Anaximenes’ life, and his practical activities, we know 
nothing (cf. n. on p. 103). From the stylistic judgement in 141, 
however, it is known that he wrote a book, a part of which at least 
must have bcen known to Theophrastus, from whom the criticism 
presumably emanates. The ‘simple and unsuperfluous’ Ionic may 
be contrasted with the ‘rather poetical terminology’ of Anaxi- 
mander (112). 


AIR IN ANAXIMENES 


(i) Aur ts the originative substance and basic form of matter; it changes by 
condensation and rarefaction 

142 Aristotle Met. A3, 984a5 ᾿Αναξιμένης δὲ ἀέρα καὶ Διογένης 
πρότερον ὕδατος καὶ μάλιστ᾽ ἀρχὴν τιθέασι τῶν ἁπλῶν σωμάτων. 

142 Theophrastus ap. Simplicium Phys. 24, 26 ᾿Αναξιμένης δὲ 
Εὐρυστράτου Μιλήσιος, ἑταῖρος γεγονὼς ᾿Αναξιμάνδρου, μίαν 
μὲν καὶ αὐτὸς τὴν ὑποκειμένην φύσιν καὶ ἄπειρόν φησιν ὥσπερ 
ἐκεῖνος, οὐκ ἀόριστον δὲ ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνος ἀλλὰ ὡρισμένην, ἀέρα λέγων 
αὐτήν διαφέρειν δὲ μανότητι καὶ πυκνότητι κατὰ τὰς οὐσίας. καὶ 
ἀραιούμενον μὲν πῦρ γίνεσθαι, ττυκνούμενον δὲ ἄνεμον, εἶτα νέφος, 
ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ὕδωρ, εἶτα γῆν, εἶτα λίθους, τὰ δὲ ἄλλα ἐκ τούτων. 
κίνησιν δὲ καὶ οὗτος ἀίδιον ποιεῖ, δι᾽ ἣν καὶ τὴν μεταβολὴν γίνεσθαι. 
144 Hippolytus Ref. 1,7, 1 ᾿Αναξιμένης. .. ἀέρα ἄπειρον ἔφη τὴν 
ἀρχὴν εἶναι, ἐξ οὗ τὰ γινόμενα καὶ τὰ γεγονότα καὶ τὰ ἐσόμενα καὶ 
θεοὺς καὶ θεῖα γίνεσθαι, τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ ἐκ τῶν τούτου ἀπογόνων. (2) τὸ 





142 Anaximenes and Diogenes make air, rather than water, the material principle 
above the other simple bodies. 


143 Anaximenes son of Eurystratus, of Miletus, a companion of Anaximander, also 
says that the underlying nature is one and infinite like him, but not undefined as Anaxt- 
mander said but definite, for he identifies it as air; and it differs in its substantial nature by 
rarity and density. Being made finer it becomes fire, being made thicker tt becomes wind, 
then cloud, then (when thickened still more) water, then earth, then stones; and the rest 
come into being from these. He, too, makes motion eternal, and says that change, also, 
comes about through it. 


144 Anaximenes...said that infinite air was the principle, from which the things that 
are becoming, and that are, and that shall be, and gods and things divine, all come into 


144 


ANAXIMENES 


δὲ εἶδος τοῦ ἀέρος τοιοῦτον ὅταν μὲν ὁμαλώτατος 7, ὄψει ἄδηλον, 
δηλοῦσθαι δὲ τῷ ψυχρῷ καὶ τῷ θερμῷ καὶ τῷ νοτερῷ καὶ τῷ 
κινουμένῳ. κινεῖσθαι δὲ ἀεί" οὐ γὰρ μεταβάλλειν ὅσα μεταβάλλει, ef 
μὴ κινοῖτο. (3) τυκνούμενον γὰρ καὶ ἀραιούμενον διάφορον φαίνεσθαι" 
ὅταν γὰρ εἰς τὸ ἀραιότερον διαχυθῇ, wp γίνεσθαι, ἀνέμους δὲ πάλιν 
εἶναι ἀέρα πυκνούμενον, ἐξ ἀέρος {δὲν νέφος ἀποτελεῖσθαι κατὰ τὴν 
πίλησιν, ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ὕδωρ, ἐπὶ πλεῖον πυκνωθέντα γῆν καὶ εἰς 
τὸ μάλιστα πυκνότατον λίθους. ὥστε τὰ κυριώτατα τῆς γενέσεως 
ἐναντία εἶναι, θερμόν τε καὶ ψυχρόν. 


142, together with 153 and 162, is all that Aristotle had to say 
about Anaximencs by name, and our tradition depends on Theo- 
phrastus, who according to Diogenes Laertius v, 42 wrote a spccial 
monograph on him (see p. 4). A short version of Theophrastus’ 
account of the material principle is preserved by Simplicius in 143. 
In the present case Hippolytus’ version is longer than Simplicius’ ; 
but an inspection of 144 shows that this is mainly due to wordy 
expansion and additional (sometimes non-Theophrastean) inter- 
pretation. However, the expression πίλησις (πιλεῖσθαι), ‘felting’, 
for the condensation of air, is found also in Ps.-Plutarch’s sum- 
mary (1§1) and was probably used by Theophrastus; it was a 
common fourth-century term and need not have been used in this 
form by Anaximenes himsclf, contrary to what Diels and others 
Say. 

For Anaximenes the originative stuff was explicitly the basic form 
of matcrial in the differentiated world, since he had thought of 
a way in which it could become othcr components of the world, 
like sea or earth, without losing its own nature. It was simply 
condensed or rarefied—that is, it altered its appearance according 
to how much there was of it in a particular place. This met the 
objection which Anaximander seems to have felt against Thales’ 
water (pp. 112ff.), and which encouraged him to postulate an 





being, and the rest from its products. The form of air is of this kind: whenever it is most 
equable it is invisible to sight, but is revealed by the cold and the hot and the damp and by 
movement. It is always in motion: for things that change do not change unless there be 
movement. Through becoming denser or finer it has different appearances; for when it ts 
dissolved into what is finer it becomes fire, while winds, again, are air that is becoming 
condensed, and cloud is produced from air by felting. When it is condensed still more, water 
is produced; with a further degree of condensation earth is produced, and when condensed as 
far as possible, stones. The result is that the most influential components of generation are 
opposites, hot and cold. 


To 145 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


indefinite originative material. Anaximenes’ air, too, was in- 
definitely vast in extent—it surrounded all things (110 and 163), 
and was thus described as ἄπειρον, infinite, by Theophrastus. It is 
questionable exactly what he meant by air. ἀήρ in Homer and 
sometimes in later Ionic prose meant ‘mist’, something visible and 
obscuring; if Anaximander really talked of ‘the cold’ in cosmo- 
gony he probably meant a damp mist, part of which congealed to 
form a slimy kind of earth. Anaximencs probably said (163) that 
all things were surrounded by πνεῦμα καὶ ἀήρ, ‘wind (or breath) 
and air’, and that the soul is related to this air; which suggests that 
for him ἀήρ was not mist but, as Hippolytus in 144 assumed, the 
invisible atmosphcric air. This is confirmed by the fact that he 
evidently described winds as a slightly condensed form of air (143, 
144). Now atmospheric air was certainly not included as a 
world-component by Heraclitus (e.g. 221), and its substantiality— 
that is, corporcality—needed to be emphasized by Empedocles 
(453). It looks, then, as though Anaximenes simply assumed that 
some part, at least, of the atmospheric air was substantial, and 
indced the basic form of substance; although he did not offer any 
notable demonstration of its substantiality and so convince his 
immediate successors. This assumption would be a very remark- 
able one; though it must be remembered that πνεῦμα in the sense 
of breath was certainly regarded as existing, and yet it was 
invisible. It was not, however, totally insensible; its presence was 
revealed by tangible propcrties—in Hippolytus’ terms by ‘the cold 
and the hot and the moist and the moving’. Atmospheric air, on 
occasions, makes itself known by none of these things; probably 
in that state Anaximenes would not recognize it as alr, or as 
existing at all. 

The main forms assumed by air as a result of condensation and 
rarefaction were outlined by Theophrastus. They are obvious 
enough, and were clearly based on observation of natural pro- 
cesses—rain coming from clouds, water apparently condensing 
into earth, evaporation, and so on. Such changes were accepted 
by all the Presocratics; it was only Anaximenes who explained 
them solely in terms of the density of a single material. It may be 
asked why air was specified as the normal or basic form of matter; 
from the point of view of natural change within the world, water, 
equally, might be basic, with air as a rarefied variant. In view of 
163 (pp. 158ff.), where cosmic air is compared with the πνεῦμα or 


146 


ANAXIMENES 


breath which is traditionally conceived as the breath-soul or life- 
giving ψυχή, it seems that Anaximenes regarded air as the breath 
of the world, and so as its ever-living, and therefore divine, source; 
see also p. 161. Further, air might have seemed to possess some of 
the indefinite qualities of Anaximander’s originative stuff (not being 
naturally characterized by any particular opposite) ; in addition it 
had the advantage of occupying a large region of the developed 
world. Anaximenes seems at first sight to have abandoned the 
principle of general opposition in the world (it was shortly to be 
revived in a more Anaximandrean form, though with some modi- 
fication, by Heraclitus), and so to have lost even the metaphorical 
motives of injustice and retribution, for natural change. Yet one 
pair of opposites, the rare and the dense, took on a new and special 
significance, and it could legitimately be argued that all changes 
are due to the reaction of these two: see further p. 149. In 
addition, no doubt, Anaximenes shared Thales’ assumption that 
matter was somchow alive, which would be confirmed by the 
constant mobility of air—especially if this was only accepted as 
being air when it was perceptible. Theophrastus, as usual, reduced 
these assumptions to the formula of ‘eternal motion’, adding that 
all change would depend on this motion. 
τ Cf. 14§ Simplicius Phys. 149, 32 ἐπὶ yap τούτον (sc. Anaximenes) 
μόνον Θεόφραστος ἐν τῇ ‘lotopia τὴν μάνωσιν εἴρηκε καὶ ττύκνωσιν, δῆλον 
δὲ ὡς καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι τῇ μανότητι καὶ πυκνότητι ἐχρῶντο. There is no 
difficulty here (and no need for drastic expedients like the supposition that 
μόνου means πρώτου): ‘the others’ (e.g. Hippasus and Heraclitus in 
DK 2245) were loosely described by Theophrastus as using condensation, 
but only Anaximenes explicitly used the rare and the dense as an essential 


part of his theory. Simplicius then slightly misunderstood ‘Theophrastus’ 
comment on Anaximenes, which may indeed have been carelessly phrased. 


It appears that according to Theophrastus (‘the other things, 
from these’ in 143 fin., also in a vague and inaccurate paraphrase 
in 144 init.; cf. Cicero Acad. 11, 37, 118, DK. 1349) Anaximences did 
not think that every kind of natural substance could be explained 
as a direct form of air, but that there were certain basic forms (fire, 
air, wind, cloud, water, earth, stone) of which other kinds were 
compounds. If true, this is important, since it makes Anaximenes 
the pioneer of the idea that there are clements from which other 





145 For in the case of him [Anaximenes] alone did Theophrastus in the History speak 
of rarefaction and condensation, but it is plain that the others, also, used rarity and density. 


I 47 10-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


objects are compounded—an idea first formally worked out by 
Empedocles. Yet it seems questionable whether this interpretation 
is justified. There is no other evidence that anyone before 
Empedocles tried to give a detailed account of any but the main 
cosmic substances; having invented a device to explain diversity, 
it would be morc in the Milesian character for Anaximenes to have 
adhered to it; and Theophrastus was prone to add just such 
gencralizing summarics, often slightly misleading, to a specific list." 
1 Another probably false interpretation is that which makes Anaximencs 
the forcrunner of atomism. He cannot have conceived of matter as 
continuous, it is argued; thercfore, since there can be more or less of it in 
the same space, it must have been composed of particles which can be 
more or less heavily concentrated. But it seems unlikely that anyone 
before Pythagoras or Heraclitus bothered about the formal constitution of 


matter, or about precisely what was involved in condensation, which 
could be simply an objective description of certain observed processes. 


(ii) Hot and cold are due to rarefaction and condensation 


146 Plutarch de prim. frig. 7, 947F (DK13B1) .-. «ἢ καθάπερ 
᾿Αναξιμένης ὁ παλαιὸς Geto, μήτε TO ψυχρὸν ἐν οὐσίᾳ μήτε TO 
θερμὸν ἀπολείττωωμεν, ἀλλὰ πάθη κοινὰ τῆς ὕλης ἐπιγιγνόμενα ταῖς 
μεταβολαῖς" τὸ γὰρ συστελλόμενον αὐτῆς καὶ πυκνούμενον ψυχρὸν 
εἶναί φησι, τὸ δ᾽ ἀραιὸν καὶ τὸ ᾿χαλαρόν᾽ (οὕτω πῶς ὀνομάσας 
καὶ τῷ ῥήματι) θερμόν. ὅθεν οὐκ ἀπεικότως λέγεσθαι τὸ καὶ θερμὰ 
τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἐκ τοῦ στόματος καὶ ψυχρὰ μεθιέναι: ψύχεται γὰρ ἡ 
πνοὴ πιεσθεῖσα καὶ πυκνωθεῖσα τοῖς χείλεσιν, ἀνειμένου δὲ τοῦ 
στόματος ἐκπίτττουσα γίγνεται θερμὸν ὑπὸ μανότητος. τοῦτο μὲν 
οὖν ἀγνόημα ποιεῖται τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ὁ ᾿Αριστοτέλης. .... (Cf. Prodble- 
mata 34, 7, 9644 το.) 


Plutarch seems to have had access to a genuine citation from 
Anaximenes: the word yaAapos, ‘slack’, if no more, is definitely 
said to be his, and there is no reason to doubt it. Conceivably 
Plutarch depends on a lost passage of Aristotle; the passage from 








146 ...or as Anaximenes thoughi of old, let us leave neither the cold nor the hot as belong- 
ing to substance, but as common dispositions of matter that supervene on changes; for he says 
that matter which is compressed and condensed is cold, while that which is fine and 
“relaxed” (using this very word) is hot. Therefore, he said, the dictum is not an unreason- 
able one, that man releases both warmth and cold from his mouth: for the breath is chilled 
by being compressed and condensed with the lips, but when the mouth 1s loosened the breath 
escapes and becomes warm through its rarity. This theory Aristotle claims to be due to the 
man’s [sc. Anaximenes’] ignorance.... 


148 


ANAXIMENES 


the Aristotelian Problems discusses the phenomenon in the manner 
suggested in the continuation of 146, but without naming Anaxi- 
menes. The example of breath was evidently cited by Anaximenes 
as showing that rarefaction and condensation of air can produce, 
not merely obvious variations like those of hardness and softness, 
thickness and thinness, but a variation of the hot and the cold 
which seems to have little directly to do with density. On this 
evidence alone one would expcct the instance to be part of an 
argument that condensation and rarefaction can produce quite 
unexpected alterations, and so could be responsible for every kind 
of diversity. Hippolytus in 144, however, suggests that hot and 
cold play a vital part in coming-to-be: in other words Anaximcnes 
still attributed special importance to the chief cosmogonical sub- 
stances in Anaximander, the hot stuff and the cold stuff. There is 
no mention of this in Simplicius’ extract from Theophrastus (143), 
but Hippolytus or his immediate source is unlikely to be entirely 
responsible for it. It is, however, difficult to sec how these opposed 
substances could be basic in Anaximenes’ scheme of things, and it 
seems highly probable that ‘Theophrastus, seeing that some promi- 
nence was given to hot and cold in Anaximencs, suggested that 
they were for him, as they were for Aristotle and for Theophrastus 
himself, one of the essential elements of γένεσις. (The Peripatetic 
simple bodies were composed of prime matter informed by either 
hot or cold and cither wet or dry.) This interpretation is anachro- 
nistic, and Icaves us free to accept the natural one suggested by 
Plutarch himself, expressed though it still is in Peripatctic terms. 
But can even Anaximenes have thought that temperature varied 
directly with density? There is such a thing, for example, as hot 
stone or cold air. This difficulty might not have occurred to him, 
since in general it is true that the ascending scale of density repre- 
sents also a descending scale of temperature, from fire down to 
stones; air itself normally not striking one (at any rate in the 
Mediterranean) as consistently either hot or cold. Alternatively, 
the instance of breath compressed by the lips might seem to illu- 
strate that density can affect temperature, without implying that it 
always does so to the same degree." 


1 The instance of the breath is one of the first recorded Greek uses of a 
detailed observation to support a physical theory. Note, however, (i) that 
it is not strictly an ‘experiment’, i.c. the deliberate production of a chain 
of events the unknown conclusion of which will either confirm or deny a 


149 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


prior hypothesis; (ii) that because of lack of control and of thoroughness 
the conclusion drawn from the observation is the exact opposite of the 
truth; (ii) that the word λέγεσθαι may suggest that the observation was a 
common one, not made for the first time by Anaximenes. 


(iii) Aur ts divine 

147 Cicero V.D.1, 10, 26 post Anaximencs aera deum statuit 
cumque gigni esseque immensum et infinitum et semper in motu, 
quasi aut aer sine ulla forma dcus esse possit. . .aut non omne quod 
ortum sit mortalitas conscquatur. 

148 Aetius1, 7,13 ᾿Αναξιμένης τὸν ἀέρα (sc. θεὸν εἶναί φησι)" δεῖ 
δ᾽ ὑπακούειν ἐπὶ τῶν οὕτως λεγομένων τὰς ἐνδιηκούσας τοῖς 
στοιχείοις ἢ τοῖς σώμασι δυνάμεις. 

149 Augustinus C.D. ΝΠ, 2 iste (sc. Anaximander) Anaximenen 
discipulum et successorem reliquit, qui omnes rcrum causas aerl 
infinito dedit, nec deos negavit aut tacuit; non tamen ab ipsis 
aerem factum, sed ipsos ex aere ortos credidit. 


The first and third of these passages assert that according to 
Anaximenes a god or gods came into being from the primal air; 
Hippolytus also, in the first sentence of 144, wrote that ‘gods and 
things divine’ arose from air. Theophrastus, therefore, probably 
said more than that Anaximenes’ primal air itself was divine (cf. 
Aristotle’s assertion in 110 that Anaximander and most of the 
physicists considered their originative stuff to be divine). It is 
probable, then, that Anaximenes himself said something about 
gods: it may be reasonably inferred that this was to the effect that 
such gods as there were in the world were themselves derived from 
the all-encompassing air, which was truly divine. If so, Anaxi- 
menes might be a precursor of Xenophanes and Heraclitus in their 
criticisms of the deities of conventional religion; though there is no 
evidence that Anaximenes went so far as actually to deny their 
existence, any more than Heraclitus did. That air itself was divine 





147 Afterwards, Anaximenes determined that air is a god, and that it comes into being, 
and 1s measureless and infinite and always in motion; as though either formless air could be 
a god...or mortality did not attend upon everything that has come into being. 


148 Anaximenes (says that) the air (is god): one must understand, in the case of such 
descriptions, the powers which interpenetrate the elements or bodies. 

149 He [Anaximander] left Anaximenes as his disciple and successor, who attributed all 
the causes of things to infinite air, and did not deny that there were gods, or pass them over 
in silence; yet he believed not that air was made by them, but that they arose from air. 


150 


ANAXIMENES 


is implied both by Aristotle’s generalization and by Actius in 148, 
who gives a Stoicizing description of the kind of divinity involved 
as “powers permeating elements or bodies’, i.e. a motive and 
organizing capacity that inheres in varying degrees in the consti- 
tuents of the world. 


t It has sometimes becn maintained in the past (e.g. by Burnet, EGP 78) 
that Anaximenes’ gods are innumerable worlds. This is because according 
to Aetius 1, 7, 12 and Cicero N.D. 1, 10, 25 Anaximander’s innumerable 
worlds were called gods (DK 12A17). These statements sccm to have 
arisen from a confusion of the innumerable worlds with the stars; and 
Cicero cannot possibly have had the same kind of evidence for Anaxi- 
mcenes, since in the very next sentence, 147, he only mentions one god as 
coming into being (and confusedly describes it as infinite, i.e. as primal 
air). Therc are in fact only two doxographical indications that Anaximenes 
postulated innumerable worlds: Aetius nu, 1, 3 (Stob. only; see p. 124) 
and 150 Simplicius Phys. 1121, 12 γενητὸν δὲ kal φθαρτὸν τὸν Eva κόσμον 
ποιοῦσιν ὅσοι ἀεὶ μέν φασιν εἶναι κόσμον, οὐ μὴν τὸν αὐτὸν ἀεί, ἀλλὰ 
ἄλλοτε ἄλλον γινόμενον κατά τινας χρόνων περιόδους, ὡς ᾿Αναξιμένης τε 
καὶ Ἡράκλειτος καὶ Διογένης καὶ ὕστερον of ἀπὸ τῆς Στοᾶς. Here Simplicius 
appcars to assign successive worlds to Anaximenes. One possible reason for 
this is given on p. 126; but Simplicius’ passage is very closely based on 
Aristotle de caelo Ato, 279b12 (DK 22A10), in which Empedocles, not 
Anaximenes, precedes Heraclitus; and the possibility of contamination 
cannot be excluded. There is far less reason to assign innumerable worlds 
to Anaximenes than to Anaximander, from the state of the doxographical 
evidence; though something was probably said on the subject by Thco- 
phrastus, on the grounds that Anaximenes, too, postulated what Theo- 
phrastus considered to be an infinite originative stuff (see pp. 123 ff.). 


COSMOGONY 


151 Ps.-Plutarch Strom. 3 (cf. DK 1346) .. .γεννᾶσθαί te πάντα 
κατά τινα πύκνωσιν τούτον (sc. ἀέρος) Kal πάλιν ἀραίωσιν. τήν ye 
μὴν κίνησιν ἐξ αἰῶνος ὑπάρχειν πιλουμένου δὲ τοῦ ἀέρος πρώτην 
γεγενῆσθαι λέγει τὴν γῆν πλατεῖαν μάλα᾽ διὸ καὶ κατὰ λόγον αὐτὴν 
ἐποχεῖσθαι τῷ ἀέρι᾽ καὶ τὸν ἥλιον καὶ τὴν σελήνην καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ 
ἄστρα τὴν ἀρχὴν τῆς γενέσεως ἐκ γῆς ἔχειν. ἀποφαίνεται γοῦν 





150 All those make the one world born and destructible who say that there is always a 
world, yet it is not always the same but becoming different at different times according to 
certain periods of time, as Anaximenes and Heraclitus and Diogenes said, and later the 
Stoics. 

151: ...and all things are produced by a kind of condensation, and again rarefaction, of 
this [sc. air]. Motion, indeed, exists from everlasting; he says that when the air felts, 
there first of all comes into being the earth, quite flat—therefore it accordingly rides on the 
air; and sun and moon and the remaining heavenly bodies have their source of generation 


Ι51 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


τὸν ἥλιον γῆν, διὰ δὲ τὴν ὀξεῖαν κίνησιν Kal μάλ᾽ ἱκανῶς θερμότητα 
λαβεῖν [Zeller; θερμοτάτην κίνησιν λαβεῖν codd. plurimi]. 
152 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 7,5 γεγονέναι δὲ τὰ ἄστρα ἐκ γῆς διὰ τὸ 
τὴν ἰκμάδα ἐκ ταύτης ἀνίστασθαι, ἧς ἀραιουμένης τὸ πῦρ γίνεσθαι, 
ἐκ δὲ τοῦ πυρὸς μετεωριφομένου τοὺς ἀστέρας συνίστασθαι. 


Anaximencs presumably gave an account of the development of 
the world from undifferentiated air; as with Anaximander, only 
ps.-Plutarch summarizes the subject in general, and he does little 
more than apply the obvious changes of air (outlined by Theo- 
phrastus with reference to continuing natural processes, cf. the 
present tense of γίνεσθαι in 143) to what could be an a prior 
cosmogonical pattern. Only in the case of the formation of the 
heavenly bodies is there detailed information; here Hippolytus in 
1§2 is almost certainly right as against the last sentence of 151, 
which seems to impose on Anaximenes ideas from Xenophanes 
(ignition through motion) and Anaxagoras (the same, and sun 
made of carth; cf. pp. 155 ff. for another confusion). The heavenly 
bodies (ἄστρα) certainly originate from the carth, but only in 
that moist vapour is exhaled or evaporated from (the moist parts 
of) earth; this is further rarefied and so becomes fire, of which 
the heavenly bodies are composed. The formation of the earth had 
occurred by the condensation of a part of the indefinitely-cxtended 
primal air. No reason is cven suggested for this initial condensa- 
tion, except possibly the ‘eternal motion’; as with Anaximander, 
this was Theophrastus’ way of expressing the capacity of the divine 
originative stuff to initiate change and motion where it willed: see 
p. 128.% 


< As with Anaximander, there is no ground for postulating a vortex in 
Anaximenes except Aristotle’s generalization in 119; in Anaximenes’ case 
there is not even the mysterious ‘produccr of the hot and the cold’ to be 
accounted for. Yet Anaximenes was not implicitly excepted from the 
generalization, as Anaximander may have been (p. 128). However, 
Aristotle had reason a few lines earlier, 153, to class Anaximenes with 
Anaxagoras and Democritus (they all assumed that the earth remains 
stable because of its breadth); the two others certainly postulated a 





from earth. At least, he declares the sun to be earth, but that through the rapid motion it 
obtains heat in great sufficiency. 


152 The heavenly bodies have come into being from earth through the exhalation arising 
from it; when the exhalation is rarefied fire comes into being, and from fire raised on high 
the stars are composed. 


152 


ANAXIMENES 


vortex, and so Aristotle might have been content to class Anaximenes with 
them in this respect too—if he was not simply being careless in his use of 
‘all’, πάντες, in 119. Of course, as Zcller pointed out, vortex-action 
would produce the variations of pressure required for a cosmos; though 
Anaximenes did not in fact explain the heavenly bodies by direct rare- 
faction of the extremities. 


COSMOLOGY 
(1) The earth is flat and rides on atr 


153 Aristotle de caelo B13, 294b13 (DK 13A20) ᾿Αναξιμένης δὲ 
Kai ᾿Αναξαγόρας καὶ Δημόκριτος τὸ πλάτος αἴτιον εἶναί φασι τοῦ 
μένειν αὐτήν (sc. τὴν γῆν) οὐ γὰρ τέμνειν ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιτωματίτειν τὸν 
ἀέρα τὸν κάτωθεν, ὅπερ φαίνεται τὰ πλάτος ἔχοντα τῶν σωμάτων 
ποιεῖν ταῦτα γὰρ καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἀνέμους ἔχει δυσκινήτως διὰ τὴν 
ἀντέρεισιν. 

Anaximenes appears to have originated the conception of the earth 
as broad, flat and shallow in depth—‘table-like’ according to 
Aetius πὶ, 10, 3 (DK 13A20)—and as being supported by air. This 
idea was closely followed by Anaxagoras and the atomists (529 init. 
and p. 412), who in details of cosmology conservatively selected 
from the Ionian tradition. That the carth was supported by air was 
obviously an adaptation, encouraged no doubt by the observation 
of leaves floating in the air, of ‘Thales’ idea that the earth floated on 
water. Aristotle in the continuation of 153 was wrong in suggesting 
that support is provided because the air underneath is trapped 
and cannot withdraw: for Anaximenes the surrounding air was 
unbounded in any way, and was doubtless unthinkingly supposed 
to support the earth because of its indefinite depth—and because 
leaves do float on air. Theophrastus, judging from 151, 154, and 
Aetius m1, 15, 8 (DK 13420), wrote that according to Anaximenes 
the earth rides, ἐττοχεῖσθαι, on air: the verb occurs in Homer and 
could well have bcen used by Anaximenes. Aristotle’s ‘covers the 
air below like a lid’ is obviously his own expression, an improve- 
ment perhaps on Plato’s reference (Phaedo 998) to an unnamed 
physicist—Anaximenes or Anaxagoras or the atomists or all of 
them—who ‘puts air underneath as a support for the earth, which 
is like a broad kneading-trough’. 





153 Anaximenes and Anaxagoras and Democritus say that its [the earths] flatness is 
responsible for it staying still: for it does not cut the air beneath but covers it like a lid, 
which flat bodies evidently do; for they are hard to move even for the winds, on account 
of their resistance. 


153 


PRESOCRATIG PHILOSOPHERS 


(ii) The heavenly bodies 

154 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 7, 4 τὴν δὲ γῆν πλατεῖαν εἶναι ett’ ἀέρος 
ὀχουμένην, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἥλιον καὶ σελήνην καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ἄστρα 
πάντα πύρινα ὄντα ἐποχεῖσθαι τῷ ἀέρι διὰ πλάτος. 

155 Aetius Π, 13, 10 ᾿Αναξιμένης πυρίνην μὲν τὴν φύσιν τῶν 
ἄστρων, περιέχειν δέ τινα καὶ γεώδη σώματα συμπεριφερόμενα 
τούτοις ἀόρατα. 

156 Aetius Π, 23, 1 ᾿Αναξιμένης ὑπὸ πειττυκνωμένου ἀέρος καὶ 
ἀντιτύπου ἐξωθούμενα τὰ ἄστρα τὰς τροττὰς ποιεῖσθαι. 

157 Aetius u, 14, 3-4 ᾿Αναξιμένης ἥλων δίκην καταπετηγέναι 
τὰ ἄστρα τῷ κρνυσταλλοειδεῖ ἔνιοι δὲ πέταλα εἶναι ττούρινα ὥσπερ 
φωγραφήματα. 

1568 Aetius 11, 22, 1 ᾿Αναξιμένης πλατὺν ὡς πέταλον τὸν ἥλιον. 
159 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 7, 6 οὐ κινεῖσθαι δὲ ὑπὸ γῆν τὰ ἄστρα 
λέγει, καθὼς ἕτεροι ὑπειλήφασιν, ἀλλὰ περὶ γῆν, ὡσπερεὶ περὶ τὴν 
ἡμετέραν κεφαλὴν στρέφεται τὸ πιλίον. κρύτττεσθαί τε τὸν ἥλιον 
οὐχ ὑπὸ γῆν γενόμενον GAA’ ὑπὸ τῶν τῆς γῆς ὑψηλοτέρων μερῶν 
σκετπόμενον καὶ διὰ τὴν πλείονα ἡμῶν αὐτοῦ γενομένην ἀπόστασιν. 
160 Aristotle Meteor, Β1, 354a28 πολλοὺς πεισθῆναι τῶν 
ἀρχαίων μετεωρολόγων τὸν ἥλιον μὴ φέρεσθαι ὑτὸ γῆν ἀλλὰ περὶ 
τὴν γῆν καὶ τὸν τόπον τοῦτον, dpavizeoOar δὲ καὶ ποιεῖν νύκτα διὰ 
τὸ ὑψηλὴν εἶναι πρὸς ἄρκτον τὴν γῆν. 





154 The earth is flat, being borne upon air, and similarly sun, moon and the other 
heavenly bodies, which are all fiery, ride upon the air through their flatness. 

155 Anaximenes says that the nature of the heavenly bodies is fiery, and that they have 
among them certain earthy bodies that are carried round with them, being invisible. 

156 Anaximenes says that the heavenly bodies make their turnings through being pushed 
out by condensed and opposing air. 

157 Anaximenes says that the stars are implanted like nails in the crystalline; but some 
say they are fiery leaves like paintings. 

158 Anaximenes says the sun is flat like a leaf. 

159 He says that the heavenly bodies do not move under the earth, as others have supposed, 
but round it, just as uf a felt cap turns round our head; and that the sun is hidden not by 
being under the earth, but through being covered by the higher parts of the earth and 
through its increased distance from us. 

160 Many of the old astronomers were convinced that the sun 1s not carried under the 
earth, but round the earth and this region; and that it is obscured, and makes night, 
through the earth being high towards the north. 


154 


ANAXIMENES 


That the heavenly bodies were created by the rarefaction into fire 
of vapour from the earth was asserted in 152. Like the earth, they 
ride on air (154); though since they are made of fire, as 154 and 
155 confirm, and since fire is more diffuse than air, there is a 
difficulty which Anaximenes may not have seen in making them 
rest on air in the same way as the denser earth docs. That the 
movements of the sun on the ecliptic, of the moon in declination, 
and perhaps of the planets, are caused by winds (which are slightly 
condensed air, cf. 143) is suggested by 156; Aristotle had referred 
at Meteor. B1, 35365 and Ba, 355a21 (612) to old writers who had 
explained the first two of these three celestial motions in just this 
way. 157 creates a difficulty, however, in stating that the ἄστρα 
(which can mean all the heavenly bodies, or the fixed stars and the 
planets, or just the fixed stars) are attached like studs to the ice- 
like outer heaven (which according to 1§9 would be hemi- 
spherical), and not floating free. This could only apply to the fixed 
stars; but we hear nothing more about the ‘ice-like’, and indced 
the concept of a solid outer heaven is foreign to the little that is 
known of Anaximenes’ cosmogony and to the other details of 
cosmology. The same term was applicd three times by Aetius to 
Empcdocles’ heaven (which would be spherical), and at 1, 13, 11 
(437) he said that Empedocles’ fixed stars were bound to the 
ice-like, while the planets were free. It appears that this con- 
cept may have been mistakenly transferred to Anaximenes. The 
second part of 1§7 is introduced as an opinion held by ‘some 
people’; but since Anaximenes certainly held the heavenly bodies 
to be fiery, and since 1§8 compares the sun to a leaf, it looks as 
though he is the author of the opinion that they were fiery leaves, 
and as if the text is astray. What the comparison to paintings 
implies is quite uncertain. If Anaximenes is meant, the ἄστρα in 
question could be the heavenly bodies in general, or (if the first part 
is accepted) they could be the planets, which would be distin- 
guished, as by Empedocles, from the fixed stars on the ‘ice-like’. 
Presumably this last term refers to the apparent transparency of 
the sky; it represents an improvement, from the empirical point of 
view, on the Homeric solid metal bowl (p. 10). Such an improve- 
ment would not be uncharacteristic of Anaximenes; but the attri- 
bution of this view to him remains very doubtful.t The inaccuracy 
of doxographical attributions, particularly in Aetius, is probably 
demonstrated by the second part of 155. It is usually assumed that 


159 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Anaximenes postulated these invisible celestial bodies in order to 
explain eclipses; but according to Hippolytus 1, 8, 6 (DK 594 42) 
Anaxagoras, too, believed in them. Yet Anaxagoras knew the true 
cause of eclipses, therefore he cannot have postulated the invisible 
bodies for this purpose. The previous sentence in Aetius explains 
all: Diogenes of Apollonia postulated these bodies to explain 
meteorites like the famous one which fell at Aegospotami in 
467 B.c. (611). Anaxagoras, too, had probably bcen persuaded by 
this notable event to account for metcorites; but Anaximenes had 
no such good reason, and the theory was probably projccted on to 
him from his assumed follower Diogencs. In any case the theory 
concerned meteorites and not cclipses.? 


τ W. K. C, Guthrie (CQN.S. 6 (1956) 40ff.) suggests that the simile might 
conceivably be a physiological onc, since in Galen’s time, at least, ἧλος could 
be uscd for a spot or lump growing on the pupil of the eye, while the cornea 
itself was sometimes described as ‘ the ice-like membrane’, This membrane 
was regarded as viscous, not as solid; which removes one difficulty of the 
attribution to Anaximenes. The date of such terminology is not known; 
the simile might possibly have been supplied by Aetius or his immediate 
source, though this seems unlikely. 


2 Eudcemus(?) in the sequel to 78 (DK 13416) assigns to Anaximenes the 
discovery that the moon shines by reflected light. This is incompatible with 
the belief that the moon is fiery, and is probably due to another backward 
projection, this time of a belicf common to Xcnophancs, Parmenides and 
Empedocles. 


The heavenly bodies do not pass under the carth, but (as in the 
pre-philosophical world-picture, where the sun, at least, floats 
round river Okeanos to the north: see pp. 14f.) they move round it, 
like a cap revolving round our head as Hippolytus adds in 159. 
This image is scarcely likely to have been invented by anyone 
except Anaximenes. The cap in question is a closc-fitting, roughly 
hemispherical felt cap; conceivably it supports the dubious impli- 
cation of 1§7 that the heaven can be regarded as a definite (though 
perhaps a viscous) hemisphere, carrying the fixed stars. As has 
been remarked, this is merely a refincment of the naive view of the 
sky as a metal bowl. The second part of 1§9 adds that the sun is 
hidden (that is, in its passage from the west back again to the east) 
‘by the higher parts of the earth’ (also by its greater distance; this 
may be a doxographical addition). If the sun does not go under 
the earth, some explanation has to be given of why it is not visible 
at night. But do the ‘higher parts’ refer to high mountains in the 


156 


ANAXIMENES 


north—thce mythical Rhipaean mountains, that is—or to the actual 
tilting of the flat earth on its horizontal axis? The latter explana- 
tion was certainly ascribed to Anaxagoras, Leucippus, and 
Diogenes, who were strongly influenced by Anaximencs in cosmo- 
logical matters. This tilting would explain how the stars could set, 
supposing that they are somehow fixed in the heaven: they rotate 
on the hemisphere (whose pole is the Wain) and pass below the 
upper, northern edge of the carth but not below its mean horizontal 
axis. Yct attractive as this interpretation 15, it is made very doubtful 
by 160: here Aristotle refers to the theory of ‘higher parts’ (again, 
in ambiguous terms) as being held by many of the old astronomers. 
But his context, which is concerned with showing that the greatest 
rivers flow from the greatest mountains, in the north, makes it quite 
clear that he understands ‘the carth being high to the north’ to 
refer to its northern mountain ranges. It must be assumed that 
Aristotle was thinking in part of Anaximenes, details of whose 
cosmological views were known to him (cf. 153, 162); Anaxagoras 
and Leucippus, then, cither made an advance on Anaximencs hcre 
or were themselves misinterpreted later. A serious difficulty in the 
tilted-carth hypothesis is that the earth would not thus float on air, 
but would slip downwards as leaves do; this applics also to 
Leucippus’ earth. The cap-image must illustrate the hemi- 
spherical shape of the sky, not its obliquity; it is difficult, indeed, 
to sec why the cap should be imagined as being tilted on the 
head. Thus Anaximenes appears to have accepted the broad 
structure of the naive world-picture, but to have purged it 
of its more obviously mythological details like the sun’s golden 
bowl (which presumably helped to conccal its light during the 
voyage north). 


(111) Meteorological phenomena 

161 Aetiusi, 3,2 ᾿Αναξιμένης ταὐτὰ τούτῳ (sc. ᾿Αναξιμάνδρῳ), 
προστιθεὶς τὸ ἐπὶ τῆς θαλάσσης, ἥτις σχιφθομένη ταῖς κώπαις 
παραστίλβει. ΠΙ, 4, 1 ᾿Αναξιμένης νέφη μὲν γίνεσθαι τταχυνθέντος 
ἐπὶ πλεῖον τοῦ ἀέρος, μᾶλλον δ᾽ ἐπισυναχθέντος ἐκθλίβεσθαι τοὺς 








------.ο-. ee ee 


161 Anaximenes said the same as he [Anaximander], adding what happens in the case 
of sea, which flashes when cleft by oars.—Anaximenes said that clouds occur when the atr 
is further thickened; when it 1s compressed further rain is squeezed out, and hail occurs 


[57 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ὄμβρους, χάλαξαν δὲ ἐπειδὰν TO καταφερόμενον ὕδωρ παγῇ, χιόνα 
δ᾽ ὅταν συμπεριληφθῇ τι τῷ ὑγρῷ πνευματικόν. 

162 Aristotle Meteor.B7, 365b6 ᾿Αναξιμένης δέ φησι βρεχομένην 
τὴν γῆν καὶ ξηραινομένην ῥήγνυσθαι καὶ ὑπὸ τούτων τῶν ἀπορ- 
ρηγνυμένων κολωνῶν ἐμττιτττόντων σείεσθαι διὸ καὶ γίγνεσθαι τοὺς 
σεισμοὺς ἔν τε τοῖς αὐχμοῖς καὶ πάλιν ἐν ταῖς ὑπερομβρίαις᾽ ἔν τε 
γὰρ τοῖς αὐχμοῖς, ὥσπερ εἴρηται, ξηραινομένην ῥήγνυσθαι καὶ ὑπὸ 
τῶν ὑδάτων ὑπερυγραινομένην διαπίττειν. 


Anaximenes is said to have given the same explanation of thunder 
and lightning, in terms of wind, as Anaximander: see 132 and 
comment. The oar-image may be original. Clouds, rain, hail and 
snow are mainly due to the condensation of air, as one would 
expect; this was indicated by Theophrastus in 143, and Aetius 
(also Hippolytus, Ref. 1, 7, 7-8, DK 1347) adds further details. 
Winds, too, are slightly condensed air (143), and according to 
Hippolytus the rainbow was due to the reflexion of different sun- 
beams by air. Aristotle in 162 gives a relatively full account of 
Anaximenes’ explanation of earthquakes: note that air plays no 
part in this whatever. 


THE COMPARISON BETWEEN COSMIC AIR AND THE BREATH- 
SOUL 

163 Aetiusi, 3,4 ᾿Αναξιμένης Εὐρυστράτον Μιλήσιος ἀρχὴν τῶν 

ὄντων ἀέρα ἀπεφήνατο᾽ ἐκ γὰρ τούτου πάντα γίγνεσθαι καὶ εἷς 

αὐτὸν πάλιν ἀναλύεσθαι. οἷον ἡ ψυχή, φησίν, ἡ ἡμετέρα ἀὴρ οὖσα 


--.--ὄ ---ὄὄ----....... ......ψ.ὄἕ-Ὄ-΄. ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee 


ee ee ee «ὦ. .σὕὉ. ...ὄὄ ..-. «ὕ 


λέγεται δὲ συνωνύμως ἀὴρ καὶ πνεῦμα. ἁμαρτάνει δὲ καὶ οὗτος ἐξ 
ἁπλοῦ καὶ μονοειδοῦς ἀέρος καὶ πνεύματος δοκῶν συνεστάναι τὰ 
φτῷα...... (For continuation see DK 1982.) 











when the descending water coalesces, snow when some windy portion is included together 
with the moisture. 


162 Anaximenes says that the earth, through being drenched and dried off, breaks asunder, 
and is shaken by the peaks that are thus broken off and fall in. Therefore earthquakes 
happen in periods both of drought and again of excessive rains; for in droughts, as has been 
said, it dries up and cracks, and being made over-moist by the waters it crumbles apart. 
163 <Anaximenes son of Eurystratus, of Miletus, declared that air is the principle of 
existing things; for from it all things come-to-be and into it they are again dissolved. As 
our soul, he says, being air holds us together and controls us, so does wind [or breath] and air 
enclose the whole world. (Air and wind are synonymous here.) He, too, is in error in 
thinking that living creatures consist of simple and homogeneous air and wind.... 


158 


ANAXIMENES 


The underlined words here are commonly accepted as a direct 
quotation from Anaximenes. There must, however, have been 
some alteration and some re-wording: for the sentence is not in 
Ionic (cf. 141), and it contains one word, συγκρατεῖ, which could 
not possibly have been used by Anaximenes, and another, κόσμον, 
which is unlikely to have been used by him in precisely this sense." 
That the sentence does, however, represent some kind of reproduc- 
tion of a statement by Anaximenes is shown by Aetius’ comment 
that ‘air’ and ‘breath [or wind]’ have the same meaning here, and 
also by the fact that the comparison with the soul complicates the 
simple Aristotelian criticism which Aetius is reproducing, that 
Anaximenes did not specify a moving cause. On the other hand 
the use of pnoi, ‘he says’, does not guarantee a direct quotation in 
this kind of writing. περιέχει, of air enfolding all things, is quite 
likely to be Anaximenean, cf. 110; while the concept of the soul as 
breath (one suspects that πνεῦμα, not ἀήρ, originally stood in the 
first clause) is certainly an archaic one—compare the Homeric 
distinction between the life-soul, which normally scems to be 
identified with the breath, and the sensory and intellectual soul 
normally called θυμός. τὸν κόσμον could have replaced e.g. simply 
ἅπαντα, ‘all things’. ‘he degree of re-wording, then, probably is not 
very great; unfortunately we cannot determine whether, or how 
far, it affected the exact point and degree of comparison. 


t ouykpateiv is otherwise first used in Plutarch (twice), then in 2nd-cent. 
A.D. medical writers and Diog. L. (of restraining the breath etc.) ; also in 
the Geoponica and the Christian fathers. It is an unnatural compound 
which could only have occurred in the Κοινή; it is really a compendium for 
συνέχειν καὶ κρατεῖν. This is illustrated in Plut. Vit. Phoc. 12, συνεκράτει 
TO μαχιμώτατον τῆς δυνάμεως: he kept control of his troops by keeping 
them together (on a hill-top). κόσμος originally means ‘order’, and it is 
probably not established in the meaning ‘world-order’ until the second 
half of the fifth century B.c. It must have been used in descriptions of the 
order apparent in nature much before then, and probably by early 
Pythagoreans; Pythagoras himself is credited with using κόσμος = οὐρανός, 
but this is perhaps an over-simplification (Diog. L. vi, 48). Heraclitus’ 
κόσμον τόνδε (220) is probably transitional to the later and widely 
accepted usage, which appears unequivocally for the first time in 
Empedocles fr. 134, 5. (This passage was omitted by an oversight from the 
discussion in Kirk, Heraclitus, the Cosmic Fragments 312-14, and the conclu- 
sions there should be modified accordingly.) 


As it stands the comparison is not very clear: ‘Breath and air 
enclose (surround) the whole world in the way that our soul, being 


159 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


breath, holds us (i.e. our bodies) together and controls us.’ The 
similarity in the two cases cannot just be that of the subject, air, 
without further implication; it would be pointless to say, for 
example, “just as air dries moisture, so docs it fill balloons’. Four 
possibilities, out of many, may be mentioned: (i) συγκρατεῖ in 
Aetius has replaced a simple notion like συνέχει, and the meaning 
is ‘air holds us together, from inside, and the world together, from 
outside, (and therefore man and the world are more alike than at 
first appears), or {and therefore air is operative in the most diverse 
kinds of object)’. (ii) πτεριέχει carries with it the implication of καὶ 
κυβερνᾷ, cf. 110. ‘The meaning would then be ‘as our soul holds 
the body together and so controls it, so the originative substance 
(which is basically the same stuff as soul) holds the world together 
and so controls 7é’, supporting the inference ‘holds together there- 
fore controls’. (iii) ‘The soul, which is breath, holds together and 
controls man; therefore what holds together and controls the 
world must also be breath or air, because the world is like a large- 
scale man or animal.’ (iv) ‘The life-principle and motive force of 
man is, traditionally, πνεῦμα or the breath-soul; {πνεῦμα is scen in 
the outside world, as wind ὃ thcrefore the life-principle of the out- 
side world is πνεῦμα; (therefore wind, breath, or air is the life and 
substance of all things)..—Now it has been scen that the form 
συγκρατεῖ is impossible for Anaximenes, but the question also 
arises whether even a verb like συνέχει could, for him, have 
described the relation of the soul to the body. The fact is that the 
idea of the soul holding together the body has no other parallel in a 
Presocratic source, or indecd in any Greek source earlier than 
Stoic oncs and some of the later Hippocratic works. The concept 
involved is admittedly not a complex onc: for when the life-soul 
departs, the body, or most of it, obviously disintegrates, it is no 
longer held together. Nevertheless the absence of parallels, together 
with the knowledge that Anaximenes’ terminology has certainly 
been tampered with at this pomt, makes it unwise to accept the 
sense even of συνέχει here. This damages (11), but not (i) and (111); 
their main arguments can be re-stated with the substitution of 
‘possess’, for example, in place of ‘hold together (and control)’: 
for Anaximenes could certainly have held that the soul possesses, 
ἔχει, the body, meaning that it permeates the whole of it (cf. e.g. 
Heraclitus fr. 67a); and possibly, even, that it controls it. (iv) 
avoids emphasizing ovyKpatei, and depends in part on the fact 


160 


ANAXIMENES 


that Anaximenes’ is the first extant use of the word πνεῦμα, which 
became common (both for breath and for gust of wind) with the 
tragedians; its possible dual application could have led Anaximenes 
to the parallelism of man and the world. Indeed all three remain- 
ing interpretations, (iv) and the revised forms of (i) and (iii), 
express this parallelism in one form or another: it is the essence of 
the statement to be interpreted. Beyond that, to the particular 
form of the inference that must have been based upon it, we can 
hardly hope to penetrate with certainty. Yet the fully devcloped 
and clear-cut use of the inference from the known microcosm, man, 
to the unknown macrocosm, the world as a whole, does not other- 
wise appear until the latter part of the fifth century, under the 
influence, it is thought, of the new interest in theoretical medicine 
at that time; it is perhaps unlikely to occur in such a plain form as 
(iii) so early as Anaximenes. It is possible, moreover, that he did 
not argue so logically as even (i) or (iv) suggest; rather that a con- 
jecture about the world was zllustrated by reference to man and the 
soul, just as a dogma about the cause of lightning was illustrated 
by the example of the oar-blade, or that about the heavenly bodies 
by that of the cap on the head. This would be morc plausible as 
the first stage in the development of the man-world argument, and 
accords with Anaximenes’ known use of imagery. 

All this is necessarily very conjectural. It remains uncertain to 
what extent Anaximenes was tending to treat the world itself as 
alive, as a kind of huge animal organism; it has been noticed that, 
although he introduced a thoroughly rational description of 
change, Anaximenes in some respects clung to the framework of 
the popular, non-philosophical world-construction, and so might 
retain more of the old anthropomorphic attitude than at first sight 
seems probable. However, his perception that air is the cosmic 
equivalent of the life-soul in man goes far beyond that attitude; 
it must, in fact, have been an important motive for his choice of air 
as the originative substance." The mention of soul is important in 
itself; apart from gx it is the first Presocratic psychological state- 
ment to survive—though the actual structure of the soul envisaged, 
as breath, belonged to an age-old popular tradition. Another con- 
ception of the soul, as made of the fiery aither which also fills the 
outer sky, was accepted from another channel of the popular 
tradition by Heraclitus, who was also to develop the as- 
sumption, probably implicit in Anaximenes, that man and the 


II 161 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


outside world are made of the same material and behave ac- 

cording to similar rules. 
t It is perhaps odd that Aristotle did not name Anaximenes at de an. A2, 
405a21, where ‘ Diogenes and some others’ are named as holding the view 
that the soul is air: Aristotle is arguing that the Presocratics made the soul 
out of their ἀρχή. Plato, Phaedo 968 (what we think with is air), was 
probably referring to Diogenes of Apollonia (cf, PP. 437£.), who held that 
soul was warm air, thus perhaps conjoining the view of soul as aither or 


fire. ‘There is no reason to think with Vlastos (A7P 76 (1955) 364 and 
n. 56) that Diogenes was here exclusively indebted to Anaximenes. 


CONCLUSION 


Anaximenes is the last of the great Milesian thinkers. He was 
obviously indebted to Anaximander, but also probably to Thales, 
to whose concept of the originative stuff as an actual component of 
the world he was cnabled to return by his great idea of condensa- 
tion and rarefaction—an observable means of change by which 
quantity controls kind. This idea was probably accepted by Hera- 
clitus and submerged in a system of a rather diffcrent nature: for 
after the Milesians the old cosmogonical approach, according to 
which the most important object was to name a single kind of 
material from which the whole differentiated world could have 
grown, was enlarged and moderated. New problems, of theology 
and of unity in the arrangement, rather than the material, of 
things, exercised Anaximenes’ successors Xenophanes and Hera- 
clitus—although they too (even though the former migrated) were 
Tonians; still more basic departures from the Milesian tradition 
were made in the west. But when the fifth-century thinkers of the 
east and the mainland (Anaxagoras, Diogenes, Leucippus and 
Democritus) had recovered from the western elenchus of the 
Eleatics, it was to the Milesians, and particularly to Anaximenes, 
that they chiefly turned for details of cosmology ; doubtless because 
those details had been in part adapted from, and were still pro- 
tected by, the popular, non-scientific tradition. 


162 


CHAPTER V 
XENOPHANES OF COLOPHON 


DATE AND LIFE 


164 Diogenes Laertius x, 18 (DK2r1ar) Zevopdvns Ac€iou A, 
ὡς ᾿Απολλόδωρος, ᾿Ορθομένους Κολοφώνιος... οὗτος ἐκπεσὼν τῆς 
πατρίδος ἐν Ζάγκλῃ τῆς Σικελίας διέτριβε καὶ ἐν Κατάνῃ... .γέγραφε 
δὲ ἐν ἔπεσι καὶ ἐλεγείας καὶ ἰάμβους καθ᾽ Ἡσιόδου καὶ Ὁμήρου, 
ἐπικότπτων αὐτῶν τὰ περὶ θεῶν εἰρημένα. ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτὸς ἐρραψῴδει 
τὰ ἑαυτοῦ. ἀντιδοξάσαι τε λέγεται Θαλῇ καὶ Πυθαγόρᾳ, καθάψασθαι 
δὲ καὶ ᾿Επιμενίδου. μακροβιώτατός τε γέγονεν, ὥς Trou καὶ αὐτός 
φησιν᾿ 
(Fr. 8) ἤδη δ᾽ ἑπτά τ᾽ ἔασι καὶ ἑξήκοντ᾽ ἐνιαυτοὶ 
βληστρίφοντες ἐμὴν φροντίδ᾽ ἀν’ “Ἑλλάδα γῆν᾽ 
ἐκ γενετῆς δὲ τότ᾽ ἦσαν ἐείκοσι πέντε τε πρὸς τοῖς, 

εἴπερ ἐγὼ περὶ τῶνδ᾽ οἶδα λέγειν ἐτύμως. 
.. «(20) καὶ ἤκμαϑε κατὰ τὴν ἑξηκοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα. 
165 Clement Strom.1, 64,2 τῆς δὲ ᾿Ελεατικῆς ἀγωγῆς Ζενοφάνης 
ὁ Κολοφώνιος κατάρχει, ὅν φησι Τίμαιος κατὰ Ἱέρωνα τὸν Σικελίας 
δυνάστην καὶ ᾿Επίχαρμον τὸν ποιητὴν γεγονέναι, ᾿Απολλόδωρος 
δὲ κατὰ τὴν τεσσαρακοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα γενόμενον παρατετακέναι 
ἄχρι Δαρείου τε καὶ Kupou χρόνων. 


Xenophanes, as opposed to the Milesians, wrote in versc; and a 
number of fragments of his work have survived. If we assume that 





164 Xenophanes son of Dexios or, according to Apollodorus, of Orthomenes, of 
Colophon. ..he, being expelled from his native land, passed his time in Zanele in Sicily 
and in Catana....He wrote in epic metre, also elegiacs and tambics, against Hesiod and 
Homer, reproving them for what they said about the gods. But he himself also recited 
his own original poems. He is said to have held contrary opinions to Thales and Pytha- 
goras, and to have rebuked Epimenides too. He had an extremely long life, as he himself 
somewhere says: ‘ Already there are seven and sixty years tossing my thought up and down 
the land of Greece; and from my birth there were another twenty-five to add to these, if I 
know how to speak truly about these things.’...And he was at his prime in the 6oth 
Olympiad. 

165 Of the Eleatic school Xenophanes the Colophontan ts the pioneer, who Timaeus says 
lived in the time of Heron, tyrant of Sicily, and the poet Epicharmus, while Apollodorus 
says that he was born in the goth Olympiad and lasted until the times of Darius and 
Cyrus. 


163 11-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


he left Colophon in Ionia about the time of its capture by the 
Medes in 546/5 B.c. (he certainly knew it before this time, since in 
fr. 3, DK 2183, he referred to the corruption of the Colophonians 
by Lydian luxury), then from his own words in 164 he would have 
been born around 570 B.c., twenty-five years earlier. Even if this 
assumption is made, his great age—at least 92 from his words 
in 164—makes it impossible to assign his extant poetry to any 
narrow period. He referred to Pythagoras (268) and Simonides 
(DK 21821), as well as to Thales and Epimenides—no more is 
known than the bare fact of his reference to the last three—and 
was himself referred to by Heraclitus (193); and Parmcnides was 
later supposed to be his pupil. All this is possible enough if he 
lived from ca. 570 to ca. 475 B.c. The statement of Timaeus (the 
A4th/3rd century B.c. historian of Sicily) in 16§ 15 compatible with 
this assumption, since Hiero reigned from 478 to 467 B.c. and 
Epicharmus was at Syracuse during this time. Apollodorus is 
perhaps wrongly reported in 16§: Ol. 40 (620-617 B.c.) is 1m- 
probably early for Xenophanes’ birth, and ‘until the times of 
Cyrus and Darius’ is curious, since Cyrus died in 529 and Darius 
gained power in 521. Yet there is no absolutely positive evidence 
that Xenophanes died later than e.g. 525, when Pythagoras had 
not been long in Italy. However, Diogenes in 164, after men- 
tioning Apollodorus, put Xenophanes’ florwt in Ol. 60 (540- 
537 B.c.); this seems to be the truc Apollodoran dating, based on 
the epoch-year of the foundation of Elea (on which Xenophanes 
was said to have written a poem) in 540. | 

The details of Xenophanes’ life are even more uncertain. Born 
and brought up in Ionia, and obviously acquainted with the 
trends of Ionian thought, he was compelled to leave when a young 
man, and from then on lived a wandering life, chicfly perhaps in 
Sicily; his connexion with Elea may have becn a later invention 
(sec pp. 165f.). He was a poet and sage, a singer of his own songs 
rather than those of others: he was certainly not, as some have 
mistakenly assumed from 164, a Homeric rhapsode. In the longest 
of his extant elegies (fr. 1, which has no immediate philosophical 
relevance) he has authority enough to outline the rules of behaviour 
for the symposium that is to follow; he secms therefore to have been 
honourably received in aristocratic households. 


164. 


XENOPHANES 


THE ASSOCIATION OF XENOPHANES WITH ELEA 


166 Plato Sophist 242D (DK 21A29) τὸ δὲ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ᾿Ελεατικὸν 
ἔθνος, ἀπὸ Ζενοφάνους Te Kal ἔτι πτρόσθεν ἀρξάμενον, ὡς ἑνὸς ὄντος 
τῶν πάντων καλουμένων οὕτω διεξέρχεται τοῖς μύθοις. 

1670 Aristotle Met. A5, 986618 Παρμενίδης μὲν γὰρ ἔοικε τοῦ 
κατὰ τὸν λόγον ἑνὸς ἅπτεσθαι, Μέλισσος δὲ τοῦ κατὰ τὴν ὕλην διὸ 
καὶ ὁ μὲν πεττερασμένον, ὁ δ᾽ ἄπειρόν φησιν εἶναι αὐτό: Ζενοφάνης 
δὲ πρῶτος τούτων ἑνίσας (ὁ γὰρ Παρμενίδης τούτου λέγεται 
γενέσθαι μαθητής) οὐθὲν διεσαφήνισεν.. .. (For continuation see 
177.) 

It is commonly assumed in the doxographers that Xenophanes 
spent a part at least of his life in Elca, and that he was the founder 
of the Eleatic school of philosophy. This is exemplified in 165. That 
he was Parmenides’ mastcr stems from Aristotle in 167, and was 
categorically asserted by Theophrastus according to Simplicius 
(168). Yct Aristotle’s judgement possibly arises from Plato’s 
remark in 166. This remark was not necessarily intended as a 
serious historical judgement (one may compare the statements in 
the Theaetetus (152 D-E, 160 Ὁ) that Homer and Epicharmus were 
the founders of the Heraclitean tradition), as is confirmed by the 
addition of the words καὶ ἔτι πρόσθεν, ‘and even before’. The con- 
nexion between Xenophanes and Parmenidcs obviously depends 
on the superficial similarity between the motionless one deity of 
the former and the motionless sphere of Being in the latter— 
although it will be seen that Parmenides’ theorctical construction 
was reached in a quite different way from Xenophanes’, a way 
which is in fact incompatible. The extreme example of the treat- 
ment of Xenophanes as an Eleatic is seen in the pscudo-Aristo- 
telian de Melisso Xenophane Gorgia (DK 21428), a treatise written 
probably about the time of Christ in which Xenophanes’ god is 
explained in fully Eleatic terms, and the inference is drawn from 
Aristotle’s judgement in 167 that it was neither limited as in 





166 Our Eleatic tribe, beginning from Xenophanes and even before, explains in its 
myths that what we call all things are actually one. 

167 For Parmenides seems to fasten on that which 1s one tn definition, Melissus on that 
which is one in material; therefore the former says that it is limited, the latter that it is 
unlimited. But Xenophanes, the first of these to postulate a unity (for Parmenides ts said 
to have been his pupil), made nothing clear.... 


165 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Parmenides nor unlimited asin Melissus. Unfortunately Simplicius, 
who could not find at least some physical parts of Xenophanes’ 
poetry (de caelo 522, 7, DK 21447), relied on this treatise and 
quoted far less than usual from Theophrastus. Other evidence 
connecting Xenophanes with Elca is slight: he is said by Diogenes 
Laertius (ΙΧ, 20, DK21A1) to have written 2000 lines on the 
foundation of Colophon and the colonization of Elea, but this 
probably comes from the stichometrist and forger Lobon of Argos 
and is unreliable; while Aristotle (Rhet. B23, 1400b5, DK 21413) 
told an anecdote of some advice of his to the Eleans—but this was 
a ‘floating’ anecdote also connected with Heraclitus and others. 
It is not improbable that Xenophanes visited Elea; that was 
perhaps the extent of his connexion with it. He was not in any 
way typical of the new western trend in philosophy initiated by 
Pythagoras; nor was he typically Ionian, but since his ideas were 
a direct reaction from Ionian thcories and from the originally 
Ionian Homer he is placed in this book with the Ionians, and not 
in his probable chronological place after Pythagoras—like him an 
emigrant from castern to western Greece. 


HIS POEMS 


Some of Xenophancs’ extant fragments are in elegiac metre, some 
are hexamcters; while 170 consists of an iambic trimeter followed 
by a hexameter. This accords with Diogenes’ mention of these three 
metres in 164. Some at any rate of his pocms were called Σίλλοι, 
‘squints’ or satires, and the third-century B.c. ‘sillographer’ Timon 
of Phlius is said by Sextus (DK 21435) to have dedicated his own 
ZiAAo1 to Xenophancs, about whom he certainly wrote; see also 
DK 21A20-23. According to three late sources, Stobaeus (from an 
allegorizing author), the Geneva scholiast on the /iad, and Pollux 
(DK 21436, 21830, 21B39), there was a physical work by Xeno- 
phanes called Περὶ φύσεως, ‘On nature’. The value of this title has 
already been discussed (p. 101 and n. 2 on p. 102), and it is only 
to be expected that at least some later references to physical 
Opinions in Xenophanes should occur in this form. It is notable 
that Aetius, who also quoted the passages cited in the first two 
cases above, said nothing about a Περὶ φύσεως (DK 21 436 and 46). 
That Xenophanes wrote a formal work on physical matters seems 
questionable—though not so impossible as Burnet would have us 
believe (EGP 115f.). Theophrastus, we may observe, said that 


166 


XENOPHANES 


Xenophancs’ monistic conception was not ‘physical’ in the normal 
sense.* Xenophanes was not, like Anaximencs or Heraclitus, 
primarily engaged in giving a comprehensive cxplanation of the 
natural world. He was interested, without doubt, particularly in 
theology, and many of his remarks on physical topics are connected 
with that; others may have been ironical rejections of previous 
theories, and others again would naturally reflect the interest 
which many educated Greeks must have felt about natural 
problems at this time. Such remarks, together with comments on 
particular poets and thinkers (e.g. 169; cf. also DK 21 422), could 
have been expressed in separate pocms in a variety of metres— 
though the extant theological and physical fragments are nearly 
all in hexameters. There may have been a separate collection of 
convivial songs in elegiacs. 
I Cf. 168 Simplicius Phys. 22, 26 μίαν δὲ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἤτοι ἕν τὸ ὃν καὶ 
πᾶν (καὶ οὔτε πεπερασμένον οὔτε ἄπειρον οὔτε κινούμενον οὔτε ἠρεμοῦν) 
Ζενοφάνην τὸν Κολοφώνιον τὸν Παρμενίδου διδάσκαλον ὑποτίθεσθαί φησιν 
ὁ Θεόφραστος, ὁμολογῶν ἑτέρας εἶναι μᾶλλον ἢ τῆς περὶ φύσεως ἱστορίας 
τὴν μνήμην τῆς τούτον δόξης. Theophrastus is here misled by Aristotle in 
177 into thinking that Xenophanes’ one god is definitely non-physical, 
and is the whole of existence like the Parmenidean Being. But he can 


hardly have thought this if there was a poem which in any way resembled 
the works of the Milesians. 


HIS IMPORTANCE 


Widely different views have been held on the intellectual import- 
ance of Xenophanes. Thus Jaeger (Theology 52) writes of his 
‘enormous influence on later religious development’, while Burnet 
(EGP 129) maintained that ‘he would have smiled if he had known 
that onc day he was to be regarded as a theologian’. Burnet’s 
depreciation is certainly much exaggerated. Yet it is plain that 
Xenophanes differed considerably from the Milesians or Heraclitus 
or Parmenides. He was a poet with thoughtful intcrests, especially 
about religion and the gods, which led him to react against the 
archetype of poets and the mainstay of contemporary education, 
Homer. His attacks on Homeric theology must have had a deep 
influence both on ordinary men who heard his poems and on other 





168 Theophrastus says that Xenophanes the Colophonian, the teacher of Parmenides, 
supposed the principle to be single, or that the whole of existence was one (and neither 
limited nor unlimited, neither in motion nor at rest); and Theophrastus agrees that the 
record of Xenophanes’ opinion belongs to another study rather than that of natural philosophy. 


167 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


thinkers; Heraclitus’ attack on blood-purification and images 
(244), for example, was presumably influenced by him. His 
positive description of deity conceivably lay behind Aeschylus’ 
description of divine power in the Supplices (176). The assessment 
of the true relative merits of poets and athletes (fr. 2) was developed 
by Euripides in the Autolycus (fr. 282 Nauck, DK 2162); this is a 
less specialized instance of Xenophanes’ rational intellectualism. 
Nor is it safe to exaggerate his non-scientific character on the 
grounds of his theological interest; the study of gods was not 
divorced from that of nature, and the deduction from fossils 
(pp. 177), whether or not it reflects original observation, shows 
careful and by no means implausible argument from observed fact 
to general hypothesis—a procedure notoriously rare among the 
Presocratics. Some of his other physical statements are unutter- 
ably bizarre, but we cannot tell how scrious they were mcant to be. 
He was a critic rather than an original dogmatic, not a specialist 
but a true σοφιστής or sage, preparcd to turn his intelligence upon 
almost any problem (though as it happens we know of no political 
pronouncements)—which is why Heraclitus attacked him in 193. 
His opinions on almost all subjects deserve careful attention. 


THEOLOGY 


(i) Attacks on (a) the immorality, (b) the anthropomorphic nature, of the 
gods of the conventional religion 


169 Fr. 11, Sextus adv. math. 1x, 193 

πάντα θεοῖς ἀνέθηκαν “Ὅμηρός θ᾽ “Hoiodds τε 

ὅσσα παρ᾽ ἀνθρώποισιν ὀνείδεα καὶ ψόγος ἐστίν, 

KAETITELV μοιχεύειν τε καὶ ἀλλήλους ἀπατεύειν. 
170 «Fr. 14, Clement Strom. v, 100, 2 

ἀλλ᾽ of βροτοὶ δοκέουσι γεννᾶσθαι θεούς, 

τὴν σφετέρην δ᾽ ἐσθῆτα ἔχειν φωνήν τε δέμας τε. 
17:1 Fr. 16, Clement Strom. vu, 22, 1 

Ai€iotrés τε (θεοὺς σφετέρους) σιμοὺς μέλανάς τε 

Θρῇκές τε γλαυκοὺς καὶ πυρρούς {ζφασι πέλεσθαιν. 
169 Homer and Hesiod have attributed to the gods everything that is a shame and 
reproach among men, stealing and committing adultery and deceiving each other. 
170 But mortals consider that the gods are born, and that they have clothes and speech 
and bodies like their own. 
1971 The Ethiopians say that their gods are snub-nosed and black, the Thracians that 
theirs have light blue eyes and red hair. 





168 


XENOPHANES 


172 ΕἾ. 15, Clement Strom. v, 109, 3 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ χεῖρας ἔχον βόες {ἵπποι τ᾽) ἠὲ λέοντες, 
ἢ γράψαι χείρεσσι καὶ ἔργα τελεῖν ἅπερ ἄνδρες, 
ἵπγσπτοι μέν θ᾽ ἵπποισι βόες δέ τε βουσὶν ὁμοίας 
καί (Ke) θεῶν ἰδέας ἔγραφον καὶ σώματ᾽ ἐποίουν 
τοιαῦθ᾽ οἷόν περ καὐτοὶ δέμας εἶχον ζέἕκαστοιλ).ἵ 
1 171 is convincingly reconstructed by Diels from an unmetrical quota- 
tion in Clement. The supplements in 172 are respectively by Diels, 


Sylburg and Herwerden; the text as in DK. Line 1 of 170 is an iambic 
trimeter. 


Xenophanes’ criticisms are clear enough: first, the gods of Homer 
and Hesiod are often immoral—this is patently true; second, and 
more fundamental, there is no good reason for thinking that the 
gods arc anthropomorphic at all. Xenophanes brilliantly perccives, 
first that different races credit the gods with their own particular 
characteristics (this is an early example of the new anthropological 
approach which is seen in Herodotus and culminated in the φύσις-- 
νόμος distinction) ; second, as a reductio ad absurdum, that animals 
would also do the same. The conclusion is that such assessments 
are subjective and without valuc, and that the established picture 
in Homer (‘according to whom all have learned’, fr. 10) of gods as 
men and women must be abandoned. 


(ii) Constructive theology: there is a single non-anthropomorphic detty 
173 Fr. 23, Clement Strom. v, 109, 1 

εἷς θεός, Ev τε θεοῖσι καὶ ἀνθρώτπτοισι μέγιστος, 

οὔτι δέμας θνητοῖσιν ὁμοίιος οὐδὲ νόημα. 
174 Fr. 26 Ἐ25, Simplicius Phys. 23, τι +23, 20 

αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἐν ταὐτῷ μίμνει κινούμενος οὐδέν 

οὐδὲ μετέρχεσθαί μιν ἐπιπρέπει ἄλλοτε ἄλλῃ, 

ἀλλ᾽ ἀπάνευθε πόνοιο νόου φρενὶ πάντα κραδαίνει. 





172 But tf cattle and horses or lions had hands, or were able to draw with their hands 
and do the works that men can do, horses would draw the forms of the gods like horses, and 
cattle like cattle, and they would make their bodies such as they each had themselves. 
172 One god, greatest among gods and men, in no way similar to mortals either in body 
or in thought. 

174 Always he remains in the same place, moving not at all; nor 1s it fitting for him to 
go to different places at different times, but without toil he shakes all things by the thought 
of his mind. 


169 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


175 Fr. 24, Sextus adv. math. 1x, 144 
οὖλος ὁρᾷ, οὖλος δὲ νοεῖ, οὖλος δέ τ᾽ ἀκούει. 


τ Diog. L. rx, 19 (ΠΚ 914 1) implies that the concluding words are not 
οὔλος δέ τ᾽ ἀκούει but οὐ μέντοι ἀναπνεῖ. This is probably a later version 
by someone intcrested in Pythagorean cosmology. 


‘Greatest among gods and men’ in 173 should not be taken 
literally; men are mentioned by a ‘polar’ usage, as in Heraclitus 
fr. 30 (220), where this world-order was made by ‘none of gods or 
men’. This is simply an emphatic device, and for the same reason 
the plural of ‘gods’ need not be intended literally. In fact Xeno- 
phanes wrotc of ‘gods’ in other places also, e.g. in 191; partly, no 
doubt, this was a concession, perhaps not a fully conscious one, to 
popular religious terminology. It scems very doubtful whether 
Xenophanes would have recognized other, minor deitics as being 
in any way related to the ‘one god’, except as dim human pro- 
jections of it. The one god is unlike men in body and thought—it 
has, therefore (and also in view of 175), a body; but it is motion- 
less,t for the interesting reason that it is ‘not fitting’ for it to move 
around. Xenophancs thus accepts the well-established Greek 
criterion of seemliness. Not only is it unfitting for the god to move, 
but movement is actually unnecessary, for the god ‘shakes all things 
by the active will proceeding from his insight’ .? Thisinsight is related 
to sceing and hearing, but like them is accomplished not by special 
organs but by the god’s whole unmoving body. This remarkable 
description was reached, probably, by taking the very antithesis of 
the characteristics of a Homeric god. ‘That thought or intelligence 
can affect things outside the thinker, without the agency of limbs, 
is a dcvclopment—but a very bold onc—of the Homeric idca that 
a god can accomplish his end merely by implanting, for example, 
Infatuation (“Atn) in a mortal. That it was nevertheless a possible 
idea is shown by its acccptance and expansion by Aeschylus. 
t It was probably because of its motionless unity that Xenophanes’ god 
was identified with Parmenides’ Being, and later absorbed some of its 
properties. As early as Timon of Phlius it is called ‘equal in every way’ 
(ἴσον ἁπάντῃ, cf. μεσσόθεν ἰσοταλὲς πάντῃ in Parmenides, 351), and so 
becomes credited with spherical shape. Xenophancs may have described 
it as ‘all alike’ (ὁμοίην in Timon fr. 59, DK 21435), since this is implicit 


in the whole of it functioning in a particular way as in 175; its sphericity 
goes beyond the fragments and is highly dubious. 





—_—.- ee oe . 


175 = All of him sees, all thinks, and all hears. 





170 


XENOPHANES 


2 This translation is based on K. von Fritz, CP 40 (1945) 230, who has a 
good discussion of the sense of νόος and φρήν. The phrase νόον φρενί looks 
more curious than it is: it is obviously based on νόει φρεσί and νοέω φρεσί 
at Iliad 9, 600 and 22, 235 respectively. Further, κραδαίνει can only mean 
‘shakes’, which suggests that Xenophanes had in mind J]. 1, 530, where 
Zeus shakes great Olympus with a nod of his head. These are other 
indications that Xenophancs’ god is more Homeric (in a negative direction) 
than it scems. 


3 176 Acschylus Supplices 96-103 (Ζεύς) |ἰάπτει 8 ἐλπίδων [ἀφ᾽ 
ὑψιπύργων πανώλεις / βροτούς, βίαν δ᾽ οὔτιν᾽ ἐξοπλίτει. [ πᾶν ἄπονον 
δαιμονίων. {ἥμενος ὃν φρόνημά πῶς αὐτόθεν ἐξέπραξεν ἔμ- τας ἑδράνων 
ἀφ᾽ ἁγνῶν. In some ways this reminds one of Solon; we cannot be quite 
sure that Xcnophanes’ view of deity was as original as it now secms to be. 


(iii) Is the one god coextensive with the world? 


177 Aristotle Met. A5, 986b21 (for what precedes sce 167) 
... Zevopavns δὲ πρῶτος τούτων Evioas (ὁ yap Παρμενίδης τούτου 
λέγεται γενέσθαι μαθητής) οὐθὲν διεσαφήνισεν, οὐδὲ τῆς φύσεως 
τούτων οὐδετέρας (sc. formal or material unity) ἔοικε θιγεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ 
εἰς τὸν ὅλον οὐρανὸν ἀποβλέψας τὸ ἕν εἶναί φησι τὸν θεόν. 


Xenophanes arrived at the concept of one god by reaction from 
Homeric anthropomorphic polytheism; Parmenides arrived at the 
sphere of Being by logical inference from a purely existential 
axiom. The processes are absolutely different, and, as has already 
been emphasized, Parmenides is unlikely to have becn a pupil of 
Xenophanes, even though he might have noted the older poct’s 
view with some interest. Aristotle obviously could not understand 
what Xenophancs meant by his onc motionless god, but com- 
plained that he ‘made nothing clear’ and went on to dismiss both 
him and Melissus as being ‘rather too uncouth’ (μικρὸν ἀγροικό- 
tepo1). This puzzlement of Aristotle’s suggests that Xcnophanes 
did not produce a discursive elaboration of his theological views, 
which might not, indeed, have gone very far beyond the extant 
fragments on the subject. Aristotle’s implication that the one god 
was neither immaterial (as he thought Parmenidcs’ One to be) nor 


eee ee 9-0΄.--᾿ .-.-.. 0 








176 (<eus) hurls mortals in destruction from their high-towered expectations, but puts 
forth no force: everything of gods is without toil. Sitting, he nevertheless at once accom- 
plishes his thought, somehow, from his holy resting-place. 

177. .... but Xenophanes, the first of these to postulate a unity ( for Parmenides is said to have 
been his pupil), made nothing clear, nor does he seem to have touched the nature of either of 
these [sc. Parmenides’ formal unity or Melissus’ material unity]; but concentrating on the 
whole world he says that the One is god. 


171 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


material like Melissus’ One (cf. 167) was due to the presence of 
both corporeal and apparently non-corporeal elements in Xeno- 
phanes’ description—the body, δέμας, on the one hand (173), and 
the shaking of all things by intellect on the other (174). It is 
significant here that Aristotle did not adduce Anaxagoras’ Nous 
(which was the ultimate source of movement and the finest kind of 
body, and which permeated some but not all things) in illustration 
of Xenophanes’ deity. Instead he made the cryptic remark that 
Xenophanes ‘with his eye on the whole world said that the One was 
god’ (for οὐρανός can hardly mean ‘first heaven’ here). This 
clearly implies that god is identical with the world, which is what 
Theophrastus scems to have assumed (168). But Aristotle must be 
wrong here: how could the god be motionless if it is identical with 
a world which is itself implied to move (174)? It is probable, 
indeed, that although Xenophanes’ god is not a direct develop- 
ment from the cosmogonical tradition, yct it 15 to some extent 
based upon the Milesian idea of a divine substance which, in the 
case of Thales and Anaximenes, was regarded as somehow per- 
meating objects in the world and giving them life and movement. 
Yet Xenophanes cannot have precisely worked out the local re- 
lationship of the god on the one hand and the manifold world (which 
he cannot have intended to reject) ontheother. Aristotle, by treating 
him as a primitive Eleatic, misled the whole ancient tradition on this 
point. (It may be noted that if Xenophanes had even implied that 
the god lay outside the world, then Aristotle would have seized upon 
this as an anticipation of the Prime Mover.) The conclusion seems 
to be that Xenophancs’ god was conceived as the negation of 
Homeric divine properties, and was not precisely located—any 
more than the old Homeric gods were thought by Xenophanes’ 
contemporaries to be necessarily located on Olympus. It had a body 
of sorts because totally incorporeal existence was inconceivable, 
but that body, apart from its perceptual-intellectual activity, was 
of secondary importance, and so perhaps was its location. 


PHYSICAL IDEAS 

(i) Lhe heavenly bodies 

178 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 14, 3 τὸν δὲ ἥλιον ἐκ μικρῶν πυριδίων 
ἀθροιφομένων γίνεσθαι καθ᾽ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν, τὴν δὲ γῆν ἄπειρον 





tere ee = ----- - --.....-.. ie eC C$ .-... 


178 The sun comes into being each day from little pieces of fire that are collected, and the 
172 


XENOPHANES 


εἶναι καὶ μήτε ὑπ᾽ ἀέρος μήτε ὑπὸ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ περιέχεσθαι. Kal 
ἀπείρους ἡλίους εἶναι καὶ σελήνας, τὰ δὲ πάντα εἶναι ἐκ γῆς. 


179 -Ps.-Plutarch Strom. 4 (DK 21.4.22) τὸν δὲ ἥλιόν φησι καὶ τὰ 
ἄστρα ἐκ τῶν νεφῶν γίνεσθαι. 
180 Actius 0, 20,3 Zevopavns ἐκ νεφῶν πεπυρωμένων εἶναι τὸν 
ἥλιον. Θεόφραστος ἐν τοῖς Φυσικοῖς γέγραφεν ἐκ πυριδίων μὲν τῶν 
συναθροιτομένων ἐκ τῆς ὑγρᾶς ἀναθυμιάσεως, συναθροιζόντων δὲ 
τὸν ἥλιον. 
18: Fr. 32, 2 BLT in Ihadem 11, 27 

ἦν τ᾽ Ἶριν καλέουσι, νέφος Kal τοῦτο πέφυκε, 

πορφύρεον καὶ φοινίκεον καὶ χλωρὸν ἰδέσθαι. 
182 Aetius 11, 24,9 Zevopdvns πολλοὺς εἶναι ἡλίους καὶ σελήνας 
κατὰ κλίματα τῆς γῆς καὶ ἀποτομὰς καὶ zavas, κατὰ δέ τινα καιρὸν 
ἐκττίτττειν τὸν δίσκον εἴς τινα ἀποτομὴν τῆς γῆς οὐκ οἰκουμένην ὑφ᾽ 
ἡμῶν καὶ οὕτως ὥσπερ κενεμβατοῦντα ἔκλειψιν ὑποφαίνειν᾽ ὁ δ᾽ 
αὐτὸς τὸν ἥλιον εἰς ἄπειρον μὲν προϊέναι, δοκεῖν δὲ κυκλεῖσθαι διὰ 
τὴν ἀπόστασιν. 


There is a divergence in the doxographical accounts of the consti- 
tution of the heavenly bodies: were they a concentration of ficry 
particles as the sun is said to be in 178, the second part of 180, and 
ps.-Plutarch a few sentences before 179; or ignited clouds as is said 
of sun and stars in 179, of the sun in 180, and of the stars, which 
are said to re-kindle at night like embers, in Aetius Π, 13, 14, 
DK 21438? Theophrastus is named in 180 as supporting the 
former view, but the latter also, which is widely represented in the 





earth is infinite and enclosed neither by air nor by the heaven. There are innumerable suns 
and moons, and all things are made of earth. 

179 He says that the sun and the stars come from clouds. 

180 Xenophanes says that the sun is made of ignited clouds. Theophrastus in the 
Physical philosophers wrote that it is made of little pieces of fire collected together from 
the moist exhalation, and themselves collecting together the sun. 

181: What they call Iris [rainbow], this too is cloud, purple and red and yellow to 
behold. 

182 Xenophanes said there are many suns and moons according to regions, sections and 
zones of the earth, and that at a certain time the disc is banished into some section of the 
earth not inhabited by us, and so treading on nothing, as it were, produces the phenomenon 
of an eclipse. The same man says that the sun goes onwards ad infinitum, but seems to 
move in a circle because of the distance. 


173 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


doxographers, must somehow stem from him. It scems possible that 
the idea of the sun, at least, as a concentration of fire, which arose 
from the exhalation from the sea, is in part due to a conflation of 
Xenophanes with Heraclitus, who probably thought that the bowls 
of the heavenly bodies were filled with fire nourished in their 
courses by the exhalation (227). Heraclitus also thought that the 
sun was new evcry day, which accords with Xenophanes in 178. 
But Heraclitus was certainly influenced in other respects by Xeno- 
phanes, and the similarity here might be so caused. Yet are the 
two thcories as different as they appear to be at first sight? It 1s 
conceivable that the concentrations of fire resemble fiery clouds, and 
that some such statement in Theophrastus became dissected in 
the epitomces. Alternatively, the sun alone, because of its special 
brightness, might be a ‘concentration’ of fire, the other heavenly 
bodies being merely ignited clouds. That Xenophanes explained 
the rainbow as a cloud (a development, perhaps, of Anaximenes, 
cf. p. 158) is demonstrated by 181; according to Actius u, 18, 1 
(DK 21439) what we term St Elmo’s fire was due to little clouds 
ignited by motion, and perhaps this explains the καί ἢ 181 1. 1. Itis 
not safc to deduce from this particle that some heavenly bodies were 
clouds; though it seems possible that this was in fact Xenophanes’ 
view. It is notable that this (as opposed to some of his other ideas) 
is an entirely reasonable physical theory, which proves that 
Xenophancs cannot be classified solely as a theologian; though it 
is possible enough that his motive for giving physical explanations 
of the heavenly bodies was to disprove the popular conception of 
them as gods. This is certainly implied by the phrase ‘what men 
call Iris’ in 181. 

Hippolytus’ statement in 178 that there are ‘innumerable suns 
and moons’ scems to refer to the re-kindling of the sun (and 
presumably also of the moon) each day; but in 182 a completely 
different and much more bizarre explanation is given. There are 
many suns and moons in different regions, zones, or segments of 
the earth; eclipses of the sun are caused by our sun as it were 
treading on nothing and being forced into another segment not 
inhabited by ‘us’. The concluding sentence of 182, however, 
accords with the view of 178 that the sun is new every day. There 
is certainly a confusion here by Aetius or his source. It seems 
probable that the plurality of suns and moons is simply due to their 
being renewed each day; that Xenophanes explained eclipses as 


174 


XENOPHANES 


caused by the sun withdrawing to another region of the earth; and 
that the two ideas became confused. That the sun continues west- 
ward indefinitely looks like a deliberately naive statement of the 
anti-scientific viewpoint (Heraclitus perhaps reacted in a similar 
way to excessive dogmatism about astronomy, cf. fr. 3). It is 
possible that the segments of the earth were regarded as hollow 
depressions, as in the Phaedo myth; this might seem to account both 
for the sun’s apparent rising and setting and for its disappearance 
at eclipscs. Whatever is the true explanation, it is clear that 
Xenophanes permitted himself'a certain degree of fantasy here (and 
possibly, judging by the expression ‘treading on nothing’, of 
humour). Perhaps there was some kind of irony; at any rate the 
explanation of eclipses must be plainly distinguished from his more 
empirical, if not necessarily original, views on the actual consti- 
tution of the heavenly bodies.? 


1 The same combination of a bizarre original statement by Xenophanes 
and misunderstanding by the doxographers probably accounts for Aetius’ 
mention (11, 24, 4, DK 21 A 41) of a month-long, and a continuous, eclipse. 


(it) Lhe earth’s roots 
182 Fr. 28, Achilles [sag. 4, p. 34, 11 Maass 


γαίης μὲν τόδε Treipas ἄνω παρὰ ποσσὶν ὁρᾶται 
ἠέρι προσπλάτον, τὸ κάτω δ᾽ ἐς ἄπειρον ἱκνεῖται.ἷ 


1 ἠέρι Dicls, αἰθέρι Karsten, καὶ ῥεῖ mss. Both suggested emendations are 
possible, but the former is in every respect preferable: -e1 was written 
for -1 by a common mis-spelling, and then καὶ was substituted for what 
appeared to be an impossible disjunctive ἠὲ. 


Here Xenophanes gives an extreme kind of common-sense account, 
based upon the Hesiodic description of Tartarus as being as far 
below the earth as sky is above it (Theog. 720, cf. /l. 8, 16 and see 
p. 11). At Theogony 726f. (2) the roots of earth and unharvested sea 
are above Tartarus. Thus in the Hesiodic picture the earth 
stretched a defined distance downwards, but in reality this distance 
was obviously thought of as indefinitely vast—the height of the sky, 
in fact. Xenophanes was not seriously emending it in calling it 
‘indefinite’. That the earth does stretch downwards indefinitely is 





183 Ofearth this is the upper limit which we see by our feet, in contact with air; but tts 
underneath continues indefinitely. 


175 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


a naive but understandable view which Xenophanes probably 
intended as an implied criticism of the dogmatic theories of the 
Milesians on this subject. Aristotle (de caelo B13, 294a21, 
DK 21447) criticized Xenophanes and others for holding this 
view, on the grounds that they were being idle in not seeking a 
proper explanation. The first part of 183 is such an obvious state- 
ment of fact that it cannot have been intended as anything else; 
which confirms our interpretation of the second part. Ps.-Plutarch 
(Strom. 4, DK 21432) and Hippolytus in 178 state that the earth 
is not totally enclosed (περιέχεσθαι) by air. This is presumably 
a further deduction from 183. 


(iii) Water, or sea, and earth 
184 Fr. 29, Simplicius Phys. 189, 1 

γῆ καὶ ὕδωρ πάντ᾽ ἐσθ᾽ ὅσα yivovt’ ἠδὲ φύονται. 
185 Fr. 33, Sextus adv. math. x, 34, 

πάντες γὰρ γαίης τε καὶ ὕδατος ἐκγενόμεσθα. 


186 Fr. 30, Σ Genav. in Lliadem 21, 196 
πηγὴ δ᾽ ἐστὶ θάλασσ᾽ ὕδατος, πηγὴ δ᾽ ἀνέμοιο᾽ 
οὔτε γὰρ ἐν νέφεσιν {γίνοιτό κε is ἀνέμοιο 
Extrvelovtos) ἔσωθεν ἄνευ πόντου μεγάλοιο 
οὔτε ῥοαὶ ποταμῶν οὔτ᾽ αἰ(θέρος) ὄμβριον ὕδωρ, 
ἀλλὰ μέγας πόντος γενέτωρ νεφέων ἀνέμων τε 
καὶ ποταμῶν. 


The idea that everything, men included, is composed of and 
originates from water and earth is a naive popular one: flesh and 
bone may be compared with earth and stone, blood with water. 
Compare our burial service, ‘earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to 
dust’; and Iliad 7, 99, ‘but may you all become earth and water’. 
Further, the surface of the carth, that which lies by our feet (183), 
is obviously broadly composed of earth and sea. Xenophanes takes 
this simple apprehension and develops it into a rudimentary 





184 All things that come-io-be and grow are earth and water. 
185 For we all came forth from earth and water. 


186 Sea is the source of water, and source of wind; for neither (would there be the force of 
wind blowing forth from) inside clouds without the great ocean, nor river-streams nor the 
showery water from the upper air: but the great ocean is begetter of clouds and winds and 
rivers. 


176 


XENOPHANES 


physical theory in 186 (where the main supplement is by Diels) : sea, 
which is the most extensive form of water, is noted as the source of 
all rivers as in Homer (see §)—but also of rain and of clouds (which 
Anaximander had assumed to be condensations of the exhalation 
from the sea) and of the winds which appear to issue from clouds. 
This importance attached to the sea gains significance from the 
observation and deduction to be described in the next section, that 
the earth’s surface in its present form must have developed from sea. 


(iv) The earth’s surface becomes sea once again 

187 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 14, 5 ὁ δὲ Zevopdvns μίξιν τῆς γῆς πρὸς 
τὴν θάλασσαν γίνεσθαι δοκεῖ Kal τῷ χρόνῳ ὑπὸ τοῦ ὑγροῦ λύεσθαι, 
φάσκων τοιαύτας ἔχειν ἀττοδείξεις, ὅτι ἐν μέσῃ γῇ καὶ ὄρεσιν 
εὑρίσκονται κόγχαι, καὶ ἐν Συρακούσαις δὲ ἐν ταῖς λατομίαις λέγει 
εὑρῆσθαι τύπον ἰχθύος καὶ φυκῶν [Gomperz; φωκῶν mss.], ἐν δὲ 
Πάρῳ τύπον δάφνης ἐν τῷ βάθει τοῦ λίθου, ἐν δὲ Μελίτῃ πλάκας 
συμπάντων τῶν θαλασσίων. (6) ταῦτα δέ φησι γενέσθαι ὅτε πάντα 
ἐπηλώθησαν πάλαι, τὸν δὲ τύπον ἐν τῷ πηλῷ ξηρανθῆναι. ἀναι- 
ρεῖσθαι δὲ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους πάντας ὅταν ἡ γῆ κατενεχθεῖσα εἰς τὴν 
θάλασσαν πηλὸς γένηται, εἶτα πάλιν ἄρχεσθαι τῆς γενέσεως, καὶ 
ταύτην πᾶσι τοῖς κόσμοις γίνεσθαι καταβολήν [H. Lloyd-Jones; 
καταβάλλειν mss., μεταβολήν Diels, DK}. 

188 Fr. 37, Herodian tr. μον. λέξ. 30, 30 


καὶ μὲν ἐνὶ σπεάτεσσί Teois καταλείβεται ὕδωρ. 


The deduction based upon fossils is a remarkable and impressive 
one. The enumeration of different occurrences is in itself unusually 
scientific; the assertion ascribed to Xenophanes in the Aristotelian 
Mirabilia (DK 21448), that Stromboli tended to erupt in the 
seventeenth year, shows a similar method. Not that the poet him- 
self need have observed fossils in all three places—fossil-impressions 











187 Xenophanes thinks that a mixture of the earth with the sea ts going on, and that in 
time the earth is dissolved by the moist. He says that he has demonstrations of the following 
kind: shells are found inland, and in the mountains, and in the quarries in Syracuse he says 
that an impression of a fish and of seaweed has been found, while an impression of a bay- 
leaf was found in Paros in the depth of the rock, and in Malta flat shapes of all marine 
objects. These, he says, were produced when everything was long ago covered with mud, and 
the impression was dried in the mud. All mankind is destroyed whenever the earth is 
carried down into the sea and becomes mud; then there is another beginning of coming-to-be, 
and this foundation happens for all the worlds. 


188 And in some caves water drips down. 


12 177 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


might naturally arouse popular curiosity, and so become known; 
though it is notable that two of the three places were in Xeno- 
phanes’ Sicilian orbit. (Paros has been doubted on geological 
grounds; but its north-eastern part is neither marble nor schist, 
and could have contained fossils. The Director of the Institute for 
Geology, Athens, confirms that plant fossils have recently been 
found therc.) We cannot even be sure that the observations were 
first made in Xenophancs’ lifetime; they might conccivably have 
been available to Anaximander. However, Xenophanes may 
reasonably be acceptcd as the first to draw attention to their real 
significance. The conjecture that the earth’s surface had once been 
mud or slime was again not new; this was a Milesian theory 
possibly originating with Thales and certainly held by Anaxi- 
mander, who believed that life started from mud. The fossils, 
however, seemcd to be positive proof. It has been seen (pp. 139 1.) 
that Alexander attributed to Anaximander (as well as to Diogenes) 
the belicf that the carth is diminishing and will eventually dry up. 
In Anaximander, however, there is no positive information that the 
process is a cyclical one. Hippolytus in 187 ad fin. definitely 
ascribes a cyclical theory to Xcnophancs: the carth must once have 
been mud because plants once existed in what is now rock, fishes 
in what is now dry land, and men arc destroyed when it turns back 
to mud; then they are produced anew, and this happens for all the 
arrangements of the earth’s surface. ‘Thus Xenophanes accepted 
that living creatures come from mud, after Anaximander; but 
while Anaximander scems to have seen their destruction as arising 
from extreme drought, for Xcnophanes it was due to flood; it has 
already been suggestcd that myths of great catastrophes, notably 
the flood of Deucalion and Pyrrha and the earth-scorching of 
Phaethon, may have provided a precedent for this kind of theory. 
This divergence between the two thinkers was connected with 
divergent interpretations of the present trend of change in the 
earth’s surface: for Anaximander it was drying up, for Xenophanes 
it was already turning back into sea or mud. This might have been 
a conscious correction on the part of the latter; it may not be 
coincidence that the sea was receding round Miletus, but in Sicily 
was supposed to have engulfed the land-bridge which became the 
Messina strait. 

The cyclical transformations between earth and sea—neither of 
which, however, can have been completely eliminated—were 


178 


XENOPHANES 


clearly related to the assertions in 184 and 185 that things come 
from earth and sea; while the products of sea in 186 showed that 
sea is surprisingly potent. 188, fragmentary as it is, may be 
intended to illustrate the passage between the two basic materials: 
Diels and others have thought of stalactitic caves, i.e. of water 
turning to earth (rock not being clearly differentiated), while 
Deichgraber (Ah. M. 87 (1938) 16) thought that both this and the 
reverse process might be meant; certainly, damp caves can appear 
to produce moisture from earth. This, like much elsc, remains 
uncertain (for example, at what stage is the drying-up of the sea 
reversed?). ‘The clear exposition of a cyclical theory supported by 
concrete evidence is indisputable, and once again shows that 
Xenophancs must be seriously reckoned with. ‘The way in which 
such a cyclical theory could encourage the doxographers in an 
innumerable-world interprctation is demonstrated by the ambi- 
guous use of κόσμοις in 187 (there properly ‘world-arrangements’, 
i.c. of the earth’s surface, but appearing to mean ‘separate 
worlds’). 


XENOPHANES EMPHASIS ON THE LIMITATIONS OF HUMAN 
KNOWLEDGE 


189 Fr. 34, Sextus adv. math. vu, 49 and 110, cf. Plutarch aud. poet. 


2) I7E ’ ¥ ‘ ) ᾿ ” Ie ” 
Kal TO μὲν οὖν σαφὲς οὔτις ἀνὴρ ἴδεν οὐδέ τις ἔσται 


εἰδὼς ἀμφὶ θεῶν τε καὶ ἅσσα λέγω περὶ πάντων " 

εἰ γὰρ καὶ τὰ μάλιστα τύχοι τετελεσμένον εἰττών, 

αὐτὸς ὅμως οὐκ οἶδε: δόκος δ᾽ ἐπὶ πᾶσι τέτυκται. 
190 ΕἾ. 35, Plutarch Symp. 1x, 7, 7468 

ταῦτα δεδοξάσθω μὲν ἐοικότα τοῖς ETUPOIOI.... 
190: Fr. 18, Stobaeus Anth. 1, 8, 2 

οὔτοι ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς πάντα θεοὶ θνητοῖσ᾽ ὑπέδειξαν, 

ἀλλὰ χρόνῳ τητοῦντες ἐφευρίσκουσιν ἄμεινον. 





189 No man knows, or ever will know, the truth about the gods and about everything I 
speak of: for even if one chanced to say the complete truth, yet oneself knows it not; but 
seeming is wrought over all things [or fancy is wrought in the case of all men}. 


190 Let these things be opined as resembling the truth.... 


101 Yet the gods have not revealed all things to men from the beginning; but by seeking 
men find out better in time. 


179 12-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


192 Fr. 38, Herodian tr. pov. λέξ. 41, 5 
el μὴ χλωρὸν ἔφυσε θεὸς μέλι, ττολλὸν ἔφασκον 
γλύσσονα σῦκα πέλεσθαι. 


It has been suggested by K. Deichgraber (Rh. M. 87 (1938) 24 ff.) 
that Xenophanes in his utterances on the shortcomings of human 
knowledge is developing a common poetical contrast between the 
comparative ignorance of the poet and the all-knowledge of the 
Muse whom he calls on to assist him: cf. e.g. Homer Il. 2, 485f., 
Pindar Paean 6, 51 ff. Yet this contrast is merely a special form of 
that between the capacity of the gods in general and the limitations 
of men, which is re-stated, after Xenophanes, by Heraclitus in 
fr. 78 (208) and by Alcmaeon in fr. 1 (285). In Xenophanes him- 
self it is implicit, too, in the assertion of 173 that the one god 1s 
unlike men either in body or in thought. Parmenidcs, when he 
came to propose dogmatic views which could not be corroborated 
from human expcrience, gave them the form ofa divine revelation. 
Yet there is no indication that Xenophanes claimed anything like 
a revelation; 191 suggests that arduous investigation is rewarded, 
and the probability is that he, like Heraclitus, felt himself to be in 
a special state of knowledge for this reason. Dcichgraber also 
thought that 189 was intended as the prooemium of the physical 
doctrine, not of the constructive theology; but it seems most 
unlikely that the plural of ἀμφὶ θεῶν should be taken literally to 
mean ‘about the gods of conventional religion’; the phrase means 
simply ‘about theology’. The assumption of two distinct poems is, 
it has been suggested, a dubious one; and this is confirmed by the 
linking of ‘theology’ and ‘what I say about all things’. The con- 
structive description of the one god must ultimately have come 
within the scope of 189: it was the antithesis of the mistaken 
Homeric concept, but, though it might be ‘like the truth’, in the 
words of 190, it could not be taken as absolutely certain. Even 
Xenophanes’ special position as one who had given much attention 
to the subject could not ensure that. However, Xenophanes did 
not suggest that one could not be certain that a belief was wrong; 
and his destructive criticism of the Homeric gods, based as it was 
on a demonstrated subjectivity, might be accepted as true. 

192 shows that Xenophanes thought about problems of rela- 
tionship, which were to be especially significant for Heraclitus 








192 If god had not made yellow honey, men would consider figs far sweeter. 


180 


XENOPHANES 


(pp. 189f.). For Xenophanes the observation about honey (which 
may have been proverbial) presumably confirmed his beliefs about 
the limitation of knowledge—again the contrast between god, or 
gods, and men is perhaps present. Once again Xenophanes was 
developing an idea already implicit in popular literature and giving 
it a special philosophical significance. After the dogmatism of the 
Milesians (and also of Pythagoras, mocked by Xenophanes in 268 
for his extravagant theory of metempsychosis) an appeal to caution 
was salutary, and from this time on there was certainly more verbal 
reference to the broadest aspects of epistemology. Unfortunatcly 
Xenophanes’ revival of the traditional doctrine of human limita- 
tions, this time in a partly philosophical context, did little else that 
is noticeable to curb the naturally over-dogmatic tendency of 
Greek philosophy in its first buoyant stages. 


181 


CHAPTER VI 
HERACLITUS OF EPHESUS 


DATE AND LIFE 


193 Diogencs Lacrtius rx, 1 (DK 22A1) ‘HpdkAertos BAdowvos 
ἤ, ὥς τινες, Ἡράκωντος Ἐφέσιος. οὗτος ἤκμαφε μὲν κατὰ τὴν 
ἐνάτην καὶ ἑξηκοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα. μεγαλόφρων δὲ γέγονε παρ᾽ 
ὁντιναοῦν καὶ ὑπερόττης, ὡς καὶ ἐκ τοῦ συγγράμματος αὐτοῦ 
δῆλον, ἐν © φησι" (Fr. 40) Πολυμαθίη νόον ἔχειν οὐ διδάσκει" 
Ἡσίοδον γὰρ ἂν ἐδίδαξε καὶ Πυθαγόρην αὗτίς τε Ζενοφάνεά τε καὶ 
Ἑκαταῖον... .(3).. .καὶ τέλος μισανθρωττήσας καὶ ἐκπτατήσας ἐν τοῖς 
ὄρεσι διῃτᾶτο, πόας σιτούμενος καὶ βοτάνας. καὶ μέντοι καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο περιτρατεὶς εἰς ὕδερον κατῆλθεν εἰς ἄστυ καὶ τῶν ἰατρῶν 
αἰνιγματωδῶς ἐττυνθάνετο εἶ δύναιντο ἐξ ἐττομβρίας αὐχμὸν ποιῆσαι: 
τῶν δὲ μὴ συνιέντων αὑτὸν εἷς βούστασιν κατορύξας τῇ τῶν βολίτων 
ἀλέᾳ ἤλπισεν ἐξατμισθήσεσθαι. οὐδὲν δὲ ἀνύων οὐδ᾽ οὕτως ἐτελεύτα 
βιοὺς ἔτη ἑξήκοντα. 


The information that Heraclitus was at his acme, i.e. aged forty, in 
Ol. 69 (504-501 B.c.) was doubtless taken from the chronographer 
Apollodorus: Heraclitus’ middle age is placed about forty years 
after Anaximenes’ assumed acme and Xenophanes’ departure from 
Colophon. (According to Sotion (Diog. L. rx, 5, DK 2241) some 
people said that Heraclitus ‘heard’ Xenophanes. That there was 
some influence is probable enough, but the critical tone of fr. 40, 
quoted in 193, does not suggest a formal master-pupil relationship.) 
There is no need seriously to doubt Apollodorus’ dating here, since 
Heraclitus mentioned Pythagoras and Hecataeus as well as Xeno- 








193 Heraclitus son of Bloson (or, according to some, of Herakon) of Ephesus. This man 
was at his prime in the 69th Olympiad. He grew up to be exceptionally haughty and 
supercilious, as is clear also from his book, in which he says: ‘ Learning of many things does 
not teach intelligence; if so it would have taught Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again 
Aenophanes and Hecataeus.’... Finally he became a misanthrope, withdrew from the 
world, and lived in the mountains feeding on grasses and plants. However, having fallen 
in this way into a dropsy he came down to town and asked the doctors in a riddle tf they 
could make a drought out of rainy weather. When they did not understand he buried himself 
in a cow-stall, expecting that the dropsy would be evaporated off by the heat of the manure; 
but even so he failed to effect anything, and ended his life at the age of sixty. 


182 


HERACLITUS 


phanes,? and was perhaps indirectly referred to by Parmenides 
(345, cf. p. 272; also fr. 8, 55ff., 353). Attempts have sometimes 
been made to place Heraclitus’ philosophical activity later than 
the Apollodoran dating would reasonably suggest, after 478 B.c. 
(and even, most improbably, after Parmenides) ; but they have not 
won acceptance, and rest on implausible hypotheses such as that 
no trace of self-government (suggested by the information of fr. 121 
that the Ephesians had exiled Heraclitus’ friend Hermodorus) 
would be possible in Ephesus until after its liberation from Persia 
around 478. Heraclitus might have lived longer than Apollodorus’ 
sixty years (at which age Anaximenes also, and Empedocles 
according to Aristotle, were said to die); but we may nevertheless 
provisionally accept that he was in his middle years at the end of 
the sixth century and that his main philosophical activity had 
ended by about 480. 


1 The past tense in fr. 40, ‘would have taught’, need not mean that all 
those mentioned were dead (Xenophancs at any rate lived until after 478), 
but it implics that they were all widely known at the time of writing. 
Another fragment, 129 (261; it may be to some extent re-worded but is not 
spurious, sce Ὁ. 219n.), implics that Pythagoras was already dead; he is 
said to have ‘flourished’ in 532/1 B.c. (p. 217), and perhaps died between 
510 and 505. The Suda places Hecataeus’ birth as late as 520-516 B.c. 


The rest of 193 is quoted as a sample of the kind of biographical 
fiction that proliferated round the name of Heraclitus. We are also 
told by Diogenes that he refused to make laws for the Ephesians 
but preferred playing with children in the temple of Artemis. 
Most of these stories are based on well-known sayings of Heraclitus; 
many were intended to make him look ridiculous, and were 
invented with malicious intent by Hellenistic pedants who resented 
his superior tone. For example, extreme misanthropy is deduced 
from his criticisms of the majority of men (e.g. 197), vegetarianism 
from a mention of blood-pollution in 244, the fatal dropsy from his 
assertion ‘it is death for souls to become water’ in 232. He was 
known as an obscure propounder of riddles, and this is made out to 
have cost him his life: the doctors, whom he appeared to criticize 
in fr. 58 (p. 190), do nothing to save him. He 15 said to have buried 
himself in dung because he had said in fr. 96 that corpses are more 
worthless than dung; ‘being exhaled’ refers to his theory of 
exhalations from the sea. The only details about Heraclitus’ life 
which it might be safe to accept as true are that he spent it in 


183 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Ephesus, that he came of an old aristocratic family," and that he 

was on bad terms with his fellow-citizens. 
1 Cf. 194 Diog. L. rx, 6 σημεῖον δ᾽ αὐτοῦ τῆς μεγαλοφροσύνης 
᾿Αντισθένης φησὶν ἐν Διαδοχαῖς: ἐκχωρῆσαι yap τἀδελφῷ τῆς βασιλείας. 
There is no apparent reason why this information should be fictitious. 
Strabo, 14, p. 633 Cas. (DK 224 2), said that the descendants of Androclus 
foundcr of Ephesus were still called ‘kings’, and had certain privileges like 
that of front seats at the games. 


‘THE OBSCURE’ 

Timon of Phlius, the third-century B.c. satirist, called Heraclitus 
αἰνικτής, ‘riddler’ (Diog. L. 1x, 6). This legitimate criticism of his 
style later gave rise to the almost invariable epithet σκοτεινός, 
obscurus in Latin (Cicero de finibus 11, 5, 15, etc.). Another common 
description in the Roman period was ‘the weeping philosopher’. 
This latter judgement is entirely trivial, being founded partly on 
humorous referenccs to the idea that all things flow like rivers (cf. 
e.g. Plato Crat. 440 α, believers in flux are like people with catarrh), 
and partly on Theophrastus’ well-known attribution to Heraclitus 
of μελαγχολία (Diog. L. rx, 6), by which, however, he meant 
‘impulsiveness’ (sce Aristotle’s description at Eth. Nic. Η 8,1150 25) 
and not ‘melancholy’ in its later and its modern sense. 


HERACLITUS BOOK 


195 Diogenes Laertius Ix, 5 τὸ δὲ φερόμενον αὐτοῦ βιβλίον ἐστὶ 
μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ συνέχοντος Περὶ φύσεως, διήρηται δὲ εἰς τρεῖς λόγους, 
εἴς τε τὸν περὶ τοῦ TravTds καὶ πολιτικὸν καὶ θεολογικόν. (6) ἀνέθηκε 
δ᾽ αὐτὸ εἰς τὸ τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἱερόν, ὡς μέν τινες, ἐπιτηδεύσας ἀσα- 
φέστερον γράψαι ὅπως οἱ δυνάμενοι προσίοιεν αὐτῷ καὶ μὴ ἐκ τοῦ 
δημώδους εὐκαταφρόνητον ἧ... -τοσαύτην δὲ δόξαν ἔσχε τὸ 
σύγγραμμα ὡς καὶ αἱρετιστὰς ἀττ᾽ αὐτοῦ γενέσθαι τοὺς κληθέντας 
Ἡρακλειτείους. 


Ancient biographers and historians of philosophy assumed that all 
the Presocratics wrote one or more books (though there was doubt 








194 Antisthenes in his Successions quotes as a sign of his [Heraclitus’] arrogance that 
he resigned the hereditary ‘kingship’ to his brother. 

195 The book said to be his is called ‘On Nature’, from its chief content, and is divided 
into three discourses: On the Universe, Politics, Theology. He dedicated it and placed it in the 
temple of Artemis, as some say, having purposely written it rather obscurely so that only 
those of rank and influence should have access to it, and it should not be easily despised by 
the populace....The work had so great a reputation that from it arose disciples, those 
called Heracliteans. 


184 


HERACLITUS 


over Thales, see pp. 84 ff.). They certainly assumed that Heraclitus 
wrote one, and Diogenes tells us that its title was ‘On nature’. This 
title was regularly assigned to works by those whom Aristotle and 
the Peripatetics called ‘natural philosophers’, and cannot be 
regarded as necessarily authentic in all cases: see ἢ. on p. 102. 
The division into three sections is unlikely to have been original, 
and suggests that Diogenes or his source was thinking of an edition 
or collection of sayings, probably made in Alexandria, which 
followed a Stoic analysis of the parts of philosophy. Diels main- 
tained that Heraclitus wrote no consecutive book, but merely gave 
repeated utterance to a series of carefully-formulated opinions or 
γνῶμαι. This view has found few supporters, but could be correct. 
The surviving fragments have very much the appearance of oral 
pronouncements put into a concise and striking, and therefore 
easily memorable, form; they do not resemble extracts from a 
continuous written work. The obstacle to this view is fr. 1 (197), 
a structurally complicated sentence which looks very like a written 
introduction to a book. Possibly when Heraclitus achieved fame 
as a sage a collection of his most famous utterances was made, for 
which a special prologue was composed. In any event the frag- 
ments we possess (and not all those in DK arc fully authentic) were 
for the most part obviously framed as oral apophthegms rather than 
as parts of a discursive treatise; this was in keeping with Hera- 
clitus’ oracular intentions (see p. 212). The suggestion in 195 that 
the ‘Heracliteans’, also mentioned by Plato and Aristotle, were 
devotees of the book is almost certainly guesswork; its importance 
lies in its implication that there was no ‘school’ of direct followers 
at Ephesus.t No follower of note is known until Cratylus, an older 
contemporary (probably) of Plato, who developed a debased form 
of Heracliteanism by exaggerating, and combining together, the 
Ephesian’s belief in the inevitability of change and his belief (quite 
a common one in his time) in the significance of names. 


I In spite of 196 Plato Theaet. 179D πολλοῦ Kal δεῖ φαύλη εἶναι (sc. ἡ 
μάχη), ἀλλὰ περὶ μὲν τὴν Ἰωνίαν Kal ἐπιδίδωσι πάμπολυ. of yap τοῦ 
“Ηρακλείτου ἑταῖροι χορηγοῦσι τούτου τοῦ λόγου μάλα ἐρρωμένως. 
(Cf. ibid. 1798, .. . αὐτοῖς μὲν τοῖς περὶ τὴν Ἔφεσον.) This whole passage 
is intentionally humorous, as indeed are most of Plato’s remarks about 





196 (The battle) is far from being a slight one, but in the region of Ionia it is even 
greatly increasing. For the companions of Heraclitus minister to this argument with might 
and main. (Cf. ...to those around Ephesus.) 


185 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Heraclitus, and the local references need not be intended literally; anyone 
using what Plato would consider to be a Heraclitean type of argument 
might be ironically associated with Ephesus. Plato’s most extreme 
Heraclitcan acquaintance, at any rate, namely Cratylus, was neither an 
Ephesian nor from Ionia. 


SPECIAL DIFFICULTIES OF INTERPRETATION 


As has been seen, Heraclitus was renowned in antiquity for his 
obscurity: his pronouncements were undeniably often cryptic, 
probably intentionally so, and little serious attempt seems to have 
been made by Plato and Aristotle to penetrate to his real meaning. 
Theophrastus, on whom the later doxographical tradition depends, 
unfortunately based his interpretation on Aristotle’s. He does not 
appear to have had access to a complete book by Heraclitus, or 
even (to judge, for example, from the omission of all but the barest 
reference to Heraclitus in Theophrastus’ de sensu) to a fully repre- 
sentative collection of separate utterances; in fact he complained 
that Heraclitus’ pronouncements were cither unfinished or incon- 
sistent. he Stoics further distorted the account. ‘They adopted 
Heraclitus as their ancient authority, chiefly on physical matters, 
and in some respects produced an accurate development of his 
ideas; for example in thcir ideal of ὁμολογουμένως τῆν, living in 
accord with Nature (cf. e.g. 198). In other respects, however, they 
radically re-adapted his views to mcet special requirements of their 
own—for example in their attribution to him of the idea of 
ecpyrosis, the periodical consumption of the whole world by fire. 
Our sources subsequent to the founder of Stoicism, Zeno of Citium, 
accepted this particular interpretation of Heraclitus, which can be 
reconciled with some of the extant sayings and may have been 
encouraged by ‘Theophrastus, but is incompatible with others and 
wholly at variance with the basic Heraclitean concept of measure 
in natural change: see further pp. 196-9 and ἢ. on p. 202. 

As for Plato and Aristotle, there is little verbatim quotation of 
Heraclitus in either, nor were they really intercsted in the accurate 
objective assessment of early predecessors. Plato occasionally men- 
tions him, mainly in a humorous or ironical way and with emphasis 
on a view freely attributed to him in the dialogues, that ‘all things 
are in flux’—trdvta ῥεῖ or πάντα χωρεῖ. According to Aristotle at 
Met. ΑΘ, 987432, Plato was influenced in youth by the emphasis 
laid by Cratylus on this kind of view. But all Presocratic thinkers 
were struck by the dominance of change in the world of our 


186 


HERACLITUS 


experience. Heraclitus was obviously no exception, indeed he 
probably expressed the universality of change more clearly than 
his predecessors; but for him it was the obverse idea of the measure 
inhering in change, the stability that persists through it, that was 
of vital importance. Plato may have been genuincly misled, 
especially by fifth-century sophistic exaggerations, in his distortion 
of Heraclitus’ emphasis here; and Aristotle accepted the Platonic 
flux-interpretation and carried it still further. Other references to 
Heraclitus in Aristotle attack him for denying the law of contra- 
diction in his assertions that opposites are ‘the same’. Again, this 
is a misinterpretation by Aristotle, who applicd his own high 
logical standards anachronistically: by ‘the same’ Heraclitus 
evidently meant not ‘identical’ so much as ‘not essentially 
separate’, or ‘belonging to one single complex’. 

In view of these defects in the authors of the ancient assessment 
it is safer to attempt the reconstitution of Heraclitus’ thought, in 
the first instance, on the basis of the extant genuine fragments. 
Even so one cannot hope for more than a very limited under- 
standing, mainly because Heraclitus, as Aristotle found, did not 
use the categories of formal logic, and tended to describe the same 
thing (or roughly the same thing) now as a god, now as a form of 
matter, now as a rule of behaviour or principle which was never- 
theless a physical constituent of things. 


HERACLITUS THOUGHT 


(1) Men should try to comprehend the underlying coherence of things: tt 1s ex- 
pressed in the Logos, the formula or element of arrangement common to all things 


197 Fr. 1, Sextus adv. math. vu, 132 τοῦ δὲ λόγου τοῦδ᾽ ἐόντος 
ἀεὶ ἀξύνετοι γίνονται ἄνθρωποι Kal πρόσθεν ἢ ἀκοῦσαι Kal ἀκού- 
σαντες τὸ πρῶτον γινομένων γὰρ πάντων κατὰ τὸν λόγον τόνδε 
ἀπείροισιν ἐοίκασι, πειρώμενοι καὶ ἐπέων καὶ ἔργων τοιούτων 
ὁκοίων ἐγὼ διηγεῦμαι κατὰ φύσιν διαιρέων ἕκαστον καὶ φράφων 
ὅκως Eyer’ τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους λανθάνει ὁκόσα ἐγερθέντες 
ποιοῦσιν ὅκωσπερ ὁκόσα εὕδοντες ἐπιλανθάνονται. 





197 Of the Logos which is as I describe it men always prove to be uncomprehending, both 
before they have heard it and when once they have heard it. For although all things happen 
according to this Logos men are like people of no experience, even when they experience such 
words and deeds as I explain, when I distinguish each thing according to its constitution and 
declare how it is; but the rest of men fail to notice what they do after they wake up just as 
they forget what they do when asleep. 


187 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


198 Fr. 2, Sextus adv. math. vu, 133 διὸ δεῖ ἕπεσθαι TH (EuvH)° 
τοῦ λόγου δ᾽ ἐόντος ξυνοῦ zmovuolv of πολλοὶ ὡς ἰδίαν ἔχοντες 
φρόνησιν. 

199 Fr. 50, Hippolytus Ref. rx, 9, 1 οὐκ ἐμοῦ ἀλλὰ τοῦ λόγου 
ἀκούσαντας ὁμολογεῖν σοφόν ἐστιν ἕν πάντα εἶναι. 


1 διὸ δεῖ ἕπεσθαι τῷ κοινῷ ξυνὸς γὰρ ὁ κοινός" τοῦ δὲ... mss. ξυνός and 
κοινός are different words for the same idea, the former being the normal 
epic and Ionic form and that used by Heraclitus. The later form was 
evidently given in a gloss, and then this gloss replaced the original word, 
though the appended explanation remained. 


These sayings make it plain that Heraclitus regarded himself as 
having acccss to, and trying vainly to propagate, an all-important 
truth about the constitution of the world of which men arc a part. 
The great majority fail to recognize this truth,t which is ‘common’—. 
that is, both valid for all things and accessible for all men, if only 
they use their observation and their understanding? and do not 
fabricate a private and deccptive intclligence. What they should 
recognize is the Logos, which is perhaps to be interpreted as the 
unifying formula or proportionate method of arrangement of 
things, what might almost be termed the structural plan of things 
both individual and in sum. The technical sense of λόγος in 
Heraclitus is probably related to the general meaning ‘measure’, 
‘reckoning’ or ‘proportion’; it cannot be simply Heraclitus’ own 
‘account’ that is in question (otherwise the distinction in 199 
between ἐμοῦ and τοῦ λόγου is meaningless), although the Logos 
was revealed in that account. The effect of arrangement according 
to acommon plan or measure is that all things, although apparently 
plural and totally discrete, are really united in a coherent complex 
(199) of which men themselves are a part, and the comprehension 
of which is therefore logically necessary for the adequate enact- 
ment of their own lives. Yet ‘formula’, ‘proportionate arrange- 
ment’ and so on are misleadingly abstract as translations of this 
technical sense of λόγος: the Logos was probably conceived by 
Heraclitus as an actual constituent of things, and in many respects 
it 15 cO-extensive with the primary cosmic constituent, fire (see 
p. 200). It must constantly be remembered that no firm distinc- 








198 Therefore it is necessary to follow the common; but although the Logos is common 
the many live as though they had a private understanding. 


199 Listening not to me but to the Logos it is wise to agree that all things are one. 


188 


HERACLITUS 


tion between different modes of existence had yet been envisaged, 
and that what to us is obviously non-concrete and immaterial, like 
an arrangement, might be regarded before Plato as possessing the 
assumed ultimate characteristic of ‘being’, that is, concrete bulk. 
To put it in another way, the arrangement would not be fully 
distinguished from the thing arranged, but would be felt to possess 
the same concreteness and reality as the thing itself. 
: Men are attacked for this failure in many other extant fragments: see 
frr. 17, 19, 28, 34, 56, 72. But nothing substantial is added there to the 
content of 197, 198, 199. Analogous rebukes are also hurled at indivi- 
duals--Homer, Hesiod, Xenophanes, Hecataeus, Archilochus and Pytha- 
goras: sce e.g. 193, where the ground of criticism is that such men (of 
whom Pythagoras comes in for special attack elsewhere, cf. e.g. 261) 


pursued the wrong kind of knowledge, πολυμαθίη or the mere collection 
of disparate and unrelated facts. 


2 Cf. 200 Fr. 55, Hippolytus Ref. rx, 9, 5 ὅσων ὄψις ἀκοὴ μάθησις, 
ταῦτα ἐγὼ προτιμέω. But observation must be checked by understanding, 
φρόνησις: this is shown by 201 Fr. 107, Sextus adv. math. vu, 126 κακοὶ 
μάρτυρες ἀνθρώποισιν ὀφθαλμοὶ kal ὦτα βαρβάρους ψυχὰς ἐχόντων. Here 
‘barbarian souls’ are those that cannot understand the language of, cannot 
correctly interpret, the senses, but are misled by superficial appearances. 
An analogous distinction betwecn mere sensation and the intelligent 
interpretation of scnse-data was later made by Democritus (pp. 423f.). 


(2) Different types of example of the essential unity of opposites 

202 Fr.61, Hippolytus Ref. 1x, 10,5 θάλασσα ὕδωρ καθαρώτατον 
Kal μιαρώτατον, ἰχθύσι μὲν πότιμον Kal σωτήριον, ἀνθρώποις δὲ 
ἄποτον καὶ ὀλέθριον. 

203 Fr. 60, Hippolytus Ref. 1x, 10, 4 ὁδὸς ἄνω κάτω μία καὶ 
ὧντή. 

204 Fr. 111, Stobaeus Anth. m1, 1,177 νοῦσος ὑγιείην ἐποίησεν 
ἡδὺ καὶ ἀγαθόν, λιμὸς κόρον, κάματος ἀνάπαυσιν. 

20ς Fr. 88, [Plutarch] Cons. ad Apoll. 10, το6Ε ταὐτό τ᾽ ἔνι τῶν 
καὶ τεθνηκὸς Kal τὸ ἐγρηγορὸς Kal τὸ καθεῦδον Kal νέον Kal γηραιόν᾽ 





200 The things of which there is seeing and hearing and perception, these do I prefer. 


201 Evil witnesses are eyes and ears for men, if they have souls that do not understand 
their language. 


202 Seais the most pure and the most polluted water; for fishes it 1s drinkable and salutary, 
but for men it is undrinkable and deleterious. 


203 The path up and down is one and the same. 
204 Disease makes health pleasant and good, hunger satiety, weariness rest. 
205 And as the same thing there exists in us living and dead and the waking and the 


189 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


τάδε yap μεταπεσόντα ἐκεῖνά ἐστι κἀκεῖνα [πάλιν] μεταπεσόντα 
ταῦτα. 


These fragments exemplify four different kinds of connexion 
between evident opposites: 

(1) In 202 the samc thing produces opposite effccts upon 
different classes of animate object; so also fr. 13 (pigs like mud 
<but men do not)) and fr. 9 (donkeys prefer rubbish to gold, (men 
gold to rubbish)). 

(ii) In 203? different aspects of the same thing may justify 
opposite descriptions; so also fr. 58 (cutting and burning (which 
are normally bad) call for a [ες when donc by a surgeon) and 
fr. 59 (the act of writing combines straight, in the whole line, and 
crooked, in the shape of each letter). 

(11) In 204 good and desirable things like health or rest are 
sccn to be possible only if we recognize their opposites, sickness or 
weariness; so probably fr. 23 (there would be no right without 
wrong). 

(iv) In 205 certain opposites are said to be essentially connected 
(literally, to be ‘the same’, a pregnant expression) because they 
succced, and arc succeedcd by, each other and nothing else. Thus 
the hot substance and the cold belong to what we might call 
a hot-cold continuum, a single entity (i.e. temperaturc). So also 
fr. 57: night and day, which Hesiod had made parent and child, 
are, and must always have been, essentially connected and co- 
existent. 


These four kinds of connexion between opposites can be further 
classed under two main headings: (a) i—iii, opposites which inhere 
in, or are simultaneously produced by, a single subject; (6) iv, 
opposites which are not susceptible of simultaneous distinction 
in relation to different objects, or parts of the subject, but are con- 
nected through being different stages in a single invariable process. 


τ This seems the most probable interpretation of ‘the road up and down’. 
Theophrastus and a few of his followers applied the phrase to the inter- 
changes between world-masses in the cosmic process, and most modern 
scholars have done the same. But the same words ‘one and the same’ are 
used of evident opposites in the formally similar fr. 59; and Hippolytus, 
a reliable source of verbatim quotations from Heraclitus who seems to have 





sleeping and young and old: for these things having changed round are those, and those 
having changed round are these. 


190 


HERACLITUS 


used a good handbook in which sayings of Heraclitus were grouped by 
subject, certainly took ‘the road up and down’ as another illustration of 
the unity of opposites and not as a cosmological metaphor, to which indeed 
it is not completely appropriate. We should think of an actual road or 
path, which is called ‘the road up’ by those who live at the bottom, ‘the 
road down’ by those at the top. Vlastos, 4.7} 76 (1955) 349 ἢ. 26, objects 
to this interpretation on the grounds of its ‘banality’; but it only appears 
banal to us because of its familiarity, and fr. 59, for example, undoubtedly 
has precisely the same quality. 


These and similar reflexions (cf. also frr. 103, 48, 126, 99), on 
objects conventionally treated as entirely separate from and 
opposed to each other, evidently persuaded Heraclitus that there 
is never any real absolute division of opposite from opposite. (For 
a re-statement of this view by Anaxagoras sce p. 381.) 


(3) Each pair of opposites thus forms both a unity and a plurality. 
Different pairs are also found to be inter-connected 


206 Fr. 10, [Aristotle] de mundo 5, 396b20 συλλάψιες ὅλα καὶ 
οὐχ ὅλα, συμφερόμενον διαφερόμενον, συνᾷδον διᾷδον ἐκ πάντων 
ἕν καὶ ἐξ ἑνὸς πάντα.ἷ 
2070 Fr. 67, Hippolytus Ref. 1x, 10, 8 ὁ θεὸς ἡμέρη εὐφρόνη, 
χειμὼν θέρος, πόλεμος εἰρήνη, κόρος λιμός [τἀναντία ἅπαντα, οὗτος 
ὁ νοῦς] ἀλλοιοῦται δὲ ὅκωσπερ (TrUp) ὁπόταν συμμιγῇ θνώμασιν 
ὀνομάτεται καθ᾽ ἡδονὴν ἑκάστον. [πῦρ suppl. Diels. | 
1 συλλάψιες is textually slightly preferable to συνάψιες, which would mean 
‘things in contact’. A more important question is whether the word is 
subject or predicate. Snell showed that it is subject, contrary to the 
common view; neither ‘wholes’ and ‘not wholes’ nor ‘in tune’ and ‘out 


of tune’ are typical pairs of Heraclitean opposites, nor indeed are they 
connected by Heraclitus’ regular principles. 


In 206 ‘things taken together’ must be, primarily, opposites: what 
one takes together with night, for example, is day. (Here we may 
note that Heraclitus expresses what we should call ‘quality’ 
always in terms of simple extremes, which he can then classify as 
opposites; so that all change can thus be regarded as that between 





206 Things taken together are whole and not whole, something which is being brought 
together and brought apari, which is in tune and out of tune; out of all things there comes 
a unity, and out of a unity all things. 

207 God is day night, winter summer, war peace, satiety hunger [all the opposites, this 
is the meaning]; he undergoes alteration in the way that fire, when it is mixed with spices, 
is named according to the scent of each of them. 


IQI 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


opposites.) Such ‘things taken together’ are truly described in one 
sense as ‘whole’, that is, forming one continuum, or in another 
sense as ‘not whole’, that is, when acting as single components. 
Applying these alternative analyses to the conglomeration of 
‘things taken together’, we can see that ‘from all things a unity 
is formed’, and also that from this unity (ἐξ ἑνός) there can 
be separated the superficial, discrete, plural aspect of things 
(tdvta). 

207 asserts a rclationship between god and a number of pairs of 
opposites, each pair separately connected by automatic succession ; 
these, as the glossator saw, probably stand for all pairs of opposites 
however connected. ‘The relationship in question is a loose pre- 
dicative one; and Heraclitus, perhaps enlarging on Xenophanes, 
sccms to have regarded ‘god’ as in some probably undefined way 
immanent in things, or as the sum total of things.’ One recalls the 
Milesian view that the originative material, which may still be 
represented in the world, is divine. Heraclitus, although not so 
explicitly corporcalistic in his conception of divinity, was little 
more ‘religious’ than the Milesians in that he did not associate 
‘god’ with the need for cult and worship (although he did not 
utterly reject all cult, see p. 212). The particular point of 207 15 
that every opposite can be expressed in terms of god: because peace 
is divine it does not follow that war is not equally divine, is not 
cqually permeated by the directive and formulaic constituent 
which is on occasions cquated with the whole ordered cosmos 
(pp. 188, 200). God cannot here be essentially different from Logos; 
and the Logos is the constituent of things which makes them 
opposed, and which ensures that change between opposites will be 
proportional and balanced overall. God, then, 1s said to be the 
common connccting element in all extremes, just as fire is the 
common element of different vapours (because these were con- 
ceived as a compound of fire with different kinds of incense) ; 
change from one to another brings about a total change of name, 
which is misleading, because only a superficial component has 
altered and the most important constituent remains. This difficult 
saying implies that, while each separate pair of contraries forms a 
single continuum, the several continua, also, are connected with 
each other, though in a different manner. Thus the total plurality 
of things forms a single, coherent, determinable complex—what 
Heraclitus called ‘unity’. 


192 


HERACLITUS 


< The superiority of god to man, and of the divine ‘synthetic’ view of 
things to the human chaotic view, is heavily stressed by Heraclitus: e.g. 
208 Fr. 78, Origen c. Celsum v1, 12 ἦθος yap ἀνθρώπειον μὲν οὐκ ἔχει 
γνώμας, θεῖον δὲ ἔχει. See also frr. 79, 82-3, and compare the Hebrew 
concept: ‘As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher 
than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts ’—Isaiah lv. 8f. One 
saying specifically asserts that for god the separateness implied by opposites 
does not exist: 209 Fr. 102, Porphyrius in Iliadem 4, 4 τῷ μὲν θεῷ καλὰ 
πάντα Kal ἀγαθὰ καὶ δίκαια, ἄνθρωποι δὲ ἃ μὲν ἄδικα ὑπειλήφασιν ἃ δὲ 
δίκαια. 


(4) The unity of things les beneath the surface; 11 depends upon a balanced 
reaction between opposites 


210 ΕἾ. 54, Hippolytus Ref. ΙΧ, 9, 5 ἁρμονίη ἀφανὴς φανερῆς 
κρείττων. 
211 Fr. 123, Themistius Or. 5, p.69 D. φύσις κρύπτεσθαι φιλεῖ. 


212 Fr. 51, Hippolytus Ref. ΙΧ, 9, 1 οὐ ξυνιᾶσιν ὅκως δια- 
φερόμενον ἑωντῷ ξυμφέρεται᾽" TraAivtovos ἁρμονίη ὅκωσπερ τόξου 
καὶ Avpns.* 


I Hippolytus, the fullest source here, and usually a reliable onc, has 
ὁμολογέειν (for ὁμολογέει!) and παλίντροπος. ξυμφέρεται is a probable 
restoration from Plato’s version, Symp. 187A, and avoids a difficult use of 
ὁμολογεῖν---ἃ verb which could easily have been repeated accidentally, 
since Hippolytus used it twice in the infinitive just before he quoted the 
fragment. traAivtovos has as much support as πταλίντροτος in the versions 
(of the second part only) by Plutarch and Porphyry, and 15 preferred 
because it gives a fully intelligible sense. G. Vlastos, A7P 76 (1955) 348/Ff, 
defends traAivtpotros: his strongest point is that Diog. L. rx, 7, a summary 
and often imprecise version of Theophrastus, has the phrase διὰ τῆς 
ἐναντιοτροπῆς ἡρμόσθαι. This certainly appears at first sight to be based 
upon παλίντροπος &ppovin; yet the ἐναντιοτροττή (which would have to 
be évavtiotpotria if derived from an adjectival form -tpotros) probably 
refers to the tpotral of 221%, combined (as they certainly were by Theo- 
phrastus, cf. the fuller account of him in Diog. L. 1x, 8) with the ‘way up 
and down’ interpreted as change between oppositcs. ἡρμόσθαι could be a 
general application of the concept of ἁρμονίη, cf. 210. It is also possible 





208 Human disposition does not have true judgement, but divine disposition does. 


209 To god all things are beautiful and good and just, but men have supposed some 
things to be unjust, others just. 


210 An unapparent connexion is stronger than an apparent one. 
21: The real constitution of things ts accustomed to hide itself. 


212 They do not apprehend how being at variance it agrees with ttself [literally, how 
being brought apart it is brought together with itself]: there is a back-stretched connexion, 
as in the bow and the lyre. 


13 193 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


that there was doubt about the form of the epithet as early as Theophrastus, 
as there certainly was later. Objections to twaAivtpotros are (i) can ‘a 
turning-back connexion’ really be said, even by Heraclitus, for ‘a con- 
nexion achieved by contrary changes’? Perhaps it can—it would be possible, 
certainly, in Aeschylus, If this is accepted, the meaning given fits in well 
enough with Heraclitus’ theory of natural change. Unfortunately (11) it 
docs not make any intelligible sense when applied, as it is, to the bow and 
the lyre. Vlastos suggests that the sequence of tension and relaxation of 
the string, which discharges the arrow or makes the note, is meant: but 
this sequence cannot be described as an ‘adjustment’ or ‘connexion’, in 
any kind of Greek. The traAlvtpotros κέλευθος in Parmenides fr. 6 (345) is, 
of course, perfectly intelligible, and does not necessarily contain a reference 
to Heraclitus (cf. p. 272), or at any rate to this fragment. 


What is stated in 210 is a general rule; comparison with 211 
(where φύσις probably means not ‘Nature’ but ‘a thing’s true 
constitution’), and also with 212, suggests that the rule is intended 
to apply to the working of the world as a whole, as a sum of 
constituent parts whose connexion is not apparent at first sight. 
The unseen connexion of opposites is in fact stronger than other, 
morc obvious types of connexion.’ 212, one of Heraclitus’ most 
familiar sayings, contains a characteristic looseness in predication: 
the subject of ξυμφέρεται is probably not {τὸν διαφερόμενον, i.e. 
another example of a specific opposite, but a generalizing δια- 
φερόμενόν <1)», where ‘anything being carried apart’ means 
something like ‘any discrete pair of opposites’. Thus the sense 
given is similar to that implicit in συμφερόμενον διαφερόμενον in 
206: any pair, or sum of pairs, can be regarded either (a) as 
heterogeneous and analysable in terms of separate extremes, or 
(δ) as tending together with itself to form a unity. Now comes an 
important addition: there is (sc. in it, i.e. it exemplifies) a con- 
nexion or means of joining (the literal sense of &pyovin) through 
opposite tensions,? which ensures this coherence—just as the 
tension in the string of bow or lyre, being exactly balanced by the 
outward tension exerted by the arms of the instrument, produces 
a coherent, unified, stable and efficient complex. We may infer 
that if the balance between opposites were not maintained, for 
example if ‘the hot’ (i.e. the sum of hot substances) began seriously 
to outweigh the cold, or night day, then the unity and coherence 
of the world would cease, just as, if the tension in the bow-string 
exceeds the tension in the arms, the whole complex is destroyed. 


* A number of fragments imply that it needs both faith and persistence to 
find the underlying truth. So e.g. 213 Fr. 18, Clement Strom. u, 17, 4 


194 


HERACLITUS 
ἐὰν μὴ ἔλπηται ἀνέλπιστον οὐκ ἐξευρήσει, ἀνεξερεύνητον ἐὸν Kal ἄπορον. 
See also 247, and frr. 22, 86; compare Kenophancs (ΥΦΧ). 


2 qadivtovos= *counter-stretched’, i.e. tending equally in opposite direc- 
tions. A tension in one direction automatically produces an equivalent 
tension in the other; if not, the system collapses. 


(5) The total balance in the cosmos can only be maintained if change in one 
direction eventually leads to change in the other, that 1s, if there is unending 
‘strife’ between opposites 


214 Fr. 80, Origen c. Celsum vi, 42 εἰδέναι χρὴ τὸν πόλεμον 
ἐόντα Euvov, καὶ δίκην ἔριν, καὶ γινόμενα πάντα κατ᾽ ἔριν καὶ 
χρεών. 
215 Fr. 53, Hippolytus Ref. ΙΧ, 9,4 πόλεμος πάντων μὲν πατήρ 
ἐστι, πάντων δὲ βασιλεύς, καὶ τοὺς μὲν θεοὺς ἔδειξε τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους, 
τοὺς μὲν δούλους ἐποίησε τοὺς δὲ ἐλευθέρους. 
t χρεών Diels, χρεώμενα ms. The emendation is not certain, but is hard to 
improve; the three extra letters may be connected with the omission of 


three letters just before, where the unique Vatican ms. has εἰ δέ for the 
obvious original εἰδέναι. 


Strife or war is Heraclitus’ metaphor for the dominance of change 
in the world. It is obviously related to the reaction between 
opposites; most kinds of change (except for e.g. growth, which is 
the accretion of like to like), it may be inferred, could be resolved 
into change between opposites. At all events, change from one 
extreme to the other might seem to be the most radical possible. 
The ‘war’ which underlies all events, and is responsible for 
different and indeed opposed conditions of men and for their fate 
after death (cf. 239 and 242 for the difficult assertion about men 
and gods), is called δίκη, the ‘indicated way’ (from the same root 
as δείκνυμι), or the normal rule of behaviour. This must be a 
deliberate amendment of Anaximander’s dictum (112) that things 
pay retribution to each other for the injustice of their alternate 
encroachments in the processes of natural change. Heraclitus 
points out that if strife—that is, the action and reaction between 





213 If one does not expect the unexpected one will not find it out, since it is not to be 
searched out, and difficult to compass. 

214 It is necessary to know that war is common and right ts strife and that all things 
happen by strife and necessity. 

215 War is the father of all and king of all, and some he shows as gods, others as men; 
some he makes slaves, others free. 


195 13 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


opposed substances—were to cease, then the victor in every 
contest of extremes would establish a permanent domination, and 
the world as such would be destroyed. Yet just as in a battle there 
are temporary local stoppages, or deadlocks produced by the exact 
balance of opposing forces, so Heraclitus must have allowed that 
temporary stability is to be found here and there in the cosmic 
battlefield, so long as it is only temporary and is balanced by 
a corresponding state elsewhere. This would not diminish the 
validity of the domination of strife (which, as for Anaximander, 
provides a metaphorical motive for change), but it allows the 
principle to be applied to the world of our actual experience, in 
which all things must eventually change but some things are for 
the time being obviously stable. 
I Cf. 216 Aristotle Eth. Eudem. H1, 1235225 καὶ Ἡράκλειτος ἐπιτιμᾷ 
τῷ ποιήσαντι “Ws Epis ἔκ τε θεῶν καὶ ἀνθρώπων ἀπόλοιτο (= Jl, 18, 107)" 
οὐ γὰρ ἂν εἶναι ἁρμονίαν μὴ ὄντος ὀξέος καὶ βαρέος οὐδὲ τὰ φτῷα ἄνευ 
θήλεος καὶ ἄρρενος ἐναντίων ὄντων. Here ἁρμονία has its special sense of 
‘musical scale’. 


(6) The river-tmage illustrates the kind of unity that depends on the 
preservation of measure and balance in change 


2170 Fr. 12, Arius Didymus ap. Eusebium P.£. xv, 20, +fr. 91, 
Plutarch de £18, 3928 ποταμοῖσι τοῖσιν αὐτοῖσιν ἐμβαίνουσιν 
ἕτερα Kal ἕτερα ὕδατα ἐπιρρεῖ (=fr. 12).7...oKiSvnot kal. ..ouv- 
ἀγει. .. συνίσταται καὶ ἀπολείττει. . . πρόσεισι Kal ἄπεισι (=fr. g1). 
1 The words καὶ ψυχαὶ δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ὑγρῶν ἀναθυμιῶνται, which follow 
ὕδατα ἐπιρρεῖ in Arius, are counted as part of fr. 12 by most editors; but 
they are out of place here and are almost certainly part of an attempt by 
Cleanthes to find an exhalation of soul in Heraclitus as in Zeno: see Kirk, 
Heraclitus, the Cosmic Fragments 367 {f. The pairs of verbs which form fr. 91 


occur in Plutarch immediately after a summary by him (in Platonic 
terms) of the main river-statement; see further p. 198. 


According to the Platonic interpretation, accepted and expanded 
by Aristotle, Theophrastus, and the doxographers, this river- 
Image was cited by Heraclitus to emphasize the absolute con- 





216 Heraclitus rebukes the author of the line ‘Would that strife might be destroyed 
from among gods and men’: for there would be no musical scale unless high and low 
existed, nor living creatures without female and male, which are opposites. 


217 Ubon those that step into the same rivers different and different waters flow... .It 
scatters and. ..gathers.. .it comes together and flows away. ..approaches and deparis. 


196 


HERACLITUS 


tinuity of change in every single thing: everything is in perpetual 
flux like a river. So 218 Plato Cratylus 4024 λέγει που “Hpd&kAertos 
ὅτι πάντα χωρεῖ Kal οὐδὲν μένει, καὶ ποταμοῦ ῥοῇ ἀπεικάφων τὰ 
ὄντα λέγει ὡς δὶς ἐς τὸν αὐτὸν ποταμὸν οὐκ ἂν ἐμβαίης. It is to this 
interpretation that Aristotle refers in 219 Aristotle Phys. Θ 9, 
253b9q Kai φασί tives κινεῖσθαι τῶν ὄντων οὐ τὰ μὲν τὰ δ᾽ οὔ, 
ἀλλὰ πάντα καὶ ἀεί, ἀλλὰ λανθάνειν τοῦτο τὴν ἡμετέραν αἴσθησιν. 
Aristotle here makes explicit what is implicit in Plato, that many 
things (those that appear to be stable) must be undergoing invisible 
or unnoticed changes. Can Heraclitus really have thought that a 
rock or a bronze cauldron, for example, was invariably under- 
going invisible changes of material? Perhaps so; but nothing in the 
extant fragments suggests that he did, and his clearly-expressed 
reliance on the senses, provided thcy be interpreted intelligently, 
suggests that he did not.? It cannot be too strongly emphasized 
that before Parmenides and his apparent proof that the senses 
were completely fallacious—a proof that was clearly a tremendous 
shock to his contemporarics—gross departures from common sense 
must only be accepted when the evidence for them is extremely 
strong. In the present case it 15 quite conceivable that Plato was 
misled by post-Heraclitean exaggerations and distortions of 
Heraclitus’ emphasis on eventual change; in particular, perhaps, 
by Cratylus, who thought that you could not step even once into 
the same river (Aristotle Met. [5, 10104213), and who is said by 
Aristotle to have influenced Plato as a young man (Met. A6, 


987 a32).? 


I Sec 200, 201. It is true that Melissus in fr. 8 (392) drew attention to the 
appearancc that some ‘stable’ things do change: iron is worn away by the 
finger, and so on. This observation occurs in a contcxt which perhaps has 
verbal references to Heraclitus (e.g. τό Te θερμὸν ψυχρὸν γίνεσθαι Kal TO 
ψυχρὸν θερμόν, cf. fr. 126). Yet there is no reason whatever to think that 
Melissus meant that change must in this case be continuous, even though it 
can be invisible. Every time the finger rubs, it rubs off an invisible portion 
of iron; yet when it does not rub, what reason is there to think that the 
iron is still changing? Melissus’ point is rather that appearances show that 





218 Heraclitus somewhere says that all things are in process and nothing stays still, and 
likening existing things to the stream of a river he says that you would not step twice into 
the same river. 

219 And some say not that some existing things are moving, and not others, but that 
all things are in motion all the time, but that this escapes our perception. 


197 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


everything, even the apparently stable, is subject to change. This is precisely 
what Heraclitus must have thought; he may or may not have mentioned 
infra-visible changes, but in any case would only accept them when they 
were deducible—and continuous change is not deducible in many appa- 
rently stable objects. Melissus’ argument, of course, was that the senses 
must be fallacious; for between Heraclitus and himself had come 
Parmenides. With Empedoclean effluences (p. 343) the situation changes. 


2 Viastos, AJP 76 (1955) 338ff., argues that Cratylus’ rejoinder as 
reported by Aristotle implies a previous statement just like that in Plato 
(218), that you could not step twice into the same river; in fact what 
Heraclitus said was not fr. 12 (217) but something very like Plato’s 
version, and the Platonic interpretation of universal flux is correct.—But 
(i) Aristotle’s formulation of Cratylus’ emendation of Heraclitus is likely 
enough to be based on Plato’s summary, rather than on the exact form of 
statements by Cratylus or Heraclitus; and (11) in any case, the river- 
statement could havc been slightly distorted by other sophists even before 
Cratylus; or he (who ccrtainly grossly exaggerated Heraclitus’ belief 
about names) could have altered its formal expression himself. As for the 
question of which is the morc original form of the river-statement, fr. 12 
or Plato’s version, the former has every appearance of belonging to 
Heraclitus, being in natural and unforced Ionic and having the charac- 
teristic rhythm of archaic prose; while the latter looks Platonic, and could 
morc easily be a misunderstanding of fr. 12 than vice versa. See further 
Kirk, Heraclitus, the Cosmic Fragments 367 ff., as well as Vlastos, loc. cit. 
Cratylus’ ‘improvement’ of Heraclitus is implicit in a saying ascribed, 
almost certainly wrongly, to Heraclitus, fr. 49a in DK: ‘We step and do 
not step into the same rivers; we are and are not.’ This last existential 
aphorism is particularly improbable, and the whole sentence can be 
explained as a development of fr. 12, where the mention of the human 
standard (‘those who step...’) probably has no purpose other than the 
provision of an animate point by which the flow can be gauged. 


In 217 the tentative addition to fr. 12 of the verbs which compose 
fr. g1 (which the context, and their own nature, seem to indicate 
as describing the flow of water, with special attention to the 
regularity of its replacement) brings out what is implicit in fr. 12: 
that the unity of the river as a whole is dependent upon the 
regularity (also perhaps suggested by the repetition ἕτερα καὶ 
ἕτερα) of the flux of its constituent waters. The river provides an 
image of the balance of constituents in the world. The river- 
statement does not suggest for one moment that everything singly 
behaves like a river. Obviously, a rock or a mountain or a table is 
temporarily static, and will remain so, perhaps, for a long time: 
what matters for Heraclitus’ theory of balanced reaction and strife 
is that eventually it should change and so help to maintain the process 
of world-constituents. Meanwhile the stability of a mountain, for 


198 


HERACLITUS 


example, is balanced by a corresponding stability elsewhere of 
corresponding masses of sea, and of fire or aither (the mountain 
being mostly earth); on which see the next section. 


(7) The world ts an ever-lwing fire, parts of which are always extinguished 
to form the two other main world-masses, sea and earth. Changes between 
fire, sea and earth balance each other; pure, or aitherial, fire has a directive 
capacity 

220 Fr. 30, Clement Strom. v, 104, 1 κόσμον τόνδε [τὸν αὐτὸν 
ἁπάντων]: οὔτε τις θεῶν οὔτε ἀνθρώπων ἐποίησεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἦν ἀεὶ Kal 
ἔστιν καὶ ἔσται πῦρ ἀείφωον, ἁπτόμενον μέτρα καὶ ἀποσβεννύμενον 
μέτρα. 

221 Fr. 31, Clement Strom. v, 104, 35 πυρὸς τροπαί πρῶτον 
θάλασσα, θαλάσσης δὲ TO μὲν ἥμισυ γῆ TO δὲ ἥμισυ πρηστήρ. .. 
{γῆς θάλασσα διαχέεται, καὶ μετρέεται εἰς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ὁκοῖος 
πρόσθεν ἦν ἢ γενέσθαι γῆ. 

222 τ. go, Plutarch de Ε 8, 388D πυρός τε ἀνταμοιβὴ τὰ πάντα 
καὶ πῦρ ἁπάντων ὅκωσπερ χρυσοῦ χρήματα καὶ χρημάτων χρυσός. 


223 Fr. 64, Hippolytus Ref. rx, το, 6 τὰ δὲ πάντα οἷακίρει 
κεραυνός. 


X Ψ]δβίοβ, op. cit. 344/f., argues that ‘the same of all’ is original, and 
contrasts the real physical world of common experience with the deceptive 
private imaginings of men who do not follow the Logos (cf. 198 ctc.). 
This would be possible enough if (what does not secm particularly 
probable) fr. 30 followed directly upon a reference to men’s delusions; 
but neither Plutarch nor Simplicius, who also quote the first part of the 
fragment, gives the debated phrase. More important, Vlastos does not 
mention that Clement in the context of the quotation is following some 
Stoic source in endeavouring to explain away this fragment’s incon- 
sistency with the Stoic ecpyrosis-interpretation, by arguing that ‘this 
world-order’ in Heraclitus is the all-inclusive, eternal system, tov ἐξ 
ἁπάσης τῆς οὐσίας ἰδίως ποιὸν κόσμον as Clement had just said, and not 
this particular world. Thus the interpolation is very strongly motivated; 
see further Kirk, Heraclitus, the Cosmic Fragments 307 ff. 





220 This world-order [the same of all] did none of gods or men make, but it always was 
and is and shall be: an everlasting fire, kindling in measures and going out in measures. 


221 Fire’s turnings: first sea, and of sea the half is earth, the half ‘ burner’ [i.e. lightning 
or fire]. . .(earth) is dispersed as sea, and is measured so as to form the same proportion 
as existed before it became earth. 


222 All things are an equal exchange for fire and fire for all things, as goods are for gold 
and gold for goods. 


223 Thunderbolt steers all things. 
199 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Fire is the archetypal form of matter. The world-order as a whole 
can be described as a fire of which measures are being extinguished, 
corresponding measures being re-kindled; not all of it is burning 
at the same time. It always has been, and always will be, in this 
condition (220). Cosmogony in the Milesian sense is therefore not 
to be found in Heraclitus. Fire cannot be an originative stuff in 
the way that water or air was for Thales or Anaximenes, and 
according to Aristotle and his followers it is no longer indefinite or 
infinite (cf. Theophrastus ap. Simpl. Phys. 24, 1, DK 2245); it 15 
nevertheless the continuing source of the natural processes in 221. 
Regarded as a part of the cosmos, fire is on a par with sca (presum- 
ably representing watcr in general, as in Xenophanes) and earth, 
as one of the three obvious world-masses. The pure cosmic fire was 
probably identified by Heraclitus with αἰθήρ (aither), the 
brilliant fiery stuff which fills the shining sky and surrounds the 
world: this aither was widely regarded both as divine and as a 
place of souls.t The apprehension that the soul may be fire or 
aither, not breath as Anaximencs had thought, must have helped 
to determine the choice of fire as the controlling form of matter 
(cf. p. 161). 223 shows that Heraclitus’ fire—the purest and 
brightest sort, that is, as of the aitherial and divine thunder- 
bolt—has a directive capacity. In part this reflects the divinity 
assigned to aither in the popular conception; more important, 
perhaps, is the fact that all fire (even the lower, mundane sort), by 
the regularity with which it absorbs fuel and emits smoke, while 
maintaining a kind of stability between them, patently embodics 
the rule of measure in change which inheres in the world process, 
and of which the Logos is an expression (pp. 188f.). Thus it is 
naturally conceived as the very constituent of things which 
actively determines their structure and behaviour—which ensures 
not only the opposition of opposites, but also their unity through 
‘strife’. 

τ Cf. c.g. 224 Aristotle de caelo Bt, 284a11 τὸν δ᾽ οὐρανὸν καὶ τὸν ἄνω 

τόπον of μὲν ἀρχαῖοι τοῖς θεοῖς ἀπένειμαν ὡς ὄντα μόνον ἀθάνατον.... 


225 Inscriptiones Graecae’ 1, 945, 6 (Athens, 5th c. B.c.) αἰθὴρ μὲν ψυχὰς 
ὑπεδέξατο, σώμζατα δὲ χθών]. 226 [Hippocrates] de carnibus 2 δοκέει δέ 


- ee - - ---- 





224 ‘The ancients assigned to the gods the heaven and the upper region as being the only 
immortal place... . 


225 Aither received their souls, earth their bodies. 


200 


HERACLITUS 


μοι ὃ καλέομεν θερμὸν ἀθάνατόν te εἶναι καὶ νοέειν πάντα Kal ὁρῆν Kal 
ἀκούειν καὶ εἰδέναι πάντα, ἐόντα τε καὶ ἐσόμενα. τοῦτο οὖν τὸ πλεῖστον, 
ὅτε ἐταράχθη ἅπαντα, ἐξεχώρησεν els τὴν ἀνωτάτω περιφορήν, καὶ αὐτό 
μοι δοκέει αἰθέρα τοῖς παλαιοῖς εἰρῆσθαι. Cf. also Euripides fr. 839, 91}, 
fr. g41 (Nauck’), Helen 1014 ff.; Aristophanes Peace 832f. None of these 
passages, of course, 1s as carly as Heraclitus, and 226 clearly shows the 
influence of Anaxagoras and Diogenes of Apollonia. But the belief is 
described as ancient in 224 and 226, and is so widely represented in fifth- 
century poetry that it must have been well established and widely known 
by then. It is comparable with the belief in the divinity of the sun, which 
must be of great antiquity. 


The cosmos consists, broadly, of the masses of earth (inter- 
penetrated with secondary fire, as in volcanos) and sea, surrounded 
by the bright integument of fire or aithcr. This fire, we may 
conjecture on the basis of 221, was regarded by Heraclitus as the 
motive point of the cosmological processes: from its region appears 
to come rain, which ultimately nourishes the sea, and it is itself 
replenished (for fire ‘consumes’ moisture) by the moist evaporation 
ascending from the sca. Sea, as Xcnophanes had shown, turns 
into earth, and earth at other times and places changes to water. 
Thus sea and earth are what cosmic or aitherial fire ‘turns to’ 
(221).1 Changes between the three world-masses are going on 
simultaneously in such a way that the total of each always remains 
the same. If a quantity of earth dissolves into sea, an cquivalcnt 
quantity of sea in other parts is condensing into earth, and so with 
changes between sea and ‘burner’ (fire) : this seems to be the sense 
of 221. The λόγος or proportion remains the samce—again it is the 
measure and regularity of change, this time of large-scale cosmo- 
logical change, that is stressed. The only surprising thing about this 
cosmology is its apparent avoidance of analysis into opposites and 
of the relation of opposites to fire-sea-earth. ‘The probable expla- 
nation is that the opposites are invoked in the logical examination 
of change, but that in the examination of large-scale changes a 
more empirical description can be retained, particularly as the 
Logos is closely related to fire. The connexion between the two 
types of analysis is the underlying concept of measure and 
proportion. 





226 What we call ‘hot’ seems to me to be immortal and to apprehend all things and to 
see and hear and know all things, both present and future. This, then, the most of all, when 
all things became confused, went out to the furthermost revolution, and seems to me to have 
been what was called aither by the men of old. 


201 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


< Or ‘is exchanged for’ in the phrase of 222. Note that 220 and 222 
both utterly invalidate the Stoic ascription to Heraclitus of a periodic 
ἐκττύρωσις or consumption of the world by fire. The world-order is and shall 
be an ever-living fire kindling and going out in measures (simultaneously, 
that is): and in the trade-image of goods and gold the situation could not 
arise that all the goods (the manifold world) are simultaneously absorbed 
into gold (fire), so that there is all gold and no goods. Theophrastus, after 
referring to this image, added ‘He makes an order and a definite time of 
the change of the world according to some destined necessity’ (Simpl. 
Phys. 24, 4ff., DK 22.4.5). It seems probable that Theophrastus was here 
misapplying Aristotle’s dictum that ‘things are destroyed into that from 
which they came’; influenced in addition, perhaps, by Aristotle’s curious 
remark (de caelo A10, 279b14, DK 22410) that Empedocles and Heraclitus 
made the world fluctuate between its present condition and destruction. 
Aristotle may have been thinking of a great-year cycle of 10,800 years 
apparently mentioned by Heraclitus (DK 22413); this may have applied 
to a cycle of favoured souls, or conceivably to the time taken for a single 
portion of fire to pass through all its stages, and in either case could have 
been misleading if presented incompletely. Plato (Soph. 242 Ὁ, DK 224 10) 
clearly distinguished between Heraclitus’ simultaneous unity and plurality 
of the cosmos and Empedocles’ separate periods of Love and Strife. At the 
same time, they are mentioned together as both alike believing in the unity 
and plurality of the cosmos; and Aristotle’s coupling of the two might 
conceivably have been motivated by the Platonic comparison, the 
important distinction between them being overlooked. 


(8) Astronomy. The heavenly bodies are bowls of fire, nourished by 


exhalations from the sea; astronomical events, too, have their measures 


227 Diogenes Laertius rx, 9-10 (DK22A1) τὸ δὲ περιέχον 
ὁποῖόν ἐστιν οὐ δηλοῖ εἶναι μέντοι ἐν αὐτῷ σκάφας ἐπεστραμμένας 
κατὰ κοῖλον πρὸς ἡμᾶς, ἐν αἷς ἀθροιφτομένας τὰς λαμτρὰς ἀναθυμιάσεις 
ἀποτελεῖν φλόγας, ἃς εἶναι τὰ ἄστρα. (10) λαμπροτάτην δὲ εἶναι 
τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου φλόγα καὶ θερμοτάτην... .ἐκλείττειν τε ἥλιον καὶ 
σελήνην ἄνω στρεφομένων τῶν σκαφῶν τούς τε κατὰ μῆνα τῆς 
σελήνης σχηματισμοὺς γίνεσθαι στρεφομένης ἐν αὐτῇ κατὰ μικρὸν 
τῆς σκάφης. 

228 Fr. 6, Aristotle Meteor. B2, 355a13 ὁ ἥλιος... «νέος ἐφ᾽ 
ἡμέρῃ ἐστίν. 





227 He does not reveal the nature of the surrounding; it contains, however, bowls 
turned with their hollow side towards us, in which the bright exhalations are collected and 
form flames, which are the heavenly bodies. Brightest and hottest is the flame of the sun.... 
And sun and moon are eclipsed when the bowls turn upwards; and the monthly phases of the 
moon occur as its bowl is gradually turned. 


228 The sun...ts new each day. 


202 


HERACLITUS 


229 Fr. 94, Plutarch de exil. 11, 604A “HAtos οὐχ ὑπερβήσεται 
μέτρα᾽ ef δὲ μή, “Epivues μιν Δίκης ἐπίκουροι ἐξευρήσουσιν. 


No extant fragment clearly reveals Heraclitus’ ideas on the nature 
of the heavenly bodies; but Theophrastus evidently gave a 
moderately detailed if subjective account of his views, the non- 
Peripatetic parts of which there is no reason to disbelieve. 
Diogenes preserves the fullest version of this account, of which 227 
is a part; for the rest (the stars are further from the earth than the 
sun, the moon nearer) see DK 22aA1. The heavenly bodies are 
solid bowls filled with fire. This fire is maintained by moist 
exhalations or evaporations from the sea, which are somehow 
collected in them and burned as fucl.t This is presumably the way 
in which water changes into fire in the balanced interaction 
between world-masses described in 221. The idea that, since 
moisture is evaporated by fire, fire 1s physically nourished by it 
is a naive and popular one. Similarly the solid celestial bowls are 
probably a quasi-scientific elaboration of the popular myth that 
the sun each night sails from west to east in a golden bowl round the 
northern stream of Okeanos (see 7, 8). Eclipses and phases of the 
moon were explained by the turning away of the bowls: but no 
true cause (as opposed to a mere mechanism) was given, and 
Diogenes (ΙΧ, 11, DK22A1), presumably still following Theo- 
phrastus, stated that Heraclitus said nothing about the constitu- 
tion of the bowls. Heraclitus was probably not interested in 
astronomy for its own sake, and seems to have been content with 
adaptations of popular accounts so long as his general theory of 
cosmological change was preserved. 228 is consonant with 
Theophrastus’ account of the celestial bowls: the sun is ‘new’ 
every day in the sense that its fire is replenished each night with 
entirely fresh exhalations. Naturally, this replenishment and 
consumption form a regular cycle, though one which could admit 
slight variations. The principle of measure in natural change is 
illustrated also in 229, where the sun is restrained by Dike, the 
personification of normality and therefore regularity, from exceed- 
ing its measures—for example from coming too close to the earth 
or shining beyond its proper time. 





229 Sun will not overstep his measures; otherwise the Erinyes, ministers of Justice, will 
find him out. 


203 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


t Theophrastus and his followers usually attributed two exhalations, a 
moist and a dry one, to Heraclitus: this is most probably a misunder- 
standing based upon Aristotle’s own dual-exhalation explanation of 
meteorological (as opposed, in his case, to astronomical) events. Aristotle 
seems to have elaborated this theory out of Heraclitus’ ideas on the 
importance of the exhalation from the sea and other terrestrial waters; but 
it appears from passages in his Meteorologica that Aristotle considered the 
dry exhalation from the earth to be his own discovery (Kirk, Heraclitus, the 
Cosmic Fragments 273 ff.). Yet, because it is kindled, he can treat Heraclitus’ 
exhalation as fiery: see p. 207 n. 1. The explanation of night and day (as 
well as winter and summer) as due to the alternating prevalence of the 
dark and bright exhalations, ascribed to Heraclitus in Diogenes’ Theo- 
phrastean account, is absurd: Heraclitus knew as well as anyone that day 
is due to the sun, and declared in fr. 99 that ‘if there were no sun, it would 
be night’, 


(9) Wisdom consists in understanding the way the world works 
230 ΡῚ. 41, Diogenes Laertius 1x, 1 ἕν TO σοφόν᾽ ἐπίστασθαι 
γνώμην, Kn κυβερνᾶται πάντα διὰ πάντων. 


231 Fr. 32, Clement Strom. v, 115, 1 ἕν τὸ σοφὸν μοῦνον 
λέγεσθαι οὐκ ἐθέλει καὶ ἐθέλει Ζηνὸς ὄνομα. 


1 ὁτέη κυβερνῆσαι P’B, ὁτ᾽ ἐγκυβερνῆσαι F; ὁτέη ἐκυβέρνησε Diels, DK, 
ὁπῇ κυβερνᾶται Gigon, Walzer, ὁτέῃ κυβερνᾶται Vlastos, ὅκη κυβερνᾶται 
scripsi. The feminine form ὁτέη is not, in fact, found; ὅκη is one obvious 
source of corruption. This involves taking γνώμην as internal accusative 
with ἐπίστασθαι, after Heidel: ‘to be acquainted with true judgement how 
all things are steered through all’. This would be a development of Solon 
fr. 16 Diehl: γνωμοσύνης δ᾽ ἀφανὲς χαλεττῶώτατόν ἐστι νοῆσαι {|μέτρον, ὃ 
δὴ πάντων πείρατα μοῦνον ἔχει (‘Most hard is it to apprehend the un- 
apparent measure of judgement, which alonc holds the limits of all things’). 
On the other hand the Stoics took γνώμην in Heraclitus’ saying as direct 
object of ἐπίστασθαι (cf. Cleanthes Hymn to Zeus 34f.), as representing their 
own familiar idea of divinc Reason; that they should place this interpreta- 
tion on the dictum is not surprising, in any casc. But that Heraclitus should 
have used γνώμη by itself, with no definite article and no possessor 
expressed, to stand for Fire or Logos (cf. 223), has seemed improbable to 
some. Each of the two alternative interpretations has its difficulties, but 
the resulting sense in each case is not very different: wisdom consists in 
understanding how the world works—which in any event involves under- 
standing the divine Logos. 


230 gives the real motive of Heraclitus’ philosophy: not mere 
curiosity about nature (although this was doubtless present too) 





230 The wise is one thing, to be acquainted with true judgement, how all things are 
steered through all. 
231 One thing, the only truly wise, does not and does consent to be called by the name of 


Keus. 
204, 


HERACLITUS 


but the belief that man’s very life is indissociably bound up with 
his whole surroundings. Wisdom—and therefore, it might be 
inferred, satisfactory living—consists in understanding the Logos, 
the analogous structure or common element of arrangement in 
things, embodying the μέτρον or measure which ensures that change 
does not produce disconnected, chaotic plurality. Absolute under- 
standing here can only be achieved by god (231; cf. also 209), who 
in some respects, therefore (but not of course in anthropomorphism 
and in the demand for cult), resembles the Zeus of the conven- 
tional religion. God, with his synoptic view, is thus ‘the only thing 
that is (completely) wise’. Fire (223) and the Logos itself (199) 
are to a large degree co-extensive with, or different aspects of, this 
completely wise thing. 

It remains to describe Heraclitus’ views about men—their soul, 
institutions and ideas. But for Heraclitus this subject was in no 
way separate from the study of the outside world; the same 
materials and the same laws are found in cach sphere. 230 clearly 
depends upon this assumption, which is implicit also in 197 (fr. 1). 


(10) The soul 1s composed of fire; 1t comes from, and turns into, moisture, 
total absorption by which is death for it. The soul-fire 1s related to the 
world-fire 

232 ΒΥ. 36, Clement Strom. vi, 17, 2 Ψψυχῆσιν θάνατος ὕδωρ 
γενέσθαι, ὕδατι δὲ θάνατος γῆν γενέσθαι" ἐκ γῆς δὲ ὕδωρ γίνεται, 
ἐξ ὕδατος δὲ ψυχή. 

233 ΕῪ. 118, Stobaeus Anth. τπ, 5, 8 αὔη ψυχὴ σοφωτάτη καὶ 
ἀρίστη. 

234 Ετ. 117, Stobaeus Anth. πὶ, 5,7ῶ ἀνὴρ ὁκόταν μεθυσθῇ ἄγεται 
ὑπὸ Tra1ddos ἀνήβου, σφαλλόμενος, οὐκ ἐπαΐων ὅκη βαίνει, ὑγρὴν τὴν 
ψυχὴν ἔχων. 

235 Fr. 45, Diogenes Laertius 1x, 7 Ψυχῆς πείρατα ἰὼν οὐκ ἂν 
ἐξεύροιο, πᾶσαν ἐπιπορενόμενος ὁδόν: οὕτω βαθὺν λόγον ἔχει. 





232 For souls it ts death to become water, for water it is death to become earth; from 
earth water comes-to-be, and from water, soul. 


233 A dry soul is wisest and best. 


234 <A man when he is drunk is led by an unfledged boy, stumbling and not knowing 
where he goes, having his soul moist. 


235 You would not find out the boundaries of soul, even by travelling along every path: 
so deep a measure does it have. 


205 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Anaximenes had probably drawn cosmological conclusions from 
the nature of the soul, which, following the Homeric view, he 
envisaged as breath. Heraclitus abandoned this idea in favour of 
another popular conception of the soul, that it was made of fiery 
aither. On this foundation he built up a rationalistic psychological 
theory, in which for the first time (unless Pythagoras himself went 
further in this direction than we suspcct) the structure of the soul 
is related not only to that of the body, but also to that of the world 
as a whole. 

The soul in its true and effective state is made of fire: in 232 
soul replaces fire in a list of what might otherwise be taken for the 
main interactions of the world-masses (cf. 221). ‘The implication 
is not only that soul is fiery, but also that it plays some part in the 
great cycle of natural change. It comes into being from moisture 
(and, if it is analogous to cosmic fire, is maintained, at least in 
part, by some kind of moisture—sec p. 203), and is destroyed 
when it turns entirely into water. The efficient soul is dry (233), 
that is, fiery. A soul that is moistened, for example by excessive 
drinking as in 234 (which well illustrates the still naive character 
of Heraclitus’ psychology), is diminished in capacity and makes 
its owner behave childishly, without either wits or physical 
strength. Thus intellect is explicitly placed in the soul. The soul, 
which can move to all parts of the body at need,” has limits that 
cannot be reached (235) ; probably the thought here is not so much 
of the problem of self-consciousness as of the soul being a repre- 
sentative portion of the cosmic fire—which, compared with the 
individual, is obviously of vast extent. Thus it could be conceived 
as an adulterated fragment of the surrounding cosmic fire,3 and 
so as the possessor in some degree of that fire’s directive power 
(223). All this, as has been indicated, is a development of what 
may be reasonably taken as a popular conception of the nature of 
aither (cf. n. 1 on p. 200); but a simpler and more empirical 
indication of the fiery nature of soul was at hand, since it must 
have been commonly observed that warmth is associated with the 
living body and that the dead, soulless body is cold (so Vlastos, 


op. cit. 364f.). 


ΤΑ Stoic re-formulation of 232, in which air is characteristically added 
to the three genuinely Heraclitean world-masses (to produce the four 
‘elements’ of post-Empedoclean speculation), gives ‘the death of fire is 
the birth of air’, etc.; this appears as fr. 76 in DK, but is totally misleading 


206 


HERACLITUS 


for Heraclitus. He appears to have ignored air as a major cosmic consti- 
tuent, in spite of Anaximenes; though the exhalation from the sea, by 
which sea turns to fire, might have been termed ἀήρ. Aristotle (de an. A2, 
405a24, DK22A15) wrote that Heraclitus made soul the same as the 
material principle, namely ‘the exhalation from which he compounds 
the other things’. Aristotle himself accepted two kinds of exhalation, one 
being fiery, so that the ‘exhalation’ here represents fire. 


2 According to the scholiast on Chalcidius (fr. 676 in DK) Heraclitus 
compared the soul to a spider which rushes to any part of its web which is 
damaged. The soul is described as ‘firme et proportionaliter iuncta’ to 
the body; the idea of proportion is appropriate to Heraclitus. Cf. on 
Anaximenes, pp. 158 ff. 


3 So Macrobius S. Scip. 14, 19 (DK 224 15), ‘Heraclitus said that the soul 
is a spark of the essential substance of the stars’ (scintillam stellaris essentiae)— 
the stars being no doubt conceived as concentrations of aither. 


(11).-Waking, sleeping and death are related to the degree of fieriness in the 
soul. In sleep the soul ts partly cut off from the world-fire, and so decreases 
in activity 

236 Fr. 26, Clement Strom. tv, 141, 2 ἄνθρωπος ἐν εὐφρόνῃ 
φάος ἅπτεται ἑαυτῷ [ἀποθανὼν] ἀποσβεσθεὶς ὄψεις, τῶν δὲ ἅπτεται 
τεθνεῶτος εὕδων [ἀποσβεσθεὶς ὄψεις], ἐγρηγορὼς ἅπτεται εὕδοντος. 
(Text as in DK, after Wilamowitz.) 

237 Sextus adv. math. vu, 129 (DK22A16) τοῦτον οὖν τὸν 
θεῖον λόγον Kad’? Ἡράκλειτον δι’ ἀναπνοῆς σπάσαντες voepol 
γινόμεθα, καὶ ἐν μὲν ὕπνοις ληθαῖοι, κατὰ δὲ ἔγερσιν πάλιν ἔμφρονες" 
ἐν γὰρ τοῖς ὕπνοις μυσάντων τῶν αἰσθητικῶν πόρων yopizetar τῆς 
πρὸς τὸ περιέχον συμφυΐας ὁ ἐν ἡμῖν νοῦς, μόνης τῆς κατὰ ἀναπνοὴν 
προσφύσεως σῳτομένης οἷονεί τινος ῥίφης, χωρισθείς τε ἀποβάλλει 
ἣν πρότερον εἶχε μνημονικὴν δύναμιν. (130) ἐν δὲ ἐγρηγόρσει πάλιν 
διὰ τῶν αἰσθητικῶν πόρων ὥσπερ διά τινῶν θυρίδων προκύψας καὶ 
τῷ περιέχοντι συμβαλὼν λογικὴν ἐνδύεται δύναμιν. ... 





236 A man in the nighi kindles a light for himself when his vision is extinguished ; 
living, he is in contact with the dead, when asleep, and with the sleeper, when awake. 


237 According to Heraclitus we become intelligent by drawing in this divine reason 
[logos] through breathing, and forgetful when asleep, but we regain our senses when 
we wake up again. For in sleep, when the channels of perception are shut, our mind is 
sundered from its kinship with the surrounding, and breathing is the only point of attach- 
ment to be preserved, like a kind of root; being sundered, our mind casts off its former power 
of memory. But in the waking state it again peeps out through the channels of perception 
as though through a kind of window, and meeting with the surrounding it puts on tts power 
of reason.... 


207 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


The light kindled at night in 236 must be what a man sees in 
dreaming, when the actual darkness seems to be illuminated; we 
are also told that ‘sleepers are workers’ (fr. 75) and that ‘what 
we see when asleep is sleep’ (fr. 21). Naturally this light 15 
deceptive: sce the last sentence of fr. 1 (197). It is an individual, 
private illumination which supplants the real illumination of the 
Logos which is common to all (198). In sleep a man is ‘in contact 
with’ death (there is a typical Heraclitean word-play in 236 
between the two senses of ἅπτεσθαι, ‘kindle’ and ‘touch’): his 
soul-fire is burning low, is almost extinguished, and in most 
respects he resembles a dead man. Sleep, then, is a medial state 
between waking life and death. 

Sextus’ information in 237 15 obviously important, but must be 
treated with caution: he naturally imposed Sceptic epistemo- 
logical interpretations upon Heraclitus, for whom his sources were, 
in addition, Stoic-influenced. Yet he goes on to make clearly 
accurate quotations of the long fr. 1 and of fr. 2 (197 and 198). It 
is to be expectcd from 232 that the soul-fire has some kind of 
physical affinity, and therefore connexion, with the cosmic fire 
outside. Sextus tells us that in the waking state the connexion is 
provided by a direct contact through the senses with the external 
fire—with the ‘surrounding’, in his own terminology, by which it 
may be inferred that the surrounding aither is meant; or rather the 
Logos-element in things, which may be envisaged as a direct off- 
shoot of the pure aitherial fire. Sight is presumably of particular 
importance among the senscs, since it receives and absorbs the 
fiery impressions of light. In slcep the only possible contact is 
provided by breathing; it may be wondered whethcr this draws in 
fire so much as moisture (though cf. n. 3 on p. 211), since ‘souls 
come from water’ (232) and should draw nourishment from 
moisture. According to Aetius Iv, 3, 12, DK 22415 (where there 
is some Stoic influence), souls are nourished by both external and 
internal exhalations: the internal exhalations, if they exist, would 
be from blood and other bodily liquids; the external ones would 
be those absorbed by breathing, and likewise moist. Unfortunately 
the extant fragments are no help here.? It is possible that in sleep 
the moist nourishment of the soul-fire, no longer balanced by the 
direct fiery accretions received in waking through the senses, 
subdues the soul and brings it into a death-like state. It may be 
noted that the intelligent condition consequent upon the appre- 


208 


HERACLITUS 


hension of the Logos (see fr. 1, 197) would mean in psychological 
terms that the active, fiery part of the soul has made contact with 
the fiery Logos-constituent of the objective situation, and has been 
increased by it.? 
t Sextus went on to compare the resuscitation of the soul-fire by restored 
contact with the universal Logos (here expressed in Stoic-Sceptic terms) 
with the way in which embers glow again when brought near to a live fire. 
This image, already perhaps used by Xenophanes (p. 173), may well have 
been re-used by Heraclitus. Conceivably the word ἀγχιβασίη, ‘going 


near to’, which Heraclitus used (fr. 122) according to the Suda, belonged 
to the same image. 


2 Chalcidius, probably after Posidonius, ascribed to Heraclitus a view 
quite different from Sextus’, according to which the soul only has contact 
with the cosmic reason when free in sleep from the interruption of the 
senses (in Tim. ch. 251, DK 22.4.20). The ‘cosmic reason’ is Stoic, and the 
rest is quite obviously (pace A. Delatte) Platonic; though cf. Pi. fr. 131b. 


(12) Virtuous souls do not become water on the death of the body, but 
survive to join, eventually, the cosmic fire 


238 «Fr. 25, Clement Strom. τν, 49, 3 μόροι yap μέφονες μέφονας 
μοίρας λαγχάνουσι καθ᾽ Ἡράκλειτον. 

239 [ΓὙ. 63, Hippolytus Ref. 1x, το, 6 Τἔνθα δ᾽ ἐόντι ἐπανίστ- 
ασθαι καὶ φύλακας γίνεσθαι ἐγερτὶ φτώντων καὶ νεκρῶν. 

240 (Fr. 136), Σ Bodl. ad Epictetum, p. Ixxxiii Schenkl 


Ψυχαὶ ἀρηίφατοι καθαρώτεραι ἢ ἐνὶ νούσοις. 


The ‘better portions’ which are won in 238 must belong to the 
soul alone, since aftcr death the body is ‘more fit to be cast out 
than dung’ (fr. 96). Therefore not all souls can equally undergo 
the ‘death’ (232) of becoming water, that is, of ceasing to be soul, 
which is essentially fiery. 239 (whose first words are probably 
corrupt) seems to suggest that certain souls survive death and 
become daimons; this is manifestly developed from a famous 
passage in Hesiod." The key to Heraclitus’ belicf here is, I think, 
provided by 240, which is clearly not a verbatim quotation but a 
versc summary of perhaps considcrably later date than Heraclitus 
himself (although we know from Diogenes Laertius rx, 16, 





238 for better deaths gain better portions according to Heraclitus. 


239 {To him [or it], being there,t they rise up and become guardians, wakefully, of 
living and dead. 


240 Souls slain in war are purer than those (that perish) in diseases. 


14 200 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


DK 2241, that Scythinus made a metrical version of Heraclitus in 
the late fourth or third century B.c.). It probably owes something 
to fr. 24, ‘Gods and men honour those slain in battle’, but the 
comparison with those who die from illness is quite new, and is 
unlikely to have been simply invented after Heraclitus. How can 
the souls of those dying in battle, it may be asked, be ‘purer’ than 
the souls of those dying from disease? The answer I suggest is that 
the latter are moistened and inefficient, and their possessors are in 
a semi-conscious and sleep-like condition; those slain in battle, on 
the contrary, are cut off at their most active, when their souls are 
fiery from virtuous and courageous activity. At the moment of 
death the enfeebled souls of the sick lose their last residue of 
fieriness and become completely watery, so that they cease to 
exist as souls; while the souls of those slain in battle (almost 
instantancously, for the most part) are predominantly fiery. It 
seems plausible, then, that the latter avoid the soul-death of 
becoming water.3 They leave the body and, we may guess, are 
re-united with the aitherial fire. Before this happens they probably 
remain for a time as disembodied daimons, after the Hesiodic 
pattern. But there can be no idea of individual survival apart from 
this, or indeed of perpetual survival as aitherial fire: for measures 
of that fire are constantly being drawn into the cosmological 
process, and undergo the changes of 221 (see n. on p. 202 for a 
possible soul-period of some kind). Thus Heraclitus does not 
appear to be indebted here to Pythagoras. 


1 241 Hesiod Erga 121 ff. (of the golden race) αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ δὴ τοῦτο γένος 
κατὰ yal’ ἐκάλυψε || τοὶ μὲν δαίμονές εἶσι Διὸς μεγάλον διὰ βουλὰς / ἐσθλοί, 
ἐπιχθόνιοι φύλακες θνητῶν ἀνθρώπων. See also ibid. 252ff. Another 
saying of Heraclitus preserved by Hippolytus is very obscure: it evidently 
has some connexion with the doctrine of opposites, but also suggests the 
deification of some souls (cf. 216): 242 Fr. 62, Hippolytus Ref. rx, 10, 6 
ἀθάνατοι θνητοί, θνητοὶ ἀθάνατοι, yddvtes τὸν ἐκείνων θάνατον τὸν δὲ ἐκείνων 
βίον τεθνεῶτες. 

2 Though it has been ingeniously suggested by W. J. Verdenius that one 
saying implies that θυμός, anger or emotion, entails a fiery expenditure or 
decrease of the soul-fire (compare ‘flashing eyes’, ‘breathing fire’, etc. in 





241 But when the earth hid this race, they are noble daimons through the counsels 
of great Keus, guardians on earth of mortal man. 

242 Immortal mortals, mortal immortals [or mortal immortals, immortal mortals; or 
immortals are mortal, mortals are immortal; or immortals are mortals, mortals are 
immortals, etc.], living their death and dying their life. 


210 


HERACLITUS 


our own idiom): 243 Fr. 85, Plutarch Coriol. 22 θυμῷ μάχεσθαι χαλεπόν" 
ὃ γὰρ ἄν θέλῃ ψυχῆς ὠνεῖται. It is difficult to control anger because the 
soul-fire (which presumably does the controlling) has been diminished by 
anger. This is probably correct: but in virtuous anger or cmotion (as in 
the heroic conception of battle) this loss might be more than made up by 
an increase of fire. 


3 Fr. 98 describes souls as ‘using smell in Hades’: this, too, suggests that 
some souls, at least, exist after the death of the body. ‘Hades’ should not 
be taken too literally. The point of this cryptic saying is perhaps that those 
souls which survive death are surrounded by dry matter (in other words, 
fire) ; for it was a common view that the sense of smell operates on objects 
drier than the smelling organ (de carnibus 16; Aristotle de sensu 5, 444.22). 
It is possible, however, that the fragment is quite naive in implication : 
simply that soul is (according to one popular view) breath, that smell is 
inhaled with the breath, and therefore that smell is the sense used by the 
soul when the other organs have perished with the body. If this is so the 
saying could be ironic, or an attack on the idea of the breath-soul. 


(13) The uses of conventional religion are foolish and illogical, although 
on occasion they accidentally point to the truth 


244 Fr. 5, Aristocritus Theosophia 68 καθαίρονται δ᾽ ἄλλως 
(αἷμαν αἵματι μιαινόμενοι οἷον ef tis εἰς πηλὸν ἐμβὰς πηλῷ ἀπονί- 
τοῖτο. μαίνεσθαι δ᾽ ἂν δοκοίη, εἴ τις αὐτὸν ἀνθρώπων ἐπιφράσαιτο 
οὕτω ποιέοντα. καὶ τοῖς ἀγάλμασι δὲ τουτέοισιν εὔχονται, ὁκοῖον 
εἴ τις δόμοισι λεσχηνεύοιτο, οὔ τι γινώσκων θεοὺς οὐδ᾽ ἥρωας 
οἵτινές εἰσι. [ζαἷμαΣ D. 5. Robertson. | 

245 Fr. 14, Clement Protrepticus 22 τὰ νομιφόμενα κατ᾽ ἀνθρώ- 
πους μυστήρια ἀνιερωστὶ μνεῦνται. 

246 Fr. 15, Clement Protrepticus 44. ei μὴ γὰρ Διονύσῳ πομτὴν 
ἐποιοῦντο καὶ ὕμνεον ἄσμα αἰδοίοισιν, ἀναιδέστατα εἴργαστ᾽ ἄν᾽ 
ὡυτὸς δὲ ᾿Αίδης καὶ Διόνυσος, ὁτέῳ μαίνονται καὶ ληναΐφουσιν. 

247 Fr. 93, Plutarch de Pyth. or. 21, 404 E ὁ ἄναξ οὗ τὸ μαντεῖόν 
ἐστι TO ἐν Δελφοῖς οὔτε λέγει οὔτε κρύπτει ἀλλὰ σημαίνει. 





243 Its hard to fight with anger; for what it wants it buys at the price of soul. 


244 They vainly purify themselves with blood when they are defiled with blood, as 
though one who had stepped into mud were to wash with mud; he would seem to be mad, 
if any of men noticed him doing this. Further, they pray to these statues, as if one were to 
carry on a conversation with houses, not recognizing the true nature of gods or demi-gods. 
245 The secret rites practised among men are celebrated in an unholy manner. 

246 For if it were not to Dionysus that they made the procession and sung the hymn to 
the shameful parts, the deed would be most shameless; but Hades and Dionysus, for whom 
they rave and celebrate Lenaean rites, are the same. 


247 The lord whose oracle is in Delphi neither speaks out nor conceals, but gives a sign. 


211 14-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Heraclitus followed Xenophanes in ridiculing the anthropo- 
morphism and idolatry of the contemporary Olympian religion. 
Yet the last words of 244 (and also, e.g., 207 and 239) show that he 
did not reject the idea of divinity altogether, or even some con- 
ventional descriptions of it. 245 implies that mysteries would not 
be utterly worthless if they were correctly celebrated. 246 suggests 
how this is so: such rituals can possess (and sometimes accidentally 
do possess) a positive value, because they guide men indirectly to 
the apprehension of the Logos. The precise grounds on which 
Hades and Dionysus are here identified are not known, but pre- 
sumably the former represents death, the latter exuberant life; and 
it is the implied identification of these cspecially significant 
opposites (cf. 205, 242) that prevents the cult from being utterly 
shameful. It may be observed that the participants themselves 
could hardly be expected to see the significance of what they do, 
at least before Heraclitus revealed it—or rather hinted at it: the 
method adopted by Apollo in his Delphic pronouncements is 
praised in 247, because a sign may accord better than a mis- 
leadingly explicit statement with the nature of the underlying truth, 
that of the Logos (cf. 210-212). Probably Heraclitus intended by 
this kind of parallel to justify his own oracular and obscure style." 
1 Cf. 248 Fr. 92, Plutarch de Pyth. or. 6, 3974 Σίβυλλα δὲ μαινομένῳ 
στόματι Kad? Ἡράκλειτον ἀγέλαστα Kal ἀκαλλώπιστα Kal ἀμύριστα 
φθεγγομένη χιλίων ἐτῶν ἐξικνεῖται τῇ φωνῇ διὰ τὸν θεόν. It is impossible 
to determine precisely how much of this is a verbatim quotation; H. Frankel, 
for example, thinks that only down to στόματι is. I would conjecture that 
down to φθεγγομένη (with the possible exception of καὶ ἀκαλλώπιστα καὶ 
ἀμύρισταλ is by Heraclitus, the rest is a very loose paraphrase by Plutarch. 
The saying looks like a justification of the unadorned oracular method of 
exegesis; but precise interpretation is impossible. Heraclitus himself 
certainly combined the terseness of the gnomic style with the obscurity of 
the related oracular style; his underlying meaning was sometimes rein- 
forced by the use of word-plays and etymological periphrases. A somewhat 


similar use is seen in Aeschylus, whose choral style, especially in the 
Oresteia, has some affinities with Heraclitus. 


(14) Ethical and political advice; self-knowledge, common sense and 
moderation are ideals which for Heraclitus had a special grounding in his 
account of the world as a whole 

249 Fr. 101, Plutarch adv. Colot.20, 11180 ἐδιφησάμην ἐμεωυτόν. 





248 The Sibyl with raving mouth, according to Heraclitus, uttering things mirthless, 
unadorned and unperfumed, reaches over a thousand years with her voice through the god. 


249 I sought for myself. 
212 


HERACLITUS 


250 Fr. 119, Stobaeus Anth. Iv, 40, 22 ἦθος ἀνθρώπῳ δαίμων. 


251 Fr. 43, Diogenes Laertius 1x, 2 ὕβριν χρὴ σβεννύναι μᾶλλον 
ἢ πυρκαΐϊήν. 

252 Fr. 44, Diogenes Laertius ΙΧ, 2 μάχεσθαι χρὴ τὸν δῆμον 
ὑπὲρ τοῦ νόμου ὅκωσπερ τείχεος. 


253 Ετ. 114, Stobaeus Anth. m, 1, 170 ξὺν νόῳ λέγοντας ἰσχυ- 
ρίφεσθαι χρὴ τῷ ξυνῷ πάντων, ὅκωσπερ νόμῳ πόλις καὶ πολὺ 
ἰσχυροτέρως: τρέφονται γὰρ πάντες οἱ ἀνθρώπειοι νόμοι ὑπὸ ἑνὸς 
τοῦ θείου κρατεῖ γὰρ τοσοῦτον ὁκόσον ἐθέλει καὶ ἐξαρκεῖ πᾶσι καὶ 
περιγίνεται. 


Heraclitus’ ethical advice is gnomic in form, and for the most part 
similar in general content to that of his predecessors and con- 
temporaries; sometimes it is expressed more graphically and often 
more savagely.t It stresses the importance of moderation, which 
itself depends upon a correct assessment of one’s capacities. But this 
kind of advice (with which one naturally compares the Delphic 
maxims “Know thyself’ and ‘Nothing too much’) has a deeper 
significance in Heraclitus because of its grounding (not explicitly 
stated but clearly implied in 197 etc.) in his physical theories, and 
because of his belief that only by understanding the central pattern 
of things can a man become wise and fully effective: see 197, 199, 
230, 237. That is the real moral of Heraclitus’ philosophy, in 
which ethics is for the first time formally interwoven with physics. 


1 Heraclitus was undoubtedly of a strongly critical temperament, and his 
abuse can hardly have made him popular with his unfortunate fellow- 
citizens: cf. e.g. 254 Fr. 29, Clement Strom. v, 59, 5 αἱρεῦνται yap ἕν 
ἀντὶ ἁπάντων of ἄριστοι, κλέος ἀέναον θνητῶν of δὲ πολλοὶ κεκόρηνται 
ὅκωσπερ κτήνεα. His political ideas seem to have becn anti-democratic, 
though perhaps from empirical rather than ideological motives: ‘One man 
is as ten thousand for me, if he is best’, he said (fr. 49), and abused the 





250 Man’s character is his daimon. 
25x Insolence is more to be extinguished than a conflagration. 
252 The people must fight on behalf of the law as though for the city wall. 


253 Those who speak with sense must rely on what 1s common to all, as a city must rely 
on its law, and with much greater reliance. For all the laws of men are nourished by one 
law, the divine law; for it has as much power as it wishes and is sufficient for all and is 
still left over. 


254 The best choose one thing in place of all else, ‘everlasting’ glory among mortals; 
but the majority are glutted like cattle. 


213 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Ephesians for exiling his friend Hermodorus on the ground of his excep- 
tional ability (fr. 121). Himself of noble birth, he refused his traditional 


privileges (194). 

Thus ‘searching for oneself’ in 249 leads, it may be inferred, to 
the discovery that the soul ranges outside oneself (see 235, 237). 
250 is a denial of the view, common in Homer, that the individual 
often cannot be held responsible for what he does. δαίμων here 
means simply a man’s personal destiny; this is determined by his 
own character, over which he has some control, and not by 
external and often capricious powers acting perhaps through a 
‘genius’ allotted to each individual by chance or Fate. Helen 
blamed Aphrodite for her own weakness; but for Heraclitus (as 
indeed for Solon, who had already reacted against the moral 
helplessness of the heroic mentality) there was a real point in 
intelligent and prudent behaviour. 251 has no special overtones: 
it shows how conventional the practical side of Heraclitus’ ethics 
often was, and also that he did not always think of human behaviour 
in terms of the fiery nature of the soul (for ὕβρις should involve a 
moistening of the soul, not its conflagration). By contrast, the 
insistence on respect for law in 252, though again expressed in 
conventional terms, takes on a far deeper significance, and is given 
a profound justification, in the light of 253 (which should be 
compared with 197, 198 and 199). Human laws are nourished by 
the divine universal law; they accord with the Logos, the formulaic 
constituent of the cosmos. ‘Nourished’ is mainly, but not 
completely, metaphorical: the contact between human laws and 
the Logos is indirect, though not without matcrial basis, since good 
laws are the product of wise men with fiery souls (233) who thereby 
understood, as Heraclitus himself does, the proper relation of men 
with the world. 


CONCLUSION 


In spite of much obscurity and uncertainty of interpretation, it 
does appear that Heraclitus’ thought possessed a comprehensive 
unity which (conceivably because of the lack of information about 
Anaximander and Pythagoras) seems completely new. Practically 
all aspects of the world are explained systematically, in relation 
to a central discovery—that natural changes of all kinds are 
regular and balanced, and that the cause of this balance is fire, 
the common constituent of things that was also termed their 


214 


HERACLITUS 


Logos. Human behaviour, as much as changes in the external 
world, is governed by the same Logos: the soul is made of fire, part 
of which (like part of the whole world-order) is extinguished. 
Understanding of the Logos, of the true constitution of things, is 
necessary if our souls are not to be excessively moistened and 
rendered ineffective by private folly. Heraclitus’ relation of the 
soul to the world was more credible than that of Pythagoras, 
since it was more rational; it pointed a direction which was not, 
on the whole, followed until the atomists and, later, Aristotle; in 
the intervals a new tendency, towards the rejection of Nature, 
flourished with the Eleatics, Socrates and Plato. 


215 


THE ITALIAN SCHOOLS 


The second main stage in the history of Presocratic speculation con- 
sists of the two great Italian schools, the Pythagorean and the Eleatic. 
The original motive and character of Italian thought differ widely 
from those of the Milesians. Whereas the Milesians were impelled by 
innate intellectual curiosity and dissatisfaction with the old mytho- 
logical accounts to attempt a rational explanation of physical pheno- 
mena, the impulse underlying Pythagoreanism seems to have been a 
religious or emotional one. Plato himself refers to Pythagoras (Republic 
600 A-B, DK 14, 10) as ‘presiding over a band of intimate disciples 
who loved him for the inspiration of his society and handed down a 
way of life which to this day distinguishes the Pythagoreans from the 
rest of the world’. ‘Such a eulogy would be scarcely appropriate to the 
Milesians. Again, while the Milesians sought a purely materialist 
explanation of the world, and Heraclitus represents an intermediate 
stage, the Pythagoreans, this time in the words of Aristotle (Metaphysics 
A8, 989b29, DK 58822), ‘employ stranger principles and elements 
than the physicists, the reason being that they took them from non- 
sensible things’. he Pythagorean cosmology is concerned, at the out- 
set at any rate, more with the form or structure of the world than with 
its mere matter. 

But, as Aristotle adds in the next breath, having chosen their appa- 
rently abstract principles, ‘they still concern themselves wholly with 
nature; they generate the universe and watch what happens to its 
various parts and affections and activities; and they use up their first 
principles and causes on these things, as if they agreed with the other 
physicists that Being is just so much as is sensible and is embraced 
within what they call the universe. And yet, as I said, they maintain 
causes and first principles that are adequate to lead up to the higher 
kinds of reality—that are indeed better fitted to them than to discus- 
sions about nature.’ These sentences state very clearly what is probably 
the most important of all facts about the Italian schools. While the 
Pythagoreans were only secondarily, and the Eleatics hardly at all, 
interested in the material aspect of the world, and while both groups 
therefore start from first principles which in these days would be called 
abstract, both groups of thinkers alike, thanks merely to the date at 
which they lived, were so subject to the universal preconception that 
‘Being is just so much as is sensible’ that they end in a corporealism 
hardly less total, if much more difficult to understand, than that of the 
Milesians. Many modern scholars find this conclusion so repugnant 
that they read into the Italian philosophers’ theories philosophical 
distinctions of which all the evidence, including sometimes the actual 
words of the philosopher in question, seems to show that they were 
unaware. In the opinion of the present writer, it is only on the sup- 
position that the only form of existence recognized by the Presocratics 
was existence in space, and that consequently the distinction between 
the corporeal and the incorporeal had not yet been clearly and 
explicitly drawn, that it is possible to understand what the early 
Italian philosophers meant. 


216 


CHAPTER VII 
PYTHAGORAS OF SAMOS 


LIFE AND DATE 


While the developments already described were taking place in 
Ionia, an independent movement, initiated by Pythagoras, was 
gaining strength in southern Italy. Of the life of Pythagoras him- 
self, though there are several late and unreliable works on the 
subject, we can be said to know very little indeed. He passed his 
early life in the island of Samos,? flourishing, according to 
Apollodorus, in 532/1 B.c., during the reign of the tyrant Poly- 
crates. He is said to have left Samos to escape from the tyranny? 
and to have settled at Croton in southern Italy, where he appears 
to have risen to a position of great authority. Eventually, how- 
ever, the Crotoniates rose in revolt against him and he withdrew 
to the neighbouring city of Metapontium, where he died.* ,. - 

1 Cf. 2§§ Herodotus tv, 95 (DK 14, 2) os δὲ ἐγὼ πυνθάνομαι τῶν τὸν 

Ἑλλήσποντον οἰκεόντων Ἑλλήνων καὶ Πόντον, τὸν Σάλμοξιν τοῦτον ἐόντα 


ἄνθρωπον δουλεῦσαι ἐν Σάμῳ, δουλεῦσαι δὲ Πυθαγόρῃ τῷ Μνησάρχον... 
δοκέω δὲ πολλοῖσι ἔτεσι πρότερον τὸν Σάλμοξιν τοῦτον γενέσθαι Πυθαγόρεω. 


2 256 Porphyrius V.P. 9 (DK 4, 8) γεγονότα δ᾽ ἐτῶν τεσσαράκοντά 
φησιν ὁ ᾿Αριστόξενος καὶ ὁρῶντα τὴν τοῦ Πολυκράτους τυραννίδα συντονὼω- 
τέραν οὖσαν... .οὕτως δὴ τὴν εἷς ᾿Ιταλίαν ἄπαρσιν ποιήσασθαι. 


3 247 Diog. L. vin, 4 .-. .ἀπῆρεν els Κρότωνα τῆς Ἰταλίας, κἀκεῖ νόμους 
θεὶς τοῖς ᾿Ιταλιώταις ἐδοξάσθη σὺν τοῖς μαθηταῖς, of pds τοὺς τριακοσίους 
ὄντες φκονόμουν ἄριστα τὰ πολιτικά, ὥστε σχεδὸν ἀριστοκρατίαν εἶναι τὴν 
πολιτείαν. 


4 258 Iamblichus V.P. 249 (Κ΄ 14, 16) ὁ μὲν οὖν Πυθαγόρας διὰ 
ταύτην τὴν αἰτίαν ἀπῆλθεν els τὸ Μεταπόντιον κἀκεῖ λέγεται καταστρέψαι 
τὸν βίον. Cf. Diog. L. vim, 15. 





255 According to my information from the Greeks who live beside the Hellespont and 
Pontus, this Salmoxis, a real man, was a slave in Samos to Pythagoras son of Mnesarchus 
.. but I believe that this Salmoxis lived many years before Pythagoras. 

256 Aristoxenus says that at the age of forty, seeing that the tyranny of Polycrates had 
grown more intense,...he eventually emigrated to Italy. 

257 ...He emigrated to Croton in Italy and there, by legislating for the Italians, won 
renown together with his pupils. They numbered nearly 300, and they administered the 
affairs of state so well that the constitution was virtually an aristocracy. 


258 For this reason Pythagoras departed to Metapontium, where he is said to have died. 
217 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


OBSCURITY OF THE TRADITION 


Both Plato and Aristotle are remarkably chary of mentioning 
Pythagoras by name,’ and neither tells us, in the extant works, 
anything of the slightest value about him. Moreover, from the way 
in which they speak of Jater Pythagorean doctrine,” it would 
appear that they are both alike sceptical about the historical 
origins of Pythagoreanism. Probably the name of Pythagoras 
was already, as it certainly was later, enveloped in a mist of 
legend.3 


I Plato mentions him once only, at Rep. 600 A—s, Aristotle in his extant 
works (but cf. note 2 below) only twice, at Met. A5, 986a 30 (where, how- 
ever, the name of Pythagoras is probably only a later addition: cf. Ross, 
note ad loc.) and Rhet. B23, 1398b14. 

2 Plato uses the word Πυθαγόρειος with equal reserve: it occurs only at 
Rep. 530. Elsewhere he cites what we know to be Pythagorean doctrine 
anonymously. Aristotle, though he is not so shy of the word Πυθαγόρειος, 
frequently prefers to describe the Pythagoreans as either of Ἰταλικοί, of 
περὶ Ἰταλίαν or (as at Met. 985b23, 989b2¢9 etc.) of καλούμενοι Πυθαγό- 
peiot. Aristotle, however, was sufficiently interested in Pythagoreanism to 
write a treatisc, which is unfortunately lost, entitled Περὶ τῶν Πυθαγορείων. 
3 Certainly the surviving fragments of Aristotle’s lost work on the Pytha- 
goreans already incorporate several miraculous tales; cf. also 259 
Apollonius Hist. Mir. 6 (DK 14, 7) Πυθαγόρας Μνησάρχον υἱὸς τὸ 
μὲν πρῶτον Sietroveito περὶ τὰ μαθήματα Kal tous ἀριθμούς, ὕστερον 
δέ ποτε καὶ τῆς Φερεκύδον τερατοποιΐας οὐκ ἀπέστη. This is probably not 
a quotation from Aristotle (=fr. 191 Rose), as Heidel showed (417Ρ 61 
(1940) 8f.); but it may be based on Aristotle. For Pherecydes cf. 


pp. 50ff. 


EARLY EVIDENCE ABOUT PYTHAGORAS 

260 Heraclitus fr. 40, Diogenes Laertius 1x, 1 πολυμαθίη νόον 
ἔχειν οὐ διδάσκει" Ἡσίοδον yap ἂν ἐδίδαξε καὶ Πυθαγόρην αὖτίς τε 
Ζενοφάνεά τε καὶ Ἑκαταῖον. 

261 Heraclitus fr. 129, Diogenes Laertius vm, 6 Πυθαγόρης 
Μνησάρχου fotopinu ἤσκησεν ἀνθρώπων μάλιστα πάντων Kal 





259 Pythagoras son of Mnesarchus at first worked strenuously at mathematics and 
numbers, but later could not resist the miracle-mongering of Pherecydes. 


260 The learning of many things does not teach intelligence; if so it would have taught 
Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again Xenophanes and Hecataeus. 


261 Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchus, practised scientific enquiry beyond all other men 


218 


PYTHAGORAS 


ἐκλεξάμενος ταύτας Tas συγγραφὰς (sc. e.g. Hesiod?) ἐποιήσατο 
ἑαυτοῦ σοφίην, πολυμαθίην, κακοτεχνίην. 
262 Herodotus tv, 95 (DK 4, 2) .. .τὸν Σάλμοξιν τοῦτον. .. 
Ἕλλησί τε ὁμιλήσαντα καὶ Ἑλλήνων οὐ τῷ ἀσθενεστάτῳ σοφιστῇ 
Πυθαγόρῃ. ... 
263 Porphyrius Vita Pythagorae 30 (DK 318129) (= Empedocles 
fr. 129) τούτοις καὶ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆῇς μαρτυρεῖ λέγων περὶ αὐτοῦ 
(sc. Pythagoras) 
ἦν δέ τις ἐν κείνοισιν ἀνὴρ περιώσια εἰδώς, 
ὃς δὴ μήκιστον ττρατίδουον ἐκτήσατο πλοῦτον 
παντοίων τε μάλιστα σοφῶν {τ᾽ ἐπιήρανος ἔργων" 
ὁπότε γὰρ πάσῃσιν ὀρέξαιτο πραπίδεσσιν, 
ῥεῖ᾽ ὅ γε τῶν ὄντων πάντων λεύσσεσκεν ἕκαστον 
καί τε δέκ᾽ ἀνθρώπων καί τ᾽ εἴκοσιν αἰώνεσσιν. 
1 The authenticity of this fragment has been long doubted, and it was 
regarded by Diels (though not by Kranz) as spurious; but since the case 
against it rests on a misunderstanding of the word ἐκλεξάμενος, which was 


taken to imply that Pythagoras wrote rather than read books, there is no 
good reason why it should not be substantially genuine. 


Despite the silence of Plato and Aristotle these fifth-century 
passages, to which should be added also 268 and 269, amply 
suffice to prove that Pythagoras was in fact a historical, not merely 
a legendary, figure. The difficulty lies in establishing anything 
more than his bare existence; but we shall find that on the basis of 
what little contemporary or early evidence survives it is possible 
to reconstruct at least the rough outlines of his system. -- 


THE EARLY PYTHAGOREAN COMMUNITY 

Little as we know of Pythagoras himself, of his immediate followers 
we know even less. There can be no doubt that Pythagoras 
founded in Croton a sort of religious fraternity or order ;* but there 





and, making a selection of these writings, claimed for his own a wisdom which was really 
dilettanttsm and malpractice. 

262 ... This Salmoxis...who had associated with the Greeks, and especially with 
Pythagoras, who was not the weakest sage among the Greeks.... 

263 Empedocles too bears witness to this, writing of him: ‘And there was among them 
a man of rare knowledge, most skilled in all manner of wise works, a man who had won 
the utmost wealth of wisdom; for whensoever he strained with all his mind, he easily saw 
everything of all the things that are, in ten, yea, twenty lifetimes of men.’ (Empcdocles 
trans. Burnet) 


219 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


is no good evidence for the widely held view that it was modelled 
on Orphic cult-societies. It is true that Orphic and Pythagorean 
doctrines and practices are often compared, as they are first in the 
following passage: | 


264 Herodotus mn, 81 οὐ μέντοι ἔς ye τὰ ἱρὰ ἐσφέρεται εἰρίνεα 
οὐδὲ συγκαταθάπτεταί σφι (sc. the Egyptians)’ οὐ γὰρ ὅσιον. 
ὁμολογέουσι δὲ ταῦτα τοῖσι ᾿᾽Ορφικοῖσι καλεομένοισι καὶ Βακχικοῖσι, 
ἐοῦσι δὲ Αἰγυπτίοισι, καὶ Πυθαγορείοισι᾽ οὐδὲ γὰρ τούτων τῶν 
ὀργίων μετέχοντα ὅσιόν ἐστι ἐν εἰρινέοισι εἵμασι θαφθῆναι. ἔστι δὲ 
περὶ αὐτῶν ἱρὸς λόγος λεγόμενος. (Cf. also 270.) 


Even such ἃ relatively early passage cannot, however, be safely 
taken as evidence for the existence of the Orphics (or of the 
Pythagoreans) before, say, the middle of the fifth century B.c., and 
it throws no light on the question which of the two communities, if 
either, was indcbted to the other. Of Pythagoras’ earlicst adherents 
very few are even known to us by name—a state of affairs which 
seems to have come about from two main reasons. In the first 
place, there was apparently a rule of secrecy in the community,? 
by which the offence of divulging Pythagorean doctrine to the 
uninitiated is said by later authorities to have been severely 
punished—with the result that there were evidently no Pytha- 
gorean writings before, at earlicst, the time of Philolaus3 (i.e. the 
end of the fifth century B.c.). And second, even within the school 
itself, such was the respect paid to its founder that later dis- 
coveries made by members of the fraternity seem not to have been 
claimed as individual achievements but rather attributed indis- 
criminately to Pythagoras himself4—with the result that much 
that can hardly have been the work of Pythagoras, especially in 
the mathematical field, must remain anonymous. The most, there- 
fore, that can be even attempted in the case of the Pythagoreans is 
to divide their doctrine into three sections, two of which cover the 
period from the founder to Parmenides, while the third is concerned 
with the generation of Pythagoreans which flourished, under the 
leadership of Philolaus, at the end of the fifth century.5 j 





264 But woollen articles are never taken into temples, nor are they buried with them; 
that is not lawful. They agree in this with the so-called Orphic and Bacchic practices, 
which are really Egyptian, and with the Pythagorean; for it is not lawful for one who 
partakes in these rites to be buried in woollen clothes. There is a sacred account given 
on this subject. 


220 


PYTHAGORAS 


τ We hear much of the rules of the socicty in late and (except when 
quoting from a reputable source) unreliable authors (cf. e.g. Diog. L. vm, 
10; Iambl. V.P. 81), but such evidence should be treated with reserve. It 
will, however, become clear from what follows that the society must have 
been, in part at least, a religious fraternity. 


2 265 Porphyrius Vita Pythagorae 19 (DK 14, 8a) γενομένων δὲ τούτων 
μεγάλη περὶ αὐτοῦ (sc. Pythagoras) ηὐξήθη δόξα, καὶ πολλοὺς μὲν ἔλαβεν 
ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς πόλεως (sc. Croton) ὁμιλητάς, οὐ μόνον ἄνδρας ἀλλὰ καὶ 
γυναῖκας, ὧν μιᾶς γε Θεανοῦς καὶ διεροήθη τοὔνομα, πολλοὺς δ᾽ ἀπὸ τῆς 
σύνεγγυς βαρβάρον χώρας βασιλεῖς τε καὶ δυνάστας. ἃ μὲν οὖν ἔλεγε τοῖς 
συνοῦσιν, οὐδὲ εἷς ἔχει φράσαι βεβαίως: καὶ γὰρ οὐδ᾽ ἡ τυχοῦσα ἦν παρ᾽ 
αὐτοῖς σιωπή. (See 271 for continuation.) This passage derives from 
Dicaearchus of Messene, a pupil of Aristotle. ‘There seem to have been two 
motives for silence: first (see Iambl. V.P. 94), to insure that initiates could 
‘hold their peace’ (ἐχεμυθεῖν); and second (see Diog. L. vim, 15), to 
discourage ‘the utterance of all things to all men’. Diogenes is here 
quoting Aristoxenus of Tarentum, another pupil of Aristotle, of whose 
book on Pythagoreanism relatively substantial fragments are preserved by 
later writcrs, especially Iamblichus. 


3 266 Iambl. ΚΡ. 199 (DK 14, 17) θαυμάφεται δὲ Kal ἣ τῆς φυλακῆς 
ἀκρίβεια’ ἐν γὰρ τοσαύταις γενεαῖς ἐτῶν οὐδεὶς οὐδενὶ φαίνεται τῶν 
Πυθαγορείων ὑπομνημάτων περιτετευχὼς πρὸ τῆς Φιλολάου ἡλικίας, ἀλλ᾽ 
οὗτος πρῶτος ἐξήνεγκε τὰ θρυλούμενα ταῦτα τρία βιβλία, ἃ λέγεται Δίων 
ὁ Συρακούσιος ἑκατὸν μνῶν πρίασθαι Πλάτωνος κελεύσαντος... .. (Εογ the 
story of Plato’s plagiarism, scc p. 308.) Cf. 267 Plutarch Alex. fort. τ, 4, 
328: οὐδὲ Πυθαγόρας ἔγραψεν οὐδὲν οὐδὲ Σωκράτης οὐδὲ ᾿Αρκεσίλαος 
οὐδὲ Καρνεάδης. 


4 Hence arose, presumably, the favourite Pythagorean expression αὐτὸς 
Epa, ‘he himself said so’; sce Diog. L. vim, 46. 


5 Iambl. V.P. 267 (DK 584) gives us, it is true, a long list of the names of 
Pythagoreans, some few of whom are probably carly; but the failure to 
distinguish between different generations of the school, illustrated by the 
inclusion in the same list of, for instance, Alcmaeon (see p. 232) and 
Plato’s contemporary, Archytas, renders it almost worthless. 





265 After this his fame grew great, and he won many followers from the city itself (not 
only men but women also, one of whom, Theano, became very well known too) and many 
princes and chieftains from the barbarian territory around. What he said to his associates, 
nobody can say for certain; for silence with them was of no ordinary kind. 


266 The strictness of their secrecy is astonishing; for in so many generations evidently 
nobody ever encountered any Pythagorean notes before the time of Philolaus; he first 
published those three notorious books, which Dion of Syracuse is said to have bought, at 
Plato’s request, for 100 minae.... 


267 Pythagoras wrote nothing, nor did Socrates nor Arcesilaus nor Carneades. 


221 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


THE MYSTICAL SIDE OF PYTHAGORAS TEACHING 
(1) Transmigration of souls 


268 Diogenes Laertius vi, 36 (= Xenophanes fr. 7) περὶ δὲ τοῦ 
ἄλλοτ᾽ ἄλλον γεγενῆσθαι Ζενοφάνης ἐν ἐλεγείᾳ προσμαρτυρεῖ, ἧς ἀρχή, 

νῦν αὖτ᾽ ἄλλον ἔπειμι λόγον, δείξω δὲ κέλευθον. 
ὃ δὲ περὶ αὐτοῦ (sc. Pythagoras) φησιν οὕτως ἔχει" 

καί ποτέ μιν στυφελιφτομένου σκύλακος παριόντα 

φασὶν ἐποικτῖραι καὶ τόδε φάσθαι ἔπος" 

Παῦσαι μηδὲ pdr’, ἐπεὶ ἢ φίλου ἀνέρος ἐστὶν 

Ψψυχή, τὴν ἔγνων φθεγξαμένης ἀΐων. 
269 Diogenes Laertius 1, 120 (=Ion fr. 4) Ἴων δ᾽ ὁ Χῖός φησι 
περὶ αὐτοῦ (sc. Pherecydes) ° 

Gs ὁ μὲν ἠνορέῃ Te κεκασμένος ἠδὲ καὶ αἰδοῖ 

καὶ φθίμενος ψυχῇ τερπνὸν ἔχει βίοτον, 

εἴπερ Πυθαγόρης ἐτύμως ὁ σοφὸς περὶ πτάντων 

ἀνθρώπων γνώμας εἶδε καὶ ἐξέμαθεν.... (-Ξ 46). 
270 Herodotus u, 123 πρῶτοι δὲ καὶ τόνδε τὸν λόγον Αἰγύπτιοί 
εἰσιν oi εἰπτόντες ὧς ἀνθρώπου ψυχὴ ἀθάνατός ἐστι, τοῦ σώματος δὲ 
καταφθίνοντος ἐς ἄλλο τῷον αἰεὶ γινόμενον ἐσδύεται, ἐπεὰν δὲ πάντα 
περιέλθῃ τὰ χερσαῖα καὶ τὰ θαλάσσια καὶ τὰ πετεινὰ αὖτις ἐς 
ἀνθρώπου σῶμα γινόμενον ἐσδύνειν, τὴν περιήλυσιν δὲ αὐτῇ 
γίνεσθαι ἐν τρισχιλίοισι ἔτεσι. τούτῳ τῷ λόγῳ εἰσὶ οἱ Ἑλλήνων 
ἐχρήσαντο, οἱ μὲν πρότερον οἱ δὲ ὕστερον, ὡς ἰδίῳ ἑωυτῶν ἐόντι: 
τῶν ἐγὼ εἰδὼς τὰ οὐνόματα οὐ γράφω. 


--- - ὄ 





268 On the subject of reincarnation Xenophanes bears witness in an elegy which begins: 
‘Now I will turn to another tale and show the way.’ What he says about Pythagoras runs 
thus: ‘Once they say that he was passing by when a puppy was being whipped, and he took 
pity and said: *‘ Stop, do not beat tt; for it is the soul of a friend that I recognized when 
I heard it giving tongue.”’’ 

269 Ton of Chios says about him (Pherecydes): ‘Thus did he excel in manhood and 
honour, and now that he is dead he has a delightful existence for his soul—if indeed 
Pythagoras the wise learned and knew true opinions above all men.’ 


270 Moreover, the Egyptians are the first to have maintained the doctrine that the soul of 
man is immortal, and that, when the body perishes, it enters into another animal that is 
being born at the time, and when it has been the complete round of the creatures of the dry 
land and of the sea and of the air it enters again into the body of a man at birth; and tts 
cycle is completed in 3000 years. There are some Greeks who have adopted this doctrine, 
some tn former times, and some in later, as if it were their own invention; their names I 
know but refrain from writing down. 


222 


PYTHAGORAS 


Herodotus’ refusal to mention names in 270 has been taken to 
indicate that he is speaking not of Pythagoras himself but of 
contemporaries of his own; Stein suggested Empedocles, but it 
seems more plausible to suppose that it was people in Athens whom 
Herodotus preferred not to name. It is, however, likely that the 
phrase oi μὲν πρότερον, ‘some in former times’, was intended to em- 
brace both Pythagoras and certain others who were already known 
as Orphics (cf. 264). That Pythagoras himself did indeed believe 
in the transmigration of souls is anyhow pretty conclusively proved 
by 268. He is even said by Diogenes Laertius (vit, 4-5, DK 14, 8) 
to have claimed to remember his own four previous incarnations. 


(2) Kinship of all living things 
The fragment of Xenophanes (268) shows that souls could be 
reincarnated in the form of other living things than man, and this 
in turn suggests the kinship of all living things. 

265, where Porphyry is drawing on Aristotle’s follower 
Dicaearchus, continues as follows: 


271 Porphyrius, Vita Pythagorae 19 (DK 14, 8a) μάλιστα μέντοι 
γνώριμα παρὰ πᾶσιν ἐγένετο ττρῶτον μὲν ὡς ἀθάνατον εἶναί φησι 
(sc. Pythagoras) τὴν ψυχήν, εἶτα μεταβάλλουσαν εἰς ἄλλα γένη 
φῴων, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ὅτι κατὰ περιόδους τινὰς τὰ γενόμενά ποτε 
πάλιν γίνεται, νέον δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἁπλῶς EoTI,® καὶ ὅτι πάντα τὰ γινόμενα 
ἔμψυχα ὁμογενῆ δεῖ vouizeiv. φαίνεται γὰρ εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα τὰ 
δόγματα πρῶτος κομίσαι ταῦτα Πυθαγόρας. 
1 It was presumably in connexion with the cycle of reincarnation that the 
Pythagoreans held the remaining doctrine here attributed to them, that of 
the periodic recurrence of events. The most reliable statement of this belief 
is in the following fragment of Eudemus: 272 Eudemus ap. Simplic. Phys. 
732, 30 (DK 583834) ef δέ τις πιστεύσειε τοῖς Πυθαγορείοις, Hote πάλιν τὰ 
αὐτὰ ἀριθμῷ, κἀγὼ μυθολογήσω τὸ ῥαβδίον ἔχων ὑμῖν καθημένοις οὕτω, 
καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πάντα ὁμοίως ἕξει, καὶ τὸν χρόνον εὔλογόν ἐστι τὸν αὐτὸν 





271: None the less the following became universally known: first, that he maintains that 
the soul is immortal; next, that it changes into other kinds of living things; also that events 
recur in certain cycles, and that nothing is ever absolutely new; and finally, that all living 
things should be regarded as akin. Pythagoras seems to have been the first to bring these 
beliefs into Greece. 

272 If one were to believe the Pythagoreans, that events recur in an arithmetical cycle, 
and that I shall be talking to you again sitting as you are now, with this pointer in my 
hand, and that everything else will be just as it 1s now, then it ts plausible to suppose that 
the time too will be the same time as now. 


223 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


εἶναι. A passage in the Theologumena Arithmeticae (p. 52, 8 de Falco; DK 14, 8) 
tells us that certain later Pythagoreans, working on the basis of the intervals 
between Pythagoras’ own earlier incarnations, believed that the human 
soul was reincarnated evcry 216 years—the precise number 216 being 
characteristically chosen as the cube of 6. Though such embellishments of 
the doctrine are doubtless late, it is not impossible that Pythagoras himself 
did indeed hold the belief, later adopted by the Stoics, in the periodic cycle; 
but it is at least as likely that the later Pythagoreans borrowed it from 
Empedocles (sce pp. 326f.). 


Unfortunately, despite the definite suggestion in the last sentence 
that Pythagoras had learnt these doctrines abroad, the question of 
their origin is hopelessly shrouded in Iegend. He is said by 
different late writers to have visited, and to have learnt from, 
peoples as various as the Chaldaeans, the Indian Brahmins, the 
Jews and even the Druids and the Celts; but all that such traditions 
tell us is that certain similarities were later detected between the 
teaching of Pythagoras and the beliefs held in countries other than 
Greece. Even Herodotus’ suggestion in 270 that the doctrine of 
transmigration came from Egypt is demonstrably false—the 
Egyptians never held such a doctrinc; and none of the other 
guesses about its origin are as well attested as that. 

Nor are the details of the two closcly related doctrines, the 
transmigration of souls and the kinship of all living things, at all 
casy to fill in. Empedocles’ version, as his fr. 117 (476) proves, 
included at least some plants among living things, and presum- 
ably for that reason involved abstention from laurel leaves (fr. 140) 
and beans (fr. 141). Since, as we shall see in the next scction, 
similar rules of abstinence are attributed to Pythagoras, it may 
well be that he too thought it was possible to be reincarnated as a 
plant; but such relatively reliable and explicit evidence as exists, 
most of which has already been cited, proves only that a human 
soul can sink as low in the scale of living things as a dog (268). It 
is possible, but no more than that, that in a world which he 
regarded as dualistic (see pp. 240ff.) Pythagoras believed that 
ψυχή, ‘life’, was somehow a unity, a single mass, a part of which 
was scattered in an impure form throughout the world, while 
another part, into which the individual soul would be reabsorbed 
after its final incarnation, retained its purity. Such a doctrine, 
however, even if it was held, seems to have had little effect on the 
cosmological side of Pythagoreanism (see pp. 250ff.), in which the 
place of the immortal soul is by no means clear. 


224, 


PYTHAGORAS 


(3) Rules of abstinence and other prohibitions 


Arising in part from his belief in the kinship of all living things, 
but with a clear admixture of other motives and influences, various 
forms of abstinence are attributed by later writers to Pythagoras. 
Two typical passages, chosen from many others like them, are: 


273 Porphyrius Vita Pythagorae 7 (DK 14,9) .. «μὴ μόνον τῶν 
ἐμψύχων ἀπέχεσθαι, ἀλλὰ Kal μαγείροις Kal θηράτορσι μηδέττοτε 
πλησιάζειν. 

274 Diogenes Laertius vit, 19 παντὸς δὲ μᾶλλον ἀπηγόρευε 
μήτ᾽ ἐρυθῖνον ἐσθίειν μήτε μελάνουρον᾽ καρδίας τ᾽ ἀπέχεσθαι καὶ 
κυάμων ᾿Αριστοτέλης δέ φησι καὶ μήτρας καὶ τρίγλης ἐνίοτε. .. 
(20). . .θυσίαις τε ἐχρῆτο ἀψύχοις" οἱ δέ φασιν ὅτι ἀλέκτορσι μόνον 
καὶ ἐρίφοις γαλαθηνοῖς καὶ τοῖς λεγομένοις ἁπαλίαις, ἥκιστα δὲ 
ἀρνόάσιν. 


It would appear from 273 that the primary motive (but not, as 
some of the instances in 274 show, the only one) for the Pythagorean 
rules and prohibitions was the belief in the kinship of all living 
things: butchers and huntsmen are presumably alike defiled by 
the murder of their own kin. Unfortunately, as 274 again serves 
to show, there is great inconsistency between the various authori- 
ties about the details of the Pythagorean rules of abstinence.? ‘The 
fuller accounts are clearly unreliable, and perhaps all that can be 
safely concluded from them is that certain rules of abstinence 
arising from the belief in kinship were an early feature of the 
Pythagorean way of life. 

“= The conflicting nature of the evidence is in part due to Aristoxenus, who, 
being a friend of the Pythagoreans of his day and anxious to justify their 
neglect of the religious side of Pythagoras’ teaching, was intent on 
eliminating, or at least rationalizing, all such rules. But that some at 


least of these rules are of a certain age is proved by Herodotus’ mention in 
264 of the ban on burying the dead in woollen shrouds. _ 





273 ...not only to abstain from living things, but also never to approach butchers and 
huntsmen. 

274 Above all else he forbade the eating of red mullet and black-tail; and he enjoined 
abstinence from the heart and from beans; also, according to Aristotle, on certain occasions, 
from the womb and from mullet....He sacrificed only inanimate things; but others say 
that he used only cocks and sucking kids and piglings, as they are called, and never 
lambs. 


15 225 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Besides the rules that can be explained in this way there are also, 
however, in thc various lists handed down to us, others of at least 
four different types.s A few, such as ‘be not possessed of irrepres- 
sible mirth’ or ‘disbelieve nothing strange about the gods or about 
religious beliefs’, would seem to be nothing more than common 
ethical or religious reflexions.’ A larger group, some of which have. 
already appeared in 274, are probably descended from primitive 
folk-taboo. Others again, such as ‘sacrifice and worship without 
shocs on’ or ‘cut not your finger-nails at a sacrifice’, clearly con- 
cern ritual purity. And finally somc, such as ‘when you rise from 
bed, roll the bed-clothes together and smoothe out the place where 
you lay’, scem to owe their origin to sympathetic magic.". 


τ The list from which these examples are taken is perhaps of sufficient 
interest to deserve extensive quotation® 27§ Iamblichus Protr. 21 
(DK 5806) ἔστω δὲ τὰ φρασθησόμενα Σύμβολα ταῦτα’ a. els ἱερὸν 
ἀπιὼν προσκυνῆσαι, μηδὲν ἄλλο μεταξὺ βιωτικὸν μήτε λέγε μήτε πρᾶττε. 
β. ὁδοῦ πάρεργον οὔτε εἰσιτέον εἰς ἱερὸν οὔτε προσκυνητέον τὸ παράπαν, 
οὐδ᾽ εἰ πρὸς ταῖς θύραις αὐταῖς παριὼν γένοιο. y. ἀνυπόδητος θῦε καὶ 
προσκύνει. ὃ. τὰς λεωφόρους ὁδοὺς ἐκκλίνων διὰ τῶν ἀτραπῶν βάδιξε.... 
¢. γλώσσης πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων κράτει θεοῖς ἑπόμενος... «ἢ. πῦρ μαχαίρῃ μὴ 
σκάλευε... .1. ἀνδρὶ ἐπανατιθεμένῳ μὲν φορτίον συνέπαιρε, μὴ συγκαθαίρει 
δὲ ἀποτιθεμένῳ. τα. εἰς μὲν ὑπόδησιν τὸν δεξιὸν πόδα προπάρεχε, εἰς δὲ 
ποδόνιτπτρον τὸν εὐώνυμον. 1p. περὶ Πυθαγορείων ἄνευ φωτὸς μὴ λάλει. 
ty. 3uyov μὴ ὑπέρβαινε. 15. ἀποδημῶν τῆς οἰκείας μὴ ἐπιστρέφου, Ἐρινύες 
γὰρ μετέρχονται... .ἴῷ. ἀλεκτρυόνα τρέφε μέν, μὴ θῦε δέ. Μηνὶ γὰρ καὶ Ἡλίῳ 
καθιέρωται. In. ἐπὶ χοίνικι μὴ καθέτου... «κα. χελιδόνα οἰκίᾳ μὴ δέχον. 








-----ὄἕ ὦ 


275 Let the rules to be pondered be these: 
1. When you are going out to a temple, worship first, and on your way neither say nor 
do anything else connected with your daily life. 
2. Ona journey neither enter a temple nor worship at all, not even if you are passing the 
very doors. 
3. Sacrifice and worship without shoes on. 
4. Turn aside from highways and walk by footpaths.... 
6. Follow the gods and restrain your tongue above all else.... 
8. Stir not the fire with iron.... 
10. Help a man who is loading freight, but not one who is unloading. 
11. Putting on your shoes, start with the right foot; washing your feet, with the left. 
12. Speak not of Pythagorean matters without light. 
13. Never step over a cross-bar. 
14. When you are out from home, look not back, for the Furies come after you.... 
17. Rear a cock, but do not sacrifice it; for it is dedicated to Moon and Sun. 
18. Do not sit on a quart measure.... 
21. Let not a swallow nest under your roof. ἡ 


226 


PYTHAGORAS 


Kp. δακτύλιον μὴ φόρει... .Κδ. παρὰ λύχνον μὴ ἐσοπτρίφτον. κε. περὶ θεῶν 
μηθὲν θαυμαστὸν ἀπίστει μηδὲ περὶ θείων δογμάτων. ΚΦ. ἀσχέτῳ γέλωτι μὴ 


ἔχεσθαι. Kz. παρὰ θυσίᾳ μὴ dvuyxizou... KO. στρωμάτων ἀναστὰς συνέλισσε 
αὐτὰ καὶ τὸν τόπον συνστόρννε. A. καρδίαν μὴ τρῶγε... .λβ. ἀποκαρμάτων 
σῶν καὶ ἀπονυχισμάτων κατάτπτυε... .λδ. χύτρας ἴχνος ἀπὸ σποδοῦ 


ἀφάνιε... AZ. κυάμων ἀπέχου... 0. ἐμψύχων ἀπέχου. For other such 
lists, and rationalizations of the various ἀκούσματα they contain, cf. Porph. 
V.P. 42 (DK 58c6) and Diog. L. vin, 17-18. 


\ After the death of Pythagoras, his school apparently split into 
two sects, one of which, the so-called ‘Acousmatics’ or ‘Pytha- 
gorists’, preserved the mystical side of his teaching, while the 
other, the ‘Mathematicians’, concentrated on the scientific side.* 
There is no telling how many of the Pythagorean rules and 
prohibitions—dxovopata or σύμβολα, as they were called— 
actually go back to the founder himself, but certainly many of 
them look like primitive survivals. | 


t Porphyry suggests that this division gocs back to Pythagoras himself: 
276 Porph. V.P. 37 διττὸν yap ἦν αὐτοῦ τῆς διδασκαλίας TO σχῆμα" 
Kal τῶν προσιόντων of μὲν ἐκαλοῦντο μαθηματικοὶ of δ᾽ ἀκουσματικοί, 
καὶ μαθηματικοὶ μὲν οἱ τὸν περιττότερον καὶ πρὸς ἀκρίβειαν διαπεπτονημένον 
τῆς ἐπιστήμης λόγον ἐκμεμαθηκότες, ἀκουσματικοὶ δ᾽ οἱ μόνας τὰς κεφα- 
λαιώδεις ὑποθήκας τῶν γραμμάτων ἄνευ ἀκριβεστέρας διηγήσεως ἀκη- 
κοότες. But this is probably no morc than a misguided attempt to account 
for the later cleavage. 


PYTHAGORAS CONCERN WITH SCIENCE 


So far, of course, there is little to distinguish Pythagoreanism from 
a mere mystery religion: the only reliable traces, in the evidence so 





22. Do not wear aring.... 

24. Do not look in a mirror beside a lamp. 

25. Disbelieve nothing strange about the gods or about religious beliefs. 

26. Be not possessed by irrepressible mirth. 

27. Cut not your finger-nails at a sacrifice. ... 

29. When.you rise from bed roll the bed-clothes together and smoothe out the place where 
vou lay. 

30. Eat not the heart.... 

32. Spit upon the trimmings of your hair and finger-nails.... 

34. Leave not the mark of the pot in the ashes.... 

37. Abstain from beans.... 

39. Abstain from living things. ΄" 
276 The form of his instruction was twofold: one group of his followers were called the 
Mathematicians, the other the Acousmatics. The Mathematicians were those who had learnt 
the more detailed and exactly elaborated version of his knowledge, the Acousmattcs those who 
had heard only the summary headings of his writings, without the more exact exposition. 


227 I5*2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


far cited, of another side to Pythagoras’ teaching are Heraclitus’ 
references, in 260 and 261, to his πολυμαθίη and iotopin (‘poly- 
mathy’ and ‘scientific enquiry’), and Herodotus’ description of 
him in 262 as ‘by no means the weakest sage among the Hellenes’. 
‘These passages alone, however, do suggest—-what is evident also 
from the fact that in the fifth century the Pythagoreans were among 
the leading scientists—that Pythagoras was interested in science as 
well as in the fate of the soul. ; Clearly too religion and science were, 
to Pythagoras, not two separate departments between which there 
was no contact, but rather the two inseparable factors in a single 
way of life.t Unfortunately there is no reliable evidence whatever 
concerning the nature of Pythagoras’ scientific teaching: any 
reconstruction must be conjectural, merely attributing to Pytha- 
goras himself such of the later Pythagorean doctrines as could 
without anachronism have been held in the sixth century B.c. and 
may plausibly account for the subsequent spread and devclop- 
ment of Pythagoreanism.;The central notions, which held together 
the two strands that were later to fall apart, seem to have been those 
of θεωρία (contemplation),? κόσμος (an orderliness found in the 
arrangement of the universe)? and κάθαρσις (purification).4 By 
contemplating the principle of order revealed in the universe— 
and especially in the regular movements of the heavenly bodies— 
and by assimilating himself to that orderliness, man himself was 
progressively purified until he eventually escaped from the cycle of 
birth and attained immortality. ) 


* The widening of the basis of mathematics is suggested by 277 Proclus 
in Eucl. p. 65 Friedl. (DK 14, 6a) ἐπὶ δὲ τούτοις Πυθαγόρας τὴν περὶ αὐτὴν 
(sc. γεωμετρίαν) φιλοσοφίαν els σχῆμα παιδείας ἐλευθέρου μετέστησεν 
ἄνωθεν τὰς ἀρχὰς αὐτῆς Etriokotroupevos,... Several passages in Aristotle 
even suggest a close connexion in Pythagoreanism between mathematics 
and ethics. 

2 The supremacy of the contemplative life is illustrated by the parable of 
the Festival in 278 Diog. L. vm, 8 καὶ τὸν βίον ἐοικέναι πανηγύρει" 
ὡς οὖν els ταύτην of μὲν ἀγωνιούμενοι, of δὲ κατ᾽ ἐμπορίαν, of δέ ye 
βέλτιστοι ἔρχονται θεαταί, οὕτως ἐν τῷ βίῳ οἱ μὲν ἀνδραποδώδεις, ἔφη, 
φύονται δόξης καὶ πλεονεξίας θηραταί, οἱ δὲ φιλόσοφοι τῆς ἀληθείας. 





277 So Pythagoras turned geometrical philosophy into a form of liberal education by 
seeking its first principles in a higher realm of reality.... 

278 Life, he said, is like a festival; just as some come to the festival to compete, some to 
ply their trade, but the best people come as spectators, so in life the slavish men go hunting 
Sor fame or gain, the philosophers for the truth, 


228 


PYTHAGORAS 


‘Pythagoras is said by Aetius, in a much debated passage (n, 1, 1; DK 14, 
21), to have been the first to use the word κόσμος of the universe; but if the 
passage has any foundation in fact, it is most likely that Pythagoras used 
the word, not, as Aetius said, to mean ἡ τῶν ὅλων περιοχή, ‘that which 
embraces all things’, but with a special emphasis on the element of 
orderliness, or the arrangement: cf. p. 159 n. Pythagoras is also said by 
Diog. L. (1, 12), who is here quoting Heraclides, to have coined the word 
‘philosophy’; cf. Kirk, Heraclitus, the Cosmic Fragments, 395. 


4 The notion of κάθαρσις was linked especially with music: see 279 Cramer, 
An. Par.t,172 ...of Πυθαγορικοί, ὡς ἔφη ᾿Αριστόξενος, καθάρσει ἐχρῶντο 
τοῦ μὲν σώματος διὰ τῆς ἰατρικῆς, τῆς δὲ ψυχῆς διὰ τῆς μουσικῆς. Cf. 
Iambl. V.P. 110 and Porph. V.P. 30. 


SCIENTIFIC ACHIEVEMENTS 


The two most fundamental and universal of Pythagorean scientific 
doctrines are, first, the ultimate dualism betwcen Limit and 
Unlimited, and sccond, the equation of things with numbersd(sce 
pp. 240-50). What is required, therefore, is a plausible explanation 
of how these two doctrines, by no means obviously interdependent, 
should have occurred to Pythagoras or his followers. There seems 
no reason to doubt the tradition that Pythagoras himself dis- 
covered—probably by measuring the appropriate lengths of string 
on a monochord—that the chief musical intervals are expressible 
in simple numerical ratios between the first four integers.t This 
single discovery would account naturally for all the most charac- 
teristic of Pythagorean doctrines. If the musical scale depends 
simply upon the imposition of definite proportions on the indefinite 
continuum of sound between high and low, might not the same 
principles, Limit and the Unlimited, underlie the whole universe? 
If numbers alone are sufficient to explain the ‘consonances’, 
might not everything else be likewise expressible as a number or a 
proportion? Moreover, since the first four integers contain the 
whole secret of the musical scale, their sum, the number 10 or the 
Decad, might well ‘seem to embrace’, as Aristotle puts it, ‘the 
whole nature of number’ (see 289) and so come to be regarded, as 
it certainly was, with veneration. \It is not surprising, therefore, 
that both mathematics and music should have played from the 
outset so vital a part in Pythagoreanism# Of the various mathe- 
matical discoveries attributed to Pythagoras it is not unlikely that 





279 The Pythagoreans, according to Aristoxenus, practised the purification of the body 
by medicine, that of the soul by music. 


229 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


some—notably, the theorem that still bears his name, and its 
corollary, the incommensurability of the diagonal and the side of 
a square3—are genuinely his. It is also a remote possibility, in 
view of his interest in the musical scale, that he himself invented 
the well-known doctrine of the ‘Harmony of the Spheres’ Ἶ (see 
330). Some authorities maintained that he first discovered that 
the morning and the evening star are one and the same, while 
others attributed the discovery to Parmenides,’ There is, un- 
fortunatcly, no means of assessing the relative strength of the two 
claims—though it might perhaps be thought that Pythagoras’ 
interests would have inclincd him morc towards astronomy than 
would those of Parmenides. All such details, however, rest on no 
reliable evidence; all that can be said with confidence of the 
scientific achievements of Pythagoras himself is that they must 
have been sufficient to give the original impetus to the Pytha- 
gorcanism of the fifth century which Aristotle describes. ; 


1 Octave=2:1, fifth= 3:2, fourth=4:3. An elaborate story that Pytha- 
goras made his discovery by noticing that the hammers in a smithy 
happened to produce these intervals and therefore weighing the hammers 
is found in several late authors (e.g. lamb]. V.P. 115 Εν, Bocthius de mus. 1, 
10); but it is proved to be unreliable by the fact that Pythagoras’ alleged 
experiments could not have yiclded the results attributed to them. 


2 The number to was represented by ten dots or alphas arranged in an 
equilateral triangle so: 


This diagram, which shows at a glance that 1lo=1+2+3+4, was known 
to the Pythagorcans as the Tetractys of the Dccad, and by it they swore 
their most binding oaths. So 280 Aetius 1, 3, 8 (DK 58815) εἶναι δὲ 
τὴν φύσιν τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ δέκα. μέχρι yap τῶν δέκα πάντες Ἕλληνες, πάντες 
βάρβαροι ἀριθμοῦσιν, ἐφ᾽ ἃ ἐλθόντες πάλιν ἀναποδοῦσιν ἐπὶ τὴν μονάδα. 
καὶ τῶν δέκα πάλιν, φησίν (sc. Pythagoras), ἡ δύναμίς ἐστιν ἐν τοῖς τέσσαρσι 
καὶ τῇ τετράδι. τὸ δὲ αἴτιον᾽ εἴ τις ἀπὸ τῆς μονάδος [ἀναποδῶν] κατὰ πρόσθε- 
σιν τιθείη τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς ἄχρι τῶν τεσσάρων προελθὼν ἐκιτληρώσει τὸν {τῶν) 
δέκα ἀριθμόν ἐὰν δὲ ὑπερβάλῃ τις τὸν τῆς τετράδος, καὶ τῶν δέκα ὑπερεκτεσ - 
εἶται᾽ οἷον εἴ τις θείη ἕν καὶ δύο προσθείη καὶ τρία καὶ τούτοις τέσσαρα, τὸν 





280 Ten is the very nature of number, All Greeks and all barbarians alike count up to 
ten, and having reached ten revert again to the unit. And again, Pythagoras maintains, the 
power of the number ten lies in the number four, the tetrad. This is the reason: if one starts 
at the unit and adds the successive numbers up to four, one will make up the number ten; 
and if one exceeds the tetrad, one will exceed ten too. If, that is, one takes the unit, adds 


230 


PYTHAGORAS 


τῶν δέκα ἐκττληρώσει ἀριθμόν. ὥστε ὁ ἀριθμὸς κατὰ μὲν μονάδα ἐν τοῖς δέκα, 
κατὰ δὲ δύναμιν ἐν τοῖς τέσσαρσι. διὸ καὶ ἐπεφθέγγοντο οἱ Πυθαγόρειοι ὡς 
μεγίστου ὅρκου ὄντος τῆς τετράδος" 
οὐ μὰ τὸν ἁμετέρᾳ γενεᾷ παραδόντα τετρακτύν, 
παγὰν ἀενάον φύσεως ῥίφωμά τ᾽ ἔχουσαν. 
Cf. Theo Smyrnaeus 94, 6 Hiller; Sextus adv. math. vu, 94 ff. 
3 281 Proclus in Ἐμοὶ. p. 426 Friedl. (ἐν τοῖς ὀρθογωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ 
τῆς τὴν ὀρθὴν γωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς 
ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ὀρθὴν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν πλευρῶν τετραγώνοις): ἵτῶν μὲν 
ἱστορεῖν τὰ ἀρχαῖα βουλομένων ἀκούοντας τὸ θεώρημα τοῦτο εἰς Πυθαγόραν 
ἀναπεμπόντων ἔστιν εὑρεῖν καὶ βουθυτεῖν λεγόντων αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῇ εὑρέσει.Τ 
According to one version of a very variable story Hippasus οὗ Meta- 
pontium, an early Pythagorean, was expelled from the school, or even 
drowned at sea, for revealing to the uninitiated, in defiance of the rule of 
secrecy, the irrational or incommensurable (i.e. that some geometrical 


quantities cannot be expressed in terms of whole numbers). See Iambl. 
V.P. 247 (DK 18, 4). 





two, then three and then four, one will make up the number ten. So that number by the unit 
resides in the number ten, but potentially in the number four. And so the Pythagoreans used 
to invoke the tetrad as their most binding oath: ‘Nay, by him that gave to our genera- 
tion the tetractys, which contains the fount and root of eternal nature.’ 


281 (The square on the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal to the sum of the 
squares on the sides enclosing the right angle.) The text of the next sentence 15 corrupt, 
but the sense is: If we pay any attention to those who like to recount ancient history, we 
may find some of them referring this theorem to Pythagoras, and saying that he sacrificed 
an ox in honour of his discovery. 


231 


CHAPTER VIII 
ALCMAEON OF CROTON 


DATE AND RELEVANCE 


Of the generation of Pythagoreans contemporary with or imme- 
diately following Pythagoras very few are cven known to us by 
name, and, with the possible exception of Hippasus (cf. p. 231 n. 3), 
nothing of importance is known about any of them. The only 
Italian thinker between Pythagoras and Parmenides of whose 
opinions thcre is sufficient evidence to justify his inclusion in this 
book is Alcmaeon of Croton, who flourished, probably, early in 
the fifth century B.c.? 


282 Diogenes Laertius vit, 83 (DK24A1) ᾿Αλκμαίων Kpo- 
τωνιάτης. Kal οὗτος Πυθαγόρου διήκουσε. Kal τὰ πλεῖστά ye [τὰ] 
ἰατρικὰ λέγει, ὅμως δὲ καὶ φυσιολογεῖ ἐνίοτε λέγων ᾿δύο τὰ πολλά 
ἐστι τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων᾽. δοκεῖ δὲ πρῶτος φυσικὸν λόγον συγ- 
γεγραφέναι. 

This brief passage contains several important pieces of information. 
The statement that he ‘heard Pythagoras’ doubtless means, as it 
usually does, no more than that he was in some sort of contact 
with the Pythagorean school.? The following sentence, on the other 
hand, is certainly accurate; but, though Alcmacon’s interests were 
primarily medical and physiological,3 his theories even in these 
specialized fields exercised a considerable influence on later 
philosophers. The alleged quotation, whether or not it preserves 
Alcmaeon’s own words, certainly preserves one of the most 
important of his views, his dualism. And finally, though the 
suggestion that he was the first to do so is of doubtful value (cf., e.g., 
45, 98), he does indeed seem to have written a book on natural 
science, of which a few possibly genuine fragments survive.‘ 


1 The evidence on which this dating relies is 283 Aristotle Met. A5, 
986a29 καὶ γὰρ ἐγένετο τὴν ἡλικίαν ᾿Αλκμαίων ἐπὶ γέροντι Πυθαγόρᾳ... .. 





282 Alcmaeon of Croton: another pupil of Pythagoras. For the most part his theories are 
medical, but sometimes he treats of natural philosophy too, maintaining that ‘the majority 
of human affairs are in pairs’. He seems to have been the first to write an account of nature. 


283 Diels’ text means: Alcmaeon was a young man in Pythagoras’ old age.... 


232 


ALGMAEON 


The text, however, is obviously corrupt. While Diels inserts νέος before ἐπί, 
Ross regards the words ἐγένετο τὴν ἡλικίαν and ἐπὶ γέροντι Πυθαγόρᾳ, 
which are omitted by one ms. and ignored by Alexander, as a later 
addition (see his note ad loc.). It is true that Iamblichus V.P. 104 lists 
Alcmaeon among ‘the contemporaries of Pythagoras, his young pupils in 
his old age’; but since the same list contains also the names of Philolaus, 
Archytas and Leucippus, it clearly has no value as evidence. All that can 
safely be said, therefore, is that there is no reason why this dating, whether 
it represents Aristotle’s own opinion or that of an interpolator, should not 
be approximately correct. 

2 Aristotle mentions Alcmaeon by name on several occasions, but, though 
in 289 he guesses either that Alcmaeon borrowed from the Pythagorcans 
or they from him, he never suggests that Alcmaeon himself was a member 
of the school. Later writers arc, as usual, Icss cautious. 

3 Alcmaeon’s physiological research was directed chiefly towards deter- 
mining the nature of sense-perception. His theorics are summed up by 
Theophrastus in a passage of which the most important sentences are the 
following: 284 Theophr. de sensu 25f. (DK24A5) τῶν δὲ μὴ τῷ ὁμοίῳ 
ποιούντων τὴν αἴσθησιν ᾿Αλκμαίων μὲν πρῶτον c&popizer τὴν πρὸς τὰ 
τῷα διαφοράν. ἄνθρωπον γάρ φησι τῶν ἄλλων διαφέρειν ὅτι μόνον 
ξυνίησι, τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα αἰσθάνεται μέν, οὐ ξυνίησι δέ, ὡς ἕτερον ὃν τὸ φρονεῖν 
καὶ αἰσθάνεσθαι, καὶ οὔ, καθάπερ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς, ταὐτόν: ἔπειτα περὶ 
ἑκάστης λέγει... ἁπάσας δὲ τὰς αἰσθήσεις συνηρτῆσθαί πὼς πρὸς τὸν 
ἐγκέφαλον διὸ καὶ πττηροῦσθαι κινουμένου καὶ μεταλλάττοντος τὴν χώραν᾽ 
ἐπιλαμβάνειν γὰρ τοὺς πόρους, δι᾽ ὧν αἱ αἰσθήσεις. The view that the brain 
is the seat of sensations was taken over from Alcmaeon in the Hippocratic 
treatise de morbo sacro, 14 and 17 (DK 24.4.11). The existence of the πόροι 
is said by Chalcidius (in Tim. ch. 237, DK 24.410) to have been proved by 
Alcmaeon’s dissection of the eye. 

4 The book is said by Diog. L. (with only one brief sentence between 282 
and this passage) to have begun as follows: 285 Diog. L. vir, 85 ᾿Αλκ- 
μαίων Κροτωνιήτης τάδε ἔλεξε Πειρίθου υἱὸς Bpotiva Kal Λέοντι καὶ 
Βαθύλλῳ περὶ τῶν ἀφανέων, περὶ τῶν θνητῶν σαφήνειαν μὲν θεοὶ ἔχοντι, 
ὡς δὲ ἀνθρώποις τεκμαίρεσθαι... Ὡς fact that Brotinus (or Brontinus, as 
other ancient sources call him) was evidently connected with Pythagoras 
by some marriage tie is one of the indications that Alcmaeon was in close 
contact with the Pythagorean school. Leon and Bathylaus (not Bathyllus) 
are to be found in the list of Pythagoreans in Iambl. V.P. 267 (DK 584). 





Of those who think perception is of unlike by unlike Alcmaeon first defined the 


difference between man and animals. For man, he says, differs from other animals in that 
‘he only understands, while the rest perceive but do not understand’, thought and perception 
being different, not, as Empedocles maintains, the same. Thereafter he discusses each of the 
senses severally. ...Collectively he maintains that the senses are somehow connected with 
the brain; and so they are incapacitated when it moves or changes its position; for it stops 
the passages through which sensations come. 

285 Alcmaeon of Croton, son of Peirithous, spoke these words to Brotinus and Leon and 
Bathyllus. Concerning things unseen and things mortal the gods see clearly, but so far as 
men may conjecture.... 


233 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ALCMAEON’S INFLUENCE ON HIS SUCCESSORS 
(1) Ets theory of health 


Alcmacon, like the Pythagoreans, was a dualist; but whercas the 
Pythagoreans recognized certain particular pairs of opposites as 
ultimate (notably Limit and Unlimited, Odd and Even; sce 289, 
p- 238), Alcmaeon, presumably owing to his medical approach 
to cosmology, seems merely to have asserted that contrariety was 
fundamental without specifying any ultimate pair or pairs. His 
most influential doctrine, his theory of health, illustrates his 
dualism, and is summarized by Aetius as follows: 


286 Aetius v, 30, 1 ᾿Αλκμαίων τῆς μὲν ὑγιείας εἶναι συνεκτικὴν 
τὴν ‘icovopiav’ τῶν δυνάμεων, ὑγροῦ, ξηροῦ, ψυχροῦ, θερμοῦ, 
πικροῦ, γλυκέος καὶ τῶν λοιπῶν, τὴν δ᾽ ἐν αὐτοῖς ᾿μοναρχίαν᾽ 
νόσου ποιητικήν φθοροτοιὸν γὰρ ἑκατέρου μοναρχίαν. καὶ νόσον 
συμπίπτειν ὡς μὲν ὑφ᾽ οὗ ὑπερβολῇ θερμότητος ἢ ψυχρότητος, ὡς 
δὲ ἐξ οὗ διὰ πλῆθος τροφῆς ἢ ἔνδειαν, ὡς δ᾽ ἐν οἷς ἢ {περὶ Diels) 
αἷμα ἢ μυελὸν ἢ ἐγκέφαλον. ἐγγίνεσθαι δὲ τούτοις ποτὲ κἀκ τῶν 
ἔξωθεν αἰτιῶν, ὑδάτων ποιῶν ἢ χώρας ἢ κόπων ἢ ἀνάγκης ἢ τῶν 
τούτοις πιααραπτλησίων. τὴν δ᾽ ὑγίειαν τὴν σύμμετρον τῶν ποιῶν 
κρᾶσιν. 


This doctrine, though here restricted to the medical field, may 
perhaps have suggested the theory put forward by Simmias in 
Plato’s Phaedo (85 £-86D) that the soul is merely an ‘attunement’ 
of the physical opposites that compose the body; and since Plato 
is there probably citing a Pythagorean view, it seems quite likely 
that at this point at least Alcmaeon exercised an influence on the 
Pythagoreans (see pp. 261f.).7 

τ Once again, despite the general similarity between Alcmaeon’s views 


and those of the Pythagoreans, the ἰσονομία theory involves a significant 
difference of detail from the Pythagorean doctrine of ἁρμονίη. G. Vlastos 





286 Alcmaeon maintains that the bond of health ts the ‘equal balance’ of the powers, 
moist and dry, cold and hot, bitter and sweet, and the rest, while the ‘supremacy’ of one of 
them is the cause of disease; for the supremacy of either ts destructive. Illness comes about 
directly through excess of heat or cold, indirectly through surfeit or deficiency of nourish- 
ment; and its centre 15 either the blood or the marrow or the brain. It sometimes arises in 
these centres from external causes, moisture of some sort or environment or exhaustion or 
hardship or similar causes. Health on the other hand is the proportionate admixture of the 
qualities. 


234 


ALCMAEON 


(Gnomon 25 (1953) 33-4) writes: ‘It is well known that the general norm of 
κρᾶσις in Greek cosmology and medicine was ἰσονομία (Alcmacon B4) or 
ἰσομοιρία (περὶ ἀέρων 12), i.e. the 1/1 ratio....Over against this wide- 
spread view, the Pythagorean discovery of the formulae for musical 
harmony introduced an entirely new idea, for it depicted patterns of good 
κρᾶσις which did not conform to ἰσονομία but involved pairs of unequal 
(and, in cach case, odd-even) numbers: 1/2, 2/3, 3/4.’ See p. 230 ἢ. 1. 


(2) The composition of the soul 


287 Aristotle de anima A2, 405a29 παραπλησίως δὲ τούτοις 
(sc. Thales, Diogenes of Apollonia and Heraclitus) καὶ ᾿Αλκμαίων 
ἔοικεν ὑπολαβεῖν περὶ ψυχῆς" φησὶ γὰρ αὐτὴν ἀθάνατον εἶναι διὰ 
τὸ ἐοικέναι τοῖς ἀθανάτοις" τοῦτο δ᾽ ὑπάρχειν αὐτῇ ὡς ἀεὶ κινουμένῃ * 
κινεῖσθαι γὰρ καὶ τὰ θεῖα πιάντα συνεχῶς ἀεί, σελήνην, ἥλιον, τοὺς 
ἀστέρας καὶ τὸν οὐρανὸν ὅλον. 

288 [Aristotle] Probl. 17, 3, θ016444Ζ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους φησὶν 
᾿Αλκμαίων διὰ τοῦτο ἀπόλλυσθαι, ὅτι οὐ δύνανται τὴν ἀρχὴν τῷ 
τέλει προσάψαι. 


These two passages, despite their apparent dissimilarity, have been 
thought to refer to the same doctrine. The heavenly bodics have 
the property of continuous motion in a circle, and the soul, too, 
according to 287, is endowed with continuous motion; but whereas 
the movement of the heavenly bodies is circular, ‘man’, according 
to 288, ‘is unable to join the beginning to the end’—in other words 
the soul’s motion cannot long remain circular—and so dies. This 
curious doctrine recalls fr. 103 of Heraclitus, ‘on a circle beginning 
and end arc the same’; but its details are obscure and there is no 
reliable evidence to enable us to reconstruct them. Here again, 
however, it seems possible that Alcmaeon exercised an influence 
on Plato, since the doctrine in the Timaeus of circles revolving in 
the soul seems to bear some relation to the theory of Alcmaeon and 
may perhaps have been borrowed directly from him. 





Sr 


287 Alcmaeon also seems to have held much the same view about the soul as these others; 
for he says that 1t is immortal owing to its similarity to the immortal; and it has this 
quality because it 1s always in motion; for everything divine is in continual motion—the 
sun, the moon, the stars and the whole heavens. 


288 Alcmaeon says that men die for this reason, that they cannot join the beginning to 
the end, 


235 


CHAPTER IX 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


THE PROBLEM OF DATING 


In his numerous references to Pythagorcanism Aristotle very 
seldom either names individual Pythagoreans or distinguishes 
between different generations of the school. Howcver much 
Pythagorean doctrine may have evolved during the fifth and early 
fourth centuries, Aristotle is content to summarize the main 
featurcs of the system as a whole; and since there is no ancient 
authority of comparable weight with Aristotle, very various views 
have been taken of the development of the Pythagorean cosmo- 
logy. The most that we can hope to achieve is to divide the 
Pythagoreanism of the fifth century into two main periods, one 
before Parmenides, the other after Zcno; and since the primary 
means by which even so much may be achieved consists in con- 
sidering which Pythagorcan doctrines scem to be attacked by 
Parmenides and which look like a reply to either Parmenides or 
Zeno, any such reconstruction must of necessity be hazardously 
conjectural. None the less the attempt seems worth the making, 
for otherwise the only possible course is to follow Aristotle and 
group all the Pythagorean doctrines of more than a century of 
development into one indiscriminate amalgam. 

t For three widely different reconstructions of 5th-century Pythagoreanism 

see (i) Burnet, EGP; (ii) F. M. Cornford, CQ.xvi and xv (1922 and 1923), 


and introductory chapters of Plato and Parmenides; (iii) J. E. Raven, 
Pythagoreans and Eleatics. 


ARISTOTLE S GENERAL SUMMARY 


The longest and most helpful of Aristotle’s summaries of Pytha- 
goreanism, which must first be read and considered 1n extenso, is: 


289 Aristotle Metaphysics A5, 985b23 ἐν δὲ τούτοις καὶ πρὸ 
τούτων (sc. Leucippus and Democritus) of καλούμενοι Πυθαγό- 
ρεῖοι τῶν μαθημάτων ἁψάμενοι πρῶτοι ταῦτα προήγαγον, Kal 








289 Contemp ly with these philosophers, and before them, the Pythagoreans, as 
they are called, devoted themselves to mathematics; they were the first to advance this study, 


236 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


ἐντραφέντες Ev αὐτοῖς τὰς τούτων ἀρχὰς τῶν ὄντων ἀρχὰς φήθησαν 
εἶναι πάντων. ἐπεὶ δὲ τούτων οἱ ἀριθμοὶ φύσει πρῶτοι, ἐν δὲ τοῖς 
ἀριθμοῖς ἐδόκουν θεωρεῖν ὁμοιώματα πολλὰ τοῖς οὖσι καὶ γιγνο- 
μένοις, μᾶλλον ἢ ἐν πυρὶ καὶ γῇ καὶ ὕδατι, ὅτι τὸ μὲν τοιονδὶ τῶν 
ἀριθμῶν πάθος δικαιοσύνη, τὸ δὲ τοιονδὶ ψυχὴ καὶ νοῦς, ἕτερον δὲ 
καϊρὸς καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὡς εἰττεῖν ἕκαστον ὁμοίως, ἔτι δὲ τῶν ἁρμονιῶν 
ἐν ἀριθμοῖς ὁρῶντες τὰ πάθη καὶ τοὺς λόγους, ἐπεὶ δὴ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα 
τοῖς ἀριθμοῖς ἐφαίνετο τὴν φύσιν ἀφωμοιῶσθαι πᾶσαν, οἱ δ᾽ ἀριθμοὶ 
πάσης τῆς φύσεως πρῶτοι, τὰ τῶν ἀριθμῶν στοιχεῖα τῶν ὄντων 
στοιχεῖα πάντων ὑπέλαβον εἶναι, καὶ τὸν ὅλον οὐρανὸν ἁρμονίαν 
εἶναι καὶ ἀριθμόν καὶ ὅσα εἶχον ὁμολογούμενα δεικνύναι Ev τε τοῖς 
ἀριθμοῖς καὶ ταῖς ἁρμονίαις πρὸς τὰ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ πάθη καὶ μέρη καὶ 
πρὸς τὴν ὅλην διακόσμησιν, ταῦτα συνάγοντες ἐφήρμοττον. κἂν εἴ 
τί Trou διέλειπε, προσεγλίχοντο τοῦ συνειρομένην πᾶσαν αὐτοῖς εἶναι 
τὴν πραγματείαν. λέγω δ᾽ οἷον, ἐπειδὴ τέλειον ἡ δεκὰς εἶναι δοκεῖ 
καὶ πᾶσαν περιειληφέναι τὴν τῶν ἀριθμῶν φύσιν, καὶ τὰ φερόμενα 
κατὰ τὸν οὐρανὸν δέκα μὲν εἶναί φασιν, ὄντων δὲ ἐννέα μόνον τῶν 
φανερῶν διὰ τοῦτο δεκάτην τὴν ἀντίχθονα ποιοῦσιν. διώρισται δὲ 
περὶ τούτων ἐν ἑτέροις ἡμῖν ἀκριβέστερον. .. .2 (οδθ8 15) φαίνονται 
δὴ καὶ οὗτοι τὸν ἀριθμὸν νομίφοντες ἀρχὴν εἶναι καὶ ὡς ὕλην τοῖς 
οὖσι καὶ ὡς πάθη τε καὶ ἕξεις, τοῦ δὲ ἀριθμοῦ στοιχεῖα τό τε ἄρτιον 
καὶ τὸ περιττόν, τούτων δὲ τὸ μὲν ἄπειρον, τὸ δὲ πεπερασμένον, TO 








and having been brought up in it they thought its principles were the principles of all things. 
Since of these principles numbers are by nature the first, and in numbers they seemed to see 
many resemblances to the things that exist and come into being—more than in fire and earth 
and water (such and such a modification of numbers being justice, another being soul and 
reason, another being opportunity—and similarly almost all other things being numerically 
expressible); since, again, they saw that the attributes and the ratios of the musical scales 
were expressible in numbers; since, then, all other things seemed in their whole nature to be 
modelled after numbers, and numbers seemed to be the first things in the whole of nature, 
they supposed the elements of numbers to be the elements of all things, and the whole heaven 
to be a musical scale and a number. And all the properties of numbers and scales which 
they could show to agree with the attributes and parts and the whole arrangement of the 
heavens, they collected and fitted into their scheme; and if there was a gap anywhere, they 
readily made additions so as to make their whole theory coherent. E.g. as the number 10 
is thought to be perfect and to comprise the whole nature of numbers, they say that the 
bodies which move through the heavens are ten, but as the visible bodies are only nine, to 
meet this they invent a tenth—the ‘ counter-earth’. We have discussed these matters more 
exactly elsewhere... . 

Evidently, then, these thinkers also consider that number 15 the principle both as matter 
for things and as forming their modifications and their permanent states, and hold that the 
elements of number are the even and the odd, and of these the former is unlimited, and the 


237 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


δ᾽ ἕν ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων εἶναι τούτων (καὶ yap ἄρτιον εἶναι καὶ περιττόν), 
τὸν δ᾽ ἀριθμὸν ἐκ τοῦ ἑνός, ἀριθμοὺς δέ, καθάπερ εἴρηται, τὸν ὅλον 
οὐρανόν. 
ἕτεροι δὲ τῶν αὐτῶν τούτων τὰς ἀρχὰς δέκα λέγουσιν εἶναι τὰς 
κατὰ συστοιχίαν λεγομένας" 
πέρας καὶ ἄπειρον 
περιττὸν καὶ ἄρτιον 
ἕν καὶ πλῆθος 
δεξιὸν καὶ ἀριστερόν 
ἄρρεν καὶ θῆλυ 
ἠρεμοῦν καὶ κινούμενον 
εὐθὺ καὶ καμπύλον 
φῶς καὶ σκότος 
ἀγαθὸν καὶ κακόν 
τετράγωνον καὶ ἑτερόμηκες᾽ 


ὅνπερ τρόπον ἔοικε καὶ ᾿Αλκμαίων ὁ Κροτωνιάτης ὑπολαβεῖν, καὶ 
ἤτοι οὗτος παρ᾽ ἐκείνων ἢ ἐκεῖνοι παρὰ τούτου παρέλαβον τὸν 
λόγον τοῦτον. καὶ γὰρ ἐγένετο τὴν ἡλικίαν ᾿Αλκμαίων ἐπὶ γέροντι 
Πυθαγόρᾳ, ἀπεφήνατο δὲ πιαραπλησίως τούτοις.3 φησὶ γὰρ εἶναι 
δύο τὰ πολλὰ τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων, λέγων τὰς ἐναντιότητας οὐχ 
ὥσπερ οὗτοι διωρισμένας ἀλλὰ τὰς τυχούσας, οἷον λευκὸν μέλαν, 
γλυκὺ πικρόν, ἀγαθὸν κακόν, μέγα μικρόν.4 οὗτος μὲν οὖν ἀδιορίστως 
ἀπέρριψε περὶ τῶν λοιπῶν, οἱ δὲ Πυθαγόρειοι καὶ πόσαι καὶ τίνες 
αἱ ἐναντιώσεις ἀπεφήναντο. παρὰ μὲν οὖν τούτων ἀμφοῖν τοσοῦτον 
ἔστι λαβεῖν ὅτι τἀναντία ἀρχαὶ τῶν ὄντων τὸ δὲ ὅσαι, παρὰ τῶν 
ἑτέρων, καὶ τίνες αὗταί εἰσιν. πῶς μέντοι πρὸς τὰς εἰρημένας αἰτίας 





latter limited; and the 1 proceeds from both of these (for it is both even and odd), and 
number from the 1; and the whole heaven, as has been said, 1s numbers. 

Other members of this same school say there are ten principles, which they arrange in two 
columns of cognates—limit and unlimited, odd and even, one and plurality, right and left, 
male and female, resting and moving, straight and curved, light and darkness, good and 
bad, square and oblong. In this way Alcmaeon of Croton seems also to have conceived the 
matter, and either he got this view from them or they got it from him; .. .for he expressed 
himself similarly to them. For he says most human affairs go in pairs, meaning not 
definite contrarieties such as the Pythagoreans speak of, but any chance contrarieties, e.g. 
white and black, sweet and bitter, good and bad, great and small. He threw out indefinite 
suggestions about the other contrarieties, but the Pythagoreans declared both how many and 
which their contrarieties are. 

From both these schools, then, we can learn this much, that the contraries are the 
principles of things; and how many these principles are and which they are, we can learn 

from one of the two schools. But how these principles can be brought together under the 


238 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


ἐνδέχεται συναγαγεῖν, σαφῶς μὲν οὐ διήρθρωται trap’ ἐκείνων, 
ἐοίκασι δ᾽ ὡς ἐν ὕλης εἴδει τὰ στοιχεῖα τάττειν ἐκ τούτων γὰρ ὡς 
ἐνυπαρχόντων συνεστάναι καὶ πεπλάσθαι φασὶ τὴν οὐσίαν. 


t For Aristotle’s caution in speaking of the Pythagoreans see note 2 on 
p. 218. 


2 Alexander, in his comments on this passage (Met. 41, 1, DK 5884), refers 
to the de caelo (i.e. 329) and the lost Πυθαγορικῶν δόξαι for Aristotle’s 
fuller treatment of this topic. 


3 On the text of this sentence see note I on p. 232. 
4 See p. 234. 


This long passage, though it is one of the few in which Aristotle 
recognizes (in the words ἕτεροι δὲ τῶν αὐτῶν τούτων, ‘others of 
these same thinkers’) distinctions within the school, is evidently 
intended as a summary of the main features of Pythagoreanism as 
a whole.! It accordingly refers in passing to most of the doctrines 
which Aristotle elsewhere examines in greater detail. At the same 
time it is by itself far from self-explanatory: almost every sentence 
in it needs corroboration, amplification or elucidation. The most 
convenient course will be to take this passage as a text for the whole 
of this chapter, expanding in turn each of the most important 
sentences in their logical order rather than in the order in which 
Aristotle presents them. Since Pythagoreanism is evidently based 
on an ultimate dualism, it will be best to start from the two first 
principles (which are first not only in the list but also, as the 
previous paragraph shows, in cosmology), Limit and Unlimited 
and Odd and Even. Next, since the unit is derived from these two 
principles, we must examine the nature of the Pythagorean units 
and of number in general. That will enable us to see what the 
Pythagoreans meant by the equation of things with numbers. 
Finally we can attempt to reconstruct the cosmogony of these early 
Pythagoreans, against which the criticisms of the Eleatics seem to 
have been primarily directed. 


t The opening words of the passage, ἐν δὲ τούτοις καὶ πρὸ τούτων, show 
that Aristotle has in mind, at least among others, the generation of 
Pythagoreans which flourished at the end of the fifth century B.c. and of 
which Philolaus was the most prominent member. When, however, he 





causes we have named has not been clearly and articulately stated by them; they seem, 
however, to range the elements under the head of matter; for out of these as immanent parts 
they say substance is composed and moulded, (Trans. Ross) 


239 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


passes in the following paragraph to ‘others of this same school’, his 
suggestion that either Alcmaeon borrowed from them or they from him 
seems to indicate that he is passing from a later to an earlier generation. 
But since the entire passage is clearly intended as a summary of the salient 
features of Pythagoreanism as a whole, no reliance can safely be placed 
upon this unusual distinction. 


DUALISM 


290 Aristotle Met. A5, 986b2, from 289 παρὰ μὲν οὖν τούτων 
ἀμφοῖν τοσοῦτον ἔστι λαβεῖν ὅτι τἀναντία ἀρχαὶ τῶν ὄντων TO δὲ 
ὅσαι, παρὰ τῶν ἑτέρων, καὶ τίνες αὗταί εἰσιν. 

201: Aristotle Met. Α5, 987a13 (ΠΚ 5888) οἱ δὲ Πυθαγόρειοι 
δύο μὲν τὰς ἀρχὰς κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν εἰρήκασι τρότον, τοσοῦτον δὲ 
προσεπέθεσαν ὃ καὶ ἴδιόν ἐστιν αὐτῶν, ὅτι τὸ πεπερασμένον καὶ τὸ 
ἄπειρον [καὶ τὸ ἕν] οὐχ ἑτέρας τινὰς φήθησαν εἶναι φύσεις, οἷον TrUp 
ἢ γῆν ἤ τι τοιοῦτον ἕτερον, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ ἄπειρον καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ ἕν 
οὐσίαν εἶναι τούτων ὧν κατηγοροῦνται, διὸ καὶ ἀριθμὸν εἶναι τὴν 
οὐσίαν πάντων. 


292 Aristotle Eth. Nic. A4, 1096b5 πιθανώτερον δ᾽ ἐοίκασιν of 
Πυθαγόρειοι λέγειν περὶ αὐτοῦ, τιθέντες ἐν TH τῶν ἀγαθῶν συστοιχίᾳ 
τὸ ἕν. 

293 Aristotle Eth. Nic. Β5, 1106b29 τὸ γὰρ κακὸν τοῦ ἀπείρον, 
ὡς οἱ Πυθαγόρειοι eikazov, τὸ δ᾽ ἀγαθὸν τοῦ πεπερασμένον. 


These passages make it plain that in Aristotle’s opinion not only 
was Pythagoreanism fundamentally dualistic! but also the Table 
of Opposites, attributed in 289 to only one section or generation 
of the school, was a characteristic feature of that dualism. What 
that Table in fact represents is, as Cornford says (Plato and 
Parmenides 7), ‘ten different manifestations of the two primary 








290 From both these schools, then, we can learn this much, that the contraries are the 
principles of things; and how many these principles are and which they are, we can learn 
From one of the two schools. 

291 But the Pythagoreans have said in the same way that there are two principles, but 
added this much, which is peculiar to them, that they thought finitude and infinity [and 
unity| were not attributes of certain other things, e.g. of fire or earth or anything else of this 
kind, but that infinity tiself and unity itself were the substance of the things of which they 
are predicated. This is why number was the substance of all things. (Trans. Ross) 
292 The Pythagoreans seem to have a more plausible view on the subject, when they put 
the One in the column of goods. 

293 For evil belongs to the unlimited, as the Pythagoreans conjectured, and good to the 
limited. 


240 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


Opposites in various spheres; in each pair there is a good and an 
answering evil’. The principle of Limit, in other words, is repre- 
sented in the appropriate sphere by oddness, unity, rest, goodness 
and so on, while the principle of the Unlimited is represented by 
their opposites. Moreover, as is clear from the phrases αὐτὸ τὸ ἕν, 
‘unity itself’, in 291, and ἐν τῇ τῶν ἀγαθῶν σνστοιχίᾳ, ‘in the 
column of goods’, in 292, unity and goodness at least—and the 
same is presumably true of the rest—are not only ‘manifestations’ 
of Limit but rather, each within its appropriate field, actually 
synonymous with Limit: in arithmetic Unity, in ethics Good take 
upon themselves the function of the primary principle.3 


t This is denied by Cornford (op. cit.), who, on the basis of two very un- 
reliable passages (Alexander Polyhistor ap. Diog. L. vin, 24 (DK 5881 a), 
on which sce Festugiére, Rev. des Et. Grecques 58 (1945) 1 ff., and Eudorus 
ap. Simpl. Phys. 181, 10, on which see Raven, Pyth. and El, 15), argues 
against Aristotle that Pythagoreanism was fundamentally monistic. There 
can, however, be no doubt that on this question in particular Aristotle is 
by far our most reliable authority. Moreover, if we elect to follow him, we 
can immediately see the motive for the tradition preserved in 294 
Hippolytus Ref. 1, 2, 12 Διόδωρος δὲ ὁ ᾿Ερετριεὺς Kal ᾿Αριστόξενος ὁ 
μουσικός φασι πρὸς Ζαράταν τὸν Χαλδαῖον ἐληλυθέναι Πυθαγόραν. 
Zoroastrianism, like Pythagoreanism, was based upon a dualism between 
a good principle, Ormazd, and a bad, Ahriman; and all that this tradition 
proves is that already in the 4th century 8.c. the similarity between the two 
systems had bcen observed. 

2 It has been maintained, by Zeller and others (see Ross, Ar. Met. note 
ad loc.), that the Table of Opposites belongs to the time of Philolaus. We 
shall see, however, when we come to Parmenides, that Aristotle’s im- 
plication that it belongs rather to the time of Alcmaeon is probably 
reliable. 


3 Cf. also 295 Aristotle Met. A6, 987b22 (DK 58B13) τὸ μέντοι ye 
ἕν οὐσίαν εἶναι, Kal μὴ ἕτερόν γέ τι Ov λέγεσθαι Ev, παραπλησίως τοῖς 
Πυθαγορείοις ἔλεγε (sc. Plato), καὶ τὸ τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς αἰτίους εἶναι τοῖς 
ἄλλοις τῆς οὐσίας ὡσαύτως ἐκείνοις. τὸ δὲ ἀντὶ τοῦ ἀπείρου ὡς ἑνὸς 
δυάδα ποιῆσαι, τὸ δὲ ἄπειρον ἐκ μεγάλον καὶ μικροῦ, τοῦτ᾽ ἴδιον. Here 
again τὸ ἕν clearly stands for πέρας and as such is contrasted with τὸ 
ἄπειρον. 





294 Diodorus of Eretria and Aristoxenus the musical scholar say that Pythagoras visited 
Karatas the Chaldaean. 

295 But he agreed with the Pythagoreans in saying that the One is substance and not a 
predicate of something else; and in saying that the Numbers are the causes of the reality of 
other things, he also agreed with them; but positing a dyad and constructing the infinite out 
of great and small, instead of treating the infinite as one, is peculiar to him, (Trans. Ross) 


16 241 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


LIMIT AND UNLIMITED, ODD AND EVEN 


296 Aristotle Met. A5, 985623, from 289 ἐν δὲ τούτοις Kal ττρὸ 
τούτων οἱ καλούμενοι Πυθαγόρειοι τῶν μαθημάτων ἁψάμενοι ττρῶτοι 
ταῦτα προήγαγον, καὶ ἐντραφέντες ἐν αὐτοῖς τὰς τούτων ἀρχὰς τῶν 
ὄντων ἀρχὰς φήθησαν εἶναι πάντων. ἐπεὶ δὲ τούτων οἱ ἀριθμοὶ 
φύσει πρῶτοι.. .τὰ τῶν ἀριθμῶν στοιχεῖα τῶν ὄντων στοιχεῖα 
πάντων ὑπέλαβον εἶναι... τοῦ δὲ ἀριθμοῦ στοιχεῖα τό τε ἄρτιον καὶ 
τὸ περιττόν, τούτων δὲ τὸ μὲν ἄπειρον, τὸ δὲ πτεπτερασμένον... .. 


In these sentences Aristotle first tells us that the Pythagoreans 
were led to adopt their primary principles by their study of 
‘mathematics’, and then suggests, by the stress he lays on ‘the 
elements of number’, that he is thinking only of arithmetic. There 
is, however, no doubt that from the outset the Pythagoreans 
studied geometry as well as arithmetic. Indeed Diogenes Laertius 
(vi, 12) tells us that Pythagoras himself studied especially ‘the 
arithmetical form of geometry’, τὸ ἀριθμητικὸν εἶδος αὐτῆς. But 
whereas the opposition of Odd and Even is clearly appropriate in 
arithmetic, it is equally clear that it is not applicable to geometry. 
Evidently, therefore, when the Pythagoreans wished to find a 
similar pair of opposites to underlie geometry, they had recourse to 
the pair which Pythagoras himself had already presumably dis- 
covered in his study of harmonics (see p. 229), namely Limit and 
the Unlimited. Every geometrical figure can be naturally enough 
regarded as a parcel of unlimited space bounded by limiting points, 
lines or surfaces. At the same time it was clearly undesirable to 
have two unrelated pairs of opposites underlying respectively 
arithmetic and geometry. The Pythagoreans therefore simply 
equated Odd with Limit and Even with Unlimited, and proceeded 
to rationalize these by no means self-evident equations by a 
number of curiously unconvincing arguments which we must next 
consider. 





296 Contemporancously with these philosophers and before them, the Pythagoreans, as 
they are called, devoted themselves to mathematics; they were the first to advance this study, 
and having been brought up in it they thought its principles were the principles of all things. 
Since of these principles numbers are by nature the first. ..they supposed the elements of 
numbers to be the elements of all things.... The elements of number are the even and 
the odd, and of these the former is unlimited, and the latter limited. ... 


242 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


THE NATURE OF NUMBER 


The early Pythagoreans, having no simple form of numerical 
notation, chose to express numbcrs in the form of patterns similar 
to those now found on dominoes or dice. ‘Thus the number 10 was 
represented, as we have already seen (p. 230 note 2), by ten dots 
or alphas arranged in an equilateral triangle. Aristotle is certainly 
referring to two other such figures when he explains the Pytha- 
gorean equation of Even with Unlimited as follows: 


297 Aristotle Physics [4, 203a10 (DK58B28) καὶ of μὲν (se. 
φασὶ) τὸ ἄπειρον εἶναι TO ἄρτιον (τοῦτο yap ἐναττολαμβανόμενον καὶ 
ὑπὸ τοῦ περιττοῦ περαινόμενον παρέχειν τοῖς οὖσι τὴν ἀπειρίαν" 
σημεῖον δ᾽ εἶναι τούτου τὸ συμβαῖνον ἐπὶ τῶν ἀριθμῶν περιτιθε- 
μένων γὰρ τῶν γνωμόνων περὶ τὸ ἕν καὶ χωρὶς ὅτε μὲν ἄλλο ἀεὶ 
γίγνεσθαι τὸ εἶδος, ὅτε δὲ ἕν). Πλάτων δὲ. .... 

Difficult as are the words καὶ χωρίς (which are usually taken to 
mean ‘and in the other case’), there can be no doubt that the two 
figures to which Aristotle is here referring are these: 











e Φ Φ 9 Φ Φ ® Φ Φ 

Φ Φ Φ Φ . _ e e Φ : Φ 

. _ ΜΝ Φ Φ Φ Φ Φ ; Φ : Φ 

e Φ : Φ Φ ° _ ° | Φ : Φ : Φ 
Fig. 1. Fig. 2. 


Either of these figures can, of course, be extended, by the addition 
of more ‘gnomons’,! ad infinitum. In Figure 1, where ‘the gnomons 
are being placed around the one’, each successive addition marks 
the next in the series of odd numbers, while Figure 2 similarly 
represents the series of even numbers. But whereas Figure 1 
remains, with each addition, always the same figure, a square, 
Figure 2 on the contrary changes with each addition the ratio of 
its length to its height. Hence, of course, the inclusion of tetpd- 
yovov καὶ ἑτερόμηκες in the Table of Opposites; for ἑτερόμηκες, as 





297 Further, the Pythagoreans identify the infinite with the even. For this, they say, 
when it is taken in and limited by the odd, provides things with the element of infinity. An 
indication of this is what happens with numbers. If the gnomons are placed round the one, 
and without the one, in the one construction the figure that results 15 always different, in the 
other it is always the same. But Plato.... (After Hardie) 


243 16-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


we are told in many passages in later mathematical writers,? refers 
properly to a rectangle in which one side exceeds the other by a 
single unit. And Aristotle is no doubt right in giving this as one of 
the arguments by which the equations of Odd with Limit and of 
Even with Unlimited were justified. Figure 1 representing the Odd 
is uniform, év, Figure 2 representing the Even is infinitely variable, 
ἄλλο ἀεί. 
1 As Ross says in his note on this passage (Aristotle, Physics η42--5) : ‘The 
stricter meaning of the word (sc. “‘gnomon’”’) is “ the figure which remains 
of a square when a smaller square is cut out of it”... .. But in a wider sense 
γνώμων can stand for any number which when added to a figurate number 


gives the next number of the same figure (lamb. in Nic. 58, 19 Pistelli; 
Hero Def. 58).’ 


2 E.g. 298 Nicomachus Jnirod. Arithm. u, 17 (108, 8 Hoche) ἑτερομήκης 
ἀριθμὸς λέγεται ot ἐπιπέδως σχηματογραφέντος τετράπλευρος μὲν Kal τετρα- 
γώνιος γίνεται ἡ καταγραφή, οὐ μὴν ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις αἱ πλευραὶ οὐδὲ τὸ μῆκος 
τῷ πλάτει ἴσον, ἀλλὰ παρὰ μονάδα. Cf. Theo 31, 20 Hiller. 
It seems probable, too, that the samc two figures were used to 
justify these equations in another way. Simplicius, commenting 
on the first words of this passage, writes as follows: 


299 Simplicius Physics 455, 20 οὔτοι δὲ TO ἄπειρον τὸν ἄρτιον 
ἀριθμὸν ἔλεγον “Sic τὸ πᾶν μὲν ἄρτιον, ὥς φασιν οἱ ἐξηγηταί, els 
ἴσα διαιρεῖσθαι, τὸ δὲ εἰς ἴσα διαιρούμενον ἄπειρον κατὰ τὴν διχο- 
τομίαν " ἡ γὰρ εἰς ἴσα καὶ ἡμίση διαίρεσις ἐττ᾽ ἄπειρον ᾿ τὸ δὲ πτεριττὸν 
προστεθὲν περαίνει αὐτό κωλύει γὰρ αὐτοῦ τὴν εἰς ἴσα διαίρεσιν᾽. 
οὕτως μὲν οὖν οἱ ἐξηγηταὶ τῷ ἀρτίῳ τὸ ἄπειρον ἀνατιθέασι κατὰ 
τὴν εἰς ἴσα διαίρεσιν, καὶ δηλονότι οὐκ ἐπ᾽ ἀριθμῶν ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ μεγεθῶν 
λαμβάνουσι τὴν ἐπ᾽ ἄπειρον τομήν... ὅλως δὲ οὐδὲ ὁ ᾿Αριστοτέλης 
φαίνεται τὴν εἰς ἴσα διαίρεσιν αἰτιασάμενος τοῦ ἀπείρου. 


Whatever these commentators whom Simplicius quotes may 
have meant, they clearly cannot have mcant that every even 





298 An ‘oblong number’ is one which, when represented diagrammatically, has a four- 
sided rectangular figure, but its sides are not equal, its length differing from its breadth by 
a single unit. 


299 1772» meant by infinity even numbers, ‘since everything even’, as the commentators 
say, ‘is divisible into equal parts, and what is divisible into equal parts is infinite in respect 
of division into two; for division into halves goes on ad infinitum, while the addition of 
the odd limits it by putting an end to halving’. So the commentators refer the unlimited to 
the even in respect of divisibility into halves, and it is plain that they conceive of infinite 
divisibility in terms not of numbers but of magnitudes... .But Aristotle evidently does not 
regard divisibility into halves as in any way an explanation of infinity. 


244. 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


number is divisible ad infinitum into halves; for it is an axiom 
common to all Greek mathematicians that the unit is indivisible 
and that such fractions as + or τίς represent one unit out of a total 
of 4 or 16. The easiest way to make sense of their comment can in 
fact be represented diagrammatically so: 

















Φ Φ Φ Φ 
Φ ® e Φ 
Φ Φ : Φ Φ 
Φ : Φ Φ Φ 
Fig. 3. Fig. 4. 


Whereas in Figure 4 ἡ εἰς ἴσα καὶ ἡμίση διαίρεσις ἐπ᾽ ἄπειρον, 
‘division into halves goes on ad infinitum’ ,in Figure 3 on the contrary 
TO περιττὸν προστεθὲν περαίνει αὐτό κωλύει γὰρ αὐτοῦ τὴν εἰς 
ἴσα διαίρεσιν, ‘the addition of the unit prevents division into 
halves’. Odd number in general, and the number 3 in particular, 
were defined by the Pythagoreans (and Aristotle himself was 
evidently familiar with the definition, see 388) as ‘that which has 
a beginning, a middle and an cnd’. Even number on the other 
hand, as Figure 4 shows, has no ‘middle’; and the absence of a 
‘middle’ may well have provided the Pythagoreans with another 
rationalization, however naive and artificial, for the equation of 
Even with Unlimited. 


< Cf. with this passage from Simplicius four others cited by Ross in his 
note (p. 542) on Aristotle Phys. 203a10-11, and also especially 300 
Nicomachus 7.4. 1, 7 (13, 10 Hoche) ἔστι δὲ ἄρτιον μὲν ὃ οἷόν τε εἰς δύο 
ἴσα διαιρεθῆναι μονάδος μέσον μὴ παρεμτιττούσης, περιττὸν δὲ τὸ μὴ δυνά- 
μενον els δύο ἴσα μερισθῆναι διὰ τὴν προειρημένην τῆς μονάδος μεσττείαν. 


UNITS HAVE MAGNITUDE 


301 Aristotle Met. A5, 986a15 (from 289) φαίνονται δὴ καὶ 
οὗτοι τὸν ἀριθμὸν νομίφτοντες ἀρχὴν εἶναι καὶ ὡς ὕλην τοῖς οὖσι... .. 





300 Even is that which admits of division into halves without the interposition of the 
unit, odd is that which does not admit of division into halves because the unit is interposed 
as described. 

301 Lvidently, then, these thinkers also consider that number is the principle both as 
matter for things.... 


245 


PRESOCRATICGC PHILOSOPHERS 


302 Aristotle Met. M6, 1080b16 καὶ of Πυθαγόρειοι δ᾽ Eva, τὸν 
μαθηματικόν (sc. ἀριθμόν φασιν εἶναι), TAY οὐ κεχωρισμένον GAA’ 
ἐκ τούτου τὰς αἰσθητὰς οὐσίας συνεστάναι φασίν. τὸν γὰρ ὅλον 
οὐρανὸν κατασκευάζουσιν ἐξ ἀριθμῶν, πλὴν οὐ μοναδικῶν, ἀλλὰ 
τὰς μονάδας ὑπολαμβάνουσιν ἔχειν μέγεθος"... μοναδικοὺς τοὺς 
ἀριθμοὺς εἶναι πάντες τιθέασι πλὴν τῶν Πυθαγορείων". . ἐκεῖνοι δ᾽ 
ἔχοντας μέγεθος, καθάπερ εἴρηται πρότερον. 

303 Aristotle Met. M8, 1083b8 ὁ δὲ τῶν Πυθαγορείων τρόπος 
τῇ μὲν ἐλάττους ἔχει δυσχερείας τῶν πρότερον εἰρημένων, τῇ δὲ 
ἰδίας ἑτέρας. τὸ μὲν γὰρ μὴ χωριστὸν ποιεῖν τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἀφαιρεῖται 
πολλὰ τῶν ἀδυνάτων: τὸ δὲ τὰ σώματα ἐξ ἀριθμῶν εἶναι συγκείμενα, 
καὶ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦτον εἶναι μαθηματικόν, ἀδύνατόν ἐστιν. οὔτε 
γὰρ ἄτομα μεγέθη λέγειν ἀληθές, εἴ θ᾽ ὅτι μάλιστα τοῦτον ἔχει τὸν 
τρόπον, οὐχ αἵ γε μονάδες μέγεθος ἔχουσιν. μέγεθος δὲ ἐξ ἀδιαιρέτων 
πῶς δυνατόν; ἀλλὰ μὴν ὅ γ᾽ ἀριθμητικὸς ἀριθμὸς μοναδικός ἐστιν. 
ἐκεῖνοι δὲ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τὰ ὄντα λέγουσιν. τὰ γοῦν θεωρήματα 
προσάπτουσι τοῖς σώμασιν ὡς ἐξ ἐκείνων ὄντων τῶν ἀριθμῶν. 


1 Aristotle has been discussing before this passage, and in the second 
sentence quoted is referring to, the theory held by Plato and some of the 
Platonists that number cxists as a separate entity apart from sensible 
things. On this theory see Ross, Ar. Met. liu-lvii. 


The unfortunate consequence of their diagrammatic representa- 
tion of numbers was that the Pythagoreans, thinking of numbers 
as spatially extended and confusing the point of geometry with 





302 Now the Pythagoreans also believe in one kind of number—the mathematical; only 
they say it 1s not separate but sensible substances are formed out of it. For they construct 
the whole universe out of numbers—only not numbers consisting of abstract units; they 
suppose the untts to have spatial magnitude....All...suppose numbers to consist of 
abstract units, except the Pythagoreans; but they suppose the numbers to have magnitude, 
as has been said before. (Trans. Ross) 


303 The doctrine of the Pythagoreans in one way affords fewer difficulties than those 
before named, but in another way has others peculiar to itself. For not thinking of number 
as capable of existing separately removes many of the impossible consequences; but that 
bodies should be composed of numbers, and that this should be mathematical number, is 
impossible. For it is not true to speak of indivisible spatial magnitudes; and however much 
there might be magnitudes of this sort, units at least have not magnitude; and how can 
a magnitude be composed of indivisibles? But arithmetical number, at least, consists 
of abstract units, while these thinkers identify number with real things; at any 
rate they apply their propositions to bodies as if they consisted of those numbers. 
(Trans. Ross) 


246 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


the unit of arithmetic, tended to imagine both alike as possess- 
ing magnitude. It 15 true that Aristotle, in discussing the views 
of earlier thinkers, often confronts them with such logical con- 
sequences of their doctrines as they themselves never cither 
enunciated or foresaw; and no doubt in 303 he is, to some extent 
at least, pursuing this usual practice. But 302 leaves no doubt that 
the Pythagorcans did indeed assume, even though the assumption 
was only tacit,’ that units are spatially extended; and when we 
come to consider the paradoxes of Zeno we shall find that it is 
against this assumption, along with the confusion of points and 
units, that they have their greatest force (see pp. 280 ff.). 


I This is, I believe, a point of great importance. In his review of J. E. 
Raven, Pythagoreans and Eleatics, G. Viastos (Gnomon 25 (1953) 29-35), 
following Heidel (A7P 61 (1940) 29 n. 58), cites 304 Aetius 1, 3, 19 
“Expavtos Συρακούσιος, εἷς τῶν Πυθαγορείων, πάντων τὰ ἀδιαίρετα 
σώματα καὶ τὸ κενόν (sc. ἀρχὰς εἶναι)" τὰς γὰρ Πυθαγορικὰς μονάδας 
οὗτος πρῶτος ἀπεφήνατο σωματικάς. He then writes (p. 32): ‘Whatever 
may be the date of Ecphantus, this statement definitely implies that 
number-atomism was not regarded by the tradition stemming from 
Theophrastus as an original feature of Pythagoreanism.’ Even if we 
accept, as we doubtless should, the view of both Heidcl and Vlastos that 
Ecphantus ‘was, at most, no earlier than the atomists and, more probably, 
a fourth-century figure’ (Vlastos, p. 32 n. 1), I cannot myself accept the 
implication which the statement of Aetius is said to carry. All that the 
statement seems to me to imply is that Ecphantus was the first Pythagorean 
explicitly to acknowledge the consequences of Zeno’s attack upon the tacit 
confusion of the earlicr Pythagoreans. The phrase ‘number-atomism’ too 
easily suggests (as it was meant to do by Cornford, who used it freely) a 
system in which units were explicitly stated to possess magnitude. It is 
not therefore appropriate to the present reconstruction of Pythagoreanism, 
which suggests only that the earlier Pythagoreans, like all the rest of the 
Presocratics, failed to distinguish between the corporeal and the incor- 
poreal. See further on Melissus, pp. 302 ff. 


Nor, indeed, is that the full extent of the confusion. These unit- 
points functioned also as the basis of physical matter: they were 
regarded in fact as a primitive form of atom. When, thercfore, 
Aristotle speaks of number as ὡς ὕλην τοῖς οὖσι, ‘functioning as 
the material element in things’, or when, as he often does, he 
asserts that the Pythagoreans regarded the universe as consisting 





304 Ecphantus of Syracuse, one of the Pythagoreans, held that the principles of all things 
are indivisible bodies and void. For he was the first to say that the Pythagorean units were 
corporeal. 


247 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


of numbers, he means that concrete objects were literally composed 
of aggregations of unit-point-atoms. ‘T'wo such passages are: 


305 Aristotle Met. A8, 990a18 (DK 58B22) ἔτι δὲ πῶς δεῖ 
λαβεῖν αἴτια μὲν εἶναι τὰ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ πάθη καὶ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῶν κατὰ 
τὸν οὐρανὸν ὄντων καὶ γιγνομένων καὶ ἐξ ἀρχῆς καὶ νῦν, ἀριθμὸν 
δ᾽ ἄλλον μηθένα εἶναι παρὰ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τοῦτον ἐξ οὗ συνέστηκεν ὁ 
κόσμος; 

306 Aristotle Met. N3, 1090a20 of δὲ Πυθαγόρειοι, διὰ τὸ ὁρᾶν 
πολλὰ τῶν ἀριθμῶν πάθη ὑπάρχοντα τοῖς αἰσθητοῖς σώμασιν, 
εἶναι μὲν ἀριθμοὺς ἐποίησαν τὰ ὄντα, οὐ χωριστοὺς δέ, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ 
ἀριθμῶν τὰ ὄντα. 


THINGS EQUAL NUMBERS 


307 Aristotle Met. A5, 985b26, from 289 ἐπεὶ δὲ τούτων of 
ἀριθμοὶ φύσει πρῶτοι, ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀριθμοῖς ἐδόκουν θεωρεῖν ὁμοιώματα 
πολλὰ τοῖς οὖσι καὶ γιγνομένοις, μᾶλλον ἢ ἐν πυρὶ καὶ γῇ καὶ ὕδατι, 
ὅτι τὸ μὲν τοιονδὶ τῶν ἀριθμῶν πάθος δικαιοσύνη, τὸ δὲ τοιονδὶ 
ψυχὴ καὶ νοῦς, ἕτερον δὲ καιρὸς καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὡς εἰπεῖν ἕκαστον 
ὁμοίως... .. 


308 [Aristotle] Magna Moralia Ai, 1182a11 πρῶτος μὲν οὖν 
ἐνεχείρησε Πυθαγόρας περὶ ἀρετῆς εἰπεῖν, οὐκ ὀρθῶς δέ τὰς γὰρ 
ἀρετὰς εἰς τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς ἀνάγων οὐκ οἰκείαν τῶν ἀρετῶν τὴν 
θεωρίαν ἐποιεῖτο᾽ οὐ γάρ ἐστιν ἡ δικαιοσύνη ἀριθμὸς ἰσάκις ἴσος. 
(Cf. Ar. Eth. Nic. E8, 1132b21, DK 5884.) 





305 Further, how are we to combine the belief that the modifications of number, and 
number itself, are causes of what exists and happens in the heavens both from the beginning 
and now, and that there is no other number than this number out of which the world is 
composed? (Trans. Ross) 


306 But the Pythagoreans, because they saw many attributes of numbers belonging to 
sensible bodies, supposed real things to be numbers—not separable numbers, however, but 
numbers of which real things consist. (Trans. Ross) 


307 Since of these principles numbers are by nature the first, and in numbers they seemed 
to see many resemblances to the things that exist and come into being—more than in fire and 
earth and water (such and such a modification of numbers being justice, another being soul 
and reason, another being opportunity—and similarly almost all other things being 
numerically expressible) .... 


308 Pythagoras first attempted to discuss goodness, but not in the right way; for by 
referring the virtues to numbers he made his study of them inappropriate; for justice is not 
a square number. 


248 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


309 Aristotle Met. M4, 1078b21 (DK 5884) of δὲ Πυθαγόρειοι 
πρότερον περί τινων ὀλίγων, ὧν Tous λόγους εἰς τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς 
ἀνῆτπττον, οἷον τί ἐστι καιρὸς ἢ τὸ δίκαιον ἢ γάμος, ἐκεῖνος [1.6. 
Socrates, not, asin DK, Democritus] δ᾽ εὐλόγως ἐτήτει τὸ τί ἐστιν. 
310 Aristotle Met. A8, οοοδ2ῶ (ὨΚ 5»88Β22), continuing 305 
ὅταν yap ἐν τῳδὶ μὲν τῷ μέρει δόξα καὶ καιρὸς αὐτοῖς 7, μικρὸν δὲ 
ἄνωθεν ἢ κάτωθεν ἀδικία καὶ κρίσις ἢ μῖξις, ἀπόδειξιν δὲ λέγωσιν ὅτι 
τούτων μὲν ἕκαστον ἀριθμός ἐστι, συμβαίνει δὲ κατὰ τὸν τόπον 
τοῦτον ἤδη πλῆθος εἶναι τῶν συνισταμένων μεγεθῶν διὰ τὸ τὰ 
πάθη ταῦτα ἀκολουθεῖν τοῖς τόποις ἑκάστοις, πότερον οὗτος ὁ 
αὐτός ἐστιν ἀριθμός, ὁ ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ, ὃν δεῖ λαβεῖν ὅτι τούτων 
ἕκαστόν ἐστιν, ἢ παρὰ τοῦτον ἄλλος; 


We have scen in the last paragraph what the Pythagoreans 
meant by their cquation of concrete objects with numbers: they 
meant that each such object consisted of a definite number of 
unit-point-atoms. Accordingly we often find Aristotle protesting 
against the Pythagoreans, as he docs, for instance, at 311 de caelo 
Γι, 300a17 (DK 58838): τὰ μὲν γὰρ φυσικὰ σώματα φαίνεται 
βάρος ἔχοντα καὶ κουφότητα, τὰς δὲ μονάδας οὔτε σῶμα ποιεῖν 
οἷόν τε συντιθεμένας οὔτε βάρος ἔχειν. In 308, 309 and 310, how- 
ever, we are concerned with equations of, to us at least, a very 
different type: the equation of justice with ἀριθμὸς ἰσάκις ἴσος--- 
1.6. the first square number, 4—scems clearly symbolical rather 
than literal. It must once again be remembered, however, that 
Greek thinkers were very slow to apprehend that anything could 
exist without spatial extension. Empedocles, as we shall see (424), 





309 The Pythagoreans had before this treated of a few things, whose definitions they 
connected with numbers—e.g. opportunity, justice or marriage. But it was natural that 
Socrates should seek the essence. (Trans. Ross) 


310 When in one particular region they place opinion and opportunity, and, a little above 
or below, injustice and sifting or mixture, and allege as proof of this that each one of these 
is a number, and that in this place there is already a plurality of the extended bodies 
composed of numbers just because the qualities of number that constitute these are 
connected with these groups of places,—this being so, is this number, which we must 
suppose each of these abstractions to be, the same number which is exhibited in the material 
universe, or is tt another than this? (Trans. Ross, altered in accordance with his notes 
on Ar. Met. 990a25 and 26, pp. 184-5) 


311 For natural bodies are manifestly endowed with weight and lightness, but an 
assemblage of units can neither be composed to form a body nor possess weight. (Trans. 
Stocks) 


249 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


still speaks of his moving principles (as we might call them), Love 
and Strife, as ‘equal in length and breadth to the four elements’, 
and likewise Anaxagoras describes his Nous as ‘the finest and 
purest of substances’ (503). Plato seems to have been the first Greek 
to have consciously thought that anything could exist otherwise 
than in space, and he was followed in this respect by Aristotle. 
But that these two were the exception rather than the rule is 
suggested by the fact that the Stoics still regarded justicc, for 
instance, as cxtended in space. It seems most probable, therefore, 
that these early Pythagoreans had not clearly distinguished in their 
own minds between such equations as, on the one hand, ‘A man 
=250’ and, on the other, ‘Justice=4’. The question in 310, 
whether it is the same kind of number in each casc, is not only, in 
fact, perfectly legitimate, but should probably be answered (though 
here again the Pythagoreans’ assumption was doubtless only tacit 
rather than explicit) in the affirmative. Aristotle himself, having 
learnt the distinction betwccn the concrete and the abstract, fails to 
sce the confusion underlying the Pythagorean equations of abstracts 
with numbers. But even if thosc equations had been intended, as 
Cornford supposes (Plato and Parmenides 26), to be merely sym- 
bolical, they would still have had little appeal to a mind such as 
Aristotle’s. 

1 Both Plato’s Ideas and Aristotle’s Unmoved Mover are explicitly stated 


by their authors to be not in space. See Plato Tim. 52 α and Aristotle 
Met. ΔΊ. 1072 8 5. 


COSMOGONY 

(i) The first unit 

312 Aristotle Met. N3, 1og1a12 ἄτοπον δὲ καὶ γένεσιν ποιεῖν 
ἀιδίων ὄντων, μᾶλλον δ᾽ ἕν τι τῶν ἀδυνάτων. of μὲν οὖν Πυθαγόρειοι 
πότερον οὐ ποιοῦσιν ἢ ποιοῦσι γένεσιν οὐδὲν δεῖ διστάφειν φανερῶς 
γὰρ λέγουσιν ὡς τοῦ ἑνὸς συσταθέντος, εἴτ᾽ ἐξ ἐπιπέδων εἴτ᾽ ἐκ 
χροιᾶς εἴτ᾽ ἐκ σπέρματος εἴτ᾽ ἐξ ὧν ἀποροῦσιν εἰπεῖν, εὐθὺς τὸ 
ἔγγιστα τοῦ ἀπείρον ὅτι εἵλκετο καὶ ἐπεραίνετο ὑπὸ τοῦ πέρατος. 





312 It is strange also to attribute generation to eternal things, or rather this is one of the 
things that are impossible. There need be no doubt whether the Pythagoreans attribute 
generation to them or not; for they obviously say that when the one had been consiructed, 
whether out of planes or of surface or of seed or of elements which they cannot express, 
immediately the nearest part of the unlimited began to be drawn in and limited by the limit. 
(After Ross) 


250 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


313 Aristotle Met. M6, 1080b20 (DK 5889) (omitted from the 
middle of 302) ὅπως δὲ TO πρῶτον Ev συνέστη ἔχον μέγεθος, 
ἀπορεῖν ἐοίκασιν. 

The mode of generation of ‘the first unit with magnitude’ is 
indeed, as Aristotle complains, one of the most mysterious features 
of the Pythagorean cosmology, and there is no reliable evidence 
apart from Aristotle’s own words to enable us to solve the problem. 
Fortunately, however, Aristotle’s three suggestions in 312, which 
‘must have been prompted’, as Cornford says (Plato and Parmenides 
19; cf. Ross’s note ad loc.), ‘by known features of the system’, give 
us something to go on. Surfaces do certainly play a large part 
in Pythagorean cosmology; and χροιά is to the Pythagoreans, as 
Aristotle himself tells us, so inseparable an aspect of surface that 
the two words are actually synonymous: 


314 Aristotle de sensu 3, 439a30 TO yap χρῶμα ἢ ἐν τῷ πέρατί 
ἐστιν ἢ πέρας. διὸ καὶ of Πυθαγόρειοι τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν χροιὰν 
ἐκάλουν. 


Since, however, surfaces do not appear to be generated till a later 
stage in cosmogony (sce pp. 253 ff.), it is the third suggestion 
that appears the most plausible. ‘This biological conception’, as 
Cornford again wrote (ibid.), ‘fits the notion of the world as a 
living and breathing creature’ (cf. 312 and also 316 below), 
‘which, like other living things, would grow from a sced to its full 
form. It also fits in with the position of the male principle under 
Limit, the female under Unlimited, in the Table of Opposites. ’ 
This notion of the seed certainly looks like an early doctrine (cf. 
the genealogical concept of cosmogony exemplified in ch. 1), and 
its connexion with another Pythagorean view which therc is reason 
to regard as early, namely the Table of Opposites (see p. 241 
note 2), serves perhaps to confirm what we might anyhow suspect. 

The early Pythagoreans may well, therefore, have initiated the 
cosmogonical process by representing the male principle of Limit 
as somchow implanting in the midst of the surrounding Unlimited 
the seed which, by progressive growth, was to develop into the 
visible universe. Here once again, however, it is possible that they 


ee ee 





313 But how the first unit with magnitude was constructed, they seem at a loss to 
describe. 

314 For colour is either contained in the limit or actually is limit; and so the Pytha- 
goreans regarded surface and colour as synonymous. 


251 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


felt no need, and consequently, as Aristotle’s words in both 312 
and 313 certainly suggest, simply omitted, to explain this mysterious 
beginning of cosmogony. 


(11) The void 
315 Aristotle Physics A6, 213b22 εἶναι δ᾽ ἔφασαν καὶ of Πυθα- 
γόρειϊιοι κενόν, Kal ἐπεισιέναι αὐτῷ: τῷ οὐρανῷ ἐκ TOU ἀπείρου 
πνεῦμά Te? ὡς ἀναπνέοντι καὶ τὸ κενόν, ὃ διορίφει τὰς φύσεις, ὡς 
ὄντος τοῦ κενοῦ χωρισμοῦ τινος τῶν ἐφεξῆς καὶ τῆς διορίσεως καὶ 
τοῦτ᾽ εἶναι πρῶτον ἐν τοῖς ἀριθμοῖς: τὸ γὰρ κενὸν διορίφειν τὴν 
φύσιν αὐτῶν. 
216 Stobacus Anth. 1, 18, τὸ (quoting Aristotle) ἐν δὲ τῷ περὶ 
τῆς Πυθαγόρου φιλοσοφίας πρώτῳ γράφει τὸν μὲν οὐρανὸν εἶναι 
ἕνα, ἐπεισάγεσθαι δὲ ἐκ τοῦ ἀπείρου χρόνον τε καὶ πνοὴν καὶ τὸ 
κενόν, ὃ Siopizer ἑκάστων τὰς χώρας ἀεί. 
317 Alexander Met. 512, 37 (commenting on Ar. Met. Z11, 
1036b8, 406) ἐπειδὴ γὰρ Suds ἐστι TO πρῶτον διάστατον 
(εἰς πρώτην γὰρ τὴν δυάδα ἡ μονὰς διέστη, καὶ οὕτως εἰς τὴν 
τριάδα καὶ τοὺς ἑξῆς ἀριθμούς), εἴπερ ὁριφόμεθα, φασί (sc. the 
Pythagoreans), τὴν γραμμήν, οὐ χρὴ λέγειν αὐτὴν πόσον ἐφ᾽ ἕν 
διάστατον, ἀλλὰ γραμμή ἐστι τὸ πρῶτον διάστατον. 
1 The text and precise meaning of this sentence are doubtful: αὐτῷ G 
Philoponus Stobaeus, αὐτὸ EFIJ; πνεύματος codd. Philoponus in lemmate 
Stobaeus, πνεῦμα Simplicius ‘l'ennecmann Heidel, πνεῦμά te Diels, fortiter 
E’,—Ross prints αὐτὸ and πνεύματος, with some hesitation; but the 
paraphrases of Philoponus (610, 8; 615, 23) and Simplicius (to whom 
Themistius is here closely similar) say nothing about infinite breath, but 
merely mention ‘the surrounding infinite’ or ‘that which lies outside’: 


so 318 Simplicius Phys. 651, 26 ...16 κενὸν ἐπεισιέναι TH κόσμῳ οἷον 
é&vatrvéovTi ἤτοι εἰσπνέοντι αὐτῷ ὥσπερ πνεῦμα aro τοῦ ἔξωθεν περικεχυ- 








3215 The Pythagoreans, too, held that void exists and that breath(?) and void enter from 
the Unlimited into the heaven itself which, as it were, inhales; the void distinguishes the 
natures of things, being a kind of separating and distinguishing factor between terms in 
series. This happens primarily in the case of numbers; for the void distinguishes their nature. 
316 In the first book of his work On the philosophy of Pythagoras he writes that 
the universe is one, and that from the unlimited there are drawn into it time, breath and the 
void, which constantly distinguishes the places of the various classes of thing. 

317 For since the dyad is the first extension (for the unit first extended into the dyad, so 
to the triad and the numbers in succession), if we define the line, the Pythagoreans say, we 
should not call it quantity extended in one dimension, but the line is the first extension. 
318 ... The void enters the universe, which, as it were, inhales or breathes it in, just 
like breath, from that which surrounds it. 


252 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


μένου. This suggests that Simplicius read πνεῦμα in his text of Aristotle, 
and that πνεῦμα belongs to the inhalation image (according to Simplicius, 
though not to Philoponus and ‘Themistius, it is explicitly a simile, i.e. ὡς in 
315 means οἷον). If Simplicius is correct we must accept αὐτῷ and πνεῦμα 
in Aristotle, and the meaning will be: ‘. . .and there enters into the universe 
itself out of the infinite, as though the universe were inhaling breath, even 
the void’. This climinates the surprising idea (which is anyhow irrelevant 
to Aristotle’s point) that the world draws in breath as well as the void; though 
the idea was accepted by Stobaeus in 316, perhaps through an ambiguity 
of Aristotle’s language. 


However it came into being, the first unit seems forthwith to 
have begun, as it were, to inhale the surrounding Unlimited. 
Exactly as, in 297, the Even was said to be ‘taken in and limited 
by the Odd’, so in 312 ‘the nearest part of the Unlimited was 
drawn in and limited by Limit’—or rather, to be precise, by the 
first unit functioning as Limit. And now, in 315 and 316, wc learn 
something of the consequences of this progressive ‘inhalation’: 
whether or not breath and time came with it, at all events the void 
entered in from outside. ‘The function of the void is to keep things 
apart—and things include the units of arithmetic. Unfortunately 
Aristotle himself nowhere in his extant works tells us anything at 
all of the first consequence of this ‘inhalation’ of the void by the 
first unit; but 317, which, in the opinion of Ross, ‘was probably 
derived from Aristotle’s lost work on the Pythagorcans’ (note on 
Ar. Met. Z11, 1036b8), seems to fill the gap. Apparently the first 
unit, like other living things, began at once to grow, and somehow 
as the result of its growth burst asunder into two; whereupon the 
void, fulfilling its proper function, keeps the two units apart, and 
thus, owing to the confusion of the units of arithmetic with the 
points of geometry, brings into existence not only the number 2 
but also the line. So the process is begun which, continuing 
indefinitely, is to result in the visible universe as we know it. 


(11) Points, lines, planes and solids 


319 Speusippus ap. Theologumena Arithmeticae p. 84, 10 de Falco 
(DK 44413) τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἕν στιγμή, τὰ δὲ δύο γραμμή, τὰ δὲ 
τρία τρίγωνον, τὰ δὲ τέσσαρα πυραμίς. ταῦτα δὲ πάντα ἐστὶ 
πρῶτα καὶ ἀρχαὶ τῶν καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ὁμογενῶν... .τὰ αὐτὰ δὲ καὶ 





319 For 1 ts the point, 2 the line, 3 the triangle and 4 the pyramid. All these are primary, 
the first principles of individual things of the same class. ..and the same holds in generation 


253 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἐν τῇ γενέσει" πρώτη μὲν yao ἀρχὴ eis μέγεθος στιγμή, δευτέρα 
γραμμή, τρίτη ἐπιφάνεια, τέταρτον στερεόν. 
320 Aristotle Met. N3, 10o90b5 (with which cf. 2b. Z2, 1028 
b15, 405) εἰσὶ δέ tives of ἐκ τοῦ πέρατα εἶναι Kal ἔσχατα τὴν 
στιγμὴν μὲν γραμμῆς, ταύτην δ᾽ ἐπιπέδου, τοῦτο δὲ τοῦ στερεοῦ, 
οἴονται εἶναι ἀνάγκην τοιαύτας φύσεις εἶναι. 


317 has already told us that, having generated the number a, 
which equals the linc, the first unit ‘proceeds in the same way to 
the number 3 and the other numbers in succession’; and just as 
2 equals the line, so also, we learn from 319, 3 equals the triangle, 
the simplest plane figure, and 4 the tetrahedron, the simplest 
solid. By the time of Aristotle there were already two different 
accounts given of the way in which the first unit proceeded to 
generate in turn the line, the plane and the solid. Besides the 
apparently primitive method with which we are at present 
concerned, by which the ‘inhalation’ of the void resulted in the 
division of the first unit into 2, 3 and 4 in succession, there was also 
a more sophisticated view by which the first unit ‘flowed’ into a 
line, the line into a plane and the plane into a solid. By this 
method, however, which looks like a later refinement of the other, 
the resulting figures are obviously not, as in 319, the triangle and 
the tetrahedron, but rather the square and the cube." There is little 
doubt that the view of the early generation of Pythagoreans we are 
now considering is that preserved by Speusippus in 319;? and if, as 
is usually assumed, 320 also refers to the Pythagoreans, then we 
have Aristotle’s authority for the conclusion that points, lines and 
planes, being regarded as φύσεις, i.e. separate entities, played a 
vital part in Pythagorean cosmogony. 


t Aristotle himself mentions this more sophisticated method at 321 de 
an. A4, 409a4 ἔπεί φασι κινηθεῖσαν γραμμὴν ἐπίτεδον ποιεῖν, στιγμὴν δὲ 
γραμμήν, καὶ αἱ τῶν μονάδων κινήσεις γραμμαὶ ἔσονται. ἡ γὰρ στιγμὴ 
μονάς ἐστι θέσιν ἔχουσα. Whoever it was who first held this view, therefore, 





too; for the first principle in magnitude is the point, the second the line, the third surface and 
the fourth the solid. 

320 There are some who, because the point is the limit and extreme of the line, the line 
of the plane, and the plane of the solid, think there must be real things of this sort. 
(Trans. Ross) 

321 For they say that the movement of a line creates a plane and that of the point a line; 
and likewise the movements of units will be lines. For the point is a unit having position. 


254 


PRE-~PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


it is at least pre-Aristotelian. But in any case Sextus is probably right when, 
in the course of a long discussion of the two methods, he first describes that 
with which we are concerned and then proceeds as follows: 322 Sextus 
adv. math. x, 281 τινὲς δ᾽ ἀπὸ ἑνὸς σημείου τὸ σῶμά φασι συνίστασθαι 
τουτὶ γὰρ τὸ σημεῖον ῥνὲν γραμμὴν ἀποτελεῖν, τὴν δὲ γραμμὴν ῥνεῖσαν 
ἐπίπεδον ποιεῖν, τοῦτο δὲ els βάθος κινηθὲν τὸ σῶμα γεννᾶν τριχῇ διάστατον. 
διαφέρει δὲ ἡ τοιαύτη τῶν Πυθαγορικῶν στάσις τῆς τῶν προτέρων. In the 
present chapter we necd consider in detail only the method resulting in the 
tetrahedron rather than the cube. 


2 The extract from Speusippus is introduced by the author of Theol. 
Arithm. as follows: 323 Theol. Arithm. 82, 10 de Falco Σπεύσιππος... ἐκ 
τῶν ἐξαιρέτως σπουδασθεισῶν ἀεὶ Πυθαγορικῶν ἀκροάσεων, μάλιστα δὲ τῶν 
Φιλολάου συγγραμμάτων, βιβλίδιόν τι συντάξας γλαφυρὸν ἐπέγραψε 
μὲν αὐτὸ Περὶ Πυθαγορικῶν ἀριθμῶν... . ΤΠΟΌΡ the extant fragments 
ascribed to Philolaus are of very doubtful authenticity (see pp. 308 ff.), 
there can be little doubt that Speusippus is here at least preserving a 
genuinely early Pythagorean doctrine. Cf. also the sixth of the list of 
eleven Tctractycs preserved by Theo, where all but the sccond—that 
consisting of the ‘numbers by which Plato constructs the soul in the 
Timaeus’—would seem to be derived from a Pythagorean source: 324 
Theo Smyrnaeus 97, 17 Hiller ἕκτη δὲ (sc. τετρακτὺς) τῶν φνομένων. 
TO μὲν σπέρμα ἀνάλογον μονάδι Kal σημείῳ, ἡ δὲ els μῆκος αὔξη δυάδι καὶ 
γραμμῇ, ἡ δὲ εἰς πλάτος τριάδι καὶ ἐπιφανείᾳ, ἡ δὲ εἰς πάχος τετράδι καὶ 
στερεῷ. This passage is of interest as confirming two points already made: 
first, that the first unit may have been deposited in the Unlimited like a 
seed (cf. 312 and comment) ; and second, that the generation of numbers, 
geometrical figures and physical bodies is achieved by one and the same 
process (cf. pp. 246 ff.). 


So far, then, thanks to the tacit confusion between the unit of 
arithmetic and the point of geometry, the first unit has by one and 
the same process generated both the next three numbers in the 
series and the three dimensions. But once again the confusion does 
not stop there. Just as the number 4, being composed of four unit- 
points, is equated with the simplest geometrical solid, so also that 
geometrical solid, being composed of four point-atoms, is itsclf a 





322 Some say that the solid body is constructed from a single point; this point, by 
Jluxion, creates the line, the line, by fluxion, makes the plane, and it in turn, by moving 
upwards or downwards, generates the three-dimensional body. But this section of the 
Pythagoreans differs from the earlier. 

323 Speusippus...drawing on the Pythagorean doctrines that have always been 
particularly valued, and especially the writings of Philolaus, compiled an accomplished 
treatise which he entitled ‘On Pythagorean numbers’... . 


324 The sixth tetractys is of things that grow. The seed is analogous to the unit and 
point, growth in length to the dyad and the line, growth in breadth to the triad and the 
plane, growth in depth to the tetrad and the solid. 


259 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


physical body. The generation of the number-series is to the 
Pythagoreans, in other words, both the generation of the objects 
of geomctry and also cosmogony. Since things cqual numbers, the 
first unit, in generating the numbcr scries, is generating also the 
physical universe. 


(iv) Qualitative distinctions 

325 Aristotle Met. A5, 986a15, from 289 φαίνονται δὴ καὶ 
οὔτοι τὸν ἀριθμὸν νομίφοντες ἀρχὴν εἶναι Kal ὡς ὕλην τοῖς οὖσι Kal 
ὡς πάθη τε καὶ ἕξεις... .. 

326 Aristotle Met. A8, g90a12 (DK 588 22) (immcdiately pre- 
ceding 305) ἔτι δὲ εἴτε Soin τις αὐτοῖς ἐκ τούτων εἶναι TO μέγεθος 
εἴτε δειχθείη τοῦτο, ὅμως τίνα τρόπον ἔσται τὰ μὲν κοῦφα τὰ δὲ 
βάρος ἔχοντα τῶν σωμάτων; ἐξ ὧν γὰρ ὑποτίθενται καὶ λέγουσιν, 
οὐθὲν μᾶλλον περὶ τῶν μαθηματικῶν λέγουσι σωμάτων ἢ περὶ τῶν 
αἰσθητῶν: διὸ περὶ πυρὸς ἢ γῆς ἢ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν τοιούτων 
σωμάτων οὐδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν εἰρήκασιν, ἅτε οὐθὲν περὶ τῶν αἰσθητῶν 
οἶμαι λέγοντες ἴδιον. 

327 Aristotle Met. N5, 1092b8 οὐθὲν δὲ διώρισται οὐδὲ ὁπο- 
τέρως οἱ ἀριθμοὶ αἴτιοι τῶν οὐσιῶν καὶ τοῦ εἶναι, ττότερον ὡς ὅροι, 
οἷον αἱ στιγμαὶ τῶν μεγεθῶν... «(δες 402), ἢ ὅτι [ὁ] λόγος ἡ 
συμφωνία ἀριθμῶν, ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἄνθρωπος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον; 
τὰ δὲ δὴ πάθη πῶς ἀριθμοί, τὸ λευκὸν καὶ γλυκὺ καὶ τὸ θερμόν; 


On their implicit assumption that units, points and atoms are 
identical, the Pythagoreans have now succeeded in explaining the 
bare existence of physical bodies. But they have not yet begun to 
explain the fact, which they can hardly have overlooked, that one 
such physical body differs in appearance and behaviour from 





325 kvidently, then, these thinkers also consider that number 1s the principle both as 
matter for things and as forming their modifications and their permanent states.... 


326 Further, if we either granted them that spatial magnitude consists of these elements, 
or this were proved, still how would some bodies be light, and others have weight? To judge 
Srom what they assume and maintain, they speak no more of mathematical bodies than of 
perceptible; hence they have said nothing whatever about fire or earth or the other bodies 
of this sort, I suppose because they have nothing to say which applies peculiarly to 
perceptible things. (Trans. Ross) 

327 Once more, it has in no sense been determined in which way numbers are the causes 
of substances and of being—whether (1) as limits (as points are of spatial magnitudes)... 
or (2) ἐδ it because harmony is a ratio of numbers, and so is man and everything else? But 
how are the attributes—white and sweet and hot—numbers? (Trans. Ross) 


256 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


another. The question that Aristotle asks in 326 is not, perhaps, 
very difficult to answer: presumably bodics are light when they 
contain a high proportion of void, and heavy when the proportions 
are reversed. But the question at the end of 327 (even if ana- 
chronistic, since the distinction had not yet been drawn between 
qualities and things) is by no means so simple and can only be 
answered with a conjecture. Every body consists, in varying 
proportions, of the two fundamental components, Limit and Un- 
limited; and those two fundamental components have each, as the 
Table of Opposites shows, their respective manifestations in 
different spheres. According, therefore, as either Limit or Un- 
limited prevails in the constitution of a thing, so presumably will 
that thing reveal more of the one principle’s manifestations— 
more, for instance, of rest, straightness, goodness or light—and less 
of the other. ‘This is admittedly a very unsatisfactory explanation 
of so important a factor in cosmology as qualitative distinctions. 
But this particular deficiency in the Pythagorean system should 
surprise us the less when we find, as we do, that this is one of the 
grounds on which Aristotle most strongly and repeatedly criticizes 
the Pythagoreans. 


(v) Astronomy 


328 Aristotle Met. A5, 986a8, from 289... ἐπειδὴ τέλειον 7 
δεκὰς εἶναι δοκεῖ Kal πτᾶσαν περιειληφέναι τὴν τῶν ἀριθμῶν φύσιν, 
καὶ τὰ φερόμενα κατὰ τὸν οὐρανὸν δέκα μὲν εἶναί φασιν, ὄντων δὲ 
ἐννέα μόνον τῶν φανερῶν διὰ τοῦτο δεκάτην τὴν ἀντίχθονα ποιοῦσιν. 
διώρισται δὲ περὶ τούτων ἐν ἑτέροις ἡμῖν ἀκριβέστερον. 

329 ΑΑταϑίοι!ς de caelo B13, 293a18 τῶν πλείστων ἐπὶ τοῦ μέσου 
κεῖσθαι λεγόντων (sc. τὴν γῆν)... «ἐναντίως οἱ περὶ τὴν ᾿Ιταλίαν, 
καλούμενοι δὲ Πυθαγόρειοι, λέγουσιν. ἐπὶ μὲν γὰρ τοῦ μέσον πῦρ 
εἶναί φασι, τὴν δὲ γῆν ἕν τῶν ἄστρων οὖσαν κύκλῳ φερομένην περὶ 
τὸ μέσον νύκτα τε καὶ ἡμέραν ποιεῖν. ἔτι δ᾽ ἐναντίαν ἄλλην ταύτῃ 





328 As the number 10 is thought to be perfect and to comprise the whole nature of 
numbers, they say that the bodies which move through the heavens are ten, but as the visible 
bodies are only nine, to meet this they invent a tenth—the ‘ counter-earth’. We have discussed 
these matters more exactly elsewhere. 

329 ©Most people say that the earth lies at the centre of the universe,. . . but the Italian 
philosophers known as Pythagoreans take the contrary view. At the centre, they say, 1s fire, 
and the earth is one of the stars, creating night and day by its circular motion about the 
centre. They further construct another earth in opposition to ours to which they give the 


17 257 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


κατασκευάτουσι γῆν, ἣν ἀντίχθονα ὄνομα καλοῦσιν, OU πρὸς τὰ 
φαινόμενα τοὺς λόγους καὶ τὰς αἰτίας φητοῦντες, ἀλλὰ πρός τινας 
λόγους καὶ δόξας αὑτῶν τὰ φαινόμενα προσέλκοντες καὶ πειρώμενοι 
συγκοσμεῖν. πολλοῖς δ᾽ ἂν καὶ ἑτέροις συνδόξειε μὴ δεῖν τῇ γῇ τὴν 
τοῦ μέσου χώραν ἀποδιδόναι, τὸ πιστὸν οὐκ ἐκ τῶν φαινομένων 
ἀθροῦσιν ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἐκ τῶν λόγων. τῷ γὰρ τιμιωτάτῳ οἴονται 
προσήκειν τὴν τιμιωτάτην ὑπάρχειν χώραν, εἶναι δὲ πῦρ μὲν γῆς 
τιμιώτερον, τὸ δὲ πέρας τοῦ μεταξύ, τὸ δ᾽ ἔσχατον καὶ τὸ μέσον 
πέρας ὥστ᾽ ἐκ τούτων ἀναλογιτόμενοι οὐκ οἴονται ἐπὶ τοῦ μέσου τῆς 
σφαίρας κεῖσθαι αὐτήν, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον τὸ πῦρ. (b1) ἔτι δ᾽ of γε Πυθα- 
γόρειοι καὶ διὰ τὸ μάλιστα προσήκειν φυλάττεσθαι τὸ κυριώτατον 
τοῦ παντός τὸ δὲ μέσον εἶναι τοιοῦτον ᾿ ὃ Διὸς φυλακὴν ὀνομάτουσι, 
τὸ ταύτην ἔχον τὴν χώραν πῦρ, ὥσπερ τὸ μέσον ἁπλῶς λεγόμενον 
καὶ τὸ τοῦ μεγέθους μέσον καὶ τοῦ πράγματος ὃν μέσον καὶ τῆς φύσεως. 
καίτοι καθάτπτερ ἐν τοῖς φῴοις οὐ ταὐτὸν τὸ τοῦ τῴου καὶ τοῦ σώματος 
μέσον, οὕτως ὑποληπτέον μᾶλλον καὶ περὶ τὸν ὅλον οὐρανόν. 

3320 Aristotle de caclo Bg, 290b12 φανερὸν δ᾽ ἐκ τούτων ὅτι καὶ 
τὸ φάναι γίνεσθαι φερομένων (sc. τῶν ἄστρων) ἁρμονίαν, ὡς 
συμφώνων γινομένων τῶν ψόφων, κομψῶς μὲν εἴρηται καὶ περιττῶς 
ὑπὸ τῶν εἰττόντων, οὐ μὴν οὕτως ἔχει τἀληθές. δοκεῖ γάρ τισιν 
ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι τηλικούτων φερομένων σωμάτων γίγνεσθαι ψόφον, 
ἐπεὶ καὶ τῶν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν οὔτε τοὺς ὄγκους ἐχόντων ἴσους οὔτε 





name counter-earth, In all this they are not seeking for theories and causes to account for 
observed facts, but rather forcing their observations and trying to accommodate them to 
certain theories and opinions of their own. But there are many others who would agree that 
it is wrong to give the earth the central position, looking for confirmation rather to theory 
than to the facts of observation. Their view is that the most precious place befits the most 
precious thing: but fire, they say, is more precious than earth, and the limit than the inter- 
mediate, and the circumference and the centre are limits. Reasoning on this basis they take 
the view that it is not earth that lies at the centre of the sphere, but rather fire. (b1) The 
Pythagoreans have a further reason. They hold that the most important part of the world, 
which is the centre, should be most strictly guarded, and name it, or rather the fire which 
occupies that place, the ‘Guard-house of eus’, as if the word ‘centre’ were quite 
unequivocal, and the centre of the mathematical figure were always the same with that of 
the thing or the natural centre. But it is better to conceive of the case of the whole heaven 
as analogous to that of animals, in which the centre of the animal and that of the body are 
different. (After Stocks) 


330 From all this it is clear that the theory that the movement of the stars produces a 
harmony, i.e. that the sounds they make are concordant, in spite of the grace and originality 
with which it has been stated, is nevertheless untrue. Some thinkers suppose that the motion 
of bodies of that size must produce a noise, since on our earth the motton of bodies far 
inferior in size and in speed of movement has that effect. Also, when the sun and the moon, 


258 


PRE-PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 


τοιούτῳ τάχει φερομένων ἡλίου δὲ Kal σελήνης, ETI TE τοσούτων 
τὸ πλῆθος ἄστρων καὶ τὸ μέγεθος φερομένων τῷ τάχει τοιαύτην 
φοράν, ἀδύνατον μὴ γίγνεσθαι ψόφον ἀμήχανόν τινα τὸ μέγεθος. 
ὑποθέμενοι δὲ ταῦτα καὶ τὰς ταχυτῆτας ἐκ τῶν ἀποστάσεων ἔχειν 
τοὺς τῶν συμφωνιῶν λόγους, ἐναρμόνιόν φασι γίγνεσθαι τὴν φωνὴν 
φερομένων κύκλῳ τῶν ἄστρων. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἄλογον δοκεῖ τὸ μὴ συν- 
ακούειν ἡμᾶς τῆς φωνῆς ταύτης, αἴτιον τούτου φασὶν εἶναι τὸ γιγνο- 
μένοις εὐθὺς ὑπάρχειν τὸν ψόφον, ὥστε μὴ διάδηλον εἶναι πρὸς τὴν 
ἐναντίαν σιγήν πρὸς ἄλληλα γὰρ φωνῆς καὶ σιγῆς εἶναι τὴν 
διάγνωσιν, ὥστε καθάπερ τοῖς χαλκοτύποις διὰ συνήθειαν οὐθὲν 
δοκεῖ διαφέρειν, καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ταὐτὸ συμβαίνειν. 


There is unfortunately no sure means of precisely dating either of 
these celebrated doctrines, the Counter-Earth (328 and 329") and 
the ‘Harmony of the Sphercs’ (330). The former is explicitly 
attributed by Aetius to Philolaus ;? but despite the relative reliabi- 
lity of its source the attribution has often been doubted. On the 
whole it seems legitimate provisionally to accept the attribution of 
the Counter-Earth doctrine to Philolaus (sce pp. 307 ff.), while the 
doctrine of the ‘Harmony of the Spheres’, which is considerably 
less complicated, may perhaps be surmised to have originated 
early in the fifth century B.c., when, thanks to Pythagoras’ own 
discovery that the intervals of the musical scale could be expressed 
as numerical ratios (see pp. 229f.), the Pythagoreans sccm, in 
Aristotle’s words in 289, to have ‘collected and fitted into their 
scheme all the properties of numbers and scales which they could 
show to agree with the attributes and parts and the whole arrange- 
ment of the heavens’. 


t Simplicius, paraphrasing, expanding, and commenting on this passage, 
adds just sufficient detail, derived in part from Aristotle’s lost work On the 
Pythagoreans, to be worth quoting at some length: 331 Simplicius de caelo 








they say, and all the stars, so great in number and in size, are moving with so rapid a 
motion, how should they not produce a sound immensely great? Starting from this argument 
and from the observation that their speeds, as measured by their distances, are in the same 
ratios as musical concordances, they assert that the sound given forth by the ctrcular move- 
ment of the stars is a harmony. Since, however, it appears unaccountable that we should 
not hear this music, they explain this by saying that the sound ts in our ears from the very 
moment of birth and is thus indistinguishable from its contrary silence, since sound and 
silence are discriminated by mutual contrast. What happens to men, then, is just what 
happens to coppersmiths, who are so accustomed to the noise of the smithy that it makes no 
difference to them. (Trans. Stocks) 


331 In the centre of the universe they say there is fire, and round the centre moves the 


259 17. 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


511, 26 ἐν μὲν τῷ μέσῳ τοῦ παντὸς πῦρ εἶναί φασι, περὶ δὲ TO μέσον τὴν 
ἀντίχθονα φέρεσθαί φασι γῆν οὖσαν καὶ αὐτήν, ἀντίχθονα δὲ καλουμένην 
διὰ τὸ ἐξ ἐναντίας τῆδε τῇ γῇ εἶναι, μετὰ δὲ τὴν ἀντίχθονα ἡ γῆ Se φερομένη 
καὶ αὐτὴ περὶ τὸ μέσον, μετὰ δὲ τὴν γῆν ἡ σελήνη" οὕτω γὰρ αὐτὸς (sc. 
Aristotle) ἐν τῷ περὶ τῶν Πυθαγορικῶν ἱστορεῖ τὴν δὲ γῆν ὡς ἕν τῶν ἄστρων 
οὔσαν κινουμένην περὶ τὸ μέσον κατὰ τὴν πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον σχέσιν νύκτα καὶ 
ἡμέραν ποιεῖν. ἡ δὲ ἀντίχθων κινουμένη περὶ τὸ μέσον καὶ ἑπομένη τῇ γῇ 
ταύτῃ οὐχ ὁρᾶται ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν διὰ τὸ ἐπιπροσθεῖν ἡμῖν ἀεὶ τὸ τῆς γῆς 
σῶμα... . τέλειον γὰρ ἀριθμὸν ὑποθέμενοι τὴν δεκάδα ἐβούλοντο καὶ τῶν 
κυκλοφορητικῶν σωμάτων τὸν ἀριθμὸν εἷς δεκάδα συνάγειν. θέντες οὖν, φησί, 
τὴν ἀπλανῆ μίαν καὶ τὰς ττλανωμένας ἑπτὰ καὶ τὴν γῆν ταύτην τῇ ἀντίχθονι 
τὴν δεκάδα συνεπλήρωσαν. Kal οὕτω μὲν αὐτὸς τὰ τῶν Πυθαγορείων 
ἀπεδείξατο’ οἱ δὲ γνησιώτερον αὐτῶν μετασχόντες πῦρ μὲν ἐν τῷ μέσῳ 
λέγουσι τὴν δημιουργικὴν δύναμιν τὴν ἐκ μέσου πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν τωογονοῦσαν 
καὶ τὸ ἀπεψυγμένον αὐτῆς ἀναθάλπουσαν᾽ διὸ οἱ μὲν Ζηνὸς πύργον αὐτὸ 
καλοῦσιν, ὡς αὐτὸς ἐν τοῖς Πυθαγορικοῖς ἱστόρησεν, οἱ δὲ Διὸς φυλακήν, 
ὡς ἐν τούτοις, of δὲ Διὸς θρόνον, ὡς ἄλλοι φασίν. Hilda Richardson ((Ὁ 20 
(1926) 119) argues, on the basis of this passage and a number of other less 
definite indications, that ‘the carliest generations of the Pythagorean 
school conceived of fire as existing at the heart of their central, spherical 
earth’, But whcther this is so or not, Simplicius himself evidently believed 
that the earlier Pythagorean theory was geocentric, and that the more 
sophisticated doctrine was a later refinement. 


2 332 Actius u, 7, 7 (DK 44A16) Φιλόλαος πῦρ ἐν μέσῳ περὶ TO κέντρον 
ὅπερ ἑστίαν τοῦ παντὸς καλεῖ Kal Διὸς οἶκον καὶ μητέρα θεῶν βωμόν τε Kal 
συνοχὴν καὶ μέτρον φύσεως. καὶ πάλιν πῦρ ἕτερον ἀνωτάτω τὸ περιέχον. 
πρῶτον δ᾽ εἶναι φύσει τὸ μέσον, περὶ δὲ τοῦτο δέκα σώματα θεῖα χορεύειν, 
[οὐρανόν] (peta τὴν τῶν ἀπλανῶν σφαῖραν τοὺς ξ πλανήτας, μεθ᾽ os ἥλιον, 








counter-earth, being itself an earth, and called the counter-earth because it 1s opposite this 
earth of ours; and after the counter-earth comes our earth, which also moves around the 
centre; and after the earth comes the moon; for so Aristotle records in his work On the 
Pythagoreans. The earth, being one of the stars and moving around the centre, makes day 
and night in accordance with its position relative to the sun. The counter-earth, as it moves 
around the centre following our earth, is invisible to us because the bulk of the earth ts 
always in the way... .For on their assumption that the decad is the perfect number, they 
wished to bring the number of bodies revolving in a circle also up to ten. And so, Aristotle 
says, positing the sphere of the fixed stars as one, the planets as seven, and then this earth of 
ours, they completed the decad with the counter-earth. So Aristotle expounded the Pytha- 
goreans’ views; but the more genuine members of the school regard five at the centre as the 
creative force which gives life to the whole earth from the centre and warms its cold parts; 
and so some call it the ‘ Tower of Zeus’, as Aristotle recorded in On the Pythagoreans, 
others the ‘Guard-house of Zeus’, as he says here, others again the ‘ Throne of Zeus’, as 
other authorities tell us. 


332 Philolaus places fire around the centre of the universe, and calls it the ‘ Hearth of the 
world’, the “House of Zeus’, ‘ Mother of the Gods’, ‘altar, bond and measure of nature’. 
Then again there is another fire enveloping the universe at the circumference. But he says 
that the centre is by nature primary, and around the centre ten divine bodies dance—irst 
the sphere of the fixed stars, then the five planets, next the sun, then the moon, then the earth, 


260 


PRE~PARMENIDEAN PYTHAGOREANISM 
Ug’ ᾧ σελήνην, ὑφ᾽ ἧ τὴν γῆν, ὑφ᾽ ἧ τὴν ἀντίχθονα, μεθ᾽ ἃ σύμπαντα τὸ πῦρ 
ἑστίας περὶ τὰ κέντρα τάξιν ἐπέχον. The supplement μετὰ... -σφαῖραν is 
by Diels, οὐρανόν being presumably a marginal gloss. 


(vi) The soul 


333. Aristotle Met. Α 5, 985b209, from 289 .... τὸ μὲν τοιονδὶ τῶν 
ἀριθμῶν πάθος δικαιοσύνη, τὸ δὲ τοιονδὶ ψυχὴ καὶ νοῦς. .... 

334 Aristotle de anima A2, 404a16 ἔοικε δὲ καὶ τὸ παρὰ τῶν 
Πυθαγορείων λεγόμενον τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχειν διάνοιαν: ἔφασαν γάρ 
τινες αὑτῶν ψυχὴν εἶναι τὰ ἐν τῷ ἀέρι ξύσματα, οἱ δὲ τὸ ταῦτα 
κινοῦν. περὶ δὲ τούτων εἴρηται, διότι συνεχῶς φαίνεται κινούμενα, 
κἂν 7) νηνεμία παντελής. 

335 Aristotle de anima A4, 407027) καὶ ἄλλη δέ τις δόξα 
παραδέδοται περὶ ψυχῆς... ἁρμονίαν γάρ τινα αὐτὴν λέγουσι" 
καὶ γὰρ τὴν ἁρμονίαν κρᾶσιν καὶ σύνθεσιν ἐναντίων εἶναι καὶ τὸ 
σῶμα συγκεῖσθαι ἐξ ἐναντίων. Cf. Ar. Pol. 05, 1340b18 (DK η88 41) 
and Plato Phaedo 86 B—c. 


336 Aristotle de anima A3, 407b20 of δὲ μόνον ἐπιχειροῦσι 
λέγειν ποῖόν τι ἡ ψυχή, περὶ δὲ τοῦ δεξομένου σώματος οὐθὲν 
ἔτι προσδιορίφτουσιν, ὥσπερ ἐνδεχόμενον κατὰ τοὺς Πυθαγορικοὺς 
μύθους τὴν τυχοῦσαν ψυχὴν εἰς τὸ τυχὸν ἐνδύεσθαι σῶμα. 


Here we have at least four different (though not necessarily 
mutually exclusive) views of the soul, each of which is said by 
Aristotle to be Pythagorean. Once again the attempt to date them 
can rest only upon conjecture. It seems probable that the view 
in 334, that the soul is either the motes in the air or that which 





then the counter-earth, and finally the fire of the ‘Hearth’, which has its station around 
the centre. 

333 ...such and such a modification of numbers being justice, another being soul and 
reason. ... 

334 The theory held by the Pythagoreans seems to have the same purport; for some of 
them said that the soul is the motes in the air, others that it is what moves them. They 
spoke of motes because they are evidently in continual motion, even when there is a complete 
calm. 

335 Another theory has been handed down to us about the soul... . They say that it is a 
kind of attunement; for attunement is a blending and composing of opposites, and the 
body ts constituted of opposites. 

336 But they only attempt to say what sort of a thing the soul is, while concerning the 
body that is to receive it they specify nothing further, as if it were possible, by the Pytha- 
gorean tales, for any chance soul to enter into any chance body. 


261 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


moves them, belongs to the early and unwittingly corporealist 
gencration which thought that units were extended in space. The 
doctrine in 335, on the other hand, that the soul is an attunement 
(which is of course reconcilable with the view mentioned in 333 
that it is a πτάθος ἀριθμῶν) may have originated from the ἰσονομία 
view of health introduced by Alcmacon (see pp. 234f.), and in 
that case would not have been held before his time. Finally, the 
familiar belief in transmigration, to which Aristotle is clearly 
referring in 336, is a belief of a different order, not being concerned 
with the naturc of the soul as such but rather with what befalls it. 
This is one of the few traces of the religious side of Pythagoreanism 
that are to be found in Aristotle’s extant writings; and it is note- 
worthy that in this unusual context he uscs, not the familiar form 
Πυθαγόρειος, but the variant, very seldom found in his works, 
Πυθαγορικός. ‘he belicf in transmigration goes back, as we saw 
(pp. 222f.), to Pythagoras himself, but was certainly preserved, 
throughout the whole of the fifth century at least, by the Acous- 
matics (sec p. 227). 

It would be possible, if perhaps dangcrously conjectural, to fit 
all these theories into a consistent picture, as follows. The earliest 
Pythagoreans might well have maintained that between its various 
incarnations the soul, separated from a body, hovered in the air 
like the motes in a sunbeam; and in that casc others of the school, 
feeling perhaps that this was too humble a part, preferred to 
regard it rather as that which moved the motes (conceivably even 
as the πνεῦμα or πνοή (‘breath’) of 315 and 316). Alcmacon could 
then have borrowed from these earliest Pythagoreans the belief, 
which underlies also his own peculiar vicw of the soul (cf. p. 235), 
that the soul is always in motion. Finally the next generation of 
Pythagoreans, borrowing in their turn from Alcmaeon, may have 
based upon his theory of health their own doctrine, by far the 
most influential of those under discussion, that the soul was an 
attunement of the bodily constituents. 


262 


CHAPTER Χ 


PARMENIDES OF ELEA 


DATE 


237 Plato Parmenides 127A ἔφη δὲ δὴ ὁ ᾿Αντιφῶν λέγειν τὸν 
Πυθόδωρον ὅτι ἀφίκοιντό ποτε εἰς Παναθήναια τὰ μεγάλα Ζήνων τε 
καὶ Παρμενίδης. τὸν μὲν οὖν Παρμενίδην εὖ μάλα δὴ πρεσβύτην 
εἶναι, σφόδρα πολιόν, καλὸν δὲ κἀγαθὸν τὴν ὄψιν, περὶ ἔτη μάλιστα 
πέντε καὶ ἑξήκοντα Ζήνωνα δὲ ἐγγὺς ἐτῶν τετταράκοντα τότε εἶναι, 
εὐμήκη δὲ καὶ χαρίεντα ἰδεῖν: καὶ λέγεσθαι αὐτὸν παιδικὰ τοῦ 
Παρμενίδου γεγονέναι. καταλύειν δὲ αὐτοὺς ἔφη παρὰ τῷ Πυθοδώρῳ 
ἐκτὸς τείχους ἐν Κεραμεικῷ: of δὴ καὶ ἀφικέσθαι τόν τε Σωκράτη καὶ 
ἄλλους τινὰς μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ πολλούς, ἐπιθυμοῦντας ἀκοῦσαι τῶν τοῦ 
Ζήνωνος γραμμάτων--τότε γὰρ αὐτὰ πρῶτον UT” ἐκείνων κομισθῆναι 
- Σωκράτη δὲ εἶναι τότε σφόδρα νέον. (Cf. Plato Theaetetus 1838 
and Sophist 217 α (both DK 28.4.5), each of which refers briefly 
to the meeting of the young Socratcs with the old Parmenides.) 


338 Diogenes Laecrtius rx, 23 (DK28A1) ἤκμαρε δὲ (sc. Par- 
menides) κατὰ τὴν ἐνάτην Kal ἑξηκοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα (1.6. 504-- 
HOI B.C.). 


Whether or not Parmenides and Zeno ever visited Athens and 
met there the young Socrates, Plato need not have been so precise 
about their respective ages. The fact that he gives these details 
strongly suggests that he is writing with chronological accuracy. 
Socrates was just over seventy when he was put to death in 
399 B.C., which means that he was born in 470/469. If we assume 
that the words σφόδρα νέον, ‘very young’, mean that he was under 
twenty-five, then the mceting might have taken place between 
450 and 445 B.c. This places Parmenides’ birth at about 515- 











337 According to Antiphon’s account, Pythodorus said that Parmenides and Zeno once 
came to Athens for the Great Panathenaea. Parmenides was well advanced in years—about 
sixty-five—and very grey, but a fine-looking man. Keno was then nearly forty, and tall and 
handsome; he was said to have been Parmenides’ favourite. They were staying at Pytho- 
dorus’ house outside the city-wall in the Ceramicus. Thither went Socrates, and several 
others with him, in the hope of hearing Zeno’s treatise; for this was the first time Parmenides 
and Zeno had brought it to Athens. Socrates was still very young at the time. 


338 Parmenides flourished in the sixty-ninth Olymprad. 
263 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


510 B.c. and Zeno’s at about 400-485. It is of course true that the 
date given by Diogenes, which he probably derived from Apollo- 
dorus, does not nearly square with this; but, as Burnet points out 
(EGP 170), ‘the date given by Apollodorus depends solely on that 
of the foundation of Elea (540 B.c.), which he had adopted as the 
floruit of Xenophancs. Parmenides is born in that year, just as 
Zeno is born in the year when Parmenides “‘flourished’”’.’ Unsatis- 
factory as a late Platonic dialogue may be as evidence for 
chronology, it can hardly be doubted that it is more reliable than 
this. But in any case what really matters is not so much Par- 
menides’ precise dates as his relation to the other Presocratics. We 
shall 566 as we proceed that his poem certainly contains references 
to Anaximenes (see p. 275) and perhaps also to Heraclitus (see 
pp. 183 and 272), while both Empedocles and Anaxagoras refer 
often and obviously to Parmenides (cf. 414-416, 497). 


LIFE 


339 Diogenes Laertius tx, 21-3 (DK28a1) Παρμενίδης Πύρη- 
tos ᾿Ἐλεάτης διήκουσε Zevopdvous. (τοῦτον (sc. Xenophanes) 
Θεόφραστος ἐν τῇ ᾿Επιτομῇ ᾿Αναξιμάνδρου φησὶν ἀκοῦσαι.) ὅμως 
δ᾽ οὖν ἀκούσας καὶ Ζενοφάνους οὐκ ἠκολούθησεν αὐτῷ. ἐκοινώνησε 
δὲ καὶ ᾿Αμεινίᾳ Διοχαίτα τῷ Πυθαγορικῷ, ὡς ἔφη Σωτίων, ἀνδρὶ 
πένητι μέν, καλῷ δὲ καὶ ἀγαθῷ. ᾧ καὶ μᾶλλον ἠκολούθησε καὶ 
ἀποθανόντος ἡρῷον ἱδρύσατο γένους τε ὑπάρχων λαμπροῦ καὶ 
πλούτου, Kal Um’ ᾿Αμεινίου, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὑπὸ Ζενοφάνους εἰς ἡσυχίαν 
προετράπη. . .(23).. «λέγεται δὲ καὶ νόμους θεῖναι τοῖς πτολίταις, ὥς 
φησι Σπεύσιτπος ἐν τῷ Περὶ φιλοσόφων. 

340 Strabo 6, p. 252 Cas. (ὨΚ 284 12) .. . Ἐλέαν. ..., ἐξ ἧς 
Παρμενίδης καὶ Ζήνων ἐγένοντο ἄνδρες Πυθαγόρειοι. δοκεῖ δέ μοι 
καὶ δι᾽ ἐκείνους καὶ ἔτι πρότερον εὐνομηθῆναι. 





339 Parmenides of Elea, son of Pyres, was a pupil of Xenophanes (and he, according to 
Theophrastus in his Epitome, of Anaximander). But though a pupil of Xenophanes, he 
did not follow him. He associated also, as Sotion recorded, with the Pythagorean Ameinias, 
son of Diochaitas, a poor but noble man, whom he preferred to follow. When Ameinias died 
Parmenides, who came of a distinguished family and was rich, built a shrine to him. It was 
by Ameinias rather than Xenophanes that he was converted to the contemplative life... .He 
is said also to have legislated for the citizens of Elea, as Speusippus records in his work 
On the philosophers. 


340 ...Elea..., whence Parmenides and Xeno came, both Pythagoreans. I believe 
that through their agency the city was well governed, as it had also been even earlier. 


264 


PARMENIDES 


τ Cf. 341 Plutarch adv. Colot. 32, 11264 Παρμενίδης δὲ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ πατρίδα 
διεκόσμησε νόμοις ἀρίστοις, ὥστε τὰς ἀρχὰς Kad’ ἕκαστον ἐνιαυτὸν ἐξορκοῦν 
τοὺς πολίτας ἐμμενεῖν τοῖς Παρμενίδου νόμοις. 


These two passages, though both from late authors, preserve two 
traditions which are likely enough, on other grounds, to be true. 
That Parmenides should have taken an active part in the politics 
of his city is in no way surprising: several of the Presocratic 
philosophers did. And that he should originally have been a 
Pythagorean is not only not unlikely in itself, Elea being no great 
distance from Croton and Metapontium, but is borne out by 
internal evidence in his poem (see especially p. 277). Again, the 
statement in 339 that it was not Xcnophanes but the otherwise 
unknown Pythagorean Ameinias who ‘converted’ Parmenides to 
the philosophic life is not the sort of thing to be invented. Aristotle 
himself, possibly misled by a remark of Plato’s in the Sophist 
(242c-D, cf. 166) which is not to be taken scriously, says of 
Parmenides that “he is supposed to have been a pupil of Xeno- 
phanes’ (Met. A5, 986b22, DK28a6); and Sotion, whom 
Diogenes is quoting in 339, must have had some good reason— 
possibly the existence of the shrine erected by Parmenides in 
memory of Ameinias—for rejecting Aristotle’s guidance and sub- 
stituting for Xenophanes so obscure a figure. When it is remem- 
bered, finally, that these traditions are probably derived from such 
earlier authorities as the fourth-century historian ‘Timaeus, there 
seems to be no good ground for rejecting the scanty evidence we 
possess about the life of Parmenides. 


THE NATURE OF PARMENIDES POEM 


Parmenides wrote cxclusively in hexametcr verse—in which he 
was followed by Empedocles. With the exccption of the allegory of 
the procm (and perhaps also certain passages in the ‘Way of 
Seeming’, in which divine figures were introduced), his subject- 
matter is of the most prosaic order. His diction, moreover, besides 
being far from poetical, is often exceedingly obscure: the precise 
meaning of some of his sentences will probably never be unani- 
mously agreed. Thanks to Simplicius, who, knowing that the 
original work was already in his day rare, transcribed large 








341 Parmenides set his own state in order with such admirable laws that the government 
yearly swears its citizens to abide by the laws of Parmenides. 


265 


PRESOCRATIG PHILOSOPHERS 


sections of it into his commentaries on Aristotle, we possess, 
probably, a higher proportion of the writings of Parmenides than 
of any other Presocratic philosopher. After the allegorical intro- 
duction the poem is in two parts, the ‘Way of Truth’ and the ‘Way 
of Seeming’. The former, of which Diels estimated that we possess 
about nine-tenths, presents an unprecedentcd exercise in logical 
deduction: starting from the premise ἔστι, ‘it is’,—in much the 
same way as Descartcs started from the premise ‘cogito’— 
Parmcnides proceeds, by the sole use of reason unaided by the 
senses, to deducc all that can be known about Being, and he ends 
by denying any truthful validity to the senses or any reality to 
what they appcar to perceive. Then in the ‘Way of Seeming’, 
unexpectedly reinstating the world of appearances that he has so 
vehemently demolished, he appends what seems, from the rela- 
tively scanty fragments that survive, to have been a cosmogony of 
the traditional type. The relation between the two parts of the 
poem is by no means obvious and has, as we shall see, been very 
variously interpreted; but fortunately it is the ‘Way of Truth’, of 
which so large a proportion survives, that made Parmenides the 
most influential of all the Presocratics, while the ‘Way of Seeming’, 
whatever the motive that prompted Parmenides to write it, seems 
to have exercised comparatively little influence upon his successors 
(but see p. 283). 


THE PROEM 
342 Fr. 1, Sextus adv. math. vu, 111 and Simplicius de caelo 557, 25 


ἵπτποι ταί με φέρουσιν ὅσον τ᾽ ἐπὶ θυμὸς ἱκάνοι 
πέμττον, ἐττεί μ᾽ ἐς ὁδὸν βῆσαν πολύφημον ἄγουσαι 
δαίμονος, ἣ κατὰ πάντ᾽ ἄστη: φέρει εἰδότα φῶτα" 
τῇ φερόμην᾽ τῇ γάρ με πολύφραστοι φέρον ἵπποι 
ἅρμα τιταίνουσαι, κοῦραι δ᾽ ὁδὸν ἡγεμόνευον. 
ἄξων δ᾽ ἐν χνοίῃσιν ἵει σύριγγος ἀυτὴν 

αἰθόμενος (δοιοῖς γὰρ ἐπείγετο δινωτοῖσιν 

κύκλοις ἀμφοτέρωθεν), ὅτε σπερχοίατο πέμπειν 








342 The steeds that carry me took me as far as my heart could desire, when once they 
had brought me and set me on the renowned way of the goddess, which leads the man who 
knows through every town. On that way was I conveyed; for on it did the wise steeds convey 
me, drawing my chariot, and maidens led the way. And the axle glowing in the socket—for 
it was urged round by well-turned wheels at each end—was making the holes in the naves sing, 


266 


PARMENIDES 


Ἡλιάδες κοῦραι, προλιποῦσαι δώματα Νυκτός, 
10 εἰς φάος, ὠσάμεναι κράτων ἄπο χερσὶ καλύπτρας. 
ἔνθα πύλαι Νυκτός τε καὶ Ἤματός εἰσι κελεύθων, 
καί σφας ὑπέρθυρον ἀμφὶς ἔχει καὶ λάινος οὐδός. 
αὐταὶ δ᾽ αἰθέριαι πιλῆνται μεγάλοισι θυρέτροις" 
τῶν δὲ Δίκη πολύποινος ἔχει κληῖδας ἀμοιβούς. 
15 τὴν δὴ παρφάμεναι κοῦραι μαλακοῖσι λόγοισιν 
πεῖσαν ἐπιφραδέως, ὥς σφιν βαλανωτὸν ὀχῆα 
ἀπτερέως ὥσειε πυλέων ἄπο: ταὶ δὲ θυρέτρων 
χάσμ᾽ ἀχανὲς ποίησαν ἀναπτάμεναι TroAuyaAKous 
ἄξονας ἐν σύριγξιν ἀμοιβαδὸν εἰλίξασαι 
20 γόμφοις καὶ περόνησιν ἀρηρότε᾽ τῇ pa δι᾽ αὐτέων 
ἰθὺς ἔχον κοῦραι κατ᾽ ἀμαξιτὸν ἅρμα καὶ ἵτπτπτους. 
καί με θεὰ πρόφρων ὑπεδέξατο, χεῖρα δὲ χειρὶ 
δεξιτερὴν ἕλεν, ὧδε δ᾽ ἔπος φάτο καί με προσηύδα" 
ὦ κοῦρ᾽ ἀθανάτοισι συνάορος ἡνιόχοισιν, 
25 ἵπποις ταί σε φέρουσιν ἱκάνων ἡμέτερον δῶ, 
χαῖρ᾽, ἐπεὶ οὔτι σε μοῖρα κακὴ ττροὔτπεμτε νέεσθαι 
τήνδ᾽ ὁδόν (7) γὰρ ἀπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἐκτὸς πάτου ἐστίν), 
ἀλλὰ θέμις τε δίκη τε. χρεὼ δέ σε πάντα ττυθέσθαι 
ἠμὲν ᾿Αληθείης εὐκυκλέος ἀτρεμὲς ἦτορ 
30 ἠδὲ βροτῶν δόξας, ταῖς οὐκ ἔνι πίστις ἀληθής. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης καὶ ταῦτα μαθήσεαι, ὡς τὰ δοκοῦντα 
χρῆν δοκιμῶσ᾽ εἶναι διὰ παντὸς πτάντα περῶντα.2 
I πάντ᾽ ἄστη Sextus Ν, πάντ᾽ ἄτη L, πάντα τῇ E, . κατὰ πάντα tort 
Barnett Wilamowitz (= ‘stretched through all things’) seems improbable, 
since τατός occurs elsewhere only once, in Aristotle’s Hist. An. The reading 











while the daughters of the Sun, hasting to convey me into the light, threw back the veils from 
off their faces and left the abode of night. There are the gates of the ways of Night and Day, 
fitted above with a lintel and below with a threshold of stone. They themselves, high in the 
air, are closed by mighty doors, and avenging Justice controls the double bolts. Her did 
the maidens entreat with gentle words and cunningly persuade to unfasten without demur 
the bolted bar from the gates. Then, when the doors were thrown back, they disclosed a wide 
opening, when their brazen posts fitted with rivets and nails swung in turn on their hinges. 
Straight through them, on the broad way, did the maidens guide the horses and the car. And 
the goddess greeted me kindly, and took my right hand in hers, and spake to me these words: 
‘Welcome, ο youth, that comest to my abode on the car that bears thee, tended by immortal 
charioteers. It is no ill chance, but right and justice, that has sent thee forth to travel on 
this way. Far indeed does it lie from the beaten track of men. Meet it is that thou shouldst 
learn all things, as well the unshaken heart of well-rounded truth, as the opinions of mortals 
in which is no true belief at all. Yet none the less shalt thou learn these things also—how, 
passing right through all things, one should judge the things that seem to be.’ (Afier Burnet) 


267 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 
of N, by its suggestion that Parmenides was an itinerant philosopher, accords 
with the statement of Plato that Parmenides and Zeno visited Athens. 


2 δοκίμως (Simpl. mss.) is adopted in DK, though Diels himself, admitting 
an elision otherwise unknown in hexameters, read δοκιμῶσ᾽ εἶναι. περῶντα 
Simpl. A: περ ὄντα DEF. 


This proem is not only of the utmost interest as a whole but also 
contains anumberof important points of detail. Parmenidesisclearly 
describing his escape from crror to enlightenment, and itis most likely 
that, as Diels suggested, the allegorical form is borrowed from oracle- 
and mystery-literature. ‘Itis clear’, writes Bowra (Problems in Greek 
Poetry 47),‘that this Proem is intended to have the importance and 
scriousness of a rcligious revelation.’ Not only the passage from 
darkness into light but many minor details throughout the poem sug- 
gest that Parmenidcs desired, particularly in the Proem, to arm him- 
sclf in advance, by stressing the religious nature of his revelation, 
with an answer to his potential critics. Bowra is probably right in 
concluding that these potential critics were ‘hisfellow Pythagoreans’. 

Two points of detail call for comment. It is to be noted, in the 
first place, that the goddess 15 made to address Parmenides (1. 24) 
as κοῦρε, ‘youth’, a word which provides us with our only clue as 
to the date of the poem’s composition. If we take this to mean 
that Parmenides was, at the most, not much over thirty when he 
wrote his poem, that would fix its date somewhcre between, say, 
400 and 475 B.c.; and if this estimate is right, then we have an 
approximate terminus ad quem, not only for several of the Pytha- 
gorean views already described, against which we shall see that 
Parmenides especially aims many of his arguments, but also, possi- 
bly, for the publication of the fundamental doctrine of Heraclitus. 

The other important point concerns the phrase (1. 29) ᾿Αληθείης 
εὐκυκλέος, ‘well-rounded Truth’. Truth is described as well- 
rounded because, presumably, wherever you pick up the chain 
of Parmenides’ reasoning, you can follow it round in a circle, 
passing through each of its links in turn, back to your starting- 
point. Parmenides himself says almost exactly that in fragment 5: 


343 ~Fr. 5, Proclus in Parm. 1, 708, 16 Cousin 
. .€uvov δέ μοί ἐστιν 
ὅτπποθεν ἄρξωμαι" τόθι γὰρ πάλιν ἵξομαι αὖθις. 
Every attribute of reality can be deduced from every other. 











343 Its all one to me where I begin; for I shall come back there again in time. 
268 


PARMENIDES 


THE WAY OF TRUTH 
(1) The premise 
344 Fr. 2, Proclus zn Tim. 1, 345, 18 Dichl 

εἰ δ᾽ ἄγ᾽ ἐγὼν ἐρέω, κόμισαι δὲ σὺ μῦθον ἀκούσας, 

αἵπερ ὁδοὶ μοῦναι διφήσιός εἶσι νοῆσαι" 

ἣ μὲν ὅπως ἔστιν τε καὶ ὡς οὐκ ἔστι μὴ εἶναι, 

πειθοῦς ἐστι κέλευθος (Αληθείῃ γὰρ ὀπηδεῖ), 
5 ἧ δ᾽ ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν τε καὶ ὡς χρεών ἐστι μὴ εἶναι, 

τὴν δή Tol page παναπευθέα ἔμμεν ἀταρπόν᾽ 

οὔτε γὰρ ἂν γνοίης τό γε μὴ ἐόν (οὐ γὰρ ἀνυστόν) 

οὔτε φράσαις. (ΕἾ. 4) τὸ γὰρ αὐτὸ νοεῖν ἔστιν τε καὶ εἶναι. 
The goddess begins her instruction by defining ‘the only two 
conceivable ways of enquiry’, which are directly contrary one to 
the other: if you accept one premise, then logic compels you to 
reject the other. The choice in fact, as Parmenides later puts it in 
its briefest form (347 1. 16), is simply this: ἔστιν ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν. 
Unfortunately even to translate these apparently simple words is 
liable to be misleading, because of the ambiguity, of which 
Parmenides himself was unconscious, between the predicative and 
the existential senses of the Greek word ἐστι.: The usual translation, 
‘It is or it is not’, too easily gives rise to the question what ‘it’ is. 
So Burnet, for instance, at the beginning of his discussion of the 
Way of Truth (EGP 178), writes: ‘. . .it is not quite obvious at first 
sight what it 15 precisely that z7s....There can be no real doubt 
that this is what we call body. ...The assertion that it 15 amounts 
just to this, that the universe is a plenum.’ Such a conclusion is at 
best premature. At this early stage in his poem Parmenides’ 
premise ἔστι has no definite subject at all: if it is necessary to 
translate the sentence ἔστιν ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν, then perhaps the least 
misleading rendering is: ‘ Either a thing is or it is not.’ Parmenides 
is attacking those who believe, as all men always had believed, 





344 Come now, and I will iell thee—and do thou hearken and carry my word away— 
the only ways of enquiry that can be thought of (literally, that exist for thinking, the old 
dative sense of the infinitive]: the one way, that it is and cannot not-be, is the path of 
Persuasion, for it attends upon Truth; the other, that it is-not and needs must not-be, that 
I tell thee is a path altogether unthinkable. For thou couldst not know that which 1s-not 
(that is impossible) nor utter it; for the same thing can be thought as can be [construction 
as above, literally the same thing exists for thinking and for being]. 


269 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


that it is possible to make a significant negative predication; but 
he is enabled to attack them only because of his own confusion 
between a negative predication and a negative existential judge- 
ment. The gist of this difficult and important fragment is therefore 
this: ‘Either it is right only to think or say of a thing, “it is...” 
(i.e. “it is so-and-so, e.g. white’’), or else it is right to think or say 
only “it is not...” (i.e. “it is not something else, e.g. black’’). 
The latter is to be firmly rejected on the ground [a mistaken one, 
owing to the confusion betwcen existential and predicative] that 
it is impossible to conceive of Not-Being, the non-existent. Any 
propositions about Not-Being are neccessarily meaningless; the 
only significant thoughts or statements concern Being.’ 

t Owing to this undetected ambiguity it is often difficult to decide how the 

word ἐστὶ should be accented in Parmenides’ poem. I have for the most 


part, but not always, followed DK; where I have diverged, see the 
parentheses in the translation. 


A page or two after the sentences quoted in the last paragraph 
Burnet, in discussing the effects of Parmenides’ ‘thorough-going 
dialectic’, adds (p. 180): ‘Philosophy must now cease to be 
monistic or cease to be corporealist. It could not cease to be 
corporealist; for the incorporeal was still unknown.’ This too 
secms an over-simplification. It 15 true that the incorporeal was 
still unknown; but it does not follow from that that Parmenides 
was wishing to describe ‘body’ or ‘a plenum’. On the contrary, 
the chief difficulty about Parmenides is that, while the incorporeal 
was still unknown, and no vocabulary therefore existed to describe 
it, he was none the less, as were the Pythagoreans in the choice of 
their first principles, feeling his way towards it. We shall see 
(pp. 302 ff.) that Melissus carried the advance a stage further; but 
it seems probable, even in the case of Parmenides, that had he 
been asked whether his ‘Being’ was solid (or ‘body’) his answer 
would have been a hesitant negative. 


(ii) Two false premises 

345 Fr. 6, Simplicius Phys. 117, 4 
χρὴ TO λέγειν τε νοεῖν τ᾽ ἐὸν ἔμμεναι" ἔστι γὰρ εἶναι, 
μηδὲν δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν τά σ᾽ ἐγὼ φράζεσθαι ἄνωγα. 











------....... -ὄ -.-.- 


345 That which can be spoken and thought needs must be [construction as in 344]; 
for it ts possible for it, but not for nothing, to be; that is what I bid thee ponder. This is 


270 


PARMENIDES 


πρώτης yap o ἀφ᾽ ὁδοῦ ταύτης διτήσιος <elpyw), 
αὐτὰρ ἔπειτ᾽ ἀπὸ τῆς, ἣν δὴ βροτοὶ εἰδότες οὐδὲν 
5 πλάττονται, δίκρανοι" ἀμηχανίη γὰρ ἐν αὐτῶν 
στήθεσιν ἰθύνει πτλακτὸν νόον οἱ δὲ φοροῦνται 
κωφοὶ ὁμῶς τυφλοί τε, τεθηπότες, ἄκριτα φῦλα, 
οἷς τὸ πέλειν τε καὶ οὐκ εἶναι ταὐτὸν νενόμισται 
KOU ταὐτόν, πάντων δὲ παλίντροπός ἐστι κέλευθος. 
346 Fr. 7, Plato Sophist 2374 and Sextus adv. math. vu, 114 
οὐ yap μήποτε τοῦτο δαμῇ εἶναι μὴ ἐόντα" 
ἀλλὰ σὺ τῆσδ᾽ ἀφ᾽ ὁδοῦ διφήσιος εἶργε νόημα 
μηδέ σ᾽ ἔθος πολύπειρον ὁδὸν κατὰ τήνδε βιάσθω 
νωμᾶν ἄσκοπον ὄμμα καὶ ἠχήεσσαν ἀκουὴν 
5 καὶ γλῶσσαν, κρῖναι δὲ λόγῳ πολύδηριν ἔλεγχον 
ἐξ ἐμέθεν ῥηθέντα. 


Though Parmenides has, in 344, suggested that there are only 
two ‘conceivable ways of enquiry’, either a thing is or it is not, it 
now appears from these two fragments (which seem to present a 
continuous passage) that in addition to the true premise there are 
actually two premises that must be rejected. One of these, of 
course, is that already defined in fr. 2, the premise οὐκ ἔστι, and 
described as travatrevOéa, ‘altogether inconccivable’ ; misguided as 
men may be, no man could confine himself to negative judgements 
and negative statements only. But for all that, the goddess (in 345 
I. 3) warns Parmenides against treading this path, because, as she 
goes on to suggest (in Il. 8-9), this utterly false way can be, and 
constantly is, so combined with the true way that a third way, a 
compromise between the other two, a thing both is and is not, 
comes into the picture. This third way is the way on which 
‘ignorant mortals wander two-faced’; and they are two-faced 
because, as Simplicius puts it (Phys. 117, 3; DK 2886), eis ταὐτὸ 
συνάγουσι τὰ ἀντικείμενα, ‘they combine contrarics’. It is in fact 





the first way of enquiry from which I hold thee back, and then from that way also on which 
mortals wander knowing nothing, two-headed; for helplessness guides the wandering 
thought in their breasts; they are carried along, deaf and blind at once, altogether dazed— 
hordes devoid of judgement, who are persuaded that to be and to be-not are the same, yet 
not the same, and that of all things the path is backward-turning. 

346 For never shall this be proved, that things that are not are; but do thou hold back thy 
thought from this way of enquiry, nor let custom, born of much experience, force thee to let 
wander along this road thy aimless eye, thy echoing ear or thy tongue; but do thou judge by 
reason the strife-encompassed proof that I have spoken. 


271 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


this very combination of contraries that is the basis of ‘the 
opinions of mortals’ (342 I. 30 and 353 1. 51) which provide the 
content of the Way of Sceming; the premise upon which the whole 
Way of Seeming rests is just this compromise between the true 
way and the utterly false way, a thing both is and is not. It has 
often been suggested that the last clause of 345, πάντων δὲ 
παλίντροτός ἐστι κέλευθος (translated ‘of all things the path 15 
backward-turning’), contains a special reference to the doctrines 
of Heraclitus; and so translated, it certainly is particularly 
appropriate to the Heraclitean belief that all things eventually 
change into their opposites (sce pp. 195f.).7 But it is by no means 
the case that unless we see such a reference, then the last two lines 
of the fragment are meaningless. They need not necessarily mean 
anything more than that mortals as a whole (note ἄκριτα φῦλα, 
‘hordes devoid of judgement’) ‘have made up their minds to 
believe that to be and not to be are the same and yet not the same’ 
(i.e. they belicve that that which zs can change and become not 
what it was before. ‘To be and not to be are the samc in that they 
are both found in any event; and yct they are obviously opposites 
and are therefore, in a more exact sense, not the samc), ‘and they 
imagine that all things pass back and forth between bcing and 
not-being’ (i.e. all things change from being so-and-so, c.g. hot, to 
not being so-and-so, and then change back again). 


ΣᾺ quite different interpretation of this last clause is possible, taking 
πάντων as masculine and κέλευθος (as in 344 1. 4) as a ‘way of thought’, 
which is described as taAivtpotros because, having started out promisingly 
by saying ἔστι, these muddlers turn back on their tracks by adding 
οὐκ ἔστι. If this interpretation were adopted, the case for seeing here 
a reference to Heraclitus (which anyhow was largely based on the 
doubtful reading παλίντροπος for παλίντονος in 212) would be further 
weakened. 


(111) Deductions from the true premise: 
(a) dental of time, the void, plurality 

The premise ἔστι is by now established as the only possibility: the 
only significant thought or statement is that a thing zs. At this 
stage, therefore, Parmenides proceeds to consider precisely what 
must be the nature of the subject of the only true statement that 
can be made. From now onwards until the end of the Way of 
Truth he is concerned, in other words, to deduce all that can be 
deduced from his chosen premise about the properties of Being. 


272 


PARMENIDES 


347 ‘Fr. 8, Simplicius Phys. 145, 1 (continuing 346) 
μόνος δ᾽ ἔτι μῦθος ὁδοῖο 
λείπτεται ὡς ἔστιν" ταύτῃ δ᾽ ἔπι σήματ᾽ ἔασι 
πολλὰ μάλ᾽, ὡς ἀγένητον ἐὸν καὶ ἀνώλεθρόν ἐστιν, 
ἔστι γὰρ οὐλομελές τε καὶ ἀτρεμὲς ἠδ᾽ ἀτέλεστον" 
5 οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἦν οὐδ᾽ ἔσται, ἐπεὶ νῦν ἔστιν ὁμοῦ πᾶν, 
ἕν, συνεχές: τίνα γὰρ γένναν διφήσεαι αὐτοῦ; 
πῇ πόθεν αὐξηθέν; οὐδ᾽ ἐκ μὴ ἐόντος ἐάσσω 
φάσθαι σ᾽ οὐδὲ νοεῖν οὐ γὰρ φατὸν οὐδὲ νοητὸν 
ἔστιν ὅπως οὐκ ἔστι. τί δ᾽ ἄν μιν καὶ χρέος ὦρσεν 

10 ὕστερον ἢ πρόσθεν, TOU μηδενὸς ἀρξάμενον, φῦν; 
οὕτως ἢ πάμπαν πελέναι χρεών ἐστιν ἢ οὐχί. 
οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἐκ μὴ ἐόντος ἐφήσει πίστιος ἰσχὺς 
γίγνεσθαί τι Trap’ αὐτό: τοῦ εἵνεκεν οὔτε γενέσθαι 
οὔτ᾽ ὄλλυσθαι ἀνῆκε Δίκη χαλάσασα πέδῃσιν, 

15 GAA’ ἔχει ἡ δὲ κρίσις περὶ τούτων ἐν τῷδ᾽ ἔστιν 
ἔστιν ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν κέκριται δ᾽ οὖν, ὥσπερ ἀνάγκη, 
τὴν μὲν ἐᾶν ἀνόητον ἀνώνυμον (οὐ γὰρ ἀληθὴς 
ἔστιν ὁδός), τὴν δ᾽ ὥστε πέλειν καὶ ἐτήτυμον εἶναι. 
πῶς δ᾽ ἂν ἔπειτ᾽ ἀπόλοιτο ἐόν; πῶς δ᾽ ἄν κε γένοιτο; 

20 εἰ γὰρ ἔγεντ᾽, οὐκ ἔστ᾽, οὐδ᾽ εἴ πτοτε μέλλει ἔσεσθαι. 
τὼς γένεσις μὲν ἀπέσβεσται καὶ ἄπυστος ὄλεθρος. 


This passage, though it presents a continuous argument and is 
impossible to subdivide, leads Parmenides none the less to more 
than one conclusion; and each of his affirmations involves a 
corresponding denial. The selected premise ἔστι, being the only 











347 One way only is left to be spoken of, that it is; and on this way are full many signs 
that what is is uncreated and imperishable, for it is entire, immovable and without end. It 
was not in the past, nor shall it be, since it is now, all at once, one, continuous; for what 
creation wilt thou seek for tt? how and whence did it grow? Nor shall I allow thee to say 
or to think, ‘from that which is not’; for it is not to be said or thought that it is not. And 
what need would have driven it on to grow, starting from nothing, at a later time rather 
than an earlier? Thus it must either completely be or be not. Nor will the force of true 
belief allow that, beside what is, there could also arise anything from what is not; 
wherefore Justice looseth not her fetters to allow it to come into being or perish, but 
holdeth it fast; and the decision on these matters rests here: it is or it is not. But it has 
surely been decided, as it must be, to leave alone the one way as unthinkable and nameless 
(for it ts no true way), and that the other is real and true. How could what is thereafter 
perish? and how could it come into being? For if it came into being, it ἐδ not, nor if it is 
going to be in the future. So coming into being is extinguished and perishing unimaginable. 


18 273 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


true premise, must, Parmenides first argues, be eternally true; 
there cannot ever have been a time in the past, nor will there ever 
be a time in the future, when the statement ἔστι is anything but 
true. It follows, therefore, that past and future are alike meaning- 
less, the only time is a perpetual present time, and Being must of 
necessity be both uncreated and imperishable. Parmenides 
actually adds in the coursc of this argument that Being must also 
be both ἀτρεμές, ‘immovable’, and ἕν, συνεχές, ‘one, continuous’; 
but unless each of these epithets is interpreted (not very plausibly, 
since συνεχές unquestionably refers to space, not time, in 348]. 25) 
to mean only that Being exists unalterably in one continuous 
present, then he is here anticipating—for ‘it is all one to him 
where he begins’ (343)—-conclusions which he does not establish 
until later in the present fragment. 

The next step in the argument, which occupies 1], 6—11, is the 
demolition of the concept of the void. The cosmogony of the 
Pythagoreans had made great usc of the void: the first unit, once 
generated, had proceeded forthwith to take in from the surrounding 
Unlimited, possibly time (which Parmenides has just demolished), 
and certainly the void (to which he now turns his attention) ; and 
the void had from the outsct fulfilled its vitally important function 
of keeping units apart (sce pp. 252f.). It is tempting to suppose 
that Parmenides, whom there is reason to suspect of being a 
dissident Pythagorean (cf. p. 265), aims the three questions that 
these lines contain at the very cosmogony that he had come to 
reject. At all events the Pythagoreans’ answer to the second of 
these questions (tf) πόθεν αὐξηθέν;) could only be that their first 
unit had grown by ‘inhaling’ the void; and Parmenidcs’ imme- 
diate demolition of that concept cffectually destroys, therefore, the 
very basis of their cosmogony. Moreover, even granting that the 
first unit had indeed so developed, as the Pythagoreans main- 
tained, into the universe as we know it, why should the process 
have ever begun at one moment rather than another? Being 
must either exist as a whole or not exist at all: that (as ll. 15-18 
repeat) has already been established. Yet the Pythagoreans assert 
that more and more of Being is constantly coming into existence 
from the unreal void. 

The last point established in this passage before Parmenides 
rounds it off with a summary is that contained in lines 12-13. 
Unfortunately this particular sentence is ambiguous. It could 


274 


PARMENIDES 


perhaps mean simply that nothing can come from τὸ μὴ ὄν, ‘that 
which does not exist’, except Not-Being; but in view of the fact 
that it follows, in its context, immediately after nine lines that are 
concerned entirely with τὸ ὄν, ‘Being’ (in one of which, |. 6, τὸ ὄν 
is referred to as αὐτό), it seems preferable to follow Cornford 
(Plato and Parmenides 37) and translate: ‘Nor will the force of belief 
suffer to arise out of what is not something over and above it (viz. 
what is).’ In any case, as Cornford points out, this latter sense is 
unquestionably contained in another brief sentence further on in 
the same fragment (352 ll. 36-7). 


(b) Reality 1s indivisible 

348 Fr. 8, 1. 22, Simplicius Phys. 145, 23 (continuing 347) 
οὐδὲ διαιρετόν ἐστιν, ἐπεὶ TV ἐστιν ὁμοῖον" 
οὐδέ τι τῇ μᾶλλον, τό κεν εἴργοι μιν συνέχεσθαι, 
οὐδέ τι χειρότερον, πᾶν δ᾽ ἔμτλεόν ἐστιν ἐόντος. 
τῷ ξυνεχὲς πᾶν ἐστιν ἐὸν γὰρ ἐόντι πελάτει. 


With these four lines should be read also the following fragment, 
the place of which in the poem as a whole is not clear: 


349 Fr. 4, Clement Strom. v, 15,5 
λεῦσσε δ᾽ ὅμως ἀπεόντα νόῳ παρεόντα βεβαίως: 
οὐ γὰρ ἀποτμήξει τὸ ἐὸν τοῦ ἐόντος ἔχεσθαι 
οὔτε σκιδνάμενον πάντῃ πάντως κατὰ κόσμον 
οὔτε συνιστάμενον. 


In these two short passages Parmenides reinforces his earlier 
denial of the void by a fresh argument which appears to be aimed 
both at Anaximenes and at the Pythagoreans. Anaximenes by his 
doctrine of condensation and rarefaction (see pp. 145ff.), the 
Pythagoreans by their view of the void as χωρισμός τις τῶν 
ἐφεξῆς καὶ διόρισις, ‘a kind of separation and definition of things 
in proximity’ (sce 315), had both alike been guilty of assuming the 
existence of what is not. Being, Parmenides maintains against 
them, is both indivisible and homogeneous. 





348 Nor is tt divisible, since it ts all alike; nor ts there more here and less there, which 
would prevent it from cleaving together, but it ts all full of what is. So it is all continuous; 
for what is clings close to what is. 

349 Look steadfastly at things which, though far off, are yet present to thy mind; for 
thou shalt not cut off what is from clinging to what 1s, neither scattering itself everywhere 
in order nor crowding together. 


275 18-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(c) Realtty ts motionless, finite, spherical 

350 «Fr. 8, 1. 26, Simplicius Phys. 145, 27 (continuing 348) 
αὐτὰρ ἀκίνητον μεγάλων ἐν πείρασι δεσμῶν 
ἔστιν ἄναρχον ἄπαυστον, ἐπεὶ γένεσις καὶ ὄλεθρος 
τῆλε μάλ᾽ ἐπλάχθησαν, ἀττῶσε δὲ πίστις ἀληθής. 
ταὐτόν T ἐν ταὐτῷ τε μένον καθ᾽ ἑαυτό τε κεῖται 

go ἄχοὔύτως ἔμπεδον αὖθι μένει" κρατερὴ γὰρ ᾿Ανάγκη 
πείρατος ἐν δεσμοῖσιν ἔχει, τό μιν ἀμφὶς ἐέργει, 
οὕνεκεν οὐκ ἀτελεύτητον τὸ ἐὸν θέμις εἶναι" 
ἔστι γὰρ οὐκ ἐπιδευές: [μὴ] ἐὸν δ᾽ ἂν παντὸς ἐδεῖτο. 

351 ‘Fr. 8,1. 42, Simplicius Phys. 146, 15 (after 352) 
αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ Treipas τύματον, τετελεσμένον ἐστὶ 
πάντοθεν, εὐκύκλου σφαίρης ἐναλίγκιον ὄγκῳ, 
μεσσόθεν ἰσοτταλὲς πτάντῃ τὸ γὰρ οὔτε τι μεῖτον 

45. οὔτε τι βαιότερον πελέναι χρεόν ἐστι τῇ ἢ τῇ. 
οὔτε γὰρ οὐκ ἐὸν ἔστι, τό κεν Travol μιν ἱκνεῖσθαι 
εἰς ὁμόν, οὔτ᾽ ἐὸν ἔστιν ὅπως εἴη κεν ἐόντος 
τῇ μᾶλλον τῇ δ᾽ ἧσσον, ἐπεὶ πᾶν ἐστιν ἄσυλον᾽ 
οἷ γὰρ πάντοθεν ἶσον, ὁμῶς ἐν πείρασι κύρει. 


These two passages are actually separated by eight lines of 
summary, but by temporarily omitting those eight lines the 
argument is shown to be so continuous that they are best treated 
together. Parmenides is of course inevitably repetitive, because, 
as we saw (343), his arguments are so closely linked one with 
another that each attribute of Being can be deduced from any 
other. But even allowing for his habitual repetitiveness, we can 





350 But, motionless within the limits of mighty bonds, it ἐς without beginning or end, 
since coming into being and perishing have been driven far away, cast out by true belief. 
Abiding the same in the same place it rests by itself, and so abides firm where it is; for 
strong Necessity holds it firm within the bonds of the limit that keeps it back on every side, 
because it is not lawful that what is should be unlimited; for it is not in need—if tt were, 
it would need all. 


351 But since there is a furthest limit, it ts bounded on every side, like the bulk of a well- 
rounded sphere, from the centre equally balanced in every direction; for it needs must not 
be somewhat more here or somewhat less there. For neither is there that which is not, which 
might stop it from meeting its like, nor can what is be more here and less there than 
what is, since it is all inviolate; for being equal to itself on every side, it rests uniformly 
within its limits. 


276 


PARMENIDES 


hardly fail to notice, in these sixteen lines, the recurrent emphasis 
placed on the conception of limit, πεῖρας. Now Limit, as one of 
the two fundamental Pythagorean principles, stood at the top of 
the left-hand column in the Table of Opposites (see 289); and 
among the concepts listed in that column was one, namely unity, 
which Parmenides has already accepted as consistent with his 
premise. Morcover, there is another point in these two passages 
that Parmenides is evidently concerned to stress: Being—or the 
One—is ἀκίνητον, ‘motionless’, ἐν ταὐτῷ μένον, ‘resting in the 
same place’, ἔμπεδον, ‘stable’, and iootradés, ‘equally poised’. It 
is in fact, in Pythagorean terminology, ἠρεμοῦν, ‘at rest’, as 
opposed to κινούμενον, ‘in motion’. It begins to look almost as if 
Parmenides, having been reared in the Pythagorean school, had 
come to feel that the fatal flaw in Pythagoreanism was its dualism. 
At all events he seems so far, while denying the existence of those 
two manifestations of the Unlimited, time and the void, to be 
applying to his Being those attributes from the left-hand column 
of the Table of Opposites that can be apprehended by the sole 
use of reason as opposed to the senses. 


SUMMARY OF THE WAY OF TRUTH 

352 Fr. 8, 1. 34, Simplicius Phys. 146, 7 (continuing 350) 
ταὐτὸν δ᾽ ἔστι νοεῖν Te Kal οὕνεκεν ἔστι νόημα. 

35 οὐ yap ἄνευ τοῦ ἐόντος, ἐν ᾧ πεφατισμένον ἐστίν, 
εὑρήσεις τὸ νοεῖν οὐδὲν γὰρ (ἢ, ἔστιν ἢ ἔσται 
ἄλλο πάρεξ τοῦ ἐόντος, ἐττεὶ τό γε Μοῖρ᾽ ἐπέδησεν 
οὖλον ἀκίνητόν τ᾽ ἔμεναι" τῷ πάντ᾽ ὄνομ᾽ ἔσται 
ὅσσα βροτοὶ κατέθεντο πεποιθότες εἶναι ἀληθῆ, 

40 γίγνεσθαί τε καὶ ὄλλυσθαι, εἶναί τε καὶ οὐχί, 
καὶ τόπον ἀλλάσσειν διά τε χρόα φανὸν ἀμείβειν. 


These eight lines, which belong properly between 350 and 351, 
give a summary recapitulation of the main steps in the argument 





352 What can be thought is only the thought that it ts. [The infinitive by itself 
seldom bears the sense of the infinitive with article—i.e. ‘thinking’; the con- 
struction must be the same as in 344 and 345—that is: the only thing that exists 
for thinking is the thought that it is.] For you will not find thought without what ts, in 
relation to which it 1s uttered; for there is not, nor shall be, anything else besides what 1s, 
since Fate fettered it to be entire and immovable. Wherefore all these are mere names which 
mortals laid down believing them to be true—coming into being and perishing, being and 
not being, change of place and variation of bright colour. 


277 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


of the Way of Truth. Lines 34-6 repeat the conclusion reached 
at the end of 344; lines 36—7 confirm lines 12-13 of fragment 8, 
347; lines 37-8 summarize very briefly the content of 350 and 351; 
and lines 38-40 revert to lines 19-21 of this same fragment, 347. 
It is only in the last clause, διά τε χρόα φανὸν ἀμείβειν, ‘and change 
of bright colour’, that we find a new point. Change of colour 1s 
presumably specified as being a type of change that docs not 
involve change of place; both locomotion and qualitative change 
are ‘mere names’. 


TRANSITION TO WAY OF SEEMING 

353 Simplicius Phys. 30, 14. μετελθὼν Se ἀπὸ τῶν νοητῶν ἐπὶ 
τὰ αἰσθητὰ ὁ Παρμενίδης, ἤτοι ἀπὸ ἀληθείας, ὡς αὐτός φησιν, ἐπὶ 
δόξαν, ἐν οἷς λέγει 


(Fr. 8, 1. 50) ἐν τῷ σοι παύω πιστὸν λόγον ἠδὲ νόημα 
ἀμφὶς ἀληθείης᾽ δόξας δ᾽ ἀπὸ τοῦδε βροτείας 
μάνθανε κόσμον ἐμῶν ἐπέων ἀπατηλὸν ἀκούων, 


τῶν γενητῶν ἀρχὰς καὶ αὐτὸς στοιχειώδεις μὲν τὴν πρώτην 
ἀντίθεσιν ἔθετο, ἣν φῶς καλεῖ καὶ σκότος (ἢ) πῦρ καὶ γῆν ἢ πυκνὸν 
καὶ ἀραιὸν ἢ ταὐτὸν καὶ ἕτερον, λέγων ἐφεξῆς τοῖς πρότερον 
παρακειμένοις ἔπεσιν 
(Fr.8,1.53) μορφὰς γὰρ κατέθεντο δύο γνώμας ὀνομάτφειν, 
τῶν μίαν οὐ χρεών ἐστιν--ἐν ᾧ πεπλανημένοι εἰσίν--- 
55 τἀντία δ᾽ ἐκρίναντο δέμας καὶ σήματ᾽ ἔθεντο 
χωρὶς ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων, τῇ μὲν φλογὸς αἰθέριον πῦρ, 
ἤπιον ὄν, μέγ᾽ [ἀραιὸν] ἔλαφρόν, ἑωυτῷ πάντοσε τωὐτόν, 
τῷ δ᾽ ἑτέρῳ μὴ τωὐτόν ἀτὰρ κἀκεῖνο κατ᾽ αὐτὸ 
τἀντία νύκτ᾽ ἀδαῆ, πυκινὸν δέμας ἐμβριθές τε. 











453 Parmenides effects the transition from the objects of reason to the objects of sense, or, 
as he himself puts it, from truth to seeming, when he writes: ‘ Here I end my trustworthy 
discourse and thought concerning truth; henceforth learn the beliefs of mortal men, listening 
to the deceitful ordering of my words’; and he then himself makes the elemental principles 
of created things the primary opposition of light and darkness, as he calls them, or fire and 
earth, or dense and rare, or sameness and difference; for he says immediately after the lines 
quoted above: ‘ For they made up their minds to name two forms, of which they must not 
name one only—that is where they have gone astray—and distinguished them as opposite 
in appearance and assigned to them manifestations different one from the other—to one the 
aitherial flame of fire, gentle and very light, in every direction identical with itself, but not 
with the other; and that other too is in itself just the opposite, dark night, dense in appear- 


278 


PARMENIDES 


60 TOV σοι ἐγὼ διάκοσμον ἐοικότα πάντα φατίτω, 
ὡς OU μή ποτέ τίς σε βροτῶν γνώμη παρελάσσῃ. 


1 This passage of Simplicius actually ends here, at 1. 59, but elsewhere 
(Phys. 39, 8) he appends also the next two lines. [ἀραιὸν] secl. Diels. 


Parmenides has now, in the Way of Truth, taught us all that 
reason, unaided by the senses, can deduce about Being. It is a 
single, indivisible and homogeneous sphere, timeless, changeless 
and (since there is no void either inside it or outside) motionless. 
It has in fact no perceptible qualities whatever. If Parmenides 
had taken the left-hand column of the Pythagorean Table of 
Opposites and selected from it those concepts which could be 
apprehendcd by reason alone, the result would be much what his 
One is; while to the right-hand column, the various manifestations 
of the Unlimited, he has denied any reality whatever. Such are 
the consequences of the exercise of reason. Now, however, in 
passing from the Way of Truth to the Way of Seeming, Parmenides 
passes, as Simplicius saw, ἀττὸ τῶν νοητῶν ἐπὶ τὰ αἰσθητά, ‘from 
the objects of reason to the objects of sense’; and just as in the Way 
of Truth the objects of sense have been altogether excluded, so also, 
as we shall see, the Way of Seeming will exclude altogether the 
objects of reason. Since all objects of sense are, to Parmenides, 
‘mere names’ without substantial existence, he is obviously com- 
pelled to base his survey of them upon the false assumptions which 
he himself declines to share with mortals; but at the same time his 
survey does not cover all those falsc assumptions. Besides allowing 
existence to non-cxistent phenomena, most men went so far as to 
confuse them with the objects of reason. Parmenides will not, 
even in what he knows and avows to be ‘a deceitful ordering of 
words’ (1. 52), follow them as far as that in their error. 

The significance and purpose of the Way of Seeming has been 
very variously interpreted. Whereas Zeller for instance, following, 
as he thought, a suggestion by Theophrastus,‘ regarded it as a 
review of popular beliefs, Burnet (EGP184—5) concluded that ‘in 
the absence of evidence to the contrary’ it should be regarded 
rather as ‘a sketch of contemporary Pythagorean cosmology’. 
Against any such view there are several strong arguments. The 





ance and heavy. The whole ordering of these I tell thee as it seems likely, that so no thought 
of mortal men shall ever outstrip thee.’ 


279 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Way of Seeming, contrary to Burnet’s view, bears no discernible 
trace of the twofundamental Pythagorean doctrines—the opposition 
of Limit and Unlimitcd, and the equation, in whatever sense, of 
things with numbers; nor do the remarks of the ancient com- 
mentators indicate that there ever was any trace of these doctrines 
anywhere in the whole poem. It does, on the other hand, contain 
at Icast one doctrine, that of the στεφάναι in 358 and 359, of which 
there is no trace in the Pythagorean cosmology, nor indeed any- 
where else cxcept possibly in Anaximander (see pp. 135ff.). 
Finally, it is surely inconceivable that all the ancient commentators 
should have regarded the cosmology of the Way of Seeming, as 
they all, including Theophrastus, almost invariably did, as 
Parmcenides’ own invention, if it was in reality nothing but a sum- 
mary of cither popular belicfs or contemporary Pythagoreanism. 


£ 354 Theophrastus Phys. Op. tr. 6 ap. Alexandrum Met. 31, 12 (DK 2847) 
.. «κατὰ δόξαν δὲ τῶν πολλῶν εἷς TO γένεσιν ἀποδοῦναι τῶν φαινομένων 
δύο ποιῶν τὰς &pxds.... Burnct also (EGP 182-4), to this extent following 
Zeller, uscd this passage to show that in the opinion of Theophrastus 
Parmenides meant to give the belief of ‘the many’. It is, however, open 
to doubt whether Theophrastus here meant any more than that in the 
opinion of the many it is the phenomenal world that has to be explained. 
Cf. 3§§ Aristotle Met. A5, 986b31 (DK 28a24)_ .. . ἀναγκαζόμενος δ᾽ 
ἀκολουθεῖν τοῖς φαινομένοις, Kal TO Ev μὲν κατὰ TOV λόγον πλείω δὲ κατὰ 
τὴν αἴσθησιν ὑπολαμβάνων εἶναι, δύο τὰς αἰτίας καὶ δύο τὰς ἀρχὰς 
πάλιν τίθησι... .. ΛΕ all events this passage from Aristotle seems to show that 
he regarded the cosmology of the Way of Seeming as Parmenides’ own; 
and that Theophrastus usually took the same view is evident from 357 
below. The real value of these two passages is that they emphasize what 
was evidently the most important characteristic of the Way of Seeming: 
two constituents (and two only) are named, not one only. Parmenides’ 
predecessors, other than the Pythagoreans and Alcmaeon, had run into 
difficulties by trying to generate the opposites out of one ἀρχή. 


The foregoing interpretation of the Way of Truth will have 
suggested quite a different interpretation of the Way of Seeming. 
The essential difference between the objects of reason and the 
objects of sense is evidently, to Parmenides, just this: that whereas, 
in the case of the objects of reason, acceptance of one of a pair of 





354 ...to give an account, in accordance with popular opinion, of the coming into being 
of sensible things, he makes the first principles two.... 
355 ...but being forced to comply with sensible things, and supposing the existence of 
that which is one in formula but more than one according to our sensations, he now posits 
two causes and two first principles.... (After Ross) 


280 


PARMENIDES 


contraries logically involves the rejection of the other, in the case 
of the objects of sense the acceptance of one involves the accept- 
ance of the other as well. Light, for instance, can only be seen to 
exist in its contrast with darkness; a heavy body cannot be heavy 
unless there is a lighter body with which to compare it; and so with 
all sensible contraries.t The fundamental error of which men are 
guilty is that they have agreed to recognize the existence of these 
sensible opposites; and this is, of course, the error which Par- 
menides himsclf must knowingly perpetrate if he is to give an 
account of phenomena. Accordingly, even as he perpetrates it he 
declares it to be an error: ‘that’, he says (353, fr. 8 1. 54), “is 
where they have gone astray’. But at least he will follow misguided 
mortals no further. If he is to introducc these sensible contraries 
he will not confuse them with intelligible; and so, instead of the 
primary pair of Pythagorean opposites, Limit and Unlimited (the 
former of which has been shown in the Way of Truth to be 
intelligible), he sclects as his own primary pair one of their 
perceptible manifestations, φῶς and σκότος (or, as he himself calls 
it, νύξ), ‘light’ and ‘darkness’ (or ‘night’). 


t This consideration seems sufficient to establish Simplicius’ interpretation 
of the clause τῶν μίαν ot χρεῶν ἐστιν, ‘two forms, of which it is not right 
to name one only (1.6. without the other)’, as the most convincing. It is 
true that Cornford’s translation, ‘of which it is not right to name so much 
as one’ (Plato and Parmenides 46), avoids the obvious difficulty of taking 
μίαν in the sense of ἑτέρην, and may thercfore be right. But if we suppose 
Parmenides to mean that, whereas in the Way of Truth it is right to name 
one opposite and one only (the other being ἀνώνυμον, 347 1. 17), in the 
Way of Seeming you must not name one only without also naming the 
other, then we not only give the sentence an additional point, of which the 
structure of the whole poem seems to show that Parmenides himself was 
fully aware, but we also give to the crucial word μίαν the significance 
which its obvious contrast with δύο seems to suggest. 


What Parmenides has in fact done, in passing from the Way of 
Truth to the Way of Seeming, is to take his own sphere of reality, 
the One, and fill it, quite illegitimately, with the sensible opposites 
of light and darkness; and once he has taken that forbidden step, 
then he can proceed, as had the Pythagoreans with Limit and 
Unlimited, to broaden the scope of each of these primary opposites 
by describing their various manifestations.t Light is rare, night 
dense, and so on. Once one pair of sensible opposites has been 
admitted, then there is no insuperable difficulty in giving an 


281 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


explanation of phenomena; and if only because it avoids the con- 
fusion between reason and sense, Parmenides’ own explanation, 
even though deliberately based on error, is at least such that ‘no 
thought of mortal men shall ever outstrip him’ (353, fr. 8 1. 61). 


1 Cf. Fr. 9, which according to Simplicius comes pet’ ὀλίγα (1.6. soon 
after Fr. 8): 356 Simplicius Phys. 180, 9 


αὐτὰρ ἐπειδὴ πάντα φάος Kal νὺξ ὀνόμασται 

καὶ τὰ κατὰ σφετέρας δυνάμεις ἐπὶ τοῖσί τε καὶ τοῖς, 
πᾶν πλέον ἐστὶν ὁμοῦ φάεος καὶ νυκτὸς ἀφάντου, 
ἴσων ἀμφοτέρων, ἐπεὶ οὐδετέρῳ μέτα μηδέν. 


THE SENSIBLE OPPOSITES 


357 Theophrastus de sensu 1 ff. (DK 28446) περὶ δ᾽ αἰσθήσεως 
αἱ μὲν πολλαὶ καὶ καθόλου δόξαι δύ᾽ εἰσιν᾽ of μὲν yap τῷ ὁμοίῳ 
ποιοῦσιν, οἱ δὲ τῷ ἐναντίῳ. Παρμενίδης μὲν καὶ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆῇς καὶ 
Πλάτων τῷ ὁμοίῳ, οἱ δὲ περὶ ᾿Αναξαγόραν καὶ Ἡράκλειτον τῷ 
ἐναντίῳ... .((4()] Παρμενίδης μὲν γὰρ ὅλως οὐδὲν ἀφώρικεν ἀλλὰ 
μόνον ὅτι δυοῖν ὄντοιν στοιχείοιν κατὰ τὸ ὑπερβάλλον ἐστὶν ἡ 
γνῶσις. ἐὰν γὰρ ὑπεραίρῃ τὸ θερμὸν ἢ τὸ ψυχρόν, ἄλλην γίνεσθαι 
τὴν διάνοιαν, βελτίω δὲ καὶ καθαρωτέραν τὴν διὰ τὸ θερμόν᾽ οὐ 
μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ταύτην δεῖσθαί τινος συμμετρίας" 


(Fr. 16) ὡς γὰρ ἕκαστος (φησίν) ἔχει κρᾶσιν μελέων πτολυπτλάγκτων, 
τὼς νόος ἀνθρώποισι παριστᾶται" τὸ γὰρ αὐτὸ 
ἔστιν ὅπερ φρονέει μελέων φύσις ἀνθρώποισιν 
καὶ πᾶσιν καὶ Travti: τὸ γὰρ πλέον ἐστὶ νόημα. 


τὸ γὰρ αἰσθάνεσθαι καὶ τὸ φρονεῖν ὡς ταὐτὸ λέγει" διὸ καὶ τὴν 
μνήμην καὶ τὴν λήθην ἀπὸ τούτων γίνεσθαι διὰ τῆς κράσεως" ἂν 





356 And when all things have been named light and night, and things corresponding to 
their powers have been assigned to each, everything is full of light and of obscure night at 
once, both equal, since neither has any share of nothingness. 


357 The majority of general views about sensation are two: some make it of like by like, 
others of opposite by opposite. Parmenides, Empedocles and Plato say it is of like by like, 
the followers of Anaxagoras and of Heraclitus of opposite by opposite... .Parmenides gave 
no clear definition ai all, but said only that there were two elements and that knowledge 
depends on the excess of one or the other. Thought varies according to whether the hot or the 
cold prevails, but that which is due to the hot is better and purer; not but what even that 
needs a certain balance; for, says he, ‘ According to the mixture that each man has in 
his wandering limbs, so thought 1s forthcoming to mankind; for that which thinks is 
the same thing, namely the substance of their limbs, in each and all men; for that of 
which there 1s more 1s thought’—for he regards perception and thought as the same. So too 
memory and forgetfulness arise from these causes, on account of the mixture; but he never 


282 


PARMENIDES 


δ᾽ ἰσάφτωσι τῇ μίξει, πότερον ἔσται φρονεῖν ἢ οὔ, καὶ tis ἡ διάθεσις, 
οὐδὲν ἔτι διώρικεν. ὅτι δὲ καὶ τῷ ἐναντίῳ καθ᾽ αὑτὸ ποιεῖ τὴν 
αἴσθησιν, φανερὸν ἐν οἷς φησι τὸν νεκρὸν φωτὸς μὲν καὶ θερμοῦ καὶ 
φωνῆς οὐκ αἰσθάνεσθαι διὰ τὴν ἔκλειψιν τοῦ πυρός, ψυχροῦ δὲ καὶ 
σιωτῆς καὶ τῶν ἐναντίων αἰσθάνεσθαι. καὶ ὅλως δὲ πᾶν τὸ ὃν ἔχειν 
τινὰ γνῶσιν. 


This passage, which scts forth the most influential of the doctrines 
that survive from the Way of Seeming, contains two points in 
particular that are of interest and importance. It is noteworthy in 
the first place how completely Parmenides must, in the Way of 
Seeming, have suppressed his real convictions: the equation of 
perception and thought comes strangely from the author of the 
Way of Truth. At the same time the whole of this passage again 
makes clear how prominent a place was taken in the Way of 
Seeming by the sensible opposites: if we can trust Theophrastus’ 
interpretation, even thought derives from the preponderance of 
onc opposite in the body over the other. Here once again, as in 
the ψυχὴ ἁρμονία theory of the Pythagoreans (see pp. 261 [.), it 
is probable that we sce the influence of Alcmaeon; but be that as 
it may, Parmenides’ own theory of the perception of like by like 
was not without influence on his successors (cf. especially 
Empedocles, pp. 343 ff.). 


ASTRONOMY 
358 Fr. 12, Simplicius Phys. 39, 14. and 31, 13 
al yap στεινότεραι (sc. στεφάναι) ττλῆντο πυρὸς ἀκρήτοιο, 
αἱ δ᾽ ἐπὶ ταῖς νυκτός, μετὰ δὲ φλογὸς ἵεται aloa: 
ἐν δὲ μέσῳ τούτων δαίμων ἣ πάντα κυβερνᾷ᾽ 
πάντα γὰρ (ἣν) στυγεροῖο τόκου καὶ μίξιος ἄρχει 
5 πέμπουσ᾽ ἄρσενι θῆλυ μιγῆν τό τ᾽ ἐναντίον αὖτις 
ἄρσεν θηλυτέρῳ. 





made clear whether, if they are equally mixed, there will be thought or not, or, if so, what 
its character will be. But that he regards perception as also due to the opposite as such he 
makes clear when he says that a corpse does not perceive light, heat or sound owing to its 
deficiency of fire, but that it does perceive their opposites, cold, silence and so on. And he 
adds that in general everything that exists has some measure of knowledge. 

358 The narrower rings were filled with unmixed fire, those next to them with night, and 
after them rushes their share of flame; and in the midst of them is the goddess who steers 
all; for she it is that begins all the works of hateful birth and begetting, sending female to 
mix with male and male in turn with female. 


283 


ΡΕΒΕΒΟΘΟΒΑΤΙΟ PHILOSOPHERS 


359 Aetius Π, 7, 1 Παρμενίδης στεφάνας εἶναι περιτετλεγμένας 
ἐπαλλήλους, τὴν μὲν ἐκ τοῦ ἀραιοῦ, τὴν δὲ ἐκ τοῦ πυκνοῦ μικτὰς 
δὲ ἄλλας ἐκ φωτὸς καὶ σκότους μεταξὺ τούτων. καὶ τὸ περιέχον δὲ 
πάσας τείχους δίκην στερεὸν ὑπάρχειν, ὑφ᾽ ᾧ πυρώδης στεφάνη, καὶ 
τὸ μεσαίτατον πασῶν στερεόν, περὶ ὃ πάλιν πυρώδης (sc. στεφάνη). 
τῶν δὲ συμμιγῶν τὴν μεσαιτάτην ἁπάσαις (ἀρχήν τε καὶ (aitiav) 
κινήσεως καὶ γενέσεως ὑπάρχειν, ἥντινα καὶ δαίμονα κυβερνῆτιν καὶ 
κλῃδοῦχον ἐπονομάφτει Δίκην τε καὶ ᾿Ανάγκην. καὶ τῆς μὲν γῆς 
ἀπόκρισιν εἶναι τὸν ἀέρα διὰ τὴν βιαιοτέραν αὐτῆς ἐξατμισθέντα 
πίλησιν, τοῦ δὲ πυρὸς ἀναπνοὴν τὸν ἥλιον καὶ τὸν γαλαξίαν κύκλον. 
συμμιγῆ δ᾽ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν εἶναι τὴν σελήνην, τοῦ τ᾽ ἀέρος καὶ τοῦ πυρός. 
περιστάντος δ᾽ ἀνωτάτω πάντων τοῦ αἰθέρος ὑπ᾽ αὐτῷ τὸ πυρῶδες 
ὑποταγῆναι τοῦθ᾽ ὅπερ κεκλήκαμεν οὐρανόν, ὑφ᾽ ᾧ ἤδη τὰ περίγεια. 


It is fortunate that, since he neither believed in it himself nor, 
apparently, succecded in influencing others by it, Parmenides’ 
astronomical system is of little importance; for it is virtually im- 
possible to reconstruct. These two passages are quoted now chiefly 
because they give us what little reliable information we possess 
about the very obscure doctrine, to which reference has already 
been made (p. 280), of the otepdvai or ‘bands’. Two other points 
of interest do, however, arise from these passages. First, we see yet 
again how prominent are the sensible opposites in the cosmology 
of the Way of Seeming; and in addition to the two familiar pairs in 
359, dense and rare, light and darkncss, we meet also in 358 with 
the new pair—another, incidentally, which figures in the Pytha- 
gorean table—male and female.t And second, we learn again, 
from the fact that Justice or Necessity is now described as the 
“cause of movement and becoming’, how totally irreconcilable are 
the two parts of Parmenides’ poem (cf. 347 1. 14 and 3§01. 30). We 





359 Parmenides said that there were rings wound one around the other, one formed of 
the rare, the other of the dense; and that there were others between these compounded of light 
and darkness. That which surrounds them all like a wall is, he says, by nature solid; 
beneath it is a fiery ring; and likewise what lies in the middle of them all is solid; and 
around it 1s again a fiery ring. The middlemost of the mixed rings ts the primary cause of 
movement and of coming into being for them all, and he calls it the goddess that steers all, 
the holder of the keys, Justice and Necessity. The air, he says, is separated off from the 
earth, vaporized owing to earth’s stronger compression; the sun 1s an exhalation of fire, and 
so is the circle of the Milky Way. The moon is compounded of both air and fire. Aither is 
outermost, surrounding all; next comes the fiery thing that we call the sky; and last comes 
the region of the earth. 


284 


PARMENIDES 


should not waste time in the hopeless attempt to reconcile the two 
parts. For Parmenides, such inconsistency is inevitably involved 
in any attempt to explain, what deserves only to be negated, the 
evidence of the illusory senses. 


1 Fr.17,a single line concerned with embryology, 360 Galen in Epid. νι, 48 
δεξιτεροῖσιν μὲν κούρους, λαιοῖσι δὲ Koupas.... 


actually links two pairs found in the Pythagorean Table; but this, in the 
absence of further evidence, cannot safcly be regarded as more than a 
coincidence. It is also of interest, however, as showing that Parmenides, 
despite his emphatic theoretical negation of the world of sense, was yet 
prepared to go into considerable detail in his explanation of it (cf. also 
DK 28A50-4, especially 52). Presumably any account of the sensible 
world had at this period, perhaps owing to the influence of Alcmaeon, to 
take some account of physiological and embryological questions. 





360 On the right boys, on the left girls. ... 


285 


CHAPTER XI 


ZENO OF ELEA 


DATE AND LIFE 


The most reliable evidence for Zeno’s date is the same passage of 
Plato’s Parmenides as was uscd (p. 263) to determine the date of 
Parmecnides. On the basis of that evidence, Zeno seems to have 
been born about 490-485 B.c. Once again the date given by 
Apollodorus for Zeno’s floruit, namely 464-461,? conflicts with 
this; but we have already scen that his dating of the Eleatics 
depends solely on the date of the foundation of Elea. As with 
Parmenides, so with Zeno, Plato’s testimony is obviously 
preferable. 
1 Diog. L. rx, 29 (DK 2941) is unfortunately incomplete, but the date to 
be restored there is approximately indicated by 361 Suda s.v. Ζήνων 
(ΟΚ 2942) ...4v γὰρ ἐπὶ τῆς on ὀλυμπιάδος (468-465), μαθητὴς 
Ζενοφάνους ἢ Παρμενίδου. The verdict of Eusebius (DK 2943) that Zeno’s 


floruit was in 456—454 B.c., though nearer the mark, is shown to be equally 
unreliable by the fact that he makes Heraclitus and Zeno contemporarics. 


Of Zeno’s life, likewise, we know little more than we have 
alrcady learnt in connexion with Parmenides. Like Parmenides he 
came from Elea; like Parmenides he is said to have been originally 
a Pythagorean (340); and like Parmenides he is credited, also 
by Strabo in 340, with political activity. As a pupil of Par- 
menides his name is in fact constantly coupled with that of his 
master. In the one context in which his name repeatedly occurs 
by itself—the story of his part in a plot against a tyrant and of his 
courage under torture (see DK. 29A1, 2, 6, 7, 8 and 9)—the details 
vary so much that the facts are impossible to reconstruct. 


NATURE OF HIS WORK 

362 Plato Parmenides 128c (DK2gaAi2) .. -ἔστι δὲ τό γε 
ἀληθὲς βοήθειά τις ταῦτα [τὰ γράμματα] τῷ Παρμενίδου λόγῳ πρὸς 
τοὺς ἐπιχειροῦντας αὐτὸν κωμῳδεῖν ὡς, εἰ ἕν ἐστι, πολλὰ καὶ γελοῖα 





36. He lived in the seventy-eighth Olympiad, being a pupil of Xenophanes or 
Parmenides. 

362 ...Ln reality the book ts a sort of defence of Parmenides’ argument against those who 
try to make fun of it by showing that, if there is a One, many absurd and contradictory 


286 


ΖΈΝΟ 


συμβαίνει πάσχειν τῷ λόγῳ καὶ ἐναντία αὑτῷ. ἀντιλέγει δὴ οὖν 
τοῦτο τὸ γράμμα πρὸς τοὺς τὰ πολλὰ λέγοντας, καὶ ἀνταποδίδωσι 
ταὐτὰ καὶ πλείω, τοῦτο βουλόμενον δηλοῦν, ὡς ἔτι γελοιότερα 
πάσχοι ἂν αὐτῶν ἡ ὑπόθεσις, εἰ πολλά ἐστιν, ἢ ἡ τοῦ ἕν εἶναι, εἴ τις 
ἱκανῶς ἐπεξίοι. διὰ τοιαύτην δὴ φιλονικίαν ὑπὸ νέου ὄντος ἐμοῦ 
ἐγράφη.... 

363 Plato Phaedrus 2061 Ὁ τὸν οὖν ᾿Ελεατικὸν Παλαμήδην λέγοντα 
οὐκ ἴσμεν τέχνῃ ὥστε φαίνεσθαι τοῖς ἀκούουσι τὰ αὐτὰ ὅμοια καὶ 
ἀνόμοια, καὶ ἕν καὶ πολλά, μένοντά τε αὖ καὶ φερόμενα; 

364 Diogenes Laertius vin, 57 “ApiototéAns δ᾽ ἐν τῷ Σοφιστῇ 
φησι πρῶτον ᾿Εμπεδοκλέα ῥητορικὴν εὑρεῖν, Ζήνωνα δὲ διαλεκτικήν. 


Such passages as 362 cannot admittedly be taken as historical 
unless they are supported by other evidence. But we shall see 
later that there are various reasons for accepting the suggestion 
that the opponents of Parmenides had attempted, in return for his 
biting criticisms, to make fun of his Onc, and we shall see also 
(pp. 299fF.) what form these attempts could have taken. There- 
upon, according to Plato, Zeno set about ‘repaying them in the 
same coin with something to spare’. But be that as it may, there 
is anyhow no doubt of the controversial nature of Zeno’s work: he 
fully earns the remarks made about him in 363 and 364. His 
characteristic method was, as 362 and 363 both suggest, to reduce 
his opponents’ hypotheses to absurdity by deducing from them 
contradictory consequences. The hypotheses to which he especially 
turned his destructive talents were two, namely plurality and 
motion, which were unquestioningly accepted by all except the 
Eleatics themselves; but for all that, his arguments were probably, 
as we shall see, aimed particularly at the Pythagorcans. His 
primary object must indeed have been exactly as Plato represents 











consequences follow for his argument. This book is a retort against those who believe in 
plurality; it pays them back in their own coin, and with something to spare, by seeking to 
show that, if anyone examines the matter thoroughly, yet more absurd consequences follow 
from their hypothesis of plurality than from that of the One. In such a spirit of contention 
I wrote it while 1 was a young man.... 

363 Do we not then know that this Eleatic Palamedes argues with such skill that the 
same things appear to his listeners to be both like and unlike, both one and many, both at 
rest and in motion? 

364 Aristotle in the Sophist says that Empedocles was the first to discover rhetoric and 
Keno dialectic. 


287 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


it in 362; he is evidently rallying to the rescue of the Parmenidean 
One against its pluralist assailants in general and the Pytha- 
goreans in particular. 


ARGUMENTS AGAINST PLURALITY 
365 Fr. 1, Simplicius Phys. 141, 1 and Fr. 2, ibid. 139, 8 εἰ 
πολλά ἐστι, καὶ μεγάλα ἐστὶ καὶ μικρά" μεγάλα μὲν ὥστε ἄπειρα TO 
μέγεθος εἶναι, μικρὰ δ᾽ οὕτως ὥστε μηθὲν ἔχειν μέγεθος. 

el μὴ ἔχοι μέγεθος τὸ ὄν, οὐδ᾽ ἂν εἴη. el γὰρ ἄλλῳ ὄντι προσγένοιτο, 
οὐδὲν ἂν peizov ποιήσειεν μεγέθους γὰρ μηδενὸς ὄντος, ττροσγενο- 
μένου δέ, οὐδὲν οἷόν τε εἰς μέγεθος ἐπιδοῦναι. καὶ οὕτως ἂν ἤδη τὸ 
προσγινόμενον οὐδὲν εἴη. εἰ δὲ ἀπογινομένου τὸ ἕτερον μηδὲν 
ἔλαττον ἔσται μηδὲ αὖ προσγινομένου αὐξήσεται, δῆλον ὅτι τὸ 
προσγενόμενον οὐδὲν ἦν οὐδὲ τὸ ἀπογενόμενον. 

εἰ δὲ ἔστιν, ἀνάγκη ἕκαστον μέγεθός τι ἔχειν καὶ πτάχος καὶ ἀπέχειν 
αὐτοῦ τὸ ἕτερον ἀπὸ τοῦ ἑτέρου. καὶ περὶ τοῦ προύχοντος ὁ αὐτὸς 
λόγος. καὶ γὰρ ἐκεῖνο ἕξει μέγεθος καὶ προέξει αὐτοῦ τι. ὅμοιον δὴ 
τοῦτο ἅπαξ τε εἰπεῖν καὶ ἀεὶ λέγειν. οὐδὲν γὰρ αὐτοῦ τοιοῦτον 
ἔσχατον ἔσται οὔτε ἕτερον πρὸς ἕτερον οὐκ ἔσται. 

οὕτως εἰ πολλά ἐστιν, ἀνάγκη αὐτὰ μικρά τε εἶναι καὶ μεγάλα" 
μικρὰ μὲν ὦστε μὴ ἔχειν μέγεθος, μεγάλα δὲ ὥστε ἄπειρα εἶναι. 
366 Fr. 3, Simplicius Phys. 140, 29 εἰ πολλά ἐστιν, ἀνάγκη 
τοσαῦτα εἶναι ὅσα ἐστὶ καὶ οὔτε πλείονα αὐτῶν οὔτε ἐλάττονα. εἶ 
δὲ τοσαῦτά ἐστιν ὅσα ἐστί, πεπερασμένα ἂν εἴη. 





365 If there is a plurality, things will be both great and small; so great as to be infinite 
in size, so small as to have no size at all. 

If what is had no size, it would not even be. For if it were added to something else that 
is, it would make it no larger; for being no size at all, it could not, on being added, cause 
any increase in size. And so what was added would clearly be nothing. Again if, when it is 
taken away, the other thing is no smaller, just as when it is added it is not increased, 
obviously what was added or taken away was nothing. 

But if it is, each thing must have a certain size and bulk, and one part of it must be a 
certain distance from another; and the same argument holds about the part in front of it— 
it too will have some size and there will be something in front of it. And it is the same thing 
to say this once and to go on saying it indefinitely; for no such part of tt will be the last, 
nor will one part ever be unrelated to another. 

So, if there ts a plurality, things must be both small and great; so small as to have no 
size at all, so great as to be infinite. 


366 If there is a plurality, things must be just as many as they are, no more and no less. 
And if they are just as many as they are, they must be limited. 


288 


ZENO 
el πολλά ἐστιν, ἄπειρα τὰ ὄντα ἐστίν ἀεὶ γὰρ ἕτερα μεταξὺ τῶν 
ὄντων ἐστί, καὶ πάλιν ἐκείνων ἕτερα μεταξύ. καὶ οὕτως ἄπειρα τὰ 
ὄντα ἐστί. 


These two arguments against plurality are all that survive of a set 
of, according to Proclus (in Parm. 694, 23, DK 29415), no less than 
forty. (The first of the two is actually reconstructed from four 
separate quotations in Simplicius, Phys. pp. 139-41 (DK 29B1 and 
2); but, as Zeller suggested, the four pieces together seem to make 
up a single argument.) These two probably suffice, however, to 
illustrate Zeno’s method. A significant feature of these two 
arguments (though not necessarily, of course, of all the others) is 
that both alike admit of two different interpretations. Zeller, for 
instance, who is followed by Ross (Aristotle, Physics 479, note on 
187a1), paraphrased the latter as follows: ‘The many must be 
both limited and unlimited in number. Limited, because it is as 
many as itis; no more nor less. Unlimited, because two things are 
two only when they are separatcd; in order that they may be 
separated, there must be something between them; and so too 
between this intermediate and each of the two, and so ad infinitum.’ 
H. D. P. Lee, on the other hand, writes of this same dilemma 
(<eno of Elea 31): ‘The second part must again make nonsense 
unless it is understood that the “things’”’ in question are supposed 
to have the properties of points on a line. And the argument is 
simply that between any two points a and 4g, it is possible to take 
further points a, and a, and so on.’ This same divergence of inter- 
pretation is found also in their respective comments on the 
argument in 365: while Lee’s interpretation 15 again geometrical, 
Zeller’s is again arithmetical. 

The reason for this difference of interpretation rests ultimately 
in the ambiguity of the hypothesis ef πολλά ἐστιν. In his discussion 
of the Pythagoreans whom he believed that Zeno was attacking, 
Cornford (Plato and Parmentdes 58) wrote as follows: “The assertion 
that “things are many” probably covered the following proposi- 
tions. (1) There is a plurality of concrete things, bodies capable 
of motion, such as our senses show us. . .. (2) Each of these concrete 
bodies is a number, or plurality of units.’ The first of these pro- 





If there is a plurality, the things that are are infinite; for there will always be other 
things between the things that are, and yet others between those others. And so the things 
that are are infinite. 


19 289 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


positions, on which Zeller bases his interpretation, is self-evident; 
the second, on which Lee relies, calls for further comment. 


367 Simplicius Phys. 99, 13 (DK 29421), quoting Alexander ὡς 
γὰρ ἱστορεῖ... .Εὔδημος, Ζήνων... .ἐπειρᾶτο δεικνύναι ὅτι μὴ οἷόν 
τε τὰ ὄντα πολλὰ εἶναι τῷ μηδὲν εἶναι ἐν τοῖς οὖσιν ἕν, τὰ δὲ πολλὰ 
πλῆθος εἶναι ἑνάδων. (Cf. Philoponus Phys. 42, 9; ὈΚ 29A21.) 


368 Eudemus ap. Simplicium Phys. 97, 12 καὶ Ζήνωνά φασι 
λέγειν, εἴ τις αὐτῷ TO Ev ἀποδοίη τί ποτέ ἐστιν, ἔχειν τὰ ὄντα λέγειν. 


Thesc two passages, both based on Eudemus, make it clear that in 
his opinion the plurality that Zeno was especially attacking was 
‘a plurality of units’, πλῆθος ἑνάδων. By exposing the contra- 
dictions involved in the notion of the unit Zeno sought to demolish 
the hypothesis of plurality. Accordingly it is only when, in the argu- 
ments preserved in 365 and 366, we substitute for the single word 
πολλά, ‘ plurality’, the phrase πλῆθος ἑνάδων, ‘a plurality of units’, 
that Zeno’s purpose is fully apparent. For not only had Zeno’s 
principal opponents, the Pythagoreans, maintained that everything 
in the universe—sun and moon, man and horse, justice and oppor- 
tunity—was indeed asum of spatially extended units (see pp. 248 ff.) ; 
they had also, if only tacitly, confused these spatially extended units 
with the points of geometry. It is against this confusion in particular 
that, according to Tannery, Cornford, Lee and others, Zeno’s 
arguments against both plurality and motion are alike directed. 
To suppose that this special anti-Pythagorean significance is 
merely accidental is surely unjust to Zeno; it must indeed, in the 
opinion of the present writer, have been the prime motive of his 
arguments. It may be true, as some scholars have lately objected, 
that there are no traces in extant fifth-century literature of an 
explicit equation of numbers with atoms; and it has also been 
maintained against Tannery and his followers (though in view of 
367 and 368 this seems to be rather a matter of opinion) that, in 
W. A. Heidel’s words (4 7P 61 (1940) 21), ‘there is not, so far as I 
know, a single hint in our sources that the Greeks themselves were 
aware of the purpose of Zeno to criticize the fundamental doctrines 





367 As Eudemus...records, Zeno...used to try to prove that it ts impossible that 
existing things should be a plurality by arguing that there is then no unit in existing things 
and that plurality is a sum of units. 

368 They say that Zeno used to argue that, if anyone would explain to him whatever the 
one was, he would then be able to account for existing things. 


290 


ZENO 


of the Pythagoreans’. Neither of these objections seems, however, 
very damaging. If the confusion between units, points and atoms 
was, as was suggested in Chapter 1x, a tacit confusion arising from 
the inability to imagine incorporeal entities, then it is not only 
not surprising that there is as yet no explicit equation, it would be 
very surprising indeed if there were. And as for the failure of our 
sources to point out the special anti-Pythagorean purport of 
Zeno’s arguments, that, so far as it is true, surely comes about 
because our sources, especially Aristotle himself, were concerned 
with the validity of the arguments in their own day rather than 
with the ad hominem motive that inspired them. At the same time, 
to suppose that this was their only motive is probably an over- 
simplification; that the clause εἰ πολλά ἐστιν was not intended to 
bear, at least among others, its superficially obvious sense of ‘if 
there is a plurality of concrete things’ seems very hard to believe. 
The safest conclusion therefore (and this will apply also to the 
arguments against motion) would seem to be that Zeno did indeed 
aim his dilemmas especially at the tacit confusions which he 
detected in the Pythagorean theory of numbers—the Pythagoreans 
were in fact ‘those who had tried to make fun of the Parmenidean 
One’ (362) ; but that, wishing to give them as wide an interest and 
applicability as possible, he couched them in the most general 
terms, and so left his various pluralist opponents to read into them 
as much or as little significance as they in fact posscssed against 
their particular variety of pluralism. Only so, it seems, can we 
satisfactorily explain the diversity of interpretation that these 
arguments have been shown to admit; only so can we account 
for the remarkable fluctuations of Zeno’s repute. Thus Aristotle, 
seeing only the general and less valid significance of the antinomies, 
is content to dismiss them (Met. B4, 1001b14) with the con- 
temptuous words, οὗτος θεωρεῖ φορτικῶς, “his speculations are 
crude’. Modern scholars and philosophers on the other hand, 
appreciating the full purport of these same arguments, have 
accorded to Zeno the greatest respect. 


ARGUMENTS AGAINST MOTION 


369 Aristotle Phys.Z9,239b9 (DK 29425) τέτταρες δ᾽ εἰσὶν οἱ λόγοι 
περὶ κινήσεως Ζήνωνος οἱ παρέχοντες Tas δυσκολίας τοῖς λύουσιν. 





369 κοπο᾽ς arguments about motion, which cause such trouble to those who try to solve 
the problems that they present, are four in number. (After Gaye) 


201 19-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Zeno’s arguments against motion, unlike those against plurality, 
were originally only four in number, of which Aristotle discusses 
each in turn (though in a somewhat garbled version) in Physics Zg. 
It will be best to discuss each separately; but since the four were 
undoubtedly intended to stand together, the full purpose of each 
being dependent on the other three, we must first consider the 
combined object of the four together. 

Theories of motion depend inevitably on theories of the nature 
of space and time; and two opposed views of space and time were 
held in antiquity. Either space and time are infinitcly divisible, 
in which case motion is continuous and smooth-flowing; or else 
they are made up of indivisible minima—értopa peyé6n—in which 
case motion is what Lee aptly calls ‘cinematographic’, consisting 
of a succession of minute jerks. We shall find that Zeno’s arguments 
are directed against both theories—the first two arguments against 
the formcr view, the last two against the latter. The four argu- 
ments are really, in fact, two pairs; and further, to complete the 
neatness of the pattern, the first member of each pair aims to prove 
that motion is impossible for a single body—that is to say, is 
impossible absolutely—while the second aims to prove that it is 
impossible for more than one body—that is to say, relatively. 
Finally, it is once more against the Pythagoreans in particular that 
these four arguments together are most valid and damaging; for it 
was the Pythagoreans alone who, by their confusion of spatially 
extended and indivisible units with the points of geometry, would 
be logically compelled to admit, under cross-cxamination, that 
they held simultaneously the two contradictory theories of space 
and motion. 


(i) The Stadium 

370 Aristotle Phys. Z9, 239b11 (continuing 369) ...mpdTos μὲν ὁ 
περὶ τοῦ μὴ κινεῖσθαι διὰ TO πρότερον εἰς TO ἥμισυ δεῖν ἀφικέσθαι TO 
φερόμενον ἢ πρὸς τὸ τέλος. ... 

371 Aristotle ΤΖοῤίς Θ8, 160b7 πολλοὺς γὰρ λόγους ἔχομεν 
ἐναντίους ταῖς δόξαις, καθάπερ Ζήνωνος, ὅτι οὐκ ἐνδέχεται κινεῖσθαι 
οὐδὲ τὸ στάδιον διελθεῖν. 





370 ... The first asserts the non-existence of motion on the ground that that which 15 in 
locomotion must arrive at the half-way stage before it arrives at the goal.... (Trans. Gaye) 


371 For we have many arguments contrary to accepted opinion, such as Zeno’s that 
motion is impossible and that you cannot traverse the stadium. 


292 


ZENO 


372 Aristotle Phys. Z2, 233a21 διὸ Kal ὁ Ζήνωνος λόγος 
ψεῦδος λαμβάνει TO μὴ ἐνδέχεσθαι τὰ ἄπειρα διελθεῖν ἢ ἅψασθαι τῶν 
ἀπείρων καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐν πεπερασμένῳ χρόνῳ. διχῶς γὰρ λέγεται 
καὶ τὸ μῆκος καὶ ὁ χρόνος ἄπειρον, καὶ ὅλως πᾶν τὸ συνεχές, ἤτοι 
κατὰ διαίρεσιν ἢ τοῖς ἐσχάτοις. τῶν μὲν οὖν κατὰ ποσὸν ἀπείρων 
οὐκ ἐνδέχεται ἅψασθαι ἐν πεπερασμένῳ χρόνῳ, τῶν δὲ κατὰ δι- 
αίρεσιν ἐνδέχεται καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸς ὁ χρόνος οὕτως ἄπειρος. ὥστε ἐν 
τῷ ἀπείρῳ καὶ οὐκ ἐν τῷ πεπερασμένῳ συμβαίνει διιέναι τὸ ἄπειρον, 
καὶ ἅτττεσθαι τῶν ἀπείρων τοῖς ἀπείροις, οὐ τοῖς πτεπερασμένοις. 


Zeno’s first argument amounts simply to this: ‘It is impossible to 
traverse the stadium; because before you reach the far end you 
must first reach the half-way point; before you reach the half-way 
point you must reach the point half way to it; and so on ad 
infinitum. In other words, on the assumption that space 15 
infinitely divisible and that therefore any finite distance contains 
an infinite number of points, it is impossible to reach the end of an 
infinite series in a finite time. Aristotle’s answer to this conundrum 
in 372, even if philosophically unsatisfactory,’ shows that in this 
case he has rightly understood the problem. 


τ On the philosophical aspect of this and the other arguments against 
motion see Ross, Aristotle, Physics 71-85. Ross himself concludes about this 
first argument: (i) that since Aristotle himself, from whom almost the whole 
of our knowledge of all four arguments derives, evidently regards the 
solution he gives in 372 as ‘an adequate argumentum ad hominem as against 
Zeno’, Zeno must therefore have ‘made the paradox turn on a contrast 
between the infinite number of divisions of space to be covered in covering 
a finite space, and the finitude of a particular portion of time’ (p. 73); 
(ii) that none the less ‘the fact apparently remains that, before it gets to 
the end of the line, the moving body will have had to get to the end of an 
infinite series, 1.6. to have got to the end of something that has no end’ 
(p. 74), and that so understood ‘Zeno’s first paradox still awaits its final 
answer’ (p. 75). See also the controversy in Analysis vols. 11 (1951) to 
15 (1954), which however is hardly relevant to Zeno’s intentions. 





372 Hence Keno’s argument makes a false assumption in asserting that it ἰδ impossible 
for a thing to pass over or severally come in contact with infinite things in a finite time. 
For there are two senses in which length and time and generally anything continuous are 
called ‘infinite’: they are called so either in respect of divisibility or in respect of their 
extremities. So while a thing in a finite time cannot come in contact with things quanti- 
tatively infinite, it can come in contact with things infinite in respect of divisibility: for in 
this sense the time itself ts also infinite: and so we find that the time occupied by the passage 
over the infinite is not a finite but an infinite time, and the contact with the infinites is made 
by means of moments not finite but infinite in number. (Trans. Gaye) 


293 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(ii) Achilles and the tortoise 

373 Aristotle Phys. Z9, 2200 14 δεύτερος δ᾽ ὁ καλούμενος ᾿Αχιλ- 
λεύς. ἔστι δ᾽ οὗτος ὅτι τὸ βραδύτατον οὐδέποτε καταληφθήσεται 
θέον ὑπὸ τοῦ ταχίστου " ἔμττροσθεν γὰρ ἀναγκαῖον ἐλθεῖν τὸ διῶκον 
ὅθεν ὥρμησε τὸ φεῦγον, ὥστ᾽ ἀεί τι προέχειν ἀναγκαῖον τὸ βραδύ- 
τερον. ἔστι δὲ καὶ οὗτος ὁ αὐτὸς λόγος τῷ διχοτομεῖν, διαφέρει δ᾽ 
ἐν τῷ διαιρεῖν μὴ δίχα τὸ προσλαμβανόμενον μέγεθος. 


Having in ‘the Stadium’ dealt with a single moving body, Zeno 
proceeds in ‘ Achilles’ to deal with the relative motion of two bodies. 
The argument this time is as follows: ‘ Achilles can never overtake 
a tortoise; because by the time he reaches the point from which the 
tortoise started, it will have moved on to another point; by the 
time he reaches that second point it will have moved on again; and 
so ad infinitum.’ Aristotle’s comment on this conundrum is again 
sensible as far as it gocs: the underlying theory of spacc is indeed 
the same as in ‘the Stadium’—namely that it 15 infinitely divisible 
~——but this time the serics is not, as it was in ‘the Stadium’, the 
simple geometrical progression 3, 4, 4, 7g ..., but somewhat more 
complicated. 

That concludes Zeno’s attempt to disprove ‘continuous’ 
motion, and he now proceeds to ‘cinematographic’ motion. 


(iii) The flying arrow 

374 Aristotle Phys. Z9, 239b30 τρίτος δ᾽ ὁ viv ῥηθείς, ὅτι ἡ 
ὀιστὸς φερομένη ἕστηκεν. συμβαίνει δὲ παρὰ τὸ λαμβάνειν τὸν 
χρόνον συγκεῖσθαι ἐκ τῶν νῦν μὴ διδομένου γὰρ τούτου οὐκ ἔσται 
ὁ συλλογισμός. (Cf. zbid. 239 b5, where, however, the text iscorrupt.) 
This third argument can be confidently reconstructed as follows: 


‘An object is at rest when it occupies a space equal to its own 
dimensions. An arrow in flight occupics, at any given moment, a 





373 The second is the so-called Achilles, and it amounts to this, that in a race the 
quickest runner can never overtake the slowest, since the pursuer must first reach the point 
whence the pursued started, so that the slower must always hold a lead. This argument is 
the same in principle as that which depends on bisection, though it differs from it in that the 
spaces with which we successively have to deal are not divided into halves. (Trans. Gaye) 


374 The third is that already given above, to the effect that the flying arrow is at rest, 
which result follows from the assumption that time 1s composed of moments: if this 
assumption is not granted, the conclusion will not follow. (Trans. Gaye) 


294 


ZENO 


space equal to its own dimensions. Therefore an arrow in flight is 
at rest.’ It is easy to see that this argument, unlike the two that 
precede it, treats time and space alike as composed of indivisible 
minima; as Aristotle puts it, it assumes τὸν χρόνον συγκεῖσθαι ἐκ 
τῶν νῦν. 


(iv) The moving rows 

375 Aristotle Phys. Z9, 239b33 τέταρτος δ᾽ ὁ περὶ τῶν ἐν 
σταδίῳ κινουμένων ἐξ ἐναντίας ἴσων ὄγκων παρ᾽ ἴσους, τῶν μὲν 
ἀπὸ τέλους τοῦ σταδίου τῶν δ᾽ ἀπὸ μέσου, ἴσῳ τάχει, ἐν ᾧ 
συμβαίνειν οἴεται ἴσον εἶναι χρόνον τῷ διτλασίῳ τὸν ἥμισυν. ἔστι 
δ᾽ ὁ παραλογισμὸς ἐν τῷ τὸ μὲν παρὰ κινούμενον τὸ δὲ Trap’ 
ἠρεμοῦν τὸ ἴσον μέγεθος ἀξιοῦν τῷ ἴσῳ τάχει τὸν ἴσον φέρεσθαι 
χρόνον. τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐστὶ ψεῦδος. οἷον ἔστωσαν οἱ ἑστῶτες ἴσοι ὄγκοι 
ἐφ᾽ ὧν τὰ ΑΑ, οἱ δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὧν τὰ ΒΒ ἀρχόμενοι ἀπὸ τοῦ μέσου τῶν Α, 
ἴσοι τὸν ἀριθμὸν τούτοις ὄντες καὶ τὸ μέγεθος, οἱ δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ὧν τὰ ΓΓ ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ἐσχάτου, ἴσοι τὸν ἀριθμὸν ὄντες τούτοις καὶ τὸ μέγεθος, καὶ 
ἰσοταχεῖς τοῖς Β. συμβαίνει δὴ τὸ πρῶτον Β ἅμα ἐπὶ τῷ ἐσχάτῳ 
εἶναι καὶ τὸ πρῶτον Γ, παρ᾽ ἄλληλα κινουμένων. συμβαίνει δὲ καὶ 
TOT παρὰ πάντα τὰ Β διεξεληλυθέναι, τὸ δὲ Β παρὰ τὰ (A) ἡμίση: 
ὥστε ἥμισυν εἶναι τὸν χρόνον" ἴσον γὰρ ἑκάτερόν ἐστιν παρ᾽ ἕκαστον. 
ἅμα δὲ συμβαίνει τὰ Β παρὰ πάντα τὰ Γ παρεληλυθέναι" ἅμα γὰρ 
ἔσται τὸ πρῶτον Γ καὶ τὸ πρῶτον Β ἐπὶ τοῖς ἐναντίοις ἐσχάτοις, 





375 The fourth argument is that concerning the two rows of bodies, each row being 
composed of an equal number of bodies of equal size, passing each other on a race-course 
as they proceed with equal velocity in opposite directions, the one row originally occupying 
the space between the goal and the middle point of the course and the other that between the 
middle point and the starting-post. This, he thinks, involves the conclusion that half a given 
time is equal to double that time. The fallacy of the reasoning lies in the assumption that 
a body occupies an equal time in passing with equal velocity a body that is in motion and a 
body of equal size that is at rest; which 1s false. For instance (so runs the argument), let 
A, A ... be the stationary bodies of equal size, B, B ... the bodies, equal in number and in 
size to A, A, ..., originally occupying the half of the course from the starting-post to the 
middle of the A’s, and Γ, Γ᾿... those originally occupying the other half from the goal to 
the middle of the A’s, equal in number, size, and velocity to B, B .... Then three consequences 
follow: 

First, as the B’s and the Γ᾽ pass one another, the first B reaches the last T at the 
same moment as the first Γ reaches the last B. Secondly, at this moment the first T has 
passed all the B’s, whereas the first B has passed only half «the A’s), and has con- 
sequently occupied only half the time occupied by the first T, since each of the two 
occupies an equal time in passing each body. Thirdly, at the same moment all the B’s 
have passed all the Γ᾽ 5: for the first Γ and the first B will simultaneously reach the opposite 
ends of the course, since (so says Keno) the time occupied by the first T in passing each of 


295 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἴσον χρόνον παρ᾽ ἕκαστον γινόμενον τῶν Β ὅσον περ τῶν A, ὥς φησι, 
διὰ τὸ ἀμφότερα ἴσον χρόνον παρὰ τὰ Α γίγνεσθαι. 
376 Diagram of Alexander ap. Simplicium Phys. 1016, 14 














Α ὄγκοι ἑστῶτες 
AAAA Β ὄγκοι κινούμενοι ἀπὸ τοῦ A ἐπὶ TOE 
ΔΙ BBBB> Ε Γ ὄγκοι κινούμενοι ἀπὸ τοῦ Ε ἐπὶ τὸ Δ 
ς«-ΓΓΓΓ Δ ἀρχὴ τοῦ σταδίου 
Ε τέλος τοῦ σταδίου 


This final argument is much the most complicated of the four and 
it is virtually certain that Aristotle himself has misunderstood it; 
Zeno was far too shrewd to have been guilty of the paralogism of 
which Aristotle accuses him. The clue to the true significance of 
the argument lies in its relation to the other three: as ‘Achilles’ 
stands to ‘the Stadium’, so will this conundrum stand to the 
‘Flying Arrow’. In other words, this argument too will be based 
on the assumption that space and time are composed of indivisible 
minima. 

Indeed the only way in which any sense can be made of the 
argument is to suppose—and by so supposing it becomes perhaps 
the most telling of the whole set—that each of Zeno’s ὄγκοι (a 
deliberately vague word meaning ‘solid bodics’ or ‘masses’) 
represents one such indivisible minimum of space, and that those 
in the rows B and Γ are alike moving at such a speed as to pass one 
A in one indivisible minimum of time. Zeno is of course fully 
justified in asking his opponents—or those of them at least who 
believed in indivisible minima—to visualize such a situation. If 
space does indeed consist of indivisible minima, then it is clearly 
legitimate to draw a diagram to represent, on however magnified 
a scale, a number of such minima; and if the same is true of time, 
then the rest of the data is equally legitimate. But once so much 
is granted, then the rest of the argument is valid. For while each 
B has passed two A’s—which, by the data, means in two indivisible 





the B’s ts equal to that occupied by it in passing each of the A’s, because an equal time is 
occupied by both the first B and the first T in passing all the A’s. (After Gaye) 
376 A=stationary bodies. 

B= bodies moving from A towards E. 

[= bodies moving from E towards A. 

A= starting-post. 

E= goal. 


296 


ZENO 


minima of time—each Γ has passed four B’s—which again by the 
data must have taken four indivisible minima. It 1s true, of course, 
that unless the argument is concerned with indivisible minima it 
is, as Aristotle says, totally invalid. But as soon as it is seen to be 
concerned with indivisible minima, both of space and time, then 
it does most ingeniously demonstrate that these so-called indivisible 
minima are divisible after all. And upon the unfortunate Pytha- 
goreans, who had hitherto confused the indivisible units of 
arithmetic with the points in infinitely divisible geometrical 
magnitudes, this last argument must finally have impressed the 
urgent need for revision of their suppositions.” 


< For a full and lucid exposition of this last argument see H. D. P. Lee, 
Keno of Elea 83-102, 


SPACE 

377 Aristotle Phys. Δα, 210b22 (DK29A24) ὃ δὲ Ζήνων 
ἠπόρει, ὅτι “εἰ ἔστι τι ὁ τότος, ἔν τινι ἔσται᾽, λύειν οὐ χαλεπόν. 
378 Aristotle Phys. Δι, 209223 1) γὰρ Ζήνωνος ἀπορία τητεῖ 
τινα λόγον εἰ γὰρ πᾶν τὸ ὃν ἐν τότῳ, δῆλον ὅτι καὶ τοῦ τόπου 
τόπος ἔσται, καὶ τοῦτο εἰς ἄπειρον πρόεισιν. 


This apparently isolated argument calls for little comment, being 
cited chiefly because rcference will be made to it in the next 
chapter (p. 302). It is, however, worth noting that the premise ef 
πᾶν TO ὃν ἐν τόττῳ, “1 everything real is in space’, confirms the 
point made several times already (see especially pp. 188f. and 
246 ff.) that the Prcsocratics could imagine no form of existence 
other than spatial. 





377 K<eno’s problem—that ‘if Place is something, 1t must be in something’—is not 
difficult to solve. (‘Trans. Hardie) 


378 <eno’s difficulty demands an explanation: for if everything that exists has a place, 
place too will have a place, and so on ad infinitum. (Trans. Hardie) 


297 


CHAPTER XII 
MELISSUS OF SAMOS 


DATE AND LIFE 


379 Diogenes Laertius rx, 24 (DK 3041) Μέλισσος ᾿Ιθαγένους 
Σάμιος, οὗτος ἤκουσε Παρμενίδου... .. γέγονε δὲ καὶ πολιτικὸς ἀνὴρ 
καὶ ἀποδοχῆς παρὰ τοῖς πολίταις ἠξιωμένος " ὅθεν ναύαρχος αἱρεθεὶς 
ἔτι καὶ μᾶλλον ἐθαυμάσθη διὰ τὴν οἰκείαν ἀρετήν... φησὶ δ᾽ ᾿Απολλό- 
Sapos ἠκμακέναι αὐτὸν κατὰ τὴν τετάρτην καὶ ὀγδοηκοστὴν 
ὀλυμπιάδα. 

380 Plutarch δογιοίος 26 (DK30A3) πλεύσαντος γὰρ αὐτοῦ 
(sc. Pericles) Μέλισσος ὁ ᾿Ιθδαγένους, ἀνὴρ φιλόσοφος στρατηγῶν 
τότε τῆς Σάμου, καταφρονήσας τῆς ὀλιγότητος τῶν νεῶν ἢ τῆς 
ἀπειρίας τῶν στρατηγῶν, ἔπεισε τοὺς πολίτας ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖς 
᾿Αθηναίοις. καὶ γενομένης μάχης νικήσαντες of Σάμιοι καὶ πολλοὺς 
μὲν αὐτῶν ἄνδρας ἑλόντες πολλὰς δὲ ναῦς διαφθείραντες ἐχρῶντο τῇ 
θαλάσσῃ καὶ παρετίθεντο τῶν ἀναγκαίων πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον ὅσα 
μὴ πρότερον εἶχον. ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ Μελίσσου καὶ Περικλέα φησὶν 
αὐτὸν ᾿Αριστοτέλης: ἡττηθῆναι ναυμαχοῦντα πρότερον. 


I J.e. in the lost Πολιτεία Σαμίων. 


These two passages tell us virtually all we know of the life of 
Melissus. ‘The battle in which he defeated the Athenian fleet was 
fought in 441/40 B.c., and it is probably for that reason that 
Apollodorus fixed his floruit at 444-441. Whether or not he was, 
as Diogenes tells us, a pupil of Parmenides, he certainly followed 





379 Melissus son of Ithagenes, a Samian. He was a pupil of Parmenides....He was 
a statesman, and was held in great honour by the citizens; and later, when he was elected 
admiral, he won even greater fame for his personal courage... .Apollodorus says that he 
flourished in the eighty-fourth Olympiad. 

380 For when Pericles had set sail, Melissus, son of Ithagenes, a philosopher who was 
then in command of Samos, was so contemptuous of the small number of the Athenian ships 
or of their commanders’ inexperience that he persuaded the Samians to attack. A battle 
took place which the Samians won. They took so many prisoners and destroyed so many ships 
that they had command of the sea, and they devoted to the prosecution of the war certain 
supplies which they did not till then possess. Pericles himself, according to Aristotle, had 
also been defeated by Melissus in an earlier naval battle. 


298 


MELISSUS 


him very closely. We shall see reason to suppose that he was also 
acquainted with contemporary Pythagoreanism. 

Melissus’ book is said by Simplicius (Phys. 70, 16, DK 3044), to 
whom we owe the preservation of the ten surviving fragments, to 
have been entitled Περὶ φύσεως ἢ περὶ τοῦ ὄντος, ‘About nature or 
reality’—a version of the title regularly given by later com- 
mentators to books by the Presocratics. Its date is impossible to 
determine; but if we are to trust Plato that Zeno wrote his treatise 
as a young man (see 362), then it is at least highly probable that 
Melissus’ book is considerably the later of the two. We shall find 
that there is internal evidence also to the same effect. 


REALITY IS INFINITE 


381 Fr. 2, Simplicius Physics 29, 22 and 109, 20 ὅτε τοίνυν οὐκ 
ἐγένετο, ἔστι Te Kal ἀεὶ ἦν Kal ἀεὶ ἔσται Kal ἀρχὴν οὐκ ἔχει οὐδὲ 
τελευτήν, ἀλλ᾽ ἄπειρόν ἐστιν. εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἐγένετο, ἀρχὴν ἂν εἶχεν 
(ἤρξατο γὰρ ἄν ποτε γινόμενον) καὶ τελευτήν (ἐτελεύτησε γὰρ ἄν 
ποτε γινόμενον)" ὅτε δὲ μήτε ἤρξατο μήτε ἐτελεύτησεν, ἀεί τε ἦν 
καὶ ἀεὶ ἔσται (Kal) οὐκ ἔχει ἀρχὴν οὐδὲ τελευτήν οὐ γὰρ ἀεὶ εἶναι 
ἀνυστόν, ὅ τι μὴ πᾶν ἔστι. 

482 Fr. 3, ibid. 109, 31 ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ ἔστιν ἀεί, οὕτω καὶ τὸ 
μέγεθος ἄπειρον ἀεὶ χρὴ εἶναι. 

3483 Fr. 4, διά. 110, 4 ἀρχήν τε καὶ τέλος ἔχον οὐδὲν οὔτε 
ἀίδιον οὔτε ἄπειρόν ἐστιν. 

284 «Fr. 5, bid. 110, 5 εἰ μὴ ἕν εἴη, περανεῖ πρὸς ἄλλο. 

385 Fr. 6, Simplicius de caelo 557, 16 εἰ γὰρ (ἄπειρον) εἴη, ἕν 
ein av’ ei yap δύο εἴη, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο ἄπειρα εἶναι, ἀλλ᾽ ἔχοι ἃ 
πείρατα πρὸς ἄλληλα. 





381: Since, then, it did not come into being, it is now, always was and always will be, 
without either beginning or end, but infinite. For if it had come into being, it would have a 
beginning (for it would at some time have begun coming into being) and an end ( for it 
would at some time have stopped coming into being); but since it neither began nor ended, 
it always was and always shall be, without either beginning or end; for it is not possible 
for anything to exist for ever unless it all exists. 

382 But just as it exists for ever, so too it must for ever be infinite in magnitude. 

383 Nothing that has a beginning and an end is either eternal or infinite. 

384 If it were not one, it would be bounded by something else. 

385 For if it were (infinite), it would be one; for if it were two, the two could not be 
infinite, but would be limited by one another. 


299 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Faithfully as he followed Parmenides in other respects, Melissus 
yet broke away from him, as these fragments amply show, on one 
very important point. Whcreas the One of Parmenides was finite 
and spherical (see 350 and 351), the One of Melissus is unequi- 
vocally declared, to the irritation of Aristotle,’ to be infinite in 
extent? as well as in time. For this remarkable change there seem 
to have been two main reasons, of which we will consider the 
simpler first. Melissus himself tells us, in 384 and 385, that if there 
were more than one Bcing, they would be bounded by one 
another. He argues for the unity of the One, in other words, from 
its infinity. But that his real object was rather to prove its infinity 
from its unity is obvious enough cven in these fragments, and is 
even more apparent from the following summary description of 
the Eleatics: 


386 Aristotle de gen. et corr. A8, 325a14. (DK30A8) ἕν καὶ 
ἀκίνητον τὸ πᾶν εἶναί φασι Kal ἄπειρον ἔνιοι" TO γὰρ πέρας περαίνειν 
ἂν πρὸς τὸ κενόν. 


Melissus is in fact countering the possible objection to the Sphere 
of Parmenides that, if it is indeed ‘limited on every side’, then 
something must surcly lie outside its limits, and that something 
can only be the void. 


t Aristotle had a profound but unjust contempt for Mclissus whom he 
dismisses with such words as φορτικός ‘crude’ (Phys. A3, 185a 10, DK 304 7) 
or μικρὸν ἀγροικότερος ‘a little too naive’ (Met. A5, 986b26, DK zbid.). 

2 This has lately been denied by G. Vlastos (Gnomon 25 (1953) 34), who, 
having argued on the strength of fr. 9 (391 below) that the One of 
Melissus is incorporeal, writes: ‘How then could Melissus affirm that 
Being is incorporeal while infinite in magnitude? Because, I suggest, the 
infinity in question is that of beginningless and endless duration, not that 
of unlimited spatial extension.’ I find it incredible that, if this was what 
Melissus wished to say, he should have included the words τὸ μέγεθος in 
382 or written οὔτε ἀίδιον οὔτε ἄπειρον in 383. The only answer to 
Vlastos’ question seems to me to be to suppose that Melissus still thought 
that the only kind of existence was existence in space; see below, pp. 303 f. 


His second motive for the change is also discernible in the 
fragments, this time in 381 and 383. The One must have neither 
beginning nor end. There has been a prolonged discussion con- 
cerning 381 as to whether it signifies a temporal or a spatial 





386 They say that the universe is one and motionless, and some add that it is infinite; for 
its limit would limit it against the void. 


300 


MELISSUS 


beginning and end; but since the next two fragments make it clear 
that Melissus denied both, the question 1s relatively unimportant. 
There can in any case be no doubt that Melissus is once again 
improving upon Parmenides’ description of his Sphere as ‘limited 
on every side’ and ‘equally poised from the centre in every direc- 
tion’. The objection that he is this time countering seems, there- 
fore, to be this: if, as Parmenides’ own language suggests, the One 
has a beginning, a middle and an end, then surely it is no longer 
one but three. 

There is some ground for the conjecture that these two possible 
objections to the One of Parmenides had actually been raised. 
Besides Plato’s reference in the Parmenides to ‘those who try to 
make fun of Parmenides’ One by showing its many absurd and 
contradictory consequences’ (see 362)—words which themselves 
suggest destructive arguments of exactly this type—thcre are two 
passages from Aristotle which point in the same direction: 


387 Aristotle Phys. Ag, 216b22 εἰσὶ δέ τινες of διὰ TOU μανοῦ 
καὶ πυκνοῦ οἴονται φανερὸν εἶναι ὅτι ἔστι κενόν. εἰ μὲν γὰρ μὴ ἔστι 
μανὸν καὶ πυκνόν, οὐδὲ συνιέναι καὶ πιλεῖσθαι οἷόν τε. εἰ δὲ τοῦτο 
μὴ εἴη, ἢ ὅλως κίνησις οὐκ ἔσται ἢ κυμανεῖ τὸ ὅλον, ὥσπερ ἔφη 
Ζοῦθος. 

388 Aristotle de caelo Αἰ, 268a10 καθάπερ γάρ φασι καὶ οἱ 
Πυραγόρειοι, τὸ πᾶν καὶ τὰ πάντα τοῖς τρισὶν ὥρισται" τελευτὴ 
γὰρ καὶ μέσον καὶ ἀρχὴ τὸν ἀριθμὸν ἔχει τὸν τοῦ παντός, ταῦτα 
δὲ τὸν τῆς τριάδος. 


It is not, unfortunately, clear from 387 just how much Aristotle 
intends to ascribe to Xuthus; but even if it is only the fantastic 
view that when there is motion ‘the universe bulges’, it still seems 
likely enough that the motive underlying the suggestion was 
nothing but the desire to make fun of Parmenides’ Sphere. We are 
told by Simplicius, in his comment on this passage (683, 24, 
DK 33), that Xuthus was, as we should hope, a Pythagorean. It 





387 There are some who think that the existence of rarity and density shows that there is 
a void. If rarity and density do not exist, they say, neither can things contract and be 
compressed. But if this were not to take place, either there would be no movement at all, or 
the universe would bulge, as Xuthus said. (Trans. Hardie) 


388 For, as the Pythagoreans say, the world and all that is in it is determined by the 
number three, since beginning and middle and end give the number of the world, and the 
number they give ts the triad. (After Stocks) 


4801 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


may possibly have been in answer to Xuthus, or at any rate to the 
argument that outside Parmenides’ One must be the void, that 
Zeno, following his usual practice of reducing his opponents’ 
hypotheses to absurdity, included among his arguments one that 
was directed against the notion of τόπος, ‘space’ (see p. 297).! 
When, finally, we learn that the theory in 388 was held by, among 
others,? Ion of Chios, whose first tragedy is said in the Suda (s.v. 
Ἴων Χῖος, DK 3643) to have been produced in 452-449 B.c., and 
who, according to Harpocration (s.v. Ἴων, DK 36A1), was υἱὸς 
"OpBopévous, ἐπίκλησιν δὲ ZowGou, ‘son of Orthomenes, who was 
known as Xuthus’,3 we have perhaps enough evidence to justify a 
tentative conclusion. M*elissus’ solitary departure from the 
guidancc of Parmenides may well have been forced upon him by 
the criticisms of the Pythagoreans. 


1 Space and the void are very closely associated in Greek thought. 'The 
precise relation between the two is actually defined in 389 Aristotle Phys. 
Δι, 208b25 ἔτι οἱ TO κενὸν φάσκοντες εἶναι τόπον λέγουσιν“ TO yap 
κενὸν τόπος ἂν εἴη ἐστερημένος σώματος. lélsewhere, however, the two are 
often treated as entirely synonymous; e.g. 390 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 11, 2 
(DK 28423, about Parmenides) ἀίδιον εἶναι τὸ πᾶν... .καὶ ὅμοιον, οὐκ 
ἔχον δὲ τόπον ἐν ἑαυτῷ. 

2 The same view was evidently held also by the Pythagorean Occelus 
(DK 48, 8), who seems, however, so far as we can judge from our very 
unreliable information, to have belonged to a latcr generation of the 
school. 

3 It may well be true, as Kranz suggests in his note at DK1, 377, that the 
father of Ion was nicknamed Xuthus in allusion to the myth that provided 
Euripides with the plot for his tragedy. But that does not alter the fact 
that Xuthus is mentioned under that name by Aristotle himself. 


THE ONE IS INCORPOREAL 

391 Simplicius Phys. 109, 34 ὅτι γὰρ ἀσώματον εἶναι βούλεται 
TO ὄν, ἐδήλωσεν eitrav: (Fr. 9) εἰ μὲν ὃν [ὃν D, οὖν EF, Diels, DK] 
εἴη, δεῖ αὐτὸ ἕν εἶναι" ἕν δ᾽ ἐὸν δεῖ αὐτὸ σῶμα μὴ ἔχειν. εἰ δὲ ἔχοι 
πάχος, ἔχοι ἂν μόρια, καὶ οὐκέτι ἕν εἴη. 





389 Again, the theory that the void exists involves the existence of place: for one would 
define void as space bereft of body. (After Hardie) 


390 (He said that) the whole is eternal. . .and homogeneous, and has no space within it. 


391 For he made it clear that he means that what exists is incorporeal when he wrote: 
“If Being 1s, it must be one; and being one, it must have no body. If it were to have bulk, 
tt would have paris and be no longer one.’ 


302 


MELISSUS 


Simplicius, who was no fool and who evidently had the book of 
Melissus before him as he wrote, actually quotes this fragment in 
two pieces on two separate occasions (the other being Phys. 87, 6), 
with the object on each occasion of showing that the Eleatic One 
was incorporeal. Yet in spite of this fact, which alone would seem 
decisive enough, Burnet (EGP327), following the second thoughts 
of Zeller, regards the statement that the One of Melissus was 
incorporeal as ‘incredible’, and argues instead that the fragment 
must have been ‘directed against the Pythagorean assumption of 
ultimate units’. None of the arguments by which he supports his 
contention carry, however, the slightest weight, not even the 
alleged similarity between this fragment of Melissus and fragment 1 
of Zeno (365). For whereas there is no mention in any of Zeno’s 
fragments of the Eleatic but only of the Pythagorean (or at any 
rate the pluralists’) One, the exact reverse is true of Melissus. ‘This 
is IN no way surprising. It was Zeno’s characteristic method (see 
pp. 287f.) to base his essentially destructive arguments upon the 
suppositions of his opponents. Melissus by contrast was essentially 
constructive and only incidentally critical. Moreover—and this 
is a very important point—the constructive and destructive 
approaches are, as this νοῦν fragment reveals, by no means easy 
to reconcile. If, indeed, the argument of the fragment is inter- 
preted as an attack upon the Pythagorean unit-atoms, it succeeds 
in demolishing the Pythagorean ‘plurality of ones’ (πλῆθος 
ἑνάδων, cf. 367) only at the expense of the Eleatic One. ‘The same 
is, of course, true also of Zeno’s arguments against plurality; but 
since Zeno’s purpose was primarily to demolish the system of his 
opponents, it is open to doubt whether, even if he was aware of this 
fact, he would have allowed it to deter him. With Melissus, whose 
object was to vindicate the Eleatic One, the case is altogether 
different. If anything that possesses σῶμα and πάχος, ‘body’ and 
‘bulk’, must thereby possess also μόρια, ‘parts’, and so sacrifice 
its unity, then the only way to preserve the unity of the Eleatic 
One is obviously to deny it these attributes. This fact is so evident 
that Melissus, with his constructive intent and the consequent 
desire to anticipate objections, can hardly have failed to observe 
it. It has already been suggested (pp. 300 f.) that it was partly to 
avoid a form of this argument that Melissus explicitly stated that 
his One was infinite, without spatial beginning or end. The 
further suggestion seems to follow that, on this question of the 


393 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


corporeality of the One, Melissus marks another parallel advance 
from the position of Parmenides. Parmenides, though he described 
his One as indivisible and homogeneous, had yet conveyed the 
distinct impression, in so describing it, that it possessed parts. The 
Pythagoreans pounced upon this oversight and based upon it one 
of their ‘attempts to make fun of the One’ (362). Zeno in turn 
answered the Pythagorcans, using their own type of argument to 
refute them. Herc, as elsewhere, it seems to have been left to 
Melissus to adapt the positive aspect of Eleaticism in the light of 
the purely negative disputes of his immediate predccessors. The 
obvious, if not indeed the inevitable, adaptation would seem to be 
embodicd in this fragment. Another step has been taken towards 
the apprehension of the abstract; but it is still only a step in that 
direction, not the eventual arrival at the goal. It is admittedly 
difficult for us to imagine anything except empty space which is at 
once infinite in extent and yet has no ‘body’ or ‘bulk’; and even 
empty space can be imagined to have, what Melissus’ One did not 
have, ‘parts’. But Melissus’ own words allow no escape from the 
conclusion that that was the way his mind was working. If he had 
been capable of imagining something that was not only incorporeal 
but non-spatial as well, the outcome of his thought would have 
been different; but the only safe deduction to be drawn from the 
surviving fragments of his book, which must always remain the 
best guide to his meaning,’ is that he was not capable. And since 
neither of his approximate contemporaries, Empedocles and 
Anaxagoras, was any more successful in this respect than he was, 
that conclusion is perhaps less startling than it might otherwise be. 

1 The pseudo-Aristotelian treatise de Melisso Xenophane Gorgia (MXG), 

written about the time of Christ, tells us virtually nothing about Melissus’ 


doctrine that we do not learn direct from the fragments. Its author’s 
purpose, moreover, is so critical that its reliability is doubtful. 


MELISSUS FORESHADOWS ATOMISM 

392 Fr. 8, Simplicius de caelo 558, 21 μέγιστον μὲν οὖν σημεῖον 
οὗτος ὁ λόγος, ὅτι ἕν μόνον ἐστιν᾽ ἀτὰρ Kal τάδε σημεῖα. εἰ γὰρ 
ἦν πολλά, τοιαῦτα χρὴ αὐτὰ εἶναι οἷόν περ ἐγώ φημι τὸ ἕν εἶναι. 
εἰ γὰρ ἔστι γῆ καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ ἀὴρ καὶ πῦρ καὶ σίδηρος καὶ χρυσός, 





392 This argument, then, is the greatest proof that it ts one alone; but the following are 
proofs of it also. If there were a plurality, things would have to be of the same kind as I 
say that the one ts. For if there is earth and water, and air and fire, and iron and gold, and 


304 


MELISSUS 


Kal TO μὲν φῶον TO δὲ τεθνηκός, Kal μέλαν Kal λευκὸν Kal τὰ ἄλλα 
ὅσα φασὶν οἱ ἄνθρωποι εἶναι ἀληθῆ, εἰ δὴ ταῦτα ἔστι, καὶ ἡμεῖς 
ὀρθῶς ὁρῶμεν καὶ ἀκούομεν, εἶναι χρὴ ἕκαστον τοιοῦτον οἷόν περ τὸ 
πρῶτον ἔδοξεν ἡμῖν, καὶ μὴ μεταπίττειν μηδὲ γίνεσθαι ἑτεροῖον, 
ἀλλὰ ἀεὶ εἶναι ἕκαστον οἷόν πέρ ἐστιν. νῦν δέ φαμεν ὀρθῶς ὁρᾶν καὶ 
ἀκούειν καὶ συνιέναι" δοκεῖ δὲ ἡμῖν τό τε θερμὸν ψυχρὸν γίνεσθαι καὶ 
τὸ ψυχρὸν θερμὸν καὶ τὸ σκληρὸν μαλθακὸν καὶ τὸ μαλθακὸν 
σκληρὸν καὶ τὸ φτῶον ἀποθνήσκειν καὶ ἐκ μὴ φτῶὥντος γίνεσθαι, καὶ 
ταῦτα πάντα ἑτεροιοῦσθαι, καὶ ὅ τι ἦν τε καὶ ὃ νῦν οὐδὲν ὁμοῖον 
εἶναι, ἀλλ᾽ ὅ τε σίδηρος σκληρὸς ἐὼν τῷ δακτύλῳ κατατρίβεσθαι 
ὁμουρέων [Bergk Diels; ὁμοῦ ῥέων mss.], καὶ χρυσὸς καὶ λίθος καὶ 
ἄλλο ὅ τι ἰσχυρὸν δοκεῖ εἶναι πτᾶν, ἐξ ὕδατός τε γῆ καὶ λίθος γίνεσθαι" 
ὥστε συμβαίνει μήτε ὁρᾶν μήτε τὰ ὄντα γινώσκειν. οὐ τοίνυν ταῦτα 
ἀλλήλοις ὁμολογεῖ. φαμένοις γὰρ εἶναι πολλὰ καὶ ἀίδια καὶ εἴδη 
τε καὶ ἰσχὺν ἔχοντα, πάντα ἑτεροιοῦσθαι ἡμῖν δοκεῖ καὶ μεταπίτττειν 
ἐκ τοῦ ἑκάστοτε ὁρωμένου. δῆλον τοίνυν, ὅτι οὐκ ὀρθῶς ἑωρῶμεν 
οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνα πολλὰ ὀρθῶς δοκεῖ εἶναι: οὐ γὰρ ἂν μετέπιπτεν, εἰ 
ἀληθῆ ἦν ἀλλ᾽ ἦν οἷόν περ ἐδόκει ἕκαστον τοιοῦτον. τοῦ γὰρ 
ἐόντος ἀληθινοῦ κρεῖσσον οὐδέν. ἢν δὲ μεταπέσῃ, τὸ μὲν ἐὸν 
ἀπώλετο, τὸ δὲ οὐκ ἐὸν γέγονεν. οὕτως οὖν, εἰ πολλὰ εἴη, τοιαῦτα 
χρὴ εἶναι οἷόν περ τὸ ἕν. 


This skilful attack upon the validity of the senses may well be, 
as Burnet suggests (HGP328), directed cspecially against Anaxa- 
goras; in which case, of course, it too, as well as the possible 








uf one thing is living and another dead, and if things are black and white and all that men 
say they really are—if that is so, and if we see and hear aright, each one of these must be 
such as we first decided, and they cannot be changed or altered, but each must be always just 
as it is. But, as it is, we say that we see and hear and understand aright, and yet we 
believe that what is warm becomes cold, and what is cold warm; that what is hard turns soft, 
and what is soft hard; that what is living dies, and that things are born from what lives not; 
and that all those things are changed, and that what they were and what they are now are 
in no way alike. We think that iron, which ts hard, is rubbed away by contact with the 
finger; and so with gold and stone and everything which we fancy to be strong, and that 
earth and stone are made out of water; so that it turns out that we neither see nor know 
realities. Now these things do not agree with one another. We said that there were many 
things that were eternal and had forms and strength of their own, and yet we fancy that 
they all suffer alteration, and that they change from what we see each time. It is clear, then, 
that we did not see aright after all, nor are we right in believing that all these things are 
many. They would not change if they were real, but each thing would be just what we 
believed it to be; for nothing is stronger than true reality. But if it has changed, what 1s has 
passed away and what is not has come into being. So then, if there were a plurality, things 
would have to be of just the same nature as the one. (After Burnet) 


20 305 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


rejoinder to Ion of Chios in 381 and 383, is evidence for dating the 
work of Melissus relatively late. Its prime importance lies, how- 
ever, at the beginning and the end. There can be little question, as 
we shall see when we come to Leucippus (pp. 4041), that Melissus’ 
reiterated assertion, ‘if there were a plurality, each one of the 
many would have to be just such as I say the One is’—an assertion 
that was intendcd, of course, as a reductio ad absurdum of plurality— 
provided the atomists with the basis of their entire system. Greek 
atomism is precisely a plurality in which each one of the many is, 
in almost every essential respect, just such as Melissus said that 
the One was. 


306 


CHAPTER XIII 


PHILOLAUS OF CROTON AND 
EURYTUS OF CROTON 


DATE 


393 Plato Phaedo 618 (Cebes speaking) καὶ Φιλολάου ἤκονσα, 
ὅτε παρ᾽ ἡμῖν διῃτᾶτο. 

394 Diogenes Laertius ΙΧ, 38 φησὶ δὲ καὶ ᾿Απολλόδωρος ὁ 
Κυτικηνὸς Φιλολάῳ αὐτὸν (sc. Democritus) συγγεγονέναι. 

395 Diogenes Laertius vin, 46 τελευταῖοι γὰρ ἐγένοντο τῶν 
Πυθαγορείων, ots καὶ ᾿Αριστόξενος εἶδε, Ζενόφιλός τε ὁ Χαλκιδεὺς 
ἀπὸ Θράκης καὶ Φάντων ὁ Φλιάσιος καὶ ᾿Εχεκράτης καὶ Διοκλῆς 
καὶ Πολύμναστος Φλιάσιοι καὶ αὐτοί. ἦσαν δὲ ἀκροαταὶ Φιλολάον 
καὶ Εὐρύτου τῶν Ταραντίνων. 

These three passages, being consistent one with another, provide 
the best evidence available for dating Philolaus.? If we accept the 
further statement of Apollodorus (ap. Diog. L. 1x, 41, §49) that 
Democritus was born about 460~457 B.c., then we can take it 
that Philolaus too was born somewhere around the middle of 
the fifth century, and was about fifty years of age when he was 
lecturing in Thebes. His name is repeatedly linked, as it is in 395, 
with that of Eurytus. In dealing with these two at this point we 
are, therefore, deserting a strictly chronological order; there is no 
question that they were both considerably later than either 
Empedocles or Anaxagoras. There is, however, one fact of 
considerable importance about each which it will be more con- 
venient to discuss before we leave the subject of the interaction 
between Pythagoreans and Eleatics and proceed to the post- 
Parmenidean pluralists. 


1 The statement of Iamblichus (V.P. 104) that Philolaus and Eurytus 
were pupils of Pythagoras in his old age is obviously absurd. Both are 
usually associated with Croton, but sometimes with Tarentum (as in 395) or 
Metapontium. 





393 J heard Philolaus lecture when he lived in our town [1.6. ‘Thebes]. 
394 Abollodorus of Cyzicus, too, says that Democritus and Philolaus were contemporaries. 


395 For the last of the Pythagoreans, whom Aristoxenus saw, were Xenophilus the 
Chalcidian from Thrace, and Phanton, Echecrates, Diocles and Polymnastos, all of 
Phleious. They were pupils of Philolaus and Eurytus, the Tarentines. 


307 20-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(1) PHILOLAUS 

Story of Plato’s plagiarism 

396 Diogencs Laertius vir, 84 (DK44A1) Φιλόλαος Kpo- 
τωνιάτης Πυθαγορικός. παρὰ τούτου Πλάτων ὠνήσασθαι τὰ 
βιβλία τὰ Πυθαγορικὰ Δίωνι γράφει... . γέγραφε δὲ βιβλίον ἕν. (ὅ 
φησιν Ἕρμιππος λέγειν τινὰ τῶν συγγραφέων Πλάτωνα τὸν 
φιλόσοφον παραγενόμενον εἷς Σικελίαν πρὸς Διονύσιον ὠνήσασθαι 
παρὰ τῶν συγγενῶν τοῦ Φιλολάου ἀργυρίου ᾿Αλεξανδρινῶν μνῶν 
τετταράκοντα καὶ ἐντεῦθεν μεταγεγραφέναι τὸν Τίμαιον. ἕτεροι δὲ 
λέγουσι τὸν Πλάτωνα λαβεῖν αὐτά, παρὰ Διονυσίου τταραιτησάμενον 
ἐκ τῆς φυλακῆς νεανίσκον ἀπηγμένον τῶν τοῦ Φιλολάου μαθητῶν.) 


This curious story, of which this passage shows that there were 
several variant versions (cf. 266), scems likcly to have originated 
with Aristoxenus. It was certainly Aristoxenus who, in his desire 
to detract from Plato’s originality, asserted that the Republic was 
largcly based on a work of Protagoras; and this is clearly a story of 
the same malicious order. Its historical importance is of course 
negligible, but it serves to raise the important question of the 
authenticity of the fragments still preserved in Philolaus’ name. 


The fragments of ‘ Philolaus’ 


More than twenty fragments are attributed to Philolaus, some 
of considerable length. If they are genuine, they undoubtedly 
constitute much the best evidence that we posscss concerning the 
Pythagoreanism of the fifth century. Unfortunately, opinion 
seems still to be divided on the question of their authenticity. 
Though much has been written both for and against them, all the 
more important arguments are conveniently to be found in the 
works of three scholars only. Ingram Bywater (7. Philol. 1, 21-53), 
who played a large part in originally subjecting the fragments to 
suspicion, and Erich Frank (Plato und die sogenannten Pythagoreer 
263-335) between them set out the whole case against the frag- 





396 Philolaus of Croton, a Pythagorean. It was from him that Plato, in a letter, told 
Dion to buy the Pythagorean books....He wrote one book. (Hermippus says that 
according to one writer the philosopher Plato went to Sicily, to the court of Dionysius, 
bought this book from Philolaus’ relatives for 40 Alexandrian(!) minae, and from it copied 
out the Timaeus. Others say that Plato acquired the books by securing from Dionysius the 
release from prison of a young man who had been one of Philolaus’ pupils.) 


308 


PHILOLAUS AND EURYTUS 


ments, while R. Mondolfo (Zeller-Mondolfo 1, 2, 367-82) is the 
chief advocate for the defence. On the whole the argument must 
be pronounced so far to have gone in favour of the prosecution: 
Mondolfo, even if he has succeeded in producing an explanation 
or a precedent for every single suspicious feature, has hardly 
succeeded in explaining away what might be thought the strongest 
of all arguments against the fragments, the unduly large number 
of such suspicious or unusual features. It is impossible in the 
present context to recapitulate all the detailed arguments already 
adduced by either party. One general argument must suffice. 

A careful reading of the fragments reveals in them a notable 
resemblance to Aristotle’s extant accounts of Pythagoreanism. 
The most striking example is probably that afforded by the 
following comparison: 


397 Fr. 5, Stobaeus Anth. 1, 21, 7¢ ὅ ya μὰν ἀριθμὸς ἔχει δύο 
μὲν ἴδια εἴδη, περισσὸν Kal ἄρτιον, τρίτον δὲ dm’ ἀμφοτέρων 
μειχθέντων ἀρτιοπέριττον ᾿ ἑκατέρω δὲ τῶ εἴδεος πολλαὶ popgal, ἃς 
ἕκαστον αὐταυτὸ σημαίνει. 


398 Aristotle Met. Α 5, 986a17 (cf. 289) τοῦ δ᾽ ἀριθμοῦ στοιχεῖα 
τό τε ἄρτιον καὶ τὸ περιττόν... τὸ δ᾽ ἕν ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων εἶναι τούτων 
(καὶ γὰρ ἄρτιον εἶναι καὶ περιττόν)... .ἕτεροι δὲ τῶν αὐτῶν τούτων 
τὰς ἀρχὰς δέκα λέγουσιν εἶναι τὰς κατὰ συστοιχίαν λεγομένας: 
πέρας καὶ ἄπειρον 
περιττὸν καὶ ἄρτιον... .. 

: The fact that the fragments are in Doric has been used as an argument 

both for and against them. 
There are several other such resemblances,! sufficient to establish 
at least a strong probability that Aristotle’s account of Pythagor- 
eanism and that given by the author of the fragments are inter- 
dependent. If, therefore, it can be shown that the author of the 
fragments was dependent upon Aristotle rather than vice versa, 
then the case against the fragments is virtually conclusive. 





397 Number has two special forms, odd and even, and a third derived from the mixture 
of these two, even-odd. Each form has many manifestations, which every individual thing 
reveals in its own nature. 

398 The elements of number (they say) are the even and the odd...the 1 proceeds from 
both of these ( for it is both even and odd).... Other members of this same school say 
there are ten principles, which they arrange in two columns of cognates—limit and unlimited, 
odd and even.... 


399 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


1 Compare especially fr. 10 with Ar. de an. A4, 407631; also fr. 1 with 
Met. A5, 987a13-19 (DK 5888); fr. 2 with de caelo A7, 274a30-3 and 
Phys. T4, 203a10-15 (DK 58828); and fr. 7 with Met. Ng, 1og1a15 
(DK 58326) and de caelo B13, 293a21 (DK 58837). 


There are three considerations that point firmly in that 
direction: 

(1) It is to be noted that Aristotle mentions Philolaus by name 
only once in his extant writings (at Eth. Eud. B8, 1225433, 
DK 448316), and he there tells us nothing of the slightest import- 
ance. ‘Chat, if Aristotle actually derived much of his information 
about Pythagorean doctrine from Philolaus’ book, is an almost 
inconceivable state of affairs. 

(2) One of the minor resemblances between the two authors’ 
phraseology is of a very suspicious nature. In the middle of 
fragment 6 occurs the following sentence: 


399 Fr. 6, Stobaeus Anth.1,21,7d .. .ἐπεὶ δὲ tal ἀρχαὶ Uap xov 
οὐχ ὁμοῖαι οὐδ᾽ ὁμόφυλοι ἔσσαι, ἤδη ἀδύνατον ἧς κα αὐτοῖς 
κοσμηθῆναι, εἰ μὴ ἁρμονία ἐπεγένετο ᾧτινιῶν ἅδε τρόπῳ ἐγένετο. 


It is surprising enough in itself to find the author of the fragments 
expressing, in the last four words, perplexity about what seems 
to have been the most important constituent in his whole cosmo- 
logy. It becomes more surprising still when we find Aristotle, 
In 313, voicing an almost identical doubt. For even if Aristotle is 
here faithfully reproducing an obscurity or omission in the early 
Pythagorean cosmogony, it would be difficult to maintain that 
once that vital omission had been consciously acknowledged, as 
it evidently was by the author of these fragments, it would have 
been left unrepaired. 

(3) If, finally, we look at fragments 3, 4, 6 and especially 11, we 
find that they are all concerned with a theory of knowledge. It 
will suffice to quote one only: 


400 Fr. 4, Stobaeus Anth. 1, 21, 75 καὶ πάντα ya μὰν τὰ 
γιγνωσκόμενα ἀριθμὸν ἔχοντι: ov yap οἷόν τε οὐδὲν οὔτε νοηθῆμεν 
οὔτε γνωσθῆμεν ἄνευ τούτον. 





399 ...But since the first principles were not by nature alike or akin, it would be 
impossible for them ever to have been arranged, had not harmony supervened, in whatever 
way it came into being. 

400 And all things that can be known contain number; without this nothing could be 
thought or known. 


310 


PHILOLAUS AND EURYTUS 


This theory is in itself regarded by both Bywater and Frank— 
though their contention is disputed by Mondolfo—as a palpable 
anachronism. ‘We are required’, wrote Bywater (loc. cit. p. 35), 
‘to believe it to have been propounded in a pre-Socratic school of 
thought, and at a time when the critical enquiry “‘ How is know- 
ledge possible?”’ had barely been started, much less settled. But 
after Plato’s time the unknowableness of matter without form 
(ὕλη ἄγνωστος καθ᾽ αὑτήν, says Aristotle) became with various 
modifications a received formula wherever his influence extended.’ 
It is, however, only when this argument is combined with that 
other of the resemblance between Aristotle and the author of the 
fragments that it acquires its full force. For in Aristotle’s accounts 
of Pythagoreanism, though there is abundant evidence of the 
cosmological significance of numbers, there is nowhere the faintest 
suggestion that among their other functions they are the only 
cause of knowledge. This once again, secing that Aristotle often 
discusses Pythagoreanism for the express purpose of enquiring 
what early traces he can find of his own doctrines, seems an 
almost inconceivable omission. Moreover he consistently repre- 
sents the Pythagorcans as concerned only with physical pheno- 
mena, with never a mention of such an epistemology as that of the 
fragments. Finally, the argument that the existence of knowledge 
implics the existence of stable realities is always represented by 
Aristotle (e.g. at Met. Ag, ggobi1) as pcculiarly Platonic, 
resulting from the blending of Pythagoreanism with Heracliteanism 
(cf. 22:14. A6, 987a29); yet it may fairly be claimed that fragments 
4, 5 and especially 6 reveal a familiarity with that argument. 
Irrespective, therefore, of Bywater’s contention that the epistemo- 
logy of the fragments is anachronistic (which, even if not by itself 
conclusive, can hardly be dismissed as entirely groundless), it 
scems virtually certain, from Aristotle’s complete silence on the 
subject, that that epistemology was not in fact part of the pre- 
Platonic Pythagoreanism. 

For these and other reasons the fragments attributed to Philolaus 
can be dismissed, with regret but little hesitation, as part of a 
post-Aristotelian forgery, based, not without skill, on Aristotle’s 
own accounts of the Pythagorean system. 


911 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Other evidence concerning Philolaus 


Whereas there is abundant information concerning Philolaus in 
the works of several late writers, there is scarcely so much as a 
mention of him in any early and reliable author. Plato and 
Aristotle each mention him once only, in the passages alrcady 
cited (see 393 and p. 310), and from neither of these passages do 
we learn anything of importance about his doctrine. Otherwise 
there are only two sources of information that are at all reliable: 
namely, first, a quotation in the Theologumena Arithmeticae (p. 82, 
10 de Falco; DK 44413) from a lost work by Speusippus On 
Pythagorean Numbers, which was largely based, we are told, on the 
writings of Philolaus; and second, a passage from Mcno’s Jatrica in 
the so-called Anonymus Londinensis. The former tells us something 
of the properties of the Decad, and so suggests that in regard to 
numbers Philolaus was faithful to the Pythagorean tradition. The 
latter, which describes the fundamental principles of his medical 
and physiological theories, is so interesting that a considerable part 
of it is worth quoting. 


401 Menoap. Anon. Londinensem xvin, 8 (DK 44427) Φιλόλαος 
δὲ Κροτωνιάτης συνεστάναι φησὶν τὰ ἡμέτερα σώματα ἐκ θερμοῦ. 
ἀμέτοχα γὰρ αὐτὰ εἶναι ψυχροῦ, ὑπομιμνήσκων ἀπό τινῶν 
τοιούτων τὸ σπέρμα εἶναι θερμόν, κατασκευαστικὸν δὲ τοῦτο τοῦ 
φῴου: καὶ ὁ τόπος δέ, εἰς ὃν ἡ καταβολή (μήτρα δὲ αὕτη), ἐστὶν 
θερμοτέρα καὶ ἐοικυῖα ἐκείνῳ τὸ δὲ ἐοικός τινι ταὐτὸ δύναται ᾧ 
ἔοικεν" ἐπεὶ δὲ TO κατασκενάφον ἀμέτοχόν ἐστιν ψυχροῦ, καὶ ὁ 
τόπος δέ, ἐν ᾧ ἡ καταβολή, ἀμέτοχός ἐστιν ψυχροῦ, δῆλον ὅτι καὶ 
τὸ κατασκευαφτόμενον οῷον τοιοῦτον γίνεται. εἰς δὲ τούτου τὴν 
κατασκευὴν ὑπομνήσει προσχρῆται τοιαύτῃ μετὰ γὰρ τὴν ἔκτεξιν 
εὐθέως τὸ τῷον ἐπισπᾶται τὸ ἐκτὸς πνεῦμα ψυχρὸν ὄν᾽ εἶτα πάλιν 
καθαπερεὶ χρέος ἐκπέμτει αὐτό. διὰ τοῦτο δὴ καὶ ὄρεξις τοῦ ἐκτὸς 





401 Philolaus of Croton holds that our bodies are composed of the hot; for they have no 
share in the cold, as he reasons from considerations such as the following: the sperm is warm, 
and it is the sperm that produces the living thing; and the place in which it ts deposited 
(1.6. the womb) is, like it, warm; and what is like something has the same power as that 
which it resembles. Since, then, the productive factor has no share in the cold, and also the 
place in which it is deposited has no share in the cold, clearly the living thing produced will 
also be of the same nature. With regard to its production, he makes use of the following 
reasoning: immediately after its birth the living thing draws in the breath outside, which is 
cold; and then, as if of necessity, it expels it again. This desire for the breath outside arises 


312 


PHILOLAUS AND EURYTUS 


πνεύματος, ἵνα τῇ ἐπεισάκτῳ τοῦ πνεύματος ὁλκῇ θερμότερα 
ὑπάρχοντα τὰ ἡμέτερα σώματα πρὸς αὐτοῦ καταψύχηται. 


Then follow a number of detailed doctrines which, in the present 
context, are of importance only as showing that Philolaus had 
something more than a merely conventional interest in medical 
and physiological matters. 

The significance of the passage quoted is that it shows a 
remarkable similarity, both in the general picture it draws and 
also, in the last three sentences, in vocabulary, to the passages 
quoted in chapter 1x which describe the beginning of the Pytha- 
gorean cosmogony, 312, 315, and 316. Just as the sperm, which is 
warm, is deposited in the womb, so also, in cosmogony, the first 
unit, which represents the principle of Limit, issomehow implanted 
in the midst of the surrounding Unlimited; and just as the child, 
immediately after birth, inhales the breath outside, so also the first 
unit, immediately after it is generated, proceeds to draw in the 
void from the surrounding Unlimited. There are of course dis- 
crepancies between the cosmogonical and the biological processes: 
whereas, for instance, Philolaus insists that the womb itself, like 
the sperm deposited in it, is warm, the Unlimited in which the 
first unit is implanted represents darkness, while Limit, and the 
first unit likewise, stand for light. But the general similarity 
between the two pictures is perhaps sufficient to suggest that 
Philolaus is at this point maintaining an analogy between the 
macrocosm and the microcosm; and in that case, whichever of the 
two was originally the model for the other, his embryological 
theories may perhaps provide some support for a particularly 
conjectural stage in the reconstruction of the Pythagorean cosmo- 
logy in chapter Ix. 


(2) EURYTUS AND HIS PEBBLES 


Slight as is our reliable information about Philolaus, about his 
associate Eurytus we know even less. We have, however, one 
solitary piece of information about him which is at once unusually 
well attested and, despite its superficial triviality, probably of 
considerable importance. 





in order that, as the result of the inhalation of the breath, our bodies, which are by nature 
too warm, may be cooled by it. 


313 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


402 Aristotle Met. N5, 1092b8 οὐθὲν δὲ διώρισται οὐδὲ Stro- 
τέρως of ἀριθμοὶ αἴτιοι τῶν οὐσιῶν Kal τοῦ εἶναι, πτότερον ὡς ὅροι, 
οἷον αἱ στιγμαὶ τῶν μεγεθῶν, καὶ ὡς Εὔρυτος ἔταττε τίς ἀριθμὸς τίνος, 
οἷον ὁδὶ μὲν ἀνθρώπου ὁδὲ δὲ itrtrou, ὥσπερ οἱ τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς ἄγοντες εἰς 
τὰ σχήματα τρίγωνον καὶ τετράγωνον, οὕτως ἀφομοιῶν ταῖς ψήφοις 
τὰς μορφὰς τῶν φυτῶν, ἢ ὅτι [ὁ] λόγος ἡ συμφωνία ἀριθμῶν..... 
403 Alexander Met. 827, 9, commenting on 402 κείσθω λόγον 
χάριν ὅρος τοῦ ἀνθρώπου ὁ GV ἀριθμός, ὁ δὲ TE τοῦ φυτοῦ: τοῦτο 
θεὶς ἐλάμβανε ψηφῖδας διακοσίας πεντήκοντα τὰς μὲν πρασίνας τὰς 
δὲ μελαίνας ἄλλας (δὲ) ἐρυθρὰς καὶ ὅλως παντοδαποῖς χρώμασι 
κεχρωσμένας. εἶτα περιχρίων τὸν τοῖχον ἀσβέστῳ καὶ σκιαγραφῶν 
ἄνθρωπον καὶ φυτὸν οὕτως ἐπήγνυ τάσδε μὲν τὰς ψηφῖδας ἐν τῇ 
τοῦ προσώπου σκιαγραφίᾳ, τὰς δὲ ἐν τῇ τῶν χειρῶν, ἄλλας δὲ ἐν 
ἄλλοις, καὶ ἀπετέλει τὴν τοῦ μιμουμένου ἀνθρώπου διὰ ψηφίδων 
ἰσαρίθμων ταῖς μονάσιν, ἃς ὁρίτειν ἔφασκε τὸν ἄνθρωπον. 

404 Theophrastus Met. 11, 6a19 (p. 12 Ross-Fobes; DK 45, 2) 
τοῦτο yap (sc. μὴ μέχρι TOU προελθόντα παύεσθαι) τελέου καὶ 
φρονοῦντος, ὅπερ ᾿Αρχύτας ποτ᾽ ἔφη ποιεῖν Εὔρυτον διατιθέντα 
τινὰς ψήφους: λέγειν γὰρ ὡς ὅδε μὲν ἀνθρώπου ὁ ἀριθμός, ὅδε δ᾽ 
ἵππου, ὅδε δ᾽ ἄλλου τινὸς τυγχάνει. 


The statement in 404 that the information concerning this 
curious practice of Eurytus comes from Archytas is a strong 
indication of its accuracy: no more trustworthy witness could be 
found on this generation of Pythagoreans. ‘The only question, there- 
fore, is what Eurytus was attempting to prove with his pebbles. 





402 Once more, it has in no sense been determined in which way numbers are the causes 
of substances and of being—whether (1) as limits (as points are of spatial magnitudes) : 
this is how Eurytus decided what was the number of what (e.g. of man, or of horse), viz. 
by imitating the figures of living things with pebbles, as some people bring numbers into 
the forms of triangle and square; or (2) is it because harmony is a ratio of numbers. ..? 
(Trans. Ross) 


403 For the sake of argument let the definition of man be the number 250 and that of 
plant 360. Having settled that, he used to take 250 pebbles, some green, some black, others 
red and, in short, of a variety of colours. Then he would smear the wall with unslaked lime 
and make a shaded drawing of a man or a plant; some pebbles he fixed in the drawing of 
the face, others in the hands, and others elsewhere, until he had completed the drawing of 
a man in the number of pebbles equal to the number of units which he claimed to define man. 
404 For this (sc. not stopping half-way) ἐδ the mark of the really sensible man; just as, 
for instance, Archytas once said that Eurytus used to do when he distributed his pebbles; 
for he apparently used to claim that such and such was the number of man, such and such 
that of horse, and such and such that of anything else. 


314 


PHILOLAUS AND EURYTUS 


It is usually assumed that, retaining the early Pythagoreans’ 
confusion between units and atoms, he claimed, by drawing these 
pictures with pebbles, to determine the number of unit-atoms that 
constituted the objects, such as man and horse, which he repre- 
sented. But for a variety of reasons that seems a very improbable 
explanation of his procedure. Eurytus, being one of the foremost 
Pythagoreans of his generation, is surely unlikely to have alto- 
gether ignored Zeno’s devastating exposure of the earlier Pytha- 
goreans confusion. Again, it scems scarcely credible that he 
should have believed in unit-atoms of such a magnitude that their 
number in such an object as man or horse could be so easily 
determined, especially by means of a drawing in only two dimen- 
sions. And finally, as we learn from 403, he had in any case 
already decided upon the appropriate number before he began to 
delincate the object in question. There is every reason to suppose 
that his purpose was somewhat [055 ingenuous than this explanation 
suggests. 

A more plausible explanation would seem to be as follows. 
Eurytus might well have held that it was possible with his pebbles 
so to delineate the external form of a man or a horse that the 
resulting figure could represent nothing but a man or a horse. 
That is to say, he would mark off the surfaces that were pcculiarly 
those of a man or a horse, and the points that bounded those 
surfaces, and then, by counting the number of points needed to 
represent a man so that it could be nothing but a man, consider 
that he had corroborated the equation of man with a particular 
number. This is exactly the method that 403 suggests. He started, 
according to that account of his procedure, with a oxiaypagpia— 
that is to say, probably (though the word is occasionally used to 
mean only an outline drawing), a drawing shaded to give the 
illusion of solidity. He was probably in fact thinking in three 
dimensions, not two only. The boundary points of a three- 
dimensional object could hardly be represented by a three- 
dimensional arrangement of pebbles, simply because of the 
mechanical difficulties involved ; but by means of ashaded drawing 
they could be represented by an arrangement of pebbles on a two- 
dimensional surface. Further, if the pebbles used were of different 
colours, as 403 again tells us that they were, the arrangement of 
pebbles would appear no longer a merely arbitrary scattering but 
an intelligible representation. 


315 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


In strong support of this suggestion is the reason for which 
Aristotle tells us in 402 that Eurytus developed this practice. The 
doctrine that lies behind the words οἷον αἱ στιγμαὶ τῶν μεγεθῶν, 
‘as points define magnitudes’, is referred to in several other 
passages of Aristotle, and even if not explicitly, at least by a process 
of elimination, attributed to the Pythagoreans. One such passage 
has already been quotcd, 320; this time we will select others: 


405 Aristotle Met. Z2, 1028b15 (DK 58823) δοκεῖ δέ τισι τὰ 
TOU σώματος πέρατα, οἷον ἐπιφάνεια Kal γραμμὴ Kal στιγμὴ καὶ 
μονάς, εἶναι οὐσίαι, καὶ μᾶλλον ἢ τὸ σῶμα καὶ τὸ στερεόν. 

406 Aristotle Met. Z11, 1036b8 ἀποροῦσί τινες ἤδη καὶ ἐπὶ 
τοῦ κύκλου καὶ τοῦ τριγώνου, ὡς οὐ προσῆκον γραμμαῖς ὁρίφεσθαι 
καὶ τῷ συνεχεῖ, ἀλλὰ πάντα ταῦτα ὁμοίως λέγεσθαι ὡσανεὶ σάρκες 
ἢ ὀστᾶ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου καὶ χαλκὸς καὶ λίθος τοῦ ἀνδριάντος. καὶ 
ἀνάγουσι πάντα eis τοὺς ἀριθμούς, καὶ γραμμῆς τὸν λόγον τὸν τῶν 
δύο εἶναί φασιν. 


If, as is generally supposed, Alexander is right in telling us that 
the anonymous thinkers in 406 were Pythagoreans, then it would 
appear that, besides the carlier doctrine that the line equals 2 
because two extended points placed side by side constitute a line, 
there was also another and subtler Pythagorcan view by which a 
line was a stretch of continuous magnitude bounded by two points. 
It seems likely that this is a post-Zenonian revision of the traditional 
view, in which case it may reasonably be ascribed to the generation 
of Philolaus and Eurytus. And in that case again the procedure 
of Eurytus begins to look less absurd. Just as a tetrahedron, for 
instance, could be represented by the number 4, gua the number 
of points required to bound its surfaces, so also, Eurytus may well 
have thought, could a physical body such as man or horse be 
represented by however many pebbles were found necessary to 
bound the visible and tangible surfaces peculiar to that particular 
body. Expressed in its most general terms, in fact, the ovoia or 
essence of an object would be held, as in 405, to consist in its 





405 Some think the limits of body, 1.6. surface, line, point and unit, are substances, and 
more so than body or the solid. (Trans. Ross) 

406 Some are in doubt even in the case of the circle and the triangle, thinking that it is 
not right to define these by lines and by continuous space, but that all these are to the circle 
or the triangle as flesh or bones are to man, and bronze or stone to the statue; and they reduce 
all things to numbers, and they say the formula of ‘line’ is that of ‘two’. (Trans. Ross) 


316 


PHILOLAUS AND EURYTUS 


surfaces, or more precisely, since a surface is derived from points, 
in the points that bounded those surfaces. Physical matter and 
geometrical magnitude alike are bounded by surfaces, lines and 
points; and the number of points required to bound any object, 
whether mathematical figure or physical body, is the number with 
which that object is equated. Finally, as the inclusion of the 
word πέρατα in 405 (and also in the passage quoted carlier, 320) 
clearly suggests, both types of equation are applications, revised 
in the light of Eleatic criticism, of the traditional Pythagorean 
doctrine of the imposition of Limit upon the Unlimited. 


THE UNIT AS EVEN-ODD 


One last Pythagorean doctrine remains to be discussed, that 
mentioned in a passage from Aristotle’s Metaphysics already cited 
in this chapter (398), by which the unit is neither odd nor even but 
both even and odd. Wesaw earlier (p. 241) that in the pre-Parmeni- 
dean Pythagoreanism the unit was unquestionably regarded as a 
manifestation of the principle of Limit only. It seems likely, 
therefore, that the present view represents once again a later 
modification of Pythagorean doctrine in the light of Eleatic 
criticism. Unfortunately Aristotle himself here, as usual, refuses 
to distinguish between an earlier and a later Pythagoreanism, 
but simply groups all Pythagorean doctrines together in his general 
survey. Ihe following passage, however, scems to preserve for us 
a genuine Pythagorean tradition. 


407 Theo Smyrnaeus p. 21, 20 Hiller τῶν δὲ ἀριθμῶν ποιοῦνται 
τὴν πρώτην τομὴν εἰς δύο" τοὺς μὲν γὰρ αὐτῶν ἀρτίους, τοὺς δὲ 
περιττούς φασι. καὶ ἄρτιοι μέν εἶσιν οἱ ἐπιδεχόμενοι τὴν εἰς ἴσα 
διαίρεσιν, ὡς ἡ Suds, ἡ τετράς᾽ περισσοὶ δὲ οἱ εἰς ἄνισα διαιρούμενοι, 
οἷον ὁ €, 6 2. πρώτην δὲ τῶν περισσῶν ἔνιοι ἔφασαν τὴν μονάδα. 
τὸ γὰρ ἄρτιον τῷ περισσῷ ἐναντίον: ἡ δὲ μονὰς ἤτοι περιττόν 
ἐστιν ἢ ἄρτιον᾽ καὶ ἄρτιον μὲν οὐκ ἂν ein’ οὐ γὰρ ὅπως εἰς ἴσα, ἀλλ᾽ 
οὐδὲ ὅλως διαιρεῖται" περιττὴ ἄρα ἡ μονάς. κἂν ἀρτίῳ δὲ ἄρτιον 
προσθῇς, τὸ πᾶν γίνεται ἄρτιον" μονὰς δὲ ἀρτίῳ προστιθεμένη τὸ 





407 The first division of numbers that they make is into two classes, calling some even, 
some odd, Even numbers are those which can be divided into equal paris (e.g. 2 or 4), 
odd those which can be divided only into unequal parts (e.g. 5 or 7). Some held that the 
Jirst of the odd numbers is 1. For even is the contrary of odd; 1 is etther odd or even; it 
cannot be even; for so far from being divisible into equal parts, it cannot be divided at all; 
whence it follows that 1 is odd. Again, if you add even to even, the whole is even; but 


317 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


πᾶν περιττὸν ποιεῖ᾽ οὐκ dpa ἄρτιον ἡ μονὰς ἀλλὰ περιττόν. 
᾿Αριστοτέλης δὲ ἐν τῷ Πυθαγορικῷ τὸ ἕν φησιν ἀμφοτέρων μετέχειν 
τῆς φύσεως" ἀρτίῳ μὲν γὰρ προστεθὲν περιττὸν ποιεῖ, περιττῷ δὲ 
ἄρτιον, ὃ οὐκ ἂν ἠδύνατο εἰ μὴ ἀμφοῖν τοῖν φυσέοιν μετεῖχε" διὸ καὶ 
ἀρτιοπέριττον καλεῖσθαι τὸ ἕν. συμφέρεται δὲ τούτοις καὶ ᾿Αρχύτας. 


It is hard to resist the conclusion that this passage represents 
two distinct stages in the development of Pythagoreanism. In the 
original view there are only two classes of number, even and odd, 
of which the former comprises those numbers which are divisible 
into halves, the latter those which are divisible only into unequal 
parts.t The unit itself, though it will not fit into either class, is 
asserted to be odd because it cannot be even, and its equation with 
Limit is thereby justificd. But sooner or later the fact must be 
acknowledged that according to these definitions the unit cannot 
be odd any more than it can be even. So, while the traditional 
definitions are retained essentially unaltered, the third category is 
introduced to contain the unit and the unit only. Arithmetically, 
of course, the consequence of the change is of no great significance. 
The first odd number is no longer 1 but 3; but the unit can 
presumably remain the principle of numbers and their mode of 
generation necd not necessarily be altered. Metaphysically, how- 
ever, since odd is Limit and even Unlimited, the consequences 
scem to be of the utmost significance. No longer is the first unit, 
the starting-point of Pythagorean cosmogony, regarded as the 
embodiment of Limit in the Unlimited, it is instead the first 
product of the blending of the two principles; and by that simple 
change another of the Eleatic criticisms, that directed against the 
‘inhalation’ of the one principle by the other (cf. pp. 253 and 274), 
is duly acknowledged and countered. 


1 ‘This early definition of odd and even numbers is also preserved, in very 
similar words, both by Aristoxenus ap. Stob. Anth. τ, 1,6 (DK 5882) and by 
Nicomachus J.A. 1, 7 (p. 13, 15 Hoche). The twofold classification of 
number in Theo’s first sentence is to be contrasted with what may well 
have been (despite the probable spuriousness of the actual fragment) the 
genuine view of Philolaus in 397 above. 





add 1 to an even number and it makes the whole odd; whence it follows that 1 is not even 
but odd. Aristotle, however, in his work on the Pythagoreans, says that 1 partakes of the 
nature of both; for when added to an even number it makes it odd, when added to an odd, 
even—which would be impossible if it did not partake of the nature of both; and so, he 
says, it is called even-odd. Archytas too agrees with Aristotle on this point. 


318 


THE POST-PARMENIDEAN 
SYSTEMS 


The last stage of Presocratic philosophy consists primarily of the 
pluralist systems of Empedocles and Anaxagoras, of the combination 
of pluralism and monism represented by the atomism of Leucippus 
and Democritus, and finally of the re-adapted Ionian monism of 
Diogenes of Apollonia. Each of these systems is, in its own way, a 
deliberate reply to Parmenides, Parmenides secmed, to his contem- 
poraries and immediate successors, to have established once and for all 
certain canons with which, until Plato himself exposed the fallacies on 
which they were based, all future cosmologists must somehow comply. 
Being, in the first place, must not be allowed to spring from Not-being: 
anything that was claimed as real must also be ultimate. Again, the 
void, being sheer non-existence, can find no place in any account of 
reality. Third, plurality cannot come from an original unity: if there 
is to be a plurality, it too, like reality, must be ultimate. And finally, 
motion must no longer be simply taken for granted; its existence must 
somehow be explained. Any future system that ignored any one of 
these four canons would, for the time being at least, have been con- 
sidered from the outset untenable. 

This estimate of the strength of Parmenides’ influence is no mere 
conjecture. Both Empedocles and Anaxagoras repeatedly and clearly 
reveal, not only by their thought but also by the language in which it 
is expressed, an almost servile observance of the Parmenidean 
demands; atomism, although its method of complying with the 
Parmenidean canons shows a courageous refusal to be intimidated, is 
nevertheless in a very special sense the outcome of the Eleatic 
paradox; and Diogenes, even though he reverts to the single specific 
substance of Anaximenes, incorporates much from Anaxagoras and 
Leucippus in order to protect himself against Elea. Since one of the 
most interesting and important aspects of the history of early Greek 
philosophy—and it is an aspect that can easily be lost from sight—is 
its peculiar continuity, a part of each of the main chapters that follow 
will be devoted to showing, where possible in the philosophers’ own 
words, how these post-Parmenidean systems are deliberately designed 
to take account of the findings of the Way of Truth. 


319 


CHAPTER XIV 


EMPEDOCLES OF ACRAGAS 


DATE 


408 Diogenes Laertius vii, 74 (DK31A1) ἤκματε δὲ κατὰ τὴν 
τετάρτην Kal ὀγδοηκοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα. 
409 Diogenes Laertius vm, 51 (ὩΚ 1 Δ 1) ᾿ἘἘμπεδοκλῆς, ὥς 
φησιν Ἱππόβοτος, Μέτωνος ἦν υἱὸς τοῦ ᾿Εμπεδοκλέους ᾿Ακραγαν- 
τῖνος.. «λέγει δὲ καὶ ᾿Ερατοσθένης ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ολυμπιονίκαις τὴν 
πρώτην καὶ ἑβδομηκοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα νενικηκέναι τὸν τοῦ Μέτωνος 
πατέρα, μάρτυρι χρώμενος ᾿Αριστοτέλει. ᾿Απολλόδωρος δ᾽ ὁ 
γραμματικὸς ἐν τοῖς Χρονικοῖς φησιν ὡς 

ἦν μὲν Μέτωνος υἱός, εἷς δὲ Θουρίους 

αὐτὸν νεωστὶ παντελῶς ἐκτισμένους 

(ὁ) Γλαῦκος ἐλθεῖν φησιν. 
... AplototéAns γὰρ αὐτόν, ἔτι τε Ἡρακλείδης, ἑξήκοντα ἐτῶν φησι 
τετελευτηκέναι. 
410 Aristotle Met. A3, 984a11 (DK31A6) ᾿Αναξαγόρας δὲ 
ὁ Κλαζομένιος τῇ μὲν ἡλικίᾳ πρότερος ὧν τούτον (sc. Empedocles), 
τοῖς δ᾽ ἔργοις ὕστερος. ... 
411: Simplicius Phys. 25, 19, quoting Theophrastus ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆῇς 
ὁ ᾿Ακραγαντῖνος οὐ πολὺ κατόπιν τοῦ ᾿Αναξαγόρον γεγονώς, 
Παρμενίδου δὲ τηλωτὴς καὶ πλησιαστὴς καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον τῶν 
Πυθαγορείων..... 


Empedocles’ precise dates are impossible to determine. Apollo- 
dorus, whom Diogenes is doubtless following in 408, is, as usual, 





408 He flourished in the eighty-fourth Olympiad. 

409 Empedocles, according to Hippobotus, was the son of Meton, himself son of 
Empedocles, and came from Acragas... . Eratosthenes, in his Olympic victors, says that 
the father of Meton won a viciory in the seventy-first Olympiad, and he cites Aristotle as 
evidence. But Apollodorus the grammarian writes in his Chronicles that ‘he was the son 
of Meton, and Glaucus says that he came to Thurii very soon after its foundation’.... 
According to Aristotle, and also Heraclides, he died at the age of sixty. 

410 Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, who, though older than Empedocles, was later in his 
philosophical activity.... (Trans. Ross) 

411 Empedocles of Acragas was born not long after Anaxagoras, and was an admirer and 
associate of Parmenides, and even more of the Pythagoreans.... 


320 


EMPEDOCLES 


definite enough; but it seems most likely that he has arrived at his 
answer by simply assuming that Empedocles was forty years old 
when Thurii was founded (1.6. in Ol. 84, 444-441 B.c.). Accord- 
ingly it has often been suggested that the date given by Apollodorus 
is considerably too late. In the absence of any reliable and decisive 
evidence, there is no ground for more than the very tentative 
conclusion that Empedocles’ floruit must have been somewhere 
around the middle of the century. That, at any rate, as we shall 
see (pp. 380 f.), tallies with what we are told in 410 and 411 about 
the relative dates of Empedocles and Anaxagoras. 


t See Diels, ‘Gorgias und Empedokles’, SB Ber. (1884) 343 ff. 


LIFE 


Empedocles, like Pythagoras and Heraclitus, was a favourite subject 
(cf. p. 183) for apocryphal biographical tales. A considerable 
number of them, drawn from numerous sources, are preserved by 
Diogenes. For the most part they are concerned either with his 
political activities or with his death, and it is the former group alone 
which may perhaps contain a germ of truth. He is said to have been 
an ardent democrat, to have broken up some otherwise unknown 
organization called the Thousand, and to have refused the king- 
ship of his city (see Diogenes Laertius vin, 66 and 63, DK 3141). 
Here at least we do seem to have something other than a mis- 
guided embellishment of his own words in his poems; indeed we 
might almost conclude from his poems that his views were aristo- 
cratic rather than democratic. It would be unwise, however, to 
accept even these stories at their face value; they do no more than 
testify to a probably genuine tradition that as a democrat he took 
a leading part in the politics of his city. He was evidently also an ac- 
complished orator: Aristotle, in his lost dialogue Sophzst, apparently 
called him the inventor of rhetoric (Diog. L. vit 57, DK 31 A1), and 
Gorgias is said to have been his pupil. Finally, his fame as a doctor, 
which is suggested by his own words in fragment 112,71is proved by 
the numerous references to him in later medical writings. 


1 For whole fr. (and refs.) see 478, but cf. especially 412 ll. 1o—12 
of μὲν μαντοσυνέων κεχρημένοι, of δ᾽ ἐπὶ νούσων 
παντοίων ἐπύθοντο κλύειν εὐηκέα βάξιν, 
δηρὸν δὴ χαλεττῇσι πεπαρμένοι (ἀμφ᾽ ὀδύνῃσιν). 





412 ...some seeking prophecies, while others, for many a day stabbed by grievous pains, 
beg to hear the word that heals all manner of illness. 


21 321 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


WRITINGS 


The two poems from which the surviving fragments come were 
called respectively Περὶ φύσεως, On Nature, and Καθαρμοί, Purifica- 
tions. According to Diogenes Laertius (vit, 77) these two poems 
together ran to five thousand lines," while the Suda (s.v. Empedocles, 
DK31A2) tells us that On Nature was in two books, together 
comprising some two thousand lines. The extant verses even of 
the poem On Nature represent, therefore, less than a fifth of the 
original whole, while those of the Purifications, if the figure given 
by Diogenes is correct, are even more fragmentary. 

In addition to these two poems Diogenes (l.c.) says that there 
was also a work of six hundred lines on medicine, which the Suda 
(1...) however tells us was in prose. Several other works are also 
ascribed by later authorities to Empedocles, including no less than 
forty-three tragedics, but it seems very unlikely that they are in 
fact his. 

1. 413 Diog. L. vin, 77 (DK31A1) τὰ μὲν οὖν Περὶ φύσεως αὐτῷ Kal of 
Καθαρμοὶ εἷς ἔπη τείνουσι πεντακισχίλια. Diels, however, on the ground 


that the Καθαρμοί is unlikely to have extended to 3000 lines, suggested 
reading πάντα τρισχίλια instead. 


THE PROBLEM 


Though the precise order of the fragments cannot be certainly 
determined, and though in a few cases it is even doubtful from 
which poem a fragment comes, the arrangement of Diels is now 
generally accepted. On the basis of the fragments alone it is 
possible to reconstruct the system of Empedocles with greater 
confidence than most of the Presocratic philosophers allow. The 
chief difficulty in his case is of quite a different order. Whereas the 
poem On Nature is primarily concerned to give a physical explana- 
tion of the universe and its contents, and in the process seems to 
leave no room for an immortal soul, the Purifications is based 
upon the Pythagorean belief in transmigration. The resulting 
conflict between the two poems has been resolved, in modern 
times, in a variety of ways. While some scholars, including both 
Zeller and Burnet, are content to conclude that Empedocles held 
simultaneously beliefs that are not only incompatible but actually 





413 His On nature and Purifications together comprise as much as 5000 lines. 


322 


EMPEDOCLES 


contradictory, others have argued that the two poems must 
belong to separate stages of Empedocles’ life. The following 
exposition, which owes much to the unpublished work of the late 
Ἐς M. Cornford, will attempt to show that, while the former of 
these two views is far preferable to the latter, it still lays undue 
stress upon the alleged incompatibility of the two poems. It will 
always remain a difficult question what view Empedocles really 
did take of the soul; but unless one poem is used to throw light 
upon the obscurities of the other, even more difficult problems 
will remain to be solved. 


THE INFLUENCE OF PARMENIDES AND ITS EFFECTS 
414 Fr. 11, Plutarch adv. Colot. 12, 1113¢ and Fr. 12, [Aristotle] 
MXG 2, 975b1 
νήπιοι οὐ yap σφιν δολιχόφρονές εἰσι μέριμναι, 
οἵ δὴ γίγνεσθαι πάρος οὐκ ἐὸν ἐλπίφουσιν 
ἢ τι καταθνήσκειν τε καὶ ἐξόλλυσθαι ἁπάντῃ. 
ἔκ Te γὰρ οὐδάμ᾽ ἐόντος ἀμήχανόν ἐστι γενέσθαι 
καί τ᾽ ἐὸν ἐξατπτολέσθαι ἀνήνυστον καὶ ἄτυστον᾽ 
αἰεὶ γὰρ τῇ γ᾽ ἔσται, ὅττῃ κέ τις αἰὲν ἐρείδη. 
415 Fr. 13, Aetius 1, 18, 2 
οὐδέ TL TOU παντὸς κενεὸν πέλει οὐδὲ περισσόν. 


416 Fr. 14, [Aristotle] Μιχα 2, 9760 24 
τοῦ παντὸς δ᾽ οὐδὲν Kevedv’ πόθεν οὖν τί κ᾽ ἐπέλθοι; 
417 Fr. 6, Aetius 1, 3, 20 
τέσσαρα γὰρ πάντων ῥιτώματα πρῶτον ἄκουε" 
Ζεὺς ἀργὴς Ἥρη τε φερέσβιος ἠδ᾽ ᾿Αιδωνεὺς 
Νῆστίς θ᾽ ἣ δακρύοις τέγγει κρούνωμα βρότειον. 





—, 


414 Fools—for they have no far-reaching thoughts—who fancy that that which formerly 
was not can come into being or that anything can perish and be utterly destroyed. For 
coming into being from that which in no way is is inconceivable, and it 1s impossible and 
unheard-of that that which ts should be destroyed. For it will ever be there wherever one 
may keep pushing it. 


415 Nor is any part of the whole either empty or over-full. 
416 And no part of the whole is empty; whence then could anything enter into it? 


417 Hear first the four roots of all things: shining Zeus, life-bringing Hera, Aidoneus 
and Nestis who with her tears fills the springs of mortal men with waiter. 


323 21-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 
418 Fr. 17, 1. 6, Simplicius Phys. 158, 6 
Kal ταῦτ᾽ ἀλλάσσοντα Siaptrepts οὐδαμὰ λήγει, 
ἄλλοτε μὲν Φιλότητι συνερχόμεν᾽ εἰς ἕν ἅπαντα, 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖ Sly’ ἕκαστα φορεύμενα Νείκεος ἔχθει. 


These fragments amply suffice to show the strength of the in- 
fluence exercised by Parmenides on Empedocles. A comparison of 
414 with fragment 8 of Parmenides (especially ll. 16-21, 347), or of 
415 and 416 with lines 22-25 of the same fragment (348), reveals 
that Empedocles was not only complying with the Parmenidean 
canons but doing so consciously and deliberately. It might even 
be maintained that this compliance is the basis of Empedocles’ 
system; for these few fragments, besides affording an cloquent 
indication of Empedocles’ dependence on Parmenides, can be 
made to serve also as an introduction to his cosmology. 

Parmenides had maintained that reality cannot come from 
unreality nor plurality from an original unity. Empedocles meets 
both demands simultaneously. There never was, he replies, an 
original unity; there were rather four cternally distinct substances, 
Zeus, Hera, Aidoneus and Nestis, or Fire, Air, Earth and Water. 
These between them fill the whole of space, leaving no place in the 
universe for the non-existent void. All things consist of these 
elements, or irreducible forms of matter, in various proportions. 
When a thing is said to come into existence or to perish, all that 
has really happened is that one temporary combination of these 
indestructible elements has been dissolved and another been 
established. Change in fact is nothing but a re-arrangement; and 
to account for the motion in space which alone could effect such 
a reshuffling, two motive forces, Love and Strife, take their place 
along with the elements as the only ultimate realities. So all four 
of the Parmenidean demands (see p. 319) are duly met, and 
already, in meeting them, Empedocles has evolved the essentials 
of his system. In following his cosmology through the peculiar 
cycle which he imposed upon it, we shall be merely filling in the 
details of an outline that has already emerged. 


1 It is characteristic of Empedocles that he should present the ‘four roots’ 
at their first appearance in mythological guise. Nestis is certainly Water, 





418 And these things never cease from continual shifting, at one time all coming together, 
through Love, into one, at another each borne apart from the others through Strife. 


324 


EMPEDOCLES 
but even in antiquity there was a difference of opinion concerning the 
other three. Fire, which is here probably represented by Zeus, is in frs. 96 
and 98 called Hephaestus. For Empedocles’ belief in the corporeality of 
air see 453. 


EMPEDOCLES DEFENCE OF THE SENSES 

419 Fr. 3, 1. 9, Sextus adv. math. vu, 125 
GAN’ ἄγ᾽ ἄθρει πάσῃ παλάμῃ, πῇ δῆλον ἕκαστον, 

10 μήτε τιν᾽ ὄψιν ἔχων πίστει πλέον ἢ κατ᾽ ἀκουὴν 
ἢ ἀκοὴν ἐπίδουτον ὑπὲρ τρανώματα γλώσσης, 
μήτε τι τῶν ἄλλων, ὁπόσῃ πόρος ἐστὶ νοῆσαι, 
γυίων πίστιν ἔρυκε, νόει δ᾽ 7 δῆλον ἕκαστον. 


One of the first questions Empedocles had to tackle was whether or 
not the senses are a reliable guide to the truth. In these important 
verscs, which are shown by the rest of the fragment to come from 
the introduction to the pocm, he is as deliberatcly contradicting 
Parmenides as he is elsewhere obeying him. Clearly the sort of 
cosmology on which he is about to embark demands, as indeed any 
cosmology must, faith in the validity of sense-perception. So far, 
therefore, from following Parmenides in his condemnation of the 
senses, he instructs his readers to make full but discriminating use 
of them, taking care to employ each sense for the appropriate 
purpose.” 
τ Line ro may contain also an implied criticism of Heraclitus: 420 fr. 101 a, 
Polybius xu, 27 ὀφθαλμοὶ [τῶν] ὥτων ἀκριβέστεροι μάρτυρες. Perhaps, 
however, Heraclitus only mcant that seeing something for oneself is better 
than hearing second-hand reports; but cf. pp. 207 ff. 


THE SPHERE 
421 Frr. 27 and 28% 


ἔνθ᾽ οὔτ᾽ ἠελίοιο διείδεται ὠκέα γυῖα 
οὐδὲ μὲν οὐδ᾽ αἴης λάσιον μένος οὐδὲ θάλασσα 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅ γε πάντοθεν ἴσος <é0i) καὶ πτάμταν ἀπείρων 





419 But come, consider with all thy powers how each thing 15 mantfest, neither holding 
sight in greater trust as compared with hearing, nor loud-sounding hearing above the clear 
evidence of thy tongue, nor withhold thy trust from any of the other limbs, wheresoever there 
is a path for understanding, but think on each thing in the way by which it is manifest. 
420 Eyes are more accurate witnesses than ears. 


421 Here are distinguished neither the swift limbs of the sun nor the shaggy might of the 
earth nor the sea; but rather, equal {to himself) from every side and quite without end, he 


325 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


οὕτως “Apyovins πυκινῷ κρύφῳ ἐστήρικται 
σφαῖρος κυκλοτερὴς μονίῃ περιηγέϊ γαίων. 
422 Fr. 29, Hippolytus Ref. vir, 29 


ov yao ἀπὸ νώτοιο δύο κλάδοι ἀίσσονται, 
οὐ πόδες, οὐ θοὰ γοῦν᾽, οὐ μήδεα γεννήεντα, 
ἀλλὰ σφαῖρος ἔην καὶ (πάντοθεν) ἶσος ἑαυτῷ. 


< This is probably a single fr., of which Plut. (ἐς fac. lun. 12, 926 ©) quotes 
Il, 1~2 (though he refers them to the rule of Strife and reads ἀγλαὸν 
εἶδος for ὠκέα yvia), Simpl. (Phys. 1183, 30) ll. 1, 4 and 5, and Stob. 
(Anth. 1, 15, 2a, b) 11. 3 and 5. Diels prints ll. 1, 2, 4. and 5 as fr. 27 and ll. 3 
and 5 as fr. 28 (a solution which docs not, however, evade the principal 
problem, that posed by Plut.’s citation of ll. 1-2). 


In these fragments Empedocles’ debt to Parmenides is again 
obvious: though 422 doubtless reflects also the influence of 
Xenophancs’ attack upon anthropomorphic gods (see pp. 168 f.), 
Empcdocles’ Sphere is indisputably modelled on that of Par- 
menides. What Empcdocles has done in fact is to take the sphere 
of Parmenides and fill it from the outset with the four eternally 
distinct elements. But this single change from an original unity to 
an original plurality makes the whole difference to the sequcl. 
Whercas with Parmenides the sphere, being a unity, can never 
undergo the slightest change, with Empedocles it proves to be but 
one phase in a never-ending cosmic cycle. 


THE COSMIC CYCLE 
423 Fr. 17, 1-13, Simplicius Phys. 158, 1 
δίττλ᾽ ἐρέω τοτὲ μὲν γὰρ Ev ηὐξήθη μόνον εἶναι 
ἐκ πλεόνων, τοτὲ δ᾽ αὖ διέφυ πλέον᾽ ἐξ ἑνὸς εἶναι. 
δοιὴ δὲ θνητῶν γένεσις, δοιὴ δ᾽ ἀπόλειψις" 
τὴν μὲν γὰρ πάντων σύνοδος τίκτει τ᾽ ὀλέκει τε, 
5 ἡ δὲ πάλιν διαφυομένων θρεφθεῖσα διέτττη. 








stays fast in the close covering of Harmony, a rounded sphere rejoicing in his circular 
solitude. 

422 Two branches spring not from his back, he has no feet, no swift knees, no fertile 
parts; rather was he a sphere, equal to himself from every side. 

423 A double tale will I tell: at one time it grew to be one only from many, at another it 
divided again to be many from one. There is a double coming into being of mortal things 
and a double passing away. One is brought about, and again destroyed, by the coming 
together of all things, the other grows up and 1s scattered as things are again divided. And 


326 


EMPEDOCLES 


Kal ταῦτ᾽ ἀλλάσσοντα διαμπερὲς οὐδαμὰ λήγει, 
ἄλλοτε μὲν Φιλότητι συνερχόμεν᾽ εἰς ἕν ἅπαντα, 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖ Six” ἕκαστα φορεύμενα Νείκεος ἔχθει. 
(οὕτως ἧ μὲν ἕν ἐκ πλεόνων μεμάθηκε φύεσθαι» 

10 ἠδὲ πάλιν διαφύντος ἑνὸς τπιλέον᾽ ἐκτελέθουσι, 
τῇ μὲν γίγνονταί τε καὶ οὔ σφισιν ἔμπεδος αἰών" 
ἢ δὲ διαλλάσσοντα διαμπερὲς οὐδαμὰ λήγει, 
ταύτῃ δ᾽ αἷὲν ἔασιν ἀκίνητοι κατὰ κύκλον.ἷ 

t Lines 7-8 and 10-13 are almost identical with ll. 5-6 and 9~12 of fr. 26, 


which is also preserved by Simpl. at Phys. 33, 19. Line 9 above, which is 
needed to complete the sense, is 1. 8 of fr. 26 interpolated here by Diels. 


The cosmic cycle which Empedocles is here describing is the most 
peculiar feature in his whole system. This never-ending cycle 
would seem (though this has been disputed) to have four stages, 
two polar stages represented by the rule of Love and the rule of 
Strife, and two transitional stages, one from the rule of Love to- 
wards the rule of Strife, and the other back again from the rule of 
Strife towards the rule of Love. The rule of Love itself, in which 
‘all things unite in one through Love’ (I. 7), is of course the Sphere 
described in the fragments in the last section. It is a uniform 
mixture of the four elements—so uniform that nothing whatever 
can be discerned in it. Before we proceed to follow the cosmic 
cycle through the other three stages, it will be as well to pause at 
this first stage (for though the cycle is never-ending and has 
therefore no chronologically first stage, the rule of Love is still the 
logical starting-point of the process), and consider in more detail 
the various ingredients in the mixture. 


THE FOUR ROOTS AND LOVE AND STRIFE 

424 Fr. 17,1. 14, Simplicius Phys. 158, 13 (continuing 423) 
GAA’ ἄγε μύθων κλῦθι" μάθη yap τοι φρένας αὔξει" 

15 ὡς γὰρ καὶ πρὶν cerita πιφαύσκων πείρατα μύθων, 





these things never cease from continual shifting, at one time all coming together, through 
Love, into one, at another each borne apart from the others through Strife. «So, in so far as 
they have learnt to grow into one from many,) and again, when the one is sundered, are once 
more many, thus far they come into being and they have no lasting life; but in so far as they 
never cease from continual interchange of places, thus far are they ever changeless in the 
cycle, 

424 But come, hearken to my words; for learning increaseth wisdom. As I said before 
when I declared the limits of my words, a double tale will I tell: at one time it grew to be 


327 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


δίπλ᾽ ἐρέω᾽ τοτὲ μὲν yap ἕν ηὐξήθη μόνον εἶναι 

ἐκ πλεόνων, τοτὲ δ᾽ αὖ διέφυ πλέον᾽ ἐξ ἑνὸς εἶναι, 
πῦρ καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ γαῖα καὶ ἠέρος ἄπλετον ὕψος, 
Νεῖκός τ᾽ οὐλόμενον δίχα τῶν, ἀτάλαντον ἁπάντῃ, 

20 καὶ Φιλότης ἐν τοῖσιν, ἴση μῆκός τε πλάτος Te’ 
τὴν σὺ νόῳ δέρκευ, μηδ᾽ ὄμμασιν ἧσο τεθηττώς᾽ 
ἥτις καὶ θνητοῖσι νομίζεται ἔμφυτος ἄρθροις, 
τῇ τε φίλα φρονέουσι καὶ ἄρθμια ἔργα τελοῦσι, 
Γηθοσύνην καλέοντες ἐττώνυμον ἠδ᾽ ᾿Αφροδίτην᾽ 

25 τὴν οὔ τις μετὰ τοῖσιν ἑλισσομένην δεδάηκε 
θνητὸς ἀνήρ᾽ σὺ δ᾽ ἄκουε λόγου στόλον οὐκ ἀπατηλόν. 
ταῦτα yao lok τε πάντα καὶ ἥλικα γένναν ἔασι, 
τιμῆς δ᾽ ἄλλης ἄλλο μέδει, ττάρα δ᾽ ἦθος ἑκάστῳ, 
ἐν δὲ μέρει κρατέουσι περιπλομένοιο χρόνοιο. 

80 καὶ πρὸς τοῖς οὔτ᾽ ἄρ τι ἐπιγίγνεται οὐδ᾽ ἀπολήγει" 
εἴτε γὰρ ἐφθείροντο διαμπερές, οὐκέτ᾽ ἂν ἧσαν" 
τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐπαυξήσειε τὸ πᾶν τί κε; καὶ πόθεν ἐλθόν; 
πῇ δέ κε κἠξαπόλοιτο, ἐπεὶ τῶνδ᾽ οὐδὲν ἔρημον; 
ἀλλ᾽ αὔτ᾽ ἔστιν ταῦτα, δι᾽ ἀλλήλων δὲ θέοντα 

45 γίγνεται ἄλλοτε ἄλλα καὶ ἠνεκὲς αἰὲν ὁμοῖα. 

425 Fr. 21, 1. 9, Simplicius Phys. 159, 21 
ἐκ τούτων yap πάνθ᾽ ὅσα τ᾽ ἦν ὅσα τ᾽ ἔστι Kai ἔσται, 

10 δένδρεά τ᾽ ἐβλάστησε καὶ ἀνέρες ἠδὲ γυναῖκες, 
θῆρές τ᾽ οἰωνοί τε καὶ ὑδατοθρέμμονες ἰχθῦς, 
καί τε θεοὶ δολιχαίωνες τιμῇσι φέριστοι. 





one only from many, at another it divided again to be many from one, fire and water and 
earth and the vast height of air, dread Strife too, apart from these, everywhere equally 
balanced, and Love in their midst, equal in length and breadth. On her do thou gaze with 
thy mind, and sit not with dazed eyes; for she is recognized as inborn in mortal limbs; by 
her they think kind thoughts and do the works of concord, calling her Joy by name and 
Aphrodite. Her does no mortal man know as she whirls around amid the others; but do 
thou pay heed to the undeceitful ordering of my discourse. For all these are equal, and of like 
age, but each has a different prerogative and its own character, and in turn they prevail 
as time comes round. And besides these nothing else comes into being nor ceases to be; for 
if they were continually being destroyed, they would no longer be; and what could increase 
this whole, and whence could it come? And how could these things perish too, since 
nothing is empty of them? Nay, there are these things alone, and running through one 
another they become now this and now that and yet remain ever as they are. 


425 From these things sprang all things that were and are and shall be, trees and men 
and women, beasts and birds and water-bred fishes, and the long-lived gods too, most mighty 


328 


EMPEDOCLES 


αὐτὰ yap ἔστιν ταῦτα, δι᾽ ἀλλήλων δὲ θέοντα 
γίγνεται ἀλλοιωτπά“ τόσον διὰ κρῆσις ἀμείβει. 


X ΤΊ looks as if a line had fallen out here, balancing the εἴτε clause and 
completing what in its present form appears an incomplete argument. 


In these passages the influence of Parmenides is once again 
obvious enough: certain lines in 424 could well have come from 
Parmenides himself. Empedocles is in fact playing his usual part 
of mediator. Taking, presumably, those opposite substances which 
had been most conspicuous in earlier cosmologies, the hot, the 
cold, the wet and the dry (the first pair of which were definitely 
used by Anaximander, while both pairs werc mentioned in 
Heraclitus fr. 126), and explicitly asserting that they are eternally 
distinct, he places them in the Parmenidean sphere and, by merely 
mixing and reshuffling them, accounts for birth, death, change and 
all physical phenomena. As he is at pains to point out, his clements 
do not, either in nature or behaviour, break any of the Parmeni- 
dean canons. He has already effectively restored, by a mere 
revision of pre-Parmenidean ideas, plurality and diversity; he 15 
about to restore, by the introduction of his two motive forces, 
motion, change and time. In fact the only Parmenidean tenet that 
he has sacrificed is that which Parmenides himself had valued 
most of all, his monism. That gone, the rest follows without 
further infringement. 

The elements, Empedocles says in both 424 and 425, comprise 
the whole of material reality: ‘there are these alone.’ Simplicius 
would seem therefore to be fully justified in the following comment 
on Empedocles: 


426 Simplicius Phys. 25, 21 (DK31A28) οὗτος δὲ τὰ μὲν 
σωματικὰ στοιχεῖα ποιεῖ τέτταρα, πῦρ καὶ ἀέρα Kal ὕδωρ Kal γῆν, 
ἀίδια μὲν ὄντα, πλήθει δὲ καὶ ὀλιγότητι μεταβάλλοντα κατὰ τὴν 
σύγκρισιν καὶ διάκρισιν, τὰς δὲ κυρίως ἀρχάς, ὑφ᾽ ὧν κινεῖται ταῦτα, 
Φιλίαν καὶ Νεῖκος. δεῖ γὰρ διατελεῖν ἐναλλὰξ κινούμενα τὰ στοιχεῖα, 





in their prerogatives. For there are these things alone, and running through one another 
they assume many a shape: so much change does mixing effect. 


426 He makes the material elements four in number, fire, air, water and earth, all 
eternal, but changing in bulk and scarcity through mixture and separation; but his real 
first principles, which impart motion to these, are Love and Strife. The elements are 


329 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ποτὲ μὲν ὑπὸ τῆς Φιλίας συγκρινόμενα, ποτὲ δὲ ὑττὸ τοῦ Neixous δια- 
κρινόμενα ὥστε καὶ ἕξ εἶναι κατ᾽ αὐτὸν τὰς ἀρχάς. 


Empedocles was certainly feeling his way towards the distinction 
here drawn between the material and the efficient cause. Love, he 
explicitly says, is the same as Aphrodite, which we recognize in 
ourselves but not in the universe. He is in fact drawing, and 
literally believing in, the analogy between the universe as a whole 
and man. Love and Strife are not, therefore, mere mechanical 
forces disguised undcr mythical or allegorical names. Empedocles 
believes, as the analogy shows, that sexual love and cosmic Love 
are one and the same self-existent external force which acts upon 
the person or the thing that loves.t At the same time he is still 
unable to imagine any form of existence other than spatial exten- 
sion, and in consequence his Love and Strife are still represented 
(in 424, ll. 19-20) as if they too were material.2 We have seen 
earlier (pp. 302 ff.) how gradual was the advance towards the 
apprehension of the abstract. Empedocles here takcs another step 
in that direction. We shall see, on pp. 374f., how Anaxagoras 
takes yet another. But it was not until Plato elaborated his theory 
of Ideas that the goal was eventually reached. 


t Aristotle in his comments on Empedocles goes further than this and says 
that Love and Strife have a moral character. Cf. 427 Aristotle Met. Ad, 
98524 (DK31A39) el γάρ τις ἀκολουθοίη Kal λαμβάνοι πρὸς τὴν διάνοιαν 
καὶ μὴ πρὸς ἃ ψελλίφεται λέγων ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς, εὑρήσει τὴν μὲν Φιλίαν 
αἰτίαν οὖσαν τῶν ἀγαθῶν, τὸ δὲ Νεῖκος τῶν κακῶν ὥστ᾽ ef τις φαίη 
τρόπον τινὰ καὶ λέγειν καὶ πρῶτον λέγειν τὸ κακὸν καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἀρχὰς 
᾿Εμπεδοκλέα, τάχ᾽ ἂν λέγοι καλῶς... .ΑὐἸβίοι]ς may be right: there is little 
doubt that Empedocles was to some extent influenced by the moral 
dualism of the Pythagoreans. 


2 Cf. 428 Aristotle Met. Ag, 1075b1 ἀτόπως δὲ καὶ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς" τὴν γὰρ 
Φιλίαν ποιεῖ τὸ ἀγαθόν, αὕτη δ᾽ ἀρχὴ Kal ὡς κινοῦσα (συνάγει yap) καὶ 





continually subject to an alternate change, at one time mixed together by Love, at another 
separated by Strife; so that the first principles are, by his account, six in number. 

427 For if we were to follow out the view of Empedocles, and interpret it according to its 
meaning and not to its lisping expression, we should find that Love is the cause of good 
things, and Strife af bad. Therefore, if we said that Empedocles in a sense both mentions, 
and is the first to mention, the bad and the good as principles, we should perhaps be 
right.... (After Ross) 


428 Empedocles also has a paradoxical view; for he identifies the good with Love. But 
this is a principle both as mover ( for it brings things together) and as matter ( for it is part 
of the mixture). (Trans. Ross) 


330 


EMPEDOCLES 


ὡς ὕλη᾽ μόριον yap τοῦ μίγματος. Note that in this passage also, as in 427, 
Love is credited with a moral character—though in both cases this may 
be only Aristotle’s own interpretation. 


DISRUPTION OF THE SPHERE 
429 Aristotle Met.B4, 1000b12 καὶ ἅμα δὲ αὐτῆς τῆς μεταβολῆς 
αἴτιον οὐθὲν λέγει ἀλλ᾽ ἢ ὅτι οὕτως πέφυκεν" 
(Fr. 30) GAA’ ὅτε δὴ μέγα Νεῖκος ἐνὶ μελέεσσιν ἐθρέφθη, 
εἷς τιμάς τ᾽ ἀνόρουσε τελειομένοιο χρόνοιο 
ὅς σφιν ἀμοιβαῖος πλατέος Trap’ ἐλήλαται ὅρκου᾽ 
ὡς ἀναγκαῖον μὲν ὃν μεταβάλλειν. 
430 Simplicius Phys. 1184, 2 ἀρξαμένου δὲ πάλιν τοῦ Νείκους 
ἐπικρατεῖν τότε πάλιν κίνησις ἐν τῷ Σφαίρῳ γίνεται" 
(Fr. 41) πάντα γὰρ ἑξείης πελεμίφετο γυῖα θεοῖο. 


These two bricf fragments are all that survive of Empedocles’ 
description of the disruption of the Sphere. At that stage in the 
cosmic cycle when the rule of Love was complete, Strife was 
evidently altogether excluded from the Sphere. Indeed one short 
fragment may well, in its context, have said exactly that: 


431 Fr. 27a, Plutarch Maxime cum prince. 2, 777 α 
OU στάσις οὐδέ τε δῆρις ἀναίσιμος ἐν μελέεσσιν. 


When we come to the opposite polar stage in the cycle, we shall 
find Empedocles, in his description of the disruption of the rule of 
Strife, saying that ‘a soft, immortal stream of blamelcss Love kept 
running in’ (sec 464). Presumably, therefore, the reverse process 
has becn taking place in the Sphcre: Strife, at one stage completely 
excluded, has been flowing back into the Sphere until it attains a 
sufficient proportion to assert itself. When that happens, motion 
begins, and cosmogony, in the normal sense, is initiated. But, as 
Aristotle complains in 429, what higher power it is that determines 
‘by a mighty oath’ the timing of the alternations in the cosmic 











429 And at the same time Empedocles mentions no cause of the change ttself, except that 
things are so by nature. ‘But when Strife waxed great in the limbs, and sprang to his 
prerogatives as the time was fulfilled which is fixed for them in turn by a broad oath’—this 
implies that change was necessary. (After Ross) 

430 But when Strife began once more to prevail, then there is again motion in the Sphere; 
‘for all the god’s limbs in turn began to quake.’ 

431 There is no discord nor unseemly rivalry in his limbs. 


331 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


cycle is very far from clear. It might conceivably be maintained 
that Love and Strife had themselves sworn the oath; but it seems 
much more likely that Empedocles is here guilty of an undetected 
confusion, at one moment asserting that the four elements and 
Love and Strife are alone ultimate, at another suggesting that even 
for them there are laws laid down which they cannot infringe. 


COSMOGONY 
(i) The first stages 
432 Fr. 38, Clement Strom. v, 48, 3 

εἰ δ᾽ ἄγε τοι λέξω πρῶθ᾽ ἥλιον ἀρχήνΐ, 

ἐξ ὧν δῆλ᾽ ἐγένοντο τὰ νῦν ἐσορῶμεν ἅπαντα, 

γαῖά τε καὶ πτόντος πολυκύμων ἠδ᾽ ὑγρὸς ἀὴρ 

Τιτὰν ἠδ᾽ αἰθὴρ σφίγγων περὶ κύκλον ἅπαντα. 
433 Actius π, 6, 3 ᾿Ἐμπεδοκλῆς τὸν μὲν αἰθέρα πρῶτον δια- 
κριθῆναι, δεύτερον δὲ τὸ πῦρ, ἐφ᾽ ᾧ τὴν γῆν, ἐξ ἧς ἄγαν περισφιγγο- 
μένης τῇ ῥύμῃ τῆς περιφορᾶς ἀναβλύσαι τὸ ὕδωρ᾽ ἐξ οὗ θυμιαθῆναι 
τὸν ἀέρα, καὶ γενέσθαι τὸν μὲν οὐρανὸν ἐκ τοῦ αἰθέρος, τὸν δὲ 
ἥλιον ἐκ τοῦ πυρός, πιληθῆναι δὲ ἐκ τῶν ἄλλων τὰ περίγεια. 
434 [Plutarch] Strom. ap. Eusebium P.E. 1, 8, 10 (DK31A30) 
Ἐμπεδοκλῆς ὁ "Axparyavtivos. . «ἐκ πρώτης φησὶ τῆς τῶν στοιχείων 
κράσεως ἀποκριθέντα τὸν ἀέρα περιχυθῆναι κύκλῳ: μετὰ δὲ τὸν 
ἀέρα τὸ πῦρ ἐκδραμὸν καὶ οὐκ ἔχον ἑτέραν χώραν ἄνω ἐκτρέχειν 
ὑπὸ τοῦ περὶ τὸν ἀέρα πάγου. εἶναι δὲ κύκλῳ περὶ τὴν γῆν φερόμενα 
δύο ἡμισφαίρια τὸ μὲν καθόλου πυρός, τὸ δὲ μικτὸν ἐξ ἀέρος καὶ 
ὀλίγου πυρός, ὅπερ οἴεται τὴν νύκτα εἶναι. τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν τῆς 
κινήσεως συμβῆναι ἀπὸ τοῦ τετυχηκέναι κατά (TI) τὸν ἀθροισμὸν 
ἐπιβρίσαντος τοῦ πυρός. 





432 Come, I shall tell thee first of the sunt, and whence became manifest all the things 
we now behold, the earth and the billowing sea, the damp air and the Titan aither who 
fastens his circle around all things. 

433 Empedocles holds that aither was the first to be separated off, next fire, and after that 
earth. From the earth, as it was excessively constricted by the force of the rotation, sprang 
water. From water air came by evaporation. The heavens arose from the aither, the sun 
from the fire, while terrestrial things were compressed from the other elements. 


434 Empedocles of Acragas...holds that the air that was separated off from the original 
mixture of the elements flowed around in a circle; and after the air fire ran outwards and, 
having nowhere else to go, ran upwards under the solidified periphery around the air. There 
are, he says, two hemispheres revolving round the earth, one consisting entirely of fire, the 
other of a mixture of air with a little fire; this latter he supposes to be night. Their motion 
arises from the fact that the accumulation of fire in one region gives it preponderance there. 


332 


EMPEDOCLES 


In these passages we see the earliest stages of cosmogony. Air,* 
being the first of the elements to be separated out of the sphere, 
took up a position surrounding the world, and evidently (to judge 
from 434) its outermost margin solidified to form the firmament. 
When, however, fire followed air upwards, it seems to have dis- 
placed the air enclosed in the upper half of this solid firmament, 
and the air thereupon sank, taking a little fire with it, into the 
lower half. Two hemispheres arc thus formed inside the firmament, 
the diurnal and the nocturnal, and when the concentration of fire 
in the upper hemisphere somehow? so upsets the balance of the 
sphere as to start a circular motion, the result is the alternation of 
day and night. 


1 433 is one of several passages which suggest that Empedocles sometimes 
called air ‘aither’, though the two were normally regarded as distinct. 
Admittedly in 432 ‘aither’ must stand for fire; but equally clearly in 
453 (Il. 5, 7, 18 and 24) it represents air. 


2 Why a concentration of a light element, Fire, in the upper hemisphere 
should start a circular motion is altogether obscure; but the evidence 
strongly suggests that Empedocles thought it did. 


(ii) The heavenly bodies 
435 [Plutarch] Strom. ap. Eusebium P.F. 1, 8, 10 (DK 31430) 


(continuing 434) ὁ δὲ ἥλιος τὴν φύσιν οὔκ ἐστι πῦρ, ἀλλὰ τοῦ 
πυρὸς ἀντανάκλασις ὁμοία τῇ ἀφ᾽ ὕδατος γινομένῃ. σελήνην δέ 
φησιν συστῆναι καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν ἐκ τοῦ ἀποληφθέντος ἀέρος ὑπὸ τοῦ 
πυρός. τοῦτον γὰρ παγῆναι καθάπερ καὶ τὴν χάλαζαν. τὸ δὲ 
φῶς αὐτὴν ἔχειν ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου. Cf. Aetius π|, 20, 13 (DK 41.4.56). 
436 Aetius Π, 13, 2 ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς πύρινα (sc. εἶναι τὰ ἄστρα) ἐκ 
τοῦ πυρώδους, ὅπερ ὁ ἀὴρ ἐν ἑαυτῷ περιέχων ἐξανέθλιψε κατὰ τὴν 
πρώτην διάκρισιν. 

437 Aetius Π, 13, 11 ᾿ἘἘμπεδοκλῆς τοὺς μὲν ἀπλανεῖς ἀστέρας 
συνδεδέσθαι τῷ κρυστάλλῳ, τοὺς δὲ ττλανήτας ἀνεῖσθαι. 





43ς The sun is not in its nature fire, but rather a reflexion of fire like that which comes 
from water. The moon, he says, was composed of air that had been shut in by fire; this air 
was solidified, like hail. The moon gets its light from the sun. 


436 LEmpedocles says that the stars are made of fire, composed of the fiery element which 
the air originally contained but squeezed out at the first separation. 


437 Empedocles says that the fixed stars were attached to the ice (i.e. the frozen 
periphery), while the planets were unattached. 


333 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


438 Fr. 42, Plutarch de fac. in orbe lun. 16, 9296 
ἀπεστέγασεν δέ ol αὐγάς, 

ἔστ᾽ ἂν ἴῃ καθύπερθεν,: ἀπεσκνίφωσε δὲ γαίης 

τόσσον ὅσον τ᾽ εὖρος γλαυκώπιδος ETTAETO μήνης. 
439 Aristotle de caelo B13, 295a13 διὸ δὴ καὶ τὴν γῆν πάντες 
ὅσοι τὸν οὐρανὸν γεννῶσιν ἐτὶ τὸ μέσον συνελθεῖν φασιν. ὅτι δὲ 
μένει, τητοῦσι τὴν αἰτίαν καὶ λέγουσιν οἱ μὲν τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον, ὅτι 
τὸ πλάτος καὶ τὸ μέγεθος αὐτῆς αἴτιον, οἱ δ᾽ ὥσπερ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς τὴν 
τοῦ οὐρανοῦ φορὰν κύκλῳ περιθέουσαν καὶ θᾶττον φερομένην τὴν 
τῆς γῆς φορὰν κωλύειν καθάπερ τὸ ἐν τοῖς κυάθοις ὕδωρ καὶ γὰρ 
τοῦτο κύκλῳ τοῦ κυάθον φερομένου πολλάκις κάτω τοῦ χαλκοῦ γινό- 
μενον ὅμως οὐ φέρεται κάτω πεφυκὸς φέρεσθαι διὰ τὴν αὐτὴν αἰτίαν. 


t The text of this fr. is corrupt. he above version is Diels’ conjecture for 
the ms, ἀπεσκεύασε.... ἔστε alav καθύπερθεν. 


These passages contain the most notable of Empcdocles’ astro- 
nomical theories. The statement in 435 that the sun is not itself 
fire but a reflexion of fire involves a difficulty. Aetius tells us 
(1, 20, 13, DK 31456) that the fire reflected by the sun is that 
which, according to 434, is concentrated in the diurnal hemi- 
sphere; but in that case its reflexion cannot be in the opposite 
hemisphere, because that is the nocturnal. A possible solution 
seems to be that suggested by Burnet (EGP 238) that ‘the light of 
the fiery hemisphere is reflected by the earth on to the fiery hemi- 
sphere itself in one concentrated flash’. Empedocles knew, as 435 
goes on to tell us, that the moon shines by reflected light. His 
complicated view of the nature of the sun looks like a curious 
application of the same theory. 

t Cf, Plut. de Pyth. or. 12,4008 (DK 31844), which supports this interpreta- 

tion. Against it, however, is the suggestion in the same passage of Aetius 


(1, 20, 13) that the sun is a solid object (κρυσταλλοειδής, ‘crystalline’) in 
the fiery hemisphere which carries it round (but cf. n. 1 on p. 156). 





438 But she kept off the sun’s rays, so long as it was passing over above her, and cast a 
shadow over as much of the earth as was the breadth of the pale-faced moon. 


439 All those who generate the heavens hold that it was for this reason that the earth 
came together to the centre. They then seek a reason for its staying there; and some say, in 
the manner explained, that the reason is its size and flatness, others, like Empedocles, that 
the motion of the heavens, moving about it at a higher speed, prevents movement of the 
earth, as the water in a cup, when the cup is given a circular motion, though it is often 
underneath the bronze, ts for this same reason prevented from moving with the downward 
movement which is natural to it. (After Stocks) 


334 


EMPEDOCLES 


For the rest these passages are straightforward enough. 438 
shows that Empedocles knew also the true cause of eclipses, while 
439 is one of the few reliable passages affording evidence of simple 
argument from observation on the part of the Presocratic physicists 


(cf. p. 149 n., and p. 341, 453 and comment). 


(iii) Organic compounds 

440 Fr. 96, Simplicius Phys. 300, 21 
ἡ δὲ χθὼν ἐπίηρος ἐν εὐστέρνοις χοάνοισι 
τὼ δύο τῶν ὀκτὼ μερέων λάχε Νήστιδος αἴγλης, 
τέσσαρα δ᾽ Ἡφαίστοιο τὰ δ᾽ ὀστέα λευκὰ γένοντο 
᾿Αρμονίης κόλλῃσιν ἀρηρότα θεσπεσίηθεν. 

441 Fr. 98, Simplicius Phys. 32, 6 
ἡ δὲ χθὼν τούτοισιν ἴση συνέκυρσε μάλιστα, 
Ἡφαίστῳ τ᾽ ὄμβρῳ τε καὶ αἰθέρι παμφανόωντι, 
Κύπριδος ὁρμισθεῖσα τελείοις ἐν λιμένεσσιν, 
εἴτ᾽ ὀλίγον μείφων εἴτε ττλεόνεσσιν ἐλάσσων " 
ἐκ τῶν αἷμά τε γέντο καὶ ἄλλης εἴδεα σαρκός. 


These two fragments show that Empedocles was concerned (as 
indeed hc had to be, in order to explain how composite organisms 
could come into existence from a mixture of the four elements) 
not only with the elements themselves and the complete objects 
which they ultimately formed, but also with such intermediate 
substances (the proximate materials of the complete objects) as 
bone and flesh. He seems to have been the first of the Presocratic 
philosophers to pay much attention to such compounds; but, 
essential as they are in his cosmogony, they still did not apparently 
figure so prominently in Empedocles as they did in Anaxagoras 
(see pp. 378 ff.). The exact proportions in which these substances 
are compounded reveal the influence of Pythagoreanism on 
Empedocles. We shall see later (pp. 351 ff.) that this is by no means 
the only manifestation of that influence. 





440 The kindly earth received in its broad funnels two parts of gleaming Nestis out of 
the eight, and four of Hephaestus; and there arose white bones divinely fitted together by 
the bonds of Harmony. 

441 And the earth came together with these in almost equal proportions, with Hephaestus, 
with moisture and with brilliant aither, and so it anchored in the perfect harbours of 
Kupris, either a little more of it or less of it with more of the others. From these did blood 
arise, and the forms of flesh besides. 


335 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


FOUR STAGES OF EVOLUTION 


At this point we meet a further complication in Empedocles’ 
physical system. Not only is there, as we have already seen 
(pp. 326f.), a cosmic cycle of two polar and two transitional 
stages, but also, in each of the latter, there are evidently two 
distinct stages in the evolution of living things. The four stages to- 
gethcr seem to be accurately summarized in the following passage: 
442 Aetius v, 19, 5 (DK31A72) Ἐμπεδοκλῆς τὰς πρώτας 
γενέσεις τῶν τῴων Kal φυτῶν μηδαμῶς ὁλοκλήρους γενέσθαι, 
ἀσυμφυέσι δὲ τοῖς μορίοις διεφευγμένας, τὰς δὲ δευτέρας συμφνομένων 
τῶν μερῶν εἰδωλοφανεῖς, τὰς δὲ τρίτας τῶν ὁλοφυῶν, τὰς δὲ 
τετάρτας οὐκέτι ἐκ τῶν ὁμοιομερῶν [Dicls, ὁμοίων mss.] οἷον ἐκ γῆς 
καὶ ὕδατος, ἀλλὰ δι᾽ ἀλλήλων ἤδη, τοῖς μὲν πυκνωθείσης [τοῖς δὲ 
καὶ τοῖς οῴοις] τῆς τροφῆς, τοῖς δὲ καὶ τῆς εὐμορφίας τῶν γυναικῶν 
ἐπερεθισμὸν τοῦ σπερματικοῦ κινήματος ἐμποιησάσης" τῶν δὲ φῴων 
πάντων τὰ γένη διακριθῆναι διὰ τὰς ποιὰς κράσεις... .. 


With the aid of this passage it is possible to allocate to the appro- 
priate stage of evolution most of the fragments of Empedocles that 
are concerned with the generation of living things. It will be best 
to describe the first three of the four stages before considering which 
two belong to the phase in the cosmic cycle now under discussion 
and which to the transition from the rule of Strife back to the rule 
of Love. 


Stage 1: disunited limbs 
443 Fr. 57, Aristotle de caelo [2, 400} 40 (1. 1) and Simplicius 
de caelo 587, 1 (Il. 2-3) 

ἢ πολλαὶ μὲν κόρσαι ἀναύχενες ἐβλάστησαν, 

γυμνοὶ δ᾽ ἐπτλάτοντο βραχίονες εὔνιδες pov, 

ὄμματά τ᾽ of? ἐπλανᾶτο πενητεύοντα μετώπων. 





442 Empedocles held that the first generations of animals and plants were not complete 
but consisted of separate limbs not joined together; the second, arising from the joining of 
these limbs, were like creatures in dreams; the third was the generation of whole-natured 
forms; and the fourth arose no longer from the homoeomerous substances such as earth or 
water, but by generation, in some cases as the result of the condensation of their nourish- 
ment, in others because feminine beauty excited the sexual urge; and the various species 
of animals were distinguished by the quality of the mixture in them.... 


443 Here sprang up many faces without necks, arms wandered without shoulders, 
unattached, and eyes strayed alone, in need of foreheads. 


336 


EMPEDOCLES 


This fragment clearly describes the first of the four stages described 
by Aetius in 442. At this stage, according to the brief and 
incomplete fr. 58, ‘solitary limbs wandered about seeking for 
union’. The next stage therefore shows them having achieved, if 
at random, the union they were seeking. 


Stage 2: monsters and deformities 

444 Fr. 59, Simplicius de caelo 587, 20 
αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ κατὰ μεῖτον ἐμίσγετο δαίμονι δαίμων 
ταῦτά τε συμπίτττεσκον, ὅττῃ συνέκυρσεν ἕκαστα, 
ἄλλα τε πρὸς τοῖς πολλὰ διηνεκῆ ἐξεγένοντο. 

445. Fr. 60, Plutarch adv. Colot. 28, 11238 

.. «εἱλίπτοδ᾽ ἀκριτόχειρα.... 

446 Fr. 61, Aelian Nat. anim. xvi, 20 
πολλὰ μὲν ἀμφιπτρόσωπα Kal ἀμφίστερνα φύεσθαι, 
βουγενῆ ἀνδρόπρῳρα, τὰ δ᾽ ἔμπαλιν ἐξανατέλλειν 
ἀνδροφυῆῇ βούκρανα, μεμειγμένα τῇ μὲν ἀπ᾽ ἀνδρῶν 
τῇ δὲ γυναικοφυῆ σκιεροῖς [oteipois Diels] ἠσκημένα γυίοις. 


These fragments describe vividly enough Aetius’ second stage, 
a period of monsters and deformities. We learn also from the 
following passage that at this stage in evolution, as presumably at 
each of the others too, those creatures that were accidentally fitted 
to survive did so, while the rest perished: 


447 Aristotle Phys. B8, 198b29 ὅπου μὲν οὖν ἅπαντα συνέβη 
ὥσπερ κἂν ef ἕνεκά Tou ἐγίνετο, ταῦτα μὲν ἐσώθη ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτο- 
μάτου συστάντα ἐπιτηδείως: ὅσα δὲ μὴ οὕτως, ἀττώλετο καὶ 
ἀπόλλυται, καθάπερ Ἐμπεδοκλῆς λέγει τὰ “βουγενῆ ἀνδρό- 
πρῴῷρα΄. 





444 But ας one divine element mingled further with another, these things fell together as 
each chanced to meet other, and many other things besides these were constantly resulting. 
445 ...with rolling gait and countless hands.... 

446 Many creatures were born with faces and breasts on both sides, man-faced ox- 
progeny, while others again sprang forth as ox-headed offspring of man, creatures com- 
pounded partly of male, partly of the nature of female, and fitted with shadowy [or sterile 
Diels] parts. 

447 Wherever, then, everything turned out as it would have if it were happening for a 
purpose, there the creatures survived, being accidentally compounded in a suitable way; but 
where this did not happen, the creatures perished and are perishing still, as Empedocles says 
of his ‘man-faced ox-progeny’. 


22 337 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


On the ground that he combined belief in evolution with this 
theory of the survival of the fittest, Empedocles has sometimes 
been extravagantly claimed to have anticipated Darwin (cf. also 
on Anaximander, p. 142). 


Stage 3: ‘whole-natured forms’ 
448 Fr. 62, Simplicius Phys. 381, 31 


νῦν δ᾽ ἄγ᾽, ὅτως ἀνδρῶν Te πολυκλαύτων τε γυναικῶν 
ἐννυχίους ὅρπηκας ἀνήγαγε κρινόμενον πῦρ, 

τῶνδε κλύ᾽ οὐ γὰρ μῦθος ἀπόσκοτπος οὐδ᾽ ἀδαήμων. 
οὐλοφυεῖς μὲν πρῶτα τύποι χθονὸς ἐξανέτελλον, 
ἀμφοτέρων ὕδατός τε καὶ εἴδεος αἷσαν ἔχοντες" 

τοὺς μὲν πῦρ ἀνέπεμτε θέλον πρὸς ὁμοῖον ἱκέσθαι, 

οὔτε τί πτω μελέων ἐρατὸν δέμας ἐμφαίνοντας 

οὔτ᾽ ἐνοττὴν οἷόν τ᾽ ἐπιχώριον ἀνδράσι yviov. 


This third stage, the stage of ‘whole-natured forms’ without 
distinction of sex, may possibly have been the origin of the theory 
put into the mouth of Aristophanes in Plato’s Symposium." ‘These 
‘wholc-natured forms’ are the outcome of the tendency of fire ‘to 
join its like’; and that tendency in turn is the outcome of the 
influence of Strife, the function of which, as we shall see, is to break 
up the uniform mixture of the elements, the work of Love, into 
four separate masses. As the process of separation continues, the 
sexes are eventually distinguished and we reach the last of Aetius’ 
four stages. 

I Widely different interpretations are, however, possible. Simplicius, for 


instance, thinks that a ‘whole-natured form’ has no distinct parts at all, 
while Aristotle regards it as merely a form of seed. 


Where Stages 1-3 belong 


449 Aristotle de caelo T2, 300b25 ἔτι δὲ τοσοῦτον ἐττανέροιτ᾽ 
ἄν Tis, πότερον δυνατὸν ἢ οὐχ οἷόν τ᾽ ἦν κινούμενα ἀτάκτως καὶ 
μείγνυσθαι τοιαύτας μίξεις ἔνια ἐξ ὧν συνίσταται τὰ κατὰ φύσιν 





448 Come now, hear how the fire, as it was separated, caused to spring up the nighi- 
born scions of men and of tearful women; for this is a tale that is neither irrelevant nor 
uninformed. First sprang up from the earth whole-natured forms, having a share of both 
water and fire; these the fire sent forth, desiring to reach its like, showing forth as yet 
neither the lovely form of the limbs, nor the voice nor the organ proper to men. 


449 There is a further question, too, which might be asked. Is it possible or impossible 
that bodies in unordered movement should combine in some cases into combinations like 


338 


EMPEDOCLES 


συνιστάμενα σώματα. λέγω δ᾽ οἷον ὀστᾶ Kal σάρκας, καθάπερ 
Ἐμπεδοκλῆς φησὶ γίνεσθαι ἐπὶ τῆς Φιλότητος᾽ λέγει γάρ (οἴ. 443) 
“πολλαὶ μὲν κόρσαι ἀναύχενες ἐρβλάστησαν᾽. 


450 Aristotle de anima [6, 430a29_ .. «καθάπερ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς ἔφη 
“ πολλῶν μὲν κόρσαι ἀναύχενες ἐβλάστησαν᾽, ἔπειτα συντίθεσθαι 
τῇ Φιλίᾳ.... 


451 Aristotle de gen. et corr. B7, 334a5 ἅμα δὲ καὶ τὸν κόσμον 
ὁμοίως ἔχειν φησὶν ἐπί te τοῦ Νείκους νῦν Kai πρότερον ἐπὶ τῆς 
Φιλίας. 


The question of which evolutionary stages belong to which phase 
in the cosmic cycle has been much debated. But these passages 
leave little room for doubt. It is clear from 449 that the first stage 
belongs to the period when Love is gaining ascendancy;? and 
since the second stage follows immediately upon the first, that too 
must obviously belong there. On the other hand 451, and 
especially the word νῦν, ‘now’, shows that the present state of the 
world belongs to the other transitional phase, when Strife is 
gaining upon Love. That leaves only the third stage; and as that 
third stage is, as we have just seen, only the preludc to the present, 
the pattern is complete. The third and fourth stages belong, in that 
order, to the phase of the cycle that we are now considering, the 
progressive disruption of the Sphere by Strife; and the fourth stage 
is that which the actual world has now reached. The first and 
second stages, on the other hand, belong to the last phase in the 
cosmic cycle, which is yet to be discussed (pp. 346ff.). 


t That Aristotle’s phrase ἐπὶ τῆς Φιλότητος (or Φιλίας) refers, not to the 
rule of Love, but to the pcriod when Love is again gaining ascendancy is 
clear from (among other considerations) the following passage: 452 
Simplicius de caelo 587, 24 (DK31B59) ἐπὶ τῆς Φιλότητος.. .οὐχ ὡς 
ἐπικρατούσης ἤδη τῆς Φιλότητος, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς μελλούσης ἐπικρατεῖν. 





those of which bodies of nature’s composing are composed, such, I mean, as bones and flesh? 
Yet this is what Empedocles asserts to have occurred under Love. ἡ Many a head’, says he, 
‘came to birth without a neck.’ 

450 ...as Empedocles said that ‘where heads of many creatures came to birth without 
necks’, they are then put together by Love.... 

451 At the same time he asserts that the world is in the same state now in the period of 
Strife as it was earlier in that of Love. 

452 By ‘in the period of Love’ he means, not when Love was already in control, but when 
it was going to be. 


339 22-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Stage 4: the present world 


Since the world as we know it belongs to the fourth and last of the 
evolutionary stages of 442, it is here that the relatively numerous 
fragments belong that are concerned with such specialized 
sciences as botany, embryology and physiology. In each of these 
Empedocles made important contributions to Greck thought. 
A number of brief fragments (77-81) concerned with botany-—a 
subject to which Empedocles seems to have been the first Greek to 
pay much attention—are supplemented by a fairly detailed 
summary by Actius (v, 26, 4, DK 31470). Plants, Empedocles 
maintained, were the first living things to appear, being, like the 
‘whole-natured forms’ of 448, temporary combinations of fire 
moving upwards from bencath the earth to join its like in the 
firmament, and earth moving downwards under the same impulse. 
Again like the ‘whole-natured forms’, plants are not yet sexually 
differentiated, but, combining the two sexcs in one, reproduce 
themselves by bearing ‘eggs’ (fr. 79). The fragments concerned 
with embryology (63—70) are likewise very brief, but are again 
supplemented by Aetius (v, 7, 1; 8, 1; 10, 13 11, 1; 12, 2; all in 
DK 31A81). Male children are conceived in the warmer part of 
the womb (fr. 67) and contain a grcater proportion of the hot than 
do female. ‘The substance of the child’s limbs is divided’ between 
the parents (fr. 63), or in other words is derived from both—a 
view that was by no means universal in the ancient world, the 
Pythagoreans, for instance, believing that it derived entirely from 
the father—but the child will resemble whichever of the parents 
has contributed most. As for physiology, Empedocles here again 
attached great importance to the principle of the attraction of like 
to like; not only does it account for nutrition and growth (Aetius v, 
27, 1, DK 31477), but also for pleasure and pain (Aetius Iv, 9, 15, 
DK 31495). It is not possible to describe in detail all Empedocles’ 
biological and physiological theories that have been preserved; 
from the point of view of the historian of philosophy his chief 
importance lics elsewhere. But there are a few special topics 
falling under this general heading that are sufficiently notable to 
merit inclusion. 


340 


EMPEDOCLES 


(a) Respiration 

453 Fr. 100, Aristotle de respiratione 7, 473b9 
ὧδε δ᾽ ἀναπνεῖ πάντα καὶ ἐκπνεῖ πᾶσι λίφαιμοι 
σαρκῶν σύριγγες πύματον κατὰ σῶμα τέτανται, 
καί σφιν ἐπὶ στομίοις πυκιναῖς τέτρηνται ἄλοξιν 
ῥινῶν ἔσχατα τέρθρα διαμπερές, ὥστε φόνον μὲν 

5 κεύθειν, αἰθέρι δ᾽ εὐπορίην διόδοισι τετμῆσθαι. 

ἔνθεν ἔπειθ᾽ ὁπτόταν μὲν ἀτταίξῃ τέρεν αἷμα, 
αἰθὴρ παφλάτων καταίσσεται οἴδματι μάργῳ, 
εὖτε δ᾽ ἀναθρῴσκῃ, πάλιν ἐκπνέει, ὥσπερ ὅταν παῖς 
κλεψύδρῃ παίφζουσα διειττετέος χαλκοῖο-- 

10 εὖτε μὲν αὐλοῦ πορθμὸν ἐπ᾽ εὐειδεῖ χερὶ θεῖσα 
εἰς ὕδατος βάπτῃσι τέρεν δέμας ἀργνυφέοιο, 
οὐδεὶς ἄγγοσδ᾽ ὄμβρος ἐσέρχεται, ἀλλά μιν εἴργει 
ἀέρος ὄγκος ἔσωθε πεσὼν ἐπὶ τρήματα πυκνά, 
εἰσόκ᾽ ἀπτοστεγάσῃ πυκινὸν ῥόον αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα 

15 πνεύματος ἐλλείποντος ἐσέρχεται αἴσιμον ὕδωρ. 
ὡς δ᾽ αὔτως, 60° ὕδωρ μὲν ἔχῃ κατὰ βένθεα χαλκοῦ 
πορθμοῦ χωσθέντος βροτέῳ χροΐ ἠδὲ πόροιο, 
αἰθὴρ δ᾽ ἐκτὸς ἔσω λελιημένος ὄμβρον ἐρύκει, 
ἀμφὶ πύλας ἠθμοῖο δυσήχεος ἄκρα κρατύνων, 

20 εἰσόκε χειρὶ μεθῇ, τότε δ᾽ αὖ πάλιν, ἔμπαλιν ἢ πρίν, 
πνεύματος ἐμττίτττοντος ὑτπτεκθέει αἴσιμον ὕδωρ. 
ὡς δ᾽ αὔτως τέρεν αἷμα κλαδασσόμενον διὰ γυίων 
ὁττττότε μὲν τταλίνορσον ἀπαΐξειε μυχόνδε, 





453 So do all things inhale and exhale: there are bloodless channels in the flesh of them 
all, stretched over their bodies’ surface, and at the mouths of these channels the outermost 
surface of skin is pierced right through with many a pore, so that the blood is kept in but 
an easy path is cut for the air to pass through. Then, when the fluid blood rushes away 
thence, the bubbling atr rushes in with violent surge; and when the blood leaps up, the air 
is breathed out again, just as when a girl plays with a klepsydra of gleaming brass. 
When she puts the mouth of the pipe against her shapely hand and dips it into the fluid 
mass of shining water, no liquid enters the vessel, but the bulk of the air within, pressing upon 
the frequent perforations, holds tt back until she uncovers the dense stream, but then, as the air 
yields, an equal bulk of water enters. In just the same way, when water occupies the 
depths of the brazen vessel and the passage of its mouth ἐς blocked by human hand, the air 
outside, striving inwards, holds the water back, holding its surface firm at the gates of the 
ill-sounding neck until she lets go with her hand; and then again (the reverse of what 
happened before), as the breath rushes in, an equal bulk of water runs out before 11. And 
in just the same way, when the fluid blood surging through the limbs rushes backwards and 


34! 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


αἰθέρος εὐθὺς ῥεῦμα κατέρχεται οἴδματι θῦον, 
25 εὖτε δ᾽ ἀναθρῴσκῃ πάλιν ἐκπνέει ἴσον ὀπίσσω. 


This celcbrated passage, with its implicit proof of the corporeality 
of air, is often cited, along with 439, as evidence that the Pre- 
socratics in general, and Empedocles in particular, were familiar 
with the expcrimental method of modern science. ‘The risc of the 
experimental method’ writes Burnct (EGP27) ‘dates from the 
time when the medical schools began to influence the develop- 
ment of philosophy, and accordingly we find that the first recorded 
experiment of a modern type is that of Empedokles with the 
klepsydra.* Wc have his own account of this (fr. 100), and we can 
sec how it brought him to the verge of anticipating Harvey and 
Torricelli.’ This is of course an exaggerated view. ‘That Empedocles 
made occasional usc, if not of expcriment, at least of simple 
observation, cannot be disputed. It might easily be maintained, 
however, that all he is here doing is using an isolated observation 
to illustrate a theory already rcached by methods far removed 
from the experimental technique of modern science. And even if 
the opposite view be takcn, that his observation of the klepsydra was 
the result of delibcrate rescarch (which it quite patently was not), 
this same fragment proves conclusively that his expcriments were 
scarcely, as Burnet claimed, modern in character. For, as Corn- 
ford replied (Principium Sapientiae 6), ‘this theory could have been 
tested by anyone who would sit in a bath up to his neck and 
observe whcther any air bubbles passed through the water into, or 
out of, his chest as he breathed’. 


1 The κλεψύδρα, usually translated ‘water-clock’, was a metal vessel with 
a narrow neck and with its base perforated, like a modern coffee-strainer, 
with numerous small holes. For further details of experiments with it see 
[Aristotle] Probl. xvi, 8, 914b9 (DK 59469), which, however, is concerned 
with Anaxagoras rather than Empedocles. Cf. also 498. 


2 Vlastos (Gnomon 27 (1955) 73), having quoted this sentence, continues: 
‘But what is there in Empedocles’ theory to imply that minute quantities 
of air passing through water out of (or into!) one’s chest would cause 
bubbles? Nothing at all; bubbles or no bubbles, the theory would survive 
the bath experiment.’ Even that criticism, however, whether or not it is 
valid against Cornford, seems to support the present point, that Empe- 
docles knew nothing of the experimental method as it is now understood. 





inwards, straightway a stream of air comes in with swift surge; but when the blood leaps 
up again, an equal quantity of air is again breathed back. 


342 


EMPEDOCLES 


(b) Sense-perception 
454 Fr. 109, Aristotle Met. B4, 1rooob6 

γαίῃ μὲν yap γαῖαν étratrapev, ὕδατι δ᾽ ὕδωρ, 

αἰθέρι δ᾽ αἰθέρα δῖον, ἀτὰρ πυρὶ πῦρ ἀίδηλον, 

στοργὴν δὲ στοργῇ, νεῖκος δέ τε veixel λυγρῷ. 
455 Theophrastus de sensu 7 (DK31486) ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς δὲ περὶ 
ἁπασῶν (sc. αἰσθήσεων) ὁμοίως λέγει καί φησι τῷ ἐναρμόττειν εἰς 
τοὺς πόρους τοὺς ἑκάστης αἰσθάνεσθαι᾽ διὸ καὶ ov δύνασθαι τὰ 
ἀλλήλων κρίνειν, ὅτι τῶν μὲν εὐρύτεροί πῶς, τῶν δὲ στενώτεροι 
τυγχάνουσιν οἱ πόροι πρὸς τὸ αἰσθητόν, ὡς τὰ μὲν οὐχ ἁπτόμενα 
διευτονεῖν τὰ δ᾽ ὅλως εἰσελθεῖν οὐ δύνασθαι. 


Theophrastus goes on to describe in some detail, and to criticize, 
Empcdocles’ explanation of the various senses, especially sight and 
hearing. But these two passages give the essentials that apply to all 
the senses alike. Perception is due to an clement (here including 
Love and Strife) in the body of the perceiver meeting with the 
same element outside. ‘AIl things that have come into existence’, 
according to fragment 89,1 are continually giving off effluences; 
and when these effluences are of the right size to fit into the pores 
of the sense organ, then the required mceting takes place and 
perception arises.? 


: See 456 Plutarch Quaest. nat. 19, 916D σκόπει δὴ κατ᾽ ᾿Εμπεδοκλέα 
(Fr. 89) 
γνούς, ὅτι πάντων εἰσὶν ἀπορροαί, ὅσσ᾽ ἐγένοντο᾽ 


οὐ γὰρ φῴων μόνον οὐδὲ φυτῶν οὐδὲ γῆς καὶ θαλάττης, ἀλλὰ καὶ λίθων 
ἄπεισιν ἐνδελεχῶς πολλὰ ῥεύματα καὶ χαλκοῦ καὶ σιδήρου" καὶ γὰρ φθείρεται 
πάντα καὶ ὄλωλε τῷ ῥεῖν ἀεί τι καὶ φέρεσθαι συνεχῶς. 





454 For with earth do we see earth, with water water, with air bright air, with fire 
consuming fire; with Love do we see Love, Strife with dread Strife. 


455 Etmpedocles has the same theory about all the senses, maintaining that perception 
arises when something fits into the passages of any of the senses. So one sense cannot judge 
the objects of another, since the passages of some are too wide, of others too narrow, for the 
object perceived, so that some things pass straight through without making contact while 
others cannot enter at all. 

456 Consider the matter in Empedocles’ words, ‘knowing that there are effluences of all 
things that came into being’. Not only animals and plants and earth and sea, but also 
stones and brass and iron continuously give off many a stream; for everything is worn 
away and perishes from the continual motion of a ceaseless flux, 


343 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


2 It is perhaps worth remarking that this explanation of sense-perception 
(as also the account of respiration in 4§3) would appear to involve the 
admission of void. It looks as if Empedocles, when he came to details, was 
not always faithful to his fundamental principles. 


(c) Consciousness 
457 Fr. 103, Simplicius Phys. 331, 12 
τῇδε μὲν οὖν ἰότητι Τύχης πεφρόνηκεν ἅπαντα. 
458 Fr. 105, Porphyry ap. Stobacum Anth. 1, 49, 53 
αἵματος ἐν πελάγεσσι τεθραμμένη (sc. ἣ καρδία) ἀντιθορόντος, 
τῇ τε νόημα μάλιστα κικλήσκεται ἀνθρώποισιν" 
αἷμα γὰρ ἀνθρῶποις περικάρδιόν ἐστι νόημα. 
459 ‘Theophrastus de sensu 9 (DK 41.4.86) ὡσαύτως δὲ λέγει καὶ 
περὶ φρονήσεως καὶ ἀγνοίας. (10) τὸ μὲν γὰρ φρονεῖν εἶναι τοῖς 
ὁμοίοις, τὸ δ᾽ ἀγνοεῖν τοῖς ἀνομοίοις, ὡς ἢ ταὐτὸν ἢ παραπλήσιον 
ὃν τῇ αἰσθήσει τὴν φρόνησιν. διαριθμησάμενος γὰρ ὡς ἕκαστον 
ἑκάστῳ γνωρίφομεν, ἐπὶ τέλει ττροσέθηκεν ὡς 
(Fr. 107) ἐκ τούτων (yap) πάντα πετήγασιν ἁρμοσθέντα 
καὶ τούτοις φρονέουσι καὶ ἥδοντ᾽ ἠδ᾽ ἀνιῶνται. 
διὸ καὶ τῷ αἵματι μάλιστα φρονεῖν" ἐν τούτῳ γὰρ μάλιστα κεκρᾶσθαι 
[ἐστὶ] τὰ στοιχεῖα τῶν μερῶν. 


These passages, which follow naturally upon Empedocles’ theory 
of sense-perception, are of central importance for the interpreta- 
tion of his system as a whole. Everything, according to 447 (which 
is expanded by Actius Iv, 5, 12, DK31A96), has a share of 
thought, which in man, according to 4§8, resides chiefly in the 
blood around the heart. But blood, as we saw in 441, is, like all 
the other constituents of the body, a merely temporary combina- 
tion of the four elements; indeed it is just because the four elements 
are most evenly proportioned in the blood, and blood is therefore 





457 So by the will of Fortune all things possess thought. 

458 ...(The heart) dwelling in the sea of blood which surges back and forth, where 
especially is what is called thought by men; for the blood around men’s hearts is their 
thought. 

459 And he has the same theory about wisdom and ignorance. Wisdom ts of like by like, 
ignorance of unlike by unlike, wisdom being either identical with or closely akin to percep- 
tion. For having enumerated how we know each thing by its equivalent, he added at the 
end that “out of these things are all things fitted together and constructed, and by these do 
they think and feel pleasure or pain’. So it ts especially with the blood that they think; for 
in the blood above all other parts the elements are blended. 


344 


EMPEDOCLES 


equally perceptive of all four elements outside, that it is the chief 
seat of perception. It seems inevitably to follow that both per- 
ception and thought (which, if not identical, are at any rate, as 
459 says, very closely related) arc as temporary as the physical 
compound on which they depend. Where, then, is there room in 
Empedocles’ physical poem for the immortal soul that is the very 
basis of the Purifications? That is a question that must eventually 
be discussed (pp. 357ff.). Meanwhile, however, the last two 
phases in the cosmic cycle, the rule of Strife and the reverse 
cosmogony, remain to be described. 


THE RULE OF STRIFE 
460 Fr. 26, ll. 3~7, Simplicius Phys. 33, 21 (cf. 418) 

αὐτὰ γὰρ ἔστιν ταῦτα, δι᾽ ἀλλήλων δὲ θέοντα 

γίγνοντ᾽ ἄνθρωποί τε καὶ ἄλλων ἔθνεα θηρῶν 

ἄλλοτε μὲν Φιλότητι συνερχόμεν᾽ εἰς ἕνα κόσμον, 

ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖ δίχ᾽ ἕκαστα φορούμενα Νείκεος ἔχθει, 

εἰσόκεν ἕν συμφύντα τὸ πᾶν ὑπένερθε γένηται. 
461 Aristotle Met. A4, οϑηαϑο (DK31A37) πολλαχοῦ γοῦν 
αὐτῷ (sc. Empedocles) ἡ μὲν Φιλία διακρίνει τὸ δὲ Neixos συγκρίνει. 
ὅταν μὲν γὰρ εἰς τὰ στοιχεῖα διίστηται τὸ πᾶν ὑπὸ τοῦ Νείκους, 
τότε τὸ πῦρ εἰς Ev συγκρίνεται καὶ τῶν ἄλλων στοιχείων ἕκαστον " 
ὅταν δὲ πάλιν ὑπὸ τῆς Φιλίας συνίωσιν εἰς τὸ ἕν, ἀναγκαῖον ἐξ 
ἑκάστον τὰ μόρια διακρίνεσθαι πάλιν. 


If Empedocles ever described the rule of Strife in detail, the 
description has not survived; the only references to it in extant 
fragments are those in 418 and 460. The omission, however, is 
sufficiently repaired by 461. Whereas during the rule of Love the 
four elements were so cvenly mixed that the whole sphere pre- 
sented no perceptible qualities whatever, during the rule of Strife 
they are completely separated one from the other into four homo- 
gencous masses. Even if Empedocles himself gave no detailed 





460 There are these alone, but running through one another they become men and the 
tribes of beasts, at one time coming together through Love into one order, at another each 
borne apart from the others by the enmity of Strife, till they have grown into one and are 
utterly subdued. 

461 At least on many occasions he makes Love segregate things and Strife aggregate them. 
For when the universe is dissolved into its elements by Strife, fire 1s aggregated into one, and 
so ts each of the other elements; but when again under the influence of Love they come 
together into one, the parts must again be segregated out of each element. (After Ross) 


345 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


description of the rule of Strife, it is perhaps legitimate to imagine 
four concentric spheres, with (to judge from two isolated hints 
from Aristotle’) the lighter elements, fire and air, outside, and the 
heavier, earth and water, nearer to the centre. And in that case 
(to judge this time from the opposite polar stage, the rule of Love, 
in which Strife is altogether excluded from the Sphcre) Love would 
now be excluded, while Strife presumably pervaded each of the 
four separated elements (but see the next section). 

: (1) 462 Ar. de gen. et corr. ΒΘ, 334a1 (DK 31853) διέκρινε μὲν γὰρ τὸ 

Νεῖκος, ἠνέχθη δ᾽ ἄνω ὁ αἰθὴρ οὐχ ὑπὸ τοῦ Nelxous, GAA’ ὁτὲ μέν φησιν 

ὥσπερ ἀπὸ τύχης--- 

(fr. 54) οὕτω γὰρ συνέκυρσε θέων τοτέ, πολλάκι δ᾽ ἄλλως--- 
ὁτὲ δέ φησι πεφυκέναι τὸ πῦρ ἄνω φέρεσθαι. 


(2) 463 Ar. Phys. B4, 196220 (DK 31853) ... Ἐμπεδοκλῆς οὐκ ἀεὶ τὸν 
ἀέρα ἀνωτάτω ἀποκρίνεσθαί φησιν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτως ἂν τύχῃ. 


TRANSITION BACK TO RULE OF LOVE 


464 Fr. 35, Simpl. de caelo 529, 1 and Physics 32, 13, and Fr. 36, 
Stobaeus Anth. 1, 10, 11 

αὐτὰρ ἐγὼ παλίνορσος ἐλεύσομαι ἐς πτόρον ὕμνων, 

τὸν πρότερον κατέλεξα, λόγου λόγον ἐξοχετεύων, 

κεῖνον " ἐπεὶ Νεῖκος μὲν ἐνέρτατον ἵκετο βένθος 

δίνης, ἐν δὲ μέσῃ Φιλότης στροφάλιγγι γένηται, 

5 ἐν τῇ δὴ τάδε πάντα συνέρχεται Ev μόνον εἶναι, 
οὐκ ἄφαρ, ἀλλὰ θελημὰ συνιστάμεν᾽ ἄλλοθεν ἄλλα. 
τῶν δὲ συνερχομένων ἐξ ἔσχατον ἵστατο Neikos." 
πολλὰ δ᾽ ἄμεικτ᾽ ἔστηκε κεραϊιομένοισιν ἐναλλάξ, 
ὅσσ᾽ ἔτι Νεῖκος ἔρυκε μετάρσιον οὐ γὰρ ἀμεμφέως 

10 τῶν πᾶν ἐξέστηκεν ETT” ἔσχατα τέρματα κύκλου, 





462 For though Strife was segregating the elements, it was not by Strife that aither was 
borne upwards; on the contrary, he sometimes speaks as if it happened by mere chance— 
‘ for so, at the time, it chanced to be running, though often otherwise’—while sometimes he 
says it 1s the nature of fire to be borne upwards. 


463 ...Empedocles says that the air is not always separated into the highest region, but 
as it may chance. 


464 But now I shall turn back again to the channel of song that I proclaimed before, 
drawing off from my discourse another discourse. When Strife had reached to the lowest 
depth of the whirl, and Love was in the middle of the eddy, under her do all these things 
come together so as to be one, not all at once, but congregating each from different directions 
at their will, And as they came together Strife began to move outwards to the circumference. 
Yet alternating with the things that were being mixed many other things remained unmixed, 
all that Strife, still aloft, retained; for not yet had it altogether retired from them, blame- 


346 


EMPEDOCLES 


ἀλλὰ τὰ μέν τ᾽ ἐνέμιμνε μελέων τὰ δέ τ᾽ ἐξεβεβήκει. 
ὅσσον δ᾽ αἰὲν ὑπεκτροθέοι, τόσον αἷὲν ἐττήει 
ἠπιόφρων Φιλότητος ἀμεμφέος ἄμβροτος ὁρμή᾽ 
αἶψα δὲ θνήτ᾽ ἐφύοντο, τὰ πρὶν μάθον ἀθάνατ᾽ εἶναι. 
15 τωρά Te τὰ πρὶν ἄκρητα διαλλάξαντα κελεύθους. 
τῶν δέ τε μισγομένων χεῖτ᾽ ἔθνεα μυρία θνητῶν, 
παντοίαις ἰδέησιν ἀρηρότα, θαῦμα ἰδέσθαι. 


465 Aristotle de σασίο 2, 301a14 ἐκ διεστώτων δὲ καὶ κινουμένων 
οὐκ εὔλογον ποιεῖν τὴν γένεσιν. διὸ καὶ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς ποαραλείτπει 
τὴν ἐπὶ τῆς Φιλότητος᾽ οὐ γὰρ av ἠδύνατο συστῆσαι τὸν οὐρανὸν 
ἐκ κεχωρισμένων μὲν κατασκευάφων, σύγκρισιν δὲ ποιῶν διὰ τὴν 
Φιλότητα: ἐκ διακεκριμένων γὰρ συνέστηκεν ὁ κόσμος τῶν στοιχείων, 
ὥστ᾽ ἀναγκαῖον γίνεσθαι ἐξ ἑνὸς καὶ συγκεκριμένου. 

1 L. 7 of fr. 35 is, in the text of Simplicius, identical with 1. 16. Since fr. 36, 

consisting of the solitary line that is printed above as ]. 7, fits so naturally 

into the context, it seems most probable that Simplicius himsclf is 


responsible for an error in transcription and that the fr. ran as here 
printed. 


Aristotle’s remark in 465, that Empedocles passes over the 
cosmogony of the transition to the rule of Love, is not perhaps 
strictly true; not only 464 but also, as we saw, 443 to 446 are all 
concerned with this phase in the cosmic cycle. But there is no 
denying that 464 is both vaguc in outline and obscure in detail. 
What, for instance, is the δίνη, ‘whirl’, of 1. 4, and how did it 
arise? (The δίνη described on p. 333 15 clearly not the same as 
this one.) And is its ‘lowest depth’, to which Strife is said in 1. 3 
to have fallen, the same as ‘the outermost boundaries of the circle’ 
in 1. τοῦ It would seem that it must be so, but it is far from clear 











lessly, to the outermost boundaries of the circle, but while some parts of it had gone forth, 
some still remained within. And in proportion as it was ever running forth outwards, so a 
gentle immortal stream of blameless Love was ever coming in. And straightway what before 
had attained to immortality became mortal, what had been unmixed before was now mixed, 
each exchanging its path. And as these things mingled, countless tribes of mortal things 
were spread abroad, endowed with shapes of every kind, a wonder to behold. 


465 But there is no sense in starting generation from an original state in which bodies 
are separated and in movement. Hence Empedocles omits the period when Love was 
gaining ascendancy; for he could not have constructed the heavens by building them up out 
of bodies in separation, making them combine by the power of Love; since our world has its 
constituent elements in separation, and therefore presupposes a previous state of unity and 
combination. (After Stocks) 


347 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


from Empedocles’ own words. The reason for this obscurity is not 
hard to guess. Empedocles, by his introduction of the cosmic 
cycle, has set himself a task which might well overtax even the 
most fertile imagination: he has imposed upon himself the neces- 
sity of describing a cosmogony and a world that are the exact 
reverse of the world we know and of the cosmogony that brought 
it into being. It cannot even be said that the cosmic cycle was 
unavoidable: it would surely have been a simpler undertaking to 
describe the emergence from the Sphere of a world in which the 
two motive forces, Love and Strife, instead of prevailing alter- 
nately, reached a stable equilibrium. Why then—and this is 
another question of central importance for our understanding of 
Empedocles’ system—did he introduce the cosmic cycle at all? 
The answer is to be found, if at all, in the Purtfications. Between the 
physical poem and the Purifications there are certain remarkable 
parallels of detail, on which comment will be made on pp. 349 ff. 
But the most remarkable parallel of all is that between the cosmic 
cycle in the physical poem and the cycle through which the soul 
passes in the Purifications. It 15, at the least, very probable that 
it is the analogy, already encountered in Empedocles (p. 330), 
between microcosm and macrocosm, man and the world, that 
induced him so to complicate his cosmology with the otherwise 
arbitrary cycle. 


THE ‘PURIFICATIONS’ 


The Purtfications is concerned with the fall of man and with the 
practices necessary for his restoration. The scheme 15 found else- 
where in Pindar’s ‘Orphic’ odes, and especially in the second 
Olympian, written in 476 B.c. for Theron of Acragas, Empedocles’ 
own city. The cycle in this scheme starts from unity and peace, 
falls into disorder and strife, recovers, and so begins again. It was 
probably this cycle of the soul that suggested to Empedocles his 
cosmic cycle. At any rate we find not only that the cosmic cycle 
runs as parallel as possible to it but also that, whenever he can, 
Empedocles marks the parallel with parallel phrases. The best 
course will be to follow the pattern already adopted in discussing 
the physical poem, and look in turn at what little evidence survives 
about each phase of the soul’s cycle. 


348 


EMPEDOCLES 


THE STATE OF PRIMAL INNOCENCE 

466 Fr. 128, Porphyrius de abstinentia u1, 21 
οὐδέ Tis ἦν κείνοισιν “Apns θεὸς οὐδὲ Κυδοιμὸς 
οὐδὲ Ζεὺς βασιλεὺς οὐδὲ Κρόνος οὐδὲ Ποσειδῶν, 
ἀλλὰ Κύπρις βασίλεια. 
τὴν οἵ γ᾽ εὐσεβέεσσιν ἀγάλμασιν ἱλάσκοντο 

5 γραπτοῖς τε φῴοισι μύροισί τε δαιδαλεόδμοις 

σμύρνης τ᾽ ἀκρήτου θυσίαις λιβάνου τε θνώδους, 
ξανθῶν τε σπονδὰς μελίτων ῥίτττοντες ἐς οὖδας᾽ 
ταύρων τ᾽ ἀκρήτοισι φόνοις οὐ δεύετο βωμός, 
ἀλλὰ μύσος τοῦτ᾽ ἔσκεν ἐν ἀνθρώποισι μέγιστον, 

10 θυμὸν ἀπορραίσαντας ἐνέδμεναι ἠέα γυῖα. 


According to Hesiod (Works and Days 109), whose word on such 
subjects carried great weight, the rule of Kronos belongs to the 
Golden Age at the beginning of the world. Irrespective, therefore, 
of the reigns of Zeus and Poscidon (the latter of which has been 
confidently but quite conjecturally (cf. chapter 1, pp. 37 ff.) said 
to be borrowed by Empedocles from the ‘traditional’ Orphic 
mythology), the important point in 466 is that, even before the 
reign of Kronos, Kupris reigned alone and there was no god 
Arcs. Now Kupris is plainly identical with Aphrodite, with 
whom, in 424, the cosmic force of Love is expressly equated, while 
Ares equally plainly represents Strife. The primal state of man’s 
innocence exactly corresponds, therefore, to the cosmic rule of 
Love, when Strife is wholly excluded. Moreover, if it be true, as 
most modern scholars except Bignone agree, that fr. 134 comes 
from the Purifications, then the parallel between the two poems calls 
for no further proof: 


467 Fr. 134, Ammonius de interpretatione 249, 6 Busse 
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀνδρομέῃ κεφαλῇ κατὰ γυῖα κέκασται, 
ov μὲν ἀπαὶ νώτοιο δύο κλάδοι ἀΐσσονται, 





466 They had no god Ares nor Kudoimos, nor king Zeus nor Kronos nor Poseidon, but 
Kupris as queen. Her did they propitiate with holy images, with paintings of living 
creatures, with perfumes of varied fragrance and with sacrifice of pure myrrh and sweet- 
scented frankincense, casting to the ground libations of golden honey. Their altar was not 
steeped in the pure blood of bulls, but rather was this the greatest abomination among men, 
to tear out the life from the goodly limbs and eat them. 


467 He boasts not a human head upon his body, two branches spring not from his 
349 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


οὐ πόδες, οὐ Bok γοῦν᾽, οὐ μήδεα λαχνήεντα, 
ἀλλὰ φρὴν ἱερὴ καὶ ἀθέσφατος ἔπλετο μοῦνον, 
φροντίσι κόσμον ἅπαντα καταΐσσουσα θοῆσιν. 


The close parallelism between this and the description of the 
Sphere in 422 is obvious.t But even if Bignone is right and this 
fragment actually comes, like 422, from the physical poem, it 1s 
still perhaps worth noting that, while cosmogony is evidently a 
sort of dismemberment of the Sphere by the forces of Strife, 
dismemberment of living things is described at the end of 466 as 
‘the greatest abomination among men’.? To emphasizc the 
analogy between the cosmic rule of Love and the reign of Kupris 
in man’s primal innocence 15 not, of course, to say that they are 
one and the same; the point is rather that the latter may serve to 
explain the obscuritics of the former. 

X On such verbal parallels it is admittedly arguable that, of two uncon- 

nected poems, passages from one (including this passage, which has been 

said to be concerned with Apollo) were subsequently adapted to the 


othcr. That argument, howcver, seems to be considerably weakened, if 
not invalidated, by the parallelism of content between the two poems. 


2 A further indication of the parallelism is to be found in Aristotle’s 
description of the cosmic Sphere (at Met. B4, 1000b3) as εὐδαιμονέστατον, 
‘happiest’ or ‘most blessed’. It could perhaps be argued that this is 
merely another trace of the Pythagorean moral dualism; but the survival 
of that dualism in Empedocles supports the view that the cosmic state and 
man’s state are parallel. 


THE PRIMAL SIN AND FALL OF MAN 
468 Fr. 136, Sextus adv. math. 1x, 129 
οὐ παύσεσθε φόνοιο δυσηχέος; οὐκ ἐσορᾶτε 
ἀλλήλους δάπτοντες ἀκηδείησι νόοιο; 
469 Fr. 137, Sextus adv. math. 1x, 129 
μορφὴν δ᾽ ἀλλάξαντα πατὴρ φίλον υἱὸν ἀείρας 
σφάξει ἐπευχόμενος μέγα νήπιος" of δ᾽ ἀπορεῦνται 
λισσόμενον θύοντες ὁ δ᾽ αὖ νήκουστος ὁμοκλέων 





shoulders, no feet has he, no swift knees, no shaggy parts; rather is he only a holy, un- 
speakable mind, darting with swift thoughts over the whole world. 

468 Will ye not cease from ill-sounding bloodshed? See ye not that in careless folly ye 
are consuming one another? 

469 Father lifts up his own dear son, his form changed, and, praying, slays him— 
witless fool; and the people are distracted as they sacrifice the imploring victim; and he, 


359 


EMPEDOCLES 


σφάξας ἐν μεγάροισι κακὴν ἀλεγύνατο δαῖτα. 
5 ὡς δ᾽ αὔτως πατέρ᾽ υἱὸς ἑλὼν καὶ μητέρα τταῖδες 
θυμὸν ἀπορραίσαντε φίλας κατὰ σάρκας ἔδουσιν. 
470 Fr. 139, Porphyrius de abstinentia τι, 31 


οἴμοι 6 τ᾽ οὐ πρόσθεν με διώλεσε νηλεὲς ἦμαρ, 
πρὶν σχέτλι᾽ ἔργα βορᾶς περὶ χείλεσι μητίσασθαι. 


The second stage in the religious poem is the primal sin and the 
consequent fall of man. In ‘Orphic’ myth this primal sin was 
committed by the Titans, who dismembered and ate Dionysus in 
the form of a bull; and similarly in Empedocles, before man’s fall, 
‘the altar did not reek with pure bull’s blood’ (466, 1. 8). But 
with Empedocles, as 468 and 469 suggest,’ the primal sin scems to 
have been rather bloodshed and meat-eating in general. This 
primal sin evidently Ied to the gencral fall of man: the fall 15 
conceived as collective, and leads to the end of the rule of Kupris. 
But at the same time, apparently, this did not preclude also the 
particular fall of the individual soul. 470 shows in fact that the 
individual soul falls through exactly the same crime as led to the 
collective fall; and once the individual soul has fallen we pass to 
the next stage in its cycle. 


t Although 468 and 469 do not describe the primal sin but contemporary 
sin, there can be little doubt that this contemporary sin is a repetition of 
the primal sin. 


INCARNATION AND TRANSMIGRATION 
471 Fr. 115, Hippolytus Ref. vu, 29 and Plutarch de exilio 17, 


60o7c , oA ~ ~ , 
ἔστιν ᾿Ανάγκης χρῆμα, θεῶν ψήφισμα παλαιόν, 
ἀίδιον, πλατέεσσι κατεσφρηγισμένον ὅρκοις" 
εὖτέ τις ἀμπλακίῃσι φόνῳ φίλα γυῖα μιήνῃ, 
(veixel 8°) ὅς κ᾿ ἐπίορκον ὁμαρτήσας ἐπτομόσσῃ, 

5 δαίμονες οἵτε μακραίωνος λελάχασι βίοιο, 





deaf to its cries, slays it and makes ready in his halls an evil feast. And likewise son seizes 
Sather, and children their mother, and, tearing out the life, eat the flesh of their dear ones. 
470 Alas that the pitiless day of death did not first destroy me before I contrived the 
wretched deed of eating flesh with my lips. 

471 There is an oracle of Necessity, ancient decree of the gods, eternal and sealed with 
broad oaths: whenever one of those demi-gods, whose lot is long-lasting life, has sinfully 
defiled his dear limbs with bloodshed, or following strife has sworn a false oath, thrice ten 


351 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


τρίς μιν μυρίας Opas ἀπὸ μακάρων ἀλάλησθαι, 
φυομένους παντοῖα διὰ χρόνον εἴδεα θνητῶν 
ἀργαλέας βιότοιο μεταλλάσσοντα κελεύθους. 
αἰθέριον μὲν γάρ σφε μένος πόντονδε διώκει, 

10 πόντος δ᾽ ἐς χθονὸς οὖδας d&rrétrtucE, γαῖα δ᾽ ἐς αὐγὰς 
ἠελίου φαέθοντος, ὁ δ᾽ αἰθέρος ἔμβαλε δίναις" 
ἄλλος δ᾽ ἐξ ἄλλου δέχεται, στυγέουσι δὲ πάντες. 
τῶν καὶ ἐγὼ νῦν εἶμι, φυγὰς θεόθεν καὶ ἀλήτης, 
νείκεϊ μαινομένῳ πίσυνος. 


472 Fr. 118, Clement Strom. ΠΙ, 14, 2 
κλαῦσά Te καὶ κώκυσα ἰδὼν ἀσυνήθεα χῶρον. 


473 Fr. 121, Hierocles ad carmina aurea 24 and Proclus in 
Cratylum p. 97 Pasquali 
ες ἀτερπέα χῶρον, 
ἔνθα Φόνος τε Κότος τε καὶ ἄλλων ἔθνεα Κηρῶν 
αὐχμηραί τε Νόσοι καὶ Σήψιες ἔργα τε ῥευστὰ 
ἼἌτης ἀν λειμῶνα κατὰ σκότος ἠλάσκουσιν. 


The fallen soul, as is clear from 471, goes the round of the elements, 
banished from its proper abode. We may compare the so-called 
apeniautism of Hesiod’s Theogony 793 ff.—banishment, that is, for 
a ‘great year’, a period the length of which varies in different 
sources but in Empedocles is 30,000 seasons. It may perhaps be 
that this period is, in Empcdocles, the same as that of the cosmic 
cycle, but there is unfortunately no evidence to substantiate the 
conjecture. Empedocles, it should be noted, has no equivalent 
of Hell: on the contrary, the soul, as 472 and 473 show, pays 
the penalty for its sin in this world—a world, as other frag- 
ments prove, of opposites;t and its objective throughout its suc- 
cessive incarnations is, as we shall see in the next section, to 





thousand seasons does he wander far from the blessed, being born throughout that time in 
the forms of all manner of mortal things and changing one baleful path of life for another. 
The might of the air pursues him into the sea, the sea spews him forth on to the dry land, 
the earth casts him into the rays of the burning sun, and the sun into the eddies of air. One 
takes him from the other, but all like abhor him. Of these I too am now one, a fugitive 
from the gods and a wanderer, who put my trust in raving strife. 


472 I wept and wailed when I saw the unfamiliar place. 


473 ...ajoyless place, where Bloodshed and Wrath, and tribes of Fates too, withering 
Plagues and Corruptions and Deluges roam in the darkness over the field of Doom. 


35? 


EMPEDOCLES 


escape again from the whcel of birth back to the state of bliss 
from which it has fallen.? 


1 Cf. eg. 474 Fr. 122, Plutarch de trang. an. 15, 4748 (which, as Burnet 
says (EGP 223 n. 2), ‘is closely modelled on the Catalogue of Nymphs in 
Iliad xvi, 39 sqq.’) 


ἔνθ᾽ ἧσαν Χθονίη τε καὶ ἩΗλιότη ταναῶπις, 

Δῆρίς θ᾽ αἱματόεσσα καὶ ‘Appovin θεμερῶώτπις, 

Καλλιστώ τ᾽ Αἰσχρή τε, Θόωσά τε Anvain τε, 

Νημερτής τ᾽ ἐρόεσσα μελάγκουρός τ᾽ ᾿Ασάφεια. 
This list, which is continued in fr. 123, is clearly a catalogue, in mythical 
garb, of the opposites that characterize this "Atns λειμῶν or ‘vale of tears’ 
(473, 1. 4). 
2 It is difficult at this stage to avoid language which may mistakenly 
suggest that the soul which has sinned falls into this world. Actually of 
coursc, by the interpretation here offered, it has been in this world 
throughout. Just as the four stages of the cosmic cycle all take place 
within the Sphere, so the soul too goes through all the stages in its cycle 
inside this world. Since, however, (1) the world is at present reverting to 
the rule of Strife (see p. 339), (2) Empedocles is yet convinced that he 
himself is about to cscape from the wheel of birth back to the primal state 
of bliss (see the next section), it seems that the cycle of the individual soul 
and the cosmic cycle, though parallel, are not synchronized. 


Such, so far as the extant fragments permit a reconstruction, 
was the nature of man’s primal sin and fall. But at this stage we 
must turn back to the physical poem, and especially to fr. 30 
(429): ‘But when Strife waxed great in the limbs, and sprang to 
his prerogatives as the time was fulfilled which is fixed for them in 
turn by a broad oath. ..’. Few as are the lines that survive about 
the first disruption of the cosmic rule of Love, it is surely not pure 
accident that they contain so many echoes of man’s fall. Strife is 
the cause of the disruption of the cosmic Sphere: strife is the cause 
of man’s fall (471, ll. 13-14). In the cosmic cycle there is the fulness 
of time set for the alternation of Love and Strife: the duration of 
the fall of man from the rule of Kupris to the world of opposites is 
fixed at 30,000 seasons (471, 1]. 6). The pact between Love and 
Strife in the physical world is confirmed ‘by a broad oath’: the 
oracle of Necessity that fixed the period of the soul’s banishment 
is ‘sealed by broad oaths’. Once again in fact these echoes in a 
mere three lines are sufficient to establish that the cosmic disrup- 





474 There were Chthonie and far-seeing Heliope, bloody Rivalry and kindly-faced 
Harmony, Beauty and Ugliness, Swiftness and Tardiness, lovely Truthfulness and black- 
haired Obscurity. 


23 353 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


tion of the original Sphere is parallel to, and probably therefore 
suggested by, the fall of man through the dismemberment of 
living things. 


ESCAPE FROM WHEEL OF BIRTH 
475 Fr. 127, Aelian Nat. anim. xu, 7 


ἐν θήρεσσι λέοντες ὀρειϊιλεχέες χαμαιεῦναι 
γίγνονται, δάφναι δ᾽ ἐνὶ δένδρεσιν ἠυκόμοισιν. 


476 Fr. 117, Diogenes Laertius vim, 77 
ἤδη yap ποτ᾽ ἐγὼ γενόμην KoUpds τε Κόρη τε 
θάμνος τ᾽ οἰωνός τε καὶ ἔξαλος ἔλλοπος ἰχθύς. 


4770 Frr. 146 and 147, Clement Strom. Iv, 150, 1 and v, 122, 3 


eis δὲ τέλος μάντεις Te καὶ ὑμνοπόλοι Kal ἰητροὶ 
καὶ πρόμοι ἀνθρώποισιν ἐπιχθονίοισι πέλονται, 
ἔνθεν ἀναβλαστοῦσι θεοὶ τιμῆσι φέριστοι, 
ἀθανάτοις ἄλλοισιν ὁμέστιοι, αὐτοτράπεζοι 
ἐόντες, ἀνδρείων ἀχέων ἀπόκληροι, ἀτειρεῖς. 

478 Fr. 112, Diogenes Laertius vim, 62 and Clement Strom. v1, 30 
ὦ φίλοι, of μέγα ἄστυ κατὰ ξανθοῦ ᾿Ακράγαντος 
vaiet’ ἀν᾽ ἄκρα πόλεος, ἀγαθῶν μελεδήμονες ἔργων, 
ξείνων αἰδοῖοι λιμένες, κακότητος ἄττειροι, 
χαίρετ᾽ " ἐγὼ δ᾽ ὑμῖν θεὸς ἄμβροτος, οὐκέτι θνητὸς 

5 πωλεῦμαι μετὰ πᾶσι τετιμένος, ὥσπερ ἔοικα, 
ταινίαις τε περίστετττος στέφεσίν τε θαλείοις. 
τοῖσιν ἅμ᾽ (εὖτ᾽) ἂν ἵκωμαι ἐς ἄστεα τηλεθάοντα, 
ἀνδράσιν ἠδὲ γυναιξί, σεβίφτομαι᾽ of δ᾽ ἅμ᾽ ἕπονται 
μυρίοι ἐξερέοντες, ὅπτῃ πρὸς κέρδος ἀταρπός, 





47ς Among beasts they are born as lions that lurk in their mountain lairs, and among 
Sair-tressed trees as laurels, 


476 For already have I once been a boy and a girl, a bush and a bird and a dumb sea fish. 


477 But at the end they come among men on earth as prophets, bards, doctors and princes; 
and thence they arise as gods mighty in honour, sharing with the other immortals their 
hearth and their table, without part in human sorrows or weariness. 


478 Friends who dwell throughout the great town of golden Acragas, up by the citadel, 
men mindful of good deeds, unversed in wickedness, havens of respect for strangers, all hail. 
I go about among you all an immortal god, mortal no more, honoured as 1s my due and 
crowned with garlands and verdant wreaths. Whenever I enter the prosperous townships 
with these my followers, men and women both, I am revered; they follow me in countless 


354 


EMPEDOCLES 


10 οἱ μὲν μαντοσυνέων κεχρημένοι, of δ᾽ ἐπὶ νούσων 
παντοίων ἐτύθοντο κλύειν εὐηκέα βάξιν, 
δηρὸν δὴ χαλεπῇσι πετπαρμένοι (ἀμφ᾽ ὀδύνῃσιν). 


It is only when we come to this fourth and last stage in the 
soul’s cycle that the parallel between it and the cosmic cycle be- 
comes really illuminating; for it was the fourth and last stage in 
the cosmic cycle that appeared so arbitrary and unnatural. The 
fourth stage in the soul’s cycle consists, as we should expect, in the 
return to primal innocence and bliss; it is obviously in fact, from 
the point of view of fallen man, the most vital stage of all. The 
return is accomplished by the gradual ascent, with which these 
passages are concerned, up the scale of lives. 475, according to 
Aclian who preserves it, is concerned with the highest incarnations 
—next, that is, to man—in the animal and vegetable kingdoms; 
while 476 tclls us that Empedocles himself had once sunk so low 
in the scale as to become a bush. The top rung of the scale is 
found in 477, namely ‘prophets, bards, doctors and princes’—and 
Empedocles himself was all of these. Having climbed so far, he is 
at last on the eve of escape from the cycle and will be reincarnated 
no more. As he says in 478, which is the introduction to the 
Purifications, and as he virtually repeats in fr. 113, ‘I go about 
among you an immortal god, no mortal now.’ No wonder 
therefore that, with bliss just ahead, he regards this stage as 
all-important; and no wonder that, regarding the otherwise in- 
explicable cosmic cycle as parallel to the cycle of the soul, he felt 
compelled to describe that most obscure stage in the cosmic cycle, 
the return from the rule of Strife to the rule of Love. The motive 
was sufficient to stimulate him even to so difficult a task. 


ARE THE TWO POEMS REALLY INCOMPATIBLE? 


Though the parallelism between the two poems tells strongly 
against the view that they are quite separate and independent and 
must therefore belong to different periods in Empedocles’ life, 
there is still no denying that they seem to take two widely different 
views of the nature of the soul. The last question to be considered, 
then, is whether the two poems are, as they are usually thought to 
be, fundamentally incompatible, or whether, in view of the marked 





numbers, asking where lies the path to gain, some seeking prophecies, while others, for 
many a day stabbed by grievous pains, beg to hear the word that heals all manner of illness. 


355 25:2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


similarities between them, some escape cannot be found from this 
conclusion. It will be best to approach the question from two 
opposite angles, and consider, first, whether the religious poem 
does indeed reveal belief in the survival of the individual soul, as 
opposed to mere reabsorption into a sort of common reservoir of 
consciousness, and second, whether the physical poem does 
indeed preclude the possibility of any part of the soul, as opposed 
to the whole of it, surviving death. 


INDIVIDUAL SURVIVAL 
479 Ir. 142, Volumina Herculanensia no. 1012, col. 18 
τὸν δ᾽ οὔτ᾽ ἄρ τε Διὸς τέγεοι δόμοι αἰγζιόχοιο 
oU)te ποτ᾽ ᾿Αἴδεω δέζχετ᾽.... 
(Cf. 4771. 4 
ἀθανάτοις ἄλλοισιν ὁμέστιοι, αὐτοτράπεροι.. ..) 
480 Fr. 133, Clement Strom. v, 81, 2 
οὐκ ἔστιν πελάσασθαι (sc. TO θεῖον) ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἐφικτὸν 
ἡμετέροις ἢ χερσὶ λαβεῖν, ἧπεέρ τε μεγίστη 
πειθοῦς ἀνθρώποισιν ἁμαξιτὸς εἰς φρένα πτίτττει. 
(Cf. 467 Il. 4-5 
ἀλλὰ φρὴν ἱερὴ καὶ ἀθέσφατος ἔπλετο μοῦνον, 
φροντίσι κόσμον ἅπαντα καταΐσσουσα Bofjotv.) 
48:1 Hippolytus Ref. vu, 29 (ὨΚ918Β115) καὶ τοῦτό ἐστιν ὃ 
λέγει περὶ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ γεννήσεως ὁ ᾿Εμπεδοκλῆς᾽ 
τῶν καὶ ἐγὼ νῦν εἶμι, φυγὰς θεόθεν καὶ ἀλήτης (= 4711. 13), 
τουτέστι θεὸν καλῶν τὸ ἕν καὶ τὴν ἐκείνου ἑνότητα, ἐν ᾧ ἦν πρὶν 
ὑπὸ τοῦ Νείκους ἀποσπασθῆναι καὶ γενέσθαι ἐν τοῖς πολλοῖς 
τούτοις τοῖς κατὰ τὴν τοῦ Νείκους διακόσμησιν. 


Of these passages 479 (the reference of which is perhaps, how- 
ever, too obscure to support argument) and the line from 477 are 





479 Him will neither the vaulted halls of aegis-bearing Zeus nor the house of Hades ever 
welcome. ... 

480 It is not possible to reach to god and set him before our eyes, nor to grasp him with 
our hands—and that is the broadest way of persuasion leading to the minds of men. 

481 This is just what Empedocles says about his own birth—‘ Of these I too am now 
one, a fugitive from the gods and a wanderer.’ He calls by the name of god, that is to say, 
the One and its unity, in which he himself dwelt before he was snatched thence by Strife 
and born into this world of plurality which Strife has organized. 


356 


EMPEDOCLES 


couched in language so material that, unless they are more 
figurative than is generally supposed, they seem strongly to 
suggest individual survival. On the other hand 480 and the two 
lines from 467, passages which reflect the influence of Xenophances, 
might be thought to tell equally strongly against it. If God is of 
this intangible nature, then it is certainly a tenable view that the 
individual soul, after escape from the cycle of birth, is merely 
reabsorbed into the ‘sacred mind’.t Such is certainly the inter- 
pretation of Hippolytus in 481; but a bishop is perhaps hardly a 
reliable authority on such a topic. Though the evidence on this 
question is far from conclusive, it seems safest on the whole to 
trust to those of Empedocles’ own phrases that tell against any 
such abstract conception of immortality. 


t Apart from the alleged reference to Apollo in 467, other Olympian 
dcities appear in the fragments of the Ka€apyol, notably in 466 and 479. 
It seems unlikely that they are only different aspects of a single divine 
mind. 


THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 
482 (= 458 |. 3) αἷμα γὰρ ἀνθρώποις περικάρδιόν ἐστι νόημα. 
483 (=441 1.5) ἐκ τῶν (sc. the four clements) αἷμά τε γέντο... .. 
484 (-- 454) γαίῃ μὲν γὰρ γαῖαν ὀττώτταμεν, ὕδατι δ᾽ ὕδωρ, 
αἰθέρι δ᾽ αἰθέρα δῖον, ἀτὰρ πυρὶ πῦρ ἀίδηλον, 
στοργὴν δὲ στοργῇ, νεῖκος δέ τε νείκεϊ λυγρῷ. 
485 Aristotle de anima A4, 408a13 ὁμοίως δὲ ἄτοπον καὶ {τὸν 
τὸν λόγον τῆς μίξεως εἶναι τὴν ψυχήν οὐ γὰρ TOV αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον 
ἡ μίξις τῶν στοιχείων Kad’ ἣν σὰρξ καὶ καθ᾽ ἣν ὀστοῦν συμβήσεται 
οὖν πολλάς τε ψυχὰς ἔχειν καὶ κατὰ πᾶν τὸ σῶμα, εἴπερ πάντα μὲν 
ἐκ τῶν στοιχείων μεμειγμένων, ὁ δὲ τῆς μίξεως λόγος ἁρμονία καὶ 
ψυχή. ἀπαιτήσειε δ᾽ ἄν τις τοῦτό γε καὶ παρ᾽ ᾿Εμπεδοκλέους" 





+ me mee 


482 For the blood around men’s hearts is their thought. 

483 From these (sc. the four elements) did blood arise.... 

484 For with earth do we see earth, with water water, with air bright air, with fire 
consuming fire; with Love do we see Love, Strife with dread Strife. 

485 In the same way it is absurd to identify the soul with the formula of the mixture; 
for the mixture of the elements that produces flesh has not the same formula as that which 
produces bone, and so, if everything does indeed consist of a mixture of the elements and if 
the formula of the mixture is indeed the harmony that ts the soul, the same thing will prove 
to have many souls distributed throughout its body. This is indeed a question that one might 


357 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἕκαστον yap αὐτῶν λόγῳ τινί φησιν εἶναι’ πότερον οὖν ὁ λόγος 
ἐστὶν ἡ ψυχή, ἢ μᾶλλον ἕτερόν τι οὖσα ἐγγίγνεται τοῖς μέλεσι; ἔτι 
δὲ πτότερον ἡ Φιλία τῆς τυχούσης αἰτία μίξεως ἢ τῆς κατὰ τὸν λόγον; 
καὶ αὕτη πότερον ὁ λόγος ἐστὶν ἢ παρὰ τὸν λόγον ἕτερόν τι; 


These passages, taken together, not only present the second aspect 
of the problem but also suggest a possible solution. Itis clear from 
483 and 484 that Empedocles himself describes the blood in two 
different ways according to the point of view that is uppermost in 
his mind at the moment. Vicwed simply as a physical compound 
it is described as a mixture, in nearly equal proportions, of the 
four elements and nothing elsc. But viewed as the seat of conscious- 
ness—and this is the point of view that concerns us—it was 
evidently assumed to contain also Love and Strife. Aristotle 
actually inferred from 484 that, since soul consists of all six factors, 
each of them must therefore be a seat of consciousness, recognizing 
its like outside (sce, e.g., de an. A2, 404b8, DK 31B109); but this 
is generally admitted to be a false inference. It is only when all 
six ingredients are combined in appropriate proportions that the 
whole mixture acquires consciousness; and though it is still with 
the earth in the eye that we sec earth, we should not be conscious 
of seeing it if there were not the other ingredients of consciousness 
present as well, including Love and Strife. 

Is there then any part of this composite consciousness, the 
product of all six factors, that can remain conscious in separation 
from the body? Modern scholars unanimously, and perhaps 
rightly, say no; but not so Aristotle. Aristotle was obviously 
puzzled over this question of the relation of the migrating soul to 
the consciousness of the blood, but he never asserts, as moderns do, 
that the latter precludes the former. It appears from 485, where 
he is actually puzzling over the problem, that he concluded that 
Empedocles must have held a ψυχὴ ἁρμονία doctrine (‘the soul is 
an attunement’), the soul which is an attunement being the pro- 
portion of the mixture. But he evidently could not make out how 
in that case the migrating soul came in at all. Was it perhaps a 





put to Empedocles, who maintains that everything owes its existence to the formula of its 
constituents. Is then this formula itself the soul, or is the soul rather something of a 
different nature that arises in the limbs? And again, is Love the cause of any chance 
mixture, or of the mixture in accordance with the formula? And is Love itself the actual 
formula, or something different over and above the formula? 


358 


EMPEDOCLES 


portion of Love that maintained the proportion? ‘Is Love’, he 
asks in the last sentence, ‘the proportion itself or something over 
and above it?’ And with that question he does suggest a possible 
answer to the present problem. 

Love is itself, of course, indestructible and immutable; but there 
must be a portion of it in every living, changing and perishable 
thing. It is therefore inevitably contaminated, in all composite 
things, with Strife; and so, even though essentially immutable, and 
preserving its identity even when contaminated, it is not, as the 
result of this contamination, reabsorbed at the dissolution of the 
body into the mass of Love, but enters, its identity preserved, into 
another body. Eventually, however, it can become so purified as 
to rid itself of the contamination of Strife; and then, at its next 
release, it will either be reabsorbed and return to the unity—the 
rule of Kupris—from which it had fallen, or else, possibly, remain 
as a separate bundle of Love until all Love is reabsorbed in the 
Sphere. It seems possible (but no more than that) that Aristotle’s 
vague suggestion is right and that Empedocles himself did think 
like this. Such an interpretation has at any rate the great 
advantage over any other yet offered that, by providing the 
migrating soul with a physical basis, it resolves the monstrous 
incompatibility between the two poems, and so allows us to attach 
due importance to the obvious parallels between them. 


I Cf. the adjectives δολιχαίων in 425 and μακραίων in 47%. 


There is one last passage which lends support to this reconcilia- 
tion: 


486 Plutarch de exilio 17,607D οὐ γὰρ αἷμα, φησίν (sc. Empe- 
docles), ἡμῖν οὐδὲ πνεῦμα συγκραθέν, ὦ ἄνθρωποι, ψυχῆς οὐσίαν 
καὶ ἀρχὴν παρέσχεν᾽ GAA’ ἐκ τούτων τὸ σῶμα συμπέπλασται 
γηγενὲς καὶ θνητόν. τῆς δὲ ψυχῆς ἀλλαχόθεν ἡκούσης δεῦρο, τὴν 
γένεσιν ἀποδημίαν ὑποκορίφεται, τῷ πρᾳοτάτῳ τῶν ὀνομάτων 
τὸ δὲ ἀληθέστατον φεύγει καὶ πλανᾶται θείοις ἐλαυνομένη δόγμασι 
καὶ νόμοις. 





486 For it is not our blood, he says, nor the blending of our breath that produced the 
essential principle of soul; rather from these ingredients the body is moulded, which is 
earth-born and mortal. Since the soul has come hither from elsewhere, he euphemistically 
calls birth a sojourn abroad—the most comforting of all names; but in truth the soul ts a 
fugitive and a wanderer, banished by the decrees and laws of the gods. 


359 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


It seems likely enough that in this passage, which follows close 
upon the quotation of five lines of fr. 115 (471), Plutarch is para- 
phrasing a lost passage of the Purtfications; and in that case it 
provides just the corroboration required. For by the implication 
that Empedocles regarded the migrating soul and physical 
consciousness as quite distinct, Plutarch would seem to have 
proved, what it is most desirable to prove in order to ac- 
count for the parallelism between them, the connexion and 
compatibility between the two compartments of Empedocles’ 
thought. 


CONCLUSION 


If this neccessarily tentative interpretation of Empedocles’ view of 
the soul is correct, then it places him in a direct current of thought 
flowing from Homcr down to Plato, Aristotle and beyond. For 
Homer, no doubt reflecting a popular view, distinguishes between 
θυμός, the conscious soul, and ψυχή, the life-soul, the former 
perishing with the body, the latter surviving. True that, when 
separated from the body, the surviving soul in Homer is a mere 
shadow, which can only be restored to conscious life by drinking 
blood; to Empcdocles, on the other hand, it is of divine race and 
has fallen for the very reason that it has tasted blood. But that 
contrast might well be deliberate—in which case, of course, it 
would prove that Empedocles is consciously following Homer in 
distinguishing the two souls. Again, looking forward, the same 
twofold distinction is clear enough in Plato. In the Timaeus, for 
instance, he contrasts the immortal part of the soul, which is 
created by the Demiurge himself, with the mortal, including 
perception, which is added by the created deities at the moment 
of union with the body. Most striking of all, we find the same 
distinction in the ‘active reason’ of Aristotle, which, whatever its 
nature, alone has no bodily organ and therefore alone survives 
death. For the reasons suggested it seems not unlikely that 
Empedocles is, in this respect, the connecting link between Homer 
on the one side and Plato on the other. More than any other of 
the Presocratics Empedocles is demonstrably influenced by his 
predecessors; Anaximander, Xenophanes, the Pythagoreans, 
Parmenides, all left their mark upon him, and even his view of the 
soul may possibly have owed something to the view of Heraclitus 
(see pp. 205ff.). The fact that, as we saw, Homer himself provided 


360 


EMPEDOCLES 


the model for the catalogue of opposites in frr. 122 (474) and 123 
is of course of no significance: the stylistic influence of Homer on 
Greek hexameter and elegiac verse was so strong that it would be 
more surprising if Empedocles did not reflect it. But it is at least 
a tenable view that in Empedocles the influence of Homer (or of 
the popular semi-philosophical views which Homer reflects) went 
deeper than that. 


461 


CHAPTER XV 
ANAXAGORAS OF CLAZOMENAE 


DATE AND LIFE 


487 Diogenes Laertius n, 7 (DK59A1) λέγεται δὲ κατὰ τὴν 
Ζέρξου διάβασιν εἴκοσιν ἐτῶν εἶναι, βεβιωκέναι δὲ ἑβδομήκοντα 
δύο. φησὶ δ᾽ ᾿Απολλόδωρος ἐν τοῖς Χρονικοῖς γεγενῆσθαι αὐτὸν 
τῇ ἑβδομηκοστῇ ὀλυμπιάδι (1.6. 500-497 B.C.), τεθνηκέναι δὲ τῷ 
πρώτῳ ἔτει τῆς ἑβδομηκοστῆς ὀγδοῆς (i.e. 4687; ὀγδοηκοστῆς 
ὀγδοῆς Scaligcr, i.e. 4287). ἤρξατο δὲ φιλοσοφεῖν ᾿Αθήνησιν ἐπὶ 
Καλλίου (i.e. 456/5) ἐτῶν εἴκοσιν ὦν, ὥς φησι Δημήτριος ὁ 
Φαληρεὺς ἐν τῇ τῶν ᾿Αρχόντων ἀναγραφῇ, ἔνθα καί φασιν αὐτὸν 
ἐτῶν διατρῖψαι τριάκοντα... .(12). .. περὶ δὲ τῆς δίκης αὐτοῦ διά- 
φορα λέγεται. Σωτίων μὲν γάρ φησιν ἐν τῇ Διαδοχῇ τῶν φιλοσόφων 
ὑπὸ Κλέωνος αὐτὸν ἀσεβείας κριθῆναι, διότι τὸν ἥλιον μύδρον ἔλεγε 
διάπυρον ἀπολογησαμένου δὲ ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ Περικλέους τοῦ μαθητοῦ, 
πέντε ταλάντοις φημιωθῆναι καὶ φυγαδευθῆναι. Σάτυρος δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς 
Βίοις ὑπὸ Θουκυδίδου φησὶν εἰσαχθῆναι τὴν δίκην ἀντιπολιτευο- 
μένου τῷ Περικλεῖ καὶ οὐ μόνον ἀσεβείας, ἀλλὰ καὶ μηδισμοῦ" καὶ 
ἀπόντα καταδικασθῆναι θανάτῳ... .(14).. «καὶ τέλος ἀποχωρήσας 
els Λάμψακον αὐτόθι κατέστρεψεν. ὅτε καὶ τῶν ἀρχόντων τῆς πόλεως 
ἀξιούντων τί βούλεται αὑτῷ γενέσθαι, φάναι, τοὺς παῖδας ἐν ᾧ ἂν ἀπο- 
θάνῃ μηνὶ κατ᾽ ἔτος Traizelv συγχωρεῖν. καὶ φυλάττεται τὸ ἔθος καὶ 
νῦν. (15) τελευτήσαντα δὴ αὐτὸν ἔθαψαν ἐντίμως οἱ Λαμψακηνοί..... 





487 He is said to have been twenty years old at the time of Xerxes’ crossing, and to have 
lived to seventy-two. Apollodorus says in his Chronicles that he was born in the 
seventieth Olympiad and died in the first year of the eighty-erghth. He began to be a 
philosopher at Athens in the archonship of Callias, at the age of twenty, as Demetrius 
Phalereus tells us in his Register of archons, and they say he spent thirty years there... . 
There are different accounts given of his trial. Sotion, in his Succession of philosophers, 
says that he was prosecuted by Cleon for impiety, because he maintained that the sun was a 
red-hot mass of metal, and that after Pericles, his pupil, had made a speech in his defence, 
he was fined five talents and exiled. Satyrus in his Lives, on the other hand, says that the 
charge was brought by Thucydides in his political campaign against Pericles; and he adds 
that the charge was not only for impiety but for Medism as well; and he was condemned to 
death in absence....Finally he withdrew to Lampsacus, and there died. It is said that 
when the rulers of the city asked him what privilege he wished to be granted, he replied that 
the children should be given a holiday every year in the month in which he died. The custom 
is preserved to the present day. When he died the Lampsacenes buried him with full honours. 


362 


ANAXAGORAS 


488 Aristotle Met. A3, 984a11 (=410) ᾿Αναξαγόρας δὲ ὁ 
Κλατομένιος τῇ μὲν ἡλικίᾳ πρότερος ὧν τούτου (sc. Empedocles), 
τοῖς δ᾽ ἔργοις ὕστερος. ... 

489 Plato Phaedrus 270A (ὨΚΚ 594 15) ὃ (se. τὸ ὑψηλόνουν) καὶ 
Περικλῆς πρὸς τῷ εὐφυὴς εἶναι ἐκτήσατο προσπεσὼν γὰρ οἶμαι 
τοιούτῳ ὄντι ᾿Αναξαγόρᾳ, μετεωρολογίας ἐμπλησθεὶς καὶ ἐπὶ 
φύσιν νοῦ τε καὶ ἀνοίας ἀφικόμενος, ὧν δὴ πέρι τὸν πολὺν λόγον 
ἐποιεῖτο ᾿Αναξαγόρας, ἐντεῦθεν εἵλκυσεν ἐπὶ τὴν λόγων τέχνην τὸ 
πρόσφορον αὐτῇ. 


These passages suffice to show the difficulty of determining the 
dates of Anaxagoras’ life. The first section of 487, most of which 
probably represents mere conjecture by Apollodorus based on a 
statement of Demetrius Phalereus which it 15 impossible to recon- 
struct, immediately presents acute problems of chronology; for 
even if we accept, as we apparently must, the emendation of 
Scaliger and conclude that Anaxagoras lived from ca. 500 to 
428 B.C., it is still necessary, in order to make the passage consistent, 
to suppose that the words ἐπὶ Καλλίου, ‘in the archonship of 
Callias’, should rather read ἐπὶ Καλλιάδου, ‘in the archonship of 
Calliadcs’, i.e. 480 B.c. That would give the following outline: 


Born 500/499 B.c. 
Came to Athens and began his 

philosophical activities 480/79 B.C. 
Died at Lampsacus 4.28/7 B.C. 


All that can be said is that these dates may well be approximately 
right; for 488, which might have thrown some light on the 
problem, is robbed of most of its value, not only by our ignorance 
of the exact dates of Empedoclcs (see pp. 320f.), but also by the 
ambiguity of its last phrase, which may mean either that Anaxa- 
goras wrote his book after Empedocles (the more probable inter- 
pretation), or that he was more up-to-date (or even, by Alexander’s 
interpretation, inferior) in his views. 





488 Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, who, though older than Empedocles, was later in his 
philosophical activity.... (Trans. Ross) 


489 Pericles acquired high-mindedness in addition to his natural talents; for he fell in, 
I believe, with Anaxagoras, who already possessed this quality, and steeping himself in 
natural speculation, and grasping the true nature of mind and folly (which were the subjects 
of much of Anaxagoras’ discussion), he drew from that source anything that could con- 
tribute towards the art of debate. 


363 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


The problem of the date of his trial is even more difficult. 
A. E. Taylor (CQ11 (1917) 81-7) held that (1) Plato consistently 
conveys the impression that Anaxagoras was an important figure 
in Athens before Pcricles’ rise to fame but not after Socrates grew 
up; (2) Anaxagoras could not have attained the position at 
Lampsacus that the last sentences of 487 suggest unless he had 
spent a considerable time there. He therefore concludes that ‘the 
account given by Satyrus was right in placing his prosecution at 
the beginning and not at the close of Pericles’ political carecr’, 
i.e. ca. 450B.c. On the other hand J. A. Davison (CQN.S. 3 (1953) 
33 45), arguing in favour of accepting both Satyrus’ and Sotion’s 
accounts, surmiscs that therc must have been an amnesty (other- 
wise unattested) in ca. 445/4 B.c. by which Anaxagoras was per- 
mitted toreturn to Athens, and estimates the relevant dates as follows: 


Prosecuted by Thucydides ca. 456/5 B.C. 
Conjectured amnesty after Thirty 

Years’ Peace Ca. 445/4 B.C. 
Prosecuted by Cleon Ca. 433-430 B.C. 
Died at Lampsacus 428/7 B.C. 


Fortunately, from the point of view of the historian of philosophy, 
the exact date of the trial (or trials) is of relatively little importance. 
There is ample evidence in the fragments of Anaxagoras’ own 
book that he wrote Jater than either Parmenides or Zeno (sce 
pp. 368ff.); and it seems likely, though it is incapable of proof, 
that while Anaxagoras (in accordance with the more probable 
interpretation of 488) includes implicit criticism of Empedocles, 
Melissus (see p. 305) aims one of his arguments primarily, if not 
exclusively, at Anaxagoras. Fortunately too, the most important 
facts of his life are not in dispute. There can be no question that 
he spent a large part of his active life in Athens,‘ that he was fairly 
intimately associated with Pericles,? that he was prosecuted on a 
charge (at least among others) of impicty, and that he thereupon 
withdrew to Lampsacus.3 

I Anaxagoras is said to have taught both Archelaus (see ch. xvi) and 

Euripides. Cf. 490 Strabo 14, p. 645 Cas. KAagzopévios δ᾽ ἦν ἀνὴρ 


ἐπιφανὴς ᾿Αναξαγόρας ὁ φυσικός, ᾿Αναξιμένους ὁμιλητὴς τοῦ Μιλησίου" 
διήκουσαν δὲ τούτου ᾿Αρχέλαος ὁ φυσικὸς καὶ Εὐριπίδης ὁ ποιητής. Since 





490 Anaxagoras the natural philosopher was a distinguished Clazomenian, an associate 
of Anaximenes of Miletus; and his own pupils included Archelaus the natural philosopher 
and Euripides the poet. 


364 


ANAXAGORAS 


the statement that Anaxagoras was an associate of Anaximenes can mean 
no more than that he reproduced elements of Anaximenes’ cosmology, it 
could be argued that the tradition of Anaxagoras’ own influence on 
Archclaus and Euripides need imply no more. But even by 450 B.c. 
Euripides was at least thirty years old, and it seems almost certain that, in 
a society as small as the intellectual circle at Athens, he would already 
have made the acquaintance of Anaxagoras. For passages in Euripides in 
which the influence of Anaxagoras is said to be manifest see DK 59 A 20a-¢ 
and 33. These citations by later writers seem, however, to prove only that 
the tradition of that influence was later widespread. 


2 Cf. Plutarch Pericles 4. (DK 59415), 5, 8 etc.; also 491 Plutarch Nicias 23 
(DK 59418) ...Kal ᾿Αναξαγόραν εἱρχθέντα μόλις περιεποιήσατο Περικλῆς. 


3 Cf. 492 Alcidamas ap. Aristotle Rhet. B23, 1398b15 καὶ Λαμψακηνοὶ 
᾿Αναξαγόραν ξένον ὄντα ἔθαψαν καὶ τιμῶσιν ἔτι καὶ νῦν. 


WRITINGS 

493 Plato Apology 26D Μὰ Ai’, ὦ ἄνδρες δικασταί, ἐπεὶ TOV μὲν 
ἥλιον λίθον φησὶν εἶναι, τὴν δὲ σελήνην γῆν. ᾿Αναξαγόρον οἴει 
κατηγορεῖν, ὦ φίλε Μέλητε, καὶ οὕτω καταφρονεῖς τῶνδε καὶ οἴει 
αὐτοὺς ἀπείρους γραμμάτων εἶναι, ὥστε οὐκ εἰδέναι ὅτι τὰ ᾿Αναξα- 
γόρου βιβλία τοῦ KAazoueviou γέμει τούτων τῶν λόγων; καὶ δὴ 
καὶ οἱ νέοι ταῦτα trap’ ἐμοῦ μανθάνουσιν ἃ ἔξεστιν ἐνίοτε, εἰ πάνυ 
πολλοῦ, δραχμῆς ἐκ τῆς ὀρχήστρας πριαμένους Σωκράτους κατα- 
γελᾶν, ἐὰν ττροσποιῆται ἑαυτοῦ εἶναι, ἄλλως τε καὶ οὕτως ἄτοτα ὄντα. 
494 Diogenes Laertius 1, 16 οἱ δὲ ἀνὰ ἕν σύγγραμμα Μέλισσος, 
Παρμενίδης, “Avagaydpas. 


That Anaxagoras did indeed write only one book is almost cer- 
tain; the other writings attributed to him by late and unrcliable 
authorities—a treatise on perspective, another on the squaring of 
the circle and a book of problems—if they ever existed at all, are 
most unlikely to be the genuine work of Anaxagoras. His one 





491 ...Pericles had difficulty in rescuing Anaxagoras from imprisonment. 

492 The inhabitants of Lampsacus buried Anaxagoras although he was a foreigner and 
even to this day still honour him. 

493 ‘By Zeus, gentlemen of the jury, it is because he says that the sun 15 a stone, the 
moon earth.’ Do you imagine, friend Meletus, that you are accusing Anaxagoras, and do 
you despise the jury, and think them so illiterate that they do not know that the rolls of 
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae are packed with such theories? The young, I suppose, learn 
these things from me—things which you can sometimes buy for a drachma, dear as that may 
be, in the orchestra, and then mock Socrates if he claims them as his own, particularly 
when they are so absurd. 


494 Those who wrote only one book include Melissus, Parmenides and Anaxagoras. 


365 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


book, moreover, though it is said by Burnet (apparently on the 
strength of the plural βιβλία in 493, which ‘perhaps implies that it 
filled more than one roll’t) to have been ‘of some length’, would 
seem more probably to have been quite short. Not only do the 
fragments preserved by Simplicius seem to give us, with consider- 
able repetitions, the whole basis of his system; but also the state- 
ment in 493 that the book could be bought for a drachma is a 
strong indication that it ran to no great length. The economics of 
Athens in 399 B.c. are by no means easy to reconstruct, but what 
evidence there is shows that the purchasing power of a drachma 
was by then quite small. No doubt in the latter part of his book 
Anaxagoras pursued his general principles into such detailed 
topics as astronomy, mctcorology, physiology and sense-perception 
—subjects on which there is plenty of second-hand evidence but 
very few and scanty fragments. But he must in that case have 
dealt with them with the samc summary brevity that characterizes 
some of the fragments surviving from the earlier part. The extant 
fragments, which together comprise about a thousand words, can 
hardly represent less than an eighth of the original whole and 
may well represent a considerably larger fraction.” 


t Simplicius also implies that in his day Anaxagoras’ work was divided into 
more than one part: at, e.g., Phys. 34, 29 (DK 5984) and 155, 26 (DK 598 1) 
he speaks of ‘the first part’ (or ‘ book’) of the work On Nature. ‘This certainly 
seems to tell in favour of Burnet’s view. But there is nothing in Socrates’ 
words in 493 to suggest that the book was a long one except the plural 
βιβλία, ‘books’; and the word βιβλίον, even in the plural, carries (at this 
date at least) no definite implication of length. It seems more likcly, for 
the reasons given in this section, that if the work was originally divided, as 
it was in Simplicius’ time, into more than one part, they were very short 
parts. 


2 Prof. A. H. M. Jones has very kindly corroborated this calculation with 
the following note: ‘The simplest calculation is on the assumption that the 
copyist would be a slave χωρὶς οἰκῶν. His owner would expect an &tropop& 
from a skilled slave of at least 2 obols a day; Timarchus’ σκυτοτόμοι 
(Aeschines 1, 97) paid him 2 obols and their foreman 3 obols; Nicias and 
others in the fifth century got 1 obol a day for unskilled mine slaves, but 
this included amortization (the hirer had to replace those who died) 
(Xenophon Poroi tv, 14-15). Food is reckoned at 2 obols a day by Dem. rv, 
28, but this is probably an underestimate, as Dem. is trying to prove that 
his scheme could be run quite cheaply. The Eleusinian accounts (J.G.” 1 
and πὶ 1672-3, of 329-327 B.c.) allow 3 obols a day for public slaves for 
τροφή. One must also allow for clothes and other extras, and for the slave’s 
own profit (he would have to allow for slack times when he had no work, 
and he also expected to put by to pay for his freedom) ; also for the cost of 


366 


ANAXAGORAS 


papyrus (I fear this cannot be calculated as we do not know in what units 
it was bought). However, a man’s time alone would amount to at least 
a drachma a day; skilled men (carpenters, stonemasons etc.) are paid 
2 to 24 drachmae a day in the Eleusinian accounts. 

A book sold for a drachma would, therefore, be such as could be copied 
in well under a day.’ 


THE PROBLEM 


No Presocratic philosopher has given rise to more dispute, or been 
more variously interpreted, than has Anaxagoras. Among recent 
attempts to reconstruct his system the most notable are those of 
Tannery (Pour Vhistoire de la science helléne, 2nd edition), Bailey 
(Greek Atomists and Epicurus, App. 1), Cornford (CQ 24 (1930) 14 ff. 
and 83ff.), Peck (CQ 25 (1931) 27ff. and 112ff.), and Vlastos 
(Philos. Rev. 59 (1950) 31ff.). At the beginning of Cornford’s 
reconstruction the problem, as it is usually understood, is succinctly 
stated as follows: ‘Anaxagoras’ theory of matter. ..rests on two 
propositions which seem flatly to contradict one another. One is 
the principle of Homocomereity: A natural substance, such as a 
piece of gold, consists solely of parts which are like the whole and 
like one another—every one of them gold and nothing else. The 
other is: “‘‘There is a portion of everything in everything”, under- 
stood to mean that a piece of gold (or any other substance), so far 
from containing nothing but gold, contains portions of every other 
substance in the world. Unless Anaxagoras was extremely 
muddleheaded, he cannot have propounded a theory which 
simply consists of this contradiction. One or the other proposition 
must be reinterpreted so as to bring them into harmony. Some 
critics attack one, some the other; some try to modify both.’ The 
following reconstruction, though it owes something to each of those 
listed above, has more in common with the ancient interpretations 
than it has with any of the modern except, perhaps, Peck’s. It is 
actually very doubtful whether any critic, ancient or modern, has 
ever fully understood Anaxagoras, and there are some points on 
which certainty is now unattainable. There are, however, two 
principles which every reconstruction should observe: first that 
the only entircly reliable guide to the opinions of Anaxagoras is 
his own words; and second (a principle often overlooked in 
modern times) that he is much more likely to have meant what 
he said than what, though he could easily have said it, he did not 
in fact say. If the result of observing these two principles is 


367 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


unpalatable, then it must be remembered that what is unpalatable 
to us, and even what was unpalatable to Aristotle and his succes- 
sors, need not necessarily have been so to Anaxagoras himself. 

The system of Anaxagoras, like that of Empedocles before him 
and that of the atomists aftcr, is to a large extent a conscious 
reaction to the theories of his predecessors. It will be easiest, 
therefore, to basc our reconstruction of it on his reaction to 
Parmenides, Zeno and other Presocratics. 


ANAXAGORAS REACTION TO PARMENIDES AND THE EARLIER 
PLURALISTS 

495 Fr. 1, Simplicius Phys. 155, 26 ὁμοῦ πάντα χρήματα ἦν, 
ἄπειρα Kal πλῆθος Kal σμικρότητα᾽ Kai yap τὸ σμικρὸν ἄπειρον ἦν. 
καὶ πιάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲν ἔνδηλον ἦν ὑπὸ σμικρότητος" πάντα 
γὰρ ἀήρ τε καὶ αἰθὴρ κατεῖχεν, ἀμφότερα ἄπειρα ἐόντα᾽ ταῦτα γὰρ 
μέγιστα ἔνεστιν ἐν τοῖς σύμπασι καὶ πλήθει καὶ μεγέθει. 

496 Fr. 4 (latter half), 2bzd. 34, 21 (for rest of fr. 4 see 510 and 
§25) πρὶν δὲ ἀποκριθῆναι ταῦτα πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲ 
χροιὴ ἔνδηλος ἦν οὐδεμία: ἀπεκώλυε γὰρ ἡ σύμμιξις ἁπάντων 
χρημάτων, τοῦ τε διεροῦ καὶ τοῦ ξηροῦ καὶ τοῦ θερμοῦ καὶ τοῦ 
ψυχροῦ καὶ τοῦ λαμπροῦ καὶ τοῦ zopepow, καὶ γῆς πολλῆς ἐνεούσης 
καὶ σπερμάτων ἀπείρων πλῆθος οὐδὲν ἐοικότων ἀλλήλοις. οὐδὲ 
γὰρ τῶν ἄλλων οὐδὲν ἔοικε τὸ ἕτερον τῷ ἑτέρῳ. τούτων δὲ οὕτως 
ἐχόντων ἐν τῷ σύμπαντι χρὴ δοκεῖν ἐνεῖναι πάντα χρήματα. 


Simplicius, to whom we owe the preservation of almost all the 
fragments, tells us that 495 was the opening of Anaxagoras’ book. 
It shows at the outset how extreme was the reaction of Anaxagoras 
against the Eleatic monism. Whereas Parmenides had written (in 


347): οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἦν οὐδ᾽ ἔσται, ἐτεὶ νῦν ἔστιν ὁμοῦ πᾶν, 
ἕν, συνεχές, 





495 All things were together, infinite in respect of both number and smallness; for the 
small too was infinite. And while all things were together, none of them were plain because 
of their smallness; for air and aither covered all things, both of them being infinite; for 
these are the greatest ingredients in the mixture of all things, both in number and in size. 


496 But before these things were separated off, while all things were together, there was 
not even any colour plain; for the mixture of all things prevented it, of the moist and the 
dry, the hot and the cold, the bright and the dark, and of much earth in the mixture and of 
seeds countless in number and in no respect like one another. For none of the other things 
either are like one to the other. And since this is so, we must suppose that all things are in 


the whole. 
368 


ANAXAGORAS 


(‘nor was it at some time past, nor shall it be, since it zs now all at 
once, one, continuous’), Anaxagoras in his very first sentence 
starts by substituting ὁμοῦ πάντα χρήματα for ὁμοῦ πᾶν, ἕν; next 
admits the forbidden ἦν; and finally, in the words ἄπειρα 
σμικρότητα, denies also the implication of indivisibility in Par- 
menidcs’ συνεχές. The world, according to Anaxagoras, arose from 
a universal mixture of every single thing that was ultimately to 
emerge; only by putting ‘all things together’ into this original 
mixture could coming into being and perishing be effectually 
eliminated. This is put very clearly in the following passage: 


497 Fr. 17, Simplicius Phys. 163, 20 τὸ δὲ γίνεσθαι καὶ ἀπόλ- 
λυσθαι οὐκ ὀρθῶς νομίτουσιν of Ἕλληνες. οὐδὲν γὰρ χρῆμα γίνεται 
οὐδὲ ἀπόλλυται, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπὸ ἐόντων χρημάτων συμμίσγεταί τε καὶ 
διακρίνεται. καὶ οὕτως av ὀρθῶς καλοῖεν τό τε γίνεσθαι συμ- 
μίσγεσθαι καὶ τὸ ἀπόλλυσθαι διακρίνεσθαι. 


Here it cannot be doubted that Anaxagoras is explicitly accepting 
one of the Parmenidean demands. There can be little doubt either 
that the rejection of the other demands, in 49§, is equally 
deliberate. 

The original mixture, as Anaxagoras says in both 495 and 496, 
was so uniform a mixture of so many diverse ingredients that 
nothing would have bcen perceptible to an imaginary observer 
except perhaps ‘air* and aither’ (see pp. 382ff.). The list of 
ingredients in the long sentence in 496, which has been a source of 
difficulty to modern commentators, is probably not intended to be 
exhaustive. Apart from the ‘numberless seeds’, of which more will 
be said later, the other ingredients listed can be reasonably 
explained by reference to the views of others of Anaxagoras’ pre- 
decessors. There had in the past been two main types of pluralism. 
There had been those who, like Anaximander, the Pythagoreans 
and Heraclitus, had in one way or another regarded the world as 
a battlefield of the opposites; and there had been Empedocles, who 
had solidified the warring opposites into the four eternal and 
immutable elements. Neither type of pluralism, to Anaxagoras’ 
mind, went far enough. His own original mixture must contain, 
not only the traditional opposites (of which the hot and the cold 





497 The Greeks are wrong to recognize coming into being and perishing; for nothi 
comes into being nor perishes, but is rather compounded or dissolved from things that 
So they would be right to call coming into being composition and perishing dissoluty 


24 369 K/ 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


are Anaximander’s, the wet and the dry are also possibly his or 
possibly added from Heraclitus, while the bright and the dark are 
presumably the Pythagorean φῶς and σκότος (sce 289)), nor only 
the Empedoclean elements (here probably cxemplified by earth, 
because two of the others, air and aither (or fire), have already been 
mentioned as ingredients in 495); it must contain also ‘innumer- 
able seeds in no way like each other’. 


t Anaxagoras evidently followed Empedocles in accepting also the 
Parmenidean equation of the void with Not-being. Cf. 498 Aristotle 
Phys. A6, 213a22 of μὲν οὖν δεικνύναι πειρώμενοι ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν (sc. TO 
κενόν), οὐχ ὃ βούλονται λέγειν οἱ ἄνθρωποι κενόν, τοῦτ᾽ ἐξελέγχουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἁμαρτάνοντες λέγουσιν, ὥσπερ ᾿Αναξαγόρας καὶ οἱ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον 
ἐλέγχοντες. ἐπιδεικνύουσι γὰρ ὅτι ἔστι τι ὁ ἀήρ, στρεβλοῦντες τοὺς 
ἀσκοὺς καὶ δεικνύντες ὡς ἰσχυρὸς ὁ ἀήρ, καὶ ἐναπολαμβάνοντες ἐν ταῖς 
κλεψύδραις (see 453). In Anaxagoras, therefore, as in Empedocles, air, 
being corporeal, is clearly distinguished from the non-existent void. Cf. 
also Aristotle de caelo Az, 309a19 (DK 59868), wherc Aristotle groups 
Empedocles and Anaxagoras together as (1) denying the existence of the 
void, (2) giving no explanation of differences of weight. 


ANAXAGORAS REACTION TO ZENO 

499 «Fr. 3, Simplicius Phys. 164, 170 οὔτε yao τοῦ σμικροῦ ἔστι 
TO ye ἐλάχιστον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔλασσον ἀεί (TO γὰρ ἐὸν οὐκ ἔστι TO μὴ οὐκ 
εἷἶναι)--ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ μεγάλου ἀεὶ ἔστι μεῖτον. καὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ 
σμικρῷ πλῆθος, πρὸς ἑαυτὸ δὲ ἕκαστόν ἐστι καὶ μέγα καὶ σμικρόν. 
500 Fr. 5, 2614. 156, το τούτων δὲ οὕτω διακεκριμένων γινώσκειν 
χρὴ ὅτι πάντα οὐδὲν ἐλάσσω ἐστὶν οὐδὲ πλείω (οὐ γὰρ ἀνυστὸν 
πάντων πλείω εἶναι), ἀλλὰ πάντα ἴσα ἀεί. 

There is good reason to suppose that in these two brief fragments 
Anaxagoras is explicitly replying to Zeno. It is at any rate a 
striking coincidence that, of the only two of Zeno’s arguments 





498 Those who try to show that the void does not exist do not disprove what people really 
mean by it, but argue erroneously; this ἐδ true of Anaxagoras and of those who refute the 
existence of the void in this way. They merely give an ingenious demonstration that air is 
something—by straining wine-skins and showing the resistance of the air, and by cutting 
it off in klepsydras. (After Hardie) 

499 Neither is there a smallest part of what is small, but there is always a smaller (for 
it is impossible that what is should cease to be). Likewise there 1s always something larger 
than what is large. And it is equal in respect of number to what is small, each thing, in 
relation to itself, being both large and small. 


500 And when these things have been thus separated, we must know that all things are 
neither more nor less ( for it is not possible that there should be more than all), but all things 
are always equal. 


370 


ANAXAGORAS 


against plurality which have survived in his own words, one 
should end as follows: sox Zeno Fr. 1, Simplicius Phys. 141, 6 
(=365) οὕτως εἰ πολλά ἐστιν, ἀνάγκη αὐτὰ μικρά Te εἶναι Kal 
μεγάλα μικρὰ μὲν ὥστε μὴ ἔχειν μέγεθος, μεγάλα δὲ ὥστε ἄπειρα 
εἶναι, and the other should begin thus: 502 Zeno Fr. 3, Simplicius 
Phys. 140, 29 (=366) ef πολλά ἐστιν, ἀνάγκη τοσαῦτα εἶναι ὅσα 
ἐστὶ καὶ οὔτε πλείονα αὐτῶν οὔτε ἐλάττονα. Since both these 
statements are of a somewhat unusual character, it seems most 
likely that, when Anaxagoras echoes them both so exactly as he 
does, he is doing so quite deliberately. 

500 is of comparatively little importance. Zeno’s argument had 
been directed against the Pythagorean confusion between the units 
of arithmetic, the points of geometry and the atoms of physics. Any 
physical body, according to the Pythagoreans, consisted of a 
number of units; and, since units are by definition indivisible, the 
number attaching to any finite body is itself necessarily finite. 
But if units are also geometrical points, then, since geometrical 
space is by definition infinitely divisible, the number is at the 
same time infinite. Anaxagoras’ reply is a direct contradiction: 
even though, as he has said in 495, things are ἄπειρα καὶ πλῆθος 
καὶ σμικρότητα, they are still “no morc and no [085 than they are’. 

It is 499 which contains the important part of Anaxagoras’ 
reply to Zeno. Zeno’s argument in sor had again been aimed 
primarily at the Pythagorean confusion of units, points and atoms: 
since every physical body consists of an infinite number of points, 
it must, if those points have magnitude, be infinitely large, and, 
if they have no magnitude, have none itself either. The conse- 
quences of Zeno’s arguments were, as Cornford pointed out (Plato 
and Parmenides 60-1), twofold: ‘the first was reflected in the 
separation of arithmetic from geometry; . . .the second. . .was the 
distinction between the geometrical solid and the sensible body, 
which the Pythagoreans had confused. . .. The atomists, Leucippus 
and Democritus, saw that, if physical bodies need not have all the 
properties of geometrical solids, they could elude Zeno’s dilemmas. 
They could reply: “‘We grant that all geometrical magnitudes are 
infinitely divisible and that a geometrical point has no parts or 





50x So if there is a plurality, things must be both small and great; so small as to have no 
magnitude at all, so great as to be infinite. 


502 If there is a plurality, things must be just as many as they are, neither more nor less. 


371 24-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


magnitude; but our atoms are not either the points or the solids 
of geometry, but compact bodies, which, if they were large enough, 
you could see and touch....” ...The atom thus ceased to be 
confused with the unit of number and the point of geometry, and 
became a purely physical body whose essential property was 
impenetrability.” The answer of Leucippus and Democritus was 
not, however, the only possible answer to Zeno: it could equally 
easily have been granted that physical matter, like geometrical 
magnitude, was infinitely divisible. This, as is evident from 499, is 
the answer that Anaxagoras chose to give. ‘I grant’, he means, 
‘that physical matter, like geometrical magnitude, is infinitely 
divisible; but physical matter composes sensible bodies, and since 
sensible bodies exist and have magnitude, the same must be true 
of physical matter. However far you subdivide matter [Zcller’s 
reading τομῇ for τὸ μὴ is attractive], you can never reduce it to 
shecr nothingness; even the smallest imaginable particle must still 
possess some magnitude. In consequence each thing is indeed both 
great and small: great because it contains an infinite number of 
parts, and small because those parts are themselves of an infinite- 
simal smallness.’ Anaxagoras’ theory of matter is in fact deli- 
berately adopted, like that of the atomists, as an answer to Zeno; 
and when that answer is added to his answer to Parmenides, one 
half of the basis of his system is now complete. He is enabled, by 
his beliefin the infinite divisibility of matter, to devise a cosmogony 
and to give an account of change which does indeed eliminate the 
forbidden coming-into-being of what was not. 


MIND 
§03 Fr. 12, Simplicius Phys. 164, 24 and 156, 13 τὰ μὲν ἄλλα 
παντὸς μοῖραν μετέχει, νοῦς δέ ἐστιν ἄπειρον Kal αὐτοκρατὲς Kal 
μέμεικται οὐδενὶ χρήματι, ἀλλὰ μόνος αὐτὸς ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἐστιν. εἰ μὴ 
γὰρ ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἦν, ἀλλά τεῳ ἐμέμεικτο ἄλλῳ, μετεῖχεν ἂν ἁπάντων 
χρημάτων, εἰ ἐμέμεικτό Tew’ ἐν παντὶ γὰρ παντὸς μοῖρα ἔνεστιν, 
ὥσπερ ἐν τοῖς πρόσθεν μοι λέλεκται" καὶ ἂν ἐκώλυεν αὐτὸν τὰ 
συμμεμειγμένα, ὥστε μηδενὸς χρήματος κρατεῖν ὁμοίως ὡς καὶ 











503 All other things have a portion of everything, but Mind is infinite and self-ruled, 
and is mixed with nothing but is all alone by itself. For if it was not by itself, but was 
mixed with anything else, it would have a share of all things if it were mixed with any; 
Sor in everything there is a portion of everything, as I said earlier; and the things that were 
mingled with it would hinder it so that it could control nothing in the same way as it does 


372 


ANAXAGORAS 


μόνον ἐόντα ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ. ἔστι γὰρ λεπτότατόν τε πάντων χρημάτων 
καὶ καθαρώτατον, καὶ γνώμην γε περὶ παντὸς πᾶσαν ἴσχει καὶ 
ἰσχύει μέγιστον " καὶ ὅσα γε ψυχὴν ἔχει, καὶ τὰ μείφω καὶ τὰ ἐλάσσω, 
πάντων νοῦς κρατεῖ. καὶ τῆς περιχωρήσιος τῆς συμπάσης νοῦς 
ἐκράτησεν, ὥστε περιχωρῆσαι τὴν ἀρχήν. καὶ πρῶτον ἀπό Tou 
σμικροῦ ἤρξατο περιχωρεῖν, ἐπὶ δὲ πλέον πτεριχωρεῖ, καὶ περιχωρήσει 
ἐπὶ πτλέον. καὶ τὰ συμμισγόμενά τε καὶ ἀποκρινόμενα καὶ διακρινό- 
μενα πάντα ἔγνω νοῦς. καὶ ὁποῖα ἔμελλεν ἔσεσθαι καὶ ὁποῖα ἦν, ἅσσα 
νῦν μὴ ἔστι, καὶ ὅσα νῦν ἔστι καὶ ὁποῖα ἔσται, πτάντα διεκόσμησε νοῦς, 
καὶ τὴν περιχώρησιν ταύτην ἣν νῦν περιχωρεῖ τά τε ἄστρα καὶ ὁ 
ἥλιος καὶ ἡ σελήνη καὶ ὁ ἀὴρ καὶ ὁ αἰθὴρ οἱ ἀποκρινόμενοι. ἡ δὲ 
περιχώρησις αὕτη ἐποίησεν ἀποκρίνεσθαι. καὶ ἀποκρίνεται ἀττό τε 
τοῦ ἀραιοῦ τὸ πυκνὸν καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ ψυχροῦ τὸ θερμὸν καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ 
τοφεροῦ τὸ λαμπρὸν καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ διεροῦ τὸ ξηρόν. μοῖραι δὲ 
πολλαὶ πολλῶν εἶσι. παντάπασι δὲ οὐδὲν ἀποκρίνεται οὐδὲ δια- 
κρίνεται ἕτερον ἀπὸ τοῦ ἑτέρου πλὴν νοῦ. νοῦς δὲ πᾶς ὅμοιός ἐστι 
καὶ ὁ μείφων καὶ ὁ ἐλάττων. ἕτερον δὲ οὐδέν ἐστιν ὅμοιον οὐδενί, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτων πλεῖστα ἔνι, ταῦτα ἐνδηλότατα ἕν ἕκαστόν ἐστι καὶ ἦν. 
504 Fr. 13, Simplicius Phys. 400, 41 καὶ ἐπεὶ ἤρξατο ὁ νοῦς 
κινεῖν, ἀπὸ τοῦ κινουμένου παντὸς ἀπεκρίνετο, καὶ ὅσον ἐκίνησεν ὁ 
νοῦς πᾶν τοῦτο διεκρίθη κινουμένων δὲ καὶ διακρινομένων ἡ 
περιχώρησις πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἐποίει διακρίνεσθαι. 


505 Fr. ο, tbid. 35, 14 .. .oUT@ τούτων περιχωρούντων τε καὶ 











now being alone by itself. For it is the finest of all things and the purest, it has all 
knowledge about everything and the greatest power; and mind controls all things, both the 
greater and the smaller, that have life. Mind controlled also the whole rotation, so that it 
began to rotate in the beginning. And it began to rotate first from a small area, but tt now 
rotates over a wider and will rotate over a wider area still. And the things that are mingled 
and separated and divided off, all are known by Mind. And all things that were to be, all 
things that were but are not now, all things that are now or that shall be, Mind arranged 
them all, including this rotation in which are now rotating the stars, the sun and moon, the 
air and the aither that are being separated off. And this rotation caused the separating off. 
And the dense is separated off from the rare, the hot from the cold, the bright from the dark 
and the dry from the moist. But there are many portions of many things, and nothing is 
altogether separated off nor divided one from the other except Mind. Mind is all alike, both 
the greater and the smaller quantities of it, while nothing else is like anything else, but each 
single body is and was most plainly those things of which it contains most. 


504 And when Mind initiated motion, from all that was moved separation began, and 
as much as Mind moved was all divided off; and as things moved and were divided off, the 
rotation greatly increased the process of dividing. 


505 ...as these things rotated thus and were separated off by the force and speed (of 
373 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἀποκρινομένων ὑπὸ Bins te Kal ταχυτῆτος. βίην δὲ ἡ ταχυτὴς 
ποιεῖ, ἡ δὲ ταχυτὴς αὐτῶν οὐδενὶ ἔοικε χρήματι τὴν ταχυτῆτα τῶν 
νῦν ἐόντων χρημάτων ἐν ἀνθρώποις, ἀλλὰ πάντως πολλαπλασίως 
ταχύ ἐστι. 

506 Fr. 14, ibid. 157, 7 ὁ δὲ νοῦς, ὃς ἀεί ἐστι, τὸ κάρτα [so Diels: 
ὅσα ἐστί τε κάρτα Simplic. mss.] καὶ νῦν ἐστιν ἵνα καὶ τὰ ἄλλα 
πάντα, ἐν τῷ πολλῷ περιέχοντι καὶ ἐν τοῖς πτροσκριθεῖσι καὶ ἐν τοῖς 
ἀποκεκριμένοις. 


Another Parmenidean demand with which Anaxagoras had to 
comply was that motion should not be simply taken for granted 
but explained. In place of Empedocles’ Love and Strife (moral 
and psychological forces expressed in corporeal terms, see 424) 
Anaxagoras substitutes the single intellectual motive force of Mind. 
It too, like Love and Strife, has many of the qualities of an abstract 
principle. ‘1t has all knowledge about everything, and the greatest 
strength; it controls all things that have life’; and ‘it set in order 
all things that were to be’, including, of course, the cosmic revolu- 
tion. Yet at the same time it is ‘the finest of all things and the 
purest’; it is ‘all alike, both the larger and the smaller quantities’ ; 
and though it is ‘mixed with nothing’, it is none the less present 
‘there, where everything else is, in the surrounding mass, and in 
what has been united and separated off’. Anaxagoras in fact 15 
striving, as had several of his predecessors, to imagine and describe 
a truly incorporeal entity. But as with them, so still with him, the 
only ultimate critcrion of reality is extension in space. Mind, like 
everything else, is corporeal, and owes its power partly to its 
fineness, partly to the fact that it alone, though present in the 
mixture, yet remains unmixed. 

How Mind imparted the first rotatory movement is by no means 
obvious; it may be that even Anaxagoras himself had no clear 
mental picture of the process. It appears, however, that the area 
affected was at first small but is still steadily increasing. ‘The speed 
of the revolution is immense, and therefore its effect on the original 
mixture is very powerful (504). The immediate consequence 15 
progressive separation: the moment the rotation takes in a new 





their rotation). And the speed creates the force. Their speed is like the speed of nothing that 
now exists among men, but it 1s altogether many times as fast. 


506 But Mind, which ever is, is assuredly even now where everything else is too, in the 
surrounding mass and in the things that have been either aggregated or separated. 


374 


ANAXAGORAS 


area, as it is doing all the time, the ingredicnts of that area begin 
at once to separate off (§04). It is in fact the rotation which is 
directly responsible for the separation, which leads in turn to 
cosmogony. Mind, having initiated the rotation, remains alone 
ultimately responsible; but at the same time, as is evident from the 
statement at the end of 504, once the original motion has been 
imparted, purely mechanical factors begin to operate and the 
agency of Mind itself becomes less direct. This is a feature of 
Anaxagoras’ system which, to the irritation of Plato and Aristotle 
(see §22 and note), becomes more pronounced as his cosmogony 
proceeds. 

With the introduction of Mind the basis of the system is 
complete. Anaxagoras is, like Empedocles, in a sense a dualist; 
and his dualism is, for the first time, in a sense a dualism of Mind 
and matter.? But both members of this dualism are peculiar. 
Mind, like matter, is corporeal and owes its power over matter to 
its fineness and purity. Matter itself, so far from being pure, is 
originally at least an infinitely divisible mixture of cvery form of 
substance that the world is ultimately to contain. 


1 Cf. 407 Theophrastus Phys. Op. fr. 4 ap. Simplictum Phys. 27, 17 
(DK 59441) καὶ οὕτω μὲν λαμβανόντων δόξειεν ἂν ὁ ᾿Αναξαγόρας τὰς μὲν 
ὑλικὰς ἀρχὰς ἀπείρους ποιεῖν, τὴν δὲ τῆς κινήσεως καὶ τῆς γενέσεως αἰτίαν 
μίαν τὸν νοῦν εἰ δέ τις τὴν μίξιν τῶν ἁπάντων ὑπολάβοι μίαν εἶναι φύσιν 
ἀόριστον καὶ κατ᾽ εἶδος καὶ κατὰ μέγεθος, συμβαίνει δύο τὰς ἀρχὰς αὐτὸν 
λέγειν τήν τε τοῦ ἀπείρου φύσιν καὶ τὸν νοῦν. 


IN EVERYTHING A PORTION OF EVERYTHING 


508 Fr. 6, Simplicius Phys. 164, 26 Kal ὅτε δὲ ἴσαι μοῖραί εἰσι 
TOU Te μεγάλου καὶ τοῦ σμικροῦ πλῆθος, καὶ οὕτως ἂν εἴη ἐν παντὶ 
πάντα᾽ οὐδὲ χωρὶς ἔστιν εἶναι, ἀλλὰ πάντα παντὸς μοῖραν μετέχει. 
ὅτε τοὐλάχιστον μὴ ἔστιν εἶναι, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο χωρισθῆναι, οὐδ᾽ 





507 Such being their theory, Anaxagoras would appear to make his material principles 
infinite, but the cause of motion and coming into being one only, namely Mind. But if we 
were to suppose that the mixture of all things was a single substance, indefinite both in form 
and in extent, then it follows that he is really affirming two first principles only, namely the 
substance of the infinite and Mind, 


508 And since the portions of the great and of the small are equal in number, so too all 
things would be in everything. Nor is it possible that they should exist apart, but all things 
have a portion of everything. Since it is not possible that there should be a smallest part, 
nothing can be put apart nor come to be all by itself, but as things were originally, so they 


375 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἂν ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ ὅπωσπερ ἀρχὴν εἶναι Kal νῦν πάντα 
ὁμοῦ. ἐν πᾶσι δὲ πολλὰ ἔνεστι καὶ τῶν ἀποκρινομένων ἴσα πλῆθος 
ἐν τοῖς μείφοσί τε καὶ ἐλάσσοσι. 


509 Fr. 11, ibid. 164, 22 ἐν παντὶ παντὸς μοῖρα ἔνεστι πλὴν 
νοῦ, ἔστιν οἷσι δὲ καὶ νοῦς ἔνι. 


These two fragments say what they want to say briefly, emphatic- 
ally and, one might have thought, clearly. 508 tells us that, as in 
the original mixture, so now in everything, of whatever size, that 
is being separated off, all things are together; while 509, by its 
addition of the words πλὴν νοῦ, drives home the point that, just 
as the original mixture contained not only the traditional opposites 
and the Empedoclean clements but ‘countless secds’ as well, so 
now evcrything contains a portion of everything except Mind. That 
is unquestionably what Anaxagoras himself says; and he repeats 
it more than once in a later fragment which has already been 
quoted, 503. Those who maintain, as the majority of recent 
commentators do, that when Anaxagoras said: ‘in everything 
there is a portion of everything’ he can only have meant that in 
everything there is a portion of all the opposites, can only do so at 
the expense of accusing Anaxagoras of saying what he did not 
mean. It is surcly inconceivable that any Greek, let alone a 
practised thinker like Anaxagoras, should have written ἐν παντὶ 
παντὸς μοῖρα ἔνεστι if by παντός he really meant to signify some- 
thing quite different from παντί. Whatever παντί and παντός are 
or are not intended to include, it must in fairness to Anaxagoras 
be assumed that they include the same things. And that those 
things comprise other things than the opposites seems to follow 
inevitably from a comparison of fr. 6, 508, with fr. 4, 496. 
When Anaxagoras adds at the end of §09 that there are some 
things also in which Mind is present, the statement is to be 
compared with that other sentence in 503 which tells us that 
Mind controls everything that has life. If there are some things 
in which Mind is present, there are obviously other things in 
which it is not. Mind is presumably therefore to be imagined as 
discontinuously distributed throughout the world in living things; 





must be now too, all together. In all things there are many ingredients, equal in number in 
the greater and in the smaller of the things that are being separated off. 


509 In everything there is a portion of everything except Mind; and there are some things 
in which there is Mind as well. 


376 


ANAXAGORAS 


which would explain how Anaxagoras could speak, as he does 
near the end of 503, of ‘both the greater and the smaller 
quantities’ of it. 


‘SEEDS’ AND ‘PORTIONS’ 


The chicf problem in any reconstruction which assumes that 
Anaxagoras meant what he said is to determine the relation of the 
σπέρματα of 496 to the μοῖραι of 503, 508 and 509. If Anaxagoras 
really believed (and this at least is never disputed) in the infinite 
divisibility of matter, how is it that there are already ‘seeds’ 
present in the original mixture? To answer this crucial question, 
it will be easiest first to consider what precisely Anaxagoras means 
by the word μοῖρα and only then to consider why the ‘seeds’ need 
be introduced at all. 

μοῖρα is not, of course, in the way in which σπέρμα is, employed 
by Anaxagoras as a semi-technical term; but for all that, he seems 
to have used the word in a sense that requires careful consideration. 
An Anaxagorean μοῖρα is a ‘portion’ in the sense of a ‘share’ 
rather than of a ‘piece’ or ‘particle’. The essential characteristic 
of such a ‘portion’ secms to be that it is something which neither 
in theory nor in practice can ever be actually reached and 
separated out from that which contains it. However far you may 
subdivide matter, and however infinitesimal a piece of it you may 
thereby reach, Anaxagoras will always reply, exactly as Zeno 
would have replicd of a geometrical line, that so far from being 
irreducible, it still contains an infinite number of ‘portions’. ‘This 
indeed is precisely the nature of Anaxagoras’ reaction to Zeno; 
and it is probably what he means when he says in §08 that ‘the 
portions of the grcat and of the small are equalin number’. Both 
the infinitely great and the infinitesimally small alike contain an 
infinite number of ‘portions’. In effect, of course, such a theory 
is indistinguishable from a theory of fusion such as Bailey (Greek 
Atomists and Epicurus, App. I) attributes to Anaxagoras; but it 
remains, as a theory, widely different. Neither of the illustrations 
that are usually cited, the analogy of the mixture of liquids such 
as water and wine and that of the mixture of grains such as those 
of sugar and sand, is at all adequate to the theory. The only 
satisfactory analogy is that suggested by the influence of Zeno, the 
analogy of the infinite number of points in even the shortest line. 
By that analogy alone can we see how Anaxagoras, despite the 


377 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


infinite divisibility of matter, could still maintain that even the 
infinitesimally small contained a ‘portion’ of everything. 

Unfortunately, the objection can be brought against such a 
theory—and indeed it has been brought by both ancient and 
modern critics—that in that case Anaxagoras’ cosmogony is based 
upon a vicious regress. It is not, as a matter of fact, by any mcans 
certain that Anaxagoras himself would have regarded such a 
regress as undesirable. ‘The very notion of an infinite regress was 
a new one, dating only from the time of Zeno, and it seems in no 
way improbable that Anaxagoras should have scen in it a welcome 
escape from Parmenides’ denial of coming-into-being. But in any 
case Anaxagoras has an answer to his critics. As is evident from 
the fact that there is already an infinite number of ‘seeds’ in the 
original mixture, matter naturally tends, however infinitely 
divisible it may be, to coagulate into ‘seeds’, and there is therefore 
a natural unit of matter from which cosmogony can begin. So, it 
seems, Anaxagoras evaded the dilemma. On the onc hand, 
certainly, the infinite regress must be retained: it is the only way 
in which there can be a ‘portion’ of everything in everything, and 
so both coming-into-being and change can be effectually climi- 
nated. On the other hand, equally certainly, this same infinite 
regress must be somehow at least momentarily halted so that 
Anaxagoras can start moving in the opposite direction towards the 
building up of the sensible world. It is at this point that the ‘sceds’ 
(an appropriate word, sincc a seed is that from which larger things 
develop) have an essential part to play in the system. 


‘SEEDS’ AND OPPOSITES 

510 Fr. 4 (first sentence), Simplicius Phys. 34, 29 τούτων δὲ 
οὕτως ἐχόντων χρὴ δοκεῖν ἐνεῖναι TOAAG τε Kal πταντοῖα ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς 
συγκρινομένοις καὶ σπέρματα πάντων χρημάτων καὶ ἰδέας πταντοίας 
ἔχοντα καὶ χροιὰς καὶ ἡδονάς.... (Continues at 525.) 

511: Fr. 10, Σ 1, Gregor. Naz. ΧΧΧΝῚ, 911 Migne πῶς γὰρ ἂν 
ἐκ μὴ τριχὸς γένοιτο θρὶξ καὶ σὰρξ ἐκ μὴ σαρκός; 

512 Aristotle Phys. A4, 187a23 διαφέρουσι δὲ ἀλλήλων τῷ τὸν 





ΦῚΟ And since these things are so, we must suppose that there are many things of all sorts 
in everything that is being aggregated, seeds of all things with all sorts of shapes and colours 
and tastes.... 

511 How could hair come from what is not hair or flesh from what is not flesh? 

512 These iwo, however, differ from each other in that Empedocles imagines a cycle of 


378 


ANAXAGORAS 


μὲν (sc. Empedocles) περίοδον ποιεῖν τούτων, τὸν δ᾽ (se. Anaxa- 
goras) ἅπαξ, καὶ τὸν μὲν (sc. Anaxagoras) ἄπειρα, τά τε ὁμοιομερῆ 
καὶ τἀναντία, τὸν δὲ τὰ καλούμενα στοιχεῖα μόνον. ἔοικε δὲ ᾽Ανα- 
ξαγόρας ἄπειρα οὕτως οἰηθῆναι διὰ τὸ ὑπολαμβάνειν τὴν κοινὴν 
δόξαν τῶν φυσικῶν εἶναι ἀληθῆ, ὡς οὐ γιγνομένου οὐδενὸς ἐκ τοῦ 
μὴ ὄντος (διὰ τοῦτο γὰρ οὕτω λέγουσιν, ἦν ὁμοῦ πάντα, καὶ τὸ 
γίγνεσθαι τοιόνδε καθέστηκεν ἀλλοιοῦσθαι, οἱ δὲ σύγκρισιν καὶ 
διάκρισιν) " ἔτι δ᾽ ἐκ τοῦ γίγνεσθαι ἐξ ἀλλήλων τἀναντία᾽ ἐνυπῆρχεν 
ἄρα᾽ εἰ γὰρ πᾶν τὸ γιγνόμενον ἀνάγκη γίγνεσθαι ἢ ἐξ ὄντων ἢ ἐκ 
μὴ ὄντων, τούτων δὲ τὸ μὲν ἐκ μὴ ὄντων γίγνεσθαι ἀδύνατον (περὶ 
γὰρ ταύτης ὁμογνωμονοῦσι τῆς δόξης ἅπαντες of περὶ φύσεως), τὸ 
λοιπὸν ἤδη συμβαίνειν ἐξ ἀνάγκης ἐνόμισαν, ἐξ ὄντων μὲν καὶ 
ἐνυπαρχόντων γίγνεσθαι, διὰ μικρότητα δὲ τῶν ὄγκων ἐξ ἀναισθήτων 
ἡμῖν. διό φασι πᾶν ἐν παντὶ μεμῖχθαι, διότι πιᾶν ἐκ πταντὸς ἑώρων 
γιγνόμενον φαίνεσθαι δὲ διαφέροντα καὶ προσαγορεύεσθαι ἕτερα 
ἀλλήλων ἐκ τοῦ μάλισθ᾽ ὑπερέχοντος διὰ πλῆθος ἐν τῇ μίξει τῶν 
ἀπείρων᾽ εἰλικρινῶς μὲν γὰρ ὅλον λευκὸν ἢ μέλαν ἢ γλυκὺ ἢ σάρκα 
ἢ ὀστοῦν οὐκ εἶναι, ὅτου δὲ πλεῖστον ἕκαστον ἔχει, τοῦτο δοκεῖν 
εἶναι τὴν φύσιν τοῦ πράγματος. 


Unfortunately the only two surviving sentences of Anaxagoras 
himself that give us any clue concerning the composition of the 
‘seeds’ are those in 510 and 511; and of these the latter may well 
represent, not Anaxagoras’ own exact words, but a paraphrase by 





such changes, Anaxagoras a single series. Anaxagoras again posited an infinity of 
principles, namely the homoeomerous substances and the opposites together, while Empedocles 
postis only the so-called ‘elements’. The theory of Anaxagoras that the principles are 
infinite in number was probably due to his acceptance of the common opinion of the physicists 
that nothing comes into being from not-being. For this 1s the reason why they use the phrase 
‘all things were together’, and the coming into being of such and such a kind of thing is 
reduced to change of quality, while others speak of combination and separation. Moreover, 
the fact that the opposites proceed from each other led them to the same conclusion. The one, 
they reasoned, must have already existed in the other; for since everything that comes into 
being must arise either from what is or from what is not, and it is impossible for it to arise 
JSrom what is not (on this point all the physicists agree), they thought that the truth of the 
alternative necessarily followed, namely that things come into being out of existent things, 
i.e. out of things already present, but imperceptible to our senses because of the smallness of 
thetr bulk. So they assert that everything is mixed in everything, because they saw every- 
thing arising out of everything. But things, as they say, appear different from one another 
and receive different names according to the nature of the thing that is numerically pre- 
dominant among the innumerable constituents of the mixture. For nothing, they say, is 
purely and entirely white or black or sweet or flesh or bone, but the nature of a thing is held 
to be that of which it contains the most. (After Hardie) 


379 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


the scholiast on Gregorius Nazianzenus who preserves the argu- 
ment. At this point, therefore, we are compelled to invoke 
secondary sources. But at least our secondary authorities (one of 
whom, Simplicius, certainly had Anaxagoras’ book before him) 
are unanimous in attributing to Anaxagoras the views voiced by 
Aristotle in §12. 

It is fairly cvident from 510, whcre the ‘seeds’ are said to have 
diverse colours and tastes, that some at least of the opposites, such 
as bright and dark or sweet and bitter, were actually ingredients 
in the ‘secds’; and there can be little doubt that Aristotle 15 there- 
fore right when he attributes to Anaxagoras the general argument 
that, since opposites ‘come out of one another’—-since, in other 
words, a thing becomes hotter from having been cooler and vice 
versa—thcy must have been present in one another all the time. 
But that docs not seem to be, as it is sometimes taken to be, the end 
of the matter. §11 equally suggests, if somewhat less directly, that 
natural substances arc on an equal footing with the opposites. For 
if hair cannot come from what is not hair nor flesh from what is 
not flesh, hair and flesh too, just like the opposites, must have been 
there all the time. Again, moreover, this inference is supported by 
Aristotle; for in the last sentence of 512, in the list of examples of 
the things the predominance of which determines the apparent 
character of a whole body, there appear, besides the opposites, 
white, black and sweet, the natural substances, flesh and bone. 
The ‘seeds’ in fact contain, like the original mixture in which they 
were present, not only the opposites, nor only natural substances, 
but both together. 

It is significant that Aristotle should so often, as he does in 512, 
compare and contrast Empedocles and Anaxagoras. Anaxagoras 
seems to have felt, as has already become evident from the list of 
the ingredients of the original mixture in 496, that Empedocles 
had not gone far enough. If everything consisted solely of the four 
elements, then in putting together the four elements in different 
proportions to form, say, flesh or bone, Empedocles had not, to 
Anaxagoras’ mind, succeeded in eliminating the coming-into- 
being of something new. The only way to do that was to posit in 
everything the presence αὖ initio of everything which might emerge 
from it. Since there was no end to the apparent changes that might 
take place in the world, there must be, not only in the original 
mixture as a whole but in every constituent ‘seed’, a ‘portion’ 


380 


ANAXAGORAS 


not only of all the opposites but of every natural substance as well. 
In that way alone can hair and flesh come from the wheat which 
nourishes them without the coming-into-being of something new. 


THE OPPOSITES 
413 Fr. 8, Simplicius Phys. 175, 12 and 176, 20 οὐ κεχώρισται 
ἀλλήλων τὰ ἐν τῷ ἑνὶ κόσμῳ οὐδὲ ἀπτοκέκοττται πελέκει οὔτε TO 
θερμὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ ψυχροῦ οὔτε τὸ ψυχρὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ θερμοῦ. 
This fragment should be compared with the last few sentences of 
503 (beginning καὶ ἀποκρίνεται), where, incidentally, it is to be 
noted that Anaximenes’ pair of opposites, the rare and the dense, 
are added to those of Anaximander and the Pythagoreans. The 
two passages together are often taken, along with those in the next 
section, as indicating that Anaxagoras did indeed regard the 
opposites as primary clements of superior status to natural sub- 
stances. It seems more likely, however, in view of the evidence to 
the contrary, that he merely regarded the opposites as providing 
the best illustration of his gencral theory that ‘in everything there 
is a portion of everything’. Heraclitus had already shown that one 
of a pair of opposites cannot exist without the other; while the very 
fact that they are oppositcs means that the existence of a close 
relation between them, whatever it may be, is more obvious than 
in the case of such substances as, say, gold and flesh. Indeed a 
particular argument which Anaxagoras is said to have used, the 
paradox that snow must really be black,’ may well be no more 
than a later distortion of a statement to the effect that there is 
a ‘portion’ of ‘the black’ in snow. But even though the opposites 
do unquestionably, for this reason, figure very prominently in the 
fragments, the evidence still seems to suggest that, just as the hot 
and the cold cannot be cut off from one another with a hatchet, so 
are flesh, hair, gold, and every other natural substance equally 
inseparable one from another. 

1 §14 Sextus Pyrrh. 1, 44( νοούμενα δὲ φαινομένοις (sc. ἀντιτίθεμεν), ὡς ὁ 


᾿Αναξαγόρας τῷ λευκὴν εἶναι τὴν χιόνα ἀντετίθει ὅτι ἡ χιὼν ὕδωρ ἐστὶ 
πετηγός, τὸ δὲ ὕδωρ ἐστὶ μέλαν, καὶ ἡ χιὼν ἄρα μέλαινά ἐστιν. 





513 The things in the one world-order are not separated one from the other nor cut off 
with an axe, neither the hot from the cold nor the cold from the hot. 

514 We oppose the objects of thought to those of the senses, as Anaxagoras used to oppose 
to the view that snow is white the argument that snow is frozen water, and water is black, 
whence it follows that snow is black. 


381 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


THE BEGINNINGS OF COSMOGONY 
615 Fr. 2, Simplicius Phys. 155, 31 Kal yap ἀήρ te καὶ αἰθὴρ 
ἀποκρίνονται ἀπὸ τοῦ πολλοῦ τοῦ περιέχοντος, Kal τό ye περιέχον 
ἄπειρόν ἐστι τὸ πλῆθος. 
516 Fr. 15, ibid. 179, 4 τὸ μὲν πυκνὸν καὶ διερὸν καὶ ψυχρὸν 
καὶ τὸ τοφερὸν ἐνθάδε συνεχώρησεν, ἔνθα νῦν (ἡ γῆν, τὸ δὲ ἀραιὸν 
καὶ τὸ θερμὸν καὶ τὸ ξηρὸν ἐξεχώρησεν εἰς τὸ πρόσω τοῦ αἰθέρος. 
517 Fr. 16, ibid. 170, 8 and 155, 21 ἀπὸ τουτέων ἀποκρινομένων 
συμπήγνυται yi}; ἐκ μὲν γὰρ τῶν νεφελῶν ὕδωρ ἀποκρίνεται, ἐκ 
δὲ τοῦ ὕδατος γῆ, ἐκ δὲ τῆς γῆς λίθοι συμπήγνυνται ὑπὸ τοῦ 
ψυχροῦ, οὗτοι δὲ ἐκχωρέουσι μᾶλλον τοῦ ὕδατος. 

1 ‘The supplement (which is not essential) is derived from the paraphrase 

of this fr. in Hippolytus Ref. 1, 8, 2. 
S15 suggests that in the progressive separation caused by the 
rotation the first things to emerge were air and aither (or fire).* 
There is, however, a difficulty here. We have already been told, 
in the opening sentences of the book, 495, that in the original 
mixture ‘nothing was visible because of its smallness; for air and 
aither, both being infinite, held all thingsin subjection’. Why, then, 
if air and aither are already distinguished in the original mixture, 
do they need to be separated off when the rotation begins? There 
seems to be only one satisfactory answer to that question, which, 
however, will only emerge from an examination of §16. 


τ Cf. §18 Aristotle de caelo A3, 270b24 ᾿Αναξαγόρας δὲ κατακέχρηται 
TH ὀνόματι TOUTE (sc. αἰθήρ) οὐ καλῶς. ὀνομάτει yap αἰθέρα ἀντὶ πυρός. 

Cf. e.g. Ar. Meteor. Bo, 369b14 (DK 59484) and 521. 
The opposites, as we have already seen, exist in the form of 
‘portions’ in the ‘seeds’, each ‘seed’ being characterized by that 





515 For air and aither are being separated off from the surrounding mass, which is 
infinite in number. 

516 The dense and the moist and the cold and the dark came together here, where the 
earth now is, while the rare and the hot and the dry went outwards to the further part of the 
aither. 

517 From these things, as they are separated off, the earth is solidified; for water is 
separated off from the clouds, earth from water, and from earth stones are solidified by the 
cold; and stones tend to move outwards more than water. 

518 Anaxagoras employs this name (i.e. aither) incorrectly. For he speaks of aither in 


place of fire. 
382 


ANAXAGORAS 


of which it has most in it. When, therefore, 516 tells us that ‘the 
dense, the moist, the cold and the dark came together where the 
earth now is’, it means that the ‘seeds’ in which there was a pre- 
ponderance of the dense, the moist, the cold and the dark over 
their respective opposites tended towards the centre of the rotation. 
They obeyed, in other words, two laws which Anaxagoras seems 
to have regarded as virtually axiomatic, the attraction of like to 
like and the tendency of the heavy to the centre, of the light to the 
circumference of a whirl.t The Empedoclean elements were not 
to Anaxagoras primary substances, but rather mixtures of ‘seeds’ 
of all sorts.2 At this stage in cosmogony at least, earth is earth 
rather than anything else simply because of the predominance in 
its constituent ‘sceds’ of the dense and the rest over their opposites. 
Aither, on the other hand, consists of ‘seeds’ that are characterized 
by the rare, the hot and the dry. All that is happening, therefore, 
at this very early stage in the world’s evolution is that the ‘seeds’ 
that are characterized by the same combination of opposites are 
tending together towards their appropriate place in the universe. 


τ §19 Simplicius Phys. 27, τι (DK 59441) καὶ ταῦτά φησιν ὁ Θεόφραστος 
παραπλησίως τῷ ᾿Αναξιμάνδρῳ λέγειν τὸν ᾿Αναξαγόραν᾽ ἐκεῖνος (sc. 
Anaxagoras) γάρ φησιν ἐν τῇ διακρίσει τοῦ ἀπείρου τὰ συγγενῆ φέρεσθαι 
πρὸς ἄλληλα, καὶ ὅτι μὲν ἐν τῷ παντὶ χρυσὸς ἦν, γίνεσθαι χρυσόν, ὅτι δὲ 
γῆ, γῆν. 

520 Diog. L. nu, 8 (DK 59A1) καὶ νοῦν μὲν ἀρχὴν κινήσεως" τῶν δὲ 
σωμάτων τὰ μὲν βαρέα τὸν κάτω τόπον, τὰ δὲ κοῦφα τὸν ἄνω ἐπισχεῖν. ... 
Cf. 119. 


2 421 Aristotle de caelo T 3, 302a28 ᾿Αναξαγόρας δὲ ᾿Εμπεδοκλεῖ ἐναντίως 
λέγει περὶ τῶν στοιχείων. ὁ μὲν γὰρ πῦρ Kal τὰ σύστοιχα τούτοις στοιχεῖά 
φησιν εἶναι τῶν σωμάτων καὶ συγκεῖσθαι πάντ᾽ ἐκ τούτων, ᾿Αναξαγόρας δὲ 
τοὐναντίον : τὰ γὰρ ὁμοιομερῆ στοιχεῖα, λέγω δ᾽ οἷον σάρκα καὶ ὀστοῦν καὶ 
τῶν τοιούτων ἕκαστον ἀέρα δὲ καὶ πῦρ μείγματα τούτων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων 
σπερμάτων πάντων" εἶναι γὰρ ἑκάτερον αὐτῶν ἐξ ἀοράτων ὁμοιομερῶν 





519 Theophrastus says that the theory of Anaxagoras resembles that of Anaximander; 
for Anaxagoras says that, in the dividing up of the infinite, things of a like kind tend 
together, and what was gold or earth in the original whole becomes gold and earth respectively. 
520 Mind, he says, initiates motion, and heavy bodies occupy the lower position, light 
bodies the upper.... 


521 Anaxagoras and Empedocles hold opposite views on the elements. Empedocles holds 
that fire and the rest of the list are the elements of bodies and that everything 1s made up of 
these; but Anaxagoras opposes this. He maintains that the homoeomerous substances 
(e.g. flesh, bone and so on) are the elements, while air or fire are mixtures of these and all 
other seeds; each of them is an aggregation of all the homoeomerous substances, which, 


383 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


πάντων ἠθροισμένον. διὸ Kal γίγνεσθαι πάντ᾽ ἐκ τούτων TO γὰρ πῦρ Kal 
τὸν αἰθέρα προσαγορεύει ταὐτό. 


But if that is so, then the problem raised by the comparison of 
fr. 1, 495, with fr. 2, §1§, is easily solved. All that the crucial 
sentence in fr. 1 is intended to tell us is that, in Cornford’s words 
(CQ 24 (1930) 25), ‘Acther and Air are merely collective names for 
the sets of hotter and colder (etc.) Seeds respectively. Both sets 
exist in the Mixture, and indeed together make up the whole 
Mixture; but originally they were completely jumbled together 
and coextensive.’ Fr. 2, on the other hand, describes how these 
scts of ‘seeds’, originally completcly intermingled, began to be 
separated one from the other to form two distinctive masses. 
Anaxagoras, true to his Ionian upbringing, has in fact allowed the 
traditional opposites, even though they are now reduced to the 
status of ‘portions’ in ‘seeds’ and are therefore on an equal 
footing with natural substances, to retain their traditional part in 
cosmogony; and at the same time he has found a place in his 
system for the Empedoclean elements." 

1 This is another illustration of the way in which the responsibility of 
Mind becomes less direct as cosmogony proceeds, It is clearly the ground 
for Socrates’ famous criticism of Anaxagoras’ use of Mind in Phaedog7B{f. 
Cf. especially 422 Plato Phaedo 9887 (DK 59447) ἀπὸ δὴ θαυμαστῆς 
ἐλπίδος, ὦ ἑταῖρε, ᾧχόμην φερόμενος, ἐπειδὴ προϊὼν Kal ἀναγιγνώσκων ὁρῶ 
ἄνδρα τῷ μὲν νῷ οὐδὲν χρώμενον οὐδέ τινας αἰτίας ἐπαιτιώμενον els τὸ 
διακοσμεῖν τὰ πράγματα, ἀέρας δὲ καὶ αἰθέρας καὶ ὕδατα αἰτιώμενον καὶ ἄλλα 


πολλὰ καὶ &totra. This criticism is echoed by Aristotle Met. A4, 9854 18 
and Eudemus ap. Simpl. Phys. 327, 26 (both DK 59447). 


So Anaxagoras’ cosmogony is launched; and the process begun 
in §15 and 516 is continued in 517. First air, which is at this stage 
the opposite of aither, is solidified into clouds; from clouds comes 
water ; from water comes earth; and finally from earth are solidified 
stones. Not only is like continuing to be attracted by like, but also, 
evidently, the pressure at the centre of the rotation (cf. the Bin of 
505) is compressing the ‘seeds’ into ever more solid bodies. Of 
the ingredients in the ‘seeds’ it is still apparently the opposites that 





however, are invisible. For this reason everything comes into being from these two ( fire and 
aither being in Anaxagoras synonymous). 

522 From this wonderful hope, my friend, I was at once cast down: as I went ahead and 
read the book I found a man who made no use at all of Mind, nor invoked any other real 
causes to arrange the world, but explained things by airs and aithers and waters and many 
other absurdities. 


384 


ANAXAGORAS 


are the operative factor: stones are solidified from earth under the 
agency of the cold. But by now the opposites have fulfilled their 
main function; from now onwards their place will be largely taken 
by the substances with which they are mixed in the ‘seeds’. 


NOURISHMENT AND GROWTH 

523 Aetius 1, 3, 5 (DK 59446) ᾿Αναξαγόρας Ἡγησιβούλου ὁ 
Κλαφομένιος ἀρχὰς τῶν ὄντων τὰς ὁμοιομερείας ἀπεφήνατο. ἐδόκει 
γὰρ αὐτῷ ἀπορώτατον εἶναι, πῶς ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος δύναταί τι 
γίνεσθαι ἢ φθείρεσθαι εἰς τὸ μὴ ὄν. τροφὴν γοῦν προσφερόμεθα 
ἁπλῆν καὶ μονοειδῆ, ἄρτον καὶ ὕδωρ, καὶ ἐκ ταύτης τρέφεται θρὶξ 
φλὲψ ἀρτηρία σὰρξ νεῦρα ὀστᾶ καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ μόρια. τούτων οὖν 
γιγνομένων ὁμολογητέον ὅτι ἐν τῇ τροφῇ τῇ προσφερομένῃ πάντα 
ἐστὶ τὰ ὄντα, καὶ ἐκ τῶν ὄντων πάντα αὔξεται. καὶ ἐν ἐκείνῃ ἐστὶ 
τῇ τροφῇ μόρια αἵματος γεννητικὰ καὶ νεύρων καὶ ὀστέων καὶ τῶν 
ἄλλων" ἃ ἦν λόγῳ θεωρητὰ μόρια. οὐ γὰρ δεῖ πάντα ἐπὶ τὴν 
αἴσθησιν ἀνάγειν, ὅτι ἄρτος καὶ τὸ ὕδωρ ταῦτα κατασκευάζει, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἐν τούτοις ἐστὶ λόγῳ θεωρητὰ μόρια. Cf. Simplicius Phys. 460, 12 
(DK 59.445). 

This passage and others like it, along with fr. 10 (511), suggest 
that Anaxagoras was particularly interested in the problem of 
nutrition. His general principles, ‘a portion of everything in 
everything’ and the attraction of like to like, provide him with a 
simple solution—so simple, indeed, that he may well have arrived 
at those general principles from consideration of this very problem. 
For though there are certain inevitable differences of detail, the 
analogy between macrocosm—the world in which we live—and 
microcosm—the individual living thing—is in Anaxagoras 
especially plain. 





523 Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, son of Hegesiboulos, held that the first principles of 
things were the homoeomeries. For it seemed to him quite impossible that anything should 
come into being from the non-existent or be dissolved into it. Anyhow we take in nourish- 
ment that is simple and homogeneous, such as bread or water, and by this are nourished hair, 
veins, arteries, flesh, sinews, bones and all the other parts of the body. Which being so, we 
must agree that everything that exists is in the nourishment we take in, and that everything 
derives its growth from things that exist. There must be in that nourishment some parts that 
are productive of blood, some of sinews, some of bones, and so on—parts which reason alone 
can apprehend. For there is no need to refer the fact that bread and water produce all these 
things to sense-perception; rather, there are in bread and water parts which only reason can 
apprehend. 


25 385 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Bread and water, like all other substances, consist of ‘seeds’; 
and cach of those ‘sceds’ contains a ‘portion’ of everything. (It is 
true, of course, that bread is not a natural substance, while water, 
as we have already secn, is a collection of ‘seeds’ of every sort; but 
if we substitute wheat, which is a natural substance, for the bread 
which both Actius and Simplicius actually cite, it makes no 
difference to the argument.) When the bread (or wheat) is eaten, 
it is presumably broken up into its constituent ‘secds’; and since 
these are themselves infinitely divisible, some of them at least will 
probably be broken down, by the processes of mastication and 
digestion, into still smaller secds. Thereupon those sceds in which 
flesh predominates proceed, by the attraction of like to like, to join 
the flesh of the body, hair joins hair, and so on. But since no such 
thing as a particle of pure substance can ever exist, the flesh from 
the bread that goes to join the flesh of the body must always carry 
with it a ‘portion’ of everything else, and so ensures that the flesh, 
like the loaf, will continue to contain a ‘portion’ of everything. 
Meanwhile, of course, those ingredients in the loaf that are 
irrelevant to nutrition, copper, for instance, or cork,? are for the 
most part—that 15, all except the few ‘portions’ which are carried 
to join the flesh or hair of the body—eliminated by the digestive 
processes. 


t The examples are Cornford’s. Commenting on this passage from 
Actius, he writes (CQ 24 (1930) 20): ‘Corn feeds flesh and bones; therefore 
it contains particles of flesh and bone. It does not nourish silver or rubies; 
so why should it contain particles of these?... There is no motive here for 
asserting “ἃ portion of every substance’’ in bread or corn or any other food as 
such. The assertion would be gratuitous as well as absurd.’ But the 
argument that the contention ‘a portion of everything in everything’ is 
absurdly uneconomical, true as it may be in one way, overlooks the fact, 
on which comment has already been made above (pp. 38o0f.), that it is 
at least economical of effort. It would have been an unending task for 
Anaxagoras to determine what could and what could not come from what; 
and it is perhaps characteristic of Presocratic dogmatism that, rather than 
face that unending task, he should simply have asserted, as we have seen 
he several times did, ‘a portion of everything in everything’. 


HOMOEOMERIES 

Three of the passages already quoted have used one or other of the 
words ὁμοιομερῆ or ὁμοιομέρειαι (“homoeomeries’ or “things with 
like parts’). None of these passages comes from Anaxagoras him- 
self; two, 512 and 5421, come from Aristotle; one, 523, to which 


386 


ANAXAGORAS 


many parallels could be found in Simplicius and others, comes 
from Aetius. It is actually very unlikely that Anaxagoras himself 
ever used cither word; what the later commentators called 
ὁμοιομέρειαι, he himself seems to have called ‘seeds’. Aristotle, 
who was probably the first to apply the phrase τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ to the 
theorics of Anaxagoras, seems at least to have used it consistently. 
But in the later writers the precise meaning of either term 1s open 
to question. 

Perhaps the most significant of the passages in Aristotle is that 
at the beginning of 512 in which he tells us that Anaxagoras 
regarded as primary elements both the opposites and τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ, 
‘the things with like parts’. Now Aristotle frequently uses the 
phrase τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ for his own purposes: τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ in his own 
system were natural substances, such as flesh or bone, metals, or 
the four clements, every part of which, in his own view, was 
exactly like the whole. It seems hardly likely that, when he used 
the phrase in connexion with the theories of Anaxagoras, he should 
have used it in a diffcrent sense. What 512 thereforc tells us is that 
Anaxagoras regarded both the opposites and natural substances as 
primary elements. It is true that elsewhere in Aristotle, as in §21, 
the homoeomerous substances appear alone as the primary 
elements of Anaxagoras; but that after all does not contradict the 
fuller statement in 512. Our own reconstruction of Anaxagoras’ 
system suggests that the fuller statement is correct. For in that 
system as reconstructed the opposites and the natural substances 
do indeed together comprise the ‘everything’ of which everything 
contains a ‘portion’. Even if, therefore, the strictest possible 
interpretation is placed upon the phrase τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ in Aristotle, 
that still does not in the slightest degree undermine any arguments 
adduced in earlier sections of this chapter. It may be that 
Aristotle uses the phrase in a sense which Anaxagoras himself 
would not have allowed; whatever the natural substances were or 
were not in Anaxagoras’ system, they were certainly not, as they 
were in Aristotle’s own, homogeneous. But that does not invalidate 
the truth of the statement that in the system of Anaxagoras the 
primary elements were the opposites and the natural substances 
together. 

Only in the later writers, when the term ὁμοιομέρεια creeps in 
alongside τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ, does the problem become more compli- 
cated. Itis evident from, for instance, Lucretius 1, 830 (DK 594 44) 


387 a5 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


that the word ὁμοιομέρεια had by now become a catchword that 
was almost automatically applied to Anaxagoras’ physical 
theories; and it seems very probable that many of those who used 
it did so without understanding its exact significance. Simplicius, 
thanks to his familiarity with Anaxagoras’ book, is probably our 
safest guide as to its correct usage. In the passages of Simplicius 
where either τὰ ὁμοιομερῆ or ὁμοιομέρειαι figure, the former can 
always be understood in the sense in which Aristotle used it, 
whereas the latter can usually, if not always, be taken to mean the 
‘seeds’. The fact is, of course, that the problem is somewhat 
academic. Not only did Anaxagoras himself apparently never use 
the words, but also, whatever interpretation be put upon them 
(except only the impossible interpretation of homogeneity), there 
is no difficulty in fitting them into the system as reconstructed. 
But if we have to speculate on why Anaxagoras’ ‘seeds’ came to be 
called ὁμοιομέρειαι, then the most likely explanation is that, since 
every ‘sced’ contains a ‘portion’ of everything, not only every 
individual ‘seed’ but also everything composed of ‘seeds’ will, in 
a very real sense, contain similar ‘portions’. 


1 Aetius, e.g., is clearly uncertain of the exact implications of the word 
ὁμοιομέρεια. §23 continues thus: 524 Aetius 1, 3, 5 (DK 59446) ἀπὸ 
τοῦ οὖν ὅμοια τὰ μέρη εἶναι ἐν τῇ τροφῇ τοῖς γεννωμένοις ὁμοιομερείας 
αὐτὰς ἐκάλεσε καὶ ἀρχὰς τῶν ὄντων ἀπεφήνατο. .... 


SUMMARY OF THE PHYSICAL SYSTEM 


Before proceeding to certain special doctrines, it will be as well to 
add a few last observations on the above reconstruction of the basis 
of Anaxagoras’ system. 

The problem which faced Anaxagoras was, of course, exactly 
the same as faced the atomists. He had to give an account of the 
origin of the world without either deriving a plurality from an 
original unity, or allowing the coming-into-being or change of 
anything real, or, finally, confusing geometrical space with 
physical matter. Given the same problem, the two solutions could 
hardly have been more different. Whereas Anaxagoras made 
matter, like magnitude, infinitely divisible, the atomists main- 





524 Since, therefore, the nourishment contains parts that are like the things which it 
produces, he called them homoeomeries and said that they were the first principles of existing 
things.... 


388 


ANAXAGORAS 


tained that it was composed of indivisible minima; and whereas 
Anaxagoras eliminated both coming-into-being and the deriva- 
tion of plurality from unity by postulating ad initio an infinite 
variety of substances, the atomists regarded all substance as 
absolutely homogeneous and accounted for the apparent variety 
of phenomena by mere differences of shape, size, position and 
arrangement. Both solutions are full of ingenuity, in outline and 
in detail. But for all their ingenuity, and for all the difference 
between them, they are each the outcome as much of the Eleatic 
paradox as of the inventiveness of their respective authors. 


SPECIAL DOCTRINES 

(i) Innumerable worlds? 

525 Fr. 4, Simplicius Phys. 35, 3 (continuing §10) ...Kal ἀνθρώ- 
TOUS TE συμπαγῆναι Kal τὰ ἄλλα 2a ὅσα ψυχὴν ἔχει. καὶ τοῖς γε 
ἀνθρώποισιν εἶναι καὶ πτόλεις συνῳκημένας καὶ ἔργα κατεσκευασμένα, 
ὥσπερ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν, καὶ ἠέλιόν τε αὐτοῖσιν εἶναι καὶ σελήνην καὶ τὰ 
ἄλλα, ὥσπερ Trap” ἡμῖν, καὶ τὴν γῆν αὐτοῖσι φύειν πολλά τε καὶ 
παντοῖα, ὧν ἐκεῖνοι τὰ ὀνῆστα συνενεγκάμενοι εἰς τὴν οἴκησιν 
χρῶνται. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν μοι λέλεκται περὶ τῆς ἀποκρίσιος, ὅτι οὐκ 
ἂν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν μόνον ἀποκριθείη, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄλλῃ. (496 follows.) 
526 Simplicius Phys. 157, 9 καὶ μέντοι εἰπτὼν ᾿ἐνεῖναι πολλά... 
ἡδονάς᾽ (from 510), καὶ ᾿ἀνθρώπους γε συμπαγῆναι.. . ψυχὴν 
ἔχει᾽, ἐπάγει “καὶ τοῖς γε ἀνθρώποισιν. . .-.χρῶνται᾽ (from 525). 
καὶ ὅτι μὲν ἑτέραν τινὰ διακόσμησιν παρὰ τὴν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν αἰνίττεται, 
δηλοῖ τὸ “ὥσπερ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν᾽ οὐχ ἅπαξ μόνον εἰρημένον. ὅτι δὲ 
οὐδὲ αἰσθητὴν μὲν ἐκείνην οἴεται, τῷ χρόνῳ δὲ ταύτης Trponynoa- 
μένην, δηλοῖ τὸ “ὧν ἐκεῖνοι τὰ ὀνῆστα συνενεγκάμενοι εἰς τὴν 
οἴκησιν χρῶνται. οὐ γὰρ ᾿ἐχρῶντο᾽ εἶπεν, ἀλλὰ “χρῶνται᾽. 





525 (We must suppose that) men have been formed and the other animals that have life; 
and that the men have inhabited cities and cultivated fields, just as we have here; and sun 
and moon and so on, just as we have; and that the earth brings forth for them all manner of 
produce, of which they garner the best into their houses and use it. So much, then, have I 
said about the process of separating off—that separation would have taken place not only 
here with us but elsewhere too. 

526 Having said, however, ‘there are many things. ..and tastes’ [from 5107 and ‘men 
have been formed. ..have life’, he adds ‘the men have...and use it’ [from 525]. That 
he is hinting at another world in addition to our own is clear from the phrase, which he uses 
more than once, ‘just as we have’. And that he does not regard this other world as a 
perceptible world which preceded this world in time is clear from the words ‘of which they 
garner the best into their houses and use it’. For he did not say ‘used’ but ‘use’. Nor does 


389 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ὡς νῦν κατ᾽ ἄλλας τινὰς οἰκήσεις ὁμοίας οὔσης κατα- 
στάσεως τῇ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν. οὐ γὰρ εἶπε “Tov ἥλιον καὶ τὴν σελήνην 
εἶναι Trap” ἐκείνοις ὥσπερ καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν᾽, ἀλλ᾽ “ἥλιον καὶ σελήνην, 
ὥσπερ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν᾽, ὡς δὴ περὶ ἄλλων λέγων. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν εἴτε 
οὕτως εἴτε ἄλλως ἔχει, φητεῖν ἄξιον. 


Many scholars have maintained, on the strength of 525, that 
Anaxagoras must have believed in a plurality of contemporary 
worlds. Yct some of the ancient evidence seems to suggest that he 
believed in one world only. Admittedly Aetius at one point (n, 4, 
6, DK 59465) lists Anaxagoras among those who held that the 
world was perishable, thereby suggesting that he believed in a 
succession of worlds; but Aetius, as was shown in the case of 
Anaximander (p. 124), was confused on this issue, and elsewhere 
(u, 1, 2, DK 59463) lists Anaxagoras instead among those who 
believed in one world only. Simplicius is probably our most 
reliable witness, since he certainly had the relevant part of 
Anaxagoras’ book before him; and though elsewhere in his 
commentary on the Physics (e.g. 154, 29, DK 59464) he speaks of 
Anaxagoras’ world in the singular, that need mean no more than 
that he was there concerned only with the world we know." 526 
gives us his considered view, and clearly acknowledges his un- 
certainty on the point. It is perhaps just possible that, as Cornford 
maintained, Anaxagoras is referring in 525, not to other worlds, but 
to distant and unknown parts of this earth’s surface, comparable 
with the ‘hollows in the earth’ in the myth in Plato’s Phaedo 
(10g Aff.). But since the question was anyhow not for Anaxagoras 
(as it was for the atomists, see p. 412) one which arose inevitably 
from his first principles and consequently demanded a definite 
answer, it scems wisest to follow the guidance of Simplicius in 526 
and leave the question open. 
t Aristotle’s remarks about Anaxagoras at, e.g., Phys. A4, 187223 ff, O1, 
250b18ff., though they have been used as evidence that Anaxagoras 
believed in only one world, are either so generalized that they are of little 
value as evidence on this particular question, or else suggest only that in 


Aristotle’s opinion Anaxagoras regarded this world (irrespective of the 
existence of others) as imperishable. 








he mean that they are now inhabiting other regions of the same world as our own. For 
he did not say ‘they have the sun and the moon just as we too have’ but ‘sun and moon, as 
we have’—as if he were talking of a different sun and moon. But it is debatable whether or 
not these considerations are valid. 


399 


ANAXAGORAS 


(11) Astronomy and meteorology 


527 Fr. 18, Plutarch de fac. in orb. lun. 16, 929B ἥλιος ἐντίθησι 
τῇ σελήνῃ TO λαμπρόν. 

528 ΕἾ. 10,Σ BT in Lliadem 17, 547 “Ipiv δὲ καλέομεν τὸ ἐν τῇσι 
νεφέλῃσιν ἀντιλάμπον τῷ ἡλίῳ. χειμῶνος οὖν ἐστι σύμβολον 
τὸ γὰρ περιχεόμενον ὕδωρ τῷ νέφει ἄνεμον ἐποίησεν ἢ ἐξέχεεν 
ὄμβρον. 

529 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 8, 3-10 (DK 59.442) τὴν δὲ γῆν τῷ 
σχήματι πλατεῖαν εἶναι καὶ μένειν μετέωρον διὰ τὸ μέγεθος καὶ διὰ 
τὸ μὴ εἶναι κενὸν καὶ διὰ τὸ τὸν ἀέρα ἰσχυρότατον ὄντα φέρειν 
ἐποχουμένην τὴν γῆν. (4) τῶν δ᾽ ἐπὶ γῆς ὑγρῶν τὴν μὲν θάλασσαν 
ὑπάρξαι (ἔκ) τε τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ ὑδάτων, (dv) ἐξατμισθένζτων, τὰ 
ὑποστάντα οὕτως γεγονέναι, καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν καταρρευσάντων 
ποταμῶν. (5) τοὺς δὲ ποταμοὺς καὶ ἀπτὸ τῶν ὄμβρων λαμβάνειν τὴν 
ὑπόστασιν καὶ ἐξ ὑδάτων τῶν ἐν τῇ γῇ. εἶναι γὰρ αὐτὴν κοίλην καὶ 
ἔχειν ὕδωρ ἐν τοῖς κοιλώμασιν..... (6) ἥλιον δὲ καὶ σελήνην καὶ 
πάντα τὰ ἄστρα λίθους εἶναι ἐμττύρους συμπεριληφθέντας ὑπὸ τῆς 
αἰθέρος περιφορᾶς. εἶναι δ᾽ ὑποκάτω τῶν ἄστρων ἡλίῳ καὶ 
σελήνῃ σώματά τινα συμπεριφερόμενα ἡμῖν ἀόρατα. (7) τῆς δὲ 
θερμότητος μὴ αἰσθάνεσθαι τῶν ἄστρων διὰ τὸ μακρὰν εἶναι [καὶ 
διὰ] τὴν ἀπόστασιν τῆς γῆς᾽ ἔτι δὲ οὐχ ὁμοίως θερμὰ τῷ ἡλίῳ διὰ 
τὸ χώραν ἔχειν ψυχροτέραν. εἶναι δὲ τὴν σελήνην κατωτέρω τοῦ 
ἡλίου πλησιώτερον ἡμῶν. (8) ὑπερέχειν δὲ τὸν ἥλιον μεγέθει τὴν 
Πελοττόννησον. τὸ δὲ φῶς τὴν σελήνην μὴ ἴδιον ἔχειν, ἀλλὰ ἀπὸ 
τοῦ ἡλίου. τὴν δὲ τῶν ἄστρων περιφορὰν ὑπὸ γῆν γίνεσθαι. 





527 The sun indues the moon with brightness. 


528 We call the reflexion of the sun in the clouds a rainbow. So it is a sign of storm; for 
the moisture that suffuses the cloud either creates a wind or spills forth rain. 


§29 The earth (he thinks) is flat in shape, and stays suspended where tt 1s because of its 
size, because there is no void and because the air, which is very strong, keeps the earth afloat 
on it. (4) Of the moisture on the earth, the sea came from the waters in the earth, the 
evaporation of which gave rise to all that has emerged, and from the rivers that flow into 
it. (5) Rivers owe their origin partly to rain, partly to the waters in the earth; for the earth 
is hollow, and in its hollows contains water.... (6) The sun, the moon and all the stars 
are red-hot stones which the rotation of the aither carries round with it. Beneath the stars 
are certain bodies, invisible to us, that are carried round with the sun and moon. (7) We 
do not feel the heat of the stars because they are so far from the earth; moreover, they are not 
as hot as the sun because they occupy a colder region. The moon is beneath the sun and 
nearer to us. (8) The sun exceeds the Peloponnese in size. The moon has not any light of 
its own but derives it from the sun. The stars in their revolution pass beneath the earth. 


39! 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(g) ἐκλείτεειν δὲ τὴν σελήνην γῆς ἀντιφραττούσης, ἐνίοτε δὲ καὶ τῶν 
ὑποκάτω Tis σελήνης, τὸν δὲ ἥλιον ταῖς νουμηνίαις σελήνης 
ἀντιφραττούσης.. ... (10).. «ἔφη δὲ γηίνην εἶναι τὴν σελήνην ἔχειν 
τε ἐν αὑτῇ πεδία καὶ φάραγγας. Cf. Diog. L. π, 8ὃ-9 (DK 5g9A1). 


527 and 528 are included mainly to show that Anaxagoras did 
indeed concern himself with the usual astronomical and meteoro- 
logical questions. It is from the long passage of which 529 is a part 
that we get most of our information on the subject; and 429 for 
the most part speaks for itself. Clearly Anaxagoras’ astronomy is 
much more rational than most of his predecessors’, especially 
perhaps the view that the sun, moon and stars are huge incan- 
descent stoncs. There is a story preserved by Diogenes Laertius? 
and Pliny that Anaxagoras predicted the fall of the large meteorite 
which fell at Acgospotami in 467 B.c. (cf. p. 439). Certainly this 
event caused a considerable stir; and though the suggestion that 
Anaxagoras predicted it is absurd, it may well have contributed 
towards his belicf that the heavenly bodies were made of stone. 
It is because of their solidity, as 517 has already suggested, that 
they were originally thrown off from the earth at the centre of the 
cosmic revolution to take up their positions nearer the periphery. 
Presumably meteorites are heavenly bodies which, despite the 
speed of the revolution which normally keeps them aloft, have 
been drawn back to the earth by the familiar tendency of the 
heavy to move towards the centre of the revolution. 


1 420 Diog. L. u, 10 (DK 5941) φασὶ δ᾽ αὐτὸν προειπεῖν τὴν περὶ 
Αἰγὸς ποταμοὺς γενομένην τοῦ λίθον πτῶσιν, ὃν εἶπεν ἐκ τοῦ ἡλίου 
πεσεῖσθαι. Cf. Marmor Parium 57 and Pliny V.H. τι, 149 (both DK 594 11). 


(111) Brology 

5321 Fr. 22, Athenaeus 1, 57D τὸ καλούμενον ὄρνιθος γάλα TO 
ἐν τοῖς ᾧοῖϊς λευκόν. 

532 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 8, 12 (ὨΚ 59442) τῷα δὲ τὴν μὲν ἀρχὴν 





(9) Eclipses of the moon are due to its being screened by the earth, or, sometimes, by the bodies 
beneath the moon; those of the sun to screening by the moon when it is new.... (10) ...He 
held that the moon was made of earth, and had plains and ravines on it. 

530 6 They say that he foretold the fall of the stone at Aegospotami, saying that it would 
fall from the sun. 

531 What ts called ‘birds’ milk’ is the white of the egg. 


392 


ANAXAGORAS 


ἐν ὑγρῷ γενέσθαι, μετὰ ταῦτα δὲ ἐξ ἀλλήλων. Cf. Diog. L. τὶ, 
9 ad fin. (DK 5941). 

533 Theophrastus Hist. plant. πὶ, 1, 4 ᾿Αναξαγόρας μὲν τὸν 
ἀέρα πάντων φάσκων ἔχειν σπέρματα Kal ταῦτα συγκαταφερόμενα 
τῷ ὕδατι γεννᾶν τὰ φυτά.... 


531 is again quoted merely to show that Anaxagoras did include 
detailed doctrines in his book: its point presumably is that the 
white of an egg is the embryo’s food. Several equally detailed 
theories are attributed to him by the ancient authorities, including 
Aristotle; but they are of no great importance for present purposes. 
The two most important of his biological theories are those in §32 
and 533. In his belief that life originated in ‘the moist’ he followed 
Anaximander (see pp. 141f.), but the notion that it was brought 
down to the earth with the rain is curious. All living things, of 
course, from plants at the bottom of the scale to man at the top,? 
have a portion of Mind (see 503 and 509). Before living things 
came into existence Mind was presumably dispersed evenly 
throughout the mixture; but from the time when life originated it 
evidently began to localize itself in living things, so that there are 
now, according to 509, only ‘some things in which there is Mind 
also’. 

1 This may be a development of the popular idea, exemplified in Aeschylus 

(see 26), that rain is the semen of Ouranos, by which Gaia is fertilized. 


2 434 Plutarch Quaest. phys. 1, 911D 3@0v yap ἔγγειον τὸ φυτὸν εἶναι 
of περὶ Πλάτωνα καὶ ᾿Αναξαγόραν καὶ Δημόκριτον οἴονται. Also 538 
Ar. de part. an. Διο, 687a7 (DK 59A102) ᾿Αναξαγόρας μὲν οὖν φησι διὰ 
TO χεῖρας ἔχειν φρονιμώτατον εἶναι τῶν φτῴων ἄνθρωπον. 


(iv) Sensation 
536 Fr. 21, Sextus adv. math. vu, 90 ὑπ᾽ ἀφαυρότητος αὐτῶν 
(sc. τῶν αἰσθήσεων) οὐ δυνατοί ἐσμεν κρίνειν τἀληθές. 








532 Animals (he says) originally arose in the moisture, but later from one another. 


533 Anaxagoras, when he says that the air contains the seeds of all things and that tt is 
these seeds which, when carried down with the rain, give rise to plants.... 


534 The followers of Plato, Anaxagoras and Democritus regard a plant as an animal 
fixed in the earth. 

535 Anaxagoras says, then, that it is his possession of hands that makes man the wisest 
of living things. 

536 From the weakness of our senses we cannot judge the truth. 


393 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 

537 Fr. 214, thid. vu, 140 ὄψις yap τῶν ἀδήλων τὰ φαινόμενα. 
538 Theophrastus de sensu 27ff. (DK 59492) ᾿Αναξαγόρας δὲ 
γίνεσθαι μὲν (se. τὰ αἰσθητὰ) τοῖς Evavtiois’ TO yap ὅμοιον atradEs 
ὑπὸ τοῦ ὁμοίου. . ., τὸ γὰρ ὁμοίως θερμὸν καὶ ψυχρὸν οὔτε θερμαίνειν 
οὔτε ψύχειν πλησιάτον οὐδὲ δὴ τὸ γλυκὺ καὶ τὸ ὀξὺ δι᾽ αὐτῶν 
γνωρίτειν, ἀλλὰ τῷ μὲν θερμῷ τὸ ψυχρόν, τῷ δ᾽ ἁλμυρῷ τὸ πότιμον, 
τῷ δ᾽ ὀξεῖ τὸ γλυκὺ κατὰ τὴν ἔλλειψιν τὴν ἑκάστου" πάντα γὰρ 
ἐνυπάρχειν φησὶν ἐν hiv... ἅπασαν δ᾽ αἴσθησιν μετὰ λύπης, ὅπερ 
ἄν δόξειεν ἀκόλουθον εἶναι τῇ ὑποθέσει: πᾶν γὰρ τὸ ἀνόμοιον 
ἁπτόμενον πόνον παρέχει. φανερὸν δὲ τοῦτο τῷ τε τοῦ χρόνου 
πλήθει καὶ τῇ τῶν αἰσθητῶν ὑπερβολῇ. 


These three passages are all concerned with the senses, but other- 
wise they have little in common. 536, as we are told by Sextus 
who prcscrved it, was concerned with imperceptible gradations of 
colour, and its general point seems to have been that though our 
senses show us what ‘portions’ predominate in a thing thcy are not 
adequate to reveal all the other ‘portions’ which that thing must 
contain. §37, on the other hand (which may perhaps come from 
a discussion of epistemology rather than of perception), suggests 
that from what we can sce we are enabled to imagine also what we 
cannot see. §38 contains only the most important excerpts from 
a detailed account of Anaxagoras’ theories of perception. ‘These 
few sentences suffice to show that in this field too Anaxagoras 
marks an advance upon most of his predecessors. His theory may 
have becn developed in conscious opposition to that of Empedocles, 
who believed in perception of like by like (see 454); but the notion 
that the perception of unlike by unlike is, as it were, an imper- 
ceptible pain is original and subtle. 








537 Appearances are a glimpse of the obscure. 


538 Anaxagoras thinks that perception is by opposties, for like is not affected by like.... 
A thing that is as warm or as cold as we are does not either warm us or cool us by its approach, 
nor can we recognize sweetness or bitterness by their like; rather we know cold by warm, 
Sresh by salt and sweet by bitter in proportion to our deficiency in each. For everything, he 
says, 1s in us already....Every perception is accompanied by pain, a consequence that 
would seem to follow from his hypothesis; for everything unlike produces pain by its 
contact; and the presence of this pain becomes clear either from too long a duration or from 
an excess of sensation. 


394 


CHAPTER XVI 
ARCHELAUS OF ATHENS 


DATE AND LIFE 

539 Diogenes Laertius n, 16 (DK60a1) ᾿Αρχέλαος ᾿Αθηναῖος 
ἢ Μιλήσιος, πατρὸς ᾿Απολλοδώρου, ὡς δέ tives, Μίδωνος, μαθητὴς 
᾿Αναξαγόρου, διδάσκαλος Σωκράτους: οὗτος πρῶτος ἐκ τῆς ᾿Ιωνίας 
τὴν φυσικὴν φιλοσοφίαν μετήγαγεν ᾿Αθήναφε, καὶ ἐκλήθη φυσικός, 
παρὸ καὶ ἔληξεν ἐν αὐτῷ ἡ φυσικὴ φιλοσοφία, Σωκράτους τὴν 
ἠθικὴν εἰσαγαγόντος. ἔοικεν δὲ καὶ οὗτος ἅψασθαι τῆς ἠθικῆς. καὶ 
γὰρ περὶ νόμων πεφιλοσόφηκε καὶ καλῶν καὶ δικαίων. 


The precise date οἵ Archelaus is uncertain. Diogenes is almost 
certainly wrong in saying that Archelaus first brought physical 
speculation to Athens; that distinction probably belongs to 
Anaxagoras. Likewise the statement that physical philosophy 
ended with him is very dubious;t even Leucippus, let alone 
Democritus, was probably later than Archelaus. But the tradition 
that Archelaus was a pupil of Anaxagoras and teacher of Socrates 
is too well attested to be doubted,” and it gives us at least an 
approximate date. His importance lies chiefly in these distin- 
guished associations; in comparison with either his master or his 
pupil his direct contribution to philosophy is very small. But he 
is of a certain interest as indicating the straits to which all but the 
very greatest of the later physicists were driven in their search for 
an original cosmology. 

t This is doubtless merely an instance of the passion for organizing history 


into ‘Ages’. Socrates introduces the ‘Age of Ethics’, so the ‘Age of 
Physical Philosophy’ must stop abruptly. 

2 See 541, and also 540 Diog. L. u, 23 Ἴων δὲ ὁ Χῖος (sce p. 302) καὶ 
νέον ὄντα (sc. Socrates) els Σάμον σὺν ᾿Αρχελάῳ ἀποδημῆσαι. Cf. also 
Porphyry Hist. phil. fr. 11 Nauck (DK 604 4). 





539 Archelaus, of Athens or else Miletus, son of Apollodorus or, according to some 
accounts, of Midon, was a pupil of Anaxagoras and teacher of Socrates; it was he who first 
transferred physical philosophy from Ionia to Athens, and he was called a physicist. 
Moreover, physical philosophy came to an end with him, owing to Socrates’ introduction of 
ethics. Archelaus too seems to have touched upon ethical questions, for he speculated as well 
about law, goodness and justice. 


540 Ion of Chios says that in his youth Socrates went away with Archelaus to Samos. 


395 





PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


COSMOLOGY AND ZOOGONY 

541 Simplicius Phys. 27, 23 Kal ᾿Αρχέλαος ὁ ᾿Αθηναῖος, © καὶ 
Σωκράτη συγγεγονέναι φασὶν ᾿Αναξαγόρου γενομένῳ μαθητῇ, ἐν 
μὲν τῇ γενέσει τοῦ κόσμον καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις πειρᾶταί τι φέρειν ἴδιον, 
τὰς ἀρχὰς δὲ τὰς αὐτὰς ἀποδίδωσιν ἅσπερ ᾿Αναξαγόρας. οὗτοι μὲν 
οὖν ἀπείρους τῷ πλήθει καὶ ἀνομογενεῖς τὰς ἀρχὰς λέγουσι, τὰς 
ὁμοιομερείας τιθέντες ἀρχάς. ... 

542 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 9, 1 ᾿Αρχέλαος τὸ μὲν γένος ᾿Αθηναῖος, 
υἱὸς δὲ ᾿Απολλοδώρου. οὗτος ἔφη τὴν μίξιν τῆς ὕλης ὁμοίως 
᾿Αναξαγόρᾳ τάς τε ἀρχὰς ὡσαύτως. οὗτος δὲ τῷ νῷ ἐνυπάρχειν τι 
εὐθέως μῖγμα. (2) εἶναι (8°) ἀρχὴν τῆς κινήσεως (TO) ἀποκρίνεσθαι 
ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων τὸ θερμὸν καὶ τὸ ψυχρόν, καὶ τὸ μὲν θερμὸν κινεῖσθαι, 
τὸ δὲ ψυχρὸν ἠρεμεῖν. τηκόμενον δὲ τὸ ὕδωρ εἰς μέσον ῥεῖν, ἐν ᾧ καὶ 
κατακαιόμενον ἀέρα γίνεσθαι καὶ γῆν, ὧν τὸ μὲν ἄνω φέρεσθαι, τὸ 
δὲ ὑφίστασθαι κάτω. (4) τὴν μὲν οὖν γῆν ἠρεμεῖν καὶ γενέσθαι διὰ 
ταῦτα, κεῖσθαι δ᾽ ἐν μέσῳ οὐδὲν μέρος οὖσαν, ὡς εἰττεῖν, τοῦ παντός. 
(τὸν δ᾽ ἀέρα κρατεῖν τοῦ παντὸς» [Roepcr, Diels] ἐκδεδομένον ἐκ 
τῆς πυρώσεως, ἀφ᾽ οὗ πρῶτον ἀποκαιομένου τὴν τῶν ἀστέρων εἶναι 
φύσιν, ὧν μέγιστον μὲν ἥλιον, δεύτερον δὲ σελήνην, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων 
τὰ μὲν ἐλάττω τὰ δὲ μείφω. (4) ἐπικλιθῆναι δὲ τὸν οὐρανόν φησι καὶ 
οὕτως τὸν ἥλιον ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ποιῆσαι φῶς καὶ τόν τε ἀέρα ποιῆσαι 
διαφανῆ καὶ τὴν γῆν ξηράν. λίμνην γὰρ εἶναι τὸ πρῶτον, ἅτε 
κύκλῳ μὲν οὖσαν ὑψηλήν, μέσον δὲ κοίλην. σημεῖον δὲ φέρει τῆς 





541 Archelaus of Athens, the pupil of Anaxagoras with whom Socrates ἐς said to have 
associated, tries to introduce something original of his own into cosmogony and other 
subjects, but still gives the same first principles as Anaxagoras had. Both hold that the 
first principles are infinite in number and different in kind, and they posit the homoeomeries 
as principles. ... 

542 (1) Archelaus was by birth an Athenian, the son of Apollodorus. He believed in 
a material mixture like that of Anaxagoras and his first principles were the same; but he 
maintained that from the outset there was a certain mixture immanent in Mind. (2) The 
origin of motion was the separation one from the other of the hot and the cold, of which the 
JSormer moves, the latter stays still. When waiter is liquefied it flows to the centre, and there it 
is burnt up to become air and earth, the former of which is borne upwards, while the latter 
takes up a position below. (3) For these reasons, then, the earth came into being, and lies 
at rest in the centre, forming no appreciable fraction of the whole universe. <The air) 
produced by the conflagration {controls the universe), and from its original combustion 
comes the substance of the heavenly bodies. Of these the sun is the biggest, the moon the 
second, and of the rest some are smaller, some larger. (4) He says that the heavens are 
inclined, with the result that the sun gave light on the earth, made the air transparent, and 
the earth dry. For it was originally a marsh, being lofty around the edge and hollow in the 


396 


ARCHELAUS 


KOIAOTHTOS ὅτι ὁ ἥλιος οὐχ ἅμα ἀνατέλλει Te Kal δύεται πᾶσιν, 
ὅπερ ἔδει συμβαίνειν εἴπτερ ἦν ὁμαλή. (5) περὶ δὲ φῴων φησίν, ὅτι 
θερμαινομένης τῆς γῆς τὸ πρῶτον ἐν τῷ κάτω μέρει, ὅπου τὸ θερμὸν 
καὶ τὸ ψυχρὸν ἐμίσγετο ἀνεφαίνετο τά τε ἄλλα τῷα πολλὰ καὶ οἱ 
ἄνθρωποι, ἅπαντα τὴν αὐτὴν δίαιταν ἔχοντα ἐκ τῆς ἰλύος τρεφόμενα 
(ἦν δὲ ὀλιγοχρόνιαὶ), ὕστερον δὲ αὐτοῖς ἡ ἐξ ἀλλήλων γένεσις συνέστη. 
(6) καὶ διεκρίθησαν ἄνθρωποι ἀπὸ τῶν ἄλλων καὶ ἡγεμόνας καὶ 
νόμους καὶ τέχνας καὶ πόλεις καὶ τὰ ἄλλα συνέστησαν. νοῦν δὲ λέγει 
πᾶσιν ἐμφύεσθαι φτῴοις ὁμοίως. χρῆσθαι γὰρ ἕκαστον καὶ τῶν 
φῴων τῷ νῷ, τὸ μὲν βραδυτέρως, τὸ δὲ ταχυτέρως. 

1 Cf. the only surviving fragment of Archelaus, ap. Plut. de primo frig. 21 

Q54F: ἡ ψυχρότης δεσμός ἐστιν (‘coldness is the bond’). 


It would appear from these passages, which of course derive 
ultimately from Theophrastus,' that Archelaus took over the 
system of Anaxagoras but at numerous points, some fundamental, 
some superficial, made his own modifications or corrections. The 
following are the most interesting features of the revised cosmology: 

(1) Mind. Whereas Mind in the system of Anaxagoras had been 
‘mixed with nothing’ and had derived its power from its purity 
(see §03), in Archelaus it seems to be deprived of its purity (§42, 
δ 1)? and therewith, perhaps, of its creative power. 

(2) Primary substance. Though some of the ancient authorities 
suggest that Archelaus made air the primary substance (and one, 
Epiphanius, even that he chose earth), there can be little doubt 
that 541 and 542 preserve the most reliable tradition and that he 
started, like Anaxagoras, with ‘seeds’ or ‘homoeomeries’. Whereas, 
however, Anaxagoras had made Mind initiate motion and so 
cause the separating off of ‘the dense, the moist, the cold and the 
dark’ from ‘the rare, the hot and the dry’ (see §16), Archelaus 
seems (though the evidence is conflicting: cf. DK 60A10 and 18) 
to make the apparently automatic separation of the hot from the 





middle. He adduces as a proof of this hollowness the fact that the sun does not rise and set 
at the same time for all men, as would inevitably happen if the earth were flat. (5) On 
the subject of animals, he holds that when the earth was originally getting warm in the 
lower region, where the hot and the cold were mingled, many animals began to appear, 
including men, all with the same manner of life and all deriving their nourishment from the 
slime. These were short-lived; but later they began to be born from one another. (6) Men 
were distinguished from animals, and established rulers, laws, crafts, cities and so on. 
Mind, he says, is inborn in all animals alike; for each of the animals, as well as man, makes 
use of Mind, though some more rapidly than others. 


397 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


cold the cause of movement (§42, §2). Thereby he exaggcrates the 
tendency in Anaxagoras, to which Plato so strongly objected (see 
p. 384.n.), to delegate the responsibility of Mind to the opposites. 

(3) Lhe four world-masses. The method by which Archelaus 
brought the four world-masses into being from the opposites is 
somewhat obscure and very peculiar. Water scems to have been 
‘mclted’ or ‘liquefied’ from ‘the cold’ in its interaction with ‘the 
hot’ (which suggests, perhaps, that ‘the cold’ was conceived of as 
icc), and when it thereupon flowed to the centre, it was ‘burnt 
up’, again in its interaction with ‘the hot’, to form earth and air. 
The mobility of ‘the hot’ (i.e. fire), and the immobility of ‘the 
cold’ (i.e. perhaps ice, producing first water, and thence not only 
the stationary earth but also fluid air3), and the reaction between 
them, seem to constitute an esscntial and, so far as we can judge, 
an original feature of Archelaus’ cosmogony.* Therc is no obvious 
motive for this revision of Anaxagoras except perhaps the desire to 
bring the Empedoclean ‘clements’ into greater prominence. 

(4) Zoogony. The zoogony of Archelaus seems to represent a 
reversion from that of Anaxagoras, in which seeds were carried 
down to earth with the rain (sce §33), to that of Anaximander, 
in which ‘living things arose from the moist element as it was 
evaporated by the sun’ (see 139). 


1 Diog. L. v, 42 lists among the writings of Theophrastus Περὶ τῶν 
᾿Αρχελάον ἃ (‘1 book on the theories of Archelaus’); cf. pp. 3f. 

2 The relevant sentence of 542, δὶ is, however, so curiously expressed if 
this is really what it means that Zeller suggested reading τῷ νῷ ouvuTrapyeiv. 
3 Cf. 443 Diog. L. u, 17 (DK 60A1) τηκόμενόν φησι τὸ ὕδωρ ὑπὸ τοῦ 
θερμοῦ, καθὸ μὲν els TO (κάτω διὰ TO) πυρῶδες συνίσταται, ποιεῖν γῆν" 
καθὸ δὲ περιρρεῖ, ἀέρα γεννᾶν. The supplement by Diels, or something very 
like it, seems essential. 

4 This theory is extended in the Hippocratic de victu, an eclectic and very 
superficial quasi-philosophical treatise written, probably, toward the end 
of the fourth century B.c. 


CONCLUSION 


In general, it is hard to resist the conclusion that Archelaus was 
a second-rate thinker, motivated by the desire to revise the system 





543 He holds that water is liquefied by the hot; and in so far as it comes together to the 
lower region owing to the fiery element, it forms earth; in so far as it flows around, it creates 
air. 


398 


ARCHELAUS 


of Anaxagoras by the inclusion of as many as possible of the 
doctrines of his most eminent predecessors. From Anaximander 
he borrowed, besides his biological theories, the primacy of the 
hot and the cold; from Anaximenes he apparently borrowed the 
doctrine of the condensation and rarefaction of air (see 143) ;t 
from Empedocles he seems to have taken the four ‘elements’; and 
from Anaxagoras he inherited, with a number of modifications of 
detail such as that concerning the shape of the earth (§42, §4), 
almost everything else. It is hardly surprising that the resulting 
synthesis is lacking in great interest or importance.? 


1 Cf. 544 Aetius 1, 3,6 (DK60A7) ᾿Αρχέλαος... ἀέρα ἄπειρον (sc. ἀρχὴν 
ἔφη εἶναι), καὶ τὴν περὶ αὐτὸν πυκνότητα καὶ μάνωσιν. τούτων δὲ TO μὲν 
εἶναι πῦρ τὸ δ᾽ ὕδωρ. 

2 If more were known of Archelaus’ ethical doctrines, this evaluation 
might possibly have to be revised. Almost all we are told about them is 
summarized in the following sentence, which comes very soon after §39: 
545 Diog. L. u, 16 (DK 60A1) καὶ τὸ δίκαιον εἶναι καὶ τὸ αἰσχρὸν οὐ 
φύσει, ἀλλὰ νόμῳ. This is of course the well-known Sophistic view, which 
may well have been read into Archelaus (perhaps, as Zeller suggested, 
because he had said something to the effect that men were at first without 
laws or morals and had only attained to them in course of time (cf. §42, §6)) 
in a misguided attempt to credit the teacher of Socrates with a decent 
minimum of ethical teaching. 


a ...... .....ὄ.--.-.-... -------.- 








544 Archelaus...(held that the first principle was) infinite air, with its condensation 
and rarefaction, the former of which was water, the latter fire. 


545 (He maintained that) right and wrong exist only by convention, not by nature. 


399 


CHAPTER XVII 


THE ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS OF 
MILETUS AND DEMOCRITUS 
OF ABDERA 


INDIVIDUAL CONTRIBUTIONS, AND DATES 


§46 Simplicius Phys. 28, 4 (=Theophrastus Phys. Op. fr. 8) 
Λεύκιττπος δὲ ὁ ᾽᾿Ελεάτης ἢ Μιλήσιος (ἀμφοτέρως yap λέγεται περὶ 
αὐτοῦ), κοινωνήσας Παρμενίδῃ τῆς φιλοσοφίας, οὐ τὴν αὐτὴν 
ἐβάδισε Παρμενίδῃ καὶ Ζενοφάνει περὶ τῶν ὄντων ὁδόν, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς 
δοκεῖ τὴν ἐναντίαν. ἐκείνων γὰρ ἕν καὶ ἀκίνητον καὶ ἀγένητον καὶ 
πεπερασμένον ποιούντων τὸ πᾶν καὶ τὸ μὴ ὃν μηδὲ φητεῖν συγχω- 
ρούντων, οὗτος ἄπειρα καὶ ἀεὶ κινούμενα ὑπέθετο στοιχεῖα τὰς 
ἀτόμους καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτοῖς σχημάτων ἄπειρον τὸ πλῆθος διὰ τὸ 
μηδὲν μᾶλλον τοιοῦτον ἢ τοιοῦτον εἶναι, καὶ γένεσιν καὶ μεταβολὴν 
ἀδιάλειπτον ἐν τοῖς οὖσι θεωρῶν. ἔτι δὲ οὐδὲν μᾶλλον τὸ ὃν ἢ τὸ 
μὴ ὃν ὑπάρχειν, καὶ αἴτια ὁμοίως εἶναι τοῖς γινομένοις ἄμφω. τὴν 
γὰρ τῶν ἀτόμων οὐσίαν ναστὴν καὶ πλήρη ὑποτιθέμενος ὃν ἔλεγεν 
εἶναι καὶ ἐν τῷ κενῷ φέρεσθαι, ὅπερ μὴ ὃν ἐκάλει καὶ οὐκ ἔλαττον τοῦ 
ὄντος εἶναί φησι. παραπλησίως δὲ καὶ ὁ ἑταῖρος αὐτοῦ Δημόκριτος 
ὁ ᾿Αβδηρίτης ἀρχὰς ἔθετο τὸ πλῆρες καὶ τὸ κενόν. ... 

5470 Diogenes Laertius x, 13 τοῦτον (sc. Epicurus) ᾿Απολλό- 
δώρος ἐν Χρονικοῖς Ναυσιφάνους ἀκοῦσαί φησι καὶ Πραξιφάνους- 
αὐτὸς δὲ οὔ φησιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἐν τῇ πρὸς Εὐρύλοχον ἐπιστολῇ. 





546 Leucippus of Elea or Miletus (both accounts are current) had associated with 
Parmenides in philosophy, but in his view of reality he did not tread the same path as 
Parmenides and Xenophanes, but rather, it seems, the opposite path. For while they 
regarded the whole as one, motionless, uncreated and limited and forbade even the search 
for what is not, he posited innumerable elements in perpetual motion—namely the atoms— 
and held that the number of their shapes was infinite, on the ground that there was no 
reason why any atom should be of one shape rather than another; for he observed too that 
coming-into-being and change are incessant in the world. Further he held that not-being 
exists as well as being, and the two are equally the causes of things coming-into-being. The 
nature of atoms he supposed to be compact and full; that, he said, was being, and tt moved 
in the void, which he called not-being and held to exist no less than being. In the same way 
his associate Democritus of Abdera posited as principles the full and the void.... 


547 Abpollodorus in the Chronicles says that Epicurus was instructed by Nausiphanes 
and Praxiphanes; but Epicurus himself denies this, saying in the letter to Eurylochus that 


400 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ Λεύκιττπτόν τινα γεγενῆσθαί φησι φιλόσοφον οὔτε αὐτὸς 
οὔτε Ἕρμαρχος, ὃν ἔνιοί φασι (καὶ ᾿Αττολλόδωρος ὁ ᾿Επικούρειος) 
διδάσκαλον Δημοκρίτου γεγενῆσθαι. 

548 Ciccro Academica pr. τι, 37, 118 Leucippus plenum et inane; 
Democritus huic in hoc similis, uberior in ceteris. 


549 Diogenes Laertius tx, 34 Δημόκριτος ᾿Ηγησιστράτου, of δὲ 
᾿Αθηνοκρίτον, tives Δαμασίππου, ᾿Αβδηρίτης ἤ, ὡς ἔνιοι, Μιλήσιος. 
.. «ὕστερον δὲ Λευκίπτπτῳ παρέβαλε καὶ ᾿Αναξαγόρᾳ κατά τινας, 
ἔτεσιν ὧν αὐτοῦ νεώτερος τετταράκοντα... .. (41) γέγονε δὲ τοῖς 
χρόνοις, ὡς αὐτός φησιν ἐν τῷ Μικρῷ διακόσμῳ, νέος κατὰ 
πρεσβύτην ᾿Αναξαγόραν, ἔτεσιν αὐτοῦ νεώτερος τετταράκοντα. 
συντετάχθαι δέ φησι τὸν Μικρὸν διάκοσμον ἔτεσιν ὕστερον τῆς 
Ἰλίου ἁλώσεως τριάκοντα καὶ ἑπτακοσίοις. γεγόνοι δ᾽ ἄν, ὡς 
μὲν ᾿Απολλόδωρος ἐν Χρονικοῖς, κατὰ τὴν ὀγδοηκοστὴν ὀλυμπιάδα 
(460-457 B.c.), ὡς δὲ Θρασύλος, ἐν τῷ ἐπιγραφομένῳ Τὰ πρὸ 
τῆς ἀναγνώσεως τῶν Δημοκρίτου βιβλίων, κατὰ τὸ τρίτον ἔτος 
τῆς ἑβδόμης καὶ ἑβδομηκοστῆς ὀλυμπιάδος (470/69), ἐνιαυτῷ, 
φησί, πρεσβύτερος ὧν Σωκράτους. 


Leucippus was generally agreed to have evolved his theory of 
atoms in answer to the Eleatic elenchus: so Aristotle in 552 below. 
He was even assumed by late sources to have been an Eleatic; 
according to Diogenes Laertius rx, 30 (DK 674 1) he was a pupil 
of Zeno. This we need not believe: it is not suggested by Aristotle, 
and is the kind of thing which might easily be asserted by Sotion 
and the other succession-writers. Miletus is given as his alter- 
native birth-place; the a priort reasons for this are not so strong, 





he instructed himself. He and Hermarchus both maintain that there never was a philosopher 
Leucippus, who some (including Apollodorus the Epicurean) say was the teacher of 
Democritus. 


548 Leucippus postulated atoms and void, and in this respect Democritus resembled him, 
though in other respects he was more productive. 


549 Democritus, son of Hegesistratus (or by other accounts of Athenocritus or Dama- 
sippus), a citizen of Abdera or, as some say, of Miletus.... Later he met Leucippus and, 
according to some, Anaxagoras also, whose junior he was by forty years.... (41) As he 
himself says in the Little World-system, he was a young man in the old age of Anaxagoras, 
being forty years younger. He says that the Little World-system was composed 
730 years after the capture of Troy. He would have been born, according to Apollodorus in 
the Chronicles, in the eightieth Olympiad; according to Thrasylus, in his book entitled 
Preparation for reading the works of Democritus, in the third year of the seventy- 
seventh, being one year (as he says) older than Socrates. 


26 401 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


though he obviously revived some Milesian astronomical theories; 
it might therefore be true. He may of course have visited Elea, 
but the Eleatic doctrines were known in Athens, and Melissus, 
against whom Leucippus perhaps chiefly reacted, was an Ionian. 
Singularly little was known about Leucippus, in any case, and in 
547 his very existence seems to be denied by Epicurus and 
Hermarchus. But Epicurus is intent on proving his own origin- 
ality; Burnet (£GP330 ἢ. 2) suggested that all Epicurus said was 
somcthing like Λεύκιτηον οὐδ᾽ εἰ γέγονεν οἶδα, meaning ‘I don’t 
consider Leucippus worth discussing’. Alternatively, the emphasis 
might have been on the word φιλόσοφον: there was no philosopher 
Leucippus (i.c. Leucippus was no philosopher). It is clear from 
552 that Aristotle considcred Leucippus to be the inventor of 
atomism, and this is accepted also by Theophrastus in 546. 
Normally they write simply of ‘Leucippus and Democritus’, 
though certain elaborations, e.g. of the theory of perception, are 
distinguished as Democritean. On the whole we might accept the 
assessment of Cicero in §48; all our other evidence seems to show 
that the main theory was originated by Leucippus and accepted 
by Democritus, who worked out the details and introduced a few 
minor refinements. It would be very difficult here satisfactorily to 
distinguish the two, especially since many post-Theophrastean 
sources ignore Leucippus; where distinctions are traceable they 
will be pointed out. The doxographical passages mentioning 
Leucippus are collected in DK chapter 67: see also C. Bailey, The 
Greek Atomists and Epicurus, for a valiant attempt to distinguish the 
views of the two thinkers. 

The date of Leucippus is not known independently, except from 
such guesscs as that he was a pupil of Zeno. Democritus, however, 
evidently gave a clue to his own age in his work ‘The Little 
World-system’: he was about forty years younger than Anaxa- 
goras. This fits Apollodorus’ date in 549 (born 460-457 B.c.) 
better than Thrasylus’, of some ten years earlier. In any case, if 
Democritus accepted 1184 B.c. as the year of the capture of Troy 
(and this, the Eratosthenic epoch-year, was mercly the com- 
monest of several dates), then the composition of the ‘Little 
World-system’ (on which see the next section) would be placcd 
too early, in 454. The probability is that it was written after 430. 
Leucippus, presumably, was somewhat older, and his floruit (i.e. 
the composition of the ‘Great World-system’) might be put 


402 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


around 440-435. A possible terminus ante quem is provided by 
Theophrastus’ statement (601) that Diogenes of Apollonia derived 
some of his ideas from Leucippus; for Diogenes was already 
parodied in the Clouds of 423 B.c. (617). 


WRITINGS 


550 Diogenes Laertius rx, 45 (DK 68433) τὰ δὲ βιβλία αὐτοῦ 
(sc. Democritus) Kal OpaovAos ἀναγέγραφε κατὰ τάξιν οὕτως 
ὡσπερεὶ καὶ τοῦ Πλάτωνος κατὰ τετραλογίαν. (46) ἔστι Se ἠθικὰ 
μὲν τάδε"... -φυσικὰ δὲ τάδε: [tetralogy mt] Μέγας διάκοσμος (ὃν 
οἱ περὶ Θεόφραστον Λευκίππου φασὶν εἶναι), Μικρὸς διάκοσμος, 
Κοσμογραφίη, Περὶ τῶν πλανητῶν. ... 


It is true that the ‘Great World-system’ is usually assigned to 
Democritus, since he was the elaborator of atomism and, apart 
from Epicurus, its chief exponent. Epicurus himself would 
presumably have credited it to Democritus. But Theophrastus’ 
opinion in 550 counts for much: Aristotle came from a city in 
Thrace, and both he and his pupil Theophrastus devoted special 
works to Democritus. They were evidently aware of the distinction 
between Leucippus and Democritus, whereas it is natural that 
when the distinction became forgotten all early atomistic works 
should be attributed to Democritus. We may therefore provi- 
sionally accept Theophrastus’ view that Leucippus wrote the 
Μέγας διάκοσμος, Democritus the Μικρὸς διάκοσμος : with the 
possible modification that the former may have been ἃ com- 
pendium of Leucippus’ cosmological work with other, later, 
atomistic additions. One other work is attributed to Leucippus, 
namely On Mind: the quotation from him by Aetius (568) 15 
assigned to this work, which may, of course, have been a section 
of the ‘Great World-system’. The content of this fragment would 
certainly not be foreign to that work, and might have formed part 
of an attack on the concept of Mind in Anaxagoras. 

I It seems probable that this work contained a description of the origin of 


civilization and culture, and that part of the description in Diodorus 1, 7-8 
(DK 68B5,1) goes back to Democritus by way of Hecataeus of Abdera 





550 Thrasylus listed his books in order by tetralogies, just as he did Plato’s books. 
(46) His ethical works comprised the following.... The physical books were these: The 
Great World-system (which Theophrastus’ followers say was by Leucippus), the Little 
World-system, the Cosmography and On the planets.... 


403 26-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


(see G. Vlastos, AJP 67 (1946) 51 ff.). However, Diodorus certainly used 
more than one Ionian source for this section, and it can be conceded that 
the account of cosmogony in 1, 7 is not primarily atomistic. 


Democritus, on the other hand, must have been one of the 
most prolific of all ancient authors. Thrasylus (or Thrasyllus), who 
arranged Plato’s dialogues in tetralogies, did the same for Demo- 
critus according to §§0: there werc thirteen tetralogies (comprising 
fifty-two separate works, some no doubt quite short) divided 
between the following general headings: Ethics (2 tetralogies), 
Physics (4), Mathematics (3), Music, including literature and 
language (2), Technical subjects (2). There were additional works 
which were probably not genuinc.? It is a tantalizing misfortune, 
and a reflexion of later tastc, that the considerable number of 
fragments that have survived (not all of which are certainly 
genuinc) are nearly all taken from the ethical works. 


1 Among the works classed as Ὑπομνήματα and not included by Thrasylus 
(Diog. L. rx, 49, DK 68433) are five concerned with foreign travel, for 
example a Chaldaean and a Phrygian dissertation. The attribution is 
perhaps rclated to the many stories in our ancient biographical sources 
that Democritus travelled extensively: for example §§I Diog. L. rx, 35 
φησὶ δὲ Δημήτριος ἐν “Opavupors καὶ ᾿Αντισθένης ἐν Διαδοχαῖς ἀττοδημῆσαι 
αὐτὸν καὶ εἰς Αἴγυπτον πρὸς τοὺς ἱερέας γεωμετρίαν μαθησόμενον καὶ ττρὸς 
Χαλδαίους εἷς τὴν Περσίδα, καὶ εἷς τὴν ᾿Ερνθρὰν θάλασσαν γενέσθαι. τοῖς 
τε Γυμνοσοφισταῖς φασί τινες συμμῖξαι αὐτὸν ἐν Ἰνδίᾳ καὶ εἷς Αἰθιοπίαν 
ἐλθεῖν. Another story is that Xerxes left Chaldaean overseers in Demo- 
critus’ father’s household, from whom Democritus learned much. There 
may have been some basis in fact for these stories of foreign contact. 
According to another anecdote Democritus said that he visited Athens, 
but that no one recognized him. 


ORIGINS OF THE ATOMIC THEORY 


552 Aristotle de gen. et corr. A8, 325a2 ἐνίοις yap τῶν ἀρχαίων 
ἔδοξε τὸ ὃν ἐξ ἀνάγκης ἕν εἶναι καὶ ἀκίνητον" τὸ μὲν γὰρ κενὸν οὐκ 
ὄν, κινηθῆναι δ᾽ οὐκ ἂν δύνασθαι μὴ ὄντος κενοῦ κεχωρισμένου, οὐδ᾽ 
αὖ πολλὰ εἶναι μὴ ὄντος τοῦ διείργοντος... (4.24) AeuKitrtros δ᾽ 





551 Demetrius in his Homonyms and Antisthenes in his Successions say that he 
travelled to Egypt to visit the priests and learn geometry, and that he went also to Persia, to 
visit the Chaldaeans, and to the Red Sea. Some say that he associated with the ‘naked 
philosophers’ in India; also that he went to Aethiopia. 

552 For some of the early philosophers thought that that which is must of necessity be 
one and immovable; for the void is not-being; motion would be impossible without a void 
apart from matter; nor could there be a plurality of things without something to separate 


404 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


ἔχειν φήθη λόγους οἵτινες Trpds τὴν αἴσθησιν ὁμολογούμενα λέγοντες 
οὐκ ἀναϊιρήσουσιν οὔτε γένεσιν οὔτε φθορὰν οὔτε κίνησιν καὶ τὸ 
πλῆθος τῶν ὄντων. ὁμολογήσας δὲ ταῦτα μὲν τοῖς φαινομένοις, τοῖς 
δὲ τὸ ἕν κατασκευάτουσιν ὡς οὐκ ἂν κίνησιν οὖσαν ἄνευ κενοῦ, τό τε 
κενὸν μὴ ὃν καὶ τοῦ ὄντος οὐθὲν μὴ ὄν φησιν εἶναι" τὸ γὰρ κυρίως 
ὃν παμπλῆρες ὄν. ἀλλ᾽ εἶναι τὸ τοιοῦτον οὐχ ἕν, ἀλλ᾽ ἄπειρα τὸ 
πλῆθος καὶ ἀόρατα διὰ σμικρότητα τῶν ὄγκων. ταῦτα δ᾽ ἐν τῷ 
κενῷ φέρεσθαι (κενὸν γὰρ εἶναι), καὶ συνιστάμενα μὲν γένεσιν ποιεῖν, 
διαλυόμενα δὲ φθοράν. 


553 Melissus Fr. 8 fin., Simplicius de caelo 559, 11 (from 392) 
οὖς ἣν δὲ μεταπέσῃ, TO μὲν ἐὸν ἀττώλετο, TO δὲ οὐκ ἐὸν γέγονεν. 
οὕτως οὖν, εἰ πολλὰ εἴη, τοιαῦτα χρὴ εἶναι οἷόν περ τὸ ἕν. 


Aristotle plausibly regarded Leucippus’ theory of indivisible 
particles moving in the void as an attempt to answer the Eleatic 
dilemma. This had implied among other things that anything 
which zs could not alter, since that would involve its becoming 
what-is-not. Leucippus, it was held, agreed that such alterations 
of being were out of the question; but whereas the Eleatics had 
rejected void as patently not-being, and had thus made motion (of 
which void was held to be a necessary pre-condition) impossible, 
Leucippus baldly accepted the existence of void, and so was able 
to explain variety and change by the accretion and separation of 
distinct particles of real, fully existing stuff, which itself did not 
alter, but preserved the properties of Eleatic ἐόν. The idea that 
apparent alteration consists, in fact, of the rearrangement of 
indestructible matter had already been reached by Empedocles, 
and, in a particularly clear form, by Anaxagoras. The latter stated 
in fr. 17 (497) that ‘no object comes-to-be or passes away, but is 
mixed or separated from existing objects’. But Empedocles and 


ee 





them.... But Leucippus thought he had a theory which, being consistent with sense- 
perception, would not do away with coming-into-being or perishing or motion or the 
multiplicity of things. So much he conceded to appearances, while to those who uphold the 
one he granted that motion is impossible without void, that the void is not-being and that 
no part of being is not-being. For being, in the proper sense, 1s an absolute plenum. But 
such a plenum is not one, but there is an infinite number of them, and they are invisible 
owing to the smallness of their bulk. They move in the void (for the void exists), and by 
their coming together they effect coming-into-being, by their separation perishing. 
553... But if it has changed, what is has passed away and what is not has come into 
being. So then, if there were a plurality, things would have to be of just the same nature as 
the one. 


405 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Anaxagoras had continued to accept the Eleatic arguments about 
the impossibility of void; though it is not clear that their ideas 
about motion were entirely consistent with this position.’ Further, 
an Eleatic could have objected, as Melissus did implicitly object 
in 384 and fr. 7, that different root-forms of matter did not meet 
the arguments about τὸ ἐόν being uniform; for if water, or a portion 
of flesh, for example, exists, then it might be argued that earth or 
bone, being different in some way at least, cannot exist. Leucippus, 
then, postulated a truly uniform type of material being. In this he 
may well have becn following out the consequence evolved by 
Melissus in 392 as an absurdity, from an argument about the 
fallacy of the senses, that if there are many things, and not the 
uniform Eleatic Onc, then the many must each possess the 
propertics of that One—homogeneity, permanence, lack of 
internal change, and indivisibility. 

I Empedocles’ theory of pores in the body actually presupposed the 


existence of the void which he formally denicd, according to Aristotle de 
gen. et corr. A8, 325b1. See also ἢ. 2 on p. 344. 


The later accounts which make atomism a development of 
Eleaticism, and Lcucippus, for example, a pupil of Zeno, were 
probably derived from the Aristotelian assessment; cf. Theo- 
phrastus in 546. But this assessment is so plausible in itself that, 
even while admitting the tendency in Aristotle to over-schematize 
the relations of his philosophical forebears, we may yet accept it. 
Empedocles and Anaxagoras were unquestionably striving to 
overcome the Eleatic dilemma; it is a4 priort probable that Leucippus 
too, since he indubitably dealt with the same kind of problems, 
devoted careful attention to the Eleatics. Melissus had suggested 
a possible solution so clearly that it is difficult to believe that 
Leucippus’ support of this very solution was independent. At the 
same time Leucippus remained faithful to the principles of his 
probably Ionian background, since he was now enabled to revert 
to a single material basis for phenomena. In the acceptance of 
void he was consciously correcting an Eleatic axiom. 


ATOMS AND THE VOID 
554 Aristotle Met. A4, 985b4 Λεύκιππος δὲ Kai ὁ ἑταῖρος 
αὐτοῦ Δημόκριτος στοιχεῖα μὲν τὸ πλῆρες Kal τὸ κενὸν εἶναί φασι, 





554 Leucippus and his associate Democritus hold that the elements are the full and the 
406 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


λέγοντες TO μὲν Ov TO δὲ μὴ ὄν, τούτων δὲ TO μὲν πλῆρες Kal στερεόν, 
τὸ ὄν, τὸ δὲ κενὸν καὶ μανόν, τὸ μὴ ὄν διὸ καὶ οὐθὲν μᾶλλον τὸ ὃν 
τοῦ μὴ ὄντος εἶναί φασιν, ὅτι οὐδὲ τὸ κενὸν (ἔλαττον) τοῦ σώματος" 
αἴτια δὲ τῶν ὄντων ταῦτα ὡς ὕλην. καὶ καθάπερ οἱ ἕν ποιοῦντες τὴν 
ὑποκειμένην οὐσίαν τἄλλα τοῖς πάθεσιν αὐτῆς γεννῶσι, τὸ μανὸν 
καὶ τὸ πυκνὸν ἀρχὰς τιθέμενοι τῶν τταθημάτων, τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον 
καὶ οὗτοι τὰς διαφορὰς αἰτίας τῶν ἄλλων εἶναί φασιν. ταύτας 
μέντοι τρεῖς εἶναι λέγουσι, σχῆμά τε καὶ τάξιν καὶ θέσιν" διαφέρειν 
γάρ φασι τὸ ὃν ῥυσμῷ καὶ διαθιγῇ καὶ τροττῇ μόνον. τούτων δὲ ὁ 
μὲν ῥυσμὸς σχῆμά ἐστιν, ἡ δὲ διαθιγὴ τάξις, ἡ δὲ TOOT θέσις 
διαφέρει γὰρ τὸ μὲν Α τοῦ Ν σχήματι, τὸ δὲ ΑΝ τοῦ ΝΑ τάξει, τὸ 
δὲ I τοῦ Η θέσει. 

555 Aristotle On Democritus ap. Simplictum de caelo 205,1 
(DK 68437) Anyoxpitos...mpooayopever δὲ TOV μὲν τόπον 
τοῖσδε τοῖς ὀνόμασι, τῷ τε κενῷ καὶ τῷ οὐδενὶ Kai τῷ ἀπείρῳ, 
τῶν δὲ οὐσιῶν ἑκάστην τῷ τε δενὶ καὶ τῷ ναστῷ καὶ τῷ ὄντι. 
νομίφει δὲ εἶναι οὕτω μικρὰς τὰς οὐσίας ὥστε ἐκφυγεῖν τὰς ἡμετέρας 
αἰσθήσεις: ὑπάρχειν δὲ αὐταῖς παντοίας μορφὰς καὶ σχήματα 
παντοῖα καὶ κατὰ μέγεθος διαφοράς. ἐκ τούτων οὖν ἤδη καθάπερ ἐκ 
στοιχείων γεννᾷ καὶ συγκρίνει τοὺς ὀφθαλμοφανεῖς καὶ τοὺς 
αἰσθητοὺς ὄγκους. [δὲ A, δενὶ Diels, cf. DK 68 B156.] 

§56 Simplicius de caelo 242, 18 (DK67A14) οὗτοι γὰρ (se. 
Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus) ἔλεγον ἀπείρους εἶναι τῷ 
πλήθει τὰς ἀρχάς, ἃς καὶ ἀτόμους καὶ ἀδιαιρέτους ἐνόμιφον καὶ 





void; they call them being and not-being respectively. Being 1s full and solid, not-being 1s 
void and rare. Since the void exists no less than body, it follows that not-being exists no less 
than being. The two together are the material causes of existing things. And just as those 
who make the underlying substance one generate other things by its modifications, and 
postulate rarefaction and condensation as the origin of such modifications, in the same way 
these men too say that the differences in atoms are the causes of other things. They hold that 
these differences are three—shape, arrangement and position; being, they say, differs only in 
‘rhythm, touching and turning’, of which ‘rhythm’ ts shape, ‘touching’ is arrangement and 
‘turning’ is position; for A differs from N in shape, AN from NA in arrangement, and 
x from H in position. 

555 Democritus...calls space by these names— the void’, ‘nothing’, and ‘ the infinite’, 
while each individual atom he calls ‘ hing’ i.e. ‘nothing’ without ‘not’], the ‘compact’ 
and ‘ being’. He thinks that they are so small as to elude our senses, but they have all sorts 
of forms and shapes and differences in size. So he ts already enabled from them, as from 
elements, to create by aggregation bulks that are perceptible to sight and the other senses. 


556 They (sc. Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus) said that the first principles were 
infinite in number, and thought they were indivisible atoms and impassible owing to their 


407 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ἀπαθεῖς διὰ τὸ ναστὰς εἶναι, καὶ ἀμοίρους τοῦ κενοῦ: τὴν yap 
διαίρεσιν κατὰ τὸ κενὸν τὸ ἐν τοῖς σώμασι ἔλεγον γίνεσθαι... .. 


These passages (to which 546 should be added; there are several 
other similar but less concise descriptions in Aristotle and the 
doxographers) state clearly enough the basis of the atomists’ 
theory of matter. Full reality is assigned, as in the Milesian 
tradition, to the corporcal; but the corporeal is fully corporeal and 
homogeneous, like the Eleatic ‘sphere’ of Being—it contains no 
void and no interstices, so cannot be divided (§§6).* ‘The atoms 
were so small as to be invisible (§§5); though Democritus might 
have allowed exceptions here (§60). They were indivisible in fact, 
though not (since they had extension in space) in thought: in this 
way the old Eleatic argument against Pythagorean monads was 
circumvented. The solid atoms, infinite in number and shape,? 
are scattered throughout infinite void, which is declared to exist: 
it is called ‘that which is not’, in Eleatic phraseology, but is 
asscrted nevertheless to have existence of a sort (it must have, 
a priori, to allow movement and coalescence of the atoms; the 
same preconception had been unconsciously adopted by Empe- 
docles, see n. on p. 406).3 The existence of the void is distinct, 
however, from the full corporeal existence of atoms. Aristotle in 
§§5§ is misleading when he calls the void ‘space’; the atomists had 
no conception of bodies occupying space, and for them the void only 
exists where atoms are not, that is, it forms the gaps between them. 
The atoms differ from each other, not in matter, but only in 
arrangement and shape: all ‘qualitative’ differences in objects 
(which are conglomerates of atoms), therefore, are dependent 
on quantitative and local differences alone. 


t This is probably Democritus’ reason. Leucippus, according to a late 
doxographical source, held that the atoms were indivisible because of their 
smallness: §§7 Galen de elem. sec. Hippocr. 1, 2 (DK 68449) ἀπαθῆ δ᾽ 
ὑποτίθενται τὰ σώματα εἶναι τὰ πρῶτα (τινὲς μὲν αὐτῶν ὑπὸ σκληρότητος 
ἄθραυστα, καθάπερ οἱ περὶ ᾿Επίκουρον, ἔνιοι δὲ ὑτὸ σμικρότητος ἀδιαίρετα, 
καθάπερ οἱ περὶ τὸν Λεύκιπτον).. .. 





compactness, and without any void in them; divisibility comes about because of the void in 
compound bodies.... 

557 They suppose their primary bodies to be impassible (some of them, e.g. Epicurus’ 
school, regarding them as unbreakable because of their hardness, others, e.g. the school of 
Leucippus, as indivisible because of their smaliness).... 


408 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


2 According to Aristotle, both Leucippus and Democritus made the 
number of shapes of atoms infinite: 5.58 Aristotle de gen. et corr. A2, 
315b6 ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ᾧοντο τἀληθὲς ἐν TH φαίνεσθαι, ἐναντία δὲ Kal ἄπειρα τὰ 
φαινόμενα, τὰ σχήματα ἄπειρα ἐποίησαν... . [{ is unnecessary to postulate 
infinite shapes in order to account for the different objects of the pheno- 
menal world, even if these are supposed to be infinite, for variety is pro- 
vided by changes of position and order also. But a different motive for 
infinite shapes is suggested in 559 Theophrastus Phys. Op. fr. 8 ap. 
Simplic. Phys. 28, 9 (from 546) .. . καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτοῖς (sce. ταῖς ἀτόμοις) 
σχημάτων ἄπειρον τὸ πλῆθος διὰ τὸ μηδὲν μᾶλλον τοιοῦτον ἢ τοιοῦτον 
elvai...(repeated at Phys. 28, 25). Bailey, Greek Atomists 81, suggests that 
this relatively sophisticated type of argument (which is, of course, falla- 
cious) is probably the product of Democritus rather than Leucippus. 
Epicurus maintained that infinite shapes will eventually demand infinite 
sizes, and indeed Democritus may have suggested that some atoms are com- 
paratively large: 560 Dionysius ap. Eusebium P.E, x1v, 23, 3 τοσοῦτον 
δὲ διεφώνησαν (se. Epicurus and Democritus) ὅσον ὁ μὲν ἐλαχίστας 
πάσας καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ἀνεταισθήτους, ὁ δὲ καὶ μεγίστας εἶναί τινας ἀτόμους, 
ὁ Δημόκριτος, ὑπέλαβεν. Aristotle in 552 asserted that Leucippus, and 
in §§§ that Democritus, supposed all atoms to be invisible: possibly 
the latter passage is misleading. In any case Democritus is unlikely 
to have thought of anything larger than the specks of dust in a sun- 
beam; even those would be ‘very large’ in comparison with the vast 
majority. 

3 Cf. §61 Aristotle Phys. A6, 213231 οὔκουν τοῦτο δεῖ δεικνύναι (sc. τοὺς 
πειρωμένους δεικνύναι ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι κενόν), ὅτι ἐστί τι ὁ ἀήρ, GAA’ ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι 
διάστημα ἕτερον τῶν σωμάτων, οὔτε χωριστὸν οὔτε ἐνεργείᾳ ὄν, ὃ διαλαμ- 
βάνει τὸ πᾶν σῶμα ὥστε εἶναι μὴ συνεχές, καθάπερ λέγουσι Δημόκριτος καὶ 
Λεύκιππος... .. Empedocles’ demonstration of the corporeal nature of air 
(453) is rightly dismissed as evidence for the non-existence of void. 


THE FORMATION OF WORLDS 


562 Diogenes Laertius ix, 31 (DK67A1) τὸ μὲν πᾶν ἄπειρόν 
φησιν (sc. Leucippus)...toWtou δὲ τὸ μὲν πλῆρες εἶναι, TO δὲ 





§58 Since they thought that truth lies in appearances, and appearances are contradictory 
and infinitely variable, they made the number of shapes infinite. . .. 

559 «..-he held that the number of shapes in the atoms was infinite on the ground that 
there was no reason why any atom should be of one shape rather than another.... 

§60 To this extent they (sc. Epicurus and Democritus) differed, that one supposed that 
all atoms were very small, and on that account imperceptible; the other, Democritus, that 
there are some atoms that are very large. 

561 (Those who try to prove that there is no void) should not prove that air is something 
but rather that there is not, either by abstraction or actually extsting, any interval (as 
distinct from bodies) which so separates body as a whole as to make tt discontinuous, as 
Democritus and Leucippus say it ts.... 


562 Leucippus holds that the whole is infinite. ..part of it is full and part void.... 
409 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


KEVOV. . «κόσμους τε EK τούτου ἀπείρους εἶναι καὶ διαλύεσθαι εἰς 
ταῦτα. γίνεσθαι δὲ τοὺς κόσμους οὕτω᾽ φέρεσθαι κατὰ ἀποτομὴν 
ἐκ τῆς ἀπείρου᾽ πολλὰ σώματα παντοῖα τοῖς σχήμασιν εἰς μέγα 
κενόν, ἅπερ ἀθροισθέντα δίνην ἀπεργάφεσθαι μίαν, καθ᾽ ἣν προσ- 
κρούοντα καὶ παντοδατῶόώς κυκλούμενα διακρίνεσθαι χωρὶς τὰ 
ὅμοια πρὸς τὰ ὅμοια. ἰσορρόπων δὲ διὰ τὸ τλῆθος μηκέτι δυνα- 
μένων περιφέρεσθαι, τὰ μὲν λεπττὰ χωρεῖν εἰς τὸ ἔξω κενόν, ὥσπερ 
διαττώμενα: τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ ὑσυμμένειν᾽ καὶ περιπλεκόμενα συγ- 
κατατρέχειν ἀλλήλοις καὶ ποιεῖν πρῶτόν τι σύστημα σφαιροειδές. 
(32) τοῦτο δ᾽ οἷον ᾿ὑμένα᾽ ἀφίστασθαι περιέχοντα ἐν ἑαυτῷ 
παντοῖα σώματα᾽ ὧν κατὰ τὴν τοῦ μέσου ἀντέρεισιν περιδινουμένων 
λεπτὸν γενέσθαι τὸν πέριξ ὑμένα, συρρεόντων ἀεὶ τῶν συνεχῶν κατ᾽ 
ἐπίψαυσιν τῆς δίνης. καὶ οὕτω γενέσθαι τὴν γῆν, συμμενόντων τῶν 
ἐνεχθέντων ἐπὶ τὸ μέσον. αὐτόν τε πάλιν τὸν περιέχοντα οἷον 
ὑμένα αὔξεσθαι κατὰ τὴν ἐπέκκρισιν [Heidel, ἐπέκρυσιν mss.] τῶν 
ἔξωθεν σωμάτων ᾿ δίνῃ τε φερόμενον αὐτόν, ὧν ἂν ἐπιψαύσῃ, ταῦτα 
ἐπικτᾶσθαι. τούτων δέ τινα συμπλεκόμενα ποιεῖν σύστημα, τὸ μὲν 
πρῶτον κάθυγρον καὶ τηλῶδες, ξηρανθέντα δὲ καὶ περιφερόμενα σὺν 
τῇ τοῦ ὅλου δίνῃ εἶτ᾽ ἐκπυρωθέντα τὴν τῶν ἀστέρων ἀποτελέσια 
φύσιν. (Cf. also Aetius 1, 4, 1-4, DK67A24.)! 

563 Aetiusu, 7, 2 Λεύκιππος kal Δημόκριτος ᾿χιτῶνα᾽ κύκλῳ 
καὶ ᾿ὑμένα᾽ περιτείνουσι τῷ κόσμῳ διὰ τῶν ἀγκιστροειδῶν ἀτόμων 
συμπεττλεγμένον. 








Hence arise innumerable worlds, and are resolved again into these elements. The worlds 
come into being as follows: many bodies of all sorts of shapes move ‘ by abscission from the 
infinite’ into a great void; they come together there and produce a single whirl, in which, 
colliding with one another and revolving in all manner of ways, they begin to separate apart, 
like to like. But when their multitude prevents them from rotating any longer in 
equilibrium, those that are fine go out towards the surrounding void as if sifted, while 
the rest ‘abide together’ and, becoming entangled, unite their motions and make a first 
Spherical structure. (32) This structure stands apart like a ‘membrane’ which contains 
in itself all kinds of bodies; and as they whirl around owing to the resistance of the middle, 
the surrounding membrane becomes thin, while contiguous atoms keep flowing together 
owing to contact with the whirl. So the earth came into being, the atoms that had been borne 
to the middle abiding together there. Again, the containing membrane is itself increased, 
owing to the attraction of bodies outside; as it moves around in the whirl it takes in anything 
it touches. Some of these bodies that get entangled form a structure that 1s at first moist and 
muddy, but as they revolve with the whirl of the whole they dry out and then ignite to form 
the substance of the heavenly bodies. 


§63 Leucippus and Democritus envelop the world in a circular ‘cloak’ or ‘membrane’, 
which was formed by the hooked atoms becoming entangled. 


410 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


564 Hippolytus Ref. 1, 13, 2 (DK68A40) λέγει δὲ ὁμοίως 
Λευκίππῳ (sc. Δημόκριτος) περὶ στοιχείων, πλήρους καὶ κενοῦ... 
ἔλεγε δὲ ὡς ἀεὶ κινουμένων τῶν ὄντων ἐν τῷ κενῷ ἀπείρους δ᾽ εἶναι 
κόσμους καὶ μεγέθει διαφέροντας. ἐν τισὶ δὲ μὴ εἶναι ἥλιον μηδὲ 
σελήνην, ἐν τισὶ δὲ μείφω τῶν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν καὶ ἐν τισὶ πλείω. (3) εἶναι 
δὲ τῶν κόσμων ἄνισα τὰ διαστήματα καὶ τῇ μὲν πλείους, τῇ δὲ 
ἐλάττους, καὶ τοὺς μὲν αὔξεσθαι, τοὺς δὲ ἀκμάτειν, τοὺς δὲ φθίνειν, καὶ 
τῇ μὲν γίνεσθαι, τῇ δ᾽ (ἐκ)λείτπειν. φθείρεσθαι δὲ αὐτοὺς ὑπ᾽ ἀλλήλων 
προσπίπτοντας. εἶναι δὲ ἐνίους κόσμους ἐρήμους φῴων καὶ φυτῶν 
καὶ παντὸς ὑγροῦ. 
t It looks as though συμμένειν, ὑμήν, and (in 563) χιτών were actually 
derived from atomist contexts. The phrase κατὰ ἀποτομὴν ἐκ τῆς ἀπείρου 
(se. χώρας) is closely paralleled in the Epicurean letter to Pythocles 
(Ep. τι, 88; DK 67424). Diogenes might have derived it from Democritus; 
but it is also possible that σνμμένειν, ὑμήν, χιτῶν, as well as κατὰ ἀποτομήν, 
arc merely Epicurean. 


The account in §62 of the formation of worlds (formally attributed 
to Leucippus, but no doubt representing the general vicws of 
Democritus also) is fairly detailed, but full of difficulties. The first 
stage is when a large collection of atoms becomes isolated, as it 
were, in a large patch of void. ‘The second stage is when they form 
a whirl or vortex. How this occurs we cannot tell; it must happen 
“by necessity’,' as the result of a particular combination of their 
separate atomic movements, and a vortcx would presumably not 
necessarily or commonly arise out of the circumstances of the first 
stage alone. The vortex-action causes like atoms to tend towards 
like.2, (There is a good deal of reminiscence of Anaxagoras in all 
this: in him Nous started a vortex and similar particles came 
together to form bodies, 503 and pp. 382f.)3 ‘The larger atoms 
congregate towards the middle, the smaller ones are squeezed out 
(575). A kind of membrane or garment (§63) encloses the whole: 
whether this is formed by the smaller and extruded atoms (as 





564 Democritus holds the same view as Leucippus about the elements, full and void... 
he spoke as if the things that are were in constant motion in the void; and there are 
innumerable worlds, which differ in size. In some worlds there is no sun and moon, in 
others they are larger than in our world, and in others more numerous. (3) The intervals 
between the worlds are unequal; in some parts there are more worlds, in others fewer; some 
are increasing, some at their height, some decreasing; in some parts they are arising, in 
others failing. They are destroyed by collision one with another. There are some worlds 
devoid of living creatures or plants or any moisture. 


411 


PRESOCRATIG PHILOSOPHERS 


suggested by Actius, DK 67424), or whether these are thrust 
right out of the σύστημα into the void (as suggested in §62), is 
uncertain. Other atoms come into contact with the extremity of 
the revolving mass and are drawn within the membrane. Certain 
of these atoms become ignited by the speed of the revolution 
(562 ad fin.) and so form the heavenly bodies; the bulkier ones at 
the centre ‘stay together’ (συμμένειν) to form the earth. Diogenes 
Lacrtius continues, after the end of 562, with a description 
of cosmological details which are not particularly enlightening, 
but show us that here Leucippus tended to accept, not very 
critically, the old Ionian theories. Onc important and highly 
conservative idea of Leucippus is that the earth is flat, shaped like 
a tambourine (Tuptravoeidns, Aetius 11, 10, 4) ; Democritus slightly 
emended this (zd. m1, 10, 5), but retained thc overall flatness. Both 
appear to have held that the carth was tilted downward towards 
the south.* Since there are innumerable atoms and an infinite 
void, there is no reason why only one such world should be formed; 
Leucippus and Democritus therefore postulated innumerable 
worlds, coming-to-be and passing away throughout the void 
(562 init., 564). They are the first to whom we can with absolute 
certainty attribute the odd concept of innumcrable worlds (as 
opposcd to successive states of a continuing organism), one which 
is reached entirely on the a priort grounds described above.5 The 
doxographcrs, however, certainly attributed the idea of plural 
worlds (whether coexistent or successive) to some Ionians, con- 
ceivably by an error initiated by Theophrastus (sce pp. 123 ff. also 
p. 390). Democritus, according to §64, seems to have embellished 
the idea by observing that there is no need for each world to have 
a sun and moon, and so on, or to have waters and give rise to life: 
the random nature of the cosmogonical process 562 would not 
always produce the same result. For example, if there were no 
further atoms to be attracted close to the outer membrane of a 
world, that world would presumably have no heavenly bodies.® 


I So δός Diog. L. 1x, 45 (on Democritus) πάντα te κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην 
γίνεσθαι, τῆς δίνης αἰτίας οὔσης τῆς γενέσεως πάντων, ἣν ἀνάγκην λέγει. 
The whirl or vortex is called necessity because it produces the necessary 
(mechanical and theoretically determinable) collisions and unions of atoms: 





565 Everything happens according to necessity; for the cause of the coming-into-being of 
all things is the whirl, which he calls necessity. 


412 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


sO 566 Aetius 1, 26, 2 (IT. οὐσίας ἀνάγκης) Δημόκριτος τὴν ἀντιτυπίαν καὶ 
φορὰν καὶ πληγὴν τῆς ὕλης. In Aristotelian terms, combinations can be 
said to take place by chance: §67 Aristotle Phys. B4, 196a24 εἰσὶ δέ tives 
οἱ Kal τοὐρανοῦ τοῦδε kal τῶν κόσμων πάντων αἰτιῶνται τὸ αὐτόματον 
ἀπὸ ταὐτομάτον γὰρ γίγνεσθαι τὴν δίνην καὶ τὴν κίνησιν τὴν διακρίνασαν 
καὶ καταστήσασαν els ταύτην τὴν τάξιν τὸ πᾶν. For Aristotle they are 
chance events because they do not fulfil any final cause; but the atomists 
emphasized the other aspect of non-planned mechanical sequences, i.e. as 
necessity. So in the only extant saying of Leucippus himself: §68 Fr. 2, 
Aetius 1, 25, 4 οὐδὲν χρῆμα μάτην γίνεται, ἀλλὰ πάντα ἐκ λόγου τε Kal 
Un’ ἀνάγκης. Every object, every event, is the result of a chain of collisions 
and reactions, each according to the shape and particular motion of the 
atoms concerned, 

2 Democritus illustrates this traditional rule of the behaviour of things, 
both animate and inanimate, in 569 Fr. 164, Sextus adv. math. vu, 117 
Kal yap 26a, φησίν, ὁμογενέσι φτῴοις σνναγελάφεται ὡς περιστεραὶ περι- 
στεραῖς καὶ γέρανοι γεράνοις καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὡσαύτως. (ds) δὲ καὶ 
ἐπὶ τῶν ἀψύχων, καθάπερ ὁρᾶν πάρεστιν ἐπί τε τῶν κοσκινενομένων 
σπερμάτων καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν παρὰ ταῖς κυματωγαῖς ψηφίδων. .. (similar grains, 
he continues, and pebbles of the same shape, congregate under the action 
of sieve or waves). The mechanical tendency of objects of similar shape 
and size to sort together under the influence of motion is especially relevant 
to atomism, of course, and goes beyond the naive view of Homer, Od. 17, 
218, that ‘god always leads like to like’. 

3 According to Simplicius, Democritus held that the vortex was ‘separated 
off’: 570 Fr. 167, Simplic. Phys. 327, 24 ἀλλὰ καὶ Δημόκριτος, ἐν οἷς 
φησι “Sivov ἀπὸ τοῦ παντὸς ἀποκριθῆναι παντοίων ἰδεῶν᾽ (πῶς δὲ καὶ 
ὑπὸ τίνος αἰτίας μὴ λέγει), ἔοικεν ἀπὸ ταὐτομάτου καὶ τύχης γεννᾶν 
αὐτόν. The idea of the initiator of the cosmogonical process bcing 
‘separated off’? may go back to Anaximander (see 123 and pp. 132f.). 

4 So 571 Diog. L. rx, 33 (on Leucippus) ἐκλείπειν δ᾽ ἥλιον Kal σελήνην 
τῷ κεκλίσθαι τὴν γῆν πρὸς μεσημβρίαν τὰ δὲ πρὸς ἄρκτῳ ἀεί Te νίφεσθαι 
καὶ κατάψυχρα εἶναι καὶ πτήγννσθαι. Most scholars have assumed a gap 





566 (On the nature of necessity) Democritus means by it the resistance and movement 
and blows of matter. 

567 There are some who make chance the cause both of these heavens and of all the 
worlds; for from chance arises the whirl and the movement which, by separation, has 
brought the universe inio its present order. 

568 Nothing occurs at random, but everything for a reason and by necessity. 

569 For creatures (he says) flock together with their kind, doves with doves, cranes 
with cranes and so on. And the same happens even with inanimate things, as can be seen 
with seeds in a steve and pebbles on the sea-shore.... 

570 When Democritus says that ‘a whirl was separated off from the whole, of all sorts 
of shapes’ (and he does not say how or through what cause), he seems to generate it by 
accident or chance. 

571 Eclipses of sun and moon are due to the tilting of the earth towards the south; the 
regions towards the north are always under snow and are very cold and hard-frozen. 


413 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


after σελήνην, so that some other phenomenon than eclipse is explained by 
the tilting of the earth. The order of subjects in Diogenes is against a gap; 
but the tilting of the earth would be so uttcrly unsuitable as an explanation 
of eclipses that it seems reasonable to postulate either a textual displace- 
ment or a total misunderstanding by Diogenes or his sources. The tilting 
of the carth remains; it explains both the slant of the zodiac and the 
differences of climate, and is conceivably related to, though very different 
from, Anaximencs’ theory that the sun is hidden behind high northern 
parts at night, Eclipses had already been correctly explaincd by Empe- 
docles and Anaxagoras, Cf. also Aetius πὶ, 12, 1-2 (DK 67427 and 68496). 
5 Compare the well-known saying of Democritus’ pupil Mctrodorus of 
Chios, that it is strange for one ear of corn to be produced in a great plain, 
and for one world in the boundless. 

© It looks as though there is a reference here to Anaxagoras fr. 4 (525; the 
recurrence of the phrase trap’ ἡμῖν may be accidental). It is not at all 
certain, however, that that fragment described entirely separate worlds 
with separate suns and moons; if it did, then the fact that every world had 
the samc structure justifics G. Vlastos’ reference (Philos. Rev. 55 (1946) 
53f.) to ‘the teleological streak in Anaxagorean physics’, and his suggestion 
that Democritus’ theory may be a ‘conscious rcfutation’ of it. 


THE BEHAVIOUR OF ATOMS 
(a) Weight 

572 Aristotle de gen. et corr. A8, 326ag9 καίτοι βαρύτερόν ye 
κατὰ τὴν ὑπεροχήν φησιν εἶναι Δημόκριτος ἕκαστον τῶν ἀδιαιρέτων. 
573 Theophrastus de sensu 61 (DK68A135) βαρὺ μὲν οὖν καὶ 
κοῦφον τῷ μεγέθει διαιρεῖ Δημόκριτος... ... οὐ μὴν GAA’ ἔν γε τοῖς 
μεικτοῖς κουφότερον μὲν εἶναι τὸ πλέον ἔχον κενόν, βαρύτερον δὲ τὸ 
ἔλαττον. ἐν ἐνίοις μὲν οὕτως εἴρηκεν " (62) ἐν ἄλλοις δὲ κοῦφον εἶναί 
φησιν ἁπλῶς τὸ λεπτόν. 

574 Aetius 1, 3, 18 (DK68447) Δημόκριτος μὲν γὰρ ἔλεγε δύο 
(sc. ταῖς ἀτόμοις συμβεβηκέναι), μέγεθός τε καὶ σχῆμα, ὁ δὲ 
᾿Επίκουρος τούτοις καὶ τρίτον βάρος προσέθηκεν... .1, 12, 6 
Δημόκριτος τὰ πρῶτά φήῆσι σώματα (ταῦτα δ᾽ ἦν τὰ ναστά) βάρος 
μὲν οὐκ ἔχειν, κινεῖσθαι δὲ κατ᾽ ἀλληλοτυπίαν ἐν τῷ ἀπείρῳ. 





572 Yet Democritus says that each of the indivisible bodies is heavier in proportion to its 
excess (sc. of bulk). 

573 Democritus distinguishes heavy and light by size.... Nevertheless in compound 
bodies the lighter is that which contains more void, the heavier that which contains less. 
Sometimes he expressed it thus, but elsewhere he says simply that the fine is light. 

574 Democritus named two (sc. properties of atoms), size and shape; but Epicurus added 
a third to these, namely weight... .—Democritus says that the primary bodies (1.6. the solid 
atoms) do not possess weight but move in the infinite as the result of striking one another. 


414 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


§75 Simplicius de caelo 712,27 (ὨΚ 68. 61) ...oi περὶ Δημόκριτον 
οἴονται πάντα μὲν ἔχειν βάρος, τῷ δὲ ἔλαττον ἔχειν βάρος τὸ πῦρ 
ἐκθλιβόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν προλαμβανόντων ἄνω φέρεσθαι καὶ διὰ 
τοῦτο κοῦφον δοκεῖν. 


These passages present apparently contradictory opinions on the 
question whether the atoms, for Democritus, possessed weight, and 
if so, of what kind. Leucippus is not mentioned, and presumably 
did not think that the subject demanded special treatment. 
Aristotle in §72 is quite clear that for Democritus the atoms had 
weight, but that the weight depended on their size. We may here 
pause to consider what weight means: it means a tendency to 
move consistently in a certain direction, what we call * downwards’, 
and a resistance to ‘upward’ movement. This tendency might be 
explained by the operation of outside forces; there is no need to 
think of it as essential to all body, no matter what its environment, 
and in fact (as Burnet EGP 342f. argues) it appears that the 
concept of absolute weight as an cssential attribute of body did 
not occur to the early physicists. Now bodics in our world do as 
a matter of experience seem to have weight; Democritus would 
obviously not deny this. Composite bodies arc composed of atoms 
and void; void cannot have weight; therefore weight, iz our world, 
must belong to atoms. But the atoms arc solid, and of the same 
substance; therefore their weight varies directly with their size 
(§72). Compound objects of the same size can differ in weight 
because of differences in the amount of void they contain (573, of 
which the last sentence does not indicate a real inconsistency). In 
our world all objects have weight of some kind and there is no such 
thing as absolute lightness, as there was for Aristotle: things which 
apparently tend upwards, such as fire, are actually being squeezed 
up by the compression of bulkier bodies (§75). At this point it 
must be remembered that the atoms as such, and before being 
associated into bodies, differ from each other only in size and in 
shape (see e.g. 554). These are their ‘primary qualities’. The 
interaction of atoms is due to their collisions with and rebounds 
from each other, which are continuing effects of the original 
random motion (see p. 417); there is no mention of weight, or a 





575 ..-Democritus’ school thinks that everything possesses weight, but that because it 
possesses less weight fire is squeezed out by things that possess more, moves upwards and 
consequently appears light. 


415 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


tendency to fall in one direction, as a cause of collision. (It is 
explicitly stated, in fact, most clearly by Aetius in 574, that 
Epicurus added weight as an original property, and source of the 
behaviour, of atoms; he made their original motion a fall through 
space due to their weight.) ‘Weight’ only operates in a vortex, in 
a developed world, and is an expression of the tendency of bulky 
objects towards the centre of a whirl. Before becoming involved 
in a vortex an atom is not activated by weight at all." 

I This explanation has been worked out chiefly by Dyroff and Burnet, 


and is accepted by Bailcy: it does seem adequately to account for some 
confusion in the ancient authorities. 


(δ) ‘Ortginal’ and ‘ derived’ motion 

576 Aristotle de caelo [2, 300b8 διὸ καὶ Λευκίτππτῳ Kai Δημο- 
κρίτῳ, τοῖς λέγουσιν ἀεὶ κινεῖσθαι τὰ πρῶτα σώματα ἐν τῷ κενῷ καὶ 
τῷ ἀπείρῳ, λεκτέον τίνα κίνησιν καὶ τίς ἡ κατὰ φύσιν αὐτῶν 
κίνησις. 

577 Aristotle On Democritus ap. Simplicium de caelo 295, 9 
(continuing 554) στασιάτειν δὲ καὶ φέρεσθαι ἐν TH κενῷ Sik Te 
τὴν ἀνομοιότητα καὶ τὰς ἄλλας εἰρημένας διαφοράς, φερομένας δὲ 
ἐμπίτττειν καὶ περιττιλέκεσθαι... .. 

578 Aristotle de caelo 4, 303a5 φασὶ γὰρ (sc. Leucippus and 
Democritus) εἶναι τὰ πρῶτα μεγέθη πλήθει μὲν ἄπειρα, μεγέθει δὲ 
ἀδιαίρετα, καὶ οὔτ᾽ ἐξ ἑνὸς πολλὰ γίγνεσθαι οὔτε ἐκ πολλῶν ἕν, 
ἀλλὰ τῇ τούτων συμπλοκῇ καὶ περιταλάξει πάντα γεννᾶσθαι. 

479 Alexander Met. 36, 21 οὗτοι γὰρ (sc. Leucippus and 
Democritus) λέγουσιν ἀλληλοτυπούσας Kal κρονομένας πρὸς 
ἀλλήλας κινεῖσθαι τὰς ἀτόμους. 





576 So Leucippus and Democritus, who say that their primary bodies are always in 
motion in the infinite void, ought to specify what kind of motion—that is, what is the 
motion natural to them. 

577 They struggle and move in the void because of the dissimilarities between them and 
the other differences already mentioned; and as they move they collide and become 
entangled.... 

578 For they (sc. Leucippus and Democritus) say that their primary magnitudes are 
infinite in number and indivisible in magnitude; the many does not come from one nor one 
JSrom many, but rather all things are generated by the intertwining and scattering around of 
these primary magnitudes. 

579 For they (sc. Leucippus and Democritus) say that the atoms move by mutual 
collisions and blows. 


416 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


580 Aetius 1, 23, 3 Δημόκριτος ἕν γένος κινήσεως TO κατὰ 
παλμὸν ἀπεφαίνετο. 


It is evident from 576 and other similar complaints by Aristotle, 
as well as from the lack of positive information on this point, that 
neither Leucippus nor Democritus gave any full account of an 
original motion of atoms—the motion, that is, which causes 
collisions, not that which is caused by collisions. Indeed, since 
atoms and the void have always existed, it is clear that there must 
always have been motion (whose eternity had to be postulated in 
order to avoid Eleatic arguments against a beginning of motion), 
and consequent collisions. To enquire, therefore, as Aristotle does, 
what was the ‘natural’ motion of atoms is less pertinent than at 
first appears. The real problem, philosophically speaking, is 
whether atoms and void have always existed; if this is accepted, 
one can also accept that they have always interacted with each 
other. However, if the atomists were forced to define an ‘original’ 
motion they could presumably say that it was a random motion, 
with no tendency in any atom to move in one direction rather than 
another. It is clear that collisions would very soon take place, and 
that the original motion would progressively be supplanted by the 
secondary motions which result from collision and rebound. 

It is just possible, however, that Democritus, at any rate, did 
point to some kind of ‘original’ motion. Aristotle (de an. Aa, 
403b31ff.) tells us that he held soul-atoms to be self-moving, like 
motes in a sunbeam; and it has been suggested that this image 
more aptly illustrates a random motion of atoms in general. In 
577 it is suggested that motion in the void is originally caused by 
dissimilarities between the atoms. Democritus could not, of 
course, have meant that unlike exercised a force of repulsion on 
unlike, operating at a distance and not by contact. More probably 
the suggestion is that irregular atoms are in a state of discquilibrium 
in the void, and so undergo movement.! 


I Simplicius may have misrepresented Aristotle here. When giving his 
own views the former is unreliable on this point; for at Phys. 1318, 35 
(DK 68458) he claims that the original motion of atoms is due to their 
weight, an Epicurean idea; and that it is through this, and because the void 
does not resist, that they are ‘scattered around’, περιπαλάσσεσθαι 
(περιπαλαίσεσθαι mss., em. Diels)—on which see the next note. 





580 Democritus said there was only one kind of motion, that due to vibration. 


27 417 K&R 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


The regular motion of atoms, and perhaps the only one which 
Leucippus and Democritus fully envisaged, is due to rebounds of 
atoms after collision. This is frequently called a ‘derived’ motion; 
in most of the doxographical accounts (e.g. 574) it is the only one 
known. Collisions of atoms result either in ‘intertwining’ 
(συμττλοκή), if the atoms arc of congruent shape, or in ‘being 
scattered around’ {περιτάλαξις), if not—that is, in rebounding in 
one direction or another. This is what is meant by Aristotle in §78. 
Aetius in §80 assigns a special type of motion to Democritus, 
namely παλμός or ‘vibration’ (the verbal root of which 15 the 
same as that of περιπάλαξις: Bailey actually interpreted περι- 
πάλαξις in §78 in the sense of παλμός, though not very plausibly). 
There is little doubt that Actius is here reading an Epicurean idea 
into Democritus; Epicurus used this word to describe the invisible 
oscillation which, as he conceived, atoms underwent when con- 


fined in a complex body (Epicurus Ep. 1, 43; cf. Bailey p. 332).7 


I LSJ gives the meaning of περιτάλαξις as ‘collision, combination’ of 
atoms, though that of περιπαλάσσεσθαι is given as ‘to be hurled around’. 
Both translations are imperfect. The meaning of παλάσσεσθαι is ‘to be 
shaken about, or sprinkled’, and that of its simpler form πάλλειν is ‘to 
shake’. A transitional stage to the Epicurcan traApds-interpretation 15 
perhaps scen at Theophrastus de sensu 66 fin. (DK684A135). In §78 
Aristotle simply means that things are produced by the entanglement and 
rebound of atoms; the latter does not of itsclf produce γένεσις, but is 
necessary for its continuity. 


(c) The formation of bodies 


58x Aristotle On Democritus ap. Simplicium de caelo 295, 11 
(continuing 577) . . -φερομένας δὲ (sc. τὰς ἀτόμους) ἐμπίπτειν Kal 
περιπλέκεσθαι περιπλοκὴν τοιαύτην ἣ συμψαύειν μὲν αὐτὰ καὶ 
πλησίον ἀλλήλων εἶναι ποιεῖ, φύσιν μέντοι μίαν ἐξ ἐκείνων κατ᾽ 
ἀλήθειαν οὐδ᾽ ἡντιναοῦν γεννᾷ κομιδῇ γὰρ εὔηθες εἶναι τὸ δύο ἢ 
τὰ πλείονα γενέσθαι ἄν ποτε ἕν. τοῦ δὲ συμμένειν τὰς οὐσίας μετ᾽ 
ἀλλήλων μέχρι τινὸς αἰτιᾶται τὰς ἐταλλαγὰς καὶ τὰς ἀντιλήψεις τῶν 
σωμάτων: τὰ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῶν εἶναι σκαληνά, τὰ δὲ ἀγκιστρώδη, τὰ 





81 ...As they (sc. the atoms) move they collide and become entangled in such a way as 
to cling in close contact to one another, but not so as to form one substance of them in reality 
of any kind whatever; for it is very simple-minded to suppose that two or more could ever 
become one. The reason he gives for atoms staying together for a while is the intertwining 
and mutual hold of the primary bodies; for some of them are angular, some hooked, some 


418 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


δὲ κοῖλα, τὰ δὲ κυρτά, τὰ δὲ ἄλλας ἀναρίθμους ἔχοντα διαφοράς: 
ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον οὖν χρόνον σφῶν αὐτῶν ἀντέχεσθαι νομίφει καὶ 
συμμένειν ἕως ἰσχυροτέρα τις ἐκ τοῦ περιέχοντος ἀνάγκη παρα- 
γενομένη διασείσῃ καὶ χωρὶς αὐτὰς διασπείρῃ. 

582 Simplicius de caelo 242, 21 (continuing 556) ... ταύτας δὲ 
τὰς ἀτόμους ἐν ἀπείρῳ τῷ κενῷ κεχωρισμένας ἀλλήλων καὶ διαφε- 
ρούσας σχήμασί τε καὶ μεγέθεσι καὶ θέσει καὶ τάξει φέρεσθαι ἐν τῷ 
κενῷ καὶ ἐπικαταλαμβανούσας ἀλλήλας συγκρούεσθαι, καὶ τὰς μὲν 
ἀποπάλλεσθαι, ὅπῃ ἂν τύχωσιν, τὰς δὲ περιτπλέκεσθαι ἀλλήλαις 
κατὰ τὴν τῶν σχημάτων καὶ μεγεθῶν καὶ θέσεων καὶ τάξεων 
συμμετρίαν καὶ συμμένειν [ Diels, συμβαίνειν mss.] καὶ οὕτως τὴν 
τῶν συνθέτων γένεσιν ἀποτελεῖσθαι. 


These passages state more precisely what has been outlined in 
earlier cxtracts, e.g. §46 and 562, namely how atoms make up the 
visible complex bodies of our experience. As a result of collision 
between atoms those which are of congruous shape do not rebound 
but remain temporarily attached to one another: for example a 
hook-shaped atom may become involved with an atom into whose 
shape the hook fits. Other congruous atoms colliding with this 
two-atom complex then become attached, until a visible body of 
a certain character is formed. It is emphasized that no real 
coalescence of atoms takes place: they simply come into contact 
with each other, and always retain their own shape and indivi- 
duality. When a complex of atoms collides with another complex 
it may be broken up into smaller complexes or into its constituent 
atoms, which then resume their motion through the void until 
they collide with a congruous atom, or complex, once again. 
There are considerable difficulties in this account. What part 
does the principle of like-to-like play? This principle, illustrated 
by Democritus in 569, is used in the description of world-formation; 
for in 562 atoms of all shapes come together in a great void, and 
like tends to like when the smaller atoms go to the periphery, the 





concave, some convex, and indeed with countless other differences; so he thinks they cling to 
each other and stay together until such time as some stronger necessity comes from the 
surrounding and shakes and scatters them apart. 


482 ...these atoms move in the infinite void, separate one from the other and differing 
in shapes, sizes, position and arrangement; overtaking each other they collide, and some are 
shaken away in any chance direction, while others, becoming intertwined one with another 
according to the congruity of their shapes, sizes, positions and arrangements, stay together 
and so effect the coming into being of compound bodies. 


419 27-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


bulkier ones to the centre. It is likeness of size rather than shape 
that seems to be primarily in question here; and it is only in a vortex 
that the sorting of sizes takes place. In the collisions of atoms not 
primarily subject to a vortex, 1.6. either outside the scattered areas 
of world-formation, or within a formed world where the vortex- 
action may be modified, coalescence is due to congruence (which 
implies difference, so far as συμπλοκή is concerned, and not 
similarity) rather than to the principle of like-to-like. 582 tells us 
that this congruence must operate in respect of shapc, size, 
position, and order. But this is not a complete solution, since we 
are told of one particular shape of atom that cannot be subject to 
any obvious type of congrucnce with others of its shape, but 
which docs nevertheless combine to make up a single type of 
complex (or rather two different but connected types). This is the 
spherical atom, of which both soul and fire were evidently held to 
be composed.t Soul, it might be argued, is regarded (as elsewhere 
in the fifth century) as scattered throughout the whole body; but 
even 80 some conjunction of soul-atoms seems necessary. Fire isa 
clearer case, for it is distinctly visible, and must be composed of 
spherical atoms and no (or very few) atoms of another shape. How 
did these atoms come together? They cannot have become 
implicated with or hooked on to one another, as a result of 
collision; rather they must have become conjoined by the operation 
of the principle of like-to-like. It seems, therefore, that Aristotle 
in 581 is misleading in implying that all examples of συμμένειν, 
i.e. of the formation of apparently stable complex bodies, are due 
to implication of atoms: there are occasions when other types of 
συμμετρία (see 582), especially similarity of shape and size, are 
more relevant. 


I Aristotle asserts in several passages that for the atomists soul- and fire- 
atoms were spherical, because they had to be mobile and penetrative: 
e.g. 583 dean. A2, 405a11 τῶν δὲ σχημάτων εὐκινητότατον τὸ σφαιροειδὲς 
λέγει (sc. Δημόκριτος) ᾿ τοιοῦτον δ᾽ εἶναι τόν τε νοῦν καὶ τὸ πῦρ. Compare 
ibid. 404.5 (ὨΚ 67.4.28), where soul is said to be recruited by the inhala- 
tion of spherical atoms from the atmosphere—an idea analogous, perhaps, 
to that of Heraclitus in 237. Aristotle occasionally implies that the soul 
is fire, because of this community of shape; but the truth is that a spherical 
atom is neither soul nor fire, it is just a spherical atom. It takes on 
secondary properties only in association with other atoms; in the context 





583 Democritus says that the spherical is the most mobile of shapes; and such is mind and 


fire. 
420 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


of an animal body it is soul, in other contexts it is fire (cf. Cherniss, 
Aristotle’s Criticism of Presocratic Philosophy, 290n.). Nevertheless, the 
similarity of shape explains how soul can be nurtured from the atmosphere 
(which is not besouled, but contains some fire). Apart from soul (equivalent 
to mind according to Aristotle’s account of atomism) and fire, no details 
have survived about which shape of atom gave rise to which secondary 
characteristics, except in the case of sensation—sharp atoms produce salty 
tastes, etc. (see §91 below). Aristotle understood that air and water (and 
earth, probably) were conglomerations of all shapes of atoms, ττανσττερμίαι: 
§84 de caelo 4, 303412 ποῖον δὲ καὶ τί ἑκάστου τὸ σχῆμα τῶν στοιχείων 
οὐθὲν ἐπιδιώρισαν (sc. Aeuxitrtros καὶ Δημόκριτος), ἀλλὰ μόνον τῷ πυρὶ 
τὴν σφαῖραν ἀπέδωκαν" ἀέρα δὲ καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ τἄλλα μεγέθει καὶ μικρότητι 
διεῖλον, ὡς οὖσαν αὐτῶν τὴν φύσιν οἷον πανσπερμίαν πάντων τῶν 
στοιχείων. If this is accurate, then the atomists took over the idea from 
Anaxagoras (see p. 383). 


SENSATION, THOUGHT AND KNOWLEDGE 


§85 Aristotle de sensu 4, 442a29 Δημόκριτος δὲ Kal of πλεῖστοι 
τῶν φυσιολόγων ὅσοι λέγουσι περὶ αἰσθήσεως ἀτοπώτατόν TI 
ποιοῦσιν " πάντα γὰρ τὰ αἰσθητὰ arta ποιοῦσιν. 

σδό Actius tv, 8, 10 Λεύκιππος Δημόκριτος ᾿Επίκουρος τὴν 
αἴσθησιν καὶ τὴν νόησιν γίνεσθαι εἰδώλων ἔξωθεν προσιόντων" 
μηδενὶ γὰρ ἐπιβάλλειν μηδετέραν χωρὶς τοῦ ττροσπίτπτοντος εἰδώλον. 
587 ‘Theophrastus de sensu 50 (ὨΚ 68. 195) ὁρᾶν μὲν οὖν ποιεῖ 
(sc. Δημόκριτος) τῇ updos: ταύτην δὲ ἰδίως λέγει. τὴν γὰρ 
ἔμφασιν οὐκ εὐθὺς ἐν τῇ κόρῃ γίνεσθαι, ἀλλὰ τὸν ἀέρα τὸν μεταξὺ 
τῆς ὄψεως καὶ τοῦ ὁρωμένου τυποῦσθαι συστελλόμενον ὑτὸ τοῦ 
ὁρωμένου καὶ τοῦ ὁρῶντος ἅπαντος γὰρ ἀεὶ γίνεσθαί τινα ἀπορροήν. 
ἔπειτα τοῦτον στερεὸν ὄντα καὶ ἀλλόχρων ἐμφαίνεσθαι τοῖς ὄμμασιν 
Τὐγροϊς7 καὶ τὸ μὲν πυκνὸν οὐ δέχεσθαι τὸ δὲ ὑγρὸν διιέναι. ... 





584 They (sc. Leucippus and Democritus) did not further define what particular shape 
belonged to each of the elements but merely attributed the sphere to fire; air, water and the 
rest they distinguished by magnitude and smallness, as 1. their substance was a sort of 
mixture of seeds of all the elements. 


585 Democritus and the majority of natural philosophers who discuss perception are 
guilty of a great absurdity; for they represent all perception as being by touch. 


586 Leucippus, Democritus and Epicurus say that perception and thought arise when 
images enier from outside; neither occurs to anybody without an image impinging. 


587 Democritus explains sight by the visual image, which he describes in a peculiar way; 
the visual image does not arise directly in the pupil, but the air between the eye and the 
object of sight is contracted and stamped by the object seen and the seer; for from everything 
there is always a sort of effluence proceeding. So this air, which is solid and variously 
coloured, appears in the eye, which is moist(?); the eye does not admit the dense part, 
but the moist passes through.... 


421 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


588 Alexander de sensu 56, 12 εἴδωλα γάρ τινα ὁμοιόμορφα ἀπὸ 
τῶν ὁρωμένων συνεχῶς ἀπορρέοντα καὶ ἐμτίτττοντα τῇ ὄψει τοῦ ὁρᾶν 
ἠτιῶντο. τοιοῦτοι δὲ ἦσαν οἱ περὶ Λεύκιπτπον καὶ Δημόκριτον. ... 
589 Democritus Fr. 9, Sextus adv. math. vu, 135 νόμῳ γλυκύ, 
νόμῳ πικρόν, νόμῳ θερμόν, νόμῳ ψυχρόν, νόμῳ χροιήῆ, ἐτεῇ δὲ ἄτομα 
καὶ κενόν... .. (136) ἡμεῖς δὲ τῷ μὲν ἐόντι οὐδὲν ἀτρεκὲς συνίεμεν, μετα- 
πῖπτον δὲ κατά τε σώματος διαθήκην καὶ τῶν ἐπεισιόντων καὶ τῶν 
ἀντιστηριφόντων. 


590 Democritus Fr. 11, Sextus adv. math. vu, 139 (DK 688 11) 
γνώμης δὲ δύο εἰσὶν ἰδέαι, ἡ μὲν γνησίη, ἡ δὲ σκοτίη᾽ Kal σκοτίης 
μὲν τάδε σύμπαντα, ὄψις ἀκοὴ ὀδμὴ γεῦσις ψαῦσις. ἡ δὲ γνησίη, 
ἀποκεκριμένη δὲ ταύτης... . ὅταν ἡ σκοτίη μηκέτι δύνηται μήτε ὁρῆν 
ἐπ᾽ ἔλαττον μήτε ἀκούειν μήτε ὀδμᾶσθαι μήτε γεύεσθαι μήτε ἐν τῇ 
Ψαύσει αἰσθάνεσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ AeTrTOTEpov***, 


It is a necessary consequencc of the atomist doctrine, that evcry- 
thing consists of atoms and void, that all sensation should be 
explained as a form of contact or touch (§85). The soul consists of 
spherical atoms (583) spread through the body, and the mind 
was presumably regarded as a concentration of soul-atoms. ‘Thus 
thought is a process analogous to sensation, and takes place when 
the soul- or mind-atoms are set in motion by the impingement of 
congruent atoms from outside. This is implied in 586; in the case 
of thought one might suppose that self-motion by the kinetic 
spherical atoms is also possible, to account for apparently spon- 
taneous thoughts. A full account of Democritus’ detailed expla- 
nation of the different senses is given by Theophrastus in his de 
sensu, §§49-83 (DK 684135); this account may contain some 
Peripatetic distortion and elaboration, but shows that Democritus, 
on this and on other subjects, went to great pains to work out the 





588 They attributed sight to certain images, of the same shape as the object, which were 
continually streaming off from the objects of sight and impinging on the eye. This was the 
view of the school of Leucippus and Democritus.... 

589 By convention are sweet and bitter, hot and cold, by convention is colour; in truth 
are atoms and the void.... In reality we apprehend nothing exactly, but only as τὶ changes 
according to the condition of our body and of the things that impinge and press upon the 
body. 

590 There are two forms of knowledge, one genuine, one obscure. To the obscure belong 
all the following: sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch. The other is genuine, and 1s quite 
distinct from this....When the obscure form can no longer see more minutely nor hear 
nor smell nor taste nor perceive through touch, but finer ***. 


422 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


detailed mechanism of the atomic theory. The fullest, and least 
satisfactory, description is of vision. Leucippus had evidently 
(§88) taken over the Empedoclean theory (see p. 343) that 
images, εἴδωλα, are given off by objects, and affect the sense- 
organs. This was elaborated by Democritus, who held (§87) that 
the visual image (ἔμφασις) in the pupil is the result of effluences 
(&troppoai) both from the seen object and from the observer; 
these meet and form a solid impression (ἐντύπωσις) in the air, 
which then enters the pupil of the cye. The other senscs are 
explained more simply, and with emphasis on the different effects 
of different sizes and shapes of atom; nonc of the explanations 
stands close examination, and Aristotle and Theophrastus were 
able to make some very pertinent criticisms. We do not know, for 
example, how Democritus explained the sense of touch: as all 
senses depend ultimately on this sense, it is obviously a problem 
how sight or taste, for example, diffcr from it. 


t E.g. of taste, 501 Theophrastus de sensu 66 (DK 684135) τὸν δὲ πικρὸν 
(sc. χυλὸν) ἐκ μικρῶν Kal λείων Kal περιφερῶν, τὴν περιφέρειαν εἰληχότων 
[-α mss., Diels; -wv scripsi] καὶ καμπὰς ἔχουσαν᾽ διὸ καὶ γλίσχρον εἶναι 
καὶ κολλώδη. ἁλμυρὸν δὲ τὸν ἐκ μεγάλων καὶ οὐ περιφερῶν, GAA’ Ett” ἐνίων 
μὲν oKaAnvdev....Sound is transferred when the particles of voice or noise 
mingle with similar particles in the air (and thus, presumably, form 


εἴδωλα) : 592 Aetius tv, 19, 3 (DK 684128; probably from Poseidonius, 
according to Diels) Δημόκριτος καὶ τὸν ἀέρα φησὶν els ὁμοιοσχήμονα 
θρύπτεσθαι σώματα καὶ συγκαλινδεῖσθαι τοῖς ἐκ τῆς φωνῆς θραύσμασι. 


It follows that there can be no unchanging knowledge, the same 
for all, of the secondary appearances (which are primary, however, 
for our experience) or ‘qualities’ of things. Hot and cold, and 
so on, are conventional: in reality there are simply atoms and void 
(589). We can know nothing of the former kind, for our perception 
of the secondary qualities is distorted by resistance in the medium, 
air, or by the special dispositions of our own soul-atoms. Demo- 
critus made other pronouncements of a sceptical nature (cf. also 
frr. 6, 7, 8); but in 590 it is clearly stated that there is a genuine 
kind of opinion apart from sensation; it operates on objects too fine 





591 Bitter taste is caused by small, smooth, rounded atoms, whose circumference is 
actually sinuous; therefore it is both sticky and viscous. Salt taste is caused by large, not 
rounded atoms, but in some cases jagged ones.... 


592 Democritus says that the air is broken up into bodies of like shape and is rolled along 
together with the fragments of the voice. 


423 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


for sensation to apprehend. The fragment itself breaks off at the 
crucial point, but Sextus’ introductory comments (not quoted here) 
indicate that ‘genuine’ opinion is intellectual. Obviously, its 
objects are atoms and the void—it penetrates beyond the 
‘conventional’ secondary characteristics to the ultimate reality. 
Leucippus and Democritus themselves had been employing this 
kind of judgement. Yet the mind, like the soul as a whole, operates 
through the mechanical motions and collisions of atoms, and its 
impressions must be subject to the same sort of distortions as those 
of sensation (for which cf. 589, second part). It is clear, then, that 
Democritus should not have claimed, and perhaps did not claim, 
morc than approximate truth for his ‘genuine’ opinions—the truth 
still lay ‘in the depths’ (fr. 117).? 


t The difficulty of proving a conviction about atoms and the void, if we 
can only infer these from our possibly fallacious corporeal impressions, is 
implied in a rejoinder by the senses to the first part of 589 (“by conven- 
tion. ..in reality atoms and void’), ascribed to Democritus by Galen: §93 
Democritus Fr. 125, Galen de medic. empir. 1259, 8 Schoene (DK 688 125) 
οὐ .τάλαινά φρήν, Trap’ ἡμέων λαβοῦσα τὰς πίστεις ἡμέας καταβάλλεις; 
πτῶμα Tor τὸ κατάβλημα. This neat criticism is normally accepted as 
Democritean, but the possibility must not be overlooked that it is framed 
by a later critic as an intentional epilogue to, and corrective of, §89. It is 
odd that Sextus did not quote it. 


ETHICS 

594 Fr. 174, Stobaeus Anth. u, 9, 3 ὁ μὲν εὔθυμος εἰς ἔργα 
ἐπιφερόμενος δίκαια Kal νόμιμα καὶ ὕπαρ Kal ὄναρ χαίρει Te καὶ 
ἔρρωται καὶ ἀνακηδής ἐστιν ὃς δ᾽ ἂν καὶ δίκης ἀλογῇ καὶ τὰ χρὴ 
ἐόντα μὴ ἔρδῃ, τούτῳ πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα ἀτερπείη, ὅταν τεὺ 
ἀναμνησθῇ, καὶ δέδοικε καὶ ἑωυτὸν κακίζει. 


ξος Fr.171, Stobaeus Anth. τι, 7, 41 εὐδαιμονίη οὐκ ἐν βοσκήμασιν 
οἰκεῖ οὐδὲ ἐν χρυσῷ: ψυχὴ οἰκητήριον δαίμονος. 


es 








593 --.. Wretched mind, do you, who get your evidence from us, yet try to overthrow us? 
Our overthrow will be your downfall. 


594 The cheerful man, who is eager for just and lawful deeds, rejoices whether waking or 
sleeping and is strong and free from care; but he that cares nought for justice and does not 
the things that are right finds all such things joyless, when he remembers them, and is 
afraid and reproaches himself. 


595 Happiness does not reside in cattle or gold; the soul is the dwelling-place of one’s 
good or evil genius. 


424 


ATOMISTS: LEUCIPPUS AND DEMOCRITUS 


596 Fr. 246, Stobaeus Anth. m, 40,6 €evitein βίου αὐτάρκειαν 
διδάσκει" μᾶφα γὰρ καὶ στιβὰς λιμοῦ Kai κότου γλυκύτατα ἰάματα. 
597 Fr. 277, Stobaeus Anth. τν, 24, 32 (DK68B277) ὅτεῳ 
χρήμη Tek ἐστι παῖδα ποιήσασθαι, ἐκ τῶν φίλων τεύ μοι δοκεῖ 
ἄμεινον εἶναι, καὶ τῷ μὲν παῖς ἔσται τοιοῦτος οἷον ἂν βούληται: 
ἔστι γὰρ ἐκλέξασθαι οἷον ἐθέλει... ἣν δέ τις ποιῆται ἀπὸ ἑωντοῦ, 
πολλοὶ ἔνεισι κίνδυνοι ἀνάγκη γάρ, ὃς ἂν γένηται, τούτῳ χρῆσθαι. 


We know of no ethical doctrines held specifically by Leucippus, 
but Democritus devoted a part, though evidently not a particu- 
larly large part, of his considerable output to this subject. It 
happens that nearly all of the 290 or so verbatim fragments that 
have come down to us are from the ethical writings. Many are 
preserved because John Stobaeus, the 5th-century-a.pD. anthologist, 
incorporated them in his collection. Over a quarter of the total 
are ascribed to ‘Democrates’; most critics now follow Diels and 
accept the majority of these as genuine fragments of Democritus. 
Democritus’ ethics are not explicitly based upon atomist physical 
preconceptions, and atoms are not mentioncd.' The ethical 
fragments express, in a graphic and highly developed gnomic 
form, the Hellenic sentiments of restraint, common sense, and 
sanity. Yct no irrational sanctions of behaviour are introduccd, no 
Justice or Nature that could not be resolved into the interplay of 
atoms and void. Vlastos may well be right in calling Democritean 
ethics ‘the first rigorously naturalistic ethics in Greek thought’. 
At the same time there is no pandering to sophistic amoralism: the 
ethical ideal is εὐθυμίη (otherwise termed εὐεστώ, ἀθαμβίη)--- 
contentment founded on moral well-being. 594 and §95 show this 
clearly enough; the latter may contain a reference to Heraclitus 
fr. 119 (250). There are other, clearer references to Heraclitus; and 
Democritus also repeated Anaxagoras’ famous pronouncement 
‘the things that appcar are a vision of the unseen’ (§37), which 
has an obvious relevance to the atomic theory. 596 shows the 
non-hedonistic and indeed ascetic nature of much of his ethics, 





596 Service abroad teaches self-sufficiency; barley-bread and a straw mattress are the 
pleasantest medicines for hunger and fatigue. 

597 He who feels any desire to beget a child seems to me better advised to take it from one 
of his friends; he will then have a child such as he wishes, for he can choose the kind he 
wants.... Buttfaman begets his own child, many are the dangers there; for he must make 
the best of him whatever his nature. 


425 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


a trend which was followed by Epicurus; while 597 is an amusing 
example of philosophical rationalism, which in a Mediterranean 
way rejects as secondary the emotional and psychological over- 
tones which some would consider of first importance. 
I C. Bailey, The Greek Atomists and Epicurus 522, stated that ‘there is no 
cffort to set the picture of the “cheerful” man on a firm philosophical 
basis or to link it up in any way with the physical system’. This is probably 
too extreme a view: the ethical doctrines are certainly not incompatible 
with the physical, and connexions may have been established in parts of 
Democritus that have not survived. G. Vlastos, Philos. Rev. 54 (1945) 


578 ff. and 55 (1946) 53ff., describes some possible but relatively slight 
points of contact between Democritean ethics and physics, 


CONCLUSION 

Atomism is in many ways the crown of Greek philosophical 
achievement before Plato. It fulfilled the ultimate aim of Ionian 
matcrial monism by cutting the Gordian knot of the Eleatic 
elenchus. Much as it owed not only to Parmenides and Melissus, 
but also to the pluralist systems of Empedocles and Anaxagoras, 
atomism was not, however, an eclectic philosophy like that of 
Diogenes of Apollonia. It was in essence a new conception, one 
which was widely and skilfully applicd by Democritus, and which 
through Epicurus and Lucretius was to play an important part 
in Greek thought even after Plato and Aristotle. It also, of course, 
eventually gave a stimulus to the development of modern atomic 
theory—the real nature and motives of which, however, are utterly 
distinct. 


426 


CHAPTER XVIII 
DIOGENES OF APOLLONIA 


LIFE AND DATE 


598 Diogenes Laertius 1x, 57 Διογένης ᾿Απολλοθέμιδος ᾿Απολ- 
λωνιάτης, ἀνὴρ φυσικὸς καὶ ἄγαν ἐλλόγιμος. ἤκουσε δέ, φησὶν 
᾿Αντισθένης, ᾿Αναξιμένους. ἦν δὲ τοῖς χρόνοις κατ᾽ ᾿Αναξαγόραν. 


The Apollonia of which Diogenes was a citizen was probably the 
Milesian foundation on the Pontus, rathcr than the Cretan city." 
The statement that he was roughly contemporary with Anaxa- 
goras must be taken together with Theophrastus’ judgement in 
601 that he was ‘almost the youngest’ of the physical philosophers, 
and with Aristophanes’ parody in the Clouds (617), produced in 
423 B.c. All this is consonant with a floruit around 440~-430. The 
statement that the succession-writer Antisthencs made Diogenes 
a pupil of Anaximenes may be due to a misunderstanding by 
Laertius rather than by Antisthenes: Diogenes would naturally be 
placed in the Milesian tradition and associated with Anaximenes 
because of his material principle, but his relative lateness in date 
does not seem to have been in doubt. 


t So Aelian, V.H.u, 31 (DK 64.43), who mentioncd ‘ Diogenes the Phrygian’ 
in a list of ‘atheists’, Stephanus of Byzantium, on the other hand, asso- 


ciates ‘ Diogenes the physicist’ with the Cretan city, the former Eleutherna 
(DK idid.). 


WRITINGS 


599 Diogenes Laertius 1x, 57 ἀρχὴ δὲ αὐτῷ τοῦ συγγράμματος 
ἥδε: (Fr. 1) λόγου παντὸς ἀρχόμενον δοκεῖ μοι χρεὼν εἶναι τὴν 
ἀρχὴν ἀναμφισβήτητον παρέχεσθαι, τὴν δὲ ἑρμηνείαν ἁπλῆν καὶ 
σεμνήν. 





598 Diogenes son of Apollothemis, an Apolloniate, a physicist and a man of exceptional 
repute. He was a pupil of Anaximenes, as Antisthenes says. Hts period was that of 
Anaxagoras. 

599 = This is the beginning of his book: ‘It is my optnion that the author, at the beginning 
of any account, should make his principle or starting-point indisputable, and his explanation 
simple and dignified.’ 


427 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


600 Simplicius Phys. 151, 20 ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἡ μὲν τῶν πλειόνων 
ἱστορία Διογένην τὸν ᾿Απολλωνιάτην ὁμοίως ᾿Αναξιμένει τὸν ἀέρα 
τίθεσθαι τὸ πρῶτον στοιχεῖόν φησι, Νικόλαος δὲ ἐν τῇ περὶ θεῶν 
πραγματείᾳ τοῦτον ἱστορεῖ τὸ μεταξὺ πυρὸς καὶ ἀέρος τὴν ἀρχὴν 
ἀποφήνασθαι... .,: ἱστέον ὡς γέγραπται μὲν πλείονα τῷ Διογένει 
τούτῳ σνυγγράμματα (ὡς αὐτὸς ἐν τῷ Περὶ φύσεως ἐμνήσθη 
καὶ πρὸς φυσιολόγους ἀντειρηκέναι λέγων, οὺς καλεῖ καὶ αὐτὸς 
σοφιστάς, καὶ Μετεωρολογίαν γεγραφέναι, ἐν ἧ καὶ λέγει περὶ τῆς 
ἀρχῆς εἰρηκέναι, καὶ μέντοι καὶ Περὶ ἀνθρώπου pices), ἐν δέ γε τῷ 
Περὶ φύσεως, ὃ τῶν αὐτοῦ μόνον εἰς ἐμὲ ἦλθε, προτίθεται μὲν διὰ 
πολλῶν δεῖξαι ὅτι ἐν τῇ UT’ αὐτοῦ τεθείσῃ ἀρχῇ ἐστι νόησις πολλή. 
t According to Simplicius (Phys. 149, 18) the references by Aristotle in 
106 to an ‘intermediate’ substance were interpreted by Nicolaus of 
Damascus and by Porphyry as referring to Diogenes of Apollonia. Clearly 
this was an inference from passages like 606, where warm air (which 
might be taken as intermediate between fire and air) forms the all- 
important noetic substance. 


There has been much debate about whether Diogenes wrote a 
single book which, like Anaxagoras’ work, for cxamplc, covered 
different but nevertheless interrelated subjects, or whether, as 
Simplicius thought (600), he wrote at Icast four books: ‘Against 
the Sophists’, ‘Meteorologia’ (a highly dubious form of book- 
title), and ‘On the nature of man’, as well as the ‘On nature’ 
which Simplicius himself saw and from which he quoted nearly all 
our extant fragments. Diels held the former view, which is 
supported by 599, and thought that a subdivision of the book in 
the Hellenistic period (suggested by a reference by Rufus in Galen, 
DK 6489, to the second book of Diogenes’ ‘On nature’) could have 
misled Simplicius. Burnet (EGP 353) and W. Theiler, on the 
other hand, argued that Simplicius is unlikely to be wrong on this 
point. Yet Simplicius’ argument in 600, that what he took to be a 
divergence in the ancient interpretation of Diogenes’ primary 








600 Since the generality of enquirers say that Diogenes of Apollonia made air the primary 
element, similarly to Anaximenes, while Nicolaus in his theological investigation relates 
that Diogenes declared the material principle to be between fire and atr..., it must be 
realized that several books were written by this Diogenes (as he himself mentioned in 
On nature, where he says that he had spoken also against the physicists—whom he calls 
‘ sophists’—and written a Meteorology, in which he also says he spoke about the 
material principle, as well as On the nature of man); in the On nature, at least, 
which alone of his works came into my hands, he proposes a manifold demonstration that 
in the material principle posited by him is much intelligence. 


4.28 


DIOGENES 


substance must have arisen from the existence of different and not 
entirely consistent accounts by Diogenes, is rendered invalid 
because Nicolaus could have derived his interpretation from the 
book available to Simplicius himself (see p. 428 n.). Further, that 
same book certainly included a great deal on the ‘nature of man’; 
for the long and detailed fr. 6 (extracts in 619), quoted by 
Aristotle, seems to give precisely what Simplicius claims (Phys. 153, 
13, DK 6486) to have found in ‘On nature’, namely ‘an accurate 
anatomy of the veins’, and not to have come from a separate work 
on the nature of man. Similarly the subjects of the other separate 
books postulated by Simplicius could have been comprehended in 
one original work, and Simplicius might easily have mistaken 
references to other parts of this work for references to separate 
books; modern scholars are sometimes confronted by a similar 
ambiguity in Aristotle’s references to his treatment of particular 
subjects elsewhere. Yet perhaps Diogenes did writc at least one 
book other than Simplicius’ ‘On nature’: for it is stated by Galen, 
On medical expertence Xx, 3 (in R. Walzer’s translation from the 
Arabic), that ‘Diogenes, writing more briefly and compendiously 
than you (sc. Asclepiades), has collected the diseases and their 
causes and remedies in one treatise’. This Diogenes (mentioned 
also ibid. xu, 4) may well be the Apolloniate, whom we know 
from Theophrastus (de sensu 43, DK64A19) and from another 
medical author ([Galen] de humor. x1x, 495 Κύμη, DK 64.292) to 
have held views about diagnosis by the tongue and colour of the 
patient. He was, thercfore, perhaps a professional doctor, who 
may have published a technical medical treatise as well as a 
general exposition of his cosmic theory. 

The opening sentence of the latter, quoted in §99, reminds one 
of the methodological claims made at the beginning of some of the 
older and more philosophically-inclined works of the Hippocratic 
corpus, notably Ancient medicine, Airs waters places, and The nature of 
man. It must be admitted to Diogenes’ credit that his exposition 
and argumentation is, for his period, clear, simple and dignified. 


THE ECLECTIC, BUT NOT VALUELESS, NATURE OF DIOGENES 
THOUGHT 


601 ‘Theophrastus Phys. op. fr. 2 ap. Simplicium Phys. 25, 1 
(DK 6445) Kal Διογένης δὲ ὁ ᾿Απολλωνιάτης, σχεδὸν νεώτατος 











601 Diogenes the Apolloniate, almost the youngest of those who occupied themselves with 


429 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


γεγονὼς τῶν περὶ ταῦτα σχολασάντων, τὰ μὲν πλεῖστα συμπεφορη- 
μένως γέγραφε, τὰ μὲν κατὰ ᾿Αναξαγόραν, τὰ δὲ κατὰ AeuKitrtrov 
λέγων τὴν δὲ τοῦ παντὸς φύσιν ἀέρα καὶ οὗτός φησιν ἄπειρον εἶναι 
καὶ ἀίδιον, ἐξ οὗ πυκνουμένου καὶ μανουμένου καὶ μεταβάλλοντος 
τοῖς πάθεσι τὴν τῶν ἄλλων γίνεσθαι μορφήν. καὶ ταῦτα μὲν 
Θεόφραστος ἱστορεῖ περὶ τοῦ Διογένους, καὶ τὸ εἰς ἐμὲ ἐλθὸν αὐτοῦ 
σύγγραμμα Περὶ φύσεως ἐπιγεγραμμένον ἀέρα σαφῶς λέγει τὸ ἐξ 
οὗ πάντα γίνεται τὰ ἄλλα. 


Simplicius here obligingly distinguishes Theophrastus’ judgement 
on Diogenes from his own appended comments. According to 
Theophrastus, then, most of Diogenes’ theories were eclectic, 
being derived from Anaxagoras, from Leucippus, or, in the 
important matter of the material principle, from Anaximenes. 
This sccms to be true so far as it goes; but it seems probable that 
Heraclitus should be added to the list of important influences 
(pp. 433f, 436ff, 442). Although an eclectic, Diogenes seems to 
have been far more effective than Hippon of Samos, for example, or 
even Archelaus; he used elements from carlier systems as material 
for a unitary theory of the world which was more self-consistent, 
less complicated, more explicit and more widely applicable than 
its monistic forebears. He adapted Anaxagoras’ ‘Mind’ to his own 
monistic conception, and thercby showed, perhaps more clearly 
than his predecessors, how the basic substance (which 15 itself, in 
certain forms, νόησις or intelligence) could control the operation 
of natural change; and in the explicitly teleological fragment (604, 
which must have been further expandcd in other parts of Diogenes’ 
work) he fully worked out an idea which seems to have been fore- 
shadowed in Heraclitus and left uncompleted in Anaxagoras. 


t H. Diller, Hermes 76 (1941) 359 ff., argued that the Leucippean elements 
are negligible; and that Melissus was criticizing both Diogenes and 
Leucippus (the normal view being, of course, that Leucippus reacted to 
suggestions in Melissus, see pp. 4.05f.). The chronology of these three thinkers 
is admittedly loose enough to allow that they were all active, as Diller 
suggests, in the decade 440-430 B.c.; and we cannot be absolutely certain 





these matters (1.6. physical studies), wrote for the most part in an eclectic fashion, following 
Anaxagoras in some things and Leucippus in others. He, too, says that the substance of 
the universe is infinite and eternal air, from which, when it is condensed and rarefied and 
changed in its dispositions, the form of other things comes into being. This is what 
Theophrastus relates about Diogenes; and the book of Diogenes which has reached me, 
entitled On nature, clearly says that air is that from which all the rest come into being. 


430 


DIOGENES 


about their relationship. Yet Diller bases his theory of the priority of 
Diogenes to Mcelissus largely on similarities of diction and vocabulary, 
and overlooks the fact that words like μετακοσμεῖσθαι were liable to be used 
in any philosophical writing of the latter half of the fifth century B.c. There 
are verbal similarities between Melissus fr. 7 and Diogenes fr. 2 (602 
below); but it seems clear, not that Melissus is rebuffing Diogenes, or even 
vice versa, but that both are reacting in different ways to pluralist expla- 
nations of the world. 


ALL THINGS MUST BE MODIFICATIONS OF ONE BASIC SUB- 
STANCE 

602 Fr. 2, Simplicius Phys. 151, 31 ἐμοὶ δὲ δοκεῖ TO μὲν ξύμπαν 
εἰπτεῖν πάντα τὰ ὄντα ἀπὸ TOU αὐτοῦ ἑτεροιοῦσθαι καὶ TO αὐτὸ 
εἶναι. καὶ τοῦτο εὔδηλον εἰ γὰρ τὰ ἐν τῷδε τῷ κόσμῳ ἐόντα νῦν, 
γῆ καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ ἀὴρ καὶ πῦρ καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ὅσα φαίνεται ἐν τῷδε τῷ 
κόσμῳ ἐόντα, εἰ τούτων τι ἦν ἕτερον τοῦ ἑτέρου, ἕτερον ὃν τῇ 
ἰδίᾳ φύσει, καὶ μὴ τὸ αὐτὸ ἐὸν μετέπιτττε πολλαχῶς καὶ ἑτεροιοῦτο, 
οὐδαμῇ οὔτε μίσγεσθαι ἀλλήλοις ἠδύνατο, οὔτε ὠφέλησις τῷ ἑτέρῳ 
οὔτε βλάβη, οὐδ᾽ ἂν οὔτε φυτὸν ἐκ τῆς γῆς φῦναι οὔτε τῷον οὔτε 
ἄλλο γενέσθαι οὐδέν, εἰ μὴ οὕτω συνίστατο ὥστε ταὐτὸ εἶναι. ἀλλὰ 
πάντα ταῦτα ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἑτεροιούμενα ἄλλοτε ἀλλοῖα γίνεται καὶ 
εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ ἀναχωρεῖ. 

This statement, which according to Simplicius’ introductory 
remark (DK 6482) came ‘immediately after the proem’—that is, 
immediately or shortly after §99—1s a re-affirmation of monism in 
face, presumably, of the pluralist systems of Empedocles and 
Anaxagoras. It is based on a new argument: not that it is sempler 
to have a single originative and basic substance (which may have 
been the chief Milesian motive, partly consciously, but partly 
unconsciously through the influence of the mythical-genealogical 
tradition), but that interaction of any kind between absolutely 
and essentially distinct substances would be impossible. Of the 





602 My opinion, in sum, is that all existing things are differentiated from the same 
thing, and are the same thing. And this is manifest: for uf the things that exist at present 
in this world-order—earth and water and air and fire and all the other things apparent in 
this world-order—if any of these were different from the other (different, that is, in its own 
proper naiure), and did not retain an essential identity while undergoing many changes and 
differentiations, it would be in no way possible for them to mix with each other, or for one 
to help or harm the other, or for a growing plant to grow out of the earth or for a living 
creature or anything else to come into being, unless they were so composed as to be the same 
thing. But all these things, being differentiated from the same thing, become of different 
kinds at different times and return into the same thing. 


AI 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


interactions named, ‘helping’ and ‘harming’ (probably), and 
plant and animal growth, are taken from the animate sphere; 
which suggests that Diogenes’ view of the world is influenced by 
his physiological interests, much as Anaxagoras’ theory seems to 
have been intimately connected with his reflexions on nutrition. 
Biological change cannot arise from the mere juxtaposition of 
totally different substances, as for example in Empedocles’ 
‘recipes’ for bone and flesh (440 and 441). This principle is 
extended by Diogenes to the inanimate world, too, which is 
analysed in terms of the four now recognized world-masses and the 
other natural substances, thus showing the effect of Anaxagoras’ 
extension of natural substance beyond Empedocles’ four ‘roots’ 
(496). 602 concludes with the earliest certain enunciation (cf. 
pp. 118) of a principle assigned by Aristotle to the Presocratics in 
general, that things are destroyed into that from which they came.? 

t Simplicius, in his connecting comment (DK 648 2) betwcen 602 and 604, 

found it odd that air, which is to be identified as the single underlying 

substance, is mentioned in 602 as one of several world-constituents. But 

this suggests that atmospheric air is not the basic form of air, but a close 

derivative. ‘Che basic form of air is presumably the warm air that is 


intelligence, cf. 606—if, that is, Diogenes distinguished any such ‘basic’ 
or truc form. 


602 may also be taken as a limitation of the principle expressed 
in Anaxagoras fr. 17 (497), that all coming-to-be is mixture, all 
passing-away is separation. Diogenes accepted this, but only if the 
clements of the mixture were of one kind and not, as Anaxagoras 
thought, of many different kinds. In this respect Diogenes may 
have been following Leucippus. The direct evidence for dependence 
on Leucippus, however, apart from Theophrastus’ bare asscrtion 
in 601, 1s slight. 

τ Cf. 603 Diogenes Laertius 1x, 57 (after 598) ἐδόκει δὲ αὐτῷ τάδε" 
στοιχεῖον εἶναι τὸν ἀέρα, κόσμους ἀπείρους καὶ κενὸν ἄπειρον τόν τε ἀέρα 
πυκνούμενον καὶ ἀραϊιούμενον γεννητικὸν εἶναι τῶν κόσμων οὐδὲν ἐκ τοῦ 
μὴ ὄντος γίνεσθαι οὐδὲ els τὸ μὴ ὃν φθείρεσθαι" τὴν γῆν στρογγύλην, 
ἠρεισμένην ἐν τῷ μέσῳ, τὴν σύστασιν εἴληφυῖαν κατὰ τὴν ἐκ τοῦ θερμοῦ 
περιφορὰν καὶ πῆξιν ὑπὸ τοῦ ψυχροῦ. (Cf. 6x0.) This bricf summary is 





603 His opinions were as follows. Air is the element, and there are innumerable worlds 
and infinite void. Air is generative of the worlds through being condensed and rarefied. 
Nothing comes to be from that which is not, nor is anything destroyed into that which is 
not. The earth 1s circular, supported in the centre (sc. of the world), having received its 
formation in accordance with the revolution proceeding from the hot and coagulation 


produced by the cold. 
432 


DIOGENES 


indirectly derived from Theophrastus, but through a third-rate bio- 
graphical source. There is no other mention of the void in connexion with 
Diogenes of Apollonia; and it might be argued that its presence here is 
due to doxographical conjecture. Yct Theophrastus evidently credited 
Diogenes with innumerable worlds of atomistic type (see 610, as well as 
the present passage), and Diogenes could certainly have taken this theory 
from Leucippus. If so, then he might also have followed Leucippus in 
postulating the void—a postulate intimately connected, for the atomists, 
with that of innumerable worlds. 


THE BASIC SUBSTANCE CONTAINS DIVINE INTELLIGENCE, 
WHICH DIRECTS ALL THINGS FOR THE BEST 

604 Fr. 3, Simplicius Phys. 152, 13 οὐ yap ἄν, φησίν, οἷόν te ἦν 

οὕτω δεδάσθαι ἄνευ νοήσιος ὥστε πάντων μέτρα ExElV,? χειμῶνός τε 

καὶ θέρους καὶ νυκτὸς καὶ ἡμέρας καὶ ὑετῶν καὶ ἀνέμων καὶ εὐδιῶν" 

καὶ τὰ ἄλλα, εἴ τις βούλεται ἐννοεῖσθαι, εὑρίσκοι ἂν οὕτω διακείμενα 

ὡς ἀνυστὸν κάλλιστα. 


1 Were it not for the difficulty of providing a subject for πάντων μέτρα 
ἔχειν, it would be natural to understand πάντα as the subject of δεδάσθαι. 
As it is, it seems preferable to understand something like the underlying 
substance referred to in 602 fin. as the subject both of δεδάσθαι and of 
ἔχειν. 


According to Simplicius, 604 followed very closely upon 602, and 
was itself followed by 605. Diogenes set out his teleological belief 
in a prominent position, therefore, before the basic substance had 
been fully identified as air. According to that belief the world and 
its parts are arranged by a divine intelligence in the best possible 
way. This intelligence, according to Simplicius and to fr. 5 (606), 
is implicit in the basic substance. It is postulated because other- 
wise it would have been impossible for things to be divided up, 
and to be measured, as they patently are, into winter and summer, 
night and day, rain and wind and fair weather. It is the regularity 
of natural events, therefore, of year- and day-cycles and of the 
weather, which impressed Diogenes ;? here he was surely to some 
extent dependent on Heraclitus, who stressed that the measures 
(220-222) of all natural change were preserved by the Logos, 
itself an expression or aspect of the archetypal substance, fire. 





604 For, he says, it would not be possible without intelligence for it (sc. the underlying 
substance) so to be divided up that it has measures of all things—of winter and summer and 
night and day and rains and winds and fair weather. The other things, too, if one wishes 
to consider them, one would find disposed in the best possible way. 


28 433 καὶ 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


Heraclitus had instanced these same natural oppositions and cycles 
(cf. 205, 207 and fr. 57) as evincing a basic unity because of the 
regularity of their measures. Diogenes’ concept of the conscious 
purposefulness of nature, however, goes beyond Heraclitus; the 
latter, although he considered all things to be ‘steered’ by fire 
(223), held that this was in accordance with an objcctive natural 
rule (which could be regarded matcrially as Logos or fire itself) 
implicit in the constitution of things—a development, perhaps, of 
Anaximander’s idea that natural interchanges were governed by 
a natural law of justice. Thus for Heraclitus pure fire was intelli- 
gent, but the regularity of natural events was achieved not so much 
by the deliberate exercise of this intelligence on every occasion as 
by the incorporation of the Logos (fire in a systematically mctric 
function) in each separate thing, Icading it to behave in a regular 
or measured way. For Diogenes, on the other hand, every natural 
event was evidently due directly to the intelligence of the pure 
form of the basic substance; and thus occasional local anomalies, 
which were permitted in the systems of Anaximandcr and 
Heraclitus, providing they were eventually corrected and counter- 
balanced, should not really take place. ‘The difference in Diogenes’ 
view is undoubtedly due to the influence of Anaxagoras’ Mind, 
νοῦς (503 ff.) ; the effect of which, however, as Socrates complained 
in 522, was only too often merely mechanical. 
t No doubt he was also impressed by the significant functions of the 
organs of living creatures. We know that he gave considerable attention 
to methods of sensation (see 616) and breathing in different species—for 
example in fish (DK 64.431); and that such differences were explained by 


differences in natural structure, which might thus appear to be purpose- 
serving. 


INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE ARE DUE TO AIR, WHICH IS 
THEREFORE THE BASIC FORM OF MATTER. AIR IS 
DIVINE AND CONTROLS ALL THINGS; IT TAKES DIF- 
FERENT FORMS ACCORDING TO ITS DIFFERENCES IN 
HEAT, MOTION AND SO ON 

605 Fr. 4, Simplicius Phys. 152, 18 ἔτι δὲ πρὸς τούτοις Kal τάδε 

μεγάλα σημεῖα. ἄνθρωποι yap Kal τὰ ἄλλα 26a ἀναπνέοντα τώει 

τῷ ἀέρι. καὶ τοῦτο αὐτοῖς καὶ ψυχή ἐστι καὶ νόησις, ὧς δεδηλώσεται 





605 Further, in addition to those, these too are important indications. Men and the other 
living creatures live by means of air, through breathing it. And this is for them both soul 


434 


DIOGENES 


ἐν τῇδε τῇ συγγραφῇ ἐμφανῶς, καὶ ἐὰν τοῦτο ἀπαλλαχθῇ ἀποθνή- 
oKel καὶ ἡ νόησις ἐπιλείττειϊ. 

606 Fr. 5, Simplicius Phys. 152, 22 καί μοι δοκεῖ τὸ τὴν νόησιν 
ἔχον εἶναι ὁ ἀὴρ καλούμενος ὑτὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, καὶ ὑπὸ τούτου 
πάντας καὶ κυβερνᾶσθαι καὶ πάντων κρατεῖν αὐτὸ γάρ μοι τοῦτο 
θεὸς δοκεῖ εἶναι καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶν ἀφῖχθαι καὶ πάντα διατιθέναι καὶ ἐν 
παντὶ ἐνεῖναι. καὶ ἔστιν οὐδὲ ἕν ὅ τι μὴ μετέχει τούτου μετέχει δὲ 
οὐδὲ ἕν ὁμοίως τὸ ἕτερον τῷ ἑτέρῳ, ἀλλὰ πολλοὶ τρόποι καὶ αὐτοῦ 
τοῦ ἀέρος καὶ τῆς νοήσιός εἶσιν" ἔστι γὰρ πολύτροπος, καὶ θερμό- 
τερος καὶ ψυχρότερος καὶ ξηρότερος καὶ ὑγρότερος καὶ στασιμώτερος 
καὶ ὀξυτέρην κίνησιν ἔχων, καὶ ἄλλαι πολλαὶ ἑτεροιώσιες ἔνεισι καὶ 
ἡδονῆς καὶ χροιῆς ἄπειροι. καὶ πάντων τῶν τῴων δὲ ἡ ψυχὴ 
τὸ αὐτό ἐστιν, ἀὴρ θερμότερος μὲν τοῦ ἔξω ἐν ᾧ ἐσμεν, τοῦ μέντοι 
παρὰ τῷ ἡλίῳ πολλὸν ψυχρότερος. ὅμοιον δὲ τοῦτο τὸ θερμὸν 
οὐδενὸς τῶν τῴων ἐστίν (ἐπεὶ οὐδὲ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἀλλήλοις), ἀλλὰ 
διαφέρει μέγα μὲν οὔ, ἀλλ᾽ ὥστε παραπλήσια εἶναι. οὐ μέντοι 
ἀτρεκέως γε ὅμοιον οὐδὲν οἷόν τε γενέσθαι τῶν ἑτεροιουμένων 
ἕτερον τῷ ἑτέρῳ, πρὶν τὸ αὐτὸ γένηται. ἅτε οὖν πολυτρόπου 
ἐούσης τῆς ἑτεροιώσιος πολύτροπα καὶ τὰ τῷα καὶ πολλὰ καὶ οὔτε 
ἰδέαν ἀλλήλοις ἐοικότα οὔτε δίαιταν οὔτε νόησιν ὑτὸ τοῦ πλήθεος 
τῶν ἑτεροιώσεων. ὅμως δὲ πάντα τῷ αὐτῷ καὶ τῇ καὶ ὁρᾷ καὶ 
ἀκούει, καὶ τὴν ἄλλην νόησιν ἔχει ἀτ᾿ὸ τοῦ αὐτοῦ πάντα. 





(i.e. life-principle) and intelligence, as will be clearly shown in this work; and tf this ts 
removed, then they die and intelligence fails. 


606 And it seems io me that that which has intelligence is what men call air, and that all 
men are steered by this and that it has power over all things. For this very thing seems to 
me to be a god and to have reached everywhere and to dispose all things and to be in 
everything. And there is no single thing that does not have a share of this; but nothing has 
an equal share of it, one with another, but there are many fashions both of air itself and of 
intelligence. For it is many-fashioned, being hotter and colder and drier and moister and 
more stationary and more swiftly mobile, and many other differentiations are in tt both of 
taste and of colour, unlimited in number. And yet of all living creatures the soul is the 
same, air that is warmer than that outside, in which we exist, but much cooler than that 
near the sun. But in none of living creatures is this warmth altke (since it 1s not even so in 
individual men); the difference is not great, but as much as still allows them to be similar. 
Yet it is not possible for anything to become truly alike, one to the other, of the things under- 
going differentiation, without becoming the same. Because, then, the differentiation ts many- 
fashioned, living creatures are many-fashioned and many in number, resembling each other 
neither in form nor in way of life nor in intelligence, because of the number of differentiations. 
Nevertheless they all live and see and hear by the same thing, and have the rest of their 
intelligence from the same thing. 


435 28-2 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


6070 Fr. 7, Simplicius Phys. 153, 19 Kal αὐτὸ μὲν τοῦτο Kal 
ἀίδιον καὶ ἀθάνατον σῶμα, τῶν δὲ τὰ μὲν γίνεται, τὰ δὲ ἀπτολείτει. 
608 ΕἾ. 8, Simplicius Phys. 153, 20 ἀλλὰ τοῦτό μοι δῆλον δοκεῖ 
εἶναι, ὅτι καὶ μέγα καὶ ἰσχυρὸν καὶ &id16v τε καὶ ἀθάνατον καὶ πολλὰ 
εἶδός ἐστι. 
1 This is the old contrast between god and man, or god and the world: the 
perfect and the imperfect (cf. p. 180). Simplicius noted (DK 6487) that 
both the divine and the world arc made of the same thing, air, for Diogenes. 
It is nevertheless legitimate to contrast the pure, divine form of air with its 


derivative, corporeal forms; the severity of this contrast is due to its 
traditional formulation. 


Simplicius obviously omitted something that came between 604 
and 605 in Diogencs’ book, so that we do not know the ‘signs’ 
(cf. Melissus fr. 8 inzt., 392) mentioned in 605: presumably they 
too werc signs that the basic substance was air. Perhaps the 
gradual diminution of decaying bodies, ‘into thin air’, might have 
been one such indication, the nature of semen (scc p. 444 and 619) 
another. The sign that is mentioncd, that all creatures live by 
breathing air, which is both soul (life-principle) and intelligence, 
is obviously the most important of all; it was probably stated in 
Anaximenes, indeed (cf. pp. 161f.), but would occur naturally to 
anyone of pronounced physiological interests like Diogenes. ‘That 
breath is the life-substance is deduccd in 605 from the fact that 
life leaves the body with the breath, and was implicit in some 
Homeric uses of θυμός and ψυχή. The connexion of πνεῦμα, 
breath, with πνεῦμα, wind, was perhaps first made by Anaxi- 
menes. That air is also intelligence is, on the one hand, an inference 
from its divinity as the life-principle; on the other it may be a 
reasonable development of a view like Heraclitus’, that the 
intelligent substance (in his case Logos or fire) is inhaled by 
breathing.* But even in Homer the distinction between life 
(ψυχή) and intelligence or feeling (θυμός) was blurred. 

I Diogenes succeeded in accounting for the dual function of air (as life, 


and as intelligence and perception) in his detailed physiological theory; 
for air as sensation see p. 442 below, for air as life cf. 609 Aetius v, 24, 3 





607 And this very thing is both eternal and immortal body, but of the rest some come into 
being, some pass away. 

608 But this seems to me to be plain, that it is both great and strong and eternal and 
immortal and much-knowing. 


436 


DIOGENES 


(DK 64.4.29) Διογένης (se. φησὶ) ἐὰν ἐπὶ rev τὸ αἷμα διαχεόμενον πληρώσῃ 
μὲν τὰς φλέβας, τὸν δὲ ἐν αὐταῖς περιεχόμενον ἀέρα ὥσῃ εἰς τὰ στέρνα καὶ 
τὴν ὑποκειμένην γαστέρα, ὕπνον γεγενῆσθαι καὶ θερμότερον ὑπάρχειν τὸν 
θώρακα᾽ ἐὰν δὲ ἅπαν τὸ ἀερῶδες ἐκ τῶν φλεβῶν ἐκλίτῃ, θάνατον συντυγ- 
χάνειν. This is analogous to Heraclitus’ theory of waking, sleeping and 
death as descending stages of consciousness, due to the diminution of 
soul-fire. 


Air is god; it steers, has power over, inheres in, and disposes all 
things (606 init.) ; it is eternal and immortal (607, 608). In these 
descriptions, whose hieratic quality (particularly 606 with its 
repetition of πάντας, πτιάντων, πᾶν etc.) has been rightly remarked, 
Diogenes seems to collect together all the phraseology of his 
predecessors—of Anaximander (110), Heraclitus (223) and 
Anaxagoras (§03) in particular. His emphasis in 606 that all 
things absolutely participate in air may be intended as a correction 
of Anaxagoras, for whom Mind only existed in animate things. 
For Diogenes all things are made of air, but the inanimate 15 
divided from the animate world by the fact that only in some things 
is warm air found. In 606 the animate is chiefly in question; 
differences are explained by air changing in accordance with its 
warmth, dryness, motion, and other characteristics, which give it 
different ‘tastes and colours’. It may be noted here that, in spite 
of Theophrastus’ assessment in 601, Diogenes does not appear to 
be interested in explaining all changes of air as being due solely to 
rarefaction and condensation; at least he describes some altera- 
tion in terms of what should be derivative and secondary changes, 
like those of temperature. In fact, the distinguishing mark of the 
divine is its temperature, not its density; Diogenes has clearly over- 
looked, or at least failed to stress, the elegant consistency of 
Anaximenes. 

Intelligence is warm air, warmer than the atmosphere (which is 
presumably air verging towards water), but cooler than the air 
round the sun (which is verging towards fire). ‘There are indefinite 
slight variations in the temperature-range of intelligence-pro- 
ducing air, thus accounting for countless variations in perception, 
intelligence, and way of life. Moderate warmth 15 the differentia of 








609 Diovgenes says that if the blood, pouring into every part, fills the veins and pushes the 
air enclosed in them into the chest and the stomach below, then sleep occurs and the middle 
part of the body is warmer; but if all the airy part goes away from the veins, death occurs 
simultaneously. 


437 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


soul-air; thus Diogenes achieves a rational distinction between 
the animate and the inanimate world, while retaining (unlike 
Anaxagoras) a common substance for both, and thus keeping his 
monistic conception intact. Neatness, rather than originality, is 
his contribution here. Anaximenes had already assumed that both 
soul and the world were made of air, and that they were neverthe- 
less distinguished, presumably by degree of concecntration— 
though this is not explicitly stated; and for Heraclitus, too, the 
archetypal form of matter, fire, was also, in certain forms, soul- 
substancc—which acted not only within animate creatures but 
also, as noetic and directive, on the world as a whole. 


DETAILED PITYSICAL DOCTRINES 

(1) Cosmogony and cosmology 

610 [Plutarch] Strom. 12 Διογένης ὁ ᾿Απολλωνιάτης ἀέρα 
ὑφίσταται στοιχεῖον " κινεῖσθαι δὲ τὰ πάντα ἀπείρους Te εἶναι τοὺς 
κόσμους. κοσμοποιεῖ δὲ οὕτως" ὅτι τοῦ παντὸς κινουμένου, καὶ ἧ 
μὲν ἀραιοῦ ἧ δὲ πυκνοῦ γινομένου, ὅπου συνεκύρησεν τὸ πυκνὸν 
συστροφῇ {τὴν γῆν ποιῆσαι καὶ οὕτως τὰ λοιπὰ κατὰ τὸν αὐτὸν 
λόγον, τὰ {δὲν κουφότατα τὴν ἄνω τάξιν λαβόντα τὸν ἥλιον ἀπο- 
τελέσαι. [συστροφὴν ποιῆσαι mss., em. Kranz, cf. 603. (δὲ) Diels. | 
611 Aetiusu, 13,5+9 Διογένης κισηροειδῇ τὰ ἄστρα, Siatrvods 
δὲ αὐτὰ νομίτει TOU κόσμον εἶναι δὲ διάπυρα. συμπεριφέρεσθαι δὲ 
τοῖς φανεροῖς ἄστροις ἀφανεῖς λίθους καὶ Trap’ αὐτὸ τοῦτ᾽ ἀνωνύμους᾽ 
πίτττοντας δὲ πολλάκις ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς σβέννυσθαι καθάπερ τὸν ἐν 
Αἰγὸς ποταμοῖς πυροειδῶς κατενεχθέντα ἀστέρα πέτρινον. 


Diogenes’ cosmogony is unoriginal, and is dependent on Anaxa- 
goras (for the idea of the noetic substance starting a vortex) and 
on the Milesian tradition (the dense coalescing at the centre to 
form earth, the rarer material going to the extremity, by like-to- 





610 Diogenes the Apolloniate premises that air is the element, and that all things are in 
motion and the worlds innumerable. He gives this account of cosmogony: the whole was in 
motion, and became rare in some places and dense in others; where the dense ran together 
centripetally it made the earth, and so the rest by the same method, while the lightest parts 
took the upper position and produced the sun. 

61x Diogenes says that the heavenly bodies are like pumice-stone, and he considers them 
as the breathing-holes of the world; and they are fiery. With the visible heavenly bodies are 
carried round invisible stones, which for this reason have no name: they often fall on the 
earth and are extinguished, like the stone star that made tts fiery descent at Aegospotami. 


438 


DIOGENES 


like and differentiation). Both 610 and 603 assign innumerable 
worlds to Diogenes (see n. on pp. 432f.); these were of atomistic 
type, presumably after Leucippus—coming-to-be, that is, and 
passing away throughout the boundless void (cf. also Actius πὶ, 1, 3, 
DK64A10). Aristotle’s comment (134) that according to some 
natural philosophers the world was drying up was referred by 
Alexander (135) to Diogenes as well as to Anaximander; Alexander 
adds (DK 64417) that Diogenes explained the saltness of the sea 
by the sun’s evaporating the sweet water, which may suggest that 
this drying of the sea was a simple meteorological comment not 
necessarily concerned with cosmic cycles or innumerable worlds." 
The heavenly bodies (of which the sun is probably farther away 
than the stars, cf. 610 fin.) are like pumice-stone, and glowing; 
doubtless their pumice-like consistency is postulated so that they 
can be very light, and interpenetrated by fire. The great Aegos- 
potami meteorite of 467 B.c. had evidently impressed Diogenes (as 
it had Anaxagoras, cf. p. 392), who inferred that there must be 
other such bodies revolving unseen in the sky. This may be 
Diogenes’ own idea (cf. p. 156). Other astronomical details are 
derivative: that the sun is a concentration of rays from the aither 
(Aetius π, 20, 10, DK 64.413) is from Empedocles (p. 334); that 
the earth, which is a circle, presumably a round disc, is tilted 
toward the south (Aetius n, 8, 1, DK 59467) is ascribed also to 
Anaxagoras and Leucippus; whether or not it is derived from 
Anaximenes is questionable (see pp. 156f.). 


1 It is probable that Diogencs is referred to (though perhaps not exclu- 
sively; for this kind of detail he was classed with Anaximenes) in 612 
Aristotle Meteor. B2, 355a21 τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ συμβαίνει καὶ τούτοις ἄλογον Kal 
τοῖς φάσκουσι τὸ πρῶτον ὑγρᾶς οὔσης καὶ τῆς γῆς, καὶ τοῦ κόσμου τοῦ 
περὶ τὴν γῆν ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου θερμαινομένον, ἀέρα γενέσθαι καὶ τὸν ὅλον 
οὐρανὸν αὐξηθῆναι, καὶ τοῦτον πνεύματά τε παρέχεσθαι καὶ τὰς τροττὰς 
αὐτοῦ ποιεῖν. That the drawing up of vapour by the sun was mentioned 
by Diogenes is proved by his solution of that popular natural problem, the 
cause of the flooding of the Nile: 613 = in Apollonium Rhod. rv, 269 
Διογένης δὲ ὁ ᾿Απολλωνιάτης ὑπὸ ἡλίου ἁρτάξεσθαι τὸ ὕδωρ τῆς θαλάσσης, 





612 The same illogicality results both for these and for those who say that when the 
earth, too, was at first moist, and the part of the world round the earth was being heated by 
the sun, air was produced and the whole heaven was increased, and that air causes winds 
and makes the turnings of the sun. 


613 Diogenes the Apolloniate says that the water of the sea is snatched up by the sun, 
439 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


ὃ τότε els tov Νεῖλον καταφέρεσθαι" οἴεται γὰρ πληροῦσθαι τὸν Νεῖλον 
ἐν τῷ θέρει διὰ τὸ τὸν ἥλιον εἷς τοῦτον τὰς ἀπὸ γῆς ἰκμάδας τρέττειν. 
Diogenes used ἰκμάδες, moist secretions or emanations, to explain another 
popular natural problem too, that of magnetism: 614 Alexander Quaest. τι, 
23 (DK 64.433) (περὶ τῆς Ἡρακλείας λίθου, διὰ τί ἕλκει TOV σίδηρον.) 
Διογένης δὲ ὁ ᾿Απολλονιάτης πάντα τὰ ἐλατά φησιν καὶ ἀφιέναι τινὰ 
ἰκμάδα ἀφ᾽ αὑτῶν πεφυκέναι καὶ ἕλκειν ἔξωθεν τὰ μὲν πλείω τὰ δὲ ἐλάττω, 
πλείστην δὲ ἀφιέναι χαλκόν τε καὶ ofSnpov....(The magnet, on the con- 
trary, absorbs more emanations than it discharges, and therefore draws in 
the superfluous emanations of iron and bronze, which are ‘akin’ to it—and 
so also attracts the metals themselves.) Similarly Empedocles, DK 31 A 89. 


(Ὁ Phystology: (a) Cognition 

615 Thcophrastus de sensu 39 ff. (DK 644 190) Διογένης δ᾽ ὥσπερ 
TO φτῆν Kal TO φρονεῖν τῷ ἀέρι Kal τὰς αἰσθήσεις ἀνάπτει" διὸ καὶ 
δόξειεν ἂν τῷ ὁμοίῳ ποιεῖν (οὐδὲ γὰρ τὸ Troteiv εἶναι καὶ πάσχειν, εἰ 
μὴ πάντα ἦν ἐξ ἑνός) τὴν μὲν ὄσφρησιν τῷ περὶ τὸν ἐγκέφαλον 
ἀέρι"... .(40) τὴν δ᾽ ἀκοήν, ὅταν ὁ ἐν τοῖς ὠσὶν ἀὴρ κινηθεὶς ὑπτὸ τοῦ 
ἔξω διαδῷ πρὸς τὸν ἐγκέφαλον. τὴν δὲ ὄψιν [ὁρᾶν] ἐμφαινομένων 
εἷς τὴν κόρην, ταύτην δὲ μειγνυμένην τῷ ἐντὸς ἀέρι ποιεῖν αἴσθησιν" 
σημεῖον δέ" ἐὰν γὰρ φλεγμασία γένηται τῶν φλεβῶν, οὐ μείγνυσθαι 
τῷ ἐντὸς οὐδ᾽ ὁρᾶν ὁμοίως τῆς ἐμφάσεως οὔσης. τὴν δὲ γεῦσιν τῇ 
γλώττῃ διὰ τὸ μανὸν καὶ ἁπαλόν. περὶ δὲ ἁφῆς οὐδὲν ἀφώρισεν 
οὔτε πῶς οὔτε τίνων ἐστίν. ἀλλὰ μετὰ ταῦτα πειρᾶται λέγειν διὰ 
τί συμβαίνει τὰς αἰσθήσεις ἀκριβεστέρας εἶναι καὶ τῶν ποίων. 


(41) ὄσφρησιν μὲν οὖν ὀξυτάτην οἷς ἐλάχιστος ἀὴρ ἐν τῇ κεφαλῆῇ᾽ 





and then comes down into the Nile; for he thinks that the Nile floods in summer through 
the sun turning into 11 the emanations from earth. 


614 (On why the Heraclean stone (i.e. the magnet) attracts iron.) Diogenes the Apollo- 
niate says that all ductile metals naturally discharge from themselves, and draw in from 
outside, a kind of emanation, some more and others less; but that bronze and iron discharge it 
in the greatest quantity.... 


615 Diogenes attributes thinking and the senses, as also life, to air. Therefore he 
would seem to do so by the action of similars ( for he says that there would be no action or 
being acted upon, unless all things were from one). The sense of smell is produced by the 
air round the brain.... (40) Hearing is produced whenever the air within the ears, being 
moved by the air outside, spreads toward the brain. Vision occurs when things are reflected 
on the pupil, and it, being mixed with the air within, produces a sensation. A proof of this 
is that, if there is an inflammation of the veins (i.e. those in the eye), there is no mixture 
with the air within, nor vision, although the reflexion exists exactly as before. Taste 
occurs to the tongue by what is rare and gentle. About touch he gave no definition, either 
about its nature or its objects. But after this he attempts to say what is the cause of more 
accurate sensations, and what sort of objects they have. (41) Smell is keenest for those who 


440 


DIOGENES 


τάχιστα yap μείγνυσθαι Kai Trpds τούτοις ἐὰν ἕλκῃ διὰ μακροτέρου 
καὶ στενωτέρου " θᾶττον γὰρ οὕτω κρίνεσθαι διόπερ ἔνια τῶν φῴων 
ὀσφραντικώτερα τῶν ἀνθρώττων εἶναι’ οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ συμμέτρου γε 
οὔσης τῆς ὀσμῆς τῷ ἀέρι πρὸς τὴν κρᾶσιν μάλιστα ἂν αἰσθάνεσθαι 
τὸν ἄνθρωπον... .ὅτι δὲ ὁ ἐντὸς ἀὴρ αἰσθάνεται μικρὸν ὧν μόριον 
τοῦ θεοῦ, σημεῖον εἶναι, διότι πολλάκις πρὸς ἄλλα τὸν νοῦν ἔχοντες 
οὔθ᾽ ὁρῶμεν οὔτ᾽ ἀκούομεν. (43) ἡδονὴν δὲ καὶ λύπην γίνεσθαι τόνδε 
τὸν τρόπον᾽ ὅταν μὲν πολὺς ὁ ἀὴρ μίσγηται τῷ αἵματι καὶ κουφίφῃ 
κατὰ φύσιν ὧν καὶ κατὰ πᾶν τὸ σῶμα διεξιών, ἡδονήν " ὅταν δὲ παρὰ 
φύσιν καὶ μὴ μίσγηται συνιφάνοντος τοῦ αἵματος καὶ ἀσθενεστέρου 
καὶ πυκνοτέρου γινομένου, λύπην. ὁμοίως καὶ θάρσος καὶ ὑγίειαν 
καὶ τἀναντία... .. (44) φρονεῖν δ᾽, ὥσπερ ἐλέχθη, τῷ ἀέρι καθαρῷ καὶ 
ξηρῷ κωλύειν γὰρ τὴν ἰκμάδα τὸν νοῦν᾽ διὸ καὶ ἐν τοῖς ὕπνοις καὶ 
ἐν ταῖς μέθαις καὶ ἐν ταῖς τλησμοναῖς ἧττον φρονεῖν" ὅτι δὲ ἡ ὑγρότης 
ἀφαιρεῖται τὸν νοῦν, σημεῖον, διότι τὰ ἄλλα φτῷα χείρω τὴν διάνοιαν 
ἀναπνεῖν τε γὰρ τὸν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς ἀέρα καὶ τροφὴν ὑγροτέραν προσ- 
φέρεσθαι. τοὺς δὲ ὄρνιθας ἀναπνεῖν μὲν καθαρόν, φύσιν δὲ ὁμοίαν ἔχειν 
τοῖς ἰχθύσι: καὶ γὰρ τὴν σάρκα στιφράν, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα οὐ διιέναι διὰ 
παντός, ἀλλὰ ἱστάναι περὶ τὴν κοιλίαν... τὰ δὲ φυτὰ διὰ τὸ μὴ εἶναι 
κοῖλα μηδὲ ἀναδέχεσθαι τὸν ἀέρα παντελῶς ἀφῃρῆσθαι τὸ φρονεῖν. 


Slightly over half of Theophrastus’ description is given in 615; for 
the remainder see DK. Some of Theophrastus’ explanations show 
his own interpretation, notably like-to-like as a principle of 
sensation, and ‘symmetry’, which has apparently been super- 








have least air in thetr heads, for it is mixed most quickly; and, in addition, if a man draws 
it in through a longer and narrower channel; for in this way it is more swiftly assessed. 
Therefore some living creatures are more perceptive of smell than are men; yet nevertheless, 
if the smell were symmetrical with the air, with regard to mixture, man would smell 
perfectly.... That the air within perceives, being a small portion of the god, is indicated by 
the fact that often, when we have our mind on other things, we neither see nor hear. 
(43) Pleasure and pain come about in this way: whenever air mixes in quantity with the 
blood and lightens it, being in accordance with nature, and penetrates through the whole 
body, pleasure is produced; but whenever the air is present contrary to nature and does not 
mix, then the blood coagulates and becomes weaker and thicker, and pain is produced. 
Similarly confidence and health and their opposites.... (44) Thought, as has been said, is 
caused by pure and dry air; for a moist emanation inhibits the intelligence; for this reason 
thought is diminished in sleep, drunkenness and surfeit. That moisture removes intelligence 
is indicated by the fact that other living creatures are inferior in intellect, for they breathe 
the air from the earth and take to themselves moister sustenance. Burds breathe pure air, 
but have a constitution similar to that of fishes; for their flesh is solid, and the breath does 
not penetrate all through but stays around the abdomen....Planis, through not being 
hollow and not receiving air within them, are completely devoid of intelligence. 


441 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


imposed on Diogenes’ idea of κρᾶσις, correct mixture. All sensa- 
tion is caused by air, air from the outside meeting and mixing with, 
or simply agitating, air in the sense-organ itself or in the brain, 
whither it is led by blood-channels from the sense-organ. Clarity 
of perception depends on the fineness of the air in the body and the 
fineness and directness of the blood-channel by which the air is 
conveyed. Apparently the air is mixed with blood on its journeys 
through the head; when air naturally permeates the blood through- 
out the whole body, pleasure is produced. Thinking (φρονεῖν) 
depends on pure, dry air; it is not clear from 615 exactly where or 
how this functions,? but Simplicius tells us in 619 that air mixed 
with blood and pervading the body through the blood-channels 
produces thought (being distinguished from pleasure, presumably, 
by its purity, dryness and warmth). One may compare Anaxa- 
goras’ Mind, which was ‘purest and finest of all substances’ (503), 
and Heraclitus’ soul-fire; in Diogenes, as in Heraclitus, moisture 
(ἰκμάς again) quenches or inhibits intelligence. Differences of 
intclligcnce and of animation are explained partly by differences 
of surrounding air (that near the ground is moist and heavy, there- 
fore plants have a very low degrce of life),? partly by differences of 
bodily structure (birds cannot properly assimilate their pure 
surrounding air). 
1 However, a theory is advanced, in one of the earlier Hippocratic 
treatises, which seems probably to be derived from Diogenes: 616 
[Hippocrates] de morbo sacro 16 (DK64c3a) κατὰ ταῦτα νομίφω τὸν 
ἐγκέφαλον δύναμιν ἔχειν πλείστην ἐν τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ. οὗτος γὰρ ἡμῖν ἐστι τῶν 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ἠέρος γινομένων ἑρμηνεὺς ἢν ὑγιαίνων τυγχάνῃ τὴν δὲ φρόνησιν ὁ 
ἀὴρ παρέχεται. οἱ δ᾽ ὀφθαλμοὶ καὶ τὰ ὦτα καὶ ἡ γλῶσσα καὶ αἱ χεῖρες καὶ 
οἱ πόδες, οἷα ἂν ὁ ἐγκέφαλος γινώσκῃ, τοιαῦτα πρήσσουσι᾽ γίνεται γὰρ ἐν 
ἅπαντι τῷ σώματι τῆς φρονήσιός τι, ὡς ἂν μετέχῃ τοῦ ἠέρος, ἐς δὲ τὴν 
ξύνεσιν ὁ ἐγκέφαλός ἐστιν ὁ διαγγέλλων. ὅταν γὰρ σπάσῃ τὸ πνεῦμα 
ὥνθρωπος ἐς ἑωυτόν, ἐς τὸν ἐγκέφαλον πρῶτον ἀφικνεῖται καὶ οὕτως ἐς τὸ 
λοιπὸν σῶμα σκίδναται ὁ ἀὴρ καταλελοιτὼς ἐν τῷ ἐγκεφάλῳ ἑωυτοῦ τὴν 


ἀκμὴν καὶ 6 τι ἂν A φρόνιμόν τε καὶ γνώμην ἔχον. This writer attaches 
particular importance to the brain. 





616 Accordingly I consider that the brain has the most power in man. For, 1 it ts in 
sound condition, it is our interpreter of the things that come into being through air; and air 
provides intelligence. The eyes and ears and tongue and hands and feet do whatsoever the 
brain determines; for there is an element of intelligence in the whole body, according as each 
part partakes of air, but it is the brain that ts the messenger to the understanding. For 
whenever man draws breath into himself it arrives first at the brain, and thus the air 
spreads into the rest of the body after leaving behind its choicest part in the brain, and 
whatever of it is intelligent and possesses judgement, 


442 


DIOGENES 


2 Diogenes is undoubtedly the source of Socrates’ remarks in the Clouds: 
617 Aristophanes Clouds 227 
οὐ yao ἄν ποτε 

ἐξηῦρον ὀρθῶς τὰ μετέωρα πράγματα, 

εἰ μὴ κρεμάσας τὸ νόημα καὶ τὴν φροντίδα 

λεπτὴν καταμείξας ἐς τὸν ὅμοιον ἀέρα" 

εἰ δ᾽ ὧν χαμαὶ τἄνω κάτωθεν ἐσκόπουν, 

οὐκ ἄν ποθ᾽ ηὗρον’ οὐ γὰρ ἀλλ᾽ ἡ γῆ βίᾳ 

ἕλκει πρὸς αὑτὴν τὴν ἰκμάδα τῆς φροντίδος. 
—Aristotle (de respir. 2, 4771a2, DK64431) criticized Diogenes for his 
theory that fish breathed a small amount of air in water, but that fresh air 
was too much for them. 


(b) Anatomy and reproduction 
618 Fr. 6, Aristotle Hist. anmalium [2, 511b31 (DK648B6) αἱ 


δὲ φλέβες ἐν τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ὧδ᾽ ἔχουσιν: εἰσὶ δύο μέγισται: αὗται 
τείνουσι διὰ τῆς κοιλίας παρὰ τὴν νωτιαίαν ἄκανθαν, ἡ μὲν ἐπὶ 
δεξιά, ἡ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀριστερά, εἰς τὰ σκέλη ἑκατέρα τὰ Trap’ ἑαυτῇ καὶ 
ἄνω eis τὴν κεφαλὴν παρὰ τὰς κλεῖδας διὰ τῶν σφαγῶν. ἀπὸ δὲ 
τούτων καθ᾽ ἅπαν τὸ σῶμα φλέβες διατείνουσιν, ἀπὸ μὲν τῆς δεξιᾶς 
εἰς τὰ δεξιά, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἀριστερᾶς els τὰ ἀριστερά, μέγισται μὲν δύο 
εἰς τὴν καρδίαν περὶ αὐτὴν τὴν νωτιαΐίαν ἄκανθαν, ἕτεραι δ᾽ ὀλίγον 
ἀνωτέρω διὰ τῶν στηθῶν ὑπὸ τὴν μασχάλην εἰς ἑκατέραν τὴν 
χεῖρα τὴν παρ᾽ ἑαυτῇ᾽ καὶ καλεῖται ἡ μὲν OTTANVITIS, ἡ δὲ ἡπατῖτις.... 
(512 Ὁ 1) ἕτεραι δ᾽ εἰσὶν ai ἀτὸ ἑκατέρας τείνουσαι διὰ τοῦ νωτιαίου 
μυελοῦ εἰς τοὺς ὄρχεις λεττταί " ἕτεραι δ᾽ ὑπὸ τὸ δέρμα καὶ διὰ τῆς 
σαρκὸς τείνουσιν εἰς τοὺς νεφροὺς καὶ τελευτῶσιν εἰς τοὺς ὄρχεις τοῖς 
ἀνδράσι, ταῖς δὲ γυναιξὶν εἰς τὰς ὑστέρας. (αἱ δὲ φλέβες αἱ μὲν 





617 For never would I have correctly discovered the affairs on high, except by hanging up 
my thought and mingling my rarefied intelligence with air of like kind. If I had stayed on 
the ground and considered from beneath the things above, never would I have discovered 
them; for the truth is that the earth draws to itself by force the emanation of intelligence. 


618 The veins in man are as follows. There are two veins pre-eminent in magnitude. 
These extend through the belly along the backbone, one to right, one to left; either one 
to the leg on its own side, and upwards to the head, past the collar-bones, through the 
throat. From these, veins extend all over the body, from that on the right hand to the right 
side and from that on the left hand to the left side; the most important ones, two in number, 
to the heart in the region of the backbone; other two a little higher up through the chest in 
underneath the armpit, each to the hand on its own side: of these two, one being termed 
the spleen-vein, and the other the liver-vein.... There is also another pair, running 
from each of these through the spinal marrow to the testicles, thin and delicate. There is, 
further, a pair running a little underneath the cuticle through the flesh to the kidneys, and 
these with men terminate at the testicle, and with women at the womb. (The veins that 


443 


PRESOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 


πρῶται ἐκ τῆς κοιλίας εὐρύτεραί εἰσιν, ἔπειτα λετττότεραι γίγνονται, 
ἕως ἂν μεταβάλωσιν ἐκ τῶν δεξιῶν εἰς τὰ ἀριστερὰ καὶ ἐκ τούτων 
εἰς τὰ δεξιά.) αὗται δὲ σπερματίτιδες καλοῦνται. τὸ δ᾽ αἷμα τὸ μὲν 
παχύτατον ὑπὸ τῶν σαρκωδῶν ἐκπίνεται᾽ ὑπερβάλλον δὲ εἰς τοὺς 
τόπους τούτους λεπτὸν καὶ θερμὸν καὶ ἀφρῶδες γίνεται. 

619 Simplicius Phys. 153, 13 καὶ ἐφεξῆς (after 606) δείκνυσιν 
ὅτι kal TO σπέρμα τῶν φτῴων πνευματῶδές ἐστι, Kal νοήσεις γίνονται 
τοῦ ἀέρος σὺν τῷ αἵματι τὸ ὅλον σῶμα καταλαμβάνοντος διὰ τῶν 
φλεβῶν, ἐν οἷς καὶ ἀνατομὴν ἀκριβῆ τῶν φλεβῶν παραδίδωσιν. ἐν 
δὴ τούτοις σαφῶς φαίνεται λέγων ὅτι ὃν ἄνθρωποι λέγουσιν ἀέρα, 
τοῦτό ἐστιν ἣ ἀρχή. 

619 seems to show that the long fragment on the blood-channels, 
618, actually came in the book called by Simplicius On nature. 
That the semen is aerated is stated in both 618 and 619; this is 
important, since semen produces new life, and its aerated nature 
(conceivably noted by Pherecydes, though see p. 57) is an important 
indication that air is the vital substance. Semen, for Diogenes and 
for other early theorists on the anatomy of the body, was a product 
of the blood, which was also, of course, aerated (though not so 
conspicuously), and thus conveyed sensation and thought. The 
great detail of the account of the blood-channels (the central part 
of which is omitted here) shows that Diogenes’ physiological 
interests,* which connected with and perhaps partly motivated the 
general theory, were of no merely incidental importance to him; 
in this we may compare Empedocles (also a doctor of some kind, 
cf. p. 321) and Anaxagoras (p. 393). There is no doubt that from 
Alcmaeon and Empedocles onwards the more easily determinable 
structure of the human body was used as a clue to that of the whole 
world. The assumption of a parallelism between the two seems to 
have been held in some form by Anaximenes, probably as a 





leave the stomach are comparatively broad just as they leave; but they become gradually 
thinner, until they change over from right to left and from left to right.) These veins are 
termed the spermatic veins. The blood is thickest when it is imbibed by the fleshy parts; 
when it is transmitted to these regions it becomes thin, warm, and frothy. (After D’Arcy 
Thompson) 

619 And in the continuation he shows that also the sperm of living creatures is aerated, 
and acts of intelligence take place when the air, with the blood, gains possession of the whole 
body through the veins; in the course of which he gives an accurate anatomy of the veins. 
Now in this he clearly says that what men call air is the material principle. 


444 


DIOGENES 


development of the entirely unscientific tendency to treat the 
outside world as a person, to animate it and regard it as a living 
organism. This assumption was grounded in reason as a result of 
integrations like that of Heraclitus, who had emphasized very 
strongly that the Logos or arrangement of all things, of men and 
of the world as a whole, was essentially the same. 

1 Diogenes, like Empedocles and Anaxagoras, also paid attention to 

embryology (cf. DK 64.425-8); treating, for example, the old problem of 


whether the embryo is produced from the male contribution only, or from 
both male and female (cf. p. 340). 


CONCLUSION 


With Diogenes and Democritus, who were little if at all older than 
Socrates, the Presocratic period is legitimately held to end. During 
the second half of the fifth century B.c., particularly during the 
Peloponnesian War and under the influence of the mature Socrates 
and the Sophists, the old cosmological approach—by which the 
primary aim was to explain the outside world as a whole, man 
being considered only incidentally—was gradually replaced by 
a humanistic approach to philosophy, by which the study of man 
became no longer subsidiary but the starting-point of all enquiry. 
This re-orientation was a natural development: in part it was 
determined by social factors, but in part, as will have become 
apparent, it was the product of tendencies in the Presocratic 
movement itself. 


445 


SELECTIVE BIBLIOGRAPHY 


For full bibliography of recent work on the Presocratics see 1). ‘Tarrant, 
The Year’s Work in Classical Studies 1939-45 and 1945-7; Ὁ. J. Allan, 
Philosophical Quarterly τ (1950-1) 61ff.; Εἰ. L. Minar Jr., Classical 
Weekly 47 (1954) 161 ff. and 177 ff. 


Burnet, J., Early Greek Philosophy, 4th ed. (London, 1930). 

Cuerniss, H., Aristotle’s Criticism of Presocratic Philosophy (Baltimore, 
1935). 

—— ‘The characteristics and effects of Presocratic philosophy’, 
Journal of the History of Ideas 12 (1951) 319-45. 

Cornrorp, F. M., ‘Mystery religions and Pre-Socratic philosophy’, 

Cambridge Ancient History, τν (Cambridge, 1939), ch. 15. 

Principium Sapientiae (Cambridge, 1952). 

FRANKEL, H., Dichlung und Philosophie des friuhen Griechentums (New York, 
1951) (American Philological Association Philological Mono- 
graphs, no. 13). 

JaEcER, W., The Theology of the Early Greek Philosophers (Oxford, 1947). 

Rosin, L., Greek Thought, English trans. (London, 1928) 1-147. 

TANNERY, P., Pour I’ Histoire de la Science Helléne, 2nd ed. (Paris, 1930). 

ZELLER, ["., Die Philosophie der Griechen, τ, i and 1, 11, respectively 7th and 
6th ed. (Leipzig, 1923 and 1920), edited and enlarged by 
W. Nestle. 

La Filosofia det Greci, 1, i and 1, ii, edited and enlarged by R. 

Mondolfo (Florence, 1932 and 1938). 


Text 
Diets, H., Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 5th, 6th and 7th eds., edited 
with additions by W. Kranz (Berlin, 1934-54). 








Assessment of Sources 

Cuerniss, H., Aristotle’s Criticism of Presocratic Philosophy (Baltimore, 
1935). 

Diets, H., Doxographi Graeci (Berlin, 1879). 

Jacosy, Εἰ, Apollodors Chrontk (Berlin, 1903). 

McDiarmip, J., ‘Theophrastus on the Presocratic causes’, Harvard 
Studies in Classical Philology 61 (1953) 85-156. 

(See also the works listed under Burnet, Robin, Kerschensteiner.) 


Mythical cosmogony and cosmology 

Donps, E. R., The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley, 1951) 147-9 with 
notes. (On Orphism.) 

GutTurigE, W. K. C., The Greeks and their Gods (London, 1950). 


446 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


HO tscHer, U., ‘Anaximander und die Anfange der Philosophie’, 
Hermes 81 (1953) 257ff. and 385 ff. 

Linrortu, I. M., The Arts of Orpheus (Berkeley, 1941). 

Niusson, M. P., Geschichte der griechischen Religion, 1, 2nd ed. (Munich, 
1955). (See Index II, s.v. “Kosmogonie’ and ‘Kosmogonische 
Mythen’.) 


Thales 
HouscuHer, U., op. cit. 485}, 


Anaximander 

HOxscuer, U., op. cit. esp. 257-77, 415-18. 

Kirk, G. 8., ‘Some problems in Anaximander’, Classical Quarterly 
N.S. 5 (1955) 21-38. 

Kraus, W., ‘Das Wesen des Unendlichen bei Anaximander’, 
Rheinisches Museum 93 (1949-50) 364-79. 

Matson, W. I., ‘The naturalism of Anaximander’, Review of Meta- 
physics © (1952-3) 387-95. 

Vuastos, G., ‘Equality and justice in early Greek cosmologies’, 
Classical Philology 42 (194.7) 156-78. 


A enophanes 
DEICHGRABER, K., ‘Xenophanes περὶ φύσεως᾽, Rheinisches Museum 87 
(1938) 1-31. 


KERFERD, G. B., Gnomon 29 (1957) 127-31. 


Heraclitus 

Gicon, O., Untersuchungen zu Heraklit (Leipzig, 1935). 

KERSCHENSTEINER, JULA, ‘Der Bericht des Theophrast tiber Heraklit’, 
Hermes 83 (1955) 385-411. 

Kirk, G. S., ‘Heraclitus and death in battle (fr. 24D)’, American fournal 

of Philology 70 (1949) 384-93. 

Heraclitus, the Cosmic Fragments (Cambridge, 1954). 

RemnuHarpt, K., ‘Heraklits Lehre vom Feuer’, Hermes 77 (1942) 
1-27. 

Vuastos, G., ‘On Heraclitus’, American Journal of Philology 76 (1955) 
337-68. 





Pythagoras and the early Pythagoreans 

Cornrorp, F. M., Plato and Parmenides (London, 1939), ch. 1. 

FESTUGIERE, A. J., ‘Les ‘‘ Mémoires Pythagoriques”’ cités par Alexandre 
Polyhistor’, Revue des Etudes Grecques 58 (1945) 1-65. 

HEwEL, W. A., ‘The Pythagoreans and Greek Mathematics’, American 
Journal of Philology 51 (1940) 1-33. 

RaAveEN, J. E., Pythagoreans and Eleatics (Cambridge, 1948), chs. 1 
and 4. 


447 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Alcmaeon 
Vuastos, G., ‘Isonomia’, American Journal of Philology 74 (1953) 


337-66. 


Parmenides 
REINHARDT, K., Parmenides und die Geschichte der griechischen Philosophie 


(Bonn, 1916). 


Keno 

Leg, H. Ὁ. P., Zeno of Elea (Gambridge, 1936). 

Ross, W. D., Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford, 1936) 71-85. 

THomson, J. F., ‘Tasks and Super-Tasks’, Analysis 15 (1954) 1-13. 


Melissus 
RAvEN, J. E., op. cit. ch. 6. 


Philolaus and Eurytus 

Bywater, I., ‘On the fragments attributed to Philolaus the Pytha- 
gorean’, Journal of Philology 1 (1868) 21-53. 

Frank, E., Plato und die sogenannten Pythagoreer (Halle, 1923) 263- 
335: 

Monpbo ro, R., ‘Sui frammenti di Filolao’, Rivista dt Filologia N.S. 
(1937) 225-45. 

RAvEN, J. E., op. cat. chs. 7-11. 

*Polyclitus and Pythagoreanism’, Classical Quarterly N.S. 1 (1951) 


147-52. 


Empedocles 
BIGNONE, E., E’mpedocle, Studio critico (Turin, 1916). 
Furey, Ὁ. J., ‘Empedocles and the Clepsydra’, Journal of Hellenic 


Studtes 77 (1957) 31-4. 


Anaxagoras 

CornrorpD, F. M., ‘Anaxagoras’ theory of matter’, Classical Quarterly 
24 (1930) 14-30 and 83-95. 

Peck, A. L., ‘Anaxagoras: prediction as a problem in physics’, 
Classical Quarterly 25 (1931) 27-37 and 112-20. 

Vuastos, G., ‘The physical theory of Anaxagoras’, Philosophical 


Review 59 (1950) 31-57. 





Leucippus and Democritus 

BarLey, C., The Greek Atomisis and Epicurus (Oxford, 1928). 

Scumip, W., ‘Der Ausgang der altionischen Naturphilosophie: die 
Atomistik’, Schmid-—Stahlin, Geschichte der griechischen Literatur, 1. 5 
(Munich, 1948) 224-349. 

VuasTos, G., ‘Ethics and physics in Democritus’, Philosophical Review 
54 (1945) 578. and 55 (1946) 53 ff. 


448 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Diogenes of Apollonia 


Diuter, H., ‘Die philosophiegeschichtliche Stellung des Diogenes von 
Apollonia’, Hermes 76 (1941) 359 ff. 


Studies of special subjects or concepts 

BEARE, W., Greek Theories of Elementary Cognition (Oxford, 1906). 

Fritz, K. von, “Νοῦς, νοεῖν and their derivatives in Presocratic philo- 
sophy’, Classical Philology 40 (1945) 223-42 and 41 (1946) 12-34. 

Heatu, T. L., A [History of Greek Mathematics, 1 (Oxford, 1921). 

Aristarchus of Samos (Oxford, 1933) (pp. 1-133 on pre-Platonic 
astronomy). 

Roupe, E., Psyche, English trans. (London, 1925). 

SAMBuRSKY, ὅ., The Physical World of the Greeks, English trans. (London, 
1956). 

SNELL, B., The Discovery of the Mind, English trans. (Oxford (Blackwell), 
1953), chs. 7, 9, 10. 





29 449 KER 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


A page-number in bold type indicates that the passage in question is 
quoted in full, with translation, on that page. Other, ordinary-type, 
page-references to such a passage will normally be to citations of the 
passage-number, which should be found by turning to the bold-type 


page-reference first. 


E.g. Aetius I, 3, 1 15 quoted on p. 76, where its passage-number is 
seen to be 68; and the reference on p. 77 is simply to this passage- 


number, 68. 


Usually, only the first line is specified in the references to passages 


quoted. 


ACHILLES 


Isag. in Arati Phaen. (3), 59n.3 (4), Pp. 335 
17 Maass, 47~8; p. 34, 11 Maass, 


175, 176 
AELIAN 


ΑΗ. (ut, 31), 427.3 (am, 17), 104 
Nat. anim. (xu, 7), 354; (XVI, 29), 337, 
347 


AXESCHINES 
(1, 97), 366 n. 2 


AESCHYLUS 

Ag. (1382), 110 n.1 

Pr. (351 ff.), 59 

Suppl. (96-103), 168, 171 n. 3 
fr. (44, 1-5), 29 n. 2 


AETIUS 


I (3, 1), 76, 77; (3, 3), 105, 1133 (3, 4); 
158; (3, 5), 385; (3, 8), 230n.; 
(3, 18),414, 416, 418; (3, 19), 247M.5 
(3, 20), 323; (4, 1-4), 410; (7, 12), 
124, 151.3 (7, 13), 1560, 151; (18, 2), 
264, 323, 324; (23, 3), 417, 418; 
(25, 4), 403, 413 π.1; (26, 2), 
413 n.1 

π (1, 1), 229 5.3; (1, 2), 3903 (1, 3), 124, 
151n., 4393; (4, 6), 390; (6, 3), 332, 
333n.; (7, 1), 284; (7, 2), 410, 411n.; 
(7, 7), 260 mn. 2; (12, 1), 81; (13, 2), 
333; (13, 5+9), 156, 438; (13, 10), 
154, 1553 (13, 11}, 155, 3333 
(14, 3-4), 154, 155; (16, 5), 136, 


451 


137; (18, 1), 174: (20, 1), 135, 136; 
(20, 3), 173; (20, 13), 333, 3343 
(21, 1), 135, 136; (22, 1), 154, 1553 
(23, 1), 154, 155; (24, 1), 805 (24, 4), 
175 πὸ; (24, 9), 173, 1745 (25, 1), 135 

It (3, 1-2), 138, 139, 158; (3, 2), 157-8; 
(10, 2), 134n.; (10, 3), 1535 (15, 8), 
153 

IV (1, 1), 773 (3) 12), 208; (5, 12), 3443 
(8, 10), 42%; (9, 15), 310; (19, 3), 
423n. 

ν (7, 1), 340; (8, 1), 340; (10, 1), 340; 
(11, 1), 3403 (12, 2), 3403 (19, 4), 
140, 141, 1423 (19, 5), 336, 337, 340; 
(24, 3), 436-7m.; (26, 4), 340 


AGATHEMERUS 
I (1), 103 


ALCIDAMAS 
ap. Ar. Rhet. B 23, 1398b15, 365 n. 3 


ALCMAEON 


fr. (1), 180, 233 (no. 285) 
fr. (4), 235n. 


ALEXANDER OF APHRODISIAS 


in Met. (31, 12), 280n.; (36, 21), 416; 
(41, 1), 239 ἢ. 2 

in Meteor. (67, 11), 133, 137, 1393 
(512, 37), 252, 253; (827, 9), 314, 
315 

Quaest. (11, 23), 440n. 

de sensu (56, 12), 422, 423 


29-2 


INDEX OF 


AMMONIUS 
de interpretatione (249, 6 Busse), 349-50 


ANAXAGORAS 

fr. (1), 110n., 368, 369, 370, 371, 382, 384; 
(2), 10.» 382, 384; (3)s 379, 571, 
3723 (4), 368, 369, 376, 377, 378, 
379, 380, 389, 390, 432; (5), 370, 
371; (6), 375-6, 376, 377; (8), 385; 
(9), 133 0. 2, 373. 4, 374, 4343 (10), 
378, 379, 380; (11), 376, 3775 (12), 
372-3, 376, 377, 381, 411, 434, 437. 
442; (13), 373, 375» 4343 (14), 374, 
434; (15), 382, 383, 384, 3975 (16), 
382, 384; (17), 264, 369, 432; (18), 
391, 392; (19), 391, 392; (21), 393, 
494; (214), 394; (22), 392, 393 

ANAXIMANDER 

fr. (1), 56.n. 1, 105, 112, 117. 117-21, 140, 
195 

ANAXIMENES 

fr. (2), 115n., 158 (no. 163) 

Anonymus Londinensts 

xI (22), 8gn.; xvi (8), 312-13 

APOLLODORUS MyTHOGRAPHUS 

Bibl. ut (4, 2), 62 n. 3 


APOLLONIUS PARADOXOGRAPHUS 
Hist. Mir. (6), 51, 218 n. 3 


APOLLONIUS RHODIUS 

I (496), 32-33 (503), 66, 67, 69 
Σ on ιν (269), 439 -40n. 
APULEIUS 

Florida (15, 20), 100n. 


ARATUS 


Phaen. (39), 82 
Σ on Phaen. (39), 82; (172), 86 


ARCHELAUS 
ap. Plut. de primo frig. (21, 954F), 397Nn. 


ARISTOCRITUS 
Theosophia (68), 168, 183, 211, 212 


ARISTOPHANES 


Birds (693), 27, 44, 45; (697), 46n. 2; 
(1218), 27; (1737ff.), 62 n. 4 

Clouds (227), 443 n.25 (424),275 (627),27 

Peace (832f.), 201n. 

Σ on Clouds (247), 67 


PASSAGES 


ARISTOTLE 


de an. A2 (403b31ff.), 417; (404416), 
261; (404b8), 358; (405411), 420m., 
422; (405219), 88, 93, 94, 95, 161; 
(405421), 162n.; (405a24), 207 n. 1; 
(405b1), 90n. 1 

A3 (407b20), 261, 262 

A4 (407b27), 261, 262; (407b31), 
gion.; (408413), 357-8, 558; 
(40944), 254n. 

A5 (41147), 88, 94, 95 

ΓΘ (430429), 339 

de caelo Ax (268a10), 301, 302 

A3 (270b24), 382n. 

A7 (274430-3), 310n. 

Ag (278bq9), 116 

Ato (279b12), 151n.; (2790 14); 202n. 

Br (284a11), 200n. 

Bg (2gob12), 258, 259 

B13 (293418), 239n., 257, 259; 
(293a21), 31on.; (294a21), 176; 
(294228), 85, 87; (294b13), 152n., 
153, 157; (29547), 127, 128, 129, 
383 τ. 1; (295213), 334, 3353 
(295b10), 63, 134 

Γι (300a17), 249 

r2 (300b8), 416; (300b25), 338-9; 
(300b30), 336, 339, 347 

rg (302428), 383 ἢ. 2, 386, 387 

4 (30345), 416, 418 and n.; (303a12), 
421n. 

Γ5 (9050) 10), 108, 112 n. 1, 114, 115, 
116, 125 

ΔΩ (409419), 370Nn. 

On Democritus, ap. Simpl. de caelo (295, 
1), 407, 408, 409 ἢ. 2, 415; (295; 
9), 416, 417; (295, 11), 418-19, 
420 

Eth. Eud. B8 (1225a33), 310 

Hi (1235a25), 196, 210n.1 
EN A4 (1096b5), 240, 241 
Β5 (1106b29), 240 
E8 (1132b21), 248 
H8 (1150b25), 184 
GA B3 (736b33ff.), 57 
rr (762a21), 94n. 1 
GC ΔΩ (315b6), 409 ἢ. 2 
Αϑ (325a2), 401, 402, 404-5, 409 
Nn. 2; (325a14), 300; (326a9), 414, 
415 
Br (328b35), 112 2.1 
Β5 (322819), 110, 111, 112 Π.1 
Β6 (33441), 346n. 
Β7 (33485), 339 
HA Γὰὼ (511b3t), 443-4, 444 


452 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


ARISTOTLE (continued) 

Met. A3 (983b6), 85, 87, 88, 8gn., 92, 118; 
(983b27), 16-17; (98445), 144, 145; 
(984a11), 320, 321, 363, 364 

A4 (98524), 330 n. I, 331n.; (0854 18), 
384n.; (985a23),3455 (985b4),406~7 
A5 (985b23), 236-8, 240, 242, 277, 
309; (985b26), 248; (985b29), 261; 
(986a8), 257, 259; (986a15), 245, 
256; (986a17), 309, 317; (986a29), 
232n.; (986a30), 218 ἢ. 1; (g86b2), 
240; (986b18), 165, 171; (οΒ6} 21), 
167, 171; (986b22), 265; (986b26), 
400 n. 1; (986b31), 280n.; (987a13), 
240, 241; (987a13-19), 510}. 
ΑΘ (987429), 311; (987432), 186, 197; 
(987b 22), 241 n. 3 
A7 (988a30), 112 ἢ. 1; (989a14), 112 
n. I 
A8 (989029), 216; (g90a12), 256, 257; 
(9904 18), 248; (g90a22), 249, 250 
Ag (ggobr1), 311 
Β4 (1000b3), 350 n. 2; (1000b6), 343; 
(1000b12), 331, 353; (r0o01b14), 291 
5 (1010a13), 197 
Z2 (1028b15), 254, 316, 317 
Z11 (1036b8), 252, 253, 316 
Ax (1069b 20), 112 n. 3, 1338 nm. 
ΛΘ (1071b 27), 20 
A7 (107345), 250n. 
Ag (1075b1), 330 n. 2 
M4 (1078b 21), 249 
M6 (1080b16), 246, 247; (1080b20), 
251, 252, 310 
M8 (1083b 8), 246, 247 
N3 (1090a20), 248; (1090b5), 254, 
317; (1091 aI2), 250, 251, 252, 3135 
(1091a15), 310n. 
N4 (1091b4), 20, 22, 24, 40; (1091 8), 
48, 58 n. 1 
N5 (1og2b8), 256, 257, 314, 316 
Meteor. A14. (352417), 139 
Br (353b5), 1553 (35366), 133, 137, 
139; (354428), 154, 157 
ΒΩ (355413), 202, 203; (355a21), 139, 
155, 4398. 
B7 (365b6), 158 
Bg (369b14), 382n. 
de part. animal. A1o (68747), 393 n. 2 
Phys. Ag (185a10), 300 n. 1 
Aq (187a1), 289; (187a12), 110, 111, 
112 ἢ. 1, 428n.; (187a20), 119, 129, 
131 n. 1, 133; (187223), 378-9, 380, 
386, 387, 3gon. 
A6 (189b1), 112 n. 1 


B4 (196a20), 346n.; (196a24), 413 
n. I 
B8 (198b29), 337 
Γῴ4 (203a10), 243; (203ar10—-I11), 245n.; 
(203a10-15), 310n.; (203a16), 108, 
togn., 111, r12n.1; (203a18), 
Ii2n.13 (203b7), 108, 109, 111, 
114, 116, 125-6, 128, 150, 160, 437; 
(203b15), 112, 113, 114, 115; 
(203b23), 123, 124 
Γῆ (204b22), 111, 112, 113, 114; 
(204b33), 118 
C8 (208a8), 114 
Δι (208b25), 302 n. 1; (208b29), 26 
A6 (213a22), 370n.; (213a31), 409 
n. 3; (213b22), 252, 253, 262, 313 
Ag (216b22), 301 
Z2 (233a21), 293 
Zg (293b9), 291; 
(239b14), 294; 
(239633), 295-6 
Θι (250b11), 97,127, 128; (250b18ff.), 
3gon. 
93 (253b9), 197 
Pol. Art (1259a9), 78, 79, 82 
de respir. 2 (471a2), 443 n. 2 
7 (473b9), 146, 325n., 335, 341-2, 
344.N. 2, 409N. 3 
Rhet. B23(1398b14), 218 ἢ. 1; (13998b15), 
365 n. 3; (1400b5), 166 
de sensu 3 (439430), 251 
4 (442429), 421, 422 
5 (444422), 211 n. 3 
Top. ΘΒ (160b7), 292 
fr. (191 Rose), 218 n. 3 


(239br11), 292; 
(239b30), 294; 


[ARISTOTLE] 

Magna Moralia At 
249 

de mundo 5 (396b20), 191, 194 

MXG 1 (975811). 25n.1 

2 (6, 9751), 264, 323, 324; 2 (28, 

976b24), 264, 323, 324 

Problemata xxxiv (7, 964a10), 148 


(1182a11), 248, 


ARISTOXENUS 
ap. Stob. Anth. 1 (1, 6), 318n. 


ATHENAEUS 
τ (57D), 392, 393 


ATHENAGORAS 


pro Christianis 18 (p. 20 Schwartz), 17 n. I, 
42-3 


453 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


AUGUSTINE, S. 
de cw. det vin (2), 125, 150 


BACCHYLIDES 
fr. (5, 27 Snell), 27 


BoeEtTuius 
de mus. 1 (10), 230 n. 1 


CALLIMACHUS 
Iambus τ (52) (fr. 191 Pfeiffer), 75, 82 


Crrsus 


ap. Origen. c. Celsum v1 (42), 64n., 65 n. 1, 
65-6, 66, 67 


CENSORINUS 
de die natali (4, 7), 140, τ41 


CHALcIDIus 

in Tim. (122), 25n.13; (237), 233 n. 3; 
(251), 209 ἢ. 2 

Zon, 207 Π. 2 


CHRYSIPPUS 
ap. Philodemum piet. (13, 16), 23n. 13 
(14, 18), 23n. 1 


CICERO 


Academica priora 1 (37, 118), 5, 14:7, 401, 
402 

de fin. 1 (5, 15), 184 

N.D. 1 (10, 25), 96 π. 1, 125; (το, 26), 
150, 15In. 

Tusc. 1 (16, 38), 60 n. 1 


CLEANTHES 
Hymn to Zeus (34f.), 204n. 


CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA 


Protrepticus (22), 241, 212; (34), 2X1, 212; 
Stromateis 1 (64, 2), 163, 164 
I (14, 2), 352 
IV (49, 3), 209; (141, 2), 207, 208; 
(150, 1), 354, 355 
ν (15, 5), 275; (48, 3), 332; (59, 5)» 
213n.; (81, 2), 356, 357; (104, 1), 
55, 159N., 170, 199, 200, 202N., 433; 
(104, 3), 193N., 199, 200, 201, 206, 
210, 433; (109, 1), 169, 170, 180; 
(109, 2), 166, 168, 169n.; (109, 3), 


169; (115, 1), 204, 205; (122, 3), 
354. 355 

VI (9, 4); 6on.; (17, 2)» 185, 205, 206, 
208; (30), 321n., 354, 355; (53> 5)» 
62, 63, 65 n. 2 

vit (22, 1), 168, 169n. 


[CLEMENT] 
Hom. v1, 47 


CLEOSTRATUS 
fr. (4 Dicls), 86 


Cramer, Anecd. Par. (1, 172), 229 ἢ. 4 


DAMASCIUS 


de principits (123), 41, 473 (123 bis), 41-2, 
43N., 45, 47; (124), I7M., 21, 22, 
23 N. 2, 40, 44, 45, 46 n. 3; (124 dis), 
55, 57, 58, 59, 69, 70 


DEMOCRITUS 


fr. (6), 423; (7), 423; (8), 423; (9), 422, 
423, 424 and n.; (11), 422; (117), 
424; (125), 424n.; (164), 413 n.2, 
419; (167), 132, 413n.3; (171), 
424, 425; (174), 424, 425; (246), 
425; (277), 425, 426 


Dioporus Sicuutus 1 (7, 1), 32; (7-8), 
403n. 
Χ (3, 4). 51 


DroGENEs or APOLLONIA fr. (1), 427, 428, 
429; (2), 431 and n.,'432, 433 and n.; 
(3). 430, 433, 436; (4), 433, 434-5, 
436; (5), 115n., 432n., 435, 4373 
(6), 443-4, 444; (7), 436, 437; (8), 
436, 437 


DIOGENES LAERTIUS 


I (12), 229 n. 3; (16), 365; (22), 74, 75; 
(23), 79, 83n., 84-5, 86; (24), 81, 88, 
94, 96 n. 2; (27), 77, 83; (34), 85; 
(42), 49n.; (116), 49; (118), 4gn., 
HI; (119), 49, 59, 51, 52, 54-5; 
57 n. 1, 613; (120), §1, 219, 222 

π (1-2), 81, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 105; 
(3), 143; (7), 362, 363, 364; (8), 
383 n. 1; (16), 395; (17), 398 ἢ. 3; 
(23), 395 n. 2 

v (42), 398 n. 1 

vil (3), 217 τι. 3; (4-5), 223; (6), 183n., 
218-19, 228; (8), 228 mn. 2; (10), 221 


454 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


DIoGENES LAERTIUS (continued) 


N.15(12),242;(15),221n.2; (17-18), 
227n.; (19), 225, 226; (24), 241 n. 13 
(36), 164, 219, 222, 223; (46), 
221 Ὡ. 4,307; (48), 159n.; (51), 320; 
(57), 287, 3215 (62), 321n., 354, 355; 
(63), 321; (66), 3215 (74), 320; (77), 
224, 322n., 354; (83), 232, 233 n. 4; 


48.414 (Aetius), 94 ἢ. 2 

48, 8 (John Lydus), 302 n. 2 

5ga20a-c (= in Pindarum δὲ alii), 
365 n. 1 

59433 (Galen), 365 n. 1 

64A425-8 (Censorinus ¢¢ alii), 445}. 

6487 (Simplicius), 436n. 

6489 (Galen), 428 


(84), 308 
ΙΧ (1), 164, 168, 182, 183, 204, 205, 213, 


EMPEDOCLES 


218, 228; (2), 213, 214; (5), 182, fr. (3, 9), 3253 (6), 323; (11), 264, 323; 


184, 185; (6), 184m., 214n.; (7), 205, 
206, 214; (9-10), 15, 202, 203; (11), 
203; (16), 209-10; (18), 163, 164, 
166; (19), 170n.; (20), 163, 164; 
(21-3), 264, 265; (23), 263; (24), 
298; (29), 286n.; (30), 401; (31), 
409-10, 411, 412, 419; (33),413n.4; 
(34). 40%, 402; (35), 404:.; (38), 
307; (41), 307, 4015; (45), 403, 404, 
412n.; (49), 404n.; (57), 427, 428, 
429, 431, 432m., 438, 439 
Χ (13), 400-1, 402 


Dionysius ALEXANDRINUS 


ap. Eusebium P.E. xtv (23, 3), 409 n. 2 


DK references not further specified 
3AI-—5 (Diog. L. et aliz), 45 
4B1—5 (Athenaeus et alt), 86 
684 (Censorinus), 86 
7A2 (Suda), 49n., 59n. 
7A5 (Aponius), 6on. 

746 (Porphyrius), 51 

749 (Probus, Hermias), 56 n. 1 
7A10 (Sextus), 59n. 

7B1a (Achilles), 27 

787 (Porphyrius), 59n. 

789 (Herodian), 56 

7B12 (Diog. L.), 56 

1145 (Eusebius), 74n. 

13A16 (Dercyllides), 156 ἢ. 2 
21A22 (Proclus), 167 


(12), 264, 323, 324; (13), 264, 323, 
3243; (14), 264, 323, 524; (17, 1-13), 
326-7; (17, 6), 324, 345; (17, 14), 
249, 327-8, 329, 330, 374; (21, 9), 
328, 329, 359n.; (26), 345; (27), 
325-6; (274), 331; (28), 325-6; 
(29), 326; (30), 331, 353; (31), 331; 
(35), 331, 346, 3473 (35, 7)» 347n-3 
(35, 16), 347n.; (36), 331, 346-7, 
347 and n.; (38), 3323 (42), 334, 3353 
(53), 346n.; (57), 336, 339, 3473 
(59), 337, 347; (60), 337, 347: 
(61), 337; (62), 338, 340; (63), 340; 
(63-70), 340; (77-81), 340; (96), 
335, 432; (98), 335, 344, 4323 
(98, 5), 357; (100), 324n., 335, 
341-2, 344n.2, 409n.3; (109), 
344; (105), 344; (107), 344; (109), 
343, 3575 (112), 354, 355; (112, 
10-12), 32Im.; (113), 355; (115), 
351-2, 352, 3533 (117), 224, 
354, 355; (117, 4), 356; (118), 
352; (121), 352; (122), 353 n.1, 
3615 (123), 353 n. 1, 3615 (127), 354, 
3553 (128), 349, 350, 3515; (128, 8), 
351; (129), 219; (133), 356, 3573 
(134), 349-50; (134, 4-5), 356; 
(136), 350, 351; (137), 350, 351; 
(139), 351; (140), 224; (141), 2245 
(142), 356, 357n.; (146), 354, 355; 
(147), 354, 355 


21A48 ([Aristotle]), 177 EPICHARMUS 

2181 (Xenophanes), 164 fr. (1 Diels), 55 
Aristotle), 1 . 

rao Hecaclitua). 198 n. 2 Epictetus, = Bodl. on (p. lxxxiii Schenkl), 

228674 (2 in Chalcidium), 207 ἢ. 2 209 

28450—4 (Actius et alii), 285n. 

2042 (Eusebius), 286n. Eprcurus 

2946 (Diodorus), 286 Ep. (1, 43), 418 

29A7 (Plutarch), 286 Ep. (u, 88), 411n. 

29A8 (Clement), 286 

2949 (Philostratus), 286 ETyMOLocicum MacnuM 

41.480 (Alexander), 440n. (772. 50), 57 n. 2 


455 


INDEX OF 


EUDEMUS 
ap. Simplicium Phys. (97, 12), 290; 
(327, 26), 384n.; (732, 30), 2231. 


EURIPIDES 


Helen (101 4ff.), 201n. 

Phoen. (1605), 31 

fr. (282 Nauck?), 168; (448), 27; (484), 
32; (839, off.), 201n.; (910), 1170.5 
(941), 20In. 


EUSEBIUS 


Praeparatio Evangelica 1 (8, 10), 332, 333; 
3343 (10), 31n.; (10, 50), 52, 68 
Xv (20), 196, 198 n. 2 


GALEN 


de elem, sec. Hippoc. 1 (2), 408n. 

in Epid. vi (48), 285n. 

de humor. (x1x, 495 Kuhn), 429 

de medic. empir. (xxu, 3 Walzer), 429; 
(1259, 8 Schocne), 4242. 


HERACLIDES 
ap. Diog. L. (1, 12), 229 Nn. 3 


HERACLITUS 


fr. (1), 183, 185, 187, 189 n. 1, 205, 208, 
213, 214; (2), 188, 189 ἢ. 1, 199n., 
2143 (3), 175; (5), 168, 183, 211; (6), 
202, 203; (9), 190; (10), 191, 194; 
(12), 196, 198 n. 2; (13), 190; (14), 
211, 212; (15), 211, 212; (17), 
189n.1; (19), 189n. τ; (23), 190; (24), 
210} (25), 209; (26), 207, 208; (28), 
189 n.1; (29), 213n.; (30), 55, 159N., 
170, 199, 200, 202N., 433; (31), 193N., 
199, 200, 201, 206, 210, 4333; (32), 
204, 205; (34), 180 n. τ; (36), 183, 
205, 206, 208; (40), 182, 183n., 218, 
228; (41), 115N., 204, 205, 213; (43), 
213, 214; (44), 213, 214; (45), 205, 
206, 214; (48), 191; (49), 213n.; 
(50), 188, 189 n. 1, 213, 214; (51), 
193, 194, 212, 272n.; (53), 195; 
(54), 193, 194, 212; (55), 189 n. 2, 
197n.; (56), 189 n. 1; (57), 190, 434; 
(58), 190; (59), 190; (60), 189, 190; 
(61), 189, 190; (62), 195, 210 n. I, 
212; (63), 195, 209, 212; (64), 199, 
200, 434, 437; (67), 191, 192, 212, 
434; (674), 160; (72), 189 n. 1; (76), 
206n.; (78), 180, 193n.; (80), 117, 
119, 195; (85), 21:1 ἢ. 2; (88), 


PASSAGES 


189-90, 190, 212, 4343 (90), 199, 
202n., 433; (91), 196, 196n., 198; 
(92), 212:ι.; (93), 211, 212; (94), 
203; (98), 211 n. 3; (99), I91, 
204n.; (101), 212, 214; ([Ο1α), 
325 n. I; (102), 193m., 205; (103), 
191; (107), 189n. 2; (111), 189, 100; 
(114), 213, 214; (117), 205, 206; 
(118), 205, 206, 214; (119), 213, 2143 
(121), 183; (122), 209n. 1; (123), 
193, 212; (126), 119, 191, 329; (129), 
183n., 218-19, 228; ([136]), 209 


HeERACLITUS HOMERICUS 
Qu. Hom. (22), 90 n. 2 


HERO 

Deff. (58), 244. 1 

HERODIAN 

π΄ μον. AEE. (40, 30), 177, 1793 (41, 5), 180 
HrERODOTUS 


1 (29), 81m.; (74), 79, 81n.; (75), 75-63 
(146), 75n.; (170), 75 

τ (4), 82n.; (20), 77; (81), 220, 223, 
225n.; (109), 77m., 81, 82n., 102; 
(123), 220, 222, 223 

ιν (8), 12; (36), 103-4; (95), 217 1.1, 
219, 228 

vu (6), 23n. 3 


HEs1op 


Erga (109), 349; (121ff.), 210n.; (252ff.), 
2710Nn. 

Theogony (20), 20; (106f.), 20; (116), 20, 
22, 24-§, 28, 35, 41n.3; (123), 
28; (126), 28; (154), 25 n. 2, 28-9, 
34-5, 57; (211), 20n.,, 25n.2; 
(295), 67 n. 2; (358), 67 n. 2; (468), 
36; (632), 28; (669), 26; (681), 28; 
(695), 273 (720), 11, 175; (726-8), 
10, 30, 64, 175; (726-819), 23-4; 
(736), 24, 30, 31,41 ἢ. 1, 45, 46 n. 2; 
(740), 41 n. τ; (742), 46 n. 2; (793), 
3525 (811), 28, 30; (814), 28; (825), 


HYEROCLES 
ad carmina aurea (24), 352 


Hippocratic Corrus 

de carnibus (2), 200-1n.; (16), 211 ἢ. 3 

de morbo sacro (14), 233 τι. 3; (16), 442n.; 
(17), 233 n. 3 


456 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


Hippocratic Corpus (continued) 


wT. ἀέρων (12), 235n. 
π΄. ἑβδομάδων (1-11), 58 n. 2 


HIPPoLyTus 


Refutatio 1 (2, 12), 241 m.13; (6, 1-2), 
105~7, 107, 116; (6, 2), 126, 130; 
(6, 3), 134; (6, 4-5), 131, 133, 
135, 136; (6, 6), 141; (6, 7), 137-8; 
(7, 1), 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150; 
(7, 4), 154, 1553 (7, 5)» 152, 1553 
(7, 6), 154, 155, 156; (8, 2), 382n.; 
(8, 3-10), 391-2, 392; (8, 12), 
392-3, 393; (9, 1), 396-7, 397, 
398, 809; (11, 2), 302 5.1: (13, 
2), 411, 412; (14, 3), 172-3, 173, 
1743 (14, 5), 177, 178 

VII (29), 326, 351-2, 352, 356, 357 

ix (9, 1), 188, 189 n. 1, 193, 194, 212, 
213, 214, 272n.; (9, 4), 1953 (9, 5), 
189 ἢ. 2, 193, 194, 197n., 212; 
(10, 4), 189, 190; (10, 5), 189, 190; 
(10, 6), 195, 199, 200, 209, 210 n. I, 
212, 434, 437; (10, 8), 191, 192, 212, 
434 


HoMER 

Iliad τ (530), 171 n. 2 

π (447), 116; (485), 180 

v (6), 15n.; (504), 10 

vit (99), 176; (422), 15n. 

vil (13), 16n.; (16), 175; (478), 16n. 

ΙΧ (600), 171 n. 2 

ΧΙ (574), 97 n. I 

xiv (153-360), 15-16; (200), 12, 15, 16, 
21, 67, 773 (203), 16n.; (244), 15, 
16, 21, 67, 77; (258), 16n., 19, 20, 
21, 24; (271), 16n.; (274), 16n.; 
(279), 16n.; (288), 10; (296), 70; 
(301), 15 

xv (init.), 15-16; (37f.), 16n.; (189), 
16n., 20n.; (225), 16n. 

XVII (425), 10 

XvitI (39), 353 ἢ. 13 (398), 67 n. 2; (489), 
15n.; (607), 11, 12 

xx (444), 137 

ΧΧΙ (194), IX, 93, 1775 (549), 137 

XXII (235), 171 ἢ. 2 


Odyssey πὶ (2), 10 

V (123), 54.n. 3; (218), 116 

Χ (191), 15n. 

XIV (328), 64 

XV (329), το; (403-4), 52, 54 1. 25 (455), 
54n. 2 


Χν (218), 413 n. 2; (565), 10 
2 on Jl. 1 (783), 45, 58, 70 
2 on Jl. x1 (27), 173 


Σ on Il. xvu (547), 391, 392 

2 on Jl. xx1 (196), 176, 177, 179 

Σ on Od. xv (403), §2-3 

[Homer] 

Hymn to Apollo (16), 54n.2; (951f.), 
57n. 2 

TAMBLICHUS 


in Nic. (58, 19 Pistelli), 244 n. 1 
Protrepticus (21), 226—-7n. 
Vita Pythagorae (81), 221 n. 13 (94), 221 


Nn. 2; (104), 233 ἢ. 1, 307 ἢ. 13 (110), 

509 π. 4; (1158), 230n. 1; (199), 

221 τι. 3, 308; (247), 231 τι. 3; (249), 

217 n. 4; (267), 221 n. 5, 232 ἢ. 4 
Inscriptions 


I.G.? 1 (945, 6), 200n. 
1-1 (1672-3), 366 ἢ. 2 


Ion oF CHios 
fr. (4), 51, 219, 222 
TIsrporus GNOSTICUS 


ap. Clem. Strom. v1 (53, 5), 62, 63 


LEUCIPPUS 

fr. (2), 403, 413 2.1 

LUCRETIUS 

1 (830), 387 

Macrosius 

S. Scip. (14, 19), 207 n. 3 

Maximus TyYRIus 

IV, 4. (p. 45, 5 Hobein), 62, 62, 63, 66, 67, 
69 

MELIssus 


fr. (2), 299, 300, 306; (3), 299; (4), 299, 
300 and n., 306; (5), 299, 300, 406; 


(6), 299, 300; (7), 431n.; (8), 197n., 
304-5, 405, 406, 436; (9), 300 n. 2, 
302 

MENO 

ap. Anon. Londinensem xvi (8), 312-13 


MIMNERMUS 
fr. (10 Diehl), 14, 90, 203 


457 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


NIcOMACHUS 


ILA. 1, 7 (13, 10 Hoche), 245n.; (13, 15 
Hoche), 318n. 
τ, 17 (108, 8 Hoche), 244 n. 2 


ORIGEN 


ο. Celsum vi (12), 193m.; (42), 64n,, 
65 n. 1, 65-6, 66, 67, 195 


Orphica fr. (66 Kern), 41 n. 1, 46n. 2; (68 
Kern), 46n.1, 56n.; (70 Kern), 
41 n. 2, 45; (78 Kern), 46n. 2; (86, 
1f. Kern),22n.1; (89 Kern), 40 n.2; 
(91-3 Kern), 40 N. 2; (94 Kern), 
40n.2; (96 Kern), 40n.2; (101 
Kern), 22 n.1; (107 Kern), 23n. 1, 
41 n. τ; (109 Kern), 23 ἢ. 1,40n.2 


PARMENIDES 


fr. (1), 266-7; (1, 30), 272; (2), 269, 271, 
278; (2, 4), 272n.; (4), 275; (5), 
268, 276; (6), 183, 194n., 270-1, 
271, 272; (8), 273, 368; (8, 14), 
284; (8, 16), 269; (δ, 16-21), 
324; (8, 17), 281n.; (8, 19-21), 278; 
(8, 22), 275; (8, 22-5), 3245 (8, 25), 
274; (8, 26), 276, 277, 300; (8, 30), 
284; (8, 34), 2775 (8, 36-7), 275; 
(8, 42), 170n., 276, 277, 278, 300; 
(8, 50), 278; (8, 51), 272; (8, 52), 
279; (8, 54), 281; (8, 61), 282; (9), 
282n.; (12), 280, 283, 284; (12, 3), 
115n.; (16), 282; (17), 285n. 


PHERECYDES 
(fr. 2), 57 ἢ. 2, 58n. 1, 60, 63 


PHILODEMUS 

de pietate (13, 16), 23n.1; (14, 18), 
a3n.1; (47a), 17M., 21, 40, 44, 
46 Nn. 3; (137, 5)» 21, 27, 40 

[PHiLo.aus] 


fr. (1 Diels), 310n.; (2), 310n.; (3), 310; 
(4), 310, 311; (5), 309, 311, 318n.; 
(6), 320, 3115 (7),310n.; (10), 310n.; 
(11), 310 

PHILOPONUS 

in Phys. (42, 9), 290 

PINDAR 


Nem. vt (3-4), τὸ 
Ol. τι (17), 56n. 1 


Pyth. 1 (16ff.), 59 
Paean vi (51 ff.), 180 
fr. (131b), 209 ἢ. 2 
zon Ol. x (53), 82 


PLATO 


Apology (26D), 365, 366 

Cratylus (402A), 197, 198 n. 2; (4028), 16, 
17; (4400), 184 

Laws x (8098), 94n. I 

Parmenides (127A), 263; (1286), 286-7, 
288, 291, 299, 301 

Phaedo (618), 307, 312; (85E-86D), 234; 
(96ff.), 3; (968), 162n.; (9887), 
384n., 434; (998), 153; (1ogaff.), 


390 

Phaedrus (261D), 287 

Republic (530D), 218 ἢ. 2; (600A—B), 216, 
218 n. 1 

Sophist (2170), 263; (237A), 271; (2426 
—D), 71 mn. 1, 265; (2420), 165, 202n. 

Symposium (1788). 25 n. 1 

Theaetetus (152D-E), 165; (152E), 16, 17; 
(1600), 165; (1744), 78, 79, 82; 
( ; 79D), 185n. ; (179E), 185n.; (183k), 
203 

Timaeus (22C-E), 122; (40D-E), 17-18, 
18; (526), 250n. 


PLINY 


N.H. 11 (31), 1013 (53), 740.3 (187), 1ogn. 
xvul (213), 86 


xxxvi (82), 83 


PLUTARCH 


adv. Colot. (12, 1113C), 264, 323, 324; 
(20, 1118 c), 212, 214; (28, 11238), 
337, 347; (32, 11264), 265n. 

Alex. fort. 1 (4, 328A), 221 n.3 

Coriol. (22), 211 n. 2 

de E (8, 388pD), 199, 202n., 433; (18, 
392B), 196, 198 

de exilio (11, 604A), 203; (17, 607C¢), 
351-2, 352, 3533 (17, 607D), 359 

de fac. in orb. (12, 926), 326n.; (16, 
9298), 391, 392; (16, 9296), 334, 335 

de Iside (32), 56 n. 13 (34, 364D), 19, 771.» 
g2n. 

de prim. frig. (7, 9478). 148, 149 

de Pyth. or. (6, 397A), 212m.; (12, 4008), 
334n.; (18, 402E), 85; (21, 404E), 
211, 212 

de soll. an. (33, 982A), 142. 

de tranqu. an. (15, 4748). 353 mn. 1, 361 

Maxime cum prince. (2, 7776)» 33% 


458 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


PLuTARCH (continued) 
Nicias (23), 365 n. 2 
Pericles (4; 5; 8), 365 n. 2; (26), 298 
Phocion (12), 159n. 
Quaest. phys. (1, 9110), 393 n.2 
Sept. sap. conv. (2, 147A), 83 
Symp, vul (730E), 141 
1X (7, 7468), 179, 180 


[PLUTARCH] 


Cons. ad Apoll. (10, 106), 189-90, 190, 
212, 434 

Strom. (2), 63, 105--7. 116, 118, 119, 130, 
131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136n., 
137, 141, 142, 4130.3; (3), 145» 
151-2; (4), 173, 176; (12), 432n., 
438, 439; ap. Eusebium P.E. (1, 8, 
10), 332, 333, 334 


PoLyBIus x (27), 325 n. I 


PORPHYRIUS 


de abstinentia (11, 21), 349, 350, 351; (1, 
31), 351 

de antro nymph. (31), 55, 58, 60 

Mist. phil. (fr. 11 Nauck), 395 n. 2 

Quaest. Hom. ad Iliadem τν, 4 (p. 69 
Schrader), 193 n., 205 

Vita Pythagorae (7), 225; (9), 217 n.2; 
(19), 221 m.2, 223; (30), 219, 229 
Nn. 43 (37), 227m.; (42), 227n.; (56), 


51 
ap. Stobaeum Eel. 1 (49, 53), 344 


PROCLUS 


in Cratylum (p. 55 Pasquali), 22 m. 1, 46 
n. 1; (p. 97), 352 

in Euclidem (p. 65 Friedl.), 76, 228 n. 1; 
(p. 352), 83, 84, 85; (p. 426), 
231 n.3 

in Parm. (1, p. 694, 23 Cousin), 289; 
(1, p. 708, 16), 268, 276 

in Tim. (1, p. 345, 18 Diehl), 269, 271, 
272n., 278; (1, p. 54, 28), 61 

SENECA 

Quaest. nat. 1 (18), 138 

mt (14), 92 

SExTus ΕΜΡΙΒΙΟΙΒ 

adv. math. vit (90), 393, 394; (94ff.), 231 
n.2; (111), 266-7; (114), 271; 


(117), 413 0.2, 419; (125), 325; 
(126), 189 n. 2; (120f.), 207, 208, 


213, 214, 420n.; (132), 183, 185, 


187, 189 n.1; (133), 188, 189 n.1, 
1g99N., 208, 214; (135), 422, 423, 424 
and n.; (139), 422; (140), 394 

IX (129), 350, 3513 (144), 170; (193), 
167, 168 

X (34), 176, 179; (281), 255 1.1 


SIMPLICIUS 


de caelo (p. 242, 18 Heiberg), 407-8, 408; 
(242, 21), 419, 420; (295, 1), 407, 
408, 409 π. 2, 415; (295, 9), 416; 
(295, 11), 418-19; (511, 26), 259-- 
60n.; (522, 7), 166; (522, 14), g2n.; 
(529, 1), 331, 346-7, 3473 (557, 16), 
299, 300; (557, 25), 266-7; (558,21), 
197N., 304-5, 406 

in Phys. (p. 22, 23 Diels), 108; (22, 26), 
165, 167n.; (23, 11), 169; (23, 20), 
169; (23, 29), 84, 85; (24, 1), 200; 
(24, 4), 202n.; (24, 13), 100, ΙΟῚ, 
105-7, 107, 108, 109, 116; (24, 17), 
56 5.1, 117, 140, 195; (24, 21), 129, 
130; (24, 26), 143, 144, 145, 146,147, 
149, 152, 155, 3993 (25, 1), 427, 
429-30, 432, 4373 (25, 19), 320, 321; 
(25, 21), 329-30; (27, 11), 38g n.1; 
(27,17), 375 τι.; (27,23), 395n- 2, 396, 
397; (28, 4), 400, 402, 406; (28, 9), 
409 n.2; (29, 22), 299, 300, 306; 
(31, 13), 280, 283; (32, 6), 335, 344, 
432; (32, 13), 331, 346-7, 3473 
(33, 19), 327n.; (33, 21), 3453 
(34, 21), 368, 369, 376, 380, 432; 
(34, 29), 366 n. 1, 378, 379, 380, 389; 
(35, 3), 389, 390; (35, 14), 373-45 
374, 434; (39, 8), 279n.; (39, 14), 
280, 283, 284; (87, 6), 303; (97, 12), 
290; (99, 13), 290, 303; (109, 20), 
299, 300, 306; (109, 31), 299, 300 
n. 2; (109, 34), 300 ἢ. 2, 302; (110, 
3), 299, 300 and n. 2; (110, 5), 299, 
800, 406; (117, 3), 271; (117, 4), 
183, 194n., 270-1, 271, 272; (139- 
41), 289; (139, 8), 288, 289, 290, 
371; (140, 29), 288-9, 290, 371; 
(141, 1), 288, 289, 290, 303, 371; 
(141, 6), 371; (145, 1), 269, 273, 
278, 281n., 324, 368; (145, 23), 274, 
275, 324; (145, 27), 276, 277, 300; 
(146, 7), 275, 2773; (146, 15), 170n., 
276, 277, 278, 300; (149, 18), 428n.; 
(149, 32), 93n., 147M.; (150, 22), 
129; (150, 23), 1075 (151, 20), 428; 
(151, 31), 431 and n., 432 and n., 
433 and n.; (152, 13), 433, 436; 


459 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


SIMPLICIUs (continued ) 


(152, 18), 434-5, 436; (152, 22), 
428n., 432n., 435, 4373 (153, 13), 
429, 442, 444; (153, 19), 436, 437; 
(153, 20), 436, 4373 (154, 29), 3905 
(155, 21), 382, 384; (155, 26), 366 
n. 1, 368, 369, 370, 371, 382, 384; 
(155, 31), 382, 384; (156, 10), 370, 
371; (156, 13), 372, 376, 377, 381, 
411, 434, 4373 (157, 7)» 374) 434; 
(157, 9), 389-90, 390; (158, 1), 
326-7; (158, 6), 324, 345; (158, 13), 
327-8, 329, 330; (159, 21), 328, 
329, 359n.; (163, 20), 264, 369, 432; 
(164, 17), 370, 371, 372; (164, 23), 
376, 377; (164, 24), 372-3, 376, 377, 
411, 434, 4375 (164, 26), 375-6, 376, 
377; (175, 12), 381; (176, 29), 381; 
(179, 3), 382, 383, 384, 397; (179, 8), 
382, 384; (180, 9), 282n.; (180, 14), 
ggn.; (181, 10), 241 n. 13 (189, 1), 
176, 179; (300, 21), 335, 4323 
(300, 31), 373) 375. 4343 (327) 24), 
413 n. 3; (327, 26), 384n.; (331, 12), 
344; (381, 31), 338, 340; (455, 20), 
244; (458, 23), 93n.; (479, 33), 1133 
(651, 26), 252-3n.; (683, 24), 301; 
(732, 20), 223N.; (1 121, 5)» 124, 126; 
(ΤΙΩΙ, 12), 126, 1§1m.; (1183, 30), 
326n.; (1184, 2), 331; (1318, 35), 
417}. 


SOLON 


fr. (16 Diehl), 204n.; (24, 1-7), 56n.1, 
120 


SPEUSIPPUS 


ap. Theologumena Arithmeticae (p. 82, 10 de 
Falco), 2§§ n. 2, 3123; (84, 10), 2§3- 
4, 254 


STESICHORUS 
fr. (6 Diehl), 14, 203 


STOBAEUS 
Anth.1 (1, 6), 318n.; (8, 2), 170, 179, 180; 
(10, 11), 331, 346-7, 3475 (15, 24, 6), 
326n.; (18, 16), 251, 252, 262, 313; 
(21, 75), 310; (21, 7¢), 309, 318n.; 
(21, 74), 310; (49, 53), 344 
Il (7, 31), 424, 425; (9, 3), 424, 425 
mr (1, 172,) 94n.13 (1, 177), 189, 
190; (1, 179), 213, 214; (5, 7), 205, 
206; (5, 8), 205, 206, 214; (40, 6), 
425 


IV (24, 32), 425, 426; (40, 23), 213, 
214 


STRABO 

(1, p. 12 Casaubon), 11; (6, p. 252), 264, 
286; (14, p. 633), 184n.; (14, p. 645), 
364n. 


SUDA 
s.v. ᾿Αναξίμανδρος, 99, 101, 102; Θαλῆς, 85; 
Ἴων Χῖος, 302; Ὀρφεύς, 4on. 1; 


Φερεκύδης, 49, 50, §2, 68; Ζήνων, 
286 n. 


TERTULLIAN 
de corona (7), 67 


'THEMISTIUS 


Or. (5, p. 69 Dindorf), 193, 212; (26, 
p. 383), 85, 1021. 


Theologumena Arithmeticae (p. 52, 8 de 
Falco), 224n.; (82,10), 255 M. 2, 312; 
(84, 10), 253-4, 254 


"VT HEOPHRASTUS 


Hist. plant. πὶ (1, 4), 393 

Met. 11 (6a1g, p. 12 Ross-Fobes), 314 

Φυσικῶν δόξαι (Phys. op.) fr. (1), Bgn.; (2), 
427, 429-30, 432, 4373 (4), 375M.5 
(6), 280n.; (8), 400, 402, 406, 409 
n. 2 

de sensu (1ff.), 282-3; (7), 3433 (9), 344, 
345; (25f.), 233 n.3; (27ff.), 394; 
(39ff.), 440-1, 442; (50), 421; (61), 
414; (66), 418n., 423n. 

ap. Simplicium in Phys. (24, 1), 200; 
(24, 26), 144, 399 


THEO SMYRNAEUS 

(p. 21, 20 Hiller), 317-18; (31, 20), 
244n. 2; (94, 6), 231 n. 2; (97, 17)» 
255 n. 2; (198, 14), 80, 81, 85, 86, 
103n. 

VIRGIL 

Aen. τν (166), 57 n. 2 


Volumina Herculanensia (no. 1012, col. 18), 


356, 357n. 


XENOPHANES 


fr. (1), 164; (2), 168; (3), 164; (7), 164, 


460 


INDEX OF PASSAGES 


MENOPHANES (continued ) 


219, 222, 223; (8), 163, 164; (10), 
169; (11), 167, 168; (14), 166, 168, 
169n.; (15), 169; (16), 168, 169n.; 
(18), 170, 179, 180; (23), 169, 170, 
180; (24), 170; (25), 169; (26), 169; 
(28), 11, 88, 175, 176; (29), 176,179; 
(30), 176, 177, 1793 (32), 1733 (33), 
176, 1793 (34), 179, 180; (35), 179, 
180; (37), 177, 1793 (38), 180 


461 


XENOPHON 
Porot 1v (14-15), 366 n. 2 


ΖΕΝΟ OF CITIUM 
(SVF 1, 103), 26 


ZENO OF ELEA 


fr. (1), 288, 289, 290, 303, 371; (2), 288, 
289, 200; (3) 288-9, 290, 371 


GENERAL INDEX 


For ancient authors see also the Index of Passages (pp. 451 ff.). Reference 
is not normally made in this General Index to the content of passages 
quoted or cited, unless this is the subject of further comment. 


Abstinence, Pythagorean rules of, 225-7 

Abstract, Melissus and the incorporeal 
one, 302-4; Presocratic difficulty of 
apprehension, 330; Anaxagoras’ pro- 
gress towards, 3'72—5 

Acusilaus of Argos, cosmogony associated 
with, 21, 22, 38; his interpretation 
of χάος, 27 

Aegospotami, fall of meteor at, 156, 392, 
439 

ἀήρ (mist), between earth and sky, 10, 
146; distinguished from ‘air’, 22; 
from αἰθήρ, 333 ἢ. 1; associated with 
Night in Orphic and Hesiodic cos- 
mogony, 22; one of Epimenides’ 
first principles, 23 ἢ. 2; compared 
with ψυχή by Anaximenes, 158-62; 
synonymous with πνεῦμα, 158, 159; 
as exhalation from the sea, source 
of fire, 207 ἢ. 13 see also Air 

Aeschylus, 194n.; on impregnation of 
earth by rain, 393 n. 1; Xenophanes’ 
influence on, 168, 170; affinities 
with Heraclitus, 71, 212n. 

Aetius, 2, 6, 124; and the Vetusta Placita, 
4-5; on Thales, 77-8, 95n.; on 
Anaximander, 105, 113; on Anaxi- 
menes, 158; on Heraclitus, 208; on 
Pythagoras, 229 n. 3; on Empedo- 
cles, 334, 340; on Anaxagoras, 390; 
on the atomists, 418, 421 

Ahriman, bad principle of Zoroastri- 
anism, 241 n. I 

Aia, identified with Colchis, 54 ἢ. 3 

ἀίδιον, in cosmogony of Anaximander, 
132, 1393 n. 1 

Aidoneus, in cosmology of Empedocles, 
324 

Air, in post-Hesiodic cosmogony, 20; 
distinguished from ἀήρ, 22; in 
Anaximander, 131, 133; in Anaxi- 
menes, 143, 144-53, 154-5, 161; in 
Empedocles, 324, 333; his assump- 
tion of its corporeality, 342, 409 n. 4; 


in cosmogony of Anaxagoras, 369, 
382, 384; distinguished from void 
(Anaxagoras, Empedocles), 370n.; in 
Archelaus, 398; in theory of atomists, 
409 ἢ. 3, 420n.; in system of Dio- 
genes, 434-8, 442, 4445 see also ἀὴρ 
αἰθήρ, the upper air, 10; in Orphic cos- 
mogony, 41, 42, 45; gencration from 
Erebos (Hesiod), 26; identified with 
fire (Heraclitus), 161, 200; popularly 
regarded as divinc, 200n., 206; 
normally distinguished from ἀήρ, 
333 n.13 in cosmogony of Anaxa- 
goras, 382, 383, 384 
Alcmaeon of Croton, 119, 180, 221 n. 5, 
239-40 
date and relevance, 232-3; contact 
with Pythagorean school, 232; his 
book, 232 
medical and physiological interests, 
232, 285n.; theory of health and 
dualism, 232, 234, 262 
on the composition of the soul, 235, 
262 
influence on his successors, 234-5, 262, 
283 
Alexander of Aphrodisias, as source for 
Simplicius, 3-4, 104; on Anaxi- 
mandcr, 111, 139, 178; on Zeno, 
290; on Anaxagoras, 363; on 
Diogenes, 439 
Ameinias, and Parmenides, 264, 265 
Anacalypteria (Unveiling of the bride), 61 
Anatomy, Diogenes’ views, 443-5; used 
as parallel with cosmos, 444-5 
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, 110, 115n., 
110, 152, 162, 201, 250, 264, 304, 
395, 307, 320, 321, 335, 395» 399> 
405, 406, 420n., 427 
sources for, 1, 4, 5-6 
date and life, 362-5; the trial, 364; 
pupils and associates, 364-5 
writings, 365-7 
problem of interpretation, 367-8 


462 


GENERAL INDEX 


Anaxagoras of Clazomenae (continued) 

reaction to Parmenides and _ carlier 
pluralists, 319, 368-70, 374; com- 
position of the original mixture, 
369-70, 380-1; and cf. 131 n. 2 

reaction to Zeno, 370-2, 377-8 

Mind, 372-6; regarded as a substance, 
250; and the single god of Xeno- 
phanes, 172; and motion, 374-5 
(cf. 133 n. 2); and Empedocles’ 
Love and Strife, 374; dualism of mind 
and matter, 375; Archelaus’ modi- 
fications, 397-8 

‘in everthing a portion of cvcrything’, 
375-7; significance of πλὴν νοῦ, 376; 
application to nourishment, 385-6 

‘seeds’ and ‘portions’, 377-8 

‘seeds’ and opposites, 378-815; exten- 
sion of Empedocles’ views, 380-1, 
383, 432 

the opposites, 381 (and cf. 191) 

beginnings of cosmogony, 382—4 

nourishment and growth, 385-6, 432 

Homoeomeries, 386-8 

summary, and contrast with atomists, 
388-9; their debt to him, 411, 426 

special doctrines, 389-94; question of 
innumerable worlds, 389-90; as- 
tronomy and meteorology, 390-2, 
413 n. 4, 414 n. 6, 439 (and cf. 152n., 
153, 156, 157); biology, 392-3, 444, 
445n.; sensation, 393-4 

influence on Diogenes, 430, 4.32 


Anaximander of Miletus, 43, 49, 50, 55, 

143, 196, 214, 398, 434 

Hippolytus as source for, 5-6 

life and date, 99-101; association with 
Sparta, 99, 102~3, 104n.; relation to 
Thales, 100-1, 105;slight evidence for 
connexion with Pythagoras, roon.; 
colonization of Apollonia, 104 

his book, 101-2, 105 

scientific activities, 102-4; the map, 
63, 99, 103-4; astronomy and the 
gnomon, 81, 99, 102-3 

τὸ ἄπειρον, 104-17; origin of, 31n.; use 
of ἀρχή, 105, 107-8, 111; meaning of 
ἄπειρον, 108-10; Aristotle’s inter- 
pretation, 108; Anaximander’s use 
(spatially indefinite or indefinite in 
kind), 109-10; as an intermediate 
substance (Aristotle), 110-12; rea- 
sons for postulating, 112-14; charac- 
teristics, 114-17; view of change, 
114, 128 


the extant fragment, 117-21; extent, 
117-18; meaning, 118-19; original 
and Theophrastean elements, 117- 
18, 119-20, 121; the opposites, 
119-20, and cf. 329; justice and 
injustice, 118-21, 195-6; the ‘assess- 
ment of time’, 120-1 (and cf. 56 
n. 1) 

the innumerable worlds, 121-6, 390; 
a cycle of worlds rejected, 122-3; 
atomist arguments applied to Anaxi- 
mander, 123-4; atomistic worlds 
assigned to Anaximander, 124-6, 
128; clements in his cosmology en- 


couraging innumerable-world in- 
terpretation, 126 
cosmogony, 126-33; doubtful rele- 


vance of ‘eternal motion’ and vortex, 
126-9, 130; opposites, 113-14, 119- 
21; ‘Lheophrastus’ misinterpreta- 
tion, 121, 126; separation of oppo- 
sites, 128-31, 132-3, 413 ἢ. 3; 
formation of the cosmos, 131-3 

cosmology, 134-40; the earth, 81-2, 
134-5, and cf. 63; the heavenly 
bodies, 135-7; mathematical basis, 
136, 137; possible influence on 
Pythagoras, 136; meteorological 
phenomena, 137-9; the earth drying 
up, 139-40, 178; the cyclical pro- 
cess, 139-40 

zoogony and anthropogony, 140, 141-2 

influence on Anaximenes, 162; on 
Empedocles, 360 

Anaximenes of Milctus, 55, 93n., 115n., 

124, 134, 183, 200, 206, 207 nn. 1 
and 2, 427 

sources for, 4, 5-6 

date, life, book, 143-4; style, 144 

his view of change, 144, 145, 149, 161, 
162 

air, 144-53; as basic form of matter, 
144-8; reason for the choice, 144-7, 
161; nature of ἀήρ and πνεῦμα, 146—7 
(and cf. 57); condensation and rare- 
faction, 147; as cause of heat and 
cold, 148-50; gives life to matter, 
147; assumption of other basic forms 
unlikely, 147-8; air is divine, 150-1; 
attribution to Anaximenes of innu- 
merable worlds, 151n. (and cf. 126) 

attitude to doctrine of opposites, 147, 
149 

and scientific experiment, 149n. 

attitude to conventional religion, 150 


463 


GENERAL INDEX 


Anaximenes of Miletus (continued) 

cosmogony, 151-3; air as origin of 
earth, 152; origin of heavenly 
bodies, 152; confusion with other 
thinkers, 152 

cosmology, 153-8; earth, flat, floats on 
air, 153, 1543 the heavenly bodies, 
154-7; inaccuracy of doxographical 
attributions, 155-6; explanation of 
setting of sun and stars, 156-7, 439; 
meteorological phenomena, 157-8 

ἀήρ-Ψψυχή comparison, 158-62, 436 (and 
cf.207 n. 2); cxplanations of the com- 
parison, 160-2 

his debt to predecessors and later 
influence, 162, 172, 399, 427, 430 

Parmenides’ references to, 264, 275 

and parallel between human body and 
cosmos, 444 

Androclus, founder of Ephesus, 184n., 

Andron of Ephesus, on Pherecydes, 51 

Animism, primitive, contrasted with 
Thales’ view of the soul, 95; in 
Homer, 97n. 

Anonymus Londinensis, on Ilippon, 89n.; 
on Philolaus, 312 

Antiphon, 263 

Antisthenes, on Heraclitus, 184n.; on 
travels of Democritus, 404n.; on 
Diogenes, 427 

Anu, Hittite sky god, 36 

ἄπειρος, ἀπείρων, 109, 110nn.; applied to 
air, 146; see also Anaximander (τὸ 
ἄπειρον) 

Aphrodite, 35, 214; equated by Empe- 
docles with cosmic Love, 330, 349; 
see also Kupris, Love and Strife 

ἀποκρίνεσθαι, applied to opposites, 129-30 

ἀπόκρισις, use of in embryology, 133n. 

Apollo, 350n.1; Orphic cult of, 37; 
Heraclitus and the oracle at Delphi, 
211, 212, 213 

Apollodorus of Athens, his dates: Phere- 
cydes, 49; Thales, 74n.; Anaxi- 
mander, 99, 100, 101, 144n; Xeno- 
phanes, 164; Heraclitus, 182-3; 
Pythagoras, 217; Parmenides, 264; 
Zeno, 286; Melissus, 298; Philolaus, 
307; Empedocles, 320-1; Anaxa- 
goras, 363; Leucippus, 400 

Apollonia (Pontic), colonized by Anaxi- 
mander, 104; and Diogenes, 427 

Apollonius Paradoxographus, on con- 
nexion between Pythagoras and 
Pherecydes, 50-1, 218 ἢ. 3 


Apollonius Rhodius, on separation of 
earth and sky, 32-3; on the fight 
between Kronos and Ophioneus, 
66-7, 69; non-Orphic elements at- 
tributed to Orphcus, 67 n. 1 

ἀπορρήγνυσθαι, use of in biology, 133 n. 1 

Apsu, in Babylonian Crcation-epic, 13n., 
34, 90 

Apuleius, on Anaximander, 100n. 

ἀρχή, Aristotle’s use of, 88, 92, 97; 
Anaximandcr’s, 105, 107-8, 111 

Archelaus of Athens, 124 

sources for, 4, 5-6, 398 n. 1 

date and life, 395; association with 
Anaxagoras and Socrates, 4264 ἢ., 
395, 396 

cosmology and zoogony, 396-8; modi- 
fication of Anaxagoras’ Mind, 397- 
8; primary substance, 397-8; the 
four world-masses, 398; zoogony, 
398 

his lack of originality, 398-9 

Archytas, 221 n. 5, 233 ἢ. 2; on Eurytus, 
914 

Ares, in Empedocles’ Purifications, 349 

ἀρέσκοντα, see ‘Placita’ 

Arimon, 58, 59 

Aristophanes, 132, 201n.; meaning of χάος 
in, 27; cosmogonical concepts in, 44, 
45-6, 47, 62 n. 4; and Thales, 76; 
use of ἄπειρος, 110 n. 1; on Diogenes, 
403, 427, 443 n. 2 

Aristotle 

as source for Presocratic thought: 
quotations, 1; his surveys of Pre- 
socratic opinions, 3; Simplicius’ 
commentary on Physics, 3-4; his 
influence on Theophrastus, 4, 6-7; 
and non-Theophrastean judgements 
in the doxographical tradition, 6 

on cosmogonical concepts: Okeanos 
and Tethys, 16-17; Night, 22, 24, 
40; interpretation of χάος, 26 

on the date of Epimenides, 45 

on Pherecydes of Syros, 48, 71 

on σπέρμα, 57 

on Thales, 79; cosmology, 87-97 
passim; use of ἀρχή, 88, 92, 97; not 
acquainted with his writings, 85 

on Hippon, go n. 1 

on ‘hylozoism’, 97 

on Anaximander: and Theophrastus’ 
account of originative substance, 
107-8; Peripatetic interpretation of 
τὸ ἄπειρον, 108; the Indefinite as 


464 


GENERAL INDEX 


Aristotle (continued) 

an intermediate substance, 110-12; 
reasons for choice of the Indefinite, 
113-14; the Indefinite ‘enfolds all 
and steers all’, 114-16; and appli- 
cation of atomist-type arguments, 
123-6; and relevance of eternal 
motion and vortex, 127-8; on sepa- 
rating out of opposites, 129-31; the 
earth drying up, 139 

on Anaximenes: air as originative 
substance, 145; air as divine, 151; 
cosmology, 153, 155; meteorology, 
158; the soul as air, 162n. 

on Xenophanes: and connexion with 
Parmenides, 165-6; on single god, 
171-2; cosmology, 176 

on Heraclitus, 185; defects in his 
assessment, 186-7; extension of 
Platonic interpretation of flux, 
196-7, 198n.2; his dual exhala- 
tion and Heraclitus’ meteorological 
views, 204n.; soul as the fiery cx- 
halation, 207 n. 1 

on Pythagoreanism, 216, 218, 236; his 
lost book, 218 nn. 2 and 3, 253, 
259n.; the Decad, 229; his summary, 
236-40; dualism, 240-1; Limit and 
Unlimited, Odd and Even, 242; 
Number, equation of Even with Un- 
limited, 243-5; units have magni- 
tude, 245-8; things equal numbers, 
248-50; distinction between con- 
crete and abstract, 250; cosmogony: 
the first unit, 250-2; the void, 252- 
3; points, lines, planes, solids, 254— 
5; qualitative distinctions, 256-7; 
astronomy, 257-61; the soul, 261-2 

on Parmenides, 265; the Way of 
Seeming, 280n. 

on Zeno, 291-2; the stadium argu- 
ment, 293; Achilles and the tortoise, 
294; the arrow, 294-5; the moving 
rows, 295-7 

on Melissus, 300 

on Xuthus, 301, 302 n. 3 

and the fragments of Philolaus, 309-11, 
312 

on Empedocles: moral character attri- 
buted to Love and Strife, 330nn.; 
evolution, 338n., 339; sense-percep- 
tion, 344 n. 2 (and cf. 406 n. 4); 
the rule of Strife, 346; transition 
back to rule of Love, 347; primal 
innocence, parallel with the Sphere, 


30 46 5 


350 ἢ. 2; consciousness, 358-9; his 
view of the soul and Empedocles’, 
360; comparison with Anaxagoras, 
380-1 

on Anaxagoras: equation of void with 
Not-being, 370n.; seeds and oppo- 
sites, 380; comparison with Empe- 
docles, 380-1; and Socrates’ criti- 
cism of Mind, 384n.; on homoeo- 
meries, 386-7; and Anaxagoras’ 
belief in only one world, 39on. 

on the atomists: origin of theory, 
405-6; atoms and the void, 408, 
409n.2; weight of atoms, 415; 
motion, 417-18; formation of bodies, 
419-20; sensation as touch, 420n., 
423; soul- and fire-atoms, 420n. 

on Diogenes: the soul as air, 162n.; 
and attribution of intermediate sub- 
stance, 428n.; anatomical work, 429 

[Aristotle], ALXG, 165-6, 304n. 

Aristoxenus, his biographies, 6; on Phere- 
cydes, 49 n.1, 51; on Pythagoras, 
65 n.2, 225n., 241n.1; on Pytha- 
goreanism, 221 n.2; and story of 
Plato’s plagiarism, 308; on odd and 
even, 318n. 

ἁρμονίη, in Heraclitus, 193n., 194; per- 
sonified by Empedocles, 335 

Arnobius, 4. 

Assyrian thought, reflected in Greek art, 
ggn. 

Astronomy: heavenly bodies as bowls, 10, 
14, 15, 157, 203; Thales, 79-83; his 
nautical star-guide, 85-6; Baby- 
lonian, 80, 81,82 and n.; stellar obser- 
vation in archaic times, 86; Anaxi- 
mander, 99; star-maps (spheres), 99, 
103; Anaximenes, 154-7, 4140.43 
Heraclitus, 175, 202-4; Pythagorcan, 
230, 257-60; Parmenides, 230, 284; 
Empedocles, 333-5, 414 ἢ. 4; An- 
axagoras, 392, 414 nn. 4, 6; atomists, 
412; Diogenes, 439; see also Moon, 
Navigation, Planets, Stars, Sun 

ἀθαμβίη, in Democritean ethics, 425 

“Arn, as instrument of divine power, 
170 

Athenaeus, 2 

Athenagoras, 5; on Orphic cosmogony, 
42-3 

Athene, 63, 64n. 

Athens, 263, 402, 404n.; Parmenides’ and 
Zeno’s visit, 267n.; naval defeat at 
Samos, 298; Anaxagoras at, 364, 395 


K&R 


GENERAL INDEX 


Atomists (Leucippus and Democritus) 
Hippolytus as source for, 5-6 
Aristotle and atomist arguments ap- 
plied to Anaximander, 123-4; Ana- 
ximander and atomist-type worlds, 
124-6 
Ionian elements in their cosmology, 
153; improbability of Anaximenes 
as forerunner, 148n.; foreshadowed 
by Melissus, 304-6; their solution 
contrasted with Anaxagoras’, 388—9 
attitude to Parmenidean demands, 319 
individual contributions, and dates, 
400-3 
writings, 403-4 
origins of the atomic theory, 404-6 
atoms and the void, 406-9; the shape 
and size of atoms, 408n., 409 n. 2, 
420n. 
formation of worlds, 409-14; chance 
and necessity, 411, 412.1; in- 
numerable worlds, 412; the carth 
and heavenly bodies, 412 
behaviour of atoms, 414 21; weight, 
414-16 
‘original’ and ‘derived’ motion, 416— 
18; (cf. 422) 
formation of bodies, 418—21 
sensation, thought, knowledge, 421-4 
ethics, 424-6; possible connexion with 
physics, 426n. 
their position in Presocratic thought, 
426; and modern atomic theory, 426 
Atoms, confusion with points and units, 
246-50, 254-6, 290-1, 315, 371. See 
also Atomists 
Atum, in Babylonian creation-cpic, 
13 5.1, 57 
Augustine, St, as source for Presocratic 


thought, 4, 125 


Babylon: mythology, similarities with 
Greek, 9, 12-13, 18-19, 21n., 34, 58, 
71-2, go-1; thought of, reflected in 
Greek art, 39n.1; prediction of 
eclipses, 80, 82, 97; invention of the 
gnomon, 80; Greek scientists’ debt to, 
80, 102 

Bacchylides, meaning of χάος in, 27 

Bailey, C., on Anaxagoras, 367, 377; on 
the atomists, 402, 409n.2, 416n.; 
on περιπάλαξις, 418; on Democritean 
ethics, 426n. 

Baldry, H. C., on cosmogony of Anaxi- 
mander, 133 n.1 


Barnctt, R. D., on the Kumarbi-Tablet, 
ΟῚ 

Basilides, father of Isidorus the Gnostic, 
65 n.2 

Bathylaus, Pythagorean, 233 n. 4 

Bignone, E., on Empedocles (fr. 134), 
349, 350 

Biology: biological language in cosmo- 
gonical explanation, 133n.1; in 
Anaximander, 141-2; Anaxagoras’ 
theories, 392—3; influence on thought 
of Diogenes, 434n.; see also Embryo- 
logy, Physiology 

Birds, in cosmogony, 44-6; 
Aristophanes 

Blood, and Empedocles’ views on con- 
sciousness, 344-5, 358-9; its pro- 
ducts, in Diogenes, 444 

Books, use of standard titles, 101; con- 
tents of papyrus rolls, 102 n. 2; prices 
in 4th-century Athcns, 366 and n. 2 
(and cf. 308) 

Botany, Empedoclcs’ contribution, 340 

Bowra, Sir M., on Parmenides’ Proecm, 
268 

Brahmins, and teachings of Pythagoras, 
224, 

Brain, as seat of sensation, in Alcmaecon, 
2330.3; as instrument of intelli- 
gence, 442n. 

Brotinus (Brontinus), connected with 
Pythagoras, 233 ἢ. 4 

Burnet, J., viii, 218, 219; on Thales, 84n., 
96; on G6th-century meteorological 
interest, 89; on Anaximander, 100, 
107-8, 122, 128; on Anaximenes, 
151n.; on Xenophanes, 166, 167; on 
5th-century Pythagoreanism, 236n.; 
on Parmenides, 264, 269, 270, 279- 
80 and n.; on Melissus, 303, 305; on 
Empedocles, 322, 334, 353 n. 1; on 
rise of the experimental method, 342; 
on Anaxagoras, 366; on concept of 
weight, 415; on the atomists, 402, 
416n.; on the writings of Diogenes, 
428 

Bywater, I., on fragments of Philolaus, 
308, 411 


and seé 


Cadmeians, among Ionian colonists, 75n. 
Cadmus, marriage-gift to Harmonia, 
62 n. 3; ancestor of Thales, 74 
Calendar, determination of in archaic 

period, 86 
Calliades, archonship of, 363 


466 


GENERAL INDEX 


Callimachus, 50; on Thales’ work in 
navigation, 82, 86 

Callir(r)hoe, 67 n. 2 

Cartography: map of Anaximander, 63, 
99, 103-4; of Hecataeus, 103-4 

Casius, Mt, as scene of fight between 
Zeus and Typhoeus, 68 

χαλαρός, used by Anaximenes, 148 

Chalcidius, 39 n.1, 209 n. 2 

Chaldaeans, and teaching of Pythagoras, 
224, 

Chance and nccessity, in theory of atoms, 
411, 412 andn. I 

Change, in Anaximander, 114, 128; 
Anaximenes, 144, 145, 149, 162; 
Heraclitus, 187, 191-2, 195-6; his 
river image, 196-9; Melissus, 197n.; 
Parmenides, 278; Empedocles, 324 

Chaos 

archaic cosmogonical position of, ac- 
cording to Aristotle, 20; in Orphic 
cosmogonical succession, 22 n.1I3 in 
Hesiodic cosmogony, 22; in later ad- 
ditions, 23-4, 29-31; priority and 
primacy of, 24, 26—7, 44; offspring, 26 
interpretations of χάος, 26-7; etymo- 

logy, 27; use in literature, 27; in 
Theogony, 28 {f.; Cornford’s interpre- 
tation as gap between earth and sky, 
28-9, 31; comparison with Nordic 
ginnunga-gap, 29 n.1; description of 
underworld in variants appended to 
Titanomachy, 23-4, 29-31; nature 
of the gap and relation to Tartaros, 
31; interpretations of Vlastos and 
Holscher, 31n.; in Pherecydes, 56, 
598. 

χάσμα, the windy gap, location of Night, 
24, 41n. 1 

χέεσθαι, as etymological source of χάος, 
56, 59 n.1 

Cherniss, H., on τὸ ἄπειρον, 110 N. 2, 113; 
on opposites in Anaximander, 118— 
1gn.; on Aristotle’s view of the soul, 
420n. 

Choerilus of Iasus, 96 n. 2 

χρεών, meaning of, 117 

χροιά, in Pythagorean cosmology, 251 

Chronos, oriental origin of cosmogonical 
concept, 39 n.1, 56 n.1; represented 
as winged snake, 39 n.1; in Orphic 
cosmogony, 39 N.I, 40, 41, 42, 45, 
46n.1, 56n.1; association with 
Kronos, 39 n. 1, 45, 56, 58-9, 66, 67; 
in cosmogony of Pherecydes, 49, 


467 


50 n.1, 54-5, 56 n. 1; initial creation 
from his seed, in Pherecydes, 57-60, 
70; supplanted by Zas-Zeus, 67, 69; 
as father of Ophioneus, 70; see also 
Time 

Χρόνου τάξις, in Anaximander, 56n., 120 

Chrysippus, on cosmogonical position of 
Night, 22 n.1 

Chthonie, in cosmogony of Pherecydes, 
49, 55» 56, 57.2, 58; given the 
name of Ge, 55, 57 ἢ. 2; significance 
of, in relation to earth, 56, 61; as 
guardian of marriage, 61; marriage 
to Zas and gift of embroidered cloth, 
60-2; the winged oak and the cloth, 
62-5; as parent of Ophioncus, 70; 
equated with Hera, 70 (cf. 61) 

Cicero, his use of the Vetusta Placita, 5; on 
Pherecydes’ view of the soul, 60n.; 
on god as mind, 96n.1; on in- 
numerable worlds, 124, 125n., 151}. 

Cleanthes, 196n.; his work on Hera- 
clitus, 6 

Clement of Alexandria, as source for Pre- 
socratic thought, 2, 6; on Heraclitus, 
1ggn. 

Cleon, and prosecution of Anaxagoras, 
362 

Cleostratus of Tenedos, his Astrologia, 86 

Colchis, identified with Ala, 541.3 

Colophon, birthplace of Xenophanes, 73, 
163, 164; capture of (5465 B.c.), 
164; foundation and alleged poem of 
Xenophanes, 166 

Consciousness, Empedocles on, 344-5, 
357-90 

Cornford, F. M., his interpretation of 
χάος, 28 ff.; on τὸ ἄπειρον, 109, 110N.; 
on Anaximander, 122, 124, 131 n. 2, 
132, 142; on 5th-century Pytha- 
goreanism, 236n.; on the Table of 
Opposites, 240-1; on ‘number- 
atomism’, 247n.; on equation of 
abstracts with numbers, 250; on 
Pythagorean cosmogony, 251; on 
Parmenides, 275, 281n.; on Zeno, 
289-90, 371-2; on Empedocles, 323; 
on Presocratics and scientific experi- 
ment, 342; on Anaxagoras, 367, 
386, 390 

Cosmogony 

in mythological contexts, 8; Hesiod’s 

attempt at systematization of legend, 
8; rational investigations of the 
Milesians, 8, 10 


30-2 


GENERAL INDEX 


Cosmogony (continued) 
the naive view of the world, 10-11 
the concept of Okeanos, 8, 11-19 
the concept of Night, 8, 19-24; in 
cosmogonical ideas associated with 
Orpheus, 8, 21-4 
similarities in near-eastern mythology, 
9, 12-13, 18-19, 20n. 
anthropomorphic image of growth of 
the world, g—10 
Hesiodic, and separation of earth and 
sky, 24-32; separation in Greek 
literature, 932-3; in non-Greek 
sources, 33-4 
mutilation myth in Hesiod, 34-7; 
Hittite parallel, 36—7 
Orphic, 37-48; neoplatonic accounts, 
39-40; ‘the usual Orphic theology’, 
41; Hieronymus and Hellanicus, 
41-2; Athenagoras, 42-3; the egg, 
448 
Pherecydes of Syros, 48-72 
of Anaximander, 126-33 
of Anaximenes, 151-3 
Pythagorean, 250-62; Parmenides and, 
274, 275, 276-7; similarities in 
Philolaus, 313 
of Empedocles, 332-5, 345-8 
of Anaxagoras, 382-5 
of Archelaus, 398 
of the atomists, 409-14 
of Diogenes, 438-9 
Cosmology 
of Thales, 87-98 
influence of study of medicine on, 89 
of Anaximander, 134-40 
of Anaximenes, 153-8 
of Parmenides, 280, 284 
of Empedocles, 324-30 
of Archelaus, 396-8 
of the atomists, 404-8, 414-20 
of Diogenes, 438-9 
Cratylus, his Heracliteanism, 185 and n., 
186; and the river-image, 197, 
198 n. 2 
Croesus, assisted by Thales in crossing of 
Halys, 75-6 
Croton, 265, 307n.; Pythagoras at, 217 
Cyril of Alexandria, 5 
Cyrus, King of Persia, 49, 163, 164 


Daimons, in Aetius’ account of Thales, 
g5n.; in Heraclitus, 209, 214 

Damascius, 23 nn. 2, 4; on priority of 
Night in Eudemus, 21, cf. 40; on 


Orphic cosmogonies, 39, 
πεντέμυχος, 5O NI 

Damasias, archonship of, 49, 74n. 

Darius I, King of Persia, 163, 164 

Darkness, as Hades’ sharc in division of 
cosmos, 20n.; in Pythagorean Table 
of Opposites, 238; as one of primary 
pair of contraries (Parmenides), 281; 
see also Night 

Darwin, Ch., Empedocles’ alleged antici- 
pation of his theories, 338 

Davison, J.A.,on trial of Anaxagoras, 364. 

Day, cosmogonical position of, 20; genera- 
tion from Erebos (Hesiod), 26 

Decad, the, in Pythagorean doctrine, 229, 
230 ῃ. 2, 312 

Deichgraber, K., on Xenophanes’ earth- 
sea cycle, 179; on his view of know- 
ledge, 180 

Delatte, A., 209 n. 2 

Delos, 53, 54 ἢ. 2; in legend of Phere- 
cydes, 51 

Delphi, Heraclitus and the oracle at, 
211, 212, 213 

Demeter, 57 n.2 

Demetrius of Phaleron, on Thales, 74n., 
94 n.1; on Anaxagoras, 363 

‘Democrates’, and ethical writings of 
Democritus, 425 

Democritus of Abdera, 123, 124, 132, 236, 
307 371, 372, 395, 408n., 409 n. 2, 
445; Stobacus as source, 2, 425; lost 
work by Theophrastus, 4; in Dio- 
dorus, 33 n.1; on the nationality of 
Thales, 74; on Thales as astronomer, 
79, 83n.; on the drying-up of the sea 
and the end of the world, 139 and n.; 
on the shape of the earth, 152n., 153, 
412; debt to Milesians, 162; distinc- 
tion between sensation and φρόνησις, 
189 n. 2, 422-4; his travels, 404n.; 
on vortex-action, 411, 413 ἢ. 2; on 
innumerable worlds, 412, 414 τ. 5; 
and weight of atoms, 415; and 
‘original’ motion, 417; his ethical 
writings, 424-6; see also Atomists 
(Leucippus and Democritus) 

Deucalion, 140, 178 

Διαδοχαί (accounts of philosophical suc- 
cessions), 4, 5 

Dicaearchus of Messene, 221n.2; on 
Pherecydes, 51 

Diels, H., 60n., 143n., 169n., 175n., 
177, 191, 195N., 204N., 232n., 252n., 
279N., 305, 327N., 334 n.1, 398 ἢ. 3, 


42 nn.; 


468 


GENERAL INDEX 


Diels (continued) 
407, 417n., 419, 423n., 438; his 
Doxographi Graect, 5, 78; on Phere- 
cydes’ book, 50 n.1; on the winged 
oak, 63; on Thales’ star-guide, 86; on 
Anaximander’s views on stars, 136; 
on πίλησις, 145; on Xenophanes’ 
earth-sea cycle, 179; on Heraclitus’ 
γνῶμαι, 185; on Empcdocles fr. 129, 
21gn.; on Parmenides’ Proem, 268; 
on date of Empedocles, 321n.; on his 
writings, 322n.; on fr. 27-8, 326n.; 
on Democritus, 425; on Diogenes, 428 
δίκη, in Heraclitus, 195; personified, 203 
Diller, H., on Diogenes, 430n. 
Diodorus Siculus, cosmogony and anthro- 
pogony in Bk. I, 33 Π.1, 402 Π.1 
Diogenes of Apollonia, 115 and n., 116, 
124, 144, 15In., 201n., 403 
date and life, 427 
writings, 427-9; his medical work, 429 
his eclecticism, 429-31; influence of 
other thinkers, 162, 319, 427, 430, 
432, 434, 437, 438, 439 
the basic substance, 431-4; contains 
divine intelligence, 433-4;  teleo- 
logical belief, 433 
air as basic form of matter, 434-8; life 
due to, 436; is soul and intelligence, 
436 (cf. 162n.); divine, controls, 437; 
forms differ according to tempera- 
ture, 437-8 
cosmogony and cosmology, 438-40; 
doctrine of plurality of worlds attri- 
buted to him, 126, 439; views on 
astronomy, 156, 157, 439 
physiology, 440-5; cognition, 440-3; 
anatomy and reproduction, 443-5, 
and cf. 57 
Diogenes Laertius, as source for Pre- 
socratics, 2, 3, 4, 6; on Thales, 81-2, 
83-6; on Anaximenes, 143; on Hera- 
clitus, 185, 203, 204n.; on Pytha- 
goras, 221 n. 1, 229 ἢ. 3; on Par- 
menides, 264; on Zeno, 286n.; on 
Empedocles, 322; on Archelaus, 
395; on the atomists, 411n., 413 ἢ. 4 
Dion of Syracuse, 221 n.3, 308 
Dionysus, identified with Hades (Hera- 
clitus), 211, 212; in ‘Orphic’ 
mythology, 351 
Dodds, E. R., Zhe Greeks and the Ir- 
rational, 9; and cf. Bibliography, p. 446 
Dodona, Zeus’ shrine at, 64 
Douris, on nationality of Thales, 74, 75 


Doxographical tradition, as source for 
Presocratic thought, 4-7; and views 
of Thales, 88; and ‘innumerable 
worlds’, 124-6; and Xenophanes’ 
physical ideas, 173-5; and concept 
of plurality of worlds, 412 

Dualism, Pythagorean, 240-1;  Par- 
menides and, 277; influence on 
Empedocles, 330 n. 1; of Anaxagoras, 


375 
Dyroff, A., on weight in atomists, 416n. 


Earth 

relation to sky and Tartaros, 10-11; 
solidly rooted, 10, 64; surrounded 
by Okecanos, 11-15; roots of, in 
Hesiod, 23-4, 64 

separation from sky, implies advent of 
Day and Night, 20; separation in 
Hesiodic cosmogony, 28-32; in 
Greek literature, 32-3; in non-Greek 
sources, 33-4; relevance of near- 
eastern cosmological ideas on, 12, 
36-7, 90- Ὁ 

impregnated by rain, 29 ἢ. 2, 393; by 
severed member of god, 35, 36 

represented by winged oak in Phere- 
cydes, 64 

Thales: floats on water, 77, 87-9, 90-2, 
134; originates from water, 92-3 

Anaximander: free-swinging, 81-2, 
128-9, 135; cylindrical, 133, 134; 
formation of, 131, 133; drying up, 
139-40, 178 

Anaximenes: flatness as cause of 
stability, 152 n.1, 153, 154; tilted, 
156-7, 414.n.4, and cf. 439 

Xenophanes: has roots, 175-6 (cf. 88) ; 
becomes sea again, 177-9, 201 

relation to sea and fire in Heraclitean 
cosmos, 200-2 

in Pythagorean cosmology, 259-60 

as one of Empedocles’ four roots, 324, 
346 

Anaxagoras’ view, 391-2, 439 (cf. 
152n.); heavenly bodies thrown off 
from, 392 

in cosmogony of Archelaus, 398 

the atomists: flat, tambourine-like, 
tilted, 412, 413 n. 4, 439; Composi- 
tion of, 421n. 

Diogenes: a tilted disc, 439 

See also Gaia (Ge) 

Earthquakes, Thales’ explanation of, 

go ἢ. 2, 92; Anaximenes’, 158 


469 


GENERAL INDEX 


Echidna, 67 n.2, 68n. 

Ecphantus of Syracuse, on spatial exten- 
sion of the unit, 247n. 

ecpyrosis, attributed by Stoics to Hera- 
clitus, 186, 199n., 2o2n. 

Egg, produced from union of two Titans, 
22, 44, 45, 58-9, 70; possibly men- 
tioned in cosmogony attributed to 
Sanchuniathon, 31n.; in Orphic 
theogony, 39, 41, 42-3, 46—7; in non- 
Orphic sources, 44~6; an archaic 
theogonical device, 48; produced by 
sharks (Plutarch), 142n. 

Egypt, 73; the Nile floods and idea of 
Okcanos, 13; mythology of, simi- 
larities with Greck, 9, 12-13, 18-19, 
33, 57, 68, 77, go-1; Thales’ visit to, 
76-8; astronomical observation in, 
80; influence on Thales’ cosmology, 
go-2; and teachings of Pythagoras, 
224; Democritus’ visit, 404n. 

ἐκκρίνεσθαι, applied to opposites, 129-30 

ἐκλεξάμενος, 210. 

ἐκροή, in Pherecydes, 59n. 

Elea, Xenophanes’ association with, 164, 
165-6; foundation (540 8B.c.), 164, 
264, 286; and Zeno and Parmenides, 
264-5 

Eleatic School, 216; Hippolytus as source 
for, 5-6; Xenophanes as founder, 
163, 165; see also Melissus, Parmc- 
nides, Xenophanes, Zeno 

Eliun, deity in theogony attributed to 
Sanchuniathon, 32n. 

Elohim, replaced by Jahweh in Genesis 
iii, 35 n.1 

ἧλος, 154, 155, 156n.1 

Embryology, Anaximander’s knowledge 
of, 142 and n.; and Parmenides, 
285n.; Philolaus’ theories on, 312- 
13; Pythagorean beliefs, 340; Em- 
pedocles’ contribution, 340, 445n.; 
Anaxagoras’ theories, 393, 445n.; 
Diogenes’ study, 445n. 

Empedocles of Acragas, 110, 119, 128, 
121, 151, 183, 202n., 223, 233 n. 3, 
249-50, 265, 304, 307, 363, 405, 
406 

sources for: Simplicius, 1; Plato, 3; 
lost work by Theophrastus, 4; Hip- 
polytus, 5-6 

influence of Parmenides, 264, 283, 319, 
323-5, 326, 329, 360; Pythagorean 
influence, 335, 351-5 (and cf. 224); 
of Xenophanes, 357; and cf. 360-1 


470 


date and life, 320-1; political activi- 
ties, 321; as doctor and orator, 321, 
444; contributions to science, 340, 
445n.; explanation of eclipses, 413 
n. 4; the magnet, 440n. 

writings, and problem of conflict be- 
tween the poems, 322-3, 355-6, 
359-60 

defence of the senses, 325 

the Sphere, 326-7 (and cf. 123); its 
disruption, 331-2 

the cosmic cycle, 326-7, 331-2, 336, 
345-8; and later Pythagorcanism, 
224n.; and cvolution, 338-9; and 
the fall of the soul, 348, 350-1, 
353 N. 2, 353-4, 355; and the Great 
Year, 352, 353 

the four roots, 327-30 (and cf. 119); as 
an answer to Parmenides, 324; and 
Anaxagoras, 370, 376, 380-1, 383; 
and Archclaus, 399; and Diogenes, 
432 

cosmogony, 332-5; the first stages, 
332-4; the heavenly bodies, 333-5; 
organic compounds, 335; the rule of 
Strife and the reverse cosmogony, 
345-8 

evolution, four stages, 336-45; dis- 
united limbs, 336-7; monsters and 
deformities, 337-8; ‘whole-natured’ 
forms, 338; relation of first threc 
to cosmic cycle, 338-9; the present 
world, 340-5; respiration (the klep- 
sydra simile), 341-2 and cf. 370n., 
409n.3 0 

sense-perception, 343-4; consciousness, 
344-5, 357-60; sense-perception and 
his denial of the void, 344 n.2, 406n., 
408 

the rule of Strife, 345-6 | 

transition back to rule of Love, 346-8; 
reason for introduction of the cosmic 
cycle, 348 

the Purifications, 348; parallel in 
Pindar’s Odes, 348; the fall of the 
soul and the cosmic cycle, 348, 
349-50 

the state of primal innocence, 349-50; 
the return to, 355 

the primal sin and fall of man, 350-4 

incarnation and transmigration, 351-5 
and cf. 224 

escape from Wheel of Birth, 354-5; the 
scale of lives, 355 

individual survival, 356—7 


GENERAL INDEX 


Empedocles of Acragas (continued) 
physical basis of consciousness, 257-60 
his views on the soul related to other 

thinkers, 360-1 
criticized by Anaxagoras, 363, 364. 
atomists’ debt to, 423, 426 
Emperius, 142n. 
Eos, 54.1.3 
Ephesus, birthplace of Heraclitus, 73, 
182, 183 

Epicharmus, 163, 164; on primeval 
deities, 55; and the Heraclitean 
tradition, 165 

Epicureanism, influence on the doxo- 
graphical tradition, 6; Epicurean 
interpretation of Democritus, 418 

Epicurus, 124, 400, 426; on the atomists, 
402, 403; on shape and size of atoms, 
409 n.2; parallel in phraseology 
with atomists, 411n.; and weight of 
atoms, 416; his use of παλμός, 418; 
and ethics of Democritus, 425-6 

Epimenides, 47, 163; cosmogony as- 
signed to, 21, 22, 38, 40, 46; on 
production of Tartaros by Night and 
Air, 22, 44: writings attributed to, 37 

Epistemology: Xenophancs on limita- 
tions of human knowledge, 179-81; 
in fragment of Philolaus, 311; 
atomists’ views, 422--4. 
ἐποχεῖσθαι, of the earth riding on air, 153 
‘Etrrapuxos, title of Pherecydes’ book, 50 
Eratosthenes, 5, 320; on cartography, 
103 

Erebos, its relation to Hades and 
Tartaros, 11; possible Hittite etymo- 
logy, 26; place in Hesiodic cosmo- 
gony, 26; in Orphic cosmogony, 42, 
45; Aristophanes’ reference, 44 
Eridu, Babylonian myth of, go-1 
Erinyes (Furies), 203, 226 
Eros, as rain/semen between sky and 
earth, 28; relation to Phanes, 
41 ἢ. 3, 45; Zeus, as creator, changes 
into, 61-2 

Esharra, the firmament of earth in Baby- 
lonian Creation-epic, 34. 

ἐστι, ambiguity of in Parmenides, 269, 
270 n.I 

ἑτερόμηκες, 243-4 

Ethics, of Heraclitus, 213; of Democritus, 
424-6 

Eudemus, 3, 237.2; significance of 
Okeanos and Tethys, 17; position of 
Night, 21; Time as cosmogonical 


figure, 39n.; his History of Theology, 
39; account of Orphic theogony, 
40, 43; on Thales, and astronomy, 
80, 81, 83—4, 85, 86, 103n.; on the 
moon shining by reflected light, 
156 n. 2; on periodic recurrence of 
events, 223n.; on Zeno, 290 

εὐεστώ, in Democritean ethics, 425 

Euripides, on Okeanos as a circle around 
the carth, 12; on immortality of 
Nature, 117n.; Xenophanes’ in- 
fluence on, 168; and Anaxagoras, 
364n. 

Eurynome, daughter of Okeanos, 67 

Eurytus of Croton, his pebbles, and later 
modifications of Pythagoreanism, 
314-18 

Eusebius, as source for Presocratic 
thought, 4, 6; his summary of cos- 
mogony of Sanchuniathon, 31n.; 
on Zeno, 286n. 

εὐθυμίη, in Democritean ethics, 425 

Examyes, father of Thales, 74, 75n. 


Farnell, L. R., 62 n. 3 

Favorinus, on Anaximander, 99 

Festugiére, A. J., 241 n.1 

Fire, produced from seed of Chronos, 
57-8, 59n.; in cosmogony of Ana- 
ximander, 131, 133, 136, 137; of 
Anaximenes, 152; primary con- 
stituent in Heraclitus, 188, 433-4; 
and the world-order in Heraclitus, 
199-203; probably identified with 
αἰθήρ, 200; in Pythagorean cosmo- 
logy, 257-60; in Empedocles, 324, 
333, 338, 346; in Anaxagoras, 382; 
in Archelaus, 398; atomist explana- 
tion, 420 

Fish, in zoogony of Anaximander, 141, 
142; Diogenes on their breathing, 
443n. 
Flux, Platonic interpretation of Hera- 
clitean, 186-7, 196—7, 198 ἢ. 2 
Fossils, and Xenophanes’ physical studies, 
168, 177-8 

Frank, E., on fragments of Philolaus, 308 

Frankel, H., on Heraclitus fr. 92, 212n. 

Frankfort, H., and others, Before Philo- 
sophy, 9 

Frankfort, H., on Nun, Οἱ n.1 

Fritz, K. von, on Pherecydes, 63; on 
Xenophanes, 171 n. 2 

Fusion, theory of, attributed to Ana- 
xagoras, 377 


471 


GENERAL INDEX 


Gaia, Ge 
her offspring, 17-18, 24-5 and n. 2, 26; 
classed with Night, Okeanos and 
Ouranos in Hesiod, 20; in Hesiodic 
cosmogony, 20, 24-5; offspring of 
Night, 22 n. 1, 40 n. 2; mutilation 
myth and her offspring, 35-7; mother 
of ‘Typhoeus, 70; in Orphic cosmo- 
gony, 40, 42-3 
in Pherecydes: Chthonie receives her 

name, 55, 57 ἢ. 2; slanders Zeus to 
Hera, 58-9; reprcsented on em- 
broidered cloth, 60—1 ; her portion, 67 

Galen, 2 

γαλεοί, 142n. 

Ge, see Gaia 

Genesis, cosmogony in, 34, 35 Π.1 

γένεσις, whether genuine in Anaximan- 
der, 117-18 

Gcometry, introduced to Greece by 
Thales, 76-7, 81, 83-4; Anaximan- 
der as geometer, 99; Pythagoras’ use 
of, 228n.; theorem of Pythagoras, 
230 

Gigon, O., 204n. 

ginnunga-gap, in Nordic cosmogony, com- 
parison with χάος, 28 n.1 

γνώμη, Heraclitus’ use of, 204n. 

gnomon, used by Babylonians, 81; Anaxi- 
mander’s use, 81, 99, 102-3; 
meaning of the word in mathe- 
matics, 244 n.1 

Gnosticism, and Ham-Zoroaster identi- 
fication, 65 n.2 

God, gods, the divine, 9, 19, 20, 25, 34, 
36-7, 39n., 124; in Pherecydes, 
55-72 passim; in Thales, 93-7, 98; in 
Anaximander, 116-17, 118; in 
Anaximenes, 150-1; in Xenophanes, 
167-72, 180-1; in Heraclitus, 192, 
193N., I99, 200-1, 205, 200-10, 
212, 214; in Parmenides, 268, 269; 
in Empedocles, 326, 349-55, 357, 
360 

Gomperz, H., 51, 177; on ἐκροή in 
Pherecydes, 59n.; on Pherecydes’ 
views on the soul, 60n.; on the oak 
and embroidered cloth, 63 

Ὑόνιμος, 132, 133n. 

Gorgias, 102n.1; as pupil of Empe- 
docles, 321 

Creat Year, cycle of, 80, 202n., 2103 in 
Hesiod, 352; and cosmic cycle of 
Empedocles, 352, 353 

Growth, Anaxagoras’ theory of, 385-6 


Gruppe, O. F., on Orphic beliefs, 38 

Gurney, O. R., The Hittites, 9, 33-4, 
37n.1, 68 

γυρόν, applied to the earth, 134n. 

Guterbock, H.G.,on the Kumarbi-tablet, 
47 n.1 

Guthrie, W. K. C., on the Orphics, 37; 
on the use of ἧλος, 156 n.1 


Hades, relation to Erebos and Tartaros, 
11; share in division of the cosmos, 
16n., 20n,; identified with Dionysus 
(Heraclitus), 212 

Halys, river, diverted by Thales, 75-6 

Ham, the prophecy of, and Pherecydes, 
62, 65 n.2; identified with Zoroaster, 
65 n.2 

Harmonia, her marriage-gift from Cad- 
mus, 62 n.3 

Harnack, A. von, on Ham-Zoroaster 
identification, 65 n. 2 

Hecataeus of Abdera, 403 n.1 

Hecataeus of Miletus, his map, 103-4; 
rebuked by Heraclitus, 182, 189 n.1; 
his date, 183n. 

Heidel, W. A., 204 n. 1, 247n., 252n.; 
on cosmogony of Anaximander, 133 
n.1; on Zeno’s arguments against 
Pythagoreans, 290—1 

Helen, 46, 214 

Hellanicus, on Orphic cosmogony, 41-2; 
his identity, 42 n. 1 

Hephaistos, depicts Okeanos on shield of 
Achilles, 11, 12; in cosmology of 
Empedocles, 324n., 335 

Hera, her deception of Zeus, 15-16, 19, 
20n.; guardian of marriage, 57 n. 2, 
61; and production of Typhoeus 
from egg, 58, 70; represented by 
oaken statue in ἱερὸς γάμος, 62 ἢ. 3; 
equated with Chthonie, 70; in cos- 
mology of Empedocles, 324 

Heracles, Orphic name for Chronos, 42-3 

Heraclides of Pontus, 320; his work on 
Heraclitus, 6 

Heraclitus of Ephesus, 71, 115 and n., 
116, 118n., 121, 123, 147n., 1510... 
162, 164, 180, 228, 286n., 321, 325 
n. I 

sources for: Hippolytus, 2, 5-6; Plato, 
3; non-Theophrastean influences in 
the doxographical tradition, 6 

relation to other thinkers, 73, 182-3, 
216; Xenophanes’ influence, 168, 
174, 182; rebukes others, 183, 


472 


GENERAL INDEX 


Heraclitus of Ephesus (continued) 

189 n.1, 218; Parmenides’ reference 
to, 183, 264, 272; influence on Em- 
pedocles, 360; and Diogenes, 430, 433 

date and life, 182-4; fictitious anec- 
dotes, 182, 183; resignation of 
‘Kingship’, 184n., 214n.; the epi- 
thets ‘obscure’ and ‘weeping’, 184 

his book, 184-6 

his thought, 186-214 

distortion of his views and difficulty of 
interpretation, 186—7 

the Logos, 187-9, 200, 204; and the 
Delphic oracle, 211, 212, 213; and 
human law, 214 

esscntial unity of opposites, 189-91; 
the ‘road up and down’, 189, 1gon. 

unity and plurality from opposites, 
191--2, 329; god and the Logos, 192; 
god as connecting element in ex- 
tremes, 192; superiority of god to 
man, 193n. 

unity unapparent, dependent on ba- 
lance between opposites, 193—5 

dominance of change, and strife be- 
tween opposites, 195-6; fire as 
example, 200 

the  river-image illustrates unity 
through balance in change, 196-9 

fire and the world-order, 199-202; 
cf. 55, 88, 433-4; his use of κόσμος, 
15gn.; the trade-image and world- 
order, 199, 202n. 

ecpyrosis attributed to, by Stoics, 186, 
1ggn., 202Nn. 

views on astronomy, 202-4, and cf. 
15, 83n., 1753 Simplicius assigns suc- 
cessive single worlds to, 126; 
heavenly bodies as bowls of fire, 203; 
fire nourished by exhalations from 
the sea, 203, 204n.; maintenance of 
measure in change, 203 

the nature of wisdom, 204-5 

views on the soul, 205-11, and cf. 9, 
161-2; waking, sleeping and death, 
207-9, 437N., 442; the soul and the 
Logos, 209; the fate of virtuous souls, 
209-11; survival after death, 200, 
211 ἢ. 3; suggestion of deification of 
some souls, 210 n.1 

attitude to conventional religion, 211-- 
12; and that of the Milesians, 150, 
192 

ethical and political advice, 212-14 

summary of his position, 214-15 


Hermippus of Smyrna, 308; as source for 
Presocratic thought, 4; on date of 
Pherecydes, 49 n.1 

Hermodorus, exiled from Ephesus, 183, 
214n. 

Herodotus, on Okeanos, 12; on Thales, 
76; on Babylonian use of gnomon, 81; 
and anthropological approach to 
religion, 169; on Pythagoras, 223 

Hesiod, 19, 59; his attempt to systematize 
legend, 8; on relation of earth to 
Tartaros, 10-11, 175; and cosmo- 
gonical importance of Okeanos, 18; 
position of Night in his cosmogony, 
20, 24, 40; on the division of the 
cosmos, 20n.; rearrangement of the 
Hesiodic figures, 22, 24; composition 
of Theogony, 25-6; methods of genera- 
tion in, 26; primacy and meaning of 
χάος, 26-32; mutilation-myth, 34-7; 
non-Greek sources in Theogony, 36—7 ; 
influence on Orphics, 38; as source of 
Aristophanes’ bird-cosmogony, 45-6; 
Phoenician affinities, 52, 68; the 
Zeus-Typhocus battle an interpola- 
tion, 67-8; contrasted with Phere- 
cydes, 72; Xenophanes’ attack on 
gods in, 168-9; rebuked by Hera- 
clitus, 189 n.1, 218; and Heraclitus’ 
views on the soul, 209, 210; on 
rule of Kronos in Golden Age, 349; 
apeniautism (banishment for a Great 
Year), 352 

[Hesiod], Astronomia, 86 

Hesychius, on marriage of Zas and 
Chthonie, 62n.1; on writings of 
Thales, 85 

Hieron, tyrant of Syracuse, 163 

Hieronymus, source for Orphic theology, 
41, 42n.1 

Hieronymus of Rhodes, 4; on Thales, 83 

Hippasus of Metapontium, 147n., 231 
Nn. 3, 232 

Hippias of Elis, on Thales, 94 

Hippocratic works: use of ydvipos, 132; 
and Archelaus’ cosmogony, 398 n. 4; 
and Diogenes, 429, 442n. 

Hippolytus of Rome, as source for Pre- 
socratics, 2, 5-6, 104-5, 131; on 
Anaximander, 104-5, 131; on Xeno- 
phanes, 174, 178; on Heraclitus, 
193n.; on Empedocles, 357 

Hippon of Samos, on water as constituent 
material, 89n., gon.1; on Thales, 
94; confusion about his name, 94 n.2 


473 


GENERAL INDEX 


Hittite mythology, similarities with Greek 
theogonical and cosmogonical stories, 
9, 12-13, 33-4, 36-7, 68 

Holscher, U., on near-eastern parallels 
with Thales, 91 n.1; on separation 
of opposites in Anaximander, 129-30 

Homer, naive account of the world in, 8, 
10-113; on relation of earth to Tar- 
taros, 10-11, 88; on Okeanos, 12-13, 
14. Ὡ. 2, 15n., 21; Okeanos as origin 
of all things, 15-16; cosmological 
references in Διὸς ἀπάτη, 15-16, 10, 
20n.; Plato on, as forerunner of 
Heraclitean idea of flux, 17; per- 
sonification of Night, 19; and the 
soul, 95, 159, 360, 436; animism in, 
g7n.: and the Hcraclitean tradition, 
165; Xenophanesand Homeric gods, 
169, 170, 171 n. 2, 172; rebuked by 
Heraclitus, 189 n. 1; copied by Em- 
pedocles, 353 n.1; influence on Em- 
pedocles, and on Greek verse, 361 

Homocomeries, in Anaxagoras, 386-8; 
in Archelaus, 397 

Hot and cold in Anaximander, 132-93; in 
Anaximenes, 148-50; in Heraclitus, 
190; in Parmenides, 282; in Mclis- 
sus, 305; in Empedocles, 329; in 
Anaxagoras, 369-70, 380, 381, 
383-4; in Archelaus, 396, 397-8; in 
Diogenes, 437-8 

Humanism: humanist approach replaces 
cosmological, 445 

‘Hylozoism’, and Thales’ view of soul, 


97 


Iamblichus, 2; on Pythagorean com- 
munities, 221 nn. 1, 3, 5; on Alc- 
maeon, 233 n. 1; on Philolaus and 
Eurytus, 307n. 

Aus, in Orphic cosmogony, 42, 43; in 
zoogony of Anaximander, 140, 142 

Indefinite, the, see Anaximander (τὸ 
ἄπειρον) 

Infinity, Aristotle’s attribution of specific 
quality to concepts of, 108, 110; 
Theophrastus on τὸ ἄπειρον as 
spatially infinite, 108-9; Aristotle 
and atomist arguments for, 123-4; 
Melissus on, 299-302 

Innumerable worlds, in Anaximander, 
121-6; successive, 126; in Anaxi- 
menes, 151n.; in Anaxagoras, 389— 
go; in the atomists, 412; in Dio- 
genes, 433N., 439 


Intelligence (νόησις), and Diogenes’ 
basic substance, 430, 433-8 

Ion of Chios, on Pythagoras and Phere- 
cydes, 51; his Pythagoreanism, 302; 
on Socrates and Archelaus, 395 n. 2 

Ionia, development of thought in, 73; 
mainland colonists in, 75n.; contacts 
with Babylon, 80 

Irenaeus, 4 

Iris, 174, 391; see also Rainbows 

Ishtar, 58 

Isidorus the Gnostic, on the winged oak 
and embroidered cloth, 62-3, 65 n.2 

ἰσονομία, 234n., 262 


Jacoby, F., on identification of Phere- 
cydes of Syros, 48n. 

Jaeger, W., Theology of the Early Greek 
Philosophers, 9; on title of Phere- 
cydes’ book, 50n.; on Xenophanes, 
167 

Jahwch, 91; contrasted with Elohim in 
Genesis, 35 n.1 

Jews, and teaching of Pythagoras, 224; 
see also Semitic mythology 

Justice, and relation of opposites to τὸ 
ἄπειρον, 118-21, 140; Heraclitus’ 
amendment of Anaximander’s view, 
195-6; personified by Heraclitus, 
203; spatial extension attributed to 
by Stoics, 250 


Keb, earth-god in Egyptian mythology, 


Kerferd, G. B., on date of Anaximenes, 
143n. 

Kirk, G. S., Heraclitus, The Cosmic Frag- 
ments, 102 n. I, 159n., 196n., 198 
n. 2, 199Nn., 204n., 229n.3; on τὸ 
ἄπειρον, 112 n. 3; on Anaximander’s 
innumerable worlds, 122 

Klepsydra, 342, 370n. 

Κοινή, dialect, 159n. 

κόσμος, 159 and n.; development of 
meaning of, 228, 229 n. 3 

κραδαίνει, in XKenophanes, 171 n. 2 

Kranz, W., 44.n.1, 438; on Empedocles 
fr. 129, 219n.; on Xuthus, 302 n. 3 

Kronos, Homer’s reference to, 16n.; in 
Orphic, Homeric and Hesiodic cos- 
mogony, 17—18; in mutilation-myth, 
25n.2, 28, 34-5, 36, 57; parallel 
with Hittite Kumarbi-Anu story, 36; 
and production of egg, 45, 58-9, 70 
(see also Egg) ; in Orphic cosmogony, 


474 


GENERAL INDEX 


Kronos (continued) 
45, 46 n.1; association with Chronos, 
39n., 45, 46 n. I, 56, 58-9, 66, 67; 
fight with Ophioneus, 52, 65-8, 69; 
and initial creation, in Pherecydes, 
55-6; Pherecydes on etymology, 
57 n.1; as first king of the gods, 67; 
in Empedocles’ Purtfications, 349 

κυβερνᾶν, 115. 

Kumarbi, Hittite equivalent to Kronos, 
36 

Kumarbi-tablet, as evidence of non- 
Greek elements in Theogony, 36-7 

Kupris (Aphrodite), equated with cos- 
mic Love (Empedocles), 349, 350; 
her rule, 349, 350, 351, 359 


Lampsacus, Anaxagoras at, 363, 364 

Law, in Heraclitus, 214 

Lee, H. D. P., on Zeno’s arguments 
against plurality, 289, 290; on 
‘moving rows’ paradox, 297n. 

Leon, Pythagorean, 233 n. 4 

Leucippus, 123, 124, 233 n. 1, 371, 372, 
395; cxplanation of setting of hea- 
venly bodies, 157, 439; debt to Mile- 
sians, 162; and Anaxagoras’ Mind, 
403; indivisible particles in void as 
answer to Eleatics, 405-6; on the 
shape of the earth, 412, 439; on 
chance and necessity, 413 n. 1; and 
weight of atoms, 415; on vision, 423; 
and Melissus, 430n.; see also Atomists 
(Leucippus and Democritus) 

Leviathan, analogous with Tiamat, Οἱ 

Light, in Pythagorean Table of Oppo- 
sites, 238; as one of primary pair of 
contraries (Parmenides), 281 

Lightning, Anaximander’s explanation, 
138-9; Anaximenes’, 158; see also 
Meteorology 

Like-to-like principle, in Anaxagoras, 
383-4; in atomism, 411, 413 n. 2, 
419-20; in Diogenes, 441-2 

Limit and Unlimited, Pythagorean con- 
cept of, 239, 240-1, 242, 251, 253, 
255 n. 2, 257, 313; Parmenides and, 
277, 281; later modifications, 317— 
18 

Linforth, I. M., on the Orphics, 37, 
38 

Lobon of Argos, 166; on writings of 
Thales, 85 

Λόγος, in Heraclitus, 188, 192, 199n., 200, 
201, 205, 208-9, 212, 214-15 


Lorimer, H. L., on Syrie and τροπαὶ 
ἠελίοιο, 54. nn. 2, 3 

Love, Empedocles’ attribution of spatial 
extension to, 249-50; his identifica- 
tion of sexual and cosmic, 330 (see 
also Kupris) 

Love and Strife, in Empedocles, 249-50, 
324, 327-32, 338, 339, 343, 353-5, 
358-9; the rule of Strife, 345-6; 
transition back to rule of Love, 
346-8; Anaxagoras’ substitution of 
Mind, 474 

Lucretius, and Anaxagoras’ 
merics, 387-8 


homoco- 


Magic, sympathetic, and Pythagorcan 
rules, 226 

Magnctism, Thales on, 93-4, 95, 96, 98; 
Diogenes and Empedocles, 440n. 

Malta, fossils found at, 177 

Maori mythology, similarities with Greek, 
33> 35 

Marcus Aurelius, 2 

Marduk, in Babylonian Creation-epic, 
20n., 34, 68, 90-1 

Marriage, Chthonie and Hera as guar- 
dians of, 57 n. 2, 61 

Mathematics: Thales’ discoverics, 83-4; 
neglected by other Milesians, 84; 
Pythagoras and, 228n.1, 229-30, 
236-7, 242; and Zeno’s arguments 
against atom-unilt-point confusion, 
371-2; see also Geometry, Pyramids 

Matter, air as basic form of (Anaxi- 
menes), 144-8; (Diogenes), 434-8; 
Anaxagoras’ theory of, 368~—72; 
dualism of mind and matter, 375; 
‘seeds’ and ‘portions’, 377-8; atom- 
ists’ theory of, 408 

Maximus of ‘Tyre, 2 

Mazdaism, and Iranian <vran Akarana, 
56n.1 

Medicine, influence of study of on cos- 
mology, 89; Alcmaeon’s interest, 
232; his theory of health, 234; 
Philolaus’ interest, 313; Empedo- 
cles as a doctor, 321; study of, and 
the experimental method, 342; 
Diogenes’ medical work, 429 

Melissus of Samos, 109, 165, 166, 197n. 

date and life, 298-9, 305-6; his naval 
successes, 298; association with Par- 
menides and Pythagoreanism, 298- 
9; his book, 299 
Aristotle’s opinion of him, 300 


475 


GENERAL INDEX 


Melissus of Samos (continued) 
reality is infinite, 299-302; departure 
from Parmenides, 300-2 
the One is incorporeal, 302-4 
his method contrasted with Zeno’s, 
393° 
atomism foreshadowed, 304-6, 406, 426 
and T.eucippus, 306, 402, 406, 430n. 
and Anaxagoras, 364 
and Diogenes, 430n. 
Menon, 3; on Philolaus, 312 
Mensuration, Thales’ work in, 83-4 
Mesopotamia, and devclopment of idea 
of Okeanos, 13 
μετα-, implying change 
succession, 142 
μετακοσμεῖσθαι, 4201. 
Metapontium, 265, 307n.; death at, of 
Pythagoras, 217 
Meteorites, Diogenes’ cxplanation, 156, 
439; fall of, at Acgospotami (467 
B.C.), 392, 439; Anaxagoras’ alleged 
prediction, 392 
Meteorology, ‘Vhales and 6th-century 
interest in, 89, 90 ἢ. 2; Anaximan- 
der’s explanation of phenomena, 
137-9; and Anaximenes’ choice of 
air as material principle, 146; his 
explanation, 157-8; Xenophanes’, 
174; function of the sea, in Xeno- 
phanes, 176-7; Aristotle’s dual-ex- 
halation theory, 204 n. 1; Anaxa- 
goras’ interest, 391-2; Simplicius on 
Diogenes’ book, 428; influence on 


rather than 


Diogenes’ thought, 433; see also 
Lightning, Meteorites, Rain, Rain- 
bows 


Metrodorus of Chios, 414 ἢ. 5 

Milesian School, 73; rational approach 
to cosmogony, 8, 10; practical 
activities, 76; and mathematical 
theory, 84; contrasted with Pytha- 
gorean, 216; see also Anaximander, 
Anaximenes, Thales 

Miletus, birthplace of Thales, 73, 74; of 
Anaximander and Anaximenes, 73; 
possibly of Archelaus, 395; and of 
Leucippus, 401-2 

contact with Egypt, 77, 78; and geo- 

graphical knowledge, 104; recession 
of the sea reflected in cosmological 
ideas, 139, 140; destruction of 
(494 B.c.), 143 

Mind, in Anaxagoras, 372-5, 376-7, 393; 
and single god of Xenophanes, 172; 


regarded as a substance, 250; sub- 
stituted for Empedocles’ Love and 
Strife, 374; and motion, 374-5; 
Plato’s criticism, 384n., 398; Ar- 
chelaus’ modification, 397; and 
Leucippus’ vortex-action, 411; ad- 
apted by Diogenes, 430, 442 

μοῖρα, meaning of in Anaxagoras, 477-- 


Mondolfo, R., on fragments of Philolaus, 
309, 311 

Moon, Thales’ observations of, 81, 82n.; 
in cosmology of Anaximander, 135- 
6; of Anaximenes, 155, 156; shines 
by reflected light (Xenophanes, 
Parmenides, Empedocles, Anaxa- 
goras), 156 n. 2, 391; Empedocles’ 
view, 156 n. 2, 333, 334, 391; An- 
axagoras’ view, 391-2 

Mot (slime), in cosmogony attributed to 
Sanchuniathon, 31n. 

Motion, in Anaximander, 126-8, 130; 
Anaximenes, 144, 147, 151, 152; 
cause of ignition (Xcnophanes, Ana- 
xagoras), 152; the motionless god of 
Xenophanes, 170, 171n.2; Par- 
menides on Being as motionless, 
277, and cf. 319; Zeno’s arguments 
against, 291-7; Xuthus’ argument, 
301-2; Empedocles’ explanation, 
324; Anaxagoras on, 374-5; in 
Archelaus, 397-8; atomists’ theory 
of, 415, 416-18 

Musaeus, cosmogony assigned to, 21--4, 
37, 38, 40, 43 

Music, Pythagoras’ discoveries, 229, 
234n.}3 linked with κάθαρσις, 229 n. 4; 
and Harmony of the Spheres, 259 

Muspellsheim, realm of fire in Nordic cos- 
mogony, 29 Π.1 

Mutilation-myth, in Hesiod, 25 n.2, 28, 
34-7, 57; Hittite parallel, 36-7 

Mythology, 8; of near-eastern cultures, 
similarities with Greek, 9, 12-13, 
18-19, 20N., 31N., 33-4, 35 0. 1, 36-7, 
57, 58, 68, 71-2, 77, 88, 90-2, 97; 
Maorl, and earth-sky separation, 33, 
35; as influence towards monism, 441 


Naucratis, and Milesian contact with 
Egypt, 77 

Navigation: Thales and use of the Little 
Bear, 75, 82; his star-guide, 85-6 

Neanthes of Cyzicus, 4; on Anaximander, 
100n. 


476 


GENERAL INDEX 


Necessity, in Parmenides, 276; in 
Empedocles, 351, 353; cf. 195 
(Heraclitus) 


Neoplatonists, 2; as sources for Orphic 
cosmogonies, 39-43 

Nestis (Water), in cosmology of Empe- 
docles, 324, 335 

Nicolaus of Damascus, on Diogenes, 
428n., 429 

Niflheim, realm of ice in Nordic cosmo- 
gony, 29 ΠῚ 

Night, cosmogonical concept in Homer, 
16n., 24; personification in Homer, 
19, 24; an archaic concept, accord- 
ing to Aristotle, 20, 22; in Hesiod, 
20, 22, 24, 30-1, 40; in post-Hesiodic 
cosmogonics, 20, 21-4, 40; priority 
of, in Orphic cosmogony, 21-4, 38, 
40, 43; associated with ᾿Αήρ in pro- 
duction of Tartaros, 22; gave birth 
to Gaia and Ouranos, 22n.1, 40; 
daughter of Phanes, 22 n.1, 40; the 
first goddess (Chrysippus), 23 n.1; 
absolute priority not an early con- 
cept, 24; mates with Erebos, 26; off- 
spring of Chaos, 26, 31; the halls of 
Night in Tartaros, 31; Heraclitus’ 
connexion with day, 190; in Par- 
menides, 278, 281; see also Darkness 

Number, in Pythagorean doctrine, 229- 
30, 237-8, 243-50, 317-18 ; numerical 
notation, 243; Eurytus and his 
pebbles, 313-17; see also Atoms 


Oak tree, in Pherecydes, 62-5; at Plataea, 
62 n. 3; at Dodona, 64 

Occelus, Pythagorean, 302 n. 2 

Odd and Even, Pythagorean concept of, 
73° 240-1, 242, 245, 253, 317- 
I 

Ogénos, possibly related to Akkadian 
uginna (circle), 62n.2; problem of 
his position in Kronos-Ophioneus 
fight, 69; see also Okeanos 

Oinopides of Chios, 80, 81, rogn. 

Okeanos 

surrounds the earth, source of all 

waters, 11-15, 91, 93, 103-4; a Cir- 
cular river, 11-12; as broad outer 
sea, 12; concept of, independent of 
experience, 12; Homeric references 
and non-Greek mythology, 13, 18f.; 
possible connexion of concept with 
Nile floods and Mesopotamia, 13, 
18-19; origin of the word and 


possible etymology, 14 ἢ. 3; the sun’s 
passage round, 14; sun and stars 
and, in Homer, 15n. 

as source and origin of all things, 15- 
19; slight indications of cosmo- 
gonical importance in Homer, 15- 
16; significance in Plato and Aris- 
totle, 16-17; evidence of Orphic 
poetry, 17-18; priority of, not an 
early concept, 18-19; archaic cos- 
mogonical position according to 
Aristotle, 20; classed with Night, 
Gaia, Ouranos, in Hesiod, 20, 26; 
in Orphic cosmogony, 22n.1; in 
Hesiodic, 24-6 

Poseidon’s share in division of cosmos, 
20n. 

relation to Pontos, 26n. 

provides contact between earth and 
sky, 26n. 

treated as integral part of the earth’s 
surface, 63 

in battle between Kronos and Ophio- 
ncus, 66, 69 

as Ogenos, in Pherecydes, θ0--ἰ; re- 
presented on embroidered cloth 
given to Chthonie, 61, 63, 64-53 see 
also Ogenos 

Olympus, as Zeus’ sharc in division of the 
cosmos, 20n.; ruled by Ophion, 66 

Onanism, in creation myths, 45, 57—60, 70 

Onomacritus, banished from Athens, 
23 n. 

Ophioneus (Ophion), 62; battle with 
Kronos, 52, 65-8, 69; analogous to 
Typhon, 59; connccted with ὄφις, 
66; problem of his parentage, 69—70 

Ophionids, 68n. 

Opposites 

generation by, in Hesiodic cosmogony, 
26 

in Anaximander, 107-8, 113-14, 119- 
21; separation from the Indefinite, 
129-31 

Anaximenes’ attitude, 147, 149 

in Heraclitus, 2, 119; essential unity 
of, 189-94 

Pythagoreanism and, 229, 234; the 
Table of Opposites, 238 (quoted), 
240-1, 251, 257, 277, 279, 284, 
285n.; see also Limit and Unlimited, 
Odd and Even 

Parmenides and, 271-2, 
280-2, 282-3, 284 

Empedocles and, 329, 352-3 


277, 279; 


477 


GENERAL INDEX 


Opposites (continued) 
in Anaxagoras, 191, 369-70, 378-81, 
382-5 
in Archelaus, 398 

Oracles, Heraclitus and, 211, 212, 213; 
oracular literature reflected in Par- 
menides, 268 

Origen, 2, 5; quoting Celsus, on Phere- 
cydes, 64n. 

Ormazd, good principle of Zoroastri- 
anism, 241 n. 1 

Orpheus, non-Orphic elements attri- 
buted to, in Apollonius’ Argo- 
nautica, 33.n.2, 67 n.1 

Orphics, 8; poetry as testimony for cos- 
mogonical importance of Okcanos, 
17-18; priority of Night, 21-2; cult 
and belief, 37-8; cult-societies and 
Pythagorcan communities, 37, 220; 
clements derived from the Theogony, 
38; oriental influences, 39 n. 1; the 
egg in cosmogony, 39, 41-8, 132, and 
see ἔσῃ; Neoplatonist accounts of 
Orphism, 39 -43; Night and Phanes 
in Orphic Rhapsodies, 40; date and 
origin of the Rhapsodies, 40 n. 1; 
the ‘usual Orphic theology’, 41; 
Hieronymus and Hellanicus, 41-2; 
Athenagoras, 42-3; date of develop- 
ment of Orphic cosmogony, 46-8; 
connexion of Kronos with Chronos, 
56 n. 1; Empedocles and Orphic my- 
thology, 349, 351; the primal sin, 351 

Orthomenes, possibly father of Xeno- 
phanes, 163; identified with Xuthus, 
302 

Ortygie, 52, 53, 54 nn. 2, 3 

οὐρανοί, as celestial spheres, 116, 125 

Ouranos, classed with Night, Okeanos, 
Gaia, in Hesiod, 20; an archaic 
cosmogonical concept, according to 
Aristotle, 20; offspring of Night, 23 
n. 13; successor of Phanes in Orphic 
Rhapsodies, 22n., 40; in Hesiodic 
cosmogony, 24-34; fertilizing the 
earth, 29 ἢ. 2, 393 n.1; in Hesiodic 
mutilation-myth, 34-5, 57; etymo- 
logical parallel with Hittite Anu, 
36; produced by Night, in Orphic 
Rhapsodies, 40, 43; Athenagoras on 
production from egg, 42-3 


Pain, in Anaxagoras’ theory of percep- 
tion, 394; and pleasure, Empedocles’ 
explanation, 340; Diogenes’, 442 


παλίντονος, 193N., 195 ἢ. 2, 272}. 
παλίντροπος, 193N., 272}. 
παλμός, of atoms, 418 
Pamphile, on Thales as geometer, 84n. 
Panathenaia, no connexion with Phere- 
cydes’ winged oak, 63, 64n. 
Papa (earth), in Maori myth, 33, 35 
Parmenides of Elea, 73, 115n., 119, 143, 
180, 220, 364 
sources for, 1, 3 
the One and the single god of Xeno- 
phanes, 170n., 171-2 
possible reference to Heraclitus, 183, 272 
date and life, 263-5; visit to Athens 
and meeting with Socrates, 263, 
267n.; as pupil of Xenophanes, 
164, 165, 171, 264, 265; early associ- 
ation with Pythagoreanism, 265, 
274; Zeno’s reaction to criticisms of 
him, 287 
his poem: contents, style, importance, 
265-6; inconsistency of the two 
parts, 266, 284-5 
the proem, 266-8; emphasis on 
religious nature of revelation, 268; 
description of ‘Truth, 268 
the Way of Truth, 269-78; the pre- 
mise, 269-70; ambiguity of ἐστι, 
269, 270n.1; approach to appre- 
hension of the abstract, 270, 304; 
two false premiscs, 270-2; compro- 
mise and the Way of Sccming, 271-- 
2; deductions from the true premise, 
272-7; denial of time, the void, 
plurality, 272-5; reality, 275-7; 
indivisible, 275; motionless, finite, 
spherical, 276-7, 279; summary, 
277-8 
transition to Way of Seeming, 278-82; 
sense and reason, and the two ways, 
279, 280-1; the Way of Seeming and 
Pythagoreanism, 280; treatment of 
contraries, 281-2 
the sensible opposites, 282-3 
astronomy, 230, 283-5 
reaction of later systems to concept of 
Being, 319; Empedocles, 323-5, 326, 
329, 360; Melissus, 298, 300, 301; 
Anaxagoras, 368-70; atomists, 426 
Paros, fossils found at, 177, 178 
Peck, A. L., 367 
πεντέμυχος, rejected as title of Phere- 
cydes’ book, 50 n.1 
Pericles, defeated at sea by Melissus, 298; 
and Anaxagoras, 362, 364, 365n. 


478 


GENERAL INDEX 


περιέχω, used of air, 114, 1151.) 159 
περιπάλαξις, of atoms, 418 
Phaethon, 140 
Phanes, in Orphic cosmogony, 22n., 40, 
41 and n. 3, 43n., 46 ἢ. 2, 47; rela- 
tion to Eros, 41 n. 3, 45 
Pherecydcs of Athens, 48, 50 
Pherecydes of Leros, 48 
Pherecydes of Syros 
relevance of his cosmogonical ideas, 
8-9; his approach to cosmogony, 
48 
personification of Time, 39n., 46 n.1, 
56n. 
date and book, 49~50; the title, 50, 58 
life and legend, 50-4; miracles con- 
nected with Pythagoras, 49, 50-1, 
6on., 218 n. 3; near-eastcrn affinities, 
52, 65 n. 2, 68, 71-2; the solstice- 
marker, 52-4, 81 
contents of his book, 54~—71; primeval 
deities and creation, 55-60; his ad- 
diction to etymology, 55-6, 59n., 
62 n. 2, 71; Chthonie-Ge, 55-6; his 
connexion of Chronos with Kronos, 
56-7 (cf. 45); initial creation by 
Chronos, 57-60; the seven recesses, 
49, 50, 58, 60; later interpretations 
of Chronos’ creation from his own 
seed, 57-8, 444; Kronos-Chronos’ im- 
pregnation of eggs, 58-60; interpre- 
tation of χάος, 59n. (cf. 27); views on 
the soul attributed to, 6on. 
wedding of Zeus and Chthonie and the 
embroidered cloth, 60-2, 68—g; the 
embroidery an allegory of creation, 
61-2, 69; Eros in the wedding, 61-2 
the winged oak and the cloth, 62-5; 
interpretations of the oak, 63-5; the 
oak as foundations of the earth, 64—5; 
Pherecydes’ world-picture, 64-5 
the fight between Kronos and Ophio- 
neus, 65-8 
similarities with Zeus-Typhoeus battle, 
67-8; near-eastern parallels, 68 
order of events, 68-71; division of 
the cosmos, 69; missing incidents, 
69, 71; problem of parentage of 
Ophioneus, 69-70 
summary of his position, 71-2; con- 
trast with Hesiod, 72; compared 
with Thales, 72 
Philo of Byblus, and Sanchuniathon, 31n. ; 
on Pherecydes’ borrowings from 
Phoenicians, 68 


Philodemus, 23 n. 2, 44 

Philolaus of Croton, 220, 233n., 239 
n.; and the Counter-Earth doctrine, 
259; date, 307; associated with 
Eurytus, 307; story of Plato’s pla- 
giarism, 308; authenticity of the 
fragments rejected, 308-11; other 
evidence for Philolaus, 312-13; 
physiological and medical interests, 
312-13; similarities between his 
embryological theories and Py- 
thagorean cosmogony, 313 

Philoponus, 252n. 

φθορά, whether genuine in Anaximander, 
117-18 

φιλοσοφία, first use of attributed to 
Pythagoras, 229 n.3 

φλοιός, in cosmogony of Anaximander, 
133n., 142 

Phoenicia, cosmogony of and Hesiod’s 
Chaos, 31n.; Phoenician affinities in 
Hesiod, 52, 68; in Pherecydes, 52, 
68; Thales’ Phoenician ancestry, 
74, 75; use of stars in navigation, 75, 
82 

Phokos of Samos, 84, 86 

φρήν, in Xenophanes, 171 n. 2 

Φυσικῶν δόξαι, see Theophrastus 

φύσις, conventional use in book-titles, 
IOI, 102 n.1, 166, 185, 299 

Physiology, influence of study of on cos- 
mology, 89 and n. 1, 93; Alcmaeon’s 
interest in, 232; Philolaus’ theories, 
312-13; Empedocles’ contribution, 
340; and Diogenes, 431-2, 436, 
440-3, 444 

πίλησις, applied to condensation of air, 
145, 151 

Pindar, on Chronos as πάντων πατήρ, 
56n.1; and the cosmic cycle of 
Empedocles, 348 

Placita, derived from Theophrastus, 4; of 
Aetius, 5 

Planets, in cosmology of Anaximander, 
136-7; in Anaximenes, 155; in 
Empedocles, 333 

Plants, and doctrine of reincarnation, 
224; in Empedocles, 224, 340; in 
Anaxagoras, 393 

Plato 

as source for Presocratic thinkers: 
laxity in quotation, 1; his comments 
and references, 3 
and cosmological significance of Oke- 

anos, 16-17 


479 


GENERAL INDEX 


Plato (continued) 
on Homer as forerunner of Heraclitean 
idea of flux, 17 
concept of space, 26 
on Orphic oracles and dispensations, 
37 
concept of Time in Timaeus, 39n. 
on date of Epimenides, 45 
and Pherecydes, 71n. 
on Thales, 79, 82, 94 n.1 
on successive worlds, 122 
motion in the Timaeus, 128 
on the earth supported by air, 153 
on Xenophanes, 165; the Phaedo myth 
and, 175 
on the Heraclitean school, 185n. 
his interpretation of Heraclitus, 186, 
187, 196-7, 198 n.2, 209 n.2 
on Pythagoras, 216, 218; and Py- 
thagorean view of health, 234 
possibly influenced by Alcmacon, 234, 
255 
and existence without spatial exten- 
sion, 250, 330 
on Parmenides, 263, 265, 301; his reply 
to, 319 
on Zeno, 286, 287, 299 
on Philolaus, 312; story of his plagi- 
arism, 308 
and Empedocles’ theory of evolution, 
338; his view of the soul in relation 
to Empedocles, 360 
criticism of Anaxagoras’ use of Mind, 
384n., 398 
Pleasure and pain, Empedocles’ expla- 
nation, 340; Diogenes’, 442 
πλήρης, Meanings of, 96 
Pliny, the Elder, 74n.; on early astrono- 
my, IOI, 10gn. 
Plotinus, 2 
Plurality, Pluralism: Parmenides’ di- 
lemma, 272-5, 319; Zeno’s argu- 
ments against, 288-91; Melissus’, 
306; Empedocles and, 329; Anaxa- 
goras’ reaction, 368-70; and Zeno’s 
attack, 370-2; types of, related to 
opposites, 369; of Empedocles and 
Anaxagoras, Diogenes’ answer, 431-2 
Plutarch 
as source for Presocratic thought, 1, 6; 
false ascription to of the Epitome of 
Physical Opinions, 5; and of the pseu- 
do-Plutarchean Stromateis, 6 
on identification of Chronos with 
Kronos, 56 n.1 


on oriental influence on Thales, 77, 
g2n.; star-guide, 85 

his use of ydvipos, 132 

on Anaximenes, 148 

on Heraclitus, 193n., 212}. 

on Empedocles, 326n., 331, 360 

[Plutarch] Stromatets, 6, 104-5, 124 

πνεῦμα, in Anaximenes, 146-7, 
comparison with ψυχή, 158-62 

Polycrates of Samos, 99, 100, 217 

Pontos (sea), 18, 26 

Porphyry, 2 

on Pherecydes, 51, 58; on his use of 
ἐκροή, 59n.; Neoplatonist bias in his 
interpretation, 60 

on Heraclitus, 193n. 

on Diogenes, 428n. 

Poseidon, 349; his share in the division 
of the world, 16n., 20n. 

Posidonius, on Heraclitus, 209 n.2; on 
the atomists, 4.23n. 

Presocratic thought, schools of (general 
summaries): Ionian, 73; Italian, 
216; post-Parmenidean, 319; see also 
Succession-writers 

Prime Mover, of Aristotle, and Xeno- 
phanes’ god, 172 

Pritchard, J. B. (ed.), Ancient Near 
Eastern Texts, 9, 13n., 21n., 33-4, 
36 n.1, 37n., 57, 68 

Probus, on connexion between Chronos 
and Kronos, 56 n.1 

Proclus, as source for Presocratic thought, 
2; on Thales as geometer, 84 

ψυχή, compared with ἀήρ by Anaximenes, 
158-62; distinguished from θυμός in 
Homer, 159, 436; see also Soul 

Psychology, Heraclitus and rationalizing 
of, 206 

Purification, ritual, and Pythagorean 
rules, 225-6 

Pyramids, measured by Thales, 81, 83 

Pythagoras, 163, 164, 166, 214, 215, 216, 
307N., 321 

sources for: Porphyry and Iamblichus, 
2; Hippolytus, 5-6 

interpretation of χάος, 26 

and Ionian thinkers, 73; possible in- 
fluence of Anaximander, 136 

Aetius on his knowledge of the 
Zodiac, 81 

his use of κόσμος, 159n., 228, 229 n. 3 

life and date: 183n., 217-19; legend of 
his connexion with Pherecydes, 49, 
50-1, 6on.1, 218n.3; slight evi- 


161; 


480 


GENERAL INDEX 


Pythagoras (continued) 

dence for connexion with Anaxi- 
mander, 100n.; rebuked by Hera- 
clitus, 182, 189n. 1, 218-19; obscurity 
of the tradition, 218; early evidence 
establishes his historical character, 
218-19; study of arithmetic, 242 

the Pythagorean School, its general 
position, 216 

the early Pythagorean community, 
219-21; Plato on, 216; and Orphic 
cult-societies, 37, 220; attribution to 
Pythagoras of later discoveries, 220; 
the rule of silence, 221 n. 2 

mystical side of his teaching, 222-7; 
transmigration of souls, 222-4, 262; 
Xenophanes on transmigration, 181, 
222, 223; reincarnation and periodic 
recurrence of events, 223n.; kinship 
of all living things, 223-4; origin of 
the doctrines, 224; plants and 
animals, 224; rules of abstinence, 
etc., 225-7; their origin, 226; list of 
rules, 226n.; Acousmatics-Mathe- 
maticians, 227, 262 

his interest in science, 227-30; con- 
nexion with religion, 228; astro- 
nomical observation, 228; scientific 
achievements (music and mathe- 
matics), 229-30 

Pythagoreanism, prc-Parmenidean 

the problem of dating, 236 

Aristotle’s summary, 236-40; the 
Table of Opposites, 238, 240-1; 
dualism, 240-1; Limit and Un- 
limited, Odd and Even, 242; the 
nature of number, 243-5; nu- 
merical notation, 243; equation of 
Even with Unlimited, Odd with 
Jumit, 243-4; units have magni- 
tude, 245-8; unit-points as basis of 
physical matter, 247-8, 255 n. 2; 
things equal numbers, 248-50; con- 
fusion of concrete and _ abstract 
existence, 249-50 

cosmogony, 250-62; the first unit, 
250-2; biological conception and 
Table of Opposites, 251-2, 255 ἢ. 2; 
the void, 252-3; points, lines, planes 
and solids, 253-6; qualitative distinc- 
tions, 256-7; Parmenides’ attack on, 
274, 275, 276—7; similarities in Philo- 
laus, 313 

astronomy: the Counter-Earth, and 
Harmony of the Spheres, 257-60 


31 481 


the soul, 261-2; suggested reconcilia- 
tion of different views, 262 

Zeno’s arguments against, 288-97 

influence on Empedocles, 335 

Eurytus’ modifications, 316-18 

see also Atoms (confusion with points 
and units), Limit and Unlimited, 
Odd and Even, Transmigration 

Πυθαγόρειος distinguished from Πυθαγο- 

pikds, 262 


Rain, impregnating earth, 28, 393 and 
n. 1; Anaximander’s explanation, 
138, 140; Anaximencs’, 158, 177; 
Heraclitus on, 201 

Rainbows, Anaximenes’ explanation, 
158, 1743 Xenophanes’, 174; Anaxa- 
goras’, 391 

Rangi (sky), in Maori myth, 33, 35 

Ras Shamra, 31n., 68 

Raven, J. E., Pythagoreans and Eleatics, 
236n., 247}. 

Re, sun-god, 13 n.1, 33, 57, 68 

‘Pi, as name for Rhea, 56 

Reason and sense, and Parmenides’ Ways 
of Truth and Seeming, 197, 266, 
279, 280-1, 284 

Recesses, in cosmogony of Pherecydes, 
49, 50, 58, 70 

Reincarnation, as element of Orphic 
beliefs, 37; in Pythagoras, 222-4; 
in Empedocles, 351-5 

Respiration, Empedocles’ views on, 341-2; 
Diogenes’, 441-3 

Rhea, in Homeric, Hesiodic and Orphic 
cosmogony, 17-18, 45; mother of 
Zeus, 36; and production of egg, 45, 
48, 58-9, 70; in Pherecydes, 56; 
supplants Eurynome, 66 

Rhipaean mountains, 157 

Richardson, H., on Pythagorean astro- 
nomy, 26on. 

Rohde, E., Psyche, 9 

Ross, Sir D., 127n., 218 ἢ. 1, 233 ἢ. 1, 
241 nN. 2, 245n., 252n.; on the 
meaning of gnomon, 244.1; on 
Platonic theory of numbers, 246n.; 
on Zeno’s arguments, 289, 293n. 


St Elmo’s fire, Xenophanes’ explanation, 
174 

Salmoxis, said to be slave of Pythagoras, 
Q17N., 219 

Samos, birthplace of Pythagoras, 217; of 
Melissus, 298 


K&R 


GENERAL INDEX 


Sanchuniathon, cosmogony attributed to, 
gIn., 42 Nn. 1, 47 

Sardis, 73, 81, 97; capture of (546/5 B.c.), 
5, 740., 143, 144n.; (498 B.c.), 1451. 

Scepticism, influence on the doxo- 
graphical tradition, 6; and Scxtus’ 
interpretation of Heraclitus, 208, 
209 nn. 

Science, Pythagoras’ interest and achieve- 
ments in, 227-30; scientific method, 
149N., 335, 3423 see also Astronomy, 
Biology, Embryology, Magnetism, 
Medicine, Meteorology, Physiology 

Scythinus, his metrical version of Hera- 
clitus, 210 

Sea, as Poseidon’s share in division of the 
cosinos, 20n.; salinity derived from 
the earth, 12; Diogenes’ true expla- 
nation of salinity, 439; formation of, 
in Egypuian mythology, 90-1; cos- 
mological idea of its drying up, 139- 
40, 439; function of, in Xenophanes, 
176-7; his earth-sea transformation, 
177-9; in Heraclitean cosmos, 201; 
see also Okeanos, Pontos 

Semen, and early cosmogonical myths, 57, 
and see Onanisin; in Stoic physio- 
logy, 57 ὃ; Aristotle on, 93; Dio- 
genes on, 436, 444 

Semitic mythology, and parallel with 
Greek, 34, 35 n.1, 68, 91 

Senses, Sensation, Heraclitus on correct 
interpretation, 189 n. 2; and reason, 
and Parmenides’ Ways, 197, 266, 
279, 280-1, 283, 284; Aristotle on 
smell, 211 ἢ. 2; Alcmaeon’s re- 
searches, 233 n. 3; Melissus’ attack 
on validity of, 305-6; Empedocles’ 
defence, 325; Em:pedocles on sense- 
perception, 340, 343-4, 423; Anaxa- 
goras’ views, 393-43 atomists’ theory 
of sensation and thought, 420n., 
421-4; Diogenes on pleasure and 
pain, 441-2 

Seth, equated with Typhoeus/Typhon, 
68 

Sethians, Gnostic sect, 65 ἢ. 2 

Seven Sages, 49, 74n., 82, 86 

Sex, differentiation of, in Empedocles’ 
theory of evolution, 338, 340 

Sextus Empiricus, 25 n.1; as source for 
Presocratic thought, 1; on Phere- 
cydes, 59n.; on Heraclitus, 208, 209 
nn.; on Anaxagoras, 394; on the 
atomists, 424 and n. 


Sharks, and zoogony of Anaximander, 
142n. 

Shield of Achilles, representation of 
Okeanos on, 11, 12; contrasted with 
embroidered cloth given to Chthonie, 
61 

Shu (air god), in Egyptian mythology, 33 

Σίλλοι, 166 

Simmias of Thebes, and Alcmacon’s 
theory of health, 234 

Simplicius, as source for Presocratic 
thought, 1, 2, 3-4 

on Thales, 93n. 

on Anaximander, 127n., 130; his 
version of Theophrastus’ account of 
τὸ ἄπειρον, 104-8; and Aristoile’s at- 
tribution of an intermediate sub- 
stance, 111: on reason for choice of 
primary substance, 113; and the 
extant fragment, 117-18; and appli- 
cation of atomist-type worlds, 124-5; 
on separation-off of opposites, 120-- 
30 

on Anaximenes, 145, 151n. 

on Xenophanes, 166 

on Heraclitus, 1ggn. 

on Pythagoreanism, 252-3n., 259n. 

on Parmenides, 271, 281n., 282n.; and 
preservation of his poem, 265 -6 

on Mclissus, 299 

on Xuthus, 301 

his preservation of the fragments of 
Anaxagoras, 366, 368, 380; on 
homoeomeries, 388; and question of 
innumerable worlds, 390 

on the atomists, 413 n.3, 417}. 


on Diogenes, 428-9, 430, 431, 432n., 


433, 436 

Sin, the primal, in Empedocles, 350-4, 
355 

oxid@npa, possibly name of natural 


feature, 99, 102-3 

Sky, like a bowl, 10, 155, 156; relation 
to earth and Tartaros, 10-11; im- 
plies advent of Night and Day, 20; 
separation from earth, in Hesiodic 
cosmogony, 24—32; in Greck litera- 
ture, 32-3; in non-Grcek sources, 
33-4; relation of Greek and Hittite 
versions to a common archaic ac- 
count, 36-7; in Babylonian mytho- 
logy, 90; see also Ouranos 

Snell, B., rgin. 

Snow (and hail), Anaximenes’ expla- 
nation, 158 


482 


GENERAL INDEX 


Socrates, 215, 221n.3, 263, 366n.1, 
384n., 434, 445; and Parmenides, 
263; pupil of Archelaus, 395 

Solon, on χρόνου δίκη, 56n., 120; visit 
to Sardis, 81 n.1; possible anticipa- 
tion of Xenophanes, 171 n. 3; on 
wisdom, 204n.; on personal re- 
sponsibility, 214 

Sophists, vii; Archclaus and their view of 
right and wrong, 399 n. 2 

Sotion of Alexandria, 401; originator of 
Διαδοχαί, 4, 101n.; Apollodorus of 
Alcxandria’s debt to, 4-5; on Hera- 
clitus, 182; on Parmenides, 265; on 
Anaxagoras, 364 

Soul 

pre-philosophical views: the Homeric 
psyche, 9, 95, 206; the psyche and 
θυμός, 159, 436; Orphic instructions 
for souls of the dead, 38; in Phere- 
cydes, 60 

in ‘l‘hales, souls as gods, 94; as motive, 
95; attributed to inanimate objects, 
93-7 

in Anaximenes, cosmic air and breath- 
soul comparison, 158-62, 206 

Heraclitus’ view, 160, 161-2, 205-11, 
214, 2153; comparcd to spider, 207 
n. 2; and cf. 9 

in cosmology of Pythagoras, 224, 234, 
261-23; as an attunement of physical 
opposites, 234, 358; cf. 9, and see also 
‘Lransmigration 

Alemaeon on motion of, 235, 262 

Empedocles’ view, 323, 345, 351-5; 
355-6, 358~9; the fall of the soul and 
the cosmic cycle, 348, 350-1; indi- 
vidual survival, 356-7 

in the theory of the atomists, 420, 
4.22 

Diogenes’ view, 434-8 

Sources for Presocratic thought, 1-7; 
direct quotation, 1-3; ¢estimonia, 
3-7; the doxographical tradition, 
4-6; see also Aristotle, Doxographical 
tradition, Plato, Scepticism, Sim- 
plicius, Stoics, Theophrastus 

Space, as interpretation of χάος, 26; 
spatial extension inseparable from 
existence in Presocratic thought, 
245-97 passim, 300 n.2; concept of in 
Zeno’s argument, 292; his argu- 
ment against, 297, 302; association 
with void, 302 n.1; and theory of 
atoms, 408 


Sparta, Anaximander’s association with, 
99, 102-3, 104n. 

σπέμμα, meaning in Anaxagoras, 377-8; 
566 also Semen 

Speusippus, on Pythagorean cosmogony, 
254; on Parmenides, 264; on Philo- 
laus, 312 

Stars, bathe in Okeanos (Homer), 15n.; 
archaic observations, 86; in cosmo- 
logy of Anaximander, 136-7; in 
Anaximenes, 143, 154, 155; Em- 
pedocles’ view, 333 (cf. 155); Anax- 
agoras’, 391; see also Astronomy, 
Navigation 

Stein, H., 223 

στεφάναι, in Parmenides’ astronomy, 280, 
284 

Stephanus of Byzantium, 62 ἢ. 2; on 
Diogenes, 427}. 

Stobaeus, John, 2; source for Aetius, 5, 
124; on Xenophanes, 166; on ethics 
of Democritus, 4.25 

Stoics, Stoicism, influence on the doxo- 
graphical tradition, 6; interpretation 
of χάος, 26-7, 56, 59 n. 1; Chrysippus 
and Orphic theogonical ideas, 23 
n. 1; influence on Orphic cosmo- 
gony, 43; interpretation of Phere- 
cydes’ account of creation, 57-8, 61; 
and interpretation of Thales, 00 ἢ. 2, 
g6nn.; and Heraclitus, 186, 1ggn., 
202n., 204n., 206n., 208, 20gnn.; 
view of justice as spatially extended, 
250 

Strabo, 2 

Strife, personified in Hesiod, 25 n. 2; as 
justice in Heraclitus, 119, 195; as 
Heraclitus’ metaphor for change, 
195-6; Strife and Love in Empe- 
docles, 249-50, 324, 327-32, 338, 
339, 343, 345-6 

Succession-writers, as sources of Pre- 
socratic thought, 4, 5, rorn.; on the 
date of Anaximencs, 143 

σνλλάψιες, 1QIN. 

Sun 

sails round Okeanos in a golden bow], 
14, 156, 203; asa bowl, 15, 203; rises 
from Okeanos, 15; sails across the 
sky, 15, 90 
solar observation: Thales’, 74, 79-82; 

Babylonian, 80, 81; solstice-marker, 
52-4, 81; establishment of cycle of 
solstice, 79-81 ; discovery of obliquity 
of the ecliptic, 81, 101, 103n.; ratio 


483 


GENERAL INDEX 


Sun (continued) 
of diameter to celestial path, 82n.; 
archaic, 86; of Anaximander, 99, 
102-3; of Empedocles, 335 

in cosmology: Anaximander, 133, 

135-6, 139, 142; Anaximenes, 154, 
155-6; XMenophanes, 172-3; Hera- 
clitus, 203 (cf. 15); Empedocles, 
333-5; Anaxagoras, 392 (cf. 152); 
Diogenes, 439 
see also Astronomy 

Sundials, 99, 102-3; see also gnomon 

Syracuse, 164; connexion with Syrie im- 
probable, 54.n.2; fossils found at, 
177 

Syrie, in Homer’s reference to the τροπαὶ 
ἠελίοιο, 52-4 

Syros, the solstice-marker at, 52-4, 81 


Tannery, P., on ‘Uhales’ eclipse, 74n.; on 
motion in Anaximander, 128; on 
Zeno, 290; on Anaxagoras, 367 

τάξις, 120 

Tartaros, 18; its relation to earth and sky, 
LO-11,175; to Hades and Erebos, 11; 
Homer’s references to, 16n.; in 
Hcsiodic cosmogony, 20; associated 
with Night in Hesiodic and Orphic 
cosmogonies, 22, 24-5, 30-1, 45; 
produccd by Night and ᾿Αήρ (Epi- 
menides), 22; Night surrounds the 
‘throat’ of, 23; Aristophanes’ re- 
ference, 44; Pherecydes’ account, 
64n., 65n.1, 66, 67; Hesiod’s 
description related to Pherecydes’ 
winged oak, 64 

Taylor, A. E., on the trial of Anaxagoras, 
364. 

Teleology, of Diogenes, 430, 433 

Tethys, cosmogonical position of, 15, 
17-18, 67; Aristotle on, 17 

Tetractys of the Decad, 230 ἢ. 2 

Thales of Miletus, 3, 8, 16, 49, 50, 73, 108, 
163, 178, 200 

Hippolytus as source for, 5-6 

compared with Pherecydes, 72 

life and practical activities, 74-84; 
date, 74, 100; nationality, 74-5; 
astronomical and navigational work, 
74, 75) 79-83, 86; as statesman and 
engineer, 75-6; as type of practical 
man, 76; as geometer, 76-7, 83, 97; 
visit to Egypt, 76-8, 83, 84n., 97; on 
the flooding of the Nile, 77-8; 
anecdotes on, 78-9, 82, 84n.; 


measurement of the pyramids, 81, 
83-4; mathematical discoveries, 83-4 
writings, 84—6, 102 n.1, 184-5 
cosmology, 87-98; oriental influences 
and similarities, 9, 12, 88, 89, 90-2, 
97; water as principle of all things, 
87-93, 97-8, 125; earth floats on 
water, 87-9, 134 (cf. 13, 17, 77); 
theory of earthquakes, 92; origin of 
importance attached to water, 89— 
gt; earth originates from water, 
92-3; summary of his views on 
water, 93; water as ἄπειρον, ggn., 
109; life in the apparently inani- 
mate, 93~—7, 127-8, 147; the soul as 
motive, 95-6; ‘all things full of 
gods’, 96-7 
his work and thought summarized, 
97-8; ‘hylozoism’, 97; as the first 
philosopher, 98, 100 
influence on Anaximenes, 162; and 
Xenophances’ concept of god, 172 
Theano, disciple of Pythagoras, 221 ἢ. 2 
Theiler, W., on writings of Diogenes, 428 
Themistius, 127n., 252n. 
Theodoretus, 4, 5 
Theophrastus 
his Φυσικῶν δόξαι as source for Pre- 
socratic thought, 3-4, 6; his debt to 
Aristotle, 4, 6-7; his place in the doxo- 
graphical tradition, 4, 5, 6-7 
on Thales, 85, 89n., gonn., 93, 95n. 
on Anaximander: date, 100; versions 
of his account of the originative sub- 
stance, 104~7; and the extant frag- 
ment, 117, 121; and attribution of 
atomist argument, 123-43; attri- 
bution of atomist-type worlds, 124-6, 
128, 130, 151n., 412; on eternal 
motion, 127, 128; on separation of 
opposites, 129-30; the Indefinite 
likened to Anaxagoras’ mixture, 
131n.2; formation of the cosmos, 
131-3; meteorology, 138; drying up 
of the sea, 139 
on Anaximenes: date, 143; book, 144; 
lost work on, 145; cosmology, 152, 
153; attribution of innumerable 
worlds, 151n. 
on Xenophanes, 166-7; as Parmenides’ 
master, 165; on his single god, 167n., 
172; on his views on the sun, 173 
on Heraclitus: his μελαγχολία, 184; and 
Aristotle’s interpretation, 186; on 
the ‘road up and down’, 190-In.; 


484 


GENERAL INDEX 


Theophrastus (continued) 
the trade-image, 202n.; the hea- 
venly bodies, 203; exhalations, 204n. 
on Alcmaeon’s views on sense-percep- 
tion, 233 ἢ. 3 
on Parmenides’ 
279-80, 283 
on Empedocles’ explanation of sense- 
perception, 343 
on Anaxagoras’ cosmology, 383 n.1 
on Archelaus’ adaptation of Anaxa- 
goras, 397; his lost work on, 398 n.1 
on the atomists, 402, 403; their theory 
of sense-perception, 422, 423 
on Diogenes’ eclecticism, 430; and his 
acceptance of the void, 433n.; his 
physiology, 441-2 
Theopompus, on Pherccydes of Syros, 51 
θεωρία, in Pythagoreanism, 228 
Theriomorphism, origin of in Greece, 
39 n.1 
‘Vheron of Acragas, 348 
Thought, Empedocles on relation to 
perception, 344-5; atomists, 422-4 
Thrasylus (Thrasyllus), and Democritus, 
404 
θυμός and ψυχή, distinction in Homer, 159, 
436 
Thurii, foundation of, 5, 320, 321 
Tiamat, in Babylonian Creation-epic, 
1gn., 20n., 34, 68, 71-2, 90-1 
Timaeus, on Xenophanes, 163; as source 
for Parmenides, 265 
Time, as cosmogonical concept, 39 n.1, 
56-7, and see Chronos; ‘assessment 
of ‘Time’ in Anaximander, 56n., 120-- 
1; Parmenides’ view, 273-43; concept 
of, in Zeno’s arguments, 293, 294-5 
Timon of Phlius, and Xenophanes, 166, 
170n.; on Heraclitus, 184 
Titans, Homer’s references to, 16n.; 
parentage of, 18, 45; subjection of, 
21n., 23, 27-8, 58; list of, in Hesiod, 


Way of Seeming, 


24-5; Neoplatonist etymology of 
Titév, 44η. 
Transmigration, ridiculed by Xeno- 


phanes, 181, 222; Herodotus on, 223; 
Pythagoras’ teaching, 222-4; and 
teaching of Alcmaeon, 262; in Em- 
pedocles, 351-5 

Typhoeus (Typhon), 21n., 57n., 70; fight 
with Zeus, 52, 67-8; produced from 
egg, 58-9; snake-headed, 66; mates 
with Echidna, 67 n.2, 68n.; equated 
with Egyptian Seth, 68 


Ugarit, 31n., 68 

Ullikummi, Song of, 33-4, 37 n.1 
Upelluri, in ‘Song of Ullikummi’, 33-4 
ὑπόπτερος, 63 


Varro, used the Vetusta Placita, 5 

Verdenius, W. J., on Heraclitus’ views on 
the soul, 210 n.2 

Vetusta Placita, as source of doxographical 
summaries, 5 

Viastos, G., 204n.; interpretation of 
χάος, 31N.; ON opposites in Anaxi- 
mander, 118—1gn.; on the Indefinite 
as a mixture, 131 ἢ. 2; on cosmo- 
gonical process in Anaximander, 
132-3; on Heraclitus’ ‘road up and 
down’, 1g1n.; on παλίντροπος, 193N.; 
on Heraclitean flux, 198 ἢ, 2; inter- 
pretation of Heraclitus fr. 30, 19gn.; 
on Heraclitus’ views on the soul, 
206; on Alcmacon, 234n.; on 
“number-atomism ’, 247n.; on Melis- 
sus, 300 n. 2; on Empedocles’ theory 
of respiration, 342 ἢ. 2; on Anaxa- 
goras, 367; on Democritus, 403-4; 
on Anaxagoras and Democritus, 
414.n.6; on Democritean ethics, 
425, 426n. 

Void, in Pythagorean cosmogony, 252-3; 
Parmenides’ demolition of the con- 
cept, 274, 275, 277, 319; relation to 
space, 202 Π.1; and Empedocles’ 
theory of sense-perception, 344n., 
406n., 408, 409 n. 3; Anaxagoras’ 
equation with Not-being, 370n. 

accepted by Leucippus, 405; atomist 
view, 408; Diogenes and, 432-3 

Vortex, Aristotle on, in Anaximander 
and Anaximenes, 128-9, 130, 132, 
135, 152 ἢ. 2; in Democritus, 132; 
separating-off from vortex, in Anax- 
agoras, 133 ἢ. 2, 374-5, 382-3, 398, 
438; in theory of the atomists, 411, 
412n., 413 nn. 2 and 3, 416, 419-20; 
in Diogenes, 438-9 


Walzer, R., 204n.; (tr.), Galen, On 
Medical Experience, 429 

War, as Heraclitus’ metaphor for change, 
195-6 

Wasserstein, A., on Babylonian measure- 
ment of the ecliptic, 82n. 

Water, earth floats on, 13, 77, 87—9, go-2, 
97; male and female principles of, in 
Babylonian Creation-epic, 13n.; pri- 


485 


GENERAL INDEX 


Water (continued) 
ority of, in Orphic cosmogony, 41-2; 
produced from seed of Chronos, 
57-8, 59n.; in cosmology of ‘Thales, 
87-93, 97-8; and the soul, in Hera- 
clitus, 206, 442; Nestis, in Empe- 
docles, 324, 346; in Archelaus, 398; 
Aristotle on atomist theory of com- 
position of, 420n.; inhibits intelli- 
gence (Diogenes), 442; see also 
Okcanos 

Webster, T. B. L., 64 

Weight, concept of, and atomusm, 415-16 

Wilamowitz, U. von, 48n.1, 267n.; on 
Timc as cosmogonical god, 56—7 

Wind, produced from sced of Chronos, 
57-8, 59n.; as cause of Nile floods, 
77-8; cause of movement of hcaven- 
ly bodies, of thunder (Anaximander, 
Anaximenes), 137, 138, 1553; Xcno- 
phanes’ explanation, 176—7 

Wisdom, Heraclitus on, 204-5 


Xenophancs of Colophon, 102 n.1, 124, 

152, 162, 200, 209 n.1, 286 

lJippolytus as source for, 5-6 

relation to other thinkers: refercnces 
to, and in, others, 163, 164; his place 
among the Ionians, 73, 166; on 
Thales as anastronomer, 79, 83n. ; his 
‘hylozoism’ compared with Thales’, 
97; as teacher of Parmenidcs, 164, 
165, 167, 265; rebuked by Hera- 
clitus, 168, 183, 189 n.1, 218; ridi- 
culed transmigration, 181, 222, 223; 
influence on epistemology, 180-1; 
influence on Empedocles, 326, 357 

date and life, 163-6, 183n.; poems, 
163, 166-7; association with Elea, 
164, 165-6 

his physical studies, 167, 168 

his importance and influence on 
religious thought, 167-8, 170 

his theology, 168-72; theology his 
main interest, 167; attacks on con- 
ventional religion, 168—9 and cf. 150; 
reaction from Homeric idea of 
divine properties, 170-2, 180; single 
non-anthropomorphic deity, 169- 
71; his god and Parmenides’ Being, 
170n., 171-2 (cf. 165-6); corporeal 
and non-corporeal elements, 170, 
172; wrongly identified with the 
whole world, 171-2; possible in- 
fluence of Solon, 171 ἢ. 3 


physical idcas, 172—9; heavenly bodies 
as concentrations of fire, 173-4; his 
ideas related to Heraclitus’, 174; 
meteorological phcnomena, 174, 
177; theological motives in physical 
inquiries, 174; plurality of suns and 
moons, 174-5; explanation of ec- 
lipses, 174. 5; the earth’s roots, 175-6 
(cf. 11, 88, 109); the earth becomes 
sca again, fossils as evidence, 177-8 
(cf. 139n.) 
on the limitations of human knowledge, 
179-81 
Xerxes, King of Persia, 362; and Demo- 
critus, 404n. 
Xuthus, on motion, 301-2; identified 
with Orthomenes, 302 


Yggdrasil, Scandinavian world-tree, 65 
nt 


3a, Cyprian form of Ge, 56 
Zas, in cosmogony of Pherecydes, 49, 
54-5, 58; etymological connexion 
with Zeus, 55-6; marriage to 
Chthonic and presentation of em- 
broidered cloth, 57 n. 2, 63, 69; 
as cosmogonical creator, 58 ἢ. 1, 60— 
2; creates as Eros, 61-2; the winged 
oak and the cloth, 62-5; dcposes 
Kronos-Chronos, 67; connexion 
with Zeus, 55-6, 67 
Zeller, E., 152, 372, 398 ἢ. 2; on Phere- 
cydes’ winged oak, 64; on Anaxi- 
mander’s plural worlds, 121-2; on 
vortex action in cosmogony, 153Nn.; 
on Pythagorean ‘lable of Opposites, 
241 ἢ. 2; on Parmenides’ Way of 
Seeming, 279, 280n.; on Zeno’s 
arguments, 289, 290; on the One of 
Melissus, 303; on Empedocles, 322 
Zeno of Citium, 186; his interpretation 
of χάος, 26-7 
Zeno of Elca, 109, 24.7, 364, 401 
date and life, 264, 286; alleged visit to 
Athens, 263; association with Par- 
menides, 286; originally a Pytha- 
gorean, 286 
controversial nature of his work, 287-8 
arguments against plurality, 288-91; 
Pythagorean confusion of units, 
points, atoms, 290-1; Aristotle’s 
judgement on the arguments, 291; 
his method contrasted with Melis- 
sus’, 303-4; Anaxagoras’ answer, 


486 


GENERAL INDEX 


Zeno of Elea (continued) 
370-2; and Anaxagoras’ ‘seeds’ and 
‘portions’, 377-8 
arguments against motion, 291-7; relc- 
vance of theories of space and time, 
292, 293, 294, 295; the Stadium, 
292-3; Achilles and the tortoise, 
294; the flying arrow, 294-5; the 
moving rows, 295-6; Aristotle’s 
answers, 293, 294, 295, 296 
argument against space, 297, 302 
Zeus, deceived by Hera, 15-16, 19, 20n.; 
his share in division of the cosmos, 
16n., 20n.; subdues Titans, 21n., 
23, 27-8, 58; in Orphic theogony, 
23n.1; paralleled by Hittite storm- 
god, 36; battle with Typhocus, 52, 
67-8; connexion with Zas, 55-6, 67; 


slandered by Ge, 58; his shrine at 
Dodona, 64; his childhood in Crete, 
67; in cosmology of Empedocles, 
324; in Empedocles’ Purifications, 349 

Zodiac, discovery of obliquity of, 80, 81, 
101, 103n. 

Zoogony, of Anaximander, 141-2; spon- 
taneous gencration, 142; of Empc- 
docles, 336-45; of Archelaus, 398 

Zoroaster, identified with Ham, 65 n. 2; 
visited by Pythagoras, 65n.2,241n.1 

Zoroastrianism, Pherecydes’ connexion 
with, 52, 65 n. 2; literature of, 65 
n. 2; similarities with Pythagorean- 
ism, 241 n. I 

Kouran Akarana (Iranian ‘unending time’), 
409 5.1, 56n.1 


