


PROBLEMS 


Progress 
Publishers 
Moscow 





{ e a eR), es AR KS, OR a ee ae ae OM bole a call 


Translated from the Russian by Bryan Bean 
Designed by Victor Korolkov 


OD ead a 


Pe a ee 


Z 
I 
ait 
A 





REQUEST TO READERS 


x Progress Publishers would be glad to 
oy have your opinion of this book, its transla- 
tion and design and any suggestions you 
may have for future publications. 

Please send all your comments to 21, 
Zubovsky Boulevard, Moscow, U.S.S.R. 





Tipo6embl BOHHBI H Mupa 


Ha axeaudicxom a3oixe 





First printing 1972 


Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 





CONTENTS 


Introduction 


PART ONE. The bali fe Peace in the Social 
Thought of the Past 
Chapter I. Utopian Socialism and Problems of Peace 
Chapter II. The Idea of Universal Peace in the Theories of the 
Bourgeois Humanists (16th-18th Centuries) 


PART TWO. The Origins and Essence of War 


Chapter III. The Dialectics of War and Peace 

Chapter IV. Politics and War in Our Time 

Chapter V. The Monopolies and War . 

ae VI. Bourgeois Philosophy and Problems of War and 

eace . 

Chapter VII, National Sovereignty and War. 

Chapter VIII. Against Justification of War by Malthusianism 
and Geopolitics : 

Chapter IX. Western Social Psychology ¢ on the Causes of Wars 
and the Means of Averting Them 


PART THREE. Against the iaations of Mititarism 
and Reaction. For Peace and Social Progress 


Chapter X. American Doctrines of Power Politics ; i 
Chapter XI. The Theory of Games in International Affairs . 
Chapter XII. Who Is Opposed to Peaceful Coexistence . 
Chapter XIII. Criticism of the Interpretation of Peaceful 
Coexistence As Preserving the Social Status Quo. . 
Chapter XIV. Against the Theory of Ideological Disarmament 
Chapter ou Modern Catholicism and Problems of War and 
Peac 
Chapter XVI. Pacifist Ideology Today. The American 1 Quaker 


Movement 


1* 8 


Page 





19 
89 


57 
77 
100 


111 
130 


146 
163 


189 
214 
229 


244 
268 


293 
306 

















Chapter XVII. Western Scientists and Intellectuals and the 


Quest for Peace . . Mees oe ye . . 330 
Chapter XVIII. The Pugwash Movement . 351 
Chapter XIX. The Soviet Disarmament Programme and. Its 

Critics 2. 359 


Chapter XX. The Peace Movement and Socialist Humanism . 376 





INTRODUCTION 





The monstrous brutalities of fascist aggression, all the 
boundless grief and suffering caused by the Second World War 
are still fresh in people’s memories. The courage and heroism 
shown by the peoples of the Soviet Union who bore the main 
brunt of the fighting against nazi Germany, defending the free- 
dom and independence of their homeland and saving world 
civilisation from destruction, will be remembered for all time. 
Today the peoples of the world are constantly aware of the 
danger of war. Despite a marked aggravation of its inherent 
contradictions, imperialism has retained its aggressive nature, 
as revealed in the arms race and the launching of local wars. 
This is largely connected with the increasing influence of the 
“military-industrial complex” in the most highly developed 
capitalist countries, the alliance between the big monopolies 
and the military clique in the state machine. 

One of the most serious dangers imperialism presents to the 
peoples of the world is the threat of a new world war. The 
sinister mushroom-shaped cloud of Hiroshima serves as a grim 
warning of the tragic consequences a third world war launched 
by imperialism would have for mankind. A world conflict in 
present-day conditions, when intercontinental missiles can 
devastate vast areas of the globe in a matter of minu- 
tes, would mean death for hundreds of millions of people 
and the reduction to ashes of the treasures of world civilisa- 
tion. 





$ 
{ 








Wars, acts of violence and aggression and infringement on 
national sovereignty all have their origin in imperialist poli- 
cies. 

In the 1960s the USA and other imperialist powers com- 
mitted acts of armed aggression against Vietnam, Cuba, Pana- 
ma, the Dominican Republic and the Arab states. 

The Americans are waging the war in Vietnam with the 
most barbarous methods. The International Meeting of Com- 
munist and Workers’ Parties held in Moscow in June 1969 
expressed the violent indignation of progressives everywhere 
over the armed aggression of the forces of imperialism in Viet- 
nam, and appealed to all men of good will, to all who cherish 
peace, justice, national freedom and independence, to make 
every effort to strengthen and coordinate the activities of 
the anti-imperialist forces in support of the people of Viet- 
nam. 

The war being waged by the American imperialists in Indo- 
china is an unlawful, pirate war. It is in fact a colonial war, an 
act of military intervention, violating the right of nations to 
self-determination, the right of the people of Vietnam to choose 
their own road. 

The barbarous crimes perpetrated by the American interven- 
tionists against the Vietnamese people, the use of biological, 
chemical and other means of mass destruction—amounting to 
nothing short of genocide—violate the conscience of human- 
ity, and have revealed to the peoples of the world the true, in- 
human essence of imperialism. 

All this has led to the increasing political and moral isola- 
tion of the aggressor by broad sections of the world public, up 
to and including the ruling circles in certain capitalist coun- 
tries. Even in the USA, ever wider sections of the population 
are protesting against the dirty war in Vietnam, the conse- 
quences of which are rocking American society to the very 
foundations. 

The heroic resistance of the Vietnamese people is a deter- 
mining factor in the anti-imperialist movement of the peoples. 

Despite his gigantic war machine, the aggressor found him- 
self forced to call an unconditional halt to bombing raids over 
the territory of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and sit 
down at a four-sided conference table for peace talks, with the 
National Liberation Front of South Viet-Nam as a full and 
equal participant. Meanwhile the NLF forces are striking heavy 
blows at the US interventionists and their puppets. People’s 


6 








government has been established in most areas, and the bank- 
rupt puppet regime is only held in power at the point of US 
imperialist bayonets. 

In 1967 Israel launched an aggressive war on the United 
Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan. Since that time the Israeli 
ruling circles supported by the imperialists, and first and fore- 
most by the American imperialists and the Zionists, have con- 
tinued to occupy the Arab territories seized during the aggres- 
sion, refusing to carry out UN resolutions, following an expan- 
sionist and annexationist policy, practising repression of the 
Arab population in the occupied territories and continually 
mounting new military provocations. 

The Israeli aggression represents a gross violation of the 
rights of the Arab people, including the Arab population of 
Palestine, a gross violation of the UN Charter which condemns 
all acts of aggression. Peace and order can only be restored in 
the area following the withdrawal of Israeli forces from all the 
occupied territories and the full implementation of the Security 
Council resolution of November 22, 1967. 

Imperialist plots and provocations directed against Cuba, 
many Asian, African and Latin American countries, and along 
the coast of Korea constitute a continual threat to peace. 

The imperialists resort to all sorts of false arguments in the 
attempt to mask the criminal nature of their wars and other 
anti-democratic actions. They make anti-communism their main 
ideological platform, justifying militarism and aggression, and 
although such arguments are based on lies and falsification it 
would be wrong to underestimate the influence of such reac- 
tionary propaganda on people’s minds. 

In view of the increased danger of war with which we are 
now faced, a sober scientific examination of problems of war 
and peace acquires a special significance as providing a firm 
ideological foundation for the struggle against anti-communist 
fabrications and for the practical activities of the peace move- 
ment. 

Action for peace can only be conducted purposefully and 
effectively provided people are aware of the most suitable 
methods to adopt and understand the real essence of the situa- 
tion obtaining in the world. 

The Communists offer a clear and precise answer to the 
vexed questions of war and peace. The attempts of the interna- 
tional Communist movement to curb the aggressors and pre- 
vent a new world conflict are based on a sober analysis accord- 


7 





ing to the principles of dialectical materialism of the new rela- 
tionship of forces in the international arena. However, for such 
attempts to be effective, it is necessary to enlist the broadest 
sections of the masses, to increase active involvement of all the 
forces of peace. 

The degree to which such active efforts can be effective 
depends directly on the degree to which the right paths of 
action are indicated, the degree of solidarity and awareness of 
the broad front of supporters of peace, the degree of their 
understanding of the real origins of the threat of war. At the 
present time, success or failure of the peace movement depends 
to a considerable extent on a scientific interpretation of the 
theory of peaceful coexistence. 

Appeals for peace based on false, unscientific premises, and 
the advancing of utopian slogans can only do serious damage 
to the cause of peace and social progress. 

Problems of war and peace are extremely diverse and com- 
plex. They are analysed by experts working in various disci- 
plines in both the natural and social sciences. Economists, histo- 
rians, specialists in law and international affairs all find vast 
scope for exercising their respective knowledge and _ abilities, 
while sociologists too find a great deal in these problems that 
falls within their province. 

War and peace are essentially social phenomena: they are 
inseparable from society, from concrete historical conditions. 
Any attempt to analyse problems of war and peace that fails 
to take this into account is foredoomed from the outset to 
complete failure. 

This book comprises articles by Soviet philosophers and 
experts in international affairs. No attempt has been made to 
deal with the problems of war and peace from the point of 
view of military strategy. The book is rather concerned with 
the ideological struggle currently being waged over issues of 
war and peace, with the spotlight on the root causes of war and 
the need for a scientific interpretation of the theory of peaceful 
coexistence. For it is over these issues that numerous views are 
current in the capitalist countries with which we find it impos- 
sible to agree and which require thorough investigation and 
exposure. The fact that unscientific views are very often held 
not only by the opponents but also by the supporters of the 
peaceful settlement of international conflicts makes necessary 
an especially thorough and well-argumented scientific dialogue 
and polemic with them. 





The authors have attempted to examine some of the most 
widespread sociological and socio-political theories of war and 
peace in the capitalist West, and confront them with the scien- 
tific Marxist standpoint. 

A scientific analysis of social development inevitably leads 
to the conclusion that imperialism is the sole cause of aggres- 
sive, reactionary wars in the conditions obtaining in our 
time. 

Imperialism, and imperialism alone, bears full responsibility 
for the two world wars, the most destructive and costly wars 
in history. The ten years of world war in the twentieth centu- 
ry cost mankind far more than all the wars in the preceding 
three centuries. 

Three million were killed in wars in Europe in the seven- 
teenth century, 5,200,000 in the eighteenth century and 5,500,000 
in the nineteenth century. In the First World War the number 
of fatal casualties, excluding civilians, was 10 million, with 
a further twenty million disabled. In the Second World War 
54 million were killed, and over 90 million wounded, of which 
some 28 million were permanently disabled. Two million ci- 
vilians were killed in air raids. 

The two world wars caused colossal material damage. In 
the First World War material damage is estimated to have 
amounted to 338,000 million dollars. The figure for the Second 
World War is 4,000,000 million dollars, of which some 500,000 
million in the Soviet Union. 

Both world wars involved tremendous military expenditure, 
and this is actually still on the increase. Direct military expen- 
diture amounted to 208,000 million dollars in the First World 
War and_ 1,380,000 million dollars in the Second World 

ar. 

US military expenditure alone in the years 1946 to 1968 
amounted to 1,050,000 million dollars, or over twice as much 
as in the whole history of the United States prior to 1945. And 
this in a world where millions live in abject poverty, where 
disease, hunger, and illiteracy are still rife! 

Today the aggressive nature of imperialism is manifesting 
itself with renewed vigour. American military expenditure over 
the last five years amounted to some 350,000 million dollars, 
or twenty per cent more than during the Second World War. 

According to US official sources, by the end of 1968 Amer- 
ican casualties in Vietnam were in the order of a quarter of 
a million killed or wounded. The war in Vietnam had already 


9 














cost the United States 100,000 million dollars. This money 
might well have been spent as follows: 


The war on poverty in the USA .... 70,000 million 
dollars 

The Building of: 

Hospitals, etc . 2... 21,000 million dollars 

Homes for old-age pensioners, etc. 7,000 million dollars 





Total 98,000 million dollars! 


1 See United States News & World Report, Nov. 11, 1968. 


While 20,000 million dollars was being spent on a war against 
a people numbering 30 million souls, a mere 600 million dollars 
was allocated for “economic aid” to developing Asian countries 
with a population of over 800 million. 

To put it another way: while, on the one hand, seventy cents 
(the price of a packet of cigarettes) is being spent on every in- 
habitant of the Asian countries under Washington’s patronage 
with the aim of “helping him live’, on the other hand, according 
to Washington Post, 322,000 dollars is being spent on every Viet- 
namese with the aim of helping him die. Such is the true face of 
American imperialism today. This is just one of the many facts 
which go to show that the threat of war will continue to exist as 
long as imperialism exists. 

Yet many people still fail to recognise the real root of war. 
This is largely due to the wide currency of various false theo- 
ries of the causes of war. It is such theories that the present 
work sets out to analyse. 

The views examined include the theory that ascribes the 
causes of war to human nature, the Malthusian and geopoliti- 
cal views, attributing the causes of war to demographic pressure 
and various geographical factors, and the wholly unfounded 
concept of “international anarchy”, based on the false premise 
that national sovereignty is the major cause of war. This last 
view is usually combined with reactionary utopian plans for 
the creation of a World State with a powerful police force 
to “restrain the nations”, and is thus extremely harmful since 
it leads many people who sincerely support peace to adopt a 
wrong course of action. 


10 





In many countries there are to be found reactionary politi- 
cians and scholars who openly support militarism and aggres- 
sion, attempting to provide sociological justification of ‘‘power 
politics” and “scientific” apologia for reactionary foreign poli- 
cies in general. 

This aggressive course represents a serious threat to 
peace, and makes the greatest vigilance and readiness to 
defend the gains of socialism a vital historical necessity of 
our age. 

At the same time, quite apart from such open apologia for 
militarism and aggression, many other views on war and peace 
are gaining wide currency which, although ostensibly advocat- 
ing peaceful coexistence, nevertheless deserve the most resolute 
criticism and condemnation. Thus, some ideologists in capitalist 
countries are wont to interpret peaceful coexistence between 
states with different social systems as something quite separate 
from social progress, and in some cases even in a manner that is 
contrary to the interests of social progress, attempting to extend 
it to such internal processes as the class struggle in capitalist 
countries, the national liberation movement, and so on. Such 
views are at once unscientific, in that their adherents reject the 
idea of social progress or attempt to obstruct it, and reacti- 
onary, in that they are trying to outlaw the revolutionary 
struggle of peoples for their national and social emanci- 
pation and are violating the elementary principles of democ- 
racy. 

Every people has the sacred right to take up arms in defence 
of its freedom and independence. The scientific theory of peace- 
ful coexistence defends the right of every people to re- 
solve the problems of its social development independently, 
and is opposed to the imperialist policy of interference in 
the affairs of other peoples and the export of counter-rev- 
olution. 

The policy of peaceful coexistence has nothing at all to do 
with defending the social system of exploitation, or with renun- 
ciation of the class struggle and wars of national liberation. 
On the contrary, it creates the best possible conditions from 
the point of view of the masses for the solution of class conflicts 
and ensures further social progress without the risk of a new 
world war. 

The Communists have never separated the question of war 
and peace from the interests of national and social emancipa- 
tion. Over half a century ago, the very next day after the crea- 


11 








tion of the world’s first workers’ and peasants’ state, on Octo- 
ber 26 (November 8), 1917, Lenin made a speech on peace, in 
which he declared: “The question of peace is a burning ques- 
tion, the painful question of the day. ... 

“The workers’ and peasants’ government, created by the 
Revolution of October 24-25 and basing itself on the Soviets 
of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, calls upon all 
the belligerent peoples and their governments to start imme- 
diate negotiations for a just, democratic peace. 

“By a just or democratic peace, for which the overwhelm- 
ing majority of the working class and other working people of 
all the belligerent countries, exhausted, tormented and racked 
by the war, are craving—a peace that has been most definitely 
and insistently demanded by the Russian workers and peasants 
ever since the overthrow of the tsarist monarchy—by such a 
peace the government means an immediate peace without an- 
nexations (i.e. without the seizure of foreign lands, without the 
forcible incorporation of foreign nations) and without indem- 
nities.” 

The first act of the Soviet state in the field of foreign policy 
was Lenin’s historic Decree on Peace passed on October 26 
(November 8), 1917, in which questions of peace were clo- 
sely linked with the fundamental interests of the working 
people. 

Faithful to the principles of Marxism-Leninism, the Soviet 
Union resolutely champions the cause of peace among the na- 
tions, consistently defends the interests of the working people 
and follows the Leninist principle of equality of all countries, 
irrespective of size. 

This was well summed up in the Report of the Central Com- 
mittee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to the 24th 
Party Congress in March 1971: “The goals of Soviet foreign 
policy, as formulated by the 23rd Congress of the CPSU, consist 
in ensuring, together with other socialist countries, favourable 
international conditions for the construction of socialism and 
communism; in consolidating the unity and cohesion of the soci- 
alist countries, their friendship and brotherhood; supporting 
the national liberation movement and engaging in all-round co- 
operation with the young developing states; consistently stand- 
ing up for the principle of peaceful coexistence between states 
with different social systems, giving a resolute rebuff to the 


! V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 26, p. 249. 


12 





err eee eEe=Eeo—u— 





aggressive forces of imperialism, and safeguarding mankind 
from another world war.’”! 

This policy aimed at the preservation and consolidation of 
peace serves the fundamental interests of all the peoples of the 
world and is manifested in concrete activities of the peace 
movement. 

The Soviet Union, together with the fraternal peoples of the 
other socialist countries and all revolutionary and progressive 
forces everywhere, is waging a continuous struggle against the 
aggressive and reactionary policy of imperialism, for the 
triumph of peace, democracy, national independence, socialism 
and communism. The Soviet Union and the friendly socialist 
countries are making joint efforts towards the implementation 
of these principles. The Karlovy Vary Conference, the Decla- 
ration of the Central Committees of Communist and Workers’ 
Parties and the governments of the socialist countries in con- 
nection with the Israeli aggression in the Middle East, Alexei 
Kosygin’s speech at the extraordinary session of the UN, the 
resolution adopted by the Plenary Meeting of the Central Com- 
mittee of the CPSU “On the Policy of the Soviet Union in Con- 
nection with Aggression by Israel in the Middle East”, the 
speech made by Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gro- 
myko at the 24th Session of the UN General Assembly, in 
which he announced the Soviet Government proposals concern- 
ing the strengthening of international security including sev- 
eral urgent measures designed to avert and obviate threats to 
peace and suppress acts of aggression; the proposal for the 
“conclusion of a convention forbidding the elaboration, pro- 
duction and stockpiling of chemical and bacteriological (biolog- 
ical) weapons and calling for the destruction of the existing 
stocks” submitted to the General Assembly by the Soviet Union, 
Poland, Hungary, Mongolia, Bulgaria, Rumania, Czechoslova- 
kia, the Ukraine and Byelorussia—all these and other measures 
testify to the great efforts the Soviet Union and the other so- 
cialist countries are making to preserve peace. 

The International Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Par- 
ties held in Moscow in June 1969 issued an Appeal for Peace. 
It contained the following: “Today lasting peace is no longer 
a utopia—it is a fully feasible aim. Mighty social and political 
forces exist in the world today which oppose war and work for 


1 Report of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union, Moscow, 1971, pp. 8-9. 


13 





SAL . ~arry oc inl as en ee en ae . xe, oat ve 4 
CR GO QO RP ERI SOP RRS IES he OLE SRE a eT OO 
t g . S 


re 
> 


Shapes aw BOR BI 





a relaxation of tension and broad international co-operation. 
The consistent peace policy of the first socialist country—the 
Soviet Union—and other socialist states, the intensification of 
the working people’s struggle in the capitalist countries, the 
growth of the national liberation movement, and action by broad 
circles of world democratic opinion and by peace fighters 
remove the fatal inevitability of another world war and create 
a real possibility for effectuating the striving of the peoples for 
peace. 

The tense international situation undoubtedly complicates 
the struggle for peace, yet even so progressive forces still have 
real opportunities for curbing the imperialists and forcing them 
to accept disarmament. 

A fierce ideological struggle is being waged over the disar- 
mament programme proposed by the Soviet Union. All kinds 
of argument are put forward against this programme, and the 
most typical of these are examined in the present work. We 
consider it essential that these questions be debated, especially 
since the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries are do- 
ing everything in their power to resolve the problem of disarma- 
ment. 

The best representatives of the intelligentsia of other coun- 
tries are among the progressive forces actively supporting peace. 
One of our aims in this book has been to note the positive con- 
tribution to the cause of peace which is being made by the pro- 
gressive scholars of the capitalist world. Many of them, although 
not from the Marxist standpoint, are playing an active role in 
the peace movement and sharply condemn aggressive imperial- 
ist foreign policy. 

The prime task of all supporters of peace and progress is 
to tighten their ranks in the struggle against the forces of reac- 
tion and imperialist militarism, and put an end to the interven- 
tion of the aggressors in the affairs of the Vietnamese, Arab 
and other peoples. 


This book is divided into three parts. 
Part One, entitled “The Quest for Peace in the Social 
Thought of the Past’, contains two chapters—“Utopian Social- 


1 International Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties, Moscow, 
1969, Peace and Socialism Publishers, Prague, 1969, p. 48. 


14 





. az sss, iss, 





ism and Problems of Peace” by Y. G. Panfilov and ‘The Idea 
of Universal Peace in the Theories of the Bourgeois Humanists 
(16th-18th Centuries)” by I. S. Andreyev. 

There are several reasons for the special attention that has 
been devoted to the ideas of the utopian communists and the 
sixteenth to eighteenth century humanists. The first is that the 
contribution made by the forerunners of scientific communism 
to the theory of war and peace is generally ignored by bour- 
geois scholars. Another important reason is that these progres- 
sive thinkers of the past all to a greater or lesser extent examined 
the subject in a social context. 

Part Two, “The Origins and Essence of War’, is chiefly con- 
cerned with studying the essence of war and peace from the 
standpoint of dialectical materialism, and critically analysing 
false, unscientific theories of the origins of war. It contains the 
following chapters: “The Dialectics of War and Peace” by 
N. V. Karabanov; ‘Politics and War in Our Time” by 
T. R. Kondratkov; “The Monopolies and War’ by V. Y. Abol- 
tin; “Bourgeois Philosophy and Problems of War and Peace” 
by B. T. Grigoryan; “National Sovereignty and War” by 
Y. D. Modrzhinskaya; “Against Justification of War by 
Malthusianism and Geopolitics” by B. Y. Smulevich and “West- 
ern Social Psychology on the Causes of Wars and the Means 
of Averting Them” by Y. M. Kondakov. 

Part Three, “Against the Ideology of Militarism and Reac- 
tion. For Peace and Social Progress”, analyses the main trends 
in the current ideological struggle over questions related to the 
problem of peaceful coexistence between states with different 
social systems. 

The chapters in this section are as follows: “American 
Doctrines of Power Politics” by B. A. Shabad; “The Theory of 
Games in International Affairs” by G. I. Gerasimov; “Who 
Is Opposed to Peaceful Coexistence” by V. I. Zamkova; 
“Criticism of the Interpretation of Peaceful Coexistence 
As Preserving the Social Status Quo” by G. B. Starushenko; 
“Against the Theory of Ideological Disarmament” by 
A. P.  Butenko; “Modern Catholicism and Problems 
of War and Peace” by L.N. Velikovich; “Pacifist Ideology 
Today. The American Quaker Movement” by L. N. Mitrokhin; 
“Western Scientists and Intellectuals and the Quest for Peace” 
by A. G. Grigoryan; “The Pugwash Movement” by M. S. Vos- 
lensky; and “The Soviet Disarmament Programme and Its 
Critics” by A. N. Kalyadin. 


15 

















The three parts are followed by a concluding chapter entitled 
“The Peace Movement and Socialist Humanism” by E. A. Bag- 
ramov. 

This book was prepared by members of the staff of the Insti- 
tute of Philosophy, Academy of Sciences of the USSR, with 
contributions from members of various Moscow research in- 
stitutes. 





| 

THE 

QUEST 

FOR PEACE 


| 


IN 

THE 
SOCIAL 
THOUGHT 
OF 

THE 

PAST 





Chapter | 


UTOPIAN SOCIALISM 
AND PROBLEMS OF 
PEACE 





Eternal peace among the nations, an end to all wars, is among 
the greatest ideals of mankind, an ideal for which the Com- 
munists are striving. Karl Marx maintained that only peace 
could serve as the international principle of the new, communist 
society,! while Lenin described communism as the society of 
“universal prosperity and enduring peace’,? and wrote: “An 
end to wars, peace among the nations, the cessation of pillaging 
and violence—such is our ideal.’ 

The social sciences have proved that the path to eternal 
peace lies through the triumph of socialism throughout the world, 
since this would finally eliminate the causes of all wars. It is 
thus the historical mission of communism to establish eternal 
peace in the world. 

The ideal of eternal peace championed by the Marxists- 
Leninists has a long history. It was developed over many cen- 
turies by progressive social thinkers. Non-Marxist literature 
on the history of the development of the ideas of peace almost 
invariably ignores the contribution of the utopian communists— 
the forerunners of scientific communism—to the struggle for 
the triumph of justice and enduring peace in international 


{See The General Council of the First International. 1870-1871. 
Minutes, Moscow, 1967, p. 328. 

2 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 27, p. 159. 

3 Tbid., Vol. 21, p. 293. 


2 19 





eR AS eae 


ef 
mq 
ig 
: 











relations. On the contrary, indeed, we find a host of all kinds of 
pacifists who refuse to see any connection whatsoever between 
the problem of peace and transformation of the economic and 
political foundations of society. The social significance of this 
kind of approach to the history of social thought is not hard 
to see. It amounts to a refusal to recognise the organic link 
between communism and international peace which was there 
from the very emergence of communist ideas and which was 
later fully developed in Marxism-Leninism. 

The longing for a life without war has been one of the cher- 
ished ideals of the masses from earliest times. The ideal of 
eternal peace was first embodied in the legends of a Golden 
Age which arose in the period of fierce strife that accompanied 
the break-up of the tribal system when the earliest class soci- 
eties (practising slavery) were being established through 
bloodshed and violence. Legends and tales of a Golden Age 
when people lived in peace and concord formed the basis of the 
first anti-military social utopias. Their authors idealised the 
society of the primitive commune and drew a picture of a soci- 
ety in which the evils of slave-owning society would be abolished 
(Jambul’s novel about “the sunny land” and so on). Thus the 
popular ideal of eternal peace was from the very outset insep- 
arably linked up with flashes of communist ideas—common 
ownership of property, comradely labour and a society without 
masters and slaves. 

With the passing of the slave-owning societies and the advent 
of the Middle Ages, the view that peace could be brought about 
by the embodiment in the form of a single state of the vague 
spiritual unity of the peoples of what had been the Roman Em- 
pire became current in social thought. Apologists of the Papacy 
used this idea as the basis for a programme of theocratic peace, 
the universal dominion of the Church of Rome. The temporal 
powers of the feudal era, and in particular the German emper- 
ors, opposed these claims, seeking instead to revive the Roman 
Empire, masking these ambitions with a pretence of “concern” 
for peace in Europe. 

By the beginning of the sixteenth century, progressive think- 
ers had begun to treat the problem of peace in a new way, link- 
ing it with the principle of nationality and making a clean 
break with the assumption that peace was only possible within 
the framework of a World Empire. 

One of the first to raise his voice on behalf of the masses 
and criticise wars of plunder at the dawn of the capitalist era 


20 





was the father of utopian communism, the great English human- 
ist Thomas More (1478-1535). 

More insisted that the highest principle of government should 
be the people’s welfare. But there is no concern for the latter 
in royal courts, where everyone is busy finding excuses for new 
adventures and all the time suggesting new plans for war. Even 
peace is made an object of these intrigues, attempts being made 
to create the impression that the prince is loving and merciful 
in bringing bloodshed to an end, deceiving the common people 
into believing that he has done so out of pity and compassion 
for them, whereas in fact he continues to exploit them as before.! 

More referred to the countless mercenaries that countries 
were full of and occupied by even in peacetime as a “destruc- 
tive pestilence”. He pointed to the example of the Romans, the 
Carthaginians and the Syrians, whose Empires, fields and cities 
had on various occasions been overrun and destroyed by their 
own armies.” 

More was quite aware that it was pointless to appeal to kings 
and their advisers with sensible arguments, and beg them to 
renounce their scheming and ambitions for territorial gains. 
“(These, and) suche other informations, yf I shoulde use among 
men wholye inclined and geven to the contrarye part, how 
deaffe hearers thinke you shoulde I have?’’? The root of all 
social evils, More pointed out, was private property. “Where 
possessions be private, where money bearethe all the stroke, it 
is harde and almoste impossible that there the weale publique 
maye justeleye be governed, and prosperouslye floryshe.’”@ 

More was the author of the first attempt in the history of so- 
cial thought to work out a peaceful, non-expansionist foreign 
policy. In place of the world of violence and injustice he pro- 
posed his dream of a wondrous land, Utopia, where private 
property did not exist. The inhabitants, the Utopians, abhor 
war as “a thing very beastly”, and only resort to it for three 
purposes: to defend their own territory when invaded; to de- 
liver the territory of an ally from invaders; and to free an op- 
pressed nation from tyranny. They may also make war for the 
purpose of avenging insults and injuries done to them, but only 
after having ascertained that the other side has no intention of 


1 Thomas More, Utopia, London, 1935, p. 37. 
2 Ibid., p. 23. 
3 Ibid., p. 40. 
4 Ibid. p. 43. 


21 











making fair reparation, and is thus to be considered the aggres- 
sor. 

Here we see one of the most typical features of the utopian 
communist ideology as regards issues of war and peace. The 
first utopian communists, while condemning war between peo- 
ples, rejected outright the idea of pacifism. They were the first 
to draw a distinction between just and unjust wars, regarding 
as just all wars waged in the interests of the people, in defence 
of the communist motherland, or which served to free people 
from bondage, although the idea of “a just war” did not yet 
exist as a scientific concept. It was natural that in drawing 
their picture of the ideal state, the utopian communists should 
have devoted much attention to military training. 

In war, the Utopians pity the common people among their 
enemies, practically as if they were their own citizens, know- 
ing that people are driven and enforced to war against their will 
by the furious madness of their rulers and heads.? The Utopians 
strictly honour truces, do not lay waste their enemy’s lands and 
even go out of their way not to damage their crops. They do 
not harm unarmed civilians, or put to the sack towns that have 
surrendered or been captured, and do not harm the civilian 
population or take any booty for themselves. In his account 
of the way the Utopians behave in war, More was in fact 
anticipating many major principles of international law con- 
cerning humane behaviour in war. 

The Utopian state maintains numerous ties with other 
peoples. Foreign trade is carried on not only in the interests of 
the Utopians but also in the interests of the poor of the countries 
with which they trade, making the latter a present of one- 
seventh of their exports.* One of the aims of exporting goods is 
to amass wealth to be used in the case of international discord 
for the hiring of foreign mercenaries, for paying their allies and 
buying off their enemies.5 More considered that it was more 
humane and merciful to prevent or end a war by using money 
rather than arms against the enemy. 

The virtues of the Utopians attract the attention of their free 
and enslaved neighbours; many of the former have been freed 
from tyranny by the Utopians. Those countries that out of envy 


{ Thomas More, op. cit., p. 91. 
2 Ibid., p. 94. 

3 Ibid., pp. 98-99. 

4 Ibid., p. 66. 

5 Ibid., pp. 66-67. 


22 





have made an attempt on the freedom of the Utopian state 
have invariably been rebuffed. 

Thus, Thomas More was the first to discover the new prin- 
ciples of international relations that arise from the interests of 
preserving the communist way of life in a state surrounded by 
non-communist nations. Thus, approximately a century prior 
to the emergence of the science of international law and long 
before the time when, thanks to the efforts of the great thinkers 
of the Enlightenment, the need to build international relations 
on the democratic foundations of Liberty, Equality and Frater- 
nity had been accepted by progressive social strata, More ad- 
vanced the idea that communism is inseparable from the strug- 
gle against injustice in international relations. 

In 1623, The City of the Sun by the Italian utopian philoso- 
pher Tommaso Campanella was published almost simultaneous- 
ly with Hugo Grotius’ treatise De Jure Belli et Pacis and Emeric 
Crucé’s The New Cyneas, or Discourse of the Occasions and 
Means to Establish a General Peace, and the Liberty of Com- 
merce Throughout the Whole World. But while Grotius was 
trying to put in order existing international relations, banish- 
ing arbitrariness and affirming justice, and while Crucé was 
thinking along the lines of creating a bourgeois civilisation by 
peaceful means, Campanella made a tremendous jump for- 
ward in time, linking his hopes for the triumph of justice 
in international relations with a communist social order. 

Campanella did not present his City of the Sun as an isolated 
state, but as one with all sorts of ties with its neighbours, in al- 
liance with numerous other peoples. The inhabitants make 
voyages for the purpose of learning about the customs of other 
countries, they trade with foreign merchants, and welcome 
foreigners in their midst, permitting any who wish it to take 
their citizenship. The first problem the Solarians come up 
against in their contacts with the outside world is that of protec- 
ting their own people’s morals from corrupting outside influ- 
ences. 

The Solarians have no real motives for embarking on wars 
of conquest, but they do, nonetheless, have to resort to war on 
occasion. The inhabitants of the City of the Sun “never commit 
aggression but neither do they submit to it, and they go to war 
only if they are attacked”’.2 


1 Tommaso Campanella, La Citta del Sole, Milano, 1962, pp. 27-28. 
2 Ibid., p. 30. 


23 











The only kind of war that is permissible is “war against 
violators of natural justice and religion”. War is declared when 
an enemy refuses to make compensation for damage, to cease 
oppression of the allies of the State of the Sun, or expel a tyrant 
from cities that have appealed to the Solarians for help.? Thus, 
the views of the two founders of utopian communism, Thomas 
More and Tommaso Campanella, on just warfare are practical- 
ly identical. 

Campanella expressed the conviction that communism was 
the future of all mankind. The Solarians “maintain that the 


whole world will one day come to live according to their cus- 
toms. ..”. 

The people of the neighbouring countries of the island on 
which the City of the Sun lies want to live like the Solarians, 
and their rulers therefore try to conquer the City of the Sun.’ 
These wars result in the overthrow of the social system of the 


attacking states.® 

In the second half of the seventeenth century, another de- 
scription of Utopia, its social organisation and foreign policy 
appeared, this time in France. It was the utopian novel The 
History of the Sevarambes by Denis Vairasse, published in 
two parts in 1677 and 1679. The author propounds the idea 
that one of the ideals of communism was to put an end to war. 
“Peace gives peoples tranquillity and happiness’. 

Vairasse saw the problem of ensuring peace as primarily a 
moral issue. In order that peace be preserved, it was necessary 
in his opinion to ensure moral purity and uproot vice.? This 
involved the reorganisation of society at grass-roots level. Thus, 
Vairasse tells how the founder of the State of the Sevarambes 
(or the State of the Sun), Sevarias, made a thorough investi- 
gation of the causes of strife, wars and other evils. He finally 
came to the conclusion that they arise from three basic things— 
pride, covetousness and idleness, which are encouraged by social 
inequality, wealth and private property. In order to rid society 
of these vices and free it from the associated evils, Sevarias 





1 Tommaso Campanella, op. cit., p. 24. 

2 Thid., pp. 23, 24. 

3 Ibid., p. 30. 

§ Tbid., p. 24. 

5 Ibid., p. 26. 

6 Denis Vairasse, Histoire de Sevarambes, Amsterdam, MDCCXVI, 
. 293. 

7 Ibid., pp. 293-94. 


24 


abolished all class privileges, together with private property, 
and made work universally compulsory.! In short, Vairasse did 
not simply describe the foreign policy of the ideal state, but 
showed what engendered this policy, its historical roots. 

Vairasse’s State of the Sun strove to isolate itself from the 
rest of the world for motives of a moral, ideological nature. It 
avoided all relations with other nations of the Eurasian con- 
tinent for fear that their vices might infect the Sevarambes.? 
However, while avoiding all bad influences, the Sevarambes 
took note of all good examples and useful inventions that could 
be borrowed from other peoples. In their relations with other 
countries the Sevarambes always acted incognito: in travelling 
abroad to trade or study the arts and sciences which could be 
of benefit to their own country, they were forbidden to tell 
foreigners anything about their homeland. 

The Englishman Gerrard Winstanley, the leader and ideolo- 
gist of the English Diggers, clearly stands head and shoulders 
above the other bourgeois thinkers of the seventeenth century 
in his understanding of the fundamental conditions for eternal 
peace. As early as the time of the world’s first successful 
bourgeois revolution, he expressed the grave doubts of the 
working masses that the system of private ownership would 
ever give them peace and happiness. 

We have seen how neither Thomas More nor Campanella 
actually made an ideal of eternal peace. Their ideal state was 
forced to resort to war in order to defend its rights. Winstanley 
was the first in the history of utopian thought to express the 
idea that human society based on common ownership would 
bring enduring peace to all nations and put an end to war. He 
insisted that common ownership of the land by the whole people 
and the freeing of the common people from bondage and 
servitude would “settle such a peace in the earth, as nations 
shall learn war no more”’.3 

Characteristic of the Diggers’ views was their belief that 
private property was the root of wars. Although this view was 
shared by the earlier utopians, Winstanley was the first to make 
it explicit in his works. The Digger Manifesto “The True 
Levellers’ Standard Advanced” stated that “pleading for 


{ Tbid., pp. 275-79. 

2 Thid., p. 168. 

3 Selections from the Works of Gerrard Winstanley, London, 1944, 
p. 119. 


25 














property and single interest divides the people of a land and 
the whole world into parties, and it is the cause of all wars and 
bloodshed, and contention everywhere”.! In a letter to Lord 
Fairfax, Winstanley mentioned the connection between war 
and class oppression: “I demand, whether all wars, bloodshed, 
and misery came not upon the Creation when one man en- 
deavoured to be a lord over another, and to claim property in 
the earth one above another?”’2 

In the seventeenth century, the ideologists of the ascendant 
bourgeoisie conceived the view that capitalist trade had a 
peacemaking mission to fulfil. Winstanley is strongly opposed 
to this view. “This buying and selling,” he wrote, “did bring 
in, and still doth bring in, discontents and wars, which have 
plagued mankind sufficiently for so doing. And the nations of 
the world will never learn to beat their swords into plough- 
shares and their spears into pruning hooks, and leave off war- 
ring, until this cheating device of buying and selling be cast 
out among the rubbish of kingly power.” 

Thus Winstanley finds the earthly basis on which he believes 
the prophecy of Isaiah can be brought to pass. 

Winstanley elaborated a somewhat original theory of histor- 
ical progress, from which he proceeded to examine the history 
of war and peace. He represents the earliest period of history 
as an age of innocence in which people lived in freedom and 
in peace and harmony. As long as the earth was a common 
treasure house, the domain of all, there was no hostility between 
people. But in their ignorance people allowed the “subtle spirit” 
to drive them along the path of “buying and selling”, and then 
covetousness, the desire for conquest and domination gradually 
arose. Man lost his original innocence and the spiritual bless- 
ings of universal freedom, peace and harmony. This ushered 
in the second stage of history, which Winstanley termed the 
age of kingly government. Everybody wished to become a 
landlord and make his brother his servant. 

The rule of kings is replaced by republican rule, by which 
Winstanley intends society where there is common ownership 
of the land, without buying and selling, with the Common- 
wealth’s Government restoring “the ancient peace and 
freedom”’.’ 


1 Selections from the Works of Gerrard Winstanley, p. 42. 
2 Tbid., p. 59. 

3 Ibid., pp. 117-18. 

4 Ibid., p. 133. 


26 





Winstanley refers to the government of kings as “a breeder 
of wars’”,! and says it may well be called “the government by 
highwaymen”.? “He sheds blood not to free the people from 
oppression, but that he may be king and ruler over the op- 
pressed people.”? The Commonwealth’s Government, on the 
other hand, he describes as “the government of righteousness 
and peace’’.4 

The progressive nature of this view is perfectly plain. Not 
only Winstanley’s contemporaries, but indeed many later 
pacifists, piaced their hopes of peace in an “enlightened mon- 
arch”. Considerably later, Rousseau and Diderot were to 
advance the idea that the condition for peace was the replace- 
ment of the monarchy by republican government, but even then 
this did not involve for them the abolition of private ownership. 

Winstanley pointed out that peoples would not all go over 
to republican government simultaneously. The English could 
be the first and the new system would then be spread by other 
nations following this good example. “In that Nation,’ Win- 
stanley wrote, “where this Commonwealth’s Government shall 
be first established, there shall be abundance of peace and 
plenty, and all Nations of the Earth shall come flocking thither 
to see his beauty, and to learn the ways thereof”® and “if this 
our English Commonwealth’s Government carry perfect freedom 
in his hand, then shall the law go forth from England to all 
the nations of the world” .6 

In the eighteenth century the utopian communist programmes 
for eternal peace were closely related in content to the 
views expounded by the thinkers of the French Enlightenment. 
Essential features of Enlightenment views were to be seen in 
the sharp criticism of the principles of feudal absolutism in the 
sphere of international relations, and the condemnation of war 
as a survival of a barbaric age, the condemnation of conquest, 
coercion and authoritarian power, and passionate insistence on 
the equality of nations and their sovereignty in international 
affairs, sincere support for the interests of the masses and 
concern for their welfare. 

The belief in the need for political interference in the “nat- 


1 Ibid., p. 119. 
2 Tbid., p. 181. 
3 Ibid. 
4 Tbid., p. 121. 
5 Ibid. 
8 Thid., p. 127. 








ot 
a 


TE IM INIA 


mn 
oe PS 


Wenn re ae ms 
VTP rat ean Tr Re 





ural course of events” was another feature linking the utopian 
communists with the thinkers of the Enlightenment. But here 
we find another ideological current coming into play—rejection 
of the sincere belief held by the thinkers of the Enlightenment 
that the abolition of the feudal dynastic principles would 
automatically lead to eternal peace. Whereas the thinkers of 
the Enlightenment saw the path to eternal peace to lie in the 
creation of a union of equal states, in the abolition of monar- 
chical government, or in the ideal of the “enlightened mon- 
arch”, the utopian communists sought to demonstrate that 
war could only be abolished following the reorganisation of 
the social structure of nations on the basis of common owner- 
ship. 

Jean Meslier, a revolutionary democrat, atheist and material- 
ist, and the father of French utopian communism, devoted 
much effort to exposing the anti-popular nature of the foreign 
policy of the absolute monarchy in his critique of the social 
and political structure of feudal society. He likened kings to 
wolves and lions on the prowl in search of prey, always ready 
to light the flame of war and cause bloodshed and _ killing, 
always ready to destroy towns and lay fields waste.! He con- 
sidered it was the duty of those in power “to make every en- 
deavour to establish everywhere the reign of peace, justice and 
truth, which would make all the nations of the world happy 
and content’’.? 

As for the causes of war, Meslier insisted that the bad 
distribution of wealth in a society where property was privately 
owned led to hatred and envy among people, which in turn 
gave rise to discontent, strife and wars.? 

In his book The Code of Nature, or the True Spirit of Her 
Laws (1775) the French utopian communist Morelly expounded 
the idea that peace had been the origina! state of mankind. Like 
Winstanley a century earlier, he considered that human history 
began with communal society, as in accordance with both nature 
and reason. According to Morelly, the collapse of communal 
society was the source of the differences that might arise between 
individuals, families, or whole nations, and was the unhappy 


origin of all civil strife, war and brigandage.‘ Private property, 


1 Jean Meslier, Le Testament, tome II, Amsterdam, 1864, p. 283. 

2 Tbid., tome I, p. 17. 

3 Ibid., tome II, pp. 210-15. 

4 Morelly, Code de la nature ou le véritable esprit de ses lois, Paris, 
1953, p. 6. 


28 


any division of property, whether equal or unequal, engenders 
the desire to subjugate others. Thus, ‘‘the most humane and mild 
nations have always been those that have practically no property, 
or which have not yet established it universally”? 

Morelly considered that eternal peace could be achieved by 
gradually bringing all nations to accept the new order by means 
of setting an example. “Peaceful laws which would have in- 
creasingly strengthened the social relations of a humane, benefi- 
cent people, would have served as a powerful example to another 
nation: these wise institutions would have spread their mild 
authority throughout the earth and would have caused the 
weapons to fall from the hands of the fiercest peoples.’ 

Morelly said nothing like as much as his predecessors about 
the actual form international relations should take in the future. 
But he made a great step forward in the understanding of the 
new principles of international relations by formulating as a 
law of the society of the future the extending of aid to other 
peoples. “If the nation helps a neighbouring or foreign nation 
with its own produce, or is likewise helped, this is the only 
form of trade by means of exchange.... Great care will be 
taken to ensure that such trade does not introduce the least 
property into the Republic.’ 

L’Abbé de Mably was another thinker who imagined the 
initial period of human history as a Golden Age, a natural com- 
munist society. “Some philosophers have claimed that we are 
all born enemies to one another, and that from their first breath 
men have wished to make war, tear one another asunder and 
enslave one another.” 

He considered this to be “an absurd philosophy” and offered 
his own historical theory as to the causes of war. According to 
him, the division of property, the introduction of private owner- 
ship and the resulting social inequality were to be regarded as 
the prime source of all human sufferings. Property destroyed 
the natural ties that had linked mankind. People who are 
accustomed to property tend to think that their wealth will 
increase if their frontiers are expanded at their neighbours’ 
expense. Hence the outbreak of foreign wars,® which occur 
~ 1 Tbid., p. 59. 


2 Thid., p. 121. 
3 Ibid., p. 74. 


Ocuvres completes de VAbbé de Mably, London, 1789, Vol. 9, 
' 6 Ibid., p. 13. 








ae rie ain alee une RATT a a _ - . 
S us is ei VCO captor 5 4 ROC mR . r 
set pee Pane aS ae IS Shy ke ie ea ee : eee 
inte Se oe, Sete Sa PERT 2 22S tank 2 Ae 








entirely as a result of “our failure to conform with the inten- 
tions and laws of nature’.! A return to the laws of nature, 
a return, that is, to communist society, will ensure enduring 
peace. “Would not citizens without private fortunes, rich by 
virtue of the common weal, have, on the contrary, more reason 
not to trouble the calm of their neighbours?’’2 

The approaching “reign of the bourgeoisie” could not in 
l’Abbé de Mably’s opinion be the reign of peace. In response 
to the request of Franklin and Adams that he express his 
opinion on the Constitution of the United States, he declared 
that unless material inequality were abolished in the United 
States, the country would inevitably take the path of aggression 
against other peoples, which would lead to an alliance of the 
latter against the “new Carthaginians’. 

During the years of the Thermidor reaction that followed 
the overthrow of the Jacobin dictatorship, Babeuf founded Le 
Derectoire Secret de Salut Publique, with the aim of preparing 
an armed revolution in France, setting up a dictatorship of the 
plebeians, which would gradually implement the egalitarian 
communist programme of the members of the conspiracy. For 
Babeuf and the revolutionaries grouped round him, the question 
of the policy that the plebeian government should adopt towards 
other peoples was not merely a subject for abstract theory but 
a matter of immediate practical concern. The foreign policy 
programme of the members of the Conspiracy of Equals es- 
sentially embodied the just principles of international politics 
elaborated by the eighteenth-century utopian communists, but 
took them a stage further in the light of the ideas of revolution- 
ary government by the masses of the poor. 

Babeuf’s supporters considered that every kind of aggressive 
war should be expressly forbidden by law. They considered 
that it was their duty to instil in the people a “loathing for con- 
quests”. The desire for conquest and plundering would be 
totally alien to the people who had set up the communal order. 
They would have neither the desire nor the opportunity to take 
up arms to oppress their neighbours. They would “only wage 
war in order to repel an enemy invasion or aid a neighbour 
who was being unjustly oppressed”.? 


2 tid coment de l’Abbé de Mably, Vol. 9, p. 191. 
Ibid., 

3 Ph. GR ouatok Conspiration pour Veégalite dite de Babeuf, Paris, 
1957, p. 80. 


30 





Respect for international law and support of international 
peace was to be the cornerstone of the foreign policy of the 
Babeuvists’ communist state. But since respect for international 
law was not enough to ensure that the country was safeguarded 
against foreign invasion, the people must always be prepared 
to defend the frontiers of their land, and must be well capable 
of bearing arms. 

It was the duty of all peoples to help one another defend and 
restore “the natural rights’. But manifestations of fraternal 
feelings do not go together very well with acts of violence, the 
inevitable consequence of war. The French Republic could not 
impose its principles on other peoples by force of arms, but 
should carry out its duty towards other peoples “above all by 
giving the world a shining example of the powerful establish- 
ment based on equality and liberty”.! 

“Barbed-wire fences” should be erected between France and 
her neighbours to protect the French Republic from the per- 
nicious influence of foreign morals and institutions alien to the 
spirit of freedom and equality and to prevent outside inter- 
ference in the country’s internal affairs. Thus, in order to 
prohibit corruption and the evils that arise from private owner- 
ship, foreign trade should be entirely in the hands of the highest 
governing bodies of the Republic. But the Babeuvists had no 
intention of isolating France completely from the rest of the 
world: anybody who wished to learn about French institutions, 
anybody who came to the country with a sincere desire to find 
equality and happiness, would be perfectly welcome. 

The Babeuvists’ foreign policy programme shows that their 
social aims were inseparably linked up with the struggle for 
the establishment of just peace between the nations. The rejec- 
tion of wars of conquest, observance of international law, the 
defence of their communist homeland, refusal to impose their 
principles on other peoples by force of arms, help for oppressed 
nations and, finally, the institution of freedom and equality in 
their country as fulfilment of their duty to all the peoples of 
the world—such were the principles of the foreign policy of 
future communism put forward by the Babeuvists on the basis 
of the utopian social ideas of the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries. Lenin pointed out, as Marx had done before him, 
that the principles put forward by Babeuf and his supporters 


{ Tbid., p. 28. 
2 Ibid.,:p. 168. 














“consistently developed, contained the idea of a new Weltzu- 
stand (world order)”’.! 

With the rise of capitalism, the awareness of a contradiction 
between war and the development of production acted as a 
stimulus to intense activity on the part of Free Traders, pac- 
ifists, and various kinds of philanthropists, who wished to put 
right the evils of the capitalist system, manifested, among other 
things, in destructive wars between nations, without abolishing 
the basic conditions of bourgeois society. Pacifists and the Free 
‘Traders went to a great deal of trouble to collect and present 
facts and figures in order to prove their view that wars intended 
to promote the interests of national trade and the subjugation 
of other peoples were highly detrimental to trade and pro- 
duction, and caused great material and moral damage. But in 
speaking of the unprofitability of wars for a nation as a whole, 
they overlooked the fact that it might be profitable for some. 
As a result, they found themselves faced by the following par- 
adox: if war was unprofitable, what was it that forced nations 
to act against their own interests, and why did war continue 
to hold sway among the nations? The pacifists were unable to 
answer this question for the simple reason that they failed to 
perceive the fundamental connection between war and the 
capitalist system of production, between war and the basic 
interests of the bourgeoisie. 

It was the utopian communists, with their awareness of the 
connection between war and relations based on private property, 
who were the first to point to this connection in progressive 
social thought. As we have already seen, the first ideologists of 
the deprived classes, the utopian communists of the 16th-18th 
centuries, saw the abolition of private property as the pre- 
condition for enduring peace. The idea that the substitution of 
socialism for the bourgeois system would put an end to wars 
underlay the theories of eternal peace of the great nineteenth- 
century utopian socialists Fourier and Robert Owen. 

Fourier pointed out that wars were a recurrent phenomenon 
in “civilised society”, i.e., from the slave-holding societies, 
through the feudal to bourgeois society, while peace was but a 
fleeting vision, briefly glimpsed from time to time. Commercial 
rivalry, which “has for so long bathed Europe in blood, con- 
tinues to erupt and holds the political world on the brink of a 
volcano whose devastation will not cease as long as it is only 


{ V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 38, p. 40. 


32 





countered by feudal despotism instead of being countered by 
social genius”. A bourgeois army is a real social parasite, a 
minority of armed slaves holding in check the majority of 
unarmed slaves. Only a harmonious, that is, a socialist society 
“will establish general unity in the world and cause the disap- 
pearance of wars, revolutions, poverty and injustice. ..”’.! 

There is no room for war either in Robert Owen’s New Moral 
World. Owen’s analysis of bourgeois society brought him to 
the conclusion that “another organisation of society to terminate 
war, its immoralities, its miseries, and its insanities, is become 
necessary and irresistible”.2 The governments of all countries 
would soon be forced in the interests of self-preservation to 
accept a more perfect and rational social system, in order to 
avoid anarchy, war and calamity. Only the total destruction 
of the old social system and the introduction of a new one 
would forever put an end to rivalry, strife and wars. 

In proposing the replacement of the capitalist system by a 
new, socialist system, both Fourier and Owen believed that the 
whole of bourgeois society, including the ruling class, could 
not but be interested in the direct benefits mankind would 
derive from the social transformations they recommended. They 
did not perceive that the interests of the bourgeoisie involved 
the preservation of the system of exploitation and were an- 
tagonistic to the interests of the working people. In this respect 
the utopian socialists might appear to hold similar views to the 
pacifists on problems of war and peace, since both direct their 
appeals to society as a whole without drawing a distinction be- 
tween the different classes or making any exception for the ruling 
class. In point of fact, however, a wide gulf separates them, for 
the pacifists are utopians in that they are yearning for the im- 
possible—capitalism without wars, eternal peace on the basis 
of the bourgeois system—while the utopian socialists are utopian 
in that they do not know what force is capable of abolishing 
capitalism and establishing eternal peace. These two different 
approaches to the problems of war and peace lead to com- 
pletely opposite consequences: the pacifists try to embellish 
capitalism, while the utopian socialists castigate it as the system 
that breeds wars. 

The theories of Saint-Simon were out of tune with the gen- 


1 Oeuvres completes de Charles Fourier, tome 1, Paris, 1966, p. 86. 
2 Robert Owen, The Book of the New Moral World, London, 
1844, pp. 15-16. 


3—203 83 





eral theories of the early nineteenth-century utopians, who 
glorified socialism as a system that would ensure enduring 
peace. While considering that with the new system “the scourge 
of war would leave Europe, never to return”, he held that gen- 
eral European peace would not mean an end to wars against 
the peoples of Africa and Asia in order to force happiness on 
them.! It was no accident that Saint-Simon should have parted 
ways with the humanist tradition of utopian socialism, for his 
was a racist, chauvinist brand of “socialism”, and racism and 
chauvinism go hand in hand with war. 

The development of class contradictions in bourgeois society 
by the 1840s made room for several amendments to the views 
of the utopian socialists, and the ideologists of the disinherited 
classes began to acquire a deeper understanding of the interests 
of the different classes in bourgeois society, and to take into 
account these differences in class interests in their appraisal 
of wars. Thus, Louis Auguste Blanqui, the outstanding repre- 
sentative of the revolutionary wing of French utopian commu- 
nism of the 1830s and 1840s, pointed out that in the Napoleonic 
wars the interests of the bourgeoisie had been very different 
from the interests of the masses. He also perceived how the 
interests of the bourgeoisie were quite contrary to the interests 
of the masses with regard to the policy of the counter-revolu- 
tionary Holy Alliance.? 

These developments in pre-Marxian progressive social thought 
in the nineteenth century with regard to the scientific theory 
of war and peace culminated in the views developed in the 
1850s by the outstanding Russian revolutionary democrat and 
utopian socialist, Nikolai Chernyshevsky. 

Chernyshevsky approached the whole question of war and 
peace from the point of view of the “working man’. Opposed 
to the use of force in international affairs and stressing the 
destruction caused by wars and the inevitable pain and suf- 
fering they brought the working people, he only recognised 
as “useful” those wars that were waged in defence of one’s 
homeland. “Any war is ruinous to the working man,” he wrote. 
“Only a war that is waged to drive enemies from one’s home- 
land is useful.’ 


1 Oeuvres choisies de C.-H. de Saint-Simon, Bruxelles, 1839, p. 38. 

2 A. Blanqui, Textes choisis, Paris, 1955, pp. 85-86, 96-97. 

3 N. G. Chernyshevsky, Selected Philosophical Works, Vol. II, 
Russ. ed,. Moscow, 1950, p. 198. 


34 





Chernyshevsky discerned the organic link between war and 
the interests of the ruling class. Thus, in examining the policy 
of Napoleon III’s ruling clique which threatened to embroil 
the French nation in destructive wars, Chernyshevsky pointed 
out that the only way to escape from such a policy for France 
was to expel from French life those elements that were leading 
her to war contrary to her interests. Later, on the subject of 
England’s colonial war in the East Indies, he wrote that “the 
war is unprofitable for the nation, but is very much to the 
advantage of the class that rules England. ..”.! 

Chernyshevsky considered that the way to put an end to 
war was for the working classes to assume a decisive role in 
the affairs of state. “When the working class gains a decisive 
influence in English affairs,” he wrote, ‘and becomes experi- 
enced enough in them to judge according to the interests of 
labour and not according to what is impressed on it by people 
to whom these interests are alien, England will completely 
renounce all wars outside her own frontiers. When the same 
situation obtains in other European countries, all possibility of 
war between them will disappear. But until such time, wars 
are inevitable, although completely contrary to the real interests 
of each of the belligerent nations. . .”.? 

As to the causes of war, Chernyshevsky considered that war 
was the direct product of the “civil order of society”. The 
warlike inclination common to all the European nations, he 
wrote, “an inclination that is so unnatural for working people 
and yet which still holds sway over European life, developed 
and persists as a result of the social order of those nations. . .”.° 

Thus, in the nineteenth century the ideologists of the masses 
made a considerable advance towards the discovery of the 
causes of war and peace. They began to link up hopes of peace 
with the historical activity of the masses, and perceived the 
connection between war and the interests of the ruling class. 

Nevertheless, they did not adhere consistently to this view. 
This was particularly evident in the way the utopian socialists 
saw the bourgeoisie not as the ruling class in bourgeois society 
delegating the management of their affairs to the aristocracy, 
but as the “middle class”, and were unable to determine the 
latter’s role in the occurrence of wars. Thus, Chernysheysky 


1 Tbid. 
2 Ibid., p. 199. 
3 Ibid. 





te eer 


ee 
- aS 


be SE Ss RR oe 


ORE OE I Po ES SPLAT RES SO 


supposed that as the direct participation of the English man- 
ufacturers in state affairs increased there would be less like- 
lihood of war, although he admitted that he did not consider 
them fit to express the interests of labour.1 Dezamy also inclined 
to the opinion that the bourgeoisie was capable of playing a part 
in implementing the principle of common ownership, which 
would link all men with ties of boundless brotherhood, free frora 
narrow nationalism.” Thus, even utopian socialists with the most 
scientific approach at that time, like Chernyshevsky and Deza- 
my, failed to appreciate the fact that the working people and 
the bourgeoisie represented opposite poles over matters of war 
and peace. 

This tendency is even more evident in the case of the petty- 
bourgeois utopian socialists. John Gray, the foremost English 
representative of the latter in the first half of the nineteenth 
century, shared all the illusions common to the bourgeois man- 
ufacturers and the pacifists in the question of ensuring peace. 
He wrote: “Improve the conditions of mankind universally by 
the establishment of free trade, in the most comprehensive sense 
of the term, and fighting will die a natural death in its own good 
time”’, 

The prerequisites for a scientific interpretation of problems of 
war and peace were created with the development of the class 
struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie. 

Robert Owen’s Grand National Consolidated Trades’ Union 
of Great Britain and Ireland, the aim of which was to take over 
the country’s production and gradually transform the economy 
on the socialist pattern by organising the workers in co-opera- 
tives, had as one of its main political demands: “Wars to cease; 
and all differences between nations to be adjusted by an annual 
congress, to be held in rotation in each of the different states”.4 
Owen believed that this union of workers would allow for “ar- 
rangements to be adopted, as soon as practicable, to put an end 
to individual and national competition and contest, now unneces- 
sary, and producing innumerable grievous evils to all classes’’.5 
This was one of the first peace programmes of the English 
labour movement. 





1 N. G. Chernyshevsky, op. cit., p. 199. 

2 T. Dezamy, Code de la Communauté, Paris, 1812, pp. III-VI. 

3 John Gray, The Social System: a Treatise on the Principle of 
Exchange, Edinburgh, 1831, p. 172. 


he Crisis, No. 24, Vol. III, February 8, 1834, London, p. 200. 
Ibid. 


36 


At the dawn of the international labour movement, in the 
1840s, spokesmen for the working class and revolutionary dem- 
ocrats of various nations proclaimed the principle of opposi- 
tion to unjust wars as an organic part of the general interna- 
tional tasks of the working class. The year 1845 saw the first 
successful attempt to unite the revolutionary democrats of 
various nations, which resulted in the formation of the Frater- 
nal Democrats, an international democratic alliance comprising 
representatives of the Left wing of the English Chartist Move- 
ment, members of the German League of the Just, and revolu- 
tionaries of other nationalities living as émigrés in London. 
Addressing a meeting of this society which was attended by 
over a thousand democrats of almost every nation in Europe, 
George Harney, writer, Left-wing Chartist leader and one of 
the outstanding figures in the English labour movement, de- 
clared on behalf of the English workers: “We denounce all 
wars, except those into which nations may be forced against 
domestic oppressors or hostile invaders.””! 

Weitling made a speech on behalf of the German workers, 
in which he declared: “What other interest can all these cam- 
paigns of conquest and bloodshed have for us except that of 
taking advantage of the situation to turn against the robbers 
and butchers, the aristocracy of all nations?” 

Thus, by the mid-1840s questions had been posed in progres- 
sive social thought, to which a scientific answer was essential if 
effective means of ensuring enduring peace were to be forth- 
coming. One of them was in what way war was connected with 
the capitalist system, the interests of the bourgeoisie and polit- 
ical relations between the capitalist states. Another was what 
social forces were capable of putting an end to war, and the 
question of the antagonism between the interests of the bour- 
geoisie and the proletariat in international relations. There were 
also the questions of the peaceful nature of the new, communist 
system to serve as the basis for eternal peace between the 
nations, and of an independent peace programme of the work- 
ing class, and what tactics the proletariat should adopt in the 
struggle to establish justice in international relations. 

The solution of all these questions was the historic contribu- 
tion of scientific communism, Marxist-Leninist science.2 Marx- 


1 The Northern Star, Vol. VHT, No. 411, London. 
2 The dialectical-materialist teaching on war and peace is treated 
in later chapters of the present volume. 


37 








‘ 
* 


ism-Leninism brought about a revolution in views on war and 
peace, revealing their true essence and causes. It pointed out 
what socio-political forces and what methods could save man- 
kind from disastrous wars and ensure eternal peace on earth, and 
banished metaphysics and idealism from the analysis of these 
complex and contradictory social phenomena. The Marxist- 
Leninist teaching on war and peace serves as a powerful 
ideological weapon in the struggle for social progress, peace 
and security, the struggle to prevent a thermonuclear disaster. 





Chapter Il 


THE IDEA OF 
UNIVERSAL PEACE 
IN THE THEORIES OF 
THE BOURGEOIS 
HUMANISTS 
(16th-18th 
CENTURIES) 


Peace is one of the age-old ideals of mankind. The strong 
opposition to war of progressive people in every age has 
invariably been part of a wider longing for peace, universal 
prosperity and social justice. These humanitarian principles 


found their highest expression in the idea of communism. The 
development of the idea of universal peace in social thought 
throughout the ages is thus an important object of study. 

In recent years a large number of works have appeared 
devoted to this subject. In many of them the content of the 
programmes for universal peace of the Enlightenment have 
been treated in a rather one-sided manner. In particular, the 
inevitable utopian elements in these theories have been used 
by contemporary thinkers who insist that wars are inevitable 
and can never be abolished; the aspects of the problem which can 
be interpreted as advocating class peace have been singled out 
and the original ideas of the thinkers of the Enlightenment 
deliberately distorted for the purpose of justifying the idea of 
World Government. For this reason, it is extremely important 
that the content of the ideas of universal peace expounded by 
the thinkers of the bourgeois Enlightenment should be scien- 
tifically analysed and substantiated. 

The rise of bourgeois humanism (16th to 18th centuries) cor- 
responded to the emergence and development of capitalism. 
The age of primary accumulation of capital gave rise to nu- 
merous military conflicts that brought untold sufferings to the 


39 











peoples: nation states were established and overseas colonies 
acquired, both by force of arms. Numerous theories justifying 
the increasing consolidation of state power and wars served to 
provide ideological support for this process. The principles of 
“national interest” formulated by Machiavelli (1469-1527) in 
The Prince became widely current in those times. 

In the latter years of the sixteenth century and the early years 
of the seventeenth century national consolidation and the rise 
of the bourgeoisie in Europe speeded up the emergence of a 
national consciousness, giving rise at the same time to nation- 
alism. Thus, the geography text-books published in France 
between 1631 and 1646, insisted that France should restore the 
frontiers of ancient Gaul.! Military victory became an organic 
part of the doctrine of national interest, which was also sup- 
ported by the members of the Third Estate. Most typical in this 
respect were the views of Jean Bodin, who devoted a great deal 
of attention to matters of war and peace in treating the prin- 
ciples of state sovereignty and international economic relations. 
In Answer to the Paradoxes of Maltrois (1568), he presented a 
most original concept of free trade, which he considered to be 
the most effective means of ensuring international peace. But 
in his Republic (1576), the idea was implicit that external wars 
to repel an enemy attack were necessary if they were in the 
national interests, that war was the best means of preserving 
the state since it distracted the people from revolts, uprisings 
and civil strife, and created internal unity, and even that war 
was perfectly justified if it was waged by a ruler for gain or 
expediency.” 

These ideas were taken a stage further by the French econ- 
omist Antoine de Montchrétien in his Treatise on Political 
Economy (1615), which represented an appeal for protectionism 
addressed to the French Government. Montchrétien includes 
military glory and territorial power among the conditions 
necessary for economic prosperity. 

However, the wars of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
had a decidedly adverse influence on the development of Eu- 
rope. The Thirty Years War alone brought devastation and ruin 
to a large part of the continent. The bourgeoisie were thus in- 
terested in seeing to it that peace was preserved in order that 
industry might flourish and home and foreign trade might 


{ R. Mousnier, Les XUIe et XUIIe siécles, Paris, 1961, tome 4, p. 190. 
2 Jean Bodin, Six livres de la République, Paris, 1580, p. 755. 


40 





develop. This was what moved bourgeois thinkers to seek ways 
of limiting conflicts, and to analyse the causes of war. Yet there 
was an overwhelming tendency to regard war as inevitable. It 
was at this period, indeed, that the following view expressed by 
Luigi da Porto at the beginning of the sixteenth century came 
into its own, the theory that ‘“‘peace brings riches, riches pride, 
pride wrath, wrath war, war poverty, poverty rises mildness, 
mildness peace, peace riches, etc.”’! 

Since war was considered inevitable, the majority of bour- 
geois thinkers in the sixteenth century were concerned not only 
with elaborating principles of international law, but also with 
the criticism of war from humanitarian standpoints. 

Erasmus of Rotterdam (1466-1536) was one of the most ar- 
dent champions of peace, with his impassioned appeals for 
Christendom to refrain from the folly of bloodshed and thereby 
set a good example to the rest of mankind. 

Honoré Bonet, writing in the second half of the sixteenth 
century, appealed for less brutality in war. His disciple Christine 
de Pisan was only prepared to accept wars that were fought in 
order to redress an injustice and even then deplored brutality 
of any sort being practised. 

The greatest contribution to the elaboration of various aspects 
of international law in the latter part of the sixteenth century 
was made by Francisco da Vittoria, a professor of the Univer- 
sity of Salamanca, who, while considering war an evil, looked 
upon peace as an unattainable ideal. Of particular interest was 
his idea that the European nations, forming an equal whole 
since they were interdependent upon one another, should strive 
to abolish injustice in their relations with one another, and form 
a “republic of humanity”? 

The appeal for peace was developed by Sebastian Franck 
(1499-1542), a representative of the democratic trend of the 
Reformation. In his Kriegbuchlein des Friedens?, Franck 
reminds people that God commands them not to be wrathful 
without good reason, and declares that it is not for man to 
concern himself with increasing and strengthening his armies 


4 J. R. Hale, “War and Public Opinion in Renaissance Italy”, ltalian 
Renaissance Studies, London, 1960, p. 101. 

2 E. Nys, Etudes de droit internationale, 1896, pp. 321-23; M. R. Ves- 
nitch, Deux précurseurs francais du pacifisme et larbitrage internationale, 
Paris, 1911, p. 37. 

3S. Franck, “Kriegbuchlein des Friedens”, in the book by K. Raumer, 
Ewiger Friede, Freiburg-Minchen, 1953. 


4l 





and arms, since the Almighty alone knows when it is necessary 
to defend Him. The fact that he invokes God, does not make 
Franck’s arguments acquire an abstract, purely religious char- 
acter. His religious phraseology was normal for the Middle 
Ages and suggests the idea that if man refrains from settling 
earthly conflicts by force of arms, there will be no room for 
war to the glory of God, and “long, truly eternal peace” will 
reign on earth. Moreover, Franck associated the triumph of 
peace on earth with the triumph of social justice, recognising 
the right of the common people to rise up against their masters. 
Yet his dream of peace was not backed up by any positive pro- 
gramme for action. 

In the seventeenth century, when the idea of a union of states 
was being debated, its authors—William Penn, Lilienfeld, 
Saint-Pierre and others—claimed that their idea stemmed from 
le Grand dessein of Henri IV of France. Some historians are of 
the opinion that the Duc de Sully—the real author of the Grand 
Design—borrowed the idea of a union of states and arbitration 
from E, Crucé.! Actually, the Grand Design can really only 
be considered to embody a plan for eternal peace on the 
strength of the literary tradition created by such thinkers of 
the seventeenth century and the Enlightenment as William 
Penn, Saint-Pierre and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. The latter were 
dazzled both by the “peaceful” phraseology in which the plan 
was couched and by the implications that could be drawn from 
it—which acquired common currency in the seventeenth century 
and were clearly used by Sully for demagogical purposes— 
and by the legend of Henry IV’s authorship of the plan, which 
they accepted at its face value. In actual fact, Sully’s plan 
was for a military-political alliance of the states of Western 
Europe, and there are no grounds whatsoever for regarding it 
as a plan for eternal peace. Nevertheless, it is impossible to 
overlook its importance in view of the considerable influence 
it had on later thinkers like Penn and Rousseau. 

Bourgeois international law was further developed in the 
17th century in the works of Grotius, and, later, of Samuel von 
Pufendorf and Emerich von Vattel. Numerous theories arose 
of the important influence of war and peace on the develop- 
ment of society, and of just and unjust wars, and attempts were 
made to study the economic causes of war and ways of limiting 


1 Ch. Pfister, “Les Economies royales de Sully, et le Grand dessein 
de Henri IV”, Revue Historique, 1894, tome 56, p. 330. 


42 





————— 








military conflicts and maintaining peaceful development for 
long periods. 

A book published in Paris in 1623 is of exceptional interest 
in this connection. It had the rather ponderous title The New 
Cyneas, or Discourse of the Occasions and Means to Establish 
a General Peace, and the Liberty of Commerce Throughout the 
Whole World. To the Monarchs and Sovereign Princes of the 
Present Time.’ The author, E. Crucé, in setting forth the main 
ideas of his peace programme insists that he is moved exclusi- 
vely by love for his native land and expresses the hopes and 
fears of all honest people in France. He believes that the 
achievement of peace and stability at home is not the whole 
task, and that peace abroad is far more important. It is to the 
latter problem that Crucé’s book is mainly devoted. 

What is the reasonable basis for the creation of the peaceful 
community of nations? Crucé considers it to be the natural right 
of men to life and prosperity, based on their natural unity and 
equality. Natural rights, the laws of nature are to apply to all 
and sundry, irrespective of their importance. “The sun casts 
its light on gold or mud equally. Waters flow for all men. God 
protects the life of the most insignificant creature. Why then 
should rulers set themselves apart from the common people?” 
All men should submit to the same laws because they are by 
their nature an indivisible whole, since man is a social being, and 
cannot but take other people into account and pay attention 
to his fellow men. People should live in friendship with one 
another. 

The idea of the natural equality and unity of mankind is 
essentially an expression of the bourgeois theory of natural 
law, of which Grotius is generally considered to be the founder. 
Thus, Crucé, whose book appeared in 1623, at the time when 
Grotius had only just begun writing his On the Law of War 
and Peace, was to a certain extent anticipating the theory of the 
founder of international law which was to achieve universal 
recognition. It is possible that Grotius came to know of Crucé’s 
treatise when he took refuge in Paris, where his magnum opus 
was conceived, written and published. 

Of course, Crucé only expresses the concept of natural law 
in the most general terms and in a manner in which Divine 
Will plays a far larger role than in the case of Grotius. Yet, as 


1 E. Crucé, Le nouveau Cynée, Ed. by T. W. Balch, Philadelphia, 
1909. 


48 





with later expounders of natural law theories, his concept was 
already based on the most abstract expression of law—justice. 

In his criticism of war, Crucé lays the main stress on the 
moral principle of justice, although he shows himself to be by 
no means unaware of the socio-economic aspects of the prob- 
lem. He points out that foreign wars are fought for glory or 
gain, to repair an injury or, finally, for practice in the art of 
war. In most cases the aim and basic causes of a war are ex- 
pressed in a thirst for glory and appear most legitimate. But 
rulers should put an end to the dominating position of the 
military and should not give in to their demands to wage a 
senseless war. The number of troops should be limited to those 
needed for defence. Soldiers should be provided for so that 
they do not see war as an opportunity to plunder and run wild. 
Crucé condemns outright wars which are waged over a question 
of honour or purely for acquiring military experience. 

Crucé also considers that wars should not be fought purely 
for gain, as a means of acquiring some advantage, for not only 
is honour very much in danger in a war, but gain is highly 
uncertain. Even victory does not improve the position of the 
victor for long, since in any case taxes, and various impositions 
and requisitions are increased. 

This idea that the military victories of rulers are ruinous for 
their subjects was later splendidly developed by Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau in his “Judgement on Eternal Peace”. “It is plain 
enough to all that Conquering Princes make war as much on 
their subjects as on their enemies, and that the position of the 
victor is no better than that of the vanquished. ‘I have defeated 
the Romans,’ Hannibal declared to the Carthaginians. ‘Send 
me troops. I have imposed tribute on Italy; send me money.’ 
This is the significance of all those Te Deums, the gay fireworks 
and the rejoicing of the people at the triumph of their mas- 
ters.” 

As regards the third kind of war—wars to restore a right 
that has been denied or to repair a wrong—Crucé’s attitude is 
extremely contradictory. The whole difficulty, he points out, 
lies in the claims of monarchs who have at some stage lost part 
of their territory. But while disapproving of their urge for ven- 
geance and to regain their former rights on the grounds that a 
kingdom is not to be compared to a normal inheritance—and 





{ J.-J. Rousseau, “Jugement sur la paix perpétuelle”, Collection com- 
pléte des oeuvres, Genéve, 1782, tome 28. 


44 























therefore, unlike da Vittoria and Grotius, appearing to regard 
this kind of war to be unjustified—Crucé at the same time con- 
siders that a monarch has the right to reparation for injury and 
to the restoration of his rights, not by war but only by arbitra- 
tion. 

For this purpose Crucé suggests that an international tribunal 
should be set up for the peaceful settlement of conflicts. 

On the basis of the assumption that all men are members of 
a single family and possessed of reason, Crucé holds that neither 
political discord nor religious dissent can prevent people from 
establishing eternal peace as long as their actions are guided 
by reason. And since he is convinced that monarchs are judi- 
cious and conscious of their duty, he considers that the establish- 
ment of universal peace depends on them. 

By consistently developing the idea of the unity of mankind 
and natural equality, Crucé widened the scope of the traditional 
ideal of European peace to include all other nations. Universal 
peace would lead to wide acceptance of international co-opera- 
tion and would serve first and foremost to promote world trade. 

Such, in general terms, was Crucé’s programme for universal 
peace. Utopian though it was, it was nevertheless a bright 
manifestation of French humanism. 

As the seventeenth century advanced, more and more voices 
were heard condemning war. Vauban, La Bruyére, Fenelon, 
and Houdar de la Motte all embarked on the quest for ways 
of preventing military conflicts. The outstanding Czech philo- 
sopher Jan Amos Comenius devoted many years of his life to 
a comprehensive analysis of ideas on peace. He placed the 
question of safeguarding peace before the rulers of Europe in 
his treatise, Only One Thing Is Necessary, which he addressed 
to those taking part in the international conference at Breda, 
convened to work out terms for a peace treaty between England 
and Holland, which he called “The Herald of Peace”. 

His major work, General Advice to the Human Race, and 
Above All to the Scholars and the Devout Rulers of Europe, on 
the Correcting of Human Affairs, was a comprehensive criticism 
of feudal relations, characterised throughout by an ardent desire 
for peace in all spheres of social life—in the internal affairs 
of nations, in relations between different religious confessions 
and especially in international relations. 

Comenius regarded the chief cause of foreign war or civil 
strife to lie in differences of opinion arising from human igno- 
rance. Thus, an equal education would be a guarantee of peace 


45 


and prosperity, since man’s intrinsic rights are based on a com- 
mon nature, and identical needs and interests. He advances the 
idea of “Pansophia” (universal wisdom) underlying the unity 
of the human race, and sees it as the point of departure for 
the transformation of society. An important role is to be attrib- 
uted to an international gathering of scholars (“The Com- 
mune of Light”) with the task of developing education and 
knowledge both in Europe and in the “overseas possessions”, 
i.e., the colonies. Improvements in education would not only 
promote the development of science, but would also serve to 
stimulate greater co-operation among peoples. International 
unity would ensure peace and security. That is why rulers 
should proceed from truth and justice in their government and 
not impose their will on their neighbours by force of arms. War 
should be completely excluded in a society ruled by reason. To 
preserve peace, a universal state body—which Comenius refers 
to variously as a peace tribunal, a universal Senate, an Areo- 
pagus court and the directory of the powers—would have the 
task of safeguarding the unity of peoples and ensuring peaceful 
relations between them. All peoples (including the peoples of 
Asia, Africa and America) should take part in the formation 
of this international organisation. Later, similar separate or- 
ganisations would be set up for each continent. 

Unfortunately, the plan of the great Czech humanist was not 
published in his lifetime. Yet, even had it appeared, it could 
not possibly have been implemented, any more than could the 
plan of his younger contemporary, the great William Penn. 

William Penn (1644-1718) published An Essay Towards the 
Present and Future Peace of Europe by the Establishment of 
an European Diet, Parliament or Estates in 1693 when a gen- 
eral war was ravaging the continent. His idea is for the cre- 
ation of a union of states, but unlike Crucé, the union he proposes 
was only to involve the countries of Western Europe, Russia 
and Turkey, and was of an exclusively military-political nature. 

Penn enumerates and dispels the various doubts that might 
arise in connection with his plan. What should be done if a 
ruler refuses to accept a decision of the Diet? The most power- 
ful state, Penn replies, would be forced to submit to combined 
pressure by the other countries. How was corruption to be 
avoided? To begin with, only honest and worthy representa- 
tives should be sent to the Diet, and to make double sure their 
actions would be subject to strict control. Would not the real- 
isation of such a programme tend to weaken the soldiers and 


46 








make them incapable of doing their duty in time of need? This 
could be avoided if the soldiers were given appropriate train- 
ing. Thus, the soldiers should be taught the arts and sciences, 
which would help to make them socially useful. Lastly, would 
not the monarchies lose their sovereignty? Not at all: “... States 
retain their former sovereignty, but now none has any advan- 
tages over the others, And if this be called weakening of their 
power, then it is only so in the sense that a large fish will no 
longer be able to devour the small and every state is equally 
protected from injustice and unable to wreak unjustice.”’ Penn’s 
plan is based on the principles of international law and strives to 
turn Europe from a loose collection of states into a coherent sys- 
tem of states. It goes without saying, this plan had absolutely 
no practical influence on the political development of Europe. 

Such was the fate of many programmes for peace that arose 
in the early eighteenth century. Of these, the one that achieved 
the greatest fame at the time was the plan of |’Abbé de Saint- 
Pierre (1658-1743), a representative of the early Enlightenment 
and throughout his life an ardent champion of peace. In 1712, 
he published his Essay on the Achievement of Eternal Peace in 
Europe,t which was followed by his major work, the three- 
volume Plan for Eternal Peace in Europe. Twelve years later 
came an abridged version of the Plan and there was a constant 
stream of letters and minor works all serving the same aim—to 
substantiate the basic ideas contained in his plan. His persistent 
propagation of the idea of peace gained him a wide audience 
and a great reputation with the progressive minds of his age. 

Like Comenius, Saint-Pierre was convinced that only educa- 
tion could guarantee peaceful development. But until such time 
as education had been made available to all, eternal peace 
should be achieved by the creation of an international coalition. 
Saint-Pierre invoked the Grand Design of Henri IV, but the 
alliance he proposed differed from the latter both in its aims 
and in the manner in which they were to be realised. His plan 
was based on acceptance of existing political orders and the 
existing norms of international relations. All matters of disag- 
reement arising between the member states of the coalition 
should be decided exclusively by means of talks. Moreover, he 
placed far greater responsibility on the monarchs for the peace 
of Europe. 


‘ Charles-Irénée, Abbé de Saint-Pierre, Projet pour rendre la paix 


perpétuelle en Europe, Utrecht, 1718-17; abrégé du Projet de paix per- 
pétuelle, Rotterdam, 1729. 


47 














There is no doubt that the idea of a political coalition of 
the states of feudal-absolutist Europe acquired a largely reac- 
tionary character as soon as it was treated in practical terms, 
since it served as a convenient formula for expressing the as- 
pirations of the feudal monarchs for European hegemony. Thus, 
D’Argenson, who considered himself a disciple of Saint-Pierre, 
would have France in the role of organiser of a peaceful coali- 
tion of European states. Indeed, Saint-Pierre’s plan was so 
unrealistic for the Europe of those times that he himself had 
grave doubts as to its possibility of success. 

However, despite their utopian nature, the anti-military 
writings of the Renaissance and early Enlightenment were 
undoubtedly progressive in content. Their great merit lay in 
their comprehensive criticism of war. The coalition of states 
they propounded had the single aim of maintaining enduring 
peace. Their support for the sovereignty and unity of the 
member states was accompanied by boundless faith in the sense 
of duty and justice of the absolute monarchs of Europe. They 
had not come to suspect that the absolute monarchs were totally 
incapable of putting an end to war or that the union of peoples 
in the interests of peace was impossible in the framework of an 
antagonistic social order. 

In the 16th and 17th centuries, when the absolute monarchies 
embodied the process of centralisation of state power and the 
consolidation of nation states throughout Europe in opposition 
to the centrifugal forces of feudalism, it was quite understand- 
able that the bourgeois humanists should have subscribed to 
such utopian views. However, as the crisis of the feudal abso- 
lutist system deepened as the eighteenth century wore on, the 
thinkers of the late Enlightenment were quite unable to accept 
any form of appeal to the good will of monarchs. They came 
instead to the conclusion that absolutism was in fact the root 
of war. 

It was symptomatic that Voltaire should have been so scorn- 
ful of Saint-Pierre’s plan for idealising the role of the monarchs 
of Europe in the creation of a peaceful coalition of states. Vol- 
taire abhorred war, but believed that Europe was quite inca- 
pable of putting an end to it, and considered Saint-Pierre’s 
plan a chimera. 

Voltaire was highly critical of the idea of controlling wars 
by the principles of international law, as really doing no more 
than legalise military depredation. “I know the law of peace 
very well,” he wrote. “It consists in keeping one’s word and 


48 





recognising the natural rights of others. But I do not know the 
law of war. A code of laws of murders permitted in war seems 
a peculiar invention to me. I hope that in the near future we 
shall be given a collection of laws permitting highway rob- 
bery”. 

Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778) supported Saint-Pierre’s 
criticism of war and his demand for universal peace. He even 
published a short summary of Saint-Pierre’s plan (1761) and 
brought out a pamphlet entitled “Judgement on Eternal Peace” 
in which he declared himself in favour of the creation of an 
international peace organisation.? The advantages that a peace- 
ful union of states would bring to each nation separately and 
to Europe as a whole were so great and obvious that it would 
have been enough to set it up for one day to ensure that it lasted 
for ever. However, the methods which had hitherto been sugge- 
sted for the realisation of such a union seemed to Rousseau to be 
totally unrealistic. Saint-Pierre’s plan was too good to be ac- 
cepted. For can one really expect from monarchs, who boast 
their right to start wars when they think fit, to agree to submit 
to an international court? Of course not, for all the activities 
of monarchs and their ministers are directed towards increasing 
the power of their states abroad and strengthening their own 
absolute power. There is a close relationship between war and 
conquest on the one hand and the progress of despotism on the 
other. 

Eternal peace can only be attained when personal interests 
coincide with the common interest. In a society in which the 
rulers oppress their subjects nobody is interested in preserving 
peace. Changes must be brought about within the framework 
of the state, despotism must be abolished and political life made 
more democratic. Only then will it be possible to ensure en- 
during peace. Thus, Rousseau introduced to the concept of 
peaceful coexistence the idea that universal peace was linked 
with the need for fundamental political changes in society. 

Another confirmed opponent of war was Montesquieu. His 
ideal was a federative republic endowed with wide powers in 
foreign affairs and the right to intervene in internal distur- 
bances in any of the member states. He insisted that the federa- 


1 F. M. Voltaire, “De la paix perpétuelle”, in Collection compléte 
des wuvres, Genéve-Paris, tome 28, p. 105. 
2 See Collection compléte des oeuvres de J.-J. Rousseau, tome 23, 


pp. 3-52. 


4—203 49 





tion should consist of states with an identical form of govern- 
ment and was in favour of this being the republican system. 

Diderot shared the view of Montesquieu that a single form 
of government was an essential prerequisite for eternal peace. 
Like Rousseau he saw the connection between a policy of con- 
guest and the strengthening of despotism and held that only 
universal progress towards freedom and the abolition of mon- 
archy would create the conditions in which international 
military conflicts would be replaced by legal conflicts. 

Anti-military ideas also developed in German philosophy. 
Beginning with the appearance of Franck’s ‘“Kriegbuchlein des 
Friedens’, German thinkers embarked on a ceaseless quest for 
peace. Leibniz, writing at the end of the 17th century, was an 
ardent champion of the cause of universal peace. He proposed 
the creation of a union of European nations, and suggested 
that in case of conflicts arising France should be the arbiter 
and her armies should be used for the purpose of resolving them. 
He thought very highly of the plans of Crucé and Saint-Pierre. 

Wolf and Lessing were also interested in Saint-Pierre’s 
treatise, but it was Kant, Fichte and Herder who enriched the 
idea of eternal peace with new content. 

Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) was the first to brilliantly pre- 
dict the inevitability of a union of nations. Human nature 
under the impact of wars and the burden of maintaining armies, 
and the poverty which was to be found in every country even 
in time of peace, would induce people after numerous devasta- 
tions, revolutions and complete exhaustion to listen to the voice 
of Reason and form an international alliance where each state, 
be it ever so small, could expect its independence and rights to 
be guaranteed not by its own strength but by that powerful 
union of peoples. 

In 1795, Kant published his famous treatise Towards Eternal 
Peace, which contained many extremely penetrating ideas on 
international relations. 

Kant was by no means a pacifist. He held war to be perfectly 
lawful when a nation was forced to resort to it in order to de- 
fend its independence. But while admitting that war was lawful 
and just in certain cases, he could not accept a state of affairs 
whereby war remained a constant threat in international affairs, 
and was convinced of the feasibility of establishing enduring 
peace between the nations.! 


1 T. Kant, Zum ewigen Frieden, Kénigsberg, 1795. 


50 








Many bourgeois writers today distort Kant’s idea of a fede- 
ration of free states bound together by a covenant forbidding 
war out of all recognition (M. Adler, K. Friedrich and others). 
Attempts are made to show that Kant held that national sover- 
eignty inevitably leads to war and that universal supranational 
government can ensure peace. American interpreters of Kant 
modernise the concept of “federation” as used by him, giving 
it quite a different meaning from the one he intended. 

However, an unbiased analysis of the content of the three 
“final articles” of the treatise, in which Kant advises how peace 
should be maintained once it has been achieved, shows that the 
organisation of states he envisaged was neither a universal 
monarchy nor a universal republic but a league of free, sover- 
eign states. Kant speaks of a league of nations, not a state of 
nations. 

In Article One Kant describes the best form of civil govern- 
ment for each of the component states, and limits the right 
to universal citizenship to the right of the foreigner to hospi- 
tality among other peoples. As for the principle of federation, 
Kant gave it the same meaning as his predecessors: his federa- 
tion of free states meant combining efforts for the attainment 
of universal, eternal peace, and was by no means directed 
against the sovereignty of the individual states. Thus all at- 
tempts by contemporary ideologists of cosmopolitanism to pre- 
sent Kant as their precursor and an advocate of a universal 
supranational government are totally unfounded. 

It was the cherished ideal of Herder (1744-1803) to see his 
people living in peace and friendship with other nations, and 
he expressed great admiration for those who had made a con- 
tribution to spreading the idea of peace. One of his “Letters for 
the Promotion of Humanity”! was specially devoted to Saint- 
Pierre, although he had somewhat different ideas from the latter 
as to how eternal peace should be brought about. While Saint- 
Pierre, and Kant also, saw the matter essentially in legal terms, 
for Herder it was above all a moral issue, a question of moral 
education. Herder held that an agreement concluded in a hostile 
world could not serve as a guarantee of peace: only the spread 
of universal justice and humanity could promote the improve- 
ment of morals and at the same time lessen military conflicts. 

Herder made several suggestions as to how the task of edu- 


1 J. G. Herder, Briefe zur Beforderung der Humanitat, Berlin, 
1793-97. 


4° 51 








cating people in the spirit of justice and humanity might best be 
accomplished. What characterised him was his appeal to the 
masses as the ones who suffered most from war. The peoples 
should take the matter into their own hands and force the rulers 
to accept their demands for peace. 

Humanitarian ideas of universal peace occupied a worthy 
place in the Russian Enlightenment. Mikhail Lomonosov ex- 
pressed hopes that war might be abolished; Roman Tsebrikov 
(1763-1817) and Ippolit Bogdanovich (1743-1803) propagated 
the ideas of peace, and in the 1760s Semyon Desnitsky wrote in 
favour of universal peace. 

Yakov Kozelsky, who was familiar with the theories of the 
French Enlightenment and especially with the works of Rous- 
seau, held that peace could only be achieved in a society where 
the interests of rulers and subjects were in harmony. Criticising 
wars of annexation, Kozelsky maintained that it was the states- 
men striving to enrich themselves at the expense of other 
nations who should be held responsible for war crimes. 

Alexander Radishchev held that the way for the people to 
free themselves forever from the great evil of war was through 
revolution and the reorganisation of society. Vasily Malinovsky, 
in his Reflections on Peace and War, proposed a plan for the 
creation of an international peace organisation. Particularly 
interesting is his idea of applying sanctions, up to and including 
the use of military force, against disturbers of international 
peace. 

It was not only political thinkers who examined the problem 
of international peace in the eighteenth century: the physiocrat 
economists also voiced support for the idea of enduring peace, 
albeit from a bourgeois standpoint. They appealed for the 
universal strengthening of natural law as the basis for inter- 
national relations with a view to the creation of favourable 
conditions for the development of trade and other interna- 
tional ties. 

Thus, bourgeois thinkers of the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries examined the idea of peace in three basic aspects: 
firstly, peace through a union of states; secondly, peace through 
social harmony, and, thirdly, peace as the result of a just social 
order. However, the appeal for the institution of the harmo- 
nious state based upon Reason, excluding the need for war, 
never involved recognition of the need for the revolutionary 
destruction of the social order based on private ownership, so 
that in fact the practical effect of all such bourgeois criticism 


52 


of war and advocation of peace was limited to hastening the 
passing of feudal institutions in Europe. 

There is no denying that criticism of feudal institutions and 
absolutism had a progressive humanist content. However, the 
dreams of the bourgeois humanists were not destined to come 
true either in their own day or in the period that immediately 
followed. The triumph of the bourgeoisie over feudalism re- 
sulted not in the institution of the harmonious state based upon 
Reason its ideologists preached, but in the emergence of the 
capitalist order, which brought mankind even greater social 
contradictions than before, even greater exploitation of man by 
man, economic crises, unemployment, poverty and even greater 
strife and bloodshed. Engels wrote, describing the crisis of the 
ideals of the Enlightenment: “The state based upon reason com- 
pletely collapsed.... The promised eternal peace was turned 
into an endless war of conquest.”! 


! Frederick Engels, Anti-Diihring, Moscow, 1969, p. 303. 





II 
THE 


ORIGINS 
AND 


ESSENCE 
OF 
WAR 








Chapter Il 


THE DIALECTICS OF 
WAR AND PEACE 


The Concept of War 





A scientific definition of politics, war and peace as social 
categories is an essential prelude to the correct understanding 
and solution of current international political problems. An 
irrefutable explanation of these categories in historical and 
sociological terms has been provided by Marxist-Leninist phi- 
losophy. 

War is a many-sided and fluent concept, and those scholars 
who fail to reckon with its dialectical nature and persist in 
treating it in terms of metaphysical, immutable principles are 
bound to find themselves in an impasse. Thorough-going anal- 
ysis of the essence of war in all its major aspects was made 
on the basis of the dialectical method of investigation. The first 
step in adopting the dialectical approach to analysis of war 
as a socio-political phenomenon was taken by the German 
military theoretician Clausewitz. But it was Marx, Engels and 
Lenin who played the major role in revealing the true content 
of war employing the dialectical method, which enabled them 
to avoid the subjective, eclectical approach typical of bour- 
geois sociologists past and present. 

Marxism-Leninism rejects dogmatic views of war as an ab- 
solute evil and on the basis of concrete analysis draws a dis- 
tinction between just and unjust wars, reactionary and pro- 
gressive, revolutionary wars, and so on. Only a historical ap- 
proach to the analysis of wars relying on dialectically fluent 
and flexible concepts can adequately reflect the different objec- 


57 





obvekt-sanncul 


mas 


a GI we NR. 





tive content of wars, their qualitative variety. According to 
metaphysical theories, war appears as an eternal and immutable 
category. Such an approach is clearly unhistorical, and fails 
to keep in sight the true essence of war, its social, political 
and class content. 

The Marxist-Leninist approach to the analysis of wars is 
based on interfusion of history and logic, which makes it pos- 
sible to reveal the specific nature of a specific war. Lenin put 
it as follows: “There are wars and wars. We must be clear as 
to what historical conditions have given rise to the war, what 
classes are waging it, and for what ends. Unless we grasp this, 
all our talk about the war will necessarily be utterly futile, 
engendering more heat than light.”! And again: “We Marxists 
differ from both pacifists and anarchists in that we deem it 
necessary to study each war historically (from the standpoint 
of Marx’s dialectical materialism) and separately.”? 

Analysis of class contradictions and class policies is central 
in the historical study of wars according to the dialectical meth- 
od. The dialectics of the development of class policies is the 
key to understanding the essence of war as a socio-historical 
category. 

The development of a scientific theory of the essence and 
causes of wars began not with recognition of “eternal laws” of 
human antagonisms, but with the determining of the political 
factors that have given rise to a particular war. From the stand- 
point of the dialectics politics are the cornerstone of the theo- 
ry of war. It was to the dialectical materialist approach that 
we owe the first successful attempt to scientifically determine 
the origin and causes of all wars in the history of human so- 
ciety. 

As distinct from the metaphysical approach which treated 
politics and war as completely opposite concepts, Clausewitz 
defined war from the standpoint of the Hegelian dialectic, ac- 
cording to which concepts are fluent and interfuse. Clausewitz’s 
central thesis was that the concepts of war and politics, far 
from being static, interfuse. He was the first military theoreti- 
cian to employ the dialectical method in the analysis of war. 

The success that could be achieved by adopting the dialecti- 
cal approach to the analysis of war was made particularly clear 
by Clausewitz’s definition of war as the continuation of politics 





1 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24, p. 399. 
2 Ibid., Vol. 21, p. 299. 


58 





a 





by other, violent means. “War,” he wrote, “is none other than 
the continuation of the policy of the state by other means. \f 
this point of view is everywhere firmly adopted it will intro- 
duce more unity into examination of the question and will help 
make everything more easily comprehensible.”! This definition 
testifies to the triumph of the dialectical approach over the 
metaphysical approach. That, indeed, was how Marx, Engels 
and Lenin evaluated the formula when they applied the dialec- 
tical method to the analysis of particular wars. 

Nevertheless, Clausewitz’s definition of war differs essential- 
ly from the definition we find in Marxist-Leninist theory. Clau- 
sewitz, employing Hegel’s idealist dialectic, was only able to 
give an idealist definition of politics. For him politics combines 
and harmonises all the interests of internal government and so- 
cial relations, including questions of humanism and so on. This 
was the fundamental weakness of his philosophy. His incorrect, 
abstract definition of politics prevented him from revealing the 
class nature of war as a social category. Nonetheless, his ideas 
are still important today as an antidote to narrow, philistine 
views on the nature and causes of war that are widely cur- 
rent. 

Many contemporary bourgeois military theoreticians refuse 
to accept Clausewitz’s correct dialectical theory of war as the 
continuation of politics by violent means. In defining the nature 
of war, they adopt a subjective metaphysical approach that 
masks the connection between war and politics. They strongly 
oppose the scientific analysis of the class politics of imperialism 
and refuse to recognise the connection between imperialist wars 
and the imperialist policies of the capitalist countries. 

Subjectivism and mysticism underlie the approach of many 
contemporary bourgeois theoreticians to the problem of war. 
They treat war as something eternal and as an unsolved mystery 
of social life. Thus, the military historian Hans von Manteuffel, 
former nazi general, holds that wars constantly break out as a 
result of continuous conflict between demoniac ideas. In his 
opinion, “an unknown force... since 1914—apparently for 
superior metaphysical reasons—has plunged peoples and nations 
into one disaster after another”2. General Guderian ascribes the 
outbreak of the two world wars to the mysterious “will of 


{ Karl von Clausewitz, Uom Krieg, Berlin, 1957, S. 6. 
2H. von Manteuffel, Bilanz des zweiten Weltkrieges. Erkenninisse und 
Verpflichtungen fiir der Zukunft, Hamburg, 1953, pp. 463-64. 


59 








Fate”: “By the will of Fate my generation took part in two 
world wars... .”4 

The English military historian Fuller also gives a mystical, 
abstract explanation for the occurrence of wars. “From whence 
come wars and fighting among you? Come they not hence, 
even of your lusts that war in your members? 

“In these words of St. James is the answer which the nations 
can only reject at their peril. It is in the envies, greeds and 
fears of men that the roots of war are to be found.” In other 
words, Fuller sees war as a permanent, immutable social cate- 
gory resulting from the antagonistic nature of human relations. 

We find this same subjective, eclectic approach underlying 
the views of the English military specialist E. J. Kingston- 
McCloughry on the content of modern war. He chooses to 
single out ideological contradictions as the sole source of 
modern military conflicts. “Perhaps the most profound change 
lies in the motive round which nations now manoeuvre and 
prepare for war. No longer is the motive of war simply to gain 
new territories, resources and materials. Today, a prime feature 
of war or threat of war is a world-wide struggle over ideolo- 
gies: a struggle in respective ways of life which is some- 
thing like a reversion to the wars of the crusaders. . . .”3 

Marxism-Leninism, employing the dialectical approach, 
makes a thorough, comprehensive study of the connection be- 
tween war and politics. Perhaps the most striking feature of 
Leninist dialectics is that it is so concrete, and reflects all the 
real contradictions of social life. This can be seen very clearly 
in Lenin’s concrete historical analysis of war, where everything 


is treated in terms of social, economic and class relations, and. 


placed on a firm materia! basis. Lenin’s approach revolution- 
ised the very concept of politics, stripping it of idealist dogma- 
tism and abstraction, and placing it on firm concrete historical, 
class foundations. Opposing all attempts to vulgarise the con- 
cept of war and detach it from politics, he made a thorough- 
going historical analysis of the dialectic of this central category. 
Clausewitz had overlooked what was to become an essential 
element of the Marxist-Leninist analysis of war—historical 
analysis of class policies. 


{ Vincenz Miller, Ich fand das wahre Uaterland, Berlin, 1963, p. 471. 
2 J. F. C. Fuller, The Second World War 1939-1945, London, 1948, 


p. 412. 
3 E. J. Kingston-McCloughry, Global Strategy, New York, 1957, p. 26. 


60 








Marx, Engels and Lenin evolved their theories of the true 
nature of war on the basis of their analysis of numerous wars 
in the conditions of capitalism and imperialism. Unlike Clause- 
witz, they regarded politics not as an expression of the abstract 
interests of society as a whole, but as an expression of definite 
class interests. Their main aim was thus to reveal the political 
content of a war and the connection between its aims and the 
material interests of a particular class. Lenin maintained that 
war and politics were not to be opposed and contrasted to one 
another as the metaphysicists held, but that a war represented 
the continuation and consummation of the policy of a particular 
class. “The Marxist viewpoint,” he wrote, “requires that in each 
individual case we define the political content of the war. 

“But what determines the political content of a war? 

“Every war is only the continuation of policy. What kind of 
policy is being continued in the present war?”! 

Lenin shared the dialectical viewpoint of Marx and Engels, 
who saw war as the natural outcome and continuation of the 
policies of the particular states involved and the various 
classes within those states at the time. In his own words, “all 
ee ate inseparable from the political systems that engender 
them”’. 

Refuting the view of those dogmatists and eclectics who 
were inclined to see war as a casual, chance conflict between 
states, Lenin wrote: “How, then, can we disclose and define 
the ‘substance’ of a war? War is the continuation of a policy. 
Consequently, we must examine the policy pursued prior to 
the war, the policy that led to and brought about the war.” It 
was only by adopting the dialectical method that it proved pos- 
sible to reveal the true essence of a war and the development 
of the class policies that had engendered it. 

This does not mean that the dialectic draws no distinction 
between the concepts of “war” and “politics”. A policy can be 
peaceful, while a war means that the course of peace has been 
abandoned for other, violent methods. When a war breaks 
out, a policy is still being pursued but by different, military 
methods. Lenin expressed this as follows: “The policy 
which a given state, a given class within that state, pursued 
for a long time before the war is inevitably continued by that 


4 V_I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 23, p. 196. 
2 Tbid., Vol. 24, p. 400. 
3 Ibid., Vol. 23, p. 33. 


61 











same class during the war, the form of action alone being 
changed.”! 

Failure to understand the dialectic of the interdependency 
and interfusion of war and politics is the metaphysical gnoseo- 
logical foundation from which grow numerous empty defini- 
tions of war that explain absolutely nothing. Such definitions, 
moreover, lead to crude distortions of the concept and mask the 
class essence of war. Lenin was most insistent on this point: 
“How can a war be accounted for without considering its 
bearing on the preceding policy of the given state, of the given 
system of states, the given classes? I repeat: this is a basic point 
which is constantly overlooked. Failure to understand it makes 
nine-tenths of all war discussions mere wrangling, so much 
verbiage.”2 

When people like Kautsky, Plekhanov and many others tried 
to define the imperialist war (the First World War) in this 
way, reducing it to the secondary question of who started it, 
they were unable to explain the real essence of the war since 
they failed to pay due attention to the policies of the leading 
imperialist powers in the years preceding the war and evaded 
its real causes, ignoring which classes were waging it and 
with what political objects. Lenin criticised such mistaken as- 
sessments as follows: “The mistake and falsehood of popular 
literature on war is the evasion of this question; it ignores this 
question and presents the matter as if there had been no class 
struggle, as if two countries lived amicably, until one attacked 
the other, and the attacked had been defending itself. This is 
vulgar reasoning in which there is no shadow of objective 
truth.”3 Lenin insisted that the most important feature of the 
imperialist war was “the striving of the capitalists of every 
nation for profits and the exploitation of others, and the striv- 
ing of the Great Powers to partition the world and ‘enslave’ 
weaker nations”.4 

Thus the real objective content of the First World War was 
only revealed by means of concrete comprehensive dialectical 
analysis of the policies that had led to it. Lenin chastised the 
eclectic theoreticians who refused to employ the dialectical 
method of cognition in analysing the causes and essence of war. 


1 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24, p. 400. 
2 Tbid., p. 402. 

3 Ibid., Vol. 26, p. 266. 

4 Tbid., Vol. 21, p. 384. 


62 














“The philistine does not realise that war is ‘the continuation 
of policy’, and consequently limits himself to the formula that 
‘the enemy has attacked us’, ‘the enemy has invaded my coun- 
try’, without stopping to think what issues are at stake in the 
war, which classes are waging it, and with what political ob- 
jects.... 

“For the philistine the important thing is where the armies 
stand, who is winning at the moment. For the Marxist the im- 
portant thing is what issues are at stake in this war.”’! 

Attempts to treat war purely as an armed struggle consid- 
ered in isolation cannot possibly produce a scientific defini- 
tion of its essence. This was the way Kautsky approached the 
First World War, regarding it as an armed conflict between 
peoples and states, some of them attacking and the others de- 
fending themselves. 

Such a definition allows little or no distinction to be drawn 
between a war and an armed attack by highway robbers or a 
shooting match between bandits. After all, either of these are 
forms of armed struggle, with those attacking and those defend- 
ing themselves. Lenin exposed the absurdity of this arbitrary 
approach to war as follows: “...Closer examination of the 
theoretical premises in Kautsky’s reasoning will reveal the self- 
same idea that Clausewitz ridiculed about eighty years ago, viz., 
that when war breaks out, all historically created political rela- 
tions between nations and classes cease and that a totally new 
situation arises! There are ‘simply’ those that attack and those 
that are defending themselves, ‘simply’ the warding off of the 
‘enemies of the fatherland’! 

Lenin insisted that politics must be taken into account in 
determining the real essence of any war and opposed the wide- 
spread fallacy that war could be treated without reference to 
class policy, “as being a simple attack that disturbs the peace, 
and is then followed by restoration of the peace thus disturbed, 
as much as to say: “They had a fight, then they made up!’ This 
is a grossly ignorant view.” 

Let us take as an example the war that the United States is 
at present waging against the people of Vietnam. It is quite 
impossible to arrive at an understanding of the true essence of 
this imperialist war without first analysing the imperialist policy 


1 Ibid., Vol. 23, p. 33. 
2 Ibid., Vol. 21, p. 220. 
3 Tbid., Vol. 24, pp. 399-400. 


63 





















oe Ot ws il Bo aa. 





ens 


es 


of the USA. The same applies to any other war launched by 
the imperialists. 

Reactionary bourgeois theoreticians view the war in Vietnam 
in quite a different light. They arbitrarily contrast the war it- 
self and the class and national policy of the Vietnamese people 
who have taken up arms fighting to oppose American impe- 
rialism, trying to present it as a “lawless” insurrection by sub- 
versive elements against the “lawful” government. The real 
essence of the war is an attempt by American imperialism, 
the local military and reactionary bourgeoisie and landowners, 
in pursuit of their own class interests, economic and political, 
to crush the national liberation struggle of the Vietnamese 
people. 

The dialectic of historical development in the twentieth cen- 
tury clearly demonstrates that however different the aims pur- 
sued in wars may be, they represent in every case a continua- 
tion of a particular class policy by violent means. 

A war in which a nation is engaged cannot be separated 
from its policy, let alone contrasted with it, for every war is a 
link in one political chain, an extension and continuation of 
the policy of a particular class and state at a given time. 

Criticising metaphysical methods of investigating the causes 
of the First World War, Lenin wrote: ““We must take the 
whole policy of the entire system of European states in their 
economic and political interrelations if we are to understand 
how the present war steadily and inevitably grew out of this 
system.””! 

From this it can be seen what a tremendous importance the 
analysis of the whole system of international economic and polit- 
ical relations has in determining the true essence of a war. 

Lenin continued to develop his concept of war with analysis 
of political development as a many-sided whole. 

Although war is a general concept, each war is qualitatively 
different in content from all others. Thus, it only genuinely 
became a general concept when it ceased to be an abstract con- 
cept of war in general and became a comprehensive scientific 
concept. The dialectical method is called upon to make a 
thorough concrete study of the objective class content of poli- 
tics as the fundamental concept underlying the system of devel- 
opment of scientific categories in question. The Marxist-Lenin- 
ist analysis of policy concepts differs fundamentally from the 


4 V. 1. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24, p. 401. 


64 
























views of dialectical idealists, from the one-sided views of the 
eclectics and from the moribund systems of the modern scho- 
lastics and dogmatists. 

Lenin defines the essence of a war by means of concrete anal- 
ysis of the class policy of particular classes at a given time. If 
the policy preceding a war was imperialist then the war it has 
led to must be qualified as imperialist. If the policy was one of 
national liberation, then the war it has led to is to be defined 
as a war of national liberation. 

A comprehensive scientific classification of wars can only be 
produced on the basis of analysis of their class nature. 

The adoption of the scientific dialectical method of analysis 
made it possible, for example, to determine the reactionary, 
colonialist nature of many wars of the post-war period—such 
as those waged by Britain in Malaysia and the Middle East, 
by France in Algeria, by Portugal in Angola, and so on—since 
these wars were fought with a view to crushing the national 
liberation movement in colonies and dependent countries. On 
the other hand, the wars waged by the Chinese, Indonesian, 
Egyptian and Algerian peoples for their freedom, against the 
imperialists, were just and progressive. 

In the post-war period, the reactionary forces of the world 
imperialist bourgeoisie headed by the United States have been 
threatening mankind with the menace of a world nuclear war. 
But the introduction of nuclear weapons does not alter the es- 
sential class nature of war. A nuclear war on a world scale in 
present-day conditions can only be the outcome of the adventu- 
ristic imperialist policy of modern state-monopoly capitalism. 
Imperialism, which has already unleashed two colossally de- 
structive world wars, now threatens mankind with the danger 
of an even more terrible catastrophe. 

From a close study of the class policy of the USA, 
the Federal Republic of Germany, Britain and other bourgeois 
states in the post-war period it is quite plain that imperialism 
creates the threat of a third world war, a conclusion reached 
by Marxists-Leninists on the basis of a strictly objective analy- 
sis of all the basic antagonisms and conflicts of our time. It is 
the policy of war and aggression being pursued in the interests 
of monopoly capital that could lead to a third world war. 

Unlike other imperialist wars, a world thermonuclear war 
represents a serious threat to the whole of mankind, and could 
cause the destruction of the centres of world culture and hund- 
reds of millions of lives. At the same time, it would mark the 


5—203 65 





end of the adventuristic policy of all the reactionary forces of 
world imperialism. 

The Marxist-Leninist dialectic is opposed to abstract views 
on the essence of war, and insists on a social, class definition 
of individual wars. Marx, Engels and Lenin sharply condemned 
attempts by bourgeois philosophers and military theoreticians 
to substitute references to biological, psychological, natural and 
other factors for the social definition of war. 

Intelligent application of the dialectic to scientific study of 
the category of war makes possible a deeper and more compre- 
hensive analysis of the mechanics of development of this form 
of expression of social conflicts, of the inner processes and es- 
sential changes affecting the nature of war. 

It is to the Marxist dialectic that we owe the discovery of 
qualitative changes in the nature of wars. Rejecting the meta- 
physical approach to war as a fixed, invariable category, Lenin 
made a comprehensive study of the dialectical transformation 
of wars. The dialectical theory that concepts are dynamic and 
flexible opened up wide possibilities for comprehensive histor- 
ical analysis of this process of transformation with regard to 
wars. Moreover, Lenin saw the transformation of wars as a 
clear demonstration of the thesis that all dividing lines in na- 
ture and society are conventional and dynamic. “That all divid- 
ing lines, both in nature and society, are conventional and 
dynamic, and that every phenomenon might, under certain 
conditions, be transformed into its opposite, is, of course, a basic 
proposition of Marxist dialectics. A national war might be 
transformed into an imperialist war and vice versa.”! 

This qualitative transformation of wars into their opposite 
is only natural. Only dogmatic thought finds itself powerless 
to explain the transformation of a particular phenomenon into 
its opposite. According to dialectical logic a qualitative change 
in a class policy automatically entails a corresponding funda- 
mental change in the essence of a war. It is in this way that 
Lenin explains the change that occurred in the nature of the 
wars of the Napoleonic era: “...The wars of the Great French 
Revolution began as national wars and indeed were such. They 
were revolutionary wars—the defence of the great revolution 
against a coalition of counter-revolutionary monarchies. But 
when Napoleon founded the French Empire and subjugated a 


number of big, viable and long-established national European 


{ V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 22, p. 309. 


66 





states, these national wars of the French became imperialist 
wars and in turn led to wars of national liberation against 
Napoleonic imperialism.”! 

A truly scientific analysis of the essence of each of these 
wars, of the historical process whereby a national war is trans- 
formed into an imperialist war and vice versa necessarily in- 
volved a concrete study of the respective political situation and 
the objectives of the war in question. 

Criticising the subjective and dogmatic approach to the prob- 
lem, Lenin wrote: “Only a sophist can disregard the difference 
between an imperialist and a national war on the grounds 
that one might develop into the other. Not infrequently have 
dialectics served—and the history of Greek philosophy is an 
example—as a bridge to sophistry. But we remain dialecti- 
cians and we combat sophistry not by denying the possibility 
of transformations in general, but by analysing the given 
phenomenon in its concrete setting and development.’ 

Here is yet a further example of Lenin’s analysis of wars of 
national liberation passing into their opposite—an imperialist 
war. Describing nascent Italian imperialism at the time of the 
First World War, he wrote: “Revolutionary-democratic Italy, 
i.e., revolutionary-bourgeois Italy, the Italy that cast off the 
yoke of Austria, the Italy of the times of Garibaldi, is chang- 
ing before our very eyes into an Italy that is oppressing other 
peoples and plundering Turkey and Austria, an Italy of a 
crude, repulsively reactionary and rapacious bourgeoisie whose 
mouth waters at the prospect of a share in the loot.” 

Lenin also examined the way the First World War became 
transformed into a civil war in Russia. He sharply criticised 
the lack of realism shown by those dogmatists and eclectics 
who refused to believe that the imperialist war could be trans- 
formed into a civil war in the age of imperialism. This sub- 
jective attitude was based on the abstract conception of war 
as a permanent evil and their treatment of the war as some- 
thing separate from imperialist policy. Lenin’s view, based on 
a concrete historical analysis of the age of imperialism, was 
that “the objective inevitability of capitalism which grew into 
imperialism brought about the imperialist war. The war has 
brought mankind to the brink of the precipice, to the brink of 


1 Ibid. 
2 Tbid. 
3 Tbid., Vol. 21, pp. 357-58. 


5° 67 








the destruction of civilisation, to the brutalisation and destruc- 
tion of more millions, countless millions, of human beings. 

“The only way out is through a proletarian revolution.”! 

The logic of developing social conflicts at the time of the 
First World War showed that the most realistic way out of 
these contradictions was to turn the imperialist war into its 
opposite—a civil war—in the interests of socialism. “The slogan 
of civil war for socialism indicates the quickest way out of the 
imperialist war and links our struggle against the war with 
our struggle against opportunism.”? However, the materialist 
dialectic views the transformation of one war to another not as 
a subjective act but as a process of objective logic involving the 
movement of contradictions from one stage to another. “The 
conversion of the imperialist war into a civil war cannot be 
‘made’, any more than a revolution can be ‘made’. It develops 
out of a number of diverse phenomena, aspects, features, char- 
acteristics and consequences of the imperialist war.’ 

In the conditions attending that particular stage in Russia’s 
development the course Lenin urged was the only path that 
would serve mankind’s advance towards socialism. The cor- 
rectness of Lenin’s deduction that the imperialist war could be 
turned into a civil war waged by the proletariat against the 
bourgeoisie was confirmed by the triumph of the Great October 
Socialist Revolution. 

The dialectic of the developments by which the Second World 
War was transformed from an imperialist war into a just war 
of liberation against the fascist states can be seen from an 
analysis of the policies of the imperialist powers in the preced- 
ing period. 

Marxist-Leninist analysis of the character of the Second 
World War shows that the ruling circles in Germany, Britain, 
France, the USA and Japan waged the war for world domina- 
tion, and that the war was the continuation of years of imperial- 
ist rivalry in the capitalist camp. This was the real cause 
of the war, which began as an unjust, reactionary, imperialist 
war. 

Only dogmatists and metaphysicists can regard the Second 
World War as having remained unchanged in character 
throughout. With the invasion of the USSR, the war assumed a 


1 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24, p. 87. 
2 Tbid., Vol. 23, p. 26. 
3 Ibid., Vol. 21, p. 278. 


68 








new character and by virtue of the liberation struggle and the 
struggle of the countries of the anti-Hitler coalition became 
a just war, a war against fascism, a war of liberation. This 
was the turning-point in the dialectic of development of the 
Second World War. 

The key to the correct scientific interpretation of the problem 
is to be found in analysis of the policy of the USSR before the 
war and in the period of the Soviet people’s Great Patriotic 
War. Only by making this the basic point of departure can the 
true character of the Second World War and the causes of its 
transformation from an imperialist war into a just, anti-fascist 
war be successfully revealed. Any other approach will lead to 
an inextricable tangle in the jungle of scholasticism and ec- 
lecticism. 

However, the phenomenon of the transformation of war must 
not be stretched to eclectical absurdity. As we have seen, while 
condemning dogmatic clichés of the impossibility of a war 
being transformed, Marxism-Leninism is strongly opposed to 
an abstract subjective approach to the process, and to the pos- 
sible being confused with the real. Lenin insisted: “It is preci- 
sely in ‘methodology’ ... that one must distinguish the possible 
from the real.”! 

Dialectical materialism thus examines every instance of a 
war being transformed in its concrete historical context, in its 
organic relationship with the actual development of class politics 
and class contradictions in the time in question. Objective as- 
sessment of the real possibility of the transformation of a war 
is therefore always based on a comprehensive analysis of the 
nature of social forces, the content of class and national contra- 
dictions in a particular historical period. Only in this way can 
the objective logic of changes in the character of war be cor- 
rectly assessed. 





The Scientific 
Approach to the 
Concept of Peace 


Everyone believes he has a clear understanding of what peace 
is and how it differs from war. Everyone seems to be equally 
convinced that the concept of peace is the direct opposite of the 

1 Tbid., Vol. 35, p. 248. 


69 









concept of war. However, appearances are deceptive, and we 
are dealing here with an extremely widespread illusion. This 
abstract definition of war and peace as two stable poles is in 
fact a completely unscientific approach to the problems of peace. 
Dialectical materialist analysis of war and peace is in funda- 
mental contrast of this superficial view, and shows that the 
mechanism of the relationship between these two social concepts 
is quite different from what it appears to be at first sight. 

The problem of peace found its first scientific interpretation 
in Marxist-Leninist philosophy. The nature and character of 
this social category can only be revealed by an approach in 
which the historical and the logical are organically combined. 
Like the concept of war, the concept of peace must be defined 
in terms of its political essence and class nature. In both cases 
politics have a decisive significance. This was pointed out by 
Clausewitz, who held that the outbreak of war did not mean the 
end of political relationships or their transformation into 
something entirely different, but was merely their continuation 
by different means. 

Only the principle of the organic unity of the historical and 
the logical provides a basis for cognizance of the real, class 
essence of peace, and the main trends of its development, involv- 
ing qualitative transformation of one kind of peace into another. 
The metaphysical approach leads to impoverishment of the 
content of peace, ignores the fact of its development and results 
in abstract theories of peace “in general”. 

Lenin criticised such views as follows. ““The peace slogan 
can be advanced either in connection with definite peace terms, 
or without any conditions at all, as a struggle, not for a definite 
kind of peace, but for peace in general (Frieden ohne weiters). 
In the latter case, we obviously have a slogan that is not only 
non-socialist but entirely devoid of meaning and content.”! 

In order to see the dialectic of the development of the con- 
cept of peace correctly it is necessary to adopt a concrete his- 
torical approach. The content of peace as a social category can- 
not be understood without concrete analysis of political rela- 
tionships in a class society. The Marxist dialectic discovered 
these relationships by revealing the logic of the transition from 
particular methods of implementing class politics to others, 
from war to peace and vice versa. 

Describing the nature of the relationship between war, peace 


4 V_I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 21, p. 290. 


70 



















































and politics, Lenin wrote: “War is a continuation, by violent 
means, of the politics pursued by the ruling classes of the bel- 
ligerent powers long before the outbreak of war. Peace is a 
continuation of the very same politics.”’! 

There can be no non-class peace in a class society, any more 
than there can be non-class war or non-class politics. Politics 
is thus the point of departure for a concrete analysis of peace, 
just as it is in the case of war. If war is the continuation of poli- 
tics by other, violent means, peace is the continuation of poli- 
tics by non-violent means. Here lies the fundamental difference 
between war and peace. Lenin defined the historical content 
of the two concepts, war and peace, as follows: “Socialists have 
always condemned wars between nations as barbarous and 
brutal. Our attitude towards war, however, is fundamentally 
different from that of the bourgeois pacifists (supporters and 
advocates of peace) and of the anarchists. We differ from the 
former in that we understand the inevitable connection between 
wars and the class struggle within a country; we understand 
that wars cannot be abolished unless classes are abolished and 
socialism is created. .. .”2 

Lenin criticises as devoid of meaning and content the meta- 
physical concept of war and peace as finite, eternal values—war 
an absolute evil and peace an absolute good. 

Abstract interpretations of just peace were widespread before 
the appearance of Marxist-Leninist philosophy. It would be 
unfair to deny the positive value of such principles as, for 
example, those that underlay many utopian socialist concepts 
of just peace—the establishment of good neighbourly relations, 
equality and justice in international relations and so on. How- 
ever, it was Marxist-Leninist philosophy that dealt the final 
death-blow to the unhistorical, abstract slogans of just peace 
in general. 

Lenin criticised the dogmatic, abstract approach to peace. 
“To bourgeois pacifists and their ‘socialist’ imitators, or echoers, 
peace has always been a fundamentally distinct concept, for 
neither has ever understood that ‘war is the continuation of 
policies of peace and peace the continuation of the policies of 
war’.” 

The dialectic offered tremendous opportunities for penetrat- 


1 Tbid., Vol. 22, p. 163. 
2 Ibid., Vol. 21, p. 299. 
3 Ibid., Vol. 23, p. 192. 


71 


ing the social essence of peace. With the aid of the dialectic it 
was possible to determine that changes in the content of the 
concept of peace were directly dependent on the social nature 
of the policies of states and peoples. Thus, on the basis of dia- 
lectical analysis of political relations Marxism-Leninism pro- 
duced a clear definition of the two opposite concepts of just 
peace and unjust peace. If political relations between states are 
based on enslavement and outright robbery, class and national 
oppression, the seizure of other people’s territory and infringe- 
ment of the independence of states, then the concept of peace 
that fully embodies all these essential features must be defined 
as an imperialist, unjust peace. 

Time and again, in examining the essential features of im- 
perialist peace, Lenin defined it as simply a “breathing space” 
between imperialist wars, as division of the imperialist spoils, 
or a typical example of the division and redivision of the world 
“on the basis of a new relation of forces’, “being changed by 
methods anything but peaceful’.! In the age of monopoly capi- 
talism these breathing spaces between aggressive, predatory 
wars became shorter and shorter, with the result that the divid- 
ing line between imperialist war and imperialist peace became 
more and more blurred. Noting this qualitative feature in the 
dialectic of the transition from the concept of war to the con- 
cept of peace in the imperialist age, Lenin qualified the intense 
and uninterrupted struggle between the imperialist states as 
an example of “the division and the redivision of the world, 
the transition from peaceful division to non-peaceful division 
and vice versa’’.? 

Lenin arrived at his definition of imperialist peace through 
analysis of the policies of the major capitalist states involved 
in the First World War. The imperialist nature of the war it- 
self naturally led to an imperialist peace. Lenin insisted that 
the only way to determine the essence of the peace was to ana- 
lyse the imperialist policies of the war. “And the truth of the 
present time, of the present war, of the present attempts to 
conclude peace, is the division of the imperialist spoils. That is 
at the bottom of it all; and to understand this truth, to express 
it, ‘to show things as they actually are’, is the fundamental 
task of socialist policy as distinct from bourgeois policy, the 
principal aim of which is to conceal, to gloss over this truth.’ 


1 V_I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 22, p. 274. 
2 Ibid, p. 273. 
3 Tbid., Vol. 23, p. 179. 


72 











This objective truth was revealed through historical analysis 
of the political essence of the First World War. Since the war 
was the continuation of the imperialist policies of the major 
capitalist powers, its outcome was an imperialist peace. An im- 
perialist war naturally leads to an unjust imperialist peace. 
This was the scientific conclusion deduced from definition of 
the class essence of the First World War. 

Lenin’s answer to the non-dialectical views of various bour- 
geois philosophers and sociologists was as follows. “Neither 
the bourgeois nor the social-chauvinist wants to see that the 
imperialist war of 1914-1917 is the continuation of the impe- 
rialist policies of 1898-1914, if not of an even earlier period. 
Neither the bourgeois pacifists nor the socialist pacifists realise 
that without the revolutionary overthrow of the bourgeois gov- 
ernments, peace now can only be an imperialist peace, a con- 
tinuation of the imperialist war.’’! 

A frequent major gnoseological error of bourgeois philo- 
sophers is that they attempt to determine the true essence of 
peace without reference to the class policies of states, and isolate 
the content of the concept of peace from the preceding policies 
of violence. Thus, Kautsky, Plekhanov and Trotsky had tried to 
examine the content of the concept of peace without any ref- 
erence at all to the essence of the imperialist war or the policies 
of the bourgeois states in the age of imperialism. 

Kautsky’s theory, like the views of other opportunists and 
bourgeois pacifists, did not go beyond a feeble expression of 
subjective hopes of a just peace and abstract contrasting of war 
and peace. Some of them proposed that the war be brought to 
an end and a just peace be concluded by a one-sided withdrawal. 

Lenin wrote: “The idea that the war can be terminated 
without changing the classes in power is an anarchist idea. 
Either this idea is anarchistic, in which case it has no meaning, 
or no state significance, or it is a hazy pacifist idea that fails 
completely to appreciate the connection between politics and 
the oppressing class.”2 

Lenin criticised such untenable abstract schemes for a just, 
democratic peace in the following terms: “The ‘social’ parsons 
and opportunists are always ready to build dreams of future 
peaceful socialism. But the very thing that distinguishes them 
from revolutionary Social-Democrats is that they refuse to 


1 Ibid., p. 192. 
2 Ibid., Vol. 24, p. 264. 








think about and reflect on the fierce class struggle and class 
wars needed to achieve that beautiful future.”! In the concrete 
historical conditions of the First World War, the only way to 
achieve a just, democratic peace was for the working masses to 
transform the imperialist war into a civil war against the bour- 
geois governments of all the belligerent countries. “Marxism 
is not pacifism,” Lenin wrote. “Of course, the speediest pos- 
sible termination of the war must be striven for. However, the 
‘peace’ demand acquires a proletarian significance only if a 
revolutionary struggle is called for. Without a series of revolu- 
tions, what is called a democratic peace is a philistine Utopia.”? 
Whoever wanted a democratic, enduring peace at that time 
should be in favour of a civil war against the imperialist gov- 
ernments and the monopoly bourgeoisie. This was the dia- 
lectic of the transition from a world imperialist war to a just, 
democratic international peace in the conditions then obtai- 
ning. 

It is often the case in present conditions, too, that the only 
way for a people to ensure a just, democratic peace is to take 
up arms and engage in a just struggle against imperialism. 
Thus, the Egyptian and Algerian peoples achieved a just, de- 
mocratic peace through a tenacious struggle against the colo- 
nialists and imperialist aggressors supported by the forces of 
internal reaction—the big bourgeoisie and landowners. 

Revealing the historical and economic factors that bring 
about a war, the materialist dialectic at the same time examines 
the socio-political order whose establishment would ensure a 
just peace and remove the possibility of further wars occurring. 
Contemporary bourgeois metaphysicians attempt to prove that 
war is a permanent phenomenon in the life of society and peace 
is but a contingency, a chance occurrence. The materialist dia- 
lectic, revealing the class nature of war and demonstrating that 
war is the continuation of certain policies, has proved that 
socialism naturally eliminates war and engenders peace between 
the nations. 

Whenever Lenin examined the problem of just peace, he 
always treated it in a definite historical context. If war as a 
social phenomenon is an intrinsic part of the development of 
social relations based on private ownership and is as much a 
natural feature of capitalist society as the exploitation of man 


1 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 23, p. 79. 
2 Ibid., Vol. 21, pp. 328-29. 


74 





Eo Ll 


by man, socialist society with its public ownership eliminates 
the conditions which engender war. 

History itself has demonstrated that the basic content of the 
foreign policy of the world socialist system is the struggle for 
the creation of favourable conditions for the building of social- 
ism and the strengthening of its own power, support for peoples 
struggling for national and social emancipation and for the 
consolidation of Lenin’s principles of peaceful coexistence be- 
tween states with different social systems. 

In the socialist countries there are no classes and_ social 
groups with a vested interest in war. Power is in the hands of 
the workers and peasants, who are firm supporters of peace 
between the working people of all countries. 

Discussing the essence of the peaceful policy of socialism, 
Lenin insisted that the Communist Party on coming to power 
would see to it that the land of socialism based its relations 
with other countries on humanitarian principles of equality and 
non-intervention. “All our politics and propaganda, however,” 
he wrote, “are directed towards putting an end to war and in no 
way towards driving nations to war.’’! 

Lenin’s principle of peaceful coexistence between capitalist 
and socialist countries has been carried on and developed in the 
policy of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the 
Soviet Government. Today, powerful social and political forces 
dispose of formidable means to prevent the imperialists from 
launching a new world war. 


eb 


The Marxist-Leninist analysis of the concepts of war and 
peace is of tremendous importance for the solution of present 
international problems. Marxism-Leninism elaborated a com- 
plete scientific dialectical-materialist theory of war and peace 
which provides the only valid basis for analysing the essence 
of any war, has revealed the relationship between politics and 
war in a class society, produced a scientific classification of 
different kinds of war and peace, and examined the historical 
conditions for the elimination of war and the establishment of 
enduring international peace. The consistent peaceful policy of 
the Soviet Union has dispelled the myth of a “Communist 
menace”. The strengthening of the forces of socialism in Europe 


4 Ibid., Vol. 31, p. 470. 











provides new opportunities for ensuring peaceful coexistence 
and co-operation between the peoples of that continent. 

A most impressive example of such co-operation is provided 
by the good neighbourly relations that have been firmly estab- 
lished between the Soviet Union and Finland. Franco-Soviet 
relations represent a notable instance of two major powers 
with different social systems establishing ties of firm friendship 
and co-operation. Many developing countries also show a marked 
inclination to adopt an independent policy, based on their own 
i interests rather than those of any aggressive military 

ocs. 

The power of the Soviet Union and the socialist countries 
provides a real counterbalance to the aggressive forces of impe- 
rialism, and represents an extremely important factor in pre- 
serving peace and preventing the outbreak of a third world war. 


Chapter IV 

















POLITICS AND WAR 
IN OUR TIME 


The problem of the relationship between politics and war, 
with its historical, economic, philosophical, sociological and 
military aspects, has attracted and continues to hold the atten- 
tion not only of specialists in these various fields but also of 
millions of ordinary people all round the globe. Today mankind 
is deeply concerned as to whether war can be eliminated from 
the life of society and permanent peace established, or whether 
the terrible threat of war is destined to continue to hang over 
us, a threat to our future, and indeed, in present conditions, to 
the very existence of life on our planet. 

Two ideologies—the Marxist-Leninist and the bourgeois— 
are locked in a fierce struggle over this question, and represent 
opposite world outlooks, methods of enquiry and class-political 
standpoints. 


Revolution in Views 
on Politics and War 


Throughout the history of class society, which represents 
a comparatively short period in the history of mankind, innu- 
merable wars, big and small, have occurred. It has been esti- 
mated that in the last 5,500 years mankind has gone through 
over 14,500 wars, an average of almost three a year! Some 
4,000 million people lost their lives in them, more than the 
present population of the world. The most destructive of all 


77 





were the two world wars, with their colossal toll in human lives 
and in material values it had taken generations of labour to 
produce. 

Every war in the past represented a method of solving certain 
social and international conflicts, an extreme means of over- 
coming antagonisms between classes, peoples and states. Times 
changed, one social order was superseded by another, and the 
forms and means of armed struggle were developed and im- 
proved, but war remained what it had always been—an instru- 
ment of politics. The ruling exploiter classes always resorted 
to war with the object of strengthening and extending their 
own power, in order to implement their policy of subjugating 
the working masses and in order to oppress and enslave other 
peoples. Lenin noted that it was the reactionary classes who 
were usually the first to resort to force, and “placed the bayonet 
on the agenda”’.! 

At the same time, the progressive, revolutionary classes and 
peoples were, and still are compelled to resort to war as an 
extreme measure in their struggle against their oppressors. 
Lenin stressed that no revolutionary class can renounce revolu- 
tionary war.? But to the progressive forces in society war is 
abhorrent and they only resort to it with the object of defending 
themselves from the forces of counter-revolution. As Engels 
put it, “... when there is no reactionary force that must be 
overthrown, there can be no question of revolutionary 
force...”.3 

Many philosophers, sociologists and political and military 
figures of the past pointed out the close relationship that exists 
between war and politics. At the stage of slave-owning society, 
Plato and Aristotle regarded war as one of the means of achiev- 
ing political objects, and the art of war as a part of the art of 
politics, “the art of statecraft’”.4 Hegel considered the object 
of the policy of the state to be “the Universal Spirit”, and 
held that the power of the state and its policy lay ‘“‘in Reason”. 
He demonstrated on the basis of numerous examples from 
history that “the armies were used for particular expeditions, 
suggested by policy”.> The famous Russian general Kutuzov 
also emphasised the relationship between war and politics. In 


1 V. 1. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 31, p. 346. 

2 Tbid., Vol. 25, p. 39. 

3 Marx/Engels, Werke, Band 38, S. 489-90. 

“ Aristotle, Politics, Saint-Petersburg, 1911, p. 22 (in Russian). 
5 Hegel, The Philosophy of History, New York, 1900, p. 308. 


78 











1811 he remarked that “political circumstances will indicate 
the kind of war”.! 

But, as we have already seen, it was the German military 
theorist Karl von Clausewitz (1780-1831) who gave the fullest 
picture of the relationship between war and politics prior to 
Marx. In his book On War he employed the Hegelian dialectic 
and generalised on the experience of the Napoleonic wars to 
establish the essential connection between war and _ politics. 
War, he wrote, is not an independent act, but depends on poli- 
tical relations, on politics. It always arises from the political 
situation and is invariably caused by political motives. It repre- 
sents the continuation of politics by other means, and is in fact 
an instrument of politics. War is politics substituting “the 
sword for the pen”. Since war is a part of politics, it naturally 
assumes the features and character of politics and should be 
measured by the political yardstick. “When politics become 
more mighty and puissant then so does war.’”? 

ar is an act of violence. In war everything is subordinated 
to the law of settlement by military force. The scale on which 
force is employed and the intensity of the armed conflict depend 
on the political aim pursued. The political aim is the measure 
of both the end being pursued by means of military action and 
the necessary military efforts. It is thus “senseless to subordinate 
the political standpoint to the military”. 

These propositions represented the high water mark of bour- 
geois thought on the problem of war. They were duly praised 
by the classics of Marxism-Leninism. Engels referred to Clau- 
sewitz as a “star of the first magnitude” in German military 
literature, and Lenin called him one of the very great writers 
on questions of military history. 

Clausewitz employed Hegel’s idealist dialectic to reveal the 
relationship between war and politics and it left its mark on 
his views too. Clausewitz treated politics from the idealist 
standpoint, without reference to economic factors, the class 
struggle, or the character of the social order. He thus regarded 
politics as the “Reason of the state personified”,* and “represen- 
tative of the interests of the whole of society”.® Moreover, by 


1M. Kutuzov, Documents, Voyenizdat, 1952, Vol. III, p. 754 (in 
Russian). 

2 Karl von Clausewitz, op. cit., p. 729. 

3 Thid., p. 730. 

4 Ibid., p. 35. 

5 Ibid., p. 730. 


79 











politics he intended only foreign policy, and completely ignored 
the home policy of the ruling class. Since he did not understand 
the class nature of politics and their material roots, Clausewitz 
failed to perceive the true essence of war, its content and 
character, the economic and socio-political class factors that 
underlie it. He held that all wars were historically necessary 
and lawful. In short, his views were circumscribed within the 
narrow framework of the bourgeois idealist outlook of his age. 

Some modern bourgeois ideologists studying the problem of 
war and peace lavish excessive praise on Clausewitz, crediting 
him with more than he really deserves. Thus, the French socio- 
logist and historian C. Rougeron writes in his preface to a 
French edition of Clausewitz’s On War that he was “the 
greatest military classic of all times’! The West German 
military historian W. R. Schramm describes him as “the only 
military philosopher of lasting importance that Europe has 
produced” 2 

Such exaggeration of the role of Clausewitz is not only a 
distortion of historical truth, but an instrument used to belittle 
the Marxist-Leninist interpretation of the relationship between 
war and politics. Thus, we find in Wehrwissenschaftliche 
Rundschau, a military journal of the West German revanchists: 
“We too must interpret Clausewitz’s theory creatively and de- 
velop it as an instrument of the world-wide political and 
philosophical dispute, if we wish to cross spiritual swords with 
the East and overcome it ideologically, as we need to.’ 

In accordance with this and similar aims, philosophers, socio- 
logists and military historians in the capitalist countries often 
go out of their way to make it appear that there is nothing 
new in the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of war and that it has 
been borrowed wholesale from Clausewitz, a bourgeois military 
theorist. Typical in this respect are the views expressed by 
R. L. Garthoff, an American specialist in falsification of the 
Marxist-Leninist doctrine of war and politics. He maintains 
that the Soviet outlook fully accepts Clausewitz’s idea that war 
is the continuation of politics by other means, without any 
critical re-evaluation or modification of its content or meaning.’ 
Similar views are to be found in the collective work Protracted 


1 Karl von Clausewitz, De la guerre, Paris, 1955, p. 9. 

2 Wehrkunde, Jan. 1966, Band I, S. 2. 

3 Wehrwissenschaftliche Rundschau, Nov. 1958, Band II, p. 655. 

4 See R. L. Garthoff, Soviet Military Doctrine, Glencoe, 1953, p. 10, 
and Soviet Strategy in the Nuclear Age, New York, 1958, p. 6. 


80 





Conflict: “The idea that military and political instruments are 
interchangeable in the execution of one vast strategic plan, cen- 
tral to Clausewitz’s thought, is the pith of Communist doctrine.” 

The West German sociologist T. Arnold writes in his The 
Revolutionary War that Lenin merely restated Clausewitz’s 
“proposition that ‘war is the continuation of politics by other 
means’, called it ‘dialectical’, and added that war is not only 
a political phenomenon but a climax, an ‘ultima ratio of 
politics’. He goes on to say: “This estimate of war as a special 
case of politics is taken over by the Communists as the basis 
of their interpretation of conflicts in full accordance with the 
‘dialectical method’. ... This thesis derived from the doctrine 
of Clausewitz underlies the whole of Communist military and 
political strategy.”? Similar statements occur in the writings of 
important NATO figures, for instance in Admiral Ruge’s book 
Politics, the Military, Alliance, where we are told that Clau- 
sewitz created the theory of war and Lenin “adopted and 
successfully applied his idea”.? In this manner the ideologists 
of imperialism try to belittle the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of 
war and politics and discredit it in the eyes of the masses. 

In fact, however, Marxism-Leninism brought about a com- 
plete revolution in views of war and politics, providing the 
first scientific interpretation of them, banishing idealism, meta- 
physics and sophistry. The Marxist-Leninist doctrine of war 
and politics naturally did not appear out of the blue, and it 
absorbed all that was best and progressive in earlier military 
theory. Nevertheless it is by no means a restatement of Clause- 
witz’s views but represents a qualitatively new, higher stage, 
a highly original system of views. 

The fact that Marxism-Leninism accepts the words of the 
formula that war is the continuation of politics by violent 
means should not be allowed to mask the totally different 
content with which materialists and idealists imbue it. The 
Marxist-Leninist theory of war and politics is based on the 
principles of dialectical materialism, on elucidation of the 
material, economic factors that underlie and determine politics, 
and on analysis of their class nature. Military theorists of the 


{ R. Strausz-Hupé, W. R. Kintner, J. E. Dougherty and A. J. Cottrell, 
Protracted Conflict, New York, 1959, p. 31. 


2 Theodor Arnold, Der revolutiondre Krieg, 3. Aufl., Pfaffenhofen-Ilm, 
1961, S. 19-20. 


3 Friedrich Ruge, Politik, Militdr, Bindnis, Stuttgart, 1963, S. 51. 


6—203 81 








NATO countries prefer to ignore this aspect, thereby revealing 
their biased, hostile attitude to Marxist-Leninist ideology. 

War is a part of the whole, a part of politics. The dialectic 
of the part and the whole, of war and politics, is of a contra- 
dictory nature. Thus, Lenin wrote: “With reference to wars, 
the main thesis of dialectics, which has been so shamelessly 
distorted by Plekhanov to please the bourgeoisie, is that ‘war 
is simply the continuation of politics by other (i.e., violent) 
means’. 

“And it was always the standpoint of Marx and Engels, who 
regarded any war as the continuation of the politics of the 
powers concerned—and the various classes within these coun- 
tries—in a definite period.’’! 

Politics occupy the dominant position in relation to war. 
The content of a war, its essence, character and causes cannot 
be understood without reference to the politics of the respective 
classes and states, without studying the whole system of political 
relations that developed some time before the war, brought the 
war about and continued during it. Lenin was scornful of 
those who held that with the outbreak of war the historically 
prepared political relations between classes and nations were 
interrupted. He considered it gross ignorance, a philistine prej- 
udice to imagine that war could be viewed separately from the 
politics of the respective governments and classes, simply as 
an enemy attack. “...The most important thing that is usually 
overlooked in the question of the war, a key issue to which 
insufficient attention is paid and over which there is so much 
dispute—useless, hopeless, idle dispute, I should say—is the 
question of the class character of the war: what caused that 
war, what classes are waging it, and what historical and his- 
torico-economic conditions gave rise to it.”? Lenin maintained 
that in order to judge a war and determine what attitude to 
take to it, it was necessary to investigate the historical circum- 
stances from which it arose, what political system it was con- 
nected with, what politics had given rise to it, and what classes 
were waging it and with what aims. The ruling class determines 
politics in war as well as in peace. 

Lenin insisted that each war must be approached from a 
concrete historical viewpoint, that in order to understand the 
character of a particular war one must first have an under- 


1 V_I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 21, p. 219. 
2 Tbid., Vol. 24, p. 398. 


82 


standing of the character of the particular age. Lenin was 
not satisfied to define war in general terms but made a thorough 
analysis of the nature and specific features of wars in the age 
of monopoly capitalism. He divided these into different types, 
expounded a doctrine of two kinds of wars—just and unjust— 
and explained the nature of wars in defence of the socialist 
state. 

Marxism-Leninism rejects the idealist concept of politics 
in investigating the essence, character and content of war, and 
its dependence on politics. Lenin described politics as the con- 
centrated expression of economics, their generalisation and 
consequence. The material roots of policies giving rise to war 
were to be sought in the exploiting method of production based 
on private ownership. At the same time, Lenin warned against 
oversimplifying the relationship between economics and politics, 
the automatic deduction of politics from economics, and pointed 
out the relatively independent nature of politics and the fact 
that they, in turn, influence economics. 

Politics comprise the relations between classes and peoples 
within a state (home policy), and also the relations between 
states and nations (foreign policy). The two are closely inter- 
related, the former playing the dominant role and determining 
the content and character of the latter. Lenin stressed that “‘no 
idea could be more erroneous or harmful than to separate 
foreign from home policy”.! This thesis should not be taken 
as suggesting that foreign policy can be reduced simply to a 
function of home policy. Indeed, at times foreign policy can 
exert a decisive influence on home policy. Nevertheless the 
major role goes to home policy. War is the result not of home 
or foreign policy taken separately, but of the two together, the 
two interrelated sides combined. 

Politics embody the relations between large masses of people 
and reflect their conflicting interests and aspirations. ‘The essence 
of politics is the winning, holding and wielding of power. As 
Lenin put it, serious politics begin where it is a question of the 
destiny of millions. Thus, politics can actually be said to be the 
destiny of millions. Modern wars are prepared and launched 
by the politics of imperialism, but these wars draw into their 
orbit vast masses of people, and set whole nations in motion. 
Thus, the character of the politics that lead to and are con- 


1 Ibid., Vol. 25, p. 85. 











tinued in a war has a decisive influence on the way the masses 
behave in the war, on its course and outcome. 

Politics as a form of human relations and a specific human 
activity have an objective and a subjective side. The objective, 
decisive side is the sphere of class relations, and the relations 
between nations and states which, in the final analysis, are not 
dependent on people’s conscious will. Politics, Lenin wrote, 
“have their own objective logic, irrespective of what persons 
or parties plan in advance”.! The subjective side of politics 
derives from the objective, which it expresses and reflects. It 
involves the orientation of the activity of classes, parties, states- 
men, politicians, military leaders, and the like, political theo- 
ries and programmes, slogans, etc. 

The policy of the exploiter classes not only prepares a parti- 
cular war, determining its political content, aim and character, 
but also influences the strategy and tactics employed, the 
methods and form of the armed conflict, the organisational 
structure of the armed forces, the methods of military leader- 
ship and training. Politics underlie military strategy and war- 
fare in general. The introduction of nuclear weapons leads to 
increased “‘politicisation” of strategy: the dependence of strategy 
on politics becomes greater and the relationship between them 
becomes more complex. Conversely, politics take into account 
the achievements and needs of military strategy, so that the 
latter has an active influence on politics.? 

However, war is not ordinary politics, but politics carried 
out in a special way, by means of armed force. On the outbreak 
of war, armed violence, military action, becomes the main 
instrument of policy, the form in which it is pursued, since, as 
Lenin put it, “military resistance cannot be broken except by 
military means...”.2 Armed struggle is subject to special 
objective laws, studied by military science. For the purpose of 
waging an armed struggle a special organisation is created— 
the armed forces which are provided with specific equipment 
(arms and materiel)—that differs qualitatively from the instru- 
ments of peaceful labour. Special organs—Ministries of 
Defence, General Staffs, and so on—are created and special 
methods employed to conduct the armed struggle, and direct 
military actions. Armed struggle, the fundamental attribute of 


{ V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 11, p. 379. 

2 This is treated in detail in Uoyennaya Strategiya, Moscow, 1963, 
pp. 23-36. 

3-V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 27, p. 247. 


84 








war, influences politics and every other aspect of life in the 
belligerent states. 

Armed struggle puts a special qualitative stamp on the war, 
making it, in Lenin’s words, ‘“‘barbarous and brutal”,! the ex- 
treme method of resolving political disputes, a strict judge and 
arbiter of relations between classes, nations and _ states. 
It would be wrong to reduce war to the specific means and 
methods employed, to the armed struggle alone, isolated from 
class and state politics. 

Thus, Marxism-Leninism established the profound relation- 
ship between war and politics, showed for the first time the 
class nature of politics and its continuation, war; revealed the 
causes of war, its connection with the socio-political system of 
exploitation based on private property, and discovered the 
historically transient nature of war, and the specific objective 
nature of the laws of armed struggle. All this serves to re- 
fute the erroneous view of the ideologists of imperialism who 
deny that there is any qualitative difference between the 
theories of Clausewitz and Marxist-Leninist doctrine of politics 
and war. 


Has War Ceased to Be 
the Continuation of 
Politics? 


The profound relationship between war and politics expound- 
ed scientifically by the founders of Marxism-Leninism is not 
a static, permanent relationship. Like all other relationships 
in nature and society it develops and changes, growing more 
complicated. Certain changes take place in the relationship 
between war and politics and in their very essence which must 
be taken note of in theory and practical activity. 

As a result of the changes taking place in the process of 
socio-economic development, politics undergo certain funda- 
mental changes and acquire a qualitatively new content at 
different stages. These changes in politics affect the essence, 
content and character of war, and provide a basis for drawing 
distinctions between wars in different ages, an objective basis 
for their scientific classification according to type and their class 
character, for their qualification as just or unjust, and for 


4 Tbid., Vol. 21, p. 299. 











evolving the strategy and tactics of Marxist-Leninist parties. 

Simultaneously with changes in politics and under their 
influence, the means, methods and forms of armed struggle 
have been improved, and the scale of wars, as regards the area, 
the complex arms and equipment and the number of people 
involved, has increased. Wars assume an ever more destructive 
character, the social consequences become ever greater, as does 
the reverse influence of war on politics and all other aspects of 
the life of the belligerent peoples and states. This is another 
way in which fundamental changes in the essence, content and 
character of war are manifested. 

Today, changes in the relationship between war and politics 
are brought about by three factors. Firstly, they are brought 
about by the change in the relationship of forces between the two 
opposed camps, by the world socialist system becoming the 
decisive factor in the development of mankind and by the 
increasingly aggressive nature of imperialism on the retreat. 
Secondly, they are the result of the more involved nature of 
political relations in our age, an age characterised by the strug- 
gle between two opposed social systems, socialist revolutions 
and national liberation struggles, the collapse of imperialism, 
the liquidation of colonialism, new nations choosing the socialist 
path of development, the triumph of socialism and communism 
on a world-wide scale and the political awakening of millions 
of people in every corner of the globe. Moreover, it is in this 
age of ours that politics have received a powerful material base 
in connection with the scientific and technological revoluticn 
and the rapid development of the productive forces. The third 
factor that has fundamentally altered the relationship between 
war and politics is the revolution in warfare that has taken 
place on the basis of advances in production, science and 
technology. 

The revolution in warfare has manifested itself first and 
foremost in the unprecedented development of armaments and 
military equipment, in the change-over from conventional to 
nuclear and thermonuclear weapons and delivery vehicles, and 
also chemical and bacteriological weapons, and the wide 
introduction of automation and cybernetics. The introduction 
of nuclear missiles on a vast scale in the last few years makes 
warfare an incomparably more dangerous proposition than any 
previous war waged with conventional weapons. 

Nuclear weapons, combined with the latest delivery vehicles, 
make vulnerable every point on the globe. Highly accurate, 


86 








they can destroy their target in an extremely short space of 
time, quite irrespective of weather conditions, the time of the 
year or the time of day. Attacks can be launched from small 
launching sites on or under ground, mobile platforms, submar- 
ines, surface vessels or aircraft. They make for extremely high 
firing manoeuvrability and a high state of action alertness. All 
this makes defence against nuclear missiles extremely difficult. 

Nuclear missiles have completely transformed the material 
and technical base of the armed forces, have led to fundamental 
changes in their structure and organisation, in the roles and 
relative importance of the various arms, and in their training 
methods. 

With respect to an earlier age, Marx wrote: “With the inven- 
tion of a new instrument of warfare, firearms, the whole internal 
organisation of the army necessarily changed; the relationships 
within which individuals can constitute an army and act as an 
army were transformed and the relations of different armies 
to one another also changed.”’! In the same way, only more so, 
this process can be seen to have taken place in connection with 
the creation of nuclear weapons. 

New military doctrines and new concepts of strategy have 
been developed on the basis of the latest weapons and military 
equipment. Qualitatively new methods and forms of armed 
struggle have arisen. Unlike conventional weapons, designed 
for striking armed forces engaged on the battlefield, the new 
weapons are primarily directed against major economic and 
political centres, against large cities and the civilian population. 
The first samples of these weapons, which are already out of 
date, were used by the American imperialists not to strike mili- 
tary targets but against the civilian population of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki. 

The fact that the NATO leadership has adopted nuclear 
missiles for the furtherance of its aggressive policy has caused 
its ideologists to step up their activities in military theory, 
falsify the problem of war and peace and engage in open and 
covert apologetics of the use of military force. 

Some imperialist ideologists, while holding as_ valid 
Clausewitz’s formula that war is the continuation of politics by 
forceful means, refuse to take into account new features of the 
relationship between war and politics, arguing in favour of the 


{ Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, Moscow, 1969, 
Vol. 1, p. 152. 


87 





policy of nuclear blackmail and the arms race in nuclear and 
conventional weapons, and shutting their eyes to the danger of 
a world war. 

In his books On Thermonuclear War, Thinking About the 
Unthinkable and On Escalation, H. Kahn, who has been called 
“the Clausewitz of the nuclear age”, expounds his doctrine 
of the ‘“‘admissibility” of nuclear war as an instrument of the 
aggressive policy of American imperialism. He has developed 
a theory of escalation, conceived as an escalator rising in 44 
stages, across the nuclear threshold to the cherished dream of 
the nuclear warmongers—an all-out thermonuclear war. Kahn’s 
gloomy, inhuman writings have, he is proud to admit, become 
indispensable textbooks on military planning for the Penta- 
gon. 

At the same time the ideologists of imperialism try to 
discredit the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of the relationship be- 
tween war and politics, by propagating the idea that the new 
weapons have fundamentally altered this relationship as it 
stood for centuries. 

In his Soviet Strategy at the Crossroads the American anti- 
communist T. W. Wolfe speaks of “erosion” of classical 
Marxist-Leninist doctrine, and Lenin’s views on war as an 
instrument of politics. “A nuclear environment,” he writes, 
“...has helped to undermine traditional Marxist-Leninist doc- 
trine on the link between war and politics, and has given rise 
to disturbing questions on the political utility of the use of 
military power, or the threat of its use in the nuclear-missile 
age.”’! One is left in no doubt at all as to the class bias of such 
thinking, the object of which is not to get at the truth but 
simply to discredit Marxist-Leninist doctrine. 

In point of fact, however, the profound relationship between 
war and politics presented in the works of the classics of 
Marxism-Leninism loses none of its validity in the nuclear age, 
but merely assumes a more complex and contradictory form. 
Plainly nuclear war cannot appear out of the blue, out of a 
void. It can only be the result of intention, of the malevolent 
policies of aggressive imperialist groups. Like the two world 
wars, which were the outcome and continuation of the depre- 
datory, aggressive policies of the imperialist powers, and like 
countless local wars waged by imperialism since the defeat of 


1 Thomas W. Wolfe, Soviet Strategy at the Crossroads, Cambridge, 
1964, p. 4. 


88 








Nazi Germany and militarist Japan, a thermonuclear world war 
could only be the outcome and continuation of the aggressive 
policy of American imperialism and its accomplices, its 
monstrous instrument. 

The tremendous danger involved in nuclear war has naturally 
influenced the way bourgeois theorists, politicians and strategists 
view it, producing a dual and contradictory attitude. While 
regarding nuclear weapons as a powerful instrument for 
opposing socialism and communism, they at the same time fear 
the fatal consequences a nuclear war would have for capitalism. 
Hence the policy of staking on limited, local wars. 

Some imperialist ideologists, fully aware of the dangers of a 
nuclear war, while not rejecting it in principle, would like the 
use of nuclear weapons in the interests of politics to be limited 
and localised. They want nuclear war on a limited scale, to 
have it limited to certain spheres that suit their purposes, to 
make it easier to handle and less dangerous as a means of 
achieving their aggressive political objects. This kind of 
thinking has found expression in the theory of local wars and 
in the creation of nuclear weapons with a limited capacity for 
use in such wars. Professor W. Kaufmann, specialist in interna- 
tional relations, believes that limited wars “preserve us from 
revolutionary and disorienting changes that are the products of 
great wars”.! 

According to these bourgeois ideologists the policy of limited 
warfare should apply to all aspects of war. Thus, political aims, 
the nuclear weapons employed, geographical area, strike targets 
and duration of military actions, should all be limited. They 
distinguish several different kinds of limited wars: wars between 
small countries where the interests of the major powers are not 
affected, wars between major Western capitalist countries or 
small countries in which other countries are not involved, wars 
between a major power and small countries, and lastly, limited 
wars between major powers, not allowed to develop into a world 
nuclear conflict.” 

Bourgeois ideologists only view the essence and character of 
limited wars in quantitative terms: limited use of forces and 
arms, limited area of operations, limited political and strategic 
aims fixed in advance, and so on. Such an approach completely 


1 “Limited Warfare”, by William W. Kaufmann, Military Policy and 
National Security, Ed. by W. W. Kaufmann, New Jersey, 1956. 

2 Henry A. Kissinger, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, New 
York, 1957, pp. 136-41. 


89 











obscures the class nature of such wars and their political content, 
and allows for no distinction between just and unjust wars. 

The Marxist-Leninist method of inquiry rejects this bourgeois 
objectivist approach, analysing these wars in terms of class, 
political and other socio-economic factors underlying them. 
Limited wars are but another form of the continuation of aggres- 
sive imperialist policy by violent means: the fact that they in- 
volve limited forces and means employed in a limited area does 
not affect their class nature, embodying aggressive politics 
combined with armed force applied in strictly controlled doses. 

The Marxist-Leninist classification of limited wars, on the 
other hand, is based not so much on quantitative factors as on 
qualitative features—the class essence, political content, social 
character, socio-historical role, and methods of armed struggle. 
Only a classification of this sort, based on quantitative and 
qualitative features combined, makes it possible to determine the 
attitude of the masses, classes and parties to this kind of 
war. 

Limited wars are directed primarily against the socialist 
countries and peoples struggling for social and national eman- 
cipation. By waging limited wars, the American imperialists and 
their stooges strive to stave off the final break-up of the colonial 
system and impose neo-colonialism on the newly-independent 
countries. The brutal aggression of the American imperialists 
in Indochina and the Israeli aggression against the Arab coun- 
tries provide a clear demonstration of this. 

The supporters of limited wars advocate limited use of 
nuclear weapons. Far from declaring themselves in favour of 
having nuclear weapons banned, they are opposed to the 
solution of international disputes by peaceful means and the 
cessation of the arms race. Thus, the American military theoreti- 
cian R. Osgood, for example, declares in his book Limited 
War: “Tt is a peculiarly irresponsible form of self-righteousness 
to regard general renunciation of force as more virtuous than 
the planned disposition of military power as a rational instru- 
ment of policy.”! 

History has shown that limited wars serve as the prelude to 
world wars and hasten their occurrence. In our time the danger 
of this happening is greater than ever before. Not that every 
local conflict will inevitably develop into a world conflict; but 


! Robert E. Osgood, Limited War. The Challenge to American Strategy, 


Chicago, 1957, p. 283. 


90 


Oe 


given the tense and complex international situation, the complex 
system of mutual treaty obligations among the states of the 
different camps and the rapid advances in nuclear technology, 
there is always the danger that it will, especially where nuclear 
weapons are employed. 

Thus, a considerable number of imperialist ideologists advo- 
cate the use of means of mass destruction on a local or global 
scale for the achievement of political objectives. Their views and 
theories are embodied in the strategic conceptions of American 
| imperialism and its partners. 

One of these conceptions is the strategy of “flexible response”, 
developed as a result of criticism of the strategy of ‘‘massive 
retaliation”, i.e., the immediate mass use of nuclear weapons 
against major targets in the Soviet Union and other socialist 
countries. The strategy of “‘massive retaliation” was based on 
the absolutisation of nuclear weapons, underestimation of 
conventional weapons, and on the acceptance of nuclear war 
as the only valid alternative. 

Thus M. Taylor writes in The Uncertain Trumpet: “Massive 
retaliation could offer our leaders only two choices, the initia- 
tion of general war or compromise and retreat.”! 

In place of the strategy of “massive retaliation’, Taylor 
suggested a strategy of “flexible response”, as being “flexible 
enough for ready adaptation to presently unforeseen and 
unforeseeable situations.’’? In other words, the aggressive strat- 
egy of “flexible response” is oriented not only towards world 
nuclear war, but also towards the waging of limited wars using 
both nuclear and conventional weapons on behalf of the aggres- 
sive policy of American imperialism. 

An important element of the strategy of “flexible response” 
is the “forward strategy” of the Bonn revanchists, which intends 
that the armed forces of the aggressive NATO bloc should be 
moved as close as possible to the frontiers of the socialist 
countries so that in the case of a war operations could imme- 
diately be carried into their territory, with the emphasis on 
NATO nuclear forces. 

A third group of bourgeois ideologists, aware that a nuclear 
war would be fatal to capitalism, declares the old concep- 
tion, i.e., Clausewitz’s formula that war is the continuation of 
politics by violent means, to be no longer valid in view of the 





1M. D. Taylor, The Uncertain Trumpet, New York, 1960, p. 5. 
2 Ibid., p. 36. 


91 








fact that nuclear weapons have fundamentally altered the 
traditional relationship between war and politics. 

Senator John Fulbright declared in one of his speeches that 
Clausewitz’s theory that war is the same policy but carried out 
by other methods is no longer valid, that the appearance of 
nuclear weapons has rendered it obsolete. This view is also to 
be found in the book Global Strategy by RAF Vice-Marshal 
Kingston-McCloughry, who writes: “Take his (Clausewitz’s) 
most famous pronouncement that ‘war is the continuation of 
policy by other means’, viz., by force, and consider it in the 
light of present-day conditions. Nothing would seem further 
from the truth in the event of nuclear war.”! This opinion is 
expressed by French sociologist and historian C. Delmas in his 
Nuclear Strategy,? and is to be found in numerous books, articles 
and speeches of other military writers in the capitalist West. 

The main argument used to prove that Clausewitz’s formula 
is no longer valid is that modern warfare represents a danger 
to the economy of both sides. The argument of growing econ- 
omic vulnerability is used by West German sociologist and 
economist F. Sternberg in his The Military and Industrial 
Revolution. 

There is no denying the fact that a nuclear-missile war 
represents a tremendous threat to the economy of the countries 
involved. But Sternberg’s conclusion cannot be automatically 
deduced from this and is untenable, since he does not take into 
account the essence, the political content and class character of 
a possible future war, or its connection with the aggressive 
policy of monopoly capital. 

Other arguments against the validity of Clausewitz’s formula 
are based on the theory that modern war has gone beyond the 
confines of politics and produced a “thermonuclear paradox”, 
whereby the threat of a nuclear disaster has become a means 
of preventing a military conflict between the two systems, 
making the threat of nuclear war a new stabilising factor, a 
new guarantee of peace. Thus, a new socio-political function, 
that of preserving peace, is attributed to war and the fear of 
it in the nuclear age. L. Bohn of the American Rand Corpo- 
ration writes in his article “Peace with Disarmament—or 


1 E. J. Kingston-McCloughry, Global Strategy, New York, 1957, p. 248. 

2 Claude Delmas, La stratégie nucléaire, Paris, 1963, pp. 17-18. 

3 F. Sternberg, Die militérische und industrielle Revolution, Berlin, 
1957, S. 62. 


92 


Without?” that ‘the fundamental instrument for preventing 
war” is war, and that the destruction of nuclear stockpiles 
would only serve to greatly increase the danger of a new world 
war, making it practically inevitable.! 

Bourgeois ideologists also declare that modern military 
technique has destroyed the sense of war and deprived it of 
its political content, freeing arms from politics. Thus, T. K. Fin- 
letter writes: “Applied science for destruction is wholly out of 
hand: it is like a wild tiger running about the city streets.”2 A 
similar point of view is to be found in the collection of articles 
published in West Germany. It stresses that the totalitarian 
tendency in the development of technology has led to a situa- 
tion where “military weapons run free like the magic broom in 
the fairy tale”, have run out of the door of politics, out of their 
control. War thus ceases to be the continuation of politics and 
becomes a ruinous struggle for ‘naked survival”. Henceforth 
the type of weapon determines the concept of war. “If wars in 
the past were the continuation of politics by other means, 
modern politics are but the continuation of war, which could 
enter the hot stage at any moment”? 

There is, of course, a certain amount of truth in assertions of 
this sort made by Western sociologists and military writers 
with various philosophical views and political credos—their 
unanimous recognition of the exceptional danger of nuclear war 
used as an instrument of the aggressive policy of imperialism. 
At the same time, it is necessary to expose these arguments as 
being highly fallacious, one-sided, and showing a strong class 
bias. 

Firstly, in rejecting Clausewitz’s formula these bourgeois 
sociologists and military writers are in fact attacking the Marx- 
ist-Leninist doctrine of war and politics and trying to prove 
that it is no longer valid in the nuclear age. This is a new 
method of attacking the Marxist-Leninist theories in a covert 
manner, often behind a pacifist mask, 

Secondly, these arguments represent an attempt to mask the 
role of the aggressive policy of American imperialism in the 
creation of the new weapons of mass destruction. Nuclear weap- 


1 Disarmament: Its Politics and Economics, Ed. by Seymour Melman, 
Boston, 1962, p. 50. 

2 Thomas K. Finletter, Power and Policy. US Foreign Policy and 
Military Power in the Hydrogen Age, New York, 1952, p. 392. 

3 Atomkrieg, Bad Godesberg, 1955, S. 35, 36, 40. 


93 














ons are not simply a product of the development of science and 
technology, they are above all the monstrous offspring of the 
militarist policies of monopoly capitalism striving for world 
domination. Nuclear weapons are the material embodiment of 
aggressive power politics. Scientific and technological progress 
made possible the invention of nuclear weapons, but the deci- 
sive role in turning this possibility into a reality was played by 
imperialist politics. It was the aggressive, anti-Soviet and anti- 
socialist policy of American imperialism and its one-sided, 
selfish use of the achievements of scientific and technological 
progress that actually produced weapons of mass destruction, 
led to the nuclear arms race, determined the direction of 
changes in the structure of the US armed forces and the armed 
forces of the North Atlantic bloc and their equipment with 
nuclear weapons, and determined the NATO strategy based 
on the massive use of nuclear weapons against the socialist 
countries. 

It is significant that bourgeois writers closely connected with 
militarist circles themselves admit the supreme importance of 
politics in the creation of nuclear weapons. 

Militarist circles actually admit the relationship between 
politics and war, accept Clausewitz’s formula, and are guided 
by it in their practical military and political activities. They 
reject neither aggressive politics and war as a means of achiev- 
ing political ends nor the production and use of nuclear 
weapons. On the contrary, these terrible weapons (along with 
conventional arms) are the basis of the aggressive policy and 
strategy of American imperialism and its partners in NATO 
and other blocs, directed above all against the socialist coun- 
tries. Thus, the NATO journal General Military Review, 
mouthpiece of the most aggressive imperialist groups and 
their nuclear policies and strategy, declares that the most 
extreme measures, up to and including a world war, however 
terrible it may be, should be employed in the struggle against 
communism. 

The third feature of the above-mentioned arguments used 
by bourgeois sociologists and military writers which renders 
them untenable is the fact that they fail to separate two related 
but quite distinct questions, lumping them together as one. 
These are the question of the essence, political content and 
class character of nuclear war which belongs to the realm of 
military theory, and the question of whether nuclear war 
should be allowed to serve as a political instrument, which 


94 














tt 


belongs to the realm of practical politics. By combining these 
two essentially different aspects of the problem, sociologists, 
politicians and military groups of the capitalist countries 
demonstrate a narrow class outlook, a singular philosophical, 
methodological bias, and a failure to comprehend the complex 
relationship between politics and war. 

Bourgeois sociologists and military writers deliberately or 
unwittingly separate war from the aggressive policies of 
imperialism, although the two are quite inseparable, and try to 
present a possible future war as a natural disaster, in the form 
of a technological conflict of machines, having nothing to do 
with the aggressive policy of imperialism or with any political 
aims at all. Thus, in his Policy in the Shadow of the Bomb, 
West German sociologist R. Mattfeldt writes of war using the 
latest weapons as a natural catastrophe like eruptive protu- 
berances on the sun, volcanic eruptions and so on. “Nuclear 
explosions,” he writes, “are catastrophes unleashed by pressing 
a button.”! He does not regard nuclear war as a struggle be- 
tween people. 

Thus the masses are misled as to the real essence, political 
content and class character of a possible future war, are 
morally and politically disarmed and confused over what 
course to take and how to act. They are made to believe that in 
the event of a world war the armed forces and inhabitants of 
the NATO countries would be fighting not for the political 
interests and aspirations of monopoly capital, but for their own 
lives, simply to save themselves from physical annihilation. 
The aim is to clear the aggressors of all responsibility for 
preparing and launching a nuclear catastrophe. 

Thus, over the question of the essence of politics and war 
Marxists-Leninists are waging a struggle on two fronts. They 
struggle against the dogmatic approach, against relativism and 
revisionism in any form, against attempts to absolutise theories 
and formulae advanced in the past and sanctioned by habit, 
and their transformation into self-contained abstractions quite 
unrelated to real conditions which are changing all the time. 
At the same time, they oppose attempts to cast doubt on the 
doctrine of the relationship between politics and war which laid 
the foundations for scientific inquiry into the subject, and which 
has lost none of its validity today. 


4 Rudolf Mattfeldt, Politik im Schatten der Bombe, Minich-Wien, 
1963, S. 13. 


95 

















Thermonuclear War: 
the Greatest Crime 
Against Humanity 


Marxists-Leninists, on the basis of the dialectical materialist 
method of inquiry, consider thermonuclear war to be a special 
kind of warfare in its essence, content, character, the means of 
armed struggle employed, and its possible consequences. 

A thermonuclear war launched by imperialism would be 
qualitatively different from wars in the past or modern wars 
using conventional weapons above all in its concrete political 
content, its political aims and its class character. It would 
resolve not individual, limited political issues, but an issue of 
historic importance, affecting the fate of all mankind. 

Another fundamental difference between thermonuclear war 
and conventional warfare is the means employed for the achiev- 
ement of political objects. Whereas in conventional warfare 
the political aim is achieved through destruction of the enemy’s 
armed forces, in a nuclear war its achievement would involve 
the destruction of the opponent’s armed forces and nuclear 
capacity by means of economic annihilation. 

A nuclear war would also differ from previous wars in the 
methods and form of armed struggle employed. It would most 
certainly involve the use of nuclear missiles and would draw 
into its destructive orbit many countries and nations, thus 
becoming a world conflict. 

Unlike conventional warfare, nuclear war represents a 
threat of the first magnitude as regards its social, biological, 
psychological, moral and other consequences. As stressed in the 
Main Document of the International Meeting of Communist 
and Workers’ Parties (Moscow, 1969), a nuclear war would 
result in the death of millions of people and the devastation of 
whole countries and this is why struggle against the danger of 
war, the danger of a world nuclear war remains a basic element 
of the united actions of the anti-imperialist forces. 

A nuclear war, should it occur, would be basically serving 
the insane, criminal policy of imperialism aimed at the de- 
struction of the socialist countries and the recapture of the lost 
positions of capitalism. 

In contrast to the imperialist countries, the Soviet Union and 
other socialist countries oppose nuclear war and are working 
towards the banning of nuclear weapons. However, if the 
imperialists should force the socialist camp into a war, such a 


96 





war would be the continuation of the latter’s just, defensive, 
liberation policy, a just and lawful act of countering aggres- 
sion, the natural right and sacred duty of progressive mankind 
to destroy their bitterest enemy and the source of destructive 
wars—imperialism. 

A world war is not fatally inevitable: it can be prevented 
from happening. In the world today there exist powerful 
socio-political forces capable of preventing the outbreak of a 
thermonuclear war, of isolating militarist circles and frustrating 
their aggressive policy. These forces are the world socialist 
system, the world communist, working-class and national 
liberation movements, and millions of individuals all over the 
world strongly opposing war in the peace movement. They 
dispose of the material and moral means and resources for 
isolating the warmongers and averting a nuclear conflict. 

The scientists and intellectuals of all countries have an im- 
portant role to play in the struggle to prevent a nuclear catas- 
trophe. They bear a tremendous moral and social responsibility 
for the destiny of mankind. 

The scientists who created nuclear weapons, and the best 
representatives of other professions are well aware of the 
gigantic destructive capacity of these weapons. It is therefore 
their duty to bring to bear the whole weight of their authority 
in opposition to the warmongers. 

While being strongly opposed to nuclear war, the Marxists- 
Leninists do not oppose all kinds of war. They support just, 
revolutionary wars, in which the masses take up arms to fight 
for their freedom and independence and for socialism—such as 
the wars of national liberation resulting from contradictions 
between the imperialist powers and the peoples of colonial and 
dependent countries, and civil wars provoked by antagonism 
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. These are wholly 
just, emancipatory wars, the continuation and instrument of 
the revolutionary policies of national, social and class eman- 
cipation. 

The Programme of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union states that the CPSU and the whole Soviet people will 
continue to oppose all kinds of annexationist wars, including 
those between capitalist countries, and also local wars whose 
object is to crush national liberation movements, and that they 
consider it their duty to support the sacred struggle of op- 
pressed peoples, their just wars of liberation against imperia- 
lism. 


7—203 97 














In this the Marxists-Leninists differ fundamentally from the 
pacifists, who are opposed to all wars including just and 
lawful ones. The pacifists are out to find “models” for eternal 
peace. Professor Galtung, Director of the Oslo International 
Institute of Peace Studies, has counted thirty-five such model 
projects—peace based on “nuclear deterrence”, the creation of 
a world state, man’s development towards spiritual and moral 
perfection, the religious path to peace and so on. To this motley 
collection of pacifist peace plans, Galtung added his own, which 
he calls the theory of enthropy. The essence of this theory is 
that as political, economic, technological, cultural, scientific and 
other ties and relations grow more complicated, the sharp 
contrasts between the two separate social systems will gradu- 
ally become softened and blurred, leading eventually to uni- 
versal peace.! 

Pacifist ideology is unscientific. It fails to reveal the true 
sources of war, their class essence, and misleads the masses as 
to how universal peace can be achieved, disorienting people and 
disarming them in the face of the threat of war presented by 
imperialism. Marxists-Leninists reject pacifism and support 
those who are striving for peace by opposing imperialist wars. 

The Soviet Union’s relations with the countries of the capi- 
talist world are based on Lenin’s principle of peaceful coexist- 
ence between states irrespective of their social system. This 
principle means that international disputes should be resolved 
by peaceful means, without resorting to armed force. Soon after 
the First World War, Lenin pointed out that the prevention of 
a new, even more destructive world war had become “the key- 
stone of all policy in all the countries of the globe’’.2 

Today, the question of preventing a thermonuclear war has 
assumed even greater importance and has become the pivot of 
world politics. The need to uphold the principle of peaceful 
coexistence between states with different social systems, reso- 
lutely oppose the aggressive forces of imperialism and save 
mankind from a new world war was expressed by the Com- 
munist Party of the Soviet Union at its 24th Congress. The 
creation of a reliable system of collective security in Europe and 
other parts of the world would represent a tremendous contri- 
bution to the cause of peace. 

In its manifold activities towards the building of communism 


Buchholz, Die grosse Transformation, Stuttgart, 1968, S. 112. 
L 


1A, 
2 V1. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 33, p. 55. 


98 








and strengthening the defence capacity of the Soviet Union, the 
CPSU is guided by the great ideas of Lenin and is constantly 
working to put them into practice, safeguarding the Leninist 
heritage and resolutely opposing all attempts to distort it. The 
Leninist policy of the CPSU and the fraternal parties is a major 
factor of peace and social progress, and creates favourable con- 
ditions for the building of socialism and communism and the 
development of the revolutionary and liberation movement. 

This policy is imbued with the spirit of internationalism and 
a strong sense of responsibility for the destiny of mankind, the 
success of the communist movement in its struggle against 
imperialism, the co-operation of all Communist and Workers’ 
Parties and the unity of all anti-imperialist forces. The Meeting 
of Communist and Workers’ Parties held in Moscow in 1969 
provided a clear demonstration of this. The documents passed 
at the Meeting give a generalisation of the tremendous 
experience accumulated by the communist movement, a pro- 
found analysis of contemporary world development and a 
militant programme for joint struggle against imperialist 
aggression and oppression, and for national and social eman- 
cipation, peace, democracy and socialism. 

The ceaseless efforts of the Soviet Union and the other 
socialist countries to ensure the constant growth of the defence 
capacity of the socialist states—to ensure that the Armed 
Forces of the Warsaw Pact are provided with the latest arms 
and equipment, to ensure the constant improvement of their 
control and moral and political training—are a continuation and 
expression of this peaceful policy. 

The resolution of the 24th Congress of the CPSU on the 
Report of the Central Committee of the CPSU stressed: “As a 
result of the collective formulation and implementation of a 
number of measures in recent years, the military organisation of 
the Warsaw Treaty has been further improved. The armed 
forces of the allied powers are in a state of high readiness and 
are capable of guaranteeing the peaceful endeavour of the 
fraternal peoples.” At the same time, the armed forces of the 
Warsaw ‘Treaty serve as a mighty shield and bulwark of all 
freedom-loving peoples. 











Chapter V 


THE MONOPOLIES 
AND WAR 


The basic cause of the great majority of wars between 
nations and classes throughout the history of human society 
has been private property. It was almost invariably the prop- 
erty-owning classes at a particular stage of historical dev- 
elopment—slave-owners, feudal lords, and later the bourgeoisie 
—who were the instigators of war. The seizure of property— 
slaves, land, natural resources, created values and so on—was 
also the chief object of wars. The wars of the twentieth century 
are no exception to the rule, since their main cause is monopoly 
and state-monopoly capital. 

Lenin defined politics as the concentrated expression of 
economics. The economic basis of the aggressive policies of im- 
perialism is the vested interest of the big monopolies in the arms 
race. The production of arms ensures the monopolies large 
guaranteed profits, speeds up the introduction of new technology 
and vitalises production, thereby serving as a temporary boost to 
economic growth and helping postpone overproduction crises. 
The stimulating effect of the arms race on capitalist economy 
has been clearly demonstrated during the United States’ wars 
in Korea and Vietnam. 

Government arms orders are a form of state interference in 
the economy which far from worrying the monopolies actually 
suits their vested interest in the preservation of the capitalist 
system. 

In the USA, the chief bulwark of monopoly capitalism, 
arms production has assumed an unprecedented scale. Govern- 


100 








ment expenditure on preparations for war is constantly on the 
increase, and amounted to 81,000 million dollars for the 1968/69 
financial year, as against 46,000 million dollars for the year 
1959/60. Taking into account collateral expenditure, total mili- 
tary expenditure in 1968/69 amounted to 112,000 million 
dollars out of a total government budget of 184,000 million 
dollars. No less than nine million people, or eleven per cent of 
the country’s total labour force, are engaged in military sec- 
tor—in the Armed Forces and the arms industry. 

Two figures suffice to show how these colossal amounts 
contrast with the figures for the war on poverty in the USA: 
2,000 million dollars is all the American Government is pre- 
pared to spend on the 32 million poor. Other major problems 
receive equally niggardly attention. Thus, in 1968 some 2,000 
million dollars were spent on housing and 5,200 million on 
education. 

The American monopolies do not only produce arms for the 
home market. Not satisfied with having military bases scat- 
tered throughout the world, 429 large ones and some 3,000 minor 
ones, they have taken to making large arms sales to “loyal” 
countries. They provide their protégés and “friends” with 
“free” arms, in order to protect their vested interest in the 
American empire and the capitalist system. Since 1950, the US 
has offered other countries military aid to the value of 38,000 
million dollars. In the words of Senator McCarthy, the USA has 
become “the principal source of conventional weapons through- 
out the world”.! 

In order to increase their influence over the government, the 
monopolies try to establish close personal contacts with the 
Defence Department by offering administrative posts to retired 
officers, and especially generals. An investigation conducted in 
1957 showed that a hundred large corporations which had 
managed to grab 75 per cent of all military orders employed no 
less than 1,400 ex-officers, including 261 generals. According 
to the latest available data on the role of the monopolies in 
arms production in 1968, of the several tens of thousands of 
contractors and subcontractors to the Pentagon, the hundred 
largest corporations secured 70 per cent of all orders. 

Bourgeois sociologists and economists in the service of the 
arms industry monopolies and the militarists advance all sorts of 


1 E. McCarthy, The Limits of Power. America’s Role in the World, 
New York, 1967, p. 32. 





101 








mendacious arguments in justification of the arms race, imperial- 
ist aggression and war. 

Ever since Keynes expounded his theory of “controlled capi- 
talism”, numerous bourgeois economists have produced all 
sorts of arguments in favour of his views. They present his 
theory with their own pet modifications, which merely serve to 
make it even more preposterous, frequently criticise Keynes 
himself and one another, and invent all sorts of sophisms 
and deliberately fallacious arguments in defence of militarism. 

After the Second World War they were practically unani- 
mous in keeping up a constant stream of praise for military 
expenditure, maintaining that it stimulated economic develop- 
ment, prevented overproduction crises, and was a firm guaran- 
tee of economic prosperity. Many American and West Euro- 
pean economists insist that even a reduction of military 
expenditure, let alone complete or partial disarmament, might 
well lead to economic disaster. 

It is easy enough to see the source of inspiration of these 
economists and other ideologists of militarism. One has only to 
consult the figures and see who is lining their pockets from the 
production of arms and the fanning of wars. Suffice it to note 
that the minimum estimate for the clear profits made by the 
arms industry corporations over the last fifteen years is 100,000 
million dollars. 

The blood of Vietnamese and of American soldiers who are 
dying in the colonial war in Vietnam brings fabulous 
profits for the war business. Escalation of the war there has its 
counterpart in escalation of the earnings of all connected with 
military-industrial capital, which has spread like a giant cancer 
through the social organism of the United States. 

Some American corporations—firms like Martin-Marietta, 
North American Aviation, Lockhead, and Boeing—depend 
almost entirely for their existence on military orders. 

The generals and senior officers are also securing higher and 
higher salaries for themselves. Thus, in 1965, the generals got 
a further annual pay increase of 2,000 dollars, the colonels 700 
dollars, and so on. 

These amounts are insignificant, however, compared to the 
sums that can be earned by the military for using “a little 
influence” to secure military orders. The periodic court cases 
and disclosures that appear in the press represent only a frac- 
tion of the machinations and secret deals that accompany mili- 
tary orders and deliveries. 


102 








The large role played by the arms manufacturers in causing 
two world wars is common knowledge. There is the notable and 
much written-of example of the dealings of Basil Zakharoff, 
who at the end of the last century rose from a proprietor of 
shady dives in Constantinople to a leading arms dealer. He 
financed both the hostile camps, helped provoke numerous 
military conflicts, and was rewarded for his “services” with 
British Orders, the French Legion d’Honneur and 296 other 
medals and Orders of thirty-one countries. 

Yet compared to the modern nuclear missile kings, the 
cannon kings of the past such as Zakharoff and Krupp are 
mere dwarfs as regards the scale and scope of their activities. 
If in the past millions died in order that a few might live in the 
lap of luxury, your grasping modern Zakharoffs and Krupps are 
preparing death for hundreds of millions. 

While insisting on the important role of the arms corpora- 
tions, it is necessary at the same time to bear in mind the 
aggressive, violent nature of monopoly capital as a whole. The 
militarised state apparatus is the weapon of the whole mon- 
opoly bourgeoisie. Although it is only a small group of mon- 
opoly capitalists that is deriving direct benefit from militarisa- 
tion, the scale and scope of militarisation, the state armaments 
programme and military policy are dictated by the political 
and military strategy interests of the whole of monopoly capi- 
tal. The military-industrial monopolies merely represent the 
most adventuristic and reactionary force of the modern mon- 
opoly bourgeoisie. 

Militarism has deeply penetrated American science. In 1968, 
two-thirds of the total of 28,000 million dollars allotted for 
scientific research were spent on military research. The great 
majority of the vast army of scientists and engineers, over half 
a million strong, is engaged in research connected in one way 
or another with the arms industry. According to the American 
journalist J. Ridgeway, research work for military departments 
is being conducted at universities and colleges in the United 
States. Sixteen scientific research establishments, with numerous 
ex-government employees on their staffs, are working on con- 
tracts for the Pentagon. By offering high salaries American 
monopoly capital is attracting large numbers of scientists and 
engineers from other capitalist countries, mainly with a view 
to using their knowledge and talent for the development of 
military weapons. 

The American militarists openly congratulate themselves on 


103 





the fact that top secret bacteriological laboratories have dev- 
eloped lethal bacilli and viruses that could wipe out the popu- 
lation of whole continents in no time. Meanwhile, expenditure 
for the war on widespread diseases is being cut back yearly. 
Thus, in 1962, the budget of the National Institute of Health 
was slashed by 60 million dollars, of which 15 to 20 million 
came from the cancer research programme. The New York 
Times wrote that of 450,000 cancer cases every year, 75,000 
more die than would be the case if sufficient money was de- 
voted to the struggle against the disease.* 

American chemists are perfecting the technology of mass 
murder by means of gas and other poisonous substances. 
a are factories producing nerve gas for the US armed 
orces. 

It goes without saying that the United States continues to 
spend the largest sums—thousands of millions of dollars 
enneheen developing nuclear weapons and delivery vehi- 
cles. 

Yet the military-industrial business is still not satisfied with 
its vast earnings and profits, and the militarised American 
press is demanding that more and more of the taxpayers’ money 
should find its way into the safes of the war industry monopolies 
and their hirelings. The US News & World Report listed seven 
kinds of weapon which, despite protests from the military, the 
US Government was supposed to have cancelled, although they 
were already in the process of development. Three further kinds 
of weapon were mentioned whose production had been sus- 
pended on government instructions. The magazine went on to 
enumerate fourteen extremely important weapons the govern- 
ment was not paying sufficient attention to. These included 
plasma missiles, machines capable of causing an earthquake, 
giant tidal waves and permanent dense cloud; death rays, 
military bases on the moon, submarine aircraft-carriers, neu- 
tron bombs, and space bombs, capable of burning a city from a 
height of 250 miles. 

Although the lion’s share of the total sum spent by the US 
Department of Defence on military research goes on developing 
the technology of death and destruction, bourgeois economists 
and sociologists receive a considerable amount. Research in the 
social sciences has the purpose of conditioning public opinion in 


! The New York Times, October 14, 1965 and November 4, 1961. 


104 





favour of militarisation, the arms race and support for military 
conflicts, fanning chauvinism and racism, and proving that war 
is as necessary as the air we breathe and as inevitable as 
atmospheric phenomena. 

From conversations with professors and teachers and scien- 
tific research workers at various institutes and “foundations” 
it emerges that many aspects of their research programmes are 
wholly financed by the Pentagon. 

Money flows into the pockets of bourgeois economists, socio- 
logists, historians, philosophers and geographers not only via 
purely military channels but also via the United States Infor- 
mation Agency, the Central Intelligence Agency, various 
foundations created by corporations and multi-millionaires, 
such as the Rockefeller Foundation and the Ford Foundation, 
and numerous other establishments. 

In the spring of 1966, the American press got hold of certain 
information on contracts concluded between the CIA and the 
universities for the financing of “research programmes”. The 
CIA had a secret contract with the University of Michigan, 
whereby the university was to train CJA police spies for work 
in Vietnam. Even a number of American anthropologists work- 
ing abroad complained that they had been forced to sign con- 
tracts and inform the CIA of the results of their research. 
Stanford and other universities had secret contracts with the 
CIA. These disclosures caused a storm of indignant protest 
from students and conscientious citizens. The international 
research centre of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
was even forced to announce that it was ending its contracts 
with the CIA as from June 1966, including its contracts for 
“communist studies”. 

A huge army of representatives of the social sciences with 
publishing houses and magazines, the press, radio, TV and the 
cinema at its disposal is working in the service of the arms 
industry. The situation is similar in other industrial capitalist 
countries. Well-paid scholars, at the imperialists’ beck and call, 
are doing their utmost to convince the public that military 
spending is vitally necessary and should be increased. 

The henchmen of the monopolies and the military are 
always ready to assure the public that the high level of state 
military expenditure that has been maintained since the war in 
the United States has played a major role in the avoidance of 
periodic economic crises. They completely ignore the need to 
study the two-way influence of the civilian market and the 


105 











military market in close connection with changes in surplus 
value and the impact of surplus profits on the production cycle 
and the occurrence of crises. Instead of making a thorough- 
going analysis, they merely make the bold claim that the mili- 
tary market plays a stabilising role since it remains unaffected 
by general crises while the market for civilian products con- 
tracts. They ignore the fact that even if the military market is 
not affected the main tendency of capitalist production remains 
the same, the tendency, that is, for effective demand to fall 
behind supply, immediately causing overproduction crises. 

Let us take a look at the inner mechanism of the way mili- 
tary consumption affects the development of the economy as a 
whole in practice. In a situation where output to supply the 
Armed Forces is growing year after year at a higher rate than 
output for civilian consumption and the military market is 
expanding more rapidly than the civilian market, capitalist 
military production attracts ever greater capital investment. 
Surplus value created in the arms industry only accounts for a 
small part of investments, a large part being represented by 
surplus value derived from civilian production. Not only is 
capital invested in the arms industry instead of other indus- 
tries, but capital already invested in other industries may be 
transferred to military production, whenever there is a large 
demand for new weapons, a sharp increase in the Armed 
Forces, large-scale stockpiling of arms or an outbreak of war. 

In such circumstances military production and expenditure 
have a temporary stimulating effect on the development of 
capitalist production, and may alter the production cycle and 
create the illusion of prosperity. 

Yet it is perfectly plain that the military market cannot con- 
tinue to develop at higher rates than the civilian market for 
any extended period. This, for the simple reason that it even- 
tually not only curbs but even brings to a halt the accumulation 
of capital for investment in the development of the productive 
forces. Where military demand is particularly high it may 
even cause a reduction in capital accumulation affecting the 
whole of society. 

Capital invested in military production (which Marx de- 
scribed as that part of the wealth of nations that is thrown away 
to the four winds) has to be constantly replenished from public 
funds. The capitalist state does this chiefly out of the portion 
of the national income that should be spent on the working 
people, thus adversely affecting their standard of living. This 


106 








can be done within certain limits, these being set by the mini- 
mum necessary for the reproduction of the labour force. 

But what happens to the capitalist production cycle when the 
market for military output remains steady for a long time or 
only expands gradually at the same rate as the civilian market? 

Such a situation can naturally have only a very slight limit- 
ing effect on overproduction crises. Military production then 
produces sufficient surplus value to cover its own investment 
needs. Indeed, it may more than cover its own needs and have 
some to spare for investment in other industries. In any case, 
military production cannot attract surplus capital accumulated 
in the production cycle of civilian industries. 

In any case, whatever the situation may be at a particular 
time, one thing remains invariably true of military production 
as regards its influence on extended reproduction: it is very 
largely lost for social production, being either kept until it is 
obsolete, or destroyed. Military production is essentially an 
unproductive, parasitic type of production. 

Plainly, the greater the diversion of productive forces to 
unproductive purposes, the less reproduction there is resulting 
in slower growth, rates, inflation, and a levelling out or even 
decline in the standard of living. 

Some Western economists prescribe military expenditure as 
a cure for modern capitalism from its ailments of cyclical crises 
and unemployment: what they are in fact prescribing is the 
systematic bleeding white of the capitalist states by gradual 
economic strangulation. Withdrawal from reproduction, the 
destruction or freezing of a large portion of output in order to 
enable this system of production to survive really amounts to 
gradual suicide of the system itself. 

All this answers the question: what would be the economic 
consequences of disarmament for the capitalist countries? A 
UN consultative group (consisting of ten experts, from the 
USSR, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and seven capitalist countries 
including the USA, Britain, France and Pakistan) lifted the 
heavy curtain of falsehood and deception woven by the advo- 
cates of the arms monopolies and the militarists by declaring 
in the conclusion of their special report “Economic and Social 
Consequences of Disarmament” in 1962: “There should thus be 
no doubt that the diversion to peaceful purposes of the resources 
now in military use could be accomplished to the benefit of 
all countries and lead to the improvement of world economic 
and social conditions. The achievement of general and complete 


107 











disarmament would be an unqualified blessing to all mankind.”’! 

This report, which was unanimously approved in the same 
year by the UN General Assembly, is an international docu- 
ment of major importance and has enabled the public in capi- 
talist countries to gain a correct understanding of the economic 
role of the arms race and the consequences of disarmament. 

The publication of this report dealt a serious blow to all 
advocates of the arms race and opponents of disarmament. 
Speeches were even made in Congress, mentioning the tremen- 
dous benefits disarmament would bring the American economy. 
Critics of militarism are pointing out that several sectors of the 
American economy require large state investment in order to 
make them healthy and ensure their development. American 
scientists have calculated that measures to put an end to water 
and air pollution which has reached an extremely serious level 
in the United States would require 50,000 million dollars, that 
1,000 million dollars is needed to improve navigation on the 
Ohio River, that tens of millions is needed for the building of 
schools and other educational establishments and to train 
enough teachers to make up for the present shortage, to give 
but a few examples. 

Further convincing arguments against militarism and the 
arms race are to be found in Seymour Melman’s Our Depleted 
Society, and in numerous other books and articles that have 
appeared in the USA recently. 

The declaration of the XVII Session of the UN General 
Assembly noted that the vast sums of money thrown into the 
insatiable maw of war and the efforts of tens of millions of 
people now being spent on preparations for destruction could 
serve to improve life on our earth beyond recognition in a very 
short time if they were diverted to peaceful purposes. In 1966, 
the direct military expenditure of all the countries of the world 
amounted to 140,000 million dollars. The declaration, which 
was unanimously supported, admitted that the arms race is 
robbing mankind and that disarmament would lead to economic 
growth for all countries and to the flourishing of culture, science 
and civilisation. 

General and complete disarmament would be of special 
benefit to the economies of the developing countries. In 


1 Economic and Social Consequences of Disarmament, Report of the 
UN Secretary General transmitting the study of his consultative group, 
Vienna, 1962, p. 57. 


108 





1966 the military budget of these countries amounted to some 
8,000 million dollars, more than half their present annual capital 
investments. Besides making available these vast sums, disar- 
mament would make it possible to divert to the backward areas 
of the world a considerable portion of the means the industrial 
countries would save by ending the arms race. Annual economic 
aid to the less developed countries in the form of mutually 
advantageous loans and credits could be more than double the 
present amount offered in the form of capital investments. 

If freed from the need to spend vast amounts on defence, the 
Soviet Union and the other socialist countries would be in a 
position to greatly increase their aid to the less developed areas 
of the globe. 

More and more people in the capitalist countries are coming 
to realise what a tremendous burden military expenditure places 
on their economies. Yet monopoly circles in the USA—the most 
militarised country in the world—are so hostile to the idea of 
cutting back military expenditure that they not only insist that 
the arms race continue in their own country but are doing their 
utmost to exert pressure on other countries, especially those 
of the North Atlantic bloc, to increase their already excessively 
inflated military budgets. 

The growth of militarism in the USA, and certain other 
capitalist countries, the criminal war against the peoples of 
Indochina, military provocations in Latin America, reactionary 
coups in Africa and Asia engineered by the CIA, and aggres- 
sion in the Middle East—all this testifies to the increasingly 
aggressive nature of imperialism and the hardening of reaction. 
The 23rd Congress of the CPSU made the following analysis 
of the international situation: “The deepening of the general 
crisis of capitalism, the exacerbation of its contradictions, are 
driving imperialism to greater adventurism and adding to the 
danger it presents to peace and social progress. More and more 
frequently imperialism seeks an escape in armed provocations, 
all kinds of conspiracies and outright armed interventions.’’! 

An important factor in the political life of the Western coun- 
tries is that along with the malignant growth of militarisation, 
opposition to this process on the part of the democratic and 
peace-loving forces is stiffening. Examples of this are the wide 
protest movement against the American war in Vietnam, both 
in other countries and America herself, where it has spread to 


! 93rd Congress of the CPSU, p. 286. 





109 











all sections of the public, from private company owners to the 
trade unions. 

The war in Vietnam, which has cost the United States over 
100,000 million dollars, has clearly revealed the defects inhe- 
rent in capitalist society. It has shown that the arms race can 
never really cure, let alone save capitalism. The American 
economy has revealed serious inflationary tendencies; there has 
been a heavy run on gold, and gold reserves have dropped 
sharply, from 23,000 million dollars in 1953 to 10,500 million 
in 1968. 

The main political result of the war in Vietnam has been to 
reveal the futility of the attempts by American imperialism 
both to defeat socialism on a world-wide scale and to “deter” 
socialism by means of local wars. 








Chapter VI 





BOURGEOIS 
PHILOSOPHY 

AND PROBLEMS 

OF WAR AND PEACE 


Bourgeois philosophers are no longer able nowadays to limit 
themselves to abstract theorising on the subject of war and 
peace. They often supplement their theoretical conclusions with 
concrete political programmes. 

In the present article the theoretical and practical proposi- 
tions of several modern bourgeois doctrines of war and peace 
are held up for comparison. This should enable us to determine 
to what extent certain modern bourgeois philosophical theories 
correspond to the requirements of international and internal 
state affairs. 

A philosopher’s political views—in the case in point, his 
answer to the problem of war and peace—depend to a large 
extent on how he understands the “essence of being”, the possi- 
bilities and limits of cognition and the nature of social ideals 
and social development. 

The main bourgeois philosophico-sociological theories can be 
roughly divided into two groups according to how they view 
social progress, its motive forces, and hence the causes of war. 
The first comprises theories of an objective-fatalist character, 
the second subjective-voluntarist attitudes. 

Philosophers of the first group see the motive forces of his- 
tory, its real sense and content as lying in extra-historical 
factors, such as Divine Providence, the development of the 
Absolute Spirit, and the aims and intentions of Nature. The 
second group view history in terms of social phenomena, in 
terms of inevitable inherent biological and_ psychological 
characteristics of the individual personality, his free moral and 
spiritual activity. 


Hil 











Many contemporary bourgeois philosophers reject the tradit- 
ional forms of idealism, and are opposed to both the abst- 
ract @ priori metaphysical systems and various brands of 
“spiritual subjectivism’. Their theories are based on human- 
ist emphasis of the free development of the human perso- 
nality. 

These trends in contemporary bourgeois philosophy, whatever 
their real essence and direction, are all forms of reaction to the 
tremendous social changes that have taken place in the world 
in the last fifty years. The results of scientific and technological 
progress, and especially the dramatic situation that arose in the 
world with the appearance of the atom bomb and rocketry have 
had a tremendous influence on the philosophical and political 
views of bourgeois philosophers. 

There are no grounds at all for doubting the peace-loving 
intentions of many contemporary bourgeois philosophers. Yet 
as regards their views on the question of war and peace we 
must judge not only according to their subjective intentions but 
also the objective role their philosophies and political pro- 
grammes play and their practical attitude to existing political 
systems. 

K. Jaspers, one of the founders of existentialism, devotes a 
great deal of attention both to the theoretical and to the concrete 
political aspects of the problem of war and peace. His theories 
are interesting for two reasons: firstly, they contain practically 
all the typical features of modern bourgeois philosophy and, 
secondly, the political aspects of the problem we are here con- 
cerned with are more closely combined with its philosophical 
aspects than is often the case. 

Like many other modern bourgeois philosophers, Jaspers 
rejects metaphysics, and all kinds of frozen, doctrinaire phi- 
losophical systems. He does not consider his ideas to form a 
philosophy of things but regards them rather as a philosophy 
of the human personality purporting to reveal the real mean- 
ing of human existence. 

Jaspers sought the real underlying essence and value of human 
existence not in the spheres that are completely alien to man 
(among which, by the way, he includes the outward phenomena 
of social life), but in the human personality, free and independ- 
ent of these forms. According to him, man acquires his real 
place in the world, his real essence, only by freeing himself 
from the forms of social life, which are ‘absolutely alien” to 
him. 


112 





Jaspers holds that man comes to understand the meaning of 
life by what he calls “existentialist illumination” which he may 
experience for short moments in certain situations. This illumi- 
nation may occur in moments of passionate love, deep mutual 
understanding, in so-called frontier situations—times when a 
man comes face to face with death and suffering in his day-by- 
day struggle for survival. 

Thus, a man may come to understand the meaning of life 
when he comes face to face with death. Death affects all of us 
and serves as a frontier situation insofar as its entry into our 
lives reveals the limited nature of our existence. Man is aware 
of death as a frontier situation not at the time of his own 
death, since “when I die, I experience death but do not perceive 
it”,1 but when somebody else dies with whom he is connected 
by existential communion. Thus, we retain a connection with 
someone who has passed away in spite of his death. Death helps 
us determine what is existential in life and what is not. ‘“What 
remains essential in the face of death, is existential and what 
becomes valueless and vain is naked existence.”? 

However existential illumination comes to a person, whether 
in a positive or negative way, it always produces a revelation 
of the tragic nature of human life. After the brief flash of 
existential illumination, a man is once more plunged into the 
darkness of his day-to-day existence. Jaspers holds that the 
way out of this tragic situation lies via the world of the Absolute 
and the Eternal: he regards existential illumination as being 
essentially irrational and occurring at those special moments 
when a ray of light from the world of the Absolute breaks 
through the wall of everyday existence. Jaspers insists that this 
world has nothing at all to do with the metaphysical spheres 
found in the doctrinaire systems of the past, and that the 
various objects and phenomena of human life are but cyphers 
resisting rational definition that give us an insight into the 
Beyond.? 

Jaspers had a horror of rigid scientific and philosophical asser- 
tions, definite conclusions or results, with their doctrinaire 
implications. While science is concerned with investigating the 
relationship between things, he intended his philosophy to 


1K. Jaspers, Philosophie, Band II, Minchen, 1932, S. 222. 
2 Ibid., S. 223. 
3 Ibid., Band III, S. 1-2. 


8—203 113 








reveal the basic factors underlying human behaviour. Science 
has a universal compulsive value, while philosophy leads beyond 
compulsion to freedom; science raises the edifice of actual 
knowledge, whereas philosophy destroys all edifices of truth to 
cast man back into a state of uncertainty. 

In his profound aversion to dogmatism and his attempt to 
create a completely non-doctrinaire philosophy, Jaspers unwit- 
tingly arrives at an extremely one-sided philosophy, which is 
really a kind of relativist dogmatism. By insisting that no 
attitude or assertion is rigidly applicable and final, he is in fact 
rejecting the objective value of his own philosophy. This had 
an important influence on his political views, and not least on 
his theory of war and peace. 

Jaspers creates an unbridgeable chasm between knowledge 
and existence, between the existent, concrete forms of social 
life and what ought to be. He seeks the motive forces and prin- 
ciples of moral behaviour in the existent individual. This 
tendency to contrast different sides of the historical process— 
the internal and the external, civilisation and the moral and 
spiritual development of mankind, historical necessity and 
individual freedom—is typical of modern bourgeois philosophy 
and sociology as a whole. 

These typical features of Jaspers’ philosophy influenced his 
approach to contemporary political problems, despite the fact 
that his views and judgements of political questions were 
mainly based on realistic, concrete analysis of the various 
factors and phenomena of contemporary internal state and 
international life. 

Jaspers’ theory of war and peace is developed in several 
of his post-war works—The Atom Bomb and the Future of 
Mankind (1961), the Vital Problems of German Politics (1963) 
and Hopes and Fears (1965), both comprising various articles 
and speeches of various periods. His last work, “Where Is 
the German Federal Republic Heading?”’, was published in 
three successive numbers of Der Spiegel in 1966, and rep- 
resents an important supplement to the afore-mentioned works, 
showing considerable evolution of his views towards radical 
criticism of the undemocratic, militarist policies of West Ger- 
many and resolute support for peace. 


1K. Jaspers, Die Atombombe und die Zukunft des Menschen, Munchen, 
1961; Lebensfragen der deutschen Politik, Minchen, 1963; Hoffnung und 
Sorge, Miinchen, 1965; Der Spiegel, 1966, Nos. 17, 18, 19. 


14 





Jaspers’ concrete political programme is summed up in the 
following proposals. Firstly, existing treaties should remain in 
force until replaced through further talks; secondly, the estab- 
lishment of principles of international law involving the 
renunciation by states of absolute sovereignty, namely, the 
acceptance of decisions taken by the majority of members of an 
international legal organisation, abolition of the right of veto, 
and, of course, the establishment of such an international 
organisation wielding unprecedented powers; thirdly, unlimited 
exchange of ideas, and their free and public confrontation 
without any form of censorship; fourthly, legalisation of inter- 
vention by supranational forces in the internal affairs of indi- 
vidual states in cases where the latter have failed to act in 
accordance with the universally accepted principles of justice; 
fifthly, unjust frontiers and agreements imposed in the 
past be considered as subject to review and subjected nations 
be liberated by supranational decision. Jaspers regards free 
elections by secret ballot to be the most suitable means of 
expressing the will of the people. He considers that the above 
measures, if put into effect, would not only avert war but would 
serve to abolish it altogether. The world faces the alternative 
of a world order or a world war.! 

What then are the essential conditions for the creation of 
such a world order? Jaspers discusses them in detail in his 
article “Truth, Freedom and Peace”. Peace throughout the 
world, he writes, begins with peace in one’s own home, and 
peace is founded on freedom. Internal and external peace can 
only be ensured on the basis of the existential freedom of each 
and every individual. Beginning with the individual, freedom 
is embodied in republican government within a state and is 
also expressed in this state’s opposition to the oppression of 
other peoples. 

But freedom does not mean arbitrary behaviour, real freedom 
necessarily involves fidelity to the truth: “No peace without 
freedom, but no freedom without truth.”2 Peace is an empty 
word unless it supposes truth, unless it derives from truth and 
serves it. 

Now let us proceed to make a concrete analysis of these ideas 
of Jaspers we have briefly listed above, for they really require 
it. What does he mean by this truth without which there can 


1K. Jaspers, Lebensfragen der deutschen Politik, Munchen, 1963, S. 143. 
2 Tbid., S. 161. 


8° 115 








be no freedom or peace? On the basis of what principles does 
he propose to create his international control bodies, his world 
order? What frontiers and what agreements fixed and concluded 
in the past does Jaspers consider unjust? Only if we know 
something about Jaspers’ attitude to existing political and state 
systems shall we be able to understand the real content with 
which his “peace programme” is imbued. 

Firstly, then: What is truth? Jaspers answers this question 
in full accordance with his anti-doctrinaire philosophy, which 
rejects all dogmatic assertions. ““We are always only on the 
way to truth. Nobody possesses it, everyone is searching for 
it.”! According to Jaspers’ philosophical credo, the truth is 
what promotes man’s ascent to existence. 

Vague and hazy though these ideas may be, they neverthe- 
less have the merit of excluding the possibility of dogmatic 
insistence on one particular answer as the only just one, and 
thus leave the door open for discussion of this universal prob- 
lem. It is taken on faith that all states are to a greater or lesser 
degree intent on finding the truth. Jaspers warns us that exclu- 
sive insistence on one’s own point of view being true a priori 
completely excludes the possibility of ever attaining the truth. 

Yet Jaspers is convinced a priori of the exclusive value 
of Western ideals and principles of social life, and does not re- 
gard socialism as resolving or as capable of resolving many basic 
contradictions of modern society. Without taking the trouble 
to make a concrete analysis of the state systems of whole con- 
tinents, with the prejudice that is typical of modern bourgeois 
philosophy in general, he talks glibly about the “Free West” 
and the “totalitarian East”, about “European democratic tra- 
ditions” and “Afro-Asian nationalist expansiveness”. The 
following sample should suffice to illustrate this. “Under the 
shadow of the atom bomb, the danger of the totalitarian forces 
depriving the world of freedom is increased. As long as war 
is waged by masses of people with conventional weapons, using 
modern technology but not the atom bomb, the totalitarians 
have the advantage. In such a war events will inevitably lead 
to a point when the free countries will be faced with the choice 
of using the bomb or accepting totalitarianism.... To risk the 
destruction of humanity or to sacrifice freedom? Everyone is 
agreed that the bomb must go. But there is no such unanimity 
when the question arises: what should we do when it is a 


1 K. Jaspers, op. cit., S. 161. 


116 





matter of the life or death of freedom? The bomb destroys life, 
but the destruction of freedom by totalitarianism makes it 
worthless even if not for ever. ... The moment of the monstrous 
decision must come. There is no avoiding it for anybody”.! 
Thus Jaspers’ “flexible anti-doctrinaire” philosophy gives way 
to absolute conviction, without any doubts or hesitation, in the 
truth of the bourgeois “freedom” of the West and the “totalita- 
rianism” of the East. Free countries are faced with the choice 
of using the bomb or sacrificing their freedom. 

In his latter years Jaspers severely criticised the West Ger- 
man political system. He pointed out that the Federal Republic 
was heading via party oligarchy to dictatorship. This could 
result in “the gravest threat to peace”, and produce “the final, 
and this time fatal disaster for Germany”. 

Yet Jaspers ascribed all these “corruptions of the West Ger- 
man parliamentary system”, as he called them, not to socio- 
economic factors of capitalist society, to the attempt of the 
ruling class to use the system in their own interests, but to the 
undesirable internal evolution of the leading parties, bourgeois- 
democratic institutions, attitudes, and so on. Jaspers made no 
mention of those objective factors of capitalist society and the 
Western way of life which in a certain international or internal 
political situation will inevitably lead to the destruction of 
bourgeois democratic freedoms and the institution of some form 
of dictatorship. For it is in fact this exclusively Western and 
at the same time anti-Communist (socio-economic and political) 
orientation of the reactionary forces in West Germany 
that is the real source of the trouble that Jaspers found so 
disturbing. Here we come across that very categorical, 
doctrinaire attitude and shortsightedness that Jaspers so 
opposed in his philosophy. In theory, the truth for Jaspers 
is not a given quantity, already fixed and defined, but 
something that is constantly in the process of being pro- 
duced and revealed, constantly “becoming”. In practice, how- 
ever, he declares the existing social principles and ideals of the 
“Free West” to be the only ones that are true and acceptable. 

With due consideration to the age we live in with its real 
threat of universal destruction, Jaspers calls for energetic action 
in the cause of peace. He warns that any complacency, apathy 
or irresponsibility in the frontier situation that obtains in the 


1 K. Jaspers, “Wohin treibt die Bundesrepublik?”, Der Spiegel, Nr. 19, 
1966, S. 85. 


117 








world today could have the direst consequences. Here, in order 
to emphasise the grave danger of the situation, Jaspers resorts 
to scientific facts and real concrete factors, analyses the role 
and significance of various social organisations and institutions, 
and calls for sober judgement and the maximum rationality. 
At the same time, in his philosophy he insists that a man can 
only find his real raison d’étre in life, outside of science, in the 
moments of existential illumination that occur in frontier 
situations. His existentialist philosophy destroys all edifices of 
truth to throw man into a state of uncertainty and constant 
anxiety. 

It can certainly be a very good thing to criticise thoughtless 
optimism, blind faith in historical progress, taking for granted 
the triumphant march of mankind towards happiness and 
prosperity. This kind of optimism dulls vigilance, and leads to 
apathy and inactivity such as cannot be tolerated in our time. 
However, by constantly hurling man into a state of anxiety 
and uncertainty, existentialism produces pessimism and a sense 
of despair differing but slightly in its consequences from thought- 
less optimism. 

Frontier situations—like death, suffering, guilt, the struggle 
for survival—can all undoubtedly help us understand life, 
appreciate and prize it, provided that these situations do not 
crush man, make him lose all interest in life, or scar him morally 
or physically, which, after all, is an equally frequent conse- 
quence of various forms of human suffering. 

The philosophy of frontier situations constantly makes itself 
felt in Jaspers’ political works. Fear is essential for a real 
peace policy, he writes. Deliverance from fear increases serenity 
and lack of concern and blocks the path to a policy of peace. 

One cannot but agree with Jaspers that a profound aware- 
ness of the grave danger that exists in the modern world 
undoubtedly increases our vigilance and sense of moral respon- 
sibility for our decisions and actions. But it does not follow 
from this that people should be held in constant fear and appre- 
hension. The spreading of fear and uncertainty which Jaspers 
so strongly advocates is quite incompatible with a consistent 
peace policy. 

Jaspers’ philosophy is regarded as an optimistic brand of 
German existentialism (in contrast to Heidegger). Yet this op- 
timism is purely formal and does not spring from the actual 
essence of his philosophy. Indeed, Jaspers himself admits that 
his existential illumination reveals all the tragedy of human 


118 





existence. Jaspers looks at life through the eyes of a dying man 
and assesses it from the standpoint of death, whereas true 
optimism consists in assessing life from the standpoint of life. 
Faced with the death of a man who is existentially linked with 
us, faced with our own extinction, we can certainly achieve a 
heightened awareness of what was essential in life and what 
was not. Awareness of the finite nature of our existence also 
helps us to value time and to value life. But there is always the 
other side of the medal: horror of death makes it impossible to 
make an objective appraisal of what has been achieved and of 
the possibilities that exist, and paralyses man, while awareness 
of the finite, limited nature of our own existence often leads 
to egoism and indifference towards the fate of future genera- 
tions. 

Jaspers also speaks of love as the heart and soul of existen- 
tial communion. He is all for taking risks and going out towards 
others, trusting in them and relying on them to be reasonable. 
This is all very well in that reason and mutual trust may indeed 
help to bring individuals and nations closer together and thus 
aid the solution of various human problems including the 
extremely vital one of peace: but what of the numerous ins- 
tances of irrational behaviour by individuals and states, what of 
cases of breach of trust which one meets so frequently in life? 

Jaspers is perfectly aware of all this; yet even so he sets 
great hopes on the strengthening of trust and reason in the 
world through existential communion. But how can we be so 
sure that in a critical situation, in the moment of existential 
illumination, man will not perceive in his soul a truth that 
contradicts real reason? After all, his reaction to a frontier 
situation is largely predetermined by his social environment, by 
that very existence in family, church and state which Jaspers 
calls “alien existence”. 

Jaspers seeks to affirm the objective significance of existential 
illumination by referring to our connection with the Absolute: 
he suggests we should rely on philosophic faith, on a miracle 
helping us from above. For him, existential communion is not 
man’s well-earned right but a gratuitous gift of fortune. What 
of those who have not been so favoured? 

Once again, Jaspers contradicts himself on this point, since 
in his practical judgements he suggests a different answer. 
“Can we rely on spontaneous, unforeseen changes, appearing 
by magic, in the development of mankind, life on Earth and 
the Universe, on salvation sent from the transcendental in the 


119 





moment of disaster?”! On the one hand, Jaspers regards the 
things, phenomena and events around us as irrational cyphers, 
that somehow inform us of our real calling. On the other hand, 
he insists quite categorically that in expectation of something 
beyond our understanding we cannot act according to reason: 
“This expectation would imprison us in illusions of our own 
making, and deprive us of our ability to act.’’2 

The anguish with which Jaspers says that war in the atomic 
age will lead to universal destruction and that we must ‘do 
absolutely everything we can to save the world” is perfectly 
understandable. But this unconditional demand for peace pre- 
supposes a correspondingly principled appraisal of existing 
socio-political systems, recognition of the need for their peace- 
ful coexistence with all ensuing consequences. 

Wherever Jaspers is reckoning with facts and basing himself 
on a realistic appraisal of things, he frequently puts forward 
ideas that are not only inconsistent with his philosophy but 
actually contradict and preclude it, showing it to be untenable 
in practice. At the same time, many indisputable propositions 
of his philosophy lose their value and practical significance as 
soon as their concrete content is revealed. 

Jaspers speaks of his desire to free man from external factors 
of life that exert compulsion on him. He tries to find the root 
causes of man’s behaviour within the human personality and 
to assert the individual’s freedom and independence. In actual 
fact, however, by rejecting the social forms of human existence 
as absolutely alien and plunging into the existential depths of 
individual being, he loses sight of man and merely acquires 
philosophic faith which again points to a realm of absolute 
values and ideals that lies somewhere in the Beyond. Jaspers’ 
philosophical belief merely exchanges outward fatalism for 
inner fatalism which is even far stronger and more difficult to 
overcome. 

The existentialists try to understand and explain social devel- 
opment not from the standpoint of society as a whole but from 
the standpoint of perception and understanding of the existent, 
individual, human personality with its personal perception 
and views. A similar view of the individual and society is held 
by the personalists (Caulkins, Hocking, Brightman, Flewelling, 
Kent, Roy, etc.). They too place man’s problems, the problems 


 K. Jaspers, Lebensfragen der deutschen Politik, S. 155. 
2 [bid. 





120 





of his life, happiness and freedom in the centre of their philo- 
sophies. The personalist philosophy also rejects absolute ideal- 
ism and metaphysical materialism, refusing to regard the 
individual personality as a manifestation of the Absolute. 

According to the personalists, the Universe contains certain 
spiritual realities, which in the final analysis are of an essenti- 
ally personal nature and represent the selfperceiving thought, 
feeling and volition of certain Egos. Moreover, the Universe 
itself is completely spiritual and personal by its very nature 
and represents an all-embracing, finite Ego. 

While personifying and spiritualising the Universe, the per- 
sonalists constantly stress the irreducibility of the spiritual to 
the non-spiritual and material. Matter is a purely mechanical 
and inert force, while the personality is the concrete active 
force that creates new qualities. It is from this contraposition 
of active spirit and inert matter that Brightman draws his 
philosophical concept of history. According to him, a conflict 
is going on in the soul of every man between good and evil, 
between things of value and things that are worthless. This 
constant struggle going on within us is extended to society and 
determines our attitude to nature. 

Brightinan regards the 20th century as an age of conflicting 
values. As he writes in his Introduction to Philosophy: “Free- 
dom, reason, the rights of man, the worship of God, the love 
of truth, beauty, and goodness—all of man’s highest values— 
are threatened by ‘military necessity’, the totalitarian state, 
materialistic theories and practices, and ruthless competition.”! 
There is a constant struggle in man between the spiritual and 
materialism, between religion and the secular, between light 
and darkness. The meaning of history lies in putting an end to 
this conflict and achieving an acceptable union of these opposite 
sides of life. According to Brightman, this should be done by 
developing the best sides of each person, and following those 
principles whereby true values can be created. He hopes that 
the present world conflict can be resolved in this way. He 
believes that behind every war there lies peace, that beyond 
chaos lies order, and on the other side of apparent contradic- 
tions the truth is to be found. Both Brightman and Flewelling, 
despite their sincere desire to find a solution to the conflict, 
merely succeed in underlining its inevitability. 


1f£. S. Brightman, An Introduction to Philosophy, New York, 1951, 
pp. VIE, VIII. 


121 














According to them, the struggle between the destructive and 
the creative force within man and society is inherent in their 
very nature. War and peace succeed one another with the 
regularity of the tides. “Civilisations fall as well as rise. The 
sting of this fact now looming on the general intellectual hori- 
zon gives poignancy to the disillusionment of our times.”! 

The problem of peace for them is closely linked with their 
theories of historical progress, and they provide no practical 
positive solution to the problem. 

The personalists consider growing alienation to be to blame 
for all social evils. Hocking maintains that alienation arose 
from man’s attempt to know God as an object different from 
himself, as something which can be not only man’s companion 
but his worst enemy, more terrible than death or any other 
natural phenomenon. The solution he offers is for religion to 
be restored to its leading role in society, for another kind of 
communion between man and the Absolute, his mystical union 
with the deity. Once again we find philosophy turning to 
faith as mankind’s only road to salvation. 

Personalism reveals its essential kinship with existentialism 
not only in its fundamental premises but also in its insistence 
on the tragic, fortuitous and insecure nature of human exis- 
tence, the importance of reason and ineradicable alienation 
between man and the world. 

Modern objective idealism is closely allied to the subjective- 
idealist philosophies such as those discussed above. One of the 
most influential trends of objective idealism in the present 
century has been the Anglo-American neo-realism. There has 
been a great revival of interest in the USA in recent years 
in the theories of the well-known American neo-realist philoso- 
pher Alfred North Whitehead. In the framework of his Pla- 
tonic realist philosophy, Whitehead attempts to resolve some 
of the fundamental social questions of our day. 

For Whitehead the problem of peace is a theological rather 
than a practical one. He holds that mankind will live in 
peace as long as it is capable of intuitively grasping pea- 
ceful aims. 

Whitehead’s objective idealism is not identical with the 
Platonic variety, despite his Platonic approach. He adopts 


{ Ralph Tyler Flewelling, The Survival of Western Culture, New 
York-London, 1943, p. 5. 


122 





a metaphysical standpoint whereby reality can only be 
interpreted with reference to the ideal. His term for 
these transcendental qualities is “eternal aims”. Whitehead 
sees the world as a process of constant evolution, representing 
the combination of “eternal aims” (non-actualised potentia- 
lities) with “really real things”, the transformation of the 
potential into the actual. His is a doctrine of “creative 
advance’, a process involving the actualisation of qualitatively 
new features not presented by the data of the antecedent world. 
To explain creative advance he introduces the concept of crea- 
tive ability and God. The process of advance requires that the 
various characteristics descriptive of life include the “really 
real” thing, representing the a priori basis for the ascent of 
ideal forms in the definite process of the temporal world. 
Whitehead describes this process as the continuous destruction 
of “really real” things which at the same time possess “‘objec- 
tive immortality” both in the elements of other “really real” 
things and above all, in the “nature of God”. God is both the 
source of the appearance of factors of novelty in nature and 
society and the basis of the immortality of any transient being, 
social or natural. Real human freedom comes from God, as 
the source of all harmony in the world. 

This philosophy of a “continuously self-destructive” world 
expresses a pessimistic attitude to social development. White- 
head rejects all hard and fast rules, refusing to accept that 
any social theories can go any way towards explaining human 
actions and behaviour in terms of general tendencies of a par- 
ticular social system. According to him, the rapid transition 
and constant renewal of the phenomena of modern social life 
make it impossible to speak of any constant, generally valid 
factors. 

As a result, Whitehead’s “metaphysics of social harmony” 
provides no satisfactory theoretical foundations for a positive 
peace programme. 

Whitehead himself was opposed to war, and placed his hopes 
for peace in the continuous development of mankind towards 
common ethical principles. His views on freedom and demo- 
cracy were far less circumscribed than was the case with many 
other neo-realist philosophers. 

In American philosophy we often find attempts to justify 
aggressive US “power politics’. One of those to do so was 
George Santayana with his unusual brand of speculative 
philosophy, according to which behind every existing thing 


123 

















there lies a more real ideal essence. It is this theory that deter- 
mines the nature of his “philosophy of life’? and his social 
ideas. 

Santayana maintains that no one theory can claim to represent 
the whole truth, and that science, philosophy, poetry, religion, 
etc., are only symbolic forms produced by the human imagina- 
tion for the purpose of understanding and explaining reality. 
Science, art and religion, despite their various relationships 
with the world of things, simply represent mythological forms, 
their value being dependent on the extent to which imagination 
is present as opposed to reason. 

On the basis of a fundamental opposition between the 
material and the ideal, Santayana distinguishes two levels of 
social existence—the animal and the spiritual. In the former 
category he places all forms of social activity, including intel- 
lectual activity, that serve to satisfy material needs. In the 
latter he includes what he considers to be the more elevated 
forms of creative activity—art, poetry, literature and religion. 

He classifies forms of government according to the same 
criteria. Thus, the more perfect form of government is that 
in whose activity spiritual rather than animal motives domi- 
nate. The aim of social development is the establishment of 
what he considers to be a rational order originating from 
irrational human impulses. According to Santayana, nature 
contains its own ideal, and progressive organisation of irra- 
tional impulses produces the rational life. Man is a rational 
animal, and all his rational life is controlled by the biological, 
animal life of man in the depths of nature. Irrational impulses 
are the fundamental and initial factors of human life, that arise 
irrespective of man’s aims and are organised in the “life of 
reason’, “the rational life’. 

In society, the “life of reason” passes through three stages: 
the natural stage, the stage of free society, and, finally, the 
ideal society in which the ideal interests themselves take posses- 
sion of the mind. 

Santayana’s theory of the “ideal society” is really an ariste- 
cratic elitist doctrine. Santayana considers modern democracy 
as a means for attracting people to power who are not bearers 
or inheritors of human culture. Thus, better forms of social life 
must be introduced in order to preserve mankind’s cultural 
heritage and organise society in a rational manner. Santayana 
regards the policy of force to be fundamental to international 
relations. The United States could assume the role of world 


124 











leader and intervene “in the traditional life of all other nations 
not only by selling there innumerable American products, but 
by recommending, if not imposing, American ways of living 
and thinking”! 

Santayana considers universal peace to be incompatible with 
freedom and unattainable under general democracy. Peace will 
reign on earth only when “the flower’ of humanity—the in- 
tellectual elite—impose their rational rule by force. Santayana 
appears to be championing the elitist cause; in fact, he is de- 
fending the policy of force conducted by the most extreme 
elements in the ruling groups of capitalist countries. 

Obviously, the only way to really defend peace and man- 
kind’s spiritual values is through democracy. Peace and pro- 
gress can only be achieved by democratic and peaceful settle- 
ment of internal state and international disagreements. This 
is especially true in the atomic age. 

While in existentialism, personalism, critical realism and 
other modern philosophies, the traditional propositions of 
objective idealism are either transformed or combined with 
elements of subjective realism, the theories of Whitehead and 
various other religious philosophers are generally within the 
bounds of traditional idealism. The Christian existentialism of 
Paul Tillich, Reinhold Niebuhr’s “theology of crisis”, and the 
neo-Thomist theories do not differ essentially from the tradi- 
tional religious philosophies. 

Tillich and Niebuhr speak of sin as alienation from God, 
which has brought mankind to a state of crisis. “In an age 
of atomic energy and total wars it is pathetic that our techni- 
que has made it possible for one finger to press one button and 
destroy millions of people while our wisdom has not given 
birth to the knowledge that no man is safe if any man is un- 
safe.”2 

They go on to propose what they consider to be the only way 
out of this situation. Mankind can be saved, they say, only 
if it finds within itself the strength to free itself from this sin, 
and develops in itself the necessary wisdom. Niebuhr insists 
that man must understand that he is not creator but creature, 
and must therefore act according to the intentions of the creat- 
or, and not try to build a “Tower of Babel” and perish be- 
neath the rubble: “...Through the faith in God revealed in the 


1 J. L. Horowitz, The Idea of War and Peace in Contemporary Phi- 
losophy, New York, 1957, p. 86. 
* Ethics, July 1960, Vol. LXX, No. 4, p. 307. 


125 








Christ who died and rose again, death can become the basis 
of a new life for individuals, for nations, and for civilisations.’! 

The neo-Thomists (Jacques Maritain, Gilson, Copleston and 
others) also hold that the way to peace and perfect happiness lies 
through man’s constant ascendance towards a pure and perfect 
life, of which God himself is the embodiment. Maritain holds 
that peace cannot be achieved “before the time of great crisis 
and great reconciliation announced by St. Paul’”’.2 

Under the influence of the theory of universalism which is 
extremely popular in the West, both neo-Thomists and protes- 
tant theologians clamour for the setting up of a “world state”. 

Despite the original forms in which bourgeois philosophy ap- 
pears today, in its approach to the problem of war and peace, 
as indeed in its approach to many other problems, it is based 
on the same principles as the idealist philosophies of the past. 
There is still a general tendency to seek the motive forces of 
history, the essence of human existence, and the objective foun- 
dations of human activity directed towards the attainment of 
perpetual peace in the beyond, in spheres that really lie out- 
side human social and individual existence. 

Along with certain positive points, all the philosophical and 
political solutions to the problem of war and peace offered by 
bourgeois religious and secular philosophers alike have cer- 
tain common features which make them quite untenable both 
in theory and practice. These include: an irrational interpre- 
tation of the motive forces and influences at work in the indi- 
vidual and society; a highly pessimistic view of the human con- 
dition; a tendency to regard science, technology and existing 
social forms as factors and forces essentially hostile and ab- 
solutely alien to man; an insistence on self-awareness and self- 
perfection as the chief means of resolving human problem; 
faith and reliance on salvation from above (from God); dog- 
matic absolutisation of the ideals of the “Free World” and 
Christianity, and an abstract idealist approach to concrete 
political problems. 

Unlike many of his philosophical fellow-thinkers, the foun- 
der of American neo-realism Ralph Perry was always an ar- 
dent champion of a policy of peace and international co-ope- 
ration. Perry held that peaceful coexistence between the capi- 
talist USA and the socialist USSR was possible on the basis 


! Ethics, July 1960, p. 315. 
2 Quoted from I. L. Horowitz, op. cit., p. 79. 


126 








of the community of interests existing between the two sys- 
tems in as far as the general rights of the individual were 
broadly speaking similar. According to him, both systems were 
interested in peace rather than war, and co-operation rather 
than conflict. In present conditions, he said, peace had become 
more than an ideal good: it was an absolute and paramount 
necessity.! 

In this connection, it is well worth taking a look at the views 
on war and peace of the eminent English philosopher Bertrand 
Russell. Over the last twenty years Russell’s views have evolv- 
ed considerably, and today he is one of the most active and 
dedicated supporters of the peace movement, regarding peace- 
ful coexistence as the only way to save civilisation. His phi- 
losophical standpoint remains unchanged, however, and he sees 
the problems of war and peace chiefly in terms of social psy- 
chology. He holds that the attainment of peace involves not 
only fundamental social changes affecting both internal state 
and international affairs, but changes in man himself and his 
beliefs, bringing human harmony. 

Russell asks: Has Man a Future? and replies that his future 
will be only what he makes it. If he behaves as a rational being 
then the outlook is good. If he surrenders to political passions 
then nuclear war is inevitable. 

Russell proposes the following practical measures for achiev- 
ing peace in our time: first and foremost, nuclear disarma- 
ment; secondly, the banning of nuclear tests; thirdly, removal 
of the threat represented by the doctrine of immediate retalia- 
tion; and fourthly, the prevention of the spread of nuclear 
weapons to the countries that do not yet possess them. 

Russell writes that the Great Powers often find themselves 
in a very difficult position today, especially as regards disar- 
mament. Fach side is afraid of the other side’s nuclear poten- 
tial and thus strives to increase its own nuclear capacity. The 
other side naturally does the same, with the result that all 
steps towards removing the nuclear threat only serve to in- 
crease it. 

Russell is strongly critical of the view that war is part of 
human nature, and that human nature cannot be changed. Those 
who support this view, he says, forget that primitive instinct 
plays a very small role in the life of civilised man. 

The idea that peace is definitely to be prized and that prac- 


1 Ibid., p. 192. 


{27 











tical steps must be taken against various types of militarism 
and undemocratic tendencies in contemporary capitalist society 
is gaining ever wider recognition among certain bourgeois 
philosophers. In this respect, the standpoints of Bertrand Rus- 
sell and Jean-Paul Sartre can be considered typical. Both these 
philosophers combine their theoretical work with social and 
political activity in the interests of peace and democracy. Their 
active participation in public condemnation of the American 
war in Vietnam testifies to their great civil courage and sense 
of personal responsibility for what happens to mankind. The 
latter statements of Jaspers also show that he had come much 
closer to the views of progressive bourgeois thinkers as regards 
his general attitude to problems of war and peace. In his po- 
litico-philosophical works he showed himself to be still under 
the influence of a narrow approach to developments in inter- 
national affairs. But nevertheless, the apprehension with which 
he regarded the rise of undemocratic and militarist forces in 
the Federal Republic of Germany gradually led him to adopt 
a somewhat less circumscribed attitude, which definitely af- 
fected his views and judgements. 

Many reactionary bourgeois philosophers, both by the very 
nature of their philosophical and political views and by de- 
liberate intent, directly or indirectly justify “power politics” 
and obstruct the strengthening of international security and the 
ending of the arms race. 

However, progressive philosophers of various schools of 
thought are tending to join forces over the question of peace, 
and try to help remove these obstacles to the development and 
spread of progressive views on the vital problems of our 
time. 

This evolution in their views was considerably encouraged 
and aided by Lenin’s principle of peaceful coexistence and the 
foreign policy of the Soviet Union, directed towards the im- 
plementation of that principle. The socio-philosophical pro- 
positions of contemporary bourgeois philosophy have on the 
whole a speculative and abstract a priori character and do not 
include principles that could serve as an adequate basis for 
a realistic and just political programme for peace. Moreover, 
there is a tendency for the positive and realistic political theo- 
ries advanced by some bourgeois philosophers on the basis of 
a realistic appraisal of the facts of the situation obtaining in 
the world today to conflict with their philosophical premises. 


128 





Problems of war and peace require a concrete historical ap- 
proach. Contemporary bourgeois philosophy is generally 
dominated by abstract principles which cannot possibly be ex- 
pected to lead to realistic solutions. 


9—203 








Chapter VII 


NATIONAL 
SOVEREIGNTY 
AND WAR 


The cause of wars is a question that looms large in modern 
bourgeois social thought. 

Along with numerous attempts to seek the origin of wars 
in psychological, demographic and geographical factors, there 
is also a widespread theory in Western capitalist countries 
that views national sovereignty as the prime cause of war. The 
theory is that national sovereignty inevitably leads to inter- 
national anarchy, and thus the creation of a cosmopolitan, sup- 
ranational world government would be the most effective means 
of ensuring peace. The American sociologist Walt Rostow writes 
that “war, ultimately, arises from the existence and accep- 
tance of the concept of national sovereignty”.! Some bourgeois 
scholars regard the dynamic nature of the national state as 
one of the main philosophical apologetics for war.2 

How did such a theory originate? What objective phenomena 
does it reflect and what are its social significance and class role 
in the contemporary world? 


1 'W. W. Rostow, The Stages of Economic Growth, Cambridge, 1960, 
p. 108. 

2 See, for example, the typical view expressed by the Dean of Boston 
University, A. Knudson: “The philosophical apologetic for war has not 
as yet taken on a fixed form ... but these may be reduced to three 
main arguments: one based on the combative nature of man, a second 
on the dynamic nature of the state, and the third on the beneficent func- 
tion of war. (A. C. Knudson, The Philosophy of War and Peace, New 
York, 1947, p. 20.) 


130 


There is undoubtedly some connection between wars and na- 
tional sovereignty, so that these theories are based on an ele- 
ment of truth. In the history of the last few centuries there 
have been numerous examples of wars (including two devas- 
tating world wars) launched by bourgeois national sovereign 
states. But it is quite wrong to interpret this connection as a 
causal relationship. The concept of war as a social phenome- 
non is much wider than the concept of wars waged by national 
sovereign states. Wars occurred at earlier stages of develop- 
ment, under the slave-holding system and the feudal order, 
long before the establishment of nation states. Some of them 
were extremely ferocious and destructive, such as the wars 
between the great slave empires or the Crusades in the Middle 
Ages. We can find examples of all kinds of wars in history, 
differing greatly in their nature and social character: unjust, 
aggressive, expansionist wars, and just, progressive, emanci- 
patory wars. All they had in common sociologically was that 
they all represented the continuation of the politics of a par- 
ticular class. In every society where class antagonisms existed 
there were wars representing the continuation of the politics 
of the oppressor and exploiter classes, and wars that expressed 
the political aspirations of the oppressed, and which were 
essentially armed protest against oppression or aggres- 
sion, 

On the evidence of world history we can conclude that war 
is an essential feature of all socio-economic systems where class 
antagonisms exist, and that aggressive, expansionist wars have 
always been an expression of the property interests of the 
exploiter groups who wielded power, attempts by them to ex- 
tend that power. 

Attempts to present national sovereignty as a fundamental 
cause of war do not stand up to objective criticism in the light 
of historical facts, since national sovereignty is a later 
product of socio-historical development than war is. 

Yet the opponents of national sovereignty often base their 
arguments not so much on historical as on present-day expe- 
rience. In support of their demand for the abolition of nation- 
al sovereignty they point to trends towards economic and 
political integration to be observed in the capitalist world today. 
Thus, D. B. Heater writes in his Political Ideas in the Modern 
World: “The world is shrinking.... The economic units are 
not nations, but sterling and dollar blocs and the economic fed- 
erations of the European Common Market.... Most signifi- 


9* 131 











cant of all, however, has been the measure of supranational 
agreement in Western Europe in NATO.”! 

Henry Owen, Chairman of the US State Department’s Poli- 
cy Planning Council, writes that “the modern industrial na- 
tion state is simply not adequate to the needs of the day”,? by 
which he intends such organisations as international banks, the 
Common Market and so on. 

The present trend towards economic integration is dic- 
tated by the needs of the productive forces at a high stage of 
development. Yet the ways in which these trends are mani- 
fested differ greatly depending upon their social content. 

Modern international relations provide ample evidence to 
demonstrate that the international division of labour, dev- 
eloping on the basis of progressive social practice, leads to the 
establishment of mutually beneficial relations founded on com- 
plete equality that promote economic development and far 
from threatening, actually strengthen the national sovereignty 
of the countries concerned. On the other hand, the international 
division of labour developing on the basis of imperialism in- 
evitably leads to increased exploitation, oppression and enslave- 
ment of the weaker nations by the stronger imperialist powers. 

Two historical tendencies are inherent in capitalism as re- 
gards the national question. The first involves the awakening 
of national life and national movements and the creation of 
nation states, and the second is the destruction of national par- 
ticularism and national identity as territories are brought clos- 
er together and united as a result of their increasing economic 
interdependence. The latter tendency is mainly characteristic 
of the imperialist stage of capitalism, and is particularly strong 
today, mainly due to the influence of the law of uneven dev- 
elopment of capitalism at a time when the general sphere of 
capitalist exploitation is shrinking. 

Supranational tendencies also reflect the political aspirations 
of the capitalists for unity in order to strengthen their posi- 
tions vis-a-vis the main forces of the world revolutionary proc- 
ess—the socialist system, the working-class movement and 
the national liberation movement. This situation has led to 
an unprecedented development of the characteristic tendency of 


1D. B. Heater, Political Ideas in the Modern World, London, 1964, 


Pyke 
2 “Policy Premises for the Next Administration”, Foreign Affairs, No. 4, 
1968, p. 701. 


182 








imperialism to enslave not only agrarian countries but also 
highly developed industrial countries that have already achiev- 
ed national statehood. The desire of the stronger capitalist 
countries to dominate weaker countries, including their part- 
ners, in order to dictate their will to them or at least bring 
considerable pressure to bear on their policies often takes the 
form of encouraging them to join various types of supranation- 
al organisation. This produces very sharp conflicts within the 
imperialist supranational federations and blocs. As Lenin noted 
long ago, underlying these conflicts is the deep ineradicable 
conflict of interests between imperialist countries. Lenin’s 
words are confirmed by the fierce struggle going on today in 
imperialist circles in the field of economic rivalry, and over 
many international political issues, an excellent example being 
the dispute over the creation of a NATO multilateral nuclear 
force. All this tends to contradict the claims of the champions 
of integration that the imperialist countries could develop 
without conflict provided their sovereignty was limited. 

The tendency to internationalisation invariably has a defi- 
nite social content. Organisations like NATO or the Common 
Market have a definite imperialist character and infringe on 
the national sovereignty of other peoples: they actually rep- 
resent the attempts of reactionary imperialist groups to im- 
pose their will on other peoples in their own selfish inte- 
rests. 

Thus, a negative attitude to national sovereignty in present- 
day conditions is essentially reactionary, whatever the po- 
litical sympathies of those who hold such views. 

The opponents of the principle of national sovereignty, in- 
cluding those who support the theory of “international anar- 
chy”, viewing it as the root cause of war, include people with 
very different political views, from conservative, neo-fascist 
and militarist to liberal and anti-militarist. 

Let us take a look at the reasons for the wide range of po- 
litical views held by advocates of this theory, and also at the 
content of the theory itself. 

The reason why conservatives and reactionaries support the 
theory of international anarchy is above all to be sought in 
their class standpoint and the circumstances in which they have 
to act. Reactionary ideologists reject that all nations are equal 
and support aggressive imperialist “power politics”. The prin- 
ciple of national sovereignty is incompatible with power pol- 
itics since it declares interference in the internal affairs of 


133 














other countries unlawful, demanding respect for territorial in- 
violability and political independence, and insists that all na- 
tions, great or small, are equal. 

The reactionary neo-fascist ideologists justify war and vio- 
lence just as their predecessors did in the past. But since it is 
rather dangerous to repeat the old Nazi apologetics for aggres- 
sion, they resort to the new method of combining propaganda 
of war with hypocritical phrases about the need to put an end 
to war. The theory that national sovereignty is the root cause 
of all wars suits their purposes perfectly. As a result, the apo- 
logists of militarism openly glorify war for world domination 
against sovereign states, slyly adding that such a war would 
put an end to war by putting an end to the principle of na- 
tional sovereignty. 

Such views find support in certain well-known theories from 
the political thought of the past which in their day reflected 
the political aims of the exploiter classes. Force and its in- 
crease are taken as inherent in the very nature of the state. 
Sovereignty is treated exclusively in terms of force, and war 
as its fatally inevitable consequence. This theory implies de- 
nial of the right of weak nations to exist. 

Such views were most clearly stated by the English philo- 
sopher Hobbes (1588-1679), the reactionary German histo- 
rian H. von Treitschke (1834-1896) and Friedrich Nietzsche 
(1844-1900). Indeed, Treitschke actually went as far as to say: 
“There is definitely something amusing in the existence of a 
small state!,” and “...the use of force is the logical consequence 
of the nature of the state. The very existence of many states 
makes wars necessary.” These ideas are still propounded 
today, in a modern key, and as in the past express reactionary, 
aggressive aspirations. 

Similar ideas are presented by the American neo-fascist ide- 
ologist C. Wickum. Basing himself on Treitschke with his cult 
of brute force, aggressive wars, chauvinism and racism, Wickum 
quotes his statement that “wars will occur as long as there are 
numerous states”, interpreting it very differently, however. 
“If man has any method in his madness at all,” he writes, 
“he should at least regard wars which emanate from a multi- 
plicity of states as a means to reduce that multiplicity. This 
then is the essence of the new super-nationalism. If by this 


1 H. Von Treitschke, Politik, Leipzig, 1922, Band I, S. 34. 
2 Tbid., Band II, p. 592. 


134 





new kind of purposeful war we can finally get unity, then all 
the obliterations of national frontiers and sovereignties and 
even the temporary servitude of defeated nations to the vic- 
tor nations is justified.””! 

Similar preaching of aggression is to be found in the pro- 
posals for the creation of a world state advanced by several ad- 
vocates of modern cosmopolitanism. Thus, E. Reves wrote in 
his The Anatomy of Peace, a book which caused quite a sen- 
sation in the West at the time of its appearance: “If we can- 
not attain to universalism and create union by common con- 
sent and democratic methods as a result of rational thinking— 
then rather than retard the process, let us precipitate unifica- 
tion by conquest.’ 

Some opponents of national sovereignty do not deem it nec- 
essary to pretend sympathy with “democratic methods”. Thus, 
the same C. Wickum makes no attempts to hide the undemo- 
cratic essence of his views, but openly brandishes the ideal of 
world domination, justifying war as a means of attaining it and 
criticising national sovereignty as an obstacle to its achieve- 
ment. According to him, the idea of world government goes 
right back to the times of Confucius, Alexander the Great and 
the Roman Stoics, but “the practice of universal rule is only 
now becoming real and possible’? He sees the practical 
realisation of this ideal in the struggle for world power under 
the leadership of the United States. 

Wickum has no qualms about glorifying war and violence 
in his propagation of the ideal of world government. He de- 
clares: “We must be prepared to understand that the means 
whereby a world state is accomplished will come as a matter of 
course and not as a matter of rose-coloured dreams. ... Among 
these means are certain to be Force and Compulsion in the 
stead of discussion and economic persuasion.’ 

In the ideology of overt militarism and violence, the prin- 
ciple of national sovereignty, and indeed democratic princi- 
ples in general, are naturally criticised, and the right of small 
states to exist is denied. Wickum cynically declares: “If de- 
mocracy also means protecting the self-determination of every 


1C. Wickum, The Total State. A Philosophical Interpretation of 
Contemporary and Future Society, Boston-Mass., 1964, pp. 73-74. 

2 Emery Reves, The Anatomy of Peace, New York-London, 1945, 
p. 269. 

3 C. Wickum, op. cit., p. 165. 

§ Tbid., p. 103. 


135 








geographical fly-speck that wishes to call itself a nation, then 
we should shun democracy like the plague.’ 

But what about the United Nations? What about interna- 
tional law? In Wickum’s opinion, “there is no recognisable 
rule of law in international relations and it is a dream to think 
there ever could be”’.2 

As for the UN, “today’s United Nations is ... a guarantor 
of national sovereignty or pluralism.... It cannot be an in- 
strument of world peace or world peace unity because as long 
as there are sovereign powers there will be wars.’ 

Thus, the only so-called “argument” on which Wickum bases 
his aggressive, militarist appeals for war for world domina- 
tion is the fallacious thesis that national sovereignty inevitab- 
ly leads to wars. The conclusion to be drawn from Wickum’s 
neo-fascist statements is that national sovereignty is anathema 
to the imperialist reactionaries, as representing an obstacle to 
their expansion and their hopes of attaining world domina- 
tion. At the same time, the theory that “national sovereignty 
leads to war” serves as a convenient mask for apologists of 
aggression, enabling them to put on a false front of concern 
for peace behind which to make their appeals for war. The 
role this thesis plays in the service of reaction is in this case 
perfectly plain to see. 

Thus, condemnation of national sovereignty and attempts to 
discredit it lead straight to justification of war and militarism. 

However, in the capitalist West condemnation of national 
sovereignty often goes hand in hand with the propagation of 
anti-militarist ideas and appeals for peace. It is often the case 
that liberal, and even progressive, anti-militarist scholars gen- 
uinely regard the abolition of national sovereignty and the 
creation of a world state as the only way to achieve peace. 

The well-known American historian and expert in interna- 
tional affairs F. Schuman wrote in his magnum opus that the 
constant multiplication of independent sovereignties is aggra- 
vating international anarchy and is a cause of disorder and 
violence. He holds that the only way to ensure peace is the vol- 
untary establishment of a World Federal Republic through 
agreement among governments and peoples.‘ This line of 


1 C, Wickum, op. cit., p. 114. 

2 Thid., p. 150. 

3 Ibid., p. 114. 

4 Frederick L. Schuman, International Politics. The Western State 
System and the World Community, New York-Toronto-London, 1958, 
pp. 391, 678. 


136 





reasoning is common among bourgeois scholars. Ignoring the 
class causes of militarism and failing to recognise the funda- 
mental antagonism between the two main existing socio-econ- 
omic systems, they elaborate all sorts of utopian projects for 
the creation of a single, universal supranational government. 

In actual fact, the adoption of any of these projects would 
involve the rejection of democratic principles both in the in- 
ternal affairs of states and in international relations. 

Let us examine some of the arguments used in defence of 
such views. 

One of the first bourgeois liberal scholars to insist that na- 
tional sovereignty is a fundamental cause of war was the Brit- 
ish writer and publicist N. Angell, who entitled his major work 
on the problems of war and peace The Great Illusion.‘ 

His abstract metaphysical approach to nationalism prevent- 
ed Angell from perceiving the class nature of the forces wield- 
ing socio-economic power within the nation state. He was 
thus unable to make a concrete analysis of the question and 
produce a true explanation of the causes of war. Angell ad- 
vocated supranationalism, the supranational ties of capital. He 
made the basic error of idealising international ties and ac- 
cepting at its face value the myth that capital is essentially a 
peaceful factor. The outbreak of the First World War shortly 
after the appearance of his book served to underline his own 
“great illusion”. 

Angell, however, was undeterred, and continued to defend 
his theory. At a luncheon discussion held by the American For- 
eign Policy Association in New York in 1932, he once more 
maintained that “the fundamental cause of war ... the really 
fundamental cause is, J believe, international anarchy.... 

“It is just as impossible for anarchy to work effectively in 
the international field as it would be for anarchy to work within 
the state, for us to live at peace within the frontiers of the 
nation without the institutions of government, without law, 
without a Constitution, without courts.”2 The cause of inter- 
national conflicts was “the separateness and independence of the 
national bodies”.3 

Angell predicted a future struggle between two trends: the 


1N. Angell, The Great Illusion, London, 1911. 

2.N. Angell, “What Causes War? N. Y. Luncheon Discussion”, Foreign 
Policy Association, Dec. 17, 1932, p. 10. 

3 Tbid., p. 12. 


137 








development of nationalism, producing international tension, 
hostility and armed conflict, and the conscious striving of “an 
enlightened minority” to create a world organisation capable 
of ensuring peace. These ideas of Angell’s were approved of by 
liberal philosophers, sociologists, jurists and publicists, many 
of whom regarded cosmopolitanism as the only way to at- 
tain peace and rid the world of war. 

This theory is propagated in various forms by a whole host 
of scholars, American, British, French, German and others. 

However, it has been expressed most clearly by the Ameri- 
can philosophers M. Adler and A. Freud.! Adler, Professor of 
Legal Philosophy at the University of Chicago, holds that in 
the interests of peace national sovereignty should not only be 
limited but completely abolished, and that the need to create 
a world government should be widely propagated without de- 
lay. In the foreword to Adler’s book How to Think About War 
and Peace, Clifton Fadiman writes: “Something will cause 
world peace. It is world government. Something causes war. It 
is anarchy. Something causes world wars. It is world anarchy. . . . 

“Mr. Adler takes the bull by the horns. By the time we 
know what the bull’s name is. The bull is called Sovereignty.”2 
Adler himself declares: “The price of sovereignty is war.’? 

The chief failing of Adler’s theory is that he completely 
ignores socio-economic factors and reduces all questions of 
war and peace to the problems of organisation of political life 
considered in the abstract. This is how he treats national sov- 
ereignty, reducing it to anarchy and self-will. “Anarchy,” he 
writes, “is the condition of those who try to live together 
without government.... Anarchy and sovereignty are insepa- 
rable.” 

A. Freud develops the same idea, maintaining that “war is 
the direct outcome of national sovereignty”,® that “it is our 
political, anarchistic world system of national sovereignty’® 
that is responsible for it, and that “the national state is obso- 
lete, anachronistic, and a drag on all humanity”.? National 


1M. Adler, How to Think About War and Peace, New York, 1944; 
A. Freud, Of Human Sovereignty, New York, 1964. 
2M. Adler, op. cit., pp. XII-XIV. 


3 Thid., p. 70. 

4 Thid. p. 69. 

5 A. Freud, op. cit., p. 82. 
6 Thid., p. 89. 

? Thid., p. 332. 








sovereignty he defines as follows: “... national states, basing 
their claims on a mysterious ‘national’ background, have re- 
served the privilege of acting with no regard for any moral 
code. This privilege is called ‘National Sovereignty’ ”.! 

This way of presenting the matter involves a gross distor- 
tion of the concept of sovereignty. Not only is sovereignty ir- 
reducible to self-will and anarchy in international affairs but 
it actually serves to counter them. The principle of sovereignty 
implies the right to resist arbitrary acts since it is an organic 
element of the whole system of concepts that constitute inter- 
national law. 

As for the principle of national sovereignty, it is inseparable 
from democratic conceptions of social progress since it presup- 
poses the absolute rights of a particular nation in all matters 
pertaining to its socio-economic and political structure. State 
sovereignty is complete freedom of the state from interference 
by other states in all matters concerning its internal affairs and 
external relations. Applied to all states, it implies respect for 
the inviolability and independence of any one of them, large 
or small. Sovereignty necessarily involves recognition of the 
equality of sovereign states, and respect for the sovereign rights 
of all nations. 

Thus, we can see that sovereignty is not only perfectly com- 
patible with organisation and order in international relations, 
but that recognition of sovereignty actually serves as the basis 
for international agreements, and is the basis of international 
law. The principle of sovereignty underlies those universally 
accepted principles of international law whose observance is 
an essential condition for co-operation between peoples and 
states. 

The American professor, Charles Hyde, writes in his six-vol- 
ume manual of international law that sovereignty is the basis 
of modern international law. “The growth of the law govern- 
ing the relations between States has been characterised in prac- 
tice by acceptance of the theory that the society of nations is 
comprised primarily of a number of so-called independent 
States, resembling each other in their acknowledgment of no 
obligation to recognise any common superior, and deemed ac- 
cordingly to stand in law upon an equal footing. The basis of 
the law, that is to say, what has given to some principles of 
general applicability the quality and character of law, has been 


! Thid., p. 2. 
189 








the acquiescence of the several independent States which were 
to be governed thereby.””! 

This well-known principle of international law is being gross- 
ly flouted today by several imperialist powers, especially the 
USA, and the theory of “international anarchy” declaring 
national sovereignty to be the cause of war, is used to “justify” 
the aggressive policies of monopoly capital. 

Another aspect of this theory that makes it scientifically un- 
tenable is its distorted treatment of social progress. Thus, Adler 
regards the development of human society solely as a process of 
quantitative growth, a process of continuous expansion involv- 
ing the formation of ever larger political units. 

On the basis of this false approach, Adler questions the right 
to existence of nation states, and criticises national sovereignty 
as putting the brakes on the process of political expansion, 
which he regards as inevitable. A world state is the natural 
limit of this expansion, the final stage of political growth in 
which two basic unities are combined: 1) world unity as the 
territorial basis for political life and 2) the unity of mankind, 
overcoming all racial or cultural differences as the psycholo- 
gical basis for world citizenship.? 

Adler’s argumentation reveals the same basic methodolog- 
ical flaw—the attempt to raise political categories to the qual- 
ity of absolutes totally independent of socio-economic factors. 
He views the state in two dimensions only—the territorial and 
the biological—as an organisation uniting the whole human 
race. But the evolution of political forms cannot be considered 
without reference to the decisive factor of the socio-economic 
and class nature of a particular state. 

Implicit in Adler’s reasoning is the idea that the world state 
of which he speaks should be a socio-economic projection of the 
American state on a universal scale. Social inequality is taken 
as an inevitable feature of Adler’s world state, a product of 
the functional needs of society. One of the functions he attrib- 
utes to it being that of curbing the class struggle, it is essen- 
tially an organ of coercion.? 

This view of the world state combined with the rejection 
of national sovereignty lends Adler’s theory a basically reac- 


1 Charles Cheney Hyde, International Law Chiefly as Interpreted and 
Applied by the United States, Boston, 1947, Vol. I, p. 4. 

2M. Adler, op. cit., p. 69. 

3 Tbid., pp. 21, 30, 42, 190. 


140 











tionary character. It is directed against historical progress, the 
gradual development and perfection of society, a process which 
is inseparable from the creative activity of the masses. 

Recognition of national sovereignty is an essential element 
of the scientific theory of progress. The concept arose as a 
reflection of the appearance of nations on the historical scene 
and served the interests of social progress insofar as it was 
directed against moribund feudalism. From the outset the prin- 
ciple of national sovereignty has been represented as an im- 
portant democratic principle, being interpreted as the right 
of a nation to determine its own destiny. Thomas Jefferson, US 
President and an outstanding progressive of his age, wrote in 
support of the principle of popular sovereignty that “whenever 
any form of government becomes destructive of these ends 
(human rights.—The Author], it is the right of the people to 
alter or to abolish it, and to institute new government, laying 
its foundation on such principles, and organising its power in 
such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their 
safety and happiness”’.! 

Defined in the most general terms, national sovereignty 
is the principle that all nations have equal rights, the right to 
independence, national unity and self-determination up to and 
including the right to form an independent state, and also the 
right to freely determine their own economic, socio-political 
and cultural development.” 

Today, in our age characterised by the transition from 
capitalism to socialism, the existence of a world socialist sys- 
tem and historic victories of the national liberation move- 
ment, the principle of national sovereignty does not merely re- 
tain its former progressive significance, but assumes new con- 
tent that gives it a special relevance. It is called upon to safe- 
guard the interests of the peoples of all countries, large and 
small, and implies recognition of the right of every nation to 








1 The Life and Selected Writings of Thomas Jefferson, Ed. by A. Koch 
and W. Peden, New York, 1944, p. 22. 

2 The principle of national sovereignty is similar to the concept of 
state sovereignty (where a nation has formed its own state), but care 
should be taken not to confuse the two, since state sovereignty existed 
prior to the formation of nations, while multinational states can also 
possess state sovereignty. State sovereignty is the complete independence 
of a state from interference on the part of other states in all matters 
concerning its internal affairs and foreign relations. The main content of 
national sovereignty is the right of every nation and people to decide 
its destiny. 


141 

















freely choose its own path of socio-economic development, 
capitalist or non-capitalist. 

Thus, the principle of national sovereignty is spearheaded 
against imperialist expansion, against all imperialist attempts 
to prevent peoples from becoming masters of their own destiny. 

Why is it that the completely unfounded theory of “interna- 
tional anarchy” has come to interest so many intellectuals in 
the United States and Western Europe? Why is it that anti- 
militarist scholars and public figures in the capitalist West so 
often express views identical with, or very similar to those of 
Adler? 

There are several reasons for this, the chief one being the 
gnosiological roots of the theory of “international anarchy”. 
The theory has, as we have already seen, an objective basis in 
the aggressive, expansionist policy of the exploiter classes 
wielding power, today as in the past. Reactionary, undemocrat- 
ic features of the routine policy of the imperialist countries 
(without going into the social essence of this policy) are easily 
associated with the national nature of the state, and national 
sovereignty in general. 

Like Angell, Adler rejects biological and socio-psychological 
theories of the origins of war, quite rightly insisting that wars 
do not derive from human nature, but that the peace is the 
normal, natural condition, towards which man aspires. But the 
way of attaining peace recommended by Adler and other sup- 
porters of the theory of “international anarchy” runs contrary 
to the true interests of individuals and nations, since nothing 
is more damaging and prejudicial to the interests of social prog- 
ress in our time than hostility to the principle of national 
sovereignty. 

In their vain attempts to find arguments against national 
sovereignty, bourgeois ideologists speculate on the real fea- 
tures of the modern world, arbitrarily singling out certain links 
from the chain of contemporary events, interpreting them equal- 
ly arbitrarily, and inventing patterns of social development 
that just do not exist. 

Some positivist philosophers and sociologists (Ogburn, for 
example) see only the quantitative side of social processes and 
establish a direct causal link between the level of technological 
development (often reduced to speed of communications) and 
the area of “political units”, i.e., state territory, making this 
the basis of their argument in favour of the abolition of 
national frontiers. 


142 











There is no denying that technology plays an extremely im- 
portant role in social development. But technology is to be con- 
sidered not in isolation, but as an organic part of the system of 
social relations, as part and parcel of the mode of social pro- 
duction as a whole. Nor is there any observable causal rela- 
tionship between the speed of communications and the extent 
of a state’s territory. 

National frontiers per se cannot be said to hamper techno- 
logical progress and the development of the productive forces. 
Thus, with socialism the productive forces are developing at 
unprecedented rates, despite the fact that the socialist system 
is a social, political and economic community of sovereign na- 
tions. 

The international ties of capital are reactionary and based 
on exploitation, and national sovereignty is undoubtedly a hin- 
drance to them. However, the struggle of peoples to free them- 
selves from exploitation by monopolies, national and interna- 
tional, is definitely a progressive phenomenon. It is thus quite 
wrong to extol the supranational principle in the abstract and 
criticise national frameworks in general, without reference to 
specific cases. One must first determine the socio-economic na- 
ture of a given system of international ties and see whether 
they are based on equality and mutual advantage, whether 
they serve to promote the development and welfare of the par- 
ticular nations concerned, whether they ensure aid and sup- 
port for peoples whose economic progress has been retarded 
by the ravages of colonialism. 

National liberation movements whose object is the attain- 
ment of national sovereignty promote above all the abolition 
of political oppression, one of the ugliest and most inhuman 
social features. However, social progress implies the liberation 
of society from all forms of oppression—economic, social and 
spiritual. The attainment of political independence and the 
collapse of the colonial empires create an important pre-con- 
dition for advance of the developing countries along the path 
of progress, involving deep-going socio-economic transforma- 
tion. 

The scientific concept of national sovereignty is based on 
the doctrine of the right of nations to self-determination. Any 
attempt to deny national sovereignty thus has an objectively 
undemocratic character. 

There are some anti-militarist scholars and public figures 
who are opposed to national sovereignty and support the idea 


143 























of a world state and advance the thesis that absolute national 
sovereignty should be abolished.! But there is no such thing as 
absolute sovereignty. The existence of various international 
agreements and the obligations deriving from membership of 
the United Nations Organisation means that states voluntarily 
agree to certain general principles of conduct. This is the rea!- 
istic way to go about the prevention of a new world war. Thus 
the draft agreement on general and complete disarmament 
submitted by the Soviet Union to the XV Session of the UN 
General Assembly for its consideration on September 23, 1960, 
contains no infringement on national or state sovereignty. 

In the modern world we witness a conflict between two dia- 
metrically opposed policies. 

The first is directed towards the complete social and national 
emancipation of the peoples of the world. It corresponds to the 
natural direction of social progress and is most fully embodied 
in the Marxist-Leninist theory of social development. It is or- 
ganically connected with democratic principles and the policy 
of peaceful coexistence and involves respect for both state and 
national sovereignty. 

The second is directed against social and national emanci- 
pation, and runs directly counter to social progress. It reflects 
the interests of reactionary imperialist groups, whose aim is to 
oppose social progress with force, and is quite incompatible 
with the policy of peaceful coexistence. 

The principle of peaceful coexistence provides the only ra- 
tional basis for a foreign policy. Since prevention of a ther- 
monuclear war is in the vital interests of all nations, peaceful 
coexistence is an objective necessity for the development of 
contemporary human society. The policy of peaceful coexis- 
tence combines the principles of international law, based on 
respect of state sovereignty in international relations, and rec- 
ognition of the inalienable right of nations to self-determina- 
tion and equality, embodied in the principle of national 
sovereignty. 

It should be noted that the UN Charter itself is based on 
a combination of these principles. The concepts of state sover- 
eignty and national sovereignty are both reflected in the Char- 
ter, which proceeds from the principle of sovereignty and non- 


1 See N. Cousins, In Place of Folly, New York, 1961, pp. 105-06. 
2 The Soviet disarmament plan will be discussed further on, in a 
separate chapter devoted to the subject. 


144 








interference of states in one another's internal affairs (i.e., rec- 
ognises state sovereignty) and from the principle of equality 
and self-determination of peoples (ie., recognises national 
sovereignty). 

The Preamble to the UN Charter states that the peoples of 
the United Nations are determined “to reaffirm faith ... in 
the equal rights of nations large and small”. 

The principle of equal rights for all nations, large or small, 
is expressed in several articles of the Charter. Thus, Article 
1 (2) prescribes UN members “to develop friendly relations 
among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights 
and self-determination of peoples”. This is an affirmation of 
the principle of national sovereignty. 

Article 2 (4) stipulates that “all Members shall refrain in 
their international relations from the threat or use of force 
against the territorial integrity or political independence of 
any state’. This formula demands respect for the principle of 
state sovereignty in international relations. 

If we look at the world today we can easily see that every 
hotbed of war around the globe is connected to a greater or 
lesser degree with direct violation or infringement of national 
sovereignty on the part of the imperialists. Progressives in all 
countries are clamouring for an end to these violations, and 
are demanding that all countries, and above all the United 
States, should henceforth adhere to the UN Charter and the 


principles of international law. 


10—203 











Chapter Viil 


AGAINST 

JUSTIFICATION OF 

WAR BY MALTHUSIANISM 
AND GEOPOLITICS 


Demographic theories are an important weapon in the bour- 
geois ideological arsenal. A good example is Malthusianism, 
propagated by the ruling classes right from the outset of or- 
ganised opposition to capitalist exploitation, from the earliest 
days of the labour movement. 

Malthus explained war and colonialism in terms of demo- 
graphic processes. Racist theories, serving to stir up chauvinism 
and sanctify colonial oppression, are used as a means of com- 
bating the class ideology of the proletariat. 

The general crisis of capitalism and the growing influence 
of the socialist countries and Marxist-Leninist theories in our 
age have led to the appearance of new, less overt demographic 
theories in the capitalist West. Biological conceptions have to a 
certain extent been replaced or supplemented by more subtle 
socio-psychological theories. 

The well-known basic tenet of Malthusianism is the theory 
that mankind is heading for absolute overpopulation, that is, 
that population growth outpaces the growth of the means of 
subsistence. In An Essay on the Principle of Population, Mal- 
thus claimed that while food increases in an arithmetical ratio, 
population increases in a geometrical ratio. According to him, 
it is the workers, through immoderate multiplication, who are 
responsible for the existence of such evil as unemployment and 


4 T. R. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, Vol. I, 
Book I, London, 1826, p. 6. 


146 


poverty. He expressed the “hope” that each man from the “‘low- 
er classes” who came to know his theory “would be disposed 
to bear the distresses in which he might be involved with more 
patience”, “would feel less discontent and irritation at the 
government and the higher classes of society, on account of his 
poverty”, “would be on all occasions less disposed to insubor- 
dination and turbulence’”’.! 

Today, Malthusianism is widely used to “justify” imperialist 
aggression. It played an important part in the events which 
led up to the Second World War, being advanced as an of- 
ficial doctrine of the Japanese imperialists, the Italian fas- 
cists and the nazis, all of whom tried to convince the working 
people that a nation should unanimously support the acquisi- 
tion of Lebensraum, the lack of which was the cause of all 
their troubles. The nazis tried to justify their aggression by the 
theory of a “large economic territory’, a theory which repre- 
sented a mixture of racism, social-Darwinism, Malthusianism 
and geopolitics. “The state is a body, formed as a result of 
the instinct for survival of the species,” Hitler wrote. “The 
healthy instinct of preservation of the species is expressed in 
the effort to ensure a correct balance between population and 
Lebensraum.” 

The military defeat of nazism represented a serious blow to 
its “race theory”. Nevertheless, many ideologists of German 
imperialism have continued to preach the same basic views in 
the post-war period. Referring to this, the demographic expert 
Otto Rihle (GDR) wrote: “Here we can clearly see the dan- 
ger of the neo-Malthusian ideas that West Germany needs 
new Lebensraum’ in the East. He points out that “since 1945 
the number of ideologists of neo-Malthusianism has been grow- 
ing yearly. Today, we can find neo-Malthusian ideas in West 
German school text-books. These views are becoming more and 
more widespread, serving as they do as an ideological ‘justi- 
fication’ for the revanchist aspirations of the West German 
monopolies.” 

In his book CUhy—Where From—But Where To?, the West 
German Malthusian and racist Hans Grimm, whose ideas were 
once a source of inspiration to Hitler, tries to justify Hitlerite ag- 
gression. He insists that only by taking into account the bio- 
logical factors that drove Germany to war can “the history of 


1 Tbid., Vol. II, Book IV, p. 438. 
2 O. Rihle, Brot fur sechs Milliarden, Berlin, 1963, S. 20. 


1o* 147 











Germany and Hitler as a historical phenomenon be properly 
understood”.! He also maintains that if the Germans wish to 
ensure themselves a satisfactory way of life and avoid the 
threat of Bolshevism, the main problem they have to tackle is 
that of Lebensraum. 

F. Fried, who preached racism and geopolitics under the 
nazis, is another who did not abandon his old course after 
the war, as can be seen from his Changes in World Economy.? 
Also published in West Germany in the late forties were Land 
and Life by K. Gebauer (Cologne, 1947), and Universal Hu- 
man Geography by A. Gettener (Stuttgart, 1947), both of which 
propagated the ideas of Lebensraum, overpopulation and “the 
organic theory of the state”. In Universal Political Geography 
and Geopolitics (1951), A. Haushofer® once more advanced the 
theory that in the human struggle for survival the victors will 
be those races that produce the most offspring, and that in this 
“struggle for survival” “the Aryan master race” should expand 
its Lebensraum at the expense of other peoples. Also in 1951, 
the journal Geopolitik, originally founded and edited by Karl 
Haushofer, resumed publication, and the West German geo- 
politicians returned to propagating their “theories” of Lebens- 
raum, overpopulation and East-West conflict. The aim of all 
these theoretical concoctions was agitation for the remilitari- 
sation of West Germany and the arming of the Bundeswehr, 
led by ex-Wehrmacht officers, with weapons of mass de- 
struction and above all nuclear weapons. 

However, so soon after a war which ended in defeat, the 
West German imperialists can hardly speak as openly about 
the need for Lebensraum as Hitler did. Openly aggressive Mal- 
thusian and racist theories would have been bound to cause 
alarm among the supporters of peace and progress in West 
Germany. Thus, in offering their services once again as a 
“shield” or “bulwark” against Bolshevism and communism, they 
prefer to cloak their designs in revanchist slogans like “reviewal 
of frontiers”, the return of Germans to “the lost territories”, and 
their “right to a homeland”. They no longer express their ex- 
pansionist aspirations in terms of the annihilation of the “infe- 
rior Slavs”, but talk instead of the “integration” of Europe as 


{ Hans Grimm, Warum—Woher—aber Wohin?, Lippoldsberg, 1954, 
S. 206. 
2 F. Fried, Wandlungen der Weltwirtschaft, Stuttgart, 1948. 

3 A. Haushofer, son of Karl Haushofer, a leading nazi geopolitician, 
tried at Nuremberg. 


148 





far as the Urals, the “liberation” of the peoples of Eastern 
Europe from “communist slavery” and so on. The more intel- 
ligent bourgeois ideologists have recognised the need to take 
into account the lessons of the Second World War and the 
growth of opposition to fascism among a wide public both 
in the Federal Republic and throughout the world. Their atti- 
tude has been influenced to some extent by the fact that part 
of the West German bourgeoisie has shown dissatisfaction with 
the undisguised policy of revenge and a desire to lessen mili- 
tary and political dependence on the United States. Hence the 
need that arose in nationalist circles for other ways of pursu- 
ing their aggressive aims. 

This has led several bourgeous ideologists to revise their 
theories somewhat. The aim was to “humanise’” their ideas 
in order to make them more acceptable to the West German 
public at large. The essence of this “reinterpretation” of nazi 
theories is well revealed by the Marxist philosopher G. Heyden 
(GDR) in his Critique of German Geopolitics. The Essence 
and Social Function of a Reactionary Sociological School.' 

Heyden examines the philosophical and scientific revision 
of nazi theories beginning with 1957 on the basis of an anal- 
ysis of the journal Geopolitik. This “reinterpretation”, which 
takes several directions, can be illustrated by a few examples, 
and especially by the articles of the journal’s editor and lead- 
ing theoretician, Rolf Hinder. 

In contrast to the geopolitics of the 1920s and 1930s, which 
was mainly concerned with the “special structure of states” and 
with the establishing of the relationship between geography 
and politics, modern geopolitics, as Hinder writes, “devotes 
more attention to spacial changes caused by man”, and “stud- 
ies the space-changing strength of the human spirit and the 
inner relationship between politics and the conflict of social 
interests based on space”’.? 

Here we can immediately note an attempt to widen the “field 
of investigation” by the addition of “spiritual forces”. Where- 
as the principle of geographical determinism was formerly 
adhered to, today the geographical sphere is linked to the po- 
litical by an “intermediate factor”, i.e., man, his “spirit”, psy- 
chology, etc. 


1G. Heyden, Kritik der deutschen Geopolitik. Wesen und _ soziale 
Funktion einer reaktiondren soziologischen Schule, Berlin, 1958. 

2 Rolf Hinder, “Vom Sinn der modernen Geopolitik” in Zeitschrift 
fiir Geopolitik im Gemeinschaft und Politik, N. 1, 1958, S. 35. 


149 














Attempts to give the impression of opposition to the old dis- 
credited theories are even to be found on the pages of the fas- 
cist magazine Nation Europa, to wit an article by A. Ehr- 
hardt entitled “Biopolitics: Accomplishment of the Laws of 
Life”! Ehrhardt suggests that today’s most complicated inter- 
national problems can be resolved by “applying the findings 
of genetics to politics’. Purporting to be attacking both impe- 
rialism and Bolshevism (“the dictatorship of the proletariat”), 
he writes: “In contrast to these plans of East and West, bio- 
politics serves the future of all mankind.” Treating Marxist 
theory as a kind of biological doctrine, he criticises the ‘““Marx- 
ist-Michurinist theory” that “a perfect human race” can be 
derived from a perfect social environment. He claims that the 
findings of genetics refute this theory, which he mistakenly re- 
gards as Marxist. According to him, it is inherited features, 
combinations of genes, that determine the environment, and 
not the other way round. Thus, the anti-Communist Ehrhardt 
tries by means of primitive biologising of social phenomena to 
present genetics as the answer to the most burning social and 
political issues. 

These few examples of “corrections” made by West German 
theoreticians are far from exhausting the numerous devices em- 
ployed in the “reinterpretation” of geopolitics. 

On the whole the new trends to be observed in geopolitics 
represent a departure from the traditional theory of Lebens- 
raum, and an attempt to suggest a clean break with such dis- 
credited theories as racism. While remaining nationalistic sup- 
porters of “the Great Germany”, the new theorists aspire to 
the role of spokesmen for a new political awareness suited to 
the nuclear age. The widespread fear of nuclear war and of a 
possible solution of the German question by military means 
forces them to accept the idea of the peaceful solution of inter- 
national conflict. As Hinder wrote, in the nuclear age war would 
mean “the destruction of all possibility of life’. Geopolitics 
should attend to “the spacial factors of a strategy of peace for 
the world”. Since war is no longer “a real possibility, but is 
rather a real impossibility”, an enemy becomes an equal, an 
ally and even a “friend”. Self-preservation of society consists 
“not in annihilation of alien society but in coexistence”. Since 
the impossibility of coexistence still creates a basis for war, it 


{ A. Ehrhardt, “Biopolitik—Vollzug der Gesetze des Lebens” in Nation 
Europa, No. 12, Dec. 1964, S. 3-9. 


150 





is essential that we “banish all hostile feelings”. Hinder con- 
siders “the policy of womanly softness and compliance” to be 
the “only realistic attitude today”. He refers to the cold war 
in Freudist terms, as “survivals of the past” and the cultiva- 
tion of “hate complexes’’.! 

Similar views are expressed by G. Jentsch in an article in 
the same magazine. He also advances a theory of geopolitical 
cosmopolitanism and a socio-political programme based on the 
possibility of “rational coexistence of historical forces’.2 There 
are three stages to his programme for the “renewal” of the 
world. The first is “overcoming mental hostility” in order to 
“overcome world contradictions and transform them into a 
new harmonious system”. This leads to the second, the estab- 
lishment of a system whereby the earth’s resources would be 
distributed and used “according to the biological laws of sym- 
biosis”. The third stage is a “perfect world Empire”, “a per- 
fected divine Empire of Christians” where all the dreams and 
hopes of all the peoples of the world will be brought to pass. 
R. Hilf views the society of the future in similar terms, main- 
taining that the world “is moving relentlessly towards a uni- 
versal order of peoples and states”, a “just order”, combining 
“the Christian and the communist world-view”. The above con- 
ceptions of the development of world events are clearly utopian 
with marked theological overtones. 

Since the war Malthusian-racist and geopolitical ideas have 
been taken up and used by several American imperialist ideol- 
ogists. A feature of the post-war works of the US Malthus- 
ians has been the importance attached to the issues of war 
and peace. Once more the ideologists of the most aggressive 
forces of monopoly capital began clamouring about “inexorable 
growth of population”, population increase as a cause of war, 
about “the need for nations with a low birth rate to defend 
themselves from nations with a high birth rate” and so on. 
Numerous books appeared in the USA after the war preach- 
ing the most gloomy, negative ideas of Malthusianism, books 
like the Road to Survival by W. Vogt (New York, 1948), Pop- 
ulation Roads to War or Peace by Burch and Pendell (New 
York, 1947), The Conditions of Economic Progress by C. Clark 
(New York, 1953) and a host of others. The World’s Hunger 


1 Zeitschrift fiir Geopolitik ..., No. 1, 1958, S. 4. 
2G. Jentsch, “Der Begriff des Politischen” in Zeitschrift fir Geopoli- 
lik ..., Nr. 1, 1958, S. 32. 


151 








by Pearson and Harper (New York, 1945) presents the old 
Malthusian theory that population increases more rapidly than 
food supply and there will inevitably be wars unless popu- 
lation can be drastically reduced. 

The famous American demographer W. Thompson put in a 
great deal of effort in an attempt to produce an ideological 
justification for war, trying to prove that the growth of popu- 
lation in the Pacific area represented a “threat” to the United 
States and the whole of Western civilisation.! In another book 
he writes: “The only sure relief for population pressure and 
the tensions and troubles it creates is population control ... the 
alternative to such control must be the return of a high death 
rate due to hunger and want and disease and probably hot 
war in the not distant future.” 

Malthusian theories have influenced French sociology too. 
G. Bouthoul writes in his A Hundred Million Corpses that 
war is a natural periodic phenomenon, like animal migration, 
and is due to “overpopulation of the earth and a shortage of 
living space”. He looks upon wars as useful in that they help 
“restore the upset social balance” by destroying “surplus” 
population. In another book he expresses the view that “a sur- 
plus of young people who are not indispensable to the principal 
economic tasks” creates “collective aggression”.? Another 
French Malthusian, Paul Reboux, regards modern wars as bio- 
logical events, and remarks that “the ferocity of wars is pro- 
portional to the surplus of human beings”’.4 

Similar views are expressed by several British Malthusians. 
Thus, the former President of the American Association of 
Advancement of Science, Mr. Hill, declared that high popula- 

tion growth would lead to increasing international tension and 
disorder threatening the very existence of civilisation.5 The 
Daily Telegraph wrote on June 28, 1947, that war was not 
such a bad thing after all, since it gets rid of crisis and unem- 
ployment and raises production. 
Like the West German revanchists, the supporters of modern 
geopolitics in the NATO countries are trying to disassociate 
themselves from the fascist theories of population, cloaking the 


1 W. Thompson, Population and Peace in the Pacific, Chicago, 1946. 
2 W. Thompson, Population and Progress in the Far East, Chicago, 1959, 
pp. 399, 400. 
3G. Bouthoul, La surpopulation dans le monde, Paris, 1958, p. 184. 
4 Paul Reboux, Trop d’enfants?, Paris, 1951, p. 253 et seq. 
5 R. Innes, Essays in Biography, London, 1954, p. 26. 


152 





old Malthusian ideas in “truth”, “humanism”, “defence of 
peace”, “philanthropy” and numerous other guises. The Ameri- 
can journalist G. Seldes correctly observed in his book One 
Thousand Americans: “...Any fascist attempt to gain power 
in America would not use the exact Hitler pattern. It would 
work under the guise of ‘super-patriotism’ and ‘super-Ameri- 
canism’. Fascist leaders ... know that they must hand out a 
line that ‘sells’. ”’4 

The strong movement for peace and the peaceful policy of 
the socialist countries force even the most reactionary ideolo- 
gists of aggression to refrain from expressing their views open- 
ly and adopt a more subtle approach. In this respect the “evo- 
lution” of W. Vogt’s ideas may serve as a good example. His 
misanthropical book Road to Survival (1948) was followed in 
1952 by an article in which he declared that the increase in the 
earth’s population represents a greater threat to peace than 
the atom bomb. In 1960, he published another book? in which 
he insisted that he was guided, as before, by his concern for 
the future of mankind and expressed his regret that his former 
book had been misunderstood and branded as fascist. He then 
proceeded to advance the same Malthusian views as before, but 
taking care to do so in a more cautious manner. Referring to 
demographic statistics, he draws a very gloomy picture of the 
contemporary world on the brink of catastrophe. The growth 
in the population, he wrote, “has taken on the sinister shape of 
the nuclear blast’s mushrooming cloud”.* He draws another 
equally graphic comparison, this time between world popula- 
tion growth and the growth of a cancer cell.4 Vogt laments the 
fact that there have never been so many people dissatisfied 
with their lives as there are today. People eke out a wretched 
existence, suffering from lack of employment in the literal and 
in the more general sense. The reason for this sorry state of 
affairs, according to Vogt, is excessive population growth, mak- 
ing us vulnerable in a number of ways Malthus could never have 
conceived.5 Disaster is brought nearer by a fanatical cult of 
economic growth, a policy of state and public social welfare, 
unemployment benefit, child allowances, free education and 
health services, and so on and so forth. Despite the vast sums 


1 George Seldes, One Thousand Americans, New York, 1947, p. 103. 
2 W. Vogt, People! Challenge to Survival, New York, 1960. 

3 [bid., p. 43. 

4 Tbid., p. 47. 

5 Tbid., p. 66. 


153 











spent on various forms of “aid”, this great sea of starvation 
and malnutrition continues to exist.1 Like other neo-Malthu- 
sians, Vogt devotes a great deal of attention to the less dev- 
eloped countries, and would have us believe that it is overpopu- 
lation that is responsible for their poverty and backwardness, 
and that this represents a serious threat to the developed coun- 
tries. Vogt refers to the suggestion he made twelve years be- 
fore in Road to Survival that aid should only be accorded to 
those less developed countries that were sponsoring birth con- 
trol, and tries to explain that his proposals were dictated by 
genuine humanitarian concern. He suggests that instead of send- 
ing armies of technicians and engineers to these countries, and 
paying out billions of dollars on their industrialisation, it would 
be far more sensible to send birth-control pills.2 Only those 
who agree to accept birth control should be helped. However, 
afraid this might sound just a little too callous, he adds that 
he is by no means suggesting that birth control is the only an- 
swer to the problem of overpopulation. All sorts of other meas- 
ures are necessary, such as the improvement of agricultural 
techniques, the soil, water, meadows and forests, industrialisa- 
tion, education, capital investment and technical aid. Yet he 
nevertheless insists on a reduction of the birth rate as a pana- 
cea for all the world’s economic and social problems. All the 
time, in a careful effort to avoid the accusation that he is being 
too misanthropic, he cloaks his gloomy Malthusian ideas in 
heavily sugared protestations of concern for “the welfare of 
mankind”. This, however, does not serve to make them any 
more scientific. 

Unfortunately, the task of the ideologists of aggression is 
lightened by the incorrect method of analysis of the demo- 
graphic processes employed by several outstanding bourgeois 
scientists. The latter include the supporters of the theory of 
“demographic cycles” and “demographic stages”, according to 
which all nations pass through three stages in their develop- 
ment: the stages of potential growth, transitional growth and 
gradual decline. The first stage of extremely slow population 
growth is followed by a veritable population “explosion”, which 
in turn is followed by virtual stabilisation but at what is con- 
sidered an excessively high density. This theory was advanced 
by the American geographer P. James in his A Geography of 


1 'W. Vogt, op. cit., p. 84. 
2 bid, p. 146: 


154 











Man (New York, 1949). Some of those who support such theo- 
ries hold that countries at the second and third stages have an 
excessively high population causing “demographic pressure”. 
This, they hold, is what moves them to undertake aggressive 
wars for the acquisition of living space. Some treat society as 
a biological organism, others approach the dynamics of the 
demographic processes in the abstract, without relating them 
to modes of production. In point of fact, however, the dynamics 
of demographic processes can only be successfully analysed in 
the context of a given set of socio-economic conditions. 

After the Second World War a new situation arose in view 
of the sharp uptrend in population growth resulting from a 
decline in the mortality rate in the countries that had freed 
themselves from colonial rule. At the turn of the century the 
world’s population was about 1,600 million; in 1964 it was 
3,260 million, or more than doubled, and according to UN 
estimates it is expected to almost double again by the year 
2000. 

Population growth has indeed become a serious problem, es- 
pecially in the case of the developing countries. Hence the in- 
creasing influence of Malthusianism on scholars and scientists 
who fail to adopt a scientific approach to the complex rela- 
tionship and interaction between socio-economic and demo- 
graphic factors, and are dismayed by such rapid growth. 

The American sociologist Philip Hauser writes in his Pop- 
ulation Perspectivest of “a demographic revolution” and the 
possibility of a global crisis, since ‘‘the globe is finite” and “liv- 
ing space would be exhausted”. He thinks that if the dev- 
eloping countries fail to achieve a higher standard of living, 
we must expect aggression from large hungry countries as a 
result of population pressure. Similar views are to be found 
in The Population Dilemma (New York, 1963), Population 
Problems in the Future (Minneapolis, 1958), Overpopulation— 
The Twentieth Century Nemesis by A. Stuart (New York, 
1958), and numerous other books and articles. 

There are many scholars who support peace, yet who re- 
gard the “population explosion” as a major obstacle to the 
peaceful solution of international problems. A good example 
is the famous British historian and sociologist Arnold ‘Toynbee, 
who expressed his ideas on the subject in his address “Man and 


1 P. Hauser, Population Perspectives, New Brunswick-New Jersey, 
1960, p. 8. 


155 











Hunger: The Perspective of History” to the World Food Con- 
gress in 1963.4 From time immemorial man has suffered from 
three great evils: war, disease (epidemics) and hunger. These 
three natural scourges all have the effect of keeping numbers 
down to within certain limits. However, man has escaped from 
complete dependence on nature and is able to embark on a 
more humane path for fulfilling the aims of nature. He can 
only be successful on one condition—that of regulating the 
birth rate. Our earth has finite dimensions so that if war and 
epidemics are eliminated it is essential that population growth 
be limited correspondingly. Moreover, a high unregulated birth 
rate is the most difficult challenge modern man must respond to, 
more difficult than the challenge to abolish war. Although war 
is caused by the imperfection of human nature as of other ani- 
mals, “war could perhaps be abolished effectively by agreement 
among the small minority of the human race that has a 
monopoly of political power”. 

Reducing the birth rate, on the other hand, is more diffi- 
cult in Toynbee’s opinion, because it involves the behaviour 
of millions of couples with their personal family relations, tra- 
ditions and prejudices. The danger of rapid population growth 
and the (according to Toynbee) resulting hunger in the dev- 
eloping countries has been greatly increased by the appearance 
of the atomic weapon, which has brought “race suicide” within 
sight of becoming feasible. The two main tasks today are: the 
political task of getting the whole human race to administer it- 
self as a single world-wide unit for the purpose of producing 
and distributing food, and the task of regulating the birth rate 
to match the already achieved reduction of the death rate. 

Bertrand Russell writes in his article “Population Pressure 
and War” that the world at the present day is faced with two 
antithetical dangers. The first is the risk that nuclear war 
might destroy the human race, and the second, not nearly so 
widely appreciated, is that the human population of our planet 
may increase to the point where the threat of universal desti- 
tution through overpopulation might easily lead to a nuclear 
war.? He considers that a reduction in the birth rate promises 
rapid progress, the elimination of poverty and the creation of 


1 Population Bulletin, Population Reference Bureau, Inc., Washington, 
Dec. 1963, Vol. XIX, No. 8, pp. 218-24. 

2 World Academy of Art and Science. The Population Crisis and 
the Use of World Resources, Ed. by Stuart Mudd, The Hague, 1964, p. 1. 


156 





a harmonious fellowship of nations, and the population 
problem is thus the most important. 

As we have seen, considerable nuances are to be found in 
Malthusian literature. Side by side with the diehard ideolo- 
gists of imperialism we find well-meaning scholars who have 
simply failed to grasp the complex relationships between de- 
mographic, social and political factors, who are sincerely dis- 
mayed at the rapid growth of population and consider it an 
important determinant factor for the future of mankind. The 
liberal Malthusians sincerely believe that the struggle to re- 
duce the birth rate is an important means of removing the 
threat of war. There are many attempts to present the modern 
age as the “age of the demographic revolution’, in which 
mankind is threatened by two grave dangers, the Bomb and 
Overpopulation. Some even go as far as to say that the great 
danger is “not the nuclear explosion but the population explo- 
sion’. Whatever their subjective aims, however, such people 
are in fact supporting the Malthusian cause of diverting the 
attention of the masses from the most vital social, economic 
and political issues of our time—the struggle against impe- 
rialism and neo-colonialism—to the problem of population. Yet 
the fact remains that without a clear understanding of the so- 
cio-economic, class origins of war, and unless the social forces 
capable of abolishing them are revealed, all efforts to con- 
demn war are futile. 

Marxism rejects the idea that the causes of war are to be 
sought in human nature or demographic processes. Marxism- 
Leninism regards wars as the continuation of politics by vio- 
lent means. Thus, Lenin wrote: “All wars are inseparable from 
the political systems that engender them.”! In order to define 
the true nature of a war, it is necessary to reveal its class es- 
sence, see which class is waging the given war. The aim of 
Malthusianism, geopolitics and other such false doctrines is to 
conceal it. Yet only by first discovering the causes of wars can 
we hope to find ways of abolishing them and establishing 
peace. Such is the attitude of many progressive scholars. 

Thus, the German scholar W. Hollitscher, in his article “On 
the Supposed Overpopulation of the World” published in Wis- 
senschaft und Fortschritt (GDR), wrote of Vogt’s Malthusian 
“theories”: “It is perfectly understandable that the spokesmen 
for this doomed socio-economic system should try to divert 


1 V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24, p. 400. 


157 























mankind's attention from the real causes of the poverty that 
imperialism brings the world. This is why these scholars at- 
tribute all evils in the world to supposed “overpopulation”, in- 
sisting that overpopulation makes a struggle for Lebensraum, 
and thus wars, inevitable. ...”! 

The French scholar Jean Gaudebert writes in his article 
“Neo-Malthusianism, the Instrument of War and Social Reac- 
tion of Decaying Capitalism”, that the neo-Malthusians intend to 
cast the blame for a third world war, especially if it should 
originate in Asia, on overpopulation, and thereby attempt to 
demoralise and demobilise the peoples struggling for peace.2 

As early as November 1948, the journal Political Affairs crit- 
icised the “resurrection” and dissemination of reactionary 
Malthusian ideas. The journal pointed out that neo-Malthu- 
sianism had become one of the weapons in the ideological ar- 
senal of imperialism, and that it was therefore essential to re- 
veal on the basis of concrete material the unscientific nature 
of these ideas and the reactionary character of the political de- 
ductions drawn from them. Life refuted Malthusianism, both 
on the demographic count (the proposition that population in- 
creases in a geometrical ratio) and on the economic (the claim 
that the means of subsistence increase at a lower rate than 
population). 

By the turn of the century, population growth had dropped 
off considerably in the advanced capitalist countries and by 
the time of the Great Depression (1929 to 1933) the leading 
capitalist countries (France, Germany, Britain and the USA) 
were threatened with a population decrease, while the growth 
of the means of subsistence had easily outstripped the rate of 
population increase. It was then that “Malthusianism turned 
inside out” (Hersch) made its appearance, an attempt to attri- 
bute poverty and unemployment to a low birth rate and not 
a high one, while Hitler strove to promote aggression on the 
grounds that the birth rate in Germany had fallen off due to 
lack of Lebensraum. 

It should have been quite obvious that this sharp decline in 
the birth rate was due to capitalist class contradictions, for the 
birth rate dropped quite as much in France and Britain with 
their vast colonial territories as it did in Germany.* Moreover, 


1 “Uber die angebliche Ubervolkerung der Erde”, Wissenschaft und 
Fortschritt, N. 3, 1952, S. 65. 

2 Cahiers du communisme, Mai 1952, p. 506. 

3 The causes were industrialisation and urbanisation, and the fact 


158 








today the aggressor is not India, with a high density of popu- 
lation (110 inhabitants per sq. km.) or Egypt with its high 
rate of increase (2.5 per cent), but the United States, with a 
low density (20.5 per sq. km.) and a low increase (1.5 per 
cent).1 

The modern Malthusians attach a great deal of significance 
to high rates of population increase in the developing coun- 
tries. There are numerous factors contributing to this, just as 
there were in Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries: com- 
plete absence of family planning, the persistence of the house- 
hold economy, child labour, early marriage, high infant mor- 
tality, illiteracy, and tradition and religion sanctifying large 
families and preventing a more rational approach to mother- 
hood and family planning. Modern advances in medicine have 
led to a sharp reduction in the death rate and must thus be 
counted as another factor contributing to higher population 
increase. Such large increase brings additional difficulties 
when it comes to tackling the task of freeing the economy from 
outside control and raising living standards. Marxists are thus 
all in favour of an active policy of birth control out of consi- 
derations of simple humanity. What they are opposed to is the 
attempt to use Malthusian and other reactionary bourgeois 
theories in an open or heavily camouflaged form for the pur- 
pose of diverting attention from the real causes of poverty 
and want, thereby obstructing the struggle against colonial ag- 
gression and neo-colonialism. Marxists hold that the real an- 
swer to the problems of the developing countries is for them to 
be freed from their economic dependence on the imperialist 
powers. The solution for the developing countries is to adopt 


that more and more women were going out to work, abandoning their 
traditional role of housewife and mother which had given them the time 
to bring up large families. Another reason for such a drastic reduction, 
almost to the point of depopulation, was insecurity and unemployment, 
particularly in the period of the Great Depression (1929-33). 

1K. Witthauer, Bevélkerung der Erde, Gotha, 1958, S. 105, 276-77. 

2 Analysis of the facts shows that “aid” being offered by the capitalist 
countries at present by no means always helps strengthen the economy 
of the developing countries, since the profits derived from it by the mo- 
nopolies of the imperialist countries are often in excess of the amount 
invested, so that new investment is often largely reinvestment of the 
profits already made. Economic assistance is frequently offered in the 
form of military aid. The increasing losses borne by the agricultural and 
raw material producers on the world market are generally greater than 
aid received from the Western powers. 


159 














the non-capitalist path of industrialisation, improving the ef- 
ficiency of agriculture, abolishing child labour, raising the wel- 
fare and educational standards of the masses, improving the 
health system and overcoming the prejudices concerning the 
size of families, birth control and so on. In other words, Marx- 
ists and Communists are not against birth control and family 
planning, but against neo-Malthusianism, which reduces all 
social problems to the problem of population and considers the 
biological development of mankind to be the chief motive 
force of history. 

In contrast to the pessimistic Malthusian forecasts, many 
scientists and scholars have produced convincing evidence to 
show that at the modern level of scientific achievement our 
earth could support a far larger population than it does at pre- 
sent and ensure them a high standard of living, were it 
not for the negative influence of capitalist production rela- 
tions. 

It is interesting to note what the former director of FAO (the 
UN Food and Agriculture Organisation), J. Boyd-Orr, has 
to say in this connection: “Modern science has the answer to 
Malthus. ...food production has never been geared up to full 
speed. The target in Western civilisation has been, not the 
amount needed to supply human needs, but the amount that 
could be sold at a profit.”! 

The one-time leader of the World Peace Movement, John 
Bernal, states in his famous book World Without War that at 
present only 13,200,000 sq. km. of land, or 10 per cent of the 
world’s land surface, are being used for agriculture, whereas 
the area suitable for agricultural purposes amounts to 
93,900,000 sq. km. or some seven times that area. Bernal 
holds that science offers practically unlimited prospects of 
improving agricultural techniques and increasing food 
output. 

The Danish scientist A. Jakobson announced at the Agrar- 
ian Economists Conference in Helsinki in 1955 that he had 
calculated that harvests as high as those gathered in Denmark 
or other West European countries from an area of 3,600 mil- 
lion hectares would be enough to feed a population of 32,000 
million. If we consider that apart from increasing harvests it 
is also possible to greatly extend the area under cultivation, 


1 J. Boyd-Orr, The White Man's Dilemma. Food and the Future, 
London, 1953, p. 80. 


160 


it would appear that man has indeed practically unlimited 
prospects for increasing food output, without mentioning the 
wealth of the seas and oceans. 

In contrast to the Malthusians, Marxists are optimistic as 
regards demographic prospects too. What are the demographic 
trends to be observed in the socialist countries, and what is 
the outlook for their development under communism? 

If we take into account, as we must, the complexity of the 
factors influencing these trends, and the fact that some of them 
—poorly developed productive forces, existing family rela- 
tions and everyday habits, wars and their consequences—con- 
tinue to exert an influence for a considerable time after a 
revolution, it is plain that the trends of population growth can- 
not be changed as quickly as production relations. 

If we take the Soviet Union as an example of population 
trends in socialist society, we can observe the following char- 
acteristic features: a rapid decline in overall and infant mor- 
tality as a result of improved welfare and a state health sys- 
tem making qualified medical attention available to all sections 
of the population, and the disappearance of social distinctions 
in the birth and death rates; this is accompanied by a drop in 
the birth rate, due to numerous factors, the chief of which are 
a sharp decline in child mortality, better family planning 
as a result of higher educational standards, all helped by rapid 
industrialisation and urbanisation involving large-scale migra- 
tion, the equal participation of women in education, economic 
and public life, a widening of the gap, despite the fast rates 
of building, between housing construction and the actual new 
requirements, and changes in the age structure of the popula- 
tion and the sex ratio as a result of the war. There are other 
factors, however, working in the opposite direction, such as 
the absence of unemployment, confidence in the future that 
comes with social security, the vast increase in public services 
and child welfare services (including créches, kindergartens, 
etc.) and rapidly improving living conditions. 

As for the future prospects, in communist society where all 
people’s needs are satisfied (on the basis of the principle “From 
each according to his ability, to each according to his needs”) 
the economic factors that tend to reduce the birth rate will no 
longer apply. 

Communism presupposes an extremely high future growth 
of the productive forces. At the same time, Engels’ prediction 
that people will “make their history conscientiously” will ap- 


11—203 161 











ply to population growth: with the attainment of complete 
harmony between the individual and society, the population 
growth rate will fully correspond to the interests of both the 
individual family and society. Thus, communist society will 
face neither the threat of overpopulation (as the Malthusians 
fear) nor the threat of depopulation (as feared by the sup- 
porters of the “welfare theory’). 

To conclude, the socio-political trends to be observed in the 
modern world—and that includes demographic trends—do not 
confirm the neo-Malthusian theories that population growth is 
a major cause of wars and the chief threat of a new world 
war. 





Chapter !X 


WESTERN SOCIAL 
PSYCHOLOGY ON THE 
CAUSES OF WARS 
AND THE MEANS OF 
AVERTING THEM 


There has been a growing interest in the West over the last 
few decades in the socio-psychological aspects of war and 
peace. Although there had been earlier attempts to find the 
psychological origins of conflicts and the means of eliminating 
them, it was only after the war that the range of investigations 
conducted in this sphere was greatly widened to include such 
a plurality of different problems as national character, indi- 
vidual character, the influence of social and other conditions, 
and psychological distortion of reality, to mention but a few. 

Marxists show a keen interest in the study of the psycholo- 
gical aspects of war and peace. With regard to the work car- 
ried on by Western scholars in this field, they are guided by 
the principle of careful selection of valuable, realistic propo- 
sitions, and energetic criticism of theories that obscure the es- 
sence of the problems, and either directly or indirectly help 
spread the idea that war is inevitable. 





Basic Trends in 
Western Social 
Psychology 

and Their Treatment 
of the Problem 

of the 

Origins of War 


There are two basic trends in modern Western social psy- 
chology, the psycho-analytic and the behaviourist, differing in 
their origin, methods of investigation and main theories. 


11* 163 








The psycho-analytic trend, which still commands widespread 
support, albeit far less than in the thirties, derives from the theo- 
ries of the founder of psycho-analysis, Sigmund Freud (1856- 
1939). Although Freud never actually set himself the specific aim 
of investigating the causes of war, he considered his theories 
to be universally valid, applicable to the solution of the most 
diverse social phenomena, international conflicts included. 
Freud explained aggressive behaviour by the hypothesis of the 
existence of a supply of unconscious aggressive energy in man. 
In peacetime numerous social taboos are imposed on_ this 
drive, but in wartime the position is reversed and there is plenty 
of opportunity for the drive to discharge its energy. To begin 
with, Freud was inclined to believe that aggressive behaviour is 
produced by a state of crisis resulting from the disappointment 
of plans and hopes (frustration), but later he abandoned this 
view for the theory of a built-in aggressive instinct. 

The First World War bringing violence and destruction on 
a colossal scale moved Freud to develop further his theory of 
an innate aggressive drive: he postulated an innate drive for 
death and destruction (Thanatos) in constant conflict with its 
opposite, the drive of life and its procreation and preservation 
(Eros). He came to regard this innate death drive as the one 
and only cause of wars: if a nation is not at war and has no 
suitable substitutes for war, the pent-up death instinct, fin- 
ding no outlet, will bring about the destruction of that na- 
tion. 

The deduction that automatically follows from this fatalistic 
theory is that wars are a natural phenomenon, deriving from 
human nature and therefore unavoidable. Despite the fact that 
Freud himself wanted to be a pacifist, and indeed considered 
himself as such, his fatalistic theory forced him to adopt a far 
from pacifist attitude to war. He declared that war “seems 
quite a natural thing, no doubt it has a good biological basis 
and in practice it is scarcely avoidable”’.! 

Freud’s theory was severely criticised from the start by pro- 
gressive scholars and even by several Right-wing philosophers 
and psychologists. The highly reactionary political character of 
Freudism and its metaphysical methodology supposing the 
existence of immutable unconscious drives in man, the primi- 
tive structure of the theory based on two major instincts, and 
the strong element of fatalism caused even its followers to 


1 Quoted from Harry K. Wells, Pavlov and Freud, New York, 1960, p. 34. 


164 





adopt a critical approach, introducing certain alterations and 
rejecting several of its propositions. 

Today, psycho-analysis no longer represents a single system 
but has forked out along various paths. One group of psycho- 
analysts—Nunberg, Strachey, Waelder, and others—accepts 
Freud’s theory of the “death instinct” or the “aggressive in- 
stinct”; another, the most influential—Saul, McNeil, Berko- 
witz, et. al.—has developed the theory that aggression is the 
product of frustration, individual or social. Saul declares that 
“hostility is a disease of development and has its chief sources 
within the personality”.1 While Dollard and his colleagues, 
in their book Frustration and Aggression (1939) held that frus- 
tration invariably results in aggression, McNeil supports the 
rather different view that “the bulk of human aggressiveness 
can be traced directly to frustration”,? but that frustration, in- 
dividual or social, does not necessarily produce aggressive 
response. 

The supporters of the theory of frustration are generally 
sharply critical of the Freudian concept of a built-in instinct 
of aggression. Berkowitz, for instance, claims that ‘““very few 
psycho-analysts today accept Freud’s hypothesis of a death in- 
stinct”, since “... the concept of an innate drive for destruc- 
tion, as Freud has posited it, is scientifically unwarranted”. 
Berkowitz, like many other psychologists, could not fail to ob- 
serve the marked reactionary nature of the basic Freudian 
propositions. 

The supporters of the theory of frustration ascribe the cause 
of war not to an innate aggressive instinct but to social frus- 
tration, i.e., social psychology in a state of crisis as a result of 
the frustration of national plans, hopes and aspirations. Some- 
times the source of this frustration may lie within a given coun- 
try. As McNeil puts it: “Since so many of our working and 
social relationships are organised in terms of employers and 
employees and leaders and followers, frustration can issue di- 
rectly from unsatisfactory leadership which thwarts gratifica- 
tion of the needs of others.” 





1 See A. H. Buss, The Psychology of Aggression, New York-London, 
1961, p. 190. 

2 FE. B. McNeil, “Psychology and Aggression”, Journal of Conflict 
Resolution, 1959, Vol. HII, No. 8, p. 202. 


3 L. Berkowitz, Aggression. A Social-Psychological Analysis, New York, 
1962, p. 8. 
4 E. B. McNeil, op. cit., p. 203. 


165 





A similar view is held by the psycho-analyst J. C. Flugel, 
who considers that a country where the essential needs of the 
population are reasonably satisfied is less liable to go to war 
than a country whose inhabitants suffer serious discontent or 
irritation. “In the latter case,” he writes, “the people feel that 
they have little or nothing to lose by going to war, and will 
welcome the relief afforded by the opportunity of expressing 
their aggression against a foe who can be made the scapegoat 
responsible for all their ills.”’! 

Sometimes the source of social frustration may lie outside 
the country in question. Etzioni notes that “the more frustra- 
tions Americans suffer on the international front or in space 
competition, the more aggressive their mood becomes.... In 
fact, as the international situation continues to deteriorate ... 
the public becomes more and more aggressive and the pacifist 
program becomes less and less adequate.” 

The above few examples should suffice to show how the sup- 
porters of the theory of frustration adopt an idealist as op- 
posed to a materialist approach to investigation of the causes of 
war—proceeding from changes in social psychology to changes 
in objective reality. They regard a state of psychological 
crisis as the chief direct cause of aggressive behaviour, despite 
the fact that many of them admit that frustration is produced 
by outside circumstances. Thus, they are really making human 
psychology the chief cause of war,? which is actually the basic 
premise of the concept of an “aggressive instinct”. 

Another methodological weakness of the frustration theory, 
which is connected with the first, is its inability to explain ag- 
gressiveness in the absence of visible frustration. If Flugel’s 
proposition that aggressiveness is the result of frustrated needs 
were correct, a country like the United States which enjoys 
the highest standard of living in the capitalist world ought 
surely to be one of the most peace-loving of all nations. In 
practice, however, we find that the opposite is the case. The 


{ J. C. Flugel, “Some Neglected Aspects of World Integration”, Psy- 
chological Factors of Peace and War, Ed. by T. H. Pear, London-New 
York, 1950, pp. 129-30. 

2 A. Etzioni, The Hard Way to Peace. A New Strategy, New York, 
1962, pp. 77, 78. 

3 Thus, the psycho-analyst R. Stagner writes: “Dictatorship and war 
are made possible by emotional infantilism on the part of both leaders 
and aes ...” (R. Stagner, Psychology of Personality, New York, 1961, 
p. 525). 


166 











USA is today one of the most aggressive states in the world, 
the international gendarme of freedom-loving peoples. 

Many of the critics of the theory of frustration quite rightly 
point out that the most bellicose states in history were not 
particularly poor, but, indeed, on the contrary, were usually 
among the most prosperous.! On the other hand, we cannot 
agree with those critics who insist that there is no connection 
at all between frustration and aggressive behaviour.” 

Another important methodological flaw in the theory of 
frustration is that it fails to distinguish between the frustra- 
tions experienced by vastly differing groups in capitalist so- 
ciety, as for example the workers and the monopolists. In other 
words it puts into the same category the “aggressiveness” of 
the average man in the street and the aggressiveness of the 
ruling classes and closely allied imperialist military clique. 

Despite the shortcomings we have mentioned, it would be 
a mistake to ignore the several sensible ideas supporters of the 
theory have advanced or helped propagate. One of the most 
constructive of these is the theory that popular indignation 
may be aroused by actions of bourgeois leaders who fail to 
satisfy the needs of the people, and that this discontent may be 
directed by the latter towards an illusory enemy, as Hitler 
did by making the Communists and the Jews the scapegoats 
for all Germany’s troubles. Another is the theory that the hos- 
tility of a section of the population in capitalist countries tow- 
ards national minorities like the Negroes, the Jews, etc., may 
be based on unfavourable economic factors producing frustra- 
tion and resultant aggressive attitudes and behaviour. 

A third psycho-analytic school (Fromm, Adorno, Else-Fren- 
kel-Brunswick) is concerned mainly with describing the sub- 
conscious or “prejudiced” features of the personality of the 
contemporary individual. For Fromm, modern man is an “‘au- 
thoritarian personality”, i.e., a personality aspiring to power, 
combining sadism (the desire to inflict pain) and masochism 
(the desire to receive pain). 

For Adorno and his colleagues,* “the authoritarian persona- 
lity” is synonymous with the “potentially fascistic individual”, 
who when the favourable social conditions present themselves, 





ae See, for instance, G. Watson, Social Psychology. Issues and Insights, 
New York-Philadelphia, 1965, p. 502. 

2 See A. H. Buss, op. cit., p. 20. 

3 T. W. Adorno and others, The Authoritarian Personality, New York, 
1950. 


167 











that is, when powerful economic forces wish to use anti-demo- 
cratic propaganda to achieve domination, is capable of actively 
supporting the Napoleonic plans of his leaders. Buss gives a de- 
scription of the “authoritarian man” as he is seen by the social 
psychologists. “The authoritarian divides others into two classes, 
the strong and the weak. He has a sstrict, rigid conscience 
and maintains that something is either good or bad, right or 
wrong, with nothing in between. He is afraid of being weak 
and must prove to himself that he is strong by aggressing 
against those who cannot retaliate.’’! 

The “authoritarian personality” is a type who is frequently 
to be met in Western capitalist countries and indeed carries a 
threat to bourgeois democracy and international peace. But 
it is a great mistake to represent him as one of the chief po- 
tential causes of modern wars, or as typical of contemporary 
society as a whole. 

A fourth psycho-analytic school is formed by the social psy- 
chologists, who are mainly concerned with examining the con- 
nection between child and adult psychology (A. Kardiner, 
M. Mead). Their main thesis is that differences between in- 
dividual or group psychology (aggressive or non-aggressive) 
are determined by educational methods and the relationships 
between parents and children. They conduct experiments with 
school children, investigating, for example, such problems as 
the influence on the child’s psychology of a “democratic” teach- 
er, i.e., a teacher who uses persuasion, and an “authoritarian” 
teacher, who resorts to bullying, shouting, scolding and other 
forms of compulsion. A number of experiments have shown 
that the pupils of the latter kind of teacher are inclined to re- 
volt and generally less constructive behaviour.2 The child psy- 
chologists attempt to apply the results of their experiments and 
other observations from study of educational methods to society 
as a whole. 

The main weakness of this approach is that it exaggerates the 
influence of education on the behaviour of adults. Educational 
methods doubtless play considerable role in forming the social 
psychology of large groups of people, but the ideological tenden- 
cies of teaching, whether propaganda of militarism or peace pre- 
dominates, depend chiefly on the underlying economic and po- 
litical tendencies of a given society, in short, on the social system. 


1 A. H. Buss, op. cit., p. 262. 
2 E. B. McNeil, op. cit., p. 269. 


168 





Moreover, as the sociologist H. Jones points out, the introduc- 
tion of teaching methods designed to avoid provoking aggres- 
siveness in children does not remove all the sources of social 
aggressiveness since “aggressive responses may be no less effec- 
tively mobilised even in adult life, by severe frustrations in 
current experience.... A wave of national aggressiveness due 
even to transitory frustrations (perhaps arising from the nation’s 
position in the world) can be very violent... .””! 

The various schools of psycho-analysis outlined above, al- 
though differing somewhat in their basic points of departure, 
have enough in common to merit being considered as repre- 
senting a single school of thought. In many cases both the prob- 
lems they treat and the solutions they offer coincide. 

Behaviourism, founded by J. B. Watson, developed in the 
twenties as a rival movement to the psycho-analytic trend in 
social psychology. In contrast to the latter, which postulated 
the existence of active or potential unconscious drives in peo- 
ple, behaviourism regards human perception as a combination 
of conditioned reflexes and behaviour as the sum of assimilat- 
ed reactions to environment. Mental psychological activity is 
reduced to habits and behaviour patterns developed through 
study and practice. 

In place of the “aggressive instinct” the behaviourists ad- 
vance the concept of “aggressive habits”. As A. Buss puts it, “in 
this behavioral approach to aggressiveness a crucial role is played 
by habit: aggressiveness is the habit of attacking”.2 T. Lentz 
declares: ‘The barriers (to international co-operation.—Y. K.] 
are in our heads and hearts. They are in our habits of social 
behaviour.” 

How does an “aggressive habit” emerge? If we accept that 
the individual himself creates his habits we come back to the 
psycho-analyst postulation of unconscious active drives. The 
behaviourists therefore seek the answer in the behaviour of 
the group, and maintain that the causes of individual habits are 
to be found in the aggressive habits and traditions of the latter. 
According to Buss, “society specifies the targets, the amount 
and the modes of aggression; those who do not conform are 
maladjusted”.4 


1H. Jones, Human Relationships and Group Behaviour. Alternatives 
to War and Violence—A Search, London, 1963, p. 21. 

2 A. H. Buss, op. cit., p. 198. 

3 T. E. Lentz, Towards a Science of Peace. Turning Point in Human 
Destiny, New York-London, 1955, p. 22. 

4 A. H. Buss, op. cit., p. 207. 


169 








However, in transferring the source of aggressiveness from 
the individual to society, the behaviourists really do no more 
than state the plain fact of the existence of aggressive habits, 
without solving the problem of their origin. 

In their attempts to find the origins of social aggressiveness 
psychologists of various trends and schools frequently resort 
to the theory of “culture-patterns” advanced by Ruth Benedict 
in 1934. According to this theory, warfare is a “social theme 
that may or may not be used in any culture”.! T. H. Pear, a 
supporter of this theory, sees the culture-pattern as “the gen- 
eral principle of integration by means of which the customs, 
institutions and dogmas, the sentiments, interests and values of 
a culture are woven into a more or less coherent ‘pattern’”’.? 
The method of ascribing aggressiveness to certain cultures does 
not account for the question of the causes of hostile relation- 
ships with other countries of an “aggressive culture”, since ag- 
gressiveness is treated as something given in advance, and its 
social origins are left unexplained. 

What are the chief methodological shortcomings of the “ag- 
gressive habit” theory that prevents the behaviourists from re- 
vealing the main causes of war? The most important is to be 
found in their treatment of the aggressive habit as an indi- 
vidual, psycho-physiological “instrumental” response of the or- 
ganism, ignoring the social processes that produce an aggres- 
sive attitude to other nations, thus ascribing an equal role to 
such factors as social class and family in influencing the indi- 
vidual. The behaviourists fail to single out the main, decisive 
factors from the complex of external factors influencing human 
behaviour, for the simple reason that they do not recognise 
the social importance of the origins of man’s “aggressive habits”. 

This, the chief shortcoming of the behaviourist approach to 
the development of the aggressive habit gives rise to another 
when it comes to assessing the already formed habit. The be- 
haviourists fail to draw any distinction between the aggres- 
siveness of different groups of people. In fact, the reproach Pear, 
among others, makes with respect to the psycho-analytic theory 
of aggressiveness, namely that it “fails to distinguish between 
the aggressiveness of the war-makers ... and the attitudes of 
the general population, many of whom may not know of the 


i. R. Benedict, Patterns of Culture, New York, 1934, p. 27. 
2 T. H. Pear, “Peace, War and Culture- Patterns” F Popehalowiul Factors 
of Peace and War, pp. 21-22. 


170 





— » = 


impending war’”,! applies equally to the behaviourists them- 
selves. 

The logical outcome of these weaknesses is the view shared 
by behaviourists and psycho-analysts alike that the causes of 
war are wholly or largely psychological. Human psychology 
is regarded by both as the chief cause of war, with the only dif- 
ference that for the psycho-analysts it is unconscious drives 
that underlie psychology while for the behaviourists it is habits. 

Even some of the social psychologists who are prepared to 
accord social factors their due role in the development of an 
aggressive attitude to other nations are liable to adopt a one- 
sided psychological approach to the origins of war. The most 
notable in this respect is Erich Fromm, leader of the school of 
“culture psycho-analysis”, who claims to be a Marxist. 

Fromm’s idealism is patently evident in his views on the 
origins of war in our own age. “We live in one world,” he 
writes, “yet in his feelings and thoughts contemporary man 
still lives in the nation state.... This anachronism can only 
lead to disaster.” Thus, the main cause of war is not the pol- 
icies of certain social classes but the fact that the thoughts and 
feelings of modern man belong to a past age. In another work 
Fromm maintains—and this view is shared by many other 
psychologists—that “the chief potential cause of war is fear” 
of nuclear weapons, shattering people’s hope and forcing them 
to deny the existence of a mortal danger, and producing mass 
paranoia and schizophrenia.3 

In one of his latter works, Fromm apparently sought to 
somewhat revise his theory which emphasised the social-psycho- 
logical causes of war. He tried to get away from the “defeatist 
attitude” that war was inevitable due to man’s innate drive to- 
wards destruction. Fromm’s exposure of the weaknesses of this 
view does not however represent a fundamental departure 
from his earlier approach. “Wars,” he writes, ‘are the result 
of the decision of political, military, and business leaders to 
wage war for the sake of gaining territory, natural resources, 
advantages in trade... .”4 According to this logic, modern wars 


{ T, H. Pear, op. cit., 
2 E. Fromm, Beyond ie “Chain of Illusion. My Encounter with Marx 
and Freud, New York, 1962, p. 171. 

3 FE. Fromm, “The Case tor Unilateral Disarmament”, Daedalus, 1960, 
Vol. 8, No. 4. 

4E. Fromm, The Heart of Man. Its Genius for Good and Evil, New 
York, 1964, p. 22. 


171 











are caused not by the economics and policies of imperialism, 
but are simply the result of a decision that may be taken by 
the leaders of any state, capitalist or socialist. 

Throughout the book, Fromm continues to place the main 
emphasis on the unconscious drives of “modern man”, like the 
all-pervasive tendency to narcissism and so on. Fromm tries 
to reveal the secret of history through “global” social-psychol- 
ogical theorising: “Protestants against Catholics, French against 
Germans, whites against blacks, Aryans against non-Aryans, 
Communists against capitalists; different as the contents are, 
psychologically we deal with the same narcissistic phenome- 
non and its resulting fanaticism and destructiveness.”’! In place 
of concrete analysis of the causes of modern conflicts, Fromm 
offers an ever more abstract and generalised psychological theo- 
rising on different social, class, party and political interests. 
Fromm does not abandon this idealist, non-Marxist approach 
in his last book,? in which he more or less adopts the theory of 
frustration, declaring “destructiveness and violence” to be the 
result of the “shattering of hope”. 

The causes of wars are always of a concrete-historical na- 
ture, i.e., are linked with the existence of particular societies 
and classes, definite class interests and a particular relationship 
of forces. The mistake of Fromm and other social psychologists 
lies in their unhistorical approach, their substitution of abstract 
psychological causes, purporting to be valid in any society, for 
the real economic, political and social-psychological causes of 
wars. 

Many social psychologists still cling to the same mistaken 
approach that the American sociologist L. Bernard indicated 
as long ago as 1944. Although not a materialist, Bernard in- 
clined to the view that imperialism bore the responsibility for 
the world wars, and the fact that he understood this important 
point enabled him to spot the shortcomings of the psychologi- 
cal theories of war. ““To the superficial observer, or to one who 
for any reason wishes to avoid ‘materialist’ theories of the cau- 
sation of war,” he wrote, “the psychological causes seem to be 
important ones. These causes may be called public opinion, 
patriotism, nationalistic spirit, race or cultural prejudices, re- 
ligious intolerance, or any other set of opinions, beliefs or 


{ E. Fromm, The Ieart of Man..., pp. 82-83. 
2 E. Fromm, The Revolution of Hope. Toward a Humanized Technology, 
New York, 1968. 


172 








ideologies. But back of them almost invariably lie those eco- 
nomic causes which have conditioned them.”! 

Non-Marxist social psychologists sometimes recognise the 
role of economics and politics in their study of the causes of 
war, but they do so simply to make their analysis appear as 
comprehensive as possible and forestal possible accusations of 
one-sidedness, and not in order to give a materialist explana- 
tion to socio-psychological conceptions. 

The general tendency in Western social psychology to over- 
look the primary politico-economic causes of war in favour of 
the secondary, socio-psychological causes, which are in fact de- 
rivative from the former, is objectively advantageous to the 
imperialist bourgeoisie who are eager to conceal their vested 
interest in the arms race and the class nature of their aggres- 
sive policy towards the socialist countries. 


The Prevention of War 
in Western Social 
Psychology 


In present-day Western social psychology it is very rare in- 
deed that we come across theories deliberately expressing the 
idea that another world war is inevitable. Such fatalism has gen- 
erally been abandoned. Nevertheless, the idealism which pre- 
vails in Western sociology is an obstacle to a realistic approach 
to the problem of preventing war. This idealistic approach, as 
expressed in a “supraclass” viewpoint, and a tendency to ex- 
tend to the whole of society conclusions drawn from experi- 
ments or observations conducted with individuals and groups 
of people, renders many of the theories rather ineffectual and 
greatly limits the field of their practical application in the 
peace movement. 

In examining the socio-psychological theories of ensuring 
peace, it should be borne in mind that social psychology and 
sociology are interpenetrative, so that it is necessary to 
examine the theories of both psychologists and sociologists alike. 

The psycho-analysts, with their theory of innate human drives 
and instincts, regard the problem of preventing war either 
as that of “sublimation” of aggressive impulses, the directing 
of such impulses along socially acceptable channels, or as a 


1L. L. Bernard, War and Its Causes, New York, 1944, p. 328. 


173 




















problem of the individual overcoming his defects by moral 
self-perfection. 

As regards the former, the psycho-analysts claim that unless 
society allows its members a free outlet for their aggressive 
drives, they will transfer their aggressive energies from inter- 
nal to outside targets, i.e., other countries and peoples. Thus, 
in order to avoid hostility towards other countries, society 
should provide harmless outlets for aggressive energy, by en- 
couraging competition, sport, and struggle against disease and 
various other evils, the idea being that free expression of ag- 
gressive impulses in personal relationships considerably weakens 
aggressiveness towards “outside groups”. 

The theory of “sublimation” has been rejected by many so- 
cial psychologists and even by some psycho-analysts. It is also 
refuted by the facts of modern capitalist life in the USA. Here, 
indeed, is a country where there are quite ample opportunities 
for practising sport, where, judging by the crime rate, there 
are better opportunities than anywhere else in the world for 
free expression of “aggressive instincts”, and where racial dis- 
turbances have government sanction. Yet, despite the wide 
range of outlets for aggressiveness provided in American so- 
ciety—from sport to the assassination of presidents—the ag- 
gressiveness of the power elite towards the socialist countries 
and all peace-loving peoples, far from declining, is actually on 
the increase. 

The theory of “sublimation” is extremely ambivalent. 
Those psycho-analysts who attach the greatest importance to 
international peace can use it to recommend the encouragement 
of aggressiveness within society, to the damage of public order 
and social unity, while those who would have peace within so- 
ciety at any cost can use the theory equally well to support 
society’s encouragement of hostility towards other peoples. In 
either case, it is simply a question of inevitable aggressiveness 
being transferred from one object to another. 

This “theory” is so abstract and mechanistic that it can be 
used equally well to support international peace or racial hos- 
tility, depending on subjective inclination. 

The psycho-analytic theories of moral perfection all rely 
exclusively on the efforts of the individual to re-educate him- 
self. According to one such view, man does not merely per- 
ceive his Ego but projects a “psychological shadow” of it, or 
rather of that aspect of his personality of which he is ignorant 
or ashamed. This shadow is usually transferred to another per- 


174 





son or group of persons who become enemies, which enables the 
subject to take cognizance of his own existence. This view is 
held by J. L. Henderson, who writes: “Our individual and 
group Egos necessarily produce shadows, which necessarily 
fall somewhere, and there reside our enemies, without whom 
we could have no assurance of our own existence.” It is this 
dichotomy that represents the grave threat to peace. Hender- 
son continues: “The reason why most international relations 
are destructive of one another is man’s inability or unwilling- 
es to recognise and accept this unavoidable split within him- 
self.” 

According to M. Klein and H. Jones, it is not the whole 
psychological Ego that is split but only the feelings. Before 
the split occurs positive and negative feelings are in a con- 
fused, “ambivalent” state, and are present in many relationships 
with other people. If the burden of inner aggressiveness is very 
great, the feelings split, and the friendly feelings are 
directed onto one’s own group, which becomes “wholly good” 
and the hostile feelings are directed towards an alien “outside” 
group, which becomes “wholly bad”. This is how aggressive 
relationships between certain groups and nations arise. 

Henderson suggests that the psychological causes of war 
can be eliminated by a new awareness of the middle point of 
one’s personality, the point, that is, where the conscious and 
the unconscious are balanced: men have to “re-discover today 
that part of themselves which does not cast a shadow. This 
will enable them to dispense with their psychological need of 
enemies. ...”* Henderson does not indicate what practical steps 
should be taken to resolve the problem of his own making, but 
merely speaks of some “material and spiritual disciplines” 
whereby the Self can be cognised and educated. 

Maurice L. Farber disagrees with those psycho-analysts who 
claim that the main psychological cause of war is to be found in 
mankind as a whole: according to him it is to be found only in 
the psychology of government leaders.? The latter have at their 
disposal certain means whereby they can awaken aggressive sen- 
timents in the masses. Thus, the main cause of wars could be 
eliminated by establishing control over the aggressiveness of 


1 J. L. Henderson, “Psychological Implications of an Alternative to 
War”, Alternatives to War and Violence—A Search, London, 1963, p. 15, 

2 Ibid., p. 17. 

3M. L. Farber, “The Anal Character and Political Aggression”, Journal 
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, November 1955, Vol. 51, No. 3. 


175 








leaders. He suggests compulsory therapy for the leaders of all 
nations, and thinks it would be a good thing if the masses also 
submitted to special treatment to make them less responsive to 
the aggressive policies of their leaders. Unfortunately, he fails to 
explain who should be entrusted with carrying out this treatment 
or even what sort of treatment he intends. His suggestions seem 
to count entirely on the good will and willingness to co-op- 
erate of the leaders themselves. 

We find this same appeal for the moral perfection of lead- 
ers in the theories of R. K. White. According to White, the 
vast majority of people in all countries do not think in terms 
of black and white but in terms of compromise, of finding a 
middle way between extremes. Psychologically, most people 
hold the same “modal philosophy”, and “...instead of falling 
apart into two hostile camps ... the human race seems to have 
been pulling closer together on questions of social philosophy 
and has now arrived at a fair degree of consensus”. The con- 
flict between capitalism and socialism is “outmoded”, because 
“the men-in-the-street have been stubbornly holding out for 
an undramatic middle position. ..”’.! 

A closer look at this “modal philosophy” shows it to be a 
typical bourgeois philosophy. Its main propositions, to quote 
White himself, are the faith of the “modal individual” in “free 
enterprise’, the desire of the masses to see the capitalists un- 
der “popular control” (apparently, under imaginary control), 
and the great importance individuals attach to political free- 
dom. Naively believing that this “modal philosophy” combines 
capitalist and socialist principles, White sees it as a means of 
achieving lasting peace, if only it could be adopted by political 
leaders. He urges Western statesmen to hurry up and announce 
their support for the modal philosophy. In case he does not 
know it, Western leaders have long since adopted the politi- 
cal and economic demagogy—i.e., the idea of “rule by the peo- 
ple” in capitalist countries—which he mistook for the philo- 
sophy of the masses. 

H. Jones, another psycho-analyst of the “split feelings” 
school, makes two suggestions for “psychological prophylactic 
treatment against war’. The first is more tolerant methods 
in educating the younger generation, and the second is to make 
things easier for the adult members of society, since even those 


1 R. K. White, “The Cold War and the Modal Philosophy”, Journal 
of Conflict Resolution, 1958, Vol. II, No. 1, p. 45. 


176 











who have received the best education can experience frequent 
crises giving rise to aggression. The latter suggestion is most 
typical of those social psychologists who hold the view that 
aggressive behaviour is a product of frustration. They consid- 
er that the aggressive attitude of certain sections of the pop- 
ulation in capitalist countries to the Negroes, the Jews, the 
Communists and other groups is based on “economic frustra- 
tion”. As R. Stagner, another supporter of the frustration theo- 
ry, writes: “Economic insecurity is also a major factor in 
anti-Semitism, persecution of racial groups, and other ‘scape- 
goat’ reactions.”! However, the realistic attitude embodied in 
this accurate observation is wholly lacking in his recommenda- 
tion for the establishment of “industrial democracy”, since this 
is quite impracticable in capitalist society. 

J. C. Flugel holds that in order to overcome frustrations 
steps must be taken to remove the causes of adult discontent, 
among which he includes “physical hardships caused by lack 
of food, housing, clothing, etc., together with the threats of 
hardship connected with economic insecurity and unemploy- 
ment’”’.2 Like Stagner, he campaigns for “industrial democra- 
cy”, but he seems to be aware that this is by no means enough 
to ensure international peace. On the basis of the theory of 
“the psychological need for enemies’, he advises man to choose 
nature as his common enemy and unite to combat it. In other 
words, in order to avoid war, man should take the path of 
moral self-perfection, forget the differences that divide, and 
invent a common “non-human enemy”. 

Berkowitz demonstrates similar wishful thinking in express- 
ing the hope that “competition between groups could be min- 
imised” and “peace and harmony” propagated. An energet- 
ic defender of the theory of frustration, Berkowitz neverthe- 
less rightly rejects the idea that the main sources of frustration 
productive of social aggressiveness can be removed in Western 
society. “The most direct procedure for reducing inter-group 
conflict, of course, would be to lessen the occurrence of frus- 
trations. 

“. . .but obviously, little actually can be achieved along these 
lines ... there is no real prospect for eliminating more than a 
few of the many sources of anxiety and insecurity in our so- 
ciety.’3 








1 R. Stagner, Psychology of Personality, New York, 1961, p. 528. 
2 J. C. Flugel, op. cit., p. 132. 
3 Berkowitz, op. cit., p. 185. 


12—203 











Many of the behaviourist proposals for the elimination of 
war are similar, if not identical, to those made by the psycho- 
analysts. This is hardly surprising for two reasons. Firstly, 
the same general approach underlies all the different trends 
and schools of Western social psychology—namely, an ideal- 
ist view of social development, a positivist interpretation of 
social phenomena, sectarian social-psychological generalisa- 
tions, lack of political commitment with regard to class and 
party struggles. Secondly, the various Western trends and 
schools of social psychology show great interpenetration and 
mutual influence. 

The behaviourist A. Buss, like many psycho-analysts, would 
combat aggressiveness in children from an early age. How- 
ever, the methods he proposes differ radically from those sug- 
gested by the psycho-analysts. While the latter recommend 
that children be given plenty of opportunity to satisfy their 
aggressive impulses, he and other behaviourists advise the 
“uprooting” of aggression. “Habit strength of aggression,” he 
writes, “is also weakened by punishment, whether the mechan- 
ism is direct weakening of the habit or the strengthening of 
incompatible habits.”! 

Peaceful habits are the main thing the behaviourists are 
interested in implanting in children through education. 

As to the methods of education, some psychologists try to 
avoid both the extreme liberalism of the psycho-analysts and 
the radicalism of the behaviourists. Thus, M. Argyle proposes 
the following eclectical course of action: at “any rate overtly 
aggressive behaviour can be trained out by suitable socialisa- 
tion technique—warm relations with parents who do not permit 
aggressive behaviour and do not punish it.” 

Lentz regards scientific investigation of methods of achieving 
peace as the way to save mankind from the threat of war. The 
basic premise underlying his book is that “the knowledge neces- 
sary for effective peace action is not now possessed by man” 2 
The problem, as he sees it, is that “men do not want war but... 
they want what causes war...”, and thus, “better knowledge of 
these causes and of more desirable alternatives might quickly 
change their behaviour”.4 Thus, according to Lentz, the whole 
trouble lies in our failure to understand the causes of war. He is 


1 A. H. Buss, op. cit., p. 199. 

2M. Argyle, Psychology and Social Problems, London, 1964, p. 57. 
3 T. F. Lentz, op. cit., p. 56. 

4 Tbid., p. 72. 


178 


apparently blissfully unaware of the existence of the class in- 
terests of the monopoly bourgeoisie trying to hold on to their po- 
sitions by force of arms, or powerful monopolies making a for- 
tune out of the arms race. 

Scientific investigation of the ways to ensure peace is certainly 
necessary, but it is absurd to maintain that the true source of 
wars is still unknown in our age. Failure to indicate the true 
source of wars—imperialism—is practically speaking to con- 
done imperialist policy. Moreover, it shows exceptional politi- 
cal naivete to imagine that in bourgeois society knowledge can 
bring about a change of heart on the part of the imperialists 
and cause them to adopt new ideas without a political struggle. 
This is but a utopian dream of the moral self-perfection of the 
bourgeoisie. 

The idea of moral self-perfection underlies numerous West- 
ern social-psychological theories for ending war advanced by 
psychologists and sociologists alike. One such theory is the 
idea of “unilateral mutual disarmament” proposed by the well- 
known American psychologist C. Osgood. According to him, 
a real struggle is now in progress to alter the system of be- 
liefs upheld by any group of people when these beliefs con- 
flict with our own. He insists that this struggle is not politico- 
economic but purely ideological and psychological: ‘““We are 
fighting to preserve a way of life, a system of beliefs, an ide- 
ology, if you will.”! 

his one-sided, idealist conception of the struggle being 
waged in the world today leads Osgood to attribute the chief 
causes of the arms race to the distorted reflections of reality 
produced by the mental mechanisms. One of the latter is an 
indefinable “psycho-logic” which determines numerous human 
actions. Thus, “psycho-logic’” dictates to the American that 
his people is good, kind, honest and just, while the Russians 
are bad, unjust, etc. 

Osgood protests against distorted views of the communist 
world. Although he shares several of the more common Ameri- 
can prejudices about communism, he condemns attempts to 
fling mud at the Soviet Union. He writes: “The Russian peo- 
ple suffered more ... than any other during World War II; 
they have had reason to perceive an external threat for a long 
period... .””? 


1C. E. Osgood, “Suggestions for Winning the Real War with Com- 


munism”, Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. III, No. 4, Dec. 1959, p. 296. 
2 Ibid., p. 314. 


128 179 











However, Osgood overlooks the fact that the bourgeois psy- 
chology is derived from deeper, material processes of bour- 
geois society. Therefore, his call for “graduated unilateral dis- 
armament” in fact only hinges on a sudden chance flash of 
vision among US leaders, on Western politicians breaking out 
of the vicious circle of “‘psycho-logic” by their own will power 
and awareness. 

The proposal for “graduated unilateral disarmament” ad- 
vanced by the American sociologist A. Etzioni likewise bears 
a plain idealist stamp. Although he is right in regarding the 
unilateral stand (for complete and immediate unilateral dis- 
armament) as a “politically impotent” doctrine in the USA, 
his own view is based on the same fallacy as the one he is 
criticising: he, too, attaches great importance to “the removal 
of ‘psycho-logic’ pressure” in carrying his proposed programme 
into effect. “What is needed, and what might work under 
the present conditions, is a policy that will break this vicious 
circle of suspicion and remove the mental blocs and psy- 
chological barriers of both sides.”! 

He would appear to be suggesting that the first impulse 
towards the new policy must come from the conscience and 
good will of Western leaders realising the evil of the arms 
race and the advantages of a peaceful policy. His programme 
is based on the idealistic assumption that Western leaders can 
adopt a new policy as an act of moral awareness and through 
the enlightening activity of supporters of the peace movement. 
There is indeed, of course, a real chance of a change in Western 
policy, but such a change can only be brought about by the 
political struggle of progressive forces on a global scale and 
within the capitalist countries themselves, and not by the “con- 
version” of Western leaders through any form of agitation. 

Self-perfection seems to be the chief hope of sociologists 
and political science experts. Of the latter, for example, E. Still- 
man and W. Pfaff express the idealistic view in their book, 
The Politics of Hysteria. The Sources of Twentieth-Century 
Conflict, that the chief motive force in Western history was 
and remains the “longing for perfection”, man’s desire to con- 
trol both his physical and social environment. They hold that 
this resulted in great material and cultural achievements on 
the one hand, and enormous crimes, “violence on a horrific 
scale” and wars, on the other. 





1 A. Etzioni, op. cit., p. 93. 


180 


The great political weakness of the social-psychology peace 
theories lies in the extremely limited and ineffectual practical 
solutions they offer. The proposed measures for reducing “the 
aggressiveness’ of children, for establishing “industrial demo- 
cracy’, developing sport, declaring war on disease, and so on, 
might possibly lead to a reduction of juvenile crime in the USA, 
and to a certain improvement in public welfare, and might con- 
ceivably lead to a certain decrease in general violence in the 
USA and other capitalist societies, but they could hardly be 
expected to remove the basic sources of the aggressiveness of 
bourgeois ruling groups. 

Several Western scholars, realising the limited value and 
obvious insufficiency of petty reforms, call for a radical change 
in Western policy and fundamental transformation of the 
state political structure. Some of their proposals contain 
valuable ideas on the principle of mutual concessions, on the 
gradual nature of the necessary change in relations between 
the capitalist and socialist countries. The propaganda by many 
social psychologists and sociologists of such means of reducing 
international tension as developing international ties in various 
spheres, co-operation (e.g., in space research), reduction of 
armaments, the withdrawal of troops, and many others, have 
a definite progressive significance. The criticism of the poli- 
cies of Western governments that often accompanies social- 
psychological peace theories also plays a positive role. Thus, 
Etzioni sharply criticises the American plan for “armaments 
control”, condemns the mood of Russophobia prevailing in the 
USA, and the bandying about for propaganda purposes of 
such abstract symbols as “the Free World” and so on. Ac- 
cording to Etzioni, many Americans are “infested with suspi- 
cions of the Communists, fears over bombs secretly hidden by 
the other side. ...””4 

However, such criticism of the political situation in the West 
does not really touch upon the basic causes of war preparations 
and cannot conceal the serious weaknesses of social-psychologi- 
cal theories for transforming international relations. Their 
main fault is the utopian premise that on being presented with 
a good plan for ensuring peace, the imperialist bourgeois 
leaders would willingly embrace the new ideas, and, through 
a new-found awareness, adopt a new policy. 

A general weakness of the socio-psychological peace theo- 


1 Tbid., p. 77. 








ries taken as a whole is the fact that they contradict one anoth- 
er. Some scholars maintain that aggressiveness can be “curbed” 
by sport, games, etc., while others insist that they merely 
serve to increase it. Some hold that contacts between people in 
different spheres lead to a reduction of cold war tensions, 
while others insist that such contacts merely increase hostility. 
Obviously, divergences of opinion are inevitable in the quest 
for truth, but if such differences become an end in themselves, 
if they fail to produce a single theory and a common strategy 
and tactics, the result is a fruitless intellectual tug-of-war, 
everyone pulling energetically in his own direction and thus 
getting nowhere with the main issue—the task of abolishing 
war. 


The Role of Scientific 
Social Psychology in 
Investigation of 
Problems of War and 
Peace 


No review of socio-psychological theories of the origins and 
means of preventing war would be complete without some 
attempt to assess the role of social psychology in the study of 
problems of war and peace. The question might be put as fol- 
lows: has social psychology any use in analysis of the causes 
of wars and the means of preventing them? We have no hesi- 
tation in reaching a positive verdict. 

After all, the cause of wars in the present age is imperial- 
ism, which, as a socio-economic system, includes not only a 
sum of certain economic relations but at the same time a certain 
political, ideological and socio-psychological superstructure. 
Thus, the cause of war in the present age is the sum total, or 
rather the combination of imperialist economics, and the po- 
licies, ideology and social psychology of the imperialist bour- 
geoisie. The psychology of the imperialist bourgeoisie and the 
methods it uses to influence the psychology of other social 
strata and classes in bourgeois society is one of the links in the 
causal chain leading to wars. It is an important link, but nat- 
urally not the chief one, being simply a product of imperialist 
economy and policy. The bourgeoisie is well aware of the role 
of social psychology in the cold war and in the preparation and 
waging of imperialist wars. The US Department of Defence 


182 


employs a large number of psychologists. T. Lentz remarked: 
“The newest division of the American Psychological Associa- 
tion is the division of military psychology. Doubtless the larg- 
est employer of psychologists in the US is the Department 
of Defence.”! 

The imperialists go out of their way to use psychology for 
cold war purposes. Strausz-Hupé, Kintner and Possony, who 
are to be counted among the most ardent supporters of the cold 
war, declare that “a free and open society should not be af- 
raid to engage in propaganda and to conduct a psychologi- 
cal campaign in pursuit of its goals”.2 The imperialists and 
the scholars in their service resort to psychological warfare in 
the ideological struggle. The above-named writers include the 
following among the chief goals of America’s psychological 
campaign: battle with Marxist-Leninist ideas, the dissemination 
of bourgeois ideas in the socialist countries, and propaganda 
of the “ideals of freedom” in the newly-liberated countries. 

The study of socio-psychological phenomena in bourgeois 
society occupies an extremely important place in the matter of 
discovering the causes of war and the ways to prevent it. But 
in order to be really scientific, such study must examine socio- 
psychological factors as products of economic and _ political 
relations in a given society, while recognising the relative in- 
dependence of ideology and social psychology, without which 
they would simply represent a mere reflection of economic 
and political processes. 

The chief defect of the socio-psychological theories examin- 
ed above is that they either tend to exaggerate the relative 
independence of social psychology or treat psychological 
processes as the decisive factor of social development. In either 
case, the result is an idealistic approach to the subject, and a 
failure to recognise the decisive role of imperialist economy and 
bourgeois class policies in preparations for war. Yet, if one 
penetrates this idealistic coating, one can perceive numerous 
positive elements in many Western scholars’ treatment of the 
socio-psychological problems of war and peace, provided one 
views them from a materialist standpoint. 

Let us take by way of example the question of “psychologi- 


1 T. E. Lentz, op. cit., p. 156. We do not propose to discuss here 
the problems of military psychology; this is a vast separate subject, lying 
beyond the scope of this book. 

2 R. Strausz-Hupé, W. R. Kintner, §. T. Possony, A Forward Strategy 
for America, New York, 1961, p. 260. 


188 











cal obstacles” to mutual understanding and international ag- 
reements. One of these, in the opinion of Osgood, is the fact 
that “it is congruent for us to dislike things that people we 
dislike are in favour of”.! If we approach this from the his- 
torical idealist standpoint of the author himself it would ap- 
pear that the psychological obstacles in question and others like 
them account for the unwillingness of Western leaders to ag- 
ree to general disarmament, the imperialists and the leaders 
of the socialist countries being equally hostile to everything that 
the other side is in favour of. 

If, however, we interpret it from a materialist standpoint, 
we cannot fail to see that, firstly, the method of outright rejec- 
tion of all the other side is in favour of is typical of the im- 
perialist politicians and ideologists alarmed at the rise of so- 
cialism, and, secondly, that the removal of this psychological 
obstacle would lead to an improvement of the international 
situation. 

Valuable ideas (again provided they are interpreted from 
the materialist standpoint) are also expressed by Western schol- 
ars concerning the role of stereotype formulae in shaping an ag- 
gressive social psychology in the capitalist countries. The ex- 
posure of the psychological undercurrents of the ideological 
devices employed by imperialist propaganda, of those stereo- 
type formulae whereby the imperialists seek to shape public 
opinion, is of great importance in the ideological struggle to 
prevent a world war. 

There is a certain amount of truth, for example, in Fromm’s 
definition of the psychological influence of the nuclear threat 
on Western society (though it must be said that Fromm is 
greatly mistaken in supposing the nuclear threat to have the 
same influence on all societies). Fromm writes: “To live for 
any length of time under the constant threat of destruction 
creates certain psychological effects in most human beings— 
fright, hostility, callousness, a hardening of the heart, and a 
resulting indifference to all the values we cherish. Such condi- 
tions will transform us into barbarians.”2 

Methodological errors and defects cannot conceal the nu- 
merous positive results Western social psychologists have ob- 
tained in their research into the origins of war and the means 


1 C. E. Osgood, op. cit., p. 307. 
2 E. Fromm, “The Case for Unilateral Disarmament’, Daedalus, 1960, 
Vol. 9, No. 4, p. 1019. 


184 


“= 


to prevent them. In the vast majority of cases, such research 
is empirical so that the results often faithfully reflect certain 


aspects of socio-psychological life of bourgeois society. There 
is therefore no doubt at all but that these realistic deductions 
and observations will find a place in scientific social psychol- 
ogy devoted to the study of socio-psychological aspects of in- 
ternational relations. 





It goes without saying that social psychology alone is not 
enough to provide a solution to the problems of the origins of 
wars and the ways and means of preventing them. In order to 
preserve universal peace and hold in check the imperialist ag- 
gressors it is necessary to make constant efforts to increase the 
vigilance of the peoples of the world, make use of international 
organisations, adopt various forms of struggle with the war- 
mongers, mobilise the peace movement, draw in the widest 
possible sections of the population in capitalist countries, ex- 
pose ideology and schemes involved in preparing and carry- 
ing into effect military provocations and irresponsible ventures. 

On the level of interstate relations the quest for peace takes 
the form of resolute, effective opposition to the reactionary ag- 
gressive policies of the imperialist countries by close solidarity 
between the socialist countries and independent sovereign 
national states to curb the forces of reaction. 

One of the means of opposing the aggressive policy of the 
imperialists is active exposure of aggressors in the UN and 
other international organisations. 

Future successes in the struggle against the threat of war, 
the struggle to put an end to military intervention and pre- 
vent the outbreak of another world war depend to a large 
extent on the development in breadth, depth and scope, on a 
truly international scale, of the peace movement, to include 
all who are in favour of peace, irrespective of their political 
views and world outlook. 

It would be hard to exaggerate the importance in this strug- 
gle of a correct, scientific understanding of the ways in which 
peace can be achieved, and hence of the theories advanced by 
various social groups that might provide a practical solution 
to problems of war and peace. It is to analysis of such theories 
that the following part of this book is devoted. 


III 
AGAINST 


THE 
IDEOLOGY 
OF 
MILITARISM 
AND 
REACTION. 
FOR 
PEACE 
AND 
SOCIAL 
PROGRESS 


| 
| 











Chapter X 


AMERICAN DOCTRINES 
OF POWER POLITICS 


The Social Roots and 
Features of the 
Doctrines of Power 
Politics in the USA 


Doctrines and theories whose purpose is to justify the use 
of violence in international relations—imperialist “power po- 
litics’—are becoming more and more common in US bour- 
geois sociology.! This is a reflection of objective processes, 
namely the growing role of violence in imperialist politics, 
and is the result of a deliberate effort to find new ways of de- 
ceiving the masses, new methods of ideological influence. 

There are two main reasons for the growing demand for 
new doctrines and theories to justify imperialist ‘power 
politics”. 

Firstly, the increased political awareness of the masses and 
the mobilisation of the peace movement compel the imperial- 
ist bourgeoisie to resort to all sorts of pseudo-scientific theories 
combining justification of the use of violence with more subtle 
methods of explaining the grounds for so doing. Sociological 
doctrines masking the real source of the threat of war are 
intended above all to pull the wool over the eyes of wide sec- 
tions of the public in the capitalist West.? 


1 The following definition of “political science” is characteristic in this 
respect: “It is with power in society that political science is primarily 
concerned....” (W. A. Robson, The University Teaching of Social Sciences. 
Political Science. A Report prepared by W. A. Robson, on behalf of 
the eta Political Science Association, UNESCO, Paris, April 
1954, p. 17. 

2 A remark by a Western politician, L. Pearson, is not without in- 
terest in this connection: “If current opinions and popular prejudices 


189 














Secondly, the highly destructive character of modern war- 
fare and changes in the world balance of power in favour of 
socialism have given rise to certain doubts about the expediency 
of “power politics’, especially in the forms adopted hitherto. 
Hence the attempts of the most reactionary forces of imperial- 
ism to make use of sociological doctrines to instil reactionary 
political views in the masses and strengthen the determination 
of the ruling groups to conduct an international policy of war 
and violence. 

Sociological ‘“‘justification” of war and violence has become 
particularly widespread in the United States of America. 

During the Second World War, when reactionary groups 
in the United States were already planning to use the defeat of 
nazi Germany and militarist Japan in the interests of ensur- 
ing their own world hegemony, geopolitical and racist doc- 
trines became current in American sociological literature. 

In the American environment, however, the sociological doc- 
trines designed to justify power politics, the ideology of the 
struggle for world hegemony, acquired certain typical features 
of the ideology and politics of American imperialism. These 
involve the manipulation of a wide selection of unscientific 
sociological theories that distort the question of the nature 
and causes of war, psychological theories, and, especially, the 
careful camouflaging of power politics in pseudo-democratic 
garb. 

At different periods, representing various swings in Amer- 
ican foreign policy connected with the current international 
balance of power and the development of the class struggle 
within the country, different aspects of political ideology and 
different doctrines and theories came to the fore. 

The following stages can be distinguished in the develop- 
ment of these political and sociological theories: the first, from 
the end of the Second World War to the early fifties; the sec- 
ond from then to the early sixties, and the third from the early 
sixties to the present time. 

The first stage was characterised by geopolitical doctrines 
and various nationalist theories of America’s “special role”, 
her “mission” to rule the “Western World”. They had their 
socio-economic and political roots in American imperialist dom- 


are not to impose themselves with relentless force on our minds, we 
must judge them in the light of historical knowledge and _ historical 
experience, and of the truths that have been tested by such experience.” 
(Lester B. Pearson, Democracy in World Politics, New York, 1955, p. V.) 


190 








ination in the post-war capitalist world, and were designed 
to fan anti-communist sentiments, in connection with the be- 
ginning of the cold war against the Soviet Union, the creation 
of NATO and other aggressive military blocs. 

The second stage corresponded to the emergence of the 
world socialist system as a powerful factor in international re- 
lations, and was marked by an already clearly definable crisis 
of America’s aggressive power politics. 

This stage saw the emergence and spread of the doctrine 
of “political realism’, designed to conceal by more subtle 
means than hitherto had been the case the threat to peace con- 
stituted by imperialism. The aim was to present the imperial- 
ist policy of the ruling groups to the public as being dictated 
by “political reality”, and the very “essence” and “nature” 
of man. The doctrine was several times revised and “brought 
up to date” to correspond to changes in the bourgeois political 
camp, reflecting the struggle of various foreign policy courses 
and the crisis of power politics. In fact, it evolved so much 
that many of its supporters were forced by confrontation with 
actuality to renounce some of the original cardinal principles 
of the doctrine. 

Typical in this respect was the evolution to be observed in 
the views of one of the founders of the doctrine of “political 
realism”, H. Morgenthau, who as early as 1960 abandoned 
(though only very cautiously) the thesis of military-political 
force being the only effective means of resolving international 
problems, and in 1965 openly condemned the American ag- 
gression in Vietnam. 

It should be pointed out, however, that despite differences 
in the views of its supporters and the fact that many bourgeois 
sociologists have rejected some of its basic original tenets, the 
doctrine is still flourishing and continues to exert a consider- 
able influence on all the major concepts of power politics. 

The third stage has been characterised by mounting reac- 
tionary tendencies in US home and foreign policy, the grow- 
ing influence on foreign affairs sociology of the political ideol- 
ogy of various “ultra”, semi-fascist currents, Goldwaterism 
and Birchism, notable for extreme anti-communism, racism 
and neo-colonialism, and last but not least, ideas of counter- 
revolutionary violence, as expressed in the aggressive anti- 
communist conceptions of US ruling circles, whose aim is to 
halt the world revolutionary process by force of arms. 

This stage has seen the “stepping up” of the USA’s policy 


191 














of aggression, violence and colonial revenge—viz., Indochina, 
Africa, the Middle East and several other parts of the world. 

Neo-conservatism, reflecting the most reactionary and ag- 
gressive features of the ideology and foreign policy of the “War 
Party” in the USA, and representing a synthesis of the most 
reactionary features of the doctrine of “political realism”, 
American racism and geopolitics, is more and more becoming 
the theoretical foundation of the sociology of international re- 
lations in the USA. 

After the Second World War military sociology was in 
vogue in the United States; many military experts took to writ- 
ing sociological treatises while sociologists began to try their 
hand at military topics. Today, this process of splicing aggres- 
sive military theory and reactionary military sociology has gone 
a long way. Military-sociological doctrines and theories are 
becoming more and more a component part of American bour- 
geois sociology of international affairs, providing the theoreti- 
cal justification for imperialist power politics. 


The Philosophical 
Foundations of the 
Doctrine of Violence. 
The Doctrine of 
"Political Realism” 


The philosophical-methodological basis of the sociological 
doctrines that justify power politics is an idealistic approach to 
politics as a whole, and to international relations in particu- 
lar. Although outwardly extremely heterogeneous, these doc- 
trines all represent, from the point of view of methodology, 
theories of subjective or objective idealism, often combined 
with elements of vulgar materialism. 

In American bourgeois sociology of international relations 
there exists a traditional line between “‘political idealism” and 
“political realism”. In practice, however, the only methodolo- 
gical difference between them is that the former is an abstract 
idealist approach treating subjective moral factors as the basis 
of international relations, while the latter is an empirico-pos- 
itivist form of idealism including elements of vulgar material- 
ism (especially, as we shall see, in the interpretation of “vio- 
lence’). 


192 





The doctrine of political realism is the one usually resorted 
to for the purpose of justifying power politics.1 

Political realism analyses a number of social concepts and 
categories concerning the essence of politics and international 
relations (“power”’, “interest”, ‘‘will”, “human nature”, “the 
nature of international relations’, etc.). The aggressive foreign 
policy of imperialism is invariably treated as the inevitable 
product of “political reality”, human nature and the character 
of international affairs. 

Naturally, a doctrine based on the old worn thesis that vio- 
lence is the main instrument of politics and derives inevitably 
from “real” political relations is nothing new in bourgeois 
ideology. What is special about this particular doctrine is that 
it is raised to the status of a “universal” theory of imperialist 
foreign policy that has a considerable influence on other un- 
scientific sociological theories of international politics. 

The doctrine of political realism was mobilised above all in 
the sphere of geopolitics—the straight “deduction” of aggres- 
sive foreign policy from existing geographical factors—rep- 
resented by numerous pre- and post-war works by Spykman? 
and others, and several recently published works including 
Geography and Politics in a World Divided by Professor 
S. Cohen of Boston University. 

Political realism is based on American pragmatist philos- 
ophy with its elements of vulgar materialism. Thus, the main 
object of the political theories of the American sociologists 
Merriam and Lasswell that arose in the thirties under the in- 
fluence of the pragmatists, was to create the impression of a 
clean break with the formal “institutional” approach to poli- 
tics. They claimed to be writing about real political phenome- 
na and analysing the political dynamics of society. 

The supporters of the realist doctrine generally stress its 
“empirical and pragmatist” nature, pointing out that, unlike 
so many other politico-philosophical movements, they avoid 


{ “Political idealism”, traditionally regarded by bourgeois ideologists 
as rejection of the use of violence, has more recently become a means 
of justifying various reactionary foreign policies, involving above all 
ideological and propaganda service to the aggressive policy of imperialism 
in the so-called psychological war. (See, for example, Propaganda and 
International Relations, San Francisco, 1962, and M. Donelan, The Ideas 
of American Foreign Policy, New York, 1963. 

2 See N. Spykman, The Geography of Peace, New York, 1949, and 
America’s Strategy in World Politics, New York, 1942. 


13—203 193 











all abstract theorising. It is indeed true that essential cate- 
gories of international relations like “power” and “interest” in 
politics and “political reality” in international affairs do oc- 
cupy a central place in the sociological doctrine of political 
realism: but they are treated idealistically and metaphysically. 

The cornerstone of the doctrine of political realism is the 
proposition that “interest” is the basis of politics. As Morgen- 
thau writes, “the idea of interest is indeed of the essence of 
politics and, as such, unaffected by the circumstances of time 
and place’”’.! 

Just what interest is meant here? What is this abstract “in- 
terest” which is independent of time and place? Interest does 
indeed play a very important role in politics, and its true class 
content is revealed in Marxist sociology. 

In a class society, the interests of the various classes are 
determined by their economic and political position. As for 
the interests of individuals, they are a reflection of these in- 
terests plus certain individual features, partly influenced by 
personal demands, the upbringing and education they have 
received and so on. 

Yet whatever the personal, individual element, people’s in- 
terests in a class society always have a class character, and it is 
class interests that determine different approaches to interna- 
tional relations, to the fundamental issue of war and peace, 
and to the question of the methods by which international dis- 
agreements should be resolved. The doctrine of political real- 
ism, however, derives “interest” from such abstract categories 
as “human nature” and “human will”, completely ignoring the 
question of what economic and social class factors underlie 
political phenomena. In view of this false premise underlying 
the doctrine of political realism, it can be used in typical prag- 
matist style to reduce the whole socio-historical process to cer- 
tain “trends of power”.? Thus, abstract “interest” is reduced 
to the use of naked violence, extended to all social relations. 
Many bourgeois sociologists go as far as to declare that the 
“laws of violence” are the only force at work in international 
telations. 


1H. J. Morgenthau, Dilemmas of Politics, Chicago, 1958, p. 67. 

2 Charles Merriam, one of the founders of the doctrine of political 
realism, wrote that power completely dominates society and tends to 
crystallise and converge, that “the emerging trends of power are deeper 
down than nations, classes or other passing units...”. (Political Power, 
A Study of Power, Glencoe, 1950, p. 324.) 


194 








A large proportion of the works of political philisophy pub- 
lished in the United States is based on postulations of this sort. 
Thus, Rodee, Anderson and Christol write: “Power is a pri- 
mary objective of foreign policy.”’! 

The most recent theories advanced by American sociologists, 
who, in the spirit of political realism, view modern internation- 
al relations as a power conflict do not differ from the above 
examples. They either regard present international relations as 
a two-sided struggle between two superpowers, the USA and 
the USSR, or advance the theory of “three power-centres”—the 
USA, the USSR and Western Europe, and so on. N. Padelford 
and G. Lincoln express the view that “a central feature of 
world politics is the power struggle, the conflicts in which 
elements of power are used for resolution among the Great 
Powers’? 

It is perfectly plain from this that American bourgeois so- 
ciologists completely fail to grasp the real major conflicts and 
the social essence of international relations. The chief contra- 
diction of the modern age is the contradiction between social- 
ism and capitalism. In the course of its resolution, the old, 
capitalist social order retires from the international arena to 
be replaced by the new, higher, communist order. The con- 
flict between imperialist powers is merely a conflict between 
historically doomed ruling exploiter classes struggling for their 
own selfish interests. Bourgeois ideologists try to equate these 
totally different conflicts in an attempt to whitewash the aggres- 
sive policy of imperialism, by placing it in the same category 
as the socialist political struggle against social and national 
oppression, for peace and international security. 

As well as failing to distinguish between qualitatively dif- 
ferent social forces operating in the modern world, the authors 
of such theories also insist that military power is the basis of 
international relations. But since it is not to the advantage of 
the bourgeois ideologists at the present time to openly glorify 
the use of military force, they resort to more subtle, covert 
methods. In the above-mentioned book by Padelford and Lin- 


{ C. Rodee, T. Anderson, C. Christo], Introduction to Political Science, 
New York-Toronto-London, 1957, p. 534. See also T. Stanley, American 
Defense and National Security (Washington, 1956, p. 3), where the author 
declares that force is the basic means of achieving both general and 
specific state policy aims in international affairs. 

2 N. Padelford and G. Lincoln, The Dynamics of International Politics, 
New York, 1967, p. 293. 


13° 195 











coln, the role of power is treated in the light of the theories of 
“social dynamics”, currently very popular in bourgeois social 
science, theories which, purporting to analyse the mutual in- 
fluence of various social factors, do a good job distorting social 
reality. They are based on manipulation of qualitatively differ- 
ent social phenomena and arbitrary selective emphasis, depend- 
ing on the particular aims being pursued. 

In examining the question of what factors lie at the root of 
present-day international relations, American sociologists refer 
to ideological, technological, economic and military aspects of 
foreign policy. While ascribing some importance to all these 
factors, they present military force as the foundation of foreign 
policy in general, and of the foreign policy of the capitalist 
states with regard to the socialist countries in particular. 

A book by Olson and Sondermann! presents a similar “dy- 
namics” of international relations, making a thorough analysis 
of the influence on international relations of geography, demo- 
graphy, economic and technological development, scientific ad- 
vances and changes in the military machine. Here, too, the 
military factor is regarded as being of prime importance, and 
the authors call for generous military expenditure, stressing 
the all-embracing, total nature of modern warfare, and urge 
all-round preparations for it and the building up of stockpiles 
of all kinds of weapons, in view of the decisive role of military 
power in international politics. 

These and other theories of the “dynamics” of international 
relations, although having the outward attributes of scientific 
theories, in fact represent no more than the familiar device of 
absolutising the role of power in politics in general and in in- 
ternational relations in particular which is a traditional feature 
of imperialist ideology. 

Thus, it can be seen that the doctrine of political realism 
transfers the basic premises of the theory of violence to the 
sphere of international relations, regarding military-political 
force as an independent factor. This kind of approach is typical 
of pragmatist philosophy, with its insistence on theory as the 
antithesis of practice and its subjective-idealist thesis that “the 
truth is what is useful”. The imperialist bourgeoisie have no 
objective socio-economic possibilities of overcoming the contra- 
dictions of capitalism and preventing the success of socialism, 


{ William C. Olson, Fred A. Sondermann, The Theory and Practice 
of International Relations, New Jersey, 1966. 


196 





and thus gamble on military power as a means of halting his- 
torical progress. 

The supporters of political realism completely ignore the ob- 
jective foundations of the development of international rela- 
tions and attribute a major role to the will of imperialist ruling 
circles, ascribing to them the capacity to arbitrarily mould the 
socio-historical process to suit their own designs with the aid 
of military-political power. 

The cult of power has always been a feature of the policy 
and ideology of exploiter classes, and has always been com- 
bined with adventurism and a failure to make a realist assess- 
ment of the relationship of forces, results and consequences. 

This is truer than ever of the present-day policy and ideolo- 
gy of the imperialist bourgeoisie. The preaching of “power pol- 
itics” by imperialist ideologists under the banner of “political 
realism” is nothing more than a cloak to cover up the irrespon- 
sible nature of such policies. This adventurist element is parti- 
cularly evident in their total disregard for the vital interests 
of the masses. The exploiter classes have long since been acting 
according to the principle of “aprés moi le déluge”, but today 
the use of force in international politics is fraught with dangers 
of a nuclear catastrophe, and terrible consequences for future 
generations. 

The element of adventurism is also apparent in the subjec- 
tive assessment of the present power relationship in world 
political development that is fundamental to political realism. It 
takes its departure from voluntarist concepts, since it treats 
power as a self-contained, self-sufficing factor, deriving solely 
from the will of certain individuals. Indeed, in the last resort, 
it is the will of political leaders that is regarded by the sup- 
porters of political realism as the decisive factor in politics. 

The bourgeoisie hopes with the aid of strong personalities to 
create the position of power necessary to imperialism—i.e., 
military supremacy—so as to force the Soviet Union and other 
socialist countries to submit to the will of imperialist ruling 
circles by blackmail and dictation. 

There is no denying that military power plays an important 
role in international relations. Marxist sociology by no means 
rejects the role of power and violence either in history in gen- 
eral or in international relations in particular. But the Marxist 
concept of the role of power and violence and their place in 
the system of social categories differs fundamentally from the 
bourgeois idealist and vulgar-sociological concept. 


197 

















In the first place, the Marxist interpretation is in direct con- 
trast to the idealist view of power and violence as abstract 
forces, as violence in general. Marxist sociology draws a clear 
distinction between revolutionary violence, expressing the in- 
terests and will of the masses, and counter-revolutionary vio- 
lence, expressing the subjective will and interests of the exploit- 
er classes. The doctrine of political realism, on the other hand, 
is an apology for the use of violence as a means of halting 
socio-historical progress. 

Secondly, from the Marxist standpoint, violence is never a 
primary factor in history. The means of coercion and violence 
which may be employed as a manifestation of power are them- 
selves the product of economic and social relations. In the pres- 
ent time the relationship of power between capitalism and 
socialism is produced by numerous factors, mostly economic and 
social. It can on no account be taken as equivalent to the sum of 
military power, for that would mean overlooking such important 
objective factors as the trends of economic, social and political 
development, the moral and political sentiments of the masses, 
and their determination to support or oppose a particular policy. 
Suffice it to recall how imperialist military forces have been 
repeatedly smashed by the firm determination of the masses to 
defend their revolutionary gains. 

This has been demonstrated time and again, beginning with 
the defeat of the interventionist forces in the Civil War in Rus- 
sia, to the defeat of armed intervention in Cuba, the struggle 
of the Vietnamese people and the national liberation movement 
in Asia, Africa and Latin America. The whole history of polit- 
ical relations in the present, revolutionary age points to the 
fact that genuine political realism consists not in staking on 
military power but in taking careful account of the whole “par- 
allelogram of forces” that operate in social development, to 
use Engels’ expression. 

The great fallacy of the doctrine of political realism is the 
way it regards military-political power as a major, self-con- 
tained factor in the resolution of international problems: in 
point of fact, the military-political power of states alters not 
through the agency of individual will, but as a result of eco- 
nomic and social changes. 

The growth of the economic power of the Soviet Union and 
the other socialist countries, the powerful upswing of the na- 
tional liberation movement and the collapse of the colonial sys- 
tem of imperialism, the loss by the USA of her nuclear mono- 


198 





poly, and Soviet superiority in several areas of military techno- 
logy—all these factors have completely altered the relationship 
of forces in international politics. The consolidation and devel- 
opment of socialism and the exacerbation of the crisis of capi- 
talism are inexorably tipping the scales of power, including 
military power, more and more in favour of socialism. 

The change in the military power balance is not an isolated 
factor, independent of economic and social development: it is 
the direct outcome of the advantages of the economic and polit- 
ical system of socialism, advantages which are revealed above 
all in peaceful economic competition between the socialist sys- 
tem and capitalism. 

Even bourgeois ideologists have been forced to admit the 
bankruptcy of power politics and the fact that the scales in the 
international arena have been tipped in favour of peace. Sig- 
nificant in this respect is W. Lippmann’s remark that the United 
States is now dealing with an adversary who is equally power- 
ful militarily and with partners who are equally powerful eco- 
nomically. This, he said, was something completely new for 
the USA, who for a hundred years had not had to face up to 
the old human problem of learning to live in a world where 
Fad aie is not the only law” (emphasis added.—The Au- 
thors). 

Another American sociologist, Hartmann, writes that “the 
power alone is not determinant’—a statement that is tanta- 
mount to a refutation of the doctrine of political realism. 

Ostensibly adopting a broad sociological approach to polit- 
ics and international relations, the doctrine of political realism 
is in point of fact based on a one-sided approach to the object 
of cognition, on arbitrary exaggeration of one of the factors— 
the military-political factor. This is due to its treatment in iso- 
lation from social and economic factors, and the consequent 
subjective-idealist method of approach in the spirit of prag- 
matism. 

The doctrine of political realism does not regard politics in 
terms of the class struggle, and its basic premises and catego- 
ries (especially the central category of “political realism’’) are 
vague and eclectic. This enables it to be used to justify the 
policies both of the “wildmen” and of those representatives of 
the imperialist bourgeoisie who, while opposed to communism, 
consider it wiser to restrict the use of counter-revolutionary 
violence. 


199 














The Fate of the 
Doctrine of Political 
Realism in the Crisis 
of Power Politics 


As the crisis of imperialist power politics progresses, we find 
more and more differences developing among the supporters 
of the doctrine of political realism, reflecting a fierce struggle 
between various foreign policy theories in the imperialist camp. 

The philosophical and sociological basis of the doctrine of 
political realism, and above all its fundamental premise that 
military force is an inevitable phenomenon in international re- 
lations make it an extremely convenient instrument for justi- 
fying the most reactionary political theories of the American 
“wildmen”. 

The supporters of one of these trends of “political realism’, 
reflecting the views of the “hawks”, preach the inevitability 
of nuclear war. The most explicit expression of the views of the 
“hawks” are to be found in the works of the well-known socio- 
logist Robert Strausz-Hupé and several of his colleagues at 
the Foreign Policy Research Institute of the University of Penn- 
sylvania. They represent the views of those American bour- 
geois politicians who have learnt absolutely nothing from the 
lessons of the past. Their works (Protracted Conflict, 1959; A 
Forward Strategy for America, 1961, and others) all have as 
their basic premise the idea that “the logic of total nuclear war 
predominates throughout the entire conflict spectrum in the 
same manner as the law of gravity influences physical events.”! 
In A Forward Strategy for America they insist that coexistence 
between such fundamentally different systems as capitalism and 
socialism is out of the question, and nuclear war is inevitable. 

The main argument the “hawks” advance in favour of this 
view is that the history of mankind is a struggle for domina- 
tion, and in international relations, for world domination. They 
refer to the fact that the conflict between Carthage and Rome 
ended in war: ergo, the conflict between such contrasting social 
systems as socialism and capitalism is bound to end in a major 
nuclear war. Since, according to them, war between the two 
systems is inevitable, it would be best to start it as soon as pos- 
sible, to strike first. 


1 R. Strausz-Hupé, W. R. Kintner, S. T. Possony, A Forward Strategy 
for America, p. 14. 


200 








In view of the fact that the balance of power is altering in 
favour of the socialist system, they recommend a preventive 
war as a panacea. “The United States cannot renounce the first 
use of atomic weapons. Such a self-imposed restriction could 
be disastrous.”! 

One can hardly fail to notice in such theories the familiar 
motives of the policy US ruling groups have been conducting 
for years, and indeed we find frequent admissions of this by 
bourgeois authors. Thus, H. B. Hester, a retired brigadier gen- 
eral, remarked at the beginning of the sixties that for the last 
ten years the school of Realpolitik had almost entirely dominated 
the foreign policy of the United States, and that even the night- 
mare of the atom bomb and the H-bomb had failed to convince 
the West of its complete bankruptcy. He added that, terrible 
though it was, it was nonetheless true that some nursed the 
hope “that we can be the first to drop the bomb”.? This elo- 
quent admission, extremely rare for its frankness, pinpoints 
several important features of the doctrine of political realism 
typical of the political views of the “hawks”. 

However, in the present international situation, the policy of 
military force is extremely reckless and could have the direct 
consequences for the very people who conduct it. 

This fact, of which the more sober bourgeois politicians are 
well aware, has had a definite influence on the political ideolo- 
gy of imperialism. It has forced some of the supporters of polit- 
ical realism to take into account the relationship of forces 
actually obtaining in the world. Thus, side by side with the 
“hawks”, we now find a number of the supporters of the doctrine 
trying to find rather more expedient foreign policy methods, in 
view of the crisis of ‘power politics”. 

While the “hawks” are doing their utmost to convince people 
of the necessity for war without delay, others are devoting 
their efforts to producing theoretical “justification” for other 
methods of imperialist foreign policy. 

Typical of the latter is K. Thompson, head of the sociological 
research department of the Rockefeller Foundation. In a book 
in which he sets out to examine the present content of the 
doctrine of political realism, in discussing the basic premises of 
the doctrine, he writes: “Men in politics seek power and they 
come into conflict with others engaged in the same quest. They 


1 Ibid., p. 142. 
2 Quoted from Pravda, May 24, 1960. 


201 











use moral justifications to cover their aspirations and thus 
highten and intensify the struggle.’’! 

Thompson writes that the international events of the last few 
years have brought about a revolution in our thinking and have 
considerably changed and narrowed down our traditional con- 
cepts. However, he sees no reason why the theory of political 
realism should not continue to serve as the basis of American 
foreign policy. “Even if we stood alone,” he writes, “the task of 
foreign policy would be much the same. It would call for vigour 
and public courage in rallying American military strength. 2 

Thompson supports the theory of “political realism” but tries 
to bring it up to date and adapt it to present conditions. He 
advises agreements and compromises in the cold war, and de- 
clares that political realism in foreign policy should not be 
identified with war. Nevertheless, he hastens to add that “his- 
tory teaches that peace has rarely if ever been earned through 
surrender, weakness, or appeasement”.? But in an age when 
war is fraught with such terrible dangers and a local conflict 
is always liable to develop into general conflict on a world scale, 
political realism, Thompson maintains, “falls short of assuming 
that war is inevitable”.4 

It is highly symptomatic that Thompson and others, unlike 
the “hawks”, should refrain from appealing for war without 
delay. However, the majority of these people regard peaceful 
coexistence simply as a truce in the nuclear conflict or identify 
it with a particular stage in the cold war. 

This interpretation of the principle of peaceful coexistence 
accounts for the form of the concrete foreign policy “recipes” 
they propose. 

In the new world situation, bourgeois theoreticians are con- 
stantly on the lookout for means of conducting a policy based 
on conservation of existing social relations. 

What are these “new” theories and means put forward by 
the supporters of the doctrine of political realism? They in- 
volve continuation of the arms race and power politics, now 
referred to as “nuclear balance”, an updated version of the 
“balance of power”. The latter theory served for a long period 
as the basic principle behind American diplomacy, which strove 


1K. Thompson, Political Realism and the Crisis of World Politics. An 
American Approach to Foreign Policy, Princeton, 1960, p. 34. 

2 Ibid., p. 242. 

3 Ibid. p. 246. 

& Tbid., p. 248. 


202 


to take advantage of differences between the European powers, 
extract the maximum profit from armed conflicts between them, 
and only intervene directly in cases when it was necessary to 
prevent one of the European rivals from getting too much of 
an upper hand. In the post-war period US ruling circles supple- 
mented the theory of the “balance of power” with the doctrines 
of “deterrence”, “rolling back”, “liberation” and other anti- 
communist doctrines, the main object of which was to make use 
of the manpower reserves and military potential of the West 
European countries in the interests of the American monopolies. 

The new American version of the balance of power theory 
is elaborated by several “political realists”. Thus, G. Jackobsen 
and M. Lipman write: “Its main tenet is to prevent any single 
power from achieving a position of strength sufficient to threat- 
en the existence of other states. On it nations relied for the 
maintenance of peace in the international scene.”! 

It is also treated in great detail in a book by G. Liska, of the 
Washington Centre of Foreign Policy Research, who tries to 
show that the existence of various regional military and polit- 
ical blocs is the best way of guaranteeing international security. 

According to him, military blocs and alliances have always 
served the diplomacy of keeping the balance of power in inter- 
national relations. But today their role is greater than ever 
before, since they serve the “defence of the Free World” and 
at the same time as an important deterrent. In this connection, 
he takes the opportunity to embark on detailed arguments in 
favour of the “balance of fear”. 

“The balance of fear” is an imperialist theory extremely 
dangerous for the future of mankind. It is as unrealistic as all 
the other theories of the doctrine of political realism, since it 
fails to reckon with a number of important facts connected with 
the arms race and the formation of aggressive blocs. It is the 
ideological counterpart to Dulles’ reckless policy of ‘“brink- 
manship”’, and is quite incompatible with true peaceful coexist- 
ence and the strengthening of democratic principles in inter- 
national relations. The continuation of the arms race definitely 
increases the danger of war, including the danger of a war 
being started by accident. 

Today, however, many bourgeois ideologists find it impos- 
sible to totally ignore the realities of the world situation, and 
are forced at least to renounce in word, if not 1n deed, those 


! G. Jackobsen, M. Lipman, Political Science, New York, 1955, p. 195. 


203 

















principles that only recently formed the basis of the political 
ideology of imperialism, and above all the thesis of violence as 
the basis of foreign policy. Many bourgeois ideologists have 
been forced to admit the need for a measure of coexistence 
between socialism and capitalism and even the expediency of 
ensuring it by non-military means. 

In view of the obvious crisis of the doctrine of ‘“‘political 
realism”, the more extremist imperialist groups are having to 
introduce various modifications to the theories of power poli- 
tics. It is not surprising, therefore, that we should find the doc- 
trine of political realism being supplemented by neo-conser- 
vatism, the most concentrated expression of the ideology and 
politics of violence and aggression. 


Neo-Conservatism—the 
Ideological Expression 
of Aggressive 
Foreign Policy 


Parallel to “political realism”, neo-conservatism has been 
growing in importance recently as a further theoretical justifi- 
cation for power politics in the bourgeois sociology of interna- 
tional relations. Conservatism, the clinging to outdated ideas 
and institutions and opposition to progress, was associated in 
the past with feudal-aristocratic reaction. It was clearly ex- 
pressed in the last century in the writings of such reactionaries as 
Joseph de Maistre in France and Disraeli in England. As the 
crisis of bourgeois society deepens, the imperialist bourgeoisie 
resort more and more frequently to conservative political ide- 
ology. Thus, the American professor M. Burns points out that in 
the capitalist world “... conservatism has flourished in a new 
and distinctive form”’.2 

This “new and distinctive form” of conservatism in bourgeois 


! Neo-conservatism has a great deal in common with “political realism”: 
both are off-shoots of American pragmatism. Thus, S. Possony, who claims 
to be an adherent of both, writes that contemporary conservatism is 
“realistic conservatism”, and supports “real power” as opposed to political 
abstractions. See S. Possony, “The Challenge of Crisis. Preliminary Thought 
on a Conservative Defense Doctrine’, What is Conservatism?, New York, 
1964. 

2M. Burns, Ideas in Conflict. The Political Theories of the Contem- 
borary World, New York, 1960, p. 315. 


204 








sociology is characterised by the attempt to cloak neo-fascist 
ideas, political reaction and aggression in more respectable 
garb, and sanctify the policy of counter-revolutionary force on 
the basis of extra-temporal, and hence, supraclass conservative 
principles. If in the doctrine of political realism the need for 
an aggressive foreign policy is derived from the nature of man 
as a social being fighting for definite concrete interests, neo- 
conservatism aims to justify the policy of violence in interna- 
tional relations by the “divine sanction” of the religious-ideal- 
ist world view, trying to present it as having nothing at all to 
do with political reaction, as an eternal, extra-temporal phe- 
nomenon. 

This is stated in quite unambiguous terms in the preface to 
the book The Conscience of a Conservative by Barry Gold- 
water. “The principles on which the Conservative position is 
based have been established by a process that has nothing to 
do with the social, economic and political landscape that changes 
from decade to decade and from century to century. These 
principles are derived from the nature of man, and from the 
truths that God has revealed about His creation.”’! This kind of 
metaphysical approach to politics is designed to conceal the 
chief purpose of the sociology of modern conservatism— 
apologetics for social and national inequality. 

For the conservative, old or new, “except in an ultimate 
moral sense, men are unequal. Social organization ... always 
includes a variety of classes, orders, and groups. Differentia- 
tion, hierarchy, and leadership are the inevitable characteristics 
of any civil society.’” 

It is significant that the idea that society should be ruled by 
a chosen few, by an elite, and that democracy is an inexpedient 
form of social organisation runs like a golden thread all through 
the modern conservative trend of bourgeois sociology.’ 

Contemporary bourgeois conservatism, like the conservatism 
of the nineteenth-century aristocracy, is completely backward- 
looking. For the solution of twentieth century problems it pre- 
scribes one of the time-hallowed recipes of the exploiter classes: 
the use of force—police coercion at home and military aggres- 


4B. Goldwater, The Conscience of a Conservative, New York, 1960, 
p. 5. 

2 Samuel P. Huntington, “Conservatism as an Ideology”, Political 
Thought Since World War Il, Ed. by W. J. Stankiewicz, London, 1964, 
p. 358. 

3 Clinton Rossiter, Conservatism in America, New York, 1955. 


205 








sion abroad—for the purpose of maintaining social and national 
inequality. 

In the old conservative tradition, neo-conservatism aims to 
create a kind of “Holy Alliance”, comparable to the one set 
up by reactionary aristocracy in the early 19th century for the 
purpose of opposing bourgeois revolutions. 

Times have changed, and the bourgeoisie has changed from 
being the revolutionary class to become a counter-revolutionary 
class, its ideologists going all out to glorify the new “Holy Al- 
liance” of reaction—NATO and other aggressive military blocs, 
directed against social progress. Thus, the American sociologist 
C. Rossiter declares that conservatism “is a Western phenome- 
non, a philosophy peculiar to the Atlantic community and cer- 
tain of its extensions throughout the world”.1 Which brings us 
to the geopolitical and racist elements present in modern con- 
servatism, whose numerous supporters are fond of harping on 
about the superiority of “Atlantic civilisation” and the Anglo- 
Saxon race, and America’s great mission in the struggle with 
“world communism”. 

Very typical in this respect is an article by S. Possony, head 
of the International Affairs Department of the Hoover Institute, 
Stanford University. Discussing the social significance of anti- 
communist conservatism in connection with the development of 
the world revolutionary process, he directly states the funda- 
mental hostility of modern bourgeois conservatism to social 
revolution. “The central contention of conservatism,” he writes, 
“has been that, before building something new, the values that 
have been created must be conserved.”? He goes on to say that 
in the United States, the foremost conservative commitment is 
to defend and improve “the social and economic institutions on 
which our civilisation is built.” Possony holds that these 
institutions may be improved by certain limited social changes 
and reforms, but never, on any account, by revolution. 

There is, of course, nothing new in this attitude. Auguste 
Comte, the father of positivism, and Herbert Spencer, both 
writing in the 19th century, advocated “smooth evolution”, 
progress through reforms as opposed to revolution. Many trends 
of contemporary bourgeois sociology have rejected the concept 


{ Clinton Rossiter, op. cit., p. 16. 

2S. Possony, “The Challenge of Crisis. Preliminary Thought on a 
Conservative Defense Doctrine”, What Is Conservatism?, Ed. by F. S. Meyer, 
New York, 1964, p. 190. 

3 Tbid., p. 190. 


206 





of progress altogether, replacing it with the abstract, empty 
concept of social change, dispensing with all views of consistent 
development by stages, the progressive movement of society, 
and refusing to recognise qualitatively different stages of human 
history. 

This, then, is Possony’s standpoint. He is for conserving the 
economic, social and political institutions of the capitalist sys- 
tem, allowing limited social changes (reforms) within the 
framework of this outdated, anti-popular order. 

It is, of course, perfectly true that social progress involves 
the preservation and transmission of certain features and ele- 
ments from one socio-economic formation to another. But each 
new stage in social development, as Marxist sociology has 
proved irrefutably, is marked by the “dismissal” or rejection 
of outdated, conservative features. It is indeed this fact that the 
conservatives in bourgeois sociology are intent upon driving out 
of the minds of the masses. The aim of conservatism is to 
perpetuate the basic social, economic and political institutions 
of the capitalist system. The conservatives’ hostility to social 
progress determines their hostility to the world revolutionary 
process. It is no accident that they are so fond of referring to 
The Reflections on the Revolution in France, published by the 
ideologist of “classical conservatism” Burke (1790), citing it in 
support of their views. 

The idea of the world revolutionary process, reflected in em- 
bryo form in the works of progressive French bourgeois thinkers 
of the 18th century, comprehensively analysed in Marxist- 
Leninist theory, and further developed in our time in various 
documents of creative Marxism, including the programme of 
the CPSU, absolutely infuriates the ideologists of contemporary 
conservatism. 

Possony writes: “The American conservative is committed to 
defending the United States and its social order against the 
threat of Communism, including ... revolution... .”! Further 
on he says: “If the United States wants to survive ... it must 
maintain a broadly superior military force financed by a sub- 
stantial budget,” and adds that “the present military budget of 
about sixty billion dollars is too low and sooner or later may 
have to be increased”? 

However, social revolution is brought about not by exporting 


! S. Possony, op. cit., p. 190. 
2 Ibid., p. 199. 


207 











| 


it, by force imposed from without, but by the objective con- 
tradictions inherent in the capitalist system itself. 

The successful development of the world socialist system 
does have a revolutionary catalysing influence on the workers 
of all countries, but this influence is that of the power of exam- 
ple and not that achieved through the use of force, by resorting 
to military means as Possony and other anti-communist con- 
servatives would have people believe. The socialist system in- 
fluences the world revolutionary process by demonstrating the 
advantages of socialism for all to see, by offering political and 
moral support to the movements for emancipation from social 
and national oppression. 

Reactionary imperialist politicians and the conservative 
ideologists who express their views would very much like to 
interrupt the course of historical progress by forceful means, 
and use military force, including surprise attack, to overcome 
the superiority of the socialist system. 

In A Forward Strategy for America, Possony and his co- 
authors insist that capitalism must be prepared to oppose so- 
cialism at “any level of force”, and that in view of the growing 
pes of socialism, the USA may find it necessary to “strike 

rst”. 

Thus, neo-conservatism supplements the thesis of military 
force with the false premise that counter-revolutionary force 
is an inevitable factor of contemporary social relations in the 
sphere of international politics. 


The Doctrine of 

“Escalation” and 

Preaching of the Inevitability of 
Nuclear War 


The various sociological theories on which power politics 
are based all have in common the basic premise that force is 
the decisive factor in international relations. Where they differ 
is over the point of whether they consider to be necessary un- 
limited use of force (up to and including world nuclear war) 
or its use on a limited (local) scale. 

Yet all these doctrines of force meet with strong censure and 
opposition on the part of world public opinion. The former, 
i.e., those in favour of resorting to world nuclear war, are 
strongly criticised not only by Marxists and progressives, but 


208 





by many sober-minded bourgeois politicians too. There has 
also been an increasing amount of criticism in bourgeois socio- 
logical literature over the past few years of the concept of 
“limited” use of force, and especially that of ‘local wars”. 

Many bourgeois sociologists quite rightly point out that the 
fundamental weakness of this idea is that it is extremely dif- 
ficult, indeed, practically impossible, to determine where the 
borderline lies between “limited” and “unlimited” use of force. 
In the present international situation, a local war is always 
liable to develop into a nuclear conflict on a world scale.! 

However, there are some bourgeois sociologists who insist 
that the doctrine of “limited use of force” is not effective 
enough as a means of achieving the foreign policy aims of the 
reactionary imperialist groups whose interests they represent. 

Typical of the latter attitude are the ideas P. Anderson 
presents in his book Thermonuclear Warfare. He regards “limit- 
ed war” as a purely defensive measure, the idea being that 
“wherever aggression occurs’, the West “should intervene, 
directly or indirectly, with as much force as is necessary to stop 
it, and no more”. He regards this concept as “important” but 
“not enough” as “it is essentially defensive, and defensive psy- 
chology never won any wars’. He therefore insists that Amer- 
ica should abandon “a policy of containment in favor of a 
policy of initiative”.? 

This “policy of initiative’ involves maintaining “a large 
standing armed force equipped to fight any kind of war, con- 
ventional or otherwise”,* since he sees no dividing line at which 
limited war becomes total, any more than he does between a 
limited conventional war and a limited atomic war. Moreover, 
he holds that, undesirable though a nuclear war may be, the 
longer it is postponed, the worse it will be: “A total war today 
would presumably not destroy mankind, a total war in fifteen 
or twenty years might do so.”® 

While urging that America should go all out to prepare for 
the event of a total nuclear war, Anderson considers she should 
also be prepared for limited wars, including a “limited atomic 


war” which he considers to be likely in the near future. 

1 Morton H. Halperin, Limited War in the Nuclear Age, London, 
1963, p. 17. 

2 Paul Anderson, Thermonuclear Warfare, Derby, Connecticut, 1963, 
p. 127. 

8 Ibid., p. 181-52. 

4 Tbid., p. 151. 

8 Ibid., p. 152. 


14—203 209 











Thus, Anderson’s attitude represents a typical combination 
of the concepts of “limited” and “unlimited” use of force, a 
view expressed particularly clearly in the doctrine of “escala- 
tion”. This doctrine, advanced by the American military strat- 
egist and sociologist H. Kahn, director of the Hudson Institute, 
a research organisation that analyses international affairs for 
the Pentagon, has become extremely current in the United 
States recently as a theoretical and practical basis for the policy 
of counter-revolutionary force. 

The doctrine of “escalation” is an overtly aggressive prin- 
ciple of military strategy, which at the same time has certain 
philosophical and sociological aspects. It is founded on the 
premise that war is inevitable in the present age. 

The main content of the doctrine of “escalation” is close 
analysis of the “continuous paths between a low-level crisis and 
an all-out war”.! In other words, it is a well worked-out pro- 
gramme for gradually involving mankind in total nuclear war. 
“Strategies that emphasise the possibility of escalation”, Kahn 
writes, “are associated with the term ‘brinkmanship’ ”.2 Kahn’s 
metaphorical “ladder” has 44 rungs starting at the bottom with 
“the ostensible crisis stage”, a war of speeches and declarations 
(rung 1), and finishing on the top rung with “spasms or insen- 
sate war’, when “all the buttons are pressed” (rung 44). 

On the first rung, Kahn writes, one side asserts that “un- 
less a given dispute is resolved in the immediate future it 
will in effect begin to climb the rungs of the escalation lad- 
der”. 

The next steps are “threatening acts” and “hardening of po- 
sitions”, when one can reassure one’s own side by pointing out 
that the other side is not mad and will therefore back down; 
“show of force”; “significant mobilisation”; “harassing acts of 
violence”: “bombs may be exploded”, “frontier guards may be 
shot”, sabotage and terrorisation, flights over enemy territory. 
Then comes the “dramatic military confrontation”. 

Next, following the “provocatory diplomatic break” (rung 
10), and the ‘“‘super-ready status”, comes a “large conventional 
war’. Now, Kahn continues, “the stage has been set for some 
kind of organised military violence”. Three more rungs, and 
we arrive at the “barely nuclear war”: either “a nuclear weapon 
is used unintentionally” or “one (?] of the antagonists may 


> Kahn, “ ‘Escalation’ as a Strategy”, Fortune, April 1965, p. 110. 
Ibid. 


210 








make military or political use of a nuclear weapon and try to 
give the impression that its use was unintentional”. 

The remaining rungs are various stages of nuclear war. 
Thus, Kahn concludes, “the unthinkable all-out war is becom- 
ing thinkable” and “we cross the threshold”’.! 

It is this view that contains the essence of Kahn’s doctrine 
of “escalation”: the inevitability of ‘crossing the threshold”, 
the fatal way in which the possible becomes the actual. 

Naturally, as long as imperialism and its aggressive circles 
exist, the possibility of war, including world nuclear war, can 
never be excluded. But in our time the necessary subjective and 
objective prerequisites for preventing the possible from coming 
about do exist. The most important of these are the existence 
of the world socialist system, the powerful upswing of the na- 
tional liberation movement, the international peace movement, 
and the firm determination of peace-loving people everywhere 
not to let it happen. 

The doctrine of escalation has another aspect with important 
social implications, and that is the way it obliterates the divid- 
ing line between local war and total nuclear war on a world 
scale. It serves to justify whatever form of military force is 
most to the advantage of United States monopoly capital at 
any particular juncture. Hence the insistence on the possibility 
of local nuclear wars which can “escalate” to an all-out nuclear 
war that is characteristic of the ideas of H. Kahn and other 
supporters of his theory.2 Synthesis of the “limited” and ‘“‘un- 
limited” use of military violence in foreign policy, depending 
on circumstances, is a major sociological aspect of the escalation 
doctrine. 

The doctrine of escalation represents an attempt to put pres- 
sure on opponents of American imperialism, and_ blackmail 
them. In this respect, it is similar to another socio-political 
theory of American militarism, Thomas Schelling’s theory of 
political blackmail. The theory is based on the premise that the 
scientific and technological revolution and general international 
development in the last few decades make it extremely dan- 
gerous to resort to all-out thermonuclear war for the defence 
of certain social interests. “War and the brink of war’, Schel- 


{ Tbid., p. 112. 

2 Viz., Edward Teller who, insisting on how difficult it is to draw 
a line between local and all-out nuclear war, points out that “a limited 
nuclear conflict can escalate” (E. Teller, “The Uses of Nuclear Energy”, 
The Conservative Papers, New York, 1964, p. 211). 


14° 211 





ling writes, ‘‘are more a contest of nerve and risk-taking, of 
pain and endurance,” while “military strategy, whether we like 
it or not, has become the diplomacy of violence”’.t 

The central issue of the “diplomacy of violence” is manipu- 
lation of threats in such a way as to ensure the achievement of 
political demands at the price of risking nuclear war but not 
at the price of the war itself. The main thing is psychological 
deterrence, best achieved, in Schelling’s opinion, by “limited” 
or “local” war. 

He illustrates his theory with the following example. “If I 
say, ‘Row, or I'll tip the boat over and drown us both’, you'll 
not believe me. I cannot actually tip the boat over to make you 
row. But if I start rocking the boat so that it may tip over—not 
because I want it to but because I do not completely control 
things once I start rocking the boat—you'll be more im- 
pressed”’.2 

Schelling applies the term “generator of risk” to this kind of 
local war. To wage a limited war, he writes, is to begin to rock 
the boat, to start off a process which is not entirely under our 
control, counting on the other side retreating before the danger 
of an all-out war. 

The basic error of both of Schelling’s theory of psychological 
deterrence and Kahn’s theory of escalation is that they both 
derive from the fallacious voluntarist premise that the class will 
of the imperialist politicians can be imposed on the countries of 
the socialist community by means of gradual and limited use of 
military force or political blackmail. 

In point of fact, class will is not a self-contained factor, but 
an intrinsic part of the whole sum of social and, above all, ma- 
terial conditions. History has shown that the class will of the 
imperialist bourgeoisie to the destruction of socialism comes up 
against insurmountable obstacles, and “power politics” suffer 
failure after failure. 


eb 


This short review of the main trends of US bourgeois sociol- 
ogy involving attempts to provide theoretical justification for 
imperialist power politics leads us to the following conclusions. 

First, modification of the traditional sociological theories of 
imperialist power politics is in the direction of their adaptation 


4 Thomas CG. Schelling, Arms and Influence, No. 9, 1966, pp. 33, 34. 
2 Ibid., p. 91. 


212 











to new conditions in view of the bankruptcy of this policy, and 
the search for methods to camouflage imperialist aggression. 

Second, representing as they do the interests of a reactionary 
class that is historically doomed—the imperialist bourgeoisie— 
supporters of aggressive sociological doctrines have not aban- 
doned their support for adventurist efforts to change the course 
of social development and obstruct the triumph of socialism by 
force of arms, but have merely somewhat altered the outward 
appearance of their traditional theories. 

Third, the modification and decline of the traditional impe- 
rialist doctrines of “power politics” has produced doubt and un- 
certainty in the minds of many bourgeois sociologists, causing 
them to think again, and in some cases even to protest against 
certain extremes of aggressive imperialist policy. 


Ts 


Chapter XI 


THE THEORY OF 
GAMES IN 
INTERNATIONAL 
AFFAIRS 


The publication in 1944 of a book entitled The Theory of 
Games and Economic Behaviour by John von Neumann and 
Oskar Morgenstern is generally taken as marking the birth of 
the “theory of games”. It quickly found practical application in 
warfare, economics, the construction of electronic computers and 
cybernetics, and little over a decade later a UNESCO publica- 
tion announced: “There is in the process of developing at the 
present time a radically different kind of mathematical mod- 
el.... It is called the theory of games of strategy”’.! Since 
then the theory has taken its first independent steps. Two 
eminent specialists described it as “one of the first examples 
of an elaborate mathematical development centered solely in 
the social sciences” .? 

The term itself is not entirely satisfactory since it might sug- 
gest to the layman such specific pastimes as cards, chess and 
so on, depending on his own particular associations. In point 
of fact, however, this theory treats all conflicts of interests as 
games of strategy, and games as we usually understand them 
are only one kind of many as far as this theory is concerned. 
The theory of games is used for the purpose of analysing all 


1 The Nature of Conflict. Studies on the Sociological Aspects of In- 
ternational Tensions, UNESCO, Paris, 1957, p. 71. 

2 R. Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa, Games and Decisions, New 
York, 1957, p. 11. 


214 











—— 


——— 


kinds of conflict, including politics in general and problems of 
war and peace in particular. 

One may or may not agree with the usefulness of the theory, 
but it would be wrong to reject it out of hand, without examin- 
ing the evidence carefully. Especially where so much is at stake 
—nothing more nor less than the future of mankind. No path 
which might lead to peace must be left unexplored, no stone 
left unturned that might lead to a solution of this vital issue. 

Unfortunately, it was the militarists who were the first to 
turn their attention to the possibility of using the new theory 
in their own interests. This was largely due to the efforts of 
Morgenstern himself, though many others have contributed to 
it, including H. Kahn, T. Schelling, M. Halperin, H. Kissinger, 
B. Brodie, A. Wollstetter, K. Knorr, R. Osgood and D. Bren- 
nan. The great danger lies in the fact that neither the generals 
nor the public at large are in a position to test the validity of 
the deductions made by Kahn and his colleagues, who have 
been dubbed “the new civilian militarists” in the United States. 
Their deductions are being taken at their face value, on trust, 
because everyone is prepared to accept the theory itself, and 
these self-styled experts are thus left to draw the conclusions 
they wish to from it. 

It was probably to them that Eisenhower was referring 
when, at the end of his term of office as president, he warned 
of the danger of national policy becoming the “captive of a 
scientific-technological elite”. He was, of course, exaggerating 
somewhat, since the latter basically “takes the orders”, but it 
is certainly a two-way process, since the “customer” depends 
to a certain extent on the advice of the experts. The influence 
of the “theory of games” experts has made itself clearly felt 
in the Pentagon, and it may well extend to the White House. 
I. Horowitz, a professor of sociology, warns of this danger in 
his book The War Game. He writes: “...the prophecies of the 
NCM [New Civilian Militarists—The Author.} may be realised 
not because they are based on scientifically accurate predictions, 
but simply as a consequence of the general acceptance of the 
definitions provided by game theorists.” 

The “civilian militarists” naturally arouse the antipathy and 
condemnation of world public opinion. Here are a few examples 
of reactions to their writings. Charles Osgood, Professor of 
Psychology and Director of the Institute of Communications 


1]. Horowitz, The War Game, New York, 1963, p. 23. 


215 





Research, University of Illinois, writes that Kahn’s views 
represent “The final degradation of human intelligence”.! 
R. Watson-Watt, the inventor of radar, criticised Kahn’s in- 
human arithmetical approach to the question of nuclear war.? 

Such indignation is fully justified and understandable, but 
is not enough in itself. The authors of these bloodthirsty works 
are quite indifferent to the moral indignation the unprejudiced 
reader is bound to feel. Thus, in Thinking About the Unthink- 
able, Kahn tries to shrug off the blame, and rejects the accusa- 
tion that he is a warmonger. It is not a surgeon’s fault, he 
argues, that he has to bloody his hands. One cannot, like the 
rulers of old, punish a messenger who brings bad news. All he 
is doing is to study some aspects of the tragedy of mankind 
from the quantitative angle. 

The supporters of peace do not always find it easy to expose 
the militarist who has donned the mantle of omniscience, and 
dared to think of the unthinkable. The latter insists that science 
is impartial, that he is merely offering strategical advice for 
achieving a pre-set aim, and that it is not his job to draw 
ethical conclusions. The advocates of peace are made to look 
like poor fools who are hopelessly out of step with the times, 
and the strategists like heroes who have the courage to look the 
Medusa of war straight in the face without being turned to 
stone. As H. S. Hughes, Harvard University professor, put 
it, “the advocates of peace and disarmament will never be 
taken seriously until they can meet and answer the authority 
of a Herman Kahn”? The only way to fight the strategist 
scholars is to put the ball squarely in their court. 

The following is a brief outline of the theory of games, just 
enough to enable the reader to gain a general idea. No attempt 
is made to go into the mathematical side of the theory. 

According to the theory of games, all conflicts and disputes 
are divided into two categories: games that are strictly com- 
petitive and games that are not strictly competitive. In the 
former case, the interests of the two sides are diametrically 
opposed and irreconcilable, and victory for one side means 
defeat for the other. The principle is much the same as in cards 
or wrestling. A victory means that a side is one point up, a 


4 Charles E. Osgood, “Reciprocal Initiative’, The Liberal Papers, 
Chicago, 1962, p. 165. 

2 R. Watson-Watt, Man’s Means to His End, New York, 1961. 

3-H. S. Hughes, An Approach to Peace, New York, 1962, p. 62. 


216 








defeat that it is one point down. A victory followed by a defeat 
for a side brings its score to nil, hence the term “zero-sum 
games” often applies to this category. 

In the case of games that are not strictly competitive, the 
interests of the two sides conflict without being diametrically 
opposed. There is plenty of leeway for compromise, mutual 
concessions and even co-operation. This kind of situation is to 
be observed in family life or international relations. The score 
is not so easily determined as in games of the first category, 
hence the term ‘“‘non-zero-sum games”. 

The two sides are able to choose their own course of action, 
it being assumed that they will choose the course most likely 
to lead to victory. In deciding upon a course of action it is 
necessary to take into account the intentions of the adversary, 
who is assumed to be no less intelligent than yourself. All the 
possible courses of action represent a set of strategies. The com- 
bination of strategies—for example, strategy No. 1 for blue, and 
strategy No. 4 for red—produce a possible result. These pos- 
sible results can be represented by a chart called the payments 
matrix, the gains of one side and the losses of the other being 
entered in the squares and termed payments. Thus, in the 
square where blue’s strategy 1 intersects red’s strategy 4 plus 
one is entered, representing a win for blue and a loss for red. 
It is important to have a clear idea of exactly what payments 
are involved in a given conflict. In politics the lives of thou- 
sands and millions of people may depend on it. 

The theory of games does not represent a purely utilitarian 
discovery of the means of solving a conflict in favour of the 
side that knows the theory better. Indeed, practice has often 
shown the opposite to be the case—that there are no easy ways 
to victory. Just as spectacles correct bad sight, the theory of 
games helps see a situation and the ways of resolving it better. 
But if glasses are to be of any use at all, they have to be the 
correct strength, corresponding to the defect. Similarly, game 
theory can only be effective if the “model of the game” is ap- 
propriate to the nature of the conflict. Often the best moves for 
a zero-sum game are not only different from but quite the op- 
posite of what would be best in a non-zero-sum game. An in- 
crease in the number of players above two also fundamentally 
alters the situation, since it then becomes possible to form al- 
liances, two against one, and so on. 

The theory of games has only been well elaborated for one 
class of games, two-person zero-sum games. But that is not a 


217 











very common situation in international relations. If we ap- 
proach international affairs from the point of view of the first 
class of games, and not the other more complex ones, there is 
the danger of producing false recommendations, all the more 
dangerous for the fact that the process by which they were 
reached has the appearance of being scientific. Since these re- 
commendations generally correspond to the deductions of the 
most reactionary and militarist circles, it is extremely impor- 
tant that they be exposed as invalid. 

The intellectuals in the service of American militarism are 
represented above all by the staff of the Rand Corporation, 
which is almost entirely engaged on various work for the US 
Air Force. 

Professor Morgenstern of Princeton University is one of 
those to whom this might well apply. In an article entitled 
“The Cold War Is Cold Poker” which appeared in The New 
York Times Sunday Supplement he makes abuses of his great 
authority to liken US-Soviet relations to a zero-sum game. 
Since poker is an example of the latter he urges that American 
diplomacy would do well to take a leaf out of the book of an 
expert card player. “Although the situations are not completely 
identical in poker and the cold war, they are similar enough 
so that something substantial can be learned from good poker 
peels: S 

rgenstern had expounded this theory in more detail in his 
book. he Question of National Defense. Here he insists that 
in international poker, the problem of what is “best” for each 
side “cannot be solved by merely using the common-sense ap- 
proach of military academies. This is the domain of the mathe- 
matical theory of games of strategy....”2 It is with declara- 
tions of this sort that Morgenstern and his followers try to 
produce firm scientific justification of the aggressive policies of 
American imperialism. By their own paths, of which the layman 
remains ignorant, these experts reach the most banal conclu- 
sions of the most hardened reactionaries. 

This happens because in a zero-sum game the sides usually 
have to make an “all or nothing” choice, so that they tend to 
act according to the principle of “win or bust”. Undoubtedly, 
this kind of thinking in terms of victory or defeat has a strong 


{ The New York Times Magazine, February 5, 1961, 
2 QO. Morgenstern, The Question of National Defense, New "York, 1959, 
p. 164. 


218 





appeal for the reactionary military in the service of monopoly 
capital. The conclusions of the game theory specialists suit 
them perfectly and they welcome them with open arms. This 
kind of thinking also fits in with the widespread attitude in 
the United States which N. Wiener, the father of cybernetics, 
described as “the tendency ... to regard a war in the light of 
a glorified football game, at which at some period the final score 
is in, and which we have to count as either a definite victory 
or a definite defeat”. The apparently scientific nature of these 
theories can also have a strong appeal for young officers with 
a technological background. The British journalist Paul John- 
son wrote that “the impact of pseudo-scientific doctrines on 
these men, whose moral reflexes have been blunted by the 
exigencies of the cold war, can be disastrous”? 

There is certainly a danger of game theory infused with the 
cold war spirit blocking all paths to resolution of the conflict 
between the two socio-economic systems apart from a direct 
military clash. This dangerous combination is to be found in 
the attitude of the American “ultras”, including the republican 
candidate defeated in the 1964 presidential elections, Barry 
Goldwater. “For him,” Walter Lippmann wrote, “all conflicts 
and disputes must end either in victory or defeat.”? In the 
language of game theory, the ultras regard international rela- 
tions as a zero-sum game. It is hardly surprising that they 
should widely advertise the conclusions of Kahn and other 
“strategists”, for “‘a two-person zero-sum game is a game be- 
tween two players in which their interests are diametrically 
opposed: one player gains only at the expense of the other. 
Consequently, there is no motive for collusion between the 
players.’ 

It is easy to see how treating international relations, or at 
least relations between the capitalist and socialist countries, as 
a zero-sum game entails rejection of the principles of interna- 
tional law and excludes the possibility of peaceful coexistence, 
by removing all bases for agreement. 

What we have here is a shameless distortion of scientific 
principles, the attempt to apply the logic of zero-sum games to 


4N. Wiener, 1 Am a Mathematician. The Later Life of a Prodigy, 
New York, 1956, p. 299. 

2 New Statesman, May 12, 1961, p. 754. 

3 New York Herald Tribune, March 3, 1964. 

4 D. Blackwell, M. A. Girshick, Theory of Games and Statistical Deci- 
sions, New York, 1954, pp. 9-10. 


219 











non-zero-sum conflicts, which require a completely different, 
often completely opposite, set of rules. 

Let us take a look at an example given by Professor Rapo- 
port of Michigan University—the example of the conflict in 
Puccini’s opera La Tosca. The police chief Scarpia promises 
Tosca he will spare Cavaradossi’s life in return for her favours. 
But both decide to double-cross the other: Tosca kills Scarpia, 
who has not in fact given the order to have the firing squad’s 
bullets replaced with blanks. 

According to game theory, the situation is as follows. Tosca 
can save Cavaradossi’s life, but at an extremely high price. 
If she can trick Scarpia, and thereby save Cavaradossi without 
paying the price requested, she will save herself from dis- 
honour. She thus chooses the strategy of double-cross. Scarpia 
looks at it like this: he can get what he wants from Tosca, but 
at the high price of sparing his rival. But if he double-crosses 
Tosca and she keeps her word, he will have got what he wants 
from Tosca and Cavaradossi will have been put out of the way 
into the bargain. He therefore chooses the strategy of double- 
cross. Both choose to double-cross and both lose. Why? 

The mistake is that both Scarpia and Tosca viewed the 
situation as a zero-sum game, and chose their strategy accord- 
ingly. In actual fact, however, the situation was not at all that of 
a zero-sum game, and both would have done better to have kept 
their word, however difficult it might have been. Both would 
then have achieved their main, though not their maximum 
objective. 

Here is what Rapoport has to say on the subject. “I have 
seen many research proposals and listened to long discussions 


of how hot and cold wars can be ‘gamed’.... By far the most 
important conflicts that plague the human race do not fit into 
the two-person zero-sum category at all.... No argument ad- 


dressed individually to Tosca or to Scarpia will convince either 
that it is better to keep the bargain than to double-cross the 
other. Only an argument addressed to both at once has this 
force. Only collective rationality will help them to avoid the 
trap of the double double-cross.... At times we must learn 
the meaning of trust, or else both we and our opponents will 
invariably lose in games of the Tosca-Scarpia type.”! 

Let us examine another version of the same game. Suppose 


1 “The Use and Misuse of Game Theory”, Scientific American, Dec. 
1962, p. 118. 


220 














two countries have concluded an agreement on disarmament 
measures. They are both at liberty to choose either of two 
courses: the strategy of honouring the agreement or the strategy 
of breaking it. If side 1 breaks the agreement, and side 2 honours 
it, side 1 gains a considerable advantage. If, on the other hand, 
it honours the agreement, it stands to lose a lot should side 2 
decide to break it. Both sides will reason this out in the same 
way. Arguments addressed to the zero-sum category by both 
sides dictate the strategy of double-cross to both sides. Yet both 
sides will lose by this double double-cross, since the arms race 
would be on again, although it is in the interest of both sides 
to stop it. 

These examples should suffice to show how mistaken it is to 
treat international political relations as belonging to the zero- 
sum category. As Professor Fisher of Harvard University so 
aptly put it, “the world is not a zero-sum game”.! The same 
view is expressed in another major work on game theory: “The 
strict conflict of interests is a realistic assumption for parlor 
games and military operations, and for a few special situations 
in business.... Outside of this rather limited domain, one is 
hard pressed to come up with a truly realistic game problem.”? 

Meanwhile, the strategists of the Rand Corporation, not to 
mention the Pentagon strategists, persist in regarding US-Soviet 
relations as a zero-sum game. Thus, Morgenstern for one, 
adopts the basic premise that “the opponent’s interests are 
clearly opposed to our own”, and makes this an excuse for the 
most aggressive recommendations. 

Generally speaking, imperialist policies can be regarded as 
being based on the concept of deterrence, which the French 
general Beaufre described as the “hidden mainspring of our 
age”. The theory of deterrence rests on the same assumptions 
as a zero-sum game. Rapoport has the following to say in this 
connection: “The theory of deterrence rests squarely on the as- 
sumption that the all-consuming passion of the Enemy is to 
destroy us and that only the realisation of his own vulnerabil- 
ity prevents him from doing so.... The zero-sum-game as- 
sumption is most pronounced in the fact that we attribute to the 
other preferences for those courses of action which are most 


1 Fractionating Conflict. International Conflict and Behavioral Science. 
The Craigrille Papers, Roger Fisher, Editor, New York, 1964, p. 109. 

2 Samuel Karlin, Mathematical Methods and Theories in Games, 
Programming and Economics, London, 1959, p. 7. 


221 














devastating to ourselves. The fact that the other does not as a 
rule carry those actions out is attributed almost exclusively to the 
effectiveness of deterrence”.! The absence of a control experi- 
ment permits this line of reasoning to turn in a vicious circle of 
self-justification. 

Many sober-minded people in the USA urge the development 
of wider spheres of co-operation, or what they call “the common 
interests of the opponents”. One attempt to find such interests is 
a book by V. P. Rock of the Institute of Defence Research, in 
which the author calls for “a whole variety of ‘non-zero 
games’ ”.2 He mentions in particular joint research programmes, 
cultural exchanges, increased trade, and a disarmament agree- 
ment. 

Political struggle and social progress are only possible in the 
context of peace, in the absence of nuclear war. Albert Einstein 
expressed this idea when he wrote: “Man must first ensure his 
survival; only then can he ask himself what type of existence 
he prefers.’’ 

The importance of peace is also something’ that emerges 
perfectly clearly from the theory of games. Many leading 
scholars and scientists insist that the pay-offs must be carefully 
calculated in a game. How much is international peace worth? 
The price of a world nuclear war is so high, and would cause 
colossal damage to both national interests and the interests of 
mankind as a whole, representing a loss vastly in excess of any 
possible hoped-for gain. As J. Williams points out, “an 
obvious difficulty, which the user of Game Theory must learn 
to live with, has to do with the need to measure things which 
do not afford secure basis for measurement”.4 This remark is 
especially applicable to international relations. 

The theory of games is concerned with quantitative values. 
Can victory in a nuclear war really be measured in quantitative 
terms? Morgenstern, Kahn, Teller and others who consider 
nuclear war “thinkable” hold that it can. They write that by 
building nuclear shelters American casualties in a nuclear war 


1 A. Rapoport, Strategy and Conscience, pp. 106-07. 

2 Vincent P. Rock, A Strategy of Interdependence. A Program for 
the Control of Conflict Between the United States and the Soviet Union, 
New York, 1964, p. 40. 

3 Einstein on Peace, Ed. by O. Nathan and H. Norden, New York, 
1968, p. 468. 

4 J. D. Williams, The Complete Strategist Being a Primer on the 
Theory of Games of Strategy, New York-Toronto-London, 1954, p. 193. 


222 


could be reduced to an “acceptable” level of 50 to 80 million. 
But if we forget the mathematics for a moment and view the 
matter in human terms, is there really any sense in aiming for 
such a Pyrrhic victory? What does “getting ‘wiped out’ mean” 
in a thermonuclear war? asks the American sociologist A. Was- 
kow. Would it not be far more useful to concentrate intellectual 
efforts, including the use of the mathematical apparatus of the 
theory of games, on finding peaceful means of resolving inter- 
national conflicts? N. Wiener points out: “The only experience 
of a nuclear war which is not immediately catastrophic is the 
experience of the war game. If we are to use this experience 
as a guide for our procedure in a real emergency, the values of 
winning which we have employed in programming games must 
be the same values which we hold at heart in the actual out- 
come of the war. We can fail in this only at our immediate, 
utter, and irretrievable peril.””! 

Many scientists and scholars in America who object strongly 
to the misuse of game theory by the militarists insist that the 
results of nuclear war cannot be reckoned in quantitative terms. 
Thus, the physicist and publicist R. Lapp writes: “Let us try 
to imagine a two-player nuclear game between the United States 
and the Soviet Union. Some of our mathematical analysts have 
become fascinated with the results of their calculus. Their com- 
puters tell them that, under certain circumstances, we could score 
a ‘win’ in a nuclear war. Unhappily, the computer arrives at this 
result only because it has no feelings: it grinds out answers with 
complete unconcern.... If Country A loses 30 million dead and 
27 per cent of its economy, whereas Country B has 90 million 
dead and 68 per cent of its economy destroyed, the computer 
pronounces Country A the winner. One wonders how much 
consolation that would be to Country A.”2 

Retired Rear Admiral Eccles expresses a similar view: “While 
in many tactical encounters and in some strategic situations it is 
possible to win, in most major international crises the popular 
connotation of ‘winning’ may be both false and harmful to our 
thinking.” 

The “civilian strategist” thesis that nuclear war is admissible 


1 N. Wiener, Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal 
and the Machine, New York-London, 1961, p. 177. 
. Lapp, Kill and Overkill. The Strategy of Annihilation, New York, 
1962, pp. 94, 95, 96. 
3H. Eccles, Military Concepts and Philosophy, New Brunswick, 1965, 
p. 58. 


223 

















represents a pseudo-scientific treatment of political issues, jug- 
gling with abstractions and imaginary situations bearing little 
relation to reality. 

This kind of thinking is typical of practically all theorising 
based on game theory. Whole series of imaginary events and 
stratagems are devised, while those aspects of game theory that 
cannot be reconciled are conveniently forgotten. Thus, one of the 
essential premises of game theory, the assumption of the players’ 
intelligence, is completely ignored by Kahn and company. The 
Hudson Institute of which he is director is responsible for devis- 
ing all sorts of games based on irrational assumptions that game 
theory just does not admit. 

Similar imaginary situations are examined in the book 
Limited Strategic War. One of the games is as follows: country 
A destroys one of country B’s towns and B retaliates by de- 
stroying two of A’s towns. A is faced with the dilemma of 
whether to carry on the “exchange” or climb down. Suppose 
A decides on limited strategic war. Then B is faced with the 
same problem, and so on. The authors have the grace to remark 
that “the world of limited strategic war is very strange’, and 
“the reader may be left wondering what relevance, if any, these 
notions have to the real world”. Yet it is entirely to this 
“strange world” that the work so highly paid by the Rand 
Corporation is devoted. 

We find the same kind of irrelevant thinking in the last 
book by the late J. Strachey, a British Labour theoretician. “It 
is improbable that Russia will set out to conquer the world by 


military means.... But improbable events sometimes happen. 
And think of what would be at stake if this improbable event 
did happen?””! 


One is rather at a loss for an answer when faced with such 
intellectual pathology. Erich Fromm is right on the mark when 
he writes: “Most Americans today think about Russia in a para- 
noid fashion; namely, they ask what is possible rather than 
what is probable.... If we think only of possibilities, then in- 
deed there is no chance for realistic and sensible political ac- 
tion.”2 The method of going through all the possible moves 
and courses of action employed by numerous American sup- 
porters of game theory leads to just this kind of progressive 
political blindness. 


1 J. Strachey, On the Prevention of War, London, 1962, p. 101. 
2 E. Fromm, May Man Prevail? An Inquiry Into the Facts and Fictions 
of Foreign Policy, New York, 1961, pp. 20-21. 


224 


The “scientific” works of the nuclear strategists are charac- 
terised by their complete divorce from political life and total 
absorption in a narrow world of abstract pay-offs. R. Levine 
of the Rand Corporation tries to justify this on the grounds 
that “‘it is impossible in any meaningful way to show that any 
single policy is ‘wrong’”’.! The sides are at perfect liberty to 
choose their own “priorities”, their own “hierarchy of values’, 
and may base their actions on such principles as “better dead 
than Red”. This of course can be the basis for a game with a 
suicidal outcome, but why this choice in the first place? Surely it 
would be far nearer the truth to say that the choice is between 
a sensible policy of peaceful coexistence and the highly danger- 
ous policy of cold war. 

A close look at the subject soon reveals the essential falla- 
ciousness of the attempt to treat international politics as a zero- 
sum game, and it has been strongly criticised by many. The 
Americans R. D. Lewis, H. Raiffa, J. Horowitz and W. Mills, 
and the Englishman P. Blackett are among its many most viru- 
lent critics. It has come in for a great deal of criticism on the 
grounds that it takes no account of psychological factors. 
Professor Schelling of Harvard launched a “counter-attack” 
on critics of the theory in his book The Strategy of Conflict, in 
which he attempts to link game theory with psychology. He 
declares that the theory can also be called “a theory of inter- 
dependent decisions”, and recommends the use of bluff, intimi- 
dation, blackmail and double-cross. Unfortunately, when he 
comes to international politics he devotes his intellectual powers 
to developing the theory of “power politics” rather than to the 
quest for ways of ensuring peace. 

His dubious contribution in this field includes the idea of 
“coercive deficiency”, and the theory that the strength of a 
threat does not depend on the damage it would cause to the one 
who carries it out. Schelling terms this the theory of skilful 
non-use of the armed forces. The threat is effective, he writes, 
in as far as the one who makes it shows that he will not be able 
to refrain from carrying it out should the threat itself fail to 
work. 

People often resort to “coercive deficiency”. In such cases 
they say they have “burnt their boats’. The smoker who has 
decided to give up this harmful habit, intentionally leaves his 
cigarettes at home when he goes off fishing, so that whether 


1 Robert A. Levine, The Arms Debate, Cambridge, 1963, p. 9. 


15—203 225 














he wants to or not he will be unable to smoke. Or to take an 
example from international politics: during the so-called Ber- 
lin crisis in 1961, the United States moved more troops into 
Western Europe. The threat implied was: since the troops 
have been transferred, in ‘“‘an emergency situation” it may prove 
necessary to use them whether we want to or not. 

Schelling writes: “Game theory adds more insight into the 
strategy of bargaining by emphasising the striking truth that 
the threat does not depend on the threatener’s having less to 
suffer than the threatened party.... Threats of war... threats 
to make a ‘scene’ ... cannot be understood except by denying 
the utility-comparison criterion.”! Thus, a threat does not 
depend on the idea “You'll come off worse than me!” but rather 
on the thought: “I may come off worst, but you won’t come off 
so well yourself.” In this way it is possible to use the threat 
of nuclear war to blackmail one’s opponent. The thing is to 
do so skilfully, making it quite plain that you are really quite 
prepared to cross the “nuclear threshold”. 

One of the ways of doing so is the “coercive deficiency” we 
have already mentioned. In simple terms, this involves break- 
ing off all contacts with the opponent once the ultimatum has 
been delivered. Another way is reckless behaviour. Kahn has 
gone into this theory in great detail. He describes the game of 
“chicken’”” as an example. Two people drive their cars at top 
speed toward each other, straddling the white line down the 
centre of the road. The first to lose his nerve and swerve aside 
is ‘‘chicken”, an object of contempt and scorn. Kahn goes on 
to say that “the game is a useful analogy because it brings out 
some aspects of international relations that are important.... 
The skilful player gets into the car quite drunk, throwing 
whiskey bottles out of the window to make it clear to every- 
body just how drunk he is. He wears very dark glasses so that 
it is obvious that he cannot see anything. As soon as the car 
reaches high speed, he takes the steering wheel and throws it 
out of the window.”2 The other driver sees there is nothing for 
it but to swerve. 

This kind of theory of international blackmail is very much 
to the liking of the West German revanchists. They hope to 


1 Thomas C. Schelling, The Strategy of Conflict, New York, 1963, 
p. 131. 


2 National Security. Political, Military and Economic Strategies in the 
Decade Ahead, New York, 1963, p. 523. 


226 








achieve their aims by playing “chicken” with nuclear weapons. 

But surely the stakes are really too high? This brings us back 
to the question of “pay-offs”, going beyond the limits of game 
theory. 

Bertrand Russell considers: ““The game may be played with- 
out misfortune a few times, but sooner or later it will come 
to be felt that loss of face is more dreadful than nuclear anni- 
hilation.”’! After which the world will be plunged into a disaster 
that possibly nobody wanted. The game of “chicken” is alright 
for playboys but it is criminal to recommend it as a principle 
of behaviour in international affairs. 

Yet dangerous advice urging the use of international black- 
mail is to be heard more and more frequently. It is no exag- 
geration to speak of a flood of literature of this kind, ‘“‘theoreti- 
cal” material reflecting the growing role of the Pentagon in 
American foreign policy. Thus Horelick and Rush of the Rand 
Corporation accuse the White House of “excessive restraint” in 
the “political employment of strategic nuclear threats”,? while 
Bernard Brodie objects to the “timidity” of the American Gov- 
ernment. Schelling rebukes several of his colleagues for pay- 
ing too much attention to “deterrence” and not enough to “con- 
straint”, and suggests the US Defence Department ought to be 
renamed the Department of Attack.* 


% 


It remains to be seen how successfully the theory of games 
can be applied to international politics in general, and to mat- 
ters of war and peace in particular. So far the theory is simply 
not ready for use in international affairs. 

The formalisation of a conflict situation that its treatment in 
terms of game theory entails cuts two ways. It can be useful 
if it serves to free a conflict from secondary details and suggests 
ways of resolving it. But it can also lead one away from impor- 
tant, and even basic details, so that the main essence of the 
conflict is completely lost in the game model. As Professor 
Boulding of Michigan University grudgingly admits, “it is per- 
haps true at the moment that game theory operates at a level of 


1 B. Russell, Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare, London, 1959, p. 30. 

2 A. Horelick, M. Rush, Strategic Power and Soviet Foreign Policy, 
Chicago, 1966, p. 10. 

3 Bernard Brodie, Escalation and the Nuclear Option, Princeton, 1966. 

4 Thomas C. Schelling, Arms and Influence, New Haven-London, 1966. 


15* 227 

















abstraction that is a little too high to be immediately fruitful 
in practical conclusions”’.! 

The main difficulty involved in applying game theory to 
international situations is that so much remains to be clarified 
before any definite conclusions can be drawn—this particularly 
applies to the question of pay-offs, which often in practice 
cannot be assessed in quantitative terms (how much is the high 
morale of a people fighting for its freedom worth?)—and also 
the fact that it is impossible to take into account all the rele- 
vant political and moral factors. 

The simpler the situation the greater the chance of game 
theory being successfully used. But international relations are 
extremely complicated. Many political problems can only with 
great difficulty, if at all, be translated into mathematical terms. 
If an algorithm could be found for political problems, it would 
be possible to programme electronic computers accordingly, 
and leave them to find the answers, and thus dispense with the 
services of generals and diplomats. But, for the time being at 
any rate, such an “electronic death’ does not even threaten 
chess, which is simpler than politics. 

However, the present shortcomings of game theory should not 
be used as grounds for out-of-hand rejection or sweeping 
criticism of the whole theory—however great the temptation 
might be in view of the use made of it to justify aggressive poli- 
cies. In other words, the deliberate abstraction from major po- 
litical, social and class factors that imperialist ideologists find 
necessary for pseudo-scientific justification of their aggressive 
policies should not provoke the supporters of peace to ignore 
game theory as just another reactionary device. Game theory 
itself, as a mathematical method of analysis, is perfectly neutral. 
Some of the ideas it suggests could prove useful in practice. We 
are bound to agree with A. Rapoport, one of the most virulent 
critics of militarist use being made of game theory, when he 
says that reference to this theory in itself may be useful since 
it “stimulates us to think about conflict in a novel way”.? How- 
ever, it is always necessary to bear in mind the dangers of get- 
ting carried away with this theory and the possibility of its 
being deliberately distorted. 


{ Kenneth E. Boulding, Conflict and Defense. A General Theory, New 
York, 1962, p. 57. 


2A. Rapoport, Fights, Games and Debates, New York, 1960, p. 242. 


228 


Chapter XIi 


WHO IS OPPOSED TO 
PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE 


At the present time there is an increasingly evident and im- 
perative need for energetic struggle against the reactionary 
aggressive forces which have already plunged mankind into 
two world wars and are now aggravating the situation. 

The theories propagated by the ideologists of imperialism 
regarding the problem of war and peace and peaceful coexist- 
ence are extremely dangerous. 

The principle of peaceful coexistence between states with 
different social systems has acquired a vital importance for the 
whole of mankind, as the only reasonable alternative to nuclear 
war. Thus, acceptance or rejection of this principle serves as 
the basic criterion of attitudes to the whole problem of war 
and peace. 

The most reactionary imperialist ideologists direct their 
efforts towards denying the possibility of peaceful coexistence, 
which is tantamount to assuming that a world military conflict 
between the imperialist camp and the socialist countries is 
inevitable. Yet even those who openly profess revanchist aims 
avoid making direct appeals for war. 

The representatives of the most diverse ideological trends 
of West German imperialism are all continually stressing that 
West German interests are identical with those of the other 
European countries, insisting that the age of nation states is 
over, that national sovereignty is no longer necessary and is 
even harmful, that what is needed is a common European 
policy, that all Europe shares common traditions, a common 
heritage, and so on and so forth. 


229 








One of the most ardent preachers of the idea of European 
integration is the former defence minister of the FRG, Herr 
Strauss, who declared that “German policy is, and can only be, 
a function of European policy’’.! 

Some West German imperialist ideologists even go so far as 
to maintain that not only renunciation of sovereignty and in- 
dependence but the transformation of Western Europe into a 
single military camp is a condition for its very existence. They 
insist that renunciation of sovereignty is an absolute universal 
necessity in the present age, that it is the only way to ensure 
national security, along with the formation of large military 
blocs on a geographical basis. 

But this is not all: reactionary ideologists are doing their 
utmost to discredit the principle of peaceful coexistence, invent- 
ing all sorts of “theoretical adductions” and “arguments” 
against the possibility of it working. The aim of this is to justify 
the aggressive policy of the revanchists, who have become the 
bastion of imperialist reaction on the continent of Europe. 

Two main lines of approach can be distinguished in present 
attempts to refute the possibility of peaceful coexistence. One 
of them is to present a false picture of Marxist-Leninist doc- 
trine, trying to show that it is incompatible with the idea of pea- 
ceful coexistence, and the other is to “‘prove” peaceful coexist- 
ence to be unrealistic in the present international situation. 

The first includes the following two theses: 

1) the thesis that peaceful coexistence contradicts the spirit 
and content of Marxism-Leninism, and is in particular incom- 
patible with the Marxist-Leninist theory of socialist revolution; 

2) the thesis that the principle of peaceful coexistence is not 
an essential part of Soviet foreign policy, but merely a tempo- 
rary tactical measure, designed to bring about the destruction 
of the capitalist system by political and ideological means 
without resorting to military conflict. 

One of the arguments most frequently employed by the op- 
ponents of peaceful coexistence in the FRG is the fallacious 
theory of the incompatibility of the idea of peaceful coexistence 
with the principles of Marxism-Leninism. For instance, it is 
the leitmotiff of the book, The Soviet Conception of Peaceful 
Coexistence, by G. Wetter, a leading representative of clerical 
ideology. Posing as an impartial commentator on Marxism- 
Leninism, Wetter writes: “The policy of peaceful coexistence. . . 


! Aussenpolitik, 1961, Heft 2, S. 79-80. 


230 


—S——————— ns 


thus really means calmly waiting while one country after 
another, on the basis of a ripening process running its course as 
an objective necessity, ‘falls away’ from capitalism as dry 
leaves fall off a tree in autumn. ... But it must be said that such 
a waiting attitude contradicts the inner nature of Leninism. For 
non-temporising and the urge to speed up the revolutionary 
process by military intervention was the point in which Lenin 
exerted a decisive influence on the development of Russian 
Marxism.”’! 

On the basis of this interpretation of Marxism-Leninism, 
Wetter goes on to claim that “the thesis of peaceful coexis- 
tence can not only not be regarded as a logical conclusion from 
the Marxist-Leninist doctrine, but is rather contrary to some 
of the basic theses of this doctrine”’.? 

Wetter is clearly tilting at windmills here, for he is attempt- 
ing to defeat a concept of Marxism-Leninism that is purely 
the product of his own imagination. He commits at least two 
gross errors. 

To start with, Marxism-Leninism has never likened the ob- 
jective historical process of the ripening of socialist revolution 
in various capitalist countries to “dry leaves falling off trees”. 
Such gross oversimplification of the development of social phe- 
nomena is quite alien to Marxism-Leninism. Moreover, such 
a passive, fatalistic waiting for historical events is not a feature 
of the revolutionary spirit of Marxism, especially in the case of 
events like social revolutions, which do not take place of their 
own accord, but with the active participation of the progressive 
social forces within the countries where conditions are already 
ripe for revolution. In speaking of the present age, the very 
fact of the existence of the world socialist system has a tremen- 
dous influence on the ripening and realisation of the revolu- 
tionary process in capitalist countries. 

The Soviet Union and the other socialist countries are a bul- 
wark of the world revolutionary movement. Countries where a 
revolution is in progress, be it a socialist revolution or a nation- 
al liberation revolution, can count on the moral and, where 
necessary, material support of the socialist countries. The eco- 
nomic and political achievements of the socialist countries serve 
as a powerful example to peoples who are struggling for fun- 


1G. Wetter, Die sowjetische Konzeption der Koexistenz, Bonn, 1959. 


S. 22. 
2 Ibid., p. 31. 


231 











damental social transformations and national liberation, and 
give them confidence in the ultimate triumph of their just cause. 
Thanks to the achievements of the peoples of the USSR in the 
building of socialism and communism, “there exists in the world 
a socialist society that is a reality and a science of socialist 
construction that has been tested in practice. The highroad to 
socialism has been paved.”! 

In whatever part of the world a revolution is in progress, the 
world socialist system exerts a tremendous influence on its final 
outcome. This influence is manifested above all in the fact 
that imperialist reaction is unable to use force against a 
country in which a revolution is under way or has taken place, 
without risking counter-measures by the socialist countries. 

But when Wetter writes of the urge of Marxism-Leninism 
to speed up the revolutionary process by forceful intervention, 
he means something quite different, and this is his second gross 
error. His standpoint in this matter is no different from the triv- 
ial attitude of the official anti-communist ideology of the im- 
perialist countries, which views every socialist or national libe- 
ration revolution as a result of “world communist plots” and 
export of revolution. It is impossible to engage in a serious po- 
lemic with such views, since they represent a gross distortion 
of the revolutionary process. 

Wetter sees his own false premise that socialist revolution 
is the product of outside influence as the chief obstacle to peace- 
ful coexistence, and regards socialist revolution and peaceful 
coexistence as mutually exclusive. “The actual problem of 
coexistence,” he writes, “is how it fits in with the communist 
aim of world revolution. Does the policy of coexistence mean 
renunciation of this aim? Or does it simply mean renunciation 
of achieving this aim by military means?’”2 

The foregoing is significant in two respects. Firstly, it shows 
that the ideologists of imperialism still question the historical 
inevitability of the emergence of socialism as a new economic 
and political system, and thus reject the inevitability of socialist 
revolution. Secondly, it shows the willingness of ruling circles 
in the imperialist states to accept the principle and policy of 
peaceful coexistence between the two systems only on condition 
that it guarantees the preservation of the bourgeois order in 
all the countries that are not yet socialist. 


1 The Road to Communism, Moscow, 1961, p. 463. 
2 G. Wetter, op. cit., S. 44. 


232 





In other words, in the first case imperialist ideologists are 
trying to “outlaw” socialist revolution, and in the second case 
imperialist ruling circles would have the Communists renounce 
their views, the class struggle and socialist revolution. Absurd 
though it is, imperialist ideologists only consider the policy of 
peaceful coexistence acceptable on these terms.! 

In point of fact, however, the Leninist principle of peaceful 
coexistence is in present conditions the only rational basis for 
preserving peace and the independence of all nations irrespec- 
tive of their social and political system. The fundamental prin- 
ciples underlying peaceful coexistence as an objective necessity 
deriving from the existence of capitalism and socialism side by 
side in the world are set out in plain, unambiguous terms in 
the Programme of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. 
“Peaceful coexistence of the socialist and the capitalist countries 
is an objective necessity for the development of human society. 
War cannot and must not serve as a means of settling interna- 
tional disputes. Peaceful coexistence -or disastrous war—such is 
the alternative offered by history.” 

The Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties held in 
Moscow in 1969 emphasised the inseparable link between the 
policy of peaceful coexistence and the struggle to preserve 
peace and prevent a new world war, and stressed the need for 
the peoples of the world to struggle for the triumph of the 
principles of peaceful coexistence in relations between countries 
with different social systems. 

Obviously, Communists cannot, and do not intend to give 
the capitalists any guarantees. that socialist revolution will not 
take place in their countries in due course, any guarantees of 
the perpetuation of the capitalist system. The history of human 
society, and especially the present age, render such hopes and 
demands of bourgeois ideologists pure utopian illusion. 

Peaceful coexistence is the basis for peaceful competition 
between socialism and capitalism on an international scale, and 
is a form of class struggle between them. The principle of 
peaceful coexistence involves coexistence not between antago- 
nistic classes, but between states, which despite their different 
class nature are equal subjects of international law and inter- 
national relations. 

The Moscow International Meeting of Communist and 


1 Tbid., S. 45. 
2 The Road to Communism, p. 506. 


233 














Workers’ Parties (1959) expressed in clear and unambiguous 
terms the significance of peaceful coexistence as the essential 
condition for mobilising the forces of peace, socialism and prog- 
ress for the historical offensive against the forces of imperial- 
ism and reaction. The clear, unequivocal statements contained 
in Documents of the Meeting render perfectly groundless all 
idle speculation and attempts to distort the class content of the 
principle of coexistence emanating from ideologists of impe- 
rialism and adventuristic ultra-Left groups. 

Here is an extract from the Documents of the Meeting by 
way of illustration. “This policy [i-e., peaceful coexistence.— 
The Author.) does not imply either the preservation of the 
socio-political status quo or a weakening of the ideological 
struggle. It helps to promote the class struggle against imperial- 
ism on a national and world-wide scale. Determined class 
struggle for the abolition of the monopolies and their rule, for 
the institution of a genuinely democratic system, and for the 
establishment of socialist power, whatever may be the road 
leading to this goal, is an inalienable right and duty of the 
working people and their Communist Parties in the capitalist 
countries. The Communists of the world are in solidarity with 
this just battle.’’! 

The principles of peaceful coexistence on no account involve 
forceful interference by the socialist countries in the internal 
affairs of the capitalist countries. Socialist revolution, the pre- 
conditions for which mature as part of the natural historical 
process, is quite incompatible, by virtue of its social, economic 
and political nature, with any form of outside interference, 
“pushing” or artificial hastening of revolutionary events. As 
Engels pointed out, “the Communists know only too well... 
that revolutions are not made deliberately and arbitrarily, but 
that everywhere and at all times they were the essential out- 
come of circumstances quite independent of the will and the 
leadership of particular parties and entire classes’.? Lenin, too, 
frequently repeated this point, insisting that “Marxism has 
always been opposed to ‘pushing’ revolutions”, and that “it is 
impossible to hasten something for which the historical condi- 
tions are not yet mature”.3 


{ International Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties, Moscow 
1969, Prague, 1969, p. 31. 

2 K. Marx, F. Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I, p. 89. 

3-V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 22, p. 110. 


234 





In this connection it should be noted that it has been the 
capitalist countries who have recently stepped up their subver- 
sive activities against the socialist countries with the aim of 
restoring capitalism there and upsetting the political balance in 
Europe. 

All these factors show the claims of bourgeois ideologists 
that the principle of peaceful coexistence is incompatible with 
the theory of socialist revolution to be unwarranted. Both the 
simultaneous existence of socialism and capitalism in the world 
and socialist revolutions, whereby the transition of society to 
a higher stage of development is affected, represent objective 
laws of history, completely independent of subjective judge- 
ment. 

On the basis of a thesis of their own invention, namely that 
peaceful coexistence is incompatible with Marxist-Leninist prin- 
ciples in general and the theory of socialist revolution in par- 
ticular, bourgeois ideologists represent peaceful coexistence as a 
deliberate, treacherous tactic designed to destroy the capitalist 
system using all and any means other than thermonuclear war. 
This attitude is extremely common in bourgeois writings. It 
runs like a scarlet thread through German Foreign Policy in 
the Post-War Period by W. Grewe, one-time West German 
ambassador to the United States. Grewe writes: “The fact that 
the expression ‘World Revolution’ is to be met less frequently 
in the Soviet vocabulary nowadays, has changed nothing in the 
repeatedly stated determination to spread communism by 
means of cunning, deception, intimidation and if necessary 
even by force and establish it throughout the world as the uni- 
versal system.”! 

Similar interpretations of peaceful coexistence are current in 
bourgeois ideology in other countries apart from the Federal 
Republic. Thus, the well-known US military theoretician Kis- 
singer writes: “Peaceful coexistence has been justified by the 
Soviet leaders as the most efficient offensive tactic, as the best 
means to subvert the existing structure by means other than 
all-out war.’ 

This highly distorted view of peaceful coexistence, the in- 
vention of certain bourgeois ideologists, would not even deserve 


1'W. G. Grewe, Deutsche Aussenpolitik der Nachkriegszeit, Stuttgart, 
1960, p. 447. 

2 Henry A. Kissinger, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, New 
York, 1957, pp. 142-43. 


235 














our attention, were it not for the far-reaching practical deduc- 
tions that are made from it, which have a direct bearing on im- 
perialist policy towards the socialist community. 

Some of the more consistent bourgeois ideologists reject 
the feasibility of peaceful coexistence, and identify it with cold 
war which could be “hotted up” at any moment. Thus T. Ober- 
Jander, an ex-nazi, declares: “There is no coexistence between 
the Free World and the Unfree World”, but rather “cold or 
psychological war”, which is a “means of the World Civil War 
in which we now find ourselves”.! 

But probably no one has gone further in the attempt to 
identify peaceful coexistence with cold war than the well-known 
veteran of West German imperialist ideology H. Rauschning 
in his book bearing the pretentious and intriguing title Js Peace 
Still Possible?. Rauschning wrote: “Soviet policy is nothing 
but permanent war against the capitalist states, a war in which 
military means are employed whenever the situation demands 
it.... The policy of the Soviet state towards the not yet com- 
munist world is war.”? This represents the ultimate logic of the 
concept of peaceful coexistence as a tactic designed to bring 
about the destruction of capitalism by all possible means. 

It is interesting to note how representatives of the most 
various trends of present-day bourgeois ideology, whatever 
their views, are practically unanimous in admitting that the 
Soviet Union has no intention of beginning a world war. This 
is a big departure from the views current in the first post-war 
years. It shows how in view of the actual facts of Soviet foreign 
policy directed towards consolidating universal peace, the of- 
ficial doctrine of imperialism has had to retreat from some of 
its more “orthodox” positions. 

In the light of the facts, any attempts to present Soviet foreign 
policy as being directed towards starting a world war, simply 
fail to convince. Hence the “revised” thesis advanced by bour- 
geois ideologists attempting to prove the impossibility of peace- 
ful coexistence—namely that the Soviet Union intends to de- 
stroy world capitalism by any means other than world war. 
Rather than attempt to actually disprove the impossibility of 
coexistence, the bourgeois opponents of the principle generally 
limit themselves to flagrant abuse and standard accusations in 
the worst traditions of the gutter press. 


1 Der Stahlhelm, 1962, N. 2. 
2-H. Rauschning, /st Friede noch moglich?, Heidelberg, 1953, S. 113. 


236 








The quite unfounded accusations that for the Communists 
peaceful coexistence is a “treacherous tactic” designed to bring 
about the destruction of the capitalist system by all forceful 
means apart from world war is refuted not only by theoretical 
arguments but also by the actual facts in which the theory and 
politics of the Marxist-Leninist parties are embodied, which 
show that the Soviet Union does not merely pay lip service to 
the policy of coexistence but consistently implements it. 

The idea is current in present-day bourgeois political and 
philosophical literature that peaceful coexistence is only possible 
between states with similar socio-political systems. This idea 
is usually presented not as an independent argument but as a 
supplement to the arguments examined above. In view of the 
fact that at the present time this is not the case since there exist 
two opposed systems, some bourgeois ideologists propose that in 
the interests of “peace and calm’, the two systems should be 
completely isolated from one another. Thus, Karl Jaspers wrote 
in his book, The Atom Bomb and Man’s Future: “‘Coexistence 
as a state of calm and peace is impossible unless both sides are 
completely isolated from each other.”! 

Jaspers reaches this conclusion on the basis of his own arbi- 
trary division of the present-day world into “the world of free- 
dom” and the “world of totalitarianism”, which he regards as 
excluding all possibility of peace and coexistence. This dichot- 
omy of his own creation leads him to the alternative of “free- 
dom or the atom bomb”, and since the world cannot be built 
on the ideals of freedom and truth acceptable to Jaspers, he is 
left with only one path, that of nuclear war. “In order not to 
lose man’s freedom,” he writes, “we must not conceal the pos- 
sibility of there arising at some particular moment the necessity 
for a decision to be taken: ‘the totalitarian state or the atom 
bomb’ ”’.2 

True, towards the end of his life, Jaspers’ views underwent 
a considerable evolution towards realisation of the danger of 
the aggressive, extremist policy conducted by West German 
ruling groups. Thus, in one of his latter works, Where Is the 
German Federal Republic Heading? (1966), Jaspers strongly 
criticised the undemocratic, revanchist policy of reactionaries in 


1 K. Jaspers, Die Atombombe und die Zukunft des Menschen, Minchen, 
1958, S. 151. 
2 Tbid., p. 107. 


237 

















the FRG, protested against the rehabilitation of war criminals 
and the passing of emergency laws, and expressed wholehearted 
support for the peaceful settlement of international disputes. 

Nevertheless, whatever his own sentiments may have been, 
the objective logic of the philosophical conceptions he advanced 
in several of his major post-war works, in particular in The 
Atom Bomb and Man’s Future, serve the interests of revanchist 
circles of West German imperialism. 

The various arguments against peaceful coexistence are 
deliberately employed by the revanchist press in the FRG for 
the purpose of “proving” the inevitability of a military conflict 
between the two systems and justifying NATO military prepa- 
rations. As the militarist paper Der Stahlhelm solemnly de- 
clares, “peace and friendship only exist between free peoples”. It 
should be pointed out that these arguments are based on a fun- 
damental flaw of a logical nature. 

The concept of “coexistence”, applied to social relations, 
implies the existence of opposite or at least different social 
phenomena. With regard to social phenomena of the same or- 
der, the question of coexistence does not arise. 

Actually, of course, far more than logic is involved here. The 
Soviet Union does not only exist alongside the capitalist coun- 
tries but has considerable economic, political and cultural ties 
with them. The Soviet Union and other socialist countries are 
members of the UN (comprising countries irrespective of their 
social and political order) and many other international organi- 
sations. During the Second World War, the Soviet Union was 
a member of, and the decisive force in an alliance of states 
with different social and political systems. All this provides 
ample proof that the mere fact of countries having a different 
social and political system does not inevitably engender war. 

A particularly widespread argument against peaceful coexis- 
tence is the thesis that in the process of competition between 
the two systems the capitalist countries are at a disadvantage 
in that they have political parties actively opposing the bour- 
geois order, whereas there are no anti-socialist parties in the 
socialist countries. This is the line taken by A. Buchholz in his 
book The Struggle for a Better World, in which he writes: “The 
problem begins with the fact that communism has considerably 
more opportunities for exerting influence in the West than the 
West has in the communist area. In view of its system of par- 
liamentary freedom the West is wide open to communist in- 
fluence while in the opposite direction all Western influences 


238 





are hermetically sealed off. Communism has parties in almost 
every country in the world at its disposal, while in the com- 
munist area not a single party is to be met with a ‘Western’ 
orientation.”! From this Buchholz draws the conclusion that 
“peaceful competition between East and West is basically a 
one-sided way to the advance of communism” .? 

Buchholz is thus really side-stepping the issue, since the pres- 
ence or absence of parties hostile to the existing system in any 
country bears no direct relation to the problem of peaceful 
coexistence, but is simply a question concerning the nature and 
social features of the two systems. It is not the specific nature 
of the two systems but the principles which determine their 
external relations with each other that have the decisive signifi- 
cance for the problem of peaceful coexistence. 

The existence in capitalist countries of social forces strug- 
gling for the overthrow of capitalism merely shows that the 
system is not viable and is an argument in favour of replacing it 
with socialism. The instability of capitalism in face of the unity 
and solidarity of the socialist system is not an obstacle to peace- 
ful coexistence between the two, since the principles of coexis- 
tence, including the most important of them—the principle of 
non-interference in the internal affairs of other states, apply 
to both sides. 

Buchholz thus goes off at a tangent from the main issue in 
his arguments against the possibility of peaceful coexistence. 
Others who share this view conduct the argument on a differ- 
ent plane, attacking the communist attitude that capitalism is 
an outmoded system. Typical in this respect is The Red Torrent 
by H. van Bergh. “The Soviets,” he writes, “see... other par- 
ticipants at a conference not as their equal partners but as an 
enemy already condemned to death by history. For this reason 
they themselves can be not a real partner but a_ potential 
enemy.’ 

From this he draws the following sweeping conclusion: ‘For 
the Free West there can be no prolonged coexistence with the 
Soviet Union either de facto or de jure, since Marxism-Leninism 
has passed the death sentence on our world.’ 

In accusing Marxism-Leninism of regarding capitalism as a 


1 A. Buchholz, op. cit., pp. 50-51. 
2 Tbid., p. 52. 


3-H. van Bergh, Die Rote Springflut, Minchen, 1958, S. 487. 
4 Ibid. 


239 




















“condemned” social system and in treating this as an obstacle 
to peaceful coexistence, bourgeois ideologists deliberately ignore 
a fundamental aspect of the principle of coexistence. Peaceful 
competition between capitalism and socialism, like the ideolog- 
ical struggle between them, is not subject to any definite time 
limits, since the decay of capitalism on the one hand and the 
birth, firm establishment and development of socialism on the 
other are part of a natural historical process. It is therefore 
completely illogical to use the Marxist thesis of the inevitable 
doom of capitalism as the argument against peaceful coexis- 
tence. 

Many opponents of peaceful coexistence claim that Lenin 
never put forward the idea of peaceful coexistence, and was 
even against such an idea. Bourgeois ideologists resort to this 
claim as an ultima ratio in their efforts to prove that peaceful 
coexistence is impossible. Falsification of Lenin’s views on this 
subject has become a tradition in bourgeois philosophical, 
sociological and political literature. Sweeping statements are 
made to this effect which are completely unsupported by 
any evidence. Thus, in Soviet Ideology Today, an openly anti- 
communist work by Wetter and Leonhard, the latter writes 
that Lenin never elaborated a doctrine, theory or principle of 
peaceful coexistence, without making any attempt to show how 
he reached this conclusion. 

B. Maurach, a regular contributor to the West German mili- 
tary journal Wehrkunde, also advances this view. “In discussing 
the theory of coexistence,” he writes, “the Soviet leaders refer 
in their party programme to Lenin and speak of ‘the Leninist 
principle of peaceful coexistence’. In fact, however, Lenin never 
advanced the thesis of possible long-term coexistence between 
‘capitalism’ and communist states.”! This is the line taken by 
the well-known apostle of anti-communism Bochenski in his 
Handbook of World Communism, by Grewe in German Foreign 
Policy in the Post-War Period and many, many other ideolo- 
gists of West German imperialism. 

In view of these attempts to falsify Lenin’s views on peaceful 
coexistence, some clarification is necessary. In point of fact, it 
was Lenin who for the first time in history advanced the idea 
of peaceful coexistence between states with different social 
systems, and formulated the fundamental principles on which 
relations between socialist and capitalist countries should be 


4 Wehrkunde, 1962, Nr. 2, S. 63. 


240 












based. He demonstrated scientifically the possibility and indeed 
historical inevitability of peaceful coexistence even before the 
October Revolution. 

The policy of peaceful coexistence is based on Lenin’s theory 
that socialism would triumph first in one or several countries, 
from which he concluded that the other countries would “for 
some time remain bourgeois or pre-bourgeois’’.! 

With the triumph of the October Revolution in Russia, the 
existence side by side of countries with a totally different social 
system became an accomplished fact, and theory became prac- 
tice. Lenin wrote: “...We are in a position of having won 
conditions enabling us to exist side by side with capitalist pow- 
ers,’2 and further on: “...We have something more than a 
breathing space: we have entered a new period, in which we 
have won the right to our fundamental international existence 
in the network of capitalist states.” 

Lenin is clearly speaking not of a short, temporary stage, 
but of a long period in which capitalist and socialist countries 
will exist side by side, in other words, coexist. Although at 
that time the socialist system was limited to one country, none- 
theless here was peaceful coexistence between capitalist and 
socialist states already demonstrated as an historical fact, from 
which derived as a historical necessity the need to establish 
the appropriate relations between these countries. It should be 
stressed that Lenin regarded peaceful coexistence between 
socialist and capitalist countries as a process of mutually bene- 
ficial economic exchange. In this connection Lenin wrote: “The 
bourgeois countries must trade with Russia; they know that 
unless they establish some form of economic relations their 
disintegration will continue in the way it has done up to 
now.... 4 Pointing out the necessity for the Land of the Soviets 
to trade with capitalist countries, he wrote: “We must trade 
with the capitalist countries as long as they exist.’® 

Thus, Lenin expressed his attitude to relations between the 
Land of the Soviets and the capitalist countries in perfectly 
clear, unequivocal terms. He pointed out that the nature of these 
relations depended on the good will and desire of either side, 
and stressed that the Soviet Republic was “decidedly for an 


1 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 23, p. 79. 
2 Ibid., Vol. 31, p. 412. 

3 Ibid. 

4 Ibid., Vol. 33, p. 214. 

5 Tbid., p. 215. 


1G6—203 241 




















economic understanding ... with all countries....”! Failure to 
recognise these clear statements of the leader of the world pro- 
letariat’s genuine attitude to the idea of peaceful coexistence 
indicates a definite aim—that of distorting historical truth in 
order to demonstrate the impossibility of peaceful coexistence. 

In attacking the principle of peaceful coexistence and 
distorting its real meaning, bourgeois ideologists are delib- 
erately shutting their eyes to the fact that coexistence is an 
objective historical necessity. The imperialist countries are 
forced to enter into economic and trade relations with the 
socialist world as an economic necessity. This was shown 
after the victory of the October Revolution in Russia. Today, 
when socialism has become a powerful world-wide econom- 
ic system, the sphere of economic and cultural relations be- 
tween capitalist and socialist countries has widened and 
deepened. 

The whole course of historical development has confirmed 
beyond doubt the correctness of Lenin’s proposition that “there 
is a force more powerful than the wishes, the will and the deci- 
sions of any of the governments or classes that are hostile to us. 
That force is world general economic relations, which compel 
them to make contact with us.”2 

It is pointless, to say the least, to try and prove the impos- 
sibility of something that exists as an objective historical reali- 
ty. It is therefore perfectly futile to try and deduce from 
this the inevitability of a new world war. In fact, strict observ- 
ance of the principles of peaceful coexistence between the 
socialist and capitalist countries is the only way to prevent a 
thermonuclear disaster, and preserve and strengthen world 
peace. 

The struggle of the democratic forces in the European coun- 
tries, including West Germany, against militarism and 
revanchism, has wrought definite changes in West Germany’s 
foreign policy. The Coalition of Social-Democrats and Free 
Democrats, headed by Willy Brandt, has taken a set of meas- 
ures to normalise the political situation in Europe. 

Among these measures particular mention should be made 
of the treaties between the USSR and the FRG, Poland and the 
FRG, renouncing the use of force and recognising the post- 
war status quo of West Germany’s eastern borders, the recogni- 


1 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 30, p. 51. 
2 Thid., Vol. 38, p. 155. 


242 


tion by her of the sovereignty of the German Democratic 
Republic, and the settlement of the West Berlin question. These 
changes in the Federal Republic’s foreign policy were made 
possible by the consistently peaceful policy of the USSR and 
other socialist countries, and show that the idea of peaceful 
coexistence is beginning to dominate the relations between 
countries with different social systems. 

















Chapter XIil 


CRITICISM OF THE 
INTERPRETATION OF 
PEACEFUL 
COEXISTENCE AS 
PRESERVING THE 
SOCIAL STATUS QUO 


The imperialist bourgeoisie have always been opposed to 
the theory and policy of peaceful coexistence between the coun- 
tries of the socialist and capitalist systems. Immediately after 
the October Revolution in Russia the Western powers inter- 
vened with the aim of crushing the world’s first socialist state. 

After the Second World War, when the United States was 
for several years the only country with nuclear weapons, the 
idea of “rolling back communism” became a major aim of US 
policy, a policy that rejected peaceful coexistence with the 
socialist countries in favour of atomic blackmail, the object of 
which was the destruction of the socialist system. Echoes of 
this policy are still to be found today in the works of some of 
the most inveterate bourgeois reactionaries. 

Times change however, and thanks to the tremendously in- 
creased power of socialism, peaceful coexistence has become 
a reality, and any attempt to change it by military means would 
involve the gravest risks. In view of the widespread support 
of peoples throughout the world for the principles of peaceful 
coexistence, reactionary politicians and sociologists (and some 
who are well-intentioned but misguided) are trying to produce 
various bourgeois versions of the doctrine of coexistence. 

The most fashionable and widespread of these is the inter- 
pretation of peaceful coexistence as preservation of the sta- 
tus quo. 


244 





Ideologists of the imperialist countries aim to convince the 
public that any change in the world threatens the security of the 
West. The well-known American sociologist James Warburg 
writes: “Status quoism has created in the American mind the 
belief that the status quo is legal and that any change in the 
status quo—unless it be a change in the direction of restoring 
the status quo ante—is illegal.” 

Capitalising on the sincere desire of the peoples to preserve 
peace, bourgeois ideologists try to place the principle of peace- 
ful coexistence in the service of reaction, colonialism and capi- 
talism, interpreting it as preservation of the status quo. The 
aim pursued in defending the status quo, as Soviet researchers 
have clearly demonstrated, is the preservation not of peace but 
of capitalism. What the various bourgeois interpretations of the 
status quo really amount to is a series of attempts to perpetuate 
capitalism and elicit from the communist governments guaran- 
tees of the permanence of the capitalist order in the countries 
where it has so far been preserved. 

Obviously no sober-minded politician in the West can 
seriously believe that the socialist states are really going to 
give any such guarantees. In interpreting peaceful coexistence 
as preservation of the status quo, bourgeois ideologists are pur- 
suing three more realistic political goals: firstly, that of con- 
taining and weakening the revolutionary movements in capital- 
ist countries under the pretext of strengthening peaceful co- 
existence; secondly, that of weakening the struggle of the social- 
ist countries in the international arena against imperialist poli- 
cies under the same pretext, and, thirdly, that of justifying 
their aggressive interventionist policies on the grounds that the 
class struggle continues both in the international arena and in 
individual countries. 


The Status Quo and 
Attempts to Prevent 
Social Progress 

in Individual 
Countries 


In treating the principle of peaceful coexistence as preser- 
vation of the status quo, bourgeois ideologists try to apply it to 
class relations, i.e., to relations within capitalist countries. In 


{ James P. Warburg, The West in Crisis, New York, 1959, p. 170. 


245 











this way oppressed classes and nations are deprived of the right 
to struggle for their emancipation, the right to revolution, under 
the pretext of preservation of peace. Thus, the American so- 
ciologist L. Perla writes: “Because we generally approve of the 
status quo in non-communist areas, we take the position that 
any change in such areas jeopardizes security,’! while his col- 
league George Catlin declares that peaceful coexistence pre- 
supposes “civil peace”—the reconciliation of classes within in- 
dividual capitalist countries. 

At this point any reasonably intelligent person is bound to 
wonder what possible connection there can be between events 
within capitalist countries and relations between capitalist and 
socialist countries. Supporters of status quoism offer the fol- 
lowing answer to that one. The Soviet Communists speak of the 
inevitability of socialism triumphing throughout the world, 
which means that they are opposed to the status quo and thus 
to peaceful coexistence. They go on to deduce from this that 
peaceful coexistence is merely a trap, a cunning manoeuvre by 
the socialist countries. 

It is pointless to seek any logic in such arguments. Commun- 
ist policy Documents, including the Main Document of the 
1969 International Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties 
and the Programme of the CPSU, do, it is true, state the ob- 
jective necessity and inevitability of revolution. Thus, the Pro- 
gramme of the CPSU points out that “the peoples can only 
come to socialism by way of socialist revolution’, it being under- 
stood that such revolution may be peaceful or non-peaceful. 
However, bourgeois ideologists take the statement that revolu- 
tion is an historical necessity and identify it with the export of 
revolution, and try to place the responsibility for the revolution- 
ary activities of the masses in any part of the world on the 
Soviet Union, accusing the latter of violating the principle of 
peaceful coexistence. 

But it is not simply a matter of the supporters of the status 
quo theory making completely unfounded accusations against 
the socialist countries: the whole theory itself is unscientific 
and completely divorced from reality. It rests on the false as- 
sumption that revolution is no longer a necessity. Thus, Erich 
Schieweck, who represents the interests of Bonn business circles, 
writes in his book, The Out-of-Date World Revolution, that 
the Western countries have achieved a high level of prosperity 


1 Leo Perla, Can We End the Cold War? A Study in American 
Foreign Policy, New York, 1960, p. 103. 


246 








and a great measure of political freedom, so that there is no 
longer any need for revolution.’ French socialist leader P. Ra- 
madier noted with satisfaction that the programmes of the 
majority of socialist parties in Western Europe did not neces- 
sarily support “the prospect of revolution and socialist society”. 

To suppose that the existing situation can be preserved for 
an indefinite period is to adopt an unscientific standpoint and 
to reject the progressive nature of historical development. 

Revolution is every bit as inevitable at the capitalist stage 
of social development as it was at any preceding stage. How- 
ever, much as capitalist society may be touched up and modi- 
fied by reforms, it will remain capitalist in essence just as long 
as capitalist private ownership of the means of production and 
the exploitation of man by man continue to exist. Only the 
abolition of private ownership and exploitation provides for the 
transition to socialism. It is quite impossible to effect this tran- 
sition by means of reforms, without resorting to fundamental 
revolutionary transformations. 

The world has now entered the historical phase of the tran- 
sition from capitalism to socialism. After the fourteen socialist 
countries, several of the young sovereign states have embarked 
on their own specific revolutionary roads to socialism. History 
is confirming again and again that whatever stage of ripeness 
the conditions for establishing the new social order may have 
reached and however propitious the situation, the transition 
can only be effected by means of revolution, peaceful or other- 
wise. 

As for the policy of peaceful coexistence, it rests on a sys- 
tem of principles that make it possible to avoid a major inter- 
national conflict in the course of development of revolutionary 
processes within individual countries. 

One of these principles is the principle of self-determination, 
i.e., recognition of the right of every people and nation to in- 
dependently decide all matters relating to its own external 
affairs, up to and including the right to secession and the for- 
mation of a separate state, and its internal affairs, including the 
choice of its own social and political system. This principle, 
elaborated and advanced by the CPSU before the October 
Revolution as a political principle has since earned the official 


1 Erich Schieweck, Die iberholte Weltrevolution, Dusseldorf, 1959. 
2 Paul Ramadier, Les Socialistes et V'exercice du pouvoir, Paris, 1961, 
p. 110. 


247 











recognition of all states and become an essential norm of inter- 
national relations. Its inclusion in the UN Charter (article 1(2}) 
means that neither the United Nations itself nor any of its 
members engage to guarantee either the political and socio- 
economic or the territorial status quo of any state.’ Since the 
chief aim of the UN is to support universal peace, clearly the 
attainment of this aim is envisaged against a background of 
continual change. 

The imperialist countries may take advantage of revolution- 
ary events in various countries as an excuse for interference 
in their internal affairs, and this may lead to counter-meas- 
ures being taken by the socialist countries. It is for this reason 
that the principle of non-interference, applying to all countries, 
is another essential principle underlying the policy of peaceful 
coexistence. The imperialist countries often violate this princi- 
ple, but this always provokes sharp condemnation on the part of 
people all over the world, and the interventionists are forced 
to take ever greater account of this and often even to retreat. 
Repeated attempts by the ideologists of intervention to discred- 
it the principle of non-interference are of no avail. The great 
majority of states, especially the socialist countries and the 
young national states, and progressives everywhere, do their 
utmost to defend the principle as appropriate to the conditions 
of present social progress. The principle of non-interference 
serves both the cause of peace and the strengthening of state 
sovereignty. 

Self-determination and non-interference, along with the other 
principles of peaceful coexistence (equality, mutual understand- 
ing and trust between states, taking one another’s interests into 
account, respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity; the 
development of economic and cultural co-operation based on 
complete equality and mutual advantage),2 provide a real op- 
portunity for preserving peace in a period when progressive, 
revolutionary transformations are taking place within various 
countries. This has been repeatedly confirmed in practice. In 
the post-war period revolutions of national liberation have 
occurred in many countries, and socialist revolutions have taken 
place in Eastern Europe, China, Vietnam and Cuba. Yet none 
of these revolutions led to a world war. If some of these events 
led to an increase in international tension, this was simply due 


{ G. P. Zadorozhny, Peaceful Coexistence, Moscow, 1968. 
2 The Road to Communism, p. 506. 


248 





to interference on the part of the imperialist powers in internal 
affairs of other countries, for foreign interference invariably 
leads to a worsening of the international situation, irrespective 
of whether revolutionary or other events served as the pretext. 

Thus, the policy of peaceful coexistence can ensure peace 
between capitalist and socialist countries while the intensifica- 
tion of revolutionary processes is in progress within class socie- 
ties, without involving the abandonment of the class struggle or 
revolution, were this possible, which it is not. 


“The Revolution of 
Freedom" as a Means 
of Putting the Brakes 
on Social Progress 


The idea of effecting a fundamental, revolutionary trans- 
formation of the world with the aim of abolishing oppression, 
coercion and social and national inequality has won the minds 
of hundreds of millions all over the world. More and more 
workers in the highly developed capitalist countries are com- 
ing to understand that this transformation is only feasible on 
the basis of the Marxist-Leninist theory of socialist revolution. 
Even in the socially backward countries, the bulk of the popu- 
lation and progressive individuals as yet unable to make a clean 
break with the traditional bourgeois outlook already accept 
“certain aspects of Marxism”, as Lenin put it, certain of its slo- 
gans and demands. In all these countries there can be observed 
a general longing for a revolutionary transformation of society 
on socialist principles, as expressed in their choice of the non- 
capitalist path of development. 

In these circumstances many Western ideologists are begin- 
ning to realise the impossibility of denying the need for changes 
even under the pretext of preserving peace. The bankruptcy 
of the reactionary pacifist theory of preserving the status quo 
is particularly clear in the case of the countries of Asia, Africa 
and Latin America, where the need for revolutionary changes 
is patently evident. Hence the increasing publicity being given 
in bourgeois sociology and politics to their new brain-child, the 
theory of “democratic” revolution or “the revolution of free- 
dom”, meaning reforms carried out from above by the ruling 
groups with the object of consolidating their position. Bour- 
geois ideologists claim that the “revolution of freedom” has the 


249 














advantage of recognising the need for changes while rejecting 
violence. Numerous theories are advanced under the general 
panoply of the revolution of freedom, but they all have this in 
common. 

In 1963 a book entitled A Warless World was published in 
the United States. It included articles by famous bourgeois law 
experts, philosophers, historians and statesmen, in which the 
inevitability of social changes was taken for granted. Thus, 
Arnold Toynbee, the historian, wrote: “A policy of accepting 
and promoting peaceful change is a necessary condition for the 
maintenance of a warless world.”! Yet all the authors or the 
articles somehow manage to dodge the main issue, which is how 
to ensure that all the changes necessary for progress are carried 
out. For they insist, like the editor Arthur Larson, that ‘“fun- 
damental to the whole concept of peaceful change is the prin- 
ciple that real change can most effectively take place within the 
framework of law”.* Yet bourgeois law protects private owner- 
ship of the means of production: socialist revolution is thus ille- 
gal as being directed towards the liquidation of exploitation and 
private ownership. 

The imperialist bourgeoisie employs the slogan of “non-vio- 
lent revolution” merely as a means of deceiving the masses. 
This can be plainly seen in the demagogy of American im- 
perialism. 

John Foster Dulles, former US Secretary of State, understood 
the inevitability of change, although he continually underesti- 
mated it in his practical activity. “Change is the law of life,” 
he wrote, “of international life as well as national and personal 
life. If we set up barriers to all change, we make it certain that 
there will be violent and explosive change.” 

The setbacks suffered by the Americans in the course of their 
aggression in Vietnam and the Dominican Republic, and the 
sharp criticism this policy has provoked from the public and 
governments even of bourgeois countries, have led US leaders 
to make wider use of the “freedom revolution” theory, adapt- 
ing it to their own interests. 

At the end of June and the beginning of July 1965, The 
New York Times published a series of reactionary articles on 
wars of national liberation. In compiling the material for the 


{ A Warless World, New York, 1963, p. 39. 
2 Thid., p. 56. 
3 John Foster Dulles, War or Peace, New York, 1950, p. 18. 


250 








articles the paper drew on statements made by President John- 
son, Vice-President Humphrey, the United States represen- 
tative in the UN Stevenson, and other leading figures on the 
need to find an alternative “revolutionary” theory to national 
liberation and socialist revolutions. 

Thus, the first article contained the following comment on 
the revolutionary movement in Latin America: “Washington 
wants the revolutions to be democratic and peaceful under the 
Alliance for Progress. The Communists seek revolution through 
the ‘wars of liberation’.”! 

The theory of “democratic” revolution was first formulated 
in detail as a policy of the US Government in a speech made by 
the then Secretary of State Dean Rusk at a symposium at the 
University of Tennessee, in May 1962. Rusk made some curious 
admissions, declaring that “great revolutionary forces are at 
work in our era’, and that these “tremendous, often conflicting, 
forces are pressing for change”. He reiterated the President’s 
call “to resume our leadership of the revolution of freedom and 
to join with it our leadership in the revolution of economic 
and social progress”.? Rusk’s statements are of interest as repre- 
senting the policy programme of the Democratic Party with 
regard to the current world revolutionary process. 

What is the essence of this policy? 

Rusk was not prepared to admit the existence of revolutiona- 
ry outbursts in Asia, Africa and Latin America, maintaining 
that it was simply a question of “industrial revolution”. 
By refusing to ascribe to the revolutionary movement 
in the less developed countries aims other than those of “indus- 
trial revolution”, and ignoring the fact that the aims are really 
far, far wider, he was attempting to minimise the importance of 
popular unrest—a time-honoured stratagem of imperialist rul- 
ing circles. In point of fact, events in Asia, Africa and Latin 
America are not isolated outbreaks of revolt due to “poverty”, 
as Rusk would have us believe, but social revolution: the anti- 
colonial revolution aims not only to remove foreign oppression 
and imperialist domination, but at the same time to implement 
far-reaching social transformations. 

Rusk is loth to admit the international working class revolu- 
tionary movement and its main offspring—the world socialist 
system—to be a revolutionary force, and endeavours to represent 


1 The New York Times, June 30, 1965. 
2 Ibid., May 12, 1962. 


251 











it as “the counter-revolution of coercion”. As a former teacher 
of sociology, Rusk is well aware that the term “revolutionary” 
is applied to those forces that overthrow an old, outmoded 
order, while the term “counter-revolutionary” applies to those 
forces that try to defend it. But he is not too fussy with his 
definitions as long as they serve his purpose. 

Having undertaken to defend a system that is condemned to 
destruction by history, Rusk can perhaps be excused for his 
failure to conform to the principles of elementary logic. He 
rejects socialist revolution on the grounds that it is carried out 
by means of force. Yet he can hardly fail to be aware that no 
major revolution in history has triumphed without the use of 
force, since the obsolete ruling classes have never voluntarily 
relinquished their privileged position. The American revolution, 
of which US leaders claim to be the heirs, only triumphed after 
a fierce armed struggle. Its programme document, the Declara- 
tion of Rights—which Rusk, by the way, quotes in his speech 
—contains the statement: “All men are created equal. ... Gov- 
ernments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers 
from the consent of the governed. ... Whenever any form of 
government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right 
of the people to alter or abolish it.” 

Rusk might also care to remember the words of Thomas 
Jefferson: “A little rebellion, now and then, is a good thing, 
and as necessary in the political world as storms are in the 
physical.” US leaders and ideologists are, for obvious reasons, 
wont to forget them, despite the fact that they were uttered 
by a great leader of the American revolution to whose principles 
they swear fidelity often enough. How can any one claim to be 
carrying on the cause of the American revolution and at the 
same time reject the use of force which was a fundamental 
condition ensuring its triumph? 

Rusk even goes as far as to say that socialist revolution is 
carried out without the support of the masses “against the 
will of the majority” by a “tight conspiratorial organisation”. 
This at least represents a certain amount of progress from the 
time when the enemies of socialism maintained that the social- 
ist system only comes on “the bayonets of the Red Army”. The 
triumph of socialist revolution in China, Vietnam and Cuba 
has effectively silenced those who preached that view. But the 
idea that socialist revolution can be carried out without the 
support of the masses (by an internal conspiratorial organisa- 
tion) cannot be seriously entertained by anybody in his right 


252 














mind. Rusk himself admits that the Communists have gained 
control of “all or part of 18 nations with some 1 billion people”. 
How could the Communists, who began with “a small revolu- 
tionary party in Russia’ and were opposed by the whole old 
world armed to the teeth have achieved such remarkable suc- 
cess without the support of the masses? It would seem to sug- 
gest intervention by some supernatural power—a power that is 
clearly pro-communist. 

Let us take a look now at the kind of “revolution” Mr. Rusk 
advocates. This concept of revolution, in Rusk’s own words, “is 
magnificently simple: it was stated by Thomas Jefferson with 
an eloquence which will never die’. Rusk speaks hazily of the 
desirability of applying certain general principles of the Amer- 
ican revolution in other countries, without saying a word about 
their observance at home. Perhaps because at the time he oc- 
cupied the post of head of the Department of State? But more 
likely for other, more substantial reasons. 

The general aim of the policy of “freedom revolution” for- 
mulated in Rusk’s speech is more than hazy—“uniting the 
nations into one great family of men”. However, the six spe- 
cific political tasks that Rusk attributes to this “revolution” make 
it possible to form a pretty clear opinion. 

The first task is to convince the peoples of the developing 
countries that the shortest road to progress lies not via com- 
munism but via capitalism, “to show those peoples what free 
peoples have achieved and are achieving in freedom”. The 
evidence offered is the economic development of two southern 
states of the USA as a result of hydrotechnical works in the 
Tennessee Valley. Rusk waxes sentimental in recalling his 
childhood spent in these parts. “There is a certain poignancy,” 
he says, “in the fact that unemployed CCC [Civilian Conserva- 
tion Corps) boys in the thirties planted seedlings which today 
are producing new jobs” (in forestry.—The Author). But the 
picture Rusk draws is not really calculated to impress the less 
developed countries. For a start, as Rusk himself admits, back 
in the thirties, that is after more than a hundred years of capi- 
talist development, one-third of the population of this region 
suffered from malaria, unemployment drove people to accept 
any work, even the most menial, that was going, and the average 
annual income was 168 dollars, or about the same as it is now 
in the less developed countries. Moreover, despite tremendous 
capital investment, on a scale quite beyond the means of the 
less developed countries, the average income in the area is still 


253 





only 65 per cent of the national average. It took capitalism 180 
years to achieve this, and the economically less developed 
countries want to catch up with the advanced countries in a 
couple of generations. 

The second task is to “maintain great and varied forces, 
capable of responding to a variety of challenges. We must have 
...a capability for helping other free nations defend themselves 
against guerilla and other subversive attacks”. Here is a frank 
admission of the true aim of the “revolution of freedom’”—to 
crush revolutionary movements directed towards emancipation 
from imperialist and social oppression. The world has already 
seen how the US Government helps countries “defend them- 
selves from guerilla attacks”. The organisation of brazen inter- 
vention in revolutionary Cuba, armed intervention in the affairs 
of the Dominican Republic, open, though not officially declared, 
war against the peoples of Indochina, support for the Belgian, 
Portuguese and British colonialists in crushing the revolutions 
of national liberation in the Congo, Angola and Oman, and 
aggression in the Middle East—these are just a few cases from 
the long list of American measures to counter the world revo- 
lutionary process in the past few years. The United States is 
acne not as a revolutionary force but as an international gen- 

arme. 

The third task is “to consolidate the bonds between the 
already more highly industrialised nations, such as our allies 
of Western Europe, Canada and Japan”. Rusk makes no secret 
of the fact that in giving all-out support to the formation of a 
capitalist Common Market, American ruling circles are pur- 
suing their own strategic and economic ends. He admits that 
the establishment of “interdependence” between the USA and 
the Common Market would lead to “a consolidation of the 
pate of the great industrial powers within the predictable 
uture”. 

The fourth task is ‘a long-term partnership with the develop- 
ing nations of Latin America, of Africa and Asia to assist them 
in their plans to carry forward the revolution of economic and 
social progress”. But it is clear from what Rusk says that the 
US Government is interested not in the development but in the 
restriction of revolution, for he declares that “with one or two 
exceptions ... the crises of the past decade have arisen in the 
newly-independent ... areas of the world’. The conclusion is 
that the task of the United States should be to put the brakes 
on the process of national liberation, hold up the development 


254 


Pe — —— 





of the revolutionary process in the newly-liberated countries 
and force them to remain within the world capitalist system. 
According to Rusk, “the future of the world and our own peace 
and prosperity will almost certainly depend” on how successful 
America is in carrying out this task. 

The fifth and sixth tasks—to draw new countries into “free 
partnership” on the pattern of NATO and SEATO, and help 
bring about the day when capitalism will be restored in the 
socialist countries and “they may join us in common existence 
in the community of free men”—are so openly reactionary that 
it is an insult to anybody’s intelligence to expect him to accept 
them as “revolutionary”. 

Rusk’s statements, not to mention the actions of the US 
Government, show that there is in fact not one iota of revolu- 
tionary content in the “revolution of freedom” slogan. US 
leaders only resort to recalling the glorious revolutionary tra- 
ditions of the American people for the purpose of masking their 
reactionary policy of preserving the capitalist, colonial status 
quo that is so odious to the peoples of the world with borrowed 
communist slogans and the revolutionary battle standards of 
the past. Even the highly respectable bourgeois historian Arnold 
Toynbee feels obliged to admit that America, once a revolution- 
ary nation, “is today the leader of a world-wide anti-revolu- 
tionary movement in defence of vested interests”.! Further on 
he writes: “I am maintaining that, since 1917, America has 
reversed her role in the world. She has become the arch-con- 
servative power instead of the arch-revolutionary one. Stranger 
still, she has made a present of her glorious discarded role to 
the country which was the arch-conservative power in the 
nineteenth century, the country which, since 1946, has been 
regarded by America as being America’s Enemy Number One. 
America has presented this historic revolutionary role to Rus- 
sia.”2 Further on again, he addresses the American leaders: 

. during these last forty-four years, your revolution has 
gone ahead without you. The leadership has fallen into other 
hands. These non-American hands could never have seized the 
leadership of your revolution if you had not dropped it.”* 

This was also admitted in The New York Times in an edi- 


1 A. Toynbee, America and the World Revolution, New York-London, 
1962, p. is 

2 Thid., p. 102. 

3 Tbid., os 150-151. 


255 














torial on the subject of “democratic” revolutions in the struggle 
against wars of national liberation: ‘““The United States also has 
a sometimes deserved reputation as a defender of the status quo, 
of capitalism as we interpret it, of democracy only in our form, 
of opposing social reform if it comes from the left and of com- 
placently accepting coups d’éiat from the right.”! These lines 
were written over three years after the theory of ‘freedom rev- 
olution” was first proclaimed official US foreign policy by the 
then Secretary of State Mr. Rusk, and serve to show how this 
policy has proved itself in practice to be nothing more than a 
Big Stick policy. This is understandable, since the liberal con- 
tent of the theory (the demand for “social justice for the under- 
privileged”, democratic reforms, etc.) is not practicable within 
the framework of the capitalist system, while what is practicable 
(suppression of internal aggression, the defence of free enter- 
prise, etc.) has nothing at all to do with either revolution or 
freedom. 


The Demand for Ending 
the Class Struggle in 
the Sphere of 
International Affairs 


Peaceful coexistence does not, however, mean a cessation of 
the struggle between the two opposed social systems in the 
sphere of international relations. The objective laws of dev- 
elopment of a society composed of antagonistic classes apply 
not only to the internal life of nations but also on a world scale. 
The attempts made by Western sociologists to interpret peace- 
ful coexistence as an admission of the inevitability of the “per- 
petual” existence of the two systems are unrealistic and un- 
scientific.? 

The point about peaceful coexistence is that it ensures that 
the international struggle is waged not by military means but 
is confined to the sphere of economics, politics and ideology, 
and thus does not threaten the life and welfare of peoples. 


1 The New York Times, July 8, 1965. 

2 See The Foreign Policy of the Soviet Union, pp. 405-07; P. Bastid, 
“Les principes juridiques et moraux de la coexistence” in Bulletin Inter- 
parlamentaire, No. 1, 1955, p. 7; 8. Fischer-Galati, “Soviet Policy in East 
Kurope” in Current History, November 1959, p. 278. 


256 





Supporters of status quo-ism, on the other hand, base their 
attacks at peaceful coexistence on the fact that it involves 
struggle, ignoring the essential feature of this struggle—its 
peaceful nature. 

So great is the panic of Western, and especially US politi- 
cians, at the very idea of revolutionary changes that, as the 
sociologist Warburg notes, they are ready to see any change at 
all in the world as a threat to their state security.4 

Western ideologists are in fact demanding as a condition for 
their agreement to peaceful coexistence that the socialist states 
commit themselves to refusing to support revolutionary move- 
ments, “not allowing” revolutions to take place in the capitalist 
world, and practically co-operating with them in putting down 
such revolts of the masses. Lord Douglas-Home, then British 
Minister for Foreign Affairs, suggested at a Conservative Party 
meeting in Buckinghamshire that the socialist countries should 
give the West assurances, firstly, that there should be no 
revolutions in capitalist countries, and secondly, that they 
should put an end to the class struggle in the international 
arena. 

But peaceful coexistence is the result of the appearance on 
the international scene of socialist states that are peace-loving 
by their class content, the result of the existing relationship of 
forces between socialism and capitalism. The West, therefore, 
is not in a position to dictate terms of coexistence. 

Imperialist ideologists (such as the Americans J. Hazard and 
P. Reynolds, and the French sociologist R. Aron) approach the 
policy of peaceful coexistence from the standpoint of cessation 
of the class struggle. 

They describe peaceful coexistence as a “tendentious Marx- 
ist” theory, diametrically opposed to “the objective, non-Marx- 
ist” concept of peaceful co-operation. 

Thus, R. Aron and P. Reynolds write: “Peaceful coexistence 
derives from a philosophy of class conflict which is so projected 
on to the international scene that no relationship except one 
of hostility is conceivable between states of different economic 
systems.... Peaceful co-operation derives from a philosophy 
of moral community and common interests. . . .””2 

The idea of replacing peaceful coexistence with “peaceful 


1 J. Warburg, The West in Crisis, p. 170. 
2. R. I. Aron, P. A. Reynolds, “Peaceful Coexistence and Peaceful Co- 
operation”, Political Studies, Oxford, October 1956, Vol. IV, No. 8, p. 289. 


17—203 257 


| 


co-operation”, purged of class conflict, highly attractive though . 
it may be for bourgeois politicians, is completely unrealistic . 
and scientifically unwarranted. 

The capitalist countries themselves have no intention of 
renouncing class conflict in the international sphere. The impe- 
rialist bourgeoisie still hopes by means of tendentious propa- 
ganda and slanderous attacks on socialism to undermine the 
existing order in the socialist countries and divert the masses 
in the capitalist countries from socialist revolution. The book 
Protracted Conflict, by members of the staff of the Foreign 
Affairs Institute of the University of Pennsylvania, describes 
ideological influence on the citizens of the socialist states as a 
major strategic task of the West to be achieved by propaganda 
of the “Western way of life” by all possible means—tourist and 
student exchange visits, wireless propaganda and so on and so 
forth. 

Class conflict is an objective law of social development 
wherever social antagonisms exist. There can be no class peace 
between colonies and colonial powers, between young states 
and the imperialist monopolies that have them in their grasp, 
between aggressors and victims of aggression. Even between 
bourgeois states, which belong to the same social system, a 
ceaseless struggle is in progress that frequently leads to war. 
How then can economic competition and political and ideolo- 
gical conflict be expected to cease between states belonging to 
antagonistic social systems? Especially when, as we shall show, 
the imperialist countries are conducting a policy aimed at the 
destruction of the existing order in the socialist countries and 
the restoration of capitalism. As long as imperialism continues 
to exist in the world, causing wars, misery, poverty, enslave- 
ment and exploitation, the peoples of the socialist countries, 
educated in the spirit of proletarian internationalism, cannot 
cease the struggle against its crimes. Let us now take a look 
at the three main spheres in which the socialist countries 
wage this struggle—the economic, political and ideological 
spheres. 

Economic competition between the two systems is not only 
inevitable, but is to the advantage of the peoples of the respec- 
tive countries. Unlimited, unrestricted economic competition is 
the one peaceful way in present conditions of resolving the 
great historical controversy of our age: which system— 
the capitalist or the socialist—is best. In the long run, after 
all, victory will go to the system that ensures man a better life, 


258 











that is, most fully satisfies his material and spiritual needs. 
The inevitability and necessity of economic competition between 
the two systems is so obvious that it is recognised by many of 
the more intelligent Western politicians. 

The political struggle waged by the socialist camp in the 
sphere of international relations has the purpose of ensuring 
free national, social, economic and cultural progress for all 
peoples, in conditions excluding world war and foreign inter- 
ference. The socialist countries try to achieve this by increasing 
the vigilance of the peoples of the world, exposing imperialism 
and its aggressive policies, arousing the anger of the masses 
against warmongers and colonialists, drawing new sections of 
the population into the peace movement, and strengthening 
co-operation with all countries conducting a policy of peace. 
They offer wide moral and political support to the forces of 
peace—the international labour movement and its various 
ramifications, the national liberation movement, and other 
progressive movements. 

The ideological conflict in which the socialist countries are 
involved in the sphere of international relations is also inevi- 
table. The conflict of ideas, reflecting processes of development 
and paving the way to progress, takes place in any society, but 
is especially inevitable in an antagonistic society or a system of 
antagonistic societies. Irreconcilable ideas, political theories 
and outlooks reflect the different position of classes in the proc- 
ess of production, and will continue to exist and conflict as 
long as antagonistic classes exist. 

In reality, genuine peaceful co-operation and conflict exist 
simultaneously and are interconnected. Thus, there could hardly 
be co-operation with the peace movement without simultaneous 
conflict with those who reject or distort the theory of peace- 
ful coexistence, with the forces of reaction, militarism and 
revenge. 

The main aim pursued by imperialist ideologists in demand- 
ing that the socialist countries renounce class conflict in 
international relations, is to disrupt the policy of proletarian 
internationalism and drive a wedge between the international 
labour and national liberation movements and the world social- 
ist system. 

Bourgeois sociologists slander the policy of the socialist 
countries, accusing them of “illegal acts”, of breaking the UN 
Charter and violating the principles of peaceful coexistence, of 
using “any and all non-military means ... for the ultimate 


17 259 








termination of the capitalist system”, and for establishing their 
own world hegemony, and so on.! Such slander serves the 
policy of the ruling classes in capitalist countries. Thus, Mr. 
Martin, Canadian Minister of Foreign Affairs, speaking at a 
meeting of the Montreal section of the International Law 
Association, claimed that the theory of peaceful coexistence 
provided the communist countries with a theoretical basis for 
subversive activities in the countries of the “Free World” while 
maintaining normal relations with them. 

Reactionary ideologists struggling against support for the 
revolutionary movements can claim neither progressive political 
principles nor morality to be on their side. This is why they 
transfer the question of the nature and acceptability of such 
movements to the plane of formal law. But in so doing they 
are making yet another grave miscalculation, for if revolution 
was perhaps regarded as illegal according to the principles of 
international law prior to 1917, present-day international law 
views the matter somewhat differently. The UN Charter admits 
the right of every people and nation to decide for itself all 
questions of its internal and international life (Article 2 [1)). 
Admission of the right of every nation to determine its own 
destiny is tantamount to admission of its right to transform its 
life by revolution. It is not a question of revolution being 
derived from law, but of law confirming the objective tendencies 
of the development of human society. This being the case, 
from the point of view of international legality, revolutions of 
national liberation and social revolutions are a progressive, law- 
ful phenomenon. 

There was a time when the Soviet Union was one of the 
few countries to defend this point of view. Today, however, 
it has been accepted by the majority of countries. This in itself 
represents a major triumph. The fact that a political principle 
has become accepted as a principle of international law formally 
binding on all countries is convincing proof of its viability and 
validity. 

The lawfulness of wars of liberation is implicit in the Declara- 
tion of Human Rights, in the Preamble: “Whereas it 1s essen- 
tial, if mankind is not to be compelled as a last resort to rebel 


1 Wladislaw W. Kulski, Peaceful Coexistence. An Analysis of Soviet 
Foreign Policy, Chicago, 1959, p. 187. See also Milton Kovner, The Challenge 
of Coexistence, Washington, 1961, p. 108, and Elliot R. Goodman, The Soviet 
Design for a World State, New York, 1961, p. 49. 


260 








against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be 
protected by a regime of law....”” The Cairo Conference of 
Non-Aligned Countries expressly recognised the legality of 
wars of national liberation and did so on roughly the same basis 
as the Soviet Union in its Documents. “The process of libera- 
tion,” the Cairo communiqué ran, “‘is irresistible and irrevers- 
ible. The colonial peoples can lawfully resort to arms, to 
completely guarantee their right to self-determination and 
independence, if the colonial countries insist on repressing their 
natural aspirations.” 

Recognition of the lawfulness of revolutions naturally throws 
a new light on the question of the assistance offered by the 
socialist countries to the young sovereign states and the peoples 
who have risen up in social or national liberation revolutions. 
In principle the offering of such assistance is perfectly lawful 
and today it is only the form in which it is offered that is an 
object of dispute. This is the view now held by the majority 
of states. It is actively supported by the African countries, and 
by many other non-aligned countries. The participants in the 
Cairo Conference decided ‘“‘to work ceaselessly for the destruc- 
tion of all remnants of colonialism and unite all their efforts to 
offer all the necessary assistance and support—moral, political 
or material—to peoples fighting against colonialism or neo- 
colonialism” (Part 1). 

Bourgeois ideologists are fond of asking the following pro- 
vocative questions: will the Soviet Union interfere if a socialist 
revolution occurs in a capitalist country? and will it resort to 
armed force on the grounds that its contradictions with capi- 
talism are of an antagonistic nature?! These questions can be 
answered as follows. 

The assistance offered by the socialist countries to social rev- 
olutions is in conformity with the methods permitted by the UN 
Charter (support for the revolutionary people in UN bodies, 
mobilisation of public opinion, moral support, and so on). The 
main aim is to ensure that nobody interferes in the internal 
affairs of the country where the revolution has begun (i.e., 
opposition to the export of counter-revolution). Unlike the 
imperialist countries, which organise subversive activities against 
lawful governments (viz., the United States against the Cuban 
Government), the Soviet Union and the socialist countries do 


1 Aus Politik und Zeitgeschichte, Beilage zur Wochenzeitung Das 
Parlament, July 15, 1959. 


261 











not send their troops into other countries, do not set up military 
bases and arms dumps on their territory, and do not call for 
the overthrow of existing regimes. Such activities would greatly 
facilitate the organisation of aggression for the imperial- 
ists. 

The Soviet Union and other socialist countries are determined 
opponents of the “export of revolution”. They hold that revolu- 
tion can and will triumph in all countries as a result of internal 
development, through the people’s own liberation activities. 
Antagonistic contradictions exist in all capitalist countries and 
they will resolve themselves in a_ peaceful or non-peaceful 
manner depending on the situation within a given country. 

The socialist countries have absolutely no reason whatsoever 
to violate the principle of peaceful coexistence, which it is in 
their interests to observe. This is recognised even by such a 
diehard imperialist ideologist as Schlamm to whom we have 
already had occasion to refer. Schlamm writes: “Communism 
thrives on peace, desires peace, and triumphs in conditions of 
peace.”! Peaceful coexistence may not suit the revanchists, 
Schlamm, and all those like him who still hope to see commu- 
nism defeated, but then whether it suits them or not is rather 
beside the point. The socialist countries have absolutely no need 
to resort to military measures to resolve the contradictions of 
capitalism. So much for the second question. 

The support the Soviet Union and other socialist countries 
offer national liberation movements comes under particularly 
heavy fire from reactionary imperialist sociologists. The 
reactionary article “Wars of Liberation”, published in The 
New York Times, repeated the panicky warnings of US leaders 
and their foremost ideologists to the effect that the Soviet 
Union and certain other socialist countries “are at work trying 
to undermine societies [capitalist societies—The Author.) as 
termites do a wooden house”’.? 

The socialist countries do indeed offer peoples fighting for 
their national independence material as well as moral and 
political assistance. But these peoples are bearers of national 
sovereignty, their revolutionary forces have the rights of com- 
batants and their organs of power receive official international 
recognition as lawful subjects of international law. In the field 
of international affairs they are accepted as having many of the 


1°W. Schlamm, Die Grenzen des Wunders, Zurich, 1959, S. 185. 
2 The New York Times, June 30, 1965; p. 36. 


262 


EEE 





same rights of already established states, including the right of 
receiving outside assistance. Thus, the socialist countries have 
every right to assist them even from the strictly legal point of 
view. 

The Soviet Union has long been offering considerable assis- 
tance to peoples struggling for their independence. Thus, the 
peoples of Algeria, the Yemen, Angola, Mozambique, Egypt 
and many other countries have accepted Soviet political, moral 
and material support. A number of other countries have begun 
to follow suit recently. Several African countries are forming 
bases on their territory for the training and instruction of 
insurgents from the Portuguese colonies, providing them with 
arms and equipment. Such actions represent lawful collective 
self-defence by the African countries against the collective 
aggression of the colonialists (Portugal being supported by coun- 
tries of the NATO bloc). 

While condemning imperialist wars and all other wars of 
aggression, the socialist countries support wars of liberation, 
which are sacred popular wars against enslavement, colonial 
rule and imperialist oppression. Such wars are recognised by 
present-day international law. The UN Charter condemns wars 
of aggression but recognises the right of peoples to individual 
or collective self-defence, ie., the right to conduct a war 
of liberation. Such a war is an extreme method of defend- 
ing national sovereignty which peoples only resort to when 
the imperialists leave them no other choice. The offering 
of assistance to peoples conducting a war of liberation does not 
undermine peaceful coexistence, but on the contrary, streng- 
thens it. It is not only the right, but the duty of all peace-loving 
countries to offer such assistance. 

The socialist countries strictly adhere to the principles of 
peaceful coexistence because they are peaceful by their very 
nature and are guided by the most humane ideology—Marxism- 
Leninism. Observance of these principles is in their own 
interests and in the interests of the international revolutionary 
movement. This is why the socialist countries have adopted 
peaceful coexistence as an essential part of their policy and 
pursue it consistently and not whenever it suits them. 

The internationalist policy conducted by the socialist coun- 
tries with respect to the national liberation movements is just 
in its aims and lawful in its methods. Whoever is defending a 
just cause has no need to violate the principles of peaceful 
coexistence. 


268 








The Export of 
Counter-Revolution 

As a Means of Preserving 
the Social Status Quo 


Some bourgeois sociologists realise fully well that economic 
competition, and political and ideological struggle between the 
two systems is inevitable, but are averse to these objective 
historical processes taking place in conditions of peaceful 
coexistence. They propose an alternative to peaceful coexis- 
tence, “competitive coexistence”, whose content has nothing at 
all to do with either peace or coexistence. As is clear from a 
book by the American sociologist J. Scott in which this theory 
is expounded, the theory is intended to justify the United States’ 
policy of intervention and economic sabotage.! It is really iden- 
tical with imperialist cold war policies, the object of which, as 
has been frequently demonstrated during the last couple of 
decades, is to undermine peaceful coexistence. 

The governments of the imperialist powers encourage the 
view that peaceful coexistence is merely another name for the 
cold war, now and then becoming hotted up in certain parts 
of the world in small local wars. This interpretation of peace- 
ful coexistence suits them perfectly, since only in force and 
aggression do they see any possibility of preserving the social 
status quo which is so dear to their hearts and so odious to the 
peoples of the world. Thus, Strausz-Hupé and his colleagues, 
whom we have already had occasion to mention, declare: 
“Force, if it is to be used at all, should serve to preserve the 
status quo.”? 

On the basis of the practical action of their governments, 
Western statesmen and scholars try to show that in present-day 
conditions the principle of non-interference is out-of-date, and 
widespread intervention should replace peaceful coexistence as 
the rule of international relations. The campaign to discredit 
peaceful coexistence is waged by a whole army of well-paid 
philosophers, jurists and publicists. Some of them try to deny 
altogether the unlawful nature of the imperialist policy of 
aggression. Others are prepared to admit it, but attempt to 


1 J. Scott, Political Warfare. A Guide to Competitive Coexistence, 
New York, 1955. 

2 R. Strausz~Hupé, W. R. Kintner, J. Dougherty, A. Cottrell, Protracted 
Conflict, p. 25. 


264 


— = 


justify it. In a lengthy tome published in the USA, the claim 
is made that large-scale American intervention in the internal 
affairs of other nations does not run contrary to the principles 
of peaceful coexistence and is justifiable, especially when the 
aim is the defence of important national rights and interests. 
Its author, D. Graber, writes: “...Despite the magnitude and 
multiplicity of American interventions in many parts of the 
world, the State Department, as a rule, denies that interventions 
have occurred and are continuing, instead of admitting their 
existence and explaining the political and legal reasons which 
justify American policy.”! 

Another American sociologist, C. Eagleton, attempts to justify 
American intervention in the internal affairs of other nations 
on the grounds of strategical considerations and interest in 
natural resources,? while Professor Burnham writes that “the 
doctrine of ‘non-intervention in the internal affairs of other 
nations’ —already little more than a verbal shell—would have 
to be discarded altogether’. 

Such adductions made by the apostles of capitalism against 
the principle and policy of peaceful coexistence are completely 
unfounded and do not withstand the slightest criticism. 

To begin with, the world socialist community, the newly- 
independent states and public opinion in the capitalist coun- 
tries greatly hamper the interventionist policy of the imperi- 
alists. 

Secondly, it is wrong to deduce that the multiplicity of 
imperialist interventions make peaceful coexistence impossible. 
Infringement of the law does not affect the validity of the law 
itself. The fact that there is an increase in the cases of robbery 
in certain capitalist countries does not lead to the repeal of 
the laws protecting private property or changes in the criminal 
code concerning the sentences for such crimes. International 
principles come into existence and are applied as and when 
they are needed by states. Thus, the principles of peaceful 
coexistence, including the principle of non-intervention, will 
remain valid as long as there exist states whose sovereignty 
they are intended and called upon to protect. 

Thirdly, the policy of peaceful coexistence is not a generous 


1D. A. Graber, Crisis Diplomacy. A History of US Intervention Po- 
licies and Practices, Washington, 1959, p. X. 
2 C. Eagleton, “Excesses of Self-determination”, Foreign Affairs, July 


1953, p. 596. 
3 J. Burnham, The Struggle for the World, New York, 1947, p. 174. 


265 








concession made by the imperialists to the peoples of their 
own free will, but the result of the existing relationship of 
forces in the world, the outcome of the struggle for peace of the 
socialist countries. The imperialists, therefore, cannot reject 
peaceful coexistence even if they want to. Any attempt by the 
imperialists to torpedo peaceful coexistence invariably meets 
with counter-action on the part of the socialist countries and 
other anti-imperialist forces. 

Fourthly, attempts to preserve the status quo by force runs 
directly counter to the aim they are claimed to be serving—the 
preservation of peace. This is admitted by all objective bour- 
geois sociologists. Thus, the well-known American sociologist 
Mills wrote: “The continued attempt by the USA to defend 
the economic and political status quo of the world today will 
end in war.”! Indeed, imperialist attempts to obstruct revolu- 
tionary changes in many parts of the world have constituted, 
and continue to constitute a serious threat to world peace. 

One extremely effective method of preserving peaceful 
coexistence in today’s world of revolutionary change is the 
struggle against the export of counter-revolution. The Com- 
munist Party of the Soviet Union cannot remain an indifferent 
bystander and watch the imperialists trampling underfoot the 
principle of peaceful coexistence and drowning revolutionary 
movements in blood. Faithful to the principles of peaceful 
coexistence and proletarian solidarity, the CPSU resolutely 
opposes the imperialist policy of intervention and the export of 
counter-revolution. “Together with the other Marxist-Leninist 
parties, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union regards it as 
its international duty to call on the peoples of all countries to 
rally, muster all their internal forces, take vigorous action, and 
drawing on the might of the world socialist system, frustrate or 
firmly repel imperialist interference in the affairs of the people 
of any country risen in revolt, and thereby prevent imperialist 
export of counter-revolution.’”2 

Opposition to the export of counter-revolution is of tremen- 
dous importance both for the future of world socialism and for 
ensuring peaceful coexistence. Measures taken in this direction 
are essentially measures of collective defence, which are just in 
their aims and sanctioned by the UN Charter. The Soviet 


{ Wright Mills, The Causes of World War Three, New York, 1958, 
p. 116. 
2 The Road to Communism, p. 484. 


266 





Union has helped to prevent or oppose the export of counter- 
revolution on several occasions and every time it proved to the 
benefit of the cause of peace. This was the case in 1956, 1957 
and 1958, when the USSR prevented the gains of the national 
liberation revolutions of the Arab peoples from being lost, and 
it was the case in 1961 and 1962, when the Soviet Union and 
other peace-loving states helped the heroic Cuban people 
defend their state sovereignty. The Soviet Union continues to 
perform its duty in helping the heroic Vietnamese people and 
the Arab countries to oppose imperialist intervention. 

The export of counter-revolution is the chief means of 
preserving the status quo and a most serious act of aggression 
and international crime, and the Communists, in mobilising all 
progressive forces to prevent or oppose it, are defending the 
principles of peaceful coexistence and promoting universal 
peace, thereby rendering an invaluable service to mankind. 


a i 


One of the fundamental contradictions between the imperial- 
ist ideology and Marxist-Leninist ideology is reflected in their 
vastly different approach to the status quo. Attempts by Western 
ideologists to replace the policy of peaceful coexistence with 
the policy of perpetuating the status quo are incompatible with 
the objective laws of social development, and run counter to 
the views of the progressive classes and the universally accept- 
ed principles of international relations. They are, moreover, 
discredited by the actions of the Western powers themselves, 
who behind the smoke screen of talk of preserving the status 
quo are actually engaged in attempts to export counter-revo- 
lution, and destroy the gains of the peoples of the socialist 
countries and the young national states. Status quo-ism is not 
merely reactionary: it is futile, since it is incapable of achieving 
the aim it claims to serve—that of ensuring peace. Moreover, it 
is entirely superfluous, since mankind has already evolved the 
system of principles of peaceful coexistence, which makes it 
possible to avert a new world war in the conditions of the 
irreversible world revolutionary process. 





Chapter XIV 


AGAINST THE THEORY 
OF IDEOLOGICAL 
DISARMAMENT 


As time goes on more and more people are coming to share 
the conviction that the major contradiction of our age, the 
contradiction between socialism and capitalism, must not on 
any account be resolved by means of a new world war. 

Of course, there are still many people in the world of 
finance capital, and very influential people at that, who still 
place their hopes in armed force and hold that “there is no 
possible compromise between East and West on any issue of 
importance”.! Nevertheless, even in bourgeois circles, sensible 
admissions of the fact that a nuclear conflict between the two 
socio-economic systems is not the answer are to be heard more 
and more frequently. 

The fact that part of the monopoly bourgeoisie are against a 
new world war does not mean that they recognise their impo- 
tence, the futility of their attempts to stop the march of history; 
nor is it based on any humane considerations. It is merely the 
result of a sober appraisal of the situation, the recognition that 
in the situation that obtains in the world today, a world war 
would not serve to further the aims of the imperialist bour- 
geoisie. As Senator Fulbright put it: “we have reached a point 
in history in which no rational man can conceive of war as a 
useful instrument of national policy.’ 


1 Paul Anderson, Thermonuclear Warfare, Derby, 1963, p. 102. 
2 Congressional Record. Proceedings and Debates of the 89th Congress. 


268 











At the same time, the ideological struggle is assuming ever 
greater importance. The reasons for this are to be sought in 
material, socio-economic conditions. Today, when the objective 
conditions for revolutionary transition to socialism have ma- 
tured everywhere, the matter of carrying out the transition 
depends on the subjective factor, namely, on the awareness of 
the masses of their fundamental interests and historical tasks, 
and their organisation and conscious activity directed towards 
the abolition of capitalism. Thus, the transition to socialism, the 
objective conditions for which have already matured, of neces- 
sity requires that ideas be called upon to play an organising and 
mobilising role. 

The growing acceptance of the principle of peaceful coexis- 
tence in international relations and the increasing importance 
the ideological struggle is assuming in the world are not regard- 
ed as isolated phenomena from the Marxist-Leninist stand- 
point. Both are products of present-day socio-economic condi- 
tions. Moreover, peaceful coexistence creates a new situation 
for the ideological struggle and is at the same time directly 
dependent on it. Thus, actual conditions link the struggle for 
peace with the class conflict between socialism and capitalism 
and bring to the forefront the problem of peaceful coexistence 
and the ideological struggle. 

In bourgeois ideology this problem is treated in numerous 
ways, both as regards how the question is posed and the prac- 
tical solutions offered. This is dictated by the class views of the 
individual ideologist in question, to what particular group of 
finance, middle or petty bourgeoisie he belongs, by his political 
sympathies and his individual abilities, including his ability to 
make a more or less sober appraisal of history within the limits 
of his basic world view. But all these different anti-Marxist 
views have one feature in common: they all adopt a subjective- 
idealist approach. Thus, the concept of ideological struggle is 
invariably treated as an absolutely self-contained sphere of 
human activity, dependent entirely on the whims and arbitrary 
desires of the protagonists, and even directing the course of 
historical events along avenues chosen according to the abilities 
of the ideologists and the skill of the propaganda machine. 

Since it is quite impossible to enumerate in the space avail- 
able here all the various bourgeois interpretations of the prob- 


First Session, Vol. 111, Part 1, January 4, 1965, to January 27, 1965, 
p. 316. 


269 





a 


lem of peaceful coexistence and ideological struggle, we shall 
confine our attention to just two, as being the most widespread 
and most extreme. One of these treats peaceful coexistence as 
identical with cold war, i.e., a struggle between the two ideo- 
logical systems for world hegemony with no holds barred. The 
other takes its departure from the view that peaceful coexis- 
tence should exclude cold war, replacing it with ideological 
coexistence. 

Both these theories distort the concepts of peaceful coexis- 
tence, cold war and ideological struggle, giving a false picture 
of their inter-relationship. This can easily be seen from a brief 
look at some of the views expounded by the adherents to each 
of these two interpretations. 


Peaceful Coexistence 
and Cold War 


The imperialist bourgeoisie, irrespective of whether they 
regard another world war to be inevitable or accept the possi- 
bility and desirability of peaceful coexistence, generally view 
relations between the socialist and capitalist countries as a cold 
war, in which the competing ideologies strive to attain world 
supremacy by all and any means. 

Thus, ideologists of monopoly capital generally draw no 
distinction between “peaceful coexistence”, “the cold war” 
and “ideological struggle’, but regard them as synonyms de- 
scriptive of the same implacable conflict between the two systems 
that has gone on ever since the October Revolution. However, 
various ideologists attribute a vastly different role to cold war 
in the present stage of this conflict, depending on their par- 
ticular socio-political standpoint. 

For the ultra-reactionary wing of the imperialist bourgeoisie, 
for the “hard-liners” who contemplate the possibility of a 
nuclear clash, the cold war is a means of increasing interna- 
tional tension. The West German publicist L. Schulte writes: 
“The war of nerves has been and remains a prelude to military 
conflicts.” The logical outcome of this course is for cold war 
to become hot war, by means of which the most aggressive for- 


1L. Schulte, Uom Blitzkrieg zum Nervenkrieg. Atlantische Partner- 
schaft im atomaren Zeitalter, Boppard/Rh., 1964, S. 31. 


270 














ces of the imperialist bourgeoisie hope to turn back the wheel 
of history and achieve “total victory” over communism. 

The more moderate sections of the imperialist bourgeoisie 
view cold war as a means of achieving imperialist aims without 
resorting to world war. In contrast to the “ultras”, they “hope 
that the present situation will at least not change for the worst, 
i.e., that the cold war will continue without developing into an 
open conflict that could lead to the destruction of mankind’.! 
The moderates are for the continuation of the arms race and 
the increase in “deterrent forces”, and hope by means of a 
combination of peaceful cold war methods and “local wars” to 
return the peoples of the socialist countries to the capitalist 
fold. 

Today, the ruling groups in the capitalist world are afraid to 
risk all-out nuclear war, and resort to other methods of achiev- 
ing their imperialist aims. These methods include military 
blackmail and “local wars”, and—one of the most important of 
all—ideological warfare. 

Let us take a look at the theses most widely held by those 
bourgeois ideologists who are for stepping up the ideological 
struggle in conditions of peaceful coexistence. They are: a) that 
peaceful coexistence is cold war, involving the attainment of 
foreign policy aims with the aid of all sorts of ideological 
means; b) that given peaceful coexistence, victory will go to 
the side with the best-equipped ideological arsenal; c) that the 
West must perfect its ideological weapons and use them on an 
ever wider scale. 

Let us now examine these theses in more detail. 

A, Many bourgeois ideologists, being opposed to a world 
thermonuclear war conflict, interpret peaceful coexistence as 
inevitable cold war for world domination. 

The defenders of capitalism generally argue along the follow- 
ing lines. In present conditions the two worlds are obliged to 
coexist in order to avoid nuclear annihilation. However, this 
coexistence cannot be “peaceful” in anything like the real 
meaning of the word, since communism is, by its very nature, 
“subversive”, so that cold war is inevitable.2 Similar views are 
expressed on the other side of the Atlantic. “In fact, we have 
no alternative but to engage the enemy in the psychological 
arena of the Cold War.... For, short of the outbreak of the 


{ Ibid., p. 7. 
2 Some Reflections on British Foreign Policy, London, 1959. 


271 











Third World War, the immediate prospect is for a continuation 
and intensification of the Cold War—the great and protracted 
psycho-political conflict.” 

The cold war comprises all methods of struggle for world 
domination apart from nuclear war: the arms race, local wars, 
political and ideological subversion, military blackmail, the 
application of economic sanctions, lies and slander—in short, 
everything that produces international tension and, in the 
opinion of bourgeois ideologists, can bring pressure to bear on 
communism. 

Most bourgeois ideologists who attribute a major role to 
ideological conflict between capitalism and socialism, view it 
not as the reflection of the class positions of the two parties, but 
purely as an instrument for ensuring world hegemony. In other 
words, they ascribe imperialist content to it. 

In order to give the semblance of truth to this view, the anti- 
communists carry out a double manipulation. Firstly, they pre- 
sent the strengthening of the international positions of social- 
ism which is dictated by the laws of history as being merely the 
result of “Red imperialism”, interpreting the communist view 
of the inevitability of capitalism being superseded by socialism 
as “communist imperialism”. Thus, Fulbright maintains that 
the Soviet Union is dedicated to “the imposition on an unwill- 
ing world of its own form of totalitarian society”.? Secondly, 
the anti-communists represent imperialism and its struggle 
against social progress not as a struggle against the choice of the 
masses in favour of communism, but as a struggle against 
foreign imperialism. To cite Fulbright again: “ It is not 
Communism which is at issue between the Soviet Union and the 
West but Communist imperialism. .. .”” 

It should perhaps be pointed out that bourgeois ideologists 
who hold this view are regarding as imperialism not a system of 
socio-economic relations and the politics arising therefrom, but 
a social doctrine (namely, the Marxist thesis of the inevitable 
universal triumph of communism). They interpret a Marxist 
doctrine which has been proved correct by history itself as a 
manifestation of “communist imperialism”. 

The subjective-idealist approach is patently evident in this 
fraudulent device, an approach which regards history not in 


1 R. Strausz-Hupé, W. R. Kintner, S. T. Possony, op. cit., p. 260. 

2 William J. Fulbright, Prospects for the West, Cambridge-Massachu- 
setts, 1963, p. 14. 

3 Tbid., p. 20. 


272 


terms of underlying socio-economic conditions and changing 
material foundations of social life, but in terms of a struggle 
between two ideologies—the bourgeois and the communist. 

This subjective-idealist approach permits bourgeois ideolo- 
gists to attain at least three major aims. 

Firstly, it makes it easy to falsify the struggle between prog- 
ress and reaction, and peace and aggression. For if we admit 
that the course of history is determined by the conflict between 
two opposite ideologies, it is not difficult to convince the igno- 
rant that it is the communist ideology proving the need for 
changing the social order that is the “aggressive”, “imperialist” 
ideology, and that the bourgeois ideology and politics directed 
towards the defence and perpetuation of capitalism are of a 
“defensive”, “peaceful” nature. Dean Rusk declared that the 
“first objective of our policy towards the Communist states must 
be, and is, to play our part in checking Communist imperialism. 
This administration will vigorously oppose the expansion of the 
Communist domain—whoever the Communists in question may 
be—by force or the threat of force, whether directly or indi- 
rectly applied.’ This provides a fine example of how sophistry 
and demagogy are used to make an aggressive, reactionary 
policy appear a “policy of peace”, and brand the real struggle 
for social progress as imperialism. 

Secondly, the subjective-idealist approach makes it easy to 
justify the persecution of those who hold different views. If 
communist ideology is declared imperialist (and it is hardly 
impossible to establish what influence particular ideas have), 
then the whole system of repression at home and constant inter- 
vention abroad can be justified as being “in the interests of 
security”. Mr. Rusk frankly admitted that US policy was 
directed against ideas, against views. “Until the Communists 
themselves change,” Rusk declared, “the most elementary 
security considerations demand that we remain ever alert to 
the dangers the very outlook on life raises for us and for others 
committed to freedom.’’2 In this way a whole series of military, 
political and psychological cold war devices are justified, which, 
although reactionary and aggressive, are presented as necessary 
for the struggle with the “expansionist doctrine” of commu- 
nism. 


! The Department of State Bulletin, Vol. L, No. 1290, March 16, 1964, 
p. 391. 
2 Ibid., p. 392. 


18—203 273 





SS 


The third advantage of this approach is that it is extremely . 
comforting and gives ample grounds for the reassurance the | 
bourgeoisie so sorely need. If social development is determined 
by ideas formulated perfectly arbitrarily, the whole course of 
social evolution can be regarded as depending not on the ma- 
terial contradictions of social life, but on skilful propaganda, 
the ability to instil specially chosen ideas into the masses, to 
pull the wool over the eyes of the masses and produce the de- 
sired attitudes. In short, it depends on the strategy and tactics 
of “psychological” or cold warfare. 

This indeed is the general direction of most of the recommen- 
dations made by the less subtle champions of capitalism, who 
advise the use of any methods whatsoever, from lies to acts of 
provocation, in order to achieve the desired results in the 
struggle with communism. Thus, the West German anti-Com- 
munist T. Arnold suggests “skilful parrying’, making use of 
“apt comparisons”, “demagogical exaggeration” (which should 
be “close to the truth’’) and direct frontal attacks. 

It is perfectly clear that the bourgeois interpretation of 
peaceful coexistence as cold war and of the ideological conflict 
as a means towards world domination has nothing to do with the 
real interests of peace, with strengthening good-neighbourly 
relations between nations, or with the scientific concept of 
ideological struggle. 

The democratic theory of peaceful coexistence and the im- 
perialist theory of cold war are not simply different things, they 
are antithetical. Moreover, this reflects the divorce not only 
between the views of the working class and the bourgeoisie but 
equally that between the masses in general and the imperialist 
clique. 

The principle of coexistence between countries with different 
social systems, which is supported by the masses, involves the 
demand for preserving peace and the implementation of a 
whole series of measures guaranteeing the strengthening of peace 
and the improvement of the international situation. Such meas- 
ures include the cessation of the arms race and gradual disarma- 
ment, putting a stop to local wars launched by imperialism, the 
ending of military blackmail and war psychosis, the improve- 
ment of international commercial and cultural ties, and so on. 
All these measures are of a generally democratic nature and 
perfectly acceptable to capitalism. Thus, when the Communists 
propose them to bourgeois governments they are not suggesting 
that the leaders of the bourgeois world should abolish their 





274 














own system. These measures would not serve to overthrow 
capitalism, but merely to improve the international situation, 
while creating favourable conditions for social progress. 

The cold war launched by imperialism, on the contrary, is an 
attempt to reduce peaceful coexistence to the use of every 
possible means of prolonging and increasing international ten- 
sion without resorting to total nuclear war. 

Since this leaves the arms race, local wars, nuclear black- 
mail, war psychosis, political subversion, economic blockade, 
and a whole host of other cold war tactics, the task of preserving 
peace in these circumstances is an extremely difficult one. Any 
really effective measures to strengthen peaceful coexistence and 
develop good-neighbourly relations are rendered quite impos- 
sible. 

Naturally these two totally different approaches to peaceful 
coexistence involve totally different use of the means of ideolog- 
ical struggle. For the Communists ideological struggle is an 
organic part of the class struggle, reflecting the antagonism be- 
tween the working class and the bourgeoisie, a means of showing 
the real qualities of socialism and capitalism. For the imperialist 
bourgeoisie, it is a means of achieving world hegemony, a means 
of attaining the aims of imperialist foreign policy and of con- 
ditioning public acquiescence to aggressive acts. 

Thus, genuine peaceful coexistence does not mean cold war at 
all, but is a constructive programme for the all-round develop- 
ment of international ties. The aim of this programme is to 
exclude armed conflict and channel the historically inevitable 
conflict between socialism and capitalism into economic compe- 
tition and ideological struggle. 

B. In assessing the general trends of social change in the post- 
war period, the anti-communists generally admit that commu- 
nism has achieved notable successes. ‘To what do they attribute 
these successes? In full accordance with their underlying sub- 
jective-idealist approach, bourgeois ideologists regard the 
successes achieved by the forces of socialism as the result 
of a well-organised ideological struggle waged by the Com- 
munists. 

In so doing they fail to distinguish between ideological 
struggle and propaganda warfare. In other words they are not 
willing to admit that it is the practical demonstration of the 
advantages of the existing social systems and not a comparison 
of abstract ideals that is involved. They treat the ideological 
conflict purely in terms of propaganda, as “psychological war- 


18° 275 








fare”. The successes achieved by communism are therefore al- 
most completely divorced from socio-economic conditions, from 
the contradictions of concrete reality, and the causes are rele- 
gated entirely to the sphere of ideas. Two causes are most often 
mentioned. 

One is that the Communists have made a cunning choice of 
ideology, “releasing” a number of “clever ideas”, thereby 
sowing disorder in the world and causing various revolutionary 
changes. Thus, the American anti-Communist T. Whitney 
writes in his preface to the book, The Communist Blueprint for 
the Future: “One thing is clear: Marx, Engels and Lenin let 
loose in this world a revolution by thought and deed which is 
indeed remaking history.”! 

Many bourgeois ideologists attribute the successes achieved 
by the Communists to the fact that they possess a single ideol- 
ogy. The American sociologist Fred J. Cook writes that the 
strength of communism lies in its transformation of Marxism 
from a philosophy into an ideology, ensuring unity of views and 
certainty in the choice of ends. The English sociologist 
M. Shanks makes the same point in his book ‘The Stagnant So- 
ciety: ““.. .In this very uniformity, in this disciplining of society 
to the attainment of particular social and economic goals, there 
is at the same time something decent, honest, and inspiring. 
Whatever else it lacks, this society contains within itself a sense 
of purpose. This, vis-a-vis the West, is the great strength.”2 

Bourgeois thinkers practically ignore the question of the rela- 
tionship between ideology and life. Viewing things in terms of 
their own ideological armour, representing a mixture of prom- 
ises, lie and demagogy, the defenders of capitalism do not even 
ask themselves how it is that communist ideas answer the 
urgent needs of the masses and take into account the objective 
trends of social development. For the bourgeoisie do not even 
recognise the existence of these inevitable trends. Thus, ascrib- 
ing the successes achieved by communism entirely to the merits 
of its ideology instead of to socio-economic factors, bourgeois 
sociologists regard these merits as deriving from the unity of 
purpose of communist ideology, its internal organisation, 
and not from the fact that it corresponds to the needs of the 
age. 

The second factor to which bourgeois ideologists ascribe the 


1 The Communist Blueprint for the Future, New York, 1962, p. XIV. 
2 Michael Shanks, The Stagnant Society, Baltimore, 1961, p. 15. 


276 








successes achieved by communism is skilful propaganda. Thus, 
R. White, an American anti-Communist, describing the delights 
of American capitalism, asks why it is that tens or hundreds of 
millions of people in other countries consider that ‘‘we capital- 
ists are scoundrels” or “ruled” by capitalist scoundrels? For him 
the answer is simple: it is purely the result of communist pro- 
paganda, a world-wide communist propaganda campaign with 
the aim of discrediting capitalism and the USA as its chief 
home. 

However, whatever explanations bourgeois ideologists might 
offer, the important thing is that the bourgeoisie recognises the 
superiority of communist ideas, and regards their spread as a 
mortal danger. They are well aware that the results of the 
ideological conflict (or, as they would have it, the “psycholo- 
gical war’) have so far been by no means comforting for them. 

It is this, the fact that capitalism loses to socialism in the 
conditions of peaceful coexistence, that explains the unwilling- 
ness to accept the policy of peaceful coexistence proposed by the 
Communists. 

While recognising the successes of communism, bourgeois 
ideology is unable to accept the fact that these successes are the 
outcome of historical development and social progress, the 
result of objective laws of history, and not of a cunningly cho- 
sen idea and a cleverly organised “psychological war”. The 
course of history is not determined by ‘‘clever ideas”: the objec- 
tive laws of history condition the growing influence of ideas 
that encourage progress and the declining influence of the 
ideas of the moribund class. 

Even some of the ideologists who are far from accepting 
Marxist views have gradually come to recognise this. They note 
the growing popularity of communism as the bearer of progress. 
Thus, the American publicist W. Manger remarks a propos the 
situation in Latin America: “One of the greatest tragedies of the 
current era is that our ideological opponents should have been 
permitted to replace us in the imagination of so many of the 
Latin American people; to have created the impression in their 
minds that it is they, not we, who are the advocates of peace, the 
champions of democracy, the defenders of individual rights and 
the friend of the oppressed and the downtrodden.”! 

At the same time there is a growing awareness and recogni- 








1 William Manger, Pan America in Crisis. The Future of the OAS, 
Washington, 196], p. 6. 


277 

















tion of the fact that the capitalist world appears as the centre of 
reaction and the bulwark of counter-revolution. The American 
sociologist H. C. Aubrey writes: ‘““Whether one likes it or not, 
the United States ... is often being tagged as a ‘conservative’ 
power, the friend and ally of regimes that oppose change.’’! 
Symptomatic in this respect are the many admissions made by 
Arnold Toynbee in his book, America and the World Revolu- 
tion, where he states that America today is the leader of a 
world-wide anti-revolutionary movement in defence of vested 
interests. 

Naturally, such admissions do not mean that capitalism no 
longer has the support of its ideologists. It is simply that the 
champions of capitalism are forced to make a reasonably sober 
assessment of the actual situation if they are to be able to 
choose the best “courses of action” in the ideological conflict. 
Nevertheless, such admissions are highly significant: when the 
champions of capitalism begin to openly admit defeats, the 
outlook for capitalism is none too bright. 

C, Admitting communist successes and capitalist defeats, the 
ideologists of the imperialist bourgeoisie press for a reversal of 
this situation. However, failing to recognise the objective laws 
of social development and the objective impossibility of the 
bourgeoisie being able to defend the non-existent advantages 
of their system, in short, failing to recognise the historical 
bankruptcy of their own ideas and ideals, bourgeois ideologists 
ascribe their defeats to failure to make good use of the oppor- 
tunities of ideological struggle. To reassure their class that the 
causes of failure are to be sought in minor ideological short- 
comings rather than in the inherent defects of capitalism which 
the bourgeoisie are powerless to abolish, bourgeois ideologists 
are again concentrating on the shortcomings in bourgeois ide- 
ology and propaganda instead of on the real contradictions of 
social life. 

They adopt a subjective-idealist approach both in explaining 
their defeats and in the search for a solution, and suggest that 
the main trouble is that the West lacks a single common ideal 
(implying that everything will be all right once such an ideal 
is found). Thus, the American anti-Communist Fertig writes in 
Prosperity through Freedom that communism flourishes where 
there is no strong opposing ideal to offset it, such as a powerful 


1H. C. Aubrey, Coexistence: Economic Challenge and Response, 
Washington, 1962, p. 9. 


278 





religious force, or intense and unified nationalism, or a vigor- 
ous libertarianism, and that where such ideals do not exist, all 
the money in the world will not prevent the growth of com- 
munism. M. Shanks writes about the Western world as rich and 
exciting, “but seemingly incapable of concentrating its enereis 
on a positive social pattern. The whole Western world, 
varying degrees, stands in need of a new dynamic, a new sense 
of social purpose.... And among the industrial powers this 
lack seems to be most acutely felt here in Britain. . .”.1 Numer- 
ous other bourgeois ideologists join the chorus, bemoaning the 
absence in the West of dynamism and purpose, and the gene- 
ral feeling of disarray and lack of direction that finds expres- 
sion in the appeal for an ideal to oppose communism. 

Having diagnosed the trouble as being the unity and dyna- 
mism of communist ideology as opposed to the heterogeneity 
and passiveness of bourgeois ideology, the physicians of capital- 
ism prescribe the panacea of improvement and activisation of 
bourgeois ideology. 

But they do not agree when it comes to the actual remedy 
to be prescribed. Some feel that bourgeois ideology should be 
brought up to date, others hold that it is the tactics employed in 
the ideological struggle that should be altered, others are for 
a combination of both. 

The many bourgeois ideologists who propose a single com- 
mon “Western ideal” to counter the “communist menace” are 
forgetting that this is quite impossible. Bourgeois ideology is 
unable to offer either progressive ideas or a general common 
doctrine for the simple reason that the bourgeoisie is divided 
into numerous antagonistic groups with mutually exclusive 
standpoints. 

Another question of no small interest to the anti-Communists 
is that of acquiring more “living space” for their ideas by 
advancing them beyond the “Iron Curtain”. An important role 
here is played by the theory of “erosion of communism”, taking 
the war into the opponents’ territory, the concept of “equalising 
the chances” of capitalism and socialism, in short, the concept 
of ideological subversion in the socialist countries. 

Bourgeois ideologists totally ignore the socio-economic rea- 
sons for the spread of certain ideas and believe that they can 
achieve great success merely by ensuring the penetration of 
bourgeois ideas into the socialist countries. They claim that 


1 Michael Shanks, op. cit., p. 17. 


279 











simply by striking a few successful psychological blows at the 
enemy on his own ground they can achieve tremendous suc- 
cesses for the “Free World” and thus propose the “opening up” 
of “closed communist societies” and the “dethroning” of Marx- 
ism-Leninism. 

That these hopes are quite futile is not only due to the fact 
that the socialist countries are carefully guarding the interests 
of the working people. The point is that the numerous propos- 
als made by bourgeois politicians and ideologists are based on 
the fundamental misconception that the course of history is 
determined by the choice of ideas and the ability to instil them 
in the masses. It is a grave mistake to accord such exaggerated 
importance to ideas. This is not to say that ideas are not tremen- 
dously important, today more than ever before. But the ideas 
around which a social conflict centres are not the arbitra- 
ry choice of ideologists: they are the reflection of socio-eco- 
nomic class interests, an expression of certain social tenden- 
cies. 

The successes of communist ideology are not due to the 
founders of Marxism-Leninism having created a “convenient”, 
“unified” system of ideas and views, but to the fact that these 
views represent essential needs of social development, that they 
form the “true slogan” of a struggle already being waged, that 
they reflect and take into account the objective trends of social 
development, which, quite independently of the wishes of any 
particular social groups, will lead, sooner or later, to the replace- 
ment of capitalism by socialism. It is possible to reject com- 
munist ideas, to dispute the view of social development they 
represent. But this cannot serve more than a limited propa- 
ganda purpose: it will not affect in the slightest the general 
course of historical development, which will confirm time and 
again the correctness of Marxism-Leninism and the unsound- 
ness of bourgeois forecasts, leading to increasing defection from 
the ranks of bourgeois ideology and conversion to the ideology 
of the proletariat. 

This process will obviously not be a regular, straightfor- 
ward one. Bourgeois ideology and its propaganda machine exert 
a powerful influence on the masses. By spreading lies and 
slander, and combining truth with half-truths, they are in a 
position to retain their influence over a number of people for 
a time. But bourgeois society is rent by antagonisms. The gulf 
between the two main classes—the proletariat and the bour- 
geoisie—is especially great. The conditions thus exist in capi- 


280 
























talist society for propagating the ideology of the working class— 
Marxism-Leninism. 

In the socialist world, on the other hand, socio-economic 
conditions for the propagation of bourgeois ideas are non- 
existent, since there are no social groups or classes whose inter- 
ests these ideas would represent. Nevertheless, in view of the 
fact that ideas are to some extent independent of socio-economic 
conditions, the bourgeois intentions to sow confusion in the 
minds of the working people of the socialist countries should 
by no means be ignored and dismissed as totally ineffectual. 
Insistent propagation of bourgeois ideas can have its effects 
and this makes it essential for us to make a careful examina- 
tion and criticism of bourgeois theories within the “frontiers 
of communism”. 

Communists reject the bourgeois concept of ideological con- 
flict as part of the cold war: they regard the struggle between 
the proletarian and bourgeois ideologies as a reflection of the 
competition between two qualitatively different socio-economic 
systems, and the proletariat’s struggle against the bourgeoisie 
as a means of demonstrating the advantages of socialism, as 
a condition for ensuring free choice by the masses of the social 
system that best satisfies their needs. Communists have no 
reason to be afraid of the ideological conflict, for only socialism 
and communism satisfy the true interests of the working masses, 
and only Marxist-Leninist ideology signposts the way to a 
society in keeping with the aspirations of the vast majority of 
mankind. 


Peaceful Coexistence 
and Ideological 
Reconciliation 


Many middle-class people today, representatives of the petty 
and middle bourgeoisie, support peaceful coexistence not as 
cold war but as “ideological reconciliation”. These social groups 
and their ideologists are prepared to accept peaceful coexistence 
provided it involves neither cold war nor ideological conflict: 
they are for “ideological coexistence”. 

Thus, the German sociologist A. Buchholz writes: “A political 
peace without a spiritual peace is always temporary”.! The 
British Labour MP Christopher Mayhew was maintaining the 





1 A. Buchholz, Der Kampf um die bessere Welt, Stuttgart, 1961, S. 50. 


281 





same when he insisted that a condition for peaceful coexistence 
is “ideological coexistence”, “an end to the outdated, bitter 
propaganda battle between so-called capitalism and so-called 
communism”! 

There naturally exist numerous shades of opinion among 
the supporters of this theory too. We are faced with a vast 
number of theories, approaches, solutions and proposals, cor- 
responding to the political and personal views of their authors. 
Thus, in examining the essence of the general view in question, 
we can only limit ourselves to some of the more widespread and 
fully expounded viewpoints. These are: a) the view that the 
ideological struggle is temporary and will cease at some point 
during the subsequent evolution of capitalism and communism; 
b) the view that the ideological conflict is incompatible with 
peaceful coexistence and should therefore give way to ideo- 
logical peace. 

Let us proceed to analyse each of these concepts in turn. 

A. Some of the bourgeois ideologists who consider peace to 
be of paramount importance regard the ideological conflict as 
the product of the present aspirations of communism and capi- 
talism, as an accompanying feature of the present temporary 
phase of peaceful coexistence, and thus destined to cease in 
time. 

One of the main works in support of this view is The Struggle 
for a Better World by A. Buchholz. Viewing the present course 
of history in terms of the struggle between capitalism and com- 
munism, Buchholz writes: “Here two life principles confront 
one another which are mutually exclusive, yet at the same time 
both aim at universal spread.”? He rejects the idea that these 
two principles can be reconciled by any form of agreement or 
compromise. “No ‘agreement’ can be reached between the two 
principles existing in East and West simply through negotia- 
tions or compromises.’ He is far from presenting the Com- 
munists simply as a band of evil conspirators, and recognises 
that “the supporters of this ideology are convinced that they 
are fighters for a better world, and consider it only a matter 
of time before the whole world becomes communist. Connected 
with this is the conviction that a law of history leads to com- 
munism. .. .’”4 


! The Guardian, Nov. 7, 1961, p. 1. 
2 A. Buchholz, op. cit., p. 50. 

3 Thid. 

& Ibid, p. 15. 





Buchholz bases his attitude to peaceful coexistence and the 
ideological conflict on this basically sound appraisal of the 
situation. He holds that in present conditions, when both capit- 
alism and communism have “global pretensions”, peaceful 
coexistence is not firmly established, but is accompanied by 
profound distrust of the other side. In his view, peaceful coexis- 
tence today is “a dangerous balance between the need for 
peace, the aims of world communism and a more or less defined 
global claim to freedom. Behind all this lies profound distrust 
of the other side.’’! 

This mutual distrust can only be overcome and_ peaceful 
coexistence be firmly established provided that a state of “ideo- 
logical peace” is brought about between the two conflicting 
principles. For the time being this is impossible since “spiritual 
peace can only be attained when a spiritual basis, lying deeper 
than the contradictions that are visible today, is discovered and 
mentally assimilated”’.? 

How can this be achieved? 

Unlike most other bourgeois ideologists, Buchholz treats 
ideological principles as reflecting certain social needs, albeit 
somewhat superficially. “For the time being the principles of 
the West and of communist ideology are in a state of uncom- 
promising conflict, which can be expected to grow even fiercer 
since communist ideology is now directed towards the satisfac- 
tion of certain needs of the world that lies ahead of us, while 
the West is hardly facing the problems of the future. This 
imbalance explains the mutual distrust.” 

Failing to see the conflict of class interests that lies behind 
this conflict of ideas, Buchholz treats the present struggle be- 
tween the two ideologies as a temporary phenomenon, relating 
only to the present stage of the relations between capitalism 
and communism. He considers that the struggle is at present 
inevitable, but that in the future, when a balance of needs and 
interests is achieved, the mutual distrust will disappear, a com- 
mon ideological foundation will be created, and peace will 
be firmly established. Thus, according to Buchholz, “the spiritual 
polemic between East and West is an inevitable gateway 
beyond which lies the road to a better future”.4 


1 Tbid., p. 53. 
2 Ibid. 
3 Tbid., p. 10. 
4 Ibid. 


283 

















The utopian nature of such views is quite plain. Ideology is 
the expression of basic class interests, so that, however much the 
international situation may change, whatever alterations there 
may be in the relationship of forces in the international arena, 
the ideology of the working class and that of the bourgeoisie 
will remain implacably hostile to one another. Neither circum- 
stances nor time can reconcile them, for the interests of the 
exploiters and the interests of the exploited, the interests of 
capitalist and worker, are irreconcilable. 

Certainly, it is true to say that a change in the relationship 
of world forces influences the course of the ideological conflict. 
It is becoming increasingly apparent that the imperialist bour- 
geoisie’s hopes of achieving a military victory over communism 
are vain, and this serves to undermine the positions of the 
“ultras” and detract from the popularity of their ultra-reac- 
tionary ideology, causing more and more bourgeois to support 
the principle of peaceful coexistence upheld by the Communists. 
But the fact that both Communists and some bourgeois ideolo- 
gists have a common commitment to peace and peaceful coexis- 
tence does not mean “ideological peace”, for the interests and 
ideology of the working class and the bourgeoisie remain as 
mutually exclusive and irreconcilable as ever. 

B. Some ideologists of the middle bourgeoisie, and especially 
the social-reformists, while recognising the desirability of peace- 
ful coexistence, maintain that ideological conflict is incompati- 
ble with true coexistence which requires ideological peace. 

A most forthright expression of the conception of “ideological 
coexistence” is to be found in an article in the press and a 
brochure by the British Labour MP Christopher Mayhew. 

Basically, Mr. Mayhew’s view is as follows: “Cold war is 
better than hot war: and competitive coexistence is better than 
cold war. But competitive coexistence is in itself an inferior 
conception, unsuited to the new age which we are now enter- 
ing.”2 What does Mr. Mayhew find so eminently unsatisfactory 
about this conception? In his view, the present communist con- 
ception of peaceful coexistence is disruptive and dangerous, 
since while it rejects the assumption that war is inevitable it 
does not preclude a fierce struggle against capitalism. Mr. 


{C. Mayhew, “Coexistence—the West’s Answer’, The Guardian, 
November 7, 1961, p. 9, and Coexistence Plus. A Positive Approach to 
World Peace, London, 1962. 

2 This and the following quotations, unless otherwise stated, are from 
the brochure. 


284 








Mayhew’s brochure is an attempt to point out, in particular, 
that “the ideological struggle on which this conception insists 
is sterile and meaningless and poisons East-West relations’”.! 

Mayhew bases his argument on the assertion that it is mean- 
ingless to speak of a Communist World and a Capitalist World. 
“This communist-capitalist propaganda struggle is based on 
increasingly unreal assumptions—in particular the assumption 
that the ideologies of the world can be divided into two groups 
and that these two groups can be neatly labelled ‘communist’ 
and ‘capitalist’ (or ‘free’).’”* 

This view is not a new one, but it is no more convincing for 
its age. No one is trying to dispute the perfectly obvious fact 
that “the ideologies and social systems of the world are ex- 
tremely varied”. But it is equally incorrect to go to the opposite 
extreme, as Mayhew does, echoing several of his colleagues in 
the Labour Party—like Richard Crossland and John Strachey— 
and suggest that ‘‘capitalism has become socialism”, that “this 
variety is increasing, on both sides of the Iron Curtain; that 
capitalist-type freedom is increasing in some communist coun- 
tries, and communist-type planning in some capitalist countries; 
and that, in fact, the whole conception of a clear-cut ‘com- 
munism’ confronting a clear-cut ‘capitalism’ across an un- 
bridgeable gulf is increasingly unscientific and will soon become 
obviously absurd” .3 

This is simply a new variation on the popular theme of cros- 
sing capitalism with socialism to produce a “hybrid society”. 

Mayhew does not limit himself to generalisations, but ex- 
pounds his views in detail, comparing them point by point with 
the corresponding Marxist interpretation. In so doing he comes 
across what he considers to be three false premises. It should 
perhaps be mentioned here in this connection, that Mr. Mayhew 
is not overscrupulous about presenting his opponents’ standpoint 
accurately. 

One of these premises he holds up for criticism concerns the 
social structure of the present-day world. “The first of these 
assumptions is that there are only two basic ideologies or social 
systems.”4 Mayhew emphatically rejects this. ‘Military power 
is polarised in the world, but social systems are not; and the 
communist thesis that they are is a typical error of Marxist 


Labia, p. i 
2 Ibid, p. 2. 
3 Tbid. 

4 Tbidy peo: 


285 











dialectical thinking, with its consuming passion for arbitrary 
division by two. In fact, of course, the social systems of the 
world are extremely varied, and the variety is increasing.”! 

Mayhew’s reference to the dialectic can hardly be said to 
make his ideas more credible. For a start, the Communists have 
never had a particular passion for “arbitrary division by two” 
and, moreover, they have never disputed the fact that there are 
other social systems in the world besides socialism and capital- 
ism, systems that combine elements of feudalism and capitalism, 
or primitive tribal society and capitalism, as can be clearly seen 
from a look at the social structure of many African states. 

But the true task of science is not to make an inventory of 
all the social systems existing in the world and note how varied 
they are, but to determine the essence of the major socio-eco- 
nomic systems and the main direction of social development. If 
one approaches the matter from this point of view, it is only 
by deliberately turning a blind eye to the facts or distorting 
them that one can deny that socialism and capitalism are the 
major social systems in the world today, and that it is the 
conflict between them—economic, political and ideological— 
that is the chief factor underlying social development. 

Indeed, this is admitted not only by the Communists: it is a 
basic premise of all frankly bourgeois ideology. Naturally, the 
social-reformists are loth to admit it, since it would be tanta- 
mount to an admission of the unsoundness of their whole policy 
of reconciling class antagonisms and subduing the working 
class to the bourgeoisie. But this does not give them carte 
blanche for manipulating the facts as they please and present- 
ing a picture of reality that suits the conception of their choice. 
One cannot play about with facts with impunity: life has a 
nasty habit of taking revenge on those who do. 

Another premise, or as he calls it “assumption”, that May- 
hew attacks concerns the differences between communism and 
capitalism. “The second false assumption is that the gulf be- 
tween ‘communism’ and ‘capitalism’ is unbridgeable.”* In his 
opinion, “the gulf between most communist and non-communist 
countries is undoubtedly narrowing and will probably continue 
to narrow further in the years ahead”? 

What does Mayhew refer to in support of this view? Once 


1 C. Mayhew, op. cit., p. 10. 
2 [bid., p. 13. 
3 Ibid., p. 14. 


286 





am eee eT OO -— hm” 10 TT 


again, he is remarkably unoriginal, adducing such “similarities” 
as socialist planning and capitalist state regulation of the econ- 
omy, the existence of profit in both socialist and capitalist 
economy, commodity production in the socialist countries, and 
so on. 

But these arguments are all rather vague and carry little 
weight. The existence of not one or two, but even dozens of 
formally similar phenomena in capitalist and socialist society 
does not alter in the slightest the fact that the basic social 
features of the two systems are diametrically opposed. They 
will continue to be opposed for the simple reason that the 
development of the two systems is not movement along two 
separate courses gradually drawing closer and closer together, 
but the revolutionary transition of one into the other, of capi- 
talism into socialism. 

If we accept, as we must, that ownership of the means of 
production forms the basis of social relations, how can we deny 
that public ownership in socialist society and private capitalist 
ownership in bourgeois society are diametrically opposed in 
their essence, social role, and the nature of the social relations 
based on them? It is on these directly opposite forms of owner- 
ship that the directly opposite social and political systems of 
capitalism and socialism rest. The presence of certain features 
common to the two is due partly to the fact that communism is 
not yet sufficiently mature and is making use in the first phase 
of its development of economic categories inherited from the 
preceding stage, capitalism, imbuing them with new content— 
categories such as “commodity”, “money”, “profit”, etc., and 
partly to the fact that in the capitalist system, growing cen- 
tralisation and concentration of production has made necessary 
a certain amount of state control bearing a similarity to plan- 
ning, state interference in the economy and so on. 

This does not mean that capitalism and socialism are drawing 
together: it merely shows that the material-economic prerequi- 
sites for the new society are maturing in the depths of present- 
day capitalist production. As history advances and communism 
develops, the difference between communism and capitalism 
will increase, while the revolutionary process of the transforma- 
tion of capitalism into socialism will develop more and more 
rapidly. 

Non-Marxists, with their idealist outlook, cannot or will not 
understand that the ideological struggle is the inevitable reflec- 
tion of the class conflict engendered by socio-economic con- 


287 








tradictions. It cannot be brought to an end at will, for it is not 
brought about and kept going by the evil intrigues of revolu- 
tionaries, it is not imposed on mankind by the Communists: it 
is simply a historically necessary social product. Class society 
has been in existence for thousands of years, and throughout 
these millennia the class conflict has continued in its basic 
forms—the economic, political and ideological. Not only did it 
begin long before the Communists came on the scene: it began 
long before there was even such a thing as a working class, or 
capitalism. Capitalist society engendered the class conflict, 
including the ideological struggle, between the working class 
and the bourgeoisie. 

Obviously the ideological struggle is waged consciously, and 
is controlled by people, but its historical necessity and inevita- 
bility remain the decisive factor. 

Expounding his conception of ideological coexistence, May- 
hew advances two arguments in its favour. 

The first argument is that the ideological struggle is an 
obstacle to peaceful coexistence, and prevents co-operation 
between the socialist and the capitalist countries. 

The idea that the ideological struggle—‘“‘the ideological 
myths”—lies at the root of international tension and is the chief 
obstacle to peace and disarmament runs like a scarlet thread 
through the whole brochure. Mayhew calls upon the countries 
of the world “to abandon their foolish capitalist-communist 
propaganda struggle, and learn to tolerate each other’s ideas 
and institutions”. This appeal is directed particularly to the 
socialist countries, and referring to the Communists, Mayhew 
writes: “But why, if they feel that friendship and co-operation 
are desirable at the interstate level, do they not take the next 
logical step and accept ideological coexistence as well?’’? In 
his opinion, “if the Communists insist on imposing an ideolog- 
ical struggle on the world, the possibilities of friendly co-opera- 
tion are limited”? 

We need hardly return to the fact that the Communists 
do not impose the ideological struggle on the world. Let us 
instead pause for a moment to examine Mayhew’s thesis that 
the ideological struggle hinders the possibility of friendly co- 
operation. 


1 C. Mayhew, op. cit., p. 2. 
2 Thid., p. 16. 
2 Ibid: p: 15. 


288 


| Mayhew is one of those ideologists who regard the ideolog- 
ical struggle as an important instrument of cold war, as an 
instrument for increasing international tension. He, like so 
many others, tends to forget that this is only one interpretation 

| of its essence and role, that it is by no means the only one. 
They go on from there to represent the Communists, who 
recognise the inevitability of the ideological struggle, as advo- 
cates of cold war and international tension. 

But the Communists have always insisted on the fundamental 
difference between cold war as a means of maintaining and 
increasing international tension, and ideological struggle as a 
means of expressing class standpoints. The Communists reject 
cold war and hold that it can be brought to an end. But they 
insist that the ideological struggle cannot be brought to an end 
as long as there exist antagonistic classes. Therefore, any 
attempt to accuse the Communists of stirring up war hysteria 
on the grounds that they insist on the inevitability of the ideolog- 
ical struggle and wage that struggle is completely unfounded, 
and can only be put down either to ignorance of the elementary 
principles of communism or to deliberate falsification. 

Mayhew’s second argument in favour of ideological coexis- 
tence is that “besides being unscientific and dangerous, the 
ideological struggle is also expensive”’.! 

As for the ideological struggle being unscientific, Mr. May- 
hew does not make it at all clear what he means by this sweep- 
ing statement. If he means that it is “unlawful”, we have 
already discussed that question earlier. If he means that 
“unscientific” ways and means are used in the struggle, then we 
have a subject for discussion. 

In this question we come up against the qualitatively different 
character of Marxist and bourgeois ideology—the former, pro- 
gressive and scientific, and the latter, reactionary and unscien- 
tific. This predetermines the means by which each of these 
ideologies tries to win people’s minds. The Communists have 
always been firmly opposed to the use of falsehood, slander, 
distortion of facts, and other such methods employed by bour- 
geois ideology in the struggle with its rivals, against sordid 
devices such as are used by bourgeois propaganda to pull the 
wool over the eyes of the man in the street. The Communists 
have always stressed the need for waging the ideological strug- 
gle by fair means, which is perfectly understandable since they 


1 Ibid., p. 19. 


19-203 





a oe oe 


know that their ideas represent the interests of the masses and | 
are confirmed by history. It is because bourgeois interests are 
reactionary that the bourgeois ideologists have to resort to false- 
hood, in the form of lies, half-truths and distortions of the 
truth in order to win the support of the masses, for there is no 
other way open to them today to justify their reactionary 
interests and aims. Thus, while holding it necessary to expose 

the falsehood of bourgeois ideology, the Communists have no 
illusions as to the possibility of the latter being any other than 

what it is. 

As for the “expense” involved, although the bourgeoisie 
might express occasional annoyance at it being so “unwarrant- 
ed”, this does not prevent them from meeting it. The bour- 
geoisie is perfectly aware that it is thanks to their ideological 
influence that the exploiters are able to maintain their hold over 
the masses, and most of the appeals for a reduction of expendi- 
ture on the struggle that are heard from time to time in the 
bourgeois camp are purely rhetorical. Whether Mr. Mayhew 
likes it or not, the ideological struggle cannot be excluded from 
social life. 

What positive programme does Mr. Mayhew offer for ensur- 
ing peace? He expresses the opinion that “three vital things” 
must be added to the Marxist conception of peaceful coexis- 
tence: “ideological coexistence, an end to the outdated, bitter 
propaganda battle between so-called ‘capitalism’ and so-called 
‘communism’”; “genuinely free East-West contacts”; and 
“active co-operation, instead of sterile rivalry, between com- 
munist and non-communist governments’’.! 

As for the first “plus”, namely, “ideological coexistence”, we 
have already examined it, and shown how it is not only unac- 
ceptable to Communists, but is a physical impossibility. 

As for the second, if Mr. Mayhew means co-operation on the 
basis of equal rights and mutual benefit, the Communists have 
never had any objections. On the contrary, it was they who 
kept on insisting that peaceful coexistence must mean not just 
the absence of war, but all-round active co-operation in trade, 
culture and science between countries with different social 
systems. It was the imperialists, not the Communists, who im- 
posed sanctions on trade with the socialist countries, it is the 
US imperialists who are trying to impose a blockade on Cuba, 
it is the bourgeois governments that are unwilling to co-operate 








! C. Mayhew, op. cit., p. 1. 











with the socialist countries on a programme of controlled 
disarmament. One could go on and on. Mr. Mayhew’s second 
appeal is thus clearly addressed to the wrong side. 

The genuine “free contacts’ Mr. Mayhew intends is the 
advancement of bourgeois ideas within the frontiers of com- 
munism. He admits this quite frankly when he writes (in his 
article in The Guardian) that the most important task facing 
non-Communists like himself today is to encourage communist 
countries to continue along the path of “revisionism” towards 
a conception of peaceful coexistence appropriate to the nuclear 
age. 

This completely contradicts all the “arguments” in favour 
of “ideological coexistence’. For to support the dissemination 
of such ideas is none other than to engage in the ideological 
struggle which Mr. Mayhew hypocritically claims to be 
opposed to. 

Upon closer examination, therefore, the conception of 
“ideological coexistence” proves to be no more than a means 
of “ideological appeasement” of the Communists by submitting 
them to bourgeois ideas. 

The Communists have never agreed, and never shall agree 
to this kind of “free contacts”. The bourgeoisie and their hire- 
lings may be worried about the paucity of opportunities for 
propagating their ideas in the socialist countries, but they need 
not expect the Communists to facilitate their task for them by 
agreeing to “ideological coexistence” thereby clearing the 
ground for the dissemination of bourgeois ideas where com- 
munist ideology now holds sway. 


The tendency to regard the ideological struggle as a major 
means of combating communism runs like a scarlet thread 
through all the various bourgeois views on the subject of peace- 
ful coexistence and the ideological struggle, and one of the 
chief objectives is ideological disarmament of the Communists. 

It is fairly obvious why. Ascribing to ideas a decisive role in 
shaping the course of history, bourgeois ideologists believe that 
by “disarming” the Communists in the ideological field, they 
can win the ideological struggle and thereby alter the actual 


1 The Guardian, Nov. 7, 1961. 


19* 291 





a ee 


course of social development, which is definitely not to the 
advantage of the bourgeoisie. 

However, this strategy is fundamentally unsound and cannot 
possibly work, since it is based on the fallacious subjective- 
idealist concept of historical development, which greatly exag- 
gerates the role of the ideological struggle, viewing it as the 
determinant factor. In point of fact, the ideological struggle is 
but the spiritual reflection of the material struggle of social 
forces, the class conflict. It is objective material tendencies 
which determine the direction of social development, and condi- 
tion the clash of social forces, including its reflection—the 
ideological struggle. Thus, whether bourgeois ideologists like 
it or not, peaceful coexistence between countries with different 
social systems of necessity involves social struggle in all its 
forms, except that of armed struggle between the socialist and 
capitalist countries. In other words, peaceful coexistence always 
has been and remains class conflict waged in various forms, 
including that of ideological struggle. 








Chapter XV 


MODERN 
CATHOLICISM 

AND PROBLEMS 

OF WAR AND PEACE 


The views of the Catholic hierarchy, not only on religion but 
also on major socio-political issues of our time are constantly 
impressed on believers from the pulpit and through religious 
literature. These opinions are frequently advanced as dogma, 
binding on all Catholics. It is no wonder, therefore, that the 
bourgeois reactionaries should invoke the support of the Catholic 
Church, which has always been their willing accomplice. 

After the Second World War, the Catholic hierarchy in 
capitalist countries used their influence over the faithful to lend 
support to the aggressive policy of the imperialists. This was 
a continuation of the line the Vatican took during the war 
when it gave de facto support to the nazi coalition. In the 
immediate post-war years the pastors gave their blessing to 
nuclear weapons, especially while the United States still had 
the monopoly of the atom bomb. The Vatican made it quite 
clear that it did not consider it sinful to use nuclear weapons 
against the socialist countries. However, the militant churchmen 
took good care to play up to the longing of the peoples for 
peace, and tried to present preparation for nuclear war as 
being in the interests of preserving peace. 

The arguments employed were the following. Firstly, war 
was regarded as just and necessary for the defence of the faith 
from the threat of communism. At a session of the Catholic 
Academy of Bavaria in February 1959, a Jesuit priest, Gund- 


293 





5 = - “Ses OF 


lach, former adviser to Pope Pius XII, declared that there 
are some values for the defence of which it is permissible and 
not immoral to use nuclear weapons. According to him, a 
nuclear war waged on behalf of “Christian” values is moral 
and theologically justified.2 By “Christian values” he means 
the capitalist system and its institutions, which the Church has 
a vested interest in preserving and strengthening. 

Secondly, statesmen were absolved from all responsibility 
for causing a nuclear war. Gundlach assured them that God 
would assume full responsibility. In his zeal to justify nuclear 
war, he cynically declared: “Even if the world should thereby 
be destroyed, this would not be a valid argument against our 
argumentation. For, to begin with, we are absolutely certain 
that the world will not last eternally, and moreover, the end of 
the world is not our responsibility. We can therefore say that 
the Lord, who through His Providence has let us reach a situa- 
tion where we are bound to give this testimony of our fidelity 
to the order He has ordained, will likewise assume the respon- 
sibility.’ 

Thirdly, these clerical apologists of nuclear war obliterate 
the distinction between conventional and nuclear weapons, and 
insist that there is no reason why the Church should revise its 
traditional attitude to war. Thus, we find in the American 
Jesuit journal America a criticism of those theologists who 
oppose the application of traditional Christian doctrines to 
nuclear war on the grounds that such a war is totally different 
from a war with bows and arrows for forgetting that it is no 
longer a question of defence from the Christian Tzar of Russia.’ 
The journal considered the use of any weapons of mass destruc- 
tion to be perfectly permissible in a war against the Soviet 
Union. 

This view is also defended by the West German churchman 
Schardt, who maintains that “the development of military 
techniques does not make killing people any more sinful and 
is not a reason for regarding this power or the use of force 
as an evil in itself”.5 

These views are attacked even by Catholic theologists opposed 





4 Documents. Revue des questions allemandes, Paris, 1959, No. 3, 
p. 283. 

2 Ibid. 

3 bid. 

4 See America, March 17, 1962, p. 781. 

5 Rheinischer Merkur, October 17, 1958. 


294 











to nuclear war. Thus, the authors of Nuclear Weapons and 
Christian Conscience write that the H-bomb differs from all 
other weapons in that it is intended for mass destruction and 
is therefore amoral. There is no defence against it and the 
strategy of retaliation cannot be regarded as an effective theory 
of defence.! 

Another thesis used to justify nuclear war was the argument 
that it was “the lesser of two evils’, the other being commu- 
nism, This was the view expressed by Pella, a leading member 
of the Italian Christian-Democratic Party, quoted as saying: 
“The nuclear destruction of Italy is preferable to a communist 
victory. ’”2 

Professor Correa de Oliveiro of the Catholic University of 
Sao Paolo argued in favour of this view in the newspaper 
Catolicismo: “It may well come to pass that one or several 
Western nations will be obliged to choose between two worlds, 
i.e., between modern war inside or outside their country, con- 
ventional war or nuclear war, with all its horrors, and recogni- 
tion of a communist regime. In that case we should choose the 
lesser evil.... Loss of faith is a greater evil even than the 
possibility of annihilation through nuclear war.”? 

An extremely hostile attitude to communism and the social- 
ist countries was largely responsible for the bellicose views of 
clerical ideologists, who dreamed of a new Crusade. against 
the socialist world. These views were supported by the Holy 
See and during the pontificate of Pius XII, the Vatican’s stand 
on questions of war and peace was identical with that of 
aggressive forces in the USA and other capitalist countries. 
Pope Pius XII and his intimates were prepared to give their 
blessing to any weapon that would be directed against com- 
munism. The faithful were insistently prevailed upon to believe 
that the victory of communism would mean the destruction of 
Christianity and a nuclear war would thus be a war in the 
defence of the Faith. 

At the same time it was insisted that atheism was the main 
cause of increasing international tension. Cardinal Cushing, 
Archbishop of Boston, declared that: “Authentic coexistence 
would be possible only if Communism renounced atheistic 





4 Nuclear Weapons and Christian Conscience, London, 1961, p. 33. 

2 [’Unita, April 6, 1959, p. 1. 

3 Quoted in World Marxist Review: Problems of Peace and Socialism, 
August, 1965, No. 8, p. 53. 


295 








materialism and the anti-religious policies deriving there- 
from.”! 

The clerical ideologists identified atheism with amorality. 
In Dictionary of Moral Theology we find this statement: 
“Atheism is the denial of the existence of God; and since God 
is the basis of the metaphysical postulate of the moral order, 
atheism also implies a denial of morality.”2 From this it is 
inferred that it is impossible to base relations with socialist 
countries on principles of morality and law, and that peaceful 
coexistence between the socialist and capitalist countries is thus 
out of the question. 

In the justification of nuclear war various religious concep- 
tions of war are adduced which help the bourgeoisie conceal 
from the masses the aims of aggressive wars, their class content 
and their connection with the policies of the exploiter classes. 
Religious ideologists tend to make a great mystery of war, 
its nature and causes. They present it as a manifestation of 
Divine Providence, deriving above all from man’s sinful- 
ness, from “original sin’. “Wars are the mysteries of his- 
tory: they break out for complex and often incontrollable rea- 
sons.’ 

It would be wrong, however, in examining the position of 
the Catholic Church over issues of war and peace, to overlook 
the fact that the views of the hierarchy differ considerably from 
those of many of the ordinary clergy. Part of the Church 
hierarchy are closely connected with capitalist ruling classes and 
support the policies of the latter, who are only too pleased to 
have religious camouflage for their aggressive plans. This is 
particularly the case in the USA and West Germany. The lower 
clergy, who have greater contact with the mass of the faithful, 
are mostly for peace, as indeed are certain members of the 
Church hierarchy who take a realistic view of the present world 
situation. 

Moreover, the Church is not only the higher and lower 
clergy: it is also millions of believers who, while accepting reli- 
gion, reject the policy of preparing nuclear war. 

A great change in the attitude of the Catholic Church to 
questions of war and peace took place during the pontificate 
of Pope John XXIII, when the Vatican began to condemn the 


1 The Pilot, May 7, 1960, p. 8. 
2 Dictionary of Moral Theology, Westminster, Maryland, 1962, p. 104. 
3 Idea, Rome, No. 10, October 1961, p. 654. 


296 








policy of preparing nuclear war and to disassociate itself from 
the aggressive forces of imperialism. 

Far-sighted Church leaders saw the danger of support for 
the nuclear warmongers as compromising the Church in the 
eyes of the faithful, and felt the time had come to revise 
Vatican policy with regard to questions of war and peace. 
This change took place under the impact of tremendous social 
changes, above all a great upswing in the power of the forces 
of peace and socialism, and also reflected the attitude of those 
sections of the bourgeoisie who felt nuclear war to be contrary 
to their interests. The Main Document adopted by the Interna- 
tional Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties in Moscow 
in 1969 noted that the “contradictions are also growing deeper 
within the ruling circles of the imperialist countries, between 
the most belligerent groups who gamble on extreme measures, 
on war, and those who, reckoning with the new relationship 
of class forces in the world, the growing might of the socialist 
countries, tend to take a more realistic approach to interna- 
tional problems and to solve them in the spirit of peaceful 
coexistence between states with different systems”! 

But the main thing that forced the Vatican to change its 
stand was pressure from the mass of the faithful. 

The change was part of the general evolution of Catholi- 
cism, the process of its “revival” and adaptation to modern 
conditions. Church ideologists were forced to recognise the fact 
that the Church was losing its hold on the masses, which was 
certainly due partly to the stand of the Church hierarchy on 
questions of war and peace and its negative attitude to the 
policy of peaceful coexistence. A profound religious crisis is 
shaking the time-hallowed religious conceptions of the Catholic 
Church and several other Churches and religions. In the inter- 
ests of “revival”, the Catholic Church is forced to renounce 
some of its traditions and rulings that people find unacceptable 
today. 

Numerous Church leaders in the capitalist countries speak 
out in support of peace, and the number has greatly increa- 
sed of those who do not limit themselves to uttering platitu- 
des but take an active part in the peace movement of the 
masses. 

At the same time another tendency is still to be noted in 


! International Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties, Moscow 
1969, p. 18. 


297 








religious organisations in bourgeois countries, again expressed 
both in words and deeds, and that is the tendency to propagate 
war and support the policies of the imperialist powers as truly 
“Christian”. This tendency of part of the Church hierarchy 
widens the gap between the leaders of the Church and the faith- 
ful, aggravating the contradiction between them. 

Pope John XXIIVs declarations on peace, and in particular 
the Encyclical “Mater et Magistra”, aroused great interest all 
over the world. This letter, which taken as a whole represented 
an appeal for peace, contained statements which, although 
perhaps less categorically than in the past, nevertheless asserted 
the old idea of Pax christianae. Take the following, for example: 
“The absence of mutual trust is explained by the fact that 
men, especially those who shoulder the most responsibility, are 
inspired in their activity by different or radically opposed out- 
looks on life. Some of these outlooks, unfortunately do not 
recognise the existence of a moral order, transcendental, 
universal, absolute, equal and valid for all. There is thus no 
possibility of meeting and understanding one another in the 
light of a single law of justice admitted and followed by 
all.” 

In ascribing international tension to mutual distrust, the 
Encyclical insists that only one side is to blame, the side that 
does not accept the moral order proclaimed by the Church. 
This clearly implies the Soviet Union. The Encyclical regards 
the difference between the morality of the two systems, rather 
than the aggressive policy of imperialism, as the reason for the 
conflict between them. Its authors approached war purely in 
terms of moral criteria. While indicating the danger of nuclear 
war, it does not call for a struggle against that danger. 

In later statements Pope John XXIII renounced the thesis 
that atheism was to blame for international tension. 

The Church’s new course with regard to peace was patent 
in Pope John’s Encyclical “Pacem in Terris” (Peace on Earth),? 

The Pope decided that differences in social systems were not 
to be seen as an obstacle to peaceful coexistence. He renounced 
the conception of Pax christianae preached by his predecessor, 
according to which war was regarded mainly as a Divine 
punishment and the result of growing lack of faith and the 
abandonment of religion. This conception not only rejected the 


1 La Civiltd Cattolica, August 5, 1961, Vol. III, p. 267. 
2 Ibid., April 20, 1963, p. 129. 


298 





possibility of peaceful coexistence between countries with dif- 
ferent social systems: it also served to justify aggressive war 
against the socialist countries. 

Pope John’s Encyclical was addressed not only to the clergy 
and Christians all over the world, but to all men of good will. 
The Pope called for an end to the arms race, and disarmament 
under effective international control. “Justice, wisdom and 
humanity demand that the arms race be stopped; that existing 
arms be simultaneously and reciprocally reduced; that nuclear 
weapons be banned; and that disarmament be finally effected 
by general agreement under a system of effective controls.” 

The Pope rejected the theory of “the balance of fear”, which 
some churchmen were in favour of. “It has become customary 
to justify the arms race on the grounds that peace is only pos- 
sible today if it is based on the balance of forces. Thus, if one 
political community arms itself, other political communities 
must keep up and arm themselves too. And if one political 
community produces atomic weapons, the others must also pro- 
duce atomic weapons of equal destructive power. As a result, 
people live beneath the nightmare of a hurricane that could be 
unleashed at any moment causing unimaginable misery.””! 

The Encyclical “Pacem in Terris” testified to considerable 
progress in the attitude of the Catholic Church on issues of war 
and peace. As the French Marxist André Moine remarked: 
“Only yesterday the Church saw war as an opportunity to 
destroy socialism: today it sees it as the danger of the destruc- 
tion of christianity.”2 

While welcoming the general attitude displayed in the En- 
cyclical, there are a few things to be noted about the concept of 
peace it contains. Firstly, it extends the concept of peaceful 
coexistence to beliefs and classes. The Pope speaks of peace 
between creeds, nations and classes and, accordingly, Church 
ideologists accept peaceful coexistence as implying peace be- 
tween the antagonistic classes in capitalist society and between 
bourgeois and socialist ideology as well as between na- 
tions. 

The Marxist concept of peaceful coexistence is based on the 
thesis that disagreements between socialist and capitalist coun- 
tries can be solved by peaceful means despite fierce class con- 


1 Tbid., pp. 128-29. 
2 A. Moine, Apres “Pacem in Terris’. Chrétiens et communistes, 
Paris, 1965, p. 95. 


299 








flict in the bourgeois countries: it is a form of ideological strug- 
gle and economic competition between the two systems, and 
does not involve renunciation of the class struggle or the na- 
tional liberation struggle. 

Pope John’s course towards peaceful coexistence, which found 
its clearest expression in the Encyclical “Pacem in Ter- 
ris” met with opposition on the part of the more reactionary 
elements in the Catholic Church, who continue to cling to the 
policy of cold war and preparation of aggression. Lo Svizzero, 
in his book, The Church after John XXIII, published in Italy 
in 1963, accuses the Pope of controlling a new opium for the 
people—the idea of peace on earth—thereby helping destroy 
the Catholic Church and playing into the hands of the Com- 
munists. 

Those opposed to the Pope’s policy did their best to see to 
it that the Encyclical got as little attention as possible. A letter 
in The Guardian claimed that “most Catholics in England are 
still ignorant of its content”, which tended to suggest that the 
Catholic hierarchy in Britain was loth to follow the course pro- 
posed by the Pope over matters of war and peace.! 

The French Jesuit journal Etudes wrote that the text of the 
Encyclical had not been brought to the attention of the Holy 
Chancellery prior to publication since its leaders made no 
secret of their opposition to the neutral stand of Pope John 
XXIII? 

There were even attempts to distort the text of the Encyc- 
lical. A speaker at the Congress of ‘the Communist Party of 
Germany in 1963 noted that “the Catholic information agency 
crudely distorted two important passages of the Encyclical. It 
saw to it that the stress fell on the theological problems, trying 
to gloss over the question of peaceful coexistence”. A serious 
conflict developed within the Catholic Church over the question 
of the Church’s stand on war and peace. 

The question came up for discussion at the III and IV ses- 
sions of the Second Vatican Council, in 1964 and 1965 respec- 
tively. At the very first session the Pope had declared that it 
was necessary to promote the creation of a new atmosphere in 
international affairs and eliminate all conflicts, especially war, 


1 The Guardian, April 14, 1964. 
2 Etudes, Paris, June 1963, p. 407. 


3 Parteitag der Kommunistischen Partei Deutschlands, Berlin, 1963, 
S. 261. 


300 








that “scourge of the nations’. The Pope called for decisive 
steps towards ensuring lasting peace. An appeal to the peoples 
of the world was adopted at this first session in which the par- 
ticipants pledged their support for Pope John XXIII’s call for 
peace, for co-operation, mutual understanding and rapproche- 
ment between the nations. 

At the III and IV sessions a fierce struggle developed over 
the question of the attitude the Catholic Church should adopt 
towards nuclear weapons. Opinions were sharply divided over 
this issue. Many of the Bishops, particularly those from France, 
Holland and Belgium, were for condemning war as a means of 
implementing national policy, and spoke in favour of banning 
nuclear weapons. 

Scheme XIII (draft decree), which came up for discus- 
sion at the III Session of the Council, held in the autumn of 
1964, condemned nuclear war and criticised policies based on 
the balance of forces and deterrence. It contained a demand 
for the abolition of nuclear weapons, and urged support for all 
international organisations concerned with preventing war and 
halting the arms race. It also mentioned the need for the peace- 
ful settlement of all international disputes. 

The new draft version of this Scheme XIII submitted for 
discussion at the IV Session contained certain inconsistencies. 
While condemning total war as being war against God and 
man, declaring the balance of fear to be a monstrous idea, and 
urging the destruction of modern weapons, it at the same time 
justified the possession of nuclear weapons where the sole aim 
was to deter aggression, and countenanced their use, in 
the spirit of traditional Catholic doctrine, to counter aggres- 
sion. 

The section of the scheme that concerns the question of war 
and peace did however reflect the sentiments of those elements 
in the Catholic Church that take a realistic view of the existing 
relationship of forces and the danger of nuclear war for all 
mankind, and thus for the Church. 

There were also those who spoke in favour of what they 
regarded to be “just” wars, expressed their disagreement with 
Scheme XIII, and argued that a nuclear war waged by the 
Western Powers would be just since its aim would be the de- 
fence of Christianity. 

Reactionary Catholic theoreticians are less concerned with 
preventing another world war than with deciding in what cir- 
cumstances it would be justified from the point of view of 


301 














Catholic morality. The Jesuit de Soras declares that “‘theologists 
can justify a state that attacks first if in so doing it is pursuing 
the aim of asserting its undisputed rights after having tried 
all peaceful means. They require that the reason for resorting 
to force was serious enough to justify the evil caused by military 
operations.”’! 

At the Vatican Council, Bishop Hannan of the United States 
insisted that the Church should not object to the limited use of 
nuclear weapons: “At present there exist nuclear weapons of 
fairly limited destructive power.... There are weapons with 
a radius of action of 1.3 to 2.5 miles and a destructive power 
of 40 tons of ITNT. These weapons are designed to destroy set 
military objectives while avoiding the devastation caused by 
large-scale nuclear explosions.”2 

Bishop Hannan and Archbishop Beck of Liverpool demanded 
the suppression of the paragraphs mentioning the need to 
renounce nuclear weapons. They also disagreed with the state- 
ment condemning nuclear, bacteriological and chemical weapons, 
contained in Scheme XIII. Both condemned ‘“‘extreme pacifism”, 
by which they intended all open opposition to nuclear weapons. 
Some of those who spoke camouflaged justification of war 
against the socialist countries with appeals for peace. Thus, Car- 
dinal Ottaviani, a die-hard Conservative who had frequently 
spoken in defence of imperialist aggression, deemed it neces- 
sary to appear as a supporter of peace. But his “peace-loving” 
message delivered to the Council really amounted to an appeal 
for war against totalitarian states, by which he meant the social- 
ist countries. At the same time he condemned just national 
liberation wars as guerilla wars, thereby distorting their nature 
and aim. 

The final text of the fifth section of “The Church in the 
Modern World” passed by the Vatican Council condemned 
massacre (stressing that it is the massacre of ethnic minorities 
that is intended) by any means whatsoever. Paragraph 80, 
dealing with total war, condemns indiscriminate devastation of 
cities and whole areas since this comes outside the pale of legi- 
timate defence. 

Section Five bears the stamp of a compromise with the 
United States Catholic hierarchy. At the Council, and in par- 
ticular at the Fourth Session, the US hierarchy spearheaded a 


1 A. de Soras, Morale Internazionale, Catania, 1963, p. 90. 
2 La Documentation catholique, 1964, No. 1438, col. 1609. 


802 





drive to prevent it being passed, distributing appeals to par- 
ticipants to vote against it. 

The XIII Scheme represents something of a step backwards 
from the “Pacem in Terris” Encyclical, in view of the inclusion 
of the point on the right to use nuclear weapons for defence. 
Nevertheless, the passing of “The Church in the Modern 
World” was of great importance as giving an important impulse 
to the peace movement. 

Many of those who spoke at the Council, unlike Han- 
nan and Beck, showed a realistic view of the world situation, 
and an understanding of and sympathy with the longing of the 
faithful to prevent nuclear war. Thus, Cardinal Alfrink (Hol- 
land) said: “Not only the ‘dirty bomb’, but also what is called 
the ‘clean bomb’ should clearly be condemned. General discus- 
sion of such serious problems could lead to misconceptions 
among certain sections of the public. It is necessary to express 
ourselves with equal clarity on just and unjust war. Can a war 
with atomic weapons be called ‘just’?! 

The Patriarch of Antioch, Maximus IV, said: “The threat 
of destruction hangs over the whole of mankind. It is a question 
of atomic weapons.... People often speak of just war, but 
what motives could morally justify devastation tantamount to 
a universal cataclysm! Is it permissible to destroy civilisation 
and whole peoples on the pretext of defending them?’2 The 
Patriarch called upon the Council to condemn the use of nuc- 
lear, bacteriological and chemical weapons. 

It should be noted that these praiseworthy declarations are 
unfortunately not always accompanied by real support for the 
forces of peace. The Vatican has never condemned the aggres- 
sive NATO bloc, or the dangerous policy of the West German 
revanchists and their trans-Atlantic patrons, and has frequently 
put the imperialists and the victims of their aggression in the 
same category. Thus, in the papal Encyclical “Mense Maio” 
(“In the Month of May”), issued on May i, 1965, Paul VI said: 
“There is at present a terrible aggravation of conflicts between 
nations in some parts of the world and the repetition of a dan- 
gerous phenomenon—the use of armed force instead of talks ‘ 
for the resolution of disputes. This means that the population 
of whole countries is having to undergo terrible suffering, caus- 
ed by all kinds of disturbances, guerilla warfare and military 


{ La Documentation Catholique, 1964, No. 1438, col. 1659-1660. 
2 L’Osservatore Romano, November 10, 1964, p. 3. 


303 











operations, which are spreading and worsening all the time and 
could spark off a fearful new conflict at any moment’.! In the 
same breath Pope Paul condemns the US aggressors in Vietnam 
and the just war of national liberation waged by the Vietna- 
mese people against the aggressors. The Encyclical is typical of 
the Vatican’s rather inconsistent, muddled approach to prob- 
lems of war and peace. 

In the Encyclical “Christi Matri” of October 19, 1966, Pope 
Paul made a new appeal for peace, calling for an end to the 
arms race and reminding people of the dangers of nuclear war. 
However, as in the “Mense Maio” Encyclical, he does not 
condemn American aggression in Vietnam, and draws no dis- 
tinction between the aggressors and the victims of aggression. 
The neutral stand taken in the letter detracts from its role as 
an instrument of peace and in arousing public opinion against 
the aggressors. 

If the Vatican stand can be described as basically peace- 
loving, the same can not be said of the Catholic hierarchy in 
several countries, and especially the USA and the FRG. Stick- 
ing to the attitude they adopted at the Vatican Council, Amer- 
ican Catholic leaders are doing their best to sabotage the 
Council’s decisions, particularly the document “The Church in 
the Modern World”. This is shown by their attitude to the 
American war in Vietnam. In his address to the Congress of 
the Daughters of the American Revolution held in Boston, 
August 1966, the Archbishop of Boston, Cardinal Cushing 
made the rather extraordinary remark that the war in Vietnam 
is the only means of preserving peace.” “Nobody likes war,” 
he writes, “but there are moments in history when force must 
be used against evil people. The refusal of good people to use 
force would merely lead to the triumph of evil.” 

Those members of the Church who support American aggres- 
sion are meeting with growing opposition from the faithful and 
even other members of the clergy who are against the war in 
Vietnam. The papal Encyclical of March 1967, “Populorum 
Progresso” was a most significant declaration of the Catholic 
Church for peace and international security. It is a clear expres- 
sion of the new trends to be observed in the Christian approach 
to problems of peace and social progress. 


1 L’Osservatore Romano, May 1, 1965. 
2 The Pilot, August 27, 1966. 
3 Informations catholiques internationales, September 15, 1966, No. 272. 


304 





The line adopted at the Second Vatican Council, which de- 
spite the reservations contained in the documents was never- 
theless a course of peace, is ignored by the Catholic hierarchy 
in the USA, West Germany and several other imperialist coun- 
tries. American Church leaders support US aggression in 
Vietnam. At an episcopal conference held in November 1966, 
a declaration on the war in Vietnam was passed by 189 votes 
to 6 in which the bishops appealed to the American people 
to trust their government, and claimed that in the light of facts 
brought to their knowledge the war in Vietnam was justified. 

Early in 1967, the Catholic clergy were polled on their 
attitude to the policy of the Johnson administration. Of the 
3,078 priests polled, 2,706 said that the United States should 
take a hard line and make sure it won the war in Vietnam, and 
2,740 were of the opinion that the USA should rely mainly on 
military power rather than agreements with the Soviet Union. 

In December 1965, and again in December 1966, Cardinal 
Spellman visited South Vietnam as the chief Catholic chaplain 
of the US Army to spend Christmas with the troops. During 
his second visit he gave eleven sermons. He assured them that 
the American army was an army of peace, that they were 
fighting for peace, and defending not only America but civili- 
sation. He also said that there was no other possible solution but 
an American victory. In May 1967, Cardinal Spellman exhorted 
people to support “our boys in Vietnam who are fighting for 
liberty and against atheistic communism”.* 

The continuing upswing of the peace movement will almost 
certainly lead to the increasing isolation of the section of the 
Catholic clergy who are using religion to justify the aggressive 
plans and actions of the imperialists. 


1 Herder-Korrespondenz (orbis-catholicus), 21. Jahrgang, 5. Heft, 
Mai 1967. 

2 Carrefour, Paris, December 28, 1966, p. 3. 

3 The Pilot, Boston, May 13, 1967, p. 18. 


20—203 805 











Chapter XVI 


PACIFIST IDEOLOGY 

TODAY. 

THE AMERICAN 
QUAKER MOVEMENT 


In recent years many Americans have been viewing the 
aggressive policy of their government with growing concern. 
This is shown by various public opinion polls,! the speeches of 
politicians and public figures, and the upswing in the activity 
of numerous anti-war movements and organisations. Naturally, 
much of this concern is occasioned by the war in Indochina. 
Often, however, Americans associate militarism not with any 
particular actions in the field of foreign affairs, but rather with 
the state of society as a whole—the powerful influence of the 
so-called “military-industrial complex”, the growth of bureau- 
cracy and corruption, increasing violation of the rights of the 
individual, etc. There is a strong tendency for the programmes 
of various organisations campaigning for peace, democratic 
rights and the immediate solution of the colour problem to 
draw closer together. It is significant that influential leaders of 
the anti-racist struggle like Martin Luther King and Malcolm X 
have frequently stressed the connection between the oppres- 
sion of the Negroes and the aggressive war in Vietnam. Equally 
significant was the fact that the programme of the Students for 
a Democratic Society contained a clear demand for an end to 
the war in Vietnam and curbing of the power of the military. 

Various Churches and religious organisations play an im- 
portant role in the anti-war movement—viz., the resolution of 


41 See, for example, Youth in Turmoil, No. 4, 1969, p. 33. 


306 








the World Council of Churches, the position of the Black 
Moslems, the Methodist Church and Jewish religious leaders. 
One of the most active and influential of these religious move- 
ments is the American Friends Service Committee, the Quakers, 
who in 1947, along with the British Quakers were awarded the 
Nobel Prize for Peace. 

The socio-political programme of the Quakers is extremely 
complex and many-sided and takes in many aspects of home 
and foreign policy. The Quakers are perhaps best known today 
for their anti-war demonstrations. The present organisation 
and activity of the American Quakers represents the most com- 
prehensive expression of the ideology and practice of pacifism, 
which is extremely widespread in the West today. 

The obscure metamorphosis that the old religious movement 
of Quakerism has undergone in recent times, involving the 
fusion of religious concepts with bourgeois liberalism and anti- 
militarism clothed in religious attire makes the task of analysis 
an extremely complicated one. An investigation must of neces- 
sity involve analysis of the social conditions which produced the 
Quaker outlook, the real problems it embodies and also its inner 
structure, method of presentation and argumentation. 


% + 


Quaker ideology arose in the 17th century, in the age of the 
emergence of bourgeois production methods, and gave a reli- 
gious coating to the interests of the bourgeoisie who were 
opposed to the rigid caste order of feudal society and the bar- 
riers it imposed, and against the established Church. Today, 
Quaker views represent an ideological survival in a society that 
has reached further stage in its development—the stage of 
monopoly capital. 

For the highly religious writer, the process by which people 
come to adopt a particular social standpoint and their attitude 
to certain current political events is quite simply a matter of 
the concretisation of general religious dogmas or biblical pro- 
positions. For him there exist certain immutable divine prin- 
ciples which are applied in evaluating the phenomena of the 
changing world. He thus has a false picture of the true sources 
of his views. In point of fact, it is the other way round: social 
reality conditions a person’s interpretation of “immutable” 
divine principles. 

The Quaker social outlook centres round their own very 
special interpretation of the processes characteristic of modern 


20* 307 








capitalist society. We need not trouble to go into these pro- 
cesses in detail here: suffice it to say that they are mainly 
derived from economic factors—the concentration of capital 
and the growth of the monopolies, imposing an ever tighter 
grip on society by virtue of both economic and non-economic 
bonds. The power of the monopolies extends to all so- 
cial spheres—economic, political and ideological. As a result, 
people are coming to feel more and more like helpless pup- 
pets, manipulated by social forces that lie beyond their 
control. 

In view of this there is a growing divorce between the tra- 
ditional time-honoured slogans of bourgeois freedom and dem- 
ocracy, the ideals of free enterprise and bourgeois individualism 
on the one hand, and existing social relations on the other. All 
this is profoundly disturbing for the average American, and 
has attracted the attention of sociologists, psychologists, philo- 
sophers, politicians and theologists who have various interpre- 
tations and explanations to offer. Quaker ideology provides an 
interesting reflection of this process. 

It is not hard to see why the traditional propositions of 
Quaker ideology should have assumed such actuality today. 
Quaker ideology took shape as a protest against the rigidity 
of feudal society, and against various non-economic forms of 
coercion. With the growth of the monopolies it is as if these 
features are raising their ugly heads again, and the problem of 
protecting the rights of the individual, individual freedom, 
understood as free private enterprise, has once more become 
extremely acute. 

The Quakers are particularly concerned by one specific fea- 
ture of present-day American society, and that is the increasing 
influence of military circles and the military industrialists, the 
arms race, aggressive foreign policy, the inculcation of milita- 
rist sentiments, etc. On the surface these phenomena appear in 
the form of reactionary political platforms, the actions of dip- 
lomats, politicians and military leaders, the activities of various 
state institutions and public organisations, the main propa- 
ganda trends and so on. 

In order to understand the true cause and essence of such 
phenomena it is necessary to view them in terms of the basic 
laws of social development, and compare the qualitative features 
of those laws with the development of other social systems. 
It then becomes clear that wars, violence, militarism and 
aggressiveness are not to be regarded as “abnormalities” caused 


808 











by the deliberate actions of certain persons, for they are deter- 
mined by objective laws of social development. 

It is thus a question of the class character of the method 
employed in their analysis, of the analyst’s general outlook. In 
this respect the Quaker position is quite clear. However much 
they may criticise the home and foreign policy of the United 
States, the Quakers remain what they have always been: con- 
vinced supporters of “the American way of life” and capitalist 
relations. This is only to be expected, since the Quaker teaching 
originally arose as a bourgeois brand of Christianity. Quaker 
religious doctrine reflected the humanistic trends of early bour- 
geois thought, central to which was the concept of man as a 
being endowed with fine moral qualities, which could be 
revealed with the aid of the “Holy Spirit”. This concept was 
based on idealisation of the psychology of the small producer. 
Bourgeois freedom is their social ideal, which they see as being 
the main aim of the whole American people. “We believe that 
every man should be free to think for himself, to worship his 
God in his own way, to express his convictions, and to act, 
either alone or in association with others, in accordance with 
what he believes to be the highest good.... We believe that 
every people should have the same freedom to choose for itself 
the type of government under which it shall live, and to deter- 
mine the policies of that government.”! 

In short the Quaker position is highly paradoxical: the 
Quakers are for the development of the capitalist economy but 
against the concentration of capital which destroys the inde- 
pendence of the small producer, they are for free trade but 
against the non-economic coercion of the monopolies. They are 
for capitalism and private enterprise, but only on the basis of 
“moral”, “humane” principles.” 

This contradictory attitude is reflected in Quaker ideological 
doctrine. The Quakers are opposed to the development of mo- 
nopoly capitalism but support capitalism, as the “natural” form 
of human community. That is why the Quaker theoretician is 


1 Steps to Peace. A Quaker View of US Foreign Policy. A Report 
ke for the American Friends Service Committee, Philadelphia, 
1961, 

2 tt need hardly be stressed that as supporters of the ideology of 
capitalist enterprise and bourgeois’ freedom, the Quakers are hostile to 
socialism. They frequently write of “totalitarianism”, “fanaticism”, “the loss 
of individual freedoms” and so on, as occurring under socialism. Sometimes 
they simply echo the current slogans of official propaganda. 


309 














unable to examine the objective causes determining the “‘extre- 
mes” he condemns. His attention is entirely limited to the 
sphere of behaviour, and his mind never penetrates beyond 
outward phenomena (although he claims to be explaining them). 
Thus, for him it is only features that are permanent or conti- 
nually repeated and reflected in visible external phenomena 
that he regards as “laws”, and not the real causes underlying 
these phenomena. A law is equated to some ideal model of real- 
isation of a phenomenon, to the form deprived of real content. 
In the end a curious metamorphosis takes place. 

The law, derived from permanent or recurrent phenomena 
as a generalisation of purely empirical observations, is substi- 
tuted for the original concrete facts, which are then viewed as 
individual instances confirming the validity of the “general 
law”. 

Thus, the Quaker’s thoughts inevitably go round in circles, 
abstract propositions being regarded as concrete empirical facts, 
and the general logic of his reasonings is the sum total of such 
circles of different radius. The Quaker conception is then 
projected onto a vast amount of factual material. However, its 
basic elements remain the same: the formulation of views, which 
in their author’s opinion are the only way to ensure peace, the 
suggestion that existing social relations do not correspond to this 
formula, and the attempt to explain why—the reason being 
sought in the generalised expression of the very facts which 


awaited explanation. 
% mf 


In examining the views of the Quakers we shall be referring 
chiefly to Speak Truth to Power‘, since this work is extremely 
typical of Quaker sociological views. In their attempt to analyse 
present United States home and foreign policy, the authors 
begin by pointing out some of the most typical features that may 
later provide the key to understanding concrete phenomena. 
They regard the “rule of violence” as the main feature of 
modern life. 

They hold that violence permeates the whole of society, that 
this is an “age of violence”. “It is also an age in which individ- 
ual personality is being crushed by the spread of totalitarian 
doctrines. The growth of centralized authority is producing a 


{ Speak Truth to Power. A Quaker Search for an Alternative to 
Violence. A Study of International Conflict Prepared for the American 
Friends Service Committee. 


310 





depersonalized society in which men are pressed into a 
common mould and made to conform to accepted standards of 
thought and behaviour. The noble concept of the supremacy of 
the individual ... is rapidly losing ground to various forms of 
totalitarianism. Centralized authority... is the dominant force 
in large segments of East and West alike.”! 

At the same time, this is “an age of revolution”. Techno- 
logical progress has raised mankind’s material living standards 
to a level that was once undreamed of. Yet these opportunities 
are not taken advantage of. The industrialised nations are only 
concerned with satisfying their own needs, leaving millions 
hungry and destitute. This paradox of modern society “is more 
deeply rooted and more widely spread, for it grows out of the 
very mastery of the instruments of power that man so confi- 
dently sought. Poverty and wealth, hunger and food, insecurity 
and power, bondage and freedom, war and peace—these are 
the real paradoxes... .”” 

The contrasts in bourgeois society are so patent that it requires 
no more than empirical observation to establish them. But the 
insistence on a “paradox” in the logic of modern social study 
can serve various purposes. 

It can serve as a point of departure, taken as defying expla- 
nation, as a testimony of our inability to see the inner connec- 
tions between phenomena when limiting ourselves to observa- 
tion of what is immediately visible on the surface of things. In 
this case, a scientific analysis will show the paradox to be me- 
rely apparent and will reveal the inner mechanism which pro- 
duces it: the natural laws of private ownership automatically 
engender exploitation, violence and wars. 

These is another way, characteristic of the religious outlook, 
whereby the “paradox” is “ontologised”, regarded as a self- 
contained, irreducible feature of social life, testifying to the 
presence of two separate lines of development. In this case, two 
opposite poles are raised to the level of absolutes, excluding 
all possibility of a rational explanation. The Quaker concep- 
tion is of this type, it bisects the world into the human and the 
divine. “One of the most profound problems that man must 
face,” we are told, ‘‘arises from the conflict between his indi- 
vidual response to his world environment and the political 
response of the group of which he is part.”3 This kind of state- 


1 Speak Truth to Power..., p. 2. 
2 Tbid., p. 3. 
3 Ibid. 











ment, which is typical of modern theology, could well be used 
as a basis for analysis of the “external” forces that exert pres- 
sure on man. But here the authors immediately plunge into 
another realm, treating the conflict between the individual and 
the forces to which he is enslaved not as a clash in life itself, 
but as an expression of the anti-thesis between the divine and 
the human in every individual. “As Americans, we are both 
individual children of God with deep commitments to the sup- 
remacy of conscience, and citizens of a nation that plays a major 
role in shaping and meeting the issues that surround us.”’! As 
we shall see, this “‘anti-thesis”, in various forms, runs through 
the whole Quaker outlook. 

The authors of this booklet are mainly concerned with mili- 
tary policy, the arms race, and attempts to use force in the 
rivalry between the two “super-powers’—the United States 
and the Soviet Union. They see this as the root of the contra- 
dictions inherent in the world today. The hopes of lasting peace 
which seemed so well-founded after the war were soon to 
prove vain, for “twenty years of pre-war hostility had produced 
in both Russia and the West mutual suspicions too pro- 
found to be broken down by an uneasy war-time alliance”.? 
Thus, a policy of force, the arms race, and a situation of mu- 
tual suspicion and reciprocal threats reigns in the world today. 
Since the booklet is addressed above all to the American 
government, the authors are mainly concerned with examining 
US policy. Once again we find the expected duality in the 
Quaker views. While condemning the main direction and aims 
of American foreign policy, they at the same time insist that it 
is based on concern for the “national interests”, and altruistic, 
humane principles. Viewing politics as the embodiment of cer- 
tain particular ideas, they regard American policy as the real- 
isation of the avowed American ideals of freedom, equality, 
democracy, and so on. They therefore treat the facts of aggres- 
siveness, violence, collusion with reaction and so on, not as the 
logical, inevitable expression of the imperialist nature of this 
policy, but as rather distressing, unwarranted features. 

It must be said that in appraising the practical foreign policy 
of the United States, the Quakers refuse to swallow “official 
versions” wholesale, and often go a fair way towards interpret- 
ing things in their true light. They note, for example, that the 





1 Tbid. 
2 Tbid., p. 4. 


$12 








Marshall Plan after the war was advanced ‘almost simulta- 
neously with the policy to contain the Soviet state and commu- 
nism by force”.1 They have no illusions, either, about the cre- 
ation of NATO and SEATO, the policy of rearming West Ger- 
many, the signing of a peace treaty with Japan and so on. They 
show how in many parts of the world American policy is based 
chiefly on military force, and often involves the suppression of 
freedom and the rights of other peoples. 

It should also be noted in their favour that the Quakers are 
aware, in their own way, of the connection between power 
politics and the offensive on democratic rights. 

The authors of the booklet show how the traditional bour- 
geois freedoms are being sacrificed to the requirements of a 
military posture leading to the gradual submergence of indi- 
vidual rights. 

The Quakers are often fully aware of the connection between 
the influence of militarist propaganda and the conditions that 
obtain in society. Thus, the British Quaker P. Seed sets out to 
probe the psychological aspects of the arms race, and asks why 
it is that many Englishmen believe in the danger of aggression 
and the need to defend their country from enemies.? He sees 
two contributing factors: ‘““The first is the extreme degree of 
diminished personal responsibility arising from the fact of 
living in a mass organised society, subject of such influences as 
advertising, political propaganda, and the very fact of being 
just one in a crowd.... The second new factor arises from the 
development of modern weapons.”? He goes on to say how 
relations between people are becoming more and more superfi- 
cial and mechanical, and that this is one reason why people feel 
defenceless and are susceptible to the influence of militarist 
propaganda. 

Certainly Seed is describing real processes typical of bour- 
geois society today. But as soon as one attempts to make these 
typical features serve as an explanation for the phenomena 
described, they lose all validity. This is especially evident in 
the attempts of our Quaker authors to give a sociological ex- 
planation for “power politics”. It should be remembered that 
this is a key moment in the Quaker social philosophy, since they 
regard the present commitment to violence as the cause of mili- 


tf Ibid, p. 5. 
2 P. Seed, The Undefended. Psychological Aspects of the Problem of 
Disarmament and Possible Solutions, London, p. 3. 
Ibid., p. 6. 


313 








tary conflicts. This begs the question of what it is that produces 
this form of relations between people, social groups and coun- 
tries. “Why is it that hopeful proposals have so often remained 
only idle, intellectual exercises printed in pamphlets or em- 
bodied in Congressional resolutions. . .?! Or to put it, as they do, 
in more striking terms: why is it that people “believe more in 
the power of the hydrogen bomb than in the power of love?” 

The Quakers return to this question and attempt to answer 
it again and again. Moreover, their answer is intended 
as an argument in favour of their faith, as their “positive” 
programme. Yet it cannot be said that their explanation 
really reveals the causes of violence: indeed, strictly speak- 
ing, it is not an explanation at all, but merely the vicious 
circle that characterises all religious sociological thought, so 
that behaviour is in the last analysis put down to ... behaviour. 
The Quakers reject the idea that the causes of violence are to 
be sought in specific social tendencies. They insist that it is to 
be sought in the characteristics of the individual, irrespective 
of what society he lives in. “The real evils that have driven the 
world to the present impasse, and which we must struggle to 
overcome, spring from the false values by which man has lived 
in East and West alike. Man’s curse lies in his worship of the 
work of his hands, in his glorification of material things, in his 
failure to set any limit on material needs. This idolatry leads 
him to lust for power, to disregard human personality, to ignore 
God, and to accept violence or any other means of achieving 
his ends. It is not an idolatry of which the communists alone are 
guilty. All men share it, and when it is examined, the global 
power struggle is given a new perspective.” 

Overtones of the Quaker religious outlook are clearly evident 
in the above. Here we have a modern version of the Christian 
dogma of man’s “sinfulness” as the root of all social evil. 
Further on this idea is no longer implied but clearly stated: “the 
real evils at the root of the tragic conflicts which threaten to 
destroy mankind are those that flow from man’s idolatry: lust 
for power and the inability of power to set limits to itself; the 
violation of human personality and infringements on its free- 
dom and dignity; the ‘practical atheism’ of a pervading mate- 
rialism and secularism; the spreading cult and practice of vio- 
lence and the poisonous doctrine that our ends justify all 


1 Speak Truth to Power..., p. 13. 
2 Tbid., p. 28. 


314 





means.”! Thus, the authors’ thoughts have described a complete 
circle, returning to the presence of violence in the world, but 
this time not as an empirical observation of the phenomenon 
itself but as the fundamental cause of such phenomena. 

As we have seen, the Quakers proceed from the character- 
istic phenomena of monopoly capital: they talk of “‘central- 
ised authority”, “the machinery of coercion”, the “deperson- 
alisation” of society, obligatory subscription to ideological stan- 
dards, the spread of conformism and so on and so forth. Yet 
according to their reasoning a particular policy or the behaviour 
of certain social groups are simply the sum of individual beha- 
viour, while the factors determining the appearance of these 
groups and conditioning the ideas and tastes of their members 
are completely ignored. Thus, for the Quakers, a social group 
or class only forms a unit in so far as the individuals that 
comprise them can be observed to follow a common course of 
behaviour, and social tendencies are regarded simply as a com- 
bination of individual behaviour. 

The Quaker concept of man is certainly humanistic and dem- 
ocratic. The Quakers firmly believe in man’s ability (with 
the aid of the “Holy Spirit’) to choose “the policy of eternity”, 
to behave according to what they consider to be high moral 
principles and resist the wheel of sin that dominates society. 
But this optimism is based not on a realistic analysis of modern 
social tendencies but on their faith in the individual’s capacity 
for self-perfection according to Christian principles. For this 
reason, their programme, though dictated by noble intentions, 
really amounts to no more than wishful thinking. 


+ F F 


We have already seen how the Quakers regard relations 
between the United States and the Soviet Union as the main 
cause of tension in the world today. This is why they write 
so much of the “challenge of communism”, of Soviet “totalita- 
rianism”, and devote a great deal of effort to interpreting the 
foreign policy of the USSR. At the same time they always 
try to place themselves ‘‘above” the two “conflicting giants”, 
condemning the foreign policy of both. They maintain that 
it is immaterial which side was the first to display bad will: 
the important thing is that it has become a fact of present- 
day life, and a way must be found to put an end to it. 


1 Speak Truth to Power..., p. 31. 


315 











The Quaker chief concern is to refute the idea that “power 
politics” can serve as a means of resolving national problems 
and is justified as being in the interests of national security. 
They generally argue somewhat as follows: 1) the influence 
of the Soviet Union, and the appeal of its communist doctrines, 
have grown steadily since the end of World War II, while 
the position of the United States and its prestige throughout 
the world have been declining; 2) the aggressive policy of 
the United States tends to confirm the Marxist view of the 
aggressive nature of capitalism and increases hostility between 
the two “blocks”; 3) the traditional principles of US policy 
are being seriously undermined, as a result of increasing US 
interference in the internal affairs of other countries, support 
for dictators, and encouragement of the arms race and so 
on; 4) this policy is not in the interests of national security, 
but, on the contrary, is producing increasing fear and a growing 
sense of hopelessness among Americans; 5) as a result of all 
this, the nation’s moral standards have been debased.! 

What constructive programme do the Quakers offer in the 
place of the policy of force? Obviously, it is a programme 
designed to put an end to the rule of violence in the world, 
so that the way it is formulated depends on the explanation 
the Quakers give for the latter. As we have seen, the Quakers 
either equate the cause of violence with the fact of violence, 
or attribute it to idolatry practised by the whole of mankind. 
Their programme is thus limited to appeals to refrain from 
violence or for moral self-perfection according to Christian 
principles. 

One occasionally comes across an oblique reference to the 
social causes of the policy of force in Quaker writings, but 
they have their own rather strange interpretation of “the 
social”. Thus, with regard to the East-West conflict, they 
maintain that it can no longer be discussed “in simplified terms 
of good and evil”.2 One might expect this to be followed by 
an attempt to break away from the interpretation of the 
conflict in terms of idolatry and seek its social causes. But 
no, the author simply regards the matter in terms of different 
attitudes to Christian ideas, as if this were the sole factor 
determining different forms of social organisation. The conflict, 
he says, is between the “Judaeo-Christian philosophy of man’s 


1 Tbid., pp. 6-9. 
2 Thid., p. 82. 





















innate worth’! and totalitarianism. Here again we find the 
traditional Christian attitude of contrasting the impure “wordly” 
morality with the “true”, divine morality. 

Thus, the “constructive” programme of the Quakers, even 
in its most sociological form, is concerned with removing the 
causes of the individual’s idolatry and returning to “true” 
Christian standards. The Quakers note that there is a wide 
gap between actual social development and their recommenda- 
tions. In claiming their programme for the reformation of 
society, their “policy of eternity”, to be a “realistic” one, the 
Quakers have to find a sphere of life in which it can be put 
into effect. 

The Quakers view every individual as consisting of two 
essences: a divine essence which is the source of true moral 
virtue, and a human, sinful essence. Hence, the view of man’s 
duality, the division into “inner”, religious, moral man and 
“outward”, inessential, social man. Social evil can thus only 
be abolished by means of the moral perfection of the indi- 
vidual, by the individual revealing his ‘genuine’ divine 
essence, purged of “outward”, social features, which merely 
spoil his true nature. In other words, a man is held to be 
virtuous in as far as he behaves as the “inner”, religious man, 
full of humility and a sense of sonship to his Maker. This is 
merely a rephrasing of the traditional Christian idea that moral 
virtues are of “extra-social”, divine origin. 

This brings us to an essential feature of the Quaker stand- 
point. The Quakers do not address their appeals to any 
particular social groups, or even to the concrete socio-historical 
individual, but to the individuals in an abstract sense, possessed 
of an immutable nature, regarded above all as a religious 
being. His willingness to transform the world is taken for 
granted, as his personal duty to God. The Quakers explain 
the presence of social evil in the world today by the fact 
that modern human society blunts man’s awareness of his 
obligations to God. “Human nature demands that people put 
their faith in someone and something. Yet few of us seem 
to have enough faith in God and the teachings of Christ to 
be willing to rely on them rather than armament. We believe 
the other alternative is faith in mankind as the creation of 
God, with His image in each one....”2 Thus, going over to 


1 Speak Truth to Power..., p. 


$2. 
2 Paths to Peace on Earth, Path 4 (Disarmament. Down to Police 
Level). 


317 








ccc 


the “policy of eternity” involves “purging” man of “outward”, 
“worldly” influences that eclipse the image of God in his soul 
and cause him to abandon true Christian humility. “We believe, 
therefore, that any proposal to resolve the conflict without 
violence must begin with a recognition of the humbling fact 
of man’s common guilt and common nobility.””! 

It is suggested that only the practical introduction of certain 
“absolute” moral criteria—“eternal”, divine moral standards— 
will enable people to rise above utilitarian considerations by 
which various groups of people may be guided in defending 
their interests. 

In order to gain a clearer idea of this Quaker view, we 
ought to take a look at the special features of their concept 
of the relationship between God and man in which they 
differ essentially from most other Protestants. The Quakers 
stress the idea that God is constantly present in man, that He 
is immanent in human life. “The reality of God as a living 
Presence in the world and in men lies at the very center of 
the Quaker faith.... Every day is a day of creation. All 
history is sacred history.... They think of man’s soul as a 
revealing place for God. Man is made in the divine image.’ 
It is God’s presence in man, in every individual, the presence 
of the “inner light” as the Quakers put it, that the Quakers 
regard as the foundation of human brotherhood. This convic- 
tion that there is something divine in every individual which 
gives him an inalienable dignity and nobility explains their 
insistence that man must not be submitted to exploitation in 
the interest of any aims whatsoever. This is what determines 
Quaker opposition to violence. “The Quaker doctrine of ‘that 
of God in every man’ is generally considered to be the basis 
for the pacifism of the Society of Friends”’.8 

Moreover, the Quakers maintain that relations opposed to 
the policy of violence can only be achieved on the basis of 
Christian love. 

Let us take a look at the line of thought that leads the 
Quaker theoretician to the conclusion that only the principle 
of divine love can serve as an effective means of improving 
society. 


7 5 Speak Truth to Power..., pp. 33-34. 
2 R. M. Jones, The Quaker’s Faith, Philadelphia, p. 3. 
3 Gunnar Sundberg, Toward Pacifism. The Convincement and Commit- 
ment of a Young European, December 1950, Pendle Hill, Wallingford, 
p. 20. 


318 






















































We have already observed how the Quakers regard the 
very fact of violence as an independent, self-contained feature 
of human relations, personal and social, ultimately deriving 
not from fluent, changing social relations but from human 
nature, the nature of the individual, taken as being constant 
and immutable. Thus, a sphere of spiritual values lying out- 
side morality and considered the product of man’s “sinful” 
nature is regarded as determining all spheres of actual social 
relations—economic, political and cultural. Man’s “sinfulness” 
is most manifest in his commitment to violence, in the hostile 
relations that exist between people. Since evil is innate in 
human nature, it can only be overcome or eliminated by the 
triumph of the opposite moral values: the effort to overcome 
hatred with love, pride with humility, the cult by man of 
his own works with awareness of his own sinfulness, idolatry 
with a return to God, and so on. The most universal of 
these formulae embodying the evangelical morality is the 
principle of love. 

Unfortunately, it is impossible in the limited space available 
here to make a detailed analysis of this principle, which is 
far more complex than is generally realised. When a theologist 
advances the principle of Christian love as a basis for the 
transformation of society, he intends love not as an emotional 
relationship continuing “worldly” feelings, but a_ special 
“divine” love serving as a model for social relations. This 
emerges quite clearly in Quaker thought, where love is re- 
garded as the underlying principle not of real, socially deter- 
mined relations, but of some invisible, mystical “human 
family”, a “divine-human society”. 

As we have seen, the Quakers do not approach analysis 
of society in terms of theory or passive diagnosis of its ills; 
but see it above all as a form of activity. The pacifism of the 
Quakers “is not the result of ivorytower theorizing but stems 
from direct experience with the raw edge of strife”.! Yet they 
regard their action programme not as the continuation of 
actual politics, as the reflection of certain social forces, but 
as lying outside the context of real events. They see their 
role to consist in making a special “religious” survey of society, 
revealing the underlying mystical principles that the “secular” 
mind cannot grasp, rather than in presenting and explaining 
actually existing social programmes and forms of political 


1 'W. Comfort, The Quaker Way of Life, Philadelphia, 1968, p. 166. 


319 


=") 


2 eee Sa — - 














activity. Thus, they are convinced that they have an apostolic 
mission to perform in modern society, that they are bearers 
of the message of Christian truth, which, as distinct from 
purely human truths, is eternal. “Our truth is an ancient one: 
that love endures and overcomes; that hatred destroys; that 
what is obtained by love is retained, but what is obtained 
by hatred proves a burden. This truth, fundamental to the 
position which rejects reliance on the method of war, is ulti- 
mately a religious perception, a belief that stands outside of 
history.’’! 

Thus, the Quakers gauge the likelihood of the success of 
their views as depending on how far they can go in convincing 
people of the need to adopt a “new” policy. The main aim 
of their preaching work is thus to demonstrate that their views 
are “realistic” and practicable. As a result, their theories are 
patently didactic. 

In attempting to show the practicability of their conception, 
Quaker writers employ all sorts of arguments, invoking science, 
sociology, their movement’s past, human feelings, man’s sense 
of moral duty, and so on—so many, in fact, that it is impos- 
sible to examine them all here. We therefore propose to take 
a look at a few of these arguments, those that we consider 
most typical. 

The chief of these is the reference to a higher “divine” 
morality—the only one appropriate to the providential nature 
of creation. “God did not create men to hate, nor establish 
His law so that peace could emerge from fury.”* This argu- 
ment is strictly speaking invalid since it is derived from a 
completely false concept of the processes by which the social 
or political stand of different religious movements and Churches 
are formed. The Quakers claim their interpretation of the 
Bible to be the only valid one. In point of fact, of course, 
there is no such thing as an immutable, single Biblical truth. 
As Feuerbach noted, every age has its own Bible of its own 
making. It is not Biblical dogma that determines the social 
stand of a Church or religious movement, but on the contrary, 
its political views that determine its interpretation of the Bible. 

Another common argument used by the Quakers to substanti- 
ate their claim that their programme is perfectly realistic and 


1 Speak Truth to Power..., p. 375. It should be noted that_Quaker 
preaching of “eternal truth” has little in common with insistent Christian 
sermonising which is not at all typical of the Quakers. 

2 Tbid., p. 50. 


820 





practicable is that it is most compatible with ‘“‘democracy”, 
which they believe to be “the noblest philosophy of social 
organization”.1 Here is yet another fundamental bourgeois 
misconception. For what is democracy? For the Quakers it is 
the triumph of the liberal democratic principles underlying the 
system of private enterprise. Yet such a society no longer exists. 
Advancing according to the inner objective laws of social dev- 
elopment, bourgeois society has lost those features that the 
Quakers regard as “democratic”. Thus, in invoking an ideal, 
non-existent democracy, the Quakers are ignoring the processes 
actually taking place in life, thereby belying their claim to a 
“realistic” programme. 

The Quakers often regard as the chief merit of their posi- 
tion the fact that it takes into account the mortal danger of 
an aggressive policy in the nuclear age. This doubtless reflects 
the growing conviction in America that the path of war is 
suicidal, which even has a certain influence on military circles, 
restraining them to some extent from committing acts of overt 
aggression. Here the Quakers are opposed by the arguments 
of the militarists and the powerful propaganda machine for 
“brainwashing” the public. These arguments, producing a 
whole system of social myths, stereotype views, “patriotic” 
slogans, etc., have not arisen out of the blue: they reflect the 
interests of certain social groups and classes, and extremely 
influential ones at that. A “realistic” approach would neces- 
sarily involve perception and analysis of the social class factors 
underlying and determining militarist ideology, examination 
of the connection between such ideology and real interests, 
the forms in which capital operates, etc. Only then would 
anti-war arguments be directed to real social forces and not 
some abstract “common sense” and serve to expose not “eternal” 
human failings but the concrete historical forms of human 
relations and those people who go out of their way to exploit 
these failings. But, as we have already seen, the Quakers 
ignore concrete historical analysis, and can therefore do no 
more than hope and trust that sooner or later people will 
follow them, and that “human nature, illumined and ennobled 
by divine power, can bear effective witness in the direction 
of world community”.2 Thus, the “constructive” programme 
of the Quakers acquires clear utopian features. 


! Speak Truth to Power..., p. 50. 
2 Tbid., p. 52. 


21—203 321 














It cannot be repeated too often that the Quaker conception 
does not stand up to strictly scientific, sociological criticism. 
However, our analysis will remain superficial unless we attempt 
to answer one question of fundamental importance: namely, 
how did this conception arise, what are its social roots? This 
is extremely important because Quaker ideology is not the fruit 
of philosophical speculation and arid theorising, but embodies 
certain experience acquired spontaneously and independently 
of the activities of individual ideologists. Therefore, if we 
wish to judge this conception “from the inside”, according to 
its “innate” “inherent” organic criteria rather than “from the 
outside”, according to “external” criteria, we have no alter- 
native but to examine this experience. 

The Quakers regard the elimination of violence as a gradual 
process of transposing ordinary, everyday relations to the 
various other spheres of social, international, political, class 
and various other relations. 

There is hardly any need to demonstrate the illusory nature 
of such an attitude. Of course, the Quakers are right in drawing 
a distinction between ordinary, everyday relations and polit- 
ical, class relations—they are indeed very different things— 
but in doing so they demonstrate a very naive concept of the 
relationship and interaction of the two. Society cannot be 
regarded as an “enlarged family”, for it is highly heteroge- 
neous, with objective laws and tendencies, various institutions, 
spontaneous social forces, and so on at work which are quite 
independent of the will or moral convictions of individuals. 
This thesis of the materialist concept of history is sufficiently 
well-known to require no further elaboration here. Indeed, the 
view that the social sphere is basically independent of indivi- 
dual morality is widely current in various trends of Western 
sociology. Suffice it to mention Niebuhr’s famous dilemma of 
“the moral individual and the amoral society”, numerous works 
by American philosophers and sociologists that analyse the 
process of alienation and bureaucratisation in progress in con- 
temporary society (Riesman, Fromm, Mills, etc.), the theories 
of the existentialists, and so on. 

We are now in a position to take a look at the formation 
of the Quaker social outlook. 

The Quaker theoretician does not analyse the objective 
fabric of society, the extent to which certain relations and 
ties are essential, the alternation of form and_ content, 
phenomenon and essence and so on. He rather “lives” the 


322 





events he is describing, fixing them in the sequence and degree 
of substantiality that he perceives through direct experience. 
It is on such perception that his social views are based, 
although he imparts to them an integrated conceptual form, 
giving them the semblance of a theory based on principles of 
scientific research. In the absence of sufficient facts or real 
scientific arguments (as it seems to him, at least), he makes 
up for the lack by reinforcing his general view with faith, 
passionate conviction, moral principles, etc. Thus his conception 
ultimately depends not on logic or strictly scientific analysis, 
but on his belief in the truth and “desirability” of his ideas. 
“Pacifism, I presume, must remain emotional to some extent. 
It cannot be a matter of the intellect alone. Feeling, intuition, 
faith, all play their role. The unconditional acceptance of 
human brotherhood is an important element.”! 

So much for the theoretical side of the Quaker programme. 


> 


Let us now turn to the practical side of the Quaker “con- 
structive” programme, which is determined by their own special 
interpretation of the laws of social development. 

Many religious campaigners for social reform do not go 
beyond the level of simple religious sermonising. The Quaker 
programme forces attention as a social phenomenon by virtue 
of the fact that it is definitely intended as a plan for practical 
action. The Quakers accept only one way of putting this plan 
into practice, and that is non-violent action directed towards 
achieving universal brotherhood. “It seeks to knit the break 
in the sense of community whose fracture is both a cause 
and a result of human conflict.... It offers a way of meeting 
evil without relying on the ability to cause pain to the human 
being through whom evil is expressed. It seeks to change the 
attitude of the opponent rather than to force his submission 
through violence. It is, in short, the practical effort to over- 
come evil with Good.”2 Analysis of this approach lies far 
beyond the scope of our present examination of Quaker activ- 
ities, since the tactic of “non-violent protest” is extremely 
widespread in US democratic movements at the present time. 

To begin with, let us see how the Quakers define the term 


4 Gunnar Sundberg, Toward Pacifism, Pendle Hill, Wallingford, Penn., 
1950, pp. 16-17. 
2 Speak Truth to Power..., p. 35. 


21* 3238 











“non-violence”. “We use this term ‘non-violent action’ because, 
though the behaviour of the persons described is determined 
enough, and even in its own way forceful, it is without 
physical violence.”! It must be said that this is a rather over- 
simplified definition, since in point of fact the term non- 
violence covers a multitude of different forms of action and 
possible social consequences. 

First of all, let us take those forms of action that are 
intended to influence public opinion in a certain direction. 
Their effectiveness is to be measured simply according to the 
influence they have on the people responsible for the object 
of the protest. Various legal methods are resorted to in such 
cases, such as inquiries into the activities of government bodies, 
petitions, the publication of material in newspapers and mag- 
azines, the dissemination of leaflets or pamphlets, peaceful 
demonstrations and the like. In other words, the idea is to 
propagate certain ideas, without exerting any direct practical 
influence on the object of protest. This is the most typical 
form of action taken by various liberal-democratic organisa- 
tions, including the Quakers, and does not generally result in 
violence or police interference. 

What exactly do those engaged in such forms of non- 
violent protest hope to achieve? They insist that the main 
thing is to make those who employ force realise that their 
victims are their fellow human beings. The aim is thus to 
achieve a rapprochement between oppressors and their victims, 
between those who wield power and those who suffer from 
the way they exercise it, by “identifying” themselves with 
their victims. The Quakers claim that this is the only way 
to overcome the conflicts between them. 

This end is best served by actions that demonstrate the 
good will, courage and sincerity of those who perform them, 
in many cases by actions that involve obvious suffering. The 
main thing here is not suffering in itself, but the suffering 
of human beings endowed with noble moral qualities. 
“Whether the suffering is perceived as human or non-human 
suffering depends upon these actions.”? In short, such methods 
can only be successful where the suffering is undergone 
voluntarily. 

It is not at all surprising that we should hear this from 


1G. Lakey, Non Violent Action. How It Works, Lebanon, Pennsy]- 
vania, 1963, p. 3. 
2 Tbid., p. 14. 





the Quakers, since the idea of voluntary suffering is an 
important feature of the Christian ethic. The insistence on 
the suffering being voluntarily undergone is understandable, 
since suffering is only indicative of a person’s moral qualities, 
provided it is voluntarily assumed as a conscious choice, i.e., 
suffering is human if a person could avoid it but declines 
to for moral motives. 

But this brings us to an important consequence of this view 
of the way non-violence works. If we accept that this method 
is effective in so much as the sufferings of the protestors are 
voluntary, then we are surely bound to admit that the use 
of this method against violence only has any sense insofar 
as the violence too is voluntary, i.e., can be renounced. This 
method is therefore completely ineffective against violence 
that has deep-rooted social causes. 

We have already noted that the Quaker definition of non- 
violence is rather vague. “Non-violent” action can be merely 
a background to social phenomena, an accompanying factor, 
it can also be a factor disrupting the normal course of these 
phenomena. Thus, a “silent demonstration” can stand outside 
the Pentagon till the cows come home, without having the 
slightest influence on the activities going on inside, without 
arousing any desire for “identification” among the military 
officials. Yet strike action by workers, which also falls into 
the “non-violent” category is quite a different matter. One 
can hardly attribute concessions made by the employers to 
their having “identified themselves” with the workers. Thus, 
in some circumstances this method works according to the 
principle of force. In the above case, for instance, the 
employers are forced to take notice of the consequences of the 
activities of those using it. 

Our considered opinion, therefore, is that while “non- 
violence” remains at the root of such activity, there is a 
growing tendency for the method of “convincing” one’s op- 
ponent to be replaced by the method of force. This tendency 
is certainly typical of many social movements in the United 
States, and has been particularly noticeable in the movement 
against racial segregation and discrimination, where the old 
tactics were supplemented by the “non-violent direct action’, 
first successfully adopted by Martin Luther King. “Non-violent 
direct action,” he wrote, “seeks to create such a crisis and 
establish such creative tension that a community that has 
constantly refused to negotiate is forced to confront the issue. 


325 











It seeks so to dramatise the issue that it can no longer be 
ignored.”’! 

“Non-violent direct action” involves interrupting the 
normal working routine of factory, shop, bus station, etc., and 
thus represents the use of force, albeit in a special way. It 
is “non-violent” insofar as the participants, while refusing 
to comply with the orders of the powers-that-be, do not respond 
with violence to police measures. It is interesting to note the 
development of this tactic in organisations adhering to the 
Christian idea of non-violence and appealing to people’s 
hearts and conscience. The fact that they found it necessary 
to resort to a certain degree of force shows that their former 
methods (petitions, inquiries, appeals, etc.) had proved 
ineffective. 

The peace movement has deep roots in the United States and 
is constantly developing, altering its methods of struggle and 
ideology. By and large, without going into the various details 
and nuances, we can note the same general trend towards 
active struggle involving the use of force, though developing 
far more slowly, as in the civil rights struggle. The develop- 
ment of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, which has 
offshoots in various countries, provides an interesting example 
of this. It began as a movement fully committed to non-violent 
action, whose aim was to influence public opinion by all kinds 
of methods strictly within the bounds of the law. However, 
many of its adherents gradually became more and more 
convinced of the fruitlessness of such action, and the more 
energetic ones seized the idea of “direct action”, i.e., active 
interference in the activities of those conducting a militarist 
policy. Whereas before it was simply a matter of holding 
peaceful demonstrations calling for the dismantling of rocket 
bases, demonstrators now marched to the base in question, 
set up pickets on the approach roads and tried to obstruct 
its normal activities. Such actions inevitably led to police 
intervention, beatings, arrests and court charges. 

All this applies to the activities not of isolated individuals 
but of special organisations created for the purpose of 
employing the new tactic. One such organisation, for example, 
is the Committee for Nonviolent Action—a small but extre- 
mely active organisation founded in 1957. One of their 
leaflets contains the following: “There is a game.... Two 


{M. L. King, Letter from Birmingham City Jail, 1963, p. 5. 


326 


a 








people take revolvers and put one cartridge in each. The 
chambers of the revolvers are then spun and the people put 
the guns to their heads and pull the triggers simultaneously. 
(If neither gun fires, the game is repeated). Eventually, some- 
one dies. The great nations of the world are playing... with 
H-bombs, missiles and jet bombers. Unless we stop this 
ghastly game, every one will die.”! The Committee stresses 
the need for resolute action, and its supporters have given 
numerous examples of such action, including attempts to 
penetrate nuclear test zones in Nevada and the Sahara and 
various nuclear submarine bases, taking two small boats into 
H-bomb test waters, and so on. All these actions resulted in 
court charges and received wide publicity. 

It is a well-known fact that more and more Americans 
have recently been resorting to active protest against their 
country’s aggressive policy. There is a strong movement afoot 
among American youth, and particularly the students, 
demanding the withdrawal of American forces from Indochina. 
This action has not been limited to peaceful demonstrations. 
There have been numerous instances of large-scale brawls 
with the police on University campuses throughout the 
country. Then there were the mass demonstrations in Washing- 
ton in the autumn of 1969, at which definite political demands 
were put forward. 

What is the attitude of the Quakers to these tendencies? 
By and large, they reject methods involving the use of force. 
“It is absurd to think that the government is going to be 
coerced by the peace movement into unilateral disarmament 
or anything else. In the meantime, 300,000 or three million 
pacifists sitting down will not coerce the government because 
they are irrelevant to the defence structure of the nation.” 
They opt for the method of setting a good example. They 
“cannot make people stop fighting. But they can show that 
there are a few people who are still capable of showing good 
will.”’3 Another aspect of Quaker non-conformism is that they 
are opposed to organised “non-violent resistance”. According 
to Quaker tradition, participation in any collective action, . 
such as the “peace watch” is a matter of individual choice, 
but can on no account be decided by any Quaker body 


4 Quoted from the leaflet, The American European Peace March, 87 
Chancery Lane, London, England. 

2G. Lakey, Non Violent Action..., p. 18. 

3°W. Comfort, The Quaker Way of Life, Philadelphia, 1968, p. 160. 


827 





officially, since they hold that this would represent an infringe- 
ment of individual freedom. At the same time they try very 
hard to ensure that the supporters of various anti-war campaigns 
do not resort to illegal actions. 

The Quakers do a considerable service in influencing public 
opinion against the war in Indochina. However, the mass protest 
movement against the war, for its political radicalism, methods 
of action and clear political awareness, adds more and more 
new dimensions to the struggle so that it is gradually coming 
to correspond less and less to the narrow, traditional forms 
of Quaker protest. Thus, many American draftees are refusing 
to respond to call-up, and there are numerous cases of draft- 
cards being demonstratively burned in public. There was a 
time when the Quakers’ refusal to do military service brought 
them into conflict with the government, so that one might 
well expect them to approve of this form of protest. In fact, 
however, they adopt an extremely cautious attitude, maintaining 
that they do not view this as a suitable method; firstly, because 
it is illegal, and secondly, because it is directed against the 
war in Indochina and not against war in general, while the 
Quakers are protesting against war as a method of resolving 
disputes as a matter of principle rather than against American 
policy in Vietnam in particular. At the same time, faithful to 
their traditional philanthropical principles, the Quakers are 
trying to help the families of men imprisoned for avoiding 
the draft. 

What can be said in conclusion, by way of summing up the 
ideology and activities of the Quakers? 

Clearly, since the Quaker conception is unscientific, dissem- 
inates false ideas about the laws of social development and 
the ways of transforming society, and fails to reveal the real 
social contradictions, our final verdict on the Quaker ideology 
cannot be favourable. But it would be wrong to leave it at 
that. 

The activities of the Quakers are not simply derivative from 
their social outlook, which is a reflection of the real contradic- 
tions inherent in American society. One must not confuse the 
social role of an ideology and the social role of the movement 
that produced it. The fact that an ideology is unscientific, does 
not prevent the corresponding movement from being democratic 
and progressive. Thus, one cannot judge Quaker ideology 
purely on the basis of the outlook it involves, but only in terms 
of the trends of the movement in the context of present-day 


328 

























American socio-political life. It would be naive to expect the 
ideology of the peace movement to be a hundred per cent 
scientific in the context of intense bourgeois propaganda. This 
can only emerge after a long process of struggle and search 
involving numerous disappointments, as the result of experience 
acquired in political action. Indeed, a complex, painful process 
of evolving a scientific, realistic social philosophy and effective 
methods of struggle against militarism is actually in progress 
at the present time. And the activity and ideology of the 
Quakers is an important part of this process. 

The Quakers render an important service in convincingly 
demonstrating the way the existing relations and institutions 
of American society are in sharp contradiction to the tradi- 
tional democratic freedoms, and the fact that America’s home 
and foreign policy are neither of them in the national interests. 
Quaker attempts to present the horrors of nuclear war and 
expose the false, criminal nature of such theories as “retalia- 
tion” and “limited war” have had a great impact. The fact 
that these ideas are cloaked in the traditional Christian guise 
has actually helped to promote their influence in a country 
where Christianity preserves great authority. 

There is another important aspect of Quaker activities that 
deserves mention. The Quaker acts on behalf not of particular 
political doctrines but of elementary, universal moral principles, 
such as mutual respect, love, trust, honesty, the right to hold 
one’s own opinions, strong family ties and so on. The fact that 
these demands remain unfulfilled, despite all the action taken 
on their behalf, causes people to think about these problems 
and make an effort to discover their real causes. 








Chapter XVII 


WESTERN 
SCIENTISTS 

AND INTELLECTUALS 
AND THE QUEST 
FOR PEACE 





Today, the problem of war and peace is more closely con- 
nected with the development of science and technology than 
ever before. As a result, leading scientists throughout the world 
find themselves unable to ignore the problems of war and 
peace which have forced their way into the “sacred precinct” 
of science and knowledge. 

In the post-war period progressive scientists and sociologists 
have been increasingly active in defending ideas for elimina- 
ting war and elaborating programmes for universal peace. This 
has been accompanied by growing criticism of the official 
ideology and policies of the imperialist countries for total war 
against the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries and 
“local wars” against the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin 
America struggling for their national independence and 
freedom. 


General Features of 
the Anti-War Views 
of Western Scientists 
and Scholars 


The growing opposition to war on the part of Western 
scientists and scholars is determined by a number of important 
objective factors of the socio-political realities of the world 


330 










today. Their views are an expression of three basic factors: 
firstly, growing international opposition to the forces of mi- 
litarism and war that is manifest in the relations between the 
socialist and capitalist systems, in the international labour 
movement and the national liberation movement; secondly, the 
inherent contradictions in the socio-political and spiritual life 
of the capitalist countries, the mounting struggle of all the 
forces of peace against the extreme Right-wing forces of reac- 
tion, fascism and war, and thirdly, the acceptance by the more 
far-sighted and intelligent Western thinkers of the pro- 
gressive anti-war traditions of humanism, and the universal 
democratic ideals of peace and social progress. 

These traditions are not passively inherited and accepted 
but are being consistently developed by progressive, democratic 
scientists, in both the socio-political and _ ethico-ideological 
spheres. The historical events of the twentieth century are 
gradually producing a fuller awareness of the special impor- 
tance of the present age in the history of mankind, realisation 
of the tremendous responsibility leading scientists bear for 
what happens in the world and hence of the need for selfless 
struggle to prevent a thermonuclear holocaust. 

It is of fundamental importance for the anti-war activities 
of the scientists that they have a correct understanding of 
the true causes of war and the militarisation of science and 
technology in the West and are fully aware of the chief 
sources of violence in the present age. The International Meet- 
ing of Communist and Workers’ Parties held in Moscow in 
1969 addressed an “Appeal in Defence of Peace” to people 
of every station in society all over the world to call their 
attention to these causes. “Wars, acts of aggression and 
violence, encroachments on the freedom of nations—all have 
their roots in the policies of imperialism.... Imperialism is 
responsible for channelling the greatest achievements of science 
and technology, which throw open new vistas to humanity, for 
purposes of destruction, while at the same time hundreds of 
millions of people suffer from hunger and poverty”.! These 
ideas are meeting growing response from leading scientists 
throughout the world. 

The history of the present century, and especially the tragic 
lessons of the two world wars and the whole series of local 


! International Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties, Moscow, 
1969, Prague, 1969, pp. 47-48. 





331 








wars in the post-war period caused by imperialist aggression 
against peoples trying to win their freedom, has forced many 
scientists to abandon the “ivory tower’ of “pure science”. The 
socio-political shortsightedness of adherents to the idea of 
“pure” science is harmful not only as encouraging “neutrality” 
and “non-interference” in politics, but as dangerous fellow- 
travelling with the forces of militarism and war. Practice has 
shown that it is impossible to remain aloof from the conflicts 
of our age. The forces of war and reaction not only exploit 
scientists: in the long run they repress those scientists who 
refuse to go along with them.” 

Max Born writes in this connection that the destruction of 
the historically shaped scientific centres by the nazis was the 
heavy political lesson learnt by the German scientists who 
wanted to keep away from politics and tried to defend academic 
freedom alone.! This lesson brought such famous German 
scientists as M. Born, O. Hahn and C. Weizsacker, and many 
others over to opposition to nazism and militarism. Their own 
bitter experience served to convince some of the leading 
Western scientists of the impossibility of scientists remaining 
“uncommitted”, since in the twentieth century science and 
technology have become a direct and powerful instrument of 
politics. 

The great scientist Albert Einstein abandoned his neutral, 
pacifist position to become an active opponent of militarism 
at the time when militant fascism, including German nazism, 
rose its ugly head. Unlike Gandhi, he believes “in passive 
resistance only up to a certain point”. He believes that “one 
should resort to violence whenever militant fascism arises. . . .””2 
Referring to the qualitative change that has occurred in the 
place and role of science, and especially physics, in society 
over the last few decades, Born says that modern physics is no 
longer the “quiet, pure science of old”. Several Western coun- 
tries are making use of it as a “decisive factor in the power 
politics of nations”. Therefore, no scientist “can avoid the 
question of conscience how far he wants to collaborate in the 
development of forces which threaten the very existence of 
the civilised world”.? 

The life and work of Einstein and several other leading 


1 See Max Born, Physics in My Generation, London, 1956. 
2 Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, Evanston, 1949, p. 654. 
3 M. Born, Physics in My Generation, London, 1956, p. 223. 


332 















Western scientists, and the court charges brought against the 
nuclear physicist R. Oppenheimer and other anti-militarist 
scientists in the USA are convincing proof that science cannot 
remain “neutral” in the age of contest between the forces of 
reaction and progress; and that non-involvement in socio- 
political life is futile and even harmful. In his lecture “War 
and the Nations”, Robert Oppenheimer points out the tremen- 
dous responsibility scientists have for the advice they give their 
governments, for what they say in public, and, especially, for 
finding the right direction in good time. He rightly insists that 
it is impossible for scientists to remain aloof from conscious 
social activity. “The question of what our purpose is on earth, 
the question of how we may make a government that would 
represent these purposes, the question of what our own res- 
ponsibility is, the question of what business it is of ours to 
think about these things are not to be solved in any laboratory 
or settled by any equation or any mathematics.”! 

Karl Jaspers’ courageous condemnation of militarism and the 
undemocratic features of the West German scene was followed 
by an open letter addressed to him by Walter Ulbricht, pub- 
lished in Neues Deutschland. Ulbricht wrote: “I hold a dif- 
ferent view from you on many matters. But your book has 
convinced me that you are moved by the same concern that 
forces me and my political friends to use every opportunity to 
ensure peace in Germany and for Germany.... I am extremely 
moved by the fact that on the basis of our experience, and 
especially on the basis of our experience of two world wars 
and the events that led up to them, and also as a result of 
the transition of the Federal Republic of Germany to a formed 
society and ... we have reached similar conclusions on the 
major questions.... The time has come for all humanistically 
minded people to oppose this ‘formed society’. We welcome 
the fact that you—along with many other scientists—raise a 
warning voice, pointing out the danger of such developments 
and openly defending the rights and interests of the masses 
and their longing for peace’.2 Thus, once again, in new 
historical conditions, the grave threat of war brings the spotlight 
back to the direct connection between the military danger of 
war and its social origins—the socio-economic and _ political 
system of capitalism. 

1 J. Robert Oppenheimer, The Flying to Peace. Three Crises for 


Physicists, London-New York-Toronto, 1964, pp. 62-63. 
2 Neues Deutschland, June 10, 1966, p. 3. 


333 














Jaspers is not alone. Many other outstanding members of 
the West German intelligentsia are approaching the masses 
in an attempt to oppose the threat of war and the reactionary 
political forces from whom this threat derives. Three hundred 
and sixty two West German professors signed a protest against 
emergency laws addressed to the West German Trade Union. 
The famous physicists Max Born, Otto Hahn, Carl Weizsacker 
are also active champions of peace. 

An important feature of the anti-war activities of leading 
scientists today is their growing solidarity and unity. This is 
indeed an important general feature of the development of 
the peace movement in the post-war period. Ideological differ- 
ences did not prevent a large group of scientists headed by 
Einstein, Joliot-Curie, Bertrand Russell, Pauling and Rotblat 
from uniting to issue a joint Manifesto—known as the Russell- 
Einstein Manifesto—which presented the problem in the 
starkest terms: “Shall we put an end to the human race; or 
shall mankind renounce war?”! All differences were submerged 
by this common inescapable problem. 

The last few decades have seen a noteworthy evolution, 
which is still going on, among the more far-sighted Western 
scientists towards a greater sense of social and moral respon- 
sibility for what happens in the world. The logic of their life 
and work involves them in the struggle against the forces of 
war and reaction. M. Born draws the patently correct and 
progressive general conclusion that for all scientists the “prob- 
lem of responsibility is as international as science herself’? 

For all their differences, the leading Western scientists who 
actively support peace are in agreement on the basic issues: 
unconditional condemnation of wars of aggression as the 
gravest of crimes against humanity, opposition to militarism 
and nuclear war, sincere dedication to the humanistic ideal of 
ensuring that scientific achievements are used in the interests 
of peace. These fundamental socio-political principles have 
always served as a unifying factor for progressive Western 
intellectuals. Today, they provide a rallying point for people 
of such different views and calling as the physicists Einstein 
and Born, the philosophers and sociologists Russell and Mills, 
the writers Ernst Hemingway and Remarque, the religious and 


1 J. Rotblat, “History of the Pugwash Conferences’, Science and World 
Affairs, London, 1962, p. 40. 
2M. Born, op. cit., p. 224. 


334 




































public figures Johnson and Endicott, and the winners of the 
Nobel Prize for peace, Linus Pauling and Albert Schweitzer. 

For many years these men have revealed in their writings 
and social activities the conviction that with the appearance 
of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, 
the problem of peace and war has become the major problem 
of the second half of the twentieth century. They intend that 
all men of good will everywhere should fully realise this and 
mobilise all their efforts to prevent nuclear war and decide 
the vital problem of our age—war or peace?—once and for 
all in favour of the latter. Yet in defining the nature of war 
they show themselves unable to advance objective criteria that 
could serve as the basis for a scientific classification of wars. 

A typical example of the kind of classification advanced 
by Western scientists and scholars is that of the American 
professor of philosophy and _ sociology L. Mumford. “War 
differs in scale, in intention, in deadliness, and in frequency 
with the type of society,” he writes.! Yet neither in the several 
hundred pages of his book, nor in other works by him and his 
colleagues do we find a satisfactory explanation of how the 
“type of society” actually affects these features let alone as 
to how it determines the socio-political content of a given war, 
making it progressive or reactionary. 

It is Marxism-Leninism that gives the only scientific clas- 
sification of wars, defining them as just or unjust on the basis 
of objective criteria—the concrete historical essence of a war. 
Thus, Lenin stressed the need to “be clear as to what historical 
conditions have given rise to the war, what classes are waging 
it, and for what ends,” adding that “unless we grasp this, all 
our talk about war will necessarily be utterly futile, engender- 
ing more heat than light.”2 If war is waged by a people 
fighting for its independence and freedom, against imperialism, 
fascism or neo-colonialism, such a war is no doubt just. If a 
war is waged against the masses, it is criminal and ultimately 
doomed to ignominious defeat. 

In our age the opposition between two antagonistic social 
systems, socialism and capitalism, stands out more clearly than 
ever before, as do the qualitatively different attitudes of the - 
two systems to war. This to some extent compensates for the 
lack of perception and social limitations of the methodology 


{1 Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilisation, New York, 1934, p. 108. 
2 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24, p. 399. 





335 











of Western philosophers and sociologists who are opposed to 
war. Given conscientiousness and the abundance of facts they 
are able to draw the right conclusions as regards the socialist 
interest in preventing war and capitalist adherence to war. 

The American scholar F. L. Schuman, who has devoted over 
forty years to serious study of the USSR, presents the view, 
founded on very sound arguments, that war is essentially alien 
to the socialist system. He notes that Lenin, in the earliest 
days of the Soviet state, learned that ‘reliance upon military 
force to extend Communism was a ‘mistake’”.t Schuman 
considers that the Soviet state has always remained faithful 
to this principle throughout its history. 

Analysing the nine years of war the Soviet state was forced 
to wage (1918-21 and 1939-45), Schuman concludes that they 
“were not the consequence of Communist military attacks upon 
the Western Powers but of anti-Communist military attacks 
upon the USSR.... Soviet war of defence against unprovoked 
attack aimed at the annihilation of the Soviet State’”.2 

The attitude to war of the bellicose forces of contemporary 
imperialism and anti-communism—the so-called “military-in- 
dustrial complex” in the USA, the FRG and several other 
Western countries—is diametrically opposed to this attitude 
of the socialist system. It was the inherent contradictions of 
the capitalist system, the Great Depression and all it entailed 
(monetary upheavals, economic stagnation, the militarisation of 
science and the economy), the emergence of fascism in Germany, 
Spain, Italy and Japan that were the inevitable causes of the 
Second World War.’ Erich Fromm, in his book May Man 
Prevail? presents a penetrating and convincing analysis of the 
fundamental reasons for the adherence to militarism and war 
of those forces in the USA and other Western countries that 
detest socialism. He notes their fear of peaceful competition 
with the Soviet Union. This pathological fear leads the United 
States and anti-socialist forces in the West to opt for armed 
struggle against the Soviet Union and the other socialist coun- 
tries in preference to socio-economic competition. Contrary to 
the dogmas of Western ideologists and politicians who are 
hostile to socialism, Fromm qualifies their adherence to mi- 
litarism and war as a sign of the weakness, not the strength 


1 F. Schuman, International Politics, New York-Toronto-London, 1958, 
p. 501. 

2 bid. 

3 Ibid., p. 102. 











of the capitalist West, as defeatism and loss of faith in the 
values proclaimed by the West.! 

Whatever their other differences, the most consistent and 
far-sighted Western scientists and scholars who are opposed 
to war all have in common acceptance of and growing support 
for the principle of peaceful coexistence. 

Despite certain faults and limitations in their interpretation 
of this principle, their support for it has undeniably a great 
ideological impact and practical effect. Its most consistent 
champions in the West (C. Lamont, Bertrand Russell, Erich 
Fromm, L. Mumford, F. Schuman, H. Hughes, D. Fleming, 
A. Monk and L. Pauling) see the problem of our age in the 
stark terms of “Co-existence or Co-destruction?”. 

Most of them condemn anti-communism and adopt a friendly 
attitude to the Soviet Union and socialism. Demonstrating 
great scientific objectiveness and civic courage, they scorn 
the absurd accusations of the militarists that they are “un- 
patriotic” and guilty of “treachery”. They present all kinds of 
evidence of the Soviet Union’s sincere desire for peace, and 
the dangers of anti-communism as an instrument of war or a 
means to war (Mills, Russell, Lamont, Sartre, Pauling and 
others). 

A basic feature of the ideological and moral growth of 
Western anti-militarist intellectuals is their ever better under- 
standing, in spite of anti-communist propaganda to the con- 
trary, of the fact that the Soviet people and its Communist 
Party, guided by Lenin’s ideas, are sincere and convinced sup- 
porters of international peace. In the twenty years since its 
founding, the World Peace Movement’s Lenin Peace Prizes 
have gained truly world-wide recognition, and have been 
awarded to people from 51 countries. 

Another of these common features is social optimism, the 
belief that it is possible to prevent world nuclear war and put 
an end to war altogether, the belief that mankind’s future does 
not necessarily involve the continuation of the extremely costly 
and highly dangerous arms race, that reason and humanism 
can prevail in international relations, and that the forces of 
war are effectively isolated and defeated. 

Thus, Bertrand Russell exorts us not to listen to the pes- 
simist, “for if we do, we are traitors to Man’s future.’’2 


{ Erich Fromm, May Man Prevail?, New York, 1961. 
2 B. Russell, Has Man a Future?, London, 1961, p. 128. 





22—203 337 


| 
| 











Yet another of these features is moral integrity, a conscience 
as impeccably reliable, to borrow a phrase from Hemingway, 
as the standard metre in Paris. In times of tense international 
crises brought about by imperialist policies and distorted by 
Western propaganda, these people have kept their sanity and 
sense of proportion, their objectiveness and dignity, and have 
demanded moral and political responsibility of their govern- 
ments. They have sufficient civic courage to scorn philistine 
considerations of “personal gain”. As Bertrand Russell has 
put it, these scientists and philosophers have not shown them- 
selves “obedient tools of their governments’’.4 

The main material forces on the side of peace and the 
prevention of nuclear war—the Soviet Union and the other 
socialist countries, the international communist and workers’ 
movement, peace-loving countries and the peace movement— 
also create, undoubtedly, the chief moral, spiritual forces of 
the struggle for peace, against aggressors. The increasing 
activity of intellectuals and scientists in the West directed 
against the aggressors and their policies, and the influence 
their ideas have on public opinion in the West are an addi- 
tional factor of considerable importance in the broad democratic 
front of the peace movement. 


Condemnation of War 
and the Arms Race 


The analysis of militarism and wars as spegific social 
phenomena occupies a place of increasing importance in the 
researches of Western philosophers and_ sociologists who 
declare themselves for lasting universal peace. Indeed, it could 
not be otherwise, for any search for ways and means of en- 
suring peace of necessity sooner or later leads to a battle 
against militarism and war. 

Wright C. Mills is speaking for a large number of Western 
peace-loving intellectuals when he hits out against all the 
empty talk about peace current in the West: “To talk about 
peace without ever talking about the means of war is indeed 
to be softheaded.”2 Moreover, he insists that: “Insofar as men 
want peace, they must see to it that these means (“the means 
of making history”, including ‘armed force and economic 


1 B. Russell, op. cit., p. 134. 


2 Wright C. Mills, The Causes of World War Three, New York, 1958, 
p. 121. 


338 





forces”.—A.G.) are used to bring it about, that they are not 
made relevant to the drift and thrust toward war.”! 

Several Western scholars are taking steps in the direction 
of revealing the true causes of modern militarism and war, 
that lie deeply rooted in the socio-economic and political nature 
of imperialism and neo-fascism. 

Thus, at the time when the world stood on the threshold 
of the Second World War, the British philosopher Bertrand 
Russell wrote of the outmodedness of the capitalist “system 
of private property”, and concluded that expansionism, the 
scramble among the imperialist powers to further their own 
interests at the expense of the others and to seize one another’s 
possessions was bound to end in “a diplomatic bargain or a 
war’. 

The events of the last three decades have given Bertrand 
Russell a vast fund of facts for even more emphatic general 
conclusions. Analysing the aggressive war waged by the United 
States in Vietnam, he speaks out against the criminal aim of 
American imperialism for world domination, and calls upon 
the peoples of Europe and America to curb the milita- 
rists. 

Western scholars are becoming increasingly aware of the 
doubtful motives that are pursued by the monopolies and 
magnates in encouraging the militarisation of science and 
technology. Thus, Norbert Wiener speaks of the sin of “using 
the magic of modern automatisation to further personal profit 
or let loose the apocalyptic terrors of nuclear warfare.’ 

The American sociologist L. Mumford, among others, points 
out the harmfulness of war to society in view of the tremendous 
waste it involves. “The institution of war is such a large- 
scale perversion....” “With the very advance of civilisation 
war became a collective drama....” “In modern times this 
monstrous negation of values has captured and drained off 
energies that should have gone to the culture of cities and 
the development of man”.4 

The evil and futility of war lies not only in the colossal 
squandering of energies it involves. As the more sober-minded 
representatives of their society, the anti-militarist scholars in 


1 Ibid. 

2 Bertrand Russell, Which Way to Peace?, Plymouth, 1936, pp. 17, 75. 

3 Norbert Wiener, God and Golem, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1964, 
p. 52. 

4 Lewis Mumford, The Conduct of Life, London, 1952, p. 129. 


22* 339 














the West show that wars, far from removing the contradic- 
tions of capitalism, only serve to increase them greatly. “Wars 
have indeed aggravated all our difficulties today,”! remarks 
L. Mumford. 

The well-known American philosopher C. Lamont warns 
capitalist ruling circles that: “The Third World War would 
most certainly create more problems than it solved; and would 
leave mankind in a bitter, disorganised, economically chaotic 
state which would in all likelihood lead to future wars and 
revolutions.’”2 

Western anti-militarist scholars lay special emphasis on the 
absurdity of “‘a first-class H-bomb war”, as threatening colossal 
destruction without offering the West any chance of political 
advantage. But they also condemn the policy of “local wars”, 
for the obvious reason that today any one of them could easily 
lead to an all-out nuclear conflict. Mumford, for example, 
suggests ceasing to prepare for war against Russia and avert 
a total catastrophe while it is still possible.? 

Western anti-militarist scholars give a great deal of atten- 
tion to the economic aspects of the problem of war and peace. 
The policy of militarism, the arms race and the waging of 
aggressive wars paralyses the development of many major 
spheres of human activity, and involves a tremendous waste 
of human and material resources. The increasing militarisa- 
tion of the economies of the USA and _ its satellites 
in the NATO and other military blocs does not in fact serve 
to ensure that they flourish as Western propaganda would 
have people believe. On the contrary, it inevitably entails 
exacerbation of the economic contradictions of the capitalist 
system, and the masses are forced to bear the onerous burden 
of exhorbitant military expenditure. 

Anti-militarist scientists have proved beyond doubt that 
atomic and thermonuclear explosions have already caused 
people serious harm in the form of radiation sickness. A large- 
scale nuclear war would cause irreparable genetic damage 
to human beings, flora and fauna on all continents. World- 
famous scientists like Einstein, Born and Albert Schweitzer 
(in the famous series of lectures “Peace or Atomic War?”) and 
many others have therefore openly condemned nuclear war 
on the basis of irrefutable facts, and branded as a crime 
~ 1 Lewis Mumford, op. cit., p. 13. 


2 C. Lamont, Soviet Civilisation, New York, 1952, p. 363. 
3 L. Mumford, The Art of the Impossible, pp. 9, 29. 


340 


















the sanctioning by the US ruling circles of the dropping of 
atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.! Today, anti-mili- 
tarist scientists in the West are issuing numerous declarations, 
articles and protests against the American use of weapons of 
mass destruction (lethal chemical substances and napalm bombs 
against the Vietnamese). 

The fact that scientific and technological progress is chan- 
nelled to military purposes by the Western power élite and 
the very system of capitalism, and the great danger this re- 
presents, was pointed out at the World Congress for Peace 
in 1949: “Science, whose role is to ensure the happiness of 
mankind, is being diverted from its goal and is forced to 
serve the ends of war’.? 

Einstein, for instance, regards the “economic anarchy” of 
capitalist society producing “an oligarchy of private capital 
the enormous power of which cannot be effectively checked...” 
to be “the real source of the evil’. Socialism, on the contrary, 
is deeply interested in preserving peace. Einstein rejects the 
reactionary idea spread by anti-communist propaganda that 
the Soviet Union today is a militarist state, similar in many 
respects to nazi Germany, and believes them to be very 
different, particularly “as to basic aims and goals”’.* He 
referred to the nazis as a “bunch of thugs” who would “get 
their deserts”, and was equally scathing in his criticism of 
those responsible for Munich sell-out. 

Leading Western scientists point to the fact that in their 
countries, and particularly in the USA, “there are large in- 
dustries and numerous businesses that make money out of 
arms”. There are active forces there who “have a personal 
interest in the preparation and, if necessary, the waging of 
war’. “Accordingly,” the outstanding American sociologist 
W. Mills declares, “an attack on war-making is also an 
attack on the US power élite.’ 

The actions of the economic and political power élite of the 
USA in the post-war years exposed them to the judgement of 


1 See S. Melman, Our Depleted Society, New York, 1965; Albert Einstein, 
Philosopher-Scientist. The Library of Living Philosophers, p. 656. 
2 Supplement to New Times, No. 19, May 4, 1949, Moscow, p. 52. 
3 Albert Einstein, “Why Socialism?” Monthly Review, New York, June 
1955, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 48, 49. 
4 Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, op. cit., p. 657. 
5 M. Born, op. cit., p. 219. 
6 W. Mills, The Causes of World War Three, pp. 120-21. 


341 
















history as responsible for international crises fraught with 
nuclear disaster. 

As Professor Wheelwright, member of the Peace Committee, 
observed, as soon as the forces of peace got the upper hand 
in the UN, the US Government ignored the United Nations 
completely in conducting its aggressive policy. US ruling 
circles act counter to the aspirations for freedom of the peoples 
of the former colonial countries. Professor Wheelwright calls 
on people to use every available method to make the American 
leaders realise that “the world has changed in the last twenty 
years”! 

Western scientists are undertaking more and more energetic 
actions in this direction. An example was the much-publicised 
refusal of Jean-Paul Sartre to go to the USA as a protest 
against the American war in Vietnam. In his article ‘““Why 
I did not go to America”, Sartre referred to the war in 
Vietnam as “a clear, frank, overt, typical act of aggression, 
for which there is neither justification nor any serious alibi.” 
Sartre puts his finger on the reactionary character of American 
policy when he says: “...the American intervention in North 
Vietnam, should be regarded in the context of American foreign 
policy as a whole. It is not merely a question of Vietnam. 
If the Americans are driven out of Saigon, it will entail conse- 
quences throughout the third world, and will eventually lead 
to upheavals in Latin America. The aim is to forcefully 
preserve the whole system of exploitation.’ 

Under the impact of the events of recent history and current 
affairs, more and more Western scientists are coming to 
condemn anti-communism as an instrument of war and a force 
preparing a nuclear disaster. As F. Schuman points out, since 
the emergence of the Soviet Union, the fiercest wars have been 
the result of “anti-Communist military attacks upon the 
USSR”.3 In the USSR and the other socialist countries, on 
the other hand, militarism and aggression have never been 
used as a means of solving internal and international problems. 
Soviet leaders have never acted rashly and improvidently in 
international affairs, but have always “cultivated peace and 
trade” with the Western Powers.‘ 





{ E. L. Wheelwright, “Hiroshima or the U.N. Which Road for Man- 
kind?‘ Peace Action in Australia, 1965, Vol. 7, No. 5, pp. 6, 7. 

2 Izvestia, April 5, 1965. 

3 F. Schuman, International Politics, p. 501. 

4 Thid., p. 502. 


342 









Even those democratic scientists, scholars and public figures 
in the West who are far from embracing Marxism and com- 
munism are becoming more and more articulate in condemning 
the reactionary doctrine “justifying” war in the name of anti- 
communism. Intellectuals and peoples realise that anti-com- 
munism means war. 

Among the more prominent intellectuals who indicate to 
the relationship between cold war and anti-communism, special 
mention should be made of Bertrand Russell, Albert Einstein, 
D. Fleming, W. Mills, Jean-Paul Sartre, J. Sommerville, 
F. Schuman, Erich Fromm, J. Morray, C. Lamont, L. Mumford 
and H. Hughes. 

The idea that it is militarism and anti-communism that 
engender cold war, local imperialist and neo-colonialist wars 
runs like a scarlet thread through the vast majority of intel- 
ligent works devoted to the cold war and the numerous acts of 
aggression committed by the Western Powers. 

The eminent American historian D. F. Fleming, by the very 
title of his book The Cold War and Its Origins: 1917-1960, 
draws the reader’s attention to the fact that the source of 
the cold war is to be sought in the historic turning point of 
the 1917 Revolution.! Keeping strictly to irrefutable historical 
facts, Professor Fleming analyses the whole history of the 
cold war of the capitalist countries against the Soviet state. 
He writes how after the October Revolution the USA, Germany, 
Britain, Japan and other countries organised armed interven- 
tion which was only repelled as the result of enormous efforts 
and sacrifices. This marked the actual beginning of the cold 
war of international anti-communism against the Soviet State, 
which has gone on year in year out ever since, although the 
term “cold war” was not introduced until after the Second 
World War. Western ideologists and politicians who them- 
selves contribute to the cold war are also wont to regard 
October 1917 as its origin and cause.” 

Rejecting the anti-communist claim that the cold war 
was initiated by the Soviet Union, Professor Fleming 
points out that from the very first, Lenin declared the 
very opposite course, the course of peaceful coexistence: 


t Fleming D. F., The Cold War and Its Origins: 1917-1960, New York, 
1956. 

2 See, for example, D. Donnelly’s Struggle for the World. The Cold 
War: 1917-1965, New York, 1965. 


348 








“Let American capitalists not touch us; we will not touch 
them”. 

Many progressive Western intellectuals share the view that 
the cold war is a major weapon against democracy, and that 
if continued, it will eventually stifle all democracy in the 
USA and other Western countries.? 

Western progressive intellectuals are growing more and 
more openly critical of such inevitable attributes of the cold 
war as the arms race, the essentially aggressive “strategy of 
deterrence”, increased taxation and violation of democratic 
freedoms. Even among the faithful supporters of the official 
ideology of the West there is a growing realisation that the 
USA is not in a position to dictate its selfish will to other 
states and force its own wishes upon the peoples of the world? 
War and the forces of war are condemned by the peoples of 
the world and by history. 


Western Intellectuals 
on the Ways of 
Achieving Lasting Peace 


All significant works by Western anti-militarist intellectuals 
propound the idea that stable universal peace would be to 
the advantage of all nations, capitalist or socialist, and call 
for a great collective effort by all peoples to achieve it. 

In his Common Sense and Nuclear War, Bertrand Russell 
appeals to the common sense of peoples and governments, and 
sets out “to show possible means of achieving peace in ways 
which should be equally acceptable....”4 As Russell rightly 
points out, both social systems should base their relations on 
the existing possibilities of preserving peace and the pressing 
need for common measures to ensure their mutual security. 

Western anti-militarist intellectuals realise that a long period 
of peace will ensure new achievements in the building of 
socialism and communism, and reject outright the absurd argu- 
ment of anti-communist ideologists and politicians that a 
nuclear war is “desirable” on the grounds that peace is to 


{D. F. Fleming, The Cold War and Its Origins: 1917-1960, Vol. I, 
. 537. 
4 2H. H. Ransom, Can American Democracy Survive the Cold War?, 
New York, 1964, pp. XI, XIV, 353. 
3 A. Etzioni, Winning Without War, New York, 1965, pp. XI- 
XIII, 244. 
4 B. Russell, Common Sense and Nuclear (Warfare, op. cit., p. 7. 


344 








the advantage of the Communists. Thus, C. Lamont writes: 
“international peace, disarmament and a normal exchange 
of goods on the world market would be beneficial for the 
Communist nations. But to reject these aims on this account 
is to negate the processes of reason. For plainly the fulfilment 
of such goals would also be immensely beneficial to America 
and the rest of the non-Communist world.”! 

Western anti-militarists are generally agreed on the fact 
that peace can and must be achieved purely on a democratic 
basis of complete equality between nations, great and small, 
and on no account as a result of the major powers forcing 
their dictates on the weaker countries. 

Bertrand Russell insists that international peace should be 
achieved without sacrifices and concessions by individual 
nations, or infringement on their vital interests. Provided this 
attitude is observed, he sees no obstacles to the achievement 
of lasting peace acceptable to all countries.? 

This attitude involves condemnation of the idea of “peace 
based on force” which is extremely current among militant 
politicians and irresponsible “Sovietologists” in the West. 

Many Western philosophers and sociologists label their views 
on peace “conceptions”, “doctrines” and “strategies”, elaborat- 
ing them in an extremely pretentious form and claiming that 
only their own particular ideas can save the world from thermo- 
nuclear war (viz. “the doctrine of world government’, “the 
new gradualist strategy of peace”, and so on). As for the anti- 
militarist scholars and scientists they refrain from giving their 
views high-flown names, and make a serious attempt to examine 
the role of concrete factors in the achievement of peace. 

A vitally important task today is that of achieving total, 
universal disarmament under a system of strict controls, and 
this is one of the main directions in which Western anti-mili- 
tarist intellectuals are investigating the possibilities of en- 
suring peace. 

Their views generally have the following basic features in 
common: the form in which they view the question of disarma- 
ment, their serious arguments showing the need for universal 
disarmament, their correct analysis and high opinion of the 
position of the USSR as opposed to that of the USA, the FRG 
and other Western powers, and intelligent criticism of the 


1 C. Lamont, Soviet Civilisation, op. cit., pp. 386-87. 
2 B. Russell, Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare, p. 7. 


345 





numerous “theories” justifying the arms race that are current 
in the West. 

They regard the question of disarmament as a major problem 
of our time;! the complete destruction of the monstrous weapons 
of the second half of the twentieth century is the chief means 
of preventing a nuclear war, an absolute necessity and the 
main path to real peace on earth for all nations;? not palliatives, 
not arms control, not even the “freezing” of nuclear stock- 
piles are the answer—‘‘the first steps in avoiding a nuclear 
cataclysm and preserving democracy are to agree on universal 
disarmament.’ 

The arguments they put forward can largely be summed 
up in two main ones: the terrible devastating power of nuclear 
weapons, and secondly, the harmful results the arms race 
entails for the Western countries. The latter not only serves 
to exacerbate the basic contradictions of Western society, being 
detrimental to the bulk of the population, but threatens to 
destroy all vestiges of democracy and leads to the dominance 
of Right-wing militarist forces. This latter argument is pre- 
sented most convincingly by Bertrand Russell, W. Mills and 
several others. Erich Fromm points out that a society follow- 
ing the road of mutual threats cannot be expected to preserve 
its democratic character.4 

Western anti-militarist intellectuals began to call for disarma- 
ment and the liquidation of nuclear weapons and effective 
international control shortly after the Second World War when 
the USA was conducting a policy of “nuclear blackmail’. 
L. Mumford presented a detailed system of practical measures 
for US disarmament in his Programme for Survival as early 
as 1946. He insisted that the American Government, the 
President and Congress should undertake the following mea- 
sures without delay in the interests of the whole world. 

1. Declare readiness to submit to a complete system of 
United Nations’ inspection and control of atomic weapons 
and atomic energy. 

2. Stop further manufacture of atomic bombs. 

3. Dismantle the bombs America had made and place her 
stockpile of fissionable materials under United Nations’ guard, 


1 Problems of World Disarmament, Boston, 1963, pp. 1-11. 
2 S. Chase, Live and Let Live, New York, 1960, p. 135. 

3 E. Fromm, May Man Prevail?, p. 248. 

4 Ibid., p. 207. 


346 

















as a proof of moral unwillingness to use the bombs in a surprise 
attack against any nation.! 

If the United States had adopted this programme twenty 
years ago instead of forcing the arms race on the Soviet Union, 
the socialist countries, and all mankind, the threat of atomic 
destruction would not hang over the world today and tremen- 
dous material values now being expended on the arms race 
could be used in the interests of the peoples of the world and 
social progress. 

Bertrand Russell insists on the need for universal disarma- 
ment and unmasks the “hypocrisy of the official attitude”. He 
criticises the “theory”, current in the West and especially in 
the USA, that “disarmament might cause a disastrous economic 
dislocation”, and shows how ridiculous and paradoxical it is 
to believe that “we can only keep alive by preparing to kill 
each other”. He points out that this attitude is reactionary and 
“fostered by those who are interested in the armament 
industry.” This “theory”, intended to discredit disarmament 
and deceive people, is completely unfounded. As Russell says, 
experience at the end of the Second World War “showed 
the possibility of a smooth transition from a war economy 
to a peace economy.’ 

The American sociologist and philosopher S. Chase insists 
that peace must triumph in the world since the only alternative 
is nuclear destruction. He considers of paramount importance 
the elaboration of a programme for transferring the US 
economy to a peace footing, though he recognises that the 
process of diverting the capitalist economy and the whole US 
social organisation into peaceful channels would be an 
extremely complicated and painful process in view of the 
anarchy of capitalist production, the lack of planning at a 
national level and the dependency of the whole economy on 
the policy of militarism. Nevertheless, he convincingly shows 
that peaceful coexistence with the USSR and disarmament is 
the only sensible policy for the United States to adopt.3 

All the anti-militarist intellectuals are agreed that general 
and complete disarmament is a vital necessity in our time, 
and would guarantee peace and ensure the solution of major 
social problems. A basic stimulus to the further struggle of 


L. Mumford, Programme for Survival, London, 1946, p. 67. 
See B. Russell, Has Man a Future?, London, 1961, pp. 129-30. 
S. Chase, Live and Let Live, New York, 1960. 


1 
2 
3 


347 











progressive intellectuals against war is their conviction that 
peace is an absolutely essential condition for a qualitatively 
new stage in the development of world science, directing scien- 
tific and technological progress along non-military avenues. 
Soviet scientists are convinced that given international peace 
“the conditions for intercourse and exchange of ideas between 
scientists of the world would be greatly improved and this 
would provide the basis for an unprecedented flourishing of 
science and rapid progress”.1 

The “gradualist approach” to peace is widely advertised in 
American sociology as “the American road to peace”. What 
is the essence of this fundamentally anti-military theory, in- 
volving criticism of US militarist policy? What sensible ideas 
does it contain, and what are its limitations and shortcomings? 

The founder and most ardent champion of the ‘“gradualist 
theory” is the American sociologist Amitai Etzioni. Today he 
is a research associate of the Institute of War and Peace Studies 
at Columbia University. He expounded his theory in two 
works. He first presented it in The Hard Way to Peace. 
A New Strategy and later “considerably extended and updated 
it” in Winning Without War. In point of fact, however, the 
latter work is very much inferior and omits several of the 
sensible ideas contained in the former. 

The gradualist theory is intended as a detailed socio- 
political programme for the gradual, step-by-step transition 
from international tension, the arms race and the cold war 
to mutual understanding especially between the USSR and 
the USA, controlled disarmament, international co-operation 
and lasting peace. Professor Etzioni makes concrete suggestions 
as to how this may be achieved, which, although not new or 
original, can be generally regarded as positive and anti- 
militarist. The gradualist theory is propounded as an all- 
embracing programme, containing a new policy for speeding 
up the modernisation of the underdeveloped countries and 
proposals for the formation of a world-wide community and 
a new United Nations, and a new political strategy for elim- 
inating poverty, illiteracy and disease. In respect of the latter, 
the gradualist conception is a typical example of the numerous 
utopias to be found in post-war American sociology and has 
absolutely no practical value. 


1 The USSR, USA and Disarmament (in Russian), Nauka Publishers, 
Moscow, 1967, p. 191. 


348 








The idea that peace is to be identified with preserving the 
status quo, a view held by many Western intellectuals, is 
false and unrealistic. Although their subjective intentions may 
be, and often are, perfectly sincere, objectively the idea is 
fundamentally utopian and only serves to hinder the progres- 
sive struggle of peoples for their freedom and independence 
against imperialism and neo-colonialism. More and more 
progressive intellectuals are coming to understand the dialec- 
tical relationship between real peace and the struggle of peoples 
against the forces of war and coercion. Thus, Jean-Paul Sartre 
correctly noted the interdependence of peace and the freedom 
of peoples when he said: “We want to ensure peace through 
freedom and return peoples their freedom through peace.”! 

Along with realistic ideas for preventing wars and ensuring 
lasting peace, Western scientists and scholars advance many 
ideas which do not reflect the real conditions and objective 
tendencies of social development at all, and are even wholly 
incompatible with them. 

The most obvious and typical example of such utopian ideas 
is the theory of “world government” as the best way to ensure 
lasting peace.2 The wide currency and popularity this theory 
has enjoyed for decades now calls for serious critical analysis 
of its essentials, all the more so because it has been cham- 
pioned by such ardent supporters of peace among Western 
intellectuals as Bertrand Russell, L. Mumford, and Erich Fromm 
and numerous outstanding scientists, for example, Albert Ein- 
stein. 

The utopian views of anti-militarist intellectuals, for all their 
incompatibility with real conditions, are not to be confused 
with the aggressive “doctrine” of US ruling circles, who exploit 
the idea of ‘world government” in the interests of their policy 
of “world domination”. 

One of the most wide-spread weaknesses of the various 
peace programmes presented by Western intellectuals is that 
they are based on abstract humanitarian principles. Take the 
following statement by L. Pauling, for example: “I believe 
that there is a greater power in the world than the evil power - 
of military force, of nuclear bombs—there is the power of 
good, of morality, of humanitarianism.’3 


1 L’Assemblée Mondiale de la Paix. Helsinki, 22-29, Juin, 1955.— 
Supplement au numéro 50-51 de la revue Horizons, Aott 1955, p. 8. 

2 This is dealt with in the chapter “National Sovereignty and War”. 

3 Linus Pauling, No More War!, London, 1956, p. 193. 


349 








Many Western scientists, scholars and public figures who 
support peace are becoming more and more convinced of the 
advantages of peaceful coexistence both as theory and practice. 
Although they tend to give it a limited interpretation—as an 
alternative to war—they are nonetheless coming to realise the 
historical prospects and necessity of this policy, and to regard 
it as a sensible form of international relations, beneficial to 
socialist and capitalist countries alike. They realise that peace- 
ful coexistence is a necessity dictated by objective conditions— 
the only real alternative being a thermonuclear disaster. 
Western progressive intellectuals present this idea in various 
forms, but the underlying message is the same. “Co-existence 
or co-destruction” is C. Lamont’s way of posing the problem.! 
While M. Born says: “Bertrand Russel is right if he never 
tires of repeating: Our choice is only between Co-existence and 
Non-existence.”” 

It is perfectly natural that progressives in the West should 
support peaceful coexistence, since it is in the interests of all 
humanity with the exception of political reactionaries, the 
military clique, and the monopolies with a vested interest 
in the arms race—in short the various forces pursuing selfish, 
anti-social aims. 

The Western intellectuals who see the policy of peaceful 
coexistence as the road to universal peace are ardent supporters 
of the peace movement and opponents of reaction and war. 

It is the duty of Marxist philosophers to continue to objec- 
tively examine and support the anti-war ideas and practical 
peace programmes of Western anti-militarist scholars, point 
out the positive elements they contain and show how it is 
possible to overcome the frequent inconsistencies and_ social 
utopian features they contain. 

The present struggle for peace and social progress against 
the threat of war is not only a ceaseless ideological and polit- 
ical struggle against the forces of reaction and obscurantism 
and the ideology and policy of war and anti-communism, it 
also involves universal solidarity with and support for those 
anti-war movements and ideas which are declaring themselves 
in an ever more resolute fashion throughout the world. 


1 A chapter heading (pp. 355-411) in C. Lamont’s Soviet Civilisa- 
tion. 
2 M. Born, op. cit., p. 221. 


350 





A = 


Chapter XVIII 


THE PUGWASH 
MOVEMENT 


A feature of the development of international social move- 
ments today is the greatly increased role and influence of 
scientists. This is especially true of movements for peace and 
disarmament in which scientists play a role out of all propor- 
tion to their numerical strength among the supporters of such 
movements. This is partly a reflection of the generally increased 
role of science in modern life, but there are also certain more 
specific reasons. 

The first of these reasons is that scientists are more aware 
than most people of the terrible consequences of a thermo- 
nuclear war. Today, thermonuclear weapons exist that possess 
thousands of times the destructive power of the first atomic 
bombs dropped by the Americans on Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
in August 1945. Physicists, biologists, medical experts and other 
scientists are in a position by virtue of their own work and 
knowledge to fully realise, explain and show to others the 
terrible consequences involved in the use of this monstrous 
weapon of destruction. 

The second reason is that states make wide use of science 
in working out the strategy and tactics of modern warfare 
and in the creation of new destructive weapons, while the 
objective necessity of eliminating war demands that science 
play an active role in the development of peaceful relations 
between states, in producing a strategy and effective instru- 
ments of peace and international security. 


351 


STE Le en ee 


ee eet 











The first of our two factors explains the emergence of an 
international movement of scientists devoting special attention 
to problems of disarmament and co-operation—the Pugwash 
Movement. The second factor accounts for the growing amount 
of scientific research into the problems of peace in various 
countries over the last few years, which already makes it 
possible to speak of the birth of a new branch of | scientific 
research—peace studies. 

Since it is clearly impossible in the limited space available 
here to analyse all the numerous questions of the whole 
complex subject of the relationship between international 
science and peace and disarmament, we shall confine ourselves 
to examining the two above-mentioned factors and their con- 
sequences. 


The fact that we have chosen to pay special attention to 
the Pugwash Movement does not mean that we ignore the 
active role scientists are playing in numerous other social 
movements. Thus, a large group of leading scientists of several 
countries are members of the World Peace Movement, in the 
framework of which an active role is played by the World 
Federation of Scientific Workers (WFSW), with some 200,000 
members in 19 countries. However, the Pugwash Movement 
attracts our attention as being the only social movement ac- 
tually founded by scientists, composed exclusively of scientists, 
and concerned specifically with problems of international se- 
curity, disarmament and co-operation. 

The Pugwash Movement is a widely representative move- 
ment, including in its ranks scientists of various countries, 
socialist and capitalist, and of different philosophical and 
political views. It enjoys considerable authority, and even the 
governments of several capitalist countries that conduct a 
policy having little in common with peace and co-operation 
are forced to reckon with it. 

Although natural scientists, and particularly nuclear physic- 
ists form the core of the Pugwash Movement—this is a direct 
result of the first factor mentioned above, determining the 
special role of scientists in movements for peace and disarma- 
ment—specialists in the social and political sciences also play 
an active role. 

Such outstanding scientists of our age as Albert Einstein, 
Frederick Joliot-Curie, Bertrand Russell, Max Born and Linus 


352 





Pauling were among the founders of the Pugwash Movement 
and nursed it through its early stages. On July 9, 1955, these 
scientists issued a Manifesto in London, calling upon the 
scientists of the world and progressives everywhere to declare 
their opposition to world war as a means of solving political 
disputes and insist on their settlement by negotiation.! The 
scientists who signed, or actively supported, the Russell-Einstein 
Manifesto, as it was called, first met in conference in the house 
of the well-known businessman and public figure Mr. Cyrus 
Eaton, at Pugwash, Nova Scotia. Present were 22 scientists 
from 10 countries (USSR, USA, Britain, France, the Chinese 
People’s Republic, Japan, Poland, Austria, Canada and Austra- 
lia). They elected a Continuing Committee, whose members 
were Bertrand Russell (Britain), D. V. Skobeltsyn (USSR), 
E. Rabinovich (USA), J. Rotblat and S. Powell (Britain). 

The history of the Pugwash Movement is essentially the 
history of its conferences. It was not without reason that the 
Secretary-General of the Pugwash Continuing Committee, 
Professor J. Rotblat entitled his book on history of the move- 
ment: History of the Pugwash Conferences.? 

The Third International Pugwash Conference of Scientists, 
held in the Tyrolese town of Kitzbithel and in Vienna (Sep- 
tember 14-20, 1958), issued the Vienna Statement, a document 
of major importance stating the need to end wars and the 
arms race, promote international scientific co-operation 
and ensure that technology was used in the service of 
peace.3 

In December, 1958 the Pugwash Continuing Committee 
decided to poll scientists on their attitude to the problems of 
war and peace. The questionnaire included questions about 
the responsibility of scientists and whether they considered the 
Vienna Statement a suitable basis for the international scientific 
co-operation. Over 80 per cent of the scientists of countries 
(other than the USSR) to which the questionnaire was sent— 
some 10,000—expressed their support for the Vienna State- 
ment. In the USSR, all 5,000 Soviet scientists polled fully 
approved of the Statement. 

The Fifth Pugwash Conference, held at Pugwash, Canada 


! B. Russell, The Early History of ee Pugwash Movement. “Disarma- 
ment: Its Politics and Economics” » pp. 18-2 

2 J. Rotblat, Science and World a iais: History of the Pugwash 
Conferences, London, 1962. 

3 International Affairs, Moscow, November 1958, No. 11, pp. 80-83. 


23-203 353 





(August 24-29, 1959), was especially devoted to biological and 
chemical warfare.! 

One of the most important of the Pugwash Conferences was 
the Sixth, held in Moscow (November 27-December 5, 1960), 
which discussed problems of disarmament and _ international 
security. It was attended by 74 scientists from 15 countries. 
By far the largest delegation was the American, which included 
several scientific advisors to President Kennedy (J. Wiesner 
and P. Doty). Some fifty speeches were made on a wide range 
of questions concerning various aspects of the problem of 
disarmament: the history of the arms race and disarmament 
talks, the stage reached in nuclear test ban talks, international 
security, the plan for general disarmament, political, economic 
and technical aspects of disarmament, preventing surprise 
attack, control of nuclear delivery vehicles, and the role and 
responsibility of scientists. A Statement was issued on the 
need for disarmament.” 

The Tenth Pugwash Conference (London, September 3-7, 
1962) made a valuable contribution to agreement on disarma- 
ment by proposing that existing national means of detecting 
nuclear explosions should be supplemented by automatic control 
stations (“black boxes”, as they were called), which would be 
sealed by an international control body and placed in an agreed 
quantity in various parts of the world. This would have served 
to remove the need for special inspection bodies to check that 
nuclear test ban agreements were being carried out. 

The Tenth Pugwash Conference passed two important docu- 
ments—a Statement and a Programme. Those present, from 
East and West alike, agreed that general and complete disarma- 
ment was a prime necessity, and that the whole activity. of 
the movement should be devoted to this end. The first step to 
general and complete disarmament should be the destruction 
of existing nuclear delivery vehicles in conjunction with a 
considerable reduction in conventional weapons and armed 
forces, and the simultaneous dismantling of all military bases 
on foreign territory. The Conference elected a new, much 
enlarged Continuing Committee.? 

The Eleventh Pugwash Conference (held in Dubrovnik, 
Yugoslavia, September 20-25, 1963) discussed the destruction 


1 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientist, Chicago, October 1959, Vol. XI, 
No. 8, pp. 337-39. 

2 Becruux Axademuu Hayx CCCP, 1961, Ne 1, pp. 84-85. 

3 Ibid., 1962, Ne 11, pp. 100-04. 


354 





of all existing nuclear delivery vehicles, with the exception of 
a minimum deterrent, or “umbrella” force to be placed under 
joint US-Soviet control for the purpose of preventing any 
country from committing aggression with missiles or other 
weapons concealed during the process of general disarma- 
ment. 

The Pugwash scientists condemned the proposed creation of 
a NATO multi-lateral force and all other forms of nuclear 
proliferation. They condemned the American aggression in 
Vietnam, and particularly American use of chemical weapons 
there. General and detailed proposals were made for interna- 
tional scientific co-operation. 

The above summary of the history of the Pugwash Movement 
allows us to draw several conclusions. 

Firstly, the Pugwash Movement makes a detailed survey 
of the whole problem of disarmament, both partial measures 
and general and complete disarmament, analysing these matters 
in relation to problems of international security and scientific 
co-operation. Since those involved in the movement are leading 
scientists—in many cases in the field of nuclear physics and 
other natural sciences—they have been able to offer important 
practical suggestions. At the same time, it was inherent in 
the logic of the movement that it should extend its attention 
to all problems of major importance at a given stage of the 
peace and disarmament movement. 

Secondly, the importance and authority of the Pugwash 
Movement has steadily increased. The movement has grown 
over the years from discussions between a small group of 
scientists in the private house of Cyrus Eaton, to a world- 
wide forum of scientists whose views carry great weight and 
who are well-known to the public at large. 

Thirdly, although the Pugwash Movement remains outside 
the World Peace Movement, in many respects it pursues the 
same aims and advances the same demands, in its sincere, 
conscientious attempts to seek constructive methods of solving 
problems of peace and disarmament. 

Soviet scientists have been playing an active part in the 
Pugwash Movement since its inception. They consistently 
support the programme of general and complete disarmament, 
the implementation of measures to end the arms race and 


1 Disarmament and Arms Control. An International Quarterly Journal, 
Vol. 2, No. 1, Winter 1963/64, p. 91. 


2° 355 














reduce international tension. They have frequently taken part 
in discussions with American and other Western scientists in 
the movement. 

It is a tradition of the Pugwash Movement that the actual 
course of discussions at conferences is not made public. Without 
violating this tradition, we can say of the views expressed by 
Pugwash scientists in their discussions that despite the many 
differences of opinion taken together they represent support 
for the idea of general and complete disarmament, for the 
implementation of already practicable agreements on measures 
to end the arms race. This is the important contribution of the 
Pugwash Movement to the quest for peace. 


> Se + 


The last decade has seen the appearance in many countries 
of numerous research centres and institutes for peace and dis- 
armament studies. 

According to a UNESCO report based on the work of one 
of these centres—the International Peace Research Institute 
in Oslo—by the end of 1965 there were 83 such centres em- 
ploying a total of 2,500 research workers. 

Let us take a look at a few of them. The World Peace 
Movement founded the International Institute for Peace in 
Vienna, which works to co-ordinate peace and disarmament 
studies in different countries and publishes a bulletin and 
numerous other publications. 

There are several institutes of peace studies in the socialist 
countries. In the Soviet Union, research work on_ peaceful 
coexistence, disarmament and other aspects of the peaceful 
foreign policy of the USSR and other socialist countries is 
carried on in various branches of the Academy of Sciences, 
including the Institute of World Economy and International 
Relations, the Institute of the History of the USSR, the State 
and Law Institute, the Institute of Philosophy, the Institute of 
Eastern Studies, the Africa Institute, the Latin America 
Institute and the USA Institute. The task of co-ordinating all 
disarmament studies falls to a Commission for Disarmament 
Studies set up by the Presidium of the Academy of Sciences. 
The Commission has wide ties with researchers in the field 
in other countries. 

Peace studies are also conducted at various higher educa- 
tional establishments, including the Moscow State Institute for 


356 








Foreign Relations, and several universities and law colleges. 

The many research institutes and higher educational establish- 
ments where peace studies are carried on in the other socialist 
countries include the Polish Institute of International Affairs, 
the Institute of International Politics and Economics in Cze- 
choslovakia, the German Institute for Contemporary History 
in the German Democratic Republic, and the Institute of World 
Economics and World Politics in Yugoslavia. 

The intensive work conducted in this field in the socialist 
countries is a reflection of the genuine desire for peace and 
disarmament of the governments and peoples of the socialist 
community. 

The vast majority of research centres for peace and disarma- 
ment studies in the capitalist countries are very small, with 
only a handful of permanent research workers on their staff. 
They tend to work on a shoe-string budget and rely largely 
on donations to make ends meet. They include the Polemol- 
ogical Institute in Groningen (Holland), the International 
Institute of Peace Studies in Oslo, several centres in Britain, 
Canada, Denmark, India and Japan, the Society for Peace 
Studies in the Federal Republic of Germany, and an Inter- 
national Peace Institute founded and financed by the Swedish 
Government. 

In the United States there are several research centres osten- 
sibly engaged in peace studies, the majority of which are in 
fact concerned with military strategy and arms rather than 
disarmament. There are naturally many scientists in the USA 
genuinely concerned over the problems of peace and making a 
serious study of the subject. Their work is examined in detail 
in other chapters of the present book. 

Peace studies have become so wide-spread that there are 
now two international organisations of researchers in the 
field—the International Peace Research Association (IPRA) 
and the International Peace Research Society (IPRS). 

The various institutes and centres for peace studies founded 
in various countries in the last few years present rather a 
motley assortment. But the fact remains that almost simulta- 
neously in different parts of the world numerous centres were 
founded for the purpose of answering a major question of our 
age: how to ensure international peace, security and disarma- 
ment? 

This can hardly have been a coincidence: it was a natural 
phenomenon, called to life by the objective requirements of 


857 











present-day social relations. Life itself has placed the problem 
of war and peace at the very centre of world politics, and any 
constructive policy today must be based on studies of this 
problem. 

It should be realised that genuine science can only be based 
on the Marxist-Leninist approach. It is no accident that it is 
the researches of Marxist-Leninist social science in this field 
that are producing true scientific results that can serve as a 
basis for political decisions. The idealist and eclectical ap- 
proach that underlies non-Marxist science hampers true re- 
search and prevents many bourgeois scholars from conducting 
a truly scientific analysis of problems of war and peace. 


+ OF 


The attention of the scientists of the world is being drawn 
more and more towards the problems of war and peace. Both 
practical activity and theoretical studies are being undertaken 
for the purpose of solving these problems. An example of 
the former is the participation of scientists in social movements 
such as the World Peace Movement and the Pugwash Move- 
ment; of the latter it is the remarkable development of peace 
and disarmament studies in various countries leading to the 
emergence of a new independent field of research. 

Both are important social phenomena, typical of our time. 
It is in the logic of history that the quest for the solution of 
problems of such vital importance to mankind should be joined 
by more and more social groups, including the progressive 
scientists of the world. 








Chapter XIX 


THE SOVIET 
DISARMAMENT 
PROGRAMME 
AND ITS CRITICS 


Today, the arms race launched by imperialism has assumed 
unprecedented proportions. Imperialism has placed the vast 
resources of the technological revolution in the service of 
militarism. The technological revolution has brought about a 
colossal increase in the destructive capacity of the instruments 
of war. The stock-piles of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons 
that already exist in the world are enough to threaten the 
very existence of human society, and the stock-piling and 
development of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction 
continues. The arms race has become a major source of inter- 
national tension, greatly increasing the danger of a world war. 
All this makes the problem of disarmament one of vital impor- 
tance to mankind in our day and age. 

Imperialism makes wide use of the policy of militarism 
against the masses, for the suppression of national liberation 
movements and interference in the internal affairs of sovereign 
states. Aggressive groups in the imperialist camp have been 
resorting to armed force more and more frequently of late, 
to maintain, and where possible expand their sphere of domina- 
tion and put the brakes on progress. To this end they are trying 
to step up the arms race, activising military blocs, launching 
local wars and carrying out other militarist actions designed 
to undermine international peace and security. 

Preparations for war place an intolerable economic burden 
on the masses, lead to the squandering of national resources 


359 


agp az? 











and hold back socio-economic progress. Disarmament has thus 
become an indispensible condition for the further progress of 
mankind. General and complete disarmament under effective 
international control would be the answer to the problem of 
curbing the shock forces of imperialist aggression and reaction. 

Is there a real possibility of achieving general disarmament? 
Marxists-Leninists have no hesitation in answering in the 
affirmative. The theory of scientific socialism from the outset 
connected the possibility of preventing wars and reducing 
armaments with action on the part of the masses and_ all 
progressive social forces. The founders of scientific socialism 
rejected the fatalistic approach to the assessment of the concrete 
processes of social development, and pointed to the need to 
conduct anti-militarist activities in the conditions of capitalism 
and the possibility of solving the practical questions of struggle 
against the burden of arms. 

Today, the Marxist demand for disarmament has been 
enriched with new concrete content and its importance is greater 
than ever. New possibilities have arisen for its solution. This 
can be deduced from the scientific analysis of the tendencies 
of the present age, taking careful account of the main trends 
of world development, the relationship of class forces in the 
world, and various other relevant material and moral factors. 
The possibility of achieving disarmament exists today because 
imperialism and the militarism engendered by it have lost 
their dominant role in international relations, while socialism 
has become the decisive factor of world development. 

For the first time in history powerful organised forces are 
demanding disarmament: the Soviet Union, which has taken 
the lead in decisive branches of science and technology; the 
other socialist countries, who have placed their economic and 
political might in the service of peace; the international labour 
movement and Communist parties throughout the world, who 
consider it their first duty to save mankind from the horrors 
of a new world war and put an end to war; the peoples of 
Asia, Africa and Latin America, who are vitally interested in 
preserving peace; national liberation movements, throwing off 
the chains of imperialism and colonialism, and the world peace 
movement uniting in its ranks people of various social position, 
political opinions and religious convictions. The growth and 
consolidation of these progressive social factors, their unity 
and solidarity, improves the prospects for progress in the ques- 
tion of disarmament. 


860 





ee | CO 


The events of the last few years have confirmed the correct- 
ness of the Marxist-Leninist definition of the character of the 
present age, its content and major trends: namely, that the 
main course of mankind’s development is determined by the 
world socialist system, the international working class and all 
other revolutionary forces. The International Meeting of Com- 
munist and Workers’ Parties held in Moscow, 1969, expressed 
the opinion that in view of the changes that have taken place 
in the world during the last decade stable peace is no longer 
an utopian dream but a perfectly attainable aim and appealed 
to the peoples to struggle hard for general and complete 
disarmament. 

On the basis of the theory of scientific socialism that inter- 
national disarmament of states under international control is 
perfectly feasible, for years the Soviet Union, supported by the 
other socialist countries, has been waging a ceaseless struggle 
for the attainment of universal peace. 

The first steps towards limiting and stopping the nuclear 
arms race—the treaty banning nuclear tests in three media 
(1963), the treaty on the principles governing the activities of 
states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the 
Moon and other celestial bodies (1967), banning the putting of 
nuclear weapons in orbit around the earth and their placement 
in outer space, the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (1968), the 
treaty banning the placement of nuclear weapons and other 
mass annihilation weapons on the sea bed and ocean floor and 
in their bowels (1971), the agreement between the USSR and 
the USA on measures to prevent the accidental application of 
nuclear weapons—convincingly prove that the fight against 
the arms race can achieve important results. The more 
actively it is waged, the more difficult does it become for 
the forces of aggression to torpedo urgent arms limitation 
measures. 

Influential militarist circles in the USA and other imperialist 
states desperately combat the principal items in the disarma- 
ment programme proposed by the Soviet Union. For that 
purpose they have mobilised scientists, who are willing to serve 
militarism and believe that the arms race is mankind’s only 
prospect. 

Efforts to halt the race in all types of weapons and achieve 
disarmament occupied a prominent place among the basic tasks 
set forth in the programme for peace and international security 


passed by the 24th Congress of the CPSU. 


361 











The Congress advanced the following concrete proposals for 
the accomplishment of these tasks: the conclusion of treaties 
putting a ban on nuclear, chemical, and bacteriological weapons; 
an end to the testing of nuclear weapons, including underground 
tests; the establishment of nuclear-free zones in various parts of 
the world; the dismantling of foreign military bases; the 
reduction of armed forces, especially in Central Europe; the 
working out of measures reducing the probability of accidental 
outbreak or deliberate fabrication of armed incidents and their 
development into international crises, into war; the reduction 
of military spending, above all by the major powers; the con- 
vocation of a conference of the five nuclear powers—the USSR, 
the USA, the People’s Republic of China, France and Britain— 
with a view to achieving the nuclear disarmament of all states 
in possession of nuclear weapons, and the convocation of a 
world conference to consider disarmament questions to their 
full extent. 

The solution of disarmament problems would be facilitated 
by the implementation of other proposals of the programme, 
designed to increase international security, namely: the elimina- 
tion of hotbeds of war in South-East Asia and in the Middle 
East and a political settlement in these areas on the basis of the 
legitimate rights of states and peoples subjected to aggression; 
repudiation of the threat or use of force in settling outstanding 
issues and the conclusion of appropriate bilateral or regional 
treaties; the adoption of measures to ensure a radical turn 
towards a détente and peace in Europe and the convocation and 
success of an all-European conference; the simultaneous an- 
nulment of the Warsaw Treaty and of the North Atlantic 
alliance or—as a first step—dismantling of their military organi- 
sations; full implementation of the UN decisions on the abolition 
of the remaining colonial regimes; the development of relations 
of mutually advantageous co-operation in every sphere, includ- 
ing such problems as the conservation of the environment, 
development of power and other natural resources, development 
of transport and communications and so on. 

Determined action in this direction would substantially faci- 
litate the solution of the cardinal problem of universal, total 
disarmament, opening a new chapter in the history of human 
society. 

The American sociologists Strausz-Hupé, Kintner and Pos- 
sony declare general and complete disarmament to be a “fruit- 
less chimera”. They write, “We hold that permanent coex- 


362 


aes between systems so fundamentally opposed is impos- 
sible.” 

The conception of an unrestrained arms race, which emerged 
when the USA had a temporary monopoly of the A bomb, 
and was fostered by Dulles’s doctrine of “rolling back” com- 
munism and “liberating” the socialist countries, dominated 
bourgeois sociology and politics for a long time. Some of its 
main postulates enjoy the favour of some influential politic- 
ians representing the social élite even now and hamper all 
attempts at finding an alternative way. 

The super-armament conception is part and parcel of the 
extremist, adventurist policy pursued by US imperialism. It 
is an essential component of the socio-political philosophy 
expounded by rabid reactionaries. It is a conception held by 
businessmen making a fortune on government war orders, by 
the leaders of the Right-wing bourgeois political parties 
(Goldwater, Wallace), by some senators and congressmen, 
especially members of the Congress Committee on Armed 
Services, Internal Security (Thurmond, Jackson, Homer, Find- 
ley), by prominent researchers of laboratories working on new 
weapons, research corporations, centres for strategic studies, 
and also by active members of such ultra-Right organisations 
as the John Birch Society and the National Security Council. 

Psychopathic anti-communism and anti-Sovietism, illusions 
about the omnipotence of US imperialism and extreme obscur- 
antism nourish the theories about the inevitability of small 
and big wars and the application of mass-destruction weapons. 
Such theories form the premise of conceptions about the need 
for an unrestricted arms race. These conceptions are bound up 
with the names of the ultra-Right ideologists, such as Burnham, 
Kahn, Possony, Strausz-Hupé, Tucker and Teller. 

The latest variants of the super-armament conception, as 
applicable to the conditions at the end of the 1960s and the 
beginning of the 1970s, can be found in the publications of 
the Georgetown University Center for Strategic Studies, in 
Orbis, a quarterly journal of world affairs, published by the 
Foreign Policy Research Institute of the University of Penn- 
sylvania, as well as in the testimony given by Strausz-Hupé, 
Teller and Kahn to various US Congress Committees in 1967- 
69. 


1 R. Strausz-Hupé, W. Kintner, 8S. Possony, A Forward Strategy for 
America, p. 267. 


363 














The super-armament champions reject the principle of co- 
existence with the socialist countries as “incompatible with 
genuine peace”. They declare obsolete the traditional view on 
aggression, and regard the very existence of the socialist coun- 
tries and the international communist movement as an act of 
aggression and a challenge to US interests. The ultra-Right 
ideologists insist on a policy aimed at securing a “victory over 
communism’ by intensifying military pressure up to and 
including the delivery of a preventive nuclear strike. 

The above theories regard relations between states with 
different social systems as phases of a military conflict; they 
reject the prospect of easing tensions, of a normalisation of 
international relations; they are ready to resolve controversial 
issues between the socialist and capitalist countries by armed 
force. 

As a rule, the champions of this trend ignore the risk of 
nuclear war and belittle its consequences. They exaggerate 
optimistically the possibility of rehabilitating the damages 
caused by an exchange of nuclear blows. Their recipes are 
based on the presumption of US military supremacy, and they, 
therefore, raise an alarm in view of a dynamic strategic equil- 
ibrium established between the USA and the USSR. 

The ultra-Right ideologists do not wish to tie the hands of 
the military-industrial complex and therefore ignore the nega- 
tive consequences entailed by the unrestrained arms race for 
the USA itself, and categorically object to any steps aimed 
towards an agreement on its limitation. They endeavour to 
prove that it is possible to create forces able to strike a success- 
ful blow at the opponent and thus to make missile and nuclear 
war a convenient instrument of imperialist policies. 

Robert Kilmarx, a senior staff member of the Center of 
Strategic and International Studies, Georgetown University, 
advocates the building up of the US missile defence system, 
and of the latest kinds of missiles with multiple independently 
targeted nuclear warheads. His main concern is that the Soviet- 
American talks may reduce the scale of military research and 
development. Kilmarx favours talks with the USSR, but says 
that those who believe that the USA can insure the sanctity of 
agreements reached from a level of technological and military 
inferiority must carry “a heavy cross”. He regards arms control 
as but another field of international conflict. The purposes and 
rules of such control “must be fully responsive to overall na- 
tional strategy and supportive of the aims that guide DOD”. 


364 








“Proceed we must,” he says, “however if only to reduce in part 
the risk of global conflict and open up what may become new 
avenues to Soviet constraints.”! Kilmarx is for arms control 
that would help “... to penetrate and to open Soviet society, 
to facilitate intelligence overall to spur on liberal trade’’.? 

Thus, with him it is not so much a question of halting the 
arms race and limiting its role in international relations, as it 
is of opening up new trends in the military-technical competi- 
tion, of providing advantages to US aggressive circles by im- 
posing on the opponent unfavourable terms in an agreement. 

Herman Kahn, the Director of the Hudson Institute, who 
has joined the polemics on the building up of missile defence 
and other strategic arms systems, continues to hold a special 
place among the extremist theoreticians. 

His present arguments are but a continuation of his former 
views, though, at the end of the sixties, he made a somewhat 
more cautious appraisal of the possibility of making a big 
thermonuclear war a political instrument. He admits that the 
pros and cons for a thin BMD System have “really changed 
dramatically” over the last couple of years, which has led to 
the loss by the USA of its “strategic advantage” and the 
emergence of a “strategic parity”. This is tantamount to an 
admission that the main postulate in Kahn’s schemes for 
escalating threats and military conflicts, based on US military 
superiority, has been shaken. Admitting that a global nuclear 
conflict would be dangerous for the USA, Kahn does not how- 
ever draw the logical conclusion that his policy of securing 
strategic and political advantages through the arms race 
should, therefore, be discarded. He rejects the only logical 
alternative to his bankrupt policy—the signing of an agree- 
ment to halt the arms race. No, he argues that the way out lies 
in the launching of a new armament cycle. 

Kahn insists that the United States should adopt “competitive 
mobilisation” for its strategy in the seventies. Its aim is to 
compel the opponent steeply and steadily to raise the military 
budget and correspondingly to bring the war machine into a 


4 Kilmarx R., “ABM and MIRV in the Context of SALT”, Vital 
Speeches of the Day, Vol. XXXVI, July 15, 1970, pp. 602-04. 

2 Tbid., p. 603. 

3 Strategy and Science: Toward a National Security Policy for the 1970s 
Hearings before the Subcommittee on National Security Policy and Scientific 
Development of the Committee on Foreign Affairs House of Representatives, 
Ninety-First Congress, First Session, Washington, 1969, p. 114. 


365 


vail 





state of complete combat readiness in peacetime conditions. To 
attain this he proposes that the US war expenditure should be 
200,000 million dollars in the first year of the “competitive 
mobilisation” and reach 500,000 million at the end of the third 
year. In the course of three years the entire population, industry, 
and all institutions are to be hidden away in underground 
shelters, fundamentally new systems of strategic arms are to 
be developed and a superiority is to be achieved that will make 
possible an agreement with the USSR (meaning a capitulation 
of the USSR) or, in the event of war, ensure a better result for 
the USA. The idea is that the ‘competitive mobilisation” and 
the resulting greater combat readiness will make it possible to 
change the rules of the game, that is, to remove all restraints 
and enable the USA to resort to tactics of advancing ultimatums. 

Note should be taken of the provocative implications of the 
“competitive mobilisation” conception, which proceeds from 
the premise that a sharp international crisis is inevitable. Es- 
sentially, Kahn implies that US interests would be furthered 
best of all by the fabrication of such crises, since that would 
trigger off the “competitive mobilisation” mechanism. 

Kahn advertises his conception as a substitute for a war and 
promises the USA victory if it acts in accordance with his 
recipes. His plan, Kahn believes, is particularly advantageous 
because it creates an excellent mechanism for the improvement 
of military research and development, for exhausting the op- 
ponent’s economy, and also for getting a “ransom”, should the 
opponent decide to accept the challenge. Kahn’s attempt to 
obtain through a “substitute war” the results which the many 
years of the cold war were unable to furnish, demonstrates 
that he has fully lost all sense of reality. 

This aspect of Kahn’s speculations must not be overlooked 
because some other military strategists, too, presume that the 
stepping up of the arms race is able to give the United States 
an advantage over the Soviet Union. They believe that the 
West can “bleed” the Soviet economy “by forcing it to keep up 
with high levels of US arms programmes”.! The futility of 
these designs is self-evident. Now that the economic, scientific 
and technological potentials of the two world systems are more 
in favour of the Soviet Union than they were twenty or even 
ten years ago, now that the Soviet economy and science are 








! World Politics, A Quarterly Journal of International Relations, 
Vol. XXIII, No. 3, April 1971, p. 440. 


366 





developing at steady high rates, the defence capacity of the 
USSR has grown immensely, as has also its ability to defend 
the international positions of socialism. 

Any attempts by the military-industrial complex to act in 
the international arena on the basis of an unrealistic approach, 
any attempt to attain “predominant superiority” will be strewed 
with obstacles more difficult to overcome than at any time 
before. 

The hope of being able to gain an advantage by plunging 
the world into a new strategic arms race is particularly ground- 
less in the seventies. Moreover, this mode of action is fraught 
with ruinous consequences notably to the national interests of 
the United States—to the prospects of placing its economy on 
a sound basis, and of resolving its pressing social problems at 
home. 

The balance of forces in the world changed in the sixties 
and the unleashing of a nuclear war by an aggressor will 
inevitably doom him to extinction. The dynamic strategic 
equilibrium established between the USSR and the USA has 
nipped in the bud all attempts at reinstating the traditional 
policy of using nuclear arms for diplomatic pressure and black- 
mail, 

For this reason a process of regroupment has begun within 
the ruling classes of the imperialist countries over the question 
of disarmament. The most sober-minded representatives 
of the bourgeoisie, realising the disastrous results a thermonu- 
clear war would entail for the ruling classes in imperialist 
countries, have begun to search for new ways of attaining their 
class aims. While not excluding military methods altogether, 
they are gradually becoming convinced of the futility of 
making nuclear war their main trump in opposing the socialist 
countries, 

The new attitude to the problem of war and peace is re- 
flected in bourgeois literature in the appearance of numerous 
monographs and collections of articles presenting the concep- 
tion of “peace based on mutual fear or deterrence”, and various 
doctrines of arms control. 

Among the great flood of publications devoted to the ques- 
tions of control, the main trend is represented by sociologists 
who support to a greater or lesser degree the continuation of 
the arms race. They present in place of the Soviet programme 
for disarmament various schemes of control that have nothing 
to do with real disarmament and are intended to justify the 


367 





continuation of the arms race, in such a way as would be in 
the interests of imperialism. While assuming that disarmament 
is impossible, at the same time they recognise that thermonu- 
clear war would be a disaster for all countries. They thus hold 
the highly illogical view that war can be prevented not by 
disarmament but by the continuation of the arms race, main- 
taining that the further development of military technology is 
not necessarily such a bad thing since the tremendous destruc- 
tive capacity of modern weapons should guarantee that neither 
side will be prepared to risk an all-out military conflict. 

The ideas of peace through “the balance of fear” or “mutual 
deterrence” are expounded by B. Brodie, T. Schelling, H. Kis- 
singer, M. Halperin, J. Strachey, H. Bull, A. Buchan, L. Halle 
and R. Osgood.! 

Some of them hold that the power of nuclear deterrents 
should be stabilised at the present high level, while others are 
for the continuation of the nuclear arms race on the grounds 
that new powerful “balancing” weapons and the improvement 
of systems of deterrence would serve to improve the interna- 
tional atmosphere. 

The various recipes they offer for regulating the arms race 
by limited arms control do nothing towards removing the threat 
of nuclear war. 

These positions are defended by many of the contributors to 
the collection, containing articles, speeches and other materials 
by associates of a number of study centres and research institu- 
tes.2 They differ from the ultra-Right ideologists in that they 
adopt a more cautious approach to the appraisal of the conse- 
quences a nuclear war would entail, and reckon with the risk 
of it coming to a head. Their recommendations concern mainly 
the indirect uses of strategic arms. The champions of the so- 
called controlled arms race show some concern for the danger 
of a further proliferation of nuclear weapons, and also of an 


1 See: B. Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age (Princeton, 1959); 
T. Schelling, Strategy of Conflict (Cambridge, 1960); T. Schelling and 
M. Halperin, Strategy and Arms Control (New York, 1961); H. Kissinger, 
The Necessity for Choice. Prospects of American Foreign Policy (New 
York, 1961); J. Strachey, On the Prevention of War (London, 1962); 
H. Bull, The Control of Arms Race (London, 1960); A. Buchan, NATO 
in the 1960s (New York, 1960), and The Age of Insecurity, an article in 
Encounter, 1963, Nos. 6, 7; L. Hallé, Peace in Nuclear World, Survival, 
1964, Vol. VI, No. 2; R. Osgood, Limited War, Moscow, 1960, Russ. ed. 

2 Safeguard: Why ABM Makes Sense, Edited by W. R. Kintner, New 
York, 1969. 





368 








accidental outbreak of a big war. “Throughout the next decade 
of strategic arms,” writes Richard B. Foster, Director, Strategic 
Studies Center of the Stanford Research Institute, “both we 
and the Soviets will have as a single overriding objective the 
minimisation of the risk of nuclear war from any cause.”! 

Even though they do not deny the usefulness of Soviet- 
American talks in that field in principle, the advocates of 
controlled armament seek to reduce the types of arms embraced 
by the possible agreement to a minimum. “Strategic superiority” 
is their prime worry. Some of them agree to the establishment 
of restraints and the introduction of limitations, but only for 
some strategic arms and on the condition that extensive pos- 
sibilities will be afforded for the development of others (anti- 
missile weapons, for example). They also seek to ensure the 
unhindered military research and development, and the testing 
of new kinds of military equipment. 

They have much in common with the champions of the 
“super-armament” schemes we have discussed above. This 
includes anti-communism, the view that nuclear arms fulfil the 
function of a political instrument, the willingness under definite 
conditions to risk unleashing a nuclear war, emphasis on the 
creation of a varied and extensive arsenal of means for waging 
an offensive war. In fact, they want the United States to adopt 
a policy aimed at achieving strategic superiority by controlling 
the arms race. “The best assurance for peace,’ William R. 
Kintner believes, ‘may lie in the possession of superior power.”?. 

The great importance attached by the champions of the 
controlled arms race conception to strategic superiority, to 
nuclear force used for the solution of foreign policy aims, 
conditions their approach to the Soviet-American talks. In 
R. B. Foster’s view, the main purpose of these talks is not to 
achieve an agreement on the reduction of nuclear stockpiles, 
but to utilise “the presence of nuclear weapons as an active 
component of deterrence to influence the behaviour of ‘“‘an- 
tagonistic states”. He believes that it is possible, in principle, 
to establish a definite limitation on the means of delivery of 
such arms, but at the same time proposes to set up an extensive 
BMD (Ballistic Missile Defense) system in order to “restabilise 
the deterrent’. He admits that such restabilisation and negotia- 


1 Ibid., p. 245. 
2 Tbid., p. 67. 
3 Ibid., p. 256. 


24—203 369 








tions to establish control over armaments are “two apparently 
contradictory objectives’’.! 

This conception has been worked out in greater detail by 
D. G. Brennan, former President of the Hudson Institute. He 
proposes to fix a ceiling for the strategic offensive forces of 
the USA and the USSR. This ceiling should be set not only 
for the means they already possess, but also for the systems yet 
to be installed. As regards missile defence, he insists that full 
freedom of action should be preserved. Even though Brennan 
believes that certain limitations might be set on the rate of 
growth of such military equipment in the yet uncertain future, 
he considers their development “on a considerable scale” 
desirable in every way. 

The “arms limitations” champions believe that attention 
should be shifted from the quantitative growth of arms to their 
qualitative improvement, and that the building of some kinds 
of missiles should be frozen. They do not want the agreement 
to restrict extensive military research and development, the 
building of BMD systems, and work to improve targeting and 
other parameters of offensive strategic arms. Such an inter- 
pretation of the concept “arms limitations” contradicts 
US commitments under the nuclear non-proliferation 
treaty. 

To make their interpretation of the concept “arms limita- 
tions” sound convincing, some “experts” on the USSR allege 
that the Soviet viewpoint is an equivalent of US “hawkish” 
conceptions. This can be seen from the latest variant of the 
theory that claims there is a “growing similarity between the 
two systems”, which is supposed to express itself in the devel- 
opment of common negative socio-political processes. Es- 
sentially, Kahn’s model of the interaction of the opposing 
systems in conditions of a “substitute war” also presupposes a 
course under which total militarisation, the curtailing of dem- 
ocratic freedoms, the psychology of a garrison state, etc., would 
develop in both opposing camps. 

The “Sovietologist” R. Kolkowicz deduces his conception of 
“progressive symmetry” between Soviet and US. strategic 
doctrines and policies from the trends of scientific and techno- 
logical progress, which, he says, is “an autonomous, transna- 
tional, trans-ideological phenomenon that creates and imposes 


1 Safeguard. .., p. 27. 


870 





its own imperatives on the fabric of politics”.1 In this way he 
seeks to camouflage the fundamental differences that exist be- 
tween Soviet and US foreign policies. 

As distinct from the postulates of deterrence, forming the 
theoretical basis of US foreign policy, the Soviet conception of 
international relations proceeds from the need for a renuncia- 
tion of the use or threat of force for the solution of controver- 
sial issues between states. This policy has been supplemented 
by all the measures proposed by the Soviet Union to halt the 
arms race and to bring about disarmament, to resolve interna- 
tional conflicts by political methods, to develop peaceful 
coexistence and mutually advantageous co-operation between 
states in all fields. This has been stressed with special force at 
the 24th Congress of the CPSU. 

As far as the Soviet conception of the arms limitation is 
concerned, it holds that the agreement should be based on the 
principle of equal security for the parties to the agreement, 
that it should not provide unilateral advantages, that it should 
consider in full measure the aim of reducing war danger in 
general and that it should fall in with the vital interests of all 
the peoples of the world. 

The principle of identical or mutual security opposes the 
idea of continuing the arms race which, as historical experi- 
ence has shown, ultimately has a malignant effect on universal 
security. The Soviet conception proceeds from the belief that 
the end of the arms race, primarily of nuclear missiles, the 
most dangerous arms of all, promotes universal security to the 
highest degree. This basic idea in the Soviet conception has 
been endorsed by the 24th Congress of the CPSU, which 
pointed out that the fight for a halt to the arms race, both of 
nuclear and conventional arms, for disarmament, including 
general and complete disarmament, will continue to be one of 
the main trends in the foreign policy of the CPSU and _ the 
Soviet state. 

Thus, the idea is to halt the arms race in all its forms, which 
does not mean that the manufacture of some arms should be 
stopped and that of others stepped up. This applies with special 
force to strategic arms. It is important to note in that connec- 
tion that the Soviet delegation voted at the 25th Session of the 
United Nations General Assembly for the adoption of a 
resolution calling on all nuclear powers to put an immediate 


1 World Politics, Vol. XXIII, No. 3, April 1971, pp. 450-51. 


24e 371 

















stop to nuclear armament, to all tests, and the development of 
offensive and defensive nuclear arms systems. The USA 
abstained when the proposal was voted. This is important to 
an understanding of the different approaches of the two powers 
to the strategic arms problem. 

The emphasis laid by the Soviet Union on comprehensive 
arms limitation does not mean that it adheres to the “all or 
nothing” principle. The American press reported that the USA 
had resorted to manoeuvres to prevent the inclusion into the 
list of strategic arms to be limited those stationed near the USSR 
and other socialist countries (aircraft on carriers, medium- 
range aircraft on the territory of some West European coun- 
tries, etc.). This prevented an agreement covering offensive as 
well as defensive nuclear arms systems, since it would have 
provided a military advantage to one of the parties. 

In trying to achieve real progress at the talks, the USSR 
proposed that an initial limited agreement should be drawn up, 
one ensuring the mutual security of the parties. This proposal 
provides a way out of the impasse. 

In May 1971 it was reported that the governments of the 
USSR and the USA had agreed to concentrate efforts on the 
preparation of an agreement on limitations in the development 
of BMD systems. It was also agreed that some measures to 
limit strategic offensive weapons would be co-ordinated when 
the agreement was signed. 

An agreement on BMD would affect one of the aspects of 
the rivalry between strategic offensive and defensive weapons. 
It would cut the ground from under the feet of those who 
regard the setting up of an extensive BMD system as a com- 
ponent part of the offensive forces and hope that BMD will 
provide them with a reliable defence against a counterblow, 
should they decide to unleash a preventive war. Making it 
perfectly clear that nuclear aggression will not go unpunished, 
and thus checking nuclear adventurism, such an agreement 
will promote the security of both parties. 

The USSR raises not only the question of limiting strategic 
arms, but also that of their subsequent reduction, giving prefe- 
rence to a plan that would provide for the reduction of all 
strategic stockpiles to an absolute minimum, leaving, and only 
for the time being, a strictly limited number of them. 

Hence, in the Soviet view, the principle of equal security 
should presuppose not a stabilisation of the status quo, but 
implies the attainment of a higher degree of mutual security 


372 








as a result of arms reduction. In other words, the Soviet Union 
proceeds from the assumption that the maintenance, let alone 
perpetuation of vast strategic forces, or of the ‘assured destruc- 
tion” level, is not a suitable basis for securing reliable mutual 
security but, on the contrary, is a factor threatening the 
security of all states. Decisively rejecting the postulates of the 
nuclear deterrence theory as a basis of international peace, the 
Soviet conception shows the way to the achievement of a 
genuinely higher level of security for the participants in the 
talks and for all other countries. That the Soviet position is 
a principled one and not just a concession to the present situa- 
tion can be seen from the Soviet Union’s increasing efforts, ever 
since the war, to ban all means of mass annihilation—nuclear, 
chemical and bacteriological—and the fact that it does not make 
this dependent on the solution of other questions. Until the 
great powers take up nuclear disarmament, the Soviet Union 
considers it essential to make steps in order consecutively to 
decrease the role of nuclear arms in international relations. 

The USSR believes that the ban on nuclear aggression, on 
the use and the threat of force, must become universal. That 
is why the Soviet Union offers to sign corresponding bilateral 
and regional agreements with countries sharing its views. The 
signing of such agreements would weaken the positions of the 
political forces still hoping that they will be able to intimidate 
other countries. 

The development of more and more dangerous kinds of 
weapon can only be stopped by disarmament, the destruction 
of the military machine of states and the cessation of military- 
technological research. This is the course proposed in the Soviet 
disarmament programme. 

Bourgeois ideologists propagating the idea of peace based on 
“mutual deterrence” try to weaken the great appeal of the 
Soviet proposals and cast doubt on the possibility of stopping 
the arms race. They criticise the Soviet programme on several 
counts. 

Ultra-reactionary bourgeois sociologists claim that the Soviet 
programme contradicts communist ideology to which they at- 
tribute the totally alien features of justification of the use of 
force in international relations, of the arms race and wars 
between states. 

It is on this wholly false interpretation of Marxism-Leninism 
that the myth about the aggressive nature of the Soviet Union 
is based, a myth exploited by imperialist politicians to justify 


373 














militarisation, the creation of military blocs and their own 
refusal to conclude disarmament agreements. 

The champions of militarism insist that the Soviet disarma- 
ment programme is merely a propaganda move, a shrewd 
diplomatic manoeuvre. They even go as far as to claim that 
the arms race is beneficial to the Soviet Union. 

In point of fact, the idea of general and complete disarma- 
ment derives from the principles of scientific socialism, the con- 
fidence of the USSR and the world communist movement in 
the ultimate triumph of their ideals. Disarmament would create 
the most favourable conditions for practical demonstration of 
the advantages of the new social system over the old; would 
speed up the socio-economic progress of mankind as a whole, 
and create favourable opportunities for carrying out fundamen- 
tal social transformations by peaceful means. 

As for the Soviet Union’s willingness to accept disarma- 
ment, it is determined by the absence in the country of social 
classes and groups with a vested interest in war and military 
programmes, and the conviction that disarmament would 
enable the country to complete the building of communism far 
more rapidly. 

Accusations of Soviet “insincerity” and “unwillingness” to 
disarm are smokescreens to hide the fear and doubts of the 
ideologists of capitalism of the ability of the capitalist system 
to compete with socialism on a peaceful basis in a disarmed 
world. 

In advancing reactionary views bourgeois sociologists are, 
often unwittingly, revealing the militarist essence of imperialism. 
These statements all add up to the fact that imperialism needs 
a vast military machine, the arms race, and international mili- 
tary conflicts to ensure its very existence, to boost its econo- 
my, suppress revolutionary struggles of the masses and the 
national liberation movement, and impose its will on other 
peoples. 

In the last few years there have been signs of a marked 
tendency among Western scholars to seek a way out of the 
danger in the direction of limiting the arms race and steps to- 
wards disarmament. Certain constructive measures towards pro- 
gress and disarmament have been proposed by L. Pauling, 
K. C. Wright, D. Fleming, A. Etzioni, S. Melman, M. I. Horo- 
witz, F. Baad and many other scholars in the capitalist world. 

Various proposals on ways to curb the growth of armaments 
have been advanced by other known experts, reflecting the 


374 






interests of moderate circles. In their view, a continuation of 
the rivalry in strategic arms will greatly aggravate the risk of 
nuclear war, intensify the tendency towards nuclear adventur- 
ism, escalate military expenditure and make it more difficult 
to resolve internal socio-economic problems. 

Sober-minded people in the USA, including such who held 
key positions in the Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson 
administrations, have become aware of that. Thus, Herbert 
York, former Director Defense Research and Engineering, 
Office of the Secretary of Defense, says that in the past twenty 
years “ever-increasing military power has been accompanied 
by an ever-decreasing national security”. He maintains that 
“the dilemma cannot be resolved by the development and 
deployment of ever more complex and more costly machines”.! 

Bourgeois social thought is dominated, however, by concep- 
tions justifying and extolling the arms race, considering it an 
essential and “normal” component of international relations, 
and wars, the use and threat of force a necessary and permis- 
sible instrument for the attainment of political objectives. 

It would seem that the baselessness of conceptions justifying 
the arms race is self-evident. Yet, there are people who 
advance such conceptions in all seriousness. They are particu- 
larly dangerous because they are backed by the most militant 
political and military circles in the imperialist countries, who 
are willing to implement their adventurist policies in interna- 
tional affairs. 

The champions of militarism want the peoples to get used 
to the arms race, to the prospect of unending war preparations 
and ultimately to the idea that the wars planned by the 
military-industrial complex are unavoidable. 

The exposure of the “theorists” advocating war, nuclear 
blackmail and the arms race is an important task in the fight 
against the danger of war. 


1 Herbert York, Race to Oblivion: A Participant's View of the Arms 
Race, New York, 1970, p. 23. 


375 


























Chapter XX 


THE PEACE MOVEMENT 
AND SOCIALIST 
HUMANISM 


Attitude to the problem of war and peace has today become 
a touchstone of humanism. This is understandable in an age 
when tremendous technological progress and the creation of 
weapons of ever greater destructive capacity have produced a 
situation where a world war would involve unprecedented suf- 
fering and devastation. Even those bourgeois sociologists who 
in the past were wont to insist that war is inevitable and even 
beneficial are beginning to recognise this in more and more 
cases. 

Although the peoples of the world are eager to prevent the 
occurrence of a disastrous war, the problems of preserving peace 
are far from solved. The danger of war remains because the 
imperialists, and especially the US imperialists, continue to 
undertake acts of aggression in various parts of the world, and 
are gradually widening the theatre of their military operations. 
While committing countless crimes and outrages in the territo- 
ries they have seized, the aggressors loudly declare that the 
main aim of their policy is peace. Many bourgeois ideologists, 
of the most various views, claim that they are defending the 
ideas of peace and humanism and the rights of the individual. 

It is thus of vital importance to mankind that a clear dividing 
line should be drawn between humanists in word and human- 
ists in deed. This is essential in order to ensure the unity and 
solidarity of the great army of peace supporters of which the 


376 





peoples of the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries are 
in the van, and isolate those militant imperialist ideologists and 
public figures who are exploiting the undeveloped political 
awareness of certain layers of bourgeois society. 

The attitude of real humanists to the problems of war and 
peace is formed on the basis of study of social processes as they 
really exist, on the basis of the actually existing relationship 
of forces. Good intentions are not enough. What are the real 
tendencies of present-day social development? Do existing con- 
ditions make a nuclear conflict between the two social systems 
inevitable? That is the question no sociologist studying the prob- 
lems of war and peace can evade, and the answer to which is 
bound up with the ways and means of putting humanitarian 
ideals into practice. 

No one who keeps a close watch on international events can 
fail to observe that it is not merely two diametrically opposed 
foreign policies that are in conflict but two ideologies—the so- 
cialist and the bourgeois. Whatever the issue, whether it be 
that of removing the threat of world war, strengthening inter- 
national security, step-by-step disarmament or the development 
of international trade, the Soviet Union and the other socialist 
countries are unvariably the initiators of genuinely peaceful 
policies, policies that testify to the humanitarian essence of 
socialism. 

Indeed, humanism means making people, their welfare and 
dignity one’s first concern. The humanist’s aim is to free man 
from hostile forces and defend his right to happiness. Human- 
ism appears in many forms—there is genuine humanism and 
there is false humanism, there is active humanism and there is 
passive humanism. The majority of bourgeois philosophers are 
abstract humanists, paying lip service to the rights of the in- 
dividual. They propose not the real emancipation of the masses, 
but merely intellectual freedom, that illusory freedom that, as 
Marx put it, considers itself free even though it is in chains. It 
was no accident that the founders of Marxism devoted one of 
their earliest works to exposing the abstract, impotent huma- 
nism of the young Hegelians, who “criticised everything” 
but did not actually do anything to oppose existing evils, and 
thus were really conservatives for all their “world-shaking” 
phrases. 

Marx and Engels called communism genuine humanism. They 
not only proclaimed humanitarian principles but linked their 
practical realisation with struggle against the inhuman policies 


25—203 377 








of the exploiter classes, and with the revolutionary transforma- 
tion of society. They saw in society itself, in the proletariat, a 
force that history had entrusted with a great humanitarian mis- 
sion. 

As Marx and Engels showed, the proletariat has no need 
of petty-bourgeois philanthropy, hypocritical “sympathy” and 
gratuitous pity. Socialist humanism, embodied in Marxism—the 
ideology of the proletariat—demands not the illusion of hap- 
piness but genuine happiness, not happiness received as a gift 
‘from above” but happiness won through the efforts of the most 
progressive class in history, and the rest of the working masses. 
This active revolutionary element of socialist humanism is 
more than one of its features; it is an expression of its very 
essence, what makes it a more advanced one than any previous 
progressive concept of man. 

Marxism takes a new approach to the eternal problems of 
man and the human personality. It views it as inseparable from 
social problems, including problems of an_ international 
character. 

Marxism embodies mankind’s longing for a world without 
war. In indicating the paths along which the struggle for true 
international brotherhood should be waged, Marx and Engels 
showed that the ideal of peace could not possibly be realised 
under the reign of capitalism, but that it would definitely 
triumph in the communist society of the future. The First Ad- 
dress on the Franco-Prussian War of the General Council of 
the First International, which bore Marx’s signature, said that 
“in contrast to the old society, with its economic miseries and 
its political delirium, a new society is springing up, whose 
International rule will be Peace, because its national ruler will 
be everywhere the same—Labour!”! 

The October Revolution opened a new chapter in the history 
of mankind and brought nearer the day when mankind’s age- 
old dream of eternal peace would come true. It introduced 
socialism, to which the urge for expansion and enslavement of 
peoples is totally alien and which, on the contrary, unites all 
peoples in one great family. 

Lenin struggled ardently against the wars unleashed by 
imperialism. He stressed that the Communists consider just only 
those wars waged by the oppressed classes against the oppres- 


4 The General Council of the First International. 1870-71. Minutes. 
Moscow, 1967, p. 328. 


378 





Mngt ne eh VAs 


sors, wars waged by peoples in order to win their freedom and 
independence, wars waged with the object of defending so- 
cialism once revolution has triumphed. ‘All our politics and 
propaganda, however, are directed towards putting an end to 
war and in no way towards driving nations to war.’’! 

The Soviet State and other socialist countries defended their 
revolutionary gains by heroic struggle and selfless labour. Their 
achievements are gradually forcing certain bourgeois groups to 
regard the policy of peaceful coexistence as an historical neces- 
sity. The experience of over fifty years of the existence of the 
Soviet State has proved beyond doubt that policy of peace, 
corresponding to the vital interests of all mankind and entirely 
deriving from Lenin’s analysis of the prospects of world social- 
ist development, is the most sensible and realistic policy. 

Lenin was firmly convinced that socialism would triumph 
over capitalism through peaceful economic competition and not 
through war, by attaining the highest labour productivity in 
the world, and influencing the course of world history with its 
economic achievements. Lenin’s faith in the power of socialism 
imbues the whole activity of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union and the Soviet Government. The CPSU has expounded 
convincing arguments on the basis of incontrovertible facts that 
in the present age, characterised by the growing superiority of 
the forces of peace and socialism over the forces of imperialism 
and war there exists a real opportunity to abolish war. This 
deduction is expressed in the decisions of the International 
Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties in Moscow and 
the CPSU Programme. Conflicts fraught with serious conse- 
quences have been quashed by the efforts of the supporters of 
peace, backed by the might of the world socialist system. The 
mass movement of protest against American aggression in Indo- 
china and Israeli aggression in the Middle East is snowballing 
rapidly. 

Gradually the masses are becoming aware of the fact that 
war is not inevitable and that the success of the movement for 
peace depends on their own efforts, on the unity, solidarity and 
organisation of the great army of peace. The struggle for the 
realisation of humanitarian ideals, once thought of as the ex- 
clusive task of moralists and thinkers, has acquired a firm foun- 
dation: humanism becomes an effective force when it relies on 
the struggle of the masses for their future. 


1 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 31, p. 470. 


25° 379 








Marxism-Leninism requires a realistic, sober awareness of 
things as they really are, a correct appraisal of the relationship 
of forces in the international arena. The Communist parties 
cannot exclude the possibility of a world war, should the masses 
fail to curb the imperialists, who have a vested interest in it. 
That is why Marxists-Leninists regard the matter of strength- 
ening the might of the world socialist system, including its 
military might, as the best way of ensuring international secur- 
ity. Thus, the daily creative labour of the peoples of the socialist 
countries and the development of fruitful co-operation between 
them is also an effective contribution to the cause of interna- 
tional peace. Socialist humanism is thus inseparably linked with 
proletarian internationalism and patriotism. 

Bourgeois ideologists in an attempt to discredit the aims and 
methods of struggle of the Communist parties, accuse the Com- 
munists of aspiring to universal destruction. 

In fact, socialist humanism rejects the idea that man should 
undergo unwarranted suffering in order to achieve commun- 
ism. The Marxists-Leninists have always made it their aim to 
spare the people unnecessary hardships. The Communists have 
always been openly opposed to Macchiavellianism in politics 
and reject the Jesuit formula that “the end justifies the means’. 
The Communists have always rejected wanton cruelty and 
inhuman actions. They do not contrast end and means but 
regard them as inseparable. As Marx wrote, “an end that 
involves unjust means is not a just end”’.! 

Peaceful coexistence is a form of the class struggle that 
enables the peoples of the socialist countries to transfer the 
contest with capitalism to spheres in which it can be beneficial 
to mankind. The standpoint of the socialist countries is by no 
means “peace at any price”: it is the confidence of the new 
society in its strength and viability, and ceaseless struggle 
against reaction and aggression. 

It is the humane nature of communism that makes it the great 
ideal it is. “Communist ideology... is the most humane ideol- 
ogy. Its ideals are to establish truly human relations between 
individuals and peoples, to deliver mankind from the threat 
of wars of extermination, and bring about universal peace and 
a free, happy life for all men on earth.’ 

Socialism, as a more progressive system, negates capitalism. 


4 K. Marx, F. Engels, Werke, Vol. I. 
2 Programme of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, pp. 102-03. 


380 





But it represents not a direct but a dialectic negation of capital- 
ism, retaining the positive features of the latter. Capitalism is 
not only an outmoded ugly social order that has outlived its 
usefulness: it is a level of development of the productive forces, 
and in many cases a very high one, it is material and spiritual 
values created by many generations of working people. Social- 
ism inculcates profound respect for the material values created 
by the working people. The idea that the fruits of his labour 
should be destroyed in the holocaust of nuclear war is hateful 
to the working man. 

The dichotomy between the two systems of capitalism and 
socialism engenders certain forms of struggle between them, 
which may be peaceful or non-peaceful. The history of the 
world’s first socialist state shows that the imperialist states in- 
cline to war as a means of resolving the fundamental dichotomy 
between the two systems, while the socialist state has remained 
unerringly faithful to Lenin’s principle of peaceful coexistence 
between states with different social systems. 

Bourgeois scholars try very hard to hide or gloss over this 
side of the matter, often by referring to Lenin’s thesis of the 
inevitability of class struggle between the proletariat and the 
bourgeoisie on a world scale, ending in the complete triumph 
of the working class. However, the content of the class struggle 
of the proletariat after it has triumphed over the bourgeoisie 
in its own country differs greatly from that of the proletariat 
in countries where the bourgeoisie are still in power. The ques- 
tion of abolishing capitalism in a particular country is essen- 
tially the question of overcoming the inherent contradictions 
between the opposed social forces. The task of overthrowing the 
social order that is unjust from the point of view of the prole- 
tariat in a given country rests squarely on the shoulders of the 
proletariat of that country. The socialist countries have no in- 
tention of exporting revolution, since revolutions have to come 
about as a result of the exacerbation of class contradictions 
within a given country. Lenin declared himself categorically 
opposed to “pushing” revolutions as being “completely at vari- 
ance with Marxism”! 

This, of course, does not mean that the peoples of the social- 
ist countries remain indifferent to revolutionary struggles 
abroad. Faithful to the cause of proletarian internationalism 


4 V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 27, p. 71. 





381 








they support the labour movement and national liberation 
movement throughout the world, and resolutely oppose the 
efforts of the imperialist powers to export counter-revolution. 
The growing economic power of the socialist system, the creation 
of more favourable conditions in the world for the revolutionary 
struggle of the proletariat, and the power of the example of 
the revolutionary transformation of society—such factors are 
of tremendous value in promoting the struggle against impe- 
rialism. Thus, by supporting peace and peaceful coexis- 
tence the Communists are by no means evading their class 
duty. 

Some claim that humanism is a bourgeois, not a_ socialist 
slogan, and that in adopting it the Communists are making a 
concession to bourgeois ideology. Nothing could be further 
from the truth. The fact that the bourgeoisie at one time pro- 
claimed humanism, freedom and fraternity, does not mean that 
these slogans correspond to the interests of the modern impe- 
rialist bourgeoisie. The latter have long since betrayed the 
ideals once proclaimed by their class and the standard of strug- 
gle for freedom and progress has been taken over and raised 
high by the Communists and the working masses. 

Socialist humanism derives from the class interests of the 
proletariat. Yet, at the same time, it defends the interests of 
mankind. There is no contradiction involved here. Today, 
the universal ideals of mankind are embodied in communist 
ideals. 

The proletariat is the only class in history whose interests 
in their objective essence correspond with the interests of all 
progressive mankind. The removal of all the social and national 
causes of wars between peoples and of imperialist oppression 
and violence is linked above all with the activity of the pro- 
letariat. This is why the founders of Marxism regarded the 
development of the labour movement and its successes as the 
condition for social progress. Thus, Engels addressed the En- 
glish workers as follows: “I found you to be more than mere 
Englishmen, members of a single, isolated nation, I found you 
to be Men, members of the great and universal family of Man- 
kind, who know their interest and that of all the human race 
to be the same. And as such, as members of this Family of 
‘One and Indivisible’ Mankind, as Human Beings in the most 
emphatical meaning of the word, as such I, and many others 
on the Continent, hail your progress in every direction and wish 
you speedy success... your success is certain, and no step you 


382 


eee eer 


will have to take in your onward march, will be lost to our 
common cause, the cause of Humanity.”! 

Today, when the strength of the international proletariat has 
increased beyond measure, and with the emergence of its off- 
spring, the world socialist system, we can say without hesita- 
tion that the future of mankind depends above all on the activ- 
ity, enterprise and solidarity of the working masses. It is the 
historical mission of the proletariat to eliminate the exploiting 
classes, at the same time itself ceasing to exist as a class and 
merging with all working people to form a classless society in 
which the interests of the proletariat and the interests of the 
other layers coincide and become the general interests. In the 
struggle for peace against thermonuclear war, the Communists 
are the bearers of progressive civilisation. This must be stressed 
in view of the primary importance the Communists attach to 
preserving the main productive forces—the people who create 
material and cultural values. 

Socialist humanism is essentially militant, since it will not 
be reconciled to any form of exploitation or violence, since it 
combats the forces that aspire to war, colonial expansion and 
the enslavement of peoples. The CPSU attacks complacency 
and carefree happy-go-lucky attitudes and constantly trains the 
Soviet people to be ready to take up arms where necessary to 
defend the gains of socialism. Moreover, it should be noted 
that if a world war were launched by imperialism, the interna- 
tional proletariat, and the world socialist camp would do their 
utmost to ensure that the whole system of imperialism were 
overthrown. 

Yet the militant nature of socialist humanism does not mean 
that the peoples of the socialist countries are encouraged to 
threaten anybody. On the contrary, Communists act in the in- 
terests of universal peace and social progress. 

The International Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Par- 
ties (Moscow, 1969), advanced a broad programme for ensur- 
ing peace and international security, which, if carried out, 
would be in the interests of all peoples. The main points of 
this programme are: an end to imperialist aggression in Indo- 
china, the elimination of the consequences of Israeli aggression 
in the Middle East, struggle for the complete abolition of colo- 
nialism, neo-colonialism and racism, for the reduction of in- 
ternational tension and the settling of outstanding international 


1 K. Marx, F. Engels, On Britain, pp. 337-38. 


383 


RS oo ae 











issues by means of talks, for an end to the arms race and the 
creation of an effective system of collective security. 

Marxist-Leninist humanism involves active affirmation of 
life and the struggle to transform the world on revolutionary 
principles. N. K. Krupskaya writes of Lenin, that “he was no 
ascetic”, but “loved life in all its manifold beauty, loved his 
comrades, loved people. Everyone knows of his simplicity, and 
his gay, infectious laughter. But everything in him was subor- 
dinated to one thing—the struggle for a bright, enlightened, 
prosperous, full and happy life for all. Successes in this strug- 
gle made him happier than anything else.”! 

The life-assertive force of socialist humanism is determined 
by the fact that it is founded on a clear understanding of future 
social development and confidence in the triumph of Commu- 
nist ideals, and by the fact that in its very essence it involves the 
practical activities of the working masses directed towards 
elimination of the forces that are hostile to them and promotion 
of the cause of peace. 

As Lenin put it: “...we are ardent optimists in what con- 
cerns the working-class movement and its aims. We are already 
laying the foundation of a new edifice and our children will 
complete its construction.’ 

Inspiring the supporters of peace with confidence in their 
own strength, communist ideology gives meaning to the activity 
of every member of the movement for international peace and 
friendship. Awareness of the connection between the labour and 
struggle of today and the bright future of all mankind immea- 
surably increases the energies of all who struggle for progress 
and helps them surmount the numerous difficulties they encoun- 
ter on the way. 

The struggle waged by the Marxists-Leninists on the ideo- 
logical front is the struggle of socialist humanism against obscu- 
rantism, the struggle of truth against bourgeois falsehood. This 
struggle only helps to improve the international situation. 
though some bourgeois publicists try to prove the contrary. Thus, 
the French sociologist Raymond Aron maintains that according 
to the logic of peaceful coexistence to which the Communists 
adhere, they should recognise the need for ideological peace.? 


1 N. K. Krupskaya about Lenin, Collection of articles, Moscow, 1960, 
p. 291, Russ. ed. 

2-V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 19, p. 237. 

3 Raymond Aron, “Les Contradictions de la coexistence pacifique”, 
Le Figaro, August 29, 1963, p. 1. 


384 


NYT Pl. et veteds sea libe pata” okt eee TO? G8 Jo een 
Ads BGT Ss THe SND 


ea 





Many bourgeois ideologists distort the essence of the struggle 
waged by the Marxists on the ideological front, equating ideo- 
logical struggle with cold war. 

In point of fact, however, ideological struggle and cold war 
are totally different concepts. Cold war in the ideological 
sphere, supported by aggressive forces of anti-communism 
throughout the world, is a slanderous campaign intended to 
subvert the socialist system and disorientate the masses in order 
to facilitate the adventurist actions of the imperialists. The 
struggle against bourgeois ideology, on the other hand, in- 
volves proving on the basis of facts and strict scientific analysis 
the advantages of socialism over capitalism, exposing the ideo- 
logical myths of anti-communism, affirming the truth and unit- 
ing the masses for the struggle for the bright ideals of man- 
kind. 

Bourgeois champions of “ideological coexistence” are in fact 
deliberately confusing two issues: the question of normal rela- 
tions between countries with different social systems and the 
question of the irreconcilability of the bourgeois and commu- 
nist outlooks. Soviet co-operation with such countries as Afgha- 
nistan, Finland and India has shown that relations between 
states can be successfully developed despite fundamental ideo- 
logical differences. 

As for demands for an “ideological truce”, or as American 
sociologist A. Mayer puts it, the conclusion of a “modern Peace 
of Westphalia”, they are completely vain. Capitalism and its 
ideologists are not going to get an “ideological armistice” with 
the socialist world for the simple reason that communist and 
capitalist ideology are wholly incompatible and irreconcilable. 
Marxist ideas are born of the struggle for a better future; they 
have spread all over the world and have already proved their 
superiority over bourgeois ideology. This is what worries those 
who adhere to reactionary ideas most of all. The ideological 
struggle will naturally continue until the total victory of the 
communist ideology, the most progressive ideology there is, 
over the bourgeois ideology. 

Some bourgeois ideologists, while pretending to accept 
a policy of peaceful coexistence, demand that the Com- 
munists renounce Marxism and sometimes even try to address 
the socialist countries in the form of an ultimatum. The Marx- 
ist-Leninist concept of peaceful coexistence, however, means 
the desire to wage the inevitable class struggle between the two 
systems in such spheres as economics and ideology, in accord- 


385 











ance with the principles of humanism. The Marxists hold real- 
istic views, and do not expect the ruling elite in capitalist coun- 
tries to renounce their bourgeois ideology. Unscientific theories 
and false views cannot be overcome by mere volition, but only 
as the objective result of long, persistent class struggle, through 
which the socialist system and its genuinely scientific and gen- 
uinely humane ideology will eventually triumph throughout 
the world. 

One cannot help noticing the element of latent fear and em- 
barrassment at the triumphal march of Marxist ideas through- 
out the world in the bourgeois demand that Communists should 
renounce Marxism. The fact that many bourgeois ideologists 
today reject the idea of nuclear war does not remove the deep 
ideological crisis that grips modern capitalism. The more far- 
sighted bourgeois ideologists cannot help being more and more 
worried by the question: if not war, then what other future 
awaits capitalism? Loath to accept the idea that the capitalist 
system is doomed (sooner or later) to collapse, they try to prop- 
agate the old idea of capitalism lasting forever by all sorts of 
roundabout means: propounding such concepts as that of a 
single “industrial society”, calling upon the peoples to renounce 
the struggle for national and social emancipation, and so 
on. Naturally Marxists expose these concepts for what 
they are. On the basis of the scientific prognosis and expe- 
rience of the class struggle, Communists will never cease to 
recognise the inevitability of their ideas being universally 
adopted. 

However hard bourgeois ideologists may try to hide the 
source of war, it remains the aspirations of the monopolists for 
unrestrained expansion in order to rob the peoples, win new 
positions in the world market, increase their profits and set up 
their economic and political domination throughout the world. 
The monopolies subdue to their will the organs of power in a 
country, are ardent supporters of the arms race, of the creation 
of aggressive blocs, and the suppression of the revolutionary 
movements of the masses. Since they regard the Soviet Union 
and the other socialist countries as the main obstacle in 
their path, their primary aim is to overthrow world socia- 
lism. 

Of course, even the most inveterate reactionaries today realise 
that it is not so easy to draw the masses into a new war. That 
is why they mobilise their ideologists to justify imperialist ag- 
gression with myths of the aggressiveness of the socialist coun- 


386 


a oe ee 


tries, and above all to convince the masses that war is inevi- 
table so they may as well reconcile themselves to it. In this way 
too, they seek to show the futility of peace movements which 
represent such serious obstacle to their plans. 

Naturally, Marxists-Leninists are well aware that along with 
the socialist humanists numerous representatives of various 
trends and shades of bourgeois humanism are interested in 
peace. The latter may differ from the Marxists in their under- 
standing of various questions of social development, but often 
engage in useful activity for the cause of peace, exposing war 
hysteria in the capitalist countries and mobilising the masses to 
activity in defence of peace. In this respect the activity of the 
British philosopher Bertrand Russell was characteristic. Pope 
John XXIH, too, in his famous Encyclical called for an end to 
the arms race, the banning of nuclear weapons, disarmament 
under effective international control, peaceful coexistence, 
equal rights for all nations and states, and an end to war 
psychosis. What is the communist attitude to such declara- 
tions? 

Communists do not accept religious-idealist beliefs and 
views, but consider that the problem of preserving peace affects 
all people equally, irrespective of their nationality, politics or 
faith. The Communists make every effort to ensure that all 
men of good will join forces. 

At the same time, the Communists are well aware that 
preachers of cosmopolitan plans for world unity, a “world 
state”, and other such reactionary ideas often speak from the 
pacifist rostrum. Under the cloak of “humanism” these people 
are often, in point of fact, supporting the hegemony of the US 
monopolies. Clearly this is not to be countenanced. 

There are bourgeois “humanists” who preach the “moral 
value” of suffering in anticipation of the joys of the “beyond”, 
and demand that mankind follow the path of suffering, since 
this is “God’s will”. Some bourgeois philosophers see the choice 
for mankind to lie in either abandoning all further devel- 
opment or being reconciled to the prospect of self-destruc- 
tion. 

Although such openly anti-humanitarian trends in bourgeois 
sociology as biologism and social-Darwinism have been very 
largely discredited with the collapse of racist and geopolitical 
theories, the view is still widely held in the West that the source 
of wars is to be sought in man’s imperfect nature. Thus, the 
American sociologist L. Kohr writes that “nothing seems to 


387 





be More natural to man than aggressiveness and his delight 
in it.” 

Observing what a powerful stimulus in people’s lives the 
aspiration towards some high ideal can be, many bourgeois 
ideologists do their utmost to destroy belief in the very exis- 
tence of ideals. The Canadian historian A. Lower,? for example, 
writes that even if man journeys into outer space, he will re- 
main the same wild animal he is today, and, falling back on a 
worn social-Darwinist argument, declares that if man ceased 
to be a fighting animal he would cease to exist since war is a 
basic law of life. On the basis of this “argument” he justifies 
aggressive wars as revealing man’s true essence! 

Lower rightly points out the obvious fact that the means of 
destruction are becoming more and more terrible. But he deli- 
berately refrains from mentioning that it is not man’s “aggres- 
sive nature” that is to blame for the threat that hangs over 
mankind, but the moribund imperialist system. Lower entitled 
his article ‘““Man’s Future”, but all his efforts are directed to- 
wards proving that man has no future. Mankind places its hopes 
in the collective reason of the peoples, which is capable of 
finding ways of fulfilling their age-old hopes and longings. 
Lower declares that human reason is only capable of inventing 
ever-new means of self-annihilation. 

Lastly, there still persist to this day attempts to justify war 
by religion. Reactionary theologians exhort people not to baulk 
before the “divine” mission on earth of, say, dropping a few 
H-bombs on the socialist countries for the triumph of the 
principles of “Christian humanism”. As a rule, they preach 
fiercely aggressive anti-communism, holding that the ideo- 
logical differences between the socialist and _ capitalist 
countries will inevitably lead to armed conflict between 
them. 

Equally fashionable in the West at present are the theories 
of the bourgeois social-psychologists, who attribute the causes 
of war to psychological factors, such as the existence of what 
they call “authoritarian personalities”. These theories are ex- 
pounded by people with various political views, some of them 
anti-militarist. However, such theories by their very existence 
serve to mask or distort the social essence of such phenomena 
as war, fascism and aggression, and are thus not infrequently 


41. Kohr, The Breakdown of Nations, London, 1957, p. 18. 
2 Queen's Quarterly, 1962, Winter, p. 542. 


388 





employed in practice to “disarm” progressive movements and 
justify the policies of imperialist reaction. 

Appeals for peace are often combined with appeals for pas- 
siveness and submission. Bourgeois humanists often preach uni- 
versal love as the basis for human relations without consider- 
ing the question of how this should be achieved in practice. For 
socialist humanism practicability is the main criterion. 

The actual stand taken by a bourgeois scholar or public figure 
on the questions of war and peace is to some extent connected 
with his views. A person may or may not accept the materialist 
view of things, yet sooner or later the very logic of the struggle 
for peace gradually forces him to abandon many idealist illu- 
sions. Evolution in the views of many active supporters of peace 
and progress is the result of their participation in the practical 
struggle of the masses, in the process of which a person can 
take cognizance of the real mainsprings of the contemporary 
world. 

Action for peace is an expression of genuine humanism. The 
political inactivity and ideological apathy of the masses is a 
condition for the implementation of the imperialists’ aggressive 
plans. Conversely, the realisation in practice of the ideals of 
peace and socialism requires that every individual be fully 
aware of his role in the common struggle and act with confi- 
dence in victory over the forces of evil. This involves overcom- 
ing and throwing off bourgeois ideas of the helplessness of the 
individual to resist the blows of fortune, understanding the role 
of the masses as the true maker of history, and active struggle 
for the triumph of the just cause. 

In The Life of Galileo, Bertolt Brecht puts into the mouth 
of Galileo’s pupil the following question: “Don’t you think that 
the truth, if it is the truth, will make headway even without 
us?” To which Galileo replies: “No, no, no! The truth will make 
headway only in as far as we assist it. The triumph of 
reason can only be the triumph of people endowed with 
reason.” 

Today there exists a powerful bulwark of peace and human- 
ism—the world socialist system. Everything honest and progres- 
sive in the world unites around it. And every sincere humanist 
must promote the strengthening of this foundation, and make 
his contribution to the cause of preventing war. “We Commu- 
nists, through all our trials have preserved our devotion heart 
and soul to the Leninist ideas of peace and friendship between 
nations. Today, as before, we shall continue to struggle for 


389 





these noble, universal aims together with all who oppose the 
policy of militarism, aggression and war.”! 

Socialist humanism, which is practical humanism, is an in- 
valuable weapon in the struggle for the affirmation of the prin- 
ciples of peace, freedom, and international brotherhood. 


1 Appeal of the Moscow Meeting of Communist and Workers’ Parties. 


