THE BOOK WAS 
DRENCHED 



00 jr 

64457 



OSMANIA UNOTKgTfY LIBRARY 

Call NO./&/ /|X **- . Accession ^o- 



uthor /jt4^*< t^ 4 V, 




This book should be returned on or before the date last marked below. 



A REALISTIC 
PHILOSOPHY 



The Perennial Principles of Thought 
and Action in a Changing World 



K. F. REINHARDT, Ph.D. 

Stanford University 



THE BRUCE PUBLISHING COMPANY 
MILWAUKEE 



Nihil obstat: H. B. RIES, Censor librorum 

Imprimatur: *i* MOSES E. KILEY, Archbishop of Milwaukee 

April 24, 1944 



To 
DR. OSWALDO ROBLES 

Executive Head of the Department of Philosophy 

at the 
National University of Mexico, Mexico, D.F. 

Representative of the PHILOSOPHIA PERENNIS among our 
neighbors south of the Rio Grande 



Preface by the General Editor 

A philosophy that "is both alive and can be lived" must strike 
its roots deep into the soil of reality. Such is the author's basic 
contention. 

It must be a philosophy that takes account of the full truth of 
things and can apply to passing problems the eternal principles; 
a philosophy called to preserve what is best in the traditions 
of the past, and yet prepared with equal determination to 
assume its place in the van of every genuine modern forward 
movement. 

In a single word, it must be a realistic philosophy. 

Such, in its ideal development, is the system of thought here 
espoused, a system combining the truest elements of Greek 
wisdom with the finest product of the Christian mind. In this 
book the system is fearlessly applied to the issues that have 
arisen out of false and godless philosophic principles and 
which have thrown into cosmic confusion our twentieth cen- 
tury world. 

There is no other system of thought in our time that can be 
said to verify all the essentials of a universal realism. Com- 
pared to it, what are the countless conflicting and ephemeral 
philosophies of our age but broken mirrors, stained, dimmed, 
and reflecting only confused and isolated fragments of the 
truth ? From a false idealism, repugnant to common sense, on 
to a hopeless materialism, they alike represent but partial views 
of that great, magnificent reality of which we all are part and 
that perpetually encompasses us. 

Realism may neither exclude the ideal nor belittle the mate- 
rial. It may be no sketchy and superficial philosophy, singling 
out one thing only and condemning all the rest to a limbo of 
nonconsidered things. True realism excludes none of all God's 
creatures, nor least of all God Himself, their Maker. It acknowl- 
edges them alike and all the relations that arise from them. 



moil and contusion. 

For men of all denominations or of none, this book will be 
a valuable guide to a life of intellect and spirit. With prayer 
and the grace of God all other things can then readily enough 
be supplied for the needed renewal of rational human life and 
relations. 

If what has been said here may appear polemical, yet such 
is not the nature of this book. It is rather a positive presenta- 
tion, making reference incidentally to the various schools and 
shades of thought, but with a purpose profoundly constructive. 

If the opening chapter, on the concept of being, is tensely 
metaphysical, yet the reader's reward will be proportionately 
great in the assured hold it provides on the essential and funda- 
mental principles of all clear thinking. In the latter sections 
particularly of this book abundant practical application will be 
found to the large human issues of our day with their un- 
happily multiplied social and economic problems. 

JOSEPH HUSSLEIN, S.J., PH.D. 
General Editor, Science and Culture Series 
St. Louis University 
April 20, 1944 



Preface by the Author 

This book deals with the basic concept of Reality as such and 
with the main problems of philosophic realism as embodied in 
and elaborated by the philosophia perennis. The author sees 
the reason for our uncertainties and confusions in the fact that 
philosophic realism has been exchanged in our time for un- 
realistic attitudes in thought and life or for a certain false 
"realism" which takes account only of some aspects of reality, 
but loses sight of the whole. Out of these unrealistic attitudes 
grows the tendency to see things and events in isolation, sep- 
arated from their natural and supernatural context and there- 
fore emptied of their true meaning and significance. Such par- 
tial and consequently distorted views of reality are particularly 
evident in those fields which offer a practical testing ground of 
philosophic principles, such as, for example, the vast field of 
moral philosophy, with its subdivisions of political, economic, 
and educational thought and practice. The author, therefore, 
pleads for a return to a total view of reality, which includes in 
particular a total view of man and society. And he tries to 
demonstrate that only a philosophy of integral realism is 
capable of working out an intellectual and moral synthesis 
which duly recognizes the essential values of matter and mind, 
body and soul, sense and intellect, nature and supernature. 

Much of the material expounded in the following pages has 
been the subject of lectures and discussions, conducted by the 
author under the auspices of the University of California Exten- 
sion, over a period of about twelve years (1932-1944). The ideas 
underlying this work of teaching and research are presented 
here in a new form and in a more systematic arrangement. It is 
the author's hope that his treatment of many problems of 
highly controversial character, and of subjects which seem of 
eminently practical relevance to the professional philosopher 
and the educated average reader alike, will contribute to some 



x Preface by the Author 

extent to a better understanding of the tasks of intellectual, 
moral, and social reconstruction that lie ahead. 

A debt of gratitude is due, in the first place, to the Rev. Dr. 
Joseph Husslein, S.J., the General Editor of the Science and 
Culture Series, as well as to the publisher of the Series, who 
suggested the writing of this book and lent their encourage- 
ment to its progress and completion. The author furthermore 
acknowledges his indebtedness to his colleague, Professor B. Q. 
Morgan of Stanford University, who read both the manuscript 
and the galley proofs and made many excellent suggestions as 
to the stylistic and material improvement of the work. The 
author wishes to extend special thanks to the Very Rev. Joseph 
Nevins, S.S., President of St. Patrick's Seminary, Menlo Park, 
California for generously offering library and other facilities ; to 
Rev. R. L. Gratto, S.S., Professor of Philosophy at St. Patrick's 
Seminary, for much encouragement and pertinent criticism; 
and to Miss Esther Davies of Stanford University, for material 
aid in compiling part of the index. 

KURT F. REINHARDT, PH.D. 
Stanford University, July 31, 1944, 
The Feast of St. Ignatius of Loyola. 



Contents 



PAGE 

Preface by the General Editor v 

Introduction i 



CHAPTER ONE 
BEING AND REALITY (METAPHYSICS) 

SECTION 

1 The Concept of Being 27 

2 The Analogy of Being 29 

3 The First Principles of Being 32 

4 The Transcendental Attributes (Properties) 

of Being 34 

5 The Categories (Predicaments; Modes) of Being 39 

6 The Categories, Viewed Individually .... 41 

7 Essence and Existence 55 

8 Matter and Form 58 

9 The Law of Causality 63 

10 The Different Kinds of Causes 65 

11 The First Cause or the Origin of Being ... 71 

12 The Demonstration of God's Existence 77 

13 The Nature of Man 90 

CHAPTER Two 

T-JTTTV/fAVT A^TTrYVT AXTr X/irVDAT \7ATTTT7C 



xii Contents 

CHAPTER THREE 

HUMAN ACTION IN STATE AND SOCIETY 
(POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY) 

SECTION PAGE 

19 Man and Society 141 

20 The Law of Nature and the Moral Law . . . 147 

21 The Natural Law and Human Rights .... 152 

22 The Nature of Justice 159 

23 Man and the State 162 

24 The Commonwealth of Nations 200 

25 War and the Moral Law 209 

CHAPTER FOUR 

MAN AS PRODUCER AND CONSUMER 
(ECONOMIC PHILOSOPHY) 

26 Economics and Ethics 217 

27 The Dignity of Labor 221 

28 Rights and Obligations of Ownership . . . 229 

CONCLUSION 

29 Man World God 237 

Glossary 244 

Bibliography 253 

Index 259 



Introduction 

IT IS a peculiar feature of the present age that individuals 
and groups in all the countries that comprise what may 
roughly be termed "Western Civilization" are engaged in an 
almost frantic search for norms and standards of thought and 
action. The so-called "totalitarian" nations have attempted in 
recent decades to build pyramids of uniform and unified 
social and political structures based on definite anthropological 
and biological concepts and culminating in such supposed 
absolutes as "the State," "the people," "the race," or "the class- 
less society" of the emancipated proletariat. The "democracies," 
on the other hand, challenged in their complacent lassitude 
by the aggressive violence and the uncompromising determina- 
tion of these dynamic forces, have been compelled in self- 
defence to rally their inherent strength by re-examining their 
own intellectual and moral foundations, in order to meet the 
great challenge by an equally consistent and conscious reaffirma- 
tion of their own root principles. The search for norms and 
standards is therefore not confined to one side or one party 
in this clash of several ways of thinking, doing, and living 
it is well-nigh universal, and the struggle is waged in the 
last analysis in behalf of different and indeed essentially 
irreconcilable ideas concerning the nature and the ultimate 
destiny of man. An age which, as many had thought, was 
characterized by crass materialism and a cynical disregard of 
all absolutistic claims and beliefs, has actually reverted to types 
of ideological warfare considered peculiar to the more or less 
remote past. 

The search for new absolutes follows upon a period of 
laissez faire in politics, economics, and morals and is nourished 
by mounting resentment against a society which, while still 
paying lip service to such traditional values as human liberty 
and human personality, had gradually lost its understanding 



2 A Realistic Philosophy 

of the true meaning of these values and was already in grave 
danger of losing its faith in them as well. Intellectual and 
social deordination were earmarks of a "liberalism" which, 
owing to its waning faith in any objective and indubitable 
set of values, lacked motivation, will, and ability to realize 
in social structures the demands of social justice and to build 
an organic society in accordance with the order of nature 
and the dignity of man. 

If today's "crisis" were the indication of an ordinary change 
or transition, if it were merely a question of a shift of 
emphasis in the scale of values or in the order of allegiances, 
then the present cataclysm would not be very different from 
similar crises in the past. Time and time again the Western 
World has been deeply shaken by violent upheavals and 
revolutionary transformations, and even the nineteenth century 
abounds in clashes of conflicting ideas. What makes the present 
crisis different and perhaps unique is its all-pervasive nature, 
as well as the radical break with the past which characterizes 
many of its aspects. 

It is hardly open to question that down through the centuries 
of the "Western Tradition" definite patterns of thought were 
either inherited and therefore taken for granted or, if at 
times they were questioned and challenged, this was done 
with the intent to perfect human nature, to improve human 
relations, and to promote social and cultural progress. There 
have been, it is true, thoroughgoing skeptics all along the 
line, such as the Sophists in ancient Greece, the Nominalists 
in the Middle Ages, or David Hume in the eighteenth 
century. But these were either the spokesmen of a sophisticated 
intelligentsia or they were sturdy individualists of thought. 
Though their influence, like that of the French Encyclopaedists, 
was at times considerable, their following was always numeri- 
cally small, and the peoples of the West as a whole have 
steadfastly refused to accept any categoric or nihilistic denial 
of certain criteria of true and false, right and wrong, 
good and evil. 

Not until the nineteenth century were the conditions created 
for what Hermann Rauschning in our own age has called 
a "Revolution of Nihilism." 1 What distinguished this most 

1 Hermann Rauschning, The Revolution of "Nihilism (New York, 1939). 



Introduction 3 

recent form of skepticism from similar intellectual trends of 
the past was, firstly, that it was associated from the outset with 
a very positive evaluation of one limited branch of human 
knowledge, viz., the body of facts gained by the methods 
employed in the natural sciences; secondly, the alliance between 
the new skepticism and certain extreme forms of political, 
economic, and ethical "liberalism" and "laissez faire"; and, 
thirdly, the absorption of the skeptical attitude by broad 
masses of the population. While the first two characteristics 
were, in part at least, historically conditioned, the third has 
as its principal cause the infiltration of skepticism and 
relativism into the institutions of learning and their spread 
through the channels of the modern systems of universal 
education. 

It is obvious that it would be difficult if not an impossible 
task to arrange the multiform trends of the nineteenth century 
under any common denominator. And yet, a careful analysis 
suggests that they all converge in an increasing respect for 
experimental science, coupled with a decreasing confidence in 
the time-honored standards and values of the Western Tradi- 
tion. Many of the publications of recent date that deal with 
the complex problems of European civilization in past and 
present echo the almost verbally identical lament that disaster 
and despair must result from the eclipse of the spiritual 
heritage of the past. 2 Prophets of gloom joined their voices 
to those of the enthusiastic apostles of progress, indicting the 
modern age and confessing the breakdown of a faith in man 
and reality that had seemed infallibly established in the 
Western World. The picture which Spengler paints in "The 
Decline of the West" and the one which unfolds itself in 
Bernard Shaw's provocative play "Too True to Be Good" 8 
betray a similar mood, despite the contrasting intellectual 
premises of the two authors. And the two messages fall equally 
short of overcoming pure negation and of offering guiding 
principles or practical methods to master a crisis the symptoms 



a Cf. Mortimer J. Adler, What Man Has Made of Man (New York, 1937); Michael 
dc la Bedoyere, Christian Crisis (New York, 1942); Nicolai Berdiaev, The End 
of Our Time (New York, 1933); Pitrim Sorokin, The Crisis of Our Age (New 
York, 1942); Oswald Spengler, The Decline of the West, 2 vols. (New York, 1939); 
W. T. Stace, The Destiny of Western Man (New York, 1942). 

"Bernard Shaw, Too True to Be Good (London, 1934). 



4 A Realistic Philosophy 

of which they so admirably describe. When the adventurer 
Aubrey in Shaw's play whose father was a fanatical atheist 
and whose mother was a religious bigot, and who obviously 
is interpreting Shaw's own ideas for the benefit of readers and 
audiences when Aubrey delivers his final sermon, the space 
surrounding him grows cold and empty. Gradually a dense 
fog envelops everything in a veil of mystery, finally swallow- 
ing even the form and voice of this lonely preacher. His 
parting words convey the conviction that mere negation cannot 
satisfy the mind of man, and that a "way of life" must needs 
be found if all is not to be lost beyond redemption. 

Now it is the peculiar privilege of man to formulate such 
ideas and to arrive at such conclusions as will be conducive 
to the establishment of a hierarchy of values and therewith to 
the finding of such a "way of life." Man does not accept 
passively and without questioning the conditions and situa- 
tions in which he finds himself: he rather reacts to them 
actively, either spontaneously or according to some reasoned 
plan or design. He thereby affirms himself as a being of 
a special kind. His kinship with inorganic and organic nature 
notwithstanding, he is alive in his own unique way. He is, 
potentially at least, a thinking being, a reasoning or "meta- 
physical" animal, i.e., a being that asks questions and contrives 
answers concerning the world about him as well as regarding 
himself, his own nature and existence. He fries to assimilate 
the world of phenomena by means of cognition, and he 
expresses and communicates his knowledge by means of speech 
and language, using grammar and syntax to impart to his 
communications order and meaning. 

To say that man is a thinking or rational animal is to 
assert that reason is the distinctive mark of human nature, the 
specific difference which establishes man's rank above minerals, 
plants, and brutes. It is this conviction of man's prerogatives 
as a rational creature that of late has become shaky, that has 
been called in question by professional and amateur philos- 
ophers alike, and that has been attacked by new irrational 
creeds in many lands. But the very way in which such creeds 
are presented and defended provides in itself additional 
evidence of man's rational nature. Thus the advocates of the 



Introduction 5 

"new myths" 4 underlying the political and social totalitarian 
systems in Europe, or of the "twin myths of progress and 
utility" 5 underlying the collectivist emotionalism of the 
"progressive" philosophy of education in the United States 
they all resort willy-nilly to every imaginable type of rational- 
ization in the attempt to justify their antirational tenets. It 
seems therefore that man is not merely a reasoning but a 
rationalizing or philosophizing animal by virtue of the very 
fact that he cannot escape the necessity of fashioning his life 
in accordance with definite patterns of thought. His rationality 
compels him to choose among several philosophical or meta- 
physical arguments or propositions, arguments which may or 
may not be in accord with the anthropological structure of his 
own nature and with the ontological structure of reality. The 
man who extols emotionalism or "energeticism" or the primacy 
of the forces of will and instinct, of the race or of the blood, 
implies in his praise a distinct philosophical and metaphysical 
conviction, a specific attempt to establish, to displace or to 
replace certain standards and values, to perform some more 
or less systematic philosophical valuation, transvaluation, or 
revaluation. 

If it is true then that man cannot escape the implications 
and consequences of his own thinking, it would seem a 
counsel of elementary common sense that he cultivate and treas- 
ure such an important faculty. Therefore it would seem wise 
for him to recognize and honor philosophy, that science which 
involves relations with the impersonal realm of nature as 
well as with the personal types of being in individual and social 
life, and with God, the first cause of all being. Philosophy, 
therefore, seems to be properly defined as the science of the 
functions and implications of human thought. It may be 
objected that such a science is of little value because it deals 
of necessity with various abstract principles whose relation to 
practical life may not be immediately evident. The objection, 
however, would only be valid if philosophic wisdom were 



4 Cf. Alfred Rosenberg, The Myth of the Twentieth Century (Der Mythos des 20. 
Jahrhunderts) (Miinchen, 1934). 

6 Cf. Robert M. Hutchins, The Higher Learning in America (New Haven, 1936). 
An indictment of these twin myths. 



6 A Realistic Philosophy 

something purely theoretical and self-contained, if theoretical 
knowledge were not steadily overflowing, so to speak, into 
practical knowledge, thereby manifesting itself as a creative 
force, imparting its values not only to the human mind but 
to human acts as well. 

Philosophy rightly understood, therefore, is not only a basic 
theoretical discipline but also an eminently practical science, 
exercising its ordering and regulating function in relating 
thought to action and in unifying both. It is the misunder- 
standing of the nature of philosophy and its function in the 
history of human thought that has led to numerous overstate- 
ments and understatements concerning the value of philosophy 
as a rational science. An overemphasis on abstract theoretical 
thought is apt to lead to the loss of close contact with the 
practical side of life, while the exclusive preoccupation with 
practical and utilitarian ends may obstruct the apprehension 
of intellectual and moral principles. The history of Western 
thought offers examples of both types of aberration. Extreme 
philosophic rationalism appears as a rule to be accompanied 
or followed either by certain types of "actionism" or by various 
degrees of skepticism. Periods of philosophical inflation seem 
to alternate with periods of philosophical deflation. Over- 
confidence in the capacities of human reason finds itself almost 
inevitably challenged by a flat rejection of reason as a valid 
instrument of knowledge. 

Thus, in antiquity the rationalism of Socrates gave rise to the 
skepticism of the Sophists; in the Middle Ages the rationalism 
of decaying scholasticism was opposed by the nominalism of 
William of Occam and the fideism* of Martin Luther, the 
former despairing of the ability of human reason to establish 
criteria of true and false, of good and evil, and the latter 
denouncing reason as "a whore," but both finding one sole 
anchor of certitude in the subjective testimony of the individual 
conscience. Again, the rationalism of Descartes was challenged 
by the skepticism of Pierre Bayle (1647-1706) and the French 
Encyclopaedists and by the fideism of Blaise Pascal (1623-62) 
and the Jansenists of Port Royal. In the course of the nineteenth 
and the early twentieth century the rationalist "idealism" of 
the followers of Kant and Hegel engendered on the one hand 

* Sec Glossary for this and other scientific term*. 



Introduction 7 

the antirational and antimetaphysical "scientism" of Augustc 
Comte, Herbert Spencer, and a host of recent representatives 
of pragmatism, behaviorism, and "logical empiricism" all 
more or less faithful disciples of the "positivism" of their two 
masters while on the other hand the same rationalism invited 
another fideist reaction in the form of Schleiermacher's and 
Kierkegaard's (1813-55) irrationalist theology and that of their 
present-day followers. Kierkegaard's influence, in particular, 
is very much in evidence in the "dialectical theology" of Karl 
Earth and his school, an influence which today extends far 
beyond the boundaries of Denmark, Switzerland, and Ger- 
many, the native lands of the "dialectical theologians." 6 
Irrationalist reactions of a different kind and, to be sure, on 
a different level are the contemporary "wind-and~will" philos- 
ophies of violent actionism and dynamic energeticism (fascism, 
national-socialism, etc.), in which the telluric forces of race, 
blood, and instinct revolt against the lifeless abstractions and 
rationalizations of armchair philosophers. 

Carried forward to this point, an analysis of the human 
search for knowledge seems to suggest that two pitfalls must 
be avoided if the genuine philosophical quest is not to be 
frustrated or at least seriously impeded: (i) a supposed self- 
sufficiency and omnipotence of thought, which is in danger 
of resulting in empty abstraction and lifeless dialectics; and 
(2) a refusal to acknowledge the validity of rational operations 
and demonstrations, which in all likelihood is bound to issue 
in listless "scientism" or sterile skepticism. When theoretical 
wisdom tries to cut itself loose from actual experience and 
factual observation, it becomes unreal, and the same is true of 
practical wisdom or scientific knowledge when it rejects or 

* "Dialectical Theology" stresses the "infinite qualitative difference" between 
creature and Creator, the absolute transcendence of God as against a fallen and 
corrupted world and nature (Luther). Such a theology not only implies the 
devaluation of the natural faculty of human reason but also denies the possibility 
of a "natural theology" or theodicy. All human predications concerning the Deity 
are actually regarded as blasphemous. The contents of faith and revelation arc 
purely irrational and paradoxical and can be expressed in human terms only by 
seemingly self-contradictory ("dialectical") affirmative and negative ("y cs " and 
"no") statements. 

Cf. Karl Earth, The Epistle to the Romans (London, 1933); The Doctrine of the 
Word of God (Edinburgh, 1936); Credo (New York, 1936); Church and State 
(London, 1939); The Church and the Political Problem of Our Day (New York, 
J 939); also the works of F. Gogarten, W. Thurneysen, and E. Brunncr, most of 
them only available in German. 



8 A Realistic Philosophy 

disregards the normative functions of a philosophical evalu- 
ation of scientific facts and practical situations. In other words, 
wisdom without science is barren and science without wisdom 
is dangerous. Both the extreme rationalist and the extreme 
empiricist seem to underrate or overlook entirely an essential 
section of reality, and therefore sooner or later they find them- 
selves involved in insurmountable difficulties. Rationalist ideal- 
ism in its various forms inclines toward the denial of the 
value of practical experience, toward the denial of the 
reality of that which is concrete and individual, and toward 
the depreciation of matter. It feels tempted to reject in part 
or in toto the evidence furnished by sense perception, to regard 
as real only that which is mental or universal, and to treat 
extra-mental phenomena as illusions. A purely empiricist and 
materialist science, on the other hand, will try to reduce all 
reality to measurable quantities. It will distrust the evidence 
furnished by intellectual perception and is prone to attribute 
reality only to the concrete and particular, and to regard all 
intellectual and spiritual reality as illusory. While extreme 
rationalism and idealism fail to provide a satisfactory explana- 
tion of the phenomena of change, extreme empiricism and 
materialism fail to offer a satisfactory explanation of those 
enduring qualities and aspects of reality that underlie all 
change. Both views, therefore, are construed upon an in- 
complete understanding of the nature of reality. 

The one-sidedness of such fragmentary views of life in gen- 
eral, and of life on the human level in particular, is very 
conspicuous in the two major branches of modern philosophy 
which grew out of the disintegration of the systematic specula- 
tion of the medieval schools. Medieval thought, which in the 
thirteenth century had achieved a magnificent synthesis of the 
dialectical claims of nature and supernature, sense and intellect, 
reason and faith, in the philosophical "Summae" of St. Albert 
the Great and St. Thomas Aquinas, found it increasingly diffi- 
cult to cope with the tremendous transformations which 
resulted from the expansion of man's physical and intellectual 
view of the universe in the age of the Renaissance. In every 
department of civilization, in theology and philosophy, in faith 
and morals as well as in politics and economics, in science and 
education, in literature and in the arts, the symptoms of a 



Introduction 9 

spiritual and cultural crisis multiplied as the West traversed 
the span of time stretching from the thirteenth to the sixteenth 
century. The stable order of the God-centered "Sacred Empire" 
of the medieval Commonwealth of Nations, resting upon the 
twin pillars of the unquestioned authority of Emperor and 
Pope, was shaken to its foundations by the onrushing forces 
of Humanism, Renaissance, and Reformation, by the impact 
of new discoveries and inventions, by new trends in speculative 
thought and new methods in the inductive sciences. Even in 
the fourteenth century William of Occam (f 1349), the excom- 
municated Franciscan Friar, had proclaimed that a proposi- 
tion might be philosophically true and theologically false and 
vice versa (doctrine of the "double truth") and had thereby 
encouraged distrust in the objectivity of eternal verities. More- 
over, with his denial of the principle of causality he had antic- 
ipated Hume's skepticism and Kant's criticism and had, at 
least by implication, rejected the idea of finality or the belief 
in a teleological universe of causes, means, and ends. 

If there were no eternal verities or universal truths, where 
was certainty to be found? Two different and mutually ex- 
clusive answers to this question had been given by philosophical 
thought. Descartes (1596-1650), the rationalist, found certitude 
in the subjectivity of his mind and conscience (cogito, ergo 
sum: I think, therefore I am), and he made this certainty the 
starting point and cornerstone of his philosophy; Francis Bacon 
(1561-1626), the empiricist, found it in physical nature, in the 
experimental exploration of the laws of the universe, and hence 
in the newly developing science of mechanical physics. 

Thus, when at the beginning of modern times the mighty 
river of human thought divided into two streams rationalistic 
and critical philosophy on the one hand, experimental philos- 
ophy and empirical science on the other the once imposing 
edifice of medieval scholasticism had already crumbled. It was 
no longer a vital force, but could only be called "scholastic" 
in that derogatory sense in which the term was used by the 
representatives of both the rationalist and empiricist modes of 
thought, and which, owing to an unjust and unhistorical 
generalization, has remained associated with it in large measure 
to this day. The treasures of the medieval philosophical 
synthesis were buried in commentaries and textbooks, and the 



io A Realistic Philosophy 

creative intellectual effort and broad vision of the great 
medieval thinkers gave way to ultraconservatisrn and to the 
academic subtleties or the standardizations of second-rate 
scholars and teachers, who made a fetish of tradition and 
worshiped defunct authorities. When, after two centuries of 
decline, scholastic thought recovered some of its former vigor 
in the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the 
systems of modern philosophy had emancipated themselves to 
such a degree that an almost unbridgeable gulf separated them 
from the spiritual heritage of their scholastic contemporaries. 
Not only the philosophical interests and problems but also the 
linguistic and terminological patterns had undergone such 
radical changes that a mutual understanding and rapproche- 
ment between the old and new schools and systems of thought 
was rendered extremely difficult. 

It seems that in the incubation period of modern philosophy 
most of the truly creative thinkers felt themselves intrigued by 
the new vistas of speculation, and it is therefore not surprising 
that both rationalism and empiricism captivated many illus- 
trious minds. Rationalism followed the road marked by 
Descartes, Malebranche, Spinoza, Leibniz, Kant, and Hegel. 
The beginnings of empiricism are usually associated with the 
keen speculation of the Franciscan Friar, Roger Bacon (1214- 
1294), the "Doctor Mirabilis," who was one of the most ad- 
vanced thinkers of his age and is credited with a large 
number of scientific discoveries. He was an Oxford scholar, 
and most of the distinguished representatives of empiristic 
philosophy, such as Francis Bacon, Hobbes, Hume, Herbert 
Spencer, John Stuart Mill, are likewise Anglo-Saxons. 

Rationalism, following its innate bent, culminated in the 
extreme idealism of Hegel, who confined reality exclusively 
to the mind and consistently maintained that everything that 
is rational is real and everything that is real is rational. Em- 
piricism, no less loyal to its inherent premises, issued in the 
nineteenth century in the "positive philosophy" of Auguste 
Comte and Herbert Spencer and reached its climax in our 
own time in the laboratory of the behaviorist, for whom all 
human thought, reduced to stimulus and response, must be 
interpreted in the terms of physical science. The positivist 
insistence on "scientific impartiality" implies in the last analy- 



Introduction n 

sis a complete indifference to qualitative distinctions of an in- 
tellectual and moral kind and consequently demands the 
wholesale rejection of all the traditional forms and values of 
thought and morals, which are regarded either as infantile 
conceptions or as pathological aberrations. In its most recent 
form, the "logical empiricism" and "semanticism" of the 
Vienna School (Carnap, Reichenbach, Schlick, etc.) 7 posi- 
tivism has invaded the precincts of American education, chal- 
lenging philosophy not only in its own field but, on a broader 
scale, in its dominant significance as a liberal art and as a 
basic discipline in a liberal arts curriculum. 

It is the contention of the "logical positivist" that only 
what can be tested in the laboratories of the physical sciences 
has any meaning at all. He therefore demands that every type 
of being and reality be reduced to and expressed in sensori- 
mathematical symbols. He distrusts the rational operations 
commonly associated with the human mind and describes them 
as tautological tricks. The task which is in the end reserved 
for the intellect, to save it from total and permanent unem- 
ployment, is the compilation and transformation of mathe- 
matical signs and symbols. 

In "logical positivism" (empiricism) we have then the 
extreme empiricist reaction against a philosophy and meta- 
physics whose integral rationalism had caused their gradual 
estrangement from life and their hostility toward physical 
science. But one one-sidedness is usually as bad as another, 
and therefore what was meant as a remedy turned out to be 
something quite different: "logical positivism" actually en- 
couraged the forces of intellectual and moral nihilism, and 
thus in turn threatened to issue in the self-destruction of phi- 
losophy as a rational discipline. 

It is true that Kant (1724-1804) and after him Comte 
(1798-1857) attempted a synthesis of the dogmatic assertions 
of rationalism and empiricism, but neither Kant's "tran- 
scendental idealism" nor Comte's "humanism" could escape 
the consequences of that rationalist-empiricist dualism which 
was the fatal bequest of the fathers of modern philosophy; 

7 Cf. Carnap, Rudolf, The Logical Syntax of Language (London, 1937); The Unity 
of Science (London, 1934) Rcichcnbach, Hans, Experience and Prediction (Chi- 
cago, 1938) Schlick, Moritz, Problems of Ethics (New York, 1939). 



12 A Realistic Philosophy 

it had been glaringly evident in Descartes' (1596-1650) de- 
scription of man as consisting of pure spirit and pure geometri- 
cal extension, an angelic mind mysteriously juxtaposed with 
a mechanico-physical body. For Kant the synthesis was frus- 
trated by the fact that he overstated the mind's share in the 
constitution of reality and therefore tried to explain the world 
of phenomena as depending for its existence on the organizing 
constitutional forms and categories of the understanding (Ver- 
stand}. For Comte the aspired goal was missed because physi- 
cal reality was declared to be the sum total of being, and 
knowledge was confined to the experimentally knowable. 
Comte's new "religion of humanity" was a logically unwar- 
ranted digression from his original intentions, inspired by 
love and by the desire to achieve a new cultural and social 
unity on a scientific basis. 

It seems that there exists a law of equilibrium in thought 
and life which exacts retribution whenever it is violated, "the 
truth being that the excessive increase of anything often 
causes a reaction in the opposite direction; and this is the 
case not only in the seasons and in vegetable and animal life, 
but above all in forms of government." 8 When Plato wrote 
these lines, he tried to explain how an excessive amount of 
liberty may directly issue into an excess of slavery, but his 
observation may well be generalized, and a realization of its 
fundamental veracity may be found in the dialectical triad 
(thesis antithesis synthesis) of Hegel's (1770-1831) phi- 
losophy of history, in Karl Marx's (1818-1883) dialectic of the 
class struggle (capital labor classless society; "expropria- 
tion of the expropriators"), and more recently in P. Sorokin's 
attempt to explain radical changes in the systems and values 
of art, truth, morals, and culture by means of a similar triadic 
dialectic (ideational ideal sensate). 9 The reaction in each 
case results from the fact that a partial truth or a fragmentary 
aspect of reality is overstated to such an extent that it eventu- 
ates in distortion and even falsehood, thereby refuting itself 
and leading to a contrary overstatement. Thus an integral 
spiritualism may elicit an integral materialism; or a rigorous 

"Plato, Republic VIII, Jowctt's trans., vol. II, p. 822 (New York: Random 
House, 1937). 

*Pitrim Sorokin, Cultural and Social Dynamics, 4 vols. (New York, 1937-40); 
The Crisis of Our Age (New York, 1942). 



Introduction 13 

moralism and asceticism may turn into immoralism and 
libertinism. And this process may have to go on until the 
initial error is rectified, the equilibrium restored, and the in- 
trinsic laws of reality honored and sanctioned. 

An age such as ours, beset with the vexation of wars and 
revolutions, confronted with novel tasks in domestic and in- 
ternational relations, in government and administration, in 
the conduct of public and private affairs, an age that is en- 
gaged in experiments and readjustments in the distribution 
of wealth and property, in the broad field of education, and 
in the narrower circles of group and family life such an 
age seems to be called upon to seek and find its "best guard- 
ian" in philosophy "who," we are told, "comes and takes her 
abode in a man, and is the only savior of his virtue through- 
out life." 10 This, too, to be sure is an overstatement, leaving out 
religion. And yet, as in past ages, philosophy may once more 
become in no slight measure a guide for the intellectually and 
morally homeless, whether they be individuals or groups or 
multitudes. Having been rudely torn from the stability of tradi- 
tions and conventions, we feel inclined to reflect more pro- 
foundly on the meaning of individual and social life. 

But if philosophy is to make a vital contribution to the re- 
establishment of order and direction in human life and in the 
several departments of civilization, it must vindicate and justify 
itself as a trustworthy guide by avoiding the extreme and 
unrealistic attitudes just characterized, and by respecting in 
its beginning, in its progress, and in its end the laws and 
proportions of reality. To be trustworthy, philosophy must 
have its roots deeply and firmly in reality. To claim the al- 
legiance of man, the rational animal, it must be true in the 
sense that it will have to be as broad, comprehensive, and 
enduring as die eternal laws of being, and yet sufficiently 
flexible and dynamic to apprehend, appraise, and understand 
the phenomena of flux and change. 

If such be die nature of what may be called a sound phi- 
losophy, much evidently depends on the point of departure 
or on the principles which are to guide and inform human 
thought and action. No amount of activity, energy, or en- 
thusiasm can atone for initial errors in the philosophical prem- 

10 Plato, Republic, cit., p. 807. 



14 A Realistic Philosophy 

ises. The violated sanctions of being will sooner or later 
exact vengeance, and the initial fallacy in the premises will 
have to be rectified by the arduous lessons of actual experience. 

This latter consideration serves to focus our attention once 
more on the importance of a proper view of nature and life 
in general and of an adequate definition of human nature 
in particular. Man, the philosopher, is the subject as well as 
the object of the philosophy that he chooses as his guide. The 
truths and values which the human mind discovers in regard 
to its own being and in regard to other types and aspects of 
being determine man's view of reality as a whole. The order 
of values thus apprehended will in turn serve as a pattern for 
man's life as an individual and social being. The individual's 
view of himself and of his surrounding world will thus emerge 
as the sum total of observed facts and actual experiences on 
the one hand, and of the utilization of the mental faculties 
of abstraction on the other. This sum total will be more or 
less integrated and complete, or more or less fragmentary, 
deficient, or distorted, in proportion to the circumference of 
reality actually apprehended, properly evaluated, and ration- 
ally understood. 

Now man, especially in time of tribulation, feels naturally 
inclined to ask: "what shall I do?," although, philosophically 
speaking, this question ought to have been preceded by another 
and more fundamental one. In order to learn what to do in 
any particular predicament or in any number of situations, it 
is first of all necessary to know what kind of a being man is. 
In other words, the norms which are to guide human acts 
will follow from the definition of man. This definition will 
suggest and eventually decide what every man can do, should 
do, and should not do. Expressed in philosophical terminology, 
this means that ethics (the science of human acts) is based 
on and derived from metaphysics (the science of being). It 
may be said that at any given time civilization bears of neces- 
sity the imprint of the then prevalent idea of man. Civilization 
changes its entire physiognomy according as man is defined 
with Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas as a rational animal, 
or with Epicurus (341-270 B.C.) and Spengler (1880-1936) 
as a brute or beast of prey, or with Descartes as part angel 
and part machine, or with Lamettrie (1709-1751) and Holbach 



Introduction 15 

(1723-1789) as a mere machine, or with Nietzsche (1844-1900) 
as a superman and demi-god. But no matter what kind of a 
world is built around these or yet other definitions of man, 
it is always man, the rational animal, whether acknowledging 
or disavowing his rationality, who builds these worlds and 
who therefore has to bear what Balduin Schwarz calls "the 
burden of consequences." 11 The German author sees in this 
burden the dominant feature of the present age, the source of 
both gloom and hopefulness. "For since the consequences 
appear as chaos, the radical abandonment of the original errors 
has become easier than it was in times when one could still 
nourish illusions as to the nature of the consequences." 12 

This abandonment of the original errors, however, involves 
all the resolute determination and all the responsibility of 
man, i.e., of a being endowed and burdened not only with 
rationality but also with the faculty of choice, a faculty which 
relates to both premises and consequences. To be rational and 
to be free are two privileges and two responsibilities which 
philosophy shares with the person in whom it originates. And 
philosophy avails itself of these privileges and discharges these 
responsibilities if it takes reality as its guide and fashions its 
principles and premises in accordance with the ontological 
structure of the spiritual and material universe, so that the 
degrees of knowledge will be proportioned to the degrees of 
being. In this way a hierarchy of sciences will be established 
which is derived from the graduated order of life itself, span- 
ning the entire breadth between matter and spirit. In such 
a graduated order each particular science and each particular 
aspect of reality will receive its due, and none of the sciences 
will encroach upon a mode of knowledge which transcends 
its proper sphere, and for which by its very nature it lacks 
equipment and method. And thus the quarrel between the 
natural sciences and philosophy will be amicably settled, the 
former dealing with proximate causes and the lowest degrees 
of abstraction, the latter dealing with remote and ultimate 



** Balduin Schwarz, Ewige Philosophic. Gesetz und Freihtit in dcr Geistes- 
gcschichte (Leipzig, 1937), pp. 199 sq. 

13 B. Schwarz, he, cit.: "Denn da die Konsequenzen das Chaos rind, ist dcr 
Schritt xum vollstfindigcn Heraustreten aus den urspriinglichcn Fehlern grund- 
s&tzlich leichter moglich als in den Zeitcn, wo man sich nofh Hber die An d*r 
Konsiquenzen in lllusionen wiegcn 



16 A Realistic Philosophy 

causes and the higher degrees of abstraction; but both forms 
of knowledge are engaged, albeit from different aspects, in the 
unrelenting search for the selfsame truth. 13 

It should be remembered that for many of the greatest 
among the scientists and philosophers of the past such quar- 
rels and jealousies between the natural sciences and philosophy, 
between factual observation and speculation, did not exist and 
were not even conceivable. In ancient Greece the science of 
nature was closely linked to philosophical thought. The major 
works of Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) dealt with physics, ethics, 
and metaphysics. In the Middle Ages, St. Albert the Great 
(1193-1280), the "Doctor Universalis," was a careful observer 
of nature and a master of speculative thought. In modern times 
Spinoza (1632-1677), in writing his "Ethics," adopted th 
method of geometry (more geometrico}. Both Descartes anc 
Leibniz (1646-1716) are listed as philosophers and mathe- 
maticians. These and other thinkers of similar influence tried 
more or less successfully to avoid partial and partisan views; 
they regarded scientific and philosophic truth as branches of 
the same tree of reality. 

There was, we may infer, in some of the greatest of scientists 
and philosophers an acute awareness of the moral blindness 
of a science that is divorced from philosophic principles, 
and of the moral lameness of a speculation that is divorced 
from life. In their attempt to achieve some sort of totality in 
their world view and in their devotion to the paramount 
values of thought and life, they proved themselves witnesses 
to that ancient philosophic tradition which has ever been 
searching for the abiding truth in the changing conditions 



18 According to Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas the three supreme sciences, 
corresponding to three degrees of abstraction, are, in the ascending order, physics, 
mathematics, and metaphysics. "The mind may . . . limit itself to the consideration 
of material things . . . experimentally observable. This would give the science 
of physics. The object of the mind cannot exist without sensible matter, but it can 
be conceived without it, for nothing sensible enters into the definition of a cube 
root. This second degree of abstraction which concerns itself only with quantity, 
number, and extent, quite apart from their sensible manifestation in material things, 
is the science of mathematics. Finally, the mind can concern itself with things not 
inasmuch as they are quantitative but only inasmuch as they are or have being, 
for there are certain objects of knowledge which cannot only be conceived without 
matter, but which can also exist without matter, such as truth. This science which 
concerns itself with being as being is the science of metaphysics, and belongs to the 
third degree of abstraction." Fulton J. Sheen, Philosophy of Science (Milwaukee, 
1934), PP. 103 sq. 



Introduction 17 

and situations of time and place, and which was ever intent 
upon making philosophy more than a fascinating intellectual 
game or gamble and upon making science more than an 
encyclopaedic knowledge of facts and sense data. In this way 
and in this way only they were able to vitalize philosophy 
and to humanize science. 

A philosophy such as was conceived and cultivated by these 
synthetic thinkers may truly be called "eternal" or "perennial," 
in that its validity and truth content is not confined to any 
particular age or civilization but is absolute and enduring. The 
f erm "philosophia perennis" was first used in this sense by 
xibniz, in whose correspondence we find the following pas- 
age: "Truth is more widespread than one would think, but 
jo often it is ... veiled and weakened, mutilated and cor- 
rupted by additions which distort it and render it less useful. 
By making visible these traces of truth in the ancients, or, 
speaking more generally, in our precursors, one would draw 
gold from the earth, diamonds out of their mines, and light 
out of darkness, and this in effect would yield a kind of 
perennial philosophy (perennis quaedam philosophia)"^ 

This "philosophia perennis," which has been variously 
named "perennial," "permanent" (Chesterton), and "eternal" 
(Balduin Schwarz), is as old and as new as philosophical 
speculation itself. It reached its first culminating point at 
the height of Greek thought, in the works of Plato and 
Aristotle. With an added religious and aesthetic flavor it was 
handed on to the Christian Middle Ages by Plotinus (203-269), 
the neo-platonists, and St. Augustine (354-430); it became 
resplendent in the works of the medieval Schoolmen and 
especially in the imposing system of St. Thomas Aquinas. 
While, as we had occasion to observe, the idea of a "perennial 
philosophy" was subsequently upheld and even enriched by 
individual thinkers, the continuity of the established philo- 
sophical tradition of the West was broken on the one hand 
by the temporary stagnation of scholastic thought and, on 
the other, by the multiple divisions and one-sided systems and 
propositions of post-Renaissance philosophy. 

Today it has become customary to associate the term "per- 

a * Letter addressed to Remond (1714); cf. Leibniz, Philosophise he Schrijtcn, ed. 
Gerhardt, III. B. (1887), pp. 424 sq. 



i8 A Realistic Philosophy 

cnnial philosophy" with the thought content and the proposed 
solutions of the so-called "Thomistic" tradition, i.e., with that 
synthetic digest of Greek and Christian philosophy that was 
embodied in the works of St. Albert the Great, St. Thomas 
Aquinas, and some of their contemporaries and followers, as 
well as with certain trends in contemporary philosophy that 
show a marked affinity with "Thomism." This definite fixa- 
tion of the meaning of the term dates from the time of the 
publication of Pope Leo XIII's Encyclical Aeterni Patris (1879), 
a document which inaugurated the "neo-scholastic" or "neo- 
thomistic" movement, calling upon Catholic scholars am 
teachers to meet the many problems and challenges of th 
modern age by a return to the principles of the philosoph 
perennis. 

We shall have occasion to expound these principles in deta 
It may therefore suffice here to point out some of the chai 
acteristic marks of a philosophy which lays claim to the epithet 
"eternal." As to its content and object, it may be said that the 
"philosophia perennis" is concerned with the ever changing 
aspects of the one unchangeable and immutable Truth, a truth 
which is much older than antiquity and much newer than 
modernity, being, as it were, independent of time and place 
and likewise independent of how much or how little of it may 
be known at any given moment. Because this truth embraces 
permanence and change, it is of necessity both static and 
dynamic, its static nature being expressed in the metaphysical 
and moral law and order of reality, and its dynamism mani- 
festing itself in its capacity to present, without changing its 
essence, ever new and different aspects to the searching human 
mind. "It seems to be natural to human reason," wrote St. 
Thomas Aquinas, "to proceed step by step from the imper- 
fect to the perfect. And thus we observe in the speculative 
sciences that those who philosophized in early times handed 
on something imperfect which, later on, by their successors 
was transmitted in a more perfect form." 15 These words con- 
tain in essence the program which Leo XIII recommended 
for the renewal of scholastic studies. Philosophy was to regain 
its health and vigor by re-establishing a happy balance be- 
tween arid traditionalism and impatient progressivism. Vetera 

l * Summa Thwlogica, MI,** q. 97, a. i. 



Introduction 19 

novis augerc ct pcrficere (to augment and perfect the old by 
means of the new) was the formula which Pope Leo had 
used in his Encyclical Letter. Philosophy was to look upon 
the methods and achievements of modern science critically 
but without bias, acknowledging and appropriating gratefully 
whatever could contribute to the true progress and perfection 
of man and his civilization. "We hold," the Pope had written, 
"that every word of wisdom, every useful thing by whomsoever 
discovered or planned, ought to be received with a willing 
; and grateful mind." 

With the full weight of his authority, Leo XIII encouraged 
id supported the efforts that were crowned by the opening 
the Institut Superieur dc Philosophic or Ecole Saint Thomas 
4quin (1889) at the University of Louvain, which was to 
come die center of neo-thomistic learning and research, 
id whose founder and director was the great Belgian scholar 
and Cardinal, Mercier (1851-1926). The Institut of Louvain 
was the first and foremost among several similar institutions 
on the European continent and in the Western Hemisphere. 
In the New World the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies 
in Toronto, Canada, founded as a graduate school in 1929 
and endowed with the special canonical privileges of a Papal 
University in 1939, is on the way to become an American 
Louvain. As the Institute, from its modest beginnings as a 
liberal arts college in 1881, was affiliated with the University 
of Toronto, some of its professors, among them several of the 
most distinguished representatives of neo-thomism, are at the 
same time members of the Graduate School of the University. 
Cardinal Mercier's great ambition to bring about the recon- 
ciliation of modern thought and "perennial philosophy" was 
shared by a number of philosophers in several lands, some 
of them demonstrating in their own works the possibility 
of such a reconciliation. Jacques Maritain, the Frenchman, 
probably the most prolific neo-thomistic author of today and 
perhaps the most profound contemporary interpreter of the 
"eternal philosophy," had acquired a thorough mastery of 
modern philosophy and was equally well versed in the 
problems and in the methodology of the natural sciences 
when his first decisive encounter with the "philosophia per- 
ennis" occurred. Etiennc Gilson, Maritain's fellow country- 



20 A Realistic Philosophy 

man, and like him now a resident of the United States, the 
author of the renowned Gifford Lectures on "The Spirit of 
Mediaeval Philosophy" and of numerous other books dealing 
for the most part with various historic aspects and problems 
of the "perennial" tradition, shows an equally intimate fa- 
miliarity with the philosophical speculation of the most di- 
vergent authors and schools. Again, Theodor Haecker, the 
German, who at one time felt at home in the labyrinths of 
Hegel's dialectics and Kierkegaard's paradoxes, was able to 
work his way through these complexities to the eternal well- 
springs of philosophic thought. And he never tired of acknowl 
edging his debt of gratitude to those thinkers who, thoug 
they had retarded his progress, had quickened his mind ar 
broadened his view. These examples could easily be multiple 

As to the attitude and method that befits the disciple 
the "philosophia perennis" in regard to individual philosopht 
and different systems of thought, St. Thomas Aquinas himse 
has spoken his mind very plainly. 16 As the first requisite h 
demands gratitude to one's intellectual ancestors and precursors, 
from whose work and even from whose errors inspiration and 
guidance may be derived. It is necessary, he further enjoins, 
to listen to many voices and to get acquainted with many 
modes of thought in order to be able to distinguish truth 
from falsehood and thus gradually to proceed to a synthetic 
view. It is most important, however, St. Thomas concludes, 
to pay particular attention to such systems of thought as 
appear closest to the truth, with a view to disengaging the 
transitory from that which endures. The latter will have to 
be substantiated and supported with new proofs, so that its 
defense becomes impregnable. While the former will have 
to be discarded, what is still undeveloped but promises a 
healthy growth must be treated with particular care, so that 
it may gradually be led to perfection. 

This consideration also throws some added light on the 
real meaning of Leo XIII's phrase vetera novis augere ct perfi- 
cere. What this formulation implies is neither a mere com- 
pilation and aggregation of commentaries and syllogisms nor 
the purely mechanical addition of certain new departments 
or disciplines of knowledge to the original body of thought. 

M DC substantia, 9; I De anima, 2; II Met., i; III Met., i. 



Introduction 21 

The former attitude would be indicative of an uncritical ac- 
ceptance of doctrine on purely authoritarian grounds. This 
attitude was rejected by St. Thomas when he stated that the 
argument from (human) authority is always the weakest 
of all possible arguments. 17 The second interpretation of the 
verbs "to augment and perfect" would assign to the philos- 
opher the task of performing some kind of elaborate patch- 
work. What is suggested by St. Thomas and evidently meant 
by Leo XIII is no mere quantitative addition and enlargement 
but an organic growth, nourished by the eternal life stream 
of Truth itself. It is only by such a periodical rejuvenation 
from within that philosophic thought can escape from be- 
coming ossified and sterile. 

A rejuvenation of thought from within seems to be espe- 
cially necessary in times of crises, such as St. Thomas en- 
countered in the thirteenth century when he created the classi- 
cal system of the "philosophia perennis," and such as 
characterized the historical constellation at the time of the 
publication of Leo XIIFs Encyclical. When men find them- 
selves placed in the midst of contradictory philosophical move- 
ments and cross-currents, they begin to feel discouraged by 
the breakdown of their exaggerated hopes and favorite beliefs. 
Badly shaken in their trust in established standards and values, 
they experience the lure of skepticism as a daily temptation. 
And yet, such a moment seems most opportune for the re- 
awakening of man's inborn desire for Truth. It is in this way 
that Mme. Maritain describes in her "Souvenirs" her own and 
her husband's plight and quest at the time when they both 
were groping their way to the terra firma of the eternal phi- 
losophy, "that Truth, so ardently sought, so unconquerably 
believed. . . . We reserved for it an altar in our hearts, we loved 
it ardently without knowing it, and in advance we acknowl- 
edged its claims on us and on our lives. . . . Would it rise 
like the sun to start upon a long journey of happy discoveries? 
Or, like the moon, would it only shine upon the night of our 
misery ? Or would it be like the star-lit sky : light and darkness 
at one and the same time? We did not know. We knew only 



1T ". . . licet locus ab auctoritate quae fundatur super ratione humana, sit 
infirmissimum; locus tamen ab auctoritate quae fundatur super rcvelatione divina, 
cst efficacissimum." (Summa Theologica, I, q. i, a. 8, ad 2.) 



22 A Realistic Philosophy 

that whatever it might be it would be our mistress, and we 
would be her servants." 18 

The attitude so eloquently described by Mme. Maritain aims 
at a philosophy of integral realism, and it is this realistic ap- 
proach, tending as it were to a sphere of transsubjective norms 
and values, which liberates the philosopher and his philosophy 
from the limitations of partial and subjectively distorted views, 
and which also serves as a connecting link between the "per- 
ennial" tradition of thought and the several realistic trends 
in contemporary philosophy. This realism, however, presup- 
poses not only an unbiased love of Truth as an end in itself 
and as embedded in a realm of objective validity, but it also 
requires a frank recognition of the reflection and counter- 
part of the transsubjective order of reality in the constitution 
of the human being, his live-forces and faculties. The "realistic" 
philosopher, therefore, recognizing in intelligence, reason, or 
understanding the highest faculty and the distinctive mark 
of man, will have to accept its guidance in the operations of 
his own discipline and in the workings of his own mind. Phi- 
losophy then, it would seem, discharges its functions properly 
when it confines itself to the examination of natural truths 
by reason. To insist upon this point means to establish phi- 
losophy as a rational investigation which in itself is truly 
autonomous. However, to be autonomous within its own cir- 
cumscribed sphere is not the same as being entirely self-suffi- 
cient. Reason evidently is neither infallible nor omniscient. 
In acknowledgment of this fact it will not a priori reject il- 
lumination by a superior source of light, if such a one is 
offered or discovered. The rational-metaphysical investigation 
of the nature of reality will soon rise from sense observation 
to the intellectual understanding of the created universe and 
of the human self, to ascend finally to an analogical compre- 
hension of God, the first and final cause. As a "natural theol- 

18 ". . . ccttc ve*rite* si ardemment chcrchce, si invinciblemcnt crue . . . Nous lui 
rescrvions un autel dans notre coeur, nous 1'aimions ardemment sans la connaitrc; 
d'avance nous lui reconnaissions tous les droits sur nous, sur notre vie ... Se 
Icvcrait-elle comme le soleil, pour une longuc journee d'heureuses decouvertes? Ou 
comme la lune, pour n'eclairer que la nuit de notre misere? Serait-elle comme le 
ciel e"toile lumiere et tenebres a la fois? Nous le savions pas. Nous savions 
seulemcnt que telle qu'elle serait elle scrait notre maitresse et que nous voudrions 
ctre ses serviteurs." Editions de la Maison Fran^aise (New York: 1941), pp. iiosq. 
(Raissa Maritain, Les Grandes Amiti&s.) 



Introduction 23 

ogy," philosophy, by establishing the proper relationship be- 
tween the contingent and the necessary, and by thoroughly 
analyzing the nature of contingency, will attempt the rational 
demonstration of the existence of God, the immortality of 
the human soul, the freedom of the human will, and the pos- 
sibility as well as the necessity of a supernatural revelation. It 
will thus provide the intellectual presuppositions or "pre- 
ambles" of faith, leaving to theology the task of drawing its 
arguments and conclusions from the dogmatic premises of 
revelation and from the contents of faith. Philosophy, then, is 
possible as an autonomous discipline in its own right, "though 
it cannot demonstrate all truth; it is enough that every dem- 
onstrated proposition is true." 19 Consequently, philosophy is 
"the handmaid of theology" (ancilla theologian), not in the 
sense that its conclusions are predetermined beforehand 
by another discipline, but in that it acknowledges theology 
as the science of divine revelation and accepts its aid and 
moral support. "Philosophy ... is subordinate to theology, 
but, as philosophy, it depends on nothing but its own proper 
method; based on human reason ... it reaches an accord 
with faith spontaneously and without having to deviate from 
its own proper path. If it does so it is simply because it is 
true, and because one truth cannot contradict another." 20 

The chances for a growing rapprochement between the 
"perennial" tradition and contemporary "realism" in phi- 
losophy have become more auspicious in recent years. Out of 
Germany has come the call for a "resurrection of metaphysics," 
and die "phenomenology" of Edmund Husserl and his school 
(Scheler, Geiger, Heidegger, etc.) as well as Nicolai Hart- 
mann's decisive turn from Kantian idealism to Aristotelian 
realism signified an important change in philosophical con- 
victions which seemed to be deeply ingrained. While in France 
the return of leading philosophers to the "philosophia per- 
ennis" was most remarkable, the clashes between the anti- 
metaphysical positivism of Auguste Comte's disciples and the 
new defenders of metaphysics in that country were most 

J * R. Kremer, "The Prejudices Against the New Scholasticism," in Present Day 
Thinkers and the New Scholasticism, by John S. Zybura (London and St. Louis, 
1927), p. 207. 

"Etienne Gilson, The Spirit of Mediaeval Philosophy (New York: Scribner's, 
1936), p. 6. 



24 A Realistic Philosophy 

violent. The revival of metaphysical speculation in contem- 
porary secular philosophy in France is inseparably linked with 
die name of Henri Bergson (1859- 1941). He was the teacher 
and friend of Jacques and Ra'issa Maritain, and the latter 
ascribes to him and his philosophy their rescue from skepticism 
and despair. When they first began to attend Bergson's lec- 
tures, he was a professor of the College de France, while the 
Maritains were students of the Sorbonne. The two institutions 
faced each other, separated only by the "rue Saint-Jacques." 
Yet "there was a mountain of prejudices and distrust between 
these two institutions, and particularly on the part of the phi- 
losophers of the Sorbonne with regard to the philosophy of 
Bergson." 21 Skepticism with its concomitant, moral nihilism, 
had eaten themselves deeply into the academic mind and into 
the teaching methods of the Sorbonne, one of France's oldest 
and most venerable institutions. Thus, the physical juxtaposi- 
tion of the Sorbonne and the College de France, and the local 
proximity but intellectual separation of their teachers, expressed 
almost symbolically the antagonism that existed between the 
positive sciences and philosophy. At the turn of the century 
the same situation largely prevailed in the other intellectually 
and scientifically leading nations of Europe. 

In North American speculation and learning the powerful 
influence of European "positivism" blended with the innate 
practical and pragmatic bent of the Anglo-Saxon mind (Wil- 
liam James, John Dewey, etc.), leading to the cultivation of 
the natural and social sciences from a purely utilitarian point 
of view, and to the neglect and even contempt of philosophy 
as a rational discipline. The fact that almost without exception 
these "scientific" philosophers crowned their labors with some 
system of philosophical or metaphysical "scientism" furnishes 
conclusive evidence that it is impossible to dispose of meta- 
physical speculation as easily as the positivists and pragmatists 
had imagined. Both scientists and philosophers, by their 
achievements no less than by their failures, have substantiated 
again and again the conviction that positive science and ra- 
tional philosophy cannot dispense with each other without 
mutual detriment. Both are valid and both are necessary, be- 
cause no positive science can proceed without metaphysical 

* Raiisa Maritain, loc. cit., p. 116. 



Introduction 25 

presuppositions or assumptions of one kind or another, and 
no realistic philosophy can exist without the support of factual 
experience and evidence. 

Speaking of man's inborn religious urge, Martin Luther 
once remarked with keen psychological and metaphysical in- 
sight that man worships either God or an idol ("Der Mensch 
hat entweder Gott oder Abgott"). This observation is equally 
true of philosophical speculation. As Etienne Gilson has pointed 
out, 22 when some individual science, overstepping its bound- 
aries, offers itself as a "know-all" and "cure-all," and tries to 
absorb into itself the functions and methods of other and es- 
sentially different sciences, the result will inevitably be the 
illegitimate substitution of one discipline for another. If one 
particular science proclaims itself as capable of serving as a 
substitute for all the others, that science will soon develop 
the symptoms of what in medicine is known as "elephantiasis." 
Then theology turns into "theologism" (Occam), mathematics 
into "mathematicism" (Descartes), natural science into "sci- 
entism" (Hume, Kant), sociology into "sociologism" (Comte), 
etc. The example of Auguste Comte is particularly illumi- 
nating because here the founder of the supposedly strictly 
antimetaphysical system of "positive philosophy" actually ends 
by recommending the new science of "sociology" as a grand 
metaphysical substitute. Thus metaphysics, which he believed 
he had thrown out for good, enters in a novel disguise by 
the back door. 

It would seem then that the slogan of the "resurrection of 
metaphysics" may have any number of meanings. An inte- 
grally "realistic" and therefore "true" metaphysics will of 
necessity be frustrated by any illegitimate omission, any arbi- 
trary partition, any undue generalization in the fields of the 
positive and speculative sciences. A "realistic" metaphysics is 
identical with a realistic observation and interpretation of 
"being" in its manifold aspects and on its different levels. An 
"unreal" metaphysics will only yield various kinds of false 
"absolutisms," whereas a "realistic" metaphysics will issue in 
the discovery of true absolutes. It will, because of its intrinsic 
truth, provide man with a knowledge of the ontological bases 
of his own nature and thereby with an understanding of life's 

"Eticnnc Gilton, The Unity of Philosophical Experience (New York, 1937). 



26 A Realistic Philosophy 

meaning and end. It will, last but not least, establish a hier- 
archy of sciences and a graduated scale of knowledge, at- 
tributing to each discipline its due place and proper function. 
Would it be too much to hope that the metaphysical re- 
adjustment of man in accordance with the laws and propor- 
tions of being might lead to a realistic acknowledgment of 
his own true position in the created universe and thus pro- 
vide him with a design for such acts as may properly be called 
"human"? If this hope should be justified and fulfilled, then 
the essence of the eternally true and the eternally good might 
once more find due recognition amid the transitoriness and 
frailty of human works. The "eternal philosophy" in a new 
garb would once again have borne fruit, and the way would 
have been prepared for another one of the great masters of 
philosophical synthesis, who would be initiated in the diversi- 
fied knowledge of this modern age, and who, for the sake 
of eternal truth, would gather together the multiple seeds 
and germs and powers which now, like restless snowflakes, 
are blown hither and thither by an angry storm. He would 
put to shame the prophets of decline, dissolution, and despair; 
he would outbid with his gifts those others who have been 
dreaming of their earthly paradise of progress and utility, 
ruled over by millions and billions of horsepower. And he 
would usher in the dawn of a new era of great philosophic 
thought and great moral action. 



Chapter One 

BEING AND REALITY 

(Metaphysics) 



1. The Concept of Being 

THE most commonplace and at the same time the most 
mysterious and elusive notion of which man, the rational 
animal, has to take account in his thoughts and actions is the 
concept of being. It sounds paradoxical when we say that what 
we call being is both the richest and the poorest of ideas as well 
as of realities, and yet this statement describes only weakly the 
great complexity of content which is enclosed in the two little 
and seemingly insignificant words to be. They not only con- 
tain in themselves the roots of all the other forms and parts of 
speech, and therewith of all categorical statements and judg- 
ments, but also the cues for the understanding of all types and 
gradations of existents and essences, ranging from the shape- 
lessness of pure and indeterminate potentiality to the highest 
degrees of actual forms and ideas. 

The science which has as its object this vast and mysterious 
realm of being is commonly referred to as metaphysics or 
ontology. 1 The term metaphysics was first employed by An- 
dronicus of Rhodes (about 70 B.C.) who, as editor of the works 
of Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), placed those books which dealt with 
being in its most general and fundamental aspects "after" those 
books which treated of physical nature (/*era rd c^oW). Aris- 
totle himself had used the term "the first philosophy" to de- 
scribe that science which was to consider the ultimate principles 
and causes of reality as discovered and investigated with the 
aid of human reason. In the history of Western thought the 

1 It is customary to distinguish between general metaphysics or ontology (a term 
first used by Clauberg in 1656), treating of being in its most general aspects, and 
special metaphysics, treating of the special departments and realms of being which 
arc dealt with by the disciplines of cosmology, rational psychology, and theodicy 
or natural theology. 

27 



28 Bang and Reality 

terms metaphysics and ontology are referred to the science c 
being as such and to the knowledge of its ultimate causes. S 
Thomas Aquinas (1226-1274), agreeing with Aristotle in r< 
garding metaphysics as the first and supreme human science, -< 
times also describes it as "universal" in its character (scienti 
communis). 

This latter term seems to fit excellently the object of met; 
physics as well as of philosophy in general, because all philo 
ophy which rightfully bears the name is concerned with th 
study of being and reality. Being, in other words, is the mo: 
common object of human thought, its beginning and its enc 
But because the concept of being is the first and most gener; 
of human ideas, and because everything of which either po 
sible or actual existence can be predicated shares in being an 
has some kind or amount of being, it is very difficult if n( 
impossible to give a satisfactory definition of this commo 
denominator of all reality. Because of its character of con 
bined simplicity and universality, being in one form or ai 
other would have to be contained in the very elements of i 
definition. All we can do therefore is to give an approximal 
description of what is implied in the concept of being, b 
setting it off first of all from the idea of nothingness, and h 
including in our positive predication everything which actual! 
exists as well as everything which possibly can exist. 

If we say that everything is being which is not nothing, tl 
further implication is that being extends not only to th; 
which exists or is capable of existing (possible beings 
but even to everything which can be conceived intellectual! 
i.e., to the realm of pure thought (ideal beings; logical beings) 

Finally, if we refer the concept of being to that peculiar b 
ing called man, we meet with a form of existence which 
related to both the mental and the extramental, involvin 
thought as well as action, intellect as well as will. Beings, hov 
ever, whose willful actions and attitudes are intrinsically linke 
with definite mental patterns are properly called moral agen 
or moral beings. 

A distinction is thus made between several orders of bein 
which may be roughly described as physical being, metaphys 

2 Ideal being is real being, as known by the intellect. Logical being is ascrifo 
to such purely mental operations as judgments, negations, syllogisms, etc. 



Analogy of Being 29 

cal being, logical being, and moral being. Metaphysics as such 
is concerned with those types of being which have either actual 
or potential existence, while logic deals with mental (think- 
able) being, and ethics with moral being, with constant 
reference, however, to the metaphysical and logical orders. 

2. The Analogy of Being 

IT HAS been said that the results of metaphysical speculation 
merely reaffirm on a higher plane the intuitions and observa- 
tions of common sense. There is a great deal of truth in this 
statement. The man of common sense, confronted with the 
different orders of being of which the world of his experience 
is composed, draws certain conclusions from the series of ob- 
served data. The normal and prescientific application of his 
sensory organs and his reason provides him with a rudimentary 
knowledge of himself, of his fellow creatures, of the universe 
of which he and they are parts, and of the place which he and 
they occupy in the universal realm of being. In this way, as W. 
Schmidt 3 has conclusively demonstrated, primitive man is 
capable of reasoning from observed effects to their underlying 
causes and of arriving at the idea of a first cause or a Creator- 
God by means of a simple syllogism. In a similar manner 
ordinary common sense attains to a certain amount of theoret- 
ical and practical wisdom, to a certain knowledge of moral 
values, of right and wrong, true and false, etc. 

If this were all that is necessary, the undertaking of the 
philosopher and particularly of the metaphysician would be 
ended before it had really begun. While it may truly be said 
that the observations of common sense are valid as far as they 
go, it must immediately be added that they do not go far 
enough. To the metaphysician, therefore, must be assigned 
the formidable task of raising the intuitions of common sense 
to a higher level, with a view to penetrating into the still hidden 
depths of being and, so far as is humanly possible, to providing 
an intelligible explanation of its mysterious qualities. 

Now the first of these mysterious aspects of being which 

"Wilhelm Schmidt, The Origin and Growth of Religion, transl. from the German 
by H. J. Rose (London, 1931). 



30 Being and Reality 

is vaguely intuited by ordinary common sense, but which 
must be elucidated by metaphysical analysis, is its polyvdem 
or analogous nature. 

The problem can be stated in the following way: Owing tc 
the fact that the concept of being is so all inclusive that ii 
comprises everything which exists or can exist, it is in its ver} 
generality empty of definite and determinate content. It ij 
"transcendental" in the sense that it transcends or overflows 
so to speak, all classes of determinate objects and categories 
Being, however, acquires definite meaning and characteristic: 
in the various species and categories in which it manifests itseli 
in reality. In other words, while there is only one transcendenta 
realm of being, there are numerous species of determinate 
beings, all sharing in a greater or lesser degree in the universa 
amplitude of being, their common denominator. 

This reflection makes us aware of the fact that the genera 
concept of being is realized in different ways and degrees ir 
different kinds of "beings" and that it, therefore, has a differem 
meaning and value in each class or category of such realizations 

This generic and specific difference of being which is rep 
resented by different classes of beings (minerals, plants, ani 
mals, pebbles, roses, dogs, men, etc.) does not destroy thai 
unity which embraces everything that can be termed "being.' 
And the understanding of the nature of this unity will enable 
us to probe the nature of the contractions of being in the dif 
ferent degrees represented by different "beings," and to estab 
lish a real relation between transcendental being on the one 
hand and the genera and species of being on the other. 

Now being is predicated of things (beings) either univocally 
or equivocally, or analogically. A univoccd attribution mean: 
that the term which we apply to designate a certain numbej 
of things is used in an identical sense. Thus, we apply the 
term "tree" univocally to the apple tree, the pear tree, the 
oak tree, etc. In an equivocal attribution the term used hai 
an entirely different meaning in its application to scvera 
things. Thus, we speak of the lock of a door and of a loci 
of hair; of the palm of the hand and of the palm tree. Here 
the two things have nothing in common but the name. Finally 
in an analogical attribution there exists a real relationshij 
between two or more things and their terms. This relation 



Analogy of Being 31 

ship may be described as indicating partial identity and partial 
difference of being. Analogical predications, therefore, are 
midway between the univocal and the equivocal. Thus, we 
speak of a red rose, of a red nose, and of a red flag. The com- 
mon term is "red," and all the things so designated share in 
it, but not in the same manner and degree. 

The concept of being is of the latter type: it is analogous 
in the sense that wherever "being" is found in a determinate 
form in "beings," a partial sameness and a partial otherness 
may be inferred. The understanding of this analogous nature 
of being is of vast metaphysical importance. For if being were 
univocal, a real plurality of genera and species of being would 
seem impossible; and if being were equivocal, there would 
be no bridge to relate one being to another because none of 
them would share in a common nature. Our knowledge would 
be confined to singulars, and the way to both science and 
philosophy would be barred because both modes of knowl- 
edge rise from the singular to the universal and cannot do 
otherwise. Or, to refer the argument to a problem of strictly 
metaphysical character: if being were predicated univocally 
of creature and Creator, the essential difference between the 
two terms would be obliterated either by reducing the Creator 
to the level of the creature or by raising the creature to the 
stature of the Creator. In the former case the procedure would 
result in some form of atheism, while in the latter case the 
result would be some form of pantheism. 

If, on the other hand, being were predicated of creature and 
Creator equivocally, there would be no possibility of arriving 
by rational argument at the idea of a first cause of the uni- 
verse. The total difference between the two terms would be 
stretched to a point where reason would have to abdicate, 
and there would be only room left for a "credo quia absurdum" 
(I believe because the object of my belief is an incompre- 
hensible paradox) 4 or for the "ignoramus et ignorabimus" (we 
don't know and we shall never know) of Du Bois-Reymond 5 
and other disciples of agnosticism. 

4 Credo quia absurdum: a saying which is by some attributed to Tertullian (about 
160-220), one of the great Latin theologians of the early Church, who late in his 
life became the head of the Montanist sect. 

8 Emil Du Bois-Reymond (1818-1896) was a famous German physiologist and 
an exponent of antimetaphysical positivism. 



32 Being and Reality 

3 . The First Principles of Being 

BEFORE exploring any further the mysterious depths of 
being, it will be necessary to examine briefly those root 
principles or axiomatic postulates without which neither any 
individual science nor any philosophic discipline could ever 
be conceived. These principles are prior to all scientific and 
philosophical operations and formulations, and though the indi- 
vidual scientist need not even be aware of them, he presupposes 
them or takes them for granted without further investigation. 
These root principles are called axiomatic because they are 
self-evident intuitions of common sense. Their supreme sim- 
plicity renders them supremely intelligible, and once they are 
clearly presented to the mind they are also clearly perceived 
and do not stand in need of further demonstration. 

On account of the fact that these root principles of being 
precede either in time or in nature the reality which flows 
from them, they are called "first" principles. They are both 
the first principles of thought (logical order) and the first 
principles of being or reality (ontological order). They com- 
prise the Principle of Identity (A is A), the Principle of Con- 
tradiction (A is not non-A), the Principle of the Excluded 
Middle (X is either A or it is not A), and the Principle of 
Sufficient Reason (causality: nothing is without a sufficient 
reason). 

The Principle of Identity states in an axiomatic or self-evi- 
dent fashion that being is being and not being is not being, 
or that everything is what it is. If we express this axiom in 
the form "a rose is a rose," it may appear as a mere tautology. 
That such a statement is more than a tautology becomes clear 
when we give our axiom the form "a rose is a vegetative 
being." In other words, the Principle of Identity signifies an 
identification of the thing and the affirmative judgment of 
the mind, so that the logical definition of the mind corresponds 
exactly to the ontological content of the thing. 

The Principle of Contradiction is the most fundamental of 
all the root principles of being, because without it any other 
judgment would be impossible. It states that a thing cannot 
both be and not be the same thing at the same time and in 



First Principles of Being 33 

the same respect. The self-evidence of this principle derives 
from a comparison of being with not being an^ ^rom the 
intuitive knowledge of the mind that these two mutually 
exclude each other. Thus, it is self-evident that a man cannot 
be rich and poor, healthy and sick, short and tall, ignorant 
and wise at the same time and in the same respect. 8 Logically 
stated, the principle says: nothing can be predicated affirma- 
tively and negatively at the same time. 

On the Principle of Contradiction are built the entire logi- 
cal and ontological orders, the realms of thinking and of 
being. Its denial or suspension would do away with the 
distinctions between true and false, good and evil, being and 
not being. 

The Principle of the Excluded Middle, too, rests in the last 
analysis on the self-evident truth of the Principle of Contra- 
diction. In its ontological formulation it states that "X is either 
A or it is not A" or that there is no middle term between 
being and not being. In its logical formulation this principle 
expresses the self-evident truth that two contradictory judg- 
ments cannot at the same time and under the same circum- 
stances both be true or both be false: Man is either a rational 
animal or he is not a rational animal; a rose is either a plant 
or it is not a plant; fire is either hot or it is not hot. 

The Principle of Sufficient Reason, finally, states as self- 
evident that no contingent being can be and exist without 
a sufficient reason. If we formulate this principle by saying 
that the very concept of being implies that it cannot be not 
being, we realize that its validity, too, depends ultimately on 
the Principle of Contradiction. This validity again embraces 
both the logical and ontological orders. Considered logically, 
die Principle of Sufficient Reason states that no thought con- 
tent is without a sufficient reason. Viewed ontologically, it 
asserts that everything that is has a sufficient reason for its 
being or, stated negatively, that nothing is without a sufficient 
reason or an intelligible cause. 

The Principle of Sufficient Reason was first clearly formu- 



*The qualification "at thr same time and in the same respect" is added because 
a man might conceivably act stupidly at one time and intelligently at another, or 
he might be ignorant regarding some matters and well informed regarding others, 
but he cannot be stupid and intelligent at the same time and in the same respect. 



34 Being and Reality 

lated by Leibniz (1646-1716), who claimed that it was as self- 
evident as the other root principles of being. Many modern 
thinkers, both scholastic and nonscholastic, have questioned 
this assertion and have tried to establish certain rational bases 
for the evidence of this principle. 

It would seem that the Principle of Sufficient Reason derives 
its absolute validity from the concept of objective truth and 
from the definite relations which exist between being and 
knowing. The principle, therefore, has to do directly with 
the problem of the knowability or comprehensibility of "being" 
as well as of "beings," stating as it were quite unequivocally 
and optimistically that all being is more or less intelligible. 
Being and intelligibility are closely associated, so that wherever 
there is being there is also a certain amount of intelligibility. 
And wherever there is a deficiency, a lack or a total absence 
of being (not being), there is also a partial or total lack of 
intelligibility. It may be said, therefore, that the significance 
of the Principle of Sufficient Reason lies in the fact that it 
grounds knowledge in being and, by establishing the primacy 
of being, guarantees the objectivity of being as well as of true 
knowledge, making it possible for the mind to test the veracity 
of its judgments by adapting them to the objective proportions 
of being or reality. 

4. The Transcendental Attributes 
(Properties) of Being 

FROM the discussion of the root principles of being we 
pass now to a consideration of its most general or tran- 
scendental attributes. We have seen (cf. p. 30) that being as 
such is the most general of concepts in that it is not confined 
to any particular genus, species, or category, but transcends 
the boundaries of all such determinations. In this most general 
concept of being all our determinate concepts are dissolved. 
However, it would forever remain impossible to understand 
the nature of being or reality if it could not be reconstructed, 
so to speak, by way of addition or composition. This recon- 
struction or composition of being takes place when we relate 



Attributes of Eting 35 

it to consciousness or, more specifically, to the faculties of 
intellect and will. Out of this relationship grow several new 
attributes of being which, as they are common properties of 
all being, are called the transcendental attributes of being. 
These transcendental attributes of being are the one, the true, 
and the good. To these some authors have added the beautiful, 
regarding it as "transcendental" in its own right, while others 
have described the beautiful as the fusion of the transcendental 
attributes of unity, truth, and goodness in things. 7 

It is possible to consider being in its relation to not being, 
and then we arrive at the notion of "something" as opposed 
to "nothing," a division of being which in turn yields the 
concept of that which is undivided or one. The concept of 
unity does not add a real or positive but only a logical qualifi- 
cation to the concept of being. In other words, everything that 
is and is recognized as being is one and is recognized as being 
one. It is recognized because, and in so far as, it is one. It may 
be said therefore that being and oneness are convertible. 

Furthermore, it is possible to consider being in its relation 
to a knowing intellect. If being and intellect are in mutual 
agreement, this relationship of being expresses (ontological) 
truth. In fact, the very concept of ontological truth requires 
the relationship of being to some (finite or infinite) mind. If 
intellect and being are disproportioned, this lack of agreement 
expresses "falsehood." Thus, we say of a man that he is a 
true or genuine human being if he as an individual person 
corresponds to our idea of a human being. Conversely, we 
say that he is "false," i.e., not a "true" human being to the 
extent that his personal existence disagrees with our idea 
of a human being. 

Finally, we may relate being to an appetitive power (will) 
which moves toward the object presented to it by intellec- 
tual knowledge. In this case the accord of being and will is 
called the "good," while their lack of accord is termed "evil." 
In each case, oneness, truth, and goodness are properties of 
being, while their opposites multiplicity (diversity), error, 
and evil express a lack or privation of being (not being). 



7 Jacques Maritain, Art and Scholasticism, pp. 30 sqq. and 172 sq. (New York: 
Scribncrs, 1930); E. I. Watkin, A Philosophy of Form, pp. 313 sqq. (New York: 
Shccd and Ward, 1935); Theodor Haecker, Die Schonheit, passim (Leipzig: 1936). 



36 Being and Reality 

In the case of the beautiful, a relation between being on the 
one hand and both intellectual knowledge and sense percep- 
tion on the other seems to be established. The knowing subject, 
intuiting the properties of being (oneness, goodness, and truth) 
in the contemplated sense object, is pleased by the correspond- 
ence or congruity which is thereby achieved between the 
being in and of the mind and the being in and of the thing. 
Thus, the presence of such congruity is named beauty, while 
its absence is termed ugliness. 

It was stated above that being and oneness are convertible. 
The same must be said of being and truth and of being and 
goodness. In other words, everything is true and good in so 
far as it is being. This qualification, to be sure, applies only 
to the ontological or transcendental concepts of truth and 
goodness, i.e., it applies only to truth and goodness in so far 
as they are grounded in and represent the absolute cause and 
source of all truth and goodness (God). Everything is one, 
true, and good in so far as its being contains and expresses its 
ontological relationship to the first or absolute unity, truth, 
and goodness. According to Aristotle, St. Thomas Aquinas, 
and the thinkers of the Aristotelian and Thomistic tradition, 
absolute truth and goodness have their source in the Divine 
Mind and in the Divine Essence. Nothing, therefore, is either 
true or good unless it participates in the likeness of the supreme 
truth and goodness. That which is (i.e., "bein^") is intelligible 
precisely because it proceeds from the Supreme Reality or the 
Supreme Being. 

From this consideration we get a glimpse of what is meant 
by "eternal truth" or "eternal verities." "Even if you destroy 
all the true things, truth itself remains," said St. Anselm of 
Canterbury (1033-1109). In other words, there is "eternal 
truth" provided there is an eternal mind. Truth is eternal or 
absolute only in the eternal mind and in the multiform par- 
ticipating expressions of this mind in finite, contingent beings. 
If, on the other hand, there is no such Supreme Being, com- 
prising both supreme knowledge and supreme truth, then 
there is no truth in the ontological sense and therefore no 
truth at all. For truth exists only in relation to a knowing 
mind, and if there were no mind aside from our finite, con- 
tingent minds, there would consequently not only be no "eter- 



Attributes of Being 37 

nal truth" but no ontological truth at all. The reality of things 
is eternally true only if and in so far as it is eternally related 
to and in conformity with the way in which these things are 
known by an eternal mind. 

A similar reasoning will serve to elucidate the nature of 
goodness, viewed as one of the transcendental attributes of 
being. Whereas truth has its seat in the intellect, goodness 
resides in things as related to a will. On the first pages of 
Aristotle's Ethics we find the statement that "good is what 
all desire." According to this definition a thing is good to the 
extent to which it is desirable. We may say, therefore, that 
while the intellect draws out of things (abstracts) their truth, 
the appetitive faculty (the will) is drawn toward things by 
their inherent goodness. That, however, which makes a thing 
good or desirable is some kind of perfection. But the primary 
perfection which is common to all desirable things (goods) 
is their reality (actuality), i.e., the mere fact that they are 
real or that they are "being." Hence we may now conclude 
with St. Thomas Aquinas that "every being, in so far as it 
is being, is in some way perfect, because every actuality (real- 
ity) is a certain perfection. But that which is perfect is *ap- 
petible' and 'good/ It therefore follows that every being is 
good, in so far as it is being." 8 In other words, transcendental 
(ontological) being embraces the entire range of goodness: 
being and goodness are convertible. Evil, on the other hand, 
must then be described as a lac\ or privation of reality, as the 
absence of a due perfection, and in the extreme case where 
all reality, all being, all perfection is lacking, we arrive at the 
concept of "nothingness." 

Now owing to the fact that the good in things (their being) 
attracts desire, the way in which being attracts being implies 
a kind of polar movement (polarity): a force of attraction 
on the side of the good and a striving or appetitive force on 
the side of an agent. Beings, whether of a rational nature 
(man), or of a sentient nature (brutes), or of a vegetative 
nature (plants), or of an elemental nature (the affinity of 
chemical substances), desire each other for the sake of the 
greater perfection to be attained by the fulfillment of their 



* Summa Theologtca, I, q. 5, a. 3. 



38 Being and Reality 

innate natural exigencies. The desire for the fullest actualiza- 
tion of their natures seems to be a desire shared by all types 
of being. It is for this reason that the idea of the good implies 
the idea of an end or of an inclination and purpose directed 
toward the perfect realization of a being's intrinsic possibil- 
ities (potencies). 

These ingredient forces of attraction and desire in beings 
are indicative of the dynamism of being as such (ontological 
being). This dynamism expresses itself in beings and their 
movements toward an end or toward what is known in 
philosophical language as a "final cause" (cf. pp. 66 sq.). Such 
a movement toward an end "is effected in a rational nature 
by the rational appetite which we call the will, while in other 
natures it is effected by what is termed the natural appetite." 9 
Thus, all things move toward their end in order to bring their 
own natures to perfection. But by doing so they simultaneously 
perfect their likeness to that fullness of being and that pleni- 
tude of goodness from which their own being and its good- 
ness are derived. Their own goodness is participated goodness, 
just as their own being is participated being, and the two are 
convertible. The being and the goodness which each being 
has received from the absolute source of all being and good- 
ness are further communicated from one being to another, with 
resultant movements and activities which tend to actualize all 
the potential goodness inherent in the Being of the created 
universe. 

From the foregoing it should be evident that from an on- 
tological point of view every being is true as well as good in 
so far as it is being. To be termed "true," a being must be 
related to an intelligent agent: it must be \nowablc. To be 
termed "good," a being must be related to a will: it must be 
desirable. Both the true and the good, the knowable and the 
desirable, are transcendental aspects or attributes of being. 

What we have called the dynamism of being is more strik- 
ingly revealed in its aspect of goodness than in its aspect of 
truth. As all types of being share in the desire for the fullest 
actualization of their natures, they are all related to that aspect 
of being which expresses its desirability, i.e., its aspect of 



*St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, I II, q. i, a. 2. 



Categories of Being 39 

goodness. And as all types of being, owing to this relentless 
striving for their fuller actualization or perfection, not only 
perfect themselves but communicate to a certain degree their 
own perfection or goodness to other beings, it may be said 
that the good is diffusive and communicative of itself, express- 
ing as it were the overflowing superabundance of being. 

Ontological evil, considered correlatively from the point of 
view of the good, appears essentially to be suffering from the 
flaw of defection. It does not result from a fault but rather 
from default, i.e., from a privation of being or from an in- 
trusion of not being into the sphere of being. Similarly, error 
as opposed to truth is not caused by a flaw in being but rather 
by faulty judgment, a judgment which ignores or contravenes 
the laws of being. In both cases a kind of not being appears 
under the guise of being. 

If the good is that which all beings desire and, therefore, 
something to which all aspire, and if every being is good in 
so far as it is being, then evil is the direct opposite of good: 
it is that which no being desires (the nonappetible) and to 
which, therefore, no type of being can possibly correspond, 
i.e., it is a privation or a lack of being. The term "privation," 
however, implies that evil is not a pure negation, not mere 
nothingness, but that it is something and somewhere in be- 
tween being and not being: it is the absence of a perfection 
which is properly due to a particular kind of being, according 
to its nature. Thus, blindness is a lack of being in an organism 
whose nature appears stunted without the faculty of optical 
vision (physical evil). Vice is a lack of being in a rational 
agent whose nature is similarly stunted by being deprived 
of a due perfection (moral evil). 



5. The Categories (Predicaments; 
Modes) of Being 



transcendental attributes of being are predicated of 
JL being as related to intellect or will. The transcendental 
attribute of unity indicates that being is undivided in itself 
and divided off from every type of determinate being. The 



40 Being and Reality 

transcendental attribute of truth expresses the conformity of 
being and intellect. The transcendental attribute of goodness 
refers to the relationship that exists between being and appeti- 
tion (will). 

Aside from and inferior to these transcendental and most 
general attributes there are several other and more concrete 
divisions or modes of being which differ not only in view 
of their relationship to either intellect or will, but which are 
realizations of different orders or classes of being. Transcen- 
dental being, as it unfolds itself, is broken up, so to speak, 
into several subordinate parts which in themselves constitute 
the supreme classes or "frames" of "real" being or of "reality" 
as such. These determinate classes of real being are known 
as its categories or predicaments. 

While, on the one hand, such a contraction or concretion 
of transcendental being involves a loss in plenitude and depth, 
there accrues from it, on the other hand, a real gain in that 
these new divisions enable us to determine philosophically and 
scientifically the mode of existence of every real being, thus 
aiding in the understanding and interpretation of reality as 
a whole. 

According to Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas there are 
ten such supreme categories of real being, each of which 
serves to answer certain questions that may be asked to deter- 
mine the nature of real beings (things). These ten cate- 
gories are: substance, quantity, quality, relation, action, pas- 
sion, place, time, posture (attitude), and state or condition 
(habitus}. This ancient classification has been retained in the 
Aristotelian-Thomistic tradition of philosophy and has of 
late been reaffirmed by such contemporary thinkers as Hans 
Driesch and Nicolai Hartmann. 

To understand the meaning and practical significance of 
these ten categories, it is necessary to emphasize that they 
represent not merely mental concepts or forms of judgment 
but also extramental modes of being or reality. It is in this, 
their metalogical or ontological character, that the categories 
of Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas differ essentially from 
the twelve categories of Kant, 11 for whom the above classi- 

11 Unity, plurality, totality, affirmation, negation, limitation, substantiality, causality, 
reciprocity, possibility, existence, necessity. 



Categories, Viewed Individually 41 

fication refers only to certain subjective and a priori (innate) 
mental forms which are prior to and prerequisites of all 
experience. The categories, to use Kant's terminology, belong 
to the sphere of "phenomena" and tell us nothing about the 
world of "noumena" or "things-in-themselves," the latter being 
inaccessible to human knowledge. 

It has been doubted that the ten categories of Aristotle and 
St. Thomas Aquinas really exhaust the richness of being as 
it unfolds itself into its several modifications. Furthermore, 
it has been correctly observed that some of the Aristotelian- 
Thomistic categories evidently overlap. On the other hand, 
it can be said in their favor that they provide valuable to6ls 
for the understanding of reality and that so far no more 
convincing or more adequate classification and systematization 
of the modes of being have been offered. 

6. The Categories, Viewed Individually 

A) SUBSTANCE AND ACCIDENT 

WE HAVE already stated (p. 40) that in Aristotle's 
table of categories the first is called substance. The other 
nine, though otherwise distinguished, have in common the 
fact that they are all accidents. 12 It may be gathered from this 
kind of classification, and from the terminology used, that 
Aristotle regarded the category of substance as the most im- 
portant and fundamental of the ten supreme classes of being. 
It designates that which underlies (Lat., substans: "that which 
bears," "supports") the accidental determinations of a thing 
or the absolute nature which is hidden underneath the rela- 
tive appearances. The category of substance provides a special 
instance of the general metaphysical principle that everything 
relative presupposes something which is not relative, as every- 
thing contingent presupposes something which is necessary. 
Underlying every "expression" there is something which is 
expressed or which expresses itself; every whiteness is the 
whiteness of something, every shape or motion or growth is 
the shape or motion or growth of something, etc. Substance 



1 Aristotle, Anal. post. I, 22; De antnta I, i; Met. IV, 2. 



42 Being and Reality 

may, therefore, be defined as a being independent of the sub- 
ject in which it inheres; or, negatively expressed, substance 
is a kind of being which does not inhere in something else. 
If a finite being, it is not, however, independent in itself, since 
it needs a Creator. Such acts as walking, standing, seeing, or 
such modalities as "being large," "being small," "being heavy," 
cannot be termed realities independent of a subject in which 
they inhere. Such a reality is only the being which walks, 
stands, sees, or the being which is large, small, or heavy. 

An accident, on the other hand, denotes a "being of being" 
(Lat, ens entis), i.e., an "expression" or modality of being. 
It is not independent but exists and inheres in another, either 
in another accident or in a substance. Thus, the substance 
"man" denotes an independent being which as such underlies 
every activity and modality which may be predicated of all 
individual men. It may, therefore, be said that substance is 
the constant and permanent nature of things which subsists 
in all accidental change and differentiation. 

Many modern thinkers (Berkeley, Hume, Kant; the posi- 
tivists, pragmatists, logical empiricists, etc.) have denied either 
wholly or in part the existence or knowability of substance, 
while others have acknowledged only the existence of either 
spiritual substances (Leibniz) or material substances (the 
atomists and materialists). These philosophers were brought 
to their total or partial denial of the existence of substances 
by the exaggerated rationalism or empiricism of their sys- 
tems, the extreme rationalists trying to reduce all knowledge 
to intellectual knowledge, and the extreme empiricists claim- 
ing that all knowledge is experimental or empirical knowl- 
edge and all reality is confined to physical extension. 

Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas, too, are agreed that 
substances as such cannot be perceived by the senses, but they 
add that they are nevertheless accessible to sense knowledge 
indirectly, viz., through the veil of their accidental determina- 
tions. If sense observation were the only legitimate source of 
knowledge, substances would be unknowable indeed, and 
their very existence might well be doubted. But as reason 
is an equally legitimate and valid source of knowledge, it is 
possible to know substances by means of the various quali- 



Categories, Viewed Individually 43 

tative or accidental modifications in which they reveal them- 
selves. These accidental qualities are not "pasted on" the sub- 
stance, as it were; they are rather the unfolding of the being 
of the substance, and the substance is the partly hidden and 
partly manifest source of its accidental modifications. 

Plato (427-348 B.C.), as well as Aristotle and the Thomists, 
distinguishes between "primary" and "secondary" substances, 
but Plato's usage of these terms is directly reversed in the sys- 
tems of Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas. For the two latter 
thinkers the primary substance is the real and concrete indi- 
vidual being or thing, while for Plato it is the general or 
universal idea, which is predicable of the individual thing 
but which exists strictly separated from physical objects in a 
realm of ideas. Hence for Plato all concrete individual beings 
are secondary substances, feeble images only of their eternal 
and unchangeable prototypes or ideas. For Aristotle and St. 
Thomas Aquinas, on the other hand, universal ideas do not 
exist in a world of their own but in concrete individual 
things or beings, and it is the human mind which is capable 
of abstracting the universal elements from individual sub- 
stances and of forming universal ideas. Thus, it is by way of 
abstraction that we derive from one or several individual 
trees the universal idea "tree" or "vegetative being"; from one 
or several individual animals the idea "animal" or "sen- 
tient being"; from one or several individual men the idea 
"man" or "rational being." For Aristotle and St. Thomas 
Aquinas, therefore, the concrete individuals are primary sub- 
stances, while the universal ideas, derived from individual 
beings, are secondary substances. 

B) SUBSTANCE; INDIVIDUALITY; PERSONALITY 

The distinction between primary and secondary substances 
acquires added significance when the attempt is made to ex- 
plain the problem of individuation and to describe the nature 
of individuality. The problem of individuation involves the 
question as to the relationship which exists between the con- 
crete objects of our experience (primary substances) and the 
universal ideas (secondary substances) which are embodied 
or realized in these individual objects. How can we adequately 



44 Being and Reality 

describe and explain both the contraction and "multiplication" 
of universal ideas or natures (plant, animal, man, etc.) in con- 
crete individual beings (oak tree, dog, Mr. Jones) ? 

Aristotle tried to answer this question by designating "mat- 
ter" with its accidental determinations as the cause of the 
individuation (multiplication) of universal ideas. St. Thomas 
Aquinas accepts this explanation but adds some important 
qualifications and distinctions which greatly aid in the further 
clarification of the problem. Thus he describes a "first sub- 
stance" or an individual as a reality which exists independently 
in itself and which is incommunicable to another. Such an 
independent and incommunicable substance the philosophers 
and theologians of the medieval schools called a "suppositum," 
while the Greek philosophers had used the term "hypostasis." 
"First substance," according to St. Thomas Aquinas, may be 
either simple (immaterial: God, pure spirits) or composite 
(composed of matter and form); either subrational and ir- 
rational (inorganic objects; plants; brutes) or rational (human 
beings; persons). Subrational and irrational substances, ac- 
cordingly, are indivisible in themselves and are divided off 
from every other kind of being, i.e., they are individuals. 
Rational substances likewise are indivisible in themselves and 
divided off from each other and from every other kind of 
being. They, too, are individuals, but individuals of a dif- 
ferent and higher order, by virtue of their rational nature 
and the added faculty of free choice, a faculty derived from 
and guided or illumined by reason. An individual being on 
a rational plane, endowed with a freedom which makes it 
the master of its acts and, therefore, a responsible and self- 
determining being, is called a person. 

The perfections of persons increase in proportion to the 
greater perfection of their rational or intellectual natures. 
These perfections are limited in finite persons (human beings 
and pure spirits), while the perfection is greatest in that Abso- 
lute Personality which is ascribed to the godhead. Likewise, 
the independence or autonomy (freedom) of finite persons 
is partial and incomplete, whereas the autonomy of the In- 
finite or Divine Personality is complete and absolute. 13 



18 For further discussion of freedom, cf. 17. 



Categories, Viewed Individually 45 

C) THE ACCIDENTS 

In order to relate a substance, which in itself belongs neither 
to the realm of extension nor to that of number, to the world 
of space and time, it is necessary to add to it several concrete 
determinations: 

i) Quantitative Being. Quantity or extension is the result 
of a special composition or contraction of being or of a 
special ontological determination. Substance and quantity 
are different kinds of being, the former having an independent 
existence of its own, and the latter having existence only in 
and through the substance. The being of quantity, therefore, is 
accidental being, and quantity is the first or primary accident 
of inorganic and organic bodies, i.e., of entities which exist in 
space and time. Quantity is the first accident because only 
through it is it possible for the other accidents to inhere in a 
substance, and because without it the other accidental prop- 
erties of bodies would not even be conceivable. Quantity 
furthermore is the basis of the divisibility as well as of the 
individuation of bodies and therewith also the principle of 
addition, subtraction, and multiplication. This significance of 
quantity was recognized by Plato when he stated that the 
primary determinations of matter are found in "the big" and 
"the small." 

Quantity may be predicated not only in relation to that 
which can be counted but also in relation to degrees of in- 
tensity or efficiency, as is the case with measurable dynamic 
quantities in physics, such as amperes, volts, horsepower, or 
other units of physical valency. 

The concept of a continuous quantity, i.e., of physical ex- 
tension as realized in space, time, and motion, is a common 
characteristic of all bodies. Nevertheless, extension is rather 
an effect of quantity than identical with it. When Descartes 
maintained that body and extension were one and the same 
thing, he described adequately the nature of mathematical 
bodies but misjudged the nature of physical bodies. It is com- 
mon knowledge that the latter produce in us impressions 
which to a large degree transcend the property of pure exten- 
sion, e.g., impressions of heaviness, of chemical constitution, 
of shape, etc. While it is, therefore, true that an unextended 



46 Being and Reality 

body is inconceivable, it is necessary to add that the property 
of extension does not exhaust or completely describe the nature 
of bodies. 

The practical importance of the accidental properties of 
quantity and extension is evidenced by the fact that on these 
accidental determinations of being rests the objective validity 
of the mathematical and physicomathematical sciences (geom- 
etry, trigonometry, stereometry, statics, dynamics, mechanics, 

etc ->- 

2) Qualitative Being. Whereas the quantitative determina- 
tions of being answer the questions: how big? how small? 
how much?, the qualitative determinations of being answer 
the question: what kind of a thing is it? The qualitative de- 
terminations are likewise accidental with regard to the sub- 
stance. They add some accidental changes to the species of 
the substance without impairing its nature, as is the case 
when we say: the sky is blue; the iron is hot; this man is cruel. 

There are many such real modifications of substances which 
have this character of accidental qualities, such as sickness 
and health, beauty and ugliness, virtues and vices, and no 
less the sense qualities of bodies and the psychological fac- 
ulties of animate and rational beings. In rational beings such 
psychological faculties or qualities are equivalent to the ability 
to accomplish specified tasks or to produce certain effects, and 
they, therefore, constitute the root principles of action. 

The repeated use of such faculties is conducive to the crea- 
tion of enduring psychological dispositions or habits, which 
establish an intrinsic relationship between specific faculties 
and their corresponding acts, so that eventually the aptitude 
to perform these acts and the ease of their performance may 
become a kind of "second nature." Thus the relation of fac- 
ulty (quality of being) to act or "moral habit" effectively 
illustrates the way in which morality (ethics) is rooted in 
psychology and psychology in metaphysics. Inanimate and 
subrational natures (chemical elements, bees, ants, spiders, 
etc.), following in their movements and courses of action a 
strictly determined pattern, are incapable of developing "moral 
habits" and are, therefore, properly speaking incapable of 
either improvement or degeneration. Thus, progress and retro- 
gression, growing moral perfection and depravation are evi- 



Categories, Viewed Individually 47 

dence and the prerogatives of free and rational natures. Ac- 
quired habitual patterns of action, virtue and vice, testify 
positively as well as negatively to the continuity and consistency 
of personal character. The significance of these psychological 
factors for education in general and the education of the will 
in particular is self-evident. 

The accidental quality of "passion" in the wider sense refers 
to the faculties of "passive" (Lat., passio: suffering, or the 
correlative of actio: action) receptivity to certain impressions 
(sense faculties, etc.) and in a more restricted sense to dis- 
positions of character and the "passions" in the familiar and 
popular connotation of the term. 

The accidental quality of external form is not identical with 
that of bodily extension, but rather further delimits and de- 
termines quantity. As a visible expression of structural rela- 
tions it reveals to some extent the substantial nature of the 
being or object in question, and the scientific significance of 
such external form is well recognized in such disciplines as 
chemical morphology, crystallography, botany, zoology, biol- 
ogy, biological morphology, etc. 

The sense qualities (size, shape, density, movement, color, 
sound, smell, etc.) as well as all other qualities were for St. 
Thomas Aquinas the red properties of concrete things, while 
in modern philosophy the attempt has been made to deny 
the objective reality of qualities, to reduce them either to 
purely quantitative determinations and relationships, or to 
describe them, as to origin and existence, as purely subjective- 
physiological phenomena. John Locke (1632-1704) distin- 
guished between "primary" (mathematical, spacial, temporal 
determinations of size, shape, number, position, and move- 
ment) and "secondary" (color, tone, smell, taste, etc.) qualities, 
admitting objective existence only for the former and re- 
stricting the reality of the latter to the sphere of subjective 
consciousness. Berkeley (1684-1753) and Hume (1711-1776) 
denied the objectivity of all the material qualities of objects. 
According to Hume the assumption of an extramental world 
is a matter of "faith" rather than of knowledge. After having 
thus dispensed with all metaphysics, skepticism remained as 
the only alternative. 

3) Relational Being. The many philosophical controversies 



48 Being and Reality 

concerning the nature of the category of relation suggest that 
we are confronted here with an important problem. What is 
really at stake is that all-pervading order of which St. Thomas 
Aquinas said it was the best thing in the universe (optimum 
universi). This order manifestly is realized in a multitude of 
relations, and the question which challenges the speculation 
of the philosopher refers to the nature or quiddity of these 
ordered relations. Is the order of the universe merely a result 
of the creative and ordering activity of the human mind, as 
Kant and all the idealists and phenomenalists have assumed, 
or has this order a real existence in itself, outside and even 
without die human mind, as all the realists and especially 
the Aristotelians and Thomists assert? Are relations mental 
constructs or are they real entities? 

The answer to these questions will have to take account of 
the constitutive elements of relationship. Now every relation 
involves three factors: (i) a subject or a bearer of the rela- 
tion, i.e., that which is related to something else; (2) a term 
to which a subject is related; (3) a foundation or common 
basis which makes it possible and meaningful to speak of 
relationship. This common basis may express a relationship 
either of identity and proportion (quantitative relations) or a 
relationship of causality, end (aim, purpose), dependence, kin- 
ship, energetic force, etc. (causal relations). 

Furthermore, the relation existing between the two correla- 
tive poles of subject and term may be a relation between con- 
cepts or elements of thought, as is the case when we define and 
systematize ideas or establish relationships between different 
branches of knowledge (logical relations). Or, secondly, the 
relation existing between subject and term may be a relation 
between extramental objects and beings, as between quantities 
(big, small; double, half, etc.) or as between energies, activ- 
ities, and receptivities (the mover and the moved; bud and 
blossom; father and son, etc.). Quite aside from being logical, 
relations of this latter kind are also reed. In other words, the 
human mind by no means creates these and other relations 
between real objects: it rather observes and reconstructs them. 

After the foregoing analysis of logical and real relations and 
their correlative poles, the question as to the nature of "rela- 
tional being" is still unanswered. What, if any, degree of 



Categories, Viewed Individually 49 

reality must be attributed to "being related"? Is it "being" 
in the full sense? Is it nothing? Is it a mental construct? 

The answer of St. Thomas Aquinas ascribes to "relational 
being" an accidental rather than a substantial reality, taking 
cognizance of its dependency on its correlative poles and on 
the common foundation which supports and sustains its "being 
related." Hence relationships are neither "things" nor are they 
"nothings." They are real in a restricted and qualified sense. 
That is why we are justified in attributing reality to the 
manifold physical, psychological, and causal relations which 
we observe in the physical and moral universe. 

4) Space and Time. In considering the accident of quantity 
we stated that continuous quantity or extension is realized in 
space and time. An analysis of these concepts will, therefore, 
serve to explore more fully the nature of quantitative or ex- 
tended being. 

The apperception of space is mediated by the senses of sight 
and touch and by the kinesthetic sense. In so far as these proc- 
esses are of a psychological nature, they are not the concern 
of metaphysics. On the other hand, the question as to the 
objectivity (reality) or subjectivity of space is a strictly meta- 
physical one. The objectivity of space was denied by idealistic 
philosophers in ancient and modern times. Kant, for example, 
described spaciousness as an innate, a priori (preceding all ex- 
perience) form of sense intuition. Against this view it must 
be maintained that the entire spacial order of things, their 
extension, distance, and co-ordination does not depend on our 
mental concepts but that conversely our concept of space is 
fashioned in accordance with objective spacial relations. We 
are not at liberty to invest the contents of our experience with 
arbitrary spacial properties, directions, dimensions, and loca- 
tions. On the other hand, it would be equally misleading to 
attribute to space an absolute substantial existence, as did, 
among others, Plato, Newton, and the ancient and modern 
atomists, or to identify space with the physical nature of things, 
as did Descartes. 

While the category of space evidently comprises only physi- 
cal objects and their movements, the category of time applies 
also to nonspacial, nonmaterial, purely mental and spiritual 
forms of being and their activities. The category of time, 



50 Being and Reality 

therefore, plays an essential part in those disciplines which 
deal with genetic and historic evolution. 

The difficulties which a clarification of the problem of time 
entails are well expressed in St. Augustine's (354-430) famous 
saying: "What then is time? If nobody asks me, I know it. 
But when I try to explain it to a questioner, then I don't 
know it." 14 

Aristotle stressed the intimate relation of time and motion, 
for without motion there would be neither time nor the con- 
cept of time. And yet time and motion are not identical. If 
they were, the multiplicity of motions would establish a multi- 
plicity of times, and the unity and continuity of time would 
be lost. Aristotle, therefore, concluded that time was the count- 
ing or measuring of motion with regard to the "before" and 
"after" of its individual moments. This argument refers to 
the objective aspect of time, its real flux and flow. But the 
same author also paid attention to the measuring and counting 
activities of the subject. He asked whether there could be a 
time without an apperceptive mind, and he answered that 
time was indeed a reality independent of a human mind but 
that a measurement of time was inconceivable without a 
measuring mind. 

To St. Augustine we owe a most profound psychological 
analysis of the concept of time. The time element appears to 
him as a tension (distensio) of the human soul. For, he argues, 
when we measure time we do not measure the future which 
is not as yet, and we do not measure the past which is no 
longer, but we measure something in the human soul, some- 
thing which is made present either by memory or by expecta- 
tion: "In thee, my soul, I measure time." 15 St. Thomas Aquinas 
further elaborates on the speculation of both Aristotle and 
St. Augustine and places strong emphasis on the objective 
reality of time. 16 

14 Confessions, XI, 14. 

18 Confessions, XI, 28. 

M In modern times the French philosopher Henri Bergson (1859-1941) and the 
German philosophers Franz Brentano (1838-1917) and Edmund Husserl (1859- 
1935) have enriched the historical treatment of the time problem by profound 
metaphysical analyses of their own. Cf. H. Bergson, Maticre et Memoire (1896, 
1925); E. Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie. Halle, 1913; Eng. Ed.: 
Ideas; General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, transl. by W. R. B. Gibson 
(London: 1931); F. Brentano, "Gesammelte philosophische Schriften" in F. Meiner's 
Philtsophischc Bibliothek., Leipzig. 



Categories, Viewed Individually 51 

As is the case with the category of space, the psychological 
constitutive elements of the time concept do not directly be- 
long to the province of metaphysics, which considers chiefly 
the general ontological elements of the problem of time. 

The idea which is most intimately associated with the 
nature of time is that of duration, i.e., the continuous identity 
of a being or state as against change and annihilation. Dura- 
tion thus implies steadiness and continuity and provides the 
unified background for the events of a temporal succession. 
The second important element, therefore, in the nature of 
time is that of a flux or change which is one dimensional, i.e., 
proceeding in one and the same direction, and irreversible. 
The third major element in the nature of time is that of 
temporal order, relating to the "before" and "after," to "past," 
"present," and "future" and ultimately anchored in the causal 
order of reality. 

An indefinite extension of the divisibility and multiplication 
of time is logically and ontologically conceivable. However, 
when we speak of "real" or objective time, these expressions 
can only have reference to "present" time, while the "past" 
as well as the "future" are "unreal" in the sense that they have 
existence only as contents of consciousness, either as memory 
or as expectation. "Real" or objective time is coexistent with 
change and motion. Where there is no change and motion, 
there is also no "real" time. 

To deny with the idealists the reality of time means to deny 
meaning and validity to any attempts and methods which are 
concerned with the measuring of time. The arguments ad- 
duced against the supposed unreality of space are equally 
valid with regard to the category of time. We are not at liberty 
to invest our experiences with arbitrary temporal relations 
but are bound to adjust the contents of our consciousness to 
the objective relations of "real" time. 

Finally, it is necessary to determine the nature of time in 
relation to eternity. Both space and time may be said to be 
capable of potentially infinite expansion or extension, respec- 
tively. By "potentially infinite" is meant the possibility of multi- 
plying and dividing space and time indefinitely. But the in- 
definitely continued multiplication and division of time will 
never yield the idea of eternity. Or, to express the same thought 



52 Being and Reality 

differently, a mere mathematical infinity is not an absolute 
infinity but only a potential infinity. In other words, eternity 
is not the summation of an infinite number of finite elements, 
but eternity is the complete absence or negation of time: the 
eternal is the timeless, i.e., it is without measurable duration, 
without temporal order, measure, limit, and succession, with- 
out beginning and without end. Hence for both Plato and 
Aristotle eternity is never attributable to finite and changeable, 
but only to infinite and immutable being. 17 

5) Action and Receptivity ("passio"). As we have tried to 
demonstrate, the common denominator in all the objects of 
our experience is "being" of one kind or another. In one way 
or another all things of which we know "are"; they "exist." 
But when we say they are or exist "in one way or another" we 
thereby indicate that their being is not fixed or static but that 
it is mobile or dynamic. 

We observe beings in various processes of change and de- 



11 Plato, Timaios, 10; Aristotle, Phys., IV, i. 

All scholastic philosophers, medieval and modern alike, distinguish between three 
fends of duration. To describe them they use the Latin words aeternitas, acvum, 
and tcmpus. Aeternitas (eternity) is the measure of the duration of that which is 
altogether unchangeable and it can, therefore, be predicated of God alone. Eternity 
is a never beginning and never ending simultaneity, an everlasting "now," involv- 
ing neither past nor future. Consequently, in eternity there is no succession, and 
even such things as succeed each other in time cannot be said to be successive with 
regard to or from the point of view of eternity: "Just as if there were a tree of 
such size as to stretch out over all the waters of a river, it would coexist with all 
the parts of the river together, even though these parts succeeded one another" 
John of St. Thomas, Phil Nat., Q. 18, a. i, diff. 3; quot. from R. P. Phillips, 
Modern Thomistic Philosophy, Vol. I, p. 118 (London: Burns, Gates & Wash- 
bourne, 1934). Aevum (an untranslatable term) is the measure of a duration which 
is likewise without succession, without a "before" and "after"; it is the measure 
of things which are immutable in their substance but subject to accidental change, 
of things which had a beginning and may have an end. Tempus (time) is the 
measure of the duration of things which are subject to change and corruption, 
of things which succeed each other in perpetual flux. Eternity can be called "the 
measure" of the duration of the unchangeable only in a metaphorical sense because 
a real "measure" presupposes a distinction between the measure and the measured, 
and such a distinction does not exist between God's being and God's eternity. 
Aeternitas then is an exclusive characteristic of the Divine Life, while the life of 
creatures is measured by either "aevum" or "tempus" or by a combination of both. 
Aeternitas is uncreated, whereas both aevum and tempus were created for the sake 
of creatures. Human beings dwell in both "aevum" and "tempus," i.e., in the 
category of created time. According to St. Thomas Aquinas the distinction between 
aevum and tempus is as follows: aevum is the measure of the duration of created 
substances whose natures are unchangeable and incorruptible (the human soul and 
the angelic nature). Tempus is the measure of the duration of the substance of 
man's physical nature (body), a nature which is changeable and corruptible. 
Summa Theologica, I, X. 



Categories, Viewed Individually 53 

velopment, passing from one state to another, now gaining 
and then again losing reality, now appearing and then ap- 
parently disappearing altogether. And this mobility of being 
seems to be governed by certain conditions, relationships, and 
dependencies of a causal nature which involve on the one 
side a capacity to act or to give or to cause and on the other 
side a capacity to react or to receive or to be affected. This 
observation permits us to add to the predicaments of being 
those of action and receptivity (passio), the latter term under- 
stood in the sense of the capacity of "being acted upon." Thus, 
a man builds a house (he acts), but the same man is attacked, 
wounded, or killed (he is acted upon). A plant grows (it acts), 
and the same plant withers under the influence of the sun 
(it is acted upon). 

In order to grasp the full meaning and import of these two 
predicaments of being it is necessary to consider briefly the 
Aristotelian and Thomistic division of being into "act" and 
"potency." 

Contemporary Thomists have called the doctrine concern- 
ing this twofold aspect of being the keystone of metaphysics. It 
denotes the fact that any change involves a passage from one 
state to another, i.e., a process of becoming. Every becoming 
in turn presupposes a twofold potency or capacity: an active 
potency on the side of the active principle of change and a 
passive potency on the side of that which suffers the active 
influence and undergoes the change. An active potency is an 
"overflowing" reality, so to speak, a reality capable of affecting 
and perfecting another being, while a passive potency is an 
incomplete reality capable of receiving the perfections which 
it lacks. Thus, a chemical compound, for example, includes 
and combines active and passive potencies. Or an architect, 
constructing a building, impresses his idea upon the building 
materials which he uses: he actualizes the potentialities in his 
mind (active potency). The building materials, on the other 
hand, by virtue of their suitability, were capable of being acted 
upon by the architect and were thereby made into a house 
(passive potency). We therefore conclude that the potency 
underlying all processes of becoming is twofold, active and 
passive. 

We may further say that everything which, actively or pas- 



54 Being and Reality 

sively, is in some way or other capable of becoming or of 
change, everything which is capable of realization, determina- 
tion, or perfection is potential being. It is, to be sure, a kind 
of "being" of which "existence" cannot be predicated because 
it is merely "possible," not "actual" being. On the other hand, 
it must be emphasized that potency is not mere "nothingness" 
because in it is contained the principle of future actualization. 
Hence potency implies an imperfection, a "being incomplete" 
which is perfected and completed by a process of becoming. 
Potency, therefore, can only be attributed to relative or con- 
tingent types of being, while from absolute or total being, in 
which every potency is actualized, potency of any kind is 
logically and ontologically excluded: absolute being is pure 
actuality (actus purus). Only the "pure act" can no longer 
receive any further perfections or determinations, and only 
"pure potency" or pure becoming cannot impart any perfec- 
tion or determination. 

It is this latter observation which compels us to say that 
"actuality" (the act) is first and "potency" is second, that act 
is prior to potency as a cause is prior to its effects. In other 
words, that which is merely possible or potential cannot real- 
ize itself: it must be realized by something which is already 
actual (an "act"). 

Act or actuality, therefore, as distinct from potency, may be 
defined as any present sum total of perfection. And potency is 
the aptitude to become that perfection. The passage, however, 
from potency to act, from that which is "being determinable" 
to that which is "being determined," is called "movement" or 
motion. Thus it may be seen that in the doctrine of potency 
and act the entire web of causal relationships is implicitly con- 
tained. Its basic metaphysical importance was first fully recog- 
nized by Aristotle. His own theory of "matter and form" and 
the profound speculation of St. Thomas Aquinas on "essence 
and existence" represent further applications and elaborations 
of that interpenetration of potency and act which permeates 
the innermost depths of reality. 

When some critics of the doctrine of act and potency point 
out that our experiences do not acquaint us with potential but 
only with actual being, there is no possibility of denying that 
this is true. All we can answer in defense of the doctrine is 



Essence and Existence 55 

that we are using the concept of potency as a negative postulate 
for the explanation of the nature of positive experience, and 
that a more satisfactory explanation has never been offered. 

7. Essence and Existence 

FROM the consideration of the supreme categories of being 
we return once more to the constitution of being as such. 
What we have learned about the nature of act and potency 
will now prove helpful for the understanding of two further 
aspects of being which in Thomistic philosophy are described 
as essence and existence. 

Essence is that by which a concrete individual being is con- 
stituted in its own nature. Existence is that which constitutes 
a being in its actuality as distinct from mere possibility or 
potency. While a possible being has only a capacity for exist- 
ence, an actual being does exist: a new determination or per- 
fection has been added to it by the realization of a potency. 

All actual beings have both essence and existence. Their 
essence expresses what they are (whatness, quiddity), while 
their existence indicates that they are. As far as their essence 
is concerned, there are vast differences between actual beings, 
but as to their existence they are alike, i.e., they all are. Thus, 
a pebble, a rose, a canary, and Mr. Smith differ in their essence, 
but it is obvious that existence is equally though analogically 
predicated of them all. 

It will be readily seen then that ontologically an essence is 
very much like a substance in that it exists in and by itself and 
does not inhere in another (cf. pp. 41 sq.). And, like a substance, 
an essence forms the basis or permanent substrate in which 
all its accidents inhere and have their being. There is, how- 
ever, this distinction between essence and substance: essence 
being by definition "that which makes a thing what it is," it 
appears that not only substances but also accidents have their 
essences, since both substances and accidents are realities. 

Taking the above definition as our basis, we may now con- 
clude that the term "essential being" implies a twofold mean- 
ing. If we consider the essence as such, disregarding its realiza- 
tion in actual beings, we may speak of a "general essence." 



56 Being and Reality 

If, however, we include the concretely existing or actual being, 
we may then speak of an "individual essence." In the concept 
of "general essence" all particular individual characteristics 
are omitted, the attention being focused on those elements 
which all the individuals of a species have in common. These 
common elements we call "essential," and those elements which 
differ from individual to individual we call nonessential. 

The question now arises whether or not essences can be 
known by the human mind, a question which has been the 
object of heated philosophical controversies. The possibility of 
arriving at an objectively valid knowledge of essences is denied 
by practically all the representatives of skepticism and pos- 
itivism as well as by Kantian and post-Kantian criticism. 

It seems that a sober philosophical analysis will have to 
admit that essences can be neither intuited nor known by sense 
observation. They can, however, be known by applying ra- 
tional operations to the data of sense experience, i.e., by the 
use of dialectical and syllogistic reasoning, by abstraction, de- 
duction, and analogy. 

The Aristotelian-Thomistic philosophers regard the ascent 
to the knowledge of essences as a natural function of human 
reason, and they see in the concept of the essence the basis as 
well as the aim of the different sciences. These thinkers point 
out that we can know and in most instances actually do know 
the essential differences between minerals, plants, and animals; 
between irrational and rational animals; between body and 
mind, etc. These essential differences between several classes 
and species of beings are the bases and the source of their 
specific behavior. And it is an undeniable fact that the concept 
of essence is indispensable for scientific classifications, for the 
formulation of scientific laws, and for all scientific judgments 
which lay claim to general validity. 

The argument for the reality of essences is further strength- 
ened by taking account of the causal relations (cf. 9) 
which penetrate deeply into the constitution of actual beings. 
There is no effect without a cause, and wherever we find a 
definite and co-ordinated set of diverse qualities, tendencies, 
compositions, modes of behavior, etc., these constantly re- 
curring composite structures point to an underlying substantial 
unity which we call essence. Our sense experience confronts 



Essence and Existence 57 

us with these structures of composite and co-ordinated qual- 
ities, and thereupon our reason discovers their principle and 
basis in the unity of the substantial essence. 

Finally, and most important, we have to decide whether or 
not there is a real or merely a logical distinction between the 
essence and existence of concrete beings. The question is of 
vital significance because it has a bearing on fundamental 
theological and philosophical problems, such as the concepts 
of causality, of creation, of the nature of the human soul, and 
of the nature of God. And the question poses itself as soon 
as the attempt is made to define the distinction between the 
Absolute Being of the godhead and the contingent being of 
creatures. 

The answer is broadly suggested in the way in which such 
early Christian philosophers as St. Augustine, Dionysius "the 
Areopagite" (circa A.D. 500), and Boethius (circa 480-525) 
distinguished between the essence of an Absolute Being (ens 
a se} and the essences of relative or contingent beings (entia 
ab alio). To the former they attributed a perfect fullness of 
both being and reality (existence), while of the latter they 
claimed that they had received and possessed their being and 
their reality (existence) by way of participation (ens per 
participationem ) . 

On the basis of this preliminary presentation of the problem 
St. Thomas Aquinas arrived in his tract "De Ente et Essentia" 
(On Being and Essence) at the conclusion that essence and 
existence are identical in God but really distinct in creatures. 
He argued that essence, considered in relation to existence, 
is of the nature of a potency which is actualized by the addition 
of existence. Thus, the essence of "whiteness" contains an 
element of potency with regard to the existence of concrete 
white things. Only in a being which includes in its essence 
all possible perfections, and from whose pure actuality (actus 
purus} every potency is excluded, there is no limitation either 
of essence or of existence: its essence is its existence, the two 
being identical as well as infinite. Or, to formulate the Thom- 
istic argument in somewhat simpler terms: every element 
added to a finite essence, including the element of existence, 
the supreme and necessary being, nothing is caused, He rather 
is due to an extrinsic cause. Only in God, the infinite essence, 



58 Bang and Reality 

being the cause of everything: His infinitely perfect essence 
includes His infinitely perfect existence, i.e., in Him essence 
and existence are identical. 

8. Matter and Form 

THE transitions from potential to actual being, as well as 
the actualizations of essences in existents are grounded 
in the phenomena of "becoming" or change, without which 
such transitions or actualizations would be inconceivable. In 
both its cosmology and metaphysics the Aristotelian-Thomistic 
philosophy has attempted to account for these phenomena by 
referring to matter and form as the constitutive elements of 
all bodies. 

It seems that neither the theory of mechanistic atomism nor 
that of dynamism is able to explain fully and satisfactorily the 
constitution of bodies and the phenomena of substantial 
change. While mechanistic atomism and dynamism are valu- 
able theories of physical science, they fail to provide an ulti- 
mate philosophical solution of the problems inherent in the 
nature of the physical universe. For mechanistic atomism the 
only constituent cosmic elements are extended matter and 
motion. For dynamism, on the other hand, the only constituent 
cosmic elements are inextended forces. To these one-sided 
propositions Aristotelian scholasticism opposes a third theory 
which is known as "hylomorphism" (from fay matter, and 
/xopc^ or $o form) or the theory of matter and form, com- 
bining the positive characteristics of mechanistic atomism and 
dynamism. 

Hylomorphism offers a philosophical rather than physical 
explanation of the constitution of the universe. It is intent 
upon finding rational grounds for the observed facts of change 
and motion. And it sees in matter the quantitative principle 
of spacial extension and in form a qualitative principle of 
active force. 

However, to understand the theory of hylomorphism cor- 
rectly, some important qualifications of the terms "matter" 
and "form" will have to be made. In his attempt to account 
for the chemical composition and decomposition of substances 



Matter and Form 59 

Aristotle arrived at the concept of a permanent substrate of 
bodies which he named "first matter" (^? irpcony, matcria 
prima, prime matter) and at a specific activating principle 
which he called "substantial form" (cvTXc X ta, ^o^ entelechy, 
energy). First matter, according to Aristotle, is then the com- 
mon indeterminate element of bodies, an element which is 
capable of receiving successively various determinations. Sub- 
stantial form, on the other hand, is the determining principle 
which actualizes and specifies the potentialities of prime mat- 
ter. Being wholly indeterminate or "pure" potentiality, prime 
matter can neither exist nor be recognized by itself but only 
in conjunction or in a natural union with form. There is 
nothing in physical nature which is either pure matter or pure 
form: all physical reality is actualized ("informed") matter 
and realized (individualized) form (idea). Thus, the cor- 
poreal world is composed of an ordered and graduated series 
of genera and species (chemical elements, minerals, plants, 
animals, men, etc.), the individuals of each species being 
grounded in their substantial natures and all being subject 
to substantial as well as accidental changes due to generation, 
corruption, increase, decrease, local motion, etc. And thus the 
entire realm of being is permeated to its very depths by a 
perpetual "becoming" which, so to speak, feeds on the suc- 
cessive actualizations of the pure potentiality or indetermina- 
tion of matter and of the energizing dynamism of form. 

Both "prime matter" and "substantial form" are conditions 
or bases of a substantial change which can be intellectually 
conceived but cannot be perceived directly in sense observa- 
tion. From them must be distinguished what is known as 
"second matter" and "accidental form." While prime matter 
is pure potency, second matter is actualized potency, i.e., it 
is contained in a real body as one of its constituent elements. 
This body, in turn, is subject to various qualitative changes, 
modes, relations, etc., constituting its accidental forms. 

In this way the doctrine of matter and form expresses the 
duality of nature as evidenced by the phenomena of becoming 
or of substantial and accidental change. By substantial change 
we mean a change which transforms the very substance of 
things, as is the case in the process of the decomposition or cor- 
ruption of living organisms or in the case of two chemical 



60 Being and Reality 

elements combining to form a new substance. Thus, a su 
stantial change occurs when chlorine and sodium combine 
produce salt or when hydrogen and oxygen combine to pr 
duce water. While in the new combination a common i: 
determinate element (materia prima) endures, the active < 
determinating element of a new substance has replaced tl 
specific natures and properties of the original chemical co 
stituents. By accidental change, on die other hand, we mes 
such superficial modifications in the mechanical and physic 
properties of bodies as do not affect or destroy their su 
stantial unity. 

However, the phenomena of substantial change still rema 
a mystery unless we add to matter and form a third principi 
known as "receptivity" or "privation," a principle which serv 
to describe the way in which the actuality of a subs tan ti 
form is "educed" from the potentiality of prime matter. F 
it is obvious that the common indeterminate substrate of su 
stantial "becoming" (i.e., matter) must possess a potency < 
capacity for "receiving" a certain form before it actually a 
quires it. And Aristotle sees in this "receptivity" (i.e., tl 
faculty of receiving) or "privation" the most profound cha 
acteristic of matter. For him natural evolution is an expre 
sion of the perpetual striving of matter for a form which 
lacks but to which it is proportioned and which it is, ther 
fore, capable of receiving. And so the evolution of bodi 
proceeds in accordance with certain natural propensities ar 
affinities, tending toward definite perfections or ends. 

This Aristotelian description of matter is virtually su 
scribed to by St. Thomas Aquinas. From this point of vie 
then prime matter is "possible" substance, and concrete su 
stance is "actual" matter. While for Plato forms (ideas) h; 
been immaterial and disembodied entities, the Aristoteli; 
"forms" are embodied in matter. 

We have indicated above that prime matter, not being o 
servable or experimentally verifiable, can only be describ< 
in negative terms: it is neither quiddity, nor quality, n 
quantity, nor any other of the determinations of being. Ar 
yet, matter, being potency, is not nothing: it is as much 
possibility and as much a reality as the raw block of marb 
which contains in its shapelessness the future sculptural fon 



matter ana rurm ui 

Thus, in the speculation of both Aristotle and St. Thomas 
Aquinas prime matter figures as pure potentiality. God, on 
the other hand, is conceived as pure actuality Cactus purus). 
And in between the pure potency of the universe and the pure 
actuality of God are found those things and beings which are 
composed of the potential and the actual, of matter and form. 
"When matter reaches its perfection in that realization which 
is its form, that means for it a participation, albeit imperfect, 
in an image of the First Actuality," wrote Boethius. 18 And 
for Aristotle, too, the substantial form shares in the character 
of the Divine in that it is not only in itself excellent and 
desirable but is related to that which is most excellent and 
most desirable and "to which are attached the high heavens 
and the whole of nature, by virtue of the fact that they desire 
It." 19 In other words, matter in search of "form" is really in 
search of the highest and purest form, i.e., in search of God. 
And all those beings, inorganic and organic, irrational and 
rational, which are steeped in matter if they follow the 
innermost tendency of their natures range in an ascending 
scale, from the imperfection of potency and privation to an 
ever closer image of the perfection of the Highest Good which 
simultaneously is all-pervasive being. 

If we say that prime matter contains potentially, in promise 
or in desire, certain series of forms in which it dresses itself 
successively in an evolutionary process, the question may legiti- 
mately be asked: where do these substantial forms originate? 
Where were they before they appeared, and where are they 
after their disappearance? To answer that they are of Divine 
origin means to refer to their ultimate derivation but fails to 
solve the question as to their immediate origin. The sources 
or seeds of these forms cannot be in prime matter because 
no amount of pure potentiality can ever by itself account for 
or be a cause of actuality. However, if the form is not con- 
tained in primate matter as the seed is contained in a plant, 
how can it ever be "educed" from prime matter? 

It seems that a dual basis and dependency must be ascribed 
to substantial forms: (i) the active force which "informs" 
matter and (2) matter itself, out of which the form emerges. 

18 DC Trinitatc, 4, 2. 

19 XI Metaphysics, io72 a , 14. 



62 Being and Reality 

The form may be said to pre-exist in matter in a way similar 
to that in which works of sculpture pre-exist in blocks of 
marble. "To educe the form out of the potency of matter 
means to make of matter that which it is capable of becoming 
or to give to matter the kind of determination which it is 
capable of receiving." 20 In other words, the potentiality of 
matter is naturally proportioned or ordained to a certain form. 
And the generation of the form is essentially nothing but the 
substantial transformation of the material substrate or "bearer/' 
aside from which the form has no independent existence of 
its own. 

Even after having thus attempted to dispose of some of the 
difficulties attaching to the understanding and acceptance of 
the theory of matter and form, there are still many aspects 
of the problem which defy a cut and dried explanation. Speak- 
ing of these unsolved and perhaps insoluble complexities of 
this theory, the French author Paul Claudel contends that the 
doctrine of matter and form is not self-explanatory but that 
it serves to explain practically everything else in the world of 
our experience; just as a lamp is better known by the light 
it sheds than by its wick. 

Among the objections with which the theory of matter and 
form has met in modern times, those which question its com- 
patibility with the discoveries of modern science deserve the 
most serious consideration. It is said, for example, that spectro- 
scopic research has furnished evidence that chemical elements 
remain substantially identical or unchanged in the chemical 
composite and that the constitutive elements of such a com- 
posite can always be freed and reduced to their original state. 
Likewise, it is pointed out that in the processes of nutrition 
the elements absorbed by the organism are merely assimilated 
without undergoing a change of substance. Finally, attention 
is called to the fact that the radioactive properties of atoms 
remain substantially unchanged in the composite and that 
the notion of the continuity of matter and the unity of bodies 
had to be abandoned after the discovery of the discontinuous 
structure of the atom. How can these objections be answered ? 

First of all, it must be emphasized again that the theory of 
matter and form is not and does not claim to be a physical 

' M St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Thfologiea, I, q. 90, a. 2. 



Law of Causality 63 

theory: it is a /wtftfphysical theory. Evidently, therefore, it 
does not attempt, as do the experimental sciences, to offer 
analyses of individual physical structures and forces. As a 
metaphysical theory it is concerned with the ultimate nature 
of bodies and with the reality in which they all share. Further- 
more, while it is true that science has demonstrated that the 
elements of the molecule remain intact in the molecule, it 
cannot be denied that nevertheless the molecule acts as a 
whole and possesses properties of its own which are different 
from the properties of its elements. And as to the asserted 
discontinuity of matter, it is a fact of common experience, at 
least as far as living organisms are concerned, that they act 
as unities and, therefore, can hardly be considered as acci- 
dental aggregates of discontinuous properties. Finally, even if 
the experimental methods of science have so far failed to 
reveal continuity or substantial change in the material world, 
the possibility of such continuity and change is not thereby 
excluded, and the rationally based methods and hypotheses 
of philosophy are as plausible as die experimentally gained 
hypotheses of science. Both science and philosophy use theories 
and methods which are best suited to their objects and their 
respective ends. 

9. The Law of Causality 

HpHE understanding of the nature of potency and act and 
JL of matter and form makes it possible for us now to ap- 
proach the even more intricate problem of causal relations. 
The Law of Causality represents a special application of the 
principle of sufficient reason (cf. p. 33), which simply stated 
is that "no contingent being can be and exist without a suffi- 
:ient reason." This very formulation indicates that the order 
rf being and existence is not merely constituted of facts and 
things but also of numerous relations and mutual depend- 
encies. These relations and dependencies manifest themselves 
in the continued activities of beings, and these activities in 
turn can be understood by means of the theories of act and 
potency and of matter and form. 
Without that constant activity and receptivity of beings 



64 Being and Reality 

which is described in the doctrine of act and potency, and 
without the correlation of prime matter and substantial form, 
the processes of becoming, change, and evolution would re- 
main largely unexplained. But with the aid of these concepts 
we are not only in a position to throw light on die phenomena 
of change but also to gain a deeper understanding of the 
nature of "activity" (actio) as such. 

Every activity may be said to include three aspects or factors: 
(i) the active principle from which it proceeds; (2) the recep- 
tive principle to which it tends or is related; (3) the principle 
of "becoming," which in itself is a composite of potency and 
act and marks the transition from lesser to greater perfection. 

In its most general sense the idea of "becoming" or change 
implies any transition either from nonbeing to being or vice 
versa; or from potential to actual being; or from being in one 
state to being in another state: in short, any movement resulting 
from an "efficient cause" (cf. p. 66). This transition is itself 
a form of action, or better, of actualization, by virtue of which 
certain properties or qualities are transmitted as from cause 
to effect. "It is the nature of every 'actuality,' " says St. Thomas 
Aquinas, "to communicate itself as far as this is possible; 
therefore, a thing is active in so far as it is 'in act/ and to act 
means to communicate, as far as this is possible, that by virtue 
of which an active thing is 'in act.' " 21 

However, it would be contrary to the principle of sufficient 
reason to assume that real being could have its origin in total 
not-being. We therefore must conclude that being can origi- 
nate only in something which is. Nothing can come into being 
from nothing (ex nihilo nihil fit). It is nevertheless logically 
and ontologically possible to conceive of the origination of 
relative or contingent being as following upon a state of not- 
being (and, conversely, as returning to a state of not-being) 
by virtue of the absolute power of a Divine Being. In this case 
we speak of an act of "creation" and call its opposite an- 
nihilation. However, such an "absolute becoming" as is implied 
in an act of creation we do not find in the world and nature 
which are known to us. Here we always observe only "creation 
in the second degree," so to speak, i.e., the generation of new 



1 De Potentia, II, i. 



Kinds of Causes 65 

substances by virtue of the activities and through the utiliza- 
tion and transformation of already existing forms of being. 
What we observe in this world of created beings is transi- 
tions from one state to another, as resulting from various 
forms of local motion and from qualitative or quantitative 
changes. 

If we try then to formulate the Law of Causality we shall 
have to state that it not only requires that every contingent 
being has a cause but that it either must be its own cause or 
that its own existence must be caused by something outside 
itself. Or, expressed in terms of potency and act: no being 
which is composed of potency and act (and that includes all 
created beings) can pass from potency to act (i.e., no being 
can become or change) without the operative efficiency of 
some other being which is already in act and which causes 
the change. In other words, every contingent being can be a 
cause only to the extent that it is "in act" and to the extent that 
it is capable of communicating its own perfection to some 
receptive principle or potency. 

Summarizing, we may say that the Law of Causality derives 
from the contingency of created beings. It demands and at- 
tempts to provide an explanation and proportionate cause 
for the existence and nature of contingent beings. Generally 
speaking, that positive something by which a change is in- 
itiated and from which it proceeds is termed a cause, while 
the change which is produced is called an effect. Cause and 
effect together constitute the nexus of causal relations. The 
Law of Causality then does not necessarily express either tem- 
poral succession or temporal coexistence but rather an inter- 
dependence of being or an inner bond, linking cause and 
effect. 

10. The Different Kinds of Causes 

FOLLOWING the lead of Aristotle and the scholastic 
philosophers we find it sensible and convenient to dis- 
tinguish between four kinds of causes: material, formal, effi- 
cient, and final. The material and formal causes, referring 
to the inner constitution or composition of things, are termed 



66 Being and Reality 

intrinsic. The efficient and final causes, referring to the forces 
and agencies which work upon beings from without, arc 
called extrinsic. The former relate to the order of being, the 
latter to the order of becoming. A fifth kind, the exemplary 
cause, referring to the eternal creative ideas or prototypes of 
all things in the Divine Mind, was first mentioned by Plato 
and some Platonic and Neo-Platonic thinkers, but has received 
a consistent and cogent explanation only in the speculation 
of Christian philosophers. 

This distinction between different kinds of causes serves 
to satisfy still further the demands of the Law of Causality 
by accounting more fully for the existence and constitution 
of all beings and existents. 

The reasoning which led Aristotle to the formulation of his 
four causes had as its basis the contention that four kinds of 
questions must be asked and answered if we want to under- 
stand the true nature of any real being. Thus, if we take as 
an example some particular object such as a chair or a shoe 
or a book, we may begin our inquiry by first asking: "Out of 
what (material) is it made?" {material cause}; secondly, we 
ask: "What causes it to be this particular kind of thing or to 
have this particular kind of form?" (formal cause); 22 we ask, 
thirdly: "By what or by whom is it made?" (efficient cause); 
and, fourthly and lastly, we ask: "For what purpose or end 
is it made?" (final cause). By adding together or combining 
all the answers to these four questions we learn to know the 
full raison d'etre of this or that particular thing or being, i.e., 
we learn "how" it is and "why" it is what it is. 

It appears that of these four causes the final cause is the 
most important, for as the Thomists express it, "every agent 
acts in view of an end," and it is the end or the final cause 
which moves the efficient cause to act. Thus, the chairmaker 
or shoemaker or bookmaker must first conceive in his mind 
the purpose of a chair or a shoe or a book before he begins 
making these objects. He can be said to be a good craftsman 

M The understanding of the nature of the "material cause" and its correlative, the 
"formal cause," is greatly aided by the theory of hylomorphism (cf. pp. 58 sq.). The 
indeterminate, but determinable, substrate in any accidental or substantial change 
is matter, while the activating and determining principle in any such change is 
form. Prime matter, being that out of which something is made, and substantial 
form, being that which actualizes prime matter and makes a thing or species what 
it is, are both true causes. 



Kinds of Causes 67 

only if he "knows what he is doing" and why he is doing it. 
Therefore, we ma) say with St. Thomas Aquinas that "the 
end is a cause inasrruch as it moves die agent to its operation." 28 
And we may add that this end or final cause is first in intention 
but last in execution, i.e., in its ideal being the final cause 
precedes the efficient cause, whereas from the point of view 
of physical realization (execution) the efficient cause is first 
and the final cause is last. 

The saying that every agent acts for an end holds good for 
any kind of being, irrational and rational, material and im- 
material alike. "Action for an end" is merely another form 
in which the "dynamism of being" expresses itself. It is indica- 
tive of a tendency, implanted in the very heart of all things, 
to strive for perfection or to actualize their potentialities. And 
the perfection or "good" toward which things and beings 
tend is what we call their end. 

Now, obviously, things or agents act in view of vastly dif- 
fering ends, depending on whether they are inorganic or or- 
ganic, irrational or rational agents. Therefore, the Law of 
Causality, like the concept of being, applies to these different 
classes of agents analogically (cf. pp. 30 sq.). And to these dif- 
ferent classes of agents corresponds a hierarchy of goods as 
well as a hierarchy of ends. 

It is, of course, evident that purposive action or action in 
view of an end can be predicated in a strict sense only of 
rational agents, i.e., of beings endowed with intelligence and 
the faculty of free choice. The natural tendency toward per- 
fection which we observe in subrational beings, as the growth 
of a plant or the smooth operation of the planetary system, 
simply expresses their complete obedience to the laws of their 
natures. And yet, the very laws of nature as manifested in the 
ordered processes, functions, adaptations, and co-ordinations 
of inorganic and organic life testify to purpose or finality in 
the entire universe. The fact that such purposiveness, wherever 
it is found, presupposes in the last analysis some intelligent 
mind and will, either contingent or absolute, furnishes, as we 
shall see (cf. pp. 86 sqq.), the basis of one of the proofs of the 
existence of God. 



1 De Potentia, q. 5, a. i. 



68 Being and Reality 

If, on the other hand, materialists and positivists of every 
brand feel themselves compelled by their netaphysical or anti- 
metaphysical premises to deny that there is purpose or finality 
in nature and life, including human life, they are immediately 
forced to the conclusion that all seeming order and purposive- 
ness are the result of pure chance. However, we can no more 
say that purposiveness is the result of chance than we can 
say that order is produced by chaos or that being is derived 
from not-being. To speak of chance only makes sense where 
there is a recognition and acknowledgment of law, just as an 
exception is only possible where there is a rule. 

It is true, nevertheless, that we do not know and may never 
know the purpose of many things, and it is likewise true that 
many occurrences in nature and life result from chance. How- 
ever, it is necessary to distinguish between what may be called 
absolute and relative chance. If we admit that all agents act 
in view of ends in accordance with their natures, the possi- 
bility of absolute chance is thereby excluded, but the possibility 
of relative chance is not denied. It is quite conceivable that 
several independent causal series may have a chance encounter 
at a given point or moment and thereby produce a fortuitous 
event. While each series as such is causally determined, the 
intersecting of the different lines of causation is purely co- 
incidental in that it is without a cause save only the all-pervasive 
causality of an all-knowing Mind or Providence which as such 
constitutes and acts as a First Cause. In this sense we under- 
stand the saying of St. Thomas Aquinas: "The Will of God 
is the origin of the entire motion of nature, and . . . therefore 
its activity is required in every activity of nature/' 24 Thus, final 
causality points to a lawfully designed and interlinked order 
of reality. 

Although the possibility and nature of the free activities of 
"second causes" is largely a problem of ethics and will, there- 
fore, be discussed in more detail under that heading (cf . Chap- 
ter Two), it seems necessary to mention at this point the radical 
denial of the efficient causality of created beings by the so-called 
occasionalists, such as Geulincx (1625-1669) and Malebranche 
(1638-1715). Like some medieval Arabic and Jewish philos- 



1 De Potentia III, 7, ad 



Kinds of Causes 69 

ophers, they stretched the scripturally attested all-embracing 
causality of God to a point where it left no room for the in- 
dependent activities of creatures. According to the view of 
these thinkers, God alone acts, using creatures only as "occa- 
sions" or tools of His own actions. Thus, the attempt to ele- 
vate the efficiency of the First Cause led to the annihilation 
of second causes and thereby ultimately to the denial of the 
free will and personal responsibility of all agents, save only the 
all-powerful will and all-inclusive responsibility of the Divine 
Cause and Agent. 

It is true, of course, that all secondary causes are causes, and 
can act as such, only by virtue of the Primary and Absolute 
Cause, but it must be added that second causes are as much 
real and independent causes as created beings are real and 
independent beings: they are causes and beings participating 
in the First Cause and in the First Being in the same way in 
which that which is contingent partakes of and is grounded 
in that which is necessary. 

In modern times the very concept of causality has been se- 
verely criticized or totally rejected by individual philosophers 
as well as by entire philosophical schools. For Hume and Kant 
and, mutatis mutandis, for the positivists Comte and John 
Stuart Mill, the Law of Causality does not reflect and express 
any real or objective relations, but is merely a subjective notion 
of the human mind. Hume, the empiricist, for whom only 
sense knowledge is real, sees in all supposedly causal rela- 
tions nothing but the result of repeatedly observed sequences 
of events and of habitual subjective associations, while Kant 
describes causality as an "a priori" (innate) category of the 
mind which is valid only for the world of appearances (phe- 
nomena), but has no reference to extramcntaJ relations and 
realities (noumena, things-in-themsclves). Both points of view 
deny to the human mind the capacity to penetrate beyond 
sense perceptions and beneath sensible appearances to the laws 
and structures of being. 

Against such attempts to explain away causality it may be 
said that common sense as well as science refuse to admit that 
such observed processes and events as the freezing of water 
at a certain temperature or the illumination associated with 
the lighting of a candle or the rising of the sun involve no 



TO Being and Reality 

relation of cause and effect but are merely habitually observed 
sequences of causally unrelated occurrences. And, furthermore, 
we are quite capable of distinguishing between real causal 
relations and mere habitual associations, such as the observed 
sequences of day and night or the changing seasons. In other 
words, we say with conviction that heat causes a rise of tem- 
perature and that cold causes a lowering of temperature, but 
we would be foolish to maintain that night causes day or that 
winter causes spring or that one tone of a musical scale causes 
the next higher or lower tone. 

Our discussion of the different kinds of causes would be 
incomplete without our devoting some attention to the notion 
of the exemplary cause. It plays an important part in the 
speculation of Plato and the Neo-Platonists as well as in the 
thinking of the early Church Fathers, who recognized in the 
Platonic doctrine of Eternal Ideas or prototypes of all things 
a certain relationship with the Christian doctrine of the creative 
causality of the Divine Word (Logos'), as stated in the Gospel 
of St. John. Thus, Dionysius "the Areopagite" 25 recognized in 
the eternal "exemplary" ideas or "paradigms" the necessary 
links between God and His creation, between Divine immuta- 
bility and temporal succession and change. However, the most 
comprehensive treatment of this "Divine exemplarism" we find 
in some of the writings of St. Augustine. He describes the 
"eternal causes" (rationes aeternae} as the Divine paradigms 
of all the manifestations of being in nature and history. They 
are the "exemplars" of every element of form, measure, energy, 
and beauty in the entire breadth and depth of reality: "In 
Thee, my God, are the causes of all unstable things; in Thee 
are the immutable origins of all that is mutable; in Thee are 
the living, eternal reasons of all that is irrational and 
temporal." 2 " 



* Dionysius Arcopagita was a disciple of St. Paul and the first Bishop of Athens. 
He is mentioned in Acts 17:34 as one of those Athenians who listened to the 
preaching of St. Paul on the Hill of Ares (the "Areopagus") and was converted. 
In the fifth or sixth century the name of "the Areopagitc" attached itself to the 
works of an unknown writer, frequently referred to in the future as the "Pseudo- 
Dionysius" or "Pscudo-Areopagite." The real author of these works was probably a 
Christian Neo-Platonist of Syria. The scriptural fame of St. Paul's disciple caused 
these writings to exert an enormous influence on medieval theological and philo- 
sophical thought and especially on medieval mysticism. 

M Quaestioncs, 83, qu. 48. 



Cause or Origin of Being 71 

This Augustinian description of the "exemplary cause" was 
essentially adopted by the leading scholastic theologians and 
philosophers of the Middle Ages, such as Alexander of Hales, 
St. Bonaventure, St. Albert the Great, and St. Thomas Aquinas. 

11. The First Cause or the Origin of Being 

THE common characteristic of all beings composed of 
potency and act, matter and form, is their relativity. They 
are members in a chain of causality, and in their being and 
existence, in their origins, their activities, and their ends they 
are neither their own causes nor their own ends but rather 
caused by and related to something else (entia ab alio). In 
contrast to such relative types of being we can conceive of an 
Absolute Being which as such must be uncaused (ens a se} 
and its own end, i.e., it must be unconditioned and autonomous 
being, without limitations, without vicissitude, without need 
and want and, therefore, absolutely self-sufficient. If it can be 
said of all relative being that it is contingent in that the idea 
of its not being involves no contradiction, Absolute Being, on 
the odier hand, is Necessary Being in that even to conceive of 
its not-being involves a logical and ontological contradiction. 
The idea of such an Absolute Being or Uncaused Cause is 
identical with the idea of God. And that part of metaphysics 
which treats of the idea and existence of God is known as 
natural theology or theodicy. 

The philosophical inquiry which is the special concern of 
natural theology has as its starting point the simple question 
of common sense: "Why is there something? Why not 
nothing?" This query involves the threefold philosophical 
problem of the existence, the demonstrability, and the nature 
of God, the Absolute Being and the Absolute Cause. It can 
be answered philosophically, if at all, only by rational argu- 
ment, and it will appear that in every step of the demonstra- 
tion the Law of Causality will provide the indispensable basis 
and the most potent instrument of understanding. 

We approach this most important and controversial problem 
of metaphysics by first inquiring: Is it possible at all to gain 
a knowledge of the existence of God by the medium of 



72 Being and Reality 

reason? The answer to this question is of such vast import 
because our philosophical comprehension and interpretation 
of the universe and of man will largely depend on whether 
or not we are able to include in it the demonstrable existence 
of a First Cause. Positively or negatively, a philosopher's atti- 
tude in regard to the Divine determines the general direction 
of his thought. 

But might not the question as to the demonstrability of God 
be regarded as unnecessary ? Is not God's existence self-evident ? 
Or, if not self-evident, is God's existence not perhaps an object 
and article of faith rather than an actuality to be demonstrated 
by reason? Is God not present within us in a most intimate 
manner, and can His presence not be experienced directly 
and intuitively? Is reason not an entirely inadequate instru- 
ment when, with its natural powers, it attempts to prove the 
existence of a supernatural First Cause? Or, supposing there 
is a God: is it not absolutely impossible for us, finite and lim- 
ited as we are, to know anything about Him, either by direct 
experience or by discursive reasoning ? Finally : do the universe 
and its inhabitants really require a First Cause? Are they not 
self -sufficient and self-explanatory, after all? 

All these questions have in fact been asked again and again 
in the fluctuating history of human thought, and the different 
philosophical attitudes which they express may be summarized 
under the headings ontologism, criticism, agnosticism, and 
atheism. Before stating our own position, we shall try to dis- 
cuss briefly the arguments implied in these four points of view. 

A) IS IT NECESSARY TO PROVE THE EXISTENCE 
OF GOD? 

The view that a rational demonstration of the existence of 
God is unnecessary because He manifests Himself in the im- 
mediate inner experience or intuition of the mind is known as 
ontologism. 

All the defenders of ontologism are agreed that the existence 
of God is evident a priori, i.e., without the necessity of having 
recourse to empirical or rational knowledge. Ontologism in- 
sists that God is known before anything else is known and 
that the knowledge of all other things depends on and is 
conditioned by our knowledge of God. 



Cause or Origin of Being 73 

The ontological argument of St. Anselm in his "proslogium" 
must not be confused with the tenets of ontologism. It is 
neither a priori nor a posteriori but, as philosophers say, a 
simultaneo. It is unique in that it attempts to prove God's 
existence from the very concept of the Deity. 

As its basis it has the idea that in God essence and existence, 
are identical (cf. pp. 57 sq.). Thus, included in the conception 
of God's essence must be that of His existence. If God, then, by 
definition, is that Being greater than which none can be con- 
ceived, and if once we have formed the idea of such a Being, 
then its existence is simultaneously included and predicated. 
For that which has its being in both mind and extramental 
reality is greater than that which has its being only in the 
mind. Thus, if God were merely an idea in our own mind 
and His actual extramental existence were not included, then 
something would be lacking in the original concept: God 
would not have been thought of as that Being greater than 
which none can be conceived. Therefore, that which is the 
greatest conceivable is also the most real in actual existence. 

St. Thomas Aquinas subjected the ontological argument to 
a stringent critical analysis. He finds the demonstration in- 
conclusive on these two counts: (i) St. Anselm wrongly as- 
sumes that all men are agreed that "God is that Being greater 
than which none can be conceived." Many of the ancient 
(Greek) philosophers either thought of God as a finite physical 
entity or they identified Him with the finite universe. While it 
is true that a Christian philosopher, for whom God and Being 
(i.e., Being as such, Absolute Being) are identical, finds no 
difficulty in accepting the statement "God is" as self-evident, 
this same statement has little meaning and less convincing 
force for a non-Christian or an atheist. (2) St. Anselm illegiti- 
mately concludes from the conceptual to the real, from the 
logical to the ontological order, from the order of thought 
to the order of existence, from abstract to concrete reality. 
In other words, from the understanding of the meaning of 
the word God it does not follow that God exists really or extra- 
mentally, and to that which is conceptually the greatest, red 
existence is by no means necersarily attached. It is true that 
the essence of God includes His existence, but the mere concept 
of God's essence includes only the mere concept of His exist- 



74 Being and Reality 

ence. We may say, therefore, that if there is a God, then He 
also exists of necessity, but the decisive question remains 
whether or not there is such a Being. Thus, for St. Thomas 
Aquinas any conclusive demonstration of God must be a 
posteriori, i.e., it must start from His effects as they are given 
in our experience, and any true evidence of His existence must 
be gained by way of causal regress. 

Kant objected to the ontological argument on very similar 
grounds. For him, too, to conceive of the Deity is to conceive 
of an infinite, most real, and most perfect Being, but he, like 
St. Thomas, maintains that there is no possibility for human 
thought to derive God's existence from the idea of this most 
real and infinitely perfect Being. 

B) CAN GOD'S EXISTENCE BE RATIONALLY 
DEMONSTRATED? 

The view that a rational demonstration of God's existence 
is impossible is held by Kant and by all those philosophers 
who either anticipate him or follow him in his denial of the 
knowability of objective (transsubjective) reality. We have 
seen (cf. p. 69) that for Kant the Law of Causality is merely 
a subjective category of reason and, therefore, unsuited for 
the exploration of the nature of "things-in-themselves." He 
extends his criticism of the ontological argument to the other 
traditional proofs of the existence of God, as formulated by 
medieval philosophy. It appears to Kant that all these tradi- 
tional "proofs" are merely variations or disguises of St. An- 
selm's ontological argument. Convinced that the existence of 
God cannot be proved by "pure reason" and equally certain 
that without the idea of the living God human life as such 
will be deprived of its very meaning, Kant establishes God's 
existence as a "regulative principle of reason," as "a postulate 
of practical reason." In other words, Kant proposes to make 
the existence of God an article of philosophical faith, as not 
demonstrable by reason: "a concept which includes and crowns 
all human knowledge, whose objective reality, however, can 
indeed neither be proved nor disproved." 

In answer to Kant's positici it might be stated that God 
as a "postulate of practical reason" can only be accepted after 
His existence has first been proved. Or, expressed differently, 



Cause or Origin of Being 75 

the existence of God is not an article of faith in the philosophi- 
cal realm, which is not concerned with supernatural faith, but 
is one of the rational "preambles" of faith. 27 

C) CAN ANYTHING BE KNOWN ABOUT GOD'S 
EXISTENCE? 

The view which holds that God is absolutely unknowable, 
by rational or any other means, is termed agnosticism. With 
the ancient Greek philosopher Protagoras (circa 485-415 B.C.) 
the agnostic says: "I say neither that He exists nor that He 
does not exist." 

Agnosticism maintains either with Kant that we cannot 
acquire any knowledge of God's existence because we cannot 
penetrate beyond the innate forms and categories of our own 
mind and can consequently only have knowledge of intra- 
mental phenomena (idealistic agnosticism); or agnosticism 
insists with Hume, Comte, and Spencer that all knowledge 
is sense knowledge (empiristic and positivistic agnosticism). 
Thus, agnosticism developed with some kind of logical neces- 
sity from Kant's criticism and Hume's skepticism. 

The agnostic arguments may be answered by admitting first 
of all that our knowledge of an Absolute Being can never be 
fully adequate but must here below always remain limited and 
merely analogical; by admitting, secondly, that God's being 
and existence can never become the object of sense experience 
or of direct intuitive knowledge in this life. However, it ought 
to be added that to say that God cannot be adequately known 
(i.e., known as He is in Himself) does not mean that He can- 
not be known at all. It is true that God is incomprehensible 
in His essence, but the fact of His existence and the nature 
of this existence may nevertheless be known, albeit imper- 
fectly, by means of an a posteriori demonstration, starting 
from His known works or effects in the created universe and 
proceeding from these visible effects to an invisible and im- 
material First Cause. 28 



* Other "preambles" of faith are the immortality of the human soul, the free- 
dom of will, the possibility, necessity, and knowability of revealed truth. For Kant 
all these are necessary "postulates of practical reason." 

"This way is followed in the Old Testament, where we read in Wisdom 13:1-5: 
"But all men are vain, in whom there is not the knowledge of God: and who by 
these good things that are seen, could not understand him that it, neither by 



j6 Being and Reality 

D) 75 THERE A GOD? 

The view which denies that there is a God and asserts that 
the universe and its inhabitants do not require a First Cause 
but are entirely self -sufficient and self-explanatory is known as 
atheism. This denial of the existence of a transcendent God 
appears historically in the theories of materialism, naturalism, 
pantheism, and the several forms of positivism. 

Any consistent atheism would have to prove: (i) that the 
universe is in itself and in its every part and aspect self-ex- 
planatory and, therefore, absolute; (2) that the idea and 
existence of a personal, transcendent God contains in itself 
an element of impossibility. These proofs have never been 
offered with any degree of conclusiveness. 

If we say with Kant that the existence of God cannot be 
rationally demonstrated because our knowledge is confined to 
the phenomena of intramental experience, then we are in no 
position to make any predications concerning the extramental 
or transcendent realm of "noumena," including the essence 
and existence or nonexistence of God. Granted the Kantian 
premise, we must logically suspend our judgment concerning 
"noumena" and become agnostics. 

Jacques Maritain, one of the foremost contemporary repre- 
sentatives of Thomistic philosophy, claims that consistent 
atheism "cannot be lived," and he finds evidence of this, among 
other things, in the heroic and tragic experience of a man 
like Friedrich Nietzsche, who had felt it his "terrible duty" 
to announce to the world "the death of God," and whose 
mind broke not only under the weight of physiological dis- 
integration but even more because of the terrific strain of an 
attempted absolute experience of atheism. "Atheism, if it could 
be lived down to its ultimate roots in the will, would dis- 

attending to the works have acknowledged who was the workman: But have 
imagined cither the fire, or the wind, or the swift air, or the circle of the stars, 
or the great water, or the sun and moon, to be the gods that rule the world. With 
whose beauty, if they, being delighted, took them to be gods: let them know how 
much the Lord of them is more beautiful than they: for the first author of beauty 
made all those things. Or, if they admired their power and their effects, let them 
understand by them, that He that made them, is mightier than they: For by the 
greatness of the beauty, and of the creature, the creator of them may be seen, 
so as to be known thereby." Cf. also in the New Testament, Romans 1:20: "For 
since the creation of the world His invisible attributes are clearly seen being 
understood through the things that are made." 



Demonstration of God's Existence 77 

organize and kill the will metaphysically/' writes M. Mari- 
tain. 29 In other words, the logical end of a consistent atheist 
would be either psychical or physical self-destruction or both. 
This is perhaps the reason why absolute atheism is so rare 
and why most of the so-called atheists are in fact either deists 
(Rousseau, Voltaire, etc.) or pantheists (Spinoza, Shaftesbury, 
Hegel, etc.). In Rousseau's "6mile" (IV) we even find the 
following severe indictment of atheism: "By overthrowing, 
destroying, trampling under foot everything which men re- 
spect, they (the atheists) rob the afflicted of the last comfort 
in their misery, and they break down the only curb which 
keeps the mighty and wealthy from giving full rein to their 
passions. They tear from the innermost heart the hope of virtue 
and remorse over sin, and with all that they even boast of 
being the benefactors of mankind." 

12. The Demonstration of God's Existence 

THE objections to St. Anselm's ontological argument (cf. 
pp. 73 sq.) were based on the negation that the existence of 
God is self-evident. It did not claim for mortals a direct 
intuition of God, the Absolute Being. St. Thomas Aquinas 
holds that most of the so-called intuitions of God are in reality 
psychological reactions and reflections corresponding to the 
experiences we have of God's effects in the universe and in 
ourselves as parts of it, and that, therefore, both the "in- 
tuitive" and the rational experience of God's existence suggest 
inferences from effect to cause. The objections to Kant's criti- 
cal "phenomenalism," on the other hand, were based on the 
contention that our knowledge is not confined to "phenomena," 
but that our reason is competent to apprehend being or reality 
as such, although different grades or classes of being are 
rationally apprehended with varying degrees of clarity. 

A) GENERAL PRESUPPOSITIONS 

The question then which a rational demonstration of God's 
existence will have to answer concerns the kind of information 



29 Jacques Maritain, True Humanism (New York: Scribner, 1938), p. 53. 



78 Being and Reality 

which reason can provide regarding that Infinite and Absolute 
Being which we call God. And it is evident that the supposi- 
tion that such information can be obtained implies certain 
principles and premises, some epistemological and some meta- 
physical, without whose acceptance any such attempt would 
be foredoomed to failure. The most important of these prin- 
ciples and premises were explained and discussed in the pre- 
ceding sections of this book. They include and involve: the 
basic structure of being and thinking, the principles of con- 
tradiction, of sufficient reason, and of the different kinds of 
causality. Included among the common premises of the dem- 
onstration are the following: the extramental (ontological) 
existence of an external reality subject to objective natural 
laws; the transsubjective (extramental; ontological) validity 
of the principles of contradiction, identity, sufficient reason, 
and causality; finally, the congruence or mutual correspondence 
of the laws of thinking and being, or the conviction that 
thought and consciousness on the one hand and extramental 
reality on the other are ordered and proportioned to each other. 
To these general principles and premises must be added a 
definitional clarification of some of the terms used in the 
demonstration, the misinterpretation of which has given rise 
to numerous unwarranted difficulties and objections. Thus, 
when Kant criticizes the traditional rational demonstration of 
the existence of God by claiming that the infinite difference 
between God and creatures excludes the possibility of a com- 
mon denominator, he is not aware of the analogical nature 
of being (andogia cntis) as well as of causality (cf. p. 67), 
on which the traditional arguments stand and without which 
they fall to the ground. If, on the other hand, being and causal- 
ity are analogical concepts, then Kant's contention that a finite 
effect must have a finite cause and that no higher degree of 
being or reality can be attributed to the cause than to the 
effect misses the point at issue. For if being and causality are 
understood not univocally but analogically, then the fact that 
we discover a certain analogy or proportion between finite 
and Infinite, relative and Absolute Being, entitles us to make 
from God's known effects certain inferences as to His exist- 
ence as a first cause. We grant again that it would be a futile 
and impossible undertaking to try to comprehend God as He 



Demonstration of God's Existence 79 

is in Himself, but it is quite a different matter to try to under- 
stand the world and thereby the ways in which God manifests 
His own Infinite Being in its finite beings. 

Kant is also undoubtedly correct when he asserts that we 
shall never know positively what God is, but that does not 
preclude us from acquiring a trustworthy knowledge of the 
fact that He is. And yet, even of His "whatness" or of the 
essential qualities of His nature we may acquire some limited 
degree of understanding, by determining negatively what He 
is not. "For the Divine Substance," writes St. Thomas Aquinas, 
"transcends every form which our reason can approach, by 
Its infinity and Its immeasurability, and thus we cannot com- 
prehend what It is. However, we have some measure of knowl- 
edge of It by our recognition of what It is not. . . . For our 
knowledge of anything is the more perfect the more fully we 
recognize in what respects it differs from other things. . . . 
And since with regard to the Divine Substance we cannot 
comprehend the whatness nor understand positively what dis- 
tinguishes It from other things, we must try to comprehend 
It by way of negative distinctions." 30 In this way (via re- 
motionis; via negationis} we learn that God is not material, 
not finite, not composed of potency and act, matter and form, 
etc. Using both the principle of analogy and the method of 
negation, St. Thomas Aquinas, in the Summa Contra Gentiles 
(I, 14-102), discusses the different attributes and qualities of 
the Deity in great detail, including the divine knowledge, will, 
freedom, love, life, and happiness. Contemplating the existing 
analogical perfections of knowledge and love, intellect and 
will in creatures, and considering furthermore the perfection 
of being as such with its transcendental properties of unity, 
truth, and goodness, in which all created beings share pro- 
portionately he finds reason to affirm the existence of these 
same perfections, in the highest degree, in God, the author 
of all created perfection. 

A final preliminary observation and presupposition concerns 
the impossibility of conceiving, under certain conditions, of an 
infinite series of causes. The qualification "under certain con- 
ditions" is necessary because an infinite series of causes is pos- 

Contra Genukt, I, 14. 



80 Being and Reality 

sible when these causes are co-ordinated or merely accidentally 
subordinated to each other, as for example in the series father 
son, father son, etc., ad infinitum, where it might be reason- 
ably argued that fathers have generated sons from infinity 
and may continue to do so into infinity. And the same is 
true in the case of a craftsman who uses different tools, one 
after the other, and he might go on doing so indefinitely. If 
we consider only the technical and mechanical conditions of 
such activities, leaving out of consideration the nature of the 
agents and of the activities as such, we might suppose that an 
indefinite number of tools could be used by one or by any 
number of craftsmen. 

On the other hand, an infinite series of causes becomes an 
impossibility as soon as we deal with causes which are essen- 
tially subordinated to each other, as in our second example, 
when we consider the nature of the craftsman and his activity 
as such: to understand his activity we have to refer to the 
causal relation which exists between the physical effort of 
his arm or hand, the action of his will, the motivations of this 
will, etc. In this case the activities as such and their causal 
sequence remain unexplained unless we can find at the end 
of the series a primary source which imparts causality to the 
entire series. In other words, essentially subordinated causes 
indicate not simply a causal co-ordination but an essential 
causal dependency among the inferior and superior members 
of the series, so that in the last analysis the entire causality 
of the series depends on the causal initiative or activity of its 
first member. 

B) THE "FIVE WAYS" 

The most famous arguments to prove the existence of God 
a posteriori, i.e., starting from experience and making the Law 
of Causality the cornerstone of the demonstration, were pre- 
sented by St. Thomas Aquinas in the form of the "five ways." 31 
They all are concerned with the solution of the most difficult 
and sublime task of metaphysics: to anchor the web of ob- 
served causes and effects in the universe in an absolute ground 
and in this way to account for them and render them mean- 



91 Summa Thcologica, q. 2, a. 3, and Summa Contra Gentiles, I, 13. 



Demonstration of God's Existence 81 

ingful individually as well as collectively. All five ways have 
their common frame of reference in the concept of being as 
such, the common transcendental ground of all individual 
beings. Searching for the absolute source of being as such, 
the five ways lead from the contingent to the necessary, from 
the relative to the absolute. Each of the five ways bases its 
argument on a different set of observed facts or effects, each 
passing along different channels of experience to arrive ulti- 
mately at the identical goal. And as the entire demonstration 
has its common denominator in being as such, the five ways 
meet and intersect even before they finally merge. Individually, 
each of them demonstrates one particular aspect of God's 
existence and is, therefore, to some extent incomplete in itself 
without the remaining four, while in their unison the five 
ways describe God in terms of five major attributes of His 
existence: He is demonstrated as the First Mover, the First 
Efficient Cause, the First Principle of Necessity, the Supreme 
and Absolutely Perfect Being, and the First Ruling Intelligence. 
The first way of demonstration is the argument from motion 
to a First Mover. Its reasoning is as follows: It is a fact of 
common experience that there are various forms of movement 
or changes in the world, comprising not only local motion 
but all kinds of qualitative and quantitative changes of which 
we are aware in our internal and external experience. Any 
such motion or change involves a passage from potency to 
act (cf. pp. 53 sq.). For "to change" means to actualize a potency 
or to pass from potency to act. Thus, anything that is moved 
is in a state of potency, and anything that moves (i.e., causes 
motion) is "in act." However, nothing can at the same time 
and in the same respect both be moved and cause motion or be 
both in potency and "in act," which is the same as saying 
that nothing can pass from potency to act without the aid 
or initiative of something which is already "in act." "To 
move" (i.e., to cause motion) means to communicate being, 
while "to be moved" means to receive being. Thus, that which 
is moved requires a mover, and if this mover be in turn moved 
or in motion, another mover is required to account for its 
motion, until at the end of such a series of essentially subordi- 
nated causes we arrive at what Aristotle called "the First Un- 
moved Mover." 



82 Being and Reality 

"It is not possible here to proceed indefinitely (in the series 
of moved movers) because in that case there would be no 
First Mover and consequently also no other movers. For all 
intermediate movers are in motion only by virtue of the in- 
itiative of the First Mover, as a stick is in motion only by 
virtue of the fact that it is moved by a hand. Therefore, it is 
necessary to arrive at a First Cause of all motion which itself 
is moved by no other. And, as all will understand, this First 
Mover is God." 32 

One of the objections against this argument, first advanced 
in the Middle Ages and then again in a slightly different 
form in connection with Newton's First Law of Motion or 
the Principle of Inertia, concerned the validity of the state- 
ment that "everything which is moved is moved by another." 
Does not the vertically falling body, in following the law of 
gravity, "move itself"? Does not the moving body, once it is 
in motion, persevere in it forever, without being moved by 
another ? 

As to the objection based on the Law of Inertia, it may be 
said that the infinite extension of motion which it theoretically 
implies is experimentally unverifiable, depending as it were 
on a set of conditions which can never be practically assembled. 
And as to the objection based on the Law of Gravity, St. 
Thomas Aquinas admits that the heavy body "moves itself," 
but it does so only by responding to the call or initiative of 
nature which as such is the real source of the seemingly 
spontaneous movements of bodies. These bodies "are moved 
by Him who moves nature." 33 

The second way of demonstration proceeds from the con- 
sideration of efficient causes and argues to the existence of a 
First Efficient Cause. 

We know from experience not only that there is motion 
or change in the world but also that there are relationships 
of causes and effects (cf. p. 65). In each causal relationship, 
however, the first member of a series is the cause of the 
intermediate, and the intermediate is the cause of the last. 
If the first member is eliminated, the intermediate and last 
members will of necessity be annihilated, i.e., the effects will 

"St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Thcologica, I, q. a, a. 3. 

**St Thomai Aquinas, Summa Thcologica, MI, q. 9, a. 4, ad i m . 



Demonstration of God's Existence 83 

cease to be. And as there would no longer be either causes 
or effects, the entire texture of causality would be destroyed. 
Our experience, on the other hand, testifies that there actually 
are causes and effects. And just as the waters in a river bed 
are not "self-explanatory" but require some source from which 
they flow or aggregate, so also all other effects which we 
observe are dependent on necessary causes. These causes in 
turn, however, not being self-explanatory, depend on other 
and superior causes, since nothing contingent can be its own 
cause. But we cannot go on indefinitely in such a series of 
essentially and actually subordinated causes and must, there- 
fore, eventually arrive at a First Cause which is itself un- 
caused. On this First Cause the entire series of causes depends. 
And this First Cause we call God. 

It should be emphasized that this argument makes no 
reference to any temporal regression. There is no question of 
arriving at a temporal beginning of the cause-effect relation- 
ships, but the attempt is made to account for the causal rela- 
tionships as they operate under actual conditions here and 
now. 

The third way of demonstration starts from the considera- 
tion of the contingency which we recognize in the universe 
and in its every part and explains the "conditioned" nature 
of things by referring to something which is "unconditioned" 
or necessary. 

The argument proceeds as follows: We are surrounded by 
beings, large and small, inanimate and animate, irrational and 
rational, which are all subject to continuous processes of gen- 
eration and corruption: they are now, but they were not always, 
and they can and will cease to be. Now if "everything" were 
of this kind, then the entire cosmos would be deprived of its 
foundation, and we would be led to the conclusion that at 
one time nothing at all had existed. That, however, is im- 
possible. For if at one time "nothing at all" had existed, then 
nothing at all could and would exist today. As we know 
that this is not so, our initial assumption must be false: some- 
thing necessary must always have existed and must still exist 
and must account for the existence of all contingent beings. 
And as no existent which can cease to exist can contain in itself 
the reason or cause of its own existence, every contingent 



84 Being and Reality 

being must derive the reason for its existence from something 
else. However, it is impossible to lengthen the series of such 
contingent beings to infinity. For even if we would assume 
such an infinite series, it would never suffice to account for 
itself or for any member of the series. Therefore, we must 
conclude that all contingent beings depend on the existence 
of a necessary being, a being which exists of its very nature 
or whose essence is his existence (cf. p. 57). And this Neces- 
sary Being we call God. 

We see that this argument does not proceed (as did the 
first way) from the phenomena of change, nor (as did the 
second way) from the facts of actual causal relationships, but 
from the observation of generation and corruption in finite 
beings. Considering, as it were, the very nature of finite being 
and its "conditioned" character, and discovering that it has 
its necessary support in Infinite Being this third way may 
be said to strike the central theme of the five ways of demon- 
stration. In the form of the so-called cosmological proof it 
was strongly reaffirmed by Leibniz and partly endorsed, partly 
rejected by Kant. In the "Critique of Pure Reason" the argu- 
ment from contingency appears in the following phrasing: 
"If something, whatever it be, exists, then it must also be 
admitted that something exists of necessity. For the contingent 
exists only by being conditioned by something else as by its 
cause, and from this cause we must argue further to a cause 
which in itself is not contingent and, therefore, unconditioned 
and necessary." But, having gone so far, Kant finds it impos- 
sible to conclude from a necessary being to the affirmation of 
God, the Most Real Being (ens realissimum) . He sees in such 
a conclusion a relapse into the fallacy of the ontological 
"proof" (cf. pp. 73 sq.). However, Kant is unaware that in the 
Thomistic Third Way no reference whatsoever is made to 
the Most Real Being (ens realissimum) and that, therefore, 
there is no necessity whatsoever to have recourse to St. An- 
selm's argument. St. Thomas Aquinas rather demonstrates 
here and elsewhere that in the Necessary Being essence and 
existence are identical and that for this reason existence must 
be of its very nature?* 

** Sum ma Theologica, I, 3, a. 4. 



Demonstration of God's Existence 85 

The fourth way of demonstration is of Platonic origin. It is 
found with only slight variations in St. Augustine, in Dionysius 
"the Areopagite," and in St. Albert the Great (1193-1280) 
and his school. Its conclusiveness was reaffirmed by Descartes 
and Bossuet (1627-1704). 

This time the argument proceeds from multiplicity to unity 
or from the varying degrees of perfection which are perceived 
in the universe to the absolute perfection of its First Cause. 

We recall our analysis of the transcendental properties of 
being the true, the good, the beautiful, and the one (cf. 
4) . We observe that these "transcendentals" are realized 
in different degrees in those beings which we know from 
experience. These beings are more or less true, more or less 
good, more or less beautiful, more or less unified. But while 
there are in these different beings such differing degrees of 
perfection, the transcendental attributes which are common 
to all classes of beings involve in themselves indeed "more 
or less" perfection, but no /^perfection. Thus, we know that 
there are ascending scales or hierarchical orders of truth, 
goodness, beauty, and oneness. By speaking of "more or less" 
we imply an approximation to something which is "most" 
(true, good, beautiful, one). The fact, however, that these 
transcendental attributes of being are found in different beings 
in varying degrees suggests that none of these beings can in 
and by itself account for the possession of these limited degrees 
of perfection, unless they all had received them from a being 
which possesses these perfections in an unlimited degree. The 
very fact that there are gradations of the same perfections in 
different beings indicates that these perfections have their 
source not in these beings themselves but in something else. 
For if each of these beings had its perfections by virtue of its 
own nature, then it would be difficult to see how and why 
different beings should share in the same perfections in dif- 
ferent degrees. For that which is of a being's very nature is 
possessed in the fullest degree and not "more or less." What- 
ever has its ground and reason in the nature of a thing has 
also its fullest measure of realization in that same thing. It is 
therefore necessary to find the ultimate source of the same- 
ness of these graduated perfections in all beings, and we can 
only find this source in a being whose very nature is all these 



86 Being and Reality 

perfections and thereby fully accounts for them wherever 
they occur, i.e., a being which is Being, Truth, Goodness, 
Beauty, and Oneness itself. And such a being we call God. 

In this way we have now arrived at the first member in the 
series of perfections, at that Absolute Being which by its very 
nature possesses every perfection which all other beings have 
only "borrowed" in a greater or less degree. We have also 
gained a deeper understanding of the Platonic idea of that 
ontological "participation," by means of which the multiple 
is related to the One. We have discovered that unity of pleni- 
tude from which multiplicity radiates in ever so many ways 
and directions: "All those beings which in different ways 
participate in the perfection of Being, must of necessity be 
caused by a First Being which possesses being in its plenitude. 
This is the reason why Plato remarked that unity must pre- 
cede multiplicity, and why Aristotle called that which is being 
and truth in the highest degree, the cause of all being and 
of all truth." 35 

We gather, however, from the above quotation that St. 
Thomas Aquinas went one important step further than Plato. 
For in Plato's "realm of ideas" are included not only the 
prototypes of the transcendental attributes of being which, 
as we have seen (cf. 4), converge and coincide with being 
as such, but also the prototypes of the entire realm of con- 
crete material species. St. Thomas Aquinas, on the other hand, 
ascends beyond the Platonic "realm of ideas" to the "Father 
of Ideas," i.e., to the source and origin of the transcendentals 
as well as of everything else. For him, therefore, the tran- 
scendentals as well as the concrete material species have their 
ultimate ground in the infinite knowledge and wisdom of the 
Divine Mind. 

The fifth way of demonstration has as its empirical basis 
the ordered multiplicity of things and arrives by rational argu- 
ment at a supreme ordering intelligence. It is often called the 
argument from design and is also known as the teleologiccd 
proof ( re Aos purpose, end). Its conclusive strength derives 
from the principle of finality or find causality (cf. pp. 66 sq.). 

In the concise formulation of St. Thomas Aquinas the argu- 



8 St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Thevlogica, I, 44, a. i. 



Demonstration of God's Existence 87 

ment is stated as follows: "We observe that things which lack 
thought and cognition, as for example, natural bodies, act in 
view of some definite end. This appears from the fact that 
they always or at least most of the time act in the same way 
in order to attain to that which is best for them. From this it 
is clear that they attain their end not by chance but rather 
by following a certain intention. But those things which lack 
thought and knowledge could not strive toward an end unless 
they were directed to it by some force or being which possesses 
knowledge and intelligence, as the arrow is directed by the 
archer. Therefore, an intelligent being must exist, by which 
all natural things are directed toward their end. And this 
being we call God. 36 

This closely knit presentation of the problem is not imme- 
diately evident in all its ramifications without some further 
analysis. 

We start out from the common experience that there is 
finality in nature, i.e., that we find among beings which lack 
intelligence an interrelation of means and ends, and that cer- 
tain means are utilized to attain certain ends. There is in 
nature a finality of being (static teleology), a finality of action 
(dynamic teleology), and a finality of becoming (genetic 
teleology). We know by observation that certain inanimate 
beings and certain animate (but unintelligent) beings behave 
and act in identical ways, in accordance with their respective 
natures. From this we conclude that there is in such beings 
a certain urge or "intention" to achieve definite results or to 
attain certain ends. This adaptation or suitability of means 
to ends, however, presupposes some thinking and willing force 
or being which designs these intentional interrelations, fitting 
means to ends and realizing the immanent tendencies of natu- 
ral beings. 

Thus we see that the central concept of this argument is 
the principle of finality. The "end" designates the full realiza- 
tion of tendencies which are found in die nature of things 
and which are gradually actualized in the processes of "be- 
coming." From this immanent or "internal" finality we may 
distinguish an "external" finality which refers to the ordered 



* Summa Theologica, I, q. 2, a. 3. 



88 Being and Reality 

relations which exist among natural beings and which make 
it possible for us to group them together in different classes. 
From the point of view of usefulness or serviceableness, for 
example, there exist definite relations between inorganic and 
organic nature, between plants and brutes, between brutes and 
men relations which in themselves are indicative of an hier- 
archical order, expressed in terms of greater or less value and 
perfection. 

It is undeniable, on the other hand, that, as far as "external" 
finality is concerned, there is also found in nature much ap- 
parent incongruity or inappropriateness whicn seems to mili- 
tate against the idea of an intelligently ordered and directed 
cosmos. However, it would be very unrealistic indeed to accept 
the contention of philosophic pessimism that these phenomena 
of seeming disorder are so prevalent in nature and life that 
they outweigh the phenomena of order and design. The phe- 
nomena of seeming disorder are the exception rather than 
the rule. Furthermore, it should be taken into consideration 
that something may appear to be without purpose or meaning 
to our limited intellectual comprehen ion, while in a larger 
context or when referred to the totality of means and ends 
or when viewed by a less limited ir telligence, it may have 
both meaning and value. 

The appeal to chance as a possible explanation of the ap- 
parent order of the universe has already been rejected (cf. 
p. 68). The attempt to eliminate purposes and ends from 
nature and life must of necessity lead to the annihilation of 
any and all meaningful activities. 

We have tried to demonstrate that every sort of "becoming" 
has its ground in a passage from potency to actuality, that 
only the "actual" (i.e., that which acts or is "in act") can 
"actualize," and that nothing can produce this actualization 
of and by its own nature. For this reason we now feel justified 
in calling "the end" the cause of all causes. 37 

The appeal to the facts of cosmic evolution only serves to 
substantiate the idea of finality. The evolution in the universe 
may be traced step by step from the lowest and simplest forms 
of being to an ever greater complexity, differentiation, and 



1 Cf. St. Thomas Aquinas, Sttmma TheoJogica, I- II, q. i, a. 2. 



Demonstration of God's Existence 89 

refinement of the organism, whereby the later stages always 
presuppose the earlier ones. When finally the "typical" form 
or the species of the organism is fully developed, we discover 
in it the realization of the elements of an immanent original 
preformation. Contributory factors to this end are the proc- 
esses of fertilization, the evolution of a structural pattern, and 
the differentiation of the organic system with its large complex 
of ordered functional activities (respiration, nutrition, metab- 
olism, regenerative functions, etc.). 

From all these observable orderly and purposive relations 
and organized functions and activities we now conclude that 
the material structure and composition of the universe cannot 
possibly account for the actuality of all these phenomena. Pur- 
pose and order are character marks of mind and will, and 
where there is purpose and order there must, therefore, be 
thought and volition: "The attempt to reduce the finality in 
the universe to mechanical necessity is tantamount to saying: 
the arrow need not be shot by an archer taking aim to hit 
the target, since it is hurled toward the target by the elasticity 
of the bow." 38 It is necessary then to infer from the observed 
finality in the universe the reality of a transcendent intelli- 
gence and will. Our demonstration has thus led us to the 
recognition that God exists as the Supreme and Universal 
End and the First Ruling Intelligence of all things. 

In reviewing the five ways of the demonstration of God's 
existence it may be well to stress once more the limitations 
which of necessity attach to such an undertaking. God as He 
is in Himself remains veiled in a dark mystery. We have 
merely tried to show the several ways in which He has un- 
veiled Himself in the works of His creation. And, secondly, 
we hope to have proved that the created universe, not being 
self-explanatory, stands in need of an absolute raison d'etre, 
of a necessary and infinitely potent support. Thus, while we 
do not claim to have contributed to the comprehension of 
God's essence, we have tried to demonstrate the necessity of 
His existence. And while for a limited intelligence as ours it 
will always remain impossible to comprehend the incompre- 
hensible, it is nevertheless possible to understand and explain 
the necessary existence of that which as such is incomprc- 

"*St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Thtologica, I, q. 103, a. i. 



90 Being and Reality 

hensible, to recognize that there is an incomprehensible being 
which accounts for and makes more or less intelligible all 
other beings. For without God the world could only be viewed 
as an accidentally accrued and, in the last analysis, meaning- 
less texture of nonentities (i.e., it could not be explained at 
all), while with God the frail contingency of beings is an- 
chored, sheltered, and vitally sustained in the fatherly embrace 
of an Eternal Being. 

13. The Nature of Man 

THE fifth way of the demonstration of God's existence 
brought into plain view the structure of an ordered uni- 
verse and pointed to the Eternal Reason working in it and 
behind it. We have thus recognized this universe as composed 
of graduated genera and species of beings which, individually 
and collectively, reveal in their natures varying degrees of 
the absolute perfection of their creator. The more intimately 
these created beings participate in the perfection of the Supreme 
Being, the higher is their rank in the hierarchically ordered 
universe. In this universal order of creation everything is 
relative or contingent with regard to that Being which alone 
is absolute and necessary and which as such absolutely tran- 
scends the confines and natures of all classes of created beings. 

In this graduated and ascending scale of beings, a rather 
unique position seems to have been allotted to that being 
which we call human. Man quite evidently is deeply inter- 
woven with the various gradations of being, and while in 
some respects he appears to master and direct other types 
and classes of beings, in other respects he depends on them 
and is subservient to them. And while he possesses certain 
powers or faculties which clearly mark him off from other 
created beings, he shares with all of them their relativity and 
contingency with regard to the Absolute and Necessary Being. 

The ability to think or to philosophize being unquestionably 
one of the prerogatives of man, it is natural for the phi- 
losopher, in availing himself of this privilege, to try to answer 
for himself and for his fellow humans the question: "What 
is man?" 



Nature of Man 91 

The main tenets of any philosophical system depend to a 
large extent on a philosopher's idea of God, but they depend 
equally on his definition of man (cf. p. 14), this definition 
expressing and bearing in itself a necessary relation to the idea 
of God. 

What, then, is man? Taking into account die results of 
our previous metaphysical analyses and considering all that 
we can know and learn about man rationally and experi- 
mentally, it would seem that man's place is in the very center 
of the universe. While, on the one hand, he unites and collects 
in himself the simpler and more material grades and types 
of being (mineral, vegetative, sentient), he mirrors, on the 
other hand, the more complex and spiritual types of being. 
For St. Thomas Aquinas as well as for Pascal man marks the 
point of intersection of matter and spirit, both of which are 
united and reflected in him as in a focus. This rather mysteri- 
ous union of two seemingly mutually exclusive principles is 
usually described by saying that man is composed of body and 
soul. If then we want to understand the nature of man, it 
will be necessary to explain what is meant by these terms and 
to describe as adequately as possible the way in which body 
and soul are joined together in the human being. 

A) THE LIFE PRINCIPLE AND ITS FUNCTIONS 

The gradations of being, into which man's nature is some- 
how and somewhere inserted and integrated, reach from pure 
potency to pure actuality. These ontological gradations lie, as 
it were, between two extremes: at the one end of the scale is 
that which is completely indefinite because it lacks any actual 
determination, while at the other end of the scale is that which 
is absolutely infinite because of its being unlimited by any kind 
of potentiality. The completely indetermined and indefinite is 
unknowable because of its neighborhood to nothingness, while 
the essence of the Infinite is unknowable because of its un- 
limited plenitude. 

Confining our attention to the total realm of animate beings, 
we are able to distinguish three different classes: (i) those 
beings which are purely vegetative; (2) those beings which 
are vegetative and sentient; (3) those beings which are vege- 
tative, sentient, and rational or intellectual. All the members 



92 Being and Reality 

of these classes of beings have in common some vital principle 
of activity or motion which in a most general sense we may 
call their life principle. This life principle, however, is found 
in differing degrees in different classes of beings, and the life 
of these beings is the more perfect the more autonomously 
they possess and exercise this vital activity or motion. While 
plants undoubtedly are vitally active in the processes of nutri- 
tion and growth, their activities are initiated not by themselves 
but result from their obedience to natural laws. Brutes, like 
plants, are vitally active, but their activities involve the utiliza- 
tion of innate natural tendencies and instincts as well as of 
certain forms of sense knowledge which facilitate and aid their 
movements toward specific ends. Rational beings, like plants 
and brutes, are vitally active, but their activities are almost 
entirely autonomous in that they derive in their larger part 
from the intellectual knowledge of freely chosen ends and 
from the free adoption of means proportionate to these ends. 
An absolutely autonomous activity can only be predicated of 
God, i.e., of an infinite being whose incentives and ends have 
tKeir ground, their being, and their consummation entirely 
within its own nature. 

The life principle which is revealed in the varying activities 
or movements of different grades of being is what Aristotle 
and St. Thomas Aquinas have designated as the soul. And all 
the activities which flow from "the soul" of a being testify 
once more to the universal tendency of being and goodness 
to diffuse and communicate themselves. It is this "soul" or 
thf: principle of a being's life which constitutes that being in 
its species and in its substantial form, i.e., in the substantial 
unity of its nature and in all those lawful activities or move- 
ments which this nature entails, such as are involved in the 
processes of adaptation, evolution, regeneration, and procreation. 

If we define with Aristotle the soul as "the first act (i.e., 
the substantial form) of a physical body," 39 we imply in this 
definition that the soul is the activating principle of a physi- 
cal body. It seems necessary, however, to specify further the 
nature of the functions of soul and body and their respective 
share in the activities of animate beings. For Aristotle and St. 
Thomas Aquinas soul and body are united like act and potency 

m DC anima, I, 412, b. 5. 



Nature of Man 93 

and like form and matter, to form one substantially unified 
and animated body. The question as to how "soul" is con- 
joined with and moves "body" becomes meaningless as soon 
as it is recognized that soul and body form one unified (though 
composite) being and that consequently the activity of the 
soul is an activity of the composite "soul-body." The soul then 
may be described as an active "form" which acts in and 
through the specific nature of the composite or "mixed" or- 
ganic being. As the first principle of the composite's activity 
the soul determines the vital motion as well as the end of the 
organism. 

By insisting on the vital union of soul and body in the com- 
posite animate being, Aristotelian and Thomistic psychology 
avoids the extreme positions of monistic materialism, on the 
one hand, and of dualistic, Platonic or Cartesian, spiritualism, 
on the other. 

B) WHAT IS KNOWLEDGE? 

Among the three classes of animate beings vegetative, 
sentient, and rational the members of the second and third 
group possess the faculty of cognition. They are not only 
vitally moving and active organisms but knowing organisms 
as well, i.e., they are subjects which can and actually do know 
certain objects. The question then necessarily arises: "What 
is knowledge, and how does it come about?" 

In a very general sense it may be said that in the process 
of knowing an expansion of being takes place, making it pos- 
sible for one specific nature (the knower) to experience and 
share in another specific nature (the known). This definition 
of knowledge is implied in the saying of Aristotle, reaffirmed 
by St. Thomas Aquinas, that "the soul is [or can become] in 
some way all things" (anima est quodammodo omnia). 40 The 
subject which receives into itself the "form" of the object in 
some way "becomes" that object, a process resulting in a 
mysterious synthesis of the two natures of the knower and 
the known. It may thus be seen why all knowledge acquired 
by a knowing subject leads to an expansion or enlargement 
of this subject's being. 

Now evidently in the case of a subject's cognizing mate- 

* Summa Thcologica, I, q. 14, a. i. 



94 Being and Reality 

rial objects what is received by the knowing subject is not the 
material object itself but its dematerialized or immaterial form. 
Such an immaterial form, however, can only be received by a 
subject which itself is to some extent immaterial. Thus, an 
animal, "knowing" some other animal or some article of 
food, does not receive into itself these objects in their material 
entities unless or until the animal were to devour these objects 
and thereby absorb them physically and materially. Such physi- 
cal absorption, however, is something entirely different from 
what may be called a "cognitive union" with material objects. 
The observation that in the process of knowing the subject 
in a way "becomes" the object suggests that the mere faculty 
of cognition is related to actual knowledge as potency is re- 
lated to act or as matter is related to form. Thus we may say 
that the faculty of cognition is "actualized" by the form of 
the cognized object, and before this actualization took place 
the faculty was in the state of pure potency. This inner rela- 
tionship between possible and actual knowledge a knowl- 
edge "actualized" by its objects is indicative of the profound 
kinship which exists between all the subjects and all the ob- 
jects of knowledge, a kinship which led Aristotle 41 and St. 
Thomas Aquinas 42 to the assertion that because of this close 
interrelation and correlation between being and knowing 
without a subject there would be no object. This statement, 
however, should not be misconstrued as implying some form 
of philosophical idealism. It rather rests on the basic Thomistic 
conviction that all things arc knowable only because they are 
ortological manifestations of God's supreme knowledge. There- 
fore, without the Eternal Ideas of the Divine subject there 
would not only be no knowable objects but no objects at all: 
"God's knowledge is the cause of all things" (scientia Dei cst 
causa rerum). 43 Thus we sec that the knowing subject and 
the known object are akin because both participate in the 
plenitude of Transcendental Being. And in the process of 
cognition the subject mysteriously "becomes" the object, and 
the object "becomes" the subject without cither of them losing 
their identity. 

41 IV Phys., lect. 23. 

43 Summa Theologica, I, 14, a. 8. 

** Summa Theologica, loc. ctt. 



Nature of Man 95 

C) INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE 

Among the three classes of animate beings vegetative, 
sentient, rational the members of the third group possess 
not only sense knowledge but also intellectual knowledge. 
While all animals have sense knowledge, only man the 
rational animal has intellectual knowledge. While sense 
knowledge extends to and includes all the particular corporeal 
objects which act upon the sense organs, intellectual knowl- 
edge extends to and includes all the forms or essences which 
are abstracted from corporeal objects. What then precisely 
do we mean by intellectual knowledge? 

To answer this question we must first of all inquire into 
the nature of the intellect. We have seen that knowledge in 
general is consummated in a kind of vital union between the 
knower and the known, a union in which the subject in a 
way "becomes" the object without losing its own identity. 
But if the subject is potentially capable of knowing or "be- 
coming' all things, it cannot be actually any of them. Now 
the intellect, as is evidenced by experience, can potentially 
\now or "become" all corporeal beings, and it therefore can- 
not actually be any of them. In other words, the intellect 
cannot be corporeal or material. The intellect rather must be 
some power outside and above material bodies. And the mark 
of intellectual knowledge is an internal presence of objects 
freed from the particular individuating characteristics and 
conditions of time, number, and matter. No organic or mate- 
rial faculty could possibly account for such an abstract knowl- 
edge of the natures or essences of things. We therefore con- 
clude that the intellect must be incorporeal or immaterial. 

It should be emphasized, on the other hand, that all intel- 
lectual knowledge, i.e., the knowledge of universal ideas, 
natures, or essences, has its roots in sense \nowledge. The intel- 
lect, confronted with a multitude of sensible objects, distin- 
guishes between substances and accidents, causes and effects, 
means and ends. Applying the immanent first principles of 
thinking and being (the principles of identity, contradiction, 
excluded middle, sufficient reason [cf. 3]), the intellect 
proceeds, by means of abstraction, analysis, synthesis, and 
analogy, to the formation of concepts, judgments, and conclu- 



g6 Being and Reality 

sions, and in this way it eventually acquires its knowledge of 
material essences as well as of suprasensible realities (the soul, 
the existence of God, the moral law, etc.). The intellect thus, 
by virtue of its inherent powers, rises above the sensible and 
acquires mastery over it. 

The insistence on the metabiological nature of the intellect, 
on the one hand, and on its being involved in biological and 
organic movements and activities, on the other, will help us 
avoid the two pitfalls of integral materialism and exaggerated 
spiritualism. We know from medical and psychiatric research 
to what extent the intellect shares in the health or disease of 
the physical organism. While then it would obviously be a 
mistake to call the intellect an organic faculty, it would be 
equally erroneous to describe it as a faculty which is unrelated 
to or dissociated from the organism. Hylomorphism or the 
theory of matter and form (cf. 8) offers, if applied to 
the mind-body problem, a "via media" in a "formal mate- 
rialism" in which both the intellect and the corporeal organism 
receive their due. 44 We arrive then at the conclusion that the 
intellect for the exercise of its proper functions needs and 
uses the entire sensory organism of the body. 

However, in order to be able to abstract the universal natures 
or essences from concrete material objects, the intellect must 
not only passively receive sense stimuli from without but it 
must also respond to these stimuli actively from within. The 
intellect, once it is "informed" by the senses, immediately 
begins to react and in turn to work upon the material fur- 
nished by the senses. This reactive spontaneity of the intellect 
is attributed by Thomistic philosophy to a special intellectual 
force which is properly called the "active intellect" (intdlectus 
agens). It is the function of the "active intellect" to "demate- 
rialize" the material objects as they are presented by sense 
perception and imagination, i.e., to abstract from them their 
universal forms, ideas, or natures. 

This rather complicated process of intellectual cognition 
may be further clarified by the following consideration: The 
concretely existing thing is itself the actualization and indi- 
vidualization of a universal form or idea; it is an idea em- 

**Thc term "formal materialism" is used by Mortimer J. Adler in his constructive 
criticism of Marxian materialism. Cf. What Man Has Made of Man (New York: 
Longmans, Green, 1937), p. i66sq. 



Nature of Man 97 

ded in the pure receptivity of matter. As an individual and 
crete thing it no longer possesses that universality, neces- 
, and transcendence which could make it a proper object 
ntellectual knowledge. If then this individual thing is to 
revived in the intellect in the universal and essential qual- 

> of its nature, it must be "disembodied," i.e., it must re- 
>e its "descent" into matter by an "ascent" from material 
ividuation to ideal universality and transcendence. And it 
he function of the "active intellect" to "draw out" (ab- 
et) of the individual its universal idea or form. St. Thomas 
ainas, for whom, as we have seen (cf. p. 94), God is the 
mate cause of all intellectual knowledge, and for whom 
ry active principle in the last analysis depends on the "first 
lality" of God, describes the "active intellect" as "a light 
ived from God" (lumen derivatum a Deo). 

THE HUMAN SOUL 

Vc are now in a position to resume our discussion of the 
principle in animate beings and to apply the information 
have gained on the nature of the intellect to our inquiry 

> the life principle in man, i.e., the human soul. 

"he life principle in man differs from the life principle in 
er animals in that it is a principle of intellectual activity 
[ in that such an activity is indicative of a new positive 
Fection or actual power, of which other animals are devoid. 
is new power manifests itself in the capacity for forming 
versal and immaterial concepts (faculty of abstraction) ; 
the capacity for expressing these concepts in the symbols 
language (faculty of speech); in the capacity for creating 
inite but varying forms and patterns of individual and 
ial life and civilization; and in the capacity for acquiring 
nowledge and consciousness of one's own self (faculty of 
ection and introspection). 

F such are the activities and manifestations of the life prin- 
.e in man, there must be a corresponding and underlying 
iciple of being, from which these activities emanate; for 
hing always acts in accordance with what it is (operari 
uitur esse). And since these activities obviously do not and 
not have their raison d'etre in the material body, there 
st exist an incorporeal and substantial principle of intel- 



98 Being and Reality 

lectual operations. And this principle we call the human soul: 
"That which is the immanent principle of our intellectual 
operations (and which we call the human soul) is a cer- 
tain incorporeal and subsistent (independent, substantial) 
principle." 45 

Such a conclusion naturally cannot be admitted by those 
philosophers who either deny the reality of substances alto- 
gether (phenomenalism: Locke, Hume, Taine, etc.) or at- 
tribute substantiality only to the Divine or Absolute Mind 
(pantheistic monism: Spinoza, Hegel, E. v. Hartmann, etc.). 
Both these views, however, seem to be at odds with common 
sense as well as with the testimony of human consciousness 
which strongly affirms the substantial unity of the individual 
soul as a subsistent source of its multiform activities. 

The individual human soul, being contingent, and having 
like all created substances, its beginning in time, might con- 
ceivably also be of only limited and temporal duration. From 
the mere concept of the soul as the life principle in man, 
its incorruptibility or immortality does not necessarily follow. 
It is for this reason that Plato's arguments for the immortality 
of the human soul 46 are unconvincing. For him the soul's 
kinship with the Divine, with the realm of Eternal Ideas, 
establishes and guarantees its incorruptibility, and from his 
belief in the pre-existence of the soul before its descent into 
the body, he deduces its after-existence. Logically inconclusive 
is his further contention that the soul can never die because 
life is its essential immanent principle. Plato is on much safer 
ground when he points to the substantial unity of the soul, 
as evidenced in the way in which it rules over the body. 

Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas base their arguments on 
the demonstration of the simplicity and immateriality of the 
human soul, on the independence or autonomy of some of 
its functions and activities, on its capacity for embracing time- 
less truth, and on its unquenchable desire for complete and 
permanent happiness or beatitude. 

One of the several metaphysical arguments for the immor- 
tality of the human soul is based on its substantiality, sim- 



45 St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologtca, I, q. 75, a. 2. 

48 In the Platonic Dialogues "Phaidon," "Phaidrus," "Menon," and the "Republic." 



Nature of Man 99 

plicity, immateriality, and spirituality: We have seen that the 
activities of sense perception are acts of the composite "ani- 
mate body" or "embodied soul" (cf. pp. 92 sq.), and as the 
modes of action always correspond to the modes of being, a life 
principle which does not subsist and act independently does 
not require an independent mode of being. Thus the soul of 
brutes is entirely wrapped up, so to speak, in the composite 
"soul-body," and the dissolution or corruption of the com- 
posite involves body and soul, the latter being once more re- 
duced to the state of the pure potentiality of matter. 

The human soul, on the other hand, exercising an intel- 
lectual activity of its own, is a "pure form" (forma sui gen- 
eris} , and requires for its functions and activities a corre- 
spondingly independent or autonomous mode of being. Thus 
the destruction of the human body does not involve the soul 
which, not depending in its subsistence on the body, survives 
the corruption of the corporeal organism. Not being composed 
of quantitative material parts, the human soul bears within 
itself no principle of disintegration or corruptibility. 

But is it not conceivable that the human soul might be an- 
nihilated by the very cause which gave it being, viz., the effi- 
cient causality of God ? But such a cessation of Divine causality 
and activity could hardly be reconciled with the wisdom of 
an infinitely perfect being. For such an action on the part 
of the Deity would imply the destruction of an intellectual 
nature which as such was initially endowed with the character 
of perpetuity. To enhance the appeal of this line of reasoning, 
St. Thomas Aquinas quotes Dionysius "the Arcopagite" to 
this effect: "For the sake of the radiance of Divine Goodness 
the intelligible and intelligent substances have acquired being 
and are and live and have unceasing and undiminishing life, 
being devoid of the otherwise universal corruptibility and 
death, and being raised above every unstable flux and 
change/* 7 

A second metaphysical argument for the immortality of the 
human soul is based on the innate tendency of all being to 
endure, on what Schopenhauer (1788-1860) called the uni- 
versal "will to live" (Willc zum Lebcri). In beings endowed 
with the faculty of cognition (sense knowledge and/or intel- 

47 Summa Contr* Gentiles, II, 55; and Dionysius, DC Divinis Nominibus, IV, I, x. 



ioo Being and Reality 

lectual knowledge) this tendency assumes the form of a desire. 
But whereas brutes know only individual or particular things 
and, therefore, also desire only the individual or particular, 
the rational animal, being capable of knowing universals, com- 
prehends and desires being as such. Man not only desires life 
here and now, but he desires life as such. And such a desire 
of human nature for permanent duration cannot be in vain: 
it achieves its fruition in the immortal life of the human soul. 

A third argument, partly metaphysical and partly moral, 
represents a further elaboration of some particular aspects of 
the second. The German poet Goethe (1749-1832) wrote: 
"My conviction of our immortality is derived from the idea 
of activity; for if I strive and work unceasingly to the very 
end of my days, then nature is obliged to assign to me another 
form of existence as soon as my present form of life can no 
longer support my spirit." 48 Nature, of course, cannot supply, 
but God can make good a desire which He Himself has im- 
planted in the soul. 

The main basis of this argument is the natural desire of 
man for the true and the good and for the lasting happiness 
resulting from the attainment and inalienable possession of 
truth and goodness. Such goals or ends, however, elevate the 
metaphysical and moral desire of man above and beyond the 
world of matter and sense to the realm of permanent being 
and value. And a desire for such ends, if it is essentially in- 
nate in the human soul, cannot be in vain t v at rather testifies 
to the incorruptibility and immortality of man's soul. 

If then the human soul is immortal, the question as to the 
nature of this immortality or as to the nature of the future 
existence of the soul arises immediately. Is philosophy as such 
in a position to offer any valid answer? 

If the soul really survives the death of the body, it would 
seem that the human being is divided on the occasion of 
physical death and therefore les: complete than it was in its 
actual life on this earth. Plato tried to resolve this difficulty by 
defining the soul as the complete and true man and by re- 
garding the body merely as an organ of the soul and not as 
an essential constituent part of man. Christian theology, on 

**J. P. Eckermann, Conversations with Goethe (Feb. 4, 1829). 



Nature of Man 101 

the other hand, teaches the resurrection of the flesh and there- 
with the eventual reunion of body and soul. Philosophy, how- 
ever, cannot have recourse to the source of revelation but, 
being a rational science, has to work out its own solution 
independently. 

Now all philosophy knows is that man dies; it does not 
know whether or not his body is ever restored or regenerated. 
However, philosophy also knows, as we have seen, that not 
everything of man and in man dies: it knows that the soul, 
the very life principle of his body, survives. But what shall 
or can we say of the activities of a "disembodied" soul? Are 
such activities even conceivable? We know that the soul is 
so enmeshed in the functions and organs of the body that 
physical disease may partially or wholly destroy the activity 
of the intellectual principle in man, by impairing the instru- 
mental conditions on which sensation, imagination, memory, 
and all normal experience depend. 

St. Thomas Aquinas attempts to answer this pertinent ques- 
tion by distinguishing between psychological activities whose 
functioning depends on the body, and specifically intellectual 
activities which as such are independent of the body: "Those 
activities which depend on the body, will perish: such is the 
fate of sense experience, imagination, actual memory, and the 
passions; but the specifically intellectual activities, such as 
thought and volition, do not perish. . . . They no longer find 
the conditions of their activities in the functioning of the 
senses but are directed towards higher actualities. ... It is, 
however, to be noted that the disembodied soul differs from 
the soul which is united with the body in both its activity and 
its being. For everything acts in accordance with what it is; 
and although the being of the human soul, as long as it is 
united with the body, subsists independently, the body never- 
theless provides for it a certain foundation and support." 49 

Thus it may be said that the intellectual activities of the 
disembodied soul will be directed toward God, the absolute 
source of being and knowledge, without making use of the 
intermediary sources of sense experience and imagination. For 
the primary source of all intelligibility is above material nature 
and beyond that knowledge which is mediated by the sense! 

* Summa Contra Gentiles, I, 81. 



102 Being and Reality 

E) SOUL AND BODY 

Our foregoing considerations have led us to the conclusion 
that there are in man two realities soul and body. These two 
are united in such a way as to form one being called man, 
and it now will be our task to determine the nature of that 
union cfr, in other words, to explain how it can be that im- 
material and material being, qualitative unextended being and 
quantitative extended being are joined into one. 

Such an explanation has been attempted by different philo- 
sophical schools and systems, proposing in one way or other 
either a monistic or a dualistic solution of the problem. 

Psychological monism acknowledges that soul and body 
differ phenomenally in their modes of action but maintains 
that nevertheless they are essentially identical, being two modal- 
ities or manifestations of one and the same principle. This 
principle is either defined as matter (materialistic monism) or 
as mind or spirit (spiritualistic and idealistic monism), where- 
by the term "mind" or "spirit" is usually derived from some 
more or less pantheistically conceived Absolute Mind or World 
Soul, as in the systems of Plotinus (203-269), Spinoza, Schel- 
ling, Hegel, etc. Materialistic monism regards mind or spirit 
as a form or appearance of matter, while spiritualistic and 
idealistic monism regards matter either as a mode of spirit 
or merely as an illusion. The monistic explanation in either 
of these forms appears inadmissible on the bases of our previ- 
ous argumentation. 

Psychological dualism, on the other hand, holds that soul 
and body arc two co-ordinated but independent and essentially 
different realities. For Plato soul and body are only accidentally 
united, as a pilot is united with his ship or as a charioteer is 
united with his chariot The soul is temporarily imprisoned 
in the body and is truly itself only when freed from the mate- 
rial weight of the body. An equally extreme dualism is main- 
tained by Descartes, for whom soul and body are two com- 
plete, separate, and independent substances, the nature of the 
soul being pure thought, the nature of the body being pure 
extension. For Descartes, therefore, the body is nothing but 
a soulless mechanism or machine. The "occasionalists," Geul- 
incx and Malebranchc, accepting the principles of Cartesian 



Nature of Man 103 

dualism but finding it, like Descartes himself, impossible to 
account for the interaction of soul and body in the sensitive 
and intellectual operations of man, called upon the direct in- 
tervention of God: the mechanical movements of the human 
body "occasion" God to cause the corresponding movements 
or activities of the human soul. Such an "occasionalism," 
however, annihilating the efficient causality of creatures, must 
logically lead and has actually always led to some form of inte- 
gral pantheism. 

In all these dualistic systems a theory of psychophysicd par- 
allelism is implied. Leibniz, too, in his idea of a "pre-estab- 
lished harmony" among all the "monads" of the universe, 
with God as its author, assumes a parallelism rather than a 
mutual interaction of physical and psychological processes. 
Psychophysical parallelism was methodically and systemati- 
cally developed in the nineteenth century, especially by the 
German philosophers G. T. Fechner (1801-1887) and W. 
Wundt (1832-1920) and exerted great influence on experi- 
mental psychology. This theory, denying any causal influence 
of mind on body and vice versa, asserts that the two series of 
mental and physical operations are exactly parallel but causally 
self-sufficient and independent of each other. However, both 
common sense and scientific psychology controvert such an 
artificial and arbitrary explanation of the mind-body problem. 

In the Aristotelian-Thomistic views on the union of soul 
and body we find once more an avoidance of the extreme 
positions of spiritualism and materialism. The proposed solu- 
tion satisfies both common sense and science. And once again 
the ontological concepts of form and matter serve to throw 
light on the intimate and vital communion which exists be- 
tween the soul and its body. St. Thomas Aquinas follows Aris- 
totle in defining the human soul as the "act" or substantial 
form of an organic body This means that man is neither 
exclusively body nor exclusively soul but a composite of both, 
in which body is related to soul as matter to its form. 

In the human composite the soul is the form or the life 
principle which makes man the being he is: it is the root 
principle of his functions and activities, not only of his thought 



M Summa Theologica, I, q. 75, a. 2 and 3. 



104 Being and Reality 

and volition but also of his sensitive and vegetative functions. 
If this life principle is withdrawn, these functions cease, and 
the human body is no longer the human being. It is therefore 
not the human soul which thinks and wills, and it is not the 
human body which develops and grows and feels, but it is 
always the entire man, the soul-body composite, which exer- 
cises all of these functions. 

Furthermore: from the fact that neither the soul nor the 
body is the man, it follows that both the soul and the body 
are incomplete substances and that only the composite "man" 
is a complete and unified substance. 

Finally: if the soul is the substantial form of the human 
body, it is necessary that the body which is "informed" by 
the soul be proportionate or commensurate to its soul. And 
as it is matter which individualizes form (cf. pp. 44 and 59), we 
conclude that // is the body which individualizes the soul mate- 
rially, in accordance with the body's physical proportions and 
conditions, as determined by material generation and the laws 
of heredity; it is the spirit, however, and, more precisely, the 
creative act and causality of the Divine Spirit which individual- 
izes man formally in his spirituality and imparts to him the 
character of personality. 

Thus the proportions and conditions of human bodies "oc- 
casion" the specific character of the form or soul which is to 
be united to that particular body. The specific individual char- 
acter of the soul therefore depends on the material poten- 
tialities which the body, according to its physical constitution, 
can provide for it. And as the parents are the generators or 
givers of the child's body, they also are preparing and in a 
certain sense "conditioning" the child's soul. From this con- 
ditioning material "fixation" of the form character of the 
individual soul it may be concluded that, even after its with- 
drawal from the body, the soul retains that measure and form 
which it had in its embodied state: it remains individualized, 
by virtue of that same matter to which it owed its original 
bodily individuation and whose potentialities the soul had 
informed and actualized. 

F) THE ORIGIN OF THE HUMAN SOUL 
Our last question concerns the origin of the human soul. 



Nature of Man 105 

This question might logically be asked either at the beginning 
or at the end of a discussion of the nature of the human soul. 
We relegate it to the end, because this question becomes mean- 
ingful only after we have recognized and admitted that the 
human soul is a spiritual form and an individual substance 
and not a derivative of matter or of the body. 

The history of philosophic and philosophico-religious thought 
shows that the ideas relating to the origin of the human soul 
vary greatly. We are able, however, to distinguish four major 
theories: 

1) Theory of pre-existence and transmigration (metempsy- 
chosis). Plato took over from Pythagoras (f circa. 497 B.C.) 
the idea that the human souls, once created in a certain num- 
ber, migrate from body to body to atone for some mysterious 
guilt associated with their pre-existence. Similar convictions 
prevail in the teachings of Hindoo and Buddhist thought and 
in the doctrines of the theosophists. Now if it is admitted that 
body and soul together form one essentially united composite, 
then it is impossible for the soul to become essentially united 
or related to more than one body. On the basis of the Aris- 
totelian and Thomistic explanation of the soul-body relation- 
ship the theory of transmigration is therefore unacceptable. 

2) The Theory of Emanation. According to Plotinus and 
his school of Neo-Platonism, the human soul is an emanation 
of the world soul which in turn emanates from a supreme 
spiritual principle of oneness, goodness, beauty, brightness, 
and power. For the Neo-Platonist, matter is the darkness of 
absolute not-being or pure negation and privation and there- 
fore identical with evil as such (spiritual monism), and the 
human soul, disengaging itself from matter by the arduous 
practices of asceticism, returns eventually to its original source. 
Similar theories of emanation were espoused by the gnostic 
and Manichaean sects of Christian antiquity. Emanationist 
likewise is Leibniz's "theory of involution," according to 
which the individual human souls are "enveloped" or "in- 
volved" in the soul of the first man, being developed or 
"evolved" in the successive processes of generation. Schopen- 
hauer and E. von Hartmann, partly under the influence of 
Buddhist thought, also taught a kind of emanation in which 
and by which the pre-existing souls emerge from a subcon- 



106 Being and Reality 

scious to a conscious state. Viewing emanationism critically, 
it must be said that it can be defended only on the presupposi- 
tion that spiritual beings are divisible and therefore can give 
forth parts of their own substance. This presupposition, how- 
ever, is inadmissible on the bases of our previous considerations. 

3) The Theory of Generation. The advocates of the theory 
of generation maintain that the human soul originates as the 
effect of and in conjunction with an act of material generation 
and that this act of generation is its only efficient cause. It is 
said that the infant souls "emanate" from the parent souls by 
virtue of the "plastic force" of the parental germ. This theory 
denies implicitly or explicitly the substantiality, immateriality, 
spirituality, and simplicity of the human soul. It also runs 
counter to the law of causality which precludes the possibility 
of a material cause producing a spiritual effect. 

4) The Theory of Creation. According to St. Thomas 
Aquinas, the mode of "becoming" must correspond to the 
mode of being. 51 If then the human soul is a spiritual being, 
intrinsically independent of material causation, the mode of 
its origin or its "becoming" must likewise be independent of 
material conditions. Therefore, a purely material change or 
transformation such as is implied in an act of physical 
generation could never account for the "becoming" of a 
human soul. Nevertheless, we know that the soul, having its 
natural mode of existence in the body, must have had a be- 
ginning no less than the body with which it forms a sub- 
stantial union. Such a beginning, however, having its cause 
neither in the soul itself nor in matter, must be an "absolute" 
beginning. Such an "absolute" beginning of the limited and 
finite being of the human soul must have its raison d'etre in 
the Absolute Being of the First Cause, i.e., in God. The ex- 
planation by way of creation, therefore, concludes that the 
human soul is created by God and "infused" into the human 
body. This is what Aristotle had in mind when he said that 
at the time of the material generation of the human indi- 
vidual the soul comes into the body "from outside as through 
a door" (Qvpatiev), to unite itself with a predisposed matter. 
Thus, in the generation of a human being two generative 



01 Summa Theologica, I, 90, a. 2. 



'Nature of Man 107 

principles concur: the act of material human generation and 
the creative activity of God. The parents, in other words, co- 
operate with the First Cause of all being in the generation of 
the complete individual substance called "man," a process in 
which the activities of the secondary causes are accompanied, 
embraced, supported, and supplemented by the all-pervasive 
vital activity of the First Cause. 



Chapter Two 

HUMAN ACTION AND 
MORAL VALUES 

(Ethics) 



14. Thinking and Doing (Metaphysics 
and Ethics) 

IN OUR metaphysical analysis we have recognized man as 
a being composed of body and soul, placed in the very 
center of the universe, at a point where matter and spirit 
intersect (cf. p. 91). We tried to understand and to describe 
as nearly as possible the nature of these two constituent parts 
of the human composite, and it now becomes our task to study 
in some detail the modes of action of a being thus composed. 

Speaking in a most general sense, we may say that human 
nature is like the rest of created natures in that they all follow 
the fundamental laws of being. These laws can be discovered 
by exploring the nature of being as such as expressed in the 
graduated order of beings. And as all beings act in accordance 
with their natures (operari scquitur esse), we can best under- 
stand the meaning of the manifold activities of different beings 
by referring these activities directly to their physical and meta- 
physical roots in the structure and constitution of their natures. 

Human activities or acts, accordingly, must likewise be re- 
garded as flowing directly from the physical and metaphysical 
roots of human nature. But while subrational creatures are 
guided to the attainment of their natural ends by the wisdom 
of their maker, man the rational animal has been given 
the light of reason and with it and in it the power of self- 
determination or free choice, enabling and obligating him to 
be his own guicTe on the way to the perfection of his nature 
or his end, while in turn submitting to the divine guidance. He 

108 



Thinking and Doing 109 

cannot truly actualize his potentialities as a human being 
unless he is himself fully aware of his human perfectibility 
as well as of his limitations and imperfections. Mistaking him- 
self, for example, for either pure spirit or pure matter, he 
necessarily misjudges his own nature and its possibilities, the 
means at his disposal and the ends within his reach. 

It is at this juncture then that moral philosophy assumes 
its specific role, linking action to being, doing to thinking, 
ethics to metaphysics, and posing the all-important question 
as to how rational animals can guide themselves to their 
proper ends. And if, as we have said, all activities, including 
all human acts, flow from the natures of created beings, then 
it is the order of being and reality which establishes an un- 
shakable norm for the order of action or the moral order. And 
it is that same order of reality which exacts sanction and retri- 
bution whenever its laws are violated in the sphere of human 
action. 

This primacy of the laws of being and reality over the rules 
of action or conduct extends to every kind of human activity: 
it applies to individuals and groups, to the spheres of law, 
politics, and economics, to national and international life. In 
every field of human behavior and endeavor the ontological 
order or the order of being sets the rules and norms for the 
practical or moral order. The nature of a thing (its being) 
determines the modes of its activity, and the supreme cate- 
gories of being (cf . 5) retain their validity in the sphere 
of action. 

Now, in our discussion of the law of causality, we have 
learned that "every agent acts in view of an end" (cf. pp. 66 
sq.) and that in doing so it strives for a perfection or "a good," 
in the attainment of which it actualizes its own potentialities. 
And we have seen that, while all agents share in this general 
striving toward perfection, different classes of agents strive 
for essentially different ends and attain them in different ways. 
Inanimate beings attain their ends or "their good" in blind 
obedience to the laws of their natures; beings endowed with 
sense knowledge strive for the particular ends or "goods" 
suitable to their natures in following and satisfying their "sense 
appetite"; and beings endowed with intellectual knowledge or 
a capacity for comprehending goad as such are prompted to 



no Human Action and Moral Values 

strive for their perfection or end by an "intellectual (rational) 
appetite" commonly designated as volition or "the will." "Some 
beings," writes St. Thomas Aquinas, "are so constituted by 
God that they have intellects, and in this sense they are like 
Him and made in His image. These beings are not only 
guided to their end but also guide themselves by means of 
their actions. If, in guiding themselves, they submit to the 
divine guidance, they reach with this aid the fullness of their 
perfection; but if they choose to follow some other road, they 
do not arrive at their destination." 1 

It appears evident then that, as stated above (cf. p. 67), to 
different classes of agents correspond different kinds of "goods" 
as well as different "ends." And in accordance with what has 
been established concerning the relationship existing between 
being and action, to the greater perfection of being corresponds 
a more perfect mode of action. And thus we find in the order 
of action the same hierarchical or graduated scale that we 
have previously recognized in the order of being: "The less 
perfect devotes itself to the service of the more perfect. Plants 
use the soil for nourishment, brutes use the plants, and man 
makes use of both plants and brutes. It is therefore natural for 
man to rule over brutes. For that which is inferior is always 
dominated by that which is superior." 2 

In saying this we merely reaffirm that the "Principle of 
Order" applies to creatures universally. But while the order 
of the subrational and irrational universe is entirely in God's 
keeping, the order in the moral universe or in the various 
fields of human action is, partially at least, in man's keeping. 
By cooperating with the universal laws of nature, man can 
continue and help to perfect by his own acts the order of 
creation; he can work for the restoration of this order within 
himself and within the sphere and reach of his activities. Or, 
by refusing to cooperate with these universal laws, he can 
create a temporary disorder, first of all within himself, and 
then, by his disorderly action, in his surrounding world. In 
the strict sense, therefore, there is no human action which 
concerns only this or that individual. Each human act rather 



1 Summa Contra Gentiles, III, I. 

a St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, I, q. 96, a. i. 



Order in Human Action in 

forges a chain of cause and effect which exerts its weight on 
the larger frames of man's earthly relationships. 

Taking account then of the great responsibility which at- 
taches to each and every human act, the basic problem of moral 
philosophy may be stated thus: how can and should man, a ! 
creature endowed by the Creator with intellect and free will, 
conduct his life so as to bring to its fruition that capacity for 
infinite truth and infinite good which are the ultimate goals 
of his "intellectual appetite"? 

15. Order in Human Action 

WE KNOW that in the unity of human nature there is 
a richness of being which gathers into itself the vegeta- 
tive and sentient life principle of plants and animals, adding 
to them the life principles of the intellectual soul which super- 
sedes and spiritually informs the vegetative and sentient activ- 
ities. Man is at once a vegetative, sentient, and rational creature, 
but his distinguishing characteristic and the substantial prin- 
ciple of his humanity is the intellectual soul, so that he is man 
only by virtue of his intellect. His specifically human life is 
thus constituted by his reason and directed by his rational 
appetite or will. Any specifically human activity, therefore, is 
rational activity, and while any nonrational or subrational 
activities may be considered "acts of man," they cannot be 
called "human acts" in the strict and proper sense. 

Human activity or the activity of a rational animal is car- 
ried on by means and under the guidance of what in moral 
philosophy is known as "the practical reason," 3 as distin- 
guished from "the dieoretical reason" of purely speculative 
philosophy. It is the dual function of "practical reason" to 
order or organize man's internal and external world: the 
world of his own mind and soul and the world of animate 
and inanimate nature. 

It would, however, be a mistake to construe a hostile oppo- 
sition between the internal world of mind and the external 
world of nature, as if they were two separate and mutually 



"Cf. Aristotle, NIC. Eth., VI, 5- 



ii2 Human Action and Moral Values 

exclusive principles. From this mistake resulted Descartes' 
absolute dualism of thought and extension and Kant's abso- 
lute dualism of freedom and nature (cf. pp. 12 sq.). We know, 
contrariwise, from our metaphysical considerations that there 
is finality or a striving for an end in nature and in its every 
part, and that the presence of such a tendency is indicative 
of "a kind of reason." We also know that all creatures, in 
accordance with the more or less limited capacities and activ- 
ities of their natures, partake of the all-pervasive and all-di- 
rective Divine Reason. And thus man, who, by virtue of his 
intellectual soul, has a larger share of participation in the 
Divine Intellect than either minerals, or plants, or brutes, has 
not only a greater capacity but a unique responsibility with 
regard to the rational principle infused in the universe, aiding 
the latter, as it were, in the attainment of its ends. The ends 
of man, if they be reasonable, will form a harmonious and 
integral part within the larger framework of the ends of the 
created universe. Man, therefore, being himself part of that 
created universe, can and does by his action exert his influ- 
ence on nature in general as well as on that part of nature 
which is his own self. And by exerting this influence ration- 
ally, he acts morally. Man, himself created "in the image and 
likeness of God," can, by means of his rational or moral 
action, not only order his own inner life so as to make it 
conform to this divine image but he can in turn, following 
the guidance of reason, form the earth in his own image. 

Man realizes this twofold possibility and task in the two 
spheres of doing (agere) and making (facere). He realizes his 
own self in moral action (ethics), and he actualizes his creative 
capacities in those external works in which his spiritual and 
rational self is mirrored: in arts and crafts, in agriculture and 
city planning, in the trades and professions, in work and play, 
and in all those other creative activities which in their sum 
total constitute human culture and civilization. This may serve 
to illustrate the meaning of the Thomistic definition of morality 
as "right order in the sphere of doing" (recta ratio agibilium} 
and of art as "right order in the sphere of making" (recta ratio 
factibilium}. In describing human activity in this dual aspect, 
St. Thomas Aquinas attributes a priority to "doing" over 
"making," as every creative human activity has its primary 



Value and End of Ends 113 

source and its frame of reference in the movement of the 
human will. This means that in all human doing and making 
the vital activity invariably proceeds from the intellectual soul 
in which every specifically human act has its center. There- 
fore, it may be said that the significance of man's external 
works receives its measure and its order from the internal 
principle from which they derive and that the greater or 
lesser perfection of the inner life of man is reflected in the 
greater or lesser perfection of both his deeds and his works. 

16. The Supreme Value and 
the End of Ends 

AS IN the theoretical order or the order of thought all acts 
J- *- of knowledge have their norm or measure in first prin- 
ciples, so in the practical order or the order of action all 
individual acts have their norm in the purposes or ends toward 
which they tend, and all the different purposes or ends in 
turn must be referred to and depend on one supreme and 
final end, which we may, therefore, call "the end of ends." 
Just as in the physical universe there would be no movement 
and no causality if there were not a Prime Mover and a First 
Cause, so in the moral universe there would be no human acts 
in view of specific ends if there were not an "end of ends," 
imparting meaning to these individual acts or willed move- 
ments. Again, as in the demonstration of the existence of God, 
we are compelled to admit that we cannot have an infinite 
series of essentially subordinated causes or movements (cf. p. 
80) : "Without an end of ends nothing would be wanted, no 
action would have an objective, and the intention (striving) 
of the agent would never come to rest. And if there were no 
first member in the series (of acts) directed towards an end, 
no one would begin to do anything, because no one would 
ever get beyond making up his mind." 4 

It follows, therefore, that human acts are interlinked among 
themselves in view of the ends toward which they tend. The 
human being desires particular means in view of particular 

4 St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, I -II, q. i, a. 4. 



H4 Human Action and Moral Values 

ends, and he desires these particular ends in view of "the end 
of ends." Thus all particular ends are linked to the "end of 
ends" by virtue of a causal relationship, in which the "end of 
ends" functions as a "first cause," moving to action all the 
intermediate causes. But if the "end of ends" constitutes the 
ultimate reason for the desirability of particular ends, the 
"end of ends" must be of such a kind that it is desired for no 
ulterior reason, but for its own sake. Such an end, however, 
is commonly designated as the supreme value or the supreme 
good, and the joy which results from its attainment is called 
supreme happiness or beatitude. 

In a certain sense it may be said that the supreme good or 
"the end of ends" is the same for all creatures. They all, in 
striving for their perfection, follow a natural bent toward 
the good, and in so doing they more or less remotely imitate 
and approximate the Supreme Good: "Everything indeed re- 
sembles God in so far as it has goodness, and a particular thing 
is good or valuable in so far as it is a likeness of the Supreme 
Value. Thus, in approaching the goodness of God, it achieves 
its own, and not vice versa. The end of ends, then, which all 
things desire is that they be like God." 5 

Considered, however, from another point of view, there is 
a vast difference between the way in which the Supreme Good 
appears to subrational creatures and the way in which it ap- 
pears to man, the rational animal. And there is the same vast 
difference in the ways in which the "end of ends" is attained 
by subrational beings, on the one hand, and by man, on the 
other. For while all creatures attain to the Supreme Good by a 
kind of likeness to it, man is made aware of this likeness by 
his knowledge and by his love, and he is therefore called 
upon to realize this likeness by the exercise of his intellect 
and his will, by consciously recognizing the highest value 
and by freely loving the highest good. 

Thus we may conclude that supreme happiness for man 
results from the perfection of his own nature and from the 
full satisfaction of its innate "intellectual appetite." In the 
attainment of the Supreme Good this intellectual appetite 
comes to rest, having reached its perfect fruition. 

This positive characterization of the nature of human happi- 

* St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Contra Gentiles, III, 24. 



Value and End of Ends 115 

ness is prepared and implemented by St. Thomas Aquinas by 
first determining negatively in what the ultimate end of man 
cannot consist. 6 For while it is true that all men are alike in 
that they strive for a final end, they frequently disagree in 
their judgment as to what constitutes "the end of ends." Some, 
for example, believe it to consist in the accumulation of riches, 
some in the attainment of honor and fame, some in the 
pleasures of the senses, and still others endow other limited 
values and goods, such as nationality, race, health, or certain 
modes and patterns of human behavior and certain forms of 
human expression and communication (social and economic 
systems, artistic and aesthetic values, the creation of a world 
language, etc.) with the commanding dignity of the supreme 
value and the Supreme Good, substituting such false abso- 
lutisms for the true and only Absolute. 

Our inquiry into the true nature of man's ultimate end is 
interested no less in what this end represents objectively than 
in what it means for man subjectively. Objectively, it must be 
that good which completely satisfies man's desire. Subjectively, 
it must be that good whose possession results in man's lasting 
happiness. 

If we then try to arrive at an understanding of the nature 
of the "end of ends" by a process of elimination, we may fol- 
low the lead of St. Thomas by beginning with a scrutiny of 
those goods which are most extrinsic to human nature, viz., 
money and other external possessions. Can these fully satisfy 
the will's desire? Can these be those goods whose possession 
imparts to man lasting happiness ? The answer is in the nega- 
tive. Man's final end and the ground of his lasting happiness 
can neither consist in such natural riches as food and drink, 
clothes and luxury goods, houses and estates, nor can it con- 
sist in the artificial riches of money. Natural as well as arti- 
ficial riches are not ends in themselves, but only means to 
some further ends. Man is not made for them; rather are they 
made for man, to be used by him for the attainment of other 
and higher goods. Man being their end, they cannot possibly 
be man's ultimate end. Man creates the artificial means of 
money to facilitate the acquisition and exchange of natural 
goods and possessions, and man desires money in view of 

* Cf. Summa Theologica, I II, q. 2, a. i to 8. 



n6 Human Action and Moral Values 

these natural values. And, furthermore, the purchasing power 
of money is very limited indeed in that it buys only material 
but never spiritual goods. Therefore, "What does it profit a 
fool to have money, since he cannot buy wisdom?" 7 Finally, 
the desire of artificial riches, such as money, "is boundless, 
but not in the same way as the desire of the Supreme Good. 
For the more perfectly the Supreme Good is possessed, the 
more it is loved, and all other things are despised. But with 
the desire of riches and other temporal goods the opposite 
is true: for when these are possessed, they are soon despised, 
and something else is desired . . . because the insufficiency of 
these goods is better recognized once they are possessed. And 
this very fact indicates their imperfection and shows that 
the Supreme Good cannot consist in them." 8 

So we see that neither natural nor artificial riches can be 
the ultimate terms of human desire or the ultimate guar- 
antors of human happiness. And because the pursuit of wealth 
is without limit, the man who, owing to a perverted sense of 
values, substitutes it for the "end of ends" must forever remain 
restless and dissatisfied. 

There are, however, other goods which, though likewise 
largely external, are to a certain degree also related to the 
good of the human soul, such as honor, fame, reputation, per- 
sonal power, influence, and efficiency. Could one of these or 
their sum total constitute the ultimate end of man ? We answer 
that all these goods and values are so changeable, unstable, 
undependable, and perishable that they cannot possibly be 
regarded as the ultimate goods and goals of man. They are 
good, but not good enough, and while they are at times by- 
products of happiness, at other times they are sources of harm, 
sorrow, strife, and misfortune. They are found, furthermore, 
among the good as well as among the wicked, whereas the 
Supreme Good and supreme happiness can neither have part 
with evil nor become the source of evil. When we call these 
values "goods of fortune," we thereby imply that they are 
external to human nature and, therefore, external also to 
man's Supreme Good and his supreme happiness. For the 
lasting happiness which man desires by virtue of his nature 
must have its source within and not outside human nature. 

7 Prov. 17:16. * Summa Theologica, loc. cit., a. 2. 



Value and End of Ends 117 

It seems certain then that man's final end and the source 
of his supreme happiness cannot consist in any external goods, 
but must somehow be rooted in his own nature. And as we 
know that human nature is a composite of body and soul, this 
supreme value might conceivably be found either in man's 
body or in man's soul. The body, however, cannot be the su- 
preme value and final end, since it is itself vitally informed 
by the soul as its superior principle, and, therefore, all values 
of the body are subordinated to values of the soul as their end. 

Turning now to the soul, its substance, powers, and fac- 
ulties, we find that many argue that pleasure either the 
pleasures of sense or the more refined pleasures of the mind 
is the Supreme Good which all desire and from the posses- 
sion of which they derive supreme happiness. To this con- 
tention we answer by admitting first of all that undoubtedly 
both the activity which results in pleasure and pleasure itself 
are real values and goods and, therefore, real goals or ends. 
However, as to the pleasures of sense, they are shared by 
brutes and men alike and can, therefore, not be termed specifi- 
cally human values and ends. But even the more refined 
pleasures of mind, which are specifically human, do not by 
themselves constitute supreme happiness or the master value, 
but are merely die by-products of these. Such pleasures are 
the subjective and conscious reflections of the objective good, 
and their value is therefore derived from the possession of the 
objective good. Pleasure in the commonly accepted sense of 
the term is therefore not a primary but a secondary value, 
depending itself on the objective value of the goals or ends 
of human desire as on its raison d'etre. 

It is the error of hedonism, or the philosophical doctrine 
which sees in pleasure the Supreme Good and ultimate end 
of human desire, that it confounds the order of values and 
of ends by depriving human activity of its real and ultimate 
object. The enjoyment and satisfaction of the hedonist is en- 
tirely self-centered and more or less sterile in that he merely 
enjoys his own enjoyment and is satisfied with his satisfaction, 
instead of deriving his joys and satisfactions from the attain- 
ment of certain objective goals and from the realization of 
specifically human values. 

If the hedonist is wrong in defining pleasure as the highest 



n8 Human Action and Moral Values 

good and ultimate end, the philosopher who either denies 
that pleasure is a real good, or postulates a "disinterested 
pleasure" (Kant) as the only morally valid kind of delecta- 
tion, is equally wrong. St. Thomas Aquinas characterizes such 
an attitude as "insensibility" or apathy, holding that it is 
morally unjustifiable: "Everything which runs counter to the 
natural order is a vice. Now nature has joined pleasure with 
those activities which are necessary for human life, and, there- 
fore, the natural order demands that man use this pleasure to 
the extent which is necessary for the attainment of the human 
good, whether it be the good of the individual or the good 
of the species." 9 The scholastic philosopher goes so far as to 
maintain that the value of human activities may be judged 
according to the pleasure which is sought by their pursuit. 
Thus he who seeks the coarsest pleasures is least good, while 
he who seeks the highest pleasures is also the best human 
being. The high quality of his pleasure will be indicative of 
the superior quality of the good to whose possession he has 
attained, and the highest and most sublime pleasure will be 
concomitant with the possession of the Supreme Good. The 
supreme pleasure participates in the supreme goodness, and 
its attainment thus marks the terminus of the soul's desire, 
imparting to it the tranquillity of happiness unalloyed. 

We can see now that pleasure as it is ordinarily understood 
does not constitute the final end, but that it may well be a 
kind of bridge leading to that end. However, there are other 
human values, such as knowledge and wisdom, or personal, 
social, and racial culture, or an ever more perfect human 
adjustment to environmental conditions, or the technological 
perfection of man's rule over the universe, which are frequently 
regarded as supreme values and infallible safeguards of human 
happiness. As to knowledge and wisdom, they are acts of the 
human soul and as such realizations of the soul's potential- 
ities, and they in turn aim at objectives and objects which lie 
beyond themselves. And as these acts aim beyond themselves, 
they cannot themselves be the final end of man. Culture, social 
adjustment, or technological development, on the other hand, 
are conditions and means of human progress and as such they 
are at best intermediary, not final ends. 

* Summa Thcologica, II-II, q. 150, a. i, ad. i., and II-II, q. 142, a. 2. 



Value and End of Ends 119 

Is it then as impossible to discover the "end of ends" within 
human nature as we found it impossible to discover it out- 
side human nature? And yet, we know that the human soul 
has a capacity for infinite truth as well as for infinite good; 
we know that in its knowledge and in its love (will, desire) 
it can "become all things" and embrace all things (cf. p. 93). 
We are aware of the fact that it is this power of knowing 
and loving all things which makes finite man in a way akin 
to Divine infinity, revealing him as a being made "in the 
image and likeness of God." 

We are therefore confronted with the following dilemma: 
On the one hand, the final end of man must be somehow 
grounded in his own nature and. on the other, this final end 
is neither constituted by his body nor by his soul. How are 
we to resolve this apparent paradox without sacrificing either 
the relative intellectual autonomy of the human soul or the 
absolute autonomy of the Divine Reason? The answer is 
that the "end of ends" is both immanent and transcendent: 
the Supreme Good has implanted in the human soul and its 
faculties both the power of knowing universal truth and the 
"rational appetite" for universal good. These powers, en- 
shrined in the depth of the soul by its Maker, are waiting 
for their actualization in the moral action of man, the rational 
animal. Morality for the human soul, therefore, is not a for- 
eign law imposed from without: it is rather the soul's own 
intrinsic law, the law, the order, and the voice of reason, rec- 
ognized by the human intellect as the law and the voice of God. 

We see now that human nature for its perfection needs 
and desires the transcendent and the Divine because only in 
Divine transcendence can the human soul find and be united 
to the desired ultimate objects of intellect and will, viz., the 
totality of truth and the totality of goodness. And as God 
alone is this totality of truth and goodness, God alone can 
be the Supreme Value and the "end of ends," in which man's 
desire comes to rest and from whose attainment human nature 
derives lasting happiness. 

It only remains for us to complete our inquiry into the 
nature of the "end of ends" by asking in what man's supreme 
happiness or his enjoyment of the Supreme Value actually 
consists. What kind of reality is it that actualizes every possi- 



120 Human Action and Moral Values 

bility of human nature so that nothing more remains to be 
desired ? 

According to Aristotle, the supreme happiness or beatitude 
of man consists in the contemplation of the Divine. 10 However, 
in comparing this sublime ideal with the realities of human 
life, we find that such a contemplation of the Divine is greatly 
limited for the generality of men by the occupations and neces- 
sities of daily life. The pressures and instabilities of our natu- 
ral and social environment constantly interfere with any un- 
disturbed pursuit of our supreme happiness. 

Aristotle was not entirely unaware of this difficulty, but 
he apparently knew of no way to resolve it. St. Thomas 
Aquinas agreed with the Greek philosopher as to the way 
in which man's "rational appetite" and its infinite goal, the 
Supreme Good, were defined and evaluated. He realized, how- 
ever, the impossibility of determining the nature of man's 
supreme happiness or beatitude without having recourse to 
the source of Christian revelation, a source which had not 
been available to Aristotle. Thus it was partly in his capacity 
as a Christian theologian rather than as a philosopher that St. 
Thomas supplemented and completed Aristotle's argument. 
"We see distinctly," he wrote, "what has vexed these great 
thinkers in their diverse speculations. We are more fortunate 
because we are ... in a position to state that human beings 
can attain to perfect happiness after this life, owing to the fact 
that their souls are immortal." 11 Beginning with the factual 
observation that the present transitory state of human life does 
not permit the fullest realization of the moral order, he looks 
beyond the boundaries of human experience for the complete 
and final actualization of the potentialities of human nature. 

This inclusion of man's supernatural end in his discussion 
of the object of human desire causes St. Thomas to distinguish 
between the "natural beatitude," as described by Aristotle, and 
the "supernatural beatitude" or the "beatific vision" (tnsio 
beata), as taught by Christian theology. However, the Chris- 
tian philosopher discovers in the very nature of the human 
intellect as supernaturalized by grace the connecting link 
between man's final natural and man's final supernatural 

10 Nic. Eth., VII, ii77 a , 12-18 and VIII, 1178*, 9-14. 
M Summa Contra Gentiles, III, 48. 



Value and End of Ends 121 

destination, thereby reaffirming the famous scholastic saying 
that divine grace does not destroy nature but rather leads it to 
its perfection and transfiguration (gratia supponit ct pcrficit 
naturam). Once we fully understand that the reality of God 
is logically included in the reality of nature and in the reality 
of man, and vice versa, and that all relativity ultimately finds 
its desired complement in the Absolute, there is no longer 
an unbridgeable abyss between man's moral aspiration and 
its final end. Not only the "Kingdom of God" but God Him- 
self is "in us" as well as "above us," and in unison with His 
will our own will is capable of perfecting the order of nature 
in the order of grace until we attain, as we hope, to the "Light 
of Glory." 

Thus we are now in a position to contemplate and evaluate 
human life in accordance with its true proportions. We ascribe 
to it genuine value and substantial reality, but in doing so we 
remain ever conscious of the fact that both its value and reality 
are only "borrowed" : they are derived from the Supreme Value 
and Reality, and the ultimate meaning and significance of 
life lies not in itself but rather in that Infinite Life Principle 
which all created life represents and reflects and to which it 
consciously or unconsciously aspires. The things and beings 
of time are impregnated with the weight and dynamic force 
of the Eternal, and it is for this reason that the most ardent 
and determined seekers of the Eternal are also the most pru- 
dent and loyal servants of the temporal. 

Finally, reverting to Aristotle's high esteem of the life of 
pure speculation and contemplation, we find that for St. 
Thomas Aquinas, too, as for most other thinkers of ancient 
and medieval times, and in accordance also with Scriptural 
doctrine, 12 the contemplative ranks above the active life. To 
understand the reasons underlying this emphasis placed on 
the contemplative life by Christian theology and philosophy, 
we call to mind the dual function theoretical and practical 
attributed by Aristotle to the human intellect. When the 
intellect is engaged in the acquisition of knowledge, it exer- 
cises its capacity for pure speculation. When, on the other 

M Lukc, iom~4a, "But the Lord answered and laid to her: 'Martha, Martha, 
thou an anxious and troubled about many thingi; and yet only one thing it oetdful. 
Mary hai choten the bctt part, and it wUl not be taken away from her/ " 



122 Human Action and Moral Values 

hand, the intellect concerns itself with the principles and rules 
of human conduct and works toward the realization of the 
human good, it exercises its capacity for "practical wisdom," 
the latter being defined by Aristotle as "a state conjoined with 
reason . . . having human good for its object, and capable of 
doing." 13 Now human activity approximates the Divine activ- 
ity and consequently increases in value and significance in 
proportion as it becomes more unified and continuous. For 
unity and continuity rank above diversity and multiplicity. 
The active life, however, concerning itself with a multiplicity 
of things, is inferior, in value and as a source of happiness, to 
the life of contemplation, which is concerned with one thing 
only, viz., that Divine Truth which imparts meaning to all 
other things. 

Nevertheless, Christian philosophy does not share the Greek 
philosopher's disdain of the active, practical life. For St. 
Thomas Aquinas the active life is a means leading to the end 
of contemplation and making a person disposed for the con- 
templative life. The active life, like the life of Martha, is good, 
but the contemplative life, the life of Mary, is better. It is 
better because it is actuated by the highest principle in man, 
the intellectual soul, and because it is directly related to and 
preoccupied with the highest value, the "end of ends." It may, 
however, according to St. Thomas, become necessary to give 
preference to the active life, owing to material needs and 
contingencies: "For though it is true," he writes, quoting Aris- 
totle, "that to philosophize is better than to gather riches, it is 
nevertheless better to possess riches than to suffer privation." 14 
Thus St. Thomas Aquinas "does not conceive active and con- 
templative life as contrasts, but he regards them as two inti- 
mately related and correlative forms of the Christian life." 15 

We conclude then with St. Thomas that the "beatific vision" 
or perfect beatitude which must result from man's being face 
to face with the ultimate object of his "rational appetite" is 
impossible of attainment in this life. "In our present life, 
however, nothing comes closer to this complete and final 

"Nic. Eth., VI, U40 b . 

14 Summa Thfohgica, II-II, q. 182, *. i; Aristotle, Topic., lib. Ill, cap. 2, cxplic. 
loci 40. 

18 Cf . the author's "Fundamental Notions of Mysticism" in TA<r New Scholasticism, 
Vol. V, 2, p. 120 sq. 



Human Freedom 123 

happiness than die way of those who contemplate truth as 
well as can be done here and now. . . . The contemplation 
of truth begins in the present life, but it is completed in the 
future life, whereas the active and social life does not endure 
beyond the present." 16 

19 Summa Contra Gentiles, III, 63. 

17. Human Freedom 

HAVING determined what constitutes the Supreme Good 
and after having demonstrated that from its possession 
only can a rational creature derive lasting happiness, we now 
extend our inquiry to an investigation of those acts which 
lead to the possession of the Supreme Good and to the happi- 
ness this entails. 

Once more let us recall to mind the distinction made be- 
tween beings which act with knowledge and beings which 
act without knowledge (cf. p. 87). Of the latter we found 
that in their activities they are moved toward their ends, while 
the former act and move knowingly with a view to some end. 
And again, with the latter the principle of their activities is 
an external one, while the former bear the principle of their 
actions within their own natures. An action, however, which 
flows from an immanent principle we call voluntary, while 
an activity which receives its directives from an external prin- 
ciple is said to be imposed from without and therefore in- 
voluntary. And the more immanent or intrinsic the principle 
of action is, the clearer will have to be the knowledge of the 
end and the more purely voluntary will be the character of 
the act. But among those beings which are known to us by 
experience, it is man who most distinctly initiates his own acts 
and clearly performs them with an awareness of a purpose or 
end. The acts of man, the rational animal, thus differ from the 
activities of subrational beings who possess spontaneous voli- 
tion in the sense that they do not disagree with their inner 
nature that prompts them. An act, moreover, which has its 
principle in the nature of a being and which moves toward 
a rationally determined end, we call free. Human acts, there- 



124 Human Action and Moral Values 

fore, proceeding from an intrinsic source and tending toward 
a rationally known and determined end, arc free. 

It is obvious, as was pointed out above (cf. p. in), that 
not every "act of man" is a "human" or a "free" act in the 
sense just indicated. To make it strictly human, an act must 
be freely willed and must thus express and execute a deliberate 
judgment of the human intellect. Such a free or deliberate 
intellectual judgment, however, can only be exercised by a 
being which is capable of knowing the nature of the True 
as well as the nature of the Good. The object of the "rational 
appetite" or "the will" has the same universal or transcendental 
amplitude as the object of intellectual knowledge: while the 
ultimate object of the latter is all the truth that there is, the 
ultimate object of the former is all the good that there is. 
Both intellect and will are related to the transcendental realm 
of being, the former to its transcendental attribute of truth, 
the latter to its transcendental attribute of goodness (cf. p. 35). 
We are thus again forcefully reminded of the close inter- 
relation and interdependence of metaphysics and ethics. 

From the foregoing we conclude that human freedom has 
its roots in human reason or human judgment, and that with- 
out rationality there would be no freedom. Conversely, the 
denial of human freedom implies the denial of rationality. 
Any consistently deterministic "ethics" is actually a contra- 
diction in terms because a moral philosophy or ethics is only 
possible on the basis of human freedom. The entire moral life 
of man, including the moral qualifications of every specifically 
human act, rests on the reality of free will or free choice. 

It might be objected that brutes, having sense knowledge 
and sense appetite, possess a kind of primitive or rudimentary 
reason and, therefore, a corresponding rudimentary form of 
freedom. We answer that brutes indeed have a sensory per- 
ception of particular goods, in addition to being equipped 
with sensitive instincts, by virtue of which they are informed 
as to the suitability or unsuitability of the particular objects 
of their knowledge and desire, but we claim that this kind 
of awareness, the judgments involved in it, and the choices 
resulting from it cannot be regarded as qualitatively equivalent 
to the judgments of human reason and the resulting human 
freedom of choice. The "animal's judgment," to which St. 



Human Freedom 125 

Thomas refers and which enables brutes to evaluate situations 
as to their suitability and to arrive at decisions which benefit 
both the individual and the species, is very limited in its 
scope when we compare it with the operations and evaluations 
engaged in by the human intellect. When we observe the 
skillful but uniform methods used by spiders in spinning 
their webs, by bees in preparing their honeycombs and hives, 
by birds in building their nests or feeding their young, it 
seems that in these activities the nature of the species rather 
than the judgment of the individual is at work. The principles 
or causes of these animal activities and of the judgments from 
which they result frequently seem quite as extrinsic to the 
individual animal as the causes of the mechanical, physical, 
or chemical movements in inorganic nature are extrinsic to 
an individual inorganic being or element: "For just as the 
heavy body does not move in such a way that it could be 
called the cause of its motion, so the animal does not judge 
in such a way that it could be called the cause of its own 
judgment. 

"The real cause of the animal's judgment is rather the 
animal nature as such and, through the medium of this nature, 
God Himself. The animal, therefore, is not the free master 
of its decisions: it does not possess freedom of will. . . . We 
are masters only by virtue of the fact that we can exercise 
our faculty of judgment. Only reason, however, can judge 
even its own judgment by reflecting on its own intellectual 
activity and by recognizing the relations which exist between 
that which is judged and that by means of which reason 
exercises its judgment. From this it follows that freedom is 
entirely grounded in reason and that a being's relationship 
to reason determines this being's relationship to freedom." 17 

We have stated that an act, to be called truly human, must 
be a free act, and that every such free act is grounded in reason. 
Each "human act," accordingly, is an act of free will. Acts of 
free will, however, are by definition impossible if the will 
suffers constraint or violence. And by "free acts" we mean 
here acts which are commanded and initiated by the will. 
While the execution of such acts may be impeded by external 



"St. Thomas Aquinas, DC Veritate 24, i; 2. 



126 Human Action and Moral Values 

force, the specific determination or intention of the will itself 
remains nevertheless inviolate. Thus, an action commanded by 
the will may fall short of its realization because of the natural 
weakness or defective condition of some physical organs on 
whose aid the execution of the will's command depends. For 
example, a man suffering violence at the hands of the State 
or at the hands of his fellow men may be frustrated in the 
carrying out of his moral resolutions, but it is clear that the 
integrity of his moral resolve or the act of the will as such is 
in no way impaired by such external impediments and 
circumstances. 

There is only one imaginable case in which the human will 
would lose its power of choice and would have to reach out 
for its object with a kind of moral necessity, comparable to 
the physical necessity with which the falling stone follows 
the law of gravity. We know that the ultimate object of the 
will is the good as such, just as the ultimate object of the 
intellect or of knowledge is the true as such. Now the will is 
free to choose among the many relative goods with which 
it is confronted. If, however, the will were to find itself face 
to face with the Absolute Good or the good as such, it would 
meet, so to speak, with the sum total of the objects of its 
desire and would therefore embrace of necessity this ultimate 
end and object of the "rational appetite." In other words, if 
an immediate or direct and unobstructed vision of God were 
possible in this life, the will would no longer "will" or strive 
but would rest in the attainment and fruition of perfect 
beatitude. 

Having a capacity and an innate striving for infinite good 
or the good as such, but moving in the sphere of finite and 
relative goods, the rational appetite or will is free with regard 
to every finite, partial, or relative good. It can choose among 
the multitude of those particular goods which are within the 
realm and reach of human knowledge and experience, basing 
its preferential choice (or the refusal to make such a choice) 
on a reasoned judgment or deliberation. An act of free will 
or free choice is thus impossible without knowledge and 
rational deliberation. Ethics or moral philosophy, we conclude, 
is not only the science of human acts but, more profoundly, 
the science of the ultimate ends of human acts: it informs us 



Human Freedom 127 

as to the proper use of human freedom, as to the adequate 
means to be adopted to attain ends proposed and presented by 
reason. 

When we come to consider the nature of that deliberation 
which precedes free human acts, we have to direct our atten- 
tion not only to the structure of these acts but also and pri- 
marily to the human being whose freedom is manifested in 
them. Man's rational appetite or will is also a "natural appetite" 
in that it has its basis in human nature in the same way in 
which the sense appetite of subrational creatures has its basis 
in the nature of these beings. We therefore cannot accept the 
thesis advanced by Kant in his Critique of Practical Reason, 
by which he postulates an intrinsic and irreconcilable opposi- 
tion or antagonism between nature, on the one hand, and 
freedom, on the other. According to Kant, the complete self- 
determination or "autonomy" of the rational will is the su- 
preme law and the condition of morality. Freedom, however, 
and therewith morality are excluded from the world of phe- 
nomena or appearances as constituted by the data of intra- 
mental experience, mediated by the innate or a priori forms 
of the mind. This world of phenomena is subject to the strictly 
determined causality of "nature." A "free act," on the other 
hand, cannot be determined by other acts but only by itself. 
Moral freedom or autonomy, Kant therefore concludes, is 
radically opposed to the determinism of "nature." 

In the Critique of Pure Reason this philosopher had demon- 
strated that "theoretical reason" cannot make any valid state- 
ments concerning the nature of "things-in-themselves" 
(noumena). Morality and moral freedom, therefore, cannot 
be established or substantiated by "theoretical reason." Without 
moral freedom, however, morality and with it a meaningful 
and purposive human life would be an impossibility. Moral 
freedom, therefore, must be "postulated" and its reality af- 
firmed by "practical reason" which bases its certitude on inner 
experience. For Kant the reality of "the moral law within" 
is as indubitable as the reality of "the starry sky above." 18 

If we inquire into the philosophical meaning of this Kantian 



11 It should be noted, however, that, according to Kant's own tenets, as advanced 
in the Critique of Pure Reason, the "reality" of the "starry sky" itself can only 
be a "phenomenal," not a "noumenal" realityl 



128 Human Action and Moral Values 

argument in favor of human freedom, we find that freedom 
is regarded by him not as an object of knowledge but as an 
article and object of faith: an "a priori" or innate faith, pre- 
ceding all experience. In trying to make "practical reason" 
autonomous or entirely independent of "theoretical reason," 
Kant proclaims a primacy of ethics over metaphysics, of action 
over thought, which exactly reverses the position of pre-Kantian 
philosophy. While in the Aristotelian-Thomistic tradition, 
down the centuries to Kant's own teacher, Christian Wolff 
(1679-1754), it had been the function of "theoretical reason" 
(metaphysics) to establish the bases of "practical reason" 
(ethics) and to inquire into the metaphysical nature and 
foundations of human freedom, Kant finds in the empirical 
fact of moral conscience a practical evidence of the moral law 
which stands in no need of any metaphysical justification. 
Man, then, according to Kant, is a member of two worlds 
or orders: the natural, physical, material order in which every- 
thing is strictly determined and in which man therefore 
functions as a necessary product of the causal texture of "phe- 
nomena"; and the suprasensible, spiritual, and moral order 
in which man acts as a free or autonomous being. These two 
orders the philosopher conceives as being not only unrelated 
but strictly opposed to each other. In the Aristotelian-Thom- 
istic tradition, on the other hand, the order of mind and 
spirit as well as the order of morality or freedom are rooted 
in the order of nature, both orders having their common 
ground and term in the order of being. This order of being, 
as we have repeatedly pointed out, is a graduated or hierarchi- 
cal order, having as its base the realm of sensible objects or 
the material universe, but rising from the material, vegetative, 
and sentient to the rational and spiritual levels of being. Mor- 
ality and freedom, as we have seen, have their beginning on 
the level of rational being. But while freedom has its empiri- 
cal beginnings in rational animals, its original sources are 
found on a still higher level of being, viz., in the realm of 
supernatural or Divine Being. Man, by virtue of his knowl- 
edge and his will (rational appetite), reflects this Supreme 
Reality which is the first cause of his nature and therefore also 
the first cause of his freedom, the latter being a constituent 
of the rational part of his nature. God, therefore, who is the 



Human Freedom 129 

author of nature, including the material or physical nature of 
man, is also the author of man's rational and moral nature: 
He is the author of human freedom. 

Once more, however, a difficulty arises which, in another 
context (cf. pp. 68 sq.), we have met before: how can God's all- 
pervasive causality be reconciled with the free activities of 
secondary causes? If God is the prime author of all beings 
and their movements, is He not also the exclusive author? 
But if thus God is die prime author of all acts, is He not also 
the exclusive author of all so-called "free" or human acts? 
And are we not then committed to a "spiritual determinism" 
as rigid as the mechanistic determinism of the positivists and 
materialists? This question was in fact answered affirmatively 
by those who attributed freedom only to a World Soul 
(Averroes, Schelling, etc.) or a World Spirit (Hegel), but 
not to individual souls and wills. From the fact that relative 
being presupposes Absolute Being, the pantheists (Spinoza) 
concluded that all relative beings are only modes or attri- 
butes of "the Absolute," and from the fact that all relative 
activities presuppose the activity of the absolute First Cause, 
the fatalists concluded that there is neither freedom nor chance, 
but only necessity (Spengler). 

The solution of this problem can only be found in a phi- 
losophy which safeguards the precincts of both the Absolute 
and the relative, clarifying their nature and interrelation and 
thus saving the relative from being extinguished or absorbed 
by the Absolute and vice versa. Such a solution is suggested 
in Thomistic philosophy, chiefly by means of its profound 
analysis of the nature of divine transcendence. Thomism insists, 
first of all, that the entire realm of being depends on God 
as on its First Cause; it emphasizes, secondly, that everything 
is constituted in its specific nature by virtue of this very de- 
pendence, so that a being, far from losing its nature or essence 
by reason of this dependency, is rather fully itself only in 
virtue of it. In other words, man could neither be nor be free 
without God. As in everything else that he is or has, so also 
in his possession of freedom he entirely depends on Him who 
is. The fact that man in his being and existence depends on 
God's being and existence, far from preventing him from 
being fully man, rather firmly establishes him in his human 



130 Human Action and Moral Values 

nature and therewith in his freedom. Man depends on God 
in his being (in rationc entis), but he is independent or free 
in so far as he is involved in the contingency of those causal 
relations and activities which are implicit in his human nature. 
We may say, therefore, that he is ontologically or metaphysi- 
cally dependent, but psychologically and morally he is free. 
The activity of God is not a special condition of man's freely 
willed acts but rather the universal precondition or presupposi- 
tion of all being and therefore also of man's being: "We must 
not conceive of this matter as if one and the same effect were 
to be attributed to a natural cause and to divine power in 
such a way as to regard it as partly produced by God and 
partly by a natural cause. The effect is rather fully caused by 
both, albeit in a different manner: it is caused by God as that 
First Being which is the source of all being; and by the created 
being, acting as a secondary cause." 19 It is necessary to em- 
phasize that without God's perpetual and all-permeating "act" 
there would be neither human beings, nor human activities, 
nor human freedom. 



18. Values and Free Choice 

TO SAY that man is free is to maintain that he can choose 
among values or goods. This statement in turn implies 
that man does not and in fact cannot choose an antivalue 
(disvalue) or desire the negative as such or qua antivalue. 
For, as the only and exclusive object of the will is the good, 
man can only desire and make his choice among goods or 
values. The willing of evil qua evil would amount to a self- 
annihilation of the will, since the will as such, according to 
its very being and essence, is the desire of the good. It is there- 
fore not only correct to say with Aristotle that "good is what 
all desire" but also that what all actually desire and possibly 
can desire is the good. 

If we then further inquire into the nature of that which 
constitutes goodness or value in the concrete, we are reminded 
that in our metaphysical analysis we recognized the good 
as one of the transcendental attributes or aspects of being 

11 St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Contra Gentiles, III, 70. 



Values and Free Choice 131 

(ci. pp. 37 sq.). Being, considered as the object of knowledge, is 
called "true"; being, considered as the object of desire, is 
called "good." A thing then is good or valuable in so far as 
it is or has being; it is evil in so far as it lacks being or falls 
short of its due perfection. 

If we now apply this same criterion to the sphere of human 
acts (which are also forms of being), we may say with St. 
Thomas Aquinas that "every action, so far as it possesses 
being, to that extent it contains goodness, but in so far as it 
lacks something of that fullness of being which is due a 
human action, in the same measure it lacks goodness and 
is thus termed evil." 20 

A human action, properly speaking, must therefore be an 
action for a value or end which befits man according to the 
kind of being that he is and according to the amount of being 
that he has, i.e., according to his nature. And as this nature 
is the nature of a rational animal, any action of man which 
docs not conform to the demands of reason is lacking in a 
due moral perfection and is therefore termed nonhuman, im- 
moral, or evil. And as it is the task of the "theoretical reason" 
to reach out for truth by means of the principles of knowledge, 
so it is the task of the "practical reason" to reach out for 
goodness, by discovering the universal and necessary prin- 
ciples of human action. 

We are taking the risk of oversimplifying a highly complex 
problem when we attempt to circumscribe this task of moral 
philosophy by stating that the principles of human action 
are implied in the correct definition of man and that all that 
is morally required of man is the fullest realization of his own 
nature or his own self. 21 And yet, this statement expresses the 
vital continuity which exists between metaphysics and ethics 
and contains as in an abbreviated formula the essential struc- 
ture of moral philosophy in all its ramifications. 

We are now prepared to turn our attention to a closer 
scrutiny of the act of choice or jree will itself and of that 
deliberation which precedes every such preferential choice. A 
circumspect analysis discloses the action of the will as par- 

* Summa Theologica, I-II, q. 18, a. i. 

11 "Become what thou art" (Werdc was du bi$t) y as Goethe, following the lead 
of Plotinus, poignantly expressed this Aristotelian idea. 



132 Human Action and Moral Values 

tially dependent on and conditioned by reason, and it 
be our task to describe the essentially mixed character of a 
willed act by first considering its component parts and then 
delineating their respective share in the composite act. 

Aristotle adequately characterized the mixed character of 
the act of free choice when he termed it an "intelligent 
desire." 22 And, similarly, for St. Gregory of Nyssa (^ circa 
394), one of the early Church Fathers, choice is not desire 
taken by itself, nor deliberation taken by itself, but a com- 
posite of the two. How, then, are these operations, desire and 
deliberation, related to each other, and how does their co- 
operative interplay and junction produce the consummate act 
of choice? 

We know that the will or rational appetite has a natural 
tendency toward the good as its object. It desires the good of 
necessity and it would, as we have pointed out (cf. p. 126), 
embrace of necessity the Absolute Good if ever it were con- 
fronted with it. Actually, however, in this life the human will 
is never confronted with the Absolute Good, but only with 
relative and particular goods and values. The will, then, seek- 
ing the good as such, but finding goodness only in the form 
of particularized goods, desires these relative goods and values. 
But while the will is not free with regard to the Absolute 
Good, it is capable of evaluating relative goods, viewing them 
critically and determining their limitations and shortcomings. 
The reason for this St. Thomas Aquinas admirably analyzes: 
"If we consider," he writes, "any particular good, the intellect 
can view it under the aspect of its goodness or of its lack of 
goodness which makes it defective and which causes us to 
call it evil; and in this way the intellect can understand any 
such good as either worthy or unworthy of choice (ellgibile 
vel jugibile). The intellect cannot, however, apprehend the 
Perfect Good under the aspect of evil or of any defectiveness, 
and therefore man wills of necessity his supreme happiness 
(beatitude), and he cannot will to be unhappy or miserable." 23 
In other words, man is without freedom of choice with regard 
to the ultimate end or the perfect and absolute value, but he 
possesses freedom of choice with regard to intermediate ends 

"Nic. Eth., VI, 2. 

28 Summa Theologica, I-II, q. 13, a. 6. 



Values and Free Choice 133 

as well as with regard to those means which are presented 
to him in the form of particular goods or values. The absolute 
norm of "the good," however, can be approached or inter- 
preted by reason in various ways, prudently or imprudently, 
in accordance with the more or less changeable and fallible 
human judgment, and the formation of the judgment itself 
is man's responsibility, depending, as it were, on his more 
or less adequate realization of the nature of "the good" and 
"the end" and on his more or less developed intellectual faculty 
of comparative evaluation. Thus, reason may "substitute" 
pseudo values for real values, pseudo absolutes for the real 
Absolute, and it may present to the will these surrogates as 
acceptable and desirable goods. And as all individual human 
acts are concerned with individual objects, the will, relying 
for its choice on the deliberation and judgment of the in- 
tellect, remains indetermined or free with regard to individual 
objects. "The root of freedom," to quote again St. Thomas 
Aquinas, "is the will as its bearer and executor; but the cause 
of free choice is the intellect. For the will can direct itself 
to different objects only because the intellect can form dif- 
ferent ideas of what is good." 24 

Our next question concerns then necessarily the constitutive 
elements of those intellectual judgments on which the will 
has to rely for its decisions or choices. We know that the 
intellect is capable of recognizing an absolute norm of the 
Good, and we also know that with the aid of this universal 
concept the intellect can form its judgment regarding the 
relative value of particular goods. We must ask then what 
factors contribute to the formation of such intellectual judg- 
ments. And we must ask furthermore to what extent these 
contributing factors determine the ultimate preference or 
choice and to what extent they leave it undetermined or free. 
If man were to form his intellectual judgment by the weight 
of an irresistibly compelling influence, no room evidently 
would be left for any free judgment nor for any subsequent 
free act of the will, the latter being, so to speak, intellectually 
indifferent or blind, relying for its information on the judg- 
ment of the intellect. 

Human acts, we repeat, share in the general character of 

** Summa Theologica, I-II, q. 17, a r, ad. 2 ra . 



134 Human Action and Moral Values 

all natural activities in that they all tend toward an end or a 
good. And as every natural activity follows the form of the 
being which exercises it (ppcrari sequitur essc), the activity 
of a rational nature follows the form imparted to the human 
act or the act of the will by human reason. Thus, in the close 
cooperation which exists between human deliberation and 
human will, it is reason which lends the vision, but it is will 
which sets the act. But since the end which is visualized by 
the intellect is presented to the will for its acceptance, this 
end must be present in both faculties, and it is on this account 
that we are entitled to call the will "reasonable" and refer 
to it as a "rational appetite." Both intellect and will are fac- 
ulties of the human soul, and as faculties they are mutually 
dependent on each other, and in their activities they are re- 
lated to the originator of the action or the agent, on the one 
hand, and to the term of the action or the end, on the other. 
Man, the agent, uses his intellect to move himself to willed 
action, and he uses his will to move himself to deliberation, 
intellectual understanding, and moral judgment. If we follow 
this repeated interplay or mutual conditioning of intellectual 
deliberation and freely willed decision to its ultimate roots, 
we come back to the consideration from which we started: 
we arrive at an initial act of "rational volition" or "intellectual 
appetite" which as such proceeds from the deepest ground 
of human nature. The possibility of this first act of "rational 
volition" or "willed deliberation" by the "rational appetite" 
is due to the "First Cause" or Prime Mover of human nature 
and of all its faculties and activities, i.e., to God. By giving 
to all beings their own nature, God also gives to them the 
principles of their activities. The principles of specifically 
human activity, however, are intellect and free will. 

While we admit then that God's all-pervasive causality is 
the ultimate and most interior mover of the human will, we 
maintain that the will, though called into being by God, re- 
tains its inherent created and creative freedom of self-deter- 
mination or choice within the sphere of relative goods or 
values. As the will naturally tends toward the totality of good, 
no partial or relative good can attract it with an irresistible 
force. The indetermination or free determinability of human 
acts has as its basis the relativity of particular goods, on the 



Values and Free Choice 135 

one hand, and the flexibility and fallibility of human delibera- 
tions and judgments, on the other. Under the influence of 
both these factors man is capable of determining his actions 
in several different ways. 

But we still have to face the question as to the extent of 
the motive power or compelling strength of those factors 
which influence both judgment and will. In other words, if 
we reject the doctrine of integral determinism, are we pre- 
pared to accept the contentions of an equally integral 
indeterminism ? 

On the basis of our previous reflections we evidently neither 
claim with the determinists that the will is always forced by 
extrinsic motives, nor do we maintain with the indeterminists 
that the will is absolutely independent or "autonomous." The 
solution of the problem will therefore have to be found in 
between these two extreme positions. 

Jacques Maritain, in stating the Thomistic position in this 
matter, distinguishes between the "freedom of choice" and 
the "freedom of autonomy." 25 This distinction will aid us in 
recognizing the limitations of human freedom. 

As freedom is the distinguishing character trait of human 
personality, and as we have found (cf. p. 44) that there are 
different degrees of personality, among which that of the 
human being is the lowest and least perfect, so there are cor- 
respondingly different degrees of freedom. Human freedom 
itself admits of different degrees of realization or growth, i.e., 
it is essentially dynamic rather than static, being capable of 
increasing perfection, in direct proportion to the growing per- 
fection of human personality. In becoming ever more obedi- 
ent to the demands of his rational nature, the human being 
actualizes to an ever higher degree his possibilities as a person, 
and he realizes ever more fully the potential scope of his free- 
dom. While man thus, in making the best possible use of 
his freedom of choice, may approximate the highest degrees 
of freedom yet "freedom of autonomy" or complete and 
absolute self-sufficiency and self-determination can only be 
ascribed to the supreme form of personality, vis., the Divine 
Person. 

"Jacques Maritain, Freedom in the Modern World, transl by Richard O'Sullivan 
(New York: Scribners, 1936), pp. 29 sq. 



136 Human Action and Moral Values 

In the measure, however, in which man purifies his own sel 
by the realization of the possibilities of his rational natur< 
to the same extent he also purifies his faculty of volition c 
his freedom of choice. The more he approximates the u fre< 
dom of autonomy," the less will he become capable of usin 
his freedom improperly, the less will he be subject to the di 
tracting and debasing influences of external circumstances i 
well as of his own internal unruly emotions and passions. H 
will, on the contrary, acquire increasing self-mastery and "ai 
tonomy." A man may be said to be free when he is able t 
do wrong, but when he has reached the stage where he 
able to do always right or to choose always the good (or rath( 
"the best"), he is not less but more free. As Friedrich Schille 
the German classical poet and philosopher, in criticizing an 
correcting Kant's rigorous and antithetically pointed oppositio 
of "nature" and "freedom," so clearly recognized : man reach< 
his highest moral perfection when his natural inclination he 
become so purified and ennobled that he desires only th 
good ("the best"), i.e., when natural desire and moral oblige 
tion are harmonized and reconciled. 26 Then and then on! 
can man truly be said to be free: free from both external an 
internal constraint and bondage. Therefore, speaking of th 
more or less perfected faculty of free choice (liberum a, 
bitrium), St. Thomas Aquinas writes: "It is due to the in 
perfection of the will that it can proceed to a conclusion, di 
regarding the order of moral principles, but it is a sign c 
perfect freedom when the will reaches a stage where it ca 
choose among different things only in accordance with th 
way in which they are ordered and related to the end." 27 An 
the identical thought is expressed by St. Augustine in the wel 
known saying: "For it is less to be able not to sin, but greatc 
not to be able to sin." 28 

In rejecting both absolute determinism and absolute ind< 
terminism we made reference to the motivations which ii 
fluence the will from without as well as from within, an 
it will now be our task to weigh these influences in order t 
find out to what extent they are capable of binding or detc 

29 Friedrich Schiller, "On Grace and Dignity" (1793) and "Letters on ti 
Aesthetic Education of Man" (1794-1795). 
2T Summa Jheologica, I, q. 62, a. 8, ad 3. 
21 Op. Imperf. contra Julianum, lib. V, 58. 



Values and Free Choice 137 

mining the will and to what extent they leave it undetermined 
or free. St Thomas Aquinas, in his discussion of this matter, 
mentions a considerable number of major and minor motives 
which may cause the intellect and, subsequently, the will to 
lean to one side rather than another. A man may be faced, 
for example, with the alternative of either following a course 
which is beneficial for his health or another course which sat- 
isfies his sensual appetites. In adopting the former course he 
obeys the demand of his reason and thereby acts in accordance 
with his own human or rational nature. In other words, when- 
ever man's will moves and acts in accordance with what his 
reason tells him about human nature and about the ends of 
human nature, then the will is motivated by what ought to 
move it and not merely by what possibly could move it. Such 
acts are freely willed acts because the will might have obeyed 
other influences, but freely chose to live up to the requisites 
of that "rational appetite" which constitutes its very nature. 

Secondly, we may conceive of instances in which man finds 
himself entangled in the motivating forces of various external 
circumstances. He may be so thoroughly submissive to the 
attraction of some relative good that his intellectual awareness 
is dulled and put to sleep, and in this case the relative good 
not only will appear to him as an absolute value, but it will 
also produce an effect which is properly associated with the 
Supreme Good only, i.e., it will force the assent of the will. 
Thus, to cite an example close at hand, the ideas of nationalism 
or racism may develop into a kind of obsession, so that the 
nation or the race assume the appearance of the Absolute 
Good and in such a guise becloud the judgment of reason and 
necessitate the act of the will. 

Thirdly, the motivations which influence the decision of the 
will may be internal rather than external, i.e., they may have 
their ground in the character and disposition of the human 
agent himself. According to Aristotle: "As a man is, so appears 
to him the end." 29 The will of a calm and composed man 
differs, in its reaction to the identical objects, from the will 
of a man in a state of high-pitched emotion and passion. If 
such a particular human disposition is partially or totally con- 
ditioned by physical or physiological causes, then this man is 

" Nic. Eth., Ill, 5. 



138 Human Action and Moral Values 

no longer truly a free or responsible agent, and his will is no 
longer the faculty of free choice as which we have learned to 
know it. If, on the other hand, the human disposition is ac- 
cessible to the influence of deliberation and will, then the 
human being is a free agent, capable of changing this or that 
particular disposition. "Thus," writes Aristotle, "if a man is so 
disposed that, owing to a habit or passion, this particular object 
appears to him either as a good or as an evil, then the will 
is not motivated by necessity: for it can overcome this habit, 
so that the same object no longer appears to it in this particu- 
lar way, as, for example, a man can calm his anger, so that 
he no longer passes judgment in an angry mood." 30 

Among the other factors which affect the practical judg- 
ments and decisions of man, St. Thomas Aquinas stresses espe- 
cially those of heredity and education, to which, in conformity 
with ancient and medieval beliefs, he adds the influence of 
the heavenly bodies. 31 In an individual inclining, through force 
of hereditary and/or environmental influences, to anger, lust, 
or mendacity, certain objects and acts corresponding to such 
habits or passions may assume the appearance of goods. His 
practical judgment may regard as good what in these matters 
satisfies his habits and passions. However, in judging as good 
anything that is good only in relation to the irrational part 
of his nature, and in being carried on to act in accordance 
with this judgment, such an individual will no longer act 
freely or in a human way. What motivates his actions will 
resemble the rigid causal determinism which is at work in 
subrational nature, a causal determinism which depends en- 
tirely on the aggregate factors of physical generation, inher- 
ited characteristics, and general cosmic relations and conditions. 

What we are describing here is, to be sure, an extreme case, 
conceivable only if we presuppose that man's reason and will 
have become thoroughly fettered, enslaved, or obscured by in- 
fluences beyond the control of these human faculties. And 
once this has happened, it will no longer be possible for human 
reason and human will to find in the human body such dis- 
positions as are necessary for the proper functioning of these 
faculties. Man will then have lost the capacity of comparing 

* Aristotle, loc. cit. 

11 Cf. De Vcritatc, 24, i; ad 19"*. 



Vducs and Free Choice 139 

the Absolute Norm or end of his acts with the relative value 
of the particular physical good, i.e., his action will no longer 
be free, but strictly determined. 

On the other hand, as long as reason has a chance to de- 
liberate, and in the measure in which it can exercise its func- 
tion, to that extent man will be able to estimate the relative 
value of particular goods in view of the Absolute Norm. And 
though human passion may strongly lean toward those goods 
which satisfy man's sense appetites, the ensuing acts will no 
longer be necessitated, but will possess the character trait of 
varying degrees of freedom. 

As far as habits are concerned, they do not inhere in physi- 
cal organs or sense appetites but in the will itself. As is known 
from common-sense observation and confirmed by psychologi- 
cal research, moral as well as immoral habits are acquired by 
repeated acts of the will, resulting in the will's habitual in- 
clination in one direction or another. Thus, a will repeatedly 
obeying the demand of reason habitually learns to enjoy the 
companionship of reason and, conversely, a will repeatedly 
following the impulses of emotion and passion habitually ac- 
quires the corresponding inclinations. 

As in the intellectual faculty of the soul, by means of specula- 
tion, are inscribed the concepts of intellectual knowledge, so 
the volitional faculty of the soul, by means of moral action, 
is actualized by moral habits. Man is what he is by virtue of 
his intellectual knowledge and by virtue of his moral action. 
And again the saying holds true that "as a man is, so appears 
to him the end": An enlightened intellect and a prudently 
guided "rational appetite" are centered and anchored in Abso- 
lute Truth and Absolute Goodness, while a defective judg- 
ment and a corrupted will have lost sight of the hierarchical 
order of being and value. "That something appears to us as 
good and appropriate," writes St. Thomas Aquinas, "depends 
on two conditions: on the condition of the proposed object, 
on the one hand, and on the condition of the subject to whom 
the object is proposed, on the other. For appropriateness im- 
plies a relationship between two terms. And that is why beings 
of different disposition may conceive of the identical object 
as either appropriate or inappropriate." 32 

32 Summa Theologica, I-II, q. 9, a. 2. 



140 Human Action and Moral Values 

For man, the rational animal, there is only one way to be 
good, viz., to follow the demands of reason. There are, how- 
ever, several ways in which man's innate desire of the good 
can manifest its def ectiveness : the road of ignorance, the 
road of weakness, the roads of malice and iniquity. Accord- 
ing to Aristotle, "man may go wrong in many different ways 
but right only in one; and so the former is easy, the latter dif- 
ficult; easy it is to miss the mark, but hard to hit it. ... What 
we mean by virtue, then, is the true excellence of man, i.e., 
a state whereby man himself becomes good, and whereby good- 
ness is imparted to his works and deeds." 33 

The Aristotelian-Thomistic doctrine regarding the nature of 
human freedom affirms both the grandeur and frailty of man: 
it honors and extols the one without denying the other. By 
using freedom, his most precious and precarious gift, man 
may grow to his full and majestic stature and thus become a 
master, or he may extinguish the spark of the Divine in his 
nature and descend into the telluric realm of self-chosen 
servitude. 



u Nic. Eth., II, 6, uo6' b . 



Chapter Three 

HUMAN ACTION IN STATE 
AND SOCIETY 

(Political Philosophy) 



19. Man and Society 

WE HAVE found man metaphysically constituted as a 
being endowed with intellect and free will, i.e., with 
a capacity for reaching out after infinite truth and infinite 
good. We have designated such a being as a "person" and have 
pointed out why a greater richness of being and therefore a 
higher dignity is associated with "personality" than with "in- 
dividuality" (cf. p. 44). We have seen furthermore that a 
human "person," in virtue of his life principle the spiritual 
soul with its inherent faculties intellect and will; knowl- 
edge and love is potentially capable of embracing or "be- 
coming" in some way all things (quodammodo omnia) and 
that human personality finds its fullest realization in man's 
metaphysical and moral relationship to the absolute reality 
of God. A human person is thus in a way a small universe (a 
"microcosm") within the large universe (the "macrocosm"). 
Man is truly a "whole" or a totality though, owing to the 
physico-spiritual amplitude and plenitude of his personal es- 
sence and faculties, he is not self-sufficient but stands in vital 
relationship with other types and grades of being. He is 
neither destined nor fitted to live in isolation but, on the 
contrary, called and equipped to communicate intellectually, 
socially, and practico-politically with other beings of his own 
kind and thus to realize the possibilities of his own self 
in a constant give-and-take of thought and action. This is why 
Aristotle, having defined man as a rational animal, adds that 
he is also a political or social animal. 
Man's nature includes both rational and sociopolitical clc- 



142 Human Action in State and Society 

ments because it includes both personality and individuality. 
As an individual, man represents an animal species and as 
such forms part of the material universe. As a person, man 
is a body-soul composite and as such the incarnation of spir- 
itual and moral values, by virtue of which he may acquire 
mastery over the material universe and mastery over his own 
self. 

However, when we say that in human nature the material 
and spiritual and therefore also the individual and personal 
elements are both included, we must duly re-emphasize that 
these components are interlinked and mutually dependent 
in such a way that their normal activities are inconceivable 
without their unison. For while in nature and in the life of 
subrational creatures the ends of the individual and the ends 
of the species are achieved with the aid of the principle of 
finality inherent in the universe (cf. p. 67), the ends of in- 
dividual and social life on the human level cannot be attained 
without the guidance of human reason, which supplies motives 
and directives for the life of the individual and of the group 
and thus implements the individual and social incentives of the 
species with the weight of personal freedom and responsibility. 
Nature provides means for the self-preservation and protection 
of individual and species much more generously in the realm 
of subrational creatures than it does in the realm of human 
beings, so that as a consequence the creative activities of human 
life individually and socially considered depend to a much 
larger extent on the individual and collective ingenuity, in- 
ventiveness, and fruitful collaboration of human beings. In 
living and learning, in agriculture and industry, in the practi- 
cal achievements of the arts and crafts, in all the works of 
culture and civilization man stands in need of man, so that 
everything he does or creates has both a personal and a social 
aspect and significance. 

This mutual intellectual, moral, and physical interdepend- 
ence of the members of the human race finds its most con- 
spicuous and most noble manifestation in human speech, in 
which reason becomes, as it were, incarnate, creating for itself 
the specifically human means of personal expression and social 
communication. 

We find man, then, as previously described (cf. p. 91), 



Man and Society 143 

situated at a point of the universe where spirit and matter 
intersect. In his rational-personal and in his social existence 
he partakes of the two realms of material and spiritual reality, 
and it is from this unique and peculiar situation that the major 
problems and conflicts of his moral and social life arise. 

As a part of the material universe and a member of the 
animal kingdom man is born into and lives in the ethnologi- 
cal and sociological conditions and surroundings of a commu- 
nity of tribal or ethnic kinship and is subject to the conditions 
and laws which prevail in the kingdoms of subrational nature. 
In conception and birth, in growth and decay, in the biological 
patterns of life and death, the human individual serves and 
perpetuates the species humana. But as part of the moral and 
spiritual universe, i.e., as a human personality, man surpasses 
the collective community of tribal kinship and its materially 
conditioned and determined biological laws. As a rational and 
free being he realizes his spiritual kinship with the incor- 
ruptible reality of absolute values, and by making the best 
possible use of the faculties of his spiritual soul he moves 
progressively toward greater freedom or greater "autonomy," 
attracted and motivated by his more or less dimmed visualiza- 
tion of absolute truth, absolute goodness, and absolute beauty. 

Because man is thus a native of two essentially distinct realms 
of being matter and spirit he is prone to misjudge his own 
nature and its potential range by overstressing either its spir- 
itual component at the expense of matter or its material com- 
ponent at the expense of spirit. Instead of realistically acknowl- 
edging himself as being composed of matter and form (body 
and soul), both conjoined in one true and complete substance 
(cf. p. 104), he is apt to mistake himself for pure matter or 
pure mind, by either depreciating his material inheritance or 
by obfuscating his spiritual heritage and destination. In either 
case of mistaken identity man falls short of that physico- 
spiritual wholeness or totality which is the unique earmark 
of his "humanity." Integral materialism or naturalism and 
integral spiritualism or supranaturalism are the offshoots of 
such metaphysical misconceptions of man concerning his own 
nature and his actual position in the universe. While material- 
ism and naturalism are unrealistic in their forgetfulness of 
man's share in the supraindividual and supratemporal realm 



144 Human Action in State and Society 

of the spirit, pure spiritualism and supranaturalism arc equally 
unrealistic in their neglectfulness of the material and natural 
contingencies by which human life is individuated and dif- 
ferentiated. And while this latter view aspires to the abstract 
idea of a "humanity" emptied of individuality and oblivious 
to such natural distinctions as sex, race, and nationality, the 
former view finds itself captivated by these same relative mate- 
rial distinctions, unable to penetrate to that depth in which 
the individual and the relative reveals itself as permeated and 
sustained in its existence by the Universal and Absolute. 

For a true or realistic understanding of man's unique situa- 
tion as a rational and social animal it is therefore necessary 
that our glance take in the lower and lowest as well as the 
higher and highest reaches of human nature: we must see 
man not in the abstract but totditer individudizatus (St. 
Thomas Aquinas), i.e., in his concrete, individual, and per- 
sonal totality. To comprehend this concrete human being our 
glance will have to move in two directions: upward, from 
material flux and change to the changeless realm of spiritual 
being, and downward, from the mansions of reason and free- 
dom to the deep and vital wellsprings of physical nature. 
The first view reveals to us man's personal dignity: we follow 
the movement of his spirit as it freely aspires to the universal 
by overcoming the limitations of individuality. The second 
view reveals to us man's membership in the material uni- 
verse: we see him immersed in the processes of physical gen- 
eration, growth, and decay, in material being and becoming, 
in the exuberant richness and vitality of physico-cosmic move- 
ments and forces. Both views in their conjunction, therefore, 
are required for a fully adequate comprehension of the nature 
of man. 

It is in the material and sociopolitical aspect of man's nature 
that we find the deepest reason for the origin of civil authority 
and that politically organized society known as the State. 
God, according to the conclusions arrived at in our meta- 
physical inquiry, is the only being which is "autonomous" 
in the fullest sense: He exists self-sufficiently in Himself and 
through Himself (per se), whereas all creatures arc ab dio f 
depending, first of all, on God and, secondly, more or less 
on each other. Man is part of the superior, supraindividual 



Man and Society 145 

totality of the universe and depends on this superior order 
and owes allegiance to it, in return for the gifts and aids 
which he has received and is constantly receiving from it. 
However, while the relationships between subrational crea- 
tures are nonvoluntary or more or less determined by nature, 
man's relationship to his fellow men bears the imprint of 
freedom. He is not only an individual part of a superior 
totality, but he is himself a "whole" or a totality in his own 
right (sui generis} and therefore capable of comprehending 
and freely embracing this supraindividual or social totality. 
Human society is thus a whole composed of wholes, i.e., a 
society of human persons, each of whom is related to the other 
as well as to the social whole. In other words, the metaphysical 
and physical solidarity which exists throughout the created 
universe acquires on the human level the additional character- 
istic of a moral and spiritual solidarity, so that each man has 
a stake in the development not only of his own personal self 
but in the development of "humanity" or the human race as 
such. This virtual solidarity may be transformed into an actual 
one by man's conscious and voluntary moral effort. 

In this way man's personal moral good is directly related to 
the common good of all men or of society as such. Ethics or 
moral philosophy has therefore not only to deal with the ends 
of personal life but also with the ends of group life or social 
life. And this is why Aristotelian-Thomistic philosophy re- 
gards political and social science as branches or subdivisions 
of ethics. The good human life, i.e., a life worthy of a rational 
animal, is not merely an end of individual but also an end 
of social or collective morality. The principles of moral phi- 
losophy are equally valid for the individual person and for 
society as a whole. The moral concepts of right and wrong, 
good and evil, retain their qualitative identity in their ap- 
plication to the life of the individual and to the life of the 
group, whether it be a question of family affiliation, of tribal 
association, or of national and international relations. Thus 
acts of injustice are immoral, whether they are committed by 
individuals or by social, political, or national groups. Defeating 
the individual ends of the human person, such acts equally 
frustrate the common end or common good of the society 
of human persons. The common or social good, therefore, 



146 Human Action in State and Society 

must be in harmony with the personal good of the individual, 
i.e., it must be essentially a human good, contributing to the 
advancement and improvement of individual human persons. 

In the gradual realization of his innate possibilities as a 
rational and sociopolitical animal, man passes through dif- 
ferent stages: He is, first of all, a member of a family, next a 
member of a tribal or ethnic community, and finally a mem- 
ber of a civil society or a national association. In thus enriching 
his personal self through the fruitful fellowship of group life 
and civil society, man may find it expedient to enter by his 
own free choice into various intermediate forms of human 
companionship and association, such as fraternities, social 
clubs, occupational or professional corporations, guilds, unions, 
etc. But while all these forms of human association depend to 
a greater or lesser extent on the physical and temporal bound- 
aries of race, place, or class, on tribal, political, or national 
characteristics of group living, there is one all-embracing com- 
munity in which man may claim membership and citizenship 
in virtue of the intellectual and moral capacity of his nature: 
passing from the "City of Man" to the "City of God," man 
rises from the particular to the universal, finding his spiritual 
home in a supraracial, supratemporal, and supranatural reality, 
in that spiritual association which is visibly embodied in the 
Church Universal, in whose vital embrace the material and 
physical solidarity of the human race and its social groupings 
acquire their full moral depth and spiritual meaning and 
direction. 

While thus the individual as well as the common or social 
good have their ultimate source and their sanction in the 
transcendent sphere of absolute goodness, the social common 
good as such is not on the same level with the spiritual good 
of human persons, but rather subordinate to it. While man's 
personal perfection, owing to his being both a rational and 
social animal, cannot be fully realized unless his moral action 
extends beyond his own self to the common social good, this 
common good in turn is constituted by and must constantly 
be referred to the good of human persons, to their greater 
moral and spiritual perfection. And yet, even the attainment of 
all the objectives of the common good in the best of human 
societies would by itself not suffice to bring about man's highest 



Nature and Moral Law 147 

moral and spiritual perfection. For while it is the true function 
of State and society to aid man in the pursuit of the natural 
ends of his personal life, it is the function of the Church as 
the visible manifestation of a superior, supratemporal, and 
universal society to make it possible for man to attain to the 
spiritual and supernatural end of his nature. However, as 
"grace does not efface nature, but rather supports it and 
leads it to perfection" (cf. p. 121), the aims of State and society 
and the means employed by them in the realization of these 
aims must be essentially in harmony with man's ultimate spir- 
itual end or with his perfect beatitude. 



20. The Law of Nature and 
the Moral Law 

WE HAVE stated above (cf. pp. 112 and 128) that mo- 
rality as embodied in human action does not impose on 
the human soul an external and foreign rule but rather ex- 
presses outwardly the universal law of reason, recognized and 
acknowledged by the human intellect as the law and the voice 
of God. We have further pointed out that the internal principle 
or faculty from which human action derives its specifically 
human or moral character is human reason. Moral action, pro- 
ceeding from reason as from its internal source, tends toward 
the welfare and increasing perfection of the human person. 
Man, however, being both a rational and social animal, needs 
some regulatory principle which orders his life and his actions 
with regard to the welfare of the group or with a view to the 
common good of all. This principle, expressing the norms and 
rules which are to govern the relations between individual 
and social good and which are to guide social or group life 
as such, is commonly designated as law. 

In contrast to the internal principle of reason, "law" is an 
external principle of action, having its roots in the objective 
constitution and order of the universe. However, as man him- 
self is part of this objective and universal order of reality, 
"law," though confronting him as an external norm, is not 
foreign to human nature but rather expressive of the same 



148 Human Action in State and Society 

rational order which permeates the entke realm of beii 
and reality. Thus, in the last analysis, the internal and t] 
external principles of morality are identical, having the 
common source and the ground of their validity in Divij 
Reason and Transcendental Being. "The entire communi 
of the universe," writes St. Thomas Aquinas, "is govern< 
by Divine Reason. And so the very basis of the governme 
of things, residing in God as in the ruler of the universe, h 
the nature of law. And as the Divine Reason is an etern 
concept, and not one of the temporal order ... a law of tP 
kind should be designated as 'Eternal Law.'" 1 

It would seem then that all "law" has its origin in tl 
Divine Reason or in the Supreme Lawgiver of the univer 
and that this "eternal law" is revealed in the manifold wa 
in which created beings inanimate and animate; minera 
plants, and animals follow the laws of their particul 
natures. "Since all things which are subject to Divine Pro^ 
dence are regulated and measured by die Eternal Law . , 
it is evident that all have some share in it, as by its impre 
they incline toward their specific activities and ends. The i 
tional creature, like all other creatures, is under Divine Pro^ 
dence, but in a rather unique way: it becomes itself a pa 
taker and dispenser of providence, freely promoting its ov\ 
welfare and that of others. . . . And such a creaturely pa 
ticipation in the eternal law we call the 'natural law' or tl 
*law of nature.' Hence, when the Psalmist (Ps. 4:6) sa) 
The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, is signed upon u 
he intends to convey the meaning that the light of natur 
reason, by which we discern what is good and what evil . 
is nothing but the imprint of the Divine light in us. It fc 
lows from this that the natural law expresses the share 
rational creature has in the eternal law." 2 

The natural law, or "the unwritten law of nature," accor 
ingly, is simply the order embodied in nature, read and artic 
lated by the human mind. Man, like the rest of creation, 
bound by the law of nature, but he is subject to it in a mann 
that is determined by his own rational nature. For while ; 
subrational creatures follow the law of their natures with ; 



* Summ* Thcologica, I-H, q. 91, t. i. 
'St. Thomas Aquina*, loc. ci*., t. 2. 



Nature and Moral Law 149 

unquestioning obedience, man, through his faculty of reason, 
must, first of all, discover and comprehend this natural law 
in the created universe and in the depths of his own mind, 
and he must, secondly, through his faculty of free choice, 
determine for himself the degree of his conformity to it. In 
other words, while for all subrational beings the natural law 
is identical with the physical laws of their natures, for man 
the natural law becomes a moral law, i.e., the adherence to it 
must be self-determined and self-directed. And while all sub- 
rational beings are naturally attuned to the ends which arc- 
proportionate to their natures, man must use his intellect and 
free will to adjust or conform himself to the end that is 
proportionate to a rational animal. 

Human nature as such, then, if rightly understood, estab- 
lishes the ultimate norm and criterion of the morality of human 
acts. As far as the physical constitution of man is concerned, 
every act of which a human being is capable may be said to 
be in conformity with his physical nature. But many acts of 
man, though in conformity with his physical nature, are out 
of tune with his rational or moral nature and must therefore 
be termed immoral or evil. It is a stunted biology which takes 
account only of man's physical but not of his intellectual and 
moral nature. Such a "scientific" view of man, therefore, falls 
short of an integral understanding of human nature and con- 
sequently fails to provide criteria of moral judgments and 
moral acts. No reference to "the mores" and the "accumulated 
wisdom of the race" will ever be able to discover motivations 
beyond those of utility and expediency. Such motives, how- 
ever unless their anchorage in natural and eternal law is 
duly recognized are morally indifferent and therefore in- 
capable of establishing the norms of moral action. By refusing 
to extend our concept of man beyond the frame of physico- 
mechanical science, we will at best be in a position to make 
valid statements as to what actually happens or what pos- 
sibly may happen, but we shall never be capable of deriving 
from such a limited scientific frame distinctions of good and 
evil, right and wrong, or any valid rules regarding human 
conduct. 

It was stated by St. Paul and subsequently reasserted by 
many ancient and modern authors that the law of nature is 



150 Human Action in State and Society 

inscribed in the very mind and heart of man: "For when the 
Gentiles, who have not the law, do by nature those things 
which are of the law, these, having not the law, are a law 
to themselves: who show the wor\ of the law written in their 
hearts"* From this statement it might appear as if the law 
of nature were not only the oldest but also the best known 
of all laws. While the former supposition seems hardly open 
to doubt, the latter assumption obviously needs some further 
qualification. 

If all men at all times had been thoroughly familiar with 
the demands of the natural or moral law, then it might be 
assumed that a majority of them at all times would have 
acted in accordance with these recognized principles. How- 
ever, first of all, such a well-nigh universal acquaintance with 
the natural law can hardly be predicated in the light of human 
history and experience. Yet even if, for the sake of argument, 
we were willing to grant such an intimate familiarity of most 
men with the principles of the natural law, there is still a 
huge gap between the general knowledge of a principle and 
its specific application to any number of particular instances 
and situations. In other words, while the law of nature or the 
moral law is indeed the oldest and most fundamental of all 
laws, and while we readily follow St. Paul in asserting that 
it is written in the innermost heart of man, its discovery as 
well as its application and realization is fraught with many 
difficulties. 

The natural law is known to man as a kind of "first prin- 
ciple" of morality, demanding in a form so general as to be 
necessarily somewhat vague that "the good be done and evil 
be avoided." 4 If, however, we ask ourselves how to act in any 
particular situation, we are immediately faced with the fact 
that, owing to the fallibility of human judgment and the in- 
determination of the human will, we are prone to misinterpret 
and misapply this primary principle of morality. This is why 
St. Thomas Aquinas further elaborates on his general formu- 
lation of the principle by asking the question: "Can the law 
of nature be blotted out from the heart of man?" He answers 
as follows: "First of all, there pertain to the natural law certain 

Rom. 2:14-15. 

4 St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Thcologica, MI, q. 94, *. 2. 



'Nature and Moral Law 151 

most general precepts, which are known to all; secondly, 
there pertain to it certain secondary and more particular pre- 
cepts, which are, as it were, conclusions derived from these 
first principles. As to those general principles, the natural law 
in its universal validity can in no wise be annihilated in the 
hearts of men; but it can be blotted out in the case of a par- 
ticular action, in so far as reason is prevented from applying 
the general principle to a particular act, owing to carnal 
desire or some other passion. And as to other secondary pre- 
cepts, the natural law can be blotted out from the hearts of 
men, either on account of wrong convictions [as errors with 
regard to necessary conclusions occur also in speculative opera- 
tions], or on account of depraved customs and corrupt 

habits " 5 

We are justified then in maintaining that the law of nature 
is the oldest of all laws and that it is not only the permanent 
foundation of all other laws but also the abiding norm to 
which human acts ought to conform and therewith the ob- 
jective basis of morality. But man's knowledge of the natural 
or moral law is more or less imperfect, increasing in perfection 
in direct proportion to the elevation and purification of man's 
moral and spiritual nature and the development of his con- 
science, i.e., of the faculty of his intellect to pass judgment 
on moral issues and actions. It would, however, be erroneous 
to think of man's increasing knowledge of the natural law 
in the terms of "progress" or historic evolution. For we actu- 
ally find an acute awareness of certain principles of the natural 
or moral law in some of the most ancient and "primitive" 
tribal communities, 6 while this awareness appears dimmed to 
the point of virtual extinction in many highly "civilized" and 
chronologically very recent epochs of history. It would appear, 
therefore, that knowledge or ignorance of the natural law is 
possible wherever human beings live and with their lives prac- 
tically demonstrate the constancy of human nature in the wide 
range circumscribed by its dual, physico-spiritual constitution. 

8 Loc. cvt., q. 94, a. 6. 

*Cf. P. Wilhelm Schmidt, Der Ursprung der GoHesidee, I-V; 1912-1934. 
Eng. transl.: The Origin and Growth of Religion (London: 1931). 



152 Human Action in State and Society 

21. The Natural Law and Human Rights 

IN THE Western World, from the days of ancient Greece 
well into the eighteenth century, the basic significance of 
the natural law for individual and social life has been acknowl- 
edged and strongly affirmed by leading philosophers, jurists, 
statesmen, and men of letters alike. Many of the most illustrious 
minds of Western Civilization in ancient and modern times 
(Sophocles, Cicero, St. Paul, St. Augustine, St. Thomas 
Aquinas, Suarez, Vitoria, Grotius, etc.) saw in the natural 
law not only the permanent foundation of civilized group 
living but also the most solid bulwark of human rights. They 
realized that man's personal and social obligations as well as 
his personal and social rights have their roots in human nature 
and, more specifically, in the distinctive moral quality of human 
nature, i.e., in human freedom. Man is not only called upon 
to do everything in his power to reach his true end and there- 
by to fulfill his human destiny, but he may also justly or 
rightfully demand that those goods which are indispensable 
for the attainment of this goal, and which nature has placed 
within his reach, are not unjustly or arbitrarily withheld from 
him. Both his duties and his rightful claims are therefore 
safeguarded by the absolute norm of the law of nature, whose 
general principles and statutes define both what can justly 
be demanded or expected of human nature and to what goods 
and values human nature in its turn is entitled. 

Sophocles, in his "Antigone" offers a striking illustration of 
the way in which the natural law, the absolute and uncon- 
ditional basis of individual and collective morality, asserts its 
authority in the individual, strengthening the human will in 
its heroic resolve to uphold the natural rights of man, even at 
the cost of the supreme sacrifice of life itself. Antigone knows 
that the natural law takes precedence over any positive or man- 
made law, especially wherever such "law" defies or circumvents 
the absolute norm of the law of nature. Antigone who, con- 
trary to the explicit orders of King Creon, conducts the time- 
honored burial rites for her slain brother, and who herself is 
subsequently buried alive at the king's behest, lays down her 
life in defense of the natural law, fully aware that this law 



'Natural Law and Human Rights 153 

as such safeguards and protects the sacred rights of the indi- 
vidual and of the family from the infringements of a tyranni- 
cal State or its representative. Sacrificing the temporal to honor 
the eternal, Antigone affirms the absolute supremacy of the 
natural law which, as we have pointed out, is itself an expres- 
sion of the eternal law. And so, justifying her action by in- 
voking the authority of the eternal order of reality, she ex- 
claims: "I owe a more enduring allegiance to the dead than 
to the living, for it is in that world that I shall abide forever" 
These words imply the clear realization that the law promul- 
gated by the king a law which flagrantly contradicts the 
demands of the natural law is in reality a perversion of law 
and therefore without binding force. Creon, on the other hand, 
sums up his defiance of the eternal, natural, and moral law 
in words which very appropriately express the creed of all 
state absolutism: "Whomsoever the City-State may appoint, 
that man must be obeyed, in things small and great, in things 
just and unjust!' 

While the general principles of the natural law are thus of 
universal validity, the particular interpretations and applica- 
tions of these principles must necessarily vary in accordance 
with temporal and local contingencies. It is the function of 
positive or human law to specify and codify these interpreta- 
tions by means of positive legislation, and thereby to render 
the abstract precepts of the natural law concrete and adapted 
to the needs and conditions of different social, political, ethni- 
cal, national, and geographic surroundings. As all just positive 
law is thus chiefly explanatory or declaratory, i.e., a mere 
projection and concrete application of the natural law, its 
statutes must be in harmony with the general precepts of the 
law of nature. Legal statutes, on the other hand, which con- 
tradict the law of nature do violence also to human nature. 
They are unjust laws and are designated as such by St. Thomas 
Aquinas: "Unjust laws," he writes, "are of two kinds: first, 
they may oppose human welfare, either from the point of 
view of the end, as in the case of a ruler imposing burdens on 
the people, not for the sake of the common good but to satisfy 
his greed and for his own greater glory; or from the point of 
view of the author of the law, as in the case of a legislator 
passing laws which exceed the power entrusted to him; or in 



154 Human Action in State and Society 

view of the form, as in the case of burdens being inequitably 
imposed on the people, even if this were done in the supposed 
interest of the common good. Statutes of this kind are not 
laws but rather acts of violence, for, as Augustine says: 'because 
it is unjust it cannot be called a law' (D lib. orb. I, cap. 5). 
Therefore such laws do not bind a man's conscience. . . . 
Secondly, laws may be unjust by their opposition to divinely 
sanctioned goods and values, as the laws of tyrants commanding 
idolatry or any other thing contrary to the Divine Law. And 
no one is under obligation to obey such laws, as we read in 
the Acts of the Apostles (5:29), 'we ought to obey God rather 
than men/ " 7 

As the purpose of all legislation is the more efficient pro- 
tection and promotion of the commonweal, it is certainly 
within the province of human rights to discard obsolete laws 
and to replace them by new enactments which are better 
suited to changed conditions: "Those who first tried to dis- 
cover what is useful for human society were unable to under- 
stand and evaluate all the problems involved, and therefore 
their institutions were imperfect and defective in many re- 
spects; but those who came after them changed the prevailing 
conditions and created institutions which were less inadequate 
from the point of view of the common weal. . . . Thus a law 
may rightfully be changed because of changed human con- 
ditions, for in different circumstances different conditions are 
expedient." 8 

Yet while stressing the legitimacy and necessity of change 
and progress in legal enactments, St. Thomas simultaneously 
enjoins upon the people and the legislator due respect and 
reverence for established customs and traditions. Human laws 
should only be changed if the gain in terms of human welfare 
is very substantial. The wise ruler and legislator, therefore, 
always having his mind set on the promotion of the common 
good, will try to strike a reasonable balance between conserva- 
tion and change, between tradition and progress. 

Human rights, we summarize, are "inalienable," or uncon- 
ditionally valid, in that they are inherent in the human person, 
and they take precedence over the claims and rights of all social 
and political groups, associations, and organizations which as 

' Sttmma Theologiia, MI, q. 96, a. 4. * Loc. o/., q. 97> a. i. 



Natural Law and Human Rights 155 

such have their raison d'etre and their frame of reference in 
human persons. Man, in virtue of the spiritual and moral com- 
ponents of his nature, is the possessor of "inalienable" personal 
rights, conducive to the attainment of his supratemporal des- 
tiny, and these rights correspond in number and substance to 
the nature of human personality and to the circumference of 
its perfectibility. The human person possesses these rights prior 
to being constituted as a member of family, state, and society. 
These social groups are related to the human person as to 
their end. The family is to provide such environmental con- 
ditions and influences as are required for the cultivation of 
personal values, and State and society are to supplement the 
educational functions of the family by furnishing additional 
aids and means to contribute directly to man's natural and 
indirectly to his supernatural end and happiness. 

As all the natural rights of man have their source in man's 
rational nature, and as this rationality is shared by all men, 
it follows that these natural rights are the same for all or that 
all men are equal with regard to their natural rights, all having 
an equal claim to those means which are indispensable for the 
attainment of the ends of human personality. 

This equality of all men with regard to their natural rights 
was affirmed in almost identical phraseology by the authors 
of the French Declaration of the Rights of Man (1789) and 
the American Declaration of Independence. But while the 
French philosophes of the pre-revolution and revolution era 
interpreted the "natural law" in the spirit of eighteenth-century 
rationalism and naturalism, the American Founding Fathers 
were not only aware of the rationalism and the "natural re- 
ligion" of the eighteenth century but were also the spiritual 
heirs of the Christian theism of the Pilgrim Fathers of the 
seventeenth century, who bequeathed to them the basic philo- 
sophical and theological tenets of the European tradition. Inte- 
gral Catholicism, too, was represented in their ranks. They did 
not share with the French philosophs the belief that it was 
possible or desirable to wipe out the past with a stroke of the 
pen or with the aid of an aroused populace. They would 
rather have concurred in Joseph De Maistre's acrid criticism 
of the attempt to reduce the complexity of the natural law 
and the framework of natural rights to the oversimplified 



156 Human Action in State and Society 

terms of a mathematical formula: "One of the great errors/' 
wrote this French conservative, "was the belief that a political 
constitution could be created and written a priori, whereas 
reason and experience unite in establishing the fact that a 
constitution is a work of Providence. . . ."* 

What the American Declaration of Independence condenses 
in the phrase "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness/' and 
what was more specifically qualified in the "Bill of Rights," 
is essentially a reaffirmation of the supratemporal validity of 
the natural law and of those "inalienable" natural rights with 
which "all men are endowed by their Creator." In the concrete 
these rights refer to the prerogative of the human being to 
be the responsible author or master of his free acts; the right 
to strive for the perfection of his moral, intellectual, and spir- 
itual life ("pursuit of happiness") ; the right to own or acquire 
those material goods which serve directly man's temporal and 
indirectly also his eternal welfare ; the right of free association, 
in family relationship as well as in other forms of group living; 
and the right to enjoy that amount of political, social, and 
legal equality that is required for the safeguarding of the 
sacred dignity of human personality. 

The opposition to this ancient doctrine of natural law and 
human rights came in modern times chiefly from two sources: 
(i) from the type of liberalism sponsored by Jean Jacques 
Rousseau and his followers and (2) from the political abso- 
lutism embodied in the theory of the "Divine Right of Kings," 
as proclaimed and defended by James I of England in his 
"Premonition to All Most Mightie Monarches, Kings, Free 
Princes, and States of Christendom." This theory of political 
absolutism merged in the nineteenth century with the political 
philosophy of the totalitarian State or the "Divine Right" of 
state omnipotence. For Hegel the State is the supreme mani- 
festation of the "World Spirit," of Universal and Absolute 
Reason and Will, and therefore the one and only source of 
all rights. The individual has no reality apart from the State, 
the latter being invested with all the attributes of a fully au- 
tonomous or Divine personality. 

While political absolutism thus tried to do away with natural 

"Jbscph De Maistrc, Essai sur Ic Principe gencrateur des Constitutions politiqucs, 
p. i. 



Natural Law and Human Rights 157 

human rights by absorbing the human person completely in 
the divinized State-Personality, the extreme liberalism of the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, in righteous protest 
against all totalitarian claims, carried the doctrine of human 
rights to an excessive individualism which idolized individual- 
ity and personality. When Rousseau sounded his battle cry 
"back to nature," he had in mind Hobbes's primitive "state 
of nature" rather than the Aristotelian and Thomistic "law 
of nature." He and the other spokesmen of the revolt against 
the "ancien regime" called for a society freed from all coercive 
restraints, a society in which self-sufficient man would be his 
own lawgiver, unwilling to recognize any norm outside and 
above his "autonomous" ego. 

It is this principle of "atomistic" individualism which in the 
era of the Industrial Revolution and of capitalistic expansion 
was so frequently invoked to justify social oppression and the 
exploitation of one group by another. Dispensing with the 
sanctions of the natural law, the advocates of "laissez faire" 
and "rugged individualism" became oblivious to the fact that 
it cannot be the purpose of society to ensure unrestricted and 
unrestrained liberty for all, but rather to procure the com- 
mon good of all, i.e., the good or happiness of all the 
human persons who constitute what, in an analogical or 
metaphorical sense, may be called "the social organism." The 
merely analogical meaning of this latter term requires special 
emphasis because, as has been pointed out, the "social organ- 
ism" is composed of human persons who, in dignity, intrinsic 
worth, and legal claims at once precede and transcend the titles 
and prerogatives of any collective "body." The "social organ- 
ism," unlike a biological organism, exists for the sake, i.e., the 
perfection, of its individual members, not vice versa. It has 
no reality apart from these members, while its members have 
a reality of their own apart from it, but achieve a higher and 
fuller degree of realization in virtue of the heightened efficiency 
produced by the cooperative efforts of the "social organism." 

Hegel's ideas concerning the origin and nature of natural 
rights were shared by all the thinkers of the positivistic and 
"historical" schools of political and social philosophy such as 
Bentham, Comte, Spencer, etc. The representatives of the "his- 
torical school of law" in Germany in the nineteenth century 



158 Human Action in State and Society 

adopted the antimetaphysical bias of the positivists in de- 
nouncing the natural law with its inherent natural rights 
as an empty abstraction or an arbitrary and fictitious construct. 
They insisted that all law was positive or man-made law and 
that all legal enactments and statutes were the products of the 
Volfygeist (folk spirit) and as such represented a normative 
codification of historically evolved manners and customs. 

As against this historical positivism it may be appropriate 
to quote the British statesman and historian, Edmund Burke, 
who, in his attempt to mediate between revolutionary progres- 
sivism and inert traditionalism, stressed the permanent meta- 
physical foundation of "law" and summarized the ancient 
teachings as follows: "It would be hard to point out any 
error more truly subversive of all the order and beauty, of all 
the peace and happiness of human society, than the position 
that any body of men have a right to make what laws they 
please; or that laws can derive any authority from their in- 
stitution . . . independent of the quality of the subject matter. 
... In reality there are two, and only two, foundations of law : 
I mean equity and utility. With respect to the former, it grows 
out of the great rule of equality, which is grounded upon our 
common nature, and which Philo . . . calls the mother of 
justice. All human laws are, properly speaking, only declara- 
tory; they may alter the mode and application, but have no 
power over the substance of original justice. The other founda- 
tion of law, which is utility, must be understood, not of partial 
or limited, but of general and public utility (the "common 
good") . . . derived directly from our rational nature; for any 
other utility may be the utility of a robber, but cannot be that 
of a citizen ... of a member of the commonwealth." 10 

Edmund Burke thus concurs with Aristotle and St. Thomas 
Aquinas in the conviction that the normative bases of all law 
are eternal, that these eternal norms express the will of the 
Eternal God, and that this will is manifested in the order of 
being and can be deciphered on the pages of the book of 
nature. The eternal norms of the law of nature can therefore 
not be ignored by positive legislation without detriment to 
State and society and without grievous harm to the individuals 
by whom these collective bodies are constituted. 

10 Edmund Burke, Correspondence, H, p. 311. 



Nature of Justice 159 

22. The Nature of Justice 

THE equality of all men with regard to their natural rights 
requires that their mutual relations be subject to certain 
rules, by means of which this equality is, firstly, put forward 
as an ideal demand and, secondly, practically realized to the 
greatest possible extent. These rules, however, cannot be de- 
vised or arbitrarily imposed, but must grow out of a certain 
disposition or inclination on the part of man to deal fairly 
with others of his kind or "to give everyone his due." This 
moral disposition of human nature, "the steady, unceasing will 
to give every man his due," 11 is called justice and, according to 
some of the representative ancient and medieval philosophers, 
it is the queen of all the moral virtues. Justice may be termed 
the supreme moral virtue because, subjectively, it is most closely 
associated with reason and free will, the two highest ranking 
human faculties, and because it has as its object the good of 
other human beings of equal rank and dignity. 

What is due to some object or being is that which is com- 
mensurate or proportionate to its nature and mode of exist- 
ence. As each thing individually is proportioned to its own 
end, so also all things or created beings are collectively ordered 
and proportioned to each other, in accordance with the vary- 
ing constitution of their natures. What is due to a human 
person is accordingly determined and circumscribed by those 
human rights which are commensurate to human nature and 
which are themselves grounded in the natural law. What is 
due to each and all according to the unchanging norms of the 
law of nature is expressed in terms of legal rights and obliga- 
tions, and the concepts of justice make manifest the undevi- 
ating resolve on the part of human beings to effect in human 
behavior and human relations conformity with the eternal 
order of the natural law and thus to safeguard the inviolable 
and incommunicable rights of persons and groups. 

The end or object of justice is either the regulation of the 
conduct and dealings of persons with persons or the regula- 
tion of the relationship between individual persons and society 

11 St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Thcologica, II-II, q. 58, a. i. 



160 Human Action in State and Society 

as a whole. In accordance with these different ends moral 
philosophy distinguishes between commutative and distributive 
justice. Commutative justice, referring primarily to contracts 
or exchanges (commutationes), either between individual per- 
sons or between groups of persons, also includes contractual 
or legal relationships between States or nations, which may 
be described in an analogical sense as collective personalities 
endowed with equal natural rights and obligations. Distributive 
justice, on the other hand, as implied in the name, is concerned 
with the problems of the equitable distribution of those goods 
to which all the members of a State or society are entitled in 
virtue of their common human nature. The exercise of the 
functions of distributive justice is among the foremost obliga- 
tions and responsibilities of the State or the government acting 
as the representative of the entire community. The just claims 
of individuals to their relative share in the goods of the com- 
monwealth is to be determined by the productive capacity 
and effort of individuals and groups. As far as the equitable 
distribution of economic goods is concerned, the administra- 
tion of distributive justice rests primarily with the employers, 
while the State is to assume the role of supreme arbiter in case 
the individual employer fails to meet his obligations. 

Closely associated with the concepts of distributive justice 
are the demands of social justice, a term which came into use 
in connection with the social upheavals engendered by the 
Industrial Revolution and the subsequent increasing tension in 
capital-labor relationships. The requirements of social justice 
were strongly emphasized and specifically defined in Pope Pius 
XI's Encyclical Quadragesimo Anno (1931). According to this 
papal document, the object of social justice is the common good 
viewed as relating to and including the good of all individual 
persons who constitute the commonwealth. This common 
good, it is maintained, can only be realized if all the material 
goods of the world are distributed among individuals in ac- 
cordance with the demands of justice and equity. While all 
the members of society are called upon individually and col- 
lectively to promote the object of social justice, it is incumbent 
upon the State to see to it that all the available physical, legal, 
and moral means are employed in a determined effort to realize 



'Nature of Justice 161 

this objective, i.e., to make each and everyone benefit from 
the social actualization of the common good. 

In his Encyclical Divini Redemptoris (1937) Pius XI en- 
larged upon the general directions of Quadragesima Anno by 
further enjoining upon the States their obligations relative to 
the attainment of the ends of social justice: "It is impossible 
to care for the social organism and the good of society,'* the 
Pontiff wrote, "unless each : ingle part and each individual 
member, i.e., each individual m m in the dignity of his human 
personality, is supplied with e\erything that is necessary for 
the exercise of his social functions. . . . Social justice cannot 
be said to have been satisf ed as long as workingmen are denied 
a salary that would enable thtm to secure proper sustenance 
for themselves and for their families; as long as they are 
denied the opportunity >f acqairing a modest fortune . . . 
as long as they cannot make suitable provision through public 
or private insurance for old age, illness, and unemployment. It 
must be the special care of the State to create those material 
conditions of life without which an orderly society cannot 
exH. The State must take every measure to supply employ- 
mer , particularly for the heads of families and for die young. 
. . . The wealthy classes must be induced to assume those 
! urdens without which human society cannot be saved nor 
they themselves remain secure. And measures taken by the 
State with this end in view must be of such a nature that they 
will really affect those who actually possess more than their 
share of capital resources, and who continue to accumulate 
them to the grievous detriment of others." 

The ends of justice are more or less frustrated by laying too 
much stress on either its commutative or distributive aspect, 
at the expense of a healthy balance between these two forms 
of justice. The extreme individualism, for example, advanced 
by the "physiocratic school" of economy in France (Quesnay, 
Turgot, etc.) and again by the so-called "classical" political 
economists in England (Adam Smith, Ricardo, James Mill, 
etc.), wanted to reduce the activities of state government or 
group legislation to the exercise of the purely restrictive func- 
tions of the protection of property rights ("policeman theory 
of the State") ; they thereby failed to recognize the legitimate 



162 Human Action in State and Society 

claims of distributive and social justice. Collectivism, on the 
other hand, in both its socialist and fascist branches, regarding 
the State or society as the absolute end and individual man as 
a mere means, tends to neglect the just claims of commutative 
justice or private, individual law (Machiavelli, Hobbes, Hegel, 
Marx, etc.). The "via media" between these two extremes calls 
for the proper adjustment of the mutually supplementary 
claims of group law and private law, of distributive and com- 
mutative justice. Both types of justice have their ground in 
the equality of natural human rights, but they aim at the 
realization of this equality in different ways. While distributive 
justice takes into consideration the proportionate, intrinsic and 
extrinsic worth of human persons in their relationship to society 
as a whole, commutative justice is "strict justice" in the sense 
that it considers all members of society as parties with strictly 
equal rights or claims; it thus aims not at proportionate but 
at absolute equality. Commenting on the demands of com- 
mutative justice, Aristotle therefore wrote: "It makes no dif- 
ference whether a robbery, for instance, is committed by a 
good man on a bad man or by a bad man on a good man, nor 
whether adultery is committed by a good man or by a bad 
man: the (strict, commutative) law looks only to the differ- 
ence created by the injury and treats the men as previously 
equal, where the one does and the other suffers injury, or the 
one has done and the other suffered harm. And so ... the 
judge tries to restore equality by penalty." 12 

"Aristotle, Nich. Eth., V, 4, 1132*. 



23. Man and the State 

WE HAVE had occasion several times to refer to the 
problem of the State, in connection with the social urges 
of human nature (cf. p. 144), the need of organized group 
life in accordance with the demands of the natural law (cf. p. 
pp. 155 sq.), in the course of the discussion on the nature of 
human equality and human rights, and in our attempt to de- 
termine the rules and requirements of justice (cf. pp. 160 sq.). 
It is, however, necessary to supplement these incidental refer- 



Man and the State 163 

ences by a more detailed analysis of the principal concepts of 
the philosophy of the State, involving both the institutional 
character of government and its relationships with individual 
human beings as well as with human nature as such. This phil- 
osophical inquiry may be expected to yield important direc- 
tives for the entire field of political science, considered as a 
subdivision of moral philosophy. 

A) THE ORIGIN OF THE STATE 

The philosophy of the State has received a great deal of 
attention and emphasis in the history of Western thought, 
from the ancient Greeks down to the political theorists and 
philosophers of our own time. There is no lack of blueprints 
for desirable systems of state government, either in the form 
of "state Utopias"" or in the form of pedagogical precepts for 
the model prince or ruler. 14 Beyond these more or less abstract 
treatments of the principles of state philosophy we find in 
every century a large body of writings devoted to various 
philosophical aspects of political theory but, notwithstanding 
the spatial and temporal distances which frequently separate 
the individual authors, we are able to recognize several pat- 
terns which are identified without difficulty as the main cur- 
rents of the metaphysical and moral convictions embodied in 
the Western Tradition. 15 

Many of these writings concern themselves directly with 
theories relating to the origin of the State and the original 
sources of the titles of sovereignty. Here we distinguish in the 
main two points of view, the one holding that States originate 
by the deliberate choice of the individuals, who decide to safe- 
guard their common interests by means of a social compact, 
and the other maintaining that the State develops organically 

11 Cf. Plato's Republic, St. Thomas More's Utopia, Campanclla's Civitas Soils, 
Francis Bacon's Nova Atlantis, etc. 

1-4 These precepts range all the way from lofty idealism to brutal cynicism, from the 
idealistic pattern of St. Thomas Aquinas' De Regimine Principum and Fenelon's 
Telemaque to the cynical variety of Machiavelli's // Principe. In a category by 
themselves are works like Hobbes' Leviathan and their contemporary counterparts 
(works by Hitler, Alfred Rosenberg, N. }. Spykman, etc.), in which the State is 
seen exclusively under the aspect of power and physical compulsion, and human 
relations appear essentially based on selfishness, greed, and hate (Hobbes, Homo 
homini lupus: "man is a wolf unto man"). This latter is the state philosophy 
adhered to and advocated by most of the self-styled "political realists." 

18 Cf. Carlylc, R. W., and A. J., History of Mediaeval Political Theory in the West, 
6 vols. (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916). 



164 Human Action in State and Society 

as a natural expansion of the family and the clan. Aristotle 
and his medieval and modern disciples accept the latter ex- 
planation, while the followers of Hobbes, Locke, and Rous- 
seau lean toward the social compact theory. According to 
Hobbes the origination of the State marks the passage of man 
from the primitive "state of nature" to a condition of what 
might be termed "disciplined anarchy": "He may come out 
of it," Hobbes writes, "through the passions for peace and 
fear of death and by reason suggesting articles of peace which 
are called laws of nature." 16 John Locke agrees with Hobbes 
as to the anarchical conditions which characterize the "state 
of nature," but he opposes Hobbes in that he attributes to man 
natural rights and a natural executive power, even in the "state 
of nature." This natural executive power of the individual is 
eventually transferred to the public or to the State by means 
of compact or convention. 

The social contract theory was carried farthest by Jean 
Jacques Rousseau, for whom this contract becomes the founda- 
tion of all civil authority and therewith of all civic rights and 
obligations, so that no such rights and obligations exist prior 
to their declaration by a political society or a State. Rousseau 
shares with Hobbes the conviction that man has risen from 
the anarchical savagery of the "state of nature" to a state of 
relative civil order by means of a set of conventional agree- 
ments, and that therefore convention rather than the "natural 
law" is the basis of all orderly human relations: "The social 
order," he says, "is a sacred right which is the basis of all other 
rights. Nevertheless, this right does not come from nature 
and must, therefore, be founded on conventions. . . . Conven- 
tions form the basis of all legitimate authority." 17 For Rous- 
seau as later on for Hegel the body politic exists as a distinct 
"moral person," aside from and above the individuals who 
constitute the State, and this collective "personality" is gen- 
erated, according to Rousseau, "by the total alienation to the 
whole community of each associate with all his rights." 18 

l * Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, Chap. XIII. 

"J. J. Rousseau, The Social Contract (Everyman's Library), p. 12. 

u Of. these quotations from Rousseau's contrat social with Benito Mussolini's 
description of the fascist totalitarian State: "The Fascist State, the highest and most 
potent form of personality. ... It absorbs all the forms of man's moral and 
intellectual life. . . . The State, the veritable reality of the individual ... is the 
creator of all right" (Scritti e Discorsi, 1926). 



Man and the Stale 165 

Against these political theories which make artificial con- 
ventions or more or less arbitrary contracts the bases of state 
authority, civic rights, and orderly human relations, stands 
a solid block of Western thinkers, for whom all titles of au- 
thority and all rights are derived from and have their binding 
force in the natural law and ultimately in the eternal law of 
God. But since, as we have seen (cf. pp. 147 sq.)> this natural 
law is merely the external form and norm of the law of 
reason and therefore in harmony with the nature and object 
of man's "rational appetite," all social and political associa- 
tions require for their validity and durability the element of 
free and mutual consent. This holds true of the constitutions 
of States no less than of vocational, occupational, and family 
relations. All these relationships involve both rights and ob- 
ligations, all of which have their source and sanction in the 
natural law. It may thus be said that in this ancient Western 
theory of the origin and organic growth of the State out of 
the communal life of family and tribe, the elements of tradi- 
tion and progress, natural evolution, and voluntary contract 
are combined and harmonized. This fact is stressed by St. 
Thomas Aquinas when, after having underscored the basic 
significance of the natural law in all human relations, he 
subscribes to St. Augustine's definition of a political society 
as "a multitude united by juridical consent and a community 
of interests." 19 Hence he arrives at the logical conclusion that 
in the best State the people should have a share in govern- 
ment and in the choice of their rulers: "For the best form of 
government in any State or Kingdom," St. Thomas writes, 
"it is required that one man, superior in virtue, be at the head; 
under him are others, equally excellent in character; and yet, 
such sovereignty is shared by all because these rulers cannot 
only be selected from among all the people but arc actually 
elected by them." 20 

B) PRINCIPLES AND FORMS OF GOVERNMENT 

i) Plato. The medieval theory of government by title of 
natural law and voluntary consent had been prepared in an- 
tiquity in the political philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. 

l * Summa Thcologica, II-II, q. 42, a. 2. 
Summa Thcolo$ca, MI, q. 105, a. i. 



i66 Human Action in State and Society 

In the Republic Plato makes the important observation that 
the different forms of States reflect different dispositions of 
human character and that, therefore, "the States are as the 
men are." 21 With this general pattern in mind, he distinguishes 
five different types of government, corresponding to five dif- 
ferent states of mind: they are monarchy or aristocracy (gov- 
ernment of justice); timocracy (government of honor); 
oligarchy (government of greed) ; democracy (government of 
laissez faire); and tyranny (government of lawless power). 
With great ingenuity Plato describes the gradual transforma- 
tion of one form of government into the next inferior type, 
until finally the corruption of the best (aristocracy) gives rise 
to the birth of the worst (tyranny). 

While in aristocracy and timocracy the criteria of rulership 
are specific virtues of the soul, oligarchy makes the possession 
of property or money the qualifications of rulership as well as 
of citizenship. The State is then divided by the conflicting 
interests of the rich and the poor, and this results in creeping 
corruption within and the inability to present a united front 
to the enemy without: "Either they arm the multitude, and 
then they are more afraid of them than of the enemy; or, 
if they do not call them out in the hour of battle, they are 
oligarchs indeed: few to fight as they are few to rule. And at 
the same time their fondness for money makes them unwilling 
to pay taxes." 22 

The oligarchic State, aiming at the greatest possible accumu- 
lation of wealth, is as much frustrated in its pursuit of this 
end as is the individual citizen who strives for the same goal, 
because the desire for riches is always insatiable. The rulers 
of such a State indulge in a life of luxury and idleness and 
become increasingly incapable of resisting either pleasure or 
pain. And so "democracy comes into being, after the poor 
have conquered their opponents, slaughtering some and ban- 
ishing some, while to the remainder they give an equal share 
of freedom and power; and this is the form of government in 
which the magistrates are commonly elected by lot." 23 To a 
superficial observer it would seem that the citizens of such a 



1 Republic, VIII, 544 (B. Jowctt's transl.), 
'Plato, he. cit., VIII, 551. 
'Plato, he. cit., VIII, 557. 



Man and the Stoic 167 

State arc the freest and happiest of all. Everyone is at liberty 
to say and do whatever he pleases, and the State looks "like 
an embroidered robe which is spangled with every sort of 
flower, and . . . there are many to whom this State, which 
is spangled with the manners and characters of all mankind, 
will appear to be the fairest of States." 24 No one is required 
to rule or be ruled, or "to go to war when the rest go to war, 
or to be at peace when others are at peace, unless you are so 
disposed: ... a charming form of government, full of variety 
and disorder, and dispensing a sort of equality to equals and 
unequals alike." 25 

And as this democratic State is, so are the individuals of 
whom it is composed: their souls are inhabited by disorderly 
and contradictory motivations and desires; they lack intel- 
lectual and moral discipline and are full of "false and boast- 
ful conceits and phrases. . . . Insolence they term breeding, 
anarchy they call liberty, waste they term magnificence, and 
impudence they mistake for courage. And so the young man 
passes . . . into the freedom and libertinism of useless and 
unnecessary pleasures. . . . And if anyone says to him that 
some pleasures are the satisfactions of good and noble desires, 
and others of evil desires, and that he ought to use and honor 
some and chastise and master the others ... he shakes his 
head and says that they are all alike, and that one is as good 
as another. ... He lives from day to day, indulging the ap- 
petite of the hour; and sometimes he is lapped in drink and 
strains of the flute ; then he becomes a water drinker, and tries 
to get thin; then he takes a turn at gymnastics. . . . His life 
has neither law nor order; and this distracted existence he 
terms joy and bliss and freedom. . . ," 26 

As, according to Plato, the cause of the rise of democracy 
was the excessive wealth of the oligarchic State, so the tyranni- 
cal State springs from the excess of a democratic freedom 
which has turned into license: Having "drunk too deeply 
from the strong wine of freedom," the citizen no longer recog- 
nizes any authority; the distinctions of age, sex, and personal 
worth are gradually obliterated, and anarchy begins to invade 

* Loc. cit., VIII, 557. 
"Loc. cit., VIII, 557. 
*Loc. cit., VIII, 561. 



i68 Human Action in State and Society 

the precincts of public and private life, disorganizing all human 
relations: "The father grows accustomed to descend to the 
level of his sons and to fear them, and the son is on a level 
with his father, he having no respect or reverence for cither 
of his parents . . . and the metic (resident alien) is equal with 
the citizen and the citizen with the metic. . . . The teacher 
fears and flatters his pupils, and the pupils despise their masters 
and tutors; young and old are all alike; and the young man 
is on a level with the old . . . and old men adopt the manners 
of the young . . . nor must I forget to tell of the liberty and 
equality of the two sexes in relation to each other . . . and all 
things are just ready to burst with liberty." The citizens "chafe 
impatiently at the least touch of authority and at length . . . 
cease to care even for the laws, written or unwritten." The 
truth is "that the excessive increase of anything often causes 
a reaction in the opposite direction; and this is the case not 
only in the seasons and in vegetable and animal life but, above 
all, in forms of government." Thus "the excess of liberty, 
whether in States or individuals, seems only to pass into an 
excess of slavery. And so tyranny naturally arises cui: of democ- 
racy, and the most aggravated form of tyranny out f the most 
extreme form of liberty." 27 

The growing anarchy in public and private i e finally 
makes the people look for a protector, and soon the protector 
turns into a tyrant: He surrounds himself with a bodyguard, 
willingly granted him by the people, who still see in the 
tyrant their friend: "All their fears are for him they have 
none for themselves. ... At first, in the early days of his 
power, he is full of smiles, and he salutes everyone whom he 
meets ... he makes promises in public and also in private, 
liberating debtors, and distributing land to the people and 
to his followers, and wanting to be so kind and good to every- 
one! But when he has disposed of foreign enemies by con- 
quest or treaty . . . then he is always stirring up some war 
or other, in order that the people may require a leader." 28 

As a result of the sufferings and privations caused by foreign 
wars and internal unrest, the tyrant begins to grow unpopular. 
Some of those who aided his rise to power turn against him, 

v Loc. cit. 

* "Lor. cit., VIII, 562 sqq., and IX, 578 iq. 



Man and the State 169 

and then follows the "blood purge": "He must look about 
him and see who is valiant, who is high-minded, who is wise, 
who is wealthy ... he is the enemy of all, and must seek 
occasion against them whether he will or no, until he has 
made a purgation of the State."" But the tyrant himself is 
the most miserable of all men: nominally the master of all, 
he is the real slave, not even able to master himself. He "is 
obliged to practise the greatest adulation and servility, and 
to be the flatterer of the vilest of mankind. He has desires 
which he is utterly unable to satisfy, and ... he is truly poor 
... all his life long he is beset with fear and is full of con- 
vulsions and distractions, even as the State which he re- 
sembles." 30 Increasingly "he becomes . . . more jealous, more 
faithless, more unjust, more friendless, more impious ... he 
is the purveyor and cherisher of every sort of vice, and the 
consequence is that he is supremely miserable, and that he 
makes everybody else as miserable as himself." 31 

We have quoted from Plato's Republic at such length, not 
only because the philosopher describes realistically political 
conditions, situations, and sociopolitical transformations which 
are a matter of historical record, but also because he anticipates 
with his observations on the law of action and reaction, as evi- 
denced in historic evolution, some theories of much more 
recent date, such as Hegel's "dialectical triad" of thesis, anti- 
thesis, and synthesis, or Karl Marx's, Nietzsche's, Spengler's, 
and Sorokin's ideas on cyclical historical movements. 32 In 
Nietzsche's Beyond Good and Evil we find a passage which 
describes the transition from excessive liberty to excessive 
slavery in terms which almost verbally repeat Plato's argu- 
ment. Speaking of the increasing democratization of Europe 
and of the growing "assimilation" taking place among Euro- 
peans, he writes: "While the collective impression of such 
future Europeans will probably be that of numerous, talkative, 
weak-willed, and very handy workmen who require a master, 
a leader, as they require their daily bread; while, therefore, the 
democratizing of Europe will tend to the production of a type 
prepared for slavery in the most subtle sense of the term: the 
strong will necessarily in individual and exceptional cases be- 

M Cf . Nietzsche's Thus Spake Zarathustra; O. Spengler's The Decline of the West; 
P. Sorokin's The Crisis of Our Age. 



170 Human Action in State and Society 

come stronger and richer than he has perhaps ever been before 
. . . owing to the immense variety of practice, art, and disguise. 
I meant to say that the democratizing of Europe is at the same 
time an involuntary arrangement for the rearing of 
tyrants. . . ," 33 

While for Nietzsche democracy or government by popular 
consent and representation is indiscriminately indicted as in- 
dicative of decline and decadence, Plato distinguishes between 
a democratic rule which is anchored in the supremacy of the 
law and a democracy which has forgotten or discarded the 
sanctions of the natural and moral law and in which license 
is therefore mistaken for liberty. This distinction is made very 
clear in The Laws, the last and in many respects most mature 
of Plato's Dialogues, in which he offers his own corrective of 
the more abstract and Utopian blueprint of the ideal State as 
outlined in the Republic. While in the Republic it had 
been stated that in the perfect commonwealth the king must 
be a philosopher or the philosopher a king, in the Laws Plato 
takes a more realistic view and is satisfied with rulers who 
are righteous and prudent. The supreme authority, ruling over 
both the State and its magistrates, is "the law." Plato thus 
actually advocates what Montesquieu (1689-1755) called a 
"mixed" form of government, i.e., a constitution which com- 
bines the advantages of monarchical, aristocratic, and demo- 
cratic rule. While monarchies and aristocracies place the chief 
emphasis on unity or even uniformity, democracies extol free- 
dom. The final aim of political endeavor, according to the 
language used in the Laws, must be the attainment of a union 
of authority and freedom, unity and variety, monarchico-aristo- 
cratic and democratic rule. For an excess of authority leads 
to absolutism, autocracy, and tyranny, and an excess of free- 
dom leads to mob rule and anarchy. The final end of all good 
government is the rearing of the highest type of human per- 
sonality, and the authors of constitutions as well as the actual 
rulers, i.e., the executors of constitutional law, must be fully 
aware of this goal. If, therefore, they have false or confused 
ideas, either as to the true end of good government or as to 
the nature of man, their rule will necessarily reflect the per- 
version of their ideas, and the political and social well-being 

** Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil (The Modern Library), p. 174. 



Man and the State 171 

of their States and of their peoples will accordingly be thwarted. 

2) Aristotle. For Aristotle as much as for Plato the State 
has an eminent educational task. It is the supreme obligation 
of the State not only to promote the happiness of its citizens 
but also to teach them what constitutes true happiness and 
to inculcate in them the individual and social virtues. But 
while Plato's speculation on the ideal State is deeply impreg- 
nated with religious and theological concepts, Aristotle's phi- 
losophy of the State concerns itself only with the prerequisites 
of the good and virtuous life of citizens and communes, here 
and now. For him the individual is the primary reality, and 
he therefore endeavors to establish the necessary safeguards 
for the protection and preservation of individual rights. It is 
thus one of the chief obligations of the State to see to it that 
all just individual claims and interests are duly satisfied. 

Aristotle's enumeration of six possible forms of government 
agrees essentially with Plato's classification. He distinguishes 
between three types of good government and three types of 
bad government. The criterion of all good government is the 
direction toward the achievement of the common good. This 
end may be pursued either by one sovereign ruler (monarchy) ; 
or by an elite of highly qualified leaders (aristocracy) ; or by 
participation of the body of citizens (polity). However, when 
the personal advantage of the rulers, or of the ruling classes, 
or of the people's representatives, becomes the end of govern- 
ment, then good government degenerates: monarchy turns 
into tyranny, aristocracy into oligarchy, polity into democracy. 

It is evident from this brief summary of Aristotle's views 
on government that we meet here with the same distinction 
between two types of "democracy" which we noted in Plato's 
political philosophy. To use modern phraseology, we might 
term the one "Jeflfersonian," the other "Rousseauan" democracy, 
the former having its source and sanction in the supremacy 
of law and in the "inalienable rights" of man, the latter rest- 
ing on the assumption of "the total alienation" of these rights 
"to the whole community" by means of a "social contract," 
and therewith on the voluntary submission of the individual 
to the collective and arbitrary will of shifting majorities (cf. 
p. 164). 

The increased emphasis which Aristotle places on the indi- 



172 Human Action in Stoic and Society 

vidual makes him a strong advocate of a citizen's right to a 
proportionate share in political rule. In principle, all citizens, 
according to Aristotle, have a natural claim to civil office, but 
only those who are intellectually and morally pre-eminently 
qualified should be elected to the highest offices by the choice 
of the freemen. 34 While Aristotle admits that in most of the 
actually existing States the social order must be safeguarded 
by legal statutes, he visualizes the State of the future from the 
perspective of a growing personal freedom and self-determina- 
tion, resulting from moral and political education. In such a 
future commonwealth of freemen it will be wiser to invest 
with authority the entire people than one or several promi- 
nent and specially qualified individuals. 

Aristotle, as was pointed out (cf. pp. 163 sq.), traces civil 
government back to its origins in the family and the clan. Thus 
the civil powers in primitive society derive their authority from 
the patriarchal rule prevalent in the primitive family and 
tribe. The further stages in the development of sovereignty 
and the passage from one type of government to another are 
described by Aristotle in the following way: "The first govern- 
ments were kingships, and the reason was probably this: when 
cities were small, men of eminent virtue were few. They were 
made kings because they were benefactors. . . . But when 
many persons equal in merit grew up and were no longer 
willing to endure the pre-eminence of one, they desired to have 
a commonwealth, and set up a constitution. The ruling class 
soon deteriorated and began to enrich themselves out of the 
public treasury. Riches became the path to honor, and so 
oligarchies naturally came into being. These in turn passed 
into tyrannies, and tyrannies into democracies; for love of 
gain in the ruling classes tended to diminish their number 
and to strengthen the masses, who in the end set upon their 
masters and established democracies. And since cities have 
increased in size, no other form of government seems to be 
any longer possible." 35 

Reviewing the basic concepts of the political philosophy of 
Plato and Aristotle, we find them both wrestling with the 
central problem of the relationship of the individual to the 

*Cf. Aristotle, Politics, I, 12; II, 2; IV, 3. 
Loc. /., Ill, 15. 



Man and the State 173 

State. In Plato's philosophy of the State the ideal common- 
wealth requires the rule of a "kingly man" who possesses the 
virtues of righteousness and prudence. But because the ruler 
is a servant of the law, and because the law is the protector 
of individual rights, the Platonic State seems to strike a middle 
course between absolute autocracy and democratic liberty. For 
Aristotle even more than for Plato the quality of the State is 
determined by the quality of the individuals of whom it is 
composed and by the temper of their mutual relationships. 
Plato, by stressing the abstract and spiritual components of 
rulership, seems at times, especially in die "Republic," to de- 
prive the individual members of the State of the prerogatives 
of their personality, whereas Aristotle, who emphasizes the 
natural and material aspects of communal life, never loses 
sight of the needs and wants of the individual citizen. For 
him the best and most desirable state of affairs is not reached 
until every citizen has become his own lawgiver, so that the 
barriers of rigid and impersonal statutes may gradually be 
removed. 

3) St. Thomas Aquinas. As in most of the other depart- 
ments of philosophy so also in their social and political specula- 
tion the medieval schoolmen and, above all, St. Thomas 
Aquinas present us with a synthesis of Plato and Aristotle. 
While St. Thomas discusses the problem of the State and the 
functions of government in many passages of his major works, 
he gives special attention to the subject in the treatise entitled 
"On the Governance of Rulers," 36 composed as a manual for a 
young king of Cyprus, who died in 1267, and whose identity 
has never been established with certainty. The first and part 
of the second book were written by St. Thomas, the remainder 
by Ptolemy of Lucca, one of the master's pupils. Although the 
small volume contains a condensed summary of St. Thomas' 
political philosophy, the treatment of the subject matter is in 
part theological, and frequent reference is made to Scriptural 
authority. The essay deals with the origin of government, the 
nature and titles of sovereignty, the different forms of govern- 
ment, and the duties of rulers. 

St. Thomas demonstrates the need for social and political 

m De Regimfnc Principum. Transl. by Gerald B. Phelan (New York: Shccd & 
Ward, 1938). 



174 Human Action in State and Society 

authority from the nature of man (cf. pp. 141 sq.). This au- 
thority manifests itself in expanding social units, first in the 
father of the family, then in the head of a village community, 
and finally in the ruler or king of a land. The idea that civil 
authority derives from the individuals who constitute these 
social units in itself essentially Aristotelian receives strong 
metaphysical support from the inclusion of the Platonic notion 
that unity precedes multiplicity and from the added insistence 
of Christian philosophy that all titles of authority depend ulti- 
mately on the one and only ruler of the universe. 

Like Plato and Aristotle, St. Thomas distinguishes between 
different types of good and bad, just and unjust government. 
All good government tends toward the actualization of the 
common good: "If a group of free men is governed by their 
ruler for the common good of the group, that government 
will be right and just, as is suitable to free men. If, however, 
the government is organized not for the common good of the 
group but for the private interest of the ruler, it will be an 
unjust and perverted government." 37 

Just forms of government are polity ("Jeffersonian" democ- 
racy), aristocracy, and monarchy, the implication being that 
authority is either vested in a large group of virtuous men, 
or in a few, or in one. Unjust forms of government are de- 
mocracy, oligarchy, and tyranny, i.e., authority is either in the 
hands of the indiscriminative mob, or it is exercised by a 
group of greedy and wicked men, or it is usurped by one de- 
praved individual. While from the description given in De 
Regimine Principum it might appear as if St. Thomas were 
giving unqualified preference to monarchical rule, we gather 
from the supplementary expositions contained in his other 
works that, in speaking of the best form of government, tha 
philosopher has in mind a limited or constitutional and pref- 
erably nonhereditary monarchy, or a "mixed" form of ruler- 
ship, including the principle of election and, to some extent, 
popular representation, i.e., a form of government in which 
the positive characteristics of monarchy, aristocracy, and de- 
mocracy are united. While such a constitutional monarchy is 
designated as the best form of government, the worst form 
of unjust rule is tyranny. 

"St. Thomas Aquinas, loc. cit., p. 37. 



Man and the State 175 

As to the functions of government, St. Thomas points out 
that it is the meaning of all rulership to lead that which is 
ruled to its proper end. It is therefore the primary duty of 
the leaders of a State to promote the well-being, happiness, 
and virtue of their subjects. But in order to attain this primary 
end, several secondary ends must be realized. Above all, it 
must be the concern of the ruler "to procure the unity of 
peace." Both St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas are 
agreed that the preservation of peace is an essential prerequisite 
of the virtue and happiness of the citizens of a commonwealth. 
Next follows the demand that a multitude, thus united in the 
bond of peace, be guided to the performance of good deeds. 
Thirdly, the rulers of the State are to foster the material wel~ 
fare of their lands by creating favorable economic conditions, 
because without a sufficient supply of the things required for 
decent human living, the realization of the primary ends of the 
State, i.e., the citizens' virtue and happiness, would be jeop- 
ardized. A competent administration will take care that the 
available goods are justly distributed so that everyone may 
receive what is his due according to his services and functions 
in the commonwealth. Thus the status of the individual and 
therewith his claims to a proportionate share in the available 
goods are not determined by property or wealth but by social 
function and social performance. 

Generally speaking, all good government ought to follow 
the pattern of the government of the universe, as all the works 
of man are the more perfect the more he follows in his modes 
of operation the order and the laws of the works of nature. 
Man is a microcosm, a small world mirroring the vast uni- 
verse: "Just as the universe of corporeal creatures and all 
spiritual powers are under the Divine government, in like 
manner are the members of the body and the powers of the 
soul controlled by reason, and thus, in a certain proportionate 
manner, reason is to man what God is to the world." 38 If, 
therefore, we inquire how the soul acts in the body and how 
God acts in the universe, we shall learn how the ruler ought 
to act in his land. In other words, the Divine rule of the uni- 
verse serves as the pattern or model of a well-ruled kingdom 



1 St. Thomas Aquinas, loc. at., pp. 89 sq. 



176 Human Action in State and Society 

or commonwealth: "The way to govern may be learned from 
the governance of the world." 39 

In the last analysis the end of State and society is the same 
as the end of the individual. If this ultimate end were a physi- 
cal, corporeal one, then a physician might be the ideal ruler. 
If that ultimate end were an abundance of wealth, then some 
financier would be the ideal king. If the knowledge of truth 
were the ultimate end, then a teacher might best exercise the 
functions of government: "But it is clear that the end of any 
multitude gathered together is the life of virtue. For men form 
groups for the purpose of living well together, a thing which 
the individual man living alone could not attain. But a good 
life is a virtuous life. Therefore a virtuous life is the end for 
which men form groups." 40 

The ultimate end of individual man as well as of the men 
grouped together in States and societies is to attain through 
virtuous living to the possession of God and therewith to their 
eternal happiness. But, for the reasons pointed out by St. 
Thomas Aquinas, to lead man to this last end transcends the 
power and authority of the State and its rulers: "The task 
of leading man to that end does not pertain to human govern- 
ment but to Divine." 41 To Christ it attributed a Universal 
Kingdom and a Universal Kingship extending over all crea- 
tion. And from this Kingship is derived a royal priesthood, 
entrusted with the earthly government of Christ's Kingdom. 
Authority, according to St. Thomas, is the nobler the higher 
its end, and therefore a ruler who represents the ultimate end 
is above rulers who are concerned with those secondary ends 
which are subordinate to the highest and ultimate end. St. 
Thomas therefore teaches both an indirect and a direct power 
of the Church: an indirect power in such temporal matters as 
bear some relation to supratemporal ends, and a direct power 
in all matters pertaining directly to man's and society's moral 
and spiritual ends. 

The sociology and political philosophy of St. Thomas 
Aquinas are entirely rooted in the central metaphysical, ethi- 
cal, and theological concepts of Christianity. The tasks assigned 
to the State and the rights and obligations assigned to man in 

* Loc. cit., p. 95. 
* Loc . cit., p. 97. 
41 Loc. cit., p. 98. 



Man and the State 177 

his relationship to the State are determined by the place which 
both, man and the State, occupy in the graduated structure 
of a universal realm of means, purposes, and ends, ascending 
from the plane of matter and sense to that of moral, social, 
and intellectual purpose, and from there to the still higher 
plane of supernatural ends. Nature and supernature, State 
and Church, fallen and redeemed humanity, and the prospect 
of the future life of perfect beatitude they are all included 
in the all-embracing idea of the Corpus Christianum, i.e., the 
organic totality of the Christian body politic. The major moti- 
vating forces which animate and vitalize this body are the 
love of God and the love of man. The individual members of 
this body complement each other in their mutual cooperative 
love and in their common love of God. Thus the Platonic 
and Aristotelian idea of a society aiming at the common good 
fuses with and is crowned by the idea of the natural and 
supernatural destiny of the individual members of the social 
whole. Each of these members possesses an end and a dignity 
of his own, and this places upon him the responsibility and 
obligation to assist each other member in the attainment of 
his spiritual end. 

From this unique destiny of the human person and from 
the unique dignity and personal responsibility conferred upon 
each and every human being by the author of nature derive 
the prerogatives and obligations of the individual conscience 
with regard to the claims and demands of the State. St. Thomas 
Aquinas stresses these rights of conscience in his discussion 
of the question of popular resistance to unjust rule. In accord- 
ance with medieval political theory the philosopher insists 
that the ruler holds his authority by virtue of an unwritten 
contract or covenant with his subjects, the specific terms of 
such a covenant being determined by law and custom as em- 
bodied in past grants, decisions, or agreements. The ruler 
therefore has no right to abrogate or nullify these terms with- 
out mutual consent: "If the people are free and able to make 
their own laws, the consent of the people expressed by a custom 
counts far more than the authority of the sovereign, who has 
no power to enact laws except as representing the will of the 
people." 42 And, as if in continuation of this line of thought, 

43 St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Thcologica, I-II, q. 97, a. 3, ad 3. 



178 Human Action in State and Society 

we read in DC Regimine Principum: "If to provide itself with 
a King belongs to the right of any people, it is not unjust that 
the King set up by the people be destroyed or his power re- 
stricted if he tyrannically abuse this royal power. It must not 
be thought that such a people is acting unfaithfully in deposing 
the tyrant, even though it had previously subjected itself to 
him in perpetuity; because he himself has deserved that the 
covenant with his subjects should not be kept, since, in ruling 
the people, he did not act with that fidelity which the office 
of a King demands." 43 In this passage, then, St. Thomas un- 
equivocally defends the right of the people to organized re- 
sistance and armed rebellion against tyranny or other unjust 
forms of government. But he adds the advice that the best 
way for a people to guard itself against such evils is to provide 
for a form of government which makes the rise of tyrants diffi- 
cult, if not impossible, and to resort to revolution only after all 
legal and peaceful means have proved ineffective and only if 
there is a reasonable prospect that the use of force will produce 
more good than evil. 

4) The "Western Tradition!' In holding that the best form 
of government is one in which all the good features of mon- 
archy, aristocracy, and democracy are united; that there can 
be no good or legitimate government without some form of 
popular consent; and that the titles and rights of political 
authority as well as of political covenants are ultimately sanc- 
tioned and validated by the natural law and its Divine Author 
in all these basic concepts of his political philosophy St. 
Thomas Aquinas is only the most prominent spokesman of 
a long line of distinguished theologians, moralists, and can- 
onists, extending from the early Middle Ages to the age of 
Renaissance and Baroque (approximately from the ninth to 
the seventeenth century). We meet with an emphatic and at 
the same time more specific and systematic reaffirmation of 
the identical doctrines in the writings of the Italian Cardinal, 
Robert Bellarmine (1542-1621), and the Spanish theologian 
and philosopher, Francis Suarez (1548-1617), the two most 
prominent authors of the period of the great scholastic re- 
vival, both of them members of the Jesuit Order. In several 



1 DC Keg. Prtnc. t pp. 58 tq. 



Man and the State 179 

of their works they defended with vigorous arguments the 
sovereign rights of the people as expressed in the demand for 
government by the consent of the governed. 44 As against the 
theory of the "Divine Right of Kings" both writers main- 
tained that political authority devolves from God directly on 
the entire community and is only indirectly, by popular choice, 
delegated to some individual ruler or some ruling group. They 
were unanimous in their contention that the people must be 
granted the right originally to possess the supreme sovereign 
power in themselves, and to choose freely some form of legis- 
lative representation, i.e., to vest their rights of self-government 
either in a Senate or in a constitutional monarch, or in a con- 
junction of both. 

As regards the different forms of government: "A rule 
tempered by the monarchic, the aristocratic, and the demo- 
cratic form of government is more useful than a simple mon- 
archy," wrote Bellarmine. "If it were provided," he continued, 
"that all these rulers should obtain their position not by 
hereditary succession but that those who are best fitted should 
be selected from the body of the community . . . then the 
commonwealth would possess some of the attributes of a 
democracy." In such a government "the worth of a man rather 
than his lineage would be taken into consideration." 45 

This restatement of the principles of the sovereign rights of 
the people had become necessary in view of the exaggerated 
claims of King James I of England and of his son, Charles I. 
With the former, Bellarmine himself had entered into a rather 
heated controversy, and under the latter's tumultuous rule the 
British lawyer, Sir Edward Coke, appropriated Bellarmine's 
argumentation and expressly referred to the teachings of Henry 
de Bracton, an astute clerical jurist of the thirteenth century, 
in asserting that "the King is subject to God and the Law." 
Sir Edward Coke was the leader of the opposition and a co- 
framer of the "Petition of Right" in the ensuing conflict be- 
tween King and Parliament. To the insistence of the Crown 
and the Lords on the principle of rulership by Divine Right 
he replied in a famous speech, in which he reminded the Eng- 

** Cf . Robert Bellarmine, Disputationes De Controversiis; De Laicis sive Saecularibus, 
Eng. transl. (New York, 1928); Francisco Suirez, De Legibus ac De Legislatore 
(1891)- 

41 BclUrmine, Opera Omnia, I, p. 467. 



180 Human Action in State and Society 

lish people of their medieval tradition of liberty, and which 
contained this pertinent passage: "If we grant this by implica- 
tion, we give a 'sovereign power* above all laws. . . . That 
power which is above the Law is not fit for the King to asf{ 
or the people to yield!' And John Selden, another British jurist 
and coauthor of the "Petition of Right," wrote in the "Table 
Talk," the most famous of his works, concerning the natural 
law as the source of all covenants and rights: "I cannot fancy 
to myself what the Law of Nature means, but the Law of God. 
How should I know I ought not to steal, I ought not to com- 
mit adultery, unless somebody had told me so? It is not be- 
cause I think I ought not to do these things, nor because you 
think I ought not; if so, our minds might change; whence 
then comes the restraint? From a higher power; nothing else 
can bind. I cannot bind myself, for I may untie myself again; 
nor an equal cannot bind me, for we may untie one another; 
it must be a superior, even God Almighty." 

This entire body of political doctrine then, essentially in the 
form in which it had been handed down from the Middle 
Ages, was upheld in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 
not only by the leading philosophers of the Catholic-scholastic 
tradition, but by a large number of eminent theologians, phi- 
losophers, lawyers, and political theorists, belonging to differ- 
ent schools of thought and belief, who in word and deed 
gave testimony of the vital continuity of this tradition. And 
this medieval heritage of political thinking lived on in the 
political philosophy of the English Whigs and Puritans, and 
through them found its way into the New World, where it 
was constitutionally incorporated in such momentous politi- 
cal documents as the Virginia Declaration of Rights and the 
American Declaration of Independence. 

5) "The Divine Right of Kings!' In the meantime, how- 
ever, another theory of the State and of the origins of the 
titles of sovereignty had sprung up, a theory which may like- 
wise be traced back to the early Middle Ages, but whose real 
roots can be discovered in the political concepts of ancient 
Oriental and Roman despotism. The new theory made its 
first medieval appearance in the eleventh century, finding 
support for its claims in certain concepts of Roman Law. In 
the course of the struggle between Empire and Papacy which 



Man and the State 181 

fills the pages of the dynastic history of the German Salians 
and Hohenstauflfens, Emperors Henry IV (1056-1106), Fred- 
erick Barbarossa (1152-1190), and Frederick II (1212-1250) 
appealed repeatedly to Roman Law to justify their demands 
of Imperial supremacy in State and Church. And in Dante's 
Monarchia the Divine Right of the sovereign rulers of the 
"Universal Monarchy" is at least implicitly asserted not in 
the odious sense, however, of the ruler being privileged to use 
his power as he pleases or of domineering over the Church. 

This new trend of thought finally culminated in the politi- 
cal philosophy of Niccolo Machiavelli (1469-1527) and Jean 
Bodin (1520-1596), both of whom claimed for the State a 
supreme sovereign power, unrestrained by law. The ancient, 
pre-Christian ideas of statecraft were therewith revived, and 
with the assertion that the sovereign is above the law, the prin- 
ciple of the absolute monarchy was firmly established. The 
welfare of the State, vested in the sovereignty of the absolute 
prince, came to be regarded as an end in itself, the State ab- 
sorbing in full or in part the functions of the Church, and 
holding sway over the bodies, minds, and souls of the citizens. 
This truly "totalitarian" idea of political sovereignty was sub- 
sequently accepted almost to the letter by Thomas Hobbes 
(1588-1679) and John Austin (1790-1859), who in turn an- 
ticipated the absolutistic and totalitarian political philosophies 
of Hegel and Marx and their more recent fascist, national 
socialist, and communist disciples (Pareto, Rosenberg, Lenin, 
etc.). 

The absolutistic concept of the State and its leader was the 
exact reverse of the dominant social and political ideas of the 
Middle Ages, when a vocational division of powers and func- 
tions had given the individual his share in social and political 
administration. The new absolutistic State, on the other hand, 
asserted its autonomy in refusing to share its power with any 
other agency or to recognize any law and sanction beyond and 
above itself, and therefore was as much opposed to a Universal 
Empire as to a Universal Church. The absolutistic idea of 
state omnipotence led logically to the paralyzation of parlia- 
mentary government, wherever it existed. As far as social 
divisions and class distinctions are concerned, they were as 
conspicuous in the age of absolutism as before, but they were 



182 Hmnan Action in State and Society 

practically nullified by the fundamental and all-important 
distinction between the "sovereign ruler" and the "subject." 
The members of all social ranks were equally without rights 
and powers as against princely omnipotence. And in thus 
diminishing the intermediate steps of a graduated social order, 
the absolutistic State unknowingly prepared the way for the 
revolutionary ideas of social equality. 

State and society were henceforth no longer conceived as 
organic structures, as they had been in the sociological and 
political speculation of Aristotle and St. Thomas Aquinas, but 
the State became a gigantic mechanism, reflecting in the politi- 
cal sphere the influence of the new mechanical and mathemati- 
cal sciences. Reason and mechanical science joined in the 
construction of a well-ordered police state, in which nothing 
was to be left to chance, but everything was to be scientifically 
calculated and mechanically preconditioned, in accordance 
with the laws of induction, observation, comparison, and 
generalization. 

6) Church and State. The attempt has been made to link 
some of the main aspects of this modern theory of the secu- 
larized absolutistic State with certain political and social doc- 
trines of the Protestant Churches. Such a connection can, how- 
ever, hardly be established in any generalized form. For while 
it is true that Protestantism made a successful endeavor to free 
the State from all subordination to ecclesiastical authority, it 
persisted in regarding the State as a divinely sanctioned in- 
stitution and saw its aims and ends in the efficient protection 
of the material and moral interests of the Christian Common- 
wealth and its foundation, the natural and moral law. Thus 
the political theory of both Catholic and Protestant theology 
recognized the "Law of Nature" and its revealed embodiment 
in the Decalogue as the abiding norm of political and social 
life. Nevertheless, the Protestant insistence on the principle of 
state autonomy actually lent strong support to the absolutistic 
concepts of Machiavelli and Bodin. 

By endowing civil officialdom with the character of a di- 
vinely ordained calling, the Protestant Churches further en- 
couraged the State to extend its functions and activities to the 
fields of spiritual and moral education. Thus the State came 
eventually to regard itself as the sole organ of a civilization 



Man and the Stale 183 

which itself had become increasingly "autonomous," i.e., in- 
dependent of religion and the Church. 

Both Lutheranism and Calvinism assigned to the State cer- 
tain cultural, educational, and spiritual tasks which formerly 
had belonged to the Church. But whereas Lutheranism felt 
more and more inclined to assume a quietistic and submis- 
sive attitude with regard to secular authorities and, with an 
implicit confidence in Divine Providence, showed itself willing 
to recognize the State's demands for unquestioning obedience, 
Calvinism reserved for the Church the right to reassert its 
spiritual and moral prerogatives whenever the State failed in 
or refused to live up to its educational tasks. If such a moral 
lapse on the part of the State were to happen, then the State 
would be left in the role of a mere guardian or a guarantor 
of public order and discipline, and a protector of property 
rights. In this way Lutheranism facilitated the rise of unre- 
stricted princely absolutism while Calvinism inadvertently en- 
couraged the development of political and economic liberalism. 

Calvinism, in its dealings with actual political situations and 
with authoritarian forms of government especially in its 
prolonged struggles with the Catholic rulers of France (Hugue- 
nots), the Netherlands, Scotland, and England developed 
an attitude which was more aggressive than that of Luther- 
anism. It reaffirmed the right of resistance to "ungodly author- 
ities" and even advocated tyrannicide. In the representative 
system of the Reformed Presbyterial Church-Order, Calvinism 
practised the principles of representative government, resuming 
and perpetuating the traditional theory of rulership by virtue 
of contractual agreement, sanctioned by God as its "remote 
cause" and here patterned after the ancient covenants of Israel. 
While in some ways implementing its political philosophy and 
administrative rule with traditional and at least partially demo- 
cratic concepts, Calvinism was usually reluctant to acknowl- 
edge the rights of freedom of conscience. Among the Calvinist- 
Puritan States of North America freedom of conscience pre- 
vailed only in Rhode Island and Pennsylvania, and of these 
the former was largely settled by Baptists, the latter by Baptists 
and Quakers. 

7) Liberal Individualism, A historical review of the major 
trends of political philosophy in the West up to the eighteenth 



184 Human Action in State and Society 

century impresses upon us the fact that the attainment of the 
ultimate end of the State, viz., the common good of all citi- 
zens, was increasingly threatened by the State's encroachment 
upon natural rights and individual liberties. The seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries witnessed a series of violent upheavals, 
growing out of the popular resentment against the autocratic 
States and rulers of Europe, and finally culminating in the 
French and American Revolutions. But while these revolu- 
tionary uprisings served to crush or check the exorbitant claims 
of the absolute monarchs, the commonweal soon found itself 
threatened by two other deviations from the via media of a 
political philosophy which in the past had successfully recon- 
ciled the rights and claims of both the individual and the State. 

Out of the revolutionary movements of the eighteenth cen- 
tury arose the dual danger of an atomistic individualism, on the 
one hand, and an impersonal collectivism, on the other. While 
the tenets of atomistic individualism found expression in the 
political and economic liberalism of Adam Smith and David 
Ricardo, the theories of social collectivism were implicitly con- 
tained in the mechanist and materialist concepts of some of 
the French philosophers of the period of Enlightenment, which 
in part preceded and in part coincided with the Revolution 
of 1789 (Condillac, Lamettrie, D'Alembert, etc.). 

The genuine Western tradition of political philosophy, and 
especially its teachings as to the nature of sovereignty, essen- 
tially in the form in which they had come down from antiquity 
and the Middle Ages, had found a haven and gained a new 
lease on life in the constitutions and commonwealths of the 
New World. In England this tradition had one of its stanchest 
supporters in John Locke (1632-1704), aside from the im- 
portant aspect of all authority being derived from God. With 
such limitations, his Second Treatise of Government (1690) 
is one of the classics of Western political thought. Its basic 
political ideas are identical with those which inspired the 
American Revolution and are embodied in the Declaration of 
Independence and the American Constitution. Both Locke's 
First and Second Treatise were written to justify the English 
Revolution of 1688, and to refute once and for all the doctrine 
of the "Divine Right of Kings." His major arguments against 
these claims of the absolute monarchy Locke had already 



Man and the State 185 

presented in his "Essay Concerning Toleration" and in his 
"Letters on Toleration." Some of his ideas on religious tolera- 
tion found practical application in the "Fundamental Con- 
stitutions for the Government of Carolina" (1669), in whose 
composition the philosopher himself had a considerable share. 
But Locke, it must be stated, was thoroughly anti-Catholic and 
opposed to the Church as well as to the sovereign. He wanted 
an excessive freedom. He failed to understand that with power 
once established by the people, the authority of the ruler is 
derived from God and calls for obedience, within its defined 
limits. 

Locke teaches that civil society comes into being by means 
of a social contract whose terms provide for the surrender to 
the community of the natural right of personally enforcing 
the rule of reason, a right which, according to Locke, every 
man possessed in the original "state of nature." This natural 
right, contrary to the opinion held by Hobbes, is not considered 
by Locke as delegated to a sovereign ruler, but to the entire 
community. And this particular right is the only one which 
man is thus called upon to surrender, while all those other 
natural rights which limit the powers of the sovereign com- 
munity, including the right to own property, and freedom of 
thought, speech, and worship, are retained by the individual. 
As far as property rights are concerned, Locke advocates a 
right of "absolute" ownership and with this important stipula- 
tion furnishes one of the mainstays of economic liberalism, 
deviating in this respect from the medieval theory of owner- 
ship, which on the whole had been accepted and reaffirmed 
by the religious reformers, and which had recognized only a 
"relative" right of ownership, subject to the superior term of 
the common good or public welfare. For Locke the owner 
was no longer a "steward" in the service of the commonweal, 
but the unconditional possessor of his property. 

The political and economic liberalism and individualism 
as expounded by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations 
(1776) and by David Ricardo in his Principles of Political 
Economy (1817), shared with the traditional political philos- 
ophy of the West the conviction that a nation or a State in 
the true sense cannot exist without a written or unwritten 
covenant or constitution that guarantees and protects human 



i86 Human Action in State and Society 

rights, that all good government must be constitutional rather 
than autocratic. But these modern political theorists and their 
followers departed from the philosophical tenets of the past 
in that they made individual self-interest the source and basis 
of all moral, political, and economic values in State and society. 
Smith and Ricardo based their views on a supposed pre-estab- 
lished harmony which, they argued, permeated the cosmic as 
well as the social universe. The individual, therefore, who seeks 
his own advantage works at the same time for the well-being 
of all, and the progress of society as a whole is nothing but 
the sum total of the progress of the individuals of whom it is 
composed. Similarly, the French Physiocrats had asserted with 
Francois Quesnay, the court physician of Louis XV, that there 
existed a "natural order of things," to which all governments 
must conform and in which political and economic laws were 
as inexorably fixed as the laws of nature. It was therefore the 
main function of the State to remove all impediments which 
prevented "nature" from following its lawful course. Accord- 
ing to this view, therefore, the best government was that which 
governed least. And as all governmental activities were thus 
regarded as necessary evils, it was further demanded that these 
activities should be purely coercive and restrictive, i.e., con- 
fined to the preservation of public order, the enforcement of 
contracts, and the punishment of crimes. 

In France as well as in England these individualistic theories 
were the ideological counterpart of the political revolts against 
the autocratic regimes of Europe. In the United States the 
opposition to British rule combined with the rugged indi- 
vidualism of a pioneer people to make a policy of "laissez 
faire" acceptable to both the people and their government. 
In a land of almost unlimited opportunities the State could 
well afford to leave a maximum of free play to the political 
and economic initiative of the individual. 

The natural and civil rights guaranteed by the liberal con- 
stitutional State, as conceived by the American Republic, in- 
cluded the freedom and inviolability of person and home, the 
protection of private property, freedom of speech, press, and 
assembly, freedom of worship, equality of opportunity, equality 
before the law, and the direct form of suffrage. The creation 



Man and the State 187 

of such a constitutional State, including the safeguards of the 
independent branches of executive, legislative, and judicial 
government, as originally demanded by Montesquieu and 
Locke, was in part at least the accomplishment of a more 
moderate form of political liberalism than the one advocated 
by Smith, Ricardo, and the Physiocrats. It had one of its great- 
est theoretical proponents in Immanuel Kant, for whom 
"political freedom" did not imply that everyone should be 
permitted to do whatever he pleases, but rather that everyone 
should be free to do anything that is "right," and that no 
power on earth should ever compel anyone to do what is 
"wrong." When Kant defined "legal freedom" as the right 
of the citizen to obey only laws to which he had given his 
free consent, he thereby confirmed the time-honored principle 
of "government by the consent of the governed." 

When Kant and the other proponents of liberalism in the 
eighteenth century formulated their political creed, the term 
"liberal" had not yet become a political slogan and a house- 
hold word of political parties. The word was first used in a 
partisan sense by the Spanish Cortes of 1812, to distinguish 
the defenders of constitutional government from the advo- 
cates of state absolutism. Kant, and with him most of the 
eighteenth-century liberals, still believed in absolute norms and 
values, although for them these norms were conceived as in- 
grained in the reason and the inborn moral sense of man, 
not derived from either a supernatural revelation or from 
the metaphysical constitution of reality and of the human 
being. They were, however, convinced that political and social 
structures were as "good" and as "bad" as the ideas on which 
they were built and which they practically manifested. 

These ideological and partly rational, partly emotional bases 
of the older political liberalism were gradually undermined by 
the liberalist-utilitarian political philosophers and sociologists 
of the nineteenth century. While for Kant the purpose of the 
State had been the realization of the idea of "right," Jeremy 
Bentham (1748-1832) regarded "the greatest good of the 
greatest number" as the end of all government and state 
legislation. Fully aware of the revolutionary implications of 
his teachings, he abandoned the ancient religious and meta- 



i88 Human Action in State and Society 

physical norms relating to organized group life and substi- 
tuted for the abstract demands of "right," "equity," and "jus- 
tice" the sociological motives of utility and expediency. 

The new constitutional State of liberalism and utilitarianism, 
however, could only hope to be safe from the recurrent waves 
of autocracy if it succeeded in filling the void that had been 
created by the abandonment of the religious and metaphysical 
bases of Western political philosophy. Thus liberalism eventu- 
ally entered into an alliance with the forces of modern nation- 
alism, intent upon transforming Europe into a continent of 
autonomous, constitutional States which individually and col- 
lectively would exert their power and influence for the pro- 
motion of the greatest happiness of the greatest number and 
for the preservation of peace. 

That such hopes were doomed to end in disappointment and 
ultimate failure was due in part to the delusive utilitarian 
premise which had entertained the belief that human happiness 
could be advanced by an appeal to human selfishness, and in 
part to the erroneous view that liberty was the end of the 
individual and of society rather than merely a means to be 
used for the greater perfection of human persons and their 
association in States and societies. 

By making unrestricted liberty for all the ultimate end of 
all social life, liberal individualism vitiated the principle of 
liberty itself, turning it into a principle of disguised anarchy, 
and assigning to the State the ignoble task of acting as the 
guardian of "laissez faire" and unlimited competition. By deny- 
ing the State the right of interference to check the abuses of 
excessive liberty in the interest of the common good, the theory 
of liberal individualism frequently served as an excuse to sanc- 
tion such abuses on the part of politically and economically 
powerful individuals, groups, and classes. 

The failure of liberal individualism to grant to the State 
the right to exercise its proper functions as a moral agent in 
ordering relations between individuals and groups, in accord- 
ance with the principles of reason and justice, led in the end 
to the destruction of the very rights which individualism had 
set out to protect: breeding social disorder and anarchy, indi- 
vidualism, involved in a cumulative process of atomistic dis- 
integration, became in many modern nations the prey of the 



Man and the State 189 

avenging reactionary forces of anti-individualist collectivism. 

8) Socialism and Communism. The first collectivist menace 
to a happy equilibrium of individual and common good, as 
conceived by the traditional political philosophy of the West, 
came from "scientific" socialism. The philosophic basis of 
socialism was the anthropological materialism which had been 
developed by some of the more radical disciples of Hegel, the 
so-called "Young Hegelians," especially by Ludwig Feuerbach 
(1804-1872). For Hegel the State was the highest and most 
perfect manifestation of what he called the "World Spirit" 
or the Universal Reason. The State was morality, reason, and 
spirit incarnate: it was, in short, "God walking upon the 
earth," and therefore the dignity and worth of man was ulti- 
mately derived from the State. 

His political theory made Hegel an ardent advocate of state 
omnipotence and a passionate opponent of liberal individual- 
ism. The essential features of his ideal "Kulturstaat" Hegel 
believed he recognized in the Prussian State, whose structure 
appeared to him equally suited for the realization of the 
political philosophies of both extreme nationalism and state 
socialism. Such a State was in no way any longer the servant 
of the law, but its infallible creator, interpreter, and master, 
leaving no room for what in former times had been termed 
the natural moral law. The most powerful State at any given 
historic epoch was entitled to regard itself as the incarnation 
of the World Spirit and to consider its own advantages as its 
supreme law. Thus Hegel's political philosophy was in its 
essence an elaborate attempt to justify metaphysically the 
political theories of Machiavelli: Might and force were identi- 
fied with spirit and right, and the rebelling human conscience 
was soothed by shifting the responsibility for political crimes 
to the inexorable evolutionary laws of the World Spirit. 

When Hegel died, his disciples were divided into the two 
opposing camps of the Christian-conservative "Old Hegelians" 
and the anti-Christian and materialist "Young Hegelians." 
This division in itself reflected the ambiguity of Hegel's sys- 
tem, which lent itself to diametrically contradictory conclu- 
sions. When, for example, Hegel coined the phrase: "everything 
that is real is rational," this formulation was eagerly seized 
upon by the conservatives to serve as an argument for the 



190 Human Action in State and Society 

existing social and political system. But the same phrase 
turned into the negative assertion: "everything that is not 
rational is not real" became a watchword of political and social 
radicalism and a call for revolutionary action, to make reality 
conform to the demands of reason. 

The most astonishing and consequential fate, however, befell 
Hegel's system and method at the hands of Karl Marx (1813- 
1883), who claimed that Hegelian philosophy, which "had 
stood on its head," had been put by him on its legs again. 
Hegel's "dialectical idealism" became the methodical founda- 
tion for Marx's "dialectical materialism." While Hegel had 
tried to explain material reality by referring it back to ideas, 
Marx proposed to explain ideas as resulting from basic mate- 
rial realities. All social, political, cultural, and religious ideas 
were, according to Marx, conditioned by the modes of pro- 
duction, and the history of society was nothing but the history 
of civil wars between social classes, between the economically 
powerful and the economically weak, between the exploiters 
and the exploited, between "bourgeoisie" and "proletariat" 
civil wars which culminated in the "industrial revolution" of 
the nineteenth century. And these struggles were declared to be 
the necessary processes of historico-social evolution and of the 
interaction of social forces, following strictly the laws of mate- 
rial biological evolution. By taking over Hegel's concept of 
the State and by filling this ready-made mold with a material- 
istic content, Marx developed "scientifically" his ideal pattern 
of a future classless society in which the "expropriation of the 
expropriators" would have been consummated. 

Karl Marx and his friend and collaborator, Friedrich Engels 
(1820-1895), warmly welcomed the materialistic anthro- 
pologism of Ludwig Feuerbach, finding in it decisive support 
for their political and economic theories. Their trained histori- 
cal sense traced the beginnings of modern materialism back 
to medieval nominalism. After having subjected the capitalist 
system of economy to a penetrating analysis, they presented 
their conclusions in programmatic form in the "Communist 
Manifesto" (1848), followed later on by the publication of 
Marx's "Das Kapital" (1867). 

The class struggle was for Marx not an end in itself but 
merely a means to the elimination of classes and class privileges, 



Man and the State 191 

leading eventually to the abolition of national boundaries 
and the establishment of a universal cooperative World State. 
There was no doubt in his mind as to the inevitability of this 
immanent historical movement of the "dialectic" of economic 
forces toward the final goal. On the day when the means of 
production would be concentrated in the hands of a few capi- 
talist and monopolist owners, capitalism would have dug its 
own grave, and a class-conscious international proletariat would 
stand ready to take over the system of industrial production 
and organize the redistribution of wealth with a view to the 
welfare of all 

Thus the socialistic theory of Marx and Engels described 
the ultimate realization of the ideal proletarian commonwealth 
as resulting from necessary processes of material evolution. 
While both writers admitted that the dictatorial assumption 
of political power by the workers and the armed repulsion 
of the forces of counterrevolution might become mandatory 
during the period of transition and readjustment, the violent 
overthrow of governments and of the established social and 
political order was incompatible with the doctrine of histori- 
cal and dialectical materialism; it was never advocated directly 
by Marx and Engels themselves but rather by some of their 
more radical and less philosophical disciples and by the pro- 
tagonists of syndicalism and anarchism in the later nineteenth 
and early twentieth century. 

In the writings of Marx and Engels the terms socialism and 
communism are used almost synonymously. They were the 
labels attached to a political philosophy and economic theory 
which were opposed to the institution of private property, de- 
manding the socialization of the means of production, and 
protesting against the enslavement of human beings by the 
misuse of the privileges of ownership. They were thus re- 
actions against a liberal individualism which had made the 
State into a tool which could be used by a powerful ruling 
class for the suppression of the weaker groups and members 
of society. 

Gradually, however, the term communism came to be gen- 
erally understood as the most extreme form of Marxian social- 
ism, denoting an increasing emphasis on the more violent 
aspects of the class struggle and the clamor for the dictator- 



192 Human Action in State and Society 

ship of the proletariat, including the demand for the complete 
socialization of the means of production; the communist revo- 
lution, as is well known, did not limit itself to the seizure of 
these. Both socialism and communism further fostered collec- 
tivism in that they subordinated the welfare of the individual 
to the thoroughly organized political and economic mecha- 
nisms of the Proletarian State, and by extending government 
control over family relations and education. The individual 
citizen was to become a kind of ward of the State, depending 
on the latter from the cradle to the grave, in his education, his 
opportunities, his occupation, his economic status, and by his 
means of sustenance. Economic and social forces were con- 
ceived as ends rather than as means, and thus man, the rational 
animal, was to be transformed into man, the economic animal. 
An eventual restoration of some of the liberties of the people 
was, however, expected from the complete communization of 
the economic order. 

The ideas of the socialization or communization of property 
and of the common ownership of the soil were not entirely 
unfamiliar prior to the advent of the industrial age, either in 
the theoretical demands of political blueprints for the creation 
of an ideal State, such as Plato's Republic, or in the actual 
practice of communistically organized religious sects and 
monastic orders. But most of these communistic schemes of 
an earlier age were confined to relatively small circles or 
regions, or they were conceived and executed on a religious 
and voluntary basis, whereas Marxist socialism and commu- 
nism called for a compulsory and world-wide system of so- 
cialization. It was to be brought about by a society which had 
first to be thoroughly secularized, and whose religious, philo- 
sophical, and sociopolitical outlook was to be determined by 
the unreserved adoption of the materialistic creed. 

This common creed of the socialist masses found its first 
constitutional expression and organizational representation in 
the "First International" (London, 1864), whose statutes had 
been drawn up by Marx himself. After factional disputes had 
led to its dissolution in 1876, the "Second International" was 
founded in 1889. In 1907 a radical minority, advocating the 
instigation of civil wars, and headed by Lenin and Rosa 
Luxembourg, seceded from the more moderate majority. 



Man and the State 193 

World War I engendered further factional and regional divi- 
sions, and in 1919 the "Third International" (Kominterri), 
following a strictly communist pattern, was established with 
Moscow as its center, carrying on its extensive international 
activities until 1943, when it was officially dissolved by the 
order of Joseph Stalin. 

9) Fascism and National Socialism. The second collectivist 
threat to the ancient Western idea of "government by consent 
of the governed" came in our time in the form of the resurg- 
ence of totalitarian autocracy, coupled with "racism" and im- 
perialist nationalism. It should be recognized that both fascism 
and national socialism, in making the State, or the race, or the 
"folk," or the blood the absolute end of social and political 
life, and in reducing everything else, including man himself, 
to a mere means, borrowed their ideology partly from the 
theoretical and practical patterns of past despotisms, partly 
from the political philosophy of Hobbes and Hegel, and from 
some of their contemporary disciples, such as Vilfredo Pareto 
(1848-1923) and Oswald Spengler (1880-1936). While, on the 
one hand, these political systems embody all the evils of 
tyranny, as diagnosed by Plato, Aristotle, and St. Thomas 
Aquinas, they share, on the other hand, with socialism and 
communism in a violent antagonism to the liberal-individual- 
ist ideas in politics and economics. The law of the group, the 
community, the nation, or the race completely outweighs the 
law and the right of the individual. And while liberal indi- 
vidualism regarded with the medieval and modern nominalists 
only the individual and particular as realities and declared 
the universal or the "social organism" a mere fiction, fascism 
and national socialism endow only the universal totality of 
the State with the predicate of reality and personality, and 
therefore of necessity deprive the individual citizen of his 
natural rights and his human dignity. These political phi- 
losophies thus substitute for the inorganic and atomistic, but 
"free," society of liberal individualism the gigantic mechanism 
of a uniform, but "servile," society, viz., the Totalitarian State. 

As against the law of reason, fascism and national socialism 
advance the irrationalist rule of a collective will and instinct 
and the right of brute force. Divinizing purely biological urges, 
they consistently militate against the rule of both natural and 



194 Human Action in Statt and Society 

divine law: "If the human State is God, the supreme value 
and last end of human history and the cosmic process, God 
is at least implicitly denied. If God is the supreme value and 
last end ... the State is His servant and the servant of His 



servants." 46 



Fascism, in the early days of its rule, dreamed of a higher 
synthesis of State and Church in the caesaropapism of the 
"Third Rome" (Terza Roma), just as national socialism 
dreamed of the resurrection of the "Holy Roman Empire of 
the German Nation" in the shape of the "Third Reich." In 
its political organization fascism was essentially the creation 
of Benito Mussolini and the creature of the fascist party. The 
centralized power of the State extended over every detail of 
local and communal administration. The political and eco- 
nomic activities, functions, and interests of capital and labor 
(including intellectual labor) were welded together in a sys- 
tem of vocational corporations, composed of two major sections 
of "functional or horizontal" units (industry, agriculture, trade 
and commerce, banking) and "organic or vertical" units (e.g., 
the "corporation of bread," extending from the farmer to the 
baker, etc.). 47 While theoretically these corporations, seven in 
number, were originally conceived by Benito Mussolini as 
semiautonomous bodies, subject to state control only if they 
failed in fulfilling their proper functions, in practice they soon 
became servile organs of the Totalitarian State. 

National socialism, as implied in the name, catered to both 
the nationalist and socialist trends of the age. It endeavored to 
harness the conflicting interests of individuals, groups, and 
classes by their co-ordination in a racially purified "Volksstaat," 
attributing the defeat of Germany in 1918 and the ensuing 
impoverishment of the German people to a conspiracy of 
"international Jewry." The party program provided for the 
restoration of a prosperous middle class and a healthy peasantry. 
The iron rule of the "Totalstaat" extended to all departments 
of public life, culture, and education, and to the most inti- 
mate concerns and relations of private and family life. The 
authority of the Totalitarian State was anchored in the "leader 



4 *E. I. Watkin, A Philosophy of Form (New York: Shccd & Ward, 1935), p. 204. 
** Cf . A. Mussolini, // Fascismo e Ic corporazioni (1931); B. Mussolini, article 
Fascismo in Encyclopedia Italiano, Vol. XIV, 1932. 



Man and the State 195 

principle" (Fuhrerprinzip}, all duties and responsibilities is- 
suing from and converging in the supreme "Fiihrer," the 
embodiment of "Volk" and "Reich." 

The national-socialist "corporations" were described as 
"unions of performance" and included employers and em- 
ployees; they were placed under the strictest control of party 
functionaries. Citizenship was limited to "Aryans," while 
special discriminatory laws (Nlirnberg Laws) were enacted 
to eliminate all Jews from the political, economic, and cultural 
life of the national and racial community. In the official party 
program "positive Christianity" was endorsed, and freedom 
was promised to all religious creeds "as far as they do not 
endanger the State and are not in conflict with the moral ideas 
of the Germanic race," while at the same time a subtle but 
relentless war of extermination was consistently waged against 
Christian citizens, churches, and groups of all denominations, 
and official party leaders publicly declared Germanism and 
Christianity as mutually exclusive. 48 

Like fascism, national socialism glorified war and conquest 
as necessary and normal outlets for a nation's strength and 
will to power, as normal manifestations of national health 
and vigor, and as legitimate means to prosperity and national 
aggrandizement. 

10) The Corporate State. To protect the common good 
from the dangers of liberal individualism, on the one hand, 
and of collectivist totalitarianism, on the other, and to restore 
the true sovereignty of the State within the limits of the 
natural and moral law, the attempt was made in our time 
to work out a theory of the State in which the conflicting 
interests of individuals, classes, and groups are harmonized 
in a higher synthesis. This theory of "solidarism," as advanced 
by a number of contemporary moral theologians, political 
scientists, and sociologists, has found its strongest support in 
the principles of the "eternal philosophy" and their attempted 
realization in the corporative society of the Middle Ages. The 
demands for a reconstruction of the political and social order 
on the bases of metaphysical and moral principles, within 



* Cf. Alfred Rosenberg, Der Mythos des XX. Jahrhunderts; Hermann Rauschning, 
The Revolution of Nihilism (New York: 1940); The Voice of Destruction (New 
York: 1939). 



196 Human Action in State and Society 

the framework of the complex industrial society of our time, 
were carefully analyzed and summarized in official pronounce- 
ments of the Holy See in Rome and the Catholic Hierarchy 
in many lands, but especially in some of the Encyclical Letters 
of Leo XIII and Pius XL 49 Without trying to resuscitate a 
defunct and historically delimited political and social system, 
the two Pontiffs pointed to certain abiding truths embodied 
in the political and social philosophy of the past and called 
for their adaptation to present needs, in order to effect a 
cure of the ills that beset modern society. 

While these Papal documents vivify and fortify their argu- 
mentation by frequent references to Scripture and Tradition, 
they appeal directly to those norms of the physical and moral 
law which are deeply ingrained in the universe and in human 
reason (cf. pp. 148 sq.). These Encyclical Letters and their re- 
commendations therefore are not addressed to Catholics and 
other Christians only, but to the entire human race, calling 
upon all men of good will to come to the rescue of the common 
intellectual heritage of mankind and thus to humanize and 
personalize the individual and society. 

Dealing with moral and social phenomena only in terms 
of factual description and historic retrospection, contemporary 
positivist sociology and political science necessarily are more 
concerned with means than with ends. The problem of social 
reconstruction, however, is definitely one of ends or, as the 
scholastic philosopher would say, of final cau^* (cf. pp. 66 sq.). 
In other words, it is a problem that can only be solved by 
inquiring into the purpose of State and society and into the 
nature of man as the focal unit around which the social struc- 
ture is built and from which it derives its meaning. If the 
"eternal philosophy" is correct in regarding die universe as 
an organic totality ordered and proportioned to the 
organic totality of human nature, and if the wholeness of 
both has a common ground and final end in God as the First 
and Final Cause, then State and society, too, are not chance 
aggregations of individuals or arbitrary constructions but like- 
wise organic structures which must be integrated in the grad- 
uated metaphysical and moral order of reality. If this philo- 

40 Cf. Leo XIII, Rerum Novarum (1891) and Immortale Dei (1885); Pius XI, 
Quadragesimo Anno (1931) and Divini Rcdemptons (1937). 



Man and the State 197 

sophical premise is accepted, then the functions and the end 
of the State are circumscribed by the natural and moral law 
and must be in strict harmony with it. All the activities of the 
State must converge in the pursuit and promotion of the 
"common good," comprising the spiritual, intellectual, moral, 
physical, and economic goods of individuals, i.e., the goods of 
mind and body of concrete human beings. This "common 
good" can only be realized if all these individual goods are 
so equitably spread or distributed that they are placed within 
the reach of each and every citizen, so that, by availing them- 
selves of these proffered opportunities, they may through their 
own efforts and services work for their personal perfection as 
well as for the common welfare of all. 

Endeavoring to achieve a synthesis of what is acceptable 
in liberalist individualism and impersonalist collectivism, and 
as far as it is acceptable, the philosophy of "solidarism" neces- 
sarily makes use of the partial truths and the positive moral 
incentives embodied in the two extreme political theories 
which it proposes to harmonize. It acknowledges and respects 
both the individual and social propensities of human nature, 
encouraging and protecting a tempered and ordered self-love, 
personal initiative and ambition, but stressing simultaneously 
the social virtues of group loyalty in family relations as well 
as in the communal, national, and international spheres. It 
thus neutralizes the conflicting interests of individuals and 
groups, directing their energies and services into the channels 
of a "common good" which as such satisfies and fulfills the 
legitimate individual and social aspirations of human nature. 

It should be understood that the political philosophy under- 
lying the "solidarist" concept of society enunciates certain 
principles of organized group living which are compatible 
with different systems of government and make allowance 
for different practical applications. These principles are es- 
sentially /^compatible only with the two extreme positions 
whose inherent deficiencies they try to overcome, viz., un- 
restrained individualism and collectivist totalitarianism. "Sol- 
idarism" or the philosophy of the Corporate State is unalter- 
ably opposed to the social and political concepts of both 
because both represent a perversion of the social order, growing 
out of a misinterpretation of human nature. 



198 Human Action in State and Society 

The political philosophy of the Corporate State places great 
emphasis on the creation of "occupational" or "vocational" 
groups in which the functions and interests of employers and 
employees are to be socialized for the sake of the solidaric 
interests of the community. These vocational groups are to 
function as autonomous performance and area societies in 
which men practising the same trade or profession are joined 
together "not according to the position they occupy in the 
labor market but according to the diverse functions which 
they exercise in society." 50 Membership in these groups is to 
be "compulsory" only in the sense in which citizenship may 
be called compulsory, i.e., every member of a vocational group, 
as long as he chooses to be a member, is bound to observe the 
rules laid down by a particular trade or profession. 01 The 
State, relieved from functions and duties with which it is 
encumbered in highly individualist and collectivist societies, 
will be free once more to rule "in kingly fashion above all 
party contention, intent only on justice and the common 
good." 52 The restoration of social groups of performance, 
representing the common interests of different occupations 
and regions, will thus encourage the creation of a system of 
vocational and regional pluralism, in which the autonomous 
groups, endowed with the status and dignity of legal persons, 
will contribute to the increasing personalization of social rela- 
tions, and in which the principle of unlimited competition 
will give way to the principle of voluntary cooperation. 

The more the ideals of social justice are realized by the con- 
certed efforts of autonomous social groups, the less the State 
will be called upon to interfere on behalf of special groups 
or classes. "It is indeed true," writes Pius XI, "that, owing to 
the change in social conditions, much that was formerly done 
by small bodies can nowadays be accomplished only by large 
corporations. None the less, just as it is wrong to withdraw 
from the individual and commit to the community at large 
what private enterprise and industry can accomplish, so, too, 
it is an injustice, a grave evil, and a disturbance of the right 
order for a larger and higher corporation to arrogate to itself 

50 Pius XI, Quadragesima Anno. 

51 The economic aspects of the Corporate State are discussed in the following 
chapter. 

Piut XI, Quadragesimo Anno. 



Man and the State 199 

functions which can be performed efficiently by smaller and 
lower bodies. . . . The State should leave to these smaller 
groups the settlement of issues of minor importance. . . . Let 
those in power, therefore, be convinced that the more faith- 
fully this principle be followed, and a graded hierarchical 
order exist between the various subsidiary organizations, the 
more excellent will be both the authority and the efficiency of 
the social organization as a whole and the happier and more 
prosperous the condition of the State." 53 

A superficial perusal of the literature dealing with the pro- 
posed structure of the Corporate State might convey the im- 
pression that there exists a more than accidental parallelism 
between the fascist corporations and the national-socialist 
"groups of performance" (Leistungsgemeinschafteri), on the 
one hand, and the solidarist "vocational groups," on the other. 
However, a more careful analysis reveals the essential differ- 
ence between the political philosophies underlying the two 
theories. The philosophy of "solidarism" has its frame of ref- 
erence in the spiritual and physical nature of man, and its 
term in the perfection of human personality, in its triple 
aspect of rationality, personality, and sociability. It is based 
on the principle of free service and voluntary association, and it 
recognizes the sanctions of the Divine, natural, and moral law 
as the regulative norms of individual and social functions and 
activities. Fascist and national-socialist "corporatism," on the 
other hand, has its frame of reference in the Absolute State or 
the absolutized people or race, denying autonomy to indi- 
viduals and groups, and imposing an external corporative 
discipline from above, by means of physical coercion and regi- 
mentation. In fascism and national socialism the supremacy 
of the Divine, natural, and moral law is implicitly or explicitly 
denied, the Totalitarian State claiming to be the sole originator 
and exclusive dispenser of all law. Thus the regimented "cor- 
porative groups" and the individuals pressed into their service 
become the depersonalized organs of an omnipotent State. 

* Piu$ XI, op. cit. 



2OO Human Action in State and Society 

24. The Commonwealth of Nations 

INCLUDED among the natural rights of man, the rationa 
and social animal, is, as we know (cf. p. 146), the right t< 
form such associations as answer to his individual and socia 
needs and to aid him in his striving for personal perfection 
enabling him to realize those common ends of human natur< 
which, if he were left to his isolated individual efforts, wouk 
be beyond his reach. Among these associations are the family 
the vocational and professional groups, and those larger socia 
units which are designated as nations and States. 

We have pointed out that all these associations have thei 
common term or end in the "common good" and that thei 
functions and activities are subject to the sanctions of tha 
natural and moral law which is revealed to and discovered b] 
man in the metaphysical constitution of the created universi 
and in the physico-spiritual structure of his own self. But i 
the common good in conformity with the natural and mora 
law is the end of any particular State or nation, then the con 
elusion is inevitable that "humanity" as such or the socier 
of States must have the same end and be subject to the sami 
law. Thus the concepts of international relations or the prin 
ciples of International Law grow out of the very nature o 
the State. And just as we distinguish in the sphere of th< 
individual State between the precepts of natural and positiv< 
or human law (cf. p. 153), so also in the sphere of internationa 
relations we distinguish between the precepts of natural inter 
national law and the positive legal enactments or agreement 
which govern international relations and which ought to rep 
resent the practical interpretations and applications of the gen 
eral principles of the natural and moral law. International lav 
thus becomes part of the natural and moral law and is subjec 
to the same moral norms and standards which govern th< 
life of the individual, the family, the social group, and th< 
State. 

While in primitive human society it was usually possibl 
for the smaller units of the patriarchally organized clan o 
tribe to procure for individuals and groups many of thoa 
material and moral advantages which are essential for thi 



Commonwealth of Nations 201 

well-being of the individual members, die complex structures 
of highly civilized nations seem to call for an ever increasing 
amount of collaboration and the co-ordination of the needs 
and wants of large national units. And just as the transition 
from clanship to larger group associations and to statehood 
requires a curb on excessive individualism for the sake of the 
common good, so the transition from a state of national isola- 
tion to the order of a commonwealth of nations requires the 
surrender of some amount of individual state sovereignty in 
the interest of the international common good. As the common 
good of individual States is jeopardized by individual license 
as well as by latent or open conditions of civil strife condi- 
tions resulting from the attempt of individuals and groups to 
prosper at the expense of their fellow compatriots so the end 
of the international common good is thwarted by the attempt 
of individual States to increase their power and their wealth 
by preying upon their fellow nations. 

It is obvious, moreover, that man, being destined to live 
in community with others of his kind, cannot attain even 
to his own personal perfection in isolation, but only in the vital 
give-and-take of social relationships. In other words, man's 
moral efforts must be directed not only toward his own indi- 
vidual good but toward the common social good of his fellow 
men, and all individual moral efforts should thus converge 
in the growing realization of the common good of "humanity" 
or the human race as such. Sharing in the same human nature, 
and being destined for the same final end, all individual human 
beings are united by a common bond which establishes among 
them a universal brotherhood. And, as by virtue of their equal 
and common dependence on the First and Final Cause of the 
created universe all men are also filially united under the 
fatherhood of God, the nature of their unity is at once physi- 
cal, moral, and spiritual. 

This unity of the human race, however, is as yet only a 
virtual, not an actual one. It can only become actual by man's 
loyal observance of the two supreme injunctions of the moral 
law, as expressed in the Decalogue, viz., to love God above 
all things and to love his neighbor as he loves his own self. 
In accordance with what we have stated above, it is evident 
that this dual commandment applies unconditionally to indi- 



3O2 Human Action in State and Society 

viduals, families, groups, and nations, inasmuch as n 
States, and societies do not exist apart from the indi\ 
of whom they are composed. 

The only kind of unity which has become an actua 
the present age is of a physical or geographical nature. Alt 
there is a growing awareness of the mutual interdeper 
of the different parts of the modern world, of people 
races, in the various fields of political, economic, sci( 
and cultural endeavor, there is as yet no proportional 
sciousness of the moral unity and solidarity of the humai 

The two main obstacles which stand in the way o 
human solidarity and thus impede the pacification of 
national relations are again two extreme and exclusive 
of political philosophy, from whose harmonization aloj 
establishment of a rule of international justice and peace 
result. These antagonistic political creeds are excessive 1 
alism, on the one hand, and abstract internationalism, < 
other. The former roughly corresponds to the philosoj 
liberal individualism, transposed to the international 
while the latter applies the collectivist pattern of think 
the field of international relations, depriving persons a 
as nations of the prerogatives of their individuality. 

Extreme nationalism, finding ideological support in t 
litical philosophy of Machiavelli, Bodin, Hobbes, Hegc 
their contemporary disciples, preaches national isolatior 
love, and aggrandizement at the expense of other natioi 
thus makes the power motive the end of a nation's f 
policy. The moral law and the rules of justice are then 
held in cynical disregard or their validity is arbitraril; 
fined to the national boundaries of a particular State, 
sive nationalism manifests itself accordingly either as 
nihilism or as national isolationism. Though claiming fo 
the title of "political realism," this political philosophy i 
unrealistic in that it takes into account only the limited 
cal or zoological aspects of reality and neglects or ti 
rule out of existence the moral and spiritual compone 
man and society. Its fundamental convictions are sumi 
expressed by one of its contemporary adherents in the f 
ing words: "The statesman who conducts foreign polic 
concern himself with values of justice, fairness, and tol 



Commonwealth of 'Nations 203 

only to the extent that they contribute to or do not interfere 
with the power objective. They can be used instrumentally as 
moral justification for the power quest, but they must be dis- 
carded the moment their application brings weakness. The 
search for power is not made for the achievement of moral 
values; moral values are used to facilitate the attainment of 
power." 64 

Abstract internationalism, on the other hand, is equally un- 
realistic in that it strips both the concrete individual and the 
concrete national society of their natural, physical, and moral 
characteristics, in order that they may be fitted into the ideal 
and abstract pattern of a world-wide collective uniformity. 
Internationalism thus becomes unmindful of the personal 
destiny of man and neglectful of the significant part which 
the natural and moral associations of family, social group, and 
national State play in the realization of that destiny. 

The healthy organization of social life on a national and 
international scale will have to refrain from the two extremes 
of national egotism and international collectivism, while at 
the same time realistically acknowledging the kernel of truth 
contained in both positions. Against excessive nationalism it is 
necessary to insist that the moral law knows of no national 
and racial boundaries but is unconditional and universal in its 
validity and application. And against abstract internationalism 
it must be asserted that States and nations as natural associa- 
tions of human persons acquire a dignity of their own and, 
as interpreters and administrators of the natural and moral 
law, command the respect and obedience of the individual 
citizens. 

By rejecting both these extremes a well-balanced social 
philosophy will moreover be able to save from perversion or 
extinction the virtue of patriotism. The love of one's natural 
earthly home and of those who share with us in the same 
natural and spiritual heritage of blood, soil, race, and cultural 
tradition is an extension of legitimate self-love and as such 
in accordance with the natural law. But the true patriot will 
not therefore make an idol of his own nation and exclude 
from his love and benevolence all other nations. Nor will he 



54 Nicholas John Spykman, America's Strategy in World Politics (New York: 
Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1942), pp. i8sq. 



204 Human Action in State and Society 

have to pin his faith on the opposite fallacy, viz., renounc 
his personal and national individuality and pledge his exclu 
sive allegiance to the abstract idea of "humanity." The tru 
patriot, in other words, is a good individual, a good famil 1 
man, a good citizen of his country, and a good citizen of th 
world. If a man pursues his own personal good at the expens 
of his fellow men, he stunts and debases himself as a mora 
personality. Similarly, if a man makes the good of his owi 
nation an end in itself and the ultimate aim of his loyalties 
disregarding the moral interrelation existing between all mem 
bers of the human race, he thereby stunts and distorts botl 
the idea and the reality of his own nation. He harms his owj 
nation by pursuing its own particular good at the expens 
of the common good of all nations. The natural moral lav 
permits neither an individual nor a nation to strive for end 
which arc incompatible with or detrimental to the commoi 
good. Both individuals and nations are good only in so fa 
as they conform to and participate in the Supreme and Absc 
lute Good. Such conformity, however, implies that the indi 
vidual respects the integrity and sovereign rights of othe 
nations. 

The principles which ought to govern and regulate inter 
national relations are derived from the basic metaphysica 
and moral concepts of the "realistic philosophy." They are em 
bodied in the traditional political philosophy of the West a 
expounded by Aristotle, St. Augustine, St. Thomas Aquinas 
Vitoria, Suarez, Hugo Grotius, and many other theorists o 
International Law. All these writers are agreed that the right 
and obligations of States with regard to each other are to b 
defined and delimited in accordance with the natural lav 
and that the rules of the natural law apply equally to indi 
viduals, groups, and States. We find a strong reaffirmation o 
these traditional teachings as well as directives for their adapts 
tion to the contemporary conditions of international life ij 
several Papal Encyclicals of recent date and in other officia 
pronouncements of the Vatican dealing with the reconstruc 
tion of international society on the bases of justice and equity. 

** Cf . Principles for Peace. Selections from Papal Documents. Edited for th 
Bishops' Committee on the Pope's Peace Points by the Rev. Harry C. Koenig, S.T.E 
Preface by the Most Rev. Samuel A. Stritch, Archbishop of Chicago. Nation; 



Commonwealth of Nations 205 

Enjoining upon the nations the necessity of the rule of justice 
in international affairs, Pius XI writes: "Itjs _ never lawful or 
expedient to separate what is useful from what is right. , . . 
Advantages gained for the family, the State, or public power 
to the detriment of others may seem great and magnificent 
achievements, but St. Augustine shows us that they are not 
lasting and always carry with them fear of disaster: they are 
a bright joy as brittle as glass, accompanied by the haunting 
fear of a sudden break." 56 As peace, according to St. Augustine, 
is "the tranquillity of order," there can be no peace in human 
relations without order, "and so, likewise," says Pius XII, "if 
justice be done away with, there can be no such thing as 
order." Justice, however, "requires that all men acknowledge 
and defend the sacred rights of human freedom and human 
dignity. ... It is part of the office of justice to determine and 
to maintain the norm of that order in human affairs which 
is the primary and the principal foundation of lasting peace." 57 

But to the demands of strict and rigid justice the Pontiff 
adds the obligations of charity. As all men are members of 
the same human family and are thus brothers under the father- 
hood of God, and as all States are composed of human persons 
destined for the same end, the laws of charity and benevolence 
apply to international relations as much as to relations between 
the individual members of a national or tribal society. 

As the demands of justice and charity in domestic and inter- 
national affairs derive their titles from the natural and Divine 
law, Pius XII sees the fountainhead of the disunity of nations 
and peoples in the abandonment of the universal standard 
of morality: "Both in private life and in the State itself, and 
moreover in the mutual relations of race with race, of country 
with country, the one universal standard of morality is set 
aside; by which we mean the natural law. . . . This law reposes, 
as upon its foundation, on the idea of God, the almighty 

Catholic Welfare Conference (Washington, D. C., 1943). Distributors: The Bruce 
Publishing Co., Milwaukee, Wis. Cf. in particular: Benedict XV, Ad Beatissimi 
(1914); "Proposals for Peace" (1917); Pacem Dei (1920); Pius XI, Vbi Arcano 
Dei (1922); Hit brennender Sorge (1937); Pius XII, "Easter Sermon on Peace" 
(i939); Summi Pontificatus (1939); "The Five-Point Peace Plan" (1939); "Letter 
to President Roosevelt" (1940). 

M Pius XI, Vbi Arcano Dei. 

"Pius XII, "Easter Sermon." 

" Cf. Pius XII, op. at. 



so6 Human Action in State and Society 

Creator and Father of us all, the supreme and perfect law- 
giver." Thus "the difference between right and wrong be- 
comes more and more faint until it completely dies away." 89 
International treaties and agreements are natural ingredients 
and statutory implements of International Law. But the validity 
of such treaties, too, rests on the law of nature, without which 
they would have no binding force and might be regarded 
as mere scraps of paper. If it is maintained that the validity 
of treaties depends merely on other treaties, previously con- 
cluded, the implication is once more that the rights and ob- 
ligations which are defined in these treaties have their source 
in the absolute and arbitrary power of the State. If, however, 
the binding force of treaties rests on the natural law, then, 
obviously, all treaties which violate the precepts of the natural 
law are unjust and invalid. A treaty, for example, which has 
been entered into by one of the contracting parties under duress 
or the threat of force cannot be regarded as binding if its 
terms offend against the laws of international justice. Or, 
"in the course of time new situations may arise, which were 
not foreseen and perhaps could not be foreseen at the time 
when the pact was made. In that case, either the whole agree- 
ment or some part of it may have become . . . unjust to one 
of the contracting parties. ... In such a case, the obvious 
expedient is to take refuge as soon as possible in a full and 
frank discussion of the difficulty, so that the old pact can be 
suitably altered, or a new pact substituted for it. It is, however, 
quite a different thing to regard all signed pacts as written 
in water, assuming to oneself the tacit right of breaking them 
at one's own discretion, whenever self-interest demands it. ... 
Such behavior ... is utterly subversive of the natural order." 60 
"But even the best and most detailed regulations will be im- 
perfect and foredoomed to failure unless the peoples and those 
who govern them submit willingly to the influence of that 
spirit which alone can give life, authority, and binding force 
to the dead letter of international agreements. They must 
develop that sense of deep and keen responsibility which meas- 
ures and weighs human statutes according to the sacred and 
inviolable standards of the law of God; they must cultivate 

"Piui XII, Summi Pontificatus. 
*Pim XII, op. cit. 



Commonwealth of Nations 207 

mt hunger and thirst after justice which is proclaimed as a 
eatitude in the Sermon on the Mount and which supposes 
5 its natural foundation the moral virtue of justice!'^ 

This series of quotations from Papal documents may fittingly 
e concluded by a reference to a pertinent passage in Pius XFs 
irring appeal to the German hierarchy and the German 
eople, composed in the German language in 1937: "Man as 
person," the Pontiff wrote in this message, "possesses rights 
e holds from God, and which any collectivity must protect 
gainst denial, suppression, or neglect. To overlook this truth 
; to forget that the real common good ultimately takes its 
icasure from man's nature, which balances personal rights 
nd social obligations, and from the purpose of society, estab- 
shed for the benefit of human nature. Society was intended 
y the Creator for the full development of individual possi- 
ilities, and for the social benefits, which by a give-and-take 
rocess everyone can claim for his own sake and that of others, 
ligher and more general values, which collectivity alone can 
rovide, also derive from the Creator, for the good of man, 
3r his full development, natural and supernatural, and thus 
Dr the realization of his perfection. To neglect this order is to 
hake the pillars on which society rests, and to compromise 
ocial tranquillity, security, and existence." 62 

If we ask for the best possible and most effective means to 
ransform gradually the virtual metaphysical and moral unity 
f nations into an actual one, we are forced to the conclusion 
hat this goal can only be approached by the collaboration of 
11 nations in accordance with the rules of justice and reason, 
e., in obedience to the natural and moral law. Such collabora- 
ton, however, calls for the creation of institutions which imple- 
aent the mutual rights and obligations of States and bind all 
lations juridically to a commonly accepted covenant of justice, 
dministered by a supernationd and impartial tribunal. While 
rom the demands of the natural law we are able to infer the 
iccessity for the international organization of mankind to 
ealize the common ends of the race or the international com- 
Qon good, it is within the province of positive international 
aw to devise the executive, judicial, and legislative institu- 

*Pius XH, "The Five Point Peace Plan," V. 
*Piua XI, Mit brcnntndcr Sorgc. 



208 Human Action in State and Society 

tions which are to provide the proper means for the attain- 
ment of the desired end. 

In the past the supernational ideas embodied in the ancient 
Roman Empire (Pax Romano), in the federative association 
of Europe in the form of the "Holy Roman Empire," in the 
multilateral obligations assumed by the Congress of Vienna 
(1814) and the "Holy Alliance" (1815), and, more recently, 
in the organization of the "League of Nations" (1920) and 
the affiliated "World Court" of The Hague (1920), expressed 
more or less imperfectly the desire of the peoples and their 
leaders to set up a system of collective security, to promote 
and safeguard a rule of international justice and peace. The 
initiative for the International Peace Conferences of The Hague 
(1899, 1907), which preceded the establishment of the "Perma- 
nent World Court," originated with Pope Leo XIII, while 
his successors, especially Benedict XV, Pius XI, and Pius XII, 
were among the most ardent advocates of a system of col- 
lective security administered by a League of Nations vested 
with the authority to uphold international justice and pledged 
to defend the principles of international morality. 

The lamentable weakness and the partial failure of the 
efforts of the ill-fated "League of Nations" was in part due 
to the fact that it lacked the necessary power to back up its 
decisions by means of effective sanctions and, if necessary, 
by force of arms. It would seem, therefore, that a resurrected 
"League" and "World Court," entrusted with the tasks of 
conciliation, arbitration, and legislation in the international 
field, must have at their disposal an international armed force, 
so that, if need be, coercion may aid in the dispensation of 
justice. "It is important," writes Pius XII, "to bear in mind 
the experience gained from the ineffectiveness or imperfec- 
tions of previous institutions." 63 The peace proposals of Bene- 
dict XV of the year 1917 had called for a system of super- 
national arbitration, implemented "with sanctions to be settled 
against any State that should refuse to submit international 
questions to a court of arbitration or to accept its decisions." 64 
And in 1920 the same Pontiff had urged "that all States, putting 
aside mutual suspicion, unite in one league, or rather a sort 

"Pius XII, "The Five Point Peace Plan," III. 
"Benedict XV, "Peace Proposals" (1917). 



War and the Moral Law 209 

of family of peoples, designed both to maintain their own 
independence and safeguard the order of human society." 65 

25. War and the Moral Law 

AS LONG as there exists no generally recognized super- 
x3L national tribunal, vested with authority to settle disputes 
by arbitration and legal decisions and equipped with sufficient 
power to prevent unjust aggression and punish the unjust 
aggressor, the resort to war as a means of the restoration of 
justice and the preservation of the moral order can be morally 
justified. The natural law, while condemning the intentional 
destruction of human lives, permits legitimate acts of self- 
defense, whether of individuals, groups, or States, even if such 
acts result in the killing of an aggressor. The moral character 
of an act is determined by its object or end, and all the means 
proportionate to that end are legitimate as long as they do 
not violate the natural and moral law. As the direct object of 
self-defense is not the killing of the aggressor but the stopping 
of the aggression, as a means of self-preservation, the death 
of the aggressor is not directly willed but results indirectly 
or accidentally. 

A defensive war, according to a similar line of reasoning, 
is a means to secure as its end the restoration of justice and 
the preservation of the moral order, and may as such not 
only be permissible but even necessary. However, reason, 
common sense, and the obligations of charity demand that 
even a defensive war should be waged only as a last means or 
a final resort, i.e., after all peaceful means of settlement have 
been exhausted. 

As to wars of aggression or offensive wars, they are con- 
demned by natural and moral law if they are engaged in 
without provocation and if their object is the violation or 
destruction of a foreign State for the sake of conquest, national 
aggrandizement, or the increase of national opportunities and 
resources. Such wars are essentially unjust and cannot be con- 
doned on any moral grounds. 



'Benedict XV, Pacem Dei. 



210 Human Action in State and Society 

It is, however, conceivable that an aggressive war be under- 
taken to right certain wrongs, to remedy certain injustices, to 
gain freedom from political or economic oppression, or to serve 
in some other way the ultimate ends of justice and the moral 
order. If, in thus pursuing a morally justifiable end, and in 
the absence of an international law court, the victimized State 
resorts to the force of arms, even an aggressive war may be 
defensible on moral grounds. Similarly, and for identical rea- 
sons, a war of intervention, by which one State comes to the 
aid of another State or aids another people in their struggle 
against unjust or tyrannical rule, may be morally justified. 
For just as the individual has the right, and at times also the 
obligation, to protect one or several of his fellow men from 
unjust treatment or from violence, so likewise a State has in 
special circumstances the duty to intervene in behalf of another 
State, so that justice may prevail and injustice be curbed. 

Such are the general requisites of a just war, according to 
the well-nigh unanimous teaching of the leading representa- 
tives of the "realistic philosophy," but in particular of St. 
Augustine, St. Thomas Aquinas, Vitoria, Bellarmine, and 
Suarez. To the question whether it is not a counsel of moral 
perfection to suffer injury and thus silently condone injustice 
rather than to seek redress by violent resistance, St. Thomas 
Aquinas answers: "The pardon of injuries one has suffered 
oneself is an act of perfection if to do so is useful to others; 
but to tolerate patiently injuries suffered by others is an act 
of imperfection and even a vice if it is possible to resist the 
aggressor." 66 In other words, while the individual may rise 
to greater moral perfection by not resisting evil and, in extreme 
cases, by suffering martyrdom, this attitude cannot morally 
be defended if as a consequence the welfare of others and the 
commonweal are imperiled. It is imperative for the common 
interests vested in the State that all appropriate measures be 
taken to defend the rights of the entire community against 
unjust aggression, and the individual is bound in justice and 
charity to aid his fellow men and the State in the defense of 
their natural rights. Peace is certainly one of the greatest goods 
and an end worthy of the noblest human efforts, but without 
the even higher good of justice, peace can exist in name only: 

"Surnma Theologies. II-II, q. 188, a. 3, ad. i. 



War and (he Moral Law an 

it would then be a good that lacks its due perfection and to 
that extent would be an evil (cf. p. 39). 

St. Thomas Aquinas further demarcates the moral requisites 
of a just war by listing specifically the following three condi- 
tions: (i) war must be declared by the supreme legitimate 
authority of the State; (2) war must only be waged for a 
just and grave cause; (3) war must be carried out with the 
right intention or the right object in view. 67 To these stipula- 
tions Sudrez and Bellarmine add as a fourth demand that war 
"must be conducted in the right way!'** 

The meaning of the first of these conditions is fairly ob- 
vious: it was originally devised for an age in which many 
small potentates, princes, and nobles as well as townships and 
provinces resorted to self-help or "club law" (Faustrechi), 
especially in times when the legally constituted authority of 
the State was greatly weakened and the processes of civil law 
relatively undeveloped. In the absence of a supernational court 
of arbitration it rests with the lawful authority of the supreme 
ruler of the State to seek justice by peaceful means and, these 
failing, by force of arms. 

The requirement of a "just and grave cause" implies that 
essential rights are jeopardized by unjust aggression (defensive 
war) ; or that flagrant injustices are to be remedied, retribution 
exacted, and peace or "the tranquillity of order" restored 
(offensive war); or, finally, that armed aid is given to an 
unjustly attacked nation (war of intervention). A "just 
cause" for war cannot exist unless a "moral guilt" has been 
established beyond any reasonable doubt. But whereas St. 
Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas held that a just war could 
only be waged if the sole moral guilt rested on the opponent's 
side, Suarez taught that a just war might be waged even if 
a great deal of right was on the side of the opponent, if only 
more right and justice were found on one's own side. 69 But 
Suarez remarks elsewhere that in case of doubt no action 
should be taken, since to declare war equals the passing of a 
death sentence, and to pass such a sentence with a doubting 

* Cf . Summa Thtologica, II II, q. 40, a. i. 

* Cf. Bellarmme, Dt Controv. Christ. Fidei, II, lib. II, d* Laicis, cap. XV.; and 
Suircz, De Bella. 

*C. Suirez, DC bcllo, 7. 



212 Human Action in State and Society 

conscience constitutes a most severe violation of the Divine, 
natural, and human law/ 

The definition of what constitutes a "just cause" is naturally 
of the greatest importance in connection with the crucial 
question of fixing the responsibility for die outbreak of an 
armed conflict. In the past and to some extent even in the 
present this question of establishing the "war guilt" has pre- 
sented almost insurmountable difficulties, simply because in 
most cases the victorious nation or nations were at once bellig- 
erents and judges. The establishment of a supcrnationd 
tribunal, entrusted with powers to arbitrate international con- 
flicts, would, however, greatly simplify the problem. A State 
which obstinately refused to submit its grievances to the due 
processes of law and arbitration and resorted to the force of 
arms instead, would immediately prejudice its own cause and 
saddle itself with the fearful responsibility which the waging 
of an unjust war entails. Nor can this responsibility be shirked 
by the claim of waging a "preventive war," i.e., a war to steal 
a march on a potential aggressor. The slogan of "preventive 
warfare" has always served unjust aggressors as a subterfuge 
and handy excuse for international brigandage. 

Finally, the cause for engaging in war should not only be 
just and grave but also proportionate to the goods to be at- 
tained and to the evils that are the inevitable concomitant 
and sequel of every war: "A war is not just," writes Vitoria, 
"if it is evident that it will do the State more harm than 
good, even if there be a 'just cause.' For the State has only the 
right to declare war to protect itself and to defend itself and 
its possessions. If then a war is liable to result in the weakening 
of the State, it is unjust." 71 It seems, however, that this latter 
stipulation can hardly be accepted without reservation. For 
situations may arise in which spiritual and moral values must 
be defended, even against great odds and at the risk of possible 
defeat. The fortunes of war are unpredictable, and often the 
heroism of a people fighting for its existence and its human 
rights has turned almost certain defeat into victory. 

With regard to the third requisite of a just war, the "right 
intention," St. Thomas Aquinas offers the following comment : 

TO Cf. Suirez, Schol. Com. II-II, q. 40, a. i, dub. 5. 
"Vitoria, De Pote state Civili, cap. 13. 



War and the Moral Law 213 

"The intention must be to promote the good and to avoid 
evil. For, as Augustine says: 'With the true servants of God 
even wars serve the cause of Peace, as they are not motivated 
by greed and cruelty but by the desire for Peace, so that the 
wicked may be restrained and the good protected.' It may 
therefore happen that a war, though declared by lawful au- 
thority and waged for a just cause, may nevertheless be un- 
justifiable because of the wrong intention of those who engage 
in it. For what Augustine rightly blames in war is the desire 
to harm, the cruelty of revenge, a warlike and vindictive spirit, 
the lust of power and such-like motives." 72 

As to the "right way of conducting a war," insisted upon 
by Suarez and Bellarmine, a set of rules was gradually worked 
out in the course of the centuries of the Christian era and has 
been subscribed to by most civilized nations of the modern 
world. These rules derive from the general precepts of the 
natural law and have been codified by positive international 
law in the form of treaties and covenants. Thus, for example, 
the international standards of warfare adopted by the powers 
represented at the "Geneva Convention" (1864) and at the 
Peace Conferences of The Hague, deal in particular with the 
moral limitations of the rights of belligerents, with the treat- 
ment to be accorded to prisoners of war, and with the distinc- 
tions to be made between combatants and noncombatants. 
While some of these rules have been quite generally adhered 
to, others have been violated by individual nations under the 
strain and stress of battle or owing to the rapidly changing 
conditions of modern warfare, the invention of new weapons, 
and especially the new methods of aerial combat. "Total war," 
which transforms the entire territories engulfed in the con- 
flict into vast arsenals of war industry, and in which the entire 
civilian population is actively engaged in the prosecution of 
the war, if not in actual combat, has largely done away in the 
actual conduct of war with the formal distinction between com- 
batants and noncombatants. Air attacks on munition centers, 
railway yards and junctions, industrial plants and supply cen- 
ters, etc., involve the destruction of many civilians who were 
formerly protected by the rule that "innocent" lives must be 



Summa Thcologica, II-II, q. 40, a. I. 



214 Human Action in State and Society 

spared. Since in "total war" the entire nation of soldiers i 
civilians is on a war footing, the application of the term "in 
cent" and "noncombatant" to the civilian population is 
danger of becoming more and more meaningless. 

The total anarchy which "total war" threatens to inflict uj 
modern mankind can, it would seem, only be averted by \ 
nessing the forces of war and aggression through the creat 
of an effective machinery for the organization of Internatio 
Peace. Keenly aware of the devastating effects of internatio 
strife on the individual and on society, Immanuel Kant a 
quately described the present plight of the discordant hun 
family when, in lament and yet not without hope, he wrc 
"After a war is ended, at the conclusion of peace, it mi 
not be unfitting for a people to let the feast of thanksgiv 
be followed by a day of penitence, to ask pardon in the na 
of the State for the great sin against the Divine Law wb 
the human race still incurs by its unwillingness to submit 
a legal constitution in international relations, but rather, pn 
of its rugged individualism, to resort to the barbaric me 
of war, a means by which that right which each State se 
to attain can never be safeguarded." 73 Such an internatio 
constitution, however, as visualized here by the eighteer 
century philosopher and by those of a like mind, can o 
grow out of the renovated and reformed will of man. "F 
and above all," writes Pius XI, "peace must once more er 
into the hearts of men. For what good is a merely exter 
peace which is nothing but a conventional form of mut 
intercourse? We need much more: we need a peace wb 
permeates the human mind, making it tranquil and incli] 
to brotherly benevolence." 74 

Is there any hope then that war may be abolished? Th 
is a wide divergence of opinion in this matter between tb 
who hold that war is part of the natural order of things i 
therefore a necessary and legitimate instrument of natio 
policy, and those who condemn war without any qualificati 
advocating peace at any price, even at the expense of just 
According to Thomas Hobbes (cf. p. 164), war is not o 
the occasional manifestation of a "law of nature" but 



Ti Immanuel Kant, Z-um cwigcn Frieden (On Eternal Peace). 
**Piuj XI, Ubi Arcane Dei. 



War and the Moral Law 215 

genuine "state of nature," and peace is merely the temporary 
suspension of hostilities by means of an artificial contract. 
While peace represses the forces of nature, war restores them 
to their original status, when everybody was everybody's enemy 
(homo homini lupus). 

Count Bismarck, in defending his opposition to international 
disarmament, expressed a view similar to that of Hobbes when 
he said in 1891: "War is a law of nature: it is the struggle for 
existence in a more general form, and it will not cease until 
men have become angels." According to the Prussian historian, 
Heinrich von Treitschke (1834-1896), "without war there 
would be no States; it is only in war that a people actually 
becomes a nation; to expel war from the universe would be 
tantamount to a mutilation of human nature." 75 

Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900), in "Thus Spake Zara- 
thustra," asks the question: "You say that a good cause sancti- 
fies even war?" And he answers: "I tell you that a good war 
sanctifies any cause." And Oswald Spengler (1880-1936) sees 
in war the efficiently organized struggle for the survival of 
the strongest. Like Hobbes, he defines diplomacy and politics 
as a temporary substitute for war and subscribes to the 
Machiavellian doctrine that it is might which creates right. 

The dismal pessimism with regard to human nature which 
is the common element in this apologetics of war is opposed 
by the equally unrealistic optimism of the extreme pacifists. 
While those who see in war the normal and necessary mani- 
festation of the struggle for survival picture man as a beast 
of prey and thus overlook the rational part of human nature, 
the apostles of nonviolence and the advocates of peace at any 
price act, to use Bismarck's phrase, as if men had indeed be- 
come angels and as if the mere desire for peace were suffi- 
cient to ensure the actual pacification of the world. They 
underestimate, on the one hand, the strength of human pas- 
sions and the destructive effects of a weakened or perverted 
human will and, on the other, the corresponding need for 
the restraining, educative, and coercive agencies of legal and 
institutional authority. We have attempted to demonstrate 
that a realistic solution of the problem of war and peace must 



"Heinrfch yon Tndtichko, 



216 Human Action in State and Society 

be sought in the middle between the two extremes : War results 
as a necessary evil from the lapse of justice and charity, and 
true peace can only be found in the return to the rules of 
justice and to "the tranquillity of order/' 



Chapter Four 

MAN AS PRODUCER 
AND CONSUMER 

(Economic Philosophy) 



26. Economics and Ethics 

HPHE economic activities of man, like every other aspect 
J- of human life, have to be proportioned to and integrated 
with the metaphysical structure of reality in general and with 
the metaphysical constitution of human nature and its ulti- 
mate end in particular. And just as the principles of political 
action are derived from the natural and moral law and have 
to comply with its general precepts, so the theory and practice 
of economics have to submit to ethical norms and rules which 
are grounded in the natural and moral law. This is to say 
that economic philosophy as much as political philosophy 
must be regarded as a branch or subdivision of ethics. An 
economics, therefore, is morally good and justifiable as long 
as it recognizes this dependency and thereby acknowledges 
its proper place in the hierarchy of goods and values. It dete- 
riorates whenever it misjudges the scope and value of economic 
activities and thus violates that order of reality which St. 
Thomas Aquinas called "the very best thing in the universe": 
"To take order away from creatures is to deny them the best 
thing they possess; for while each of them is good in itself, 
together they are very good, because of the way in which they 
are fitted into the order of the universe." 1 

The metaphysical and moral order, therefore, which we 
have recognized as constituting reality, and by which man's 
place in the universe is determined, must be extended to and 
reflected by those human activities which refer to the acquisi- 



1 St. Tkomat Aquinas, Summ* Contra Gcntilet, III, cap. 69. 



218 Man as Producer and Consumer 

tion, production, and consumption of economic goods. As t 
primary purpose and final goal of human existence is the go 
life or the life of virtue and the attainment of the ultimi 
end of the "rational appetite" (i.e., the happiness or beatitu 
resulting from the contemplation of the Supreme Gooc 
economic goods, like other particular goods, are to serve tl 
primary purpose of human life. Economic goods thus becoi 
"instruments of virtue." It follows from this that these goc 
are not ends in themselves, but means to be used for t 
preservation and perfection of human nature. Their acqu 
tion and use is legitimate as long as their possession contribu 
to the greater perfection of man : "To strive for external goc 
is proper to human nature; but they must always be a 
sidered as means to an end." 2 

However, man, as we know, is not only a rational -individi 
but also a sociopolitical animal, and the perfection of 
individuality (his "personality") implies the realization of 
duties toward himself as well as toward his fellow men ( 
pp. 141 and 201). An immoderate desire for the possession 
economic goods or the possession of an excessive amount 
such goods is apt to infringe upon the rights of other hum 
beings, resulting in social injustice and social disorder. But 
immoderation of desire also disturbs the equilibrium of ma 
own soul and thus creates disorder in the individual hims< 
And because this twofold disorder results from a neglect of 1 
Supreme Good for the sake of temporal goods, it seriou 
interferes with the obligations which man owes to the Supre 
Good, i.e., to God. We conclude, therefore, that man's strivi 
for economic goods is legitimate only to the extent that 
interferes neither with the order and dignity of human nati 
nor with man's obligations to his fellow men and to 
Creator. This striving is legitimate just as long as it does j 
lead to the neglect of higher goods. 

Now man as a being endowed with intellect and free \ 
is unquestionably superior to his surrounding material envir 
ment and to the subrational beings which populate the u 
verse. And by virtue of this metaphysical, moral, and physi 
position of man in the created universe, the constitutive < 
ments and values of his personality rank higher than matei 

'St. TbofXMM AquiiMM, Swrom* Tkeohgit*, IW1, q. 118, a. i. 



Economics and Ethics 219 

values and economic goods, and this superiority must be jeal- 
ously guarded and maintained. 

But while man thus holds a superior rank with regard to 
subrational creatures and may therefore make use of their 
services, he shares with all other human beings the identical 
human nature and is therefore never permitted to use them 
as means, to infringe upon their human rights, to injure or 
destroy them, except if it be the indirect or accidental destruc- 
tion which results from legitimate self-defense (cf. p. 209). 

From the dominating position which the human intellect 
occupies in the structure of human personality it follows that 
all the other faculties and constitutive elements of human 
nature ought to be ruled and controlled by the supremacy of 
reason: "All external goods," writes St. Thomas Aquinas, "are 
ordered and subordinated to the internal ones, and thus the 
body is ordered and subordinated to the soul; the external and 
corporeal goods are good for man in so far as they serve his 
intellect." 3 As the elective power of will is blind by itself and 
dependent on the guidance of the intellect (cf. pp. 133 sq.), the 
will ought to submit to the illumination and guidance of 
rational judgment. The law of Divine Reason which permeates 
the entire universe, and whose reflection the "natural light" 
of human reason discovers in the inner depths of the human 
mind itself as well as in the external world, enjoins upon man 
the general rule that "good must be done, and evil must be 
avoided" (cf. p. 150), leaving it to human judgment and 
human will to apply this general precept to a multitude of 
concrete situations and circumstances. 

Equipped with the faculties of intellect and will, and aided 
in his judgments and choices by the general precepts of the 
natural law, man is in a position to work out a design for 
individual and social living, in accordance with a scale of 
values which represents the actual order of reality and which 
culminates in that master value which he has recognized, sub- 
jectively, as the term of his own supreme happiness and, ob- 
jectively, as the Supreme Good. The higher, therefore, a good 
ranks in the objective scale of values (i.e., in the order of 
being or reality and, correspondingly, in the moral order), 
the more it is to be desired, because the higher it ranks the 

* Stunma Com** Gutitttt, HI, f*f. 141. 



220 Man as Producer and Consumer 

more it is capable of satisfying man's "rational appetite" for 
Infinite Good, and the greater will be the amount of happi- 
ness deriving from its possession. Only the Supreme Good, 
however, can satisfy the "rational appetite" completely, and 
only the Supreme Good, therefore, can impart to man lasting 
happiness (cf. p. 114). Man will have reached his goal when 
all the intellectual and moral potentialities of his nature have 
been fully actualized, i.e., when he has attained to the term 
of all his striving, and when his reason and will fuse in the 
contemplation of the Absolute Intellect and the Supreme Good. 

Where does this brief, but necessary, recapitulation of some 
of the basic principles of metaphysics and ethics leave the 
theoretical and applied science of economics? Economic theory 
and practice can either acknowledge its dependence on meta- 
physical and moral norms, and then they will respect the in- 
trinsic laws of reality and will endeavor to serve the ultimate 
end of human nature, or economics will have to proclaim its 
own "autonomy," and then it will be at a loss to find a 
rational explanation and justification of its own activities and 
ends. It will come to regard economic activity as an end in 
itself and will refuse to integrate it with the moral requisites 
of human nature and the ends of human life. 

Referring to the mentality of the modern men of business, 
Max Weber, the German sociologist, writes: "If we were to 
ask them about the meaning of their restless activity the 
fruits of which they never enjoy . . . they would answer if 
they could think of any answer at all that business with its 
incessant activity is something which they had come to regard 
as indispensable for their lives. This is indeed their only motiva- 
tion, and it is a motivation which reveals . . . the irrational 
character of a mode of living which makes man exist for the 
sake of his business, not the business for the sake of the man." 4 
If, on the other hand, we try to measure and define economic 
activities by relating them to the principles of the "realistic 
philosophy," we shall have to admit that economics receives 
its directives from the primary purpose or final goal of human 
life, i.e., from the Supreme Good or the end of ends. We shall 
then have to place the chief accent on man f not on those cx- 



Weber, RfKgionsjoziohgie I (Tubingen, 1920), p. 54. 



Dignity of Labor 221 

ternal goods which are to serve him and aid him in his per- 
fection as a rational and social animal. And we shall recognize 
as legitimate and justifiable only those economic activities 
which minister to and satisfy human needs. 

27. The Dignity of Labor 

THOSE activities which have to do with the acquisition, 
manufacture, or production of external and economic 
goods are commonly designated as labor or wor]{. It seems, 
however, impossible to gain an adequate understanding of 
labor as a specifically human activity, unless we succeed in 
relating it to the metaphysical and moral nature of man. 

As all beings act in accordance with what they are (operari 
sequitur esse), man, too, follows in all his activities the gen- 
eral laws of his nature. And as this nature is both spiritual 
and physical, this dual aspect must also be reflected in his 
activities or in human work. The ultimate principle of action 
in man as in all other creatures is "nature" and, through 
nature, the giver of nature or its First and Final Cause. The 
ultimate principle of all human action, accordingly, is the 
Creator of human nature, who, by endowing man with reason 
and freedom, has bestowed on him His own image and 
likeness. 

This metaphysical and moral uniqueness of man must then 
of necessity be expressed in the nature of his actions. There is 
therefore not only a difference of degree but a difference in 
kind between the activities of subrational creatures and the work 
of man, the rational animal. The eminently creative character 
of human labor results of necessity from man's rationality and 
personality. We therefore feel justified in defining human 
labor as a rational, moral, and personal activity of a rational, 
self -deter mining personality. Its character and its dignity de- 
rive from the nature of man. 

In its most general sense human labor has the obligatory 
character of a natural law, imposing upon man definite and 
inescapable rules of action. As it is natural for the bird to 
fly, because nature has equipped him with wings, so it is 
natural for man to work, because nature has provided him 



222 Man as Producer and Consumer 

with physical and intellectual organs and faculties, all of 
them indicative of as many potentialities tending toward 
actualization. Human life as such is really nothing but a con- 
tinuous series of such actualizations, and this holds true even 
of the life of contemplation which, as we have pointed out 
(cf. pp. 121 sq.), is nothing but the highest, most concentra- 
ted, and most unified (i.e., the most spiritual) form of human 
activity. 

We know from our previous considerations that the "realistic 
philosophy" regards intellectual activity as being not only on 
a par with but superior to manual labor. But whereas Plato and 
Aristotle extolled intellectual activity as the only worthy occu- 
pation of freemen, St. Thomas Aquinas and the scholastic 
philosophers in general place great emphasis on the propor- 
tionate value and dignity of manual labor. For St. Thomas 
every form of labor, rightly performed, is a moral activity, 
an "office" (officium}, by which man fulfills the Divine Will 
and becomes, so to speak, a "creator in the second degree" 
(Shaftesbury) by imparting form, actuality, and perfection 
to the manifold potentialities of the material universe. Man, 
by his own creative activity, becomes an "efficient cause" of 
the being and perfection of inanimate objects as well as of 
living creatures. By making proper use of his thought, his 
will, his skill, his desires, and his inventiveness, man confers 
his own perfections on other beings. He thus imitates in the 
limited sphere of his own creative work the Absolute Creative- 
ness of God's "pure actuality." And just as God's Infinite 
Goodness is diffused in creation, so the human laborer con- 
fers some of his own relative goodness upon his work, thereby 
clothing it with a remote and doubly reflected likeness and 
sheen of Divine Power, Goodness, and Love: "In many ways 
the creature strives for a likeness of the Divine, but the most 
perfect way to attain to that likeness is by becoming a cause 
of other things or beings; for what on earth is more Divine 
than to cooperate with God?" 5 

While all human labor bears to a greater or less extent the 
imprint of the general metaphysical structure of human per- 
sonality, the labor performed by individual human beings 



"St. Thomas Aquints, Summa Contra Gentiles, III, 21. 



Dignity of Labor 223 

differs as much as the laborers differ personally as individuals. 
"Only gcnerically," says St. Thomas Aquinas, "do human 
beings constitute a unity, in everything else (e.g., age, sex, 
race, health, body, soul, etc.) they differ individually from 
each other." 8 And just as each human person is unique as 
an individual, so the labor of each human person is unique 
in its personal quality and character. Hence all human work 
shares in the universality as well as in the individuality of 
human nature: it is personal because it is human, and it is 
individual because it is the work of a concrete human person. 

The ultimate meaning of human labor or work thus bears 
an intimate relation to the ultimate meaning of human life. 
If we understand labor in this way, it assumes its natural 
place and function in the universal order of reality: "The en- 
tire universe," writes St. Thomas Aquinas, "consists of indi- 
vidual creatures, as a whole is constituted of individual parts. 
And if we try to discover the ultimate purpose of any whole 
and its individual parts, we find, first of all, that the individual 
parts exist for their own proper function and perfection, as 
the eyes exist for the sake of optical vision; next, the inferior 
parts exist for the sake of the superior and nobler ones, as 
the lungs serve the activities of the heart, and as sense knowl- 
edge serves intellectual knowledge; and, thirdly, all indi- 
vidual parts together exist for the perfection of the whole, as 
matter exists for the sake of form, since all individual parts 
are, so to speak, the material basis of the whole; but, finally, 
man as a whole exists for an end that is extrinsic to his own 
nature, viz., the fruition of God. Now in the same way in 
every part of the universe each creature exists, first of all, for 
its own proper function and perfection; secondly, the inferior 
creatures exist for the benefit of the higher and nobler ones, 
as subrational creatures exist for the benefit of man; all indi- 
vidual creatures together, however, serve the greater perfection 
of the entire universe; and, finally, the entire universe with 
all its individual parts is ordered to God as its end, inasmuch 
as they all by a kind of imitative likeness represent the Divine 
Goodness and glorify God." 7 

In this Thomistic view of the universe, human life and 

* De Rcgimine Principum, I, x. 
7 Summa Thcologica, I, q. 65, a. 2. 



224 Man as Producer and Consumer 

human activity are organically interwoven with the all-pa 
vading designs of a divinely willed order. By being activ 
in accordance with the universal laws of nature, man coopei 
ates with the Divine plan. He serves his Creator by perfectin 
his own God-given nature and by promoting the common goo 
or the welfare of all. He labors and toils with a view to th 
ultimate end of life, and his creative work becomes the realize 
tion of his perpetual service to the highest good. In this wa 
even the seemingly most insignificant operations are free 
from deadening isolation and are related to the total meanin 
of human existence. 

This evaluation of labor prevailed in the relatively stati 
economic system of medieval society, especially as long a 
political and social economy were based on personal Ian 
tenure and not yet on the impersonal power of money. It sti 
prevails in some of the equally static societies of the Far Eaj 
as well as in certain monastic, sectarian, and other cooperativ 
groups and in many farming communities in the West, whet 
the dedication to the common good makes for a communit 
of life and work and endows labor with a strong person; 
and moral accent. 

The society which arose from the ruins of the Middle Age 
was largely built around the new urban centers of commero 
and as the opportunities for financial investment steadily ir 
creased, the new money economy completely revolutionize 
the ideas on the function and significance of labor. Finally, th 
introduction of labor-displacing machinery and the resultar 
methods of modern mass production completed this revoli 
tionary process. Economic activities no longer had their mear 
ing and justification circumscribed by the needs of the coi 
sumer but had their laws and functions dictated by th 
increasingly autonomous and arbitrary power of the produce 
The principle of production for use gave way to the princip] 
of production for profit, and in consequence labor lost ii 
highly personal quality and dignity and became a mar^etabi 
commodity for the contending interests of the "labor market, 
A social rift opened between "capital" and "labor," betwec 
employers and wage earners, the former buying labor as 
commodity at the cheapest possible price, and the latter sellin 
their labor as a commodity to the highest bidder. On the on 



Dignity of Labor 225 

side we find the vested interests of the employers, who own 
the means of production, and on the odier side arc the de- 
fensively and offensively organized wage earners, the shiftless 
masses of an expropriated "proletariat," whose only titles to a 
livelihood are their labor and the proceeds derived from it. 

It is obvious that both capital and labor are needed for the 
good of society; it is equally self-evident that the class an- 
tagonism centering in the "labor market" creates social unrest 
and is injurious to the good of individuals as well as to the 
common good. To regard labor as a marketable commodity 
not only degrades labor but also the laborer, whose work is 
increasingly depersonalized, until he becomes a mere "factory 
hand" and a "wage slave" who loses all interest in the nature 
and quality of his work. "And so bodily labor," writes Pius 
XI, "has everywhere been changed into an instrument of 
strange perversion : for dead matter leaves the factory ennobled 
and transformed, where men are corrupted and degraded." 8 

The remedy of this situation, it would seem, lies in the 
repersonalization of labor and industry and in the harmoniza- 
tion of the interests of labor and management. The achieve- 
ment of these ends requires a rationally planned economy 
which harnesses and readjusts the economic forces and cor- 
relates supply and demand. Man and human needs must again 
become the foci of the economic process, and production must 
accept the limitations imposed upon surplus and waste by 
the requirements of social consumption. The employer must 
realize his social responsibilities as a functionary and trustee 
of the common good, and the wage earner must be lifted 
from his proletarian status to a position which safeguards 
his human dignity and makes him a coresponsible agent or a 
copartner in management. By thus acquiring a proportionate 
share in the means of production the laborer will be given a 
chance to make proper use of his personal initiative and his 
creative ability. As long, however, as such a "new order" of 
society has not come into being, it is the duty of the State 
to act as the trustee of the common good by protecting the 
rights of social groups and classes and especially the rights 
of those who are by themselves socially or economically too 
weak to protect themselves from social injustice and economic 

* Quadragesima Anno. 



226 Man as Producer and Consumer 

exploitation. "The richer classes," wrote Leo XIII, "have many 
ways of shielding themselves, and they therefore stand less 
in need of help from the State, whereas those who are poor 
and have no resources of their own must chiefly depend on 
the assistance of the State. And it is for this reason that wage 
earners, who are undoubtedly among the weak and needy, 
must be specially cared for and protected by the State." 

Among the protective measures to be taken by the State 
to ensure the rights of workers, Leo XIII stresses above all 
the necessity of minimum wage legislation and social legisla- 
tion, varying in accordance with local conditions, but guar- 
anteeing to the wage earner and his family a decent standard 
of living and a reasonable amount of physical and economic 
security. Wages must be high enough to allow for savings as 
well as for the satisfaction of educational and cultural needs, 
and both the conditions of work and the number of working 
hours must be properly adjusted to suit the laborer's health, 
age, and sex, always leaving sufficient leeway for recreation 
and leisure. 

Both the right to live and the right to wor\ are natural 
human rights, and it is the duty of the State to see to it that 
the individual citizens are offered the opportunity to exercise 
these rights. The same holds true of the right to organize in 
social and vocational groups or the right of coalition. This 
latter right was recognized as a natural right even in ancient 
Rome, before the rise of imperial absolutism; it was duly 
respected by the ancient Germanic tribes, and it constituted 
the legal and sociological basis of the vocational and guild 
organizations of the Middle Ages. This right of the workers 
to unite for the protection of their common interests has been, 
however, repeatedly abrogated in modern times: first by the 
absolutistic regimes of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies; next by the forces of economic liberalism, in unholy 
alliance with the modern "police state"; and again by the 
totalitarian states of the present century. By prohibiting the 
formation of such natural coalitions or unions, a State, says 
Leo XIII, "will undermine its own foundations, because the 
State itself has its origin in the selfsame desire of man for 
mutual association." 10 

* Rerum Not/arum. Ibid. 



Dignity of Labor 227 

Finally, to defend their social rights, the workers may 
legitimately resort to the strike. But the strike, like war, is to 
be regarded as a last resort of collective self-defense, after all 
peaceful means, such as collective bargaining or mediation, 
have failed. If, furthermore, the workers have freely entered 
into a just labor contract, they are bound to live up to its 
terms and have no right to strike. If, on the other hand, their 
contract has expired, then they may justly raise their claims 
to any level which seems compatible with justice and equity 
and, in pursuing this course, they may ultimately resort to 
what is known as an "offensive stride." These demands find 
their natural limitations in the health and productive capacity 
of a particular industry or individual plant as well as in the 
generally prevailing standard of living in a certain economic 
region. If the payment of higher wages or even of a minimum 
family wage would be ruinous to the particular industry or 
employer, then it would be folly to make such demands, and 
to accede to them would only further dislocate the economic 
structure and thus harm both employers and wage earners. 
Similarly, as individual rights are always limited in their 
extent by the superindividual requisites of the common good, 
a general stride, which endangers the life of the entire com- 
munity, is never morally justified. 

To eliminate class divisions, to harmonize the conflicting 
interests represented on the "labor market," and to restore 
the dignity of labor by making it again, to use Leo XIIFs 
words, "an inalienable possession of human personality," Pope 
Pius XI proposes an organic reconstruction of modern society 
on the basis of vocational groups representing the solidaric 
interests of their individual members. "Labor," he writes, "is 
not a mere chattel, since the human dignity of the working- 
man must be recognized in it; and consequently labor cannot 
be bought and sold like any piece of merchandise. None the 
less, the demand and supply of labor divides men on the labor 
market into two classes, as into two camps, and the bargaining 
between these parties transforms this labor market into an 
arena of strife. ... To this grave disorder, which is leading 
society to ruin, a remedy must evidently be applied as speedily 
as possible. But there can be no question of any perfect cure 
unless this antagonism itself can be done away with, and well- 



228 Man as Producer and Consumer 

ordered members of the social body can again come into being, 
viz., vocational groups, binding men together not according 
to the position they occupy in the labor market, but according 
to the diverse functions which they exercise in society." 11 

Pius XFs idea of vocational groups, integrated in a corpora* 
tively organized society, is indebted to the social philosophy of 
St. Thomas Aquinas and to the labor concepts embodied in 
the medieval guilds. Social order for St. Thomas and his age 
is "unity in well-arranged multiplicity." It is thus distinguished 
from the depersonalized uniformity of totalitarian economics, 
on the one hand, and from the atomistic individualism of lib- 
eralist economics, on the other. 

The medieval guilds at the time of their greatest social in- 
fluence and prestige (twelfth and thirteenth centuries) func- 
tioned as organs in a corporate social body. They protected 
the interests of the particular trades of their members with- 
out losing sight of the ends of the common good of society 
as such. The guild was a corporation made up of individuals 
who were unified by common interest and voluntary associa- 
tion. The vocational group imparted to the individual a new 
consciousness of both his personal and social value, as it freed 
him from the attachment to the soil and placed him into an 
organic relationship of responsibility to the State, the city, and 
his own corporation. In return for the restriction which mem- 
bership in the guild imposed upon his own social and eco- 
nomic liberty, he received a large amount of social and eco- 
nomic security. To safeguard the efficient control of social 
economy, to uphold the "honor of the trade," and to serve the 
interest of the common good, membership in these originally 
free associations was later on made compulsory by decree of 
public authority, so that nonmembers could no longer engage 
in a particular trade unless they were admitted to the guild 
and were willing to conform to its rules and standards. The 
guilds regulated prices, laid down definite rules for wages and 
hours of labor, and exercised control over the quality of goods. 
More important, however, than the restrictions which they 
imposed on unlimited profits and unfair competition was the 
fact that they provided the individual merchants and crafts- 
men with a reasonable equality of opportunity and thereby 

" Quadragesima Anno. 



Rights and Obligations of Ownership 229 

encouraged their economic activities and increased their 
self-respect. 

While Pius XI pays tribute to the corporative organization 
of society as exemplified by the guild system, he fully realizes 
that the social institutions of a past age cannot simply be 
revived and should not be unimaginatively copied. A different 
age requires different approaches to the problems of political 
and social economy and will have to work out its own solu- 
tions. But it may nevertheless be profitable to learn the lessons 
of past approaches and solutions, adapting social accomplish- 
ments of a former age to the specific needs and conditions 
of modern society. 

Thus the Pope refers to medieval corporatism as "a social 
order which, though by no means perfect in every respect, cor- 
responded nevertheless in a certain measure to right reason." 12 
He maintains that the breakdown of the corporative organiza- 
tion of society was not due to the fact that it was incapable of 
development and adaptation to changing needs and circum- 
stances, but was rather caused by "the wrongdoing of men: 
Men were hardened in excessive self-love, and they refused to 
extend that order ... to the increasing numbers of the people; 
or, deceived by the attractions of a false liberty . . . they grew 
impatient of every restraint and attempted to throw off all 
authority." 12 

This analysis implies that what is needed for the healing 
of the breach between capital and labor, for the elimination 
of internecine class warfare, and for the rehabilitation of both 
the laborer and his labor, is not so much new legislation but 
rather a changed state of mind, a mind ready to accept a 
philosophy of "social solidarism" in which the rival claims of 
individuals and classes are harmonized in the cooperatively 
sought common good. 

"ibid. 

28. Rights and Obligations of Ownership 

THE changed concepts of labor in modern times are inti- 
mately related to the changed ideas on the nature of 
ownership and private property. We shall discuss first the 
rights and obligations of ownership from the point of view of 



230 Man as Producer and Consumer 

the "realistic philosophy" and subsequently contrast the older, 
prccapitalistic view with the ownership idea of modern 
capitalism. 

According to Thomistic teaching, man has a natural right 
to own property. As material goods are for the benefit of 
man, he may make use of them for his own advantage as 
well as for that of his fellow men. Man in the individual and 
personal quality of his life and work, and by virtue of his 
rational nature, rises above the objects of the material universe 
and is capable of recognizing their relations, functions, and 
potentialities. As a free being he can use these potentialities 
to bring about novel combinations and transformations and 
can devise various forms of productive and creative activity. 
This mastery over things, enabling man to select what is best 
fitted for his personal use and to use it intelligently and with 
moral propriety, establishes the possession of private property 
as a natural right. 

However, man is not only an individual but also a social 
animal, and the same dual aspect of human nature which is 
manifested in all human activities and institutions is equally 
inherent in the titles of property. Property is both individual 
and social in its nature. By stressing exclusively either the 
individual or the social aspect of ownership, society will run 
the risk of turning toward the extreme positions of either 
atomistic individualism or depersonalized collectivism: "If the 
social and public aspect of ownership be denied or minimized, 
the logical consequence is individualism . . .; on the other 
hand, the rejection or diminution of its private and individual 
character necessarily leads to some form of collectivism . ms 
While, therefore, the right of ownership is a natural right, it 
is, like all other human rights, subject to the rules and limita- 
tions of the natural and moral law. Hence, an absolute right 
of ownership is strictly denied by medieval economic theory, 
and only a relative right of ownership is admitted. As God is 
the creator, giver, and absolute owner of all material goods, 
human ownership, whether private or public, is mere 
stewardship. 

It follows from the foregoing that the institution of private 

**Pius XI, Quadragesima Anno, 



Rights and Obligations of Ownership 231 

property, while indicative of an abiding natural right, is very 
flexible in the concrete and is sociologically codetermincd by 
changing political and social conditions. St. Thomas Aquinas 
maintains, on the one hand, that property belongs fully to its 
owner, but he adds immediately that such "private" owner- 
ship implies a host of social obligations and therefore to a cer- 
tain extent a "socialization" of private property, not in the sense 
of collective ownership but rather in the sense that private 
ownership can only justify its title by making the right social 
use of privately owned goods. St. Thomas Aquinas insists that 
human rights are superior to property rights and thus demands 
precedence for the former whenever required by the indi- 
vidual or social good: "In cases of need," he writes, "all things 
are common property, and so it would seem that it can be no 
sin to take another's property, for need has made it common. 
. . . According to the natural order established by Divine Provi- 
dence, inferior things are ordained for the purpose of minister- 
ing to man's needs. Therefore, the division and appropriation 
of things as decreed by human law does not countermand the 
principle that man's needs be satisfied by means of these very 
things. Hence those things of which some persons have a 
superabundance ought to be used, according to natural law, 
for the sustenance of the poor. It is for this reason that Am- 
brose says: This bread which you withhold, is the hungry 
man's bread; these clothes which you store away, are the 
clothes of the ill-clad; this money which you bury in the 
ground, is the ransom money to be paid for the redemption 
and freedom of the needy.' Since, however, there are many 
who are in need and since it is impossible to sustain all with 
the same goods, each one is entrusted with the stewardship of 
his own possessions, so that he may use them for the sustenance 
of the poor. If, however, the need is so obvious and urgent that 
it must be relieved by whatever means are at hand, as, for in- 
stance, when a human life is in danger and there is no other 
possible remedy, then it is legitimate for a person to relieve 
his own need by making use of another man's property, either 
openly or secretly; and by doing so he cannot properly be said 
to commit theft or larceny." 14 
This passage strikingly gives expression to the conviction 

14 Summa Thcologict, II-II, q. 66, a. 7. 



232 Mm as Producer and Consumer 

which St. Thomas shares with all medieval economic theorists, 
that there exists a certain common ownership among the mem- 
bers of the human race, and that therefore the actual distribu- 
tion of private property is in no way to be regarded as rigidly 
inflexible. According to St. Thomas, "man has a twofold rela- 
tion to external things, of which one is the power to produce 
and to consume. And for this it is lawful that man should 
possess property. . . . The second relation to external things 
refers to their use, and as far as this is concerned no man 
ought to have anything proper to himself, but all in common, 
so that everyone may easily minister to others in their 
necessities." 15 

These medieval teachings on the individual and social aspects 
of property and ownership were strictly adhered to by the re- 
formers of the sixteenth century. Both Luther and Calvin 
never doubted that the rights of private property were limited 
by the rights of the community and the obligations of justice 
and charity. They did not criticize the medieval theory but 
rather deplored and castigated the laxity which prevailed in 
its practical application. Nevertheless, as was the case in the 
realm of political thought, the new doctrines of the reformers 
concerning the nature of fallen man and his faculties were 
instrumental in bringing about decisive changes in economic 
theory and eventually also in the concept of ownership. 

In tracing the origins of modern capitalism, leading con- 
temporary sociologists and economists 16 have pointed out that 
in particular the Calvinist and Puritan insistence on an abso- 
lute predestination of man for either heaven or hell, together 
with the concomitant fearful responsibility placed on the in- 
dividual to assure himself and others of his "election," grad- 
ually led to an increasing emphasis on individual economic 
activity and on "success" in business enterprise as an outward 
manifestation of Divine favor and blessing: "Where Catholic 
and Anglican," writes R. H. Tawney, "had caught a glimpse 
of the invisible, hovering like a consecration over the gross 

M Summa Thcologica, I-II, q. 66, a. 2. 

16 R. H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (New York: Harcourt, 
Brace & Co., 1926); Werner Sombart, Der moderne Kapitalismus (1928); Ernst 
Troeltsch, The Social Teachings of (he Christian Churches (New York: The Mac- 
millan Co., 1931); Protestantism and Progress (New York: G. P. Putnan's Sons, 
1912); Max Weber, Protestant Ethics and the 'Spirit" of Capitalism (New York: 
Scribner's Sons, 1930). 



Rights and Obligations of Ownership 233 

world of sense ... the Puritan mourned for a lost paradise 
and a creation sunk in sin. Where they had seen society as a 
mystical body, compact of members varying in order and 
degree, but dignified by participation in the common life of 
Christendom, he saw a bleak antithesis between the spirit 
which quickeneth and an alien, indifferent, or hostile world. 
. . . Too often contemning the external order as unspiritual, 
he made it, and ultimately himself, less spiritual by reason 
of his contempt." 17 

While religion and morality thus withdrew completely into 
the privacy of the individual soul, the "world" was no longer 
a realm to be consecrated and transfigured by man's coopera- 
tion with God, but at best a kingdom to be conquered by 
relentless economic activity and at worst a cesspool of sin and 
corruption: "To insist that the individual is responsible, that 
no man can save his brother, that the essence of religion is 
the contact of the soul with its Maker, how true and indis- 
pensable! But how easy to slip from that truth into the sug- 
gestion that society is without responsibility, that no man can 
help his brother, that the social order and its consequences 
are . . . something external, alien, and irrelevant . . . the 
sphere of the letter which killeth and of the reliance on works 
which ensnares the soul into the slumber of death! In em- 
phasizing that God's Kingdom is not of this world, Puritanism 
did not always escape the suggestion that this world is no part 
of God's Kingdom." 18 

Thus trade and economic activity as such became a kind 
of religion, and immoderate acquisitiveness, formerly con- 
demned as a social vice, came eventually to be regarded as a 
Christian virtue: "If God show a way," wrote Richard Baxter 
(1615-1691), a representative of moderate Presbyterian Calvin- 
ism, "in which you may lawfully get more than in another 
way ... if you refuse this, and choose the less gainful way, you 
cross one of the ends of your calling, and you refuse to be 
God's steward." 19 

Quite consistently, therefore, early capitalism, still motivated 
by these and similar religious and moral incentives, saw in the 
accumulation of a maximum of economic goods a desirable 



"Tawney, op. cit., p. 229. 
"Tawncy, op. cit.. p. 254 



Richard Baxter, Christian Directory (1678), I, p. 336*'. 



Producer and Consumer 

and divinely sanctioned goal. To facilitate its attainment it 
adopted a theory of ownership and of the individual rights 
entailed in it which became indistinguishable from economic 
liberalism as soon as the original religious and moral motiva- 
tions were forgotten or discarded. Early capitalism was then 
at least indirectly coresponsible for the creation of an "autono- 
mous" economics divorced from the natural and moral law 
and for the rise of a new type of man, the homo oeconomicus 
of the industrial age. A man's property was henceforth re- 
garded as his absolute and inalienable possession, in the sense 
that no social and moral obligations were attached to it and 
that consequently he could manipulate it in any way he pleased. 
And it became the main duty of the liberal-capitalistic State 
to protect these absolute property rights. 

However, the boundless striving for economic goods, coupled 
with the principle of unlimited competition and with the in- 
creasing opportunities for large-scale investments, led in the 
end to the concentration of wealth in the hands of giant 
monopolies, shielding their holdings by joint liability and 
corporate capitalistic ownership. The concentrated power of 
the Trust, the Cartel, and the huge Banking Concern began 
to absorb the titles of individual ownership and, by manipulat- 
ing the money and goods of individual investors at their own 
will and discretion, deprived the institution of private 
property of much of its . original meaning. "It is patent," 
writes Pius XI, describing this development, "that in our days 
not alone is wealth accumulated, but immense power and 
despotic economic domination is concentrated in the hands 
of a few, and that those few are frequently not the owners, but 
only the trustees and directors of invested funds, administering 
them at their will. . . . They hold and control money, are able 
to govern credit and to determine its allotment and thus sup- 
ply, so to speak, the lifeblood to the entire economic body, 
grasping as it were in their hands the very soul of production, 
so that no one dare breathe against their will. . . . This accumu- 
lation of power is a natural result of limitless free competi- 
tion which permits the survival of those who are strongest, 
which often means those who are most ruthless and pay least 
heed to the dictates of conscience." 20 



} Quadragesima Anno. 



Rights and Obligations of Ownership 235 

The development of modern capitalism thus verifies Plato's 
dictum that "the excessive increase of anything often causes 
a reaction in the opposite direction": the excessive and un- 
limited freedom of economic liberalism has turned into a 
modern form of economic enslavement. The centralized own- 
ership of land of Imperial Rome and of early medieval feudal- 
ism has its modern counterpart in the centralized power of 
money and industry, the characteristic marks of contemporary 
capitalism. 

While economic totalitarianism in its socialist and fascist 
branches proposes not the restoration of private ownership 
but its abolition by means of communization or nationalization, 
those who favor an economic philosophy of "solidarism" strive 
in one form or another for correctives which would check 
the abuses of both individualism and centralism and would 
result in a wider diffusion or redistribution of private property, 
with a view to the good of the individual and to the common 
welfare of all. The so-called "distributists" (G. K. Chesterton, 
H. Belloc, R. Hoffmann, E. Gill, etc.), advocating the restora- 
tion of property rights and of the means of production in 
agriculture and industry to the individual workers, seem to 
be in essential agreement with certain ideas advanced at a 
much earlier date by Thomas Jefferson, who envisaged a solu- 
tion of the social problems of his time through the creation 
of communities of landowning small farmers. "Property," 
writes Eric Gill, "is natural to man; ... it is a bulwark against 
the exploitation of man by man; . . . unless you own the 
means of production you cannot control production; . . . unless 
you control you cannot be responsible; . . . responsibility for 
his deeds ... is the very mark of man. . . . The injustices of 
property owners in the past have only been possible because 
the few owned too much and the many nothing at all. The 
law therefore should favor ownership, whereas at present it 
favors exploitation." 21 

As the centralization of ownership in the hands of a minority 
works largely for the protection of producer interests, the 
movement of consumer cooperatives marks an important step 
toward a healthy balancing of the social order and toward 

ai Eric Gill, Autobiography (New York: Dcvin-Adair Co., 1941), pp. 296 sq. 



236 Man as Producer and Consumer 

a wider diffusion of ownership. But consumer cooperatives 
are essentially defensive organizations for the protection of the 
consumers and will therefore become unnecessary at the 
moment when a true harmonization of the interests of pro- 
ducers and consumers will have been achieved. A society which 
succeeds in preserving private initiative and in directing it 
fraternally toward the common good will combine the rights 
of individual ownership with the responsibilities of coopera- 
tive ownership. It seems that such a solution of the social 
question can be found in the vocational organization of society, 
in which the partnership of capital and labor will have its 
common term in the satisfaction of the imperative needs of 
producers and consumers alike. In such a society the abundance 
of goods produced will not be unnaturally withheld from the 
masses of the consumers but will be most widely distributed 
and will thus contribute to the humanization of modern civili- 
zation as a whole and to the greater goodness and happiness 
of every individual. 



Conclusion 
MAN WORLD GOD 



WE HAVE tried in the preceding pages to discover "prin- 
ciples of thought and action in a changing world." 
To do this we had to delve deeply into that realm of being in 
which both thinking and doing are grounded and from which 
they receive not only their lifeblood but also their laws and 
directives. "If we want to think well," writes D. Jaime Balmes, 
"we must first learn to know the truth, i.e., the reality of 
things. For what good would it do to carry on subtle or 
seemingly profound discussions, if our thinking were not 
tuned to reality ? The simple workingman, the modest artisan, 
who have a thorough knowledge of the tools and objects of 
their trade, think and speak about these things with much 
greater competence than a presumptuous philosopher who 
makes bold to lecture to people in nebulous concepts and high- 
sounding phrases on matters which he does not understand." 1 

It seems to us, then, that a philosophy, to be acceptable to 
the contemporary scholar and the average reader alike, must 
be a "living philosophy" in a dual sense: it must be alive, 
and it must be such that its principles and terms can be trans- 
lated into life. It is our contention that a philosophy which is 
both alive and can be lived must have its roots and founda- 
tions in reality: it must be a realistic philosophy. 

A realistic philosophy is of necessity bound by the exigencies 
of reality. By definition it is compelled to take into account 
every aspect of reality upon which the searchlight of human 
reason can be turned. In its quest of ultimate truth it will try 
to discover the unity which underlies multiplicity, the con- 
stancy which underlies change, the continuity which inte- 
grates past and present, tradition and progress. 

It is our conviction (i) that such a philosophy actually 
exists; (2) that it can and must be reformulated in the terms 

*Dr. D. Jaime Balmet, El Criteria, 24th cd. (Barcelona: 1920), pp. 5 gq. 

*37 



238 A Realistic Philosophy 

and within the framework of contemporary thought. It can 
and must be effectively expressed in such a way that the last- 
ing principles of thought and action acquire new meaning and 
may serve as practical guides in the highly complex situations 
of modern individual and social life. 

A philosophy which is thus perennially alive deals real- 
istically with the entire universe of beings, events, and facts, 
and with all those relations which obtain among and between 
them. Probing into the nature of reality, it describes the nature 
of "being" as well as the natures and activities of multiform 
"beings." Focusing its attention on man, it recognizes in him 
some specific characteristics which seem to assign to him a 
unique position in the created universe. In human reason and 
in human freedom it finds signs and symptoms of a greatness 
compared with which the entire universe appears small. Man, 
the rational and free animal, acquires thus an extraordinary 
significance: he is an end in one respect and a beginning in 
another; the highest animal and the lowest spirit. 

It is true, when we compare the measurements of the human 
body with the vast proportions of the universe, man appears 
as a mere nothing. It is no less true that this same human body 
appears as the body of a giant when we compare it with the 
smallest structural units of matter, with electrons, protons, 
neutrons, and positrons. And yet, whether we emphasize the 
relative physical smallness or the relative physical great- 
ness of man, the conclusion is unavoidable that the struc- 
ture of human nature as such and in its entirety is some- 
thing unprecedented; that the powers which animate human 
mind and human will are different in kind from those 
forces which are active in the kingdoms of minerals, plants, 
and brutes. But when this has been admitted, there still 
remains the possibility of comparative evaluation and meas- 
urement: man is certainly deeply embedded in nature and to 
a large extent subject to its laws. They rule over man as they 
rule over the rest of creation: the human body is subject to 
the law of gravity, to the laws of nutrition and digestion, of 
metabolism, and of inner secretion. And even human con- 
sciousness is at times dominated or dimmed by forces which 
are to some extent incalculable or unintelligible. The laws of 
nature often play as mercilessly with human lives as they do 
with the lives of plants and insects. In other words, the physi- 



Man World God 239 

cal position of man in the universe is as good or as bad as 
that of any other created being. Man finds himself enmeshed 
in the frailty and relativity of his fellow beings in the physico- 
material order. 

From what observations does philosophic reflection then 
derive its claim that man occupies an exceptional and incom- 
parable position in the universe? First of all, as mentioned 
above, from the observation of the processes and functions of 
man's rational life. The powers of cognition and intellection 
seem to differ essentially from the faculty of sensation or sense 
perception. Secondly, from the observation of the functions 
and activities of man's volitional life. The domain of the 
human will, including as it were the faculty of a free and 
rationally illuminated choice, transcends in degree as well as 
in kind the realm of instincts and urges. Human will implies 
independence, self-determination, autonomy, freedom. Is this 
then the point at which man escapes from the relativity of 
existence and enters the sphere of "the absolute" ? Sober philo- 
sophic analysis tells us that this is not the case. A simple glance 
upon the several provinces of human thinking and doing, upon 
intellectual life as such as well as upon its reflection in the 
sciences, in the arts, and in all those other activities and creative 
accomplishments which in their totality constitute human 
civilization and culture, teaches us that "man in the world," 
i.e., man within the cosmos of civilization and human rela- 
tions, is still involved in relativity and change, even within 
the proper domain of the human intellect and the human will. 
Nevertheless, once we reach, in the gradations of being, the 
level of human existence, the scene changes vastly. The intel- 
lectual landscape in its boundlessness appears to suggest the 
possibility of infinite intellectual growth. Looking out of the 
window of our individuality, we behold the manifoldness of 
being and reality as within our reach. But, alas, the realization 
is soon forced upon us that the power of our actual reach and 
grasp is limited, that we grope laboriously in partial darkness, 
that our cognition as well as our intuition is still unable to 
attain to more than fragmentary views of reality. And we be- 
come ever more acutely conscious of the fact that the whole 
of reality is more than the sum total of all the fragments 
which we actually posses* or could possibly posses*. 



240 A Realistic Philosophy 

Relativity also attaches to the changing events and aspects 
of history. When we compare modern civilization with the 
civilizations of the past we no longer delude ourselves, as did 
the historiographers of the eighteenth century, into believing 
that we are standing on a summit and that no further climbing 
is possible or necessary. As we look backward, a great length 
of time seems to separate this modern age of science and tech- 
nology from the primitive world and outlook of the cave 
dwellers. But as we look at the paintings which adorned the 
walls of the prehistoric caves of Spain and France, as we study 
the Mediterranean civilizations of antiquity, the civilizations of 
the Euphrates and the Nile, the ancient civilizations of Asia, 
it seems that the span of time that separates us from past 
ages becomes rather insignificant. We learn that men have 
been living upon this earth in whom the genius of the race 
achieved its fullest realization, so that a further ascent appears 
hardly conceivable. Viewing, on the other hand, the various 
forms of contemporary social and communal life, the relations 
between individuals, groups, states, and nations, we find them 
far from ideal: in many places conditions of such horrifying 
and barbaric primitivity seem to prevail that an impartial 
observer might arrive at the conclusion that scarcely a start 
has been made and that the whole burden of the realization of 
man's cultural and social destiny is thrown upon future 
generations. 

What, then, remains of the greatness which we have claimed 
for man? If we want to save this claim from ridicule, we 
must demonstrate that man, by virtue of his reason and his 
freedom, has often risen and is always capable of rising above 
the sequence of purely physical facts and events, above the 
relative processes and laws of nature and history. We believe 
that we have offered this demonstration in the preceding 
chapters of this book. We believe that we have proved that 
the material universe and its evolutionary laws provide merely 
the foundation and the background for the vocation of the 
human soul. The "intentional object," however, of the human 
oul and its faculties or capacities for infinite truth (intellect) 
and infinite good (will) is God, the source of all truth and 
goodness. The human soul thus aims beyond itself to that 
plenitude of being in which its own being will be perfected 



Man World God 241 

and its striving will come to rest. "All creatures by their nature 
tend toward rest," wrote John Ruysbroeck, the famous Dutch 
mystic of the fourteenth century. And, centuries earlier, St. 
Augustine had expressed the same thought in the well-known 
words: "Thou hast created us for Thyself, and restless is our 
heart until it comes to rest in Thee." 



A time of crisis asks of us that we be ready for new tasks, 
for the solution of new problems. We have stressed in the 
introduction to this book that one of the characteristic features 
of our age is its renewed craving for absolutes, a craving which 
in many parts of the earth has led men to create and embrace 
pseudo absolutes in the form of moral, economic, or political 
ideologies. Closely allied with the still largely prevalent phi- 
losophies of materialism and positivism is often a misdirected 
"idealism," attaching itself almost fanatically to the goods and 
values of the material universe, somehow convinced that the 
purely transitory will in the end yield an eternal meaning. 
And yet, the structure of life and society is much too unstable 
and unbalanced to invite or justify such implicit confidence; 
and thus most of these idealistic ventures end in disappoint- 
ment, skepticism, and despair. 

Tragic indeed is the plight of modern man. The more sin- 
cere he is the greater is his anxiety to balance his life's account. 
Having learned to doubt everything, he is no longer sure of 
anything, including his own self. He thus feels inclined to 
yield to the temptation of nihilism. In such a situation it be- 
comes more than ever the great mission of philosophy and 
religion to restore, first of all, the image of man in its original 
purity and its true proportions, and, secondly, to lead man 
back on the road to that reality which he had come to view 
with such baseless distrust and disgust. 

Confronted once more with his own true self and with a 
reality in which he confides, man may emerge from his de- 
jection with a sharpened sense of personal responsibility and 
a new eagerness for moral action in individual and social life. 
A human existence that has once been shaken to its very 
depths is usually more willing to face squarely the fundamental 



242 A Realistic Philosophy 

problems of life and death than one which knows of neither 
height nor depth. 

Can philosophy aid man in finding himself, in finding the 
world, in finding his God again? If it could not, then this 
book would have been written in vain. If, on the other hand, 
philosophy is capable of performing this service, its eminently 
practical value will have been vindicated. It will rejoice at 
what it is able to accomplish in its own limited sphere, and 
it will then step aside to make room for that superior disci- 
pline which alone can guide man to his supernatural destiny. 



Operari sequitur esse (action follows being): these three 
words express the relationship which exists between thought 
and action, between theory and practice, between speculative 
and practical reason, between metaphysics and ethics. Every 
"existential" philosophy whether it be that of St. Augustine 
or that of Martin Heidegger will have to subscribe to this 
truth. And as a philosopher's understanding of "being" de- 
termines his understanding of life, so "human being" for St. 
Augustine has its frame of reference and ultimate term in 
Divine Being, while for Heidegger both being and life termi- 
nate in death and nothingness. Generally speaking, the actions 
of creatures express their being. We have had occasion, how- 
ever, to point out why in the case of the human creature not 
all the "acts of man" are, strictly speaking, "human acts" (cf. 
p. in). "Human acts" in the proper sense of the term, on 
the other hand, have their roots in and emanate from "human 
being." 

Considering the hierarchy of goods and values, we have 
demonstrated, if there was any need of demonstration, that 
men are more important than things and that therefore human 
and personal values are of deeper significance than political 
and economic values or those institutions in which such values 
are embodied. We have seen institutions and organizations of 
every kind totter and tumble and leave scarcely a trace, al- 
though they had long enjoyed the homage of men. All human 
institutions live only from borrowed life, and they live only 
as long as they stand in the service of life. Life itself, however, 
most luminously manifested in the wise and good man, the 



Man World God 243 

lover of truth and goodness and beauty. The interior life of 
man is strong enough indeed to transform and reform reality 
in his own image. And this power is the power of pure 
human "being": being which radiates and begets action. 

Modern mankind has accomplished miracles in the explora- 
tion and scientific integration of the cosmos of physical nature. 
It is now confronted with the much greater task of exploring 
and construing the cosmos of human relations, the cosmos of 
social life. The solution of this task requires more than mere 
intelligence, more than mere genius, more than mere will 
power. And once more philosophy can offer its guidance only 
part of the way, while it remains for supernatural grace to 
come to the aid of the works of nature and lead them to per- 
fection. The reconstruction of society and civilization requires 
the intellectual and moral effort of human persons in whom 
head and heart and hand, intellect, emotion, and will arc 
working in unison, motivated and animated by the prime 
mover of all physical motion as well as of all human thought 
and action. 



GLOSSARY 



AESTHETICS. The philosophic discipline which deals with the values 
and evaluations of the beautiful in art and nature, as well as with the 
laws and criteria of creative activity and appreciation in all the arts. It 
investigates and appraises styles and modes of expression in the arts as 
well as their psychological and sociological significance. The works 
of Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, G. E. Lessing, Shaftesbury, Kant, Schell- 
ing, Schopenhauer, Hegel abound with aesthetic speculation. St. 
Thomas Aquinas designates proportion, integrity, and clarity as pre- 
requisites of beauty and aesthetic pleasure. 

AGNOSTICISM. A philosophic view which holds with Du Bois-Reymond 
(1818-1896) that no knowledge of the transcendent, suprasensible, 
and supernatural is possible (ignoramus et ignorabimus: we do not 
and we shall not know). Agnosticism shares its antimetaphysical atti- 
tude with positivism, although it does not categorically deny the exist- 
ence of suprasensible reality but rather its knowability. Its teachings 
were condemned by the Vatican Council (1869-1870) and again in 
Pope Pius X's Encyclical Pascendi Dominici Gregis (1907). 

ATHEISM. The denial of the existence of God as a supreme principle or 
being, implying the contention that the world and its creatures exist 
of and through themselves. Atheism is frequently associated with 
skepticism, positivism, pantheism, naturalism, and materialism. 
Prominent representatives: Lamettrie, Holbach, Schopenhauer, Karl 
Marx, Nietzsche, John Dewey. 

ATOMISM. The philosophic view which assumes that all things are com- 
posed of smallest indivisible and impenetrable physical, psychical, or 
spiritual parts or elements, and that all physical and mental processes 
can be reduced to varying movements and combinations of such 
"atoms" or "monads." Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius, Holbach, 
etc., were representatives of physical or materialistic atomism, while 
Spencer, Taine, Haeckel, Fechner and, on a spiritualistic basis, Leib- 
niz developed systems of psychical atomism. 

AXIOM. A self-evident principle which as such neither stands in need 
of nor admits of any demonstrations, but which may serve as a basis 
for demonstrations. Axioms may be ontological, logical, mathematical, 
physical, mechanical, etc. 

BEHAVIORISM. A contemporary, notably American, philosophical, and 
psychological system of thought which tries to explain all the vital 
functions and activities of plants, animals, and human beings as "con- 

244 



Glossary 245 

ditioned reflexes" or as reactions and responses to certain stimuli. 
Behaviorism denies or disregards all intramental or psychical phe- 
nomena and discards all the traditional psychological concepts, such as 
those pertaining to emotion, imagination, ideation, apperception, 
thought, memory, etc. It confines its interest and research to the modes 
of external behavior, which it regards as causally conditioned by ex- 
ternal circumstances and influences (milieu). "Stimuli" and "re- 
sponses" produce "habit patterns," and these patterns are the sole 
contents of life on the lowest as well as on the highest levels. All 
emotional and other psychological states are reduced to anger, fear, 
and love. Behaviorist psychology is out and out materialistic. Its influ- 
ence is especially strong in American "progressive" education. Chief 
representatives: John B. Watson, Edward Thorndike, and (more 
moderately) John Dewey and his followers. 

CAUSALITY. The principle of causality expresses the relationship which 
exists in the universe between cause and effect. It maintains that every- 
thing which comes into being is caused by or is the effect of something 
which is. This principle was characterized by David Hume as a psy- 
chological fallacy and by Kant as denoting a purely subjective category 
of the understanding (Ver stand es\ategorie). 

CLASSICAL POLITICAL ECONOMY. A term used to designate the economic 
theories of Adam Smith, John Stuart Mill, David Ricardo, and J. B. 
Say. These authors base their theories on the conditions prevalent in 
England during the early stages of modern industrialism. Under- 
estimating the historical and sociological aspects of political economy, 
they describe economic processes exclusively in terms of economic ex- 
change between individuals. Optimistically they believe in a natural 
harmony of economic interests, resulting from the prudent pursuit of 
individual self-interest. But, pessimistically, they maintain that 
nothing can and should be done for the benefit of the proletarian 
masses, since as a consequence of the inexorable "natural laws" of 
economy any attempt to improve the lot of the poor is doomed to 
failure. They therefore demand of the State a policy of noninterference 
or laissez faire (economic liberalism). 

CONTINGENCE, CONTINGENCY. A term referring to all those things 
which do not exist of necessity, i.e., which come into being and whose 
nonexistence involves no contradiction. The contingency of the created 
universe forms the basis of the demonstration of the existence of God 
"from contingency" (cosmological proof). 

COSMOLOGY. The philosophic discipline which deals with the universe, 
its origin, duration, constituent parts, forces, laws, and order. It is a 
part of the philosophy of nature. 

CRITICISM. A term designating the method used by Kant in opposition 
to his teacher Wolff's "uncritical dogmatism" and to David Hume's 
skepticism. This method consists essentially in an epistcmological in- 
vestigation of "pure reason" as an instrument of knowledge. 



246 Glossary 

DEISM. The theory which posits a Deity which created the world anc 
then left it to itself without intervening in any way with the course 01 
nature and human life. Thus, in contrast to atheism, deism posits 
transcendent God, but, in contrast to theism, it sees in Him only th< 
"author," not the ruler and sustainer of the created universe. The chid 
representatives of deism in England were the "freethinkers" of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (Herbert of Cherbury, Chas 
Blount, }. Toland, M. Tindal). The French deism of the same perioc 
frequently borders on naturalism and atheism (the Encyclopaedists 
D'Alembert, Voltaire, Rousseau). German deism of the age of "en 
lightenment" is represented by Reimarus, Lessing, and Moses Mendels 
sohn. All deists concurred in the demand of a "natural religion/' freec 
from the "shackles" of dogmatic, ecclesiastical, and institutional 
Christianity. 

DETERMINISM. The doctrine which denies the freedom of the humar 
will and regards all actions and volitions as strictly determined by ex 
ternal and internal causes or motivations. Outstanding representa 
tives of rigid philosophical determinism were Priesdey, Hobbes, Hoi- 
bach, Haeckcl, Nietzsche, John Stuart Mill. A theological determinism 
(denial of free will; absolute predestination) was taught by Luther 
Calvin, and Zwingli. 

DIALECTIC. Denotes the logical movement of thought from one concept 
to another by means of the resolution of contradictions. In Plato's 
philosophy the aim of dialectics is the discovery of the pure, ideal 
concepts. For Hegel dialectic is the "self-development of ideas" (Selbst- 
bewegung der Begriffe}: the "dialectic of history" proceeds in the form 
of the "dialectical triad" of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis (dialectical 
idealism). A similar dialectical movement forms the theoretical 
foundation of Karl Marx's "dialectical materialism." 

DUALISM. The doctrine which, as against monism, assumes two con 
stitutive principles of reality, which are either conceived as opposed to 
one another (extreme dualism) or as irreducible to each other 
(moderate dualism). An extreme dualism was taught by Plato, Manes 
(Manichaeism), William of Occam, Descartes; a moderate dualism by 
Aristotle, St. Augustine, St. Thomas Aquinas, and by all those 
philosophers who recognized the "analogy of being," while at the 
same time they insisted on the essential distinctions between God and 
world, Creator and creature, mind and matter. 

DYNAMISM. A theory of reality which reduces all the phenomena of 
nature and mind to the movement of physical (materialistic dyna- 
mism) or spiritual (spiritualistic dynamism) forces. Leibniz's "monad- 
ology" is an outstanding example of spiritualistic dynamism. 

EMPIRICISM. The doctrine which maintains that all knowledge is sense 
experience. In its extreme form (positivism, semanticism, etc.) em- 
piricism denies the validity of all intellectual or rational knowledge or 
confines knowledge to such experimental data as may be ex- 
Dressed in sensori mathematical svmbols (logical emoiricism. svmbolic 



Glossary 247 

logic). Chief representatives in modern times: Francis Bacon, Hobbes, 
Locke, Hume, Condillac, and the contemporary "logical empiricists" 
of the "School of Vienna" (Carnap, Reichenbach, Neurath, Schlick, 
etc.). 

EPISTEMOLOGY. The philosophic discipline which deals with the theory, 
the validity, and the truth content of cognition or knowledge. 

ETHICS. The philosophic discipline which deals with the nature of 
morality as a norm of human acts. As a practical science, ethics ex- 
amines these acts in so far as they are conformable or nonconformablc 
to an objective standard of goodness, discoverable by human reason. 

EUDEMONISM. The theory which holds that the ultimate aim and end of 
morality is the happiness of the individual or of society. According to 
the different ways in which happiness is conceived or defined, different 
forms of eudemonism may be distinguished: If the pleasure of the 
senses is regarded as the ultimate end of life, eudemonism assumes the 
form of hedonism; if the essence of happiness is seen in social progress, 
eudemonism turns into utilitarianism; if it is maintained that happi- 
ness consists in the realization of eternal norms, eudemonism acquires 
the characteristics of Platonic idealism; if supreme happiness is defined 
as the realization of the potentialities and faculties of human nature, 
in conformity with the Divine and natural law, eudemonism appears 
in the form of Aristotelian and Thomistic realism, in the latter in- 
stance providing however for the glory of God as the absolutely ulti- 
mate end with which man's happiness is combined. Kant main- 
tained that any kind of eudemonism rests on a perverted concept of 
morality. His "autonomous" morality makes allowance only for moti- 
vations of "duty" and excludes those of happiness. 

FIDEISM. The doctrine which maintains that human reason is impotent 
as an instrument of rational knowledge and that certitude is gained 
by "faith alone." (Occam, Luther, Kierkegaard, Karl Earth, etc.) 

FINALITY. Denotes the natural growth or development of individual 
beings and of the universe as a whole toward their ends or final 
destination (teleology), in accordance with a Divine plan or design. 
The concept of finality was introduced into philosophical specula- 
tion by Plato and Aristotle, and was later on developed in greater 
depth and implemented with the Christian ideas of creation and 
redemption by St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas. 

GNOSTICISM (from Gr. gnosis: knowledge, cognition; secret, esoteric 
knowledge). A name applied to a number of heretical sectarian 
movements which threatened the early Christian Church (first to third 
century) and which were fiercely attacked by some of the leading 
Church Fathers. Gnosticism is the rationalistic counterpart of 
"fideism"; it places exclusive emphasis on rational knowledge (gnosis} 
rather than faith (pistis} as a means to penetrate into the Divine 
mysteries and as a prerequisite for salvation. Theosophy is a modern 
form of gnosticism. Outstanding gnostics: Valentinian, Basilides, 
Marcion. 



248 Glossary 

HEDONISM: sec EUDEMONISM. 

IDEALISM. In a general sense, the doctrine which holds that the world 
is conditioned by ideas or by spiritual principles, and that visible 
reality is the mere reflection of eternal ideas (the "metaphysical ideal- 
ism" of Plato, the Platonists, and Neo-Platonists). Absolute idealism 
is the doctrine, taught by Hegel and other German idealists of the 
early nineteenth century, that the world and everything in it are 
merely representations of inner states of mind and consciousness of 
the thinking ego and that this thinking ego is only a part of the 
Infinite or Absolute Ego. In this Absolute Ego the real and the ideal, 
object and subject, nature and spirit, the thinker and the object 
thought are ultimately identical ("philosophy of identity"). Epistemo- 
logical idealism maintains that the external world exists only in sub- 
jective consciousness and has no existence outside the thinking mind, 
and that the contents of knowledge derive not from an objective 
reality but exclusively from the consciousness of the thinking subject. 
Transcendental idealism holds with Kant that the human mind im- 
poses its own innate and "a priori" forms of apperception and under- 
standing upon the multiple impressions it receives from an unknown 
and unknowable "thing-in-itself" and thus builds up its knowledge by 
way of a subjective structural synthesis. 

LOGIC. The philosophic discipline which deals with the principles, 
laws, and methods of accurate thinking. While logic provides the 
formal criteria of correct thinking, epistemology investigates the "ma- 
terial" contents and constitutive elements of thought. The founder 
of the science of logic is Aristotle. 

LOGICAL EMPIRICISM, See EMPIRICISM. 

MANICHAEISM. A syncretistic (mixed) Persian form of "gnosticism," 
founded by Manes (circa 215-277) and based on the extreme dualism 
(assuming two supreme principles, one good, one evil) of the ancient 
Iranian religion of Zoroaster or Zarathustra, with added elements of 
Babylonian, Chaldaeic, Jewish, and Christian doctrines. During the 
early Christian centuries Manichaeism spread to India and China and 
temporarily gained a strong foothold in Spain and North Africa. St. 
Augustine, who had himself been a member of the Manichaean sect, 
attacked Manichaeism after his conversion to Christianity. During the 
Middle Ages the Manichaean tradition provided a fertile soil for the 
growth of many heresies, all of which were characterized by their 
exaggerated metaphysical dualism. 

MATERIALISM. Denotes any doctrine which regards matter, or material 
force, or the corporeal world, as the one and only reality. Historic and 
economic materialism (Marxism) try to explain all historical, cultural, 
and economic phenomena, including religious creeds and philosophical 
systems, as "superstructures" resulting from changing material (eco- 
nomic, in the case of Marx) "substructures." Leading reprcsenta- 



Glossary 249 

tives: Dcmocritus, Lamettrie, Holbach, Haeckcl, Marx, Engcls, Lenin. 

/IETAPHYSICS. The science of the ultimate reasons (causes) and proper- 
ties of being and existence as such, as well as of all beings and ex- 
istents. General metaphysics, dealing with "being as such," is usually 
called ontology, while the term special metaphysics is used to designate 
the discipline which examines the different realms, classes, and grada- 
tions of being (philosophy of nature; rational psychology; natural 
theology or theodicy: the world, the soul, and God). 

MONISM. The doctrine which tries to explain reality by tracing it back 
to one single principle of either mind (idealism) or matter (material- 
ism) and therefore denies any real metaphysical distinction between 
body and soul, mind and matter, God and world. Monism is thus 
opposed to both dualism and pluralism. Representatives of idealistic 
monism are, among others, Plotinus, Giordano Bruno, Spinoza, Leib- 
niz, Fichte, Schelling, Hegel. Materialistic monists are the German 
philosophers D. F. Strauss, L. Buechner, G. Vogt, Moleschott. 



NATURALISM. The doctrine which teaches that all the phenomena of 
cultural and intellectual life are ultimately expressions or manifestations 
of material or corporeal nature and of natural instincts and urges. 
Naturalism is therefore usually anti-intellectualistic; it regards the in- 
tellect as inimical to the biological vitality of the individual and the 
race. Prominent adherents of naturalism: Karl Marx, Nietzsche, 
Oswald Spengler, Ludwig Klages in Germany; John Dewey with his 
following of "progressive" educators in the United States. 

NATURAL THEOLOGY. See THEODICY. 

sfECEssiTY. That which exists in such a way that its nonexistence in- 
volves a contradiction and is therefore impossible, is said to exist of 
necessity. It is existence per se, whereas all contingent being exists ab 
olio. The one being which exists by unconditional necessity, i.e., whose 
essence is his existence, and whose not being or nonexistence is self- 
contradictory, is God. His being and existence in turn explain the 
existence of everything contingent. 

NIHILISM. The negation of all positive values, norms, and standards. 
Nihilism may be theoretical or practical: theoretical nihilism denies 
the possibility of valid knowledge as well as the reality of the external, 
extramental world; practical or moral nihilism denies all absolute or 
generally binding norms of action. Political nihilism flourished as an 
anarchistic movement in Russia during the latter part of the nine- 
teenth century, and the term "nihilism" was popularized by Turge- 
niev, who had used it to characterize the hero (Basarov) of his novel 
"Fathers and Sons." 

sfouMENON. Designates in a general sense reality as conceivable in 
thought, in contrast to reality as known by sense perception alone. 
For Kant the noumena are the unknowable "things-in-themselves" 
(Dinge an sich) which underlie the objects of sense experience (the 
"phenomena"). 



250 Glossary 

ONTOLOGISM. The doctrine which teaches that the ideas in the human 
mind are not gathered by human rational effort but are directly de- 
rived from an intuition of God (Malebranche, Gioberti, Jules Fabre, 
Maret, Rosmini, etc.). 

ONTOLOGY. The philosophic discipline which deals with "being as 
such," i.e., with being in its most general aspects; also known as the 
"first philosophy" (philosophia prima) or general metaphysics, as dis- 
tinct from special metaphysics which deals with the specific realms, 
classes, and gradations of being. See METAPHYSICS. 

PANTHEISM. The doctrine which identifies God and the universe. 
Whereas theism regards God as both the transcendent Creator and 
ruler and immanent sustainer of the universe and of man, pantheism 
sees in the Deity an impersonal principle or force coextensive with 
the world (Giordano Bruno, Spinoza, Schelling). See THEISM. 

PHENOMENALISM. In a general sense the doctrine which holds that the 
world of sense is not the true reality but merely the "appearance" of 
an underlying reality (Platonism, Buddhism, Brahmanism). In a 
more restricted sense the epistemological doctrine of Kant, who claims 
in his Critique of Pure Reason that only "appearances" (phenomena), 
but not the "things-in-themselves" (noumena), can become objects of 
true or scientific knowledge. 

PHENOMENON. Designates the object of sense perception, as distinct 
from the "noumenon," i.e., reality as conceived by the mind (cf. 
noumenon). This distinction between "phenomenon" and "noume- 
non" was first made by Plato; it was used by Kant, who in his 
epistemology distinguishes between the knowable and known "phe- 
nomena" or "appearances" and the unknowable "noumena" or 
"things-in-themselves." 

PHYSIOCRATS. A group of political economists (Quesnay, Turgot, Mira- 
beau, Sr., etc.) who emphasize against the "mercantilists" and their 
underestimation of agriculture the importance of the produce of the 
soil for the well-being of society (la terre est I' unique source des 
richesses). They are representatives of the age of "Enlightenment" 
and its "progressive" ideology. They anticipate the views of economic 
liberalism in holding that economics is subject to definite, unchange- 
able, and so-called "natural laws," and that it is the task of political 
economy to recognize these laws and to make society conform to them. 
The motivating and ruling force of social life and social progress they 
see in enlightened self-interest. They therefore demand that the State 
confine its activities to the removal of such impediments as might 
prevent these supposed economic "laws" from taking their natural 
course. 

PLURALISM, (i) Any doctrine which, as against monism and dualism, 
asumes several (more than two) mutually irreducible ultimate prin- 
ciples or forms of being or reality. (2) Denotes any social or civil 
order which admits of several autonomous, i.e., legally or constitu- 
tionally independent units or powers. 



Glossary 251 

>SITIVISM. The theory which claims that the only valid knowledge is 
"scientific" knowledge, i.e., the knowledge of what is given in sense 
perception and verifiable by the experimental method. It is antimeta- 
physical, denies the value of genuinely philosophical or rational specu- 
lation, and substitutes for it the methods of the mathematical and 
physical sciences. Everett W. Hall ("Metaphysics," in Twentieth Cen- 
tury Philosophy, N. Y., 1943, pp. 147-194) distinguishes the following 
four types: (i) agnostic positivism (E. Mach, Kant); (2) classificatory 
positivism (the task of philosophy is the historical and systematic 
classification of the sciences: Auguste Comte); (3) psychological posi- 
tivism (philosophy is concerned exclusively with language and be- 
havior habits: John B. Watson's "behaviorism"); (4) logical posi- 
tivism: semanticism or logical empiricism (cf. empiricism). 
IAGMATISM. The epistemological doctrine which maintains that life 
and action establish the truth value of thought, or that social utility is 
the criterion of truth. Pragmatism thus sees in "truth" only an instru- 
mental aid for the achievement of individual or social progress and 
explicitly denies the possibility of an absolute or universally valid 
truth. Prominent pragmatists: Ch. Peirce, William James, F. C. S. 
Schiller, John Dewey. 

EALISM. (i) Epistemological realism rests on the conviction that an 
extramental reality exists, independent of subjective consciousness; 
(2) naive realism assumes that everything exists extramentally in 
exactly the same way in which it is perceived or experienced subjec- 
tively; (3) critical realism tries to disengage the objective extramental 
qualities of the objects of thought or consciousness from the subjective 
elements (e.g., sense qualities) and to define and analyze both; (4) 
metaphysical realism rests on the conviction (a) that to the universal 
ideas correspond universal essences in real objects (extreme realism); 
or () that the roots of the universal ideas arc contained in real 
objects and can therefore be predicated of individual things univocally 
(moderate realism). See UNIVERSALS. 

;MANTICISM. A form of naturalistic empiricism, developed especially 
by the "School of Vienna" (see EMPIRICISM). It is primarily concerned 
with problems of meaning, definition, and syntax and their translation 
into sensorimathematical signs and symbols ("logical symbolism" or 
"symbolic logic"). 

LEPTICISM. The doctrine which denies that there is any truth whatso- 
ever. Philosophical scepticism extends this denial to all the objects and 
propositions of metaphysics, ethics, and religion. Methodical s\ep- 
ticism, on the other hand, uses the device of "methodical doubt" 
(Descartes, Husserl) for the purpose of more exact investigation and 
demonstration. Representatives of philosophical skepticism: the 
sophists, Pyrrhon, Hume, O. Spengler. 

^RITUALISM. The doctrine which holds that the entire universe is of a 
spiritual nature and that everything which appears as corporeal is the 



252 Glossary 

manifestation of an all-pervasive spiritual reality. Spiritualism is thus 
a special variety of monism and pantheism and opposed to material- 
ism. Chief representatives are, among others, Berkeley, Leibniz, and 
Bergson. 

THEISM. A philosophic doctrine or system which recognizes a personal 
God as creator, ruler, and sustainer of the universe. This doctrine 
implies both God's transcendence (His being above the world) and 
God's immanence (His being within the world per essentiam, as its 
sustaining principle). According to the testimony of the comparative 
history of religion, theism is the oldest religious conviction of the 
human race, whereas polytheism (belief in several gods) is a symptom 
of later and decadent forms of religion. 

THEODICY. A term used first by Leibniz to characterize the philo- 
sophical or rational demonstration of the existence of God and of the 
manifestations of His being and essence in the created universe 
(natural theology). In a more restricted sense the term denotes the 
philosophical attempt to justify God's infinite wisdom and goodness in 
view of the phenomena of physical, intellectual, and moral evil. 

TRANSCENDENT, TRANSCENDENTAL. Denotes (a) that which "transcends" 
all genera and species and which is therefore as universal as "being as 
such" ( transcendental s: the true, the good, the one); (b) that which 
lies outside and beyond experience, in contrast to that which is "im- 
manent" in experience. In Kant's terminology the adjective "tran- 
scendental" denotes something which is prior to all experience (a 
priori). In this sense knowledge is referred to by him as transcendental 
when it deals with the preconditions which make experience possible, 
i.e., with the a priori forms of sensitive apperception and "understand- 
ing" (Ver stand). 

TRANSCENDENTAL IDEALISM. See IDEALISM. 

UNIVERSALS. Ideas or generic concepts whose contents can be predi- 
cated in the same sense ("univocally") of all individual members of a 
class or genus. The epistemological controversies concerning the 
nature of universals (especially in the twelfth and fourteenth centu- 
ries) were consolidated in the following three points of view: (i) 
Platonic or extreme realism: universal ideas (man, plant, animal, etc.) 
exist separate from the individuals of the class; (2) Aristotelian or 
Thomistic (moderate) realism: universal ideas exist pri&r to the in- 
dividuals of the class (ante res) in the form of Divine Ideas in the 
Divine Mind, but they also inhere materially in the individuals (in 
rebus)] (3) nominalism: universal ideas are mere arbitrary or con- 
ventional and meaningless words or labels, while real existence can 
only be predicated of individual things (Roscelin, Abelard, William 
of Occam, and all materialists and sensists of medieval and modern 
times). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY* 



Adam, Karl, The Spirit of Catholicism, Transl. by Dom Justin McCann, O.S.B. (New 

York: The Macmillan Co., 1935). 
Adler, Mortimer J., What Man Has Made of Man (New York: Longmans, Green 

& Co., 1937). 

Agar, Herbert, A Time for Greatness (Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1942). 
Agar, H., and Tate, A., Who Owns America (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1936). 
Aristotle, The Basic Worlds of Aristotle, Ed. with an Introduction by Richard 

McKeon (New York: Random House, 1941). 
Augustine, St., A Monument to Saint Augustine (New York: The Dial Press, 1930). 

Opera: Migne, Patr. Lat., Vols. 32-46. 

Bandas, Rudolph G., Contemporary Philosophy and Thomistic Principles (Milwau- 
kee: Bruce, 1932). 

Barth. Karl, God in Action, Transl. by E. G. Homrighausen and Karl J. Ernst 
(Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1937). 

Baschab, Chas. R., A Manual of Neo-Scholastic Philosophy (St. Louis: B. Herder 
Book Co., 1923). 

Baur, Ludwig, Metaphysif^ (Munich: Koesel and Pustet, 1935). 

Bedoyere, Michael de la, Christian Crisis (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1942). 

Behn, Siegfried, The Eternal Magnet. A History of Philosophy, Transl. by George 
N. Sinister (New York: The Devin-Adair Co., 1929). 

Bellarmine, Robert, De Laicis, Transl. by K. E. Murphy (New York: 1928). 

Belloc, Hilaire, The Restoration of Property (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1936). 

The Servile State (London: Constable & Co., 1927). 

Berdyaev, Nicolas, Freedom and the Spirit (London: The Centenary Press, 1935). 

The End of Our Time (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1935). 

Bergson, Henri, The Two Sources of Morality and Religion, Transl. by R. A. Andra 
and C. Brereton (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1935). 

An Introduction to Metaphysics, Transl. by T. E. Hulme (New York: G. 

P. Putnam's Sons, 1912). 

Boethius, Opera Omnia, Migne Patr. Lat., 63 and 64. 

Briefs, Goetz A., The Proletariat (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1937). 

Bruehl, Chas. P., The Pope's Plan for Social Reconstruction. A Commentary on the 

Social Encyclicals of Pius XI (New York: The Devin-Adair Co., 1939). 
Brunner, Emil, The Mediator, Transl. by Olive Wyon (London: The Butterworth 

Press, 1934)- 

Carlyle, R. W., and A. J., History of Mediaeval Politick Theory in the West (New 

York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1916). 

Cathrein, Victor, S.J., Moralphilosophie (Freiburg: Herder & Co., 1893). 
Chesterton, G. K., St. Thomas Aquinas (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1933). 
Cronin, Michael J., The Science of Ethics (New York: Benziger Bros., 1909). 

D'Arcy, M. C., S.J., Thomas Aquinas, Leaden of Philosophy Series (Bcnn, 1930). 

* This bibliography represents roughly the author's working list and is of neces- 
sity incomplete. 



254 Bibliography 

Dawson, Christopher, Religion and the Modern State (New York: Sheed & 

1935)- 

Progress and Religion (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1937). 

The Judgment of the Nations (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1942). 

Driesch, Hans, The Science and Philosophy of the Organism (London: A. 

Black, 1929). 

Eddington, Sir Arthur, The Philosophy of Physical Science (New York: The 
millan Co., 1939). 

Fanfani, A., Catholicism, Protestantism and Capitalism (New York: Sheed & 

1935). 
Fenwick, Charles G., A Primer of Peace (Washington, D. C.: Cath. Assoc. for 

national Peace, 1937). 
Furfey, Paul H., Three Theories of Society (New York: The Macmillan Co., 

Fire on the Earth (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1936). 

Garrigou-LaGrange, R., O.P., God, His Existence and Nature, Transl. by B. 

O.S.B. (St. Louis: Herder, 1935). 
Gierke, Otto, Political Theories of the Middle Ages, Transl. by F. Wen. Mi 

(Cambridge, 1900). 
Gill, Eric, Wort^ and Property (London & Toronto: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1937 

Autobiography (New York: The Devin-Adair Co., 1941). 

Gilson, Etienne, The Philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas, Transl. by Edw. Bel 
2nd Ed. (St. Louis: Herder, 1933). 

Christianity and Philosophy, Transl. by Ralph MacDonald (New 

Sheed & Ward, 1939). 

Reason and Revelation in the Middle Ages (New York: Charles Sen 



Sons, 1938). 

The Spirit of Mediaeval Philosophy, Transl. by A. H. C. Downes 



York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1936). 

The Unity of Philosophical Experience (New York: Scribner's, 1937) 

Moral Values and the Moral Life, Transl. by Leo R. Ward (St. 



Herder, 1931). 

Grcdt, Joseph, Elementa Philosophiae, 5th ed. (Freiburg i. Br.: Herder & Co., 
Gurian, Waldemar, Bolshevism: Theory and Practice (New York: Sheed & 

1932). 

The Future of Bolshevism (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1936). 

The Rise and Decline of Marxism (London: Burns, Gates & Washb 

1938). 

Haas, Francis J., Man and Society (New York: D. Appleton-Century Co., 1930) 
Haessle, Johannes, Das Arbeitsethos der Kirche (Freiburg, i. Br.: Herder & 

1923)- 

Hartmann, Nicolai, Zur Grundlegung der Ontologie (Berlin & Leipzig: Wai 
Gruyter & Co., 1935). 

Ethics, Transl. by Stanton Coit (New York: The Macmillan Co., 19 

Hollis, Chr., The Breakdown of Money (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1934). 
Hugcl, F. von, The Reality of God (Dent, 1931). 

Husserl, Edmund, Logische Untersuchungen (Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1913). 

Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, Transl. by 1 

Gibson (London: 1931). 

Husslein, Joseph, S.J., Christian Social Manifesto (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1939). 

Editor, Social Wellsprings, Vol. I (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1940). 

Editor, Social Wellsprings, Vol. II (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1942). 

Hutchins, Robert M., Education for Freedom (Baton Rouge: Louisana State t 

sity Press, i943>- 

Inge, W. R., Dean, The Philosophy of Plotinus (New York: Longmans, < 
1923). 



Bibliography 255 

Kierkegaard, Soren, Christian Discourses, Transl. by Walter Lowrie (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1939). 

The Present Age, Transl. by Alexander Dru and Walter Lowrie (New 

York: Oxford University Press, 1940). 

Lehmen, Alfons, Lehrbuch der Philosophic (Freiburg, i. Br.: Herder & Co., 1909- 

1912). 

Leo XIII, Great Encyclical Letters of (New York: Benziger Bros., 1903). 
Lowrie, Walter, Kierkegaard (New York: Oxford University Press, 1938). 

Maritain, Jacques, Art and Scholasticism, Transl. by J. F. Scanlan (New York: 
Scribner's, 1930). 

An Introduction to Philosophy, Transl. by E. I. Watkin (New York: Long- 
mans, Green & Co., 1930). 

Ransoming the Time, Transl. by H. L. Binsee (New York: Charles 

Scribner's Sons, 1941). 

Freedom in the Modern World, Transl. by Richard O'Sullivan, K. C. (New 



York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1936). 

An Introduction to Logic, Transl. by Jmelda Choquette (New York: Shecd 



& Ward, 1937). 

The Degrees of Knowledge, Transl. by Bernard Wall (New York: Charles 



Scribner's Sons, 1938). 

True Humanism (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1938). 

Scholasticism and Politics, Transl. & ed. by Mortimer J. Adler (New York: 



The Macmillan Co., 1940). 

A Preface to Metaphysics (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1940). 

Les Droits de I'Homme et la Lot Naturelle, Editions de la Maison Fran^aise 



(New York, 1942). Eng. ed. Scribner's (New York, 1943). 
Maritain, Raissa, We Were Friends Together, Transl. by Julie Kernan (New York: 

Longmans, Green, 1942). 

Masure, Eugene, L'Humanisme Chretien (Paris: Beauchesne, 1937). 
Mercier, D., Card., A Manual of Modern Scholastic Philosophy (St. Louis: Herder, 



-- Metaphysique Generale (Louvain: Institut Superieur de Philosophic, 1910). 
Mercier, Louis J. A., The Challenge of Humanism (New York: Oxford University 

Press, I933)- 

Michel, Dom Virgil, Christian Social Reconstruction (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1937). 
Mullcr, Albert, S.J., La Politique Corporative, "Edition Rex" (Brussels, 1935). 
Nell-Breuning, Oswald von, S.J., Reorganization of Social Economy, Transl. by 

Bernard W. Dempsey, S.J. (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1936). 
Newman, John Henry, Card., A Grammar of Assent (New York: Longmans, Green 

& Co., 1930). 

Phillips, R. P., Modern Thomistic Philosophy (London: Burns, Oates and Wash- 

bourne, 1934). 
Pius XII, The Pope Speaks: The Words of Pius XII with a biography by Charles 

Rankin and a preface by Bishop Edwin V. O'Hara (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 

194)- 
Plato, The Dialogues of Plato, Transl. by B. Jowett, with an Introduction by Raphael 

Demos (New York: Random House, 1937). 
Principles for Peace, Selections From Papal Documents, Ed. by Rev. H. C. Koenig, 

S.T.D.; preface by Archbishop Samuel A. Stritch of Chicago; National Catholic 

Welfare Conference (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1943). 

Rauschning, Hermann, The Voice of Destruction (New York: S. P. Putnam's Sons, 

1940). 

- The Revolution of Nihilism (New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1939). 
Reinhardt, Kurt F., The Commonwealth of Nations and the Papacy (Milwaukee: 

Bruce, 1943). 
Robertson, H. M., Aspects of the Rise of Economic Industrialism (Cambridge: Uni- 

versity Press, 1933). 



256 Bibliography 

Roblcs, Oswaldo, Propcdtutica Filos6fica. "Curso de Introducci6n General a la 

Filosofia" (Mexico, D. F.: Porrua HNOS & CIA., 1943)- 
Rousselot, P., S.J., The Intellectualism of St. Thomas, Transl. by James E. O'Mahony 

(New York: Sheed & Ward, 1935). 
Ryan, John A., A Better Economic Order (New York: Harper and Bros., 1935). 

Distributive Justice (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1927). 

Ryan, John A., and Boland, Francis J., Catholic Principles of Politics (New York: 

The Macmillan Co., 1941). 
Ryan, John A., and Husslein, Joseph, S.J., The Church and Labor (New York: 

The Macmillan Co., 1920). 
Ryan, John A., and Millar, Moorhouse F., S.J., The State and the Church (New 

York: The Macmillan Co., 1922). 

Scheeben, Jos. M., Natur und Gnade, Ed. by Martin Grabmann (Munich: Theatiner 

Vcrlag, 1922). 
Schmidt, P. W., The Origin and Growth of Religion, Transl. by H. J. Rose (London, 

1930. 

Schwarz, Balduin, Ewige Philosophic (Leipzig, 1937). 
Sertillanges, A. D., S. Thomas d'Aquin (Paris: Alcan, 1922). 
Sheen, Fulton J., God and Intelligence (New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1925). 
Philosophy of Science (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1934). 

- Liberty, Fraternity, Equality (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1938). 

Solovyov, Vladimir, The Justification of the Good, Transl. by Nathalie A. Dudding- 

ton (London: Constable & Co., 1918). 

God, Man and the Church (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1938). 

Sombart, Werner, The Quintessence of Capitalism, Transl. by M. Epstein (London: 

T. F. Marvin, 1915). 

Sorokin, Pitrim A., The Crisis of Our Age (New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., 1942). 
Spengler, Oswald, The Decline of the West, Transl. by Chas. F. Atkinson (New 

York: A. Knopf, 1939). 
Spykman, Nicholas John, America's Strategy in World Politics (New York: Harcourt, 

Brace & Co., 1942). 

Stace, W. T., The Destiny of Western Man (New York: Rcynal & Hitchcock, 1942). 
Stratmann, Franziskus, O.P., The Church and War (New York: P. F. Kenedy & 

Sons, 1928). 
Suarez, Francisco, Disputationes Metaphysicae (Paris: L. Vivcs, 1877). 

De Le gibus ac de Legislator e (Paris, 1861). 

Tawney, R. H., Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (New York: Harcourt, Brace & 
Co., 1926). 

The Acquisitive Society (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1920). 

Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, Ed. DC Rubeis, Billuart ct al. (Turin: 

Marietti, 1926). 

Summa Theologica, Transl. by the Fathers of the English Dominican 

Province (New York: Benziger Bros., 1913-1937). 

Summa Contra Gentiles (Turin: Marietti, 1927). 

Quaestiones Disputatae De Veritate. 

De Ente Et Essentia, In Libraries Consociationis Sancti Pauli (Fribourg, 



Switzerland, 1883). 
Troeltsch, Ernst, The Social Teaching of the Christian Churches (New York: The 

Macmillan Co., 1931). 
Protestantism and Progress (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1912). 

Vitoria, Francisco de, De Jure Belli, ed. by J. B. Scott (Washington, D. C.: The 
Carnegie Institution, 1917). 

Ward, Leo R., Values and Reality (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1935). 
Watkin, E. J., A Philosophy of Form (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1935). 
Weber, Max, Protestant Ethics and the Spirit of Capitalism, with a preface by R. H. 
Tawney (New York: Scribner's Sons, 1930). 



Bibliography 257 

DC Wulf, Maurice, History of Mediaeval Philosophy (New York: Longmans, Green 

& Co., 1935-1938). 
Scholasticism Old and New, Transl. by P. Coffey (New York: Benziger 

Bros., 1907). 

Zeller, E., Outlines of the History of Greek. Philosophy (New York: Harcourt, Brace 

& Co., 1931). 
Zybura, J. S., Present-Day Thinkers and the New Scholasticism (St. Louis: Herder, 

1926). 



Index 



Terms followed by an asterisk (*) are 

Absolutes and pseudo absolutes, 241 

Absolutism, 181 sq.; creed of state, 153; 
opposition of, to natural law, 156 sq.; 
and Protestantism, 182 

Abstraction, 43; degrees of, 15 sq. 

Accidental form, 59 sq. 

Accidents, 41 sq., 45-55 

Act, actuality, 54; human and the end 
of ends, H3sq.; and potency, 53 sq., 
63 sqq., 81 

Action, 46 sq.; and contemplation, 120 
sqq.; human, 108-140; and receptiv- 
ity, 52-55; voluntary and involuntary, 

123 sqq. 

Activity, autonomous, degrees of, 92; 

free, 123; human, 221 sqq.; of the 

soul, St. Thomas on, 101; sources of, 

108 sq. 
Acts, human, in, 123 sqq., 133 sq., 242; 

and free will, 125 sq.; in conformity 

with man's physical nature; immoral 

acts, 149; St. Thomas on the goodness 

of, 131 

"Actus purus," 54, 57, 61 
Aesthetics, 244* 

"Aeterni Patris" (Encyclical), 18 
"Aeternitas," 52 
"Aevum," 52 
Agent, 66 sq. 

Aggression, justification for, 209 
Agnosticism, 75, 244* 
Albert the Great, 16 
Ambrose, on human rights vs. property 

rights, 231 
Analogical, 30 sq. 
Analogy, 78 

Anarchy, disguised as liberty, 188 
Andronicus of Rhodes, editor of the 

works of Aristotle, 27 
Anselm of Canterbury, argument for 

God's existence, 73 sq.; on truth, 36 
Appetition, 37 
Aquinas, Thomas, 14; and the active 

intellect, 97; on "animal judgment," 

124 sq.; on attitude and method of 
the philosopher, 20 sq.; on best form 



defined in the glossary. 

of government, 165; on the categories, 
41; definition of human soul, 103; 
definition of a political society, 165; 
on the Divine Substance, 79; on an 
end of ends, 113; on essence and 
existence, 57; and the "five ways," 
80 sqq.; on free choice, 136 sq.; on 
goodness and being, 37; on goodness 
in human acts, 131; "On the Govern- 
ance of Rulers," 173; on government, 
173-178; on intuitions of God, 77; 
on just and unjust forms of govern- 
ment, 174; on man's supernatural end, 
1 20 sq.; on manual labor, 222 sq.; 
on motivations, 138 sq.; on the natural 
law, 150 sq.; on the nature of law, 
148; on the Necessary Being, 84; on 
ownership, 231 sq.; on relative goods, 
i32sq.; on resistance to aggression, 
2iosq.; on right intention in waging 
war, 212 sq.; social philosophy of, 
228; on the soul after death, 101; on 
St. Anselm, 73 sq.; on submission to 
divine guidance, no; on substance, 
42, 43; on supreme happiness, 
1 14 sqq.; on time, 50; on the two 
kinds of unjust laws, 153-154; on 
universal order, 217 sqq.; on use of 
external goods, 219; on the will of 
God, 68 

Arbitration, court of, need of, 208 

Aristotle, 14, 16; on the categories, 41; 
on the demands of commutative 
justice, 162; on government, 171 sqq.; 
idea of society, 177; on the ideal state, 
173; on the meaning of virtue, 140; 
on motivation, 138; and natural 
evolution, 60; and origin of the soul, 
1 06; on origin of the State, 164; on 
practical wisdom, 122; on prime 
matter, 59; on substance, 42, 43; on 
supreme happiness, 120; on time, 50; 
on union of soul and body, 103 

Art, definition of, 112 

Atheism, 76 sq., 244* 

Atomism, 58, 244* 



259 



260 



Index 



Augustine, and being, 242; on a just 
war, 21 1 ; on peace, 205; on die 
problems of time, 50; on war in the 
service of peace, 213 

Authority, and freedom, union of, the 
final aim of political endeavor, 170; 
source of State, 165 

Autonomy, 127 sq.; of the absolutistic 
State, 181; of groups, 198; human, 
implied by the will, 239; individual 
as a cause of social oppression, 157 

Axiom, 244* 

Bacon, Francis, and certitude, 9 

Bacon, Roger, the "Doctor Mirabilis," 10 

Balmes, Jaime, on thinking well, 237 

Baxter, Richard, on gain, 233 

Beatific vision, i2osqq. 

Beatitude, ii9sqq.; natural and super- 
natural, i2osq.; perfect, and free will, 
126; perfect, St. Thomas on, 122 sq. 

Beauty, 35 sq. 

Becoming, 53, 64 

Behaviorism, 10, 244* 

Being, absolute, 71, 86; absolute, knowl- 
edge of, 75; and action, 109 sqq., 
221, 242, 243; analogy of, 29 sqq.; 
and beings, 79, 108, 238; categories 
of, 39-55; classes of, 40; the common 
denominator of all reality, 28; con- 
tingent and absolute, 57; contingent 
and necessary, 71; definition of, 28; 
dynamism of, 38; and essence, St. 
Thomas on, 57; and goodness, 131; 
ideal, 28; logical, 28; moral, 28; 
necessary, 84; origin of, 71-77; pos- 
sible, 28; potential and actual, 54; and 
reality, 27-107; relative and absolute 
of the pantheists, 129; as such, 28, 
34, 55, 81; transcendental, 40; tran- 
scendental attributes of, 34-39, 85 sq. 

Beings, animate, 91 sqq.; animate, life 
principle in, 97 sqq.; classes of, 88; 
regulation of, by eternal law, 148 

Bellarmine, on government, 178 sq. 

Benedict XV, peace proposals of, 208 

Bentham, J., on the end of government, 
i87sq. 

Bcrgson, Henri, 24 

Biology, stunted, 149 

Bismarck, on war, 215 

Bodies, nature of, 63 

Body, physical, 92 sq.; and soul, 91 sqq.; 
and soul, relationship in man and in 
brutes, 99 sqq. 

Bocthius, on perfection, 61 

Bourgeoisie vs. proletariat, 190 

Burke, Edmund, on the two foundations 
of law, 158 

Business, false motivation of, 220 



Calvinism and the State, 183 

Capital and labor, under Fascism, 194; 
partnership of, 236; separation of, 
224 sq. 

Capitalism, 230; and Karl Marx, igosq.; 
modern, 235; motivation of, 233 sq. 

Categories, sec Being 

Catholicism and absolutism, i82sq. 

Causal dependency, 80 

Causal relationship, 54, 56, 82 sq. 

Causality, 32, 71 sq., 78, 245*; divine, 
129 sq.; law of, 63-65, 71, 80 sq., 
109; principle of, denied, 9 

Cause, and effect, 65, 82 sq.; efficient, 
64, 65 sq., 81, 82 sq.; exemplary, 66, 
70 sq.; final, 38, 65 sqq.; first, 68 sq., 
71-77, 83; first, and the fatalists, 129; 
first and final, ultimate principle of 
action, 221; first and secondary, 
129 sq.; formal, 65 sq.; intrinsic and 
extrinsic, 66; material, 65 sq. 

Causes, infinite series of, 79 sq.; kinds 
of, 65-71; second, 68 sq.; secondary, 
129 sq. 

Chance, absolute and relative, 68; appeal 
to, rejected, 88 

Change, 51, 52 sq., 64, 81 sq.; accidental, 
60; substantial, 58 sq. 

Charity, laws of, as applying to inter- 
national relations, 205 

Christ, Kingdom of, 176 

Christianity, concepts of, as basis of gov- 
ernment, 176 sq.; and Germanism, 195 

Church, direct and indirect power of, 
176 sq.; and State, 182 sq.; and State 
and Fascism, 194; the true function of, 
147; universal as an all-embracing 
community, 146 sq. 

Citizenship, Aristotle on, 171 sqq.; limits 
of, in totalitarian state, 195 

Civilization, and the definition of man, 

, M 
Class struggle, 190 sq., 191 sq. 

Classical political economy, 245* 

Classless society, of Karl Marx, 190 sq. 

Claudel, Paul, 62 

Coalition, right of, 226 

Cognition, faculty of, in rational beings, 
93 sqq. 

Coke, Sir Edward, and the "Petition of 
Right," I79sq. 

Collectivism, 189 sqq., 230; and justice, 
162 

Common good, 145 sq.; the employer, a 
functionary of, 225; end of human 
associations, 200 sqq.; international, 
the end of commonwealth of nations, 
201; promotion of, 197 sqq.; threat- 
ened by State's encroachment upon 
natural rights, 184 



Index 



261 



Common ownership, 232 sq. 

Common sense, and first principles, 32; 

and the law of causality, 69; and 

metaphysics, 29 
Commonwealth of Nations, 200-209; 

medieval, 9 

Communism and socialism, 189-193 
"Communist Manifesto," 190 
Comte, Auguste, failure of, n sq.; vs. 

metaphysics, 25 
Conscience, definition of, 151; rights of, 

in resistance, Aquinas on, 177 
Consent, of the governed, 187; required 

for valid political and social associa- 
tions, 165 
Constitution, American, and Locke's 

"Second Treatise," 184 
Constitutional monarchy, 174 
Consumer cooperatives, 235 sq. 
Contemplation and action, 120 sqq. 
Contmgence, Contingency, 245* 
Contingency, 65; and necessity, 41, 69, 

83 sq. 

Contradiction, principle of, 32 sq. 
Corporate State, 195-199 
Corporations, Fascist, 194; national 

socialist, 195 

Corporatism, medieval, 229 
"Corpus Christianum," 177 
Cosmological proof, 84 
Cosmology, 27, 245* 
Creation, 64 sq.; theory of, io6sq. 
Crisis, 241 
Criticism, 245* 
Custom, respect for, 154 



Dante, "Monarchia," 181 

Deism, 246* 

Deliberation, i26sq., 131 sq. 

De Maistre, Joseph, criticism of French 

Revolution, 155-156 
Democracy, i; Aristotle on, 172; 

"Jefifersonian" and "Rousseauan," 171; 

Plato on, 1 66 sqq., 170 
Descartes, 14, 16; on certitude, 9; ex- 

treme dualism of, 102 sq.; failure of, 

12; and the nature of mathematical 

bodies, 45 

Design, argument from, 86 sqq. 
Despotism, basis of "Divine Right" 

theory, iSosq. 
Determinism, 246*; of Kantian philoso- 

phy, 128; material vs. spiritual, 129; 

of nature, Kant on, 127; rejected, 



Dialectic, 246* 

Dionysius the Areopagitc, 70; on the 

soul's immortality, 99 
Distributism, 235 



"Divine Right of Kings," 179, 180 sqq.; 

and John Locke, 184 
"Divini Redemptoris," 161 
Doing and making, 112 
Dualism, 246*; psychological, 102 
Duration, 51 sq. 
Dynamism, 58, 246* 

Economic activity, ends of, 220 
Economic goods, responsibility for equi- 
table distribution of, 160 
Economic liberalism, 226; and Calvin- 
ism, 183 

Economic philosophy, 217-236 
Economic theory, dependence of, on 

metaphysical and moral norms, 220 
Economic totalitarianism and private 

property, 235 

Economics and ethics, 217221 
Education, under communism, 192; 
importance of, for the citizen, 172; 
progressive, 5; state, i82sq. 
Emanation, theory of, 105 
Emotions and will, 137 sqq. 
Empiricism, 8, 9, 10, 246*; logical, n 
Employer, and employee relationship in 
corporate state, 198; responsibility of, 
1 60 

End, of ends, 113-123; of State and 
society, same as that of the individual, 
176 
Ends, freedom of choice with regard to, 

132 sq. 

Engels, Fried rich, and Karl Marx, 190 sq. 
"Ens a se," 71; and "entia ab alio," 57 
"Entia ab alio," 71 
Epicurus, 14 
Epistemology, 247* 

Equality, and absolutistic state, 182; of 
all men with regard to natural rights, 

155 

Equivocal, 30 sq. 
Error, 39 
Essence, and existence 55-58, 73, 84; 

and existence of God, 75, 89; general 

and individual, 55 sq. 
Eternal law, source of state authority, 

165; St. Thomas on, 148 
Eternity in relation to time, 51 sq. 
Ethics, 14, 29, 108-140, 247*; and 

psychology, 46 
Eudemonism, 247* 
Evil, 35, 130 sq., 132; ontological, 

physical, moral, 39; the privation of 

reality, 37 
Evolution, cosmic, and the idea of 

finality, 88 sq.; historic, Nietzsche on, 

1 69-1 70 

Excluded middle, principle of, 32 sq. 
Existence, 52, 55 sqq. 



262 Index 

Existential philosophy, 242 
Expediency, Bentham on, 188 
Experimental science, 3 
Extension, 45 sq. 



Faith, 72; philosophical, 74; preambles 

of, 75 

Falsehood, 35 
Family, government control of, fostered 

by communism, 192; relation of, to 

human person, 155; and theory of 

origin of the state, 164 
Fascism, 193 sqq. 
Fcchner, G. T., 103 
Fideism, 247* 
Finality, 142, 247*; and the "fifth way/' 

86 sqq.; internal and external, 87 
First Mover, 81 sq. 
First Principles, 32 sqq. 
"Five Ways" (of demonstration of God's 

existence), 80-90 
Form, external, 47; scientific significance 

of, 47 
Founding Fathers, influence of Christian 

theism on, 155 
Free Choice, 130-140 
Freedom, 44; and authority, Plato on 

170; degrees of, 135 sq.; human, 

123-130; and nature, 112, 127 sq. 



General strike and morality, 227 

Generation, and corruption, 83 sq.; 
theory of, 106 

Germany under National Socialism, 
194 sq. 

Gill, Eric, on property ownership, 235 

Gilson, Etienne, igsq.; The Unity of 
Philosophical Experience, 25 

Gnosticism, 247* 

God, attributes of, 81 sqq.; the author of 
human freedom, 128 sqq.; autono- 
mous nature of, 144; contemplation of, 
limitations of, I2osq.; dcmonstrability 
of, 71 sqq., 74; essence and existence 
identical in, 57; existence of, 71-90; 
existence of (demonstration), 77-90; 
first and final cause, 22; and the 
human state, 194; possession of, the 
ultimate end of the state, 176; as 
pure actuality, 61; 

Goethe, on the immortality of the soul, 
100 

Good, relative and absolute, 126, 137; 
as such and free will, 126; supreme, 
1 14 sqq., 137 sq. 

Goodness, 35 sq., 37 sqq., 130 sq. 

Goods, distribution of, 160 sq.; economic, 
217 sq.; external and internal, 219; 



material and spiritual, St. Thomas on, 

r 1 6; material, vs. supreme, 218 
Government, divine, the pattern of all 

government, 175; just and unjust, St. 

Thomas on, 174; principles and formi 

of, 165-199 

Grace and nature, 121, 147, 243 
Gravity, law of, 82 
Guilds, organs of a corporate social body, 

228 sq. 

Habit, 138 sq. 

Habits, 46 sq. 

Haecker, Theodor, 20 

Happiness, 115, 118, 119 sqq.; false 

ideas of, 117; pursuit of, 156; 

supreme, 114 

Hedonism, 248*; error of, ii7sq. 
Hegel, on the state, 164; on the state 

as source of all rights, 156; on the 

supreme importance of the state, 

189 sq. 
Heidegger, Martin, and the end of 

being, 242 

History, the lesson of, 240 
Hobbes, on naturalness of war, 214 sq.; 

on the origin of the state, 164; and 

the totalitarian state, 181 
Holbach, 14 

"Homo oeconomicus," 234 
Humanity, each man's stake in the de- 
velopment of, 145; nature of, 143 sq. 
Human relations, philosophy as a guide 

in, 243 
Hume, David, and causality, 69; on 

material qualities, 47 
Hylomorphism, 58 sqq., 66; and the 

mind-body problem, 96 

Idealism, 8, 248*; dialectical of Hegel, 

190; misdirected, 241 
Ideas, eternal, 70; eternal, necessity of, 

for knowledge, 94; Platonic, 43, 86; 

universal, 43 sq. 
Identity, principle of, 32 
Immanence and transcendence, 119 
Immorality, definition of, 149 
Immortality of the human soul, 98 sqq. 
Independence, Declaration of, 155 sq.; 

inheritor of medieval political doctrine, 

1 80; and Locke's "Second Treatise of 

Government," 184 
Indeterminism, rejected, 136 sq. 
Individualism, 230; excessive, 157; and 

justice, 161 sq.; liberal, 183-189; 

liberal, opposed by Hegel, 189 
Individuality, 43 sq. 
Individuation, 43 sq. 
Inertia, principle of, 82 
Infinity, mathematical, 52 



Index 



263 



ntellcct, 124, 147; active, 96 sq.; nature 
of, 95 sq.; and will, 124 

ntellectual appetite, in, 114 

ntellcctual knowledge, 95 sqq. 

ntellectual soul, center of human acts, 
113 

'Intellectus agens," 96 sq. 

ntelligibihty, 34 

'International" (I, II, III), 192 sq. 

nternational armed force, need of, 208 

nternational law, 200 sqq.; positive, 213 

nternational organizations, necessity of, 
207 sq.; for peace, 214 

nternational relations, only sound basis 
of, 200-209 

nternational treaties, validity of, 206 

^ternationalism, abstract, 203; unreal- 
istic nature of, 203 

intervention, war of, 210, 211 

^rationalism, rule of, 193 sqq. 

isolation, national vs. the common good, 
201 

fames I, and "Divine Right," 156, 179 

[etferson, Thomas, and the social prob- 
lem, 235 

fudgment, fallibility, 150; in lower 
animals, 125; responsibility for forma- 
tion of, 133 

fust cause for war, 211 sq. 

fust war, requisites, 210 sqq. 

fustice, 159-162, 209 sqq.; commutative 
and distributive, 160, 162; definition 
of, 159; end of, 159; international, 
206; and peace, 210 sq.; social, Pius 
XI on, 198; social, requirements of, 
1 60 sq. 

Kant, Immanuel, 75; and the argument 
from contingency, 84; categories of 
being, 40 sq.; and causality, 69; 
erroneous concept of causality, 78; 
failure of, n sq.; and die existence 
of God, 74, 76; and order, 48; and 
political freedom, 187; on the rational 
appetite, 127 sq.; on the sin of war, 
214 

Knower and known, relation between, 
93 sq.; union of, 95 

Knowledge, 72 sq.; definition, 93 sqq.; 
intuitive, 75; pitfalls in search for, 7; 
and wisdom, not final ends, 118 

"Komintern," establishment of, 193 

Kremer, R., 23 

Labor, and capital, 224 sq.; definition of, 
221; dignity of, 221-229; intellectual 
and manual, 222; Pius XI on, 225 



Labor market, 227 sq.; establishment of, 
224 sq. 

"Laissez faire," i; reasons for acceptance 
of, in U. S., 1 86 

Lamettrie, 14 

Land tenure, 224 

Law, 189; definition of, 147 sqq.; of 
nature, difficulties of application and 
realization of, 150; Roman, certain 
concepts of, as sources of "Divine 
Right" theory, i8osq. 

"Leader principle," as anchor of author- 
ity of the totalitarian state, 194 sq. 

League of Nations, weakness of, 208 

Leibniz, 16; dualism of, 103; on per- 
ennial philosophy, 17; and Sufficient 
Reason, 34; "theory of involution" 
of, 105 

Lenin, advocate of civil wars, 192 

Leo XIII, on attitude toward neo- 
thomism, 20 sq.; encyclical letters of, 
196; on the need of natural unions, 
226; and the neo-thomistic movement, 
1 8, 19; on state help for wage earners, 
226 

Liberal Individualism, 183-189; failure 
of, 188-189 

Liberalism, 2, 187 sq.; economic, 226; 
source of opposition to natural law, 
I56sq. 

Liberty, as conceived of in the American 
Declaration of Independence, 156; in 
a democracy, Plato's idea of, 167-168; 
not the end of social life, 188; and 
slavery, 168 

"Liberum arbitrium," 136 

Life, active vs. contemplative, 122; 
human (meaning of), 121 sq. 

Life Principle, 91 sqq.; in man and other 
animals, 97-101 

Locke, John, on the origin of the state, 
164; on sense qualities, 47; and the 
Western tradition, i84sq. 

Logic, 29, 248* 

Logical Empiricism, 248* 

Logical Order, 32, 33 

Luther, Martin, 25; and human reason, 
6 

Lutheranism and obedience to the state, 
183 

Luxembourg, Rosa, advocate of civil 
wars, 192 



Man, 28; bound by natural law, I48sq.; 
chief accent on, 220; definition of, 91; 
the ground of his lasting happiness, 
1 15 sqq.; as an individual, 142; nature 
of, 4, 90-107; his need of man, 142; 
and the order in the moral universe, 



264 



Index 



iiosqq.; as a person, 142; proncncss 
to misjudge his own nature, 143; the 
rational animal, 15; significance of, 
238 sq.; social stages, 145 sq.; and 
Society, 141-147; and the State, 
162-199, 177; the subject and object 
of philosophy, 14 

Manichaeism, 248* 

Maritain, Jacques, 19; on atheism, 76 sq. 

Mantain, Raissa, Les Grandes Amities, 
20 sq. 

Marx, Karl, and Hegelian philosophy, 
190 sq. 

Marxism, 190 

Material welfare of citizens, St. Thomas 
on, 175 

Materialism, 248*; dialectical of Marx, 
i9osq.; and "scientific" socialism, 
189 sqq.; unrealistic nature of, 143 

Mathematics, 16 

Matter, continuity of, 62; and form, 
58-63; and form vs. soul and body, 
93 sqq. 

Means and ends, 87 sq.; of economic 
good, 218 

Mercier, Cardinal, 19 

Metaphysics, 14, 16, 27-107, 249*; 
and economics, 2i7sq.; and ethics, 
io8~ui; real and unreal, 25 

Middle Ages, dignity of labor in, 224; 
influence of political doctrine of, 180; 
philosophical thought in, 8; political 
administration in, 181 

Might and right, identical in Hegel's 
political philosophy, 189 

Mill, James, 161 

Mind, 43; divine, St. Thomas on, 86; 
and time, 50 

Mind-body problem, 96 sq. 

Minimum wage, Leo XIII on, 226; 
when it is not justified, 227 

"Mit brennender Sorge," 207 

Monarchy, absolute sources of the prin- 
ciple of, 181 

Monastic Orders and communism, 192 

Money economy, 224 sq. 

Monism, 249*; psychological, 102 

Monopoly, 234 

Moral habits, 139 

Moral law, 147-158, 217 sq.; appeal to, 
in Papal documents, 196 sqq.; basis of 
unity of human race, 201 sq.; ignored 
by capitalism, 234; and war, 209-216 

Moral order and the order of reality, 109 

Moral philosophy, 126 sq.; basic problem 
of, 111; essential structure of, 131; a 
guide to proper ends, 109; and justice, 
1 60 

Moral values, 108-140 



MoralitV- 



definition of. Ti2r Hr- 



termined by human nature, 149; first 

principle of, i5osq.; individual and 

collective, 145 sq.; Kant on, 127 sq.; 

source of, 148; the voice of God, 119 
Motion, 45, 50, 51, 54; argument from, 

8 1 sq.; law of, 82; and life principle, 

92 

Motivation (of will), 135 sq. 
Mussolini, Benito, and Fascism, 194; on 

the fascist state, 164 



National Socialism, 193 sqq. 

Nationalism, extreme, 202 sq.; and 
Hegel, 189; imperialist, means and 
ends of, 193 sqq.; opposed to world 
unity, 202 

Natural law, 147-158; appeal to, in 
Papal documents, 196 sqq.; and pa- 
triotism, 203 sq.; St. Thomas on, 148; 
the universal standard of morality, 
205 sqq. 

Natural rights, 230 sq.; as basis of asso- 
ciation, 200; include right to work, 
226; state's encroachment on, 184 

Natural Theology, 249* 

Naturalism, 249*; unrealistic nature of, 

M3 

Nature, of animals, 125; and freedom, 
127 sq.; and grace, 121, 147, 243; 
human, the basis of social rights and 
obligations, 152; human, the norm of 
morality, 149; human, realistic view 
of, 144; order of, interpreted by the 
human mind, 148; order of, St. 
Thomas on, 118; state of, and John 
Locke, 185; universal laws of, no 

Necessity, 249* 

Needs, human, only justifiable basis of 
economic activities, 221 

Neo-scholasticism (Neo-Thomism), 18 

Newton, first law of motion of, 82 

Nietzsche, Friedrich, 15; and atheism, 
76; on war, 215 

Nihilism, 249*; moral, n 

Nothingness, 37 

Noumena, 41 

Noumcnon, 249* 

"Niirnberg Laws," 195 

Occam, William of, "Double Truth" of, 

9; and human reason, 6 
Occasionalism, 102 sq.; and free will, 

68 sq. 
Old Hegelians and Young Hegelians, 

189 sq. 

Oligarchy, Plato on, 166 
Oneness, 35 sq. 
Ontological argument, 73 sq.; objections 



Index 



26 5 



Ontological order, 32, 33 

Ontologism, 72, 250* 

Ontology, 27, 28, 250* 

Order, 48; principle of, no; theoretical 
and practical, 113 

Ownership, absolute, 234; absolute and 
relative, 230 sqq.; absolute and rela- 
tive, John Locke on, 185; common, 
232 sq.; and Marxism, 191; national- 
ization of, 235; rights and obligations, 
229-236; of soil, 192 



Pacifism, 215 

Pantheism, 250*; and common sense, 98 

"Passio," 52 sqq. 

Passion, 47 

Passions, unrealistic nature of, 215; and 

will, 1 37 sqq. 
Patriot, the good, 204 
Patriotism, 203 sq. 
Peace, and justice, 210 sq.; unity of, 

St. Thomas on, 175 
Peace Proposals (Benedict XV), 208 
Perfection, 54; and being, 37; degrees 

of, 85 sq. 
Performance, unions of ("Leistungsge- 

meinschaftcn"), 195 
Person, definition of, 44; human, 159; 

human, uniqueness of, 223 
Personality, 43 sq.; degrees of, 135; final 

end of good government, 170; finite 

and infinite, 44; fullest realization of, 

141 sqq.; value of, in relation to 

material value, 218 sq. 
Phenomena, 41 
Phenomenalism, 250*; of Kant, 77; at 

odds with common sense, 98 
Phenomenon, 250* 
"Philosophies" (French) rationalistic 

spirit of, 155 

Philosophia perennis, 17, 18, 20 
Philosophy, definition of, 5; perennial, 

17; and science, I5sq., 16, 24; and 

theology, 23 
Physics, 1 6 
Physiocrats, 250*; French, 186; and 

justice, 161 
Pius XI, on economic despotism, 234; 

encyclical letters of, 196; on the 

guilds, 229; on international justice, 

205; on labor, 227 sq.; on the purpose 

of human society, 207; Quadragesima 

Anno, 198; on the rights of man, 207; 

on social justice, i6osq.; on true and 

false peace, 214 
Pius XII, on the cause of disunity, 205; 

on justice, 205 sqq. 
Planned economy, 225 
Plato, and the doctrine of ideas, 43; 



dualism of, 102; idea of society, 177; 
on the ideal commonwealth, 173; law 
of equilibrium of, 12; on the nature 
of the soul, 100; and the "realm of 
ideas," 86; "Republic," and "Laws," 
165-171; and soul's immortality, 98; 
and theory of transmigration, 105; on 
the types of states, 166-169; on the 
uses of philosophy, 13 
Plotinus, and the theory of emanation, 

105 
Pluralism, 250*; vocational and regional, 

198 

Police state, 182 
Political liberalism and Galvanism, 

1 83 sqq. 
Political philosophy, 141-216; roots of 

Aquinas', 176 
Political science, a subdivision of moral 

philosophy, 163 
Political theory (medieval), 165 
Positive law, 200; secondary to natural 

law, 152 sq. 
Positivism, n, 24, 251*; historical, 158; 

rise of, 10 sq. 
Potency, 38, 59 sq.; active and passive, 

53 sq. 

Pragmatism, 251* 
Pre-cxistence, theory of, 105 
Preventive war, 212 
Prime matter, 59 sq. 
Privation, 39 

Producer and consumer, false relation- 
ship between, 224 

Production, and consumption, adjust- 
ment between, 225; means of, 191; 
for profit, and degradation of labor, 
224 

Progress, not an indication of increasing 
knowledge of natural law, 151; of 
society, Adam Smith on, 186 
Proletariat vs. bourgeoisie, 190 
Property, individual and social, 230 sqq.; 
private, 229 sqq.; private, abuse of, 
234; redistribution of, by the solidar- 
ists, 235; socialization of, 231 
Property rights, 231; and John Locke, 

185 

Protagoras on God's existence, 75 
Protestantism, and the absolute state, 
i82sq.; and rights of private property, 
232 sq. 
Psychology, rational, 27; and 

metaphysics, 46 

Psychophysical parcllelism, 103 
Puritanism and capitalism, 232 sq. 
Puritans, medieval heritage of, 180 

"Quadragcsimo Anno," 160, 225, 228, 
229, 230, 234 



266 



Index 



Quality, 46 sq. 

Qualities, primary and secondary, 47 

Quantity, 45 sq., 49 

Quesnay, 161 

Race, human, interdependence of, mem- 
bers of, 142 JL 

Racism, opposition of, to inoividualism, 
193 sqq. 

Rational appetite, 38, 132 sq.; and hap- 
piness, 220; Kant on, 127 

Rationalism, 6, 8, 10 

Realism, 251*; political, 163 

Realistic philosophy, 237 

Reality, 8, 239; order of, 219; order of 
and the moral order, 109; the root bed 
of philosophy, 13 

Reason, 42, 175; divine, all-pervasive 
nature of, 112; and existence of God, 
72; practical, 74; source of moral 
action, 147; theoretical and practical, 
in, 127 sq., 131; and will, 134 

Receptivity, 63 sq.; privation, 60 

Relation, 47 sq.; logical and real, 48 

Relativity, 71, 239 sq. 

Religion, and economic activity, 233; 
mission of, 241 

Renaissance, expansion of thought in, 8 

"Rerum Novarum," 226 

Resistance, right of, i77sq. 

Revelation, 23; as an aid to an under- 
standing of happiness, i2osq. 

Ricardo, David, 161; and individualism, 
184; Principles of Political Economy, 
185 sq. 

Riches, natural and artificial, St. Thomas 
on, 115 sq. 

Rights, Bill of, reaflirmation of the 
validity of the natural law, 156; civic, 
derived from natural law, 165; 
human, 152-158; human, basis of 
justice, 162; human, grounded in 
natural law, 159; inalienable, 154 sq.; 
individual, Aristotle on, 171; of Man, 
Declaration of, 155; Virginia, Declara- 
tion of, inheritor of medieval political 
doctrine, 1 80 

Rousseau, J. J., on atheism, 77; opposi- 
tion to natural law, I56sq.; social 
contract theory of, 164 

St. Paul, 70; on the natural law, 

149-150 

Sanctions, need of, 208 
Schiller, Friedrich, on moral perfection, 

136 

Schmidt, Wilhelm, 151 
Scholasticism, decline of, 9 sq. 
Schopenhauer, on the soul's immortality, 

99 



Schwarz, Balduin, 15 

Science, and the concept of essence, 56; 
influence of, on the state, 182; 
physico-mechanical, limitations of, 
149; and positivism, 10; and theory 
of matter and form, 62 sq.; and 
wisdom, 8 

Sciences, hierarchy of, 15 

"Scientific" socialism, philosophic basis 
of, 189 

Scientism, 24, 25 

Second matter, 59 sq. 

Selden, John, on the Law of Nature, 180 

Self-interest as basis of social values, 
Smith and Ricardo on, 186 

Selfishness, false basis for social life, 188 

Semanticism, u, 251* 

Sense knowledge, 42; extent of, 95 

Sense qualities, 47 

Shaw, Bernard, Too True to Be Good, 
3sq. 

Skepticism, 2 sq., 6, 251*; cause of, 7 

Smith, Adam, and individualism, 184; 
The Wealth of Nations, 1 85 sq. 

Social classes and Karl Marx, 190 

Social contract (compact), 163 sq.; 
Locke on, 185 

Social justice, Pius XI on, 198 

Social order, reconstruction of, under 
the corporate state, 195 sqq. 

Social organism, proper care of, 161; 
unreality of, apart from its individual 
members, 157 

Social performance, basis of individual, 
175 

Social reconstruction, Pius XI on, 227; 
problems of, 196 sqq. 

Social security in medieval guilds, 228 

Socialism and communism, 189-193 

Socialization, of property, 231; in the 
writing of Marx and Engcls, 191 sq. 

Society, communistic, of Karl Marx, 192; 
corporate, in Middle Ages, 228; nature 
of human, 145; organization of, in 
corporate state, 198 sq.; primitive, 200 

Sociology, roots of Aquinas', 176 

Soliclarism, 195-199, 197, 235; the 
remedy for class struggle, 229 

Solidarity, moral and spiritual on the 
human level, 145 

Sophocles, "Antigone," 152-153 

Soul, and body, 102-104; and body, 
vital union of, 93; definition of, 
92 sq.; human, 97-101; human, 
capacities of, 240; human, goods re- 
lated to, n6sq.; human, origin of, 
104 sqq. 

Sovereignty, limitations of, 201; of 
people, i79sq. 

Space, 45, 49 



Index 



2 6 7 



Speech, 142 

Spengler, Oswald, 14; The Decline of 
the West, 3; on war, 215 

Spinoza, 16 

Spiritualism, 143 sq., 251* 

Spirituality, individuality in, 104; of 
soul, 99 

Spykman, N. J., on foreign policy, 203 

Stalin, Joseph, and dissolution of the 
Kommitern, 193 

State, absolute, vs. the corporate, 199; 
and Church, origin of, conflict be- 
tween, 181; corporate, 199; duty of, 
toward labor, 225 sq.; and justice, 
1 60; liberal, as conceived by the 
American republic, 186; moral norms 
and standards of, 200 sqq.; origin of, 
163-165; reasons for origin of, 144; 
relation to the human person, 155; 
social problems of, 162-199; and 
society, 141-216; and society, true 
functions of, 147 

State omnipotence, and Hegel, 189; and 
social equality, 181-182 

State-Personality, of Hegel, 164; human 
rights absorbed by, 157 

State socialism, 189 

Strike, defensive and offensive, 227; 
general and morality, 227 

Suarez, on government, 178 sq. 

Subject and object, relationship in 
knowledge, 93 sq.; relation between, 

95 

Substance, 41 sq.; and accidents, 41 sqq.; 
complete and incomplete, 104; com- 
posite, 44; divine, St. Thomas on, 
79; and essence, 55; primary and 
secondary, 43; simple, 44; subrational, 
irrational, rational, 44 

Substantial form, 59 sq. 

Substantiality (of soul), 98 sq. 

Sufficient reason, principle of, 32 sq., 63 

"Summi Pontificatus," 206 

Suppositum, 44 

Supreme Good, 219 sq.; conformity to, 
a test of nations, 204 

Tawney, R. H., on the rise of capitalism, 

232-233 

Teleological proof, 86 sqq. 
"Tempus," 52 
Theism, 252* 

Theodicy, 7, 27, 71-90, 252* 
Theology, 242; dialectical, 7; natural, 

7, 22 sq., 27, 71-90; the task of, 23 
Things-in-themselvcs, see Noumena 
"Third Reich," dream of, 194 sq. 
"Third Rome" (Tcrza Roma), dream 

of, 194 
Thomism, 18; and the "active intellect," 



96; on human freedom, 129; and 

private property, 230 
Thomistic vs. Kantian ideas on human 

freedom, 128 

Time, 45, 49 sqq.; divisibility of, 51 
Timocracy, Plato on, 166 
"Total War," 213 sq. 
Totalitaria^ State, nature of, 193 sqq.; 

relation to "Divine Right" idea, 

I56sq. 
Totalitarianism, i; economic and private 

property, 235; source of the theory 

of, 1 93 sqq. 
Trade, regarded as a Christian virtue, 

, 23 ? 

Tradition, respect for, 154 
Transcendence, divine, 129 
Transcendent, Transcendental, 252* 
Transcendental Idealism, 252* 
Transmigration (of soul), 105 
Treaties, international, validity of, 206 
Treitschke, Heinrich von, on war, 215 
Truth, 18, 35 sq.; contemplation of, 123; 

double, of Occam, 9; eternal, 36; 

love of, 22; ontological, 35 sq., 38 
Tyranny, arising out of democracy, 

1 67 sqq.; of Fascism and National 

Socialism, 193 sqq. 

"Ubi Arcano Dei," 214 

Ugliness, 36 

Unity and multiplicity, 85 

Universals, 252* 

Universe, man's position in, 239; order 

in, 90; structure of, 89; Thomistic 

view of, 223 
Univocal, 30 sq. 
Utilitarianism, 187 sq. 
Utility, Bentham on, 188 

Value, 130-140 

Values, 115 sqq.; scale of, 219, 242 

"via ncgationis," 79 

Vice, 39 

Virtue, life of, the end of the state, 176 

Vocational groups, 227 sq.; in the cor- 
porate state, 198 sq. 

"Volksgcist," claimed to be the source 
of positive law, 158 

"Volksstaat" and national socialism, 
I94sq. 

War, aerial, 213; defensive and offensive, 
209 sq., 21 1 ; glorification of, 195; of 
intervention, 210, 211; just and un- 
just, 210 sqq.; and the moral law, 
209-216; preventive, 212 

War guilt, 211 sq. 

Wealth, concentration of, 234; and the 
state, 161 



268 Index 

Weber, Max, on modern businessmen, morality, 124; indctermination of, 

220 150; related to goodness, 37 

Western Civilization, foundations of, 152 Wisdom, practical, Aristotle on, 122 

Western Tradition, 2, 204; convictions Work, 221 sqq. 

embodied in, 163; decreasing confi- Workers, rights of, 226 sqq. 

dence in, 3; of government, 178 sqq.; Workingman, duty of state toward, 161 

and the New World, 184 World Soul, 102 

Whigs, medieval heritage of, 180 World Spirit, Hegel and, 189 

Will, freedom of, io8sq., 125 sqq., World State of Karl Marx, 191 

128 sq., 132 sqq.; freedom of, and Wundt, Wilhelm, 103 



