Philosophies Ancient and Modern 


SCHOPENHAUER 


NOTE 


As a consequence of^lie success of the scries of Rdiglons 
Ancient and Modern^ Messrs. Constable have decided to issue 
a set of similar primers, wit.h brief introductions, lists of dates, 
and selected authorities, presenting to the wider public the 
salient features of the Philosophies of Greece and Rome and of 
the Middle Ages, as well as of modern Europe. They will 
appear in the same handy Shilling volumes, with neat cloth 
bindings and paper envelopes, which have proved so attractive 
in the case of the Eelu/ions. The writing in each case will be 
confided to an eminent authority, and one who has already 
proved himself capable of scholarly yet popular exposition 
within a small compass. 
Among the first volumes to a])pear will be :— 

Early Greek Philosopiiy. By A. W. Benn, author of The Philo- 
sophy of Greece, Rationalism in the Nineteenth Century. 

Stoicism. By Professor vSt. George Stock, author of Deduc- 
tive Logic, editor of the A2'>ology of Plato, etc. 

Plato. By Professor A. E. Taylor, St. Andrews University, 
author of 71ie Problem of Conduct. 

Scliolasticism. By Father Rickaj^y, S.J. 
Hobbes. By Professor A. E. Taylok. 
Locke. By Professor Alexandi-jr, of Owens College. 
Comte and Mil. By T. AV^iuttakki!., author of The 
NeoplcUonistn, Apollonius of Tyana and other jKv.say.s\ 

Herbert Spencer. By W. H. Hudson, author of An Intro- 
dmtion to Spencer's Philosophy. 

Schopenliauer. ByT. WiiiTTAKMii. 

Berkeley. By Professor CAiMPr.Er.L Ftiahei:, I ). C. L. , TvL. 1 ), 
Bergsen. By Fall i or Tyrrell. 


SCHOPENHAUER 


By 

THOMAS WHITTAKER 

AUTHOR OV ' COMTF. AND MILL,' KTC. 


LONDON 

ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE e^f CO Ltd 

1909 


CONTENTS 

CVfAV. 

1. Life and Writings, . 

II. Theory of Knowledge, . 

III. Metaphysics of the Will, 

IV. ^Esthetics, .... 
V. Etjiics, 

VI. HisToiiiCAL Significance, 
Selected Woeks, 


SCHOPENHAUEIt 


CHAPTER I 

LIFE ANB WHITINGS 

Arthur Schopenhauer may be distinctively 
described as the greatest philosophic writer of 
his century. So evident is this that he has 
somethnes been regarded as having more import- 
ance in literature than in philosophy; but this 
is an error. As a metaphysician he is second to 
no one since Kant. Others of his age have sur- 
passed him in system and in comprehensiveness ; 
but no one has had a firmer grasp of the essen- 
tial and fundamental problems of philosophy. 
On the theory of knowledge, the nature of reality, 
and the meaning of the beautiful and the good, 
he has solutions to offer that are all results of a 
characteristic and original way of thinking. 

In one respect, as critics have noted, his spirit 
is different from that of European philosophy in 
general. What preoccupies him in a special way 
is the question of evil in the world. Like the 
A I 


SCHOPENHAUER 


philosophies of the East, emerging as they do 
without break from religion, Schopenhauer's 
philosophy is in its outcome a doctrine of redemp- 
tion from sin. The name of pessimism commonly 
applied to it is in some respects misleading, 
though it was his own term ; but it is correct if 
understood as he explained it. As he was accus- 
tomed to insist, his final ethical doctrine coincides 
with that of all the religions that aim, for their 
adepts or their elect, at deliverance from * this 
evil world.' But, as the ' world-fleeing ' religions 
have their mitigations and accommodations, so 
also has the philosophy of Schopenhauer. At 
various points indeed it seems as if a mere 
change of accent would turn it into optimism. 

This preoccupation does not mean indifference 
to the theoretical problems of philosophy. No 
one has insisted more strongly that the end of 
philosophy is pure truth, and that only the few 
who care about pure truth have any concern with 
it. But for Schopenhauer the desire for specula- 
tive truth does not by itself suffice to explain 
the impulse of philosophical inquiries. On one 
side of his complex character, he had more 
resemblance to the men who turn from the world 
to religion, like St. Augustine, than to the normal 
type of European thinker, represented pre-emi- 

2 


LIFE AND WRITINGS 


nently by Aristotle. He was a temperamental 
pessimist, feeling from the first the trouble of 
existence ; and here he finds the deepest motive 
for the desire to become clear about it. He saw 
in the world, what he felt in himself, a vain effort 
after ever new objects of desire which give no 
permanent satisfaction ; and this view, becoming 
predominant, determined, not indeed all the ideas 
of his philosophy, but its general complexion as 
a ' philosophy of redemption.' 

With his pessimism, personal misfortunes had 
nothing to do. He was, and always recognised 
that he was, among the most fortunately placed 
of mankind. He does not hesitate to speak 
sometimes of his own happiness in complete 
freedom from the need to apply himself to any 
compulsory occupation. This freedom, as he has 
put gratefully on record, he owed to his father, 
Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer, who was a rich 
merchant of Danzig, where the philosopher was 
born on the 22nd of February 1788. Both his 
parents were of Dutch ancestry. His mother, 
Johanna Schopenhauer, won celebrity as a novel- 
ist; and his sister, Adele, also displayed some 
literary talent. Generalising from his own case, 
Schopenhauer holds that men of intelligence 
derive their character from their father and 

3 


SCHOPENHAUER 

their intellect from their mother. With his 
mother, however, he was not on sympathetic 
terms, as may be read in the biographies. His 
father intended him for a mercantile career, and 
with this view began to prepare him from the 
first to be a cosmopolitan man of the world. The 
name of Arthur was given to him because it is 
spelt alike in the leading European languages. 
He was taken early to France, where he resided 
from 1797 to 1799, learning French so well that 
on his return he had almost forgotten his German. 
Portions of the years 1803 to 1804 were spent 
in England, France, Switzerland, and Austria. In 
England he was three months at a Wimbledon 
boarding-school kept by a clergyman. This ex- 
perience he found extremely irksome. He after- 
wards became highly proficient in English : was 
always pleased to be taken for an Englishman, 
and regarded both the English character and 
intelligence as on the whole the first in Europe ; 
but all the more deplorable did he find the oppres- 
sive pietism which was the special form taken in 
the England of that period by the reaction against 
the French Pievolution. He is never tired of 
denouncing that phase of 'cold superstition,' 
the dominance of which lasted during his life- 
time ; for the publication of Mill's Liberty and of 
4 


LIFE AND WRITINGS 


Darwin's Origin of Species, which may be con- 
sidered as marking the close of it, came only the 
year before his death. 

The only real break in the conformity of 
Schopenhauer's circumstances to his future career 
came in 1805, when he was placed in a merchant's 
office at Hamburg, whither his father had 
migrated in disgust at the annexation of his 
native Danzig, then under a republican con- 
stitution of its own, by Prussia in 1793. Soon 
afterwards his father died ; but out of loyalty he 
tried for some time longer to reconcile himself 
to commercial life. Finding this at length im- 
possible, he gained permission from his mother, 
in 1807, to leave the ofHce for the gymnasium. 
At this time he seems to have begun his classical 
studies, his education having hitherto been ex- 
clusively modern. They were carried on first at 
Gotha and then at Weimar. In 1809 he entered 
the university of Gottingen as a student of 
medicine. This, however, was with a view only 
to scientific studies, not to practice ; and he trans- 
ferred himself to the philosophical faculty in 
1810. Generally he was little regardful of 
academical authority. His father's deliberately 
adopted plan of letting him mix early with the 
world Lad given him a certain independence of 

S 


SCHOPENHAUEK 

judgment. At Gobtingen, however, lie receh^ed 
an important influence from his teacher, G. E. 
Schulze (known by the revived scepticism of 
his Mnesidemiis), who advised him to study Plato 
and Kant before Aristotle and Spinoza. From 
1811 to 1813 he was at Berlin, where he heard 
Fichte, but was not impressed. In 1813 the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy was conferred on 
him at Jena for the dissertation On the Fourfold 
Root of the Frinci2yle of Sufficient Reason 
(Ueber die vierf ache Wttrzel des Satses vom zu- 
reicJienden Orunde, 2nded., 1847). This was the 
first result of his Kantian studies. In the same 
year he began to be acquainted with Goethe at 
Weimar, where his mother and sister had gone 
to reside in 180C. A consequence of this 
acquaintance was that he took up and further 
developed Goethe's theory of colours. His dis- 
sertation Ueber das Sehen %ind die Farhen was 
published in 1816. A second edition did not 
appear till 1854; but in the meantime he had 
published a restatement of his doctrine in Latin, 
entitled Tlteoria Golorum Physiolofjica (1830). 
This, however, was an outlying part of his work. 
He had already been seized by the impulse to 
set forth the system of philosophy that took 
shape in him, as he says, by some formative 
6 


LIFE AND WRITINGS 


process of which he could give no conscious 
account. His great work, Die Welt als Wille 
unci Vorstelhong, was ready for publication 
before the end of ISIS, and was published with 
the date 1S19. Thus he is one of the most 
precocious philosophers on record. For in that 
single volume, written before he was thirty, the 
outlines of his whole system are fixed. There 
is some development later, and there are endless 
new applications and essays towards confirma- 
tion from all sources. His mind never rested, 
and his literary power gained by exercise. Stilly 
it has been said with truth, that there never 
was a greater illusion than when he thought that 
he seldom repeated himself. In reality he did 
little but repeat his fundamental positions with 
infinite variations in expression. 

After completing his chief work, Schopen- 
hauer wrote some verses in which he predicted 
that posterity would erect a jnonument to him. 
This prediction was fulfilled in 1S95; but, for the 
time, the work which he never doubted would 
be his enduring title to fame seemed, like Hume's 
Treatise, to have fallen ' dead born from the press.' 
This he attributed to the hostility of the academi- 
cal philosophers ; and, in his later works, attacks 
oQ the university professors form a characteristic 

7 


SCHOPENHAUER 

feature. The oflicial teachers of the Hegelian 
school, he declared, were bent only on obtaining 
positions for themselves by an appearance of 
supporting Christian dogma; and they re- 
sented openness on the part of any one else. 
Yet on one side he maintained that his own 
pessimism was more truly Christian than their 
optimism. The essential spirit of Christianity is 
that of Brahmanism and Buddhism, the great 
religions that sprang from India, the first home 
of our race. He is even inclined to see in it 
traces of Indian influence. What vitiates it in 
his eyes is the Jewish element, which finds its 
expression in the flat modern ' Protestant-ration- 
alistic optimism.' As optimistic religions, he 
groups together Judaism, Islam, and Grasco- 
Eoman Polytheism. His antipathy, however, 
only extends to the two former. He was himself 
in great part a child of Humanism and of the 
eighteenth century, rejoicing over the approach- 
ing downfall of all the faiths, and holding that 
a weak religion (entirely different from those he 
admires) is favourable to civilisation. Nothing 
can exceed his scorn for nearly everything that 
characterised the Middle Ages. With Catholi- 
cism as a political system he has no sympathy 
whatever: while on the religious side the Pro- 
8 


LIFE AND WRITINGS 


testant are as sympathetic to him as the Catholic 
mystics. What is common to all priesthoods, 
he holdSj is to exploit the metaphysical need of 
mankind (in which he also believes) for the sake 
of their own power. Clericalism, ' PfafFenthum/ 
whether Catholic or Protestant, is the object of 
his unvarying hatred and contempt. If he had 
cared to appreciate Hegel, he would have found 
on this point much community of spirit ; but of 
course there was a real antithesis between the 
two as philosophers. No 'conspiracy' need be 
invoked to explain the failure of Schopenhauer 
to win early recognition. Belief in the State and 
in progress was quite alien to him ; and Germanj?- 
was then full of political hopes, which found 
nourishment in optimistic pantheism. What at 
length gave his philosophy vogue was the collapse 
of this enthusiasm on the failure of the revolu- 
tionary movement in 184j8. Once known, it 
contained enough of permanent value to secure 
it from again passing out of sight with the next 
change of fashion. 

The rest of Schopenhauer's life in its external 
relations may be briefly summed up. For a few 
years, it was diversified by travels in Italy and 
elsewhere, and by an unsuccessful attempt at 
academical teaching in Berlin. In 1831 he 

9 


SCHOPENHAUER 


moved to Frankfort, where lie finally settled 
in 1833. He lived unmarried there till his death 
on the 21st of September 1860. The monument, 
already spoken of, was unveiled at Frankfort on 
the 6th of June 1895. 

The almost unbroken silence with which his 
great work was received, though it had a dis- 
tempering effect on the man, did not discourage 
the thinker. The whole series of Schopenhauer's 
works, indeed, was completed before he attained 
anything that could be called fame. Constantly 
on the alert as he was to seize upon confirmations 
of his system, he published in 1836 his short 
work On the Will in Nature, pointing out verifi- 
cations of his metaphysics by recent science. In 
1839 his prize essay, On the Freedom of the Human 
Will (finished in 1837), was crowned by the Royal 
Scientific Society of Drontheim in Norway. This 
and another essay, On the Basis of Morality, not 
crowned by the Roj^al Danish Society of Copen- 
hagen in 1840, he published in 1841, with the 
inclusive title, Bic heiden Grund'prohleme der 
Etlbih In 1844 appeared the second edition of 
his principal work, to which there was added, 
in the form of a second volume, a series of 
elucidations and extensions larger in bulk than 
the first. This new volume contains much of 

10 


LIFE AND WRITINGS 

his best and most effective writing. His lasC, 
work, Parerga iind PavaliiJomena, which ap- 
peared in 18e51 (2 vols.), is from the literary point 
of view the most brilliant. It was only from this 
time that he began to be well known among the 
general public ; though the philosophic ' apos- 
tolate' of Julius Frauenstadt, who afterwards 
edited his works, had begun in 1840. His activity 
was henceforth confined to modifying and ex- 
tending his works for new editions; an employ- 
ment in which he was always assiduous. In 
consequence of this, all of them, as they stand, 
contain references from one to another : but the 
development of his thinking, so far as there was 
such a process after 1S18, can be easily traced 
without reference to the eaziier editions. There 
is some growth ; but, as has been said, it does not 
affect many of the chief points. A brief exposi- 
tion of his philosophy can on the whole take it as 
something fixed. The heads under which it must 
fall are those assigned to the original four books 
of Die Welt als Wille und Vorstelhong. 

Although Schopenhauer discountenanced the 
attempt to connect a philosopher's biography 
with his work, something has to be said about 
his character, since this has been dwelt on to his 
disadvantage by opponents. There is abundant 
II 


SCHOPENHAUER 

material for a personal estimate in the corre- 
spondence and reminiscences published after liis 
death by his disciples Julius Frauenstadt and 
Wilhelm Gwinner. The apparent contradiction 
is at once obvious between the ascetic consum- 
mation of his ethics and his unascetic life, 
carefully occupied in its latter part with rules for 
the preservation of his naturally robust health. 
He was quite aware of this, but holds it absurd 
to require that a moralist should commend only 
the virtues which he possesses. It is as if the 
requirement were set up that a sculptor is to be 
himself a model of beauty. A saint need not be 
a philosopher, nor a philosopher a saint. The 
science of morals is as theoretical as any other 
branch of philosophy. Fundamentally character 
is unmodifiable, though knowledge, it is allowed, 
may change the mode of action within the limits 
of the particular character. The passage to the 
state of asceticism cannot be effected by moral 
philosophy, but depends on a kind of 'grace/ 
After all, it might be replied, philosophers, 
whether they succeed or not, do usually make 
at least an attempt to live in accordance witli 
the moral ideal they set up. The best apology 
in Schopenhauer's case is that the fault may 
have been as much in his ideal as in his failure 

12 


LIFE AND WRITINGS 

to conform to it. The eloquent pages he has 
devoted to the subject of holiness only make 
manifest the inconsequence (which he admits) 
in the passage to it. For, as we shall see, this 
has nothing in common with the essentially 
rational asceticism of the schools of later antiquity ; 
which was a rule of self-limitation in view of the 
philosophic life. He did in a way of his own 
practise something of this ; and, on occasion, he 
sets forth the theory of it ; but he quite clearly 
sees the difference. His own ideal, which he 
never attempted to practise, is that of the self- 
torturing ascetics of the Christian Middle Age. 
Within the range of properly human virtue, he 
can in many respects hold his own, not only as 
a philosopher but as a man.^ If his egoism and 
vanity are undeniable, he undoubtedly possessed 
the virtues of rectitude and compassion. What 
he would have especially laid stress on was the 
conscientious devotion to his work. With complete 
singleness of purpose he used for a disinterested 
end the leisure which he regarded as the most for- 
tunate of endowments. As he said near the close 
of his life, his intellectual conscience was clear. 

Of Schopenhauer's expositions of his pessimism 
it would be true to say, as Spinoza says of the 
Book of Job, that the matter, like the style, is not 
13 


SCHOPENHAUER 

that of a man sitting among the ashes, but of one 
meditating in a library. This of course does not 
prove that they are not a genuine, if one-sided, 
rendering of human experience. All that can be 
said is that they did not turn him away from 
appreciation of the apparent goods of life. His 
own practical principle was furnished by what he 
regarded as a lower point of view; and this gives 
its direction to the semi-popular philosophy of 
the ParergcL From what he takes to be the 
higher point of view, the belief that happiness is 
attainable by man on earth is an illusion; but he 
holds that, by keeping steadily in view a kind of 
tempered happiness as the end, many mistakes 
may be avoided in the conduct of life, provided 
that each recognises at once the strength and 
weakness of his own character, and does not 
attempt things that, with the given limitations, 
are impossible. Of the highest truth, as he con- 
ceived it, he could therefore make no use. Only 
by means of a truth that he was bound to hold 
half-illusory could a working scheme be constructed 
for himself and others. This result may give us 
guidance in seeking to learn what we can from 
a thinker who is in reality no representative of a 
decadence, but is fundamentally sane and rational, 
even in spite of himself. 

14 


CHAPTER II 


THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

The title of Schopenhauer's chief work is ren- 
dered in the EngHsh translation, Tlie World as 
Will and Idea. Here the term ' idea ' is used in 
the sense it had for Locke and Berkeley ; namely, 
any object of mental activity. Thus it includes 
not merely imagery, but also perception. Since 
Hume distinguished 'ideas' from 'impressions/ 
it has tended to be specialised in the former 
sense. The German word, Vorstellung, which it 
is used to render, conveys the generalised mean- 
ing of the Lockian ' idea,' now frequently expressed 
in English and French philosophical works by the 
more technical term ' presentation ' or ' represen- 
tation.' By Schopenhauer himself the word 
'Idea' was used exclusively in the sense of the 
Platonic Idea, which, as we shall see, plays an 
important part in his philosophy. The distinc- 
tion is preserved in the translation by the use of 
a capital when Idea has the latter meaning ; but 
15 


SCHOPENHAUER 


in a brief exposition it seems convenient to adopt 
a more technical rendering of Vorstelhooig ; and, 
from its common employment in psychological 
text-books, I have selected ' presentation ' as the 
most suitable. 

The first proposition of Schopenhauer's philo- 
sophical system is, ' The world is my presentation/ 
By this he means that it presents itself as appear- 
ance to the knowing subject. This appearance is 
in the forms of time, space and causality. Under 
these forms every phenomenon necessarily 
appears, because they are a ^priori forms of the 
subject. The world as it presents itself consists 
entirely of phenomena, that is, appearances, 
related according to these forms. The most fun- 
damental form of all is the relation between object 
and subject, which is implied in all of them. 
Without a subject there can be no presented 
object. 

Schopenhauer is therefore an idealist in the 
sense in which we call Berkeley's theory of the 
external world idealism ; though the expressions 
used are to some extent different. The difference 
proceeds from his following of Kant. His Kan- 
tianism consists in the recognition of a priori 
forms by which the subject constructs for itself an 
' objective ' world of appearances. With Berkeley 
i6 


THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

he agrees as against Kant in not admitting 
any residue whatever, in the object as such, that 
is not wholly appearance. But while he allo'vvs 
that Berkeley, as regards the general formulation 
of idealism, was more consistent than Kant, he 
finds him, in working out the principle, altogether 
inadequate. For the modern mind there is hence- 
forth no way in philosophy except through Kant, 
from whom dates the revolution by which scho- 
lastic dualism was finally overthrown. Kant's 
systematic construction, however, he in effect 
reduces to very little. His is a much simplified 
' Apriorism.* While accepting the ' forms of sen- 
sible intuition,' that is, time and space, just as 
Kant sets tliem forth, he clears away nearly all 
the superimposed mechanism. Kant's ' Transcen- 
dental iEsthetic,' he says, was a real discovery in 
metaphysics ; but on the basis of this he for the 
most part only gave free play to his architectonic 
impulse. Of the twelve 'categories of the under- 
standing,' which he professed to derive from the 
logical forms of judgment, all except causality are 
mere 'blind windows.' This alone, therefore, 
Schopenhauer adopts ; placing it, however, not at 
a higher level but side by side with time and 
space, Kant's forms of intuition. These three 
forms, according to Schopenhauer, make up the 
B 17 


SCHOPENHAUER 


understanding of men and animals. ' All intuition 
is intellectual.' It is not first mere appearance 
related in space and time, and waiting for under- 
standing to organise it; but, in animals as in 
man, it is put in order at once under the three 
forms that suffice" to explain the knowledge all 
have of the phenomenal world. 

To Reason as distinguished from Understanding, 
Schopenhauer assigns no such exalted function as 
was attributed to it in portions of his system by 
Kant, and still more by some of his successors. 
The name of 'reason/ he maintains, ought on 
etymological grounds to be restricted to the faculty 
of abstract concepts. This, and not understand- 
ing, is what distinguishes man from animals. It 
discovers and invents nothing, but it puts in a 
generalised and available form what the under- 
standing has discovered in intuition. 

For the historical estimation of Schopenhauer, 
it is necessary to place him in relation to Kant, 
as he himself always insisted. Much also in his 
chief work is made clearer by knowledge of his 
dissertation On the Fourfold Root of tlie Principle 
of Sufficient Reason, to which he is constantly 
referring. Later, his manner of exposition became 
more independent ; so that he can be read by the 
general reader with profit simply by himself, and 
i8 


THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 


without reference to antecedents. Still, it -will 
always be advisable for an expositor to follow his 
directions, at least to the extent of giving some 
short account of the dissertation. This I proceed 
to give approximately in the place to which he 
has assigned it in his system. 

The name of the principle {pTincipiimn rcdionis 
siLfficientis) he took over from Leibniz and his 
successor Wolff* but gave it a new amplitude. 
With him, it stands as an inclusive term for four 
modes of connection by which the thoroughgoing 
relativity of phenomena to one another is con- 
stituted for our intelligence. The general state- 
ment adopted is, 'Nothing is without a reason 
why it should be rather than not be/ Its four 
forms are the principles of becoming {fiendi), of 
knowing {cognoscendi), of being {essendi), and 
of acting (agendi). (1) Under the first head 
come 'causes.' These are divided into 'cause 
proper,' for inorganic things; 'stimulus,' for the 
vegetative life both of plants and animals; and 
' motive,' for animals and men. The law of causa- 
tion is applicable only to changes; not to the 
forces of nature, to matter, or to the world as a 
whole, which are perdurable. Cause precedes 
effect in time. Not one thing, but one state of a 
thing, is the cause of another. From the law of 

19 


SCHOPENHAUER 


causation there results an infinite series a parte 
ante as well as a 2Mrte post* (2) The principle of 
sufficient reason of knowing is applicable to con- 
cepts, which are all derived from intuition, that 
is, from percepts. The laws of logic, which come 
under this head, can jdeld nothing original, but 
can only render explicit what was in the under- 
standing. (3) Under the third head come arith- 
metical and geometrical relations. These are 
peculiar relations of presentations, distinct from 
all others, and only intelligible in virtue of a pure 
a jy'^iovi intuition. For geometry this is space ; 
for arithmetic time, in which counting goes on. 
Scientifically, arithmetic is fundamental. (4) As 
the third form of causality was enumerated 
' motive ' for the will : but in that classification it 
was viewed from without, as belonging to the 
world of objects. Through the direct knowledge 
we have of our own will, we know also from 
within this determination by the presentation wc 
call a motive. Hence emerges the fourth form of 
the principle of sufficient reason. This at a later 
stage makes possible the transition from physics 
to metaphysics. 

All these forms alike are forms of necessary 
determination. Necessity has no clear and true 
sense but certainty of the consequence when the 

20 


THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 


ground is posited. All necessity therefore is con- 
ditional. In accordance with, the four expressions 
of the principle of sufficient reason, it takes the 
fourfold shape of physical, logical, mathematical, 
and moral necessity. 

The sharp distinction between logical and 
mathematical truth, with the assignment of the 
former to conceptual and of the latter to intuitive 
relations, comes to Schopenhauer directly from 
Kant. So also does his view that the necessary 
form of causation is sequence; though here his 
points of contact with English thinkers, earlier 
and later, are very marked. Only in his state- 
ment of the 'law of motivation' as ' causality seen 
from within ' does he hint at his own distinctive 
metaphysical doctrine. Meanwhile, it is evident 
that he is to be numbered with the group of 
modern thinkers who have arrived in one way or 
another at a complete scientific phenomenism. 
Expositors have noted that in his earlier state- 
ments of this he tends to lay more stress on the 
character of the visible and tangible world as 
mere appearance. The impermanence, the 
relativity, of all that exists in time and space, 
leads him to describe it, in a favourite term 
borrowed from Indian philosophy, as Maya, or 
illusion. Later, he dwells more on the relative 

21 


SCHOPENHAUER 

reality of things as they appear. His position, 
however, does not essentially alter, but only finds 
varying expression as he turns more to the 
scientific or to the metaphysical side. From 
Hume's view on causation he differs not by 
opposing its pure phenomenism, but only by 
recognising, as Kant does, an a iiriori element in 
the form of its law. German critics have seen in 
his own formulation an anticipation of Mill, and 
this is certainly striking as regards the general 
conception of the causal order, although there is 
no anticipation of Mill's inductive logic. On the 
same side there is a close agreement with Male- 
branche and the Occasionalists, pointed out by 
Schopenhauer himself. The causal explanations 
of science, he is at one with them in insisting, 
give no ultimate account of anything. All its 
causes are no more than * occasional causes,' — 
merely instances, as Mill expressed it afterwards, 
of ' invariable and unconditional sequence.' From 
Mill of course he differs in holding its form to be 
necessary and a priori, not ultimately derived 
from a summation of experiences ; and, with the 
Occasionalists, he goes on to metaphysics in its 
sense of ontology, as Mill never did. The differ- 
ence here is that he does not clothe his meta- 
physics in a theological dress. 

22 


THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

In the later development of his thought, 
Schopenhauer dealt more expressly with the 
question, how this kind of phenomenism is 
reconcilable with a scientific cosmogony. On one 
side the proposition, ' No object without subject,' 
makes materialism for ever impossible; for the 
materialist tries to explain from relations among 
presentations what is the condition of all pre- 
sentation. On the other side, we are all compelled 
to agree with the materialists that knowledge of 
the object comes late in a long series of material 
events. Inorganic things existed in time before 
lite; vegetative life before animal life; and only 
with animal life does knowledge emerge. 
Reasoned knowledge of the whole series comes 
only at the end of it in the human mind. This 
apparent contradiction he solves by leaving a 
place for metaphysics. Our representation of the 
world as it existed before the appearance of life 
was indeed non-existent at the time to which we 
assign it; but the real being of the world had 
a manifestation not imaginable by us. For this, 
we substitute a picture of a world such as we 
should have been aware of had our 'subject,' with 
its (Jb "priori forms of time, space, and causality, 
been then present. What the reality is, is the 
problem of the thing- in-itself (to use the Kantian 
23 


SCHOPENHAUER 


term). This problem remains over; but we know 
that the metaphysical reality cannot be matter; 
for matter, with all its qualities, is phenomenal. 
It exists only 'for understanding, through under- 
standing, in understanding.' These discrimina- 
tions made, Schopenhauer offers us a scientific 
cosmogony beginning with the nebular hypothesis 
and ending with an outline of organic evolution. 
This last differs from the Darwinian theory in 
supposing a production of species by definite steps 
instead of by accumulation of small individual 
variations. At a certain time, a form that has all 
the characters of a new species appears among 
the progeny of an existing species. Man is the 
last and highest form to be evolved. From 
Schopenhauer's metaphysics, as Ave shall see, it 
follows that no higher form of life will ever 
appear. 

A word may be said here on a materialistic- 
sounding phrase which is very prominent in 
Schopenhauer's later expositions, and has been 
remarked on as paradoxical for an idealist. The 
world as presentation, he often says, is 'in the 
brain.' This, it must be allowed, is not fully 
defensible from his own point of view, except 
with the aid of a later distinction. The brain as 
we know it is of course only a part of the 
24 


THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 


phenomenon of the subject, — a grouping of 
possible perceptions. How then, since it is itself 
only appearance, can it be the bearer of the whole 
universe as appearance? The answer is that 
Schopenhauer meant in reality ' the being of the 
brain/ and not the brain as phenomenon. He 
had a growing sense of the hnportance of 
pliysiology for the investigation of mind; and 
his predilection led him to adopt a not quite 
satisfactory shorthand expression for the corre- 
spondence we know scientifically to exist between 
our mental processes and changes capable of 
objective investigation in the matter of the 
brain. 

In science his distinctive bent was to the 
borderland between psychology and physiology. 
Hence came the attraction exercised on him by 
Goethe's theory of colours. To his own theory, 
though, unlike his philosophical system, it has 
always failed to gain the attention he predicted 
for it, the merit nmst be allowed of treating the 
problem as essentially one of psychophysics. 
What he does is to attempt to ascertain the 
conditions in the sensibility of the retina that 
account for our actual colour-sensations. This 
problem was untouched by the Newtonian 
theory; but Schopenhauer followed Goethe in 
25 


SCHOPENHAUER 


tlie error of trying to overthrow this on its own 
ground. He had no aptitude for the special 
inquiries of mathematics and physics, though he 
had gained a clear insight into their general 
nature as sciences. On the psycho-physical side 
there is to-day no fully authorised theory. The 
problem indeed has become ever more complex. 
Schopenhauer's attempt, by combination of sensi- 
bilities to ' light ' and ' darkness/ to explain the 
phenomena of complementary colours, deserves 
at least a record in the long series of essays of 
which the best known are the ' Young-Helmholtz 
theory' and that of Hering. It marks an in- 
dubitable advance on Goethe in the clear distinc- 
tion drawn between the mixture, in the ordinary 
sense, that can only result in dilution to different 
shades of grey, and the kinds of mixture from 
which, in their view, true colours arise. 

A characteristic position in Schopenhauer's 
theory of knowledge, and one that is constantly 
finding new expression in his writings, is the 
distinction between abstract and intuitive know- 
ledge already touched on. Intuitive knowledge 
of the kind that is common to men and animals, 
as we have seen, makes up, in his terminology, 
tlie * understanding ' : while 'reason' is the dis- 
tinctively human faculty of concepts. When he 
26 


THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

depreciates this, as he often does, in comparison 
with ' intuition,' it must be remembered that he 
does not limit this term to perception of par- 
ticulars, but ascribes to what he calls the 
' Platonic Idea ' a certain kind of union between 
reason and ' phantasy/ which gives it an intuitive 
character of its own. Thus intuition can stand, 
though not in every case for what is higher, yet 
always for that which is wider and greater and 
more immediate. Whatever may be done with 
reflective reason and its abstractions, every 
effectual process of thought must end, alike for 
knowledge and art and virtue, in some intuitive 
presentation. The importance of reason for 
practice is due to its generality. Its function is 
subordinate. It does not furnish the ground of 
virtuous action any more than sesthetic precepts 
can enable any one to produce a work of art ; 
but it can help to preserve constancy to certain 
maxims, as also in art a reasoned plan is necessary 
because the inspiration of genius is not every 
moment at command. Virtue and artistic genius 
alike, however, depend ultimately on intuition: 
and so also does every true discovery in science. 
The nature of pedantry is to try to be guided 
everywhere by concepts, and to trust nothing to 
perception in the particular case. Philosophy 
27 


SCHOPENHAUER 

also Schopenhauer regards as depending ulti- 
mately on a certain intuitive view ; but he allows 
that it has to translate this into abstractions. 
Its problem is to express the what of the world 
in abstract form : science dealing only with the 
luhy of phenomena related within the world. 
This character of philosophy as a system of 
abstract concepts deprives it of the immediate 
attractiveness of art ; so that, as he says in one 
place, it is more fortunate to be a poet than a 
philosopher. 


28 


CHAPTER III 


METAPIIY.SICS OF THE WILL 

We have seen that scientific explanation does 
not go beyond presentations ordered in space and 
time. This is just as true of the sciences of 
causation — the ' setiological ' sciences — as it is of 
mathematical science. All that we learn from 
Mechanics, Physics, Chemistry and Physiology, 
is 'how, in accordance with an infallible rule, 
one determinate state of matter necessarily 
follows another: how a determinate change 
necessarily conditions and brings on another 
determinate change.' This knowledge does not 
satisfy us. We wish to learn the significance of 
phenomena ; but we find that from outside, while 
we view them as presentations, their inner mean- 
ing is for ever inaccessible. 

The starting-point for the metaphysical know- 
ledge we seek is given us in our own body. The 
animal body is 'the immediate object of the 
subject*: in it as presentation the 'effects' of 
29 


SCHOPENHAUEK 


'causes' in the order of presentations external 
to it are first recognised. Now in virtue of his 
body the investigator is not pure knowing 
subject standing apart from that which he knows. 
In the case of the particular system of presenta- 
tions constituting his organism, he knows what 
these presentations signify, and that is his vnll 
in a certain modification. The subject appears 
as individual through its identity with the 
body, and this body is given to it in two different 
ways: on one side as object among objects, and 
subjected to their laws; on the other side as the 
will immediately known to each. The act of 
will and the movement of the body are not two 
different states related as cause and effect; for 
the relation of cause and efiect belongs only to 
the object, the phenomenon, the presentation. 
They are one and the same act given in different 
manners: the will, immediately to the subject; 
the movement, in sensible intuition for under- 
standing. The action of the body is the ob- 
jectified act of will. Called at first the im- 
mediate object of presentation, the body may 
now, froiu the other side, be called ' the objectivity 
of the will.' 

Thus, as was said, the 'law of motivation' 
discloses the inner nature of causality. In 
30 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 

causality in general we know only relations of 
phenomena ; but in the case of our own body we 
know something else that those relations express ; 
namely, the act of will determined by motives. 
Now there are in the world as presentation other 
systems like that which we call our body. Unless 
all these are to be supposed mere phantoms with- 
out inner reality, we must infer by analogy, in 
correspondence with like phenomena, other indi- 
vidual wills similar to that which we know in our- 
selves. This inference from analogy, universally 
admitted in the case of human and animal bodies, 
must be extended to the whole corporeal world. 
The failure to take this step is where the purely 
intellectual forms of idealism have come short. 
Kant's ' thing-in-itself,' which is not subject to 
the forms by which presentations become experi- 
ence, but which experience and its forms indicate 
as the reality, has been wrongly condemned by 
his successors as alien to idealism. It is true 
that Kant did in some respects fail to maintain 
the idealistic position with the clearness of 
Berkeley ; but his shortcoming was not in affirm- 
ing a thing-in-itself beyond phenomena. Here, 
in Schopenhauer's view, is the metaphysical 
problem that he left a place for but did not solve. 
The word of the riddle has now been pronounced. 
31 


SCHOPENHAUER 


Beyond presentation, that is, in itself and accord- 
ing to its innermost essence, tiie world is that 
which we find in ourselves immediately as will 
By this it is not meant that a falling stone, for 
example, acts from a motive ; knowledge and the 
consequent action from motives belongs only to 
the determinate form that the will has in animals 
and men; but the reality in the stone also is the 
same in essence as that to which we apply the 
name of will in ourselves. He who possesses this 
key to the knowledge of nature's innermost 
being will interpret the forces of vegetation, of 
crystallisation, of magnetism, of chemical affinity, 
even of weight itself, as different only in pheno- 
menal manifestation but in essence the same ; 
namely, that which is better known to each than 
all else, and where it emerges most clearly is 
called will. Only the will is thing-in-itself. It is 
wholly different from presentation, and is that of 
which presentation is the phenomenon, the visi- 
bility, the objectivity. Difierences affect only the | 
degree of the appearing, not the essence of that ! 
which appears. 

While the reality everywhere present is not 
will as specifically known in man, the mode 
of indicating its essence by reference to this, 
Schopenhauer contends, is a gain in insight. The 
32 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 


thing-in-itself ought to receive its name from 
that among all its manifestations which is the 
clearest, the most perfect, the most immediately 
illumined by knowledge ; and this is man's will. 
When we say that every force in nature is to be 
thought of as Will, we are subsuming an unknown 
under a known. For the conception of Force is 
abstracted from the realm of cause and effect, 
and indicates the limit of scientific explanation. 
Having arrived at the forces of nature on the one 
side and the forms of the subject on the other, 
science can go no further. The conception of 
Will can make known that which was so far con- 
cealed, because it proceeds from the most intimate 
consciousness that each has of himself, where the 
knower and the known coincide. 

B^^this consciousness, in which subject and 
object are not yet set apart, we reach something 
universal. In itself the Will is not individuahsed, 
but exists whole and undivided in every single' 
thing in nature, as the Subject of contemplation 
exists whole and undivided in each cognitive 
being. It is entirely free from all forms of the 
phenomenon. What makes plurality possible_is 
subjection to the forms of time ^^^a^^ 
which only the phOTomenon is affected. Time 
and space may therefore be called, in scholastic 


SCHOPENHAUER 

terminology, the 'principle of individuation/ 
While each of its phenomena is subject to the 
law of sufficient reason, which is the law of 
appearance in these forms, there is for the Will as 
thing-in-itself no rational ground : it is ' grundlos/; 
It is free from all plurality, although its pheno- 
mena in space and time are innumerable. It is 
one, not with the unity of an object or of a con- 
cept, but as that which lies outside of space and 
time, beyond the princvpmon inclividuationis, 
that is, the possibility of pluraUty. The indi- 
vidual, the person, is not will as thing-in-itself, 
but phenomenon of the will, and as such deter- 
mined. The will is ' free ' because there is 
nothing beyond itself to determine it. Further, 
it is in itself mere activity without end, a blind 
striving. Knowledge appears only as the accom- 
paniment of its ascending stages. 

Here we have arrived at the thought which, in 
its various expressions, constitutes Schopen- 
hauer's metaphysics. That this cannot be scien- 
tifically deduced he admits ; but he regards it as 
furnishing such explanation as is possible of 
science itself. For science there is in everything 
an inexplicable element to which it runs back, 
and which is real, not merely phenomenal. From 
this reality we are most remote in pure mathe- 
34 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 

matics and in the pure a priori science of nature 
as it was formulated by Kant. These owe their 
transparent clearness precisely to their absence of 
real content, or to the slightness of this. The 
attempt to reduce organic life to chemistry, this 
again to mechanism, and at last everything to 
arithmetic, could it succeed, would leave mere 
form behind, from which all the content of pheno- 
mena would have vanished. And the form would 
in the end be form of the subject. But the enter- 
prise is vain. ' For in everything in nature there 
is something of which no ground can ever be 
given, of which no explanation is possible, no 
cause further is to be sought' What for man is 
his inexplicable character, presupposed in every 
explanation of his deeds from motives, that for 
every inorganic body is its inexplicable quality, 
the manner of its acting. 

The basis of this too is will, and ' groundless,' 
inexplicable will; but evidently the conception 
here is not identical with that of the Will that is 
one and all. How do we pass from the universal 
to that which has a particular character or 
quality ? For of the Will as thing-in-itself we are 
told that there is not a greater portion in a man 
and a less in a stone. The relation of part and 
whole belongs exclusively to space. The more 
35 


SCHOPENHAUER 


and less touclies only the plienomenon, that is, 
the visibility, the objectivation, A higher degree 
of this is in the plant than in the stone, in the 
animal than in the plant, and so forth ; but the 
Will that is the essence of all is untouched by 
degree, as it is beyond plurality, space and time, 
and the relation of cause and effect. 

The answer to the question here raised is given 
in Schopenhauer's interpretation of the Platonic 
Ideas. These he regards as stages of objectiva- 
tion of the Will. They are, as Plato called them, 
eternal forms related to particular things as 
models. The lowest stage of objectivation of the 
Will is represented by the forces of inorganic 
nature. Some of these, such as weight and im- 
penetrability, appear in all matter. Some are 
divided among its different kinds, as rigidity, 
fluidity, elasticity, electricity, magnetism, chemi- 
cal properties. They are not subject to the 
relation of cause and effect, but are presupposed 
by it. A force is neither cause of an effect nor 
effect of a cause. Philosophically, it is immedi- 
ate objectivity of the will; in aetiology, qualitas 
occulta. At the lowest stages of objectivation, 
there is no individuality. This does not appear 
in inorganic things, nor even in merely organic 
or vegetative life, but only as we ascend the scale 
36 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 


of animals. Even in the higher animals the 
specific enormously predominates over the mdi- 
vidual character. Only in man is the Idea 
objectified in the individual character as such. 
' The character of each individual man, so far as 
it is thoroughly individual and not entirely com- 
prehended in that of the species, may be regarded 
as a particular Idea, corresponding to a peculiar 
act of objcctivation of the Will/ 

Schopenhauer warns us against substituting 
this philosophical explanation for scientific a3tio- 
logy. The chain of causes and effects, he points 
out, is not broken by the differences of the 
original, irreducible forces. The fctiology and 
the philosophy of nature go side by side, regard- 
ing the same object from different points of view. 
Yet he also gives us in relation to his philosophy 
much that is not unsuggestive scientifically. 
His doctrine is not properly evolutionary, since 
the Ideas are eternal; but he has guarded inci- 
dentally against our supposing that all the 
natural kinds that manifest the Ideas phenorne- 
nally must be always represented in every wnrld. 
For our particular world, comprising the sun and 
planets of the solar system, he sets forth in the 
Farerga an account of the process by which it 
develops from the nebula to man. This was 
37 


SCHOPENHAUER 


referred to in the preceding cliapter. In his 
fundamental work he describes a struggle, 
present through the whole of nature, in which 
the phenomenal manifestations of the higher 
Ideas conquer and subjugate those of the lower, 
though they leave them still existent and ever 
striving to get loose. Here has been seen an 
adumbration of natural selection: he himself 
admits the difficulty he has in making it clear. 
We must remember that it is pre-Darwinian. 

Knowledge or intelligence he seeks to explain 
as an aid to the individual organism in its 
struggle to subsist and to propagate its kind. It 
first appears in animal life. It is represented by 
the brain or a large ganglion, as every endeavour 
of the Will in its self-objectivation is represented 
by some organ; that is, displays itself for pre- 
sontation as such and such an appearance. 
Superinduced along with this contrivance for 
aid in the struggle, the world as presentation, 
with all its forms, subject and object, time, space, 
plurality and causality, is all at once there. 
'Hitherto only will, it is now at the same time 
presentation, object of the knowing subject.' 
Then in man, as a higher power beyond merely/ 
intuitive intelligence, appears reason as the poweij 
of abstract conception. For the most part/ 
3^ 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 


rational as well as intuitive knowledge, evolved 
originally as a mere means to higher objectiva- 
tion of the Will, remains wholly in its service. 
How, in exceptional cases, intellect emancipates 
itself, will be discussed under the heads of 
^Esthetics and Ethics. 

That this view implies a teleology Schopen- 
hauer expressly recognises. Indeed he is a very 
decided teleologist on lines of his own, and, in 
physiology, takes sides strongly with * vitalism' 
as against pure mechanicism. True, the Will is 
' endless ' blind striving, and is essentially divided 
against itself. Everywhere in nature there is 
strife, and this takes the most horrible forms. 
Yet somehow there is in each individual mani- 
festation of will a principle by which first the 
organism with its vital processes, and then the 
portion of it called the brain, in which is repre- 
sented the intellect with its a priori forms, are 
evolved as aids in the strife. And, adapting all 
the manifestations to one another, there is a 
teleology of the universe. The whole world, with 
all its phenomena, is the objectivity of the one 
and indivisible Will; the Idea which is related 
to all other Ideas as the harmony to the single 
voices. The unity of the Will shows itself in the 
unison of all its phenomena as related to one 
39 


SCHOPENHAUER 

another. Man, its clearest and completest objec- 
tivation, is tlie summit of a pyramid, and could 
not exist without this. Inorganic and organic 
nature, then, were adapted to the future appear- 
ance of man, as man is adapted to the develop- 
ment that preceded him. But in thinking the 
reality, time is to be abstracted from. The 
earlier, we are obliged to say, is fitted to the 
later, as the later is fitted to the earher ; but the 
relation of means to end, under which we cannot 
help figuring the adaptation, is only appearance 
for our manner of knowledge. And the harmony 
described does not get rid of the conflict inherent 
in all will. 

In this account of Schopenhauer's metaphysical 
doctrine, I have tried to make the exposition as 
smooth as possible ; but at two points the discon- 
tinuity can scarcely be concealed. First, the 
relation of the universal Will to the individual 
will is not made clear ; and, secondly, the emer- 
gence of the world of presentation, with the 
knowledge in which it culminates, is left unin- 
telligible because the will is conceived as mere 
blind striving without an aim. As regards the 
first point, disciples and expositors have been able 
to show that, by means of distinctions in his later 
writings, apparent contradictions are to some 
40 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 


extent cleared away; and, moreover, that he 
came to recognise more reality in the individual 
will. On the second point, I think it will be 
necessary to admit that his system as such breaks 
down. But both points must be considered in 
their connection. 

One of the most noteworthy features of 
Schopenhauer's philosophy is, as he himself 
thought, the acceptance from first to last of Kant's 
distinction between the ' empirical ' and the ' in- 
telligible' character of the individual Every act 
of will of every human being follows with neces- 
sity as phenomenon from its phenomenal causes ; 
so that all the events of each person's life are 
determined in accordance with scientific law. 
Nevertheless, the character empirically manifested 
in the phenomenal world, while it is completely 
necessitated, is the expression of something that 
is free from necessitation. This * intelligible 
character ' is out of time, and, itself undetermined, 
manifests itself through that which develops in 
time as a chain of necessary causes and effects. 
That this doctrine had been taken up, without 
any ambiguity as regards the determinism, by 
Schelling as well as by himself, he expressly 
acknowledges; and he finds it, as he also finds 
modern idealism, anticipated in various passages 
41 


SCHOPENHAUER 

by the Neo-Platonists. His adaptation of it to 
his doctrine of the Ideas is distinctly Neo-Platonic 
in so far as he recognises ' Ideas of individuals ' ; 
but of course to make Will the essence belongs to 
his OTvn system. ' The intelligible character/ he 
says, ' coincides with the Idea, or, yet more pre- 
cisely, with the original act of will that manifests 
itself in it: in so far, not only is the empirical 
character of each man, but also of each animal 
species, nay, of each plant species, and even of 
each original force of inorganic nature, to be re- 
garded as phenomenon of an intelligible character, 
that is, of an indivisible act of will out of time/ 
This is what he called the ' aseitas ' of the will ; 
borrowing a scholastic term to indicate its de- 
rivation (if we may speak of it as derived) from 
itself (a se), and not from a supposed creative act. 
Only if we adopt this view are we entitled to 
regard actions as worthy of moral approval or 
disapproval. They are such not because they are 
not necessitated, but because they necessarily 
show forth the nature of an essence the freedom 
of which consists in being what it is. Yet he 
could not but find a difficulty in reconciling this 
with his position that the one universal Will is 
identical in all things, and in each is ' individuated ' 
only by space and time. For the Ideas, like the 
42 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 


thing-in-itself, are eternal, that is, outside of time 
as well as space ; and all the things now enumer- 
ated, forces of nature, plant and animal species, 
and individual characters of men, are declared to 
be in themselves Ideas. 

He in part meets this difficulty by the subtlety 
that time and sfyace do not, strictly speaking, 
determine individuality, but arise along with it. 
The diremption of individualities becomes explicit 
in those forms. Yet he must have perceived that 
this is not a complete answer, and various modifi- 
cations can be seen going on. His first view 
clearly was that the individual is wholly imper- 
manent, and at death simply disappears ; nothing 
is left but the one Will and the universal Subject 
of contemplation identical in all. Metempsychosis 
is the best mythological rendering of what happens, 
but it is no more. Later, he puts forward the not 
very clearly defined theory of a ' palingenesia ' by 
which a particular will, but not the intellect that 
formerly accompanied it, may reappear in the 
phenomenal world. And the hospitality he 
showed to stories of magic, clairvoyance, and 
ghost-seeing, is scarcely compatible with the view 
that the individual will is no more than a 
phenomenal differentiation of the universal will. 
A speculation (not put forward as anything more) 

43 


SCHOPENHAUER 


on the appearance of a special providence in the 
destiny of the individual, points, as Professor 
Volkelt has noted, to the idea of a guidance, not 
from without, but by a kind of good daemon or 
genius that is the ultimate reality of the person. 
On all this we must not lay too much stress ; but 
there is certainly one passage that can only be 
described as a definite concession that the indi- 
vidual is real in a sense not at first allowed. 
Individuality, it is said in so many words 
{Parerga, ii. § 117), does not rest only on the 
' principle of individuation ' (time and space), and 
is therefore not through and through phenomenon, 
but is rooted in the thing-in-itself. 'How deep 
its roots go belongs to the questions which I do 
not undertake to answer/ ^ 

This tends to modify considerably, but does not 
overthrow, Schopenhauer's original system. In 
very general terms, he is in the number of the 
'pantheistic' thinkers; and it is remarkable, on 
examination, how these, in Europe at least, have 
nearly always recognised in the end some per- 
manent reaUty in the individual. This is con- 
trary to first impressions: but the great names 
may be cited of Plotinus, John Scotus Erigena, 
Giordano Bruno, Spinoza (in Part v. of the Ethics), 

' Werke, ed. Fraiienstiidt, vol. vi. p. 243. 
44 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 


and finally of Schopenhauer's special aversion, 
Hegel, who has been supposed most unfavourable 
of all to any recognition of individuality as real. 
It is more true, Hegel maintains, that the indi- 
viduality determines its world than that it is 
determined by it; and there is no explanation 
why the determination should be such and such 
except that the individuality was already what it 
is.^ And, if Schopenhauer's more imaginative 
speculations seek countenance from the side of 
empiricism, there is nothing in them quite so 
audacious as a speculation of J. S. Mill on dis- 
embodied mind, thrown out during the time when 
he was writing his Logic? 

The association with pantheism Schopenhauer 
accepts in principle, though the name is not con- 
genial to him. In his system the Will is one and 
all, like the ' Deus ' of Spinoza. The difference is 
that, instead of ascribing perfection to the uni- 
verse that is its manifestation, he regards the 

^ Phcinomenolofjie des Geistes, Jubilaumsausgabe, ed. G. Lasson, 
pp. 201-3. 

2 Letter to Robert Barclay Fox, May 10, 1842. Printed in 
Appendix to Letters and Journals of Caroline FoXj third ed. , 
vol. ii. pp. 331-2. 'To suppose that the eye is necessary to 
sight,' says Mill, ' seems to me the notion of one immersed in 
matter. What we call our bodily sensations are all in the 
mind, and would not necessarily or probably cease, because the 
body perishes.' 

45 


SCHOPENHAUER 

production of a world as a lapse from which 
redemption is to be sought. His doctrine has 
been rightly described, in common with the pre- 
dominant philosophical doctrines of his period, 
as a resultant of the deepened subjective analysis 
brought by Kant into modern philosophy on the 
one side, and of the return to Spinoza in the 
quest for unity of principle on the other. Why, 
then, it may be asked, are Fichte, Schelling, and 
Hegel the constant objects of his attack ? The 
true explanation is not the merely external one, 
that they were his successful rivals for public 
favour, but is to be found in a real antithesis of 
thought. Within the limits of the idealism they 
all hold in common, Schopenhauer is at the 
opposite pole. In spite of his attempt to in- 
corporate the Platonic Ideas, and in spite of his 
following of Kant, whose ' intelligible world ' was 
in essence Platonic or neo-Platonic, he could find 
no place in his system for a rational order at the 
summit. Now this order was precisely what 
Fichte and Hegel aimed at demonstrating. If 
Schopenhauer is less unsympathetic in his 
references to Schelling, that is because Schelling's 
world-soul appeared to him to prefigure his own 
attempt to discover in nature the manifestation 
of a blindly striving will or feeling rather than 
46 


METAPHYSICS OF THE WILL 

reason. Suspicious as he shows himself of 
possible plagiarisms by others, the charge cannot 
be retorted against himself. The supreme prin- 
ciple of Fichte, it has been pointed out, has an 
actively volitional character and was formulated 
before Schopenhauer's : but then it is essentially 
rational. For Hegel, what is supreme is the 
world-reason. Hence they are at one with Plato 
in holding that in some sense 'mind is king.' 
For Schopenhauer, on the contrary, mind, or 
pure intellect, is an emancipated slave. Having 
reached its highest point, and seen through the 
work of the will, it does not turn back and 
organise it, but abolishes it as far as its insight 
extends. 

Yet to say merely this is to give a wrong im- 
pression of Schopenhauer. Starting though he 
does with blind will, and ending with the flight 
of the ascetic from the suffering inherent in the 
world that is the manifestation of such a will, he 
nevertheless, in the intermediate stages, makes 
the world a cosmos and not a chaos. And the 
Platonists on their side have to admit that ' the 
world of all of us * does not present itself on the 
surface as a manifestation of pure reason, and 
that it is a serious task to ' rationalise ' it. Where 
he completely fails is where the Platonic systems 
47 


SCHOPENHAUER 


also fail, though from the opposite starting-point. 
His attempt to derive presentation, intellect, 
knowledge, from blind striving, is undoubtedly 
a failure. But so also is the attempt of the 
Platonising thinkers to deduce a world of mixture 
from a principle of pure reason without aid from 
anything else empirically assumed. Not that in 
either case there is failure to give explanations 
in detail ; but in both cases much is taken from 
experience without reduction to the principles of 
the system. What we may say by way of com- 
parison is this: that if Schopenhauer had in so 
many words recognised an immanent Reason as 
well as Will in the reality of the universe, he 
would have formally renounced his pessimism ; 
while it cannot be said that on the other side a 
more explicit empiricism in the account of the 
self-manifestation of Reason would necessarily 
destroy the optimism. 


48 


CHAPTER IV 


^ESTHETICS 

A PORTION of Schopenhauer's system by which 
its pessimism is considerably mitigated is his 
theory of the Beautiful and of Fine Art. The 
characteristic of aesthetic contemplation is, he 
finds, that intellect throws off the yoke and 
subsists purely for itself as clear mirror of the 
world, free from all subjection to practical pur- 
poses of the will. In this state of freedom, 
temporary painlessness is attained. 

The theory starts from his adaptation of the 
Platonic Ideas. Regarded purely as an aesthetic 
theory, it departs from Plato, as he notes; for, 
with the later Platonists, who took up the defence 
of poetic myths and of the imitative arts as 
against their master, he holds that Art penetrates 
to the general Idea through the particular, and 
hence that the work of art is no mere ' copy of a 
copy.' The difference of the Idea from the 
Concept is that it is not merely abstract and 
D 49 


SCHOPENHAUER 


general, but combines with generality the char- 
acters of an intuition. 

The Ideas, as we have seen, constitute the 
determinate stages of objectivation of the Will. 
The innumerable individuals of which the Ideas 
are the patterns are subject to the law of sufficient 
reason. They appear, that is to say, under the 
forms of time, space, and causality. The Idea is 
beyond these forms, and therefore is clear of 
plurality and change. Since the law of sufficient 
reason is the common form under which stands 
all the subject's knowledge so far as the subject 
knows as individual, the Ideas lie outside the 
sphere of knowledge of the individual as such. 
If, therefore, the Ideas are to be the object of 
knowledge, this can only be by annulling indi- 
viduality in the knowing subject. 

As thing-in-itself, the Will is exempt even 
from the first of the forms of knowledge, the form 
of being 'object for a subject.' The Platonic 
Idea, on the other hand, is necessarily an object, 
something known, a presentation. It has laid 
aside, or rather has not taken on, the subordinate 
forms; but it has retained the first and most 
general form. It is the innnediate and most 
adequate possible objectivity of the Will ; whereas 
particular things are an objectivation troubled by 
SO 


ESTHETICS 


the forms of which the law of sufficient reason is 
the common expression. 

When intellect breaks loose from the service of 
the will, for which it was originally destined in 
the teleology of nature, then the subject ceases 
to be merely individual and becomes pure will-less 
subject of knowledge. In this state the beholder 
no longer tracks out relations in accordance with 
the principle of sufficient reason — which is the 
mode of scientific as well as of common knowledge 
— but rests in fixed contemplation of the given 
object apart from its connection with anything 
else. The contemplator thus 'lost' in the object, 
it is not the single thing as such that is known, 
but the Idea, the eternal form, the immediate 
objectivity of the Will at this stage. The correlate 
of this object — the pure Subject exempt from the 
principle of sufficient reason — is eternal, like the 
Idea. 

The objectivation of the Will appears faintly in 
inorganic things, — clouds, water, crystals, — more 
fully in the plant, yet more fully in the animal, 
most completely in man. Only the essential in 
these stages of objectivation constitutes the Idea. 
Its development into manifold phenomena under 
the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, is 
unessential, lies merely in the mode of knowledge 
51 


SCHOPENHAUER 


for the individual, and has reality only for this. 
It is not otherwise with the unfolding of that 
Idea which is the completest objectivation of the 
Will. To the Idea of Man, the occurrences of 
human history are as unessential as the shapes 
they assume to the clouds, as the figures of its 
whirlpools and foam-drift to the stream, as its 
frost-flowers to the ice. The same underlying 
passions and dispositions everlastingly recur in 
the same modes. It is idle to suppose that any- 
thing is gained. But also nothing is lost : so the 
Earth-spirit might reply to one who complained 
of high endeavours frustrated, faculties wasted, 
promises of world -enlightenment brought to 
nought; for there is infinite time to dispose of, 
and all possibilities are for ever renewed. 

The kind of knowledge for which the Ideas are 
the object of contemplation finds its expression 
in Art, the work of genius. Art repeats in its 
various media the Ideas grasped by pure contem- 
plation. Its only end is the communication of 
these. While Science, following the stream of 
events according to their determinate relations, 
never reaches an ultimate end, Art is always at 
the end. ' It stops the wheel of time ; relations 
vanish for it: only the essence, the Idea, is its 
object/ The characteristic of genius is a pre- 
S2 


AESTHETICS 

dominant capacity for thus contemplating things 
independently of the principle of sufl6.cient reason. 
Since this requires a forgetting of one's own 
person and the relations between it and things, 
the attitude of genius is simply the com pie test 
' objectivity/ The 'subjectivity ' opposed to this, 
in Schopenhauer's phraseology, is preoccupation 
with the interests of one's own will. It is, he 
says, as if there fell to the share of genius a 
measure of intelligence far beyond the needs of 
the individual will : and this makes possible the 
setting aside of individual interests, the stripping 
off of the particular personality, so that the subject 
becomes 'pure knowing subject,' 'clear world-eye,' 
in a manner sufficiently sustained for that which 
has been grasped to be repeated in the work of 
art. A necessary element in genius is therefore 
Imagination. For without imagination to repre- 
sent, in a shape not merely abstract, things that 
have not come within personal experience, genius 
would remain limited to immediate intuition, and 
could not make its vision apprehensible by others. 
Nor without imagination could the particular 
things that express the Idea be cleared of the 
imperfections by which their limited expression 
of it falls short of what nature was aiming at 
in their production. ' Inspiration ' is ascribed to 

53 


SCHOPENHAUEE 


genius because its characteristic attitude is inter- 
mittent. The man of genius cannot always re- 
main on a height, but has to fall back to the 
level of the common man, who can scarcely at all 
regard things except as they affect his interests, — 
have a relation to his will, direct or indirect. 

This is the statement in its first outline of a 
theory that became one of Schopenhauer's most 
fruitful topics. Many are the pages he has de- 
voted to the contrast between the man of genius 
and 'the wholesale ware of nature, which she 
turns out daily by thousands.' The genius is for 
him primarily the artist. Scientific genius as a 
distinctive thing he does not fully recognise ; and 
he regards men of action, and especially states- 
men, rather as men of highly competent ability 
endowed with an exceptionally good physical 
constitution than as men of genius in the proper 
sense. Philosophers like himself, who, as lie 
frankly says, appear about once in a hundred 
years, he classes in the end with the artists; 
though this was left somewhat indeterminate in 
his first exposition. The weakness of the man of 
genius in dealing with the ordinary circumstances 
of life he allows, and even insists on. Genius, 
grasping the Idea in its perfection, fails to under- 
stand hidividuals. A poet may know man pro- 
54 


^ESTHETICS 

foundly, and men very ill. He admits the 
proximity of genius to madness on one side, and 
explains it in this way. What marks the stage 
of actual madness, as distinguished from illusion 
or hallucination, is complete disruption of the 
memory of past life, of the history of the personality 
as something continuous ; so that the particular 
thing is viewed by itself, out of relation. This 
gives a kind of resemblance to the attitude of 
genius, for which present intuition excludes from 
view the relations of things to each other. Or, as 
we may perhaps sum up his thought in its most 
general form, 'alienation' or dissolution of per- 
sonality has the resemblance often noted between 
extremes to the impersonality, or, as he calls it, 
' objectivity,' that is super-personal. 

In spite of his contempt for the crowd, he has 
to admit, of course, that the capacity of genius 
to recognise the Ideas of things and to become 
momentarily impersonal must in some measure 
belong to all men ; otherwise, they could not even 
enjoy a work of art when produced. Genius has 
the advantage only in the much higher degree 
and the greater prolongation of the insight. 
Since, then, the actual achievement of the artist 
is to make us look into the world through his 
eyes, the feelings for the beautiful and the sublime 
55 


SCHOPENHAUER 


may be treated irrespectively of the question 
whether they are aroused by nature and human 
life directly or by means of art, 

Esthetic pleasure in contemplation of the 
beautiful proceeds partly from recognition of the 
individual object not as one particular thing but 
as Platonic Idea, that is, as the enduring form of 
this whole kind of things ; partly from the con- 
sciousness the knower has of himself not as 
individual, but as pure, will-less Subject of Know- 
ledge. All volition springs out of need, therefore 
out of want, therefore out of suffering. No at- 
tained object of will can give permanent satis- 
faction. Thus, there can be no durable happiness 
or rest for us as long as we are subjects of will. 
* The Subject of Will lies continually on the turn- 
ing wheel of Ixion, draws ever in the sieve of 
the Danaides, is the eternally thirsting Tantalus. 
But in the moment of pure objective contem- 
plation, free from all interest of the particular 
subjectivity, we enter a painless state : the wheel 
of Ixion stands still. The Flemish painters 
produce this aesthetic effect by the sense of 
disinterested contemplation conveyed in their 
treatment of insignificant objects. There are 
certain natural scenes that have power in them- 
selves, apart from artistic treatment, to put us in 

56 


.ESTHETICS 


this state ; but the slightest obtrusion of individual 
interest destroys the naagic. Past and distant 
objects, through their apparent detachment, have 
the same power. The essential thing a^stheticalty, 
whether we contemplate the present or the past, 
the near or the distant, is that only the world 
of presentation remains ; the world as will has 
vanished. 

The difference between the feelings of the 
Beautiful and of the Sublime is this. In the feel- 
ing of the beautiful, pure intelligence gains the 
victory without a struggle, leaving in conscious- 
ness only the pure subject of knowledge, so that 
no reminiscence of the will remains. In the feel- 
ing of the sublime, on the other hand, the state 
of pure intelligence has to be v/on by a conscious 
breaking loose from relations in the object that 
suggest something threatening to the will ; though 
there must not be actual danger ; for in that case 
the individual will itself would come into play, 
and jBsthetic detachment would cease. Elevation 
above the sense of terror has not only to be con- 
sciously won but consciously maintained, and 
involves a continuous reminiscence, not indeed of 
any individual will, but of the will of man in 
general, so far as it is expressed through its objec- 
tivity, the human body, confronted by forces 
57 


SCHOPENHAUER 


hostile to it. Pre-eminently tliis feeling arises 
from contrast between the immensities of space 
and time and the apparent insignificance of man. 
It means in the last resort that the beholder is 
upheld by the consciousness that as pure subject 
of knowledge (not as individual subject) he him- 
self bears within him all the worlds and all the 
ages, and is eternal as the forces that vainly seem 
to threaten him with annihilation. 

On the objective side, and apart from the sub- 
jective distinction just set forth, the sublime and 
the beautiful are not essentially different. In 
both cases alike, the object of (esthetic contem- 
plation is not the single thing, but the Idea that 
is striving towards manifestation in it. Whatever 
is viewed sesthetically is viewed out of relation to 
time and space : ' along with the law of sufficient 
reason the single thing and the knowing indi- 
vidual are taken away, and nothing remains over 
but the Idea and the pure Subject of Knowledge, 
Avhich together make up the adequate objectivity 
of the Will at this stage.' There is thus a sense 
in which everything is beautiful ; since the Will 
appears in everythini^ at some stage of objectivity, 
and this means that it is the expression of some 
Idea. But one thing can be more beautiful than 
another by facilitating oesthotic contemplation. 


AESTHETICS 

This facilitation proceeds either from the greater 
clearness and perfection with which the particular 
thing shows forth the Idea of its kind, or from the 
higher stage of objectivation to which that Idea 
corresponds. Man being the highest stage of 
objectivation of the Will, the revelation of his 
essence is the highest aim of art. In sesthetic 
contemplation of inorganic nature and vegetative 
life, whether in the reality or through the medium 
of art, and in appreciation of architecture, the sub- 
jective aspect, that is to say, the enjoyment of pure 
will-less knowledge, is predominant; the Ideas 
themselves being here lower stages of objectivity. 
On the other hand, when animals and men are 
the object of aesthetic contemplation or representa- 
tion, the enjoyment consists more in the objective 
apprehension of those Ideas in which the essence 
of the Will is most clearly and fully manifested. 

Of all Schopenhauer's work, its sesthetic part 
has met with the most general appreciation. 
Here especially he abounds in observations drawn 
directly, in his own phrase, from intuition. To 
make a selection of these, however, is not appro- 
priate to a brief sketch like the present. I pass 
on, therefore, to those portions of his theory of 
Art by which he makes the transition, in terms of 
his system, to Morality. 

59 


SCHOPENHAUEE 


From Arcliitecture onward the arts are obliged 
to represent tlie Will as divided. Here, at tlie 
first stage, its division subsists only in a conflict 
of inorganic forces wliicli have to be brought to 
equilibrium. The conflict between weight and 
rigidity is in truth the only Aesthetic material of 
architecture as a fine art. When we come to 
animal and lastly to human life, which, in the 
Plastic Arts and in Poetry, as form, individualised 
expression, and action, is the highest object of 
a3sthetic representation, the vehemence of divided 
will is fully revealed; and here too is revealed 
the essential identity of every will with our own. 
In the words of the Indian wisdom, 'Tat twam 
asi ' ; ' that thou art.' Under the head of Ethics 
it will be shown expressly that by this insight, 
when it reacts on the will, the will can deny itself. 
For the temporary release from its striving, given 
in cesthetic contemplation, is then substituted 
permanent release. To this 'resignation,' the 
innermost essence of all virtue and holiness, and 
the final redemption from the world. Art itself, at 
its highest stages, points the way. 

The summits of pictorial and poetic art Schopen- 
hauer finds in the great Italian painters so far as 
they represent the ethical spirit of Christianity, 
and in the tragic poets, ancient and modern. It 
60 


.ESTHETICS 

is true that the poverty of their sacred history or 
mythology puts the Christian artists at a disad- 
vantage ; but events are merely the accidents of 
their art. Not in these, as related according to 
the lav/ of sufficient reason, is the essence, but in 
the spirit we divine through the forms portrayed. 
In their representation of men full of that spirit, 
and especially in the eyes, we see mirrored the 
knowledge that has seized the whole essence of 
the world and of life, and that has reacted on 
the will, not so as to give it motives, but as a 
' quietive ' ; whence proceeds complete resignation, 
and with it the annulling of the will and of the 
whole essence of this world. Of tragedy, the 
subject-matter is the conflict of the will with 
itself at its highest stage of objectivity. Here 
also the end is the resignation brought on by 
complete knowledge of the essence of the world. 
The hero, on whom at last this knowledge has 
acted as a quietive, gives up, not merely life, but 
the whole will to live. 'The true meaning of 
tragedy is the deeper insight, that what the hero 
expiates is not his particular sins, but original sin, 
that is, the guilt of existence itself.' To illustrate 
this position Schopenhauer is fond of quoting a 
passage from Calderon which declares that the 
greatest sin of man is to have been born. 

6i 


SCHOPENHAUER 

It seems strange that, after deriding as he does 
the popular notion of ' poetic justice/ so detached 
a thinker should imagine an at least equally one- 
sided view to receive its final confirmation from 
the Spanish dramatist's poetic phrasing of a 
Christian dogma. The great tragic poets, for 
Schopenhauer also, are ^Eschylus, Sophocles and 
Shakespeare. Now it is safe to say that by none 
of these was any such general doctrine held either 
in conceptual or in intuitive form. The whole 
effect of any kind of art, of course he would 
admit, cannot be packed into a formula ; but if 
we seek one as an aid to understanding, some 
adaptation of his own theory of the sublime would 
probably serve much better as applied to tragedy 
than his direct theory of the drama. In the case 
of pictorial art, all that is proved by what he says 
about the representation of ascetic saintliness, is 
that this, like many other things, can be so 
brought within the scope of art as to make us 
momentarily identify ourselves with its Idea in 
the impersonal manner he has himself described. 
His purely festhetic theory is quite adequate to 
the case, without any assumption that this is the 
representation of what is best. Art, pictorial or 
poetic, can no more prove pessimism than opti- 
mism. We pick out expressions of one or the 
62 


/ESTHETICS 


other for quotation according to our moods or 
subjective preferences ; but, if we have the feeling 
for art itself, our sense of actual sesthetic value 
ought to bo independent of these. 

Schopenhauer's jesthetic theory, however, does 
not end here. There follows the part of it b)^ 
which he has had an influence on artists them- 
selves. For him, a position separate from all the 
other arts is held by music. While the rest 
objectif}^ the Will mediately, that is to say, by 
means of the Ideas, Music is as immediate an 
objectivation of the whole Will as the world itself, 
or as the Ideas, of which the pluralised pheno- 
menon constitutes the sum of particular things. 
The other arts speak of the shadow, music of the 
substance. There is indeed a parallelism, an ana- 
logy, between Music and the Ideas; yet Music 
never expresses the phenomenon in which these are 
manifested, but only the inner essence behind the 
appearance, the Will itself. In a sense it renders 
not feeling in its particularity, but feeling in 
abstractor joy, sorrow, not a joy, a sorrow. The 
phenomenal world and music are to be regarded 
as two di{Ferent expressions of the same thing. 
The world might be called embodied Music as 
well as embodied Will. ' Melodies are to a certain 
extent like general concepts, an abstract of reality.' 
63 


SCHOPENHAUER 


A complete explanation of music, that is, a de- 
tailed repetition of it in concepts, were this 
possible, would be a complete explanation of the 
world (since both express the same thing) and 
therefore a true and final philosophy. As music 
only reaches its perfection in the full harmony, 
' so the one Will out of time finds its perfect objec- 
tivation only in complete union of all the stages 
which in innumerable degrees of heightened dis- 
tinctness reveal its essence.' But here, too, 
Schopenhauer adds, the Will is felt, and can 
be proved, to be a divided will ; and the deliverance 
wrought by this supreme art, as by all the others, 
is only temporary. 


64 


CHAPTER V 


ETHICS 

Permanent redemption from the suffering of the 
world is to be found only in the holiness of the 
ascetic ; but to this there are many stages, con- 
stituting the generally accepted human virtues. 
Of these Schopenhauer has a rational account 
to give in terms of his philosophy; and if the 
last stage does not seem to follow by logical 
sequence from the others, this is only what is to 
be expected ; for it is reached, in his view, by a 
sort of miracle. To the highest kind of intuitive 
knowledge, from which the ascetic denial of the 
will proceeds, artistic contemplation ought to 
prepare the way ; and so also, on his principles, 
ought the practice of justice and goodness. Yet 
he is obliged to admit that few thus reach the 
goal. Of those that do reach it, the most arrive 
through personal suffering, which may be deserved. 
A true miracle is often worked in the repentant 
criminal, by which final deliverance is achieved. 
E 65 


SCHOPENHAUEE 

Though the ' intelligible character ' is unalterable, 
and the empirical character can only be the un- 
folding of this, as every great dramatist intuitively 
recognises, yet the ' convertites/ like Duke 
Frederick in As Yoto Like It, are not to be regarded 
as hypocrites. The ' second voyage ' to the har- 
bour, that of the disappointed egoist, on condition 
of this miracle, brings the passenger to it as 
surely as the first, that of the true saints, which is 
only for the few. And in these equally a miracu- 
lous conversion of the will has to be finally 
worked. 

At the entrance to his distinctive theory of 
ethics, Schopenhauer places a restatement of his 
metaphysics as the possible basis of a mode of 
contemplating life which, he admits, has some 
community with an optimistic pantheism. The 
Will, through the presentation and the accom- 
panying intelligence developed in its service, 
becomes conscious that that which it wills is pre- 
cisely the world, life as it is. To call it ' the will 
to live ' is therefore a pleonasm. ' Will ' and ' will 
to live ' are equivalent. For this will, life is ever- 
lastingly a certainty. ' Neither the will, the thing- 
in-itself in all phenomena, nor the subject of 
knowledge, the spectator of all phenomena, is ever 
touched by birth and death.' It is true that the 
66 


ETHICS 


individual appears and disappears ; but iadividu- 
ality is illusory. Past and future exist only in 
conceptual thought. ' The form of life is a present 
without end, howsoever the individuals, pheno- 
mena of the Idea, come into existence and vanish 
in time, like fugitive dreams.' Only as pheno- 
menon is each man different from the other 
things of the world : as thing-in-itself he is the 
Will, which appears in all, and death takes away 
the illusion that divides his consciousness from 
the rest. ' Death is a sleep in which the individu- 
ality is forgotten: everything else wakes again, 
or rather has remained awake/ It is, in the ex- 
pression adopted by Schopenhauer later, an 
awakening from the dream of life : though this 
bears with it somewhat different implications ; 
and, as has been said, his theory of individuality 
became modified. 

With the doctrine of the eternal life of the 
Will are connected Schopenhauer's theories, de- 
veloped later, of the immortality of the species 
and of individualised sexual love. The latter is 
by itself a remarkable achievement, and con- 
stitutes the one distinctly new development 
brought to completion in his later years ; for the 
modifications in his theory of individuality are 
only tentative. His theory of love has a deter- 
67 


SCHOPENHAUER 


minate conclusion, of great value for science, and 
not really compatible, it seems to me, with his 
pessimism. In its relation to ethics, on which he 
insisted, it is rightly placed in the position it 
occupies, between the generalised statement of 
his metaphysics just now set forth on the one 
side, and his theory of human virtue on the 
other. 

The teleology that manifests itself in individual- 
ised love is, in his view, not related in reality to 
the interests of the individual life, but to those of 
the species. That this is immortal follows from 
the eternity of the Idea it unfolds.^ The end 
sought is aimed at unconsciously by the person. 
Fundamentally, for Schopenhauer, teleology must 
of course be unconscious, since the will is blind, 
and will, not intelligence, is primordial. Its 
typical case is the instinct of animals; but the 
' instinctive ' character belongs also to the accom- 
plishment of the highest aims, as in art and 
virtue. What characterises individualised love 
internally is the aim, attributed to 'nature' or 
'the species,' at a certain typical beauty or per- 

1 The disappearance of species in time raises difficulties in 
more than one way for his philosophy ,• but he formally escapes 
refutation by the suggestion, already noted, that the Idea need 
not always be manifested phenomenally in the same world. 
This, however, he did not work out. 

68 


ETHICS 

fection of tlie offspring. The lover is therefore 
deluded in thinking that he is seeking his ovin 
happiness. What looks through the eyes of 
lovers is the genius of the race, meditating on the 
composition of the next generation. It may, in the 
complexity of circumstances, be thwarted. When 
it reaches its end, often personal happiness is 
sacrificed. Marriages dictated by interest tend 
to be happier than love-matches. Yet, though 
the sacrifice of the individual to the race is in- 
voluntary in these, egoism is after all overcome ; 
hence they are quite rightly the object of a 
certain admiration and sympathy, while the 
prudential ones are looked upon with a tinge of 
contempt. For here too that element appears 
which alone gives nobility to the life either of 
intellect or of art or of moral virtue, namely, the 
rising above a subjective interest of the individual 
will. 

No doubt there are touches of pessimism in 
this statement ; but the general theory does not 
seem reconcilable finally with pessimism as 
Schopenhauer understands it. For it is a definitely 
stated position of his that nature keeps up the 
process of the world by yielding just enough to 
prevent discontinuance of the striving for an 
illusory end. Yet he admits here in the result 
69 


SCHOPENHAUER 


something beyond bare continuance of life ; for 
this is already secured without the particular 
modification of feeling described. What the feel- 
ing is brought in to secure is a better realisation 
of the type in actual individuals; and such re- 
alisation is certainly more than hare subsistence 
with the least possible expenditure of nature's 
resources. 

As the immediate preliminary to his ethics 
proper, Scliopenhauer restates his doctrine on the 
intelligible and the empirical character in man, 
and la3^s down a generalised psj^'chological posi- 
tion regarding the suffering inherent in Hfe. 
]i] very thing as phenomenon, we have seen already, 
is determined because it is subject to the law of 
sufficient reason. On the other hand, everything 
as thing-in-itself is free; for 'freedom' means 
only non-subjection to tlnit law. The intelligible 
character of each man is an indivisible, unalter- 
able act of will out of time; the developed and 
explicit phenomenon of this in time and space is 
the enipirical character. Man is his own work, 
not in the light of knowledge, but before all 
knowledge; this is secoiulary and an instrument.. 
Ulthnately, freedom is a mystery, and takes us 
beyond even will as the name for the tliing-in- 
itself. In reality, that which is ' will to live ' need 
70 


ETHICS 


not have been such (though we cannot see how 
this is so), but has become such from itself and 
from nothing else. This is its ' aseitas! Hence 
it is in its power to deny itself as will to live. 
When it does this, the redemption (like the fall) 
comes from itself This denial does not mean 
annihilation, except relatively to all that we knoAv 
under the forms of our understanding. For the 
will, though tiro nearest we can get to the thing- 
in-itself, is in truth a partially phenomenalised 
expression of this. As the will to live expresses 
itself phenomenally, so also does the denial of the 
will to live, when this, by special 'grace,' is 
achieved. Only in man does the freedom thus 
attained find phenomenal expression. That man 
can attain to it proves that in him the will has 
reached its highest possible stage of objectivation ; 
for, after it has turned back and denied itself, 
there is evidently nothing more that we can call 
existence, that is to say, phenomenal existence, 
beyond. What there is beyond in the truth of 
being is something that the mystics know — or 
rather, possess, for it is beyond knowledge — but 
cannot communicate. 

The psychological reason that can be assigned 
for the ascetic flight from the world is that all 
pleasure, happiness, satisfaction, is merely nega- 
71 


SCHOPENHAUER 


fcive. The will is a striving that has no ultimate 
aim. It is sustained only by hindrances. Hin- 
drance means suffering; and every satisfaction 
attained is only temporary, a mere liberation from 
need, want, pain, which is positive. Suffering 
increases with the degree of consciousness. The 
life of civilised man is an alternation between 
pain and enmii, which can itself become as in- 
tolerable a suffering as anything. The problem 
of moral philosophy, then, is ultimately how 
redemption from such a world is to be attained, 
but only so far as this is a matter of conceptual 
knowledge. For philosophy, being from beginning 
to end theoretical, cannot work the practical 
miracle by which the will denies itself. 

The intuitive, as distinguished from merely 
conceptual, knowledge by which the return is 
made, consists essentially in a clear insight into 
the identity of the suffering will in all things and 
the necessity of its suffering as long as it is will 
to live. This, then, is the true foundation of 
morality. The universe as metaphysical thing-in- 
itself, as noumenon, has an ethical meaning. All 
its stages of objectivation, though in the process 
what seems to be aimed at is preservation of the 
will as manifested, have in truth for their ulti- 
mate aim its redemption by suppression of 
72 


ETHICS 


tlie phenomenal world in which it manifests 
itself. 

Affirmation of the will is affirmation of the 
body, which is the objectivity of the will. The 
sexual impulse, since it affirms life beyond the 
death of the individual, is the strongest of self- 
affirmations. In it is found the meaning of the 
mythical representation that has taken shape in 
the theological dogma of original sin. For by this 
affirmation going beyond the individual body, 
suffering and death, as the necessary accompani- 
ment of the phenomenon of life, are reaffirmed, 
and the possibility of redemption this time 
declared fruitless. But through the whole process 
there runs eternal justice. The justification of 
suffering is that the will affirms itself ; and the 
self-affirmation is justified by payment of the 
penalty. 

Before the final redemption — which is not for 
the world but for the individual — there are many 
stages of ethical progress. These consist in the 
gradual overcoming of egoism by sympathy. And 
here Schopenhauer proceeds to set forth a practical 
scheme for the social life of man, differing from 
ordinary utiUtarianism only by reducing all sym- 
pathy to pity, in accordance with his view that 
there can be no such thing as positive happiness. 
73 


SCHOPENHAUER 

He begins witli a theory of justice, legal and 
moral, very much on the lines of Hobbes, except 
that he regards it as up to a certain point a 
priori. Here he is consistent throughout. As 
in his philosophical account of mathematics and 
physics, so also in his JBSthetics and ethics, he 
retained, side by side with a strong empirical 
tendency, belief in certain irreducible a priori 
forms without which our knowledge cannot be 
constituted. The pure ethical theory of justice, 
he says, bears to the political theory the relation 
of pure to applied mathematics. Injustice he 
holds to be the positive conception. It means 
the breaking into the sphere of another person's 
will to live. The self-affirmation of the will that 
appears in one individual body is extended to 
denial of the will that ap23ears in other bodies. 
Justice consists in non-encroachment. There is 
a 'natural right,' or * moral right,' of resistance to 
injustice by infliction of what, apart from the at- 
tempted encroachment, would be wrong. Either 
force or deception may be used; as either may be 
the instrument of injustice. The purely ethical 
doctrine of justice applies only to action; since 
only the not doing of injustice depends on us. 
With the State and its laws, the relation is reversed. 
The object of these is to prevent the suffering of 
74 


ETHICS 


injustice. The State is not directed against egoism, 
but has sprung out of a rationalised collective 
egoism. It has for its purpose only to avoid the 
inconvenient consequences of individual aggres- 
sions on others. Outside of the State, there is a 
right of self-defence against injustice, but no right 
of punishment. The punishment threatened by 
the State is essentially a motive against commit- 
ting wrong, intended to supply the place of ethical 
motives for those who are insufficiently accessible 
to them. Actual infliction of it is the carrying 
oat of the threat when it has failed, so that in 
general the expectation of the penalty may be 
certain. Revenge, which has a view to the past, 
cannot bo justified ethically : punishment is 
directed only to the future. There is no right 
in any one to set himself up as a moral judge 
and inflict pain; but man has a right to do what 
is needful for social security. The criminaFs acts 
are of course necessitated; but he cannot justly 
complain of being punished for them, since it is 
ultimately from himself, from what he is, that 
they sprang. 

With the doctrine of 'eternal justice,' touched 
on above, we pass into a different region of 
thought. What is responsible for the guilt in 
the world is the Will by which everything exists, 
75 


SCHOPENHAUER 


and the suffering everlastingly falls where the 
guilt is. Take the case of apparently unpunished 
injustice (from the human point of view) expressing 
itself in the extreme form of deliberate cruelty. 
Through this also, eternal justice, from which 
there is no escape, is fulfilled. ' The torturer and 
the tortured are one. The former errs in thinking 
he has no share in the torture; the latter in 
thinking he has no share in the guilt.' For all 
the pain of the world is the expiation of the sin 
involved in the self-affirmation of will, and the 
Will as thing-in-itself is one and the same in all. 

If this could satisfy any one, there would be no 
need to go further. The whole being as it ought 
to be, why try to rectify details that are absolutely 
indifferent ? But of course the implication is that 
individuality is simply illusory ; and this, as has 
been said, was a position that Schopenhauer 
neither could nor did consistently maintain. 
Indeed, immediately after setting forth this theory 
of 'eternal justice,' he goes on to a relative jus ti- 
jScation of those acts of disinterested vengeance 
by which a person knowingly sacrifices his own 
life for the sake of retribution on some extra- 
ordinary criminal. This, he says, is a form of 
punishment, not mere revenge, although it in- 
volves an error concerning the nature of eternal 

76 


ETHICS 


justice. Suicide involves a similar error, in so 
far as it supposes that the real being of the indi- 
vidual can be assailed through its phenomenal 
manifestation. It is not a denial of the will to 
live, but a strong affirmation of it, only not in the 
given circumstances : different circumstances are 
desired with such intensity that the present cannot 
be borne. Therefore the individual manifestation 
of the will is not suppressed. Yet, one might 
reply, if individuality is an illusion attached to 
the appearance in time and space of a particular 
organism, it would seem that, with the dis- 
appearance of this, all that distinguishes the 
individual must disappear also. 

Schopenhauer had no will thus to escape from 
life; nor did he afterwards devote himself to 
expounding further his theory of eternal justice. 
What he wrote later, either positively or as mere 
speculation, implies both greater reahty in the 
individual and more of cosmic equity to corre- 
spond. His next step, even at his first stage, is 
to continue the exposition of a practicable ethics 
for human life. His procedure consists in adding 
beneficence to justice, with the proviso already 
mentioned, which is required by his psychology, 
that all beneficence can consist only in the relief 
of pain. For Schopenhauer, as for Comte, what 
77 


SCHOPENHAUER 

is to be overcome is ' egoism,' an excessive degree 
of whicli is tlie mark of the character we call 
' bad/ The ' good ' is what Comte and Spencer 
call the ' altruistic ' character. This difference 
between characters Schopenhauer goes on to 
explain in terms of his metaphysics. The egoist 
is so deluded by the principle of individuation 
that he supposes an absolute cleft between his 
own person and all others. The remorse of 
conscience from which he suffers proceeds in 
part from an obscure perception that the principle 
of individuation is illusory. Genuine virtue 
springs out of the intuitive (not merely abstract) 
knowledge that recognises in another individu- 
aUty the same essence as in one's own. The 
characteristic of the good man is that he makes 
less difference than is customary between himself 
and others. Justice is an intermediate stage 
between the encroaching egoism of the bad and 
positive goodness. In the renunciation of rights 
of property, and provision for all personal needs 
without aid from others, practised by some 
religious and philosophical ascetics, it is passing- 
over into something more. There is, however, 
a certain misunderstanding involved in so inter- 
preting strict justice; for there are many ways 
in which the rich and powerful can be positively 
78 


ETHICS 


beneficent. At the other extreme, when they 
simply live on their inherited wealth, without 
doing anything in return, their mode of life is 
morally, though not legally, unjust. Rights of 
property Schopenhauer derived from labour 
spent on the things appropriated. The injustice, 
in many waj'S, of the present social order he quite 
recognises. If he has no sympathy with revo- 
lutions, it is because he has no belief in the 
realisation of an ideal state. This follows from 
his view of history. Human life, it is his con- 
viction, never has been and never will be dif- 
ferent as a whole. Redemption from evil can be 
attained only by the individual. All that the 
State can do is to provide certain very general 
conditions of security under which there will bo 
no hindrance to those who desire to live in 
accordance with a moral ideal. 

Yet there are qualifications to make. Many 
passages in Schopenhauer's writings prove his 
firm belief in the future triumph of reason over 
superstition. It is to the honour of humanity, 
he says, that so detestable a form of evil 
as organised religious persecution has appeared 
only in one section of history. And, in his 
own personal case, he has the most complete 
confidence that the truths he has put forth 
79 


SCHOPENHAUER 


cannot fail sometime to gain a hearing. In all 
cases, error is only temporary, and truth will 
prevail. His language on this subject, and in- 
deed often on others, is indistinguishable from 
that of an optimist. 

In the last resort, his pessimism entrenches 
itself behind the psychological proposition that 
every satisfaction is negative, being only the 
removal of a pain. If this is unsustainable, there 
is nothing finally in his Metaphysics of Will to 
necessitate the pessimistic conclusion drawn. 
The mode of deduction by which he proceeds is 
to argue first to the position already noticed : 
that all that love of others on which morality is 
based is fundamentally pity. True benevolence 
can only be the desire to relieve others' pain, 
springing from the identification of this with 
our own. For that reason, moral virtue must 
finally pass over into asceticism — the denial of 
the will to live. In others, if we are able to see 
through the principle of individuation, we re- 
cognise the same essence as in ourselves, and we 
perceive that as long as this wills it must 
necessarily suffer. The end then is to destroy the 
will to live. This is to be done by ask&sis, self- 
mortification. The first step is complete chastity. 
If, says Schopenhauer, the highest phenomenon 
80 


ETHICS 

of will, that is, man, were to disappear through 
a general refusal to affirm life beyond the 
individual body, man's weaker reflexion in the 
animal world would disappear also, and the 
consciousness of the whole would cease. Know- 
ledge being taken away, the rest would vanish 
into nothingness, since there is 'no object without 
subject/ That this will come to pass, however, 
he certainly did not believe. He has no cosmo- 
gony, like that of Hartmann, ending in a general 
redemption of the universe by such a collective 
act. Nor did he hold, like his later successor 
Mainliinder, that through the conflict and gradual 
extinction of individualities, 'this great world 
shall so wear out to nought.' The world for 
him is without beginning and without end. But 
the exceptional individual can redeem himself. 
What he does when he has reached the height of 
holiness is by voluntary poverty and all other 
privations, inflicted for their own sake, to break 
and kill the will, which he recognises as the 
source of his own and of the world's suffering 
existence. In his case not merely the pheno- 
menon ends at death, as with others, but the 
being is taken away. To be a ' world-overcomer ' 
in this sense (as opposed to a ' world-conqueror ') 
is the essence of sanctity when cleared of all the 
F 8i 


SCHOPENHAUER 


superstitious dogmas by which the saints try to 
explain their mode of life to themselves. 

The absolutely pure expression of this truth is 
to be found only in philosophy ; but of the 
religions Buddhism comes nearest to expressing 
it without admixture. For the Buddhist saint 
asks aid from no god. True Christianity, how- 
ever, — the Christianity of the New Testament 
and of the Christian mystics, — agrees both with 
Buddhism and with Brahmanism in ultimate aim. 
What spoils it for Schopenhauer is the Judaic 
element. This, on one side, infects it with the 
optimism of the Biblical story of creation, in 
which God 'saw everything that he had made, 
and, behold, it was very good.' On the other 
side, it contaminates the myth of original sin, 
which bears in itself a profound philosophical 
truth, by this same doctrine of a creative God; 
from which follows all the injustice and irratio- 
nality necessarily involved in the Augustinian 
theology, and not to be expelled except with its 
theism. Nevertheless, the story of the Fall of 
Man, of which that theology, in its fundamentally 
true part, is a reasoned expression, is the one 
thing, Schopenhauer avows, that reconciles him 
to the Old Testament. The truth that it clothes 
he finds also among the Greeks; Empedocles, 
82 


ETHICS 


after the Orphics and Pythagoreans, having 
taught that the soul had been doomed to wander 
because of some antenatal sin. And the mysticism 
that accompanies all these more or less pure ex- 
pressions of one metaphysical truth he finds repre- 
sented by the Sufis even in optimistic Islam ; so 
that he can claim for his philosophy a world-wide 
consent. 

Keligion, if we take this to include mysticism, 
at once rises above philosophy and falls below it. 
As 'metaphysics of the people,' it is a mytho- 
logical expression of philosophical truth : as 
mysticism, it is a kind of ' epi-philosophy.' 
Beyond pure philosophy Schopenhauer does not 
profess to go; but he accepts what the mystics 
say as the description of a positive experience 
which becomes accessible when supreme insight 
is attained intuitively. For the philosopher as 
such, insight into that which is beyond the forms 
of our knowledge and even beyond the will itself, 
remains only conceptual ; though it is within the 
province of philosophy to mark out the place for 
this. The ' something else ' that is left when the 
will has been denied, is indicated by the ' ecstasy,' 
'illumination,' 'union with God,' spoken of by 
the mystics. Paradoxically, some of the mystics 
themselves even have identified it with ' nothing ' ; 
83 


SCHOPENHAUER 


but the result of the denial of the will to live is to 
be called nothing only in relation to the world as 
we know it. 'On the other hand, to those in 
whom the will has turned back and denied itself, 
this so very real world of ours with all its suns 
and milky ways is — nothing/ 

In this terminus of his philosophy, Schopen- 
hauer recognised his kinship with Indian thought, 
of which he was a lifelong student. To call his 
doctrine a kind of Buddhism is, however, in some 
ways a misapprehension. Undoubtedly he accepts 
as his ideal the ethical attitude that he finds to 
be common to Buddhism and the Christianity of 
the New Testament ; but metaphysical differences 
mark him off from both. We have seen that he 
rejects the extra-mundane God of Semitic deriva- 
tion, adopted by historical Christianity. Indeed 
he is one of the most pronounced anti-Jehovists 
of all literature. But equally his belief in a posi- 
tive metaphysical doctrine marks him off from 
Buddhism, according to the account given of it by 
its most recent students, who regard it either as 
ultimately nihilistic or as having no metaphysics 
at all, but only a psychology and ethics. Nor can 
he be precisely identified with the Vedantists of 
orthodox Hinduism. Their ultimate reality, if 
we are to find an analogue for it in European 
84 


ETHICS 


metaphysics, seems to resemble the hypostasised 
ego of Fichte, or the Kantian 'transcendental 
unity of apperception/ much more than it 
resembles Schopenhauer's blindly striving will as 
thing-in-itself. Even in practical ethics, he does 
not follow the Indian systems at all closely. 
Philosophical doctrines of justice are of course 
purely European ; and Schopenhauer himself 
points out the sources of his own theory. In his 
extension of ethics to animals, on which he lays 
much stress, he cites the teachings of Eastern 
non-Semitic religions as superior to the rest ; but 
he does not follow the Indians, nor even the 
Pythagoreans, so far as to make abstinence from 
flesh part of the ideal. He condemns vivisection 
on the ground that animals have rights : certain 
ways of treating them are unjust, not simply un- 
compassionate. The discussion here again is of 
course wholly within European thought. Thus, 
in trying to determine his significance for modern 
philosophy, we may consider his system in its 
immediate environment, leaving it to more special 
students to determine how far it received a 
peculiar colouring from the Oriental philosophies, 
of which, in his time, the more exact knowledge 
was just beginning to penetrate to the West. 


85 


CHAPTER VI 


HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE 

ScHOPENHAUErv IS not one of the philosophers 
who have founded a school, though he has had 
many disciples and enthusiastic admirers. The 
pessimism that was for a time a watchword with 
certain literary groups has passed as a mode, and 
his true significance must bo sought elsewhere. 
Of the thinkers who have followed him in his 
pessimism, two indeed stand out as the architects 
of distinct systems, Eduard von Hartmann and 
Philipp Mainlander (both' '"already incidentally 
referred to) ; but while they are to be classed un- 
questionably as philosophers, their systems contain 
an element that their master would have regarded 
as mythological. Schopenhauer declared asj 
clearly as any of the Greeks that the phenomenal | 
world is without beginning and without end.| 
Kant's positing of an ' antinomy ' on this point he j 
regarded as wholly without rational justification. ! 
What Kant calls the * antithesis,' namely, thej 
86 ^ 


HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE 


infinite series, can be logically proved for pheno- 
mena. The ' thesis/ which asserts a beginning in 
time, is defended by mere fallacies. Now Hart- 
mann and Mainlander both hold, though in 
different fashions, that there is a world-process 
from a beginning to an end, namely, the extinc- 
tion of consciousness. This is the redemption of 
the world. Their affinity, therefore, seems to be 
with the Christian Gnostics rather than with the 
pure philo>sophers of the Greek tradition, con- 
tinued in modern times by Bruno, Spinoza, and 
Schopenhauer. 

Whatever may bo thought of the pessimism 
by wliich Schopenhauer's mood is distinguished 
from that of his precursors, few will fail to recog- 
nise that special doctrines of his system contain 
at least a large portion of truth. His theories of 
Art, of Genius, and of Love are enough to found 
un enduring reputation for any thinker, even if 
there were nothing else of value in his writings. 
But there is much else, both in systematic con- 
struction and in the illumination of detail. I 
have been inclined to put forward first of all the 
translation into idealistic terms of the universal 
sentiency hold by the Ionian thinkers to be in- 
herent in the primordial elements of nature. 
While they viewed the world as an objective 
^7 


SCHOPENHAUER 

thing having psychological qualities, Schopen- 
hauer, after the long intermediate process of 
thought, could treat it as phenomenal object with 
a psychological or subjective essence. For both 
doctrines alike, however, mind or soul is im- 
manent. Still, it must be allowed that a difference 
remains by which Schopenhauer was even more 
remote than they were from the later Greek 
idealism. As they were not materialists, so they 
did not exclude reason from the psychical pro- 
perties of their substances. Schopenhauer, while 
he rejected the materialism of their ancient and 
modern successors alike, took the step of formally 
derationalising the elements of mind. This, no 
doubt, is unsustainable ultimately, if reason is 
ever to emerge from them. Yet the one-sided- 
ness of the position has had a peculiar value in 
combating an equally one - sided rationalistic 
idealism. This is recognised by clear-sighted 
opponents. And Schopenhauer's calling the non- 
rational or anti-rational element in the world 
'wiir helps to make plainer the real problem of 
evil. There is truth in the Hegelian paradox that 
'pessimism is an excellent basis for optimism.' 
An optimist like Plotinus saw that, even if good 
comes of evil, the case of the optimist must fail 
unless evil can be shown to be a necessary con- 
88 


HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE 

stituent of the world. The Platonic and Neo- 
Platonic ' matter/ a principle of diremption or 
individuation, like time and space for Schopen- 
hauer, was an attempt to solve this problem; but 
something more positive seemed to be needed 
as the source of the stronger manifestations of 
evil. To the strength of these Plato drew atten- 
tion in a passage {Republic, x. 610 ^) where it is 
acknowledged that injustice confers a character of 
vitality and sleeplessness upon its possessor. In 
the notion of a blind and vehement striving, 
Schopenhauer supplies something adequate; only, 
to maintain a rational optimism, it must be re- 
garded as a necessary element in a mixture, not 
as the spring of the whole. 

Much might be said on the teleology by which 
he tries to educe intelligence from the primor- 
dial strife. Against his view, that it is evolved as 
a mere instrument for preserving races in a 
struggle, another may be set that is ready to 
hand in a dialogue of Plutarch.- The struggle 
among animals, it is there incidentally argued, 
has for its end to sharpen their intelligence. 
Both these theories arc on the surface compatible 

^ Cited ill one of the introductory essfiys to Jowett and 
CampbeU's edition, vol. ii. 

he Svllerlia A nimaiium^ 27. 

89 


SCHOPENHAUER 


with evolution. If, leaving aside the problem of 
mechanism, we try to verify them by the test of 
results, the latter undoubtedly seems the more 
plausible. For if the struggle was a means to 
the improvement of intelligence, nature has suc- 
ceeded more and more; whereas, if her intention 
was to preserve races, she has continually failed. 
This argument is at any rate perfectly valid 
against Schopenhauer himself; for he holds in 
common with the optimistic teleologists that 
' nature does nothing in vain/ 

I will conclude with a few detached criticisms 
on the ethical doctrine which he regarded as the 
culmination of his system. The antithesis, it 
may first be noted, between the temporary release 
from the vehemence of the will that is gained 
through art, and the permanent release through 
asceticism, is not consistently maintained. Scho- 
penhauer admits that the knoAvledge which for 
the ascetic is the ' quietive ' of the will has to be 
won anew in a perpetual conflict. ' No one can 
have enduring rest on earth.' Again, revision of 
his doctrine concerning the reality of the indivi- 
dual would, I think, necessitate revision also of 
the position that not only asceticism but ' all true 
and pure love, nay, even freely rendered justice, 
proceeds from seeing through the prmcijphim 
go 


HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE 

individuatio7iis.' If the individual is in some 
sense ultimately real, then love must be to a cer- 
tain extent literally altruism. We are brought 
down to the elementary fact, in terms of the 
metaph3^sics of ethics, that the object of love is a 
real being that is itself and not ourselves, though 
having some resemblance to us and united in 
a larger whole. An objection not merely verbal 
might indeed be taken to Schopenhauer's meta- 
physics of ethics strictly on his own ground. If 
it is purely and simply the essence of ourselves 
that we recognise in everything, does not this re- 
duce all love finally to a well-understood egoism ? 
The genuine fact of sympathy seems to escape his 
mode of formulation. And, in the end, we shall 
perhaps not find the ascetic to be the supreme 
ethical type. Of the self-tormenting kind of 
asceticism, it is not enough to say with Schopen- 
hauer that, since it is a world-wide phenomenon 
of human nature, it calls for some account from 
philosophy. The account may be sufficiently 
rendered by historical psychology; the result 
beinof to class it as an aberration born of the illu- 
sions incident to a certain type of mind at a certain 
stage. Indeed, that seems to be the conclusion 
of the Buddhists, who claim to have transcended 
it by finding it superfluous for the end it aims at. 
91 


SCHOPENHAUER 


Let us then take, as our example of the com- 
pleted type, not the monks of the Thebaid, but the 
mild ascetics of the Buddhist communities. Does 
not this type, even in its most attractiye form, 
represent a ' second best ' ? Is not the final 
judgment that of Plato, that to save oneself is 
something, but that there is no full achievement 
unless for the life of the State also the ideal has 
been brought nearer realisation ? When there is 
nothing in the world but irredeemable tyranny or 
anarchy, flight from it may be the greatest success 
possible as far as the individual life is concerned ; 
but this is not the normal condition of humanity. 
Finally, may not some actual achievement, either 
practical or, like that of Schopenhauer, specula- 
tive, even if accompanied by real imperfections of 
character, possess a higher human value than the 
sanctity that rests always in itself ? 


92 


SELECTED WORKS 


English Translations 

The World an Will and Mm. Translated by E. B. Haldane 
and J. Kemp. 3 vols. 1883-6. 

Two Essays: I. On the Fourfold Boot of the Frimvple of 
Sufficioit Reason, II. 0% the Will in Nature. Bohn's 
Philosophical Library, 1889. 

Eeligion : A Dialogue, and other Essays. Selected and trans- 
lated by T. Bailey Saunders. 3rd ed., 1891. [A series 
of other volumes of selections excellently translated by Mr. 
Saunders has followed.] 

Selected Essays of Arthur Scho2)enhauer. With a Biographical 
Introduction and Sketch of his Philosophy. By E. Belfort 
Bax. 1891. 

The Basis of Morality. Translated with Introduction and 
Notes by A. B. Bullock. 1903. . 

Biographical aiul Expositonj 

Arthur Schofenliauer : His Life and Philosophy. By Helen 

ZiMMERN. 1876. 
Life of Arthur Schopenhauer. By Professor W. Wallace. 

1890. 

93 


SCHOPENHAUER 

La Fhilo$02)hie de Scliopenlmuer, Par Tii. Ribot. 2nd ed., 
188D. 

Arthur Schopenhamr. Seine Personlichkeit, seine Lehre, 
sein Glaube. Yon Johannes Volkelt. ;3rd ed., 1907. 

Schopenhauer-LexiJcon. Yon Janus Fkauknstadt. 2 vols., 
1871. 


Printed by T. and A. Constable, Printers to His Majesty 
at the Edinburgh University Press 


