THE  BOOK  WAS 
DRENCHED 


CO  >;  00 

66385      ^ 

;o 


OSMANIA  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 
Call  No.  >ccession  No.  *  *  <<  M 

Author 


This  book  should  be  returned  on  or  before  the  date 
last  marked  below. 


THE  SCIENCE  OF  PEACE 


There  will  be  no  copyright  in  this  book  after  1957  A,  C.  Translations 

into  other  languages  may  be  made  freely  from  this  very 

time.    There  will  be  no  copyright  against  them  ;  but 

neither  must  there  be  any  copyright  reserved 

in  those  translations. 


THE  SCIENCE   OF   PEACE 

AN  ATTEMPT  AT  AN  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  FIRST 
PRINCIPLES    OF    THE    SCIENCE  OF  THE   SELF,  I.E., 

Adhyatma-  Vidya 


BY 

BHAGAVAN  DAS 

M.A.,  (Calcutta),  LL.  D.  hon.  causa  (Benares  and  Allahabad) 

Author  of  "  The  Science  of  the  Emotions," 

"  The  Science  of  the  Sacred  Word," 

"  The  Science  of  the  Self," 

"  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions,"  etc. 

(Third  Edition)        '* 


1948 

The   Theosophical  Publishing  House 
Adyax,  Madias,  India 


First  Edition,  1904 
Second  ,,  7927 
„  1948 


—  Brahma-bindu  Upanishaf 

1  Words  strung  together  in  compilations,  serve  only  to 
protect  and  hide  knowledge,  as  husk  and  chaff  the  grain  ;  let 
the  wise  look  for  the  grain  and  cast  away  the  chaff  of  words 
when  that  grain  of  truth  has  been  found.' 

1  Woulclst  thou  enclasp  the  beauty  of  the  True  ? 
Let  pass  the  word  ;  the  thought,  the  thought  pursue  !  ' 

—  Maulana  Rum 

"  Live  neither  in  the  present,  nor  the  future,  but  in  the 
Eternal,  .  .  .  because  nothing  that  is  embodied,  nothing  that  is 
conscious  of  separation,  nothing  that  is  out  of  the  Eternal, 
can  aid  you  ;  .  .  .  within  you  is  the  light  of  the  world  .... 
'Read  the  larger  word  of  life.'* 

—Light  on  the  Path 

"  There  is  a  peace  that  passeth  and  yet  passeth  not  the 
pure  understanding.  It  abides  everlastingly  in  the  hearts  of 
those  that  live  in  the  Eternal." 


3tfc*?R,  flc 

3?Tc*TT 


—  I  ska  Upanishat,  6,  7 

'  He  that  seeth  all  things  in  the  Self,  and  the  Self  in  all 
things,  he  thenceforth  doubteth  and  sorroweth  no  more/ 


Vlll 

seekers  after  a  final  solution  of  the  ultimate  problems  of 
life,  who  are  not  content  with  the  solutions  now  extant. 
I  believe  that  such  an  endeavour  deserves  sympathy;  I 
believe  that  it  will  be  more  successful  if  I  have  the  help 
and  co-operation  of  sympathetic  friends  than  if  it  were 
left  to  my  own  unaided  resources ;  and  I  believe  that  you 
can  and  will  give  such  help  effectively.  This  help  from 
you  is  the  more  needed  as  the  many  distractions  of  a  life, 
which  past  karma  has  thrown  along  the  lines  of  office  and 
the  business  of  the  householder,  rather  than  those  of 
literary  pursuits  and  the  studious  leisure  of  the  scholar, 
have,  prevented  me  from  making  this  work  anything  more 
than  the  merest  outlines  of  the  all-embracing  subject  of 
metaphysic,  well  defined  as  '  completely  unified  know- 
ledge,' treated  therein — and  those  outlines  too,  full  of 
immaturity  of  thought,  possible  extravagance  of  express- 
ion, and  certain  lack  of  the  finish  of  scholarship. 

"  I  therefore  pray  that  you  will  look  through  this 
little  book  and,  unless  you  think  it  wholly  useless  for  the 
purpose  mentioned,  will  send  it  back  to  me  after  having 
noted  on  the  blank  pages  all  obscure  or  doubtful  and 
debatable  or  positively  inaccurate  and  inconsistent  state- 
ments of  fact,  falseness  or  exaggeration  of  sentiment,  and 
confusion  or  illogic  of  arguments  and  marshalling  of 
ideas,  that  you  may  notice." 

Suggestions  for  improvement  were  received  in 
chronological  order  from :  Pt.  Ganganath  Jha,  Pro- 
fessor of  Samskrt,  Muir  Central  College,  Allahabad ; 
Babu  Govinda  Das,  of  Benares  (my  elder  brother) ; 


IX 


Dr.  Hiibbe-Schleiden,  of  Dohren  bei  Hannover,  Germany ; 
Dr.  J.  H.  Stirling,  of  Edinburgh  ;  Prof.  J.  E.  McTaggart, 
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge ;  Pt.  M.  S.  Tripathi,  Author 
of  A  Sketch  of  Vedanta  Philosophy,  of  Nadiad ; 
P.  T.  Shrinivasa  lyengar  Esq.,  M.A.,  Principal,  Narsingh 
Row  College,  Vizagapatam  ;  J.  Scott  Esq.,  M.A.,  Principal, 
Bahauddin  College,  Junagadh.  Ayodhya  Das  Esq.,  B.A., 
Barrister-at-Law,  Gorakhpur ;  Pt.  Sakharam  G.  Pandit, 
Branch  Inspector,  Theosophical  Society,  Benares  ; 
Pt.  Bhavani  Shankar,  Branch  Inspector,  Theosophical 
Society,  Benares ;  M.  Andre  Chevrillon,  of  Paris ; 
B.  Keightley  Esq.,  M.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  of  London. 

I  gratefully  record  the  names  of  these  friends,  person- 
ally known  or  not  known,  but  most  truly  friends  in  the 
spirit  and  helpers  in  a  common  cause. 

But  far  more  than  to  all  these  friends  are  this  book 
and  I  under  obligations  to  Mrs.  Annie  Besant,  who  first 
saw  the  rough  draft  of  the  work  in  manuscript,  encour- 
aged me  to  persevere  with  it,  then  carefully  went  over 
every  line  of  the  printed  proof-copy,  suggested  innumer- 
able improvements,  and  finally  saw  it  through  the  press. 

BHAGAVAN  DAS 
Benares,  1904. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 

THE  work  has  been  out  of  print  for  nearly  four  years. 
But  the  demand  for  it  has  continued.  Hence  this  second 
edition.  The  text  has  been  altered  but  little,  though 
revised  carefully.  Further  considerations,  explanations, 
solutions  of  difficulties,  answers  to  objections,  have  been 
supplied  in  additional  notes. 

Some  friends  have  queried,  Why  the  name,  The 
Science  of  Peace  ? 

It  is  only  a  rendering  of  a  recognised  and  significant 
Samskrt  word  for  the  Vedanta,  viz.,  Moksha-shastra, 
which  means,  literally,  the  Science  of  Deliverance, 
Freedom. 

Science  is  organised  knowledge,  knowledge  which 
recognises  similarities  in  diversities  and  arranges  groups 
of  facts  in  specified  relations  with  each  other.  Such 
sciences,  of  the  finite,  are  pursued  because  they,  in  some 
way  or  other,  minister  to  finite  human  needs.  This 
ministration  is  their  function.  All  organisation  is  for  a 
purpose,  towards  the  fulfilment  of  which  the  function  of 
each  organ  in  that  organisation  helps. 

The  most  comprehensive  Science  is  the  most  com- 
pletely organised,  unified  knowledge,  which  sees  not 
merely  similarities  in  diversities,  but,  co-ordinating  and 


Xll 

summing  up  all  sciences  in  itself  as  Brahma-vidya  the 
*  great  science  '  and  the  '  Science  of  the  Infinite/  sees 
the  Absolute  Unity  of  Life  in  and  through  all  the  many- 
ness  of  forms,  whereof  what  has  been  called  the  organic 
unity  of  Nature  is  the  expression  ;  it  sees  the  One  Self 
at  the  central  heart  of  all  things,  and  all  things  radiating 
from  that  central  heart ;  and  the  purpose  of  this  great 
and  '  true  vision,'  this  samyag-darshana,  is  the  fulfil- 
ment of  that  deepest,  that  infinite  need  of  the  human 
being,  viz.,  the  Peace  of  mind  that  arises  out  of  freedom 
from  all  doubts  and  consequent  sorrows,  out  of  the 
eternal  assurance  of  deathless  self-dependence. 

Hence  Moksha-shastra,  of  which  The  Science  of 
Peace  is  an  equivalent,  and  of  the  conclusions  of  which 
this  work  constitutes  one  way  of  presentation. 

The  Science  of  the  Sacred  Word,  or  the  Pranava- 
vada  of  Gdrgyayana  may  be  regarded  as  a  continuation 
of  this  work.  Other  compilations  of  the  writer  illustrate 
the  same  underlying  principles  in  different  aspects.  The 
Science  of  the  Emotions  deals  with  the  nature  and  culture 
of  the  feelings  in  the  light  thereof,  in  the  same  terms  of 
Self  and  Not-Self  and  the  desire-aspect  of  the  Relation 
between  them.  The  Science  of  Social  Organisation,  or 
the  Laws  of  Manu,  and  The  Science  of  Religion  or 
Sanatana  Vaidika  Dhanna,  show  the  application  of 
those  same  principles  (in  terms  of  the  three  aspects  of 
the  Relation  and  consequent  three  temperaments  and 
psycho-physical  types  of  human  beings,  viz.,  intellectual, 
active,  and  emotional)  to  the  planning  out  and 


xin 

administration  of  the  affairs  of  individual,  as  well  as 
communal,  human  life ;  to  civics,  politics,  and  law- 
religion,  in  other  words  ;  and  various  pamphlets  endeavour 
to  show  their  bearings  on  current  problems. 

To  help,  however  feebly  and  haltingly,  in  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  ancient  and  the  modern,  the  Eastern 
and  the  Western,  to  each  other ;  in  the  restoration  of 
spiritual  insight  to  material  science ;  in  the  passing  of 
this  revived  spirituality  into  the  new  forms  of  Science 
and  Art,  ideals  and  aspirations,  laws  and  conventions, 
that  the  turning  of  the  wheel  of  time  makes  inevitable  ; 
in  dealing  with  modern  problems  in  the  light  of  the 
Ancient  Spirit  and  bringing  about  a  true  synthesis  of 
the  many  components  of  the  human  race  and  an  effective 
and  lasting  '  balance  of  power '  between  the  many  in- 
terests, classes  and  factors  of  human  society,  '  clerical,' 
political,  financial  and  industrial — this  is  the  general 
purpose  of  all  these  compilations,  in  continuation  of  the 
immediate  and  obvious  special  purpose  of  each. 

The  great  quality  of  the  purpose  is  the  only  redeemer 
of  the  little  quality  of  the  compilations. 

Benares  BHAGAVAN  DAS 

28th  February,  1919. 


PREFACE  TO  THIRD  EDITION 

ALL  the  matter  of  the  previous  edition,  text  and 
notes,  has  been  retained  in  this.  But  verbal  improve- 
ment has  been  attempted.  Long  sentences  have  been 
cut  into  short.  There  has  also  been  endeavour  to  make 
the  meaning  clearer  where  it  was  obscure.  Considerable 
additions  have  been  made  to  text  as  well  as  notes,  by 
incorporation  of  material  which  had  gathered,  in  the 
twenty-six  years  elapsed  since  the  last  edition,  as  manus- 
cript notes  on  the  margins  of  my  personal  copy,  sug- 
gested by  books  read  during  this  period. 

A  reason  for  the  name,  The  Science  of  Peace,  was 
mentioned  in  the  preface  to  the  second  edition.  Another 
is  that  the  book  endeavours  to  make  Peace  between  all 
possible  views  and  opinions  which  seem  to  conflict,  but 
cannot  really  do  so,  since  they  all  are  in  the  Same  Con- 
sciousness. The  principle  of  reconciliation,  stated 
repeatedly  in  text  and  notes,  is,  '  Vision  Changes  with 
angle  of  vision  ',  '  Difference  of  viewpoint  makes  differ- 
ence  of  view  ',  '  Duty  differs  with  circumstance  ',  "  New 
occasions  make  new  duties  ",  "  The  old  order  changes, 
yielding  place  to  new  ".  Also,  head,  heart,  and  limbs, 
knowledge,  desire,  and  action,  are  reconciled,  Rational- 
ism, the  philosophy  of  the  head,  mysticism,  the  aspiration 


XVI 

and  longing  of  the  heart,  Practicalism,  the  activity  of 
the  limbs,  all  are  unified  here.  (Spirituo-Material) 
Science- Devotion- Action,  Jnana-Bhakti-Karma,  are  all 
shown  to  be  inseparable  aspects  of  One  and  the  same 
Life;  Conflict  is  only  Apparent,  Eternal  Unity  and 
Peace  is  Real.  This  reason  is  only  subsidiary  to  the 
first-mentioned,  because  without  peace  between  head, 
heart,  and  limbs,  there  is  no  peace  for  the  soul. 

Yet  another  reason  is  that  this  book  essays  to  make 

Peace    between   ancient   eastern   Vedanta   and   modern 

western   science.     The  former  tells   us  that  the  moving 

Universe  is  a  Mirage,   Illusion,  Myth,  Mithya,  Maya. 

The  latter  tells  us  that  Law  reigns  in  Nature.  Upanishats 

speak  of   n  i  y  a  t  i ,   '  fixed  law,  fate,  destiny,  d  i  s  h  t  a , 

and    also    of    Yadrchchha,     chance.     But   current 

V64anta   has   forgotten    it  all.     A  New  Age,  of   "  The 

Federation  of  the  World  and  the  Parliament  of  Man  " 

requires  a  new  statement  of  the  Ancient-most  Philosophy 

as  Foundation,  Inspiration,  Ideal,  Guide  and  Director. 

This    Philosophy    must    be   one   which   reconciles   the 

Yadrchchha-  Wilfulness-Self-will     of      Dream-Play 

with   the  Indefeasible  Rule  of  Law.     That  Meta-Physic 

is  not  Meta-Physic  which   does  not  include  all  Physics 

within  'itself.     That   Self  is  not  In-finite  which  does  not 

include  all  finite  selves  and  all  not-selves  within  It.  That 

Freedom  is  not  Supreme  Freedom  which  does  not  include 

all   bonds,  all  law-and-order.     This  reason,  again,  is  also 

only   subsidiary  to  the  first;  for  western  Science  and 

eastern  Philosophy  represent  age  and  youth,  Pursuit  and 


XV11 


Renunciation ;  and  without  Peace  between  the  two, 
younger  generation  and  older,  there  cannot  be  Peace 
within  the  home.  Also,  it  is  patent  that  both  states  come 
to  each  soul,  one  after  another,  in  succession.  As  a 
western  writer  has  well  said : 

"  For  a  scientific  theory  to  be  final,  the  mind  would 
have  to  embrace  the  totality  of  things  in  block,  and 
place  each  thing  in  its  exact  relation  to  every  other 
thing  ". 

Reconciliation  of  all  religions  particularly  has  been 
attempted  in  another  book  by  this  writer,  The  Essential 
Unity  of  All  Religions.  Reconciliation  of  all  sorts  of 
views,  as  well  as  of  all  'religions,  has  been  attempted  in 
Hindi,  in  Samanvaya,  by  him. 

From  one  standpoint,  this  whole  book  may  be  re- 
garded as  a  feeble  endeavour  to  expound  more  fully  some 
aspects  of  "  the  fundamental  propositions  "  and  "  the 
basic  conceptions "  stated  on  pp.  79-85  of  Vol.  I  of 
H.  P.  Blavatsky's  The  Secret  Doctrine,  (Adyar  Edit  ion) .% 


*  Print-order  '  for  the  first  forme  of  the  present  edi- 
tion was  sent  to  Adyar  on  1-1-1945,  three  years  ago. 
Conditions  created  by  the  second  World  War,  paper- 
famine,  enormous  increase  of  all  costs,  going  away  of 
press-workers  to  other  occupations,  are  responsible  for 
spreading  over  three  years,  work  which,  normally,  should 
have  been  completed  in  three  months  or  at  most  six.  In 
the  meafitime,  the  writer  has  grown  older  (from  seventy- 
six  to  seventy-nine  years  of  age),  his  eyes  weaker,  and 


xvin 


memory  more  slippery.  Consequently,  his  proof-correction 
has  not  been  efficient  ;  and  there  are  many  repetitions, 
some  of  which  were  not  necessary;  though,  probably, 
each  repetition,  in  its  new  setting,  discloses  a  new  aspect, 
or  exposes  more  fully  an  old  one,  of  the  subject ;  and  this  is 
Nature's  way  too  ;  also  of  Itihasa-Purdna.  Such  mistakes 
as  are  likely  to  cause  doubt  and  perplexity  to  the  reader, 
have  been  noted  in  the  Corrigenda  which  are  placed 
before  the  text,  (not  after,  as  is  usually  done),  to  enable 
the  reader  to  make  the  corrections  before  he  begins 
reading.  To  come  at  them  after  he  has  finished  the 
book,  with  doubts  and  perplexities  unsolved,  is  too  late, 
and  of  no  use. 


My  gratitude  is  due,  in  the  first  place,  to  Mr.  K.  S. 
Krishnamurti,  Manager  of  the  Theosophical  Publishing 
House,  who  decided  to  take  up  the  work  of  a  new 
edition,  despite  the  immense  difficulties  created  by  the 
conditions  above  referred  to ;  in  consequence  of  which 
some  projected  appendices  have  been  dropped  also.  My 
thanks  are  also  due  to  the  Press  as  a  whole  for  bearing 
patiently  with  my  bad  habit  of  making  many  additions 
and  alterations  in  the  second  galley-proof,  and,  very 
rarely  though,  in  the  page-proofs  also.  My  gratitude  to 
Miss  Preston  and  Mr.  Henry  van  Zeijst,  who  have 
revised  the  Indices,  is  more  fully  stated  in  the  note 
prefixed  to  them. 

BHAGAVAN  DAS 


MEND,  O  Master  !,  with  Thy  perfectness,  Thy  servant's 
imperfection,  lest  any  earnest  seeker  after  Truth  be  led 
astray  by  error  of  his.  Subtile  is  that  utter  Truth, 
though  all  so  simple,  very  difficult  to  set  on  high  so  it 
shall  shine  out  strong  and  clear  and  steady,  and  very 
feeble  for  such  purpose  is  the  hand  that  would  now  do 
so.  Guide  Thou  that  hand  aright. 


CORRIGENDA 


(Only  such  errors  are  noted  and  corrected  below,  as  are 
likely  to  cause  perplexity  or  misunderstanding.  These 
corrigenda  are  placed  before,  the  text  begins — instead  of  after 
it  ends,  as  is  usually  done — in  order  that  the  corrections  may 
be  made  before  the  reader  begins  perusal). 


PAGE 

LINE 

FOR 

READ 

9 

heading 

First 

Second 

14 

3  from  bottom 

on 

an 

15 

6     „         „ 

on 

or 

32 

18 

ft?  awri: 

f%|^  3fW: 

68 

14 

Carried 

endeavoured  to 

carry 

83 

heading 

Examination 

explanation 

122 

19 

h  ar  vat  i 

h  ar  at  i 

129 

7  from  bottom 

seets 

sects 

149 

15 

ftsjf^fs4t 

ft^T^ft 

157 

11 

161 

f.n.  3,  1.  3 

27 

72 

165 

heading 

IX 

VIII 

170 

19 

spirits 

spirits,  Dhyan 

Chohans 

191 

22 

as  in 

as  also  in 

- 

23 

also  Glta 

Glta 

CONTENTS 

(Headings,  placed  on  top  of  every  page,  supplement 
this  Table  of  Contents  abundantly.) 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.     THK  GREAT  QUFSTIONING 

Vairagya.  world-surfeit,  of  Nachiketa  and  his  question 
to  Yama,  ruler  of  the  Pr£ta-worlds  -  Vairagya  of  Mai^rcyl 
and  her  question  to  Yajrfavalkya  — Vairagya  of  Rama 
and  his  question  of  Vasishtha. — Quest  of  the  soul  after 
immortality  and  self-dependence  ,  its  shrinking  from  anni- 
hilation and  from  dependence  on  the  mercy  of  another.— 
NOTE  :  Psychical  Autobiography  ....  1 

II      THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND  ANSWERS  : 

Craving  of  the  jiva  for  a  synthesising  unity  —  Its  first 
finding,  viz  ,  creation  by  a  Personal  First  Cause  ,  and  its 
worship  thereof. — Failure  of  this  finding  to  bring  per- 
manent peace  — The  jiva's  further  search  and  second 
finding,  viz.,  evolution  by  the  interplay  of  two  co-eternal 
factors  ,  a  philosophy  without  a  religion  —  Failure  of  this 
second  finding. — NOTE  •  Three  theories  of  Causation  .  6 

III.  UNCERTAINTIES. 

The  main  quest. — Many  subordinate  questions. — 
Correspondence  between  answers  to  the  mam  and  sub- 
ordinate questions  — NOTE  :  The  sempiternal  longing  .  11 

IV.  PRELIMINARIES  OF  THE  THIRD  AND  LAST  ANSWER. — 

SELF  AND  NOT-SELF  ; 

Existence  of  Self. — Nature  of  Self. — Its  immortality. — 
Self  not  compound  or  multiplex,  but  the  sole  source,  sub- 
strate, refuge,  of  the  compound  and  multiplex. — Uni- 
versal solipsism  —Self  not  definable  in  terms  of  anything 
limited  and  particular. — Self  not  commonplace  nor  yet 
anything  mysterious  or  mystical.— Meaning  of  enquiry.— 
Direct  and  indirect  knowledge. --The  nature  of  the  Not- 
Self  .—The  partial  peace  of  Pratyag-atma,  the  Self  .  21 


XX11 
CHAPTER  PAGE 

V.     MUTUAL  RELATION  OF  SELF  AND  NOT-SELF  : 

The  kind  of  relation  desired  between  Self  and  Not-Self, 
viz.,  such  as  will  make  Not-Self  wholly  dependent  on 
Self.— No  enquiry  needed  as  to  origin  of  Self.— The 
only  need  of  thought  is  to  free  Self  from  dependence  on 
Not-Self,  to  derive  the  changeful  from  the  changeless. — 
Attempts  to  formulate  the  relation. — Dvaita  Vedanta,  only 
another  form  of  the  theory  of  creation,  hence  also  a 
failure. — Vishishta-Advaita  Vedanta,  only  another  form  of 
the  theory  of  evolution  by  the  interaction  of  two  factors, 
hence  also  a  failure  ......  43 

VI.     MUTUAL     RELATION   OF  SELF   AND  NOT-SELF    (Con- 
tinued) : 

The  same  results  in  terms  of  European  philosophies. — 
The  inspiration  of  Indian  thought,  ethico-rehgious  •  know- 
ledge for  the  sake  of  happiness  — That  of  modern  Euro- 
pean thought,  mostly  intellectual  and  epistemological : 
knowledge  for  the  sake  of  knowledge.  Locke's  finding  : 
there  is  nothing  in  the  intellect  which  was  not  previously 
in  the  senses. — Leibnitz's  addition  •  '  except  intellect 
itself  '. — Berkeley's  finding  .  the  csse  of  matter  is  its 
pcrcipi. — Hume's  finding  ;  the  converse  — Consequent 
restoration  of  the  problem  to  the  status  quo,  but  on  a 
higher  level. — Kant's  finding  a  mental  thing-in-itself 
prpjecting  '  forms  '  and  a  material  thing-m- itself  project- 
ing '  matter,'  '  sensations  ' — Consequent  aggravation  of  the 
problem. — Subsequent  attempts  of  Fichte  and  others  to 
unify  two  thmgs-in-themselves  of  Kant. — Schelling's  in- 
ference of  the  Absolute  from  the  Relative  — Hegel's  work. 
— Its  defects  —  Fichte's  explanation  of  World-Process  in 
terms  of  Ego  and  Non-Ego. — Its  general  similarity 
with  the  views  of  Acjvaita  Vedanta :  Determination 
of  nature  of  Ego  by  the  method  of  adhyaropa- 
apavada,  abscissio  infimti,  postulation -negation. — The 
last  difficulty. — Need  to  justify  the  very  fact  and  nature 
of  change  at  all,  and  to  combine  both  change  and 
changelessness  in  the  Absolute. — Attempts  of  Rosi- 
crucians  in  this  behalf. — Logia,  great  sentences,  of 
Veda,  as  employed  by  Advaita  Vedanta.— NOTE  I  : 
Pantheon  of  Philosophers.-— NOTE  JI  :  Comparison  of 
Hegel,  Fichte,  and  Vedanta  .  .  .  .52 

VII.    THE  LAST  ANSWER  : 

Eulogy,  in  Scripture,  of  AUM  as  last  answer. — 
A  hypothesis  as  to  real  meaning  of  Aum  as  thus 
eulogised. — The  logion,  '  Ego  Non-Ego  Non,'  as  real 


XXlll 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

meaning  of  the  three-lettered  Aum,  and  as  final  ex- 
planation of  World-Process.— Approaches  to  this  logion 
in  current  Upantshats  and  Puranas. — Most  significant 
form  of  this  logion,  '  Aham  Etat  Na,1  '  I-This-Not  '. — 
Joy  of  the  finding. — NOTE  I  :  No  appeals  to  Scripture. — 
NOTE  II  :  Some  more  ancient  texts  .  .  108 

VIII.     BRAHMA  OR  THE  ABSOLUTE— THE  DVANDVATITAM  : 

Changelessness  in  the  logion. — Change  within  it. — 
Method  of  World-Process,  and  of  all  thought,  the  same, 
viz.,  abscissio  mfimti. — Presence  of  all  that  is  needed, 
of  all  contradictions  as  well  as  of  their  reconciliation  by 
mutual  abolition,  within  the  Absolute  — So-called  indescn- 
babihty  of  the  Absolute  due  not  to  powerlessness  but  to 
completion  of  thought.  — Correction  of  Hegel  by  V6danta. 
— Many  names  of  the  Absolute.  — Reason  for  the  name 
Param-atma  given  to  Brahma. — NOTE  •  A  few  more 
ancient  texts,  Vedic  and  Buddhist  .  ...  138 

IX.    DVANDVAM — THE  RELATIVE  : 

(A)   PRATYAG-ATMA— SELF 

Nature  of  Pratyag-atma  and  its  identity  with  all  jivas. 
— Distinction  between  It  and  Brahma  — Nature  of  Self 
with  reference  to  Time,  Space,  and  Motion.— An  illu- 
stration, by  'Sound  Sleep'.— Genesis  of  the  three  attributes 
of  Pratyag-atma,  viz.,  Sat-Chit-Ananda,  Being-Con- 
sciousness-Bliss,  corresponding  to  Kriya-Jnana-Ichchha, 
Action-Cognition-Desire. — Tn-une-ness  of  the  Absolute  < 

reflected  in  these  three  attributes. — Worship  of  the  Self    .       158 

X.    PVANUVAM— THE  RELATIVE  (Continued)  : 

(B)   MULA-PRAKRTI— NOT-SELF,  MATTER 

Various  significant  names  of  Mula-prakrti.  — Its  essential 
nature  and  characteristic. — Consequences  ensuing  from 
that  nature. — Birth  of  the  world's  endless  diversity  (a)  of 
pseudo-infinite  particulars,  (b)  in  pairs,  (c)  mutually  and 
positively  opposed,  and  so  always  abolishing  each  other. — 
Meaning  of  arbitrariness ;  its  absence  from  the  World- 
Process  taken  as  a  whole.  Continuum  of  the  World- 
Process,  in  consequence  of  indivisibility  of  the  Absolute, 
appearing  in  the  fact  that  everything  is  everywhere  and 
always. — False  assumption  by  Not-Self  of  the  charac- 
teristics of  Self,  infinity,  eternity,  etc. — Explanation  of 
why  two  or  rather  three  parts  are  distinguishable  in  the 
Partless  Logion.— Meaning  of  'Illusion'.— Safeguards  pre- 
sent in  the  Logion  itself  against  all  possible  impeachments. 


XXIV 

CHAPTER  PAGE     » 

—Why  Matter  is  Uncreatable  and  Indestructible.— 
Mutual  balancing  of  increase  and  decrease,  action  and 
reaction. — Some  suggested  lines  of  thought.— How  Three 
Moments  are  distinguishable  in  the  partless  Absolute. — 
Their  simultaneousness  despite  succession. — World- 
Process  a  device  for  reconciliation  of  antinomies  of  the 
reason. — Distinction  between  ideal  and  real,  thought  and 
thing,  abstract  and  concrete. — Special  attributes  of  Mula- 
Prakrti,  viz.,  Sattva-Rajas-Tamas,  Cogmsability-Mobility- 
Desirability.  corresponding  to  Guna-Karma-Pravya, 
Quality-Movement-Substance. — Universal  presence  of  all, 
with  predominance  of  one  of  these  three. — Worship  of 
Not-Self  .—NOTE :  How  Metaphysic  illuminates  all  .  172 

XI.  PVANDVAM— THE  RELATIVE  (Continued)  : 

(C.—i.)  SHAKTI- ENERGY  AND  NEGATION— AS  THE 
RELATION  AND  THE  CAUSE  OF  INTERPLAY  BETWEEN 
SELF  AND  NOT-SELF. 

Significance  of  Negation,  in  permutations  of  the 
logion. — Various  facts  and  beliefs  corresponding  to  the 
permutations. — Affirmation  and  Negation  involved  in 
Not. — Consequences  in  shape  of  laws  of  alternation 
and  rhythm. — Chakra,  wheel,  of  Pravrtti  and  Nivrtti, 
Pursuit  and  Renunciation. — Pseudo- infinite  cycles. — Law 
and  breaches  of  law  subsumed  under  ever  wider  law. — 
.  Necessity  of  the  Changeless  Nature  of  the  Absolute,  as 
embodied  and  described  in  the  logion,  the  one  Cause  of 
all  causes.— Meaning  of  Cause.— The  Whole  the  Cause  of 
each  Part. — Metaphysic  of  Free-will. — Necessity  as 
Maya. — Etymology  of  Maya. — Correspondence  between 
evolution  of  a  language  and  a  whole  world-system. — 
Connection  between  Maya-Shakti  and  Negation. — Shakti 
as  might,  power,  energy,  etc. — Its  three  attributes,  viz., 
Avarana-Vikshe'pa-Samya  ;  attraction,  repulsion ,  balanced 
alternation ,  Srshti-Sthiti-Samhara,  creation-preservation- 
destruction  —  Vidya,  Ayicja,  Mahavidya,  Science,  Nesci- 
ence, Wisdom. — Worship  of  Shakti. — Confusion  as  re- 
gards Shakti  and  Prakrti  in  current  Samskrt  works — 
Para,  A  para,  and  Daivi  Prakr.tis. — NOTE  :  Real  mean- 
ing and  correspondence  of  Sattva-Rajas-Tamas  and  other 
triads  .  .  .  .  .199 

XII.  DVANDVAM— THE  RELATIVE  (Continued) : 

(C.— ii.)  SHAKfl-ENERGY  AND  NEGATION— AS  CONDI- 
TION OF  INTERPLAY  BETWEEN  SELF  AND  NOT-SELF. 

Cause  and  Condition. — Distinction  between  them. — 
Various  kinds  of  causes.— Their  common  chararteristic.— 


XXV 
CHAPTER  PAGE 

Shakti  as  cause  and  Negation  as  condition. — Three  attri- 
butes or  aspects  of  Negation,  vtz.t  Space-Time-Motion-  — 
Their  genesis  and  correspondence  with  the  primal  trinity. 
Variability  of  such  correspondence. 

(a)  Space. — Space  as  coexistence. — Triple  aspects   of 
Space,    viz.,    (I)    Side-beside-between,   (2)   inner-outer- 
through,      (3)     point-radii-sphere,     etc. — Pseudo-infinite 
dimensions  of  space. — Worlds  within  worlds. — Symbology 

(b)  Time. — Time  as  succession— Its  triplicities,   viz  , 
(1)     begmning-end-middle,     (2)     Past-future-present,    (3) 
Moment-period-cycle  — Personal  immortality. — Variations 
of  correspondence. — Symbology.— Interchange  of  aspects 
between  the  Puranic  Gods. 

(c)  Motion. — Motion   as   interweaving   of  co-existence 
and  succession. — Its  triplets,  viz.,   (1)  Mergence-emerg- 
ence-recurrence, (2)  approach-recess-revolution,  (3)  linear- 
rotatory-spiral,  etc.  -Various  aspects  of  motion. — Various 
significant    ways    of   describing   motion. — Symbology. — 
Unresolvable  mutual  immanence  ond  synchronousness  of 
all    trinities  and  triplets. — Co-inherence  of  all  such  trini- 
ties, that  is  to  say,  of  the  whole  of  Samsara,  in  each 
jiva-atom,  each  composite  of  Self  and  Not-Self. — Solution 
of  the  riddle  that  all  is  everywhere  and  always — NOTE  I  . 
The   World- Drama  needs  Tragedy   as  well  as  Comedy. 
NOTE  II  •  Meaning  of  Immortality  ,  all  jivas  are  equal. 

nay,  the  same.  297 

XIII.    JIVA-ATOMS—  (A)  GENERALLY 

A  resume. — Genesis  of  the  jiva-atom. — Its  general 
negational  attributes,  viz.,  Size-Life-Vibration. — Defini- 
tion of  atom. — Of  jiva. — Adhyasa,  mutual  reflection 
or  superimposition  of  each  other's  characteristics.— Um- 
versals,  singulars,  and  particulars-individuals. — Animate, 
inanimate,  all  un-inanimate  — Organic,  inorganic,  all- 
organic.—  Chemico- physical  affinities,  psychic  sympathies, 
psycho-physical  parallelism. — Significance  of  distinction 
between  animate  and  inanimate — Life,  death,  necro- 
biosis.— Meaning  of  death. — Soul,  body,  and  causal 
envelope  ;  Sthula-Sukshma-Karana,  gross-subtle-causal ; 
inner-outer-relational. — Nucleus-protoplasm-c  a  p  s  u  1  a  r  - 
network. —Pseudo-infinite  planes  within  planes  and 
sheaths  within  sheaths.— Birth,  death,  rebirth.— Patence, 
latence,  development. — The  Absolute. — Animate  nature, 
inanimate  nature,  Virat-Purusha  — Individuals  within 
individuals. — Various  theories  of  physical  science  tending 
towards  the  same  view. — Need  of  judging  things  by  their 
mutual  proportion.— Birth  of  facts  from  laws.— NOTE  : 
Support  of  Metaphysic  by  Physical  Science  .  .  333 


XXV! 
CHAPTER  PAGE 

XIV.    J!VA-ATOMS— (B)  OBJECTIVELY,  i.e.,  ATOMS: 

Other  aspects  and  sub-divisions  of  Size-Life-Activity. 
— Volume,  form,  measure :  large-small-average,  long- 
round-ovoid,  linear-square-spherical,  etc.  —Primary  form, 
sphere,  including  all  possible  other  forms.—-  Figure- 
symbology  — Period,  filling,  rate :  long-short-average, 
wen-filled-ill-filled-occupied,  fast-slow-even,  etc. — Ex- 
tent, rate,  degree:  great-little-mean,  bigh-low-even,  in- 
tense-sluggish-equable, etc. — Reason  of  these  triple 
subdivisions, — Their  simultaneity  and  nothingness. — Un- 
disturbedness  of  the  Absolute. — Other  triplets  under  Mind 
and  Matter ;  increase-decrease-equality  and  liberality- 
narrowness-tolerance  ;  growth-decay-coutinuance  and 
pursuit-renunciation-equanimity  ;  expansion-contraction- 
rhythm  and  pleasure-pain-peace.  Characteristic  attributes 
of  atom,  i.e.,  of  matter,  viz.,  Dravya-Guna-Karma. — 
Correspondences  with  other  triplets. — Nature  of  Guna, 
and  its  correspondence  with  Chit. — Subdivisions  of 
Guna. — Proprium,  accident,  attribute. — Concrete  instan- 
ces of  essential  properties. — Of  accidental  qualities. — Of 
attributes  generally. — Psychological  nature  of  sensations. 
-Pseudo-infinity  of  senses  and  sensuous  qualities. — All 
attributes  present  everywhere  and  always.  Nature  of 
Karma. — Why  it  corresponds  with  Sat — Its  subdivisions. 
— Expansion,  contraction,  vibration .»— Karmic  gunas,  gum'c 
karmas,  etc.,  eg.,  velocity,  dullness,  movement,  etc. — 
Nature  of  Dravya,  mere  'this-ness'. — Its  corres- 
pondence with  Anancla — Utter  inseparability  of  the  three 
aspects  of  matter,  Dravya,  Guna,  and  Karma,  or  '  This, 
Such,  and  Thus  '.—Subdivisions  of  Dravya. — Positive 
weight,  negative  weight,  dead  weight  ,  heavy,  buoyant, 
resistant,  etc. — Why  Dravya  corresponds  with  Ananda 
and  Tamas.-—  Reason  of  variations  in  correspondence. 
Simultaneousness  as  well  as  succession  of  all  these  sub- 
divisions — Concomitance  of  the  three  aspects  helpful  in 
reconciling  many  conflicting  theories  of  physical  science. 
— Appearance  of  qualities,  apparently  exclusively  cognis- 
able'by  one  sense  only,  in  the  objects  of  all  the  senses, 
— Vedantic  doctrine  of  quintuplication  of  all  sense- 
elements. — Parallel  changes  of  aspects. — Pseudo-infinite 
varieties  of  Guna. — Of  Karma. — Of  Dravya. — Pseudo- 
infinite  variety  of  dimension,  duration,  and  vibration  of 
atoms. —Reconciled  by  existence  of  planes  within 
•planes  .......  360 

XV.    JiVA-ATOMs— (C)  SUBJECTIVELY,  /  e.,  JIVAS  . 

Subjective  aspects  of  Size,  Life,  and  Vibration,  viz., 
range,    intensity,    calibre,   etc.,   as   appearing   in   inner 


\xvii 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

life  of  Consciousness  — Nature  of  Consciousness. — In 
what  sense  the  word  Consciousness  describes  Brah- 
ma.— A  re-statement  of  genesis  of  three  aspects  of 
individual  consciousness,  viz.,  cognition,  desire,  and 
action. — Their  subdivisions.— Cognition  and  action  in 
terms  of  each  other. — Multifarious  triplets  arising  under 
each. — Mutual  superimposition  of  attributes  between  Self 
and  Not-Self. — Pseudo-infinite  multiplications,  radiations, 
and  cognitions  between  selves  and  not-selves.  —Metaphysi- 
cal nature  and  genesis  of  organs  of  sense  and  action. — 
Metaphysic  of  sense-media,  ether,  air,  etc. — Significance 
of  concentric  mvolucra,  sheaths,  upadhis,  bodies,  of 
jiva,  with  special  reference  to  cognition.— Nucleus  and 
nucleolus. — Synthesis  of  pseudb-infinity  of  planes  — 
Method  of  the  synthesis,  by  triplets  of  planes  or  worlds. 
— Interpretation  of  Tri-bhuvanam. — Why  scriptural  state- 
ments are  capable  of  many  interpretations,  all  equally 
true  — "  As  above  so  below  ". — Distinction  between  Inner 
and  Outer,  Ideal  and  Real,  Thought  and  Thing.— Illustra- 
tion,— How  and  Why  this  distinction. — Metaphysical 
meaning  of  Memory. — Self  or  Self-consciousness  as 
reason,  and  reason  or  buddhi,  as  sutra,  thread,  network  of 
laws  of  the  World -Process,  and  web  of  life  of  individual 
organisms. — Individual  participation  in  Universal  Omni- 
science.— An  illustration — Latent  and  Patent. — Meaning 
of  '  Ideality  '  — Illustrations. — Individuality,  a  '  present  ' 
which  includes  a  '  before  '  and  an  '  after  '  — Metaphysical 
significance  of  Sukshma-Sharira. — Relation  of  subtler 
to  denser  planes  of  matter,  e  g.t  of  ether  to  gas,  gas  to 
water,  etc.,  similar  to  relation  of  Fratyag-atma  to 
Mula-prakrti. — Words  having  universal  as  well  as  special 
and  local  significance. — Illustrations. — Corollaries. — Ap- 
parently disconnected  planes  found  to  be  graded  together 
from  higher  standpoints. — Dimensions  of  space. — Expan- 
sion of  Consciousness. — Meaning  of  Yoga  .  .  399 

XVI.    SUMMATION  : 

The  Universal,  the  Singular,  and  the  Relation  between 
them.  — Certain  difficulties  of  ambiguity  — Suggested 
restrictions  of  connotation  — Reconciliation  between 
Nominalism  and  Realism,  etc.  — Manifestation  of  Self 
in  language. — Synthesis  of  discrete  facts  by  the  princi- 
ple of  Individuality. — Definitions  of  jiva-atom  and 
brahm-anda  in  terms  of  the  Absolute. — Illustrations. — 
Essential  and  complete  sameness  of  all  jivas. — Apparent 
difference  and  separateness  made  by  mere  variation  of 
order  of  experiences. — Why  order  of  experiences 
varies. — Balancing  of  pleasure  and  pain. — Bhartr-han's 


XXVU1 

CHAPTER  PAGF 

saying.— Real  significance  of  sameness  of  all  jivas  — 
The  converse  '  reality  '  of  appearance  of  difference  and 
evolution  of  jivas  from  so-called  lower  to  so-called  higher 
stages  and  involution  vice-versa. — The  wonder  of  the 
diversity  of  the  world  and  the  Peace  of  Sameness  amidst 
the  Turmoil  of  Change.— Conclusion  .  .  .  466 

DEDICATION            ....  496 

INDEX  OF  WORKS  REFERRED  TO            .  .     499 

INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES            .           .  .      505 

GLOSSARY  OF  SAMSKKT  Woitns  .           .511 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  GREAT  QUESTIONING 


"  THE  dread  doubt  that  seizeth  the  beholders  when  a 
man  passeth  away,  so  that  one  sayeth,  '  He  still  is,'  and 
another,  *  No,  he  is  no  more  '  —  I  would  know  the  truth 
of  this,  taught  by  thee,  O  Death  !  This  I  crave  as  the  third 
of  the  three  boons  thou  promised  !  '* 

This  is  the  boon  that  Nachiketa  asked  of  Yama, 
Master  of  Death,  Judge  of  departed  souls.  And  Yama 
shrank  from  the  great  task  imposed  on  him  and  an- 
swered :  "  Even  the  gods  have  suffered  from  this  doubt, 
and  very  subtle  is  the  science  that  resolveth  it.  Ask 
thou  another  boon  !  Besiege  me  not  with  this.  Take  all 
the  pleasures  that  the  earth  can  give  ;  take  undivided 
sovereignty  of  it  !  "  But  Nachiketa  :  "  Where  shall  all 
these  pleasures  be  when  the  end  comes  !  The  pleasures 
are  no  pleasures,  poisoned  by  the  constant  fear  of  Thee  ! 

1  Katha-Upanishat,    I,   i.    For   the   full    story   of   Nachiketa,   his 
seeking  and  his  finding,  see  the  Upanishat. 


2  BEGINNING    OF   THE    SEARCH    [SCIENCE    OF 

The  gods  too  suffer  from  the  doubt,  for  they  are  only 
longer-livea  and  not  eternal ;  and  that  they  suffer  is  but 
reason  why  I  would  not  be  as  they.  I  crave  my  boon 
alone.  Nachiketa  asks  not  for  another." 

"  If  all  this  earth  with  all  its  gems  and  jewels  were 
mine  without  dispute,  should  I  become  immortal  ?  "  So 
Maitreyl  questioned  Yajna-valkya  when  he  offered  wealth 
to  her  at  parting.  And  Yajna-valkya  answered  :  "  No, 
thou  couldst  only  live  as  the  wealthy  live*  and  die  as  they. 
Wealth  brings  not  immortality  !  "  Then  Maitreyl :  "  What 
shall  I  do  with  that  which  makes  me  not  immortal  ?  Tell 
me  what  thou  knowest  brings  assurance  of  eternity."  1 

So  Rama  also  asks  Vasishtha  :  "  The  books  that  say 
that  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Mahesha  are  the  three  highest 
gods  that  rule  our  solar  system,  say  also  that  they  die. 
Brahma,  the  highest-seated,  falls  ;  the  unborn  Hari  dis- 
appears ;  and  Bhava,«teource  of  the  existence  of  this  world, 
himself  goes  into  non-existence  !  How  then  may  feeble 
souls  like  mine  find  peace  and  rest  from  fear  of  death  and 
change  and  ending  ?  "  * 

"  To  be  dependent  on  another  (to  be  at  the  mercy  of 
another,  to  be  subject  to  the  relentlessness  of  death) — this 
is  misery..  To  be  Self-dependent — this,  this  is  happiness."3 

Thus,  instinctively  in  the  beginning,  consciously  and 
deliberately  at  ths  stage  when  self-consciousness  and 

1  Brhad-Aryanyaka-Upamshat,  II,  iv. 

2  Yoga-V&sishtha,  Vairagya  Prakarana,  xxvi,  29.  For  the  full  story, 
see  the  present  writer's  Mystic  Experiences,  (Talcs  from  the  Yoga- 
Vasishtha). 

8  Manut  iv,  160. 


PEACE,    CH.    l]  SPIRITUAL    DISTRESS  3 

intelligence  are  developed,  the  jlva1  feels  the  terror  of 
annihilation,  and  struggles  to  escape  from  it.  into  the 
refuge  of  some  faith  or  other,  low  or  high.  And  in  such 
struggles  only,  and  always,  hegin  religion  and  philosophy, 
each  shade  of  these  according,  step  by  step,  with  the 
stage  and  grade  of  evolution  and  intelligence  of  the  jlva 
concerned. 

But  when  this  fear  of  death  of  soul  and  body,  this 
fear  of  loss  and  change  and  ending,  pervades  t-hc  in* 
telligent  and  self-conscious  jlva  ;  when  it  destroys  his  joy 
in  the  things  that  pass,  makes  him  withdraw  from  all 
the  old  accustomed  objects  of  enjoyment,  and  fills  him, 
for  that  time,  with  sadness  and  disgust  and  loathing 
for  call  the  possible  means  of  pleasure  that  ever  hide 
within  their  lying  hearts  the  means  of  pain  ;  when  it 
leaves  him  naked  and  alone,  intensely  conscious  of  his 
solitude  and  sorrow,  shrinking  violently  from  the  false 
and  fleeting  show  of  the  world,  desolate  with  his  own 
misery  and  the  misery  of  others,  longing,  yearning, 
pining,  for  the  Permanent,  the  Eternal,  the  Restful, 
for  a  lasting  explanation  of  the  use  and- purpose,  origin 
and  end,  of  this  vast  slaughter-house,  as  the  whole 
world  then  seems  to  him  to  be — then  is  that  searching 
soul  passing  through  the  fires  of  burning  thought,  reflection 

JJiva  means  a  separate  self,  a  spirit  01  sonl,  a  living  thing,  an 
individual  unit,  vortex,  point,  focus  or  centre  of  latent  or  evolved  con- 
sciousness, a  single  part,  so  to  say,  of  the  Uni \ersal  Self,  a  dew-drop 
image  of  the  Sun,  passing  from  the  mineral  through  the  vegetable  and 
animal  into  the  human  and  superhuman  kingdoms  ;  here  of  course  a 
human  soul  or  spirit.  See  quotation  from  Yoga-V&sishthat  II,  xix,  in 
ch.  iv,  f.n.,  p.  29,  infra. 


4  STAGE    IN    LIFE   WHEN    IT    BEGINS    [SCIENCE    OF 

and  discrimination  between  the  Transient  and  the 
Permanent;  of  passionate  rejection  of  all  personal  and 
selfish  pleasures  and  attachments  in  himself  as  well  as 
others;  of  the  self-suppression,  the  intense  quiescence  and 
compassionate  sadness,  of  utter  renunciation ;  and  of  a 
consuming,  ever-present,  craving  and  travailing  for  the 
means  of  liberation,  from  that  seeming  slaughter-house, 
for  himself  and  for  all  others  ;  then  is  he  passing  through 
the  fires  that  shall  purify  him  and  make  him  worthy  of 
Ved-anta,  of  that  '  final  knowledge  '  which  he  craves,  and 
which  alone  can  bring  him  peace  and  fit  him  for  the 
work  that  lies  before  him.  Then  is  his  consciousness, 
his  individuality,  his  personal  self,  focussed  into  an  in- 
finitesimal point,  and,  thus  oppressed  with  the  feeling  of 
its  own  extreme  littleness,  is  it  ready  for  the  supreme 
reaction,  ready  to  lose  itself  and  merge  into  and  realize 
the  All-Consciousness  of  the  Infinite  and  Universal  Self. 
Why,  and  at  what  stage  of  his  evolution,  this  most 
fearful  and  most  fruitful  mood  comes  necessarily  on  every 
soul,  will  appear  of  itself,  when,  later  on,  the  mystery  of 
the  World-Process  has  been  grasped  and  understood.1 

NOTE. — The  first  six  chapters  of  this  work  constitute,  in 
a  way,  the  psychological  autobiography  of  the  writer.  They 
describe  the  stages  of  thought  through  which  he  passed  to  the 
finding  embodied  in  the  seventh  chapter.  And  they  have  been 
written  down  only  as  a  possible  guide-book  to  travellers  along 

1  Many  western  mystics,  poets,  philosophers,  have  experienced  and 
described  this  mood  ;  to  name  one,  Tolstoy,  in  How  I  came  to  Believe, 
gives  a  very  vivid  picture  of  his  own  v  a  i-r  a  g  y  a,  passionate  disgust  with 
the  world,  and  v  i-v  6  k  a,  search  for  the  Eternal  as  distinguished  from  the 
Fleeting. 


PEACE,    CH.    l]    PSYCHICAL    AUTOBIOGRAPHY  5 

the  same  path.  All  the  opinions  and  beliefs  criticised  in  them 
and,  for  the  time,  left  behind,  in  order  to  pass  further  on,  have 
served  as  staging-places  to  the  writer  himself,  have  been  held 
by  him  closely  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time,  and  then,  tailing 
to  bring  lasting  satisfaction  of  the  particular  kind  that  he  was 
seeking,  have  been  passed  by.  But  this  does  not  mean  that 
the  staging-places  and  the  rest-houses  have  been  abolished,  or 
are  of  no  use.  They  continue  to  exist,  will  always  exist, 
and  will  always  be  of  use  to  future  travellers.  No  deprecia- 
tion of  any  opinion  whatsoever  is  ever  seriously  intended  by 
the  writer.  Indeed,  it  is  a  necessary  corollary  of  the  view 
embodied  in  the  seventh  and  subsequent  chapters  of  the  work, 
that  every  opinion,  every  darshana,  every  *  view/  catches 
and  embodies  one  part  of  truth  ;  and  he  himself  now  holds  each 
and  every  one  and  all  of  the  opinions  that  appear  to  be  refuted 
in  these  preliminary  six  chapters — but  he  holds  them  in  a 
transmuted  form.  Each  form  of  faith,  each  rite  of  religion, 
each  way  of  worship,  has  its  own  justification.  If  the 
writer  has  unwittingly  used,  in  the  passion  of  his  own  struggle 
qnwards,  any  words  that  are  harsh  and  offend,  he  earnestly 
begs  the  forgiveness  of  every  reader  really  interested  in  the 
subject,  and  assures  him  that  if  he  does  think  it  worth  while 
to  read  this  book  through  systematically,  he  will  realize  that  it 
verily  endeavours,  not  to  depreciate  any,  but  to  appreciate  all 
thoughts,  and  put  each  into  its  proper  place  in  the  whole  world- 
scheme.  The  '  well-established  conclusion/  the  siddhanta, 
of  Indian  thought  is  that  as  3?r^fR^|^  qjft^:,  so  seW^T^ 
SRFT^i,  as  '  duty  varies  with  the  individual's  position,'  so  '  the 

view,  the  opinion,  varies  with  the  angle  of  vision,  the  situation, 
the  point  of  departure  '  ;  but  the  '  final  view/  of  Vcd-anta,  from 
the  '  universal '  standpoint,  includes^all  views. 

The  italicised  words,  '  and  for  all  others ',  p.  4  1.  8 
above,  make  mumuksha  equivalent  with  bodhi--chitta 
of  Buddhist  philosophy.  Spirit  of  holiness,  holiness  of  spirit, 
is  love  for  all,  compassion  for  all  who  are  suffering.  The 
objection  that  some  persons  feel  tired  of  life,  do  not  fear  death, 
indeed  welcome  it,  is  answered  in  ch.  ii  of  The  Science  of 
the  Self,  and  pp.  51-52  of  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Reli- 
gions. If  any  persons  really  do  not  want  any  philosophy,  or 


6     CRAVING  FOR  FREEDOM  FROM  FEAR    [SCIENCE    OF 

religion,  surely  none  need  be,  none  ought  to  be,  none  verily 
can  be,  forced  on  them.  From  the  point  of  view  of  this  work, 
ihe  impelling  motive,  p  r  a  -  y  o  j  a  n  a,  *  final  cause  ',  of  the 
search  for  philosophical  Truth,  is  not  intellectual  curiosity, 
but  profound  heart-cra\mg  for  Freedom,  Freedom  from  Fear, 
the  essence  of  which  Fear  is  Fear  of  Privation  and  Death  at 
the  hands  of  Another  than  Self.  To  rise  in  triumph  above  this 
Fear,  sensitive  and  steadfast  souls  seek  That  which  is  beyond 

all  Death,  ^   f§   ^   sftfcNfa  <4kT:,  3$^fa,  cTCST,  3?^%*, 

(Upan.),  "  with  abstinence  from  sense-indulgences,  ascetic 
ways,  and  intense  meditations  that  make  them  forget  even  the 
need  for  nourishment  of  body." 


CHAITKR   U 
THE    FIRST    AND    SECOND    ANSWERS 

THUS  we  find  that  the  j  I  v  a  doubts  and  asks  for  immortal- 
ity alone,  and  in  the  doubting  and  the  asking,  he  ever 
instinctively  feels  that  the  answer  lies  in  a  basic  '  Unity  ' 
of  some  sort  or  other,  and  that  peace  can  never  be  found 
in  an  unreconciled  and  conflicting  *  Many  '.  This  feeling 
conditions  his  search  throughout,  for  reasons  inherent  in 
him-Self  and  in  the  World-Process,  as  will  appear  later. 
As  the  Gitd  (xiii.  27)  says  :  "  Only  when  the  soul  sees 
the  Many  rooted  in  the  One  and  aiso  branching  out  from 
that  One,  does  knowledge  become  complete  and  perfect, 
does  the  Infinite  become  fulfilled  and  realized  in  that  soul, 
does  the  soul  identify  itself  with  the  All-Self,  Brahman." 


PEACE,    CH.    Il]       THE    FIRST    FINDING  7 

The  first  answer  that  the  soul  shapes  for  itself  to 
the  great  question,  the  first  tentative  solution  of  this 
overpowering  doubt,  is*  embodied  in  the  view  which  is 
called  the  arambha-vada,1  the  theory  of  a  begin- 
ning, an  origination,  a  "  creation  of  the  world  by  an 
agency  external  to  the  questioner  and  to  the  World  ". 
From  so-called  fetish-worship  to  highest  deism  and 
theism,  all  may  be  grouped  under  this  first  class  of 
answer. 

Instinctively  or  intelligently,  the  j  I  v  a  sees  that  effects 
do  not  arise  without  causes  ;  that  what  is  not  effected  by 
himself  must  be  caused  by  another  ;  that  he  himself  (as 
he  then  regards  himself)  is  an  effect,  and  that  his  cause 
must  be  another  ;  that  whatever  is  the  more  permanent, 
the  older,  is  the  cause  of  the  temporary,  the  younger  ; 
and  he  finally  infers  and  believes  that  his  well-being, 
permanence,  immortality,  lies  in,  is  dependent  on,  his 
cause,  his  Creator.  From  such  working  of  the  mind  arise 
the  multifarious  forms  of  faith,  beginning  with  belief  in, 
and  worship  of,  stone  and  plant  and  animal,  and  ending 
in  belief  in,  and  worship  of,  a  personal  First  Cause.  The 
general  form  and  meaning  of  worship  is  the  same  through- 
out, i.e.,  prayer  for  some  benefit  or  grace.  The  accompany- 
ing condition  of  worship  is  the  same  also,  viz.,  giving 

J  Paficha-dashi.  xin,  7. 


Hoffchng's  statement,  "  according  to  the  popular  conception  of  the 
causal  relation,  one  thing  is  the  cause,  another  thing  the  effect,  "  is  an 
almost  literal  translation  of  this  verse  ;  (Outlines  of  Psychology,  p.  209.) 


8  ITS    INSUFFICIENCY  [SCIENCE!    OF 

assurance  of  humility  in  order  to  evoke  benevolence 
in  the  object  of  worship,  by  prostration  and  obeisance  and 
sacrifice  of  objects  held  most  dAr,  to  prove  (sometimes, 
with  cruellest  immolation  of  others  or  of  self,  though  at 
others  with  a  most  beautiful  and  most  noble  self-surrender) 
that  they  are  not  held  dearer  than  that  worshipped 
object. 

This  first  answer  is  a  religion  as  well  as  a  philosophy, 
but  the  jlva  finds  not  rest  for  long  therein. 

The  concrete  material  idols  fail  again  and  again,  and 
so  does  the  mental  idol.  The  incompatibility  of  evil  and 
suffering  with  a  being  who  is  at  once  omnipotent,  omni- 
scient, and  all-good  ;  l  the  unsatisfied  need  for  an  explan- 
ation why  a  personal  being  who  is  perfect  should  create 
a  world  at  all,9  and  how  he  can  create  it  out  of  nothing  — 
as  he  must,  if  it  is  not  to  be  coexistent  with  and  so  at 
least  to  some  extent  independent  of  him  —  these  distressing 
doubts,  insoluble  on  '  the  theory  of  a  beginning,'  that 
have  always  shaken  faith,  first  in  the  power  and  goodness 
of  the  creator,  and  then  in  his  very  existence.  Inevitably, 
earlier  or  later,  they  wrench  the  earnestly-enquiring  jlva 
away  from  his  anchorage  in  that  theory,  and  set  him  adrift 
again,  again  a-searching. 

The  truth  that  underlies  this  first  answer,  in  all  its 
forms,  he  will  discern  again  when  he  has  obtained  what 
he  now  wants  so  urgently. 


|  Shankara,  Shariraka-bh&shya,  II,  i,  34. 


*  Ibid..  II,  i,  33. 


PEACE,    CH.    Il]       THE    FIRST    FINDING  9 

His  next  haven  of  rest,  the  second  answer,  is  the 
parinama-vada,1  or  vikara-vada,2  the  theory  of 
change,  transformation,  evolution  and  dissolution,  by  the 
interaction  of  two  factors.  By  a  great  generalisation  he 
reduces  all  the  phenomena  of  the  universe  to  two  per- 
manent elements,  present  always,  universally,  under  all 
circumstances,  throughout  all  the  changes  that  he  sees 
and  feels. 

The   materialism   and  agnosticism  which  believe  in 

*  Matter  and   Force  ',  and  declare  all  else  unknown  ;  the 
ordinary  Sankhya  doctrine  of  *  Purusha  and  Prakrti,  '  (or, 
rather,   an   infinite  number  of  Purushas  and  one  Prakrti), 

*  Ego   and    non-Ego,'    *  Self   and   not-Self,'  '  Subject  and 
Object  ',  '  Spirit  and  Matter  '  —  all  fall  under  this  second 
category.  Most  of  the  philosophies  of  the  world  are  here  ; 
the   variations  as  to  detail  are  endless,  but  the  view  that 
the   universe  is  due  to  two  finals,  is  common  to  them  all. 

At  this  stage,  if  the  duality  be  made  the  basis  of  a 
religion  at  all,  the  believer  proclaims  the  factor  of  Good 
as  superior  to  the  factor  of  Evil,  and  assigns^to  it  a  final 
triumph,  regarding  God  as  prevailing  over  Satan.  Hor- 
muzd  over  Ahriman,  Purusha  over  Prakrti,  Spirit  over 
Matter,  in  a  vague  undefined  way,  sacrificing  strict  logic 


1  Pancha-dasht,    xiii!   8. 


I  "  One  and  the  same  thing  pas- 
sing into  a  new  state,  as  milk  becoming  curds  ;  clay,  pots  ,  gold,  ear- 
rings —  this  is  parinama."  Compare  Hoffding,  loc.  cit.,  p.  212, 
'  *  Cause  and  effect  are  members  of  one  and  the  same  process  '  '  . 

-  Vedanta-sara. 


10  ITS    MANY    DEFECTS  [SCIENCE    OF 

to  the  instinctive  need  for  Unity,  which,  as  said  before, 
conditions  the  search  throughout.  But  where  the  two 
are  seen  as  equal,  as  in  the  Sankhya,  religion  vanishes,  no 
practice  corresponds  to  the  theory.  Thus,  the  Sankhya 
system  describes  Purusha  as  '  lame,'  and  Prakrtt  as  '  blind/ 
helping  each  other,  apparently,  for  the  purpose  of  (each 
feeling  it-kself'  alive,  existing,  in)  the  Play  of  the 
World- Process,  but  in  reality  opposed  in  nature.  The 
struggle  between  the  two  weakens  both  ;  each  factor 
neutralises  the  other.  There  is  no  worship  in  the  absence 
of  a  One  Supreme  to  worship.  Only  philosophy  remains, 
a  belief,  wavering  and  satisfactionless.  An  explanation 
by  two  eternals,  a  plurality  of  infinites,  each  unlimited 
and  yet  not  interfering  with  the  unlimitedness  of  the 
other,  though  existing  out  of  and  independently  of  it  ; 
with,  furthermore,  their  interplay  governed  by  Chance — 
such  an  explanation  is  no  explanation  at  all.  If  it  is 
said  that  these  many  eternals  and  infinites  exist,  not  out 
of  but,  within  each  other,  that  they  pervade  and  permeate 
each  other,  then  the  k  explanation  '  becomes  yet  more 
unintelligible.  It  is  all  a  contradiction  in  terms ;  it  is 
mere  arbitrariness  ;  there  is  no  order,  no  certainty,  no 
law,  no  reason  in  it.  However  correct  it  may  be  as  a 
generalised  statement  of  indubitable  facts,  viz.,  an  end- 
lessness of  Spirit  and  an  endlessness  of  Matter,  those 
facts  themselves  remain  unexplained,  unreconciled,  im- 
possible to  understand. 

The   truth   that  underlies  this  belief  also  will  appear 
when  the  final  ans\\er  is  found. 


PEACE,  CH.  Ill]   THREE  THEORIES  OF  CONSATION         11 

NOTE. — The  arambha-vada  corresponds  to  what  in 
modern  psychology  has  been  called  "  the  popular  conception 
of  causality";  (Hoffding's  Outlines  of  Psychology,  V — D). 
Hoffding's  own  view  may  be  described  as  the  scientific  notion 
ot  causality,  corresponding  to  the  parirjiarna-vada.  The 
final  or  Vedantic  notion,  including,  yet  transcending,  the  other 
two,  known  in  Samskrt  as  vivarta-vada,  adhyasa- 
vada,  and  also  as  abhasa-vada,  may  be  described  in 
modern  terms  as  the  metaphysical  notion  of  causation,  not 
yet  recognised  and  accepted  in  the  west ;  though  some 
thinkers  approximate.  Fichte,  Hegel,  Schopenhauer,  Bradley, 
Koyce,  Green,  Caird  and  others,  catch  different  aspects  of  it. 
Vivarta-vada  is  the  *  doctrine  of  reversal,  opposition,' 
because  the  Changing  World-Effect  is  the  illusory  opposite  of 
the  Changeless  Consciousness- Cause  ;  also,  perhaps,  because, 
while  the  Sankhya  concludes  that  Nature-Matter-Prakrti  is 
One,  and  Souls- Forces- Purushas  infinitely  Many,  the  Vedanta 
reverses  the  conclusion,  and  holds  that  the  Spirit  is  One,  and 
Matter  Many;  adhy-asa  is  'baseless  im-post-ure,  super - 
jm-positiou,  or  sup-position/  '  false  imputation/  of  attributes 
and  qualities  which  do  not  exist;  a-bhasa  is  'illusory 
appearance '.  The  full  significance  of  this  third  and  last 
answer  will  appear,  later  on.  See  ch.  xi,  infra. 


CHAPTER   III 

UNCERTAINTIES 

TENTATIVE,  temporary,  full  of  uncertainty  and  full  of 
questioning  is  this  stage.  Baffled  in  his  efforts  to  under- 
stand the  World- Process  completely  ;  barred  out  from  a 
perfect  religion-philosophy,  a  system  of  knowledge  which 
would  consistently  and  directly  unify  and  guide  his 
thought,  desire,  and  action,  head,  heart,  and  limbs,  in 


12  THE    ONE    GOAL  [SCIENCE    OF 

this  life  and  all  lives  to  come  ;  unable  to  rest  peacefully 
in  a  mere  incomplete  knowledge,  in  a  mere  belief  which 
remains  outside  of  his  daily  life  and  is  often  coming  into 
conflict  with  it ;  the  j  I  va  goes  back  again  and  again  to 
that  earlier  answer,  which,  if  only  belief,  only  incomplete 
knowledge,  is  yet  a  religion  also,  a  religion-philosophy, 
however  imperfect.  But  each  such  going  back  is  only 
the  preliminary  to  a  still  stronger  going  forward.  The 
jlva  is  now  in  the  grasp  of  an  indefeasible  reflective- 
ness, of  a  craving  of  the  intellect  that  may  not  be 
repressed.1  He  has  attained  his  majority  and  must 
now  stand  on  his  own  feet ;  his  parents  may  not 
fondle  him  in  their  lap  any  longer.  And  so  he  pro- 
gresses onwards  through  and  from  the  second  stage, 
driven  by  doubts,  harassed  by  heart-oppressing  questions. 
What  is  really  sought  by  the  soul,  is  the  supremacy 
of  a  One,  and  that  One,  My-Self ;  for  so  alone  can  My 
immortality  be  assured.  But  the  jlva  has  only  begun 
seeking.  It  is  full  of  the  sense  of  its  own  weakness.  It 
cannot  at  once  leap  to  the  knowledge  and  certainty  of  its 
own  supremacy.  In  the  a  r  a  m  b  h  a  ,  the  beginning,  of  its 
search,  it  can  reach  only  the  arambha-vada,  viz., 

1  f^fa,  v  i  v  6  k  a  ,  ever-present  discrimination  between  the  Transient 
ancf  the  Permanent ;  and  f^R,  vichara,  ever-present  reflection  on  the 
Why  and  Wherefore  of  things,  whence  arise  the  31*T,  shama,  <<[*?, 
d  a  m  a  ,  etc. ,  which  are  part  of  the  traditional  qualifications  of  the  seeker 
after  truth,  the  student  of  Veclanta,  the  aspirant  for  the  final  knowledge 
(or,  illumination,  experience,  including  knowledge,  emotion,  will)  and  for 
m  o  k  s  h  a  ,  freedom  (from  doubt  and  error  and  all  ills  ;  for  all  ills,  wants 
and  pains  and  restlessness,  are  but  the  consequences  of  Primal  Error,  as 
will  appear  later  on.) 


PEACE,  CH.  inj  MANY  UNCERTAINTIES      13 

that  there  is  a  Supreme  One,  who  is  other  than  me,  yet 
is  so  identified  with  me  by  His  karuna,  compassion, 
that  He  will  ensure  me  a  share  of  His  own  Immortality 
ultimately,  and  that  present  miseries  are  only  tests  and 
trials.  In  such  belief,  the  j  I  va  instinctively  feels  that  Love 
is  the  comparatively  outer  expression  of  the  Fundamental 
Inner  Unity.  But  this  '  first '  answer  is  not  only  in- 
tellectually illogical ;  it  is  also  emotionally  full  of  in- 
security. It  satisfies  neither  head  nor  heart.  Where  is 
the  ground  for  unshakeable  Eternal  Faith  ?  How  can  I 
trust  that  this  God,  outside  of  me,  different  from  me,  will 
never  be  other  than  benevolent  to  me  ?  His  present  con- 
duct to  all  His  creatures,  all  around — is  it  not  \iery  cruel, 
very  non -benevolent  ?  Nay,  the  answer  leaves  me  worse 
off  than  before.  I  am  longing  for  '  freedom  '  from  '  fear 
of  another '.  This  answer  makes  me  utterly  dependent 
on  the  mercy  of  another.  It  completes  my  servitude. 
I  have  been  created  out  of  Nothing  by  Another,  at  His 
Will.  I  can  be  annihilated  into  Nothing  by  that  Other, 
at  His  Will-full  Caprice.  "  Better  to  reign  (be  Self- 
dependent)  in  hell,  than  (be  Other-dependent)  slave  in 
heaven  ".  The  pari -nama,  transmuted  result  of  such 
critical  scrutiny  of  the  *  first  answer  ',  is  the  second,  the 
pari-nama-vada;  but  that  also  turns  out,  on  similar 
close  examination,  to  be  no  less  devoid  of  certainty  of 
knowledge  and  assurance  of  feeling.  Two  even  finite 
things  cannot  occupy  the  same  space  ;  much  more,  two 
Infinites ;  they  would  be  constantly  limiting,  finit-ising, 
struggling  to  oust  and  abolish,  each,  the  other. 


14         HOW    ACHIEVE    IMMORTALITY?          [SCIENCE    OF 

The  main  object  of  the  soul's  quest  is  but  this  :  "  How 
shall  I  make  sure  of  my  Eternity  ?  "  "  How  shall  I  be 
freed  from  fear  of  death  ?  "  "  How  shall  I  obtain  salva- 
tion, ab-solu-tion,  from  all  ills  ?  "  Yet  in  the  searching, 
he  has  trodden  many  paths  which  have  allured  him 
with  promise  of  profit ;  have  sometimes  made  him  forget 
for  the  time  being  the  goal  of  his  enquiry  ;  and  have  even, 
now  and  then,  led  him  to  a  short-lived  peace  and  confi- 
dence in  blind  unreasoning  or  ill-reasoning  faith,  or  in 
agnosticism,  assertion  of  the  impossibility  of  final  know- 
ledge and  the  futility  of  all  search.  And  all  these  paths 
he  has  discovered  again  and  again  to  be  blind  alleys. 
Each  only  leads  to  a  new  question  and  a  new  \\all  of  diffi- 
culty. All  the  questions  await  solution  by  means  of  the 
one  supremejeolution  only.  The  whole  labyrinthine  maze 
leads  him  back,  again  and  yet  again,  to  the  same  starting- 
point.  The  whole  can  be  mastered  and  traversed  in  con- 
fidence by  means  of  only  a  single  clue/ 

* 

1  Manyness  is  patent,  all  around.  One-ness  is  not  so  evident.  But 
the  craving  for  a  Unity  which  would  enmesh  all  Multiplicity  without 
destroying  it,  is  inherent  in  the  human  soul — because  it  is  Itself  the  Final 
Unity,  and  yearns  to  regain  what  it  feels  it  has  lost.  Search  for  assurance 
of  this  Final  Unity  is  Meta-physics,  '  beyond-physics  '.  This  same  craving 
and  search  for  unity,  on  limited,  but  ever  larger  and  larger,  scales,  is 
manifest  in  all  departments  of  human  life,  political,  economical,  social,  edu- 
cational, scientific,  religious.  Humanity  is  obviously  travailing,  with  the 
agony  of  world-wars,  to  give  birth  to  a  Unified  World- Federation, 
World  Order,  World  Organisation  of  the  whole  Human  Rac§ — a  Univer- 
sal Scientific  Religion,  a  World  Economy,  a  Universal  Culture- Voca- 
tional Education,  a  Universally  intelligible  Language  and  readable 
Script ,  not  to  abolish  particularity,  variety,  individuality  ;  but  only  to  co- 
ordinate and  reconcile  all  such,  by  only  sub-ord mating  them  all  to 
Unity  ;  only  to  introduce  a  well-recognised  and  well-corned  minimum  of 
uni  fbrmity  amidst  qpi  equally  well-recognised  and  well-corned  multi  form- 
itv.  Detailed  illustration  of  this  travail,  in  respect  of  all  life-aspects,  is 
not  possible  here  ;  but  any  thoughtful  observer  can  see  for  himself,  how 


PEACE,    CH.    Ill]  SOUL-STRUGGLE  15 

The  many  doubts  and  questions  which  thejlva 
gathers  and  which  all  lead  up  to  and  merge  in  the  one 
great  question,  are  mainly  these1: 

What  am  I  ?  and  Whence  ?  and  Whither  bound  ? 
and  Why  ?  what  is  Spirit,  Self,  Ego,  Subject  ?  what  are 
these  other  selves,  jlvas,  like  and  unlike  myself?  what 
is  Matter,  the  World,  Not-Self,  Not-I,  non-Ego,  Object  ? 
what  is  Life  ?  what  is  Death  ?  what  is  Motion  ?  what  are 
Space  and  Time  ?  what  is  Rest  ?  what  arc  Being  and 

larger  and  larger  concepts,  combines,  mergers,  have  been  and  are  sub- 
suming under  themselves,  smaller  units,  of  all  sorts,  in  all  these  aspects 
of  life  That  the  results  achieved,  from  time  to  time,  have  always  been 
breaking  down,  with  regresses,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  seeking  of  unity 
has  been  mostly  governed  by  the  false  self  of  separatist  egoist  individ- 
ualism, whence  periodical  revolts  and  rebellions  by  the  units  sought  to 
be  forcibly  absorbed,  perpetual  conflict,  and  recurring  great  wars  between 
larger  and  larger  groups  headed  by  stionger  and  stronger  '  individuals  '. 
Only  Metaphysics,  which  is  Spiritual  Philosophy,  Psychology,  Science, 
Keligion,  all  in  one,  can  lead  to  the  desired  result,  by  teaching  to  Mankind 
at  large,  how  the  desired  Unity  should  and  can  come  willingly  and 
eagerly  from  within,  peacefully,  creating  world-wide  Concord,  instead  of 
being  imposed  from  without  violently,  whence  world-wide  Discord. 

J  For  crowds  of  such  questionings,  see,  eg.,  Sarva-vitra  and 
Ntrqlambct  Upanisliats  also  Shvefitshvatara-  Upamshat,  Rg-vcda 
X.  1.21.  and  Atharva-veda  X  n.  Why  refer  to  so  many  other  questions, 
when  the  one  "that  has  to  be  directly  dealt  with,  is — "  How  can  the  j  i  va 
avoid  sorrow  and  secure  happiness  ' ' '  Because  whole  and  parts  are  inter- 
dependent ;  no  part  can  be  fully  understood  until  all  other  parts  are 
understood,  and  the  relation  of  all  to  each  and  each  to  all,  and  of  each 
and  all  to  the  whole  and  the  whole  to  each  and  all,  is  understood, 
generally  In  other  words,  until  the  whole- is  understood,  nothing  is 
understood,  really.  To  secure  my  happiness,  I  must  find  out  the  causes 
and  conditions  of  my  joys  and  sorrows ,  these  are  connected  with 
'  objects,  the  objective  world  ',  and  with  other  j  i  vas  and  their  joys  and 
sorrows.  It  becomes  indispensable,  therefore,  for  me  to  find  out  the  exact 
nature  of  all  these  (which  may  all  Le  classified  under  the  three  categories 
of  the  I  or  '  Subject  ',  the  not-I  on  4  Object  ',  and  the  Relation  between 
them,  in  order  to  secure  my  essential  happiness.  To  prescribe  properly  for 
the  disease  of  any  one  organ,  the  physician  must  have  knowledge  about 
all  organs  of  the  body,  and  their  inter- workings),  generally.  Compare 
the  current  saying,  "  to  know  every  thing  about  some  one  thing,  and 
something  about  every  other  thing,  is"  culture  ". 


16      COUNTLESS    DOUBTS  &  QUESTIONS    [SCIENCE    OF 

Non-Being?  what    is    Consciousness?  what   is  Uncons- 
ciousness ?  what  is  Pleasure  ?  Pain  ?  Mind  ?   Body  ? 

What  are  Knowledge,  Knower,  Known  ?  Sensation  ? 
Senses  ?  what  are  the  objects  sensed,  the  various  elements 
of  Matter  ?  what  is  the  meaning,  use,  necessity,  of  media 
of  sensation  ?  what  is  an  Idea  ?  what  are  perception,  con- 
ception, memory,  imagination,  expectation,  design,  judg- 
ment, reason,  intuition  ?  what  are  Dreams,  Wakings,  and 
Sleepings  ?  what  are  Abstract  and  Concrete  ?  what  are 
archetype,  genus,  and  species  ?  what  are  universals,  partic- 
ulars, and  singulars  ?  what  is  Truth  ?  Reality  ?  Illusion  ? 

Error  ? 

t 

What  is  Desire  ?  what  arc  the  subjects  and  the 
objects  of  desire  ?  what  are  Attraction  and  Repulsion, 
harmony,  and  discord  ?  what  is  an  Emotion  ?  what  are 
Love  and  Hate,  pity  and  scorn,  humility  and  fear  ?  what 
is  Will  ?  what,  it  any,  is  Free-will  ? 

What  are  Action,  acted  on,  and  actor  ?  what  are 
Organs  ?  Organism  ?  what  is  the  meaning  of  stimulus  and 
response,  Action  and  Reaction  ?  what  is  the  real  meaning 
and  significance  of  power,  might,  ability,  force,  or 
Energy?  what  is  Change,  creation,  transformation,  evolu- 
tion, dissolution  ?  what  are  Cause  and  Effect,  Accident 
and  Chance,  Necessity  and  Destiny,  Law  and  Breach  of 
Law,  Possible  and  Impossible  ? 

What  is  a  Thing  ?  what  are  Noumena  and  Pheno- 
mena ?  what  are  essence,  substance,  attribute,  quality, 
quantity,  number  ?  what  are  One  and  Many,  some  and  all, 
Identity  and  Difference  ?  What  is  Thought  ?  are  thought 


PEACE,    CH.    Ill]    SHALL    HE    GIVE    UP   ALL   HOPE  ?    17 

and  thing,  ideal  and  real — are  they  same  or  different,  and 
how  and  why  ? 

What  are  Speech  and  Language,  command,  request, 
and  narration,  Social  life  and  organisation  ?  what  is  Art  ? 
what  is  the  Relation  between  things  and  jivas?  indi- 
vidualities and  group-souls  ? 

What  is  Good  and  what  is  Evil  ?  what  are  Sin 
and  Virtue  ?  Right  and  Wrong  ?  Right  and  Duty  ? 
what  is  Conscience  ?  what  is  Liberty  ?  what  are  Order, 
Evolution,  the  World- Process  ?  are  jivas  bound  and 
helpless,  or  are  they  free,  and  if  not  free,  mukta, 
'  liberated/  how  may  they  become  so  ?  how  may  sin  and 
sorrow  cease  ?  what  is  the  Cause  of  sin  and  sorrow  ? 
Why  and  How  has  this  sinful  and  sorrowful  world  come 
into  existence  ?  how  may,  and  why  may  not,  joy,  happi- 
ness, bliss,  love,  and  beauty  only  pervade  the  universe  ? 
how  may  Salva-tion,  Ab-solu-tipn,  be  won  ?  who  can 
bestow  it  ?  is  it  any  Other,  or  the  Self  itself  ? 

Such  are,  the  harassing  questions  'concerning  every 
moment,  every  aspect,  of  his  life,  that  follow  on  the  heels 
of  the  searcher.  Small  blame  to  him  if  he  despair  of 
mastering  them  !  Well  may  he  give  up  the  task  again  and 
again  as  hopeless,  and  try  to  climb  out  of  their  way  with 
the  help  of  the  weakling  plants  that  rise  up  here  and  there 
before  him,  growths  of  temporary  belief  and  uncertain 
knowledge,  naturally  belonging  only  to  the  first  stage  of 
his  journey.  But  the  branches  which  he  clings  to,  fail 
him  at  the  last,  after  having  served  their  purpose  of 
giving  him  rest  and  strength  for  a  greater  effort,  and  he 


18  LET    HIM    NOT    DESPAIR       [SCIENCE    OF 

is  shaken  down  from  them  by  his  pursuers,  and  compelled 
to  press  forward  again. 

Let  him  not  despair.  The  intensity  and  stress  of 
his  vairagya1  will  soon  break  up  the  shell  of  selfishness 
that  limits  consciousness  in  him  into  a  personal-self-con- 
sciousness, and  will  transform  it  into  the  All-Self-Con- 
sciousness. Then  that  Inmost  Mystery  of  the  Universe, 
that  is  now  hidden  from  his  sight,  shall  stand  revealed. 
The  energy  of  that  vairagya  will  transform  his  hurrying 
feet  into  wings,  on  which  he  will  rise  high  above  the 
labyrinth  of  doubts  and  questions  ;  and  from  that  height 
he  will  be  able  to  master  all  the  foes  that  harried  and 
pursued  him  so  relentlessly." 


vairagya,  is  the  passionate  revolt  from  all  limitation  of  the 
Self,  from  all  selfishness,  all  selfish  and  personal  attachments  in  himself 
as  well  as  others,  which  constitutes  the  indispensable  pre-requisite  to  a 
true,  earnest,  and  fruitful  enquiry  into  the  origin  and  end  of  things,  and 
is  the  counterpart  of  59^J^  jnumuksha,  the  yearning  for  liberation 
from  pain,  the  essential  pain  of  bonds,  limitations,  doubts  and  fears  and 
lack  of  the  supreme  and  final  Self-dependence.  The  mystics'  "Dark 
Night  of  the  Soul"*,  before  it  attains  final  certainty,  the  "  Slough  of 
Despond,"  are  allied  to,  though  they  may  not  be  quite  the  same  as, 
vairagya.  In  order  to  lead  successfully  to  the  great  realisation,  the 
vairagya  must  be  s  a  1  t  v  i  k  a,  benevolent,  philanthropic  ,  not  r  a  j  a  s  a 
mere  cynicism,  or  t  a  mas  a,  mere  indifference,  sloth.  To  see  others  in 
pain  should  be  the  greatest  pain. 

>JThe  expression  employed  here  may  appear  a  little  too  impassioned. 
This  has  been  done  purposely  to  show  that  metaphysic  deals,  not  only 
with  the  single  cold  and  sober  department  of  intellect  m  life,  but  with 
the  whole  of  life  as  manifesting  m  cognition,  desire,  and  action,  and  has 
to  pass  through  the  travail  of  a  rebirth  that  would  encompass  all  these. 
The  whole  life  of  the  true  and  earnest  enquirer  is  put  into  such  search  . 
hence  the  mixture  of  science  and  emotion.  Prof.  Patrick  Geddes 
has  well  said,  in  his  report  on  The  Proposed  University  at  Indorc, 
"...To  stir  ourselves  to  a  higher  and  broader  level  of  thinking  than 
the  everyday  one...  involves  a  certain  warmth  ;  it  requires  activity 
and  ardour  as  of  the  climber,  beyond  our  habitual  alternation  of  pedes- 
trian's pavement  and  sedentary  's  chair.  With  all  real  thought-problems, 
it  is  as  with  the  forging  of  iron,  which,  to  be  strongly  or  subtly  fashioned, 


PEACE,    CH.    Ill]         SEARCH    DEEPER  "  19 

It  should  be  noted  here  that  each  of  the  first  two 
amvers  to  the  great  question  carries  with  it  its  own 
corresponding  set  of  answers  to  all  these  questions.  But, 
like  those  two,  these  also  are  unsatisfactory,  external  and 
superficial.  The  earnest  enquirer  must  search  deeper. 
How  to  answer  them  in  terms  of  Consciousness,  of  the 
Self,  which  is  the  nearest  to  him  and  therefore  after  all 
the  most  intelligible  ?  He  must  interpret  all  things  in 
their  deepest  connection  with  and  origin  from  the  Self  ; 
otherwise  doubt  will  remain  and  satisfaction  not  be  gained. 
For  as  the  answer  to  the  one  Great  Question  is  to  disclose 
the  answer  to  all  these,  so  in  turn  the  good  answering  of 
these  will  be  the  test  that  that  one  answer  itself  is  good. 

NOTE. — Who  am   I,   whence,   how,  whither,  why  ?,  this 
has  been  asked  in  the  very  same  words,  so  to  say,  by  Shankara 
of   India  and   Bergson   of  France,  to  mention  only  two  out  of 
innumerable  seekers.     Omar  Khayyam  of  Persia  has  put  the 
question   in  the  very  same   words  also,   in  beautiful  setting, 
Into  this  Universe,  and  WJiy  not  knowing, 
Nor  Whence,  like  water  willy-nilly  flowing  ; 
And  out  of  it,  as  Wind  along  the  Waste, 
I  know  not  Whither,  willy  nilly  blowing. 

But  he  was  not  a  seeker  for  the  answer,  but  had  satisfied 
himself  that  answer  was  impossible,  and  was  content  to  taste 

must  be  hammered  red-hot.  The  eagle  rises  to  Ins  height  through  the 
psych-organic  stress  of  life  and  effort,  which  heats  his  blood. ..and  so 
gives  him  wider  and  clearer  vision,  albeit  at  a  temperature  far  above  that 
of  fever." 

"It  is  the  heart  and  not  the  brain  that  to  the  Highest  doth  attain  "  ; 
(Longfellow).  Moksha  is  not  mere  vision,  but  ex-tasis  also,  a  mystic 
communion,  union,  of  the  Individual  with  the  Universal.  "  All  great 
things — and  the  great  philosophies  are  among  them— come  from  the 
heart  and  from  great  passion"  Riehl's  Nt^tsctic,  quoted  at  p.  113  of 
A.  Herzberg's  The  Psychology  of  Philosopher**.  Bergson fs  stress  on 
the  vital  element,  on  intuition,  on  life,  indirectly  expresses  instinctive 
realisation  of  the  inseparability  of  thought-emotion-volition. 


20     EMOTIONAL-INTELLECTUAL  MOTIVE   [SCIENCE  OF 

the  savour  of  inveighing  with  refined  poetic  unction  against 
the  transiency  of  this  world's  glories,  and  of  singing  the  praises 
of  love  and  wine  as  the  only  substantial  joys  that  can  give 
such  consolation  as  i?  possible  for  its  sorrows — unless  we 
.assign  mystic  interpretations  to  his  words,  t.e.9  'love'  is 
*  love  divine  and  universal ',  '  wine  '  is  *  hormones  '  secreted 
by  special  glands,  under  the  stimulus  of  yoga-exercises,  etc. 
But  the  Indian  questioners  put  before  this  question,  the  other 
question  "  how  may  pain  be  abolished,"  as  the  main  motive 
for  all  philosophico-religious  enquiry,  and  then  take  up  the 
other  as  a  consequent,  abolition  of  pain  ensuing  ultimately  on 
realisation  of  the  true  Nature  of  the  Self,  which  Nature  includes 
Relation  with  the  Not-Self.  All  the  many  questions  stated 
in  this  chapter  are  only  either  the  metaphysical,  or  the  logical, 
or  the  psychological,  or  the  ethical,  pragmatical,  practical,  or 
the  religious,  aspects,  forms,  and  derivatives,  of  this  ultimate 
problem  of  all  problems.  Many  of  them  are  answered,  from 
the  standpoint  of  what  is  regarded  here  as  the  final  answer 
to  the  main  question,  in  the  course  of  the  present  work ; 
others  are  dealt  with  in  the  other  works  of  the  writer. 

"  Life  is  rational.  It  has  a  clear  aim  and  purpose,  dis- 
cernible by  the  aid  of  reason  and  conscience.  And  no  human 
activity  can  be  fully  understood  or  rightly  appreciated  until 
the  purpose  of  life  is  perceived.  You  cannot  piece  together  a 
puzzle-map  as  long  as  you  keep  one  bit  in  a  wrong  place. 
When  the  pieces  all  fit  together,  then  you  have  a  demonstration 
that  they  'are  all  in  their  right  places.  Given  the  clue  supplied 
by  true  religious  perception,  you  can  place  Art  so  that  it  shall 
fit  in  with  a  right  understanding  of  politics,  economics,  sex- 
relationships,  science,  and  all  other  phases  of  human  activity  "  : 
Tolstoy,  quoted  by  Aylmer  Maude,  in  his  Introduction  to 
What  is  Art  by  Tolstoy  (English  translation,  Scott  Library 
Series). 


PEACE,    CH.    IV]  21 

CHAPTER  IV 

THE  PRELIMINARIES  OF  THE  THIRD  AND 

LAST  ANSWER—  THE  SELF  AND 

THE  NOT-SELF 

THE  second  answer  remains,  as  said  before,  wavering 
and  satisfactionless.  Explanation  of  the  world,  which  is 
the  sole  purpose  of  philosophy,  by  means  of  two  factors, 
can  only  be  a  tentative,  and  not  a  final,  solution.  It  is  a 
great  advance  to  have  reduced  the  multifariousness  of  the 
world  to  a  duality.  But  what  the  searcher  wants  is  a 
Unity,  and  in  this  respect,  the  first  answer  was  indeed  even 
better  than  the  second,  for  it  reduced  all  things  to  a 
unity,  the  will  of  an  omnipotent  being.1  That  unity  was, 
however,  a  false  unity.  It  had  no  elements  of  perman- 
ence in  it.  The  will,  by  itself,  of  an  individual,  carries 

1  As  a  fact,  some  earnest  seekers,  having  arrived  at  the  second 
answer,  but  not  satisfied,  and  unable  to  advance  to  the  third,  delibera- 
tely go  back  to  the  first,  and  take  up  the  bhakti-marga,  '  the  path  of 
devotion  '  to  a  Personal  God.  The  case  of  those  who  have  advanced  to 
the  third  answer,  yet  also,  deliberately,  revive  the  touch  of  personal 
b  h  a  k  t  i  ,  is  different  ;  as  that  of  Vyasa  composing  the  Bhagavaja  after 
having  compiled  the  Maha-bhttrati  and  written  the  Brahma  Surras,  or 
of  Shankara,  singing  hymns  to  Vishnu,  Shiva,  Ddvi  and  establishing 
m  a  t  h  a  s  (celibate-  S  a  n  n  y  a  s  i-convents)  and  temples.  In  such  cases 
the  b  h  a  k  t  i  is  consciously  directed  to  a  very  high  m  u  k  t  a  soul,  acting 
as  a  spiritual  administrator  of  a  department,  globe,  system,  of  the  visible 
world. 


"  Bhakti  is  threefold  :  '  As  a  physical  body,  I  am  Thy  servant  ;  as 
a  soul,  I  am  a  piece  of  Thee  ;  as  Spirit',  I  am  Thy-Self."  Compare  the 
loyalty  of  a  citizen  or  a  subordinate  official  to  the  State  as  a  whole,  and 
to  a  particular  higher  official  with  whom  he  has  to  deal  with  immediately. 
For  further  considerations  on  this  subject,  the  reader  may  see  pp.  197-244 
of  Krshna.  a  Study  in  the  Theory  of  Avataras. 


22  THE    PENULT!    MATE    DUALITY       [SCIENCE    OF 

within  it  no  true  and  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  con- 
tradictions that  make  up  the  world  ;  it  embodies  no  reason 
and  no  safeguard  against  caprice.  Tenure  of  immortality 
at  the  will  of  another  is  a^mockery  and  a  contradiction  in 
terms.  Therefore  the  jiva,  however  reluctantly,  how- 
ever painfully,  has  to  give  up  that  first  unity,  and  search 
for  a  higher  one.  In  this  search,  his  next  step  leads  him, 
by  means  of  a  close  examination  of  the  multiplicity  which 
presses  on  him  from  all  sides,  to  a  duality  which  seems  to 
him,  and  indeed  is,  at  the  time,  the  nearest  approach  to 
that  higher  unity  that  he  is  seeking. 

The  forms  of  this  duality,  wherein  he  is  centred  for 
the  time  being,  beginning  with  rough  general  conceptions 
of  Spirit  (or  Force)  and  Matter,  end  in  the  subtlest  and 
most  refined  ideas  of  Self  and  Not-Self. 

These,  the  Self  and  the  Not-  Self,  are  the  last  two 
irreducible  facts  and  factors  of  all  Consciousness.  They 
cannot  be  analysed  any  further.  All  concrete  life,  in  cogni- 
tion-desire-action,  and  substance-attribute-movement, 
begins  and  ends  \\iththese.  They  are  the  two  simplest 
constituents  of  the  last  result  of  all  philosophical  research. 

None  doubts  "  Am  I  or  am  I  not  "J  This  has  been 
said  over  and  over  again  by  thinkers  of  all  ages  and  of  all 
countries.  The  existence  of  the  Self  is  certain  and 


i,  p.  2.  (Bibhotheca 
Indica  series,  published  by  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.)  Descartes' 
famous  maxim,  Cogito,  ergo  sum,  '  I  think,  therefore  I  am,'  reverses 
cause  and  effect.  It  would  be  truer  to  say,  Sum.  ergo  cogito  The  Bible 
log  ion,  "  /  am  that  /  am...  I  am  hath  sent  me  to  you  "  (Exodus),  should 
be  noted  ,  see  pp.  109-110  of  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions  b> 
the  present  writer 


PEACE,  CH.-IV]       THE  SELF — WHAT  IS  IT  ?  23 

indubitable.  It  proves  the  existence  of  everything  else  that 
is  provable.  It  is  not  and  cannot  be  proven  by  anything 
else.  The  very  instinct  of  language,  in  East  and  West, 
past  and  present,  bears  eloquent,  insistent,  irrefrangible 
evidence  to  the  fact,  in  the  words  s  v  a  - 1  a  h  -  p  r  a  m  a  n  a  , 
se//-evident,  sva-yam-siddha,  self-proven  (the  techni- 
cal Samskrt  name  for  the  geometrical  axiom),  evident  and 
proven  in,  by,  and  to  it-Self,  the  finality  of  all  testimony, 
on  which  alone  the  purely  '  imaginary  assumptions,' 
'  metaphysical  concepts,'  of  even  that  so-called  exactest 
and  most  certain  of  sciences,  mathematics,  in  all  its 
departments,  are  veritably  and  utterly  founded.1 

The  next  question  about  it  is  :  What  is  it  ?  Is  it 
black  ?  is  it  white  ?  is  it  flesh  and  blood  and  bone,  or 
nerve  and  brain,  or  rocks  and  rivers,  mountains,  heaven!}' 
orbs,  or  light  or  heat  or  force  invisible,  or  time  or  space  ? 
is  it  identical  or  coextensive  with  the  living  body,  or  is  it 
centred  in  one  limb,  organ,  or  point  or  spot  thereof  ?  The 
single  answer  to  all  this  questioning  is  that  "  That  which 
varies  not,  nor  changes,  in  the  midst  of  things  that  change 
and  vary,  is  different  from  them  "  ;  -  therefore  the  I  Con- 
sciousness, which  persists  unchanged  and  one,  throughout 
all  tile  many  changes  of  the  material  body  and  its  sur- 
roundings, is  different  from  them  all.  '  I  '  who  played 
and  leapt  and  ^lept  as  an  infant  in  my  parent's  lap  so 
many  years  ago,  have  now  infants  in  mine  own.  What 
unchanged  and  persistent  particle  of  matter  continues 

1  See  pp.  80-6  of  The  Science  of  the  Self,  for  full  comment  on  this. 


24  THE    CHANGELESS  [SCIENCE    OF 

throughout  these  years  in  my  physical  organism  ?  *  What 
identity  is  there  between  that  infantine  body  and  this 
aged  one  of  mine  ?  But  the  *  I  '  has  not  changed.  It  is 
the  same.  Talking  of  myself,  I  always  name  myself  *  I,' 
and  nothing  more  nor  less.  The  sheaths  in  which  I  am 
always  enwrapping  the  '  I  '  —  thus  :  I  am  happy,  I  am 
miserable,  I  am  rich,  I  am  poor,  I  am  sick,  I  am  strong,  I 
am  young,  I  am  old,  I  am  black,  I  am  white,  I  am  a  god 
in  dreams,  a  very  helpless  human  creature  on  waking  — 
these  are  accidents  and  incidents  in  the  continuity  of  the 
*  I  '.  They  are  ever  passing  and  varying.  The  '  I  '  re- 
mains the  same.  Conditions  change,  but  they  always 
surround  the  same  *  I,'  the  unchanging  amid  the  chang- 
ing ;  and  anything  that  changes  is,  at  first  instinctively, 
and  later  deliberately,  rejected  from  the  '  I,'  as  no  part  of 
itself.  And  as  it  remains  unchanged  through  the  changes 
of  one  •  organism,  so  it  remains  unchanged  through  the 
changes  and  multiplicity  of  all  organisms.  Ask  anyone 
and  everyone  in  the  dark,  behind  a  screen,  through  closed 
door-leaves  :  "  Who  is  it  ?  "  The  first  impulsive  answer 
is  :  "  It  is  L"  *  Thus  potent  is  the  stamped  impress,  the 
unchecked  outrush,  the  irresistible  manifestation  of  the 
Universal  Common  T  in  all  beings.  The  special  naming  and 
description  :  "  I  am  so  and  so,"  follows  only  afterwards, 

1  What  truth  there  is  in  the  view,  that  some  one  or  more  particles  of 
matter  persist  with  persistent  consciousness  (two  forms  of  which  view  are 
the  theosophical  doctrine  of  the  auric  egg,  jiva-kosha,  and  Weis- 
mann's  theory  of  cell-continuity)  may  appear  later.  (See  the  chapter  on 
Jiva-atoms,  infra.) 


I  Brhad-Aranyaka,  I,  iv,  1. 


PEACE,    CH.    IV]       AMIDST  THE  CHANGING  25 

on  second  thought.  So  real  is  the  *  I  '  to  the  '  I  ',  that  it 
expects  others  (who  really  are  not  'others')  to  re- 
cognise it  as  surely  as  it  recognises  it-Self.  Again, 
what  is  true  of  the  *  I  '  with  regard  to  the  body,  is 
also  true  of  it  with  regard  to  all  other  things.  The 
house,  the  town,  the  country,  the  earth,  the  solar 
system,  which  '  I  '  live  in  and  identify  and  connect  with 
myself,  are  all  changing  momentarily  ;  hut  *  I  '  feel  my- 
self persisting,  unchanged  through  all  their  changes.  *  I  ' 
am  never,  and  can  never  be,  conscious  of  myself  having 
ever  been  born  or  of  dying,  of  experiencing  a  beginning 
or  an  end.T  "  In  all  the  endless  months,  years,  and  small 
and  great  cycles,  past  and  to  come,  this  Self-luminous 
Consciousness  alone  ariseth  never,  nor  ever  setteth."  *  But 
as  regards  all  the  things  other  than  *  I,'  that  '  I  '  am  con- 
scious of,  '  I  '  am  or  can  become  conscious  also  of  their 
beginnings  and  endings,  their  changes.  "  Never  has  the 
cessation—  either  in  time  or  in  space  —  of  consciousness 

1  Births  ancl  deaths  of  '  others  '  are  always  felt  as  only  '  incidents  ' 
in  our  life,  '  my  '  life,  which  is  always  felt  as  permanent,  impossible  to 
begin  or  end  '  I  '  never  mr//se(v)  that  '  I  '  was  born  or  shall  die.  '  I  ' 
can  only  '  see  '  in  '  imagination  ',  a  tiny  infant  body  being  born,  and  a 
grown  up  one  dying,  and,  in  thought,  connect  the  two  with  "  my-self  ', 
4me',  T.  So  lean,  and  do,  see,  with  physical  eyes,  the  bodies  of  'others' 
being  born  or  dying.  We  cannot  realise  that  '  I  '  ihall  die  That  we 
'fear  death  '  is  really  only  fearing  the  loss  of  enjoyment  of  our  possessions, 
especially  of  our  body,  through  which  we  enjoy  the  possessions,  with 
which  '  I  '  have  identified  my-self,  by  means  of  which  I  feel  my  separate 
individual  '  self  '-existence.  We  do  not  fear  sleep  ,  nay,  we  welcome  it, 
in  its  due  time  ,  and  stand  in  terror  of  insomnia  ,  because,  and  only  so 
long  as,  our  body  and  possessions  are  not  menaced  by  or  during  sleep. 

-  Pancha-tlasht,  i,  7. 


,  •? 


2(>  BEGINNING  OR  ENDING       [SCIENCE  OF 

been  experienced,  been  witnessed  directly  ;  or  if  it  has  been, 
then  the  witness,  the  experiencer,  himself  still  remains 
behind  as  the  continued  embodiment  of  that  siame  con- 
sciousness." l  WAen-so-ever  and  zc?A«?r^-so-ever  I  imagine 

1  Dcvi-Rhagavata,  III,  xxxn,  15-16. 


It  may  be  objected  "But  this  is  only  negative  proof  ,  show  me 
positive  proof,  that  the  '  I  '-Consciousness  stretches  through  all  time  " 
the  answer  is:  "First;  it  is  not  negative  proof  that  is  advanced  here, 
but  negation  of  negation  of  Consciousness  ,  and  two  negatives  make 
a  positive.  Second  ,  in  order  that  you  may  have  positive  proof  of  the  kind 
you  have  in  mind,  i.e.,  witnessing  the  everlastingness  of  the  '/',  you 
must  watch  it  everlastingly  ,  you  can  scarcely  have  direct  positive 
proof  of  cvcrlastmgness  compressed  into  a  few  seconds  or  a  few 
minutes  of  answer  to  your  query,  can  you  ?  Direct  positive  proof  of  your, 
'  I's  ',  self's  eternity  and  infinity,  you  have,  here  and  now,  in  one  in- 
stant and  at  one  point,  m  your,  '  I's  ',  self's,  Self  -Consciousness.  Direct 
positive  proof  of  the  self's  ever-last  ingncss  and  all-pervadtngitcss, 
Immortality  and  omni  -presence,  is  being  given  to  It-Self,  by  the  Self, 
through  endless  rebirths  and  measureless  wanderings  riding  in  and  on 
the  orbs  of  space  •  Remember  that  '  ever-lastingness  ',  the  meaning  of 
the  word,  the  whole  of  it,  is  all  in  your  mind,  your  consfciousness,  the 
Self's  consciousness,  now  and  here,  at  this  moment 

Lack  of  memory  of  past  births  is  no  disproof  of  rebirth.  Far  the 
larger  part  of  daily  knowings,  feelings,  actings,  is  completely  forgotten 
Yet  nothing  of  them  is  wholly  annihilated  ,  it  all  remains  buried  in  the 
sub-  or  supra-conscious  ;  and  is  revivable  under  special  conditions  ;  as  is 
proved  by  the  work  of  hypnotists  and  psycho-analysts.  How  and  why 
—  the  scientists  admit  they  have  no  satisfactory  purely  physical  or  physio- 
logical explanation.  The  superphy  steal  explanation,  given  by  Indian 
and  other  yqga  and  mystic  traditions,  is  that  all,  the  minutest,  details  of 
experience  are  '  photographed  '  and  '  phonographed  '  in  the  suks  h  ma- 
sh a  rira,  subtle  body,  on  which  the  successive  physical  bodies  of  the 
same  soul  are  strung.  The  complete  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the 
metaphysical  aphorism,  sarvam  sarvatra  sarvada,  'all  is  every 
where,  every  when,  everyway  or  all-ways  '.  The  nature  of  separate 
'  individuality  '  has  to  be  carefully  understood  in  this  connection  ,  see 
Chapters  XV  and  XVI  infra,  and  pp.  411-413  of  World  War  and  Its 
Only  Cure-  World  Order  and  World  Religion  ;  and  '  Note  on  Karma 
and  Rebirths  ',  pp.  190-199  of  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions.'1  The 
difference  between  '  ever-lasting-ness  '  and  '  eternity  '  will  appear  later. 


PEACE,  CH.  IV]     OF  THE  'l' — NEVER  EXPERIENCED    27 

myself,  my  consciousness,  i.e.,  all  Consciousness  (for  con- 
sciousness is  always  and  only  My  consciousness),  as  ceasing, 
in  that  same  act  of  imagination  /  see  the  subsequent  time 
and  the  further  space  as  devoid  of  Me — a  contradic- 
tion in  terms.  Every  when  and  where,  every  then  and 
there,  every  instant  of  time  and  point  of  space,  at  which 
I  may  try  to  imagine  myself  (i.e.,  the  '  My-consciousness,' 
the  consciousness  which  is  Me,  which  is  /,  the  subject, 
and  not  the  body  which  is  an  object)  as  ending,  is  itself 
within  me,  in  my  imagination  ;  I  am  all  around  and  about 
and  beyond  it  always  and  already.  Thus  may  we  deter- 
mine what  the  '  I  '  is.  Omnis  determinatio  est  negatio, 
"all  determination  is  negation,"  is  a  well-known  and 
well-established  maxim.  We  determine,  define,  delimit, 
recognise,  by  change,  by  contrast,  by  means  of  opposites  ; 
so  much  so  that  even  a  physical  sensation  disappears 
entirely  if  endeavoured  to  be  continued  too  long  without 
change ;  thus  we  cease  to  feel  the  touch  of  the  clothes 
we  put  on,  after  a  few  minutes.  Scrutinising  closely, 
the  enquirer  will  find  that  everything  particular,  limited, 
changing,  must  be  .negated  of  the  '  I '  ;  and  yet  the  '  I,' 
as  proved  by  the  direct  experience  of  all,  cannot  at  all  be 
denied  altogether.  It  is  indeed  the  very  foundation  of  all 
existence.  '  Existence,'  '  being ',  (using  the  two  words 

Modern  Western  psychology  is  also  approaching  this  view  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  continuum  of  consciousness.  "  We  cannot  imagine  the 
beginning  of  life,  but  only  life  begun/'  James  Ward,  "Psychology" 
(Encyclo.  Brit.,  p.  7).  Hoffding,  Stout,  etc.,  all  recognise  the  unity  and 
continuity  of  consciousness,  though  in  the  individualistic  sense  Green 
and  others  seem  willing  to  recognise  it  not  only  *'  lengthwise  "  but  also 
"breadthwise,"  i.e.,  universalistically,  not  only  along  the  line  of  each 
individual,  but  as  sweeping  over  and  including  all  individuals  at  once.  i 


28      THE  I'S  VERY  NATURE  —  ETERNITY     [SCIENCE    OF 

roughly  as  synonymous  at  this  stage),  means  nothing 
more  than  '  presence  in  our  consciousness/  *  presence 
within  the  cognition  of  the  I,  of  the  Self,  of  Me  '.  What 
a  thing  is,  or  may  be,  or  must  be,  entirely  apart  from  us, 
from  the  consciousness  which  is  '  I,'  of  this  we  simply 
cannot  speak.  It  may  not  be  within  our  consciousness 
in  detail,  with  its  specifications  ;  but  generally,  in  some 
sort  or  other,  it  must  be  so  within  consciousness,  if  we 
are  to  speak  of  it  at  all. 

The  third  step,  the  immortality  of  the  '  I,'  neces- 
sarily follows  from,  is  part  of,  the  very  nature  of  the  *  I  '. 
What  does  not  change,  what  is  not  anything  limited,  of 
which  we  know  neither  beginning  nor  end,  in  space  or 
time,  that  is  necessarily  immortal  and  infinite,  nitya, 
and  v  i  b  h  u  ;  it  cannot  be  created  by  and  dependent  on 
anything  or  anyone  else.1 

Let  us  dwell  upon  these  considerations  ;  let  us  pause 
on  them  till  it  is  perfectly  clear  to  us  that  'our'  conscious- 
ness is  the  one  witness  to,  the  sole  evidence  and  the  only 
possible  support  and  substratum  of,  all  that  we  regard  as 
real,  of  all  'our'  world,  Let  us  make  sure,  further,  that  by 
eliminating  the  common  factor  —  '  our  '  —  from  both  sides 

1  As  the  Charaka,   one  of  the  principal  \vorks  on  Sarnskrt  medicine, 
says  . 


"  The  notion  cannot  be  entertained  that  the  begmningless  '  Substance 
of  Consciousness,  *  '  Conscious-stuff  '  has  been  created  by  another.  If 
such  another  be  said  to  be  Atma,  the  Self,  ;  c  ,  Consciousness  itself  again, 
then  we  are  willing  to  agree.  '  ' 


PEACE,  CH.  IV]   *  YOU  '  AND  '  1  ' — BOTH  IN  THE    '  I  f    29 

of  the  equation,  the  proposition  stands,  and  stands  confi- 
dently, that  "  Consciousness  is  the  only  basis  and  support 
of  the  world  ".  For  how  can  we  distinguish  between 
'  our '  consciousness  and  '  another's  '  consciousness,  be- 
tween *  our  '  world  and  '  another's  '  world  ?  That  another 
has  a  consciousness,  that  another  has  a  world,  that  there 
is  '  another  '  at  all,  is  still  only  *  our '  consciousness.1 
And  as  this  holds  true  for  every  one,  at  every  point, 
does  it  not  follow  that  all  these  *  every  ones  '  are  only 
One,  that  all  these  '  our '  consciousnesses  are  only  one 
Universal  Consciousness,  which  makes  all  this  appear- 
ance of  mutual  intelligence  and  converse  possible  ?  For 
it  is  really  only  the  One  talking  to  itself  in  different 
guises. 

More  may  be  said  on  this,  later  on,  in  dealing  with 
Consciousness  from  the  standpoint  of  the  final  expla- 
nation of  the  Wo  rid -Process. 


1  See  the  story  of  Rbhu  and  Nidagha  in  the  Vishnu  Purana  (a 
version  of  which,  by  the  writer,  appeared  in  The  Theosophist  for 
March,  1909),  and  was  reprinted  in  The  Dream  Problem,  a  symposium, 
by  Dr.  Ram  Narayan  (Delhi)  ;  there  is  also  a  similar  story  in  the  Yoga 
V&sishtha.  "  I  am  a  character  in  your  dream  ,  and  you  are  a  character 
in  my  dream."  Here,  '  I '  and  '  your  '  and  '  you  '  and  '  my  '  are  all  in 
'  each  '  consciousness,  and  '  each  ' — the  notion  of  4  many  single  ones  ' 
that  is  implied  by  '  each  ' — is  also  One  and  the  Same  consciousness.  The 
vicious  circle  is  solved  by  adding,  "  and  I  and  you  both  are  creatures  of 
the  dream  of  the  Universal  Self  ".  A  real,  final,  distinction  between  '  1  ' 
and  '  you  '  is  impossible  and  '  unreal,'  '  illusory  ' — for  both  are  in  the  / 
which  is  speaking  That  both  are  there,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  same 
consciousness,  negates  the  cruder  forms  of  individualistic  solipsism,  but 
supports  the  Universahstic  Solipsism  which  says,  not  that  I,  the  individual 
self,  know  only  my  own  modifications,  or  states,  but  that  the  Universsl 
Self  experiences  Its  own  (sup-posed  and  negated)  modifications  or  states 
in  an  infinite  number  of  individual-seeming  selves.  Berkeley  explained, 
in  his  later  writings,  that  the  '  idealism  '  of  his  earlier  writing  was  not 
4  individual '  idealism,  but  (God's)  '  universal '  idealism. 


30  THOUGHT    AND    BRAIN       [SCIENCE    OF 

In  the  meanwhile,  we  need  not  be  disturbed  by  any 
random  statements  that  "  thought  (or  the  '  I  '-conscious- 
ness) is  the  product  of  the  brain  as  much  as  the  bile  is 
the  product  of  the  liver  'V  If  any  earnest-minded  student 
feel  himself  disturbed  by  any  such,  then  let  him  ask 
himself  and  the  maker  of  the  statement,  by  what  laws  of 
deductive  or  inductive  logic  is  such  statement  justified  ? 
If  there  are  many  points  in  common  between  the  liver 
and  the  brain,  what  similarity  is  there  between  *  bile  '  and 
4  thought  '  to  justify  an  inference  as  to  the  similarity  of 
their  causes  ?  And,  again,  how  do  we  know  that  such 
things  as  liver  and  bile  and  brain  arc  ?  Because  we  see 
and  feel  them!  But  how  are  we  sure  that  we  see  and 


1  How  philosophical  beliefs  govern  great  public  movements,  ideas  and 
idealogies  move  the  world,  theory  guides  practice,  for  good  or  for  ill  —  the 
latest  instance  of  this,  still  operating  on  a  vast  scale,  is  the  current  tremend- 
ous history  of  the  first  half  of  the  30th  Century  A.  C  For  a  succinct 
account  of  the  share  in  it,  of  the  views  of  Ilegel  and  Feurbach  the  philo- 
sophers, 'and  Marx  and  Kngels,  the  communist-socialists,  of  Germany, 
and  Lenin  and  Stalin,  the  statesmen-makers,  of  Soviet  Russia,  see 
Kngels'  pamphlet,  Socialism,  Utopian  and  scientific,  and  ch.  iv. 
(and  therein  too,  specially  the  section,  '  Dialectical  and  Historical 
Materialism  ')  ot  History  of  the  Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet  Union 
(ttolshcviks)  written  by  a  special  Commission  of  that  Party  (Second 
Indian  edition,  1944,  People's  Publishing  House,  Bombay).  Great  im- 
portance of  course  belongs  to  the  material  side  and  needs  of  human  life  ; 
but  even  greater  importance  belongs  to  the  spiritual  side  and  needs.  The 
ignoring  of  the  latter  fact  introduced  an  element  of  grave  error  into  the 
great  truths  of  the  Marxian  system,  and  has  been  the  cause  of  serious 
tribulations  and  setbacks  in  the  life  and  work  of  Soviet  Russia.  From 
these  she  has  been  extricating  itself  bv  recognising  its  mistakes,  quickly  and 
frankly,  from  time  to  time,  in  respect  of  human  psychology  and  spiritual 
requirements,  and  endeavouring  to  correct  them.  But  she  is  still  work- 
ing more  or  less  in  the  dark  ,  for  she  is  without  the  full  light  of  India's 
ancient  scheme  of  Yarn  a-  A  shram  a-Dharma  (now  utterly  corrupted), 
which  is,  indeed,  Vedanta  (Philosophy  and.  Psychology)  Applied,  as  Social 
Organisation  of  the  Human  Race.  The  whole  subject  is  discussed  in  the 
present  writer's  World  War  and  Its  only  Cure  —  World  Order  and 
World  Religion,  and  Ancient  versus  Modern  Scientific  Socialism. 


PEACE/  CH.  IV]     SENSES  —  THEMSELVES    UNSENSKD    M 

feel  ?  Do  we  see  our  eyes  that  see,  and  touch  our  hands 
that  touch  ?  If  our  senses  prove  their  objects,  what  is  the 
evidence,  the  proof,  of  our  having  the  senses,  ear,  skin, 
eye,  tongue,  nose  —  the  senses,  mind,  not  the  reflected 
images  in  a  mirror  which  are  sense-fes.v  —  and  of  our 
having  corresponding  sensations  through  them  ?  Is  it  not 
that  we  are  sure  of  our  seeings  and  feelings,  of  our  having 
the  senses  wherewith  we  do  so,  of  our  existence  at  all, 
only  because  we  are  conscious  of  such  things  ?  It  is  far 
easier  to  walk  on  the  head  comfortably  without  the  aid 
of  arms  or  legs,  than  to  live  and  breathe  and  move  and 
speak  without  the  incessant  /^-supposition  that  Con- 
sciousness is  behind  and  beyond'  and  around  everything.1 
Argue  as  we  may,  we  are  always  driven  back,  again  and 
again,  inexorably,  to  the  position  that  Consciousness  is 
verily  our  all  in  all,  the  one  thing  of  which  we  arc  abso- 
lutely sure,  which  cannot  be  explained  away  ;  and  that 
the  Universal  Self,  the  one  common  "  I  '  of  all  creatures 
(or  the  Universal,  all-including  '  We,'  if  that  word  is  more 
significant  to  us,  but  it  is  One  We,  We  as  the  Unified 
many  I's)  is  our  last  and  only  refuge.' 

1  The  word  '  Consciousness  '  is  used  for  brevity  ,  it  should  be  under- 
stood to  mean  '  the  Principle  of  Consciousness  ',  the  '  Self's  Awareness  ', 
'which  includes  all  States  or  kinds  or  degrees  of  Consciousness,  waking, 
sleeping,  slumbering,  and  all  those  varieties  which  psycho-analyst  and 
other  writers  on  psychology  endeavour  to  distinguish  minutely,  as  pre-, 
fore-,  co-t  sub-,  supra-consciousness,  hypno-pompic  and  hypnagogic  con- 
sciousness, etc.  All  these  fall  within  the  main  three,  waking  etc  ,  in 
Skt  terms,  j  a  g  r  a  t-s  v  a  p  n  a-s  u  s  h  u  p  1  1  ,  or  in  Yoga  technique, 
udara-tan  u-p  r,  a  s  u  p  t  af  from  a  different  point  of  view. 

2 


?  "  What  is  the  proof  of  our  proofs^  ,  "  Shn-harsha,  Khandana- 
Khadya.  i  , 


32      THE    ONE   PROOF   OF   ALL   PKOOFS     [SCIENCE    OF 

Perhaps,  in  our  long-practised  love  of  the  concrete, 
we  like  to  tell  ourselves  that  the  *  I  '  is  only  a  series  of 
separate  experiences,  separate  acts  of  consciousness.  We 
have  then  only  explained  the  more  intelligible  by  the  less 


"the  senses  which  sense,  are  themselves  unsensed  "  ;  (pratyaksha 
is  'here  used  in  the  limited  sense  of  '  sensation,'  not  the  essential  one  of 
'  direct  cognition  ')  ;  Charaka,  I,  xi. 


.  .  ;    "the  Hearer  of  the  ear,   .    .  . 
the  Seer  of  the  eye  .  ,  .  is  the  Self  '  '  ;  Kena  Upanishat. 

SRTOTO  sfaffi:  ;  Nyaya-Bhasdya,  I,  i,  3.  "All  proofs,  all 
evidence,  ultimately  depends  upon,  all  mental  processes  work  back  to, 
pratyaksha,  or  sensation,  '  '  in  the  narrow  sense  ;  all  experiences  ulti- 
mately base  upon  experience,  direct  cognition,  consciousness,  in  the  larger 
sense,  as  in  the  following  : 


5cf  ;  ^5  H  ^  tf  : 

^firat,  e  S^R:,  ^Tsr^ 

cT  ?3ftWT,  ^F  T?m  iRl  FSclT  I  Yoga-Vfiststha.  II,  xix. 


"  As  the  ocean  is  the  abiding  place  of  all  waters,  so  the  proof  of  all 
proofs  is  pratyaksha,  direct  cognition  —  the  a  d  h  i-a  k  s  h  a  or  overlord 
of  each  and  all  the  senses,  prat  i-aksha  —  v^dana,  feeling,  anubhuti, 
experience,  -pratipatti,  awareness,  s  a  m  v  i  t,  consciousness  ;  it  is  the 
j  i  v  a,  it  is  the  pumanorpurusha,  the  '  person,  '  personality,  of  the 
nature  of  the  I-feeling  ;  and  its  samvit-s,  cognisings,  modifications, 
states  (which  always  involve  the  notion  of  '  another-than-I,1  though  that 
notion  is  also  within  the  I,  and  so  a  'modification*  of  it)  ,  are  p  a  d- 
a  r  t  h  a  s,  '  things  ,  '  '  meant  by  words  '  . 

See  pp.  18-26  of  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions  ^  for  the 
opinions  of  over  twenty  famous  scientists,  leaders  in  their  respective 
sciences,  all  to  the  effect  that  the  universe  has  to  be  interpreted  in  terms 
of.  '  mind  ',  not  of  '  matter  '. 


PEACE,   CH.   IV]       IS   SELF   ONLY   A   SERIES  ?  33 

intelligible.  The  separate  experiences,  or  acts  of  consci- 
ousness, are  intelligible  as  a  series,  only  by  pre-supposing 
a  one  continuous  Consciousness,  a  Self.  The  acts  or 
modifications  are  of  and  belong  to  the  Self,  not  the  Self  to 
the  former.  Wherever  we  see  unity,  continuity,  similarity, 
there  we  see  the  impress  of  the  Self,  the  One.  The 
concrete  is  held  together  only  by  the  abstract,  the  two 
being  always  inseparable,  though  always  distinguishable. 
"  The  Self-born  pierced  the  senses  outwards,  hence  the 
Jlva  seeth  the  outward  and  the  concrete  *  many  ';  not 
the  inner  Self.  One  seeker,  here  and  there,  turneth  his 
gaze  inwards,  desirous  of  immortality,  and  then  beholdeth 
the  Pratyag-atma,  the  abstract  Self."  1 


Katha,  iv,  1. 

This  word  Pratyag-atma,  significant  as  it  is,  and  made  classical 
besides,  by  use  in  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the  Upanishats,  is  somehow, 
notwithstanding,  not  much  used  in  current  Vegan^a  works.  But  it  occurs 
often  in  the  Bhagavafa.  See  also  Yoga-bh&shya,  i,  29,  and,  further, 
ii,  20,  and  iv,  21,  as  regards  $gT  SfSRTSjpW  and  |fe|^fcfSf<^:,  "  The 
Seer  Ego  is  '  aware  '  of  all  mental  functionings,"  and  "  To  say  that  ideas 
cognise  one  another,  is  to  say  too  much  ".  Shankara  Mishra,  in  the  Upas- 
kara  on  Vaish&shika  Sutra,  also  very  effectively  disposes  of  the  theory, 
revived  by  William  James,  in  The  Principles  of  Psychology,  of  "  the 

stream  of  thought  "  being  self  -cognisant,  thus  :  fffi|  *J5J5*ir 


?fcr  %c^, 


?f: 


34  EGO-COMPLEX  &   EGO-SIMPLEX      [SCIENCE   OF 

The  school  of  '  the  New  Psychology,'  of  psycho- 
analysis, speaks  of  the  *  ego-complex  '  ;it  regards  the  notion 
of  '  self  '  (as  a  concrete  '  personality  ')  as  a  *  complex  ' 
of  many  thoughts,  feelings,  sentiments,  etc.  But  it  fails 
to  recognize  that  there  must  be  a  contrasting  Simplex  (the 
abstract  '  I ')  also,  to  serve  as  background  for  the  Com- 
plex, which  background  makes  the  complex  possible. 

We  feel  impatient,  we  exclaim  :  "  What  is  this  *  I ' 
that  is  neither  this  nor  that  ?  "  Let  us  define  it,  if  we 
can,  by  any  particular  '  this  '  or  '  that '.  The  whole  of 
the  World-Process  has  been  now  endeavouring  so  to  define 
it,  for  the  whole  past  half  of  all  time,  and  by  the  whole 
half  of  all  countless  possible  *  tJhis-es  ' ;  and  it  has  not 
succeeded.  It  will  go  on  similarly  endeavouring  to  define 
it,  in  the  whole  future  half  of  all  time,  and  by  the  remain- 
ing half  of  endless  possible  ways ;  and  it  will  not  suc- 
cee4*'  It  has  not  succeeded,  and  will  not  succeed,  because 

M  The  preceding  psychosis. cannot  impregnate  the  succeeding  with 
&  sainskara,  an  '  impression, '  a  '  seed, '  a  '  germ, '  a  '  tendency  ' ;  for 
the  latter  would  have  to  be  '  stationary,'  lasting  from  one  moment  into 
another — and  this  you  do  not  admit.  And  a  psychosis,-  dying  with  its 
own  moment  of  time,  cannot  look  backwards  and  forwards,  in  memory 
pr  expectation.  If  you  say,  there  is  a  latent,  subliminal  or  supraliminal, 
series  of  psychoses  of  the  nature  of  apperception,  which  is  different  from 
the  manifest  series,  and  which  remembers  and  expects  and  connects  past 
and  future,  the  same  difficulty  is  repeated  over  again.  If  it  has  any 
element  of  persistence  in  it,  why,  that  is  our  Self ;  if  not,  there  is  no 
possibility  of  memory  and  expectation  and  impression  and  tendency  and 
seed  and  germ,  etc." 
Shankara's  Shariraka-Bhashya,  II,  ii,  31,  is  to  the  same  effect. 

1  The  full  significance  of  this  statement  will  appear  later,  when  the 
distinction  between  Eternity  and  Time,  true  Infinity  and  the  mere  bound- 
lessness of  Space,  totality  and  countlessness,  the  indivisible  whole  and 
innumerable  parts,  ?>3£^*ffir,  k  G  t  a-s  t  h a-s  a  1 t  a,  '  rock-seated  being,' 
and  SRff^SRTf  3ffiT,  a  n-&  d  i-p  r  a  v  S  h  a-s  a  1 1  a,  'endless-flow  existence', 
is  understood. 


PEACE,   CH.   IV]       SUBJECT-I   AND    OBJECT-THIS          35 

the  very  being  of  the  *  I  f  is  the  negation,  the  opposite, 
of  all  '  not-I's,'  all  that  is  '  object,'  all  that  can  be  known 
as  a  knowable  object  by  the  knower  subject  '  I  ',  all  that  is 
particular,  limited,  defined,  all  that  can  be  pointed  to  as 
a  *  This  V  Do  we  think  that  we  will  evade  this  inevitable 
conclusion  by  denying  the  '  I  '  altogether  ?  We  cannot 
do  that,  as  already  said.  We  will  only  stultify  ourselves. 
*  I  '  is  not  nothing,  but  it  is  not  any-one-thing.  Let 
us  ponder  deeply  on  this  for  days  and  days,  and 
weeks  and  months  and  years  if  necessary;  as  Indra 
did  (for  a  hundred  years  and  one),  when  trying  to 
learn  the  secret  of  the  Self  from  Praja-pati,  in  the 
Upanishat-story,  till  we  see  the  pure,  unique,  universal, 
and  abstract  being  of  the  '  I  '.  We  will  do  so  if  we  are 
in  earnest  with  our  search  ;  and  when  we  have  dione  so, 
more  than  half  the  battle  is  won.  We  have  attained  to 
the  Pratyag-atma,  the  '  inward,'  abstract  and  universal, 
Ego,  and  are  now  in  sight  of  the  Param-atma,  the  '  Sup- 
reme,' the  '  Ab-sol-ute  '  Self,  the  Self  'solved,'  loosed,  freed, 
from  all  conditions,  limitations,  relations.  This  Param- 
atma  is  the  '  whole  ',  '  full  ',  significance  and  Nature  of 
the  Self,  so  named  for  special  reasons.2  It  is  the 
Brahman,  final  goal,  and  ultimate<  place  of  Peace. 

Or  perhaps  we  feel  another  difficulty.  Perhaps  we 
feel  a  sudden  revulsion  at  this  stage  and  cry  :  "  This 
commonplace  *  I  ',  that  everyone  is  glibly  talking  about 
and  relishing  acutely  every  moment  of  his  life,  from 


>  S?  gg  flSTT^Tctl      \ 
2  Explained  at  the  end  of  ch.  viii  infra. 


36  THE   INFINITE   IS   NOT  GRADED      [SCIENCE   OF 

babbling  baby  to  garrulous  old  man  in  dotage — is  this 
the  mysterious,  marvellous,  and  mystic  vision  of  beatitude 
and  perfection  that  we  hoped  for  ?  I  that  am  so  small, 
so   weak,   how   can   I  be  the  unreachable,  all-glorious, 
Supreme  !  "    Let  us  be  patient  if  we  would  understand. 
Let  us  go  back  to  our  question  ;  re-formufete  it  to  our- 
selves.    Have  we  been,  at  the  bottom  of  our  heart,  seek- 
ing so  long  for  immortality  ;  or  only  for  a  '  glorious  vision  * 
of  something  which   is  graded  on  to  our  present  experi- 
ences ;  for  aji  enlargement  of  our  powers  and  our  worldly 
possessions,  transformed  and  glorified  into  subtler  material, 
but  the  same  in  kind  ?  If  we  have  longed  for  such,  then  let 
us  seek  for  them  by  all  means  ;  but  the  way  is  different ; 
and    the    result    is    limited   and   poor   by   comparison. 
Nachik£t&  refused  such  glorious  states.     He  wanted  im- 
mortality.    If  the  emmet  were  to  sigh  for  sovereignty  of. 
a  world-wide  hurnan  empire,  it  would  be  a  '  glorious '  con- 
summation  indeed,  as  compared  with  its  present  condi- 
tion, when  it  attained  thereto,  as  it  surely  would  if  it 
desired  persistently  and   ardently   enough.     But   would 
that  glorious  consummation  be  a  final  consummation  ? 
And  are  the  lives  of  such  grand  and  glorious  beings, 
full    of  joys  only  ?   Are  they  not  full   of  miseries,  as 
much,   as  many,  if  not    more  ?    Do   we  wish   for  only 
such  an  elevation  and  expansion  ?    What  if  one  were 
ruler  of  a  solar  system,  omniscient  and  omnipotent — but 
omniscient  and  omnipotent  within  the  poor  limits  of  a 
solar  system  only  !  One  solar  system  may  be,  nay,  must 
be,  to  another  solar  system — circumscribed  in  a  sufficiently 


PEACE,   CH.   IV]      NOT   COMPARATIVE  37 

greater  breadth  of  space  and  length  of  time — even  as 
a  small  molecule  is  to  the  whole  earth-globe ;  and  such 
comparative  smallnesses  and  greatnesses  are  endless.  The 
ruler  of  a  solar  system,  of  a  hundred,  of  a  thousand,  of  a 
million  solar  systems  rolled  into  one,  must  die,  as  such 
ruler.  His  life,  as  such  ruler,  had  a  beginning  and  must 
have  an  end.  This  fact  is  almost  plain  to  the  physical 
senses,  to  say  nothing  of  logical  inferences.  Physical 
science  sees  stars  ancl  systems  beginning  and  ending. 
Whatever  tenure  of  true  immortality  such  a* ruler  has,  he 
has  it  because  of  the  identity  of  his  self  with  the  Pratyag- 
atma,  the  Universal  Self/even  as  much  as,  and  no  more 
arid  no  less  than,  the  meanest  worm  whose  form  exists 
within  his  system.  We  do  not,  at  present,  seek  for  any- 
thing that  is  only  comparative  and  circumscribed  and 
limited  by  death  at  both  ends.  We  want  an  im- 
mortality that  is  unlimited  and  un comparative.  Such 
can  be  found  only  in  the  Universal  '  I ?.  Thoughtlessness 
says,  "  This  thing  is  commonplace  and  unimportant," 
only  because  it  is  familiar.  Serious  thought,  on  the  other 
hand,  perceives,  in  that  same  ever-and-everywhere-presence 
of  the  '  I ' ;  in  that  familiar  nearness  and  pervasion,  by 
the  *  I ',  of  all  life  and  all  consciousness  and  all  universal 
processes ;  the  conclusive  evidence  of  the  Self's  unlimited- 
ness  and  true  immortality  and  everlastingness.  This 
Pratyag-atma  declares  its  utter  purity,  transparency, 
transcendence  of  all  limitations  whatsoever,  gross  and 
glorious,  through  the  mouth  of  Krshna :  "  The  '  I '  is 
the  origin,  the  middle,  and  the  end  of  all  the  worlds. 


38    VAGUE  VERSUS  CLEAR  KNOWLEDGE    [SCIENCE   OF 

It  is  the  womb,  also  the  tomb,  of  all  of  them.  There 
is  nothing  higher  than  the  '  I/  O  thou  who  wouldst  win 
the  wealth  of  wisdom  !  All  this  multitude  of  worlds  is 
strung  together  <Jn  the  '  I ',  even  as  jewels  on  a  thread."  ! 
We  may  think  again,  with  lurking  doubt  as  to  the 
value  of  our  finding  :  "  1  knew  this  *  I '  indeed  before  I 
started  on  my  quest !  "  That  we  did  so  is  no  detraction 
from  the  value  of  our  finding  now.  We  knew  it  then,  it 
is  true,  but  how  vaguely,,  how  doubtingly,  bandying  it 
about  between  a  hundred  different  and  conflicting  hypo- 
theses. Compare  that  knowledge  with  the  utter  all-em- 
bracing fullness  of  the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the 
'  I '  that  we  have  now  attained  to.  Indeed  it  is  the  law 
of  all  enquiry  about  anything  and  everything,  that  we 
begin  with  a  partial  knowledge,  and  end  with  a  fuller  one. 
None  can  turn  attention  to  that  of  which  he  knows 
nothing  at  all;  none  needs  to  enquire  about  that  of  which 
hg  knows  all  already.*  To  start  on  the  quest  of  the  North 
Pole  we  must  have  at  least  heard  of  it  as  existing  and 
in  a  certain  direction.  This  knowledge  is  very  different 
in  fullness  from  the  knowledge  we  should  acquire  if 
we  actually  stood  on  the  North  Pole ;  still  it  is  partial 
knowledge  of  it.  The  reconciliation  of  the  antitheses, 
involved  in  the  paradox,  that  we  cannot  talk  about  what 
we  do  not  know,  and  need  not  talk  about  what  we  do 
know,  will  be  seen,  later  on,  to  lie  in  this  :  As  everything 
in  the  universe  is  connected  with  everything  else  therein, 

1  Bhagavad-Gifa,  vii,  6,  7. 

2  Yoga-vOsishtha. 


PEACE,    CH.    IV]     'DO  NOT  BE-LITTLE  YOUR-SELF'     39 

so  every  single  piece  of  knowledge  is  connected  with  every 
other;  and  therefore  every  jiva  possessing  any  piece  of 
knowledge  is  potentially  in  possession  of  all  knowledge  ; 
and  enquiry  and  finding,  in  the  individual  life,  mean  only 
the  passing  from  the  less  full  to  the  fuller,  from  the 
potential  to  the  actual  knowledge.  In  other  words, 
the  unfolding  of  the  knowledge  existing,  but  concealed 
within  the  jiva,  appears  as  enquiry  and  finding.  Thus, 
then,  we  can  talk  about  all  things,  because  we  know  a 
little  of  them  all ;  and  need  to  talk  about  them,  because 
we  wish  to  know  more.  Let  us  not  look,  then,  with  slight 
upon  this  simple  *  I '.  "  The  heedless  ones  condemn  the 
'  I  '  embodied  in  the  human  frame,  unwitting  of  the 
supreme  status  of  that  '  I,'  as  the  Great  Lord  of  all  that 
hath  come  forth."  ? 

There  is  one  point  here  which  should  be  borne  in 
mind.  The  full  knowledge,  obtained  by  the  traveller 
when  he  has  attained  his  goal,  may  be  set  down  by  him 
exhaustively  in  a  book,  reading  which,  another  may 
acquire  that  knowledge.  Yet  there  will  be  a  difference 
of  degree,  the  difference  between  direct  and  indirect, 
between  the  knowledge  of  the  two.  Such  difference  will 
always  hold  good  as  regards  things  material,  whether 
gross  or  subtle  (even  those  loosely  but  not  accurately 
called  spiritual).  But  as  regards  abstract  principles,  the 
universal  '  I ',  and  the  abstract  laws  and  subordinate 
principles  that  flow  from  the  Nature  of  that  *  I ',  directly, 
and  are  imposed  by  Its  being  as  laws  on  the  World-Process 
1  Bhagavad-G?tat  ix,  11. 


40  METAPHYSIC   OF   MATHEMATIC       [SCIENCE    OF 

— in  their  case,  knowledge  and  finding  are  one ;  there 
is  no  distinction  between  direct  and  indirect  knowledge, 
intellectual  cognition  and  realisation.  In  this  respect, 
metaphysic  is  on  the  same  level  as  arithmetic  and 
geometry.1  What  the  true  significance  is  of  the 

1  Indeed  the  level  of  metaphysics  may  well  be  said  to  be  higher  than 
that  of  mathematics.  All  the  root-conceptions  of  the  latter  are  essentially 
metaphysical.  In  arithmetic,  the  mathematics  of  time,  the  only  one 
that  is  not-a-many  at  the  same  time,  which  we  know  of,  is  my-Self : 
every  sens-able  one,  is  a  many  too  ;  the  only  ratio,  relation,  that  really 
comes  home  to  us,  is  that  of  memory,  expectation,  reason,  in  which  the 
principle  of  oneness  or  identity,  working  in  the  many,  assumes  the  forms 
of  relativity,  causality,  generalised  law,  invariable  succession,  proportion, 
,  etc.  In  geometry,  the  mathematics  of  space,  the  only  point  that  we  really 
know  of  as  having  position,  posit-in g,  but  no  definable  magnitude,  is  again 
this  same  my-Self ;  all  sens-able  points  have  magnitude  ;  the  only  length 
without  breadth  is  the  line  of  memory-expectation  ;  the  only  surface 
without  depth  is  imagination's ;  the  only  perfect  sphere  is  the  infinite 
One  of  the  All-Consciousness,  indicated  by  the  logion  which  embodies  the 
final  answer  to  our  questionings ;  the  only  perfectly  equal  radii  are  the 
number-less  individual  selves  or  souls ;  the  only  intelligible  postulate  is 
the  free  feel  of  the  will.  The  first  proposition  of  the  first  book  of  Euclid 
may  well  be  interpreted  as  Purusha  and  Prakyti  interlacing,  to  give  birth 
to  the  triple-functioned,  triune-minded,  '  equi-lateral '  man;  and  other 
propositions  similarly. '  In  dynamics,  the  mathematics  of  force  or  energy, 
the  only  force  or  energy  that  we  understand  is  that  of  '  my- will '.  It  is 
in  this  sense  that  the  V£das,  and  their  climax  and  essence,  Ve"<}anta, 
Brahma-vuJyS,  aresvatah-pramana,  '  self-evident, '  and  a  -  p  a  u  r  u , 
sheya,  'not  the  inventions  of  any  particular  ^ereons,'  purushas- 
but  universal  (or,  as  they  may  be  poetically  called,  divine)  truths.  In  this 
sense  also  are  the  Vecjas,  in  their  entirety,  said  to  be  infinite,  a  n-an  t  &  h 
vai  V  e  4  5  h.  Science  must  be  as  infinite  as  the  world-objects  with  which 
it  deals.  The  comparatively  small  texts,  currently  known  as  the  four'Vedas, 
are  only  an  infinitesimal  fragment  of  this  Universal  Science ;  but  they 
apparently  contain  the  fundamental  laws  and  facts  of  the  world-process, 
and  at  the  same  time  constitute,  it  would  seem,  a  manual  of  super- 
Physical  science  and  art  of  a  special  kind,  all  ultimately  based  on  meta- 
physics and  psychology,  and  intended  to  give  access  to  the  more  or  less 
individualised  forces,  g  e  v  a  s  or  s  h  a  k  t  i  s ,  of  the  subtler  worlds,  parti- 
cularly by  means  of '  sound  '  and '  fire ' ;  either  for  the  sake  of  the  immediate 
joy  of  communion  and  intercourse  with  them  ;  or  for  the  sake  of  helping 
human  life  on  earth,  in  respect  of  the  elemental  requirements  of  timely 
sun  and  rain,  abundance  of  corn  and  cattle,  physical  and  mental  health 
and  vigour,  knowledge  and  long  life,  etc.  The  Science  of  the  Sacred 
Word,  or  The  Pranava-Vaga  of  Oargyayana  should  be  perused  by  those 
interested  in  this  line  of  thought ;  also  H.P.B.'s  The  Secret  Doctrine* 


PEACE,   CH.   IV]   DIRECT  &  INDIRECT  KNOWLEDGE    41 

distinction  currently  made,  between  so-called  '  mere 
intellectual  cognition  *  of  Brahman,  and  *  realisation  * 
thereof;  between  knowledge  which  is  par-oksha, 
'beyond  sight,'  and  that  which  is  a-par-oksha,  'not 
beyond  sight ' ;  will  appear  later.1 

Having  thus  necessarily  abs-tract-ed  and  separated 
out  from  the  World- Process,  the  true,  universal,  and  un- 
limited One,  out  of  which  all  so-called  universals  borrow 
their  pseudo-universality,  we  equally  necessarily  find  left 
behind  a  mass  of  particulars.  And  just  as  it  is  not  possible 
to  define  the  '  I '  any  further  than  by  naming  it  the  '  I,' 
so  is  it  not  possible  to  define  this  mass  of  particulars 
otherwise  than  by  naming  it  the  '  Not-I,'  '  Not-Self,' 
4  Non-Ego,'  '  This,'  Mula-prakrti,  '  Root-Nature,'  '  Root- 
Matter  '.2  Take  it  at  any  point  of  space  and  moment  of 
time,  it  is  always  a  particular  something  which  can  be 
cognised  as  Object  in  contrast  with  the  cognising  Subject. 
As  the  characteristics  of  the  '  I '  are  universality  and 
abstractness,  so  are  the  characteristics  of  the  *  Not-I ' 
particularity  and  concreteness.  It  is  always  a  '  This,' s  a 
particular  something  that  is  always,  in  ultimate  analysis, 

1  See  the  last  pages  of  this  book. 

2  Sankhya-Kdrika,  11. 

3 '  This '  is  the  name  for  the  object,  the  objectiye  world,  as  '  I '  is 
the  name  for  the  subject.  In  Samsktf,  the  word  isigamore'tat,  See, 
e.g.,  Manu,  vi,  82.  According  to  grammarians,  ejat  is  the  nearest 
'this;'  i(Jam,  the  slightly  less  near;  a 4 as*  the  distant  but  yet 
'this1,  (and  hence,  it  is  the  technical  name  for  the  next  world) ;  and 
tat,'  that, '  is  what  is  '  beyond  immediate  sense ' ,  '  out  of  sight '  ; 


42       PSEUDO-GENERALISED   NOT-SELF      [SCIENCE   OF 

limited  and  definable  in  terms  of  the  senses.  Its  special 
name  is  the  Many,  Nan  a,  An-ekam,  as  that  of  the 
Self  is  the  One,  £kam.  That  it  is  generalised  under 
the  word  '  Not-Self '  is  only  a  pseudo-generalisation, 
by  reflection  of  the  universality  of  the  '  I  '.  The  word 
'  pseudo  '  is  used  to  distinguish  the  universality  of  the 
One  from  that  of  the  Other.  It  does  not  mean  false 
in  the  sense  of  '  non-existent,'  but  only  in  the  sense  of 

*  apparent,'    *  not    real,'    '  borrowed,'    '  reflected  '.     The 
physical  fact  of  the  continuance  and  indestructibility  of 
matter  illustrates  this  distinction.  Because  the  '  I '  and  the 

*  Not- 1 '    always   imply   each    other   and   can    never   be 
actually   separated,  they  are   always  imposing  on  each 
other,  one  another's  attributes.     The  '  I '  is  always  (be- 
coming particularised  into  individuals,  and  the  '  Not-I '  is 
always  becoming  generalised  into  the  elements  and  classes 
and  kinds  of  matter,  because  of  this  juxtaposition  of  the 
two,  because  of  their  immanence  within  each  other. 

Further  treatment  of  this  point  belongs  to  a  later 
stage  of  the  discussion.  It  is  enough  to  show  here  that 
the  searcher  necessarily  comes,  at  the  last  stage  before 
the  final  finding,  to  these  two,  the  Self  and  the  Not-Self. 

It  should  be  added  that,  at  this  stage,  having  traced 
his  ego  into  the  universal  Ego,  the  j I va  finds  a  partial 
satisfaction  and  peace.  Seeing  that  the  universal  Ego  is 
unlimited  by  space  and  time,  he  feels  sure  of  his  immor- 
tality, and  does  not  yet  feel  any  great  care  and  anxiety 
precisely  to  define  the  nature  of  that  immortality.  He 
is,  for  the  time  being,  content  to  take,  it  as  a  universal 


PEACE,    CH.   IV]      UNSTABLE   PARTIAL   PEACE  43 

immortality,  in  which  all  egos  are  merged  into  one,  with- 
out any  clear  distinction  and  specialisation  ;  for  he  feels 
that  such  specialisation  is  part  of  the  limited  and  perish- 
ing, and  so  incapable  of  such  immortality  as  belongs  to 
the  Pratyag-atma.  Later  on,  he  will  begin  to  ask  whether 
there  is  any  such  thing  as  '  personal  immortality*  also  ;  he 
will  find  that  in  the  constitution  of  the  material  sheaths 
which  make  of  him  an  individual  ego  out  of  the  universal 
Ego,  there  is  a  craving  for  such  personal  immortality,1 
for  a  continuance  of  existence  as  .separate';  and  he  will 
also  find  that  such  is  possible,  nay  certain,  in  its  own 
special  sense  and  manner.  Just  now,  there  is  but  one 
last  remaining  doubt  that  makes  him  feel  that  he  has 
found  but  a  partial  peace  and  satisfaction  in  the  finding 
of  the  universal  Ego. 


CHAPTER  V 

THE  MUTUAL  RELATION  OF  THE  SELF 
AND  THE  NOT-SELF 

SEEING  the  unvarying  continuity  of  the  '  universal '  Ego, 
the  Pratyag-atma,  through  and  amidst  the  endless  flux  of 
'  particulars/  of  not-selves,  we  have  '  abs-tract-ed,'  sepa- 
rated, it  out  and  identified  ourselves  with  it,  and  so 
derived  a  certain  sense  of  absence  of  limitation,  of 

1See  Stirling's   Secret  of  Hegel,  2nd  ed.,  pp.  213,  214,  and  his 
Schwegler,  pp.  435,  436. 


44  MENTAL  VERSUS   REAL      [SCIENCE  OF 

immortality.  But  the  separation  now  begins  to  seem' 
to  us  to  be  merely  '  mental '  and  not  '  real '.  For  while 
we  see,  without  doubt,  that  '  I '  continues  unchanged 
through  changing  things,  we  also  see  that  it  continues 
to  do  so  only  in  these  things,  and  never  apart  from  them  ; 
and  if  it  must  do  so,  is  it  not,  after  all,  limited  by  some 
inherent  want  and  defect,  so  that  it  is  dependent  for  its 
manifestation,  its  existence  in  fact,  upon  these  things, 
just  as  much  as  these  things  may  depend  upon  it  ?  So  we 
come  back  to  the  old  difficulties  of  two  eternals-infinites. 
We  must  reconcile  these  two  eternals-infinites :  indeed 
we  must  derive  the  one  from  the  other ;  and  also  main- 
tain, all  the  while,  their  coevalness,  their  simultaneity ; 
for  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  deny  the  beginninglessness 
and  endlessness  of  either.  How  to  perform  this  most 
impossible  task,  to  combine  all  the  statements  of  the  first 
and  the  second  answers,  and  also  obviate  all  the  possible 
objections  to  them  ?  How  relate  Self  and  Not-Self  so 
that  Self — '  my-Self * — shall  no  longer  feel  bound,  small, 
dependent,  helpless,  at  the  mercy  of  any  Other-than-Self  ? 
We  do  not  want  to  know  how  and  why  and  whence 
the  Self.  When  we  come  to  a  true  eternal  infinite  One, 
further  search  for  causes  ceases.  To  ask  for  a  cause  of 
that  which  is  unlimited  and  changeless  is  meaningless.1 

1 '  Whence  '  is  asked  for  the  limited  in  space ;  *  when,'  for  that  in 
time  ;  '  how  ',  for  that  in  condition  (motion) ; '  why/  for  that  which  is 
limited  by  and  in  purpose,  design,  desire.  We  have  found,  by  the  think- 
ing done  so  far,  that  the  Self  is  not  limited  in  or  by  space,  time,  condi- 
tion, desire,  change.  Why  is  appropriate  only  when  there  is  a  change,  a 
new  event,  concerned.  '  Why  has  this  happened  ? '  '  Why  do  you  wish 
this  to  happen  ? '  Where  there  is  no  change,  there  can  be  no  '  why '. 


PEACE,   CH.   V]       CHANGE-LESS   IS   WHY-LESS  45 

None  really  and  sincerely  does  or  can  do  so.  All  enquiry 
starts  with  a  certain  standard  ;  when  we  have  found  such 
and  such  a  One,  we  shall  toil  and  seek  no  further  and  no 
longer ;  and  Uncausedness,  Self-existence,  is,  on  the  very 
face  of  it,  part  of  the  standard  of  the  enquiry  after  the 
Unlimited.  We  do  not  want  to  engage  in  an  endless  pas- 
time of  asking  "  Why "  after  every  answer,  without 
considering  whether  the  answer  is,  or  is  not,  complete 
and  final.  What  we  want  is  to  derive  all  and  every- 
thing from  One  True,  unchanging  and  unlimited  some- 
thing, which  something  shall  be  wy-Self,  owr-Self.  But  we 
must  do  this  and  nothing  less.  We  must  prove  conclu- 
sively to  ourselves  that  our  Self  is  the  true  eternal  and  un- 
limited, that  it  is  not  based  in  any  way  on  the  Not-Self ; 
but  that  from  it  is  derived  the  Not-Self ;  and  a  countless, 

Sankhya  declares  that  the  concrete-seeing. '  intelligence  '  and  its  '  argu- 
mentation '  can  never  come  to  a  finality,  tarka-a-prati-shthana^ 
The  reason  is  plain.  All  such  argument  starts  with  a  limited  datum  ;  and 
with  a  limited  datura,  there  must  be  an  endless  regressus  and  progressus 
of  why's  and  how's,  and  because's  and  thus's,  and  why's  and  how's  to 
these  last  two  again.  But  with  an  unlimited  datum,  unlimited  in  time  and 
space,  motionless,  there  is  no  further  how  and  why ;  we  have  finality. 
The  Self  is  such  an  unlimited  finality  ;  it  is  absolutely  certain  ;  it  is  the 
Absolute  It-Self.  The  difference  between  intellectuality  and  spirituality — 
various  aspects  of  which  are  m  a  n  a  s  and  buddhi-mahatof  Sankhya, 
b  u  dd  h  i  and  c  h  i  1 1  a  of  Vedanta,  present  cognition  and  memory,  cons- 
cious 'and  sub-and-supra-conscious,  intelligence  and  intuition,  patence  and 
latence,  willed  attention  and  dormant  tendency,  knowledge  and  wisdom, 
individual  and  universal,  understanding  and  reason,  discrete  and  continu- 
ous, (personal)  J  and  (all-personal)  We  or  the  '  I  '-—that  difference  is  but 
this  :  that  the  former  deals  with  the  Limited  and  the  latter  with  the  Un- 
limited. The  same  j  I  v  a,  in  one  mood,  is  intellectual  and  limited,  in 
another,  Spiritual  and  Unlimited.  It  may  be  said  that  it  is  not  impossible 
to  ask:  "  Why  does  the  Self  pxist  ?"  But  on  scrutiny,  it  will  be  found 
that,  if  the  questioner  has  any  meaning  behind  his  words,  it  is  only  this  : 
*'  Why  has  the  Self  come  to  be  here,  or  why  has  it  begun  to  exist."  'And 
the  changes  involved  in  these  interpretations  are  obviously  out  of  place 
in  connection  with  the  Self,  motionless,  spaceless,  timeless,  including  all 
times,  spaces,  and  motions  within  Itself,  within  Consciousness. 


46      MULTIPLYING  IS   NOT   SATISFYING     [SCIENCE   OF 

boundless,  endless  series  too  of  not-selves.     We  have  to 
create  everything,  all  things,  oat  of  the  '  I,'  and  not  only 
everything  and  all  things  but  an  endless  series  of  such. 
We  have  to  create,  in  a  rational  and  intelligible  manner, 
not  only  something  but  an  infinite  something,  viz.,  the 
second  of  two  co-infinites,  and  create  it  oufr  of  nothing  ; 
or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  out  of  the  first  co-infinite, 
without  changing  this  first  infinite  in  the  very  minutest ; 
for  thea,  its  unlimitedness  is  lost ;  it  is  subject  to  finite- 
ness,  to  change,  to  beginning  and  end.1    Impossible,  truly, 
to   all  appearance !    Yet  until  this  so  impossible  task  is 
done,  there  is  no  final  peace,  no  final  satisfaction.  Amass 
worldly   wealth   and   glories,   amass  endless   particulars 
upon  particulars  of  science,  amass  occult  knowledge  and 
powers   of  high  and  low  degree,  for  a  thousand  years,  for 
a  thousand  thousand  years,  and    do  not   this,  set  not 
at  rest  this  doubt — and  there  will  be  no  peace  for  you. 
Secure  this,  and  all  else    will  follow  in  its  proper  time, 
serenely,    certainly,    and   peacefully.      The    gods   have 
suffered  from  this  doubt,  as  Yama  said.      Indra,  king 
of  the  gods,  found  no  pleasure  in  his  heavenly  kingdom, 
and,   forsaking   it,    studied   the   Science  of  this   Peace, 

1  The  words  infinite  and  eternal  have  been  used,  so  far,  from  <tie 
standpoint  of  the  enquirer  who  has  not  yet  made  the  technical  and  pro- 
foundly significant  distinction  between  the  true  eternal  and  infinite,  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  merely  in-numer-able,  count-less,  endless,  on  the 
other,  which  distinction  will  appear  later  on.  This  false  or  pseudo-in- 
finite has  been  called  '  spurious  '  and  '  bastard  '  infinite,  by  Hegel ;  see  The 
Secret  of  Hegel,  by  Dr.  J.  H.  Stirling,  who  delights  in  an  exuberantly 
vigorous,  aggressive,  pugnacious  style,  and  imports  dramatic  phrasing  into 
philosophical  discussion,  thereby  making  it  more  '  interesting '  and 
"arresting ',  if,  perhaps,  less  serious,  lefcs  reposef ully  anxious,  less  earnest- 
ly wistful. 


PEACE,   CH.   V]       PERFORM   THE   'IMPOSSIBLE'          47 

Acjhyatma-vidya,  the  Science  of  the  Self,  for  a  hundred 
years  and  one,  in  all  humility,  at  the  feet  of  Prajapari.1 
Even  Vishnu  had  to  master  it  before  he  could  become 
the  ruler  of  a  system.2  Let  us  then  set  our  hearts  on 
mastering  it. 

The  first '  result  of  this  last  effort  is  a  return  to  the 
first  answer  on  a  higher  level.  The  universal  Self,1  the 
One-without-a-Second,  by  its  own  inherent  power  of  Will- 
Desire,  creates  the  Not-Self,  at  the  same  time  dividing 
it-Self  into  many  selves,  assuming  names  and  forms  by 
combination  with  the  Not-Self.  "  It  willed :  May  I 
become  many,  may  I  be  born  forth  ;  "  "  Having  created 
all  this  it  entered  thereinto  itself.''  Such  are  the  first  of 
the  scripture-texts  which  seek  to  sum  up  the  World- 
Process  in  one  single  act  of  consciousness,  and  bring  it  all 
within  the  Self.3 

This  first  result,  corresponding  to  the  Dvaita  or 
dualistic  form  of  the  Vedanta,  is  only  the  theory  of 
creation  on  a  higher  level,  with  a  new,  added,  and  im- 
portant significance.  Instead  of  a  personal,  extra-cosmical, 
separate  God,  the  universal  Self,  immanent  in  the 

1  Chhandogya-Upanishat,  VIII.        2 Pevi-Bhagavaf a,  I,  xv. 

^^snnita,  ?faj  Chhandogya-Upanishat,  VI,  ii. 

15  w* ,  rarfcr,  ?i%  ;  g:  w  *§  *KPRI;  *m «jr,  ^ 

^  Taittirlya-Upanishat,  II,  vi.  Cf.  Karl  Pearson, 
Grammar  of  Science  (1st  edn.) :  '*  There  is  an  insatiable  desire  in  the 
human  breast  to  resume  in  some  short  formula,  some  brief  statement,  the 
facts  of  hu  man  experience,"  (p.  44).  If  he  had  added,  "  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  derive  these  all  from  the  Self, ' '  he  would  have  explained  the  why  of 
the  insatiable  desire  at  the  same  time.  Fichte  only,  of  western  philo- 
sophers, seems  to  have  attempted  to  do  so,  but  has  not  satisfactorily 
deduced  the  concrete  '  this-es '  from  the  abstract  universal  Ego. 


48  UNIFY  GOD-NATURE-MAN      [SCIENCE   OF 

universe,  has  been  reached.  Instead  of  craftsman  and 
knick-knacks,  potter  and  pots,  builder  and  houses,  we  have 
en-Soul-ing  Life  and  Organisms.  The  world  is,  though 
vaguely,  included  in  the  being  of  the  One  ;  the  sense  of 
Unity  is  greater,  and  that  of  irreconcilable  difference  and 
opposition  less.  The  universe,  made  up  of  countless 
world-systems,  with  their  endlessly  repeated  beginnings 
and  endings,  is  without  beginning  and  without  end,  as 
much  as  the  Self,  and  individual  selves  ;  and  the  karma 
of  the  latter  is  without  beginning,  but  may  have  an  end 
by  M  the  grace  of  God  ".  As  to  what  is  the  exact  relation 
between  that  universal  Self  and  the  individual  selves  and 
living  material  organisms  and  so-called  dead  inanimate 
matter,  there  is,  as  yet,  no  really  satisfactory  idea.1  It 
appears  in  st  general  way,  at  this  stage,  that  the  three  — 
God,  individual  spirits  or  '  Man,'  and  '  Nature  '  —  are  all 
eternal,  and  ever  distinct  from  each  other,  but  yet  that 
the  latter  two  are  entirely  subordinate  to  the  first,  and 
that  the  relation  between  God  and  j  I  v  a  is  that  of  an  indi- 
visible conjunction,  the  individual  j  I  v  a  being  unable  to 
exist  without  the  energising  support  of  the  universal 
Spirit,  as  the  tree  cannot  live  and  subsist  without  its  sap. 
But  .this  transmuted  form  of  the  theory  of  creation 
fails  and  falls  short  of  final  satisfaction,  for  reasons  the 

1  The  five  kinds  of  separateness  and  relationship,  referred  to  in  the 
pvaita-Veganta,  are  : 

i.e., 


difference  between  j  i  v  a  and  j  i  v  a,  between  j  i  v  a  and  I  s  h  v  a  r  a.  be- 
tween j  I  v  a  and  the  world  (or  inanimate  matter),  between  the  world  and 
I  s  h  v  a  r  a,  and  between  inanimate  matter  and  inanimate  matter. 


PEACE,  Ctt.  V]       THE   ONE    MAKES   It-SELF   TWO        49 

same  as  those  that  demolish  that  theory*  It  explains  the 
beginning  of  the  World-Process  as  being  dependent  on, 
and  the  result  of,  the  desire,  the  will,  of  the  Self.  It 
thus  explains  motion,  change.  But  it  does  this  by  means 
of  a  mysterious  Power  which  itself  requires  rational  ex* 
planation.  Also,  there  is  no  reason  assigned  for  the 
exercise  of  such  power.  Finally,  it  does  not  explain 
and  contain  Changelessness.  The  Perfect,  the  Supreme, 
must  be  Changeless.  What  changes,  desires,  feels  want, 
is  imperfect,  is  limited,  is  less  than  the  Supreme.1  Our 
final  search  is  for  that  which  shall  be  Changeless,  and  yet 
shall  explain  and  contain  all  the  multiplicity  of  endless 
Change  within  itself. 

The  next  step,  the  second  result  of  the  last  effort, 
is  the  Vishisht-advaita  form  of  the  Ve^anfa  :  One  sub- 
stance, eternal,  infinite,  changeless,  *  Ishvara,'  has  two 
aspects,  is  animate  and  inanimate,  c  h  i  t  and  a  c  h  i  t, 
conscious  and  unconscious,  Self  and  Not-Self  ;  and  by  its 
power,  Maya,  Shakti,  this  '  sove-reign  Lord  '  causes 
interplay  of  the  two,  for  its  own  high  pleasure  which  there 
is  nohe  other  to  question,  without  any  compulsion  from 
without.  "  It  has  two  natures  ;  one,  Formless,  the  other 
Form  ;  ...  It  became  husband  and  wife  ;  ...  It  is  Being, 
also  No-thing."  9  Such  is  the  second  series  of  scripture 
texts  that  correspond  to  this  stage. 


3  TOTTcflT 
Shariraka-bhashya,  II.  i.  32. 

2  \  * 


flcfof  ^wtt  •  •  •  *n?*nJf  at^f  WWR?*,  qfire  <wft  ^  erarot  ; 


50  FOR  INTER-PLAY  [SCIENCE  OF 

This  second  result,  it  is  clear,  is  again  only  the 
second  answer,  the  theory  of  transformation,  on  a  higher 
level.  Two  factors  are  recognised,  but  subordinated  to, 
made  parts  and  aspects  of,  a  third,  which  is  not  a  third, 
however  ;  and  the  two  are  thus  rather  forcibly  reduced 
to  a  pseudo-unity.  Instead  of  the  complete  separateness 
of  seer  and  seen,  instead  of  the  Sahkhya  doctrine  of 
Purusha  and  Prakrti,  Subject  and  Object,  as  commonly 
understood,  we  have  a  complete  pantheism  of  ensouling 
life  and  organism.  The  two  are  not  only  seer  and 
seen,  subject  and  object,  desirer  and  desired,  actor 
and  acted  on,  but  also  soul  (i.e.,  j  I  v  a  or  mind) 
and  body,  force  and  '  receiver/  cause  and  instru- 
ment, knowledge  and  organ  of  knowing,  desire  and  tool 
of  desire,  actor  and  means  of  action.  But  the  objections 
to  the  original  form  of  the  transformation  theory  hold 
good,  with  only  the  slightest  modifications,  against  this 
subtler  form  of  it  also.  Why  the  need  for,  the  want  of, 
amusement  and  manifestation  and  interplay  ?f  Why  so 

Wl  3RT^  ^  ;   Brhaf-Zrapyaka-Upanishat,  II,  in,  1  ;  lbid.t  I,  iv,  3  ; 
Prashna-Upanishat,  ii,  5.  3$  WK^=3  3*;,  Bf^T;  Git  a,  ix.  19- 


t  \  sftsref 


SKfiT:  \   Bhagavafa.  Ill,  vii,  3. 

'  Sir  !  Revered  Teacher  !  how  can  specific  qualities,  attributes, 
actions,  touch,  appear  in,  the  Supreme,  Which  is  Changeless,  Pure 
Consciousness,  even  in  sport  ?  Sport,  Play,  is  the  activity  of  children,  who 
Wish  to  play  with  another  or  others,  (for  '  play  '  means  playing  with 
another  or  others)  ;  how  can  there  be  the  action,  the  motion,  of  Play,  in 
th0  Supreme,  Which  is  always  ever  Self  -Contained,  Self-Content,  Motion- 
iftfet,  Actionless.  eternally  turned-away-frora  (negat-ive,  repudiative,  of)  An- 
Other  ?  '  How  the  answer  is  hidden  in  the  words  of  the  question  itself,  how 
the  Sport,  Lila,  of  the  Supreme,  is  motionless,  actionless,  will  appear  later. 


PEACE,  CH.  V]        BUT  WHY  WANT  INTERPLAY  ?  51 

much  evil  and  misery  instead  of  happiness  in  the  course 
of  the  manifestation  ?  And  what,  after  all,  is  the  duality  ? 
Are  there  two,  or  are  there  not  two  ?  If  two,  and  there 
must  be  two  if  there  is  interplay,  as  there  self-evidently 
is,  nothing  has  really  been  explained.  Prove  that  one  of 
the  two  is  Not,  Naught,  Nothing,  and  then  you  will  have 
said  something !  What  is  this  mysterious  Maya,  Shakti, 
*  Might/  which  brings  about  the  interplay  ?  What  is  this 
unexplained  secret  ?  How  am  I,  the  individual  enquire*,  to 
feel  the  satisfaction  of  being  the  owner,  possessor,  master, 
not  the  slave,  of  that  Power?  How  does  this  explana- 
tion assure  me  of  my  own  freedom  ?  Where  is  the  law, 
the  regular  method,  the  reliable  process,  in  all  this  mani- 
festation and  interplay  and  unrestrained  power, «,  which 
may  assure  me  of  orderliness -and  sequence,  assure  me 
against  caprice,  i.e.,  at  least  against  all  caprice  other  than 
My  own,  and  also  be  in  accord  with  what  I  see  in  the 
world  around  ?  I,  as  an  individual,  do  not  feel  my  asson- 
ance with  this  explanation.  It  does  not  yet  lead  tne  to 
the  heart  of  the  World- Process.  It  does  not  explain  my 
life,  in  reference  to  and  in  connection  with  the  world 
around  me,  systematically,  satisfactorily.  The  laws  of, 
Karma  and  compensation,  the  law  of  rebirth,  do  not  fit 
into  it  quite  plainly.  To  say  that  I  am  (i.e.,  the  '  I '  is) 
feeling  happy  in  a  billion  forms,  and  also  feeling  miserable 
in  another  billion,  does  not  assimilate  readily  with  the 
constitution  of  my  being.  I  feel  the  statement  as  some- 
thing external  to  me.  In  order  to  be  satisfied,  I  must  see 
the  identity  of  the  countless  individual  *  I's,'  including 


$2        THE   CRUX  REMAINS   UNSOLVED      [SCIENCE   OF 


I  f,   not  only  in  essence  but  in  every  detail  and 
particular. 

Such  are  the  doubts  and  difficulties  that  vitiate  the 
second  result,  and  show  it  as  of  no  avail.  Such  is  the  final 
Crux  of  philosophy  —  to  reconcile  the  Changeless  One, 
Self,  Subject,  with  the  Changeful  Many,  Not-selves, 
1  This-es  ',  Objects  ;  to  explain  the  Relation  between  the 
TWo  ;  arid  in  such  a  manner  that  the  Two  shall  be  One 
onljL  He  who  will  mount  and  surmount  the  Crux,  the 
Cross,  on  which  is  sacrificed  the  '  small  self  ',  of  egoism, 
to  the  *  Great  Self  ,  the  Universal  Self,  of  altruism  and 
Universalism,  shall  win  '  Christ  '-hood,  the  full  understand- 
ing that  belongs  to  him  who  is  *  anointed  with  wisdom.' 


.',:.-.,  ^  CHAPTER  VI 

THE  MUTUAL  RELATION  OF  THE  SELF 
,         AND  THE  NOT-SELF  (Cont.) 

It  may  perhaps  be  useful  to  the  reader,  especially  the 
iSVestertt  reader,  if  a  rapid  sketch  of  modern  Europeafc 
trioiight  on  the  subject  is  given  here,  showing  how  its 
developments  stand  at  the  same  level,  though  riecessarily 
with  very  great  differences  of  method  and  details,  as  the 
second  form  of  V&Janta  above  given  iri  essence,  and  the 
<^rreiit  third  form  thereof  also,  t>fe.,  the  A-<Jvaita,  non- 
i#fc$-istic  (incorrectly  understood  as  won-istic).  The 
Ifiture  of  that  A-4vgJta  view  will  also  appear,  compa- 
;  in  the  course  of  this  sketch.  : 


PEJACE,  CH,  VI]      MOTIVE   OF  PHILOSOPHY         ,  v        53 

Indian  thought  —  in  all  departments  of  re&earch,  in 
which  we  possess  tangible  results  of  it,  in  the  shape  of 
Samskrt  and  Prakrt  works  —  has  seldom  lost  sight  of  the 
fa,ct  that  the  end  and  aim  of  knowledge  is,  directly  or 
indirectly,  the  alleviation  of  pain  and  the  promotion  of 
happiness.1  The  end,  aim,  and  sure  and  certain  result, 
of  the  supreme  knowledge,  is  expressly  declared  to  be 
the  alleviation  of  the  supreme  pain  of  the  fear  of  an-other 
and  of  annihilation,  and  the  promotion  of  the  supreme  plea- 
sure of  the  assurance  of  Immortality  and  Self-dependence. 
The  dominant  motive  of  that  thought,  therefore,  is  ethico* 
religious.9  Even  works  on  grammar  and  mathematics 
do  not  forget  to  state,  at  the  oucset,  that  they  subserve 
the  attainment  of  m  u  k  t  i,  liberation,  salvation,  in  some 
way  or  other.  "  What  is  the  human  need  it  will  sub- 
serve ?  ",  "What  is  its  prayojana,  aim,  motive  ?" 
0  Who  is  its  adhikari,  i.e.,  for  what  manner  and 
quality  of  student,  for  person  of  what  qualifications, 


4  Because  triple  pains  of  many  kinds  assail  human  beings,  therefore, 
is  there  search  for  cause  and  remedy  thereof  ;  final  remedy  is  kndtvledge 
of  the  real  nature  xrf  the  Subject  and  the  Object,  the  Un  manifest  and  the 
Manifest,  (and  of  the  Relation  between  them,  which  inhered  in  that 
real  nature)  '.  Upanisbafs,  Buddhist,  and  Jaina,  books,  SSnkhya,  Yoga, 
Nyaya.  Vaishlshika,  Purva-Mimamsa,  and  pre-eminently,  Ve^ap|a  M^- 
ras,  Aphorisms,  and  earlier  works,  all  have  sentences  to  thesam&effectrjit 
their  beginnings,  (53?^,  Manifest  ;  3=|oq^R,  Unmanifest£  P,  Kntt^ei^^ 

2  Or  "  pragmatical  "  in  the  highest  and  most  comprehensive  sena£ 
as  it  would  perhaps  be  now  called,  in  the  West,  See  William  James, 

Pragmatism.  .   .,    -. 


54     NEED   AND   QUALITY  OF   STUDENT     [SCIENCE   OF 

needs  and  requirements,  is  it  intended  ?  " — these  questions 
are  answered  at  the  outset  of  every  recognised  ancient 
classical  work  in  Sarnskrt  in  every  department  of  its  litera- 
ture. Since  it  recognises  the  organic  wholeness  and  unity 
of  life  and  nature,  the  unbreakable  connection  between 
all  departments  of  'nature'  and  all  aspects  (corresponding 
to  them)  of  '  man,'  soul,  mind  ;  therefore,  Samskrt  philo- 
sophy deals  with  all  other  questions  as  subordinate  to  the 
main  question  of  the  supreme  need  of  the  soul — "  How 
may  the  soul  be  freed  from  pain,  how  may  misery  be  abo- 
lished, how  may  happiness  be  expanded  and  perpetuated 
infinitely  ?  " — the  central  motive  which  governs  the  whole 
of  life.  Its  answer,  as  will  appear  later,  is,  "  By  realisation 
of  the  true  Nature  of  the  soul  as  the  Supreme  Self."  The 
exposition,  of  the  essential  features  of  that  Nature  of  the 
Self,  contains  within  itself,  answers  to  all  other  and  minor 
but  connected  questions. 

Modern  western  thought,  on  the  other  hand,  has, 
for  various  reasons,  historical  and  evolutionary,  become, 
dtlring,  and  since,  the  nineteenth  century,  more  and  more 
disconnected  with  D  harm  a,  Religion-Law,  which,  in 
its  perfection  and  completeness,  is  the  one  Science  of  all 
sciences,  knowledge  pre-eminently  directed  to  the  achieve- 
ment of  desired  happiness  here  and  hereafter  by  means 
of  appropriate  action ; '  V&Ja-Science,  as  it  is  named  in 
Saipskrt.  The  mainspring  of  this  modern  western  know- 
Ifedge  is  mainly  intellectual,  knowledge  for  the  sake  of 
'knowledge — at  least  as  that  mainspring  is  described  by 

.  i.  2. 


PEACE,  CH.  Vl]     SCIENCE,   ITS   USE   AND   MISUSE      55 

some  of  those  'in  whose  hands  it  has  made  progress, 
especially  in  science.  This  fallacy — as  it  is,  despite  its 
brilliant  results  in  science,  including  psychology  alsrf — 
has  its  own  good  reasons  for  coming  into  existence,  as 
may  be  understood  later.  That  it  is  fallacy  may  be  in* 
ferred,  in  passing,  even  from  the  one  single  and  simple 
fact  that  public  common  sense,  public  instinct,  public 
need,  have  always  declined  to  rest  content  with  a  mere 
subjective  and  poetical  admiration  of  the  scientific  dis- 
coveries registered  in  bulky  tomes  and  journals,  but  have 
assiduously  applied  them,  and  continue  to  apply  them, 
with  an  ever-increasing  eagerness  and  demand,  to  the 
purposes  of  daily  life,  for  the  assuagemqpt  of  its  pains 
and  the  enhancement  of  its  pleasures ;  and  this,  with  a 
success  in  the  mechanical  arts  and  appliances  of  peace 
and  commerce,  which  makes  modern  western  civilisation, 
the  wonder,  the  envy,  the  exemplar  to  be  copied,  of  the 
eastern  peoples.1 

1  Unhappily,  by  the  Law  of  Duality,  Polarity,  Action-and-Rcaction, 
Thesis-and-Antithesis,  which  Law  is  inherent  in  (the)  Nature"  (o!  the 
Supreme  Self),  Good,  by  Excess,  has  become  Evil,  Extreme  ha* iMPf 
to  Counter- Extreme ;  mechanical  arts  and  appliances  have  been  con» 
verted  into  monstrous  implements  of  internecine  destruction,  and  science 
has  been  prostituted  into  the  slave  of  horrible  war,  instead  of  being  made 
the  mother  of  peace  and  prosperity  for  mankind ;  especially  since  the 
beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  after  Christ ;  and  the  western  races, 
instead  of  becoming  the  friendly  helpers  and  uplifters  of  weaker  races, 
have  first  become  the  rulers  and  oppressors,  and  now  the  devastators,  Of 
those  weaker  races,  and  of  themselves  also  by  internecine  war,  out  of 
excessive  greed  for  lands,  serf-labor,  markets  (called  4  colonies '  and 
'  dependencies '  and  '  mandated  territories '  in  hypocritical  diplomatic 
language).  If  the  scientists  of  the  world  had  borne  in  mind,  always,  the 
awful  dangers  of  misuse  of  science,  they  would,  long  ago,  have  taken 
due  precautionary  measures,  and  insisted  on  properly  guaranteed  inter- 
national pacts,  between  Scientists  and  Statesmen,  before  publishing  their 
discoveries;  as  Manu-Smrfi  enjoins,  ch.  ii,  verse  114;  see  the  press*! 
writer's  World-War  and  Its  Only  Cure—World  Order  and  World 


56       iBPBTEMOLOGY  VS.   PRAGMATICS      [SCIENCE   OF 

In  the  meanwhile,  that  Western  thought  has  ap- 
proached metaphysic  proper,  too,  from  the  side  of  psycho- 
logy or  rather  epistemology,  the  theory  of  knowledge, 
almost  exclusively.1  It  examines  the  nature  of  the  Self 
and  the  Not-Self-  in  their  relation  to  each  other  as 
cogniser  and  cognised,  subject  and  object,  knower  and 
known,  rather  than  in  their  other  relations  to  each  other, 
of  desirer  and  desired,  and  actor  and  acted  on.9  In  other 
words,  it  at  first  confined  itself,  in  metaphysic,  mainly 
to  one  relation,  that  of  jnana,  cognition,  and  did  not 
take  much  more  than  incidental  account  of  ichchha, 

j.e.9   desire,   and    kriya,    i.e.,   action.     These,    in    their 

* 

Religion,  ch.  xii*  '  Scientists  of  the  World  !  Unite  !  '  The  hope  of  Huma- 
nity today,  is  in  a  Re-re-action,  a  higher  Synthesis  after  the  Antithesis, 
«  return  of  satya-yuga,  '  age  of  Dharma  ',  '  age  of  Truth  and  Concord,' 
and  a  better  satya-vuga  than  the  previous  one.  after  the  present  kali- 
yuga,  '  age  of  Discord  and  A-dharma  ',  has  run  its  appointed  unavoidable 
course.  Efforts  to  prevent  the  World-Wars  were  inevitable  ,  the  failure 
Of  those  efforts,  and  the  occurrence  of  the  wars  was  inevitable ;  the 
return  of  World-peace,  on  a  higher  level,  sooner  or  later,  is  also  inevit- 
able. So  we  hope,  for  such  is  the  promise  of  Metaphysic,  the  Science 
of  Peace. 

wGr,  logos,  word,  logic,  putting  into  words,  of  tyt-stetne,  under- 
Standing  ;  the  science  of  the  origin,  nature,  and  validity,  of  knowledge. 

*  This  predominantly  '  intellectual '  outlook  upon  life  has.  as  con- 
comitants or  consequences,  the  great  development  of  the  physico- material 
sciences  as  against  spiritual  science ;  the  predominance  given  to  the  law 
of  competition,  of  individualism,  of  struggle  for  existence,  over  the  law 
pf  co-operation,  of  universalism,  of  alliance  for  existence  ;  the  increase 
pf  egoism,  aha m-k  &  r a—'  I  am  superior  '  and  *  I  am  at  least  as  good  as 
you  '  —as  against  mutual  fraternal  serviceability  of  elder  and  younger ;  the 
greater  insistence  upon  one's  rights  rather  than  duties ;  and  the  whole 
development  of  the  mechanico-industrial  civilisation  '  of  the  titans  '  of  the 
modern  west,  with  its  endeavour  to  control '  nature  '  by  means  of  external 
machinery,  as  distinguished  from  the  pastoral-agricultural  civilisation  '  of 
the  gods '  of  the  ancient  world,  with  its  endeavour  to  commune  with 

*  nature '  by  means  of  internal  living  and  subtler  senses.    In  the  compre- 
H&psive  theosophical  phraseology,  all  these  issue  from  the  great  develop- 
j»»nt  of  *  the  fifth  principle  '  or  manas.  in  '  the  fifth  race ' :  '  titans '  and 

*  gods '  being  the  same  j  I  v  a  s,  taking  turns,  in  different  moods,  and  ages. 


PEACE,  CH.  Vl]       WESTERN    PHILOSOPHERS  57 

metaphysical  bearing,  it  left  for  long  entirely  to  theology, 
though,  of  course,  the  later  thinkers  have  not  been  able 
to  avoid  a  survey  of  the  whole  field  of  life  from  the 
standpoint  they  ultimately  reached. 

Thus  it  has  happened  that  Locke  (born,  1632,  in 
Britain)  decided  that  what  was  called  '  mind  *  was  a 
tabulit  rasa,  a  clean  slate,  had  no  '  innate  ideas ',  and 
that  all  its  contents  were  written  on  it  by  experience  of 
the  outer  world  of  4  matter  '  ;  nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod 
non  fuerit  in  sensu,  there  is  nothing  in  the  intellect 
which  is  not  given  to  it  by  the  senses.  Leibnitz  (b.  1646, 
in  Germany)  swung  back  towards  idealism,  and  pithily 
criticised  Locke  by  adding  these  words  nisi  ipse  intellects, 
except  intellect  itself.  The  periodic  cyclical  duel,  or  rather 
duet,  was  repeated  by  Berkeley  and  Hume.  Berkeley, 
(b.  1685),  enquiring  into  the  relation  of  knower  and  known, 
under  the  names  of  mind  and  matter,  came  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  very  being  of  matter  is  its  perceptibility  by 
mind.  Its  esse  is  its  percipi.  What  matter  is,  apart  from 
its  cognisability  by  mind,  we  cannot  say ;  indeed,  we 
may  well  say,  it  is  nothing  apart  from  mind.  Thus, 
that  which  we  have  regarded  so  long  as  out  of  us,  apart 
from  us,  independent  of  us,  is  in  reality  dependent  on  us, 
is  within  us  ;  '  without  is  within  '.' 

Hume  (b.  1711)  came  after  Berkeley.  He  may  be  said 
to  have  shown  with  equal  cogency  that,  if  the  being  of 
matter  is  perceptibility,  the  being  of  mind  is  percipience ; 

1 }.    H.   Stirling's  English  translation  of  Schwegler's  History  o/ 
Philosophy,  p.  419  (Annotations). 


58  '  WITHIN  '   AND   *  WITHOUT  '        [SCIENCE    OF 

that  if  we  do  not  know  matter  except  as  it  is  known — 
almost  an  Irishism,  (Bishop  Berkeley  was  an  Irish 
Bishop  I),  but  with  a  special  fullness  of  significance — we 
also  do  not  know  mind  except  as  it  knows,  and  apart 
from  what  it  knows.  What  is  mind  but  something 
cognising  something  ?  Vacant  mind,  empty  of  all  cogni- 
tion, we  know  nothing  about ;  therefore  '  within  is  without.9 

Thus,  then,  between  Berkeley  and  Hume,  the  status 
quo  of  the  problem  was  restored,  and  the  shopkeeper  in 
his  shop  and  the  ploughman  at  his  plough  might  well  feel 
delighted  that  these  two  philosophers  in  combination 
were  no  wiser  than  they,  though  each  taken  separately 
might  have  appeared  something  very  fearfully  profound  ; 
that  the,  net  product  of  these  mountains  in  labour  was 
that  mind  was  that  which  knew  matter,  and  that  matter 
was  that  which  was  known  by  mind.  Yet  something 
seemed  to  have  been  added  to  general  knowledge.  A  very 
close  and  intimate  tie,  an  unbreakable  nexus,  of  complete 
interdependence  between  mind  and  matter — now  clearly 
distinguished,  even  as  '  opposites ' — had  been  made 
apparent,  as  was  not  before  apparent,  to  those  who  had 
not  travelled  along  the  paths  of  enquiry  trodden  by 
Berkeley  and  Hume,  in  their  company,  or  in  that  of 
their  elders  and  predecessors  in  the  race  of  thinkers,  or, 
it  may  be,  by  themselves  and  alone.  The  problem  was 
therefore  the  richer  for  the  labours  of  these  philosophers, 
and  had  now  a  newer  and  Deeper  significance. 

Kant  (b.  1724)  took  it  up  at  this  stage.  The  tug-of- 
war  between  materialism  (or  *  sensism/  which  tends  to 


PEACE,  CH.  Vl]       '  THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES  '  59 

pass  into  *  sensualism'  on  the  ethical  side),  and  idealism  (or 
1  mentalism  ',  which  tends  to  grow,  ethically  and  practi- 
cally, into  '  unpractical  mysticism  '),  went  on.  What  is  the 
nature,  what  are  the  laws,  of  this  unbreakable  bond  be- 
tween mind  and  matter  ?  What  are  the  two  ?  How  do  they 
affect  each  other  ?  '  Within  is  without  '  and  '  without  is 
within  f  —  is  all  right  enough  :  but  this  mutual  absorption 
shows  independence  as  well  as  interdependence.  Two  men 
may  appear  to  be  standing  on  each  other's  shoulders  by 
bending,  bowlike,  in  opposite  directions  ;  but  even  this  can 
be  only  appearance  ;  each,  or  at  least  one,  must  have  a 
separate,  open  or  secret,  fulcrum,  standing-ground.  After 
many  years'  hard  thinking,  Kant  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  each  did  have  such  a  separate  standing-ground.  Be- 
hind mind  was  a  *  thing-in-itself,'  and  behind  matter  was 
a  '  thing-in-itself  '  '  ;  and  from  these  two  noumena  there 


1  Compare  the  ^3<3$[OT.  s  v  a-1  a  k  s  h  a  $  a,  '  own-mark,  '  of  the 
Sankhya  and  the  Bau^dhas.  The  Samskr,t  words,  taj-tva,  *  that- 
ness/  and  tan-matra,  'that  alone*  or  '  the  nature,  maker,  measure, 
essential  characteristic,  of  that/  convey  the  same  idea  as  '  thing-in- 
itself/  but  with  a  fuller  and  more  real  and  substantial  significance. 
f^lc*W>,  s  v-a  |  m  a  k  a,  would  be  a  literal  translation  of  '  thing-in- 
itself/  but  is  not  justified  .'by  usage  ;  and  it  is  only  a  variation  of  sva- 
1  a  k  s  h  a  p  a. 

These  words  do  not  vaguely  imply  any  such  elusive  will-o'-the- 
wisp  as  Kant's  'thing-in-itself';  e.g.,  in  Sankhya,  the  eight  forms  of 
Praktfi  are  all  $  a  M  v  a-s,  and  the  five  sens-able  qualities  are  all  |  a  n-m  a- 
tras.  In  the  Veganta,  the  expression  Ajma-tattva,  'Self-fact,  Self- 
essence/  is  frequent.  A  '  fact/  '  essence  '  substance  ',  having  a  specific. 
defining,  demarcating,  unique  characteristic,  is  a*  that  '  or  '  that-ness," 
{5Hva;and  the  characteristic  quality,  in  the  case  of  the  five  sens-able 
substances  or  true  'elements/  is  the  |an-ma|ra,  i.e.,  the  sens-able 
qualities  known  as  sound,  touch,  colour-form,  taste,  and  smell.  Bhagcr- 
vaf<t,  III.  xxvi,  uses  the  expressions  shab4a-ma(ra('  sound  only,  pure 
sound,  sound-continuum',  also  sparsha-,  rapa-,  rasa-,  gan<)ha- 
m&$ram,  'pure  tact,  color-shape,  taste,  odour  only/  i.e.,  continua, 
highest  genera,  of  these. 


60  EASTERN'    AND   WESTERN   WAYS      [SCIENCE    OF 

irradiated  and  coruscated,  spontaneously  and  by  inherent 
nature,  phenomena  which  entangled  themselves  with  each 
other  and  produced  what  we  know  as  mind  and  matter. 
But,  Kant  added,  the  phenomena  that  issued  from  the 

Some  further  observations  re  western  '  cpistemologists  '. 

It  may  be  noted  here  that  the  Indian  philosophies,  Darshanas, 
1  Views  '  (of  the  Universe),  '  Outlooks  '  (upon  Life),  do  not  approach  the 
problem  that  occupied  the  above-mentioned  western  thinkers,  in  the 
manner  of  the  latter.  Indeed  it  may  be  said  that  they  do  not  discuss  that 
particular  problem,  in  that  particular  form,  at  all.  They  all,  more 
or  less,  with  slight  variations,  take  it  for  granted,  as  undisputed  and  in- 
disputable, and  not  needing  discussion  or  enquiry,  that  the  '  mind  '• 
subject,  jiva,  chitta,  vishayi,  has  three  aspects  or  functions, 
is  triune,  knower-desirer-actor ;  and  that  'matter  '-object,  jada, 
,c  h  e*  t  y  a,  vishaya,  has  also  three  aspects,  is  tri-ime,  known-desired- 
manipulated,  or  cognisability-desirabilit  y-movability .  J  i  v  a-c  h  1 1 1  a, 
as  a  whole,  is  said  to  possess  the  faculty  or  function  of  '  memory  ', 
whence  its  name  chitta,  from  c  h  i,  to  gather,  to  store  up.  The  Sankhya 
treatment  of  Purusha-subject  and  Prakrti-object,  may  be  said  perhaps 
to  be  like  the  western  philosophers'  treatment  of  knower  and  known  ;  yet 
is  different ;  *  psycho- physical  parallelism  '  is  nearer  to  it.  '  So  many  men, 
(bodies,  faces),  so  many  minds  '  ;  yet  there  is  something  in  common,  too, 
ttm-ting  them  all;  making  some  understanding  possible  amidst  much 
misunderstanding  ;  Unity  in  Multiplicity. 

In  Sankhya,  Purusha-Spirit  is  Pure  Consciousness,  C  h  i  n-m  a  t  r  a ; 
and  all  the  details  &&&  particulars,  that  are  commonly  ascribed,  some 
to  'mind',  intelligence,  understanding,  reason,  (as  the  words  are  ordi- 
narily understood  and  used),  f.i.,  the  Kantian  '  forms  '  and  '  categories  ', 
and  the  rest  to,- matter '.  i.e.,  the  multifarious  congeries  of  countless 
sensations  and  sense-objects,  the  Kantian  '  matter '  or  '  material ', 
which  the  '  forms '  are  supposed  to  sort  out  and  arrange — all  these 
are  assigned  to  Prakrti-Nature  (-Matter-Energy) ;  and  relational  laws-and- 
facts,  '  forms-and-material ',  genera-and-species  (from  summa  genera  to 
in-fima  species,  individuals,  singulars),  universals- (generals) -and-  parti- 
culars, all  arise  together-,  all  are  'objects',  seen  in  unbreakable, 
indivisible,  connection  ;  though  they  are  distinguishable,  while  insepara- 
ble, and  though  the  seeing,  the  discerning,  of  the  inseparability-with- 
distinctness,  of  both  series,  of  facts  and  of  relations,  becomes  clearer 
and  clearer  with  the  evolutionary  growth  of  '  mind-body '  ;  which 
evolutionary  growth,  in  cycles,  is  fully  recognised  and  declared  at  length 
in  the  Purapa-History,  and  also,  much  more  briefly,  of  course,  in  the 
Upanishafs  and  Vojanta-works. 

The  '  categories  '  of  Kant  are  dealt  with  aspacj-arthasin  Vaishe- 
shika-parshana  ;  six  are  the  main,  (Jravya  (substance or  substantiality), 
Runa  (quality,  attribute,  specificate,  determinative),  karma  ductility. 


PEACE,  CH.  Vl]       OF   TREATING   'CATEGORIES*  61 

mental  thing-in-itself  were  few  in  number  add  took  the 
shape  of  '  universal '  laws  and  *  forms,'  '  categories  ',  into 
which  the  far  more  numerous  '  particular '  phenomena 
ttfat  streamed  from  the  material  thing-in-itself  as 

activity)  as  one  triplet,  and  as  another  triad,  s  a  many  a  (universality 
or  generality),  vishdsha  (particularity,  or  singularity,  or  individu- 
ality), and  (this  is  specially  noteworthy,  for  it  seems  to  be  absent  from 
the  list  of  Kant,  and  subsequent  German  philosophers  have,  apparently, 
not  named  it  specifically  as  a  distinct 'category)  sam-av-aya  (inse- 
parability), mutual  inherence,  togetherness.  Later,  '  modern  '  adherents 
and  exponents  of  the  system  have  added  a  seventh  to  the  six,  viz., 
a-bhava  (non-being,  non-existence),  distinguished  into  four  sorts, 
atyanfa-abhava  (eternal,  utter,  non-being),  prag-abhava  (ab- 
sence or  non-existence  before  coming  into  existence  and  manifestation), 
pra-(}h  vam  sa-abhava  (non-existence  after  destruction  and  disap- 
pearance), and  any-onya-abhSva  (mutual  non-existence,  each 
being-not,  not-being,  what  the  other  is ;  Hegel's  '  reciprocal  negation', 
'mutual  determination/  Spinoza's  omnis  negatio  est  deter minatio, 
'all  determination  is  negation',  seem  to  embody  much  the  same  idea). 
Under  each  of  the  other  six,  also,  are  grouped  many  subordinate  ones 
(some  of  which  are  equivalents  of  those  mentioned  by  Fichte,  Schelling, 
Hegel,  but  not  by  Kant), 

The  '  laws  of  thought ',  the  subject-matter  of  western  '  logic '  (in  the 
common  sense  of  the  word,  not  Hegel's),  and  the  triad  of  term- 
proposition-reasoning,  or  concept-(or  notion)-judgment-syllogism,  or 
(Hegelian)  apprehension- judgment- reason  (or  notion),  pacja-vakya- 
m  a  n  a,  together  with  their  subsidiaries,  major  premiss,  minor  premiss; 
conclusion,  various  forms  of  syllogism,  etc.,  are  dealt  with  in  *the 
Nyaya  ;  which  is  the  science-and-art  of  correct  thinking  ;  as  Vyakarana, 
Grammar,  is  that  of  correct  speaking-and-writing,  correct  expression  of 
thought.  But  note  that  Nyaya  is  not  mere  and  wholly  sterile  deductive 
logic,  as  that  logic,  in  strictness,  must  be  ;  (as  Hegel  too  recognises,  see 
Wallace,  The  Logic  of  Hegel,  p.  184,  edn.  of  1874) ;  but  is  induction- 
deduction  in  combination  ;  first  induction,  by  the  method  of  concomi- 
tant variations,  agreement-and -difference,  anvaya-vyatire'ka,  and 
then  deduction. 

Psychology,  pure  and  applied,  is  the  subject-matter  of  Sankhya  and 
Yoga ;  Ethics,  sin-and-merit,  vice-and-virtue,  right-and-wrong,  good-and- 
evil,  exertion-and-destiny,  freewill-and-fate,  self-dependence-and -other- 
dependence,  are  the  Subject-matter  of  Mimairisa  ;  Metaphysic,  the  ulti- 
mate problems  of  Being-and-Nothing,  Unchanging-and-Becoming,  Truth- 
and-Untruth,  Reality-and- Illusion,  God-and-Nature,  Spirit-and-Matter, 
Subject-and-Object,  God -and -Man,  Universal-Self-and-Individual-self, 
Param-Atm&-and-Jiv-atma,  Universal-and-Singular.  Self-and-Not-self, 
and  the  Relation  between  these  Pairs  of  Opposites,  (Jvam-dva  m— 
these  i^e  dealt  with 


62  CAUSES   OF   DIFFERENCE      [SCIENCE   OF 

4  sensations  '  —  the  *  matter  '  of  knowledge,  as  opposed  to 
its  '  form,'  in  technical  language  —  fitted  in  exactly  and 
helplessly  ;  and  so  an  organic  whole  of  systematised 

knowledge  was  produced. 

i 

The  other  systems  too  have  something  to  say  on  these  ultimate 
questions  ;  and,  in  this  reference,  Vaisheshika  and  Nyayaare  thought  to 
favor  what  has  been  described  before^  (pp.  7-11)  as  aram  bha-vaga; 
Sankhya  and  Yoga,  parinama-vaga;  Mi  mams  a  and 


a  t  m  a-v  a  <J  a  (as  s  v  a-k  ar  m  a-v  a  <J  a,  the  supremacy  of  the  Self's  will-and- 
action),  and  v  i  var  ta-vada  ;  but  they  are  so  thought,  generally  and 
popularly,  not  quite  precisely  and  accurately  ;  though  '  popular  '  im- 
pressions and  broad  views  are  seldom  wholly  wrong,  and  often  more 
correct  and  more  useful  than  specialist's  and  expert  1st  's  minutiae  and 
*  exactitudes  '.  Subtle  differences  on  minor  points,  mostly  verbal,  due  to 
use  of  the  same  words  in  several,  sometimes  even  opposite,  senses,  and 
consequent  misunderstandings  ;  due  frequently  to  even  mere  controversial 
and  quarrel-some  '  cussedness  '  ;  or  craving  to  pose  as  '  original  '  and 
1  superior  '—such  differences,  for  the  pleasure  of  differing,  are  without 
end,  in  the  later  exponents  of  the  six  systems  ;  also  of  the  several 
schools  of  thought  into  which  the  original  Buddhist  and  Jaina  philo- 
sophies broke  up.  The  primal  vasana-s,  '  sub-supra-conscious  urges 
of  ego-ism,  are  active  in  wduld-be  philosophers  also,  in  east  and  west 
alike.  The  earlier  Sutra-and-Bhashya  writers  of  '  Aphorism-and-Com- 
mentary  '  differ  seldom  ;  and  then  they  indicate  that  whatever  differ- 
ence there  is,  is  due  to  difference  of  viewpoint  and  naming. 

*  A  few  abridged  sentences  from  Wallace's  The  Logic  of  Hegel. 
'  Prolegomena  ',  pp.  Iviii-lxi,  may  help  to  elucidate  further  what  has 
been  said  above  in  this  note,  and  also  in  the  preceding  and  the  succeed- 
ing text  of  this  chapter.  "  Locke  as  well  as  Kant  began  with  an 
assumption  based  upon  abstraction.  This  assumption  led  to  a  fatal 
flaw  in  their  conclusions.  Both  took  the  understanding  or  reason 
to  be  some  sort  of  thing  or  entity,  however  much  they  differed  as  to  the 
peculiar  nature  of  its  constitution,  or  the  amount  of  its  original  contents. 
Both  confronted  the  mind  to  an  external  world,  an  object  of  knowledge 
existing  apkrt  by  itself,  and  coming  in  certain  ways  and  under  certain 
forms  Into  Connection  with  the  subject-mind,  likewise  existing  apart  by 
itself.  In  ibis  state  of  absolute  disruption,  with  two  independent 
centres  in  subject  and  object,  how  was  it  possible  to  get  from  the  one  to 
the  other  ?  This  was  the  common  puzzle  from  Descartes  to  Spelling, 
Locke  and  Kant  included^  "  (  '  but,'  the  present  writer  would  add,  '  Fichte 
excluded  ').  "  For  its  solution,  all  sorts  of  incredible  'devices  have  been 
suggested,  such  as  pre-established  harmony,  divine  interposition,  and 
impressions  with  ideas.  It  has  given  rise  to  two  opposite  views,  some- 
times known  as  Idealism  vs.  Realism,  sometimes  as  Spiritualism  vs. 
Materialism."  (Medieval  Conceptualism,  Nominalism,  Realism,  etc., 
ring  changes  on  the  same  theme).  "But  every  true  philosophy  tpt&st  be 


PEACE,  CH.  Vl]       ERROR  AND   CORRECTION  63 

But  this  was  worse  and  worse.  The  shopkeeper  and 
the  ploughman  might  be  excused  for  staring  aghast.  We 
had  two  difficulties  to  deal  with  before,  viz.,  mind  and 
matter ;  now  we  have  four,  viz.,  two  (or,  one  for  each 


both  idealist  and  realist.  Realism  asserts  the  rights  of  the  several  and 
particular  existences  ;  Idealism  asserts  the  thorough  inter-dependence  of 
all  that  exists.  '  '  (The  former  exhibits  the  Many  ;  the  latter,  the  One 
which  includes  and  interweaves  the  Many).  "  Neither  mind  nor  so-called 
external  world,  '  subject  *  and  '  object  ',  are,  either  of  them,  self-subsistent 
existences.  The  objective  world  and  the  subject  are  really  one  ;  they 
spring  from  a  common  source,  which  Kant  called  the  '  original  syn- 
thetic unity  of  apperception  '  .  .  .  "  (In  plain  language,  the  original 
Unity  of  Self-Consciousness,  which  synthesises,  interlinks,  Self  and  Not- 
Self,  against  which  Not-Self,  by  contrast  to  which  Not-Self,  by  negation 
of  which  Not-Self,  the  Self  eternally  realises  It-Self.  Kant  seems  to  have 
only  glimpsed,  very  late,  that  the  Self  was  the  one  and  on(e)ly  Thing- 
in-it-Self,  behind  both  outer  and  inner).  "The  subjective  world,  the 
Mind  of  Man,  is  really  constituted  by  the  same  force  as  the  objective 
World  of  Nature.  Hegel  came  to  prove  that  God  is  the  '  original 
synthetic  Unity/  from  which  the  external  world  and  the  Ego  have  issued 
by  differentiation,  and  in  which  they  return  to  Unity."  (Again,  in  plain 
words,  '  God  is  the  Supreme  Universal  Self,  whose  Unity  synthesises, 
posits-and  -negates,  creates-  (main  tains)  -destroys,  all  Multiplicity  ').  "  The 
deepest  craving  of  thought,  the  fundamental  problem  of  philosophy,  is 
to  discover  the  Nature  and  Law  of  that  Totality  or  primeval  Unity, 
which  appears  in  the  double  aspect  of  matter  and  mind." 

It  will  have  been  noted  by  the  reader  that  the  fatal  flaw  t  referred 
to  in  the  extract,  is  the  flaw  of  extremism,  as  usual  ;  by  omitting  the 
italicised  words  *  apart  by  itself  ',  '  absolute  ',  '  independent  ',  the  flaw 
disappears.  As  will  be  expounded  in  the  subsequent  chapters,  Vldanta 
tells  us  that  the  Ab-sol-ute,  solved,  salved,  from  all  limitations,  Param- 
Atma,  the  supreme  Self,  is  Pratyag-Stma,  abstract  Sell  .plus  MGla-prakrti, 
abstract  Not-Self,  which  appear  as  mind^/MS-matter,  man-£/tts-nature, 
inner-^/ws  -outer,  Ji 


Yet,  the  occurrence  of  the  '  fatal  flaw  '  has  not  been  useless.  It  was 
inevitable,  even  desirable,  that  the  '  philosophic  mind  '  should  have  erred 
away  for  a  while  from  the  '  thesis  '  of  Unity  of  Subject-Object,  into  the 
'  anti-thesis  '  of  the  '  disruption  into  two  or  Many  ',  in  order  to  re-cover, 
with  fuller  knowledge,  the  '  syn-thesis  '  of  that  primal  Unity  ;  in  the  terms 
of  the  Git  a,  £kata,  One-ness,  thence  Prthag-bhava  (visjara), 
Separateness  (Multiplication),  then  again  £  k  a  -  s  \  h  a-t  &  (re-establishment 
in  One-ness),  according  to  the  Law  of  Duality,  of  contradictory  opposites, 
appearing,  and  also  balancing,  neutralising,  cancelling,  each  other,  in  the 
One.  JBy  Error  and  Correction*  an  enrichment  of  thought  is  achieved. 


64    MANY  THEORIES    OF  MANY  SCHOOLS    [SCIENCE  OF 

mind  ?,  and  one  for  each  material  object,  therefore  count- 
less), things-in-themselves,  and  two  (or  rather  an  endless 
number)  of  things-in-other-than-themselves !  What  are 
these  things-in-themselves  ?  Some  ran  away  with  the  idea 
that  they  were  the  unknowable  ultimates  of  the  universe; 
and  whenever  that  which  it  most  concerns  us  to  know, 
that  which  is  most  necessary  for  us  to  know,  that  which 
is  a  matter  of  life  or  of  death  for  us  to  be  intimate  with  or 
strangers  to— whenever  that  comes  up  before  us,  then, 
these  people  declared,  we  must  shut  our  eyes  and  turn 
away  and  say :  "  We  cannot  know  you  ;  the  limits  of 
human  knowledge  have  been  already  reached  and  circum- 
scribed." Others,  impressed  by  the  stately  technical 
harness  and  trappings,  big  unusual  words,  of  the  philo- 
sophy, but  not  caring  to  examine  beneath  those  externals, 
took  to  themselves  the  belief  that  these  things-in-them- 
selves were  knowable  in  some  mystic  state  ;  unmindful 
that  the  very  definition  of  '  thing- in-itself  '  excluded  any 
such  possibility  of  cognition;  that,  as  soon  as  anything 
is  cognised,  it  ceases,  by  that  very  fact,  to  be  a  thing-in- 
itself;  that  its  thing-in- itself  retires  inwards,  beneath 
and  behind  that  which  has  been  cognised  and  has 
therefore  become  an  attribute  and  a  phenomenon  veiling 
the  now  deeper  thing-in-itself.  Thus  many  theories  and 
schools  arose  on  the  basis  of  the  labours  of  Kant  and 
under  the  shadow  of  his  "  critical  philosophy/'  as  it 
was  called.  But  the  plain  and  patent  objection  to  the 
conclusions  of  Kant  was  that  instead  of  an  explanation 
he  had  given  us  only  an  increase  of  confusion.  There 


PEACE,    CH.   Vl]          LAW   OF   PARSIMONY  65 

was  no  superior  law  provided  by  Kant, l  as  was  most 
imperatively  needed,  to  regulate  and  govern  the  fitting 
of  sense-phenomena  .(the  matter)  into  the  so-called  laws, 
(the  forms)  of  mind,  the  mind-phenomena.  If  there 
was  something  inherent  in  the  sense-phenomena  which 
guided  them  instinctively  to  close  v/ith  the  right  laws, 
then  that  same  instinct  might  well  enable  them  to 
marshal  themselves  out  into  systematic  knowledge  too 
without  the  help  of  any  of  such  mental  laws.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  the  mind-phenomena  had  something 
in  them  which  would  enable  them  to  select  the  right 
sense-phenomena  for  operation,  then  they  might  also 
very  well  have  in  themselves  the  power  to  create  such 
phenomena  without  the  aid  of  any  material  thing-in- 
itself.  Kant  himself  seems  to  have  felt  these  difficulties 
in  his  later  days,  and  to  have  begun  to  see  that  the 
mental  thing-in-itself  was  nothing  else  than  the  Ego, 
and  that  this  Ego  was  the  law  and  the  source  of  all  laws. 
Perhaps  he  had  also  begun  to  see  that  the  Ego  was 
not  only  thing-in-itself  to  mind,  but  also,  in  some  way 
or  other,  thing-in-itself  to  matter  too.  Perhaps,  also 

1  Ueberweg,  History  of  Philosophy  (English  translation),  II,  216. 
(Art.  "  Schelling  "),  and  Stirling's  Text-book  to  Kant,  and  Translation 
of  Schwegler's  History  of  Philosophy,  (Annotations,  Art.  "  Kant  "). 

Another  difficulty  which  seems  to  have  been  left  unsolved  by  Kant 
is  as  to  the  number  of  these  things-in-themselves.  Is  there  only  one 
thing-in-itself  for  all  minds  (or  mind  ?)  on  the  one  hand,  and  all  matters 
(or  matter  ?)  on  the  other  ;  or  one  each  for  each  person  and  each  thing  ; 
and  if  the  latter,  how  to  define  person  and  thing  respectively  ? 

Such  objections  to  Kant's  views  have  been  taken  by  Fichte,  Schel- 
ling,    Hegel,    Schopenhauer*    Stirling,    Wallace,     Caird,    and    other 
thinkers. 
5 


66    ONE    SOURCE    OF    MIND    &   MATTER     [SCIENCE    OF 

that  all  individual  ego-s  were  somehow  unified  in  the 
Supreme  Universal  Ego.  But  it  was  not  given  to  him 
to  work  out  and  attain  those  last  results  in  that  life 
of  his  ;  and  Fichte  took  up  and  onward  the  work  left 
unfinished  by  Kant. 

Fichte  clearly  saw  the  necessity,  in  the  interests  of 
mental  satisfaction,  true  internal  liberty,  and  respite  from 
restless  doubt,  of  deducing  the  whole  mass  and  detail  of 
the  universe  from  a  single  principle  with  which  the 
human  j  I  v  a  could  find  the  inviolable  refuge  of  identity  ; 
and  he  also  saw  therefore  that  this  principle  must  be  the 
Ego.  Fichte  is  the  western  thinker,  who,  of  all  western 
thinkers,  ancient  and  modern,  known  to  the  present  writer, 
appears  to  have  come  nearest  the  final  truth,  attained 
closest  to  the  ultimate  explanation  of  the  universe.  He 
divides  with  Schelling  and  Hegel,  in  current  public  judg- 
ment, the  high  honour  of  leading  a  large  number  of 
thinkers  in  the  West,  away  from  the  deadly  pits  of  blind 
belief  on  the  one  hand  and  blind  scepticism  on  the  other, 
towards  the  magnificent  health-giving  mountain  heights  of 
a  reasoned  knowledge  of  the  boundlessness  and  unsurpass- 
able dignity  of  the  j  I  v  a's  life.  Some  incline  to  place 
Hegel's  work  higher  than  Fichte's ;  especially  Stirling, 
who  spent  a  whole  lifetime  on  the  study  of  German 
thinkers,  and  whose  opinion  on  any  matter  connected 
with  them  is  therefore  entitled  to  great  respect.  Yet  it 
may  be  said  that,  though  Hegel's  work  was  fuller  in  detail 
and  more  encyclopaedic  in  its  comprehension  of  the  sci- 
ences than  Fichte's,  the  latter's  enunciation  of  thef basic 


P.   CH.   Vl]    FICHTE   GOES   FURTHER  THAN   HEGEL  67 

principle  of  the  World-Process  is  more  centre-reaching, 
more  luminous — one  would  almost  sa)'  wholly  luminous, 
were  it  not  for  a  last  remaining  unexplained  difficulty — 
than  Hegel's.    And,  therefore,  it  may  also  be  said  that 
Fichte  has  gone  a  step  further  than  Hegel.     The  man's 
noble  and  *  transparent  personal  life  deserved  too,  that  he 
should  see  more  closely  and  clearly  the  nobility  and  trans- 
parence of  the  truth.     Hegel's  life  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  so  selfless  as  Fichte's,  according  to  the  biographers 
of  the  two  ;.  therefore  he  probably  saw  the  truth  under  a 
thicker  veil.1     Jt  may  be  that  if  Fichte  had  lived  longer 
he  would  have  explained  the  last  difficulty  that  remains 
behind   at   the   end  of  his  work ;  he  would  then  have 
applied  a  master-key  to  all  the  problems  and  the  sciences 
that   Hegel  has  dealt  with,  and  opened  up  their  hearts 
with  a  surer  touch.     It  may  also  be  that  if  Hegel  had 
lived  longer,  and  not  been  suddenly  cut  off  by  an  epide- 
mic, he  might  have  completed  his  system,  (as  Stirling 
suggests)  which  also  suffers  from  a  single   but  very  vital, 
pervasive,    and    perpetual  want,  by  means  of  Fichte's 
single   principle,  and  so  have  done  the  same  work  that 

1  To  western  philosophy  and  science,  such  considerations  may  seem 
irrelevant.  Ancient  metaphysic  says  that  without  ethical  qualification  of 
v a ir agy  at  v  iveka,  etc.,  Vedanta  cannot  be  successfully  studied  ; 
other  sciences  may  be.  The  reason  is :  Ve\}anta  is  the  Science  of  the 
Infinite  ;  all  others  are  sciences  of  the  Finite.  To  enter  on  this  realisa- 
tion of  the  Infinite,  the  '  individual '  must  have  begun  to  turn  from 
'  individualism  '  in  its  triple  form  ofavi<Jy5-kama-karma>  cling- 
ing to  the  Finite,  intellectually,  emotionally,  and  practically,  i.e.,  in 
thought,  feeling,  and  action ;  and  turn  towards  '  universalism  '  in  its 
corresponding  threefold  form  of  j  Sana-bhakti-virak$i,  i.e.,  re- 
cognition of  the  small  self's  identity  with  the  Great  Self,  philanthropic 
altruism,  and  asceticism.  Taint  of  selfish  ego-ism  dims  vision  of  the 
True  Self. 


68     LAW   OF   RELATIVITY   OR   DUALITY     [SCIENCE   OF 

might  have  been  done  by  Fichte.  In  the  combination  of 
the  two  lies  great  promise  of  satisfaction.  On  the  whole, 
then,  because  of  the  view  that  Fichte  has  gone  further 
than  Hegel,  what  has  to  be  said  here  about  Hegel  will  be 
said  first  and  Fichte  taken  up  afterwards. 

But  before  taking  up  Hegel,  a  word  should  be  given 
to  Schelling,  who  has  very  much  in  common  with  HegeL 
The  two  were  contemporaries  and  associates  of  each  other 
and  partly  of  Fichte's  also,  both  being  greatly  influenced 
by  Fichte.  But  Schelling  failed  to  make  such  a  lasting 
impression  on  European  philosophy  as  did  Hegel,  because 
of  repeated  radical  changes  in  his  views,  and  lack  of  such 
consistency,  stringency,  and  rigour  of  thought  and  genetic 

.        .•  u^^a^i*    teO&n.     °  * 

construction  as  Hegel  carried  into  effect.  The  net  addi- 
tion made  by  Schelling  to  the  stock  of  Western  philo- 
sophy may  be  said  to  be  a  deeper  and  fuller  view  of  the 
Law  of  Relativity,  viz.,  the  law  that  two  Opposites 
imply  each  other.  The  point  which  Hegel  emphasised 
^so  much  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  him,  that 
such  opposites  further  inhere  in  a  third  something,  which 
is  not  exclusively  and  wholly  either  the  one  or  the  other, 
but  somehow  includes  and  contains  both,  and  is  itself 
the  summation  of  the  two.  What  Hamilton  and 
Mansel  of  England  derived  from  Schelling,  and  Her- 
bert Spencer  from  them,  is  that  as  everything  implies 
its  opposite,  so  the  whole  of  the  world,  the  whole 
mass  of  relatives,  of  opposites,  being  taken  together 
as  one  term — which  may  be  called  the  Relative — 
this  whole  would  necessarily  imply  its  opposite,  the 


PEACE,   CH.  Vl]      GOD-UNKNOWABLE-ABSOLUTE        69 

Absolute.  Hamilton  and  Mansel  vaguely  called  this 
Absolute,  God ;  Herbert  Spencer  called  it  the  Unknow- 
able. In  one  sense  this  conclusion  is  true  ;  in  another  it 
is  only  a  verbal  quibble,  so  that  critics  have  not  been 
wanting  to  point  out  that  the  Absolute  and  the  Relative 
make  a  new  relation,  a  new  pair  of  opposites,  which  also 
requires  an  opposite  in  a  higher  absolute,  and  so  on 
endlessly.1 

'  Hegel  put  a  stop  to  this  unfruitful  and  fatuous  end- 
lessness of  higher  and  higher  absolutes,  which  really 
explains  nothing  and  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  by  show- 
ing that  when  all  opposites  had  been  once  heaped  together 
under  the  Relative,  no  further  opposite  could  be  left  out- 
side of  this  mass  in  the  shape  of  an  Absolute ;  that  if 
such  a  train  of  reasoning  was  to  be  followed  at  all,  the 
logical  conclusion  should  be  that  the  Absolute  was  im- 
manent in  the  mass  of  the  Relative ;  that  every  thing 
contained  its  opposite  within  itself,  and  that  the  true 
Absolute  would  be  complete  when  opposites  had  been 
resolved  into  each  other,  so  that  no  further  search  for  a 
higher  Absolute  was  left  to  make*  Hegel's  most  impor- 
tant contribution  to  metaphysic  accordingly  seems  to  be 
a  full  development  and  application  of  the  law  that  two 
opposites,  two  extremes,  always  find  their  reconciliation 
in  a  third  something,  a  mean,  which,  as  said  before,  is 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  exclusively  but  both  taken 
together.  Applying  this  principle  to  the  World-Process 

1  For  various  criticisms  of  Spencer's  view  on  this  subject,  see  Caird, 
Introduction  to  the  Philosophy  of  Religion,  ch.  i ;  and  also  Spencer's 
own  Replies  to  Criticisms,  published  in  his  collected  Essays., 


70  BEING,   NOTHING,    BECOMING       [SCIENCE   OF 

in  the  mass,  he  first  analyses  it  into  two  '  pure '  opposites, 
*  pure  '  Being  and  '  pure  '  Nothing,  and  then  proceeds  to 
state  that  the  collapse  of  these  two  into  each  other  is  *  Be- 
coming,' is  the  World- Process.  The  fact  that  *  Becoming  * 
is  the  conjunction  of  Being  and  Nothing,  and  that  every 
particular  combines  and  reconciles  within  itself  two 
opposites  ;  and  the  consequent  law  that  the  reconciliation 
of  two  extremes  should  be  always  sought  for  in  the  mean, 
and  that  extremes  should  always  be  regarded  as  a  violent 
and  unnatural  disruption  of  the  mean — this  fact  and  this 
law  are  profoundly  significant  and  very  helpful  to  bear 
in  mind  in  all  departments  of  life.  But  yet  the  mere 
statement  of  them,  which  is  practically  all  that  Hegel 
has  done,  leaves  behind  a  sense  of  dissatisfaction.  The 
why  and  the  how  are  not  explained ;  and  the  why  and 
the  how  necessarily  come  up  when  we  begin  with  two 
and  not  with  one.  If  we  begin  with  One  and  can  main- 
tain it  Changeless,  then  none  may  afek  why  and  how. 
Merely  to  say  that  every  change  implies  a  falling  of 
Being  into  Nothing  and  of  Nothing  into  Being  is  per- 
fectly true  ;  but  is  true  only  as  breaking  down  some  old 
preconceived  notions  obstructive  to  further  progress,  true 
as  a  stimulus  to  further  enquiry;  it  is  not  at  all 
satisfactory  in  itself  or  helpful  towards  the  solution 
of  the  final  doubt.  It  was  declared  long  before  Hegel, 
and  declared  a  thousand  times,  and  the  fact  is  indeed 
so  patent  that  he  who  runs  may  read  and  even  with 
the  eyes  of  the  flesh,  that  the  world  of  things  is 
Being,  sat,  as  well  as  Non-Being,  a  sat ;  that  it  is  both 


PEACE,  CH.  vi]  HEGEL'S  *  WALKING  ON  THE  HEAD  '  71 

and  that  it  is  neither ;  tut  the  statement  remains  dark, 
unlighted ;  the  fact  remains  unintelligible.  Where  is 
the  lamp  to  light  it  up  and  to  make  all  clear  at  once  ? 

Then  this  speaking  in  the  third  person,  Being  and 
Nothing,  instead  of  in  the  first  and  second  person,  Self 
and  Not-  Self  ('  I  '  and  '  you  '),*  re-invests  the  whole  prob- 
lem with  the  old  strangeness  which  we  were  at  so  much 
pains  to  transform  into  the  home-feeling  that  goes  with 
the  words  Self  and  Not-Self.  Being  means  Self  to  us  ;  and 
Nothing  is  nothing  else  than  Not-Self  (in  the  sense  of  a 
denial  of  the  Self),  if  it  is  anything  at  all.  To  talk  of  Being 
and  Nothing,  after  Fichte  has  spoken  of  Ego  and  Non- 
Ego,  is  to  take  a  regressive  rather  than  a  progressive  step. 
Indeed,  this  may  be  said,  in  a  sense,  to  be  the  greatest 
defect  of  Hegel's  system.  To  speak  in  terms  of  'pure 
universal  notions,'  of  Being  and  Nothing,  etc.,  instead  of 
Self  and  Not-Self  and  their  derivatives ;  to  imply  that 
'  Spirit '  (in  the  sense  of  Self)  is  subsequent  to  '  pure  im- 
material thought ' ;  this  is  to  walk  on  the  head  instead 
of  the  feet.  Perhaps  a  little  '  progress  '  may  be  made  'even 
in  that  way.  But  the  falls,  the  lapses  of  intelligence,  must 
be  very  frequent ;  and  the  whole  process  is  invested  with 
an  immense  and  most  unnatural  strain.  Of  course,  it  is 
clear  that,  if  we  would  deal  with  psychology  and  meta- 
physic,  we  must  intro-spect ;  we  must  look  inwards,  more 
or  less ;  we  must  turn  our  -eyes  in  a  direction  opposite 
to  that  in  which  we  usually  employ  them  in  ordinary  life; 
we  must  become  *  introvert ',  rather  than  '  extravert ', 
1  Shankara,  Shariraka-Bhashya,  the  very  first  paragraph. 


72  INTROSPECTION  [SCIENCE   OF 

for  the  time.  But,  while  our  eyes  are  '  in-turned  ',  or  even 
closed,  our  hands  have  to  be  kept,  however  lightly,  on 
the  '  outer  '  also  ;  we  should  not  lose  touch  of  and  with  the 
*  outer  *  World  altogether;  for,  then,  the  'inner*  will  vanish 
from  consciousness  also  ;  *  inner  and  outer  ',  '  abstract  and 
concrete  ',  both  will  fall  asleep  in  Chaos,  slumber.1 

1  As  regards  the  difficulty  of  V^danta,  Metaphysic-Philosophy,  the 
Science  of  the  Infinite,  and  of  the  introspection  needed  for  the  study 
thereof,  Katha  Upanishaj  (II.  i.  1)  tells  us, 


*ifrf5| 


*  Very  subtle,   not  easy  to  be  understood,  is  this  highest  'Duty',  (of 
achieving,  this  highest  Knowledge  of  the  Self.  The  Self-born  (appearing, 
illusorily,  to  be  born  in  a  body,  a  not-Self)  pierced  the  senses  ot*£-  wards  ; 
therefore   the  individualised  self  looketh  ow^-  wards,  not  in-  wards,  not 
to  and  at  it-Self.  One  here,  one  there,  desirous  of  Immortality,  resolutely 
turning  vision  in-  wards,  saw  him-Self,  the  Self."    R£  difficulty  of  Hegel, 
Wallace,   in    The  Logic  of  Hegel,  '  Prolegomena  '  (p.  civ  ;  first  edition) 
says:    "  There-  are  two  degrees  in  the  hindrances  against  mastering 
Hegelianism.  The  first  difficulty  is  to  reach  the  point  of  view  from  which 
the  system  starts.     It  is,  says  Hegel  himself,  '  like  learning  to  walk  upon 
our  heads  '  .     The  second  demand  —  to  move  in  the  ether  of  this  absolute 
thought  —  is  even  harder  than  the  first."     Stirling  also,  in  The  Secret  of 
Hegel  (p.  81)  writes,   "Hegel  himself  allows  us  to  say—  '  We  feel  as  if 
we  were  standing  on  our  heads'  ..."   One  gets  the  impression,  from 
the  English  translations  of  Hegel,  and  also  from  various  facts  of  his  life, 
as  regards  his  relations  with  Schelling  and  others,  that  he  was  too  desir- 
ous to  be  '  original  '  —  a  common  weakness  of  '  thinkers  ',  but  excusable 
within    narrow    limits    only,    i.e.,   while    confined    to  joyous,   boyish 

*  self  '-testing,    '  self  '-delight,    and    play.     We    may  therefore  decline 
Hegel's  invitation  '  to  stand  on  our  heads;   and  may  suggest  to  those  of 
his  way  of  thinking,  that,  instead,  they  may  practice,  what  is  known  in 
Yoga  as,  the  sham  bhavi  or  vaishpavi  mudra,   eyes  nearly  but 
not  quite  closed  ;  attention  turned  in-ward  to  the  Great  Self  behind  the 
small  self's  workings  ;  but  not  wholly  oblivious  of  the  out-  ward,  the  Not- 
Self.    Ve<Janta  does  not  recognise  '  absolute  thought  '  —  an  expression  of 
frequent  recurrence  in  the  English  expositions  of  Hegel  ;  it  recognises 
the  '  Absolute  Self  ',  behind  and  around  all  '  thought  '  ;  it  is  the  same  as 
Absolute  Self-Consciousness,  including  all  Not-Self,  all  not-selves,  all 
4  this-es  '  ;   so  that,    ultimately,  and  eternally,  Abstract  and  Concrete, 
Inner  and  Outer,  all  merge  into  the  One  which  is  Number-less. 


P.  CH.  Vl]   '  PURE-S  '  CAN'T  CREATE  '  PARTICULARS  73 

Moreover,  while  pure  Being  and  pure  Nothing  might 
well  be  allowed  to  combine  into  pure  Becoming,  whence 
comes  this  endless  multiplicity  of  particular  becomings, 
or  rather  '  becomes,'  i.e.,  of  special  things  that  have 
become  ?  Hegel  does  not  seem  to  have  explained  this ; 
although  it  seems  necessary  and  even  quite  easy  to  do  so 
from  the  standpoint  of  a  true  definition  of  the  Absolute. 
A  single  word  explains  it.  Has  Hegel  said  that  word  ? 
It  does  not  appear  that  he  has.  If  he  has,  then  there  is 
nothing  more  to  be  said  against  him  on  this  score.  Yet 
the  story  goes  that  Krug  once  asked  Hegel  to  deduce  his 
particular  writing  quill  from  the  general  principle  that 
Being  and  Nothing  make  Becoming,  and  that  Hegel 
•could  reply  with  a  smile  only.  Stirling  talks  of  Krug's 
'  ridiculous  expectation  '  ;  it  seems  to  others  that  Krug's 
request  was  perfectly  fair  and  legitimate.  The  arbitrari- 
ness of  Krug's  particular  quill  does  require  to  be  ex- 
plained away.  Wallace  (op.  cit.,  p.  clxxi)  says,  "  Hegel's 
system  .  .  .  can  only  unveil  what  is,  ...  it  has  no 
vocation  to  say  why  it  is,  or  how  it  can  be  so  " ;  and 
Hegel  himself  says  (op.  cit.  p.  20),  "  The  idea  of  Nature, 
when  it  is  individualised,  loses  itself  in  a  maze  of  chance 
.  .  .  points  of  existence,  kinds,  distinctions,  which  are 
determined  by  sport  and  adventitious  incidents ;  .  .  . 
phenomena  are  regulated  by  no  law,  but  depend  upon 
arbitrary  influences  ".  Yet  the  why  is  vitally  important 
to  us,  lest  we  become  such  chance- phenomena. 

Again,  Hegel's  fundamental  proposition,  the  very 
ibase  and  foundation  of  his  system — viz.,  that  Being  and 


74  HEGEL'S  PETITIO  PRINCIPII     [SCIENCE  OF 

Nothing  are  the  same  and  yet  opposite,  and  that  their 
mutual  mergence  makes  Becoming,  which,  he  says,  is  the 
true  Absolute — is  wholly  unsatisfactory.  It  may  be  true, 
nay,  it  is  true,  in  a  certain  sense,  that  Being  and  Nothing 
are  the  same  and  yet  opposed ;  but  it  is  not  Hegel  who 
tells  us  what  that  certain  sense  is.  It  may  be  true,  nay, 
it  is  true,  in  a  certain  sense,  that  Becoming  is  the 
Absolute ;  but  it  is  not  Hegel  who  tells  us  what  that 
sense  is.  On  the  contrary,  the  general  impression  is  that 
Hegel  began  with  a  violent  petitio  principii  when  he 
assumed  that  Being  and  Nothing,  though  opposite  are  the 
same,  and  so  took  for  granted  the  very  reconciliation  of 
opposites  which  it  was  his  business  to  prove.  After 
assuming  that  the  two  most  opposed  of  all  opposites  are 
identical  with  each  other,  it  is  truly  easy  to  reconcile  all 
other  opposites  that  may  come  up  for  treatment  later. 

Then,  what  is  meant  by  saying  or  implying  that 
Becoming  is  the  Absolute  ?  If  the  word  Becoming  is 
taken  to  mean  the  totality  of  the  World-Process  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  ot  beginningless  and  endless  time, 
then  of  course  an  absolute  may  be  meant,  but  such  an 
absolute  remains  absolutely  unilluminative  and  useless. 
Hegel  says  (as  summarised  by  Schwegler)  :  "  The  absolute 
is,  firstly,  pure  immaterial  thought ;  secondly,  Aeter-isation 
of  pure  thought,  disruption  of  thought  into  the  infinite 
atomism  of  time  and  space — Nature  ;  thirdly,  it  returns, 
out  of  this  its  self-externalisation  and  self  -alienation,, 
back  into  its  own  self,  it  resolves  the  heterisation  of 
nature,  and  only  in  this  way  becomes  at  last  actual* 


PEACE,   CH.   VI]       AND    HIS   CHANGING   ABSOLUTE     75' 

self-cognisant,  thought,  Spirit." '  Perhaps,  then,  he 
means,  not  the  totality  of  the  world-process,  but,  a 
growing,  maturing,  absolute ;  in  the  course  of  the 
growth  of  which,  the  cropping  up  of  anything,  of  count- 
less things,  hetera,  '  others  ',  im-pure,  concrete,  out  of 
the  pure,  abstract,  remains  a  mystery,  unexplained  as  ever. 
But  the  absoluteness  of  an  evolving,  changing,  thing  or 
thought  is  a  very  doubtful  thing  and  thought.  Indeed, 
there  should.be  no  distinction  of  thing  and  thought  in  the 
Absolute ;  and  this  distinction  is  one  of  the  very 
hardest  and  subtlest  tasks  of  metaphysic  to  explain  away.8 
The  general  impression  left  by  Hegel  is  that  the  Absolute 
is  an  idea,  which  finds  its  gradual  expression  and  mani- 
festation and  realisation  in  the  things,  the  becomings,  of 
the  world-process  ;  and  that,  consequently,  there  is  a  dif- 
ference of  nature  between  the  idea  and  the  things.  But 
if  there  is  any  such  difference,  then  the  things  fall  outside 
of  the  idea  and  have  to  be  explained,  and  the  whole  task 
begins  again.  But  even  apart  from  this  difficulty,  which- 
constitutes  a  separate  doubt  by  itself,  is  the  main  diffi* 
culty  of  a  changing  absolute.  The  elementary  V6da- 
texts,  which  helped  as  temporary  guides  at  an  earlier  stage 
of  the  journey,  and  which  said  that  the  Self  multiplied 
it- Self  into  Many,  had  to  be  abandoned  (for  the  time  being 
at  least)  for  want  of  sufficient  reason  and  justification- 

1  Note  the  thrice-repeated  '  self  '  here  '  Thought  cannot  be,  without 
theprius  of  Self  as  basis. 

-  The  thirty-two  thousand  shlokas  or  two-line  stanzas  of  the  Yog&' 
Vasishtha  constitute  the  great  and  unique  Epic,  in  Saipskr.!  literature,  of* 
this  particular  Herculean  labour. 


76  MEANING   OF  JlVAN-MUKTA       [SCIENCE    OF 

for  the  changing  moods  of  a  Supreme.  We  have  been 
pining  all  along  for  changelessness,  for  rest  and  peace 
.amidst  this  fearful  turmoil.  Hegel  gives  us  an  endless- 
ness of  change.  He  says  the  Absolute-Universal  realises 
itself,  through  Nature-Particular,  in  and  into  the  Indivi- 
dual-Singular ;  i.e.,  the  already  supremd  and  perfect  God 
developes  into  and  finds  himself  in  perfected  man,  self- 
conscious  man,  (typified  by  Jesus).1  A  doctrine  unsatis- 
factory enough  in  the  mouth  of  anyone,  and  much  more 
so  in  the  mouth  of  Hegel — who  knows  nothing,  or  at  least 
indicates  nothing  of  the  knowledge,  of  the  vast  evolution 
and  involution  of  worlds  .upon  worlds,  material  elements 
and  j  I  v  a  s,  of  the  incessant  descent  of  Spirit  into  Matter 
and  Its  re-ascent  into  it-Self,  which  is  outlined  in  the 
Purdtuis.  What  does  Hegel  say  as  to  where  and  when 
the  Absolute  began  its  evolution  and  when  it  will 
complete  and  end  it  ?  Has  he  anywhere  entered  into  the 
question  whether  this  actual  self-cognisant  spirit,  this 
perfected  individual,  this  perfected  man,  who  has  achieved 
that  combination  of  reason  with  desire  or  will  which 
makes  the  true  freedom,  the  true  internal  liberty,  m  o  k  s  h  a 
as  altruistic  synthesis  and  balancing  ofjnana,  bhakti, 
and  karma,  knowledge,  selfless  desire,  selfless  action 
— whether  such  an  individual  is  completed  in  and  arises 
at  a  definite  point  of  time,  or  is  only  an  infinitely  reced- 
ing possibility  of  the  endless  future  ?  Also,  whether  many 

1  The  element  of  truth  in  this  view  is  to  be  found  in  the  Vlganta 
doctrine  of  the  J  i  v  an  -  m  u  k  t  a,  the  Sufi's  insan-ul-kamil,  the  Biblical 
phrase  '  Sons  of  God  ",  (Sons,  in  the  plural,  not  only  one  '  Son  '  Jesus, 
who  is  on)y  a  typical  J  i  v  a  n-m  u  k  t  a  of  high  quality,  '  freed  from  egoism 
while  still  in  the  body  '). 


PEACE,  CH.  vi]     HEGEL'S  MANIFOLD  DEFECTS     77 

such  are  possible  at  one  time  or  not  ?  There  were  millions 
of  individualised  human  jlvas  upon  earth  in  the  time  of 
Hegel.  H#d  the  Absolute  finished  evolution  in  them  or 
any  of  them,  and  if  not,  as  it  clearly  had  not,  then  why 
not  ?  Such  are  the  legitimate  questions  that  may  in  all 
fairness  be  put  to  Hegel.  He  does  not  seem  to  have 
answered  them.  Yet  each  and  every  one  of  them  should 
and  can  be  answered  from  the  standpoint  of  a  complete 
metaphysic. 

It  is  not  probable  that  Hegel  in  this  birth,  and  in  the 
life  and  surroundings  of  the  period  he  lived  and  worked 
in,  (1770-1831  A.C.),  knew  all  the  even  partial  and  one- 
sided details  about  kosmic  evolution,  which  have  since 
then  become  accessible  to  the  human  race  in  the  West, 
not  to  speak  of  the  complete  outlines  (though  lacking  in 
detail)  which  are  sketched  in  the  Puranas  (and  now  in* 
theosophical  literature).  He  ridicules  the  doctrine  of 
rebirth,1  (which  Fichte,  Schelling,  Goethe,  and  many 
others,  poets,  writers,  thinkers,  even  physical  scientists, 
famous  in  the  west,  have  believed  in) ;  and  shows 
thereby,  that  he  did  not  realise  the  full  significance  and1 
extensive  application  of  some  of  the  metaphysical  laws 
which  he  himself,  or  Fichte  and  Schelling  before  him, 
stated.  Yet  these  particulars  of  endlessly  recurring 
cosmic  evolution  and  dissolution,  in  smaller  and  larger 
cycles,  as  ascertained  by  masters  of  y  o  g  a,  and  embodi- 
ed, in  broad  outlines,  in  the  extant  Puranas  and  other 

1  Hegel,  History  of  Philosophy,  English  Translation,  Vol.  I,  Art. 
1  "Pythagoras". 


78  STIRLING'S  ADMISSIONS         [SCIENCE  OF 

Samskrt  and  Prakrt  writings  (and  in  theosophical  litera- 
ture), are  alone  capable  of  providing  a  basis  for  a  true  and 
comprehensive  metaphysic ;  for  they,  in  the  very  act  of 
pointing  out  the  way  to  the  final  goal,  explain  how  they 
themselves  are  inseparately  connected  with  and  derived 
from  that  goal.  And  if  Hegel  was  not  acquainted  with  such 
•-details,  it  is  no  wonder  that  his  metaphysic  remains  incom- 
plete. It  is,  indeed,  a  wonder,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  is  so 
full  as  it  is.  It  may,  on  the  other  hand,  be  that  it  was  given 
to  a  man  who  saw  so  much  and  so  deeply,  to  see  more  also, 
.and  that  he  did  not  say  all  he  knew  for  special  internal 
or  external  reasons.  This  is  the  view  that  Stirling  takes, 
in  pointing  out  Hegel's  shortcomings,  especially  in  his 
work  entitled,  What  is  Thought  ?  Stirling  probably  had 
not  in  mind,  when  stating  such  a  view,  anything  about 
-information  derivable  by  means  of  a  higher  development 
of  human  faculties  through  yoga.  What  most  concerns 
us  here  to  know,  is  that  such  a  lifelong  student  of  Hegel 
as  Stirling  declares,  with  all  the  weight  and  authority  of 
such  study,  that  there  is  a  radical  defect  in  the  system, 
.and  that  a  key  is  wanted  which  perhaps  Hegel  might 
have  given  if  he  had  lived  longer,  that  is  to  say,  assuming 
that  he  himself  had  it.2 

9  See  infra \  the  close  of  ch.  viii,  for  the  needed  rectification  of  Hegel 
by  Veijanta.  Here,  we  may  quote'  what  Stirling  says,  Schwegler's 
History  of  Philosophy,  pp.  445.  475:  "Whether  Hegel's  Notion* be 
really  the  pulse  of  thought-t-that  is  what  is  still  to  be  verified — that  is 
what  I  still  doubt.  So  long  as  that  doubt  remains,  I  am  not  properly 
an  Hegelian  .  *.  .  Hegel's  Logic,  though  containing  much  that  is  of 
material  importance,  is  still  principally  formal.  Its  first  note  after  all 
is  said,  will  never  ring  quite  true ;  existence  of  some  kind  and  existence 
of  no  kind  are  not  the  same  " 


PEACE,   CH.   Vl]         FICHTE'S   CLOSER    APPROACH        79 

We  see  thus  that,  while  Schelling  and  Hegel  made 
a  very  close  approach  to  the  final  explanation,  they  do 
not  seem  to  have  quite  grasped  it.  Let  us  now  examine 
what  appears  to  have  been  in  some  respects  a  closer 
approach  than  theirs. 

Fichte,  as  said  before,  realised  and  stated  that  the 
Ego  is  the  only  true  universal,  perfectly  unconditioned 
in  and  by  (sensuous)  matter  as  well  as  in  and  by  (in- 
tellectual) form  (in  the  technical  language  of  German 
thinkers)  ;  the  certainty  of  which  can  not  possibly  be 
ruffled  by  any  doubt.  And  from  this  universal,  he  en- 
deavoured to  deduce  the  whole  of  the  world-process. 
His  deduction  is  usually  summed  up  in  three  steps : 
Ego  Ego;  Non-Ego  is  not  ^Ego;  Ego  in  part--Non- 
E£o,  and  Non-Ego  in  part  =  Ego.1  There  is  first  the 
thesis,  the  position  of  identity,  *  I  '  .is  '  I  ' ;  secondly, 
there  is  the  antithesis,  the  op-position  of  contradiction, 
4  I '  is  not  *  Not-I '  ;  lastly,  there  is  the  synthesis,  the 
•corn-position,  i.e.,  a  reconciliation,  of  the  opposites,  by 
mutual  limitation,  mutual  yielding,  a  compromise  in 
which  the  *  I '  becomes,  i.e.9  takes  on  the  characteristics 
of,  the  *  Not-I,'  and  the  '  Not-I '  of  the  '  I '.  And  this  is 
entirely  and  irrefutably  in  accordance  with  the  facts  of 
the  world-process  as  they  are  there  under  our  very  eyes. 
No  western  thinker  has  improved  upon  this  sum- 
mary of  the  essential  nature  of  the  world-process  ;  and 
it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  Stirling  has  failed  to  give 

3  See  Adamson,  Fichte  (Black wood's  Philosophical  Classics),  p.  172, 
for  explanation  of  the  third  proposition. 


80         EGO,    EMP1RCAL   &   UNIVERSAL          [SCIENCE    OF 

due  meed  to  this  great  work.  He  says  regarding  Fichte  : 
"  What  is  said  about  the  universal  Ego  ...  is  not 
satisfactory.  Let  us  generalise  as  much  as  we  please, 
we  still  know  no  Ego  but  the  empirical  Ego,  and  can 
refer  to  none  other."  1  Now,  with  the  respect  one  has 
for  Stirling's  metaphysical  acumen,  one  can  only  say  that 
this  statement  of  his  is  very  difficult  to  understand.  For 
it  is  exactly  equivalent  to  the  entire  denial  of  the  possi- 
bility of  an  '  abstract,'  simply  because  we  can  never 
definitely  cognise  lanything  but  a  '  concrete '  with  our 
physical  senses.  As  said  before,  in  dealing  with  the 
process  by  which  the  nature  of  the  universal  Self  is 
established,  the  mere  fact  of  a  diversity,  of  the  '  many',  of 
concretes  and  particulars,  necessarily  requires  for  its 
existence,  for  its  being  brought  into  relief,  the  support 
and  background  of  a  continuity,  a  '  unity ',  an  abstract  and 
universal.  The  two,  abstract  and  concrete,  universal  and 
particular,  are  just  as  inseparable  as  back  and  front ; 
though,  of  course,  it  is  not  only  possible,  but  is  what  we 
always  actually  do,  viz.,  that  we  distinguish  between  the 
two,  and  attend  more  to  the  one,  now,  and  more  to  the 
other,  at  another  time.  But  looking  for  a  highest  uni- 
ersal  and  a  lowest  particular,  we  find  that  the  extremes 
meet.  The  highest  universal,  (Self  It -Self  as)  Being, 
satta-samanya,  is  also  the  most  irreducible  point, 
charama-vish6sha,  the  'singular'  (Jlva  or  atom). 
The  universal  Ego  is  also  (the  essence  of)  the  individual 
ego  (the  so-called  empirical  ego)  ;  the  universal  Being 
1  Stirling's  Schwegler's  History  of  Philosophy,  p.  428. 


PEACE,   CH.   VI]    EGO,   PRIUS   AND   ALSO   ULTIMUS    81 

and    the    anu,    atom,   of   the    Vaisheshika   system   of 
philosophy,    correspond    to   the    Pratyag-atma   and 
the  ideal    atom    which,   enshrining   a  self,    is  the  jlv- 
atma.    Between  tfrese  two  limits,  which  are  not  two  but 
one,     the     all-comprehending     substratum     of    all    the 
world-process,     the    Infinite    which    is    also     the     In- 
finitesimal, "  greatest  of  the  great  and  also  smallest  of 
the  small,"  there  fall  and  flow  all  other  pseudo-univer- 
sals  and    pseudo-particulars  ;  pseudo,  because  each  falls 
as  a  particular  under  a  higher  universal  (or  general)  and 
at  the  same  time  covers  some  lower  particulars  (specials). 
The  universal   Ego  is  thus  the  only  true,  absolutely  cer- 
tain    and     final,    universal.     "  Hegel,    in    opposition    to 
Fichte,  .  .  .  held    that    it    is  ...  not    the   E^p   that    is 
the  prius  of  all   reality,  but,  on  the  contrary,  something 
universal,  a  universal  which  comprehends  within  it  every 
individual."  !     This     is   where   the    deviation    from    the 
straight    path    began.     It  began  with   Hegel.     And  the 
results  were  :  (1)   that  dissatisfaction  with  Hegel  which 
Stirling   confesses   to  again  and  again  ;  and   (2)  a  tacit 
reversion,  by   Stirling  himself,  to  that  impregnable  posi- 
tion   of  Fichte   (as  shown  throughout  Stirling's   work, 
What  is  Thought  ?  in  which  he  endeavours  to  make  out 
that  the  double  subject-object,  '  I-me,'   is  the  true  Ab- 
solute).* «For  if  "  we  know  no  ego  but  the  empirical  ego," 

1  Ibid.,  p.  315. 

*  Compare  the  Sankshepa-Sharlraka  , 


*'  Only  this  partless,  indivisible,  Consciousness  is  both  subject  and 
object  at  once," 

6    <* 


82         MEANING   OF   BEING   AND   NOTHING  [SC.   OF 

how  much  more  do  we  know  no  '  being  '  but  empirical  and 
particular  beings,  no  *  nothing '  but  empirical  and  particular 
non-commencements  :or  destructions.  Ego  and  non-Ego 
we  understand  ;  they  are  directly  aqd  primarily  in  our 
constitution  ;  nay,  they  are  the  whole  of  our  constitution, 
essence  and  accidence,  core  and  crust,  inside  and  outside, 
the  very  whole  of  it.  But  Being  and  Nothing  we  under- 
stand only  through  Ego  and  Non-Ego ;  otherwise  they 
are  entirely  strange  and  unfamiliar.  Being  is  nothing  else 
than  pro-position,  pre-positing,  affirmation,  by  conscious- 
ness, by  the  '  I ' ;  Non-Being  is  nothing  else  than  op-posi- 
tion, centra-position,  denial,  by  that  same  *  I  '.  Stirling 
practically  admits  as  much  in  What  is  Thought  ?  Fichte's 
approach,  then,  is  the  closer  and  not  Hegel's ;  and  Stir- 
ling's opinion  that  "  the  historical  value  of  the  method 
of  Fichte  will  shrink,  in  the  end,  to  its  influence  on 
Hegel  "  *  is  annulled  by  his  own  latest  research  and  find- 
ing. The  probability  indeed,  on  the  contrary,  is  that 
Hegel's  work  will  come  to  take  its  proper  place  in  the 
.appreciation  of  students  as  only  an  attempt  at  a  filling 
and  completion  of  the  outlines  traced  out  by  the  earnest, 
intense,  noble,  and  therefore  truth-seeing  spirit  of  Fichte.* 

1  Stirling's  Schwegler,  p,  427. 

fl  Dr.  J.  H.  Stirling,  in  a  very  kind  letter  to  the  present  writer, 
*aid :  "Dr.  Hutchinson  Stirling  would  beg  to  remark  only  that  he  is 
not  sure  that  Mr.  Bhagavan  Das  has  quite  correctly  followed  the  distinc- 
tion between  Fichte's  and  Hegel's  use  of  the  Ego  in  deduction  of  the 
•categories — the  distinction  at  least  that  is  proper  to  Stirling's  inter- 
pretation of  both  ;  Stirling  holding,  namely,  that  Fichte,  while  without 
provision  for  an  external  world,  has  only  an  external  motive  or  move- 
ment in  his  Dialectic,  and  is  withal  in  his  deduction  itself  incomplete  ; 
whereas  Hegel,  with  provision  for  externality,  is  inside  of  his  principle, 
and  in  his  deduction  infinitely  deeper,  fuller,  and  at  least  completer." 


PEACE,   CH.   Vl]    DESCRIPTION,  NOT  EXAMINATION   83 

Hegel's  work  is  a  supplementation,  by  mere  descrip- 
tion, not  at  all  a  deduction  or  explanation,  of  the  succes- 
sive steps  in  mind-development,  from  simple  sensuous 
perceptions  to  complex  intellectual  thinking  or  compre- 
hending, in  terms  of  abstract  ideas  and  relations. 
Darwinian  evolutionism  is  similar ;  it  is  a  description, 
not  an  explanation,  of  body-development ;  it  assumes 
countless  perpetual  variations  of  environments,  and  corres- 
ponding ones  in  organisms,  at  every  step ;  power  of  vari- 
ation is  assumed  at  every  step. 

By  sheer  force  of  intense  gaze  towards  the  Truth, 
Fichte  has  reached,  even  amidst  the  storm  and  stress  of 
a  life  cast  in  times  when  empires  were  rising  and  falling 
around  him,  conclusions  which  were  generally  reached  in 
India  only  with  the  help  of  a  y  o  g  a-vision  developed  by 
long  practice  amidst  the  contemplative  calm  of  forest- 
solitudes  and  mountain-heights.1  (Perhaps  he  had  been 
a  disciple  in  the  home  of  an  Indian  sage,  in  a  previous 
life,  and  done  all  the  preliminary  thinking  there  !)  Page 
after  page  of  his  work  reads  like  translations  from  V&Janta 
works.  Schwegler,  apparently  unmindful  of  their  value 
and  even  disagreeing  with  them,  sums  up  the  conclusions 

I  give  this  extract  from  Dr.  Stirling's  letter  with  the  view  that  it  may 
help  readers  to  check  and  correct  any  errors  made  in  this  chapter,  in  the- 
•comparative  appreciation  of  Hegel  and  Fichte. 

Professor  J.  E.  McTaggart,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  also 
isaid,  in  a  letter  to  the  present  writer:  "...  I  still  maintain  that  Hegel 
has  got  nearer  the  truth  than  Fichte/'  x 

1  Fichte's  lecture  on  The  Dignity  of  Man  (pp.  331-336  of  the 
Science  of  Knowledge,  translated  by  A.  Kroeger)  is  full  of  statements 
which  might  be  read  as  meaning,  on  Fichte's  part,  a  belief  in  the  evolu- 
tion of  the  j  i  v  -  a  t  m  a  of  the  kind  described  inv44an|ic  and  theo- 
sophical  literature,  in  direct  contrast  to  Hegel's  statements. 


84      ABSTRACT   EGO   &  ABSOLUTE    EGO    [SCIENCE   OF 

of  Fichte  in  words  which  simply  reproduce  the  conclu- 
sions of  A-dvait  a- Vedanta  as  now  current  in  India* 
Fichte's  statement,  quoted  above,  as  to  the  transference 
of  their  characteristics  to  each  other  by  the  Ego  and  the 
Non-Ego,  is  the  language  of  Shankara.l  His  distinction 
between  the  absolute  Ego  and  the  individual  or  empirical 
ego  is  the  distinction  between  the  higher  A  t  m  a  and  the 
j  1  v  a.  The  words  '  higher  A  t  m  a  '  are  used  here,  because 
one  of  the  last  defects  and  difficulties  of  the  current 
A  -  d  v  a  i  t  a  -  Vedanta  turns  exactly,  as  it  does  in  Fichte, 
on  the  confusion  (of  the  distinction  without  a  difference) 
between"?  ratyag-atmS  and  Param-atma,  the  abs- 
tract universal  Ego  and  the  true  Absolute  ego.  Again, 
Fichte's  view  is  thus  stated  by  Schwegler  :  "  The  business 
of  the  theoretical  part  was  to  conciliate  Ego  and  Non-Ego. 
To  this  end,  middle  term  after  middle  term  was  inter* 
calated  without  success.  Then  came  reason  with  the  ab- 
solute decision — '  Inasmuch  as  the  Non-Ego  is  incapable 
of  union  with  the  Ego,  Non-Ego  there  shall  be  none.'  " 
This  is  to  all  appearance  exactly  the  Vedanta  method,2 
whereby  predicate  after  predicate  is  superimposed  upon 
the  Supreme,  and  then  refuted,  negated  and  struck 
away,  as  inappropriate,  till  the  naked  Ego  remains 
as  the  Unlimited  which  is  the  Negation  of  all  that  is 

1  The  opening  lines  of  his  commentary,  the  Sharlraka-Bhashya,. 
on  the  Brahma-sutras . 

9  And  the  method  of  the  world-process.  The  spirit  is  ions,  electrons, 
atoms?  No.  It  is  gases,  metals,  minerals?  No.  Vegetables?  No.  Ani- 
mals? No.  Humans?  No.  Upa-<J6vas,  de"  vas,  Vislvva-sr.  jas? 
No.  And  so  on. 


PEACE,   CH.  Vl]     WORLD  AS  DREAM  OF  BRAHMAN     85 

Not-Unlimited,  and  the  searcher  exclaims :  "  I  am  (is) 
Brahman,'1 '  and  "  the  Many  is  not  at  all,"  *  as  the  two 
most  famous  V6da-texts,  great  sentences  (in  the  Samskrt 
phrase,  maha-vakyas)  or  logia,  the  foundation  of  the 
A-dvaita-V6danta,  describe  it.  The  opposition  be- 
tween the  specification-less  Brahman  or  At  ma  or 
Ego,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Non-Ego,  on  the 
other,  is  stated  by  the  Vedanta  thus:  (The  At  ma  is) 
That  of  which  a  kasha  (ether),  air,  fire,  water,  and 
earth,  are  the  v  i  -  v  a  r  t  a  -  s,  opposites,  perversions.3 
The  relation  between  them  is  indicated  in  a  manner 
which  comes  home  to  the  reader  more  closely  than 
Fichte's :  "  Brahman  dreams  all  this  universe,  and  its 
waking  is  the  reduction  of  it  all  to  illusion."  4 

Thus  we  see  that  some  of  the  most  important  con- 
clusions of  the  current  A-dvait a- Vedanta  have  been 
independently  reached  by  this  truly  great  German  thinker. 
And  in  seeing  this,  we  have  ourselves  taken  a  step  further 
than  we  had  done,  when  we  left  the  Vishrshta-advaita 
system  as  the  second  result  of  the  last  endeavour  to  solve 
the  supreme  question  of  questions.  We  have  seen  that 
the  current  A-d  v  a  i  t  a  -  V&Janta  is  an  advance  upon 
theVishishtadvaita.  We  have  also  seen  that  Fichte 
and  Hegel  are  supplementary  to  each  other.  For,  while 
Fichte's  dialectic  is  the  more  internal,  starting  with 

1  Brhad-Aranyaka ,  I,  iv,  10. 
9  Ibid. t  IV,  iv,  19. 
*  B  bam  aft,  p.  l. 

4  Madhusudana  Sarasvati's  Sankshe1>a-Sharlraka-Tlk&t  iii,  shloka 
240. 


86  ANOTHER   HITCH  fSGIENCE   OF 

the  Ego,  and  therefore  the  truer  and  less  artificial,  it 
follows  out  the  world-process  up  to  the  end  of  two  stages 
only,  as  it  were,  those  of  origination  and  preservation, 
i.e.,  the  present  existing  order  of  things,  a  commingling 
of  the  Ego  and  the  Non-Ego  ;  whereas  Hegel's  dialectic 
— though  external,  starting  with  Being  (returning  how- 
ever to  thought  and  Self  afterwards),  and  therefore  the 
more  artificial — completes,  in  a  way,  the  circuit  of  the 
world-process  to  the  last  stage,  that  of  destruction,  dissolu- 
tion, or  return  to  the  original  condition.  (The  words  '  in 
a  way  '  have  been  used  for  want  of  the  certainty  that  the 
full  significance  of  this  cyclic  law  and  triple  succession  of 
origin,  preservation,  and  dissolution  of  the  kosmic  systems 
which  make  up  the  world-process,  and  which  law  is 
reiterated  over  and  over  again  in  all  Samskrt  literature, 
was  present  to  the  minds  of  Fichte  and  flegel.)  We  feel 
now  that  Hegel,  Fichte,  and  current  A-dvaita-V6danta 
have  come  close  to  the  very  heart  of  the  secret ;  we 
feel  that  it  cannot  now  be  very  far  off;  we  are  face 
to  face  with  the  lock  that  closes  the  whole  treasure- 
house  of  explanations  of  all  possible  mysteries  and  secrets 
and  confusions ;  we  also  hold  in  our  hands  the  key  which 
we  feel  is  the  only  key  to  the  lock  ;  and  not  only  do  we 
hold  the  key,  but  in  our  struggles  with  the  key  and  the 
lock  we  have,  in  the  good  company  of  the  Indian 
v6<j5ntls  and  the  German  idealists,  broken  through 
panes  of  the  door  leaves  and  almost  moved  the  door  away 
from  its  hinges,  and  obtained  many  a  glimpse  and  even 
plain  view  of  many  of  those  treasures  and  secrets.  Yet 


PEACE,   CH.  Vl]      WHY  MAYA  ?  WHY   DREAM  ?  87 

the  key  will  not  quite  turn  in  the  lock.     Some  rust-stain 
somewhere,  some  defect  of  construction,  prevents  this. 

The  defect,  some  features  of  which  have  been  already 
pointed  out  in  treating  of  Hegel,  is  that  we  cannot  deny 
altogether    this   Non-Ego.     We   cannot   quite  convince 
ourselves  that  it  is   'pure*  Non-being,  atyanta-asat. 
It    seems  both    existent   and   non-existent,    sad-asat. 
Whence  this   appearance  of  existence   in  it  ?  The   last 
unexplained   crux   of   the    current    A-dvaita-V6(J§mta 
is    the    connection    between     Brahman,   the  Absolute, 
and    Maya,    the   Illusion   of   the  World-Process.      As 
with  Fichte's  Non-Ego,  so  with  the  v6dantTs  Maya, 
there  remains  behind  an  appearance  of  artificiality,  of  a 
deus    ex    machina,   a   lack   of   organic   connection   and 
spontaneity,  in  the  working  of  the  world-process  into  and 
out  of  the  Ego,  in  the  arrangement  between  Maya,  on 
the  one  hand,  and  Brahman,  on  the  other.     Why  should 
Brahman  dream  ?  A  hundred  different  ways  of  enunciation 
and    illustration   are   tried   by   the  ordinary   v64anti. 
None  is  satisfactory.   And  therefore  the  current  A-dvai{a 
does   not   reach   to  the  final  stage  of  a  true  A-cJvaita . 
When  pressed,  it,  like  Fichte,  falls  back  upon  the  position 
that  Maya   (Non-Ego,  with  Fichte)  is  wholly  Non-being, 
instead  of  both  existent  and  non-existent,  and  this  we 
cannot    quite    bring    home   to  ourselves.     Besides  this 
difficulty,  there  is  the  process  of  change  :  the  *  I '  opposes 
to  itself  the   *  Not-I ',   and  reverts  again  to  an  original 
condition.     Why  ?  Our  Absolute  must  be  above  change* 
Again,  there  seems  to  be  an  artificiality  and  arbitrariness 


88  ETERNITY  VS.   TIME          [SCIENCE   OF 

about  the  '  Not- 1 '  in  another  way.  Why  any  one  parti- 
cular '  Not-I '  ?  Fichte's  deduction  of  the  world-process 
is  effected  in  a  syllogism  of  three  steps,  three  propositions, 
and  even  then  it  does  not  quite  complete  the  process,  but 
leaves  it  half-finished.  It  ought  to  be  complete  in  one 
proposition,  one  single  act  of  consciousness;  otherwise 
the  difficulty  of  change  in  the  Absolute  remains  unsolved. 
There  are  expressions  and  indications  that  to  the 
mind  of  Fichte  and  other  German  thinkers,  as  to  the 
mind  of  the  vedantl,  there  is  present  the  distinction  or 
rather  opposition  between  Eternity,  succession-less  Time- 
lessness,  kala-atlta-ta,,  transcendence  of  time,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  successive  time,  kala,  even  though  endless, 
on  the  other.  In  this  opposition  lies  the  clue  to  the  whole 
of  the'secret ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  utilised. 
It  is  not  properly  utilised  in  the  extant  books  on 
A-<Jvaita-V6cUinta,  although  the  fact  that  Brahman  is 
beyond  space  and  time,  is  reiterated  incessantly.  Nor  does 
it  seem  to  have  been  put  to  effective  use  by  Fichte  or  any 
other  Western  thinker,  though  it  has  been  recognised  by 
even  such  a  non-metaphysical  but  extremely  acute 
reasoner  as  J.  S.  Mill \  as  the  distinction  between  the 
true  and  the  false  Infinite.  One  hesitates  to  say 
positively  that  Fichte  has  left  this  last  work  unperform- 
ed ;  but  from  the  accounts  and  translations  of  his  writings 
available  in  English,  this  seems  to  be  the  case.  Yet  the 
secret  is  there,  all  the  time,  among  the  ideas  expressed  in 
his  writings,  as  much  as  in  the  better  works  of  current 
1  In  his  Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamilton's  Philosophy. 


PEACE,   CH.  Vl]  DEAD    CHANGELESSNESS  ?  89 

A-<Jvaita-V6danta.  Just  the  one  rust-stain  has  to  be 
removed  frprn  the  key,  then  it  will  turn,  and  will  finally 
•unclose  the  lock,  and  lay  open  before  us  what  we  want'. 

We  want,  as  said  before,  That  Which  combines 
within  itself  Change  as  well  as  Changelessness,  and  will 
also  be  our  own  inmost  Self.  An  infinity  of  change, 
even  though  it  be  a  change  of  progress — a  progress 
that  has  no  self-contained  and  consistent  meaning ; 
that  is  without  a  definite  final  goal  towards  which  it 
is  a  progress ;  an  increasing  progress  which,  there  is 
reason  to  believe,  may  also  be  alternating  with  an  ever- 
increasing  regress;  a  progress  in  a  convolved  spiral,  which, 
if  it  turns  upwards  to  ever  greater  glories  of  higher  and 
subtler  life,  may  also,  by  necessary  correspondence,  in 
accordance  with  the  law  of  balance,  compensation,  action- 
reaction,  thesis-antithesis,  pass  downwards  too,  through 
«ver-increasing  miseries  of  lower  and  grosser  densities  of 
matter — such  ceaseless,  aimless,  dual  process,  swing  to- 
and-fro,  or  progress  even,  means  not  satisfaction,  brings 
not  happiness,  but  rather  a  desolate  weariness.  Fichte  has 
said  (to  quote  again  the  words  of  Schwegler)  :  "  It  is  our 
duty  at  once,  and  an  impossibility  to  reach  the  infinite  ; 
nevertheless,  just  this  striving,  united  to  this  impossibility, 
is  the  stamp  of  our  eternity."  !  Schelling  has  said  the  same 
thing.8  To  the  principle  of  this  metaphysical  *  deduction,' 
corresponds  the  actual  fact,  ascertained  by  Yoga  and  occult 
science,  and  stated  in  the  Puranas  and  other  theosophical 

1  Schwegler's  History  of  Philosophy,  p.  270, 
1  J.  H.  Stirling,  What  is  Thought  ?,  pp.  397-398. 


-90  SISYPHUS   &  TANTALUS  [SCIENCE    OF 

and  Yoga-V6danta  literature,  that  there  is  endless  evolu- 
tion of  j  I  v  a  -  s,  by  birth  after  birth,  in  body  after  body 
and  world  after  world.  But  this  fact  is  not  the  whole  truth ; 
it  does  not  stand  by  itself.  If  it  did,  then  such  a  mere  in- 
finity of  change,  without  a  constant  and  permanent  basis 
of  changelessness  and  peace,  would  only  add  the  horrors 
of  Sisyphus  to  the  agonies  of  Tantalus.  No  soul,  however 
patiently  it  now  accepts — as  many  do — the  doctrine  of  an 
endless  progress,  will  long  feel  peace  in  it  by  itself.  The 
longing,  yearning,  resistless  and  quenchless  craving  for 
Changelessness  and  Peace  and  Rest,  for  something  final, 
will  come  upon  it  sooner  or  later. 

Besides  this  emotional  difficulty,  this  surfeit  with 
unrest,  which  is  now  upon  us,  there  is  the  intellectual 
difficulty,  the  impossibility  of  understanding  the  very 
fact  of  change.  The  instinct  of  the  intellect  cries  out,  as 
the  very  first  words  of  all  logic,  as  the  primary  laws  of 
all  thought,  that  A  is  A,  that  it  is  not  not-A,  that 
Being  is  Being  only,  and  never  Nothing.  "  The  non- 
existent cannot  be,  and  the  existent  cannot  not-be."  l 
Yet  every  mortal  moment  of  our  lives,  all  around  and 
above  and  below  us,  these  much-vaunted  laws  of  logic 
are  being  violated  incessantly.1  Every  infinitesimal  instant, 

1  Gifft,  ii,  16  ;  otherwise,  /  might  become  non-est  also  !  The  intellec- 
tual instinct  too  is  emotional  rebellion  against  that  possibility. 

*  And  in  these  textbooks  of  deductive  logic  themselves,  most  bare- 
facedly !  Solemnly  declaring  that  A  is  A  only  and  B  is  B  only,  they  at 
once  also  say,  A  is  B,  B  is  C,  therefore  A  is  C  !  If  A  is  A,  B  is  B,  and  C 
is  C,  only,  how  can  A  ever  be  B,  or  B  be  C,  or  C  be  A  ?  If  A  really  is 
B.  i.e.,  identical  with  B,  then  why  two  names  for  the  same  thing  ?  Call 
it  either  A,  or  B.  Samskrt  Nyaya  does  not  misapply  these  laws  of 
Universal  Thought,  as  if  "they  were  laws  of  individual  and  concrete 
t  hinking,  for  which  the  distinction  between  thing  and  thought,  idea  and 


PEACE,   CH.  Vl]     DEDUCTION   AFTER   INDUCTION    91 

something,  some  existent  thing,  is  becoming  «on- 
existent,  and  some  non-existent  thing  is  coming  into  being, 
is  becoming  existent.  We  may  say  that  it  is  only  the 
form  that  behaves  like  this.  But  what  is  the  good  of 
saying  so  ?  All  that  the  world  really  means  to  us — sounds- 
and  sights,  tastes,  touches,  and  scents — all  is  included  in 
the  '  form '  that  changes.  Even  weight,  it  is  being 
attempted  to  prove  by  mathematical  computations, 
will 'change,  with  change  of  position,  from  planet  to 
planet.1  And,  finally,  those  mathematical  laws  them- 
selves, on  which  such  computations  are  based,  can  no- 
longer  boast  permanence ;  they,  too,  are  being  changed 
by  mathematicians,  and  it  is  endeavoured  to  be  shown- 
that  parallel  lines  can  meet  and  two  things  occupy  the 
same  space ;  though,  on  these  points,  it  seems  likely  that 
exuberance  of  originality  has  led  to  exaggerations,  and 
that  the  '  old  order '  will  be  restored.  We  have  an- 
indestructible  faith  that  matter  is  indestructible ;  this 
faith  is  not  due  to  any  limited  facts  we  know,  for 
limited  data  can  never  justify  limitless  inductions  *  and 
inferences  ;  it  is  only  the  unavoidable  assignment  by  us, 

reality,  holds  good.  It  does  not  say  A  is  B,  and  B  is  C,  therefore  A  is 
C,  but  that  A  has  C,  because  C  goes  with  B,  and  A  has  B.  It  does  not 
artificially  separate  out  an  utterly  sterile  deductive  or  formal  logic  from 
the  wholly  useful  inductive  or  real  logic,  but  combines  both,  as  is  inevit- 
able and  natural.  The  true  and  full  significance  of  these  laws  of  thought 
appears  only  in  metaphysic,  as  laws  of  Being,  i.e.,  Universal  Thought, 
as  will  appear  later  on. 

1  See  Scripture,  The  New  Psychology ;  but  Ostwald  in  his  Hand" 
book  of  Chemistry  seems  to  think  otherwise. 

2  The  real  secret  of  the  unlimitedness  of  inductions  and  generalisa 
tions,  as  made,  is  that  every  single  instance,  every  one,  has  in  it  the 
principle  of  infinity.  Many  cases,  a  number  of  cases,  are  not  necessary  to 
justify  an  induction.    One  case,  but  it  must  be  a  clear  and  unmistakeable 


192  COMMON   LOGIC  VS.   METAPHYSIC  [SC.   OF 

by  the  '  I,'  of  a  conjugal  share  in  our  own  indefeasible 
•eternity,  to  our  undivorceable  partner  in  life,  the  *  Not-I,' 
matter.  Such  being  the  case,  it  does  not  help  us  in  any 
way  to  say  that  only  the  form  changes.  The  form  is 
•practically  everything  ;  and  even  if  it  were  not  so,  even 
tthen  it  is  something,  it  is  an  existent  something  at  one 
moment.  And  what  is  existent  once,  should  be  existent 
•  ever.  How,  why,  does  it  pass  into  non-existence  ?  We 
*do  not  understand  change.  We  do  not  understand  the 
world-process.  If  you  would  have  us  understand  it,  you 
'must  show  that  this  world-process  is  not  a  process  at  all, 
>but  a  rock-like  fixity  ;  that  procession  is  illusion,  and  fixity 
the  truth.  Then  only  shall  we  be  able  to  bring  it  into 
.accord  with  the  primary  laws  of  thought.  Such  is  the 
'difficulty  of  the  exaggerated,  yet  also  legitimate,  demand 
of  the  reason,  on  the  one  hand. 

On  the  other  hand  stands  the  difficulty  of  what  may 
<be  called  the  demand  of  the  senses.  A  doctrine  of  mere 
*changelessness  is  incomplete ;  a  mere  assertion  of  it 
perfectly  unconvincing.  It  explains  nothing  and  is  not  a 

<case.  is  enough.     Because  in  one,  therefore  in  all  ones  which  are  the 
.  same  ;  because  once,  therefore  always,  in  the  same  conditions. 

One  school  of  Nyaya  puts  the '  matter  in  a  simple  way ;  we  have 
pratyaksha,  direct  perception ,  of  a  v  y  a  k  t  i ,  a  particular,  and  of  its 
j  a  ti,  species  or  genus,  both,  together,  simultaneously;   because  parti- 
t:ular-and-general  are  inseparably  bound  together  by  samavaya,  co-in- 
herence,  mutual  'together-ness'.    No  'induction*  by  elaborate  obser- 
vation and  comparison  of  many  instances    would  be  necessary,    and 
'generalisation  '  could  be  arrived  at  straight  off,  from  the  very  first  obser- 
vation, if  it  be  sufficiently  precise,  accurate,  unmixed  ;  but,  in  practice* 
observation  and  comparison  of  many  instances  are  needed,  to  eliminate 
•irrelevant    circumstances.      In    short,    particular-perception    and    the 
><connected    general-perception    (Kantian    '  matter '  and    '  form ')  arise 
•together  in  the  observer's  consciousness. 


PEACE,    CH.   Vl]       "  I   AM    THAT    I    AM  "  9$ 

fact.  It  is,  as  just  said,  denied  by  every  wink  of  our 
eyes,  by  evsry  breath  of  our  lungs,  by  every  beat  of  our 
hearts.  We  want  that  which  will  combine  and  harmonise 
both  change  and  changelessness.  We  want  to  reduce 
each  into  terms  of  the  other. 

Many  have  been  the  efforts  to  shut  up  the  world- 
process  into  something  which  can  be  held  in  a  single 
hand ;  which  shall  be  but  one  single  act  of  consciousness. 
Kant  says,  in  his  Kritik  of  Practical  Reason,  "  to  deduce 
all  from  a  single  principle,  is  the  inevitable  demand  of 
human  reason;  we  can  find  full  satisfaction  only  in  a 
complete  systematic  Unity  of  all  the  possessions  of  our 
reason  "  ;  but  he  himself  failed  badly  to  satisfy  that  de- 
mand. Fichte  could  not  do  it  in  less  than  three  successive, 
unsimultaneotis,  and  therefore  change- involving  steps,  and 
then  too  but  incompletely.  The  great  mystic  school  of 
Rosicrucians  has  endeavoured  to  do  so  in  one  thought 
and  Bible-text :  "  I  am  that  I  am  "  ;  but  this  propounds 
mere  changelessness,  and  makes  no  provision  for  change. 
The  V£da-texts  belonging  to  the  penultimate  stage  have 
exclaimed  separately,  as  said  before :  "(The)  I  am  (is)  Brah- 
man," and  then  :  "  The  Many  is  not  at  all  "  ;  but  these 
too  are  insufficient  for  our  purpose ;  they  too  establish 
changelessness  alone  and  explain  not  change  ;  while  others- 
embody  change  only  and  not  changelessness,  as  thus  :  "May 
I  who  am  One  become  Many ;  may  I  be  born  forth  and 
multiply,"1  "  It  created  that,  and  entered  into  that  also."2 

1  Chh&ndogya,  VI,  ii,  3,  and  fait\iriya%  II,  vi,  1. 
%  II,  vi,  1. 


94  SOMETHING    MORE    NEEDED       [SCIENCE    OF 


we  seek  shall  be  obtained  by  compressing  the 
three  steps  of  Fichte  into  one  ;  6y  combining  the  first 
two  separate  scripture-utterances  into  a  unity  —  a  small 
change  perhaps,  at  first  sight,  but  almost  as  radical  and 
important  in  result  as  an  alteration  of  the  mere  order  of 
letters  composing  a  word,  an  alteration  which  makes  a 
completely  new  word  with  an  entirely  new  meaning. 

NOTE  I.  —  It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  the  western 
philosophers  especially  selected  in  the  text  to  serve  as  land- 
marks on  the  *pat:h  of  enquiry,  have  been  so  selected  because 
their  special  way  of  thought,  arising  out  of  modern  con- 
ditions, seemed  most  suited  to  the  modern  student  and  best 
fitted  for  the*  purpose  in  hand.  Otherwise,  indeed,  the  same 
subjects  of  enquiry  have  been  and  are  being  investigated  by 
hundreds  of  the  finest  intellects  of  the  human  race,  from  the 
most  ancient  times  up  to  the  present  day  ;  and  different  aspects 
of  the  same  truths  -and  propositions  and  solutions  maybe 
found  in  the  works  of  the  ancient  Greek  philosophers,  Plato, 
Aristotle,  and  the  Neo-Platonists  especially,  of  Descartes, 
Spinoza,  Leibnitz,  of  the  mystics,  Scheffler,  Eckhart,  Albrecht, 
and  Bcehme,  of  Bruno  and  Bacon,  and,  again,  Schopenhauer 
and  Spencer,  and  many  others.  Each  philosopher  worthy  of 
the  name,  and  to  whom  the  name  has  been  given  by  public 
recognition,  has  undoubtedly  left  the  world's  stock  of  philo- 
sophical knowledge  richer,  by  at  least  some  definite  piece  of 
work,  a  fuller  and  deeper  view  of  some  law,  or  a  new  appli- 
cation and  use  of  it,  a  new  aspect  of  a  question,  or  fact,  or 
law,  or  a  fresh  presentation,  in  a  new  re-arrangement,  of  the 
same  time-old  world-facts,  as  of  the  same  glass-pieces  of  a 
kaleidoscope  re-arranged  by  every  new  turn.  Indeed,  as  may 
appear  later  on,  the  most  erroneous  -seeming  opinion  ever  held 
by  any  thinker  will  be  seen,  from  an  all-embracing  standpoint, 
and  in  a  certain  sense,  to  be  a  not  inaccurate  description  of 
one  aspect  of  a  world  -fact,  one  greater  or  lesser  portion  of  the 
truth.  But  some  of  the  latest  German  thinkers  seem  to  have 
succeeded  better  than  any  of  their  precursors  in  Europe  in  the 
attempt  to  systematise  and  unify.  And  even  amongst  these, 


PEACE,    CH.   Vl]    PANTHEON    OF   PHILOSOPHERS          95 

from  such  accounts  and  translations  of  his  writings  into 
English  as  are  available,  Fichte  appears  to  be  an  almost 
indispensable  help  to  the  modern  students  of  true  Vedanta 
and  the  higher  metaphysic — the  metaphysic  which  would  en- 
•close  so-called  occult  and  superphysical  science  within  its 
principles,  as  well  as  physical  science  ;  which  claims  to  be  a 
science  because  it  offers  to  be  tested  in  the  same  way  as 
every  particular  science  is  tested,  viz.,  by  endeavouring  to 
show  that  its  hypotheses  agree  with  present  facts,  and  also 
enable  prediction  to  be  made  correctly,  of  results  in  the 
future ;  which,  indeed,  claims  to  be  the  very  science  of 
sciences  by  providing  a  great  system,  a  great  hypothesis, 
which,  while  special  sciences  systematise  and  unify  limited 
groups  of  facts,  would  deal  with  and  synthesise  the  root- 
concepts  of  all  these  special  sciences,  and  so  co-ordinate  all 
sciences,  would  systematise  and  unify  all  possible  world-facts, 
past,  present,  and  to  come. 

It  may  be  objected  that  this  claim  is  rather  large,  seeing 
that  many  thinkers  have  put  forward  many  systems  of  meta- 
physic ;  and  all  differ  from  each  other  more' or  less  ;  so  that 
metaphysic  has  been  even  described  as  the  most  contentious  of 
sciences.  The  reply  is  that  there  is,  at  bottom,  as  substantial 
an  agreement,  though  much  less  obvious,  between  these 
different  systems  as  between  different  textbooks  of,  say,  arith- 
metic or  geometry,  which  differ  in  language,  phrasing,  order 
of  presentation,  of  the  subject-matter,  method  of  calculation 
or  proof,  examples,  corollaries,  etc.  A  similar  substantial  agree- 
ment there  must  be,  at  bottom,  ultimately,  between  all  the 
changing  expositions  of  all  the  physical  sciences  too ;  for 
•each  endeavours  to  expound,  obviously,  one  aspect  of  Nature, 
all  aspects  of  which  make  up  a  mutually-agreeing  consistent 
whole ;  and  scientists  are  sensing,  and  trying  to  grasp  and 
express,  that  underlying  agreement  and  unity.  In  countries 
where  metaphysic  is  almost  as  much  in  vogue  as  arithmetic, 
e.g.,  India,  this  substantial  agreement  between  philosophies 
is  no  longer  un-obvious  either  ;  thus  the  learned  in  India  are 
all,  on  the  whole,  tacitly  agreed  that  the  Vedanta  is  the  final 
philosophy,  that  the  five  or  more  other  schools  represent  but 
stages  or  aspects,  and  that  changing  times  require  and  bring 
forth  only  fresh  presentations,  in  more  or  less  suitably  modified 


96    EACH  DEPICTS  ONE  ASPECT  OF  THE  TRUE    [SC.  OF 

forms,  of  the  same  '  final  truth  '.  When  and  where  metaphysic 
comes  to  be  really  as  much  in  vogue  as  mathematics,  then 
and  there  its  numeration  and  notation,  its  four  fundamental 
rules  and  Rule  of  Three,  its  definitions,  postulates,  and  axioms, 
its  points,  lines,  surfaces,  and  solids,  its  essential  concepts 
of  force,  fulcrum,  and  lever,  its  compositions,  resolutions, 
and  parallelograms  of  forces,  its  equations,  permutations, 
combinations,  and  probabilities — all  these  will  be  recognis- 
ed and  agreed  upon  even  more  widely  and  deeply ;  for 
what  is  or  can  be  nearer  than  the  Self,  the  Not-Self,  and  the 
Relation  between  them  ?  And  then  there  will  be,  even  obvi- 
ously, as  little  difference  between  books  on  metaphysic,  as 
between  those  on  mathematics.  What  the  traditional  feeling 
and  conviction  on  this  point  is  in  India,  may  be  inferred  from 
the  fact  that  while  the  V  edas — and,  of  course,  the  Upani- 
shats  which  are  the  Vedanta,  the  *  final '  and  crowning  part 
of  them — are  insistently  declared  to  be  svatah-pramapa, 
self-evident  (see  footnote  at  p.  40,  supra),  the  technical 
SamskrJ  name  for  the  geometrical  axioms  is  svayam- 
siddha,  '  self-proven/  the  same  thought,  and  practically  the 
same  word. 

Sometimes  it  is  said  that  philosophy  is  a  matter  of  '  per- 
sonal equation '.  Alexander  Herzberg  has  written  an  in- 
forming and  entertaining  book,  The  Psychology  of  Philo- 
sophers, in  which  he  has  tried  to  connect  the  views,  of  some 
thirty  of  the  most  famous  western  thinkers,  with  their  per- 
sonal characters,  temperaments,  physical  health  and  features, 
life-experiences,  and  circumstances.  There  is  an  element  of 
truth,  no  doubt,  in  this ;  it  is  even  proverbial  that  views 
change  with  the  situation,  the  point  of  view.  But  that  element 
of  truth  must  not  be  pressed  too  far.  The  proverb  suggests 
its  own  supplement.  Circumambulate  the  problem  concerned  ; 
view  it  from  all  standpoints ;  and  you  will  see  the  way  to 
agreement.  Differences  are  mostly  of  emphasis,  on  this  or  that 
other  aspect ;  and  of  taste.  Even  in  mathematics,  one  person 
studies  and  writes  on  arithmetic ;  another,  geometry  :  another, 
algebra,  or  trigonometry,  or  mensuration,  conic  sections, 
calculus,  etc.  But  there  is  no  contradiction  between  them. 
So  too,  there  would  not  be  any,  there  is  no,  contradiction 
between  philosophers  and  philosophies,  if  the  latter  only 


P.,    CH.   VI]       EASTERN    AND   WESTERN   THOUGHT      97 

restrained  egoism  properly,  and  were  more  desirous  to  under- 
stand than  eager  to  differ  and  claim  originality.  The  present 
writer  has  endeavoured  to  show  the  Essential  Unity  of  All 
Religions,  in  a  compilation  hearing  that  name,  by  parallel 
texts  from  the  scriptures  of  eleven  ;  and  philosophies  are  at 
least  one  aspect  of  religions,  as  religions  are  of  philosophies. 

NOTE  II. — For  readers  interested  in  the  linking  up  of 
eastern  and  western  thought,  some  further  observations  are 
subjoined.  They  may  perhaps  be  usefully  read  once  again, 
after  reading  the  next  chapter.  The  two  will  cast  light  on 
each  other. 

Schwegler,  in  History  of  Philosophy,  articles  on  Fichte, 
Schelling,  Hegel;  J.  H.  Stirling^  in  The  Secret  of  Hegel; 
Wallace,  in  The  Logic  of  Hegel,  '  Prolegomena  ' ;  Caird,  in 
Hegel — all  speak  unfavourably  of  certain  traits  and  acts  of 
Hegel,  his  grudging  and  very  insufficient  acknowledgment  of 
his  great  debt  to  Fichte,  his  jealousy  of  Schelling  and  making 
use  of  him  as  a  stepping-stone  in  various  ways,  his  flattery  of 
his  Government  and  exaltation  of  the  Monarchical  State.  He 
had  his  great  good  points  also.  All  human  beings — including 
1  philosophers '  (!),  of  East  and  West,  ancient  as  well  as 
modern — are  '  bundles  of  contradictions  ',  of  '  opposites  ',  as 
is  all  Nature.  A  soul  wearing  a  body,  is  necessarily  such  a 
compound  ;  it  is  matter  for  deep  thanksgiving,  if  the  factor  of 
soul-altruism  happens  to  predominate  over  that  of  body-egoism. 

Hegel  says  (Wallace,  op.  cit.,  pp.  101-102):  "  It  was 
only  formally  that  the  Kantian  system  established  the  princi- 
ple that  thought  acted  spontaneously  in  forming  its  constitu- 
tion. Into  the  details  of  the  manner  and  the  extent  of  this 
self-determination  of  thought,  Kant  never  went.  It  was 
Fichte  who  first  noticed  the  omission,  called  attention  to  the 
want  of  a  deduction  of  the  categories,  and  endeavoured  to 
supply  something  of  the  kind.  With  Fichte,  the  Ego  is  the 
starting  point  in  the  philosophical  development,  and  the  out- 
come of  its  action  is  supposed  to  be  visible  in  the  categories  ". 

Broadly,  '  categories ',  here,  may  be  understood  to  corres- 
pond with themaha-vakyas,4 great  logia ',  Primal  Laws 
6f  Nature,  God's  Nature,  Self's  Nature,  on  which  Laws 


98  FURTHER   COMPARISONS  (SCIENCE    OF 

the  World- Process  is  framed,  by  which  it  is  shaped,  gov- 
erned, carried  on  ;  this  sense  is  much  broader  than  that  of  the 
word  as  used  by  Kant  and  also  Hegel.  In  the  Vaisheshika 
system,  as  we  have  seen  (f.n.  to  pp.  60-61  supra)>  the  *  cate- 
gories f  are  implicitly  inherent  in  God's  Nature.  Fichte  and 
Schelling  have  their  own  sets  of  categories,  though  perhaps 
less  full,  and  less  systematically  concatenated,  than  those  of 
Hegel. 

Hegel  goes  on  to  criticise  Fichte :  "  But  in  Fichte,  the 
Ego  is  not  really  presented  as  a  free,  spontaneous  energy  ;  it 
is  supposed  to  receive  its  first  impulse  from  without  .  .  . 
The  nature  of  the  impulse  remains  a  stranger  beyond 
our  pale  ". 

Hegel's  objections  are  false,  and  apply  to  his  own 
work  forcibly ;  not  tp  Fichte's.  When  Hegel  begins  with 
the  sensationalist  paradox,  that  Being  is  Nothing,  and 
Nothing  is  Being,  and  Becoming  is  the  passing  of  each 
into  the  other,  does  he  present  the  three  as  three  free 
and  spontaneous  energies,  and  endow  any  or  all  of  them 
with  impulses  from  within,  impulses  which  are  not  strangers 
beyond  our  pale,  but  familiars  within  our  home  ?  He  tries  to 
see  a  non-existent  mote  in  Fichte's  eyes,  and  fails  to  see  the 
beam  in  his  own !  Fichte  says  clearly  that  the  Ego  itself 
positively  posits,  contra-poses,  Non-Ego,  over  against  it- 
Self,  in  order  to  realise  it-Self.  The  Ego  is  obviously, 
as  comes  home  to  every  one  us  in  our  feeling  of  free-will, 
a  free  and  spontaneous  energy,  and  the  impulse  is  it  own. 
The  following  extracts  from  Schwegler  (op.  cit.,  *  Fichte ')  will 
illustrate  :  "  The  Ego  is  manifest  in  consciousness ;  but  the 
thing-in-itself  is  a-  mere  fiction  .  .  .  (Fichte)  would  make  the 
Ego  the  (first)  principle,  and  from  the  Ego  would  derive  all  the 
rest  .  .  .  We  are  to  understand  by  this  Ego,  not  the  parti- 
cular individual,  but  the  universal  Ego  .  .  .  Egoityand  indi- 
viduality, the  pure  (abstract)  and  the  empirical  ego,  are 
entirely  different  ideas.  .  .  .  Fichte  is  the  first  to  deduce 
all  fundamental  notions  from  a  single  point,  and  to 
bring  them  into  connection,  instead  of  taking  them  only 
empirically,  like  Kant,  and  setting  them  down  in  mere 
juxtaposition.  .  .  .  Ego—Ego,  the  Ego  is,  /  am.  .  .  . 


P.,    CH.   Vl]          HEGEL,    FICHTE,      AND    VEDANTA  99 

Before  anything  can  be  given  in  the  Ego,  the  Ego  itself 
must  be  given.  .  .  .  This  is  pure,  inherent,  independent 
activity.  .  .  .  /  am  is  the  expression  of  the  only  possible 
original  act.  .  .  .  The  Ego  is  the  prius  of  all  judgment,  and 
is  the  foundation  of  the  nexus  (relation)  of  subject  and  predi- 
cate .  .  .  We  obtain  from  it,  the  category  of  reality.  All 
categories  are  deduced  from  the  Ego  as  absolute  subject.  .  .  . 
The  second  fundamental  principle  is,  ...  Ego  is  not=non- 
Ego.  .  .  .  Whatever  belongs  to  the  Ego,  the  counterpart  of 
that  must,  by  virtue  of  simple  contraposition,  belong  to  the 
non-Ego.  The  category  (idea,  general  notion,  law,  of)  deter- 
mination or  limitation  follows  ;  thence  follow  .  .  .  divisibility, 
substantiality,  causality,  cause-and-effect,  reciprocal  relation 
(etc.)  .  .  .  The  Ego  itself  is  absolutely  self-determination.  .  .  . 
Originally,  there  is  only  a  single  substance,  the  Ego;  it 
alone  is  the  absolute  Infinite.  .  .  .  But  the  Ego  sup- 
poses a  Non-Ego.  .  .  ."  And  so  on.  That  there  are  some 
minute,  subtle,  even  important,  differences  between  Fichte's 
thinking  and  Vedanta,  may  be  granted.  The  Vedanta 
way  is  preferred  in  the  present  work,  compiled  in  view 
of  the  Indian  reader's  requirements  as  well  as  those  of  the 
western  reader,  who  may  be  interested  in  Indian  thought. 
The  seeker,  goaded  by  inner  questionings,  must,  of  course, 
decide  for  himself,  which  satisfies  him  most.  But  Hegel's 
fault-finding  with  Fichte  does  not  seem  justified  in  any  case. 
He  says  (op.  cit.) :  "  What  Kant  calls  thing-tn-itself,  Fichte 
calls  impulse  from  without  .  .  .  (i.e.)  non-Ego  in  general. 
The  c  I '  is  thus  looked  at  as  standing  in  relation  with 
the  *  not- 1 '  through  which  its  act  of  self-determination  is 
first  awakened." 

Hegel  had  access  to  the  original  German  of  Fichte,  which 
the  present  writer  has  not ;  and  Fichte  may  have  employed 
words  equivalent,  in  English,  to  '  impulse  from  without '. 
But,  seeing  how  words  are  perpetually  changing  their  mean- 
ings in  the  hands  of  philosophers,  and  even  the  same  philo- 
sopher, (Hegel  himself  is  an  outstanding  example  of  this 
sin),  the  present  writer  would  interpret  Fichte  as  meaning 
4  impulse  from  non-Ego,  contraposited,  ideated,  as  if  without , 
by  the  Ego  it-self ',  and  '  first  awakened '  as  *  eternally 
realised,  once  for  all>  as  well  as  realised  throughout  all 


100  SELF,   THE    CENTRAL   FACT         [SCIENCE   OF 

time  in  unending  succession  '.  This  interpretation  is  sup- 
ported by  Schwegler's  whole  account  of  Fichte ;  and  that 
account  seems  to  be  fair  and  correct  as  against  Hegel's 
cavillings  and  carpings,  which  seem  to  be  almost  '  malice 
prepense '  (!),  in  order  to  set  off  his  own  originality.  To 
prick  the  big  bubble  of  Hegel's  big  claim,  it  is  enough 
to  observe  that  Fichte  begins  with  a  Living  One,  and  that 
One,  the  Heart's  Desire  of  the  whole  Universe  of  living 
beings,  the  Self,  '  for  the  sake  of  which  is  dear,  whatever 
else  happens  to  be  dear/  (as  the  Upanishat  says);  while 
Hegel  begins  with  three,  and  three  life-less,  soul -less,  ghosts, 
Being-Nothing-Becoming,  outside  of  Me,  there,  in  front  of 
Me.  Even  Kant,  from  whom,  according  to  Stirling,  Hegel's 
industrious  exponent,  Hegel  borrowed  very  much — even  Kant 
craved  forf  and  could  not  find,  a  Single  Principle  from  which 
all  could  be  deduced ;  but  he  did  come  to  have  an  inkling  that 
the  Self  is  that  Single  Principle,  the  *  thing -in-itself '  behind 
both  Mind  and  Matter.  Thus:  "The  'I  think'  must  be 
capable  of  accompanying  all  my  ideas ;  otherwise,  there 
would  be  presented  to  my  mind  an  idea  of  something  which 
could  not  be  thought,  and  this  means  that  the  thought  would 
be  impossible, .  or,  at  least,  that  it  would  be  nothing  at  all 
for  me  ;  .  .  .  the  proposition  that  all  the  various  elements  of 
our  empirical  consciousness  must  be  bound  together  in  one 
self -consciousness  >  is  absolutely  the  first  principle  of  all  our 
thinking" — quoted  from  Kant,  by  Edward  Caird,  in  The 
Critical  Philosophy  of  Kant,  I,  353. 

Why  so  much  dissertation  about  the  Self  ?  Because 
It  is  the  One  Central  Fact  of  Vedanja  and  of  all  Indian 
thought,  the  one  sure  and  certain  Single  Reality  of  the 
Universe  ;  One,  yet  all^enveloping,  all-regulating,  all-deducing- 
producing-inducing.  Atma,  as  J?aram-Atma,JPraJ;yag-Atma, 
Jiv-Ajma,  Sutr-Atma,  Bhut-Atma,  Jagad-Atma,  pervades 
Samskrt  literature.  And  Hegel  and  Stirling  cannot  avoid 
sensing  Its  light,  even  through  closed  eyelids.  Stirling  (op. 
cit.),  pp.  28-29,  earnestly  exhorts,  in  the  very  spirit  of  the 
Upanishats  and  the  Yoga-  Vasishtha,  the  would-be  student  of 
Hegel  to  practise  meditation  on  "  Abstract  or  Pure  Being, 
Abstract  or  Pure  Existentiality,  the  Hegelian  Seyn  .  .  .  Let 
there  be  no  stone,  no  plant,  no  sea,  no  earth,  no  sun,  no  idea, 


P.,   CH.   Vl]    STIRLING'S  SELF-CONTRADICTIONS         101 

no  space,  no  time,  no  God — let  the  universe  disappear — we 
have  not  yet  got  rid  of  Is.  Is  will  not,  cannot,  disappear." 

But,  please,  let  the  Self,  you,  your-self,  who  are  exhorting 
others  to  meditate  thus — let  your-Self  disappear.  Does  7s 
remain  after  that  ?  If  it  does,  how  do  you  know  that  it  does  ?  ! 
Stirling  again  says  :  "  Ask  yourself,  What  would  there  be,  if 
there  were  just  nothing  at  all,  and  if  there  never  had  been 
anything — neither  God,  nor  a  world,  nor  an  existence  at  all  ? 
Ask  yourself  this  and  listen  !  Then  look  at  the  question  itself, 
and  observe  how  it  contains  its  own  dialectic  and  contradic- 
tion, in  ^>r€-supposing  the  Being  it  is  actually  supposing 
not  to  be !  "  But,  please,  add  to  the  question  '  Neither  a  Self, 
your-Self  ',  and  listen  !  Who  is  left  to  listen  ?  !  The  question 
as  worded  by  Stirling,  when  it  says  '  nor  an  existence  at  all ', 
does  not  mean,  '  not  even  your  own  existence  ',  but  surrepti- 
tiously implies  that  your  own  i.e.,  your-Selfs  existence  is  left ; 
for  indeed  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  imagine  his  own 
existence  abolished,  (see  p.  22  supra).  We  do  not  know 
if  Stirling  ever  tried  to  perform  that  feat.  His  question  pre- 
supposes Being,  truly ;  but  what  Being,  whose  Being  ? 
Whatever  Being  he  meant,  that  Being  inevitably  pre -supposes 
Self,  whose  Being,  or  which  as  Being,  is  the  only  Being  that 
is  absolutely,  unshakeably,  unabolishably  sure  and  certain. 

Stirling  cannot  help  contradicting  himself  on  this  point. 
At  p.  24  of  his  book,  he  says  :  "  Hegel  as  it  were  swoons  him- 
self back  into  infancy,  trances  himself  through  all  childhood, 
and  awakes  when  the  child  awakes,  that  is,  with  reflection,  but 
retaining  a  consciousness  of  the  process,  which  the  child 
does  not.  It  is  a  realisation  of  the  wish  that  we  could  know 
the  series  of  development  in  the  mind  of  the  child  ".  Inci- 
dentally, this  is  one  of  the  exercises  suggested  in  Yoga ;  and 
a  simpler  form  of  it  is — do  not  get  out  of  bed  in  the  morning  too 
quickly,  but  practise  awaking  slowly,  and  intro-specting  the 
gradual  stages  from  dim  to  clear  consciousness ;  for,  speaking 
very  broadly,  by  the  Law  or  Fact  of  Analogy,  viz.,  that  the 
small  is  as  the  large,  the  microcosm  as  the  macrocosm,  a 
complete  day  of  an  individual  life  is  like  the  whole  of  that 
life,  and  this  latter  again  is  like  the  whole  of  the  life  of  a 
whole  Human  race  or  nation,  and  that,  again;  like  the 


102     HIS  ADMISSION  OF  THE  SELF'S  PRIMACY    [SC.  OF 

Cosmos-Chaos,  Evolution-Dissolution   of  a   whole  globe,  or 
a  whole  Solar  System  ;  and  so  on. 

Now,  Stirling  goes  on  to  say  that  when  the  child  awakes, 
"  conceivably  there  is  a  sense  of  being — or  the  vague  wide 
idea,  Being  ;  there  is  no  I  in  it ;  I  is  the  product  of  reflexion." 
This  at  p.  24.  But  at  p.  67,  he  contradicts  himself  crassly  : 
"  The  notion  then  as  being,  as  is,  as  the  absolutely  first 
crude,  dim,  dull,  opaque,  chaotic  consciousness,  brute  /  am, 
the  first  flutter  of  life,  .\  .  is  only  in  it-self — latent,  undeve- 
loped ;  "  and  again,  at  p.  99,  "  that  which  lives,  and  all  that 
lives,  is  thought ;  /  find  my  7  to  be  a  constituent  moment,** 
(better  say,  locus,  focus,  centre,  basis)  "  of  that  all  of  thought.1' 
Here,  Stirling,  unwittingly,  helplessly,  admits  the  primacy  of 
the  Self.  At  the  end  of  his  Annotations  to  Schwegler,  he  claims 
for  himself  only  the  role  of  a  "  humble  Christian  philosopher  ", 
and  on  the  last  but  one  page  (p.  750)  of  The  Secret  of  Hegel, 
he  claims  for  Hegel  that  he  "  has  no  object  but  once  again  to 
restore  to  us — and  in  the  new  light  of  the  new  thought — 
Immortality  and  Free-Will,  Christianity  and  God ".  But 
he  forgets  that  in  the  Bible,  "  God  said  unto  Moses,  I  AM 
THAT  I  AM  ;  and  he  said,  Thus  shalt  thou  say  to  the 
children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you " ;  and 
again,  repeatedly,  "  1  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  first 
and  the  last."  The  Rg-Veda,  in  the  magnificent  Nasa- 
dlya  hymn,  says:  "  Neither  non-Being  was,  nor  Being. 
Only  the  Self  breathed,  without  air.  It  breathed  Its  own  Self- 
affirmation,  Self -positing,  Sva-dha.  Death  was  not,  nor 
deathlessness,  nor  day,  nor  night,  nor  space,  nor  any  orbs 
therein.  Deep  darkness  lay  in  the  embrace  of  deep  darkness. 
Nothing-Else-than-It  was,  Tas  mad-Any  a  t-Na  pa  ram 
k  i  n  c  h  i  4  as  a.  And  in  it  moved  Primal  Desire,  Kama,  seed 
of  Universal  Mind.  Who  knows  It  ?  Perhaps  It  knows  It-Self, 
perhaps  not ! "  (For  texts  from  other  scriptures,  of  other 
religions,  to  the  same  or  similar  effect,  the  reader  may  see  the 
present  writer's  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions,  Index- 
references,  '  Self  ',  c  God  ',  '  I '). 


P.,    CH.   Vl]    HEGEL'S  PERPETUAL  USE  OF  'SELF'     103 

4  Other ',  64  times ;  and  the  word  *  This  ',  as  equivalent  to 
'  Other ',  also,  a  few  times.  On  p.  255,  '  Self '  occurs  29 
times  ;  on  p.  256,  18  times  ;  on  p.  257,  20  times.  Please  note, 
this  is  Hegel's  own  writing,  only  translated.  The  word  '  Self  * 
occurs,  in  greater  or  less  abundance,  on  many  other  pages, 
generally  in  peculiar  combinations  with  other  words.  An  sick 
(in,  at,  or  by  Self),  fur  sich  (for,  by,  or  with  Self),  An  Hjidfur 
sich  (in  and  for  Self) — this  triad  is  the  very  skeleton,  the  frame, 
on  which  are  moulded  all  the  tissues  and  the  flesh  of  Hegel's 
system.  Following  compounds  are  found  all  over  the  place  ; 
it-self,  for-self,  m-and-for-self,  self-diremption,  self-union, 
self-conservation,  self-retention,  self-reference,  self-separation, 
self -duplication,  self-mediation,  self -consciousness,  being-iri»it- 
self,  being-for-self,  being-within-it-self,  being-in-it-self-ness, 
be-ent-in-it-self,  self-identical-within-it-self,  self-to-self-re- 
ferent, in-it-self-ness  ;  and  so  on  and  so  forth.  Yet  to  give 
precedence  to  Being-Nothing-Becoming  over  Self  (and  It's  in- 
cluded Not-Self  i.e.,  This  Other,  and  Not)— this,  to  the  Vedanja 
view,  is  a  very  grave,  very  misleading,  error ;  though,  of  course, 
every  error  has  its  use,  if  it  act  as  incentive  to  further  trial, 
until  finding.  'Self,  'Other'  (Skt.  ijara,  Gr.  heteron) 
'  This  '  (Skt.  e  t  a  t ,  i  d  a  m  ) — these  words  are  in  the  very 
spirit  of  Vedanta,  which  uses  equivalents  pointedly ;  but 
Hegel  fails  to  describe  the  Relation  between  the  Three, 
satisfactorily,  or  even  at  all.  Fichte,  as  said,  makes  a  much 
nearer  approach,  without  quite  grasping,  it  seems. 

Stirling  (in  whose  own  expositions  of  Hegel,  the  word 
'  self,'  or  its  equivalent  '  ego  '  or  '  sich  '  occurs,  e.g.,  27  times 
on  p.  51,  and  29  times  on  pp.  121-122,  to  take  instances  at 
random)  says  at  p.  53  :  "  Hegel's  secret  is  very  much  the 
translating  of  the  concrete  individual  into  the  abstract 
general  or  universal.  He  is  always  intelligible  when  we  keep 
before  us  the  particular  individual  he  is  engaged  translating ; 
but  let  us  lose  the  object,  the  translation  becomes  hopeless." 
But  why  write  thus  abstractly  ?  Indian  seers  and  sages 
enjoin  the  study  of  Veda- Vedanta  and  Itihasa-Purana, 
Philosophy  and  History,  Abstract  and  Concrete,  side  by  side, 
in  the  light  of  each  other.  So  only  are  both  lighted  up. 
To  teach  a  secret  code  without  explaining  the  meaning 
simultaneously;  a  shorthand  system  without  the  longhand 


104     HEGEL'S  IGNORANT  CONCEIT  RE  Gtta    [sc.  OF 

equivalents ;  geometry  without  the  figures :  is  futile.  When 
Hegel  '  descends  '  into  concrete  illustrations,  rarely,  he  is  not 
only  intelligible  but  interesting  and  informing.  But  he,  "  in 
genera],  vouchsafes  abandantly,  dry,  abstract  allusion,  but 
never  one  word  of  plain,  straightforward,  concrete  expla- 
nation. Information  in  Hegel  is,  for  the  most  part,  but 
a  disdainful  abstruse  riling  of  us  ' :  (Stirling  op.  cit.  p.  355). 
There  are  instances  of  such  deliberate  mystification,  abstruse 
abstractness,  code-language,  *  riddling  rhymes '  and  even 
'  scornful  riling,'  in  Samskrt  literature  too,  as,  f.i.,  that  of  the 
mysterious  8800  verses '  of  Maha-bharata,  by  tradition,  of 
*  Raikva  of  the  car '  and  Yajna-valkya  in  the  Upanishats, 
of  Dharma-kirti  (Buddhist  author),  of  Shri  Harsha  (poet  and 
a-4vaijl  casuist-sophist).  But  these  are  not  regarded  as 
models ;  and  the  8800  so-thought '  mysterious  '  verses  of  Veda- 
Vyasa  are  explained  by  some  scholar's,  very  simply,  as  being 
only  the  first  draft,  which  Vyasa  himself,  later,  expanded 
to  24,000,  and  his  disciples  and  grand-disciples,  subsequently, 
to  a  hundred  thousand  verses,  by  successive  additions,  some- 
what as  the  successive  editions  of  an  encyclopedia  *  grow 
from  more  to  more  '.  Mystery-mongering  is  a  very  old 
trade ;  it  attracts  many  customers,  though  it  repels  others. 

Particularly  surprising  in* a  person  of  Hegel's  great  repu- 
tation is  his  shallow,  supercilious,  self-conceited  criticism  of 
the  V6$anta  of  Bhagavad-Gita,  and  of  Sufism  ;  (pp.  188-192, 
Wallace's 'translation  of  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  Mind).  It 
is  obvious  to  anyone  who  has  studied  Gtfa  and  the  better 
known  Sufi  writings  with  any  care,  that  that  criticism  is  based, 
not  on  knowledge,  but  on  ignorance.  He  says,  "  They  are 
systems  which  apprehend'  the  Absolute  only  as  substance  .  .  . 
The  fault  of  all  these  modes  of  thought  is  that  they  stop  short 
of  defining  "  (i.e.,  they  do  not  define)  "  substance  as  subject 
and  as  mind  ".  To  us,  in  view  of  what  has  been  said  above, 
regarding  Hegel's  treatment  of  Being  and  Self,  this  criticism 
is  like  '  the  thief  shouting — Stop  thief  ' ;  is  imputing  to  an- 
other the  fault  which  is  his  own.  No  system  of  thought,  no 
philosophy,  has  so  expressly  and  emphatically  declared  the 
only  real  substance  to  be  the  Supreme  Self  and  Subject,  as 
the  Vedanta.  The  case  of  '  mind '  is  different ;  it  is  the  Self's 
Nature ;  about  which,  later  on.  . 


P.,    CH.   Vl]  RESIDUAL  VALUE    OF    HEGEL  105 

The   substantial  value  of  Hegel  seems  to  be  what  the 

*  popular  '  or  *  general '  mind  has  decided ;  and  the  *  popular  ' 
mind  (because  it  reflects  the  element  of  Truth  in  the  Univer- 
sal Mind,  at  least  as  often  as  that  of  its  Opposite,  Untruth  or 
Falsehood  or  Error,  which  also  is  present  in  the  Universal 
Mind,    by   inevitable   Duality-wi thin- Unity),   has  concluded 
that  the  things  of  permanent  use  in  Hegel  are,  a  fuller  working 
out  of   the   method  of   thesis-antithesis-synthesis  which   he 
borrowed  from  Fichte  ;  that  the  process  of  the  world  means 
that  the  Spirit  goes  out  into  Nature,  as  into  something  other 
than  itself,  and  then  returns  to  itself  with  a  fuller  content  of 
knowledge,  and  fuller  self-consciousness,  as  in  a  *  perfected 
man  ' ;  and  that  every  individual,  as  much  as  the  universe, 
is  a  whole,  a  whole  of  wholes,  a  circle  of  circles.     But  all 
this  has  been  said   by  many  others  also,  in  other  and  some- 
times better  words,  and  needs  completion  by  Vedanta. 

Hegel  says  (Wallace,  The  Logic  of  Hegel,  1st  edn., 
p.  62)  :  "  When  the  notion  of  God  is  apprehended  only  as  that 
of  abstract  or  most  positive  being  [  most  real  being*  in  the 
new  edn.,  of  1892],  God  is,  as  it  were,  relegated  to  another 
world  beyond  ;  and  to  speak  of  a  knowledge  of  him  would  be 
meaningless.  Where  there  is  no  distinction  of  elements 
['  no  definite  quality  ',  in  the  new  edn.]  knowledge  is  impos- 
sible. Mere  light  is  mere  darkness  ".  This  is  not  unintelli- 
gible, though  *  /  am  '  is  knowledge  of  a  sort,  and  without 
any  definite  quality.  And  the  last  two  sentences  show  that 
the  sensationally  and  paradoxically  worded  proposition,  '  Pure 
Being  is  pure  Nothing  ',  is  capable  of  being  understood  into 

*  pure  '  common  sense  ;  as  thus,  when  we  are  day-dreaming,  or 
twiddling  our  thumbs,   and  a  person  asks   *  What  are  you 
doing  ?  ',  and  we  answer  '  Oh  nothing  ',  we  mean  '  Nothing 
particular,  nothing  that  matters,  nothing  worth  while  noting 
or    remembering '.     So,    Hegel's     '  Beginning  *  means    the 
passing  of  that  factor  of  Being  which  belongs  to  Something,  of 
some  particular  Being,  into  Nothing  ;  and  vice  versa ;  other- 
wise, abstract  Being  and  abstract  Nothing  would  be  "  relegated 
to    another  world  beyond,1  like   "  abstract  God ",  and  "  to 
speak  of  a  knowledge  of  them  would  be  meaningless  ".    And 
it     is,    necessarily,    with    some    such    particular  specificate 
determinate  Beginning,  with  some  object  that  has  '  begun ', 


106   CRITERION   OF   COMPLETE    METAPHYSIC   [SC.    OK 

(and  is  also  ending,  is  passing  from  birth  to  death  and  death 
to  birth,  in  the  metabolism  of  a  perpetual  round  of  anabolism- 
katabolism,  necro-biosis,  incessant  integration-disintegration, 
existence-non-existence),  that  ordinary  thinking  (Hegelian 
Perception-Conception-Understanding)  as  well  as  philosophi- 
cal thinking  (those  three  plus  Hegelian  Reason)  also  begin. 
This  thinking,  of  course,  pre-supposes  the  consciousness  of 
the  *  thinker- 1  * ;  which  consciousness  is  vague  in  ordinary 
thinking,  and  clear  in  philosophical ;  and  becomes  full 
(All-)  Self-Consciousness,  as  the  very  climax  of  Reason  (or 
'  Speculation  \  in  Hegelian  terminology). 

-As  Hegel  himself  says  (ibid.) :  "  God  must  be  simply  and 
solely  the  ground  of  every  thing,  and  in  so  far,  not  dependent 
on  anything.  .  .  .  The  demonstration  of  reason  no  doubt 
starts  from  some  thing  which  is  not  God.  But,  as  it  advances, 
it  does  not  leave  the  starting-point  a  mere  unexplained 
fact,  which  is'what  it  was.  On  the  contrary,  it  exhibits 
that  point  as  derivative,  and  called  into  being,  and  then,  God 
is  seen  to  be  primary  and  self -(Self-)  subsisting,  with  the 
means  of  derivation  wrapped  up  and  absorbed  in  himself 
(•Self)  .  .  .  The  original  antecedent  is  reduced  to  a  con- 
sequence". By  such  interpretation,  and  by  bearing  in  mind 
the  implicit  perpetual  assumption  of  Self  by  Hegel,  (the 
failure  to  announce  which,  clearly,  at  the  very  beginning,  can 
only  be  counted  as  a  disastrous  omission),  removes  much 
obscurity.  It  will  be  noticed  by  the  careful  reader,  however, 
that  Hegel  is  only  quietly  copying  Fichte  here,  and  very 
uncouthly  too,  by  substituting  the  much  less  intelligible  third - 
person  term  '  God  '  (somewhere  in  "  another  world  beyond  "), 
for  Fichte's  sun-clear  first-person  term  *  I ',  ever-near,  ever- 
dear,  here,  there,  everywhere.  This  is  a  theme  capable  of 
much  expansion,  requiring  a  sentence  or  more  for  every 
sentence  of  Hegel ;  and  cannot  be  pursued  here  any 
further. 

Hegel's  own  language,  summarised  by  Schwegler,  and 
quoted  above,  (pp.  74-75,  supra)  is  "  The  absolute  .  .  .  returns 
out  of  self-externalisation,  self-alienation,  back  into  its  own 
self,  resolves  the  heterisation  of  nature,  and  becomes,  at  last, 


P.,    CH.  VI]  HEGEL'S   ADMISSION  107 

actual  self-cognisant  spirit,1'  This  seems  to  be  the  "the 
notion,"  "  the  notion  of  the  notion,"  "  the  absolute,"  "  the 
Idea  ",  "  the  Reciprocity  which  is  the  notion  "  which  Stirling 
repeats  ad  nauseam ,  without  once  '  defining '  it '  definitively  ', 
to  the  accompaniment  of  much  dramatic  exuberance,  efferve- 
scence, exclamation,  exultation,  and  attempt  at  exposition. 

Elsewhere,  Hegel  says,  (Wallace,  op.  cit,  p.  289) :  *'  As 
Fichte  was  one  of  the  earliest  among  modern  philosophers 
to  remark,  the  theory  which  regards  the  Absolute  or  God  as 
the  Object  and  nothing  more,  expresses  the  point  of  view 
taken  by  superstition  and  slavish  fear.  .  .  ,  The  salvation 
and  the  happiness  of  men  are  effected  by  bringing  them  to 
feel  themselves  at  one  with  God  .  ,  .  God  in  the  Chris- 
tian religion  is  also  known  as  Love.  In  his  Sow,  who  is 
one  with  him,  he  has  revealed  himself  to  men  as  a 
man  amongst  men,  and  thereby  redeemed  them.  This 
religious  dogma  is  only  another  way  of  saying  that  the 
antithesis  of  subjective  and  objective,  has  been  already  over- 
come, and  that  on  us  lies  the  obligation  of  participating 
in  this  redemption,  by  laying  aside  our  immediate  subjectivity, 
putting  off  the  old  Adam,  and  learning  to  know  God  as  our 
true  and  essential  Self.  And  as  it  is  the  aim  of  religion  and 
religious  worship  to  win  victory  over  this  antithesis  of  sub- 
jectivity and  objectivity,  so  science  and  philosophy  too  have 
no  other  task  than  to  overcome  this  antithesis  by  the  medium 
of  thought.  The  aim  of  knowledge  is  to  ...  trace  the 
objective  world  back  to  the  notion,  back  to  our  innermost 
Self." 

Now,  all  this  is  good  sound  Vedanta,  Gnostic  Mysticism, 
Sufism,  and  the  right  way  to  interpret  religious  dogmas  and 
myths.  And  many  passages  in  Hegel,  and  many  more  in  Fichte, 
read  almost  like  translations  from  the  old  Indian  books; 
especially  does  page  after  page  of  Fichte's  "  The  Vocation  of 
Man ",  breathe  the  very  spirit  of  Gita,  Upanishats,  Yoga- 
Vasishtha.  But  something  more  is  wanted  than  German 
or  other  Western  thinkers  have  said.  So  we  will  take  leave 
of  them  now,  and  pass  to  the  original  ancient  Vedanta, 
where  the  keystone,  the  crown  of  them  all,  is  to  be  found.  ' 


108  THE    FINAL   ANSWER  [SCIENCE   OF 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE  LAST  ANSWER 


YAMA,  Lord  of  Death,  Ruler  of  the  next  Vorld  into  which 
souls  are  '  born  '  after  '  dying  '  out  of  this  ;  than  whom, 
as  Nachiketa  said,  there  could  be  no  better  giver  of 
assurance  against  mortality,  no  truer  teacher  of  the  truth 
of  life  and  death  ;  gives  this  last  answer  :  "  That  which 
all  the  scriptures  ponder  and  repeat  ;  that  which  all  the 
shining,  glowing,  burning,  lights  (ascetic  holy  souls) 
declare  ;  that  for  which  the  pure  ones  follow  Brahma- 
charya,  life  of  virtue,  study,  sacri-fice  to  Brahman  ;  that 
do  I  declare  to  thee  in  brief  —  it  is  AUM."1 

What  is  the  meaning  of  this  mysterious  statement, 
repeated  over  and  over  again  in  a  hundred  ways,  in  all 
Samskrt  literature,  sacred  and  secular  ?  Thus  : 

The  Prashna-Upanishat  says:  "This,  O  Satya- 
kama,  desirer  of  truth,  is  the  higher  and  the  lower 

1  Katha-Upanishat,  I,  ii,  15.  Besides  the  special  significance  of 
AUM,  (pronounced  as  OM)  expounded  here,  one  of  its  ordinary  meanings. 
as  of  its  Arabic  and  English  transformations,  AMIN  and  AMEN,  res- 
pectively. is  'yes,1  'be  it  so*  .  In  G*#J,  the  first  line  of  the  verse  is 
replaced  by, 


'  th,e  Imperishable  One  Whom  the  knowers  of  the  V&Ja  declare,  Whom 
the  passionless  sinless  self  -controllers  merge  themselves'  into.' 


PEACE,   CH.   VII]  ALL-INCLUDING   AUM  109 

Brahman  —  this  that  is  known  as  the  AUM.  Therefore, 
strong-based  in  this  as  his  home  and  central  refuge,  the 
knower  may  reach  out  to  anything  that  he  deems  fit 
to  follow  after,  and  he  shall  surely  obtain  it."  ' 

The  Chhandogya  says  :  "  The  AUM  is  all  this  ;  the 
AUM  is  all  this."  * 

The  Taittinya  says  :  "  AUM  is  Brahma(n)  ;  AUM  is 
all  this."  3 

The  Mcindukya  says  :  "  This,  the  imperishable  AUM, 
is  all  this  ;  the  unfolding  thereof  is  the  past,  the  present, 
and  the  future;  all  is  AUM."  4 

The  Tara-sara  repeats  these  words  of  the  Mandukya, 
and  says  again  :  "  The  AUM  —  this  is  the  imperishable, 
the  supreme,  Brahma(n)  ;  it  alone  should  be  worshipped."5 

Patanjali  says  :  "  The  declarer  of  It  is  the  Praoava  ; 
jap  a-litany  of  it  is  (not  mere  mechanical  repetition  of 
the  sound,  but)  exploring,  discovering,  realising,  its  full 
significance."  6 


OTWR  I  <R  WR  ^  TO 
I  v,  2» 


2  Bffeft  qSfcj  U«1*K  *&$  *      I  Hi  xxiii,  3. 

3 


w- 


I    Yoga-surras,  i,  25.  72. 

va  is  a  name  for  the 
hich  re-wov-ates.  make 
thing,    including   the 


The  word  Pra-nava  is  a  name  for  the  sound  AUM  ;  it  means. 
etymologicaliy,  '  that  which  re-wov-ates.  makes  new.  rejuvenates*  every- 
thin includin  the  mind's  outlook.  It  is  the  life-breath  of  the 


110  THE    MYSTERIOUS   WORD-SOUND  [SC.    OF 

Such  quotations  may  be  multiplied  a  hundredfold. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  these  very  fanciful-sounding 
utterances  ?  Many  profound  and  occult  interpreta- 
tions of  this  triune  sound  have  been  given  expressly 
in  the  Upanishats  themselves,  also  in  Gopatha  Brah- 
mana,  and  in  the  books  on  Tantra  ;  but  the  deepest  and 
most  luminous  of  all  remains  implicit  only.1  For  if  the 
above  seemingly  exaggerated  statements  are  to  be  justified 
in  all  their  fullness,  then,  in  view  of  all  that  has  gone  before, 
AUM  must  include  within  itself,  the  Self,  the  Not-Self, 
and  the  mysterious  Relation  between  them  which  has  not 

universe.  It  has  many  names  in  Samskrt  taraka  ortara,  udgitha, 
sarva-vin-mati,  sarva- j3a-tabi  ja,  pratibha,  etc.  Manyof 
these  have  been  collected,  and  the  special  etymological  significance  of 
each  indicated,  in  my  Samskrt  compilation,  Manava-Dhanna-Sara. 

1  The  reader  may  feel  inconsistency  between  the  decrial  of  '  mystery- 
mongering  '  at  p.  104  supra,  and  the  reverence  shown  for  riddle-like 
scripture-texts  here.  The  differentiating  test  is  in  the  motive.  Where 
there  is  wish  to  swindle,  to  gain  money,  or  '  kudos  '  and  blind  worship, 
or  both,  from  gullible  followers,  there  we  have  the  '  charlatan '.  (It 
arouses  mixed  feelings  to  remember  that  the  '  great  philosopher ' 
Schopenhauer  calls  the  '  great  philosopher  '  Hegel  a  '  charlatan  '  !). 
Where  there  is  affectionate  wish  to  arouse  only  deeper,  more  earnest, 
genuine  curiosity  and  search  for  the  highest  and  most  consoling  Truth, 
as  in  the  case  of  loving  parents  and  teachers,  there  the  temporary 
mysteriousness  is  justified,  nay,  desirable,  or  even  necessary ;  for  the 
too  easily  gained  is  often  not  appreciated,  is  even  equally  easily  thrown 
away  ;  easy  come,  easy  go  '.  In  the  case  of  the  Logion,  here  endeavour- 
ed to  be  expounded,  this  risk  is  really  serious.  Some  will  think, 
'  Mere  tautology,  truism,  trash  !  ' ;  others  '  Only  an  ingenious  juggle 
with  words'.  Pew  will  ponder  sufficiently  deeply  to  realise  its  very 
great  significance.  Therefore  Yama  wished  to  avoid  the  subject, 
when  questioned  by  Nachikita  (p.  1.  supra),  and  told  him,  '  Earnest 
seeker  is  even  rarer  than  wise  teacher ;  very  subtle  and  evasive, 
difficult  to  seize,  because  so  very  simple,  is  the  Truth  ;  marvellous  it  it, 
therefore  the  speaker  of  it  wouders,  and  the  listener  wonders  more '. 
But  times  and  circumstances  change ;  as  explained  in  The  Mahatma 
Letters  and  H.P.  Blavat sky's  writings,  Spiritual  Wisdom  has  itself  to 
go  out,  at  special  junctures  in  human  history,  which  recur  periodically 
and  cyclically,  seeking  worthy  'vessels',  receptacles  for  itself ,  facing 
ridicule  and  rebuffs. 


PEACE,   CH.  VIl]  INTERPRETATION  111 

yet  been  discovered  in  any  of  the  preceding  answers — 
that  mysterious  Relation,  which,  being  discovered,  the 
whole  darkness  will  be  lighted  up  as  by  the  Sun ;  the 
Relation  wherein  will  be  combined  Changelessness  and 
Change.  If  it  does  this,  then  truly  is  the  Indian  tradition 
justified— that  all  knowledge,  all  science,  is  summed  up 
in  the  Vedas,  all  the  V£das  in  the  Gayatri,  and  the 
Gayatrl  in  the  AUM  ;  then  truly  are  all  the  Vedas  and 
all  possible  knowledge  there,  for  all  the  W,orld- Process  is 
there.  The  Self,  the  Not-Self,  and  their  mutual  Relation 
— these  three,  the  Primal  Trinity,  the  root-base  of  all 
possible  trinities,  exhaust  the  whole  of  thought,  the  whole 
of  knowledge,  the  whole  of  the  World- Process.  There  is 
nothing  left  that  is  beyond  and  outside  of  this  Primal 
Trinity,  which,  in  its  Unity,  its  tri-une-ness,  constitutes 
the  Absolute  which  is,  and  wherein  is,  the  Totality  of 
the  World- Process — the  World-Process,  which  is  nothing 
else  than  the  Self  or  Pratyag-atma,  the  Not-Self 
or  Mula-prakrti,  and  their  L 1 1  a  or  Interplay  ;  the 
Three-in-One  constituting  Param-Atma. 

But  how  can  these  three  be  said  to  be  expressed  by 
a  single  word  ?  The  immemorial  custom  of  summing  up 
a  series,  or  of  expressing  a  fact,  in  a  single  letter,  and 
then  of  joining  letters,  thus  significant,  into  a  single  word 
— of  which  many  examples  are  to  be  found  in  the  Upani- 
shats — gives  the  clue  here.1  Each  letter  of  this  word 

1  This  ancient  method  of  expressing  a  profound  truth  by  assigning 
to  each  of  its  factors  a  letter,  and  then  writing  down  the  letters  as  a 
word,  meaningless,  a  mere  sound,  except  for  the  meanings  thus  indicated, 
is  perhaps  not  familiar  to,  and  therefore  may  not  commend  itself  to. 


112  ANAGOGY  [SCIENCE  OF 

must  be  the  expression  of  a  fact,  and  the  juxtaposition 
of  the  letters  must  signify  the  relation  between  the  facts. 

The  first  letter  of  the  sacred  word,  A,  signifies  the 
Self  ;  the  second  letter,  U,  signifies  the  Not-Self;  and 
the  third  letter,  M,  signifies  the  everlasting  Relation,  the 
unbreakable  nexus  —  of  Negation,  by  the  Self,  o/  the  Not- 
Self  —  between  them. 

According  to  this  interpretation  of  the  AUM,  the  full 
meaning  of  it,  would  be  the  proposition,  Ego—  Non-Ego 
—  Non  (est)9  or  I  —  Not-  1  —  Not  (am),  which  sums  up  all 
the  three  factors  of  the  World-Process  into  a  single  pro- 
position and  a  Single  Act  of  Consciousness. 

A  plain  example  of  this  method  occurs  in  the  Chhan- 
dogya*  :  "  The  name  of  Brahman  is  Truth,  or  the  True, 
sat  yam,  which  consists  of  three  letters,  sa,  ti,  and 
yam.Sa  is  the  Unperishing  ;  Ti  is  the  Perishing; 
Yam  holds,  binds,  Relates  the  two  together."  The 

modern  thought.  These  *  mystic  words,  '  of  which  so  many  are  found  in 
ancient  writings,  and,  later,  in  Gnostic  and  Kabbalistic  works,  are  regard- 
ed as  jargon  by  the  modern  mind.  Yet  in  these  same  words,  ancient 
wisdom  has  imbedded  its  profoundest  conceptions,  and  AUM  is  just 
such  a  word.  The  method  is-  known  as  akshara-mushti  or  akshara- 
mudra,  '  handful  '  or  *  diagram-seal  '  of  letters.  (World-  War  II  began 
in  Sept.  1939  in  Europe,  and  closed  there  in  May  1945.  with  the 
surrender  of  Germany  ;  it  began  in  Asia  in  Dec.  1941,  and  closed  in 
Aug.  -Sep.  1945,  with  the  surrender  of  Japan  ;  it  has  created  scores  of 
such  code-words,  temporarily  ;  thus,  USOWI  means  t/nited  States  Office 
of  War  /information).  But  OM  as  pure  humming  sound  also,  has  deep 
significance  ;  it  is  the  primal  sound-continuum  of  Nature,  the  first 
garment  of  God,  the  first  sensuous  manifestation  of  the  Self  ;  it  is 
probably  what  is  meant  by  '  the  Word  ',  in  the  Christian  Bible,  where 
it  says  that  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with 
God,  and  the  Word  was  God  ". 


i  srfa  5  9flr  t^rrft  sftfa  si^KFfa,  *r,  fct, 
«w  ^Ri^f  aSff^f  i 

VIII.  iii,  5, 


P.,  CH.  VIl]  THE  FALSE  ENCIRCLED  BY  THE  TRUE  113 

'  unperishing  '  here  means  nothing  else  than  the  unlimited 
universal  Self,  Pratyag-  atma;  the  'perishing'  is  the 
endlessly  perishing,  ever-renewed  and  ever-dying,  ever- 
limited  Not-Self  or  M  ula-prakrt  i  ;  the  nexus,  that 
which  holds  and  binds  the  two  together,  is  the  unending 
relation  of  Negation  by  the  One  of  the  Many-Other,  in 
which  Relation,  the  two  are  constantly  and  inseparably 
tied  to  each  other,  in  such  a  way  that  the  two  together 
make  only  the  '  number-less  '  Absolute,  in  which  the 
three,  two,  and  even  one,  all  disappear  in  the  number- 
transcending  and  all-number-containing  circle  of  the 
cipher. 

A  similar  statement,  again  using  almost  the  same 
words,  is  made  in  the  Brhad-Aranyaka.1  "  Truth, 
s  a  t  y  a  m,  verily  is  Brahman.  .  .  .  The  gods  contemplate 
and  worship  the  truth,  sat  yam,  only.  Three-lettered  is 
this  sat  yam;  sa  is  one  letter,  ti  is  one  letter,  and 
yam  is  one  letter.  The  first  and  the  last  letters, 
im  perishables,  are  true  ;  in  the  middle  is  the  false  and 
fleeting.  The  False  is  encompassed  round  on  both  sides 
by  the  True.  The  True  is  the  more,  the  greater,  the  pre- 
vailing. He  that  knoweth  this  —  he  may  not  be  over- 
powered by  the  False."  Here  sa,  the  first  truth,  is  Being; 
and  yam,  the  second  truth,  is  Nothing,  for  both  are 


tin  TO  i 


i  v,  v,  i. 


114  HOW   KNOW   ALL   AT    ONCE  ?  [SC.   OF 

imperishable  ;  the  middle  is  Becoming,  the  ever-fleeting 
and  ever-false.  In  other  words,  the  Self  is  reality  ;  the 
Negation,  of  the  Not-Self  by  the  Self,  is  also  reality  ; 
the  Not-Self  is  not  reality,  it  is  only  appearance, 
illusion. 

The  Devl-Bhagavata  says  l  :  "  Why,  by  what  means, 
from   what  substance,   has  all   this  world  arisen  ?  How 


I    I.  xv,  51-52. 
And  again  : 


I    VII,  xxxii,  2. 


"*I*(alone  was,  in  the  beginning)-Not-  Another  (i.e.,  no-thing-else,, 
O  Lord  of  Mountains  \)  '  —  such  is  the  form  or  nature  of  the  Self*  which 
is  called  Consciousness  or  Para-Brahma." 

The  Vishnu-Bhagavata  (commonly  known  as  Shrimad  Bhagavata, 
Ot  simply  as  Bhagavata)  also  has  some  verses  in  almost  the  same  words  : 


The  orthodox  commentator,  it  is  true,  explains  this  as  meaning  : 
'  I  alone  was  in  the  prime  of  time,  and  nothing  else,  neither  the 
existent,  nor  the  non-existent,  nor  even  Prakrit  which  is  beyond  both  ; 
I  was  afterwards  also,  and  I  am  all  this,  and  what  remains  behind,  that 
also  am  I/  But  the  preceding  and  succeeding  verses,  saying  :  "This 
is  the  deepest  and  the  highest  secret,  g  u  h  y  a  and  r  a  h  a  s  y  a  ;  knowing 
it  you  will  not  fail  in  spirit  throughout  the  ages,"  seem  to  permit  of 
a  more  '  secret  '  meaning  and  unusual  interpretation,  thus  :  '  I-(alone  was 
in  the  beginning)  -not-another  (which  might  be  existent  or  non-existent 
or  other  than  both)  ;  in  the  end  also  I  ;  i.e.,  after  that  which  is  known  as 


P.,  CH.  VIl]    ONE  SENTENCE  WHICH  SUMS  UP  ALL    115 

may  I  know  all  at  once,  by  a  single  act  of  knowledge  ?  — 
Thus  Mukunda-  Vishnu  pondered  within  himself,  in  the 
beginning.  Unto  him  that  sovereign  Deity,  Bhagavati, 
uttered  that  which  giveth  all  explanations  in  a  single 
half-verse,  viz.  :  *  I,  Not  Another,  is  (i.e.9  am)  alone  verily 
this  eternal  all.'  "  This,  it  seems,  is  the  plainest  state- 
ment available  in  the  Purana  literature,  after  the  V6da, 
in  which  an  endeavour  is  expressly  made  to  sum  up  the 
World-Process  in  a  siugle  sentence. 

The  Yoga  Vasishtha  says1  :  "  I,  pure  consciousness, 
subtler  than  space,  am  not  anything  limited  —  such  is  the 

This  has  been  negated,  that  which  remains,  that  am  1."  Elsewhere,  the 
work  repeats  ; 


^3"  I   VI«  iv»  47*  The  same  JPtMiftfMif 

repeatedly  describes  the  Supreme  in  phrases  or  by  epithets  which  find  their 
full  significance  only  in  the  Logion  expounded  here,  thus  : 


*  the  Self  whose  character  is  *  the  not-many  consciousness  *.f 
III.  v,  23  ;  or  33^351  cl^%3s  3Rr3y^  ^W[  I  '  It  is  Brahma(n),  It  is  the 
Supreme  Cause,  the  One,  the  Not-Another,'  VI,  iv,  30;  or  g^i 
3*TT,  'the  Supreme  whose  form  is  not-This,'  X,  ii.  42:  or 
•  •  ^^l  3f«M^3F3K£,  'Thou  art  the  ever  wantless, 
changeless  Brahma(n),  Not-Another,  Other-than-all-This,'  VIII.  xii,  7. 


Nirvana-prakarana.  Purvardha.  cxviii,  9. 

The  Antibhuti-prakasha-sar-oddhara  has  also  a  shloka  (157)  which 
describes  Brahman  as  a  n  -  i  d  a  m,  Not-This  : 


116  CONSENSUS   OF   OLD   TEXTS  [SC.   OF 

eternal  buddhi  (idea)  that  freeth  from  the  bonds  of 
samsara,  the  World-  Process." 

The  Yoga  and  Sankhya  systems  describe  the  sup- 
reme consciousness  of  K6vala-ta,  Kaivalyam,  Sole- 
ness,  One-ness,  L-one-(li)-ness,  On(e)li-ness,  (their  word 
for  moksha),  as  being  of  the  nature  of  the  awareness 
that  Purusha  (the  Self)  is  other-  than-sattva  (i.e., 
Prakrti,  sattva  being  the  finest  representative  thereof).1 

The  *  great  hymn  '  addresses  the  Supreme  thus  :  * 

*  Thou  whom  the  dazzled  scripture  doth  describe 
As  being  Negation  of  what  Thou  art  Not.' 

Glta  also  has  a  verse  which  may  be  literally  trans- 
lated :  *  Than  the  /  anything  Other  is  Not  ;  in  the  /  is 
all  This  woven,  as  gems  are  strung  on  a  thread.'  s 

Put  into  one  sentence,  such  descriptions  can  take  no 
other  form  than  that  of  the  logion,  Ego-Non-Ego-Non 
(sum).4 

Such  are  a  few  of  the  utterances  of  sacred  literature 
that  at  once  become  lighted  up  when  the  light  of  this 

'An-I4  an*.  Not-  This,  has  been  declared  to  be  the  form,  the 
nature,  of  Brahman.  Such  is  the  name  of  that  which  is  Nameless. 
Such  is  verily  the  truth.  So  have  we  heard/ 


:  or 

i,  verse  2. 


i  sifrd,  33  irfiwr  &  i  va.  7. 

4  More  texts  are  gathered  together  in  a  Note  at  the  end 
of  this  chapter. 


P.,   CH.   VIl]    ITS   LIVING   COMPREHENSIVENESS        117 

summation  is  brought  to  bear  on  them.  Thus  does 
the  Pranava,  the  AUM,  the  sacred  word,  embody  in 
itself  the  universe  ;  thus  does  it  include  all  previous  ten- 
tative summations  ;  thus  is  it  the  very  heart  and  essence 
of  the  scriptures  ;  so  only  is  the  tradition  justified  that 
all  the  universe  is  in  the  Pranava.  Herein  we  find  that 
what  before  were  the  parts  of  a  machine,  apart  and 
dead,  are  now  assembled,  powerful,  and  active  as  an 
organism.  Herein  we  find  the  two  great  scripture-texts 
combined  into  one  statement,  that  gives  a  new  and  all- 
satisfying  significance  to  them.  Herein  we  see  all 
Hegel,  and  far  more;  and  the  three  propositions  of 
Fichte  compressed  into  one,  which  is  a  re-arrangement 
of  his  second.1 


l.See  p.  85,  supra.  sift  3?T.  Brhaf  Up.  1-4-10  ;  5?  ?f 

^T,  4.4.19  ;  Katha.  4.11.  See  also  p.  47  supra.  "  It  is  difficult 
to  find  a  single  speculation  in  western  metaphysics  which  has  not  been 
anticipated  by  archaic  eastern  philosophy.  From  Kant  to  Herbert  Spencer. 
it  is  all  a  more  or  less  distorted  echo  of  the  Dvaita,  Advaita,  and  V£dantic 
doctrines  generally  "  ;  H.P.B.  The  Secret  Doctrine,  I.  49. 

A  western  writer  says  that  Hegel  was  '  '  the  first  who  succeeded  in 
making  the  history  of  philosophy  intelligible,  by  showing  that  it  is  not 
a  mere  succession  of  conflicting  opinions,  but  a  gradual  unfolding  of 
more  and  more  comprehensive  interpretations  of  reality  ".  '  First  in  the 
west  '  —  we  should  add  ;  in  the  east,  the  Puranas,  several  thousand  years 
before  Hegel,  (and  now  The  Secret  Doctrine),  have  made  the  history  of 
philosophy,  and  the  philosophy  of  history  also,  intelligible,  and  far  more 
intelligible.  But  Hegel's  eloquent,  and  true,  sentences,  on  the  subject, 
deserve  to  be  quoted,  as  pertinent  to  the  text.  "  Firstly  every  philosophy 
that  deserves  the  name,  always  has  the  Idea  "  (we  may  say,  '  the  Divine 
Plan',  'the  Logion1,  M  ah  a-  v  aky  a,  the  Scheme  of  the  World- 
Process  in  the  Universal  Mind)  "  for  its  subject-matter  or  contents;  and 
secondly,  every  system  should  represent  to  us  one  particular  factor  or 
particular  stage  in  the  evolution"  (manifestation)"  of  the  Idea.  The 
refutation  of  a  philosophy,  therefore,  only  means  that  its  limits  are 
passed  and  that  the  fixed  principles  in  it  have  been  reduced  ,  in  it  to  an 


118  PANTHEON   OF   PHILOSOPHIES          [SC.   OF 

And  it  is  not  only  a  rearrangement  of  it,  though 
that  is  important  enough,  but  more.  If  the  statement 
that  "  Being  is  Nothing  "  is  not  only  external  to  us  but 
unintelligible  and  self-contradictory,  the  statement  that 
"  Ego  is  not  Non-Ego  "  is  not  yet  quite  internal,  though 
certainly  consistent  and  intelligible.  It  does  not  yet 
quite  come  home  to  us.  The  verb  'is,1  and  the  order  of 
the  words  in  the  sentence,  make  us  feel  that  the  state- 
ment embodies  a  cut-and-dried  fact  in  which  there  is  no 
movement,  and  which  is  there,  before  us,  but  away  from 
us,  not  in  us.  The  negative  '  not '  entirely  overpowers 
the  affirmative  *  is/  and  appropriates  all  the  possibility  of 
significance  to  itself,  so  that  the  rhythmic  swing  between 
the  Ego  and  the  Non-Ego,  between  us  and  our  surround- 
ings, which  would  be  gained  by  emphasising  and  bring- 
ing out  t;he  force  of  the  affirmative  *  is  '  also,  is  entirely 

organic  element  in  the  completer  principle  that  follows.  Thus  the 
history  of  philosophy,  in  its  true  meaning,  deals,  not  with  the  past,  but 
with  the  eternal  and  the  veritable  present ;  and  in  its  results,  resembles 
not  a  museum  of  the  aberrations  of  the  human  intellect,  but  a  pantheon 
of  god-like  figures.  These  figures  are  the  various  stages  "  (factors)  "  of 
the  Idea,  as  they  come  forward  one  after  another  in  dialectical  develop- 
ment*1 (cyclic  manifestation) :  Wallace,  Logic  of  Hegel,  1st.  edn.,  pp. 
135-137.  We  have  only  to  add  that  all  these  '  interpretations  of  reality  ', 
*  philosophies  '  '  god-like  figures  '  fall  under  one  or  another  of  the  three 
main  ones:  arambha.  paripama,  adhyasa  orvivarta,  cor* 
responding  to  •  Dvaita,  Vishisht-atjvaita,  Acjvaita ;  or  theism  '(deism), 
dualism,  (monistic)  non-dualism;  or  the  theories  of  popular,  scientific, 
metaphysical  causation;  or  (substantial)  realism,  (materio-energic) 
transformationism,  (ideational  or  imaginative)  illusionism.  '  Ab-err- 
ations  of  the  intellect '  also,  have  their  necessary  place  among  these  as 
'  self-alienating  '  materialism,  a-vidya.  And  philosophy —in  corres- 
pondence with  the  World-Process,  Universal  Mind,  Cosmic  History— is 
always  treading  the  cyclic  round  of  the  same  three,  in  ever  new  words 
*nd  settings  and  surroundings,  ever  fresh  morning-noon-evening,  simple 
childhood,  complex  middle  age,  and  sage  eld.  All  Evolution  is  such, 
biological  as  well  as  psychological;  forward,  then  backward,  then 
further  forward.  • 


P.,   CH.  VIl]  'IS'   MEANS  '  AM  '  119 

hidden  out  of  sight,  and  only  a  bare,  dead,  negation  is 
left.  But  now  we  change  the  order  of  the  words  ;  and 
the  spirit  of  the  old  languages,  the  natural  law  underlying 
their  construction,  comes  to  our  help.  We  place  the 
Ego  and  the  Non-Ego  in  juxtaposition,  and  an  affirmative 
Relation  appears  between  them  first,  to  be  followed 
afterwards  by  the  development  of  the  negative  Relation, 
in  consequence  of  the  negative  particle.  And,  more  than 
this,  we  replace  the  '  is  '  by  '  am,'  the  '  est '  by  '  sum,9 
as  we  have  every  right  to  do  ;  for,  in  connection  with  the 
Self,  with  I,  A  h  a  m  ,  *  is  '  has  no  other  sense  than 
'am';  and  in  place  of  Non-Ego,  An -ah  am,  we 
substitute  '  This,'  Etat,  for  we  have  seen  their  equiva- 
lence before  '  and  will  do  so  again  later,  in  the  section 
on  Mula-Prakrti.  Our  logion  therefore  now  runs  as 
"Aham  Etat  Na,"  *  "I  This  Not  (am)".  In  the 
Samskrt  form  the  word  corresponding  to  '  am,'  trig., 
a  s  m  i ,  is  not  needed  at  all,  for  it  is  thoroughly 
implied  and  understood.  But  as  soon  as  we  have 
the  logion  in  this  new  form,  "  Aham  Etat  Na,"  we 
see  that  there  is  a  whole  world  more  of  significance 
in  it  than  the  dry  statement  of  the  logical  law  of  con* 
tradiction,  "  A  is  not  not-A,"  "  Ego  is  not  Non-Ego ". 
It  is  no  longer  a  mere  formal  logical  law  of  thought ; 
it  is  Transcendental  Log-ic,  Supreme  all-comprehending 
Law  of  all  Being ;  Thought  which  is  identical  with 
All  Reality.  The  one  law  of  all  laws,  the  pulse  of 

1  Ch.  IV.  p.  38,  Supra, 

3 


120  JOY   OF   FINDING  [SC.   OF 

the  World-Process,  the  very  heart-beat  of  all  life  is 
here,  now.  The  rhythm  between  the  Self  and  the  Not- 
Self,  their  coming  together  and  going  apart,  the  essence 
of  all  Change,  is  expressed  by  it,  when  we  take  it  in  two 
parts ;  and  yet,  when  we  take  the  three  constituents  of  it 
at  once,  it  expresses  Changelessness  also. 

As  a  man  seeking  for  the  vale  of  happiness,  may  toil 
for  days  and  nights  through  a  maze  of  mountain-ranges, 
and  come  at  last  to  a  dead  wall  of  rock,  and  find  himself 
despairing,  and  a  sudden  casual  push  of  the  arm  may 
move  aside  a  bush,  or  a  slab  of  stone,  and  disclose  a 
passage  through  which  he  may  rush  eagerly  to  the  top  of 
the  highest  peak,  wondering  how  he  had  failed  to  see  it 
all  this  while — it  looks  so  unmistakable  now — and  may 
behold,  spread  clear  and  still  before  him,  the  panorama  of 
the  scenes,  of  his  toilsome  journey,  on  the  one  side,  com- 
pleted and  finished  by  the  scenes  of  that  happy  vale  of 
smiling  flowers  and  fruits  and  crystal  waters,  on  the  other 
—such  is  the  finding  of  this  great  summation.  All  the 
problems  that  bewildered  him  before,  now  receive  easy 
solution,  and  many  statements  that  puzzled  him  formerly, 
in  the  scriptural  literature  of  the  nations,  begin  to  be- 
come intelligible. 

After  finding  the  truth  of  this  great  logion  for  him- 
self, the  enquirer  will  find  confirmation  of  it  everywhere 
in  the  old  books,  as  well  as  in  the  world  around  him. 

NOTE  I. — It  should  be  noted  here  that  the  references  to 
the  Upanishats,  Puranas,  etc.,  are  not  made  with  any  idea  of 
supporting  the  logion  by  "appeals  to  scripture '.  Rather,  the 


P.,   CH.   VII]      NO   '  APPEALS   TO    SCRIPTURE  '  121 

intention  is  to  suggest  a  new  way  of  working  with  the  sacred 
books,  which  may  be  of  use  to  some  readers  ;  for  few  will 
doubt  that  it  is  a  great  joy  to  find  that  what  is  dear  to 
us  has  been  and  is  dear  to  others  too.  Whether  any 
definite  proofs  will  or  will  not  be  found  by  experts  and 
scholars,  that  the  logion  was  really  meant  by  the  AUM,  to  the 
ancients,  does  not  affect  its  importance  as  an  explanation  and 
summation  of  the  World  -Process.  The  logion  came  to  the 
present  writer  first  in  1887,  as  the  needed  explanation  of  the 
universe,  in  the  course  of  his  studies  in  Indian  and  Western 
philosophy.  He  then  endeavoured  to  find  confirmation  of  it 
in  Samskrt  works,  but  vainly,  for  thirteen  years.  Till  the 
summer  of  1900,  when  these  chapters  were  first  drafted,  it 
remained  for  him  only  a  guess  and  a  possibility  that  the  AUM 
meant  the  logion.  This  guess  was  justified,  for  him,  in  the 
autumn  of  1900,  in  a  most  remarkable  manner,  the  story  of 
which  has  now  been  told  in  the  Preface  to  The  Science  of  the 
Sacred  Word,  a  summarised  English  version  of  the  Praqava- 
Vada  oj  Gargyayaqa,  the  three  volumes  of  which  were  pub- 
lished respectively  in  1910,  1911  and  1913,  while  the  first 
edition  of  The  Science  of  Peace  was  published  in  1904. 
As  to  whether  that  *  remarkable  manner  *  will  prove  con- 
vincing to  others,  is  for  the  future  to  decide.  In  the  mean- 
while, it  should  be  repeated  here  that  the  logion  should  be 
judged  on  its  own  merits,  and  that  the  main  purpose  of 
quotiing  from  the  Upanishajs,  etc.,  is  to  help  on  the  thought 
of  the  reader,  by  placing  before  him  the  thought,  embodied  in 
those  quotations,  as  at  least  working  in  the  direction  of  the 
logion.  To  those  interested  in  the  method  of  thinking  out- 
lined here,  the  work  will  serve  as  an  introduction  to  the 
Pranava-vada>  where  they  will  find  many  illuminative  details. 

NOTE  II.  —  In  view  of  the  vital  importance  of  the  Logion 
as  well  as  the  strange-ness  of  it,  some  more  texts  are  recorded 
below,  in  support. 


Wf  fft:  SR  ^f  5Rnpft  SMRWRt  cfcf: 

^r:  s5 

Vishnu  Puraqa,  1.  22.  86. 


122  MORE   ANCIENT   TEXTS  [SC.   OF 

Literal  translation  would  be  :  '  /,  Hari,  all,  this,  Janar- 
dana,  not,  other,  from  which,  cause-effect-product,  (mass, 
multitude)  —  such,  mind,  whose,  not,  his,  (i.e.,  to  him),  any 
more,  Becoming-born  (i.e.9  world-born),  pair-ills,  happen  '.  The 
current  commentary  by  Ratna-garbha  summarily  explains 
this  as,  *  From  the  understanding  that  Vishnu  (Hari,  Janar- 
dana)  is  all  the  world,  there  results  cessation  of  samsara 
(process  of  births  and  deaths)  '.  If  the  reader  is  satisfied 
with  this,  well  and  good  ;  if  not,  then  he  may  give  special 
attention  to  the  words  '  I  ',  '  This  ',  *  Not  Other  ',  and  arrange 
the  sentence  (as  he  can,  without  any  violation  of  Skf  .  gram- 
mar) thus  :  *  /  not  thts-Other  (is  the  Supreme  Conscious- 
ness or  Idea),  from  which  (and  in  which,  arises  and  proceeds 
all)  the  mass  and  multitude  of  causes  and  effects  (which 
constitutes  the  World  -Process)  —  he  whose  mind  is  (become 
identified  with)  such  (Consciousness),  for  him  there  are  no 
more  any  (mental)  ills  produced  by  the  countless  pairs  of 
opposites  that  are  born  from  (and  make  up  the  World-Process 
of)  Becoming;  (such)  7  (is)  Hari  (har-vatiduhkham 
i  t  i  Harih,  who  destroys  all  sorrow),  and  Jan-ardana 
(janam  ardayati,  ends  all  rebirth).'  Opposites  conflict  ; 
conflict  distresses  ;  as  Buddha  said  in  his  first  sermon,  on 
the  Four  Great  Truths,  "  To  meet  what  we  dislike,  causes 
misery  ;  to  lose  what  we  like  causes  misery  ".  Conflict  of 
dual,  polar  pairs,  is  the  root  of  all  misery,  K  1  e  s  h  a. 


I  Bhagavata,  11.  13.  22-24. 


Op.  cit.  2.  2.  27  ;  also  Chhandogya,  8.  4.  L 

('The  Self  is  Not-Many')  Not-Many-ness  is  the  Self  s 
.  .  .  Only  /-Not-Other-than-I  —  understand  this  well.  .  .  . 
There  is  no  sorrow,  no  age-ing  decay,  no  death,  (i.e.,  no  fear 
of  these),  in  the  heart,  c  h  i  1  1  a  ,  of  those  who,  by  the  bless- 
ing of  the  Self,  have  realised  (the  Self  as)  Not-This  '. 


1'.,   CH.  VII]  STATING   THE   LOGION  123 


Chhandogya,  7.  23.  1  ;  7.  24.  1. 

4  There  is  no  Joy  in  the  (or  in  being  and  feeling)  small  ; 
only  (the  feel  of)  Utmost  Greatness,  B  h  u  m  a  ,  is  Bliss. 
Where  (and  when,  the  Self)  sees  Not-Another,  hears  Not- 
Another,  knows  No-Other  (than  It-Self),  that  is  B  h  u  m  a  , 
Maximus  Ultimus,  (In-fini-ty  beyond  compare).  Where 
(the  small  individualised  personalised  Self)  sees,  hears,  knows, 
An-Other,  (feels  that  there  is  An-Other,  that  there  are  Others, 
than  it-Self,  which  is  and  are  independent  of  it  and  limit  it, 
hem  it  in,  on  all  sides),  that  is  (the  feeling  of  being)  small, 
(the  finite).  In-fini-tude,  Bhuma,  is  Im-mortality  ;  the 
small  (the  limited)  is  mortal.' 

IT  w  3ft  wrt       ^ffir^f:  i  s 


I  Brhad,  1,  4.  1-2. 

1  The  Self  al-one  was,  (and  was  aware  of  It-Self  even) 
as  a  man,  puru-sha,  person  (is,  and  is  aware).  It  looked 
round.  It  saw  None-Other-than-Self.  It  said  /  am  I  Its 
name  therefore  became  Ah-am.  It  thought  Non-Else-than-I 
(is  there).' 

Let  the  reader  carefully  consider  the  meaning  in  the 
Glta,  of  3flt-3F3r-%c!r:  (8.  14),  aRKTOT  (8.  22  ;  11.  54),  3R?q- 

we:  (9.  is),  sR^r:  (9.  22),  3R5*HTT^(9.  so),  3R5$*  (12.  6), 

3fflF*Hltfta  (13.  10).  Of  course  there  is  the  prima 
facie  simple  devotional  meaning,  *  whole-hearted  devotion  to 
Krshna  only  and  no  other  '.  For  the  temperaments  which 
are  content  with  this,  and  seek  no  further,  there  is  nothing 
more  to  say.  For  the  unsatisfied  and  further-enquiring  spirits, 
there  is  the  other  meaning  also,  beneath  the  surface,  implying 
the  Logion.  Let  the  reader  reflect  carefully  whether  this 
latter  brings  any  special  comfort  to  his  questioning,  arguing, 
intellect,  his  head,  as  well  as  to  his  (partly  selfish  and  partly 
unselfish)  heart. 


124  PUZZLE-WORDS    OF    AN    UPANISHAT         [SC.    OF 

Let  the  reader  similarly  dwell   upon   the  puzzle-words 
of  the  Katha  Upanishat, 

I  2.  8,  and 

I  2.  20. 


Shankaracharya,  in  his  Bhashya,  gives  three  or  even  four 
alternative  and  doubting  explanations  of  the  first  sentence  ;  he 
reads  it  with  ??%:,  and  again  with  swflf:.  After  pondering  on 

those,  let  the  reader  endeavour  to  see  if  the  following  inter- 
pretation throws  any  light  into  the  obscurity  :  '  It  is  not  un- 
approachable, not  inapprehensible  —  that  Supreme  Mystery, 
subtler  than  the  subtlest  atom  ;  if  It  be  described  by  (or  as) 
Not-  Another  '.  Our-Self  must  apprehend  the  Self  ;  It  must  be 
seen  with  one's  own  eyes,  not-with-another's  ;  and  It  must  be 
apprehended  as  I-Not-Another.  Shankara's  plain,  simple, 
straightforward  explanation  of  the  second  sentence  is,  '  Who 
other  than  I  (Yama,  who  am  instructing  you,  Nachik6Ja)  is 
of  sufficiently  subtle  intelligence,  to  know  that  God,  D  €  v  a  , 
who  is  the  reservoir  of  all  contradictions,  who  is  M  a  d  a  , 
Elation,  Pride,  Joy,  as  well  as  a-  M  a  da,  Non-elation,  De- 
pression, Sorrow,  both  at  once  ?  !  '  Such  a  claim,  such  a  chal- 
lenge, seems  to  imply  lack  of  due  modesty,  and  plenitude  of 
undue  aggressiveness,  which  are  not  worthy  of  a  teacher  of 
Vedanta  !  One  expects  such  to  be  benevolent  and  reverend  ! 
Yama  could  scarcely  have  been  so  conceited  when  dealing 
with  such  a  solemn  subject  !  (It  must  be  admitted,  though, 
that  some  of  the  teachers  of  Brahma-vidya,  in  the  Upanishats, 
behave  very  vulgarly  and  rudely,  e.g.j  Raikva  of  the  cart  '  ; 
and  Yajna-valkya,  in  particular  —  by  the  descriptions  of  his 
doings  in  the,  Upanishats  as  well  as  the  Puraijas,  which  des- 
criptions cannot  be  explained  '  mystically  '  —  was  a  very 
aggressive  and  now  and  there  even  criminal  person,  though,  no 
doubt,  of  great  intellectual  power  and  influence.  Yoga- 
Bhashya  and  Bhagavata  and  other  Puranas  tell  us  that 
remnants  of  rajas-tamas  persist  for  some  time  even  after 
the  vision  of  the  all-embracing  Self.  Even  after  the  supply 
of  fuel  has  been  cut  off,  embers  continue  to  smoulder  for 
some  time.  This  is  plain  psychology  ;  nothing  mysterious  ; 
so  long  as  the  body  lasts,  the  wisest  and  most  self  -controlled 


P.,   CH.   VIl]          ALLEGORIES   AND   '  BLINDS  '  125 

sage  remains  liable  to  fits  of  passion).  Let  us  translate  this 
second  sentence  as  follows:  *  Who  Else-  than  -I  can  know 
that  God  who  is  Mat  (I)—  A-(Not)—  A-Mat  (Not-I)  ;  how 
otherwise  than  as  I-Not-Another  can  that  God  be  known  ?  ' 
The  very  out-of-place  pugnacious  challenge  becomes  trans- 
formed into  the  declaration  of  a  profound  truth. 

H.  P.  Blavatsky's  The  Secret  Doctrine  throws  precious 
light  into  the  dense  darkness  of  many  '  allegories  *  and 
4  blinds  '  of  the  V6das  and  Puranas,  and  also  of  the  scriptures 
of  other  dead  and  living  religions.  She  has  indicated  (op.  cit. 
I,  314-315;  V,  371,  etc.,  and  in  her  other  great  work,  Isis 
Unveiled,  and  other  writings  also)  that  the  works  now  going 
under  the  name  of  Shankara  are  not  all  written  by  the  original 
first  or  Adi  Shankara-acharya  !  ;  that  much  '  sacred  writing  ' 
on  '  occult  *  subjects  has  been  withdrawn  and  hidden  away, 
for  historical  reasons,  by  the  custodians  of  m  a  t  h  a  -  s 
(abbeys,  convents)  ;  that  new  compositions  have  been  sub- 
stituted by  later  Shankar-acharyas  (the  name  has  become  the 
official  designation  of  all  the  successive  heads  of  a  number  of 
math  a-s,  like  '  Pope  ')  ;  and  that  even  in  the  genuine  writ- 
ings, '  blinds  '  are  often  used  to  mystify  the  in-alert  student, 
who  is  not  in  deadly  earnest,  is  therefore  easily  thrown  off  the 
scent,  does  not  question  persistently,  and  even  gives  up  the 
study  in  disgust  as  worthless  twaddle. 

Let  us  pass  on  to  other  texts. 
3Tf  ^  5^  l-Sp^Rt  I  Varaha  Upanishat,  ii,  7. 

*  /  al-one  (am  and  is)  bliss,  Not  -Another  '. 
flt  3TS  <ref  if  ^  3?wjt  arftc!  t    Maha-bhnrata,   Anu-shasana- 
parva,  ch.  168. 

'  That  /  on(e)-ly  (is  and  am),  there  is  Not  -Another 
than  I  '. 

In  terms  of  3^c£  ,  there  is  a  very  curious  and  remarkable, 
riddling,  jingling,  alliterative,  abracadabra-like  aphorism,  in 
the  Nyaya-Sufra-s  : 

:  I.  2.  2.  30. 


1  The  Secret  Doctrine  says  that  the  first  Shankar-acharya  appeared 
eighty  years  after  Buddha's  dis  appearance.  The  list  of  successors  main- 
tained  at  the  Sharacja-Pitham  a  t  ha  of  Dvaraka  (Gujerat)  supports  this. 


126  RIDDLING   iVytfya-APHORISM  [SC.   OF 

The  context,  in  which  this  is  set  down,  is  a  discussion  as  to 
whether  'sound'  is  nitya,  eternal,  or  a-ni$ya,non- 
eternal,  temporal  ;  and  the  authoritative  commentary,  Vatsya- 
yana's  Bh&shya,  tries  to  explain  it  very  briefly  in  relevance 
to  the  context  ;  but  the  obscurity  is  not  lighted  up,  at  least 
for  the  present  writer.  Another  interpretation  is  therefore 
suggested  here,  after  putting  a  semi-colon  after  the  first 
two  words,  and  another  after  the  next  two  :  '  (The  Self  is) 
Other  -Than-Other,  (i.e.,  the  Self  is  Self  alone,  is  not  anything 
other  than  It-Self)  ;  because  there  is  No-Other-Than-It, 
therefore  is  It  (describable  as)  Not-Another  ;  thus,  there  is 
Negation  of  Otherness  (i.e,  the  Self  is  Negation  of  all  Other- 
than-Self)  '.  In  other  words,  the  Self  is  '  I-this-Not  '.  Com- 
pare this  with  a  literal  word  for  word  translation  :  '  Another, 
than  another,  because  of  not-other-ness,  Not-another,  such, 
absence  of  other-  ness  '  ;  or,  if  we  read  the  last  word  as,  not 
a  -  b  h  a  v  a  but,  b  h  a  v  a,  then,  in  the  translation,  the  last 
three  words  would  read  '  presence  or  being  or  existence  of 
other-ness  '. 

The  Mandukya-kanka-s  are  100  verses  by  Gauda-pada. 
They  expound  the  meaning  of  the  Mandukya  Upanishat. 
Gauda-pada  was  the  guru  of  Govinda,  who  was  the  guru 
of  the  ShankarS-charya,  (seventh  or  eighth  century  A.  C.) 
whose  Bhashyas  on  the  Karikft-s  etc.  are  current.  The  last 
two  verses  belong,  it  seems,  to  the  same  class  of  '  mystical  ' 
xitterances  as  the  texts  above  dealt  with.  They  are 


PR 
SIR  1  -*pnr  flft 


99-100. 

Word-for-word  translation  is  :  'Steps  (proceeds,  moves  succes- 
sively step  after  step),  not,  Buddha's  knowledge,  in  (or  amidst) 
d  h  a  r  m  a-s  (functions,  attributes,  properties,  qualities),  Tayi's, 
all,  d  h  a  r  m  a  -  s,  also,  knowledge,  Not,  this,  by  Buddha,  saidv 
Difficult  to  see,  very  profound,  unborn,  same,  skilful  (proficient. 


P.,  CH.  VII]    "  MANDUKYA  KARIKX"  AND  BUDDHA      127 

or  famous),  having  known,  the  condition  (state,  status,  pa  da), 
Not- Many -ness,  salutation,  we  make,  as  our  strength  (is  or 
allows) '.  Shankara  puts  in  supplementary  words  to  fill  up 
gaps,  and  construes  the  verses  in  his  own  way,  which  is  not 
clear  and  satisfactory  to  the  present  writer.  He  winds  up  by 
saying  that  '  Buddha  has  not  said  this,  which  has  been  ex- 
pounded here  (by  Gauda-pada,  and  which  is  the  genuine 
V£danta),  which  Buddha  has  only  come  near  but  did  not  quite 
attain  '*,  Shankara  avoids  the  fact  that  one  technical  desig- 
nation of  Buddha,  in  Ma  hay  ana  Buddhism,  is  Tayi.  The 
word  is  explained  by  Prajna-kara-maji,  in  his  commentary, 
Panjika,  on  Shanfi-deva's  Bodhi-charya-vatara  (3.  2).  It 
means  '  Spreader  of  knowledge  (from  Skt.  t  a  y,  to  spread, 
protect,  preserve),  who  does  not  actually  enter  into  the  Nir- 
vana or  Pari-nirvaija  state,  though  able  to  do  so,  but  continues 
to  keep  in  touch  with  the  human  world  in  order  unremittingly 
to  help  souls  and  guide  them  on  the  Upward  Path.'  The 
Maha-yana  tradition  is  that,  for  this  purpose,  Buddha  wears 
a  body  of  subtle  ethereal  matter,  formed  by  his  own  wiJJ- 
and-ideation,  nirmana-kaya;  (Secret  Doctrine,  V.  364 
et  seq.);  and  gives  the  needed  help  mostly  by  spiritual 
thought-force,  shubha-anu-dhyan'a;  sometimes  by  over- 
shadowing and  inspiring  a  specially  qualified  human  being, 
a  •  v  e  s  h  a,  and  *  spreading  knowledge '  through  him  ;  rarely, 
by  actually  taking  birth  in  a  human  body,  avatar  a. 

Gauda-pada  may  well  have  had  access  to  some  of 
the  lore  subsequently  losj,  in  the  turmoil  of  foreign  inva- 
sions, and  by  changes  in  the  public's  tastes  and  interests. 
One  school  of  Vedantins  says  that  Tayi  means  '  thief1, 
and  Buddha  is  called  so  because  he  stole  the  esoteric 
knowledge  from  his  brahmana  guru-s  and  published  it  to 
the  world ;  (Secret  Doctrine,  ibid.).  The  word  t  ay  u  occurs 
in  the  V6da  in  the  sense  of  thief.  It  will  be  remem- 
bered that  the  word  '  Buddha '  means  '  enlightened  with 
spiritual  wisdom  ',  '  wise ',  '  he  who  has  known ',  generally  ; 
and  also  Gautama,  *  the  wise  one  ',  '  the  enlightened  one ', 
specially.  Shankara  explains  'Buddhasya  tayinah', 
of  the  first  line,  in  the  general  sense :  '  The  knowledge  of 
the  wise  man  who  has  seen  the  Highest,  does  not  move 
to  other  d  h  a  r  m  a  •  s ,  but  remains  fixed  in  its  own  £  h  a  r  ma, 


128     LOGION   IN   "  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE  "    [SC.   OF 

as  light  in  the  sun ' ;  (the  man  in  the  street  would  think 
that  the  light  of  the  sun  does  nothing  else  than  spread  to 
all  quarters  and  to  far  distances  !)  ;  '  it  is  t  ayi,  continuous, 
like  a  k  a  s  h  a,  spare.  T  a  y-  i  n  a  h ,  which  means  s  a  n  t  a  n  a- 
v  a  t  a  h  ,  may  also  means  puja-vatah,  or  it  may  mean 
prajna-vatah;  i.e.  it  may  mean  *  spreading  ',  or  receiving 
or  giving  honor  and  worship,  or  possessing  subtle  intelligence 
and  insight  or  intuition  '.  Such  are  Shankara's  explanations 
of  the  first  line,  various,  alternative,  doubtful.  But  he  cannot 
avoid  taking  '  Buddh£na '  of  the  second  line  in  the  special 
sense. 

To  the  present  writer,  the  c  mystical '  and  real  and 
consistent  sense  of  the  verses  seems  clear,  if  attention  is 
fixed  on  the  words  '  Na-Etat '  and  '  A-Nana-tvam  ', '  Not- 
This  '  and  '  Not-Many-ness  ' :  *  The  Awareness,  the  Consci- 
ousnes,  of  the  enlightened  soul,  as  of  Buddha  the  Tayi,  is 
moveless,  un-moving,  does  not  move  in  successive  function- 
ings,  na  gharmeshu  kramate,  (as  the  personal  mind 
does,  experiencing  cognitions,  emotions,  volitions  or  actions, 
one  after  another).  Buddha  declared  that  (the  Consci- 
ousness, '  /-Am-)  Not-Thts '  includes,  once  for  all,  all  function- 
ing, all  knowing.  Such  is  the  very  subtle,  very  profound, 
Truth,  very  difficult  to  see — the  Truth  of  the  Unborn, 
Undying,  Self-luminous,  Ever-the-Same-ness.  It  is  the 
High  State  of  Being  whose  sole  all-comprehending  character- 
istic is  the  Consciousness  "  (the  One  /  is  and  am)  Not-Many 
(i.e.  not  these  countless  This-es) ".  Unto  that  Supreme 
State  of  Consciousness,  we  make  reverent  salutation,  and 
we  direct  and  open  our  minds  to  It  with  all  our  power  of 
concentration  and  devotion '. 

Mme.  H.  P.  Blavatsky  does  not  appear  to  have  made 
anything  like  a  specific  mention  of  the  Logion,  but  hints  of 
the  Idea  are  to  be  found  scattered  here  and  there  in  The 
Secret  Doctrine.  Thus  she  quotes  (IV,  197)  a  reference 
made  in  a  Hebrew  mystic  book,  to  "  the  Negatively  Existent 
One  ".  The  only  way  to  bring  home  to  ourselves,  the  sense 
of  this  sense-less-seeming  expression,  seems  to  be  to  interpret 
it  as  '  the  One  Self,  I,  who  exists,  i.e.,  realises  Self-Existence, 
by  Negating  Not-Self.  It  has  been  repeatedly  indicated 


P.,    CH.   VIl]         A   WORD   SURPASSING   AUM  ?  129 

• 

before,  that  the  firm  and  clear  apprehension  of  the  nature  of, 
and  of  the  distinction  between,  succession- less  Eternity  and 
succession-full  Time  (past-present-future),  is  utterly  indis- 
pensable for  the  comprehension  of  the  Logion.  H.  P.  B.  has 
some  very  significant  sentences  which  clearly  suggest  this ; 
"  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  anything  can  go  into  Nirvana 
which  is  not  eternally  there ;  but  human  intellect,  in 
conceiving  the  Absolute,  must  put  it  as  the  highest  term 
in  an  indefinite  series.  .  .  .  Those  who  search  for  that 
highest)  must  go  to  the  right  source  of  study,  the  teachings 
of  the  Upanishads,  and  must  go  in  the  right  spirit ",  (V,  533.) 
As  the  Upanishads  say  *W  tpr  ^  Stf  wfa  |  '  Being  already 
Brahma,  he  becomes  Brahma.  To  become  Brahma,  to 
attain  m  o  k  s  h  a,  is  only  to  remember  what  had  been  forgotten, 
that  one  is  Eternally  Brahma,  is  Eternally  Free ;  or,  in 
terms  of  Time,  that  one  has  always  been,  is  now,  will  always 
be,  *  Naught-Else  than  Brahma ',  Free  from  all  limitations. 
Incidentally,  H.  P.  B.  writes  (V,  395) :  "  He  fa  Brahm- 
Ajma)  alone  could  explain  the  meaning  of  the  sacred  word 
AUM.  .  .  .  But  there  existed,  and  still  exists  to  this  day,  a 
Word  for  surpassing  the  mysterious  monosyllable,  and  which 
renders  him  who  comes  into  possession  of  its  key,  nearly  the 
equal  of  Brihrnan."  It  is  difficult  to  make  sure  whether  this 
is  to  be  taken  literally  ;  and  what  the  last  word  '  Br&hman  r 
means,  whether  Brahma  or  Brahma.  It  is  well  known  that 
H.  P.  B.  was  fond  of  quizzing,  mystifying,  testing,  her 
followers  and  questioners.  It  is  not  impossible  that  she 
casually  threw  out  the  idea  of  "  a  Word  far  surpassing  "  etc., 
to  see  whether  her  readers  had  steadiness  enough  to  secure 
and  make  sure  of  what  was  within  reach,  and  would  study  the 
Upanishats  to  find  '  the  highest ' ;  or  would  fickle-mindedly 
run  off  after  a  '  far  surpassing  '  will-o'-the  wisp.  There  are 
sects  in  India  today  which  teach  their  followers  that  their  deity 
is  fourteen  degrees  higher  than  the  Vedanja's  Para- Brahma. 
The  Upanishats  make  no  mention  of  any  such  word  '  far  sur- 
passing AUM  '.  Of  course,  as  merely  sound  (an  intensification, 
modulation,  of  this  same  primal  '  seed  '-sound,  so  to  say), 
there  may  be  another  sound,  more  '  powerful  *  for  purposes 
of  producing  practical  effects,  as  the  roar  of  a  steam-siren  is 
9 


130  BUDDHA   AND    ESOTERIC   SCIENCE      [SC.   OF 

• 

more  powerful  than  the  hum  of  a  bee.  But  so  far  as  meta- 
physical significance  is  concerned,  Tri-Une  AUM  is  exhaus- 
tive and  Supreme,  once  for  all.  Outside  the  Infinite  Eternal 
Changeless  sole  Subject,  the  pseudo-infinite  ever-continuingly 
temporal  changeful  multitudinous  Object,  and  the  affirmative- 
negative  Relation  between  them — outside  these,  there  is 
nothing  left  to  know.  But,  of  course,  the  details  of  parti&uttir 
subjects  and  objects  and  relations  are  endless,  exhaus'tless ; 
they  require  the  totality  of  in-numer-able  physical  and  super- 
physical  (both  Material-and- Psychical)  sciences  and  un-coun li- 
able Time  and  im-measur-able  Space,  to  master  and  exhaust. 

Buddha,  shortly  before  passing,  said  to  Ananda  : "  I  have 
preached  the  truth  without  making  distinction  of  exoteric  and 
esoteric.  In  respect  of  truths,  I  have  no  such  thing  as  the 
plosed  fist  (baddha-mushti)  of  those  teachers  who  keep 
something  back  "  ;  Maha-pari-nibbana  Suit  a,  32.  But,  on 
an  earlier  occasion,  "  While  staying  at  KosambI  in  a  grove  of 
trees,  he  asked  his  disciples :  Which  are  the  more,  these  leaves 
which  I  hold  in  my  hand,  or  those  on  the  trees  in  the  whole 
of  the  grove  ?  They  answered  :  Of  course,  those  on  the  trees 
are  immensely  more.  Then  he  said  :  So  too  is  that  much  more 
which  I  have  learned  and  not  told  you,  than  that  which  I 
have  told  you.  And  I  have  not  told  you  because  it  would 
not  profit  you ;  would  not  increase  your  moral  purity,  self- 
control,  self-effacing  philanthropy ;  would  not  conduct  you  to 
Nirvana,  extinction  of  selfishness  "  ;  Sawyutta,  v.  437. 

The  reconciliation  is  that  what  Buddha  taught  openly  was 
the  fundamental  principles  of  Metaphysics  and  of  the  Ethics 
issuing  out  of  that  Metaphysics — Unselfishness  because  of  the 
Universality  of  the  Self — the  principles  most  indispensably  and 
vitally  needed  for  righteous  individual  and  social  life  ;  he  did 
not  thus  publicly  teach  the  details  of  any  '  occult '  sciences 
and  arts  of  y  o  g  a-s  i  $  cl  h  i  s,  which  were  taught  only  to  these 
few  who  had  been  tried  and  tested  and  prefected  in  virtue. 

Should  the  ethico-philosophical  principles  and  practices 
of  good  citizenship  be  taught  broadcast,  or  the  methods  of 
making  *  atom-bombs  *  ? 

As  to  why  an  air  of  *  mystery '  hangs  round  even  the 
metaohvsical  exolanation  of  AUM.  see  fa.  ODD.  UQ.subra. 


P.,    CH.   VIl]  THE   LOGION   IN    "  CHARAKA  "  131 

Let  us  now  examine  another  old  text  —  this  time  an  utterly 
plain  and  direct  statement  of  the  Logion.  It  occurs  in  the 
great  work  of  Ayur-V£da  Medicine,  Charaka,  so  named  after 
its  author.  The  current  tradition,  (much  disputed  by  orienta- 
lists), is  that  Patanjali  (born  in  the  north-west  of  India,  in 
2nd  century  B.  C.),  began  as  a  brahmana  follower  of  the 
Veda-  d  bar  ma  ;  and,  as  such,  wrote  his  Maha-Bhashya, 
4  Great  Commentary  ',  on  Paijini's  Aphorisms  of  Grammar, 
and  also  re-arranged  and  renovated  the  old  Yoga~Sutra-s, 
Aphorisms  of  Yoga;  and  then,  discarding  V£dic  ritualism, 
became  a  follower  of  Buddha,  and,  under  the  name 
of  Charaka,  '  the  wanderer  ',  wrote  the  great^  work  on 
medicine,  largely  utilising  pre-existing  material.  ('  Charaka  * 
has  other  meanings  also).  In  Charaka,  as  also  in  the  equally 
famous,  equally  classical,  equally  honored  and  studied,  but 
much  older  work  on  Medicine,  Sushruta,  the  principles  of 
Sankhya-Yoga  (almost  a  synonym  for  V£danta  in  those 
days,  vide  Gita)  are  made  the  basis  of  the"  principles  and 
practice  of  Medicine  ;  because  mind  and  body,  psyche  and 
physique,  are  inseparable,  and  act  and  react  on  each  other 
constantly.  Charaka  utilises  the  psychological  and  metaphysi- 
cal principles  of  Sankhya-Yoga-V6danta,  which  were  only 
refreshened  by  Buddha,  who  had  studied  Sankhya  with 
Alara  Kalama,  and  Yoga  with  Rudraka  or  U^daka  Rgma- 
putra.  We  find  these  two  very  remarkable  verses  in  Charaka  : 


Sharira-sthana,  cb.  i,  152-153. 

Translation,  in  accord  with  the  standard  commentary  of 
Chakra*p&nit  is:  "All  this  world,  which  appears  and  dis- 
appears, which  is  born  and  dies,  all  this  is  a  perpetual  series  of 
causes  and  effects.  All  that  results  from  a  cause  has  a  begin- 
ning and  therefore  an  ending  ;  being  limited  at  one  end,  it  has 
a  limit  at  the  other  end  also  ;  and,  being  transient,  is  painful, 
is  inseparable  from  misery;  it  is  Not-Self,  a-  svam  ;  it  is 
non-  Eternal:  it  has  not  been  created  by  the  Self,  which  is  only 


132          "  CHARAKA  "   AND   SlNKHYA-YOGA  [SC.   OF 

a  Spectator  and  not  an  actor,  which  is  only  a  Witness  of  the 
Show.    A  feeling  of  identification  with  this  phantas-magoria, 
a    feeling    of  its   being   '  I  '  and   '  Mine  ',   s  v  a  -  {  a,   arises 
through  A-v  i  $  y  a  ,  PrimaJ  Error  ;  and  it  (the  feeling)  per- 
sists only  so  long  as  the  b  u  4  4  h  '  »  the  V  i  d  y  a  ,  the  right 
knowledge,  does  not  arise,  viz.,  the  Consciousness  '  I-am- 
Not-This',    Na-Efat-Ahara,    and   '  This-is-Not-Mine  ',     Na- 
Ef  at-  Mama,  by  means  of  which  Consciousness,  i.e.,  hav£' 
recovered    which  Consciousness,  the  Knower,  J  n  a  h  ,  l*pt,. 
transcends,     rises   superior  to,   becomes   sovereign  oicount- 
This  '.     In  other  words,  his  Inner  Peace  cannot  be  Exhaust. 
any  more  by  the  turmoil  of  the  *  world  ',  the  ever-'  wfej  have 
a-midst  which  his  body  lives  ;  in  his  mind,  heart,  sc    <\m\ 
has    become  free,  emancipated,   from  all  doubts  and       |le 
Jlvan-rnukja,    and  is  no  longer  enchained,  bouna   Dy, 
subject    to,    the    '  This,'    i.e.,  this  '  object  '-world,  or  any- 
thing in  it. 

The  first  of  the  two  verses  above  quoted,  is  only  a  version 
in  slightly  varied  words,  of  aphorism  2.  5,  of  Yoga-Sutra. 


"The  khySJi  (awareness,  feeling,  sense,  notion,  thought, 
idea,  consciousness),  belief,  that  the  perishing-impure-misery- 
ful-Noo-Self  (body)  is  the  Eternal-Pure-Blessed-Self—  this 
is  A-Vidya,  Ne-Science,  Primal  Error,  Original  Sin  '. 

Another  aphorism,  very  germane  to  the  subject  under 
treatment,  is, 

an*  s*-ftw  *HNt-fow  «nw  ^r  ^  ft^F-^r  ?  R  i  3.  54. 


The  authentic  comment  can  be  studied  in  Vyasa's  Bhashya. 
Without  contradicting  it,  the  following  rendering  may  perhaps 
be  found  to  throw  some  more  light  upon  it  :  4  The  Awareness, 
the  knowledge,  that  results  from  Discrimination,  v  i  -v  6  k  a  , 
(between  Purusha  and  Prakrji,  I  and  This,  i.e.,  from 
negation  of  the  latter  by  the  former),  is  devoid  of  succession 
is  a  -  k  r  a  m  a  ,  and  comprehends  at  once,  all  objects  and  all 
ways  (i.e.,  manners,  methods,  of  the  workings  of  all  objects) 
—  that  knowledge  is  T  a  r  a  k  a  ,  deliverer,  emancipator,  which 
carries  the  soul  across  (the  ocean  of  doubts  and  fears  and 
miseries)'.  Taraka  is  one  of  the  many  names  of  the 


P.,  CH.  VII]    THE   LOGION  DECLARED  BY  BUDDHA   133 

PraQava,  AUM  ;  (see  fn.,  p.  109  supra).  There  are  a  fair 
number  of  quite  technical  words  (and,  of  course,  ideas)  which 
are  common  to  Yoga-Sutra  and  Bhashya  and  books  of 
Mahayana  Buddhism,  and  some  of  these  latter  throw  much 
light  upon  the  obscure  sentences  of  the  former.  That  it  is 
so,  is  natural,  after  Buddha's  studies,  mentioned  before,  of 
Sankhya  and  Yoga. 

Yoga  Vasishthti  repeats  again  and  again, 
****&**%»:  I 
*  Not-I-(This-)  Body,  Not-Mine,  (This)  Body.' 

Finally,  we  find,  in  Buddha's  own  words,  the  origin 
of  the  Charaka-verses.1  In  a  discourse  to  his  Bhikshu-s, 
in  the  town  of  ShravastI,  Buddha  says  : 

W,  fimc%,  arfiw  ;  ^  arfN  3  5^  ;  V  $:^  a* 
wffir;  ^amnr  a  $3  *w,  ^ft?*far,  5?  ^  srarft  i 

Samyutta  Nikaya,  Pt.  Ill,  Khandha-Vagga,  pp.  22-23; 
repeated  in  the  same  words  at  pp.  44-45. 

The  Samskrt  form  of  these  Pali  words  is  : 


4  Bhikshus  !,  form  is  not-eternal  ;  the  not-eternal  is  the 
painful  ;  the  painful  is  the  Not-Self  ;  the  Not-Self  is  Not- 
This-Mine,  I-This-Not  ;  This-is-Not-My-Self  '. 

Buddha  has,  for  some  centuries  now,  in  bis  own  home- 
land, and  therefore  naturally  in  the  west,  been  debited  with 
the  absurd  view  that  the  Self  is  only  a  stream  of  sensations, 
etc.  ;  that  there  is  no  Supreme  Eternal  Self  ;  and  that  Nirvapa 

1  I  had  noted  down  long  ago,  on  the  margins  of  my  personal  copy  of 
The  Science  of  Peace,  2ndedn.,p.  110,  the  English  translation  from 
some  book  ;  bat  had  inadvertently  omitted  to  note  down  the  name  of  the 
book  and  the  pages.  My  very  worthy  friend.  Acharya  Nar^ncjra  Pe*va, 
very  learned  in  Buddhist  Pali  and  SanskrJ  literature  (Principal  of  the 
non-official  National  College,  Kashi  Vigya-Pltha,  of  Benares,  and  member 
of  the  Legislative  Assembly  of  the  United  Provinces,  who  has  spent  many 
years  in  jail  as  political  prisoner,  and  has  been  released  only  in  June, 
1945),  has  very  kindly  hunted  up,  at  very  short  notice,  and  supplied  me 
with,  the  original  Pali  texts  and  Skf.  translations. 

9  ??:  is  the  masculine,  Jgc1t(  is  the  neuter,  form  of  the  same  word, 


134  BUDDHA   MISUNDERSTOOD  [SC.   OF 

means  complete  annihilation ;  (see  fn.  pp.  33-34,  supra). 
William  James  seems  to  have  propounded  the  same  view,  in 
modern  times,  viz.,  that  the  Self  is  only  a  stream,  as  a 
challenging  jeu  dy  esprit,  rather  than  seriously ;  his  own  firm 
belief  in  a  permanent  ultimate  Self  has  been  proved  above  by 
his  own  words  ;  (pp.  122-3,  supra).  Careful  orientalists  are  now 
beginning  to  see  the  light,  and  ^to  understand  that  what 
Buddha  *  denied/  even  as  Vedanja  '  negates',  is  the  small  self, 
the  ever-changing  personality.  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids,  in  the  new 
edition  of  her  Buddhism  (1934,  H.  U.  L,  series),  has 
candidly  admitted  the  mistake  of  her  earlier  view ;  has  well 
explained  the  causes  which  gave  rise  to  the  extraordinary 
misunderstanding  in  India  and  passed  thence  to  the  west ;  has 
shown  that  Buddha  always  tacitly  assumed,  as  undeniable 
and  indisputable,  the  Being  of  the  Universal  Self,  Brahma  of 
the  Upanishats ;  and  has  ably  propounded  the  right  view, 
that,  to  Buddha,  Nirvana  meant  only  the  annihilation  of 
the  small  selfish-self,  i.e.,  of  selfishness;  (see  especially, 
her  pp.  198-210).  What  element  of  truth  there  is  in  the  very 
human  craving  for,  and  belief  in,  'personal  immortality', 
will  be  discussed  in  a  later  .chapter. 

Besides  these  causes  there  was  another  and  far  worse  cause. 
This  was* the  wicked  and  wilful  perversion  of  Buddha's  teach- 
ings, under  the  stress  of  bestially  sensualist  appetites,  by  some 
sects  of  his  followers.  The  worst  and  most  infamous  of 
these  is  the  Vajra-yana  sect ;  its  professions,  i.e.,  theories, 
are  much  the  same  as  those  of  the  Charvaka-materialists, 
*  there  is  no  soul,  no  life  after  death,  no  right  and  no 
wrong,  no  sin  and  no  merit,  therefore  eat,  drink,  and  be 
merry  as  you  .best  can,  while  you  are  alive '.  Such  a  theory 
is  obviously  indispensable  to  justify  the  sect's  practice,  which 
is  the  same*  as  that  of  the  Vama-marga  Tantrikas, 
the  '  Black  Magicians  of  the  Left-hand  Path ' ;  vide  the 
Guhya-Sam&ja-Tantra  or  TathZ-gafa-guhyaka,  Baroda 
Oriental  Series)."  Such  >sects  "have  grown  up  within  the  pale 
of  every  religion,  dead  or  living,  even  as  darkness  gathers, 
under  the  lamp.  Accumulation  of  immense  wealth  in  the 
vihSra-s,  matha-s,  (Christian)  abbeys,  *  Vatican' -sr 
(Muslim)  Khaniqah-s,  dargah-s,  etc.,  has  always  led  to  such 
foul  consequences  in  religious  *  palaces ',  even  as  in  secular. 


P.,   CH.   Vll]       ORIENTALISTS'   CONFESSION  135 

As  to  the  Self,  which  his  later  sensualist  followers  denied* 
Buddha  is  reported  to  have  said,  on  one  occasion  :  *  The 
material  form  is  not  your  -Self,  not  the  Self  ;  sensations  are 
noc  the  Self  ;  conformations  and  predispositions  are  not 
the  Self  ;  the  consciousness  is  not  the  Self  '  ;  (Vinaya,  1.  23). 
The  word  Self,  repeated  so  often,  is  specially  noteworthy  ; 
the  word  '  consciousness  '  here  means  particular  conscious* 
ness  of  particular  things.  Elsewhere,  again,  Buddha  says* 
^....flWcft  3fflRr  9Tfa;  Samyutta  Nikaya,  1.  75,  (Udana,  47). 
In  Skt.,  *  ftrarat  SflWfT  (31RIR:)  ffftrat  (ffcfacl  );'  there  is 
nothing  anywhere  which  is  dearer  than  the  Self  '.  This  is 
only  what  the  Upanishad  said  much  earlier, 


'  All  that  is  dear,  is  dear  for  the  sake  of  the  Self  ;  the  Self  i$ 
the  Best  and  the  Dearest  '. 

George  Grimm,  in  his  book,  The  Doctrine  of  the  Buddha* 
T/ie  Religion  of  Reason  (pub  :  1926,  by  Offizin  W.  Drugulin, 
Leipzig)  describes  Sariputja  as  saying  to  Yamaka  (pp.  166, 
167)  :  "  All  corporeal  form  what-soever,...all  sensation,.  ..all 
perception,..  .all  activities  of  the  mind  whatsoever,...  all  con- 
sciousness, is  not  Atma,  the  Self;  the  correct  view, 
the  highest  knowledge,  is  :_'  This  is  not  mine  ;  this  am  I 
noti  this  is  not  my  Ego,  Ajma  '..."  Grimm  does  not  men- 
tion references  ;  but  the  first  part  of  the  translation  seems 
to  be  of  a  text  of  Samyutta  Nikaya,  Pt.  Ill,  op.  cit.,  from  the 
Dialogue  of  Sariputta  and  Yamaka,  p.  115;  and  the  second 
part  is  a  translation  of  the  Buddha's  words,  quoted  before/ 
The  two  seem  to  have  been  mixed  up  by  Grimm  ;  not  sur- 
prising, since  the  first  part  is  also  only  a  repetition  by  Sari* 
putta  of  what  he  had  heard  from  Buddha.  The  vital  words 
(italicised  by  me)  '  This  I  am  Not  '  are  there  ;  so  too  '  the 
highest  knowledge  '  ;  but  did  Grimm  realise  the  Infinite 


Skt.    version  :    3: 


136         BUDDHA   RE-TAUGHT   TRUE   VEDANTA       [SC.   OF 

Significance  that  blazes  up  in  those  very  same  words  if  we  read 
them  with  capital  initials  and  arranged  as  '  I  -This-  Not  (am)  '  ? 
On  pp.  500-502  of  his  book,  Grimm  writes  :  M  The 
Buddha  has  not  become  untrue  to  Indian  thinking  ;  rather'is 
his  doctrine  the  flower  of  Indian  thought.  He  is  *  the  trite 
Brahmin*  (brShmat?a)  who  has  completely  realised  the 
Upanishads  .  .  .  What  would  it  mean  to  deny  the  Atta 
(Ajma),  to  deny  thereby  my-self,  me  (My-Self,  Me),  the 
primary  fact  which  alone  I  cannot  doubt  ?  For  am  I  not  the 
most  real  thing  of  all  for  my-self  (My-Self),  so  real  that  the 
whole  world  may  perish,  if  only  I,  this  all  and  one  (  A  11  -and  - 
One,  All-One,  Al-One)  for  every  single  individual,  remains 
unaffected  by  the  general  ruin  ?  "  This  is  all  good  and  sound. 
It  indicates  the  new  trend  towards  the  true  interpretation 
of  Buddha's  'view,'  darshana,  as  identical  with  that  of 
the  Upanishads. 

The  battle  between  Vidya  and  A-Vidya,  Truth  and 
Error,  gods  and  titans,  angels  and  devils,  cor-rect-ors  and 
per-vert-ors,  is  ever-lasting.  When  the  Not-Self  threatens 
to  black  out  the  Light  of  the  Self  altogether,  the  Self  shines 
out  strongly  in  Krshija-s  and  Buddha-s  and  Shankara-s,  and 
Negates  a.nd  brushes  aside  the  Not-Self. 

_  Many  verses  of  the  Dhamma-pada>  relating  to  ths 
Atmg,  read  almost  like  translations  of  Gf/0-verses»  One 
famous  counsel  to  his  Bhikshus,  uttered  on  other  occasions 

Other  Pali  sentences,  in  the  same  context,  rendered  in  Skt.,  are  : 


etc.  ;   5f       ,     ^iTOl   etc.  3?TcW  J 

I  Samyutta  Pt.  Ill,  pp.  113-115. 
Elsewhere  (U<J5na,  Vagga  8.  p.  80),  Buddha  says  : 
Skt.  version)  3jfel,  fif^:  !,  aTSTRT,  WJjf,  3f^i^*d  ;  5ft 
etc.,  5T  ? 


'Bhikshus!,  there  is  That  (Self)  Which  is  Un-born,  Un-begun. 
Un-create,  Un-compounded.  Were  there  not  Such,  emanation  oC  all 
that  is  born,  begun,  created,  compounded,  would  not  be  known  ;  nor 
escape  from  this  all  and  re-mergence  back  into  It  '.  Thus  is  the  Eternal 
Changeless  Partless  Self,  Atm«,  asserted  by  Buddha  over  and  over  again. 


p.,  CH.  vn]        BUDDHA'S  LAST  WORDS  137 

also,  is  said  by  tradition  to  have  been  repeated  by  him,  as 
his  last  words,  just  before  his  Immortal  Atma  cast  away  Its 
mortal  frame,  to  those  who  gathered  round'  him  at  that  time. 
With  that  great  laudation  of  the  glory  of  the  Suprerne  Self, 
and  also,  repudiation  of  the  Not-Self,  of  all  Other-Than-Self, 
this  note  may  properly  be  closed. 


3T5|53HEK<JiT  I   Samytttta  Nikaya,  ibid.,  p.  42  ;  MahU- 
part  -nibb  ana  Suit  a  >  2.  26. 

in  Skt  : 


'  Go  to  the  peoples  of  the  earth,  my  mendicant  missioners  !  , 
doing  the  duty  of  your  mission,  gently  persuading  men  and 
women  into  the  blessed  eightfold  Path  of  Virtue  !  Be  your  One 
Light,  the  Self  ;  be  your  Sole  Refuge,  the  Self  ;  let  No-Other 
than  the  Self  be  your  Refuge.  Be  Dharma,  which  is  Brahma- 
in-Practice,  Theory-  at-  Work,  Principle  -in-  Application,  be  such 
Dharma  your  Lamp  ;  be  such  Dharma,  your  Refuge  ;  be 
Naught-Else  your  Refuge.  Be  ye  Self-reliant;  Not-Other- 
dependent.'  Nirvana  is  the  extinction  of  selfishness,  and 
of  all  doubts  and  fears,  all  evil  thoughts  and  passions,  which 
all  inevitably  spring  from  selfishness,  from  clinging  to  the 
body,  only.  It  is  the  extinction  of  all  restlessness  and 
discontent  of  mind.  It  is  attainment  of  inner  reposefulness, 
equ-animity,  equ-ability,  serenity,  undisturbable  calm.  In 
the  living  Emancipate,  still  wearing  a  body,  it  has  degrees  ; 
it  grows  more  and  more  towards  perfection  \  therefore  the 
books  speak  of  Brahma-vid,  Brahma-vid-vara,  Brahma-vid- 
varishtha,  '  knower  of  Brahma  ',  '  better  knower  of  Brahma  ', 
*  best  knower  of  Brahma  '.  Nirvana  is  not  power  to  perform 
any  so-called  miracles,  to  *  see  '  what  is  going  on  in  Sirius 
or  Canopus,  or  make  a  continent  sink  beneath  the  ocean  by 
a  mere  fiat,  any  more  than  it  is  to  make  an  aeroplane  rush 
500  miles  per  hour,  or  blast  a  whole  town  with  a  single 
atom-bomb.  Nirvana  is  recognition  of,  realisation  of,  reliance 
on,  the  Universal  Self,  Brahma,  Param-Atma,  which  pervades 


138  BEYOND    DUALITY  [SC,   OF 

and  includes  all  selves ;  and  the  consequent  or  rather  simul- 
taneous recognition  of,  reliance  on,  and  steady  pursuit  of  the 
Dharma  which  is  the  '  active '  aspect  of  the  '  re-cognition  ', 
viz.,  tfre  constant  endeavour  to  serve  all,  and  help  all  to  the 
same  realisation  of  Brahma  and  Dharma.  Hence,  *  Be 
Aj;ma  and  Dharma  your  Light  and  your  Refuge;  and 
Naught-Else  '. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

BRAHMA1  OR  THE  ABSOLUTE—  THE 
DVANDV-ATITAM  * 

LKT  us  see  now   if  this  summation  will  give  us  all  we 
want,   if  it  will  withstand  and  resolve  all  doubts  and 

1  The-  distinction  between  Brahma  (ending  with  an  unaccented  short 
'  a  '),  and  Brahma  (ending  with  an  accented  long  '  a  ')  should  be  borne 
in  mind.  The  former  (in  the  neuter  gender,  nominative  singular)  is  the 
same  as  Param-Afroa,  Supreme  Universal  Self  (including  Not-Self  and 
Negation).  It  is  also  often  named  Para-Brahma  ;  to  make  unmistakable 
its  distinction  from  Brahma  ;  and  also  to  indicate  that  It  is  p  a  r  a,  Ulti- 
mate, Highest,  or  rather  Beyond  compare,  Transcendent.  Brahma 
(masculine,  nominative  singular)  means  the  Individualised  Ideating  and 
Regulating  Mind,  the  Personal  God,  of  a  world,  a  globe,  a  solar  system, 
etc.  Brahma  is  to  Brahma  as  individual  to  Universal,  particular  to 
General,  singular  to  Total,  part  to  Whole,  whirlpool  to  Ocean  ;  one 
focus,  among  pseudo-infinite  foci,  of  space-filling  Boundless  Energy. 
The  un-inflected  base  of  both  words  is  Brahman.  In  Skt.  script,  Brahma 
is  SEP  ;  Brahma,  HHT  ;  Brahman. 


The  word  Brahma  has  other  meanings  also,  (a)  V&Ja,  knowledge, 
science,  learning,  (6)  the  class-caste  of  bra  h  man  a-  s,  the  clergy,  the 
learned  profession,  the  men  of  learning,  (c)  the  vital  seed  with  potency 
of  infinite  multiplication  ;  etc.  There  will  be  no  occasion  to  use  the  word 
in  these  senses  in  this  work.  They  are  dealt  with  in  The  Science  of 
Social  Organization. 

beyond  the  pairs,  i.e.  transcending  the  Relative. 


i'.,   CH.  VIIl]         CHANGELESS   CHANGE  139 

queries  and  objections,  even  as  the  rod  of  power  wielded 
by  Vasishtha  swallowed  up  and  made  nought  of  all  the 
weapons  of  Vishvamittra.  Let  us  test  it  with  questions 
the  most  wild  and  weird  and  fanciful.  If  it  fails  to 
answer  one,  it  fails  to  answer  all,  and  we  must  seek  again 
for  another  summing  up.1 

Aham  Etat  Na — this  log  ion,  in  its  entirety,  re- 
presents with  the  greatest  accuracy  that  it  is  possible 
for  words  to  attain,  the  nature  of  the  Absolute,  the 
Absolute  which  so  many  names  and  words  endeavour 
to  describe — the  Unlimited;  the  Unconditioned;  the 
Transcendent ;  Consciousness  that  includes  Uncon- 
sciousness ;  the  compactness,  solidity,  Plenum  of 
Cognition  (knowledge  or  thought),  of  Being,  and 

1  The  splendid  chapter  on  '  The  Perception  of  Reality  ',  pp.  283-324, 
of  William  James1  Principles  of  Psychology,  II,  may  be  read  in  this 
connection  ;  and  the  claims  made  for  the  Logion,  here,  may  be  tested 
by  the  requirements  of  "  the  perfect  object  of  belief  "  laid  down  there. 
The  rest  of  the  present  book  should  be  open  to  the  same  test,  since  the 
writer  has  essayed  to  build  it  all  upon  the  basis  of  the  Logion,  to 
derive  and  deduce  it  all  therefrom .  Two  quotations  from  James  are 
subjoined.  "  Our  own  reality,  that  sense  of  our  own  life,  which  we  at 
every  moment  possess,  is  the  ultimate  of  ultimate*  for  our  belief  "; 
p.  297.  (Cf.  pp.  22-23  supra  \  Shankara,  Shariraka  Bhashya,  on 
which  Vachaspati  Mishra's  Bhamafi  is  the  most  respected  commentary, 

says:  *R?f  f|  3ttc*ttsfelc«r  Sl&fcl  J  3  «TF9^  ?^>  I-  '•  I :  'Everyone 
believes— I  am  ;  none— I  am  not ').  At  p.  317,  James  says :  "  The  perfect 
object  of  belief  would  be  a  God  or  Soul  of  the  World,  represented  both 
optimistically  and  moralistically — if  such  a  combination  could  be — and 
withal  so  definitely  conceived  as  to  show  us  why  our  phenomenal  experi- 
ences should  be  sent  to  us  by  Him  in  just  the  very  way  in  which  they 
come  ".  In  other  words,  the  perfect  object  of  belief  should  satisfy  our 
logical  and  intellectual  requirements,  our  emotional  cravings  for  happi- 
ness achievable  in  morally  virtuous  ways,  and  our  volitional  urges  for 
activity  which  would  not  harm  others. 


140  UN-CONSCIOUS   CONSCIOUSNESS         [SC.    OF 

of    Bliss;    the   Supreme;   the   Indescribable;   the   Un- 
knowable.1 

This  timeless  thought,  this  spaceless  idea,  taken  as 
a  whole,  changelessly  constitutes  and  is  the  nature  of 
Brahman.  So  taken,  it  is  one  thought,  one  knowledge,  one 
omnisciently  rounded  cognition  of  all  'this'  that  is  possible 
to  know,  one  omnipotently  fulfilled  and  surfeited  desire 
for  all  *  this  ',  one  omnipresently  completed  action  of  self- 
assertion  and  'thisMotherJ-denial,  one  single  psychosis  or 
mood  or  act  of  Consciousness,  in  which  there  is  no  particular 
content,  but  which  yet  contains  the  totality  of  all  possible 
particulars  ;  it  is  unbroken,  pieceless  ;  there  is  no  motion 
in  it,  no  space,  no  time,  no  change,  no  shifting,  no  un- 
evenness,  but  all  equality,  an  all-  complete  condition  of 
balance  and  repose,  pure,  stainless  and  formless,8  We 
can  call  it  Unconsciousness  also,  the  absence  of  thought 
or  cognition  or  desire  or  action  or  any  mood  at  all.  For 
where  the  This  is  the  whole  of  the  Not-Self,  and  even 
that  is  negated,  the  consciousness  that  is  left  may  well  be 
called  Unconsciousness,  as  that  of  the  state  of  sound 
slumber  ;  it  is  clearly  not  any  particular  consciousness, 
such  as  that  wherein  the  particularity  of  the  This,  as  a 
this,  a  that,  defines  both  the  subject  Self  and  the  object 
Not-Self.  And  yet  it  includes  the  totality  of  all  such 

",  TO 


or 
,  «f,  ST«f,  SIRT,  sftf1?,  fttsrf,  etc.,  are  the  descriptive 


words  used  in 


P.,  CH.  VIH]  ROTATING   WHEEL   OF   LIFE  141 

particular  consciousnesses,  for  the  Not-Self  includes  all 
particular  this-es. 

Taken  in  two  parts,  the  same  thought  gives:  (1) 
Aham  Etat,  I-This,  i.e.,  I  am  this  something  other  than  I, 
a  piece  of  matter,  a  material  or  physical  body ;  and  (2) 
(Aham)  Etaj-Na,  (I  am)  not  this  thing  which  is  other  than 
I,  this  piece  of  matter,  this  material  or  physical  body.1 
Here,  in  these  two  sub-propositions,  inseparable  parts 
and  constituents  of  the  one  logion,  we  have,  as  we 
shall  see  later  in  details,  the  whole  process  of  S  a  rp  s  a  r  a. 
S  a  m  ?  a  r  a  means  a  process,  (Skt.  s  r,  to  slide  on,  move  on) 
a  movement,  of  rotation,  for  it  is  made  up  of  the  alterna- 
tion of  opposites  :  birth  and  death  ;  growth  and  decay  ; 
inbreathing  and  outbreathing ;  waking  and  sleeping  ; 
acceptance  and  rejection  ;  greed  and  surfeit ;  pursuit  and 
renunciation  ;  evolution  and  involution ;  formation  and 
dissolution  ;  integration  and  disintegration  ;  differentiation 
and  re-identification  ;  emergence  and  re-mergence.  Such  is 
the  essence  and  the  whole  of  the  World -Process,  at  whatever 
point  of  space  or  time  we  examine  it,  in  whatever  aspect 
we  look  at  it,  animate  or  so-called  inanimate,  chemical, 
or  mechanical,  physical,  biological,  psychological,  or 
sociological,  in  the  birth  and  death  of  an  insect  and 
also  each  rhythmic  wing-beat  of  that  insect,  or  the  birth 
and  death  of  a  solar  system  and  also  each  vast  cyclic 

1  See  foot-note  2,  p.  84.  The  incessant  L  i  I  a,  Pastime,  of  the  Self 
is  the  playful  endeavour  to  define  the  undefinable  It-Self ;  *  Am  I  this* 
minteral  ?  *,  '  Well,  I  am  this  mineral.  But  no,  I  am  not  this  mineral. 
And  so  with  all  possible  pseudo-infinite  kinds  of  minerals,  vegetables, 
animals,  humans,  sab-and-super-humans,  and  all  other  kinds  of  things 
and  beings. 


142  GAIN-AND-PAIN    HAND-IN-HAND  [SC.   OF 

sweep  iii  space  and  time  of  that  system.1  Why  the  logion 
has  to  be  taken  in  parts  and  also  as  a  whole,  will  appear 
when  we  study  further  the  nature  of  the  *  This.' 

1  Indeed  every  science  and  every  school  of  philosophy  deals  with  one 
important  aspect  of,  and  gives  its  own  characteristic  names  to,  the 
alternately  predominating  terms  of  the  '  pairs  '  of  the  World-Process 
Thus  :  physics  speaks  of  action  and  reaction  ;  chemistry  of  composition 
and  decomposition  ;  biology  of  anabolism  and  katabolism ;  physiology  of 
secretions  and  excretions  ;  medicine  of  growth  and  atrophy,  health  and 
disease;  mathematics  of  addition  and  subtraction,  multiplication  ami 
division,  prolongation  and  bisection,  composition  and  resolution,  the 
static  and  the  kinetic  ;  civics  of  competition  and  co-operation,  or  inch 
vi  dual  ism  and  socialism  ;  law  of  right-and  duty  ;  politics  of  an  toe  rat,  v 
and  democracy  ;  poetry  of  optimism  and  pessimism,  I' allegro  and  il 
fienseroso-,  history,  of  'war'  (between  human  beings),  abnormality, 
greater  and  greater  differentiation,  excess  of  love-hate  born  of  primal 
ab-err-ation  (out  of  which  proceeds  the  bulk  of  the  multifarious  events 
and  complications  which  make  up  the  subject-matter  of  history),  and  of 
'peace,'  normality,  greater  and  greater  approach  to  the  '  perfectness 
and  *  completeness  '  of  homogeneity,  serenity,  restfulncss  (which  has  no 
history,  for  '  no  news  is  good  news  '  ;  since  the  arts  of  peace  are  mosth 
arts  of  war  with  '  nature  '  ;  '  war  '  and  '  peace  '  being  used  here 
in  the  usual  comparative  sense,  with  a  hint  of  the  ultimate  meta- 
physical sense  in  which  every  sr.shti,  every  manifestation  in  the 
World-Process,  is  by  a  disturbance  of  the  primal  equilibrium  of  tho 
Three) ;  psychology,  of  reminiscence  and  obliviscence,  waking  and  sleep- 
ing, aroused  and  focussed  attention  and  dormant  and  diffused  sub-con- 
sciousness, m  a n  as- presentation  and  b u  d d  h  i-memory  ;  philosophy,  too, 
of  (progressive  and  regressive)  change  and  absolutist  changelessness  ;  and 
finally,  religion,  of  the  worship  of  Shakti-Power  and  of  Shiva-Peace.  For 
the  '  pair  '  names  used  by  various  Samskrt  philosophies  and  sciences,  see 
The  Science  of  Religion,  or  Sana  f  ana  Vaidika  phanna,  pp.  64 — 67, 
and  The  Science  of  Social  Organisation, 'or  The  Laws  of  Manu, 
I,  32-35.  A  work  like  Rogers  Thesaurus  shows  how  the  whole 
mental  life  of  man,  and  all  the  corresponding  vocabulary  that  he  uses,  is 
made  up  of  thousands  upon  thousands  of  such  antithetic  pairs. 

The  principle,  law.  or  fact  of  Pvam-Pvam,  '  Two-and-Two  '  is  bo 
fundamental,  so  pervasive  of  all  departments,  all  aspects,  of  Nature,  is, 
indeed,  so  essentially  the  very  '  nature '  of  Nature,  that  some  more 
examples  of  the  more  important  '  pairs  of  opposites  '  may  not  be  un- 
welcome to  the  student.  They  all  arise,  of  course,  from  the  Primal  Op- 
position of  §  I '  and  *  Not- 1 '.  §  This  '  and  '  Not-This  '. 

Temperamental  types  are,  first  and  foremost,  of  which  all  others  may 
be  regarded  as  varieties,  feminine  and  masculine,  prakrti-(s(  ri)  and 
p  u  r  u  s  h  a  ;  then,  tender-minded  and  tough-minded  (William  James) ; 
romantics  and  classics  (Ostwald) ;  introverts  and  extroverts  (Jung)  ; 


P.,    CH.   VIIl]  SWING   OF  OPPOSITES  143 

This   single   logion    thus   includes    within  itself  both 
Changelessness  and  Change.     It  includes  the  fullness  of 

antar-mukha  and  bah  ir- muk  ha.  in  Skt.,  t.e.,  in-faced  and  out- 
faced, in-turned  and  out-turned,  introspective  and  extro-spective,  (Yoga- 
Vedanta)  ;  inhibitive  and  exhibitive,  niroclha-chitta  and  v  y  u  \  t  h  a- 
na-chitta  (ditto);  precocious  dement  and  hysteric  (psycho-analysis)  . 
abstractionist  artist  and  sympathetic  artist  (Warringer)  ;  Dionysius  and 
Apollo  (Nietzsche)  ,  sentimental  and  naive  (Schiller)  ,  passive  voice  and 
active  voice,  in  language  (Finch)  ;  centripetal  and  centrifugal  (Jung)  , 
abstract  and  concrete  ;  con-centric  and  ec-centnc  ;  steady  and  unstable  , 
equilibrated  and  unbalanced ;  credulous  and  sceptical ;  habit-ruled  anil 
inventive ;  agricultural  and  nomadic ;  peace-loving  and  warlike  ,  realist 
and  nominalist  (reconciled  in  the  conceptualist)  ;  spiritualist-idealist  and 
materialist-realist  (reconciled  in  the  pantheist),  j  5  ii  n  i  -  gnostic  and 
bhakta-pietist  (reconciled  in  the  '  practical  mystic  ')  ;  severe  (style  of 
writing")  and  flowery ;  synthetic  and  analytic ,  general  and  special  , 
poetic  and  scientific  ;  causalistic  (dwelling  on  past  causes  as  explanatory) 
;ind  finalistic  (emphasing  the  final  cause  or  end,  aim,  future  purpose)  , 
determinist  and  vitalist,  i  e.t  necessitarian  or  predestinarian  and  liber- 
tarian, or  fatalist  and  free-will-ist  (reconciled  in  the  '  illusionist ')  r  Will- 
to-live  (Freud,  Jung)  and  will-to-power  (Adler).  It  will  be  seen  that  the 
two  terms  of  each  of  these  pairs  often  and  readily  change  places,  with 
difference  of  situation  and  standpoint ;  because  non-Ego  has  borrowed 
the  qualities  of  the  Ego,  and  vice  versa  ,  Man  is  part  Woman,  ;irul 
Woman  is  part  Man. 

Fuller  understanding  of  the  cult  of  Shakti- Power  (as  distinguished 
from  the  cult  of  Shiva-Peace)  in  India  and  Thibet,  is  likely  to  be  helped 
by  psychoanalytic  literature,  and  vice  versa;  (see,  e.g.,  ch.  xxxiii. 
'  Psycho-path ic  Consequences  '.  of  The  Sexual  Crisis,  by  Crete  Meisel 
Hess,  translated  by  Eden  and  Cedar  Paul ;  pub.  1917,  by  the  Critic  and 
Guide  Company,  New  York).  Cerebral  energy  and  sex  energy  go 
together  ;  as  the  two  poles  of  the  one  magnet  Energy,  The  complete  ex- 
haustion or  suppression  of  either  one  of  the  two,  means  complete  loss  of 
the  other  also  ;  whence  the  aphrodisiac  quality  of  Ayur-v6dic  and  other 
tonics  for  the  cure  of  neurasthenia.  But  the  two  energies  are  as  the 
ends  of  a  see-saw  ;  physically  reproductive  energy,  (generated  primarily 
by  food,  which  stands  for  primal  Vital  Energy,  whence  both  sexual  and 
cerebral  energies),  has  to  be  continually  sublimated  into  mentally  and 
superphysically  reproductive  energy,  by  the  person  who  would  become 
u  r  d  h  v a-r  6 1  a  s  yogi,  *  whose  seminal  energy  always  streams  upwards  ' . 
In  connectio'n  with  socialism,  G.  M.  Hess  notes  the  simultaneous  rise 
of  two  opposed  pairs,  "  (1)  the  woman  emancipated  from  sex,  i.e.. 
the  de-sexed,  versus  the  woman  emancipated  jor  sex  i.e..  the  very 
highly  sexed  who  yet  wants  to  be  free ;  and  (2)  Ascetics  versus  Aesthetes." 
(among  men) .  Amazon  and  hetaira  were  the  correspondents  in  old  Greece. 
Renunciants  of  the  world  and  pursuants  of  it.  among  men  as  well  as 
women,  are  to  be  found  everywhere,  throughout  history*  The  many 


144  INCLUSION    OF   ALL   OPPOSITES       [SC.   OF 

the  Absolute-Consciousness  or  Un-Consciousness,  from  the 
all-embracing  timeless  and  spaceless  standpoint  of  which, 
the  Self  is  seen  to  have  eternally  negated,  abolished,  an- 
nihilated the  Not-Self,  in  its  totality,  without  remainder, 
and  so  has  left  behind  a  pure  strifelessness  of  complete 

aspects  of  purga-Annapurna,  destructive  martial  power  and  constructive 
food-and-hfe-giving  power,  and  of  Kali-Gauri,  '  Dark '-and-' White,1 
'  Hate '-and-' Love,'  blood-thirsty  sadism  and  meek  masochism,  are 
similar  pairs  of  opposites.  J.  Langdon  Davies  '  A  Short  History  of 
Women  is  full  of  illustrations  of  how,  age  after  age,  country  after  country. 
"  Woman  *  has  been  alternately  worshipped  as  supreme  goddess.  (Ishtar, 
Astarte,  seems  to  be  only  another  form  of  the  Skt.  word  stri,  woman), 
and  maltreated  as  slave  ;  how  every  step  forward  in  her  emancipation  has 
been  followed  by  a  step  backward  in  the  shape  of  some  corresponding 
bond  of  disability.  Such  is  the  case  with  the  freedom  and  the  bondage 
of  men  also.  So,  J.  M.  Robertson's  A  Short  History  of  Christianity 
shows,  principally  in  the  case  of  the  Christian  religion,  of  course,  but 
incidentally  in  that  of  others  also,  how  growth  and  spread,  and  then 
decline  and  decay,  are  marked  throughout,  period  after  period,  phase 
after  phase,  sect  after  sect,  by  one  gain  and  one  pain,  one  advantage 
and  one  disadvantage.  It  comes  as  a  great  surprise,  now  and  then,  and 
is  very  informing,  to  see  how  Christian  priests  and  rulers  made  converts, 
and  suppressed  pagans  and  heathens,  and  even  mere  dissidents  belonging 
to  other  sects  of  Christianity  than  their  own,  with  the  help  of  the 
Bible  as  well  as  of  '  fire  and  sword  ',  at  one  time,  under  the  stress  of  one 
kind  of  fanatical  motive ;  and,  at  another  time,  under  the  stress  of 
another  kind  of  motive,  political  or  economic  or  both,  deliberately 
avoided  making  converts  and  positively  checked  the  spread  of  Christian- 
ity. Similar  has  been  the  history  of  the  spread  of  Aryan  Vedism,  and 
of  Islam  and  other  religions.  It  is  patent  that  the  consequences  of  every 
important  scientific  discovery  and  invention  are  similarly  dual,  good  as 
well  as  evil,  because  of  the  two-fold  nature  of  the  human  being  ;  witness, 
the  two  World  Wars  of  the  first  half  of  the  20th  Century  A.  C.,  and  the 
chain  of  their  causes  and  consequences  ;  viz.,  awful  misuse  of  science  by 
the  greed,  pride,  lust,  jealousy,  mutual  fear,  and  hate,  of  the  leaders, 
teachers,  rulers,  and  propagandist-hypnotisers  of  the  nations ;  thence, 
vast  destruction  of  life  and  property  and  enormous  *;z;£ -employment  and 
waste  of  labor ;  and,  again,  more  virulent  In  revanche.  Emerson 's  classical 
1  Essay  on  Compensations  '  is  only  a  very  brief  study  of  the  '  balancings  ' 
of  Nature.  The  vast  and  ever-growing  literature  of  science  fn  every  depart- 
ment of  it,  including  that  of  Sex,  provides  instances  at  every  step.  Many 
very  striking  illustrations  are  to  be  found  in  H.  G.  Wells'  The  Science  of 
Life  and  Outline  of  History ,  of  the  Law  of  Polarity,  Duality,  Two-and- 
Two,  which  pervades  the  World-Process  and  constitutes  its  very 
heart-beat. 


P.,    CH.   VIIl]        IM-POSITION   AND    DE-POSITION         145 

balance,  utmost  repose,  Perfect  Peace.  It  also  in- 
cludes the  pseudo-eternal,  the  pseudo-infinite,  the 
in-de-finite,  and,  technically,  the  illusive,  mayavic, 
endlessness  of  incessant  identifications  and  separations, 
on  the  smallest  and  the  largest  scales,  of  the  Self 
and  the  Not-Self ;  each  identification  being  immedi- 
ately balanced  up  by  a  separation ;  each  separ- 
ation at  once  neutralised  by  an  identification  ;  sarga, 
creation,  and  p  r  a  1  a  y  a,  dissolution,  following  each 
other  in  untiring  and  ceaseless  motion  of  rotation,/ 
c  h  a  k  r  a,  '  cycling  ',  *  circling  ' ;  in  order  to  imitate 
and  show  out  in  time  and  space,  in  an  ever-futile 
and  ever-renewed  endeavour,  that  which  is  complete,, 
always  and  at  once,  in  the  Eternal  and  Infinite 
Absolute. 

Thus  it  comes  about  that  the  method  of  true 
Vedanta,  repeated  super-im-position,  ad  hy-aropa,  of 
an  attribute  upon  the  Supreme  (object  of  enquiry  and 
definition),  and  then  de-position,  refutation  and  strik- 
ing away,  a  p  a-v  a  d  a,  of  it,  till  all  particular  attri- 
butes have  been  struck  away  and  the  Supreme  remains 
defined  as  the  t/n-de-^n-able — that  method  is  also  the 
method  of  all  thought,  (sup-position — op-position — 
corn-position)  and  the  method  of  the  World -Process, 
which  is  the  embodiment  of  incessant  endeavour  to  impose 
material  Attributes  upon  the  Attributeless  throughout 
all  time  and  space,  endless  at-tempt  to  de-fine  Spirit  in 
terms  of  Matter.1 

1  See  foot-note  2,  on  p.  84,  supra. 
10 


146     ALL  SPACE-TIME-MOTION   within  SELF      [SC.   OF 

Aham  Etat  Na  ' — this  transcendent  s  a  m  v  i  t , 
thought,  consciousness,  awareness,  idea,  thus,  timelessly, 
spacelessly,  and  changelessly,  constitutes  and  is  the 
Sva-bhava,  '  own-being ',  Nature,  of  the  Absolute, 
which  Nature  and  which  Absolute  i.e.,  which  Absolute- 
Nature  is  also,  therefore,  identical  with  the  totality 
of  the  World-Process;  such  totality  being  attained, 
not  by  endless  addition  of  parts  and  pieces  of  moving 
things  in  time  and  space  as  outside  of  us  ;  but  by  grasp- 
ing of  the  Whole  of  the  Not-Self,  with  all  time  and 
space  and  things  moving  therein,  as  within  us  ;  so  that 
Past  and  Future,  Behind  and  Before,  collapse  into  Now- 
and-Here,  and  all  relative  parts  are  summed  up,  by 
abolition,  in  the  Absolute  Whole. 

All  Questions  Answered 

What  merits  and  qualifications,  or  absence  of  merits 
and  qualifications,  that  may  rightly  be  sought  in  and 
required  of  the  Absolute,  without  which  the  Absolute 
would  not  be  what  its  name  implies,  are  missing  from  this  ? 
Is  not  that  the  Thought  which  is  Independent  of  all  Else  ? 
Does  it  not  contain  all  in  It-Self  ?  The  Absolute  is  the  Un- 
conditioned. What  condition  limits  this  perfect  cognition, 
this  Complete  Idea,  which  is  its  own  end  and  looks  to  no 
end  beyond  It-Self,  which  is  also  its  own  means  and  seeks 
no  means  out  of  It-Self  for  its  realisation  ?  It  is  One  single 
act  of  Consciousness,  which  looks  not  before  or  after,  to 


P.,  CH.  VIJl]   ALL  QUESTIONS  ANSWERED  AT  ONCE  147 

past  or  future,  but  is  complete,  and  complete  now,  in  the 
Eternal    Moment,   complete  here,  in  the  Infinite  Point. 
The  '  I,'  holding  the  whole  of  the  '  Not-I  '  before  It-Self, 
denies,  in  one  single  moment  which  includes  all  time,  at 
one    single    point    which    exhausts    all    space,    in   one 
single    act    which  sums  up  the  whole   of  the   World- 
Process  in  It-Self,  the  whole  of  that  '  Not-I  '  ;  denies  that 
It-Self  is  anything  Other-than-I  ;  a  mighty  truism  which 
abolishes  and  yet  covers  all  possible   details  of  know- 
ledge, for   all  possible    '  not-I's  '    that    may   be    known, 
are  summed  up   in*  the  *  Not-I  '  so  denied.    All  possi- 
ble    conditions    of     space,     time,   causation,     d  e  s  h  a  , 
k  a  1  a  ,   nimitta,   are  within  this  Absolute  idea.     All 
contradictions  are  within    it.1    All  the  Relative  is,  and 
all  relatives  are,  within   it.      Yet  it   is  not  opposed  to 
them    or  outside   of    them  ;  for   it    indeed    is   the   very 
substratum  and  possibility  of  them  ;    nay,   it   is   them, 
in     their    entirety  ;    for,    so    taken     all    together,    they 
counter-balance    and    abolish    each    other   wholly,   and 
leave   behind  only  the  Numberless  Zero,  out  of  which 
all    plus-and-minus    numbers    emerge,   and  into   which 
they  merge  back  again.     All  divisions  are  within  it  ;  yet 
it     is    unbroken,    un-divided,    consistent,    partless  and 
numberless,   the  beyond  number,  for  the  One  and  the 
Many  are  both   within  it  ;  addition  neutralising  subtrac- 
tion,    subtraction     nullifying    addition,     multiplication 
counteracting  division,  and  division  completely  balancing 


I  Tatparya-prakasha  Tika 
on  Yoga-Vasishtha,  VI,  PGrvardha,  xxxvi,  10. 


148     ALL   OPPOSITES,    PARTS,   within   WHOLE    [SC.   OF 

multiplication.    All    possible    opposites   that   constitute 
the  factors  of  s  a  m  s  a  r  a,  are  present  in  it,  in  equation  and 
equilibration.     It  is  the   reconciliation  of  all  opposites. 
It  is  nir-gunam,  attribute-less.    It  is  guna-bhuk. 
sa  -  g  u  n  a  m,  taster,  eater,  container  of  all  attributes,  also. 
Being  is  in  it  ;  Nothing  or  Non-Being  is  in  it  too.     It  is 
beyond  Being  and  Nothing.     It  is  Being  ;  it  is  Nothing  ; 
it  is  both  ;    it  is  neither.1     Yet   it  is  there,  within  us, 
around  us,  unmistakable.     It  is  the  whole,  and  also  the 
constant  process,  of  our  daily  life.     "  It  moveth  and  it 
moveth  not,  far  is  it,  yet  'tis  near  ;  it  is  within  the  heart 
of  all  and  yet  apart  from  all."*  It  is  the  all.     All  is  in  it. 
Assertion   by    it,   and  in  it,  gives  existence  to  An-Atma, 
the  Not-Self  :  rejection  and  denial  by  it,  and  within  it,  im- 
poses non-existence  on  that  same  An-A^ma.     It  sayeth  : 
I  (am)  This  ;  and  the  This,  the  Not-Self,  is.     It  sayeth  ; 
(I  this)  'Not-Self  (am)  not  ;  and  the  Not-Self  is  no  more. 
But   it   sayeth   both  '  these   things   in   the  same  breath, 
•  simultaneously.     What  is  the  result  ?  This  Endless  Pro- 
cess that  is  ever  coming  out  of  nothing  into  being,  and 
vanishing  out  of  being  into  nothing.     We  see  it  plainly, 
yet  may  not  describe  it  adequately.     Truly  indescribable, 
a-n  i  r-v  a  c  h  a  n  I  y  a,  has  it  been  called  ;  as  also  has  been 
called  the  World-Process  which  is  It.   It  is  the  Vacuum, 

Rg-veda,  X,  cxxx,  1,  2. 

;  Hymn  by  Shankaracharya. 


:  \  Isha-Vpanishat, 


P.,    CH.    VIIl]    PSEUDO-  ETERNAL   within    ETERNAL    149 

s  h  u  n  y  a,  of  the  s  h  u  n  y  a-v  a  d  I,1  when  Self  and  Not- 
Self  are  regarded  as  having  neutralised  each  other  in 
mutual  Negation.  It  is  the  Plenum,  gh  an  am,  of  the 
g  h  a  n  a-v  a  d  I,*  which  is  ever  full  of  both,  in  the  Affirmation 
that  ever  lies  implicit  and  hidden  in  the  heart  of  the 
Negation.  Two  eternals  are  here  in  this  Absolute,  eternal 
1  I  '  and  pseudo-eternal  *  Not-I,'  eternal  Being  and 

A  few  more  scripture-texts  to  the  same  effect  may  be  cited  : 

%  3?ra^  ;  t$  f|  sraffa  sroifa  3lft^fo,  ^  f| 

;  Chhandogya,  4-15-2 

'The  Self  is  known  assamya<j-vama,  because  all  contraries 
inhere  in  It;  It  leads  forth,  It  is  the  commander  of,  all  contradictory 
pairs  '. 


:  3JT3<S«rf  ;  Bhagavafa,  4-9-16. 

o/».  CIY.,  4-17-28. 


1  Salutation,  adoration,  to  the  Supreme  Self  ,  Parama-Purusha,  Sov- 
ereign and  Law-Giver  of  Nature,  within  Whom  contrary  energies, 
s  h  a  k  t  i-s,  are  revolving  day-and-night,  a  (h  a  r)-n  i  s  h  a  m  ;  Who  spurs  on 
as  well  as  reins  in  these  opposite-  leaping  forces  (with  sure  hand)  '. 

i  o>.  at.  2-6-10. 

'  Error,  False  Knowledge,  and  Wisdom,  True  Knowledge—the 
Reservoir  of  both  is  the  Supreme  Purusha  '. 

The  metaphysical  reason  Why,  of  the  psycho-analyst's1  ambi- 
valence', heaven  -and-hell,  sub-conscious  under-world  of  selfish  hate 
devilish  thoughts,  devils,  and  supra-conscious  upper-  world  of  unselfish 
love,  angelic  thoughts,  angels,  is  to  be  found  here. 

For  further  texts  from  scriptures  of  Vaujika  pharma  as  well  as 
other  religions,  declaring  the  inherence  of  utterly  antagonistic  qualities 
in  the  Supreme,  the  reader  may  look  into  The  Essential  Unity  of  All 
Religions,  index-references  '  Duality  ',  '  Opposites  ',  '  Good  ',  '  Evil.1 

1  '  He  who  holds  the  doctrine  that  all  is  Nothing,  a  mere  Vacuum, 
S  h  u  n  y  a,  or  that  all  arises  from  and  goes  back  into  Nothing,  Emptiness/ 
'  '  He  who  hold  that  all  is  one  gh  a  n  a,  Density,  Plenum.' 


150   ALL   RELATIVES   within   THE    ABSOLUTE     [SC.    OF 

pseudo-eternal  Nothing;  yet  they  do  not  limit  or  restrict 
each  other  in  any  way,  for  there  is  only  one  eternal,  and  the 
other  eternal  is  pseudo,  is  not.  Beyond  space  and  time  are 
they  yet,  and  therefore  beyond  limits  ;  and  neither  limits 
the  other,  but  rather  each  necessarily  fits  into  the  other, 
or,  yet  rather,  the 'other  is  entirely  lost  in  the  one.  None 

can    take   objection   to   the  eternity  of  a  pure  Nothing 

. ,        ,  .  ^  .  :    within  . 

beside    the  eternity  of  pure   Being;    yet   the   t\,      t^e 

opposed  and  not  identical ;  and  yet  also  both  inhere  in 
and  make  up  the  Absolute.  If  we  are  inclined  to  feei 
that  *  I ',  holding  up  to  itself  and  denying  *  Not-I ', 
implies  a  duality,  let  us  remember  what  *  Not-I  '  is, 
essentially,  and  what  this  denial  of  it  by  '  I  '  amounts 
to.  '  Not-I  '  is  the  Negation  of  '  I,'  and  this  denial 
of  it  is  the  Negation  of  a  negation  of  itself  by  the 
'  I  '/  What  objection  can  there  be  to  the  statement 
that  "  I  am  not  Not-I,"  "  I  am  nothing  else  than  I  "  ? 
Is  it  not  purely  equivalent  to  the  statement  "  I  am  only 
I  "  ?  And  if  so,  where  is  duality  in  it  ?  A  difficulty 
seems  to  arise  when  we  vaguely  feel  that  pure  '  Not- 
I  '  cannot  be  equivalent  to  the  totality  of  all  particular 
'  Not-I's  '.  This  difficulty  will  be  dealt  with,  later,  in  a 
further  endeavour  to  show  that  pure  *  Not-I  '  is  equivalent 
to  the  totality  of  all  particular  '  Not-Ps  '. 

1  Compare  the  Saqiskrt  expressions  3??3^  3i*3^fTffi[ ,  '  other  than 
other/  i.e..  other  than-not-I ;  and  3RWfc^T^ 3Rffi[ ,  'not  other  than 
other, '  i.e.,  including  the  other  or  not-I  within  Itself.  These  expressions, 
occur  in  the  footnote  on  p.  125  supra.  See  also  f.  n.s  on  pp.  113. 
114.  121. 


P.,    CH.   VIIl]       MEANING   OF   *  INDESCRIBABLE  '        151 

The  In-de-scrib-able 

Such,  then,  is  the  Indescribable  of  which  the  Totality 
of  the  World-Process  is  the  Endless  Description. 
Exact,  rigorous,  scientific  description  here  perforce 
becomes  a  hymn,  which  may  seem  '  mystic '  to  the 
unscrutinising  observer,  yet  is  strictly  accurate,  '  rational ', 
'  practical '  also.  The  indescribability  of  the  Absolute 
Brahman  is  not  the  result  of  a  powerlessness  of  thought, 
but  of  thought's  completion.  It  is  indescribable 
if  we  will  use  only  one  of  the  two  sets  of  thought- 
counters,  terms  of  Being  or  terms  of  Nothing,  such  as 
are  used  in  dealing  with  things  relative  and  limited  ;  but 
it  is  fully  describable  if  we  will  use  both  sets  at  once.1 

Many  are  the  names  of  this  Absolute,  as  said  before.* 
To  fix  the  nomenclature  and  prevent  confusion,  the  Eng- 
lish term  used  to  describe  it  in  future  in  this  work  will 

A  But  not  in  the  way  of  Hegel,  see  ch.  vi,  supra.  After 
going  through  the  considerations  of  this  chapter,  the  reader 
will  have  realised  that  Hegel  should  have  said,  not  that 
[Being  is  Nothing,'  but  that  'Being  is  not-Nothing,'  or 
'  Being  is  no-Thing.9  or  *  Being  is  no-particular-thing ' ;  also 
that,  instead  of  saying  this  last,  he  should  have  said  '  Ego 
is  not  non-Ego ' ;  and  instead  of  that,  that  *  1  is  not  not-I  "  ; 
and  instead  of  that,  again,  he  should  have  said  that  '  I  am 
not  not-I v ;  and,  finally,  he  should  have  said  that '  I  am  not 
This/  i.e., '  I-This-Not.% 


152          FROM    PRATYAGATMI  TO    PARAMATMl       [SC.    OF 

ordinarily  be  the  word  Absolute,  and  the  Samskrt  Brahman. 
Para-Brahman  is  the  same  word  as  the  last,  with  only  the 
intensive  and  eulogistic  para,  i.e.,  Supreme,  added.  One 
other  common  and  significant  Sarpskrt  name  for  it,  which 
should  be  specially  noted  here,  is  Param-Atma  —  the 
Supreme  Atma,  Supreme  Self.  In  strictness,  the 
Absolute  is  as  much  the  whole  of  Not-Self  as  Self; 
but  it  is  given  the  name  of  the  '  Supreme  Self9  especially, 
because  the  human  jlva,  as  will  be  apparent  from  what 
has  been  said  in  Chapters  IV  and  V,  arrives  first  at  the 
Pratyag-atma,1  the  *  inward  '  or  *  abstract  '  and  universal 
Self  ;  and  being  established  there,  it  then  includes  the 
pseudo-universal  Not-Self  within  itself  ;  and  thus  realises 
ultimately  its  identity  with  the  Absolute,  which  it  then 
calls  the  Param-Atma  —  the  Supreme  Self,  because  it  is 
first  seen,  through  and  as  the  universal  Self,  though  now 
seen  also  to  contain  the  Not-  Self  ;  and  because  the  Self  is 
the  element,  the  factor,  of  Being  in  the  triune  Absolute. 


flTOTF  S*R:,  Q^fct,  3Tfa  ^»  fife  ^  I  Bhagavafa,  IV,  xi. 


\  Qg-veda. 

See  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions,  pp.  139-140.  etseq.t  for 
translation  of  the  above,  and  many  more  such  names,  in  Vaicjika  pharma 
as  well  as  in  other  religions  and  languages  ;  also  pp.  96,  et  seq.,  for  equi- 
valents  in  the  scriptures  of  other  religions,  of  the  Logion  '  I-This-Not.' 


TO?R*?T  f  F^l  WH  I  Sarva-sara  Upanishaj. 


P.,   CH.   VIIl]       SOME    MORE   ANCIENT   TEXTS  153 

"This  udglta,  this  music-sound,  the  AUM,  is 
Supreme  Brahman.  In  it  are  the  Three,  well  indicated 
by  the  three  letters.  Realising  the  secret  hidden  between 
them,  knowers  of  Brahman  merge  therein  and  become 
free  from  rebirth.  When  with  the  lamp  of  the  Atma,  the 
jiva  beholds  Brahman  with  all-intentness,  Brahman, 
the  unborn,  the  time-less,  the  pure  of  all  t  a  1  1  v  a  s,  then 
he  becometh  free  from  all  bonds.1  " 


3 

5,  ^ric^T  ^r  g^cl  ^fi:  i 

,  i,  7,  15» 


.4  few  more  Ancient  Texts 

NOTE.  —  Some  more  texts  from  Vaidika  as  well  as 
Buddhist  writings  may  be  added  here,  in  support  of  the 
contents  of  this  chapter. 

Vedic  Writers 


,  iv.  22 

*  He  who  has  visioned  That  Which  is  Beyond  Duality  ' 
Which  includes  all  Duals,  he  becomes  free  from  all  bonds  and 
fetters  of  the  soul  ;  sane,  equable,  tranquil,  in  all  conditions 
of  gain  or  of  loss  ;  satisfied  with  and  welcoming  all  that  be- 
falls ;  devoid  of  all  discontents  and  jealousies.1 


154  TEXTS    FROM    VEDIC   WRITINGS  [SC.    OF 

'  Changeless,  undecaying,  unincreasing,  is  the  state  of 
That  Which  Transcends  Duality.  To  It  go  those  who  have 
cast  off  pride  and  fear,  clinging  attachments,  blinding  infatuat- 
ing desires  ;  who  look  equably  on  the  primal  Duals,  Pleasure 
and  Pain  ;  and  devote  themselves  constantly  to  meditation  on 
that  '  Self  Beyond  Duality  '. 

intaff  33%^^; 

si3fr:  ;  Manu,  i.  26 


*  The  Supreme  (It-Self  beyond  all  Pairs,  becoming  fo- 
cussed  in  a  Brahma,  to  create  this  our  world)  created  Pleasure  - 
and-  Pain  (as  Primal  Pair),  and  invested  all  living  things  with 
them  :  and  (out  of  the  experiencing,  by  humans,  of  these  two, 
in  innumerable  settings,  forms,  situations,  the  Brahma-  Ruler 
of  our  solar  system,  or  this  earth)  wove  the  Scheme  of  Sin- 
and-Merit  and  distinctions  between  Good-and-Evil  deeds  '. 


tftaf, 


; 

'  The  True  Knowledge  (I-am-Not-This)  and  the  False 
Knowledge  (I-am-This-body  etc.)  —  he  who  knows  the  Pair  of 
both  these  together  ',  he  crosses  beyond  death,  after  having 
tasted  and  experienced  it  in  consequence  of  the  False  Know- 
ledge ;  and  he  tastes  Immortality  through  the  True  Knowledge 
(which  includes  the  False  Knowledge  plus  its  simultaneous 
repudiation).*** 


:  I  Jsha. 


P.,    CH.   VIIl]  FROM    BUDDHIST   WRITINGS  155 

1  It  moveth,  and  It  moveth  Not  ;  'Tis  far,  and  yet  'Tis 
near  :  It  is  within  all  This,  It  is  without  ;  It  is  not  large,  nor 
small  ;  not  middling,  yet  the  middle  ;  not  -pervading,  ail- 
pervading  ;  with  beginning,  and  beginningless  also  :  not  the 
whoje,  also  the  whole  ;  attributeless,  and  yet  possessed  of 
every  possible  attribute.  It  is  the  Fourth  which  transcends 
the  Three,  and  yet  not  such  (for  It  is  immanent  also  in  every- 
thing which  is  within  the  Three)  ;  It  is  the  Self,  It  is  also  the 
Not-Self  ;  It  is  harsh  (and  all-destroying),  It  is  gentle  (all- 
preserving)  ;  heroic,  timid  too  ;  great,  small  ;  all-grasping,  all- 
abandoning  ;  flaming,  and  cool  ;  facing  on  all  sides,  and 
facing  none  '. 


Rhagavata,  VI   iv   32 

*  Is  and  is  not  —  both,  and  also  all  possible  other  con- 
tradictory qualities  abide  within  that  ultimate  Reality,  which 
Yoga  and  Sankhya  endeavour  to  describe  as  equal  with  all 
and  greater  than  all,  as  friend  of  all  and  foe  of  all  '. 

There  is  another  *  mysterious  '  aphorism  in  the  Nyaya- 
Sufras,  which,  like  the  one  quoted  on  p.  125,  supra,  is  pure 
V6danta,  taken  by  itself  ;  though,  in  the  context,  it  is  given 
another  meaning  : 

5T  53^  9*  ^  arera;,  q  gv^Kig;  ,  *?S-3ra<ft:  efctqfc;  iv.  i.  48. 

1  Not  existent,  nor  non-existent,  nor  both,  because  it  has 
not  the  quality  of  either.* 

Buddhist  Writers 

The  famous  Bhikkhu,  Asanga,  who  spread  Mahay  ana 
Buddhism  in  Thibet,  writes  in  his  Mahayana-sutra-Alan- 
kara,  V.  1., 


156  MUTUAL   COPYING  [SC.    OF 

1  Not  being,  nor  non-being  ;  not  thus,  nor  otherwise  ;  It 
is  not  born,  nor  disminishes,  nor  decays  in  any  way,  nor 
increases,  nor  can  be  made  purer  —  such  is  that  Pure  and 
Perfect  Parama-arjha,  Highest  object  of  understanding  '. 

Another  very  famous  Bhikkhu,  Nagarjuna,  great  chemist, 
discoverer  and  inventor  of  metallic  preparations,  r  a  s  a-s,  for 
medical  purposes,  as  well  as  profound  philosopher,  writes  in 
his  Madhyamika  K3rika, 


1  Not  destructible,  nor  constructible,  not  slayable,  nor 
procreatable,  riot  transient,  nor  permanent,  not  One,  nor  Many, 
not  coming,  nor  departing  —  such  is  It  (the  Self  denying  the 
Not-Self).1 

Gauda-pada,  the  guru's  guru  of  Shankaracharya,  practical- 
ly copies  the  above,  in  his  Mandukya-K'arika,  32, 


\ 

'  No  in-hibition,  no  ex-hibition,  no  bondage,  no  freedom, 
no  craving  for  deliverance,:  no  emancipateness  —  such  is  the 
state  of  Parama-artha,  Highest  Object  (of  knowledge).' 

Mutual  Copying 

During  the  1200  years  of  the  Buddhist  period  ot  Indian 
history,  followers  of  Gautama  Buddha  and  followers  of  the 
Vedas  reproduced  more  or  less  the  same  old  old  teachings  ; 
varied  the  words  ,  and  often,  ostensibly  and  ostentatiously, 
(though,  in  private  they  may  have  spoken  more  sincerely  and 
made  honest  confessions  even),  told  their  respective  disciples, 
*  What  I  am  teaching  is  different  from  all  other  teachings  and 
quite  original.'  Human  weakness  —  to  afford  another  illustra- 
tion of  the  inseparable  duality  —  *  high  and  noble  thought  '  and 
4  mean  and  low  motive  '  side  by  side  ! 

In  Gauda-pada's  Karika-s,  the  words  Buddha,  Sam  buddha, 
Pra-buddha,  and  Prati-buddha  occur  repeatedly.     In  two  or 


P.,   CH.   VIIl]         THE    '  BEYOND-THE-TWO  '  157 

three  places  Gautama  Buddha  is  meant  certainly  ;  in  some 
others,  advanced  souls,  performing  the  functions  of  a  Buddha, 
seem  to  be  referred  to,  generally  (see  The  MahatmU  Letters, 
pp.  43-44,  regarding  "  the  last  Khobilgan,  .  .  .  Sang-Ko-pa  of 
Kokonor,  XIV  century  ")»  in  the  remainder,  only  '  wise  know- 
ers  '  are  meant.  But  Vaidika  annotators,  e.g.,  Shankaracharya, 
explain  all  in  the  last  sense  only. 

The  Beyond-the-Two 

As  regards  the  inclusion  of  both  Pratya-atma  and  Mula- 
Prakrti  in  Param-atma,  Vishnu  Purana,  says, 


Glta  says, 

3ft,  ftfe  3?ffl^t  3$  3?fq, 

^:  ;  xiii,  19-22. 
:  ;  xv,  16-17, 

6  Prakrti  and  Purusha  (Pratyag-atma),  both,  are  latent  in 
Param-atma.  The  former  is  changeful  ;  the  latter,  changeless  ; 
the  third,  Param-atma,  is  the  highest,  including  both  and 
distinguishable  from  each.' 

A  Sufi's  Testimony    to  the  Distinction!  ess 

Some  beautiful  lines  by  the  famous  Persian  Sufi  poet 
and  philosopher,  Maulana  Rumi,  on  the  disappearance,  during 
slumber,  of  all  time  and  space  and  motion,  illustrate  what  has 
been  said  on  the  subject,  in  the  text  above. 

Shab,  ze  zindan,  be-khabar  zindaniyan  ; 
Shab,  ze  daulat,  be-khabar  sultaniyan  ; 
Nai  gham  o  andesha-e  sud  o  ziyari  ; 
Nai  khayale  in  fulan  o  an  fulari  : 
Hal-e  a'rif  in  buwad  be-khvftb  ham. 

'  Oblivious  is  the  prisoner  of  his  chains  ; 
Oblivious  in  the  monarch  of  his  wealth  ; 


158  A    SUFI'S   TESTIMONY  [SC.    OF 

The  tradesman,  of  his  losses  and  his  gains ; 
The  sick  man,  of  his  torment  of  ill -health  ; 
And  every  one,  of  this,  that,  great  and  small ; 
When  they  sleep  as  the  dead,  at  dead  of  night. 
The  wise  man  who  has  seen  the  Self  in  all, 
Oblivious  is  of  all,  e'en  in  daylight.' 


CHAPTER  IX 


PVAM-DVAM  '—  THE  RELATIVE 


;  K  atha. 

'  The  Self  -born  pierced  the  senses  outwards  ;  therefore 
the  soul  looketh  outwards,  not  inwards.  One  resolute  one, 
here  and  there,  turneth  his  vision  inwards,  desirous  of  im- 
mortality, determined  to  achieve  it,  resolved  to  conquer 
Death  ;  and  he  then  beholdeth,  and  identifieth  himself  with, 
Pratyag-Atma,  the  Deathless  Inner  Self.' 

(A)  PRATYAG-ATMA  —  SELF 

AHAM,S    I,   Self,  in  the  great   logion,   is  Pratyag-Atma. 
It  is  the  inward,  abstract,  universal  Self  or  Spirit,  eternal 

1  55,  '  two-and-two  ',  the  paired,  the  double. 

2  3?,  a,  is  the  first  letter  of  the  Sarpskrt  alphabet,  and  ?,  ha,  the 
last  ;  therefore  the  two  together,  between  them,  exhaust  all  the  contents 
of  all  possible  '  experience,'  which  can  be  possibly  expressed  by  all  the 


P.,    CH.    IX]  PRATYAG-ATMA  159 

Subject,  wherein  all  j  I  v  a  s,  individual,  particular, 
discrete  spirits,  selves,  or  subjects,  inhere  as  whirlpools 
in  the  ocean,  as  whirl-winds  in  the  air^  as  vortices  in 
ether,  as  points  in  space.1  It  pervades  them  all,  as  the 
genus  pervades  all  individuals.  It  is  all  those  indivi- 
duals. The  *  appearance  '  of  separateness,  individua- 
tion,  differentiation,  is  caused  by  matter,  Mula-Prakrti, 
as  will  appear  later.  In  itself,  it  is  the  avyakta, 
the  unmanifest,  unspecialised.  unindividualised  ;  sheath- 
ed in  b  u  d  d  h  i  or  m  a  h  a  t,  universal  mind,  (corre- 
sponding to  the  connotation  of  the  plural  and  yet  un- 
breakably  unitive,  connective,  collective  *  we  ')>  it  becomes 

letters  of  the  alphabet,  i.e.,  language,  and  which  is  all  overshadowed 
by  the  transiency,  perish  ingness,  negation,  that  is  indicated  by  the 
JJ,  rn.  Therefore,  3?-^-^  are  the  appropriate  vocal  symbol  of  the  I.  which 
is  the  only  'expcriencer,  '  in  whom  alone  all  experience,  with  its  negation,  is. 
?,  ha,  also  stands  for  the  a  k  5s  h  a-{  a  1  1  v  a,  the  substrate  of  sound,  and 
the  first  material  manifestation  and  sheath  or  body  of  conscious  life,  in  this 
solar  system  at  least,  according  to  the  Puranas  ;  and  it  therefore  appro- 
priately takes  the  place,  in  the  name  of  the  individual  ego,  which  is 
occupied  by  3,  u,  in  that  of  the  Absolute  Ego. 


\ 
Nandik-eshvara-karika  ,  4  . 

1  B  h  r  a  m  a,  b  h  r  a  n  $  i,  is  one  of  the  names  for  the  *  illusion,'  the 
'  appearance  without  reality/  of  the  World-Process  ;  a  sort  of  anagram 
of  '  Brahman  ',  and  means  '  turning  round  and  round,1  as  the  opposite 
of  the  Moveless.  This  circling  b  h  r  a  m  a  of  the  World-Process  is  visible 
even  to  the  physical  eye,  and  requires  no  difficult  thinking.  The  earth, 
the  moon,  the  planets,  suns,  stars,  all  revolve  ;  the  seasons,  the  biological 
functions,  psychological,  political,  economical,  social,  historical  pheno- 
mena —  all  observe  cyclical  periodicity,  which  takes  on  the  form  of  spirals, 
for  reasons  explained  later  on  in  the  text.  The  Self  '  makes-believe  '  ; 
It  believes  '  as  if  '  It  is  '  this,  that,  and  tfce  other  not-Self  '  ;  and  then, 
discarding  the  mask,  It  comes  back  into  It-Self. 


160  BRAHMAN   with   ATTRIBUTES  [SC.    OF 

the  supra-conscious,  out  of  which  emerge  and  into  which 
merge  back  again,  all  v  y  a  k  t  i  s,  individuals,  manifest  con- 
sciousnesses^ particular  minds,  manas-es,  (correspond- 
ing  to  the  singular  and  separative  '  I  ').  It  is  the  One, 
eka,  in  a  special  degree.  It  is  the  essence,  source,  and 
substratum  of  airsimiianty,  sameness,  continuity,  unity, 
all  oneness.  It  is  Ishvara  in  the  abstract  sense,  the  one 
Ishvara  of  all  particular  Ishvaras  —  their  Self,  as  also  the 
Self,  and  as  much  so,  of  the  j  I  v  a  s  that  have  not  yet 
arrived  at  the  state  of  Ishvara-hood.  It  is  sometimes 
called  the  Maya-s  h  a  b  a  1  a  m  Brahman,  or  S  a-g  u  n  a  m 
Brahman,  Brahman  conjoined  with  attributes,  en- 
wrapped in,  coloured  with,  Maya.  The  Upanishats 
mostly  describe  it,  this  Pratyag-Atma,  and,  leading  the 
enquirer  to  it,  finally  state  that  it  is  identical  with 
Brahman.  Such  aphoristic  utterances,  apparently,  have 
led  to  the  confusion  which  seems  to  prevail  at  the  present 
day  amongst  the  vedantis  of  the  various  schools,  as 
to  the  relation  between  Pratyag-Atma  and  Param-Atma, 
or  Brahman.  The  follou  ing  great  words  of  the  Upanishats 
refer  to  the  Pratyag-a^ma  :  "  Unmoving,  it  outstrippeth 
the  wind  ;  the  gods  themselves  may  not  attain  to  it  ;  it 
goeth  Beyond  all  limitations  ;  by  knowledge  of  it,  the 
jlva  attains  to  the  (first)  peace  of  unity;  it  is  the  white, 
the  bodiless,  the  pure,  the  Self-born,  itself  uncaused  and 
changeless,1  and  causing  all  things  else  and  all  their 


1  A  metaphysical  axiom  in  Saipskrt,  says,  3f 
'  That  which  undergoes  no  change  has  no  cause,'  or,  more  briefly,  '  the 
changeless  is  causeless  '.  Hume  uses  the  words,  "  What  is  incorruptible 
must  be  ungenerable  ". 


P.,  CH.  IX]        BRAHMAN    without   ATTRIBUTES  161 

changes,  smaller  than  the  smallest,  yet  vaster  than  the 
vastest ;  it  cannot  be  spoken  of  or  seen  or  heard  or 
breathed,  but  itself  speaks  and  sees  and  hears  and 
breathes ;  it  espouses  the  enquirer  and  appears  within 
him  of  its  own  law,  and  may  not  be  taught  by  another ; 
ever  it  hides  in  the  cave  of  the  heart ;  it  upholds  the 
three  worlds ;  it  divides  itself  and  appears  in  all  these 
endless  forms,  and  yet  is  best  described  by  saying,  '  not 
this/  '  not  this  V  l  And  then  comes  the  addition  ; 
"  This  Atma  is  the  Brahman."  *  The  meaning  is  that 
the  one  so  described  is  the  Atma,  but  the  same  Atma 
plus  the  description,  viz.,  '  Not  This  ' — that  is  to  say,  plus 
the  consciousness  that  "  I  am  Not  Other  than  I,"  which 
consciousness  is  inseparable  from,  nay,,is  the  very  being, 
and  the  whole  being,  and  the  whole  nature  of  the  Self — 
is  Brahman. 

This  Pratyag-atma 3  is  the  true  nitya,  the  constant, 
the  fixed,  the  eternal,  kutastha-nitya,  the  change- 
lessly  and  movelessly  permanent ;  as  opposed  to 
parinami-nitya,  the  changeiully  persistent  and 
ever-lasting,  the  sempiternal.  While  the  Absolute  may 
be  said  to  be  beyond  Eternity  as  well  as  Time — or 

1  Vide  Is  ha.  Kcna,  and  Kafha  Upanishajs. 
f  Mandukya.  2. 

*  This  word  is  not  prominently  used  in  the  later  works  on  V^an^a, 
but  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Bhagavafa.  e.g..  Ill,  xxxv,  27;  III. 
xx vi,  27,  etc.  Yoga-Sufra,  I,  29,  appears  to  refer  to  the  same  principle 
under  the  name  of  Pratyak-che(ana.  Shankar-Scharya,  in  his 
commentaries  on  Kena,  iv.  6.  Katha.  i.  3,  11-12,  and  ii,  1.  1-2,  on 
Gauda-paga's  Mandukya  Karika.  65.  and  Brahmaputra,  I.  i.  1,  men- 
tions some  other  aspects,  and  even  senses,  of  it.  Words  often  put  on 
new  meanings,  as  souls  do  new  bodies. 

11 


162  SLUMBER    KNOWS   'NO-THING'  [SC.    OF 

rather  to  include  them  both  as  Eternity  plus  Time,  seeing 
that  Eternity  is  opposed  to  Time,  and  the  Absolute  is  not 
opposed  to  anything  else  and  outside  of  it,  but  contains 
all  opposites  within  itself — the  word  Eternal,  as  opposed 
to  Temporal,  may  properly  be  assigned  to  the  Pratyag- 
3tma  in  its  abstract  aspect.  As  such  it  is  ever  complete 
and  undergoes  no  change,  but  is  the  substratum  and 
support  of  all  changing  things  and  of  Time,  even  as  an 
actor  of  his  theatrical  attires. 

For  concrete  illustration,  take  the  case  ofsushupti, 
sound  slumber,  awaking  from  which  a  person  says : 
4  I  slept  well,  I  knew  nothing.'  Knowing  Nothing, 
i.e.,  the  Not-Self,  he  was  out  of  Time  literally,  he 
was  at  complete  rest  in  the  Eternal,  wherein  he  felt 
perfect  repose  after  the  day's  turn  of  fatiguing  work  ; 
whereout  he  comes  back  again  into  Time  and  to  the 
cognition  of  some-things,  when  the  restlessness  '  of  desire 
for  the  experiences  of  samsara  again  overpowers  him. 
The  further  special  meaning  ofsushupti,  the  meaning 
of  sleep,  as  of  death,  may  appear  later.  In  the  present 
connection,  it  is  enough  to  refer  to  this  one  aspect  of  it, 
and  to  point  out  that  the  inner  significance  of  the 
expression,  *  the  Self  knows  no-thing  during  s  u  s  h  u  p  t  i,' 
is  that  It,  in  that  condition,  positively  knows  what  is 
technically  called  No-Thing  i.e.,  the  Not-Self  as  a  whole  ; 

1  The  words  of  the  Yo^a-system,  for  the  repose  and  the  restlessness 
mentioned  in  the  text,  are  fw^,  n  i  r  o  <}  h  a,  and  Sgc^TH,  vyu^hana, 
restraint  and  '  uprising,'  retirement  and  enterprise,  inhibition  and 
exhibition,  obliviscence  and  reminiscence,  unmanifest  consciousness  or 
sub-consciousness  or  dormant  memory  and  manifest  consciousness,  rest 
and  work,  fatigue  and  activity,  sleep  and  wakefulness. 


P.,    OH.    IX]  THREE    NAMES    OF   SELF  163 

for  the  potency,  the  necessity,  of  the  Being  of  the  Self 
maintains  constantly,  before  or  within  that  Self,  in  one 
unbroken  act  or  fact  of  consciousness,  this  No-thing,  i.e., 
No-particular-thing  but  mere  general  This-ness  or  pure 
Not-Self.  In  other  words,  jiva,  in  the  moment  of 
s  u  s  h  u  p  t  i,  passes  almost  entirely  (since,  strictly  speaking, 
it  cannot  pass  quite  entirely,  for  reasons  that  will  appear 
on  studying  the  nature  of  the  j  I  v  a)  out  of  the  region  of  the 
many  experiences  of  particular  not-selves,  of  successive 
somethings  ;  passes  into  the  other  side,  the  other  facet  (and 
yet  not  other  but  rather  all-including  aspect)  of  that  region, 
^12.,  into  the  region  of  the  Single,  underlying, ever-present, 
One  Experience,  One  Negating  Consciousness,  in  the  uni- 
versal Self,  of  the  pseudo- universal  Not-Self.  That  ji  va 
does  not  pass  entirely  out  of  the  state  of  awareness  or  *  ex- 
perience,' out  of  a  consciousness  which  is  its  very  nature 
and  essence,  is  the  reason  why  the  thread  and  continuity 
of  its  identity  reappears  unbroken  after  the  soundest 
slumber. 

As  with  reference  to  Time,  the  Self  obtains  the  name 
of  the  Eternal,  N  i  t  y  a,  coexistently  present  at  every  point 
of  Time — for  all  the  endlessly  successive  points  of  time 
are  coexistent  to,  and  in,  its  eternal  and  universal  all- 
embracing  consciousness,  Now ;  so,  with  reference  to 
Space,  Its  name  isVi-bhu,  pervasive-being,  infinite, 
unextended,  or  extensionless ;  and,  again  with  reference 
to  Motion,  Its  name  is  Sarva-Vyapi,  all-permeating* 
Omnipresent,  the  simultaneously  present  at  every  point 
of  space  ;  for  all  the  countlessly  coexistent  points  of  Space 


164        WHY    MOVEMENT   WITHIN    BRAHMAN  ?      [SC.    OF 

are  simultaneously  present  in  that  same  consciousness, 
in  one  point,  Here.  Introspection  on  the  nature  of  sound 
Sleep  is  useful  for  understanding  the  nature  of  Space  as 
of  Time.  In  sound  sleep  we  lose  consciousness  of  Motion, 
Time,  Space,  all.  (Thus,  a  person  falling  sound  asleep 
when  his  train  is  standing  at  one  station,  and  waking 
up  when  it  is  again  standing  at  another,  cannot  say 
whether  the  train  has  moved  at  all  and  how  long  in  time 
and  how  far  in  space  he  has  slept).  In  slumber  we 
'bathe  ',  are  immersed  in,  Brahman,  and  are  4  renewed  '. 
With  reference  to  Motion,  its  best  name  seems  to 
be  Kuta-stha,  rock-seated,  or  Avi-karl,  or  A  par i- 
n  a  m  1 ,  un-changing,  the  fixed,  or,  again,  Antar-yami 
the  inner  watcher  or  ruler.1 

1  As  regards  what  has  been  said  above  about  Atma  plus  '  Not  This/ 
an  earnest  student  and  scholar  wrestled  with  the  idea  for  long.  His 
recurring  difficulty  was  :  "  Why  should  not  Brahman  remain  pure  con- 
sciousness ;  why  should  there  be  in  It  the  necessity  of  a  denial  of 
another,  and  so  movement  ? ' '  Another  might  take  the  next  step  further 
in  the  same  direction  and  ask :  ' '  Why  should  there  be  any  Brahman  at  all  ? 
Why  not  let  there  be  Nothing  only  ?  "  The  case  of  Bhushundi  questioning 
Markandeya,  in  the  Puranas,  is  similar.  More  preparation  and  practice 
in  meditation  is  needed  to  realise  the  simple  truth.  A  study  of  the  Time 
and  Space  and  Motion  experiences,  of  dreams  and  reveries  and  flights  of 
even  waking  but  rapt  and  absorbing  imagination,  is  exceedingly  helpful, 
nay  necessary ;  and  the  absence  of  all  such  experiences  in  deep  sleep 
shonld  also  be  carefully  pondered  on  at  the  same  time.  Until  the  opposi- 
tion between  Time  and  Eternity  is  realised,  the  difficulty  about  move- 
ment and  change  will  continue.  The  Yoga-Vasistha  stories  are  very 
helpful  in  this  reference.  The  whole  point  is  that  time  and  movement 
are  within,  and  negated  by,  the  Eternity  of  the  Moveless  All-Consci- 
ousness. The  questions  at  the  outset  of  this  note  may  be  more  directly 
dealt  with,  once  again,  thus  :  The  reply  is  by  a  counter  query — What  do 
you  understand  by  pure  consciousness  1  Is  not  pu re  consciousness  =*  the 
Denial  of  impure  consciousness  ?  How  can  you  talk  and  think  and  know 
at  all  of  the  pure,  except  by  at  the  same  time  opposing  it  to  the  impure  ? 
And  why  do  you  use  the  word  remain  ?  Is  it  not  that  you  have  at  the 
back  of  your  mind  the  idea  of  Pure  consciousness  persisting  from  one 
moment  of  time  to  another,  and  then  to  another,  and  so  on  endlessly  ? 


P.,    CH,   VIl]        WHY   ANY   BRAHMAN    AT    ALL?  165 

Two  Triads  of  Attributes 

Out  of  the  relation  of  the  Self  to  the  Not-Self,  as 
embodied  in  the  logion,  there  arises  a  Triplicity  of  Attri- 
butes in  both.  The  triune  nature  of  the  Absolute — the  one 
constant  and  timeless  *  moment '  thereof  which  contains 
within  it  three  '  incessant  moments  (movements,  momen- 
tums)  of  Time,  viz.,  Past,  Present  and  Future — imposes 

But  successive  moments  of  time  cannot  be  distinguished  in  pure  con- 
sciousness. Successive  'impure  consciousness,' i.e.,  particular,  definite 
experiences,  sensations,  thoughts,  emotions,  volitions,  movements  in 
short,  mark  and  make  the  successive  moments  of  time  and  points  of 
space  ;  (the  words  to  us  may  be  added,  but  they  are  perfectly  superfluous 
and  useless,  for  of  to  others  in  the  strict  sense  we  have  no  notion  and 
cannot  speak).  (Identifying  ourselves  with  them  by  turns,  we  can  see 
that)  one  cycle  of  a  conscious  sun  absorbed  in  the  act  of  rolling  may  be 
as  one  circuit  of  a  race-course  by  a  horse — though  in  human  count,  the 
former  covers  millions  of  years  and  billions  of  miles,  and  the  latter  a 
single  minute  and  about  half  a  mile.  Each  is  just  one  mind-filling 
experience  to  its  experiencer,  the  equivalent  of,  so  to  say,  one  moment  of 
time.  The  next  run  will  make  the  next  moment ;  and  so  on.  When 
there  are  no  such  '  impure  consciousnesses  '  there  can  be  no  '  remaining  '. 
The  next  question,  "  Why  not  let  there  be  Nothing  ?  "  contains  its  own 
answer.  Surely  let  there  be-Nothing,  by  all  means.  But  Brahman  is  just 
this  be-nothing,  be-no-thing,  is-not-this.  This  is  not  quibbling.  It  is  perfect- 
ly serious.  We  cannot  think  or  talk  of  nothing  without  also  thinking  and 
talking  of  being  ;  and  the  two  together,  at  once,  are  Brahman.  If  you 
mean-by  the  words,  "  Why  not  let  there  be  nothing?  ",  only  the  question 
"  Why  are  there  any  changing  things  at  all  ?  ",  then  the  whole  preceding 
text  is  an  attempt  to  answer  this  very  question.  If  you  mean  "  Why  is 
there  any  unchanging  thing?",  then  the  answer,  already  given  in  the 
text  also,  is,  again,  "  A  why  is  not  possible  to  ask,  and  cannot  be  asked, 
with  regard  to  what  is  clearly  recognised  as  really  unchanging  ". 

1  Compare  the  verse  quoted  from  Jntlna-garbha  in  the  foot-note 
at  p.  21  of  Shiva-Sutra-vimarshini,  edited  and  published  by 
Mr.  J.  C.  Chatterji,  in  1911,  for  the  Kashmir  State  Series  of  Texts. 


166  TWO    TRIADS   OF   ATTRIBUTES  [SC.    OF 

severally  on   Self  and  Not-Self,  three  gunas,  attributes, 
functions,     properties,    or     qualities.    These    three    in- 
Separable    '  moments '     in     the    Absolute   may  be  thus 
distinguished  :  (a)    The    '  I '    holds  the   '  Not- 1  '  before 
itself,    and,    so     facing    it,     denies    it,     i.e.,     cognises 
Not-Self's    non-entity,     its    nothingness.     This   face-to- 
face-ness  constitutes  the  moment  of  Cognition,  including 
sub-divisions    to    appear    later.    (6)    This    cognidon  of 
Not-Self  by  Self  is  due   to,  and   is  of  the  nature  of,  a 
self-definition  by  Self,  a  constant  definition  of  its  own 
nature    to    It-Self    as   being  actually  different  from  all 
Not-Self,  from  all  things  other  than  the  pure  Self,  which 
things  might  possibly  be  regarded  as  identical  with  itself . 
Implied  therefore  in  this  Self-consciousness  is  the  Action 
of  an   '  identification  '  and   then  a  *  separation  '  of  Self 
with  and  from  Not-Self.     This  is  the  moment  of  Action, 
having  its   subdivisions   also,    (c)  The  third  moment  is 
that  which   intervenes  between   the  other  two,  the  inner 
condition,   so   to  say  (for  there  is  no  real  distinction  of 
inner    and    outer    here),    of   the    'I,'    its   tendency  or 
Desire,   between  the  holding  of  the  *  Not-l  '  before  itself, 


"  I  invoke,  in  the  heart,  the  Goddess  Consciousness,  of  supreme 
perfections,  whose  manifest  body  is  the  triple  succession,  and  whose  inner 
Nature  or  Spirit  is  successionlessness."  This  work  and  some  others 
belonging  to  the  Kashmir  School  of  Shaivism,  which  have  become  avail- 
able since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work  and  of  the  first 
volume  of  the  Pranava-vada,  show  that  that  school  has  many  ideas  in 
common  with  these.  A  learned  friend  has  referred  roe  to  the  definition 
of  Shakti,  which  appears  in  the  commentary  by  Yoga-raja  on  Abhinava- 
gupta's  Paramartha-sttra,  kSrika  4,  as  ftsfaSqpTTCW  $fct:  which,  if 
the  context  allows,  and  if  it  is  a  definition,  can  only  mean  that  "  the 
nature  of  Shakti  is  to  operate  as  negation";  see  ch.  xi  infra  and 
Pranava-vada,  I,  53,  eto. 


P.,  CH.  IX]  CHIT-SAD-INANDA  167 

on  the  one  hand,  and  its  movement  into  or  out  of 
it,  on  the  other.  This  third  moment,  of  Desire,  also 
has  subdivisions,  to  be  developed  later.  These  three 
moments  manifest  in  the  individual  jiva  as  jnana, 
kriya,  and  ichchha  respectively.1  They  will  be 
treated  of  in  detail  further  on.  Here  it  is  enough  to 
say  that  these  three  moments  in  the  Absolute  Brahman 
appear  in  the  universal  Pratyag-atma  as  the  three  attri- 
butes of  C  h  i  t,  Sat,  and  A  n  a  n  d  a,  respectively,  which 
are  the  seeds,  principia,  possibilities  and  potencies,  univer- 
sal and  abstract  aspects,  of  what  in  the  individual  jiva 
manifest  as  jnana,  kriya  and  ichchha/  i.e.,  cognition, 
action,  desire.  Sat,  '  being',  is  in  a  special  sense  and  degree, 

1  ?R,  ?^5T,  f*fc1T.  The  English  words  '  know,  con.  ken,  cognise,' 
4  create  '  and  '  wish  '  are  apparently  derived  from  (probably  etymo- 
logically  the  same)  Samskrt  roots,  viz.,  '  jSa,1  '  kr,1  and  '  ish,'  respectively. 

3  In  current  V^^n^a  works,  the  meaning,  as  generally  accepted,  of 


sat,  chit,  and  a  n  a  n  d  a,  is  explained  to  be  being,  consciousness,  and  bliss 
respectively.  This  is  not  incorrect  in  itself,  but  is  misleading  and  vague  ; 
it  certainly  does  not  bring  out  the  characteristic  significance  of  each. 
The  correspondence  between  the  two  triplets,  mentioned  here,  which  at 
the  time  this  was  written  was  only  a  guess  based  upon  indications  in 
current  Samskrt  works,  was  afterwards  amply  confirmed  by  the  Pra- 
nava-vada.  Also,  subsequently,  I  have  found  a  definite  statement  of  it, 
though  indirectly,  in  the  Bhumika  or  Introduction  to  Guptavaji  Tlka  on 


'  Maha-Sarasvatf,  Maha-Kali,  Maha-Lakshml 
are  only  other  names  for  (the  powers  of)  cognition,  desire,  and  action/ 
And  again  : 


"O  Chandl!  that  art  Maha-Sarasva^I  or  Chi(,  Maha-Lakshmi  or 
Sat,  and  Maha-Kall  or  A  n  a  n  <}  a,  we  con-template  thec  in  the  lotus  ot 
the  heart,  in  order  to  achieve  knowledge  of  Thy  essential  being." 


168  JSANA-KRIYA-ICHCHHA  |_SC.    OF 

the  principle  in  consciousness  of  act-ua\  (self-)  assert-ion 
and  (other-)  denial,  ac/-ual  identification  and  separation, 
making  and  unmaking ;  it  corresponds  to  k  r  i  y  a,  which 
alone  gives  or  takes  away  existence,  i.e.,  manifest  and 
particularised  being.  Chit,  *  consciousness  f  in  its  special 
aspect  of  cognition,  is  the  mere  holding  before  oneself  of  a 
not-self  and  ignoring  it,  denying  it,  knowing  it  to  be  not ;  it 
corresponds  to  j  fi  ana,  which  enables  a  thing  to  be  known 
as  existent  or  non-existent,  true  or  false.  A  nantfa,  the 
inner  condition  of  the  Self  between  cognition  and  action, 
is  that  principle  of  consciousness  which  connects  the 
other  two,  is  the  basis  of  desire,  which  leads  the  j  I  va 
from  knowledge  into  action.  That  which  in  the  Uni- 
versal, All-embracing,  Omnipotent  is  A  nan  da,  '  bliss,' 
the  fulfilment,  or  rather  fulfilled  condition,  of  all  desires 
and  wants,  is  the  Eternal  want  of  want,  that  appears 
in  the  individual  as  joy  after  the  fulfilment  of  a  particular 
want,  craving,  desire,  ichchha.  What,  in  the  Infinite, 
All-judging,  Omniscient,  is  Chit,  consciousness,  the  ful- 
filled conditidn  of  all-knowing,  is  the  denial  of  the 
possibility  of  all  not-selves,  is  the  simultaneous  positing 
and  denying  of  all  else  than  Self;  that  appears  in  the 
limited  jiva  as  partial  knowledge  of  thing  after  thing, 
half-truth,  the  error  or  a-vidy  a  of  assertion,  and  then  the 
remaining,  nish6dha-sh6sha,  critical,  '  well-judged,' 
vidya,  supplementary  and  completing  truth,  of  the 
denial  of  things,  '  all  is  vanity,'  *  vortices  of  nothing,' 
'  much  ado  about  nothing  '.  Finally,  that  which  in  the 
Motionless  and  Changeless,  Omnipresent,  is  Perfect  and 


P.,   CH.   IX]  ALL   SIX  INSEPARABLE  169 

Peaceful  Being,  Sat,  Being  everywhere,  that  same  appe- 
ars, in  the  finite  person,  as  effort  to  be,  to  exist,  in  place 
after  place,  time  after  time,  i.e.,  is  action,  followed  by  rest. 
(Be-ing  is  to  '  be-tn-Self  * ;  existence  is  '  ow£-istence  '). 
It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  three  aspects, 
sat,  chit,  and  a  n  a  n  d  a,  are  not  prior  in  time  to  k  r  i  y  a, 
j  n  a  n  a,  and  i  c  h  c  h  h  a  ;  nor  are  they  in  any  sense  external 
causes  or  creators  of  the  latter.  They  are  co-eval  with 
each  other  in  their  universal  and  unmanifested  aspect, 
and  are  identical  with  the  second  triplet,  which  is  only 
their  particular  and  manifested  aspect ;  even  as  univer- 
sal and  particular,  abstract  and  concrete,  substance  and 
attribute,  plural  and  singular,  whole  and  parts,  We  and 
I,  may  be  said  to  be  identical.  The  two  cannot  be 
separated,  but  only  distinguished,  as  before  pointed  out. 
Pratyag-atma  cannot  and  does  not  exist  without  and  apart 
from  jivas,  and  jlvas  cannot  and  do  not  exist  with- 
out and  apart  from  Pratyag-atma.  But  while  in  Pratyag- 
atma,  consciousness  is  Self -Consciousness,  which,  against 
the  foil  of  the  Not-Self,  is  Self-action  or  Self-assertion, 
Self-knowledge,  and  Self-desire  or  Self-enjoyment,  all  in 
one,  all  evenly  balanced  and  equal,  none  greater  than  any 
other,  all  merging  into  each  ;  so  that  Pratyag-atma  is 
often  exclusively  referred  to  in  the  Upanishats  by  only 
one  of  the  three  attributes,  as  only  a  n  a  n  d  a,  or  c  h  i  t, 
or  sat  or  ananda-ghana,  chid-ghana,  sad-ghana ; 
jlva  is  a  compound  of  jnana,  ichchha  and  kriya, 
which,  by  the  necessary  fact  of  their  confinement  to  parti- 
culars, realise  their  inseparable  contemporaneousness 


170  UNIVERSAL   SELF,    IMPERSONAL  [SC.   OF 

only  in  an  endless  succession  ;  so  that  they  rotate  one 
after  the  other,  two  being  always  latent,  but  never 
absent,  while  one  is  patent. ' 

How  and  why  three  moments  come  to  be  distin- 
guishable in  what  is  partless,  will  appear  on  fully  con- 
sidering the  nature  of  the  second  factor  in  the  triune 
Absolute.2 

Such  then  is  Sat-Chid-Ananda,  Saguna-Brah- 
man,  having  three  attributes  as  constituent  principles 
of  its  being,  three  potentialities  which  are  necessarily 
present  in  it  with  reference  to  the  necessary  nature 
of  its  two  co-factors  in  the  Absolute.  But  we  see 
clearly  all  the  while  that  it  is  not  personal,  not  indi- 
vidual, not  some  one  that  is  separate  from  other  onest 
not  the  single  ruler  of  any  one  particular  kosmic  system  ; 
but  is  Universal  Self  which  is  the  very  substratum  of,  and 
is  immanent  in,  all  particular  Ishvaras,3  i.e.,  jivas  risen 
to  be  rulers  of  world-systems  and  all  jivas  therein; 
(Chiefs  of  hosts  of  Planetary  spirits). 

1  But,  by  predominance  of  one  function  extending  over  a  long  period 
in  a  lifetime,  individual  jivas  become  distinguished,  despite  the  perpetual 
rotation  of  all  three,  as  *  men  of  knowledge,'  '  men  of  action,'  and  *  men 
of  desire,'  or  as  men  of  undifferentiated,  unskilled,  little-skilled  work. 

J  See  the  next  chapter. 

3  The  technical  definition  in  Samskrt  is,  ^Q^  ^^JH  3F*W\  3T  $n 
fffiSf:  f^{:,  "  He  who  can  do,  or  not  do,  or  do  otherwise  as  he  pleases  ". 
Etymologlcally.  $$&  ^  (Vtt*  "  ne  who  rules,  is  master,  the 
sovereign  ".  In  the  full  sense,  only  the  Universal  Self  is  Ishvara. 
In  the  comparative  sense,  infinite  numbers  of  jivas,  at  an  infinite 
number  of  stages  and  grades,  are  Isbvaras,  .ords,  masters.  A  '  lord  of 
men, '  a  chief,  a  king,  is  a  «ft^Cj  n  a  r-e"  s  h  v  a  r  a.  Technically,  the  three 
Rulers,  or,  rather,  the  Triple  or  Tri-Une  Ruler,  of  a  solar  system. 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Shiva,  are  Ishvaras  regarded  as  Three  ;  they  are 
Param-eshvara  regarded  as  a  Tri-Unity. 


P.,   CH.    IX]      WHY   TRIPLICITY   OF    ATTRIBUTES         171 

The  triplicity  of  attributes  in  the  Self  is  a  reflection 
of  the  triuneness  of  the  Absolute:  Self,  \vith  reference 
to  the  Self,  whose  very  being  is  constant  awareness  of 
It-self,  is  Chit;  with  reference  to  the  Not-Self,  which 
it  posits,  therefore  creates,  i.e.,  gives  to  it  the  appearance 
of  existence,  and  denies,  therefore  destroys,  becomes  Sat; 
with  reference  to  the  Negation,  ceasing  from  the  restless 
turmoil  of  the  Many,  it  shows  forth  A  n  a  n  d  a  and  the 
bliss  of  peace. 

Worship  of  Pratyag-atma 

This  Pratyag-atma  is  in  a  sense  capable  of  being 
worshipped.  Worship  and  devotion  may  be  directed  to 
it  in  the  shape  of  constant  study  and  re-cognition  of  its 
nature  ;  of  constant  desire  to  see  and  feel,  by  universal 
love,  its  presence  everywhere,  and  as  all  selves,  and  in  all 
not-selves  ;  of  constant  endeavour  to  realise  such  presence 
by  acts  of  compassion  and  helpfulness  and  service.  Such 
is  the  worship  of  the  Atma  by  the  ji  va  who,  having 
finished  (for  that  cycle)  his  journey  on  the  path  of 
pravrtti,  pursuit,  marked  out  by  the  first  half  of  the 
logion,  is  now  treading  (for  that  cycle)  the  return-path 
of  n  i  v  r  1 1  i,  renunciation,  which  is  laid  down  by  the 
second  half  of  that  same  logion.  To  such  a  j  I  v  a,  the 
special  Ishvara  of  his  own  particular  world-system  is  the 
higher  individuality  of  which  his  own  individuality  is,  in 
one  respect,  an  integral  part ;  is  the  father  of  his  material 
sheaths;  and,  in  another  aspect,  the  high  ideal  of 


172  WORSHIPS   OF   VARIOUS   ASPECTS        [SC.    OF 

renunciation  and  self-sacrifice  whom  he  is  lovingly  and 
devotedly  to  serve  and  closely  to  imitate,  as  far  as  may 
be,  within  his  own  infinitesimal  sphere. 

Students  who  cannot  yet  quite  clearly  grasp  the 
nature  of  the  relation  between  Self  and  Not-Self  in  its 
purity  and  nakedness,  cannot  yet  clearly  distinguish 
Pratyag-atma  from  its  veil  of  Mula-prakrti,  but,  still, 
more  or  less  vaguely,  realise  the  universality  of  Self, 
who  are  in  short  at  the  stage  of  Vishisht-advaita — 
such  students  worship  the  particular  Ishvara  of  their 
world-system  in  a  vaguely  universalised  aspect.  Still 
other  j  I  v  a  s,  at  the  stage  of  Dvaita  and  of  the  theory 
of  creation,  worship  only  and  wholly  the  individual  ruler 
of  their  world-system,  or  a  subordinate  deity,  regarding 
him  or  her  or  It  as  the  extra-cosmical  creator,  final  cause 
and  explanation,  of  the  universe. 

Absolute  Brahman  transcends  and  includes  all  wor- 
ship. 


CHAPTER  X 

PVAM-DVAM— THE  RELATIVE  (CONTINUED) 
(B)  MULA-PRAKRTI  OR  MATTER — NOT-SELF 

WE  have  dealt  with  the  first  factor  of  the  triune  Absolute, 
namely  the  Self.  The  second  factor  is  the  Not-Self.  Its 
many  names,  each  significant  of  a  special  aspect,  are : 


P.,  CH.  X]  MULA-PRAKRTI  173 

An-atma,  Not-Self:  A-chit,  the  non-conscious;  An-rtaf 
the  false  ;  Jacja,  the  non-intelligent,  non-sentient,  inert  ; 
Nana,  the  Many;  Jn6ya,  the  knowable  :  Vishaya,  the 
Object  ;  Bh&Ja-mula,  root  of  separateness  ;  Mula-prakrti, 
Root-Nature  ;  Pradhana,  the  chief,  the  root-base,  of  all 
the  elements,  wherein  they  all  '  subsist  '  ;  Matra,  the 
measurer,  the  measure-setter,  the  delimiter,  the  de-fin-ing 
or  finitising  principle,  the  mother,  Matter  ;  and  A-vyakta, 
the  Unmanifest.1  Mula-prakrti  and  Pradhana  are  specially 
prominent  in  Sankhya,  and  of  frequent  occurrence  else- 
where too. 

arfet,  3^3,  sre,  *r*r  ite,  f^nsR,  Jfcij?,  *£5-5Tfft, 

.  Each  name  is  significant  of  an  important  aspect. 

The  word  m  a  t  r  a  has,  regrettably,  dropped  out  of  current  use 
somehow  ;  it  deserves  restoration,  being  etymologically  the  same  as  the 
well  known  English  word  '  matter'  It  is  used  in  this  sense  in  the 
Bhagavad-Gita.  *?T^I^5Tf^3,  W^M  1,  ^fan*pf§:^T:  ii,  14.  The 
word  avyakta  is  not  specific  to  the  Not-Self,  it  should  be  noted  ;  it  is  used 
for  Pratyagatma,  or  abstract  Self,  also  for  Not-Self,  and  also  for 
mahat-buddhi  of  Sankhya,  the  '  great  '  diffused  Intelligence,  uni- 
versal or  sub-supra-Conscious  Mind,  unindividualised  by  a  sheath  and  un- 
particularised  or  unfocussed  by  an  act  of  attention.  Mahan-atma  also 
occurs,  now  and  then,  in  the  sense  of  Self  plus  this  Universal  Mind. 
Sometimes  a  k  a  s  h  a  is  also  called  avyakta,  as  a  substitute  for  root- 
matter  or  'This,'  which  is  the  indispensable  second  basis  of  universal 
mind,  the  first  being  Self. 

The  etymology  of  Pra-krti,  is  thus  explained  in  ()cvi-Bhaga- 

%  IX.  i  ; 


5156 


"  The  first  letter  indicates  greatness ;  the  next  two,  activity,  creation, 
emanation  ;    also,  the   three  letters  respectively  mean  the  three  g  u  n  a  s, 
ttva.  rajas,  and  tamas." 


174    NOT-SELF  ALL-WAYS  CONTRARY  OF  SELF   [SC.    OF 

This  Not-Self  is — by  the  Necessity  of  Negation  of  it 
by  Self,  which  Necessity  is  the  very  Nature  of  the  Absolute 
— the  opposite  of  Self,  in  every  possible  respect  and 
aspect ;  as  is  indicated  in  the  fact  that  some  of  its  most 
characteristic  names  are  made  up  by  prefixing  a  negative 
to  the  names  of  Self.  Because  of  this  fact,  as  the 
essential  characteristic  of  Self  is  Unity,  the  very 
essence  of  Not-Self  is  Manyness,  separateness ;  and  as 
the  marks  of  Self  are  Universality  and  unlimited- 
ness,  so  the  marks  of  the  Not-Self  are  limitedness, 
Particularity,  ever-specifiedness.  As  Fichte  has  said  }  : 
"  All  reality  is  in  consciousness,  and  of  this  reality  that 
part  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  Non-Ego  which  is  not  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  Ego,  and  vice  versa  .  .  .  The  Non-Ego 
is  what  the  Ego  is  not,  and  vice  versa."  Or,  better,  as 
reported  by  Schwegler2:  "Whatever  belongs  to  the 
Ego,  the  counterpart  of  that  must,  by  virtue  of  simple 
contraposition,  belong  to  the  Non-Ego." 

This  characteristic  consequence  of  the  opposition 
of  Self  and  the  Not-Self  should  be  carefully  considered, 
together  with  other  aspects  of  the  Nature  of  the  Absolute. 
Solution  of  the  various  difficulties,  alluded  to  before 
from  time  to  time,  hinges  upon  it. 

Because  nothing  particular  can  be  said  of  Ego, 
therefore  everything  particular,  all  possible  particulars, 
must  be  assigned  to  Non-Ego.  But  yet  again,  lest 
the  totality  of  these  particulars  should  become  a  fact 

1  The  Science  of  Knowledge,  p.  83  (Kroeger's  English  translation). 
*  History  of  Philosophy,  p.  246. 


P.,    CH.    X]  IN    ALL   WAYS  175 

different  from  the  Non-Ego  instead  of  identical  with  it, 
even  as  positive  is  different  from  negative,  these  parti- 
culars, are  paired  off  into  opposites.  These  opposites, 
again,  because  particular  and  definite,  are  more  than  pre- 
sence and  absence  ;  both  factors  have  the  appearance  of 
presence,  positiveness,  as  debt  and  loan,  as  pleasure  and 
pain.1  The  pain  of  a  debt  is  as  much  a  positive  burden 
on  the  consciousness  of  the  debtor,  as  the  pleasure  of  a 
loan  is  a  weight  on  that  of  the  creditor. 

When  we  are  dealing  with  the  ultimate  universal 
and  pseudo-universal,  viz.,  Self  and  Not-Self,  Being  and 
Nothing,  then  even  presence  and  absence  are  adequately 
opposed ;  it  is  enough  to  prefix  a  negative  particle  to 
Self  and  Being.  But  when  we  are  in  the  region  of  parti- 
culars, this  is  not  so ;  positive  cold,  in  order  to  be 
neutralised,  must  be  opposed  by  positive  heat,  and  not 
merely  by  no-cold  :  a  positive  debt  is  not  sufficiently  set 
off  and  balanced  by  a  no-debt,  but  only  by  an  asset ;  plus 
is  not  nullified  by  zero,  but  by  minus ;  a  colour  is  not 
abolished  by  no-colour,  but  by  another  equally  positive 
complementary  colour.  It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind, 
in  this  connection,  that  the  positiveness  of  particulars, 
the  reality  of  concrete  things,  is,  after  all,  not  so  very 
definite  and  indefeasible  as  it  seems  at  first  sight,  but  on 
the  contrary,  a  very  elusive  and  illusive  fact.  In  the 
ultimate  analysis  its  whole  essence  is  found  to  be  nothing 
else  than  consciousness  ;  the  more  consciousness  we  put 

1  See  Yoga-bha$hya,  ii,  5  ;  "  A  -  v  i  <J  y  a  is  not  merely  non-knowledge 
but '  opposite  '  or  wrong  knowledge,  as  a-m  i  f  r  a.  non-friend,  un-friend ly, 
is  not  merely  '  absence  of  friend  '  but  a  positive  foe  ". 


176  MIND,    THE    ONLY   MAKER-UNMAKER      [SC.   OF 

into  a  thing,  the  more  real  it  becomes,  and  vice  versa. 
That  a  house,  a  garden,  an  institution,  falls  out  of  repair, 
or  order,  and  gradually  disappears,  loses  its  reality,  its 
existence,  if  it  is  neglected  by  the  proprietor  or  manager ; 
that  is  to  say,  if  the  latter  withdraws  his  consciousness 
from  it ;  is  only  an  illustration  of  this  on  the  physical 
plane.  The  essential  fact  is  always  the  same,  conscious- 
ness upholding  itself  as  well  as  its  object,  though  the 
details  differ  ;  thus,  to  maintain  its  objects  on  the  physical 
plane,  consciousness  employs  the  ba  h  ish-kara  na,  the 
4  outer,'  or  physical,  senses,  organs,  instruments  and  means, 
for  repairs,  etc. ;  while  on  the  mental  plane  it  employs  the 
1  a  n  t  a  h-k  a  r  a  n  a,'  the  '  inner  instrument '.  As  in  the  case 
of  the  individual  and  his  house,  on  the  small  scale,  so,  on 
the  large  scale,  when  Brahma  *  falls  asleep  '  and  with- 
draws his  consciousness  from  it,  his  brahm-anda,1 
world-egg  or  system,  disappears.  We  should  remember 
here  that  the  arrangement  of  materials  which  is  the  house,, 
the  garden,  etc.,  is,  for  all  purposes,  the  creation joi  the 
maker's  individual  consciousness,  and  that  the  other 
arrangements  of  material  which  he  uses  as  senses,  means 
and  instruments,  etc.,  are  also  evolved  and  created  by  his 
life  or  consciousness ;  (that  functions  create  organs,  and 
not  organs,  functions,  is  becoming  quite  a  commonplace 

1  Like  so  many  other  facts  and  laws  stated  by  Saniskrt  metaphysic, 
these  'world-eggs/  or  'eggs  of  Brahman,  the  Immense,  the  Infinite/ 
are  literal  facts,  which  need  no  abstruse  science  or  elaborate  thinking 
to  perceive,  bat  can  be  veritably  seen  by  physical  eyes.  Earth 
Moon,  Sun,  all  the  '  orbs  *  and  '  globes '  of  Heaven,  i.e..  the  Immense 
Firmament,  Boundless  Space,  are  quite  obviously  '  eggs '  of  the  Infinite. 


P.,   CH.   X]        ALL   CREATION   IS   PRO-CREATION         177 

of  at  least  one  school  of  advanced  science  now)  ; l  and 
finally  that  that  material,  ultimately'  the  Not-Self, 
over  which  he  as  an  individual  has  no  power,  is  the 
creation  of,  the  result  of  positing  or  affirmation  by,  the 
Universal  Consciousness,  the  Self.  If  these  facts  are 
duly  taken  into  account,  then  the  presence  of  all  possible 
kinds  of  mutually-destructive  pairs  of  *  reals,'  *  concretes/ 

*  particulars,'  within,   and  as    making   up    the    total  of, 
Not-Self,    equivalent    to    Nothing   or    Non-being   in    its 
totality,  will  not  appear  altogether  incomprehensible. 

1  Compare    Chhandogycr,  VIII,  xii,  5,   "The  Self  ideating  or  ima- 
gining itself  as  hearing,  seeing,  etc.,  became  the  ear,  the  eye,  etc." 

All  creation  is  a  continuation  of  self.  No  creation  is 
possible  without  identification  of  the  producer  with  the  pro- 
duct, (comparatively).  Every  creation  is,  more  or  less,  a  pro- 
creation, /or/fc-emanation,  (as  of  a  child).  It  is  positing  of 
the  creat-uTe,  directly  or  indirectly,  as  *  I-(am  )-this  '.  '  My  ' 
is  the  (comparatively)  indirect  form  of  positing  ;  it  is  only  a 
lesser  degree  of  '  I '.  All  dissolution  is,  similarly,  denying 
that  identity;.  '  I-not-this  ',  or  'not-mine-this '.  However 
distant  from  me,  and  apparently  indifferent  to  me,  yet  still 
the  stars,  the  planets,  the  earth's  poles,  the  earth's  centre — are 
all  '  I  '  or  '  my  ',  or  '  not  so  * ;  though  very  vaguely.  Whatever 
is  of  *  interest '  to  '  me  ',  is  related  to  me  in  terms  of  love  or 
hate  ;  therefore,  in  terms  of  '  I  *  and  '  mine  ',  a  h  a  m  -  J  a  and 
m  a  m  a  - 1  a,  or  of  '  not  I '  and  '  not  mine  ',  n  a  -  a  h  a  m  and 
n  a  -  m  a  m  a.  The  Veda  hymns,  known  ascha-ma-ka  and 
n  a-m  a-k  a,  vividly  express  this  idea  :  '  The  Sun  is  Mine,  the 
Moon  is  Mine,  Indra  is  Mine,  the  Wind  is  Mine',  etc.,  and.  again, 

*  Not  Mine,  Not  Mine  '.     To  bring  home,  the  fact  that    mine  * 
is  only  a  continuation  of  '  I ',  consider  this  ;  a  person  '  creates  * 
a  house  for  him -self;    he   feels  and  wishes,  '  a  h  a  m   grhl 
s  y  a  m  ',  '  May  I  become  a  house-man,'  (hus-band,  house- 
owner,  house-dweller) ;    this  feeling,  this  consciousness,  con- 
verts    a  r  a  m  b  h  a  into  adhy-a-ropa   or  adhy-asa; 
changes  creation  into  self-transformation  (which  includes 

12 


178     SPIRIT'S    PLASTIC    STRESS    SHAPES    ALL     [SC.    OF 
Countless  Paired  Positives 

The  negative  Not-Self  thus  appears  as  a  mass  of 
countless  paired  positives,  d  v  a  m-d  v  a  m,  '  two-and- 
two  '.  These  appear  as  particular  and  positive  when  we 
view  each  of  the  two  factors  of  every  pair  separately, 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  limited.  Yet  by  the  fact  of  their 
being  paired  into  opposites,  by  the  affirmation  and  nega- 
tion contained  in  the  Absolute,  they  aie  always  destroying 
each  other  by  internecine  controversy,  and  thereby  always 
leaving  intact  and  maintaining  the  negativity  of  the 
negative,  considered  from  the  standpoint  of  totality.  In 

p  a  r  i  -  n  a  m  a) ;  it  transforms  the  '  potter  '  into  the  theatrical 
actor  *.  All  authors,  more  or  less,  put  themselves  into  their 
creations ;  authors  of  even  science-books ;  much  more  of 
novels  and  dramas.  Literal  and  visible  proof,  of  owner  and 
house  being  identical,  are  shell-fish,  molluscs.  In  later, 
higher,  forms  of  life,  this  house  becomes  more  and  more,  and 
then  quite,  separate,  physically  only.  The  cause,  the  force, 
which  creates  a  book,  a  machine,  a  state,  an  empire,  is  the 
ideation- and -will,  of  some  individual  self,  '  May  I  be  an 
author,  a  machine- inventor,  a  statesman,  an  emperor '. 
Birds  fly  with  wings,  fishes  swim  with  fins  and  tails,  which 
are  (part  of)  them-selves  ;  men  fly  and  swim  with  aeroplanes 
and  ships  and  submarines  which  are  theirs.  Yoga-siddhas  may 
re-place  the  machines  which  are  their st  by  organs  which 
would  be  (parts  of  their  bodies)  them-selves ;  as  telescopes  and 
microscopes  may  be  replaced  by  keener  eyes  and  clairvoyance. 
The  evolutionist  (Lamarckian)  view,  that  '  functions  create 
organs ' ;  the  poet's  conviction,  that  '  the  Spirit's  plastic 
stress '  shapes  all  things  ;  are  only  corollaries  of  the  above. 
Incidentally,  for  a  very  entertaining  exposition  and  defence  of 
Lamarckism  or  neo- Lamarck  ism  as  against  Darwinism  or 
nee-Darwinism,  the  reader  may  see  Bernard  Shaw's  Preface 
to  '  Back  to  Methuselah  \ 


P.,   CH.   X]  NO    ARBITRARINESS  179 

other  words,  the  Whole  is  the  summation,  and  at  the 
same  time  the  opposite,  the  abolition  and  annihilation, 
of  all  its  parts ;  as  zero  is  the  summation  as  well  as  the 
abolition  of  all  possible  plus-figures  and  all  possible 
minus-figures.  This  paired  feature  of  Mula-prakrti  is 
only  a  reproduction,  a  reflection,  therein,  of  the  essential 
constitution  of  the  Absolute,  the  opposition  of  the  primal 
pair  of  .Pratyag-atma  and  Mula-prakrti,  which  is  neces- 
sarily the  supreme  archetype  and  paradigm  for  all  con- 
stitutions within  it ;  there  being  nothing  outside  it  to 
borrow  from.  This  being  clearly  grasped,  the  famous  quill 
of  Krug  (p.  73  supra)  may  now  be  deduced  easily.  Where 
everything  must  be,  the  quill  also  may  be,  nay,  shall  be  ; 
and  not  only  the  quill,  but  the  agencies  that  destroy  the 
quill.  All  arbitrariness,  all  caprice,  is  done  away  with  by 
this  one  statement.  Arbitrariness  means  nothing  more 
nor  less  than  this :  one  thing  more  than  another,  one 
thing  rather  than  another,  without  due  reason.  Where  all 
are,  equally,  and  none  more  than  another ;  and,  further, 
where  everything  is  with  its  opposite,  with  its  negation, 
with  its  is  not,  also,  at  the  same  time  ;  there,  there  is 
no  arbitrariness,  no  caprice.  If  we  ask,  why  this  particular 
thing  at  this  particular  point  of  space  and  time,  the  reply 
is :  In  the  first  place,  the  particular  space  and  time  of 
the  question  have  no  particularity  apart  from  the  parti- 
cular thing  which  defines  them  ;  so  that  the  particular 
thing  and  the  particular  time  and  space  are  inseparable, 
are  even  indistinguishable,  almost;  are  one  thing  in  fact, 
and  not  three.  In  the  second  place,  all  possible  orders 


180  VARIATIONS  Within  THE   UNVARYING     [SC.   OF 

• 
or  arrangements,  all  possible  particulars,  cannot  actually 

be  at  the  same  point  of  space  and  time,  to  one  limited 
j  I  va  ;  and  yet  they  are  all  there  also,  to  him,  one  actually 
and  the  rest  potentially,  to  satisfy  even  such  a  demand. 
And  they  are  there  also  actually,  turn  by  turn,  to  that 
same  jlva.  On  the  other  hand,  all  possible  orders  and( 
arrangements  and  things  are  actually  present  also  at  any 
one  point  of  space  and  time  ;  but  they  are  so  only  when  we 
take  into  consideration  all  possible  constitutions  and  kinds 
of  j  I  v  a  s,  and  see  that  any  one  order  corresponds  to  one 
particular  kind  of  j  I  v  a.  Thus,  the  extreme  demand  that 
"everything  must  be  everywhere  and  always"1  actually,. 


I  Bhagavfftct. 

'  The  seeker  for  the  Truth  of  Self,  should  find  out  That  which  is 
every-where  and  al-ways.  He  should  do  so  by  a  n  u-a  y  a  and  v  i-a  t  i-r  e  k  a  ; 
by  discriminating  between  what  persists  and  what  changes  '  ;  i.e  ,  by 
the  method  of  agreements  and  differences,  or  concomitant  variations. 
See  pp,  22-23  supra. 


I  Yoga-Vastshtha.  So  far  as  potential  presence 
is  concerned,  a  biological  illustration  is  supplied  by  the  doctrine  of  bio- 
phores,  each  containing  an  infinite  number  of  ids  or  determinants, 
developing  and  manifesting  by  turns.  Compare  also  Leibnitz,  Monado- 
logy  :  "He  who  sees  all,  could  read  in  each  what  is  happening  every- 
where;" and  again,  "each  monad  (jiva)  is  a  living  mirror  of  all 
the  universe."  Jevons,  in  The  Principles  of  Science,  describes  how 
each  atom  is  a  register  of  all  the  happenings  of  all  the  universe.  "  What 
a  wonderful  revelation  to  the  historian  and  artist  it  would  be  ...  if 
he  could  stand  in  a  modern  gallery  and  see  artists  of  all  ages  and  gener- 
ations at  work,  or  talk  to  writers,  dramatists,  and  philosophers  of  all 
times.  Yet  this  is  what  the  scientist  possesses  in  living  intensely  active 
Nature"  ;  The  Origin  and  Nature  of  Life  (Home  University  Library), 
pp.  71-72.  The  word  '  gene  '  is  now  in  vogue  in  place  of  Weismann's 
*id\  but  seems  to  mean  much  the  same.  It  maybe  noted  here  that 
such  views  as  Bergson's,  of  Creative  Evolution,  and  Morgan's,  of 
Emergent  Evolution,  all  assume  change,  of  one  sort  or  another,  and  da 
not  explain  it  ;  while  the  view,  expounded  here,  explains  all  possible 
forms  of  Change  as  being  always  within  the  Changeless. 


P.,   CH.   X]      SEMPITERNITY   OF  THE   CHANGING       181 

as  it  of  course  is  potentially,  is  also  justified  and  satisfied. 
Such  is  the  reconciliation  of  the  opposites  involved  in 
S  a  m  s  a  r  a,  and  explanation  of  its  endless  flux,  its  a  n  a  d  I- 
pra-vaha,  beginningless  flow,  as  well  as  its  ever-com- 
pleteness  and  rock-like  fixity,  k  u  t  a  •  s  t  h  a-t  a.  The 
significance  of  this  will  appear  more  and  more  as  we 
proceed  ;  for  while  all  laws  exist  and  operate  and  inter- 
penetrate simultaneously  and  pervasively,  they  cannot, 
owing  to  the  limitations  of  speech,  be  described  simul- 
taneously. "  Speech  proceeds  only  in  succession,"  ]  like 
all  other  activities  of  the  World-  Process. 

We  see,  then,  that  the  negative  Not-Self  is  a  mass 
of  positive  particulars,  and  that,  at  the  same  time,  be- 
cause of  its  being  in  inseparable  connection  with 
Self,  it  necessarily  takes  on  the  appearance  of  the 
characteristics  of  Self,  and  becomes  pseudo-eternal, 
pseudo-infinite,  pseudo-unlimited,  so  that  matter  appears 
indestructible  through  all  its  changes.2 

Yoga-Vitsishtha. 


wr  i 

4  No  actions,  nobody-forms  resulting  from  those  actions,  no  elements, 
are  ever  completely  annihilated.  Because  they  are  connected  with, 
because  they  are  'ideated  by,  the  Sovereign  Lord  of  All,  the  Eternal  Self, 
therefore  are  they  also  pseudo-eternal,  ever  -lasting,  sempiternal,  seeming 
to  disappear,  but  remaining  in  potentio  in  that  Ideator,  and  therefore 
also  re-appearing,  endlessly  '. 

A*  Sufi  mystic,  Jill,  in  his  work  The  Perfect  Man,  expresses  the 
same  fact  :  'The  existence  of  God  is  eternal,  and  the  knowledge  (of  God) 


182  NOTHING   IS    EVER   WHOLLY    LOST          [SC.   OF 

Though  essentially  a-sat,  Nothing,  Mula-prakrti  is 
yet  pseudo-Being,  i.e.,  existent,  sat;  though  many,  and 
particular,  and  changing,  yet  it  has  a  pseudo-oneness,  and 
a  pseudo-universality,  and  a  pseudo-changelessness  (of 
laws,  all-ways)  ;  though  finite,  it  is  also  pseudo-inf)nite  ; 
though  dying,  it  is  also  pseudo-eternal.  It  is  pseudo- 
eternal,  because  it  is,  not  only  dying,  but,  ever  dying  ;  ever, 
.in  order  to  keep  pace,  as  it  must,  because  of  in- 
separability from  it,  with  the  eternal  Self.  It  is  pseudo- 
infinite,  because  it  is,  not  only  finite,  but,  everywhere 
finite  ;  everywhere,  in  order  to  avoid  separation  from  that 
same  in-finite  and  omni-present  Self  from  which  it  may 
never  be  separated.  The  same  is  the  case  with  all  the 

other  characteristics. 

•» 

Why  the  Logion  must  be  taken  in  Parts,  as  well 
as  in  the  Whole 

Let  us  now  pass  on  to  the  question  why  the  Legion- 
has  to  be  taken  in  parts,  as  well  as  in  the  whole. 

By  opposition  to  the  Unity  and  unlimitedness  of 
Self,  Not-Self  is  Many  and  limited.  Under  these 
necessary  conditions,  Self  denies  Not-Self.  But  while 
pure  Non-Being,  i.e.,  the  whole  of  Not-Self,  in 
being  denied,  and  in  order  to  be  effectively  denied, 
becomes  simultaneously  affirmed,  and  so  becomes  a 


is  eternal,  and  the  object  of  knowledge  is  inseparable  from  the  knowledge, 
therefore  it  is  also  eternal  "  ;  quoted  in  translation,  by  R.  A.  Nicholson, 
Studies  in  Islamic  Mysticism,  p.  128. 


P.,   CH.   X]         TWO    PARTS   IN   THE    LOGION  183 

multitude  of  passing  and  mutually-destructive  particulars, 
any  one  of  these  particulars,  by  the  very  reason  of  its 
being  limited,  being  defined  in  time  and  space  and  motion, 
is,  from  its  own  standpoint,  incapable  of  simultaneous 
affirmation  and  denial.  Pure  Non-Being  may,  without 
objection,  be  affirmed  and  denied  in  the  same  breath ;  but 
a  particular  limited  something,  which  is  a-sat  and  yet  sap, 
which  is  sad-asat,  existent  and  non-existent,  cannot  be 
both  *  simultaneously.'  And  yet  it  must  be  both,  for 
Absolute-Consciousness  contains  both  the  affirmation  and 
the  negation  of  it.  Reconciliation  o/  these  contradictory 
necessities,  these  two  antinomies  of  the  reason,  the 
solution  of  this  apparently  insuperable  logical  difficulty, 
is  found  in  the  '  successive  '  existence  and  non-existence 
of  each  limited  something.  Hence  the  logion  appears^ 
(and  this  appearing  is  the  World- Proces-sion) ,  as  divided 
"in  two  parts,  first  '  I  (am)  this,'  and  secondly,  '  (I)  this 
(am)  not ' ;  first  affirmation,  then  negation  ;  first  the 
positing  by  Self  of  its  identity  with  a  possible  and 
therefore  actual  '  this/  a  piece  of  matter,  and  then  the 
denying  of  that  identity  with  an  impossible  and  therefore 
perishing  'this'  or  piece  of  matter;  first  birth,  then 
death.  This  *  succession  '  is  m  i  t  h  ya ,  mythical,  a  mere 
illusion,1  an  appearance  ;  because  it  is  true  only  from  the 

1  That  the  World-Process  is  an  illusion,  is,  like  so  many  other '  meta- 
physical '  laws  and  facts,  visible  even  to  the  '  physical '  eyes.  That 
which  passes,  which  is  at  one  moment,  and  is  not  the  next— how  else  can 
it  be  named  and  described  than  as  illusion  ?  Does  it  not  violate  all  the  so- 
called  laws  of  thought  ?  Science  has  been  described  as  organised  know- 
ledge. But  the  World-Process  is  an  Organised  Process  ;  Nature  has  an 
Organic  Unity,  is  a  parartha  sanghata,  in  the  words  of  SSn- 
khva,  '  an  organisation  for  the  sake  of  the  Self  '.  Therefore  sciences  are 


184      ILLUSION   OF   SUCCESSION.     ANALOGY       [SC.    OF 

standpoint  of  the  limited.  Pass  into  the  non-limitation 
of  the  Self,  by  turning  the  consciousness  inwards,  when- 
ever and  wherever  you  like,  and  thence  into  the  fullness 
of  the  Absolute,  and  there  is  no  succession.  The  whole 
of  the  limited,  past,  present,  and  future,  is  in  that  un-con- 
ditioned  thought  at  once.  The  ever-complete  and  perfect 
balance  of  the  Absolute  appears,  to  the  limited,  and  from 
its  own  standpoint,  as  the  successive  and  continuous 
balanc-*tt£  of  things  in  S  a  m  s  a  r  a.  And  this  continuity  of 
succession,  this  perpetual  resurrection  and  rebirth,  repeat- 
ed life  and  death,  this  recurrence  of  existence  and  non- 
existence,  this  Becoming  between  Being  and  Nothing,  this 

only  descriptions  of  portions  or  aspects  of  the  World-Process  as  so  or- 
ganised. And  Metaphysic,  the  Chief  of  Sciences,  which  co-ordinates  all 
the  others,  is  therefore  only  an  accurate  description  of  the  essential 
facts  of  the  World-Process  as  completely  organised  and  co-ordinated  by 
the  Unity  of  the  Self.  Hence  the  Chhftndogya  Up..  (6-1-6),  '  Knowledge 
of  the  One  is  knowledge  of  the  Whole  '  ;  (see  also  Yoga  Sutra,  iv.  31). 
There. is  no  other  mystery  than  the  Mystery  of  the  One  Self.  The  simplest, 
the  nearest,  and  dearest,  is  the  truest  and  deepest ;  as  here,  so  everywhere ; 
as  now,  so  ever ;  as  thus,  so  al-ways  ;  as  the  atom,  so  the  solar  system ;  as 
the  microcosm,  so  the  macrocosm,  There  is  no  break  in  the  Law  of  Analogy, 
i.e.,  of  Continuity,  i.e.,  of  Unity,  any  when  and  anywhere  and  anyway. 
Once  this  is  realised,  all  facts,  happenings,  laws,  so-called  errors  and  so- 
called  truths,  i.e.  part-truths,  all  become  sg//-evident,  (v£da,  '  seen* ). 
matters  for  mere  description.  There  is  nowhere  any  originality  or 
invention.  That  they  are  not  self-evident  to  everyone  always,  as  the  ele- 
mentary truths  of  mathematics  are — what  does  this  mean  ?  There  are 
primitive  or  savage  races  which  cannot  count  beyond  the  five  of  the 
fingers  of  one  hand.  Are  the  self-evident  facts  of  higher  arithmetic,  or 
even  the  'elementary  ones  of  geometry  or  dynamics,  etc.,  self-evident  to 
them  ?  The  self-evident  facts  of  higher  mathematics  are  not  self-evident 
even  to  the  vast  majority  of  the  highly  civilised.  Yet  who  that  has  once 
arrived  at  and  seen  them,  after  the  necessary  labour  of  intellect,  can 
question  their  self-evidence  ?  It  is  the  same  with  all  sciences  (and  all 
scientific  ideas,  even  those  now  '  exploded,'  each  in  its  own  time  and  place 
and  appropriate  aspect) ;  and  much  more  so,  if  possible  (as  it  is  not)  with 
Metaphysic.  Even  what  is  called,  and  rightly  called,  error,  is  self- 
evident,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  Not-Self-evident,  as  evident  as  the  Not-Self. 
Numberings,  postulates,  the  directions  of  force,  are  all  '  arbitrary  ' 
assumptions  even  in  exact  mathematics. 


P.,    CH.   X]  NO    INSOLUBLE    SURDS  185 

equivocation  between  affirmation  and  denial,  may  itself 
be  regarded  as  a  third  part  in  the  logion ;  viz.,  '  I  am 
not  this,  but  am  this  other  this ;  and  not  this  either,  but 
this  other  this,'  and  so  on,  endlessly  completing  the 
triplicity  which  is  found  every-where  because  of  the 
triuneness  of  the  Absolute. 

Safeguard  against  Surds 

But  lest  this  appearance  of  succession  should  seem  to 
introduce  something  new  and  foreign  to  the  S  v  a  -b  h  a  v  a, 
the  Nature,  of  the  Absolute,  the  safeguard,  already  men- 
tioned in  other  words,  is  provided.  While  each  one  of  a 
pair  of  opposites  is  succeeded  in  a  later  time  in  the  same 
place  (or  space)  by  the  other,  it  is  also  coexisted  with  in 
the  same  time  in  another  place  by  that  other ;  for  the 
endless  limited  positives  that  make  up  the  pseudo-un- 
limited negativity  or  non-being  of  the  Not-Self,  in  order 
to  do  so,  must  be  constantly  paired  as  opposites,  so  that 
they  always  counterbalance  each  other,  and  so  actually 
leave  behind  a  cipher  only,  whenever  the  totality  of  them 
may  be  summed  up.  Thus  a  constant  balance  too 
appears  in  the  World -Process,  wherein  the  many 
coexist  with,  as  well  as  succeed,  each  other.  The  truth 
of  this  may  be  verified  in  the  daily  life  of  human  beings 
as  well  as  the  life  of  kosmic  systems.  Life  to  one  means 
and  necessarily  implies  death  to  another  simultaneously, 
at  the  same  time,  and  to  that  one  itself  successively,  i.e., 
at  a  later  time.  Pleasure  to  one  is  pain  to  another,  and, 


186      TOTALITY   OF  -PLUS-ES   AND   MINUS-ES     [SC.   OF 

again,  to  that  one,  in  the  same  way.  So  with  the 
rise  and  decay  of  the  natural  kingdoms  of  minerals, 
vegetables,  animals,  men,  d£vas,  etc.,  of  human  king- 
doms  or  nations,  of  planets  and  of  solar  systems,  at 
the  expense  and  the  gain,  respectively,  of  one  another. 
That  this  must  be  so,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Totality 
of  paired  and  opposed  Matter  (positive  and  negative)  is 
fixed,  once  for  all,  as  the  Whole,  by  that  unconditioned 
thought  or  idea  which  is  the  Absolute,  and  cannot  newly 
be  added  to  or  taken  away  from  ;  that  Totality  being,  as 
said  before,  always  Zero,  equal  plus  and  minus.  Matter 
is  thus  uncreatable  as  well  as  indestructible.1  Therefore 

1  There  are  some  very  interesting  and  suggestive  statements  in  the 
Pranava  Vada  in  the  connection  ,  thus.  Matter  has  two  kinds,  4 '  light 
atoms  "  and  "  dark  atoms  "  ;  as  S  h  ak  ti-energy  is  "  affirmative  "  and 
negative  ".In  modern  scientific  writings  too  there  have  been  speculations 
about  ' '  well-atoms  ' '  and  ' '  sink-atoms  " ,  "  light  suns  ' '  and  ' '  dark 
suns  V.  "  vortex-rings  "  gyrating  or  spirating  in  opposite  directions,  which, 
when  they  meet,  neutralise  each  other,  and  are,  to  all  appearance, 
annihilated,  but  still  persist  in  potency,  in  possibility  (and  therefore 
actuality)  of  revival,  as  blja  or  samskara. 

A  friend  asked,  "With  what  negative  is  this  positive  book  to  be 
paired  off  ?  "  The  reply  was,  "  With  the  things,  wind  and  weather,  heat 
and  dust  of  summer,  damp  of  rains,  worms  of  many  kinds,  which  are  slowly 
disintegrating  it,  and  will  complete  its  '  non-existence  '  some  day.  The 
book  has  been  formed  out  of  elemental  material,  and  has  left  blanks, 
emptinesses,  in  various  places,  which  are  constantly  calling  for  a 
restoration  of  the  status  quo.  Vast  buildings  have  been  raised  in  all 
countries,  in  the  passing  centuries ;  walls  and  towers,  as  in  Babel,  temples 
and  pyramids,  as  in  Egypt,  India,  Mexico,  Peru  ;  more  recently,  thousand, 
twelve  hundred,  thirteen  hundred  feet  high  sky-scrapers,  like  Woolworth 
and  Empire  Buildings  in  New  York  and  Lenin  Memorial  in  Moscow.  All 
have  been  built  with  materials  taken  from  various  places.  The  Positive 
hollows  left  in  those  spots  are  the  negative  opposites  of  the  positive  build- 
ings, which  are  the  negative  opposites  of  the  positive  hollows,  in  turn. 
The  forces  which  raised  the  buildings  are  perpetually  resisted  by  the  forces 
which  are  craving  to  restore  the  status  quo.  to  lead  back  from  vai- 
s  h  a  m  y  a,  heterogeneity,  to  s  a  ra  y  a,  sameness,  homogeneity.  These 
latter  began  imperceptible  wearing  down  of  the  buildings  simultaneously 
with  their  erection ;  and  have  completed,  or  will  complete  someday,  the 


P.,    CH.   X]  WHY   RECURRENT   CYCLES?  187 

what  appears  as  an  increase  in  one  place  and  moment,  is 
necessarily  due  to  a  decrease  in  another  place  and  moment, 
and  vice  versa.  This  will  appear  further  in  treating  of 
the  Law  of  Action  and  Reaction. 

In  these  facts,  coexistent  and  successsive,  combined 
with  the  infinity  and  eternity  of  Self — against  which 
they  are  outlined,  and  which  they  constantly  endeavour 
to  reflect  and  reproduce  in  themselves — we  find  embodied 
and  manifested,  continuous  movement  of  all  and 
everything,  from  place  to  place  and  moment  to  moment ; 
and  also  recurring  return  of  all  and  everything, 
though  only  in  appearance  and  not  in  actuality,  to  the 
same  position  (comparatively,  never  exactly,),  in  coex- 
istent surroundings  amidst  its  companion-objects,  and 
also  to  the  same  position  in  the  successive  order  and 
arrangement  of  those  objects. 

This  thought,  if  properly  followed  out,  explains  the 
Why  of  Recurring  Cycles,  in  individual  as  well  as  kosmic 
life ;  why  history  is  always  repeating  itself,  in  the 
main  outlines  ;  why  every  j  Iva  and  all  j  ivas  must  pass 
though  all  experiences  and  the  same  experiences,  turn 
after  turn  ;  how  every  finite  thing,  even  a  passing  thought, 
an  atom  vibration,  the  most  evanescent  phenomenon,  is 
pseudo-infinite  and  pseudo-eternal,  i.e.,  endless  and 
everlasting ;  why  there  must  be  an  endlessness  of  veils 
upon  veils,  planes  within  planes,  senses  besides  senses, 
and  elements  after  elements ;  why  nothing  and  no  one, 

levelling  down  of  them  and  the  filling  up  of  the  hollows.  It  is  a  common- 
place of  geology  that  mountains  turn  into  ocean-beds  and  vice  versa,  by 
slow  erosions  and  fillings  and  liftings,  or  sudden  cataclysms. 


188      THREE  MO(VE)MENTS  IN  ABSOLUTE      [sc.  OF 

atom-dust  or  solar  system,  is  on  the  whole,  really  more 
important  than  any  other  ;  why  and  how  the  immortality 
of  Self  is  assured  to  all ;  and  how  all  are  yet  always 
graded  to  each  other  and  bound  up,  in  ever  higher  and 
higher  range  of  Unity,  in  (every  consciousness,  because 
all  consciousnesses  are  equally  contained  in)  the  One 
Consciousness.1 

The  considerations  which  explain  why  the  logion 
is  taken  in  two,  or  rather,  three  parts,  also  explain 
how  three  moments  are  distinguishable  in  the  Absolute. 
Indeed,  the  difference  between  the  three  parts  and  the 
three  moments  is  only  the  difference  between  the  third 
person,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  first  and  second,  on 
the  other;  between  looking  at  Self  and  Not-Self  as 
Being  and  Nothing,  or  as  *  I  *  and  '  This  '.  The  simul- 
taneity of  past,  present,  and  future ;  tbe  compression 
into  one  point,  of  behind,  here,  and  before  ;  the  absence  of 
all  movement ;  these  are  congenial  to  the  Whole,  but  are 
not  possible  to  and  in  the  part  and  the  particular.  The 
positing,  the  sup-posing  (while  denying),  of  Not-Self 
by  Self,  the  op-posing  (while  affirming)  of  Not- 
Self  by  Self ;  the  corn-posing  of  (while  negating  all 
connection  between)  the  two  by  means  of  Negation  ; 

1  In  Puranic  pictography,  this  fact  of  the  '  end-less  continuous 
spiral*  of  the  World-Process  is  described  as  the  'coils  of  An-anta- 
S  h  6  s h  a  ',  the  '  ever-unfinished,  ever-remaining '  Serpent  of  a  thousand 
heads  who  bears  a  world  on  each  head  See  the  diagram  on  p.  432 
of  The  Secret  Doctrine,  III.  Shesha  means  'that  which  always 
remains  behind  as  Residuum  ' ;  it  also  means,  in  Nvaya,  *  the  means 
which  look  to  an  end  as  their  residue  ' .  The  word  is  derived  from  s  h  i  s  h, 
'  to  leave  a  residue  ';  s  h  e  s  h  a  t  i,  leaves  a  remainder  '  ;  shishyate, 
1  is  left  behind  as  remnant '. 


P.,   CH.   X]       SYNCHRONY   OF  THE   SUCCESSIVE          189 

these  three  facts,  while  simultaneous  in  the  Absolute, 
where  the  whole  Self  deals  with  the  whole  Not-Self, 
cannot  be  such  where  a  particular,  limited,  not-self  or 
4  this  '  is  concerned.  They  can  appear  only  in  succession : 
first  sup-posing,  positing,  moment  of  jnana;  then  op- 
posing (after  identifying),  moment  of  kriya;and, 
intervening  between  them,  or,  indeed,  enveloping  them 
both  and  holding  them  together,  corn-posing,  the 
moment  of  ichchha.  Yet,  even  while  so  succeeding 
one  another,  these  moments  cannot,  as  pointed  out  in  the 
previous  chapter,  altogether  lose  the  contemporaneous- 
ness which  belongs  to  them  by  right  of  being  in  the  time- 
less and  successionless  Absolute.  This  synchronous- 
ness  appears  in  the  fact  that  when  anyone  comes  into  the* 
foreground,  the  other  two  remain  in  the  background,  and 
that  these  also  come  forward,  turn  by  turn ;  in  short, 
they  succeed,  not  only  one  another  but,  each  other,  and 
in  incessant  rotation.1 

Thus  is  the  World -Process  one  vast  device,  or, 
rather,  one  vast  mass  of  countless  devices,  for  perpetual 
reconciling  of  the  opposed  necessities  of  the  reason. 

Another  of  the  more  important  consequences  issuing 
from  the  essential  nature,  the  limitedness,  the  parti- 
cularity and  manyness,  of  Mula-prakrti,  may  also  be 
noted. 

The  distinctions  between  thought  and  thing,  ideal 
and  real,  abstract  and  concrete,  are  all  immediately  due 

1  These  facts  illustrate  the  metaphysical  '  why  '  of  the  continuum  of 
consciousness,  in  one  aspect,  the  theory  of  which  has  been  propounded 
by  James  Ward,  Stout,  and  others  in  the  West. 


190      THING   &   THOUGHT,   RE-AL  &   IDEA-L       [SC.   OF 

to  this  characteristic,  and  are  in  reality  nothing  more 
than  the  distinction  between  whole  and  part.  From  the 
standpoint  of  the  whole,  the  Absolute,  or  even  from*  that 
of  the  universal  Pratyag-atma,  all  possible  varieties  of 
Not-Self  are  *  ideal/  are  '  thought,'  are  parts  of  the 
*  abstract '  Not-Self,  are  thought,  by  the  Self,  as  negated ; 
but  each  such  variety,  from  its  own  standpoint,  to  itself, 
is  *  real,'  is  *  thing,'  is  '  concrete  '.  The  present,  to  that 
which  is  present,  is  the  re-al,  while  the  past  and  the 
future  are  idea-1 ;  but  to  the  eternal,  wherein  past,  present, 
and  future  are  all  present,  all  is  ideal,  or  all  real  (the 
name  does  not  matter).  Because  all  is  present  in  the 
Pratyag-atma,  therefore  memory  of  the  past  and  expecta- 
tion of  the  future  become  possible  in  the  jiv-atma1 
All  this  will  be  discussed  more  fully,  later  on,  in  connec- 
tion with  the  nature  of  *  cognition  '. 

The  Special  Attributes  of  Not-Self 

We  may  now  consider  those  special  attributes  of 
Not-Self  which  stand  out  with  prominence  in 
Sarnskrt  books.  They  are  sattva,  rajas,  and 
t  a  m  a  s.  They  correspond  exactly  to  the  three  attributes 
of  Pratyag-atma,  and  arise  also  from  the  same  com- 
pelling necessity  of  the  constitution,  Sva-bhava, 

1  The  Universal  Mind  of  Pratyag-atma  is  the  sub-supra-conscious- 
ness  of  j  i  v  a  £  m  §,  the  basis  of  its  memory  and  expectation,  of 
c  h  i  1 1  a  m,  the  individual  mind,  which  indeed  is  the  individual  j  i  va  (or 
jiva-atom)*  Chittam  is  that  which  ch£|aya|i.  remembers, 
looks  before  and  after,  is  conscious,  is  aware;  it  is  the  limited  form 
of  the  unlimited  C  h  i  t  or  C  h  i  \  i. 


P.,    CH.   X]  GUNA-KARMA-DRAVYA  191 

essential  Nature,  of  the  Absolute,  as  described  by  the 
Logion.  It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  here  all  that  has  been 
said  in  this  reference  before.  It  will  be  enough  to  say 
that  :  (a)  as  Sat  is  the  principle  of  '  action  '  or  activity  in 
Self,  so  rajas  is  the  corresponding  principle  in  Not- 
Self,  which  makes  it  capable  of  being  acted  on,  makes  it 
amenable  and  responsive  to  all  activity,  gives  it  the  tend- 
ency to  active  movement,  *  mobility  or  motility  J  ;  (6)  as 
Chit  is  the  principle  of  '  cognition  '  in  the  One,  so  s  a  1  1  v  a 
is  the  principle  of  '  cognisability  '  in  the  Many  ;  (c)  as 
A  n  a  n  d  a  is  the  principle  of  '  desire  '  in  the  Enjoyer,  the 
Subject,  so  t  a  m  a  s  is  the  principle  of  *  desirability  '  in 
the  enjoyed,  the  Object.  They  correspond,  respectively, 
to  what  appears  in  the  particular,  i.e.,  manifest  matter, 
as  karma,  movement,  g  u  n  a,  quality,  d  r  a  v  y  a,  sub- 
stance '  ;  and,  again,  to  the  Etat,  the  Aham,  and  the  Na, 
respectively,  in  the  Absolute.* 

fiCTTfc  W, 

I    Pevi-Bhagavata,    III.  vii,  26 


*The  ordinary,  current,  and,  so  far,  almost  exclusively  accepted 
meaning,  as  goodness-pafcsjon-inertia,  respectively,  of  sat  t  va-rajas- 
tamas,  is  different;  as  in  the  case  of  Sat-Chi  t,-Anan4a,  being- 
consciousness-bliss,  also  Glta,  ch.  xviii,  deals  largely  with  these  three 
attributes,  of  Mula-prakrti  :  and  they  are  also  defined  in  Sankhya- 
K&rika.  At  first  sight]"  there  seems  to  be  no  connection  between 
the  meanings  assigned  here  to  the  two  triplets  of  qualities  be- 
longing to  Self  and  Not-Self,  and  the  meaning  assigned  In  current 
Samskrt  works.  When  the  ordinary  v  <§  d  a  n  t  i  wishes  to  describe  the 
opposites  of  Sat-Cbi(J-Anan<la,  which  he  vaguely  ascribes  to  Brahma 
(without  making  any  definite  distinction  between  Brahma  and  Pratyag- 
atma),  he  speaks  of  anr,  ta-ja<}a-duhkh  a,  untrue-unconscious- 
pain,  as  characterising  what  he.  again  vaguely,  calls  SamsSra, 
the  World-Process,  or  Pr  a-  pa  Etch  a,  the  '.quintuplicate  '  or  the 
'tangled'.  This  is,  for  instance,  the  phraseology  employed  in 
These  current  acceptations  are  by  no  means 


192  SATTVA-RAJAS-TAMAS  [SC.   OF 

Such  are  the  three  gunas,  rajas,  sattva  and 
tarn  as,  or,  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  usually 
mentioned,  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas — the  great 
attributes  of  Mulaprakrti.  This  usual  order  has  been 
changed  above,  in  order  to  make  it  correspond  with 
the  order  in  which  the  attributes  of  Pratyag-atma,- 
S  a  t-C  h  i  d- A  n  a  n  d  a,  are  usually  spoken  of  ;  i.e.,  in 
order  to  bring  out  the  reflection-and-alliance,  the  corres- 
pondence, between  Sat  and  r  a  j  a  s  or  action-less  Being 
and  alterable  movement ;  C  h  i  t  and  sattva,  or  cogni- 
tionless  Consciousness  and  cognisable  quality ;  and  finally 
A  n  a  n  d  a  and  tamas,  or  desire-less  Bliss  and  desir- 
able substantiality.  With  regard  to  these  it  has  been 

incorrect,  but  they  are  not  the  '  whole  truth  ' .  They  are  correct  only 
if  regarded  as  expressing  one,  and  a  comparatively  less  important,  aspect 
or  portion  of  the  full  significance.  A  little  reflection  will  show  how 
they  naturally  arise  out  of,  and  are  connected  with,  the  interpretations 
given  here.  The  following  statement  of  the  various  senses,  in  which 
each  of  these  six  words  is  used  in  Samskrt,  will  help  to  show  how  thought 
has  passed  from  one  shade  of  meaning  to  another  : 

flc^    sat,    is  being,  existent,  real,   true,   good,   also  asserted  or 
asser table,  actual , 

,  c  h  i  t,  is  living,  conscious,  aware,  cognisant , 
,  ana  nda,    is    peace,    feeling    of    satisfaction,    joy,   bliss, 
pleasure,  realisation  of  desire  ; 

,  sattva,  is  being,  existence,  truth,  goodness,  harmony,  living 
being,  energy,  illuminating  power,  vital  power  ; 

rajas,  is  that  which  colours,  dust,  stain,  blood,  passion, 
restlessness,  activity. 

,  tamas,  is  darkness,  dullness,  inertia,  confusion,  chaos,  pain, 
faintness,  sleep. 

Sattva.  rajas,  tamas,  have  often  latterly  been  translated  as 
rhythm,'  mobility,  inertia.  But  these  words  indicate  only  one  sub-aspect 
of  each.  Sattvika  rajas  is  rhythm,  i.e.,  harmonious  or  uniform  repeti- 
tion, and  the  imposition,  thereby,  of  one-ness  on  a  series  of  many  move- 
ments. Rajasa  rajas  is  mobility  proper.  Tamasa  rajas  is  inertia,  persistent 
clinging  to  a  state  of  relative  rest  or  motion. 


P.,    CM.    X]    THE  3  ALL-PERVADING  INSEPARABLES    193 

said  that  '  there  is  no  individual  or  thing,  either  on  earth 
here  or  in  heaven  amongst  the  gods,  which  is  free  from 
(i.e.  devoid  of)  any  one  of  these  three  qualities  "J  Their 
inseparability  from  each  other  and  from  Not-Self,  and 
therefore  from  Self,  follows  naturally  from  all  that  has 
gone  before.  Devl-Bhagavata  *  states  clearly  and  shows 
how,  while  one  quality  may,  nay  must,  predominate  in  a 
certain  individual,  the  others  are  never,  and  can  never 
be,  entirely  absent*  even  in  the  case  of  the  high  gods, 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Shiva ;  though  they  are  ordinarily 
regarded  as  wholly  rajasa,  sattvika,  and,  tamasa, 
respectively. 

The  manifestations  and  results,  but  not  the  causes,  of 
these  g  u  n  a  s ,  are  spoken  of  largely  in  the  current  Samskrf 
works.  Nor  are  any  clear  and  detailed  statements  as  to 
the  correspondences  between  these  triplets  of  attributes, 
S  a  t-C  h  i  d-A  n  a  n  d  a,  r  a  j  a  s-s  a  1 1  v  a-t  a  m  a  s,  k  r  i  y  &- 
j  n  an  a-ich  ch  h  a,  and  ka  r  ma-gun  a-dravy  a,  avail- 
able in  the  extant  books.  Of  course,  it  is  enough,  in  a 
certain  sense,  to  group  the  contents  of  the  World- 
Process  under  the  categories  of  s  a  1 1  v  a,  r  a  j  a  s,  and 
t  a  m  a  s,  because,  at  present,  the  Mula-prakrti  or  material 
aspect  is  the  most  prominent  in  human  life ;  but  full 
understanding  of  their  significance  necessarily  requires 
knowledge  of  the  other  triplets. 

This  Not-Self,  the  second  of  the  three  ultimates  of 
the  World-Process,  is  not  capable  of  receiving  worship, 

1  G*f0,  xvii,  40. 
*  III,  vi,  vii,  viii,  ix. 
13 


194  SCIENCE  SERVES  LIFE;  NOT  LIFE,  SCIENCE  [SC.  OF 

or  of  being  made  the  basis  of  religious  practice,  except 
in  the  way  of  study,  as  the  object.  But  even  so,  be- 
cause it  is  one  of  the  ultimates,  it  will  necessarily  lead, 
in  the  end,  to  a  recognition  of  the  other  two,  and  so  to 
Peace.  To  single-minded,  disinterested,  and  unselfish 
scientists  and  students  of  the  world  of  material  objects, 
may  be  applied  the  words  of  Krshna  :  *  They  also,  ever 
desirous  of  the  good  of  all  creatures,  come  ultimately  to 
Me,  the  Self.' '  Witness  the  instinctive,  recognition  of  Self, 
in  these  statements  by  a  man  of  science  :  "  Science  serves 
life,  not  life  science  "  ;  "  The  world  is  an  idea,  or  a  sum 
of  ideas  "  ;  "  The  actual  problem  .  .  .  consists  not  in  ex- 
plaining psychical  by  physical  phenemena,  but  rather  in 
reducing  to  its  psychical  elements  physical,  like  all  other 
psychical,  phenomena."  2  It  is  not  surprising  that  such 
recognition  should  often  be  imperfect  and  often  distorted, 
as  witness  this  other  statement  of  the  same  man  of 
science  :  "  . . .  this  monistic  conception  .  .  .  alone  holds 
strictly  to  experience  .  .  .  and  necessarily  sets  aside  the 
ancient  doctrine  ...  of  the  wandering  of  the  soul."  3 

1  Gift*,  xii,  4. 

2  Max  Verworn,   General  Physiology,  translated  into  English  by 
F.  S.  Lee  (1899),  pp.  2,  37,  38.   ' 

Monism  includes  Pluralism 

3  Ibid.,    p.    39.      Study  of  physical  science,    pursued  sufficiently 
far,  no  doubt  leads  to  monism   also  ;  to  the  realisation  that  the  World- 
Process  is  something  continuous,  unbroken  :  that  the  individual  is  not 
independent,  but  part  of  one  continuous  whole.     But  the  a  d  v  a  i  t  a 
thus  reached  is  generally  an  external  or  objective  a  d  v  a  i  t  a,  so  to  say, 
one  in  terms  of  the  third  person.     Further  reflection  converts  it  into 
internal  and  subjective  ;  transforms  it  into  terms  of  the  first  person.     To 
reach  a  d  v  a  i  t  a  is  to  attain  moksha  ;  and  vichara,  viveka,  think- 
ing,   is   the    way :    pondering,    reflecting,  discriminating,   meditating, 
dwelling  on  any  one  of  the  main  aspects  or  factors  of  the  universe, 

1  consciousness  '  (see  pp.  26-29,  supra),  or  '  will,'  '  cause,1  '  matter,'  or 


P.,  CH,  X]  THE  SELF-LESS  SEEKER  FINDS  THE  SELF  195 

It  is  much  to  have  advanced  to  a  recognition  of  Self  ; 
correction  of  inaccurate  and  hasty  deductions,  is  possible 
only  on  due  study  of  the  nature  of  that  Self.  That  study 
will  show  how  there  may  be,  or  rather  must  be,  one  Self 
and  monism  or  rather  non-dualism,  and  yet  also  many 
selves  and  "  wanderings  of  souls,"  at  the  same  time. 

'force,'  etc.  In  fact,  the  seeker  may  start  anywhere,  but  if  he  only 
goes  on  to  the  end,  he  will  surely  arrive  at  the  same  goal.  But,  it  should 
be  noted  and  remembered,  the  intellectual  attitude  of  a  b  h  y  as  a,  perse- 
verant  search,  must  be  accompanied  by  the  ethical  attitude  of  v  a  i  r  a  g  y  a, 
passionate  rejection  of  the  selfishness  of  the  personal  or  individual  self  ; 
otherwise  the  Universal  Self  will  remain  hidden ;  for  the  plain  reason 
that  the  eye,  which  is  turned  to  the  finite  by  selfish  desire,  cannot  see 
that  which  is  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  Infinite,  to  which  the  eye  can 
be  turned  only  by  tm-selfish  desire  ;  but  when  it  is  so  turned,  it  simply 
cannot  help  seeing  It. 

NOTE. — Such    statements   as    those  of   Max   Verworn, 
quoted  above,  have  become  increasingly  common  in  the  half- 
century   that  has  elapsed  since  the  appearance  of  that  sci- 
entist's book.     Modern  physicists  have  begun  to  say,  '  Matter 
is  only   Force,'  '  Atoms  are  vortices  of  Nothing ;  '  which  is, 
perhaps,  going  to  the  other  extreme.     (See  leading  scientists' 
opinions  collected  in  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions; 
pp.    19-26).     Mula-Prakrti     (Matter,    Matra)     and    Daivi- 
Prakrti  (Force,  S  h  a  k  J  i,  from   d  i  v,  to  shine,  to  play)  are 
not    separable;    but   they   are   distinguishable.     The   Secret 
Doctrine  says,  "  Fohat  digs  holes  in  Space  "  ;  which  holes  are 
atoms.     The  idea  seems  to  be  that  if  you  regard  Space  as  a 
Plenum,   then  atoms  are  to  be  understood  or  imagined  as 
holes  in  it  (like  air-bubbles  in  a  solid  lump    of  glass),  by 
contrast  of  '  finite  individual '  against  *  In-finite  Universal  ". 
Per  contra,  if  you  look  upon  Space  as  a  Vacuum,  then  atoms 
have  to  be   thought  of  as   *  solid   particles ',  for  the  same 
contrast.     A   brief  look  into  the  500-pages  of  minute-print 
Indices  (Secret  Doctrine,  Vol.^  VI  of  the  Adyar  edition),  at 
references  to  '  Atom ',  '  Fohat ',  '  Force ',  '  Space  ',  *  Plenum  ', 
4  Vacuum ',  will  convince  the  reader  of  the  overwhelming 
character  of  the  very  numerous  and  very  different  statements 
regarding    each.    After    a    second  and  a  third  systematic 


196  METAPHYS1C    ILLUMINATES  [SC.    OF 

reading  of  the  whole  work — to  say  nothing  of  the  much  more 
frequent  consultation  of  particular  pages — the  mind  remains 
puzzled  and  bewildered.  At  the  same  time,  it  also  remains 
convinced  that  the  book  is  not  to  be  lightly  put  aside,  in 
hopeless  revolt  against  its  '  mysteriousness  ',  but  must  be 
pondered  over,  again  and  again.  Almost  every  statement, 
however  dis-jointed-seeming,  has  some  important  significance ; 
and  each  successive  pondering  brings  some  new  and  interesting 
aspect  into  view.  Anyway,  even  one  reading  of  the  great  work, 
and  of  The  Mahatma  Letters,  leaves  the  reader  in  possession 
of  a  positive  general  idea,  though  cloudy  and  tantalising,  of  the 
law  of  cyclic  and  spiral  in  volution -evolution,  as  governing  the 
Whole  World-Process,  and  the  subsidiary  law  of  septenates, 
as  governing  at  least  the  solar  sytem  to  which  our  earth  and 
our  race  belong.  It  also  gives  a  very  encouraging  glimpse 
into,  and  throws  light  on,  the  meaning  of  Puranic  allegories. 

If  a  few  metaphysical  principles  are  drawn  from  Ve- 
danta,  and  are  firmly  held  and  carefully  and  diligently  applied, 
they  may  prove  a  very  helpful  clue  in  the  labyrinthine 
jungle  of  facts  and  '  fancies '  (allegories),  set  out  in  the  books. 
Their  complexity  only  copies  the  actual  World-Process ; 
and  the.  books  themselves  insist,  over  and  over  again,  on  the 
necessity  of  studying  Brahma- vidya,  Atma- vidya,  Vedanta,  in 
order  to  simplify  the  complexity,  and  to  understand  the 
Nature,  of  the  World -Process,  and  also  to  practise  successfully, 
the  wholesome  individual  and  social  life  of  'Dharma,  which 
brings  happiness  here  and  hereafter/  Study  of  metaphysic  is 
strongly  advised  in  The  Mahatma  Letters,  pp.  250,  262. 

The  reader  is  invited  to  peruse  carefully,  pp.  79-83  of  the 
Proem  (in  Vol.  I,  of  The  Secret  Doctrine,  Adyar  edition),  at 
this  stage,  and  consider  whether  the  preceding  chapters  of  the 
present  work  help  to  make  any  clearer,  the  connotations  of, 
and  the  relations  between,  (1)  "  Para-brahman,  the  One 
Reality,  the  Absolute,  .  .  .  Absolute  Consciousness,  .  .  . 
Absolute  Negation,  ...  (2)  Spirit  (or  Consciousness)  and 
Matter,  Subject  and  Object.  ...  (3)  Pre-cosmic  Ideation  .  .  . 
fons  et  origo  of  (3 -a)  Force  and  of  all  Individual  Consci- 
ousness ;  .  .  .  (3-b)  Pre-cosmic  Root-substance  (Mula-prakrji), 
.  .  .  that  aspect  of  the  Absolute  which  underlies  all  the 
objective  planes  of  Nature  ; "  (p.  80).  On  p.  81,  it  is  said  ; 


P.,  CH.  X]       THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE  197 

"  Just  as  pre-Cosmic  Ideation  is  the  root  of  all  individual  Con- 
sciousness, so  pre-Cosmic  substance  is  the  substratum  of 
Matter  in  the  various  grades  of  its  differentiation.  .  .  .  Apart 
from  Cosmic  substance,  Cosmic  Ideation  could  not  manifest 
as  individual  Consciousness,  since  it  is  only  through  a  vehicle 
that  consciousness  wells  up  as  '  I  am  I ',  a  physical  basis 
being  necessary  to  focus  a  Ray  of  the  Universal  Mind.  .  .  . 
The  Manifested  Universe,  therefore,  is  pervaded  by  Duality, 
which  is,  as  it  were,  the  very  essence  of  its  EX-istence  as 
*  Manifestation  '.  But  just  as  the  opposite  poles  of  Subject 
and  Object,  Spirit  and  Matter,  are  but  aspects  of  the  One 
Unity  in  which  they  are  synthesised,  so,  in  the  Manifested 
Universe,  there  is  that  which  links  Spirit  to  Matter,  Subject 
to  Object.^  This  something  is  called  by  Occultists,  (4)  Fohat. 
It  is  the  '  bridge  '  by  which  the  (4-a)  Ideas  existing  in  the  (5) 
Divine  ^Thought  are  impressed  on  Cosmic  substance  as  the 
'  Laws  of  Nature  '.  Fohat  is  thus  the  (6)  Dynamic  Energy 
of  Cosmic  Ideation,  or,  regarded  from  the  other  side,  it  is  the 

(7)  intelligent  medium,  the  guiding  power  of  all  manifestation, 
the  '  Thought  Divine  '.  .  .  .  Fohat,  in  its  various  manifesta- 
tions,  is  the  mysterious  link  between  Mind  and  Matter,  the 

(8)  animating  principle  "    [  p  r  a  n.  a   in  one  aspect,  j  i  v  a  in 
another  ]  "  electrifying  every  atom   into    life."     (The  figures 
1   to   8,  in  brackets,  have  been  put  in  by  the  present  writer, 
in  the  above  excerpt.) 

*  Absolute  Negation  ',  '  Absolute  Consciousness  ',  '  I  am 
I  ',  the  Why  and  the  How  of  the  origin  of  Duality  in 
or  from  the  '  One  Unity ' ;  the  metaphysical  crux  of  such 
a  Relation  between  Subject  and  Object,  Spirit  and  Matter, 
as  will  not  falsify  the  Absoluteness  of  the  Absolute  Nega- 
tion ;  —  all  these  may  perhaps  be  better  understood  if 
'  Absolute  Negation  *  and  'I  am  I '  are  interpreted  in  the 
light  of  'I-am-(Not  Not)-I '.  ^So,  too,  Fohat,  as  'that 
which  links  Spirit  to  Matter/  as  *  dynamic  energy  of  Cosmic 
Ideation,'  as  '  intelligent  Medium,  the  Thought  Divine 'and 
as  *  the  animating  principle ' — all  this  may,  perhaps,  be 
better  understood,  if  '  I-(am)-Not-Not-I  '  is  seen  as  the 
Supreme  Logion  (or  Logos),  Maha-vaky  a,  Great  Word, 
the  whole  of  Cosmic  Ideation,  Thought  Divine,  and  the  One 
Supreme  Law  of  Nature ;  if  it  is  seen  as  the  Necessity  of  the 


198  WHY   AND    HOW   OF   FOHAT  [SC.   OF 

whirling  wheeling  round  and  round  each  other,  in  mutual  suc- 
cession, of  '  Am  '  and  c  Am-Not ',  as  '  Dynamic  Energy  ;  and 
if  the  Desire- Will  aspect  of  *  Am  '  and  '  Am-Not '  is  seen  as 
*  animating  principle  ',  and  the  subordinate  Laws  of  Nature  as 
'  subsidiary  necessities  ',  issuing  like  corollaries  from  the  One 
Primal  Necessity  hidden  in  the  Supreme  Logion,  and  express- 
ed by  minor  maha-vakya-s.  The  succeeding  chapters 
m^y  perhaps  help  to  make  the  nature  of  Force- Shakti  a  little 
clearer. 

The  all-important  facts  or  concepts  of  Space,  Time,  and 
Motion,  also  naturally  figure  prominently,  and  are  referred  to 
frequently,  in  H.P.B.'s  great  Work  (as  the  Index  indicates 
amply).  But  the  metaphysical  Why  and  How  of  them  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  expounded  in  it.  An  attempt  is  made  in 
this  work,  in  the  preceding,  and  further  endeavour  will  be 
made  in  the  succeeding,  chapters,  to  supply  this,  as  well  as  a 
few  other  thoughts  or  things,  out  of  Samskrt  scriptures. 

The  Mahatma  Letters  and  The  Secret  Doctrine 

In  connection  with  this  topic,  of  de-finite  a-tom  (in- 
divis-ible,  from  Gr.  a,  not,  and  tonein,  to  cut,  to  divide)  and  * 
In  -finite  space,  the  following  quotation  from  The  Mahatma 
Letters,  'pp.  77-78,  may  be  helpful  to  bear  in  mind  :  "  The 
whole  individuality  is  centred  in  the  middle,  or  3rd,  4th,  and 
5th  principles.  During  earthly  life  it  is  all  in  the  4th  (Kama- 
rupa,  sometimes  called  Kama-Manas),  the  centre  of  energy, 
volition,  will."  Veda- Upanishats  say,  Kama-  maya  6  v  a 
ayam  purushah,  '  (in-divid-ualised)  Man  is  Desire  only  ', 
i.e.,  Desire  is  the  in-divid-ualising,  focussing,  finitising,  de- 
fining, de-limiting,  principle.  Now,  that  which  is  Desire-Force 
in  the  mental,  ideal,  '  spiritual ',  or  '  subjective  '  aspect,  that 
same  manifests  as  Fohat-Force  in  the  physical,  real, 
'material',  or  objective*  aspect,  and  makes  the  in- divid-uai 
in-divis-ible  a-tom.  Fohat '  focusses  '  the  Universal,  concent- 
rates it,  brings  It  to  a  point,  makes  it  an  in-divid-ual,  (as  ? 
magnifying  glass  does  the  diffused  sunshine).  It  does  this 
by  linking,  binding  (band ha),  the  whole  and  Universal  I 
with  a  part-icle,  a  part-icular  '  this ',  an  '  a-tom ',  an 
up -ad  hi,  'l-am-this'.  The  Secret  Doctrine  defines  and 
describes  Fohat  and  its  doings  in  dozens  of  ways  (vide  Index) ; 
but  this  metaphysical  idea  will  probably  help  to  synthesise 


P.,   CH.   XI.]  THE    RELATIVE  199 

them  all.  The  chapters  which  follow,  attempt  to  expound 
this  idea  further.  The  Science  of  the  Emotions  deals  in 
extenso  with  the  view  that  '  the  individual  man  is  essentially 
Desire',  and  Cognition  and  Volition- Action  are  adjuncts; 
and  that  the  fading  away  of  Desire  is,  per  contra,  the 
re-universalising  of  the  individual,  the  resolving  and  dissolving 
of  the  whirlpool,  its  moksha,  releasing,  back  into  the  Ocean. 


CHAPTER   XT 

DVANDVAM— THE  RELATIVE  (CONTINUED) 

(C — 1.)  NEGATION  AS  SHAKTI-ENERGY — THE  RE- 
LATION    AND     THE   CAUSE    OF   INTERPLAY   BETWEEN 

THE  SELF  AND  THE  NOT-SELF 

THE  third  factor  in  the  S  v  a  -  b  h  a  v  a,  own-being,  of  the 
Absolute  is  ni-shedha,  or  prati-sh£dha,  Negation, 
denial,  '  Not/  or  rather  the  connecting  of  '  Not '  with 
'  Not-I  'by  *  I  '.'  From  the  standpoint  of  the  Absolute, 
this  third  factor  is  not  a  third,  any  more  than  the  second 
is  a  second ;  for  the  third  is  a  negation  of  the  second 

1  £*HW  ;  fMfa,  Slfcf-fa.  '  Own-being  '  may  be  regarded  as  a 
variant  of  '  thing-in-itself  '  ;  it  is  '  self -being.'  'being-in-its-self,'  the 
peculiarity,  personality,  individuality  of  the  thing ;  '  temperament '  in 
the  mediaeval  medical  phrase ;  '  constitutional  idiosyncracy  '  in  the 
modern  scientific  medical  phrase;  prakr.ti,  nature,  in  both  Samskft 
Darshana,  i.e.,  philosophy,  and  Vaidyaka,  i.e.,  medicine. 

Mula-prakrti  or  Matter  and  Daivi-prakrti  or  Force,  together,  make 
up  the  whole  Sva-bhavaof  Purusha  or  Pratyag-atmS.  ^f^-^jftwrgt: 
3&3:,  'Force  and  Possessor  of  Force  are  not-different,  not -separate 
though  distinguishable/ 


200  ANAGOGIC   PERMUTATIONS  [SC.   OF 

which  is  Nothing,  No-limited-or-particular-thing,  Not- 
Being  ;  and,  where  this  is  so,  it  also  follows  that  the  first 
is  not  a  first,  for  there  is  nothing  left  to  recognise  it  by  as 
a  first ;  the  resultant  being  a  Purity  of  Peace  as  regards 
which  nothing  can  be  said  and  no  exception  taken.  The 
full  significance  of  this  Negation,  which  is  the  nexus 
between  Self  and  Not-Self,  will  appear  when  we  consider 
the  different  interpretations,  which  turn  upon  it,  of  the 
logion,  each  correct,  and  each  exemplified  and  illustrated 
in  the  universe  around  us.  Thus,  the  logion  Aham- 
Etat-Na  may  mean  : 

(a)  M  U  A.     Not  Not-Self  (,but  only)  Self  (is). 

(6)  U  A  M.     Not-self  (is,  and)  Self  (is)  Not. 

(c)  M  A  U.  (Only  vacuity,  nothingness  is,  and) 
Not  Self  (or)  Not-Self. 

<<*)  A  M  U.  Self  (is)  Not  Not-Self  ;  or,  Self  (is) 
Not  (,to  the)  Not-Self. 

(e)  U  M  A.  Not-Self  (is)  Not  Self ;  or  Not-Self 
(is)  Not  (,to)  Self. 

(/)    A  U  M.     Self  (is)  Not-Self  (and  also)  Not  (it). 

(g)  A— U— M.  Self Not-Self— Not,  the  Ab- 
solute wherein  all  possible  permutations  are.1 

1  These  permutations  are  based  on  statements  made  in  the  Pranava- 
Vada,  an  unpublished  Saraskrt  MS.,  referred  to  in  Note  I  at  the  end  of 
Ch.'  VII  (p.  121,  supra).  As  explained  in  detail  in  that  work,  V6dat 
in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  is  Cosmic  Ideation,  i.e.,  everything, 
tsee  footnote,  p.  40  supra) ,  and  the  four  collections  of  hymns,  currently 
known  as  the  Vldas,  in  the  plural,  may  be  regarded  as  comparatively 
small  but  highly  important  text-books  of  superphysical  art  and  meta- 
physical science. 

The  question  may  be  legitimately  asked  :  If  all  these  permutations 
and  combinations  of  the  factors  of  the  logion  are,  as  indeed  they 
obviously  ought  to  be,  included  in  Cosmic  Ideation,  and  therefore  true  in 


P.,   CH,   Xl]         WHAT   IS   ABSOLUTE   TRUTH  ?  201 

Such  permutations  and  combinations  of  Self  and 
Not-Self  and  Negation  give  rise  to  the  actual  varieties 
of  facts  in  the  universe  and  to  the  corresponding  beliefs 
of  man  ;  now  to  the  prevalence  of  Spirit,  now  to  the 

their  own  times,  places,  and  circumstances,  is  there  any  final  absolute 
truth,  independently  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance  ;  and  is  there  any 
infallible  test  of  truth  ?  Who  is  to  judge  between  the  rival  claimants  of 
truth  ?  What  will  decide  ?  Is  it  spiritual  experience  ?  But  spiritual  ex- 
periences differ  also  ;  who  is  to  judge  between  them  ? 

These  difficulties  may  be  solved  thus.  Absolute  Truth  can  be  only 
that  which  totals  up,  reconciles,  and  synthesises  in  itself,  all  '  other  ' 
truths,  showing  that  they  are  all  relative  or  partial  or  half-truths.,  If  a 
person  says  :  "  No  ;  errors  and  heresies  are  the  irreconcilable  opposites 
of  the  truth,"  then  he  has  to  explain  how  they,  (like  sin,  evil,  pain,  etc.,) 
came  to  be.  If  he  says,  "  By  the  act  of  God,"  then  '  God  '  is  his  absolute 
truth  wherein  the  reconciliation  is  found.  What  '  God  '  means,  and  how 
he  brings  home  the  '  absolute  truth  '  of  '  God  '  creating  error,  etc.,  will 
remain  for  him  to  explain,  or  rather  for  the  questioner  and  seeker  to  find 
out  ;  for,  the  person  who  says  errors  are  irreconcilable  and  synthesis 
impossible,  has  no  use  for-  absolute  truth,  i.e.,  the  Absolute  ;  he  is  not 
seeking  it  and  does  not  want  it—  yet.  He  is  perfectly  content  with  what 
he  has  got,  and  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  try  to  give  to  him  something 
else  which  he  does  not  want  ;  as  food  to  one  not  hungry.  If  there  be 
any  special  reasons  making  it  right  to  do  so,  then  the  need  should  first 
be  aroused  in  him.  But  the  craving  for  Absolute  Truth  is  not  easily 
aroused  from  without,  by  'another'.  It  comes  from  within,  through 
the  cyclic  processes  of  life  of  the  individual  self.  Therefore,  among  the 
special  and  peculiar  qualifications  mentioned  for  the  student  of  Ve<Janta, 
the  seeker  after  Brahma,  is  the  ethical  attitude  of  v  a  i  r  a  g  y  a,  revulsion 
from  the  worldly  life  and  dispassionate  compassion  for  all  sufferers,  and 
shama,  4ama,  uparati,  titiksha,  shraddha,  sama<jhana. 
inner  subsidence  of  desire  and  consequent  serenity,  self-control  over 
senses,  wish  for  retirement  and  repose,  resigned  endurance  of  whatever 
befalls,  firm  faith  in  one-Self  and  in  the  guide  and  teacher  one  has 
chosen  with  due  care,  and  collected  single-mindedness  ;  Brhad  Up., 
4.4.23;  Nrsimha  Uttara  Tapini  Up.t6;  Shankara,  Sharlraka 
Bh&shya,  I.  i.  1. 


^:  I  Bhagavaja,  VI,  iv,  41. 

Daksha,  reprimanding  Narada,  (who  has  led  Daksha's  young  sons 
astray,  preaching  vairagya  to  them),  says:  'Without  experience  of  the 
sharpness,  the  intensity,  of  the  objects  of  sense,  there  can  be  no  surfeit  and 
no  real,  lasting,  revulsion  therefrom;  the  j  i  v  a  should,  therefore,  turn 
from  the  world,  suo  motu  ;  not  mis-led  prematurely  by  others.' 


202  THE   SELF-EVIDENT  [SC.   OF 

triumph  of  Matter,  again  to  the  reign  of  p  r  a  1  a  y  a  ;  to 
dreaming,  waking,  and  sleeping ;  to  subjective  monism 
or  idealism,  objective  monism  or  materialism,  sh  u  nya- 
vada  or  nihilism,  pantheism,  solipsism,  dualism,  ab- 
solutism, etc.  (corresponding  broadly,  not  strictly,  to 
a,  6,  c,  etc.,  above,  respectively)  and  all  other  possible 
forms  of  beliefs.1  All  these  permutations  mean  only  the 

But  as  soon  as  the  craving  is  aroused,  the  possibility  of  fulfilling  it  is 
aroused  also.  So  soon  as,  and  no  sooner  than,  a  question  forms  in  the 
mind,  the  answer  begins  to  form  also.  In  fact  the  question  is  the  first 
part  of  the  answer.  As  soon  as  a  person  says,  "  I  want  the  Absolute 
Truth."  he  means,  "  I  want  something  which  will  reconcile,  synthesise, 
explain,  and  not  merely  condemn  and  abuse,  all  truths  other  or  less  than 
this  ideal  Absolute  Truth  "  ;  and,  as  soon  as  he  means  that,  he  is  on  the 
track  of  it,  he  has  got  hold  of  a  vital  feature  of  it.  "It  takes  two  to  tell 
the  truth,  one  to  tell  it  and  one  to  hear  it  "  ;  *'  truth  is  truth  to  him  who 
believes  it  "  :  "  the  one  test  of  truth  is  the  belief  of  the  believer  "  ,  if 
you  convince  a  person  that  what  he  has  believed  so  far  is  not  true,  then 
you  have  created  a  new  belief  in  him  \  therefore  he,  the  I,  the  Self, 
the  One  We,  is  the  final,  universal,  absolute  test  of  Truth.  '  Self -evidence  ' 
is  the  absolute  test  and  the  Absolute  Truth.  He  who  asks,  "  Who  is  to 
judge?"  understands  the  answer,  "  The  judge  must  be  common,  impartial, 
equally  benevolent  to  him,  you,  me,  all  the  parties ,  and,  here,  such  is 
the  Self  ' '  ;  and  he  who  asks  ' '  What  is  to  prove, ' '  will  understand  the 
answer,  "Self-evidence,''  the  evidence  of  the  Self,  by,  to,  and  in  the 
Self.  The  western  school  of  thinkers  who  said  '  conceivability  '  was  the 
test,  really  meant  this.  '  Spiritual  experience  '  is  nothing  distant  and 
mysterious.  A//a-pa-roksha,  direct  '  experience, '  which  comes  home, 
whether  cognitive,  emotional,  or  actional,  is  such;  and  whether  of 
physical  or  of  superphysical  and  subtle  things.  It  attains  its  highest 
degree,  its  '  re-alisation  ',  its  '  re-ality',  its  '  act-uality  ',  when  all  these 
aspects  of  the  consciousness  coalesce,  when  the  individual's  cognition 
is  so  clear  and  certain  that  he  feels  or  desires  and  also  acts  accordingly. 
The  faith  that  maketh  martyrs  witnesseth  itself.  See  pp,  22-23,  96,  suf>ra. 

1  f fa  *HT  sreNsra  ar3Ri  ^faft:  1*1*1  i 

flf  sqHKJ  gfaJTr^;  f^tf  PftrofoCTJI  Bhagavaja,  XI,  xxii. 

'  The  seers  have  thus  explained  the  fundamental  constituents  and 
features  of  the  universe  in  various  ways.  Each  way  is  just,  because  of  its 
own  special  reasons.  The  wise  see  no  conflict  and  no  lack  of  beauty 
in  any.' 

Each  preceding  view  leaves  behind  an  unreduced  surd,  and  conse- 
quent discontent,  which  grows  slowly.  When  the  last  view  is  reached, 


?.,   CH.   Xl]  TURMOIL  within   PEACE  203 

accentuating,  in  different  degrees,  of  the  factors  of  the 
Logion  severally.  If  we  emphasise  them  all  equally, 
then  we  find  the  Peace  of  the  Absolute  left  untouched ; 
because  the  net  result,  of  the  three  being  taken  in  combi- 
nation, is  always  a  neutralising,  a  balancing,  of  opposition, 
which  may  indifferently  be  called  fullness  or  emptiness, 
peace  or  blankness,  "  the  voice,  the  music,  the  resonance 
of  the  silence  " ;  because  the  three,  A,  U,  and  M,  are 
verily  simultaneous,  are  in  inseparable  combination,  are 
not  amenable  to  arrangements  and  re-arrangements,  to 
permutations  and  combinations  ;  and  these  last  merely 
appear,  but  appear  inevitably,  only  when  the  whole  is 
looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of  apart — an  A,  a  U,  or  an 
M,  which  is  necessarily  bound  to  an  order,  a  succession, 
an  arrangement.  And  yet  also  the  whole  multitude 
and  Turmoil  of  the  World-Process  is  in  that  Peace  ;  for 
'  No-thing,'  Not-Self,  is  '  all  things  destroying  each 
other,'  and  Negation  is  '  abolition  of  all  these  particular 
things  ' ;  and  '  I  '  is  that  for  the  sake  of  which,  and  in , 
and  by  the  consciousness  of  which,  all  this  abolition 
takes  place.  This  is  the  true  significance  of  the  Sankhya 
doctrine  that  Prakrti,  Not-Self,  displays  herself  and 
hides  herself  incessantly,  only  in  order  to  provide  an 
endless  foil  for  the  Self-realisation,  the  amusement, 

no  surd  remains  ;  all  views  are  reconciled  ;  each  is  seen  to  have  its  own 
beauty  and  duty.  From  one  standpoint,  pantheism  may  appear  as  a  com- 
bination of  I  and  Not-I  only,  rather  than  as  a  permutation  of  all  three 
factors  of  the  Logion.  But  (f)  above  may  be  interpreted  as  Spinoza's 
pantheism,  viz.,  that  A  and  U,  Thought  and  Extension,  (Mind  and 
Matter),  both,  are  two  aspects  of  that  which  is  Not-describable  otherwise  ; 
or  as  Pope's  pantheism,  viz.,  "The  universe  is  one  stupendous  whole, 
whose  Body  Nature  is  and  God  the  soul ' ' . 


204  IMAGINATIVE    ATTENTION  [SC.   OF 

of   Purusha,    Self.1     In    such   interplay,  both   find  ever- 
lasting and  inevitable  fullness  of  manifestation,  fullness 
of  realisation,  and  unfettered  recreation. 
Metaphysical  Catalysis 

1  Compare  H.  Ellis,  Psychology  of  Sex,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  95 
("  Love  and  Pain  ")  :  "  .  .  .  The  male  is  active  and  the  female 
passive  and  imaginatively  attentive  to  the  states  of  the 
excited  male  .  .  .  The  female  develops  a  superadded  activity, 
the  male  becomiug  relatively  passive  and  imaginatively 
attentive  to  the  psychical  and  bodily  states  of  the  female. 
.  .  ."  ;  and  the  well-known  doctrines,  of  Sarikhya,  viz.,  that 
Purusha  is  the  actionless  Spectator  of  the  movements,  the 
dance,  of  Prakrti  ;  and  of  Vedanta,  viz.,  that  the  juxtaposition 
or  coexistence  of  Purusha  and  Prakrti,  (the  metaphysical 
archetypes  of  sex),  superimposes,  causes  a  d  h  y  a  s  a  of,  the 
characteristics  of  each  upon  the  other,  by  v  i-v  a  r  t  a,  inversion. 

The  mere  presence  and  proximity  of  a  person,  of  one  sex 
is  enough  to  produce  some  excitement  (not  necessarily  lustful 
at  all)  in  a  person  of  the  other  sex.  The  Sankhya  description  of 
Prakrti  exhibiting  Herself  to  the  watching  Purusha,  and 
shrinking  away  ashamed,  as  soon  as  the  latter  loses  interest  and 
turns  away  His  eyes  —  this  is,  literally,  an  expansion,  to  the 
Universal  and  Infinite  scale,  of  the  facts  of  daily  sex-life  ;  and 
the  latter  are,  conversely  and  obversely,  the  contraction 
to  the  finite  scale,  of  the  Infinite  Fact,  of  the  never-ceasing 
Drama  of  the  Interplay  of  the  Eternal  Masculine  and  the 
pseudo-  Eternal  Feminine. 


r  3*4  %$&  gqfa 

Sankhya  Karika,  21  and  16. 

*  In  order  that  Purusha  may  see  Prakrti  and  then  retire  into 
Soli-tude,  and  that  Prakrji  may  show  Herself  (and  then  shrink 
away),  the  two  come  together  ;  as  may  the  lame  man  who 
cannot  walk  but  can  see,  and  the  blind  man  who  can  walk  but 
cannot  see,  in  order  to  help  each  other.  Very  modest,  shy, 


P.,    CH.   Xl]       ETERNAL   FRMTNINE-MASCULINE  205 

The  why  of  the  movement  of  this  Interplay,  of  to 
and  fro,  identification  and  separation,  action  and  reaction, 
has  been  already  dealt  with,  in  one  aspect,  in  the  previ- 
ous chapter.  It  will  have  appeared  from  what  was  said 
there,  that  the  Negation  necessarily  appears,  and  can  only 
appear,  in  the  limited  as,  first,  an  affirmation,  and  then,  a 
negation. 

We  may  now  consider  a  little  more  fully  the  nature 
of  the  affirmation  and  the  negation.  The  statement, 
repeated  from  time  to  time,  that  negation  hides  affir- 
mation within  it,  and  as  preceding  it  in  time,  should  be 
clearly  grasped.  In  the  logion,  Ego  Non-ego  Non  (est), 
the  bracketed  est,  (or  sum),  is  the  hidden  affirmation.  A 
little  reflection  shows  that  it  should  be  so,  and  must  be 
so,  quite  unobjectionably  ;  that  thought  can  detect  no 
fault  in  the  fact.  Take  away  the  est,  not  only  from  the 
sentence  but  really  from  consciousness,  and  the  remain- 
ing three  words  lose  all  coherent  meaning.  To  deny  a 
thing,  it  is  necessary  first  to  describe  itr  to  allege  it  as 
at  least  a  supposition,  a  hypothesis ;  and  to  describe  it, 
is  to  postulate  for  it  at  least  a  false,  an  assumed, 

sensitive,  is  Prakrty ;  for  having  shown  herself,  and  been  seen, 
if  the  spectator  turns  away,  she  vanishes/  The  chemical  pheno- 
menon of  catalysis  seems  to  correspond  to  the  psychological 
phenomenon  of  "  imaginative  attention  "  and  its  effects  upon 
that  which  is  attended  to.  The  watering  of  the  mouth  in  the 
presence  of  a  tasteful  edible  ;  the  expanding  of  the  eyes  or  the 
nostrils,  in  that  of  a  beautiful  form  or  color  or  fragrant 
perfume — all  these  are  variants  of  the  same  fact.  In  all  cases, 
of  course,  the  perceiver  must  be  '  interested  '  and  (  pursuant ' ; 
not '  tired '  and  '  renunciant '. 


206  THE    EVER    IMPLICIT    '  AM  '  [SC.    OF 

existence.  In  order  that  Non-Ego  may  be  denied,  it  must 
first  be  alleged  as  at  least  a  supposition.  For  this  reason, 
and  for  the  reason  that  affirmation  and  negation  cannot  be 
contemporaneous  in  a  single,  particular,  limited,  thing,  it 
comes  about,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the  logion,  for  the  pur- 
poses of  the  limited,  in  order  that  the  limited  may  ex-ist 
and  appear  and  be  a  fact  at  all,  necessarily  falls  into  two 
parts,  (a)  Ego  Non-Ego,  and  (6)  Non-Ego  Non.  The  first 
contains  implicitly,  hidden  in  its  stated  words,  the  word 
est  or  sum,  for  otherwise  it  has  no  meaning ;  and  the 
second  part  also  similarly  contains  implicitly  within  it  the 
same  word  est  or  sum,  which  alone  gives  it  any  significance. 
For  the  reasons  already  partially  explained  in  chapters 
VII  and  IX,  the  affirmation  and  the  negation  respectively 
take  on  the  form  of  an  identification  of  Self  with  Not- 
Self,  and  of  a  separation  from  it.  The  mere  unconcerned 
assertion,  in  the  third  person,  of  the  being  or  the  non- 
being  of  Non-Ego,  has  no  interest  for  Self ;  it  has  no 
motive  for  making  such  an  apathetic  assertion.  Such 
indifferent  statement  about  another  would  have  no  reason 
to  justify  it,  to  make  it  necessary,  to  explain  why  it  came 
to  be  made  at  all.  It  cannot  be  said  that  Not-Self  is  a 
fact,  and  so  has  an  existence  independent  of  the  motives 
and  reasons  and  interests  of  Self ;  because  it  has  been 
settled  at  the  outset  that  Not-Self  cannot  be,  must  not 
be,  is  not,  independent  of  Self,  but  very  dependent 
thereon  for  all  such  existence  as  it  has.  Therefore  it 
follows  necessarily  that  the  assertion  and  denial  of  that 
Not-Self  by  Self  should  be  connected  with  a  purpose  in 


P,,    CH.    Xl]       IN    BOTH    PARTS   OF  THE   LOGION        207 

Self,  should  immediately  subserve  some  interest  in  that 
Self.  The  only  purpose  and  interest  that  there  can  be,  in 
that  which  is  Ever-Perfect,  "Full,  Desireless,  and  therefore 
Purposeless,  is  Self-recognition,  Self-definition,  Self-reali- 
sation, Self -maintenance,  Self-preservation,  Self-asser- 
tion. The  eternal  Self  requires  nothing  in  reality  from 
outside  of  it-Self ;  it  is  only  ever  engaged  in  the  one 
pastime  of  asking  :  "  What  am  I  ?  what  am  I  ?  am  I 
this  ?  am  I  this  ?  "  and  assuring  itself  :  "  No,  I  am  not 
this,  I  am  not  this,  but  only  My-Self."  This  pastime,1  it 
must  be  remembered,  which,  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
1  this  '  is  repeated  again  and  again,  is  from  the  standpoint 
of  the  '  I  '  but  one  single,  eternal,  and  'changeless  act  of 
consciousness  in  which  there  is  no  movement.  Thus, 
therefore,  the  affirmation  necessarily  takes  on  the  form  of 
an  identification  of  '  I  '  with  '  Not-I,'  and  the  negation, 
that  of  the  dis-identification,  the  separation,  of  '  I  '  from 
4  Not-I  '.  The  logion  is  not  merely  a  neutral  state- 
ment of  the  non-entity  of  *  Not-I  '. 

The  affirmation,  then,  Ego  est  Non-Ego,  not  only 
imposes  on  '  Not-I '  the  Being  which  belongs  inherently 
to  Self,  but  also,  for  the  time,  makes  it  identical  with 
the  Self,  i.e.,  a  self ;  and  at  this  stage,  that  is  to  say,  in 
the  separation  of  the  two  parts  of  the  logion,  because 
'  Not-I  '  is  always  a  particular,  a  limited  something,  it 
takes  on  its  most  significant  character  and  name,  viz., 

1  ^faftil  3  5ft«*wfc«f*t  I  Brahma-Stitra,  II.  i,  32.  L  i  1  £  is  pastime. 
A  western  writer  has  said  well  that  ' '  The  history  of  man  is  one  long 
search  for  God".  Ved£n|a  and  Sankhya-Yoga  instruct  us  how  "The 
history  of  the  whole  universe  is  one  eternal  search-and-finding  by  Self  of 
It-Self  ".  See  f.  n.  2  on  p.  84,  supra. 


208    'i  (AM)'  BEGINS  AND  ENDS  THE  DAY    [sc.  OF 

'  this,'  i  d  a  m  ',  or  '  €  t  a  t,'  as  it  is  called  in  Samskrt 
books.  Side  by  side,  also,  with  this  change  of  name  of 
Not-Self,  (which  does  not  mein  any  change  of  nature,  but 
only  indicates  the  special  and  most  important  aspect  and 
manifestation  of  the  nature  of  Not-Self),  the  bracketed  est 
becomes  sum,  and  the  first  part  of  the  logion  becomes : 
*  I  (am)  this.'  In  continued  consequence  of  that 
same  reason,  the  second  part  of  the  logion  becomes : 
4  This  not  (am  I),'  having  the  same  meaning  as,  '  I  am 
not  this/  with  a  special  significance,  viz.,  that  in  the 
actual  World- Process,  in  every  cycle — whether  it  be  the 
daily  waking  and  falling  to  sleep  of  the  individual  human 
being,  or  the  s  a  r  g  a  and  p  r  a  1  a  y  a,  creation  and  disso- 
lution, of  world-systems — the  I -consciousness  begins  as 
well  as  ends  the  day,  the  period  of  activity  and  manifest- 
ation. •  The  new-born  baby's  first  shut-eyed  feeling  in 
the  morning  is  the  vague  feeling  of  a  self,  in  which  of 
course  a  not-self  is  also  present,  though  a  little  more 
vaguely  ;  and  his  last  shut-eyed  feeling  in  the  evening  is 
the  same  vague  feeling  of  a  self  returning,  from  all  the 
outward  and  gradually  dimming  not-self,  into  its  own  in- 
wardness and  sleep.  The  order  of  the  words  in  Samskrt, 
Aham-]£tat-Na  (as  mi),  expresses  this  fact;  and  it  ex- 
presses something  additional  also,  for  asm  i,  '  (I)  am,' 
indicates  that  the  individual  '  I  ',  at  the  end  of  the  day's 
work,  is,  as  it  were,  fuller,  has  more  deliberate  and  definite 
self-consciousness,  than  it  had  at  the  beginning  thereof. 

The   '  this,'   it  now  appears,   is,  in  the  first  place, 
the   u  p  a  4  h  i,   the  body,  the  sheath,  or  the  organism, 


P.,    CH.   XI']       THE    BHRAMA    OF   THE    'SWAN1        209 

which  the  individualised  spirit  occupies,  owns,  identi- 
fies itself  with,  and,  again,  rejects  and  casts  away  ;  and, 
in  the  second  place,  it  is  all  the  world  of  *  objects  '  with 
which  the  Spirit  may  identify  itself,  which  it  may  possess 
and  own  as  part  of  itself,  as  belonging  to  itself,  and  again 
renounce,  in  possibility. 

Thus,  through  the  dual  nature  of  Negation,  dual  by 
reflection  of  the  being  of  Self  and  the  non-being  of  Not- 
Self,  is  kept  incessantly  moving,  that  revolving  wheel  of 
Samsaraof  which  it  has  been  declared  :  '  That  wherein 
all  find  living,  that  wherein  all  find  rest,  that  which  is 
boundless  and  shoreless  —  in  that  tire-less  wheel  of  Brahma, 
turneth  round  and  round  the  h  a  rn  -  sa,  the  swan,  because, 
and  so  long  as,  it  believeth  itself  to  be  separate  from  the 
mover  of  the  wheel  ;  but  when  it  -  recogniseth  its  own 
oneness  with  that  Self  which  ever  turneth  the  wheel,  it 
forthwith  cometh  to  rest,  and  attaineth  the  Peace  of  Im- 
mortality.' l  '  So-ham,'  is  the  jlva  that  recognises  the 


\ 
ShvetCtshvatara,  i,  6. 

Glta  also  speaks  of  the  chakra  of  the  World-Process 
di,  16).  The  '  cyclical  '  movement  of  the  World-Process,  in 
space  and  in  time,  is  a  patent  fact  ;  its  reason  is  to  be  found 
in  the  alternating,  rhythmic,  succession  of  the  two  parts  of  the 
logion.  Chakra,  kuklos,  cycle,  circle,  are  etymologically 
allied.  The  same  idea,  as  expressed  by  bhramaorbhranfi 
appearing  in  Brahma,  '  wandering  and  straying  round  and  round 
in  space,'  has  been  referred  to  on  p.  159,  supra.  To  run  round 
and  round  in  circles,  as  the  orbs  of  space  are  doing,  like  puppies 
chasing  their  own  tails,  is  to  be  aimless,  mistaken,  illusion-ed. 
14 


210  TRYING   TO    ACHIEVE    INFINITY           [SC.    OF 

identity  of  the  Universal  Ego  with  the  individual  ego 
in  the  words  '  Sah  Aham,'  'That  am  I1;  whereas 
'ham-sa'  (which,  as  an  ordinary  word,  means  the 
migrating  swan,  recurrently,  periodically,  flying  to  and 
fro  between  the  arctic  and  the  temperate  zones,  between 
cold  and  heat),  is  the  reversal  and  contradiction  of  this 
recognition,  and  indicates  the  j  I  v  a  (migrating  recurrently 

The  word  b  h  r  a  m  a  covers    all   these    meanings,    all  these 
analogies.     Say  that  '  chasing  one's  own  tail '  is  '  chasing  one's 
own  Self  ',  and  the  aimless  becomes  the  aimful ;  the  illusion-ed, 
becomes  the  illumin-ed.  To  put  it  in  another  way  :  This  verse  of 
the  Upanishat  pictures  the  v  i-v  a  r  t  a  view.    Believing  it-self 
to  be  an  infinitesimal  speck,  the  j  I  v  a  rushes  round  and  round, 
trying  to  achieve  Infinity  by  encompassing  all  Space.     It  does 
so,  because,    though  outwardly  believing  itself  to  be  limited, 
finite,  inwardly  it  knows  it-self  to  be  Infinite  ;  and  the  endless 
circling   and    cycling   is   due   to  the  necessity  of  making  the 
Outer   belief   One   with  the   Inner ;  and  thus  abolishing  the 
restless    and    intolerable  pain  of  inconsistency  and  conflict. 
So  soon  as  the  j  I  v  a  dis-covers  that  it  is  It-Self  this  Infinite 
Space,  that  It  has  that  Space  within  It-Self,  instead  of  It-Self 
being  within  It,  so  soon  is  the  v  i-v  a  r  t  a,  €  reversal f  of  out- 
look,  change  of   attitude,   completed.     It   is   the  same  with 
Time  and  Motion.     The  '  solid  '  substantial  speck  or  atom, 
which   the   j  1  v  a  formerly  identified  itself  with,  in  '  empty  ' 
Space,  now  begins  to  be  seem  as  a  '  vacuum  '-bubble  C  koil- 
on  ')>    a    '  vortex   of   nothing ',   (mere   '  imagination '),   in  'a 
Plenum  of  Consciousness.     There  is  a  reversal,  v  i  -  v  a  r  t  a, 
in   all   aspects   and  respects.     The  world  is  seen  in  a  '  new  * 
light.     Every-thing  becomes  *  new  ; '   '  ST  '3&IPI    0$   '  *Nt  73>dfcf 
fffl  c  5T-^:  ;  *  because  it  makes  everything  seem  new,  there- 
fore is  it  called  Pr&-nava  '.     '  The  solid-seeming  world  doth 
vanish  like  a  cloud,  nor  leaves  a  wrack  behind  ' ;  becomes  a 
dream,  when  'man,  most  ignorant  of  what  he's  most  assured, 
his   glassy   essence  ',   casts   off  that   i-gnor-ance,  a-v  i  d  y  a, 
recovers  v  i  d  y  a,   wisdom,   assurance  of  his  glassy  essence, 
his  Self,  the  Self  of  all. 


P.,    CH.   XI]  BY    ENDLESS    CIRCLING  211 

between  '  this  world  '  and  '  that  world ',  and  also  from  body 
to  body)  which  does  not  recognise  its  identity  with  the 
*  I  '.  Two  arcs,  and  two  only,  and  always,  are  there  in  the 
endless  revolution  of  this  wheel.  On  the  first  arc,  that 
which  is  not,  '  This,'  appears  as  if  it  is;  it  takes  'name 
and  form,'  '  a  local  habitation  and  a  name,'  and  predo- 
minates over  Self.  This  is  the  Pravrtti-marga,  Path 
of  Pursuit,  whereon  the  individualised  self  feels  its  identity 
more  and  more  with  some  not-self,  separates  itself  more 
and  more  from  the  Universal  Self,  runs  after  the  things  of 
sense,  and  takes  them  on  to  itself  more  and  more.  But 
when  the  end  of  this  first  arc  of  his  particular  cycle  comes, 
then  it  inevitably  undergoes  viveka  and  va  i  r  ag  y  a,1 
discriminative,  reflective,  introspective,  intense  think- 
ing and  surfeit,  and  turns  round  on  to  the  other  arc, 
the  Nivrtti-marga,  Path  of  Renunciation;  on 
which,  realising  more  and  more  its  identity  with  the 
Universal  Self,  it  separates  itself  more  and  more  from  the 
things  of  sense,  and  gradually  and  continually  gives  away 
all  that  it  has  acquired  of  Not-Self  to  other  jlvas,  who 
are  on  the  Pravrtti-marga  and  need  them.  Thus, 
while  on  the  first  arc,  Not-Self,  falsely  masquerading 
as  a  self,  prevails,  and  the  true  Self  is  hidden,  on  the 
second  arc  the  true  Self  prevails,  and  that  Not-Self,  or 

1  See  pp.  12,  18.  V  i  -  v  e  k  a  is  discrimination  between  n  i  t  y  a  and  a- 
nitya,  the  Permanent  and  the  Fleeting ;  and  vai-ragya  is  the  co- 
efficient revolt  against  all  selfish  desire  for  fleeting  things  and  sorrow- 
pervaded  joys.  The  Permanent  appears  to  the  j  I  v  a  first  as  the  lasting, 
then  as  the  ever-lasting,  and  only  finally  as  the  true  Eternal,  the  opposite 
or  v  i  -  v  a  r  t  a  of  the  other  two,  in  correspondence  respectively  with  the 
three  answers  (chs.  ii  and  vii,  supra). 


212  'EYE  OF  MATTER'  AND  'EYE  OF  SPIRIT'    [sc.  OF 

the  false  self,  is  hidden  and  slowly  passes  out  of  sight. 
To  him  who  sees  with  the  '  eye  of  matter '  only,  incogni- 
sant  yet  of  the  true  Self,  the  j  I  v  a  seems  to  live  and 
grow  on  the  first  arc,  and  to  decay  and  die  on  the  second, 
and  be  no  more  at  the  end  of  it.  The  reverse  is  the  case 
to  the  '  eye  of  spirit '.  What  the  truth  is,  of  both  and 
in  both,  is  clear  to  him  who  knows  the  S  v  a-b  h  a  v  a  of 
the  Absolute,  and  the  perfect  balance  between  Spirit 
and  Matter. 

Inasmuch  as  '  this-es '  are  endless  in  number  and 
extent  of  temporal  and  spatial  limitation,  cycles  are  also 
endless  in  number  and  extent,  ranging  from  the  smallest 
to  the  largest ;  and  yet  there  are  no  smallest  and  largest  r 
for  there  are  always  smaller  and  larger.  Again,  cycles 
and  periods  of  activity  are  always  and  necessarily  being 
equally,  balanced  by  corresponding  periods  of  non-activ- 
ity ;  and  vice  versa.  Further  reasons  for  this  may 
appear  later  on,  in  connection  with  the  Law  of  Action 
and  Reaction,  and  the  nature  of  Death.  Thus  s  a  r  g  a, 
emanation,  is  succeeded  by  pralaya,  dissolution,  and  the 
latter  by  the  former,  endlessly,  on  all  possible  scales  ;  and 
their  minute  intermixture  and  complication  is  pseudo-in- 
finite. Thus  are  the  names  justified,  of  nitya-sarga, 
continual  incessant  creation,  and  nitya-pralaya,  per- 
petual unremitting  destruction.  From  this  complication 
it  results  that  there  is  no  law  belonging  to  any  one  cosmic 
system,  small  or  large,  which  the  limited  jiva  can  divine 
and  work  out,  on  limited  data,  with  the  lower  reason,  i.e., 
the  understanding  or  m  a  n  a  s,  of  which  law  there  is  no 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  BUDDHI    AND    MANAS  213 

breach  and  to  which  there  is  no  exception  ;  and,  again, 
there  is  no  breach  which  will  not  come  under  a  higher 
law  belonging  to  another  and  larger  system  ;  that  ulti- 
mately, '  order '  and  *  disorder  '  are  both  equally  illusions, 
both  essentially  subjective,  both  '  such  stuff  as  dreams 
are  made  of '.  The  pure  or  higher  or  transcendental 
reason  or  b  u  d  d  h  i,  sees  the  necessity  of  both,  the 
particular  law  and  the  breach  of  that  law,  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  all-inclusive  Absolute.1 

1  The  distinction  between  b  u  d  d  h  i  and  m  a  n  a  s  has 
been  indicated  before  and  will  become  clearer  as  we  proceed. 
Briefly,  Universal  Mind,  unconscious  or  sub-conscious  or 
supra-conscious  omniscience,  reason  which  relates  together 
all  things  at  once  and  is  *  pure '  from  all  admixture  of  moti- 
vation and  therefore  limitation,  obscuration,  perversion,  or 
aberration  by  selfish  egoistic  desire — and,  so  far  as  possible, 
the  manifestation  of  such  pure  reason  in  the  individual  con- 
sciousness also — is  B  u  d  d  h  i.  Individual  mind,  dominated  by 
•egoism,  its  vision  coloured  and  narrowed  by  a  particular 
interest,  not  made  transparent  and  world- wide  by  the  *  pure  ' 
wish  to  know  all,  for  the  sake  of  the  *  deliverance  '  of  all — 
such  egoistic  mind,  manifesting  in  and  by  attention  to  a 
particular  object,  is  Manas.  Indeed,  such  m  a  n  a  s  is  the 
jiva  itself.  (Vide  the  quotation  from  Yoga-Vasishtha  in 
the  foot-note  at  p.  32,  supra,  and  Gita,  XVI.  17,  and  III.  29). 

In  terms  of  the  logio^,  we  might  put  it  thus.  Universal 
I,  ideating  jthe  whole  of  Not-I,  is  Universal  Mind,  M  a  h  a  t, 
Mahan-Atma,  Vishnu,  etc.  ;  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
individual  I,  this  Universal  Mind  is  the  unconscious,  sub- 
conscious or  supra-conscious  ;  it  is  b  u  d  d  h  i  or  '  pure '  reason 
or  s  h  u  d  d  h  a  j  n  a  n  a,  in  the  fullest  sense,  reason  here  being 
not  the  step-by-step  arguing  intelligence,  but  the  all-relating 
awareness,  all-grasping  intuition.  The  same  Universal,  when 
faintly  individualised  (the  *  We '  aspect  predominant,  the 
* 1  '  aspect  very  subordinate,  the  egoistic  intensity  and  limi- 
tation unaroused  and  undefined  by  strong  desire),  and 


214  HOT    POINT   OF   CONSCIOUSNESS  [SC.  OF 

Having  thus  very  cursorily  indicated  some  of  the 
most  important  features  of  the  Interplay  of  Self  and 
Not-Self  in  the  World- Process,  as  arising  out  of  the 

ideating  the  most  general  aspects  of  the  things  that  make  up 
Not-I,  with  the  faintest  trace  of  succession,  is  buddhiin 
manifestation,  cognising  metaphysical,  mathematical,  scientific 
generalisations.  The  same  I,  when  ideating  not-I's,  *  this-es ',  in 
the  predominantly  particular  and  singular  aspects,  itself  being 
focussed  or  canalised  by  definite  egoistic  desire,  is  m  a  n  a  s, 
the  outstanding  feature  of  which  is  '  attention,'  whereby  the 
1  hot  point '  or  focus  in  the  field  of  consciousness  changes 
from  place  to  place.  (See  William  James,  Stout,  Hoffding, 
etc.)  The  ability  to  direct  this  power  of  '  attention  '  deli- 
berately and  effectively,  by  practice  in  inhibition,  n  i  -  r  o  d  h  a, 
of  psychoses  that  are  not  wanted,  and  in  contemplation, 
sam  -  yama,  of,  and  focussing  on,  that  which  is  wanted,  is 
yoga  s  i  d  d  h  i,  achievement,  accomplishment  (of  attentional 
mind-power,  mental  force  ;  achievement  of  which  ability  is  the 
first  practical  object  of  applied  psychology,  i.e.,  Yoga). 
(Bergson's  writings  help  to  illustrate  this.) 

In  the  more  definitely  individualised  I,  which  is  the 
man  as  above-mentioned,  compounded  of  '  I  *  and  '  not- 1,' 
€  j  I  v  a  '  and  '  atom/  the  reflection,  of  the  Universal  B  u  d  d  h  i 
above-mentioned,  appears  as  intellect,  also  called  b  u  d  d  h  i  in 
Samskrt,  with  the  function  of  j  n  a  n  a  or  cognition  ;  the 
reflection  of  the  '  I  '  appears  as  a  h  a  m-k  a  r  a  with  the 
function  of  desire-emotion ;  and  the  reflection  of  m  a  n  a  s 
itself  as  the  man  as  again,  with  tte  function  of  conation  and 
action.  The  summation  of  these  three  functions  is  called 
c  h  i  1 1  a  ;  which,  however,  has  a  function  of  its  own,  memory, 
which,  again,  is,  so  to  say,  the  Universal  Mind  in  the  indivi- 
dual, the  infinite  storehouse  out  of  which  the  individual,  by 
attention,  draws,  in  succession,  what  it  wants,  and  into  which 
it  merges,  when  the  whirling  harmonogram  of  vas ana- 
desire,  the  will  to  live  as  a  separate  individual,  t  r  s  h  n,  a, 
libido,  which  makes  chitta  what  it  is,  disappears  in 
moksha  orpraljiya  (for  the  time  being).  The  theoso- 
phical  doctrine  of  Atma-Buddhi-Manas  seems  to  be  in 
accord  with  these  ideas. 


P.,    CH.    Xl]       "  SOUL-STRUGGLES    BY   NIGHT  "  215 

affirmative-negative  nature  of  the  third  factor  of  the 
Absolute,  we  may  next  deal  with  the  Cause  of  the  Inter- 
play, from  another  standpoint  than  that  taken  up  in 
Chapter  X,  in  connection  with  the  question  why  parts 
appear  in  the  logion. 

For  illustration  by  analogy,  we  may  say  that  the 
person  in  deep  sleep  represents  Absolute  Consciousness ; 
just  before  full  waking,  while  he  is  taking  a  pros- 
pective view  of  the  whole  of  the  coming  day's  work, 
he  represents  b  u  d  d  h  i ;  when  awake  and  actually  en- 
gaged in  a  piece  of  the  work,  man  as.  At  the  end  of 
this  chapter  will  be  found  a  collection  of  relevant  Samskrt 
quotations  in  a  separate  notQ.  It  seems  to  be  an  important, 
perhaps  even  fundamental  part  of  Yoga-discipline,  to  *  wake 
up  '  the  soul  and  make  it  conscious  in  the  region  of  what 
is  now  its  im-conscious.  A  Master  has  said  that  a  disciple 
progresses  through  "  soul-struggles  by  night ".  The  mean- 
ing seems  to  be  that  the  disciple  should  fix  in  his  mind, 
during  the  day,  the  determinate  resolve  that  he  will  not 
allow  himself  to  become,  in  the  night,  the  puppet  of  his 
dreams  ;  i.e.,  of  his  '  unconscious  f  lower  desires,  carnal  pas- 
sions, etc.,  which  come  out,  like  thieves  in  the  night,  and 
secure  indulgence  and  satisfaction  for  themselves,  by  creating 
the  images,  fancies,  phantasies,  dramatic  scenes,  situations, 
of  the  dreams  ;  and  which,  the  disciple  has  prevented  his  mind 
from  entertaining  during  his  waking  hours  ;  (or,  in  other  words, 
which  desires  of  the  lower  mind  have  been  kept  at  bay  by  the 
disciple's  higher  mind,  during  the  waking  hours) ;  and  that, 
by  such  fixed  resolve,  he  becomes  more  and  more  able  to 
struggle  against  those  base  fancies ;  he  can  more  and  more 
consciously  prevent  them  from  arising,  even  during  the 
dreams  ;  and  his  dream -life,  therefore  and  thereby,  becomes, 
so  to  say,  a  continuation  of  his  day-life,  part  of  his  waking 
consciousness.  The  same  Master  has  said  elsewhere  (but  my 
memory  here  is  faint  and  doubtful)  that  he,  the  Master,  sleeps 
without  dreaming  at  all,  the  three  or  four  hours,  out  of  the 
twenty-four,  that  he  ordinarily  spends  in  bed.  In  this  way, 
the  '  individual  ',  progressing  on  the  Upward  Path  becomes 


216         CHANGING    DREAMING   INTO   WAKING      [SC.    OF 

It  has  been  said  that  this  multitudinous  process 
of  Samsara  takes  place  through  Negation,  and  the 
word  '  necessary '  and  its  derivatives  have  been  used 
from  time  to  time,  all  along,  in  accounting  for  step  after 
step  of  the  deduction.  It  is  clear  that  Negation,  with 
its  included  affirmation,  is  only  a  description  of  the 
Relation  between  Self  and  Not-Self.  It  stands  between 
them  as  a  nexus  between  two  termini.  It  inheres  in  the 
two,  and  is  nothing  apart  and  separate  from  them  ;  by 
itself  it  can  do  nothing  ;  but,  as  being  the  combined 
Nature  of  the  two,  it  explains,  expounds,  accounts  for, 
and  supports  the  infinitely  complex  process  of  Samsara. 
This  combination  of  the  Nature  of  the  Two  into  the  dual 
Negation  constitutes  the  Necessity  of  the  movement 
involved  in  the  Logion.1  This  Necessity  requires  no 
support  or  justification  ;  it  is  self-evident  at  every  step 
of  the  deduction  ;  it  plainly  inheres  in,  and  is  part  of 

more  and  more  perfectly  self-controlled  on  all  planes  of  his 
being,  more  and  more  Master  of  him-Self. 

Persistent  introspection,  pratyak-ch£tana;  tracing 
semi- consciously,  even  during  the  dream,  its  occurrence  to  the 
influence  of  incidents  which  have  actually  taken  place  in  the 
day  ;  mantra-jap  a,  continuous  inner  silent  recitation  of 
some  *  sacred  words  of  power ' ;  willing  and  praying  to  the 
All-pervading  '  Power  ',  for  '  power '  to  resist  evil  thoughts, 
and  bring  in  good  ones  only — all  this  helps  the  soul  to  struggle 
successfully. 

1  A  fact  is  a  necessary  fact,  a  necessity.  Every  event  is  its  own 
justification.  When  a  fact  is,  so  to  say,  violently  and  arbitrarily  disrupted, 
and  insistently  pieces  itself  together  in  a  new  synthesis,  a  new  form,  the 
disruption  is  said  to  have  been  followed  by  its  necessary  consequence, 
illustrating  the  law  of  causality,  which  is  the  Law  of  Identity,  i.e., 
Identity  persisting  through  apparent  changes  in  succession. 


P.,    CH.   Xl]     TWO    MEANINGS    OF   AUTO-MATISM         217 

the  nature  of,  the  three  factors  of  the  triune  Absolute, 
which  have  been  sufficiently  explained,  justified,  and 
established,  before.  For,  remember,  this  nature  is  not 
three  separate  natures — or  even  two  separate  natures, 
belonging  to  three  or  two  separate,  or  even  separable, 
factors  of  the  Absolute — but  is  only  One  Single  and 
Changeless  Nature,  the  Nature  of  '  I '  denying  that  It  is 
'Not-I'.  Whatever  may  be  distinguished  or  said  of 
Not-Self  and  Negation,  or  of  their  respective  natures, 
can  be  said  only  by  the  courtesy  of  that  Supreme  Nature 
which  is  the  source,  the  essence,  and  the  whole,  indeed 
the  very  Nature,  of  what  we  call  their  natures.  Bearing 
this  in  mind,  we  may  easily  see  that  this  Supreme  and 
changeless  Nature  is  N  i-y  at  i ,  the  'fixed',  A  v  a  s  h  y  a  k  a-t  a, 
Necessity*  i.e.,  the  nature  of  the  Whole,  that  which 
must  be  always,  that  which  cannot  be  changed  and 
avoided.  This  Necessity  is  the  One  Law  of  all  Laws, 
because  it  is  the  nature  of  the  changeless,  timeless, 
Absolute  ;  all  other  laws  flow  from  it,  inhere  in  it,  are 
included  within  it.  It  is  the  Primal  Power,  the  One 
Force,  the  all-compelling  Supreme  Energy,  in  and  of  the 
World-Process,  from  which  all  forces  are  derived,  and 
into  which  they  all  return ;  because  they  are  inseparate 
from  it,  are  only  its  endless  manifestations  and  forms. 

1  If  '  Necessity  '  is  derived  from  ne,  not,  and  cessum,  to  yield,  to  give 
up,  and  means  '  that  which  will  not  yield  ',  then  it  is  literally  the  same  as 
8-v aghyaka-ta,  that  which  is  beyond  vasha  or  control,  that  which 
cannot  be  checked.  The  word  niyati  (nitaram,  wholly,  y  a  m,  to 
control)  is  used  frequently  in  Yoga  Vftstshtha,  in  the  sense  of  '  fixed  ' 
necessity.  D  i  s  h  t  a  is  another  Samskft  word  with  an  allied  sense, 
4  destiny  ',  '  fated  ',  '  ordained  ',  '  doomed  '  ;  from  dish,  to  direct, 
order,  point  out  the  direction  (d  i  s  h  a,  d  e  s  h  a)  in  which  to  go. 


218  *  CAUSE  '   AND    *  CONDITION  '  [SC.   OF 

Its  unbreakable  and  unalterable  Oneness  and  Complete- 
ness appears  in  the  facts  of  the  Conservation  of 
Energy  ;  and  of  Motion  (which  undergoes  transformations 
only,  and  never  suffers  any  real  reduction,  so  that  the 
distinction  between  static  and  kinetic  is  at  bottom 
illusory,  apparent  only,  and,  in  reality,  one  of  only  com- 
parative degree)  ;  and  the  Indestructibility  of  Matter, 
which  manifests  in  ever-new  ways,  ever-new  qualities,  but 
is  never  changed  in  the  Total  quantity  ;  for  the  Absolute 
may  not  be  added  to  nor  subtracted  from.  It  is  Absolute 
Free-Will,  which  is  called  in  the  sacred  books  by  the 
name  of  Maya-Shakti,  Impersonal  Goddess  of  a  thousand 
names  and  a  thousand  hymns  ;  !  who  alone  is  in  reality 
worshipped  by  every  worshipper,  either  as  Nirguna 

\ 


JR,  urcrf,  ST«TR  srf  sisfS, 

T:  ?fcf  3f  STff  r  t 


f)evl  Bhagavata,  VII,  xxxii, 

'  ShaktL  becomes  an  Efficient  Cause,  n  i  m  i  t  ta,  by  conjunction  with 
Consciousness,  Chaitanya;  and  a  necessary  Condition,  concomitant. 
s  a  h  a-k  a  r  i,  (orsadharapa,  a-prthak-siddha,  upa-karana) 
in  transformations  of  objects.  Some  call  Her  Tapas,  some  Tamas,  Jada, 
A-jnana,  Maya,  Prakyti,  or  Aja.  Shaivas  name"  Her  Vimarsha  ;  Vaidikas, 
A-vidya.  Such  are  Her  many  names  in  the  Nigamas,  traditions,  of 
different  thinkers  and  worshippers.' 


I  Ibid. t  III.  vi. 


P.,    CH.    XI]    NECESSITY,   THE    CAUSL    OF   CAUSES     219 

Vidya  or  as  Saguna  A-vidya;  because  she  ensouls 
all  the  million  forms  that  human  beings  worship, 
each  according  to  his  heart's  desire.  It  includes  in 
itself  the  characters,  or  rather  the  single  character,  of 
all  the  Three  Ultimates,  and  it  thereby  becomes  an- 
other expression  for  and  of  the  Absolute,  viz.,  Becoming. 
Thus,  a  hymn,  personifying  Shakti  in  imagination, 
utterly  inseparable  though  she  is  from  the  Absolute, 
and  therefore  impersonal,  exclaims  :  '  Thou  art  the 
consort  of  the  most  high  Brahma.'  !  This  Necessity  is 
the  cause  of  all  causes,  karanam  karanana  m,a  and 
all  other  so-called  necessities  are  but  reflections  of  it. 

We  may  appropriately  consider  the  meaning  of 
'  Cause  '  in  this  connection.  From  the  standpoint  of 
psychology,  as  has  been  shown  over  and  over  again  by 
various  acute  and  accurate  thinkers  in  many  lands,  the 
world  is  an  endless  succession  of  sense-impressions;  and 
the  idea  of  absolute  necessity,  which  we  associate  with 
the  successions  that  are  described  as  cause  and  effect,  is 
a  mere  hallucination  produced  by  the  fact  that  a  certain 
succession  has  been  invariable  so  far  as  our  experience 
has  gone.  This  view  is  correct  so  far  as  it  goes  ;  but 


ef  wro   3p*n  |  ibid..  VII,  xxvui. 

'  When  men  wish  to  express  contempt  for  a  (feeble,  lethargic,  inert, 
spineless)  person,  they  do  not  call  him  Rudra-less  or  Vishnu-less,  but 
Shakti-less,  Power-less,  Energy-less.  We  meditate  on  Her,  the  Sovereign 
Goddess  of  the  Universe,  as  the  very  Meaning,  the  whole  significance,  of 
Pra-nava,  AUM.' 

Shankara,  Ananda-Laharl. 


220  LILA,   THE    FINAL   why  [SC.    OF 

only  so  far  as  it  goes.  It  does  not  go  far  enough.  It 
does  not  explain  satisfactorily  the  *  Why  '  of  the  halluci- 
nation. Indeed,  some  holders  of  the  view  refuse  to  deal 
with  a  '  Why  '  at  all.  They  content  themselves  with  a 
mere  description,  a  '  How  '.  But  others  will  not  rest 
within  such  restrictions.  They  must  understand  how 
and  why  there  come  to  be  a  '  How  ,  and  a  '  Why  '  at  all 
in  our  consciousness  ;  how  and  why  we  talk  of  '  because  ' 
and  *  therefore  '  and  *  for  this  reason  '.  It  is  true  that 
every  so-called  law  of  nature  is  only  4<  a  resume,  a  brief 
description,  of  a  wide  range  of  perceptions,"  l  but  why  is 
there  any  uniformity  in  the  world  at  all,  such  as  makes 
possible  any  such  resume  or  brief  description  ? 

The  explanation  of  all  this  is  that  each  *  why/  each 
generalisation,  each  law,  is  subsumed  under  a  wider  and 
wider  law,  till  we  come  to  that  final  and  widest  law,  the 
Logion-,  which  is  the  resume^  the  Sva-bhava,  the  nature, 
of  the  Absolute,  which,  Sva-bhava,  because  of  its  Change- 
lessness,  requires  no  further  l  why  '* 

1  Pearson's  Grammar  of  Science,  p.  132,  1st  edn. 


3<^  3?5»fton£  I  '  The  unchanging  is  the  uncaused.' 
The  series  of  '  why's,'  with  reference  to  actions,  '  Why  did  you  do  this  ?  ' 
'  Because  of  this,'  '  Why  that  ?  '  '  Because  of  that,'  etc.,  ceases  when 
the  reply  comes,  '  It  was  my  pleasure  '.  Few  people  ask  further,  '  Why 
was  it  your  pleasure  ?  '  There  is  an  instinctive  recognition  of  the  fact 
that  the  pleasure,  the  Will  of  the  Me,  the  Self,  is  something  final.  But 
if  any  should  ask  that  question  also,  the  reply  is  but  an  expansion,  or 
another  form  or  aspect,  of  the  same  fact,  viz.,  that  all  '  things  '  are  in 
the  I  ;  i.e.t  all  '  this-es,'  all  conjunctions  and  all  disjunctions  with  all 
possible  things,  i.e.,  all  possible  pleasures  (i.e.,  desires  and  fulfilments 
of  desire  or  will  for  conjunction),  and  also  all  possible  corresponding 
reactive  and  necessarily  implied  pains  (which  also  are  '  pleasures,  '  sfal, 
being  willed  by  the  Self,  sub-consciously,  as  fulfilments  of  desire  or  will 
for  disjunction)  are  Mine.  In  other  words,  '  It  was,  and  is,  and  will  be 


P.,    CH.    Xl]       NO    CHANGE,   NO    CAUSE,   NO   WHY       221 

A  cause  is  asked  for  by  the  human  mind  only  when 
there  is  an  effect,  a  change.  We  do  not  ask  '  Why  ?  ' 
otherwise.  We  ask  it  because  the  very  constitution  of 
our  being,  our  inmost  nature  of  unbroken  unity  as  the 
one  Self,  '  I  am  I,'  '  A  is  A,'  revolts  against  the  creation 
of  something  new;  against  A  disappearing  and  not-A 
appearing;  against  A  becoming  *  not-A,'  i.e.,  becoming 
B,  C,  etc.  We  cannot  assimilate  such  an  innovation  ; 
there  is  nothing  in  that  inmost  nature  of  ours  to 
respond  to  it.  Our  whole  being,  our  whole  nature, 
insistently  demands  Continuity,  Identity,  in  which  is 
to  be  found  Changeless  Immortality,  and  without 
which  our  Eternity  would  be  jeopardised  ;  for  if  any 

my  pleasure  to  undergo  all  possible  experiences,  including  this  one, 
which  you  ask  about  '.  In  the  f  n.  on  p.  50,  supra,  is  stated  the 
question  which  Vidura,  sorely  exercised  in  mind,  put  to  Rshi  Maitrdya. 
Maitreya  answered  him  in  words  which  may  be  interpreted  in  two  ways  ; 


:  I  Bhagavat*.  Ill,  vu,  9-10. 

'  This  is  the  Lord's  Ma-ya  which  denes  all  nay  a,  logic,  reason,  all  why 
and  wherefore  —  this,  viz.t  that  Ishvara,  the  Sovereign  Lord  of  the 
Universe,  the  Ever-  Free,  appears  as  a  humble  creature  bound  in  bonds 
of  all  sorts;  that,  without  any  art  ha,  meaning,  purpose,  without 
rhyme  or  reason,  senselessly,  the  Supreme  Man  turns  Him-Self  inside- 
out,  upside-down,  reverses  Him-Self,  becomes  the  Opposite  of  what  He 
really  ;is.  The  Witness  of  all,  sees  Him-Self,  appears  to  Him-Self,  as  to 
a  by-stander,  as  if  He  had  cut  off  His  own  head,  as  jugglers  do  '  ' 

Such  is  the  plain  meaning  of  the  words  ;  but,  equally  plainly,  it  is 
not  a  satisfying  reply  to  Vidura  's  question.  The  real  reply  is  in  the 
riddle  of  the  words,  y  a  t  nayena  virudhyate.  They  admit  of 
another  interpretation,  by  separating  the  single-seeming  nayena  into 
two,  n  a  and  y  6  n  a.  In  Skt.,  the  gloss  would  run  :  5$  flf  ^31,  fr^,  $R 

;  '  The  Illusion  is  that  This,  E  t  a  t,  which, 


222  SPIRIT'S   UNBROKEN    IDENTITY  [SC.  OF 

thing  could  be  annihilated,  why  might  not  I  also  be 
liable  to  the  same  catastrophe  ?  We  therefore  inevitably 
break  out  with  a  '  why  ?  '  whenever  we  see  a  change. 
And  the  answer  we  receive  is  a  *  because,'  which  endea- 
vours to  resolve  the  effect  into  the  cause,  in  the  various 
aspects  of  matter,  motion,  force,  etc.,  and  shows  that  the 
effect  is  really  not  different  from  the  cause,  but  is  identical 
with  it.  And  we  are  satisfied,  our  sense  of,  and  our 
craving  for,  Unbroken  Unity  is  soothed.1  Causality  is 
the  reconciliation  between  the  necessity,  the  fixed  unity, 
of  Self  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  accidentality,  flow  and 
flux,  manyness,  of  Not-Self,  on  the  other. 

is  the  Opposite  of  the  Lord,  Self,  is  Not.'  In  this  way,  the  LI  la,  Play, 
is  seen  to  be  static,  eternally  frozen,  changeless  ;  not  kinetic,  moving, 
changeful. 

This  may,  no  doubt,  appear  a  forced  explanation.  But  we  know 
well  that  4  mystic  '  writings  are  full  of  such  riddling  rhymes,  and  that 
the  '  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  has  to  be  taken  by  storm  '. 

1  See  foot-notes,  ch.  II,  pp.  7,  9,  11,  supra.  Hoffding's  treatment 
of  the  problem  of  causation,  in  Outlines  of  Psychology,  ch.  V-D,  will  be 
found  useful  in  this  connection,  as  explaining  in  modern  terms, 
vikara-  orparinam  a-v  a  d  a,  which  may  be  called  the  scientific 
conception  of  causation.  Hoffding  himself  holds  it,  as  distinguished 
from  what  he  calls  the  popular  conception  of  causation,  corresponding 
to  a  r  a  m  b  h  a-v  a  d  a.  The  last  stage  of  thought  in  this  resnect, 
which  may  similarly  be  called  the  metaphysical  conception  of  causation, 
is  vivarta-vada,  next  dealt  with  in  the  text,  and  briefly  defined 
in  Paftcha-dashl,  xiii,  9,  thus  : 

-a  fcra! 


'  The  false  appearance  of  changes  of  states  in  the  Changeless  One, 
as  of  a  snake  in  a  piece  of  rope  in  the  dark,  isvivarta,  vortex, 
turning  round,  facing  round,  opposition  '  ;  false  appearance  as 
distinguished  from  really  passing  from  one  state  into  another. 


Or,    in   V£danta-sarat    thus, 
The  corresponding  definition  of  vikara  is,  flflr^^tyW  SWT 


P.,    CH.   Xl]       THREE   VIEWS    OF    CAUSE-EFFECT        223 

But,   all  the  same,  it  is  only  a  subterfuge,  an  evasion, 
a   mayavic    illusion  ;    it    is  only  *  the  next  best  thing  '  ; 

?rg^tf<cT:   I  '  Appearance  of  change,  when  there  is  no  real  change,  is 
vivaria;  change,  when  real,  and  in  a  real  substance,  is  v  i  k  a  r  a  '. 
Another  way  of  describing  the  three  stages  is  this  ; 

(1)  *BTJT  (STTCWHcO  *$  3W31,  WraLBtt;  'The  effect  is  non- 
existent before  its  birth  ;  it  is  existent,  real,  after  birth  '  :  this  is  the 
Nyaya-Vaisheshika  view. 

(2)  *w  (seTO:)  iwfq  *?<i,  qsara;  ^  e^;  wri^TO«if?  sifJro, 

3W  ^?r?cR  Ipf,  cW  qfalR:,  f33>ft:  ;  '  The  effect  is  existent  before 
as  well  as  after  birth,  because  it  is  not  really  different  from  the  cause, 
but  only  another  form  of  it  '  ;  this  is  the  Sankhya  view. 

(3)  ^T^f  ^  3fft  3?*Kl ,  q^7^  3ffq,  '  The  effect  is  non-existent, 
unreal,  untrue,  before  as  well  as  afterbirth,  i  <-.,  appearance  '  :  this  is 
the  Vedanta  view. 

The  reconciliation  of  all  these  is  thus  :  A  r  a  mb  h  a-v  a  d  a  (Nyaya- 
Vaisheshika)  may  be  said  to  be  true  with  reference  to  the  new  form,  and 
to  the  k  a  r  t  a,  the  doer,  actor,  maker,  the  efficient  cause,  whose 
s  ha  k  t  i,  power,  will,  creates  or  brings  into  manifestation,  the  new  form  ; 
in  other  words,  produces  the  transformation,  the  change,  the  newness. 
P  a  r  i  n  a  m  a-v  a  d  a  (Sankhya)  is  true  with  reference  to  the  u  p  a  d  a  n  af 
the  material  cause,  the  matter  or  substance  which  is  transformed. 
Vivarta-vada  (Vedanta)  is  true  with  reference  to  the  One  Nature  of 
all  the  Factors  taken  together  at  once,  from  the  transcendental  stand- 
point (as  distinguished  from  the  empirical  or  experiential  standpoint 
which  sees  things  in  succession,  one  after  another). 

This  Transcendental  View  of  Causation,  or  absence  of  cause-and- 
effect  succession,  does  not  in  the  least  diminish,  much  less  destroy,  the 
experiential  value  of  the  Law  of  Karma,  and  does  not  give  countenance 
to  any  immoral  anti-nomi-anism,  i.e.,  absence  of  (moral  and  other)  law, 
as  that  '  You  may  do  what  you  like  '.  Of  course,  in  a  way,  it  does  say 
to  the  '  emancipated  soul',  '  You  are/ree  now,  since  you  know,  and  are 
therefore  a  law  unto  yourself,  and  you  may  do  what  you  like  '  ,  but  it 
also  adds,  '  but  be  prepared  for  the  painful  consequences  of  sin,  for  you 
know  them  also. '  Every  elder  guardian,  when  handing  over  property  to  a 
ward  who  has  attained  majority,  says  ;  '  This  is  yours,  to  utilise  or  to 
waste,  as  you  please  :  you  know  the  consequences  of  each  way.1 

Sankhya  says,  ^JR^T  3?ft^  3T53TO,  (^TO  ^T^R),  '  cause  is  unmani- 
fest,  effect  is  its  manifestation  '.  In  other  words,  Undifferentiated  Uncon- 
scious is  Cause ;  differentiations  are  effects.  All  effects  exist  simultane- 
ously in  the  Cause.  The  Unconscious  Whole  is  the  Cause  of  each  part, 
each  'conscious'.  The  Darshanas,  '  views,' philosophies,  up  to  Sankhya. 
believe  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect ;  also  that  the  former  invariably 


224      VEDANTA    INVERTS    ALL   OTHER   VIEWS       [SC.    OF 

not  the  best.  For,  in  strictness,  the  merest  change, 
the  passing  of  something,  a  mere  form,  state,  condition 
only  though  it  be,  into  nothing,  and  of  nothing  into 
something,  is  impossible,  impossible  to  understand.  True 
satisfaction  is  found  only  when  we  have  reduced  change 
to  changelessness.  Then  we  see  that  there  are  no  effects 
and  no  causes,  but  only  steadfastness,  rock-fixed-ness. 
Such  steadfastness  and  shakelessness  is  its  own  necessity, 
and  requires  no  external  support.  We  find  it  in  the 
Logiori,  wherein  all  possible  sense-impressions,  all  possible 
conjunctions  and  disjunctions  of  Self  and  Not-Self, 
are  present  once  for  all,  and  therefore  in  all  possible 
successions.  These  pseudo-infinite  and  mutually  sub- 
versive successions  make  up  the  multitudinous  order 
as  well  as  disorder  of  Samsara,  World- Process,  which 
is  the  Contents  of  the  Logion.  And  the  shadow  of 
the  ever-present  Necessity  of  the  Logion,  on  each  one 
of  these  successions,  is  the  fact,  and  the  source,  of 
the  belief  about  '  cause  and  effect,'  *  reason,'  '  why/ 
'  therefore,'  etc.  Each  one  of  these  successions,  because 

precedes  and  the  latter  succeeds.  Vedanta  does  away  with  this,  as  with 
all  other  views  ordinarily  held,  by  its  v  i  v  a  r  t  a,  inversion,  of  them  all.  It 
cannot  be  said  definitively  that  the  cause  '  precedes  '  and  the  effect 
'  succeeds  ' — as  a  generalisation.  The  seed  precedes  and  the  tree 
succeeds,  no  doubt ;  but  only  in  the  sense  of  a  particular  seed  and  a 
particular  tree.  Otherwise,  the  tree  (another  particular  tree)  precedes 
and  the  seed  (another  particular  seed)  succeeds ;  and  the  relation  is 
reversed.  Therefore,  you  may  say,  in  the  case  of  any  given  event,  not 
that  the  cause  precedes,  but  that  what  precedes  is  the  cause ; 
not  that  the  effect  succeeds,  but  that  what  succeeds  is  the  effect.  From 
undifferentiated  a-vyakta  arises  differentiated  v  y  a  k  t  a  ;  from  chaos, 
cosmos  ;  from  the  homogeneous,  the  heterogeneous;  and  vice  versa  ;  and 
this,  necessarily,  as  a  rule,  not  as  an  accident.  This  being  so,  it  cannot 
be  said  that  such  and  such  a  thing  is  always  necessarily  cause,  and 
such  and  such  another,  effect. 


P.,    CH.    XI.]  WHOLE,    CAUSE    OF    EACH    PART        225 

included    in    the    necessity    of    the    Logion,   appears  as 
necessary  also,  as  a  necessary  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 
Yet    it   never  is  in  reality  necessary,  for  every  law  has  an 
exception,  and  every  exception  is  under  another  law,  as 
said    before ;   it  is  only  an   imitation    of   the    One    real 
Necessity.     The  counterpart   of  this   truth  is  that  every 
particular  free-will,   while  not  reality  free  at  all,  appears 
free  by  imitation  of  the  Absolute  Free-will ;  and  Necessity 
and   Free-will  obviously  mean  exactly  the  same  thing  in 
the  Absolute,   Aham-Etat-Na,  which   is  and  includes  the 
totality  of  endless  Becoming.1     We  may  express  the  same 
idea   in   other  words,  thus  :  Each  one  of  the  endless  flow 
of  sense-impressions,   of   motions,  of  successions,  is  an 
effect,  of  which  the  Totality  of  them  is  the  One  constant 
Cause;  or  again,  the  Absolute,  or  the  Uni-verse,  is  Its  Own 
Cause  ;   or,   yet   again,  the  necessity  of  the  Nature  of  the 
Triune    Absolute    is   the   One   Cause  of   all   the  possible 
variations,    details,    movements,    which    fall  within  and 
make  up  that  Tri-unity,  all  that  endlessness  of  Becoming, 
as  One  Effect. 

The  Whole  is  the  Cause  of  each  Part  within  it.  This 
is  what  we  have  to  studiously  realise  in  this  connection, 
in  order  to  understand  the  nature  of  Cause,  Necessity,  or 
Shakti-Energy.  The  simultaneous,  the  changeless,  the 
ever-complete,  the  Absolute,  is  the  cause  of  the  successive, 


1  Consider  the  etymological  meaning  of  '  automatic,'  viz.,  'self- 
moved,  '  '  self-willed, '  '  free-willed. '  But  it  has  come  to  mean  the  reverse, 
viz.,  '  mechanical,'  '  non-free,'  '  mechanically  necessitated  to  work  in  a 
certain  way.'  Autonomous  is  now  used  for  '  self-determining,' '  self- 
governing  ',  '  self -willing.'  Both  extremes  meet  in  the  Absolute  Self. 

15 


226  AUTO-MATIC    AND    AUTONOMOUS  [SC.    OF 

the  changing,  the  partial,  which,  in  its  full  totality  as  Not- 
Self,  is  always  contained  within  that  Absolute.     When 
we  so  put  it,  the  idea  of  causation  presents  no  difficulty. 
But  it  may  be  said  that  the  difficulty  disappears  because 
the  essential  idea  of  causation — one  thing  preceding  and 
giving  rise,   by  some  inherent,  mysterious,  unintelligible 
power,  to  another  thing  which  succeeds — is  surreptitiously 
subtracted   from   the  problem.     To  this  the  reply  is  that 
there  is  no  such  surreptitious  subtraction,  but  an  entirely 
above-board   abolition    and    refutation   of  that   so-called 
essential   idea,  and  of  every  thing  and  fact  that  may  be 
supposed  to  be  the  basis  and  foundation  of  that  idea.   We 
show  that  the  idea  of  necessary  causation,  by  some  limited 
thing,  of  some  other  limited  thing,   is  only  an  illusion, 
and  a  necessary   illusion  ;  in  the  same  way  in  which  the 
idea  of  any  one   of  many  individuals  being  a  free  agent, 
having  free-will,   is  an  illusion,  and  a  necessary  illusion. 
The  one  universal   Self  is  free,  obviously,  because  there 
is  nothing  else  to  limit  and  compel  it.     Here  the  word 
'  free '  may,  from  one  point  of  view,  be  well  said  to  have 
no  significance  at  all ;  but  from  another,  it  has  a  whole 
world  of  significance.    Now,  because  every  self  is  the  Self, 
therefore  it  also  must  be  free  by  inalienable  birthright. 
And  yet,  being  limited,  being  hemmed  in  on  all  sides,  by 
an  infinite  number  of  other  selves ;  each  of  which  is,  like 
itself,  not  only  the  Self,  but  also  a  self,  because  identified 
with  and  limited  by,  a  not-self;  how  can  it  be  free?    The 
reconciliation  is  that  every  individual  j  I  v  a  feels  free,  but 
is  not  free ;  it  is  free  so  far  as  it  is  the  One  Self,  and  it  is 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  THOUGHT    AND    THING  227 

not  free  so  far  as  it  has  made  the  '  mistake/  a  -  vi  dy  a,  of 
identifying  itself  with  a  piece  of  Not-Self.  It  is  now 
generally  recognised,  and  so  need  not  be  proved  in  detail 
here  newly,  that  the  idea  of  necessity,  present  in  our  idea 
of  causation,  is  a  purely  subjective  factor ;  not  created  by 
anything  or  any  experience  '  outside  '  of  us  (except  in  the 
metaphysical  sense  in  which  the  4  subjective  '  includes 
the  '  objective,'  in  which  the  *  outside  '  also  is  '  inside/ 
or,  as  said  before,  the  '  without  '  also  is  '  within  ')/  The 
outside  world  shows  only  a  repeated  succession,  which 
by  itself  is  never  sufficient  to  substantiate  any  notion  of 
invariable,  inherent,  necessary,  power  of  causation.  The 
validity  of  '  inductive  '  generalisations  does  not  come  from 

1  *  This  is  without,  i.e.,  outside  me,'  and  '  this  is 
within,  i.e.,  inside  me  or  my  mind/  '  this  is  objective  and  this 
is  subjective,'  '  this  is  tiling,  this  is  thought,9  '  this  is  ideal, 
this  is  real %  —  all  these  are  thoughts,  ideas,  experiences,  plays 
or  forms  of  consciousness  which  alone  creates,  and  distin- 
guishes between,  both  the  factors  of  each  of  these  pairs  of 
opposites.  '  This  is  a  thing,  and  not  a  thought ' — is  still  a 
thought.  But  the  distinction  is  made,  and  therefore  there 
must  be  some  truth  in  it  also.  The  truth  is  twofold  :  (a)  the 
percept  of  only  the  individual  consciousness  is  a  '  thought,'  is 
ideal ' ;  that  of  the  universal  consciousness  is  a  *  thing/  is 
4  real '  (pp.  59,  189-190,  supra)  ;  and  (b)  the  relatively  perma- 
nent, intense,  strong  '  thought '  is  a  thing/  and  the  weak, 
passing  'thought/  contradicted  and  abolished  by  other  and 
more  permanent  thoughts  or  things,  is  only  a  '  thought '.  The 
distinction  of  individual  consciousness  and  universal  consci- 
ousness is  made  and  grasped  by  the  former  identifying  itself 
with  the  latter,  and  then  recognising  that  the  former  is 
included  in  the  latter,  as  part  in  whole.  Cf.  Hoffding, 
Psychology,  pp.  130,206,208;  and  Yoga-  Vasishtha,  gener- 
ally, on  bhavana-dardhya  or  vasana-ghanata 
4  hardening  of  imagination  ',  '  density  of  desire  '. 


228  'DESTINY'  is  'PAST  KARMA'         [sc.  OF 

the  number  of  instances  observed.  Limited  data  cannot 
yield  unlimited  conclusions.  No  addition  or  multipli- 
cation of  finites  can  make  the  Infinite.  The  element  of 
necessary  validity  in  inductions  is  really  a  '  deductive  ' 
fact  ;  as  once,  so  ever  ;  as  here,  so  everywhere  ;  because  I, 
that  am  now  and  here,  am  ever  and  everywhere.  This 
element  of  the  idea  comes  from  within  us,  from  Self, 
from  our  self  as  willing,  as  exercising  a  power  of  causa- 
tion, from  our  indefeasible  feeling  of  an  exercise  of  free- 
will ',  though  that  again,  because  limited  and  dealing 

1  The  question  of  Free-will  and  Necessity  is  discussed  in  Samskrt 
works,  mostly  in  terms  of  d  a  i  v  a  and  p  u  r  u  s  h  a-k  a  r  a,  '  div-ine  will"  ' 
or  *  fate  '  and  *  personal  will  '  or  '  individual  effort  ',  ('  person  '  and 
'  purusha  '  are  perhaps  etymologically  the  same)  ;  and  the  siddhanta. 
the  '  established  conclusion.'  from  the  empirical  standpoint,  or  v  y  a  va- 
harika  d  r.  s  h  t  i  ,  the  stand-point  of  the  limited,  finite,  separative, 
individualist  ego,  is,  that  what  is  called  d  a  i  v  a  is  only  accumulated 
previous  Karma  operating  as  tendencies,  habits,  character,  leading  to- 
corresponding  opportunities  or  environments,  etc. 


Prayatna,  vyavasaya,  krti,  are  other  words  for  effort, 
determination,  volition,  as  niyati,  f^lRf,  is  another  word  for  fate  or 
destiny.  B  a  d  d  h  a  and  m  u  k  t  a  are  well-known  equivalents  for  '  bound  ' 
and  '  free  '  ;  d  i  s  h  t  a  is  also  used  in  the  sense  of  '  pre-ordained  '  .  S  v  a- 
tantra  and  para-tantra,  sva-chhanda  and  para- 
c  h  h'a  nda,  sv-adhina  and  par-adhlna,  atma-vasha  and 
para-vasha,  are  pairs  of  words  which  express  different  aspects  of  the 
same  idea,  viz  ,  self-dependent  and  other-dependent,  self-guided  and 
other-guided,  self-governed  and  other-governed,  self-willed  and  other- 
willed,  self-determined  and  other-determined.  Cf.  »f  ^ 


(Mahima-stuti)  and  *  q^^  |:^  flEf  3?Tc*Wf  §^f^  '  (Manu,  iv,  106); 
'The  Lord's  volitions  are  not  controlled  by  others  ',  and  '  Self-depen- 
dence is  bliss  ;  other-dependence  is  misery  '  . 

The  word  aham-kara,  in  Samskrt,  stands  for  (a)  a  s  m  i  t  a, 
4  1-am-ness,'  egoism,  the  sense  of  separate  individuality  focussed  and 
concentrated  by  desire,  emotion,  vasana,  trshna,  libido,  will-to-live  ; 
(6)  'I  do,1  'I  make/  'I  act,'  (free-will);  (c)  '/  am  the  doer,  actor. 
maker,  of  my  own  doings,  etc.,  accompanied  by  elation,  pride,  arrogance, 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  THE    ONE    TRUE    SEEING  229 

with  the  limited,  the  material,  is  naturally  always 
resolvable,  on  analysis  and  scrutiny,  into  material 
forces.  We  thus  see  that  the  two  ideas  are  intimately 
connected,  nay,  are  different  aspects  of  the  same  fact  —  the 
idea  of  necesary  causation  and  the  idea  of  causation  by 

All  the  meanings  are  obviously  closely  allied.  From  the  transcendental 
metaphysical  standpoint,  the  standpoint  of  the  Eternal,  Infinite,  Univer- 
sal One-Consciousness  (of  Aham-Etat-Na),  or  paramarthika- 
d  r  s  h  1  1,  all  are  equally,  and  together,  illusions.  This  is  also  a 
siddhanta,  or  established  conclusion,  entirely  in  accord  with  the  one 
afore-mentioned.  Cf., 


Gltat  xvni,  61  ;  iii,  27. 

Following  Skt.  texts  and  observations  may  also  be  considered  here. 
Yoga-Bhashya  says  :  tgcfiffc  ^E^W^,  ^Tlfhl  ^  3$&.     Tn«  current 


orthodox   interpretation   is   different,    but  another   permissible   one  is  : 


*& 


|IH  I  '  To  see  the  One  in  the  Many,  is  the  On(e)ly  Right  and  True 
View  ;  to  see  Many  instead  of  One,  is  Illusion  '  The  former  is  the 
'  transcendental  ',  the  latter  the  '  empirical  '  or  '  experiential  ',  view.  The 
former  underlies  n  i  -  g  a  m  a,  deduction  ;  the  latter,  a  n  u  -  g  a  m  a, 
induction  ;  tarka,  oranu-mana,  negative  or  positive  inference, 
connects  the  two. 

Param-arthika  satta  is  '  essential  reality  of  being,  in  the 
true  sense  '.  Vyava-hari'ka  satta  is  '  practical,  empirical,  ex- 
istence'. Prati-bhasika  sattais  'illusive  appearance,  false 
existence  '.  Strictly,  the  second  and  the  third  are  the  same  ;  they  differ 
in  degree  ;  not  m  kind,  as  the  first  does. 

In  the  Madhyamika  system,  of  Maha-Yana  Buddhism,  sam-vrti- 
s  a  t  y  a  seems  to  be  the  equivalent  of  vyava-harika  satta.  The 
word  param-artha-satya,  is  common  to  the  Madhyamika  school 
and  Vedanta  ;  as,  in  fact,  are,  all  important  ideas  and  many  other  words. 


230  PALRUSHA-KARMA-J>AIVA  [SC.    OF 

free-will.1  As  the  one  is  an  illusion,  so  is  the  other, 
neither  more  nor  less.  We  can  understand  both,  only 
by  understanding  how  the  Changing  is  contained  in  the 
Changeless  —  that  there  is  in  reality  no  change  ;  that 

Parana  rtha-drshti  may  also  be  called  sam-purna,  or 
samash  t  i-,  or  a  n  a  n  t  a-,  or  sam  a-,  or  s  a  many  a-,  or  kendriya-, 
drshti,  in  different  aspects,  i.e.,  the  complete,  or  all-comprehending, 
or  infinite,  or  equal,  or  universal,  or  central,  (centripetal)  \iew.  So 
Vyava-hara-drshti  would  be  k  h  a  n  d  a-,  or  vyashti-,  or 
s-anta-,  or,  vis  ham  a-,  or,  vishesha-;  or  a  pa  -  k  <•  n  d  r  a-, 
drshti,  '  the  part-ial,  or  separative,  or  finite,  or  un-equal,  or  particular, 
or"  non-central  (centrifugal),  view. 

Regarding  these  views,  Maha-bharata  says  . 

rc  g  5TF|:  $* 
ferr:,  wrra 


3W  Vl  Sg«Wip:,  arita  WTO  \    Shanti  p.  ch.  239 


•  Some  call  it  p  u  r  u  s  h  a  -  k  a,  r  a,  human  manly  effort  ;  others  d  a  i  v  a, 
divine  ordainment  ,  yet  others  s  v  ab  h  a  v  a,  (law  of)  nature.  But  the 
fact  is  that  the  three,  pa  u  rush  a,  karma,  daiva,  all  three  are  in- 
separable aspects  of  the  same  fact,  with  reference  to  p  h  a  la  ,  vrt  t  i. 
and  s  v  a  -  b  h  a  v  a,  fruit  (result  of  action),  active  movement  (striving), 
(law  of)  nature  (which  connects  the  two). 

1  Note  here,  in  these  very  words,  how  intimately  contra- 
dictions are  blended  together  ;  ambi-valence  in  uni-valence.  In 
one  sense,  the  idea  of  necessary  causation,  i.e.,  causation  by 
an  irresistible  power,  is  based  solely  on  our  experience  of 
causation  by  our  own  unchecked  free-will.  In  another  sense, 
necessary  and  free  are  the  very  opposite  of  each  other.  The 
word  '  auto-matic,'  meaning  'mechanically  necessary  and 
unavoidable,*  and  also  'self  -moved/  i.e.,  *  free/  finds  reconcili- 
ation for  these  two  opposed  senses  only  when  Autos  is 
understood  as  the  Great  Self,  whose  ordinances  are  neces- 
sarily unavoidable,  because  there  is  None-Else,  even  to  op- 
pose, much  less  compel.  In  a  psychological  sense,  while  each 
choice,  each  exercise  of  so-called  free-will,  is  determined  by 
the  predominant  motive,  still,  inasmuch  as  that  motive  is 
nothing  apart  from  or  outside  and  independent  of  the  moved 


P.,  CH.  Xl]    WHY    STRONGEST  WISH  IS  FREE   WILL  231 

there  is  in  reality  no  succedence  an'd  no  precedence,  but 
only  simultaneity  ;  no  causation  of  one  part  by  another 
part,  but  only  the  un -arbitrary  coexistence  of  all  possible 
parts,  by  the  one  Changeless  Necessity  of  the  Nature  of 
the  Absolute  ;  and  that  whatever  appears  as  a  particular 
necessity  of  any  special  Nation  between  one  part  and 
another  part  is  only  an  illusive  reflection,  appearing  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  particular  parts  concerned,  of  the 
One  in  that  particular  '  many  '.  The  Necessity  of  the 
Changeless  we  can  understand  ;  indeed  we  can  under- 
stand it  so  well  that  we  are  almost  inclined  to  call  it  a 
truism.  The  '  necessity  '  of  the  '  changing  '  is  what  we 
cannot  understand,  and  are  very  anxious  to  understand ; 
but  we  can  never  understand  it,  in  the  way  we  imagine 
and  describe  the  fact  of  change  to  ourselves;  because  it 
is  the  very  reverse  of  a  truism,  its  opposite  extreme ;  be- 
cause it  is  false,  not  a  fact ;  because  there  is  no  change. 
Only  by  understanding  this  can  we  understand  the 

individual,  inasmuch  as  the  j  I  v  a  or  self  entertains  the 
motive,  identifies  itself  with  it  as  its  strongest  wish,  therefore 
the  individual  self  feels  that  it  is  making  the  choice,  of  itself, 
by  itself,  i.e.,  of  its  own  free-will,  and  actually  does  so.  To 
be  guided  by  a  motive  is  to  be  guided  by  oneself  as  identified 
with  that  motive.  From  another  standpoint,  from  which  that 
motive  is  not  predominant  (but  some  other  is,  as  it  must  be, 
necessarily,  for  individual  existence  means  attachment  to  a 
4  this '  and  a  corresponding  wish  or  motive),  it  is  regarded 
as  something  outside  the  jiva,  to  be  rejected  and  struggled 
against,  instead  of  being  implicitly  obeyed  as  one's  very 
inmost  self.  In  Yoga  and  Theosophy,  this  other  standpoint 
which  may  be  regarded  as  higher,  is  provided  by  the  '  subtle  * 
body  or  sukshma-sharira  as  distinguished  from  the 
s  t  h  u  1  a  or  grosser  ;  these  are  dealt  with  in  a  later  chapter. 


232  THE    SELF'S    STANDING   LIBRARY  [SC.    OF 

whole  situation,  by  reducing  change  to  changelessness ;  by 
realising  that,  while,  from  the  empirical  standpoint  of  the 
successive  particular  '  this-es ',  there  appears  change, 
from  the  transcendental  standpoint  of  the  universal  Self, 
it  disappears  altogether  in  the  rock-like  fixity  of  the 
constant  Negation  of  the  whole  Not-Self,  i.e.,  of  all  the 
parts  of  the  many  Not-Self,  at  once,  by  Self. 

A  slight  illustration  may  perhaps  help  to  make  the 
thought  clearer.  A  large  library  contains  billions  of 
different  permutations  and  combinations  of  the  words  of 
a  language,  each  permutation  or  combination  having  a 
connected  serial  as  well  as  individual  meaning.  The 
library,  as  a  whole,  contains  all  these  at  once  in  an  ever- 
complete  and  finished  condition.  Yet  if  any  individual 
character  out  of  the  thousands  whose  life-story  the 
library  contains,  endeavoured  to  picture  out  its  own 
life-story,  realise  it  in  every  point,  it  would  do  so  in  what 
would  appear  to  it,  from  its  own  standpoint,  only  a  suc- 
cession. In  the  library  of  the  universe,  God's  Mind,  the 
volumes  are  countless  ;  each  volume,  a  life-story  without 
beginning  or  end  ;  sole  author,  the  One  Self ;  readers, 
pseudo-infinite  in  number  and  pseudo-eternal  in  time  ; 
they  all  also,  only  the  Author  Him-Self ;  each  volume, 
again,  tells  only  the  same  story,  but  in  an  order  which  is 
different  from  that  of  every  other.  Each  jlva-memory 
too  is  such  a  library.  Or  take  this  other  case,  which 
may  come  even  nearer  home.  Each  one  of  us  is  living 
in  the  whole  of  his  body,  at  every  point  of  it,  and  at 
every  moment  of  time.  But  let  him  try  to  define, 


P.,    CH.   Xl]      SOUL'S    LIFE    IN    EACH    BODY-CELL       233 

to  realise,  to  throw  into  distinct  relief,  his  consciousness 
of  every  one  of  these  points  of  his  body.  So  far  as  he 
can  do  so  at  all,  he  will  be  able  to  do  it  only  in  succes- 
sion. The  whole  of  the  universe,  the  whole  of  Not-Self, 
is  the  body  of  Self.  The  latter  lives  in  and  at  each 
point  of  the  former,  completely,  at  once  ;  lives  in  the 
way  of  innumerable  mutually  contradictory  and  therefore 
counterbalancing  and  neutralising  functions  ;  and  it  lives 
in  each  one  of  these  points  in  the  same  way  as  in  every 
other.  Each  point,  to  itself,  therefore,  seems  to  live,  in 
these  innumerable  ways  and  functions,  in  an  endless  suc- 
cession which  constitutes  its  sempiternal,  un-dy-ing,  life. 

The  nature  of  this  endless  Becoming,  this  endless 
World -Pro  cess,  this  cause  and  effect  combined,  is  em- 
bodied in  t  hat  most  common  and  most  significant  name  of 
Shakti-Energy,  viz.,  Maya,  even  as  the  whole  Nature  of 
the  Absolute  is  embodied  in  the  Pranava. 

Maya,  as  explained  by  books  on  Tantra,1  is  ya-ma 
reversed  ;  ya  and  ma  3  being  two  complete  Samskrt  words 

1  '  White  '    Tantra-shastra   is    a  very  important  class  of  Samskrt 
literature,   of  which   only   the  veriest  fragments  are   now  extant.      It 
seems  to  have  dealt  with   many  departments  of  physical   and   super- 
physical  or  occult  science,  especially  in  their  bearing  on  yoga-practice. 
Most  of  the  books  now  available  under  the  name  of  Tantra,  are  hodge- 
podges  of  ViSdantic  ideas  and  foul  black  magic  practices  and  mystery- 
mongering. 

2  For  another  allied  word,  bhrama  or  bhranti,  illusion,  see  foot- 
note at  p.  159,  supra.  J?f,  Ma,  is  also  the  name  for  Lakshmi,  the  goddess 
of  wealth   and  splendour,  the  mother  of  Kama,  Eros  ;  and  another  name 
of  Kama  is  Kan-darpa,  meaning  elator,  '  arouser  of  pride  ',  and  also  the 
opposite,  '  breaker  of  pride.'     The  significance  of  this  Puranic  mythology 
appears  when  we  remember  them  in  the  terms  of  Yoga-sthra  ;  a-v  i  d-y  a, 
nescience,    'that   which   is   not,'   another  form  of  m  a-y  a,   gives  birth  to 
asmi-ta,  egoism,  whence  arise  raga-dvesha,  love-hate,  and  abhi- 
nivesha,    stubborn   tenacity.    JTT   also  means  to  measure,  to  limit; 


234  THAT   WHICH    Is-Not  [SC.    OF 

which  mean,  when  put  together  as  a  sentence,  '  that  which 
is  not  ;  '  is  as  well  as  not,  sad-asat,  existent  and  not- 
existent  ;  truly  mysterious  to  the  outer  view.  The  extant 
Tantra-books  dealing  with  Shakti  in  a  personal  aspect, 
give  to  it  a  hidden  name  consisting  of  the  single  letter 
*  i,'  f,  even  as  they  call  various  other  gods  by  single 
letters.1  This  letter  stands  naturall)'  between  *a,' 
3T  and  '  u,'  3,  as  should  also  *  m,'  ^  being  only  the 
outer  sheath  of  '  i/  though  it  is  thrown  to  the  end, 
because  of  the  fact  that  it  appears  as  negation  after 
affirmation.  •  But  this  '  i,'  placed  between  '  a  '  and  *  u,' 

and  ma-ya  is  thus  only  another  form  of  JTT3T,  m  a  t  r  a,  matter,  (see 
pp.  173,  195,  supra),  it  is  the  fimtising,  limiting  principle,  which 
makes  the  all-inclusive  Universal  appear  as  the  separate,  separatist, 
egoistic,  individual  and  particular.  Matter,  mother,  mates,  m*tmxt 
mains,  matr,  m  a  t  a,  all  are  the  same  ;  from  Skt.  ma,  to  measure; 
n  i  r  -  m  a  ,  to  make,  create,  manifest  Matter  measures  Spirit,  defines 
it.  sets  limits  to  it,  makes  it  manifest.  So  does  the  mother  the  child. 

It  may  be  noted  that  asm  it  a,  *  I-am-ness ',  has  three 
stages  of  growth  and  development :  (a)  '  I -am  ',  sy  am,  '  may 
I  be  ',  '  mjty  I  continue  to  be  ',  '  may  I  always  be  ',  '  may  I 
never  cease  to  be  ' ;  (b)  '  I  am  great ',  b  a  h  u  s  y  a  m,  '  may  I 
be  much  more,'  '  may  I  be  greater  than  others  ' ;  (c)  '  I  am 
many  ',  bahudha  syam,  '  may  I  be  many  and  yet  more 
many ',  *  may  I  be  more  and  more  numerous '.  In  other 
words,  (a)  self-preservation  (by  food),  (6)  self-enhancement 
(by  possessions),  (c)  self -multiplication  (by  progeny).  In 
yet  other  words,  the  appetites  or  urges  of  (a)  hunger,  (6) 
acquisitiveness,  (c)  sex. 

Love-hate  and  the  tenacious  clinging  to  that  conglomerate 
of  thoughts,  emotions,  volitions,  which  makes  up  a  separate- 
feeling  personality  %  or  individuality  or  ego-complex,  are 
connected  with  and  arise  out  of  all  these  forms  of  egoism. 

The  subject  is  discussed  at  length  in  The  Science  of  the 
Emotions  ;  also  in  The  Science  of  the  Self. 
1  See  Tara-sara-Upanishat  for  instances. 


P.,    CH.    Xl]      SKT.    GRAMMAR'S    FIRST    APHORISM       235 

coalesces  with  and  disappears  entirely  into  '  a,'  in  the 
conjunction  which  brings  out  of  the  joined  vowel- 
sounds,  'a*  and  'u,'  the  vowel-sound  *o';  lor  AUM 
is  pronounced  as  OM.}  This  is  in  accordance  with  the 
grammatical  rules,  allowing  of  a  double  s  a  n  d  h  i  a  (coales- 
cence of  letters),  of  archaic  Samskrt,  the  deliberately 
'  well-constructed./  *  polished,'  'refined,'  '  perfected  '  langu- 
agq  ;  the  complete  grammar  of  which,  if  we  only  had  it, 
would  show,  as  tradition  says,  in  the  articulate  develop- 
ment of  vibration  after  vibration,  sound  after  sound,  letter 
after  letter,  word  after  word,  and  sentence  after  sentence, 
the  corresponding  articulate  development  of  the  vocal 
apparatus,  as  well  as  of  the  world-system  to  which  that 
language  belongs.'  That  this  coalescence  and  disappear- 
ance is  just,  is  plain  from  all  that  has  been  said  as  to  the 
nature  of  Shakti,  which  ever  hides  in  Self  ;  disappears 
into  Not-Self  whenever  Self  acts  4  upon  that  Not-Self  ; 

1  This   is   taken  from   Pranava-vada,   mentioned  before.    The  very 
first  aphorism  of  Panmi's  famous  grammar  is,  3?-f[-3'-0I  ;  the  last  letter 
may  be   regarded  as  a  blind  or  substitute  for  JJ^  ;   so  that  the  whole 
aphorism  is  the  exact  equivalent  of  A-(I-)-U-M. 

2  Instances  of  this  are  frequently  met  with  in  such  ancient  works  as 
Ram&yana,  Mahabharata,  and  Puranas. 

3  See  on   this  point,   works  on  Mantra  -shastra,  Nandikeshvara- 
Karika,  Aumk&ra-Sarvasva.  etc. 

4  This  it  does,   it  must   be  remembered,    in   the  one  single  way  of 
lending  to,  and  at  the  same  time  withdrawing  from,  the  Not-Self,  its  own 


being.     STf      ^      3^'  3%3ftZ  3q*ffi:  QW.  I      '  Purusha,  Exed, 

self-contained,  like  a  spectator,  witnesses  Prakrti  '  ;  Sankhya-Karika, 
verse  65.  This  beholding,  this  witnessing,  this  ''imaginative  attention', 
by  Self,  is  the  affirmation  by  it  of  Prakrti,  Not-Self  ;  which  affirma- 
tion alone  gives  to  it  all  the  existence  it  has  ;  it  is  Consciousness  which 
energises  and  makes  possible  all  the  phenomena  that  physical  science 


236  .    SHIVA    AND    SHAVA  [SC.    OF 

and  goes  back  again  to  Self  ,  through  and  after  Negation. 
When  we  endeavour  to  consider  it  apart  from  the  others, 
it  will  still  not  be  separated  from  '  m  '  ;  and  then,  too,  it 
will  identify  itself  with  the  hidden  affirmative,  whereby 
power  manifests  and  appears  forth,  in  many-formed 
results  and  effects,  rather  than  with  the  overt  negative. 
This  has  been  indicated  in  exoteric  Hinduism  in  the 
relation  between  Shiva  and  his  consort  Gaurl  ;  Gauri,  in 
her  many  forms,  is  the  implied  and  affirmative  aspect  of 
ichchha,  while  Shiva  is  its  overt  aspect  of  abolition 
and  negation  only  l  ;  in  His  being,  this  Gaurl  hides  insepa- 
rably as  veritable  half  of  His  frame,  so  that  hymns 
addressed  to  Her  declare  that  '  it  is  only  when  conjoined 
with  her,  Primal  Shakti,  that  Shiva  becomes  able  to 
prevail  and  energise  ;  otherwise,  cannot  stir  at  all  V 

deals  .with  ,  per  contra,  the  not  beholding,  the  turning  the  face  away 
from  the  dance,  of  Prakrti,  by  Self,  is  the  negation  by  it  of  Prakrti  ; 
which  negation  amounts  to  sleep  and  pralaya  ;  it  is  the  Principle  of 
Consciousness,  in  its  form  of  Un-consciousness,  (which,  in  practice,  is 
consciousness  of  something  else)  which  '  dissolves  '  the  phenomena  that 
physical  (including  psycho-physical)  science  deals  with. 

1  %%,    tfSffWl.,    ?fa    flra:  ;     'He   who  sleeps   in   all,  is  Shiva  '. 

^1=50%,  5%  *ft:  ;  |,  ^%-32nffr-H^-$Ff^-3ra^rr3%9  ;  '  That 
which  goes  is  Gauh  ;  that  which  goes,  pervades,  produces  (young), 
desires,  throws  away,  eats  up,  is  I  (==  EE,  as  in  '  see  ')  ,  She  who  does 
all  this  is  Gauh-i,  Gaurl  '. 


I  Saimdarya  Lahan. 

'Shiva,1   fll^,  minus    f,    i,   is   '  Shava  ',   Sftef  y  which  means    '  corpse,  ' 
lifeless,  powerless. 

Strictly,  destruction  and  negation  belong  to  the  Kara  or  Rudra 
aspects  of  Shiva  ;  his  creative  aspect,  in  the  Shaiva  Agama,  is  called 
Bhava  (corresponding  to  Brahma  of  the  Furanas),  and  his  preservative 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  THREE    ASPECTS    OF   SHIVA  237 

Because  of  its  special  connection  with  Negation  is 
this  Necessity,  this  Shakti,  treated  of  together  with 
Negation  ;  not  as  a  fourth  ultimate.  This  ever-present 
Necessity,  the  very  Nature  of  the  triune  Absolute,  of  the 
succession  of  the  World-Process,  appears  as,  and  is,  that 
which  we  call  Shakti,  Might,1  Ability,  Power,  Force, 
Energy,  etc.  In  other  words,  as  Negation  is  the  Nature 
of  the  Relation  between  Self  and  Not-Self,  so  this 
Necessity,  which  inheres  in  the  combination  of  the  three, 
and  is  not  separable  from  any,  may  be  regarded  as  the 
Power  of  that  Nature  of  Self  and  Not-Self  which  makes 
inevitable  that  Relation.  This  Relation  immediately 
flows  from,  or  better,  is  only  another  form  of,  that 
Necessity,  and  the  Necessity  is  therefore  treated  as  being 
more  closely  connected  with  the  Relation,  i.e..  Negation, 
than  with  the  other  two  factors  of  the  Absolute.  In  this 
Maya-Shakti  we  see  repeated,  the  trinity  of  the  Absolute, 
the  primal  impress  of  which  is  always  appearing  and 
reappearing  endlessly  everywhere.  Each  of  the  factors 
of  the  Absolute  repeats  in  itself,  over  again,  that  trinity, 
in  the  shape  of  corresponding  aspects.  In  Pratyag-atma, 

aspect,  Mrda  (Vishnu)  ;  Shiva  stands  then  for  Brahma.  Current  pairs  of 
words  are  also  Shiva-Shakti,  Gauri-Shankara,  Bhava-Bhavani,  etc.  But 
Gauri  (the  White)  has  also  her  other  aspect  of  Kali  (the  black)  ;  and 
abolition  of  the  world's  turmoil  is  Shiva's  Peace 


ftffHT  *Wt  TO:  (  Shiva-Mahima-stuti. 
1  '  It  may  be,'  '  may  u  be/  from  shak,  to  be  possible,  to  be  able* 


238  CORRESPONDENCES   OF   3    SHAKTlS          [SC.    OF 

Sat  corresponds  to  Etat,  the  manifest  seat  of 
action,  whereby  the  existence  of  Self  appears  forth  ; 
Chit  corresponds  to  Aham,  which  is  the  manifest  seat  of 
knowledge  ;  and  A  n  a  n  d  a  to  Na  (a  s  m  i)  wherein  lies 
the  principle  of  affirmation-negation,  attraction-repulsion, 
i.e.,  desire  (or  want,  as  negation  of  fullness,  followed  by 
fulfilment,  as  negation  of  want  or  lack  or  limitation).  In 
Mulaprakrti  again,  Rajas,  mobility,  corresponds  to 
Etat;  Sattva,  illumination,  knowability,  to  Aham  ; 
and  Tamas  to  Na(asmi),  denial  (of  Self),  darkness, 
dullness,  grossness,  inertia,  heaviness,  clinging,  material- 
ity (opposite  of  Self),  substantiality,  possessability.  In 
the  Maya-Shakti  of  Negation,  the  triplicity  appears  as 
the  energy  of  :  (a)  affirmation,  attraction,  enjoyability, 
a-v  a  r  a  n  a,  enveloping,  veiling,  corresponding  to  Aham  ; 
(b)  negation,  repulsion,  distraction,  flinging  away,  v  i  - 
k  s  h  e  p  a,  corresponding  to  Etat ;  and  (c)  the  revolu- 
tion-process of  alternation,  balancing,  samya,  a  p  - 
avarana,  sa  n-k  shepa  or  prati-shthapana, 
unveiling  (the  Truth)  and  steadying  (the  mind,  establish- 
ing it  in  the  contemplation  of  the  Truth),  corresponding 
to  A  nan  da,  the  spiral  dance  of  Shiva,  tamas  and 
Na.1  The  meaning  of  this  may  become  fuller  and  fuller 

1  There  is  no  current  triplet  of  Samskrt  words,  like  S  a  t  -  C  h  i  d- 
A  n  a  n  d  a,  or  sattva-rajas-tamas,  to  express  the  three  forms, 
functions,  or  aspects,  of  Shakti  spoken  of  in  the  text  above.  The  words 
used  here,  at  least  the  first  two  of  them,  are  met  with  in  the  extant  works 
of  Advaita-Ve"danta,  as  describing  the  workings  of  Maya-Shakti,  but  in  a 
somewhat  different  sense,  explained  below.  The  powers  of  Srshti, 
creation,  emanation,  throwing  forth,  Sthiti,  maintenance,  keeping 
together,  and  Laya,  or  S  a  m  h  5  r  a,  reabsorption,  destruction,  neutrali- 
sation, balancing  up,  which  are  currently  ascribed  to  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
and1  Shiva,  or  rajas,  sattva,  and  tamas,  respectively,  seem  to  mean  the 


P.,    CH.   Xl]    BLINDING,    MISLEADING,    RESTORING   239 

as  we  proceed,  for  no  work  that  endeavours  to  describe 
the  essence  of  the  World-Process,  can  help  imitating  that 
process  (going  round,  and  round)  more  or  less,  combining 
the  simultaneity  of  all  and  everything  in  the  Absolute 
with  its  gradual  development  in  fuller  and  fuller  re- 
petition in  the  succession  of  '  the  relative  '  of  the  World- 
Process. 

same  three  aspects,  in  essence.  Looked  at  in  another  way,  s  a  m  h  a  r  a 
would  be  reabsorption  or  attraction,  sr.  sh  1 1  would  be  throwing  forth  or 
repulsion,  and  sthiti  would  be  maintenance  or  the  balancing  of  the 
two.  In  this  view,  the  correspondences  of  the  triplets  would  also  have 
to  be  read  differently.  As  to  these  variations,  see  the  remarks  in  the 
next  chapter.  Visarga,  vikshlpa,  ad  an  a,  i  e  ,  '  throwing  out,1 
'  moving  about,'  '  taking  back  ',  respectively — is  another  triad  of  words 
sometimes  used  to  describe  the  kinds  of  Shakti.  Static,  kinetic,  dynamic 
— may  be  regarded  as  another  Shakti-Energy  triad. 

See  also  the  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter  on  the  j  n  a  n  a  - 
ichchha-kriya  s  h  a  k  t  i  s,  mentioned  in  the  Pur&nas  and  em- 
phasised by  the  Shaiva  school  of  practical  and  devotional  religion-philos- 
ophy. A  v  a  r  a  n.  a  would  then  correspond  to  j  n  a  n  a  (cognition,  a  v  i  d  y  a 
and  a  s  m  i  t  a  of  Yoga)  ;  v  i  k  s  h  6  p  a  to  k  r  i  y  a  (action,  the  r  a  g  a 
and  d  v  e  s  h  a  of  Yoga)  ,  and  s  a  m  y  a  (or  1  a  y  a  of  the  quartet  of 
the  hindrances  to  yoga-s  a  m  a  d  h  i  mentioned  in  Vedanta-works,  viz., 
k  a  s  h  a  y  a  and  ras-asvad  a — which  may  be  regarded  ab  the  un- 
pleasant and  pleasant  or  hateful  and  loving  varieties  of  a  va  r  a  p  a— and 
vi  k  she  pa  and  lay  a  or  sleep)  toichchha  lor  desire,  the  abhi- 
n  i  v  e  s  h  a  of  Yoga) . 

The  word  '  correspond,'  in  the  preceding  sentence,  means  only  that 
a-varana  (from  vr,  to  cover  up,  to  envelope),  'veil,'  'curtain1, 
'wrapping',  'cloak,'  which  blinds  the  intelligence,  is  of  the  nature  of 
'cognition  ',  but  is  wrong  cognition  ;  '  I  ',  instead  of  knowing  Self,  and 
knowing  It-Self  as  Self,  knows  not-selves,  and  knows  It-Self  as  a  not-self. 
So,  vi-kshepa  (from  vi,  intensive  prefix,  and  kship,  to  fling),  dis- 
4trac'-tion,  at-'trac'-tion  towards  a  wrong  object,  being  drawn  or  flung 
astray,  corresponds  to  '  desire  '  for  a  not-self,  and  includes  appurtenant 
'  action  '  also.  To  complete  a  triad,  we  may  add  s  a  m  y  a,  equi-lib-ration, 
or,  perhaps  better,  sva-stha-ta,  Sv£  mahimni  prat  i  -  s  h  thitih, 
return  to  and  abiding  in  Self,  '  firm  esta-blishment  in  the  greatness 
of  Self.' 

In  plain  everyday  language,  Maya  is  asm  it  a-k  ama-k  rodh  a, 
4  egoism  (pride) -lust -hate,  i.e.,  passionate  egoistic  desire  which  veils 
(a-vrnoti)  the  eyes  to  the  Truth,  and  then  drags  (v  i-k  s  h  i  p  a  t  i)  the 
so-blinded  person  into  the  wrong  direction.  A  person,  obsessed  or 
possessed  and  ridden  by  a  mad  desire,  shuts  his  eyes  to  the  truth  of 


240  VARIOUS   TRIADS  [SC.    OF 

This   Maya-Shakti   is  said  to  be  the  p  r  a  n  a  and 
b  u  d  d  h  i,  *  vitality   and  intelligence/  of  all  the  world  ;  I 

things,  their  due  proportion,  and  the  consequences  of  conduct;  and 
rushes  insanely  in  pursuit  of  that  object.  The  counter-actives  of  a- 
varana  and  vi-kshrpa,  attachment  and  infatuation,  are  v  a  i-ragy  a 
and  abhyasa,  detachment  from  the  world  of  sense  (by  surfeit  and 
revulsion)  and  persistent  practice  of  studious  contemplation  of  Self  (See 
The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions,  pp.  326,  593-4,  of  second  edn.). 

The  following  beautiful  lines  of  poetry  occur  on  p  122  of  The  Mahat- 
ma  Letters;  they  seem  to  be  Master  K.  H.'s  own  composition,  and 
are  illuminative  in  this  connection  ; 

"  No  curtain  hides  the  Spheres  Elysian, 
Nor  these  poor  shells  of  half  transparent  dust  , 
For  all  that  blinds  the  Spirit's  vision 
Is  pride  and  hate  and  lust." 

Shakti-tray  a,  '  triad  of  Shakti  ',  is  referred  to  in  the  following 
texts,  among  many  ;  they  mostly  mean  the  functions  of  creation-preserva- 
tion-destruction ',  the  three  chief  forms  of  causation  -effectuation  : 


Bhtlgavata,  VIII.  in,  28,  II,  iv,  12. 
clPT  ST^fa:,  ^T^ISlfcfl^T, 

ti,  ch.238. 


I    Bhashya  on    Ganapatj-Atharva-Shirsha-Upanishat,  at  the 
end  of  Ahnika-Chandnka 

By  the  Law  of  Analogy,  broad  correspondences  would  be  the  triads 
of  pr  ana-bud  dhi-shari  r  a,  biotic-mtelligent-physicochemical  ener- 
gies, o  jas-sa  has-balam,  vital-intellect  ual-mechamcal  6lan;  sym- 
pathic-cerebrospmal-muscular  systems  ;  affectional-(plexal  or  glandular)  - 
sensor-motor  organs  ,  k  a  n  d  a  s  (c  h  a  k  r  a  s,  p  i  t  h  a  s)  -j  n  a  n  e  n  d  r  i  y  a  s- 
karmendriyas  ;  Soma-Surya-Agm  ,  i  d  a-p  i  n  g  a  1  a-s  u  s  h  u  m  n  a 
n  a  d  i  s,  (left  sympathic,  right  sympathic,  spinal  cord)  ;  and  so  on. 

1  Symbolised  as  Radha  and  Durga  respectively  (vide  Devi-Bhaga- 
vatci,  IX.  ch.  50)  corresponding  to  the  motor  and  sensor  nerves  and 
organs,  karm-en<Jriyas  and  jnan-endriyas  respectively. 


P.,    CH.    Xl]       PRANA    AND    BUDDHI  :    MAHA-VIDYA         241 

it   is   their   whole  wisdom  and   whole  wealth  ;    it  is  the 
power  of  desire  for  the  maintenance  of  the  world's  things, 
and  also  for  their  destruction.     Many  are  its  aspects  and 
corresponding  names.    One  half  of  it — that  which  appears 
in  the  Affirmation,  "  I  (am)  this  " — is  a-v  i  d  y  a,  nescience, 
error,   illusion,   imperfect    knowledge,  separative  intellig- 
ence, which  binds  the  j  I  v  a  to  the  downward  arc  of  the 
wheel   of  S  a  m  s  a  r  a.     The  other  half — which  is  embo- 
died    in     the     Negation — appears    as    v  a  i  r  a  g  y  a   and 
vidya   (or  viveka,   viveka-khyati)    satiation  with 
the    pleasures    (and   also  the  allied  miseries)  of  the  world, 
and    discriminative    knowledge,    clear    understanding,   of 
the  distinction  between   Eternal  and  Ephemeral,  which 
lead     the    same    j  I  v  a  on    to   the    upward    arc    of   the 
Wheel.    In  its  completeness,  it  is   Maha-Vidya,  ful- 
filled    and    perfected    knowledge,     unifying    wisdom    of 
b  u  d  d  h  i  and  *  pure  reason,'  which  frees  the  j  I  v  a  from 
all    bondage,    makes  of  him  an    Ishvara    (in    the    strict 
and     technical    sense),     and    guides    his    life     on     that 
second  arc   in   that   condition  of   yoga,  union,  of  reason 
with   desire  and  .action,   which   makes  the  true  free-will 
of     de-liberate    conscious    universal     love    and   philan- 
thropic  activity ;     and    thus   confers   true   liberty,    true 
m  u  k  t  i. 

They  who  desire  to  grasp,  or  fling  away,  the  things 
of  the  world,  physical  or  subtle,  worship  Shak{i  in  her 
form  of  a-v  Id  y  a,  or  v  i  d  y  a,  respectively,  in  one  or  other 
of  their  many  aspects ;  they  who  desire  the  wealth  and 
fullness  of  the  Spirit,  worship  her  asMaha-VicJyS 

16 


242         TWO    MAIN    PHILOSOPHIES-WORSHIPS      [SC.    OF 

or  P  a  r  a  m  a-  V  i  d  y  a,  the  Great  Wisdom.1    Each  worship 
leads  on,  in  course  of  time,   by  cyclic  necessity,  to  the 


*U,  WTOft,  1W,  ft,  3$  ! 


W  TO  ?TO[  33  3RSK  3?WJ      ,  Mundaka  Up   p.  1    4. 

As  Philosophies  may  be  broadly  divided  into  those  of  Change  and 
those  of  the  Changeless  ,  and  activities  into  egoistic  and  altruistic  (the 
division  always  being  by  predominant  characteristic,  never  by  exclusion 
or  abolition  of  the  other,  but  only  by  subordination  of  the  other)  ,  so 
Worships  may  be  also  broadly  classified  into  those  of  Sagupa  and  those  of 
Nirgupa.  Nir-gupa,  the  Attribute-less,  is  the  Absolute  ,  Its  worship  is  the 
steady  realisation  of  Its  nature,  m  and  by  (1)  appropriate  perpetual  vision 
of  the  Changeless,  the  Universal  Self,  (2)  individual-self-denying,  renun- 
ciant,  other-helping  actions,  (3)  universal  benevolence,  constant 
prayer  for  the  peace,  shanti,  welfare  of  all.  Sa-gupais  'possessed 
of  attributes  '  ;  It  has  as  many  glorified  and  magnified  shapes  as  the 
heart-desires  and  ideals  of  worshippers.  As  Nirguna  is  Shiva,  '  Benevo- 
lent Sleeper  in  all.'  so  Sagupa  is  essentially  Shakti.  '  Wakeful  Power/ 
'  Ability  '  ;  and  all  objects  of  worship  and  prayer,  from  the  most 
primitive  fetish  to  the  highest  gods  and  '  madonnas  '  and  '  babies  ' 
of  the  most  splendid  pantheons  and  the  most  elaborate  mythologies, 
are  but  embodiments,  more  or  less  concrete,  of  this  Shakti  ;  and 
all  are  as  real  as  (neither  more  nor  less  real  than)  the  individual 
selves  and  heart-desires  of  the  worshippers  The  worshippers 
help  the  gods,  and  the  gods  the  worshippers,  with  exchange  of 
appropriate  '  nourishment  '  ,  as  between  all  the  kingdoms  of  nature  ;  as, 
indeed,  between  a  worker  and  his  '  instruments  '  ;  sometimes  the  '  instru- 
ment '  is  less  than,  in  other  cases  far  greater  than,  the  individual 
worker.  (Vide  Bhagavad-Git&,  vii,  21,  and  iii,  11.)  Prayer  is  only  the 
endeavour  of  a  weaker  will  to  put  itself  en  rapport  with,  to  identify 
itself  with,  and  so  draw  nourishment  and  power  from,  a  stronger  Will,  a 
greater  source  of  Power. 

P  r  ft  p  a-p  r  a  t  i-s  h  t  h  a,  '  esta-blishment  of  p  r  a  p  a,  life  '  ,  in  an 
image  ;  vivification,  vita-lisation,  of  it  by  mind-force,  intense  thought- 
concentration  ;  by  means  of  j  a  p  a,  (litany),  etc.,  is  a-v  a  h  a  n  a,  4  invi- 
tation, bringing  in'  ,  n  i  r  -  m  a  p  a,  '  formation  '.  of  a  good  or  a  bad  spirit. 
<Jevaorkr.tya,  good  or  bad  elemental  (or  elementary)  ;  (see  Mahattna 
Letters,  Index-references,  for  distinction  between  the  two)  ;  which  spirit 
is  as  much  an  instrument  (only  more  living)  as  an  engine,  a  gun,  a 
factory,  a  steamship,  a  human  or  animal  servant. 


P.,    CH.   Xl]        SHAKTI    AND    MtlLA-PRAKRTl  243 

next.  The  worship  of  Maba-Vi<}ya  is  the  same  as  the 
worship  of  Shakti's  consort,  Pratyag-Atma,  whose  supre- 
macy She  ever  insists  on,  and  in  dutiful  and  loving 
subordination  to  whom,  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  whose 
universal  law  of  compassion  to  all  selves,  She — as 
Gayatri,  mother  of  V&Ias,  wisdom-illumined  will  that 
knows  how  to  draw  upon  the  inexhaustible  stores  of 
Nature  (Shakti  herself) — confides  high  sciences  and  powers 
gradually  to  the  j  I  v  a  s  walking  on  the  Path  of  Renuncia- 
tion, for  the  humble  service  and  helping  of  all  fellow- 
j  I  v  a  s. 

One  point  should  be  specially  noted  here.  As  there 
is  confusion  in  extant  Samskrt  works  between  Pratyag- 
Atma  and  Param-Atma,  so  there  is  also  confusion  as 
regards  Shakti  and  MQla-Prakrti  or  Prakrtf.  And  the 
confusion  is  not  unnatural.  Because  Shakti  is  con- 
nect-ed  with,  con-/«s-ed  in,  both  Pratyag-Atma  and  Mula- 
Prakrti,  and  is  herself  hidden,  there  is  a  natural  tendency 
to  regard  her  only  as  the  one  or  the  other.  Throughout 
Devi-Bhagavata,  for  instance,  she  is  now  identified  with 

As  regards  the  two  main  classes  of  '  worship/  u  p  -  S  s  a  n  a  ;  here 
too  we  have  the  same  perpetual  swing  between  the  two ;  the  worship 
appropriate  to  n  i  -  v  r  1 1  i,  Rennuciation,  and  the  worship  belonging  to 
pra-vrtti,  Pursuit.  "All '  new  '  religions  are  only  re-forms  ;  from  multi- 
farious '  idol  '-worships  and  sectarianisms  towards  tmi-tarianism  and 
solidarity.  So,  Buddha  taught  philosophical  religion,  by  reaction  against 
the  numerous  more  or  less  gross  and  vicious  sects  and  worships  that  were 
prevalent.  But  again,  by  reaction  against  Buddha's  emphasis  on  the  simple 
life  and  asceticism,  ending  in  nir-vapa  ('extinction');  by  reaction 
against  this,  began  the  worship  of  thousands  of  images  of  Buddha,  and 
installation  of  these  in  great  temples,  and  luxurious  ceremonial.  This 
culminated  in  the  worship  of  hundreds  of  varieties  of  Taras,  female 
goddesses,  and,  ultimately,  the  Bachhanalian  orgies  and  horrors  of 
Vajra-Yana.  Each  object  of  worship,  god  or  goddess,  is  but  an 
apotheosis  and  anthropomorphisation  of  a  desire,  good  or  evil. 


244  SAME    AND    YET    NOT   SAME  [SC.    OF 

Self,  mentioned  under  the  epithet  of  Shiva,  and  now 
with  Mula-Prakrti.  Thus,  Shakti,  personified,  is  made  to 
say  :  *  Always  are  He  and  I  the  same  ;  never  is  there  any 
difference  betwixt  us.  What  He  is,  that  am  I  ;  what 
I  am,  that  is  He  ;  difference  is  due  only  to  perversion 
of  thought.'  But  the  distinction  is  also  pointed  out  at 
the  same  time  :  *  He  who  knows  the  very  subtle  distinc- 
tion between  us  two,  he  is  truly  wise,  he  will  be  freed 
from  S  a  m  s  a  r  a,  he  is  freed  in  truth.'  !  Again  it  is 
said  :  '  At  the  beginning  of  creation,  there  were  born 
two  S  h  a  k  1  i  s,  viz.,  P  r  a  n  a  and  B  u  d  d  h  i,  from 
Sam  v  it,  Consciousness,  wearing  the  form  of  Mula- 
Prakrti.'  J  Of  course  it  is  true,  in  the  deepest  sense,  that 
Shakti  is  not  different  from  the  Absolute,  but  only  Its 
very  own  Nature,  S  v  a  •  b  h  a  v  a  ;  and,  as  Mula  Prakrti 
is  included  in  the  Absolute,  therefore  Shakti  may  also 
be  identified  with  Mula-Prakrti,  without  which  it 
cannot  manifest  and  truly  would  not  be.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  desirable  and  profitable  to  make  the 
distinction  —  even  though  a  distinction  without  a  differ- 
ence —  from  the  standpoint  of  the  limited,  wherein 
thought  must  be  and  move,  and  has  deliberately  to  be 


fil  ^:  I 
3  &IWt  3^^,  ^TT^  OTR:  I  HI,  vi  2,  3. 


I  IX,  1.  6,  7. 


P.,    CH.    Xl]    .         PARA   AND    APARA   PRAKRTIS  245 

and  move,  taken  in  its  partial,  *  perverted,'  successive, 
form.  The  fact,  Also,  that  the  words  are  different,  and 
are  used  not  always  interchangeably  but  often  differently, 
implies  that  a  distinction  is  intended  between  Shakti  and 
Prakrti. 

In  Glta?  also,  Krshna  speaks  of  his  Daiv!  Maya, 
dur-atyaya,  '  difficult  to  cross,1  '  difficult  to  escape  and 
transcend';  his  Daivi  Prakrti,  divine  nature  or 
power  ;  and  again  of  his  two  Prakrti  s,  apara,  lower, 
and  para,  higher,  the  former  of  which,  he  says,  consists 
of  the  various  elements  which  Sahkhya  describes  as  issuing 
from  Mula-prakrti,  while  the  latter  is  j.Iva-bhuta,  (the 
life  of)  the  *  jlvas  that  uphold  and  carry  on  the  work  of 
the  world '.  The  meaning  of  such  passages  would 
probably  be  easier  to  follow  if  what  has  been  said  above 
as  to  the  nature  of  Self,  Not-Self,  and  Energy  which  is 
the  Necessity  of  the  Nature  of  these  two,  is  borne  in 
mind.  As  avidya,  this  primal  Energy  turns  more 
towards  Not- Self  and  becomes  apara-prakrti,  which 
name  is  used  to  cover  not  only  the  force  which  leads  the 
j  i  v  a  outwards,  but  also  the  objective  manifestations  of 
Not-Self  which  it  especially  brings  out,  and  into  which 
it  leads  the  j  I  v  a.  As  v  i  d  y  a,  it  turns  more  towards  Self, 
and  is  para-prakrt i,  the  source  of  subjective  life;  nay, 
which,  as  consciousness,  in  Self,  of  Not-Self,  is  life,  and 
so  includes  all  jlvas.2  As  the  two  together,  she  is 

1  Bhagavad-Glta,  vii,  14  ;  ix,  13  ;  vii,  5. 

a  For  another  aspect  of  the  fact  indicated,  that  is  to  say,  another 
interpretation  of  the  verse,  which,  however,  is  perfectly  consistent  with 
this,  and  brings  out  only  another  aspect  of  the  truth,  see  the  NOTE 
following  this  chapter. 


246  ASPECTS    OF   DAIVI   PRAKRTI     .  [SC.    OF 

Daivi-Prakrti,  in  which  vi(Jya  and  avidya 
coalesce  into  Maha-vidya,  regarded  not  as  know- 
ledge, but  rather  as  Shakti,  Energy,  which  utilises  all- 
knowledge,  for  the  carrying  on  of  the  World-Process. 


NOTE. — This  note  is  intended  as  a  continuation  of  the 
foot-notes  at  pp.  167,  190,  191,  229,  above,  in  connection  with 
b  u  d  d  h  i  and  m  a  n  a  s,  and  with  the  triads  of  (i)  s  a  t,  c  h  i  \f 
an  and  a,  (ii)  sattva,  rajas,  tarn  as,  and  (iii)  srshti, 
s  J  h  i  t  i,  1  a  y  a.  The  first  two  of  these  triads,  and  those  of  (tv) 
jfiana,  ichchha,  kriya,  and  (v)  d  r  a  v  y  a,  g  u  $  a, 
karma,  are, as  indicated  in  the  text  of  this  and  other  works, 
of  essential  importance  for  clearing  up  much  obscurity  and 
confusion  in  Samskrt  literature,  and  for  understanding  the 
whole  scheme  of  the  World- Process.  The  correspondences 
with  each  other,  of  the  various  factors  of  these  triplets,  hav^ 
been  pointed  out  here,  and  have  been  dealt  with  in  detail  in 
Praqava-vada.  But  they  are  argued  here  on  their  inherent 
merits,  and,  so  far,  have  not  been  supported  by  'testimony  * 
from  current  Samskrt- works. 

It  is  true  that  if,  as  is  claimed  here,  metaphysics;  are  no 
less  *  self-evident '  than  mathematics,  no  '  testimony '  is 
needed  for  the  conclusions  of  the  former,  any  more  than  for 
those  of  the  latter.  But  the  claim  is  obviously  not  admitted 
by  very  many.  Also,  while  solutions  of  simpler  problems  of 
mathematics  are  undoubtedly  clear  of  themselves  at  every 
step,  yet  when  we  come  to  more  complex  ones,  even  veterans 
of  the  science  are  not  unof  ten  glad  to  have  their  work  checked 
and  verified  by  others.  With  this  idea  the  following  collection 
of  quotations  and  references  is  given  here. 

As  said  before,  the  triads  belonging  to  Prajyag-atma  and 
Mula-prakrji  repectively,  viz.,  sat-chid-ananda  and 
sattva-rajas-Jamas,  especially  the  latter,  are  to  be 
found  at  every  turn  in  the  old  books.  But  the  vitally  important 
triad  belonging  to  Shakti  as  Cause  or  K  a  r  a  n  a,  viz.,  j  n  a  n  a- 
ichchha-kriya,  is,  for  some  reason,  rare.  So  also  is  that 
which  belongs  to  Shakti  as  Condition  or  N  i  m  i  1 1  a,  viz.. 


P.,    CH.   Xl]  FOUR    BASIC    TRIADS  247 

desha-kala-kriya,  or  Space-Time- Motion  ;  k  r  i  y  a  here 
being  sometimes  replaced  by  a  v  a  s  t  h  a  or  krama  or  h 6 J u 
or  n  i  m  i  t 1  a,  so  that  the  triplet  becomes  equivalent  to 
place-time-circumstance.  Yet  without  its  due  application 
in  the  work  of  interpretation,  the  ideas,  facts  and  laws,  of 
Brahma- vidy 5.  and  Atma-vidya,  metaphysic  and  psychology,  do 
not  become  a-p  a  r  -  o  k  s  h  a,  directly  experienced';  do  not  come 
home ;  are  not  realised  in  the  first  person.  Even  in  the  fanjra- 
literature  of  the  Shakja  school,  the  present  writer  has  been  in- 
formed by  friends  learned  therein,  Shakti  is  usually  referred 
to  as  t  r  i  -  g  u  n  a,  and  its  three  forms  of  subdivisions  are 
mentioned  only  as  satjviki,  rajas  1,  and  t  am  a  si 
s  h  a  k  t  i  s.  It  is  therefore  desirable  to  gather  together,  for 
the  purpose  of  confirming,  with  additional  confidence  '  the 
reasoned  faith*  of  the  reader,  by  means  of  *  trustworthy  testi- 
mony '  out  of  the  experience  of  the  ancients,  these  rare  state- 
ments, scattered  here  and  there  over  distant  parts  of  Samskjt 
literature. 

The  correspondences  may  first  be  tabulated  for  convenient 
reference. 

Chit  Sattva  Jnann  Guna 

Sat  Rajas  Kriya  Karma 

Ananda      Tamas  Ichchha         Dravya 

The  first  triad  belongs  to  Universal  Consciousness;  the 
second  to  Universal  Matter  ;  the  third,  to  individualised  con- 
sciousness :  the  fourth  to  particularised  matter.  It  is  rather 
curious  that  none  of  the  earliest,  best  known,  and  most  studied 
*  major  *  ten  Upanishats  mentions  sattva-rajas-famas  express- 
ly. If  we  include  two  more  among  the  '  major  ',  viz.,  Shvi%- 
ashvatara  and  Kaushltaki,  as  is  sometimes  done,  because 
Shankar-acharya  has  commented  on  them,  then  we  find  that 
Shvet.-ashvatara  uses  the  word  tri-gu  ij  a,  without  separately 
naming  the  three ;  but  Shankara  names  them  as  the  three. 
The  same  Upanishat  says  that '  the  s  v  a-b  h  a  v  i  k  a  s  h  a  k  t  i 
of  the  Supreme  is  triple,  jnana-bala-kriyft:  here  clearly, 
b  a  1  a,  '  power  ',  '  strength  ',  stands  for  i  c  h  c  h  h  a,  desire- 
force  (see  Shveta.,  iv.  5  ;  v.  5-12;  vi.  2-4,  8).  Among  the 
later  '  minor '  Upanishats,  Jabala,  Krishqa,  Rama-Purva- 
Tapani,  Nada,  Tripad-vibhuti-Narayaija,  Maitst,  Maitrtyt, 


250  THIRTY-FIVE    MILLION    NERVES  [SC.    OF 

equated    with    pashyantl  ;    yet  i  c  h  c  h  h  a    sits  midway  too 
between  j  fi  a  n  a  and  k  r  i  y  a. 


,  VII.  ch.  32. 

'  The  Supreme  Being,  whose  garment  is  *sat-chi(J-anan(Ja', 
appears  densified  by  karma  in  a  material  body,  which  becomes 
the  locus  of  the  attributes  or  faculties  of  cognition  -desire- 
action  '. 

,  "PI  1, 


3 


i  ibid.,  ch  35 


Goraksha,  Muktf-sop&na. 


'  Nirukta.  VII.  ii,  i  ;  See  also  Gtt&,  xvr  12. 

The  purport  of  these  last  quotations  is  that  '  out  of  thirty- 
five  millions  of  nerves  in  the  human  body,  ten  are  chief  ;  out 
of  these  ten,  three  are  the  most  vitally  important,  viz.>  i  d  a, 
p  i  n  g  a  1  a,  and  sushumna,  which  respectively  run  along 
left,  right,  and  middle  of  the  spinal  column,  and  corres- 
pond with  Chandra,  Surya,  and  Agni  (i.e.,  Moon,  Sun,  and 


P.,    CH.    Xl]       THREE    PRINCIPAL    DEITIES  251 

Fire,  or  middle,  upper,  and  lower,  orbhuvah,  svah,  and 
b  h  u  h  ,  or  astral,  mental,  and  physical  worlds  respectively), 
and  with  ichchha,jnana,  and  k  r  i  y  a  '. 


:  TO 

!    DeviBhag,  XII,  ch.  4. 
=OTfN?Tr  I         Ibid..  XII,  ch.  4. 


*  Thou  art  sung  as  the  Nature  of  Mahan-Atma,  (Mahat- 
Buddhi)  ;  thou  art  hymned  as  Shabala-  Brahma,  in  Balanced 
Repose  :  thou  art  also  the  Supreme  Might  beyond  all.  Thou 
givest  us  ichchhd-kriya-jnana.' 

(ii)  The  succeeding  extracts  show  the  correspondences  of 
iksha  —  kama  —  tapana,  jnana  —  ichchha  —  kriyd,  with  jn^na  — 
bala  —  kriya,  SarSsvati  —  K&li  —  Lakshmi,  chit  —  Snanda  —  sat, 
sattva  —  t^mas  —  rajas,  Vishrjiu  —  Rudra  (Shiva)  —  Brahmft,  and 
Sukshma  —  kdrana  —  sthula  (i.e.,  astro-mental  —  causal-  -physi- 
cal) bodies,  respectively. 


Guptavatf-tlka  on  Durg&-sapta-shatl. 

ft  f^sg?4  snfa  i 

76  iW.  on  Rahasya-^arya. 


252  THREE    DEITIES   &   THREE    BODIES        (_sc-    OF 


%?:f  fpfrrctttifr  fl  I  ptvi-Bhag..  XII,  viii. 

Jnana-ichchha-kriya  correspond  to  vijnanamaya-mano- 
maya-praijamaya  koshas  and  Isha-Sutra-Virat  or  Sarvajna- 
Hiranyagarbha-Vaishvanara  and  Prajna-Taijasa-Vishvanara 
also.  (See  Vedanta-sara,  and  Advanced  Text  Book  of 
Sanatana  Dharma,  p.  170). 


ir  ^?^      hriOT,  ?f^ri  srf:    rei  »  7^^  .  ni, 


f  fe 


I  Nilakantha,  Tefed  on  above, 


How  can  Maha^Kali  and  Rudra,  the  Destructive  Aspect, 
be  connected  with  Ananda,  Joy  ?  Joy  results  from  fulfilment 
of  Desire  :  and  Desire  is  Hate  as  well  as  Love.  The  Victor 
in  battle  triumphs  and  rejoices.  Rudra  and  Kali  are  usually 
represented  as  dancing  ;  macabre  though  that  dancing  be. 

(iii)  The  same  correspondences  are  supported  by  the 
following,  with  the  further  statement  that  creation  —  preser- 
vation —  destruction  (srshti  —  sthiti—  laya)  belong  to  rajas  — 
sattva  —  tamas  respectively- 


cTT:      R:  I    Qevi,  Bh&g,  I,  ii. 


:  i  ibid.,  i, 


P.,  CH.  Xl]        NE-SCIENCE  &   TRUE-SCIENCE  253 

(iv)  Shakti  as  sa-guna,  "  possessed  of  properties,'  '  in 
operation,1  '  functioning,'  '  kinetic,'  and  as  a-vidya,  ne-science, 
error,  passion,  is  the  object  of  adoration  to  the  *  pursuant/  those 
whose  minds  are  turned  world-wards  ;  (in  all  the  thousands 
of  different  forms  of  objects  of  devotion  which  persons  worship 
in  any  time  or  clime,  in  accord  with  their  particular  shades  of 
heart-desire  and  stages  of  intellectual  development).  As 
nir-guna,  *  functionless,'  static,  and  as  vidya,  true-science,  true- 
knowledge,  realisation,  she  is  revered  by  the  renunciant,  who 
wants  '  Self-dependence,  '  the  supreme  bliss  of  moksha,  the 
liberty  of  the  H  igher  Self,  *  freedom  '  from  '  dependence  on  an- 
Other,'  which  dependence  on  another  (the  lower  self)  is  the 
supreme  misery.  The  worship  of  nirguna  Shakti  is  the  same 
as  the  worship  of  Shiva  (the  Supreme  Self),  who  also  is  said, 
in  Puraijic  symbology,  to  bestow  moksha.  Many  schools  of 
thinkers  and  devotional  systems  of  votaries  give  her  many 
names:  '  Tapas,  Tamas,  Jada,  A-jnana,  Maya,  Pradhana, 
Prakrti,  Shakti,  Aja,  Vi-marsha,  A-vidyS  ;  and  so  on.  None  is 
despised  for  lacking  Vishnu  or  Rudra  ;  everyone  is  scorned 
who  lacks  Shakti-Power.  She  is  also  known  as  Mahd-M&yd, 
Niyati,  Mohini,  Prakrti,  V&sand,  Bhuvan-eshvari,  the  Meaning 
of  Pranava,  the  Desire  of  the  Infinite  ', 

sftf  cir 


g    fum:  i  ibid.,  \,  viu. 


:  4fl3T:  ^il^^fif^r:  i  ibid.,  v, 

qf 


f  fcF, 

OT  ^ST,  3?^cT  1  *OT%  I  Madhava,  Sarva- 
Darshana-Sangraha.  *  Purpa-prajfia-parshana  '. 

For  other  verses,  whose  purport  is  given  above,  see  p.  218, 
supra.  Many  other  names  of  Chiti-Shakti-Superconsciousness 
are  given  in  the  5th  ch.  of  Maha  Upanishat,  which  is  part  of 
Yoga  Vasishtha. 


254  THREE    GUNAS   &   THREE   YOGAS         [SC.  OF 

(v)  Artha-shakfa  (arthyat£,  '  that  which  is  desired  ',  is 
arfcha,  object,  purpose,  intention,  the  thing  meant,  etc.), 
and  dravya-shakti,  0  substance,'  the  desired  object),  are  used 
in  the  following,  in  substitution  for,  and  as  synonymous  with, 
ichchha-shakti.  Bala,  strength,  power,  as  a  synonym  for 
ichchha,  we  have  noted  before  ;  bhakti  is  also  used  as  such. 


.,  Ill,  vii. 


Vishnu-BhZg.,  II,  v. 
»V*.,  Ill,  x. 


;  5? 


«..  XI,  xx. 


P.,  CH.  Xl]      'NEUTRAL  WITNESS  OF  THE  THREE         255 

The  last  three  verses  say  that  jfiana-yoga,  the  yoga- 
method  of  philosophical  meditation,  suits  those  whose  tem- 
perament is  not  that  of  the  men  of  action,  who  do  not  like 
restless  activity  ;  for  persons  of  the  opposite  temperament, 
karma-yoga,  the  regulated  performance  of  duties  and  of  acts 
of  self-sacrifice,  is  the  best  way  of  achieving  the  purpose  of 
life  ;  for  the  man  of  the  midway,  or  emotional,  temperament, 
who  is  neither  greatly  attached  to,  nor  strongly  detached  from, 
the  world,  the  method  of  devotion,  bhakti-yoga,  is  the  best. 
The  following  verses  express  the  same  main  ideas  in  a  different 
setting. 


aft  %5,  sratfcf  sitwq;  I  Ibid.,  iv, 

..  xi.  xiv. 


SWT, 


Ibid..  IV.  xxxi. 


,  iii. 


(vi)  The  sensor  organs  express  buddhi  and  jnana-shakti  ; 
the  motor-organs,  prana  and  kriya-shakti. 


i  ibid.,  m, 


i  Ibid..  III.  xxvi 

It  should  be  noted  that,  in  this  chapter  of  the  Bhaga- 
vata,  occurs  another  verse,  which  says  that  kriya-shakti 
belongs  to  aham-kara,  whereas  our  conclusion  is  that  ichchha- 
sbak^i  is  its  proper  co-efficient  or  function  or  power.  This 
is  only  one  of  the  many  inconsistencies  and  perplexities 
which  seem  to  beset  the  question.  But  it  is  not  impos- 
sible to  solve  the  inconsistencies  and  disentangle  the 


256    PREPONDERANCE    MIDST    INSEPARABLES    [SC.   OF 

perplexities,  by  careful  reference  to  different  viewpoints.  The 
fifth  chapter  of  Maha  Upanishat,  above  alluded  to,  says 
that  the  same  functioning  appears  now  as  manas,  now  as 
buddhi,  again  as  ahamkara.  In  the  '  subtle  regions  '  of  mind, 
even  broad  distinctions  are  difficult  to  fix,  because  all  is 
always  in  a  fluid  condition,  continual  flow  and  flux.  In  this 
very  instance,  the  ahamkara  which  is  said  to  possess  kriya- 
shakti  seems  to  be  what,  in  the  last  section  of  this  note,  is 
called  manas  in  contradistinction  from  mah  at  -buddhi  ;  and 
it  is  said  to  have  three  subdivisions,  vaikarika-manas,  taijasa- 
buddhi,  and  tamasa-bhutadi,  which  last  is  ahamkara  proper. 
Vedanta-sara  assigns  antah-karana  to  sukshma-sharira  (also 
called  taiJasa  in  the  individual  form  and  sutratma  in  the 
universal)  ;  makes  it  consist  of  the  three  koshas,  viz.,  vijnana- 
maya,  mano-maya,  and  prafla-maya  ;  and  assigns  to  these,  the 
jnana,  ichchha,  and  kriya  shaktis,  respectively. 

(vii)  The  three,  sattva—  rajas  —  tamas,  are  utterly  in- 
separable though  distinguishable  ;  they  manifest  by  turns, 
one  preponderating,  the  others  subordinated,  at  any  one  time 
and  place.  '  They  suppress,  support,  produce,  also,  one 
another,  by  turns,  and  always  cling  on  to  each  other  '. 

Brahmaputra,  II,  iv,  22. 

3*:> 

:  I   Cita,  XMH,  40 


.,  III.  vm. 


Sahkhya-Karika,  12.     See  also  Anugtfa,  xxi. 

(viii)  The   characteristics,  properties,  functions,   conse- 
quences, implications,  allies,  corollaries,  etc.,  of  sattva  —  rajas 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  A-J$ANA    IS    UN-REASON  257 

—  tamas  are  very  numerous  ;  in  fact,  all  phenomena  whatever 
are  classifiable  under  these  three.  The  more  important  ones 
are  mentioned  in  Bhagavad-Glta,  chs.  xiv,  xvii,  xviii  ; 
Anugita,  chs.  xxi  to  xxviii  ;  Manu,  ch.  xii.  There  are 
many  seeming  incongruities  in  these  statements  ;  but  they 
are  mostly  reconcilable  by  the  view  that  sattva  corresponds 
to  jnana-  knowledge,  rajas  to  kriya-action,  and  tamas  to 
ichchha-desire.  Obscurity  is  greatest  with  regard  to  the  last, 
appropriately  enough,  one  might  say,  for  one  of  the  principal 
meanings  of  tamas  is  obscurity,  darkness  !  Thus, 

*W  Slffi,  W.  ^tf,  cWhSTSTftret^   I  Khazavata,  XI,  xxii. 

4  Sattva  is  jnana  ;  rajas  is  karma  ;  '  quite  plain  and 
simple  ;  but  *  tamas  is  called  a-jnana,'  not  ichchha,  straight. 
In  order  to  make  sure  that  a-jnana  is  the  same  as  ichchha 
here,  one  has  to  go  a  roundabout  way. 


:   I   S    S    Vimars/nni,  i,  2. 

4  Ajnana  is  mala,  seed  of  samsara  '  ;  it  is  obviously  the 
same  as  a-vidya.  The  synonyms  of  a-jnana,  given  in  one  of 
the  quotations  in  (iv)  above,  help  to  show  that  it  stands  for 
ichchha. 

Bhagavad-Glta,  (iii,  37,  vii,  27;  x,  11  ;  xiv,  5—17),  is 
perplexing.  (It  puts  together  :  (a)  sattva,  nirmalatva  or 
freedom  from  impurity,  prakasha  or  illumination,  an-amaya  or 
freedom  from  disease,  sukha  or  joy,  jnana  or  knowledge  ; 
(6)  rajas,  raga  or  attachment,  trshna  or  thirst  for  life,  karma 
or  action,  lobha  or  greed,  pravrtti  or  activity,  arambhah 
karmaQam  or  initiation  of  new  actions  and  enterprises, 
ashamah  or  restlessness,  sprha  or  desire  (whether  emulous 
or  envious),  duhkha  or  pain  ;  (c)  tamas,  ajfiana  or  ne-science, 
ignorance,  error,  moha  or  confusion  and  blind  clinging,  avarana 
or  veiling,  pramada  or  carelessness,  inadvertence,  a-lasya 
or  indolence,  nidrfl  or  sleep,  a-prakflsha  or  non-illumination, 
and  a-pravritti  or  non  -enterprise,  dis-inclination.  About  the 
alliances  of  sattva  here,  there  is  no  difficulty.  The  connection 
of  rajas  with  raga,  trshrjia,  lobha,  requires  explanation  ;  the  text 
says,  in  full,  that  rajas  is  rdg«atmaka,  'ensouled  by  attachment/ 
is  trshna-sanga-samudbhava,  '  is  born  of,  or  gives  birth  to, 
17 


258  UN-REASON    IS    DESIRE  [SC-    OF 

addiction  to  the  thirst  for  life,  the  will  to  live,'  and  '  rajaso 
lobhah  sanjayatje,'  *  greed  is  born  from  rajas  '.  The  reconcilia- 
tion may  be  found  in  these  turns  of  phrase.  Pra-mada  seems 
to  be  derived  from  the  same  root  as  the  English  word 
'  madness  '.  Its  fellow-derivatives  are  madana,  the  '  mad- 
dener*  or  Eros-Cupid,  mada  or  pride,  also  intoxication,  un-mada 
or  madness,  madya,  alcohol,  etc.  Mohana  has  an  allied  sense 
also.  Tamas,  a-jnana,  a-vidya,  moha,  pra-mada,  avarana,  mala, 
etc.,  all  stand  for  blind  clinging,  obstinate  arbitrary  desire* 
which  throws  a  veil  over  the  luminous  eye  of  reason,  blinds  it, 
overpowers  knowledge,  is  thoughtless,  capricious,  un-reason- 
able,  is,  in  fact,  the  very  essence  of  un-reason,  a-jnana.  Love- 
Hate,  Desire,  Passion,  is  obviously  arbitrary  Un-  Reason. 
Unreasoning  passion,  as  Love,  creates  ;  as  Hate,  destroys  : 
Reason  only  mediates,  mantains,  brings  about  sthiti  or 
palana,  preserves,  keeps  up  some  sort  of  balance  between  the 
two,  helps  to  make  law  and  order  :  as  Vishnu-sattva  between 
Brahma-rajas  and  Rudra-tamas. 

Tamas  and  moha  sometimes  mean  unconsciousness, 
swooning,  and  slumber.  In  excessive  '  perplexity  '  over  con- 
flicting desires  and  interests,  '  not-knowing  '  what  to  do, 
persons  faint  away,  and  then  they  come  out  of  that  trance  or 
slumber  with  some  one  desire  preponderating.  A  moment  of 
moha  or  laya,  oblivion,  '  the  waters  of  Lethe,1  intervenes  at 
every  change  of  '  heart,1  every  change  of  strong  desires  or 
states  of  being,  or  worlds  or  planes,  every  birth-and-death, 
avarana-vikshepa,  and  constitutes  an  initiation,  a  dlksha, 
in  which  the  jlva  dives  into  the  Infinite  Self  or  store-house 
of  Desire-  Energy  and  energies,  and  then  emerges  with  a 
'  new  *  experience,  of  success  or  failure,  a  power  gained  or 
lost.  The  moment  of  '  confusion  '  experienced  by  one  learning 
to  swim,  between  the  imminent  drowning  and  the  sudden 
floating  at  ease,  is  a  familiar  illustration. 

Some  other  helpful  texts  are, 
ffR, 


I  Manu.  xii,  24-26,  38. 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  FOKMS    OF    UN-REASON  259 


«ffi:  ; 
,  cW:  %fcf  ; 


Rhavishya  Pitrana,  Madhyama   Parva,   Bhaga  1,  ch.    1  ; 
Kurma  Pu  ra  na  ,  Purva  ,  ch  .   11. 


T  ^T:  fiPIT:   I  MWi.  Shanti,  ch.  157, 

*  Sattva  corresponds  to  jnana  and  dharma  ;  rajas  to  rdga- 
dvesha  and  artha  ;  tamas  to  a-jnana  and  kama.  Each 
preceding  one  is  higher  and  better  ;  dharma  is  best  and  should 
ever  be  clung  to.  Love,  hate,  infatuation,  elation,  pride, 
like,  dislike,  sorrow,  burning  jealousy  at  another's  prosperity 
—  all  this  is  Un-reason  ;  as  also  all  sinful  actions  '. 

Foot-Note  2,  p.  136,  of  Secret  Doctrine,  vol.  I,  says,  quot- 
ing K.  P.  Telang's  translation  of  the  3  Gita-s  (S.  B.  E.  series). 
"  The  original  for  Understanding  is  Sattva,  which  Shankara 
renders  Antah-karana,  refined  by  sacrifices  and  other  sanctify- 
ing operations.  In  Katha,  .  .  .  Sattva  is  rendered  by  Shankara 
to  mean  Buddhi  —  a  common  use  of  the  word."  To  this  H.  P.  B, 
adds,  "  Whatever  meaning  various  schools  may  give  the  term, 
Sattva  is  the  name  given  among  Occuk  students  of  the/ 
Aryasanga  School,  to  the  dual  Monad  or  Atma-Buddhi,  and 
At  ma  -Buddhi  on  this  plane  corresponds  to  Prabrahman  and 
Mulaprakrti  on  the  higher  plane." 

(ix)  The  three  functions  or  properties  and  characteristics 
of  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas  are  stated  more  specifically  and 
categorically  in  the  following,  in  connection  with  drifta 
or  mind. 


Tl  f|  5n§?TT-S?lff1-f^«rfrT-5ft5J^l?t  f5T3°Nl  I  Yoga-bhashya,  I 

an:  i  /*«..  n,  is. 
STIR:  I  ibid.,  n,  28. 
TOR!  ^  SRft  ^  3tiPn  *  'ITW  I  Gita.  xiv,  22. 


260  EXPLANATIONS,    RECONCILIATIONS          [SC.    OF 


Sankhya-Karika  ,  12.  See  also  13. 
:  \ 

S&nkhya-tattva-kaumudi,  12. 
l  I   Rhagnvata,  III,  xxvi 


i  ibid  ,  vm,  m. 

ft:,  ^Nrq  Wfl:,  3TTETC<Jr  3??f?%:  I 

Foot-note  to  Shiva-sutra-vimarshini,  ni,  I 

'  The  function  of  buddhi-satfcva  is  prakasha  or  prakhya, 
illumination,  making  known,  priti,  cheerful  joyous  affection 
and  satisfaction,  shanta-ta,  peacefulness  ;  of  manas-rajas, 
is  pravrtti,  chanchalya,  kriya,  restless  enterprising  activity, 
a-priti,  discontent,  ghora-ta,  vehemence,  dire-ness  ;  of  aham- 
kara-tanias,  is  s^hiti,  niyama,  avarana,  steady  obstinate  clinging 
to  one  thing  and  veiling  of  other  things,  with  a  regularly  fixed 
purpose,  and  also  vishada  and  moha,  cheerless  desolate 
yearning  and  pining,  mudha,  perplexed  and  confused  as  to 
the  truth,  the  right  course  of  action,  and  as  to  whether  the 
heart's  desire  will  or  will  not  be  gained.' 

(See  also  my  Yogct-Concordance-Dictioucrry,  pub.  1938  ; 
references  and  explanations  under  chitta,  pravrtti,  sthitji. 
kriya,  prakhya,  etc.) 

The  three  inseparable  but  distinguishable  aspects  or 
faculties  of  chitta  or  mind,  the  single  *  internal  organ,' 
antah-karana,  (in  contact  with  the  five  external  aud  at  least 
seemingly  separate  five  sense-organs  and  five  motor- 
organs),  are  buddhi  (or  mahat),  aham-kSra,  and  manas. 
Chitta  is  the  summation  of  the  three.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  soul 
with  three  functions,  the  psychical  '  individual,'  corresponding 
to  the  body  with  three  properties  (i.e.,  sensable  qualities, 
substantiality,  movement),  the  physical  *  singular,'  viz.,  the 
anu  or  atom  of  which  Bhagavata  (II,  xi)  says  : 


Sgcf: 
WHS!: 


P.,    CH.   Xl]          THE    ULTIMATE  IN-DIVIS-IBLE  261 

"  The  ultimate  indivisible  '  particular,'  '  many  ',  i.e., 
multitudinous,  but  uncompounded,  i.e.,  each  separate  from 
all  others,  whence  arises  men's  illusory  notion  of  the  '  final 
unit  '  or  the  singular  —  is  the  paramanu."  (See  also  Vaisheshika- 
Sutra,  I,  ii,  3,  6,  for  sum  mum  genus  and  final  singular  or 
particular,  or  "  infima  species  '). 

For  all  practical  purposes,  this  chi^ta  of  Yoga  is 
manas  of  Nyaya,  its  sinjplarising,  finitising,  principle, 
principle  of  '  attention,'  of  the  hot  place  in  consciousness  ' 
(in  William  James'  phrase),  of  focus  in  the  field  of  consci- 
ousness, which  is  the  cause  of  the  actuality  of  '  one  knowledge 
only  at  a  time,'  Nyaya  SUtra,  III,  ii,  56-62  ;  'while  buddhi 
is  the  cause  of  the  possibility  of  all  knowledges  simultaneously 
included  in  that  infinite  field  ;  but  this  'comprehensive  '  kshetra- 
jna  quality  of  buddhi  is  not  clearly  brought  out  in  current 
Nyaya  and  Vaisheshika  works  ;  some  of  these  later  works  how- 
ever distinguish  two  kinds  of  cognition,  anubhava  and  smrfi, 
i.e.,  direct  perception  and  memorial  ;  and  the  latter  is  said  to 
cover  all  three  divisions  of  time,  while  the  former  is  confined 
to  the  present. 

Vedanta  speaks  of  *  the  tetrad  of  the  inner  organ,  an^ah- 
karaoa-chatushtaya,  viz,  manas  —  buddhi  —  ahamkara  —  chitta  ; 
Sankbya,  of  mahat  (or  buddhi)  —  ahamkara  —  manas  ;  Yoga/ 
of  chitta  with  three  shila-s  or  characteristics  ;  Nyaya  mentions 
buddhi  and  manas  separately  (Sutra,  I,  i,  9),  makes  jnana  or 
cognition  (together  with  other  phenomena)  a  *  mark  '  or 
characteristic  of  Atma  (I,  i,  10),  identifies  jnana  with  buddjii 
(I,  i,  15),  and  states  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  manas 
to  be  prevention  of  more  than  one  *  knowledge  '  (or  '  ex- 
perience ')  occurring  at  one  time  (I,  i,  16).  But  Nyaya- 
Bhashya  (on  I,  i,  16)  says  :  "  Memory,  reasoning,  acceptance 
of  testimony,  doubt,  intuition,  dreaming,  jnana  or  knowledge, 
inferential  conjecture,  experience  of  pleasure,  desire,  etc.,  are 
'  marks  '  of  manas  ;  and  besides  these,  also  this  one  peculiarly, 
viz.,  the  non-occurrence  of  more  than  one  *  knowledge  '  at  a 
time."  And  Nyaya-vartika-tatparya-tlka  (on  the  same)  seems 
to  identify  buddhi  (which  as  said  above  is  expressly  declared 
in  the  sutra  to  be  identical  with  jSana)  with  manas,  thus, 


I  fsajctS^stf^  sPTrqT  IR 


262  FUNCTIONS-FACULTIES    OF    MIND       [SC.    OK 

The  reconciliation  and  explanation   of  all  these  may  be 
found  in  the  statements  that, 

,  in,  lr 


i:  \ 

Spanda-karika-vwrti,  iv,  20. 


*  Chi^ta  consists  of  buddhi  —  ahamkara  —  manas,'  '  which 
make  up  the  '  inner  organ  '  ;  and  of  these,  manas  expresses 
rajas;  ahamkara,  tamas  ;  and  buddhi,  sattva.' 


3?rc??F  3?0j;^l:   I  S.  S.  Vtmarslnni,  in,  1. 


I  Ibid.,  Appendix,  iv 

/6^.,  i,  13. 
I  Yoga-Vasishtha,  Chudala-upakhyana, 

'  This  three-functioned  mind  or  chitta  is  anu,  atomic, 
because  it  '  breathes/  aniti,  expands  and  contracts,  and  keeps 
moving^  incessantly,  ata^i,  and  hence  is  called  the  atma-jiva- 
aiju  ;  Atma,  really  Omnipresent,  therefore  motionless,  appears 
as  moving  (atatO  when,  colored  by  <fes*Ve-vasana,  it  puts  on 
a-khyati  (a-vidya,  a-jnana),  non-knowledge  or  forgetfulness 
of  Its-Own-Nature,  and,  instead  of  Omnipresent,  becomes 
arjiu,  a  limited  atom  ;  when  enveloped  in  the  triple  organ 
and  the  five  t^n-matras,  it  is  the  experiencer-chitta  ;  this 
sheathing  is  due  to  desire,  will  to  live  :  the  essence  and 
core  of  mind  may  well  be  said  to  be  desire  '  ;  while, 
no  doubt,  the  three  aspects  of  the  mind  are  co-equal,  yet> 
if  a  *  distinction  between  the  prophets  '  may  be  made  at 
all,  we  would  have  to  say  that  very  soul  of  soul  is 
desire  ;  for  desire,  emotion,  the  ruling  passion,  makes  the 
individuality,  the  peculiarity  and  character  of  the  person, 
is  the  individualising,  finitising,  characterising,  distinguishing 


P.,    CH.   XIJ         DESIRE-FORCE    AS   JIVA-S 

principle  ;  any  given  person  feels  his  separate  existence  most 
fully  and  keenly  when  he  is  expressing  &  particular  emotion 
most  intensely  ;  creation  of  krtyas,  (Tibetan  tulku)  '  arti- 
ficial '  elementals  and  deVas,  by  means  of  mantras,  i.e., 
manana,  ideation,  with  intense  desire,  is  only  an  illustration  of 
this  fact,  as  also  the  theosophical  doctrine  of  '  individualising  ' 
of  souls  from  lower  into  human  kingdom  under  stress  of 
intense  emotion,  like  '  crystallisation  '  under  stress  of  chemico- 
physical  forces  corresponding  to  emotions  ;  '  desire  is  the 
shakti  par  excellence,  shakti  -tama  ;  '  cognition  and  action 
are  shakfis  only  with  the  energy  borrowed  from  desire. 

This  is  also   the  significance  of  the  otherwise  somewhat 
obscure  verse, 

3?«it 


I  Git  ft,  vii,  5. 

'  My  para  or  higher  prakrti  is  that  which  manifests  as 
jivas,  souls,  individuals  (of  countless  grades  of  definition, 
group-souls,  etc.,  one  within  another),  and  thereby  carries  on 
and  upholds  this  moving  world.1  In  other  words,  this  para- 
prakrti  is  much  the  same  as  Daivi-prakrti  or  Shakti,  energy, 
force  ;  and  apara-prakrfi  is  Mula-prakrti,  matter.  The  three 
gunas,  in  different  aspects,  belong  to  both,  as  indeed  also  to 
Spirit  or  Pratyagatma. 

Energy,  force,  power,  though  abstract,  in  a  general  sense, 
yet  always  manifests  as,  in,  and  through,  concrete  '  indivi- 
duals,' human  and  non-human.  Hence  inevitable  mor- 
phisation  of  the  one  Ajma-Shakti,  in  many  degrees  of  defini- 
tion, first  into  prafika-s,  nature-forces  of  the  Vedas,  Agni, 
Mitra,  Varuna,  Indra,  Surya  etc.,  distinguished  by  functions, 
without  ascription  of  any  sharply-defined  concrete  human  or 
other  shapes  ;  and  then  into  pratima-s,  more  concretely 
anthropomorphic  deities  of  PurUnas,  with  well-defined  but 
changeable  shapes  in  subtler  matter,  as  abhimani  devatas, 
ruling  over  and  guiding  (not  so  much  intellectually  as  vitally 
and  inspi  rationally)  masses  of  corresponding  '  nature-spirits  ' 
of  all  kinds,  made  of  subtler  or  superphysical  matter,  or  con- 
sisting of  vegetable  and  animal  bacteria  and  bacilli  (yak- 
shafli  and  rakshamsi  —  after  whom  human  or  semi-human 


264    SINGULAR   AND    UNIVERSAL—  IDENTICAL    [SC.    OF 

races  of  yaksha-s  and  rakshasa-s  seem  to  be  named,  because 
of  the  prevalence  *-of  such  microbes  in  their  bodies),  as  also 
'  animal-  souls  '  of  masses  of  animals  and  men  ;  and  finally 
into  quite  human  and  historic  deities,  avataras,  of  Puranas 
and  other  national  legends  and  sagas,  ruling  more  intellectually 
(comparatively)  '  rational  -souls  '  of  masses  of  men. 

The  already-quoted  verses  of  Bhagavata  (VIII,  ii), 
speaking  of  '  triple  Shakft,  of  the  nature  of  I-feeling,  egoism,' 
indicate  the  same  thing  as  the  Gf£a-verse. 

This  aham-dhlh,  1  -feeling,  is  aham-kara  of  S&rikhya  and 
Vedanta,  and  asmita  of  Yoga,  which  is  but  the  second  stage, 
phase,  or  form  of  a-vi$ya,  primal  Error,  by  which  the 
Infinite  illusorily  regards  itself  as  a  finite  '  body,1  an  *  atom/ 
and  '  finitises  '  itself. 

This  aiju,  or  *  a$ava-mala/  '  atom  stain  '  or  *  atom-sub- 
stance ',  takes  the  place,  as  the  third  subdivision  of  energy, 
viz.,  samya,  mentioned  on  p.  238,  supra,  from  a  different 
standpoint. 


SP-I, 


:  I        Shwa-SHtra-Vi..  i,  3. 

We  have  seen  above  that  manas,  chitta,  or  jiva  is  aiju  : 
Upanishats  repeatedly  declare  that  Brahman  ,  Supreme 
A^ma,  is  *  larger  than  the  largest  and  smaller  than  the 
smallest/  is  infinite  and  infinitesimal  both,  (the  word  for 
1  large/  viz.,  mahan,  having  a  special  fullness  of  significance 
which  will  appear  m  a  moment).  We  have  also  seen  that  one 
of  the  quotations  above,  from  Bhagavata,  expressly  says  that 
the  '  atom/  the  '  final  singular/  is  '  many  '  and  yet  also  the 
cause  of  the  illusion  of  singularity,  '  oneness/  i.e.,  of  many 
ones.  A  quotation  from  Spanda-kartka-vtvrti  will  help  to 
show  how  '  extremes  meet/  and  not  only  meet  but  are 
identical.  / 


3  !  W*!^     ?lc«yJJH  5 


P.,    CH.   Xl]  MIND    IS   WORLD-PROCESS  265 


1  In  transcendental  and  supreme  experience,  oneness 
or  identity  is  not  distinguishable  from  *  separate  '  (or  rather 
complete  and  perfect)  singularity  (kevalata,  of  yoga).  Sepa- 
rate-singularity which  has  no  fringe  of  uncertainty  of  any 
kind  about  it,  cannot  be  distinguished  from  true  (universal) 
oneness  ;  and  vice  versa.  In  that  supreme  experience,  the 
broad  firmament,  all-bearing  earth,  ambient  air,  blazing  sun, 
rolling  oceans,  rushing  rivers,  ever-receding  quarters  of  space 
—  all  these  are  seen  to  be  but  portions,  projected  without,  of 
the  one  my  *  internal  organ  *  within"  i.e.,  they  are  all  seen 
as  constituents  of  the  One  impartible  Consciousness  which 
has  illusorily  divided  itself  up  into  a  '  without  '  and  a  '  within  f. 
*  Empirical  '  and  '  universal  '  Ego  are  identical.  Following 
verses  of  Yoga  Vasishtha,  111.  ch.  84,  are  to  same  effect. 

SSRt,  tf 


:  ,  ST 


*  The  Chit-element  in  chifta,  is  seed  of  omniscience  ; 
the  Jada-element  in  it,  is  all  this  Jagat,  moving  illusion. 
Chitta,  mind,  contains  all  the  World-Process  within  itself.  It 
should  be  reflected  upon,  controlled,  cultivated,  refined  '. 

After  all,  is  it  not  literally  true,  that  every  experience, 
and  all  that  is  contained  or  implied  in  it  and  by  it,  all  its 
contents,  is  a  mood  of  mind,  a  vr$i  of  antah-kararjia,  i.en  of 
the  Self  identified  with,  or  imagining  It-Self  as,  an^antah- 
karana  ?  To  think,  to  say,  *  this  is  my-selfs  experience,  that 


266  ASPECTS    OF    MIND  [SC.    OF 

is  another-Self  fs  experience,  this  mountain  is  outside  of  Me  '  — 
is  not  all  this,  My  experience  or  thought  ?  Is  not  all  distin- 
guishing of  one-Self  and  another-Self,  together  with  both  the 
thus  distinguished  selves,  within  the  One  Self  which  distin- 
guishes ?  Indeed  there  is  Only  One  Self  which  includes  all 
selves  and  all  not  -selves,  all  thoughts  and  all  things,  all  sub- 
jects and  all  objects. 

It  may  be  mentioned  incidentally,  that  Pranava-Vada 
makes  abam-kara  the  summation  of  chitta-buddhi-  manas, 
instead  of  chitta  the  summation  of  ahamkara  and  the  two 
others.  As  said  before,  this  implies  only  a  slight  difference  of 
standpoint,  an  emphasis  on  aham  rather  than  on  kara. 

(x)  A  few  quotations  regarding  the  three  '  faculties  '  or 
'  functions  '  of  this  *  inner  organ  '  may  help  to  make  the 
subject  clearer. 

It  is  true  that  the  ancient  works  lay  stress  on  the  indi- 
visible oneness  of  mind,  manas,  in  all  its  psychoses  i.e.,  the 
psyche's  functionmgs,  moods,  modes  ;  thus, 

:  fft:  *ft:  * 


3$  *T*f  ^4  I   Brhad-'Aranyaka,  1,  v,  3. 

'  Love  and  passionate  desire,  resolve,  doubt,  faith,  dis- 
belief, patience,  impatience,  modesty,  clear  insight,  fear  —  all 
these  are  but  manas,  mind/  These  psychoses  (mind's  func- 
tions, mentations),  are  typical  of  the  scores  mentioned  in 
different  works  of  various  schools  of  philosophy  ;  e.g.,  alo- 
chana,  pure  sensation,  and  pratyaksha,  perception  (which  are 
the  basis  of  all  other  mental  operations,  3WE*  ac<jf«Nr  ifo:, 
as  said,  in  Sctnkhya  Karikti,  30,  and  S^RNCf  Slftfa:,  in  Nyaya- 
bhashya,  I,  i,  8),  adhyavasaya,  or  ascertainment,  abhimana, 
egoistic  desire,  sankalpa  or  vyavasaya,  resolve,  viparyaya  or 
viparyasa,  error,  samshaya,  doubt,  vikalpa,  imagination, 
svapna,  dreaming,  nidra,  sleep,  praty-avamarsha  or  praty- 
abhijna,  recognition,  ichchha,  desire,  raga,  liking,  dv£sha,  dis- 
liking, krti,  volition,  abhi-sandhi,  determination,  anubhava, 
experience,  presentation,  smrti,  memory,  etc.  —  all  these  are 
only  moods  of  the  one  mind.  " 


P.,    CH.   Xl]     NAMES   VARY   WITH    FUNCTIONINGS      267 


*rf&ct 


* 
( 


J?ift  ' 


Upanishat  and 

'  Self  -born  Brahma  spreads  out  the  worlds  by  Manas. 
Wherever  there  is  sankalpa-ideation,  there  is  Manas  at  work. 
There  is  no  difference  between  the  two.  When  ideation 


268  ALL    OF   ONE    AND    SAME   MIND  [SC.    OF 

ceases,  Self  AJ-One  remains.  It  is  indicated  by  such  names  as 
Atma.  By  and  in  ideation,  Space-Time-Motion  appear,  and 
Chit-consciousness  becomes  Kshetra-jna,  cogniser  of  the  '  field  ', 
the  '  This  '.  Ideating  vasana-desires,  it  becomes  "  aham-kara  '- 
ego-ism  ;  that,  making  determinations,  free  of  doubt,  a-kalanki, 
becomes  '  bu(J(Jhi  '  ;  that,  forming  an  '  image  ',  becomes 
'  manas  '  :  that,  densifying,  crystallising,  becomes  indriyas, 
sensor-and-motor-organs  ;  these  make  up  the  body.  Thus  the 
jiva-soul,  binding  itself  with  bonds,  like  the  silkworm  im- 
prisoning itself  in  a  cocoon  spun  by  itself,  falls  lower  and 
lower  into  denser  and  denser  matter.  This  one  and  the 
same  Manas-  Mind,  according  to  its  various  functionings,  is 
named  now  *  manas  ',  now  *  buddhi  ',  now  '  jnana  ',  again 
'  ichchha  ',  then  '  kriya  ',  now  '  aham-k^ra  ',  now  '  chitta  ',  or 
prakrji,  or  m^yfl,  or  malam,  or  karma,  bandha,  puri-ashtaka, 
or  a-vidy3.  All  these  are  but  various  names  of  various 
functionings  of  one  and  the  same  ideating  Manas-  Mind  '. 

Still   it   is  possible   to  distinguish  three  broad  classes  of 
functionings  among  these  phenomena. 

%%, 


T<*ntr-aloka,  ix. 
I  Prashna  Upanishat,  iv,  8. 

Sahkhya-Karika.  23,  24.  37. 


Shabda-kalpa-druma,  art.  Antahkara^a. 


P.,   CH.   Xl]  SAMSKRT    EQUIVALENTS  269 

W  g  g^frowf^,  cf^r  ^  ^  iw 


3  cT^Kcli  ^H  I    pM-Bh**<rt  VII.,  xxxii. 

So  far  there  is  no  difficulty.  There  is  a  clear  consensus 
in  the  above  texts,  that  buddhi  is  that  faculty  of  the  mind 
whose  function  is  to  ascertain  facts,  adhyavasdya,  bodha,  syati, 
nishchaya  ;  aham-kara,  to  ego-ise,  to  connect  all  experiences 
with  self,  to  reduce  them  to  the  sake  of  the  selfishly-desiring 
self,  abhimSna,  sam-rambha,  mati,  garva  ;  manas,  to  resolve 
upon  which  course  to  follow  between  doubtful  alternatives, 
kalpana,  mantavya,  eshanS,  ichchha,  klrpti,  samshaya  or  san- 
kalpa-vikalpa  ;  chitta,  to  memorise,  to  connect  before  and 
after,  past  and  present  and  future,  and  also  all  the  three,  in 
itself,  smarana,  anu-sandhana.  Clearly  the  three  first  corres- 
pond to  jnana,  ichchha,  kriya.  But  when  we  seek  for  direct 
texts,  we  find  some  perplexing  inconsistency  here  as  in  the 
case  of  sattva,  etc.,  (vide  section  viii,  supra,  of  this  note,  and 
the  references  to  Git  a).  Thus,  . 

fe:   but 


(It  should  be  noted  that  the  quotations  from  K^shmira 
Shaiva  works,  throughout  this  Note,  are  all  taken  from 
Mr.  J.  C.  Chatter  ji's  excellent  publications  under  the  auspices 
of  the  Kashmir  State.) 

In  these  lines  jfiana  —  sattva  —  baddhi  are  brought  together 
all  right  ;  but  kriyS  and  manas  are  joined  to  tamas  instead  of 
rajas  ;  and  ichchha  and  ahamkSra  are  allied  to  rajas  instead 
of  tamas.  Spanda-karika-vivrti  (iv,  20),  however,  as  we 
have  seen  in  section  ix,  supra,  of  this  note^assigns  the  corres- 
pondences rightly.  Vatsyayana,  Kama-sutra.  I,  ii,  44,  uses 
abhimana  in  the  sense  of  desire,  expressly. 

\ 


(This  sentence  is  repeated  in  Kautalya,  Artha-shastra, 
I,  vi.) 


270  MEANING   OF   ABHI-MANA  [SC.   OF 

c  King  Dandaka,  desiring  lustfully  to  violate  the 
daughter  of  the  IJshi  Bhargava,  was  destroyed  with  all  his 
kith  and  kin,  and  all  his  kingdom  was  laid  waste  and  became 
dense  jungle  '.  Valmiki,  Ramayanat  has  a  verse  which  uses 
the  word  in  the  same  sense  :  Does  the  king's  son  carefully 
avoid  lusting  after  the  wives  of  others  ?  '. 


We  may,  on  the  whole,  take  the  following  to  be  the  net 
result.  Buddhi  is  the  principle  or  faculty  of  cognition,  know- 
ing, understanding,  intellection,  reason,  which  ascertains  and 
decides,  *  this  is  so  '  ;  it  corresponds  to  sattva  ;  Samskrt 
names  for  its  operations  are  ,  adhyavasaya,  nishchaya, 
bodha,  jfiana,  upa-labdhi,  etc.  Aham-kara  is  the  ptinciple  or 
faculty  of  desiring  (whereby  the  separateness  of  one-self  is 
primarily  accentuated),  wishing  (willing  being,  so  to  say,  mid- 
way between  wishing  and  acting),  and  of  self  -reference,  indivi- 
duation,  personalisation,  egoism,  hence  self-complacence, 
pride,  etc.  ;  it  corresponds  to  tamas  ;  Samskrt  words  for  its 
functionings  are  ichchha,  abhi-mana,  sam-rambha,  garva, 
eshana  (in  the  sense  of  vasana,  craving,  etc.).  Manas  is  the 
principle  or  faculty  of  action,  volition,  conation,  determination 
(of  what  to  do),  resolve  (after  vacillation),  attention  (after 
distraction)  ;  it  corresponds  to  rajas  ;  Samskrt  words  for 
its  activities  are  kriya,  esharjia,  (in  the  sense  of  seeking,  anu- 
eshafla,  going  after),  samshaya-vimarsha,  sankalpa-vikalpa. 
Chitta  is  the  summation  of  the  three,  with  the  special  feature 
or  function  of  memory  (and  expectation),  connecting  before 
and  after  ;  Samskrt  words  here  are  chefayate,  smaraijam, 
anu-san-dhanam.  The  name  chitta,  for  individual  mind  or  soul, 
is  appropriately  formed  from  the  root-word  Chit  which 
means  consciousness  generally,  Ch6tana,  Chiti.  The  Univer- 
sal Consciouness  or  Chit,  including  all  time,  past,  present,  and 
future,  is  obviously  the  locus  and  the  means  of  all  memory. 
A  portion,  a  slab,  so  to  say,  of  this  Universal  Conscious- 
ness, gathered  into  a  separate  aggregate,  with  a  definite 
reach  backward  and  forward  in  time,  becomes  a  chitta  J  in  this 
individual  '  memory  '  —  and  an  individual  is  but  a  '  memory,' 
a  biography,  a  number  of  experiences  in  a  certain  order,  so 
that  individuality  is  lost  and  disappears,  when,  and  to  the 


P.,  CH.  Xl]    PERPETUAL  GYRATION  OF  THE  THKEB   271 

extent  that,   memory  is  lost  and  disappars  —  the  three  other 
functions,  of  buddhi,  etc,,  are  all  incorporated/ 

The  order  of  succession  and  rotation  of  the  three  classes 
of  psychoses,  cognitive,  affective,  conative,  is  indicated  in  the 
following  : 


I  Mbh.t  Shfintt,  ch.  204. 

'  Out  of  knowledge  arises  desire  ;  out  of  desire,  krti  (or 
prayatna),  I.e.,  volition  :  out  of  that,  effort  ;  out  of  that, 
action.'  *  First  conies  knowledge  (of  a  thing)  ;  then  the  wish 
to  obtain  it  ;  then  the  purposeful  effort,  abhi-sandhi  ;  then  the 
action  ;  then  the  fruit.' 


knows  ;  then  ?*«*,  desires  ;  then  ^,  endea- 
vours —  this  is  one  of  the  commonplaces  of  Nyaya.  It  is  obvious 
that  intention,  purpose,  will,  volition,  conation,  innervation, 
exertion,  muscular  effort,  are  all  intermediate  states  of  transi- 
tion from  desire  to  action. 

In  Pura^ic  mythical  and  anthropomorphic  symbology, 
for  purposes  of  concrete  devotional  worship,  Vasudeva-Krshrja 
(an  incarnation  of  Vishnu-sattva,  representing  knowledge, 
wisdom)  ;  his  brother  Sankarshana-Bala-rama  (of  Rudra- 
tamas,  representing  the  anger-half  of  desire)  ;  his  son  Pra- 
dyumna  (of  Kama-Eros,  representing  the  love-half  thereof)  ; 
and  his  grandson  A-niruddha  (the  '  unrestrained/  representing 
action,  rajas),  stand,  respectively,  for  chitta,  buddhi  or  mahat, 
the  two  subdivisions  (anger  and  love)  of  ahamkara,  and  for 
manas  respectively  (Bhagavata,  III,  xxvi.) 

For  a  description  and  illustration  of  the  inhibitive,  veiling, 
blinding,  (dvaraQa),  distracting,  diverting,  selective,  mis- 
directive  and  incentive,  (vikNshepa),  preserving,  steadying, 
(sthiti),  fixing  and  regulating  (niyama)  effects  of  feeling, 
passion-desire-unreason,  and  of  its  connection  with  tamas, 
see  Hoffding,  Outlines  of  Psychology,  ch.  VI,  7.  Thus, 
".  .  .  Feeling  itself  may  have  a  hindering  effect  .  .  .  But  the 


272  INTERMEDIATE    STAGES  [SC.    OF 

step  once  taken,  feeling  is  the  faithful  guardian  of  what  has 
been  acquired.  Then  its  inertia"  (tamas)  "is  of  use  to 
knowledge"  (sattva),  etc.  (See  also  Herbert  Spencer,  Psy- 
chology, vol.  I,  p.  110). 

(Some  more  notes,  which  had  gathered  on  the  margins 
of  my  personal  copy  of  the  previous  editions  of  this  book, 
may  be  incorporated  here). 


Nyaya 


:,  TO:,  ^ 

I  Aitareya.  in,  2. 

'  Smrti,  memory,  has  the  past  for  object  ;  mati,  expecta- 
tion, opinion,  the  future,  the  corning  ;  buddhi,  perception,  the 
present,  •  that  which  is  immediately  before  it  ;  pra-jna,  the 
higher  mentation,  thinking,  ranges  over  and  covers,  simultane- 
ously, all  three  divisions  of  time  '.  '  Wish  to  hear  i.e.,  to 
learn,  scientific  curiosity  ',  attentive  listening  i.e.  absorption 
of  knowledge,  apprehension,  retention,  inferential  reasoning 
and  acceptance  of  a  fact,  (similar)  rejection  or  refutation  (of 
an  alleged  fact),  understanding  of  purport  and  purpose, 
knowledge  or  grasp  of  the  essential  truth  (of  a  subject)  —  these 
are  the  eight  functions  of  dhih,  intelligence  '  ;  (from  dha,  to 
place,  to  do,  to  deposit  ;  dhiyante  pad-arthah  asyam  iti 
dhih,  that  in  which  all  meanings  of  words,  i.e.,  notions  of 
things  meant  by  words,  are  deposited  ;  dhi  is  a  synonym 
for  buddhi).  Sensation,  perception,  concrete  or  factual 
knowledge,  abstract  thought  or  conceptual  knowledge 
or  generalisation,  retentive  intelligence,  view  (or  outlook, 
doctrine),  resolute  fortitude  (or  determination),  opinion, 
independence  of  mind,  propensity,  memory  or  recollection, 
imaginative  ideation,  volition,  asu  or  praya  or  innervation 
(of  a  motor  organ  or  muscle,  with  nerve-energy,  by  volitional 


P.,    CH.   Xl]          MIND    IS    BRAHMA,    IS    ALL  273 

effort  for  action),  kflma-desire,  vasha-  capability  or  will-power 
—  all  these  are  only  different  names  (of  different  aspects  or 
functions)  of  pra-jnana-consciousness  '. 


*Rt  f|  ^ir^T,  ^^  f? 

f|  5T^I,  *W:  3Tr^  ?fcf  I     Chhandogya,  vii,  3.  f^frj  %cl^  I  vh.  5. 


'  By  manas-mind,  man  resolves,  '  may  I  study  mantras  ', 
and  studies  ;  '  may  I  do  (such-and-such)  acts  ',  and  does  ; 
'  may  I  desire  children  and  domestic  animals,  and  (the  joys 
and  riches  of)  this  world  and  also  the  next  ',  and  desires  ; 
manas  is  the  soul,  the  Self,  is  all  this  world  (i.e.9  all  these 
worlds,  all  this,  all  objects)  ;  it  is  Brahma  ;  manas  should  be 
meditated  on,  propitiated,  worshipped,  given  devotion  to  (i.e.9 
should  be  purified,  elevated,  strengthened)  '  ;  '  Chitta  re- 
members '. 

The  same  three  functions,  jnana-ichchha-kriya,  cognition- 
desire-action,  with  the  fourth  all  -connecting  all-including 
memory  -expectation  -consciousness,  are  clearly  indicated  in 
these  sentences  of  the  Chhandogya.  Incidentally,  it  may 
be  noted  that  Plato,  in  Republic,  Bk.  iv,  (Jowett's  translation), 
distinguishes  "  three  principles  of  the  Soul,  Reason,  Desire, 
and  Passion  or  Spirit  or  Anger  "  ;  which  is  very  feeble  ;  in 
view  of  what  Indian  tradition  says,  from  Upanishats  down- 
wards ;  "  passion  or  spirit  or  anger  "  is  only  one  part  of 
'  desire  ',  and  "  reason  "  only  one  part  of  '  cognition  ',  and 
1  volition-action  '  is  not  discerned  and  counted  at  all  by  Plato. 

Mbh.t  Shanti-parva,  chs  :  238,  254,  258,  (also  203,  268, 
281,  and  others)  say  : 


TO 


18 


274  '  MAY   THIS    MY   MIND    BE    HOLY  '         [SC.    OF 

'  Mab  at  -Manas  manifested  first,  fast-rushing,  far  -travel- 
ling, ever-going,  desiring-and-doubting  (affirming-and-denying, 
imagining-and-effacing).  '  .  .  .  '  Beyond  Manas  is  buddhi  ; 
beyond  buddhi  is  At  ma/  ...  *  When  buddhi  undergoes 
emotion  or  any  definite  functioning  with  reference  to  a 
specific  object,  it  becomes  manas.'  .  .  .  Buddhi  determines, 
resolves,  ascertains,  makes  sure  ;  manas  expounds,  specifies.1 

There  is  a  grand  hymn  to  Manas,  of  six  mantras  (verses), 
in  Yajur-  V6da,  which  emphasises  the  all-enmeshing  quality 
and  speed  of  the  mind  : 


Jr  w:  ftrawssq 
sww, 


'  This  Mind  of  mine,  which  wanders  far  when  (I  am) 
awake,  and  comes  back  (to  me)  when  (I  am)  asleep  ;  which 
is  the  one  Light  of  lights  ;  which  is  known  as  pra-jfiana  and 
chetas  and  dhrti,  (knowledge,  desire-memory,  and  will-vohtion- 
action),  Immortal  Inner  Light  of  all  living  beings,  without 
which  nothing  can  be  done,  which  encompasses  all  past, 
present,  and  future  worlds,  in  which  are  interwoven  all  the 
minds  of  all  beings  —  may  that  Mind  of  mine  ever  ideate  holy 
thoughts,  ever  function  auspiciously,  beneficently  '. 

Chitta  has  been  said  in  some  of  the  above  texts,  to 
connect  all  three  divisions  of  time.  As  memory,  it  is  cognition 
of  an  object  with  the  additional  cognition  of  '  past-ness  ',  in 
the  sequence  of  its  experience  ;  as  expectation,  of  future-ness  ; 
as  direct  perception,  of  presentness  ;  (see  The  Mahatma 
Letters,  p.  194,  re  Time).  Other  texts  assign  the  same 
power  to  prajna  ;  others  to  buddhi  ;  they  ascribe  reasoning 
also  to  the  two  :  it  is  obvious  that  reasoning,  inference, 
proceeds  from  past  experience  to  future  similar  experience, 
connects  memory  and  expectation.  The  incessant  flow  and 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  GROUP-INDIVIDUALITY  275 

flux,  the  kaleidoscopic  assumptions  of  ever  new  forms  and 
figures  by  the  very  same  few  pieces  of  differently  coloured 
glass,  which  goes  on  perpetually  in  these  subtle  regions  of 
the  mind,  has  been  referred  to  before;  each  function  passes 
into  another,  imperceptibly  as  it  were.  Compare  the 
statement  in  The  Mahatma  Letters,  p.  187  :  "  As  no  two 
men,  not  even  two  photographs  of  the  same  person,  nor  yet 
two  leaves,  resemble,  line  for  line,  each  other,  so  no  two  states 
in  Deva-chan  are  like  ".  But  this  does  not  mean  that  the 
states  cannot  be  grouped  into  great  broad  classes.  Clouds 
at  sunset  in  the  rains  are  never  still,  are  ever  changing  their 
shapes  and  colors ;  but  the  main  seven  colors,  or  the  three  yet 
more  primary  ones,  are  always  there,  and  distinguishable. 
Deva-chan,  (?  Tibetan  for  Skt.  Deva- jana  or  Deva-sthSna,  god- 
world)  Svar-ga,  (*  where  sva,  Self,  goes  ')>  may  be  said  to  be 
the  Dream-world  par  excellence)  ;  all  mano-maya  and  vijSana- 
maya  ;  but  of  waking  dreams,  so  to  say,  vivid,  '  real ' ;  sva, 
Self,  Mind,  has  much  more  control  over  Matter  there  ;  Matter 
is  much  more  plastic. 

Incidentally  ;  the  fuller  the  comprehension  of  the  Nature 
of  Mind  and  mental  processes,  the  clearer  will  be  understood 
the  teachings  of  the  Masters,  as  regards  after-death  states 
of  normals  and  abnormals,  suicides,  '  accident-killed ', 
elementanes,  ghosts,  shells,  lower  principles,  higher  principles, 
disjunctions  of  the  principles  from,  and  fresh  conjunctions 
with,  each  other,  etc.  Each  individual  flowing  into  and  out 
of  all  others ;  individual  within  and  without  other  individuals  : 
the  principle  of  individuality-Manyness  as  well  as  all  indi- 
viduals, within  the  Principle  of  Universality  and  the  One- 
Universal — this  seems  to  be  the  key  to  the  problems  of 
personal  as  well  as  Impersonal  Immortality  and  all  subsidiary 
questions  ;  the  subject  will  come  up  for  treatment  again,  later 
on.  In  this  connection,  an  extract  from  Herodotus  (History, 
Bk.  IV,  ch.  184),  which  is  referred  to  in  the  Secret  Doctrine 
(iv,  331)  will  be  found  suggestive  :"  around  another  salt-hill 
and  spring  of  water,  dwell  a  people  called  the  Atarantians, 
who  alone  of  all  nations  are  destitute  of  names.  The  title 
of  Atarantians  [Atlanteans]  is  borne  by  the  whole  race  in 
common ;  but  the  men  have  no  particular  names  of  their 
own.  .  .  .  Near  the  salt  is  a  mountain  called  Atlas,  .  .  . 


276         SCATTERED    VS.   ONE-POINTED   WILL        [SC.    OF 

so-lofty  ...  the  natives  called  it  '  the  Pillar  of  Heaven  ', 
and  they  themselves  take  their  name  from  it,  being  called 
Atlantes  ..."  A  group  of  persons,  not  having  any  dis- 
tinctive, differentiating,  particular  names,  everyone  being 
known  as  and  called  *  Atarantian  ',  presumably  had  some  sort 
of  a  '  group-individuality  '  also  ;  somthiug  like  that  of  herds 
of  herbivores,  or  the  populations  of  termitariurns  and  bee-hives. 

In  the  last-quoted  Mbh.  text,  occurs  the  word  vy-ava- 
saya.  Ordinarily,  it  means  resolution,  determination,  in  the 
actional  sense,  rather  than  the  cogmtional  ;  f.i.  Gitjci,  ii,  41  ; 
*  The  resolute,  determined,  buddhi,  wtll,is  one-pointed,  single- 
minded,  keeps  one  aim  before  it  (and  therefore  acts,  and 
achieves  that  aim)  ;  while  the  irresolute  ones  dream  of  many 
objects  and  fritter  away  their  energy  in  endless  vague  plans  \ 
Here,  by  vyavasaya  is  meant  *  determination  to  act  '  rather 
than  '  ascertainment  of  fact  '.  The  cognitional  sense  is  usually 
expressed  by  adhy-ava-saya,  as  in  many  of  the  other  texts 
quoted  above.  The  word  vy-a-karana  has  now  come  techni- 
cally to  mean  grammar  ;  because  grammar  "  specifies  '  and 
'  limits  '  the  proper  use  of  language. 

Abhi-mana  and  its  derivatives,  as  meaning  ego-ising,  self- 
referring  self-emphasising,  self-asserting,  prideful,  overbear- 
ing desire,  occur  in  the  following  texts  :  — 


ssfft 


.  qjrfqf 


P.,    CH.   Xl]  EGO-ISTIC   PROUD    DESIRE  277 


Mbh  ,  Shanti,  chs.  308.  309,  310. 

'  This  Mahan-Atma,  for  the  sake  of  Krida,  Play,  abhi- 
manyati,  puts  upon  Him-Self,  takes  on,  a-buddhi,  a-vidyaf 
i-e.,  Prakrti,  with  its  three  gunas  ;  enters  into  these  countless 
yoni-s,  species  of  Jiving  things,  identifies  It-Self  with  Its 
companion,  its  garment  inside  which  it  dwells  ;  and  thinks 
[note  these  words]  "  I  am  Not  anything  Else  than  this 
body  *!  (  —  instead  of  thinking  its  whole  Thought,  "  than 
My-Self  "  —  )  ;  th'us,  it  abhi-manyati,  imagines,  as  attached 
to  It-self,  all  these  outer  garments,  vastrSni,  made  up  of  sattva- 
rajas-tamas,  dharma-artha-kama,  [note  the  correct  order]  ;  It 
thinks  "  I  am  all  these",  "  all  these  are  in  me  ",  these  indriyas, 
sensor-motor-organs  which  make  up  this  body.  Thus  the 
Infinite  abhi-manyate,  desirefully  imagines  It-Self  to  be 
finite  ". 


'  May   I   be  so-and-so,   I  am  so-and-so  '  —  this  imposition 
of  other  things  upon  Self  is  abhi-inana. 


*  The  essence  of  chiti  is  re-cognition,  prati-ava-marsha, 
ability  to  recognise  that  this  is  the  same  as  was  perceived 
before.  It  gathers  up  and  preserves  and  holds  all  experiences  '. 


,  5f«R%  ^  « 


1  Mbh.  Shanti,  ch.  427  ;  also  chs.  108,  180,  316,  317,  357;  Ann-gift, 
ch.  26  ;  Vdyu  Pur&na  Sjshti  Prakarapa,  ch.  iv  ;  etc.  : 


278     ALTRU-ISTIC   RENUNCIANT'S   SOCIALISM    [SC.  OF 

(See  also  Durga-Sapta-  Shaft,  and  my  Manava-Dharma- 
Sarah,  in  which  these  and  other  synonyms,  and  names 
according  with  transformations  during  gradual  manifestation, 
vyakta-pary-aya  and  aham-kara-pary-aya,  of  Mind-Brahma, 
are  repeated  over  and  over  again,  and  explained  etymologically  ; 
whereby  the  transformations  become  intelligible). 

We  have  seen  before  (pp.  121  —  131)  how  certain  texts 
play,  in  riddle,  with  the  word  anyat.  Another  text  of  the 
same  kind  occurs  in  Mbh.,  Shanti,  ch.  325  :  — 


It  occurs  in  the  course  of  a  great  debate  between  the  lady 

Sphilosopher-yogini)  Sulabha  and  king  Dharma-dhvaj  a  Janaka 
of  the  famous  dynasty  of  Janakas,  philosopher-kings,  also 
known  as  vi-deha  ;  one  of  whom,  Sira-dhvaja  Janaka,  was  the 
father  of  Sita  and  father-in-law  of  Rama).  Dharma-dhvaja 
was  a  disciple  of  the  Sankhya  Teacher  Pancha-Shikha.  The 
text  quoted  has  a  different  meaning,  in  the  immediate 
context  ;  but  that  meaning  is  of  no  particular  significance  ; 
the  other  interpretation,  of  deep  significance,  is  also  possible 
here,  as  in  the  other  cases  (pp.  121  —  131),  and  is  appropriate 
also,  in  view  of  the  nature  of  the  whole  discussion  on 
'  philosophy,  in  theory  and  in  practical  daily  life  '. 


«r  '  arfiw*ft  ' 

Valmiki,  Ramayana,  II   ch.  88,  24—29. 

'  Enemies  never  harbour  any  proud  desire  to  attack  the 
kingdom  of  Ayodhya  (even  after  Rama  has  gone  away  to  the 
forests,  on  his  four  teen  -years'  exile,  because  it  is  guarded  by 
his  fame,  and  the  fame  of  the  good  and  strong  government 
established  there)  ;  they  avoid  it  like  poisoned  food  '. 


I     Bhfigavata. 


1  (For  the  renunciant  sanyasi)  necessary  food  is  the  only 
right  possession  ;  he  who  desires  more  is  as  a  thief,  and 
should  be  punished  '. 


P.,  CH.  Xl]  FACULTY-PSYCHOLOGY  279 

These  additional  texts  will,  it  is  hoped,  enable  the  reader 
to  judge  more  confidently  the  import  and  the  correspondences 
of  the  three  factors  of  the  several  triads  which  have  been 
dealt  with  in  this  note. 

The  word  *  faculties  '  has  been  used  above  wittingly.  It 
is  true  that  modern  western  text -books  profess  to  have  given 
up  the  old  '  faculty-psychology ' ;  and  the  abandonment  is 
justifiable,  but  with  reservations.  We  have  seen  above  that 
the  ancient  Upanishats  strongly  affirm  the  indivisible  unity  of 
the  mind ;  but  that  does  not  entail  the  avoidance  of  all  classi- 
fication of  psychical  phenomena,  and  of  the  consequent 
discernment  of  corresponding  'powers/  shakes,  i.e.,  '  faculties,' 
in  the  soul.  The  doctrine  of  '  faculties  '  was  run  to  an  extreme. 
There  ought  not  to  be  a  running  to  the  opposite  extreme.  It 
has  been  pointed  out  that  the  three  functions  of  the  mind  are 
distinguishable  but  not  separable.  From  this  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  word  *  faculties  '  should  not  be  used  in  con- 
nection with  the  mind ;  for  '  faculties  '  may  also  be  regarded 
as  distinguishable  but  not  separable.  Strictly,  prthaktva, 
separateness,  separability,  complete  and  perfect,  does  not 
exist  even  in  the  realm  of  matter  :  for  the  most  utterly  separate- 
seeming  pieces  of  matter  are  found,  on  scrutiny,  to  be  floating 
in  and  connected  together  by  a  subtler  kind  of  matter  of  which 
these  separate-seeming  pieces  are,  directly,  or  indirectly  some 
sort  of  condensation.  The  organs  of  audition,  vision,  etc.,  may 
be  said  to  be  separate,  but  scarcely  the  '  faculties  '  thereof,  which 
all  inhere,  as  '  powers/  in  the  indivisible  soul.  And  even  this 
separateness  of  the  organs  is  not  quite  perfect  separateness. 
Even  physically  they  are  connected  together  by  nerves.  And 
in  abnormal  psychical  states,  persons  have  '  seen '  with 
the  '  navel/  while  their  eyes  were  tightly  closed  and  band- 
aged ;  and  *  optophones '  have  been  recently  invented.  The 
indication  is  that  the  potentialities  of  all  kinds  of  sensations 
are  present  in  all  the  sensor-nerves — on  the  general  principle 
that  all  is  everywhere  and  always — though  one  potency  pre- 
ponderates and  has  become  act-ual  in  one  special  nerve  ;  as  is 
easy  to  understand  when  we  remember  that  evolutionists  have 
ascertained  that  all  the  sensor ies  have  differentiated  out  of 
one  primal  nerve  of  '  touch '  (as  moderns  say ;  of  *  audi- 
tion/ as  ancients  say,  though  some  verses  of  Anw-Gf/3, 


280      SEPARABLE    AND    INDISTINGUISHABLE       [SC.  OF 

which  refer  to  sparsha-vidyut,  c  touch-electricity,*  seem  to 
lend  some  support  to  the  modern  view  also).  We  have 
also  to  remember  that,  with  progress  of  psycho-physical 
research  and  discovery  in  the  '  localisation  of  functions/  it  is 
being  established  more  and  more  clearly,  every  day,  that  certain 
nerve-parts,  nerve- tissues,  nerve-lobes,  and  ganglia,  pre- 
ponderantly serve  as  channels  and  organs  of  one  or  another 
of  the  three  main  functions  of  the  mind  ;  so  that  the  '  inner 
organ  '  is  beginning  to  be  seen  as  not  wholly  dissimilar  from 
the  outer  organs ;  and  vice  verse. 

In  short,  the  distinction  between  '  distinguishability '  and 
'  separability  '  too,  is  but  one  of  degree,  ultimately  ;  for  buddhi, 
which  '  distinguishes,'  is  itself  jada,  '  unconscious,'  being  a 
transformation  of  Prakr^i,  or  Root-matter,  as  Sankhya  says  ; 
and  Prakrfci  again  is  but  an  '  idea,'  in  turn,  an  '  eject '  and 
*  project '  of  Consciousness,  made  of  veritable  Conscious-stuff ; 
'  without '  and  '  within  '  being  facets  of  the  same  ;  appear- 
ance of  contrast  and  opposition  here  also  being  only  illusory, 
such  as  underlies  all  dvam-dvam,  pairs  of  opposed  relatives, 
of  the  World- Process  ;  while  Continuity,  Organic  Unity,  and, 
finally,  complete  Unity  and  Identity  of  all  (in  One  Universal 
Consciousness,  imag-in-ing  all -things  al-ways)  is  the  real  fact.1 

(xi)  Finally,  the  difference  or  distinction  between  Buddhi 
and  Manas  may  be  indicated  from  a  somewhat  different 
standpoint. 

Bergson  among  recent  philosophers  in  the  West  is 
specially  noted  for  having  pointedly  drawn  attention  anew  to 
the  fact,  latterly  tending  largely  to  be  overlooked  there,  "  that 
deeper  than  any  intellectual  bond  which  binds  a  conscious 
creature  to  the  reality  in  which  it  lives  and  which  it  may 
come  to  know,  there  is  a  vital  bond  ".  "  Our  knowledge  rests 

1  In  one  way,  Sankhya  may  be  said  to  go  beyond  the  extremist 
''behaviourists'  of  Pavlov's  and  Watson's  (Russian  and  U.  S.  American) 
Schools  ;  but  the  very  great  difference  between  the  two  is  that  Sankhya 
affirms  '  mind  '  as  a  fact,  though  material ;  while  the  latter  regard  it 
as  an  illusion,  as  non-est,  and  thus  stultify  their  own  opinions  and 
minds ;  for  they  would  be  also  only  *  conditioned  reflexes ' ,  therefore 
liable  to  change  with  changed  conditions,  therefore  unreliable  and 
untrue. 


P.,  CH.  Xl]       INTUITION    AND    INTELLECTION  281 

on  an  intuition  which  is  not,  at  least  which  is  never  purely, 
intellectual.  This  intuition  is  of  the  very  essence  of  life, 
and  the  intellect  is  formed  from  it  by  life,  or  is  one  of  the 
forms  that  life  has  given  to  it  in  order  to  direct  the  activity 
and  serve  the  purpose  of  the  living  beings  that  are  endowed 
with  it."  "  Kowledge  is  for  life  and  not  life  for  knowledge." 
"  One  thing  is  certain,  that  if  you  are  convinced  by  this  or 
any  other  philosophy,  it  is  because  you  have  entered  into  it 
by  sympathy,  and  not  because  you  have  weighed  its  argu- 
ments as  a  set  of  abstract  propositions."  "  Consciousness  of 
living  is  the  intuition  of  life."  "  Reality  is  life."  "  Why  is 
there  any  realitv  at  all  ?  Why  does  something  exist  rather 
than  nothing  ?  Why  is  there  an  order  in  reality  rather  than 
disorder  ?  When  we  characterise  reality  as  life,  the  question 
seems  so  much  more  pressing,  for  the  subject  of  it  seems  so 
much  fuller  of  content,  than  when  we  set  over,  against  one 
another,  bare,  abstract  categories,  like  the  being  and  nothing 
that  Hegel  declared  to  be  identical.  It  seems  easy  to  imagine 
that  life  might  cease  and  then  nothing  would  remain.  In  this 
way  we  come  to  picture  to  ourselves  a  nought  spread  out 
beneath  reality,  a  reality  that  has  come  to  be  and  that  might 
cease  to  be,  and  then  again  there  would  be  nought.  This  idea 
of  an  absolute  nothing  is  a  false  idea,  arising  from  an  illusion 
of  the  understanding.1  \bsolute  nothing  is  unthinkable.  The 
problems  that  arise  out  of  the  idea  we  seem  to  have  of  it  are 
unmeaning  .  .  ."  "Why,  at  ordinary  times,  does  it  seem  so 
certain  that  it  is  material  things  that  endure,  and  that  time 
is  a  mechanical  play  of  things  that  themselves  do  not  change  ? 
It  is  due  to  two  fundamental  illusions  of  the  mind  .  .  . 
The  reality  of  life  is  essentially  freedom  .  .  ." 

The  above  quotations  are  taken  from  a  little  monograph 
on  Bergson's  Philosophy  of  Change  by  Mr.  Wildon  Carr.a 
They  help  to  show  how  near  he  has  come  to  many  VedSntic 
conclusions — that  a  theory  of  knowledge  is  but  a  part 
of  the  theory  of  Life  (which  is  knowledge  plus  desire-feeling 

1  See  p.  120,  supra. 

3  Jackson's  People's  Books  series.  For  further  scrutiny  of  Berg- 
son's  philosophy,  and  objections  to  what  seen  to  be  his  defects,  or  even 
extravagances,  see  The  Science  of  the  Self,  Index-references  to  Bergson. 


282  PHILOSOPHIES  OF  CHANGE  [SC.    OP 

plus  action)  ;  that  our  knowledge  differs  with  our  attitude  ; 
that  sympathy  means  understanding,  and  antipathy,  misunder- 
standing, (the  vedanti  would  add  that  raga,  interestedness, 
implies  error  in  understanding,  and  vai-ragya,  disinterestedness, 
true  understanding)  ;  that  our  daily  life  is  based  on  illusion 
(Vedanta  would  add  that  the  basic  illusion  is  that  which  takes 
finite  for  Infinite,  and  vice  versa,  and  all  others  follow  from  it)  ; 
and  that  freedom  is  real  life  (final  freedom,  moksha,  from 
that  basic  illusion).  But  though  Bergson  has  come  so 
near,  he  would  probably  not  yet  quite  accept  the  exact 
v6dantic  conclusions.  His  own  '  attitude  '  is  one  of  raga, 
of  inclination  towards  change^  and  progress  always,  rather 
than  of  vi-raga  and  inclination  towards  changelessness. 
Characteristically,  Bergson's  philosophy  is  known  as  '  the 
Philosophy  of  Change  '.  He  is  a  worshipper  of  Shakti-  Power, 
not  of  Shiva-Peace  (see  p.  180,  f.n.,  and  p.  242,  f.n.,  supra). 

At  the  same  time,  he  has  done  good  service  by  his  work, 
and  particularly  by  laying  stress  on  Intuition  as  contrasted 
with,  or  at  least,  distinguished  from,  Intelligence  ;  stress,  which 
is  likely  to  make  certain  aspects  of  Yoga  and  Vedanta  clearer 
to  the  modern  mind.  In  a  certain  aspect,  his  Intuition  (in- 
cluding Instinct)  corresponds  with  Mahat  or  Buddhi  (identified 
with  Chitta)  ;  and  his  Intelligence  with  Manas  (including 
Aham-kara). 


The  following  quotations  will  help  to  show. 


er 

f|  1 
I  Mbh.,  Vana,  ch.  183. 


P.,    CH.    Xl]       UNIVERSAL  AND  INDIVIDUAL  MIND      283 


tW.,  Shanti,  ch.  254  ;  see  also  ch.  203. 

r  sf  *TRRt  OTTO  tftpBrcnn  ; 

g  i 


3  aurRr,  fa^taeg  f:  i  Charaka,  i,  i. 

*  Distinguishing  of  the  characteristics  of  Buddhi  and 
Manas  is  one  of  the  final  and  most  important  duties  of  the 
psychologist.  Buddhi  is  general  awareness,  which  clings  to 
the  Universal  Self,  and  is  always  a-search  for  It,  i.e.,  for  the 
Unity  in  all  things  ;  and  is  wholly  dependent  upon  it  ;  making 
its  generalisations  only  by  diligently  discerning  unity  or 
similarity  in  diversity.  It  becomes  manifest  in  and  by  ut- 
pada,  up-rising,  (appearing  *above  the  threshold  of  conscious- 
ness), and  then  takes  shape  as  general  concepts  or  laws  and 
generalisations,  vidhiyate.  Manas  on  the  other  hand,  is  ut- 
panna,  '  uprisen,'  active,  selective,  attentive  mind,  '  risen 
above  '  the  threshold  of  consciousness  (laya-sthana).  Buddhi 
specified,  particularised,  by  a  vi-kara,  a  change,  a  '  formation/ 
a  condensation,  by  '  wanting  something  '  definite,  by  selecting 
something  out  of  the  whole  field  (kshetra)  and  concentrating 
on  it,  becomes  Manas  ;  it  takes  birth  '  and  shape  in  a 
*  purpose,'  a  karya,  when  it  wishes  to  do  something  ;  (other- 
wise it  remains  a  sub-consciously  or  supra-consciously  all- 
embracing  '  great  '  memory,  '  great  self,'  Mahan  Atma, 
Mahat).  Because  Buddhi,  as  the  first  transformation  of  primal 
Prakyti,  has  the  three  gu$as,  therefore  Manas  (including 
Aham-kara),  the  second  transformation  thereof,  also  manifests 
the  three  in  operation.' 

According  to  the  Sankhya-scheme,  aham-kara,  the  princi- 
ple of  egoistic  desire,  in  its  three  subdivisions,  as  rajasa- 
taijasa,  gives  birth  to  manas  ;  as  sattvika-vaikarika,  to  the 
ten  sensor  and  motor  organs  ;  as  tamasa-bhutadi,  to  the  five 


284        DESIRE-ENERGY    THE    EGOISM-MAKER       [SC.    OF 

sense-objects,  tan-ma$ra-s,  ancj  t^e  corresponding  bhutas,  i.e., 
the  sensable-quahties  or  sensations-as-such,  and  their  sub- 
strata. The  reason  why  manas  as  the  chief  indriya,  organ 
or  instrument,  of  the  subject-consciousness,  on  one  side ;  the 
ten  outer  organs,  in  between  ;  and  the  five  great  classes  of 
*  objects  ',  on  the  other  side  ;  should  all  be  derived  from  aham- 
kara,  in  the  Sankhya  scheme,  may  be  explained  thus.  It  is 
Desire-Energy  which  connects  Subject  and  Object,  and  makes 
the  subject  an  organism,  investing  it  with  organs  made  of  the 
same  '  material '  as  the  *  objects ' — as  will  appear  more  fully  in 
the  later  chapters.  This  Desire-Energy  is  the  very  core  of 
the  separate  ego,  the  very  principle  of  egoism,  as  said  above. 
It  connects  an  *  1  '  with  a  '  this,'  spiritual  jiva  with  material 
atom,  or  rather,  indeed,  it  marks  off  and  makes  the  indi- 
vidual jiva  out  of  Universal  Spirit,  and  singular  atom  (or 
singular  *  body ')  out  of  pseudo-universal  Matter.  Hence,  it 
may  well  be  said  to  be  the  source  from  which  the  two  sets  of 
products,  subjective  and  objective,  the  instruments,  karanas, 
organs  (subdivided  into  (i)  manas,  as  chief,  and  (ii)  the  other 
ten,  as  subordinate),  and  (in)  their  objects,  are  all  derived. 

'The  element  or  feature  of  generality,  universality,  'com- 
monness,' c  sameness/  samanya,  (which  belongs  to  buddhi), 
corresponds  to  unity,  sameness  of  purpose  or  intention,  and 
co-operation  ;  and  it  makes  for  the  increase,  the  expansion,  of 
every  bhava,  '  existence,  *'  concept,'  (and  sympathy),  by  in- 
clusion of  more  and  more  '  propers  '  under  the  '  common '. 
The  element  of  vishesha,  particularity,  speciality  (which 
belongs  to  manas),  corresponds  to  'difference'  from  each 
other,  to  divergence  of  purpose  and  intention,  to  separateness 
and  misunderstanding,  and  makes  for  decrease  and  decay, 
contraction  and  enfeebling,  of  all  kinds  of  '  existence,' 
'  principles,'  '  concepts ',  into  minute  details.'  We  have  seen 
above  how  extremes  meet ;  and  how  the  perfectly  minute,  the 
infinitesimal,  the  utterly  singular,  the  true  point  and  moment  (or 
instant),  is  the  genuine  *  here  and  now/  and  is  indistinguishable 
from  the  perfectly  vast,  the  Infinite,  the  utterly  Universal, 
Boundless  Circumference,  Unlimited  and  Eternal. 

The  fundamental  ideas  are  the  universality  of  the  Self  and 
the  singularities  of  the  Not-Self.  Out  of  this  pair,  and  always 
bound  up  with  each  other  in  inseparable  Relation,  issue  all 


P.,    CH.    Xl]  CORRESPONDENT    PAIRS  285 

other  corresponding  pairs,  as  said  before.  Of  these  pairs,  the 
following  may  be  mentioned  here  for  our  present  psychological 
purpose. 

Amurta  and  mur^a,  formless  and  formed,  abstract  and 
concrete,  ideal  and  material ;  prakrti  and  vikrti,  unmanifest 
nature  and  particular  manifestation  or  transformation  ;  samanya 
and  vishesha,  general  and  particular,  (the  name  for  the  un- 
breakable relation  between  the  two  being  samavaya,  in  the 
technicology  of  the  Vaisheshika  system) ;  jati  and  vyakft, 
species  and  individual ;  para-samanya  and  apara- vishesha, 
sutnmum  gentts  and  iufima  species  or  rather  singnlaris  (the 
ultimate  or  highest  universal  and  the  final  or  lowest  particular 
or  singular  or  individual)  :  samashti  and  vyashti,  whole  and 
part ;  pra^ka  and  pratima,  nature-force  and  anthropomorphous 
image  ' ;  pratyaya  and  nama-rupa,  concept  and  name-form  ; 
shastra  and  krtya,  science  and  application  ;  naya  and  chara, 
theory  and  practice :  siddhanta,  raddhanta,  mula-sutra,  or  bija- 
man^ra,  and  prayoga,  principles  and  execution ;  Intuition- 
instinct  and  Intelligence,  buddhi  and  manas  ;  insight  of  genius 
and  argument,  pratibha  and  tarka  ;  yoga-ja  jiiana  and  prakrta- 
jfiana,  siddha-drshti  and  laukika-drshti,  satya-jn3naand  mi^nya 
jnana,  true  and  intuitive  understanding  by  love  and  sympathy 
i.e.,  'common-feeling/  and  false  intelligence  or  misunderstanding 
by  antipathy  or  diverse  and  opposite  feeling;  vayam  and 
aham,  We  and  I ;  sarva-hi^a  and  sva-hita,  the  good  of  all  and 
the  good  of  myself  ;  a-khanda-che^ana  and  khanda- jnana,  con- 
tinuum of  consciousness  and  particular  partial  knowledge; 
kshetra  and  vishesha,  vishaya  or  lakshya,  general  field  of  con- 
sciousness, and  particular  objective  or  focus  of  attention  therein  ; 
a-vyakta  and  abhi-vyak^a,  latent  and  patent,  un -manifest 
and  manifest ;  an-ud-buddha  and  ud-buddha,  un-  or  sub-  or 
supra-conscious  and  conscious  :  supta  and  jdgrat,  dormant  and 
wakeful;  nirodha  and  vyutthana,  obliviscence  and  remi- 
niscence, inhibition  and  exhibition  ;  jlva  and  deha,  soul  and 
body,  which  is  *'  the  soul  made  visible " ;  yuga-paf  and 
a-yuga-pat,  simultaneous  knowledge  of  many  or  all,  and  suc- 
cessive knowledge  of  particulars,  one  by  one,  which  are  the 
respective  characteristics  oJ  buddhi  and  manas. 

All  these  pairs  are  allied,  are  aspects  of  each  other.     And 
the  process  of  yoga-development  of  the  soul  seems  essentially 


286  BRAIN    AS    INHIBITOR-FOCUSSER          [SC.    OF 

to  consist  in  regulating,  restraining,  controlling,  selectively  and 
attentively  turning  in  one  direction  (by  sam-yama),  and  inhibit- 
ing along  all  other  directions  (by  nirodha),  the  activity  (vr$0 
of  chitta-nmnas-arjui,  after  minimising  its  egoistic  restless- 
ness (by  vairagya),  and  making  its  emotional  or  '  affective  ' 
tone  as  placid  (full  of  prasada)  as  possible,  by  various 
means  mentioned  in  Yoga- works.  In  this  way,  individual 
mind  or  ahamkara-rnanas  deliberately  orients  itself  towards, 
and  makes  itself  the  channel,  vessel,  receiver,  missionary, 
of  Universal  Mind,  Mahat-Buddhi  ;  and  replaces  intel- 
ligence by  intuition.  All  the  ways  of  prayer  are  but  ways  of 
such  opening  of  oneself  to  the  inflow  of  the  larger  Self  ;  and 
all  '  willing  '  is  also  but  a  disguised  form  of  '  prayer ;'  for  every 
exercise  of  individual  force  and  free-will  is  ultimately  and 
really  but  the  working  of  the  Universal  Force  of  Universal 
Self-Will. 

A  further  quotation  from  Bergson,  (from  a  report  of  his 
address  as  President  of  the  Psychical  Research  Society,  in 
1913),  may  help  to  illustrate  the  relationship  between  buddhi 
and  manas,  and  also,  incidentally,  the  methods  of  soul-educa- 
tion, mind-development,  and  psychical  extension  and  expan- 
sion of  -faculty.  "  Formerly  it  was  held  as  a  scientific  dogma 
that  the  brain  was  the  store-house  of  memories.  .  .  .  (The 
truth  rather  is)  that  it  is  the  function  of  the  brain  to  recall 
things  remembered,  an  instrument  to  bring  back  the  remem- 
brance of  an  action,  and  to  prolong  the  action  in  movements, 
and  enable  the  mind  to  make  adjustment  to  life.  The  brain 
is  not  the  seat  of  memory,  not  an  organ  of  preservation.  It  is 
the  organ  by  which  the  mind  adjusts  itself  to  environment, 
prepares  the  body  for  the  realisation  of  what  the  mind  has 
apprehended.  It  marks  the  useless  part  of  the  past,  and  lets 
through  only  those  remembrances  which  are  useful  to  serve 
the  present.  Consciousness  transcends  the  brain,  is  partially 
independent  of  it,  and  preserves  the  whole  of  the  past  intact  in 
every  detail.  ...  In  certain  cases,  as  when  drowning,  or 
in  battle,  the  total  past  of  a  man  is  unmasked,  and  the  whole 
of  it  comes  rushing  in,  because  the  normal  necessity  of  fixing 
attention  on  the  present,  and  still  more  the  future,  in  order  to 
live,  is  relaxed,  and  all  the  faculties  of  attention  turn  back  to 
that  past  which  it  is  the  business  of  the  brain  normally  to 


P.,    CH.   Xl]       '  PRESENT  '    AND    '  CONSCIOUS  '  287 

hide  from  him,  in  order  that  he  may  keep  his  attention  con- 
centrated on  the  present  and  the  future.  .  .  .  The  inference 
from  the  fact  that  the  consciousness  is  a  larger  reality  than  the 
brain  ...  is  ...  that  the  separation  between  individual 
consciousness(es)  may  be  much  less  radical  than  we  suppose. 
*  .  .  Consciousness  in  individuals  passes  into  that  of  other 
individuals,  and  is  not  cut  up  as  it  seems  to  be." 

All  these  remarks  may  not  be  endorsed,  exactly  as  they 
stand,  by  the  Yoga-system  of  practical  or  applied  psychology  ; 
but  their  general  trend  seems  to  agree  with  that  of  the  latter. 
Thus,  in  the  full  sense,  Consciousness,  or,  if  that  word  be 
preferred,  (the 'Unconscious,  or  the  Principle  of  Life  and  Con- 
sciousness), preserves  not  only  the  whole  of  the  past  intact,, 
but  also  already  and  always  contains  the  whole  of  the  future 
also,  according  to  NyEya  and  Yoga-Vedanta ;  and  it  is 
this  fact  which  makes  memory  and  expectation  possible.1 

1  The  Unconscious  is,  after  all,  nothing  so  very  mysterious  ;  i.e.,  it 
is  not  more  mysterious  then  anything  else  !  You  listen  to  a  question  of 
many  words,  or  a  long  lecture.  All  the  mass  of  words  goes  into  your 
ears.  Each  complete  word-sound  or  sentence-sound  produces  a  meaning, 
an  ap-prehension,  a  concept,  an  idea,  in  your  mind,  and  then  disappears. 
'  Disappears  '  means — goes  into  the  Un-Conscious  or  sub-or-supra-Con- 
scious.  Then,  when  the  question  is  completed,  you  make  a  reply  ;  when 
the  lecture  is  finished,  you  get  up  and  make  a  long  criticism.  The 
thoughts,  notions,  ideas,  come  welling  up  in  your  Mind  or  '  Conscious- 
ness ' — from  '  nowhere  ' ,  from  the  Unconscious  ;  and  you  go  on  clothing 
them  in  words,  which  also  come  welling  up  from  the  same  '  nowhere  '. 
Every  sentence,  every  pageful,  you  speak  or  write  or  read,  illustrates  the 
same  process.  You  have  an  enormous,  indeed  an  infinite,  collection  of 
'things',  of  'books'.  You  cannot  use  all  of  them  at  once.  Strictly, 
you  can  use  only  one  particular  thing,  at  one  time,  in  one  place.  But  this 
'  one  '  is  undefinable,  is  in-de-finite.  It  is  always  a  more  definite  (on 
rather,  less  in-de-finite)  core,  plus  a  less  definite  (or  rather,  more  in- 
de-fimte  fringe.  Everything  shades  and  fades  away  into  everything  else. 
The  selection  of  goods,  the  almirah  of  books,  that  you  are  more 
frequently  using,  in  any  given  time  and  place,  day,  month,  year,  or  life- 
time, and  roon^,  house,  town,  country — that  is  your  '  conscious  ',  com- 
paratively. The  rest  is  your  Unconscious,  again  comparatively.  Finite 
conscious  plus  the  remainder  of  the  Infinite,  is  Universal  Mind,  Total 
Unconsciousness  or  Consciousness — just  as  you  please  to  call  it.  Each 
portion  of  that  Mind  is  '  conscious '  to  or  in  some  one  jiva,  one  in- 
dividual, so  that  the  whole  of  the  Unconscious  is  Conscious,  too,  in  the 
Totality  of  all  pseudo-infinite  jivas,  at  every  moment  of  pseudo-eternal 
time,  in  all  pseudo-infinite  space.  As  the  '  present  *  is  a  *  slab '  or 
'  chunk  '  of  time,  cut  out  of  the  Time-Continuum,  over  which  individual 


288  PSYCHO-ANALYSTS'    EXTREMISM  [SC.    OF 

Nyaya-sutra,  III,  ii,  42,  expressly  says, 


'  Memory  (of  the  past,  and  also  of  the  future,  which  is 
called  expectation)  is  possible  only  because  the  very  nature  of 
Self  is  that  of  Eternal  All-knower.'  The  Bhashya  on  this 
explains  that  Self  is  in  constant  contact  with  all  knowledge* 
of  past,  present,  and  future. 

The  system  of  yoga  of  Yoga-sutra,  seems  to  be  a 
system  of  profound  education,  of  training  of  the  mind  and 
brain  for  more  and  more  effective  use  ;  like  the  training  of 
the  eye  or  the  ear  or  the  hands.  It  may,  indeed,  be  called, 
not  inappropriately,  '  the  Science  and  Art  of  Attention  '. 
All  possible  sounds,  all  possible  colours  and  forms,  are  there, 
in  space  ever  existent  in  the  universe  ;  but  human  eye,  human 

memory-expectation  can  range,  so  the  '  conscious  '  is  a  '  slab  '  or  '  block  ' 
or  'piece',  cut  out  of  the  Consciousness-  (or  Un-consciousness)- 
continuum,  over  which  mdividnal  memory-expectation  can  range. 
This  Universal  Mind,  Brahma,  the  flrst  manifestation  of  Brahma,  is 
called  Umm-ul-Kitab,  '  Mother  of  Scriptures,  Revelations  ',  in  Sufism. 

What  about  the  claims  of  psycho-analysts,  if  what  is  said  above 
is  correct  ?  The  substance  of  them  stands  and  remains  valuable,  after 
pruning  of  all  exaggerations.  They  draw  the  lives  too  hard  and  fast  between 
"  suppression  '  and  '  re-pression  ',  '  unconscious  '  and  '  pre-conscious  '  and 
'fore-conscious',  normal  forgetting  and  abnormal  forgetting,  etc.: 
and,  for  many  mental  phenomena,  they  have  quite  unnecessarily  coined 
new  and  imposing-looking  words,  difficult  to  remember,  and  themselves 
very  liable  to  be  '  suppressed  '  and  '  repressed  '  into  the  '  unconscious  '  ' 
If  we  only  bear  in  mind  the  facts  (1)  that  all  the  '  abnormal  '  phenomena, 
which  psycho-analysts  have  noted,  studied,  and  expounded,  are  only 
'  excesses  '  of  those  emotional  experiences  which  all  '  normal  '  persons 
undergo,  now  and  then,  more  or  less  ;  (2)  that  three  fourths  of  the  cure  of 
psycho-neurotic  trouble  consists  in  persuading  the  patient  gradually  to 
introspect  and  understand  the  true  nature  of  his  malady,  and  (3)  that  the 
remaining  fourth  of  the  cure  is  achieved  by  so  strengthening  the 
patient's  will,  that  he  becomes  able  to  control  his  excess  of  emotion—if 
these  facts  are  borne  in  mind,  psycho-analytic  literature  becomes  very 
helpful  in  understanding  Yoga-literature  ;  and  Yoga-literature  becomes 
suggestive  of  ways  to  persuade  the  patient  and  strengthen  his  will. 

Pratyak-chetana,  *  turning  the  mind's  eye  inwards 
from  outwards/  is  the  great  feat,  the  miracle,  which  '  makes 
the  whole  world  new  '  ;  it  is  the  one  sole  secret  of  real 
conversion,  real  re-education,  '  second  birth  ',  re-generation. 


P.,    CH.    Xl]     RE-EDUCATION    BY   INTROSPECTION      289 

ear,  is  riot,  in  the  first  place,  so  constructed  as  to  be  able 
to  catch  all  kinds  of  them  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  of 
those  that  it  can  perceive,  it  actually  perceives  only  those 
towards  which  it  is  diligently  and  attentively  turned. 
It  is  much  the  same  as  with  telescopes  and  microscopes; 
their  powers  are  limited,  and  they  must  be  very  carefully 
adjusted,  if  they  are  to  show  with  the  greatest  possible  effect- 
iveness, what  is  wanted  to  be  seen.  The  brain  seems  to 
be  an  *  organ/  the  physical  coefficient  of  the  psychical  '  inner 
organ/  as  the  eye-ball  or  the  ear-mechanism  is  that  of  the 
*  faculty  '  of  vision  or  audition  ;  and  its  realm  and  domain  is 
the  '  field  of  consciousness  '  generally.  All  possible  psychical 
(or  psycho-physical,  or  spirituo-material,  for  the  two  are 
utterly  interdependent  and  inseparable)  experiences,  thoughts, 
emotions,  plans,  are  always  existent  in  the  total  whole.  The 
individual  mind,  manas-brain,  catches  and  manifests  such  of 
them  as  it  turns,  or  is  turned,  towards.  To  turn,  deliberately, 
and  not  be  turned,  helplessly  ;  and  not  only  turn  one's  face, 
intellectually,  towards  the  face  of  the  object  sought  to  be 
'understood/'  but  to  enter  with  one's  heart,  vitally,  into  the 
heart  of  it :  to  identify  one's  own  life  and  being  with  that 
other's  life  and  being,  by  sympathy,  by  love— this  is,  it  would 
seem,  to  replace  intellect,  which  works  from  '  outside/  by 
intuition  which  works  from  '  inside '.  Generally  speaking,  we 
'  understand  '  what  we  love,  intuitively  ;  the  mother  intuitively 
perceives  the  requirements  of  the  child  ;  she  fails,  very  often, 
because  undeveloped  or  ill -cultured  but  insistent  intellect 
interferes  ;  in  order  to  '  understand '  another  properly,  we  must 
'  get  into  his  skin/  '  see  with  his  eyes  ' ;  the  meaning  and 
definition  of  samadhi,  in  yoga- works,  seems  to  be  just  this. 
Yet  intellect  and  intuition  have  to  check  and  correct  each 
other  too. 

After  the  needed  understanding  has  been  gained  through 
intuition,  it  may  be  utilised  in  various  ways  by  intelligence* 
To  apply  to  requirements,  to.  carry  out  into  '  action/  is  pre- 
eminently the  work  of  manas  ;  as  to  '  ascertain  '  what  the  facts 
and  laws  and  great  general  principles  are,  is  that  of  buddhi. 
AH  great  discoveries,  in  their  first  form  of  luminous  hypothesis, 
may  be  said  to  be  the  work  of  such  intuition  ;  subsequent  con* 
crete  details  and  utilisations,  and  devising  of  means  to  ends, 
19 


290  GREAT    DISCOVERIES,   INTUITIONAL       [SC.    OF 

on  the  basis  of  that  hypothesis,  are  the  work  of  intelligence. 
If  these  views  are  correct,  it  is  obvious  that  there  is  no 
opposition  or  radical  difference  of  any  kind  between  intuition 
and  intellect ;  they  may  even  be  said  to  be  degrees  or  aspects 
or  counter-parts  of  each  other,  and  to  pass  into  each  other,  at 
times  insensibly.  Every  act  of  *  attention '  is,  strictly,  a 
focusing  of  the  mind  for  the  inflow  of  *  intuitional '  knowledge. 
Yoga,  (in  the  sense  of  '  inhibition  of  other  mentations  ',  so  as 
to  make  possible  the  *  exhibition  '  of  some  one  other,  or  a  few 
others),  so  regarded,  is,  as  said  in  Yoga-bhashya  itself,  a  con- 
stant feature  of  the  mind,  and  belongs  to  it  in  all  its  moods  and 
at  all  its  stages  of  development.  But  it  is  only  when  dharaya, 
selection  or  concentration,  dhyana,  attention  or  contemplation, 
samadhi,  meditation,  raptness,  rapport — it  is  only  when  these 
attain  a  certain  degree  of  efficiency  and  success,  and,  yet  more 
so,  when  the  intuitional  knowledge  or  experience,  and  the 
extension  of  faculty  aimed  at,  refer  to  things  outside  of  the 
daily  routine  of  life,  to  matters  superphysical  and  metaphy- 
sical, that  the  word  yoga  is  used  of  them  conventionally  and 
technically. 

It  will  have  been  observed  that  the  Buddhi  and  Manas 
(corresponding  generally  to  Intuition  and  Intellect),  dealt  with 
in  the  present  section,  xi,  of  this  note,  are  not  quite  the  same 
as  the  buddhi  and  manas  which,  with  aham-kara,  constitute 
the  three  faculties  of  the  chitta-mind.  Yet  they  are  not 
altogether  different  either.  In  a  sense,  Buddhi- Intuition  may 
be  said  to  be  the  same  as  Mahat  or  Mahan-Atma,  the  Great 
Soul,  the  Universal  Mind,  of  which  the  individual  chitta  is  a 
reflection  ;  while  Manas- Intellect  would  include  the  triad  of 
buddhi-ahankara-manas. 

In  psycho -physical  Puranic  mythology  (mithya-jnana, 
primal  error,  which  invests  with  murti  or  form  that  which  is 
a-murta,  formless,  whence  it  follows  that  the  whole  of  this 
World- Process  is  one  vast  Mythos),  the  Buddhi  and  Manas 
that  are  now  being  dealt  with  are  symbolised  as  Vishrjiu  and 
Brahma  respectively,  (Shiva  then  standing  for  Atma),  on 
the  scale  of  brabm-dndas,  '  eggs  of  the  Infinite,'  '  orbs '  of 
Heaven.  Thus 


P.,    CH.   Xl]  PURANJC    METAPHORS  291 


.  Shanti,  ch.  180. 

'  Vishnu,  Jishnu,  Shambhu,  mati,  buddhi,  prajnS,  upa- 
labdhi,  khy^ti,  dhrti,  smrti,  (names  of  various  aspects  of 
intelligence  and  memory),  are  all  synonyms  for  Mahat  or 
Mahdn  Atm£L  From  the  '  navel  '-lotus,  the  central  being, 
the  '  womb  ',  of  Vishnu  or  Narayana,  '  sleeping  J  in  the 
waters  of  space,  as  sub-  or  supra-consciousness  or  Dormant 
Memory  or  Universal  Mind,  there  arises  Brahma  or  Aham- 
kara,  who  is  the  soul  of  all  beings  ;  whence  arise  all  the 
five  root-kinds  of  sens-able  matter,  etc.  ;  and  the  scene  of 
whose  activities  and  manifestations  is  the  Earth,  described  as 
a  lotus.  This  lotus,  with  irregular  petals,  some  large,  some 
small,  is  spread  out  on  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  upside  down  ; 
the  centre  of  the  lotus  is  the  North  Pole,  and  the  great  Capes 
are  the  apices  of  the  irregular  petals  ;  the  whole  of  the 
earth-globe,  in  turn,  is  an  off  -shoot  as  it  were,  from 
the  *  solar  '  plexus  or  sun-heart  of  the  larger  Vishnu  of  the 
solar  system.'  Unfortunately,  the  metaphor  of  the  PuraQas 
has  ceased  to  be  metaphor,  and  is  being  taken  literally,  with 
endless  mischief  as  consequence.  Artha-vada,  rupaka,  allegory, 
symbolism,  has  indeed  become  an-artha-vada,  baneful  misin- 
terpretation in  unhappy  India  for  many  centuries  now. 

The  names  of  Universal  Mind-Soul-Body,  Intellectus- 
Animus-Corpus-Mundi,  (which  constitutes  the  'contents  'of 
the  Logion  I-This-Not),  each  signifying  an  important  aspect 
or  characteristic,  are  etymologically  explained  in  the  following 
verses  of  Vayu  Parana. 


292  MANY   NAMES    OF   THE    SAME   ONE        [SC. 


IR, 


I 


HR,  frgcl, 

^r^:,  ct^r  ^r^  '  *fRr: 


'  9  ri  ' 


P.,  CH.  Xl]      SYNONYMS   OF  ATMA-BRAHMA-MANAS       293 


g, 

r 


'  ' 


g 

:  >  (oAi)  w  **$:  ^:  \ 

:  ' 
's     i 


294  EXPLANATIONS  [SC.    OF 


;  %<wr*w?:  H: 

Purana,  Purva-ardha.  chs  ,  iv,  v. 


',  '  flniicm',  '  i&w.  '  s 

M6^..  Shan^i.  chs.  180,  308,  316,  317,  etcr 

*  Because  this  World-Mind  manifests  first  of  all  ;  is  greater 
than  all  the  guna-s  and  tattva-s,  attributes  and  elements,  that 
spring  from  it  ;  and,  in  measure,  is  immeasurably  Immense, 
therefore  is  it  named  Mahan,  the  Great.  Because  it  mentates 
the  effortful  evolution  of  all  things  and  beings  from  smaller 
and  subtler  states  to  larger  and  denser,  therefore  is  it  Manas, 
Mind.  It  understands,  knows,  budhya^e,  all  things,  and 
distinguishes  useful  from  harmful,  therefore  it  is  Buddhi.  It 
knows,  vindate,  all,  and  its  excellence  is  such  that  it  also 
knows  that  it  knows  ;  also  it  abides,  vidyate,  in  everything, 
and  everything  abides  it  ;  therefore  it  is  Sam-vit-  It  weighs 
(by  arguments)  ;  analyses  (facts  and  views)  ;  forms  opinions 
with  reference  to  the  requirements  of  the  individual  ;  therefore 
is  it  Mati.  It  shapes  a  body,  puh,  of  and  for  the  tattvas, 
elements,  and  fills  it,  purayate",  with  kind  gifts  (experiences), 
and  then  dwells,  shete,  in  that  body  as  in  a  house  or  town, 
purl  ;  therefore  is  it  known  as  Puh  and  Puru-sha.  All  aware- 
ness, khya^i,  all  experience  of  joy  and  sorrow,  depends  upon 
it,  and  because  it  is  famously*  known  and  declared,  khyayatfl, 
by  many  attributes  and  many  names,  therefore  is  it  called 
Khyflti.  It  knows  all  ;  has  power  and  is  sovereign 
over  all,  ishate,  ishte  ;  commands  and  controls  all  things 
and  beings  and  worlds  ;  and  is  not  ruled  by  any  other  ; 
therefore  is  it  Ishvara.  It  'knows  supremely  ',  pra-jfia,  the 


P.,    CH.   Xl]       OF    THE    DIFFERENT   NAMES  295 

subtlest  mysteries,  and  the  planets  (which  are  to  the  Sun  as 
sensor-and-motor-organs  are  to  a  living  organism)  are  Its  pro- 
geny, pra-ja,  therefore  is  it  Pra-jna.  All  forms,  all  cogni- 
tions, all  volitions,  all  actions,  and  all  fruits  of  all  actions,  are 
stored  up,  chinoti,  in  it,  for  ever  ;  therefore  is  it  Chiti.  All 
work,  past,  present,  and  future,  it  remembers  ever,  smarate ; 
therefore  is  it  Smara,  Memory.  Because  it  is  vast,  brhat, 
because  it  expands  itseif,  and  expands,  spreads  out,  brmharjia, 
all  worlds,  all  things  and  beings,  all  feelings  and  emotions,  in 
infinite  space,  salila-akasha,  therefore  is  named  Brahma. 
Because  it  is  all  knowledge,  jna,  therefore  is  it  Jnana. 
Because  it  enhances,  gives  intensity  and  extensity,  vipula- 
ta,  ample  scope,  to  the  pairs  of  opposities,  two-s,  dvam-dvam-s, 
therefore  is  it  known  as  Vipura.  It  is  known  as  JShava  be- 
cause it  is  the  source  and  fount  of  all  becomings,  bhu.  Because 
it  knows  the  '  field  ',  the  object,  of  consciousness,  and  also 
the  knower  of  it,  i.e.,  it-Self,  it  is  known  as  Kah  (also, 
Yah,  Sah ;  He,  Who,  What ;  all  pronouns  which  cover 
all  objects,  as  well  as  the  subject,  of  consciousness).  It 
attains  all  objects,  apnoft :  it  takes  all,  a-datte ;  it  eats, 
tastes,  all  things,  atti ;  it  extends  continuously  over  all, 
a-tata,  san-tata,  sata^am,  ever ;  because  it  negates,  mfl,  and 
transcends,  ati-efti  all  This,  Etat ;  and,  while  thus  negating 
all  Else,  It-Self-remains  Self-established,  moveless,  eternal ; 
therefore  is  it  named  Atma,  pre-eminently.  It  reaches  all, 
rchchhati  ;  therefore  is  Rshi.  It  enters  into  all,  vishafci  ;  there- 
fore is  Vishnu.  It  possesses  all  the  lordlinesses,  marks  of 
sovereignty,  bhaga ;  therefore  is  Ehaga-vSn.  It  is  Raga, 
because  desire  stirs  in  it  and  is  controlled  by  it.  Because 
it  protects,  avati,  all  who  meditate  on  it,  therefore  is 
it  AUM  (OM).  It  knows  all,  therefore  is  Sarva-jna,  omni- 
scient. It  is  the  home,  refuge,  ayana,  of  all  souls,  nara-s ; 
therefore  is  it  Nar-ayarjia.  Because  the  first,  adi,  of  all  gods, 
therefore  is  it  Aditya.  If  produces  and  protects,  pati,  ail 
progeny,  prajS  ;  therefore  is  it  Praja-pati.  Because  it  is  the 
greatest  of  all  gods,  therefore  is  it  Maha-deva.  Because  it 
pervades  all,  *s,  bhu,  in  all,  peculiarly,  vi-shesh6na,  there- 
fore is  it  Vi-bhu.  Because  all  '  sacrifices  '  are  offered  to  it, 
are  for  it,  therefore  it  is  YajSa  personified.  Because  it  surveys, 
darshana,  the  whole  World- Process  and  ranges  over  it  all 


296  THEOSOPHICAL   TECHNICAL   TERMS       [SC.  OF 

in  mighty  flights  (of  imagination),  therefore  is  it  Kavi  (ka, 
world,  vi,  bird,  world-bird).  Because  it  is  the  Womb  of  Gold, 
garbha  of  hiraflya,  Source  of  Golden  Light,  enveloped  in 
Golden  Light,  (physical  as  well  as  mental),  therefore  is  it 
Hiranya-garbha  (the  Sun).  Because  it  makes  all  things, 
vi-shoshena  r  a  chay  at  i,  therefore  is  it  Vi-rinchi.  It  is 
Vishva-rupa,  because  all  worlds,  vishva,  all  forms,  rupa,  are 
its  forms.  Because  it  is  not  born  from  any  thing  else,  but 
only  from  It-Self,  therefore  is  it  Svayam-bhu.  Because  it  is 
the  One  and  only  Immortal,  eka  a-kshara,  and  also  because 
it  is  ultimately  named  by  eka  a-kshara,  the  One-lettered 
(tri-une)  Word-Sound  (AUM)  Om,  therefore  is  it  Ekakshara '. 

By  such  synonyms,  paryaya-s,  which  are  used  for  It 
by  turns,  *  coming  one  after  another ',  paryayaija,  is  the 
Universal  Mind  known. 

In  the  language  of  earlier  theosophical  literature,  Atmd, 
the  first  principle,  would  correspond  (on  the  cosmic  scale)  with 
Pratyag-atma  or  the  Abstract  and  Universal  I  ;  Buddhi,  the 
second  principle,  with  Universal  Mind,  all-inclusive  Intuition 
or  infinite  sub-and-supra-consciousness,  or  the  collective 
I,  the  We,  the '  I  am  and  am-not  all  this-s'  ;  Manas,  the  third 
principle,  with  the  singular  or  individual  1,  '  I  am — and, 
again,  later  on — I  am  not  this  particular  this/  the  particular 
mind  with  its  successive  experiences  of  the  nature  of  know- 
ledge, feeling,  and  activity,  and  its  particular  recollections. 
These  remarks  have  to  be  understood  as  subject  to  the 
explanation  that,  for  practical  purposes,  every  sutr-atma 
*  thread-soul ',  '  group-soul ',  or  larger  individuality,  serves  as 
'  genus  '  or  '  universal '  to  the  jiv-8tma-s  or  smaller  individual- 
ities which  are  included  within  it,  which  live  and  move  and 
have  their  being  in  it  (see  ch.  xiii,  infra). 

In  the  same  theosophical  language,  we  may  say  that 
instinct  is  the  'mystic*  participation  of  the  individual  soul  in  the 
life  of  the  astral  group-soul  or  sutr-atma  ;  and  intuition,  in  the 
life  of  the  buddhic  group-soul.  Every  individual  understands, 
knows  t.e.,  feels,  the  sensations  of  any  part  of  his  body,  because 
he  is  identified  with  that  part,  vitally ;  so  we  understand 
instinctively  and  intuitionally  i.e.,  we  feel,  the  experiences  of 
those  '  other  *  jivas  whom  we  love  and  who  are  therefore  no 


P.,  CH.  XIl]  RATIOCINATION  297 

longer  '  other  '  to  us  but  indeed  parts  of  ourselves.  If  we  can 
identify  ourselves  with  all,  if  we  can  realise  our  oneness  with 
all,  we  will  understand  or  feel  all.  "  To  know  all  is  to  excuse 
all,"  as  the  proverb  says,  because  to  know  all  is  not  possible 
without  loving  all,  and  to  love  all  is  not  only  to  excuse  all  as 
one  excuses  oneself,  but  to  help  all  as  one  helps  oneself. 


CHAPTER  XII 

PVAM-DVAM— THE  RELATIVE  (CONTINUED) 

(C.—  n.)  NEGATION  AS  CONDITION  OF 
INTERPLAY  BETWEEN  SELF  AND  NOT-SELF 

JN  the  last  chapter  we  dealt  with 'the  affirmative  aspect 
of  Negation  ;  as  the  Energy  which  links  together,  in  an 
endless  chain  of  Causality,  the  factors  of  the  succession 
of  the  World-Process ;  as  the  necessity  of  the  Whole 
which  appears  as  the  Cause  of  each  part  ;  as  the  Relation  } 
of  cause-and-effect  between  all  the  parts.  We  turn  now 
to  the  negative  aspect, of  Negation,  wherein  it  appears 
as  the  Condition  or  conditions,  of  the  Interplay  between 
Self  and  Not-Self;  the  conditions  in  which  the  succession 

1  Seeing  such  relation  (L.  ratio,  ratus,  to  think,  to  reason)  is  rea- 
soning, ratio-cmation ,  re-lat-ion-mg  (L.  re,  back,  latus,  to  carry,  to 
bear,  to  bear  or  carry  one  to  another,  and  back,  to  and  fro.  in  mind). 
There  is  a  deep  reason  why  the  words  '  cause  '  and  '  reason  '  should  be 
equivalent  and  often  synonymous  and  interchangeable  ;  it  is  the 
fact,  already  mentioned,  that  the  Universal  Mind  or  '  Pure  '  Reason, 
Cosmic  Ideation  of  the  Whole,  (bearing  or  carrying  all  parts,  at  once, 
within  itself,  in  re-lation  or  ratio  to  each  other),  is  the  cause  of  the 
appearance  of  each  portion,  in  succession,  i.e.,  is  the  cause  of 
each  event.  The  Samskrt  words  karana  and  hetu  are  similarly  allied  ; 
karana  is  active  cause ,  hetu  is  passive  condition,  reason,  motivating 
end  or  propose. 


298  CAUSE    AND    CONDITION  [SC.    OF 

of  the  factors  of  the  World-Process  appears  and  takes 
place.1 

A  little  reflection  will  show  that  cause  and  condition 
are  only  the  positive  and  negative  aspects  of  the  same 
thing.  A  cause  may  be -said  to  be  a  positive  condition, 
and  a  condition  a  negative  cause. 

Let  not  the  objection  be  taken  here  that  we  are 
transporting,  by  an  anachronism,  the  notions  of  our  life 
at  the  present  day,  to  a  primal  stage  wherein  pure  ulti- 
mates  or  penultimates  and  subtle  undeveloped  essentials 
only,  of  the  universe,  should  be  discussed.  It  has  been 
pointed  out,  over  and  over  again,  that  there  is  no  grada- 
tion, no  development  in  time,  from  the  abstract  to  the 
concrete.  The  two  underlie  and  overlie  and  inextricably 
interpenetrate  one  another  and  are  coexistent.2  And, 
even  were  it  otherwise,  that  which  appears  in  develop- 
ment must  have  been  in  the  seed  all  along.  The  World- 
Process  is  in  and  is  the  Absolute.  Metaphysic  only 
endeavours  to  trace  each  abstract  and  concrete  fact  of 
our  life,  taking  it,  as  it  stands  before  us,  back  into  its 
proper  place  in  the  Absolute,  in  the  Changeless  Whole, 

1  In  the  technical  phraseology  of  the  Nyaya,  that  which  is  called 
cause  here  would  be,  generally,  karana ;  while  condition  would  be 
sadharana-nimiffa,  or  hetu. 

-  To  philosophy,  the  whole  of  all  history  is,  as  it  were,  ever  pre- 
sent ;  all  change  is  always  within  the  Changeless.  All  the  states  that 
appear  as  successive  stages  in  the  life,  or  history,  of  any  '  individual  ' 
organism,  species,  genus,  kingdom,  planet,  solar  system,  in  any  given 
place,  are  to  be  found  existing  simultaneously  in  different  individuals 
in  different  places.  God  has  not  disappeared  and  become  absent  after 
a  single  act  of  creation,  The  forces  and  factors  of  the  World-Process , 
working  at  any  past  or  future  time,  and  near  or  distant  place,  are  all 
working  now  and  here,  overtly  or  covertly,  whenever  and  wherever  we 
may  think  of  them . 


P.,  CH.  XIl]         MANY   KINDS    AND    NAMES  299 

and  so  to  free  us  from  the  nightmare  of  overpowering, 
irresistible,  uncontrolable  Change.  Therefore,  taking 
the  words  *  cause  '  and  '  condition  '  in  the  sense  in 
which  we  find  them  used  to-day,  we  may  legitimately 
try  to  show  that  these  senses  correspond  to  aspects  of 
the  ultimates. 

Other  ways  of  looking  at  them  are  to  regard  causes  as 
successive  and  passing  conditions,  and  conditions  as  per- 
sisting and  coexisting  causes  ;  that  is,  that  causes  are 
conditions  which  cease  to  '  exist  '  when  the  effect  begins 
to  *  exist,'  and  that  conditions  are  causes  which  persist 
throughout  the  existence  of  the  effect  as  well  as  before 
and  after  ;  and  so  on.  Looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  Absolute,  inasmuch  as  everything  is  necessarily  con- 
nected with  everything  else,  and  the  Whole  only  is  the 
source  of  each  part,  all  these  various  ways  of  describing 
cause  and  condition  resolve  themselves  into  merely  various 
ways  of  describing  the  different  relations,  all  equally 
necessary,  of  facts,  or  parts,  to  each  other.  Out  of  these 
various  ways  we  have  the  many  distinctions  between  final 
cause,  efficient  cause,  material  cause,  formal  cause,  instru- 
mental cause,  movement  or  action,  motive,  etc.,  in 
western  philosophy  :  and  between  nimitta,  samavayi  or 
upadana,  a-samavayi,  saha-kari,  sadharana-nimitta  or 
mukhya,  a-sadharana-nimitta  or  a-mukhya,  udd6shya, 
karta,  kriya,  karya,  prayojana,  h6tu,  karaka,1  etc.,  all 


or 

or  a?g^,  g^r,  ^T^   fferr,  3> 
,    etc.     Gfta,  xviii.  13-15,  speaks    of  five  kinds  of 


300  POSITIVE   &   NEGATIVE    ASPECTS          [SC.    OF 

different  kinds  of  karana,  *  causes/  with  their  divisions 
and  sub-divisions,  in  the  eastern  systems. 

The  one  common  characteristic  of  cause,  running 
throughout  all  these,  is  that  which  is  given  by  the  old 
Nayyayikas  :  viz.,  "  which  being,  the  effect  becomes,  and, 
which  not  being,  the  effect  does  not  become,"  ]  the  princi- 
ple of  concomitant  variations,  in  short,  as  it  is  called  in 
western  logic.  The  first  half  represents  the  positive 
aspect,  the  one  true  universal  *  cause  ',  corresponding  to 
the  Self,  the  affirmation,  the  Shakti  element  of  the  Nega- 
tion ;  and  the  second  half,  the  negative  aspect,  the  one 
true  universal  *  condition,'  corresponding  to  the  Not -Self, 
the  denial,  the  negative  element  of  the  Negation  ;  where- 
as all  other  so-called  particular  causes  or  conditions  are 
in  reality  only  so  many  effects,  which  have  taken  on  a 
false  appearance  of  cause  or  condition  by  reflection — in 
the  succession  of  the  World- Process — of  the  true  universal 
Necessity  which  makes  each  particular  a  necessary  fact, 
and  so  a  cause  and  a  condition,  with  reference  to  all 
other  particulars  ;  that  is  to  say,  makes  each  particular 
appear  as  the  necessary  effect  of  preceding,  and  the 

%fi^:.  All  such  are  classifiable  under  our  'Cause'  and  '  Condition '. 
Each  system  of  philosophy  has  its  own  classifications  and  technical 
names.  Buddhist  systems  have  yet  others;  thus:  "  six  kinds  of  causes 
and  five  of  effects  are— karana-hetu  and  adhipati-phalam  ;  saha-bhu-hetu 
and  purusha-kara-phalam ;  sampr&yukta-hctu  and  vipaka-phalam ; 
vipaka-hgtu  and  vi-sam-yoga-phalam  ;  and  sarvatra-ga-h6tu.  Or,  (accord- 
ing to  another  system),  four  pratyayas  (causes  or  conditions),  viz.,  adhi- 
pati,  alambana,  sam-an-antara,  andheiu,  (i.e.,  additional  cause,  objective 
canse  of  mental  process,  immediate  cause,  and  direct  cause)  "  ;  Systems 
of  Buddhistic  Thought,  by  Yamakami  Sogen,  pp.  309-315  (pub.  1912, 
University  of  Calcutta). 

1  Bhimacharya,    Nyttya-kosha,  p.    197,    article  35R<T^,  karanam, 
cause. 


P.,    CH.    XIl]          ONE    CAUSE,    ONE    EFFECT  301 

necessary  cause  of  succeeding,  particulars,  in  an  endless 
and  unbreakable  chain,  the  whole  of  which  chain,  how- 
ever, is  only  One  Effect  which  is  identical  with  its  One 
Cause,  the  necessity  of  the  Absolute. 

We  thus  see  that,  in  empirical  detail,  Self  or  Spirit 
and  Not-Self  or  Matter  are,  neither  of  them,  either  cause 
or  effect  ;  but  that  the  changes  of  cognition,  desire,  and 
action,  and  of  qualities,  substance,  and  movement,  of 
which  they  are  the  form  or  substratum,  are  causes  or 
conditions,  and  effects  or  results,  of  one  another  in  turn  ; 
and  that  the  transcendental  totality  of  these  changes, 
being  regarded  as  one  effect  and  result,  has  for  one  cause, 
the  Shakti-Energy,  and  for  one  condition  the  Negation, 
embodied  in  the  third  factor  of  the  Absolute. 

This  Shakti-Energy,  we  have  seen,  has  three  aspects  : 
attraction,  repulsion,  and  rhythmic  alternation  or  revolu- 
tion ;  or  creation,  destruction,  and  preservation.1  Negation 
proper  has  also  three  aspects  :  <j6sha,  space,  kala,  time, 
and  kriya  or  ayana,  motion.*  These  are  the  triple 


occurs  in  Bhagavata.  IV,  xxix,  67; 
in    the    Yo£a-bhashya  by  Vyasa  ;    ^-^-ST^S?^^  '  by 

difference  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance/  is  an  expression  of  frequent 
occurrence  in  Samskrt  literature. 

2  The  Biography  of  Man,  the  whole  History  of  all  things,  individuals, 
groups,  institutions,  nations,  races,  kingdoms  (of  Nature,  mineral, 
vegetable,  etc.),  orbs,  worlds,  'systems,  is  all  comprised  in  the  '  six  forms 
or  ways  of  existence,  bhava-vikarah,  viz.,  is  born  i.e.,  appears  or  comes 
into  manifest  existence,  grows,  stays,  changes,  decays,  and  dies  or  dis- 
appears ;  jayatS,  varcjha|e,  tishthatd,  vipari-namaiS,  biyate,  mriyate; 


The  yet  higher  categories  under  which  these  six  are  comprised,  are, 
and  if-Sffecr,  '  is  '  and  '  is  not  '. 


302  TRIAD    OF   CONDITIONS  [SC.    OF 

g  u  n  a  s,  or  aspects,  of  Negation,  in  the  same  way  as 
S  a  t-C  h  i  d- A  n  a  n  d  a  and  S  a  1 1  v  a-R  a  j  a  s-T  a  m  a  s  are 
the  gun  as  of  Pratyag-atm5  and  Mula-prakrti  respect- 
ively. Negation,  with  respect  to  the  One  limitless  Self,  in 
whose  consciousness  the  negated  Not-Self,  the  countless 
Many,  are  co-existent,  is  negation  Everywhere,  in  Simulta- 
neity, is  the  utter  blankness  of  pesudo-infinite  and  k  ii  t  a  s- 
t  h  a-seeming  Space.  Negation,  with  respect  to  Not-Self, 
the  pseudo-infinite  Many,  which  find  themselves  posited 
and  denied  in  that  consciousness  turn  by  turn,  is  negation 
Everywhen,  in  Succession,  is  pseudo-infinite  and  ever- 
flowing  Time.  Negation  with  respect  to  Negation,  is  the 
endeavour  to  affirm,  to  justify,  the  consciousness  of  the 
inseparable  connection  between  Self  and  the  repudiated 
Not-Self  everywhere,  everywhen,  everyway ;  this  can  be 
done  onjy  in  and  by  means  of  un-end-ing  Motion,  which 
is  the  one  way  to  encompass  all  space  and  time ;  Motion, 
in  and  by  which  only,  Space  and  Time  are  joined  together 
and  realised,  even  as  Self  and  Not-Self  are  realised  in  and 
by  the  Negation. 

Let  us  dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  fact  that  Space, 
Time,  and  Motion  are  the  gun  as,  qualities,  of  Negation. 
We  see  readily,  on  even  slight  reflection,  that  Space  and 
Time  are  mere  emptinesses,  vacua,  which  may  appropri- 
ately be  regarded  as  phases  of  Na,  Not,  the  Naught. 
Motion  presents  a  little  more  difficulty.  We  seem  to  feel 
that  it  is  something  positive.  Yet  this  is  due  only  to  the 
fact  that  we  are  thinking  more  of  the  moving  thing  than 
of  its  motiop.  Let  us  try  to  (seem  to)  think  of  motion  as 


P.,    CH.    XIl]  SPACE-TIME-MOTION  303 

separate  from  the  moving  thing,  even  as  we  (seem  to,  but 
cannot  really)  think  of  space  and  time  as  (quite)  separate 
from  extended  or  enduring  things  ;  and  we  shall  see  at 
once  that  it  is  as  much  an  emptiness  as  the  latter  ;  indeed 
is  nothing  else  than  an  emptiness  which  combines  in  itselt 
the  emptinesses  of  the  other  two,  since  we  know  Space 
and  Time  only  by  Motion  ;  in  slumber,  all  three  dis- 
appear together.  It  is  thus  doubly  empty.  Space  seems, 
Time  seems,  to  leave  a  trace  behind.  More,  we  feel  as 
if  Space  is,  there,  always,  before  us  ;  we  feel  that  even 
Time  is,  there,  always.  We  speak  of  even  the  past  and 
the  future  as  if  they  were  something  positive,  something 
recoverable,  something  contained,  locked  away,  in  the 
present  which  we  hold  in  our  hands.  But  Motion  ?  —  it 
is  gone  and  has  left  no  trace  ;  lines  traced  on  running 
water,  birds'  flights  in  the  air.1  Of  course  the  moving 
or  the  moved  thing  may  remain,  but  that  is  not  motion, 
any  more  than  it  is  space  or  time.  Motion,  then,  is 
verily  the  most  negative  of  negations. 

Another  point.  Space,  Time,  and  Motion  have  been 
shown  here  as  broadly  corresponding  to  Self,  Not-Self, 
and  Negation  respectively.  But  too  much  stress  should 
not  be  laid  on,  nor  too  much  precision  expected  in,  these 
correspondences.  Where  everything  is  connected  with 


'  As  the  path  cannot  be  traced,  of  fish  in  water,  or  bird  in  air  ;  so 
cannot  be  traced  the  passage  of  the  knowers,  in  the  ocean  of  Omni- 
science, from  the  Limited  to  the  Limitless  '. 


304  EROS    AS    MEMORY  [SC.  OF 

everything,  the  distinguishing  of  such  correspondences 
can  only  mean  that  certain  facts,  as  viewed  from  a  certain 
standpoint,  are  seen  to  be  more  specially  connected 
with  each  other  than  with  others.  Change  the  stand- 
point slightly,  and  new  connections  are  thrown  Into 
relief  and  old  ones  retire  into  the  shade.  This  is  seen 
to  be  the  case,  more  and  more,  as  we  proceed  from  the 
simple  to  the  complex.  In  the  very  instance  now  before 
us,  for  example,  with  reference  to  the  fact  that  Negation 
is  the  nexus  between  Self  and  Not-Self,  Motion  may  be 
said  to  correspond  to  Negation,  as  also  being  a  nexus 
between  Space  and  Time.  But  take  another  triplet  into 
consideration  :  jnana-ichchha-kriya.  Here,  while 
it  may  be  said  that  the  condition  of  C  h  i  t  or  j  n  a  n  a  is 
Space,  implied  in  the  '  co-existence  '  of  subject  and  object, 
knower  and  known,  it  does  not  seem  quite  fitting  to  say 
that  the  condition  corresponding  to  Sat  or  k  r  i  y  a  is 
time,  and  to  Ananda  orichchhais  motion.  Of 
course  it  would  not  be  altogether  incorrect  to  say  even 
this;  yet  it  seems  more  obvious  to  say  that,  kriya 
corresponds  to  motion,  and  ichchha  to  time,  which, 
in:  terms  of  consciousness,  is  memory  of  past  pleasure 
and  pain,  and  present  wish,  and  expectation  in  the  future, 
to  secure  the  one  and  avoid  the  other  again.1  On  the 

1  One  name  for  Kama-Eros,  a  form  of  desire,  is  Sraara,  -which  means 
memory.  Incidentally,  it  may  be  noted  that  Space-Time-Motion  are  the 
4  empty  '  essentials  of  the  Great  Illusion,  Life,  in  everyway.  Life  is 
pleasurable  and  healthy,  when  it  is  '  spacio  as-leisurely-easy  going  '  ;  it 
is  unpleasant  and  unhealthy,  when  'cramped-hurried-driven'.  To  do 
fixed  work,  in  fixed  place,  at  fixed  time,  is  to  be  '  orderly  '  ;  to  do  other- 
wise, is  to  be  'disorderly',  unorganised,  inefficient  and  ineffectual 
and  unhealthy. 


P.,  CH.  XII]      VIEWS  CHANGE  WITH  STANDPOINTS    305 

other  hand,   we  may   not  unjustifiably  say  that  Motion 
corresponds  to  i  c  h  c  h  h  a,  because  i  c  h  c  h  h  a  implies  a 
movement   from   the   past   through   the   present  towards 
the  future  ;  and  that  the  succession  involved  in  k  r  i  y  a  is 
Time.     Or,    again,   we   may  consider  the  matter  without 
inaccuracy     in    this    manner :    Space    seems    something 
overt,  almost  visible,  one  may  say  ;  Motion  also  seems 
overt,   something   visible ;    but   Time   is   hidden,   it   is  a 
matter  for  the  inner  consciousness  only,  (except  on  the 
face  of  the  clock,   where    k  r  i  y  a,    active   movement,  is 
patent),   as    ichchha    is    the    hidden    desire    between 
an    overt     cognition     and   an    overt    action ;    therefore, 
while   Space   and    Motion    may    correspond    with    overt 
Self     and     Not-Self,     Time     should     correspond     with 
covert    Negation.     Arguing  from    the  mere    words  also, 
one     may   say    that   Self   and    Not    meet    in    Not-Self; 
therefore  Space  and  Time,   meeting   in   Motion,  should 
be   assigned    to   Self   and  Negation,  respectively  ;  while 
Motion   should  be  assigned   to  Not-Self.     Yet  again,  we 
may  correctly  say   that  Time  is  realised  only  by  change, 
i.e.,    Motion,  and  Motion  is  possible  only  in  Space,  there- 
fore Space  is  the  meeting-point  of  the  two,  and  so  should 
correspond  to  the  nexus,  i.e.,  Negation.     And  so  on.    We 
see  thus   that,   from  different  points  of  view,  one  and  the 
same  thing  appears  in  different  aspects.     For  the  present, 
seeing     that    Motion    has  almost   unanimously  been   re- 
garded,  in   East  and   West,  as  incorporating  both  Space 
and    Time,    we    may   accept   the   correspondence    noted 
first,   viz.,   that  of   Space,   Time,  and   Motion,  to  Self, 

20 


306  SPACE    IS    CO-EXISTENCE  [SC.    OF 

Not-Self,    and     Negation,     respectively,     as    the     most 
prominent. 

Let  us  now  take  up  each  of  these  three  separately. 

(A)  SPACE 

Space  is  the  Co-existence,  saha-astita,  together-being, 
saha-bhava,  together-moving,  saha-chara,  paired-ness  or 
simultaniety,  yanga-pa<Jya,  of  the  Many.'  It  is  the 
possibility  of  the  coexistence  of  the  many,  and  the 
actuality  of  their  non-existence/  The  Self  is  one  and 
opposed  to  the  many  at  once  and  eternally  ;  hence  the 
coexistence  of  the  countless  not-selves  as  well  as  their 
endless  succession.  The  form  and  result  of  their  co- 
existence is  mutual  exclusion,  which  produces  the 
duality  of  '  side  by  side,'  '  one  beside  another,1  with  the 
intervening  space  '  between,'  as  the  completing  third 
which  connects  the  two,  one  on  each  side.  This  triplicity 
of  *  side,  beside,  and  between/  parshva  or  paksha,  a  para  - 
parshva  or  apara-paksha,  and  antara,  appears  in  Space 
as  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  Not-Self.  This  triad 
may  also  be  expressed  as  attra,  here,  tattra,  there,  and 
madhya,  the  middle  space,  the  *  in  between  '/ 


*  In  actuality,  space  is  limited,  and  so  come  to  be  the  possibility 
of  the  co-existence  of  a  few,  and  impossibility  of  more  ;  thus,  when  fresh 
passengers  try  to  enter  a  crowded  railway  carriage,  the  occupants  cry  out. 
"  There  is  no  space  here:  please  go  to  another  carriage  where  there 
is,  i.e.  where  there  are  no  occupants  ". 


P.,    CH.    XIlJ  TRIADS    OF    SPACE  307 

Viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  Self,  Space  may  also 
be  said  to  be  the  coexistence  of  Self  and  Not-Self.  But 
the  coexistenee  of  these  two  is  scarcely  a  co-existence. 
Such  co-existence  can  properly  be  ascribed  only  to  things 
of  the  same  kind  and  nature,  on  the  same  level,  and  side 
by  side  with  each  other ;  while  Self  and  Not-Self  are 
opposed  in  nature ;  the  one  is  Being,  the  other  is  Non- 
Being.  Their  coexistence  is  only  through  and  in  the  way 
of  the  third  factor,  Negation ;  i.e.,  Not-Self  does  not  exactly 
co-exist  with  Self  ;  it  rather  exists  in  it,  in  its  conscious- 
ness, and  exists  only  to  be  denied.  Hence  we  have  another 
form,  though  not  essentially  different  in  nature,  of  spatial 
relations,  than  that  described  above  as  '  side,  beside,  and 
between  '.  This  other  form  is  that  of  '  in  and  out,'  ant  ah, 
and  bahih,  '  internal  and  external/  '  core  and  sheath,' 
both  held  together  in  the  *  through  and  through,'  sarvatah, 
the  '  whole,'  the  '  pervading,'  vyapta.i  Thus  we  have 
another  triplicity  in  Space  with  special  reference  to  Self. 
In  this,  again,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  universal  Self, 
that  Self  is  the  enveloping  Space,  pure,  colourless,  ab- 
stract, in  which  the  6tats,  the  this's.  live  and  move ;  and 
so  It  may  be  said  to  be  the  outer,  and  Not-Self  the  inner. 
It  is  this  aspect  of  Self,  Pratyag-atma,  which  has  pro- 
bably given  to  Param-atma  its  best-known  name,  Brahma, 
Boundless  Immensity,  from  the  root  brh,  to  grow,  to 
expand,  to  be  vast.*  But  from  the  standpoint  of  the 

1  a???!:,  3fg:,  wfes,  52JTH  I 

"  ^    *W,  Chh&ndogya  and  Brfya<}-&ranyaka ;    f^,    ^ 

increases,  expands ;  also  flfcf,  works,  labours,  incessantly. 


308  POINT,   LINE,   SPACE  [SC.   OF 

individual,  an  *  aham  '  limited  by  an  '  6tat,'  Self  is  the 
inner  core  and  Not-Self  the  outer  sheath. 

We  may  distinguish  another  form  of  the  triplicity  of 
Space,  with  reference  to  Negation,  viz.,  '  point,  radii, 
sphere,'  bindu,  jlva  or  trijya  or  vyas-ardha  and  gola.1  The 
other  triplets  of  words,  too,  express  nothing  else  than 
emptiness  and  negation,  but  this  mathematical  triplet 
seems  to  be  even  more  abstract,  more  empty  of  content, 
if  possible  ;  hence  the  propriety  of  regarding  it  as 
arising  from  a  view  of  Space  with  special  reference  to 
Negation. 

Other  ways  of  expressing  the  triplicity  involved  in- 
Space  may  be  said  to  be  '  behind,  here,  before,'  and 
'  length,  breadth,  and  depth,1  which  last  is  the  best  known 
and  most  commonly  mentioned  form  of  the  dimensions 
of  space. 

As  the  mathematical  kinds  of  Motion  are  pseudo- 
infinite,  as  the  standards  and  measures  of  Time  are 
pseudo-infinite,  so  the  degrees  and  measures  of  Space  or 
-extension  are  also  pseudo-infinite.  There  are  always,  and 
ad  iiifinitum,  *  etats  '  '  this-es,  '  objects,  minutes  than  the 
minutest  and  vaster  than  the  vastest.  As  minute  vibrations 
of  motion  permeate  grosser  sweeps,  as  subtler  standars  of 
time  permeate  larger  measures,  so  smaller  sizes  and  dimen- 
sions permeate  and  pervade  larger  sizes  and  dimensions.  In 
this  sense,  as  with  motion  and  time  so  with  space,  there 


or   f5|33n  or  53fTOTO,    *«s5  ;  another  triad,  included 
In  this^would  be  ^centre-diameter.  (or  line)-circumference, 
-  XI)- 


P.,  CH.  XIl]    ONLY  THREE  DIMENSIONS  POSSIBLE     309 

are  not  only  a  certain  number,  but  necessarily  a  pseudo- 
infinite  number,  of  dimensions.  Otherwise,  the  triplicity 
described  above,  in  various  triplets  of  words,  represents 
the  three  dimensions  proper  of  space,  (time  and  motion 
also  having  their  three  dimensions  proper,  each,  to  be 
mentioned  presently)  ;  all  other  dimensions,  subtler  or 
grosser,  being  but  permutations  and  combinations  of  these 
three ;  and  the  three  themselves  being  essentially  ways 
of  looking  at  the  one  fact  of  co-existence.1 

The  meaning  of  this  will  appear  further  in  connec- 
tion with  the  pseudo-infinite  lokah,  i.e.,  planes,  grades, 
kinds  or  regions  of  matter,  each  made  and  marked  by  a 

1  The  fourth  and  higher  and  even  infinite  dimensions  of  space  form 
the  subject  of  mathematical  speculations  now,  frequently  ;  but  it  is  difficult 
to  understand  them  in  any  other  sense  than  as  above.  It  is  said  that  the 
point  '  produced  '  gives  the  line,  making  the  first  dimension  ;  the  line 
'  produced  '  sidewise,  the  surface,  the  second  ;  the  surface  similarly,  the 
solid,  the  third  ;  so  the  solid  '  produced  '  will  give  the  fourth,  and  so  on. 
But  let  us  trace  the  process  backwards  ;  what  will  the  point  ,  re-duced  ' 
yield  ?  And  could  that  again  be  *  re-duced  '  further — ad  infinitum  ? 
H.  P.  Blavatsky,  in  The  Secret  Doctrine,  (I,  295,  296)  expressly 
repudiates,  the  notion  of  fourth,  etc.,  dimensions  in  any  other  sense 
than  that  of  "  permeability,"  substances  being  able  to  penetrate  grosser 
ones.  As  a  fact,  a  cube  '  produced  '  yields  an  ordinary  three-dimen- 
sioned but  elongated  solid.  Also,  as  a  fact,  the  point,  the  line,  the 
surface,  are  mere  abstractions,  as  of  back  and  front,  which  are  distin- 
guishable, but  never  separable  from  the  solid,  in  nature.  The  Mahatma 
Letters,  p.  404,  also  say  that  4 '  Humanity  belongs  to  the  three-dimen- 
sional condition  of  matter ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  in  (Deva- 
S  t  h  a  n  a,  abode  of  gods,  heaven,  svarga),  the  ego  should  be  varying 
its  dimensions  ' ' .  The  purport  of  the  whole  context  seems  to  be  that 
"Space  is  infinity  itself"  and  as  such,  has  no  dimensions,  but  only 
finite  matter  has  dimensions,  and  these  are  only  three,  and  always 
must  be  only  three  and  no  more.  The  notion,  that,  with  the  eye,  we 
see  only  two  dimensions,  length  and  breadth  is  fallacious.  In  every 
exercise  of  every  sense,  we  sense,  co-existence, — the  presence  of  subject 
and  object,  in  the  first  place,  and  of  many  objects  in  the  second.  And 
this  co-existence  is  always  l/tree-dimensional.  Careful  consideration  of 
the  ways  and  movements  of  even  the  eyeless  animals  or  animal-cubs 
even,  of  the  ocean-depths,  seems  to  show  their  sensing  of  three  dimen- 
sions, before,  behind,  and  round  and  round. 


310  SYMBOLOGY  [SC.  OF 

differently  vibrating  and  differently  sized  atom.  Each 
supports,  serves  as  adhara,  substratum,  of  the  next  so- 
called  lower  and  grosser  ;  .and  each  is  supported  in  turn* 
by  the  preceding  so-called  subtler  and  finer.  Each  be- 
haves  in  an  apparently  mysterious,  superphysical,  and 
space-transcending  way,  because  of  the  subtler  and 
penetrative,  permeative,  pervasive,  nature  of  its  vibra- 
tions, from  the  standpoint  of  the  lower  ;  but  becomes  a 
part  of,  one  step  of,  the  ordinary,  familiar  and  *  well- 
understood  '  scale  of  matter,  including  the  lower  planes» 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  higher.1 

In  the  language  of  symbology,  which  yet  seems 
intended  to  describe  literal  facts  of  subtler  planes  of 
matter  also,  this  Space  may  be  regarded  as  meant  by 
the  garland  of  human  heads,  individual-points  of  con- 
sciousness and  atom-points  of  matter,  that  Shiva, 
embodiment  of  '  negative  '  i  c  h  c  h  h  a,  ever  bears  upon 
his  breast  ;  each  head  separate  from  the  other,  each  side 
by  side  with  another,  yet  all  united  together  by  the 
strong  single  thread  of  the  desire-consciousness  of  mutual 
interlinking  and  inseparability.  It  may  also  be  sym- 
bolised by  the  dark  and  giant  mammoth-skin  that  is  the 
outer  envelope  of  that  inner  God,  for  i  c  h  c  h  h  a  cannot 
manifest  except  in  Space. 


V&yu  Pur  ana,   Purvfcrflha,   ch.   49.     D&vi  BhctgOvata  also  has  a 
verse  to  the  same  effect. 


P.,    CH.    XIl]  TIME  311 

(B)    TlMK 

As  movement  between  Self  and  Not-Self  is  the 
basic  principle  of  all  motion,  so  succession,  krama,1 
of  this  movement,  of  affirmation  and  then  negation,  is 
the  basic  principle  of,  indeed  is,  Time.  Time  is  nothing 
else  than  succession  of  events.  It  may  also  be  described 
as  the  possibility  of  the  succession  of  events,  i.e.,  changes 
in  the  conditions  of  objects,  and  the  actuality  of  their 
non-cession,  non-procession,  non-duration,  the  ever- 
standing  witness  of  their  non-permanence,  their  non- 
existence.  That  is  to  say,  as  Space  is  emptiness  which 
is  the  possibility  of  the  co-existence  of  objects  ;  which, 
regarded  in  itself,  and  as  differing  from  these  objects,  is 
only  defined  and  thrown  into  relief  by  them,  and  is  not 
them  ;  which,  indeed,  looked  at  thus,  is  their  absence 
and  their  opposite  ;  so  Time  is  an  emptiness,  which  is 
the  possibility  of  the  succession  of  events :  is  only  defined 
and  thrown  into  relief  by  those  events  ;  and  is  not  them, 
but  their  absence  and  their  opposite.  As  this  succession 
of  events,  i.e.,  experiences,  identifications  and  separations, 
slackens  or  quickens  or  ceases  (comparatively  and  appa- 
rently), so  the  standard  of  Time  changes  ;  it  appears  to  be 
long  or  short,  or  even  disappears  altogether  as  in  the  case 
of  sound  slumber,  before  mentioned,  to  the  individual  and 
limited  consciousness.2  This  is  verifiable  by  anyone  in 

'W. 

3  A  person  falling  sound  asleep  on  a  train  while  it  is  standing  at  a 
station,  and  waking  up  again  hours  later  at  another  station  some  hundreds 


312  TRIADS    OF   TIME  [SC.  OF 

the  experience  of  dreams,  reveries,  and  other  extraordi- 
nary or  abnormal  psychic  conditions,  as  in  hypnotism  and 
trance.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  standard  of  time 
with  reference  to  waking  consciousness  ;  quick  steps  make 
short  distances,  slow  paces  make  long  ones ;  sorrow 
lengthens,  joy  shortens  time  ;  i.e.,  the  quick  or  the  slow 
passing  of  time  is  something  subjective,  and  the  real 
significance  of  the  length  or  shortness  of  time  is  also  sub- 
jective, being  only  the  feel  of  such  length  or  shortness. 
In  view  of  the  increasing  rapidity  of  means  of  transit, 
people  now,  often,  speak  of  distances  in  terms  of  time — 

*  it  is  so  many  hours  '  to  a  place — rather  than  in  terms  of 
space,  so  many  hundred  miles.1 

With  reference  to  Self,  Time  may  be  said  to  present 
the  triplicity  of  beginning,  end,  and  middle  ;  beginning, 
a<JI  or  arambha,  i.e.,  the  affirmation  of  the  4  6tat  '  or  its 
origin ;  '  end,'  anta  or  avasana,  its  negation ;  and  the 

*  middle/  madhya,  which  holds  together  both.* 

The  inevitable  perpetual  appearance  and  disappear- 
ance, and  disappearance  and  reappearance,  of  each  'etat'» 

*  this,'  due  to  the  double  necessity  of  being  limited  on  the 
one  hand,  and  yet   being  also,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the 
indissoluble    relation    of   contact  with  the   eternal  Self, 
forces  upon  it  a  pseudo-eternal   succession  of  its  own, 

of  miles  distant,  is  unable  to  say  whether  the  train  has  been  moving  at 
all,  or  how  far,  or  how  long.  For  an  excellent  collection  of  concrete 
illustrations  of  the  illusions  of  space,  time,  and  motion,  see  S.  T.  Klein's 
Science  and  the  Infinite,  ch.  i,  and  Mystic  Experiences,  or  Tales  from 
Yoga  Vasishtha. 

1  Cf.  the  use  of  the  expression  "  light  years  ". 

or  3?rc**r ; 


P.,    CH.    XII]  MEANING    OF    IMMORTALITY  313 

*«p 

apart,  as  it  were,  from  its  identifications  and  disjunctions 
with  the  Self,  and  gives  us  another  aspect  of  the  same 
thing.  This  is  that  most  current  form  of  the  trinity 
inherent  in  Time,  viz.,  '  past,  present,  and  future,'  bhuta, 
bhavat  or  vartamana,  and  bhavishya,  or  '  before,  now,  and 
after,'  as  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Not-  Self.'1 

In  this  second  aspect  is  contained  the  secret  of  per- 
sonal immortality  in  brief/  Every  etat,  '  this,'  being 
once  in  touch  with  the  Eternal,  must  be  marked  with 
that  eternity  for  ever.  There  is  no  succession  of  once, 
twice,  thrice,  etc.,  in  the  Eternal  ;  but  every  separate 
etat  is  under  the  sway  of  such  succession,  and  there  is  a 
contradiction,  an  impossibility  indeed,  involved  in  the 
juxtaposition,  the  coming  together  and  the  uniting,  of 
the  successionless  and  the  successive.  But  the  two  are 
in  contact,  there,  before  us,  all  around  us,  irresistibly 
bound  together  by  and  in  the  Nature  of  the  Absolute. 
This  '  antinomy  of  the  reason  '  is  soluble  only  by  imposing, 
on  the  successive,  the  false  and  illusive  appearance  of  the 


or  SffiUR    and 


2  To  remember,  to  know,  to  realise,  that  '/  am  Immortal  ',  is  to 
become  Immortal,  is  to  attain,  to  achieve,  Immortality.  Sanat-suj&ja 
G*t&  (included  in  Mbh.)  records  a  dialogue  between 
and  the  great  rshi. 


arft  i 


314  APPEARANCE,    DIS-APPEARANCE  [SC.    OF 

%• 

successionless,  the  eternal,  which  simultaneously  includes 
all  moments  of  time,  once,  twice,  thrice,  first,  second, 
third,  etc.,  by  making  every  *  this  '  pseudo-eternal,  for- 
ever-eternal,  ever-lasting,  in  short.  Therefore,  every 
'  this  '  appears  and  vanishes  and  reappears  throughout 

'  Sanat-sujata  !  Reverend  Sir  '  I  hear  thy  teaching  is :  There  is  no 
Death.  1  also  hear  that  gods  and  titans  practised  Brahma-charya  for 
long  periods,  to  secure  Deathlessness.  Which  of  the  two  is  true  ?  Please 
instruct  me'.  '  Kshattriya  !,  both  are  true.  Some  say  Immortality  is 
won  by  effort  and  right  action  ;  others  says  that  Death- (is)  Is-Not. 
Both  views  are  current  in  the  world  to-day,  and  both  are  true.  The 
Great  Wise  Poets  hold  that  Infatuated  Forgetfulness  alone  (of  the 
fact  that  I  is-am  Immortal)  is  Death  ;  and,  following  them,  I  say  that 
Infatuated  Error  (i.e.,  the  Error,  a-vidya  of  believing  that  '  I  is-am  some- 
thing perishable,  fleeting ')  is  Death,  and  alert  Aware-ness  (that  I-am-I 
eternally,  and  the  True  Knowledge,  Viclya,  that  Death-Is-Not,  Death  K» 
Naught,  is  Immortality. 

•  But  to  this  should  be  added  the  further  consideration  that  *  All  is 
I,  Yea,  All  is  I  '  ,  and  that  this  is  the  true  Personal  as  well  as  Im- 
personal Immortality.  Each  '  you  ' ,  each  momentary  '  you  '  is  also 
(potentially)  immortal  ,  because  touched  by  the  '  All-You-He-She-lt-l  ', 
All-Consciousness  ;  because  kept  in  Its  Memory  by  the  Universal  Mind  , 
'  In  God's  Memory  is  all  being  bound  '  ;  in  that  33flfg-|Tr«1>,  samashti- 
jnana,  (P. -A.  ilw-i-ijma'tt,  aql-i-kul),  is  everything  recorded  and  pre- 
served for  ever  and  ever. 

Philosophy,  the  Search  for  Truth,  begins  in  an  acute  desire  for 
Personal  Immortality,  for  redress  of  all  wrongs,  for  abolition  of  all  pain 
and  all  evil.  It  ends  in,  is  accomplished,  achieved,  fulfilled,  completed, 
in  the  disappearance  of  that  desire,  and  its  replacement  by  the  assur- 
ance, the  realisation,  of  Universal,  Impersonal,  All-Personal,  Im- 
mortality, and  Self-identification-dissociation  with  all  good  -as-  well-as-evil, 
all  happiness-as-well-as-misery.  as  Kabir  says  :  1*1  1*1  1C  ^I^R  *1I%, 
'  a  prophet  lies  buried  in  earth  beneath  your  feet,  at  every  step  you 
take  ' ;  and  Hamlet  cries  :  "  Imperious  Caesar  dead  and  turned  to  clay, 
Might  stop  a  hole  to  keep  the  wind  away  ' .  Atoms  are  incessantly 
changing  from  the  sheath  of  one  jiva  to  that  of  another.  The  atom- 
portion  is  in-destructible,  in  its  own  way  ;  the  jiva-portion  is  also  such, 
m  its.  Personality.  '  I  am  separate  from  all  other  I's,  is  also  afeelmg,  an 
373:5^1-1^,  antah-karana-vytti,  a  '  mood  of  mind  ',  which  arises  in  a 
conjunction  of  (an)  aham  -I  with  (an)  etat-this.  Analysed tf  it  vanishes. 
'  You  want  to  be  immortal ;  but  which  You ?  Yesterday's,  to-day's, 
or  tomorrow's?  *  Each  is  different,  more  or  less;  less,  as  the  time, 
interval  is  less;  more,  as  more.  To  be  'all-Persons'  is  the  true 
'  Personal  as  well  as  Impersonal  Immortality.' 


P.,  CH.  XIl]  AND    RE-APPEARANCE  315 

all  time  (i.e.,  in  the  endless  consciousness  of  the  jiva), 
again  and  again,  as  a  firefly  in  the  black  darkness  qf 
a  cloud-shut  night  of  the  rain-time  in  the  tropics.  Hence, 
while,  in  one  sense,  mukti  is  eternal,  or  timeless,  having 
no  beginning  and  no  end,  as  viewed  from  the  standpoint 
of  Pratyag-atma  or  Param-atma  ;  in  another  sense,  it  is 
always  beginning  and  always  ending,  from  the  standpoint 
of  Mula-prakrti.  In  other  words,  the  individual  jiva,  viewed 
as  identical  with  Pratyag-atma,  and  so  with  Param- 
atma,  is  never  bound  and  never  freed.  As  such,  it 
can  scarcely  be  said  ever  to  become  mukta.  It  is 
above  and  beyond  both  bandhana,  bondage,  and  moksha  ; 
liberation  ;  indeed  both  are  in  it  always,  rather  than  it  in 
them  ever.1  But  viewed  as  identical  with  a  piece  of 
Mula-prakrti,  an  *  6tat,'  a  *  this  ',  it  is  always,  in  literally 
endless  repetition,  falling  into  bondage,  i.e.,  into  identifi- 
cation with,  and  voluntary  imprisonment  in,  a  body,  and 
getting  out  of  that  bondage  again  into  liberation,  i.e., 
separation  from,  and  out  of,  that  prison-house.  This  is 
why  we  read  in  Pur  anas  that  the  highest  gods  and 
rshis,  although  all  muktas,  *  free,'  '  emancipated,'  still, 
without  exception,  return  again  and  again,  cycle  after 
cycle,  kalpa  after  kalpa,  passing  and  repassing  endlessly 
through  the  spirals,  retaining,  every  one  of  them,  like  all 
other  jlvas,  their  centres  of  individuality  through 


'  Not  sin,   nor  merit  ;  not  bondage,  nor  liberation  ,  not   joy,   nor 
sorrow  ;  this  is  the  Final  and  Supreme  Attainment.' 


316  REFLECTION    AND    RE-REFLECTION       [SC.    OF 

pralayas  as  through  ordinary  nights,  despite  apparent 
lass  (from  the  standpoint  of  lower  planes  of  matter)  of 
their  defining  and  demarcating  circumferences.  But 
immense  complications  are  introduced  into  this  incessant 
evolution  and  involution,  by  the  ever-mutable  and  ever- 
changing  nature  of  every  *  6tat,'  '  this,'  '  object '.  These 
complications  are  pseudo-infinite  and  therefore  utterly 
unresolvable  and  incomprehensible  in  their  entirety  by 
any  individual  within  limited  time  and  space. 

To  illustrate  the  reflection  and  re-reflection  of  the 
triplicity  of  the  Absolute  everywhere,  as  of  a  light 
between  two  mirrors,  and  also  the  changes,  in  corres- 
pondence with  changes  in  points  of  view  ;  we  may  say 
that  in  this  triplet  of  '  past,  present,  and  future/  yielded 
to  us  by  looking  at  Time  with  reference  to  Not-Self ;  the 
present  is  the  nexus,  or  Na,  Not,  between  the  past  as 
jnana  and  the  future  as  kriya ;  or,  again,  the  future  may 
be  regarded  as  the  nexus  which  will  connect  together 
and  reproduce  both  past  and  present ;  or,  the  past  may 
be  thought  of  as  having  contained  both  the  present  and 
the  future.  The  three  make  a  circle,  and  we  may  start 
at  any  point  in  it. 

Finally,  Time,  viewed  with  reference  to  Negation, 
may  be  said  to  yield  the  mathematical  triplet  of  '  moment, 
period,  and  cycle,'  kshapa,  samaya,  and  yuga,  or  kshana, 
yuga,  and  kala-chakra.1 

In  symbology,  time  is  Kala,  the  *  dark,'  the  '  mover,' 
and  the  '  destroyer,  death,1  all  three  in  one.  It  is 


P.,  CH.  XIl]    CYCLES  WITHIN  THE  ENDLESS  SPIRAL    317 

pictured  as  the  vast-sweeping  Garuda  that  conveys,  from 
place  to  place  as  need  for  giving  help  arises,  the  god  of 
jfiana,  Vishnu  ;  Garuda,  the  eagle  with  the  two  all- 
covering  wings  of  the  past  and  future,  whose  sole  food 
and  means  of  sustenance  are  the  small  cycle-serpents 
(that,  though  belonging  to  the  family  of  the  '  end  less  ' 
An  anta,  form  part  of  the  retinue  of  Shiva,  the  god  of 
ichchha),  one  of  which  he  eats  up  every  day  of  his  life 
by  ordinance  of  the  Creator,  It  may  also  be  the  Vana- 
mala,  '  wreath  of  forest-flowers  ',  that  Vishnu  wears, 
representing  the  endless  chain  of  life-moments  strung 
together'  by  the  thread  of  cognitive  consciousness.  It  is 
also  the  Sudarshana-Chakra  the  blazing  '  sight-pleasing, 
beautiful-appearing,  Discus-  Wheel,'  which  overpowers 
all,  which  nothing  can  withstand.  It  is  the  Wheel  of  Life, 
which  Tribetan  Lamaism  has  adopted  as  the  chief  symbol 
of  the  World-Process.  Yet  again,  it  is  the  thousand-hooded 
serpent-king,  Ananta,  '  without  end,'  Shesha,  '  the  ever- 
remaining,'  who  on  his  countless  heads  and  coils  sup* 
ports  with  ease  the  divine  frame  of  Vishnu  as  well  as  the 
globes  of  the  heavens,  one  of  whose  visible  forms  is  the 
Milky  Way,  and  whom  alone,  of  all  the  snakes,  the  eagle 
Garuda  is  powerless  to  touch.1 


:  I    Bhagavafai  '  Vishnu,  god  of  know- 

ledge, is  borne  along  by  Garuda,  who  is  composed,  of  the  songs  of  the 
Veda/  'the  music  of  the  Spheres'.  Elsewhere,  the  picturing  is  in 
terms  of  T/l-Wf,  '  the  sacrificial  Boar  '. 


Vishnu-Bh&gavata.  XII,  xi,  gives  other  explanations  of  these  sym- 
bols, and  Pranava-vdda  still  others  ;  all  different  ways  of  looking  at 
the  same  thing,  not  inconsistent  with  each  other.  Kala  or  Maha-Kala 
is  one  of  the  names  of  Shiva,  i.e.,  Brahma,  even  as  Kham  or  Space  is. 


318  SYMBOLOGY  [SC.    OF 

It  may  be  noted  here  that  the  Purnaic  story  assigns 
Garuda,  here  regarded  as  corresponding  to  Time  and 
Not-Self,  as  vehicle  to  Vishnu,  the  god  of  sattva,  jnana, 
cognition,  corresponding  to  Self.  "It  similarly  assigns 
the  '  rosary  of  human  heads/  here  said  to  correspond  to 
Space  and  Self,  to  Shiva,  the  god  of  ichchha,  desire  cor- 
responding to  Negation.  Even  more  perplexing  than 
these,  it  assigns  Lakshml-Shakti,  the  goddess  of  all 
wealth,  splendour,  glory,  and  activity,  as  consort,  to 
Vishnu,  and  SarasvatI-  Shakti,  the  goddess  of  jnana, 
knowledge,  to  Brahma,  the  god  of  action.  The  Shakti  of 
Gaurl-Kali  (white-black,  life-death,  affirmation-negation), 
the  goddess  of  ichchha,  is  of  course  assigned  to  Shiva, 
the  god  of  destruction,  and  also  of  all  *  auspiciousness  ' 
and  blessings.  In  Rahasya-traya?  SarasvatI  is  said  to 
be  the  sister  of  Vishnu  ;  and  Lakshml  the  sister  of 
Brahma  ;  and  Vishnu  takes  Lakshmi  in  marriage  and 
SarasvatI  is  given  to  Brahma.2  All  these  and  similar 
other  apparent  inconsistencies  may  be  reconciled  by 
this  consideration,  viz.,  one  factor  of  any  trinity  is  pre- 
dominant no  doubt,  in  any  one  individual,  and  is  regarded 
as  essential  to  that  individual's  being,  as  constituting  his 
peculiar  nature  ;  still  the  other  two  factors  are  also 


,  ,  '  Of  movers,  moving  forces,  I  am  (or  is)  the 
greatest,  Kala,  Time  '.  Compare  the  English  expressions,  *  his  day  is 
over,'  '  his  time  has  come  ',  '  your  time  is  up  ',  '  time  cures  '.  Time  as 
cause  is  the  spirit,  the  genius,  of  the  time  ;  as  result,  it  is  the  era  or 
epoch,  as  Maha-bharata  says. 

1  Ch.   i.   See  also  Nila-kantha's  commentary  on  pevi-Bhagavata 
III,  1,  85. 

-  Pevl-Bhagavata.  Ill  ,.  vi. 


P.,    CH.   XIl]  MOTION.     ITS    TRIADS  319 

necessarily  present  in  or  about  him  ;  otherwise  his  peculiar 
nature  too  could  not  manifest  and  would  not  be  ;  and 
then  they  are  symbolised  as  his  shaktis,  '  powers  ', 
vehicles,  apparel,  ornaments,  etc.  Right  knowledge  should 
result  in  right  action  and  lead  to  wealth  and  splendour  ; 
so  Vishnu  marries  Lakshml.  Action  should  be  guided 
by  knowledge  ;  so  Brahma  marries  Sarnsvati.  And  so  on.1 

(C)  MOTION 

We  have  seen  above  how  the  eternal  Negation  of 
Not-Self  by  Self  appears  as  a  movement,  chalana,  gamana, 
ayana,  of  mergence  and  e-mergence,  ni-majjana  and 
un-majjana,  between  the  two,  because  of  the  limitation 
of  the  '  this  '.  The  third,  which  completes  and  binds 
together  this  duality  of  '  mergence  and  e-mergence/  may 
be  regarded  as  the  '  continual  recurrence  '  of  the  process, 
as  continual  juxtaposition,  sam-majjana,  permeation, 
pervasion.2  This  movement,  considered  metaphysically, 
in  the  abstract,  is  the  primary  and  essential  principle 

1  No  doubt,  in  every  national  or  racial  mythology,  found  at  present, 
there  are  many  simple  Nature-myths,  in  which  the  '  children  of  Nature  '  , 
primitive  humans,  have  simple-mindedly  (yet  often  with  profoundly  wise 
poetical  instinct)  anthropo-morphised  Nature-phenomena,  facts  and 
forces,  in  terms  of  their  daily  experience.  At  the  same  time,  there  are 
to  be  found,  in  many  mythologies,  deliberately  constructed  symbolical 
myths.  This  is  especially  true  of  PurSmc  Mythology,  almost  the  whole 
of  which  (and  it  is  very  large  and  complex)  has  an  elaborately  artificial 
character,  stamping  it  as  symbolical  and  allegorical. 


,  *WRf  3Hf«?  |  fa-TSffi,  3«tJT*H,  *T-JT*ffi  I  Other  aspects 
would  be  expressed  by  ^MsHft  —  fiMflSR  —  P?7?"!,  san-kochana— 
vi-kasana  —  spandana,  contraction-expansion-throbbing  , 


320  CONSEQUENCES  [SC.   OF 

which  underlies  and  determines  all  the  motion  that 
appears  in  the  World-Process  ;  and  it  gives  us  the  triplicity 
inherent  in  Motion  as  appearing  from  the  standpoint 
of  Self. 

From  the  standpoint  of  Not-Self  we  derive  another 
aspect  of  Motion.  It  is  embodied  in,  and  issues  from, 
the  fact  that  each  '  this,'  besides  the  movement  into  and 
out  of  Self,  which  it  is  continuously  subject  to,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  whole-law  of  the  logion,  has  also  a  special 
motion  of  its  own,  in  consequence  of  the  part-law  of  that 
logion.  '  This  '  is  the  opposite  of  '  I  '  in  every  respect, 
and  the  eternal  completeness  and  fulness,  the  freedom 
from  change  and  motion,  of  *  I,'  is  necessarily  matched 
by  the  limitation  and  therefore  imperfection  of  each 
separate  '  this  '  ;  and  the  motion  of  each  separate  '  this  * 
is  the  necessary  expression  of  its  endless  want  and 
changefulness.  If  the  '  etats  ',  '  this-es  ',  could  be  really 
steady  and  unmoving  points  in  endless  space,  not  feeling 
any  want,  and  therefore  not  moving,  then  the  contradic- 
tion would  arise  that  the  Whole  and  each  part  were 
equal,  being  both  perfect.  Hence  the  Whole,  i.e.,  absolute 
Brahma,  Param-atma,  and,  as  identical  with  it,  Pratyag- 
atma  also,  is  often  described  as  a  centre  without  a 
circumference,  or  conversely,  a  circle  without  a  centre, 
or  as  that  which  is  all  centres  only,  or  is  everywhere  a 


nish-shvasana—  uch-chhvasana  —  shvasana,  in-breath- 
ing— out-breathing—  breathing  ;  553«?  -flSH-flWI,  layana-sarjana-sam- 
sarana,  disappearing  —  re-appearing  —  procession  ;  m3f^-5lll 
ni-vflti  —  pra-vjtti—  anu-viftti,  retiring-advancing-circling  ;  and  so  on. 


P.,  CH.  XIl]      NO    SPACE-TIME   WITHOUT    MOTION     321 

centre  and  nowhere  a  circumference,  or  everywhere  a 
circumference  and  nowhere  a  centre,  and  so  on.  This 
is  verifiable  practically  by  everyone  without  much  diffi- 
culty. Sitting  in  a  quiet  place,  shutting  in  the  senses, 
fixing  the  consciousness  upon  itself,  i.e.,  Pratyag-atma, 
the  universal  inward  Self,  and  regarding  and  denying  the 
whole  mass  of  practiculars  summed  up  as  a  single  Not- 
Self,  the  meditator  loses  all  sense  of  Time  and  Space  and 
Motion,  and  the  whole  of  the  universe,  Not-Self  and 
himself,  seems  shut  up  into  a  single  moveless  point  of 
consciousness.  Space  and  Time  would  not  exist  if  such 
Motion,  as  between  a  particular  etat  and  another  parti- 
cular etat,  and,  indeed,  between  all  possible  Stats,  did 
not  exist.  In  other  words,  this  second  motion  is 
necessarily  due  to  the  fact  that  each  etat,  '  this  ',  being 
opposed  to  the  omnipresent,  infinite  and  eternal,  un- 
limited, '  I,'  has  to  oppose  it  at  every  point  of  the  whole 
of  its  endless  being  ;  and  thus  reproduces  and  reflects  in 
itself  a  pseudo-omnipresence.  This  pseudo-omnipresence 
of  the  limited  etat,  en-souled  by  and  en-form-ing  a  self, 
takes  shape  as,  becomes,  is,  endless  and  perpetual  Motion 
everywhere,  from  moment  to  moment  or  period  to  period 
of  Time,  and  from  place  to  place,  from  point  to  point,  of 
Space.  It  cannot  accomplish  the  law  and  achieve, 
manifest,  fulfil,  its  nature  in  any  other  way.1 

1  Similarly  to  be  interpreted  are  the  psuedo-omniscience  and  the 
pseudo-omnipotence,  in  potentiality,  of  each  jiva  ;  each  self,  as  identical 
with  Self,  must  know  and  deny,  must  identify  itself  with  and  repel,  every 
6tat  ;  and  yet  it  cannot  do  so,  as  regards  all  €tats,  at  once ;  hence, 
always  a  greater  and  greater  compassing,  and  letting  go,  and  beginning 
afresh . 

21 


322  OTHER    TRIADS    OF    MOTION  [SC.  OF 

Other  ways  of  describing  the  fact  are  these  :  Motion 
is  the  perpetual  endeavour  of  the  limited  to  become 
unlimited  ;  of  the  successive  to  achieve  simultaneity  ;  of 
the  finite  to  secure  infinity  ;  it  is  the  constant  struggle 
of  Space,  or  extension,  and  Time,  or  intension,  to  coincide, 
and  to  collapse  into  the  perfect  Rest,  the  single  point, 
the  rockboundness  of  Absolute-Consciousness. 

This  second  view  of  motion,  with  reference  to  Not- 
Self,  gives  us  the  triplet  of  '  approach,  recess,  and 
revolution,1  or  '  centripetal,  centrifugal,  and  orbital 
motion,'  upa-sarpana,  apa-sarpana,  and  pra-sarpana  or 
pari-bhramana.1 

Finally,  with  reference  to  Negation,  we  have  the 
mathematical  triplet,  in  Motion,  of  '  linear,  rotatory  and 
spiral,'  *  rju-bhramana,  chakra-bhramana,  and  avarta- 
bhramana,  corresponding  to  Self,  Not-Self,  and  Negation. 
These  three  motions  sum  up  in  themselves  all  the  possible 
motions  of  Samsara,  as  may  be  pictured  by  the  diagram 
on  p.  432,  vol.  iii,  of  The  Secret  Doctrine  (Adyar  edn.),  if 
the  spines  shown  therein  along  the  outer  side  of  the  single 
line,  whose  convolutions  make  up  the  whole  diagram, 
were  also  made  parts  of,  and  continuous  with,  that  same 
single  line,  and  the  line  were  shown  as  constantly  coiling 

1  Some  physicists  regard  vibratory  or  oscillatory  motion  as  a  third 
primary  form  of  motion,  side  by  side  with  the  translatory  or  free-path 
or  linear,  and  the  rotary  or  circular.  (Vide  Dolbear,  Ether,  Matter, 
and  Motion,  iii.)  But  it  will  probably  be  found  on  analysis,  that 
vibratory,  undulatory,  and  all  other  forms  of  motion  are  compounded  out 
of  elements  of  the  primary  kinds  suggested  in  this  and  the  preceding 
paragraph. 


an  -  *rf    si  -  gfa  or  qft  - 


P.,    CH.   XIl]  SYMBOLOGY  323 

and  turning  round  and  round  upon  itself,  like  a  spiral 
wire-spring,  and  all  this  line  and  process  of  coiling  were 
produced  and  carried  round  and  round  pseudo-infinitely. 

This  Motion,  the  first  factor  of  the  second  trinity, 
seems  to  be  figured  in  the  Puranas  as  the  h  a  m  s  a,  the 
*  swan  '-vehicle  of  Brahma,  the  lord  of  Action,  which 
h  a  m  s  a  (under  another  interpretation  of  the  Upanishap- 
text  quoted  before)  circles  with  double  beat  of  wing 
incessantly  in  the  great  wheel  or  cycle  of  Brahma.  It 
may  also  be  the  mala,  rosary  of  crystal  beads,  that 
Brahma  ever  turns  around  and  tells  in  his  right  hand, 
in  constant  movement,  weaving  all  single  vibrations  into 
one,  on  the  thread  of  the  action-consciousness.  It  may, 
yet  again,  be  the  ever  twisting,  turning,  rolling  stream  of 
holy  Ganga  stored  within  the  same  god's  '  bowl '  of 
sacred  waters,  the  kamandalu.1 

Before  passing  on  to  our  next  subject  of  discussion, 
the  individual  self,  or  jlva,  we  may  note  that  although 
Space  and  Time  and  Motion  have,  like  Pratyag-atma, 
Mula-prakrti,  and  Negation,  been  treated  of  in  successive 
order,  this  is  only  because  of  the  limitations  of  speech, 
which,  as  has  been  said,  can  proceed  only  is  succession. 
It  must  not  be  imagined,  any  more  as  regards  the  former 
trinity  than  as  regards  the  latter,  that  there  is  any 

1  The  statements  made  in  this  work  as  to  symbology,  it  should 
be  borne  in  mind,  are  only  suggestive.  They  have  no  immediate 
importance  here  with  reference  to  the  general  principles  underlying  the 
constitution  of  the  kosmos,  which  are  attempted  to  be  outlined  in  this 
work,  primarily.  That  they  are  made  at  all  is  only  in  the  hope  that  the 
suggestions  may  be  of  use  and  possibly  give  some  clue  to  students  who 
may  take  an  interest  in  working  out,  with  the  help  of  purSnic  legends, 
the  details  which  issue  out  of  the  general  principles  described  here. 


324  THE   WHY   OF   PERPETUAL    MOTION        [SC.    OF 

precedence  or  succedence  amongst  the  three.  They  are 
perfectly  synchronous,  utterly  inseparable,  all  equally 
important,  and  all  equally  dependent  with  and  on  each 
other,  and  also  with  and  on  the  primal  trinity,  of  Self, 
Not-Self,  and  Negation.  And  all  these  trinities,  again, 
co-inhere  in  and  are  inseparable  from  jlv-atma,  jiva-atom, 
jlva-unit,  which  combines  and  manifests  in  itself  all  of 
them,  and  therefore  is  '  the  immortal  beyond  doubt  and 
fear/  if  it  will  only  so  recognise  itself. 

He  who  grasps  this  secret  of  the  heart  of  Motion, 
Time,  and  Space,  will  understand  Vasishtha's  riddle  that 
'  all  is  everywhere  and  always  '. 1  For  jlva  is  the  tireless 
weaver  that,  on  the  warp  and  woof  of  Time  and  Space, 
with  the  shuttle  'of  Motion,  weaves  eternally  the  count- 
less-coloured tapestry  of  all  this  multifarious  illusion  - 
world,  carrying  the  whole  plan  thereof  incessantly  within 
itself,  and  so  carrying  '  all/  '  always  '  and  '  everywhere '  in 
one.  If  we  turn  our  eyes  to  the  warp  and  the  woof  and 
the  shuttle,  we  see  but  the  endless  tapestry  of  Penelope 
that  never  progresses  and  never  regresses,  though  worked 
incessantly.  Law  requires  more  law,  and  that  again  more 
still ;  to  fulfil  and  justify  the  opposed  necessities,  to 
reconcile  the  contradictions  of  the  constitution  of  the 


1  And  also,  incidentally,  that  orderliness  or  disorderliness  in  the 
conduct  of  the  affairs  of  this  '  maya-illusion  '  of  samsara,  the  perpetually 
moving  world,  depends  entirely  upon  the  right  or  wrong  use  of  these 
three  'emptinesses/  viz.,  space,  time,  and  motion.  To  make  a  proper 
division  of  these  three,  to  perform  fixed  actions  at  fixed  times  in 
fixed  places,  is  to  be  orderly  ;  to  do  otherwise  is  to  be  disorderly.  But  it 
has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  both  order  and  disorder  are  relative,  and 
both,  ultimately,  wholly  subjective.  To  prove  to  itself  that  it  is  not  the 
slave  of  any  particular  order,  the  Self  indulges  in  all  kinds  of  '  dreams  '. 


P,,    CH.   XIl]  THE   GREAT   PLAY  325 

Absolute,  one  process  is  invented ;  that  shows  defect, 
another  is  invented  ;  that  breeds  only  new  grievances, 
they  are  amended  ;  ten  more  start  up,  new  laws  appear 
to  cover  them  !  A  laughable  yet  very  serious,  a  fearful 
yet  all-beautiful,  an  exceeding  simple  yet  most  awesome 
and  stupendous  Hla,  pastime  and  child's-play.  An  untold 
and  untellable,  a  veritably  exhaustless,  richness  of  variety, 
which  is  yet  but  the  thinnest  Maya  and  pretence  to  hide 
the  unruffled  calm  and  sameness  of  the  Self.  A  heart  of 
utter  peace  within  mock-features  of  infinite  unrest  and 
toil  and  turmoil.  Thus  ever  goes  on  this  endless, 
countless,  strictly  and  truly  pseudo-infinite  complication, 
this  repetition  over  repetition,  reproduction  of  re- 
production, and  reflection  within  reflection.  Yet  is 
it  ever  reducible — at  any  moment  of  Space  and  Time 
and  Motion,  as  soon  as  the  jiva  really  chooses  to 
reduce  it  so,  by  simply  turning  round  its  gaze  upon  itself 
— into  the  eternal  peace  of  the  simple  formula  of  the 
logion  :  Aham  Etat  Na,  *  I  (am)-this-Not.  This  is  so, 
because  the  complications  are  not  outside  of  the  jiva,  but, 
as  soon  as  it  realises  its  identity  with  the  universal  Self, 
within  it.  Forgetting,  as  it  were,  its  own  true  nature,  it 
creates  them  in  and  by  the  very  act  of  running  after  them 
till  it  becomes  giddy,  ready  to  fall  down  in  depair  with 
its  o\vn  whirlings,  all  in  vain,  like  a  snake  chasing  its 
own  tail,  which  it  would  find  and  seize  more  surely  as 
part  of  its  own  self  if  it  but  gave  up  its  mad  gyrations, 
and  turned  back  upon  it  quietly  and  peacefully  and  rested 
still.  '  The  Self-born  pierced  the  senses  outwards,  hence 


326    COUNTLESS  PAINTINGS  ON  EMPTY  SPACE    [SC.  OF 

the  jiva  seeth  the  outer  world,  and  not  the  inner  Atma. 
A  wise  one  here  and  there  turneth  back  his  gaze,  from 
outward  to  inward,  desirous  of  immortality,  and  beholdeth 
the  inward  Self.'  ] 


fMnft, 


fag 


(O  silent  Sleeper  in  this  seething  Sea  ! 
Plain  we  behold,  and  yet  speech  may  not  be. 
We  wander,  wonder,  search,  and  then  we  find, 
But  find  it  in  the  silence  of  the  mind. 
Who  will  believe  the  marvel,  if  we  say, 
Though  it  be  plain,  plain  as  the  light  of  day, 
That  on  the  boundless  wall  of  Nothingness, 
A  Painter  full  of  skill  but  bodiless, 
Limns  phantom  figures  that  will  never  fade, 
Though  to  efface  them  time  has  e'er  essayed, 
Limns  forms  of  countless  colours  ceaselessly, 
O  serene  Sleeper  of  this^  stormy  Sea  !) 


^_-™*     Pas,     Vinaya    Patrika,    Hymn    No.     112,    to 
*'Ke-shava,'  i.e.,  Vishnu  *  sleeping  in  the  waters  '. 

NOTE  I. — The  word  f  pastime  '  may  perhaps  be  thought 
objectionable,    as  likely  to  jar  the   feelings  of  least  some 


P.,  CH.  XIl]       DRAMA  NEEDS  TRAGEDY-COMEDY          327 

earnest -minded  thinkers  who  are  holders  of  serious  views  as 
to  the  destinies  of  man,  his  relation  to  God,  and  the 
general  purpose  of  creation  or  evolution.  Readers,  who,  not 
content  with  the  solutions  now  extant  of  the  problems  of 
life,  find  it  worth  while  to  read  to  the  end  of  this  book 
systematically,  will,  it  is  earnestly  believed,  find  that  the 
view  of  life  advocated  herein,  is  not  inconsistent  with,  or 
exclusive  of,  any.  They  will  see  that  it  rather  includes  all 
the  deepest  views  of,  and  the  highest-reaching  wishes  for, 
the  future  of  man,  that  have  been  entertained  by  the  most 
honoured  thinkers  and  well-wishers  of  their  fellow  men,  so 
far  as  such  may  be  ascertained  from  published  writings. 
An  endless  progressiveness,  an  infinite  perfectibility,  an 
ever  closer  approach  to  the  ever -expanding  Divine,  are  hoped 
for  here  also  for  the  human  race,  most  sincerely  and  strongly. 
Only,  in  this  work,  this  view  is  regarded  as  constituting  not 
the  whole,  but  only  half  the  truth ;  as  being  that  aspect  of 
the  Truth  which  is  visible  from  the  standpoint  of  the  indi- 
vidual jiva  pursuing  the  philosophy  of  Change  and  its  corres- 
ponding worship.  The  other  and  supplementary  half  is  that, 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  universal  Self,  there  is  no  progress 
and  no  regress,  No  change  of  any  kind,  so  that  if  that  condi- 
tion may  be  described  at  all  in  terms  of  the  Changing,  then 
the  only  words  to  use  are  *  Pastime,'  '  Play,'  *  unfettered 
Will/  *  uncontrolled  outgoing  of  Life,'  '  unresisted  and  irresis- 
tible manifestation  of  the  inner  Nature,'  '  the  unquestionable 
Will  of  God,'  *  Thy  will  be  done,'  '  Who  shall  question  Him  ?' 
'  My  will  and  Pleasure/  'the Pleasure  of  the  Univeral  Self/ 
etc.  Are  the  free  rompings  of  the  child,  and  the  vigorous 
games  of  youth,  and  the  vast  industries  of  peace  (and  un- happily 
also  war)  of  a  nation's  matured  manhood,  that  are  but  as 
means  to  the  child's  rompings  and  the  youth's  games — are 
these  such  a  slur  upon  life  that  the  word  '  Pastime  '  should 
jar  upon  the  serious-minded  ?  Are  not,  rather,  happy  homes 
the  very  essence  of  a  nation's  life,  and  the  child's  and  the 
mother's  bright  smile  and  laugh  and  play  the  very  essence 
of  the  '  home '  ?  Play  is  a  thing  as  serious  at  least  as  work, 
in  the  well-balanced  life.  And,  while  this  idea  is  yielding 
up  to  him  its  full  significance,  let  the  reader  bear  in  mind  that, 
as  shown  by  the  above  inadequate  translation  from  Tulasi  Das, 


328  PERIODIC  WAKING-SLEEPING  [SC.    OF 

a  devotee  of  devotees,  whose  book,  the  Ramayana,  has  been 
the  Bible  of  hundreds  of  millions  of  Hindus,  for  the  last 
three  hundred  years — this  idea,  that  the  world  is  the  Pastime 
of  the  Self  has  been  entertained  with  loving  fervour  by  at 
least  some  of  the  most  earnest-minded  of  men.  Vyasa  him- 
self, in  his  Brahma-sutra  (II,  i,  33),  expressly  uses  this  very 
word  '  LilaY  as  the  final  explanation,  together  with  '  Kai- 
valyam,'  of  the  appearance  and  the  disappearance  of  the 
manifested  world  :  *  Play,  and  Retirement  into  Sleep  and 
Solitude,  as  of  the  ordinary  human  being/  This  book  will 
indeed  have  tailed  in  its  purpose  if  it  leaves  behind  the  im- 
pression that  devotion  to  individual  Ishvaras,  embodying,  in 
greater  or  lesser  degree,  the  universal  and  impersonal  ideal, 
has  been  scoffed  at  and  belittled  herein,  rather  than  made  in- 
finitely stronger  and  deeper  and  more  unshakable  by  being 
placed  on  the  firm  foundations  of  reason.  Also,  indeed,  the 
dire  tragedies  that  are  enacted  in  the  world,  every  moment, 
would  harrow  up  sensitive  souls  irredeemably,  overwhelming 
all  sense  of  the  equal  number  of  comedies  that  also  are  en- 
acted at  the  same  time  necessarily,  (for  the  pain  of  one  is  the 
pleasure  of  another  and  vice  versa),  and  destroying  all  faith 
in  the  mercy,  justice,  goodness  of  God,  were  it  not  possible  to 
assure  them  that  all  these  awful  heart-crushing  agonies,  (as 
also  the  dance  and  laughter),  are,  verily,  as  unreal  to  the 
Univeral  Self,  as  theatre-plays  are  to  the  human  spectator. 

"  God  felt  defect  ",  "  He  took  no  Joy  in  His  Sole-ness, 
Soli-tude  ",  "  He  willed  :  May  I  be  Many  ",  "  He  Want-ed  to 
love  and  be  loved  ",  "  He  willed  the  creation,  that  His  Glory 
may  be  known  and  praised"  —such  are  the  causes  assigned 
for  the  creation  of  the  world  by  a  Personal  Creator,  even  by 
devout  minds.  They  all,  on  the  least  analysis,  come  only  to 
Lila,  Play,  in  order  to  Pass-Time,  and  En-com-Pass-Space, 
and  sur-Pass-Motion. 

NOTE  II.— The  last  four  lines,  in  bold  type,  of  p.  314, 
may  seem  to  need  further  explication.  How  to  be  all  persons  ? 
How  be  personal  as  well  as  all-personal,  Im-personal  or  Non- 
personal  ?  How  be  mortal  and  also  Immortal  ?  The  subject 
will  probably  become  clear  if  the  reader  will  endeavour 
to  understand  thoroughly,  the  nature  of  (a)  Param-atma, 


P.,  CH.  XIl]    ALL  JIVAS  ARE  EQUAL,  ALL  INFINITE     329 

Pratyag-atma,  Mula-prakrti,  (b)  }iv-atma,  (c)  the  connection 
between  them  all,  as  expounded  in  the  preceding  pages.  He 
may  also  read  carefully  what  is  said  in  this  book,  in  several 
places,  supra  as  well  as  infra,  on  the  subject  of  *  individuality  ' 
and  '  individuals  within  individuals  '.  Finally  —  and  this  may 
perhaps  help  him  most  —  he  should  consider  the  case  of  the 
novelist  or  dramatist-actor  who,  while  always  conscious  '  at 
the  back  of  his  mind  ',  that  he  is  not  identical  with  any  of  the 
hundreds,  or  thousands,  of  characters  and  parts  which  he 
creates,  yet  identifies  himself,  for  the  time  being,  with  each 
of  these  characters  or  parts  ;  and,  in  fact,  the  more  thorough 
such  identification,  the  more  realistic  and  successful  his 
portraiture  or  acting.  Any  reader  also,  of  a  really  fine  novel 
or  drama  or  even  history  (if  it  is  properly  written),  may  enter 
so  thoroughly  into  the  spirit  of  each  character,  that  he  may 
(as  it  were)  forget  '  his  own  proper  self  '  for  the  time,  and  feel 
as  if  he  was  that  character,  present  in  those  surroundings,  and 
undergoing  those  experiences.  Many  dreams  are  so  vivid  that 
when  we  recall  them  a  {sufficiently  long  time  afterwards1  we 
begin  to  doubt  and  wonder  if  we  did  not  actually  and  really 
pass  through  that  experience  while  awake.  Children  on  the 
one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  very  old  men,  are  especially  liable 
to  such  '  illusions  '.  In  '  reveries  ',  which  are  '  waking 
dreams  ',  we  lose  ourselves  entirely  in  and  into  '  other 
worlds  '. 

Also,   all  jiva-s  have  to  pass  through  all  experiences,  turn 
by  turn. 


T:  |  Brhad  Vp.\.$   13. 
'  All  these  are  equal  ;  all  are  infinite  '. 


4  Among  these,  none  is  greater,  none  smaller  '. 


Mbh..  ShSnti,  ch.  291. 


330   ALL  EXPERIENCES  COME  TO  EACH  BY  TURNS   [SC. 

'  None  is  ultimately  higher,  none  is  ultimately  lower  ; 
none  has,  in  the  nett  result,  on  the  whole,  a  farther,  higher, 
finer  reach  than  any  other.  Knowing  this,  that  (temporary) 
misfortune  which  may  cause  serious  fear  and  distress  to  the 
unwise  person  who  does  not  know  the  Truth,  leaves  the  wise 
one,  who  knows  the  Truth,  unshaken  f. 


\ 

Mbh.,  Shanti,  ch.  25. 

'  Joy  and  sorrow,  growth  and  decay,  gain  and  loss,  life 
and  death,  come  to  each  and  all,  turn  by  turn.  Therefore, 
let  none  be  depressed,  none  be  elated  ;  let  all  always  maintain 
an  equable  mind. 

3RS«Jc4  qftlTTOWT^l  %<J:  I     Yoga-Sutra,  in.  15. 

*  Differences  in  the  order  of  succession  of  (the  very  same) 
experiences  are  the  cause  of  those  differences  of  personality  or 
individuality  which  are  marked  by  or  accompany  special 
births  in  special  types  of  bodies  '. 

"  To  realise  the  bliss  in  Devachan,  or  the  woes  in  Avitchi> 
you  have  to  assimilate  them  —  as  we  do  "  ;  The  Mahatma 
Letters,  p.  194.  '  We  '  here  means  the  Masters,  Adepts,  Rshis. 

See  also  the  illustrations,  by  various  examples,  of  what 
makes  the  illusion  of  difference  between  persons,  individuals, 
or  individualities,  given  on  pp.  59-60  and  173-174  of  The 
Science  of  the  Self  \  pp.  62-63  and  411-413  of  World  War 
and  Its  Only  Cure  —  World  Order  and  World  Religion  ;  and, 
in  The  Essential  Unity  of  All  Religions,  the  sections,  in 
Chap.  Ill,  on  'The  Mutual  Balancing  of  Pleasures  and 
Pains  f  and  '  Personal  and  Impersonal  Devotion.* 


CHAPTER  XIII 

JlVA-ATOMS 

(A)  GENERALLY 

BEFORE    proceeding     further     we     may    make     a    brief 
retrospect. 

From  the  confusion  of  the  world  we  travelled  slowly 
and  laboriously  to  the  Absolute.  In  that  we  saw  the 
first  trinity,  of  Self,  Not-Self,  and  Negation.1  We  saw 
again  that  Self  was  triple,  Sat-Chid-Ananda  ;  Not-Self 
was  triple,  Rajas- Sattva-Tamas  ;  the  affirmative  Shakti- 
Energy  of  Negation  was  triple,  Srshti-Sthiti-Laya  ;  and, 
finally,  that  (the  negative  shunyata,  '  emptiness ',  of) 
Negation  itself  was  also  triple,  Desha-Kala-Kriya. 
We  also  saw  that  each  one  of  this  last  trinity 
was  again  triple  in  its  own  turn.  We  may  also  have 
noticed,  in  passing,  that  the  whole,  the  aggregate,  of  any 
three,  might,  in  a  sense,  be  regarded  as  a  fourth  which 
summarised  and  completed  them  all.  We  also  had  a 
glimpse  of  the  fact  that  these  trinities  and  triplets  are  all 
combined  in  the  jiva-atom  which,  because  of  this  fact, 

1  "  The  One  can,  when  manifesting,  become  only  Three.  The  Un- 
manifested,  when  a  simple  duality,  remains  passive  and  concealed. 
The  dual  monad  (the  7th  and  6th  principles),  has,  in  order  to  manifest 
itself,  to  first  become  a  triad"'.  The  Mahatma  Letters,  347;  see 
also  p.  346.  It  would  be  useful  for  the  student  to  try  to  translate  the 
symbols  used  there  into  the  abstract  terms  used  here. 


332  DEFINITION    OF    ATOM  [SC.  OF 

contains,  in  seed,  the  whole  of  the  World-Process  in 
itself.  After  this  brief  resume  we  may  go  on  to  consider 
jiva-atoms  in  a  little  more  detail, 

Etat,  '  This,'  is  by  necessity  Many,  by  opposition  to 
the  One-ness  of  the  Aham,  the  '  I  ',  Self,  and  each  of  these 
Many,  by  opposition  to  the  Self's  unlimitedness  and  chang- 
lessncss,  and,  again,  by  mutual  exclusion  and  limitation, 
under  the  stress  of  Negation,  is  limited,  and  trebly  limited, 
in  space,  time,  and  motion;  i.e.,  it  has  got  a  pari- 
m  a  n  a,  dimension,  extension,  size  in  space,  by  limitation 
on  this  side  and  on  that  ;  a  spanda  or  sphurana, 
a  vibration  in  motion,  a  pendulum-swing,  a  revolution 
within  the  area  of  a  radius,  limited  movement,  which  is 
necessarily  made  rhythmic  by  the  fact  of  limitation  in 
space  and  time  ;  and  an  a  y  u,1  a  duration,  a  life-period, 
a  limited  succession,  in  time.  Such  is  the  general  des- 
cription of  the  atoms  which  make  up  Mula-prakrti,  the 
very  essence  of  which  is  Manyness,  atomicity.  The 
atom  is  an  etat,  a  *  this,'  having  limited  size,  duration, 
and  motion  ;  it  cannot  apparently  be  defined  more  simply 
or  comprehensively  anywise  else. 

But  an  £tat,  '  this,'  cannot  exist  apart  from 
Aham,  '  I  '  ;  Mula-prakrti  is  inseparable  from  Pratyag- 
atma.  Each  '  this  '  is  indissolubly  connected  with 


,  ;  aTrg  I  This  word  ajfg,  and  3TRmr,  ayama, 

extension,  and  3T*I«T,  ayana,  movement,  seem  to  be  connected  to- 
gether in  a  suggestive  and  significant  way,  (though  etymologically 
different)  ,  but  the  latter  two  are  not  very  current  now  in  the  general 
meanings  mentioned.  Hence  the  other  corresponding  words  have  been 
given  above. 


P.,  CH.  Kill]   MUTUAL  BORROWING  OF  ATTRIBUTES  333 

4  1,'  by  the  double  bond  of  '  am  '  and  '  am  not*  —  '  am  r 
representing  the  ascending  phase  of  the  metabolism  of  the 
life-process,  and  '  am  not  '  the  descending  phase  thereof. 
From  all  this  it  follows  necessarily  that  the  one  Self 
becomes  limited  off  into  a  pseudo-infinite  number  of 
*  aham-s,'  jlvas  or  jivatmas  ;  that  every  '  aham  '  is  em-bod- 
ied in  an  '  £tat  ',  and  every  '  etat  '  is  en-sowJ-ed  by  an 
'  aham  ;  '  and  that  every  one  of  these  pseudo-infinite  atoms 
that  make  up  Mula-prakrti  is  therefore  living.  Each  such 
living  atom,  combining  in  itself  Pratyag-atma  and  Mula- 
prakrti,  is  an  individual,  an  individualised  jiva-atom.1 
And  we  may  note  that  as  each  atom  is  a  '  this,'  having 
definite  size,  duration,  and  vibration,  so  is  each  jiva  an 
'  I/  having  a  definite  extent  or  reach  of  consciousness, 
indicated  by  the  body  ('  the  soul  made  visible  ')  which  it 
wears,  an  age  or  lifetime,  and  a  restless  activity  of  mind. 
The  Samskrt  words  denoting  these  aspects  of  the  jiva 
are  also  the  same  as  for  the  aspects  of  the  atom,  except 
that,  in  place  of  the  word  parimana,  dimension,  the  word 
kshetra,  the  '  field  '  (of  consciousness)  is  more  cqmmon- 
ly  used/ 


,  STJT 


I  Chhandogya,  I,  i,  5-6.  '  This  pair,  voice 

(speech)  and  breath,  hymn  and  melody,  both  come  together  in  the 
Imperishable  Word-sound  Om  (Aum)  ;  and  when  the  Two  come  together, 
they  fulfil  all  their  Desire  and  desires  for  each  other.' 

2  Or  3fl3IT3*?N:  ;  jati-ayur-bhoga,  in  the  words  of  the  Yoga-sUtra. 

i  e  a  sheath  or  body  extended  in  space,  a  lifetime,  and  a  sum-total  of 
experiences.  For  the  word  kshetra,  see  GI#if  ch.  xiii. 


334      ONE  BECOMES  MANY;  MANY,  ONE   [SC.  OF 

These  attributes,  it  is  clear,  appear  in  the  jiva  with 
reference  to  the  primary  attributes  of  Negation,  viz., 
space,  time,  and  motion. 

With  reference  to  the  functions  of  the  Shakti-aspect 
of  Negation,  (i.e.,  the  Energy  of  the  I,  hiding  in  M),  viz., 
creation,  preservation,  and  destruction,  the  attributes  of 
the  jiva-atom  may  be  said  to  be  birth,  life,  and  death  ; 
or,  in  other  words,  growth,  stagnation,  and  decay ;  corres- 
ponding to  attraction,  balancing,  and  repulsion. 

In  such  a  jiva-atom,  mutual  imposition  of  the  attri- 
butes of  each,  Self  and  Not-Self,  is  complete  ;  in  collaps- 
ing together  they  have  taken  on  the  properties  of  one 
another ;  and  the  jiva-atom  therefore  shows,  in  its  own 
individuality,  the  phenomenon  of  permanence  in  imper- 
manence  and  impermanence  in  permanence,  oneness  in 
manyness  and  manyness  in  oneness.  The  one  Pratyag- 
atma  becomes  many  individuals  ;  the  many  Mula-prakrti 
becomes  organised  ones,  each  indestructible,  each  having  a 
personal  immortality,  or  unending  duration,  and  a  pseudo- 
infinity  of  endless  stretch  of  consciousness,  as  also  the 
true  eternity  and  infinity  of  Pratyag-atma.  In  strictness, 
the  reflection  of  the  One  in  the  Many  should  cause  the 
appearance  of  pseudo-infinite  geometrical  *  points  without 
magnitude/  true  'centres,'  which  make  the  'singular  one,' 
as  opposed  to  and  yet  reproducing  the  'universal  One  ' ; 
but  as,  because  of  the  other  law,  operating  simultaneously 
with  equal  force,  viz.,  that  the  *  this '  is  limited  as  against 
the  unlimitedness  of  Aham,  the  point  must  have  definite 
limitation  ;  therefore,  everywhere,  we  have  jlva-atoms 


P.,    CH.   Xlll]        ALL   MATTER   ANIMATE  335 

having  size,  etc.,  as  said  before,  in  place  of  points,  which, 
however,  always  exist  as  possibilities,  as  abstract  and 
theoretical  centres.  Such  definite  jiva-atoms,  considered 
with  greater  reference  to  the  atom-aspect,  may  be  called 
*  particulars  ' ;  with  greater  reference  to  the  jlva-aspect, 
'  individuals  '  ;  the  individual,  particular,  or  definite,  be- 
ing the  reconciliation  of  the  extremes  of  the  singular  and 
the  universal ;  which  '  extremes  meet '  however,  for 
in-fin-itesimal  centre  and  in-fin-ite  circle  are  equally 
in-de-fin-able,  and  are  therefore  undistingnishable,  equal, 
identical. 

We  see  now  what  the  real  value  of  the  distinction 
between  animate  matter  and  inanimate  matter  is.  Here, 
as  everywhere  else,  the  truth  lies  in  the  mean,  and  error 
in  the  two  extremes.  There  is  absolutely  no  matter  at  all 
that  is  not  en-Kiraw-ed,  ensouled,  inspired,  animated  by 
spirit ;  and  also  no  spirit  that  is  not  in-/orm-ed  with, 
inclosed,  inclothed,  ensheathed,  embodied,  in  matter.1 
This — which  is  proved  by  its  own  irrefragable  chain  of 
deductions  to  the  inner,  '  pure/  or  higher  reason,  the 
reason  which  looks  at  facts  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
universal  Self ;  as  opposed  to  the  outer,  the  '  impure,' 
reason,  which  looks  at  them  from  the  standpoint,  and 
with  the  egoistic  clingings  and  limitations,  of  the  indi- 
vidual self — this  is  now  being  proved  even  to  the  outward 
senses  by  the  admirable  industry  of  modern  physical 
science.  It  has  been  shown  by  an  elaborate  and  very 
instructive  series  of  facts  and  arguments :  "  that  a 

\    Mah&-bharaja,  ShSntiparva,  ch.  184. 


336  FALSE    ONE-SIDED   VIEWS  [SC.    OF 

fundamental  difference,  i.e.,  difference  in  the  elementary 
materials  and  the  elementary  forces,  between  organic  and 
inorganic  bodies,  does  not  exist,"  '  and  that  the  differ- 
ences between  them  "  are  no  greater  than  the  differences 
between  many  inorganic  substances,  and  consist  merely, 
in  the  mode  of  union  of  the  elements  ",2  The  scientists  of 
to-day  have  collected  facts  and  performed  experiments 
which  show  conclusively  that  so-called  inanimate  and 
inorganic  matter  responds  to  stimulus,  and  behaves 
generally  in  the  same  manner  as  animate  and  organic 
matter.1  Hasty  deductions  from  such  facts,  e.g.,  '  the 
soul  is  but  an  electric  current  in  another  form,'  '  matter 
and  spirit  are  identical,'  are  liable  to  misconstruction,  and 
rest  really  upon  inaccuracy  and  misunderstanding.  It 
would  be  almost  truer  to  say  that  *  the  electric  current  is 
but  soul  in  another  form '.  Minds  that  have  not  yet 
learnt  to  look  leisurely,  calmly,  and  impartially,  at  both 
sides  of  a  question,  and  are  still  at  the  stage  of  taking 
hurried,  passionate,  and  one-sided  views  of  it,  with  a 
partisan  zeal,  either  emphasise  Matter  too  much  and  re- 
solve Spirit  entirely  into  it,  or  emphasise  Spirit  too  much 
and  resolve  Matter  away  entirely  into  it.  This  is  the 
result  of  looking  at  only  one  aspect,  at  one  half,  of 
the  two-sided  whole.  The  whole  Truth  is  that  all  Matter 
is  living,  and  all  Life  material ;  that  the  pseudo-eternal 
Motion  of  all  Matter,  in  all  its  endless  complication,  is 

1  Max  Verworn,  General  Physiology,  p.  336. 

3  Ibid. ,  p.  272. 

*  Sir  J.  C.  Bose,  Response  in  the  Living  and  the  Non-Living, 


P.,  CH.  XIII]       PSYCHO-PHYSICAL  PARALLELISM         337 

throughout  accompanied,  on  an  ineffaceable  parallel,  by 
the  fact  of  Consciousness,  the  fact  of  Life,  now  higher 
and  now  lower  in  degree  of  manifestation,  according  to 
the  increased  or  decreased  elaboration  of  the  compli- 
cations.1 Etat  and  Aham  can  never  be  separated/  Yet 
they  are  distinct  also  and  can  never  be  identified  literally, 
except  as  they  both  are  ever  merged,  by  Negation,  in  the 
completeness  and  Self-sarneness  of  the  Absolute'.  They 
are  distinguishable,  but  not  separable,  in  brief.  This 
psycho-physical  parallelism  is  the  inner  meaning  of  the 
Sankhya-doctrine,  referred  to  before,  viz.,  the  constant 

1  See   The  Mahatma  Letters,  pp,  60,  63.  65.  66.  67.  and  other  pages 
referred  to  in   its  index,  against  the  words  Matter.  Spirit,  Force ;  and 
endeavour  to  reconcile  the  seemingly  inconsistent  statements.     The  pre- 
sent work  may  perhaps  be  of  some  use  in  the  endeavour. 

2  Therefore  every  mood  of  mind  has  a  corresponding  mode  of  matter. 
in  and  through  which  it  manifests.     As  countless  radii  meet  in   the 
centre,  so  countless  worlds  meet  in  the  soul-Jiva.  mind-body      And  the 
soul  can  pass  from  any  radius  to  any  other  by  coming  back  tc  the  centre. 
i.e.,    it-Self,  and   issuing  forth  again  thence.     Hence,   the  scriptures  say 
that  persons  who  cultivate  such-and-such  virtues  or  vices,  noble  or  ignoble 
sentiments,  passions,  feelings,  emotions,  tastes,  interests,  go  to  such  and 
such  worlds,  physical  and  superphysical,  'heavenly*  or  '  hellish,'  by  sheer 
attraction  in  that  direction.     Consider  how  persons  gravitate  towards  the 
worlds  of  science  or  art  or  literature  or  business  or  administration,  and  to 
one    or  other  of  the  numerous  sub-sub-divisions  of  these.     The   fact 
that  the  nervous  system  (predominantly)  serves  the  '  intellectual '  ;  the 
muscular,    the     '  actional '  ;    the    glandulo-vasculor,    the   '  emotional  '  . 
illustrates  the  same  fact.     A  western  writer  has  recently  invented  the 
words     '  cerebro-tomc '.     '  somato-tonic  ' ,   and   '  viscero-tonic  '   for    the 
three  main  temperaments  and  types  of  humans.     Overloading  of  a  langu- 
age's vocabulary  with  a  plethora  of  new  coinages  which  are  not  really 
necessary,  is  not  desirable ;  and  the  French  are  wise  to  keep  their  diction 
and  dictionary  pure  and  limited,  by  the  censorship  of  their  Academy ; 
though   Herbert  Spencer  disapproves  such  limitation.     JUut  in  this  parti- 
cular case,  an  advocate  of  Manu  and  Veda  may  welcome  even  the  three 
strange  words  as  supporting  his  arguments 

The  reader  may  see,  in  this  connection,  pp  355-356  of  The  Science 
of  Social  Organisation,  vol.  I ;  pp.  32-34  of  The  Superphysics  of  War 
(Adyar  Pamphlets)  \  and  p.  79  of  World  War  and  its  Only  Cure 

22 


338    ANIMATE  AND  IN-ANIMATE  NOT  DISTINCT    [SC.  OF 

con-currence  or  co-efficience  of  Consciousness  with  all 
variations  of  Motion  in  Matter,  which  con-comitance  or 
co-incidence  constitutes  universal  Life  and  makes  those 
Movements  possible.  This  is  all  that  Consciousness  does ; 
Atmi  is  a  d  h  a  r  a,  base,  support,  of  all  these  motions  ; 
without  it,  they  would  have  no  meaning  and  would  not 
be.  When  all  vital  phenomena  have  been  explained  away 
into  atomic  affinities,  as  is  being  attempted  by  modern 
scientists  anew,  then  the  question  would  arise :  Whence  and 
how  and  why  these  affinities  ?  The  only  answer  is  :  The 
Universal  Consciousness  imposes  them  on  the  atoms; 
and  the  result  is  .that  the  whole  series  of  explanations  is 
reversed ;  belief  in  Vital  Force  is  restored  on  a  higher 
level ;  and  all  affinities  become  resolved  into  the  vital 
phenomena  of  one  ever-living  Universal  Shakti.  Of  course, 
real  initiation  of  actions  and  movements  by  individual 
consciousness  is  abolished  even  so  ;  but  apparent  initiation 
remains  untouched.  What  the  whole  truth  is  on  this 
point,  may  be  gathered  partially  from  what  has  been 
already  said  about  free-will,  and.  for  the  rest,  from  the 
fuller  discussion  which  may  be  held  later  on. 

Distinction  between  animate  and  inanimate  then 
amounts  to  this,  that,  to  the  person  noting  the  distinction 
at  any  particular  time  and  place,  in  the  former,  the  ele- 
ment of  Pratyag-atma  is  more  prominent  and  manifest, 
while,  in  the  latter,  the  element  of  Mula-prakrti  is  more 
apparent. 

Reason  for  this  alternate  predominance,  now  of  the 
one  and  now  of  the  other,  is  the  alternation  of '  am '  and 


P.,  CH.  XIIl]          INVERSE    RATIO  :   NECROBIOSIS        339 

4  am  not '.  When  '  am  '  is  strong,  we  have  the  appear- 
ance of  c  the  living,'  of  crescent  '  life,'  of  anabolism. 
When  '  am  not '  prevails,  then  we  have  the  phenomenon 
of  '  death,'  '  the  dying/  '  the  dead,'  '  the  inert,'  of  kata- 
bolism.  In  the  strict  sense  of  the  words,  *  life '  and 

*  death  '  are   not  correct  here  ;  only  '  living  '  and  *  dying  ' 
are  proper.     The   scientific  truth  of  necrobiosis,  *  dying 
life  '  or  '  living  death  ',  of  gradual  death,  is  voucher  for 
this  fact.    But  like  *  animate  '  and  '  inanimate,'  '  life  '  and 

*  death  '    have,   as  convenient  words,  a  practical  value, 
though  the  facts  can  never  in  reality  be  separated  ;  living 
and  dying  are  going  on  constantly,  incessantly,  side  by 
side,  and  also  one  after  another,  because  of  the  general 
principles  which  underlie,  as  explained  before,  the  triple 
subdivisions  of  time,  space,  and  motion  ;  for,  (1)  to  say, 
4 1  am   this  ejat,'  is  also  to  say  at  the  same  time,  in  the 
same  space,  and  by  the  same  motion,  '  I  am  not  this  other 
etat ; '   and    to  say,   '  I   am    not  this  etat,'  is  also  to  say, 
4 1  am   this  other  etat '.     Again,  (2)  to  say,  *  I  am  this  ', 
is  to  say  later,  in  another  time,  space,  and  motion,  '  I  am 
not  (the   same)    this ; '  and   vice   versa.    Finally,    (3)   it 
is   unavoidable   to   be  saying,    everywhere  and   always, 
either  *  I   am  this,'  or  *  I  qm  not  this  '.     Thus  it  comes 
about  that  every  organism   is  living  and  dying,   at  the 
same  time,  i.e.,  changing,  and   has  also  successively  as- 
cending and  descending  phases  of  metabolism.     Thus  are 
Spirit  and   Matter,  Life  and   Death,  ever  connected  like 
the   two  ends  of  the  beam  of  a  balance ;  if  one  rises, 
the    other    falls    in    equal    degree ;    if    one    falls,  the 


340      MUTUAL   BORROWING   OF   ATTRIBUTES     [SC.   OF 

other  rises  similarly  ;  but  entirely  separated  they  nevei" 
can  be. 

It  may  be  gathered  from  the  above,  that  the  word 
'  life/  as  currently  employed,  means  '  living  and  dying/ 
and  '  death  '  means  '  dying  and  living  '.  Let  us  now  see 
more  fully  what  death  really  means.  When  we  hav6 
done  that,  our  information  as  to  the  essential  significance 
of  one  prominent  aspect  of  the  jlva-atom,  the  aspect  of 
animate-inanimate,  will  have  been  rounded  out  and  com- 
pleted in  a  way. 

By  the  law  of  adhyasa,1  mutual  superimposi- 
tion  of  attributes  between  the  Self  and  the  Not-Self, 
the  jlva-atom  must  begin  and  end  in  time,  i.e.,  be 
impermanent,  and  must  at  the  same  time  be  permanent. 
Reconciliation  of  this  contradiction  4s  achieved  in  ever- 
recurrent  beginnings  and  endings."  But  how  is  this  pos- 
sible ?  How  can  a  thing,  an  etat,  having  once  been,  ever 
cease  to  be,  and  if  it  once  actually  ceased  to  be,  how 
could  it  be  again  ?  Necessity  to  obviate  this  objection 


The  word  '  im-position  '  is  peculiarly  ap-posite  here. 
Maya  is  the  Great  Impostor  or  Impostress,  who  '  imposes  '  upon  people  ; 
makes  the  false  look  like  the  true  to  them  ;  '  imposes  '  false  beliefs 
upon  them.  The  Greek  word  antidosis  seems  to  mean  the  same 
aghyasa.  F,  n.  4  on  p.  17  of  Gibbon's  Roman  Empire,  vol.  V,  (Every- 
man's Library  series)  says:  "The  antidosis  of  the  Greeks,  a  mutual 
loan  or  transfer  of  the  idioms  or  properties  ('  idios  '.  one's  own  peculia- 
rity) of  each  nature  to  the  other  —  of  infinity  to  man,  possibility  (pass- 
-ingness.  transience,  finiteness)  to  God,  etc.  Twelve  rules  on  this 
nicest  of  subjects  compose  the  Theosophical  Grammar  of  Petavius." 
See  p.  11,  supra. 

*  3?TrJTftSf?%  Stewraftfc  I  Ny&ya-sutra.  IV,  i.  10,  '  Because 
^  Atma,  Self,  is  eternal,  therefore,  it  follows  as  a  necessary  consequence. 
'that  after  having  departed  from  one  body,  it  becomes  again,  i.e.,  comes- 
into  another  body  '  . 


P.,    CH.   XIJl]  TRIPT-E   WORLD  341 

creates  at  once  new  laws  and  facts.  Firstly,  the  difficulty 
is  solved  by  (apparent)  successive  dissociations  and  re- 
associations  of  ensouling  inner  jlva  and  ensheathing  outer 
bodies,  i.e.,  transfer  of  the  individual  consciousness  from 
one  body  to  another,  and  thence  to  yet  another,  and 
so  on.  But  having  said  this,  it  becomes  necessary  to 
explain  what  is  meant  by  inner  jfva  and  outer 
sheath,  where  we  have  been  speaking  of  a  single  and 
apparently  homogeneous  jiva-atom  so  far.  Although 
the  jiva-atom  is  a  *  one,'  yet  again  within  that  one  there 
is  an  irreducible  and  irrepressible  duality  —  indeed,  a 
trinity,  strictly  speaking  ;  as  may  appear  later  in  connec- 
tion with  the  explanation  of  the  metaphysic  of  the 
expression  tri-bhuvana,  the  triple-  world.1  *  I  '  is 
joined  to  etat  by  '  am  '  in  'I  (am)  this  '  ;  yet  they  are 
only  joined  ;  the  two  cannot  be  literally  identified.  The 
consequence  of  this  is  that  we  have  an  '  inner  '  jlva, 
self  or  soul,  and  an  '  outer  '  upadhi,  sheath  or  body. 
This  inner  self  is  something  which,  by  its  very 
Pratyagatmic  nature  and  constitution,  is  always  elud- 
ing sensuous  grasp  and  definition.  '  How  and  by  what 
may  the  knower  be  known  ?  "  *  It  is  Self-luminous. 
Whenever  we  seek*  consciously  or  unconsciously,  to  de- 
fine It,  we  at  once  find  in  its  place  an  upa<Jhi,  a  sheath, 
as  Indra  found  Uma  Haima-vati/  a  sheath  subtler  than 
the  previous  one,  from  the  standpoint  of  which  as  'outer* 


3  Brhad-aranyaka.  II,  iv,  14. 
3  Kena  Up,t  Hi. 


342  VEIL   UPON    VEIL  [SC.  OF 

we  started  to  secure  this  '  inner '  self  ;  subtler,  no  doubt, 
but  yet  as  undoubtably  material.  This  'inner'  Self,  the 
*  abstract,'  would  lose  its  very  nature  and  falsify  itself, 
would  no  longer  he  'inner'  and  'abstract',  if  it  could  be 
grasped.  To  be  grasped  means  to  be  outer.  Therefore 
this  Self  ever  recedes  further  and  further  inwards,  within 
a  literally  endless  series  of  veil  after  veil,  as  we  try  to 
follow  it  with  the  eye  of  sense,  while  to  the  eye  of  the 
pure  reason,  that  is  to  say,  to  It-Self,  it  is  always  present, 
immovably  stationary.  The  physical  reflection  of  this 
law,  as  found  by  physical  science,  is  that  "  there  exists 
upon  earth  at  present  no  living  substance  that  is  homo- 
geneous throughout,"  and  that  "  the  living  substance  that 
now  exists  upon  the  earth's  surface  is  recognised  only  in 
the  form  of  cells,1'  each  of  which  "  contains,  as  its 
essential  constituents,  two  different  substances,  the  pro- 
toplasm and  the  nucleus,"'  l  (with  a  connecting  third 
kind,  viz.,  chromatin-network);  and  the  nucleus  has  been 
found,  on  further  investigation,  to  contain  still  inner  cores 
and  sheaths,  etc.,  viz.,  the  nucleolus  and  other  sub- 
stances."1 The  truth  is  that,  as  more  or  less  openly  des» 
cribed  in  Yoga  Vasishtha 3  and  other  works  on  Yoga  and 
V6danta,  and  in  theosophical  literature,  the  constitution 
of  man,  and,  indeed,  of  all  living  matter,  is  a  plantain- 
stem-like  system  of  leaf-sheath  within  leaf-sheath,  layer 

1  Max  Verworn,  General  Physiology,  p.  296. 

•  Ibid.,  p.  91  ;  see  also  H.  W.  Conn  :    The  Story  of  Life's  Mecha- 
nism. 

*  Vide  story  of   Lila  in   Utpatti-Prakarana  ;  Mystic  Kxpcrtcncest 
or  Tales  from  Yoga-Vasishtha.' 


P.,    CH.   XIIl]       RECIPROCAL   BIRTH    AND    DEATH      34$ 

within  layer,  fold  within  fold,  and  shell  within  shell,  all 
interpenetrating  one  another,  each  distinguishable  from 
each,  yet  not  wholly  separable  from  each  other,  but 
fringing  off  into  each  other  by  indefinable  gradations. 
And  metaphysic  adds  that  this  must  be  so,  not  up  to  any 
limited  extent  or  definite  number,  which  would  be 
arbitrary  (except  as  regards  any  particular  world-system, 
which  must  necessarily  deal  with  definite  time,  space,  and 
motion,  arid  therefore  definite  numbers  of  layers  and 
planes  of  matter,  e.g,,  litho-,  hydro-,  igni-,  atmo-,  ethero-, 
etc.,  spheres)  ;  but  pseudo-infinitely,  which  only  is  in 
accordance  with  reason,  when  the  whole  of  the  World- 
Process  is  taken  into  account.  More  about  this  may 
appear  later  ' ;  in  the  meanwhile  what  has  been  said  may 
suffice  to  show  how  we  have  the  possibility,  and  there- 
fore the  necessity  (for  in  the  sight  of  metaphysic  to 
be  possible  is  to  be),  of  the  phenomenon  of  deatht 
by  the  passing  of  the  jiva  from  one  outer  and  denser 
body  to  another  inner  and  subtler  body.  This  outer 
body,  which,  then,  is  left  behind,  is  called  dead  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  inner  jiva,  which  has  now 
passed  on  to  another  sheath.  And  the  inner  jiva  may 
similarly  be  called  dead  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
dense  body.  There  is  a  reciprocal  severance  of  asso- 
ciation and  reciprocal  death,  a  reciprocal  cessation  of 
interchange,  interplay,  intervivification.  The  opposite 
of  death  in  this  sense  is  *  birth  '  and  not  '  life  '  ;  and  it 

1  See  the  remarks  on   '  the  three  worlds  or  planes  '   and  '  the  three 
bodies '   in  Ch.  XV,  on  Jlvas,  infra. 


344       THREEFOLD  WORLD  LIKE  TRIUNE  MAN    [SC.  OF 

may  be  defined  in  the  same  terms.  If  *  death '  is  the 
transference  of  the  individual  consciousness  from  one 
plane  of  e  t  a  t-matter  to  another,  birth  is  the  same  trans- 
ference from  another  into  the  one.  The  same  event 
means  a  death  in  one  plane  or  world,  and  a  birth  in 
another.  In  other  words,  as  death  is  reciprocal,  so  is 
birth  ;  each  dies  to  the  other  ;  each  is  born  away  from  the 
other.  The  sleeping  of  the  jlva  in  the  s  t  h  u  1  a  or  physical 
body,  on  the  physical  plane  of  jag  rat,  '  waking* 
consciousness,  is  its  awakening  in  the  s  u  k  s  h  m  a 
or  astral  body,  on  the  astral  plane  of  s  v  a  p  n  a,  *  dream- 
ing* consciousness;  its  sleeping  in  the  latter,  again,  is 
its  awakening  in  the  k  a  ran  a,  '  causal  *  body,  on  the 
corresponding  plane  of  s  u  s  h  u  p  t  i,  *  deep  sleep  '  con* 
sciousness ;  (and  so  on  pseudo-infinitely,  in  a  special 
sense),  and  in  the  reverse  order,  vice  versa,  (also,  pseudo- 
infinitely,  in  that  special  sense). 

But,  again,  the  totality  of  6 1  a  t  s,  '  this-es  ',  can  never 
be  really  separated  from  the  One  indivisible  Self  ;  nor  an 
£tat,  a  'this,'  from  an  a  ham,  an  '  I  ',  from  its  own 
particular  4  I  ',  so  to  say,  viz.,  the  one  with  which  it  was 
identified  in  the  beginning  of  beginningless  time ;  any 
more  than  it  can  be  really  unified  and  identified  with 
such.  There  is  no  sufficient  reason  why  an  etat  should 
be  really  separated — especially  remembering  that  it  has 
to  be  reunited  with  it  as  said  before — from  any  a  ham 
with  which  it  has  once,  at  any  time,  been  in  junction. 
Once,  therefore  ever,  is  the  requirement  of  the  first 
principles  of  logic,  the  first  laws  of  thought :  "  A  is 


P,,   CH.   XIll]       ALL    EVERYWHERE,    AS    LATENT          345 

A  and  Not  not-A."  The  result  of  these  acting  and 
counteracting  necessities  of  reason  is  that  we  have  the 
periodic,  definite,  overt,  find  patent,  severance  and  con- 
nection of  each  a  ham  with  one  particular  etat  in  any 
one  particular  limited  cj'cle  of  space  and  time  ;  and  the 
undefined,  hidden,  and  latent  connection  of  it  constantly 
with  all  other  e  t  a  t  s,  in  the  past,  present  and  future, 
(Compare  the  statements  in  The  Secret  Doctrine  on  the 
subject  of  the  auric  egg,  and  in  Vedanta  on  the  subtle 
atomic  sheaths  carried  by  a  jiva  in  its  passage  from  lower 
to  successively  higher  worlds.1) 

In  other  words,  the  One  Aham  in  its  pseudo-infinite 
pseudo-subdivisions  is  in  unceasing  and  yet  recur- 
rent conjunction-disjunction,  samyoga-viyoga,* 
with  all  pseudo-infinite  etats;  each  etat,  or  rather 
<3ach  conjunction  and  each  disjunction  of  the  pseudo- 
infinite  number  of  such,  representing,  nay,  being,  a  special 
experience,  and  the  whole  being  one  constant  and  change- 
less experience  ;  so  that  we  come  back,  as  we  shall  always, 
again  and  again,  with  fuller  and  fuller  knowledge  of  the 
content,  to  the  fact  that  "  all  is  everywhere  and  always  ",5 

1  The  expression  stffctEtal,  jiva-kosha,  '  jiva-cocoon  or  capsule  ,' 
occurs  in  Bhagavata,  IV,  xxiii,  11.  In  one  of  the  debates  in 
Shankara-()ig-vijayat  occurs  the  sentence,  &  5Tfi|, 


,    fat   *I^5%  agfq$*h  I  *  The  jiva,  departing,  goes  enveloped  in 
sukshma,  subtle,  elements.' 

2 


BAagavafa,  U,  ix,  35, 
I  Ibid..  II,  i,  39. 


346        ARE   ORBS   OF    HEAVEN    INANIMATE?        [SC.   OF 

One  more  statement  seems  to  be  needed  before  we 
pass  on  to  other  aspects  of  the  jiva-atom.  What  is  the 
true  significance  of  the  words  '  nature/  *  inanimate 
nature/  as  used  to  mean  lands  and  mountains,  clouds, 
rivers,  and  oceans,  fire  of  volcanoes,  light  and  heat  of 
the  sun,  substance  of  the  stars,  airs  and  gases  of  the 
atmosphere,  ether  of  the  spatial  regions  ?  These  appear 
to  stand  out  in  sharp  contrast,  as  vast  masses  of  inani- 
mate matter,  to  the  human  and  other  jlvas  deriving  their 


;  fir***.  up   *&**&  2, 

J  Nrsimha-Uttara-Tapnii   Up.  (  H^flcfT  f|  ^?4^  ;  Gauda-pada's 
Karika 


:f  etc.  --are  the  epithets. 

descriptive  of  the  Self*  in  terms  of  '  all  '  ,  which  are  scattered  all  over  the 
Upanishats.  '  That  which  is  every-thing.  every-where,  every-when  ;  all. 
al-ways,  all-space,  all-time  ,  all-knowing  ;  all-experiencing  ;  all-ruling  ; 
all-doing,  all-desiring,  all-smelling,  all-tasting,  all-touching,  all-seeing, 
all-hearing  ;  all-named,  all-formed,  all-motioned  ;  all-giving  ;  all-taking; 
all-pervading  ;  all-grasping  ;  all-beloved  ,  all-loving  ;  all-handed,  all- 
footed,  all-eyed,  all-cared,  all-mouthed,  all-nosed  ;  all-seeing,  all- 
witnessing,  all-supporting,  all-soulcd  ;  all-desire-transcending  ;  same  and 
equal  in,  for,  to,  all  ;  devoid  of  all  ;  essence  of  all  ;  creator,  preserver, 
destroyer  of  all  ,  etc.  Such  descriptions  can  apply  and  do  apply  to 
Naught-Else-than  *  I  '.  the  Supreme,  the  Universal. 


P.,    CH.   Kill]       HAS    EACH    A    SOUL?    MONISM  347 

sustenance  from  them  ?  How  are  these  masses  to  6e 
explained  ?  Where  is  the  Aham,  '  I  ',  in  them  ?  Or  if  it 
is  there,  why  so  latent  in  so  much  tht  larger  portion  of 
Mula-prakrti  ?  The  question  seems  at  first  sight  to  be 
exclusively  within  the  province  of  mere  speculation  ;  but 
a  true  Metaphysic  should  include  the  principles  of  all 
physics  and  all  sciences  whatever  ;  for  the  ideal  standard 
thereof  is  that  it  is  the  system  of  universal  principles 
which  underlie  all  the  World- Process  and  co-ordinate 
and  synthesise  all  its  aspects  and  departments,  as  the 
architect's  plan  underlies  the  building  and  co-ordinates 
the  activities  of  all  the  workers  on  it.  The  explanation 
of  this  question  may,  therefore,  properly  be  sought  for 
in  metaphysical  as  well  as  physical  science.  If  found, 
it  will  help  greatly  to  enlarge  and  confirm  our  grasp 
of  the  nature  of  Aham  and  Etat,  and  their  pseudo- 
infinite  variety  of  extent  in  space,  time,  and  motion,  and 
therefore  their  pseudo-infinite  overlappings. 

Physiological  science,  through  leading  scientists, 
says  :  "  Individuals  of  the  first  order  are  cells  ;  of  the 
second  order  are  tissues,  associations  of  individuals -of 
the  first  order  ;  of  the  third  order  are  organs,  associations 
of  individuals  of  the  second  order  ;  of  the  fourth  order  are 
persons,  associations  of  various  individuals  of  the  third 
order  ;  of  the  fifth  order  are  communities,  associations  of 
individuals  of  the  fourth  order."  *  There  is  no  reason 
why  this  chain  should  not  be  lengthened  pseudo-infinitely. 
It  is  very  probable  that  physical  science  will  some  day 
1  Max  Verworn.  General  Physiology,  p.  62. 


348        INDIVIDUALITIES    OF    MANY   GRADES          [SC.  OF 

discover  definitely  that  the  vital  connections  between  the 
members  of  a  community  are  of  a  nature  exactly  similar 
to,  if,  perhaps,  weaker  in  intensity  than,  those  between 
the  organs  in  a  person,  the  tissues  in  an  organ,  and  the 
cells  in  a  tissue.  And  thus  it  will  discover  that  the 
solidarity  of  the  human  race,  as  made  up  of  communi- 
ties, is  not  a  merely  poetical  metaphor  or  political 
abstraction  or  religious  ideal,  but  a  physical  and  super- 
physical  fact ;  and,  still  further,  that  the  various  king- 
doms, human,  animal,  vegetable,  mineral,  etc.,  have  a 
common  life  as  well  as  special  lives,  in  endless  continuity, 
so  that  even  ordinary  pantheism  is  vindicable  in  a  very 
literal  sense,  as  being  one  part,  but  not  the  whole,  of  the 
body  of  truth  which  makes  up  metaphysic. 

'  Individuals '  in  the  preceding  paragraph  really 
signifies  selves,  and  the  quotation  shows  how  larger  and 
larger  masses  of  '  animate  nature  '  are  included  within 
larger  and  larger  *  selves  '.  We  may  now  select  some 
other  extracts  which  will  show  how  large  masses  of  '  in- 
animate nature  '  may  be  inspired  by  single  *  selves,'  while 
the  preceding  paragraph,  by  its  explanation  of  the  flux 
and  elasticity  of  individuality  '  in  animate  nature,  helps 
to  make  clear  the  possibility  of  '  individuality  '  in  inani- 
mate nature,  and  so  helps  to  abolish  the  distinction 
between  animate  nature  and  inanimate  nature.  Preyer 
thought  that  "  originally  the  whole  molten  mass  of  the 
earth's  body  was  a  single  giant  organism  :  the  powerful 
movement  that  its  substance  possessed  was  its  life." l 

1  Ibid.,  p.  303. 


p.,  CH.  xni]  'EXTREME'  ZEAL:  TRUTHFUL 'MEAN'  349 

Pfltiger  opined  that  "  living  proteid  is  a  huge 
molecule  undergoing  constant,  never-ending  formation 
and  constant  decomposition,  and  probably  behaves 
towards  the  usual  chemical  molecules  as  the  sun  be- 
haves towards  small  meteors  "V  Of  course  there  is 
difference  of  opinion  and  discussion  going  on  amongst 
the  holders  and  opponents  of  such  views,  but  the  result 
of  the  discussion  can  only  be  that  new  details  and  fuller 
significance  will  come  to  the  surface,  and  the  general 
truth  pervading  and  reconciling  all  opposing  views  will 
be  realised  in  a  higher  degree.  Individual  students  of 
science  may  now  and  then  secretly  believe  or  openly  call 
each  other  fanciful  or  unscientific,  in  the  excusable  heat 
of  the  race  after  truth,  and  under  the  influence  of  the 
zealous  faith  of  each  (which  sometimes  helps  by  putting 
vigour  and  energy  into  the  chase)  that  his  own  path  is 
shortest  cut/  But  truth  lies  in  the  net  result  of  the 
whole,  and,  from  this  standpoint,  the  mere  fact  is  enough, 
for  the  present,  for  our  purposes,  that  such  views  are 
entertained  by  scientific  men,  in  whose  sobriety,  as  a 
collective  body,  the  lay  public  implicitly  believes.  This 
fact  softens,  and  makes  possible  the  assimilation  of,  the 

1  Ibid.,  p.  307. 

-  Thus  a  recent  writer  on  political  science  says :  "It  is  difficult  to 
label  the  attitude  I  have  adopted.  It  is  Individualism  if  that  only  implies 
the  denial  of  the  existence  of  any  Social  Soul  or  Higher  Unity  in  the 
form  of  a  Super-person,"  (i.e.,  as  we  might  say,  of  a  sdtratma.  an  over- 
soul  or  group-soul,  a  virSt-purusha,  which  others  believe  in);  C.  D.  Burns. 
Political  Ideals.  Preface,  p.  5  (1915).  The  workings  of  the  '  principle  * 
of  the  'group-soul',  'net-soul',  in  animalcules,  animal-herds  (shoals, 
schools,  flights,  coveys,  packs,  hives,  termitaries),  human-families  (clans, 
tribes,  races,  nations),  should  be  observed  and  studied,  to  make  the  signi- 
ficance of  '  individuality  '  clear. 


350  INDIVIDUALS   WITHIN    INDIVIDUALS      [SC.   OF 

view  which  otherwise  would  look  exaggerated,  weird,  un- 
sober,  that  the  earth,  the  moon,  the  sun,  and  the  stars, 
might  each  be — they  are,  by  the  deductions  of  the  reason 
and  the  testimony  of  Purdnas  and  other  scriptural  works 
— as  much  individual  beings  as  the  matter-of-fact  citizens 
of  a  civilised  town  of  to-day ;  and  again,  not  only 
individuals,  but  individuals  within  individuals,  so  that  a 
large  number,  or,  strictly  speaking,  a  pseudo-infinite 
number,  of  distinct  lives,  i.e.,  lines  of  consciousness,  are 
being  ministered  to  by  apparently  each  '  this  ',  while  at  the 
same  time  all  the  pseudo-infinite  '  this-es  '  are,  vice  versa, 
ministering  to  the  one  life  of  the  One  Self  (as  also  to  the 
life  of  each  individual  self  or  jlva,  one  directly  and  the 
rest  indirectly).1 

This  will  become  clear  when  the  student  casts 
entirely  away  from  him  the  associations  of  time,  space, 
and  motion,  those  arch-magicians,  mystifiers,  and  illusion- 
makers  in  this  Maya's  Playhouse  of  the  World- Process. 
He  should  consider  the  facts  solely  in  their  mutual  pro- 
portion and  relation.  Thus  considered,  millions  and 
billions  of  such  heavenly  bodies  might  as  easily  float  in 
the  veins  of  Macrocosmic  *  Virat  Purusha  with  thousand 
heads,  feet,  hands," ''  as  blood-corpuscles,  leucocytes, 
phagocytes,  bacilli,  bacteria,  microbes,  virus-es,  in  the 
veins  of  a  single  human  being  ;  and  they  may  very  well 
discharge  similar  functions  also.  Each  of  such  has  its 

1  This  is  one  way  of  interpreting  the  Sankhya  doctrine  of  one  Prakrji 
being  '  beheld  '    by  many  porushas,  and  the  Vedanfa  view  of  One 
Brahma  and  many-natnred  yet  pseudo-one  Maya, 

2  Purusha-Suk^a.    See  also  Bhagavad-Glfa,  xi. 


P.,  CH.  XIIlJ   LIVING  BONES,  CONCHES,  CARAPACES  351 

own  life,  and  also  forms  part  of  the  life  of  another,  which, 
in  turn,  has  its  own  special  as  also  a  subordinate  life, 
and  so  on  in  a  chain  which  extends  literally  endlessly.1 

The  apparently  imanimate  masses  of  material  nature 
may  thus  all  l>e  regarded  as  parts  of  some  one  or  other 
smaller  or  larger  '  individual '.  Their  inanimateness  is  at 
the  most  no  greater  than  the  inanimateness  of  a  living  be- 
ing's teeth,  nails,  hair,  epidermis,  blood,  bone,  shell,  each 
of  which  may,  nay,  does,  harbour  and  nourish  multifarious 
minute  lives,  while  also  itself  connected  on  the  descending 
or  ascending  phase  of  metabolism  with  a  larger  lite.  This 
is  but  another  illustratibn  of  the  law  that  an  e tat  cannot 
stay  devoid  of  an  a  h  a  m  ;  if  one  a  h  a  m,  one  line  of  con- 
sciousness, deserts  it,  another  or  others  take  up  its  place 
immediately.  In  daily  experience  we  see  this,  in  the 
springing  up  of  new  lives  in  disintegrating  organic  forms 

1  The  phenomena  of  '  multiple  personality  ',  '  dissociated  states  ' — 
of  which  up  to  eight  have  been  observed  (see  Dr.  Morton  Prince,  The 
Unconscious,  Lee.  II)— are  very  useful  in  helping  us  to  realise  the  Maya 
of  the  feel  of  separate  individuality  ;  and  how  this  varies  and  fluctuates, 
by  means  of  memory,  f%f|  %cJ9%.  We  may  think  of  an  incident,  and 
even  call  up  a  vivid  picture  of  it  in  mind,  but  feel  unperturbed,  like 
a  neutral  spectator  ;  suddenly,  there  comes  a  wave,  a  surge,  an  over- 
powering rush  of  memory — '  the  principal  actor  in  the  incident  is 
myself ' — and  all  the  appurtenant  emotions  follow  at  once.  So  too.  a 
chief  means  of  consolation  for  past  mistakes  is  the  '  philosophical '  re- 
flection— '  It  was  not  I,  my  present  '  I  '.  which  committed  it ;  but  a  long- 
past  '  I ',  another  I,  someone  else,  as  it  were,  or  even  an  obsessing  spirit, 
that  did  it '.  Memory  at-taches  ;  reflection  de-taches  ;  emotion  attaches, 
connects,  binds,  identifies ;  intelligence  detaches,  analyses,  discriminates, 
separates ;  (bandha  and  mok?ha). 

The  ideas  put  forward  in  Jung's  Analytical  Psychology,  (trans,  by 
C  E.  Long,  Dub:  1920)  pp,  472-4,  '  Summary ',  supply  useful  com- 
mentary on  Vedanta  views.  Jung  calls  '  individuality  ',  persona,  and 
speaks,  of  '  collective  Psyche ',  which  comes  near  to  Mahat-Bud(Jhi. 
Vishv-a|ina,  Sutr~a|ma,  etc. 


352  MACROCOSM    AND    MICROCOSM  [SC.  OF 

that  have  served  their  purpose  of  sheath  to  a  larger  life 
and  so  '  died  '.  What  the  Upamshat  declares,  '  This 
world  appears  forth  from  the  Unperishing  as  hair  and 
nails  from  the  man,"  is  probably  declared  in  a  similar 
sense  with  reference  to  Virat-Purusha.1 

The    result    of   all    this,    in  the    words   of    physical 
science,     is    that,    as  Preyer    said  :    4<  As  the    matter   of 

1  Mnndaka,  i.  1.  7.  Many  Pnrana-s  describe,  in  different  aspects,  the 
correspondences  ^between  the  limbs,  members,  parts,  organs,  of  V  i  r  a  t- 
Purusha,  Mah  a-Pnr  us  ha,  Maha-Virat,  Macro-Cosmos,  and 
those  of  the  human  p  u  r  u  s  h  a,  k  s  h  u  cj  r  a-v  i  r  a,  t,  micro-cosmos.  The 
two  are  also  called  Braiim-anda  and  p  i  n  d  -  a  n  d  a.  fihaguvafa 
describes  them  in  grand  words,  in  11,  i,  and  repeatedly,  in  later  chapters. 
The  general  Law  of  Correspondence,  or  Law  of  Analogy,  is  also  en- 
unciated in  II  viii.  8,  and  again,  with  a  slight  variation  of  language,  in 
XII.  xi,  9.  thus: 


ffcf 
I 

3?fo  flf  fg^q: 

•  As  the  organs,  parts,  of,  and  arrangements  and  proportions  thereof, 
of  a  single  small-organism  ;  even  such,  those  of  the  Vast-Organism.'. 

'  The  seven  tala-s  (patala,  etc  )  are  the  Lord's  nether  limbs  ;  seven 
lokas  (bhilh,  etc.)  His  upper  parts  ;  sun  and  moon  are  His  eyes  ;  tempests 
and  zephyrs,  His  hot  and  cool  breaths  :  His  upper  hp  is  the  blush  of 
Love,  and  the  lower  the  Greed  of  that  same  Love  ,  His  breast  is 
pharma,  and  his  back,  A-dharma  ;  His  flanks  are  Oceans  ;  rivers.  His 
arteries  and  veins  ;  Mountains,  His  mighty  bones  ,  forests  are  the 
down  upon  His  Body  ;  clouds  His  glorious  many-colored  hair  ;  His  smil£ 
and  brilliant  teeth  are  bewitching  Maya.  The  Kaustubha-  jewel  that 
He  wears  upon  His  breast  is  the  all-illuminating  Light  of  Self- 
Knowledge  ,  the  glory  thereof  is  the  mark  Shri-va^sa  on  His  chest  ; 
Sankhya  and  Yoga  are  His  ear-rings  ;  His  all-whelming  Discus  Sudar- 
shana  is  the  Wheel  of  Cyclic  Time.  Vasudeva  (Krshna),  Sankarshana 
(Balarama,  elder  brother)  ,  Pratfyumna  (son),  Anirwjdha  (grandson)  are 
chitt*..  abamkara,  bucjdhi.  and  manas;  also  turiya. 
p  r  a  j  fi  a,  taijasa,  vishva  (planes,,  viz.  ,  transcendent  or  fourth, 
causal  ,  subtle-astral  ,  and  physical)  '  .  And  so  on  . 

The  student  should  read  up  references  in  the  Index  (Vol.  VI  of 
The  Secret  Doctrine}  against  '  Analogy  '  and  *  Correspondences  '  . 


P.,   CH.   XIIl]        COSMOLOGY    AND    PHYSIOLOGY  353 

the    universe    is    in    eternal    motion,     so    life,     which 
itself  is  only  a  complex  process  of  motion,  is  as  old  as 

On  p.  70  of  The  Mahatma  Letters,  occurs  the  following  • 
"  Nothing  in  nature  springs  suddenly  ;  all  being  subjected 
to  the  same  law  of  gradual  evolution.  Realise  but  once  the 
process  of  the  tnaha  cycle,  of  one  sphere,  and  you  have 
realised  them  all.  One  man  is  born  like  another  man,  one 
race  evolves,  develops,  and  declines  like  another  and  all  other 
races.  Nature  follows  the  same  groove  from  the  creation 
of  a  universe  down  to  that  of  a  mosquito.  In  studying  esoteric 
cosmogony,  keep  a  spiritual  eye  upon  the  physiological  process 
of  human  birth;  proceed  from  cause  to  effect,  establishing 
analogies.  Cosmology  is  the  physiology  of  the  universe 
spiritualised,  for  there  is  but  one  law  If. 

"  That  one  law  "  in  enshrined  in  Aum. 

For  some  light  on  this,  and  several  obscure  verses  tn  Manu,  i,  see  The 
Secret  Doctrine,  V.  422-6.  In  this  connection  may  also  be  considered 
the  mystical  kabbalistic  and  theosophical  views  and  doctrines  re*  the  Di- 
vine Man,  a  literal  solar  '  Golden  God-Man  ',  the  Ruling  Chief,  king, 
president  of  the  hierarchy  qf  deVa-s,  hosts  of  Dhyan  Chohans  (in  Buddh 
ism).  He  (or  She,  strictly  speaking  sexless  or  both-sexed)  is  referred  to,  in 


Ufianishats.  as  f^-W,^«r.r%fl:^ 


etc..  i.e..  '  Golden-  Wombed,  -colored.  '-haired,  -moustached,  -bearded,  - 
-formed,  -seeded,  -armed,  -toothed  .-crested  (-corona-ed,-c  rowned,.  Skt9 
k  i  r  a  p  a,  ray,  corona)/  A  well  known  Skt.  verse,  part  of  a  grand  hymn 
to  '  our  '  Lord  the  Sun,  says, 


'Narayana,  seated  on  the  golden  lotus-throne  in  the  middle  of  the 
Sun-globe,  adorned  with  ornaments,  and  holding  the  sweet-sounding. 
cqnch  and  light-shedding  discus,  should  be  ever  meditated  on  as  seated 
in  one's  own  heart  '.  All  jivas,  high  and  low,  of  the  solar  system,  would 
be  as  cells,  tissues,  organs,  in  His  being  ;  and  would  be  issuing  out  of 
and  going  back  into  that  corporate  being.  (The  analogy  of  the  peculiar 
relationship  between  the  queen-bee  and  the  whole  hive,  and  the  queen  - 
ant  and  the  whole  termitariiim,  applies).  Such  a  solar  God-Man 

23 


354      AIRY   NETWORK   OF   FACTS   AND   LAWS      [SC.   OF 

matter." '  The  student  of  metaphysic  has  to  read 
4  pseudo-eternal '  or  *  sempiternal '  in  place  of  *  eternal/ 
and  '  conscious  motion  '  in  place  of  '  motion  '. 

We  have  floated  away  very  far  on  the  stream  of  the 
discussion  of  animate  and  inanimate  ;  but  we  have  seen 
again,  in  the  course  thereof,  what  was  stated  before,  how 
law  begets  law  and  fact,  and  these  more  laws  and  facts, 
with  prolific,  indeed  endless,  multiplicity ;  and  we  are 
now  in  a  position  to  understand  how,  if  the  necessary 
means  for  knowledge  of  concrete  details,  now  sup- 
posed to  be  known  only  to  occult  physical  and  super- 
physical  science,  were  available,  every  concrete  object, 
including  Krug's  quill,  before  referred  to,  (pp.  73,  179) 
could  be  deduced  with  even  complete  minuteness  of  steps. 
Thus  we  may  realise  how  the  whole  of  the  solid-seeming 

would  be  only  a  particular  Individual,  above,  below,  and  side  by  side 
with  other  Individuals,  smaller,  larger,  or  of  equal  degree,  sub-ordinate, 
super-ordinate  or  co-ordinate,  in  smaller  and  larger  systems  within 
systems  without  end. 

It  should  be  kept  in  mind,  here,  that  '  personality  '  or  '  individual- 
ity ',  4 1  am  I,  something  separate  from  all  other  I's  '—this  also  is  only 
a  feeling,  a  mood  of  consciousness  or  v  r  1 1  i,  psychosis,  in  the  Universal 
Consciousness,  the  All-Psyche.  It  too  comes  and  goes.  The  desire  for 
*  personal '  immortality  is  intense,  at  one  time  ;  at  another,  it  disappears; 
then  supervenes,  instead,  the  wish  to  merge  into,  and  become  one  with, 
and  inseparable  and  indistinguishable  from,  the  All,  the  Whole.  The 
former  is  the  stage  of  acute  aha  m-\  a  and  m  a  m  a-t  a,  I -ness  and  mine- 
ness  ;  the  latter  of  n  a  -  a  h  a  m  and  n  a  -  m  a  m  a,  '  not  (any  separate)  I  and 
not  (any  exclusive)  mine*.  See  The  Science  of  the  Self,  re  *  will-to- 
ll ve  '  and  '  will-to-die  '. 

The  streams  of  b  h  a  k  t  i-devotion  flowing  upwards  or  inwards  ;  the 
streams  of  (Jay  a-compassion  flowing  downwards  or  outwards — these 
constitute  the  circulation  of  the  Spiritual  Blood  of  the  Divine  Man. 

Whichever  department  of  Nature,  whichever  aspect  of  Life,  we 
turn  our  eyes  to,  will  supply  abondant  illustrations  of  this  law  and  fact  of 
smaller  within  larger  individualities,  species  within  genera,  ad  infinitum. 

1  Max  Yerworn.  General  Physiology,  p.  309. 


P.f  CH.  XIIl]  COBWEBS  SPUN  OUT  AND  ROLLED  IN  355 

of  this  world  is  hung  on  to,  or  indeed  is  entirely  made  up 
of,  the  airiest  of  cobwebs  of  laws  and  principles  (that  are 
always  getting  metamorphosed  into  facts),  which  the  silk- 
worm of  the  Pratyag-atma  spins  into  an  endless  cocoon 
out  of  and  around  itself  ;  and  which  disappears  at  once, 
together  with  the  silkworm,  replaced  by  the  gorgeous  and 
free-feeling  and  free-flying  moth-butterfly  ;  as  soon  as  it 
realises  and  undergoes  the  perishing,  the  death,  the 
nothingness,  of  both  ;  as  soon  as  the  individualised 
Pratyag-atma  understands  the  endless  interplay  of  mutual 
termination  and  determination  between  Self  and  Not- 
Self,  and  so  becomes  mukta,  *  liberated  '. 

The  Upanishat-verse  just  referred  to  has,  thus, 
another  and  deeper  metaphysical  significance,  besides 
the  literal  one  before  mentioned  :  *  As  the  spider  casteth 
forth  its  web  and  rolls  it  up  again,  as  the  herbs  rise  up 
from  out  of  the  earth,  as  hair  and  down  grow  from  the 
life  and  being  of  the  man,  so  doth  this  universe  appear 
from  and  within  the  Unperishing  and  Unchanging.'  l 

1  Mundaka  Upanishaf.  i  1.7.  MUD  da.  in  Skt.  means  the  head, 
the  skull.  Why  has  the  U  pants  ha  {  been  so  named  ?  Apparently  because 
it  was  usually  '  taught  only  to  those  who  had  undergone  the  discipline  of 
the  head  '.  fiJKtal  ftfol[  %*§  ^ft«l  (ibid.,  in.  2.10)  ;  i.e.,  meditation  on 
the  light  or  sound  within  the  head,  whereby  those  parts  of  the  brain  were 
vivified  or  awakened,  which  can  apprehend  and  ,'  mirror  '  metaphysicat 
truths  ;  (see  Annie  Besant's  A  Study  in  Consciousness  r€  opening  up  of 
spirillae  of  brain-cells  ;  and  pevi  Bhagavafa  XI,  viii  and  ix.  A  mystical 
verse  says. 

:  * 


'  The  imperishable  r.  c  h  &  -  s  (nature-secrets)  are  in  the  high  heaven 
(vySma,  the  skull,  the  head)  ;  all  the  gods  (vishv6-<J€  vas,  nature- 
forces)  dwell  there.  He  who  does  not  know  tfcis—  wha|  use  uan  he  make 


356      STAR-GALAXIES   LIKE    FOAM-BUBBLES       [SC.    OF 

Of  r.  c  h  a  -  s  ?  They  only  who  know  this  sit  on  high  '.    Nerve-centres  of 
all  sensor,  motor,  and  other  organs  and  glands  are  all  in  the  brain. 

As  to  the  coimtlessness  of  suns  and  stars  and  systems,  we  have  this 
statement  : 


fripad-  Vibhuti~Maha-N&rayana-Upanishat. 

*  On  all  sides  of  this  (our)  globe  or  system,  are  blazing  countless 
billions  of  similar  ones.  The  rajas-pradhana  (predominantly 
rajasa)  B  rah  mas  of  some  have  four  faces  (elements),  some  five,  six, 
seven,  eight,  up  to  thousands  (of  facets)  ;  all  are  a  m  s  h  a  -  s,  portions, 
of  Narayana  (n  a  r  a  n  a  m  ayanam,  '  house  '  ,  '  store-house  '  ,  '  reser- 
voir '  of  nara-s,  jiva-s).  In  each  there  is  also  a  sa(tva-pra~ 
<J  h  a  n  a  Vishnu,  and  a  {amas-pradhana  Mahgshvara,  to  preserve 
and  to  destroy.  They  all  wander  about  in  infinite  space,  like  shoals 
of  fishes,  or  masses  of  bubbles  in  foam/  See  also  World-War  and 
its  Only  Cure,  pp.  62-65  and  411-413. 

Another  example  from  biological  science  may  be  adduced  :  "  Investi- 
gations by  Mr.  E.  Marais,  a  South  African  scientist,  point  to  the  exist* 
ence  of  a  communal  mind,  in  some  of  the  lower  orders  of  life,  actuated 
by  definite  purpose,  and  functioning  independently  (?  not  wholly)  of  the 
matter  with  which  it  is  connected.  Experiments  prove  that  white  ants 
are  controlled  not  only  by  their  own  individual  mentality,  but  by  a  com- 
munal or  group-mind  as  well,  without  an  organic  connection  or  outward 
touch.  If  a  part  of  the  nest  is  entirely  isolated  by  a  sheet  of  galvanised 
iron,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  work  will  go  on  as  usual.  But 
if  the  queen  is  removed  from  the  main  body  on  one  side  of  the  iron, 
-within  three  minutes,  the  ants  on  the  other  side,  though  completely 
isolated,  will  stop  all  work,  and  a  complete  cessation  of  their  normal 
functions  ensues.  Normally,  if  the  rest  is  disturbed,  they  will  resent 
intrusion,  and  stoutly  defend  themselves,  while  the  eggs  will  be  carried 
into  a  place  of  safety.  But  on  removal  of  the  queen  from  one  side  of  the 
division,  the  ants  on  the  other  side  will  no  longer  bite,  or  concern  them- 
selves in  any  way  with  the  eggs,  and  are  completely  demoralised.  (Thus) 
We  begin  to  understand  that  soul  may  exist  (?  comparatively)  independ- 
ently of  the  (?  any  given)  organism.  The  queen  is  nowise  (no  way)  the 
source  of  the  communal  mind  ;  she  is  merely  the  physical  medium 
through  which  its  influence  passes,  and  by  which  it  is  centralised. 
directed,  and  made  effective:"  Theosophist,  March,  1923.  Maurice 
Maeterlinck's  book,  The  Life  of  the  White  Ant,  gathers  together  a  lot 
of  very  interesting  information,  of  much  value  for  psychology  and  philo- 
sophy. See  also  the  description  of  Myxomycetes.  in  H.  G.  Wells' 
Science  of  Life.  pp.  301-304  (edn.  of  1938). 


PM  CH.  XIIl]    SUPPORT   FROM   PHYSICAL   SCIENCE   357 

NOTE. — It  is  necessary  to  make  distinction,  to  a  certain 
extents,  for  the  practical  purposes  of  the  daily  life  of  the 
body,  between  atom  and  cell,  animate  and  inanimate,  organic 
and  inorganic,  species  and  species,  kingdom  and  kingdom 
(mineral,  vegetable,  animal,  human,  and  others),  unicellular 
and  multicellular,  individual  and  individual,  soul  and  vehicle 
(*.£.,  instrument,  means,  of  irn-pression  and  ex-pression,  of 
sensation  and  action),  psyche  and  physique,  body  and  mind, 
Spirit  and  Matter.  But  it  is  impossible  to  make  the  distinc- 
tion radically,  for  the  metaphysical  purposes  of  the  eternal 
life  of  the  mind  (soul,  Self).  That  life  includes  all  past,  pre- 
sent, and  future,  and  the  mind  ranges  over  it  all,  at  will,  in 
any  order  it  pleases,  to  and  fro,  without  limitations  of  time- 
space-motion. 

The  above  chapter  attempts  to  set  for  the  such  ideas  in 
terms  of  a  few  main  triads  and  their  sub-divisions.  The 
plain  reason  is  that  distinction  and  even  separateness  are 
inseparable  from  the  changeful  and  limited ;  while  in  the 
Changeless  and  Unlimited,  none  such  are  possible  ;  since  all 
change  and  all  limits  are  within  that  Changeless  One  Self. 

Readers  who  would  like  to  have  further  support  of  physi- 
cal science  for  the  fact  that  individuals,  species,  kingdoms 
etc.,  merge  into  each  other,  may  usefully  read  H.  G.  Wells* 
The  Science  of  Life,  (written  jointly  with  his  son  Prof.  G.  P. 
Wells  and  Prof.  Julian  Huxley ;  revised  edition,  1938),  and 
Arthur  Schopenhauer's  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  and 
Eduard  von  Hartmann's  The  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious^ 
(both  published  in  the  English  and  Foreign  Philosophical  Libr- 
ary Series) ;  or  other  later  works  describing  evolution  of  the 
several  kingdoms.  The  books  named  are  exceedingly  interest- 
ing and  very  informing  because  of  the  abundant  examples 
they  give  from  plant  and  animal  life.  One  or  two  may  be 
quoted. 

14  For  most  of  its  life  a  slime-mould,  Myxomycetesl  is  a 
naked  slimy  mass  of  protoplasm — like  a  gigantic  amoeba  .  .  . 
Its  motion  is  so  slow  as  to  be  barely  perceptible  ;  nevertheless, 
it  creeps  with  an  appearance  of  appetite  and  purpose  .  .  .  The 
final  large  plasmode  is  in  reality  a  union  of  hundreds  of  dancing 
swarm-spores  that  have  completely  merged  their  individuality 


358  SLIME-FUNGUS   AND   POLYPS  [SC.   OF 

into  one  shapeless  gelatinous  sheet.  Imagine  that  whenever 
two  people  meet  each  other  in  the  street,  they  run  together 
into  one  blob,  as  drops  of  water  run  together,  so  that  ulti- 
mately the  whole  population  of  a  town  is  rolled  up  into  a 
gigantic  mass  of  living  substance  that  creeps  about  like  a 
single  creature ;  that  is  the  sort  of  thing  that  happens  as  a 
matter  of  course  in  the  life-history  of  a  slime-fungus :  The 
Science  of  Life,  pp.  301-304. 

"  We  see  that  all  the  marks  which  have  been  set  up  on 
different  sides  as  decisive  "  (of  distinction  between  vegetable 
and  animal)  "  do  not  hold,  such  as  partial  or  total  locomotion, 
spontaneous  movement,  morphological  and  chemical  differ- 
ences, mouth  and  stomach  . .  .  Plant  and  animal  have  some* 
thing  distinct,  somewhat  in  common.  .  .  .  and  we  may  fairly 
well  collect  the  total  of  common  characters,  if  in  both  king- 
doms we  descend  down  the  scale  of  organisation,  until  we 
come  to  those  structures  where  the  differences  disappear,  and 
essentially  only  the  common  element  remains  ...  In  this 
common  element  sensation  and  consciousness  is  still  included ; 
the  lowest  vegetable  organisms  possess  sensation  and  con- 
sciousness ;  .  .  .  we  "  (are  therefore)  "  warranted  in  ascribing 
to  the  higher  plants  also,  a  similar,  but  higher,  measure  of 
sensation  and  consciousness  : "  The  Philosophy  of  the  Un- 
conscious, pp.  145-146. 

"In  the  Mediterranean  there  is  a  rich  family  of  splendid 
swimming-polyps.  A  young  polyp  is  developed  from  an  egg. 
It  begins  life  freely  floating  in  the  sea.  At  its  upper  end  it 
forms  a  bubble,  in  which  the  air  is  set  free  which  supports  it ; 
at  its  lower  and  there  are  formed  .  .  .  feelers  and  prehensile 
threads  ...  On  its  stem,  which  is  continually  elongating, 
there  is  formed  a  filtering  tube.  From  this  stem  arise  bud- 
like  shoots.  Some  of  them  form  swimming-bells,  which 
propel  themselves,  and  consequently  the  whole  mass.  The 
others  are  metamorphosed  into  fresh  polyps,  which  possess 
mouth  and  stomach,  and  not  merely  collect,  but  also  digest 
food  for  the  whole,  to  deliver  it  finally  into  the  trunk-tube. 
Finally,  yet  other  buds  attain  a  nettle-like  aspect,  and  provide 
for  propagation;  they  bring  forth  ova,  from  which  again 
proceed  freely-floating  polyps.  Special  polyps  with  long 


P.,  CH.  XIIl]  POLYMORPHISM  359 

sensitive  tactile  threads  represent  the  sense  organs  or  the 
intelligence  of  the  state.  What  is  here  individual  ?  .  .  . 
Whoever  holds  fast  to  the  '  either-or  ',  such  an  example  must 
reduce  to  desperation  ;  but  we  see  in  the  several  members, 
individuals  partly  of  polyp-form,  partly  medusoid,  and,  in  the 
whole,  an  individual  of  higher  order  which  includes  in  itself 
all  these  individuals.  Even  in  the  bee-  and  ant-hive  there  is 
nothing  wanting  to  complete  the  view  of  the  whole  as  an 
individual  of  higher  order  but  spatial  unity,  i.e.,  the  continuity 
of  the  form ;  here  this  likewise  is  present,  and  therefore  the 
individual  is  indisputable.  This  widespread  phenomenon  in 
the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom  of  a  varied  physiological 
development  of  morphologically  originally  similarly  construct- 
ed individuals  of  the  same  species  is  termed  Polymorphism  "  : 
Op.  cit.,  196-198. 

Such  instances  make  possible  a  new  and  literal  (not  only 
metaphorical)  interpretation  of  the  VJda,  and  Gl{a  verses 
which  describe  '  p  u  r  u  s  h  a '  (jiva,  self, '  person  ')  as  '  thou- 
sand-headed, thousand-eyed,  thousand-footed,  thousand- handed, 
thousand-stomached '. 

As  to  plants  possessing  sensation  and  consciousness, 
ancient  and  modern  testimony  has  been  quoted  on  pp.  335-336 
above.  Fuller  text  is  given  below  :  '  Their  color  changes  and 
flower  and  fruit  shrivel  and  even  fall  off,  at  touch  of  great 
heat ;  therefore  plants  have  the  sense  of  touch.  Roar  of 
wind  and  crash  of  thunder  also  cause  flower  and  fruit  to  fall ; 
therefore  plants  hear.  Creepers  move  about  in  many  directions 
and  twine  themselves  round  trees ;  therefore  they  see.  Frag- 
rant incense  of  various  kinds  promotes  their  healthy  growth  ; 
foul  smoke  and  acrid  smells  make  them  diseased  or  even  kill 
them  ;  therefore  plants  smell.  They  drink  up  water  by  their 
roots,  and  thrive  if  it  is  wholesome  ;  or  become  diseased  or 
even  die  if  it  is  otherwise ;  therefore  plants  have  the  sense  of 
taste.  As  a  man,  (by  will)  may  suck  up  liquid  through  a 
pipe  from  below  upwards,  so  do  plants  ;  (therefore  they  have 
will).  Because  they  feel  pleasure  and  pain,  because  their  parts, 
cut  off,  grow  again,  therefore,  clearly,  plants  have  j  l  v  a-life. 
A-c haitanyam  na  v i d y a t £ ,  there  exists  nothing  which 
is  devoid  of  the  principle  of  consciousness : '  Mbh.,  Shanti- 
parva,  ch.  182,  Kumbakonam  edn. ;  or  184  in  the  older 


360  VEGETABLES   HAVE    CONSCIOUSNESS       [SC.  OF 

Bombay  edn.).  Arguments  very  similar  to  these  will  be 
found  in  Von  Hartmann's  book,  to  prove  that  animalcules 
have  the  sense  of  sight,  hearing,  touch,  etc. ;  and  also 
memory.  And  once  memory  is  admitted,  all  the  rest  of 
intelligence,  even  the  power  of  introspection,  ( — of  course  in 
germ — )  has  to  be  admitted  also.  It  stands  to  reason,  that 
only  that  can  evolve  and  develope  into  man  and  higher,  which 
is  already  present  in  germ  and  seed  in  the  primal  cells  of 
vegetable  and  mineral  life. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

JIVA-ATOMS— OBJECTIVELY,  i.e.,  ATOMS 

AFTER  the  above  general  treatment  of  the  Jiva-atom  we 
may  now  take  the  two  aspects  of  it  separately  and  in  a 
little  more  detail.  Of  these  two  we  may  dispose  of  the 
4  particular ',  the  atom-aspect,  first,  and  leave  for  later 
treatment  the  other  aspect  of  the  *  individual/  the  jlva, 
discussion  of  which  is  the  main  purpose  of  the  rest  of  this 
work  ;  reference  to  only  the  material  side  of  life  being  made 
as  necessary  to  explain  and  illustrate  the  spiritual  side. 

First,  attributes  common  to  jlva  and  atom,  viz.,  size,1 
life,  and  vibration,  may  be  further  particularised  with 
respect  to  the  atom.2 

1  The  significance  of  '  size  '  in  reference  to  jiva  is  explained  at 
outset  of  next  chapter. 

•Compare  5f!fcHn§?-*ft*TT:,  Yoga-sKtra,  ii.  13,  i.e.,  'species  or 
type  (by  birth),  life-period  (total  life-time),  and  experience  (as  a  whole,  of 
pains  and  pleasures  in  varied  settings).  Also  3?3T-3pM>P3Sfc*Tr,  as  des- 
criptive of  *{^ct.  of  Bh&gavaja.  Ill,  v.  28 ;  Shricjhara's  Tika  explains 
these  as  (a)  c h id-am s ha,  principle  of  consciousness  (broadly  corres- 
ponding to  bhoga  of  the  Yoga-Sutra),  (b)  of  triple  attributes  (j  a  |i). 
(c)  of  kshobhaka,  kalayfta,  'stirring',  'disturbing',  'agitating1, 
*  moving ',  '  instigating  '  time  (a' y  «). 


P.,   CH.   XIV]       THE   ONE    NON-ARBITRARY   FORM      361 

Size,  in  this  reference,  may  be  said  to  break  up  into 
the  triplet  of  '  bulk  or  volume,'  4  shape  or  form,'  and 
4  measure,  magnitude,  or  dimension/  which  includes  both 
the  others.  These  again  may  be  looked  at  as  '  large, 
small,  average,1  '  long,  round,  ovoid/  '  linear,  superficial, 
cubical/  etc.! 

A  hypothesis  may  be  advanced  here  as  to  form. 

It  has  been  said  above  that,  under  stress  of  the 
necessity  embodied  in  the  logion,  e tats,  this-es,  appear 
in  pseudo-infinite  number  as  constituent  points  of  mani- 
fold Mula-prakrti.  It  has  also  been  said  that,  by  that 
same  necessity,  they  are  never  actually  points  without 
magnitude,  but  always  points  with  magnitude,  with  de- 
finite volume,  form,  and  measure,  and  are  therefore 
atoms.  Atoms  would  be  without  these  if  Etat  were 
not  limited.  But  Etat  is  limited,  consequently  they 
must  have  these.  And  if  they  must  have  these,  or,  rather, 
as  is  enough  to  say,  form  (for  all  three  are  only  different 
ways  of  looking  at  the  same  thing,  measure  being  limita- 
tion pure  and  simple,  while  form  is  limitation  from  out- 
side, and  volume  is  limitation  from  within),  the  sphere 
ought,  apparently,  to  be  their  primal  form,  because  it  is 

1  The  view,  here  suggested,  is  that  '  a-toms  '  (non-divisible)  have  a 
definite  size  ;  that  the  size  varies  for  different  systems  or  planes :  that  the 
subtler  interpenetrate  the  denser,  in  an  indefinite  series.  With  reference 
to  the  new  ideas  that  have  come  into  western  physical  science,  regarding 
the  make-up  of  atoms,  by  electrons,  neutrons,  plutrons,  positrons,  etc., 
triplets  of  words,  in  terms  of  these,  may  be  coined,  correspond- 
ing with  those  in  the  text.  The  shapes  produced  by  the  whirling  of 
electrons  have  been  named  '  harmonograms  ',  But  it  is  quite  possible 
that  all  these  new  views  and  terms  may  change  or  even  disappear 
altogether.  The  simpler  ones,  of  the  text  above,  have  lasted  long,  and 
seem  likely  to  last  longer.  Primitive  animalcules  have  outlasted  the 
saurians.  ' 


362  FIGURE-SYMBOLOGY  [SC.   OP 

the  only  universally  non-arbitrary  form.  A  form  which 
embodies  the  essence  of  *  pointness  J-*-that  it  is  the 
same,  fiowever  looked  at — can  only  be  a  sphere, 
which  presents  the  same  appearance  or  feel  from 
whatever  side  it  is  seen  or  felt.  Of  course  the  law 
of  non -arbitrariness  requires  and  necessitates  the  exist- 
ence of  all  possible  pseudo-infinite  kinds  of  forms  and 
figures  in  the  World -Process,  but  the  difference  between 
the  non-arbitrariness  of  the  sphere  on  the  one  hand,  and 
that  of  '  all  possible  figures  '  on  the  other,  is  the  difference 
(if  such  an  expression  may  be  used  without  fear  of  mis- 
understanding) between  Pratyag-atma  on  the  one  hand, 
and  the  pseudo-infinite  contents  of  Its  consciousness,  the 
varieties  of  Not-Self,  on  the  other.  Pratyag-atma  is 
everywhere  and  always,  but  the  contents  of  Its  consci- 
ousness, made  up  of  interminable  and  intermixing  not- 
selves,  are  in  definite  times,  spaces,  and  motions ;  so  the 
sphere  (when  we  abolish  the  periphery  of  limitation)  may 
be  said  to  have  its  centre  potentially  everywhere  and 
always,  while  its  contents — all  possible  figures  m?ide  up 
of  the  numberless  interlacing  radii,  interlacing  because 
the  centre  is  everywhere,  each  corresponding  to  a  not-self 
— are  only  in  definite  times,  spaces,  and  motions. 
Because  of  this  fact,  most  figure-symbology  represents 
the  self-centred  Pratyag-atma  as  the  'point;'  differentiated 
Matter  Spirit  Matter,  as  the  'diameter-line,'  or  the 
cross  of  two  diameters,  or  two  interlaced  '  triangles' ;  and 
the  whole,  the  Absolute,  as  the  '  circle '.  The  line, 
or  cross  of  two  lines,  or  double  triangle,  and  the  circle* 


P.,  CH.  XIV]    POINT-SPHERE,   PRIMAL  ROOT-FORM   363 

are  used  to  meet  exigencies  of  script,  in  place  of 
what  strictly  ought  to  be  the  star  of  three  lines  cros- 
sing at  right  angles  at  their  middle,  and  the  sphere, 
respectively.  The  *  point '  should  stand  for  Pratyag-atma  ; 
countless  '  radii  *  for  Mula-prakrti ;  and  the  '  sphere  '  for 
Param-atma,  including  both,  and  being  the  '  Same  ',  al- 
ways, ever,  everywhere,  however  looked  at  ( — the  circle  or 
disc  varies,  f.i.,  the  moon — ) ;  but  solids  cannot  be  'written* 
on  paper  easily.  The  correspondence  of  the  point  and  the 
line  to  Self  and  Not-Self  respectively  should  be  noted,  and 
may  prove  of  use  hereafter.  It  may  seem  at  first  sight 
that  there  is  no  gftch  opposition  between  point  and  line  as 
there  is  between  Self  and  Not-Self,  inasmuch  as  a  line 
is  only  a  production,  is  prolongation,  of  a  point.  But 
the  opposition  is  there.  From  all  that  has  gone  before, 
it  will  be  clear  that  Not-Self  is  nothing  independent  of 
Self,  nothing  else  that  a  production  and  a  lengthening,  a 
limitation  and  definition,  of  Self,  that  is  to  say,  a  going 
of  the  immovable  Self  out  of  Itself  into  a  denial,  a 
negation,  of  Itself.  Even  so,  lines  are  the  first  denial  of 
the  non-magnitude  of  the  point ;  and  out  of  such  denial, 
all  the  endless  multiplicity  of  figures  grows  in  the 
Metaphysic  of  Negation,  i.e.,  Mathematics,  as  all  the 
endless  multitude  of  hot-selves  grows  out  of  the  denial  of 
Self  in  the  complete  Metaphysic.  In  describing  these 
imaginary  lines,  by  rushing  to  and  fro,  the  point 
without  magnitude  may  be  said  to  be  seeking  to  define 
itself,  to  give  itself  a  magnitude,  even  as  Self  appears 
to  define  itself  by  entering  into,  by  imposing  upon  itself, 


364  PERVADING   TRIPLICITY  [SC.   OF 

imagined  not-selves,  and  saying,  '  I  am  this,'  *  I  am  this  '. 
Points  in  juxtaposition  make  a  line  ;  but  if  they  have  no 
magnitude,  how  can  they  juxtapose  ! 

Corresponding  to  this  triple  sub-division  of  *  size  ', 
we  may  note  a  triple  subdivision  under  '  duration  '  also. 
The  words  in  this  reference  have  not  such  a  recognis- 
ed standing  as  those  connected  with  size.  But  we 
may  distinguish  '  period,'  corresponding  to  form  as 
limited  from  without  ;  '  filling  '  to  volume,  as  limited  from 
within  ;  and  '  rate,'  as  limitation  proper,  corresponding  to 
measure.  Each  of  these  again  manifests  as  '  long,  short, 
average,'  '  well-filled,  ill-filled,  occupied*,  (or  *  crowded, 
scattered,  leisurely  arranged  '),  '  fast,  slow,  even,'  etc. 

We  may  similarly  distinguish  under  vibration 
(tentatively,  as  in  the  case  of  duration)  the  three  aspects 
of  *  extent,  rate,  and  degree,9  and  subdivide  each  of  these 
three  again  into  '  great,  little,  mean,'  *  high,  low,  even,' 
and  *  intense,  sluggish,  equable,'  etc. 

In  the  above-mentioned  arrangements  of  triplets  we 
see  illustrated  the  fact  that  all  things  of  the  World  - 
Process  fall  into  groups  of  three  in  accordance  with  the 
Primal  Trinity  that  underlies  and  is  the  whole  of  the 
universe.1  And  these  groupings  are  not  mechanical  or 

1  The  Kashmir  school  of  '  Shaiva  f  philosophy,  some  works  of  which 
have  been  published,  recently,  is  also  known  as  that  of  the  Philosophy  of 
the  Triad.  fST3>  3$*TO»  The  main  ideas  of  the  present  work  appear  to 
be  very  much  in  accord  with  that  Philosophy.  The  importance  of  triads 
is  amply  recognised  in  familiar  Samskrt  literature  also  ;  thus  • 


fir*  star:,  ft-*r  \*t:,  frsr  firar,  few 


PM  CH.  XIV]       REFLECTION  WITHIN  REFLECTION      365 

empirical  but  organic.  It  may  appear  to  the  cursory 
observer  that  there  is  no  *  why  f  apparent  in  them.  But 
the  *  why  '  is  there,  and  in  a  very  simple  way  too.  Each 
member  of  a  trinity  reflects  in  itself  each  of  the  three 
and  so  produces  three  trinities  ?  and  this  process  is  a 
pseudo-infinite  one  ;  hence  the  whole  content  of  the 
World-Process  is  only  a  pseudo-infinite  number  of  groups 
of  such  triads.  All  these,  it  must  be  remembered,  are 
simultaneous  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Absolute,  and  do 
not  grow  one  out  of  another  in  time.  If  we  would  know 
why  there  is  such  a  thing  as  this  reflection,  we  should 
reconsider  the  arguments  in  the  preceding  chapters, 
whereby  the  necessity  of  both  changelessness  and  change, 
of  timelessness  and  time,  spacelessness  and  space, 
simultaneity  and  succession,  unity  and  diversity, 
reality  of  non-separateness  and  false  appearance  of 
separateness  and  distinguishability,  are  established.  The 


«ft:f 
«r9f: 


1  Three  kinds  of  gifts,  sacrifices,  worlds  or  planes,  gods,  sciences, 
paths  (after  death);  past,  present,  future  ;  dharma-artha-k&ma; 
prSpa-apana-ud  ana  ;  three  g  upas;  three  ultimates  or  elements. 
fires;  Vtdas  states  of  consciousness—  all  these  are  indicated  by  the 
three-lettered  AUM,' 


366  SELF-MAINTENANCE  [SC.  OF 

three  are  one,  and  yet  three ;  and  the  result  of  this 
apparent  antinomy  is  that  they  reflect  each  other  ;  each 
carries  the  image  of  the  others  in  its  very  heart,  to  prove 
its  oneness  with  it ;  and  all  do  this  endlessly. 

To  show  that  these  endless  multiplications,  seem- 
ingly so  tangible  in  their  multitude,  are,  in  reality, 
on  close  scrutiny,  found  to  be  very  unsubstantial,  we 
may  consider  a  little  more  fully  what  has  been  paren- 
thetically hinted  above,  (on  p.  358),  viz.,  that  volume 
and  form  mean  the  same  thing.  Form  is  nothing  else 
than  a  negation  of  continuity,  a  denial,  a  limitation,  a 
cutting  short  of  continued  existence  on  all  sides.  Volume 
means  evidently  the  same  thing  looked  at  from  within  ; 
it  is  an  inability  to  extend  further.  Hence  only  are  form 
and  volume  liable  to  change.  If  they  were  anything  real, 
actual,  having  being,  then  how  could  they  change,  i.e., 
pass  from  being  into  nothing  and  from  nothing  into 
being  ?  '  There  is  no  being  to  that  which  really  is  not, 
nor  non-being  to  that  which  truly  is.' '  But  such  change 
is  apparent  every  second,  every  millionth  of  a  second,  of 
our  lives.  The  solution  lies  in  the  fact  that,  in  all  change, 
what  really  changes  is  only  mere  form  (and  it  will  appear 
on  analysis  that  all  other  aspects  or  qualities  of  the  atom 
are  also  on  the  same  level  with  form),  which  is  simply 
negation  looked  at  as  above ;  and  that  what  remains 
behind  is  the  pseudo-thing-in-itself,  the  *  substance  * 
which  is  *  indestructible,'  the  essence  of  which  we  regard 
as  '  resistance '.  Resistance  is  nothing  else  than  the 

'  6I(Af  ii,  16.  \     , 


p.,  CH.XIV]  NO  REAL  CHANGE:  ENERGY  CONSTANT  367 

power  of  attraction  and  repulsion  embodied  in  a  not-self, 
an  etat,  as  exclusiveness,  separateness,  separate  self- 
maintenance.  It  is  the  reflection  of  the  affirmative- 
negative,  attractive-repulsive,  Energy  of  Ichchha-Desire 
in  the  Self.  This  '  resistance,'  '  self-maintenance,'  at  ma- 
d  h  arana,  like  desire  (of  which  indeed  it  is  but  another 
name,  in  the  objective  language  belonging  to  the  atom, 
as  distinguishable  from  the  subjective  language  belonging 
to  the  jlva),1  has  no  overt  form  of  its  own,  and  therefore, 
in  a  strict  and  abstract  sense,  never  changes,  remaining 
ever  the  same  in  totality.  It  is  the  Energy  which  physical 
science  recognises  as  remaining  constant  in  the  universe. 
Its  overt  form  is  the  multitude  of  changing  forms  and 
actions.  And  yet  again,  lest  it  should  be  said  that  even 
form  is  after  all  not  pure  and  utter  negation,  but  has  an 
4  appearance '  at  least,  has  an  e#-is-tence,  outer-being, 
and  so  should  not  be  -capable  of  destruction,  the  law 
makes  provision  for  this  also,  and  ordains  that  no  form, 
however  ephemeral,  shall  be  destroyed  beyond  recall. 
As  it  has  only  pseudo-being,  so  it  shall  not  have  fixed- 
ness, but  it  shall  have  unending  possibility,  and  therefore 
actuality,  of  recall  and  repetition.  The  remarks  that 
apply  to  '  forms '  apply  also-  to  *  actions,'  '  motions/ 
c  movements,'  which  constitute  the  essence  of  change. 

We  see  thus  that   these   reflections  add  nothing  to 
the  primal  trinity,  but  are  included  in  it.     Their  details 

1  In  this  consideration  is  to  be  found  the  reason  why  cT*T:, 

tf?:,  ?^r,  r^fa:,  S^srftR:,  awrfa:, 

etc.,  are  allied  terms,  more  or  less  interchangeable. 


368  TRIPLE    ASPECTS    OF   JIVA-ATOM          [SC.    OF 

constitute  all  the  universe,  and  may  not  be  comprehended 
by  any  single  individual  mind  and  in  any  single 
particular  book,  however  large  they  may  be.  As  the 
extent  of  these  is,  such  will  be  the  amount  of  detail 
comprehended.  But  the  main  principles  may  be  grasped  ; 
and  new  details  as  they  are  brought  forward  by  empirical 
experience,  may  be  classified  and  put  away,  as  a  matter 
of  convenience,  in  accordance  with  those  main  principles. 

We  may  conclude  this  line  of  observations  by 
noticing  another  series  of  triplets,  very  important  in  itself, 
and  also  illustrative  in  a  high  degree  of  the  principle  of 
reflections  and  re-reflections. 

The  attributes,  size,  life,  and  vibration,  common  to 
both  aspects  or  halves  of  the  jiva-atom,  all  considered 
with  special  reference  to  the  primal,  twofold  (or  threefold) 
motion  of  alternation  involved  in  Negation,  which  con- 
stitutes the  swing  of  the  World- Process,  yield  us  these 
parallel  triplets,  viz.  : 

(1)  '  increase,  decrease,  and  equality '  in  respect  of 
matter ;    and  '  liberality,  narrowness,   and  tolerance '  in 
that  of  spirit ; 

(2)  *  growth,  decay,  and  continuance *  in  respect  of 
body ;    and    '  pursuit,    renunciation,  and  indifference  or 
equanimity,'  in  that  of  soul ; 

(3)  *  expansion,  contraction,  and  rhythm  '  in  respect 
of  the  sheath  ;    and   '  pleasure,  pain,  and  peace,'  in  that 
of  the  jiva. 

We  may  also  note  that,  in  special  relation  to  Mula- 
prakrti,  the  triplet  of  size,  etc.,  takes  on  the  form  of 


P.,  CH.  XIV]       NEW   MEANINGS   OF   OLD   WORDS       369 

'  quantity,  quality,  and  mode  '.  Its  transformation  with 
reference  to  Pratyag-atma  also  may  be  described  by  the 
same  three  terms  in  the  absence  of  other  well-recognised 
ones,  though  the  difference  of  connotation  in  the  two 
cases  is  great  ;  for  they  cover  the  different  triplets  men- 
tioned by  Kant  under  the  heads  of  quantity,  etc.,  in 
connection  with  the  '  categories  '  and  with  '  logical 
judgments  '  respectively. 

We  may  now  proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to 
specify  the  attributes  that  appear  in  the  atom  with 
reference  to  the  primary  attributes  of  Mula-prakrti. 

These  are  : 

(a)  Dravya,  substance,  or  dravya-tva,  substantiality, 
mass,  power  of  self-maintenance,  that  which  constitutes 
it  a  something  having  a  separate  existence  ;  that  which 
makes  it  '  capable  of  serving  as  the  substratum  of  move- 
ment,' '  capable  of  being  moved  '  ;  the  immediate  mani- 
festation of  this  substance,  this  '  compacted  energy  \ 
being  movement  ; 

(6)  Guna,  all  '  qualities  '  whatsoever,  (not  the  '  three 
attributes  of  Mula-prakrti)  ;  and 

(c)  Karma,  activity,  vibration,  incessant  movement.1 

g<n,    3*$  \    5fag,  or  $refr§,   after,    *W,  '  that 


which  can  be  '  driven  '  about,  moved  from  place  to  place.    Skt.  g  r  u 
means  '  to  run,  to  <*n-ve  •» 

These  three  terms  belong  specially  to  the  Vaisheshika-system  of 
Indian  philosophy,  which  deals  with  this  part  of  metaphysic  predomin- 
antly ;  but  as  with  most  of  the  other  Samskr.t  words  used  in  this  work, 
so  with  these,  though  they  themselves  are  more  or  less  current,  yet  the 
connotations  that  have  been  put  into  them  here  would  often  not  be  quite 
recognised,  in  some  cases  would  perhaps  be  repudiated,  by  the  authors  of 


370  PRIMAL  TRIPLETS  [SC.   OF 

This  triplet  of  dravya-guga-karma,  substance-quality- 
movement,  is,  as  already  indicated,  a  reflection  and 
reproduction  of  more  primal  triplets.  The  mergence  of 
Pratyag-atma  and  Mula-prakrti,  producing  the  jlva-atom, 
also  reproduces  therein  their  two  triplets  of  attvibutes  in 
this  most  familiar  and  therefore  most  important  form. 
Sattva-rajas-tamas  become  respectively  transformed  into 
guna-karma-dravya ;  and  sat-chit-anancja  jespectively 
into  kriya-jfiana-ichchha ;  which  again  correspond  to 
karma-guna-dravya  respectively.  Jnana,  ichchha,  and 
kriya  will  be  treated  of  in  the  next  section,  in  Connection 
with  the  jlva-portion  of  the  jiva-atom.1 

(i)  Guna,  then,  is  that  in  the  atom  which  corres- 
ponds to  the  elements  of  chit  or  cognition,  an$  sattva  or 
cognisability,  in  Pratyag-atma  and  Mula-praktti  respec- 
tively. It  is  the  qualities  of  matter  which  falone  we 
know  and  can  know,  and  never  the  thing-in-itself,  as  that 
expression  is  used  by  western  psychologists  and  philoso- 
phers; for  that  thing-in-itself,  so  far  as  it  hasja  being  at 
all,  a  pseudo-being,  as  substance,  (which  holds  together 
or  possesses  the  qualities),  is  the  object  of  desire  and  not 

most  of  the  current  Samskr,t  works  in  which  they  are  to  be  met  with. 
The  present  writer  believes,  however,  that  these,  are  the  real  original 
connotations,  and  that  they  were  lost  with  the  growth  of  the  spirit  of 
separateness  and  selfishness  in  the  people,  and  the  consequent  gradual 
loss  of  the  deeper  Metaphysic  which  unified, and  organised  the  various 
systems  of  philosophy  as  different  chapters  t>f  a"  single  work  ;  clues  to 
which  Metaphysic,  it  is  endeavoured  to  rediscover  in  these  few  pages, 
all  too  poor  and  fragmentary  as  they  are.  See  Pranava-vada. 

1  Hints  and  more  or  less  veiled  statements,  regarding  these  corres- 
pondences, are  scattered  over  Dtvl-Bhtlgavata,  especially  in  Pts.  III. 
vi— ix,  VII.  xxxiii.,  and  IX,  1,  and  are  also  to  be  found  in  Kapila- 
Ctt&  and  works  on  Tantra-Shas^ra. 


P,,  CH,  XIV]  CORRESPONDENCES  371 

of  knowledge ;  *  as  its  movements  are  the  object  of,  i.e., 
can  be  changed  by,  action.  Guna  may  be  subdivided 
again  into  three  classes  :  (a)  mukhya,  chief,  vyavar^aka 
or  vish^shaka,  distinguishing  or  differentiating,  svabhavika 
or  prakrtika,  natural,  asadharana,  uncommon  or  special 
or  essential  i.e.,  proper-ties,  characteristics,  differentia, 
propria,  e.g.,  special  sensuous  properties,  sound,  touch, 
colour,  taste,  or  smell,  etc.,  which  would  from  part  of 
de-fini-tions ;  (b)  gauna,  secondary,  akasmika,  accidental, 
sadharana  or  samanya,  common,  or  non-essential  (or 
non-demarcating)  i.e.,  qualities,  which  would  form  part 
of  de-scrip-tions ;  and  (c)  dharma  (active),  functions, 
lakshana,  attributes,  signs,  marks,  which  would  generally 
include  both  ;  for,  in  reality,  distinction  between  essential 
and  accidental  rests  only  on  greater  or  less  persistence  in 
space,  time,  and  motion.8  We  might  perceive  again  in 
this  triplet  a  general  correspondence  to  Self,  Not-Self, 
and  Negation,  and  also  to  cognition,  desire,  and  action, 
respectively. 

It  may  be  observed  that  demarcating  and  non- 
demarcating  qualities  are  only  relatively  such.  A  quality 
which  is  non-distinguishing  as  between  individuals  of  the 

1  A  '  thing  '  is  known  only*  by  its  qualities  ;  to  speak  of  a 
4  thing-in-itself  *  apart  from  qualities  and  seek  to  know  it  as 
such,  is  self-contradiction  and  self-stultification.  The  One 
and  Only  Thing-in-It-Self  that  knows  (or  better,  is  aware  of) 
It-Self,  apart  from  (indeed,  by  repudiation  of)  all  qualities,  is 
the  Supreme  Self,  Patem-Atmd. 

wwrtte, 


372  SOUND    (etC.)-CONTINUA  [SC.   OF 

same  species,  is  distinguishing  as  between  that  species 
and  other  species.  This  fact  only  illustrates  further,  the 
fluidity  which  is  continual  in  the  higher  regions  of  the 
subtle  mental  plane. 

With  reference  to  (a),  we  may  note  that,  in  the 
human  race,  only  five  senses  are  working  at  the  present 
time  ;  and  hence  we  have  the  five  well-known  sense- 
properties,  or  sens-able  properties,  tan-matras,1  under  the 
sub-head  of  *  essential  '.  Varieties  of  each  of  these  again 
are  many,  and  if  we  had  the  necessary  information  as  to 
details,  we  should  be  able  to  throw  these  into  triplets, 
corresponding  with  and  reflecting  each  other  endlessly. 


rt  The  word  may  be  grammatically  construed  to  mean,  both, 
'that  only',  (a  near  approach  to  '  thing-  in-or-by-itseif  '  !)  and  'the 
measure  of  that  '  (i.e.,  that  which  measures,  de-limits,  de-fines  an  object). 
There  is  much  obscurity  as  to  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word,  in  the 
current  works  of  Sankhya-Yoga,  to  which  it  belongs  principally  as  a 
technical  term.  But  the  way  in  which  it  is  used  in  Bhagavata.  Ill,  v  and 
xxvi,  makes  it  certain  that  it  means  the  essential  property  which  belongs  to, 
and  distinguishes,  each  of  the  '  five  elements  ',  maha-bhutas  or  ta^tva-s. 
Thus,  shab4a-matram,  '  sound  only  ',  '  pure  sound  ',  '  sound-continuum  ', 
is  the  property  of  akasha-tattva  (Pether)  ;  sparsha-matram,  '  tact  only  ', 
'  tact  continuum  '.  of  vayu-air  (invisible  '  gas  ')  ;  rupa-»matram,  'color- 
form  only  ',  '  light-continuum  ',  of  tejas-fire  (visible  luminous  '  gas');  rasa- 
ma|ram,  '  taste  only  ',  '  taste-continuum  ',  of  jala-  water  ('  liquid  ')  ,  and 
gandha-matram,  'odour  only',  '  smell-continuum  ',  of  prthvi-earth  (solid). 
'  Shut  '  the  '  ear  ',  '  skin  ',  '  eye  '  '  tongue  '  '  nose  ',  and  you  will  feel 
some  continuous  sound,  tact,  light,  taste,  scent  ;  these  are  the  sense- 
continua,  all-pervasive,  generic  ;  .particular  sensations  of  sounds,  tacts, 
etc.,  are  only  particular  modifications  of  these;  as  the  words  that  are 
being  wntten  are  particularisations  of  the  ink-in-general  which  fills  the 
ink-bottle  or  the  fountain-pen's  ink-holder.  Note  that  t  a  t  -  1  v  a  means 
that-ness. 

One  more  observation  is  needed.  There  is  obscurity  and  confusion  in 
the  current  books  (even  in  Bh&gavaja  itself,  in  this  very  ch.  III.  xxvi.) 
as  to  the  word  which  stands  for  the  substrate  of  sound  and  that  which 
means  space.  Synonyms  for  the  letter  are  often  used  for  the  former.  But 
there  is  reason  to  think  that  a  k  &  s  h  a  h  (masculine)  means  the  element 
(?  ether)  which,  as  substratum,  has  the  property  of  sound;  while 
a  k  a  s  h  a  m  (neuter)  means  Space. 


P.,  CH,  XIV]  SENS-ABLE   QUALITIES  373 

Thus,  under  sound,  we  have :  soft  (in  tone  or  timbre),  or 
harsh,  low  (in  pitch)  and  grave,  or  high  (-pitched)  and 
acute,  loud,  rounded,  shrill,  sonorous,  deep,  light,  heavy, 
even,  piercing,  rolling,  crackling,  bursting,  tearing, 
thunderous,  whistling,  screaming,  roaring,  rushing,  dash- 
ing, moaning,  groaning,  rasping,  grinding,  etc.,  sounds, 
Tacts  are  smooth,  rough,  even,  silky,  flowery,  velvety, 
hard,  soft,  firm,  cool,  warm,  damp,  dry,  clammy,  moist, 
etc.  Colours  are  white,  black,  red,  yellow,  blue,  brown, 
golden,  violet,  orange,  grey,  green,  purple,  etc.,  with  their 
endless  shades  and  combinations.  Tastes  ('  gusts ', 
relishes)  are  sweet,  salt,  acid,  astringent,  hot,  bitter,  acrid, 
pungent,  putrid,  etc.  Smells  or  scents  are  fragrant, 
malodorous,  stimulating,  depressing,  sulphurous,  stinking, 
skunk-y,  civet-like  musky,  saffron,  sandal,  khas,  rose,  jas- 
mine, violet,  pSrijata,  malati,  sugandha-raja  (the  '  king  of 
scents,'  also  called  rajani-gandha  the  '  night-scent,)' 
lemon,  lily,  lotus,  blooms  of  myrtle  or  henna,  neem  or 
tamarisk,  mango,  etc.1  '  Flavors '  and  '  savors '  are 
mixed  tastes  and  smells  which  affect  palate  and  nostril 
simultaneously.  Sub-varieties  of  sensations  must  neces- 
sarily be  countless  in  accordance  with  the  countlessness 
of  the  objects  of  the  senses;  but  humanity  possesses 
definite  names  only  for  those  that  it  uses  and  experiences 
most  frequently. 

1  Mahd-bharata,  Shanti-parva,  ch.  182,  enumerates  nine  kinds 
of  smells,  six  of  tastes,  twelve  kinds  of  forms  and  colours,  twelve  kinds  of 
tacts,  and  seven  kinds  of  sounds.  Anugifd,  ch.  35,  repeats  these,  with 
slight  variations :  it  gives  ten  kinds  of  smells  and  eleven  of  sounds. 
Popularly,  seven  kinds  of  sound  (of  the  musical  gamut) ;  seven,  of  colour  ; 
six,  of  taste,  are  recognised  as  gener-al.  Of  tacts  and  smells,  no  such 


£74  NON-ESSENTIAL  QUALITIES  [SC,   OF 

(6)  Non-essenjtial  qualities  are,  by  their  very  nature, 
more  difficult  to  fix.  They  are,  generally  speaking,  those 
which  describe  the  relation  and  position  of  an  object,  to 
and  amidst  other  objects  ;  thus,  well-built,  ill-built,  near, 
distant,  commodious,  insufficient,  etc.  Many  of  the 
properties  mentioned  above  as  amongst  essential,  may, 
perhaps,  on  sifting,  be  found  to  be  non-essential,  or 
vice  versa.  Reference  to  the  purpose  in  hand  decides 
generally  whether  a  quality  is  non-essential  or  otherwise. 

(c)  Attributes,  partaking  of  the  characters  of  both, 
may  be  instanced  as  '  heat,  cold,  temperateness,'  *  light- 
ness, heaviness,  weightiness,  softness,  hardness,  firmness, 
plasticity,  rigidity,  elasticity,  pressure,  suction,  support, 
etc.,'  '  shape,  size,  duration,'  etc.  These  attributes  have 
an  obvious  reference  to  the  latent  and  patent  aspects  of 
energy,  and  to  Negation ;  as  the  others,  properties  and 
qualities,  have  to  the  Self-in-itself,  and  to  the  Not-Self 
as  Many,  respectively.  Such  considerations  are  capable 
of  endless  elaboration,  which,  however,  has  no  special  use* 
But  it  may  be  generally  useful  to  pair  them  off 
in  opposites,  as  loud  and  low  (sounds),  vivid  or  bright 

numbers  are  commonly  spoken  of.  Weavers  of  the  world-famous 
Kashmir  shawls  are  said  to  be  able  to  distinguish  three  hundred  colors 
and  shades  with  the  naked  eye.  In  North  India,  salesmen  of  perfumes, 
(for  the  manufacture  of  which,  the  towns  of  Jaunpur  and  Ghazipur  in  the; 
U.  P.  are  famous),  go  about  with  boxes  holding  a  dozen,  or  a  score,  or 
more,  of  glass  phials,  each  containing  a  different  kind  of  scent.  Musk 
is  good  for  use  in  cold  weather  ;  rose,  khas  (scented  grass  which  grows 
in  speeial  marshes  in  Gorakhpur  in  the  U.  P.).  bela  (a  variety  of  jasmine), 
in  hot  weather.  Some  are  good  for  all  weathers.  M.  W.  Calkins,  An 
introduction  to  Psychology,  (p.  60),  quotes  Zwaardemacker  (a  Dutch 
physiologist)  as  recognising  the  following  classes  of  smells :  ethereal, 
aromatic,  fragrant,  ambrosiac,  alliacious,  empyreumatic,  hircine,  viru- 
lent, and  nauseating.  To  the  Many-ness  of  Nature-Mdlaprakfti  there 
is  no  limit ! 


PM  CH.  XIV]       PAIRS  OF  OPPOSITE  QUALITIES  375 

and  faint  (colors),  hot  and  cold  (tacts),  fragrant 
arid  malodorous  (smells),  agreeable  and  disagreeable 
(tastes)  ;  corresponding  to  the  primal  pair  of  pleasure 
and  pain. 

From  the  psychological  standpoint,  we  may  note  in 
passing,  every  sense -property  is  something  sui  generis, 
on  the  same  level  'and  side  by  side  with  every  other* 
As  sense-properties,  all  are  equal  and  independent, 
and  none  is  grosser  or  subtler  than  any  other,  whence 
the  current  saying :  *  The  musk's  fragrance  cannot  be 
made  to  be  realised  by  any  amount  of  oaths  and 
affirmations  ' } ;  i.e.,  it  must  be  smelt  personally  to  be 
known.8  Thus  each  sense-property,  and  each  shade 
of  it,  must  be  experienced  directly  in  order  to  come 
within  the  precise  cognition  and  recognition  of  any 
jlva.  This  is  the  manyness,  the  separateness  and  ex- 
clusiveness,  of  sensations.  The  remarks  made  and 
figures  given  at  p.  458,  vol.  v,  of  The  Secret  Doctrine 
(Adyar  edn.,  1938)  will  be  found  very  suggestive  in  this 
connection ;  and,  read  together  with  what  has  gone 
before,  may  help  to  show  some  consistency  in  the  ap- 
parently very  inconsistent  statements  made  on  this 
subject  in  Purayas.  Thus,  it  is  declared  that  in  our 
world-system,  the  first  '  element '  to  come  forth  (to  say 
nothing  of  the  still  earlier  adi  or  mahat  taftva,  and 

1  *ff|  $<R[(farST*fa:  OTfa  f^T8^  1 

3  It  will  be  seen  that,  in  this  sense ,  not  only  is  Absolute  Brahnut 
'  indescribable '  (see  p.  148,  supra)  but  every  experience  whatsoever. 


376  ORDER   OF   EVOLUTION  [SC.  OF 

anupadaka  or  buddhi  tattva,1  which  are  only  vaguely 
alluded  to  here  and  there)  was  akasha  (ether)  with  the 
guna  of  sound  ;  then  vayu  (air),  with  the  guna  of  touch  ; 
then  fire  (agni),  with  light  and  form  and  colour  ;  then 
water  (apas),  with  taste  ;  and,  lastly,  earth  (kshiti),  with 
smell  ;  and  it  is  added  that  each  succeeding  one  was 
derived  from  the  next  preceding,  and  retained  the  property 
or  properties  of  its  originator,  besides  developing  its  own 
special  property.2  Again,  it  is  said  in  Puranas  that  the 
order  of  evolution  of  the  elements  and  properties  is 
different  in  different  cycles,  maha-kalpas,  of  this  and 
other  world-systems.  It  is  also  said  that  the  number  of 
the  elements  and  corresponding  senses  and  sensations 
differs  actually  (as  Voltaire  fancied  in  his  Zadig  et 
Micr  omegas)  in  different  worlds,  there  being  eighteen  in 


or    JT?^   3?3    3J3PWB    or   fclr^  I    In  theosophical 

literature,  the  order  given  is  usually  adi,  then  anupadaka,  then  akasha, 
etc.,  Pranava-vada  says  adi-tattva  is  the  same  as  buddhi-tattva,  and 
anupadaka  as  mahat-tattva.  In  current  Sankhya  works,  however, 
aham-kara  is  called  bhu>aqli,  and  it  is  born  from  mahat  which  is  the 
same  as  buddhi. 

2  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  words  earth,  water, 
fire,  air,  ether,  here,  do  not  mean  the  substances  ordinarily  understood 
by  them  in  the  English  language.  In  ancient  Indian  thought,  Con- 
sciousness is  the  basic  fact,  the  psychical  factor  is  primary,  and 
the  physical  is  secondary  ;  therefore  moods  of  mind  are  regarded  as 
'creators,1  evolvers,  of  modes  of  matter;  each  peculiar  sensation 
or  sense-able  quality,  tan-ma^ra,  smell,  taste,  etc.,  evolves  a  corres- 
ponding bhuta  or  tattva,  prithivl  or  kshiti  (earth),  apas  or  jala 
(water),  etc.,  i.e.,  the  primary  atomic  aspect  thereof  (vide  Sankhya  and 
Vaishgshika  works).  'Categories'  are  very  fully  dealt  with  in  Vaishc- 
shika  philosophy,  under  six  main  heads,  4ravva  (substance),  gupa 
(attribute),  karma  (movement),  sSmanya  (universality),  vishe*sha  (parti- 
cularity), samavaya  (co-inference)  ;  to  which  some  writers  have  added 
a-bhava  (non-existence). 


P.,  CH.  XIV]  QUINTUPLICATION  377 

• 
some,  thirty-six  in  others,  and  so  forth,1  as  there  are  only 

five  known  to  us  in  this  world.  Such  also  seems  to  be  the 
meaning  of  the  statement  that  '  this  world-system  of  ours 
is  crowded  round  with  infinite  other  systems  governed 
by  Brahmas  having  five,  six,  seven  and  more  up  to 
thousands  of  faces.3  Still  again,  it  is  said,  in  the  doctrine 
of  panchl-karana,8  '  quintuplication,'  i.e.,  the  mixing 
of  each  of  the  five  tattvas  with  each  of  the  other  four  in 
certain  proportions,  that,  at  present,  each  material  object 
has  in  it  all  five  elements,  and,  therefore,  the  possibility 
of  being  cognised  by  all  five  senses  ;  but  the  preponderant 
element  gives  it  its  best-recognised  nature.  As  a  fact 
we  find  that  beings  having  different  constitutions  of 
the  same  sense,  and  the  same  being  during  different 
conditions  of  the  same  sense,  receive  different  sensations 
from  apparently  the  same  sense  object.  Thus  it  is  now 
recognised  that  certain  rays  that  are  dark  to  men  are 
luminous  to  ants,  and  vice  versa  ;  and  objects  that  taste 
sweet  during  health,  taste  bitter  during  fever.4 

1  Yoga-V&sishtha. 

2  Tripd,d-Vibhuji-Mahd,-Narayana  Upamshat,  vi. 

3  Pancha-dashi,  i,  26-30,  and  Panchi-karana-vivarana. 

4  The  element  of  truth  in  the  theories  as  to  '  natural  names,'  '  true 
names,'   '  words  of  power. '   'mantras,'  etc.,  may  be  found  in  these  con- 
siderations.    Given   a  certain  constitution  of  ear,  and  also  given  certain 
surroundings,   each  object,   because  of  the  presence  of  akasha-tat^va 
in  it  and  in  the  surroundings  and  the  ear,  will  affect  that  ear  with  a 
certain  sound  which  will   be  its   '  natural '   name.     So  with  '  natural1 
forms,    smells,     tastes,    and     tacts,    of    objects.      But    because    there 
are  no  such  '  absolute  '   ears  and   '  absolute '   environments,  but  only 
varying  ones,  therefore  there  can  be  no  '  absolutely  '  natural  names,  etc., 
but  only  'comparatively'  such.    To  a  particular  race  of  men,  living  in 
a  particular  country  and  climate,  the  words  of  their  particular  scripture 
would  be  the  most  '  natural  names,'  '  words  of  power,'  most  effective  for 


378  ALL  QUALITIES   EVERYWHERE          [SC.   OF 

• 

All  this  means  again,  in  brief,  that  each  atom,  having 
in  it  the  common  guna  of  sense-cognisability,  sens-ability, 
has  also  therefore  in  it  what  is  necessarily  included  in  this 
universal  quality,  viz.,  every  possible  particular  guria ;  but 
only  one  or  some  are  manifest  and  others  latent,  in  different 
conditions  of  time,  space,  and  motion,  to  different  jivas  ; 
jivas  being  regarded  as  *  lines  of  consciousness  '.  That  is 
to  say,  one  kind  of  atom  will  mean  one  thing  at  one  time 

evoking  the  desired  results  in  those  climatic  and  other  conditions  ;  to 
others,  others.  As  we  pass  from  the  grosser  or  denser  to  the  subtler, 
from  the  more  concrete,  particular,  special,  to  the  more  abstract, 
in-de-nnite,  general,  the  range  and  reach  of  the  '  natural  '  quality,  etc., 
becomes  more  and  more  wide.  *  Bodies  '  are  very  exclusive  of  each 
other ;  even  two  cannot,  each,  take  the  whole  of  the  same  piece  of 
edible ;  but  a  million  minds  may  be  in  unison  in  respect  qf  one  thought, 
or  feeling,  or  resolve.  In  the  elemental  ideas  of  mathematics  and 
metaphysics,  in  the  domains  of  the  Mahan-a^ma  or  Mali  at,  Universal 
Mind,  all  jivas  are  of  the  '  same  opinion  ' ;  in  the  regions  of  the  vishesha- 
tattvas,  they  differ.  As  said  in  Charaka,  I,  i,  (quoted  before,  on  p,  283.) 
"  Generalisation  expands  and  enhances  all  bhavas,  thoughts,  feel- 
ings, things  ;  specialisation,  particular!  sat  ion,  narrows  and  contracts. " 
See  also  Yoga-Su{ra  and  Bhashya.  ii,  19. 

Schopenhauer,  on  pp.  482-3  of  vol.  I  of  The  World  as  Will  and 
Idea  (English  translation  in  three  volumes  by  Haldane  and  Kemp, 
pub.  1896),  illustrates  this  same  thought  in  another  and  fine  way : 
"...  The  good  conscience  .  .  .  arises  from  .  .  .  the  knowledge 
that  our  true  self  exists  not  only  in  our  own  person  .  .  .  but  in  every- 
thing that  lives.  By  this  the  heart  feels  itself  enlarged,  as  by  egoism 
it  is  contracted.  For,  as  the  latter  concentrates  our  interest  upon  the 
particular  manifestation  of  our  own  individuality,  .  .  .  the  knowledge 
that  every  thing  living  is  just  as  much  our  own  inner  nature  as  is  our 
own  person,  extends  our  interest  to  everything  living  ;  and  in  this  way 
the  heart  is  enlarged.  Thus,  through  the  diminished  interest  in  our 
own  self,  the  anxious  care  for  the  self  is  attached  at  its  very  root  and 
limited ;  hence  the  peace,  the  unbroken  serenity,  which  a  virtuous 
disposition  and  a  good  conscience  affords,  and  the  more  distinct  ap- 
pearance of  this  with  every  good  deed,  for  it"  (deed)  "proves  to 
ourselves  the  depth  of  this  disposition  ".  (Faith  is  witnessed  by  deed), 
"  The  good  man  lives  in  a  world  of  friendly  individuals,  the  well-being 
of  any  of  whom  he  regards  as  his  own/'  Here,  Schopenhauer  has 
caught  and  described  well,  one  aspect  of  the  V£<Janta  reason  for  the 
Golden  Rule  of  Ethics.  For  detailed  exposition  of  this  as  well  as  other 
aspects,  the  reader  may  see  the  present  writer's  The  Essential  Unity 
of  All  Religions. 


P.,  CH.  XV]  KARMA    AND   SAT  379 

and  space  to  one  kind  of  jlva,  and  will,  simultaneously  and 
in  that  same  position,  mean  a  pseudo-infinite  number  of 
things  to  pseudo-infinite  other  kinds  of  jivas ;  and  it  will 
also  mean  pseudo-infinite  kinds  of  things  to  the  same  kind 
of  jlva  in  the  pseudo-infinite  succession  of  time  and  space* 

(ii)  We  may  now  turn  to  the  karma-aspect  of  the 
atom,  corresponding  to  the  Sat  and  Rajas  aspects  of 
Pratyag-atma  and  Mula-prakrti  respectively. 

It  may  at  first  sight  appear  that  Sat-being,  should 
correspond  with  dravya-substance  rather  than  karma- 
movement.  But  if  what  has  been  said  before,  on  the 
nature  of  Sat  and  Ananda,  and  of  Rajas  and  Tamas,  is 
carefully  considered,  it  will  appear  that  Sat  properly 
corresponds  to  karma  and  not  to  dravya,  *  Being '  is 
what  we  are  inclined  to  regard  as  the  innermost,  the  most 
important,  factor  in  the  constitution  of  an  object,  because 
it  appears  prima  facie  to  be  the  most  permanent ;  and 
dravya,  as  shown  above,  is  such  in  the  case  of  the  atqm  ; 
the  idea  therefore  comes  up  strongly  that  dravya  should 
be  connected  with  "  being  '.  But  the  first  premise  here 
is  not  accurate.  It  does  not  discriminate  between  '  being  * 
and  '  existence  '.  What  is  being,  Sat,  in  Pratyag-atm5, 
is  '  ex-is-tence,'  asti-Ja,  '  outer-is-ness/  in  Matter.  And 
in  Pratyag-atma  (if  such  a  distinction  may  be  permitted 
where  there  is  truly  and  strictly  none  possible,  and  where 
all  are  aspects  and  all  absolutely  equally  necessary  and 

To  realise  the  awful  powers  of  sound,  consider  the  maddening  skull- 
bursting  effects  that  can  be  produced  by  magnifying  radio-sounds.  We 
can  understand  now  how  the  walls  of  Jericho  were  destroyed  by  a 
trumplet-blast. 


380  CAMOUFLAGE  [SC.    OF 

important),  Ananda-bliss,  is  even  more  *  inner '  than 
1  being  ' ;  it  is,  so  to  say,  the  feeling  of  own-being  ;  the 
difference  between  a  man  looking  at  himself  with  eyes 
open  and  again  with  eyes  shut.  In  this  sense  Ananda 
may  be  said  to  'be  even  more  '  being '  than  is  '  being  ' 
itself.  And  karma,  therefore,  corresponds  not  to  this 
innermost  being  of  Ananda,  but  to  the  outer  being,  the 
existence,  the  manifestation  of  Sat.  Existence,  reality, 
appearance,  manifestation,  is  all  in  and  by  action  and 
movement.  A  very  good  physical  illustration  of  this  is 
the  fact  of  natural  history,  that  most  insects,  aquatic 
creatures,  birds,  quadrupeds,  in  wild  life,  are  often  so 
completely  camouflaged  by  their  protective  colouring  or 
markings  that  they  are  not  distinguished  at  all  from  their 
surroundings,  that  they  remain  as  it  were  non-existent, 
even  when  they  are  quite  close  to  and  right  under  the  eye 
of  the  observer  ;  but  become  '  manifest '  at  once,  i.e., 
'  existent,'  with  the  slightest  shake,  motion,  or  action.  * 

Having  thus  shown  that  karma  represents  Sat,  we 
may  proceed  to  note  again  that  it  is  inseparable  from  the 
atom,  is  in  fact  one  of  its  essential  constituents.  The 
consequence  is  that  every  atom  is  in  unceasing  motion. 

Karma  falls  also  into  three  kinds  :  (a)  expansion, 
prasarana  (corresponding  to  the  boundlessness  of  the 

1  Consider  the  '  puzzle  '-pictures,   '  find  the  parrot,  monkey,  lion  '. 

The  point  has  been  much  emphasised  in  a  psychological  reference 
by  the  distinguished  psychologist,  Prof.  Ladd,  of  America,  as  it  has  been 
recognised  by  other  Western  psychologists  that ' '  the  deepest  and  most 
central  current  in  human  nature  is  the  ruling  passion  *'  (Hoffding, 
Outlines  of  Psychology,  p.  283),  with  the  additional  words.  '  as  mani- 
festing in  conduct ',  being  understood,  for  our  present  purpose.  See 
Science  of  Emotions  and  Science  of  Self ;  also  p.  270,  supra. 


P.,   CH.   XIV]  KARMA   OP  THREE   KINDS  381 

Self),  in-breathing,  pra-shvasana  or  ut-shvasana;  (b) 
contraction,  akunchana  (corresponding  to  the  separated 
mutual  repelling  and  restricting  of  not-selves),  out-breath- 
ing, nishvasana  ;  (c)  spandana  or  sphurana  or  an<Jolana, 
rhythmic  vibration  (or  shvasana,  in-and-out-breathing), 
corresponding  to  the  (affirmative-)  negation  which  sums 
up  both  movement  and  counter-movement  in  itself,  and 
holds  the  two  others  together  in  the  conjunction  qf 
alternation.  The  gunas  specially  arising  out  of  karma  are  : 
shighra-ta,  quickness,  manda-ta,  slowness,  and  v£ga,  or 
gati,  speed,  velocity,  tempo.  Minor  varieties  under  each 
of  the  three  are  endless,  as  in  the  case  of  gunas  :  thus, 
rapid,  slow,  steady  ;  ur<Jbva-gamana,  upward  motion, 
adho-gamana,  downward  motion,  tiryag-gamana,  side- 
ways motion  ;  u{-kshepana,  uplifting,  apa-kshepana, 
repulsing  or  casting  away,  atana,  wandering  ;  vertical, 
horizontal,  oblique  ;  centripetal,  centrifugal,  circumambu- 
lant  ;  etc.1 

(iii)  Lastly  we  come  to  the  dravya-aspect  of  the 
atom  which  represents  the  Anancja  and  Tamas  aspects  of 
Self  and  Not-Self  respectively.  It  is  the  '  etat-ness,'  the 
mere  '  this-ness  '  of  the  atom.  It  is  that  in  the  atom 
which  is  the  '  heart  '  of  the  thing,  its  substance,  its 
inertia,  its  mass  and  weight  and  resistance,  all  that 


;  3!2«T  I      ^R-1??     or      £-3^3  ;     ^-^       or 
;  ^f^I^ft  I  Many  of  these  occur  in  Vaishcshika-lists. 


382     THE  ATOM'S  INSEPARABLE  3  ASPECTS   [sc.  OF 

makes  it  a  something  existing  in  and  for  itself,  so  far  as 
it  can  have  such  a  pseudo-existence-in-itself  at  all.  It 
appears  mysterious  and  unresolvable  only  when  and  if, 
after  asking,  '  What  is  this  ?  ',  we  try  fallaciously  to 
answer  the  question  in  terms  of  something  else  than  guna 
and  karma.  The  answer  to  that  question  must  always 
be  in  terms  of  guna  and  karma  ;  or  otherwise,  merely  the 
reiteration,  '  It  is  a  this.9  Three  aspects  make  up  the 
fact  of  the  atom — idam,  '  this  '  (dravya),  ittham,  *  such  ' 
a  this  (guna),  and  evam,  '  thus**  is  this  acting  (karma)  ; ] 
and  they  can  never  be  separated  from  each  other. 

Dravya  too  may  be  subdivided  into  :  (a)  substances 
with  positive  weight  (predominant),  in  the  aspect  of 
attraction,  guru,  heavy ;  (b)  those  with  negative  weight 
(predominant),2  in  the  aspect  of  repulsion,  laghu,  light, 
buoyant ;  (c)  those  with  inertia,  dead  weight,  positive- 
negative  or  passive-active  resistance  to  all  change, 
self-maintenance  in  whatever  condition  the  thing  hap- 
pens to  be,  sthira,  stable.3  Subdivisions  of  these,  as  of 
others,  'are  endless  :  mahat,  bud<Jhi,  akasha,  vayu,  t<§jas, 
Spas,  prthivi,  solids,  liquids,  gases,  ethers,  metals,  non- 
metals,  organic,  inorganic,  minerals,  vegetables,  animal 
substances,  etc.  Some  of  the  qualities  arising  out  of 
these  subdivisions  have  been  already  noticed  before  in 
the  gunsu- aspect. 

1  TOL;  ^^;  W* 

9  See  Dolbcar's  Matter,  Ether,  and  Motion,  p.  91. 


P.,   CH.   XIV]  CORRESPONDENCES  383 

We  have  seen  that  resistance  is  of  the  very  essence 
and  nature  of  dravy a- substance,  and  we  see  now  that 
it  has  the  dual  form  of  attraction-repulsion.  This  makes 
further  clear,  if  such  clarification  were  needed,  that 
<jravya  represents  the  Ananda  and  Tamas  aspects,  which 
again  correspond  to  the  Shakti-energy  of  the  first  trinity* 
We  desire  a  thing,  we  know  its  qualities,  and  we  act 
upon,  change  or  modify,  its  movements} 

The  three  subdivisions  of  dravya  may  also  be 
regarded  as  corresponding,  in  the  order  in  which  they 
are  stated  above,  to  Self  and  Sattva,  to  Not-Self  and 
Rajas,  and  to  Negation  and  Tamas  respectively. 

It  will  have  been  noticed  by  readers  that  the 
task,  of  expressing  these  correspondences  precisely, 
becomes  more  and  more  difficult  as  we  enter  into  greater 
and  greater  details  and  subdivisions,  and  the  same  triplet 
is  repeated  under  more  than  one  head.  The  aspects  be- 
come gradually  so,  intermingled  that  they  cannot  be 
distinguished  easily,  and  the  assignment  of  triplets  in  a 
table  of  correspondences  may  naturally  and  reasonably 
vary,  if  the  students  differ  in  standpoint  and  in  the 
amount  of  attention  paid  to  each  factor,  some  regarding 
one  aspect  as  predominant,  and  others  another.  In  this 
last  case,  for  example,  if  attraction  be  regarded  as  active 
affirmation,  attention  being  specially  directed  to  the 
activity,  and  repulsion  as  passive  and  steady  negation  of 

1  See  J.  Ward,  art,  Psychology,  in  Encyclopaedia  Britannica, 
para  9.  In  Bhagava$at  the  triad  is  frequently  mentioned,  of  tfravya- 
jff&na-kriya,  instead  of  ichchh&-jff&na-kriya ;  (Jravya  being  obviously 
equated  with  ichchhS  or  desire. 


384  HARMONY   IN    DISCORD  [SC.   OF 

others,  of  manyness,  then  the  two  appear  reasonably  to 
correspond  to  Rajas  or  Not-Self,  and  Sattva  or  Self, 
respectively.  But  if  attraction  be  regarded  as  unification 
of  others  with  self,  as  se//-assertion  over  others,  and 
repulsion  as  separation  of  others  from  self,  as  pushing 
away  of  others,  then  it  would  be  right  to  say,  as 
said  above,  that  they  correspond  to  Sattva  or  Self,  and 
Rajas  or  Not-Self,  respectively.  Still  again,  if  attention 
were  paid  to  the  fact  that  the  unification  of  attraction, 
when  it  appears  in  the  limited  atom,  is  a  false  and  not  a 
true  unification,  that  it  is  the  assertion  in  reality  of  Not- 
Self,  which  is  then  only  masquerading  as  Self  (that  it  is, 
so  to  say,  fostering  the  flesh  at  the  expense  of  the  spirit), 
while  the  separation  of  repulsion  is  the  diminution  of 
such  a  false  self  and  therefore  an  advancement  of  the 
true  Self,  then  we  would  go  back  to  the  corres- 
pondence of  attractive  weight  with  Not-Self,  and  of 
negative  weight  with  Self.  The^  view  of  this  par- 
ticular correspondence  put  forward  here  as  the  main 
one,  viz.,  of  positive  weight;  to  Self,  of  repulsive  weight 
to  Not-Self,  and  of  inertia  to  Negation,  proceeds 
upon  the  consideration  that  the  fact  of  the  unity 
and  of  the  principle  of  unification  present  in  the 
atom  is  more  characteristic,  in  the  present  reference, 
than  the  fact  that  the  atom  is  only  masquerading  as  a 
one  and  a  self. 

This  should  not  confuse  the  careful  student,  but 
should  only  help  him  to  look  at  every  question  from 
many  sides  and  standpoints,  and  so  recognise  the 


P.,   CH.   XIV]        DIFFERENCES   OF   INDIVIDUALS        385 

harmonising  elements  of  truth  in  each  view,  rather  than 
the  discordant  elements  of  error. 

The  laws  previously  ascertained  apply  to  this  triplet 
of  aspects  of  the  atom.  As  these  three  cannot  be 
separated  from  each  other,  though,  turn  by  turn,  one  is 
predominant  and  the  others  in  the  background,  so  the 
three  subdivisions  of  each  are  also  contemporaneous  in 
this  way ;  that  one  appears  to  be  more  manifest  from  one 
standpoint,  while  another  appears  to  be  more  prominent 
from  another  standpoint  at  the  same  time.  This  last 
statement  applies  especially  to  the  subdivisions  of  (Jravya 
and  karma.  It  is  known  that  what  is  solid  and 
immovable  to  one  individual  may  be  pliable  as  a  liquid 
or  a  gas  to  another,  and  vice  versa ;  and,  again,  that  what 
appears  to  be  linear  motion  from  one  standpoint  appears 
as  rotatory  or  curved  from  another,  and  vice  versa.  Pro- 
vision for  limitation,  in  time,  space,  and  motion,  for 
death  and  re-birth  of  these  aspects  of  the  atom,  even 
in  the  midst  of  their  presistent  continuance,  is  made  by 
the  fact  of  change,  absorption  and  transformation,  of 
each  into  other  kinds  of  gunas,  karmas,  and  (Jravyas ; 
and,  yet  again,  recovery  of  their  previous  condition,  in  an 
endless  manner.  Ample  illustration  of  this  will  be  found 
in  physical  science,  in  connection  with  the  doctrines  of 
pseudo-indestructibility  of  matter,  pseudo-eternity  and 
conservation  of  energy,  and  perpetual  transformation  of 
motion,  showing  how  substances  (energies  proper),  attri- 
butes, and  vibration,  are  being  constantly  changed,  all  the 
while  retaining  possibility  of  recovering  their  older  shapes. 

25 


386  ATOMS — VORTICES   OF  NOTHING  ?  [SC.   OF 

Concomitance  of  these  three  aspects,  cjravya, 
guna,  and  karma,  and,  by  inference,  of  all  their  sub- 
divisions, from  the  metaphysical  standpoint  of  the  whole, 
is  especially  important  and  significant  to  bear  in  mind. 
It  will  help  to  show  the  underlying  truth  in  each,  and 
reconcile  all  of  t  the  many  conflicting  hypotheses  of 
physical  science.  Thus  :  some  hold  the  view  that  atoms 
are  nothing  substantial  but  only  vortices,  pure  motion, 
vortices  (one  may  fairly  say)  of  nothing ;  for  even  when 
the  holders  of  this  theory  say  that  atoms  are  vortices 
of  ether,  they,  in  order  to  avoid  an  obvious  petitio 
principii,  or  self-contradiction,  take  care  to  describe  ether 
in  terms  the  opposite  of  those  used  in  describing  matter ; 
and  so  practically  reduce  ether  to  nothing.  Others  say 
that  they  are  substantial,  whether  they  have  or  have  not 
a  vortical  or  other  motion  besides.  So  too,  the  first 
theory  of  light  was  corpuscular,  that  light  is  corpuscles  ; 
then  it  was  discarded  in  favour  of  the  undulatory  theory, 
that  light  is  undulations ;  with  the  discovery  of  new 
metals,  radium,  etc.,  and  observations  of  their  behaviour, 
the  radiatory  theory  is  being  reinstated  again.1  So  again, 
one  extreme  view  is  that  all  sensations  are  merely  vibra- 
tions of  the  objects  sensed,  transmitted  to  animal  nerves ; 
another  extreme  is  that  they  have  nothing  to  do  with 
vibrations,  (which  may  or  may  not  be  a  parallel  coinci- 
dent), but  are  things  sui  generis.  Scientists  who  have 

1  The  late  Dr.  Hubbe-Schleiden  (of  Dohren  bei  Hannover,  Germany) 
suggested  the  following  as  a  more  exact  statement  of  these  theories : 
"  1.  Light  is  emission  of  corpuscles  (Newton).  2.  Light  is  vibration  of 
ether  (Huyghens,  Fresnel).  3.  Light  is  emission  of  electrons. " 


P.,  CH.  XIV]        ALL   ALWAYS   CONCOMITANT  387 

trained  themselves  in  philosophy  also,  as  many  are 
beginning  to  do  now,  look  at  the  question  impartially 
from  both  points  of  view  ;  and  therefore  readily  see  the 
defects  of  each  extreme,  and  acknowledge  that  nothing 
yet  known  explains  how  a  certain  number  of  vibrations 
at  one  end  of  a  nerve  should  appear  as  the  sensation  red, 
or  blue,  or  yellow,  at  the  other  end  of  that  nerve.  The 
inconclusiveness  of  all  such  theories  lies  in  their  exaggera- 
tion, their  one-sidedness,  and  their  attempt  to  reduce  all 
the  aspects  of  the  atom  to  only  one  aspect ;  gunas  and 
karmas  to  dravya  only  ;  or  dravyas  and  karmas  to  guna 
only ;  or  gunas  and  dravyas  to  karma  only.  The  truth  is 
that  all  three  aspects  are  always  and  inseparably  con- 
comitant ;  that  an  atom  is  ever  a  something,  an  etat, 
a  this,  which  has  always  a  certain  motion,  a  certain  kind 
of  vibration,  which  motion  or  vibration,  again  is  always 
accompanied  by  a  special  sense-property.  "  The  three 
aspects  are  inseparable  and  are  the  expression  of  all  that 
happens  in  the  physical  world.  Given  one  of  the  three 
in  all  its  details,  the  other  two  would  be  known."  ! 

A  few  more  concrete,  if  somewhat  cursory,  observa- 
tions may  be  of  use  to  illustrate  the  simultaneity  and 
concurrence  of  all  aspects  of  the  atom.  Thus,  though, 
at  the  present  stage  of  evolution,  volume  and  form  appear 
to  be  speciallyy  indeed,  even  almost  exclusively,  connected 
with  the  sense  of  vision  amongst  all  the  senses,  yet  it  is 

1  Max  Verworn,  General  Physiology,  p.  546 ;  his  three  aspects, 
however,  are  "  Substance,  form;  and  transformation  of  energy  ",  form 
being  substituted  for  sense-quality,  and  transformation  of  energy  for 
motion  ;  not  very  different,  after  all. 


388  QUALITIES   COMMON  TO   ALL  [SC.   OP 

not  so,  in  reality.  Even  the  current  usage  which  employs 
words  having  a  spatial  reference,  in  connection  with  all 
senses,  shows  this,  and  is  not  merely  metaphorical.  We 
speak  of  bulky  or  extensive  or  voluminous  or  massive 
sounds  and  touches  and  tastes  and  smells ;  also  of  their 
forms.  The  words  are  so  employed  because  of  a  fact  in 
nature  ;  sounds,  touches,  tastes,  and  smells  also  have 
volume  and  form  ;  they  belong  to  sense-objects,  to  6tats, 
are  in  space,  time,  and  motion.  The  words  quantity, 
measure,  magnitude,  etc.,  apply  to  all  sense-objects  and 
with  a  clear  meaning.  Pitch  and  timbre  of  sounds; 
freshness  or  staleness,  strength  or  weakness,  insipidity 
and  vapidity  or  acuteness  and  intensity  of  tastes  ;  light- 
ness or  heaviness  of  touches  ;  sweet  sounds,  sweet  sights, 
sweet  scents,  and  sweet  tastes  ;  beautiful  voices,  beautiful 
forms  and  colours,  beautiful  smells ;  rough  and  smooth 
tones  as  well  as  touches ;  all  these  are  illustrations  of 
the  fact.1  Because  of  such  common  features  hiding 
behind  diverse  features,  under  guna  as  well  as  dravya  and 
karma,  is  it  possible  to  translate  sensations  of  one  sense 
"into  those  of  another,  under  special  circumstances  and 
conditions,  manipulation  of  which  belongs  to  that  region 
of  science  which  is  only  gradually,  with  many  set-backs, 
opening  up  to  the  public,  under  the  names  of  hypnotism, 
mesmerism,  animal  magnetism,  psychism,  telepathy, 
clairvoyance,  etc.  Cases  of  psychics  able  to  experience 
any  sensation  with  or  at  any  part  of.  the  body  are  now 

1  Lists   of  sense-qualities  given  in  Mahabh&raja,  referred  to  in 
foot-note  on  page  287,  supra,  include  many  such. 


P.,  CH,  XIV]         COMBINATIONS   OF    ATOMS  389 

recognised  by  at  least  some  scientists  of  note.  The 
obscure  Wdantic  doctrine  of  quintuplication  of  the  five 
tattvas  or  sense-elements,  (p.  377,  supra)  seems  also  to 
refer  to  this  subject.  It  seems  to  be  the  completion  of 
the  physics  of  the  universe  begun  by  Vaish6shika  and 
Nyaya  systems  in  their  statements  as  to  anu,  atoms, 
dvyanuka,  di-atoms,  trasarenu,  tri-diatoms  etc.!  This  is 
not  clear  now  in  the  absence  of  details,  but  the  suggestion 
that  they  are  such  completion  comes  to  one  who  ap» 
proaches  the  old  books  in  the  spirit  of  the  open-minded 
student,  no  less  ready  to  see  alliances  than  to  note  dif- 
ferences. Working  at  this  suggestion  and  comparing  the 
apparently  conflicting  statements  in  Pur  anas,  the  student 
may  succeed  in  making  up  some,  at  least  provisionally, 
satisfactory  system  of  the  essential  principles  of  chemistry, 
physiology,  and  cosmogony,  pending  knowledge  of  details 
through  development  of  special  faculty  by  yoga.' 

We  see,  then,  that  all  three  aspects  run  on  inde- 
feasible parallels,  even  as  thought,  thing,  and  motion 
always  accompany  each  other,  though  distinguishable  ; 
and  that  change  in  any  of  the  three  will  necessarily  bring 
about  a  change  in  the  other  two  also.  In  a  sense,  it  is 
true,  there  should  not  be  any  change  in  the  (Jravya  ;  a 
mere  *  this  '  will  remain  only  *  this  '  ;  and  cjravya 


079$,  3T59  I  The  last  is  explained  in  some  books  as  tri 
diatoms,  in  others  as  tri-atoms.  Modern  science  makes  the  '  atom  ' 
more  complex. 

*  The  student  will  find  much  help  and  suggestion  on  this  point  in 
theosophical  literature  generally,  and  in  The  Secret  Doctrine  of  H.  P» 
Blavatsky  and  Ch.  I  of  Ancient  Wisdom  of  Annie  Besant  especially. 


390  MEANING   OF   CHANGES  [SC.  OF 

constitutes  the  pseudo-permanent  element  in  the  atom  ; 
yet,  seeing  that  each  6tat  is  inseparably  connected  with  a 
quality  and  a  motion,  it  happens  that  there  is,  as  com- 
mon observation  shows,  a  sort  of  change  of  nature  in  the 
substance  also.  The  substance  is  no  longer  recognised 
as  the  same.  The  energy  has  also  changed  its  form. 
Water  becomes  gas,  and  people  naturally  and  not  un- 
reasonably say  that  the  substance  has  changed,  as  well  as 
motions  and  qualities.1  In  this  sense,  the  tat-tva,  '  that- 
aess,'  the  element,  may  properly  be  said  to  change* 
Rigorously  speaking,  there  can  be  no  change  in  mere, 
pure,  '  this '  (dravya) ;  but  no  more  can  there  be  any 
change  in  mere,  sheer,  ;  such  '  (guria),  or  in  mere,  ab- 
stract,'thus'  (karma).  What  changes  is  the  particularised 
condition  of  each  as  limited  and  made  concrete  by  neces- 
sary relativity  to  the  others. 

We  have  now  generally  defined  and  described  the 
three  universal  attributes  of  the  atom. ,  Wherever  an 
atom  is,  there  must  be  present  these  three  also.  What- 
ever its  variations,  these  must  accompany  it.  Let  us  now 
try  to  find  out  something  more  about  the  variations  of  the 
atom  generally.  These  variations  will  naturally  be  most 

1  The  phenomena  of  allotropism  and  isomerism  are  illustrations. 
Views  of  chemical  philosophers  as  to  the  development,  one  after 
another,  in  a  '  periodic  '  succession,  of  the  various  so-called  '  elements  ' 
out  of  one  primal  kind  of  root-matter,  are  also  in  accord  with  those 
propounded  in  the  text  above  and  in  Puranas  and  Sankhya  as  to 
successive  genesis,  one  from  another,  of  the  five  maha-bhu|as.  Compare 
also,  G.  W.  de  Tunzelman,  A  Treatise  on  Electrical  Theory  and  the 
Problem  of  the  Universe,  (pub.  1910),  p.  505  :  "  When  the  term  energy 
is  substituted  for  force,  the  V&Jic  scheme  of  development  becomes 
identical  with  the  one  which  expresses  the  most  recent  developments  of 
physical  research,  viz..  the  Absolute  or  Eternal  Self— Consciousness — 
Mind—Energy— Ether--Matter." 


P.,  CH.  XIV1       SPHERE,   THE   UNIVERSAL   FORM         391 

prominently  connected  with  guna-quality  and  karma- 
movement,  though  change  in  these  will  cause  the  appear-* 
ance  of  change  in  <Jravya-substance  also* 

Under  guna,  we  have  inferred  that  in  respect  of  form* 
corresponding  to  Not-Self,  Stats,  this-es,  have,  by  reflec- 
tion of  the  unity  and  completeness  of  Self,  one  universal 
underlying  form,  the  sphere,  and  a  pseudo-infinity  of 
other  forms  made  up  of  the  inter-mixture  of  points  and 
lines.  In  respect  of  volume,  corresponding  to  Self,  the 
common  fact  is  only  this,  that  there  must  be  '  bulk,' 
'  triple-dimension/  '  extension,'  some  size  ;  and  the  detail 
is  that  the  6\a.t  must  have  every  possible  size.  Thus  we 
have  atoms  of  all  possible  sizes,  *  each  size  of  atom  (with 
corresponding  other  qualities,  vibrations,  substantial 
nature,  etc.)  constituting  one  plane  of  matter  ;  each  plane 
constituting  the  'outer'  sheath,  the  material,  -of  a 
pseudo-infinite  series  of  world-systems  on  the  same  level 
with  each  other  ;  and  the  next  minuter  size  constituting 
the  *  inner,'  '  spiritual '  or  '  ideal '  counter-part  and  core 
thereof  and  therein.  The  case  is  the  same  with  special 
qualities.  The  presence  of  some  one  quality,  of  *  sense- 
cognisability,'  is  common  and  inevitable  ;  but  there  is  no 
restriction  as  to  what  that  must  be.  Reason  and  the 

'  In  order  to  see  the  element  of  truth  in  this  very  absurd-looking 
statement,  the  reader  may  read  Fournier  d'Albe's  Two  New  Worlds. 
Yoga- V As  is ht ha  stories  of  worlds  within  atoms,  and  atoms  within 
worlds  again,  ad  infinitum,  are  made  '  scientifically  intelligible  '  by  this 
work ;  see  the  present  writer's  Mystic  Experiences  or  Tales  from 
Yoga-V&sishtha.  Pranava-V&da,  of  course,  has  much  light  to  throw 
on  this  as  on  other  points  dealt  with  here.  The  scientific  discovery  of 
1  systems  '  of  '  electrons '  within  each  atom  also  helps  \o  explain  and 
support  the  ideas  of  the  text. 


392  ALL   ALWAYS    EVERYWHERE  [SC.  OF 

law  of  non-arbitrariness  require  that  the  whole  of  all 
possible  qualities  must  be  present  in  the  whole  and  every 
part  of  the  World- Process,  manifesting,  of  course,  to  any 
onejiva,  only  in  succession. 

The  main  kinds  of  karma-movements  of  atoms  may 
be  deduced,  as  a  tentative  hypothesis,  as  follows.  We 
have  seen  that  the  basic  ultimate  atom  everywhere,  in 
whichever  world-system  we  take  it,  would  be  a  sphere, 
though  size  and  quality  may  vary ;  for  it  is  formed  by 
the  aham-consciousness  revolving  round  itself  in  the 
circle  of  the  log  ion.  But,  existing  side  by  side  as  spheres, 
the  forces  of  approach  and  recess  work  between  them,  as 
mutual  attraction  and  repulsion.  Every  atom  endeavours 
to  approach  and  recede  from  every  other  simultaneously. 
The  same  atom  would  attract  as  well  as  repel  another  at 
the  same  time.  In  other  words,  every  atom  would  try 
to  absorb  another  into  itself  for  its  own  growth  (corres- 
ponding to  the  intensification  and  expansion  of  the  con- 
sciousness '  aham — 6tat — (asmi),'  ('  I-this-am)  ',  and  at 
the  same  time  to  resist  being  absorbed  into  that  other 
and  losing  instead  of  intensifying  its  own  self-existence 
and  identity.  With  attraction  and  repulsion  coming  into 
play,  the  self-revolving  spheres  would  begin  to  move  in 
straight  lines  towards  or  from  each  other.  At  this  stage 
movements  would  become  manifest.  Before  this,  (from 
the  standpoint  of  the  particular  world-system  we  may  be 
in)  the  self-revolution  would  not  be  apparent  as  move- 
ment ;  the  atom  would  scarcely  be  apparent  even  as  a 
something ;  that  there  would  be  in  it,  even  then,  a 


P.,  CH.  XIV]        MAIN  KINDS  OF  MOVEMENTS  393 

necessary  movement  of  self-revolution,  would  be  only  a 
metaphysically  necessary  assumption.  The  next  stage 
would  be,  that,  after  one  atom  has  secured  and  subordinat- 
ed another,  absorbed  it  into  itself,  (the  why  and  how  of 
which  may  appear  afterwards),  the  two  together,  making 
a  line,  would  now  fall  into  the  self-revolving  movement 
of  the  stronger,  and  the  circular-disc  movement  would 
result.  Lastly,  the  disc  revolving  on  its  own  axis  would 
become  the  sphere  again,  but  a  sphere,  the  sphericity 
and  motion  of  which  are  manifest,  instead  of  hypo- 
thetical! as  in  the  condition  of  the  primary  atom. 
We  may  consider  here  that  as  the  shortest  line  is 
composed  of  two  atom-points,  and  the  smallest  disc 
must,  be  made  of  such  a  line  circling  around  itself 
according  to  the  motion  of  the  stronger  atom,  so  the 
smallest  solid  sphere  should  be  made  of  at  least,  and  also 
at  most,  of  three  such  lines  crossing  each  other  at  the 
middle  and  revolving  round  that  point  on  the  axis  made 
by  the  strongest  line.  In  other  words,  the  manifest 
sphere  would  consist  of  three  double-atoms.  Such  is 

1  The  three  movements,  of  (straight-line-running-to-and-fro)  piston, 
{circling)  wheel,  (revolving)  sphere,  seem  to  be  the  only  elementary 
movements,  of  which,  all  possible  other  motions,  however  complex,  are 
made  up.  Nature  appears  formidably  complicated  ;  but  it  is  all  only 
appearance,  pretence,  illusion ;  to  her  persevering  devotee  she  un- 
covers her  simple  Beauty,  '  like  a  loving  bride  to  a  loving  bride-groom  ', 
jaya  iva  patyuh,  ushatf  su-vasHh.  The  most  unravellably  tangled  up 
Skein  of  thread  is  still  ravellable,  given  the  needed  unflagging  per- 
severence  ;  because,  obviously,  the  whole  tangle  is  the  twist  ings,  turn- 
ings, knottings,  inter-lockings,  of  a  simple  straight  thread.  Electricity 
finds  its  way  unerringly  and  instantaneously  through  the  most  inextricably 
tangled  Gordian  knot  of  wire  which  connects  the  switch  and  plug  with 
the  fan  or  lamp,  And  as  electricity  can,  so  can  human  fingers,  if  they 
are  only  sufficiently  persevering ;  for,  obviously,  however  tangled  the 
knot,  it  all  is  the  twistings  and  turnings  of  only  one  single  thread. 


394  METAPHYSIC   OF   MATHEMATICS  [SC.  OF 

perhaps  the  metaphysic  underlying  the  vague  available 
statements  of  Nyaya-Vaish6shika,  as  to  diatoms  being 
first  formed  from  atoms,  then  tri-diatoms  from  diatoms, 
and  the  world — our  own  world-system  at  least — from 
them.1  This  order  reproduces  respectively,  the  Absolute, 
the  duality  of  Self  and  Not-Self,  and  the  triple  duality 
(cognition-desire-action  in  soul  and  quality-substance- 
movement  in  body)  of  the  jiva-atom — the  individual,  the 
definite  one  (which  most  systems  of  numeral  notation 
express  by  a  line),  formed  by  the  junction  of  a  self  with 
a  not-self.  Intermixtures  and  modifications  of  these 
main  movements,  viz.,  linear,  circular,  and  revolutional 
or  spiral,  make  up  the  inevitable  pseudo-infinite  variations 
of  movements  in  the  World-Process. 

As  to  variations  of  the  dravya-aspect,  it  has  been 
said  that  they  accompany  variations  of  the  other  two.  It 
need  only  be  added  that  the  greater  the  number  and  the 
more  restricted  the  area  of  the  rhythm-movements,  the 
revolutions,  of  the  atom  and  the  derivative  molecule,  the 
more  firm,  rigid,  gross,  and  exclusive  and  resistant  for 
others,  and  attractive  and  insistent  for  themselves,  they 
would  become ;  and  per  contra,  the  smaller  the  number 
and  the  wider  the  area  of  the  movement,  the  subtler, 
more  plastic  and  more  evanescent,  they  would  be.  The 
atom  of  each  world-system  being  regarded  as  repre- 
senting mere  '  objectivity/  Not-Self,  Etat,  This,  it 
follows  that  it  is  uniform  and  unchanged  throughout  the 
life  of  that  system.  Differentiation  probably  begins  with 

1  See  f.n.  on  p.  389  supra. 


P.,  CH.  XIV]         ATOM,  NOT  INVARIABLE  395 

diatoms,  which  may  be  regarded  as  coeval  with  gunas, 
these  corresponding,  in  the  jiva-atom  of  a  system,  to 
what  the  tanmatra,1  would  be  in  the  consciousness  of  the 
Ishvara  of  that  system,  as  may  be  seen  later.  The  gunas 
referred  to  here  are  their  special  sense-qualities,  sound, 
touch,  etc.,  considered  psychologically.  The  differentia- 
tion may  be  considered  as  definitely  marked  at  the  stage 
of  tri-diatoms,  corresponding  to  the  '  gross-elements  ', 
sthula-bhuta-s,  defined  and  characterised  by  these  sensa- 
tions, viz.,  akasha,  vayu,  etc.,  and  to  the  respective  outer 
sensory  and  motor  organs  of  the  living  beings  of  that 
system.  These  tri-diatoms  may,  then,  for  practical 
purposes,  be  regarded  as  representing  that  dravya-aspect 
of  each  thing  which  is  variable.  Before  the  develop- 
ment of  these  tri-diatoms  (in  the  Vaish6shika,  not  the 
modern  chemical,  sense)  there  would  be  probably  no 
manifest  differentiation  of  the  'various  tattva-s,  *  sense- 
elements,'  one  from  the  other.  Variations  of  such 
ultimate  molecules  of  a  world-system,  as  physical  science 
is  now  gradually  showing  (in  terms  of  '  atoms,'  however, 
rather  than  of  '  molecules  '),  would  correspond  with 
variations  of  resistance  and  density,  of  number  and  kind 
of  vibrations,  and  of  special  sense-qualities. 

We  see  then,  that  the  atom  is  not  an  invariably 
fixed  quantity.  Its  fixedness  is  only  an  appearance,  and 
exists  only  in  connection  with  world-systems  taken 
singly.2  Just  as  a  stone,  a  tree,  an  animal,  a  human 


;  see  p.  372  supra. 
*  Bergson,  Creative  Evolution,  p.  214  :  "  When  we  observe  that  a 
thing  really  is  where  it  acts,  we  shall  be  led  to  say,  as  Faraday  was,  that 


396  INFINITE  VARIETY   OF  ATOMS  [SC.   OF 

being,  have  an  appearance  of  permanence  and  con- 
tinuance from  day .  to  day,  and  yet  are  changing  inces- 
santly from  moment  to  moment ;  just  as  a  whirling  torch, 
or  catherine-wheel,  or  gas-flame,  has  the  appearance  of  a 
flat  disc  or  sheet  of  fire,  though  something  altogether 
different  in  reality ;  so  an  atom  has  only  a  pseudo- 
fixedness  and  sameness  of  size-duration-movement,  etc., 
in  space-time-motion.  The  appearance  of  fixedness  in 
incessant  change  is  due  to  the  imposition  of  *  sameness  ' 
by  a  connected  individual  consciousness — the  conscious- 
ness of  the  Brahma  the  chief  Individualised  Cosmic  Mind 
—in  each  world-system.  In  other  words,  the  nature  of 
the  jiva,  as  Self,  imposes  (according  to  its  own  neces- 
sities, to  be  dealt  with  later),  a  certain  sameness  and 
continuance,  while  the  nature  of  the  atom,  as  Not-Self, 
requires  incessant  change  ;  reconciliation  is  found  in  the 
constant  repetition  of  the  vibrations  which  maintain  the 
other  attributes  together  with  themselves.  Apart  from 
such  appearance  of  fixity,  there  is  truly  a  pseudo-infinite 
variety  in  every  aspect  of  the  atom,  and  a  pseudo-infinite 
pseudo-infinity,  pseudo-infinity  within  pseudo-infinity. 
Thus  each  size  of  atom,  together  with  all  its  attributes 
and  qualities  corresponding  to  that  size,  is  necessarily 

all  the  atoms  interpenetrate,  and  that  each  of  them  fills  the  world ;  "  in 
other  words*  '  All  is  everywhere ' ;  but  Bergson  jibs  at  the  remaining  two 
words  of  the  VetJ&nta  maxim,  viz.,  '  and  always '.  He  has  his  peculiar 
view  of  creative  evolution  as  a  '  durational '  progress,  in  time.  Still 
his  views,  and  those,  f.i.,  of  Sir  J.  Jeans,  that  atoms  can  be  "  annihi- 
lated "  by  being  "  transformed  into  radiation  ",  can  be  reconciled  with 
the  common  atomic  theory,  by  considerations  like  those  advanced  in  the 
text.  Jeans  also  says:  "An  electron  must,  in  a  certain  sense  at  least, 
occupy  the  whole  of  space";  Mysterious  Universe,  p.  71.  Jevons' 
views  have  been  noted  before  (p.  180)  to  similar  effect. 


P.,  CH.  XIV]       INFINITE   IN   INFINITESIMAL  397 

pseudo-infinite  in  number,  and  would  be  found  in 
every  part  of  space  and  time.  Yet,  when  the  geometrical 
axiom,  which  applies  to  all  things  in  space,  says :  "  Two 
things  cannot  occupy  the  same  space  at  once,"  how  can 
all-  these  pseudo-infinite  sizes  of  atoms  exist  in  the  same 
space  ?  The  reconciliation  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that 
this  apparent  pseudo-infinity  is  a  *  psychological,'  an 
'  ideal,'  infinity,  entirely  created  and  carried  along  with 
itself,  wherever  it  goes,  by  the  Consciousness  of  the  Self 
as  a  foil  to  its  own  infinite-infinity.  The  geometrical 
axiom  does  not  apply  to  the  Absolute-Consciousness 
which  transcends  and  includes  Space-Time-Motion,  and 
creates  all  the  infinite  overlappings  of  individuality  which 
have  been  mentioned  before,  and  which  correspond  to 
the  apparent  overlappings  of  the  atoms.1  Yet  again, 
lest  there  should  be  even  the  appearance  of  a  violation  of 
the  geometrical  axiom,  the  various  sizes,  whenever  and 
wherever  examined  by  any  one  individual  consciousness, 
would  be  found  to  fit  one  into  another  (as  water  in  sand) 
and  constitute  the  different  and  interpenetrating  planes 
of  the  world-systems. 

Thus  it  happens  that  what  is  an  atom  to  one  jiva, 
within  the  limits,  spatial  and  durational,  of  a  solar 
system,  may  contain  whole  worlds  within  itsen  to  a 
jiva  sufficiently  minute.  And,  vice  versa,  what  is  a 
solar  system  to  us  may  form  only  an  atom  to  a  jiva 
sufficiently  vast.  The  repeated  and  much  emphasised 

1  From  the  transcendental  standpoint,  all  possible  things 
tions)  are  contained  in  the  single  point  (-sphere)  of  this  Absol 
sciousness. 


398  WORLDS    IN    ATOMS  [SC.   OF 

statement  in  Yoga  Vasishtha,  that  a  world  contains 
atoms ;  and  teach  of  these  atoms  a  world  ;  and  that 
world,  atoms  again;  and  so  on  ad  infinitum,  is  justi- 
fied in  this  manner  in  a  very  literal  sense.1  Consider 
here  what  was  said  before,  as  to  the  chain  of  individual- 
ities in  a  single  organism,  and  as  to  the  Virat-Purusha  ; 
then  the  thought  may  become  clear.  The  student  will 
also  be  greatly  helped  by  the  researches  of  physical 
science,  going  to  show  that  what  has  till  now  been  re- 
garded as  the  indivisibly  ultimate  atom,  consists  of  hund- 
reds of  '  corpuscles,'  *  and  by  the  tentative  results  of 

1  Yoga  V&sishtha  speaks  also  of  different  kinds  of  '  space,'  especial- 
ly three,  mah-akasha,  chitt-akasha,  and  chi^-akasha,  fitting  one  within 
the  other,  in  somewhat  the  same  sense  as  the  different  '  sizes  '  of  atoms 
mentioned  above,  and  corresponding  to  them,  or  to  the  three  bodies. 

3  The  word  '  atom  '  has  been  used  here,  throughout,  as  equivalent  to 
the  words  '  anu  '  or  '  param-anu  '  of  Samskrt.  The  new  word  '  ion  '  is, 
it  seems,  nearer  to  '  anu  '  ;  but  it  has  not  yet  got  a  recognised  position  in 
western,  science  and  philosophy,  and  is  still  competing  with  '  corpuscles,' 
'electrons,'  etc.  When  the  ideas  and  words  have  settled  down  in  the 
course  of  a  few  years,  it  may  perhaps  be  useful  to  change  our  nomen- 
clature also.  This  '  settling  down  '  is,  however,  not  a  very  likely  event, 
except  in  a  very  comparative  sense.  Like  '  fashions  '  invented  by  the 
artistic-minded,  first,  then  invaded  and  copied  by  the  '  vulgar ,' then 
abandoned  to  them,  after  the  invention  of  new  fashions,  to  undergo  a 
similar  fate  in  turn  ;  like  the  '  veil  after  veil '  which  will  lift  only  to  leave 
1  veil  upon  veil  behind  ' ;  like  the  '  bodies '  which  Brahma  successively 
puts  on  and  casts  off  to  be  taken  up  and  occupied  by  different  orders  of 
beings,  devas,  asuras,  fairies,  gancjharvas,  human  beings,  etc.,  (Bh&ga- 
vafa,  III,  xx)  ;  like  houses  and  institutions  built  up  by  some,  and 
'  captured '  and  occupied  successively  by  others ;  like  these  is  the  fate  of 
words.  £)ther  meanings  than  those  originally  intended  usurp  them,  and 
new  woros  have  to  be  coined  to  accommodate  those  old  meanings.  In 
the  meanwhile,  the  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  word  'atom  ', 
here,  is  that  of  a  piece  or  particle  of  '  6 tat,'  '  this,'  '  matter/  which,  fox 
the  time,  and  in  the  particular  world-system,  and  from  the  standpoint, 
with  which  we  may  be  concerned  at  the  moment,  is  ultimate  and 
'  indivisible  '.  Sometimes,  though  very  rarely,  the  word  has  been  used 
here  as  equivalent  to  '  sheath '  or  '  body  '  ;  and  this  has  been  done  be- 
cause, in  the  particular  connection  in  which  the  word  has  been  so  used, 
the  sheath  or  body  is  the  irreducible  minimum  which  the  jiva  requires  foe 
its  manifestation. 


P.,   CH.   XV]  ORDER   IN    DISORDER  399 

enquiry  by  budding  superphysical  senses,  so  far  as  they 
are  publicly  available.1 

How  order  is  imposed  on  this  infinity  of  disorder  ; 
how  the  World-Process  is  ever  an  organic  whole,  within 
whatever  limits  of  space-time-motion  we  take  it ;  and 
how  this  pseudo-infinity  of  pseudo-infinities  is  held 
together  in  co-ordination,  in  a  system  of  planes  within 
planes,  lokas  within  lokas,  by  the  mighty  stress  of  the 
Principle  of  the  Supreme  Individuality  or  Oneness  of  the 
Universal  Self — this  may  all  appear  in  the  next  chapter 
on  the  jlva. 


CHAPTER  XV 

JIVA-ATOMS— SUBJECTIVELY,  i.e.  JIVAS 

AT  the  outset  of  this  chapter  we  may  note  that  the 
aspects  of  size,2  specialised  with  reference  to  the  jiva, 
would  be  '  range  or  extent  of  consciousness  in  all  its 
manifestations,  cognition,  desire,  and  action/  '  its  definite- 
ness  or  intensity,'  and  its  '  calibre  or  scope  generally  ', 
These  would  subdivide  into  '  broad-mindedness,  narrow- 
mindedness,  rationality  or  common  sense/  '  vagueness  or 
weakness,  clearness  or  strength,  distinctness  or  firmness/ 
4  long-headedness  or  far-sightedness,  width  of  interests, 
depth/  etc. 

1  Vide  Annie  Besant's  Occult  Chemistry. 
9  See  p.  368  supra. 


400  JIVA   AS   CONSCIOUSNESS  [SC.   OP 

As  to  specialisations  of  duration  and  vibration,  it 
need  only  be  said  that  the  words  used  in  connection  with 
matter  in  the  preceding  chapter  apply,  by  ordinary  usage, 
to  corresponding  features  of  mind  also. 

With  these  brief  suggestions,  we  mav  pass  on  to  the 
features  more  prominently  characteristic  of  the  jlva,  as 
the  embodiment  of  consciousness. 

The  entire  nature  of  consciousness  is  exhaustively 
described  by  and  contained  in  the  words :  "  I-This-Not 
(Am)."  This  is  the  Absolute-Consciousness,  the  true 
Chid-ghana,  '  compacted  Chit,'  Maha-Samvit,  '  Great 
Consciousness,'  which,  in  its  transcendence  of  and  absolu- 
tion from  numbers,  limitations,  and  relations,  includes  all 
that  is  governed  by  numbers,  limitations,  and  relations, 
and  indeed  is  all.  This  Consciousness  is  the  Absolute, 
and  .includes  both  the  factors  of  what  is  ordinarily 
distinguished  as  dvam-cjvam,  pair,  of  Chit,  '  the 
Conscious'  (corresponding  to  Pratyag-atma)  and  Jadat 
1  the  Unconscious  '  (corresponding  to  Mula-prakrti).  It 
may  not  unreasonably  be  objected,  because  of  this  fact, 
that  the  word  '  Consciousness  '  is  not  altogether  suitable 
as  an  epithet  for  the  Absolute,  even  with  qualificatory 
adjectives*  But  it  becomes  unavoidable,  now  and  again, 
to  describe  the  Absolute  in  special  terms  borrowed  from 
the  .triplets  of  attributes  of  Pratyag-atma  and  Mula- 
prakrti,  which  are  the  Pen-ultimates  of  the  World- 
Process,  as  the  Absolute  is  the  very  Ultimate  and  the  all. 
The  nearest  approach  to  the  Ultimate  is  obviously  by  the 
Penultimates ;  hence  the  necessity  of  speaking  in  terms 


P.,  CH.  XV]  THREE    FUNCTIONS   OF   MIND  401 

of  the  latter ;  and  this  is  why  Brahma  is  described,  in 
Upanishats  and  other  works  on  Vedanta,  now  as  '  Pure 
Consciousness '  or  Shuddha-Chit,  again  as  Maha-Sat  or 
'  Boundless  Being,'  and  finally  as  Ananda-ghana  or 
Ananda-maya,  '  composed  or  compacted  of  Bliss  ' ;  also 
as  the  Tamas  beyond  Tamas,  '  the  darkness  beyond 
darkness,'  Shuddha  or  'pure'  Sattva,,  and  Paro- 
Rajas,  transcending-Rajas.  And  so,  for  our  present 
purposes,  we  have  to  speak  of  Brahma  as  the  Absolute- 
Consciousness,  slightly  emphasising  the  Pratyag-atmic 
aspect  thereof  rather  than  the  Mula-prakrtic  ;  but  care- 
fully guarding  the  while  against  possible  misconstruction, 
by  openly  stating  that  fact  at  the  outset. 

In  its  unique  completeness,  then,  this  Absolute- 
Consciousness  includes  every  possible  cognition,  every 
possible  desire,  every  possible  action,  all  at  once  and  for 
ever ;  even  as  it  includes  all  possible  objects  of  cognition, 
desire,  and  action,  namely  qualities,  substances,  and 
movements.  But,  taken  as  consisting  of  successive 
and  separable  parts  in  the  pseudo-infinity  of  World- 
Process,  it  appears  as  broken  up  into  three  aspects 
jnana-cognition,  ichchha-desire,  and  kriya-action.  How 
these  three  and  only  three  aspects  arise  in  the  jiva, 
on  the  collision  and  coalescence  of  Self  and  Not-Self, 
has  been  already  outlined  in  chapter  IX  supra,  on 
Pratyag-atma,  where  the  genesis  of  Sat-Chit-Anan4a  is 
explained.  To  restate  : 

An  ego  bound  to  a  non-ego  in  the  bond  of  the  logion 
is  necessarily  bound  by  a  triple  bond  at  three  points ;  is  in 
26 


402    IN  TERMS  OF  SUBJECT  AND  OBJECT   [SC.  OF 

contact  with  three  corresponding  points  in  the  non-ego, 
viz.,  jnana-ichchha-kriya,  on  the  side  of  the  ego,  and  guna- 
dravya-karma,  respectively,  on  that  of  the  non-ego. 
4 1-this-(am)  not ' — in  this  fact  we  see  the  following  : 

(1)  '  I  '   and  '  this,'   being   placed  opposite  to  each 
other,   are  either   turning  face  towards  face,  or  face  away 
from    face.     The   ego   cognises,    perceives,   the  non-ego, 
receives  into  itself  reflection  and  imprint   of  that  non- 
ego    (metaphorically  as  well  as  literally,   as  will  appear 
later),  or  ignores  and  forgets  it.     This  is  (dual  or,  with  a 
middle  state,  triple)  jnana. 

(2)  '  I  '  tends  to  move  towards  or  away  from  '  not-I '. 
This  tendency  is  desire,  corresponding  to  the  affirmation- 
negation  of  Shakti.1     It  is  (dual  or  rather  triple)  ichchha. 

1  See  pp,  165-169  supra.  Desire  may  be  said  to  correspond  with 
Negation  in  this  obvious  sense  :  It  consumes  its  object.  It  denies  to  it  a 
separate  existence  and  devours  it,  swallows,  merges  its  object  into  the 
desiring  self.  Food  is  eaten  up  by  the  hungry  person.  Man  and  woman 
espouse  each  other,  two  becoming  one.  When  an  English  poet  sings, 
"  For  each  man  kills  the  thing  he  loves,"  etc.,  the  thought,  though  put 
in  an  extreme  and  evil  form,  is  not  altogether  different.  The  gems  and 
jewels  and  fineries  that  people  admire  and  desire,  they  put  on  their  per- 
sons and  make  them  part  of  their  '  personality  ' .  The  three  (psycho-) 
physical  appetites,  for  food,  adornment,  sex,  are  thus  *  negation-al '  of  the 
separateness  of  their  objects.  That  which  was  a  separate  idam,  or  eta$, 
1  this,*  is  converted  by  them  into  mama,  '  mine  '  (the  diluted  weaker  form 
of  'I,'  its  '  sphere  of  influence,'  its  '  aura  '),  and  then  into  aham,  '  I  \ 
(Witness,  how  politico-economic  '  spheres  of  influence ',  '  protectorates  ', 
'  mandates  ' .  '  markets  ' ,  '  trusts  ' ,  become  absorbed) .  The  three  corres- 
ponding (physico-)  psychical  appetites,  for  honor,  wealth,  and  power, 
respectively,  behave  in  the  same  way.  Wealth  becomes  '  my  property,1 
power  says  '  I  am  the  State,'  the  honoured  person  begins  to  think  '  these, 
who  honour  me,  are  my  obedient  followers  '. 

In  a  somewhat  similar  sense,  knowledge  and  action  also  may  be  said 
to  tend  to  abolish  the  separate  existence  of  their  objects.  To  know,  to 
understand,  '  another,'  fully,  we  must  '  get  into  his  (or  its)  skin,'  '  see  with 
his  eyes,' '  feel  as  he  feels,'  '  put  ourselves  into  his  position,'  '  stand  in 
his  shoes '  ;  we  must  sym-pathise  (or  ero~pathise,  as  some  psycho- 
analysts say)  with  him  to  the  extent  of  identifying  him  with  ourselves. 


P.,  CH.  xv]     THE  FUNCTIONS  AS  Consumers  403 

(3)  The  ego  actually  moves  towards  or  away  from, 
the  non-ego,  This  is  (dual  or  rather  triple)  kriya. 

All  these  are  but  modifications,  forms,  aspects,  or 
degrees  of  the  main  fact  of  identification  or  separation 
between  Self  and  Not-Self. 

Fichte  seems  to  have  endeavoured  to  express  the 
same  or  a  similar  idea  thus:  "  (1)  The  ego  exhibits  itself 
as  limited  by  the  non-ego  (i.e.,  the  ego  is  cognitive) ; 
(2)  conversely,  the  ego  exhibits  the  non-ego  as  limited  by 
the  ego  (i.e.,  the  ego  is  active)."  ' 

This  is  the  real  significance  of  the  rapport  of  yoga-sam&dhi.  (Yoga- 
sutra,  i,  43,  and  iii,  3).  We  '  understand,'  to  the  acute  extent  of  '  feel- 
ing,' every  little  pain  and  pleasure  of  our  body,  because  we  have  identi- 
fied ourselves  with  it ;  this  is  one  aspect  of  the  truth  indicated  in  the 
doctrine  of  solipsism  ;  this  is  why  mothers  '  understand  '  the  pains  of  their 
babies.  That  action  subserves  the  purpose  of  '  identifying  '  its  object 
with  or  '  approximating  '  to,  or  subordinating  it  to  the  will  of  the  actor, 
goes  without  saying,  seeing  that  action  arises  out  of  desire.  But  this 
feature  of  knowledge  and  action  is  due  to  their  inseparable  connection 
with  desire.  In  the  case  of  '  aversion,'  '  ignoring  '  and  '  putting  away,1 
'  negation  '  appears  in  another  aspect ;  abolition  of  the  '  other  '  is  still 
there,  though  in  another  manner. 

Primal  Libido,  Elan  Vital.  Horme,  Appetite,  Urge  and  Surge  of 
Life,  Shakti-Desire,  Kama,  is  for  Self-Realisation,  S  y  a  m,  '  May  I  be  '  ; 
its  next  development  isBahu  S  y  S  m,  '  May  I  be  Much  or  More  ;  the 
further  and  final  is  Bahu-dha  S  y  a  m,  '  May  I  be  Many  '  or  Many- 
formed  '.  Skt.  names  are  L  o  k  a-e  s  h  an  a,  desire  for  '  local  habitation 
and  a  name',  appetite  for  Self-preservation  of  physical-self  by  food, 
and  of  psychical -self  by  honor  and  glory,  name  and  fame;  Vit$a- 
e'shana,  for  Self-expansion  by  possessions,  adornment,  homestead, 
wealth,  property  ;  and  Dara-suta-(Shakti)-6shapa,  for  self-conti- 
nuation (immortalisation,  sempiternahsation)  by  spouse-and-child  and 
power  over  them  (in  the  present,  as  well  as  in  the  future,  by  will  and 
testament).  The  first  corresponds  broadly  to  jnana  and  <Jharma;  the 
second  to  kriya  and  arfcha ;  the  third  to  ichchha  and  kama.  All  are 
inter-dependent;  indeed,  barely  possible  to  distinguish.  They  are  more 
fully  dealt  with  in  Science  of  Emotions,  and  Science  of  Social  Organi- 
sation (which  deals  specially  with  (Jharma-artha-kama) .  Incidentally, 
it  may  be  noted  that  the  present  work,  The  Science  of  Peace ,  corresponds 
with  Jffana ;  The  Science  of  Emotions,  with  Ichchha ;  The  Science 
of  Social  Organisation ,  with  Kriya  ;  while  The  Science  of  Self  may  be 
regarded  as  summation. 

1  Stirling's  Schwegler,  p.  265. 


404   ACTION    BETWEEN    EGO   AND    NON-EGO       [SC.   OF 

In  other  words,  we  may  say  that  there  is  a  mutual 
action  and  cognition  between  the  ego  and  the  non-ego  : 
the  action  of  the  non-ego  upon  the  ego  is  the  cognition 
of  the  non-ego  by  the  ego ;  and  the  cognition  (if  the 
expression  may  be  used)  by  the  non-ego  of  the  ego  is 
conversely  the  action  of  the  ego  on  the  non-ego.  When 
the  ego  impresses  itself  on  the  non-ego,  we  have  action 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  ego,  and  cognition  from  that 
of  the  non-ego.  When  the  non-ego  imprints  itself  on 
the  ego,  we  have  cognition  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
ego,  and  action  from  that  of  the  non-ego.  To  this  it 
should  be  added  that  the  condition  intermediate  between 
cognition  and  action,  intermediate  between  the  ego's 
1  being  influenced  and  shaped '  by  the  non-ego,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  its  '  influencing  and  shaping  '  the  non-ego, 
on  the  other,  is  desire.  The  corresponding  condition  of 
the  non-ego  would  probably  be  best  described  by  the 
word  tension.  This  desire  is  always  hidden,  while  cogni* 
tion  and  action  are  manifest. 

Multifarious  triplets  arise  under  cognition,  desire,  and 
action.  (1)  '  Waking,  sleeping,  dreaming  ' ;  '  presentation 
oblivion,  representation  ' ;  '  knowing,  forgetting,  recollec- 
tion ' ;  '  truth,  error,  illusion  ' ;  '  sensation,  conception, 
perception  ' ;  '  term,  proposition,  syllogism  ' ;  '  pada, 
vakya,  mana  ' ;  '  concept  or  notion,  judgment,  reasoning* ; 
'  reasonableness  or  sobriety,  fancy,  imagination  ' ;  '  real 
or  actual,  unreal  or  fanciful ,  ideal ' ;  4  observation, 
thought,  science ';  *  concentration,  meditation,  attention' ; 
attention,  distraction,  re-searoh  (or  rapport,  union, 


P.,  CH.  XV]  MULTIFARIOUS  TRIPLETS  405 

yoga-samadhi)  ',  etc.  (2)  '  Like,  dislike,  toleration  ' ;  '  love, 
hate,  indifference  ' ;  '  partiality,  carelessness,  justice  '  ; 
4  desire,  emotion,  will '  ;  etc.  (3)  '  Action,  reaction, 
alternation  or  balance  ' ! ;  '  activity,  indolence,  effort '  > 
4  restlessness,  fatigue,  perseverance ' ;  '  act,  labour,  in- 
dustry ' ;  *  action,  plan,  scheme  ' ;  '  evolution,  involution, 
revolution  ' ;  etc.  These  may  be  treated  of  in  detail 
later  on/  In  the  meanwhile,  some  observations  as  to 
the  general  relations  of  subject  and  object,  individuals 
and  the  surroundings  they  live  amidst,  the  more  pro' 
minent  conditions  of  the  life  of  the  World -Process,  may 
be  recorded  here. 

It  has  been  said  that  an  ego  is  literally  imprinted 
-with  and  modelled  to  the  shape  of  a  cognised  non-ego, 
and  that  cognition  by  an  ego  means  and  is  the  action 
of  a  non-ego  upon  it.  It  might  be  questioned  how  it  is 
that  action,  cognition,  and  even  desire,  which  are  the 
attributes  of  Self,  subject,  can  ever  belong,  or  be  spoken 
of  as  belonging,  to  Not-Self,  object ;  and,  conversely, 
how  the  capabilities  of  being  acted  on,  cognised,  and 
desired,  which  are  the  attributes  of  Not-Self,  can  ever 

1  A  very  important  triplet,  which  is  but  another  aspect  of  and  supple- 
mentary to  the  Law  of  Causality,  and  explains  how  the  fundamental  Unity 
is   being  constantly  restored  in  succession  also,  as  causality  preserves 
it  in  continuity.     "  Past  reason  bunted,  and,  no  sooner  had,  past  reason 
hated."     First  '  am  this  ',  and  then  '  (am)  not  this  ',  the  net  result  being 
always  the  I. 

2  Pranava-Vada,   3   vols.    (1910—1913),    gives  hundreds  of  such 
triads.      "  Every    thing  in  this  world  is  a  trinity  completed  by  the 
-quaternary  "  ;  H.  P.  B.,  I  sis  Unvailed,  I,  508.  Dr.  James  H.  Cousins, 
A  Study  in  Synthesis,  (pub.  1934)  works  oat  a  number  of  quartettes  in 
a  fresh  manner  ;  the  work  should  receive  more  attention  than  it  seems  to 
have  yet  received,  from  students  of  philosophy  generally,  and  members 
of  the  Theosophical  Society  specially. 


406  MUTUAL   REFLECTION  [SC.   OF 

belong,  or  be  spoken  of  as  belonging,  to  Self.  The  answer 
is  this.  If  we  were  speaking  exclusively  of  the  Universal 
Self  or  the  pseudo-universal  Not-Self,  and  if  it  were 
possible  to  really  separate  them,  then  it  would  be  per* 
fectly  correct  to  say  that  jnana-ichchha-kriya,  or  rather 
their  root-principles,  chit-anancla-sat,  belong  exclusively 
to  Self ;  and  guna-karma-dravya,  or  rather  their  root- 
principles,  sattva-rajas-tamas,  belong  exclusively  to  Not- 
Self.  But  we  are  now  in  the  domain  of  the  limited  and 
the  particular,  and  are  dealing  not  with  abstract 
Pratyag-atma  and  pseudo-abstract  Mula-prakrti,  but  with 
limited,  separate,  selves  and  not-selves  ;  and  it  has  been 
amply  shown  in  the  last  two  chapters  that  a  limited  self 
(soul)  means  a  composite  of  Self  and  Not-Self,  a  jlva- 
atom,  wherein  the  jiva-aspect  is  predominant ;  while  a 
limited  not-self  (body)  equally  means  a  composite  of 
Self  and  Not-Self,  but  a  composite  in  which  the 
atom-aspect  is  predominant.  The  consequence  of  this 
is  that  we  find  both  triplets  of  attributes  present 
in  every  such  composite,  although  of  course  one 
triplet  always  preponderates  over  the  other,  thereby 
giving  rise  to  the  distinction  between  animate  and 
inanimate. 

Thus  it  comes  about  that  each  separate  not-self, 
being  ensouled  by  a  self,  and  therefore  being  a  pseudo- 
self,  assumes,  by  the  connection  of  identity  with  the 
universal  Self,  the  characteristics  of  the  latter  ;  and  this 
assumption  takes  on  the  form  of  a  pseudo-infinite 
endeavour  to  find,  and  therefore  to  spread  and  impose, 


P.,  CH.  XV]    RADIATION,    MENTAL   AND    MATERIAL   407 

itself  on  everything,  everywhere,  and  aUO-ways.1  Hence  a 
pseudo-infinite  radiation,  by  vibration,  of  each  and  every 
not-self,  that  is  to  say,  of  each  and  every  piece  or  mass 
whatsoever  of  Mula-prakrti,  out  of  the  pseudo-infinite 
permutations  and  combinations  of  all  possible  sizes  of 
such  pieces  or  masses,  to  which  it  is  at  all  possible  to 
apply  the  adjectives  '  each  '  and  '  every '.  In  other 
words,  each  and  every  not-self  is  endeavouring  pseudo- 
infinitely  to  reproduce  itself  and  fill  infinity  with  its  own 
form ;  as  is  now  nearly  established  even  by  physical 
science,  in  the  doctrine  of  the  incessant  and  endless 
radiation  and  mutual  registration  by  all  objects  of  their 
own  and  of  all  others'  pictures  of  all  qualities  whatsoever, 
sights,  sounds,  smells,  etc. ;  and  this  is  the  action  of  the 
not-selves,  upon  the  selves,  which  action,  in  the  selves, 
appears  as  cognition.5 

1  The  supplement  to  this  fact  is  that  each  separate  self  or  soul,  being 
em-bodi-ed  by  a  not-self,  endeavours  similarly  to  '  radiate  '.  '  propagate1, 
1  spread  ',  '  impose  upon  all  others  ',  its  own  notions,  thoughts,  ideas, 
views,  knowledg-es,  feelings,  tastes,  interests,  likes  and  dislikes,  voli- 
tion, willings,  enterprises,  activities. 

*  In  this  fact,  with  its  '  physical  '  and  '  superphysical '  implications, 
i.et,  its  working  in  the  grosser  and  subtler  planes  of  matter,  may  be 
found  the  reason  why  'every  secret  must  out,'  some  time  or  other  to 
some  one  else,  if  not  to  the  general  public,  for  '  murder  '  does  not  always 
'  out ',  to  even  the  cleverest  police  ;  and  also  why,  while  a  secret  is  being 
kept,  for  that  time  it  makes  the  inner  body  stronger  and  fuller,  whence 
we  have  such  facts,  observations,  and  injunctions  as  these :  vows  of  silence 
make  the  inner  life  of  the  mind  richer,  promote  and  strengthen  thought, 
just  as  restraint  of  expenditure  increases  the  treasury-balance,  or  sex- 
continence  enhances  vigour  of  body  and  mind  and  intensifies  feeling ; 
certain  people  do  not  find  life  worth  living  unless  they  have  a  secret  to 
keep ;  they  revel  in  mysteriousness ;  others  find  pleasure  in  leading 
*  double '  lives,  stolen  joys  being  sweeter  to  them ;  the  names  of  the 
ishta-4eva,  the  worshipped  god,  the  venerated  preceptor,  the  parents,  the 
spouse,  the  children,  in  short  all  those  specially  near  and  dear  and 


408  INFINITE   MULTIPLICATION  [SC.   OP 

This  reproduction,  it  is  obvious,  takes  place  literally. 
When  we  see  an  object,  the  picture  of  the  object  is 
imprinted  on  our  eye,  on  the  retina ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
retina  (or  the  purpurin,  with  which,  as  the  latest 
researches  go  to  show,  the  retina  is  covered)  takes  on, 
becomes  modified  into,  the  very  shape  of  the  object  seen  ; 
and  the  eye  is,  in  the  life  of  the  physical  plane,  veritably 
the  very  ego  that  sees.  In  the  moment  of  seeing  with 
the  physical  eye,  it  is  impossible  to  say  :  '  My  eye  sees 
and  not  I.'  What  is  invariably  said  and  meant  is: 
1  /  see.'  The  I  and  the  organ  of  vision  are  here  literally 

honoured,  must  not  be  lightly  taken,  for  relations  with  the  bearers  of 
those  names  belong  to  the  life  of  the  heart,  and  avoidance  of  levity 
and  flippancy  with  regard  to  them  strengthens  and  develops  the  higher 
nature  and  the  siikshma-sharira.  Another  and  more  obvious  psychologi- 
cal reason  for  avoiding,  in  unsympathetic  company,  the  mention,  with  too 
much  unction,  of  the  objects  of  one's  love  and  devotion,  is,  that  it  only 
too  often  arouses  ridicule,  or  jealousy,  or  anger  and  counter  statements 
of  the  .greater  merits  of  other's  ;  witness,  sectarians'  quarrels  It  has  to 
be  remembered  that  in  all  these  cases  the  secrecy,  the  silence,  the 
restraint,  are  effective  for  their  purpose  only  up  to  a  certain  extent. 
Carried  to  excess,  they  fail  and  cause  harm.  They  must  come  to  an  end, 
some  time,  by  the  metaphysical  laws  of  nature  ;  they  should  be  brought  to 
an  end,  periodically,  wisely,  scientifically,  for  greater  good. 

It  should  'be  noted  that,  not  all  secrets,  being  kept,  make  the  inner 
body  stronger  in  the  healthy  and  pleasant  sense.  Sins  committed  or 
helplessly  suffered  by  oneself  (as  by  the  victims  of  sex-violence),  or  even 
simply  seen  being  committed  by  others,  if  kept,  weigh  upon  the  soul, 
oppress  it  grievously,  suffocatingly,  often  drive  it  mad.  Such  phenomena 
have  been  investigated  by  psycho-analysts  with  useful  (also  harmful) 
results.  But  even  in  these  cases,  the  general  observation  holds  true  that 
4  the  inner  body  becomes  stronger  and  fuller  '  ;  only,  it  becomes  such,  in 
the  painful  sense  ;  not  the  pleasurable.  Pain  intensifies  and  prolongs  the 
consciousness.  The  tongue  keeps  working  round  the  fibre  sticking 
between  the  teeth;  the  mind  keeps  working  round  the  painful  secret 
sticking  between  its  normal  functionings ;  the  emotions  concerned  are 
deepened.  In  case  of  excess,  either  of  pleasure  or  pain,  disintegration 
of  the  body  may  happen,  and  does  happen;  in  the  case  of  pain,  very 
frequently. 


p.,  CH.  xv]  EGO  Becomes  ORGAN  409 

identical  for  all  purposes.1  It  is  the  same  with  every 
other  sense.  The  immediate  reason  of  this  is  that  while, 
in  the  converse  case,  the  activity  of  the  apparent  not- 
self  is  due  to  its  hiding  a  self  within,  in  this  case  the 
shapability,  which  is  cognition,  of  every  self,  is  due  to  its 
hiding  within  a  not-self,  a  sheath,  an  upadhi.  As  in  the 
one  case  the  not-self  strives  to  achieve  infinity  in  pseudo- 
infinite  reproduction,  because  of  having  become  identified 
with  a  self,  and  therefore  the  universal  Self  ;  so,  in  this 
case,  the  Self  becomes  limited  and  reflective,  because  of 
having  become  identified  with  a  not-self. 

In  order  that  Self  and  Not-Self,  so  entirely  opposed 
to  each  other,  should  enter  into  dealings  with  each  other, 
it  is  necessary  that  each  should  assume  the  characteristics 
of  the  other,  and  so,  abating  their  opposition,  making  a 
compromise,  come  nearer  to  each  other.  The  interchange 
of  substance  between  nucleus  and  protoplasm  is  a  good 
illustration.2  In  this  fact  we  see  before  us  the  principle 
of  the  genesis  of  upadhis,  sheaths,  organisms,  and  organs 
of  sense  and  action.  The  ego  becomes  (of  course,  illusorily 
and  apparently,  and  for  the  time  being)  the  organ  of  sense 
or  action,  in  order  J;o  perceive  the  sense-able  or  act  upon 
it.  '  The  AtmS  who  knows  (i.e.,  who  is  feeling  the  stress 


?E?JiTmrf?r  I    Brhad-&ranyaka,    I,   iv.  7: 

4  Breathing,  It  becomes  that  which  is  named  prana-breath  ;  speaking, 
voice  ;  seeing,  eye  ;  hearing,  ear  ;  men  tat  ing,  mind  ;  such  are  Its 
functional  names  ;  functionings  of  the  self  are  named  faculties  '.  In  other 
words,  functions  create  organs  ;  not  organs,  functions. 

1  Verworn,  General  Physiology,  p.  518. 


410  THE    Why   OF   ORGANS   AND    MEDIA       [SC.  OF 

of  the  consciousness)  '  may  I  smell  this,'  becomes  or  is  the 
nose  (the  organ  of  smell),  for  the  sake  of  (experiencing) 
odour.'  l 

Such  is  the  metaphysical  significance  of  the  organs 
of  sense  and  action.  They  are  the  very  jlva  for  the  time* 
The  jlva  is  identified  with  them  entirely  while  they  are 
working.  For  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  a  distinct 
and  separate  third  something,  an  instrument  of  media- 
tion, not  only  a  relation  but  a  thing,  between  the  only 
two  factors  of  the  World-  Process,  Self,  on  the  one  side, 
and  Not-Self,  on  the  other.3  That  they  are  at  all  dis- 
tinguished as  karana,3  '  instruments,'  is  only  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  abstract  Self. 

The  metaphysical  significance  of  sense-media,  odor- 
ous particles,  saliva,  light,  air,  ether,  etc.,  is  similar.4  The 

1  Chhandogya-Upanishaf,  VIII,  xu,  4-5. 

2  The  words  '  distinct  and  separate  '   should  be  noted  ;  for  if  we 
remove  this  condition,  then  we  do  have  a  pseudo-infinity  of  planes  or 
grades  of  density-subtlety  of  Matter,  each  of  which  may  be  said  to  link 
together  a  next  denser  with  a  next  subtler. 


4  The  NySya  system  has  a  theory  that  (as  in  the  case  of  saliva)  rays 
of  light,  proceeding  from  the  organ  of  vision  to  its  object,  assume  the 
shape  of  that  object,  and  returning  to  the  eye,  produce  vision  ;  the 
modern  scientific  view  is  that  the  rays  go  kom  the  object  to  the  eye. 
The  Greek  philosophers  also  believed  in  an  "  effluvium  "  or  "  eidolon/' 
acting  as  a  tertium  quid  to  make  possible  the  approach  between  the 
opposed  subject  and  object.  We  speak  of  '  bright  eyes  '  and  *  dull  lack- 
lustre eyes  '  ;  feline  eyes  shine  in  the  dark.  That  light  is  a  substance 
amenable  to  the  section  of  gravitation,  has  been  much  discussed  by 
Einstein  and  others,  since  deflections  of  rays  from  stars  were  observed 
during  a  solar  eclipse  in  May,  1919.  A  dry  tongue  or  nose  cannot  taste 
or  smell.  Saliva  is  the  overflow  of  '  self  '  and  the  enveloping  of  a  '  not-self  ' 
with  '  self  '  ;  and  transforming  the  '  not-self  'into  '  self  '  and  absorbing 
and  as-stwito-ting  it  with  '  self,  ;  hence  salivation  is  necessary  to 
digestion.  The  same  considerations  apply  to  the  other  senses  and  their 
objects. 


P.,  CH.  XV]   INTERPENETRATING  INDIVIDUALITIES   411 

systematic  and  psychologically  consistent  names  for 
these  media,  in  Samskrt,  whatever  their  exact  nature 
may  be  ultimately  determined  to  be,  are  prthivl  (earth) 
for  the  medium  of  odour,  apas  or  jalam  (water)  for  taste, 
t£jas  or  agni  (fire)  for  vision,  vayu  (air)  for  touch,  and 
akasha  (ether)  for  sound.  These  media  are,  according 
to  V6danta,  the  five  pervasive  root-elements,  tattva-s  or 
maha-bhuta-s — and  not  the  compounds  we  live  amidst — 
distinguished  and  defined  radically  by  their  special 
sensuous  and  active  qualities,  which  are  said  to  go  in 
pairs ;  thus,  sound  and  speech  with  ear  and  vocal  organ 
belong  to  akasha  ;  vision  and  figure  (-and-color-)-  forma- 
tion with  eye  and  hands  belong  to  agni ;  and  so  forth.1  And 
their  agency,  to  secure  communion  between  organ  and 
sense-object,  is  metaphysically  necessitated,  in  order,  by 
the  fact  of  diffusion  through  space,  to  give  to  the  sense- 
object  the  semblance  of  the  Universal  Self,  which  reaches 
and  includes  all  and  is  within  the  reach  of  all.  This  perva- 
sion, which,  metaphysically,  is  pseudo-infinite  in  extent,  is 
actually  reproduced  in  the  fact  that  each  brahm-anda, 
*  great-egg/  '  egg  of  the  Infinite,'  world-system  or  macro- 
cosm, is  pervaded  by  one  individuality;  just  as  each  pind- 
anda,  microcosm,  a  human  organism,  is  pervaded  by  one 
individuality.  The  vast  masses  of  the  root-elements  that 
serve  as  the  sense-media  of  the  organisms  inhabiting  our 

1  In  the  human  kingdom,  ear  as  sensor  and  voice  as  motor,  and  eye 
as  sensor  and  finger  as  motor,  are  best  developed  ;  writing,  formation 
of  visible  letter-figures  is  done  by  the  fingers.  Ants  and  some  other 
kinds  of  insects  seem  to  communicate  by  touch  and  antennae ;  dogs  and 
certain  moths,  by  smell. 


412        Why  ISHVARA-S  ARE  PERVASIVE        [sc.  OF 

brahm-anda,  for  instance,  constitute,  in  their  totality,  the 
body  of  the  Ishvara  who  is  the  brahm-anda  ;  the  unity 
of  his  individuality  brings  together  our  senses  and 
sense-objects  in  these  sense-media;  while  he  himself 
is  but  as  an  infinitesimal  jiva  in  a  vaster  brahm-anda, 
a  sidereal  system  in  which  our  solar  system  is  as  a  grain 
of  sand  in  a  solar  system  ;  and  so  on  pseudo-infinitely. 
This  is  why  Ishvaras  are  also  called  vi-bhu,  *  per- 
vading.'1 It  is  only  the  principle  of  overlapping  in- 
dividualities, in  another  view.  Later  on  there  may 
appear  more  on  this  point,  viz.,  how  communion  between 
two  separate  things,  subject  and  object,  in  the  way  of 
cognition,  desire,  and  action,  is  possible,  and  takes  place 
only  because  the  two  are  also  one,  since  both  of  them  are 
part  of  a  higher  individuality,  a  larger  subject.* 

The  remarks  made  in  the  preceding  chapter  as  to 
the  pseudo-infinite  series  of  involucra  of  the  jiva,  one 
within  another,  should  be  recalled  im  this  connection. 
Taking  the  case  of  vision,  for  instance,  we  find  as  the 
first  step,  that  the  act  of  seeing  means  the  picturing  of 
the  object  seen  on  the  retina,  which  at  that  stage  is  for 


TO  site  f?T,  Gtfrf^l:  f 

Bh&gavafa,  XI,  iv,  3,  4. 

'  He  who  is  the  Beginning  of  All,  having  ideated  a  Frame,  made  of 
five  elements,  entered  into  it,  and  became  the  Fountain  of  n  a  ra-s. 


P.,  CH.  XV]  EVER   GREATER   INWARDNESS  413 

all  purposes  identical  with,  and  is,  the  seer.  But 
analysing  further,  we  find  that,  in  the  human  being,  the 
act  of  vision  is  by  no  means  completed  with  this  picturing 
on  the  retina.  Vibrations  of  nerves  convey  the  picture 
to  a  further  centre  in  the  brain — not  yet  quite  definitely 
determined,  it  seems,  by  physiological  investigations. 
Physical  research  leaves  the  matter  here  for  the  present. 
But  metaphysic  deduces,  as  an  inference  from  the  in- 
separable 'conjunction  of  dravya-guna-karma,  that,  what- 
ever that  brain-centre  might  be  ultimately  decided  to  be, 
it  will  be  found  that  just  as  the  vibrations  and  particles 
of  the  outer  visible  object,  transmitted  through  the 
'  ether ',  (or  whatever  other  element  may  finally  be 
determined  to  be  the  medium  of  light,  and  however  it 
may  be  named,  the  Samskrt  name  being  tejas,  as  said 
before),  make  a  picture  of  that  object  on  the  retina,  so 
the  retinal  picture,  which  has  now  in  turn  become 
'  the  outer  visible  object  '  to  the  more-inward-receded 
jlva,  is  transmitted  in  still  more  minute  particles,  by 

humans,  jivas  ;  therefore  he  is  named  Nar-ayana.  All  this  triple  world- 
system  is  His  Body  ;  all  the  sensors'  and  motors  of  all  beings  are  derived 
from  His,  are  parts  of  His  ;  His  self-consciousness  is  all  Knowledge,  His 
Breath  is  all  Energy-Desire,  which  creates-maintains-destroys  '  :  panthe- 
ism in  a  fresh  aspect.  Berkeley  also  has  seen  and  said  that  the  percep- 
tions of  individuals  are  only  participations  in  the  perceptions  of  the 
Universal  Ego.  The  name  Kavi,  Poet,  Dramatist,  Author,  is  especially 
appropriate  for  Brahma.  The  'perceptions',  experiences,  sayings, 
doings,  of  every  character  in  a  drama,  are  all  only  '  participations '  in 
the  Ideation  of  the  Author ;  all  ideas  are  parts  of  the  One  Universal 
Ideation.  Great  public  movements,  enthusiasms,  panics,  are  partici- 
tions  in  the  ideas,  ideals,  feelings,  views,  sentiments  of  one  (or  more,  but 
wm-ted)  leader  (or  leaders),  with  sufficient  intensity  of  will  and  feeling 
(tapasya,  divine  force,  hot  and  glowing  will).  Epidemics,  Yuga-dharma, 
Kala-dharma,  Time-spirit,  Zeit-geist-  indicate  the  same  fact. 


414  MEANING    OF   '  I  '    AND    '  MINE  '  [SC.   OF 

nerve-vibrations,  to  a  corresponding  subtler  organ  or 
brain-centre  which  is  now  masquerading  as  the  seer  in 
place  of  the  eye,  in  the  present  condition  of  organisms. 
And  further  research  will  show  the  process  repeated 
preudo-infinitely  inwards,  taking  the  sheath  into  subtler, 
and  ever  subtler  planes  of  matter. 

But  while  this  series  of  sheaths,  one  within  another, 
is  theoretically  pseudo-infinite,  in  practice  and  as  a 
matter  of  fact — if  we  take  any  organism,  in  any  one 
cycle  of  space  and  time — we  shall  necessarily  find  that  it 
consists  of  only  a  limited  and  countable  number  of  such 
sheaths,  with  one  unanalysable  core ;  the  very  filmiest  of 
films  it  may  be,  but  unanalysable  any  further,  for  the 
time  being ;  and  in  that  cycle,  this  core  represents, 
and  for  all  purposes  is,  the  very  self  ot  the  jiva. 
From  another  and  higher  standpoint,  embracing  a 
wider  cycle  of  space  and  time,  that  film  will  also  be 
analysable,  and  be  seen  to  be  not  the  innermost  core 
but  only  an  outer  sheath,  hiding  within  itself  another 
core,  which  will  then  be  irreducible.  Evidence  of  this 
we  find  even  physically,  in  comparing  the  earliest  avail- 
able unicellular  organisms  of  our  terrene  life  and 
evolution,  with  the  latest  most  complex  ones.  In  the 
human  being,  the  brain  with  its  centres  takes  the  place 
of  Self,  and  is  the  main, seat  of  consciousness  (from  the 
standpoint  of  physiology),  but  is  hedged  round  and 
overlaid  with  numbers  of  other  parts  of  the  body,  nerves, 
ganglia,  senses,  etc.,  through  which  only  it  can  be 
reached.  In  the  unicellular  organism  the  nucleus  is 


P.,  CH.  XV]    OF  '  MY  EYES  ',  '  MY  EARS  '         415 

probably  the  centre  of  consciousness,1  and  is,  as  it  were, 
all  the  brain;  .the  sense  organs,  etc.,  in  one  ;  in  its  case, 
the  jiva  has  not  yet  learnt  to  make  the  distinction — 
involved  in  the  expressions,  '  my  eyes,1  '  my  ears  ' — 
between  the  jiva  (identified  with  the  brain  as  centre  of 
consciousness)  and  its  sense-instruments ;  and  hence  it 
has  got  no  centre  of  consciousness,  which  may  be  separate 
from  sense-instruments.  But  when  the  consciousness 
begins  to  make  such  distinction,  the  nucleus  at  once 
resolves  into  a  subtler  core  (apparently,  but  not  yet 
positively  ^determined  to  be,  the  nucleolus)  with  different 
parts  wrapping  it  round  ;  and  under  the  continuing  stress 
of  the  individualised  consciousness,  there  appears  the 
progressive  development  and  differentiation  of  functions 
and  instruments  which  is  called  evolution. 

It  •  should  be  noted  here  that  the  expression  '  my 
brain  '  has  not  the  same  significance  as  '  my  eyes  '  and 
*  my  hands  '.*  Of  course  it  has  a  certain  meaning,  but 
the  consciousness  of  my  brain  being  distinct  and  different 
from  me  is  by  no  means  so  definite,  full,  and  clear  in  the 
ordinary  man,  as  is  the  consciousness  of  the  eyes  and  the 
hands  being  thus  different  and  distinct.  The  expression 
gains  fuller  and  fuller  significance  as  the  '  I  '  retieats 
further  and  further  inwards,  and  is  able  to  separate  itself 
more  and  more  actually  from  the  physical  body.  '  My 
clothes '  has  a  much  fuller  and  clearer  meaning  than 

1  Verworn,  General  Physiology,  p.  508. 

*  The  ashvaftha-tree,  with  its  roots  above  and  its  branches  below, 
spoken  of  in  the  Bhagavag-Glja,  xv,  1,  probably  means  the  nervous 
system  of  man,  also,  besides  other  things  ;  brain  above,  nerves  below. 


416  'MY   BRAIN',   'MY   SOUL'  [SC.  OP 

4  my  bands  and  feet ' ;  *  my  hands  and  feet '  has  a  much 
clearer  and  fuller  meaning  than  '  my  brain  '.  '  My  sukshma 
sharira,'  '  my  karana  sharira,'  *  my  soul/  are  practically 
(but  not  theoretically)  meaningless  in  the  mouths  [of 
people  who  have  never  t  succeeded,  by  means  of  yoga,  in 
separating  them  from  the  outer  physical  body.  To 
advanced  souls,  who  have  succeeded  in  doing  so,  *  my 
brain  '  has  a  meaning  as  definite  as  *  my  shirt  V 

This  development  of  the  complex  from  the  simple, 
this  opening  up  of  separated  individual  consciousness 
through  layer  into  inner  layer,  this  gradual  ^growth  of 
nerve  within  nerve  and  instrument  within  instrument, 
this  definition  of  body  within  body,  this  multiplication  of 
the  means  to  the  simple  ends  or  rather  the  one  end,  this 
4  long-circuiting '  of  the  satisfaction  of  the  elemental 
appetites  of  life  or  rather  of  the  one  appetite  of  Self-reali- 
sation— constitutes  the  evolution  of  the  individual,  from 
the  standpoint  of  limited  cycles.2  To  take  a  fanciful 

1  See  The  Mahatma  Letters,  p.  259.   Master  K.  H.  has  gone  into 
samadhi-trance,    for    three  months  (in  1882)  in    search    of   "supreme- 
knowledge".     Master  M.  has  promised  to  him  to  carry  on  his  theoso- 
phical    work    and    correspondence    with   Sinnett  and   Hume.     In  the 
coarse  of  a  letter  to  the  former,   Master  M.  says :  "  I  may  as  well 
occupy  a  few  minutes  of  my  time  to  write  to  you  in  the  best  English  I 
find  lying  idle  in  my  friend's  brain  ;  where  also  I  find  in  the  cells  of 
memory,  the  phosphorescent  thought  of  a  short  letter,  to  be  sent  by 
himself."     Master  M.  says  that  his  own  knowledge  of  English  is  not 
so  good  as  Master  K.  H.'s;  but  the  reader  can  scarcely  think  so;  of 
course  the  style  is  very  different. 

2  '  Long-circuiting '    is    a    very    significant  word,   coined    in   '  the 
science  and  art '   if  electricity.    The  whole  World-Process  is  a    long- 
circuiting  of  the  simple  Relation  between  I  and  Not-I.   Commentaries 
and  critical  expositions  and  illustrations  are  the  long-cirquiting  of  the 
meaning  of  aphorisms  and  maxims. 


P.,  CH.  XV]       LONG-CIRCUIT  SELF-REALISATION          417 

illustration :  it  is  as  if  we  should,  to  increase  the  power 
and  range  and  minuteness  of  our  vision,  first  put  on  a  pair 
of  spectacles,  then  add  a  telescope,  and  over  that  a  miscro- 
scope,  and  so  on  indefinitely.  In  this  imaginary  illustra- 
tion the  additions  are  outwards.  In  evolution,  by  deli- 
berate yoga,  on  the  nivrtti-marga,  '  re-turn  or  re-ascent 
into  Spirit ',  they  would  be  inwards,  a  retreating  within 
into  subtler*  and  subtler  planes  of  matter ;  on  the 
pravrtti-marga,  descent  into  Matter ',  they  would  be 
outwards  too,  each  self  taking  on  denser  and  denser  veils 
of  matter  to  enjoy  the  experiences  of  a  greater  and 
greater  (seeming)  definition  of  itself — '  I  (am)  this,9  I 
(am)  this  '.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  Absolute,  on 
the  other  hand,  all  cycles  and  all  evolution,  all  functions, 
all  instruments,  and  all  functionings  and  actual  workings 
of  them,  on  all  possible  planes  of  matter,  are  ever  com- 
pletely  present  in  the  transcendent  consciousness  :  "  I — 
This— Not  (am)." 

Thus  we  come  back  again  and  again  to  the  fact  of 
an  endless  series  of  plane  within  plane  of  matter,  all 
permeated  and  pervaded  by  the  consciousness  in  its  triple 
aspect  of  jnana  ichchha,  kriya.  "  Veil  upon  veil  will 
lift,  but  there  must  be  veil  upon  veil  behind."  Let  us 
see  now  how  these  pseudo-infinite  planes  of  matter  can 
be  co-ordinated  and  brought  into  organic  unity  with  each 
other.  Co-ordinated  in  fact  they  must  be ;  for  the 
£tats,  *  this-es  ' — separate  in  their  pseudo-infinity  though 
they  are  by  very  constitution — are  not  and  cannot  be 
mutually  entirely  oblivious  and  independent,  when  the 
27 


418  MATHEMATICS   AND   METAPHYSICS        [SC.  OF 

thread  of  the  One  Self  runs  through  them  all,  and  strings 
them  together  like  beads. 

Different  planes  of  matter,  though  separate  from, 
and,  from  one  standpoint,  independent  of,  each  other  to 
such  an  extent  that  they  may  even  seem  to  violate  the 
axioms  of  geometry,  cannot  escape  these  axioms  alto- 
gether. As  usual,  we  have  disorder  as  well  as  order, 
negation  as  well  as  affirmation,  defiance  of  law  and  yet 
submission  thereto,  here  as  well  as  elsewhere.  Consci- 
ousness appears  to  transcend  mathematical  laws ;  but  it 
is  only  the  Universal  Consciousness  of  Pratyag-atma  that 
can  at  all  be  said  to  do  so,  and  this  too  only  when  it  is 
considered  as  a  whole,  comprehending  and  at  the  same 
time  negating  the  whole  of  Mula-prakrti.1  Otherwise,  it 
itself  is  the  source  and  the  embodiment  of  that  unity, 
uniformity,  regularity  in  diversity,  the  fact  or  brief 
description  of  which  uniformity  is  called  a  law,  and 
which  appears  when  Self  is  intermingled  with  Mula- 
prakrti  (as  it  always  is),  under  the  changeless  stress  of 
Absolute-Consciousness,  Brahma.  Limited  individual 
consciousnesses  are  inseparably  connected  with  limited 
'  this-es ' ;  hence  they  can  never  actually  transcend  those 

1  It  is  only  in  respect  of  this  one  Supreme  '  self-contradictory  '  fact 
that  Metaphysics  transcends,  is  beyond,  Mathematics.  But  this  one  fact 
has  important  consequences  and  corollaries,  which,  for  practical 
purposes,  connect  metaphysics  more  nearly,  as  it  were,  with  the 
psychological,  ethical,  logical,  and  biological  sciences,  than  with  mathe- 
matics and  the  physico-chemical  sciences ;  though,  strictly,  metaphysics, 
as  repeatedly  said,  is  equally  connected  with  all  sciences  and  co- 
ordinates them  all.  Mathematics  deals  with  space,  time,  energy-motion, 
taking  its  start  from  certain  purely  metaphysical  notions,  as  pointed  out 
before.  Metaphysics  deals  with  these  as  well  as  with  their  Abolition, 
their  Opposite,  the  Infinite  Here,  the  Eternal  Now,  the  utterly  Motion- 
less Self,  full  of  Perfect  Rest  and  unshakeable  Peace, 


P.,  CH.  XV]  MEANING    OF   LAW  419 

laws.     That  they  appear  to  do  so  from  some  standpoints, 

is  due  to  their  identity  with  Pratyag-atma.     The  world 

of  the  lower  astral  plane,  whose  normal  inhabitants  are 

said  to  be  yakshas,  gandharvas,  kinnaras,    nagas,  kush- 

mandas,  gnomes,  undines,  fairies,  and  such  other  nature- 

spirits,  with   bodies  made  of  the  same  or  similar  '  stuff,' 

4  mind-stuff,'  as  our  grosser  dreams  and  mental  images, 

may  seem  literally  to  '  occupy  the  same  space  '  as  the 

physical  world,  whose   normal  inhabitants  are  humans, 

animals,   plants,  minerals,  etc.     But  this  is  not  really  so. 

The  facts  available  point  to  the  conclusion  that  as  soon 

as   the   human  develops  the  body  and  the  instruments 

which  enable  him  to  begin  to  live  consciously  in  the 

astral  world  as  he  does  in  the  physical,  he  sees  that  the 

two   worlds,   at   the   most,   interpenetrate,  as  sand  and 

water,     or     water    and    air,  and    do    not    actually  and 

literally  occupy  the  same  space.  In  other  words,  planes 

of  matter,  that    appear  utterly    disconnected    from  the 

standpoint  of  individual  consciousnesses  limited  to  each 

plane,    become  only  grades  of  density  of  matter  from 

the    standpoint  of  a  consciousness  that  includes  all   of 

them. 

This  thought  may  now  be  expanded  as  follows : 
The  simile  used  above,  of  thread  and  beads,  illus- 
trates the  fact  of  order  amidst  disorder,  and  also  covers 
another  fact  which  is  essential  in  the  work  of  co-ordi- 
nation. In  the  chaplet,  each  bead  touches  but  two  others, 
one  on  each  side,  and  not  more  than  two;  and  so 
too  we  find  that  Sarpsara,  World-Process,  is  triple, 


420  TRIPLE   WORLD.    Why   TRIPLE  [SC.   OF 

tribhuvanam,  trai-lokyam,1  whenever  and  wherever  we 
take  it.  This  fact,  that  it  is  always  a  triple  world,  when- 
ever and  wherever  we  take  it,  gives  the  method  of  the 
co-ordination  ;  for  each  factor  of  each  such  triplet  is  also 
concurrently  connected  with  two  other  triplets ;  and  as 
this  connection  extends  pseudo-infinitely,  it  results  that 
all  possible  planes  are  ringed  together  always.  Thus 
taking  the  three  planes  of  our  world-system,  viz.,  sthula, 
sukshma,  and  karana  *  (roughly  corresponding  to 
physical,  astro-mental,  and  causal,  of  theosophical  litera- 
ture) and  naming  them  F,  G,  and  H,  we  should  find,  on 
research,  that  F  is  simultaneously  connected  with  three 
triplets,  D  E  F,  E  F  G,  and  F  G  H  ;  so  G  with  E  F  G, 
F  G  H  and  G  H  I ;  so  H  with  F  G  H,  G  H  I  and 
H  I  J  ;  and  taking  any  of  these  triplets,  say  H  I  J,  the 
mutual  relation  of  these  three  would  be  found  to  be  the 
same  as  that  of  F  G  H  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  a  jiva  to  whom 
J  represented  the  physical,  I  would  represent  the  astro- 
mental,  and  H  the  karana  plane.  And  this  series  of 
triplets  extends  endlessly  before  D  and  after  J . 

Before  passing  on  to  the  reason  of  this  state  of  things, 
it  may  be  well  to  note  that  the  interpretation  of  tri- 
bhuvanam, '  triple  world/  or  '  three  worlds,'  advanced 
here,  is  not  exactly  what  is  commonly  understood  by  the 
word,  just  as  the  inmost  meaning  of  the  sacred  word, 
AUM,  is  not  what  is  commonly  given.  Yet  there  is  no 
conflict  or  inconsistency  between  the  two  interpretations* 


P.,  CH.  XV]  Why  ANALOGY  421 

On  the  contrary,  the  other  interpretations  all  follow 
necessarily  from  the  inmost  one.  Students  wonder  now 
and  then  how  it  is  that  resemblances  occur  in  different 
departments  of  nature  ;  and  when  it  is  said  that  one  and 
the  same  statement  may  be  interpreted  in  many  ways, 
-each  correct  and  each  applying  to  one  class  and  one 
•department  of  phenomena,  sober  people  generally  suspect 
some  sleight-of-hand.  As  a  fact,  a  statement  of  a  true 
principle  of  nature,  concerning  one  of  the  Ultimates, 
or  rather,  strictly  speaking,  Penultimates,  naturally 
applies  to  all  the  different  series  of  phenomena  derived 
from  and  constantly  embodying  those  penultimates ; 
and  the  wonder  may  as  well  be,  how  there  is  differ- 
ence between  part  and  part  of  nature,  as  how  there  is 
resemblance.  Mula-prakrti  explains  the  difference ; 
Pratyag-atma  >  the  resemblance.1  The  law  of  analogy, 

1  The  Unity  of  Self  as  pmni-present,  is  the  reason,  the  cause,  of 
-whatever  uni-formity,  similarity,  analogy,  we  find  anywhere  and  every- 
where. It  is  the  real  reason  for  the  certainty  felt  in  induction,  other- 
wise utterly  fallible.  '  Once,  therefore  always  '  ;  '  as  in  one  place,  so 
in  all  places.1  The  older  Nyaya-Vaish6shika  gives  the  reason  of  v  y  a  p  t  i- 
graha,'  ap-prehen-sion  of  pervasiveness1,  i.e.,  '  inductive  generali- 
sation ' ,  as  being  pratyaksha,  '  direct  perception  '  of  j  a  t  i ,  '  genus  ' , 
together  with  v  y  a  k{  i  ,  'the  particular  ',  because  of  sama-vaya; 
'  co-inherence  ',  inseparability,  of  '  particular  '  or  '  singular  '  or  '  indi- 
vidual '  and  '  general '  or  '  universal ' .  The  new  Nyaya  calls  the  same 
fact  or  process,  by  the  name  ofpraty-asatti.  Max  Muller,  in  his 
Six  Systems  of  Indian  Philosophy,  has  recognised  that  the  very  impor- 
tant category  of  s  a  m  a-v  a  y  a  "is  one  peculiar  to  Indian  philosophy  ", 
and  ' '  though  this  relationship  is  known  in  non-Indian  philosophies,  it 
has  not  received  a  name  of  its  own,  though  such  a  term  might  have 
proved  very  useful  in  several  controversies.  The  relation  between 
thought  and  word  "  (31^3^)  "f-i-,  is  Samavgya,  inseparableness.  .  .  . 
There  is  Samav&ya  between  threads  and  cloth,  father  and  son,  two 
halves  and  a  whole,  cause  and  effect,  substance  and  qualities,  the  two 
being  interdependent  and  inseparable";  (seepages  referred  to,  against 
the  word  '  Samavaya  '  in  the  Index  to  Max  Muller's  book). 


422  CORE,   SHEATH,   NEXUS  [SC.  OF 

*  as  above  so  below,'  s  a  m  a-d  a  r  s  h  i  t  a,  '  same-sighted- 
ness',  'same-seeing- ness  ',  is  capable  of  a  far  wider  and 
truer  application  than  is  now  charily  given  to  it ;  and  it 
provides  the  reason  of  the  existence  of  allegories  and 
parables,  in  which  there  is  as  much  literal  fact  as  meta- 
phor. Because  of  this  universal  applicability  of  basic 
laws,  tri-bhuvanam,  *  triple  world  ',  when  it  means  only 
three  different  but  interconnected  worlds  or  planes  of 
matter,  according  to  the  ordinary  explanation  of  the 
word,  means  something  which  is  the  necessary  resulf  of 
the  metaphysical  triplicity  of  all  the  life  of  united  jlva 
and  atom,  i.e.,  of  the  jiva-atom.  In  this  metaphysical 
triplicity,  which  is  the  inmost  meaning  of  tri-bhuvanam, 
lies  the  reason  for  the  state  of  things  described  in  the 
preceding  paragraph. 

Everywhere  we  find  the  world  and  ttfe  things  of  the 
world  divided  into  an  inner  and  an  outer,  a  core  and  a 
sheath,  and  a  third  something,  a  principle,  a  relationr 
rather  than  a  fact  or  factor,  binding  and  holding  these 
two  together.  This  is  due  to  the  very  constitution  of 
the  Absolute  as  shown  in  the  Logion,  viz.,  an  inner  Self, 
an  outer  Not-Self,  and  the  third  something,  the  affir- 
mative-negative Shakti,  which  ties  the  two  together 
indissolubly,  and  yet  is  not  a  third  strictly,  but  only 
a  repetition  of  the  positivity,  the  being,  of  Self,  and 
of  the  negativity,  the  nothingness,  of  Not-Self.  So  we 
find,  in  the  department  of  consciousness  taken  by  itself, 
an  outer  or  real  world,  and  an  inner  or  ideal  world, 
and  a  third  something,  the  abstract  consciousness,  or 


P.,  CH.  XV]  BUDDHIC   WEB   OF   LIFE  423 

self-consciousness,  or  apperception,  or  pure  and  abstract 
reason,  as  it  has  been  variously  named,  holding  the  two 
together.  This  pure  or  abstract  reason  is  the  embodi- 
ment and  source,  as  said  before,  of  all  abstract  laws  and 
principles,  which  are  but  forms  of  this  Self-Consci- 
ousness in  its  relations  to  the  objects  by  means  of  which 
it  may  be  realising  itself  at  the  time. 

'I  see  this  book  before  me  ' — this  consciousness  is  a 
consciousness  of  the  '  real ',  the  '  outer,'  world.  '  I 
remember  the  book,  in  memory ;  I  have  thoughts  about 
it,  i.e.,  I  call  up  mental  pictures  of  the  book  in  relation 
to  other  things,  its  author,  country,  press,  people, 
in  which  and  by  whom  it  was  printed,  published,  and 
criticised ;  of  other  books  on  the  same  subject  which 
have  been  written  in  other  times  and  places ;  of  the 
whole  history  of  the  gradual  growth  of  learning  on  the 
subject  treated  of  in  the  book,  and  the  causes  thereof, 
etc.,' — these  are  facts  of  the  inner,  the  ideal  world.  Lastly 
there  is  the  consciousness  (corresponding  to  the  Absolute) 
which  joins  together  and  connects,  in  my  own  self,  these 
two  sets  of  facts,  those  belonging  to  the  '  Me  '  and  those 
to  the  *  Not-me,'  and  weaves  them  into  the  one  process 
of  my  life.  That  the  thread  of  Self  through  the  beads 
of  Not-Self  is,  or  appears  as,  budcjhi,  laws,  principles, 
apperception,  self-consciousness,  etc.,  may  become  clearer 
if  the  matter  is  considered  thus  :  *  I  know  and  wish  and 
act,  and  /  know  1  that  I  know  and  wish  and  act ' — this  is 

1  Or,  better,  '  I  am  aware  that  I  know  and  wish  and  act.'  for  to  say 
I  '  know  '  instead  of  '  am  aware,'  seems  to  make  the  element  of  know- 
ledge or  cognition  more  essential  to  Self-Consciousness  than  the  elements 


424    Why  OUTER  WORLD  &  INNER  WORLD     [sc.  OF 

self-consciousness.  '  I  am  aware  also  that  I  knew  and 
wished  and  acted  before,  and  shall  know  and  wish  and 
act  afterwards,  in  the  same  way,  when  the  circumstances 
are  the  same ' — this  is  the  same  self-consciousness  modi- 
fied into  reason,  ratio-cination,  ratio-nality,  perception  of 
the  ratio,  relation,  of  sameness,  of  similarity,  amongst 
not-selves,  because  of  the  persistence  and  sameness^ 
through  past,  present,  and  future,  of  Self.  *  Such  an 
experience,  knowledge,  desire,  or  action,  is  always  followed 
by  such  another ' — this  is  the  same  self-consciousness 
modified  into  and  stated  as  a  law,  a  principle. 

How  and  why  does  this  state  of  things  come  about  ? 
Why  is  there  an  outer  world  and  inner  world  ?  How  does 
this  distinction  between  the  ideal  and  the  real,  ideas  and 
realities,  arise  at  all.  and  what  is  the  distinction  between 
them  precisely  ?  ] 

of  desire  and  conation  or  action,  which  is  against  fact.  Samskrt  words 
corresponding  to  apperception,  etc.,  are  anu-vyavasaya,  pra ty ay- an u pa- 
shy  ata,  buddhi-bodha,  nija-bodha,  atma-nubhava,  sakshita,  upa- 
^rashtri-ta,  etc. 

1  Self  has  been  regarded  above  as  linking  up  (by  containing  within 
itself,  both)  the  ideal  and  the  real,  inner  and  outer,  within  and  without, 
i.e.,  mental  and  material.  A  simpler  and  perhaps  practically  more 
useful  way  is  to  say  that  '  mind  '  is  the  link  between  Self  or  Spirit  and 
Not-Self  or  Matter.  In  Mind,  both  are  present ;  and  all  the  Interplay 
of  Spirit  and  Matter,  'past,  present,  and  future  ',  is  present  in  Mind. 
The  present  is,  is  existent ;  the  past  was  ;  but  is  not ;  the  future  will 
be,  but  is  not.  The  present  is  the  only  real ;  it  emphatically  is. 
What  we  see  around  us,  what  we  are,  at  any  given  moment,  carries 
with  it  an  intense  convincingness  of  actuality,  factness,  reality, 
existence.  Yet  the  passing  of  a  year,  a  day,  even  a  simple  catastrophic 
moment,  abolishes  all  that  intense  reality,  and  converts  it  into  a 
dream  of  the  past ;  and  that  too  a  more  or  less  quickly  fading  dream  ! 
From  the  metaphysical  standpoint,  therefore,  the  present  is  the  only 
and  the  most  wn-real ;  because  obviously  evanescent,  moment  by 
moment.  From  that  standpoint,  past  and  future  may  be  said  to 
be  far  more  real,  or  even  the  only  real,  because  permanently  present 
in  the  Supra-Conscious  of  God's  Memory.  To  that  Memory,  all  the 


P.,  CH.  XV]        CONTINUITY  IN   DISCRETENESS  425 

For  answer  we  have  to  refer  back  to  the  principle 
which  is  always  turning  up  on  every  side  under  every 
complication  of  phenomena,  when  that  complication  is 
sifted.  Pratyag-Stma  is  the  unbroken  continuity  of  the 
One.  Mula-prakrti,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  utterly 
discontinuous  brokenness  and  separateness  of  the  many. 
The  two  have  nothing  in  common  with  each  other ;  in 
fact  they  are  ever  and  at  every  point  entirely  opposed 
to  each  other.  Yet  they  are  violently  brought  together 
into  inviolable  relation  by  the  might  of  the  Absolute- 
Svabhava,  the  Changeless  Nature  of  the  Absolute.  The 
reconciliation  of  these  warring  principles,  each  equally 
invincible,  necessitates  the  further  principle  of  'continuity 
in  discreteness,'  whereby  each  discrete  thing  is  in  turn  a 
thread  of  continuity  to  even  more  minutely  discreted 
things  and  lower  subdivisions ;  and,  conversely,  each 
thread  of  continuity  is  in  turn  a  discrete  and  subdivisional 
item  in  a  higher  thread  of  continuity — and  this  endlessly. 
This  principle  applies  to  the  constitution  of  a  so-called 
atom  as  also  of  solar  systems,  which  include  smaller 
systems  and  form  part  of  larger  ones  in  a  series  that  is 

Procession  and  Panorama  of  the  whole  Universe  of  all  possible  and 
actual  stars  and  systems,  is  an  Eternal  Now.  Thus,  what  is  real  from 
the  empirical  standpoint,  becomes  wn-real,  or  Ideal,  from  the  metaphysi- 
cal or  transcendental  standpoint ;  and  vice  versa.  The  finite  passing 
moment  is  most  intensely  real  to  the  finitised  or  individualised  jiva  ;  the 
in-finite  contents  of  Mahat-BucJdhi,  Supra- Consciousness,  Universal 
Mind,  are  the  most  intensely  real  to  the  Infinite  Self.  The  jfva  grips 
the  Finite  with  one  hand,  and  embraces  the  In- Finite  with  the  other — 
whence  arises  the  assurance  of  '  personal  immortality  ' ,  jivan-mukti ;  feet 
on  earth,  head  among  stars ;  nest  in  tree,  flight  in  empyrean';  some 
mechanical  occupation,  even  so-called  'drudgery,1  for  livelihood  of 
body,  and  poetry,  science,  art,  yoga-si(J<Jhis,  religion-philosophy,  for 
livelihood  of  soul. 


426  THE  ABSOLUTE,  AN  ETERNAL  SENSATION    [SC.  OF 

endless  either  way;  and  it  underlies  the  continuously 
overlapping  series  of  individuals  within  individuals  which 
make  up  the  jiva-half  of  the  World- Process. 

This  same  principle,  applied  to  the  psychic  half  of 
Samsara,  that  is  to  say  to  consciousness  ;  and  even  there 
to  the  cognitional  element  specially  (in  connection  with 
which  it  is  most  manifest) ;  explains  why  there  should 
be  two  worlds  to  consciousness,  an  ideal  and  a  real, 
memory  and  sensation,  and  a  third  something  holding 
the  two  together.  The  application  may  become  clear  if 
we  endeavour  to  understand  in  a  little  more  detail  what 
is  the  significance  of  memory  and  other  allied  psycho- 
logical processes,  and  how  and  why  they  come  into 
existence. 

The  Absolute  may  be  correctly  described  as  an 
eternal  sensation  in  which  the  Universal  Self,  in  one  single 
act  of  consciousness  senses  the  non-existence  of  Not-Self  ; 
that  is  to  say,  of  all  possible  pseudo-infinite  not-selves 
in  all  the  three  divisions  of  time — past,  present,  and 
future  ;  of  space — length,  breadth,  and  depth  ;  of  motion 
— approach,  recess,  and  rhythmic  vibration.  Now  each 
separate  individual  jlva  or  self,  out  of  the  whole  mass  of 
pseudo-infinite  jivas  or  selves,  (the  totality  of  which  is 
unified  in  and  by  Pratyag-atm5)»  must  also  necessarily 
reproduce  in  itself  this  one  single  act  of  consciousness, 
this  truly  unique  sensation,  this  all-embracing,  all-ex- 
hausting experience,  by  reason  of  its  identity  with  the 
universal  Self  ;  yet  it  is  impossible  also  for  it  to  do  so, 
because  ot  its  limitedness.  The  reconciliation  of  these 


P.,   CH.  XV]  MEANING   OF  MEMORY  427 

opposed  necessities  gives  rise  to  the  ideal  world  in  which 
we  can  '  look  before  and  after  '  simultaneously  (compara- 
tively only),  as  distinguished  from  the  real  worldJn  which 
we  can  have  only  one  sensation  at  a  time  (again  only 
comparatively),  successively. 

Thus,  to  begin  with,  the  individual  self  requires  two 
acts  of  consciousness   to  sense  the  non-existence  of  a 
single  not-self.     It  cannot  compass  this  in  one  act,  like 
the  universal  Self.     It  must  first  sense  the  existence,  and 
then  sense   the  non-existence  of  that   not-self.     In  the 
second   place,  it  has  to  deal  with  pseudo-infinite  not- 
selves  ;    it  can  sense  them  all  only  in,  so  to  say,  twice 
pseudo-infinite   acts   of  consciousness,  which  means,  in 
other  words,  in  endless  acts  of  consciousness,  extending 
through    endless   time,   endless    space,   endless   motion. 
Confining  ourselves  for  the  moment  to  the  case  of  one 
self  dealing  with  one  not-self,  we  see  that  that  self  first 
senses  and  asserts  the  existence  of  that  not-self  (as  identi- 
cal with  itself),  and  secondly  senses  and  asserts  the  non- 
existence  of  that  *  same  '  not-self  (as  non-identical  with 
itself).     The  word  'same*  here  embodies  what  we  know 
as  *  memory,'     The  imposition  of  continuity  on  an  ever- 
changing  not-self  by  a  self,  in  consequence  and  by  virtue 
of  its  own  continuity,  is  memory  of  that  not-self.  Putting 
the  matter  in  another  form,  while  all  the  possible  past, 
present,  and  future  of  the  World-Process  is  completely 
and    simultaneously    present    in    the  consciousness  of 
Pratyag-atma,  it  unfolds,  as  a  mayavic  or  illusive  appear- 
ance  of  procession,  only  gradually  and  in  succession,  in 


428  MEANING   OF   THE    '  PRESENT  '  [SC.  OF 

the  actual  life  of  the  individual  ;  and  the  constant  partici- 
pation of  the  individual  self,  in  the  omniscience  latent 
and  ever-present  in  Pratyag-atma,  constitutes  the  inner 
ideal  world  of  so-called  sub-consciousness  or  supra- 
consciousness,  mahat  or  mahan-atma  or  buddhi,  whence 
arise  memory  and  expectation  and  derivative  mental 
processes.1  Consider,  in  this  connection,  the  fact  that, 
even  in  ordinary  usage,  the  word  '  present  '  never  means 
an  imaginary  point  of  time,  dividing,  as  with  a  razor,  the 
past  from  the  present,  but  always  a  period,  '  a  slab  or 
chunk  of  time  ',  so  to  say  ;  thus,  '  at  the  present  time,' 

*  at  present,'   '  in  this  present  life,'  *  the  present  circum- 
stances ',  etc.2     So,  *  the  past  ',  the  '  future  ',  also,  ordin- 
arily,   in   common    usage,    mean    more   or   less   definite 
periods,   'blocks  or  pieces  '  of  time,  ages,  epochs  ;  thus  : 

*  the  future  of  this  nation  ',  *  the  past  of  that  person  '. 

The  above  statement  is,  however,  not  complete  bj" 
itself. 

Firstly  :  if  the  separate  self  can  freely  participate  in 
the  omniscience  of  Pratyag-atma,  how  is  it  that  our 
recollection  and  our  prevision  are  so  very  limited,  so  very 
erroneous  ?  Not  one  in  a  million  can  remember  or  fore- 
cast any  facts  behind  and  beyond  this  present  birth  ;  and 
even  the  facts  of  the  present  life  are  but  very  imperfectly 


3  3ricW    If-^rmr^n^  I  Nyaya-sZtra,  Ill,  ii,  42. 

'  Recollection  (is  possible)  because  of  the  all-knowing  nature  of  the 
Self.'  Compare  Ward's  views  as  to  memory-continuum  (  Art.  '  Psycho- 
logy/ Bnc.  Brit.,  llth  Ed.) 

'See  p.  316  supra,  and,  The  Secret  Doctrine  I,  110,  116 
(Adyar  edn.) 


P.,  CH.  XVl       PRATYAGATMA   AND    INDIVIDUAL  429 

remembered  and  pre-vised.  The  answer  to  this  is  that 
while,  metaphysically,  this  continuity  of  memory  and 
expectation  in  the  individual  self  is  derived  from  the 
consciousness  of  Pratyag-atma,  practically  and  actually 
it  is  derived  from  the  consciousness  of  the  individual  of 
the  next  higher  order,1  the  Ishvara  as  Sutratma,  just  as 
in  the  case  of  the  connecting  unity  of  sens^- media; 
whence  limitations.  And  as  to  the  positive  errors  and 
forgettings  within  those  limitations,  they  are  due  to  the 
general  causes  which  make  knowledge  and  ignorance, 
recollection  and  forgetfulness,  truth  and  error,  possible, 
nay,  necessary,  in  the  World-Process  at  large ;  these 
causes  have  been  indicated  above  (pp.  404-405)  in  dealing 
with  the  sub-divisions  of  cognition. 

Secondly  (and  this  is  more  relevant  to  our 
present  purpose),  there  is  the  difference  between  the 
possibility  of  participation  and  actual  participation.  As 
soon  as  there  is  a  positive  act  of  memory,  or  positive  act 
of  prevision  or  expectation,  it  becomes  distinct  from  the 
possibility  of  such  recollection  and  prevision.9  One, 
piece,  so  to  say,  of  the  latent  has  become  patent,  and  the 
general  latency  remains  a  latency  as  ever  before.  And 
all  this  while,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Absolute,  there 

1  See  pp.  347-348  supra,  for  the  significance  of  the  expression,  '  the 
next  higher  individual '.  Also  Bh&gavata,  XI,  iv,  4,  3?£2ffifa£35:piK!f-f 
g*raffifrTfr,  p.  325  supra. 

*  Bu<J<Jhi  and  Manas  ;  Total  (Collective  or  Universal  and  sub-supra-), 
Un-Conscious  and  Conscious  (with  its  degrees  of  pro-,  fore-,  co-Con- 
scious etc.)  ;  Avyaktam  or  Unmanifest  and  Vyaktam  or  Manifest ;  Abs- 
tract and  Concrete ;  General  and  Special ;  Universal  and  Particular ; 
all  these  pairs  indicate  aspects  ot  the  same  Fact. 


430  THE   POSSIBLE   AND   THE   ACTUAL      [SC.   OF 

is  no  difference  at  all  between  latency  and  patency  ;  for, 
in  the  Absolute,  all  things  which  are  limited,  and  can  be 
distinguished,  are  exactly  on  the  same  level  of  6tat-'  this ' 
in  the  same  way,  and  not  one  within  or  higher  or  lower 
than,  or  in  any  way  different  from,  another.  The  solution 
of  these  inconsistencies  is  that  what  is  latent  to  one  is 
also  patent  to  it  in  turn,  and  simultaneously  to  others, 
while  what  is  patent  to  one  is  also  latent  to  it  in  turn, 
and  simultaneously  to  others ;  and  thus  the  equality  of 
all  is  brought  about,  all  existing  simultaneously  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  Absolute,  all  serving  as  latent  and 
patent,  ideal  and  real,  one  within  another,  at  the  same 
time.  A  hundred  sculptors  see  a  hundred  different 
statues  in  the  same  block  of  marble  simultaneously. 
The  facts  of  physical  science,  re  infinite  registration  by 
each  atom  of  all  sights,  sounds,  etc.,  are  helpful  for 
understanding,  here. 

We  may  further  illustrate  the  fact  thus.  If  a  spectator 
wandered  unrestingly  through  the  halls  of  a  vast  museum, 
a  great  art-gallery,  at  the  dead  of  night,  with  a  single 
small  lamp  in  one  hand,  each  of  the  natural  objects,  the 
pictured  scenes,  the  statues,  the  portraits,  would  be 
illumined  by  that  lamp,  in  succession,  for  a  single 
moment,  while  all  the  rest  were  in  darkness,  and  after 
that  single  moment,  would  itself  fall  into  darkness  again* 
Let  there  now  be  not  one  but  countless  such  spectators, 
as  many  in  innumerable  number  as  the  objects  of  sight 
within  the  place,  each  spectator  meandering  in  and  out 
incessantly  through  the  great  crowd  of  all  others,  each 


P.,  CH.  XV]  ILLUSTRATIONS  431 

lamp  bringing  momentarily  into  light  one  object,  and  for 
only  that  spectator  who  holds  that  lamp.  This  immense 
and  unmoving  building  is  the  rockbound  ideation  of  the 
changeless  Absolute.  Each  lamp-carrying  spectator,  in 
the  countless  crowd,  is  one  line  of  consciousness  in  the 
pseudo-infinite  lines  of  such  that  make  up  the  totality  of 
the  One  Universal  Consciousness.  Each  coming  into 
light  of  each  object  is  its  patency,  is  an  experience  of  the 
jiva ;  each  falling  into  darkness  is  its  lapse  into  the 
latent.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  objects  themselves, 
or  of  the  universal  consciousness,  there  is  no  latency,  nor 
patency.  From  that  of  the  lines  of  consciousness,  there 
is.  Why  there  is  this  appearance  of  lines  of  conscious- 
ness should  be  clear  from  all  that  has  gone  before.1 

We  see  then  that  whenever  and  wherever  we  take 
the  World-Process,  we  shall  find  it  to  consist  of  an 
outer  plane  of  grosser  matter  which  corresponds  to  and 
makes  up  the  '  real '  world,  the  patent,  and  an  inner  plane 
of  subtler  which  makes  up  the  '  ideal '  world,  correspond- 
ing to  the  latent.  At  each  stage,  the  jlva-core  consists 
of  matter  of  the  inner  plane,  while  its  outer  upadhi, 
sheath,  consists  of  matter  of  the  outer  plane ;  and  when 
a  person  says:  '  I  think,1  'I  act,'  it  means  that  the  matter 

1  For  other  illustrations,  see  p.  232  supra  and  World-War  and  Its 
Only  Cure,  pp.  411-413  f.n.,  Each  lamp,  each  point  of  light,  each 
Jiva,  in  the  illustration  above,  is  a  focus  of  the  Diffused  Continuum  of 
Light,  viz.,  IJniversal  Consciousness.  Focussing  does  not  mean  com* 
plete  concentration  of  all  the  Light  in  one  point— an  obvious  impossi- 
bility. It  only  means  a  comparative  (and  that  too,  only  illusive)  intensi- 
fication in  one  place,  and  slight  reduction  in  the  neighbourhood. 
W.  James*  phrase,  '  the  hot  point  of  consciousness,'  is  very  good.  Every 
act  of  attention  creates  such  a  hot  point. 


432  THE    IDEAL   AND   THE    REAL  [SC.  OF 

of  the  inner  core,  which  is  the  *  I '  for  the  time  being,  is 
actually,  positively,  modified  by,  or  is  itself  modifying  in 
a  certain  manner,  the  outer  real  world,  literally  in  the 
same  kind  of  way,  though  vastly  subtler,  as  a  glass  may 
reflect  an  image,  or  a  compressed  wire-spring  may  push 
back  the  object  which  compresses  it.  The  ideality  of  the 
inner  processes  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  inner  film  of 
matter  is  posing  and  masquerading,  for  the  time,  as  the 
truly  immaterial  Self.1 

Let  us  take  some  concrete  facts  to  illustrate  the 
above  remarks.  The  lower  we  descend  in  the  scale  of 
living  organisms,  the  less  we  find  of  that  individuality, 
that  self-consciousness,  which  looks  '  before  and  after,'  of 
memory  and  expectation  in  short.  And  the  less  we  find 
of  these,  the  hazier  is  the  distinction  between  inner  and 
outer,  ideal  and  real.  But  as  in  no  living  organism  which 
persists  through  even  two  moments  of  time  can  there  be 
an  utter  absence  of  a  unified  consciousness,  of  an  indi- 
viduality, of  the  sense  of  '  before  and  after,'  however 
vague  and  dim  it  may  be,  so  can  there  not  be  an  utter 
absence  of  inner  core  and  outer  sheath.  But  in  the  higher 
organisms,  this  distinction,  of  a  persisting  core  and  a 
more  or  less  changing  sheath,  is  much  more  definite.  In 
the  average  man,  the  sukshma-sharira  (so  named  in 

1  In  this  fact  may  be  seen  illustrated  the  doctrine  of  Sankhya  that 
mahat,  bwjldhi,  abamkara,  manas,  etc.,  are  all  derivatives  of  Prad  ban  a 
or  Prakjti,  born  because  of  the  simple  juxtaposition  of  Purusha,  and  are 
therefore  all  jada,  '  material'.  Intellectual  and  other  mental  proceesss 
are  shapings,  colorings,  stressings.  etc.,  of  the  '  mental  body,'  as  much 
as  vision  is  the  shaping  of  (the  purpurine  on)  the  retina.  The  element 
of  1-consciousness.  attached  to  the' shaping,  belongs  to  the  Self  alone 
That  is  the  One  and  Only  Thing  or  Fact  that  is  non-material. 


P.,  CH.  XV]  INNER    BODY  AND   OUTER   BODY       433 

Vecjanta,  and  corresponding  to  the  astral,  or  rather  astro- 
mental,  body,  of  theosophical  literature),  made  of  a  finer 
grade  of  matter  than  that  which  composes  the  physical 
plane  we  know  of,  is  the  inner  core.  This  forms  the 
individuality,  the  thread  of  continuity,  the  *  present,'  in 
which  the  past  and  future,  the  before  and  after,  of  one 
physical  life-period  of  a  human  being  are  conjoined, 
amidst  the  changes  of  his  physical  body  and  surround- 
ings, The  physical  body  itself  has  a  certain  '  form  and 
shape  '  imposed  upon  it  by  this  inner  body  ;  which  form. 
roughly  speaking,  persists  like  an  external  thread  of  con- 
tinuity, through  the  incessant  changes  of  the  material  of 
the  body.  This  but  illustrates  the  pseudo-infinite  re- 
petition of  every  principle  in  nature.  The  physical  body 
is  sheath  to  the  astral  ;  but  in  the  physical  body  itself  a 
still  further  distinction  is  made  between  a  grosser  and  a 
finer,  and  the  former,  the  grosser,  portion  becomes  sheath 
to  an  inner  less  gross,  which  becomes  distinguished  as  a 
linga-cjeha,1  a  '  type-body  ',  (or  etheric  double,  in  theoso- 
phical literature)  ,a  , 


s  And  even  in  the  grosser  '  physical  body,'  we  may  not  improperly 
say  that  the  nervous  system  is  the  '  inner'  and  finer,  and  the  rest 
'  outer*  and  coarser.  Again,  in  the  nervous  system,  the  '  central  '  por- 
tion may  be  distinguished  from  the  '  peripheral  '  ;  and  so  on,  till  we 
come  to  a  recent  theory  which  holds  that  the  nerves  proper  are  not 
really  continuous  threads,  but  consist  of  microscopic  protoplasmic  jelly- 
like  cells,  enclosed  within  tubes,  which  cells,  during  the  active  waking 
condition,  stretch  out  on  both  sides  and  touch  each  other,  thus  becoming 
one  continuous  thread,  which  undulates  with  the  alternate  jelhfication 
and  softening,  or  contracting  and  expanding,  of  these  cells  when  they 
are  carrying  afferent  or  efferent  impulses  ;  sleep  resulting  when  these 
cells  become  fatigued,  contract,  and  separate  from  each  other. 

28 


434  PHYSICAL   AND   SUPERPHYSICAL  [SC.  OF 

To  put  the  matter  in  other  words  :  Of  the  pseudo- 
infinite  variations  of  the  Logion,  due  to  the  pseudo-jnfinite 
variations  of  the  'this'  contained  in  that  logion,  each 
variation  may  be  regarded  as  representing  one  life-course, 
one  line  of  consciousness.  This  one  life-course,  one  line 
of  consciousness,  taking  the  case  of  the  average  human 
individual,  is  represented  by  the  inner  sukshma-sharira, 
*  subtle  body',  which  contains,  latent  in  itself,  the  whole 
of  the  (to  be  unfolded  actual)  life  of  that  individual,  as 
the  seed  contains  the  tree.  As  one  single  '  present,'  it 
includes  all  the  time-divisions,  past  and  future,  of  that 
life  within  itself.  Because  of  this  fact,  the  jlva  can 
range  in  memory  and  expectation  over  the  whole  of  this 
one  physical  life ; !  to  him  the  whole  of  it  is  in  a  manner 
present  at  every  moment  of  his  life,  because  it  is  all  pre- 
sent in  the  sukshma-sharira  which  is  the  ensouling  core  of 
his  physical  sheath  and  is  himself.  But  his  memory  and 


1  True,  most  of  our  experiences  are  forgotten  beyond  conscious 
recall.  But  the  experiments  of  hypnotists  and  investigation  of  '  the  un- 
conscious '  show  that  they  are  still  '  present '  and  can  be  recalled  in 
special  circumstances.  In  this  connection  should  be  considered  the 
physiology  of  the  brain.  The  Mahatma  Letters  and  The  Secret 
Doctrine  say  that  the  material  of  the  physical  body  is  changed  and 
renewed  entirely  in  every  seven  years.  But  some  Professors  of  Physio- 
logy and  Anatomy  have  told  me,  on  enquiry,  that  the  cells  of  the  brain 
do  not  change,  though  they  grow.  The  subject  requires  further  investi- 
gation. Any  way,  continuity  of  physical  basis,  in  some  way  or  other 
(may  by  transference  of  impression  from  old  to  new  cells)  seems  to  be 
needed  for  continuity  of  conscious  memory,  while  awake  in  the  physical 
body.  The  ternaries  of  anabolism  and  katabolism  within  metabolism, 
of  integration  and  disintegration  within  preservation,  of  tidal  flow  and 
ebb  within  a  level,  of  maximum  and  minimum  under  an  optimum,  seem 
to  be  at  work  continuously,  in  the  body,  as  well  as  in  the  mind,  in 
various  ways.  It  is  obvious  that  the  softer  tissues,  like  the  layers  of  the 
skin,  are  changed  and  renewed  quickly ;  the  harder  ones,  like  deep- 
seated  ideas  and  feelings,  slowly. 


P.,  CH.  XV]       ENDLESS   SPIRALS   OF   EVOLUTION       435 

expectation  cannot  go  beyond  the  limits  of  the  present 
life,  because  the  individuality  of  the  sfikshma-sharlra 
does  not  extend  over  other  physical  births.  If,  however, 
by  development  of  mind,  by  persistent  introspection  and 
metaphysical  or  even  psycho-philosophical  and  abstract 
thought,  helped  by  yogic  practices  (which  are  only 
scientifically  systematised  processes  of  education,  of  ex- 
tension or  development  of  special  old  or  new  faculties),  a 
jiva  advances  in  evolution  to  the  stage  when  he  separates 
*  himself  '  as  much  from  the  sukshma-sharira  as  from 
the  sthula-sharira  or  physical  body,  then  the  sukshma- 
sharira  loses,  in  and  to  him,  its  character  of  inner  core  ;  it 
becomes  that  jiva's  normal  seat  or  centre  of  '  waking  * 
consciousness,  as  the  physical  or  sthula  is  now  ;  and  be- 
comes merged  with  the  physical  into  the  outer  sheath  ; 
and  another  body,  (now  called  the  karana-sharira),  made 
of  a  still  subtler  grade  of  matter,  takes  the  place  of  the 
inner  core,  and  becomes  a  new  sukshma-sharira  ranging 
over  many  rebirths  and  compassing  memory  and  ex- 
pectation of  them  all.1  This  process  is  repeated  ad 
infinitum*  in  the  endless  spirals  of  evolution  including 
system  within  system.  Such  seems  to  be  the  metaphysic 

1  Kfshpa  says  to  Arjuna,  GZJd,  iv.  5,  '  I  remember  all  my  past  births ; 
you   do  not*.     See  also  the  conversation,  regarding  their  memories  of 
past  births,  between  Jaigisbavya  and  Avatya  ;  Yoga-Bhashya,  iii,  18. 

2  3TrTC>f:,  f^P^-Vibhti^-Mah&'N&rayana  Upanishaj.     We  have 
seen  before,  that  the  doctrine,  that  there  are  atoms  within  worlds  and 
worlds  within  atoms  endlessly,  is  very  familiar  in  Yoga-Vasishtha  and 
other  works.    For  the  specific  statement  that  a  param-anu,  a   '  super- 
atom,'  is  also  an    'organism/  a  'compound*   of  articulated  parts,  a 
sanghata,  as  distinguished  from  a  mere  loose  collection,  a  samuha,  see 
Yoga-Bhashya,  iii,  44. 


436  RECESSION   OF   THE   IDEAL  [SC.   OF 

of  the  facts  stated  in  The  Secret  Doctrine  *  that,  to  the 
Logos  of  our  Solar  System,  all  the  planes  of  that  system 
are  as  the  sub-planes  of  one  plane.  They  would  be  to 
Him,  one  outer  real  world  ;  his  own  inner,  ideal,  world 
would  be  a  grade  beyond.  It  is  like  this  :  If  there  were 
beings  who  had  sense-experience  of  only  solid  matter,  to 
them  liquid  matter  would  be  in  the  place  of  soul,  spirit, 
inner  or  ideal  substance  ;  but  if  they  should  gradually 
grow  very  familiar  with  water,  and  begin  to  have  some 
experience  of  gaseous  matter,  then  solid  and  liquid  would 
become  ranged  as  degrees  or  subdivisions  of  the  outer 
plane  to  them,  and  air  would  take  the  place  of  soul, 
spirit,  etc.  ;  as  air  grew  familiar,  radiant  matter,  or  ether, 
or  whatever  other  name  might  be  given  to  the  next 
degree  of  matter,  would  take  its  place  as  principle  of 
continuity8  and  support  and  unification,  in  actual  life 
and  ia  general  estimation.  Witness,  in  illustration  of 
one  aspect  of  this  fact,  various  theories  of  the  earlier 

1  Vol.  v,  pp.  424.  et  seq.,  Adyar  edn. 

1  Qevl-Bhdgavata  speaks  of  the  five  tnaha-bhtyas  serving  assSfras, 
threads,  principles  of  continuity  to  one  another  and  to  the  countless 
forms  within  each. 


Vayu  Pnr&na  I.  iv. 

'  Born  one  from  another,  each  preceding  supports  each  succeeding 
one.1 

*W  W  *i  3?^  ana*  «i  $13  ^r,  «fensi  g  ^3  a?N:  tfciT* 

fitaW,  sfa  qraft  f  fa  «W«rt%3  ;  Brhad  Up..  III.  vi. 

'  All  this  (solid  land)  is  inter-woven  with  (and  supported  by)  water. 
But  what  is  water  supported  by  ?  By  Air.  And  that  Air  ?  ...  By  Brahma 
ultimately  is  everything  supported  '. 


P.,  CH.  XV]  OPPOSITE   ATTRIBUTES  437 

Greek  philosophers,  who  endeavoured  to  reduce  the 
universe  to  one  single  element,  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  etc., 
successively  ;  and  in  illustration  of  another  aspect  thereof, 
modern  scientific  theories  with  respect  to  ether. 
Modern  scientists  have  collected  together  and  discussed 
all  the  attributes  assigned  to  this  hypothetical  ether,  and 
pointed  out  that  they  are  in  most  instances  exactly 
opposite  of  those  assigned  to  known  kinds  of  matter.* 
As  a  fact,  the  list  of  attributes  thus  given,  e.g., 
continuity,  unlimitedness,  homogeneity,  non-atomicity, 
structurelessness,  gravitationlessness,  frictionlessness,  etc., 
is  not  a  list  of  attributes  of  any  kind  of  matter  or  Mula- 
prakrti,  but  of  Pratyag-atma.  But  it  always  happens  in 
the  history  of  evolution,  that  each  subtler  and  more 
pliable  grade  of  matter,  in  its  relation  to  the  next  denser 
and  more  resistant,  displays  the  characteristics  which 
Pratyag-atma  generally  displays  towards  Mula-prakrti, 
viz.,  characteristics  of  being  a  source  of  existence 
and  support,  and  of  supplying  a  basis  of  continuity,  of 
lubrication,  whereby  the  resistant  and  separate  are 
brought  into  relation  with  each  other  with  the  least 
possible  friction,  and  are  unified.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  in 
passing  that  the  Sarpskrt  word  sn6h  a,*  means  lubricant 
oil,  or  moisture,  our  water,  as  well  as  love,  which  is 
Pratyag-atma  in  the  desire-aspect,  desire  for  unity,  and 
pre-eminently  '  lubricates '  our  human  relations.  We 

1  See,  for  instance,  A.E.  Dolbear,  The  Machinery  of  the  Universe, 
p.  93,  (Romance  of  Science  Series). 


438   CO-ORDINATION  OF  PLANES  OF  MATTER     [SC.    OF 

may  well  entertain  the  supposition,  therefore,  that  when 
modern  science,  becoming  more  and  more  familiar  with 
radiant  matter  and  protyle  and  ether,  etc.,  shall  have 
discovered  their  real  properties,  they  will  all  fall  into 
line  with  the  kinds  of  matter  now  better  known ;  and 
a  new  and  hypothetical  element  will  have  to  be  assumed, 
with  these  same  characteristics  of  Pratyag-atma,  to 
explain  the  otherwise  paradoxical  behaviour  of  the 
known  kinds.  Puranic  and  theosophical  literature 
speaks  of  two  such  elements,  after  ether  or  akasha,  to  be 
discovered  within  the  time-limits  of  our  Manvantara, 
which  have  been  already  referred  to  before,  viz.,  mahat 
or  adi-tattva  and  buddhi  or  anupadaka-tattva.1 

Co-ordination  of  these  pseudo-infinite  planes  of  matter 
then,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that,  wherever  and  when- 
ever we  take  it,  we  find  the  World-Process  as  a  limited 
brahm-an(Ja,  a  world-system,  small  or  large,  which  is  a 
tri-bhuvanam,  a  tri-lokl,  a  system  of  *  three  worlds '  or 
layers  or  planes  of  matter.  That  is  to  say,  every  jiva, 
wherever  and  whenever  he  lives,  lives  in  a  world-system 
which  to  him  has  three  factors  :  an  outer  or  real  world, 
an  inner  or  ideal  world,  and  the  all-embracing  con- 
sciousness— which  connects  the  two,  and  which,  being 
itself  essentially  and  fully  ever-present,  is  the  basis  of 

1  P.  372  supra,  f.n.  If  these  are  (as  is  said)  sense-able,  in  the  same 
way  as  akasha,  v&yu,  etc.,  and  will  have  their  corresponding  sensor  and 
motor  organs,  as  akasha  has  ear  and  vocal  (Skt.  vale)  cords  ;  vayu,  skin 
and  feet ;  agni,  eyes  and  bands, — then  mahat-budghi,  the  psychological 
principle  or  faculty,  antah-karana  or  'inner  organ*  of  Sfinkbya,  has 
to  be  distinguished  from  them,  for  it  has  to  underlie  all  senses ,  old 
or  new.  See  Pranava-vada. 


P.,  CH.  XV]      WAKING   UP   ON   HIGHER   PLANES          439 

every  *  present,'  whatever  stretch  of  time-space-motion 
that  lower  present  or  ideal  may  include.  In  our  system, 
to  average  humanity,  the  outer  world  is  the  world  of  the 
physical  plane  and  sthula-sharira ;  the  inner,  of  the 
astro-mental  plane  and  sukshma-sharira ;  the  abstract 
consciousness  (the  principles  or  outlines  on  which  the 
individual  is  constructed,  the  basic  constituents  of  his 
nature,  the  special  aspect  or  mode  of  the  One  Conscious- 
ness which  that  individual  is  intended  to  manifest,  anger, 
or  love,  or  art,  or  philanthropy,  etc.,  in  pseudo-infinite 
variety),  of  karana-sharira,  the  '  causal '  body,  which 
is  the  cause  of  the  others;  in  a  way  corresponding 
to  that  in  which  Absolute-Consciousness  is  cause 
of  all  that  occurs  within  it.  When,  by  evolution  and 
opening  up  of  the  paths  of  individual  consciousness 
through  layers  of  the  sukshma-sharira  (i.e.,  by  the 
*  waking  up '  of  the  individual  on  that  plane,  by 
transfer  to  it  of  *  the  hot  place*  in  his  consciousness), 
the  latter  and  its  material  will  become  as  much  '  object ' 
to  the  consciousness  as  the  physical  body  and  its  material 
are  now ;  then  karana-body  will  take  the  place  of 
sukshma-body,  and  abstract  consciousness  will  retire  to 
a  subtler  plane  of  matter,  which  has  been  called 
budcjhic,  or  maha-karana,  or  turlya 1 ;  and  then  the 
range  of  memory  and  expectation  will  extend  beyond 
the  present  life  to  past  and  future  births,  since  the 
karana-body  (because  of  its  subtler  matter)  has  a  more 
extensive  '  present,'  and  lasts  through  many  physical 


440          TWO    SENSES    OF   THE   SAME   WORDS       [SC.  OF 

births,  even  as  the  sukshma-sharira  lasts  through  all 
changes  of  the  physical  body  in  one  birth.  From  the 
standpoint  of  the  karana-body,  physical  births-deaths 
are  as  bright-dark  fortnights,  or  even  day-nights,  of  physi- 
cal life  would  be  to  the  sukshma-sharira.1 

We  may  now  pass  on  to  certain  inferences  from  the 
facts  stated  above.  But  before  doing  so  it  may  be  noted 
— as  useful  to  bear  in  mind  in  systematising  apparently 
disjointed  and  otherwise  inconsistent-seeming  and  confus- 
ing statements  in  old  Samskrt  and  theosophical  literature 
— that  the  same  words  are  employed,  and  for  reasons 
existing  in  the  nature  of  things  as  shown  above,  to  indi- 
cate abstract  general  principles  and  types  which  have  a 
universal  application,  and  also  special  and  concrete  facts 
which  are  peculiar  only  to  a  particular  locality  or  system. 
Thus  (a)  atma,  (6)  buddhi,  (c)  manas — these  have 
one  universal  sense,  viz.,  (a)  Self,  (6)  unifying  Reason 
or  Universal  Mind,  which  is  but  Self  *  holding 

1  For  '  practical '  purposes,  works  like  Yoga-Vasishtha  speak  of 
only  two  '  bodies, '  viz.,  adhi-bhautika  (made  up  of  maha-bhutas) 
and  ati-vahika  (by  or  in  which  the  jiva  4  passes  from  one 
mood  or  body  to  another  ').  In  Sufi  terms,  the  two  are  jism-i-kaslf  and 
jism~i-latlft  or  nafs-i-muqlm  and  nafs-i-j&ri;  (see  Essential  Unity 
of  All  Religions,  Index).  This  latter  would  be  '  core  '-body,  as  the 
former  is  '  crust  '-body.  For  considerations,  in  terms  of  modern 
science,  supporting  belief  in  the  existence  and  the  possibility  of 
development  of  such  an  'inner  body,'  see  Edward  Carpenter's  The 
Drama  of  Love  and  Death.  The  possibility  of  such  extraction  of  a 
subtler  and  finer  body  from  the  denser,  is  evidenced  by  the  even  more 
incredibly  wonderful  yet  very  familiar  actuality  of  the  caterpillar — 
chrysalis— butterfly  and  larva — pupa — moth  transformations.  Theo- 
sophical doctrines  as  to  larger  and  larger  reaches  of  subtler  and  subtler 
bodies  and  planes,  bud^hic,  nirvSnic,  etc.,  are  illustrations  of  the 
principles  attempted  to  be  expounded  in  the  text. 

More  on  the  significance  of  the  '  present '  will  be  found  in 
Pranava-v&da. 


P.,  CH.  XV]  A    COROLLARY  441 

together  '  the  Many  as  dharma-megha,1  web  of  life, 
and  network  of  laws,  and  (c)  separative  intelligence. 
They  are  also  occasionally  used  in  theosophical  literature 
in  another  sense,  viz.,  the  three  subtlest  planes  of  matter 
out  of  the  seven  of  which  our  solar  system  is  there  said 
to  consist.  When  all  the  seven  planes  are  taken  as  sub- 
planes  of  one  cosmic  plane,  these  three  may  be  regarded 
as  composing  the  inner  core  to  the  outer  sheath  made  up 
of  the  other  four  ;  even  as  the  three  subtler  sub-planes 
of  the  physical  plane  supply  the  material  for  the  '  inner  f 
etheric  double,  which  pervades  and  holds  together  the  outer 
body  composed  of  the  four  grosser  sub-planes  of  physical 
matter,  viz.,  solid,  liquid,  gaseous,  and  etheric. 

The  necessary  corollary  from  the  above  statements 
is  :  Planes  of  matter  which  may  be  very  different  from 
each  other,  which  may  be  mutually  uncognisable  by> 
and  even  as  non-existent  to,  the  jlvas  ordinarily  inhabit- 
ing each,  i.e.,  having  sheaths  and  bodies  made  of,  or 
corresponding  to,  it,  will  always  be  seen  from  the  stand- 
point of  a  higher  jiva,  having  a  sufficiently  extensive 
consciousness,  to  be  graded  or  related  to  each  other  in 
some  way  or  other.  We  can  conceive  of  beings  whose 
bodies  are  made  of  air,  and  of  others  made  of  fire-flames. 
These  two  sets  of  beings  might  even  interpenetrate 
without  being  conscious  of  each  other.  But  a  jiva,  who 
was  familiar  with  both  kinds  of  matter  in  all  their  forms, 


;  Yoga-siitra,  i,  2,  and  iv,  29,  32  ;  '  the  cloud,  m6gha,  which 
rains,  mlhati,  all  cjharma  and  dharma-s,  virtue,  and  laws  of  Nature, 
and  also  functions  and  characteristic  qualities  of  things  '  ;  see  the  present 
writer's  Yoga-Concordance-Dictionary  . 


442  INTERPENETRATING  PLANES  [SC.  OF 

would  be  able  to  distinguish  between  the  two,  and  see 
the  gradation  between  the  atoms  composing  the  one 
and  the  other  kind  of  matter.  A  mosquito  can  walk 
upon  the  surface  of  water;  for  all  practical  purposes, 
the  water  is  to  it  as  hard  and  resistant  as  stone.  It  is 
not  so  to  the  fish.  The  fish  and  the  mosquito  may  not 
be  able  to  understand,  the  one  how  the  other  lives  and 
moves  in  water,  and  the  other  how  the  one  can  walk 
upon  the  surface  of  it  without  being  immersed.  Man 
can  understand  both  things.  Pseudo-infinite  necessarily 
are  these  diversities  of  consciousness ;  and  each  plane 
and  each  kind  of  matter,  corresponding  to  each  variety 
of  this  diversity,  is  again  pseudo-infinite  in  extent  of 
space,  time,  and  motion,  as  already  said.  From  the 
narrow  standpoint,  which  knows  of  only  one,  each  may 
seem  to  exclude  even  the  possibility  of  others ;  so  that 
if  one  said  that  there  were  living  beings  whose  bodies 
were  composed  of  subtler  matter,  that  our  earth  was 
thronged  with  them  so  that  our  bodies  and  theirs  were 
passing  through  each  other  very  often,  and  in  entire 
unconsciousness  of  each  other's  existence,  the  statement 
would  ordinarily  either  not  be  believed,  as  involving  a 
breach  of  geometrical  axioms,  or  if  believed,  would  be 
regarded  as  disproving  those  axioms.  But  to  a  higher 
and  broader  outlook,  both  kinds  of  matter  and  their 
corresponding  lines  of  consciousness  fall  into  their  proper 
places  ;  and  the  graded  relations,  to  each  other,  of  these 
planes  of  matter,  by  interpenetration,  without  violation 
of  any  mathematical  laws,  also  becomes  apparent. 


P.,  CH.  XV]  NO  FOURTH  DIMENSION  443 

Another  connected  corollary  seems  to  be  that,  by 
metaphysical  deduction,  the  so-called  fourth  and  fifth 
and  higher  dimensions  of  space  can  really  not  be  any- 
thing differing  in  kind  from  the  known  three  dimensions.* 
These  three  dimensions  themselves,  length,  breadth  and 
depth,  are  but  varieties  of  the  one  fact  of  co-existence 
which  is  the  essential  and  the  whole  significance  of 
space.  Three  straight  lines  intersecting  each  other  at 
right  angles  at  one  central  point  give  us  these  three 
dimensions.  B.ut  a  million,  a  billion,  a  pseudo-infinite 
number,  of  such  triplets  of  lines  can  intersect  each 
other  at  the  same  central  point ;  that  is  to  say,  a  pseudo- 
infinite  number  of  single  straight  lines  can  intersect  each 
other,  at  that  point,  at  angles  of  all  possible  degrees ; 
and  we  can  therefore  justifiably  speak  of  a  pseudo-infinite 
number  of  dimensions  of  space.  In  any  other  sense,  all 
so-called  new  dimensions  resolve  themselves  into  cases 
of  interpenetration  in  various  ways ;  and  interpenetration 
itself,  it  is  clear,  is  but  the  co-existence  of  atoms,  or  mole- 
cules, or  component  particles,  in  special  positions  towards 
each  other.  The  case  would  be  similar  with  dimensions 
and  divisions  of  time  and  motion. 

The  question  of  how  the  consciousness  of  a  jlva 
expands,  so  as  to  embrace  more  and  more  planes  of 

1  The  Secret  Doctrine,  I,  29S-296,  and  The  Mahatma 
Letters,  p.  404,  clearly  repudiate  the  notion  o!  any  fourth, 
fifth*  etc.,  dimension  of  space,  other  than  the  three,  length, 
breadth,  depth.  They  explain  that '  interpenetration '  has 
been  mistaken  for  a  new  *  dimension  '. 


444  HIGHER  INCLUDES  LOWER  CONSCIOUSNESS  [SC.  OF 

matter,  is  one  of  general  evolution,  or  of  practical  yoga 
when  an  endvavour  is  made  to  accomplish  this 
deliberately. 

The  nature  itself  of  the  process  of  expansion  of 
consciousness  is  nothing  peculiarly  mysterious.  All 
education  is  such  expansion ;  and  yoga  is  specialised 
education.  A  jlva  takes  up  a  new  subject  of  study,  a 
new  line  of  livelihood,  a  new  department  of  life  and  mode 
of  existence,  and  forthwith  a  new 'world  is  opened  to  him, 
and  his  consciousness  flows  out  into,  becomes  co-extensive 
with,  takes  in  and  assimilates,  that  new  world.  Every 
sense,  ear,  eye,  nose,  is  a  window  into  a  world  of  its  own. 
In  another  aspect  of  'expansion',  viz.,  of  (comparatively) 
simultaneous  communion,  we  find  other  illustrations. 
Take  the  case  of  an  ordinary  government.  The  consci- 
ousness of  an  officer  in  charge  of  the  police-administration 
of  a  sub-district  is  coextensive  with  the  police-affairs  of 
that  district ;  that  of  another  in  charge  of  its  revenue- 
administration  is  similarly  co-extensive  with  its  revenue- 
affairs  ;  and  so  with  a  number  of  other  departments 
of  administration,  medical,  educational,  arboricultural, 
commercial,  municipal,  side  by  side,  in  the  same  sub- 
district.  But  there  are  larger  districts  made  up  of 
numbers  of  these  sub-districts,  and  still  larger  divisions 
of  country  made  up  of  numbers  of  these  districts ;  and 
at  each  stage  there  are  administrative  officers  in  charge 
of  each  department,  whose  consciousness  may  be  said  to 
include  the  consciousnesses  of  their  subordinates  in  that 
department,  exclude  those  of  their  compeers,  and  be  in 


P.,  CH.  XV]  ILLUSTRATIONS  445 

turn  included  in  those  of  their  superiors.  The  more 
complicated  the  machinery  of  the  government,  the 
better  the  illustration  will  be,  of  inclusions,  exclusions, 
partial  or  complete  coincidences,  and  overlappings  and 
communions  of  consciousness.  At  last  we  come  to  the 
head  of  the  government,  whose  consciousness  may  be 
said  to  include  the  consciousnesses,  whose  knowledge  and 
power  include  the  knowledges  and  powers,  of  all  the 
public  servants  of  the  land,  whose  consciousness  is  so 
expanded  as  to  enable  him  to  be  in  touch  with  them  all 
and  feel  and  act  through  them  all  constantly.  An  officer 
promoted  through  the  grades  of  such  an  administration 
would  clearly  pass  through  expansions  of  consciousness. 
A  more  common  illustration,  which  may  appear  to  show 
out  the  so-called  immediacy  of  consciousness  better,  is 
chat  of  friends  and  relatives.  Two  friends  may  be  so 
intimate  with  each  other,  husband  and  wife,  and  members 
of  a  joint  family,  may  love  and  be  in  rapport  with  each 
other  so  much,  that  they  have  a  '  common  life,'  a  '  com- 
mon feeling,'  a  '  common  consciousness  V  But  it  should 

1  Members  of  a  bench  of  judges,  arriving  at  a  concurrent 
judgment ;  disputants  coming  to  an  agreement,  after  examin- 
ing all  the  pros  and  cons  ;  a  classful  of  students,  following 
with  intelligent  assent,  a  mathmatical  demonstration  by  a 
professor  ;  all  these  are  illustrations  of  coincidence  of  con- 
sciousness ;  so  too,  a  great  public  meeting  adopting  a  resolu- 
tion unanimously.  A  simple  and  effectively  intelligible  way 
of  putting  the  idea  is  this  :  The  *  We  '-consciousness  includes, 
synthesises,  coincides  with,  unifies,  all  the  '  I-,  You-,  He-, 
She-,  It-consciousnesses  which  that  '  We  '-consciousness  may 
stretch  itself  over,  and  cover,  and  embrace.  *  We '  includes 
all  '  thou-s  ',  '  you-s  ',  '  he-s  ',  '  she-s ',  '  it-s ',  '  they-s  ' ;  and 


446  ANALOGIES    IN    DAILY   LIFE  [SC.  OF 

be  borne  in  mind  that,  strictly  speaking,  there  is  no  more 
immediacy  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other,  but  only 
quicker  cognition.  Consciousness  of  the  particular,  the 
limited,  working  unavoidably,  through  an  upadhi, '  sheath  ', 
4  garment f,  *  tenement ',  instrument,'  '  vehicle  ',  neces- 
sarily deals  with  time  as  with  space  ;  and  the  time- 
element  is  always  a  definite  element,  however  infinitesimal 
it  may  be  in  any  given  case.  The  word  '  immediate  ' 
in  such  cases  has  only  a  comparative  significance,  as  is 
apparent  from  the  fact  that  the  time  of  transmission  of 
a  sensation,  from  the  end  of  a  nerve  to  the  seat  of 
consciousness,  has  been  distinctly  and  definitely  calculated 
in  the  case  of  living  organisms ;  and  differs  with  the 
organisms;  it  is  much  longer  in  a  whale  than  in  a 
human. 

Such  expansion  of  consciousness,  then,  is  not  in  its 
nature  more  recondite  than  any  other  item  in  the  World- 
Process,  but  a  thing  of  daily  and  hourly  occurrence.  In 
terms  of  metaphysic,  it  is  the  coming  of  an  individual 
self  into  relation  with  a  larger  and  larger  not-self.  The 
processes  of  yoga  are  no  more  and  no  less  methods  of 
e-duc-ation — using  the  word  in  its  true  significance  of 
developing,  '  forth-leading  ',  opening  up  and  orienting,  of 
faculties  already  existent  but  weak  or  latent — than  the 
processes  followed  in  the  million  schools  and  colleges  of 
modern  life,  for  developing  the  physical  and  mental 

it  does  so  in  such  a  way  that  every,  individual,  included 
therein,  retains  his,  her,  its,  separate  individuality,  while 
feeling  identity  with  the  whole. 


P>,  CH.  XV]  TWO   KINDS   OF   MOKSHA  447 

powers  of  children  and  youth  ;  only  they  are  (probably) 
more  systematic,  better  thought  out,  based  on  deeper 
knowledge  of  psychology  and  metaphysic.  Every  act 
of  attention,  of  concentration,  of  regulation  and  balancing, 
of  deliberately  '  joining  '  and  directing  the  self  to  an 
object,  or  to  itself,  of  con-y^g-ating  it  to,  or  en-gag-ing 
it  in,  anything,  is  (jnana-  or  kriya-)  yoga  (respectively, 
according  as  the  chitta,  mind,  is  made  receptive  or  pro- 
jective)  ;  and  means  some  development  of  the  individual 
consciousness. 

NOTE:  Two  kinds  of  moksha,  liber-ation,  de-liver  - 
ance,  quitting,  letting  go,  e-mancip-ation,  un-binding,  (from 
much,  'to  un-tie,  re-lease ')  are  indicated  in  the  old  books. 
(1)  One  is  the  '  metaphysical ',  moksha  proper,  '  radical  deli- 
verance ',  once  for  all,  from  all  and  ultimate  doubt  of  Immort- 
ality, doubt  of  Utter  and  Perfect  Self-dependence;  from  fear 
of  pain  and  death,  fear  of  subjection-to-another,  of  being  at 
the  Mercy-of-Another.  It  is  a  change  of  the  attitude  of  the 
chitta,  mind  ;  change  of  its  outlook  upon  Life  and  World-Pro- 
cess. One  of  the  Masters  (the  real  Founders  of  the  Theosophical 
Society)  is  reported  to  have  said,  on  some  occasion,  '  Moksha 
is  not  a  change  of  conditions  '  (plural)  '  but  of  condition ' 
(singular).  The  person,  whose  mind  undergoes  this  change  of 
*  condition,'  becomes  Self-sure ;  and  instead  of  always  thinking 
of,  clinging  to,  working  for,  the  part,  the  limited,  i.e.,  his  indi- 
vidualistic egoistic  self,  he  turns  to,  or  rather  into,  the  Whole; 
and  persistently  knows,  desires  (the  welfare  of),  and  works 
4  for ',  or  rather  '  as,  the  whole,  the  unlimited  Universal  Self. 

(2)  The  other  may  be  called  '  technical '  moksha. 
Children  released  from  school,  prisoners  let  out  from  jail, 
public  servants  '  off '  duty,  wage-workers  set  free  after  work- 
hours — all  these  experience  moksha  in  the  technical  sense,  even 
on  the  physical  plane,  in  daily  life.  Any  '  freeing '  from  any 
bonds,  any  ties,  is  a  moksha.  Receiving  the  '  freedom  '  of  a 
city,  in  England,  now  a  formal  honor,  seems  to  have  meant, 


448         METAPHYSICAL  AND    SUPERPHYSICAL       [SC.  OP 

originally,  that  the  person  honored  was  really  '  free  '  to  enter 
into  any  house  of  that  city  and  be  welcomed  as  a  guest,  as  a 
matter  of  right ;  he  was  *  freed  '  from  the  ordinary  limitations 
and  restrictions  to  which  strangers  are  subject.  (Compare 
Chhandogya  Up.,  VII,  xxv,  2)  '  He  who  has  such  Self -Know- 
ledge becomes  Sva-rat,  Self -governed  ;  .  .  .  He  can  pass  into 
any  world  and  all  worlds  at  will '  (in  and  by  '  imagination  ', 
and  then  in  corresponding  *  reality  ').  '  Super-physically  ', 
with  the  achievement,  siddhi,  (from  s  idh,sddh,  to  effect 
completely,  accomplish,  suc-ceed),  of  each  new  extension  of 
faculty,  each  new  sense,  the  person  becomes  '  free  '  o/and  in 
the  corresponding  new  world,  free  to  range  in  it  at  will.  Also, 
per  contra,  if  he  becomes  tired  of  any  kind  of  experience,  any 
world  (of  science,  art,  fairies,  nymphs,  gods,  titans,  comedies, 
tragedies,  heavens,  hells),  and  abandons  it,  then  too  he  be- 
comes *  free  ',  but  free  from  it ;  he  transcends  it,  rises  above 
it  (aty-etO,  by  negation  ;  (see  quotation  from  Charaka,  p.  131, 
supra).  In  this  sense,  while  '  metaphysical  moksha '  is  of 
one  kind  only,  the  other,  '  technical  or  superphysical  moksha  * 
may  be  of  countless  kinds  ;  for  there  must  be  as  many  kinds 
of  freedom  as  there  are,  or  may  be,  of  bondage ;  thus, 
books  of  medicine  speak  of  a  person  '  freed  from  fever, '  as 
jvara-mukta. 

All  this  implies,  over  again,  that  'laws  *  are  the  same,  for 
physical  as  well  as  super-physical  planes,  worlds,  conditions  ; 
and  thereby  re-inforces  the  Law  of  Analogy  or  Corres- 
pondences. 

Yoga~Bhashyat  ii.  27,  speaks  of  two  kinds  of  v  i  • 
m  u  k  t  i  i  (the  word  is  here  used  as  a  synonym  for  mukti  or 
moksha,  but  is  seldom  employed  in  this  sense).  The  com- 
mentary, on  this  and  the  preceding  aphorism,  says  in  effect : 
The  only  cure  for  a-vidya,  Primal  Error  ('  I  am  this-body  f) 
is  viveka,  discrimination,  between  Purusha,  'I',  and 
sa^tva  (the  finest  attribute  of  Prakrti,  here  standing  for 
the  whole  of  Prakrti,1,  *  This  ',  '  Not- 1 '.  This  discrimination 
wavers,  falters,  flicker?,  does  not  burn  with  a  steady  flame. 
To  make  it  steady,  firm,  unshakable,  it  has  to  be  developed 
and  strengthened  through  seven  stages:  (1)  Thar  which  has 
to  be  given  up,  viz., '  this  '-body,  to  which  the  mind  clings,  is 


P.,  CH.  XV]  SEVEN   STAGES   TO    MOKSHA  449 

recognised  as  what  ought  not  to  be  clung  to  ;  (2)  the  causes 
which  have  produced  the  clinging  are  attenuated,  (the  causes 
being,  as  stated  in  Yoga-Sutra,  ii,  3,  the  series  of  five,  a-vidya- 
asmita,  raga,  dvesha,  abhi-nivesha,  error  or  ne-science, 
egoism,  like,  dislike,  and  'ego-complex1,  i.e.,  obstinate 
separative  individualism  ;  of  which  five  and  the  correspond- 
ing opposites,  the  whole  World-Process  is  product  and 
illustration) ;  (3)  the  dropping  away  of  them  is  bi ought 
about  by  appropriate  mind-discipline,  and  accomplished 
more  and  more  fully  in  and  by  samadhi-meditation ;  (4) 
it  is  realised  that  discrimination  (as  above)  is  the  only 
means  of  the  utter  subsidence  of  the  causes.  These  four 
constitute  kflryS  vt-mukji,  'freedom  which  has  to  be 
made  ',  achieved,  by  practice.  The  remaining  three  stages 
constitute  chit^a  vi-  mukti,  f  freeing,  or  freedom,  or 
dissolution,  of  the  mind  '  ;  (5)  the  momentum,  desire-force,  of 
buddhi,  mind,  is  exhausted  .  there  is  no  craving  left  for 
separative  individualised  existence  ;  (6)  the  gufla-s,  sattva- 
rajas-tamas,  attributes  of  mind  or  Prakyti,  like  displaced 
boulders  tumbling  from  a  mountain-top,  and  rushing  unstay- 
ably  down  to  the  bottom,  merge  back  into  their  primal  source 
and  disappear  ;  (7)  Purusha,  Self,  (individual  self  which  has 
become  Universal  Self  by  the  dropping  away  of  all  limiting 
and  individualising  upadhi-sheath  and  entanglements)  remains 
fixed  in  Its  own  Sole-ness,  K£vala-ta  or  Kaivalyam. 
11  The  dewdrop  slips  into  the  Shining  Sea  ". 

Yoga  Vasishtha  also  enumerates  seven  steps  or  stages, 
in  three  separate  places  ;  each  list  varies  a  little,  in  names 
and  order,  but  not  in  substance.  The  places  are  Bk.  3,  ch.  118, 
verses  3-16;  Bk.  6,  PUrv-ardha,  ch.  120,  verses  1-9;  and 
ch.  126,  verses  70-73.  Buddhist,  SUfi,  and  other  schools  of 
Yoga,  have,  each,  their  own  special  lists  of  steps,  practices, 
disciplines. 

In  between  the  first  stage  and  the  seventh,  come  all  the 
phases  of  '  life  abounding  ',  *  fuller  life  '  of  the  Right  Hand 
Path  of  White  Magic,  fuller  life  of  "  terrible  toil  and  profound 
sadness,  but  also  a  great  and  ever-increasing  delight  "  (Light 
on  the  Path);  gradual  progress  onthenivrtti-marga, 
Path  of  Renunciation  and  Ascent,  by  '  re-vers-ion  *  to  more  and 
29  • 


450  SAME  TROUPE  OF  ACTORS  THROUGHOUT  [SC.  OF 

more  subtle  bodies  and  planes,  through  which  the  jiva  had 
come  down,  grade  by  grade,  on  the  Path  of  Pursuit  and  Des- 
cent, pr  a-vrtt  i-m  arga.  The  Secret  Docrine,  V,  300, 
says  : 

"  Mankind,  from  the  first  down  to  the  last,  or  seventh 
Race,  is  composed  of  one  and  the  same  company  of  actors, 
who  have  descended  from  higher  spheres  to  perform 
their  artistic  tour  on  this  our  planet,  Earth.  Starting  as  pure 
spirits  on  our  downward  journey  around  the  world,  with 
the  knowledge — now  feebly  echoed  in  the  occult  doctrines 
— inherent  in  us,  cyclic  law  brings  us  down  to  the  reversed 
apex  of  Matter,  which  is  lost  down  here  on  earth,  and  the 
bottom  of  which  we  have  already  struck;  and  then,  the 
same  law  of  spiritual  gravity  will  make  us  slowly  ascend 
to  still  higher,  still  purer,  spheres,  viz.,  those  we  started 
from/' ' 


1  Pp.  294-296  of  H.P.B.'s  From  the  Caves  and  Jungles 
of  Hindustan  should  be  carefully  read  as  a  continuation  of 
the  above  extract  from  her  Secret  Doctrine,  The  following 
sentence  on  p.  296  indicates  that  Spirit,  in  its  descent  into 
Matter,  comes  right  down  into  the  mineral  stage  (atom)  and 
then  reascends  :  '  With  every  new  Maha-Yuga  (great  cycle) 
the  Deva  separates  from  that  which  is  eternal,  attracted  by 
existence  in  objective  existence,  like  a  drop  of  water  first 
drawn  up  by  the  Sun,  then  starting  again  downwards,  passing 
from  one  region  to  another,  and  returning  at  last  to  the  dirt  of 
our  planet.  Then  having  dwelt  there  while  a  small  cycle 
lasted,  it  proceeds  again  upwards  on  the  other  side  of  the 
circle."  Pp.  293-294  say  useful  things  about  spiritualistic 
phenomena.  The  whole  confirms  belief  in  personal  im- 
mortality and  Reincarnation. 

On  these  two  subjects,  The  Mahatma  Letters  throw 
much  light ;  read  the  pages  referred  to  in  its  Index  against 
4  Death  f  and  '  Reincarnation  ;  pp.  170-171  give  some  specially 
beautiful  injunctions  for  those  who  watch  by  a  death-bed; 
these  injunctions  indicate  that  the  departing  soul  gathers  out 
of  its  past,  the  most  important  material  with  which  it  will 
start  its  next  re-incarnation.  H.P.B/s  Secret  Doctrine  and 


P.,  CH.  XVj  THE    FINER   SPIRITUALISM  451 

In  other  words,  out  of  countless  Dhyan  Chohans,  jivas, 
•d6vas-asuras,  spiritual  intelligences  or  individuals,  a  great  host 

Ists   Unveiled  have  also  helpful  information  on  the  subject ; 
see  their  Index-references  against  '  Reincarnation  '. 

Sir  Arthur  Conan  Doyle  is  well  known  as  the  creator  of 
the  famous  detective  '  Sherlock  Holmes  '.  He  was  also  a  very 
versatile  writer  on  many  subjects,  historical  novels,  romances, 
short  stories,  tragic  and  comic.  A  very  important  book  by 
him,  on  a  very  serious  subject,  entitled  The  Edge  of  the 
Unknown,  came  into  my  hands  only  in  September,  1947, 
(while  these  pages  were  passing  through  the  press).  It  deals 
with  the  subject  and  the  literature  of  spiritualistic  phenomena 
from  their  beginnings,  a  little  before  the  middle  of  the  last 
century,  till  the  year  of  its  publication,  1930 ;  recounts 
the  author's  own  personal  experiences  with  clairvoyants, 
clairaudients,  levitators  in  broad  daylight,  and  mediums  of 
many  sorts,  and  his  very  careful  investigations  and  testings  ; 
and  also  records  the  conversions  of  several  leading  scientists, 
journalists,  and  clergymen,  who  were  formerly  unbelievers. 
Of  course  the  views  of  such  believers  as  Sir  William 
Barratt  (founder  of  the  Psychical  Research  Society),  Sir 
Oliver  Lodge,  Sir  William  Crookes,  all  famous  scientists,  are 
referred  to.  Bulwer  Lytton,  the  famous  novelist,  is  described 
as  one  of  the  moral  cowards  "  who  admitted  the  facts  in 
private  and  stood  aloof  in  public "  (p.  248)  as  regards 
D.  D.  Home's  phenomena  ;  though  himself  the  author  of  those 
*  Magic  '-novels,  Zanoni  (referred  to  in  The  Mahatma 
Letters  with  some  commendation)  and  A  Strange  Story. 
Sir  A.  C.  Doyle  says  that  all  the  finer  spirits  declared, 
through  their  mediums,  that  the  sole  purpose,  for  which 
they  were  endeavouring  to  communicate  with  the  earth-world, 
was  to  convince  mankind  of  the  certainty,  the  fact  and  truth, 
of  personal  immortality,  and  thereby  bring  great  solace  and 
peace  of  mind  to  all,  as  regards  the  fate  of  their  departed  dear 
ones,  and  also  their  own  future  ;  also  to  show  to  mankind  that 
the  Supreme  Power  at  the  heart  of  the  Universe  was  essen- 
tially Just,  and  that  there  were  different  kinds  of  purgatories 
for  sinners  of  different  degrees,  and  also  heavens  for  the 
virtuous  similarly ;  also  that  reincarnation  was  a  fact.  And 


452  PERSONAL  GOD  AND  IMPERSONAL  GOD  [SC.  OF 

decided  (by  the  Free- Will  of  Inner  Necessity)  to  become  '  a 
troupe  of  actors  '  and  gradually  c  descend  '  to  the  state  and  stage 
of  Humanity,  and  then  *  re-ascend  f,  equally  gradually,  to  the 
primal  state  of  spiritual  intelligences,  d£vas-asuras.  For 
fuller  understanding  of  this,  one  should  read  up  the  references 
in  the  S.D.  Index  under  *  Dhyan  Chohans,' '  Dhyanis,'  '  Dhyani-. 
Buddhas,'  etc.  In  Skt.  terms,  P  i  t  T-s,  '  fathers,'  'ancestors/  are 
born  as  '  p  u  t  r  a  -  s  ',  '  sons  ' ;  i.e.,  the  same  old  souls  are 
born  over  and  over  again,  in  new  bcdies,  generation  after 
generation.  One  point  may  be  specially  noted  here.  S.  D.,  V, 
374,  says:  "  Vajra-dhara  or  Vajra-sattva  is  the  Regent  or 
President  (chief)  of  all  the  Dhyan  Chohans  or  Dhyani 
Buddhas,  he  is  the  highest,  the  Supreme  Buddha  ;  personal  yet 
never  manifested  objectively  ".  In  this  sentence  may  be  seen 
the  reconciliation  of  belief  in  a  Personal  God  (of  a  particular 
and  limited  world,  as  in  a  king  or  emperor  or  president  or  other 
ruler  of  a  State),  and  non-belief  in  an  extra-cosniiccd  and 
Universal  but  yet  Personal  God  of  the  whole  Beginningless 
and  Endless  World-Process ;  see  pp.  170-172,  supra.  In  The 
Mahatma  Letters,  all  notion  of  such  an  extra-cosmical,  uni- 
versal, *  personal  '  god,  is  strongly  repudiated  (pp.  52-59). 

We  have  seen  above  that  moksha-freedotn  has  as  many 
kinds,  technically,  as  bondage.  Self,  having,  of  It-Self,  '  put 
aside  *  ('  forgotten  ')  Its  Freedom,  and  put  on  countless  bonds 
of  finite  forms,  modes,  moods,  experiences  ;  is  everlastingly 
engaged  in  the  task  of  regaining  Its  freedom  ;  freedom  from 
this  want,  that  slavery,  this  pain,  that  restriction,  this  limita- 
tion, that  oppression,  this  ignorance,  that  powerlessness — 
political,  economic,  domestic,  social,  individual,  biological,, 
psychological,  racial,  national,  etc. ;  freedom  from  inability  to 
fly  at  will  to  planets  and  stars,  to  see  what  is  happening,  or 
has  happened,  or  will  happen,  on  any  of  them  ;  and  so  forth. 

there  is  little  doubt  that  the  faith  of  mankind  at  large  has  been 
revived  on  a  large  scale,  by  means  of  spiritualistic  pheno- 
mena, as  also  in  various  other  ways,  directly  and  indirectly, 
in  personal  immortality  and  reincarnation.  The  whole  book  is 
well  worth  reading  and  pondering  over  by  Theosophists.  Also 
The  Wanderings  of  a  spiritualist  (1921)  by  the  same  author* 


P.,  CH.  XV]  THREE    KINDS    OF   YOGA  453 

For  practical  purposes,  however,  a  few  of  the  more  im- 
portant kinds  or  stages  of  moksha  are  specified  by  different 
schools  or  systems  of  jnana-knowledge  or  bhakti-devotion, 
from  their  own  respective  standpoints.  A  yoga-method  of 
preponderant  karma-action  is  also  recognised,  viz.y  the  karma- 
yoga  and  karma-sannyasa-yoga  expounded  in  Chs.  iii  and  v  of 
Gltn.  But  it  is  generally  agreed  that  it  is  subsidiary  ;  while 
the  yogas  of  predominant  bhakti  or  of  predominant  jnana  are 
more  direct  means  to  moksha ;  the  former,  chiefly  to  the 
special  and  super-physical  kinds  ;  the  latter,  mainly  to  the 
metaphysical.  Pranava-Vada  (see  its  Index-references  under 
4  moksha  ')  gives  helpful  information.  The  main  idea  to  bear 
in  mind,  explaining  the  unfamiliar  in  terms  of  the  familiar,  is 
that  these  many  kinds  of  moksha,  *  free  choice  ',  are  like  the 
many  vocations  and  careers  from  which  any  one  may  be 
selected,  according  to  his  taste  and  temperament,  by  a  person, 
who  has  completed  a  good  general  education.  But,  while  the 
several  vocations  may  be  regarded  as  of  equal  importance,  yet 
there  is  also  a  grading  and  ranking  among  the  persons 
pursuing  them.  Thus  Rshis,  Maha-Rshis,  Brahma-Rshis, 
D6va-Rshis,  Parama-Rshis  ;  Bodhi-sattvas,  Buddhas,  Maha- 
Buddhas,  Masters  or  Chohans  of  '  seven  rays ',  Pratyt'ka- 
Chohans ;  Thrones,  Principalities,  Powers ;  Auliya,  Abdal, 
Abrar,  Ghausas  or  Qutubs  (in  Vedic,  Buddhist,  Christian, 
Muslim,  schemes),  have  different  functions  as  well  as  grades 
and  ranks  in  the  Invisible  Spiritual  Government. 

Karma-yoga  is  the  preliminary  step,  bhakti-yoga  the 
next,  jnana-yoga,  the  last ;  after  achieving  jnana,  the  soul 
pursues  all  three  conjointly,  with  a  new  vision  and  a  new 
purpose. 

By  bhakti-devotion,  the  soul  attains  the  following  kinds 
of  moksha,  step  by  step.  Chhandogya  2.  20.  2  ;  Mukti  (1.  23)  ; 
and  other  Upanishats,  mention  them  :  (l)  Sal  ok  y  a,  life  in 
the  1  o  k  a,  world,  of  the  loved  and  worshipped  deity  ; 
(2)  S  a  m  !  p  y  a,  "  nearness  '  to  him  or  her  ;  (3)  S  a  r  s  h  t  i, 
holding  of  similar  fshti-s,  powers  and  possessions,  (4) 
Sarupya,  sameness  of  rupa,  appearance,  with  him  or 
her  ;  (5)  S  a  y  u  j  y  a,  complete  identification  with,  mergence 
into,  him  or  her.  The  worshipped  object  may  be  any  one  of 


454  "  LIVE    IN    THE    ETERNAL  "  [SC.  OF 

the  great  gods  or  goddesses.  The  several  grades  of  g  a  a  a-s,, 
retinue,  of  Shiva  ;  p  a  r  s  h  a  d  a-s,  companions  of  Vishnu  ; 
T  s  h  i-s,  court-iers,  of  Brahma  ;  s  a  k  h  i-s,  comrades,"  of 
P6vi ;  a  n  u-c  h  a  r  a-s,  followers,  of  other  deities  ;  are  ex- 
amples. Correspondences  to  all  these  '  super-physical '  states- 
will  be  readily  seen  in  human  relations  in  earth-life.  Theo- 
sophical  tradition — as  to  the  souls  of  Chaldean  votaries  of 
various  stars  and  planets  going  away  to  them,  at  special 
astronomical  conjunctions,  by  means  of  special  rites  and 
ceremonies — also  illustrates  the  same  idea. 

The  difference  between  such  moksha-s  and  states  of 
svarga  or  PSvachan  or  SukhavatI,  heaven,  may  be  regarded  as 
one  of  degree  of  comparative  voluntartness  and  conscious 
control  in  the  former,  and  the  opposite  in  the  latter  ;  like  the 
differences  of  wakefulness  and  reverie. 

As  regards  '  Metaphysical  emancipation  from  all  tetters 
of  the  soul,  and  gain  of  Self-dependence  ',  it  should  be  noted 
that  '  Realisation  of  the  Reality,  the  Real,  the  Self ',  is  not 
merely  intellectual,  nor  merely  emotional,  nor  merely  actionai 
(physical,  volitional),  nor  merely  intuitional—but  is  all  these 
at  once.  A  person  learning  to  swim,  has  one  supreme  moment,, 
when  the  experience  comes  to  him  of  '  Sink  or  Swim  ',  and 
ends  in  'Swim,  and  not  Sink*.  The  travail,  the  soul -and- 
body-rending  of  the  spiritual  experience  of  '  Die,  clinging  to 
the  Finite  body,  or  Live,  clinging  to  the  Infinite  I ',  is  similar. 
As  Light  on  the  Path  describes  it,  solemnly,  beautifully,  the 
lower  nature  weeps,  the  heart  cries,  the  lower  self  frenziedly 
strives  to  preserve  its  separateness  ;  but  it  has  to  be  trans- 
formed, transmuted,  into  the  Higher  non-separative  all- 
inclusive  Self :  "  Seek  in  the  heart  the  source  of  evil  and 
expunge  it.  He  who  will  enter  upon  the  Path  must  tear  this 
thing  out  of  his  heart.  And  then  the  heart  will  bleed,  and 
the  whole  life  of  the  man  seem  to  be  utterly  dissolved.  This 
ordeal  must  be  endured  .  .  .  Fasten  the  energies  of  your  soul 
upon  the  task.  Live  neither  in  the  present,  nor  the  future, 
but  in  the  Eternal.  This  giant  weed  cannot  flower  there." 
The  illumination,  the  transfiguration,  comes  in  different  ways 
to  different  souls.  In  some,  the  intellectual  aspect  is  pre- 
dominant—rshis,  sages,  seers;  in  others,  the  emotional — 


P..CH.  XV]  SOME    MORE   TEXTS  455 

munis,  saints  ;  in  others,  the  actional  —  hatha-yogis,  ritualists. 
The  Ultimate  Goal  is  the  same  for  all. 

Following    quotations   supply   further  explanations   and 
illustrations  of  the  principles  indicated  above.* 

:  f^f-Rf  fcJ^TFirH  I     Yoga-sty™,  i.  19. 
:  5H,  3^%:  %3?4  I    ii,  25. 

iqic«f  «4-w^N  ^  i  "i,  49. 

iii,  50. 

i  iii,  55. 

:  i  wf  29. 


7M«f  .,  iv,  34. 

-f^^T^T:  ; 
3 


i  3  fcilifcf 

RTC9  «BI^3^F  51  ft^fcl   I     Vayu-Purana,  quoted  in 
Vachaspati's  Tffed  on  Yoga-bkashya,  i,  19. 


T:  IcW:  PjpfT:  I    Fd^^-^-.  Purvarcjha, 
Ch.  57,  and  Mafrya-P..  Ch.  143. 


:  ^  ^  %<?,  qai^r  i^r  ^^^TJTT  e55t^i  grffaf 


ChhAndogya,  2.20.2. 

ipr 


55S«s^T,  ST^  lp  WTO 


456  SOME    MORE   TEXTS  [SC.    OF 


l^ff  *nfcf  3Kfaq  I  Muktika  Up.,  i,  15-43. 


Bhavishya-Purana,  III,  Khapda  ivt  Ck.  7. 

mi?: 


:  i  B^^.  xi.  xx. 
*rt  i 
%  I,  'I^OT 


V&yu-Pur&nat.  Parva,,  Ch.  vii. 


p.,  CH.  xv]  KAIVALYA-AL(L-)  ONENESS  457 


ftsfri 

M&dhyamika  Su^ra,  Ch,  25,  verses  3  and  9. 

The  substance  of  the  above  quotations  is  this:  *  Kaivalya, 
Kevala-ta,  soleness,  soli-tude,  L-one-li-ness,  On-(e)-li-ness,  is 
the  final  transcendental  metaphysical  moksha.  I-On-(e)-ly- 
am  and-None-Else.  All-is-I,  I-am-All;not-an(y)-Other.  (Leave 
me  Al-one  !,  the  harrassed  person  cries  !)  Dis-junction  of 
a-vidya  (the  Error,  I-am-this)  from  I  is  Kaivalya.  The  soul 
that  has  become  sure  of  the  difference,  opposition,  mutual- 
other-ness,  of  Self  and  Nature  (Mot-Self,  Matter,  This,  with  its 
gunas,  sattva,  etc.)  grasps  all  (i.e.,  the  whole  of  This)  by  (one 
comprehensive  act  of  Thought,  and  therefore  rises  superior 
to  all.  (See  quotation  from  Charaka,  p.  131,  supra  ;  what  I 
really  do  not  care  for,  what  I  take  no  interest  in,  what  I  have 
have  cut  off  from  myself  —  that  has  no  power  over  my  mind, 
cannot  influence  me  in  any  way  ;  I  am  superior  to  his,  her,  or 
its  guiles  and  wiles  and  witcheries).  Then  that  soul's  condi- 
tion is  the  one  called  Dharma-megha  Samadhi,  meditation  in 
which  the  Dharma-s,  laws  of  Nature,  rain  down  (megha, 
mehati)  upon  the  passion-less  error-free  truth-seeing  mind  ; 
then  the  facts  and  laws  of  the  World-Process  appear  fully 
and  clearly  to  the  meditator.  When  the  soul  loses  its  interest 
in  and  is  tired  of  even  such  contemplation  and  enumeration  of 
Nature's  secrets,  pra-san-khyane  api  a-kusidasya  ;  then  it 
retires  into  Kaivalya.  When  sattva  becomes  equal  in  purity 
to  Self,  it  hierges  into  the  latter,  (Nature  dis-appears  into  Self, 
in  pralaya-sleep),  and  Kaivalya  remains.  When  guna-s, 
Nature's  triple  attributes,  have  no  momentum  left,  nothing  left 
to  do,  no  unexhausted  unfulfilled  desire,  no  object  to  strive  fc>r, 
then  they  dissolve  and  vanish,  and  Kaivalya  remains,  i.e., 
the  Principle  of  Consciousness,  established  in  It-Self.1 

Souls  which  still  cling  to  the  finest  super-subtle  aspects 
of  nature,  attain  to  the  condition  of  vi-deha-s,  bodiless  ones, 
and  prakrt  i-laya-s,  dissolved  into  Nature  (This);  (or  the 
state  of  bodiless  beings  who  have  become  dissolved  into 
Prakrti-  Nature)  ;  and  they  enjoy  this  condition  for  long  eons 
(though  there  is  no  time-marker  in  those  conditions  ;  (vide 
Mahatma  Letters,  reDeva-chan,  and  Avlchi,  pp.  194-197). 


458  JlVAN-MUKTl  AND  VIpfcHA-MUKTl  [SC.  OF 

Buddhist  books  also  mention  these.     Pnranas  amplify  details. 
It  accord  with  their  respective  aspirations,  souls  merge  into 

(a)  various  cosmic  or  systemic  indriyas,  senses,  of  the  systemic 
Ishvara   (corresponding    to  various  deva-s,  rshi-s,   etc.) ;  or 

(b)  into  the  systemic  b  h  u  t  a-s  or  t  a  J  t  v  a-s,  elements  ;  or  (c) 
into  the  principle  of  aham-kara,  egoism,   mere  pure — '  I  am  ' ; 
or  (d)  into  the  principle  of  mahat-buddhi,  universal  mind ;  or 
(e)  into  the  principle  of  Avyakta-Mula-Prakrti ;  or  attain  other 
states.  (Artists  of  a  high  order,  painters,  sculptors,  musicians, 
perfumers,  inventors  of  delicious  perfumes,  gustators,  creators 
of  exquisite  tastes,  tactators,  or  palpators,  devisers  of  delight- 
ful touches,   as  of  silks,  velvets,  plushes,  gossamers,  zephyrs, 
cool  or    warm    and   limpid    waters,   soft   emulsive   oils   and 
unguents — such  would  be  candidates  for  the  technical  moksha 
of  incjriya-chintakas,    sense-contemplators ;   great    scientists, 
for  that  of  bhuta-chintakas  ;   abstract  introverts  or,  lather, 
introspectors,  of  abhi-manika-s  or  ahamkara-chintakas  ,  pro- 
found comprehensive    thinkers   or    philosopheis,   of   buddhi- 
chintakas ;     meditators    on   the    unmanifest,    of     Avyakta- 
chintakas).     The    state    of    (a)  lasts  for   ten   manvantaras ; 
of  each   succeeding  one,  ten  times  longer  than  the  preceding. 
(These    figures  are   scarcely   to  be  taken  as    precise  !    They 
generally  imply  that  the  more  subtle   is  the  longer-lasting)* 
When   the    attributeless    Nirguna    Purusha   is   reached,    all 
measure  of  Time  disappears  '. 

*  The  states  of  various  gods  are  attained  by  appropriate 
yajiia-s  (mystery  sacrifices,  mystic  rituals,  etc,  ;%of  Virat  (a 
deity  below  Brahma),  by  renunciation  of  the  fruit  of  all 
actions ;  of  mergence  into  Prakrti,  by  vai-ragya,  revulsion 
from  the  world ;  of  Kaivalya,  by  knowledge.  These  are  the 
fiv%  gati-s,  goings,  courses,  ways,  that  lie  before  the  aspiring 
soul. 

4  Dwelling  in  the  world  of  the  worshipped  deity  is  known 
as  salokya-muk^i ;  attaining  general  resemblance  to  him  (in 
appearance,  in  way  of  living,  wearing  his  uni-form,  so  to  say), 
is  sa-rupya  ;  being  entrusted  with  some  of  his  powers  and 
possessions  (as  a  public  servant  is,  with  a  king's),  is  sarshti ; 
being  near  him,  (as  a  member  of  a  king's  entourage  or  per- 
sonal staff),  is  samipya  ;  being  identified  with  him,  con-join-ed 


P.,  CH.  XV]  OTHER  KINDS  OF  MOKSHA  459 

with  him,  (able  to  take  his  place  and  act  for  him,  on  occasion,, 
as  queen  or  son),  is  sayujya '. 

'  While  the  physical  body  lasts,  a  soul  that  has  achieved 
(metaphysical)  moksha,  is  called  jivan-mukta  ;  when  the  body 
falls  away,  it  becomes  vid6ha-mukta,  which  is  the  same  as- 
kaivalya-mukta.' 

c  Salokya  is  obtained  by  tapas-asceticism  ;  samipya,  by 
bhakti -devotion ;  sarupya  (and  sarshti),  by  dhyana-meditation  ; 
sayujya,  by  jnana-knowledge.  Each  succeeding  one  of  these 
is  twice  as  blissful  as  the  preceding.  Moksha  into  deva-s 
comes  to  an  end,  soon  or  late  ;  usually  at  the  end  of  the 
Manvantara.  Im-mortality,a-mrta-tva,  technically  means  con- 
scious existence  or  life  (in  a  superphysical  subtle  body,  till  the 
pralaya-dissolution-chaos  of  the  elements,  a-bhuta-samplava.r 

'  There  are  three  Paths — of  (a)  Karma,  way  of  works ; 
(b)  bhakti,  way  of  devotion  ;  (c)  jnana,  way  of  knowledge  ;  in 
other  words,  energism,  pietism,  gnosticism.  The  first  is  for 
those  who  are  not  yet  tired  of  the  world  ;  they  should  continue 
to  perform  all  right-and-due  acts  till  fatigue  begins  to  come 
upon  their  mind.  The  second  is  for  those  who  are  not  too 
strongly  attached  to  the  world,  not  yet  detached  from  it  ;  and 
have  generally  heard  of  me,  the  Self  of  all,  and  begun  to 
aspire  for  a  higher  life  (of  fine  feelings  and  fine  artistic 
thoughts  and  ideas  ) ;  the  third  is  for  those  who  are  surfeited 
with  the  world,  and  long  to  cease  from  its  restlessness,  and 
find  repeal  and  peace  ! ' 

'  Those  who  worship  the  devas,  go  to  them.  They  who- 
worship  Me,  the  Self,  the  God'in  all  and  o/all,  they  come  to 
Me.1  (Gitci). 

'  That  which  is  causeless,  is  not  believed  or  arrived  at  by 
gradual  steps  and  stages,  (but  flashes  forth  all  at  once),  is 
never  destroyed,  never  cut  short,  nor  is  ever-lasting  (in  time), 
has  no  end  and  no  beginning,  (but  Is,  once  for  all,  eternally) 
— that  is  Nirvana.  This  corn-motion,  this  restless  going-and- 
coming,  which,  believed  in  and  en-dur-ed  (as  taking  place  in 
dura-tion),  time,  is  Samsara,  World -Process  ;  this  same,  not 
believed  in,  not  accepted,  (as  true,  but  seen  at  Illusion,  as 


460     PERSONAL  &  IMPERSONAL  IMMORTALITY    [SC.  OF 

Mind's  Imaginary  Creation),  is  Nirvana.'  (Buddhist  Madhya- 
mika  Karika). 

"  The  insan-ul-kamil,  perfect  man,  is  a  man  who  has 
fully  realised  his  essential  oneness  with  the  Divine  Being  in 
whose  likeness  he  is  made  .  .  .  An  ecstatic  feeling  of  one- 
ness with  God  constitutes  the  wall,  (singular  of  aultya, 
saints).  He  unites  the  One  and  the  Many,  so  that  the 
universe  depends  on  him  for  its  continued  existence/'  (Here, 
the  singular  he  is  obviously  to  be  understood  as  standing  for 
a  numerous  class  of  souls,  in  the  same  way  as  when  one  may 
say  that  the  atoll  owes  its  existence  to  the  coral  insect, 
or  that  the  color  of  the  Red  Sea  is  due  to  a  microscopic 
plant).  "  He  brings  relief  to  the  distressed,  health  to  the 
sick,  children  to  the  childless,  food  to  the  famis'hed,  spiritual 
guidance  to  those  who  entrust  their  souls^o  his  care,  blessing 
to  all  who  invoke  Allah  in  his  name  "  ;'  Nicholson,  Studies 
in  Islamic  Mysticism,  p.  78. 

Jalal-ud-din  Rumi,  chief  of  Persian  Sufis,  says: 

Kulle  shayin  halikun  juz  Wajh-i-tJ. 
Gar  na-1  dar  Wajh-i-0,  hasti  ma  ju  ! 

'  All  things  are  mortal  save  the  Face  of  God. 
If  thou  hast  found  no  place  within  that  Face, 
Then  hope  not  thou  for  Immortality  !  ' 

Face,  here,  means  Being,  the  Being  of  th^  Eternal 
Self.  The  secret  of  preserving  personal  immortality  (of  the 
technical  kinds)  is  indicated  in  these  lines,  entirely  in  accord 
with  the  theosophical  view.  If  a  soul  deliberately  fixes  in  its 
memory,  attaches  to  its  higher  manas,  the  upper  half  of  the  fifth 
principle,  any  great  incidents,  great  loves,  and  other  noble 
emotions,  in  their  settings,  great  devotion  to  a  great  deity,  and 
thus  fixes,  shapes  and  crystallises,  conglomerates,  a  particular 
personality  or  individuality  or  '  ego-complex  ',  purposefully 
creates  a  centre  of  individuality,  and  attaches  that  strongly 
to  its  realization  of  the  Eternal  Self ;  then  the  Immortality 
of  the  latter  is  reflected  on  to  the  former  also.  V6(JanJa 
tradition  is  the  same ;  the  higher  associations  and  memories 
of  the  charama-d6ha,  'the  last  physical  body1,  may, 


P.,  CH.  XV]          EXPERIENCE    IN   MOKSHA  461 

at  the  will  of  the  liberated  soul,  be  carried  into  the  liberated 
condition.  The  '  last  body  '  here  is  the  same  as  the  '  a  n  - 
aga  m  ! '  of  Buddhism  ;  it  is  the  body  in  which  Self  is  seen 
and  realised  ;  after  the  falling  away  of  which,  there  is  no 
Wfi-conscious  rebirth,  karma  having  been  exhausted,  '  burnt 
up  by  Jnana  '  (Glta) ;  whatever  birth  there  is,  afterwards,  of 
that  jiva-soul,  is  conscious,  deliberately  chosen,  for  some 
particular  service  of  the  world. 

Yoga-Vasishtha  (ill,  ix)  gives  a  fine  description,  first  of 
the  jivan-mukta,  (some  of  the  verses  occur  in  Glta  also)  ;  and 
then  of  the  videha-mukta,  thus :  '  When  the  body  of  the 
jivan-mukta  falls  away  under  the  touch  of  time,  he  enters 
into  the  videha  condition.  As  space  he  holds  the  stars  within 
himself  ;  he  blazes  as  the  sun  ;  he  blows  as  the  breezes  ;  as 
the  earth  he  bears  the  mountains,  the  foiests,  the  races  of 
men  and  animals ;  *he  bears  fruit  in  the  trees,  he  flowers  in 
the  creepers,  he  flows  as  the  rivers,  he  surges  against  the 
shores  of  the  earth  as  the  mountainous  billows  of  the  ocean  ; 
he  rains  life-sap  into  the  vegetable  kingdom  as  the  moonlight ; 
he  kills  out  life  as  the  hala-hala  venom  :  he  illumines  the 
heavens  as  light,  and  merges  them  in  gloom  as  darkness ;  he 
lives,  wakes,  sleeps,  sorrows  and  rejoices,  as  the  minds  of 
all ;  he  is  each  atom  and  all  stars  at  once ;  indeed  he  is  now 
all  time,  all  space,  and  all  their  moving  contents !  .  .  .  But  if 
the  videha-mukta  becomes  thus  identical  with  the  World- 
Process,  is  that  deliverance,  or  is  it  but  a  deeper  immersion  in 
the  welter  of  illusion-maya  ?  ...  It  would  be  such  deeper 
sinking  were  it  not  accompanied  by  the  consciousness  that 
the  illusion  is  illusion,  that  there  is  No  Other-than-I,  that 
Brahma  is  An- Any?..!.'  In  the  last  statement  is  probably 
conveyed  the  distinction  between  the  videha  and  prakrti-laya 
of  Yoga-sutra  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  kaivalya  of  Yoga  or 
videha  of  Vedanta  on  the  other. 

The  ancient  tradition  of  Upanishats  and  Yoga-Vasishtha 
is  that  when  the  soul  turns  from  the  finite,  ethically,  emo- 
tionally, and  intellectually,  it  necessarily  finds  the  Infinite  and 
attains  moksha  ;  that,  thereafter,  the  individual  consciousness 
turns  more  and  more  into  the  cosmic  consciousness,  that  jiiana- 
vairagya-bhakti  are  but  the  inseparably  correlated  aspects  of 


462  FREEDOM    FROM    EGOISM  [SC.    OF 

€ach  other,  and  grow  towards  perfection  side  by  side.     As  said 
in  Bhagavata, 


:  \ 

*  Devotion  to,  and  vision  of  the  Supreme  Self,  and  turning 
away  from  all  Else  —  these  three  are  simultaneous/  And  in 
9Yoga-bhashya  (i,  16). 


'  The  highest  degree  and  fullness  of  knowledge  is  com- 
plete vai-ragya  '. 

That  this  tradition  has  never  died  and  is  living  still  may 
be  indicated  by  the  following  renderings  of  songs  in  Hindi 
and  Urdu,  the  first  by  Kabir,  and  the  two  others  by  recent 
Sufi  poets.  All  mystic  literatures  of  all  religions,  Vedanta, 
Tasaw-wuf,  Gnosticism,  Qabbala,  etc.,  are  on  the  same  lines. 

But  before  recording  those  renderings  of  mystic  songs, 
attention  may  be  called  to  a  very  serious  danger  of  terrible 
misunderstanding  which  lurks  under  the  word  Kaivalya, 
4  Solitude  ',  '  Oneness  ',  *  Soleness  '.  It  seems  to  be  the  last 
wile  of  the  Maya  of  the  '  lower  ego  ',  which  would  live  on  by 
masquerading  as  the  '  Higher  Universal  Ego  '  :  '  I  will  have 
moksha  for  myself  ;  why  should  I  care  for  others  '.  But 
M  o  k  s  h  a  is  freedom  from  this  very  egoism  ;  which  freedom  is 
nothing  else  than  Universal  all-others  -including  (not  excluding) 
Ego-ism.  Hence  mumuksha,  '  wish  for  moksha  ',  is  rightly 
understood  as  Universal  Love  incipient,  while  Moksha  is  that 
same  Universal  Love  full-blown  and  triumphant.  In  theoso- 
phical  literature,  stress  is  laid  on  the  fact  that  the  greatest 
qualification  for  '  initiation  '  is—  having  brought  others  along 
on  to  the  Path  and  helped  them  to  their  '  majority  '  of  soul. 
Glta  and  Bhagavata  and  other  scriptures  repeatedly  declare 
that  an  indispensable  qualification  for  the  aspirant  is  '  love 
and  active  service  of  all  beings  '.  The  gateway  of  the  Path 
is  v  a  i  -  r  a  g  y  a,  '  dis-passion  ',  but  it  has  to  be  a  '  passion- 
ately compassionate  dispassion  *.  Many  types  ofvai-ragya 
are  pictured  in  the  classic  legends  of  India.  The  purest  of 
the  pui%  is  that  of  Rama,  wholly  saftvika,  so  to  say,  (see 
Mystic  Experiences  or  Tales  from  Yoga-Vasishtha);  also  that 


P.,  CH.  XV]  KINDS   OF  VAIRAGYA  463 

of  Gautama  Buddha  ;  in  both  we  see  profoundly  compassion- 
ate wish  to  free  all"  living  things  from  their  misery.  Arjuna's 
revulsion  is  very  limitedly  sattvika,  mixed  with  much  rajas 
too  ;  his  compassion  is  only  for  his  kith  and  kin  and  relatives. 
Bhartr-hari's  is  rajasa-tamasa,  caused  by  disgust  with 
the  world  because  of  the  infidelity  of  his  queenj  but  it  is, 
later  on,  made  sattvika  by  his  intense  pursuit  of  Atma-vidya. 
Similar  is  the  case  of  the  merchant  Samadhi  (in  Durga-Sapta- 
Shatl),  who  was  driven  away  from  his  wealthy  home  by  his 
wife  and  sons,  because  they  wanted  to  be  unchecked  masters 
of  the  whole  property  ;  and,  at  the  end  of  three  years'  severe 
asceticism,  desired  from  the  goddess  Durga,  only  '  the  Supreme 
Knowledge  which  would  annihilate  egoism '.  Somewhat 
different  is  the  case  of  Samadhis'  companion,  king  Sura^ha  (in 
the  same  high  story),  who  desired  from  Purga,  long-lasting 
kingship,  and  is  to  become  the  reigning  Manu,  Savarni,  of  the 
next  Manvantara  ;  !  strictly  speaking,  perhaps  there  was  no 
vairagya  in  his  case,  but  a  sattvika-rajasa  wish  to  rule  justly 
and  give  happiness  to  the  people;  but  since  such  rule  is  not 
possible  without  good  grounding  in  Atma-Vidya,  the  rajas  in 
his  case  was  infused  with  a  high  degree  and  quality  of  sattva. 
Steadiest  and  also  pure  in  sufficient  degree  is  the  deliberate 

*  vairagya  '  of  the  son  (or  daughter)  of  Manu,  who,  having  per- 
formed the  duties  of  the  first  two  stages  of  life,  a  s  h  r  a  m  a  -  s, 

*  retires  '   from   the   world,  philosophically  ;  in  this  case  too,  it 
is  not  so  much    '  vairagya  f   in   the  sense  of  sudden  onset  of 
passion   or  compassion,  as,  indeed,  moksha  already  achieved, 
partly,  if  not  wholly  :    for  exposition  of  the  subject  of  ashra- 
mas,  see   The  Science  of  Social  Organisation,  or  the  briefer 
The  Science  of  the  Self, 

Dear  reader !,  if  you  happen  to  be  husband,  wife,  father, 
mother,  elder  relative,  super-ordinate  officer,  teacher,  in  the 
outer  world  ! — your  position  acquires  a  new  and  deeper  and 
more  wonderful  significance  for  you,  when  you  realise  this 
marvellous  fact,  that  the  necessary  condition  of  your  own 

1  This  writer  has  met  with  no  definite  statement  to  that  effect  in  the 
old  books ;  but  it  almost  seems  that  Suratha  and  Samadhi  were  born  as 
Maru  and  DeVapi  (Bhagavata,  XII,  ii)  ;  are  now  the  Theosophical 
Masters  Morya  and  Koothoomi ;  and  will  be  the  Manu  and  the  Buddha 
of  the  next  Race  and  Epoch. 


464      HELPING    OTHERS    ON   TO   THE   PATH         [SC.  OF 

advancement  is  that  you  help  your  youngers  and  dependents 
on  to  that  same  path  of  Progress.  The  realisation  becomes  a 
powerful  incentive  to  patience  and  tenderness  ;  for  you  now 
always  say  to  yourself  consciously  :  '  These  weaker  souls  have 
been  entrusted  to  me  that  I  may  help  them  on,  with  myself, 
to  that  ancient  Path,  '  sharp  as  the  razor's  edge ',  yet  also 
strewn  with  the  flowers  of  love  and  sympathy,  and  also  safe- 
guarded with  the  balustrades  of  holy  instructions,  by  the 
strong  and  watchful  hands  and  hearts  of  the  Elders  of 
the  Race  ! 


'  When  the  Soul's  inebriate, 
With  God,  'tis  in  no  mood  to  prate  ! 
The  gem,  when  found,  is  hid  away ; 
Why  make  display  day  after  day  ! 
The  balance  holds,  the  scales  don't  sway, 
What  need  the  goods  again  to  weigh  ! 
The  Swan  hath  found  the  Manasa-lake  ; 
Shall  it  again  to  puddles  take  ? 
That  wanton  barmaid  Consciousness 
Hath  drunken  love's-wine  to  excess 
Herself,  and  keeps  no  more  the  tale 
Of  how  much  and  to  whom  the  sale  ! 
Thy  Lover  Loved  is  there,  in  Thee ! 
Not  out,  but  in,  ope  eyes  and  see  !  ' 

KABIR 


*  No   bar  guards  His  palace-gateway,  no  veil  screens  His 

face  of  light, 
Thou,   O   Soul  !  by  thine  own  self -ness  art  enwrapt  in 

darkest  night ! 
Youth   is  gone,  and  age  is  on  thee,  yet  vain  dreams  still 

fill  thy  mind, 
If  thou  turn  not  from  thy  small  self,  how  shalt  thou  thy 

Great  Self  find  ? 
Taste  the  wonder  of  this  heart-meat,  as  it  burneth  more 

and  more, 


P.,    CH.   XV]  MYSTIC    ECSTASIES  4J55 

Through    life's  ocean -brine  there  spreadeth  savour  sweet 

from  shore  to  shore !    . 

But  the  names  differ,  beloved !,  thou,  I,  all  are  only  One, 
In  the  firefly  gleams  the  self-same  beam  that  blazeth  in 

the  Sun ! 
Since  He  knows  all  art  ^nd  science,  we  too  may  invent 

and  know  ; 
In  the  human  heart  is  hidden  more  than  all  the  Scriptures 

show !  x 

Thou  the  music  in  the  song-bird,  Thou  the  fragrance  in 

the  rose, 
Thou   the  Goal  that  all  are  seeking,  Thou  the  Self  that 

each  one  knows  ! 
Why,    and    Where,  art   Thou  in  hiding,   My  Beloved !, 

come  to  Me  ! 
Every    year-long    moment    brings  thy   Lover  desperate 

agony  ! 
Not   without  Thy-self  permittest  may  the  strongest  win 

to  Thee, 

Out   of    this   Turmoil  and  Tumult  of  our  Life's   Tem- 
pestuous sea !  ' 

QARlN 


*  Behind  the  mask  of  every  face  He  hid — 
God,  very  God  ;  and  I — I  knew  it  not. 
The  Right  had  fallen  wrongly  into  Wrong, 
The  True  into  Untruth — I  knew  it  not. 
The  Lord  of  all  the  Worlds — in  mud  and  mire 
He  begged  from  door  to  door — I  knew  it  not. 
On  every  page  of  scripture  He  had  writ, 
'  Nearer  am  I  to  Thee  than  time  own  heart,' 
But  I — I  could  not  read — I  knew  it  not. 
In  temple,  church,  and  mosque  I  sought  for  long, 
The  gold  hid  in  the  '  mine  *  (Me) — I  knew  it  .not. 
The  moon  that  I  had  seen  and  had  forgot — 
The  clouds  had  hid  the  moon — I  knew  rt  not. 
The  rust  of  selfishness  o'erlay  my  heart, 
I  had  forgot  my-Self — I  knew  it  not. 
I  sought  the  Wonder  in  the  Noise  Outside 
30 


466  SUMMATION  [SC.   OF 

It  lay  still  in  My  Heart — I  knew  it  not. 
But  now,  my  Soul,  my  God,  my  Self,  my  All, 
Thou  magic-maker  of  this  vast  mirage, 
Juggler  of  joys  and  sorrows,  loves  and  hates, 
Thee  sole  I  (know)  An-other  (I  know)  Not  !• 
I  know  I  only  am,  alJ^Else  is  Naught ! 
I  only  is,  and  all  This  Else  is  Not ! 
I  know  I  am  but  I,  '  I-(am)-This-Not.' 

HASAN  SH&H 


CHAPTER  XVI 

SUMMATION ' 

ALL  the  main  facts  or  rather  principles  connected  with 
jivas-souls  and  atoms-bodies  have,  perhaps,  been  general- 
ly brought  out  and  summed  up  now.  One  more  point 
deserves  some  words  :  The  distinction  between  Universal 
and  Singular,  and  the  Relation  between  them,  mentioned 
before.  This  triplet  belongs  equally  to  jivas  and  atoms ; 
is,  thus,  v  part  of  the  Summation  of  the  World-Process ; 
and  could  not  well  be  discussed  before  some  general 
notion  had  been  gained  of  the  distinction  between  '  the 
ideal  world  '  and  '  the  real  world  ' ;  the  former  of  which 
is,  as  it  were,  a  complete  and  standing  picture  or  plan  of 
the  stream  of  successive  events  which  make  up  the  latter ; 


P.,  CH.  XVI]    SUBJECTIVE-OBJECTIVE  CATEGORIES  467 

and  so  occupies,  to  this  latter,  the  position  of  universal  to 
singular. 

The  aphorisms  of  Nyaya,  as  we  now  have  them, 
classify  and  describe  the  constituents  of  Samsara  in  their 
subjective  aspect,  i.e.,  in  terms  of  cognition,  as  the  means 
of  knowledge.1  The  aphorisms  of  Vaisheshika  classify 
them  as  objects  of  knowledge,  in  their  objective  aspect,  in 
terms  of  the  cognised.  Thus,  Kanada,  author  of  the 
Vaisheshika  aphorisms,  states  that  there  are  six  primary 
padarthas  '  meanings  ot  words  ',  things,  i.e.,  objects,  viz., 
dravya,  guna,  karma,  samanya,  vish£sha,  and  samavaya. 
The  first  three  have  been  discussed  before,  (pp.  284-312 
supra).  The  next  three  mean,  respectively,  the  *  universal 
or  general,'  the  '  singular  or  special,'  and  the  *  relation  of 
inseparable  co-inherence  '. ' 

As  often  indicated  before,  the  One  true  Universal  is 
Pratyag- Atma ;  the  Many,  the  manifold  Singular,  the 
Multitude  of  Singulars,  is  Mula-Prakrti ;  and  the  peculiar 
bond  that  exists  between  them  is  the  real  primal 
s  a  m  a  v  a  y  a-s  a  m  ba  n  d  h  a,  literally,  the  *  firm  bond  of 
going  into,  merging  into,  pervasion  of,  each  other ', 

1  '  Nis-shreyasa,  Summum  Bonum,  Highest  Happiness,  Moksha,  can 
be  achieved  only  by  True  Knowledge  of  the  essential  nature  of  (1)  the 
Means,  tests,  proofs,  evidences,  measures  (i.e.,  measur-ers),  ascertainers, 
of  true  knowledge;  (2)  the  Knowable,  the  to-be-known,  to-be-ascer- 
tained ;  (3)  Doubt ;  (4)  Purpose  or  Motive  (of  enquiry  or  argument) ;  (5) 
Familiar  Example ;  (6)  Established  Tenet,  accepted  maxim  or  principle  or 
fact ;  (7)  the  Members  of  a  Syllogism ;  (8)  Inference  (especially  of  a 
refutative  or  repudiative  or  eliminative  kind)  ;  (9)  Decided  Conclusion ; 
{10,  11,  12)  Three  kinds  of  discussion  (according  to  three  kinds  of 
purpose) ;  (13,  14,  15,  16)  Four  kinds  of  Fallacies.  It  should  be  noted 
that  Moksha  is  the  principal  aim,  and  that  the  nature  of  the  Self  is  the 
first  and  foremost '  to-be-ascertained ' :  Nyaya-sutrat  the  very  first. 


468  CATEGORY   OF   '  CO-INHERENCE  '  [SC.    OF 

>» 

4  co-inherence  '.  Beside  this  One  Universal  l  there  is, 
strictly  speaking,  no  other  Universal,  but  only  *  generals  \ 
So,  beside  the  (apparently,  comparatively)  final  (pseudo- 
ultihiate  infinitesimal)  singulars  of  Etat-'  This  '  a  there  is 
no  other  real  singular,  but  only  species  or  '  specials  '.* 
The  characteristic  of  these  '  generals  '  and  '  specials  '  ot 
'particulars'  is  that  each  one  of  them  is  general  to 


satta-samSnya,    'Universal   Being,'   <?C-  or 

!,  para-  or  antya-sSmanya,    '  final  or  ultimate  universal/   or  1^- 
r,  Para-jati.  summum  genus. 

2  ^l^lf^tt5!,  antya-vishesha,  <?C-f«l$ft,  para-visb£sha,   ^IT-fttft* 
charama  vishesha,  '  final,  or  extreme  or  ultimate  particularity.  ' 

3  <TOK3rfti  par-Spara-jati. 

Extremes  meet.  Para-samanya  and  para-  vishesha  are  identical  ,•  as 
Infinite  and  Infinitesimal  ;  Brahma  and  jlva.  As  said  before,  a  final 
ultimate  parama-anu  as  para-vish£sha  is  a  '  myth/  an  imaginary  concept, 
a  convention,  devised  for  practical  convenience.  With  reference  to 
samavaya,  some  observations  of  Max  Muller  are  worth  quoting.  They 
are  taken  from  his  Six  Systems  of  Indian  Philosophy  (collected  works). 
pp.  376-7,  and  447;  that  book,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  continues  to  be  the 
most  clear,  compact,  concise,  correct,  and  comprehensive  work,  on  its 
subject.  "  Samavaya  or  intimate  connection  is  a  very  useful  name  for  a 
connection  between  things  which  cannot  exist,  one  without  the  other, 
such  as  cause  and  effect,  parts  and  whole,  and  the  like.  It  comes  very 
near  to  a-vina-bhava,  *>.,  the  not-without  being,  and  should  be  carefully 
distinguished  from  mere  conjunction  or  succession  "  .  .  .  .  "  (This) 
category  .  .  ,  is  peculiar  to  Indian  philosophy.  It  is  translated  in- 
hesion or  inseparability  .  .  .  It  is  different  from  mere  connection,  as 
between  horse  and  rider.  .  .  .  There  is  samavaya  between  threads  and 
eloth,  (the  ideas  of)  father  and  son,  two  halves  and  a  whole,  cause  and 
effect,  substance  and  qualities,  thought  and  word,  the  two  being  inter* 
dependent  and  therefore  inseparable.  Though  this  relationship  is  known  in 
non-Indian  philosophies,  it  has  not  received  a  name  of  its  own,  though 
such  a  term  might  have  proved  very  useful  in  several  controversies  "  ;  as 
those,  we  may  add,  of  nominalism,  realism,  conceptualism,  etc.  A-yuta- 
si^dhi,  of  Yoga  philosophy,  seems  to  be  much  the  same  as  samavaya  or 
a-vina-bhiva.  R£  the  last,  Max  Muller's  translation  would  perhaps  be 
more  intelligible  if  read  as  '  not-being-without,'  i.e.,  '  each  being  not  able 
to  exist  without  the  other  *  . 


P.   CH.   XVl]  A   ONE   IS   ALSO   A   MANY  469 

lower  specials,  and  at  the  same  time  special  to  a 
higher  general.  In  other  words,  while  Pratyag-atma  is 
the  principle  of  the  Universal,  and  Mula-prakrti  the 
principle  of  the  singular,  the  jlva-atom  is  individual  or 
particular,  combining  and  reconciling  in  itself  both  uni- 
versal and  singular. 

Difficulty  in  the  expression  of  this  thought  is  occasion- 
ed by  the  fact  that  while  the  meaning  of  universal  and 
general  and  special  is  comparatively  fixed  and  free  from 
ambiguity,  such  is  not  the  case  with  the  significations 
of  singular  and  individual  and  particular,  as  the  words 
are  currently  used.1  The  underlying  philosophical  idea 
of  their  mutual  relation  being  indeterminate,  the  express- 
ion is  naturally  doubtful  also.  And  this  very  haziness 
of  the  idea  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  long-lasting  dispute 
between  the  doctrines  of  nominalism  and  realism  and 
their  various  modifications.  As  a  fact,  in  the  world 
around  us,  we  actually  find  neither  the  true  One,  nor  the 
true  Many  or  Not-One,  by  itself.  What  we  do  'find 
always,  instead,  is  a  one  which  is  also  a  many  at  the 
same  time.*  We  distinguish  between  the  two  by  em- 
phasising within  ourselves  the  jlva-aspect,  i.e.,  the  aspect 
of  self-consciousness  and  Pratyag-atma,  and,  from  the 

1  An  instance  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  divers  arrangements  mad* 
of  the  triplets  of  the  categories  of  Kant ;  thus  at  p.  221  of  Schwegler's 
History  of  Philosophy,  the  triplet  of  '  totality,  plurality,  and  unity ' 
is  arranged  in  an  order  the  reverse  of  that  followed  in  the  original 
of  Kant. 

2  The  pen  with  which,  the  table  on  which,  the  house  in  which, 
I  am  writing,  each  of  these  is  a  one  ;  but  is  also  composed  of  many,  very 
many,  parts. 


470    SUMMUM  GENUS,  MINUTUM  INDIVIDUUM    [SC.   OF 

standpoint  thereof,  beholding  the  Not-Self  in  juxta- 
position to  and  yet  in  separation  from  the  Self.  The 
facts,  so  viewed,  are  clear.  One  and  the  many,  abstract 
and  concrete,  general  and  special,  universal  and  singular, 
are  just  as  inseparable  as  back  and  front.  They  are 
inseparable  in  fact  as  well  as  in  thought  (which  also  is 
a  fact,  though  manufactured  in  subtler  material,  as,  on 
the  other  hand,  every  *  fact '  is  a  '  thought/  of  '  consci- 
ousness ',  and  existing  by  and  in  consciousness.)  But 
the  phraseology  requires  to  be  settled  in  accordance  with 
this  fact  and  thought.  The  settlement  may  perhaps  be 
made  thus  :  The  word  '  universal '  should  be  confined  to 
the  true  One,  Pratyag-atma,  and  to  the  modifications  and 
manifestations  of  its  unity,  viz.,  the  laws  of  the  '  pure  ' 
reason,1  the  abstract  laws  and  principles  which  underlie 
the  details  of  the  World-Process  and  are  as  it  were  the 
transformation  of  the  Pratyag-atma  itself  in  association 
with  the  diversity  of  Mula-prakrti.  The  word  '  singular  ' 
should  similarly  be  confined  to  the  pseudo-true  Many,  the 
pseudo-finally  separate.  As  the  universal  is  the  One  which 
includes  and  supports  all,  so  the  singular  is  the  exactly 
opposite  one  that  would  exclude  all  else  ;•*  it  indicates 
the  pseudo-ultimate  constituents  of  the  many,  which  may 
well,  for  practical  convenience,  be  technically  called 
*  atom/  '  anu  '  or  *  param-anu  *.3  For  that  which  is 

1  The  sattva-f actor  of  Mahat-Bud^hi,   the  cognitional  element  or 
aspect  of  'the  Cosmic  Mind,  Cosmic  Intelligence.     Cf.  Dharma-m6gha^ 
p.  441  supra. 

2  ,  para-vishSsha  or   S^ft^Cf,  antya-vish£sha. 


P.,    CH.  XVl]  THE    DEFINITE  471 

between  these  two  ones,  a  something  which  is  a  one  and 
a  many  at  the  same  time,  a  whole  composed  of  parts,  the 
word  '  particular  '  seems  appropriate.  Such  a  '  parti- 
cular '  would  be  *  general  '  (an  imitation  of  the  universal) 
to  those  it  includes  and  supports  and  holds  together,  and 
'  special  '  (an  imitation  of  the  singular)  to  that  by  which 
it  itself  is  supported  along  with  other  co-particulars  ;  all 
so-called  inanimate  substances,  all  sheaths  and  bodies 
of  the  so-called  animate,  all  objects  of  cognition  or  desire 
or  action,  all  genera  and  species,  types,  sub-types  and 
archetypes,  would  thus  be  '  particulars  '.  The  word 
1  individual  '  is  peculiar  ;  it  would  be  useful  if  it  were 
confined  to  the  jlva-atom,  which  combines  the  true  uni- 
versal and  the  pseudo-true  singular,  rather  than  only 
generals  and  specials.  It  is  not  Pratyag-atma  only,  nor 
Mula-prakrti  only,  but  both;  and  jet,  because  of  the 
unfixable,  in-de-finite,  pseudo-infinite  nature  of  the  atom, 
the  jlva-atom  may  be  called  a  particular  also.  When- 
ever and  wherever  we  may  take  an  actual  individual  jlva- 
atom,  the  atom-portion  of  it,  its  sheath,  will  be  found  to 
be  a  '  definite  '  that  merges  on  both  sides  into  the  '  in- 
de-finite  '  ;  it  is  an  infinitesimal  fraction,  on  the  one 
hand,  of  a  pseudo-infinite  universe,  and,  on  the  other, 
it  is  a  pseudo-infinite  multiple  of  infinitesimal  fractions. 
'  All  things,  all  beings,  all  thoughts,  feels,  acts,  begin  and 
also  end  in  the  in-de-finite  ;  they  are  de-finite  only 
midway.'  J 


%  a.  28. 


472  BETWEEN   TWO    INDEFINITES  [SC.    OF 

If  we  were  defining  the  main  items  of  the  World- 
Process  in  terms  of  the  Absolute,  the  jlva-atom  would  be 
called  the  individualised  Absolute,  and  a  world-system  a 
particularised  one  ;  the  Absolute  itself  being  then  com- 
paratively called  the  universal  Absolute.  But  in  view  of 
the  statements  made  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  it 
would  appear  to  be  almost  more  consistent  and  syste- 
matic to  call  the  jlva-atom  a  singularised  Absolute.  Yet, 
though,  in  strictness,  this  would  be  the  better  descrip- 
tion, still,  for  all  practical  purposes  of  metaphysical 
research  —  for  the  reasons  for  which  the  jlva-atom  may 
be  regarded  as  a  particular  also  —  it  is  more  useful  to 
employ  the  expression  '  individualised  Absolute  '.  The 
1  individuality  '  of  the  jiva  in  the  jlva-atom  is  more  pre- 
dominant than  the  '  singularity  '  of  the  atom  therein  for 

Tennyson's  "  Who  knows  !  From  the  great  deep  to  the  great  deep 
he  goes,"  is  an  expression,  in  poetical  and  emotional  form,  of  the  same 
intellectual  'truth.  All  the  World-Process,  the  world-ex-istence,  is  a 
becoming  ;  all  life  is  a  passing  ;  every  river  is  a  flowing  ;  every  sensation 
is  a  feeling.  Splendour  is  the  coming  in  and  at  the  same  time  the  going 
out  of  wealth.  Stoppage  means  sinking  into  pralaya.  Too  much  care 
kills  its  object  and  prevents  it  from  fulfilling  its  purpose  and  achieving 
its  destiny.  Beauty,  too,  is  for  due  use,  and  use  makes  more  beauty. 
Existence,  manifestation,  is  in  and  by  action.  Every  atom,  and  every 
psychosis,  is  a  (dual)  focussing,  a  vortex,  in  a  cont  inuutft^  of  '  ether,  f 
and  of  '  general  sensation  '  or  '  affective  tone  '  or  '  volitional  tension  '.  • 


Yoga-V&sishtha,  III,  xiv,  47. 

'  That  which  comes  between  is  and  is  not,  existent  and  non-exist- 
ent, is  what  is  meant  by  the  word  bhavati,  becomes  \  i.e.,  between 
Being  and  nothing  is  Becoming.' 

"The  Anglican  noble,  in  a  well-known  passage  of  Bede,  compares 
the  life  of  man  to  the  flight  of  a  bird  which  darts  quickly  through  a 
lighted  hall,  out  of  darkness,  and  into  darkness  again  ";  Inge,  Chris- 
tian Mysticism,  p.  251.  Many  other  poets  and  writers  of  note,  of  east 
and  west  have  depicted  the  thought  with  various  examples. 


P.,  CH.  XVl]       UNIVERSAL    AND     INDIVIDUAL  473 

such  purposes.  Attention  has  been  drawn  before,  to  the 
fact  that  the  Instinct  behind  Language  has  given  to  both 
jiva  and  atom,  the  same  adjectival  name,  '  in-divid-ual f, 
*  un-divid-able  ',  '  in-divis-ible  ',  '  a-tom  '. 

On  the  above  view,  recognising  the  nature  and  the 
necessity  of  the  connection  between  the  One  and  the 
Many,  it  becomes  easy  to  see  what  the  true  mean  of  re- 
conciliation is  between  nominalism  and  realism.  Every 
object,  being  a  jiva-atom,  or  a  conglomerate  of  jlva- 
atoms  (see  pp.  347-352  supra,  regarding  '  individualities 
within  individualities),  is  general  and  special,  abstract 
and  concrete,  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Therefore, 
when  the  new-born  infant  opens  its  eyes  for  the  first 
time,  it  necessarily  sees  the  genus  '  woman  '  as  well 
,as  the  species  '  (individual)  mother,'  at  one  and  the 
same  time.  As  soon  as  we  see  any  object,  we  see  its 
generality  as  well  as  its  speciality.1  Whenever  we  see 
a  one,  we  see  also  at  once  the  possibility,  inherent  in  the 
one,  of  a  pseudo-infinity  of  that  one,  i.e.,  of  such  ones. 
The  One  is  universal ;  a  one  reproduces  the  One ;  the 
universality  of  the  true  One  reappears  as  the  generality 

and  the  pseudo-infinity  of  the  illusive  one.2 

1  The  fact  has  an  important  bearing  on  methods  of  education. 
3  In  this  fact  is  contained  the  principle  of  the  validity  of  generalisa- 
tions, of  induction,  o^ff^f,  vyapti,  and  not  in  any  repetitions  of  experi- 
ments ;  these  only  help  to  eliminate,  by  means  of  concomitant  variations, 
i.e.,  agreements  and  differences,  3f?«R,  anvaya,  and  sqf^^>?  vyati-re*ka, 
the  accidental  from  the  essential  qualities.  This  fact,  of  the  instantaneous 
seeing  of  the  '  general  '  in  the  '  special  ',  is  named  SKSfflf^  pratv-Ssat$i, 
in  the  '  new  '  Nyaya,  started  by  Gange*sha  (circa  12th  century  A.C.) 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  considerations  put  forward  in  the 
text  deal  with  one  aspect  of  the  dispute  between  nominalism  and  realism. 


474  ETERNAL   MAN    AND    WOMAN  [SC.  OF 

This  fact  is  embodied  in  the  grammatical  affixes  : 
'  ness,'  '  ship,'  '  hood  '  (in  English),  and  '  ta  '  or  '  tva  r 
(in  Samskrt),  expressive  of  the  abstract  and  of  quality, 
which  can  be  added  on  to  any  noun  or  adjective.  It  is 
significant  that  abstractness  and  generality  should  belong 
to,  and  be  expressible  exclusively  in,  terms  of  quality  ; 
for  quality  or  guna  corresponds  to  jnana,  which  in  turn 
corresponds  specially  with  Pratyag-atma,  the  one  uni- 
versal and  abstract.  Abstraction,  praty-ahara,  indeed, 
means  *  drawing  away  from  others  '  and  reduction  into 
terms  of  Pratyag-atma,  making  a  one  and  therefore  a 
pseudo-wmversal,  of  that  which  was  mixed  up  with  and 
part  of  the  many.  So  too,  the  concrete  is  mostly  express- 
ed in  terms  of  motion  or  karma,  which  corresponds  to 
kriya,  which  corresponds  to  Not-Self  ;  as  witness  the 
fact  that  so  many  names  or  nouns  originate  in 

viz.,  the  one  asserting  that  abstract  concepts  do  not  exist  apart  from 
concrete  things,  the  other  that  they  do.  In  another  aspect  also,  about 
the  relation  between  thought  and  language,  notions  and  names,  the 
dispute  may  be  reconciled  by  the  same  considerations.  The  two  are 
inseparable,  though  distinguishable  ;  as,  indeed,  all  the  contents  of  the 
World-Process  are  necessarily  inseparable  from  each  other,  because  held 
together  in  and  by  the  One  Consciousness,  though  endlessly  distinguish- 
able from  each  other,  because  held  together  by  that  Consciousness  as 
Many  Mula-Prakrti.  In  the  course  of  a  beautiful  hymn  to  Purusha  and 
IVakrti,  as  Eternal  Man  and  Woman,  ever  inseparate,  Bh&gavaja,. 
VI.  xix,  13,  says  : 


fl  ssRiftfl  WOT,  tft: 

,  SUOT:  c 


'  She  is  manifestation  ;  Thou  the  Final  Cause  thereof.  She  is 
sense  and  body  ;  Thou  the  Soul  behind.  She  is  name  and  form  ;  Thou 
the  basic  Thought.' 


P.,   CH.   XVl]  GENERA   AND   SPECIES  475 

verbs.1  Finally,  the  relation  of  the  two  is  embodied  in 
diravya,  substance,  noun  or  name  ;  it  combines  act  and  fact, 
characteristic  action  and  quality,  in  a  '  thing,'  and  corres- 
ponds to  the  hidden  Negation-Shakti  that  manifests  its 
various  forms  in  the  declensional  changes  of  termination 
of  the  noun  (in  the  older  languages  ;  for  the  separate 
prepositions  of  modern  languages  are  artificial  separations 
of  these  terminational  affixes). 

From  these  observations  it  should  be  clear  that  the 
universal  9  is  One ;  the  singular,  Many ;  and  genera- 
species,  pseudo-infinite;  and  that  everywhere  and  always 
there  is  the  possibility  of  distinguishing  the  abstract  from 
the  concrete  by  the  mere  addition  of  '  ness  '  to  the  latter ; 
in  other  words,  by  concentrating  the  oneness  and  uni- 
versality of  the  Self  upon  and  into  the  concrete,  and  so 
of  discovering  an  endless  series,  in  an  endless  gradation, 
of  concepts,  ideas,  types,  archetypes,  etc,  Plato  seems 
to  have  spoken  of  only  one  archetypal  world,  while  the 
legitimate  inferences  from  the  logion  require  a  pseudo- 
infinity  of  such,  higher  and  lower,  in  an  endlessly  as- 
cending and  descending  scale.  The  logion  itself,  it  should 
be  noted,  and  the  laws  and  principles  that  proceed  from 

1  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  true  that  verbs  also  are  formed,  later  on, 
from  nouns ;  but  fewer,  apparently.  From  cognition,  action ;  from 
action,  cognition  ;  this  is  Nature's  circle. 

1  As  noted  before,  Vaisheshika  calls  the  highest,  or,  rather,  the  one 
true  universal,  by  the  name  of  universal  being,  fl^ffflRfWT,  sa(ta- 
sScianya,  which,  plainly,  is  the  objective  name  for  the  Self ;  and  the 
lowest  or  true  singular  or  fst$ft;  vishesha,  it  calls  anu  or  atom,  which  is 
but  another  name  for  £ta£-This. 


476  TYPES   AND    ARCHETYPES  [SC.    OF 

it  directly,  can  scarcely  be  spoken  of  as  types  or  arche- 
types ;  for  types  and  archetypes  are  comparatively  de- 
finite objects,  abstract-concrete,  (thoTigh  with  the  aspect 
of  abstractness  or  generality  and  commonness  inclining  to 
be  predominant),  while  laws  and  principles  are  only 
relations  between  objects. 

With  these  remarks  we  may  bring  to  a  close  the 
observations  regarding  the  general  features  of  jlvas  and 
atoms,  and  conclude  this  work  with  a  re-statement  of  the 
Summation  of  the  World-Process  in  Consciousness.1 

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  seen  how  the 
endless  and  apparently  quite  disconnected  diversity  of 
atom  beside  atom  and  atom  within  atom,  plane  beside 
plane  and  plane  within  plane,  world  beside  world  and 
world  within  world,  individuality  beside  individuality  and 
individuality  within  individuality,  collapses  together  into 
an  ordered  juggler's  box  within  box  under  the  touch  of 
the  principle  of  the  ever-expanding  Individual  Consci- 
ousness, which,  taking  its  source  in  the  Universal  Consci- 
ousness of  Pratyag-atma,  is  incessantly  threading  together 
all  the  otherwise  disconnected  beads  of  Mula-prakrti. 

The  more  the  nature  of  Consciousness  is  pondered 
on,  the  more  the  nature  of  the  jiva  becomes  clear.  As 
the  most  significant  definition  of  the  atom  is  that  it  is  a 
persisting-point,  i.e.,  a  line  or  sphere  of  objectivity,  of 
unconsciousness,  in  its  triple  aspect  of  cognisability, 

1  More  detailed  consideration  of  the  three  aspects  of  the  jiva's  life, 
viz.,  cognition,  desire,  action,  will  be  found  in  The  Science  of  the 
Emotions,  The  Science  of  Social  Organisation,  The  Science  of  the 
Self,  and  Pranava-vada  or  the  Science  o/  the  Sacred  Word. 


P.,  CH.  XVl]      DIRECT   VS.   INDIRECT   KNOWLEDGE   477 

desirability,  and  movability,  guna,  dravya,  and  karma, 
so  the  most  significant  definition  of  the  jiva  is  that 
it  is  a  persisting-point,  i.e.,  a  line  or  sphere  of  consci- 
ousness and  subjectivity,  in  its  triple  aspect  of  cogniser, 
desirer,  and  actor.  Combining  these  two  definitions,. 
a  jlva-atom  might  be  defined  as  the  individualised 
Absolute  (thus  bringing  out  the  true  significance  of 
the  current  saying,  that  '  jiva  is  verily  Brahma  and 
naught  else  '  x)  ;  a  particular  number  of  them  may  be  said 


'  I  will  tell  you  in  a  single  sentence  what  has  been  expounded  in  ten 
million  books,  viz.,  Brahma  is  true,  the  moving  world  is  an  illusion,  jiva 
is  Brahma  and  Naught  Else  '.  But  more  is  wanted  ;  realisation  is  in  the 
first  person,  not  the  third.  The  third  person  is  outside  me  ;b\vhat  I  want 
is  the  first  person,  within  me,  my-Self  . 


3*91  5        \?,  STSfTeSJlT:  fl 

4  Brahma  is  —  this  is  but  indirect  knowledge  ;*  Brahma  am,  I  am 
Brahma  —  this  is  direct  realisation  '.  All  philosophies,  all  religions, 
mysticisms,  gnosticisms,  sciences,  arts,  need  to  be  tested  by  this  supreme 
experience  and  reduced  into  terms  of  this  First-hand  Direct  Knowledge. 
*  I-This-Not  '.  The  work  is  well  worth  doing  on  an  extensive  scale  —  the 
reduction  of  different  philosophers'  views  into  terms  of  this  Logion  ; 
(see  pp.  199-204,  supra).  Thus,  the  Arabian  Sufi,  Jili,  (14th  century  A.D. 
in  his  work  Ins&n-ul-K&mil,  '  The  Perfect  Man  ',  and  Hegel,  use  very 
similar  expressions  in  developing  their  ontology.  The  former  speaks  of 
"  The  Dhat  developing  an  inward  and  an  outward  aspect,  am&  and 
ahadiyya,  and  ahadiyya  again  developing  two  aspects,  huviyya  or  that- 
ness  and  Aniyya  or  I-ness  ;  and  the  latter,  of  '  The  self-sundering  of  the 
Idea  ',  '  the  self-diremption  of  the  Absolute  ',  '  the  absolute  going  out  into 
its  opposite,  and  then  returning  into  itself  '  ,  'the  unity  of  consciousness 
holds  within  itself  in  equilibrium  the  vital  antagonism  of  opposites, 
thought  and  thing,  mind  and  matter,  spirit  and  nature,  which  seems  to 
rend  the  world  asunder  '.  .  ."  ;  (Nicholson,  Studies  in  Islamic  Mysti- 
cism, 81-97).  All  this  becomes  luminous,  freed  from  misty  obscurity, 
only  when  we  translate  it  into  terms  of  4  I-This-Not  \  That  philoso- 
phers and  mystics  seem  to  differ  from  each  other,  is  only  because  they 


478        UNIVERSAL  AND    INDIVIDUAL,   SAME       [SC.   OF 

to  constitute  a  particularised  Absolute,  or  a  world -system, 
a  cosmos  that  also  appears  like  the  individualised  Abso- 
lute to  be  complete  in  itself ;  and  the  totality  of  these 
individualised  and  particularised  Absolutes,  to  make  up 
the  universal  or  truly  complete  Absolute,  Brahma ; 
all  this  not  interfering,  in  the  slightest  degree,  with  the 
fact  that  individual  or  (strictly  speaking)  singular,  parti- 
cular, and  universal  are  not  three  but  absolutely  identical, 
literally  one  and  the  «ame. 

An  illustration  may  perhaps  help  to  make  these 
statements  a  little  clearer.  Suppose  that  life,  that  the 
World-Process,  consists  of  ten  experiences :  that  is  to 
say,  of  five  sensations,  each  dual  as  pleasurable  and  pain- 
ful, so  that  the  two  factors  of  each  such  pair,  when 
balanced  against  each  other,  neutralise  each  other  and 
leave  behind  a  cipher,  as  equal  credit  and  debit  in  a 
banker's  account  may  do.  One  self,  going  through  these 
experiences  in  one  fixed  order  of  time,  space,  and  motion, 
would  exhaust  them  all  comparatively  quickly,  and  would 
form  one  individuality,  marked  and  defined  by  the  ten 
experiences  in  that  one  order,  thus  making  one  line  of 
consciousness.  But  let  us  now  vary  the  order  of  the  ten 
experiences  ;  this  mere  variation  of  order,  it  will  be  seen, 
implies  a  variation  in  the  times,  spaces,  and  movements 
connected  with  each  item  of  experience.  If  we  vary  the 
order,  then,  |in  all  possible  ways,  but  without  decreasing 
the  number  of  the  experiences,  we  have  at  once  orders  to 

use  terms  of  the  third  person,  'he',  'she*,  'it',  instead  of  the  first 
person,  '  I ',  '  we '.  When  we  speak  in  terms  of  '  I ',  we  bring  things 
nome  to  ourselves. 


P.,   CH.  XVl]  INFINITE    EXPERIENCES  479 

the  number  of  '  factorial  ten/  in  algebraical  technicality, 
that  is  to  say  3,628,800.  It  is  clear  at  once  that  each  of 
these  millions  of  orders  of  the  succession  of  experiences 
marks  out  and  defines,  and  therefore  amounts  to,  a  dis- 
tinct and  separate  individuality;  for  an  individuality  can 
no  other  wise  be  described,  discriminated  and  fixed,  than 
by  enumerating  the  experiences  of  that  individuality,  by 
narrating  its  biography.  Yet,  while  each  one  of  these 
orders  makes  a  distinct  individuality,  it  is  also  equally 
clear,  at  the  same  time,  that  in  essence,  substance,  com- 
pleteness, all  these  individualities  are  verily  and  truly 
one  ;  and  that  whatever  difference  there  is  between  them 
is  made  up  of  the  illusory  differences  of  mere  time,  space, 
motioii,  all  three  utter  emptinesses  and  nothings,  the 
triple  aspect  of  Negation.1 

In  place  of  five  as  the  number  of  sensations,  now 
substitute  the  number  '  pseudo-infinite  '  ;  for  £tats 
are  pseudo-infinite  by  axiom,  and  each  is  pleasurable 
during  the  affirmation  of  it,  and  painful  during  the 
negation."  The  total  number  of  our  experiences  then 

1  Thus,  a  thousand  globe-trotters,  travelling  round  the  earth,  at  the 
same  or  different  times,  over  different  routes,  with  different  accou  re- 
men  ts,  will  yet  be  able  to  say,  if  they  meet  and  compare  notes  after 
completing  the  circumambulation  :  '  We  have  all  seen  the  same  coun- 
tries, and  passed  through  the  same  experiences  '  (speaking  generally). 

1  See  Nyaya  SBfra,  III,  ii,  35. 


:  \  Bh&shya  on  same  ;  '  The  knower,  i.e.  conscious  ego,  is  motived 
by  like  and  dislike,  to  advance  and  retreat,  respectively  '  ;  '  when  a 


480  ALL   IN    EACH,    EACH   IN    ALL  [SC.   OF 

becomes  2  X pseudo-infinite,  and  the  total  number  of 
permutations  of  these  experiences  is  2Xoo  (factorial 
twice  pseudo-infinite).  This,  at  first  sight,  should 
be  the  total  number  of  all  possible  '  lines  of  conscious- 
ness,' or  '  individualities '  or  '  jivas '.  But  this  is 
so  only  at  first  sight,  and  we  have  not  reached  the  end 
of  our  calculations  even  now.  For  we  have  up  to  now 
been  taking  the  experiences  all  at  a  time.  But  they  have 
to  be  taken  in  all  possible  combinations  also,  one  at  a 
time,  two  at  a  time,  and  three,  and  four,  and  so  on,  to 
pseudo-infinity.  The  result  is,  briefly,  a  pseudo-infinity 
of  pseudo-infinities  as  the  total  number  of  jivas  in  the 
World- Process;  each  being  a  distinct,  immortal,  ever- 
spirating,  ever-gyrating  line  of  consciousness  ;  yet  each 
being  absolutely  identical  with  all  others ;  for  the  World- 
Process  is  made  up  entirely  and  exclusively  of  the  one 
universal  Self,  passing  itself  through  all  possible  pseudo- 
infinite  experiences,  simultaneously  from  the  standpoint 
of  that  universal  Self,  successively  from  that  of  the  limited 
not-selves.1 

person  knows  that  so-and-so  will  give  him  pleasure,  then  he  tries  to  secure 
it ;  if  he  knows  that  it  will  cause  him  pain,  he  tries  to  avoid  it '. 

1  The  Secret  Doctrine,  V.  pp.  397-398,  says  :  "  What  difference  can 
it  make  in  the  perceptions  of  an  ego,  whether  he  enter  Nirvana  loaded 
with  the  recollections  only  of  his  own  personal  lives — tens  of  thousands 
according  to  the  modern  re-incarnationists — or  whether,  merged  entirely 
in  the  Parabrahmic  state  it  becomes  one  with  the  All,  with  the  absolute 
knowledge  and  the  absolute  feeling  of  representing  collective  humanities  ? 
Once  that  an  ego  lives  only  ten  distinct  individual  lives,  he  must  neces- 
sarily lose  his  own  self,  and  become  mixed  up—merged,  so  to  say— with 
these  ten  selves." 

If  the  reader  will  shut  his  eyes  and  ponder  what  exactly  he  feels 
would  be  perpetuation  of  his  separate  individuality,  he  will  probably 
understand  the  problem  clearly :  '  What  exactly  is  it  that  I  crave  to 


P.,    CH.   XVl]          WHY   VARIATIONS    OF   ORDER  481 

It  may  be  asked :  Why  this  interminable  vari- 
ation of  the  order  of  the  experiences  ?  As  usual,  the 
answer  is  contained  in  the  logion.  The  one  Prafyag- 
atma  is  the  ever-present.  The  many  Mula-prakrti  is 
the  ever- successive,  ever-past,  and  ever-future.  The 
opposition  between  the  two  is  utter.  Yet  also  is 
there  inevitable  and  constant  juxtaposition  and  relation. 
The  one  is  the  universal,  sarvika,  samanya;  the  other 
is  the  singular,  individual,  pratyekika,  vish£sha ;  and 
between  them  there  exists  unbreakable  relation  of  co- 
inherence,  samavaya.  The  reconciliation  of  the  con- 
tradiction is  that  Pratyag-atma  becomes  as  multitudinous 
as  the  £tats,  in  order  to  encompass  them  all  simultane- 
ously in  the  one  vast  present  of  the  totality  of  the 

perpetuate,  to  eternalise,  when  I  desire  per-sona.1  immortality?  Any  parti- 
cular experience  ?  The  ownership  of  any  particular  thing  ?  Any  particular 
shape  of  face  and  figure  ?  Any  emotional  mood  ?  Any  intellectual  feat  ? 
Any  physical  exploit  ?  Any  particular  piece  of  knowledge  ?  Any  relation- 
ship with  any  person  ?  Any  life  of  crime  ?  Any  ot  sainthness  ?  Any 
agonising  experience  ?  Any  particular  state  of  delight  ? 

The  answer,  after  due  introspection,  will  always  be  '  No  '  (See  f .  ns. 
on  pp.  84,  141,  314  supra).  For  any  and  every  particular  experience, 
possession,  face,  mood,  etc.,  will  pall,  will  tire,  will  lose  interest,  after 
some  time,  short  or  long.  When  my  own  body,  so  very  dear  to  me, 
becomes  so  tiresome  to  me,  after  sixteen,  eighteen,  twenty  hours  of 
waking  and  working,  that  I  run  away  from  it  into  sleep,  day  after  day, 
night  after  night,  how  can  I  cling  to  anything  else  unchangingly 
throughout  sempiternity  ? 

Change  is  the  Jaw  and  the  condition  of  separate  individual  existence. 
Yet  it  is  also  a  fact  that  '  I  '  wants  '  immortality  '.  What  is  the  recon- 
ciliation ?  '  Immortality  *  means  '  the  assurance  of  immortality  '  ;  I  am 
the  Universal  Supreme  I,  therefore  necessarily  Immortal.  But  all  per- 
sonal or  individual  '  I's  '  are  the  universal  I;  therefore  I  am  all  '  I's '. 
But  '  personal  I  '  means  a  conglomerate  of  particular  experiences ; 
therefore  I  contain  all  possible  such  experiences  and  conglomerates  ;  and 
I  can  revive  in  memory  and  vivid  imagination,  and  therefore  in  reality, 
any  I  wish,  whenever  I  please.  This  potentiality  is  really  all  I  crave, 
when  I  crave  personal  immortality  ;  and  metaphysical  jSana-knowledge 
assures  it  to  me. 

31 


482  ILLUSTRATIONS  [SC.   OF 

World-Process  ;  and  again,  each  single  one  of  this 
multitude  of  (Pratyag-atma  transformed  into  pseudo- 
infinite  jlvas)  also  incessantly  endeavours  to  encompass 
the  whole  of  the  many  in  the  total  succession  of  end- 
less time  and  space  and  motion,  because  each  jlva 
must  be  equal  to  and  cannot  be  less  than  the  whole  of 
Pratyag-atma.  Take  the  totality  of  the  World-Process 
at  any  one  instant  of  time,  and  you  find  all  possible 
pseudo-infinite  experiences  present  therein,  simultaneous- 
ly, coexistently,  side  by  side,  in  the  pseudo-infinity  of 
space  —  sorrows  in  one  region,  equivalent  joys  in  another  ; 
gains  here,  equal  losses  there  ;  life  and  growth  in  one 
place,  a  balancing  death  and  decay  in  another.!  But, 
again,  take  any  one  experience,  a  single  point  or  moment 
of  consciousness,  and  follow  it  out  behind  and  beyond, 
into  the  past  and  the  future,  along  any  one  of  the  pseudo- 
infinite  diameters  that  in  their  totality  make  up  the  solid 
mass  of  the  sphere,  any  one  of  the  lines  of  consciousness 
of  which  it  is  the  meeting-point,  the  point  of  junction 
and  of  crossing,  and  along  that  line  there  will  be  found 


1  To  realise  that  all  these  sorrows,  joys,  gains,  life  and  death,  are  in 
the  I,  are  in  Me,  at  once—  this  is  Moksha  ;  to  realise  that  they  are  all  in 
Me,  successively  (as  described  in  the  next  sentence  of  the  text)  is  also 
moksha—  of  another  kind. 


:  I  JMna-garbha. 


P.,   CH.  XVl]         MORE   ILLUSTRATIONS  483 

all  possible  experiences  in  different  moments  of  time,  in 
different  successions.1 

Another  illustration  may  be  attempted  :  Take  a 
round  ball  of  iron.  Let  this  ball  be  composed  of  a 
number  of  round  bullets.  Let  the  ball  have  a  revo- 
lutional  movement  of  its  own  as  a  whole,  on  a  fixed  axis, 
so  that  the  space  occupied  by  it  never  changes.  Let  each 
of  the  bullets  have  another  motion  of  its  own,  perfectly 
free  and  ever-changing  in  direction,  but  strictly  confined 
within  the  periphery  of  the  ball,  and  therefore  necessarily 
so  arranged  that  each  bullet  moves  only  by  the  equal 
displacement  and  movement  of  another.  The  ball  now 
combines  in  itself,  always  and  simultaneously,  all  the 
possible  movements  of  all  its  constituents  ;  and  each  of 
these  constituents  also  passes  through  each  one  of  all 
1  Compare  the  Sarprkjt  saying  : 


gEHcf   f  :*sf,    :  I 

4  Pain  (follows  invariably)  after  pleasure,  and  pleasure  after  pain/ 
Bhagavata,  V,  xxvi,  2,  expressly  says  that  '  all  jfvas  must  pass  through 
all  experiences,  turn  by  turn  ', 

cfitj:  9OTT  ^IcR:  a*TfaTCT:  33?  tp  eefo  aiWfifa 


Brhad  Up.  has  some  words  which  may  also  be  interpreted  to  the 
same  effect,  '  all  are  equal  or  similar,  all  are  in-finite  ', 


Mbh.,  Shantip.,  also  says  that,  '  The  gatf,  going,  path,  course, 
destiny,  of  no  one  is  greater  than  that  of  any  one  ;  Vetja  shows  that  all 
are  equal  '  , 


ff 

For  yet  other  illustrations,  see  my  World  War  and  Its  Only  Cure  — 
World  Order  and  World  Religion,  pp.  411-413,  484. 


484  ROCK-LIKE    MOVELESSNESS  [SC.   OF 

these  possible  movements,  but  in  succession,  the  motior* 
of  each  being  so  counterbalanced  by  that  of  another, 
from  moment  to  moment,  that  the  position  of  the  ball,  as 
a  whole,  in  space,  never  changes.  Finally,  wherever  in 
this  illustration  we  have  a  definite  limit  of  size  or 
number,  substitute  unlimitedness.  Let  the  whole  ball  be 
boundlessly  large.  Let  each  bullet  composing  it  be  in 
turn  composed  of  smaller  bullets  ;  these  of  shot  ;  these 
again  of  smaller  shot  ;  and  so  on  pseudo-infinitely.  Let 
these  bullets  and  shot  be  of  pseudo-infinite  sizes  ;  and 
let  the  peripheries  of  these  bullets  and  shot  be  purely 
imaginary,  so  that  each  bullet  and  shot,  while  one  such 
in  itself,  is  also  at  the  same  time  part  of  the  volume 
enclosed  by  a  pseudo-infinite  number  of  peripheries  of  all 
possible  sizes  coexisting  with  and  overlapping  each 
other  within  the  single  periphery  of  the  whole.  The 
ball  now  becomes  the  Absolute.  Its  transcendent 
axis,  of  the  pseudo-infinity  of  the  numbers  of  which 
the  ball  is  veritably  composed,  is  the  logion.  Its 
revolution  vanishes  into  a  rock-like  fixity  of  change- 
lessness,1  because  it  occupies  the  whole  of  space,  and 
in  the  absence  of  a  remaining  and  surrounding  space,. 


maha-shila-sattS,  '  rock-like-being,'  frequently  des- 
cribed in  Yoga  V&sishtha.  This  illustration  is  not  altogether  fanciful. 
Physical  science  is  establishing  more  and  more  clearly  every  day  that  it 
is  almost  a  literal  description  of  what  is  actually  taking  place  in  all  solids. 
And  when  we  remember  that  metaphysical  as  well  as  scientific  reasoning 
favours  'the  belief  that  space  is  a  vacuum  filled  full  with  a  plenum  of 
subtler  and  subtler  matter  ;  that  the  heavenly  bodies  are  not  moving  in 
empty  but  in  matter-filled  space  ;  that  vast  masses  of  subtler  matter  cling 
to  and  form  shells  for  what  we  call  these  '  solid  '  globes,  and  participate 
in  their  rotatory  and  other  motions  ;  that  the  thicker  the  rotating 
shell  the  faster  will  be  its  movement  at  the  surface  ;  that  the  quicker 


P.,   CH.   XVl]         YET   PERPETUAL   MOTION   ALSO        485 

against  which  it  could  be  seen,  no  revolution  can  be.  Its 
universal  sphericity  is  the  Pratyag-atma.  Its  concrete 
and  discrete  material  is  Mula-prakrti.  Its  bullets  within 
bullets,  and  shot  within  shot  are  the  pseudo-infinite  jiva- 
atoms  which,  in  their  pseudo-infinitesimal  sphericity  of 
pointness,  are  identical  with  the  infinite  sphericity  of  the 
whole.  The  imaginary-ness  of  the  periphery  of  each  is 
the  endlessness  of  the  overlapping  of  individuality-points. 
The  endless  movement  of  each  of  these  points  makes  a 
line  of  consciousness  working  out  in  successive  time  ; 
while  the  totality  of  these  lines  of  consciousness  is  the 
transcendent  completeness  of  the  Absolute. 

the  movement  the  greater  is  the  resistance  and  the  hardness,  i.e., 
solidity,  etc. — if  we  remember  these  things  we  may  see  that  it  is  possible 
that  the  illustration  literally  describes  the  actual  World-Process,  and 
that  we  are  living  and  moving  freely  within  masses  of  matter  that  present 
a  skin  of  iron,  a  '  ring-pass-not, '  to  things  outside.  The  '  discarded  '  old 
doctrines  of  'cycle  in  epicycle,  orb  in  orb,'  of  heavens  one  above  and 
around  another,  in  which  the  heavenly  bodies  are  studded,  as  bosses  in 
shields,  etc.,  thus  seem  to  have  a  chance  of  being  restored  with  a  much 
fuller  significance.  This  will  be  only  in  keeping  with  the  general  law  of 
all  the  march  of  the  World-Process,  viz.,  that  a  thing  passes  into  its 
opposite  and  then  returns  again  to  its  original  condition  on  a  higher  level, 
endlessly.  Take  up  a  newspaper,  and  we  find  illustrations  of  this  in  the 
most  widely-separated  departments  of  life— thus ;  (1)  Pedlars  and  hawkers 
are  replaced  by  great  central  stores,  depots,  and  fixed  shops,  and  then 
comes  the  travelling  salesman  again  ;  (2)  duels,  single  combats,  heroes, 
are  replaced  by  massed  bands,  and  these  are  superseded  by  bush-fighting 
and  sharpshooting  ;  then  the  massed  bands  reappear  as  trench-fighting, 
and  the  single  combats  as  the  fights  of  aeroplanes  and  submarines  ;  (3) 
Chinese  writing  is  superseded  by  the  alphabet,  which  again  is  threatened 
with  displacement  by  shorthand,  and  so  on. 

The  illustration  of  the  rock  may  be  interpreted  in  another  way.  The 
sculptor's  mind  fashions  ideally,  any  number  of  images,  one  after  another, 
in  one  and  the  same  block  of  marble.  All  these  possible  images  may  be 
said  to  be  acutually  contained  in  the  block  all  the  time.  The  doctrine 
of  any  number  of  '  theoretical  arches '  being  formed  in  any  given  wall, 
any  of  which  can  be  made  concrete  and  manifest  by  breaking  an  opening 
in  the  appropriate  place,  illustrates  the  same  fact. 


486  LAW   OF   RELATIVITY  [SC.   OF 

In  these  illustrations  we  see  the  summation  of  the 
World  -Process,  while  also  seeing  how  the  utter  emptiness 
which  is  the  utter  fullness  of  the  Absolute,  its  changeless 
balance  of  being  against  nothing,  is  always  being  en- 
deavoured to  be  reproduced  in  the  individualised  Absolute, 
the  jiva-atom.  Life  is  balanced  against  death  ;  progress 
against  regress  ;  anode  against  kathode;  anabolism  against 
katabolism  ;  pleasure  against  pain  ;  being  against  nothing  ; 
Spirit  against  Matter.  Taking  the  net  result  of  each 
completed  life  also,  we  see  the  same  balancing  appear* 
as  has  found  expression,  and  in  one  sense,  true  expression, 
in  words  like  those  of  Bhartr-hari,  the  poet-king  and  then 
the  ascetic-yogi  :  '  What  real  difference  is  there  between 
the  pleasures  and  the  pains  of  Indra,  the  high  chieftain 
of  the  gods,  and  those  of  the  lowliest  animal  ?  The  joys 
of  love  and  of  life  that  the  one  derives,  under  the  prompt- 
ings of  desire,  from  his  goddess  consort  and  from  nectar, 
the  same  are  derived  by  the  other  from  his  lowly  mate 
and  his  (to  human  beings)  filthy  food.  The  terrors  of 
death  again  are  as  keen  to  the  on^  as  to  the  other. 
Respective  desire-and-karma  makes  a  difference  in  their 
surroundings  and  appearances.  But  the  net  result,  and 
the  relativity  of  subject  and  object,  enjoyer  and  enjoyed, 
sufferer  and  cause  of  suffering,  are  the  same.'  !  The  equality 


Vairagya-Shatakat 


P.,   CH.   XVI]         ACTION    AND   ACTIONLESSNESS         487 

and  sameness  of  all  jlvas,  not  only  in  the  sense  of  the 
sameness  of  comparative  results  of  long  periods,  life- 
times, or  cycles,  but  also  at  each  moment  of  time,  in  the 
matter  of  pleasure  and  pain,  will  also  appear  further, 
when  the  nature  of  those  two  all-important  constituents 
of  the  life  of  the  Self  is  carefully  considered  ;  for  there  is, 
indeed,  a  pleasure  hiding  in  every  pain,  and  a  pain  hiding 
in  every  pleasure  ;  when  the  one  is  felt  by  the  outer,  the 
opposite  is  felt  by  the  inner  man.1  From  the  standpoint 
of  Brahma,  all  is  the  same,  all  is  equal  ;  there  is  no  differ- 
ence at  all,  in  kind  as  well  as  being  ;  for  Brahma  is  indeed 
the  denial  of  all  difference  by  the  Universal  Self.  Why 
should  there  be,  how  can  there  be,  the  reasonless  horror 

See.  here,  the  f.n.s.  on  pp.  228-231,  also.  A  very  useful  way  of 
interpreting  the  working  of  the  Law  of  Karma,  as  psycho-physical  cause- 
effect  or  action-reaction,  is  to  understand  it  in  terms,  not,  of  the  plea- 
sures or  pains  of  the  benefited  or  the  victimised,  but  of  the  benf  actors 
or  victimisers.  A  land-hungry  or  '  glory  '-hungry  pride-mad  '  con- 
queror ',  slays  some  millions  of  men,  of  and  through  his  armies  ;  a  butcher 
slaughters  myriads  of  sheep  and  cattle  ;  a  ravenous  predacean  kills  and 
devours  thousands  of  herbivores  He  or  it  can  scarcely  be  slain 
millions  or  myriads  or  thousands  of  times'  in  as  many  births.  Even 
infinitely  prolific  and  alt  -wise  Nature  would  find  it  very  difficult  to  keep 
and  square  the  mathematical  accounts  correctly  ;  the  more  so,  since,  in 
every  new  birth,  new  karma,  would  be  added  on  to  the  old  !  But  the 
(subjective)  pleasure  that  the  killer  derived  from  the  massacre,  the 
pleasure  of  gloating  or  money  -or-land-gain  or  glory-gain,  is  easily  counter- 
balanced by  a  corresponding  amount  of  (subjective)  pain,  experienced, 
maybe  in  even  a  single  body,  amidst  appropriate  (objective)  settings.  Also 
the  pains  of  a  prolonged  malignant  disease  or  of  manglings  and  mutila-  . 
tions  in  an  accident,  may  be  psychically  equivalent  in  the  finer  and 
more  sensitive  organism  of  a  human  body  to  the  death-pains  of  a  thousand 
lower  animals. 


'  He  who  sees  in-action  in  action  and  action  in  in-  action,  he  is 
truly  wise,  and  he  performs  all  actions  (rightly  and  wisely),  without 
attachment.' 


488  NONE  GREATER  OR  LESSER  [SC.   OF 

and  hideousness,  the  nameless  heart-harrowing,  of  one 
really  and  permanently  smaller,  weaker,  poorer,  lower, 
humbler,  more  pitiable  or  more  contemptible,  more  tram- 
pled upon  and  tortured,  than  another,  greater,  stronger, 
richer,  higher,  prouder,  more  feared  or  more  honoured 
oppressor,  tormenter,  and  gloater  ?  Where  would  be  the 
justification,  if  there  were  really  such  cruel  injustice  of 
difference  (as  the  enquirer  intensely  felt  at  the  beginning 
of  his  search),  and  not  a  mere  appearance  and  play  of 
sage  and  saint,  sovereign  and  soldier,  slayer  and  slain, 
oppressor  and  victim,  servant  and  slave,  high  god  and 
lower  man  and  lowlier,  worm  and  plant  and  mineral  !  ] 

1  He  who  realises  this  becomes  perfectly  '  natural  '  again,  as  a  child  ; 
but  on  the  higher  level  of  the  '  second  '  childhood,  through  a  '  second  ' 

birth  into  the  Ancient  Wisdom, 


3TO  j  the  Sufi's  tark-i-tark.  '  The  natural 

state  is  best  '  ;  '  the  wise  man  may  behave,  on  occasion,  like  the  very 
unwise  ;  he  no  longer  desires  moksha,  for  he  has  found  it  ;  he  gives  up 
that  which  has  enabled  him  to  give  up,  as  a  thorn  is  thrown  away  after 
having  been  used  to  extract  a  thorn  from  the  foot,  he  abandons  aband- 
oning '.  Purna-purusha,  Mard-i-famGw,  Insan-ul-k&mil,  '  final, 
complete,  perfect  man  '  are  the  expressions  which  describe  such  a  one. 

Another  aspect  of  the  idea  may  be  put  thus  :  Every  atom  is  a,  as 
well  as  the,  whole  universe.  Every  part  is  the  whole.  Every  drop  of 
water  is  the  same  (in  potential  contents)  as  the  whole  ocean.  Every  the 
tiniest  image  of  the  sun  in  every  the  tiniest  globule  of  water  is  the  whole 
Sun.  Every  jfva  is  the  whole  Universal  Self.  The  whole  universe  is  one 
infinite  'Pool's  Paradise',  bhrama;  every  jiva  has  its  own  'fool's 
paradise,  (or  rather  '  paradis-es)  '  ;  and  the  individual  '  fool's  paradise  ', 
drama,  is  as  real  or  as  mythical  as  the  Universal  Fool's  Paradise,  and  is 
part  of,  or  copy  of.  and  contained  in,  the  latter  ;  for  all  is  and  are  the 
Play  of  the  Supreme  Self's  s  a  n  -  k  a  1  p  a,  Will-Ideation. 

For  the  thought  of  the  spiritual  equality,  indeed  same-ness,  of  all 
jiva-souls,  see  pp.  329-330  supra. 

The  following  passage  from  Bible,  Eccl  estates,  9-2,  seems  to  be  a 
very  near  equivalent  of  the  verse  quoted  and  translated  on  p.  330  supra  : 
"  All  things  come  alike  ta  all.  There  is  one  "  (i.e.,  the  same)  event  to 


P.,  CH.  XVl]    ENDLESS  SPIRALS  WITHIN  ABSOLUTE   489 

It  has  been  said  that  the  words  of  Bhartr-hari  are  true 
in  a  sense.  They  are  true  in  the  deepest  metaphysical 
sense,  which  takes  account  of  the  whole  of  space,  time, 
and  motion,  in  their  totality.  But  the  current  view  of  the 
fact  of  endless  evolution  and  progress  and  difference  is 
also  true,  in  the  practical  sense  that  deals  with  only  a 
part  of  space,  time,  and  motion,  instead  of  with  the  whole 
of  them.  While  one  jlva  cannot,  in  the  net  result  of  all 
experiences,  be  really  different  from  another  jlva,  for  both 
are  equally  Pratyag-atma,  yet  each  atom  is  equally 
necessarily  different  from  every  other  atom.  Hence  what 
we  have  is  a  constant  sameness  underlying  endless 

the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked:  to  the  good  and  clean,  and  to  the 
unclean  ;  to  him  that  sacrificeth,  and  to  him  that  sacrificeth  not  ;  as  is 
the  good,  so  is  the  sinner".  Yet  always  the  warning  holds  that  "all 
things  "  includes  consequences  also,  of  good  as  well  as  evil  actions. 

The  great  Law  of  Analogy  may  be  again  pondered  by  the  reader  in 
this  reference.  It  establishes  the  similarity,  equality,  sameness,  oneness, 
of  all. 


I  Brhad.  C7^.,4,  4,  8-25. 

1  Very  subtle,  atom-like,  is  this  Ancient  Path  .  .  .  See,  by  the  mind, 
that  there  is  no  many  (no  separates).  He  goes  from  death  to  death  who 
(and  while  he)  sees  (and  clings  to  separatist)  many  (-ness).  Atma,  Self, 
is  Not-This,  Not-This.  He  who  knows  that  Self,  sees  all  in  It,  and  It  in 
all,  and  all  as  Self,  sin  touches  him  not,  he  crosses  beyond  all  sins.  He 
is  undecaying,  undying,  unf  earing.  Brahma  is  Fear-less,  Brahma  is 
Fearless,  Brahma  is  Fearless  '. 


490  NO  BEGINNING  AND  NO  ENDING      [SC.  OF 

differences.!    If  there  were  actual  limits  to  time,  space, 
motion  ;  if  the  World-Process  did  not  stretch  backwards 
and   forwards   pseudo-infinitely ;    if  cycles  and   systems 
were   complete  in  themselves  instead   of  being  parts  of 
interminable  chains  in  time,  space,  motion  ;  if  the  '  all r 
of  experiences  could  really  be  fixed  in  and  at  any  point  of 
time,    space,    and    motion  ;    then   only,   by   striking   the 
balance  of  each  and  every  life,  we  should  literally  find 
a  cipher  as  the  result  in  each  case.     But  there  are  no 
such     actual    and    absolute    limits.      Each     life-thread 
stretches   endlessly  through    endless  cycles   and   world- 
systems.     Hence  there  is   no  real  beginning  and  no  real 
end  to  any  life,  but  only  endless  apparent  beginnings 
and  apparent  ends,  and  no  final  and  complete  balancing 
of  any,  in  terms  of  the  limited  and  concrete,  is  possible. 
Also,  as  each  life,  taken  individually,  is  necessarily  and 
actually  at  a  different  point  of  time,  space,  and  motion 
from  every  other,  therefore  no  simultaneous  balancing  of 
all  is  possible.     Complete  balancing  and  casting  up  of 
accounts  is  possible  only  from  the  standpoint  of  the  true 
infinite  and  eternal,  Pratyag-atma,  wherein  the  whole  of 
time,  space,  and  motion,  and  therefore  the  whole  possible 
life  of  each  and  every  jlva,  is  summed  up  at  once,  now, 
here,  al-ways.     From  the  standpoint  of  the  limited,  the 

1  In  this  fact  we  find  the  reason  why,  though  the  chief  of  the  gods  and 
the  beast,  Indra  and  swine,  are  both  similar  or  even  the  same  or  equal 
in  respect,  of  nett  pleasure  and  pain,  yet,  in  the  infinite  complexities  of 
evolution  and  dissolution,  in  respect  of  details,  there  is  very  much  more 
4  long-circuiting  '  and  '  refinement '  between  the  desires  and  the  satis- 
factions of  the  one  than  of  the  other.  Hence  the  thought  and  the 
corresponding  language  of  '  higher  and  lower  '  is  thoroughly  justified, 
for  practical  purposes. 


P.,   CH.   XVl]       PSEUDO-INFINITE   REPETITION  491 

pseudo-infinite,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  an  endless 
alternation  of  progress  and  regress,  evolution  and  involu- 
tion on  an  ever-differing  level,  which  is  ever  making  a 
difference  of  goal  even  in  endless  repetition,  and  thus 
immortally  keeping,  before  every  jiva-atom,  an  ever  higher 
and  higher  *  ascent '  after  an  ever  deeper  and  deeper 
'  descent '  into  ever  grosser  and  grosser  planes  of  matter  ; 
a  thought  that,  despite  the  promise  of  ever-higher  goals, 
would  prove  most  desolately  wearisome,  nay,  most  agonis- 
ingly horrible,  because  of  the  corresponding  ever  deeper 
*  descents '  ;  were  it  not  that  the  constant  summation  of 
the  whole  of  the  pseudo-infinitely  complex  World- Process 
in  the  utter  simplicity  of  the  Absolute,  makes  the  endless 
succession  of  that  World-Process  the  Lila,  the  Volun- 
tary Play,  that  it  really  is,  of  Self ;  and  in  which  Play, 
Tragedy  and  Comedy  balance  and  cancel  each  other 
completely. 

Only  Self,  None  Else,  compels  to  anything  or  any 
mood  or  state  or  circumstance.  There  is  None  Else  to  so 
compel. 

Therefore  is  the  Process  of  the  World  a  process  of 
pseudo-infinite  repetition  in  pseudo-infinite  change, 
always  curling  back  upon  itself  endlessly  in  pseudo- 
infinite  spirals.  The  jlva  that,  having  reached  the  end 
of  the  pravrtti  arc  of  its  particular  cycle,  thus  realises  the 
utter  equality,  the  utter  sameness  and  identity,  of  all 
jivas  in  the  Supreme  Self,  amidst  the  utter  diversity  of 
Not-Self,  cries  out  at  the  overpowering  wonder  of  it : 
'The  beholder  seeth  it  as  a  marvel;  the  narrator 


492  THE   WONDER   OF   IT   ALL!  [SC.   OF 

speaketh  it  as  a  marvel  ;  the  listener  heareth  it  as  a 
marvel  ;  and  yet  after  the  seeing,  speaking,  and  hearing 
of  it,  none  knoweth  the  complete  detail  of  it  !  '  '  And  he 
also  cries  out  at  the  same  time  :  *  Where  is  there  des- 
pondency, where  sorrow,  unto  him  who  seeth  the  One- 
ness !  '  *  He  sees  that  all  jivas  rise  and  fall,  lower  and 
higher,  endlessly,  in  pseudo-infinite  time,  space,  and 
motion.  He  sees  that  the  jlva  that  is  a  crawling  worm 
to-day  will  be  the  Ishvara  of  a  great  system  to-morrow  ; 
and  that  the  jlva  that  is  the  Ishvara  of  a  system  to-day 
will  descend  into  deeper  densities  of  matter  in  a 
greater  system  to-morrow,  to  rise  to  the  still  larger 
Ishvara-ship  of  a  vaster  system  in  still  another  kalpa.3 
Nay,  not  only  will  be,  in  the  one  sense,  but  also  is  in 
another  sense.  The  single  human  being  that  is  so  weak 
and  helpless,  even  as  a  worm,  in  the  solar  system  of  the 
Ishvara  to  whom  he  owes  allegiance,  is,  at  the  same 
time,  in  turn,  veritable  Ishvara  to  the  tissue-cells,  leuco- 
cytes, and  animalcules,  that  compose  his  organism  ;  and 
the  currents  of  his  large  life,  unconsciously  or  consciously 
to  himself,  govern  those  of  the  minute  ones.  The  ruler 
of  a  solar  system,  again,  would  at  the  same  time,  in  turn, 
be  an  infinitesimal  cell  in  the  unimaginably  vast  frame 


Bhagavad-Glta,  ii,  28. 
2  I  Isha  Upanishat,  7. 


3  3RE  *J3WI  Sffa  »  Bfhad-Aranyaka,  I,  iv,  10. 


P.,   CH.  XVI]     '  WHATEVER  YE   WISH,    IS  YOURS  '    493 

of  a  Virat-Purusha,  whose  individuality  includes  countless 
billions  of  such  systems.  And,  throughout  all  this  wonder, 
the  knower  of  Brahma  also  knows  that  there  is  no  ruth- 
less cruelty,  no  nightmare  agony  of  helplessness  in  it,  for, 
at  every  moment,  each  condition  is  essentially  voluntary, 
the  product  of  that  utterly  Free  Will  of  Self  (and  there- 
fore of  all  selves),  which  there  is  none  else  to  bend  and 
curb  in  any  way,  the  Will  that  is  truly  liberated  from  all 
bondage.  He  knows  that  because  all  things,  all  jlvas 
and  all  Ishvaras,  belong  to,  nay,  are  in  and  are  Self 
already,  therefore  whatsoever  a  self  wishes,  that,  with  all 
its  consequences,  will  surely  belong  to  it,  if  it  only 
earnestly  wishes ;  this  earnest  wish  itself  being  the 
essence  of  yoga,  with  its  three  coequal  factors  of  bhakti, 
jnana,  and  karma,  correponding  to  ichchha,  jnana,  and 
kriya  respectively.  Knowing  all  this,  he  knows,  he 
cognises  Brahma  ;  and  loving  all  selves  as  himself,  desir- 
ing their  welfare  as  his  own,  and  acting  for  their  happi- 
ness as  he  labours  for  his  own,  he  realises  and  is 
Brahma.1  Such  an  one  is  truly  mukta,  free,  delivered 
from  all  bonds  ;  he  knows  and  is  the  Ab-sol-ute,  Self 
ab-solved  from  all  the  limitations  of  Not-Self,  the  Self 
wherein  is  ab-solu-tion  from  all  doubt  and  error,  all 
wants  and  pains,  all  fevered  restlessness  and  anxious 
seeking.  To  him  belongs  the  Everlasting  Peace  ! 

The  book  opens  with  Nachiketa's  cry  for  the  Knowledge 
which  would  give  him  Peace  through  Freedom  from  Doubt 

1  In  the  words  of  Bh&gavafa,  the  cognition  of  the  identity  of  one* 
self  with  all  selves  and  All-Self  is  shudc^h-advaita ;  the  feeling  of  that 
unity  is  bhav-acjvai^a ;  the  working  for  it  is  kriy-acjvaita. 


494      THE   GREAT   QUESTIONING   ANSWERED     [SC.    OF 

and  Fear.  It  ends  with  ancient  verses  which  sum  up  that 
Knowledge  and  bring  the  Peace.  Nachiketa  refused 
steadfastly  all  the  other  finite  and  ephemeral  things  which 
were  offered  to  him  to  allure  him  away  from  the  Infinite 
and  Eternal.  Therefore  he  obtained,  therefore  he  became 
the  Immortal,  Infinite  Eternal,  and  in  It,  he  found  all  finite 
things  also.  May  all  sincere  seekers  do  likewise. 

'  AUM  !  Such  is  the  imperishable  Brahma,  such  is 
the  unwaning  Supreme.  Knowing  It,  whatsoever  one 
desireth,  that  is  his !  The  One  Ruler  that  abideth  within 
all  beings  as  their  Inner  self,  That  maketh  the  one  seed 
manifold  ! — the  wise  who  realise  That  One  within  them- 
selves— unto  them  belongeth  the  Eternal  Joy,  unto  None- 
Else,  unto  None-Else  !  The  Eternal  One  amidst  the  ever- 
lasting Many,  That  maketh  and  f  ulfilleth  all  the  countless 
desires  of  the  Many — they  who  behold  That  One  in  their 
Self,  unto  them,  and  unto  WJone-Else,  belongeth  the 
Eternal  Peace.'  1  '  This  is  the  sole  sense  of  the  Veda, 
such  is  the  whole  essence  of  all  Experience — that  all 
language  declareth  only  Me  and  describeth  Naught-Else  ; 
it  imagineth  the  I  in  all  kinds  of  forms  and  rejecteth 
them  all ;  in  the  realising  that  all-Else-than-I  is  but  My 
Illusion,  and  in  the  Negation  and  abolition  thereof,  is 
found  the  Final  Peace  '.a 

'  Thus  did  Nachiketa,  having  obtained  from  the 
Lord  of  Death  the  Secret  of  Death,  this  Supreme  Know- 
ledge, and  also  the  whole  method  of  Yoga-practice, 
become  identified  with  Brahma,  and  free  from  all  fear 

1  Katha  Upanishaj. 

9  Bhagavaja,  XI,  xxi,  43. 


P.,   CH.  XVl]  IMMORTAL   PEACE   ACHIEVED  495 

and  doubt  and  death.  So  too  may  every  other  earnest 
seeker  become  free  who  acquires  the  Supreme  Knowledge, 
Adhyatma,  only  '.' 


qt 

,  ^^i  wfii:  ^ 
m, 


PEACE  TO  ALL  BEINGS 


1  Katka  Upanishaf. 


496        THE  GUARDIANS  OF  OUR  RACE     [SC.  OP 

DEDICATION 

A  SOUL  all  broken  with  its  petty  pains  ! — 

The  boundless  glories  of  the  Infinite  ! — 

How  may  the  one,  unfit,  feeble,  slow-moving, 

Harrassed  with  all  the  burdens  of  its  sins, 

Tell  rightly  of  the  Other's  Perfectness ! 

Yet,  for  the  love  of  self  that  drave  it  forth, 

A-searching  on  that  ancient  path  of  thought, 

They  tell  is  sharper  than  the  sword-blade's  edge, 

In  hope  to  find  that  which  would  bring  some  touch 

Of  solace  to  it  in  its  weariness — 

Because  that  love  of  self  hath  gained  its  goal, 

And  uttermost  self-seeking  found  the  Self, 

And  so  grown  love  of  Self  and  of  all  selves, 

It  drave  that  soul — unworthy,  full  of  sin, 

But  full  of  love,  yea,  full  of  agony 

Amidst  its  new-found  peace,  that  any  self, 

Thinking  itself  as  less  than  the  Great  Self, 

Should  suffer  pang  of  helpless  littleness — 

To  cry  abroad  and  set  down  what  it  found 

In  words,  too  poor,  too  weak,  and  too  confused, 

That  yet,  eked  out  by  the  strong  earnestness 

Of  other  searching  souls,  may,  with  the  blessing 

Of  the  compassioning  Guardians  of  our  race, 

Bring  to  these  seeking  souls  some  little  peace ! 

Ye  that  have  suffered,  and  have  passed  beyond 
Our  human  sorrowing,  and  yet  not  passed, 
For  Ye  are  suffering  it  of  your  own  will, 
So  long  as  any  suffer  helplessly  ! 


P.,  CH,  XVI]        MOTHER-HEARTED   HIERARCHS  497 

Ye  Blessed  Race  of  Manus,  Rshis,  BucJ4has, 

Gods,  Angels,  mother-hearted  Hierarchs  ! 

Christs,  Prophets,  Saints!  Ye  Helpers  of  our  race 

Ye  Holy  Ones  that  suffer  for  our  sake  ! 

I  lay  this  ill-strung  wreath  of  bloomless  words, 

But  with  the  hands  of  reverence,  at  your  feet, 

That,  filled  with  freshness  by.  their  streaming  life, 

And  consecrated  by  their  holiness, 

And  cleansed  of  all  the  soiling  of  my  sins, 

They  may  bespread  their  fragrance  o'er  the  world, 

And  bring  Self:knowledge  and  Self-certainness, 

And  quenchless  joy  of  all-embracing  Self, 

To  all  that  suffer  voiceless  misery. 

Peace  unto  all,  sweetness,  serenity, 
The   peace  that  from  this  doubtless  knowledge  flows 
That  there  is  naught  beyond  our  very  Self, 
The  Comman  Self  of  old  and  young  and  babe  — 
No  Death,  nor  other  Power  out  of  Me, 
To  hurt  or  hinder,  hearten  us  or  help  — 
Knowledge  that  all  this  Process  of  the  World, 
Its  laugh  and  smile,  its  groan  and  bitter  tears, 
Are  all  the  Self's,  My  own,  Pastime  and  Play  — 
Knowledge  that  all  is  Self,  and  for  the  Self, 
And  by  the  Self,  whence  is  Unshaken  Peace  ! 


32 


INDEX  OF  WORKS  REFERRED  TO 

INOTE. — Alteration  of  page-numbers  in  these  Indices,  for  the  sake  of 
the  new  edition,  represents  the  very  heavy  labor  of  love  of  Miss  Preston 
and  Mr.  Henry  Van  Zeijst.  To  them,  deep  gratitude  of  author  and 
readers  are  due.  It  is  true  that  the  Indices  are  not  quite  up  to  date  ;  for 
new  books  quoted  (few),  and  old  books  newly  referred  to  (often)  in  the 
large  additions  made  in  this  new  edition,  have  not  been  referred  to  in 
these  Indices.  But  this,  it  is  trusted  will  not  seriously  inconvenience 
readers.  The  Index  of  Proper  names  has  also  not  been  enlarged ; 
because  the  new  matter  in  the  text  contains  very  few  additional  names. 
The  Glossary  of  Samskr.t  words  has  also  been  left  unenlarged  for  the 
same  reason.  To  bring  all  these  up  to  date  would  have  taken  many 
weeks  of  heavy  labor  for  me,  which  I  am  ill  fitted  for  now  at  my  age  $ 
and  the  publishers,  the  Theosophical  Publishing  House,  are  naturally 
anxious  that  publication  of  the  book  should  not  be  delayed  longer.  It 
has  been  already  three  whole  years  in  the  press,  because  of  the  abnormal 
conditions  created  by  World  War  II  and  its  aftermath  ;  in  normal  times 
it  could  have  been  brought  out  in  three  months,  or  at  most  six. 
— BHAGAVAN  DAS]. 

Aditya-hrdaya-stotra,  a  hymn  to  the  Sun,  in  Bhavishy-oftara 

Purana,  365. 

Ananda-Lahart,  a  hymn  to  Shakti,  by  Shankara,  219. 
Ancient  Wisdom,  by  Annie  Besant,  389. 
Anubhuti-prakasha-sar-oddhGra,  a  small  work  on  Ve^lanta, 

115. 

Anu-gtta,  256,  257,  291,  365,  373. 
Aumk&ra-sarva3va,  235. 

Bergson,  by  Wildon  Carr,  281. 

Bhagavata  Parana,  also  called  Vishqu-Bhagavata  or 
Shrtmad-Bhagavata  to  distinguish  it  from  tyevl- 
Bhagavata,  33,  50,  114,  152,  161,  201,202,255,257, 
260,  264,  271,  301,  317,  345,  352,  360,  398,  412,  429, 
462,  474,  483,  494. 


500  THE    SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Bhagavad-Glta ;  see  Glta. 

Bhamati,    by    Vacbaspati,    a    commentary   on    Shankara's 

Shanraka-Bhashya  on  Brahma-sutra,  22,  23,  83. 
Bhavishya-Puratia,  456. 
Brahma-sutra,     aphorisms     by     Vyasa     on     the     VSdanta 

system  of  philosophy,  207,  256,  328. 
Brhad-aranyaka    Upanishat,   2,  24,   50,  85,   113,266,307, 

341,  409,  492. 

Charaka-samhita,  a  work  on  medicine,  28,  32,  282,  378. 
Chhandogya  Upanishat,  47,  93,  109,  112,  177,  307,  410. 

f>evl-Bhagavata  Purana,  26,  47,  114,  173,  191,193,218. 
240,  243,  244,  250-256,  269,  318,  370,  436. 

Dignity  of  Man,  by  Fichte,  84. 

Drama  of  Love  and  Death,  by  Edward  Carpenter,  440. 

Dream  Problem,  by  Dr.  Ram  Narayan,  29. 

Durga-sapta-shatl,  a  part  of  Markandeya  Pur  ana,  des- 
cribing avataras  of  Shakti,  167,  251. 

Electrical  Theory  and   the   Problem  of  the   Universe,  by 

Tunzelman,  390. 

Encyclopedia  Britannica,  27,  383. 
Ether,  Matter  and  Motion,  by  Dolbear,  322,  382. 
Examination   of  Sir    William   Hamilton's  Philosophy,  by 

J.  S.  Mill,  88. 

Fichte,  by  Adamson,  79. 

General  Physiology,  by   Max   Verworn,   194,  336,  342, 347, 

354,  387,  409. 
Gtta  or  Bhagavad-Glta,  6,  38,  39,  90,   116,  173,  191-194, 

209,  229,  242,  245,  250,  256-260,  263,  269,  318,  350, 

415,  461,  471,  487,  492. 

Gopatha-Brahmaqa,  part  of  Atharva-V6da,  110. 
Goraksha-Samhita,  249. 

Grammar  of  Science,  by  Karl  Pearson,  47,  220. 
Guptavatj,  a  commentary  on  jpurga-sapta-shatl,  by  Bhgs- 

kara-raya,  167,  251. 


INDEX    OF   WORKS    REFERRED    TO  501 

Handbook  of  Chemistry,  by  Ostwald,  91 
History  of  Philosophy,  by  Hegel,  77. 

„  „         „  Ueberweg,  65. 

,,  „  „         ,,  Schwegler,  43,  57,  65,  80,  82,  89, 

174,  403. 

Introduction  to  the  Philosophy  of  Religion,  by  Caird,  69. 
Isha  Upanishat,  148,  161,  492. 

JHana-garbha,  165,  482. 

Kalagni-rudra  Upanishat,  248. 
Kama-sutra  by  Vatsyayana,  269 
Kapila-G\ta,  370. 

Katha  Upanishat,  1,  33,  108,  161,  325,  494. 
Kena  Upanishat,' 32,  161,  341. 

Machinery  of  the  Universe,  The,  by  Dolbear,  437. 
Maha-bharata,    Epic   of   the   Great  War  between  Kauravas 

and   Pandavas,  by  Vyasa,   235,  271,  282,  283,  291,  318, 

335,  373,  388. 
Mahima-stuti,  a  hymn  to  Shiva,  by  Pushpa-cjanta,  116,  228, 

237,  365. 

Malinl-vijaya,  249. 
Mandukya  Upanishat,  109,  161. 
Mantra-shastra,  235. 
Manu,  2,  41/151,. 228,  257. 
Matsya  Purana,  455. 
Monadology,  by  Leibnitz,  180. 
Mukti-sopana,  by  Goraksha,  250. 
Mundaka  Upanishat,  352. 

Nandikeshvara-Karika,  159,  235. 

New  Psychology,  The,  by  Scripture,  91. 

Nirniamba  Upanishat,  15. 

Nirukta,  a  work  on  the  principles  of  Veda-exegesis,  by 
Yaska,  250. 

Nyaya-Sutra,  the  aphorisms  of  the  Nyaya  System  of  philo- 
sophy," by  Gautama,  261,  288,  340,  428,  479. 

Nyaya-bhashya,  commentary  on  the  above,  by  Vatsyayana, 
32,  261,  266,  479. 


S02  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Nyaya-vartika-tafparya,  annotations  by   Vachaspati,   on  a 

gloss  by  u4yotakara  on  the  above. 
Nyaya-kosha,  a  dictionary  of  the  technical  terms  of  the  Nyaya 

philosophy,  by  Bhimacharya,  300. 

Occult  Chemistry,  by  Annie  Besant  and  C.  W.  Leadbeater, 

399. 
Origin  and  Nature  of  Life,  The,  by  Dr.  B.  Moore,  180. 

Pancha-dashl,  a  work  on  the  VSdanta  System  of  philosophy, 

Vidy-ararjya,  7,  9,  25,  222,  377. 
Pancht'karana-vivarana,  a  small  treatise  on  the  doctrine  of 

the  quintuple  compounding  of  the  primal  elements,  377. 
Paramartha-sara,  a  work  of  the  Kashmir  Shaiva  School  of 

philosophy,  by  Abhinava-gupta,  166. 
Political  Ideals,  by  C.  D.  Burns.  349. 
Pragmatism,  by  Wiliiam  James,  53. 
Pranava-vada,  40,  121,  166,  167,  186,  200,  235,  317,  370, 

376,  391,  405,  438,  440,  453. 
Prashna  Upanishat.  50,  108,  268. 
Principles  of  Science,  by  Jevons,  180. 
Psychology,  by  Hoffding,  7,  9,  11,  222,  227,  271,  380. 

„      '       „  William  James,  33,  53. 

„  „'  Herbert  Spencer,  272. 

„  James  Ward,  27,  383,  339. 
Psychology  of  Sex,  by  Havelock  Ellis,  204. 
Puranas,  '  histories '  of  world-evolution  and  dissolution,  by 

many  Vyasa-s,  76,  89,  115,  120,  159,  164,  235,  236,  239, 

253,  263,  264,  271,  290,  315,  323. 
Purusha-sukta,  the  great  Vedic  hymn  to  the  Macrocosmic 

Man,  the  Supreme  Self,  350. 

Rahasya-traya,  251. 

Ramayana,  the  Epic  of  the  History  of  the  Solar  Race  of 

Kings,   and  especially  of   Rama  and  of  his  war  with 

Ravaga,  by  Valmiki,  235. 
RBmayana  (in  Hiniji),  by  Tulasi  Das,  328. 
Replies  to  Criticisms,  in  Essays,  by  Herbert  Spencer,  69. 
Response  in  the  Living  and  the  Non-Living,  by  Sir  J.  C» 

Bose,  336. 


INDEX   OF  WORKS   REFERRED   TO  503 

Rg-veja,  148,  152. 

Rubaiyat,  by  Omar  Khayyam,  12. 

Sankhya-karika,  41,  53,  235,  256,  260,  266. 

Sankhya-tattva-kaumudf,  260. 

Sankshepa   Shariraka,   a  work   on   Vedanta,    by   Sarvajfia 

Muni,  81,  191. 
Sankshepa   Tik&,   commentary  on  above  by  Macjhusudana 

Sarasvati,  85,  191. 
Sarva-sara  Upanishat,  15,  152. 

Saundarya-Lahan,  a  hymn  to  Shakti,  by  Shankara,  148. 
Science  and  the  Infinite,  by  S.  T.  Klein,  312. 
Science  of  Knowledge,  by  Fichte,  83,  174. 
Science  of  Peace  (First  Edition),  121. 
Science    of  Religion   or   Sanatana    Vaidika   Qharma,   by 

Bhagavan  Das,  142. 
Science  of  Social  Organization  or  The  Laws  of  Manu,  by 

Bhagavan  Das,  142. 

Secret  Doctrine,  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  309,  322,  345,  375,  389. 
Secret  of  Hegel,  by  Stirling,  43. 
Shabda-kalpa-druma,  268. 
Shariraka-Bhashya,     commentary    by     Shankara    on    the 

Brahma-Sutra  of  Vyasa,  8,  34,  49,  71,  84. 
Shaiva  Agama,  236. 
Shandilya,  271. 
Shiva  Purana,  248. 
Shiva-Sutra-vim arshiqi,  a   work   of   the     Kashmir    Shaiva 

school  of  philosophy,  by  Vasu  Gupta  and  Kshemaraja, 

165,  249,  257,  260,  262,  264. 
Shvet-ashvatara  Upanishat,  153,  209. 

Spanda-karika-vivrti,  by  Rflma  Kantha,  249,  262,  264,  269. 
Story  of  Life's  Mechanism,  by  H.  W.  Conn,  342. 

Taitiiriya  Upanishat,  47,  93,  109. 

faniraloka,  268. 

Tantra-shastra,    a    class    of   works  dealing   with    '  secret  * 

"sciences" and  arts,  110,  233,  247,  370. 
TQra-sara -Upanishat,  109,  234. 

Tatparya-prakSsha,  commentary  on  Yoga-Vasishtha,  147. 
Tattva-sandoha,  269. 


504  THE    SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Text-book  to  Kant,  by  Stirling,  65. 

Theosophist,  29. 

Thesaurus,  by  Roget,  142. 

The   Proposed    University  at  Indore,  by  Patrick  Geddes,  18. 

Tilaka-Tika,     commentary    on   De*vi   Bhagavata,   by   Nila- 

kantha,  252. 

Tlka,  on  Yoga-bhashya,  by  Vachaspati,  455. 
Tripad-vibhuti-maha-narayana  Upanishat,  377,  435. 
Two  New  Worlds,  by  Fournier  D'Albe,  391. 

Upanishats,  a  class  of  mystical  and  philosophical  treatises 
forming  part  of  the  Vedas,  96,  111,  120,  461. 

Upaskara,  commentary  on  Vaisheshika-sutra,  by  Shankara 
Mishra,  33. 

Vairagya-shataka,  by  Bhartr-hari,  486. 

Vaisheshika-sutra,  33,  54,  261. 

Vayu  Purana,  455. 

Vedanta-sara,  9,  222,  252,  256,  282. 

Vedas,  40,  54,  111,  115,  200,  243,  263. 

Vinaya-patrika,  a  collection  of  hymns,  in  Hindi,  by  Tulasi 

Das,  326. 
Vishqu-Purana,  29. 

What  is  Thought  ?,  by  Stirling,  78,  81,  82,  89. 

Yoga-sutra,  Aphorisms  by  PataSjali  on  the  Yoga  System 
of  philosophy  and  practical  or  applied  psychology,  109, 
161,  184,  288,  333,  360,  378,  403,  435,  455. 

Yoga-bhashya,  commentary  on  above,  by  Vyasa,  33,  175, 
259,  290,  301,  378,  462. 

Yoga-  Vasishtha,  a  large  work,  in  verse,  ascribed  to  Valmiki, 
on  mystical  and  Vecjanta  philosophy,  2,  3,  32,  38,  75, 
115,  147,  164,  180,  181,  213,  227,  262,  312,  342,  377, 
391,  398,  435,  440,  461,  484. 

Zadig  et  Micromegas,  Voltaire,  376. 


INDEX  OF  PROPER  NAMES 


Abhinava-gupta,  165. 

Adamson,  79. 

AdvaiJa-V&Janta,  the  name  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  52,  e 

Agni,  250,  263." 

Ahriman,  9. 

Albrecht,  94. 

Ananta,  317. 

Aniruddha,  271. 

Aristotle,  94. 

Bacon,  94. 

Balarama,  271. 

Boehme,  94. 

Bergson,  19,  214,  280,  281,  286. 

Besant,  Annie,  382,  399. 

Bhagavati,  a  name  and  form  of  Shakti,  115. 

Bhartr-hari,  486,  489. 

Bhava,  a  name  and  form  of  Shiva,  2,  236. 

Bhavani,    a    name  and  form   of   the  consort   or  shakti   of 

Shiva,  237. 
Bhim-acharya,  300. 
Bhushundi,  164. 

Blavatsky,  Helena  Petrovna,  389. 
Bose,  Sir  Jagacjisha  Chandra.  336. 
Brahma,  2,  170,  193,  236,  238,  249,  251,  290,  318,  319, 

323,  377. 
Brahmi,  249. 
Bruno,  94. 
Burns,  C.  D.,  349. 

Caird,  69. 
Capes,  The,  291. 
Carpenter,  Edward,  440. 


506  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Carr,  W.,  281. 

Chaldean  votaries,  454. 

Chandra,  a  name  of  the  moon,  250. 

Chandl,  a  name  and  form  of  the  Shakti  of  Shiva,  167. 

Charaka,  author  of  a  work  on  medicine,  which  is  known  by 

the  same  name ;  said  by  tradition  to  be  another  name  of 

PataSjali,  28,  etc. 
Chatterji,  J.  C.,  165. 

Descartes,  22,  94. 

Dolbear,  322,  382,  437. 

Durga,  240. 

Pvaita-Vedanta,  the  name  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  48,  etc. 

Eckhart,  94. 
Ellis,  Havelock,  204. 
Eros,  271,  304. 
Euclid,  40. 

Fichte,  66,  67,  68,  77-88,  94,  95,  174,  403. 
Fournier  d'Albe,  391. 
Fresnel,  386. 

Gargyayaga,  40,  121. 

Garuda,  317,  318. 

Gaur!,  236,  249,  318. 

Gayatri,  the  name  of  a  Rg-V6da-verse,  being  a  prayer  to  or 

invocation  of  the  Sun,  111,  243. 
Geddes,  Prof.  Patrick,  18. 
Goraksha,  250. 
Gnostic  Works,  112- 
Greek  Philosophers,  94,  410. 
Green,  27. 

Hamilton,  69. 
Hamsa,  323. 

Kara,  a  name  and  form  of  Shiva,  236. 
Hari,  a  name  and  form  of  Vishmi,  2. 

Hegel,  66-68 ;  his  main  thesis,  69-71  ;  his  petitio  principii, 
74-87  ;  his  great  error,  151. 


INDEX   OF   PROPER   NAMES  507 

Hoffding,  7,  9,  11,  27,  214,  222,  227,  271,  380. 
Hormuzd,  9. 

Htibbe-Schleiden,  Dr.,  386. 
Hume,  57,  160. 
Huygens,  386. 

Indra,  46?263,  341,  486. 

James,  William,  33,  53,  217,  261. 

Jevons,  180. 

Jishrjm,  a  name  and  form  of  Vishnu,  291. 

Kabbalistic  Works,  112. 

Kabir,  Indian  religious  reformer,  saint  and  poet,  464. 
Kala,  a  name  and  form  of  Time  and  also  of  Shiva,  316. 
Kali,  a  name  and  form  of  the  consort -Shakti  of  Shiva,  237, 

251,  318. 

Kama,  233;  Kama-Eros,  271,  304. 
Kanada,  467. 

Kandarpa,  a  name  and  form  of  Kama,  233. 
Kant,  58-66  ;  fundamental  defect  of,  54,  213,  369,  469. 
Keshava,  a  name  and  form  of  Vishnu,  326. 
Klein,  S.  T.,  312. 
Kroeger,  83,  174. 
Krshna,  38,  194,  245,  271. 
Krug,  73,  179,  354. 

Ladd,  Prof.,  380. 

Lakshml,    chief    name  and  form  of   the  consort-Shakti   of 

Vishnu,  233,  251,  318,  319. 
Lee,  F.S.',  194. 
Leibnitz,  94,  180. 

Ma,  a  name  of  Lakshmi,  234. 

Madhu-sudana  Sarasvatt,  85. 

Maha-Kala,  a  name  and  form  of  Shiva,  the  "  Great  Dark 

Time  or  Mover,11  317. 
Maha-Kall,  167. 
Maha-Lakshml,  167. 
MahS-Sarasvati,  167. 


508  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Mahesha,  a  name  and  form  of  Shiva,  2. 

Maitreyi,  2. 

Mansel,  69. 

Manu,  see  Manu. 

Markandeya,  164. 

McTaggart,  Prof.  J.  E.,  83. 

Mill,J.S.,  88. 

Mitra,  a  name  and  form  of  the  Sun,  263. 

Mukunda,  a  name  and  form  of  Vishnu,  115. 

Mystics,  94. 

Nachiketa,  1,  2,  36,  108. 

Narayana,  a  name  and  form  of  Vishnu,  291. 

Nayyayikas,  300. 

Neo-Platonists,  94. 

Newton,  386. 

NidSgha,  29. 

Nila-Kantha,  252,  318. 

North  Pole,  291. 

Nyaya,  name  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  53,  etc. 

Omar  Kfcayyam,  19. 
Ostwald,  91. 

Pajanjali,  109. 

Pearson,  Karl,  47,  220. 

Pfltiger,  349. 

Plato,  94. 

Pradyumna,271. 

Prajapati,  35,  47. 

Pra^ava,  a  name  of  AUM  ;  Etymological  explanation  of  the 

word,  109,  117,  233,  etc. 
Preyer,  348,  352. 

Qarin,  a  Sufi  poet,  465. 

Radha,  'that  form  of  Shakti,  prarja,  nerve  force,  vital  energy, 

which  energises  the  motor  organs,  240. 
Rama,  2.  "  ' 

Rama-Kantha,  249. 


INDEX   OF  PROPER   NAMES  509 

Rambha,  436. 

Ram  Narayana,  Dr.,  29. 

£bhu,  29. 

Roget,  142. 

Rosicrucians,  93. 

Rudra,  236,  251. 

Sankarshana-Bala-rama,  271. 

Sankhya,  the  name  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  9,  etc. 

SarasvatI,  231,  318. 

Satya-kama,  108. 

Scheffler,  94. 

Schelling,  his  statement  of  the  law  of  relativity,  66,  68,  77, 

79,  89. 

Schopenhauer,  94. 
Schwegler,  74,  83,  84,  89,  469. 
Scripture,  91. 
Sisyphus,  90. 
Shakti,  49. 

Shambhu,  a  name  and  form  of  Shiva,  291. 
Shankara,  a  name  and  form  of  Shiva,  234. 
Shankar-acharya,  19,  71,  84,  148. 
Shankara  Mishra,  33. 
Shesha,  317,  319. 
Shiva,    170,    193,   236,    237,    244,    248,    251,    253,    290, 

317,   318. 
Shri-Harsha,  31. 

Smara,  name  and  form  of  Kama,  304. 
Spencer,  Herbert,  69,  94,  272. 
Spinoza,  94. 
Stout,  27,  214. 
Sufi  poets,  462. 
Surya,  a  name  of  an  aspect  of  the  Sun,  250,  263. 

Tantalus,  90. 
Titans,  56. 

Tulasl  Das,  326,  327. 
Tunzelman,  390. 

Ueberweg,  65. 


510  THE   SCIENCE    OF  PEACE 

Urna  Haimavati,  a  name  and  form  of  Mula-prakrti,  '  that 
which  is  not  and  melts  away  like  snow ' ;  also  a  name 
and  form  of  Shiva's  consort,  341. 

VSchaspaJi,  455. 

Vaish6shika,  the  name  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  33,  etc. 

Vaishgavl,  a  name  and  form  of  the  shakti  of  Vishnu,  249. 

Varuija,  263. 

Vasishtha,  2,  139,  324. 

Vasudeva-Krshga,  271. 

Vatsyayana,  269. 

Vedanta,  the  name  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  4,  etc. 

Verworn,  Max,  194,  336,  342,  347,  354,  387,  409,  415. 

Vishnu,  2,  47,  170,  193,  213,  238,  249,251,271,291,317, 

318,  319. 

Vishvamitfra,  139. 
Voltaire,  376. 
Vyasa,  328. 

Ward,  James,  27,  189,  383,  428. 
Weismann,  24. 

Yajffa-valkya,  2. 

Yama,  1,  46,  108. 

Yoga,  the  name  of  a  system  of  philosophy,  33,  etc. 


GLOSSARY  OF  SAMSKRT  TERMS 

Abhasa,  '  illusory  appearance,1  11. 

Abhasa -vatfa,  *  the  doctrine '  that  the  world-process  is  an 
1  illusion/  another  name  for  Advaita-Vedanta,  11. 

Abhi-mana,  'egoistic  desire,  pride,1  266,  270. 

Abhimani-devata,  the  *  individualising  '  and  ensouling  '  deity/ 
the  non-human  jlva  functioning  as,  or  in,  a  nature-force 
or  nature-phenomenon,  263. 

Abhi-nivesha,  tenacity,  obduracy,  clinging  to  separate  indi- 
vidualised life,  will-to-live,  233,  239. 

Abhi-sandhi,  determination,  intention,  266,271. 

Abhi-vyakta,  clearly  manifested,  defined,  distinct,  285. 

Abhyasa,  practice,  perseverance,  repetition,  195. 

A-chit,  '  un-conscious  ' ;  inanimate ;  material ;  matter,  49,  173. 

Adana,  taking  back,  238. 

Adas,  the  somewhat  distant  *  this,'  41. 

Adhara,  '  that  which  supports,  310. 

Adhi-aksha,  overlord,  oversee,  32. 

Adhi-bhautika,  made  of  the  physical  bhutas,  i.e.,  sensable 
materials,  440. 

Adhikari,  the  person  entitled,  having  the  right,  53. 

Adho-gamana,  going  downward,  381. 

Adhyasa,  '  super-imposition  *  or  reflection  of  the  attributes  of 
one  thing  on  or  in  another  thing,  11,  204,  340. 

Adhyasa- vada,  the  doctrine  that  the  world-process  is  a  dream- 
image,  '  super-imposed '  upon  the  Universal  Conscious- 
ness by  Itself,  11. 

Adhyajma-vicjya,  '  the  science  of  the  Self f :  subjective 
science ;  psychology,  47. 

Adhyavasaya,  ascertained  knowledge,  266,  270. 

Adi,  '  beginning,1  the  '  first '  tattva,  312,  376,  438. 

-tattva,   '  the   first  element '   (of  matter),  next  but  one 
above  akasha  in  gradation  of  subtlety,  376,  438. 


512  THE    SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

A-dvaita,    '  non-dual ' ;    non-dualistic  ;  monistic,   52,   84-88, 

"  194,238,493. 
Agama,  '  that  which  has  come  down,'  a  traditional  school  of 

religio-philosophical  worship,  236. 
Agni,  '  fire,1  the  root-element  of  matter  corresponding  to  the 

organ  of  vision,  411,  438. 
Aham,  '  I ' ;  Ego;  Self,  119,  158,  191,  238,  285,  308,  332,  333 

337,344-7,351,402.     - 
Aham-dhiji,        I -consciousness,'      individualist-feeling,      (as 

shaktO,  264. 

Aham-EtaJ,  141,  392,  etc. 
Aham-Etat-Na,     119,      139,     146,     200,     208,     225,     238, 

325,  etc.  t  t  t 

Aham-kara,     '  I -ness,'   '  Egoism,'     Ego-ising,   self -referring, 

selfish  desire,'  56,  191,  215,  228,  255,  256,  260,  264,  376, 

432,  458. 

AjBana,  non- Knowledge,  'nescience/  tamas,  257,  258. 
Akasha,   '  space  ' ;  '  the  luminous  ' ;  the  root-element  or  plane 

of  matter  corresponding  to  the  organ  of  hearing  and  the 

quality   of  sound,  85,  159,  173,  376,  377,  282,  389,  395, 

398,411,438. 

A-kasmika,  'without  a  why,'  causeless,  accidental,  371. 
A-khanda*,  '  without  parts,'  140,  285. 
Akshara-mudra,    J     kind    f  acrosti     m 
Akshara-mushti,  J 
Akunchana,  '  contraction,'  381. 
A-lasya,  '  laziness,'  257. 
Alochana,  sensation,'  269. 
A-mitra,  'non-friend,'  foe,  175. 
Amsha-guna-kala,  360. 

A-mukhya,   '  not-chief/  minor,  subordinate,  299. 
A-mukhya-karapa,    '  un-principal   cause ' ;   a  minor  or   sub- 
sidiary cause,  299. 
A-murJa,  formless,  285,  290. 
An-aham,  '  NotJ  '  Non-Ego,  119. 
Anadi-pravaha,  '  beginningless  (and  endless)  flow,'  181. 
An-adi-pravaha-safta,     '  beginningless-flow-existence/    ever- 

lastingness,  34. 
An-dmaya,  '  not-sick'  257. 
Ananda,  4  bliss,'  167-169,  191,  238,  380-1,  383,  401. 


GLOSSARY   OF   SAMSKRT  TERMS  513 

Ananda-ghana,  1  *  compacted  bliss.' )  139    4Q- 

Anan<Ja-maya,   /  composed  of  bliss,  j         '         ' 

An-anyat,  '  not-other,1  457. 

An-artha-v£da,  a  counsel  of  evil,  a  mischievous  doctrine,  291. 

An-atma,  *  Not-Self,'  148,  173^ 

Anava-mala,   '  atom-dust,1  the  '  stain  '  of  '  atoms  f  created  by 

desire,  264. 
Andolana,    *  swinging ' ;    revolving,   weighing,   pondering   or 

balancing  in  the  mind ;  cogitation  ;  agitation,  381. 
An-idam,  '  not-this,'  115,  116. 

A-nirdeshya,  '  not  to  be  pointed  out,'  indefinable,  139. 
A-nirvachaniya,  '  indescribable,'  148. 
Aniti,  '  breathes,'  contracts  and  expands,  262. 
A-nitya,  '  impermanent,'  211. 
An-rta,    'not   right';    false;    untrue;   unlawful ;  unrighteous, 

*173,  192. 

Anrta-jada-duhkha,  unreal-unliving-miserable,  192. 
Anta,  'end,'"  315. 
Anfah,  '  inner,'  307. 

Antah-karana,  '  the  inner  instrument,  176,  260,  264,  438. 
Antah-karana-chatushtaya,  the  four  aspects,   faculties,  func- 
tions of  the  inner  organ,'  261. 

Antara,  *  interval ' ;  middle  ;  interspace  ;  difference,  306. 
Antar-yflmi,  *  inner  watcher  or  ruler  '  ;  the  Self,  164. 
Antya-sdmanya,  the  '  final '  or  highest  genus,  468. 
Antya-vishesha,  the  final  or  lowest  '  particular  '  or  singular, 

468,  470. 

Anu,  '  ion,'  atom,  81,  260,  262,  263,  264,  389,  398,  471,  475. 
Anu   bhava,   Anu-bhuti,  presentation,  experience,  '  becoming 

like  '  the  object,  32. 
An-ud  buddha,  sub-conscious,  or  supra-conscious,  not   risen 

into  waking  consciousness,  above  or  below  the  threshold 

of  consciousness,  dormant,  un-awake,  285. 
An-upSdaka,   '  receiver-less  '  ;  the  root-element  of  matter  next 

above  akSsha,  so-called  because  there  is  as  yet  no  organ 

or  '  receiver  '  developed  by  humanity  for  it,  376,  438. 
Anu*san<Jh£na,  tracing,  following  out,  connecting  before  and 

after,  270. 

Anu-vyavasflya,  '  ap-perception,'  424. 
Anvaya,  '  concomitant  presence/  473. 
33 


514  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Anyat-anyat,  '  other  of  other/  '  other  than  other,'  150. 

Apakshepana,  ^casting  away/  381. 

Apara-paksha,  'other  side  or  wing,'  306. 

Apara-p&rshva,  '  other  side  or  flank,'  306. 

Apard-prakrti,  'other  or  un-higher,  i.e.,  lower  nature,' 
245,263. 

Apara-visheha,  '  lowest  particular,'  285,  470. 

A-pari-n£mi,  *  unchanging,'  163. 

A-par-oksha,  '  not  away  from  the  eye  ' ;  direct ;  immediate, 
41,  202,  247. 

Apas  or  flpah,  '  waters ' ;  the  root-element  of  matter  corres- 
ponding to  the  organ  of  taste,  376,  382,  389,  390. 

Apa-sarpaija,  '  moving  away,'  322. 

A-paurusheya,  '  non-human,'  '  super-human,'  41. 

A-prak£sha,  'non-illumination,'  absence  of  light,  dark- 
ness, 257. 

A-pravrttij  '  in-activity,'  listlessness,  257. 

A-priti,'  dis-satisfaction,  260. 

Arambha,  'origin,'  commencement,  257,  312. 

Arambha-vacja,  'the  theory  or  doctrine  of  a  beginning/ 
i.e.,  creation  of  the  world  by  a  Personal  God,  7,  11,  222. 

Artha,  *  desired  substance '  (and  its  equivalents  and  allies, 
(Jravya,  bala,  bhakti,  ichchha)  254,  255. 

Artha-vflija,  allegory,  parable,  metaphor,  291. 

A-sa<Jhflrana,  'uncommon/  special,  371. 

A-sa<jhflrana-nimitta,  "  uncommon  cause  or  condition  ' ;  special 
or  chief  cause  or  condition,  299. 

A-samav£yi-kdrana,  '  non- concomitant  cause/  299. 

A-sat,  'non-existent/  '  un-true/  '  not-good/  70,  182,  183. 

A-shama,  restlessness,  257. 

Ashvattha,  one  of  the  three  chief  varieties  of  great  Indian 
fig-trees,  the  pipal,  415. 

Asmi,  'am/  119,  208,  238,  239. 

Asmi-Ja,  '  am-ness/  the  feeling  that  '  I  am  '  a  separate  indi- 
vidual, sense  of  separate -self -existence,  229,  234,  239, 
264. 

A-sura,  a  class  of  non- human  beings  ;  also  a  race  of  human 
beings ;  (some  think  the  Assyrians  were  so  named  in 
the  Vedas),  398. 

A  tana,  wandering,  381. 


GLOSSARY   OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  515 

Atati,  foes  about,  262. 

Atita,  'past,1  transcendent,  ]39. 

Ati-vflhika,  the  "  transmigrating  '  body  ;  ideal  or  mental  body, 
made  of  thought  or  imagination,  as  opposed  to  the  physi- 
cal or  a(Jhi-bhautika  body,  440. 

Atma,  Self  (Gr.  '  atom  '  or  '  etymon '),  28,  59,  84,  85,  153, 
160,  161,  164,  171,  261-265,  291,  292,  326,  338,  409. 

Atrna-bucjcjhi-manas,  the  Self — the  Universal  mind  or  pure 
reason — the  individualising  mind,  214,  291,  440. 

Atma-cjharana,  '  self -maintenance,'  367. 

Atrna-nubhava,  '  self-experience,'  apperception,  424. 

Atma-vasha,  '  self-dependent,'  229. 

Atma-vi(Jya, '  the  Science  of  the  Self,'  247. 

Atra,  '  here '  306. 

Aty-ant-a-sat,  '  extremely  non-existent ',  utterly  non-existent, 
pure  non-being,  87. 

A-U-M,  1,  108,  117,  121,  200,  494,  495,  497. 

Avarana,  '  enveloping ' ;  veiling,  screening,  covering  up, 
blinding,  238,  239,  257,  258,  260,  271. 

Avarta-bhramana,  *  spiral  motion,'  322. 

Avasana,  '  end  ',  completion,  termination,  312. 

Avashyaka-ta,  '  helplessness ',  necessity,  217. 

Avastha,  state,  condition,  247. 

Avatara,  '  descent,'  '  incarnation,'  an  incarnate  deity,  264. 

A-vidya,  '  non-knowledge  ' ;  nescience  ;  ignorance ;  error,  168, 
175,  218,  226,  234,  241,  242,  245,  246,  253,  258. 

Avi<Jya-Vi(Jya-Mahavi4ya,  error-truth-great-Science  (or  Wis- 
dom), 254. 

Avi$ya-kama-karmaf  '  Error-desire-action.'  67. 

A-vikarl,  '  immutable,'  164. 

A-vyakta,  '  unmanifested  ' ;  undefined  ;  vague  ;  unmanifested 
or  root- Matter;  (sometimes  also)  unmanifested  Spirit,  159, 

_  _  173,  194,  285,  458. 

Ayama,  '  extent,1  extension,  length,  332. 

Ayana,  '  going/  motion,  302,  319,  332. 

Ayu,  '  lifetime/  332. 

A-yuga-pat,  '  not  two  together/  '  not  simultaneous/  at  differ- 
ent times,  successively,  285. 

Ba<J<Jha, '  bound/  fettered,  229. 


516  THE   SCIENCE   OF   PEACE 

Bahih, '  outside  ' ;  outer,  external,  307. 

Bahish-karafla,  *  outer  instrument,*  the  external  or  physical 

sensor  and  motor  organs,  176. 
Bala,  strength,  power,  254. 
Bancjha  or  ban (Jh ana,  *  bondage/  315. 
Bhakti,  love,  devotion,  254,  453,  459. 
Bhakti-Yoga,  '  the  path  of  devotion,'  255. 
Bhava,    existence,    being,   thought,   emotion,  feeling,   thing, 

intention,  284,  378. 
Bhav  a<Jvaita,  realisation  of  non-separateness  or  unity  of  all 

life    and    all    living    beings    in    emotion,   by   universal 

love,  493. 
Bhflvand-cjardhya,   consolidation,   condensation,   '  hardening  * 

of  *  thought '  or  imagination,  228. 
Bhavishyat,  '  that  which  will  be ' ;  future,  313. 
Bheda,  'dividing1,  division  ;  separateness  ;  difference,  173. 
Bhe<Ja-mula,  *  the  root  or  source  of  separateness,'  173. 
Bhrama,  Bhranfi,   wandering,  '  gyrating,'  moving  round  and 

round,  159,  210,  233. 
Bhuh-bhuvah-svah,    the    three  worlds   or  planes,   physical- 

astral-mental,  or  physical-astro-mental-causal,  250. 
Bhuta,  *  what  has  become  ' ;  being  ;  creature ;  element,  284, 

313,376,458. 
Bhut-a(Ji;  the  '  first  being  '  or  '  the  originator  of  the  (material) 

elements,'  376. 
Bhut-a(Ji,  ahamkara  regarded  as  originator  of  the  five  tattvas, 

256,  284,  376. 

Bhuvah,  the  astral  world,  250. 
Bija,  '  seed  ' ;  potency  ;  186. 
Bija-mantra,  '  seed-idea,'  principle,  285. 
Bindu, '  point/  drop,  308. 
Bodha,  understanding,  270. 
Brahma-charya,  the  pursuit  or  storing,  of  (a)  knowledge,  (b) 

the  vital  seed,  (c)  the  '  Infinite,'  108. 
Brahma,  '  immensity,  expansion,  or  extension  f ;  the  Absolute,. 

the  Supreme,  35,  41,  84-8,  93,    108-9,  113,  115-6,  138- 

40,   150-64,   167,   172,  176-7,   192,  202,  209,  210,  219, 

264,  307,  318,  320,  350,  375,  401,  418,  458, 478, 487,  493. 
Brahm-anda,  an  egg  of  the  infinite,  an  orb  in  space,  a  globe,  a 

heavenly  body,  a  solar  system,  176,  291,  411,  438. 


GLOSSARY   OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  517 

Brahma-vidya,  the  '  Science  of  the  Infinite,'  Metaphysic, 
41,  247. 

Brahma- Vishnu-Shiva,  251,  318. 

Brh,  '  to  grow  or  expand,1  307. 

Buddhi,  '  apprehending  ' ;  consciousness  ;  knowledge  ;  deter- 
mining intelligence  ;  reason  ;  the  pure  or  determinate 
reason;  universal  mind,  supra-consciousness,  44-5,  116, 
144,  159,  160,  174,  213-15,  239-41,  244,  246,  255,  260, 
280,  283-25,  382,  424,  428,  432,  438-40,  458. 

Buddhi-bodha,  *  cognition  of  cognition,'  apperception,  424. 

Buddhi  (rnahat)-ahankara-manas  (and  their  equivalents  and 
allies),  '  intellection-emotion-volition,'  255,  256,  260-22, 
269-71,  283-5,  289-290. 

Buddhi-manas,  '  Universal  mind  and  individual  mind '  and 
allied  or  derivative  pairs  of  opposites,  285,  290,  296. 

Buddhi-tattva,  another  name  for  the  anupadaka-tatfrva,  376, 
382,  438. 

Chakra,  circle,  cycle,  200,  316,  322. 
Chakra-vat,  'like  a  disc,'  rotatory,  316,  322. 
Chalana,  '  going,1  movement,  319. 
Chanchalya,  restless  motion,  260. 
Chara,  application,  practice,  285. 
Chetana,  consciousness,  270,  285. 

Chetayati,  brings  or  calls  to  mind,  remembers,  190,  270. 
Chid-akasha-chitt-akasha-mah-akasha,   the  space  of  Consci- 
ousness and  the  space  of  mind  and  the  great  space,  398. 
Chid-ghana,     '  compressed     or     compacted    consciousness ' ; 

plenum  of  consciousness,  139,  400. 
Chit,   consciousness,    '  awareness,'  -49,   167-9,    189-91,    238, 

270.  400. 

Chiti,  Universal  Consciousness,  189,  270. 
Chitta,  the  individual  mind  as  summation  of  bu(J(Jhi-ahamkara- 

manas,   45,  189,  213-5,  258-64,  269-71,  282,  285,  290, 

447. 
Chitta-vimukti,  the  emancipation  of  (or  from  the  individual) 

mind;     change    of    attitude   from  egoism   to  altruistic 

universalism,  453. 

Daiva,  '  divine,'  ordained  by  the  divine,  destiny,  fate,  228-9. 
Daivi,  'divine,' 245-6. 


518  THE    SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Paivl-maya, '  divine  illusion,1  245. 

Daivl-prakrti,  '  divine  nature  ' :  energy,  245-6,  263. 

Dama,  restraint  of  the  senses,  12,  202. 

Darshana,  *  seeing,'  view,  point  of  view,  doctrine,  philosophy, 

5,  364. 

Deha,  body,  285. 
Desna,  '  that  which  is  pointed  out ' ;  direction  ;  space  ;  place  ; 

country,  147,  301. 

Desha-Kala-avastha,  *|  time-place-circumstance, 

Desha-Kala-Kriya,  V  time-place-action, 

Desna- Kala-nimitta  or  hetu, J  time-space-causality, 

149,  247,  301,  331. 

Desh-atita, '  beyond  space,1  transcending  space ;  spaceless,  140. 
Deva,   *  shining  being/   'deity/  a  (non-human)  spirit,  41,  84, 

185,  263,  398,  448. 

Deva-chan,  '  place  of  the  gods/  the  heaven-world,  448. 
Dharma,  '  the  holder/  *  the  supporter  ' ;  law  ;  duty  ;  religions  ; 

function  ;  attribute,  54,  371. 
pharma-megha,   a  mystic  condition  of  tranced  and  blissful 

meditation  in  which  knowledge  of  the  laws  which  govern 

and  hold  together  the  world-process,   rains  in  upon   the 

soul,  (compare,  "  the  cloud  over  the  Sanctuary  "  of  the 

mystics),  441,  457. 
Dharana,  holding  the  mind  to  one  selected  object  and  place 

(in  the  body),  285. 
Phriti,  retentiveness,  291. 
Phyafla,  incessant  contemplation,  285. 
Dikshd,  initiation,  consecration,  dedication,  258. 
Dishta,  the  '  destined/  229. 
Dravya,  *  the  movable  '  or  c  the  liquifiable  * ;  substance  ;  thing, 

191,   193,  254,  369,  379,  381-3,  389-90,  394,  395,  413, 

467,  475. 
Dravya-guga- Karma,      '  substance-quality-movement/      191, 

193,  246,  247,  369,  370,  385,   387,  388,  390,  402,  406, 

413,  467,  474,  477. 
Puhkha,  pain,  192,  257. 
pvaita, '  duality/  47-49,  172. 
Dvan-dvam,  '  two  and  two  ' ;  pairs  ;  opposites  ;  the  relative  ; 

the  opposed;    struggle;    war,   158,   173,   178,   179,  199* 

200,  280,  297,  298,  400. 


GLOSSARY   OF    SAMSKRT   TERMS  519 

Dvandv-atita,    '  beyond    duality  ' ;     the    transcendent ;    the 

Absolute,  139. 

Dvesha,  hate,  233-4,  239-41,  266. 
Dvy-arjuka,  '  di-atom/  389. 

Eka,  '  one,'  284. 

Ek-akaram,  '  one-formed  ' ;  uniform  ;  never-changing  form  ; 
partless,  263. 

Eshana,  ambitious  effort,  ambition,  270. 

Etat,  'this/  41,  119,  191,207,237-8,307-9,312-16,319-22, 
332-37,  339,  341,  344,  345,  347,  350,  351,  361,  367,  381, 
387-90,  394,  398,  402,  417,  418,  430,  468,  475,  479,  481. 

Etat-Na,  '  This-Not,'  264. 

Evam,  '  thus/  382. 

Gandharva,  a  class  of  non -human  beings  or  spirits  of  a  high 

order,  devoted  to  music,  398,  419. 
Garva,  arrogance,  270. 
Gati,  'going,'  movement,  319,  381. 
Gauna,  '  pertaining  to  guna  or  quality  (and  not  to  substance)' ; 

secondary  ;  non-essential,  271. 
Gayatrl,  '  that  which  protects   its  utterer,'  the  most  sacred 

mantra  of  the  Vedas,   an  invocation  of  the  Sun,  110-11, 

243. 

Ghora,  violent,  vehement,  dire,  260. 
Gola,  '  sphere,'  308. 
Guhya,  secret,  115. 
Guha,  'attribute,  property,  quality,'    166,   190-93,   238,283, 

301-3,  369,  370,  374,  378,  381,  382,  395. 
Guru,  *  heavy,  weighty  ' ;  teacher,  382. 

Hala-hala,  the  deadly  venom  thrown  up  at  the  churning  of 
the  Ocean,  in  the  Purana-legend  (symbolical  of  the  Hate, 
Inseparable  from  the  struggle  for  existence  in  the  Ocean 
of  Life),  461. 

Hamsa,  i.e.,  aham  sab,  '  I  am  that ' ;  the  swan  ;  the  sun  ;  the 
jiva,  210,  323. 

Hetu,  reason,  cause,  motive,  247,  297,  300. 

Ichchha,  '  desire,  wish/  56,  167,  169,  189,  193,  236,  239,  255, 
266,  310,  317,  318,  367,  402. 


520  THE    SCIENCE    OF    PEACE 


,  '  this/  41,  208,  382,  402. 

Ida-pingala-sushumna,  names  of  three  principal  nerves  not 
yet  clearly  identified  ;  but  probably  ida  means  the  chief 
motor  nerves  and  pingala  the  chief  sensor-nerves  ; 
sushumna  may  stand  for  the  spinal  canal  and  correspond- 
ing hollows  in  the  other  nerve-tubes  and  nerve-cells  in 
which  desire  plays,  250. 

Indriya,  sensor  or  motor  organ,  284,  458. 

Istita-deva,  the  *  beloved  god,1  the  deity  who  is  the  object  of 
devotion,  407. 

Ishvara,  '  ruler  '  ;  the  Ruler  of  a  cosmic  system,  or  planet,  or 
kingdom,  etc.  ;  a  Jiva  who  has  passed  on  to  the  nivrtti- 
marga,  and  so  become  a  ruler  of  his  sheaths,  49,  160, 
169-172,  241,  328,  412,  429,  etc. 

Ijtharn,  '  such/  382. 

Jada,  'inert1;  unconscious;  matter,  173,  193,280,400,432. 

Jagat,  '  that  which  goes  or  moves  incessantly  '  ;  the  world,  265. 

JagraJ,  '  waking/  285,  344. 

Jagrat-svapna-sushupti,  waking-dreaming-slumbering,  344. 

Jala,  water,  same  as  Apah,  411. 

Jati,  '  gens/  genus,  type,  species,  285. 

Jati-flyur-bhoga,  '  genus  (species,  type)  —  life-period  —  experi- 
ence, 333,  360. 

Jiva  or  Jiv-atma,  'a  living  being  ';  an  individual  ego  ;  one 
evolving  unit  or  line  of  consciousness,  3,  6,  7,  12,  22,  33, 
39,  45,  48,  50,  56,  81,  152,  158,  159,  160,  163,  179-182, 
209,  210,  213,  263,  315,  321,  324,  331,  360,  378,  399,  431, 
466,  480,  482. 

Jiva-atom,  472,  477,  etc. 

Jiva,  radius,  308. 

Jiva-kosha,  the  core-body  of  the  jiva,  the  jiva-cell,  the  jiva- 
capsule,  (the  auric  egg),  23,  345. 

Jlvan-mukta,  liberated,  emancipated,  freed  (while  still  in  the 
body,  from  narrownesses,  bigotries,  superstitions,  sectari- 
anisms; illiberalities,  etc.,  as  well  as  from  doubt  and  fears 
in  respect  of  the  soul's  '  immortality  '  and  infinity  ;  also, 
it  may  be,  from  the  bonds  of  the  flesh  in  the  mystic  sense 
of  ability  to  consciously  separate  and  reunite  the  subtler 
body  and  the  denser),  459. 


GLOSSARY   OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  521 

JSana,  'cognition,  knowledge/  56,  167-69,  189,  193,  213, 
214,  215,  239,  261,  285,  316-18,  402,  453,  461,  474. 

JSana-bhakti-karma,  '  knowledge  devotion-works/  453,  493. 

Jnana-ghana,  '  compressed,  compacted,  composed  of  know- 
ledge/ 139. 

JSSna-ichchha-kriya,  'cognition-desire-action/  55-7,  167-70, 
189,  193,  239,  246,  247,  251,  255-7,  269-71,  304,  318, 
370,  406,  417,  476,  493,  etc. 

Jfiana-yoga  —  Bhakti-yoga — Karma  or  Kriya-yoga,  '  the  paths 
of  knowledge-devotion-works/  255,  447. 

Jnana-vairagya-bhakti, '  illuminated  vision-detached  aloofness- 
love  of  the  supreme  in  all/  67,  458« 

Jnanendriya,  sensor  organ,  240. 

Jneya,  'cognisable,  knowable/  173. 

Kaivalyam,  '  One-ness/  '  sole-ness/  realisation  that  all  Life 
is  but  One,  in  the  Life  of  the  One  Self,  that  there  is 
no-other-than-I,  116,  328,  457. 

Kala,  'the  mover';  time;  death;  the  black,  88,  147,  301, 
316,  317,  318. 

Kal-atita,  'beyond  or  transcending  time/  263. 

Kal-atita-ta,  'transcendence  of  time  ' ;  timelessness,  88. 

Kalpa,    '  arrangement ' ;    a  cycle,  316,  492. 

Kamandalu,  a  water-bowl,  323. 

Kanda-Jnana,  partial  knowledge,  knowledge  of  particulars,  285, 

Kararjta,  '  means  of  doing  ' ;  instrument,  246,  284,  410. 

Kararja, '  cause/  causal,  219,  251,  297,  300,  344,  420. 

Karana-sharlra,  '  the  causal  body  '  (which  is  the  cause  or  the 
origin  of  the  others),  416,  435,  439. 

Karma,  movement ;  action  ;  human  action  regarded  as  meri- 
torious or  sinful  and  resulting  in  pleasure  or  pain  to  the 
doer,  48,  51,  191,  193,  229,  257,  369,  379,  380,  382,  392, 
467,  474,  486. 

Karma-yoga,  the  path  of  works,  255. 

Karm-endriya,  motor  organ,  239. 

Karta,  '  doer,  actor/  297,  299. 

Karya,  '  the  to-be-done ' ;   work  ;  act,  effect,  283,  299. 

Kdrya-vimukji,  a  particular  kind  of  liberation,  or  yoga- 
accomplishment,  453. 

K  ash  ay  a,  '  bitter  '  worry,  melancholy  reverie,  "  fit  of  the 
blues/'  239. 


522  THE   SCIENCE    OF    PEACE 

Kevala-ta,  same  as  kaivalya,  116. 

Khyati,  understanding,  perception,  165. 

Kinnara,  a  variety  of  non-human  or  sub-human  spirits,, 
(possibly  also  some  now  extinct  race  of  high  anthro- 
poids), 419. 

Kosha,  c  sheath,  case  ',  passim. 

Karma,  succession,  310. 

Kriya,  action,  56,  167-70,  189,  193,  239,  260,  299,  301,  316, 
403,  474. 

Kriy-advaita,  realization  of  the  one-ness  of  all  life  by  means 
of  philanthrophic  and  self-sacrificing  deeds,  493. 

Kriya-yoga,  the  path  of  works ;  a  special  yoga  discipline,  447» 

Krtya,  duty,  application,  practice,  285. 

Krtyd,  an  elemental,  a  spirit-force  artificially  created,  263. 

Krfi,  volition,  conation,  effort,  innervation,  229,  266,  270. 

Ksharjia,  moment,  316. 

Kshetra,  *  field  ' ;  field  of  consciousness  ;  the  body  wherein 
consciousness  manifests,  283,  285,  333. 

Kushmanda,  a  low  order  of  non-human  spirits,  419. 

Kuta-stha,  '  rock-seated  ' ;  motionless  ;  eternal,  164,  302. 

Kuta-stha-satta,  '  rock-seated  being  ',  changelessness,  35. 

Kuta-stha-nifya,  *  rock-seatedly  permanent ' ;  changelessly 
eternal,  161. 

Laghu,  '  light '  (the  opposite  of  heavy),  small,  382. 
Lakshana,  '  sign/  mark  ;  characteristic  ;  attribute,  371. 
Lakshya,  object,  285. 
Laukika-drshtl,   the  common    physical    (or  worldly)   vision, 

(or  view),  285. 

Laya,  '  dissolution  ' ;  mergence,  238-41,  258. 
Laya-sthdna,  the  junction  point  or  place  of  disappearance, 

the   point   of   break   or  gap   of  consciousness,  between 

waking  and  dreaming,  for  instance,  283. 
Llia,  '  play/  pastime  ;  207,  221,  325,  328,  491. 
Linga-deha,    type-body  f ;  etheric  double,  433. 
Lobha  ('  love  '),  greed,"  257. 
Loka,  '  light '  (luminous) ;  '  visible  f ;  world  ;  plane,  309,  399. 

Macja,  '  pride/  258. 

Mafjana, '  maddener,'  Cupid,  258. 


GLOSSARY   OF    SAMSKRT   TERMS  525 

Madhya,  *  medium,'  middle,  306,  312. 

Macjhyfima,  the  sound  of  the  astro-mental  plane,  250. 

Maha-bhuta,   '  great-being,'  primal  elements  of  matter,  390, 

411,  446. 

Mahfl-kalpa,  '  a  great  cycle/  376. 
Mahd-kdrana-sharira,     the  great  causal  body/  the  budcjhic 

body,  326. 
Mahfl-kflsha — chitt^-k^sha — chida-kasha,    the    space  of  the 

physical  senses,  the  space  of  the  mind,  and  the  space  of 

the  Universal  Consciousness,  398. 
MahSn-fltma,  the  great  self  as  universal  mind,  174,  213,  264, 

283,  290,  291,  378,  428. 
Mahan-purusha,  '  great  men/  352. 
Mahfl-samvit,  '  great  or  universal  consciousness/  400. 
Mahfl-sat,  the  great  existence,  401. 

Mahd-shil£-sattd»  '  great  rock-being  ' ;  rockboundness,  484. 
Mahat,   the  '  great '   universal   mind,   the  principle  of  pure 

(because  unmotived  by  selfish  egoism)  all-comprehending 

reason,  45,   160,  174,  213,  271,  282,  289,  290,  291,  360f 

378,  382,  428,  432,  438. 
Mahat-tattva,  '  the  great-element ' ;  same  as  the  3<Ji-tattva,  and 

possibly   so   called   because,   as   the  primordial  root,   it 

includes  in  its  greatness  all  the  others,  376,  382. 
Mahat-bucjdhi,  174,  256,  285,  438, 
Mahfl-v^kya,  '  great  sentence/  logion,  85. 
Maha-vidyd,    *  great    knowledge  ' ;  perfect   knowledge  ;  wis- 
dom ;  a  name  of  an  aspect  of  Shakti,  241-3,  246. 
Mala,  stain,  dirt,  258. 
Mama,  mine,  402. 
Mflna,  '  measure  ' ;  mental  measuring,  weighing,  inference  or 

reasoning ;  thinking   in  high  measure  of  oneself,  prider 

404. 
Manab,  Manas,   'mind/  56,  57,   142-5,  159-60,  213-5,  246, 

260,     261,     264,    266,  280,   282,    283,   285,   288,    289, 

432,  ^  440. 

Manana,  '  mentation/  revolving  in  mind,  263. 
Manas-bm&hi,  285,  289,  290. 
Mancjya, '  dullness,  slowness/  381. 
Mano-maya-kosha,  sheath  or  body  of  astral  or  emotional  or 

lower  mental  matter,  256. 


524  THE   SCIENCE    OF    PEACE 

Mantra,  '  that  which,  being  thought  of  '  protects,1  a  charm,  an 
incantation,  263,  285,  377. 

Manvanfara,  '  the  interval  between  two  manus,  the  period  of 
the  reign  of  a  Manu,  438. 

Mati,  intelligence,  290,  291. 

Mdtr£,  *  matter  ' ;  measure  ;  '  matrix  ' ;  that  which  measures, 
out,  i.e.,  manifests  spirit,  173,  233,  234. 

May3,  '  that  which  is  not ' ;  illusion  ;  the  Energy  or  force  of 
illusion,  which  causes  the  illusory  appearance  of  a  suc- 
cessive world-process,  49,  50,  51,  87,  145,  159-61,  218, 
222,  223,  233,  234,  237,  238,  239,  324,  350,  427. 

Maya-shabalam,  '  tinged  with  maya,'  160. 

Mithyfc,  '  mythical ' ;  false,  183,  285,  290. 

Moha,  perplexing,  '  fainting,1  257-260. 

Mohana,  '  perplexer,'  fascinator,  enthraller,  enchanting,  258. 

Moksha,  \  '  emancipation,   liberation,  deliverance  '     from  the 

Mukti,  /  pains  of  the  world-process,  14,  53,  76,  116,  195, 
214,  241,  254,  282,  315,  447-9  482. 

Mudha,  '  perplexed.1  260. 

Mukhya,  '  facial,'  chief,  principal,  in  the  forefront,  at  the 
head,  371. 

Mukhya-karana,  '  principal  cause.' 

Mukta,  '  the  freed,  the  liberated,'  17,  228,  315,  355,  493. 

Mula-prakrti,  'root-nature';  primal  matter,  41,  111,  113, 
119,  159,  172,  173,  179,  182,  189-94,  238-45,  246,  263, 
302,  315,  323,  332-4,  338,  347,  368-70,  379,  400,  401, 
406,  407,  418-25,  437,  458,  467-73,  476,  481,  485. 

Mula-sutra,  root-principle,  285. 

Mumuksha,  '  the  desire  for  deliverance,'  18. 

Murta,  having  form,  285. 

Murti,  form,  290. 

Na,  '  not ' ;  negation,  191,  238,  302,  316. 

Naga,  an  order  of  non-human  spirits  :  also,  serpent,  elephant, 

etc.,,  419. 

Nama-rupa,  name  and  form,,  285. 
Nflna,  the  many  which  are    not,'  173. 
Nareshvara,  '  lord  of  men,'  171. 
Naya,  theory,  rule,  principle,  285. 
Nifra,  sleep,  257,  266. 


GLOSSARY   OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  525 

Nija-bo<Jha,  *  self-knowledge,'  apperception,  424. 

Nimajjana,  '  immersion,  mergence/  319. 

Nimitta,  *  condition,'  reason,  cause,  instrumental  cause  pur- 
pose, 147,  246,  299. 

Nir-anjana, '  stainless,1  140. 

Nir-guna,  '  attribute-less/  148,  218,  242,  254. 

Nir-mala-tva,  '  freedom  from  impurity,'  257. 

Nirvana,  the  extinction  of  the  selfish  divine,  440. 

Nirodlia,  '  control,1  '  restraint,'  '  inhibition,'  162,  214,  285. 

Ni-rupa,  '  form-less,'  140. 

Nir-upadhi,  '  without  receptacle,'  without  a  sheath,  limitation, 
or  distinction. 

Nir-vikSra,  *  immutable,'  changeless,  140. 

Nir-vishesha,  *  without  speciality,'  without  distinguishing 
marks,  140. 

Nishchaya,  '  certainty,'  270. 

Nishedha,  negation,  forbiddal,  199. 

Nish-kriya,  '  actionless/  140. 

Nitya,  'permanent,'  28,  161,  211. 

Nitya-pralaya,  constant  dissolution,'  212. 

Nitya-sarga,  '  constant  creation  or  emanation/  212. 

Nivrtti,   'inversion/   Reversion';  return;  renunciation,   171. 

Nivrtti-mflrga,  'the  path  of  renunciation/  211,  417. 

Niyama,  fixed  rule,  vow,  260,  279. 

Niyati,  '  the  fixed/  'destiny/  necessity,  217,  228. 

Nyflya,  '  leading,  guiding ' ;  logic ;  justice ;  a  school  of 
philosophy,  90,  261,  271,  287,  298,  389,  394,  399,  410,  467. 

Pacja,  '  position/  '  foot ' ;  word,  term  ;  concept,  notion,  404. 
Pacj-artha,  '  the  meaning  of  a  word/  thing,  33,  467. 
Paksha,  '  wing,  side/  306. 
Pane  hi -kar  ana,  '  quintuplication/  377. 

Pard  and  Aparfl-Prakrti,  the  Transcendental  and  the  Empiri- 
cal Nature  (of  the'self),  263. 
Para-3para-jati»  species,  468. 

Para-Brahman,  *  supreme  or  absolute  Brahman/  114?  152. 
Para-chchanda,  subject  to  the  will  or  caprice  of  another,  228. 
Par£-4hfna,  dependent  on  another,  228. 
Pard-jflti>  summum  genus,  468. 
Param,  '  supreme,'  highest,  152. 


526  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Param-flnu,  '  extreme  or  smallest  atom/  398,  435,  471,  475. 
Param-atmS,  the  '  Supreme  Self,'  Brahman,  the  Absolute,  35, 

84,  152,  160,  243,  307,  315,  320. 
Paramirthika-drshti,  the  metaphysical  or  transcendental  point 

of  view,  228. 

Para-prakrfi,  '  highest  or  supreme  nature,1  245,  263. 
Parartha,  '  for  another's  sake/  altruism,  183. 
Para-samvit,  *  supreme  or  absolute  consciousness/  139. 
Para-samanya,  highest  genus,  285. 
Para-tantra,  at  the  order,  or  the  disposal,  or  the  service  of 

another,  228. 
Para-vasha,  under  the  control,  or  at  the  mercy  of  another, 

228.  f 

Parshva,  '  side  or  flank/  306. 
Pari-bhramana,  '  moving  all  round/  322. 
Parimana,  '  measure  all  round/  magnitude  ;  size,  332,  333. 
Parinama,  change,  transformation,  9. 
Parinama-vacja,  '  the  theory  or  doctrine  of  transformation/ 

viz.,  of  the  formation  of  the  world  by  gradual  change  and 

evolution  (by  the  interaction  of  Purusha  and  PrakrtO,  9, 

10,  222. 

Parinami-nitya,  '  changingly  permanent/  everlasting,  161. 
Paroksha,  '  away  from  the  eye  ' ;  indirect ;  mediate  ;  hidden, 

41. 

ParO-rajas,  '  that  which  is  beyond  all  action  and  motion/  401. 
Pashyanti,  the  sound  of  the  causal  plane,  250-1. 
Pindanda,  small  egg,  a  living  organism  or  human  unit,  411. 
Pingala,  a  nerve,  250. 
Pradhana,   '  the  substrate,   or  reservoir ' ;    matter,    Prakrti ; 

chief,  main,  principal,  173,  432. 
Prajna,  '  intellect/  291. 
Prakasha,  light,  clear  appearance.  257,  260. 
Prakasha-chan-chalya-avarana,    light-restlessness-v  e  i  1  i  n  g/ 

260. 

Prakasha-pravrtti-moha,  '  illumination-action-perplexity/  260. 
Prakasha-pravrtti-niyama,  '  light-movement-fixed  rule/  260. 
Prakhya-pravrtti-sthiti,  clear  knowledge — restless  activity — 

steady  clinging,  260. 
Prakrta-jnana,     knowledge     by     common    physical    means, 

ordinary  knowledge,  285. 


GLOSSARY   OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  527 

Prakrt,  '  natural  ' ;  the  name  of  a  vernacular  (as  distinguished 
from  Samskrt,  '  the  perfected  '  language),  53,  60,  78. 

Prakrti,  '  nature/  '  that  which  is  made  or  makes,'  matter, 
9,  11,  41,  50,  115,  116,  174,  199,  203,  235,  236,  243,  245, 
280,  283,  285,  432,  474. 

Prakrtika,  '  natural/  371. 

Prakrii-laya,  *  mergence  into  Nature/  457. 

Pralaya,  '  reabsorption/  the  dissolution  of  a  world,  145,  202, 
208,212,214,236,  316, 

Pramada,  carelessness,  madness,  inadvertence,  257,  258. 

Prana-maya-kosha,  '  sheath  or  body  of  etheric  or  vital  or 
biotic  matter/  256. 

Prana,  '  breathing/  vital-force,  nerve-force,  240,  244,  255. 

Pranava,  the  sacred  sound  or  word  Aunt  ;  (pronounced  Om), 
1C9,  117,  233. 

Prapancha,  '  the  quintuplicated/  '  the  multiplied/  the  multi- 
farious, 192. 

Prasacja,  placidity/  cheerfulness,  calmness,  285. 

Prasarana,  extending,  stretching  out,  380. 

Prasarpana,  '  moving  forth  on  all  sides/  spreading,  322. 

Pratyag-atma,  *  the  inward  or  abstract  Self/  the  universal 
Self  or  Ego,  33-8,  43,  81,  84,  111,  113,  152-162. 
167-173,  179, 189-93,  237-47,  263,  296,  302,  308,  315,  320, 
323,  332-4,  338,  355,  362,  369,  370,  379,  400,  401,  406, 
418-29,  437,  467-82,  485,  489,  490. 

Pratibha,  insight,  285. 

Pratika,  symbol,  nature-force  as  symbol  of  the  supreme,  263, 
285. 

Pratima,  image,  285. 

Prati-patti,  approach,  apprehension,  perception,  33. 

Pratishecjha,  denial,  prohibition,  refutation,  199. 

Pravrtti,  'pursuit/  engagement,  171,  257,  260,  491. 

Pravrtti  -m^rga,  *  the  path  of  pursuit/  211,  417. 

Pratyabhijna,  recognition,  266. 

PratyShara,  '  drawing  back/  abstraction,  474. 

Pratyak-chetana,  inturned  consciousness,  subjective  con- 
sciousness, 161. 

Pratyaksha,  direct  or  immediate  cognition,  presentative 
knowledge,  intuition,  perception,  31,  32,  33,  266. 

Pratyavamarsha,  recognition,  266. 


528  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Pratyaya,  idea,  thought^  belief,  faith,  285. 
Pratyay-Snupashyatn,    '  awareness  of  psychoses,'   appercep- 
tion, 424. 

Prayatna,  effort,  volition,  conation,  228,  271. 
PrayOga,    practice,  application,   employment,   bringing  into 

use,  285. 

Prayojana, '  motive/  53,  300. 
Pjrthaktva,  separateness,  279. 
Pjrthivi,  '  earth  ' ;  the  densest  root-element  of  matter  known 

to  present  humanity,  376,  382,  389,  411. 
Prlti-apriti-visha(Ja,  '  pleasure-pain-depression/  260. 
PumSn,  '  masculine,'  person,  subject,  33. 
Purusha,    the    Sleeper    in    the   body  * ;    man ;   Spirit,   Self, 

9,  10,  11,  33,  41,  50,  116,  203,  228,  235,  352,  474. 
Purusha- Kara,  'manly  effort/  will  (as  opposed  to  destiny), 

liberty     (enterprise     as     opposed     to     necessity),     free 

initiative   228. 
Raga,  *  tinge/  stain,  colouring,  love,  affection  ;  (also  a  musical 

tune),  234,  239,  257,  266,  282. 
Rajas,  '  movability/   one   of   the  three   attributes  of  Mula- 

prakrti ;  passion ;  stain  ;  blood;  colour;  dust,  etc.,  174, 

190-4,  238-9,  379,  384. 
Rajasa,  '  belonging  to  or  made  of  the  element  or  principle  of 

rajas,;  activity/  18,  284. 
Rahasya,  '  belonging  to  solitude/  sectet,  115, 
Rakshas,  an  order  of  non-human  beings  ;  a  kind  of  microbe  or 

bacillas,  264. 

Rakshasa,  allied  to  or  composed  of  rakshas,  a  race  of  human- 
beings  (Atlanteans  ?),  264. 
Rasasvada,    '  tasting   the   sweets '   of   imagination,   building 

castles  in  the  air,  pleasant  reverie,  239. 
IJju,  *  right ;  '  di-rect/  straight,  322. 
Rshi,  one   who   has   'seen1   or   'arrived'  at   the   Supreme, 

315,458. 

Sa<J-asat,     existent-and-non-existent ;     false ;     illusory,     82, 

183,  234. 

Satfharana,  'common/  371. 
Sdijharana-nimitta,  '  common  cause/  298. 
Sa<J-ghana, '  compacted  being/  139. 


GLOSSARY   OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  529 

Sa-guna,  '  with  attributes/  160,  218,  242,  253. 

Sa-guna  Brahma,  '  Brahma  with  attributes,1  i.e.,  Pra- 
£yag-Stma  possessed  of  three  attributes,  Sat-Chid- 
Anantja,  in  contrast  with  its  opposite  MuJaprakrti  and  its 
three  attributes,  Rajas- Sattva-Tamas,  170. 

Saha-bhava,  '  co-existence,'  305. 

Saha-chara,  '  co-movement/  305. 

Sahakari-karana,  '  concomitant '  or  instrumental  '  cause/  299. 

Saha-astita,  *  co-existence/  305. 

Sama,  '  same  ' ;  equal ;  even  ;  balanced. 

Samacjhi,  focussed  meditation,  289,  290,  405. 

Samanya,  *  sameness  or  equality  of  measure,1  commonness ; 
genus,  species,  generality,  284,  285,  467,  481. 

Samashti,' whole,  285. 

Samavflya,  '  juxtaposition  ' ;  intimate  or  inseparable  relation, 
285,  467,  481. 

SamavSyi-kSraija,  substantial  or  material  cause '  combined 
with  or  including  which  '  the  effect  is  produced,  299. 

Samaya,  '  that  which  comes  (and  goes)  f ;  time  ;  condition, 
316. 

Sam-bandha,  '  bond,'  connection,  467. 

Sam-hftra,  *  gathering  in  ' ;  re-absorption  ;  dissolution,  destruc- 
tion, 239. 

Sam-majjana,  *  mutual  mergence,'  319. 

Sam-sdra,  the  World-1  Process ',  116,  141,  147,  181,  184,  192, 
209,  216,  224,  244,  322,  324,  419,  426. 

Sam-sarana,  '  procession,'  319. 

Sam -shay  a,  doubt,  uncertainty,  266. 

Sam-shaya-vi-marsha,  doubt  and  pondering,  270. 

Sams-kdra,  '  impression,'  '  training,'  inclination,  tendency, 
(cultivated,  acquired,  imparted,  or  impressed)  disposi- 
tion, cultural  effect,  proclivity,  predisposition,  bent, 
proneness,  propensity,  34,  44,  187. 

Sam-skrt,  '  the  perfected '  language,  10,  29,  53,  54,  78,  etc. 

Sam-rambha,  excitement,  passion,  emotion,  actional  initia- 
tive, 270. 

Sam-uha,  collection,  435. 

Sam-vif,  '  con-sciousness ' ;  (vision  ;  wit),  33,  145. 

Samya,  '  sameness,'  equilibrium,  balance,  homogenity,   238, 
239,  264. 
34 


530  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Sam-yama,  control,  restraint,  self -con  trolled  meditation,  focus- 
ing, 214,  285. 

Sam-yoga,  '  con-junction,'  345. 

San-dhi  coming  together,1  coalescence,  235. 

San-ghaja,  '  striking  together/  binding  together,  an  articulated 
organism,  183,  435. 

San-kalpa-vi-kalpa,  resolve  and  alternation,  270. 

Sankhya,  a  school  of  philosophy  ;  that  particular  outlook  upon 
life,  that  view  of  the  World  Process,  which  is  expounded 
by  that  school,  9,  10,  44,  50,  60,  116,  174,  183,  203,  245, 
261,  264,  280,  283,  284,  337,  350,  376,  390,  432,  438. 

Sarga,  'surge ',  emanation,  creation,  145,  208,  212. 

Sarva,  'all*. 

Sarva-da,  '  always '. 

Sarva-hija^ '  the  good  of  all,'  285. 

Sarva-tab,  *  from  or  on  all  sides,'  307. 

Sarva-tra,  '  everywhere '. 

Sarva-vyapi,    '  all-pervading,'  163. 

Sarvika,  '  universal,'  '  pertaining  to  all.' 

Sat,  being ;  existence ;  true,  real ;  good,  70,  167,  169,  182, 183, 
191,  2_37,  379,  380. 

Sat- Chid- Ananda,  triad  of  universal  subjective  princi- 
ples of  '  action-knowledge-desire,'  or,  rather,  omni- 
presehce-omniscience-omnipotence,  167,  170,  190-3, 

237,  238,  246,  247,  250,  251,   301,  304,  331,  370,  379, 
400-4,406. 

Sat-ta-samanya,  '  universal  or  common  being,  80,  468,  475. 
Sat-tva,  '  cognisability,'  one  of  the  attributes  of  Mulaprakrti ; 
being;   existence;   energy;   goodness,   116,   174,    190-4, 

238,  239,  318,  384. 

Sattva-Rajas-Tamas,  the  universal  objective  principles  or  attri- 
butes of  Mula-prakrti,  i.e.,  Root-Matter,  or  Root-Nature, 
viz.,  the  attributes  or  properties  oFcognisability,  mobility, 
and  desirability ;  they  are  also  substituted,  in  connection 
with  the  individualised  subject,  for  Chi^-Sad-Anan(Ja,  and 
then  mean  the  subjective  principles  of  cognition-intel- 
lection, motion-action,  desire-volition,  174,  190-4,  238, 

239,  246,  247,  250,  253,  256-60,  262,  269-71,  301,  318, 
331,  370,  379,  383,  401,  406. 

made  up  of,  or  belonging  to,  Saftva,  18,  192,  193. 


GLOSSARY    OF   SASMKRT  TERMS  531 

Sattvika-rajasa-tamasa,  18,  192,  193,  283,  284. 
Sattviki-rajasi-tamasi  shaktis,  the  three  powers  of  cognition, 

action,  and  desire,  246,  247. 
Sa^yam,  '  true  ',  having  being,  113,  160-1. 
Shabala,  'spotted/  'brindled,'  159. 
Shak,  '  to  be  able,  237. 
Shakfa,   'Might,  Ability1;  power,  force,  Energy,  41,  49,  51, 

116,    142,   165,    186,    199,   218,  225,  233-48,250-4,263 

264,  279,  300,  301,  318,  319,  334,  338,  383,  402,  422,  475. 
Shama,  '  restfulness,'  '  peacefulness,'  12,  202. 
Shanta, '  peaceful '. 

Shanta-ghora-mudha,  '  peaceful-violent-confused,1  260. 
Shanti,  '  peace,'  241. 
Sh£stra,  teaching,  science,  theory,  285. 
Shighrata,  'quickness,*  'rapidity,'  381. 
Shila,  character,  characteristic  function,  261. 
Shloka,  verse ;  praise,  75,  116. 
Shuddha,  'pure,'  213,401. 
Shuddha-advaita,  '  pure  monism,'  493. 
Shunya,  vacuum,'  emptiness ;  cipher,  zero,  148,  149. 
Shunya- v£di,   '  holder  of  doctrine  of  emptiness,  viz.,  that  all 

is  born  from  and  goes  back  into  Nothing,  149,  202. 
Shvasana,  breathing,  381. 
Siddha-dyshti,     '  vision     of    accomplished '     seer    or    yogi, 

" "  285. 

SiddhSnta,  established  or  accomplished  conclusion,  5,  228,  229. 
Siddhi,  'accomplishment,'  214. 
Smararjia,  recollection,  remembrance,  270. 
Smrji,  memory,  266,  291. 

Sneha, '  love,  affection  '  ;  oil,  lubricant ;  water,  437. 
Soham  (=Sab  aham),  *  That  am  I,'  209-10. 


(     'vibration '332. 


Sprha,  envy,  257. 

Srshti,  same  as  Sarga,  142,  238-9. 

Sjhira,  '  steady,'  stable,  382. 

Srshti- sthiti-laya,      manifestation-preservation-disappearance, 

239,  246,  251-3,  331. 
iti,    '  steadiness,1    staying,  standing,  maintenance,  238-9, 

260,  279. 


532  THE   SCIENCE    OF   PEACE 

Sjhula,  '  solid  J ;  heavy ;  gross  ;  dense,  343,  420. 
Sthula-bhuta, '  gross  (or  compound)  element/  395. 
Sthula-sharira,  '  gross  bodv/  the  physical  body^  231,  435,  439. 
Sjhula-sukshma-karana,      gross-fine-causal,'  *  dense-tenuous- 
causal/  large-small-causal,  physical- as tro- mental-causal, 

250-1,  344,  420,  435,  439. 
Sukha,  pleasure,  joy,  257. 

Sukha-duhkha-moha,  pleasure-pain-perplexity,  260. 
Sukshma,  '  subtle  ' ;  small,  344,  420. 
Sukshma-sharlra,  'subtle  body,1   231,  256,  408,  416,432-5, 

"439,  440. 

Supta,  sleeping,  dormant,  latent,  285. 
Su-shupti,  'good  sleep,1  deep  and  dreamless  slumber,  161-3, 

344. 
Su^ra,    '  thread,'  aphorism,  *  that  which  ties  together,'  that 

which  '  suggests/  261,  285,  323. 
Sutra-atma,  '  thread-soul ',  group-soul,  '  over-soul ' ;  '  web  of 

life/  296,  429. 

Sushumna,  a  nerve,  (or  the  spinal  canal),  250-251. 
Sva-bhava,    '  own-being  ' ;   nature  ;   character  ;  constitution, 

146,  185,  191,  199-200,  212,  244,  425. 
Sva-bhavika,  '  natural/  371. 
Sva-chhanda,/  self-willed/  228. 
Sva-a  dhlna,  '  self-dependent/  228. 
Svah,  the  mental  plane,  250. 
Sva-hita,  '  the  good  of  self/  285. 
•Sva-lakshana,  '  self  -marked/  ( thing-in-itself/  '  characterised 

by  itself/  59. 
Svapna,  dream,  266,  344. 
Svarga,  heaven-world  (in  which  the  soul  has  '  gone  to  the 

self),  454. 

Svatah-pramana,  '  self-proven/  23,  41,  96. 
Sva-tantra,  *  self -controlled/  228. 
Sv-afmaka,  '  thing-in-itself/  59. 
Svayam-siddha, '  self-evident/  23,  88,  96. 

Ta  or  tva, '  -ness/  '  -ship/  '  -hood/  474. 

Tamas,  '  desirablility/  an  attribute  of  Mula-prakrti ;  inertia  ; 

substantiality;     dullness;     resistance;    darkness,     174, 

190-4,  238-9,  279,  379,  382. 


GLOSSARY    OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  533 

Tamasa,  belonging  to  or  abounding  in  or  made  up  of  tamas, 
18,  283. 

Tan-matra,  '  measure  of  That '  or  '  that  only  ' ;  '  thing- 
in-itself,'  primordial  root-elements  corresponding  to  sen- 
sations;  primal  consciousness  of  sensations,  which, 
constituting  the  facts  of  sound,  touch,  etc.,  gives  rise,  on 
one  hand,  to  the  elements  which  serve  as  their  sub- 
trates,  and,  on  another,  to  the  sense-organs  which  serve 
as  their  '  receivers,1  59,  262,  284,  372,  376,  395. 

Tantra,  an  '  exposition,'  a  '  spreading  out/  science,  art, 
233-4. 

Tapas,  '  burning,'  '  glowing,'  '  suffering  heat,  self-denial,1 
asceticism,  459. 

Tarka,  argument,  inference,  285. 

Tat, 'that,' 41. 

Tajra,  '  there,'  306. 

Tattva,  '  that-ness  ' ;  '  thing-in-itself  ' ;  root-element ;  essence  ; 
principle,  59,  153,  376,  377,  389,  390,  395,  411,  458. 

T6jas,  '  fire  or  light,'  the  root-element  corresponding  to  vision, 
382,  389,411,413. 

Tri-guga,  '  three-functioned,'  possessed  of  three  properties, 
247. 

Tiryag-gamana,  oblique-motion,  381. 

Tri-bhuvanam,  '  the  triple-world,'  332-4,  341,  349. 

Tri-jya. '  radius,'  308. 

Trika,    triad,'  '  triplet,'  '  trinity,'  364. 

Trika-darshana,  '  doctrine  of  Trinity,'  364. 

Trai-lokyam  or  Jri-l5ki,  '  the  three  worlds,'  420,  438. 

Trasaregu,  '  tri-atom,'  or  '  tri-diatom  ',  389,  399. 

Trshna,  '  thirst,'  '  will-to-live,'  214,  228,  257. 

Tunya,4  fourth,' 439. 

Ud-budcjfha,  awakened,  risen  into  consciousness,  285. 

Ud-^es'hya,  '  aim  ' ;  object,  299. 

U^-glta,     (also   Ud-githa)   the   'out-sung/  the   Aum   (Om) 

sound, 152. 

Un-mada,  '  madness,'  258. 
Un-majjana,  'emergence,'  319. 
Up-a^ana-karaQa, c  material  cause,'  299. 
Upa  <j6va,  a  minor  deva,  84. 


534  THE    SCIENCE    OF    PEACE 

Upadhi,  sheath  ;  limitation  ;  body  ;  title  ;  'addition,'  208,  341, 

342,  409,  431,  446. 
Upa-labdhi,  comprehension,  270,  291. 
Upa-sarpaga,  '  approach,'  322. 
Urdhva-gamana,  *  up-going,'  381. 
Ut-kshepana,  '  up-flinging,'  381. 
Ut-pada,  '  up-rising,'  manifestation,  283. 

Vaidyaka,  the  science  of  medicine,  199. 

Vaikarika-taijasa-tamasa,  same  as  sattvika-rajasa-tamasa, 
256,  283-4. 

Vaikhari,  the  sound  of  the  physical  plane,  250. 

Vairagya,  'absence  of  desire  for,  or  attachment  to,  the 
pleasures  of  this  world  or  the  next' ;  dispassion,  18,  67, 
194,^202,  211,  241,  282,  285-6,  458. 

Vaisheshika,  one  of  the  systems  of  Indian  philosophy,  dealing 
particularly  with  '  species,  genera,'  etc.,  81,  369,  376, 
389,  394,  395,  399,  467,  475. 

Vak,  speech,  '  talk,'  438. 

Vakya,  '  speech  ' ;  sentence  ;  proposition,  404. 

Vana-mala,  wreath  of  forest-flowers,  317. 

Vartamana,  '  existent ' ;  present,  313. 

Vasana;  '  pervasive '  desire,  wish,  craving,  inclination, 
214,  228. 

Vasana-ghana-ta,  '  condensation/  '  consolidation,'  materi- 
alisation, of  desire,  227-8. 

Vayam,  '  we,'  285. 

Vayu,  '  air,'  the  root-element  corresponding  to  touch,  376, 
382,  389,  395,411,438. 

V6dana,  experiencing,  awareness,  33. 

V6<JanJa,  '  end  or  crown  of  V6<Ja  or  all-knowledge ' ;  the 
chief  philosophical  system  of  India,  having  many 
subdivisions,  4,  5,  10-12,  34,  44,  47-50,  52,  59,  67,  83, 
84,  85,  95,  96,  145,  161,  167,  202,  203,  238-41,  261, 
264,  282,  287,  342,  345,  350,  389,  401,  411,  433,  461. 

V6dantit  a  holder  of  Vedanta  philosophy,  85-8,  160,  192. 

V6ga,  ft  velosity,'  381. 

Vi-bhu,  pervading,  '  being  in  an  especial  degree,  i.e.,  every- 
where,' 28,  163,  412. 

Vi-chara,  thought,  reflection,  cogitation,  12,  194,  222. 


GLOSSARY    OF   SAMSKRT   TERMS  535 

Vi-£6ha,  '  without  body,'  '  bodiless  ',  459. 

Vi-<}eha-muk{:a,  bodiless-liberation,  459. 

Vidya,  knowledge;  ('witting,1  'idea,1  'vision1),  168,  218, 
241,  245,  246,  254. 

Vijfianamaya-manomaya-pranamaya  koshas,  higher  mental* 
astromental-etheric  bodies,  256. 

Vi-kalpa,  '  imagination,'  alternative,  266. 

Vi-kara,  '  change  of  form  of  a  substance,1  222,  283. 

Vi-kara-vada,  same  as  pariijama-vada,  the  theory  of  change  or 
transformation  (i.e.,  that  the  world-process  is  a  series  of 
transformations  of  matter  and  motion),  9,  222. 

Vi-kshepa,  '  distraction,1  repulsion,  238,  239,  238,  271. 

Vi-krti,  transformation,  285. 

Vi-paryaya,  error,  perversion,  206,  266. 

Vi-paryasa,  misapprehension,  206,  266. 

Virat-Purusha,  '  the  World-Man  ' ;  the  Macrocosm,  350,  359, 
398,  493. 

Vi-sarga,  '  throwing  out  or  up,'  '  letting  go,'  239. 

Vi-shada,  depression,  perplexity,  260. 

Vi-shaya,  '  object ' ;  domain,  173,  285. 

Vi-sh6sha,  *  speciality  ' ;  characteristic ;  distinguishing  feature, 
284,  285,  378,  468,  475,  481. 

Vi-shishta-advaita,  *  non-duality  with  a  distinction,1  a  form  of 
V6danta  which  regards  consciousness  or  Spirit  and 
unconsciousness  or  Matter  as  two  aspects  of  one  Eternal 
Substance,  49,  85,  86,  172. 

Vishva-srj,  '  World-maker,'  84. 

Vi-varja,  'reversal,'  85,  203,  211,  222. 

Vi-varta-vada,  ^doctrine  of  reversal ' ;  metaphysical  or 
transcendental  view  of  causation.  Advaita-Vedanta 
is  so  called  because  it  regards  the  '  Object '  as 
'  reverse '  or  '  perversion '  of  Subject ;  also  because 
it  reverses  all  ordinary  conceptions  and  outlooks  of 
life  ;  that  which  was  real  is  ^ now  seen  to  be  unreal,  and 
vice  versa  ;  that  which  was  '  many  '  is  seen  to  be  '  one,' 
and  vice  versa  ;  that  which  was  '  without '  is  seen  to  be 
"  within,'  and  vice  versa ;  that  which  was  '  plenum  '  is 
seen  to  be  '  vacuum,'  and  vice  versa,  11,  222. 

Vi-v6ka,  *  discrimination  '  (between  Permanent  and  Imperma- 
nent), 12,67,  194,211. 


536  THE    SCIENCE    OF    PEACE 

Vi-yoga,  '  disjunction,'  separation,  345. 

Vrtti,   mood  of  mind,  psychosis,  '  way  of  existence/  '  way  of 

manifestation,'  285. 
Vyaktl,     '  manifestation,'    specification,    individualisation ;    a 

particular  individual,  284,  285. 
Vy-apta/  pervaded,'  307. 

Vy-apti,  '  pervasion  ' ;  an  induction,  a  generalisation,  473. 
Vyasa,  diameter  ;    expansion  or  amplification  ;  the  name  of  a 

Sage. 

Vyas-ardha,  '  the  half  of  the  diameter,'  radius. 
Vyashti,"part,  285. 

Vy-ajireka,  concomitant  '  absence,'  473. 
Vyavaharika-drshti,   empirical    or   experiential  standpoint  or 

view,  228." 

Vy-avarjaka,  'distinguishing  '  ;  differentia,  371. 
Vy-avasaya,  determination,  that  which  '  remains  '  (as  certain, 

after  scrutiny),  resolve,  228,  266. 
Vy-uJJhana,  up-rising,  '  ex-hibition,'  162,  285. 

YajSa,  sacrifice,  458. 

Yaksha,  an  order  of  non-human  spirits  ;  a  sub-human  race,  419. 

Yaksham  (pi.  yaskshani),  an  *  eater,'  (a  *  phagocyte  '  bacillus), 
284. 

Ya-MaV  that  which ^is  not,'  (anagram  ^of  Ma-Ya),  233,  234. 

Yoga,  '  junc-tion,'  '  en-gage-ment,'  '  con-juga-tion  ' ;  union  ; 
harmony ;  balance ;  skill  ;  attention,  i.e.,  union  of 
mind  to  an  object ;  a  form  of  practice  for  super  physi- 
cal development,  77,  78,  83,  84,  89,  116,  161,  214,  230-1, 
233-4,  239,  241,  261,  264,  282,  285-?0,  342,389,403, 
405,  416,  417,  435,  444,  447,  461,  493. 

Yoga-ja-jfiana,  knowledge  by  yoga- meditation  or  super  physi- 
cal means  generally,  285. 

Yoga-samadhi,  yoga-meditation,  405. 

Yoga-siddhi,   yoga-accomplishment,  perfection  of  mindpower, 

.  .  -214." 

Yogi,  one  practised  in  yoga,  *'.£.,  in  mind-control,  486. 

Yuga,  a  junction  '  or  '  coming  together  '  of  two  ;  a  pair  ;  a 
cycle,  316. 

Yuga-pat,  two  together,  simultaneously,  285- 

Printed  by  C.  Subbarayudu  at  the  Vasanta  Press, 

The  Theosophical  Society,  Adyar,  Madras  20, 

P.I.C,  No.  85— 16-3-'48 


