SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY 




prentice-hall 


foundations of philosophy 


Virgil Aldrich 
William Alston 
Stephen Barker 
Richard Brandt 
Roderick Chisholm 
William Dray 
Joel Feinberg 
William Frankena 


Philosophy of Art 
Philosophy of Language 
Philosophy of Mathematics 
Theory of Value 
Theory of Knowledge 
Philosophy of History 
Social Philosophy 
Ethics 


Martin Golding 
Carl Hempel 
John Hick 
David Hull 
Gerald MacCallum 
James McClellan 
Willard Van Orman Quine 
Richard Rudner 
Wesley Salmon 
Jerome Shaffer 
Richard Taylor 


Philosophy of Law 
Philosophy of Natural Science 
Philosophy of Religion 
Philosophy of Biological Science 
Political Philosophy 

Philosophy of Education 

Philosophy of Logic 
Philosophy of Social Science 


Philosophy of Mind 
Metaphysics 


SERIES 


Elizabeth and Monroe 


Beardsley, editors 




SOCIAL 

PHILOSOPHY 


Joel Feinberg 

THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY 


PRENTICE-HALL, INC. 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 





Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 

Feinberg, Joel, 1926 
Social philosophy. 

(Foundations of philosophy series) 

Bibliography: p. 

1. Political science. I. Title. 

JA71.45 320’.01 72-5433 

ISBN 0-13-817262-5 

ISBN 0-13-817254-4 (pbk.) 


3 AO 

f £9 aJ 


© 1973 by 

PRENTICE-HALL , INC. 

Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 

All rights reserved. No part of this book 
may be reproduced in any way or by any means 
without permission in writing from the publisher. 
Printed in the United States of America. 


10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 


PRENTICE-HALL INTERNATIONAL, INC., London 
PRENTICE-HALL OF AUSTRALIA, PTY. LTD., Sydney 
PRENTICE-HALL OF CANADA, LTD., Toronto 
PRENTICE-HALL OF INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED, New Delhi 
PRENTICE-HALL OF JAPAN, INC., Tokyo 



To the memory of my father, 
Abraham J. Feinberg (1888-1956) 





foundations of philosophy 


±YA.CLliy 




Philionhv? 3 Sr ° UP of d , istin g uished philosophers, the Foundations o 

ssj&ts* ir- T vxsss 

»SEr 5 r ,t f r 


Elizabeth Beardsley / M>nr<« Beardsley 


IX 







acknowledgments 


A large part of Chapter 1 of this book appears in expanded form in “The 
Idea of a Free Man” in Educational Judgments: Papers in the 
of Education , ed. James Doyle (London: Rout,edge & ^egan Paul W2 
forthcoming) Parts of Chapters 2 and 3 are contained m my essay Ha 
less Immoralilies’ and Offensive Nuisances,” in Issues in Law and Morality, 
£ C,„ and Thomas Tm.^n (Omatad: Tho «. C.» 

Western Reserve University, 1973 forthcoming). Another part ° f Chapt 
3 is contained in my “Legal Paternalism,” Canadian Journal of 
Vol. 1 (1971). Various parts of Chapter 4 are contame m my p P 
Nature and Value of Rights,” The Journal of Value Inquiry Vol. 4 (1970). 
I am grateful to the publishers of the essays mentioned above and 
Prentice-Hall, Inc. for their generous consent to these duplications. 


Joel Feinberg 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION, 1 


I 

THE CONCEPT OF 
FREEDOM, 4 




2 

GROUNDS FOR 
COERCION, 20 


3 

HARD CASES 
FOR THE HARM 
PRINCIPLE, 36 


Freedom and Constraint, 4 
Freedom from.. .and Freedom to ...,9 
Whose Freedomf 11 

“Positive and Negative Freedom” 12 Self-restraint, 14 
Freedom as Autonomy, 15 Permission and Ability, 17 
Free on Balance, 18 


The Presumptive Case for Liberty, 20 

The Anarchistic Principle, 22 The Formalistic Principle, 24 
The Concept of Harm, 25 Lines of Attack on Mill, 31 


Morals Offenses and Legal Moralism, 36 
Obscenity and the Offense Principle, 41 
Legal Paternalism, 45 
Collective Goods and Collective Action, 52 


xi 




Contents 


Xll 


4 

LEGAL RIGHTS, 55 


5 

CONFLICTS OF 
LEGAL RIGHTS, 68 


6 

HUMAN RIGHTS, 84 


7 

SOCIAL JUSTICE, 98 


FOR FURTHER 
READING, 120 


Rights, Liberties, and Privileges, 56 

Classification of Claim-rights, 59 Rights and Duties, 61 

Rights and Claims, 64 


Conflicts of Claims, 68 

Levels of Generality in Statements of Rights, 69 
Conflicts between Rights (Valid Claims), 71 
Prima-facie Rights, 73 Transcategorial Conflicts, 76 
The Concept of an Absolute Constitutional Right, 79 


Moral Rights, 84 Human Rights, 85 
Grounds for Equality, 88 

Absolute and Nonabsolute Human Rights, 94 


Comparative and Noncomparative Justice, 98 
Formal and Material Principles, 99 Prizes, 103 
General Rules, 103 Economic Income, 107 
Fair Procedures and Just Outcomes, 117 


INDEX, 122 



SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY 




Introduction 


lhe scope of social philosophy is less precisely defined than that of most 
other conventional “branches” of philosophy. Conceived very broadly, social 
philosophy mclndes problems treated in other volumes of the Foundations 
of Philosophy senes. Questions about the methodology of the social sciences 
are dealt with m Richard Rudner’s Philosophy of Social Science; theories 
, “ * 6 , foundat,on of ethical judgment are criticized in William Fran- 

enas Ethics; and distinctively political questions (for example, those con¬ 
cerning social institutions of a peculiarly political kind, such as “the state ” 
and such concepts and norms as “legitimacy,” “authority,” “consent,” and 

PohtrTphl J e r enCe) r treat6d at ' ength “ Ggrald MacCall ™’ s 

Political Philosophy Even when problems of these kinds are assigned to 

DhUosonh 38 1 P ° SOph >'’ we are Ieft with a l«ge, miscellaneous set of 
philosophical questions about social relations. I can treat here only a small 

subset of that remainder, those issues that seem to be of especially vital 
concern, and which are also highly representative of the 
p oblems of social philosophy m its narrower conception. 

Such problems are of two basic kinds. There are conceptual problems 
requiring analysis and clarification of the central concepts used in social 


1 








Introduction 


2 


theory and in everyday discourse about social questions, and there are 
general normative questions calling for the formulation of principles to 
guide decision and judgment making in the controversial realm of social 
policy. The answers to the conceptual questions are generally (with on y a 
few exceptions and qualifications) neutral in respect to the major social 
controversies. To handle them adequately we must reflect on what we 
normally mean when we employ certain words, and what we had better 
mean if we are to communicate efficiently, avoid paradox, and achieve 
general coherence. The normative questions, on the other hand, require us 
to discard our neutrality and to plunge into the moral arena where the 
interests and ideals of men are fully engaged, and conflicting practical 
norms and policies contend for our allegiance. 

The social concepts to be examined in this book are themselves o two 
kinds: first, those that express social ideals, especially the ideals of liberty, 
justice, and equality, and second, various key concepts used in statements 
of normative principles, e.g., “harm,” “benefit,” “want,” nee , c 
and “right.” For example, we can ask just how we are to understand the 
concept of liberty itself, how it can be made as coherent and precise as 
possible without begging any substantive questions about how liberty is 
best distributed. Then, when we come to the most important normative 
questions about liberty, such as those asking the conditions under which 
liberty is properly restricted, we shall have to consider critically vanous 
alternative answers. That task will presuppose that we have a clear con¬ 
ception of the central terms (“harm,” “benefit,” and so on) in which the 
various liberty-limiting principles are formulated. The relevance of the 
latter conceptual questions is easily appreciated when they arise naturally 
in the course of normative philosophizing, where they must be answered as 
a means to the end of choosing practical principles; however, persons of a 
reflective disjxisition may also make the pursuit of answers to the con¬ 
ceptual questions an end in itself. . 

The primary normative questions investigated in this book are those 
whose answers take the form of “liberty-limiting principles,” lists of human 
rights, and material principles of economic justice. It is convenient to 
think of these problems as questions for some hypothetical and abstract 
political body. An answer to the question of when liberty should be limited 
or how wealth ideally should be distributed, for example, could be used 
to guide not only moralists, but also legislators and judges toward reason¬ 
able decisions in particular cases where interests, rules, or the liberties of 
different parties appear to conflict. In posing such questions about liberty 
and justice, the philosopher is asking what coercive laws and procedures 
would be created by an ideally reasonable legislature in a commumty whose 
history, customs, and political institutions resemble our own. We must 
think of an ideal legislator as somewhat abstracted from the full legislative 








Introduction 


3 


beredtv Ae h nLd e t S ‘7 ‘° * PPeaI direCtly t0 the P ublic Merest unencum¬ 
bered by the need to please voters, to make “deals” with colleagues or any 

other merely political” considerations. (Philosophical policy mfking at this 

legislative" problems and diffiCUlt than actuaI 

egislative problems.) The principles of the ideal legislator (or constitu- 

ref d ? f | , may n0t be t0taUy decisive in deliberations of the actual 

.o«o2n„7j„«: our “ pi ’ ,ion! '».o. 

Correct general principles and ultimate policies do not reveal themselves 
spontaneously, nor are they deduced from self-evident principles The only 
way to arrive at them is to begin with those singular judgments and att 
tudes about particular social issues in which wf have the greatest con' 
fidence and attempt to extract their implicit rationales. We then tentatively 
apply the extracted principles to perplexing borderline cases reSg the 
general principle where necessary to accommodate the specific TudSent 
and modifying the particular attitude where required by a well-tested or 
deeply entrenched general principle, always aiming at the ideal of a com 

n Cate t, d P ° lic ^ maldn ? That would be an educa- 


S^p^ember 1 ^ 6^ 1^7 1 Freshraen -” Th ' ^rk Times 





CHAPTER ONE 


The Concept 
of Freedom 


1. FREEDOM AND 
CONSTRAINT 


There was a time when to call a man “free” was 
simply to describe his legal rights and duties and to 
contrast them with those of a slave. 1 In time the 
word “free” became the name not only of a legal status but also of a set 
of character virtues especially becoming to a man of free status, free 
in this sense is opposed to “servile” which was used to refer to qualities 
characteristic of slaves and hence' inappropriate in a freeman A servile 
person is “alternately fawning and insolent”; 2 a free man, haviftg nothing 
to fear, is dignified and deliberate, and can look any man m the eye In 
asking what freedom truly is, we may be asking for a fuller accoun 
these qualities; in describing a given man as free, we may be simply ascrib¬ 
ing such virtues to him. It is more likely, however, that our contemporary 
interest in a person’s freedom is not simply a concern over his legal status 
or his character. What then are we saying of a man when we say that 
he is free? 

1 See C. S, Lewis, Studies in Words (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1961), 
PP, 111 ff. 

2 Lewis, Studies in Words, p. 14. 





The Concept of Freedom 


5 


,he ^ 
freedom are be.t imdersicKd J el>W Tr 7b“ “"P 1 ”™ of 

expression. There are three kinds of oir ' u abbrevlatlve for some longer 
freedom obscure; depending on the ipSeS that . ca « render sentences about 

zzz: s s s s v = Zl W* 

sms?” 3 Until this further specificlti™ * f ^ ’ fr ° m hls Wlfe > from his 

diet he is asserting (with pleasure) the .nhlrnre of'' il'" infer 0n,v 

regards a. m impediment or p“f '*<><>' he 

“ fc — 

Und o, unhappiness, *? ?~** * * 

that we are so certain that freedom u* i ♦ . t ma ^ he for this reason 

hence of frus,„,i„„.n„ h ap'“ss”; tI "‘"T °' “ d 

tendency in our ordinary thought tor a t u hm§ ' But * here ls another 

which denies the logical link between constraint andTT ^ fi * ed ° m) 
mg to this conception one can he „« * f and fru stration. Accord- 

man can be having the time of his Vf^wi W f h ° Ut bein S frustrated. A 
because he doesn’t know that the H ' 6 . Wbl 6 ° cked in a room, either 
rare; 5 an anned guard with a gun at “ 1°^ ° r b ™ be doesn’t 
for the candidate one hTd inti de d t 0n S ^ W ’ «* *o vote 
reasons. These examples of constraintUT ** a f. aion S for one’s own 

=XX:Co 

alternatives. The freedom they des.replnT^,“^72 

Freed ° m ' A NeW Anal ** Longmans, Green « C o. 

we are constrained, 'il)ewprerenfed ir^ a /°. mpu ! sion is a matter of diction When 

compe 1Jed) we „ e pmvented^Xrlirgle" 8 '^ 0 ^ 6 ^ 

m„ * a we , cannot do what we (might) warn m l 1 l ° do - In the case of con- 
Z word™ " We . (mi « h ‘) not want to do NeJertheW f ° f com P u l«on, we 

5 Cf Tohn C rr n r f ° r b ° th C “ nts and «SS^° r I ^an use 

^-Ur (New York) Dover : 



6 


The Concept of Freedom 

in: 

b^sb^MIMA 

“7» t snl ss £ g —. —»-t™ ™ 

SSSiP® 

g” d .p.c" 

55T»?“ tr:< <»»-». *. **» r j^j 

whereas total freedom from fruSt ^ free, 

rH^s-^r, 

• vour desires so that you always want to do what you must do, tti y ^ 
Lr. never be disappointed. “Demand noiJhaL^ent^appsaL^^ 

caujioris Epictetus, “bnt.yi^TE^toj^HEgJlg?^ *£gg^J IOn 

^*.^rsst;2«2Ka 

to' the”first conception, a person is free only to the extent th 

"fivS 


6 Epictetus, The Enchiridion, VIII. 








The Concept of Freedom 


7 


tions of value aside, tl^ispositipnaUnalysis gives a more.accurate account 
°- our ordinary understanding, of what , liberty is (or what the word “free” 
means). * ^ 

Suppose that John Doe can do one thousand things at time t, but not 
the one thing he wants most to do, whereas Richard Roe can only do one 
thing at time t, but it happens to be the thing he wants most to do If 
freedom is understood as simple absence of frustration, then Roe is freer 
than Doe. However, on the dispositional or “breathing space” model Doe 
is not only freer than Roe, but Roe is totally unfree, for if there is only 
one thing that circumstances permit him to do, then he is compelled 
(however willingly) to do that thing. That the dispositional analysis of 
om is c oser to common sense is further shown by consideration of the 
case in which Doe can do one thousand things including what he most 
wants to do, whereas Roe can do only the thing he most wants to do. 
O^- alra of frjjstration^nigdel,. Doe ..and, Roejio not differ at all in 
even though Doe and Roe are equaiiy'c5'ntent"an3’Rbe 
' is forced to act with a bayonet in his back! These rough hypothetical 
examples strongly suggest thatjreedom is one thing, and want-satisfaction 
(or contentment) another. w 

Nevertheless, it may be true that ^dispositional) freedom is valuable 
as a means to,„want- a &faction. If thafis so, thM‘iWi s “7„ roun d 
for preferring freedom if our want-satisfactions are guaranteed without it 
But however we value freedom, whether as means, only or also as an end 
m itself freedom should not be confused with the other goods to which 
it can be related. Some may reach the hasty conclusion that, whatever 
freedom is, it must be importantly good. They are then led to deny that 
freedom could ever conflict with other things that are importantly good, 
that a freedom that conflicts with contentment, for example, could not be 
a genuine freedom worthy of that glittering name. It is more honest and 
perceptive to admit that freedom is one value among many, and sometimes 
may not be worth its price as calculated in terms of other values. Some¬ 
times the straightest road to happiness is through constraint, but that 
doesn t show that “true freedom” is constraint. It shows only that freedom 

thing 6 thmg an<1 happin6SS another > and *at one can’t always have every- 

Not all forms of constraint and compulsion are of equal interest to the 
social and political philosopher. If there is a special kind of freedom that 
deserves to be called “political freedom” or “liberty,” it must consist in 

is ° f 11131 ° ne S ? 6ClaI Wnd ° f constraint called coercion, which » 

ntw u 6 1 eia f a 7^ & e^-U3^r fe jy nce _JiL-the_affaiig__of_human.beings^by *1 
-PtheUluman^n^^ercion takes two maim forms: direct forcing or ' 
preventing, such as by prodding with bayonets or imprisoning, and a 
*. re:l ,° k arm clearI y backed up by enforcement power. In cases of coer¬ 
cion-via threat, there is a sense in which the victim is left with a choice. 

tV*, r ! r 


^tv.; Oc.cu'/:#-) 


v k jMa ) vo 







The Concept of Freedom 

He can comply or he can suffer the (probable) consequences. But if the 
alternative to compliance is some unthinkable disaster—such as the death 
of a child—then there is really no choice but to comply. In intermediate 
cases, between the extremes of overwhelmingly coercive threats and mere 
attractive offers, the threat, in effect, puts a price tag on noncompliance 
and leaves it up to the threatened person to decide whether the price is 
worth paying. The higher the price of noncompliance, the less eligible it 
will seem for his choice. For this intermediate range, threats are like bur¬ 
dens on a man’s back, rather than shackles, or bonds, or bayonets. They 
make one of his alternatives more difficult, but not impossible. This is the 
way in which taxes on socially undesirable conduct can be said to be 
coercive. Although they discourage without actually prohibiting, they can 
quite effectively prevent. 

We have still to discuss the troublesome d^inctiop^b^ 

(including fprins of coercion) and ; ,ijiere JnabiMtm- “ It: is not lack ° f ; free " 
dom,” said Helvetius, “not to fly like an eagle or swim like a whale .” 7 But 
why not? If a human being wants desperately to do just those things, 
won’t his desire be frustrated? He will be prevented from doing what 
he wants just as effectively by his own physical constitution and the laws 
of nature as others are by policemen’s bayonets and the laws of the state. 

The sensitive theorist will feel two contrary inclinations at this point. 
Having already embraced the view that freedom essentially involves ab¬ 
sence of constraint to actual and possible desires, he may wish to preserve 
a symmetry between different sorts of constraints, and make his analysis as 
general as possible. Consequently, he may reason as follows. Wherever it 
is meaningful to speak of a possible desire, it must be equally meaningful 
to speak of a possible constraint. Anything, even a law of nature, can be 
a constraint to some kind of desire, and constraints can be internal as well 
as external. People are constantly prevented from doing what they want, 
or what they might come to want, by their own poverty, weakness, and 
ignorance. Whatever^ prevents, satisfac tion of an actual. or ; hypothetical 
desirejs a constrm^ sir ZeTreedom is t ie absence of ^constraint, it follows 
that we”re unfree to do^hat we are*iTnab le ,|o,j o,^whatever the source 

of our inability. „ 

On the other hand, it may be confusing the issue to let the words free 
and “unfree” do so much work. There may be no limit to what we. wish 
as the object of idle fancies, but not everything wished can be seriously 
desired. A five year old might wish that he could walk on the sun, as. an 
adult might wish that he were young again, but it is conceptually impossible 
for anyone who understands these fanciful objectives to want them to come 
into existence. We should think of freedom as related to actual and possible 
wants rather than idle wishes. Even if we concede (as we should not) 

7 As quoted by Isaiah Berlin, Two Concepts of Liberty (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1961), p. 7. 


/ 




The Concept of Freedom 


9 


that there is no limit to what one can come to want or desire, the limits 
on what we can do or be are strict. I can lament that I was not born 
Winston Churchill, that I am not a mathematical genius or a potential 
weight-lifting champion, that I cannot give birth to a baby, or both be 
and not be at the same time. But to characterize these natural limitations 
as restnctions on my freedom would be to base a lament on a platitude. 

o be, wrote Santayana, “is to be something in particular.” That I am 
one thing rather than another is not so much a restriction on my freedom 
as a necessary consequence of my existing at all. Still, if I had been born 
into one of the lower classes in Brave New World, having been created in 
a test tube and deliberately conditioned to be inferior, I suppose my lament 
that I am not free to realize a higher potential might be at least intelligible. 
Although thejine^between i nabilities that are als o unfreedoms and those 
J^£uslyJiard jo_draw, we should" make'every effOTtMto" 
raw it with precision, for unless some incapacities are not considered to be 

»•> -p- 

In social and political discourse, at least, .unfreedom usually means not 
l of m^abdity, but rather inability of one special kind—namely 
that induced directly or indirectly by the coercive power of other human 
beings. Perhaps the wisest course is to follow Isaiah Berlin, who claims that 
Mere incapacity to attain your goal is not lack of political freedom ”8 It 

TT h ° wever ’ to P° int that it is the presence of the word 
politics 1 in the quoted sentence that allows it to be incontrovertibly 
ue We can then compromise between our conflicting inclinations by say¬ 
ing that political and social philosophy are concerned with freedom only 
w en conceived as the absence of coercion by others. Ethics and metaphysics 
may quite properly concern themselves with more varied sorts of constants 
and thus we can assume for a much wider range of cases that we are 
ot free to do what we are unable to do-though, as we have seen, there 
must be a limit to this principle even in ethics and metaphysics. 

wra . fca cav f at : °, f , ten povert y> illness > ignorance, and other “internal and 
egative constraints are themselves the indirect results of deliberately im- 
posed and modifiable social arrangements. In such cases, we have every 
right to refer to them as restrictions on political liberty. 9 


2. FREEDOM FROM. 
AND FREEDOM TO. 


Perhaps all he means 
X, in which case the 


When a speaker asserts that he is free, he might 
know quite clearly what he is free to do, but be 
quite vague about what constraint he is free from. 
to convey is that nothing now prevents him from doing 
intended emphasis of his remark is on the option now 


8 Berlin, Two Concepts of Liberty, p. 7. 

9 A point well made by Berlin, Two Concepts of Liberty, p. 8. 



10 


The Concept of Freedom 

open to him, and no specific descriptions of missing constraints are necessary 
to fill out his meaning. As we have seen, if the Z m question is something 
most of us are normally free to do anyway, we may be puzzled by the 
speaker’s remark until he specifies more narrowly which former constraint 
to his desire to do Z has now been removed. When this puzzlement does not 
JWrise, no description of specific missing constraints is required for clarity. ^ 

On other occasions, the primary or exclusive emphasis of a speakers 
assertion of freedom may rest on a specific missing constraint. He may, 
for example, claim to “be free” simply because one hated barrier to a 
given desire has been lifted, even though other barriers to that same desire 
still remain. All of the emphasis of his remark is thus on the removed 
constraint, and his newly asserted freedom does not imply that he can yet 
do any more than he formerly could. He is free from one barrier to his 
doing Z, and that may seem to be blessed relief from an oppressive burden, 
but he may still be unable to do Z. In an extreme limiting case, a speaker 
may have no concern with future actions whatever, and the existence of 
new alternatives for choice may be no part of his intended meaning when 
he asserts that he is free from C. He may be exclusively preoccupied with 
the removal of some odious condition, quite apart from any effect that 
removal might have on his other desires or options. He may simply hate 
his chains and conceive his “freedom” to consist entirely in their removal. 
In this not uncommon case, freedom from. . . implies no new freedom to. . . 
other than the freedom of being without the specific thing one is said 

to be free from. 

More typically, when we use the language of missing constraint, we 
imply that there is something we want to do (or might come to want to 
do) that the constraint prevents us from doing, and that to be free from 
that constraint is to be able to do it. In the typical case, then, freedom 
from” and “freedom to” are two sides of the same coin, each involved with 
the other, and not two radically distinct kinds of freedom, as some writers 
have suggested. Indeed, it is difficult fully to characterize a given constraint 
without mentioning the desires it does or can constrain (that is, desires 

other than the exclusive desire to be relieved of it). The man outside of 

divorce court who tells us that he is now free (presumably from the woman 
who was his wife) has not communicated much until he specifies which 
desires he can now' satisfy that he could not satisfy when he was married. 
Without this further specification, we know only that he is without a 
wife and quite happy about it; but then, as we have seen, that may be 
all that he had in mind when he said that he was free. 

At any given time, a person is free to do some things but not free to 

do others, just as he may be free of one kind of constraint to a given 
desire but not free of another. To ask whether a person is “free” without 
any further specification, may demand a long and detailed answer. (Of 



The Concept of Freedom 


11 


course, the context usually gives clues to the particular desires and con¬ 
straints being inquired about.) The situation is even more obscure when 
political partisans campaign for “freedom,” or freedom as qualified by 
some adjective. Maurice Cranston quite rightly advises us to “call for the 
iuii version of all such abbreviated slogans.” 10 

The full version of conceptually elliptical statements about freedom will 
normally take the form indicated in the following schema: 

-- is free from- 

to do (or omit, or be, or have) 


One fills in the first blank by naming the person (or persons) who is the 
subject of the ascnbed freedom, the second blank by specifying some com- 
pu sion or constraint, and the third blank by the specification of some ac¬ 
tion, omission, state of being, or possession actually or hypothetically desired 
either by the subject or the speaker. (Note all the sources of ambiguity in 
this formula.) If it is political freedom that is ascribed to the subject, then 
the constraint will be coercion, and the fullest version of the statement 
will specify not only the technique of constraint employed but also (in a 
fourth blank) the identity of the coercers. Which blank in the schema is 
e most important depends on the context in which a given statement is 
made, and what is assumed to be understood by the persons addressed. 


FREEDOM? 


There are occasions on which it is important 


, - * v iu 1X11 

T , . . . m the first blank as clearly as any of the others. 

mentionT^v ^ uncriticall y use Phases which do not 

ention the subjects of freedom, or slogans which conceal ambiguity by 

e crude device of adding an adjective in qualification of the word “free¬ 
dom. Maurice Cranston reminds us that both sides in the American Civil 
War claimed (quite truly) to be fighting for “freedom,” but the North 
meant the freedom of slaves from their owners to go where they wished 
while the South meant the freedom of the states from the federal govern¬ 
ment to make their own laws. As for “freedom” as qualified by some 
adjective, Cranston writes that “Conservatives, when they speak of ‘eco- 
noimc freedom usually mean ‘the freedom of the national economy from 

‘th f n j° S ° 1 ? State '’ Soclall sts advocating ‘economic freedom’ refer to 
the freedom of the individual from economic hardship.’ ”H 

People who speak with rhetorical force and pretense to precision about 
freedom as qualified by some adjective should always be invited to fill in 
all the gaps in the schema. That is not to say that adjectival modifiers 
cannot be useful, but only that they can be dangerous. We have already 

10 Cranston, Freedom , A New Analysis , p. 12. 

11 Cranston, Freedom } A New Analysis i pp. 13-14. 




12 




The Concept of Freedom 

distinguished “political freedom” from freedom generally by the nature of 
the constraints that can restrict it; but “political freedom” might just as 
well be used to distinguish a certain range of actions—“political actions — 
that might be impeded by restraints of any kind, or even a certain range 
of subjects—“political officials” or perhaps citizens—whose freedom is under 
discussion. The qualifying adjective, in short, might be taken as referring 
to any of the gaps in the schema, unless explicit directions are given for 
its interpretation. 


4. POSITIVE AND It has often been said that there_ar e_two main con - 

NEGATIVE FREEDOM cepts, or types, or ideals of freedom^ one positive 

^n^theIS^3Siiy3ye, shuTthat ideoIogleTconflict 
insofar as they employ, or give emphasis to, one, the other, or both of them. 
Although writers who have attached great importance to this distinction 
have often gained important insights, their views can be preserved an 
expressed with greater economy in terms of the “single concept analysis 
I t given here. The writers to whom I refer argue that o^x one of the two 

N k * t allegedly dkj^t-concep^^ is tp an ^ z ^ as 

may be free of all constraints to our desire 

* ^ to do X, these philosophers maintain,be free to do X. Hence, 

they conclude, “posi tive freedom’^(freedom to. . J is something other than 
the, abse nce of c onstraint. ' 

I think this way of indicating the distinction between positive and 
negative freedom will seem plausible only if the idea of a constraint is 
artificially limited. However, two important distinctions between kinds of 
constraints, cutting across each other, can be made, and once these dis¬ 
tinctions are recognized, an apparent ground for the “two concept” analysis 

vanishes. The distinction^ are those between positive.and „negative.cop- 

straints and between inte rnal and external constra int^ There is no doubt 
that some constraints are negative—Jack of money, strength, skill, or knowl¬ 
edge can quite effectively prevent a person from doing, or having, or being 
something he might want. Since these coj^ they, .are 

“negative,” and since they can be preventive causes, they are constraints. 

Row we make the distinction between “internal” and “external con¬ 
straints depends, of course, on how we draw the boundaries of the self. If 
we contract the self sufficiently so that it becomes a dimensionless non- 
empirical entity, then all causes are external. Other narrow conceptions 
of the self would attribute to its “inner core” a set of ultimate principles or 

12 See Ralph Barton Perry, Puritanism and Democracy (New York: Vanguard Press, 
1944) Chap. 18, and T. H. Green, Lectures on Political Obligation. (London: 
Longmans, Green, and Co., 1901), especially the lecture on “Liberal Legislation and 
Freedom of Contract.” 




l/h 'to 

tor 


The Concept of Freedont 1 ^ % 


<‘h 


f°f , 


i^&T] 


• ‘1*JL 

~u*>f S t 





m'4t/ 


13 


“internalized values,” or ultimate ends or desires, and relegate to the merely 
“empirical self,” or to a world altogether external to the self, all lower- 
ranked desires, whims, and fancies. If the distinction between internal and 
external constraints is to be put to political use, perhaps the simplest way 
of making it is by means of a merely spatial criterion: external constraints 
are those that come from outside a person’s body-cum-mind, and all other 
constraints, whether sore muscles, headaches, or refractory “lower” desires, 
are internal to him. This would be to use a wide total self, rather than 
the intimate “inner core” self, in making the distinction. 

The two distinctions described above cut across one another, creating 

four categories. There are internal positive constraints such.as .headaches, 

obsessive thoughts, and compulsive desires; internal negative constraints 
sycli, ys<dgnor^g.Qe, we akn ess, and deficiencies in talent or ^skill; external 
positive .constraints such as barred windows, locked doors, .and v po mted_ 
bayongts; and external negative const faints such as lack o f^ mo ney, lack of 
transportation, and lack of weapons. Freedom from a negative constraint 
is The absence" of* an absence, and therefore the presence of some condition 
that permits a given kind of doing. When the presence of such a condi¬ 
tion is external to a person, it is usually called an opportunity, and when 
internal, an ability. Not every absent condition whose presence would con¬ 
stitute an opportunity or ability, however, is a negative constraint. £)nly 
those whose absence constitu tes , a striking deviation from § .h°nn ,of ex¬ 
pectancy or propriety, or whose absenge is in some way an important con¬ 
sideration Jor some practical interest either of the subject or of some later 
commentator, can jqualify as constraints. 

If only positive factors are cou nte d as constraints, then a pauper might 
be free of constraints to his (actual or possible) desire to buy a Cadillac. 
But of course he is not free to buy a Cadillac. Similarly, if constraints are 
restricted to external factors, then the chronic alcoholic and the extremely 
ill man in a fever or coma are both free from constraints to go about their 
business; but of course, neither is free to do so. Once we acknowledge, 
however, that there can be internal and negative constraints, there is no 
further need to speak of two distinct kinds of freedom, one of which has 
nothing to do with constraint. A constraint is something—anything that 
prevents one from doing something. Therefore, if nothing prevents me 
from doing X , I am free to do X; conversely, if I am free to do X, then 
nothing prevents me from doing X. “Freedom to” and freedom from are 
in this way logically linked, and there can be no special “positive” freedom 


to which is not also a freedom from. 

Still, I suppose 

as the jibsence of_ negative constraints, and “negative freedom? as the 
absence of positive constraints, providing (1) that positive and negative 
freedom are held to be equally necessary to a person’s freedom all told 

isit umm 

mmnimiw mmm ■ 







The Concept of Freedom 


14 


(without any qualifying adjective), (2) neither is held to be “higher,” 
lower, ’ or intrinsically more worth having than the other, and (3) 

neither is analyzed as totally different in kind from the absence of con- 
straints. 


. SELF-RESTRAINT Most of us do not feel free to perform acts that are 

forbidden by rules or authorities that we have ac¬ 
cepted, even when there are no effective external hindrances and we stand 
to profit by disobedience. We are constrained from disobedience not by 
external barners and threats but by internal inhibitions. Whether the in¬ 
ternal constraint is taken to be a restriction of the self’s freedom to act 
depends upon how we model the self, that is, upon which of the elements 
of the ‘total self” we identify most intimately with. If we are prevented 
by some internal element—an impulse, a craving, a weakened condition, 
an intense but illicit desire, a neurotic compulsion—from doing that which 
we think is the best thing to do, then the internal inhibitor is treated as an 
alien force, a kind of “enemy within.” On the other hand, when the in¬ 
hibitor is some higher-ranked desire and that which is frustrated is a desire 
of lesser importance albeit greater momentary intensity, we identify with 
the desire that is higher in our personal hierarchy, and consider ourselves 
to be the subject rather than the object of constraint. When the desire to 
do that which is forbidden is constrained by conscience, by the “internalized 
authority of the prohibiting rules themselves, we identify with our con¬ 
sciences, and repel the threat to our personal integrity posed by the refrac¬ 
tory lower desire which we “disown.” no matter how “internal” it may be. 

A person who had no hierarchical structure of wants, aims, and ideals 
and no clear conception of where it is within his internal landscape that 
he really resides, would be a battlefield for all of his constituent elements 
tugged this way and that, and fragmented hopelessly. Such a person would 
fail of autonomy not because he is a mere conformist whose values are all 
borrowed secondhand, for his wants, ideals, and scruples could be perfectly 
authentic and original in him, but because these values lack internal order 
311 u st ™ ctllr< y This defective condition, which in its extreme form tends 
to be fatal, Durkheim called “anomie.” It is interesting to note why on 
the unitary “absence of constraint” theory of freedom, it is intelligible to 
speak of anomie as a kind of unfreedom. Our picture of the undisciplined 
or anomic man is not of a well-defined self with a literal or figurative 
bayonet at its back, or barriers, locked doors, and barred windows on all 
sides. Rather it employs the image of roads crowded with vehicles in the 
absence of traffic police or signals to keep order; desires, impulses, and 
purposes come and go at all speeds, in all directions, and get nowhere The 
undisciplined person, perpetually liable to internal collisions, jams, and 



The Concept of Freedom 


15 


revolts, is unfree even though unrestrained by either the outside world or 
an internal governor. To vary‘the image, he is a person free of external 
s ackles, but tied in knots by the strands of his own wants. In the apt 
current idiom, he is subject to “hang-ups.” When he may “do anything 
he wants, his options will overwhelm his capacity to order them in hierar- 
chies of preference. He will therefore become confused and disoriented, 
haunted by boredom and frustration, eager once more simply to be told 
what he must do. To be unfree is to be constrained, and in the absence of 
internal rules, desires will constrain each other in jams and collisions. Surely 
it is more plausible to construe such a state as unfreedom than as an il- 
lustration of the dreadfulness of too much freedom. 


autoSSy AS There is another use of the word “ free >” not yet 

mentioned, that provides still another—and a far 
« ... „ , ,« more Plausible—way of making a distinction between 

Drobaw! a " 3 gatIV , e ’ kinds of freedom - This use has its primary and 
p y original application not to individuals but to states and other 
institutions. Its inevitable extension to individual human beings was part of 
that elaborate parapolitical metaphor which since the time of Plato has so 
colored our conception of the human mind. To understand its extended use 
would be well advised to consider first its literal application to states, 
which is a great deal clearer. When one nation is the colony of another, it is 
not said to be free until it gains its independence. Formerly, it was governed 
from without; now it is governed from within. Hence, freedom in this sense 
and independence, and self-government all come to the same thing. Freedom 
MAej^e^mdependoace, asagpliedto states, does not at firsfTegm'fo 
fit the unitary absence-of-constraint model (tRough it can be made to con¬ 
form with a little tugging and pulling). The “free state” may be an 
impoverished tyranny with very little freedom for its citizens; or for itself 
vis-a-vis ot er states and nature. Self-government might turn out to be 

mTlw-n r Pre r ,Ve ? an f0reign occu P ation - Yet, for all of that, the state 
g still be politically independent, sovereign, and governed from within 
Hence tree. 5 

nai n o!°“° US i Iy ’ if» S ° ften Said that ^ individual ^ “free” when his ruling 
part or real self governs, and is subject to no foreign power, either ex- 

ernal or internal, to whose authority it has not consented. Suppose that 
John Doe wants nothing more than to have all his desires, actual and 
potential, free of constraints. He wants as many options as possible left 
open, especially those that are most important to him. He believes that 
Kichard Roe knows best how to arrange this state of affairs. Hence, he puts 
imse un er Roe s control, obeying as if commanded every piece of advice 
13 Lewis, Studies in Words t p. 112. 




The Concept of Freedom 


16 


Roe gives him. The example becomes even more forceful if Doe makes this 
arrangement irrevocable. He is no longer self-determined, but receives rich 
dividends of satisfaction, having found a more effective way of getting all 
the particular things he wants or may one day come to want. (Self-direction 
is not one of the particular things he wants, nor is it important to him to 
keep open the option of one day repossessing it.) He may also want breath¬ 
ing space” and “genuine options,” in which case his benevolent director, 
Roe arranges his life with these goals in mind. If this picture is coherent, 
the situation is analogous to that of the nation which gains freedom from 
constraint by becoming a colony of a wiser benevolent power. In each case, 
the subject can increase its freedom from constraint by relinquishing some 
of its power to govern itself. Both examples tend to show that self-govern¬ 
ment is a different kind of freedom from the absence of constraint. 

I think we can continue to speak of self-government as ^Ji^om, 
however, without committing ourselves to the view that it is a kind o 
freedom unanalyzable in terms of the constraint model. Putatively distinct 
“concepts” of freedom frequently turn out to be different estimates of the 
importance of only one, part of what is always present in any case of tree- 

(j om ”i5 _the importance of one class of subjects as opposed to another, or 

of one class of desires'or open options as opposed to another, or of one 
class of missing constraints as opposed to another. I think the point o 
calling individual self-direction freedom may be to emphasize the over¬ 
riding importance of one particular kind of desire or option, namely, to 
decide for oneself what one shall do. Even wise and benevolent external 
direction is a constraint to the desire, actual or possible, to decide for 
oneself. Hence there is a point in calling the absence of that constraint 

(or the presence of self-direction) freedom. 

In a similar way, almost anything can be made out as a constraint to 
some actual or possible desire. Hence the absence of anything at all (e.g., 
cloudy skies) can be identified with “true” or “positive” freedom. The 
point of singling out the desire to govern oneself for this special status is 
to acknowledge its supreme importance among desires. For those to whom 
the desire for self-government is so important that few other desires can 
yield significant satisfactions so long as it is constrained, there is every 
reason to preempt the word “freedom” for the absence of constraint to rt. 
This singling out of a supreme desire is not a purely arbitrary or su jective 
thing. A powerful case can be made to show that other acknowledged values 


14 compare Berlin, Two Concepts of Liberty, p. 130: “The‘^Xernmem 

‘Who governs me?’—is logically distinct from the question—How far does government 
ilrfere whh me?’ It is in this difference that the great contras, between the two 
concepts of liberty in the end consists/’ . 

15 Gerald C. MacCallum, Jr., “Negative and Positive Freedom,” Philosophical Review , 

LXXVI (1967), 318. 



The Concept of Freedom 


17 


e^T ”, 35 ^ P reconditi ° n - - particular that dignity self- 
esteem, and responsibility are impossible without it. g Y> 


7. PERMISSION On P finoi *• , 

AND ABILITY u • bnal ^ lstl ” ctlon between types of constraints can 

obviate still other difficulties in interpreting singular 
. judgments of the form “Doe is free to do X ” A 

speaker might mean by this judgment either of the following- 

o'? b* 

interchangeable with talk of “freedom.”) ’ b y 1S n0t always 

When om^ands or rules are not effectively enforced, a person might well 

• , , ° ° somethln S *at he is not permitted to do. Similarly a person 

ight be permitted to do something that he is unable to do becmse he is 
p evented by constraints other than rules backed by sanctions A person 
might be also incapable of doing some act simply because it is prohibited 
by commands or rules that are effectively enforced. In that case he 
enforced rule is itself a constraint. ’ the 

Corresponding to the distinction between what may be done and what 
can be done is that between two perspectives from which singular freedom 
ju gments are made namely, the juridical and the sociological. The former 

ay thatT CtlVe M T ° f ^ regulations. When I 

ht ow \ r m NW Y ° rk St3te is free to Play poker for money in 
his own home, I am simply reciting what the New York legal codes pro 

"bit. My judg ment is confirmable or disconfirmable by reference to (and 
only by reference to) those codes. In fact, thousands of P ei,om play poler 
for money m private homes in New York eveiy night with liule or no 
sTci 1° aP f rehensl ° n b >' the indifferent police. When I speak from the 

in lffeft C f pe t rspe . ctlve ’ * mi S ht say that everyone in New York is 
m effect free to play poker. This judgment is subject to a different kind 

isenfom^'^r evidence > “eluding how effectively a law 

enforced by the police, how intimidated by the law poker players actuallv 

From the juridical perspective, what I am free to do in a given case 
no a matter o degree. Any given act or omission is either permitted or 

I ” o ,” “ ‘ I? ny < ' n,i ” ly >»“• ii » 1 ™ »»■.. 

It at all. O course there are more subtle forms of legal control which em 
P y variable constraints that permit talk of “degrees” of freedom. If there 





18 


The Concept of Freedom 

is a $100 tax on conduct of type A and a $500 tax on type B, I am left 
by authority, in a quite intelligible sense, more free to do A than to do B. 
In the case of criminal law, however, and all other regu ations that control 
conduct by enjoining, permitting, and prohibiting, my freedom to do any 
act is, from the law’s point of view, either entire or f nexlsten i ^ th " 
other hand, from the sociological perspective, it is always mtelligib 
speak of degrees of freedom or unfreedom even of a particular person o 
do some given act, and even when that act is unconditionally prohibited 
by law, if only because the probabilities of being detected and/or convicted 
vary from offense to offense.*® 


8 FREE ON BALANCE A speaker may intend nothing so precise as is sug¬ 
gested by our schema with the three blanks when he 
asserts that he or some other person is free; but the second kind of thing 
he might mean presupposes and builds upon the singular noncomparative 
judgments discussed in this chapter. He may intend to convey that he is 
on the whole free, or at liberty, to do a great many things, or to do most 
of the things that are worth doing, or perhaps to do a greater percentage 
of the worthwhile things than are open to most people; or he might be 
emphasizing that he is free from most of the things that are worth being 
without in their own right (disease, poverty), or freer from those things 
than are the members of some comparison class. “Ontetoise. judgments 
of freedom are of necessity vague and impressionistic, and even the.con}- 

wmetim^incorpoiate^sutejusu^yjUM^sJble 

of precise confirmation. . , 

SuppoSe"that’John' Doe is permitted by well-enforced rules to travel only 
to Chicago, Houston, and Seattle, but may make adverse criticism o 
nothing he sees in those cities, whereas Richard Roe may go only to 
Bridgeport, Elizabeth, and Jersey City and may criticize anything he wishes, 
or suppose that Doe can go anywhere at all but must not criticize whereas 
Roe cannot leave home but may say anything he pleases. In reply to t e 
question, “Which of the two is more free?,” it appears that the only sensible 
answer is that Doe is more free in one respect (physical movement) and 
Roe in another (expression of opinion). If the questioner persists in asking 
who is the more free “on balance” and “in the last analysis,” he must want 
to know which of the two respects is more important. If we are then to 
avoid a vitiating circularity, our standard of “importance” must be some- 
thinsf other than “conducibility to freedom.” . 

When two or more properties or “respects” are subject to precise mathe- 
matical comparison, they will always have some quantitative element in 

16 Cf. Felix Oppenheim, Dimensions of Freedom (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 
Inc.. 1961b P. 187. 





lhe Concept of Freedom 

19 

derivTf' The . di * cult y in strikin g resultant totals of “on balance freedom” 
from the fact that the relation among the various “areas” in which 

k; ti7 " ;v”! u *>* «■«*» 

h JL ’ b ^f d hj ^ nd depth ot a Physical object as it is like the relation 

He,Vht n time e h !T ““T 7 ’ StyHng ’ ^ C ° mf ° rt ° f an “tobiler 

e lg ht fames breadth times depth equals volume, a dimension compounded 

menT" n° Ut °l* e 0therS ’ freedom of expression times freedom of move- 
y ? ds nothing comparable. If these areas of freedom are called 
dimensions,” they must also be labeled “incommensurable.” Still limited 
comparisons even of incommensurables are possible. If the average Amer- 

part h aS mak ater freed ° m Y" 7 dimension than hi * Ruritanian counter¬ 
part, makes sense to say that he has greater freedom on balance; if they 

the r Ily r m SOm a dimensions but the American is more free in a U 
the others the same judgment follows. What we more likely mean when 

we say that one subject is freer on balance than another is that his freedom 

the “vllue” S 6 T 6 VaIUable ’ IIMp ° rtant > or si S“ficant dimensions, where 

A resih of L !“° n 18 dete ™ ined by some independent standard. 

A resu of considerable interest seems to follow from this analysis. Since 

aximal freedom (having as much freedom on balance as pLible) is 
notion that makes sense only through the application of independent 
standards for determining the relative worth or importance of different 

thlt ctnnTT 5 T d are3S ° f aCtiVit7, “ iS by itS6lf 3 merel y fo™al ideal 
that cannot stand on its own feet without the help of other values One 

LT contrar th f Can /° nfliCt ^ an ° ther ’ S ’ freedom in °» e dimension 

meaZrfu lv b l /" an ° ther ’ 3nd * e conflictin S dimensions cannot 

requhe fha we Tt T T* ^ ^ C ° nflictS md recalcitrances 
require that we pu types of subjects, possible desires, and areas of activity 

mto some order of importance; this in turn requires supplementing Z 
political ideal of freedom with moral standards of other kinds. The’sup¬ 
plementary values, however, are not external to freedom in the manner of 

arf“internal % “ nC61Ved , rival ideals as J^ce and welfare, but rather 

tiallv emnt H SUPpl ? mel f 7 ~ a necessa W Aling-in of the otherwise par- 
tially empty idea of on balance freedom” itself. 1 


17 Cf. Oppenheim, Dimensions of Freedom , p. 200. 



CHAPTER TWO 


Grounds 
for Coercion 


1. THE PRESUMPTIVE Whatever else we believe about freedom, most of us 
CASE FOR LIBERTY believe it is something to be praised, or so luminously 

a Thing of Value that it is beyond praise. What is it 
that makes freedom a good thing? Some say that freedom is good in itself 
quite apart from its consequences. On the other hand, James Fitzjames 
Stephen wrote that “. . .the question whether liberty is a good or a bad 
thing appears as irrational as the question whether fire is a good or a 
bad thing.” 1 Freedom, according to Stephen, is good (when it is good) 
only because of what it does, not because of what it is. 

It would be impossible to demonstrate that freedom is good for its own 
sake, and indeed, this proposition is far from self-evident. Still, Stephens 
analogy to fire seems an injustice to freedom. Fire has no constant and 
virtually invariant effects that tend to make it, on balance, a good thing 
whenever and wherever it occurs, and bad only when its subsequent re¬ 
moter effects are so evil as to counterbalance its direct and immediate 
ones. Thus, a fire in one’s bed while one is sleeping is dreadful because its 

1 James Fitzjames Stephen, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity (London: 1873), p. 48. 


20 


Grounds for Coercion 


21 


makes possible’ att cup oTco^ T “ ^ ^ “ SpIendid becau ^ it 
fire in These and all oZ 17? to ^ " I" ^ direCt effect of 
temperature in its immediate enviro™ rna tenal objects and raise the 

of view of human interests and rn 'j ^5" effects > from the P°int 

good nor bad. ’ COnsldered W in themselves, are neither 

a free'man S.lteThfs IZboZZ ^ f ^ “ ** res P ect ' When 
Put to bad use, was, on baSceZ “ad ThZ b“ ***“*“’ ^ ^ 
it was not an unalloyed evil /Whatever the’h ” ^ &e * he bed ’ 

dom in a given case, there ifalways a direct onTh ’* Z 

possessor which must he 7 • . * * n the P ers °n of its" 

great evils, and be wholly justifiedZZaf 6 S °°3. C ° ercion ma y prevent 
price. Coercion may be on bllance a 7 il ^ •»* to 

always, or nearly always, constitute a definke losTlf ftists 't™ 
always a presumption in favor of freedom e f *1 5 there IS 

cases be overridden by more powerful reason ^hemler"^ “ ^ 

essentia”rre 7^ *° 

constitute the good of individual a S ° lnte ect and character which 
the progress ofZcltl. oZ r Z™ ™ans to 

variations to Von Humboldt Mi^Hobh attnbutab1 ^ with minor 

as follows. The hiZst Zd ’ H ° bh ° USe ’ and “ an y ^hers, goes roughly 
contentment but ate a d ““ “ nekher «**“«*' ** passive 

T k » «. t sr? " d 

did, namely, “The exercise of vital f bat term wbat tbe Greeks 

life affording theZcope Th b * T g ““ ° f e ^ ellence » a 

possible amount oTindZdual se f t ° Clal S °° d “ then the 8«ates t 
persons are inc.iZlby^ 

sity and fullness of life Self real' r lfferent ways) the resultant cliver- 
tain uniquely human potendaliZs/TheTringiTg 7 * Z 

.nd ,h, mo« difc.1, d* b „,„. Jdm S ,Z Mm 

and even if m T' Ve men ' al activil )'. 

anything because it is the custom makes no 777 ”<? * Ch ° 1Ce ' He Wh ° d ° es 
discerning or in desiring what is best The „ . j H ® gains no Practice either in 

powers are improved only by beZ used T m ° raI ’ Hke tIle muscuIa r, 

In short, one does not realize what is best in oneself when social pressures 

1942) E Tp‘ h 35 a fh‘ lt0n ’ The Greek Way (New York: W - W. Norton & Company Inc 
8 J ° hn StUart MilI> ° n Liberty York ■ Liberal Arts Press, 1956), p. 71 . ’ 




Grounds for Coercion 


22 


to conform to custom lead one mmdleSS . ly e ^° n n o S ' c ^ “nif first ’ place, 
^etLeTbS Teprinlnlnce or because one is terrorized by 

tends to promote the good P M :n added to this argument 

the citation of numerous sock d b«fe^^ ^ k We 

formly to those who grant ree om inta i ne d and genius, since it 

all profit from the fruits of genius, h« fl( J sh only where 

often involves doggedness an eccentnci Yj Moreover social progress 

-*• ” w “ ) h “" t r«I ! ta e S »y - 

ir—* *** 

•%- t re ri wit”» op«rrrs 

forcing a person to do so “ ettl ^ should always opt 

zzzzr. sz p 

whkh 

Jjj7*nresumption can be overridden. 


2. THE ANARCHISTIC 
PRINCIPLE 


It will be instructive to see why certain very simple 
statements of the conditions for justified J° clal a " d 
political coercion are unsatisfactory. The first of thes , 

^ • u 11 “anarchistic ” insists that society an 
which might with propriety be ca ’ b do whatever he 

the state should grant to every stlte or society ^ever 

wishes.” In this view, no.coercive p_ group 

justified. What then of the he wish es, it follows that 

on another? If every man is fr h old noisy par ties under 

all men are free to inflict bows on Jo ’ possessions. How can 

his window every night, and to he P ^ to come and go as 

it then be true that John Doe is free at the^ time^ ^ 

he pleases, to sleep at night, an to en l°Y d ; spos i- 

There is no logical inconsistency m holing both tha 

tionally free to do somethh*ese judg¬ 
ments" 1 only'when mad^from the sociological, not the juridical, perspective.) 





Grounds for Coercion 

23 

ments as equivalent to the following h^tE’ m Td T ^ 
go to Chicago, he will in fact go to Chicago and 2 Tf £ E * 
have Doe stay at home, Doe will i„ fact S 1 at hL Th" * 

factl . . 8 p ftlrn > ( 2 ) 1S true because if (contrary to 

tact) Roe were to choose to keep Doe at home rw mu, 

horn. For any Doe and any Roe! whether ot not m Zd ^ K * 

cEfeS 

S3 

in short, would be workable only in a woridTn 
Qkotces, through a miracle of preestaEiistedlrarmony, 

3§*££S3h«S£ 

to all 

w^' Bentham ”l !hT rC1 ° n u aPP CaWe by individual to individual/' 

Jeremy Bentham, Anarchical Fallacies ” in Th# u? / ± 

ed. John Bowring (Edinburgh, 1843) ’ Works of Jeremy Bent ham, Vol. 2, 





Grounds for Coercion 


24 


same net totals of liberty and constraint differing merely in. the manner of 
distribution? This conclusion is yet another trap we can fall into by inter 
preSg usefully loose talk about “amounts” of freedom m a precise quan- 

^Most 'civilized societies have prohibitive laws or other social devices to 
prevent Mividuals from inflicting blows on the faces of other individual. 
There is sometimes a great deal of pleasure to be derived from boppmg 
someone in the nose, but most of us thu* that this pi.easme >s wor h 
sacrificing for the greater good of secunty from physica attack by others. 
Suppose \owever, that some rugged individualist complains that our law 
«. hi. tecta., caking i. vi*.U, imp~blc 1- k- » “W 
, h(: thrill of smashing noses, and just because of the scruples of a 
S wiak-hneed, li.y-livfmd slrnies. "Since the days of the■ he m. S h, 
say, “there hasn’t been any real freedom m this coun y. . . j 

doubt try to explain to him that the interest people have m the physical 
integrity of their noses is more important than their aggressive m ere , 

and therefore more worthy of protection. i p 

Now suppose that we had quite different rules, and that more peop e 
were free to hit others in the nose, and correspondingly fewer were free to 
enjoy the full beauty and utility of their own unbloodied proboscises. Wou 
this new arrangement have a greater or smaller “amount of freedom m 
it on balance? Perhaps it is least misleading to say *at there would1 be 
not “less” freedom but freedom of a morally inferior kind. Most societie 
have recognized that there are some relatively permanent desires present 
in all men that must be singled out, given precedence and made legaUy 
sacrosanct. When^these interes ts are so rec ognized, and prpje^cted. by , 
they c ome to be calMri^lsee Chapter 4). Selection of those mteres s 
important enS^t^TpStEcted in this way is made in accordance wrth 
the settled value judgments of the community by application of some 
‘knfnri ..hen tai «f "-pic tecta.” tali, which. mnri- 

ficient. To receive “complete liberty” from society and its government 
would be to incur other constraints from private individuals, and almos 
all who have thought about this exchange consider it a bad trade. 


3 THE FORMALISTIC The second unsatisfactory principle of freedom dis- 

PRINCIPLE'- 7 ,, tribution does not have such obvious failings. In 

.fact, many have spoken as if it were a^selTeyident 

truth. Society, it says, should grant to every person 

he pleases providing only that he does not interfere with the like liberty 
of another.”-' This principle is the right answer to the wrong question. It 

5 L. T. Hobhouse, The Elements of Social Justice (London^ ^Xpted'lS arglmra" 
Ltd., 1922), p. 60. Hobhouse rejects this formula, and I have adapted n g 

against it in the text. 





Grounds for Coercion 


25 


S"r d b ' d r b ; w ■» 

He exception to the general prohibitive laws. But if it is taken as an 

principle emnlovs ^ P r °bibtttng all aggressive behavior. The 

tnapie AX SKi'ttS “ J ~ 

which howls all the time the piano is being plaved ”« iLt, f!f P • d ° g 
example would use his freedom to t! T? P X P^T m this 

law -wSich re^es a^ ^e,S” for ^ ° ther ^ der a 


*• A AXJU 


OF HARM 




„ .r ~S2S~i s a harm-causing 

vil, then one way to justify it is to show thaiTt is 

That is the generating inSh^f h" ^ P”’ 0 ” of even ^ater evils.; 

called simply ^ P™^ ( h —forth 

liberty of Ze p^^ThT^lb thr 

this principle can be dis^gl hed rtlfet^ " ° f 

forbe^'S'SeT 611 ! in h UI7 t0 ° ther SPedfiC indiv ^ u al“cTnther 

justify 6 ^:: 1 -I can be *-« - 

szz ss-aars* ^sswss; 

.» state co«io„ t^Z ”n "'h^L *n” ~2 


would n„7i,„ wZ 1 ^n"“ “j “» -**- ■ *** He 

ing, and co„,„p73JuT ^“77 
except insofar a, the, wesdsen p „hhc 

6 **°khouse, Liberalism (New York* Hnlf- p: u * , 

pp. 63-64. ^ K ‘ Wolt > Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1911), 







Grounds for Coercion 


26 


have a stake. I shall assume that Mill held both the public and private 

versions of the harm principle. . . , . ... a . wav from 

In its simplest formulations, the harm principle is s ill a ^ wa j£ 
being a precise guide to the ideal legislator, especially in those difficult 

cases where harms of different orders, magnitudes, and f P n tx'hcit Tnd 
be balanced against one another. Even when made ful y P 
qualified in appropriate ways, however, the unsupplemented harm 
cannot be fairly assessed until it is known precisely what is meant y 

“harm.” 

of harm always to be an interest. The Restatement of Torts 

Si 1«». c *. «n» jW^snrsfc. * - 

is the object of human desire,” 7 but this seems much too broad to be 
useful for our present purposes. A person is often said to ave an m e 
in something he does not presently desire. A dose of medicine may 
a man’s interest” even when he is struggling and kicking to avoid it. I 
this sense an object of an intswstjs “what kjndygo^fo^a person 
whether hedSiraTit or not,” Even interest defined in this second way 
ma~y beTndirectrf but necessarily related to desires. The on y way to argue 
that X is in Doe’s interest even though Doe does not want X may be to 
show that X would effectively integrate Doe’s total set of desires leading 
to a greater net balance of desire-fulfillment m the long run. If mos 
of Doe’s acknowledged important desires cannot be satisfied so long 
is ill and he cannot become well unless he takes the medicine, then tak ng 
the medicine is in Doe’s interest in this desire-related sense. 

Legal writers classify interests in various ways. One of the more common 
list! ‘Interests of Personality,” “Interests of Property,” “Interest in Reputa- 
Sl” “Interest in Domestic Relations,” and “Interest in Privacy,” among 
others A humanly inflicted harm is conceived as the violation of °ne o 
' person’s interests, an injury to something in which he has a genuine stake, n 
the lawyer’s usage, an i nterest is so mething a per^n_^ysj?9^Sm“ 

condition, something that j: 3 n__grow__aml__flourisli_.or dignn^^_^dde^ y^ 

bS^hich can rarely be totally lost. Other persons can be said to pmmote 

bodil y health ’ or ; n t the 7°:^“ ° 

damaging or offensive physical contacts, or m the safety and security of 
Ws person, his family, his friends, and his property. One advantage of 
this mode of speaking is that it permits us to appraise harms by distinguish- 
L* id 1« important «»»», =md be.w.an thorn nj*. 
which are, and those which are not, worthy of legal recognition and/or 
protecdon. 

7 nixt/it.ement of the Law of Torts (St. Paul: American Law Institute, 1939), p. 1. 





Grounds for Coercion 


27 


(ii) HARM VS- HURT: JliE v R,OLE OT ( jCNOWLEDGE 

Is it true that “what a person doesn’t know can’t harm him”? For 
most cases, this maxim certainly does not apply, and it is one of the merits 
of the “interest” analysis of harm that it explains why. Typically, having 
one’s interests violated is one thing, and knowing that one’s interests have 
been violated is another. The rich man is harmed at the time his home 
is burgled, even though he may not discover the harm for months; simi¬ 
larly, a soldier is harmed the moment he is wounded, though in the heat 
of the battle he may not discover even his serious wounds for some time. 
The law does not permit a burglar to plead “He will never miss it” even 
when that plea is true, for the crime of burglary consists in inflicting a 
forbidden harm, whether or not it will be discovered or will hurt. It is 
true that not all harms hu rt, partly because not all harms ever come to be 
noticed. There may well be a relatively narrow and precise sense of “harm” 
in ordinary usage such that “being harmed” can be contrasted with being 
hurt (as well as with “being shocked” and “being offended”) . However, if 
h^JSjsjyL 3 lerstood as the violation of an interest, and all men have an 
interest in not being hurt, it follows that hurt is jme species of harm. 
Hence, even ^though ngtidl harm§ ,hurt, all Trnm'jdo, harm (or more ac¬ 
curately, are themselves hatra), and the ^harm principle could conceivably 
be used to justify coercion when it is necessary to prevent hurts, even when 

the hurts do not lead to any further harm. ~ .* 

There are some special cases where the maxim “What a person doesn’t 
know can’t hurt him” seems quite sound. In these cases, knowledge of some 
fact, such as the adulterous infidelities of one’s spouse, is itself hurtful; 
indeed, the whole hurt consists in the knowledge and is inseparable from 
it. Here knowledge is both a necessary and sufficient condition of a hurt: 
What the cuckolded husband doesn’t know “can’t hurt him.” That is not 
to say that he cannot be harmed unless he is hurt. An undetected adultery 
damages one of the victim’s “interests in domestic relations,” just as an 
unknown libelous publication can damage his interest in a good reputa¬ 
tion, or an undetected trespass on his land can damage his interest in “the 
exclusive enjoyment and control” of that land. In all these cases, violation 
q ues rion is itself a harm eveja though no further harm 

may result to any* other interests. ..— 

'” The distinction between hurt and (generic) harm raises one additional 
question. We must include in the category of “hurts” not only physical pains 
but also forms of mental distress.jDur question is whether, in applying the 
harm principle, we should permit coercion"”designed to prevent mental 
^stress when the distress is not likely to be followed by hurt or hamTof 
any other kind. Some forms of mental distress (e.g., “hurt feelings”) can 
be ruled out simply on the ground that they are too minor or trivial to 
warrant interference. Others are so severe that they can lead to mental 





Grounds for Coercion 


28 


breakdowns. In such cases, however, it is the consequential harni to mental 
health and not the mere fact of distress that clearly warrants interference 
on the ground of harmfulness. Thus, a convenient criterion for determining 
whether a hurt is sufficiently harmful to justify preventive coercion on that 
ground suggests itself: the hurt is serious enough if and only if it is eithe? 
a symptom of a prior or concurrent harm of another order (as a pam 
in an arm may be the result and sign of a broken bone), or is in itself the 
cause of a consequential harm (e.g., mental breakdown) of another order. 

(hi) HARM VS. OFFENSE 

The relation of offensiveness to harmfulness can be treated in much 

the same way as that of hurtfulness to harmfulness. The following points 

can be made of both: 

1. Some harnis. do^n offend (as some do not hurt). 

/ 2. All offenses (like all hurts) are harms, inasmuch as all men have an interest in 

| not being offended orTiurt. 

\ 3. Some-.-offens es Hikq some h urts'! jare symptoms or consequences of prio r or _con- 

\ current harms., • 

V 4. Spme offenses (like some hurts) are causes of subsequent harms: in the case of 
<"* extreme hurt, harm To^health] In the case' of “ extreme " offense, harm from 

/ provoked ill will or violence. These subsequent harms are harms of a different 
/ order, i.e., violations of interests other than the interest in not being hurt or 
offended. 

5. Some offenses, like some hurts, are “harmless,” i.e., do not lead to any further 
harm (violations of any interests other than the interest in not being hurt or 
f\ offended). 

\ ( 6. Although offense and hurt are in themselves harms, they are harms of a relatively 
trivial kind (unless they are of sufficient magnitude to violate interests in health 
and peace). 

Partly because of points 5 and 6, many writers use the word “harm” in 
a sense that is much narrower than “the invasion of any interest.” In this 
narrower sense, harm is distinguished from and even contrasted with “mere 
offense.” Some distinguish “harm to one’s interests” from “offense to one’s 
feelings” (as if there were no interest in unoffended feelings). This is a 
permissible, even useful, way of talking, if we agree that offensiveness as 
such is strictly speaking a kind of harm, but harm of such a trivial kind 
that it cannot by itself ever counterbalance the direct and immediate harm 
caused by coercion. One should appreciate how radical the harm principle 
is when interpreted in the strict and narrow way that excludes mere 
offensiveness as a relevant sort of harm. Both the British Wolfenden Report 
and the American Model Penal Code, for example, recognize “harmless” 
offensiveness as a ground for preventive coercion in some circumstances 
(see Chapter 3). For clarity and convenience only, I shall stipulate then 
that “offensiveness as such” is a proposed ground for coercion distinct 
from harm of the sort required by the harm principle (narrowly inter- 


Grounds for Coercion 


29 


preted), sojhatjffhe offense principle” can be treated as an independent 
principle in its own, right. 

•Offensive behavior is such in virtue of its capacity to induce in others 
any of a large miscellany of mental states that have little in common ex¬ 
cept that they are unpleasant, uncomfortable, or disliked.'These states do 
not necessarily “hurt,” as do sorrow and distress. Rather the relation be¬ 
tween them and hurt is analogous to that between physical unpleasantness 
and pain, for there is also a great miscellany of unpleasant but not painful 
bodily states—itches, shocks, and discomforts—that have little in common 
except that they don’t hurt but are nevertheless universally disliked. Among 
the main sorts of “harmless but disliked” mental states are irritating sensa¬ 
tions (e.g., bad smells, cacophony, clashing colors), disgust, shocked moral 
sensibilities, and shameful embarrassment. 


(iv) HARM VS. NONBENEFIT 

When *ejiarm^rirraplejs_unsupplemented by any other accepted 
ground for coercion, it decrees that sta te power may not be used against 
°?- e P er 5 on 1 . to be ” e fi* another, but onlTto p revent harm to another CteT 
way of coercing citizens is to force fKim to pay taxes in support of various 
state activities. A partisan of the harm principle might be expected to 
cast a suspicious eye on all such schemes of involuntary support. Indeed, 
he might argue that taxing some to educate others is to coerce some merely 
to benefit others, or that taxing some to provide libraries, museums, theatres 
or concert halls for others is to coerce some merely to amuse, inspire, or 
edffy others, and is therefore unjustified. 8 On the other hand, an advocate 
of the harm principle could with consistency deny the foregoing propositions 
if he had a different way of construing the harm-nonbenefit distinction 
One muddled way of basing the distinction between harms and mere 
nonbenefits is to make it correspond to that between acting and omitting 
to act to another’s detriment. 8 That will not do for the obvious reason 
that it is possible to harm or to benefit another either by action or omission, 
n other words, both actions and omissions can be the cause of changes in 
another’s condition for better or worse. If we judge that Doe’s failure to 
save the drowning swimmer Roe was the cause of Roe’s death, then we 
can label Doe’s omission the mere “withholding of a benefit” only if we 
’ JUC ! ge the loss of llfe in the circumstances, to be the loss of a benefit 

rather than the incurring of a hann. If, on the other hand, loss of one’s 
fife, like loss of one’s health, fortune, or loved ones, is itself a harm then 

anything that causes such a loss, whether it be act, omission, or fortuitous 
event, causes a harm. 


Cf. Stephen, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, p. 16. 

XXIT nqnfl? mPle Q 7 Ja M? Ba , rr T Al r s ’ “ Law and Morals,” Harvard Law Review, 
mill, ( A > PP T 97-113 > aad Lord Macaulay, “Notes on the Indian Penal Code” 
Works (London: Longmans, Green & Co. Ltd., 1866), Vol. VII, p. 497. 






Grounds for Coercion 


30 


Another unsatisfactory way of basing the harm-nonbenefit distinction is 
to hold that being without something good is a mere nonbenefit, whereas 
being in possession of something evil is a harm. It would follow from such 
a view that not learning truths is not having a good and hence not being 
benefited, whereas being told lies is to be in possession of something bad, 
and is therefore to be harmed. Thus it would follow that education is a 
mere benefit and its lack no harm. But surely this will not do. To be effec¬ 
tively deprived of all food is clearly to be harmed as much as to be given 
poisoned food; the upshot in each case is death. Similarly, to have hardly 
any knowledge of the world is to be handicapped so severely as to be 
harmed, though perhaps not as severely as to have imposed on one a 
systematic set of falsehoods. In either case the result is damage to one s 
vital interests. Harm, therefore, is no more linked to “positive” possessions 
than it is to “positive” actions. It can consist in a lack as well as a presence, 
just as it can be caused by an omission as well as an action. 

MQr£_pxomisi.n^^ sigto,j^^ 

unmet needs and, between benefits and unneeded goods. We harm a man 
when we deny or deprive him of something he needs; we faij^toJ}£nefit„him 
(merely) when we deny or deprive him of some good he dQ€^™not.ji££cL 
An unneeded good is something a person wants which is not necessary for 
his welfare, something he can do without. To receiye something one w ants 
but does not need is to benefit or profit, but not to the pointj^SllSs^ 
of the gain"'would be "a "harmr^Thus, if I Have an annual salary of one 5 
hundred thousand dollars, and my employer gives me a fifty thousand 
dollar raise, I benefit substantially from his largesse. If he fails to give 
me a raise, I am not so benefited, but surely not harmed either (given my 
needs). If he reduces me to five thousand or fires me, however, he not 
merely fails to benefit me, he causes me harm by withholding money I 
need . These examples suggest that a statesman or legislator who is com¬ 
mitted to an unsupplemented harm principle must have means for distin¬ 
guishing authentic human needs from mere wants, and that his problem 
is little different in principle from that of the ordinary householder who 
must often distinguish between “luxuries” and “necessities” when he plans 
his household budget. 

The problem is more complex, however, than these homey examples 
suggest. The “unmet need” analysis of harm would imply, for example, 
that a rich man is not harmed by a minor larceny, a conclusion we have 
already rejected. Still another distinction can be helpful at this point: that 
between being in a harmfuT^condition (whatever its cause or origin) and 
undergoing a change in one’s condition in a harmful direction. To deprive 
even a rich man of money is to damage his interests, that is, to change his 
condition for the worse, even though not yet to the state of actual injury. 
Thus, it is to “harm” him in one sense, but not in another. At best, the 










Grounds for Coercion 


31 


“unmet need” criterion is a test for determining when a. damaged interest 
has reached the threshold of “actual injury/’ rather than a weatheryane- 
indicator of harmful, directions. Let^usjtipulate at this point, for the'sake 
of clarity and convenience, that the harm principle be interpreted in such 
a way that changes in the condition of a protectable interest in harmful 
directions, even short of the stage of “actual injury” (unmet need), count 
as a kind of harm, the prevention of which, in some circumstances, may 
justify coercion. However, when harms have to be ranked and balanced 
in a given application of the harm principle, an actually injurious condition 
should outweigh a mere change in a harmful direction. 


5. LINES OF ATTACK Arguments against Mill’s unsupplemented harm prin- 
ON MILL ciple (his claim that the private and public harm 

principles state the only grounds for justified inter¬ 
ference with liberty) have been mainly of two different kinds. 10 Many have 
argued that the harm principle justifies too much social and political inter¬ 
ference trT*the^affairs” of individuals. Others allow that the prevention of 
individual and social harm is always a ground for interference, but insist 
that it is by no means jhe only ground. 

(i) “NO MAN IS AN ISLAND” 

Mill maintained in On Liberty that social interference is never justified 
in those of a man’s affairs that concern himself only. But no man’s affairs 
have effects on himself alone. There are a thousand subtle and indirect 
ways in which every individual act, no matter how private and solitary, 
affects others. It would therefore seem that society has a right, on Mill’s 
own principles, to interfere in every department of human life. Mill antici¬ 
pated this objection and took certain steps to disarm it. Let it be allowed 
that no human conduct is entirely,'exclusively, and to the last degree self- 
regarding, Still, Mill insisted, we can distinguish between actions that are 
plainly other-regarding and those that are “directly,” “chiefly,” or “pri¬ 
marily” self-regarding. There will be a^ twilight area of cases difficult to 
classify, but that isTrue of many other workable distinctions, ~mcTu3mg 
that between night and day. 

It is essential to Mill’s theory that we make a distinction between two 
different kinds of consequences of human actions: the.x^^equenc^.,dfrcc^y 
affecting the interests.of others, and those, of primarily self-regarding behav¬ 
ior which only indirectly or remotely affect the interests of others. “No 
person ought to be punished simply for being drunk,” Mill wrote, but a 

10 Cf. H. L. A. Hart, Law, Liberty, and Morality (Stanford: Stanford University 
Press, 1963), p. 5. 










Grounds for Coercion 


32 


soldier or policeman should be punished for being drunk on duty.” 11 A 
drunk policeman directly harms the interests of others. His conduct gives 
opportunities to criminals and thus creates grave risk of harm to other 
citizens. It brings the police into disrepute, and makes the work of his 
colleagues more dangerous. Finally, it may lead to loss of the policeman’s 
_j°b, with serious consequences for his wife and children. 

Consider, on the other hand, a hard working bachelor who habitually 
spends his evening hours drinking himself into a stupor, which he then 
sleeps off, rising fresh in the morning to put in another hard day’s work. 
His drinking does not directly affect others in any of the ways of the 
drunk policeman’s conduct. He has no family; he drinks alone and sets 
no direct example; he is not prevented from discharging any of his public 
duties; he creates no substantial risk of harm to the interests of other 
individuals. Although even his private conduct will have some effects on 
the interests of others, these are precisely the sorts of effects Mill would 
call ‘indirect” and “remote.” First, in spending his evenings the way he 
does, our solitary tippler is not doing any number of other things that 
might be of greater utility to others. In not earning and spending more 
money, he is failing to stimulate the economy (except for the liquor indus¬ 
try) as much as he might. Second, he fails to spend his evening time 
improving his talents and making himself a better person. Perhaps he has 
a considerable native talent for painting or poetry, and his wastefulness is 
depriving the world of some valuable art. Third, he may make those of his 
colleagues who like him sad on his behalf. Finally, to those who know of 
his habits, he is a “bad example.”>2 All of these “indirect harms” together, 
Mill maintained, do not outweigh the direct and serious harm that would 
result from social or legal coercion. 

— Mill’s critics have never been entirely satisfied by this. Many have pointed 
out that Mill is concerned not only with political coercion and legal punish¬ 
ment but also with purely social coercion—moral pressure, social avoidance 
ostracism. No responsible critic would wish the state to punish the solita™ 
tippler, but social coercion is another matter. We can’t prevent people from 
disapproving of an individual for his self-regarding faults or from expressing 
that disapproval to others, without undue restriction on their freedom. Such 
expressions, in Mill’s view, are inevitably coercive, constituting a “milder 
form of punishment.” Hence “social p unishment” of indiv i duals for con- 
®H c lJaai.ili|Sctly concerns only themselves—the argument concludes is 
boA mevitable and, according to Mill’s own principles, proper. 

11 Mill, On Liberty, pp. 99-100. 

12 Mill has a ready rejoinder to this last point: If the conduct in question is supposed 

salutor/^thln hW 1° ** n Ct ° r - Him —’ “ the eXample ’ on the whole must be more 
salutary than harmful socially, since it is a warning lesson, rather than an allurinu 
model, to others. See Mill, On Liberty, p. 101. alluring 


Grounds for Coercion 


33 


Mill anticipated this objection, too, and tried to cope with it by making 
a distinction between types of social responses. We cannot help but lower 
in our estimation a person with serious self-regarding faults. We will think 
ill of him, judge him to be at fault, and make him the inevitable and 
proper object of our disapproval, distaste, even contempt. We may warn 
others about him, avoid his company, and withhold gratuitous benefits 
from him- “not to the oppression of his individuality but in the exercise 
of ours.’ 13 Mill concedes that all of these social responses can function as 
penalties but they are suffered “only in so far as they are the natural 
and, as it were, the spontaneous consequences of the faults themselves, not 
because they are purposely inflicted on him for the sake of punishment.” 14 
Other responses, on the other hand, add something to the “natural penal¬ 
ties”^ pointed snubbing, economic reprisals, gossip campaigns, and so on. 

to Mill, are precisely the ones that are 
never justified as responses to "merely self-regarding flaws—“if heTispleases 
us, we may express our distaste; and we may stand aloof from a person 
as well as from a thing that displeases us, but we shall not therefore feel 
called on to jnake his lif e uncomfortable.’’ 15 


(h) 



OTHER PROPOSED GROUNDS FOR COERCION 

The distinction between self-regarding and other-regarding behavior, 
as Mill intended it to be understood, does seem at least roughly serviceable, 
and unlikely to invite massive social interference in private affairs. I think 
most critics of Mill would grant that, but reject the harm principle on 
the opposite ground that it doesn’t permit enough interference. These 
writers would allow at least one, and as many as five or more; additional 
valid grounds for coercion. Each of these proposed grounds is stated in a 
principle listed below. One might hold that restriction of one person’s liberty 
can be justified: ^ 

h either/' 1 ^ 1 ** ^ ^ 1 

a. injury to.individual persons (ThePjwate Harm Principle), or 

b. impairment of^ institutional practices that are in the public interest (The 
Public Harm Principle ); 

2. To prevent offense to others (The Offense Principle ); 

3. To prevent ha Paternalism); <c ' ' ‘ . . 

4. To prevent or punish sin, i.e., to “enfprce morality as such” ( Legal Moralism); 




5. To benefit the seif (Extreme Paternalism)) 

6. To benefit others (The Welfare Principle). 


'Hm/ 


7 V, 


The liberty-limiting principles on this list are best understood as ^stating 
neither necessary nor sufficient conditions for justified coercion, but rather 
SRecifc&tions of the kinds of reasons that are always relevant or acceptable 


*3 Mill, On Liberty, p. 94. 
14 Mill, On Liberty, p. 95. 
*5 Mill, On Liberty, p. 96. 










Grounds for Coercion 


34 


in support of proposed coercion, even though in a given case they may not 
be conclusive.^ EacTTprinciple states that interference might be pefffiissible 
e/'Xbut'not only if) a certain condition is satisfied. Hence the principles 
are not mutually exclusive; it is possible to hold two or more of them at 
once, even all of them together, and it is possible to deny all of them. 
Moreover, the principles cannot be construed as stating sufficient condi¬ 
tions for legitimate interference with liberty, for even though the principle 
is satisfied in a given case, the general presumption against coercion might 
not be outweighed. The harm principle, for example, does not justify state 
interference to prevent a tiny bit of inconsequential harm. Prevention of 
minor harm always counts in favor of proposals (as in a legislature) to 
restrict liberty, but in a given instance it might not count enough to out¬ 
weigh the general presumption against interference, or it might be out¬ 
weighed by the prospect of practical difficulties in enforcing the law, 
excessive costs, and forfeitures of privacy. A liberty-limiting principle states 
considerations that are always good reasons for coercion, though neither 
exclusively nor, in every case, decisively good reasons. 

It will not be possible to examine each principle in detail here, and 
offer “proofs” and “refutations.” The best way to defend one’s selection 
of principles is to show to which positions they commit one on such issues 
as censorship of literature, “morals offenses,” and compulsory social security 
programs. General principles arise in the course of deliberations over par¬ 
ticular problems, especially in the efforts to defend one’s judgments by 
showing that they are consistent with what has gone before. If a prin¬ 
ciple commits one to an antecedently unacceptable judgment, then one has 
to modify or supplement the principle in a way that does the least damage 
to the harmony of one’s particular and general opinions taken as a group. 
On the other hand, when a solid, well-entrenched principle entails a 
change in a particular judgment, the overriding claims of consistency may 
require that the judgment be adjusted. This sort of dialectic is similar to 
the reasonings that are prevalent in law courts. When similar cases are 
decided in opposite ways, it is incumbent on the court to distinguish them 
in some respect that will reconcile the separate decisions with each other 
and with the common rule applied to each. Every effort is made to render 
current decisions consistent with past ones unless the precedents seem so 
disruptive of the overall internal harmony of the law that they must, reluc¬ 
tantly, be revised or abandoned. In social and political philosophy every 
person is on his own, and the counterparts to “past decisions” are the most 
confident judgments one makes in ordinary normative discourse. The phi¬ 
losophical task is to extract from these “given” judgments the principles 

16 I owe this point to Professor Michael Bayles. See his contribution to Issues in Law 
and Morality, ed. Norman Care and Thomas Trelogan (Cleveland: The Press of Case 
Western Reserve University, 1973). 



Grounds for Coercion 

35 

‘tssS 





CHAPTER THREE 


Hard Cases for the 
Harm Principle 


1. MORALS OFFENSES 
AND LEGAL 
MORALISM 


Immoral conduct is no trivial thing, and we should 
hardly expect societies to tolerate it; yet if men are 
forced to refrain from immorality, their own choices 
will play very little role in what they do, so _tha 
they can hardly develop critical judgment and moral traits of a S™ 5 \ 

— “““ r'? ‘“on 

"morals offt™." Offa*. again* morality oneIK.«I "S 

,»„«d . category o. crimes (» $£ mLTy ® 

offenses against property, and so on), lnese nav 

offenses, such as adultery, fornication, sodomy, incest, b “ 

also a miscellany of nonsexual offenses, including cruelty to animals, de 
J. r.O.” ” t J flag O, ..her veneratri tymbola, and .1 


36 




Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


37 


corpses. In a useful article, 1 Louis B. Schwartz maintains that what sets 
these crimes off as a class is not their special relation to morality (murder 
is also an offense against morality, but it is not a “morals offense”) but 
the lack of an essential connection between them and jojcial harm. In 
particularfTKeir suppression is not required by the public security. Some 
morals offenses may harm the perpetrators themselves, but the risk of harm 
of this sort has usually been consented to in advance by the actors. Offense 
to other parties, when it occurs, is usually a consequence of perpetration of 
the offenses in public , and can be prevented by statutes against “open 
lewdness,” or “solicitation” in public places. That still leaves “morals 
offenses” committed by consenting adults in private. Should they really 
be crimes? 

In addition to the general presumption against coercion, other argu¬ 
ments against legislation prohibiting private and harmless sexual practices 
are drawn from the harm principle itself; laws governing private affairs are 
extremely awkward and expensive to enforce, and have side effects that 
are invariably harmful. Laws against homosexuality, for example, can only 
be occasionally and randomly enforced, and this leads to the inequities 
of selective enforcement and opportunities for blackmail and private ven¬ 
geance. Moreover, “the pursuit of homosexuals involves policemen in 
degrading entrapment practices, and diverts attention and effort” 2 from 
more serious (harmful) crimes of aggression, fraud, and corruption. 

These considerations have led some to argue against statutes that pro¬ 
hibit private immorality, but, not surprisingly, it has encouraged others to 
abandon their exclusive reliance on the harm and/or offense principles, at 
least in the case of morals offenses. The alternative principle of “legal 
moralism” has several forms. In its more moderate version it is commonly 
associated with the views of Patrick Devlin, 3 whose theory, as I understand 
it, is really an application of the public harm principle. The proper aim 
o f crimin al law- he agrees, is theprevention of harm, not merely to in diyid- 
uals, but also (and primarily) to society itself. A shared moral code, Devlin 
argues, i s a n^ essarv. condition for the very''existence of a community. 
Shared moral convictions function as “invisible bonds” tying individuals 
together into an orderly society. Moreover, the fundamental unifying moral¬ 
ity (to switch the metaphor) is a kind of “seamless web”; 4 to damage it 

1 Louis B. Schwartz, “Morals Offenses and the Model Penal Code,” Columbia Law 
Review, LXIII (1963), 669 ff. 

2 Schwartz, “Morals Offenses and the Model Penal Code,” 671. 

3 Patrick Devlin, The Enforcement of Morals (London: Oxford University Press, 
1965). 

4 The phrase is not Devlin’s but that of his critic, H.L.A. Hart, in Law, Liberty, and 
Morality (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1963), p. 51. In his rejoinder to Hart, 
Devlin writes: “Seamlessness presses the simile rather hard but apart from that, I 
should say that for most people morality is a web of beliefs rather than a number of 
unconnected ones.” Devlin, The Enforcement of Morals, p. 115. 




Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


38 


at one point is to weaken, it throughout. Hence, society has as much right 
to protect its moral code by legal coercion as it does to protect its equally 
indispensable political institutions/ The law cannot tolerate politically revo¬ 
lutionary activity, nor can it accept activity that rips assunder its moral 
fabric. “The suppression of vice is as much the law’s business as the sup¬ 
pression of subversive activities; it is no more possible to define a sphere 
of private morality than it is to define one of private subversive activity .” 5 

H.L.A. Hart finds it plausible that some shared morality is necessary to 
the existence of a community, but criticizes Devlin’s further contention 
“that a society is identical with its morality as that is at any given moment 
of its history, so that a change in its morality is tantamount to the 
destruction of a society .” 6 Indeed, a moral critic might admit that we 
can’t exist as a society without some morality, while insisting that we can 
perfectly well exist without this morality (if we put a better one in its 
place). Devlin seems to reply that the shared morality can be changed^ 
even though protected by law, and, when fit does change, the emergent 
reformed morality in turn deserves its legal protection . 7 The law then 
functions to make moral reform difficult, but there is no preventing change 
where reforming zeal is fierce enough. How ddes one bring about a change 
in prevailing moral beliefs when they are enshrined in Jaw? Presumably 
by advocating conduct which is in fact illegal,-' by putting into public 
practice what one preaches, and by demonstrating one’s sincerity by march- 
ing proudly off to jail fo£ one’s convictions: ^ 

there is. . .a natural respect for opinions that are sincerely held. When such opinions 
accumulate enough weight, the law must either'yield or it is broken. In a democratic 
society. . .there will be a strong tendency for it to yield—not to abandon all 
defenses x so as to let in the horde, but to give ground' to those who are prepared to ^ 
fight for something that they prize. To fight may be to suffer. A willingness to" 
suffer is the most convincing proof of sincerity. Without the law there would be' 
no proof. The law is the anvil on which the hammer strikes; 8 " "" 

In this rerriarkable passage, Devlin has discovered another argument for 
enforcing morality as such*” and incidentally for principled civil dis¬ 
obedience as the main technique for initiating and regulating moral change. 

A similar argument, deriving from Samuel Johnson and applying mainlw 
to changes in religious doctrine, was well known to Mill. According to 
this theory, religious innovators deserve to be persecuted, for persecution 
allows them to prove their mettle and demonstrate their disinterested good 
faith, while their teachings, insofar as they are true, cannot be hurt, since 
truth will always triumph in the end. Mill held this method of testing 1 

5 Devlin, The Enforcement of Morality, pp. 13-14. 

6 Hart, Ldw, Liberty, and Morality, p. 51. 

7 Devlin, The Enforcement of Morality, pp. 115 ff. 

8 Devlin, The Enforcement of Morality, p. 116. j 



Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


Cr) 


% 


2 » 

truth, whether in science, religion, or morality, to_be both uneconomical 
and ungenerous . 9 But if self-sacrificing civil disobedience is no*'the most 
efficient 'and humane remedy for the moral reformer, what instruments 
of moral change are available to him? This question is not only difficult to 
answer in its own right, it is also the rock' that sinks bevlin’s favorite 
^s^.'anajpgy between “harmless” immorality and political subversion. 

V Consider the nature of subversion. Most modern law-governed countries 
have a constitution, a set .of duly constituted authorities, and a body of 
jtpf statutes created and enforced by these authorities. The ways of changing 
UK itr 6 things wil1 be wel1 known, orderly, and permitted by the constitution. 
'v\ r° r exam P le > constitutions are amended, legislators are elected, and new 
i ^.legislation is introduced. On, the other, hand, it is easy to conceive of 
l various sorts of unpermitted and disorderly change—through assassination 
s x gnd violent revolution,^ or bribery and subornation, or-the use of legiti¬ 
mately won power to extort and intimidate. Only these illegitimate methods 
of change can be called “subversion.” But here the analogy between posi- 
tive^Jaw^iind positive morality begins to break down. There is no “moral 
constitution,” no well-known and orderly way of introducing moral legisla¬ 
tion to duly r constituted moral legislators, no clear convention of majority 
rule. Moral subversion, if there is such a thing, must consist in the employ¬ 
ment of disallowed techniques of change instead of the officially permitted 
“constitutional” ones. It consists not simply of change as such, but of illegiti- 
p^mate change. Insofar as the notion of legitimately induced moral change 
^ remains obscure, illegitimate moral change is no better. Still, there is 
enough content to both notions to preserve some analogy to the political 
case. A citizen works legitimately to change public moral beliefs when he 
% openly and forthrightly expresses his own dissent, when he attempts to 
argue, persuade, and offer reasons, and when he lives according to his 
jjv^own convictions with persuasive quiet and dignity, neither harming others 
r Tior offering .counterpersuasive offense to tender sensibilities. A citizen at- 
tempts to change mores by illegitimate means when he abandons argument 
\, a > d exam pl e for force and fraud. If this is the basis of the distinction 
' between legitimate and illegitimate techniques of moral change, then the 
of state P ower t0 affect moral belief one way or the other, when harm- 
(Y Julness is not involved, is a clear example of illegitimacy. Government en¬ 
forcement of the conventional code is not to be called “moral subversion,” 
of course, because it is used on behalf of the status quoj but whether 
conservative or innq^atrve,- it is equally in defiance of our “moral constitu¬ 
tion” (if anything isj$|b 

The second vers*^^^ legal moralism is the pure version, not some other 
principle in disguise. Enforcement of morality as such and the attendant 
punishment of sin are not justified as means to some further social aim 


A 


CL 

Q 




9 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (New, York; Liberal Arts Press, 1956) pp. 33-34. 




Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


40 


(such jls preservation of social., cohesivenegs) but ar e_ ends ... in themselves. 
Perhaps J. F. Stephen was expressing this pure moralism when he wrote 
that “there are acts of wickedness so gross and outrageous that. . .[protec¬ 
tion of others apart], they must be prevented at any cost to the offender 
and punished if they occur with exemplary severity .” 10 From his examples 
it is clear that Stephen had in mind the very acts that are called “morals 
offenses” in the law. 

It is sometimes said in support of pure legal moralism that the world 
as a whole would be a better place without morally ugly, even “harmlessly 
immoral,” conduct, and that our actual universe is intrinsically worse for 
having such conduct in it. The threat of punishment, the argument con¬ 
tinues, deters such conduct. Actual instances of punishment not only 
back up the threat, and thus help keep future moral weeds out of the 
universe’s garden, they also erase past evils from the universe’s temporal 
record by “nullifying” them, or making it as if they never were. Thus 
punishment, it is said, contributes to the intrinsic value of the universe in 
two ways: by canceling out past sins and preventing future ones . 11 

There is some plausibility in this view when it is applied to ordinary 
harmful crimes, especially those involving duplicity or cruelty, which really 
do seem to “set the universe out of joint.” It is natural enough to think 
of repentance, apology, or forgiveness as “setting things straight,” and of 
punishment as a kind of “payment” or a wiping clean of the moral slate. 
But in cases where it is natural to resort to such analogies, there is not only 
a rule infraction, there is also a victim —some person or society of persons 
who have been harmed. Where there is no ^victim—and especially where 
there is no profit at the expense of another—“setting things straight” has 
no clear intuitive content. 

Punishment may yet play its role in discouraging harmless private im¬ 
moralities for the sake of “the universe’s moral record.” But if fear of 
punishment is to keep people from illicit intercourse (or from desecrating 
flags, or mistreating corpses) in the privacy of their own rooms, then 
morality shall have to be enforced with a fearsome efficiency that shows 
no respect for individual, privacy. If private immoralities are to be deterred 
by threat of punishment, the detecting authorities must be able to look 
into the hidden chambers and locked rooms of anyone’s private domicile. 
When we put this massive forfeiture of privacy into the balance along with 
the usual costs of coercion—loss of spontaneity, stunting of rational powers, 
anxiety, hypocrisy, and the rest—the price of securing mere outward con¬ 
formity to the community’s moral standards (for that is all that can be 
achieved by the penal law) is exorbitant. 

10 James Fitzjames Stephen, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity (London: 1873), p. 163. 

11 Cf. C. D. Broad, “Certain Features in Moore’s Ethical Doctrines,” in P. A. Schilpp, 
The Philosophy of G. E. Moore (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1942), 
pp. 48 ff. 






'O 

Cf 


^rd Cases^for the Harm Principle 41 

4^F erba Ps the m ° st mtere sting °f the nonsexual morals offenses, and the 
pmost challenging case for application of liberty-limiting principles, is cruelty 
to animals. Suppose that John Doe is an intelligent, sensitive person with 
^ one very severe neurotic, trait-he loves to see living things suffer pain. 
CSL For tunately, he never has occasion to torture human beings (he would 

^ genuinely regret that), for he can always find an animal for the purpose. 

or a period he locks himself in his room every night, draws the blind and 
Q then beats and tortures a dog to death. The sounds of shrieks and moans, 

O which are music to his ears, are nuisances to his neighbor, and when his 

<7 , f ady d ; sc oveK what he has been doing she is so shocked she has to 

^ , h0Sp ! tallZecl Dl ^essed that he has caused harm to human beings, Doe 

leaves the rooming house, buys a five hundred acre ranch, and moves 
into a house in the remote, unpopulated center of his own property. There 
m the perfect privacy of his own home, he spends every evening maiming’ 
torturing, and beating to death his own animals. 

What are we to say of Doe’s bizarre behavior? We have three altema- 
ives.ghrst we can say that it is perfectly permissible since it consists simply 
m a man s destruction of his own property. How a man disposes in private 
o his own property is no concern of anyone^ providing he causes no 
nuisance such as oud noises and evil smeip&cond, we can say that this 
rO behavior is patently immoral even though it caJbe. no harm to the interests 
of anyone other than the actor; further, since it obviously should not be 

ij 7 and™ 1 ^ K 7 * e thlS 18 3 CaSe Where the b ^ a P rinci P le >3 inadequate 
£ f d mUSt be supplemented by legal moralismtfFhird, we can extend the 

^ arm P nna P le t0 animals, and argue that theEv can interfere with the 
private enjoyment of property not to enforce “morality as such” but 
rather to prevent harm to the animals^The third alternative is the most 
inviting, but not without its difficult^ We must control animal move- 
ents exploit animal labor, and, in many cases, deliberately slaughter 
O aIUma S '. M * ese forms of treatment would be “harm” if inflicted on hu¬ 
man beings, but cannot be allowed to count as harm to animals if the 
harm principle is to be extended to them in a realistic way. The best 
1S d t0 re c COgmze 0ne su preme interest of animals, namely the 

as “ham” rd! T 1°” CrUeUy " Wantonly infl ^t ed P^n, and to count 
as Harm all and only invasions of that interest, y* 


O 

6 

jP- 

. J) 

o- 

■ 


U 

o 


2. OBSCENITY AND 
THE OFFENSE 
PRINCIPLE 


Up to this point we have considered the harm and 
offense principles together in order to determine 
whether between them they are sufficient to regulate 
from * fnr * A • . conventional immoralities, or whether they need help 

Sued as esTeT r ^ ^ m ° raHsln - ofWs ™ 

smt hd t ^ 7 PnVate 80 that the 0ffense Principle could not be 
stretched to apply to them. Obscene literature and pornographic displays 




42 


Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 

would appear to be quite different in this respect. Both are materials 
deliberately published for the eyes of others, and their existence can bring 
partisans of the unsupplemented harm principle into direct conflict with 
those who endorse both the harm and offense principles. 

In its untechnical, prelegal sense, the word “obscenity” refers to material 
dealing with nudity, sex, or excretion in an offensive manner. Such, mate¬ 
rial'becomes obscene in the legal sense when, because of its offensiveness 
or for some other reason [this question had best be left open m the defini¬ 
tion], it is or ought to be without legal protection. The legal definition 
then incorporates the everyday sense, and essential to both is the require¬ 
ment that the material be offensive . An item may offend one person and 
not another. “Obscenity,” if it is to avoid this subjective relativity, must 
involve an interpersonal objective sense of “offensive.” Material must be 
offensive by prevailing community standards that are public and well 
known, or be such that it is apt to offend virtually everyone. 

Not all material that is generally offensive need also be harmful in any 
sense recognized by the harm principle. It is partly an empirical question 
whether reading or witnessing obscene material causes social harm; reliable 
^ evidence, even of a statistical kind, of causal connections between obscenity 
and antisocial behavior is extremely hard to find. 12 In the absence of clear 
and decisive evidence of harmfulness, the American Civil Liberties Union 
insists that the offensiveness of obscene material cannot be a sufficient 
ground for its repression: ' 

the question in a case involving obscenity, just as in every case involving an 
attempted restriction upon free speech, is whether the words or pictures are used 
in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present 
danger that they will bring about a substantial evil that the state has a right to 
prevent. ... We believe that under the current state of knowledge, there is grossly 
insufficient evidence to show that obscenity brings about any substantive evil. 

The A.C.L.U. argument employs only the harm principle among liberty- 
limiting principles, and treats literature, drama, and painting as forms of 
expression subject to the same rules as expressions of opinion. In respect 
to both types of expression, “every act of deciding what should.be barred 
carries with it a danger to the community.” 14 The suppression itself is an 
evil to the author who is squelched. The power to censor and punish 
involves risks that socially valuable material will be repressed along with 
the “filth.” The overall effect of suppression, the A.C.L.U. concludes, is 

12 There have been some studies made, but the results have been inconclusive. See 
the Report of the Federal Commission on Obscenity and Pornography (New Yor . 
Bantam Books, 1970), pp. 169-308. 

13 Obscenity and Censorship (Pamphlet published by the American Civil Liberties 
Union, New York, March, 1963), p. 7. 

14 Obscenity and Censorship, p. 4. 



43 


Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


almost certainly to discourage nonconformist and eccentric expression gen¬ 
erally. In order to override these serious risks, there must be in a given 
case an even more clear and present danger that the obscene material, if 
not squelched, will cause even greater harm; such countervailing evidence 
is never forthcoming. (If such evidence were to accumulate, the A.C.L.U. 
would be perfectly willing to change its position on obscenity.) 

The A.C.L.U. stand on obscenity seems clearly to be the position dictated 
by the unsupplemgnted^hami,principle and its^oroilary, ,fhe clear and 
Is there any mason at This" point lo 1 introducTthe 
offense principle into the discussion? Unhappily, we may be forced to if 
we are to do justice to all of our particular intuitions in the most harmonious 
way. Consider an example Suggested by Professor Schwartz. By the provi¬ 
sions of the new Model. Penal Code, he writes, “a rich homosexual may 
not use a billboard on Times Square to promulgate to the general populace 
the techniques and pleasures of sodomy.” 15 If the notion of “harm” is 
restricted to its narrow sense, that is, contrasted with “offense,” it will be 
hard to reconstruct a rationale for this prohibition based on the harm 
principle. There is unlikely to be evidence that a lurid and obscene public 
poster m Times Square would create a clear and present danger of injury 
to those who fail to avert their eyes in time as they come blinking out of 
the subway stations. Yet it will be surpassingly difficult for even the most 
edicated liberal to advocate freedom of expression in a case of this kind. 
Hence, if we are to justify coercion in this case, we will likely be driven 
however reluctantly, to the offense principle. 

There is good reason to be “reluctant” to embrace the offense principle 
until driven to it by an example like the above. People take perfectly genuine 
offeqse at many socially useful or harmless activities, from commercial ad¬ 
vertisements to mane chatter. Moreover, widespread irrational prejudices 
can lead people to be disgusted, shocked, even morally repelled by perfectly 
innocent activities, and we should be loath to permit their groundless 
repugnance to override the innocence. The offense principle, therefore 
must be formulated very precisely and applied in accordance with carefully 
formulated standards so as not to open the door to wholesale and intui- 
lively unwarranted repression. Atthevery leaslwe should require that the 

prohibited apTle^^ aJm^CSvenr- 

body,, and not justjomejhdting^rnajority or special interest group 
It is instructive to note that a strictly drawn'offense^ndpTTwSiild not 
only justify prohibition of conduct and pictured conduct that is in its 
inherent character repellent, but also conduct and pictured conduct that is 
inoffensive in itself but offensive in inappropriate circumstances. I have in 
mind so-called indecencies such as public nudity. One can imagine an 


15 Schwartz, “Morals Offenses and the Penal Code,” 680. 



44 




I yjiti 


lAAUj? 


A/^4 


Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


advocate of the unsupplemented harm principle arguing against the public 
nudity prohibition on the grounds that the sight of a naked body does no 
one any harm, and the state has no right to impose standards of dress or 
undress on private citizens. How one chooses to dress, after all, is a form of 
self-expression. If we do not permit the state to bar clashing colors or bizarre 
hair styles, by what right does it prohibit total undress? Perhaps the sight 
of naked people could at first lead to riots or other forms of antisocial 
behavior, but that is precisely the sort of contingency for which we have 
police. If we don’t take away a person’s right of free speech for the reason 
that its exercise may lead others to misbehave, we cannot in consistency 
deny his right to dress or undress as he chooses for the same reason. 

There may be no answering this challenge on its own ground, but the 
offense principle provides a ready rationale for the nudity prohibition. The 
sight of nude bodies in public places is for almost everyone acutely em¬ 
barrassing. Part of the explanation no doubt rests on the fact that nudity 
has an irresistible power to draw the eye and focus the thoughts on matters 
that are normally repressed. The conflict between these attracting and 
repressing forces is exciting, upsetting, and anxiety-producing. In some 
persons it will create at best a kind of painful turmoil, and at worst that 
experience of exposure to oneself of “peculiarly sensitive, intimate, vul¬ 
nerable aspects of the self” 16 which is called “One’s feeling is in¬ 

voluntarily exposed openly in one’s face; one is uncovered... taken by 
surprise. . .made a fool of.” 17 The^j^lpjs^not mereJ‘offense,” J>ut a kind 
of psychic jolt that in many normal people can,he a painfijwpund. Even* 
those hf us who are better able to control our feelings" might well resent 
the nuisance of having to do so. 

If we are to accept the offense principle as a supplement to the harm 
principle, we must accept two corollaries which stand in relation to it 
similarly to the way in which the clear and present danger test stands to 
the harm principle. The first, the standard of universality, has already been 
touched upon. For the offensiveness (disgust, embarrassment, outraged 
sensibilities, or shame) to be sufficient to ^arrant^coer^on^Jt jshould be 
the reaction that could b»e expected from almost any person chosen at 
random from the nation as a whole, regardless of sect, faction, race, age^ 
or sex. The second is th e standard of reasonable avoid ability. No one lias 
a right to protection^ from the state against offensive^-experi ences if he 
can effectively avoid those experiences with no unreasona^^ffort^or in¬ 
convenience. If a nude person enters a public Bus and takes a seat near 
the front, there may be no effective way for other patrons to avoid intensely 
shameful embarrassment (or other insupportable feelings) short of leaving 


16 Helen Merrill Lynd, On Shame and the Search for Identity (New York: Science 
Editions, Inc., 1961), p. 33. 

17 Lynd, On Shame and the Search for Identity, p. 32. 







Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


45 


the bus, which would be an unreasonable inconvenience. Similarly, obscene 
remarks over a loudspeaker, homosexual billboards in Times Square, and 
pornographic handbills thrust into the hands of passing pedestrians all fail 
to be reasonably avoidable. 

On the other hand, the offense principle, properly qualified, can give no 
warrant to the suppression of books on the grounds of obscenity. When 
printed words hide decorously behind covers of books sitting passively on 
bookstore shelves, their offensiveness is easily avoided. The contrary view 
is no doubt encouraged by the common comparison of obscenity with 
“smut,” “filth,” or “dirt.” This in turn suggests an analogy to nuisance 
law, which governs cases where certain activities create loud noises or 
terrible odors offensive to neighbors, and “the courts must weigh the grav¬ 
ity of the nuisance [substitute “offense”] to the neighbors against the social 
utility [substitute “redeeming social value”] of the defendant’s conduct.” 18 
There is, however, one vitiating disanalogy in this comparison. In the case 
of “dirty books” the offense is easily avoidable. There is nothing like the 
evil smell of rancid garbage oozing right out through the covers of a 
book. When an “obscene” book sits on a shelf, who is there to be offended? 
Those who want to read it for the sake of erotic stimulation presumably 
will not be offended (or else they wouldn’t read it), and those who choose 
not to read it will have no experience by which to be offended. If its 
covers are too decorous, some innocents may browse through it by mistake 
and be offended by what they find, but they need only close the book to 
escape the offense. Even this offense, minimal as it is, could be completely 
avoided by prior consultation of trusted book reviewers. I conclude that 
th ere are no sufficient grounds derived eit her fro m .. theTiarm or offense 
principlesfor _ suppresTmg^ obscene literature, unless that ground be the 
protectiqn of children; but I can think of no reason why restrictions on 
sales to children cannot work as well for printed materials as they do for 
cigarettes and whiskey. 


3. LEGAL The liberty-limiting principle called Jegal paternalism 

PATERNALISM* justifies^state... c.Qerciqn_jto protect individuals from 

sjlfdnflicted harm, or, in its extreme version, to guide 
them, whether they likejit or not, toward their own good. Parents can be 
expected to justify interference iiTTbe^lTveTbT^ tEeir children (e.g., telling 
them what they must eat and when they must sleep) on the ground that 
“daddy knows best.” Legal paternalism seems to imply that, since the state 

18 William L. Prosser, Handbook of the Law of Torts (St. Paul: West Publishing 
Co., 1955), p. 411. 

* This section reprinted from my “Legal Paternalism” in Volume I, no. 1 of the 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy (1971), by permission of the Canadian Association 
for Publishing in Philosophy. 






Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


46 


often perceives the interests of individual citizens better than do the citizens 
themselves, it stands as a permanent guardian of those interests in loco 
parentis. Put this bluntly, paternalism seems a preposterous doctrine^If_^ 
adults are treated as children they will come in time to be like children . 
Deprived oFtHe right to choose for themselves, they will soon lose the power 
of rational judgment and^decisidh^ven children, after a certain point, hacP" 
bettefTiotf be “treated as children,” or they will never acquire the outlook 
and capability of responsible adults. 

Yet if we reject paternalism entirely, and deny that a person’s own good 
is ever a valid ground for coercing him, we seem to fly in the face both 
of common sense and long-established customs and laws. In the criminal 
law, for example, a prospective victim’s freely granted consent is no defense 
to the charge of mayhem or homicide. The state simply refuses to permit 
anyone to agree to jiis own disablement^or killing. The iaw of'contracts 
similarly refuses to recognize as valid contracts to sell oneself into slavery, 
or to become a mistress, or a second wife. Any ordinary citizen is legally 
justified in using reasonable force to prevent another from mutilating him¬ 
self or committing suicide. No one is allowed to purchase certain drugs 
even for therapeutic purposes without a physician’s prescription (doctor 
knows best). The use of other drugs, such as heroin, for mere pleasure is 
not permitted under any circumstances. It is hard to find any convincing 
rationale for all such restrictions apart from the argument that beatings, 
mutilations, death, concubinage, slavery, and bigamy are always bad for 
a person whether he or she knows it or not, and that antibiotics are too 
dangerous for any nonexpert, and narcotics for anyone at all, to take on 
his own initiative. 

The trick is stopping short once one undertakes thi s path, unless we 
wish to ban wTuskeyT“dgarettes, and fried foods, which tend to be bad 
for people, too. We must som ehQ\v__reconcjjg our. general repugnance for 
paternalism with the apparent n eces sity, or at least reasonableness^ of some 
paternalistic regular to do^thTs'Ts^to~find mediating maxims 

or standards of application for the paternalistic principle which restrict 
its use in a way analogous to that in which the universality and reasonable 
avoidance tests delimit the offense principle. Let us begin by rejecting the 
views that the protection of a person from himself is always a valid ground 
f or interf erence^and thatlt'is“n^r^TvaliH ground. It follows that it is a 
valid ground only under certain condi tions, wHich we must now try to state". 

It will be useful to make some preliminary distinctions. The first is be¬ 
tween those cases i n which a person directly produces hjirm to himself 
(where the harm is the certain and desired end of his conduct), and those 
cases in ^which a person simply creates a ri sk of harm to himself in the 
course of activities directed toward other ends. The man who knowingly 
swallows a lethal dose of arsenic will certainly die, and death must be 
imputed as his goal. Another man is offended by the sight of his left hand, 












Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


47 


so he grasps an ax in his right hand and chops his left hand off. He does 
not ^thereby “endanger” his interest in the physical integrity of his limbs, 
or “risk” the loss of his hand; he brings about the loss directly and deliber¬ 
ately. On the other hand, to smoke cigarettes or to drive at excessive speeds 
is not to. hann_ onesehjirectly, but rather to increase beyond a normal 
level the probability that harm to oneself wiffresult. 

The second distinrti^pTaOetwe'en' reaa onable'and unreason^ p A. 
There is no form of activity (or inactivity, for that matter) that does not 
involve some risks. On some occasions we have a choice between more and 
less risky actions, and prudence dictates that we take the less risky course. 
However, what is called “prudence” is not always reasonable. Sometimes 
it is more reasonable to assume a great risk for a great gain than to play 
it safe and forfeit a unique opportunity. Thus, it is not necessarily more 
reasonable for a coronary patient to increase his life expectancy by living 
a hfe of quiet inactivity than to continue working hard at his career in 
the hope of achieving something important, even at the risk of a sudden 
fatal heart attack. Although there is no simple mathematical formula to 
guide one m making such decisions or for judging them “reasonable” or 
unreasonable, there are some decisions that are manifesdy unreasonable 
It is unreasonable to drive at sixty miles an hour through a twenty mile 
an hour zone m order to arrive at a party on time, but it may be reason¬ 
able to drive fifty imles an hour to get a pregnant wife to the maternity 
ward. It is foolish to resist an armed robber in an effort to protect one’s 
wallet, but it may be worth a desperate lunge to protect one’s very life. 

All of these cases involve a number of distinct considerations. If there 

iTh t0 f erat '2!!!^ii^iSLder: ( 1 ) the Jegree of probability 
that harm to oneself will result fr om a gi ven course of action, 7?Whe 
seriousness of the harm being risked, i.e, “the valueVlmportance of'SIJ 
w 1C is exposed fo the risk,” (3) the degreej>f probability that the goal 

lc^ ari* ^ result Tro^TtiS course of 

action, (4) yalue^importance of achi^lF^goal, that isTTust 
how worthwhile it is to one (tKfi,- tlTe intimately peS factor, requir- 
g a decision about one’s own preferences, that makes it so difficult for 
the outsider to judge the reasonableness of a risk), and (5) the necessity 

goa^' aVaiIablfty " l£SS 

Certain judgments about the reasonableness of risk assumptions are quite 

“rf 6 Can u? f r eXample ’ that the S reater ™ considerations 
4 ” d < a reasonable the risk, and the greater are considerations 3, 

4, and 5, the more reasonable the risk. But in a given difficult case even 
w ere questions of “probability” are meaningful and beyond dispute and 

™,», f K L, defy^objective 

case r CaUSe ltS COm P° nent P erson aI value judgments. In any 

case, ,f the state is to be given the right to prevent a person from risking 







48 


Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 

harm to himself (and only himself), it must not be on the ground that the 
prohibited action is risky, or even extremely risky, but rather that the 
risk is extreme and, in respect to its objectively assessable components, 
manifestly unreasonable. There are sometimes very good reasons for regard¬ 
ing even a person’s judgment of personal worthwhileness (consideration 4) 
to be “manifestly unreasonable,” but it remains to be seen whether (or 
when) that kind of unreasonableness can be sufficient grounds for inter¬ 
ference. 19 

The third and fina^djstinctionJs.„be tween fu lly v olun tary^agd^not fully 
voluntary assumiDtions’’of a risk. One assumes a risk in a fully voluntary 
way when one sHoulders 11 w ^ e informed of all relevant facts and con¬ 
tingencies, and in the absence of all coercive pressure or compulsion. To 
whatever extent there is neurotic compulsion, misinformation, excitement 
or impetuousness, clouded judgment (as, e.g., from alcohol), or immature 
or defective faculties of reasoning, the choice falls short of perfect volun- 
tariness. 20 Voluntariness, then, js a matter of degree. One’s “choice” is 
completely involuntary when it is no choice at all, properly speaking 
when one lacks all muscular control of one’s movements, or is knocked 
down or sent reeling by a blow or an explosion—or when, through ignor¬ 
ance, one chooses something other than what one means to choose, as when 
one thinks the arsenic powder is table salt and sprinkles it on one s scram¬ 
bled eggs. Most harmful choices, as most choices generally, fall somewhere 
between the extremes of perfect voluntariness and complete involuntariness. 

The central thesis of Mill and other individualists about paternalism k 
that the fully voluntary choice or consent (to another’s doing) of a mature" 

and rational human being concerning matters that.directly affect only his 

own interests is so precious that no one else (especially the state) has a 
right to interfere with it simply for the person’s “own good.” No doubt this 
thesis was also meant to apply to almost-but-not-quite fully voluntary 
choices as well, and probably even to some substantially nonvoluntary ones 
(e.g., a neurotic person’s choice of a wife who will satisfy his neurotic needs, 
but only at the price of great unhappiness, eventual divorce, and exacer¬ 
bated guilt). However, it is not probable that the individualist thesisjyas 
meant to apply to choices" near the bottom of the voluntariness scale, and 
Mili himself left no doubt that he did not intend it to apply to completely 
involuntary “choices.” Neither should we expect antipaternalistic individ¬ 
ualism to deny protection to a person from his own nonvoluntary choices, 
for insofar as the choices are not voluntary they are just as alien to him 
as the choices of someone else. 

19 The distinctions in this paragraph have been borrowed from Henry T. Terry, 
“Negligence,” Harvard Law Review , XXIX (1915), pp. 40-50. 

20 My usage of the term “voluntary” differs from that of Aristotle in his famous 
analysis in Book III of the Nicomachean Ethics, but corresponds closely to what 
Aristotle called “deliberate choice.” 




Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


49 


/'thus Mill would permit the state to protect a.man,,, from his own 

ignorant Tit least in circumstanceVthat create a strong presumption that 
Ins unmfon Tied "or misinformed choice would not correspond to his eventual 
.enlightened one. 

If either a public officer or anyone else saw a person attempting to cross a bridge 
which had been ascertained to be unsafe, and there were no time to warn him of 
his danger, they might seize him and turn him back, without any real infringement 
of his liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one desires, and he does not desire 
to fall into the river. 21 

Of course, for all the public officer may know, the man on the bridge 
does desire to fall into the river, or to take the risk of falling for other 
purposes. Then, Mill argues, if the person is fully warned of the danger 
and wishes to proceed anyway, that is his business alone, despite the advance 
presumption that most people do not wish to run such risks. Hence the 
officer was justified, Mill would argue, in his original interference. 

On other occasions a person may need to be protected from some other 
condition that may render His informedjffioice substantially less than yolun- 
tary He maybe “a chilHTor delirious, or in some state of excitement or 
absorption incompatible with the full use of the reflecting faculty.” 22 Mill 
would not permit any such person to cross an objectively unsafe bridge. 
On the other hand, there is no reason why a child, or an excited person, or 
a drunkard, or a mentally ill person should not be allowed to proceed on 
his way home across a perfectly safe thoroughfare. Even substantially non¬ 
voluntary choices deserve protection unless there is good reason to judge 
them dangerous. 

For all we can know, the behavior of a drunk or an emotionally upset 
person would be exactly the same even if he were sober and calm. But 
when the behavior seems patently self-damaging and is of a sort in which 
most calm and normal persons would not engage, then there are strong 
grounds, if only of a statistical sort, for inferring the opposite; these grounds, 
on Mill’s principle, would justify interference. It may be that there is no 
kind of action of which it can be said, “No mentally competent adult in 
a calm, attentive mood, fully informed, and so on, would ever choose (or 
' consent to) that.” Nevertheless, there are some actions that create a power¬ 
ful presumption that an actor ill his right mind would not choose them. 
The point of calling this hypothesis a “presumption” is to require that 
it be completely overridden before legal permission be given to a person 
who has already been interfered with to go on as before. For example, if 
a policeman (or anyone else) sees John Doe about to chop off his hand 
with an ax, he is perfectly justified in using force to prevent him, because 
of the presumption that no one could voluntarily choose to do such a 
thing. The presumption, however, should always be taken as rebuttable in 

21 Mill, On Liberty , p. 117. 

22 Mill, On Liberty , p. 117. 





Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


50 


principle; it will be up to Doe to prove before an official tribunal that he 
is calm, competent, and free, and still wishes to chop off his hand. Perhaps 
this is too great a burden to expect Doe himself to “prove,” but the tribunal 
should require that the presumption against voluntariness be overturned by 
evidence from some source or other. The existence of the presumption 
should require that an objective determination be made, whether by the 
usual adversary procedures of law courts, or simply by a collective in¬ 
vestigation by the tribunal into the available facts. The greater the presump¬ 
tion to be overridden, the more elaborate and fastidious should be the 
legal paraphernalia required, and the stricter the standards of evidence. 
The .-P 01nt of the procedure, would not be to evaluate the wisdom or worthi¬ 
ness of a person’s choice, but rather to determine whether the choice^really 
, is his. 7 

This seems to lead us to a form of paternalism so weak and innocuous 
that it could be accepted even by Mill, namely, that the state has the 
right to prevent self-regarding harmful conduct only when it is substantTaTr y 
n ° nvolu iS^ or when .....temporary intervention is necessary to establish 
whetEerjJijg^ or not. A strong presumption that no normal person 

would voluntarily choose or consent to the kind of conduct in question 
should be a proper ground for detaining the person until the voluntary 
character of his choice can be established. We can use the phrase “the 
jtandard-.of_y olun tariness” as a label for considerations that mediate ap¬ 
plication of the principle that a person can be protected from his' own 
folly. 

Consider some typical hard cases for the application of the voluntariness 
standard. First take the problem of harmful drugs. Suppose that Richard 
Roe requests a prescription of drug X from Dr. Doe, and the following 
discussion ensues: 


DR. doe: I cannot prescribe drug X to you because it will do you physical harm. 
mr. roe: But you are mistaken. It will not cause me physical harm. 

In a case like this, the state, of course, backs the doctor, since it deems 
medical questions to be technical matters subject to expert opimoraTff'a 
layman disagrees with a physician on a question of medical fact, the lay¬ 
man is presumed wrong, and if he nevertheless chooses to act on his 
factually mistaken belief, his action will be substantially less than fully volun¬ 
tary. That is, the action of ingesting a substance which will in fact harm 
him is not the action he voluntarily chooses to do (because he does not 
believe that it is harmful). Hence the state intervenes to protect him not 
from his own free and voluntary choices, but from his own ignorance. 

Suppose however that the exchange goes as follows: 


. doe: I cannot prescribe drug X to you because it will do you physical harm. 
’• ROE: ^ xac dy. That’s just what I want. I want to harm myself 





Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


51 


In this case Roe is properly apprised of the facts; he suffers from no 
delusions or misconceptions. Yet his choice is so odd that there exists a 
reasonable presumption that he has been deprived of the “full use of his 
reflecting faculty.” It is because we know that the overwhelming majority 
of choices to inflict injury for its own sake on oneself are not fully voluntary 
that we are entitled to presume that the present choice is not fully volun¬ 
tary. If no further evidence of derangement, illness, severe depression, or 
unsettling excitation can be discovered, however, and the patient can con¬ 
vince an objective panel that his choice is voluntary (unlikely event!), 
then our “voluntariness standard” would permit no further state constraint. 
Now consider the third possibility: 

dr. doe: I cannot prescribe drug X to you because it is very likely to do you 

physical harm. n 

mr. roe: I don’t care if it causes me physical harm. I’ll get a lot of pleasure first, 
so much pleasure, in fact, that it is well worth running the risk of physical 
harm. If I must pay a price for my pleasure I am willing to do so. 

This is perhaps the most troublesome case. Roe’s choice is not patently 
irrational on its face. A well thought-out philosophical hedonism may be 
one of his profoundest convictions, involving a fundamental decision of 
principle to commit himself to the intensely pleasurable, even if brief, life. 
If no third party interests are directly involved, the state can hardly be 
permitted to declare his philosophical convictions unsound or “sick” and 
prevent him from practicing them, without assuming powers that it will 
inevitably misuse. 

On the other hand, this case may be quite similar to the preceding one, 
depending on what the exact facts are. If the drug is known to give only 
an hour’s mild euphoria and then cause an immediate, violently painful 
death, then the risks appear so unreasonable as to create a powerful pre¬ 
sumption of non voluntariness. The desire to commit suicide must always 
be presumed to be both nonvoluntary and harmful to others until shown 
otherwise. (Of course, in some cases it can be shown otherwise.) Alterna¬ 
tively, drug X may be harmful in the way nicotine is now known to be 
harmful; twenty or thirty years of heavy use may create a grave risk of 
lung cancer or heart disease. Using the drug for pleasure when the risks 
are of this kind may be to run unreasonable risks, but that is no strong 
evidence of nonvoluntariness. Many perfectly normal,' rational persons 
voluntarily choose to run precisely these risks for whatever pleasures they 
find in smoking. To assure itself that such practices are truly voluntary, 
the state should continually confront smokers with the ugly medical facts 
so that there is no escaping the knowledge of the exact medical risks to 
health. Constant reminders of the hazards should be at every hand, with 
no softening of the gory details. The state might even be justified in using 
its taxing, regulatory, and persuasive powers to make smoking (and similar 




Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


52 


drug usage) more difficult or less attractive; but to prohibit it outright 
would be to tell the voluntary risk-taker that his informed judgments of 
what is worthwhile are less reasonable than those of the state, and there¬ 
fore he may not act on them. This is paternalism of the strong kind, un- 
mediated by the voluntariness standard. As a principle of public policy 
it has an acrid moral flavor, and creates serious risks of governmental 
tyranny. —-— 


Despite the presumptive case for liberty, there seem 
to be numerous examples in which the modern state 
has no choice but to force (usually by compulsory 
taxation) both willing and unwilling citizens to sup¬ 
port public projects that are clearly in the public interest. In many of these 
cases those who do not benefit directly from a public service are made to 
pay as much in its support as those who do, or even more. Thus non- 
drivers are taxed to support highways and nonparents to support schools. 
This has the appearance of injustice, and the justification of unhappy neces¬ 
sity. Often the alternative to mandatory taxation—a system of purely 
voluntary suppoxt ^requiring only users to pay fees—is subject to a fatal 
defect that forces us to choose between universal compulsory support for 
the public facility or no facility at all. 

Consider, for example, public municipal parks. Suppose the town of 
Metropolis decides to create a large public park with gardens, woods, 
trails, and playgrounds. John Doe appreciates living in an attractive com¬ 
munity but has no direct personal need for such a park, since he already 
has a ten acre yard with gardens, picnic tables, tennis courts, and the 
like. Why, he asks, should he be forced to support something he doesn’t 
need and doesn’t want strongly enough to pay for? Suppose, however, that 
the city charges only those who wish to use the park, and that this group 
constitutes 90 percent of the population. The richest 10 percent opt out, thus 
raising the average costs to the remainder. That rise, in turn, forces’some 
of the 90 percent to withdraw, thus raising the cost to the others, forcing 
still more to drop out, and so on. This process will continue until either a 
very expensive equilibrium is reached, or, what is more likely, the whole 
project collapses (as in the case of some voluntary public medical and 
insurance plans). 

It is avoidance of this characteristic escalation effect, rather than pater¬ 
nalism, that provides the rationale for'compulsory social security and 
medicare programs. Here it is impo rtant Jo apply the various principles 
not to individual cases, such as the compulsory 
taxation of John Doe, but and jpneral finan cing schemes. Com¬ 

pulsory rather than voluntary schemes are justified when the social good 


4. QQLLECTIYT GOODS 
AND COLLECTIVE 
ACTION 








Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


53 


in question cannot be secured in any other way. Whether , compulsion on 
this_ground._accords with the harm principle depends on whether loss of 
the good would be classified as a social harm or the mere withholding of 
a Eenefi t /see pp*. "29-31). WKere tKeTgood is security/“medicaFcare ™or 
education, there is little doubt that its loss would properly be called a 
“harm” to those who incur it. 

In cases of j^ peo ple who don’ t 

want jT given publi c serv ice are forced t g pay Jar it because there is no 

other pra ctical wa y. of.supporting, itr and its loss wou ld be a harm , to 

those who do want 0ln a more interesting^ndTroublesome kind of case, 
aS'ortliFmeinbers of a community or group want some good which is in 
fact in the interests of each individual equally, and yet it is in no indi¬ 
vidual’s interest to contribute toward the goal unless all are made to do 
so. This paradoxical state of affairs has attracted considerable attention 
from economists who have noticed its similarity to the condition of a com¬ 
pany in an industry that enjoys “perfect competition.” So long as the 
price of a manufactured product on the free market exceeds the marginal 
cost of production, it will be in the interest of each company to increase its 
output and thus maximize its profit. But the consequence of increased 
output will be lower prices, so in the end all companies will be worse off 
for “maximizing profits” than they might otherwise have been. If any 
single firm, anticipating this unhappy result, were to restrict its own output 
unilaterally, it would be in still more trouble, for its restriction of output 
in a large industry would not prevent the fall of prices, and it would suffer 
lower sales in addition to lower prices. It is in the interest of each firm that 
all the others restrict output, but, in a purely competitive situation, none 
of the others dare do that. Where there is no coercion, we have the para¬ 
doxical result that it is “rational” for each firm to pursue policies that will 
destroy its interests in the end. It is more rational still to prefer general 
coercion. 

Problems like that raised by “perfect competition” tend to occur wherever 
large organizations have come into existence to advance the interests of 
their members. A great many such organizations, from consumer societies 
and labor unions to (as many have claimed) the political state itself, exist 
primarily to advance some common interest in virtue of which the members 
can be supposed to have banded together in the first place. Now, some of 
the collective aims to which large organizations are devoted have a very 
special character. They are directed at goods which, if they are made 
available to any one member of the group, cannot feasibly be withheld from 
any other member. Examples of such generalized and indivisible goods are 
supported prices for companies in the same industry in a not-so-competitive 
market, the power of collective bargaining for members of a union, and 
certain goods provided for its citizens by the state, such as police protec- 



Hard Cases for the Harm Principle 


54 


tion, courts of law, armies, navies, and public health agencies. Perhaps it 
would be technically possible to “sell” these goods only to those willing 
to pay for them, but it would hardly be “feasible.” It is not clear, for 
example, how an organization, private or public, could eliminate air pollu- 
tio n only for those willing^to^paj. Nonpayers would breathe the^expensively 
purified air, and there would be no way of preventing this “freeloading” 
short of banishment or capital punishment. In such cases, it is in each 
member’s interest to let the others pay the bill and then share in con¬ 
sumption of the indivisible benefit; since each member knows that every 
member knows this as well as he, each has reason to think that he may be 
taken advantage of if he voluntarily pays his share. Yet if each member, 
following his own self-interest, refuses to pay, the collective^ good for which 
al *e unit e d cannot be achieved. Voluntarily submittingHRTa coiicion 
understood by each to apply to all seems the* only way out. 

It is in virtue of sucF considerations that compulsory taxation, at least 
fBPport of collective goods and indivisible^emceT of an essential lonely 
justified by the Harm principle. That princip le woul d riot justify 
co mpuls ory taxation in su ppo rt o f benefits to private groups, or everijor 
pubhebenefits of the sort whose loss would not c onstitute a serious harm, 

,does not mean that the friends of public libraries, museums, and 
parks need.be driven^to emb race t he w elfare principle (supra, p. 33). 

P ersons an d groups are deprived o f what they need , they are harmed; 
** . i g a y thie couhtaVYis a whole, in thls"~and 

fut ure generations (including people who have no present desire for cul- 

nature, or jjeauty), needs lar ge.national parks, wilderness 

areas, enormous libraries, m useums, atomic,,,accelerators for physical re¬ 
search, huge telescopes, and so o n . To a rgue that we need these things is 
t o claim th at we cannot In the, end get along^very" well without them. That 
is the kind of case that must be made if we are to justify compulsion^on 
liberal principles, to the rel uctant taxpay er. 










CHAPTER TOUR 



Rights 


What is the difference between being at liberty to do (omit, have, or be) 
something and having a right to do (etc.) k? In this chapter we shall be 
concerned with freedom only as viewed from,the juridical perspective, with 
permissibility undSTrulS rather than with the_ absence of de facto con¬ 
straints generally. The duties imposed by rules and authorities can them- 
serveTfunction as constraints. Hence, we can with perfect propriety speak 
of the absence of duty itself as a kind of freedom; but to avoid confusion, 
we had better say of the person who, has .no, duty to,dp^Qmethm£_that_he J 
ho£to^Aat'&ing, reserving the vocabulary^of_‘ffreedoiff’ 
fo? remlfSt de facto” abilities. Thus,T p«wn mi ght be at liberty^ doj, 
and yet nofbejKS to do X_ because"^' S'sfflnsfjsined by somethmgoffifr 
than duty. The “liberty” to whlch'we refer is conferred by the very systems 
ormETand regulations that also create rights and duties. 

Rights and liberties are bestowed by rules of many different kinds rules 
of games such as chess and baseball, rules of nongovernmental institutions 
such as clubs and learned societies, even the rules of logic, which grant us, 
under certain conditions, the “right to infer.” The concepts of a right and 
a liberty (as opposed to freedom generally) probably originated however, 

55 





Legal Rights 


56 


in systems of juridical law, and it is in legal systems that they have their 
most subtle and interesting applications and most thorough and detailed 
e a orations. For that reason it will be instructive to take juridical law as 
our model, and attempt to understand its relatively definite employment of 
the concepts that interest us, before turning to the more troublesome uses of 
those concepts m moral discourse. 


AND I pRmLEGEf TIES ’ commonI y distinguish “rights in a 

GES strict and narrow sense,” usually called claim-rights , 

from ‘>ere-hbetties,” oft en called pnSLges and 
4i± e l t Z^LP rivil ege in this sense is simply the absence 
privileged-or at libertyjo do X is tolSV that 
NornSTy all dtiz^TSTSSef 
afi obhgauon to retrain from striking other persons. The criminal law, in 
orbidding assaults imposes such a duty on everyone. If Roe nevertheless 
assaults Doe then Doe has the legal privilege of striking back in self-defense: 
he is free of his usual duty of forbearance. Similarly, if Doe is sworn in as 
a witness, he acquires the liberty of saying words about other persons that 
it was previously his legal duty not to say.”2 Sometimes the law leaves two 
or more persons in a competitive situation in which each person is privileged 
to do something at the expense of the other. If Doe and Roe each see a 
ty dollar bill on the sidewalk, neither has a duty to let the other have it 
Rather both are privileged to get it if they can, though neither is at liberty 
to use iorce or violence in the process. 

There are several narrower senses of “privilege” in the law in which the 
word stands not for just any liberty but rather a liberty (absence of duty) 
o some special kind. In one of these senses, a privilege is ^a particular and 
peculiar benefit or( advantage enjoyed by a" person of"jroup b^oTSTthe 
common advantages of ot her citizens . . .an exceptional or extraordinary 
power or exemption^ 3 The word in this sense tends to be pejdratTvV'Thli 
kind of exemption is not necessarily justified, and political TquaUtarians 
tend to rail against “privilege,” so conceived, as simply arbitrary favoritism 
Sometimes the suggestion of arbitrariness is nullified by explicit definition 
as when the word is defined as “an exemption from some burden or at¬ 
tendance with which certain persons are indulged because the stations they 
fall or the offices they are engaged in are such as require all their time 

2 Corbin, Legal Analysis and Terminology,” 165. 

p.“ ^ mctionar y> 4th «*• (St- Paul, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 1951), 








Legal Rights 


57 


and care.” 4 Thus in some jurisdictions physicians are not required to ap¬ 
pear m court when they are defendants in malpractice suits, and anjbulance 
driym everywhere. are allowed 10 exceed spe ed limits . ' 

The^most common.irf_the. speciaj.jegal de finitions" of a privilege is “a 
license to invade anot^srighb” If we thffik of that domamtffii£££Tii 
which the state protects an individual by imposing duties of noninterfer¬ 
ence upon all outsiders (the model being a fenced-in area of land with a 
lock on the gate), then we can think of those who are privileged as persons 
who are permitted to carry keys to the lock on the gate. Most protective 
rules are formulated in terms of rights and duties, but exceptions are put 
in the language of “privilege,” so that privileges are “particular and pecu¬ 
liar,” the result of special circumstances not included in the rationale of 
the rule. For example, consent is a form of privilege which allows one to 
have sexual intercourse without committing rape, or to utter false and 
damaging remarks without committing slander, or to walk on another’s 
land without committing trespass. Police officers, in virtue of their office, 
can often lock up persons without committing false imprisonment. These 
are examples of special possession of a key to invade what would otherwise 
be another s right. Some more imaginative writers speak of privilege as an 
area “carved out” of other people’s rights. If liberties are to be distin¬ 
guished from privileges in any of these senses, it is primarily in view of 
the specially delimited distribution of the latter. The law can leave every¬ 
one at liberty in a certain respect, but privileges (in the special senses) 

particular few or else to everyone in very 

■“ThSe is finallfa sense of “privilege” which refers to a kind of legal 
benefit which is less secure than a right and is often described as a “mere 
gnyile^e.” AJrivgr’s-lissDSP gives a person a right to drive an autoSSBIle 
m the sense that it imposes a duty of noninterference on others that is en¬ 
forced by the state. This valuable benefit differs from some other rights in 
that one must make application for it. One must assume the burden of 
demonstrating to state officials that one is worthy of it; it is granted at 
the discretion of the state, and is very easily forfeitable. The state, in short 
is under no duty to confer the benefit on me. It is nothing l ean demand 
as my due. Rather the state grants or withholds it at its pleasure, and since 
_ ha , Ve n ° choice but to take h on the state’s own terms, it is a mere 
A £ r W ,e S e . in this sense ma y JjS-iather a liberty (privilege in 
the earlier sense) or a cl^-nghtj^^ below. What 

distinguishes a privilege in this sense is j&JacLof It is the 

basis of no correlative state duty, and can be withheTThT^itWrawn by the 

Rights in the strict sense stand in sharp contrast to both liberties and 
4 Black's Law Dictionary, p. 1359. 









Legal Rights 


58 


(especially) “mere revocable privileges.” Lega l claim-rights are necessarily 
the grounds of other people’s duties toward the right-holder. A legal^right 
i^a claim to ^om ta^alTier action or forbearance as the case may 
be7~usually against offieFprivate persons. It is also a claim against the 
state to recognition and enforcement. 

What have come to be standard examples of claim-rights were given 
by Corbin. 5 B owes A one hundred dollars. That is, B has a duty to pay A 
that amount, and that duty seen from ri’s perspective is ri’s right to receive 
one hundred dollars. B contracts to deliver goods to A , hence A has a 
right to receive those goods from B, and that right is simply B ?s contractual 
duty seen from T’s vantage point. A has a right that B shall not strike 
him, and that right (unlike a mere liberty) entails a corresponding duty 
of jB’s not to strike A. 

One can have a liberty whi ch is npt.also a right, but one cannot ha ve a 
right which is not also a liberty, for rights can be understood to contain 
liberties as components. Iflnave a right to do X, then. ..! cannQt^jalsQ jiave 
a duty to refrain from doing^X. JBut to say that I lack duty. ,tQjtgfraiii 15 
to say that I have a'liberty or privilege to do. Hence, if J H .J} ave :ja .right 
tojdo .ZjTmust also"be"aTIibe7ty 'to do X. ‘What„the right ajds ^ the liber ty 
is the duty of others not to interfere. 

“Legal claim-rights are indispensably valuable possessions. A world with¬ 
out claim-rights, no matter how full of benevolence and devotion to duty, 
would suffer an immense moral impoverishment. Persons would no longer 
hope for decent treatment from others on the ground of desert or rightful 
claim. Indeed, they would come to think of themselves as having no special 
claim to kindness or consideration from others, so that whenever even 
minimally decent treatment is forthcoming they would think themselves 
lucky rather than inherently deserving, and their benefactors extraordinarily 
virtuous and worthy of great gratitude. The harm to individual self-esteem 
and character development would be incalculable. 6 

A claim-right, on the other hand, can be urged, pressed, or rightly de¬ 
manded against other persons. In appropriate circumstances the right¬ 
holder can “urgently, peremptorily, or insistently” 7 call for his rights, or 
assert them authoritatively, confidently, unabashedly. Rights are not mere 
gifts or favors, motivated by love or pity, for which gratitude is the sole 
fitting response. A^j’ighLis something a ma n can stand on , something that 
can be demanded or insisted upon without embarrassment or shame. When 


5 Corbin, “Legal Analysis and Terminology,” pp. 164-66. 

6 The effects of this kind of treatment on Southern Negroes is vividly described by 
Richard Wasserstrom, “Rights, Human Rights and Racial Discrimination,” Journal of 
Philosophy , LXI (1964), 628-41. 

7 G. J. Warnock, “Claims to Knowledge,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 
Supplementary volume 36 (1962), p. 21. 







A>Sf A 'flLu f/k 

that to which one has a right is not forthcoming, the appropriate reaction 
is indignation; when it is duly given there is no reason for gratitude, since 
it is simply one’s own or one’s due that one received. A world with claim- 
rights is one in which all persons, as actual or potential claimants, are 
dignified objects of respect, both in their own eyes and in the view of 
others. No amount of love and compassion, or obedience to higher author¬ 
ity, or noblesse oblige, can substitute for those values. 



Legal Rights 




2. CLASSIFICATION OF Legal claim-rights can be classified in various ways. 

CLAIM-RIGHTS If we consider the structures of the rights themselves, 

that is, their characteristic patterns of involved per¬ 
sons and performances, distinctions can be made between in personam rights 
and in rem rights, between positive and negative rights, and between active 
anti passive negative rights. 

The simplest and earliest model pf^an in personam right is that of a 
creditor against his debtor. If Abel owes Baker five dollars, he has a duty 
t6 Baker to repay that amount, and Baker can insist that Abel discharge 
his duty, and can rightly complain if he doesn’t. Baker’s right holds against 
one assignable person, Abel. The di sting uishing characteristic of Jn personam 
rightsjsjthat they are correlate3~with specific duties of determinate individ¬ 
uals. O.ther examples _ of. such rights are the rights of landlords to collect 
rentj rpm th eir..te nant s, and the rights of the wrongfully injured to damages 
from their injurers. 

In rem r ights, on the other hand, are those said to hold not against 
some^specific namable person or persons, but against “the world at large.” 
Examples include a homeowner’s right to peaceful occupancy of his own 
house, a landowner’s right to exclusive enjoyment of his land, and anyone’s 
rights tp .the use or possession of the money in his own purse or pocket. 
Corresponding to these rights are the legally enforced duties of noninter¬ 
fere nce i mposecL im .ever yone. Everyone has a duty to keep off my "land 
without my permission, although in special circumstances specific persons 
may be privileged to “invade my right,” i.e., their duties of noninterference 
may be temporarily suspended. 

The_dj$tinction between positiv e an d negative claim-rights is (perhaps 
deceptively) simple. A positive right is a right to other persons’ positive 
actions^ a^ negative^ right is alright to other persons’ omissions or _fore- 
bearances. For every positive right I have, someone eTse has a duty to do 
something; for every negative right I have, someone else has a^duty to 

Typically, injpehsonam rights are positive 
and in rem^rights are^ negative. My in personam right against Jones"" to 
the repayment of his debt is a right to positive action from him, whereas 
my in rem right to the contents of my wallet is a claim against everyone 








Legal Rights 


60 



to refrain from taking those contents. There are, however, some, examples 
of both negative in personam rights and positive in rem rights. The rig ht 
of an accident victim to Jbe assisted by anyone who happens to be in a 
position tojhelp is positive and in rem. iFTiolds against “the whoIeTvorld^ 
in the same sense as the paradigmatic negative in rem right of a landowner 
holds against “the whole world.” In the latter case, anybody in a posi¬ 
tion to enter my land has a duty to refrain (unless he has my permission). 
Negative in personam rights are harder to find. One class of examples 
involves voluntary forfeiture by a determinate individual of a positive right 
he shared in common with all others. For example, if you promise me to 
stay of! the public road near my home, then I have a right against you 
to your forebearance which is in personam because it holds only against a 
determinate person, and negative because it is correlated with a duty to 
refrain from acting in a certain way. 8 

Negative^rights are, by and large, rights against others not._to be inter- 
fered with. They can be divided into two important subclasses in a distinc¬ 
tion that cuts across that between in personam and in rem negative rights. 

ji ghts . are, rig hts tq . act joy no t act as^one ^chooses; jights are 

ri ghts not to be done to by others in certain ways. Among one’s activ e 
rights may be such as the rigEts to go where one will and say whatever 
one pleases, often referred to concisely ~as “the _right_ to libe fty)’^"Among 
one’s passive rights may be such as the rights to be let alone, to enjoy one’s 
property, to keep one’s affairs secret, or one’s reputation undamaged, or 
one’s body unharmed. These are often characterized collectively as “the 
right to security.” That one person’s active rights can be protected only at 
the expehs^of another’s passive rights, and vice versa, is perhaps the major 
source of moral perplexity in the political governance of free men. We 
shall return to the problem of resolving conflicts between liberty and safety. 
For the moment let it suffice to say only that active and passive rights are 
equally rights, and that neither as a class can be flatly said to Be rnlnnsically' 
more deserving of respect than the other. 

Still another way of classifying rights is by the type of interest they 
proteHrWs^we^have Teen, the price to be paid for protecting the interests 
of some" persons is always the coercion of others, that is, violation of their 
interests. The state can only protect one man’s interest by restricting the 
liberty of others by the imposition of duties. There is therefore a loss of 
liberty for every gain, an unhappy fact of life that requires legislators to 
rank interests in respect to worthiness or importance. Throughout its his¬ 
tory the Anglo-American law has protected only those interests ranked near 
the top of such a scale; as our civilization becomes more crowded and 

8 The example is Salmond’s. See Glanville Williams ed., Salmond on Jurisprudence 
(11th ed.), (London: Sweet & Maxwell, Ltd., 1957), p. 286. 










Legal Rights 


61 


complex, protection has been extended to a continually growing number of 
interests. The general ^tendency has been to create more passive rights at 
the expense of previously existing active rights. John Locke in the seven- 
■ teenth" century S to "three "great classes*'of natural rights, the rights 
to “life, liberty, and property.” The English law of his time protected the 
interests in bodily health and integrity, and physical survival (“life”), 
from physical force; the interest in free movement (“liberty”) from actual 
restraint or imprisonment; and the interest in the exclusive use and enjoy¬ 
ment of one’s money, land, and chattels (“property”) from physical seizure, 
destruction, or fraud. Now, in the mid-twentieth century, the “right to life” 
means not only the right to health and survival, but also the right to 
enjoy life; this involves protection from certain forms of psychological as 
well as physical suffering, from the apprehension of injury as well as injury 
itself, from excessive noises, odors, and vibrations, and from invasions of 
personal privacy. The “right to property” now includes protection of “in¬ 
tangible” as well as tangible property: ideas, works of literature and art, 
good will, trade secrets, and reputation. The “right to liberty” now, as in 
the past, refers to the right to move about at will, but this active right has 
perforce retreated as the passive rights of life and property have advanced. 
Therefore, these other gains in rights have clearly been at the expense of 
Locke'sJ ^gJ^.”" ...; 7- 

3. RIGHT AND It is often said that there can be no rights without 

DUTIES duties, and that a prior condition for the acquisition 

or possession of , rights is. the ability and willingness 
to shoulder duties and responsibilities. The theory that acceptance of duties 
is the price any person must pay in order to have rights has been called 9 
the doctrine of the moral correlation of rights and duties. This is in con- 

^" Safe*-* _. 

tradistinction to the doctrine of^the logical correlationjof rights and duties, 
to be considered below, which asserts that attribution of rights to one 
person logically entails the existence of at least one other person whcUhias 
duties toward hi m. That a rightholder must himself have duties is by no 
means a logically necessary proposition. It is at least conceivable that a 
person should have a right to X but no correlative duty to provide or 
respect the ATs of anyone else. Even though a rule conferring such an 
exceptional benefit might be morally repugnant, it would nevertheless be 
conceptually coherent. Indeed, if there is some reason for granting dutyless 
rights in certain cases so that the exemption is not arbitrary, then even the 
moral repugnance disappears. Some have claimed, for example, that since 
various animals can suffer pain, they have a right not to be mistreated, 


9 S. I. Benn and R. S. Peters, Social Principles and the Democratic State (London: 
George Allen and Uowin Ltd., 1959), p. 89. 






Legal Rights 


62 


but since they are not rational beings, they lack the capacity to have 
duties. Animals would then co nstitute one k ind of e xception to the moral 
correlation^dognne, and perhap^human infants and idiots are otheFexcep- 
tions of the same kind. 

What makes the moral correlation doctrine seem a plausible account of 
most legal rights is the fact that legal rights are conferred by general rules 
that apply to classes of persons rather than to individuals. Characteristically, 
the classes are so wide that many persons are members of both the class 
of rightholders and the class of those on whom are imposed the duties 
logically correlated with the conferred rights. Many rules of law, for 
example, apply to all citizens. Thus everyone has a right not to be physically 
beaten, which is correlated with the duties of everyone else not to beat 
him. Any arbitrarily selected John Doe will have the right in question, and 
also the correlated duty toward everyone else, both imposed by the same 
rule. That is only proper, but it is not logically necessary. A universal 
right not to be beaten that is correlated with duties imposed on everyone 
except John Doe would be a moral monstrosity but a logical possibility. 

Even where rules are perfectly general and exceptionless, the rights^nd-. 
givSLto^Xbejelated-in sucfTiTS^that 
are.,,xP.nditifi|^^ of the duti es. Thus if Cain 

murders Abel, it does not necessarily Follow that there is anybody whose 
duty not to kill Cain is canceled. If Cain tortures Abel, to pick a more 
convincing example, it does not follow that Cain thereby forfeits his own 
right not to be tortured. That right should be unforfeitable under the 
governing rules. 

That version of the moral correlativity doctrine that makes a man’s 
rights conditional upon his exercise of corresponding duties to others is 
neither logically necessary nor morally desirable in every case. But there 
is no doubt that in a great many cases it is morally plausible. We send men 
to prison, and thereby deprive them of their rights of free movement be¬ 
cause they have not respected the rights of others; indeed, we tell them’that 
their failure to discharge their duties has shown them unworthy of certain 
of their rights. Even in these cases, it is important to note that the criminal’s 
invasion of his victim’s rights did not absolve the victim of his correspond¬ 
ing duties to the criminal. ■Tberight of punishment is reserv ed to the state. 

The doctrine of logical correlativity asserts natjfeta p erson’s right«~ ^gh7 
to be contingent upon performance of his own duties, but that his rights 
^...P^SSnly..l^ked with the duties of other people. This is not only a 
plausible doctrine, it is, for a certain class of rights and duties, logically 
unassailable, for as we have seen, legal cte^ightsjMS^defined in terms 
° f Qthe p e °Pk’ s du ties. A more general version of the logical co^SSwty 
thesis, however, gflcSiSters severe difficulties. I refer to the thesis that all 
duties entail other people’s rights and all rights entail other people’s duties. 







Legal Rights 


63 


Even if we confine our attention to legal contexts, toeretojeem pnma 
facie to be some duties that^are not correlated with the.rights^pi ottexs. 
M^ny duties of obedience imposed by legal rules are no^owpZ.Xo other 
persons; 6ut" rather to some wholly impersonal authority lik^/^gjaw or 
a painted stop sign. When a traffic'signal directs me to stop, it is difficult 
to find an assignable person who can plausibly claim my stopping as is 
own due. The original legislators of the traffic ordinance may be long dead, 
and if vision is clear and no other motorists are in sight, there is no other 
person to whose right of way I owe respect. In short, I have a legal duty 
of obedience that is correlated with no other person’s right against me. 

When we leave legal contexts to consider moral obligations and other 
extralegal duties, a greater variety of duties without correlative rights 
present themselves. Duties of charity, for exampleTTejuire us to contribute 

to one or*another"of a large number of eligible recipients,.no one of whom 

can claim our contribution as his due.'Charitable contributions are more 
life gratuitous servithan repayments of debts or repara¬ 
tions, and yet we do have duties to be charitable. Many persons, moreover, 
believe they are required by their consciences to do more than the duty 
which can be demanded of them by their prospective beneficiaries. 

That there now seem to be clear examples of duties without correlative 
rights is probably a consequence of the evolution of a new and generalized 
sense ..of the word duty.’ 5 Etymologically, the word is associated with ac¬ 
tions that are due someone else, the payments of debts to creditors, the 
keeping of agreements with promisees, or the payment of club dues, legal 
fees, or tariff levies to appropriate authorities or their representatives. In 
this original sense, all duties are correlated with the rights of those to whom 
the duty is owed. On the other hand, there are numerous classes of duties, 
both legal and nonlegal, that are not logically correlated with the rights of 
other persons. This is probably a consequence of the fact that jhe_word 
"duty” has come to„,be used^for any action understood Jo, be, required, 
whetheTE^lhh nghts of otherf or by law, or by higher authority, or by 
conscience. When the notion of requirement is in clear fqcus it is likely 
to seem the only essential element in the idea of duty, and the other com¬ 
ponent notion—that a duty is something due someone else—disappears. 
Thus, in this widespread but derivative usage, "duty” tends to be used for 
any action we feel we must (for whatever reason) do. It becomes, in short, 
a term of moral modality merely; and it is no wonder that the first thesis 
of the logical correlativity doctrine often fails. 

What of the other side of the logical correlativity thesis that all rights 
entail other people’s duties? Again, as long as we mean by "claim-right” a 
right which can be claimed against someone, it follows that all claim-rights 
are correlated with the duties of those against whom they may be claimed. 
There is another sense of "right,” however, common in political manifestos 






Legal Rights 


64 


if not m legal codes, and also closely linked to the notion of a claim, which 
fT** “l^hfome apparent exceptions to the logical correlativity thesis. 
^5r tl ®J^£if£^o_Sense” .pf “right,” to be discussed below, a right is a 
fW Safeng which need not also be a claim against anyone.""- 


™ AN ° Many P hilos °P hicaI '"iters have simply identified 

nghts with claims. Dictionaries tend to define 
“claims,” in turn, as “assertions of right,” a dizzying 
piece of circularity that led one philosopher to complain, “We go in 
search of rights and are directed to claims, and then back again to rights 

in bureaucratic futility.”^ What then is the relation between a claim and 
a right r 

of ri S ,hT” ShaI1 - Ckim ’ and a claira is “ an assertion 

-viSi S ° a f ° rmal defin ition of either notion in terms oTlhl^er will 

nhiir 1 v T 7 ar ‘ u hm lf We are after a “ formal definition ” of the usual 
P osophieal sort, the game is over before it has begun, and we can say 

hat me concep t of ngllt is a “ slmple , undefinable, unana l yzable primi ! 
five. Here as elsewhere m philosophy this will have the effect of making 
e commonplace seem unnecessarily mysterious. We would be better ad¬ 
vised not to attempt a formal definition of either “right” or “claim” but 
rather to U se the idea of a claim in informal elucidation of the idei of a 

If rl „ 1S T ?° SSlble by tHe faCt that daimin S is an elaborate sort 

the act o7T • aCt 7f ty ’ A dalm “ that Which 18 Claimed ’ the ob i ect of 
the act of claiming. If we concentrate on the whole activity of claiming 

t " d open ,o < *™“.•»»»“ £ 

P , , ’ W . C may earn more abouc the generic nature of rights than 

possible ^ ^ h ° Pe t0 l6arn fr ° m 3 f ° rmal — a one we“ 

tha L t et U h b nT1 7 diSt T iShin§ betWeen: making Claim claiming 

clahn 7,’ maJ T ng a ? ne SO/t 0f 45115 we may be doin § when we 

aUn 'V-^^SiSLiEJSothmg, which means “to petition or seek by 
vHjtue of supposed right; todem and as du e.” Sometimes this is done by a l 
cknowledged rightholder when he serves notice that he now wants mined 
over to him that which has already been acknowledged as his s^ ls 

rSS ZTltT 5mpr ° perly taken from him - The claim is often made 
y turning m a chit, a receipt, or a deed, that is, a title to somethin^ 

currently in die possession of someone else. On other occasions mWinf 

or a householder'^ a' tract of 
7 and in the public domain, or an .inventor to his patent rights In tll fe 

suppl. Vol. XXiV S (195Q S )' 1 pp 01 1 Q 7^8 ** tS ’ Procee dmgs of the Aristotelian Society, 









Legal Rights 


65 


ing tide; in the other kind, it is to apply for the title itself by showing 
that one has satisfied conditions specified by a rule forthe, ownership of 
title and therefore can demand it as one’s due. 

Generally speaking, only the person who has a title or has qualified 
for it, or someone speaking in His name, can make claim to something as 
a matter of right. An important fact about rights, (or claims) is that they 
can be claimed only by those who have them, Of course, anyone can claim 
that this umbrella is yours, buT'orH^you or your representative can actually 
claim the umbrella. If Smith owes Jones five dollars, only Jones can claim 
the five dollars as his own, although any bystander can claim that it belongs 
to Jones. One major difference between making legal claim to and claiming 
that is that the former Is a legal performance with direct legal consequences, 
whereas the latter is often a^'mere piece of descriptive commentary with 
npjigal ..force; Legally speaking, making claim to^ can .itself, make, things 
happen. This sense of “claiming” might well be called the,, “performa¬ 
tive! sense,” as opposed to “claiming that” (asserting in an especially 
Insistent way), which can be called the “propositional sense.” The legal 
power to claim (performatively) one’s right or the things to which one 
has a right seems essential to the very notion of a legal right. A legal 
right to which one could not make claim (be., not even for official recogni¬ 
tion) would be very “imperfect” indeed! 

We come now to the third interesting employment of the claiming 
vocabulary, that involving not the verb “to claim” but the substantive “a 
claim.” What is it to have a jlairn , and how is this related to rights? I 
would like to suggest that having a clai m co nsists in being in a position to 
claim in the^performative seme* that is. Jo _ make claim to. If,, this suggestion 
is correct, it shows the primacy of the verbal over the nominative forms. It 

links claims to a kind of activity and obv iates the temptation to think.of 

claims as things, on the model of coins, pencils, and^otfier material posses¬ 
sions which we*can carry in our hip pockets. To be sure, we often make 
or establish our claims by presenting titles, which typically have the form 
of receipts, tickets, certificates, and other pieces of paper or parchment. 
The title, however, is not the same thing as the claim; rather it is the 
evidence that establishes the claim as valid. On this analysis, one „rnight 

have.a claim with out...e^er^j^ming that.ta.which one is entitled, or 

without even knowing that one has the claim. It is possible that one might 
simply be ignorant of the fact of being in a position to claim; or one 
might be unwilling to exploit that position for one reason or another, in¬ 
cluding fear that the legal machinery is broken down or corrupt and will 
not enforce one’s claim despite its validity. 

Nearly all writers maintain that there is some intimate connection be¬ 
tween having a claim and having a right. Some identify right and claim 

ght” as justified or justifiable claim, 
My own preference is for the last 


without qualification: so me define ‘ ri 
or recognized claim, for valid cfaim!! 





Legal Rights 


66 


definition. Some writers, however, reject the identification of rights with 
valid claims on the ground that all claims as such are valid, so that the 
expression “valid claim” is redundant. These writers would identify rights 
with claims simpliciter. But this is a very simple confusion. All claims 
are put forward as justified, whether they are justified in fact or not. A 
claim conceded even by its maker to have no validity is not a claim at all, 
but a mere demand. The highwayman, for example, demands his victim’s 
money, but he hardly makes claim to it as rightfully his own. But it does 
not follow from this sound point that it is redundant to qualify claims as 
justified (or, as I prefer, valid) in the definition of a right, for not all claims 
put forward as valid really are valid; only the valid ones can be acknowl- 
edged as rights. 

If having a valid claim is not redundant, i.e., if it is not redundant to 
pronounce another s claim valid, there must be such a thing as having a 
claim that is not valid. What would this be like? One might accumulate 
just enough evidence to argue with relevance and cogency that one has a 
right (or ought to be granted a right), although one’s case might not be 
overwhelmingly conclusive. The argument might be strong enough to 
entitle one to a hearing and fair consideration. When one is in this posi¬ 
tion, it might be said that one “has a claim” that deserves to be weighed 
carefully. Nevertheless, the balance of reasons may turn out to militate 
against recognition of the claim, so that the claim is not a valid claim or 
right. (Having a claim _tp_J C is no t (vet) the j>a me as hayin g a rig ht to JC, 
a case, consisting of relevant reasons of afTeast minimal 
plausibility, that oneTias a right to X. The case establishes a right, not to 
X, but to a fair hearing and consideration. Claims, so conceived, differ in 
degree: some are stronger than othejs. Rights, on the other hand, do~not 
differ m degree; no one right is more of a“right than anotherTThat is tlie 
most important difference between rights and mere claims. It is analogous 
to the difference between evidence of guilt (subject to degrees of cogency) 
and conviction of guilt (which is all or nothing). One can “have evidence” 
that is not conclusive just as one can “have a claim” that is not valid. 

Another reason for not identifying rights with claims simply is that there 
is a well-established usage in international law and politics that makes a 
theoretically interesting distinction between claims and rights. Statesmen 
are sometimes led to speak of “claims” when they are concerned with the 
natural needs of deprived human beings in conditions of scarcity. Young 
orphans everywhere in the world need good upbringings, balanced diets, 
education, and technical training, but unfortunately there are many places 
where those goods are in such short supply that it is impossible to provide 
them for all who need them. If we persist in speaking of those needs as 
constituting rights and not merely claims, we are committed to the con¬ 
ception of a right which is an entitlement to some good, but not a valid 
claim against any particular individual, for in conditions of scarcity there 








Legal Rights 


67 


may be no determinate individuals who can plausibly be said to have a 
duty to provide the missing goods to those in need. J.E.S. Fawcett prefers 
to keep the distinction between claims and rights firmly in mind. Claims, 
he writes, “are needs and demands in movement, and there is a continuous 
transformation as a society advances [toward greater abundance] of eco¬ 
nomic and social claims into civil and political rights. . .and not all coun¬ 
tries or all claims are by any means at the same stage in the process. 
Manifesto writers on the other side who seem to identify needs, or at least 
basic needs, with what they call “human rights, are more proper y e 
scribed, I think, as urging upon the world community the moral pnncip e 
that all basic human needs ought to be recognized as claims (in the cus- 
tomary prima facie sense) worthy of sympathy and serious ^consideration 
right now, even though, in many cases, they cannot yet plausibly be treated 
as valid claims, that is, as grounds of any other people’s duties. 

For all of that, I still have a certain sympathy with the manifesto writers, 
and am even willing to speak of a special “manifesto sense” of right, in 
which a right need not be correlated with another’s duty. Ngturgi J!££fl s 
are real claims, if only upon hypothetic al ^ future beings not yet in^exjstence. 
ra^Spt'the'moral principle that to have an u nfulfillgsi^needis.tp have 
kind of claim against the world, even if against no one_ in particular. A, 
rBturaTjieed for some gSocf 'as“ such, jike a natural dgsert, is always a 
reason in support of a claim to that good. A person in need, then, is 
always^ “in a position” to make a claim, even when there is no one in 
the corresponding position to do anything about it. Such claims, based on 
need alone, are “permanent possibilities of rights,” the natural seed from 
which rights grow. Manifesto writers are easily forgiven for speaking of 
them as if they are already actual rights, for this is but a powerful way 
of expressing the conviction that they ought to be recognized by states as 
potential rights and consequently as determinants of present aspirations 
and guides to present policies. That usage, I think, is a valid exercise of 
rhetorical license. 

I prefer to define rights asjralid claims rat^^ be¬ 

cause I~suspect that justification is too broad a qualification. Validity, 
atfisasst^a it, rrjustificatTon of a peculiar and narrow kind, namely 
justification within a^ysfenTSF rules. A man ias a legal right when the 
official recognition of his claim (as valid) is called for by the governing 
rules. This definition, of course, hardly applies to moral rights, but that is 
not because the genus of which moral rights are a species is something other 
than claims. A man has a moral right when he has a claim, the recognition 
of which is called for—not (necessarily) by legal rules—but by moral 
principles, or the principles of an enlightened conscience. 

11 T E S Fawcett, “The International Protection of Human Rights,” in Political 
Theory and the Rights of Man, ed. D. D. Raphael (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1967), pp. 125, 128. 







CHAPTER FIVE 


Conflicts 
of Legal Rights 


CLAIMS ^ ICTS ° F There is no reason why a legal claim possessed by one 

citizen cannot conflict with a legal claim possessed by 
t . • . another. Having a claim, as we have seen, is some¬ 

thing like having a point,” or “having a case,” or even “having a com¬ 
plaint. It consists m having relevant reasons of some weight that put one 
in a position to make claim to something. These reasons, were they to be put 
forward, would tend to support a claim and lend it credence and cogency 
even if, m the end, they should fail to establish the claim and compel its 
recognition. Having a case is better than having no case at all, but it can 
be somewhat less than having a decisive or conclusive case. Claims, then, 
can differ in degree; some are stronger than others. When Doe and Roe 
oth have claims to X which are such that not both can be granted or 
recognized, then their claims can be said to be in conflict. A judge may 
decide that while both competing claims are plausible enough to deserve 
a hearing, neither is strong enough to be recognized or declared valid or 
e may decide that only one is valid. In either event, the conflict of claims 
remains but does not grow into anything stronger. The law remains con¬ 
sistent and gives no sanction to socially disruptive combat. It would be 

otherwise, however, if the court were to declare that both conflicting claims 
were valid. ° 


68 






Conflicts of Legal Rights 


69 


2. LEVELS OF 
GENERALITY 
IN STATEMENTS 
OF RIGHTS 


When two specific claims of precise particularity are 
both declared valid, conflict between them seems 
quite intolerable. Thus, Grunt’s right to the exclusive 
possession and control of ten acres at Blackacre is 
logically inconsistent with Groan’s right to the exclu¬ 
sive possession and control of precisely the same ten acres. Before considering 
whether such conflicting rights can be allowed to coexist m t 8 

system it would be wise to distinguish levels of generality in the statement 
of rights, for what applies to singular statements ascribing or c °" er *! 
particular rights to particular persons may not apply without qualifi 
to statements ascribing or conferring more general rights. 


(i) SPECIFIC RIGHTS^ ^ ^ statements ascribing to specific 

persons the right either to do specific actions at a specified time and place, 
or to have specific objects in their possession or control for a ^ ec J d 
or to be in a certain precisely described condition for a specified time. Thus, 
John Doe has a right to cast his vote in secret for Richard Roe when his 
turn arrives at the polls in the first precinct, second ward, any time between 
8 00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on November 5; Arnold Abel has a right to posses 
the wallet that is now in his pocket; Henry Hooch has the r^ht to be 
quietly drunk tomorrow night at midnight within the confines of his own 

home. 


(!i) DISCR w\™p^ontfalgal duty to do that which he ^ has a specific 
right to do, then of course the law gives him no discretion to decide whether 
he shall do it. He is legally compelled to do that which he has a speafi 
right to do, and indeed he has a right only in the minimal sense of a valid 
claim against others not to prevent him from performing his duty. Many 
writers reserve the term “right” for the more interesting cases ' j 1Qse 
entitlement is more than the permission trivially entailed by duty. In those 
cases specific rights are themselves instances of more general rights possesse 
by the rightholders. Doe has the right to vote not only for Roe (his favon e) 
but for any candidate he wishes; Abel has the right to dispose of his cash 
as he pleases; Hooch is king in his own home, which is legally his castle 
Any American citizen in New York has the (speci c) ng o r v 
Chicago on the next plane in virtue of his (discretionary) right to go 
wherever he pleases; a man’s right to worship at a Roman Cathohc church 
follows from his more general right to worship at a churc o 1S £ ° ■ 

Within a certain area of autonomy, the rightholder may do anything he 
wishes. Such rights are, in effect, legal competencies; they certify 
a given area, subject to certain limits, it is John Doe and no one else 

decides what is to be done. 



Conflicts of Legal Rights 


70 


rea^ Fim Doef d ” a, :' Vary ” **”* ° f S enera %: ^ « least two 
P °esi„ri ? n wh' r r’ 0na T n§ht be " dght t0 do whatever he 
of the J e ri v- T C , Ca n the S T ra% ° f * e right wil1 be a f ^tion 
general than Roe , J ’ ^ nght to d ° whatever he wishes is more 
kind of dnimr ? h * t0 M} ’. whatever he wishes. Since saying is but one 

riffht ma h gj ^° ne nght 1S Contamed in the other - Second, Doe’s discretionary 
ehhl x Y ^ u P on him the discretion to do 

of X ’l’ Z he Ch °° SeS) that is > to choose among some limited set 

m v^ ; 111 ^ 611 UP ° n tHe nUmber 0f alternatives permitted. If Doe 

hi.’dJ.Z “ T P T‘ (i -' 

rt, ,o no,e *"* 

Of on, , eh.tce melnde the !p «i,c tight, „o, „ „„„h ip J “;t 

(iii) RIGHT-PACKAGES 

co JcTZtwfZlSt Z Ti S T^ ,oe '; h " “ d ^ ■ 

some Dartirnlar , v L sets of dlscr etionary rights all relating to 

“right to llSr triaP’ c y o° r - S t J f Ct n m !! ter “ “ ri S ht -P ack ages.” Thus, Abel’s 
his own defcn e He H * tbe dl -retionary right to call witnesses in 
rrerio T -T ’ ^ dlscret ionary right of nonself-incrimination the dis- 

conductrfTtia 0 ! a C nd SS " eXa d ln ^ i0n ’ *** ° ther rightS related t0 the 

auct of a trial and considered together. Similarly, Baker’s “civil rights” 
consist of a right to vote, to use public facilities, and so on g 

(iv) right-categories 

These are classification labels for rights of anv of ti, 0 o . ,1 

classified (usually) according to the 7enera/kind of ^ three types, 
“Personal ” f , general kind of interest protected. 

!-r i't”' -i” “s-1 “ ,rom ' 

m Jhlch right-packages can be placed, as well as she discraionalyri^mmhrn 
„^e „p right-packages and ,h. specffic right, emailed bp dSta^ 

(v) RIGHT-NAMES 

for a particular kind of human value, such as life, liberty, or property 




Conflicts of Legal Rights 


71 


ownership. Many references to the grand old rights to life, liberty, property, 
the pursuit of happiness, and so on, in manifestos, constitutions, and 
philosophical discussions are best understood as allusions to icjeal directives, 
even though masquerading as right-names of some other kind. “The right 
to life” may appear, at first sight, to be another relatively specific right like 
the right to vote. Despite its singular title, however, it is rarely taken to be 
one specific right or even one narrow class of rights among others. Often 
the right to life is plausibly construed as a broad right-category in which a 
large miscellany of rights can be placed, some of them negative (for example, 
the right not to be killed by others without due process or just cause) and 
some of them positive (for example the rights to those goods indispensable 
to a life “worth living,” that is, to a form of vital existence a good deal 
higher than the merely vegetative). But to acknowledge that all persons 
have rights in this category is not yet saying much about what these rights 
are, or about what rights are entailed by universal possession of something 
called “the right to life.” For this reason, commitment to this universal right 
is often best understood as an endorsement of a more or less vague ideal. 

Whether or not “the right to life” rules out capital punishment, mercy 
killing, abortion, or wartime conscription; which of the admitted goods of 
life are to count as necessary to a life worth living; which impositions of risk 
to life are to be graded severe enough to count as takings of life; which 
causes for taking life are just: these are questions whose rival answers are 
all compatible with the universal right to life. Acknowledgment of this 
universal right commits us to the view that human life is a precious thing 
to be protected by law whenever possible and by whatever means are 
reasonable, but it does not, by itself, entail the existence of any specific rights 
of specific persons, nor does it, by itself, commit judges and legislators to 
any particular resolution of its marginal perplexities. It is not the name of 
a particular package of valid claims; rather it is an ideal directive to legisla¬ 
tive aspiration, commanding us to do our best for the cause of human life as 
we judge the various claims that may be before us in our roles as legislators, 
judges, and moral agents. Similar analyses can be given of “the right to 
liberty” and “the right to property.” 


3. CONFLICTS It should be no surprise that general rights in the 

BETWEEN RIGHTS sense of “ideal directives” are in chronic conflict both 

(VALID CLAIMS) internally and with each other. “The right to life” 

is in internal conflict when soldiers must die so that 
their buddies may live, or when a famine overwhelms food supplies. “The 
right to liberty” conflicts with itself when demand for passage exceeds 
transportation facilities and some must wait in order that others may go, 
as when the moving of a house obstructs a highway. Recognition of “the 
right to property” does not help resolve the conflict between a factory 



Conflicts of Legal Rights 


72 


owner’s right to use his property for his own benefit and a neighbor’s right 
to the peaceful and quiet enjoyment of his land. Similarly, the right to life 
conflicts with the right to liberty when authorities must decide whether to 
quarantine whole neighborhoods to prevent the spread of a plague. “In 
a famine one man’s right to life may well involve infringement, by the com¬ 
mandeering of food hoards, of another’s right to property.” 1 The right to 
liberty may conflict with the right to property when public movement 
through an area is made unreasonably slow and difficult by a combination 
of natural obstacles, congested conditions, and “inviolable” private land. 
In all these cases, the conflicting principles referred to by the right-names 
are so usefully vague and flexible that conflict is easily tolerated. If the “rights” 
in question are merely directives to adjudicators to do their best for certain 
kinds of human interests, they may be satisfied by a give and take of intelli¬ 
gent adjustments and mutual accommodations. This can be done without 
sacrifice or compromise of the commitment to do our best by all of the 
important values involved. Our “best,” in some cases, will unhappily not be 
very much. 

Apparent conflicts between specific valid claims are more serious matters. 
When both Abel and Baker have a valid claim to exclusive possession of the 
same object at the same time, their claims cannot be rights, for they entail 
no correlative duties in the other to forbear. Conflict automatically reduces 
the claims to liberties. Each may do his best to exclude the other, and the 
state will not intervene. When both are prepared to fight, however, the 
result will be that kind of violent struggle between equally right and equally 
self-righteous gladiators that no civil society can long tolerate. Conflict 
between equally valid competencies will have the same unhappy result 
whenever the rightholders choose to exercise their discretion in the same way. 

A legal system cannot very well countenance conflicting specific rights. 
Normally courts avoid such conflict by redefining the boundaries of the 
conflicting claims, either by writing express exceptive clauses into the claims 
to make them mutually consistent, or (more commonly) by “finding” such 
clauses implicit in the rules that conferred the rights on the contending 
parties. By virtue of such processes, rights become more complex. The full 
statement of any legal right, no matter how simple its name or brief its 
description, will often include numerous exceptive clauses, many of which 
are themselves qualified by further exceptive clauses, and so on. It may 
even be that no legal right has its boundaries fixed and stable for all time, 
that new and unanticipated conflicts with other rights may at any time 
require sharper specification of boundary lines via the method of appended 
exceptive clauses. 

Imagine a simple legal system at an early and immature stage that con- 

1 S. I. Benn and R. S. Peters, Social Principles and the Democratic State (London: 
George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1959), p. 96. 




Conflicts of Legal Rights 


73 


tains a rule granting everybody the right to move his arms through space in 
whatever direction and velocity he pleases, and also a rule granting everyone 
the right not to be punched in the nose. Nip then punches Tuck in the nose 
and claims in court that he was well within his rights, while Tuck claims 
with equally righteous conviction that his right was violated. If the relevant 
statutes contain no exceptive clauses and there are no relevant precedents, 
the court will have to make a decision about how these inconsistent statutes 
are to be interpreted. The court may turn to records of the deliberations of 
the legislature that passed the statutes in an effort to divine the original 
intentions of the lawmakers, or it may unabashedly “make law,” that is, 
further refine and specify existing law on its own. In either case, it is likely 
to have recourse to the same sort of interest-balancing procedures that often 
guide the deliberations of legislators. It will find that the defendant was 
promoting a private interest in the free and vigorous motion of his limbs, 
but that his victim’s private interest in freedom from facial pain and injury 
was more important to him than the competing interest was to the defen¬ 
dant. Evidence may be adduced to show that most or even all people who 
have both interests weigh the facial interest more heavily than the limb 
interest. Moreover, the court may discover a public interest in protecting 
faces (preventing medical expenses, vendettas, lost man hours) that is 
heavier than a public interest in promoting vigorous arm motion. Con¬ 
sequently, it may restrict the free motion right by an appropriate exceptive 
clause protecting faces, and its new rule will be binding on subsequent 
courts. In such a way, the boundaries between rights, while always in some 
degree of flux, become relatively fixed and stable; away from the boundaries, 
within each right s central core,” there will be more and more security. 


4. PRIMA-FACIE There is no way of drawing the boundaries of all 

RIGHTS individual legal rights so tightly that we can dispense 

with the need for judgment when conflicts threaten. 
Accommodation must often be worked out after the fact of conflict rather 
than prevented in advance by rules and decrees. This has led some theorists 
to proclaim that all legal discretionary rights are, in the very nature of the 
case, provisional. On this view, it is tacitly understood that recognition of 
a right can always be withdrawn or qualified when necessary to permit 
satisfaction of a conflicting claim. There are no “absolute” rights which 
always have the right of way when collisions threaten. Put another way, 
“the right to Z” is always to be understood as “the right to X unless some 
stronger claim shows up,” the “unless clause” being tacitly understood. 
According to this theory, since there is no foolproof way of knowing when 
a stronger claim will turn up, reliance upon our rights should always be 
tempered with skepticism; a right is no ironclad guarantee. Possession of a 




Conflicts of Legal Rights 


74 


discretionary right creates only a presumption in a given case at a given 
time that one also has a specific right normally derivable from it. 

Many writers call a merely presumptive right a ‘ prima-facie rights and 
oppose it, in meaning, to the “absolute” right that a person can possess 
unconditionally. The right that people have to exchange ideas freely, 
according to Richard Brandt, is a prima-facie right. The ascription of that 
right is properly translated thus: “People have a right (in the strong [abso¬ 
lute] sense) to exchange ideas freely if and whenever no conflicting more 
urgent moral considerations stand in the way.” 2 When more urgent conflict¬ 
ing considerations are not present, the prima-facie right becomes an absolute 
right, that is, the presumption of an absolute right becomes conclusive. How¬ 
ever, the presumption is subject to immediate weakening the moment 
circumstances change, so that absolute rights lapse back into prima-facie 
ones, and formerly conclusive presumptions are overturned. What cannot be 
overturned, on this view, is possession of the prima-facie right as such. One 
continues to have a claim, no matter what happens; no one can take that 
away. The validity of the claim, however, comes and goes with the changing 
circumstances. 

Upon consideration, the theory that all legal rights are prima facie in the 
sense explained seems highly paradoxical. The basis of the distinction be¬ 
tween “having a claim” and “having a valid claim ’ is that mere claims 
differ in strength and hence are subject to defeat by rival claims, whereas 
validity is not a property that can vary in degree. In respect to their validity, 
all genuine rights are equal. But if all valid claims are merely presumptive, 
their validity does not distinguish them in kind from those “mere claims” 
that are understood to have a merely presumptive character, and a useful 
distinction is undermined. Similarly, the basis of the distinction between 
rights and “mere privileges” is thrown in doubt if all rights are, like revo¬ 
cable privileges, subject to the withdrawal at any time of legal recognition. 
Yet, for all these misgivings based on the utility of ordinary distinctions, 
there remains the fact upon which the theory of prima-facie rights is based, 
namely, the apparent impossibility in a world full of conflict of treating 
any right as an unconditional guarantee. 

Perhaps the way out of this dilemma, at least in respect to legal rights, 
is to take seriously the distinction between recognition and enforcement. 
The state’s promise of enforcement to any given rightholder cannot be 
totally unconditional, but perhaps its recognition of the validity of right- 
holders’ claims can be totally unconditional (or at least much closer to being 
so than the promise of enforcement). Unconditional recognition does have 
some value, after all, even if it does not prevent infringement in every con¬ 
ceivable circumstance, for it certifies a feature that we all take to be essential 

2 Richard B. Brandt, Ethical Theory (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
1959), p. 437. 


Conflicts of Legal Rights 


75 


to rights, whether in conflict or not—that they are not something that one 
has only at specific moments, only to lose, regain, and lose again as circum¬ 
stances shift. Rights are themselves property, things we own, aftd from which 
we may not even temporarily be dispossessed. Perhaps in some circumstances 
rights may be rightfully infringed, but that is quite different from their 
being taken away and then returned. 

A less paradoxical alternative to the theory of prima-facie rights is the 
view that a person can maintain a right to X even when he is not morally 
justified in its exercise, or others are justified in not according it to him. 
Lack of moral justification for exercising a right does not entail (even 
temporary) nonpossession. Moreover, it is possible to have a duty but, 
because of conflicting duties and other moral considerations, also to have 
a moral justification for not acting in accordance with it. There is no 
contradiction in saying of a person that he ought not to perform one of his 
duties. The right correlated with that duty remains a right, even when 
honored in the breech. 

It may seem paradoxical to say that it can sometimes be right not to give 
a man his due (what he deserves or has a right to), for that is to say that 
it can be right to treat a man unjustly. But that, in fact, is precisely the 
final moral of the rejection of the theory of prima-facie rights. The realm 
of justice is not the whole of morality, and even within its spacious domain, 
certified injustice is unavoidable. This is an unpleasant fact of life that 
every moralist must accommodate. To deny that a rightly violated right 
could have been a real right at all is to deny this fact of life, and to do so 
in a way that can only encourage injustice, whether necessary or not, and 
discourage the spirit of reluctance, apology, and respect that should attend 
even justified or necessary injustice. I cannot forbear, in conclusion, quoting 
at length from Herbert Morris, who puts this point eloquently: 

It may be justifiable not to accord a man his rights; it may be right not to; it may 
be justifiable infringing his rights. But it is no less a wrong to him, no less an 
infringement. It is seriously misleading to turn all justifiable infringements into non¬ 
infringements by saying that the right is only prima-facie, as if we have in con¬ 
cluding that we should not accord a man his rights, made out a case that he had 
none. To use the language of prima-facie rights misleads, for it suggests that a 
presumption of the existence of a right has been overcome in these cases where 
all that can be said is that the presumption in favor of according a man his rights 
has been overcome. 3 

Still, the point of the- prima-facie right theorists may tell when put in 
another way. When they speak about prima-facie rights they talk in a man¬ 
ner appropriate to ideal directives, not to specific and discretionary rights; 
mere presumptiveness is not unbecoming in a guiding ideal, though it be 
fatal to the very existence of an established right. 

3 Herbert Morris, “Persons and Punishment,” The Monist (October 1968), p. 499. 




Conflicts of Legal Rights 


76 


5. TRANSCATEGORIAL How can conflicts between legal rights., which are 
CONFLICTS intolerable in any legal system aspiring to consistency, 

be obviated, or, failing that, be resolved? In some 
cases, relatively clear rules can be formulated for determining the right of 
way in anticipation of right-collisions. More typically, however, our question 
calls for the formulation of policy for dealing with conflicts in the absence 
of precise rules. When there are applicable rules for determining the right 
of way in a given case, the colliding interests cannot both be treated as 
rights. If the rule states that all cars may proceed carefully through inter¬ 
sections but that red cars always have precedence over blue ones, then the 
driver of a blue car has a general right to proceed through intersections 
unless a red car is doing the same, and that right (so qualified) is not in 
conflict with the right of the red car driver. (Subordination is not a form 
of conflict!) The blue car driver simply has no right against the red car 
driver in the first place. Many conflict situations, however, are much more 
complicated than this, and therefore not subject to a priori resolutions via 
the application of simple right of way rules. 

Formulation of policies for dealing with the more complex conflicts 
necessarily requires assessment of the protected interests involved. The diffi¬ 
culty is that we often cannot say in a general way which interests are the 
weightiest. It is hard enough balancing types of interests in the abstract, 
when we speak of ‘‘the Interest (with a capital I) in something” as if it 
were an impersonal entity belonging to no one in particular, but it becomes 
more difficult still when we must weigh the conflicting interests of particular 
persons in particular cases without knowing how heavily they sit on the 
scale. In these cases, we are not out to determine how heavy a given Interest 
is generally, but how heavy an interest of a given general kind is when it 
belongs to a particular litigant in a particular case. Insofar as we think that 
certain kinds of conflict can be obviated by simple “right of way” rules, the 
formulation of such rules might best be understood as a task for an ideal 
legislature. When the type of conflict seems to require instead policies for 
the guidance of interest balancing in particular cases, perhaps the cautious 
philosopher should think of it as a question for some “ideal court.” 

Conflicts between personal and property rights are especially controversial 
examples of transcategorial conflict. It is sometimes said that in a conflict 
between a property right and a personal (i.e., nonproperty) right, the 
personal right always has precedence. This generalization, which makes 
about as much sense as the assertion that red things are always heavier than 
green things, is usually made by people who have taken category labels far 
too seriously. It is not difficult to think of circumstances in which a specific 
personal right belonging to John Doe should be given priority over a 
specific property right belonging to Richard Roe, but it is equally easy to 
think of examples where the priority relation is reversed. Doe’s ownership 



Conflicts of Legal Rights 


77 


of a lot and house confers on him the right to possess, enjoy, use, or dispose 
of n as he sees fit; but if he sees fit to use it in such a way as to cause a 
widespread and nauseating stench, nerve-shattering noise, or dangerous 

filbL dT the adjacent P ubllc stree «> his property rights are subject to justi¬ 
fiable delimitation in order to protect what may be more important personal 

(and property) rights of neighbors and passersby. On the other hand, it is 
another 7 YeTh^h 1 h ^ ^ ^ ^ right 40 make love one 

their It ’ f hey Ch ° OSe t0 eX6rC SE this right in Mr ' Roe ’ s flower beds 
their neighbor’s property rights take precedence. 

Can it not be said that rights of the one category are “on the whole” more 

3ali z n ation a t ^ ‘ • * 7- ° ther? Even tUs is P robab ly broad a 
L uti itv S an t m any k iS ^sufficiently Precise to have 

ny utility. Suppose we could give every specific property right and every 

specific persona right a “score” and place it in I ranking order on some 

pfeXes'taf r tanCe '” Wh3t C ° Uld We 6XpeCt *° find? ° ur exam - 

throughoiu w>b SPeC t ““Tf ° f each * ype ° f right would be interspersed 
throughout with instances of the other kind. It would be very much like 

ranking human beings of different races, sexes, or classes in reSpLt to score! 

an objective test of intelligence, strength, or resistance to disease Even if 

one group should have a heavier concentration of scores at !he top end 

score'or uLl *^7* COncen ? ation at the ^ end, making its average 
score or posmon higher, we could still expect a large degree of overlap in 

“on tliTwM” migh ‘ eVe " bE POSSiWe that the P° orer gr°up 

on the whole contributed the individual with the single highest score and 

he better group “on the whole” contributed the individual with the Jingle 

be oth rt if we were c ° mpa ™ g 311 b ™ 

W th (say) all chimpanzees. In that case we could expect to find that the 
poorest human score would still be above the highest chimp score, and 

thlt w!y si 7atT S6Parate 7 tWO ’ H tbe grading ° f rightS came out 

tha! r h be “ 0St tnvla perSOnal right was sti11 more important 
than the most serious property right, or if there were only a tiny amount of 

overlap rather than general interdispersion, then the results wou“ 2 

•M only , few well-known 

nVb? T be reS ln the Same wa y- But nobody’s ranking of 
rights either his own or others’, comes out that simply. S 

described 7 lik ™ ded P ersons to a g«* that particular narrowly 

scribed subclasses of rights m one category are always to be treated Is 

more important than certain precisely described subclasses of rights in 

rTglt to do 77' L f S ! at °7 -° r eXample> “ ay agree that ever y one has a 
do 7 TO ', 7 7 8 W ° Uld infringe SOmeone else ’ s to 

to y ’ r effeCb t0 dlrect that a11 “"flints in the future between rights 

to Y and rights to Y are to be resolved uniformly in favor of Y More 

precisely, since this is achieved by a new law, the rights themselves have been 







Conflicts of Legal Rights 


78 


redefined so that they no longer can conflict There no longer is such aThing 
as a right to do X simply, for it has been replaced by a right to do X except 
when ?t would prevent others from doing Y,” and that new right obviously 

cannot be in conflict with anyone’s right to do Y. . 

Before the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1965, any Aiaeron Neg 
who wished to drive his family from (say) Washington, D.C ., to Jackson 
Mississippi, ran the risk of severe inconvenience and even J "^ 
highway facilities were by local custom segregated he could P „ 

when it would be necessary to drive miles out of his way to find a piAhc 
rest room, a place to eat, or, more importantly, lodgings for the n g • 
Owners of gas stations, restaurants, and motels had the lega ng 1 
accept or exclude customers as they saw fit, and most of them saw fit to 
exercise their property rights by excluding all Negroes. Since passage of the 
Civil Rights Law, things must be described differently. Southern homeowners 
still have the right (derived from their ownership) to exclude anyone from 
their property, but those who are permitted to serve the public by providing 
SodU in exchange fee -na. «« - puhije on non 

at all. (More exactly, their exclusions cannot be merely arbitrary.) Th 
former right to exclude anyone at all from their property has now been 
replaced by the right to exclude anyone except those applying for licensed 
and advertised services (and who are not drunk disorderly 
Congress decided that a motorist’s right not to be excluded on arbitrary 
grounds from hotels and restaurants along public highways n always mor 
fmportant than the innkeeper’s right to serve whomever he pleaw. 
the latter right was changed in such a way that it can never conflict with 

th Th°™ort of legislative carving of an exception out of a previously’existing 
right bears some resemblance to what is often done by private nghthcild 
themselves through contracts and other special legal devices T ^*e right 
of a landowner may be subject to, and limited by that of a tenant to the 
temporary use of the property; or to the right of a mortgagee to sell or 
take possession; or to the right of a neighboring landowner to the use 
i tTo^cr «« *c righ! .1 .h. vccdo, of ,,d 

restrictive covenants entered into by the purchaser as to the use of it, fo 
example.^ a covenant not to build upon it - The right in these examples 
that “limits or derogates from some more general right bel ° n §‘ ng t0 S °“ 
other person” 4 5 is called by lawyers an encumbrance, or right over the 
property of someone else.” An encumbrance upon another person s rig 
may be itself subject to another encumbrance, as when a tenant s " ble **> 
principle there is no reason why the process cannot go on indefinitely. What 

4 John galmond, Jurisprudence, 11th ed„ ed. Glanville Williams (London: Sweet & 
Maxwell Ltd., 1957), p. 294. 

5 Salmond, Jurisprudence , p. 294. 



Conflicts of Legal Rights 


79 


is important for present purposes is that an encumbrance on a .right is not 
a conflict between the rights of different parties, but an agreed method for 
redrawing right-boundaries, at least temporarily, so as to prevent conflict. 

Legislatively restricted rights and encumbranced rights, even thoug t ey 
can be described as rights with exceptive clauses, are not the same as so- 
called “prima-facie” rights, and are not vulnerable to the same objections. 
A restricted or encumbranced right is a right to do X except m certain 
definitely and exhaustively described circumstances, whereas a pnma-facie 
right is a right to do * except when there is “some more prgent moral 
consideration,” its nature unspecified and open-ended, that stands m the 
way. 


A controversy has raged in recent years over whether 
constitutional rights, especially those guaranteed by 
the First Amendment, should be interpreted by the 
courts as “absolute.” Many First Amendment cases 
were decided by the U.S. Supreme Court in the 
period from 1959-1962 over the eloquent dissents of Justice Hugo Black, 
the leading spokesman for the “absolutist” position. Justice Black m one case 
that “the First Amendment means what it ” wtlat 


6. THE CONCEPT 
OF AN ABSOLUTE 
CONSTITUTIONAL 
RIGHT 


55fi X\TU„4- tho Tmt'OF 


Amendment says is: 


Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of r ^ I0n > 

the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or ° f piess, or 

the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for 

a redress of .grievances. 


“I read ‘no law. . .abridging,’ ” said Justice Black, “to mean no law abridg¬ 
ing” 6 7 which is to say (he makes clear) that the First Amendment prohibi¬ 
tion is complete, exceptionless, and unconditional: “. . .the principles of the 
First Amendment are stated in precise and mandatory terms and unless they 
are applied in those terms, the freedoms of religion, speech, press, assemb y, 
and petition will have no effective protection.” 8 ... . 

The opposing position, and the one that actually prevailed m the early 
1960’s is most frequently associated with the late Justice Felix Frankfurter. 
In this view, there are no absolute rights, even in the First Amendment, and 
when the interest protected by a constitutional right conflicts with a weightier 
interest in public safety or public order, the courts must permit infringe¬ 
ment of the right. In one free speech case, Frankfurter declared that The 
demands of free speech in a democratic society as well as the interest m 
national security are better served by candid and informed weighing of the 


6 Barenblatt v. United States, 360 U.S. 109, 143-44 (1959). Dissenting opinion. 

7 Smith v. California, 361 U.S. 147, 157 (1959). Concurring opinion. 

8 Wilkinson v. United States, 365 U.S. 399, 422-23 (1961). Dissenting opinion. 



Conflicts of Legal Rights 


80 


competing interests, within the confines of the judicial process, than by 
announcing ogmas too inflexible for the. . .problems to be solved” 9 The 
alternative to inflexible dogmas is the method of ad hoc “interest-balancing ” 
Even when a judicially recognized constitutional right is on one side of the 
balance it might be invaded or even “infringed” when the interest on the 
other side more than balances it: 

We agree that compulsory disclosure of the names of an organization’s members 

But to sav ta thi S in m an r S mf, ? Se Constitutionall y Protected rights of association.... 
ay this much is only to recognize one of the points of reference from 

„ ‘ C f h , anay r S . mUSt begin ' ••• Against the impediments which particular govem- 

we 1 /I s at r Cau f s t0 emire freedom of “ divi dual action, there must be 
weighed the value to the public of the end which the regulation may achieve.™ 

It is of course beyond the scope of this work to decide whether any 
American constitutional rights are absolute. The philosophically prior ques¬ 
tion 1S ^ How could a right be “absolute?” What can it mean to say of a 
right that it is absolute? One source of confusion can be eliminated by 
lstmction etween a right s scope and its degree of incumbency within 
that scope. It is plain that such First Amendment rights as free speech 
cannot be unlimited m scope; no one can expect the courts to guarantee 
his right to say anything, any time, any place. If there were such a right 
here could be no law of defamation, no protection against fraud, no penalty 
for solicitation to crime, and, in short, no protection of other rights as vital 
to private and public interests as free speech itself. Consequently, various 
implicit exceptive clauses must be understood as part of the rule that spells 
out the right to free speech. Some of these clauses presumably were under¬ 
stood at the time the First Amendment was adopted, for there was even then 
a well-developed body of law on defamation, fraud, incitement, and solicita¬ 
tion Other exceptions have no doubt developed slowly through the piece¬ 
meal evolution of the common law and forced judicial clarifications of 
borderline cases As a result, the boundaries of the right’s domain have 
become reasonably clear and stable, though there may still be occasional 

waverings, and controversial marginal cases on both sides of the boundaries 
may always exist. 

First Amendment rights, then, are not “absolute” in the sense of “un- 
lmited in scope”: the scope of free speech must necessarily be narrower 
than the range of all possible speech. But that is no reason why these rights 
as qualified by exceptive clauses, cannot be absolute in the sense of laying 
unconditionally incumbent duties of respect and enforcement upon the 
courts A rule with exceptive clauses may itself have no exceptions. A First 

m m d l n j n - J 1 ? 111 ’ ln Short ’ ™ ay be limited in extent by the definitions of 
established judicial rules, yet be unconditionally obligatory within its proper 

9 Dennis v. United States, 341 U.S. 524-25 (1951). 

10 Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board, 367 U.S. 190-91 (1961). 



81 


Conflicts of Legal Rights 

domain. The courts would decide whether a given exercise of free speech, 
for example, falls clearly within the boundaries of First Amendment protec¬ 
tion; if it does, then any statute that prohibits it, or any governmental action 
that restricts it, must be declared unconstitutional. If the speech m question 
falls in the vague no man’s land near the right’s wavering boundaries, the 
court must further clarify the law and fix its boundaries >y whatever 
procedures of constitutional interpretation (perhaps including “interest- 
balancing”) are open to it. But once having pronounced the act m question 
to be within the area of constitutional protection, on the intelligible abso- 
lutistic” view we are considering, it is no longer open to the court to weigh 
that protection against other considerations, for the constitution says that 
its guaranteed rights, once correctly determined, always have more weight 
than any possible combination of opposing interests, private or public. 

The “defining of absolutes” method is possible only in a legal system of 
sufficient maturity to have reasonably settled boundary lines, established 
after much conflict and redefinition through explicit and implicitly under¬ 
stood exceptive clauses, between the various rights it confers. The method 
presupposes that each right, no matter how vague its boundaries at the 
periphery, has a central core of clear and certain cases that are (unless 
resort is made to constitutional amendment) permanently and uncondi¬ 
tionally established. Thus, it is always open to an American citizen, without 
any question, to express in speech or writing his opinion that a policy of his 
government is unwise, unjust, or otherwise mistaken, or his opinion as to 
“what the public welfare requires.” 11 It is unconditionally open to an 
American to receive without interference the sacraments of his church, or 
to have some time and place to engage in prayer or worship, or simply to 
be a member of a church. These activities are at the “hard core” of the 
free exercise of religion right, well away from the boundaries with other 
rights, unrestricted by legislated exceptive clauses, and unencumbranced. 

Laurent Frantz has pointed out that some constitutional rights other than 
those in the First Amendment are universally accepted as absolutely uncon¬ 
ditional in their central core cases. If an accused person is to be denied the 
right to counsel, the Constitution will have to be amended first, for its 
guarantee is not subject to judicial overruling as a result of “interest-balanc¬ 
ing” in a given case. It is simply not open to courts to balance a clearly 
defined and acknowledged right against any interests, even those in public 
safety and public welfare. If, on the other hand, a court could weigh 
interests against acknowledged core cases of constitutional rights, case by 
case, then the results might be contrary to everyone’s present understanding: 

Defendants in criminal cases can be tried in secret, or held incommunicado without 
trial, can be denied knowledge of the accusation against them, and the right to 

11 Laurent B. Frantz, “The First Amendment in the Balance,” Yale Law Journal, 
LXXI (1962), 1438. 




Conflicts of Legal Rights 


82 


counsel, and the right to call witnesses in their own defense, and the right to trial 
y jury. Ex post facto laws and bills of attainder can be passed. Habeas corpus can 
be suspended, though there is neither rebellion nor invasion. Private property can 
be taken for public use without just, or any, compensation. Suffrage qualifications 
based on sex or race can be remstituted. Anything which the Constitution says 
cannot be done can be done, if Congress thinks and the Court agrees (or is unwilling 
to set aside the congressional judgment) that the interests thereby served outweighed 
those which were sacrificed. Thus the whole idea of a government of limited 
powers, and of a written constitution as a device for attaining that end, is at least 
potentially at stake. 12 


Are these hard core rights never, under any conceivable circumstances, 
abndgeable? (They are of course subject to change by constitutional amend¬ 
ment, but that is another matter.) Is an individual to be given his rights 
even if the whole public safety or welfare must be sacrificed in the process, 
or national independence lost as a consequence? Would it not be better 
m extreme emergencies, where all that is precious rides on what we do, to 
deny a given individual his opinion, his sacrament, his trial by jury? Better, 
perhaps, or wiser, or more prudent, or even more justifiable on the whole, 
but still a desperate emergency measure, like the amputation of a limb. It 
would be the sacrifice of legality itself, of justice, of an undenied right, for 
the sake of something held even more important Perhaps courts ought to 
infringe rights m desperate circumstances, but that can never be their 
understood legal function. If or when judges take such desperate extralegal " 
steps, their actions are special, ad hoc, and presumably sorrowful infringe¬ 
ments or suspensions of rights, not the authoritative redefining of right- 
boundaries, or the official denial that a right existed in the first place. “One’s 
need for a new car,” wrote Frantz, “may be balanced against the other uses 
to which the same money might be put but not against ‘Thou shalt not 
steal.’ ” 13 In truly extraordinary circumstances, one might conceivably be 
justified, in one’s own conscience, in stealing another’s car, but that justifica¬ 
tion doesn’t affect the shape of the other’s property rights. A justified viola¬ 
tion of another’s legal rights is still a violation of his rights, which one can 

never have a legal right to do. The point applies even to violations by courts 
of law. 

A guaranteed right, “absolute” within its established sphere, adds some¬ 
thing of great importance to a liberty, or a “mere privilege,” or a “right” 
that is vulnerable to overturning by interest-balancing procedures. When the 
government leaves me at liberty (merely) to do X, it tells me in effect that 
I may do Z if I can, but it will not protect me by imposing a duty of 
noninterference upon others. A liberty is a permission without a protection. 

A mere privilege” may or may not add protection to the permission. When 
it does, the privilege looks more like a right than like a mere liberty. Unlike 

12 Frantz, “The First Amendment in the Balance,” 1445. 

13 Frantz, “The First Amendment in the Balance,” 1440. 



Conflicts of Legal Rights 


83 


rights, however, neither the permission nor the continued protection are 
assured; either can be withdrawn at any time at the state’s pleasure, although 
the holder of a privilege will be warned in advance that withdrawal is 
coming. It would be otherwise with a so-called “nonabsolute right.” When 
the government grants me a “right” that is vulnerable to interest-balancing 
tests even at its core, it tells me, in effect, that I may do X and others may 
not interfere, but that this permission cum protection does not apply when¬ 
ever the state finds it useful to withdraw it, without prior warning, in a given 
case. “When you speak quietly at a private gathering,” says the state, “you 
may say anything you please about the wisdom of a government policy 
unless a court later determines that interfering with your right at the time 
was more conducive to the public interest than protecting it.” Such a right 
begins to resemble a so-called prima-facie right in that its exceptive clause 
is virtually unspecified and unlimited. It is only a small parody to interpret 
the prima-facie right as permission to do anything except what one shouldn’t, 
and to interpret the nonabsolute “right” as permission to do anything for 
which permission is not subsequently withdrawn. These are hardly “rights” 
that one can stand upon, demand, fight for, or treasure. They are “rights” 
that make men humble, not claims that make men bold. 





CHAPTER SIX 


Human 

Rights 


1. MORAL RIGHTS Legal and institutional rights are typically conferred 

by specific rules recorded in handbooks of regulations 
that can be observed and studied by the citizens or members subject to the 
rules. But not all rights are derived from such clearly visible laws and 
institutional regulations. On many occasions we assert that someone has a 
right to something even though we know there are no regulations or laws 
conferring such a right. Such talk clearly makes sense, so any theory of the 
nature of rights that cannot account for it is radically defective. 

The term “ moral r i ght s” can be applied to all_rights that are held to 
jexist prio r to , or independently of, any legal or institutional rules. Moral 
rights so conceived form a genus^divisible into various species of rights having 
little in common except that they are not (necessarily) legal or institutional. 
The following are the main specific senses of “moral right”: (1) A conven ¬ 
tion al li ght is one derived from established custom s and expectations, 
whether or not recognized by law (e.g., an old woman’s right to a young 
man’s seat on a subway train). (2) An ideal righ t is not necessarily an actual 
right of any kind, but is rather (institutional or 

conventional) .right, and would be so in a better or ideal legal system or 


84 



85 


Human Rights 

conventional code. (3) A e amiksSm? ri £ ht is a claim the recognition of 
which as valid is called for, not (necessarily) by actual or ideal rules or 
conventions, but rather by the principles of an enlightened individual con¬ 
science. (4) An exercise right is not, strictly speaking, a right at all, though 
it is so-called in popular usage; it is simply moral justification m the exercise 
of a right of some other kind, the latter right remaining in one’s possession 
and unaffected by considerations bearing on the rightness or wrongness, of 
its exercising. When a person speaks of a moral right, he may be referring 
to a generically moral right not further specified, or to a right in one of 
these four specific senses; sometimes the context does not reveal which 
sense of “moral” is employed, and the possibility of equivocation is always 
present. 


2. HUMAN RIGHTS 


Among the rights that are commonly said to be moral 
in the generic sense (that is, independent of legal or 
other institutional recognition) are some also called “human rights.” Human 
rights are sometimes understood to be id&it.l rights, some time s .conscientiou 
rights, and lometim es both. In any case, they are held to bedosely associated 
With actual d^Tiniiven human right is an ideal right, then human 
rightholders do or will have a claim against political legislators to convert 
(eventually) their “moral right” into a positive legal one. If the human 
right in question is a conscientious right, then it is an actual claim against 
private individuals for a certain kind of treatment—a claim that holds now , 
whatever the positive law may say about it. # 

I shall define “ human rights” to be generically^m?r^ 
mentally important kind held equally by all human beings, unconditionally 
and unalterably! Whether these rights are “moral” in any of the more precise 
senses, Fshail^leave an open question to be settled by argument, not defini¬ 
tion. Of course, it is also an open question whether there are any human 
rights and, if so, just what those rights are. AU-fitfe. nghts that have been 
characterized as “natural.rights” in thejeading mamfestpes 1 can % alsp. he called 
Tiumai^ rig to sh a 11 „ be using the terms, not ah hpman rights a^e 

also JdY* definition natural rights. The theory of natural rights asserts not 
only that there are certain human rights, but also that these rights have 
certain further epistemic properties and a certain metaphysical status. In 
respect to questions of moral ontology and moral epistemology, the theory 
of human rights is neutral. Finally, it should be noticed that our definition 
includes the phrase “all human beings” but does not say “only human 
beings,” so that a human right held by animals is not excluded by definition. 

In addition to the characteristics mentioned in our definition, human 

1 E.g. the American Declaration of Independence (1776), the Virginia Bill of Rights 
(1775), and the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of Citizens (1789). 






Human Rights 


86 


rights have also been said to be “absolute.” Sometimes this is simply a 
redundancy, another way of referring to the properties of universality and 
inalienability; but sometimes ‘^absojutenras” is meant to refer to an addi¬ 
tional characteristic, which in turn is subject to at least three interpretations. 
Human rights can be absolute, first, only in the sense that all rights are 
absolute, namely, jjm^nditionally i ncumbent within the limits of their well- 
d£%ed jcope. Second, a human right might be” held to”be'lTs^ute^Tnlhe 
sense that the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, as pro¬ 
claimed in the Declaration of Independence, are most plausibly interpreted 
as absolute, namely, as “idc^directives” to relevant parties to “do their 
best’’ for the values involved. If the state has seriously considered Doe’s right 
to his land, done its best to find alternative routes for a public road, and 
compensated Doe as generously as possible before expropriating him by 
eminent domain, it has faithfully discharged its duty of “ due conside ration” 
that is ' the , cq^lative ^property” conceived simplfaT’an 

ideal directive. If a human right is absolute only in the sense in which an 
ideal directive is absolute, then it is satisfied whenever it is given the serious 
and respectful consideration it always deserves, even when that consideration 
is followed by a reluctant invasion of its corresponding interest. 

The strongest and most interesting sense of “absolute” attributed to rights 
is that of being “absolutely exceptionless” not only within a limited scope 
but throughout a scope itself unlimited. The right to free speech would be 
absolute in this sense if it protected all speech without exception in all 
circumstances. In that case, the limits of the right would correspond with the 
limit of the form of conduct specified, and once these wide boundaries had 
been defined, no further boundary adjustments, incursions or encumbrances, 
legislative restrictions, or conditions for emergency suspensions would be 
permitted. For a human right to have this character it would have to be 
such that no conflicts with other human rights, either of the same or another 
type, would be possible. 

Some formulations of human rights might be passed off as absolute in 
the strongest sense merely because they are so vaguely put. Some are formu¬ 
lated in conditional language (“a right to adequate nutrition if or when 
food is available”) and then held to be absolute qua conditional. Other 
rights, put in glittering and general language (“a right to be treated like 
a human being,” “a right to be treated like a person, not a thing”) are 
safely held to be absolute because without detailed specification they yield 
few clear and uncontroversial injunctions. Others are formulated in language 
containing “standard-bearing terms” such as “reasonable,” “proper,” or 
“worthy,” without any clue to the standards to be employed in applying 
these terms. Thus it is said that all men (like all animals) have a right not 
to be treated cruelly. So far, so good; there can be no exceptions to that 
right. But its “absoluteness” can be seen to be merely formal when one 




Human Rights 


87 


considers that cruel treatment is treatment that inflicts unnecessary, un¬ 
reasonable, or improper suffering on its victim. The air of self-evidence and 
security beyond all controversy immediately disappears from this human 
right when men come to propose and debate precise standards of necessity, 
reasonableness, and propriety. 

We should not despair, however, of finding explicit standards of (say) 
cruelty that will give human rights content and yet leave them plausible 
candidates for absoluteness in the strong sense. The right not to be tortured, 
for example, comes close to exhaustive definability in nonstandard-bearing 
terms, and may be such that it cannot conflict with other rights, including 
other human rights, and can therefore be treated as categorical and excep¬ 
tionless, If torture is still too vague a term, we can give exact empirical 
descriptions of the Chinese Water Torture, the Bamboo Fingernail Torture, 
and so on, and then claim that everyone has an absolutely exceptionless 
right in every conceivable circumstance not to be treated in any of those 
precisely described ways. Does this right pass the test of nonconflict with 
other rights? 

Suppose a foreign tyrant of Caligulan character demands of our govern¬ 
ment that it seize certain political critics, imprison them, and slowly torture 
them to death, and threatens that unless that is done, his police will seize 
the members of our diplomatic staff in his country and torture them to 
de^th. At first sight this appears to be an authentic case of conflict between 
human rights, in that it would be impossible to do anything that would 
have as its consequence the fulfillment of everyone’s right not to be tortured. 
What we should say about this blackmail situation if we wish to maintain 
that the right not to be tortured is nevertheless absolute (exceptionless and 
nonconflictable) is as follows. If the political critics in our grasp have a 
human right never to be tortured, then we have a categorical duty not to 
torture them. Thus, we ought not and will not torture them. We know, 
however, that this is likely to lead to the torture of the diplomatic hostages. 
We should therefore make every effort to dissuade Caligula, perhaps even 
through military pressure, not to carry out his threat. If Caligula never¬ 
theless tortures his hostages, their rights have been infringed, but by 
Caligula, not by us. 

All cases of apparent conflict of rights not to be tortured can be treated 
in this way. Whenever it is impossible to honor all of them, the situation 
causing that impossibility is itself the voluntary creation of human beings. 
Nothing in nature itself can ever bring such a conflict into existence. A 
tyrant’s threat is in this respect unlike a plague that renders it impossible 
for everybody to get enough to eat. It would be idle to claim that the right 
to enough food is an absolute, categorial right, exceptionless in every 
conceivable circumstance, because we cannot legislate over nature. But we 
can legislate for man (the argument continues), and this is a plausible way 




Human Rights 


88 


to do it: No acts of torture anywhere at any time are ever to he permitted. 
All human beings can thus be possessed of a right that is absolutely excep¬ 
tionless. That we have no guarantee that some people somewhere won’t 
violate it or try to force us to violate it is no argument against the “legisla¬ 
tion” itself. 

There is therefore no objection in principle to the idea of human rights 
that are absolute in the sense of being categorically exceptionless. It is 
another question as to whether there are such rights, and what they might 
be. The most plausible candidates, like the right not to be tortured, will be 
passive negative rights, that is, rights not to be done to by others in certain 
ways. It is more difficult to think of active negative rights (rights not to be 
interfered with) or positive rights (rights to be done to in certain ways) 
as absolutely exceptionless. The positive rights to be given certain essentials 
—food, shelter, security, education—clearly depend upon the existence of 
an adequate supply, something that cannot be guaranteed categorically and 
universally. 

If absoluteness in this strong sense is made part of the very meaning of 
the expression “human right,” then it would seem that there is a lamentable 
paucity of human rights, if any at all. Clarity will best be served, I think, 
if we keep “absoluteness” out of the definition of “human right.” Two 
questions can then be kept separate: (1) Are there any human rights, i.e., 
generically moral, unforfeitable, irrevocable rights held equally and uni¬ 
versally by human beings (at least)? (2) If so, are any of these rights 
absolute? We turn now to a consideration of the grounds for thinking 
that there are human rights, so defined. 


3. GROUNDS FOR Despite its current popularity, the theory that there 

EQUALITY are rights held equally by all human beings continues 

to trouble philosophers. It is natural for them to 
imagine skeptics asking: “Why all human beings equally, and not only, or 
primarily, the deserving ones?” The skeptical question still has great force. 
To appreciate this we have only to consider that the theory of human rights 
requires that in certain basic ways we treat even congenital idiots and 
convicted mass murderers the same as everyone else. 

To appreciate fully how revolutionary the idea of equal human rights 
was, recall how European society was organized during the centuries preced¬ 
ing the revolutionary period. The feudal system recognized distinct heredi¬ 
tary castes, each with its peculiar and irreducible legal status defined by 
elaborate sets of rights and duties. A legal status in the relevant sense differs 
from mere social roles like father, promiser, and farmer, in part because it 
is entirely hereditary and unmodifiable by voluntary arrangements. The 
rights men had as a matter of status were theirs as royalty, nobility, clergy, 



Human Rights 


89 


serfs, and so on; there was nothing “equal” about these statue; rights. Human 
rights as a revolutionary idea, were associated with the 1 g 

status’society where the powers of the high and mighty were limited every¬ 
where by thl rights all persons derived from their “status” as human beings. 

The single status society differs strikingly from a society with:fixed .herd* 
tarv caste distinctions as well as from a purely mentanan society m which 
all political rights are based on merit alone. Gregory Vlastos m an important 
article, 2 has ‘argued that the doctrine of universal equa human right 
presupposes a concept of equal and universal human worth that is to be 
sharply" distinguished from the idea of human merits We gradej” 
according to their talents, skills, character and personality traits and other 
rankable^qualities, but in respect to “human worth” (by detot^aU 
men must get equal grades. Indeed, “human worth is not a grad g 
concept” at all. In this it differs from every kind of merit, including, 
course, moral merit, in respect to which there are vast inequalityamong 
persons. In a society based on human rights, at least some rights w11 belong 
irrevocably to fools and rogues as well as to everyone else. These are the 
rights, Vlastos suggests, that are based on the worth human beings have as 
individuals, quite apart from their valuable qualities. 

Acknowledging another person’s “human worth is m one respect 
ingly similar to (but by no means identical with) town* another person 
tJ neither is dependent on the grades we give to the other P ers ° n ^ . 

“Constancy of affection in the face of variations of merit is one of the surest 
tests of whether a parent does love a child.” 3 A parent may admit e one 
child more than another, or like (in the sense of enjoy) one more tha 
another, or judge one higher than another; but it is a necessary condition of 
parental love that it not fluctuate with these responses to merit. Lovei u 
response to a person as an individual, not as a dispensible possessor of meri- 

t0 Z:^k at least where the idea of human rights is a common¬ 
place, the notion of human worth transfers easily to strangers whom we m 
no sense love. “If I see a stranger in danger of drowning, writes Vlasta , 
am not likely to ask myself questions about his moral character be ore going 
to his aid. ... My obligation here is to a man, to any man m such ^rcum- 
stances not to a good man.” 4 The familiarity of this example indicates tha 
we attach a value (“worth”) to any human life, no matter what the con¬ 
ceivable character of its possessor. Since this is a response to value whoUy 
independent of perceived qualities, it is by definition a response o w 
Vlastos calls “human worth.” There are many such examples: 

2 Gregory Vlastos, “Justice and Equality,” in %if Br!mdt 

(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1962), pp. 31 72. 

3 Vlastos, “Justice and Equality,” p. 44. 

4 Vlastos, “Justice and Equality,” p. 47. 



Human Rights 


90 


mi mm 

P p aTot:rr ^ ff T f : sk ^ 

A society based on human rights is actually closer to the old fixed status 

bal £hts P lre d' Mr ^ & ^ t0 the societ y in which aI1 

asic rights are distributed m proportion to merit. Some rights in any society 

of menTd'f 'T T ^ ^ °" ^ but the ^ * a ‘ are independent 
1 define the c ass ln wh ich human rights are located. 

inen rt tteat f a " ? e ° Ple 6qUaIIy “ any reSpect in the face of manifest 
inequalities of merit among them? The skeptic’s challenge has not been met 

Wl CErta :S n °‘ diSP ° Sed ° f by the repl y that a » humans are equal in’ 
moral worth, whatever their other differences. No skeptic who denies 

, easil 4 convinced that there is equal ■— 

every mher k,.d f v,*™ W ° rth ” ^ te ’ if h is f^rically like 
every other kind of worth it is a supervenient property,6 i. e a property 

possessed by something in virtue of some other property or proper* 7t 

possesses. It is impossible that two things should be alike in eveP othe 

Sbi aV t dfcntd r ° f W ° rth ’ ** d ^ee ° f worlhiLeS 

he A 7 i? r cl ^ aractenstlcs - If one is more worthy than the other it must 
be because they have different properties. Similarly, if two things or two 

mo r nTom e aV o e th 7 W ° rth ^ ^ ° f W ° rth) ’ the y must have * com¬ 
mon some other characteristic a nonvalue characteristic-that is the basis 

Philosophical 3 h™ 0 " 1 BU f / hat might this common characteristic be? 

quei Sh a h T 10nS " ^ W replied t0 this Intimate 

M^olil T ermg Vanety ° f anSWerS ’ almost a11 of *em inadequate. 
Most philosophers agree with their skeptical challengers that if there are 

certain rights possessed by all men independently of their merits, this mus 

mspeTtX tT ^ ^ , ineqUaIitieS ’ aU ““ « » — one 

respect that is of supreme moral importance. In attempting to identify this 

respect, some mention other value characteristics ; some opt for certain 
5 Vlastos, “Justice and Equality/’ p. 47. 

pp R 80 I ff. Hare ’ ^ UngUage ° f M ° ra!s (° xfOTd: 0rfOT d University Press, 1952), 



Human Rights 


91 


natural capacities, no matter how fully realized, such as rationality or 
natural vulnerabilities, such as the liability to pain and su ^ mg ’ ^ 
leave the empirical world altogether in search of transcendental properties, 
an intrinsic dignity attaching to all human beings as ‘ ends in themselve ^ 
None of this has proved very satisfactory. The intrinsically moral qualities 
invoked to explain equal human worth must rest, as moral qualities, on som 
common nonvalue characteristics which are their bases or determinants 
question about the nature of the common characteristic arises f 
about them. If human beings have human worth because of th 
pricelessness” or “infinite value,” asks the skeptic, where do th “ e ( xtra " 
vagantly dimensioned endowments come from? In virtue of what other tra 
can they be properly ascribed? These questions seem even more appropr«te 
and difficult to answer than the question that was their occasion, 
still, the “moral property” approach often involves, m the words of A. 1. 
Melden “the radical muddle that if one could somehow see. . .into the very 
depths of a person’s being, one would somehow find a quality of sheer 
preciousness in itself that endows a person with his status as the possessor 
of a right.” 7 Part of the muddle consists in treating the mysterious value 
property “preciousness” as if it were not supervenient upon other character¬ 
istics, and hence not a genuine value characteristic at all. Sure y o 
a person as precious is to see him at he is and therefore precious. It is not o 
see the preciousness direcdy, as one might see a dab of paint on a wall 
Preciousness is not “a kind of mystic moral badge” worn on the wall of the 
soul; it is a way of valuing something based on an awareness of the kind 

° f Empirical characteristics, especially natural capabilities and vulnerabilities, 
are somewhat more plausible candidates for grounds of human worth, since 
their candidacies do not involve regresses or logical muddles. But very 
more than that can be said for them. The capability most commonly favored 
for this role is man’s unique rationality. Some men are more rational than 
others however, and we do not want it to follow that the more rational are 
the more worthy, for that would be to make variable merit a ground for 
invariant worth. It might be said that all men, even the most irrational, have 
the potential to be rational, but again it would seem that even these universal 
potentials are unequal. Perhaps what is meant is that all men have the 
potential to be at least minimally rational, that is, to measure up to a 
modest standard that exceeds anything lower animals can reach. That may 
be true in some extremely weak sense of “potential (,n which even an 
irreparably brain-damaged idiot still has the “potential to be rationa1) but 
it is difficult to discern any intuitive connection between such weak pot - 
tiality and human worth. In more familiar senses of potential, many 
possessors of human rights are not even potentially rational. 

1 A. I. Melden, Rights and Right Conduct (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1959), p. 80. 





Human Rights 


92 


The natural vulnerability most commonly favored as a ground of human 

ent oH y - t0 , Pain and SUfferfng - ™ S Criterf0n ^0 pZh 

th!7lt doeTh “"S T r m0ml Cammuni * but we needn ’‘ ^ over 

£ fact r a th 6 n t • a f 0re Seri ° US kind ' S °“ e ° f these stem ^om 
the fact that liabilities to pam and suffering can vary from person to person 

natUra ‘ Iy , m ° re “ than ^ d ° eS tWs 
y " oreover , drugs and other artificial devices might be used to 

accentuate these natural differences. The most serious difficulty, however is 

that certain forms of treatment presumably violative of human rights might 

cause no pam or suffering at all, such as the sudden painless mufd r7an 

innocent man who has no family or friends to grieve for him 

onwTvT temS f T th ? meta P h y sical vocabulary “explain” human worth 
PlananonZZZ u u *° ** ex P lained ' Thus > without further ex¬ 
claim that “ hUman bein § s are “P ersons > no ‘ things” or the 

claim that men are ends in themselves” do not clearly account for the 

quality of human worth. Similarly, that men are “sacred” or of “infinite 

worth buTnot d (and . perhapS better ) wa V s of Piling the claim of equal 
‘ ’ “V deSC » P ‘ 10ns of ‘he grounds of that worth. If “sacred” (like 

aftitude US then S ti eSt f ? “ bdng the pr ° per ° bjeCt of a certain kind of 
, en the fact of a man’s sacredness cannot be invoked in justifica- 

tion of that attitude without a kind of trivializing circularity. It would be 

ke telling a man he ought to be amused by a joke, and then justifying that 

no^siehUnto^h t , at . the J °^ e ls amusin g- That would give the unamused 
no insight into the basis of the joke he is unable to appreciate, and leave 

mstthetlef ^ h ^ n0t do ’ Similar reasons, Z 

itv ” for 1 “ UmVerSal human worth on “ our common human- 

hat m k t W1 t0 u" OW PredSely What k is about our common humanity 
that makes it so worthy of our respect. ' 

Lm^n s m fprop«tubse fi t1uctthat the^u'' A “ I"* 5 ™ 16 S6 ‘ iS defined as one that 

members of the set and those of its k a 0 ij!j’ to " one correspondence between the 

is infinite since h containsTproper' Tubs* '(The integers 

^aT^mberris^alkd (i f t f^ ^ 

power of itself "Still equl atpl^nu'lP hL! .h” lawT Tlk °fi *?“ » 
quite different from those of ordinary arithmetic Thfsi! 6 " 1 i! anthme c tic are 
ahsts” in politics who would murde7 finite ^urnhe™^t d the r hasty ration ’ 

many millions of other human beine-e ; n i a- i f ^ uman for the sake of 

“infinite” value tl^rLd hoSe , unbora ' If *** life is of 

equal of all thi othl^^^^ life is the 

transfinite arithmetic presuDDosine- m P f stat f me ^ t °f the basic notions of 
see Edward Kasner and Tames L more ^hematics than elementary arithmetic, 

York: Simon and Schuste^nc lMoTctlp Tfor ^ lmagina . tion ^ 
misuse of “moral arithmetic” in Stalinist R,?' For a P erce P tlve critique of the 
Noon (New York: The Macmillan ctmpl^ 1941“ 





Human Rights 


93 


It may well be that universal “respect” for human beings is, in a sense, 
“groundless”—a kind of ultimate attitude not itself justifiable in more ulti¬ 
mate terms. This is what might be said, after all, about parental (and other) 
love. The parent’s unshaken love for the child who has gone bad may not 
be a response to any merit of the child (he may have none), or to any of 
his observable qualities (he may be a repulsive brute). In such a case, no 
quality of the child can be cited as a “reason” in justification of the parent s 
love. “I am his father after all” might be said to explain to others an affec¬ 
tion that might otherwise seem wholly unintelligible, but that does not state 
a ground for the affection so much as indicate that it is “groundless (but 
not irrational or mysterious for that). The “respect” said by Kant and many 
others to be owed to every human being by his fellows is not the same as 
affection or love, but it may well share this logical feature of ultimacy and 
“groundlessness” with it. 

We are generally not puzzled by the fact that parents can love their 
children in a “groundless” and ultimate way, because we assume that normal 
human beings are equipped by their biological natures with the disposition 
to react in just that way to their own children. Respect for the human 
worth of strangers and villains, however, is a more mysterious phenomenon. 
It may well be, however, that most normal people are disposed to fall into 
that attitude whenever their attention is drawn to certain traits of all 
humans, or when they acquire the habit of looking at (or conceiving) their 
fellows in a certain way. The traits thus attended to may not constitute 
logically coercive reasons in support of the attitude of Kantian respect (that 
may be too much to hope for), but a thorough awareness of them can make 
the attitude seem less mysterious and actually lead people to acquire it 
a result almost as good! We can think of our fellows simply as wise or 
entertaining, threatening or helpful, sexually attractive, authorities, physi¬ 
cians, or cooks, and adopt the attitude appropriate to the category. Bernard 
Williams contrasts these narrowly personal or technical attitudes toward 
another with what he calls the “human point of view,” which is concerned 
primarily with what it is for him to live that life and do those actions in 
that character.” 9 When we look at a person from that perspective, we do 
not simply regard him as “the surface to which a certain label can be ap¬ 
plied”; rather we “try to see the world (including the label) from his point 
of view.” 10 The real point of the maxim that all men are equal may be 
simply that all men equally have a point of view of their own, a unique 
angle from which they view the world. They are all equally centers of 
experience, foci of subjectivity. This implies that they are all capable of 

9 Bernard Williams, “The Idea of Equality,” in Philosophy, Politics, and Society 
(second series), ed. P. Laslett and W. G. Runciman (New York: Barnes & Noble, 
Inc., 1962), p. 115. 

10 Williams, “The Idea of Equality,” p. 116. 



Human Rights 


94 


being viewed by others imaginatively from their own point of view. They 
have shoes” into which we can always try to put ourselves; this is not true 
of mere things. It may follow (causally, not logically) from this way of so 
regarding them that we come to respect them in the sense tied to the idea 
of “human worth.” 

Human worth itself is best understood to name no property in the way 
that strength names strength and “redness” redness. In attributing human 
worth to everyone we may be ascribing no property or set of qualities, but 
rather expressing an attitude—the attitude of respect—toward the humanity 
in each man s person. That attitude follows naturally from regarding every¬ 
one from the human point of view,” but it is not grounded on anything 
more ultimate than itself, and it is not demonstrably justifiable. 

. Jt can be ar gued further against skeptics that a world with equal human 
rights is a more just world, a way of organizing society for which we would 
all opt if we were designing our institutions afresh in ignorance of the roles 
we might one day have to play in them. It is also a less dangerous world 
generally, and one with a more elevated and civilized tone. If none of this 
convinces the skeptic, we should turn our backs on him to examine more 
important problems. 


wii«An LUTE AND In , December 1948 > *e General Assembly of the 

SOLUTE United Nations adopted a Universal Declaration of 

HUMAN RIGHTS Human Rights. Unlike the eighteenth-century mani¬ 

festoes of natural rights, which were concerned almost 
exclusively with the individual’s rights not to be interfered with by others, 
the U.N. Declaration endorses numerous basic positive rights to receive 
benefits and be provided with the means to satisfy basic human needs. Even 
the conception in the U.N. document of a basic need (in contrast to an 
unneeded but valuable commodity) reflected changes in the world’s outlook 
and hopes since the eighteenth century. The U.N. Declaration contains the 
old-style negative rights, mostly pertaining to civic and political activities 
and criminal procedures, as well as the new “social and economic rights” 
that are correlated with the positive duties of others (usually of the state). 
Rights of the former kind impose duties upon private citizens and the state 
alike to keep hands off individuals in certain respects, to leave them alone. 

Other articles, however, impose duties upon others that are so difficult 
that they may, under widely prevalent conditions of scarcity and conflict, 
be impossible for anyone to discharge. Articles 22-27, for example, state that 
everyone, as a member of society. . . has the right to work, to free choice 
of employment. . .to protection against unemployment. . .to just and favor¬ 
able remuneration. . .to rest and leisure. . .and periodic holidays with pay 
• • to food, clothing, housing, and medical care. . .to education. . .to enjoy 




Human Rights 


95 


the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits. 1 Now, as 
we have seen,- these positive (as opposed to negative human rights are 
rights in an unusual new “manifesto sense,” for, unlike all other 
they are not necessarily correlated with the duties of any assignable person. 
ThI Declaration must therefore be interpreted to say that all men as su 
have a claim (that is, are in a position to make claim) to the g oods * ere ' 
mentioned, even if there should temporarily be no one in the corresp g 

position to be claimed against. • i t 

These social and economic human rights, therefore, are ce y 
absolute rights, since easily imaginable and commonly actual clr “ an 
can reduce them to mere claims. Moreover, these rights are clearly not 
nonconflictable. For example, where there are two persons for^ every^ b 
there must be conflict between the claims of some workers to free 
employment,” in the sense that if one worker’s claim is recognized as valid, 

another’s must be rejected. . * 

Can any human rights plausibly be construed as absolutely exception 
and therefore nonconflictable in principle, or must all rights in their very 
natures be vulnerable to legitimate invasion m some circumstances, 
most plausible candidates for absoluteness are (some) negative nghts smce 
they require no positive actions or contributions from others, they a,e ess 
likdy to be affected by conditions of scarcity. To say of a given negativ 
right that it is nonconflictable is to say: (1) if conflicts occur withRights 
of other kinds, it must always win, and (2) no conflict is possible with other 
rights of its own kind. The right to speak freely is a plausible human rig 
and is conferred by Article 19 of the U.N. Declaration, but it is certainty 
not nonconflictable in the sense defined above, for it cannot plausibly be aid 
always and necessarily to win out whenever it conflicts with 3 ^ 

to reputation, privacy, or safety. In theory, of course, we. cou f “" ‘ kinds 
hold that the free expression right always overrides rights 0 ’ 

but then that right would fail to satisfy the second condition for non- 
conflictability, no matter how stubbornly we back it. The requirement that 
the right in question be incapable in principle of conflicting with another 
person’s right* the **. kind is the real stumbling block in the path of 
absoluteness. Consider an audience of hecklers exercising their free speech 
to shout down a speaker, or some scoundrel using his free speech 
persuade others to cut out the tongue of his hated rival. In these cases, free 
speech must be limited in its own interest. Similar examples can be provided, 
mutatis mutandis, for freedom of movement, free exercise of religion 
right to property, and to virtually all of the characteristically eighteenth- 
century rights of noninterference. 

11 UNESCO, Human Rights, a symposium (London and New York. Allan Wingate, 
1949). 

12 Supra, pp. 66 f. 




Human Rights 


96 


eIe remaln at * east three kinds of human rights that may very well 

flictabl del p V (w !* OUt ° bvlous absurdity) to be absolute and noncon- 
fhctable. Positive rights to “goods” that cannot ever, in the very nature of 

triaWreallv TiTT* SU P pIy ’. are one possibility. Perhaps the right to a fair 
(really a package of positive and negative rights) or the right to equal 

crudlTnm t P °b Si f ity right n °‘ t0 be treated inhumanely or 

(actual or dealTl” Whether we as legislators 

entirely ud to Th C °u “ SUCh “ absolute ri g ht on everyone is 

convinced bv the „ " 7 ! 7°^ P ° HCy reaS ° nS il > but if we «« 

7 a\ P u OWCTful P° llc y a "d moral reasons in favor of it, we 
needn t be deterred by the fear of conflictability. As I argued in the previous 

2 Z C f n With0ut ab -^ity to let this right override rights of 

witt o her petw ht ” natUr * *° bring this right into conflict 

r persons rights of the same kind. Article 5 of the UN Declara 

ion, which forbids “torture or. . .cruel, inhuman... treatment^ 

ceived as conferring a human right in a very strong sense, namel/one 

which is not only universal and inalienable, but also absolute. It is stiU not 

uman right m the very strongest sense—one that applies absolutely and 

unah Wy t0 all and only humans-for it is presumaWy the one ri h[ that 

the higher animals have, if they have any rights at all. § 

de^radat 1 ion P eve lblht h “ 7 7*“ 1,01 *° be SubJeCted t0 “Potation or 

crueT It I nn h. r ! UbjeCtion is utterl y P ainless ai > d therefore not 
uel. It is possible to treat human beings with drugs, hypnosis or other 

of” a ^ B uTat niqUeS fV 1 ^ th6y b6COme C ° mpHant t0 ° ls ” * he hands 

. manipulators useful as means to their manipulators’ ends, but with 

totaIlyobIiterated - h — 

degraded hi Y ™ ^ they are bein S ex P loited °r 

graded, having come to accept and internalize their exploiters’ image of 

themselves as their own. In this state, human beings might be raised a 

?rumane g ,flf ’ ^ ^ UP f ° r a feW yearS ’ and then slaughtered 

(humanely, of course); or they might be harnessed, like donkeys, to wagons 

r mi lstones. It would be good business as well as good morals to treat them ' 

kindly (so long as they are obedient), for that way one can get more labo” I 

out of them in the long run. Clearly, kindness and “humanity ” white ! 

fficient to satisfy the rights of animals, are not sufficient for human beings, 

13 As suggested by L. B. Frantz. Cf. supra, p. 81. S 

an Zllnte righf 7* *?' '• *° 3,1 intents and Proses 

the formula for justice provides Fort^riUtTs oT” 0 ^* 6 l ght t0 be ,reated as * 
one which is under no conditions to be violafed " i • W ~ d ’ ! S th f most basic of *”> * 

tion to Ethics (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Compan^l^SS^p 11 491 M ° dern Introduc - 
15 See supra, pp. 86-88. 




Human Rights 


97 


who must therefore have ascribed to them another kind of right that we 
deliberately withhold from animals. That is a right to a higher kind of 
respect, an inviolate dignity, which as a broad category includes the negative 
rights not to be brainwashed, not to be made into a docile instrument for 
the purposes of others, and not to be converted into a domesticated animal. 
Rights in this category are probably the only ones that are human rights 
in the strongest sense: unalterable, c< absolute (exceptionless and noncon- 
flictable), and universally and peculiarly human. 



CHAP TER SEVEN 


Social 

Justice 


1. COMPARATIVE AND The problems of justice of most direct concern to 
NONCOMPARATIVE social theory are those that necessarily involve com- 
JUSTICE parisons of the claims of more than one person, and 

require that some sort of balance be struck between 
them. Occasions for these interpersonal comparisons do not by any means 
exhaust all the occasions of justice. In some contexts, an individual’s rights 
or deserts alone determine what is due him, and once we have come to a 
judgment of his due, that judgment cannot be logically affected by sub¬ 
sequent knowledge of the condition of other parties. When our task is to do 
noncomparative justice (as we might call it) to each of a large number of 
individuals, we do not compare them with each other, but rather compare 
each m turn with an objective standard and judge each “on his own merits.” 
Equality of treatment, therefore, is no part of the concept of noncomparative 
(individual) justice, even though it is a central element in comparative 
(social) justice. If we treat everybody unfairly by the relevant noncompara¬ 
tive standard, but equally and impartially so, we have done an injustice 
to each that is barely mitigated by the equal injustice done all the others. 1 

1 Cf. the sports column of Newsweek, Sept. 14, 1970, p. 123, in which the toughness 
of the late professional football coach, Vincent Lombardi, is discussed: “Tackle Henry 
Jordan’s oft-quoted remark indicated the fairness of the coach: ‘He treated us all the 
same. Like dogs.’ ” 


98 



Social Justice 


99 


Our concern in this chapter will be with judgments of fairness that are 
essentially comparative. The main occasions for social or comparative justice 
are: the allocation of burdens and benefits, the legislation and administra¬ 
tion of general rules, and the voluntary coming together in cooperative 
undertakings, or in games and other competitive activities. Comparative 
injustice under all these headings consists in the creation or modification 
of a relation between parties: unfair discrimination, arbitrary exclusion, 
favoritism, inappropriate partisanship or partiality, inconsistent rule-enforce¬ 
ment, “freeloading” in a cooperative undertaking, or putting one party at 
a relative disadvantage in a competition. 

The basic principle of comparative justice is that like 
cases are to be treated alike and different cases to be 
treated differently. If Doe gets a large share and Roe 
a small share in a distribution, our sense of justice is 
not satisfied until we learn of some respect in which Doe and Roe differ that 
underlies and justifies this difference in treatment. If Doe and Roe are exactly 
alike in every respect, but one is given more than the other, the discrimina¬ 
tion in their treatment is totally arbitrary, and arbitrary discrimination is the 
essence of comparative injustice. Indeed, many writers 2 hold that the princi¬ 
ple of like treatment for like cases is more than simply one among many 
ethical principles vying for our allegiance, but is rather an instance of a 
more general principle that is constitutive of rationality itself. One would 
violate this more general principle by ascribing different geometrical proper¬ 
ties to two identical isosceles triangles, or by holding that a given physical 
event was a lonely exception to Newton’s Laws, as much as by denying 
equal protection of the law to those citizens who have black skins. 

Any two persons or things will differ in some respects, and it is always 
possible to cite some difference between them in support (more precisely, 
in justicization ) 3 of differences in the way they are treated. Clearly, then, 
comparative justice requires more than that difference in treatment be 
based on differences in characteristics. The underlying differences between 
individuals that justicize differences in their treatment must be relevant 
differences, and the underlying similarities that justicize similar treatment 

2 E.g., Isaiah Berlin, “Equality As An Ideal,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
LVI (1955-56) ; Chaim Perelman, The Idea of Justice and the Problem of Argument 
(New York: Humanities Press, Inc., 1963), pp. 1-60. 

3 I borrow this useful term from W. K. Frankena, “The Concept of Social Justice,” 
in Social Justice , ed. R. B. Brandt (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1961), 
p. 5, and A. D. Woozley, “Injustice,” American Philosophical Quarterly , IX (1972). 
To justify an act is to show that it is on balance and in the last analysis, all things 
considered, right. To justicize an act is to show only that it is just , and therefore 
tends to be right. Since (as we have seen) not all just acts are right, and not all 
right acts are just, the distinction between justicization and on-balance justification 
is useful. 


2. FORMAL AND 

MATERIAL 

PRINCIPLES 



Social Justice 


100 


must be relevant similarities. Injustice is done when individuals who are 
alike in every relevant respect (not in absolutely every respect) are treated 
differently, or when individuals who are different in some relevant respect 
are treated alike. 

The principle of like treatment, then, is only a starting place in the 
analysis of comparative justice, and needs supplementation by criteria for 
determining the relevance of differences. For that reason, the like treatment 
principle is usually said to be merely a formal principle of justice , and the 
criteria of relevance for various contexts of justice with which it must be 
su PPl emen ted are called material principles of justice . 4 A formal principle 
of justice, in the words of a recent writer on the subject, “contains a com¬ 
pletely unspecified variable whereas material principles constitute different 
ways of replacing the variable by a constant.” 5 The principle that persons 
who are alike in the relevant respects must be treated alike, while persons 
who are unalike in the relevant respects must be treated unalike and in 
direct proportion to the differences between them is formal in the defined 
sense, since it fails completely to specify which respects are relevant. The 
principle that social wealth should be distributed to each in proportion to 
his contribution (or, alternately, his ability, need, rank, or virtue) is a 
material principle, since it at least goes a long way toward specifying which 
characteristics are relevant to the justice of distributions of social wealth. 

The principle that like cases should be treated alike is put too hastily by 
some equalitarian writers in the form of a “presumption for equality.” It is 
commonly said, for example, that although it is absurd to think that justice 
requires us to treat all men exactly alike, it does require that we give them 
equal treatment until we have good reason not to do so, that “the burden 
of proof is on the person who wants to treat people differently from one 
another. . . .” 6 But this presumptive principle is by no means identical in 
meaning or implications to the formal principle as we have formulated it. 
Our formal principle (which derives from Aristotle) would have us: (1) 
treat alike (equally) those who are the same (equal) in relevant respects, 
and (2) treat unalike (unequally) those who are unalike (unequal) in 
relevant respects, in direct proportion to the differences (inequalities) be¬ 
tween them. The equalitarian presumptivist formulation completely ignores 
the second part of this principle in insisting that all and only departures 
from equal treatment need justification. Clearly, what needs justification 

4 The best explication I know of the distinction between formal and material princi¬ 
ples of justice is that of Louis I. Katzner, “An Analysis of the Concept of Justice” 
(Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan, 1968). I am heavily indebted to that 
excellent work in the paragraphs that follow. 

5 Katzner, “An Analysis of the Concept of Justice,” p. 2. 

6 Katzner, “An Analysis of the Concept of Justice,” p. 37, paraphrasing S. Benn and 
R. S. Peters, Social Principles and the Democratic State (London: George Allen 
and Unwin Ltd., 1959), p. 111. 


101 


Social Justice 

according to the double formula above are: (1) departures from identical 
(equal) treatment when individuals seem to be the same (equal) m relevant 
respects, and (2) departures from different (unequal) treatment when indi¬ 
viduals seem to be different (unequal) in relevant respects. Where the 
“burden of proof” actually lies in a given case, then, depends upon what 
is given (believed or known) about the relevant traits of the individuals 
involved, and also upon the particular context of justice and its governing 
norms and maxims. The presumption in favor of equal treatment holds when 
the individuals involved are believed, assumed, or expected to be equal m 
the relevant respects, whereas the presumption in favor of unequal treatment 
holds when the individuals involved are expected to be different m the 
relevant respects. 

Consider some examples. If two pupils both violate the same rule but 
one is given a more severe penalty, we would presume (knowing no more 
facts) that a comparative injustice had been committed by the teacher. 
Unless some relevant difference between the two offenders or their offenses 
could be brought to light by the teacher, we would treat the presumption 
as decisive. On the other hand, consider the example cited by Louis Katzner 
to show that sometimes the “burden of proof” is on those who advocate 
equality of treatment. A testator whose sole survivor is his .son leaves one 
half of his estate to that son and, “equally,” one half to another person of 
the son’s age. The two inheritors are different in a respect we normally take 
to be relevant in such contexts, namely that one is a member of the testator s 
immediate family whereas the other is not. Because of this jiven relevant 
difference, the father has the burden of presenting a justification for treating 
two people equally that will override the presumption that they should be 
treated differently. 

The equalitarian presumptivist principle, then, errs in overlooking cases 
in which our antecedent expectations about the existence of characteristics 
agreed to be relevant creates a presumption in favor of inequality. The 
disguised normative character of the principle (“disguised” when it is 
claimed to be the formal principle of comparative justice), and, more 
importantly, its ultimately arbitrary character, are shown by a consideration 
of how it would apply to cases where no expectation exists about the equal 
or unequal degree to which relevant characteristics are possessed by those 
subject to our treatment. The presumptive principle, in these cases, tells us 
to presume even in our ignorance that equal treatment is called for, that 
individuals about whom we know nothing should nevertheless be treated 
equally unless or until grounds for distinction between them can be found. 
In this instance, the presumptive principle clearly reveals itself as not merely 
formal”; it purports to be a decisive guide to our conduct. Thus, a con¬ 
troversial (and indeed very doubtful!) normative principle is presented in 
the guise of a purely formal principle of reason supposedly definitive of the 



Social Justice 


102 


very nature of comparative justice. The moral of the story is this: Don’t 
confuse an exceptive principle (“Treat all men alike except where there are 
relevant differences between them”) with a presumptive principle (“Treat 
all men alike until it can be shown that there are relevant differences be¬ 
tween them”). The exceptive principle is indeed formal, providing no guide 
to action or grounds for presuming either equality or inequality in the case 
m which we are ignorant of the characteristics of the men to be treated. 
The presumptive principle has us presume equal treatment even in this case, 
and that would be to make a presumption every bit as arbitrary as the 
presumption m favor of unequal treatment in the absence of knowledge of 
the relevant similarities and differences of the persons involved. 

Stating the correct principles of material justice (criteria of relevance) is 
a task of a different order from that involved in formulating the principle 
of formal justice. Deciding which material principles to adopt requires us 
to enter the moral arena itself, where basic attitudes are in profound 
opposition, and social interests and political parties contend. The issues 
involved here, being substantive moral questions rather than questions of 
conceptual analysis with no direct normative implications, cannot be settled 
decisively by appeals to “the very definition of the concept of justice.” We 
shall have to bring in normative principles from the outside so that justice 
can have substance and provide direction. 

The choice of material principles is sometimes severely limited by the 
context itself, and is therefore not particularly difficult or controversial. We 
should not discriminate between persons who are alike in all relevant 
respects; but which respects are relevant depends upon the occasion for 
justice,, on our purposes and objectives, and on the internal rules of the 
game we are playing. There is no one kind of characteristic that is relevant 
m all contexts, no single material principle that applies universally. In short, 
what we seek when we look for a material principle is what H. L. A. Hart 
has called “a shifting or varying criterion used in determining when, for any 
given purpose , cases are alike or different.” 7 Hart went on to make the 
interesting suggestion that there is an analogy between relevance to a given 
purpose and other relational notions: “In this respect, justice is like the 
notions of what is genuine [real], or tall, or warm, which contain an implicit 
reference to a standard which varies with the classification of the thing to 
which they are applied.” 8 Thus, the standard of tallness varies depending 
on whether we are speaking of children, men, women, buildings, or moun¬ 
tains. There is no vicious “relativism” in this variation, and no skeptical 
affront to reason. It is useful to have words whose criteria of application vary 
m understood ways with the context, and “relevant” (as it occurs in formula¬ 
tions of the formal principle of comparative justice) is such a word. 

7 H. L. A. HartJ^ Concept of Law (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1961) p 156 

(emphasis added). J }) 

8 Hart, The Concept of Law, p. 156. 


103 


Social Justice 

3. PRIZES Let us consider briefly three typical sorts of context in 

which questions of comparative justice arise: awards 
of prizes, administration and legislation of rules, and distributions of benefits 
and burdens. There is seldom any difficulty in deciding what is relevant 
when our business is to award a prize, or to judge the fairness of an award 
already made. If we have a clear idea in advance of what the prize is to 
be awarded for, we have a clear idea of which aspects of the various con¬ 
testants are relevant. If we are awarding a prize for beauty, then phy¬ 
siognomy and bust, waist, and hip measurements are relevant, and IQ and 
swimming ability are not. If we are awarding a prize for distinguished work 
in physics, then the profundity, subtlety, and utility of a scientific discovery 
are relevant, but physiognomy and bust measurements are not. Surely those 

judgments of relevance and irrelevance are beyond controversy. 

Sometimes rules govern the awards in a manner that gives judges no 
discretion. If we are awarding a prize for winning the one hundred yard 
dash, we must give it to the runner who crosses the finish line firs a er 
having obeyed all the rules along the way; the fact that another runner as 
a better previous record, or better form, or poorer luck, are totally irre e- 
vant ” In other cases judges have room for interpretation, and must consider 
the purpose of the competition. To be sure, the “purpose” of an award, or 
notion of what the prize is for, is often obscure. Sometimes these matters 
are spelled out in detailed rules which may suffer from any of the flaws to 
which rules are prone: vagueness, ambiguity, inconsistency, incompleteness 
It is especially common for the rules to entail the relevance of a plurality of 
characteristics and then give no guide as to how these incommensurable* 
are to be weighted in importance. (Rulemakers can give such guidance by 
inventing arbitrary “point systems,” like those which govern the judging of 
track, swimming, or gymnastic contests; often the rules do not ever: give 
that kind of guidance, as, for example, in the annual Mother of the Year 
awards.) But even when there are difficulties of these kinds m deciding how 
to award a prize, they are not typically confusions over which characteristics 
are relevant, but rather over relative weights attached to factors agreed to 
be relevant. 


4 . 


GENERAL RULES Consider next the context of rule administration. 

Enforcement of the law is unjust when it is irregular, 
random, or discriminatory, that is, when it is administered unequally among 
those to whom it applies. “If a rule forbids parking in a certain area 
writes A M Honore, “it is unfair to A who has parked in that area that he 
should be fined for doing so, whilst B, who has done the same thing, is not 
prosecuted.” 9 (The unfairness in question is only comparative, since when 


9 A M Honore, “Social Justice,” McGill Law Journal Vol. 8 (1962), reprinted m 
Essays in Legal Philosophy, ed. Robert S. Summers (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Uni- 
versity of California Press, 1968), p. c 


67 , 



Social Justice 


104 


with nn r T °, n ltS ° Wn meritS exclusive h, and his “due” determined 

he haTreclH'1 *° t ° f ^ PartieS ’ h wiI1 be manifest that 

he has received the treatment he deserves.) Similarly, if no one is permitted 

unfLTtheT T h T * ^ ^ “ a d —‘ration L, it t 
unfarr if the civilian brother-m-law of the police chief is allowed through 

General rules, however, almost always contain either express or implicit 

exceptwe daises defining more narrowly the class of persons to whomTey 

PP y, and the limiting conditions under which they cease to apply even to 

persons m that class Authoritative orders and rules of law typically apply to 

ltizens except those of certain named classes who are, under specified 

conditions, granted exemptions or privileges denied to all others. Thus all 

STJc 1 ^ poUc ; lines (an order might say) “ 

III me h Re f d 1 CrOSS ,. first ald members of the Mayor’s staff, and 

musT Z d^ ^ P 1“ f ° rCe ° n duty - Simllar 'y> a!l vehicles 

L b dr 'T hrough a residential area at thirty miles per hour or less 
except ambulances, fire engines, police cars on active service, or private 

W Itself 1 "" e T” e emergenC ^ These exce pti°ns, being recognized by the 
.. ’ re y no means arbitrary, and a policeman who permits a 
journalist to cross a line or an ambulance to exceed the general speed limit 

^1317 a ? in r ice to anyone ' The - ** 

o ations of law, for the exceptive clauses are part of the very law the 
police and courts are sworn to enforce and to apply equally to everyone 
Persons who are relevantly different must be treated differently, and the 
relevance of a given difference is determined by the law itself. 7 

It is otherwise in the context of lawmaking, for the legislator must draw 

them 0! 2 f I 2 ”' 6 fr ° m S ° me S ° UrCe ° UtSide * e law if he is to a PPly 

mistakes or" £n7"f'°7™ ^ ° f le§is,ati ° n - Le g isla ‘-es can makl 
stakes, or fall short of objectivity and impartiality in making the laws 

with the result that some statutes are themselves unfair, granting undeserved 

privileges to whole classes of persons and arbitrarily withholding rights from 

would C / aSSeS ,. A law Permitting only white men access to National Parks 

Tat t dlS " lminator y> ba ^g a distinction upon a difference 

col d be e 7 7 7 fr T the P ° int ° f view of J ustice - Yet such a law 
Hence Ihe f p wlth .P erfect ^partiality by the police and the courts. 
Hence, the justice or injustice of law administration is independent of the 
substantive justice or injustice of the laws themselves; just laws cln be 
unfairly administered, and unjust laws administered Ivith immolate 
impartiality. Moreover, the comparative justice or injustice of the law is not 
de mnned by its conformity to (other) law, but by the relevance or 

by independent standards, of the respects that 
e made the basis of discriminations in the law. General rules are unfair 
w en they discriminate between classes that are actually alike in a respect 
that is really and truly” relevant, and fail to discriminate between classes 
at are actually different in a respect that is “really and truly” relevant. 



Social Justice 


105 


(Laws are subject to adverse criticism on many grounds other than injustice. 
They may be nondiscriminatory, but also inhumane, unnecessarily repres¬ 
sive, uneconomical, unenforcible, or foolish. But insofar as the criticism of 
law applies standards of comparative justice, it is aimed solely at discrimina¬ 
tions between various classes of persons.) 

Disagreements over the justice of laws (as opposed to the fairness of their 
administration) often seem to presuppose ultimate differences in values, but 
even here, genuine difficulty and controversy are more the exception than 
the rule. Why, for example, is the granting of a privilege to ambulance 
drivers to exceed posted speed limits not arbitrary, whereas the same privi¬ 
lege granted to (say) all green-eyed males would be unfair? Why are we 
sure that responsibility for the critically ill and injured is relevant to the 
question of permitted speeds, whereas eye color and sex are not? The 
answer, I think, must appeal to “the object which the law in question is 
admittedly designed to realize.” 10 The object of speed laws is to prevent 
automobile accidents and thus protect the health, lives, and property of 
motorists, passengers, and pedestrians. If we treat ambulances rushing 
victims to emergency medical treatment on the same footing as all other 
motorists bent on their private business, we will be hindering the very 
purpose for which we regulate automobile speeds. There is, on the other 
hand, no known causal connection between eye color or sex and the avowed 
objective of speed laws. They are, therefore, irrelevant to that purpose, and 
legal discriminations based on them are arbitrary, hence, unfair. These are 
judgments about relevance on which all rational men must agree. Dis¬ 
agreement over relevance is more likely to be intractable when the objectives 
of a law themselves are in dispute, especially when the given law has several 
purposes in uneasy tandem. 

I have distinguished two ways in which the administration of law can 
be unjust, but there is still a third way to be mentioned. In the first example, 
the enforcement of a general rule is irregular, corrupt, or favoritistic. In the 
second instance, the statute itself is unjust because it discriminates against 
classes of persons who differ in respects that are not relevant to the agreed- 
upon objectives of the law. We have seen that an unfair law can be fairly 
administered and that a perfectly fair law can be unfairly administered, and 
that both the law and its administration can be unfair together or fair 
together. But now there is a third case: the purpose of the law itself may be 
arbitrary and invidious. The statute may have been consciously designed to 
achieve a result that is unjust, such as the conservation of economic advan¬ 
tage for a favored class as an end in itself (quite apart from what the 
“public interest” may indicate), a legal arrangement designed to ensure that 
one group profit at the expense of another. 

The leading historical instance of the use of law for the specific purpose 

10 Hart, The Concept of Law, p. 159. 



Social Justice 


106 


of discrimination is that of Nazi Germany, 1933-1945. Imagine a Nazi law 
prescribing methods for the expropriation and reassignment of Jewish 
businesses and financial holdings. The aim of such a law, let us suppose, 
was to benefit “Aryans’ 5 at the expense of Jews, with no more ultimate goal 
in sight. That legislative purpose was to bring about a state of affairs , an 
established redistribution, that would be unjust in that it would be arbitrarily 
unequal in its benefits. German Jews did not differ from other Germans in 
any “relevant respect” justicizing this new arrangement. The motive of the 
legislation was partiality, with no cloak of fairness, and the authoritative act 
of legislating was therefore a plain “grab.” 

Now suppose that the Nazi legislature made arbitrary exceptions of red- 
haired Jews (perhaps because of bribery from or simple favoritism to a given 
red-haired Jewish millionaire with powerful connections abroad), and that 
this exemption was actually put into the expropriation statute. This would 
add to the injustice on the level of legislative purpose another injustice this 
time of our second type, an exemption that is plainly arbitrary because of 
the causal irrelevance of the class defining characteristics of the exempted 
class to the understood purpose of the law. But it is not clear whether the 
unfair exemption in the statute with the unfair objective makes the resultant 
law more or less unjust on the whole. Expropriated Jews could complain 
that their arbitrarily favored brethren are spared the hardships inflicted on 
them; on the other hand, they could consider that these exceptions consti¬ 
tute reductions in the “amount” of injustice created by the law. After all, 
though red-headedness is an irrelevant ground of difference among Jews, so 
is red-headed Jewishness an irrelevant ground of difference among the wider 
class of Germans. Thus, the special treatment of red-headed Jews is a com¬ 
parative justice when compared to that of all non-Jewish Germans, but a 
comparative injustice when compared to that of all other German Jews. To 
ask whether the immunity for redheads is fair or unfair “on the whole” is 
like asking whether a woman who is tall when compared to mice, children, 
and other women, but short when compared to men, elephants, and office 
buildings, is tall or short “on the whole.” 

Now imagine that the Jewish expropriation bill with its exemption for 
redheads is passed into law. Several months later, a corrupt policeman and 
a corrupt judge, covering their actions with lies and forgeries, manage (for 
a suitable bribe) to get a brown-haired Jew exempted, while also illegally 
seizing a red-headed Jew’s property. These acts are instances of arbitrary 
and invidious discrimination, through corruption, partiality, or prejudice, in 
the administration of general rules. How they affect the justice on balance 
of law enforcement already so unjust because of unfair exemptions in the 
law and an unfair legislative purpose is quite unclear. Again we shall have 
to define our comparison classes precisely, and make conflicting relational 
judgments. It is unfair to the other brown-haired Jews to let this one off 
when they are all forced into poverty and misery (though it is doubtful that 




Social Justice 


107 


people already so persecuted will feel still more aggrieved; they may even 
rejoice at their comrade’s good luck); it also seems unfair to the framed 
red-headed Jew when his treatment is compared to that of other red-headed 
Jews. On the other hand, there is no injustice in the exoneration of the 
brown-headed Jew when his treatment is compared to that of non-Jewish 
businessmen, nor is the framed red-headed Jew treated unfairly in com¬ 
parison to all brown-headed Jews. Balancing these judgments is complicated 
further by the problem of deciding whether characteristics that are “rele¬ 
vant” only because an unfair law says they are (red-headedness, Jewishness) 
should be given any weight at all. 

But we shall go no farther with the problem here. These examples are 
designed only to show that occasions for justice involving general rules are 
of three kinds—at the levels of administration, legislative formulation, and 
legislative purpose; that injustice is possible at all three levels; and that 
injustice at one level affects the moral quality of acts at the other levels in 
unclear ways, capable of being spelled out only in limited comparative 
judgments. Just as the irrelevance of a “respect” used as a ground of dis¬ 
crimination at level two cannot be shown by the law itself but only by 
reference to the law’s purpose, so also the irrelevance of a respect used to 
ground discrimination at level three cannot be shown by the legislative 
purpose itself, but only by reference to other extralegal standards. The way 
to test the relevance of discriminatory grounds in the legislative purpose is 
to examine the state of affairs to be produced by the law to see whether it 
includes deprivations, inequalities, and disadvantages suffered by some classes 
without good reason. The question of what constitutes a good reason at this 
level brings us to our next problem. 


5. ECONOMIC The term “distributive justice” traditionally applied 

INCOME to burdens and benefits directly distributed by polit¬ 

ical authorities, such as appointed offices, welfare 
doles, taxes, and military conscription, but it has now come to apply also to 
goods and evils of a nonpolitical kind that can be distributed by private 
citizens to other private citizens. In fact, in most recent literature, the term 
is reserved for economic distributions, particularly the justice of differences 
in economic income between classes, and of various schemes of taxation 
which discriminate in different ways between classes. Further, the phrase 
can refer not only to acts of distributing but also to de facto states of affairs, 
such as the fact that at present “the five percent at the top get 20 percent 
[of our national wealth] while the 20 percent at the bottom get about five 
percent.” 11 There is, of course, an ambiguity in the meaning of “distribu- 

“T.R.B. from Washington” in The New Republic, Vol. CLX, No. 12 (March 22, 
1969), p. 4. 




Social Justice 


108 


tion.” The word may refer to the process of distributing, or the product of 
some process of distributing, and either or both of these can be appraised as 
just or unjust. In addition, a “distribution” can be understood to be a 
“product” which is riot the result of any deliberate distributing process, but 
simply a state of affairs whose production has been too complicated to 
summarize or to ascribe to any definite group of persons as their deliberate 
doing. The present “distribution” of American wealth is just such a state of 
affairs. 

Are the 5 percent of Americans “at the top” really different from the 
20 percent “at the bottom” in any respect that would justicize the difference 
between their incomes? It is doubtful that there is any characteristic— 
relevant or irrelevant—common and peculiar to all members of either 
group. Some injustices, therefore, must surely exist. Perhaps there are some 
traits, however, that are more or less characteristic of the members of the 
privileged group, that make the current arrangements at least approximately 
just. What could (or should) those traits be? The answer will state a stan¬ 
dard of relevance and a principle of material justice for questions of 
economic distributions, at least in relatively affluent societies like that of the 
United States. 

At this point there appears to be no appeal possible except to basic atti¬ 
tudes , but even at this level we should avoid premature pessimism about 
the possibility of rational agreement. Some answers to our question have 
been generally discredited, and if we can see why those answers are inade¬ 
quate, we might discover some important clues to the properties any 
adequate answer must possess. Even philosophical adversaries with strongly 
opposed initial attitudes may hope to come to eventual agreement if they 
share some relevant beliefs and standards and a common commitment to 
consistency. Let us consider why we all agree (that is the author’s assump¬ 
tion) in rejecting the view that differences in race, sex, IQ, or social “rank” 
are the grounds of just differences in wealth or income. Part of the answer 
seems obvious. People cannot by their own voluntary choices determine 
what skin color, sex, or IQ they shall have, or which hereditary caste they 
shall enter. To make such properties the basis of discrimination between 
individuals in the distribution of social benefits would be “to treat people 
differently in ways that profoundly affect their lives because of differences 
for which they have no responsibility.” 12 Differences in a given respect are 
relevant for the aims of distributive justice, then, only if they are differences 
for which their possessors can be held responsible; properties can be the 
grounds of just discrimination between persons only if those persons had a 
fair opportunity to acquire or avoid them. Having rejected a number of 
material principles that clearly fail to satisfy the “fair opportunity” require- 

12 W. K. Frankena, “Some Beliefs About Justice,” The Lindley Lecture, Department 
of Philosophy Pamphlet (Lawrence: University of Kansas, 1966), p. 10. 




Social Justice 


109 


ment, we are still left with as many as five candidates for our acceptance. 
(It is in theory open to us to accept two or more of these five as valid 
principles, there being no a priori necessity that the list be reduced to one.) 
These are: (1) the principle of perfect equality; (2) the principle^] of 
need; (3) the principles of merit and achievement; (4) the principle of 
contribution (or due return) ; (5) the principle of effort (or labor). I shall 
discuss each of these briefly. 

(i) EQUALITY 

The principle of perfect equality obviously has a place in any adequate 
social ethic. Every human being is equally a human being, and as we saw in 
Chapter 6, that minimal qualification entitles all human beings equally to 
certain absolute human rights: positive rights to noneconomic “goods” that 
by their very natures cannot be in short supply, negative rights not to be 
treated in cruel or inhuman ways, and negative rights not fo be exploited 
or degraded even in “humane” ways. It is quite another thing, however, to 
make the minimal qualification of humanity the ground for an absolutely 
equal distribution of a country’s material wealth among its citizens. A strict 
equalitarian could argue that he is merely applying Aristotle’s formula of 
proportionate equality (presumably accepted by all parties to the dispute) 
with a criterion of relevance borrowed from the human rights theorists. 
Thus, distributive justice is accomplished between A and B when the follow¬ 
ing ratio is satisfied: 

d’s share of P _ A ’s possession of Q 

B ’s share of P B ’s possession of Q_ 

Where P stands for economic goods, Q, must stand simply for “humanity” 
or “a human nature,” and since every human being possesses that Q equally, 
it follows that all should also share a society’s economic wealth (the P in 
question) equally. 

The trouble with this argument is that its major premise is no less 
disputable than its conclusion. The standard of relevance it borrows from 
other contexts where it seems very little short of self-evident, seems con¬ 
troversial, at best, when applied to purely economic contexts. It seems 
evident to most of us that merely being human entitles everyone —bad men 
as well as good, lazy as well as industrious, inept as well as skilled—to a 
fair trial if charged with a crime, to equal protection of the law, to equal 
consideration of his interests by makers of national policy, to be spared 
torture or other cruel and inhuman treatment, and to be permanently 
ineligible for the status of chattel slave. Adding a right to an equal share 
of the economic pie, however, is to add a benefit of a wholly different order, 
one whose presence on the list of goods for which mere humanity is the 
sole qualifying condition is not likely to win wide assent without further 
argument. 



Social Justice 


110 


It is far more plausible to posit a human right to the satisfaction of 
(better: to an opportunity to satisfy) one’s basic economic needs,, that is, 
to enough food and medicine to remain healthy, to minimal clothing, hous- 
ing, and so on. As Hume pointed out, 13 even these rights cannot exist under 
conditions of extreme scarcity. Where there is not enough to go around, it 
cannot be true that everyone has a right to an equal share. 1 " 1 But wherever 
there is moderate abundance or better—wherever a society produces more 
than enough to satisfy the basic needs of everyone —there it seems more 
plausible to say that mere possession of basic human needs qualifies a person 
for the opportunity to satisfy them. It would be a rare and calloused sense 
of justice that would not be offended by an affluent society, with a large 
annual agricultural surplus and a great abundance of manufactured goods, 
which permitted some of its citizens to die of starvation, exposure, or easily 
curable disease. It would certainly be unfair for a nation to produce more 
than it needs and not permit some of its citizens enough to satisfy their 
basic biological requirements. Strict equalitarianism, then, is a perfectly 
plausible material principle of distributive justice when confined to affluent 
societies and basic biological needs, but it loses plausibility when applied to 
division of the “surplus” left over after basic needs are met. To be sure, 
the greater the degree of affluence, the higher the level at which we might 
draw the line between “basic needs” and merely “wanted” benefits, and inso¬ 
far as social institutions create “artificial needs,” it is only fair that society 
provide all with the opportunity to satisfy them. 15 But once the line has 
been drawn between what is needed to live a minimally decent life by the 
realistic standards of a given time and place and what is only added “gravy,” 
it is far from evident that justice still insists upon absolutely equal shares of 
the total. And it is evident that justice does not require strict equality 
wherever there is reason to think that unequal distribution causally deter¬ 
mines greater production and is therefore in the interests of everyone, even 
those who receive the relatively smaller shares. 

Still, there is no way to refute the strict equalitarian who requires exactly 
equal shares for everyone whenever that can be arranged without dis¬ 
couraging total productivity to the point where everyone loses. No one 
would insist upon equal distributions that would diminish the size of the 
total pie and thus leave smaller slices for everyone; that would be opposed 
to reason. John Rawls makes this condition part of his “rational principle” 
of justice: “Inequalities are arbitrary unless it is reasonable to expect that 

13 David Hume, Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals Part III (LaSalle, III.: 
The Open Court Publishing Company, 1947). Originally published in 1777. 

14 Except in the “manifesto sense” of “right” discussed on p. 67. 

15 This point is well made by Katzner, “An Analysis of the Concept of Tustice ” 

pp. 173-203. J 





Social Justice 


111 


they will work out to everyone’s advantage. .. .” 16 We are left then with a 
version of strict equalitarianism that is by no means evidently true and yet 
is impossible to refute. That is the theory that purports to apply not only to 
basic needs but to the total wealth of a society, and allows departures from 
strict equality when, but only when , they will work out to everyone’s 
advantage. Although I am not persuaded by this theory, I think that any 
adequate material principle will have to attach great importance to keeping 
differences in wealth within reasonable limits, even after all basic needs 
have been met. One way of doing this would be to raise the standards for 
a “basic need” as total wealth goes up, so that differences between the richest 
and poorest citizens (even when there is no real “poverty”) are kept within 
moderate limits. 

(ii) NEED 

The principle of need is subject to various interpretations, but in most 
of its forms it is not an independent principle at all, but only a way of 
mediating the application of the principle of equality. It can, therefore, be 
grouped with the principle of perfect equality as a member of the equal!- 
tarian family and contrasted with the principles of merit, achievement, con¬ 
tribution, and effort, which are all members of the nonequalitarian family. 
Consider some differences in “needs” as they bear on distributions. Doe is 
a bachelor with no dependents; Roe has a wife and six children. Roe must 
satisfy the needs of eight persons out of his paycheck, whereas Doe need 
satisfy the needs of only one. To give Roe and Doe equal pay would be 
to treat Doe’s interests substantially more generously than those of anyone 
in the Roe family. Similarly, if a small private group is distributing food to 
its members (say a shipwrecked crew waiting rescue on a desert island), it 
would not be fair to give precisely the same quantity to a one hundred 
pounder as to a two hundred pounder, for that might be giving one person 
all he needs and the other only a fraction of what he needs—a difference 
in treatment not supported by any relevant difference between them. In 
short, to distribute goods in proportion to basic needs is not really to depart 
from a standard of equality, but rather to bring those with some greater 
initial burden or deficit up to the same level as their fellows. 

The concept of a “need” is extremely elastic. In a general sense, to say 
that S needs X is to say simply that if he doesn’t have X he will be harmed. 
A “basic need” would then be for an X in whose absence a person would be 
harmed in some crucial and fundamental way, such as suffering injury, 
malnutrition, illness, madness, or premature death. Thus we all have a basic 
need for foodstuffs of a certain quantity and variety, fuel to heat our 
dwellings, a roof over our heads, clothing to keep us warm, and so on. In 

16 John Rawls, “Justice as Fairness,” The Philosophical Review, LXVII (1958), 165. 



Social Justice 


112 


a different but related sense of need, to say that S needs X is to say that 
without X he cannot achieve some specific purpose or perform some specific 
function. If they are to do their work, carpenters need tools, merchants 
need capital and customers, authors need paper and publishers. Some helpful 
goods are not strictly needed in this sense: an author with pencil and paper 
does not really need a typewriter to write a book, but he may need it to 
write a book speedily, efficiently, and conveniently. We sometimes come to 
rely upon “merely helpful but unneeded goods” to such a degree that we 
develop a strong habitual dependence on them, in which case (as it is often 
said) we have a “psychological” as opposed to a material need for them. 
If we don’t possess that for which we have a strong psychological need, we 
may be unable to be happy, in which case a merely psychological need for 
a functional instrument may become a genuine need in the first sense 
distinguished above, namely, something whose absence is harmful to us. 
(Cutting across the distinction between material and psychological needs is 
that between “natural” and “artificial” needs, the former being those that 
can be expected to develop in any normal person, the latter being those that 
are manufactured or contrived, and somehow implanted in, or imposed 
upon, a person.) The more abundant a society’s material goods, the higher 
the level at which we are required (by the force of psychological needs) to 
fix the distinction between “necessities” and “luxuries”; what everyone in 
a given society regards as “necessary” tends to become an actual, basic need. 

(hi) MERIT AND ACHIEVEMENT 

The remaining three candidates for material principles of distributive 
justice belong to the nonequalitarian family. These three principles would 
each distribute goods in accordance, not with need, but with desert; since 
persons obviously differ in their deserts, economic goods would be distributed 
unequally. The three principles differ from one another in their conceptions 
of the relevant bases of desert for economic distributions. The first is the 
principle of merit. Unlike the other principles in the nonequalitarian family, 
this one focuses not on what a person has done to deserve his allotment, but 
rather on what kind of person he is—what characteristics he has. 

Two different types of characteristic might be considered meritorious in 
the appropriate sense: skills and virtues. Native skills and Inherited aptitudes 
will not be appropriate desert bases, since they are forms of merit ruled out 
by the fair opportunity requirement. No one deserves credit or blame for 
his genetic inheritance, since no one has the opportunity to select his own 
genes. Acquired skills may seem more plausible candidates at first, but upon 
scrutiny they are little better. First, all acquired skills depend to a large 
degree on native skills. Nobody is born knowing how to read, so reading is 
an acquired skill, but actual differences in reading skill are to a large degree 
accounted for by genetic differences that are beyond anyone’s control. Some 



Social Justice 


113 


of the differences are no doubt caused by differences in motivation afforded 
different children, but again the early conditions contributing to a child’s 
motivation are also largely beyond his control. We may still have some 
differences in acquired skills that are to be accounted for solely or primarily 
by differences in the degree of practice,, drill, and perseverance expended by 
persons with roughly equal opportunities. In respect to these, we can 
propitiate the requirement of fair opportunity, but only by nullifying the 
significance of acquired skill as such, for now skill is a relevant basis of 
desert only to the extent that it is a product of one’s own effort. Hence, 
effort becomes the true basis of desert (as claimed by our fifth principle, 
discussed below), and not simply skill as such. 

Those who would propose rewarding personal virtues with a larger than 
average share of the economic pie, and punishing defects of character with 
a smaller than average share, advocate assigning to the economic system 
a task normally done (if it is done at all) by noneconomic institutions. What 
they propose, in effect, is that we use retributive criteria of distributive 
justice. Our criminal law, for a variety of good reasons, does not purport to 
punish people for what they are, but only for what they do. A man can 
be as arrogant, rude, selfish, cruel, insensitive, irresponsible, cowardly, lazy, 
or disloyal as he wishes; unless he does something prohibited by the criminal 
law, he will not be made to suffer legal punishment. At least one of the legal 
system’s reasons for refusing to penalize character flaws as such would also 
explain why such defects should not be listed as relevant differences in a 
material principle of distributive justice. The apparatus for detecting such 
flaws (a “moral police”?) would be enormously cumbersome and imprac¬ 
tical, and its methods so uncertain and fallible that none of us could feel 
safe in entrusting the determination of our material allotments to it. We 
could, of course, give roughly equal shares to all except those few who have 
outstanding virtues—gentleness, kindness, courage, diligence, reliability, 
warmth, charm, considerateness, generosity. Perhaps these are traits that 
deserve to be rewarded, but it is doubtful that larger economic allotments 
are the appropriate vehicles of rewarding. As Benn and Peters remind us, 
“there are some sorts of ‘worth’ for which rewards in terms of income seem 
inappropriate. Great courage in battle is recognized by medals, not by 
increased pay .” 17 Indeed, there is something repugnant, as Socrates and the 
Stoics insisted, in paying a man to be virtuous. Moreover, the rewards would 
offer a pecuniary motive for certain forms of excellence that require motives 
of a different kind, and would thus tend to be self-defeating. 

The most plausible nonequalitarian theories are those that locate relevance 
not in meritorious traits and excellences of any kind, but rather in prior 
doings: not in what one is, but in what one has done. Actions, too, are 

17 Benn and Peters, Social Principles and the Democratic State, p. 139. 


It’ll Ui.F.W 




Social Justice 


114 


sometimes called “meritorious/ 5 so there is no impropriety in denominating 
the remaining families of principles in our survey as “meritarian.” One type 
of action-oriented meritarian might cite achievement as a relevant desert 
basis for pecuniary rewards, so that departures from equality in income 
are to be justicized only by distinguished achievements in science, art, 
philosophy, music, athletics, and other basic areas of human activity. The 
attractions and disadvantages of this theory are similar to those of theories 
which I rejected above that base rewards on skills and virtues. Not all 
persons have a fair opportunity to achieve great things, and economic 
rewards seem inappropriate as vehicles for expressing recognition and 
admiration of noneconomic achievements. 

(iv) CONTRIBUTION OR “DUE RETURN” 

When the achievements under consideration are themselves contribu¬ 
tions to our general economic well-being, the meritarian principle of dis¬ 
tributive justice is much more plausible. Often it is conjoined with an 
economic theory that purports to determine exactly what percentage of our 
total economic product a given worker or class has produced. Justice, 
according to this principle, requires that each worker get back exactly 
that proportion of the national wealth that he has himself created. This 
sounds very much like a principle of “commutative justice 55 directing us to 
give hack to every worker what is really his own property, that is, the 
product of his own labor. 

The French socialist writer and precursor of Karl Marx, Pierre Joseph 
Proudhon (1809-1865), is perhaps the classic example of this kind of 
theorist. In his book, What Is Property? (1840), Proudhon rejects the 
standard socialist slogan, “From each according to his ability, to each 
according to his needs, 5518 in favor of a principle of distributive justice based 
on contribution, as interpreted by an economic theory that employed a pre- 
Marxist “theory of surplus value. 55 The famous socialist slogan was not 
intended, in any case, to express a principle of distributive justice. It was 
understood to be a rejection of all considerations of “mere 55 justice for an 
ethic of human brotherhood. The early socialists thought it unfair, in a way, 
to give the great contributors to our wealth a disproportionately small share 
of the product. But in the new socialist society, love of neighbor, community 
spirit, and absence of avarice would overwhelm such bourgeois notions and 
put them in their proper (subordinate) place. 

Proudhon, on the other hand, based his whole social philosophy not on 
brotherhood (an ideal he found suitable only for small groups such as 

Traced to Louis Blanc. For a clear brief exposition of Proudhon’s view which con¬ 
trasts it with that of other early socialists and also that of Karl Marx, see Robert 
Tucker’s “Marx and Distributive Justice,” in Nomos VI: Justice, ed. C. J. Friedrich 
and J. W. Chapman (New York: Aldine-Atherton Press, 1963), pp. 306-25. 



Social Justice 


115 


families) but on the kind of distributive justice to which even some 
capitalists gave lip service: 

The key concept was “mutuality” or “reciprocity.” “Mutuality, reciprocity exists,” 
he wrote, “when all the workers in an industry, instead of working for an entre¬ 
preneur who pays them and keeps their products, work for one another and thus 
collaborate in the making of a common product whose profits they share among 
themselves.” 19 

Proudhon’s celebrated dictum that “property is theft” did not imply that 
all possession of goods is illicit, but rather that the system of rules that 
permitted the owner of a factory to hire workers and draw profits (“surplus 
value”) from their labor robs the workers of what is rightly theirs. “This 
profit, consisting of a portion of the proceeds of labor that rightfully 
belonged to the laborer himself, was ‘theft.’ ” 20 The injustice of capitalism, 
according to Proudhon, consists in the fact that those who create the wealth 
(through their labor) get only a small part of what they create, whereas 
those who “exploit” their labor, like voracious parasites, gather in a greatly 
disproportionate share. The “return of contribution” principle of distribu¬ 
tive justice, then, cannot work in a capitalist system, but requires a federation 
mutualiste of autonomous producer-cooperatives in which those who create 
wealth by their work share it in proportion to their real contributions. 

Other theorists, employing different notions of what produces or “creates” 
economic wealth, have used the “return of contribution” principle to support 
quite opposite conclusions. The contribution principle has even been used to 
justicize quite unequalitarian capitalistic status quos, for it is said that capital 
as well as labor creates wealth, as do ingenious ideas, inventions, and 
adventurous risk-taking. The capitalist who provided the money, the inventor 
who designed a product to be manufactured, the innovator who thought 
of a new mode of production and marketing, the advertiser who persuaded 
millions of customers to buy the finished product, the investor who risked 
his savings on the success of the enterprise—these are the ones, it is said, 
who did the most to produce the wealth created by a business, not the 
workers who contributed only their labor, and of course, these are the ones 
who tend, on the whole, to receive the largest personal incomes. 

Without begging any narrow and technical questions of economics, I 
should express my general skepticism concerning such facile generalizations 
about the comparative degrees to which various individuals have contributed 
to our social wealth. Not only are there impossibly difficult problems of 
measurement involved, there are also conceptual problems that appear 
beyond all nonarbitrary solution. I refer to the elements of luck and chance, 
the social factors not attributable to any assignable individuals, and the 

19 Tucker, “Marx and Distributive Justice,” p. 310. 

20 Tucker, “Marx and Distributive Justice,” p. 311. 



Social Justice 


116 


contributions of population trends, uncreated natural resources, and the 
efforts of people now dead, which are often central to the explanation of 
any given increment of social wealth. 

The difficulties of separating out causal factors in the production of 
social wealth might influence the partisan of the “return of contribution” 
principle in either or both of two ways. He might become very cautious in 
his application of the principle, requiring that deviations from average 
shares be restricted to very clear and demonstrable instances of unusually 
great or small contributions. But the moral that L. T. Hobhouse^ 1 drew 
from these difficulties is that any individual contribution will be very small 
relative to the immeasurably great contribution made by political, social, 
fortuitous, natural, and “inherited” factors. In particular, strict application 
of the “return of contribution” principle would tend to support a larger 
claim for the community to its own “due return,” through taxation and 
other devices. 

In a way, the principle of contribution is not a principle of mere desert 
at all, no matter how applied. As mentioned above, it resembles a principle 
of commutative justice requiring repayment of debts, return of borrowed 
items, or compensation for wrongly inflicted damages. If I lend you my 
car on the understanding that you will take good care of it and soon return 
it, or if you steal it, or damage it, it will be too weak to say that I “deserve” 
to have my own car, intact, back from you. After all, the car is mine or my 
due, and questions of ownership are not settled by examination of deserts; 
neither are considerations of ownership and obligation commonly out¬ 
balanced by considerations of desert. It is not merely “unfitting” or “inap¬ 
propriate” that I should not have my own or my due; it is downright theft 
to withhold it from me. So the return of contribution is not merely a matter 
of merit deserving reward. It is a matter of a maker demanding that which 
he has created and is thus properly his. The ratio—.Ts share of X is to E s 
share of X as A’s contribution to X is to E s contribution to X —appears, 
therefore, to be a very strong and plausible principle of distributive justice, 
whose main deficiencies, when applied to economic distributions, are of 
a practical (though severe) kind. If Hobhouse is right in claiming that there 
are social factors in even the most pronounced individual contributions to 
social wealth, then the principle of due return serves as a moral basis in 
support of taxation and other public claims to private goods. In any case, 
if A’s contribution, though apparently much greater than E s, is nevertheless 
only the tiniest percentage of the total contribution to X (whatever that 
may mean and however it is to be determined), it may seem like the meanest 
quibbling to distinguish very seriously between A and B at all. 

L. T. Hobhouse, The Elements of Social Justice (London: George Allen and 
Unwin Ltd., 1922). See especially pp. 161-63. 




Social Justice 


117 


(v) EFFORT 

The principle of due return, as a material principle of distributive 
justice, does have some vulnerability to the fair opportunity requirement. 
Given unavoidable variations in genetic endowments and material circum¬ 
stances, different persons cannot have precisely the same opportunities to 
make contributions to the public weal. Our final candidate for the status 
of a material principle of distributive justice, the principle of effort, does 
muc etter in this respect, for it would distribute economic products not 
m proportion to successful achievement but according to the degree of effort 
exerted. According to the principle of effort, justice decrees that hard¬ 
working executives and hard-working laborers receive precisely the same 
remuneration (although there may be reasons having nothing to do with 
justice for paying more to the executives), and that freeloaders be penalized 
by allotments of proportionately lesser shares of the joint products of every¬ 
one s labor. The most persuasive argument for this principle is that it is 
the closest approximation to the intuitively valid principle of due return 
that can pass the fair opportunity requirement. It is doubtful, however that 
even the principle of effort fully satisfies the requirement of fair opportunity 
since those who inherit or acquire certain kinds of handicap may have little 
opportunity to acquire the motivation even to do their best, In any event, 
the principle of effort does seem to have intuitive cogency giving it at least 
some weight as a factor determining the justice of distributions. 

In very tentative conclusion, it seems that the principle of equality (in 
the version that rests on needs rather than that which requires “perfect 
equality’) and the principles of contribution and effort (where nonarbi- 
tranly applicable, and only after everyone’s basic needs have been satisfied) 
ave the most weight as determinants of economic justice, whereas all forms 
of the principle of merit are implausible in that role. The reason for the 
priority of basic needs is that, where there is economic abundance, the claim 
to life itself and to minimally decent conditions are, like other human 
rights, claims that all men make with perfect equality. As economic produc- 
tion increases, these claims are given ever greater consideration in the form 
of rising standards for distinguishing basic needs from other wanted goods. 

ut no matter where that line is drawn, when we go beyond it into the 
realm of economic surplus or “luxuries,” nonequalitarian considerations 
(especially contribution and effort) come increasingly into play. 


6. FAIR PROCEDURES We have been concerned here only with the charac 
AND JUST OUTCOMES ter of just results considered i/tol a^^a^n 

from the procedures that can be used to bring them 
about. Indeed, we have considered characterizations of just results for use 
as tests of the fairness of procedures, on the assumption that the only 



118 


Social Justice 

standard for the fairness or unfairness of a procedure is the degree to which 
it conduces to just results. But is it really possible to treat the questions of 
fair procedures and just results in such strict isolation from one another? 

John Rawls has made some useful distinctions that will facilitate our 
discussion of the relation between distributive economic institutions and 
practices and resultant patterns of wealth distribution. In a recent book,- 2 
Rawls distinguishes among three types of “procedural justice” m terms of 
their relations to the justice of outcomes. Perfect procedural justice is illus¬ 
trated by the stock example of men dividing a cake. The procedure adopted 
to bring about the correct result (here assumed to be equal shares) is for 
the man who cuts the slices to be the last to choose his own portion. Only 
if he cuts the cake into equal slices is he sure of getting the largest share 
possible under the adopted procedural rule. This situation exemplifies per¬ 
fect procedural justice because it satisfies the following two conditions:. (1) 
there is an independent criterion for what is a just result (fair division), 
defined separately from and prior to the selection of a procedure to be 
followed, and (2) it is possible to design a procedure (e.g., the cake-cutter 
chooses last) that is likely to give the proper result. Imperfect procedural 
justice is illustrated by a criminal trial. It is like perfect procedural justice 
in that there is an independent criterion for the right result, but unlike it 
in that there is no feasible procedure certain to lead to just results in every 
case. The fairness of the procedural rules is determined entirely by their 
conducibility in general to just results, but there is no guarantee that even 
the most fastidious adherence to the rules will lead to a just outcome in 
a given case. 

What Rawls calls pure procedural justice differs from both perfect and 
imperfect procedural justice in that there is no independent criterion for the 
just result. “Instead, there is a correct or fair procedure such that the out¬ 
come is likewise correct or fair, whatever it is, provided that the procedure 
has been properly followed.” 23 Betting and certain other forms of gambling 
illustrate this third type of procedural justice. The redistribution of. funds 
among a group of gamblers, as a result of their wagers or games, is fair, 
whatever it is , if and only if antecedently defined betting procedures have 
been scrupulously adhered to, with no cheating and no coercion.. 

If we assume that the criterion of a just outcome for distributions of 
economic goods can be defined independently of the rules of any given 
procedure for distributing those goods, and can be used therefore as a test 
of the fairness of alternative procedures, then we must take the context of 
economic distribution to exemplify what Rawls calls “imperfect procedural 
justice.” When we choose from the point of view of fairness among various 

22 John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971), 
pp. 84-86. 

23 Rawls, A Theory of Justice, p. 86. 



Social Justice 


119 


capitalist, socialist, and mixed schemes for organizing an economy, we can¬ 
not hope to find a system that is certain to generate a just outcome m every 
instance, giving every citizen exactly his due as determined by an indepen¬ 
dent material criterion of distributive justice. Even assuming agreement on 
the criterion of a just distributive outcome, our choice is more like that 
between rival procedures for conducting a criminal trial, e.g., between the 
adversary system used in English-speaking countries and the inquisitorial 
system used elsewhere in Europe. For criminal trials we have an agreed 
upon conception of just outcomes: we want guilty men convicted and 
innocent men acquitted. What we must decide is, which alternative system 
of criminal procedure, subject to certain obvious restrictions set by other 
values, is likely to achieve these objectives in the higher percentage of cases? 
Similarly, in the choice among economic systems on the assumption of 
independent standards for just outcomes, we must decide which of the 
alternative systems of procedures will come closest to satisfying those stan¬ 
dards, subject to the restrictions of such other values as efficiency and liberty. 

On the other hand, we might prefer to take the problem of economic 
distribution to be a question of what Rawls calls “pure procedural justice,^ 
at least for that part of the problem that concerns the economic “surplus” 
that is left after basic needs have been satisfied equally for everyone. Our 
choice will hinge in large part on whether we take the economic arena to 
be basically cooperative or competitive, whether we think of our economic 
interrelations as a race for surplus riches with economic income as prizes for 
the swiftest, or “winnings” for the luckiest, or as some other kind of mle- 
governed “game” we all play or contest we all enter. In the end, our criteria 
of economic justice will reflect the way we conceive the economic sphere of 
life. Beyond the level of basic needs (interpreted in a realistic and generous 
way), even the model of the roulette wheel with its simple rules of pure 
procedural justice provides a possible, if unappealing, model. Given the 
universal satisfaction of basic human needs, those procedures for producing 
and distributing goods are best that best promote the common good, and 
there may be no clear and convincing criterion for the just distribution of 
“surplus goods” other than the fair operation of those procedures, whichever 
they may be. 



FOR FURTHER READING 


CHAPTER 1. THE CONCEPT OF FREEDOM 

rp E T9™2n.“ BeinS Free t0 Act ’ and Bein§ 3 Free Man ’” 

IsAIAH > Four Essa y s on Liberty. London, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
Lt i d N 1953 ’ MaUWCE ’ Freedom > A N ew Analysis. London: Longmans, Green & Co. 

Ch^S^Tree”^^ Cambridge: Cambrid S e University Press, 1961, 

MacCalloi^ Gerald C., Jr., “Negative and Positive Freedom,” Philosophical 
Review, LXXVI (1967), 312-334. 

Oppenheim, Felix, Dimensions of Freedom. New York: St. Martin’s Press, Inc., 


CHAPTER 2. GROUNDS FOR COERCION 

Press'1963 L ’ A '” UW ‘ LibeHy ’ and Moralit y • Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University 

U T. Elements of Social Justice. London: George Allen and Unwin 
Ltd., 1924, Chap. 4. 

, Liberalism. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1911. 

Mill, J. S., On Liberty. New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1956. 

Stephen, J. F., Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni¬ 
versity Press, 1967. 6 


CHAPTER 3. HARD CASES FOR THE HARM PRINCIPLE 

C a re, Norman, and Thomas Trelogan, eds., Issues in Law and Morality . Cleve¬ 
land: Case Western Reserve Press, 1973. 

Olson, Manour, The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1965. 

Wasserstrom, R ed., Morality and the Law. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth 
Publishing Co., 1971. 


120 



For Further Reading 
CHAPTER 4. LEGAL RIGHTS 


121 


Benn, S. I., and R. S. Peters, Social Principles and the Democratic State. London: 
George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1959, pp. 88-95. 

Salmond, John, Jurisprudence (11th ed.), ed. by Glanville Williams. London- 
Sweet & Maxwell, Ltd., 1967, Chaps. 10, 11. 

Wasserstrom, R., “Rights, Human Rights, and Racial Discrimination,” Journal 
of Philosophy, LXI (1964), 628-41. 


CHAPTER 5. CONFLICTS OF LEGAL RIGHTS 

Frantz, Laurent B., “The First Amendment in the Balance,” Yale Law Journal 
LXXI (1962), pp. 1424-50. 

Giannella, Donald, “The Religious Liberty Guarantee,” Harvard Law Review 
LXXX (1967), pp. 1381-1431. 


CHAPTER 6. HUMAN RIGHTS 

Melden, A. I., Rights and Right Conduct. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1959, esp. 
Parts 3-6. 

The Monist, Issue on “Human Rights,” LII (1968). 

Vlastos, Gregory, “Justice and Equality,” in Social Justice , ed. by Richard B. 
Brandt. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1962, pp. 31-72. 

Williams, B. A. O., “The Idea of Equality,” in Philosophy , Politics, and Society, 
ed. by P. Laslett and W. G. Runciman. New York: Barnes & Noble, Inc 1962 
pp. 110-31. ' 5 


CHAPTER 7. SOCIAL JUSTICE 

Frankena, W. K., “Some Beliefs About Justice,” The Lindley Lecture, Department 
of Philosophy Pamphlet. Lawrence: University of Kansas, 1966. 

Friedrich, C. J., and J. Chapman, eds., Nomos VI: Justice. New York: Aldine- 
Atherton, 1963. 

Hobhouse, L. T., Elements of Social Justice. London: George Allen and Unwin 
Ltd., 1922, Chap. 9 (“Social and Personal Factors in Wealth”). 

Katzner, Louis, “Presumptivist and Nonpresumptivist Principles of Formal 
Justice,” Ethics, LXXXI (1971), pp. 253-58. 

Rawls, John, A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press 
1971. 7 

Rescher, Nicholas, Distributive Justice. Indianapolis: The Bohbs-Merrill Co 
Inc., 1966. 





INDEX 


Acton, H. B., 64 

American Civil Liberties Union, 42-43 
Ames, James Barr, 29n. 

Anarchistic principle, 22-24 
Animals: 

cruelty to, 36, 41, 86, 98n. 
rights of, 85, 86, 96 
Anomie, 14 
Aristotle, 100, 109 
Autonomy, 14—17 


Bad examples, 32 
Barenblatt v. United States, 79 
Bayles, Michael, 31 

Benn, S.I., and Peters, R.S., 61n., 72n., 
100n., 113, 121 

Benn, S.I., and Wienstein, W., 120 

Bentham, Jeremy, 23 

Berlin, Sir Isaiah, 8n., 9, 16n., 99n., 120 

Black, Justice Hugo, 79 

Blanc, Louis, 1 lln. 

Brandt, Richard B., 71 
Brave New World, 9 
Broad, C.D., 40n. 


Care, Norman, 120 

Chapman, J. (see Friedrich, C.J., and 
Chapman, J.) 

Civil disobedience, 38-39 
Claim, concept of, 2, 64-67 
Claim-rights: 
classification, 59-61 
definition, 58 
value, 58-59 

Clear and present danger, 12 
Coercion, 7, 11, 20-35 
Coherence, 3 
Collective goods, 53-54 


Communist Party v. Subversive Activities 
Control Board, 80 
Compulsion (see Constraint) 

Conceptual problems, 1 
Consent, 46 
Conservatives, 11 
Constraint: 

absence of, and self-government, 16-17 

as opposed to compulsion, 5n. 

as opposed to inability, 8-9 

external, 12-13 

internal, 9, 12-13 

negative, 9, 12-13 

positive, 12-13 

Contentment (see Want satisfaction) 
Contribution, as principle of distributive 
justice, 114-16 
Corbin, Arthur L., 56n., 58 
Corpses, mistreatment of, 36-37 
Correlativity of rights and duties: 
logical, 62-64 
moral, 61-63 

Cranston, Maurice, 5n., 11, 120 


Dennis v. United States, 80 
Desert, 112, 116 
Devlin, Patrick, 37-39 
Drugs, harmful, 50-52, 92, 96 
Drunkenness, 31-32, 48, 49 
Due return (see Contribution) 

Durkheim, Emile, 14 
Duty, concept of, 63 

Economic freedom (see Freedom) 

Economic justice (see Justice) 

Effort, as principle of distributive justice, 
117 

Elliptical expressions, 5, 11 


123 




Index 


124 


Encumbrance (see Rights, legal) 

Epictetus, 6 
Epicureans, 6 

Equalitarianism, 88-94, 100-102, 110-11 
Equality: 

as principle of distributive justice, 109- 
11 

grounds for, 88-94 
presumption of, 100 
proportionate, 109 
Fair procedures, 117-19 
Fawcett, J.E.S., 67 
First Amendment, 80 
Flag, desecration of, 36 
Formal principle of justice, 99-103 
Formalistic liberty-limiting principle, 24- 
25 

Frankena, William K., 1, 99n., 108n., 121 
Frankfurter, Justice Felix, 79-80 
Frantz, Laurent, 81-82, 96n., 121 
Free man, concept of, 4 
Freedom: 

“amounts” of, 24 
and constraint, 4-9 
areas of, 19 
as ability, 8-9, 17-18 
as autonomy, 15-17 
as “breathing space,” 6, 16 
as ideal, 6, 19 

as opposed to liberty, 17, 55 
as permission, 17-18 
as self-government, 15-17 
degrees of, 17-18 
dimensions of, 19 
dispositional, 5-7 
economic, 11 

from. . . and to. . . ,9-11 
maximal, 19 
occurrent, 6-7 
on balance, 13, 18-19 
perfect, 6, 9 
political, 7, 9, 11 
positive and negative, 12-16 
schema for statements about, 11 
Friedrich, C. J., and Chapman, J. 121 
Frustration, 5, 6 
Garvin, Lucius, 96n. 

Giannella, Donald, 121 
Green, T.H., 12n. 

Hamilton, Edith, 21n. 

Hang-ups, 15 


Happiness, 21 
Hare, R.M., 90n. 

Harm: 

applied to animals, 41 
as opposed to hurt, 27-28 
as opposed to nonbenefit, 29—31, 53-54 
as opposed to offense, 28-29, 42^14 
as the invasion of an interest, 26 
concept of, 2, 25-31 
direct and indirect, 31-32 
Harm principle, 25-26, 33, 37, 42-45, 53-54 
Harmful condition, 30-31 
Harmful direction, 30-31 
Hart, H.L.A., 31n., 37n„ 38, 102, 105n., 120 
Helvetius, 8 

Hobhouse, L.T., 21, 24n., 25, 116, 120, 121 
Hohfeld, Wesley, 56n. 

Homosexuality, 37 
Honore, A. M., 103 
Hume, David, 110 
Hurt (see Harm) 

Hurt feelings, 27-28 


Ideal court, 76 

Ideal directive (see Rights) 

Ideal legislature, 2, 76 
Incommensurability, 19 
Indecency, 43 
Individualism, rugged, 24 
Infinite value, 92, 92n. 

Injustice, as unavoidable, 52, 75 
Interest: 

concept of, 26 
types of, 26, 76 

Interest balancing, 76-78, 81-83 


Johnson, Samuel, 38 
Juridical perspective, 17-18 
Justice: 

comparative and noncomparative, 98-99 
economic, 2, 107-19 
formal principle of, 99-103 
material principles of, 2, 107-17 
of general rules, 103-7 
of prizes, 103 
procedural, 117-19 
Justicization, 99, 99n. 

Kant, Immanuel, 93 

Kasner, Edward, and Newman, James, 92n. 



Index 


125 


Katzner, Louis I., lOOn., 101, 110n., 121 
Koestler, Arthur, 92n. 


Laws: 

administration, 103—4 
legislation, 105 
purpose of, 105-7 
Legal moralism, 33, 36-41 
Legal paternalism, 33, 45-52 
Legal rights {see Rights, legal) 
Leonard, John, 3 
Lewdness, 37 
Lewis, C. S., 4n., 120 
Liberties {see Rights, legal) 

Liberty: 

as opposed to “freedom," 17, 55 
complete, 24 

presumptive case for, 20-22 
right to, 61, 71-72, 95 
Liberty-limiting principles, 33-35, 41 
Locke, John, 5n., 61 
Lombardi, Vincent, 98n. 

Love, 89-90 


Macaulay, Thomas, 29n. 

MacCallum, Gerald, 1, 16n., 120 
Marx, Karl, 114, 114n. 

Material principles of justice {see Justice) 
Melden, A.I., 91, 121 
Merit, 89-90, 112-13 
Meritarianism, 89, 112-14 
Mill, John Stuart, 21, 25-26, 31-33, 38-39, 
48-50, 120 

Model Penal Code, 28, 43 
Morals offenses, 36-41 
Morris, Herbert, 75 


Needs: 

analysis of, 111-12 
basic, 110, 111, 119 
in analysis of harm, 30-31, 54 
in conditions of scarcity, 66-67 
natural versus artificial, 112 
psychological versus material, 112 
Newman, James {see Kasner, Edward, and 
Newman, James) 

Normative questions, 2 
Nudity, 43-45 
Nuisance, 44-45 


Obscenity, 41-15 

Offense, 29, 42-45 

Offense principle, 28-29, 33, 41-45 

Olson, Mancur, 120 

Omission, 29-30, 59-60 

Oppenheim, Felix, 18n., 19n., 120 

Paternalism {see Legal paternalism) 
Perelman, Chaim, 99n. 

Perfect competition, 53-54 
Perry, Ralph Barton, 12n. 

Peters, R. S. {see Benn, S.I., and Peters, 
R.S.) 

Plato, 15 

Privacy, forfeiture of, 40 
Privileges, 58-59, 74, 82 
Prizes {see Justice) 

Proofs and refutations, 34-35 
Prosser, William L., 45n. 

Proudhon, Pierre Joseph, 114-15 


Rationality, 99 

Rawls, John, 11 In., 118-19, 121 
Reasonable avoidability, standard of, 44-45 
Reflective equilibrium, 3 
Religion, free exercise of, 81, 95 
Report of the Federal Commission on Ob¬ 
scenity, 42n. 

Rescher, Nicholas, 121 
Respect, 93-94, 97 

Restatement of the Law of Torts, 26 
Rights: 

absolute, 79, 83, 86-88, 94-97 

and claims, 64-67 

and duties, 61-64 

as ideal directives, 71, 75, 86 

as property, 75 

categories, 70 

general concept, 2, 55-56 

human, 2, 67, 84-97 

legal: 

active and passive, 60-61 
as liberties, 5, 6, 72, 82 
as privileges, 57-58, 82 
boundaries between, 73 
claim-rights, 58-59, 62-63 
conflicts of, 68-83 
constitutional, 79-83 
degree of incumbency, 80-81, 86 
discretionary, 69-70 
encumbrances on, 69-70 




Index 


126 


Rights (cont.) 

in personam and in rem, 59-60 
positive and negative, 59-61, 94-96 
recognition and enforcement, 74-75 
scope of, 80-81, 86 
specific, 69 

“manifesto sense,” 67, llOn. 
moral, 67, 84-85 
names, 70-71 
packages, 70 

personal versus property, 76-78 
prima-facie, 73-75, 79, 83 
to liberty, 61, 71-72, 95 
to life, 61, 71 

to property, 61, 71-72, 86, 95 
Risk: 

of harm to self, 46-47 
reasonable and unreasonable, 47-48 
voluntary and nonvoluntary assumptions 
of, 48-52 

Rudner, Richard, 1 


Salmond, John, 60n., 78n., 121 
Santayana, George, 9 
Schwartz, Louis B., 37, 43 
Self, conceptions of, 12-15 
Self-government, 15-17 
Self-realization, 21-22 
Self-regarding actions, 31-32 
Self-restraint, 14-15 
Sex offenses, 36-40 
Shame, 44 

Skepticism, 90, 92, 94 

Slavery, 46 

Slaves, 4, 11 

Smith v. California, 79 

Smoking, 51-52 

Social ideals, 2 

Social philosophy, scope of, 1,9 
“Social punishment,” 32 
Socialists, 11, 114-15 
Sociological perspective, 17-18, 22 


Socrates, 113 
Sodomy, 43 
Solicitation, 37 
Status, legal, 88-90 

Stephen, James Fitzjames, 20, 29n., 40, 120 
Stoics, 6, 113 
Subversion, 39 
Suicide, 51 

Supervenient properties, 90 

Taxation, 8, 54, 107, 116 
Threats, 7-8 
Torture, 87-88, 96 
Trelogan, Thomas, 120 
Tucker, Robert, 114n„ 115n. 


United Nations’ Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, 94-96 
Universality, standard of, 44 


Vlastos, Gregory, 89-90, 121 
Voluntariness, standard of, 50-52 
Von Humboldt, W., 21 

Wants: 

actual and possible, 5-8 
as opposed to wishes, 8-9 
hierarchical structure, of, 14-15 
Want satisfaction, 7 
Warnock, G. J., 58n. 

Wasserstrom, Richard, 58n., 120, 121 
Weinstein, W. (see Benn, S.I., and Wein¬ 
stein, W.) 

Welfare principle, 33, 54 
Wilkinson v. United States, 79 
Williams, Bernard, 93, 121 
Wolfenden Report, 28 
Woozley, A.D., 99 
Worth, human, 89-90 



