ROUTLEDGE LIBRARY EDITIONS:
SOCRATES
Volume 5
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS

SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
New Essays on the Philosophy of Socrates
and its Significance
Edited by
BARRY S. GOWER AND MICHAEL C. STOKES
~ ~~o~:~;n~~:up
LONDON AND NEW YORK
First published in 1992 by Routledge
This edition first published in 2019
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 1992 Barry S. Gower and Michael C. Stokes
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to
infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-1-138-61842-8 (Set)
ISBN: 978-0-429-45011-2 (Set) (ebk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-32578-4 (Volume 5) (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-45013-6 (Volume 5) (ebk)
Publisher’s Note
The publisher has gone to great lengths to ensure the quality of this reprint but
points out that some imperfections in the original copies may be apparent.
Disclaimer
The publisher has made every effort to trace copyright holders and would welcome
correspondence from those they have been unable to trace.
SOCRATIC
QUESTIONS
New essays on the philosophy of
Socrates and its significance
Edited by
Barry S. Gower and
Michael C. Stokes
London and New York
First published 1992
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
a division of Routledge, Chapman and Hall, Inc.
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
© 1992 Barry S. Gower and Michael C. Stokes
Typeset in 10 on 12 point Garamond by
Falcon Typographic Art Ltd, Fife, Scotland
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
TJ Press (Padstow) Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Socratic questions: new essays on the philosophy
of Socrates and its significance.
I. Gower, Barry S. (Barry Stephen)
II. Stokes, Michael C. (Michael Christopher)
183.2
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Socratic questions : new essays on the philosophy of Socrates
and its significance / edited by Barry S. Gower and
Michael C. Stokes.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Socrates. I. Gower, Barry. II. Stokes, Michael C.
B317.5644 1992
183'.2 - dc20 91-3986 0 CIP
ISBN 0-415-06931-9
CONTENTS
Preface
INTRODUCTION
Barry Gower
1 SOCRATES' MISSION
Michael Stokes
vu
1
26
2 SOCRATIC QUESTIONS 82
Ian Kidd
3 SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE 93
Spiro Panagiotou
4 SOCRATES VERSUS PR OTA GO RAS
Malcolm Schofield
5 SOCRATIC ETHICS
C. C. W. Taylor
6 THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
P. ]. FitzPatrick
References
Index Locorum
General Index
122
137
153
209
217
220

PREFACE
Socrates is a popular subject, and scholarly opm10n about him
moves very fast. A book of original studies on diverse aspects of
his life, thought and influence accordingly needs no apology. The
origin of this one may, however, be explained.
It originates from a series of General Lectures given in the
University of Durham in the autumn of 1989, partly in celebration
of the organisation of a Joint Honours BA Degree in Greek and
Philosophy in the University. Two members of Durham's staff and
five distinguished scholars from other universities contributed one
lecture each. We arranged the series in the belief, in which we were
not disappointed, that such a sequence would interest in the first
instance a wide cross-section of the University's staff and students.
It was hoped also that eventual publication would appeal to the
very large number of people within and outside the universities
who without necessarily knowing any Greek take a more than
passing interest in the seminal and enigmatic figure of Socrates.
With one exception, which we accepted with regret, the lecturers
agreed to prepare their scripts for publication, and to our pleasure
and gratitude Routledge agreed to consider the collection, furnished
with a general introduction, for inclusion in their list.
We have left our contributors as free a hand as possible in the
revision of their lectures. Some have kept to the scale of an hour-long
oral delivery; others have expanded their presentations well beyond
those limits in the interests of a full and fully supported argument or
exposition. Any resulting unevenness should be laid at the editors'
door; but we are unrepentant, thinking that the problems dealt with
vary widely in nature, and that our readers will need and appreciate
more extensive guidance on some of them than on others.
The planning and arrangement of the series of lectures was our
Vll
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
joint responsibility. In the preparation of the book, B.S.G. did
more of the editorial graft than M.C.S., who took the larger
share of such critical discussion with some contributors as seemed
necessary and possible in the time available; but we are content with
joint responsibility also for such things as fall within an editor's
purview.
Our References list, we would stress, does not aim at completeness
at all. It merely gives details of works referred to compendiously
in the body of the book. Those seeking a fuller bibliography
are commended to T. C. Brickhouse and N. D. Smith, Socrates on
Trial, which offers not only an extensive bibliography on Plato's
Apology, but also a bibliography of relevant bibliographies on
Socrates and Plato. Only one point of bibliog~aphy deserves
mention here: those contributors who sent in their texts with
extra-scrupulous punctuality were thereby deprived of an opportunity
to consult Gregory Vlastos' 1991 book Socrates: Ironist and
Moral Philosopher: reference to that book in the notes is accordingly
a sign less of virtue than of vice.
It is a pleasure for M.C.S. to thank the Leverhulme Trust most
warmly for a Research Grant which enabled him to spend some
months of 1990 working with welcome continuity on Plato's
Apology of Socrates, and for both of us heartily to thank the
General Lectures Committee of the University of Durham for its
sponsorship and financial support of the original series of lectures.
We wish also to thank our contributors for their graceful lectures
and their hard and remarkably punctual work.
Durham, August 1991
Vlll
Barry S. Gower
Michael C. Stokes
INTRODUCTION 1
Barry Gower
In 399 BC, at the age of seventy, Socrates was accused of subverting
the religious and moral beliefs of his younger fellow citizens. The
precise terms of the accusation have been preserved for us by the
author of a compendium on the lives and doctrines of ancient philosophers,
Diogenes Laertius: 'Socrates is a wrongdoer, inasmuch
as he does not believe in the Gods whom the city worships, but
introduces other strange deities; he is also a wrongdoer inasmuch
as he corrupts the young men, and the punishment he has incurred
is death' (Diogenes Laertius Il.40). He was tried on this charge,
found guilty and condemned to death by a jury of Athenian
citizens; he was executed in the manner customary at that time
by being obliged to drink poison. Of the life that ended in this
way and of the character of the man who lived it, we know hardly
anything for certain. In itself, the extent of our ignorance is not at
all surprising, for such information as has come down to us about
the lives of people who lived at this or an earlier time is scanty
and unreliable. The art of biography had yet to be cultivated, and
it is very doubtful whether we should think of the descriptions
we possess as essays in that genre. Nevertheless, in the case of
Socrates, the poverty of our knowledge is particularly frustrating
in that he himself left no writings upon which we might hope to
base an impression, and we therefore have to rely upon the vivid
but conflicting versions of the sort of person he was which have
come down to us from people who knew, or knew of, him. These
accounts were not written as documentary records of Socrates' life;
rather they serve as representations of points of view on that life. As
such their purpose was not necessarily so much to inform us of the
facts as to persuade us of an opinion, which may very well not be
that of the historical Socrates. Of course, persuasion needs to have
1
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
some basis in the relevant facts if it is to be effective, but when it is
difficult if not impossible to distinguish between fact and literary
embellishment, the task of choosing between diverse versions is
not at all easy. Thus, from Plato we have more than one flattering
portrait of a complex and subtle intellectual; from Xenophon a
dull portrait of a leisured worthy; and from Aristophanes a satiric
portrait of a silly quibbler. And in the face of these differences, some
modern scholars2 have indeed despaired and drawn the pessimistic
conclusion that no version is reliable; the real Socrates, they believe,
remains inaccessible to us, and we must be content with a myth.
Others, notably Gregory Vlastos,3 claim that careful and judicious
scrutiny of our sources is capable of revealing certain features of the
man and of bringing to life a recognisable character with a coherent
personal philosophy. No doubt we cannot believe everything we
are told, but we are nevertheless able to identify a moral and
philosophical personality even if it does reflect those ambiguities
which, in any real life, are never entirely resolved.
The difficulty of knowing who, if any, among a variety of
characters presented to us by ancient authors is most like the
historical Socrates can be illustrated by reference to some of the
important differences between those characters. On the one hand we
have the fact that Socrates was judged by the majority of a large jury
of his fellow citizens to be a criminal deserving death; on the other
we have the judgement that he was 'of all those whom we knew in
our time, the bravest and also the wisest and most upright man'
(Plato, Phaedo 118). According to some he was first and foremost
a patriotic Athenian committed to the city's democratic constitution
and bound by its laws; to others he was above all else the friend,
supporter and teacher of treacherous leaders of an anti-democratic
faction which brought disaster on the city (the 'accuser' reported
by Xenophon, Memorabilia I.2.12). He was presented as a sophist
earning his living by teaching rhetorical tricks, and parodied as
a 'scientific' cosmologist interested in the acquisition of useless
trifling knowledge; but he was also portrayed as a worthy but
pedestrian moralist, preaching glib sermons - 'the patron-saint of
moral twaddle', as Hegel put it. To some he was an unscrupulous
corrupter of the young men who witnessed, admired and enjoyed
his demolition of traditional and commonplace sets of values and
beliefs; to others he was the ideal educator of the young.
In seeking to appreciate how one man could be characterised in
such very different ways, we will need to attend to the exceptional
2
INTRODUCTION
political, intellectual and cultural contexts in which Socrates lived.
For in the case of each of these contexts we find a tension, a conflict,
a dualism, which informs and animates thinking about how the business
of life should be conducted. The Socrates we find portrayed, in
such diverse terms, by his contemporaries can best be understood as
a man sensitive to these tensions, and as trying to live his life in a way
that responded creatively to the debates they engendered. Thus we
may say that during his life he witnessed both the rise of Athenian
political dominance and its subsequent eclipse in military defeat,
and like his contemporaries he will have had to understand and
come to terms with this phenomenon. How could it have happened
that a state committed to democratic institutions came to be seen
as tyrannical, not only and understandably by Athens' enemies but
also by some Athenians themselves, as evidenced by the description
attributed by Thucydides to Pericles of the empire as 'like a tyranny'
(Thucydides II.65)? Moreover, partly because of its political and
commercial prominence, Athens became in the fifth century BC an
intellectual centre where ideas about physical and, especially, moral
reality could be debated - ideas many of which have continued
to command attention and respect to this day. Skill in devising
arguments, which had been cultivated to a high standard by the
Ionian natural philosophers and especially by their western Greek
critics, as well as by sophists from various parts of the Greek world,
made it seem that these ideas could be accepted or rejected, defended
or attacked with more or less equal cogency. What was the ordinary
citizen expected to think about such matters, especially when they
had a bearing on the everyday business of living and working in a
city where each person's judgement was supposed to be as good
as any other person's? And finally we have the fact that some of
these dilemmas, of individual versus community, of old-fashioned
belief versus modern rationalism, of Greek versus barbarian, were
presented in a particularly disturbing form by dramatists such as
Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides, who created and sustained a
rich literary culture for Athens. Their tragedies were moulded in
part by the experience of war, and they saw all too clearly that the
inhumanity and violence of war arose from, and was the inevitable
consequence of, the exercise of free choice. Should we, people asked,
place our faith in a divine order such as that described for us by the
poets and seers, or should we turn to the purveyors of human reason
- the intellectuals or, if you will, the sophists, and seek the guidance
of experts?
3
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Our account of Socrates had best begin, not least because it is
relatively uncontentious, with his physical appearance. He was not,
it seems, a handsome man: a flat nose, protruding eyes and thick
sensual lips are mentioned; and in his later years he was, in all
probability, both bald and bearded.4 That, at least, is how he is
portrayed in the statues and busts that have become associated
with his name. Judged by the high aesthetic standards of late
fifth-century BC Athens, he was an ugly man with features his
contemporaries would have associated with those of the satyrs
they had seen depicted in the theatre. In one of Xenophon's
representations of a Socratic conversation (Symposium V.1-8), a
mock beauty contest is described in which Socrates' clever argument
in favour of his less than lovely features is pitted against the aesthetic
qualities of the handsome young Critobulus, which have no need
of verbal defence. Socrates loses the contest, though he wins the
admiration of his fellows for his eloquence and wit. But although
not handsome, he seems to have been physically robust, for he
is said to have acquitted himself well in those gruelling military
campaigns in which he participated. As for his customary clothing,
that too was less than respectably conventional, for in a Platonic
conversation he is depicted as barefoot and wearing 'the same
cloak ... that he usually wore' (Symposium 220a5-b7). He cared,
it seems, nothing for his appearance. There are some early sculptures
representing Socrates in which we can clearly discern these features,
albeit in a softened form.5
Socrates was born in Athens and, apart from military service,
seems to have spent the whole of his life in that city. His father,
Sophroniscus, may have been a stonemason or sculptor; and if
Plato's Theaetetus is to be believed, his mother, Phaenarete, was
a midwife, though it is by no means clear that there was any
such profession recognised in Athens at this time. Perhaps indeed
this description of her was simply intended as a handy way of
introducing the well-known analogy between the art of midwifery
and Socrates' own efforts in bringing to light the ideas conceived by
his interlocutors. We know nothing at all of Socrates' childhood and
youth. He may well have learnt and, in his early years at least, have
practised his father's craft, if any. Accounts tell that he was married,
perhaps more than once, and at least once rather late in life, for his
three sons were all still young at the time of his trial and execution. 6
Whatever financial advantages he may have had in his youth, and
whatever effect the supposed aristocratic connections of his wife,
4
INTRODUCTION
Xanthippe, may have had, Socrates appears to have spent a major
part of his life in poverty. Whether deliberately chosen or not, this
poverty contributed to the image he created and explains some of
the hostility expressed towards him at his trial. For, as Pericles, the
leader of the Athenian democrats, had declared, although there is no
disgrace in poverty itself, there is real shame in a person not taking
practical steps to escape from the clutches of poverty (Thucydides
II. 40). There is an echo here of the standards and values of the elite
in society, such as those of the Homeric heroes, according to which
what really matters is the extent of a person's success in the eyes
of his contemporaries and the consequences of this for his standing
and reputation in society. Wealth was a significant measure of status,
and inherited wealth was associated with a powerful Greek word of
commendation - arete. To shun even a modicum of wealth seemed
to be to court dependence on others, to risk defeat and humiliation
and so become a person whose life counts for nothing.7
The Athens where Socrates was born and grew up was a free,
independent, enterprising, and relatively prosperous city-state, or
polis. It had recently emerged from a crucial war with Persia in
which an alliance of Greek city-states - especially the Athenian fleet
and the Spartan army - had triumphed. Much of Athens' growing
political power in the middle decades of the fifth century BC derived
from its newly developed naval supremacy, which enabled it not
only to acquire and exercise some leadership in defence, especially in
curbing the Persian threat to the Asiatic Greeks, but also to protect
its commercial interests in the Aegean and Asia Minor. An early
consequence of the initiative Athens seized after the defeat of the
Persian forces in the sea battle of Salamis and the land battle of
Plataea, some ten years before Socrates' birth, was its leadership
of a league or alliance of Greek city-states. The Ionian cities of the
west coast of Asia Minor, together with many of the Aegean islands,
were among the prominent members of this league, and at the height
of its power there were perhaps as many as two hundred city-states
throughout the Greek world which had, with varying degrees of
enthusiasm, joined. Its original purpose was to promote and enable
aggressive campaigns against remaining centres of Persian power in
the northern Aegean and in the eastern Mediterranean, and there can
be no doubt that its success in this led to a significant consolidation
of Greek power. But the alliance was even more successful in
promoting the political ambitions and economic prosperity of
Athens itself. For not only was the political hegemony of Athens
5
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
in the relevant area unchallenged, but the economic control and
management of the league was largely in the hands of Athenian
officials. In the early years, each of the allies officially had an equal
say in the determination of policy, but this equality was steadily
eroded by treaties and other administrative measures drawn up in
such a way that, collectively, they benefited Athens and undermined
the independence of the allies.
One victim of the Athenian imperialism which this process
promoted was the island of Samos, close to the western coast
of present-day Turkey, and the birthplace of Pythagoras. In 440
BC this important Ionian ally attempted to secede from the league
on account of unwanted Athenian intervention in a quarrel between
Samos and Miletus, a city-state on the nearby mainland. The conflict
that followed led to the suppression of Samian independence by the
imposition of an Athenian garrison. There are some not altogether
reliable indications that Socrates, then aged 30 or so, participated
in the Samian campaign. If he did, then he would have been in
illustrious company, for the dramatist Sophocles had been elected
as one of the military commanders of the Athenian expeditionary
force, and on the opposing side an important member of the Eleatic
school of critics of natural philosophy, Melissus, was commanding
the Samian navy - or so later sources tell us.
We have clearer evidence for Socrates' participation in a later
campaign, of 432 BC, to subdue the revolt of another member of
the Delian league, Potidaea - a city-state on the northern shores of
the Aegean. The episode is described by the historian Thucydides,
who counts it as an important incident leading to the outbreak of the
Peloponnesian War. If, as Plato reports in his Apology, Socrates took
part in this campaign, then it is very likely that he would have been
present as a 'hoplite', i.e. as a heavily armed infantryman. Athenian
citizens of moderate wealth were expected to serve when required
in this capacity and would equip themselves with body-armour,
a shield, an iron sword and a spear. He would have been in his
late thirties at this time, and we have an account of Socrates'
role which lays great stress on his powers of endurance (Plato,
Symposium 219e5-220e7). But although Plato is our best witness
on this matter, we cannot be altogether confident that Socrates took
part in the campaign at all, for if he did, it is puzzling that the fact is
not mentioned by Xenophon, who, as a soldier, would have wanted
to draw attention to his hero's military exploits.
Whether direct or indirect, Socrates' experience of the effects of
6
INTRODUCTION
Athens' aggressive foreign policy in these years before the outbreak
of the Peloponnesian War will have made it plain to him that, as
a result of exploitation of its controlling position, the allies had
become little more than subjects whose dissent or discontent
was ruthlessly suppressed. The alliance had become an empire;
an arrangement created to foster the common objectives of free,
equal and independent city-states had turned them into clients of a
single imperial power. But while this had been taking place, the old
rival, Sparta, leader of the Peloponnesian alliance of city-states, had
been aware of Athenian power, and when those Spartan allies, such
as Corinth, who saw themselves as victims of that power sought aid,
it found the pressure to oppose the military aggression of Athens
and to check its political ambition irresistible. Athens, for its part,
had become committed to the new social and cultural ideals it had
fostered. Defeat would entail abandoning those ideals; it would
threaten, in particular, the autonomy and integrity of Athens itself,
acting in accordance with decisions taken by free male adult citizens.
Pericles, in his famous 'funeral oration' early in the war with Sparta,
emphasised the differences between Athenians and other Greeks.
What was. common to the Greeks - their language, their history,
their religion, their literature - was seen by him as less significant
than what divided them. The democratic freedoms enjoyed by
Athenian citizens, the success of the policies pursued by the elected
leaders, and the cultural supremacy of the city were, he claimed,
at risk. Athens could brook no challenge to its rightful position
as the dominant city-state, since this position had been earned
and sustained by the free actions of its citizens. In its view, the
community of Greek city-states was a community of competitors.
Power, influence and ability were what mattered in the dealings of
the states with each other, as we can see from the terms in which the
Athenians later addressed their rebellious opponents in the chilling
Melian dialogue recorded by Thucydides: 'the. standard of justice
depends on the equality of power to compel and . . . in fact the
strong do what they have the power to do and the weak accept
what they have to accept' (Thucydides V. 89). It is as though the
self-regarding tyrannical attitude adopted by Athens in its relations
with neighbouring city-states, whether friend or foe, was a natural
and inevitable, but contrasting, companion to the other-regarding
democratic attitude cultivated, though not altogether successfully,
within Athens itself.
The Peloponnesian War began directly after the start of the
7
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
campaign at Potidaea. It lasted, with varying degrees of intensity,
for some twenty-seven years. Plato reports that Socrates fought in
the war at Delium in 424 BC, and at Amphipolis two years later. By
then he was in his middle to late forties and had acquired enough of
a reputation as an intellectual to enable the playwright Aristophanes
to satirise him in his comedy The Clouds, first produced at about
this time. At Delium, near the borders of Attica and therefore quite
close to Athens itself, the Athenian army was roundly defeated
by Spartan allies. Socrates' tranquil bearing and fortitude during
the subsequent retreat are described in flattering terms in two
Platonic dialogues by characters representing the distinguished
soldier, Laches and the scheming aristocrat, Alcibiades. 8 Amphipolis
was a city of political and economic importance near the Thracian
coast. Founded on the site of a former Thracian town as an Athenian
colony earlier in the fifth century, it surrendered to a Spartan
force in 424 BC, and Plato's Socrates says he was involved in the
subsequent unsuccessful attempt to restore Athenian control.
Apart from some incidental references to him by the comic
dramatists, we next learn of Socrates in 406 BC, some two years
before the end of the Peloponnesian War. The Athenian navy
had been victorious in a battle against Sparta and its allies at
the Arginusae islands near the Ionian coast south of the island of
Lesbos. Losses, though, were very heavy, partly because a storm
prevented the rescue of many shipwrecked seamen. When news of
the battle and its outcome reached Athens, it was these losses rather
than the victory itself which were seen as the chief issue. Those held
to be responsible - the commanders of the fleet - were accused of
negligence. In the prosecution, under pressure from those insisting
that action be taken against the commanders, the procedure adopted
was a trial of the commanders as a group. Socrates, serving his turn
as a member of the Presiding Committee of the Athenian Council
at the time, objected on the grounds that it was illegal to prosecute
groups of individuals. Feelings ran so high, particularly on the part
of those bereaved, about the negligence of the commanders, that
to express and maintain such an objection required considerable
obstinacy and, indeed, courage. Socrates' stand in refusing to be
intimidated was later seen to have been correct. 9
At the close of the Peloponnesian War in 404 BC Athens was a
defeated city, its inhabitants demoralised, its economy in disarray
and its empire dismantled. Plague and famine, as. well as military
attrition, had taken their toll. The wisdom of democratic rule, with
8
INTRODUCTION
its reputation for indecision, fickleness and delay, was questioned,
and for a period it was replaced, as it had been briefly during the war,
by an oligarchic system of government after the model familiar to
those city-states which had adopted something more like the Spartan
way of managing political affairs. Some Athenians welcomed this
change even though it abrogated the rights they had enjoyed under
the democracy (Plato, Seventh Letter 324b-d), but the victorious
Spartans obliged the Athenians to select thirty men to be responsible
for the affairs of the city. In the chaos and confusion which followed
the end of the war, their rule - of Thirty Tyrants, as they came to be
called - became a reign of terror. With the help of a garrison from
Sparta they imposed their brutal will on the city by sheer force of
arms. Many democrats lost their lives; others fled to the countryside
or to neighbouring cities, where they were able to regroup and
gather reinforcements. Civil war erupted and eventually, in 403 BC,
the authority of the Tyrants was broken and democracy restored.
Some among the Thirty Tyrants had been acquaintances, at least, of
Socrates - now in his sixties. And just as in the episode following
the battle of Arginusae he displayed determination in repudiating
illegalities perpetrated by a democratic Athens, so Plato's Socrates
in the Apology reports - and the story is repeated in Plato's Seventh
Letter - a similar determination to resist attempts on the part of the
Thirty to implicate him in the unjust actions of a dictatorship. The
Thirty had, it seems, ordered Socrates and others to arrest and return
to Athens for execution a certain Leon of Salamis. Socrates refused
to obey, thereby challenging the authority of the oligarchy in a very
direct manner, and had the democracy not been restored so swiftly,
he might well have paid for his disobedience with his life. Here
again, though, there is a question about the historical authenticity
of the report, for one can doubt whether Socrates' disobedience was
followed sufficiently swiftly by the restored democracy to exempt
him from any penalty.
How should we imagine Socrates using his time and energy when
not serving the city in some official or military capacity? As a
teacher, certainly, though a wholly unofficial one who in Plato's
dialogues disowns the title. But it would be hard to say with
confidence what he taught without presuming on the reliability
of one or other of our sources of conflicting information. If
the philosopher Plato is to be believed, his chief lesson was that in
order to live and act rightly we must set aside the time-honoured
teachings of tradition as unexamined and inconsistent, and acquire
9
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
instead an education which brings together morality and rationality.
If the comic playwright Aristophanes is to be relied on - and his
characterisation, or rather caricature, does have the merit of being
the earliest surviving record - then Socrates combined the attributes
of a sophistic teacher of rhetoric with those of a natural philosopher,
and in urging the claims of intellect and expertise was challenging the
religious and some of the moral conventions which were embedded
in, and which sustained, stable social relations in the polis. But
however one describes the content of his teaching, he apparently
acquired a group of followers, men - probably mostly young -
intent on learning something useful from their association with him.
No doubt some will have wanted to satisfy a natural curiosity, or
simply to enjoy listening to an eloquent and forceful arguer. Others
will have had a more direct practical motive, for they wanted to learn
those tips, tricks and tactics which enabled an ambitious person to
cultivate the art of speaking well in political debates and forensic
enquiries. Effective speaking was the key to power in democratic
Athens, and power was of increasing importance in the face of
instability created by war and civil unrest. Socrates' own skills in
persuading others that a certain view should, or should not, be
accepted can hardly be doubted. It is not surprising, therefore, that
he was thought of among many if not most of his fell ow citizens as
a sophist, i.e. as one who earned a living and a reputation by teaching
others how to use reason and argument to secure success in private
and public affairs.
For present purposes the justice of this reputation as a sophist,
though as hotly disputed now as it was during and after Socrates'
lifetime, matters less than its nature. Plato was indeed intent upon
putting as much distance as he could between Socratic philosophy
and the sophistry with which he thought it was confused, and
historically he may well have been right to do so. But if we are
to appreciate the ambiguities present in the intellectual as well
as the political context of Socrates' life, we need to have some
understanding of who the sophists were, of what they believed
and, especially, of the ambivalent attitude of Athenians towards
them and their influence.
The sophists as a group of intellectuals probably began to emerge
during the middle years of the fifth century, when the Greek word
describing these people - sophistes - was perhaps, though it is hard
to find clear evidence, starting to acquire the unfavourable tone
associated with the English 'sophistry' .1° Previously, the word
10
INTRODUCTION
would simply have been used to describe an expert, and was applied
in that sense to poets, rhapsodes and seers, because they were skilled
in the craft of using words. The sophists whom Socrates would
have heard of and probably met, men such as Protagoras, Gorgias,
Prodicus, Hippias and Thrasymachus, were - in the absence of any
regular education for the young men of the city - professional
educators with a select group of pupils or followers paying for
their instruction. They did not constitute a school of thought,
for they were not bound by allegiances to common doctrines.
They were, rather, exceptional individuals who were able, in the
social and political circumstances prevailing in Athens in the second
half of the fifth century, to exert a significant influence. For those
circumstances created a demand for the service they were able to
offer, which was, to put no finer point on it, instruction in how
best to get one's way. Much of our information about them, their
activities and their views comes to us from Plato, who presents
them as characters in his Socratic dialogues. Their encounters with
Socrates invariably end in defeat for them, though usually they are
allowed to withdraw with some dignity and grace. In so far as
we can identify a subject-matter for their teaching, it would be
political skill, forensic eloquence and practical sagacity with respect
to personal affairs - all of them valuable accomplishments for any
ambitious young Athenian. Though most of the sophists were not
citizens of Athens, that city became their intellectual home, for they
found lucrative employment there for their talents, and it is there,
too, that the effects of their teaching are most visible to us.
A number of moral and political ideas which have pervaded
Western thought originated with the sophists, and history leaves us
in no doubt that their impact has been both unsettling and powerful.
Thus, the ideas that ethical values are relative to a particular time
and place, that because virtue, or excellence - arete - can be taught,
education will make us better people, and that what people call
justice in society is what is in the best interests of those who are
the strongest - these are ideas whose influence and effect on our
lives can still be felt. Then as now, justice or fairness might seem
to some to rest on desert - on their contribution to, and merit in,
society; others might prefer to think of justice as equality. There
is evidence of both views by the time of Socrates' maturity, and
it may be that the manner in which Socrates invited individual
Athenians to consider these views, in so far as it depended on reason
rather than the authority of custom, was considered subversive of
11
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
received beliefs. But at a time of social ferment and upheaval, when
a consensus about values is hard to maintain, beliefs without logoi
- or reason - are vulnerable. In a culture which prides itself on its
intellectual as well as its artistic character, moral beliefs which lack
rational justification will not command that allegiance which would
enable them to survive social and political change of the kind that
was overtaking Athens in the last quarter of the fifth century.
But although these foreigners enhanced the city's reputation for
intellectual excellence, by no means all Athenians welcomed their
presence in the city, for apart from the Athenians' suspicion of
alien influence on the minds and characters of the young men
who were the sophists' clients, they were alert to the fact that
cleverness in speech and argument could be, and often was, used
for bad rather than good ends. The ability of these professional
pundits to manipulate people's attitudes and beliefs with words was
widely distrusted; sophists were like conjurors performing tricks
with words, or like poets, indeed, beguiling hearers and readers
with verbal images. True, there were some who admired the skill
with which the magic was performed, but there were many more
who deplored the deception it could promote. The art of making the
weaker argument appear the stronger has, no doubt, merit as well as
use when the weaker argument delivers a true conclusion, but it can
also be used, quite deliberately, to undermine or obscure the truth.
At a time of political instability, a sophist's willingness to sell his
skills to the highest bidder was seen by some as the cynical act of a
corrupt intellectual, representing a real and immediate threat to the
city.11 No wonder, then, that some characters in Plato's dialogues
are made to express vehement hostility to the activities and influence
of sophists; none more so than Anytus in the Meno, who was a
democratic politician and one of Socrates' accusers.
The fact that Socrates is represented, by Plato at least, as
disagreeing with each of the sophists he meets does not, in itself,
show that he himself was not one of them. Indeed, in so far as
he sustains his disagreements by an appeal to the intellect of his
interlocutors, rather than to tradition as an adequate guide to right
conduct, he could well be said to count as a sophist. If there is
no such thing as a coherent sophistic doctrine, then the reason
for wishing to exclude Socrates from their number must lie deeper
than his disagreement with them individually. And it seems clear
that Plato's Socrates did hold that certain features of the sophists'
method, style and approach were unacceptable. But from the point
12
INTRODUCTION
of view of his fellow citizens, what was distinctive about Socrates
was his general view about the relationship between morality and
culture - a view he can be said to have shared with the sophists
and which was widely understood as threatening to the stability
of society.12 For whatever might be said about their coherence and
rationality, the attitudes and values which had sustained Athens
and promoted its political success prior to the influence of the
sophists becoming established were those which had stood the
test of time and had proved their worth in practice. Products of
this traditional model of moral education may have been confused
in their ethical suppositions, but nevertheless they were robust in
body and mind, they were courageous and successful, and they
were, moreover, intolerant of those who sought to overturn and
replace the instinctive natural beliefs of patriotic Athenians. Some
of the more conspicuous sophists had invited their pupils and
followers to question this model - to dispute and to doubt the
rationality of its unexamined assumptions. Clarity, they thought,
must replace confusion in order that people may see what must
be done to achieve their aims. But to right-minded Athenians, the
sophists - including Socrates - were nothing but quibblers deceiving
young and inexperienced people with a web of words in an attempt
to persuade them to abandon sets of beliefs, ideals and values which
had been so painstakingly built up over time. For them, the loss
of these was an important cause of the decline, defeat and near
destruction of a justifiably proud city.
Here too, then, we find a creative tension. Personal liberty
and autonomy were prized attributes of the Athenian democratic
culture. Yet beliefs and attitudes which were perceived as posing a
threat to democracy could not be allowed to flourish. In particular,
prejudice against the intellectualism of the sophists on account of
its threat to familiar and trusted moral ideals became prominent.
But this intolerance and anger, however understandable, itself represented
a danger to the democracy. Socrates, far from being exempt
from this conflict, was subject to it in a direct manner. In accusing
him of corrupting the moral values of young men, his prosecutors
were, in effect, objecting to the manner in which he, together with
the sophists, had in their view abused and exploited the responsibilities
of a citizen in order to undermine the very basis of the
democracy. On the other hand, those prosecutors in their attempt
to silence Socrates were themselves mounting an attack which was
potentially at least as damaging to the democracy. Socrates, for his
13
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
part, had long been aware of the serious and substantial nature of
this kind of criticism, for it is clearly represented in Aristophanes'
comedy The Clouds, written and performed during his lifetime. In
Plato's Apology he refers to the allegation as an old slander which
he must try to answer in order to deflect a long-standing prejudice
against him and his activities. He would also have been aware of
the damage to the fabric of a democracy which would result if that
accusation, together with the official charges brought against him
by his prosecutors, were to remain unchallenged. For Socrates, the
freedom to pursue his mission and to engage in rational enquiry
whomsoever he will, even including rational enquiry respecting
the moral basis of society, cannot be curtailed without risk to the
character of that society.
We come, then, to the final events in Socrates' life - his trial,
imprisonment and execution. They overshadow all other events
in his life, not just because they were at a personal level of
the greatest moment, but also because their significance for our
understanding of Socrates' life has remained controversial. Some
have claimed that in these events we see simply a brutal but not
especially remarkable response to a charismatic personality whose
posturings had become too tiresome to be tolerated. The disaster
of war had shown that lives are cheap, and this life, persistently
irritating in its effect on others, was surely expendable. Others
have discerned powerful political motives propelling Socrates to
his death. His alleged oligarchic sympathies, and his association
with leaders of the infamous tyranny, could be neither forgotten
nor forgiven. The official charges are on this view no more than
plausible but transparent substitutes for the banned charge of
treason against the democracy. Still others see the events as a
monstrous mistake engineered by Socrates himself in the belief
that the time had come to make his claims about how a person
should live more prominent in the city, even if this should mean
that he would encounter overwhelming opposition and anger.
This is not the place to attempt a resolution of this controversy,
depending as it does upon some nice judgements respecting the
nature and reliability of the evidence available to us. For present
purposes, we must rely on attested facts, even if that provides only
a partial and sketchy account of the events in question.
By 399 BC, five years after the end of the Peloponnesian War and
the subsequent tyranny, Athenian citizens were able to exercise their
democratic rights and freedoms once more. The administration of
14
INTRODUCTION
the city was in the hands of an assembly of all its citizens, and the
rule of law which was intended to secure justice for those citizens
was restored. In the interests of a secure peace, new legislation had
recently been introduced as a result of the decision that no one
should be charged with offences alleged to have been committed
before or during the dictatorship of the Thirty Tyrants. This
amnesty, an attempt to provide a new beginning, was widely
welcomed as a necessary first step towards reconciliation, but
coming so soon after the calamities of defeat and tyranny, it
could not altogether eliminate fear and suspicion. Anti-democn1tic
sentiments, together with the practices thought to have encouraged
their growth, were resented and distrusted. There would be many
still grieving for family and friends who had become victims of civil
strife, and many, too, anxiously facing an uncertain future. There
were certainly some seeking redress for past wrongs, whether real
or imaginary, and probably some determined to promote change in
past attitudes in the hope of preventing a repetition of recent events.
We can do little more than guess at the reasons why charges
of impiety and of corrupting young men were brought forward
at the time they were. There is no firm evidence, or reason to
believe, that Socrates had at this time begun to behave differently,
which might justify a different and less tolerant attitude on the
part of his fellow citizens. So far as we can tell, his questioning
manner was still regarded by many as tiresomely persistent, and
his severity with received but unexamined answers continued to
be seen as destructively critical. It may be, indeed, that it was his
failure to change his manner when so much else of significance for
people's lives had changed that provoked the action taken by his
prosecutors. For it is one thing to question and to criticise the
values and assumptions of a previous generation, especially when
the mistakes of that generation are plain for all to see and feel;
but it is another and altogether more culpable matter to continue
questioning and criticising as though nothing of importance had
changed for the better.
The procedure that Socrates' prosecutors . would have had to
follow was to present their case in the first place to an elected
magistrate with responsibility for dealing with the kind of charges
mentioned in the indictment. In this case, because the overt basis of
the charges was impiety and disrespect for acknowledged divinities,
the initial enquiry would have been before the magistrate responsible
for cases with a connection with religion - the archon basileus
15
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
or King Archon, as he was called. In effect, this magistrate decided
whether the crime with which Socrates was charged and the weight
of the evidence that he was guilty of that crime were of sufficient
substance to warrant a trial by jury. We know nothing of this aspect
of the proceedings against Socrates, though it should be mentioned
that Plato's Euthyphro, which is a dialogue about the nature of piety,
opens with a scene in which Socrates is about to appear before
the King Archon at the preliminary enquiry to answer charges
brought by Meletus, here as elsewhere the principal prosecutor in
law. Evidently, though, it was decided that the case should be heard
by a jury which would determine the guilt or innocence of Socrates,
and, since there was no fixed penalty for the crimes with which he
was charged, also decide according to established procedure what
punishment, if any, was appropriate. As in all cases decided by
juries, there was no appeal against the decisions reached. In part, at
least, this was because historically trial by jury was itself conceived
as constituting an appeal against a magistrate's verdict. 13
Athenian juries consisted of citizens who were expected to volunteer
for this service. At the beginning of each year, several thousand
volunteers of at least 30 years of age were chosen, and from this
number juries to hear particular cases were formed as and when they
were needed. The size of a jury could vary, depending on the nature
and importance of the case to be considered, from several hundred
to a few thousand. We do not know how jurors were allocated
to courts; it may have been by lot, though such a procedure
had not been formally adopted at the time of Socrates' trial.
In order that poorer citizens should not be practically prevented
from serving, each juror was given a small payment per day for his
trouble. However, since the payment was less than could be earned
by an able-bodied man, a substantial proportion of those who
volunteered for the work were men who were too old for work.
This circumstance may well have had some bearing on the outcome
of the trial. Jurors were required to take an oath obliging them
to determine guilt or innocence in accordance with the evidence
presented and with the laws of the city; no such requirement was,
it seems, imposed on the prosecutor or defendant.
Socrates' trial would have been held in public and would probably
have been presided over by the King Archon. The role of the
president was simply to keep order and allow prosecutor and
defendant to be heard; unlike a modern judge he did not advise
the jury on matters of interpretation or of law, nor did he provide
16
INTRODUCTION
any kind of summing up. He might, though, have been assisted
by an official who would read out relevant laws or other public
documents. Prosecutor and defendant would each be allowed an
equal amount of time to present their cases in propria persona. They
could, within these time-limits, call witnesses, or rather have their
testimony read to the court, to support their cases. Since all jury
trials had to be completed within the space of one day, the speeches
of the litigants and their supporters cannot have been very long. Two
or three hours for the presentation of the prosecution, and the same
amount of time for the defence, is perhaps a reasonable estimate. 14
In the case of the trial of Socrates, although we know what
the charges were, we do not know what the prosecution said in
support of its allegations. The chief prosecutor appears to have
been Meletus, aided by two supporters - Anytus and L ycon. For
different reasons, we know little or nothing reliable about either
Meletus (who seems, however, from Apology 23e to have been
a poet) 15 or Lycan, but Anytus seems to have been a man of some
political influence. Anytus features as a character in Plato's dialogue
Meno, and if his treatment by Socrates there is anything like any
actual encounter between the two men, we can easily understand
why he wanted to expose Socrates' activities to public scrutiny
and criticism. On the other hand, two rather different versions
from among several composed in the fourth century BC of what
Socrates is alleged to have said in his defence have survived. The
reliability of each is questionable, though Plato's version - the
Apology - is often taken as a reasonably faithful reconstruction
of what Socrates said, if not as a word-for-word transcript of the
speeches he made in his defence. Xenophon's Apology is written
in the form of a second-hand account, and such claims as it makes
for authenticity are weak. Plato writes of himself as having been
present at Socrates' trial, whereas Xenophon was in Asia at the time.
Accordingly, scholars commonly suppose that Xenophon's version
was written later than Plato's, and probably with knowledge of its
contents. Neither writer tells of any testimonies being read to the
court, so if there were any, we remain ignorant of their content.
Unless we take our ignorance to imply that no testimony was
provided, we should be wary of any inference we might draw
from the omission of some relevant point in a representation of
Socrates' defence, even supposing it to be accurate.
According to Plato's Apology, the vote taken at the end of
Socrates' speech in his defence was close. He was found guilty of
17
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
the charges by a narrow majority, though just how small it was is
hard to judge in the confused state of our information about the total
size of the jury. 16 Five hundred jurymen is commonly suggested on
the basis of some slender evidence, and this would fit well with the
claim of Plato's Socrates that had only thirty votes gone the other
way, a majority of the jury would have judged him innocent of
the charges. As it was, though, the jury now faced the task of
determining a penalty. By law they could not, themselves, discuss
alternative penalties and propose that which seemed the most
appropriate. They could not even compromise; rather, they had to
choose between the penalty proposed by the successful prosecutors
and that proposed by the unsuccessful defendant. Meletus evidently
suggested that death be the penalty, though again we lack any report
of what he said in support of his proposal. Defendants in Socrates'
position, facing the prospect of that penalty, were presented with a
very difficult decision, for it would be vitally important that their
counter-proposal should not be judged too lenient. Plato provides
us with a version of the reasoning which eventually led Socrates to
his counter-proposal of a financial penalty - much the commonest
kind of penalty imposed upon unsuccessful defendants. It was,
though, rejected as over-lenient, perhaps because of his evident
reluctance to propose a penalty at all and indeed because of
his provocative initial claim that what he deserved was reward
rather than punishment. It could be that Socrates was expecting,
reasonably enough, that none of the jury who voted for his acquittal
would now vote for his death, and that a sufficient number of those
who had voted for his condemnation would, especially in the light
of a close vote, baulk at imposing the heavier sentence.17
As Plato describes it, the decision of the jury in favour of the
death penalty is followed by a third and final speech from Socrates.
There is no other example of such a final speech from this period
of Greek history and we may, therefore, be reading no more than
a Platonic fiction. It has, perhaps, the air of a considered and
rehearsed conclusion, in that it addresses both those men of the
jury who voted against him and those who voted for him, drawing
attention to the consequences for them as well as for himself of their
decision. On the other hand it conveys a vehemence and passion
appropriate to the circumstances we are asked to imagine, as indeed
one would expect from Plato, whatever our judgement respecting the
authenticity of his version.
Normally, the sentence of the court would have been carried out
18
INTRODUCTION
directly after the jury's decision. However, according to Plato, the
day before the trial marked the beginning of an important annual
event for Athenians. For this was the time of the year when the city
dispatched a ship to Delos in order to renew its thanks to Apollo for
the safe return from Crete of the legendary hero Theseus together
with his young companions. No public executions were permitted
until this ship returned to Athens, and for this period of time
Socrates was detained in prison. Two of Plato's dialogues, the Crito
and the Phaedo, are set within the prison, and in the latter we are
given the impression that a considerable amount of time elapsed
before the sentence could be carried out. The final hours of Socrates'
life are memorably described in the final pages of the Phaedo. It is
not likely that we shall ever be in a position to judge the veracity of
Plato's description, though there is some medical evidence that Plato
improved on reality.18 But in an important way, our uncertainty
does not matter, for it is above all the literary qualities of that simple
and straightforward description which have so successfully captured
the imaginations of readers and remained in their memories. Plato's
rare gift for conveying the life and vigour of philosophical ideas
and for embodying them so vividly in the character as well as the
words of his Socrates overshadows the doubts and debates among
historians about the relationship between his Socrates and the real
Socrates.
Each of the following chapters in this book takes the portrait of
Socrates that Plato provided as its starting point. More particularly,
there is a group of dialogues which scholars believe to have been
composed early in Plato's career which display certain affinities with
each other, and which are thought to portray at least some important
aspects of the character and ideas of the historical Socrates.
Among these early dialogues are listed Apology, Charmides, Crito,
Euthyphro, Gorgias, Laches, Protagoras, Republic I and, probably,
Meno. It is to these dialogues that the contributors have turned
for their subject-matter. Certain other dialogues, of the so-called
'middle period' - including Phaedo, Symposium, Theaetetus and
the other hooks of Republic - also feature a character called
'Socrates' and may well contain information which is authentic.
But if Aristotle's views on the difference between Socrates and
Plato are to count for anything, particularly with regard to the
use of the theory of Forms, much of what 'Socrates' is made to
say in these dialogues must be fabricated, and we should think of
19
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
'Socrates' at least there as no more than a mouthpiece for Plato's
own ideas and arguments.
Michael Stokes' chapter focusses our attention on Socrates'
declaration in the Apology that he has been charged by the god
Apollo through his Oracle with a mission to the citizens of Athens.
This 'mission' constitutes a dominant theme of Socrates' defence
against the charge of impiety. Stokes subjects to critical scrutiny
Plato's version of the reasoning which led Socrates to believe he
had such a mission. Socrates makes out that his appointed task is
to demonstrate to the Athenian citizenry the falsity of their claims
to know truths of real value. Needless to say, Plato's picture of
Socrates as undertaking this task is one of a deeply unpopular man;
but short of a perverse courting of unpopularity, no immediately
obvious reason connects it with Apollo's pronouncement that no
man is wiser than Socrates. Curiosity may certainly have motivated
Socrates' enquiries in part; but the nature of the obligation on
Socrates to pursue them so steadfastly remains obscure. Stokes
brings historical and literary, as well as philosophical and logical,
considerations to bear in a sustained investigation of this and related
questions which is intricate in its details and far-reaching in its
implications. These are significant not only for Socrates' thinking
but also for the general status, whether fact, fiction or 'faction', of
the early Platonic dialogues.
Propounding a view of the dialogues as 'faction', the following
chapter, by Ian Kidd, considers how Plato's Socrates used questions
in order to further his mission. Opposed to a view of Socrates'
questions as merely eliciting the respondent's opinions with a
view to confounding them, Kidd argues that by appreciating
the directive and guiding character of Socrates' questions we are
enabled to see that something positive emerges from the apparently
negative questioning process, or 'elenchus'. In the Laches, a dialogue
which addresses the question 'What is courage?', two eminent and
successful military leaders - Laches and Nicias - are quizzed; for
they, if anyone, should be able to provide the right answer to such a
question. Their attempts to answer lead under Socrates' questioning
to the recognition that their answers are incompatible with other
beliefs they hold. They do not, then, know about courage what
they - and we - thought they knew. With this recognition of
ignorance the dialogue comes to a seemingly negative end. Readers
are, however, challenged to do better than Laches and Nicias,
though it is clear from the form which the enquiry has taken in
20
INTRODUCTION
the dialogue that the difficulties they encountered were not simply
the result of carelessness, or impatience, or lack of intelligence. But
dramatic and literary structure here, as in some other dialogues of
Plato's early period, provide the responsive reader with evidence
of positive views being advanced by Plato's Socrates. For Plato has
designed Socrates' questions not only to lead Socrates' interlocutors
to the recognition that they are as ignorant as he, but to guide first
the conversation within the dialogue and secondly the reader to
an improved understanding, and ultimately perhaps knowledge,
of positive answers to the fundamental questions with which
Socrates starts.
Plato's Socrates evidently conceives of his mission to acquaint his
fellow citizens with the extent of their ignorance as having a positive
moral character. In the Apology he faces the prospect of punishment
for persisting in his attempts to carry out his orders, to meet what he
sees as his moral obligations. He tries, unsuccessfully, to persuade
the jury that he of all people is not guilty of impiety and that he
should be rewarded rather than punished. The jury decides that he
is guilty and that his punishment is to be death. What, though, is
to be said and done by those who think, with Socrates, that the
jury's decision - in effect the majority decision of Athenian citizens
- was wrong and unjust? This is the question that taxes Socrates
and Crito in the conversation that Plato describes as taking place in
prison near the end of the interval between Socrates' condemnation
and his death. It is a practical, not this time a theoretical question,
given urgency by the fact that Crito and his friends can arrange for
Socrates to escape from prison and thus avoid the unjust penalty.
The conversation occupies the dialogue Crito. Spiro Panagiotou's
chapter examines the responses given there to the question about
obedience to unjust laws and decisions. Once again the suggestion is
that the direction in which the reader is led may not be immediately
apparent. The dialogue contains a powerful argument to the effect
that to disobey, after one has tried and failed to persuade the state, is
always wrong. The fact that Plato makes Socrates put this argument
in the mouth of the laws of Athens and direct it against Crito as
well as himself has encouraged the attribution of the argument to
Socrates himself, or at least to Plato's Socrates. There is, though,
a well-known and much-discussed difficulty with this: the Socrates
of the Apology says that if the jury were to order him to desist
from his mission, he would disobey. Such an inconsistency cannot
be tolerated if we hope to learn anything, however tentatively,
21
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
from these sources. Panagiotou's proposals and arguments indicate
a way in which inconsistency can be avoided. Plato's Socrates,
on Panagiotou's view, is to be distinguished from the personified
laws of Athens; the Socrates of the Crito does allow that civil
disobedience on the part of a virtuous citizen is possible, and in
the hypothetical circumstances described in the Apology, Socrates
would be disobeying virtuously. On the other hand, virtue and civil
disobedience cannot be so readily combined as Crito supposes; in
particular, escape from prison for Socrates would not be a case of
virtuous disobedience.
What, though, is it to be virtuous? Needless to say, that is not
a question Plato's Socrates neglected to ask whenever the occasion
warranted. One such occasion was that on which he encountered
the famous sophist Protagoras. The dialogue in which the episode
is recounted is named after the sophist; it displays a level of literary
and philosophical sophistication appropriate not only to the intellectual
calibre of its author but also to that of its principal protagonists.
Malcolm Schofield's chapter draws attention to some significant but
neglected aspects of the dialogue's literary character, especially those
relating to the presentation of the encounter with Protagoras within
the framework of an introductory conversation. This allows for
some instructive contrasts between the cooperative character of
what Schofield argues to be a genuine philosophical discourse,
and the competitive nature of a sophistic debate. Hippocrates -
not the doctor, but a young well-off Athenian - is led gently
and helpfully by a paradigmatic Socratic elenchus to recognise his
ignorance; the distinguished Protagoras is pushed and bullied by
a questionable Socratic elenchus until he acknowledges his defeat.
True philosophy, it seems, in so far as it depends on cooperative
enquiry, cannot emerge from discourse with sophists. As Schofield
indicates, however, there is one issue on which the sophists and
Socrates can make common cause. For both agree that reason
and argument rather than intuition and custom must inform our
understanding of moral obligation. Protagoras and Socrates were
both promoters of an unsettling intellectualism and can therefore
undertake what sets out, at least, as a cooperative enquiry into
the consequences of the view that virtue and knowledge are bound
together.
C. C. W. Taylor's chapter, though focussed on the Meno rather
than the Protagoras, is directly concerned with those consequences
- the so-called 'Socratic paradoxes'. Can a person's knowledge of
22
INTRODUCTION
what is right really ensure that he or she will do what is right? And
can it be correct to deny the possibility of akrasia or weakness of
will, so that a person can never do wrong intentionally? To both
of these questions Socrates' answer, 'Yes', has seemed puzzling and
paradoxical, for it is not hard to think of examples which appear to
demonstrate that he is mistaken. The clue to understanding these
paradoxes, Taylor says, lies in a proper appreciation of their basis,
namely Socratic definitions. We can say what virtue or excellence
(arete) is, either by specifying what we take to be its component
parts, if any, or by giving an account or theory of how a person
comes, in practice, to possess virtue or excellence. The former
- a conceptual elucidation - will say what kinds of actions or
characteristics can be taken as indicative of excellence, but it need
not entail any practical advice as to how excellence may be acquired.
For such advice we do better to turn to the latter kind of definition
- an explanatory account - for that will provide a theory of what it
is that is manifested in any action or characteristic we ·can correctly
call 'excellent', i.e. conducive to the best sort of life. In Socrates'
view, according to Plato's representation of him in the Meno as well
as other Socratic dialogues, an explanatory account of excellence
is bound, for reasons of moral psychology, to link it with some
cognitive state, so that whenever a person displays excellence, he
or she manifests that cognitive state. Such an account will imply
that there is some sense in which nothing more than the cognitive
grasp of what is excellent is needed to motivate a person to do or
to be what is excellent. And from this it is but a short step to the
denial of weakness of will, i.e. to the view that a person's cognitive
grasp of what is morally right is sufficient to ensure that that person
will do what is morally right. It is accomplished with the aid of
the claim, argued for so vigorously in the Gorgias, that what is
genuinely excellent for a person and conducive to the best sort of
life for him or her always coincides with what is morally right. In
practical terms, then, Socrates' 'Cognitive Theory of Value' implies
that we must strive to rid ourselves of our ignorance if we are to
begin to live a life that is worth living.
In the final chapter in this volume P. J. FitzPatrick tells us
something of the way in which philosophers, theologians, poets
and artists have responded over the centuries to this Socrates,
portrayed so subtly and effectively by Plato, who offers advice as
startling, as important and as urgent as it is practical. To be sure, it
is no easy task to distinguish between responses to Plato's Socrates
23
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
and responses to Plato himself, particularly during that long period
when so few of the relevant texts were available. It was, perhaps,
inevitable that, at least to begin with, the main focus of attention
was Socrates' trial and death, and thus that comparisons would
be made and contrasts drawn between Socrates and the figure of
Christ. Indeed, this study of Socrates' legacy is, in large part, a study
of the complex interplay between pagan philosophy and Christian
theology, an interplay which was affected by the texts available
and by the wish to assimilate Socrates to what was regarded as
the standard of goodness. Nevertheless, despite our dependence
on Plato for our knowledge of Socrates, he has somehow resisted
assimilation and incorporation into a creed more successfully than
other philosophers, including Plato. Many theologians as well as
philosophers can be happily and correctly described as Platonists
or Aristotelians by virtue of the ideas or doctrines they adopt,
whereas it would be sheer presumption to describe anyone as
'Socratic' unless one wished to use that term merely as a label
for direct followers or disciples of Socrates. It is true that in one
sense we are all 'Socratic' in so far as we think that reasoned
discussion can bring enlightenment; but in another sense no one
can be 'Socratic', for there are no conclusions we might adopt which
could be so described. And history exemplifies this contrast: some
have embraced and some have rejected Socratic method simply
because of what it entails about the power of reason; but all have
found it difficult to ignore the Socratic determination to challenge
us with questions. His figure serves to indicate what changes of
thought are occurring, and whether our concerns be theological, or
political, or moral, that determination is a crucial part of Socrates'
legacy, and the variety of responses to it cannot fail to impress.
Often, as FitzPatrick shows, it is the forgotten writers of tracts,
pamphlets and dissertations who provide the most reliable guide
to this variety, for they exhibit a sensitivity to the characteristic
concerns and debates of a particular age which is hard for us to
recover. We may not share those concerns or wish to engage in
those debates, but we can nevertheless learn something that is of
value about Socrates by attending to the diverse ways these writers,
as well as those more widely known, felt able to portray him. Today,
what we say we know of the real Socrates is little enough, and what
we really know may be a good deal less than we think. A study of
the legacy of Socrates can serve to remind us of the extent of our
ignorance and thus fulfil another part of the mission of Socrates.
24
INTRODUCTION
NOTES
1 In preparing this general introduction, I was aided by Michael Stokes'
wise advice. Dr Clemence Schultze also saved me from mistakes and
infelicities. Naturally, neither is in any way responsible for the errors
of commission or omission that remain.
2 For references see Lacey 1971: 24; and Brickhouse and Smith 1989:
5, n. 19.
3 Especially in his most recent study, Vlastos 1991.
4 See Plato's description, in Theaetetus 143e and 209c, and Xenophon's in
Symposium (The Banquet) V.1-8. Vlastos has pointed out that none of
the earlier Platonic dialogues tell of the physical appearance of Socrates;
what little we know comes from dialogues such as the Theaetetus
belonging to the middle or transitional period. See Vlastos 1991: 251.
5 An extensive collection of portraits of Socrates, with comments on their
provenance, is to be found in Richter 1965.
6 For further information on this see Woodbury 1973.
7 See Adkins 1960: 77ff., 177, 159ff.; and esp. Dover 1974: 172ff.
8 See Rhodes 1985.
9 See MacDowell 1978: 186-9.
10 See Guthrie 1969: 27-34; or Guthrie 1971: 27-34.
11 See Kerferd 1981: 25-6.
12 For an eloquent expression of this view see Nussbaum 1980: 43-97.
13 See MacDowell 1978: 30-3.
14 See Rhodes 1986: 144-5.
15 See Brickhouse and Smith 1989: 27-9, with n. 94.
16 For the scholarly literature on this matter see ibid., 26, n. 86.
17 A useful recent discussion of the nature of Socrates' financial counterpenalty
and of his reasons for proposing it is to be found in
ibid., 214-34.
18 See Gill 1973: 25-9.
25
1
SOCRATES' MISSION
Michael Stokes
PRELUDE
Dickens once began a novel, 'What I want is facts!' In talking of
Socrates facts can be nothing more than a beginning, and they are
in short supply. Quite a number of them (his age at death, some
significant battlefields in Athenian history on which he fought, some
details of the charges against him at his trial) derive from, among
other places, the work of Plato's traditionally called the Apology
of Socrates; that means, in current English, Socrates' Defence.
Formally the Apology contains three speeches in Socrates' mouth:
one a clef ence proper against the charges brought at his trial; one
after the verdict of guilty suggesting ( as defence and prosecution
each did in Athens) a possible penalty; and the third addressed
to the jury, uniquely in recorded Athenian practice, after sentence.
The work paints a portrait of a man who spent much of his life
questioning people, particularly (perhaps only) on ethical issues,
to their discomfiture, their edification or both - the discomfiting
questions being called 'elenctic' or (roughly) 'refutatory'; the verb
elencho, 'test' or 'refute', but not the noun elenchos or the adjective,
appears in the Apology's text. That text portrays Socrates as insisting
( among other things) that he does not think he knows what he does
not know; whereas others do think they know things that in fact
they do not know. Much of what scholars say about Socrates'
mission also comes from this work. In proportion to its authenticity
as a record of Socrates' actual defence it offers a priceless source for
Socrates' view of himself and of his own activities.
In proportion, yes. But the Platonic Socrates' professions of
ignorance make it ironic that so many scholars argue for the
26
SOCRATES' MISSION
view, and some indeed appear to think they know, that Plato's
Apology is essentially what Socrates said at his trial. In my view
they do not and cannot know this. We should start, not from
the assumption even that Socrates' general drift receives faithful
reportage in Plato's Apology, but rather from the fact that the
Apology is a work of Plato's. As such it should command no
less and no more biographical credence than any other. of Plato's
earlier works. True, it could (but need not) have been the first
Socratic writing from Plato's pen, but an early date does not
seem to me a guarantee of biographical intention or historical
authenticity in detail or even in significant argument. True, also,
that Plato's text says he was there; and at first sight the Apology
might appear to be on a cliff erent footing from, say, the Crito,
which depicts a private conversation between Socrates and Crito
alone. But authorial autopsy is sometimes in Xenophon a literary
embellishment without substance, and may equally be so in Plato;
to assume the contrary is risky. True, further, that if one accepts
a parallel between Platonic writings and Thucydides' speeches,
and emphasises the historian's words about keeping as close . as
possible to the general sense of what was actually said, one ends up
attributing biographical intent to Plato; but to draw such a parallel
is to assume that Plato and his readers saw his Socratic writings as
examples of the same (or allied) genre as Thucydides' History- and
thus to beg the question at issue. 1
You are warned that when talking about Socrates I normally mean
Plato's Socrates. I commit myself to nothing about the real Socrates
of history unless I expressly take on such a commitment; and most
of the other contributors to this collection would probably echo
this reservation. I personally would go further: I am prepared when
speaking historically to deny to the real Socrates some important
parts of Plato's version, in full consciousness that to do so is to
go somewhat against the trend of recent major publications on the
subject. 2 But in trying to make sense of Socrates' mission it is in
the first instance Plato's Socrates' mission I am trying to make
sense of.
Making sense of it in context is not a wholly straightforward task.
There have been scholarly doubts 3 whether even Plato's Socrates
has any right to speak of a mission at all. There have also been
those holding that he argues quite logically and clearly that he
was acting, for much of his life, in obedience to instructions
from Apollo, the god of, in particular, the Delphic Oracle. 4 This
27
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
chapter argues for a sort of uneasy half way house between these
views concerning Plato's Socrates, while expressing serious doubts
of Plato's biographical reliability. The truth is that Plato's text gets
more difficult every time one looks at it; the difficulties are not those
of fallowing the meaning in the narrow sense, but of understanding
exactly what is going on. Recent accounts have cleared up some
points, but left others still obscure. But without the context one
has no hope of grasping what is going on, so here, at some but I
hope not excessive length, is the context.
The context mentioning the Oracle, at Apology 20e ff., has
Socrates rebutting the first of two sets, as he puts it, of accusers.
He will deal later with those who have accused him in court, and
he is dealing at this juncture with the prejudice against him created
by comic drama and by gossip (the 'first accusers', as he calls them).
Gossip has it that Socrates belongs to one or both of two classes of
intellectuals: those who produce grandiose theories of the universe
and everything (with at most a minimal function for the traditional
gods) and those who claim to teach young men goodness (where
'goodness' meant successfulness in personal and public life, and
the values of success need not, but might, undermine traditional
moral restraints). From both of these, from the so-called 'natural
philosophers' and from the 'sophists', Socrates firmly dissociates
himself. It is hardly coincidental that the two sorts of people he thus
disowns correspond rather obviously and superficially to the two
· counts of the indictment - the charges respectively of impiety and
of corrupting the young. The grounds of dissociation are those of
ignorance. Socrates says he knows nothing of 'natural philosophy',
and he disclaims knowledge of, and the ability to teach, whatever
makes a personal success of a human being. But Socrates is sure the
jury will suppose that there is no smoke without fire; and he sets
out to answer the question what it was about himself that brought
him a reputation for wisdom.
'Wisdom?' you may ask; 'wisdom' is a conventional rendering
of long standing for a Greek word meaning 'intellectual qualities
or achievements (real or supposed) setting a man apart from
or above his fellows'. This word has a strong association in
fifth-century Greek with knowing many things. 5 Socrates sets
out then from a denial of two sorts of 'wisdom', two sorts of
intellectual pretensions attributed to him, and seeks to explain
how the false attribution arose. But his explanation would have
startled a real-life jury, as it startles innocent first-time readers
28
SOCRATES, MISSION
of Plato. His false repute for 'wisdom' arose, he says, 'through
nothing other than a sort of ''wisdom"' (Apology 23d6 ). Of this
paradox there will be more to say later; all that is needed now is
that its resolution depends on there being two applications of the
word 'wisdom', one human and one, if it be genuine, superhuman.
Socrates lays claim only to a human 'wisdom'. This distinction
does not appear at once to help explain his reputation; for his
reputation was for something setting him apart from normal men,
not from all human possibilities. Socrates' argument depends on his
attribution of superhuman 'wisdom' to those he has just mentioned,
presumably both the physical philosophers and the sophists - if,
that is, their claims are true. It is hard to imagine anything more
likely than this to induce restiveness in a sizeable popular audience.
Socrates stands accused, he implies, of being a physical philosopher
or sophist. He says (adducing little or no evidence) that he is neither;
he says that his false repute for wisdom is due to his, well, sort of
wisdom; and he adds that the highly suspect physicists and sophists,
if genuine, are superhumanly wise. • It should not surprise anyone
that Plato gives Socrates here a sentence telling the audience, even
if they think he is boasting, not to raise a clamour.
The paradoxes become not a whit less provocative as Socrates
proceeds. That · he is wise is no saying of his; he can produce a
witness to his wisdom (to the questions, that is, whether he has
any and of what sort); and his witness? the god Apollo of Delphi,
the Oracle (Apology 20e7).6 The respectable democrat Chaerephon,
a man 'given to . the excessive' or 'impetuous', asked the Oracle
whether there was anyone wiser than Socrates; and he received the
answer, 'No one is wiser than Socrates.' Nothing here, you will
observe, dissociates Socrates from physics or sophistry; nothing
here distinguishes human wisdom such as · Socrates claims from
superhuman wisdom, which he does not. All we have here is an
. oracle to say that there is none wiser than he; and Socrates produces
Chaerephon as a human witness to it, though since Chaerephon
is dead, his brother testifies from hearsay. Still nothing concrete
explains Socrates' reputation, except an oracle nobody, apparently,
knew about.
MISSION AND ORACLE: SOME MODERN VIEWS
Socrates now gets down to explaining why he came to be the victim
of false gossip; and we may get down to his mission. Of course he
29
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
does not react to the oracle by saying 'The Oracle declares there
is no one wiser than me; that gives me a mission to go around
questioning people.' Socrates' logic, deeply though many readers
suspect it, is not normally as bad as that. And yet, about two pages
later, after explaining how he went around questioning people, we
find Socrates describing this way of life as a 'help' -and a 'service' to
the god of Delp .hi, which are terms appropriate to a mission - and
this . though, as many have remarked, 7 there is nothing obviously
jussive, no order, command, instruction or imperative, and no clear
imposition of a task, visible to the naked eye in the actual oracle,
nor any overt hint there that the god required of Socrates any help
• or service.
The puzzle thus set has a long history, and one cannot be confident
of one's ability to end that history. But some solutions we can surely
abandon. In the 1920s the great German scholar Wilamowitz could
write of Socrates finding welcome confirmation from an external
source of an inner vocation, without enquiring too closely how
the logic of this external confirmation worked. 8 Theodor Gomperz
earlier and Reginald Hackf orth later9 believed that Plato played up
the oracle's significance in Socrates' life. Hackforth described Socrates'
initial interpretation of the oracle as 'a typical example of Socrates'
irony' -and spoke of Plato inventing the connection between the
oracle and Socrates' - mission. There may be - and I suspect there
are - elements qf truth in these, but none seems properly to have
faced the question why Plato, the master of creative argument, _should
suddenly become as i~competent as their views implied in the creation
of a logical connection between oracle and mission.
More recently Guthrie 10 skated over the problem, saying, 'Having
learned the lesson [ of the oracle] himself he felt it to be the god's
will that he should impart it to others.' 'Felt it'? Socrates (and we)
ought surely to be able to do better than that - though we shall have
to see. More recently still, Brickhquse and Smith in their Socrates on
Trial, finding no command in the oracle or Socrates' interpretation
of . it, take refuge in an analysis of Socratic piety ( as discussed
especially in Plato's Euthyphro); they argue 11 that this Socratic piety
'fits well with' Socrates' description of his mission in the Apology,
and indeed required him 'to serve the gods by promoting what is
good', as Socrates claims to do later in this same speech by urging
Athenians to pursue virtue. This theory, you will not fail to observe,
makes Plato not only have his readers read his Socrates' Defence
backwards rather than normally but also assumes their knowledge
30
SOCRATES' MISSION
of the contents of his Euthyphro. It leaves us with a fictional (I
do not say fictitious) Socrates who confronts his mass audience at
this point with a set of remarks likely to strike the more · intelligent
as thoroughly unconvincing and indeed irrational, who only later
solves the conundrum he has thus set them, and in so doing does
not stop to explain by even the brief est cross-reference that he has
done so, or how he has done it. In this context one notices that
Socrates' audience can certainly not have been supposed even in
fiction to know the doctrines which emerge from the Euthyphro.
Earlier theories made Plato an incompetent reasoner; this one makes
him an unimaginative writer.
· Yet more recently comes Reeve's stimulating and important essay
Socrates in the Apology. Reeve12 most helpfully identifies three
separate problems. 'First, the oracle, even as he finally interprets
it, is not an explicit command or imperative. Second, it does not
mention elenctic examination. By the same token, and this is the
third problem, it does not mention elenctic examination on ethical
issues.' Reeve finds no explicit answers in the text, but believes
that 'a plausible explanation is implicit in what [Socrates] tells [the
jury]'. This explanation, boiled down, I hope, not misleadingly, runs
like this: (a) Socrates was already devoted to Apollo, or he would
not have spent the time and trouble he did over determining the
oracle's meaning, or persisted as he did through unpopularity and
poverty in the activity designed to find out that meaning. (b) The
obvious people to go to for a counter-example were those with a
repute for wisdom, and the . obvious issues to discuss with them
were ethical ones about which they were believed to be wise and
he doubted his own wisdom. Building on this foundation, Reeve
adds ( c ), Socrates' practice of refuting claimants to knowledge of
the most important things will tend to show that things are as
Apollo said, so that 'There is a sense in which Socrates is acting
according to Apollo.' 13 This leaves open the question why Socrates
should have persisted, as he says he did, after the truth of the oracle
had been demonstrated to his satisfaction. ( d) Socrates interpreted
the oracle as making the value-judgement that the person is wisest
who recognises that no human being knows the most important
things. Delphi thus 'commended anti-hybristic awareness of human
limitations in wisdom. And value-judgements and commendations
... have - especially when uttered by a god to a religious person
already devoted to him - strong action-guiding force.' Socrates'
continuing activity brings about something which Apollo values.
31
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
This constitutes a 'much more full-blooded sense' in which Socrates
aids or serves Apollo; and 'notice that Socrates speaks of coming
"to the aid of the god" only at the stage at which he tries to get
the interlocutor to recognise his own lack of wisdom (Apology
23b3-6)'. 14
This reasoning is thoroughly grounded in the text. But it smacks
of over-interpretation and at the same time of special pleading,
inadequate to account fully for what Socrates says. For, in the first
place, it is doubtful whether to ponder and take enormous trouble
over an oracle was the mark of one already devoted to Apollo.
The mythical Orestes and Oedipus, who took extreme measures
or great pains to fulfil or avoid fulfilling respectively what Apollo's
Oracle advised or foretold, were not made out by the poets to be
devotees, and a personal oracle such as Socrates says he received
through Chaerephon would have been a major event in anyone's
life, provided that he believed in the genuinely divine nature of the
pronouncement's source - and the whole story is predicated on that
much by way of Socratic piety. In the second place, whatever one
may think about 'acting in accordance with the god' and 'coming
to the god's aid', this explanation hardly suggests an order from
the god comparable, as Socrates later has it, with the orders of a
military commander; and for Apollo to commend an acceptance of
human limitations does not constitute an order, though it guarantees
the god's approval, for the continual spread of that acceptance by
refuting people - supposing, for the sake of argument, acceptance
to be indeed the upshot of the refutation. 15 To claim that Socrates
thought of himself as having thus been commanded in such a way as
not merely to justify but to compel his lifelong practice of refutation
and his persistence in it even at the risk of his life is to attribute to
him a deduction much less clear than his normal arguments. We are
back with a Plato whose Socrates reasons less than cogently and
exaggerates what force his reasoning possesses; and that at a point
where clarity and cool cogency are extra specially needed, at the very
core of Socrates' whole life-story as Plato's Apology describes it.
If these views strike one as insufficient, there are others on the
market, with which the scholars just mentioned fail to argue. These
others 16 point to a statement by Socrates (Apology 2361) that the
Oracle probably meant that he was to be an example to humankind,
and they notice that Socrates does not ref er unambiguously to a
mission from the god until after this statement about an example,
but begins to do so immediately thereafter. It seems reasonable to
32
SOCRATES' MISSION
associate the idea of a mission with the idea of an example to men.
But one may have strong sympathy with these views stressing the
notion of an example without thinking that they exhaust the topic,
or that the argument is as simple and clear-cut as this theory would
apparently presuppose. The precise nature of the example, of the
mission itself, of the connection between the two, and indeed of
Socrates' attitude all need closer attention, and Socrates' initial
attitude may reasonably come first in this investigation.
SOCRATES' ATTITUDE TO THE ORACLE
Socrates' immediate reaction to the oracle, the one saying that no
man was wiser than he, needs distinguishing from his later reaction
to his own final interpretation of it. His immediate reaction was to
wonder 'What does the god mean?' and 'What is he saying in riddles?'
This, as we shall see, is interesting. Oracles in all probability
did not actually deal at all extensively in riddles; Socrates is reacting
as if they behaved in fact as they did in legend 17 or in Delphic
propaganda. But Socrates, as we shall see, is also responding in a
way he adopts elsewhere in dealing with human interlocutors who
off er statements which seem to him counterfactual or illogical. At
any rate, after prolonged puzzlement, he adopted a course he calls
one of enquiry into the oracle. Others 18 have called it a criticism,
and have doubted Socrates' profession of belief in the god's veracity
or believed that Socrates changes his mind. Rather lengthy study
of the relevant piece of Greek text leaves me in some doubt, but
inclined to think Plato meant us (in so far as we believe anything
in Socrates' Defence) to believe Socrates genuinely to have kept
his faith in Apollo's truthfulness throughout. Since the question
affects the origins of the Platonic Socrates' mission, it is necessary
to explain both doubts and inclination.
But first, is Apollo's truthtelling relevant? There was always· a
problem with Greek oracles: granted that many people would
have accepted that the god's message always spoke truth, and
distinguished oracle-mongers as mentioned at Apology 22c2 from
respectable Oracles such as Delphi, 19 what about the human messengers
who transcribed or otherwise transmitted the message?
Could one trust them? A famous example of mistrust is Oedipus'
suspicion of his brother-in-law Crean after the latter brings home,
in Sophocles' Oedipus Tyrannus, an oracle from Delphi. It was right
not only to ask what the god meant, but who reported the message.
33
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
So, was Socrates certain that Chaerephon was a trustworthy and
entirely credible reporter? In his speech he does his best to make him
appear a credible witness for the jury in that he was a democrat, and
to explain Chaerephon's credibility to himself by portraying him as
a close friend from youth onwards. 20 No certainties are available;
but Plato has seen to it that high probabilities abound, and that (as
far as possible) it is indeed Apollo's truthtelling which is the focus
of interest.
So, what does Socrates say? In what he clearly implies is an
explanation of the nature of his process of enquiry, Socrates says
at 21b7 that he visited a man with a repute for wisdom. The verb
'I visited' in his sentence . is qualified by an adverbial phrase. That
phrase says, literally, 'as there, if anywhere, being about to refute
the prophecy and about to show the oracle "This man here is
wiser than me, but you said I was [wiser]."' 'As being about to'
renders a Greek conjunction and a future participle. The Greek
future participle can have at least two meanings. It can be either
'prospective' or 'voluntative'. It can either view the future action
concerned merely as a prospective future event, the future being
regarded simply as a stretch . of time within which the action will
fall, or view the future action as part or whole of the purposes or
intentions of the subject of the sentence. Accordingly, Socrates' visit
to the man of reputed wisdom could, with voluntative participle,
have been made with the purpose of disproving the oracle - which
is the usual interpretation, or, with prospective participle, have been
made in the expectation that ·he would, there if anywhere, refute the
oracle by counter-example. 21
If it was Socrates' purpose to refute the oracle, that argues a certain
scepticism on Socrates' part, if not downright disbelief; if he merely
thought that with this man if anywhere he would (prospective)
refute the oracle, then he need not have been nearly so sceptical.
With this prospective sense of the . participle the conditional 'if
anywhere' can have its full conditional meaning, and the sentence
does not commit Socrates to the belief that there is actually any case
which would refute the oracle. With the voluntative, or purposive,
sense, it is hard to give · any acceptable force to 'if anywhere'.
It is difficult to see why his purpose should be hedged with a
conditional; why should his purpose be to refute the god here just
if it was his purpose anywhere? One can see why Socrates should
want to cast doubt on his ability to disprove the oracle, but not why
he should state his own intentions only to cast doubt on them. If,
34
SOCRATES' MISSION
still with the purposive participle, we adopt the interpretation 'here
above all', then Socrates' intention to refute the oracle is not so far
hedged with any condition; it thus makes a break of the sharpest
kind in his faith in Apollo's truthtelling. Further, it is difficult to
see why Socrates' purpose should be to refute the oracle in this one
case above all; that might --necessitate the assumption that the man
in question was extra specially distinguished, an --assumption not
warranted by the text (which says merely 'one of those thought
to be wise') or by the context; but if the phrase 'if anywhere'
is not truly conditional but means simply 'here above all', then
we are faced with a Socrates who wants to refute the oracle in
particular with a man ·reputed wise. Now to refute the oracle
with the counter-example of a man not reputed wise would be
much more spectacular and effective, so that on this interpretation
'above all' is difficult to follow. Indeed, 'above all' must refer to the
possibility, not the desirability, of refuting the oracle with a man
reputed wise.
Could one perhaps hedge one's bets, and render: 'intending there
if he was able anywhere ... '? That makes the verb to be supplied
in the 'if anywhere' clause different from the verb going with 'there'
- which may be · possible, but would hardly make for good clear
writing. It really seems best in this context to take th-e clause as
giving not the purpose of, but the grounds for, i.e. the expectations
involved in, Socrates' choice of person to visit.
Thus far runs my inclination to take the sentence as offering
Socrates' grounds for and expectations in choosing this person
as a possible counter-example against the god. What about my
residual doubts? These are based on two things: first, some rather
technic -al matters of .Greek syntax; certainly in general the future
participle can be prospective in force, but it is standard doctrine
that if the grammatical subject of the participle is the same as
in the main clause, and the particle 'as' is present, and the main
verb is, like Socrates' 'I went' here, an active verb of motion,
then the future participle is voluntative or purposive in meaning ·.
It is uncommonly hard to find clear examples of prospective future
participles in just this particular kind of .context. One can find
examples where the prospective force is possible, or where it seems
subjectively to be marginally more appropriate. 22 I am unable to
see any special reason for forbidding the prospective participle in
such contexts, and no doubt, if· Dr Strangelove in the film can
learn to love the Bomb, I can learn to love a 'prospective' future
35
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
participle in precisely this kind of context. But a clear example
would help.
Second there is the matter of a seemingly parallel passage at 22a8
later in the text; just how far it is parallel is part of the point at
issue. The passage, still from Socrates' explanatory narrative of
how he came by his repute for wisdom, says: 'I must exhibit my
wanderings to you, wanderings as of a man per£ orming certain
labours so that the oracle might be unrefuted' (Apology 22a8).
Note, in the text I am following at present (in company with
virtually all modern editors), the word 'unrefuted'; this has caused
a good deal of disquiet since many have thought that the passage
we have just left said that Socrates' purpose was to refute the oracle,
not to leave it unrefuted. Certainly the upshot was that the oracle
was unrefuted; certainly if we abandon the purposive interpretation
of the earlier passage, we are left without the contradiction between
the two passages which has bothered readers. But we are left with
the rather obvious difficulty that if your purpose holds to leave
something unrefuted, you don't have to perform any labours at all:
you can just sit back and let it go unrefuted. On the whole it seems
best to accept that the word rendered 'so that', though normally
introducing a purpose, can on occasion, and does here, introduce
a result presented ironically as a purpose. Editors supply examples,
of which one from a fine rhetorical passage of Homer is specially
convincing. 23 But I have to confess that part of the manuscript
tradition has an additional negative in the relevant clause, giving
the superficially easier 'so that the oracle might not be unrefuted'.
On this ·reading we have most naturally, given a normal writer's
symmetry, to suppose both of our passages to off er Socr·ates'
purpose to refute the oracle. One is tempted to ask whether the
appearance of such a pair could possibly, let alone probably, be
mere coincidence due to scribal error. The answer is that it could,
and that for two reasons: first that negatives are very frequently
wrong either by insertion or by omission in medieval manuscripts ;24
and secondly that the temptation for a scribe to insert a negative in
the second passage, given its slightly unusual syntax and a possible
symmetry, would be extreme. 25
But the matter is not just one of syntax and narrowly based
textual criticism; it concerns · Socrates' possible change of mind on
something he purports on the surface of this passage and of the
whole Defence to hold dear: the veracity of the god. To say this
is not to allude to other passages in the dialogues, such as Republic
36
SOCRATES' MISSION
II-III, in which Socrates seems to think the gods incapable of deceit.
It arises rather from ·the whole drift of this part of his Platonic
clef ence: Socrates has only just said that Apollo could not possibly,
could not by divine law, tell an untruth. 26 Did Socrates abandon
that principle merely because of one oracle concerning himself that
he found hard to understand? Even granting the long hesitation
to which the text bears witness, that seems wrong; it seems much
more likely that Plato envisaged Socrates as thinking of a process
of enquiry which would if possible, if anywhere then here, find a
counter-example. The upshot ought, then, to be that the context,
and the impression of religious constancy the Apology conveys here
as elsewhere, outweigh residual grammatical doubts.
SOME PARALLELS.FOR SOCRATES' REACTIONS TO
THE ORACLE
In the context of Socrates' 'attempted refutation' of the oracle it
is essential to recall that Plato's Socrates attempts to refute, and
attempts to find the meaning of, sundry human pronouncements
in the course of discussions taking place in the dialogues, and that
the two attempts, at refutation and clarification, are often linked.
There is a case in the Apology itself. In refuting Meletus Socrates
asks 'How do you say ... ?' at 26b2 and seeks clarification at 26b9,
and Meletus is said at 27a1 to resemble someone propounding a
riddle in the form of a frivolous self-contradiction, a notion repeated
at 27d4-7. The frivolity of Meletus' riddle stands in strong contrast
with the serious view Socrates takes of the oracle.
A further example is Republic 331d ff., which offers points of
particular similarity with -Socrates' handling of the oracle. There
Polemarchus refers to Simonides the poet as holding a certain view;
Socrates avers at 331e5 ff. that it is difficult to disbelieve a wise and
divine man such as Simonides, but the poet cannot mean what a
counter-example has just scuppered. Polemarchus does accept
the counter-example? Yes. Then Simoni des' reputed view cannot
bear the meaning attached to it so far; Simonides must mean something
else, and Polemarchus obligingly reinterprets him. Here we
have a poet, 'wise' presumably as the poets were thought to be wise
in the Apology and doubtless 'divine' in the sense 'divinely inspired'
as at Apology 22b-c; but at any rate, being 'wise and divine', he
cannot (it is presupposed) be telling an obvious falsehood, so his
words are to be given a new sense. Further, Simonides' behaviour
37
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
is described, at 332b9, just like the Delphic Oracle's, as 'speaking
in riddles' on the nature of justice. Without mentioning riddles,
Socrates behaves somewhat similarly at 338c ff. of the same book:
he first expresses the expectation that Thrasymachus will speak well;
when Thrasymachus speaks and asks for approval, Socrates offers
it conditionally, 'If I first understand what you are saying, for at
present I don't yet know.' He extracts clarification by offering
possible but ridiculous meanings. The resultant exposition, at 339a5,
he can, now that Thrasymachus has said what he means, examine
for truth or falsehood. Both here and in the Polemarchus episode
understanding what is meant precedes thorough examination; in
the Apology, examination precedes understanding. But with both
Polemarchus and Thrasymachus it is after questioning that a sense
is discarded in which a lauded proposition ( or one from a lauded
source) is clearly false; and this is parallel to the Apology in that
there too a sense of the oracle which Socrates thinks obviously false,
and therefore not in accord with the Oracle's likely intentions, is
discarded after questioning.
Again, at Theaetetus 151e ff., Socrates expresses cautious approval
of Theaetetus' proposition that perception is knowledge, and says
it coincides with Protagoras' 'Man is the measure of all things'.
Socrates then asks if Theaetetus knows Protagoras' saying, questions
him about its meaning, describes Protagoras, at 152b1, as 'wise'
and suggests following him. At 152c8 Socrates (how playfully or
seriously is, as often, unclear) suggests that Protagoras is 'all-wise',
and speaking in riddles to the general public while speaking the
plain truth to his disciples, and again Socrates expresses cautious
approval at 152d of the · 'secret doctrine'. Here again someone is
supposed to mean something not obviously identical with what he
says, and the expression 'riddle' is used as of the Delphic Oracle
in the Apology. Further, the 'real' sense is examined; at first it is
found good and with it Theaetetus' original pronouncement (160d5
f.), and Protagoras is called 'very wise'. But the discussants have
still to examine related propositions; after a suggestion attributed
to Protagoras in passing at 161c7 f., that they admire his wisdom
like a god's, his theory is demolished, and with it his special claim
to wisdom (161d-e); demolition in the immediate, but not the
wider, context takes the form of a counter -example: frogs and
other animals perceive but cannot be said to know or be wise
as men do/are. The point of comparison with the Apology here is
Socrates' readiness before embarking on an elenchus to investigate
38
SOCRATES' MISSION
the sense of someone else's 'riddling' proposition and his willingness
to disprove - or to accept if it survives - the 'real' sense.
In the Charmides we find a further parallel. At 161c9, the
definition of sophrosyne as 'doing one's own thing' is 'like a sort
of riddle', which makes it difficult to discover its truth or falsehood.
It resembles a riddle, Socrates explains, in that the intention or
meaning does not coincide with the words. Socrates then takes
the locution 'doing one's own thing' far more concretely than its
author meant, and shows that such a reading of the expression
produces absurd results as an account of sophrosyne (as Charmides
agrees). The locution was therefore not meant in that sense, and
as it stands will not do. So, at 162a10, its author must have been
speaking in riddles; he cannot have been so foolish, and indeed
Charmides thought the definition's author 'wise'. In that case, says
Socrates with redoubled assurance, it must have been a riddle, the
expression 'doing one's own thing' being hard to understand. Since
the author is human, the possibility arises ( as it does not with Apollo
in the Apology) that the author himself did not know what he
meant; so 162b9 ff., answered indignantly by Critias d4-6. Critias
solves the problem, at least temporarily, by distinguishing 'doing'
from 'making', as Charmides had not. Socrates accepts whatever
vocabulary-stipulations Critias wants, but insists on his speaking
more clearly.
In all this it is clear that to call what somebody says a 'riddle'
is a way either of ridiculing it or, more often, a way of rescuing
the speaker when what he says turns out to be wrong, foolish
or otherwise out of keeping with his wisdom. It was indeed a
procedure of Socratic elenchus to put what somebody said in that
light. The procedure is closely related to that of enquiring what
a refutand means. This same passage of the Charmides supplies
another parallel to our Apology passage: for Socrates says at 165b8,
'I enquire [ or seek, zeto] always with you into what is suggested,
because I myself don't know'; and at Apology 21b4-5 he does not
know, or is not conscious, that he is wise, and turns to enquiry
(zetesis). Further, in the Charmides, on finding out that a certain
line of enquiry is wrong, he amends it slightly: this at 165e-166a.
'Enquiry' using this verbal root and with this degree of flexibility
is a regular phenomenon of the elenchus; Socrates is again, in the
Apology, treating the oracle as he would (supposedly later: see below)
treat anyone else who ventured on a pronouncement Socrates had
reason either to doubt or to suspect he had not fully understood.
39
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
In the case of the god, as he says, doubt is impossible, so the god
must be riddling. 27 This way of enquiry into the meaning of what
is said obscurely is one method of Socratic elenchus. Before he
understands the oracle, Socrates is deploying a procedure which
he calls elench-ing, and which shares prominent features with some
elenchuses as later practised, and one of these procedures was the
production 28 of counter-examples. Socrates is trying to produce a
counter-example to the oracle.
It is hard to tell what the significance of this is. If the Apology is
relatively late, some readers well versed in Plato might understand
what was going on; if Plato's 'early' Socrates was essentially the
historical Socrates, then Socrates' friends will have known what
was going on whether in the speech at this point or in Plato's
composition. But on other plausible hypotheses even fewer people
will have taken the point; the riddle-resemblance between this
passage and the refutation of Meletus is not glaringly obvious,
and Socrates does not use the word or root 'elench-' in the Meletus
passage. Yet it is hard, if not impossible, to believe that Plato was
unconscious of the fact that Socrates was treating the Oracle as
he treated others when later, and supposedly under the Oracle's
influence, he launched an assault on their pronouncements. There
is of course no inconsistency in this; Socrates could have devised
the technique first for use on the Oracle and then deployed it against
seeming-wise human beings. But it seems odd that a technique for
exploring the truth or falsehood of a proposition should first be
deployed on a proposition which must be true. Did Plato perhaps
want to display two very cliffe rent elenchuses, a successful one of
Meletus _ and an unsuccessful one of the Oracle, before Socrates'
account of his later general pursuit of elenchus? Did he want to
show the elenchus thus both in hostile form ( against Meletus) and in
friendly form ( against Apollo)? Plato is hereabouts displaying all his
remarkable capacity to keep the reader guessing, to distance himself
from the reader and leave him or her wondering how profound is
the writer's irony and just how far his writings undercut, undermine
or even deconstruct themselves.
One difference between the seeking of Apollo's meaning and
the other elenchuses is evident. Socrates is reluctant to turn the
technique on the god, but displays no reluctance (unless that
engendered by growing unpopularity) in examining any human
being who offers him a statement worth testing. The god could
not be wrong, so that the elenchus could not be used against him
40
SOCRATES' MISSION
for its otherwise universal initial purpose, to prove somebody
wrong as being inconsistent with himself or with the facts. Socrates
presumably dared so audaciously, and in spite of his reluctance,
to turn the elenchus on a god precisely because the god's surface
meaning actually appeared to be at variance with the fact of Socrates'
non-awareness of knowing anything.
SOCRATES' MOTIVES FOR HIS REFUTATIONS
Socrates, anyhow, if I am right, goes to his first apparently wise man
with the expectation and on the grounds that here if anywhere (but
not, probably, anywhere) he will refute the oracle. What happened
to him when, still with no explicit orders or mission, but engaged
in investigating Apollo's meaning, he visited a prominent politician
and, as he says, conversed with him? First, Socrates tells of his own
private internal reaction: he thought the man seemed 'wise' to many
other people and especially to the man himself, but was not wise
in fact. Secondly Socrates explains his more public response. 'And
then', he says, 'I tried to prove to the man that though he thought
he was wise, he was not.' Why did Socrates react in this way? He
offers no reason or motive for trying to prove this to the man
himself, and it would, as usual, be a mistake to read back into this
passage ·motives or reasons for Socrates' mission which appear later
in the text. It is tempting for first-time readers to suppose Socrates'
motive and reason to have been sheer devilment: Plato's Socrates has
a puckish sense of humour and a love of argumentative mischief.
But there is a lot more to be said. The detection of the unfortunate
politician's ignorance and its demonstration to him both arise in
a single conversation. Are they the same event under cliff erent
descriptions? The words 'And then' (21c7) linking the two turn
up in cliff erent kinds of Platonic context. In some they clearly
denote temporal sequence; in some they may denote temporal
sequence, but the important point is not that, but the combination
of irreconcilables; in one place, Cratylus 41 lb, temporal sequence is
at least extremely attenuated: 'They become giddy and then things
seem to be going round them': the second half of this simply
explains or amplifies the first. So in our Apology passage, did Plato's
Socrates in fact distinguish between detection and demonstration,
or was the process of demonstrating the victim's ignorance part
or even the whole of the process of detection? Plato's connecting
words 'And then' are ambiguous in this respect.
41
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
This ambiguity raises a question, and indeed a suspicion. Plato
is suspect of deliberately having Socrates paper over a crack in the
argument here. We know, as the first readers of the Apology may
not have known, that Plato's Socrates distinguishes the detection of
inconsistency from its demonstration to the inconsistent person at
Gorgias 457e. Later in the Apology too (26e-27a), Socrates observes
the contradiction inherent, in his view, in Meletus' combination of
charges before he demonstrates it to the jury through a questionand-
answer bout with Meletus extending to 27d. It looks indeed
as if he knew himself that detection and demonstration are two
different things, but has endeavoured at 21c to bury the difference
in order to stop awkward questions arising. That is not to say that
Plato's Socrates does not have an explanation to hand of his habit
of publicly exposing ignorance. He does, and another passage in
the Gorgias, at 470c,29 reveals it: he himself thinks being refuted,
and thus having one's ignorance revealed, is a great benefit. He
could have pleaded at this point in his Defence that his questioning
exposure was a benefit to his victim. But Plato has chosen to skate
over the issue at this point of his narrative. It is a reasonable
conjecture that in accordance · with what seems to have been the
best practice of the day in forensic speech-making, he did not want
to distract from the narrative by what might be a lengthy piece of
justifying argument. That did not have to prevent him froffi making
the necessary points later, though he could hardly refer back to a
difficulty he had done his utmost by a linguistic sleight-of-hand to
conceal. From our vantage-point we should observe that there is
now a major question-mark hanging over Socrates' mission. Why
does he refute people, and, if he does think refutation is a service
to them, why does he hold that opinion when some victims clearly
take a contrary view ( though not, for example, Nicias at Laches
188a-b)?
But for the moment Socrates has covered that crack; in the next
paragraph he offers a somewhat different justification for going
about detecting unrealised ignorance. He concluded, he tells us,
that he was himself wiser than the politician - in a sense I shall
discuss shortly. But one example, just that of the politician, does
not settle such a matter, nor would similar conclusions from other
politicians Socrates says he visited. Socrates went from one r~puted
'wise' man to another, refuting them. Perceiving his thus steadily
widening unpopularity, he nevertheless thought it necessary, he
says, to set the greatest store by the affair of the god; · and he
42
SOCRATES' MISSION
thought that therefore in studying its meaning he ought to visit all
those with pretensions to significant knowledge. And this is logical;
before he could be sure of the Oracle's meaning when it said that no
man was wiser than he, Socrates needed to investigate all apparent
counter-examples. Socrates calls this search at 22a an enquiry 'in
accordance with the god' - and a great editor 30 commented that
this was equivalent to 'as the God commanded'. But that is to go
too far: 'in accordance with' is in Greek a preposition of many
possible English renderings, such as, in particular, 'concerning' or
'in relation to'. 'In relation to the god' or perhaps 'concerning the
god' need imply no command yet. It is here that Socrates speaks
of himself as performing labours 'so that the oracle might actually
be unrefuted': and that is no command either, or even, as we saw,
a purpose.
Socrates visited next, in succession, the poets and the handcraftsmen.
The point is not of great significance, but it is hard to believe
in the strict historicity of this succession. Socrates will hardly have
exhausted systematically all the statesmen before going to a single
poet, or all the poets ·before meeting up with a single craftsman; and
it needs to be observed that Socrates' procedure in Plato's dialogues
and in Xenophon is not normally to go deliberately to one particular
person or type of person, but rather to take advantage of meetings
in public or semi-public places. He 'went', however, to the poets in
the expectation of catching himself red-handed knowing less than
they, and to the craftsmen (rather differently) in the knowledge that
they knew many fine things. His trouble with both groups was that
because each man was skilled in his art, each thought he was also
very wise in other matters, namely the most important ones; and
that mistake masked his other 'wisdom'. Here (22e1) the Oracle
crops up again; Socrates asked himself 'on the Oracle's behalf' or
'in its de£ ence' whether he was better off in respect of wisdom than
these people, and gave, he says, 'to myself and to the Oracle' the
answer that he was indeed better off as he was. Now to ask himself
a question in the Oracle's defence has been regarded as inconsistent
with a continuing attempt to refute the oracle and rejected on that
ground; but having doubted the intention to refute the oracle, we
are not now obliged to reject this rendering. Indeed, the words
'to myself and to the Oracle' strongly suggest that the question
comes from the Oracle, and that the relevant Greek preposition is
intended, meaning 'on behalf of', simply to signal this point. But
whether the Oracle's implied question tends to the defence or to
43
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
the elucidation of what it had said is not very important; from the
Oracle's point of view elucidation and defence are obviously closely
linked. Nevertheless, · Socrates' next remark about the oracle is his
conclusion about its meaning.
MOTIVATION: SOCRATES AS AN EXAMPLE
'Probably', Socrates says (23a5) - note that 'probably' - 'the god
himself is truly wise and is saying in this oracle that "human
wisdom is worth little or nothing".' It 'seemed' - another modest
expression - to be saying to humankind that 'he who like Socrates
recognises that he is in truth worth nothing in respect of wisdom
is the wisest, 0 mortals, among you'. Socrates says also that in
speaking of Socrates the Oracle was additionally using his name as
an example. Now, 'example' is a tricky word. An example may be
simply one of a class, singled out for no particular reason, or it can
be a paradigm, one selected to show something. It is fairly clear
both from the context and from general literary considerations
that in. Socrates' understanding the god meant him in some sense
as a paradigm, not just a mere instance. In the context he says
to mankind at large that the wisest is like Socrates. If a man
wants to be wise, he must emulate Socrates. Socrates therefore is
an example held up, in a sense, to show something, and in his own
view, a divinely chosen example to show something to humankind
in general.
This impression of an 'example' in a paradigmatic rather than
merely an instantiating sense finds support in the general Greek
literary treatment of remarkable events associated with direct divine
intervention. Divine manifestations of foreknowledge, of righteous
vengeance, or simply of power 31 are traditionally accompanied by
some reference to mankind in general in the context of an exemplary
event or other divine communication. The reference to an example
and to 'mankind' in the context of the Apology shows the literary
tradition in which Plato's Socrates' narrative stands. In this typical
passage it would be remarkable indeed if the speaker were using the
word 'example' in a merely instantiating sense.
Now, I am not the first to suggest32 that this idea of an example
is extremely important for Plato's account of Socrates' mission. For
down to Socrates' mention of himself as an example there are no
unambiguous statements of Socrates' mission, of his serving or helping
the god. After the term 'example' appears, we find immediately
44
SOCRATES' MISSION
that Socrates describes himself not only ( as before) as questioning 'in
accordance with' or 'in the matter of' the god, but actually, in his
demonstration of a man's unwisdom, as serving and helping Apollo.
Furthermore, there is a clear logical link between being an example
to show the particular point at issue and having a mission to do so.
For, again, the god means Socrates, he thinks, to show mankind
that men like Socrates, who are aware of their own ignorance, are
the wisest of men, and to show this it is now, . as it was not before,
clearly relevant to convince other people who . think they are wise
that they are not; and it is equally relevant to d:o so in the presence
of bystanders as numerous and potentially influential as possible;
all this while acknowledging with due humility that one does not
know any of the answers oneself. In fact it is not easy to see how
Socrates could function as an example of the god's particular point
otherwise; perhaps by pirouetting in the marketplace . of Athens,
ignorantly? Or, more seriously, by preaching his own ignorance and
others' as well of the things that he deems the most important? But
why should anyone in the false conceit of knoWledge, for example,
of what is right or wrong, believe Socrates when he preaches such
a message? How would you, the reader, take to it if I told you you
knew nothing that mattered? And would you take to it any better
if, in response to the obvious kind of question, I said 'Oh no, /
don't have the answer to that any more than you do'?
So here, then, is the answer in the text to the question why
Socrates thinks he has a mission to pursue people and convince
them that they are less wise than they think. But there is another
question, and it is not easy to answer. The question is, 'Why should
Socrates so construe the oracle's meaning? Does the run-up to that
construal justify it?' Before answering that, it is necessary to say a
few dogmatic words on a question I intend to discuss elsewhere.
That concerns the content of Socrates' wisdom, or if you like, of
his ignorance.
There is a popular understanding, once surprisingly popular
among scholars as well as laymen, that Socrates says that he is
wiser than other men because, whereas they think they know, he
knows that he knows nothing. That this is a logically difficult,
paradoxical, if not impossible thing to know has not always escaped
notice, and Vlastos, for example,33 suggested that Socrates was using
two senses of 'know': Socrates knows, in one sense, that h·e knows,
in another sense, nothing. But all such expedients depend on the
finding in the text of an unambiguous statement to the effect that
45
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Socrates knows he knows nothing. No one to my knowledge has
found such a statement outside the pages of Plato's Defence of
Socrates; and such apparent statements of this paradox as have
been observed within its pages dissolve on closer inspection. Of
these perhaps the most often cited is at 21b, at the very beginning
of Socrates' discussion of the oracle. Usually rendered something
like34 'For I know myself to be wise in neither a great nor a small
way', the senten -ce need mean nothing of the kind. It could, and
probably does, mean 'There is nothing, great or small, such that
I know myself to be wise in it' 35 - which is very different and
is not logically, though it may be factually, odd. To take another
specimen I have quoted already, when the oracle is interpreted at
23b as meaning that the wisest man is he who, like Socrates, has
recognised that he is worthless with respect to knowledge, one
might be tempted to suppose that the oracle is saying that the
wisest is he who like Socrates knows that he knows nothing; but
one should restrain oneself in the face of this temptation. First, there
is a loophole; perhaps Socrates and other men know a whole lot of
other things, but none of them is of any value. Second, the text
bears witness to Socrates having seen and shot neatly through that
loophole: for one recalls that Socrates was not disappointed in his
expectation, for which he uses at 22d 1 the . expression 'I knew~, of
finding the handcraftsmen knowing many fine · things; their de£ ect
was that they did not know the really important things which
they thought they knew in addition. The message from Socrates'
experiences was not that men knew nothing; it was that what they
knew was of no real importance, that the technical knowledge men
had was no good to them; there were other more important things
to know, which the apparently wise men he met did not know, and
which he could not, and did not, claim to know himself.
But there is still a problem in Socrates' mission. It is one thing
to speak of Socrates' message; it is quite another to speak of the
god telling him, or giving him a mission, to spread that message.
So let us return to that problem. Apropos of his first move beyond
the circle of politicians with whom he started, Socrates says that,
though pained and scared at the perception of the growing dislike
of his attentions, he nevertheless thought it necessary to attach very
great importance to, or to take extremely seriously (both possible
senses of a vague Greek expression), the affair of the god - that is,
clearly, the oracle. That, so far, is impeccable reasoning, in the Greek
milieu; in the face of an oracle with personal reference to oneself,
46
· SOCRATES' MISSION
one was well advised to take it seriously. In particular, it was well
to understand any such oracle: remember Croesus and Oedipus. 36
It is not in any way surprising that Socrates thought himself obliged
- at least prudentially - to investigate the meaning of that to him
strange pronouncement, or that it was necessary for him to make
sure what it meant.
We have seen that to be sure what the oracle meant, Socrates had
to visit_ everybody with any pretensions to wisdom, and that that
meant a rather wide search. Of course Socrates could not carry out
a universal search. It must, however, have extended in fact beyond
the circle of acknowledged experts, since Socrates is at pains to
point out at 22a that those of especially high repute seemed to
him in his search most lacking, but those of lesser esteem (surely
the majority, though Socrates does not say so) were better men
with respect to prudence. But after visiting the politicians, the
poets and the artisans, Socrates had .not visited everybody who
might be relevant. Admittedly our modern professions - lawyers,
accountants, surveyors, estate agents (realtors to American readers)
- were unknown to the Athens of Socrates' day; and he might
have included doctors among the .artisans; but he had still not
addressed quite everybody who could claim an intellectual gift or
skill that set him to some degree apart. What about, for instance,
rhapsodes sμch as Ion? Or accomplished soldiers such as Nicias
and Laches? Furthermore, over Socrates' long life statesmen rose
and fell, poets came and went, and craftsmen trained, worked and
passed on: there would never have been a lack of new subjects for
the Socratic treatment. Just so long as there was anyone with a
repute for 'wisdom' uninvestigated, Socrates had not completed
his investigation of the oracle's meaning. His pursuit of the . god's
true meaning was necessarily a lifelong pursuit; he could never
be sure that a genuine counter-example - one he could take in
puzzlement to Delphi - was not just round the next corner. He
himself mentions in Plato's version (21e6 f.) the need to investigate
all with reputations for 'wisdom'. And this last point blocks a way
out which might otherwise present itself. According to Phaedo
101d, Socrates' -method included accepting as true what he could
not .show to be in discord with other propositions in some way
following after; and the suggestion of a time-limit for the refutation
of a hypothesis has met with some scholarly favour; and after years
of trying, Socrates could reasonably have thought the oracle's case
established by his failure to locate any counter-example. But there
47
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
it stands: he says he was obliged to visit all with an apparent claim
to wisdom.
One naturally asks how Socrates could bring out a meaning
for the oracle at all in these circumstances. But without making
the obviously false claim to have achieved a universal search, he
nevertheless comes up with his interpretation of the oracle. If he
ever said that he knew, was certain, or even had discovered what
the oracle meant, one could pounce on him. But he says none of
these things. He does not even say, at least in this portion of the
Defence, simply 'The oracle means such-and-such.' What he says
at 23a-b is: 'Probably the god is truly wise and means this by the
oracle ... ,' and 'He seems to have used my name, making me an
example .... ' Now, by the time Socrates ventures in his Defence on
this 'Probably' and 'seems', he is certainly to be thought of as having
been pursuing his investigation for a good few years. Exactly how
long is not a question on which it is wise to be dogmatic, but the
chronological evidence, such as it is, suggests that Plato had in mind
more than thirty years.37 Whether the audience knew how long is
more than doubtful, but the fictional audience are given no reason to
regard Socrates' investigation as a recent phenomenon. So a goodly
number of people have in Plato's version succumbed to Socrates'
dialectic between the oracle -and the trial. It would be on the whole
surprising for Socrates to have arrived at no tentative conclusions
by this time; but it would be wrong for him to represent those
conclusions as certainties. Hence that 'Probably' and that 'seems'.
Socrates' conclusion in this form does not detract from the necessity
of envisaging his investigation as lasting the whole of his life. If it
was advisable for Socrates to pursue the interpretation of the oracle
logically if impractically with an attempted universal search, then it
was advisable for him to continue after he had worked out what
seemed to him the most probable meaning. Socrates' 'feelings'
in favour of continuing 38 are as much reasons as feelings: the
unspoken premise, that it was advisable to understand a personal
oracle, would be unspoken because assumed obvious to religious
people at the time.
The gap in Socrates' reasoning does not seem to fall between
his starting to investigate the oracle's meaning and his continuing
to do so; the gap, if it is one, seems to lie between the oracle
and his starting to prove. to the ignorant that they were indeed
ignorant. Socrates offers his audience no reason why he should
have started to do this; the idea of ·himself as an example cannot
48
SOCRATES' MISSION
then have been in his mind. He has left them, if they so wish, to
suppose wrongly that discovery and proof of ignorance were the
same thing for practical purposes, or were inseparable parts of a
single process. Can we do any better for Socrates than that? Co-uld
we, for instance, suppose that, although the two things are logically
distinct, and open proof of someone's inconsistency does not always
and inevitably follow on its discovery, nevertheless in a certain
number of cases Socrates could only find out his respondent's
ignorance by continuing his questions until not only Socrates but
also the respondent was convinced of the respondent's ignorance?
And that Socrates accepted this frequent concurrence of proof
with discovery as sufficient to show that the apparent necessity
of investigation entailed, for practical _ purposes, the necessity of
showing some people that they were ignorant? One could perhaps
argue thus, but the argument needs completing with another step
or two, to connect those 'practical purposes' with the Oracle. One
would have to add that Socrates, seeing what the Oracle's statement
had in fact led to, namely the demonstration to many people of their
own ignorance, had concluded that that result was intended by the
Oracle. Since the god knows the future as a god of ·prophecy, he
knew the consequences of making ~ pronouncement which Socrates
was bound in prudence to investigate. If he knew the consequences,
then in effect he was enjoining upon Socrates the task of proving to
people that they were ignorant.
But if Socrates was prepared to accept that somewhat dubious line
of argument, might he also accept a simpler one? If the Oracle was
all-knowing, then it knew what sort of man Socrates was. If it knew
what sort of man Socrates was, it would know that given implied
advice to investigate people's ignorance, Socrates would be quite
unable to resist making the results of the search known to the people
concerned. But that would be a precarious kind of argument, since it
would open the door, I think, to too many excuses for disreputable
conduct. One doubts, on the whole, if this argument would appeal
to Socrates.
Both these attempts to justify this crucial part of Socrates'
mission, the demonstration of others' ignorance, suffer from the
absence of any clear statement of the necessary connections in the
text. This need not be conclusive against them; Socrates in Plato
does not always spell out all his reasons. But it is undeniably a
drawback. It grows in dubiety when one concedes the complexity
of the premises involved, and the unlikelihood that an Athenian
49
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
audience whether actual or imagined would be able or, indeed,
willing to supply them. They are worth exploring, and may be part
of the answer to our question about the justification of Socrates'
mission in full; but one doubts if they are the whole truth.
THE MORALITY OF SOCRATES' MISSION
Let us try again. Towards the end of Socrates' account of his
wanderings from person -to person, he tells us that he asked on
behalf of himself and the Oracle whether he would pref er to
combine in his own person the craftsmen's knowledge and their
ignorance or to combine a lack of their wisdom with a lack of
their ignorance; the answer he gave himself and the Oracle was
not simply one of preference, but rather that it profited him to be
as he was, that is without the craftsmen's special skill or wisdom,
but also without their false opinion of their own knowledge of other
things. If Socrates thought that it was actually good for him to be
aware of his own ignorance, and certainly better for him than to
be ignorant without being aware of it, then obviously he thought
· he was conferring a benefit on those whom he caused to be aware
of their own ignorance. In normal Greek thinking he was behaving
justly towards those he treated in this way, by doing them a good
turn when it lay in his power to do so. At the same time Socrates
did of course make them, if he had read the oracle's meaning right,
wiser than before. But that in itself might or might not actually be
a benefit to them; the important fact is that Socrates was convinced
that he was conferring a benefit, and hence, presumably, that h.e was
behaving in accord with the dictates of justice.
If we now suggest that Greeks in general thought one had an
obligation to behave in accordance with justice, that Socrates was
certainly no exception ( see Crito 49), and his jurors (historical or
:fictional) were certainly no mass exception either, then our way
lies open to a further suggestion: not directly that we have already
justified Socrates' notion that he had a mission from Apollo, but
that if the gods were normally held to enjoin just behaviour,
then, once Socrates had perceived where just behaviour lay in his
particular circumstances, he could maintain that such behaviour
was enjoined by the gods. If we ask the further questions, why
Apollo in particular, and why not simply expound the benefit and
mention the gods in general, then the answer could conceivably be
that Socrates would not have recognised the benefit as a benefit or
50
SOCRATES' MISSION
even as a phenomenon if it had not been for the insight conveyed
to him by the oracle.
But this is again a thin line of argument. It leaves too much to the
audience's or readers' imagination. There is no obvious reason why
Socrates could not have spelt out directly either in court or in Plato's
pages that it was the oracle which convinced him that refutation was
a benefit he was morally obliged to con£ er. And the oracle does not
say that Socrates' special wisdom is more valuable to men than their
normal technical knowledge; Socrates may be wiser, but does his
wisdom profit him? That is in the last analysis Socrates' opinion
and judgement, not a direct implication of what the Oracle said.
Special intellectual endowments are not unambiguously beneficial
to · their possessor; many distrusted sophia or wisdom, and could
continue to do so whether it was labelled as 'wisdom' by god or
by man.
TRUTH OR FICTION?
General
It begins to look, though it will need confirmation by analysis later,
as if Socrates' own values might off er a better, easier and safer road
to the justification of his life's work than the oracle Plato's Socrates
reports from Delphi. And with that prospect, however distantly, in
view, it is well to put to ourselves, in full awareness that we are not
the first to put it, the question, Was Plato being truthful when he
portrayed Socrates as invoking the testimony of Delphi's Oracle?
Was there any such oracle as Plato's Socrates recounts? Did it take
the form it has in Plato's Apology? These questions continue to
disturb a minority of scholars. The majority of those writing on
the subject today seem satisfied with affirmative answers to them
all. Socrates, they argue for the most part, was ( as Plato portrays
him) a teller of truth and not of lies: he seeks to persuade the jury by
rational means, not by emotional appeals and certainly not by fraud
or deceit . So indeed does Plato portray Socrates, and it is indeed
hard to conceive of 'Socrates' as telling a deliberate falsehood. But
we do not have the original words or necessarily the arguments
of Socrates. We have only what Plato, perhaps for purposes of
literature or of propaganda rather than those of biography, chose
to put in his mouth. The oracle which occupies so prominent a
51
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
position in Socrates' argument could in principle be Plato's creation.
A distinction is necessary here: what was false in objective fact could
be true within Plato's fiction; Plato's fictional Socrates could within
the fiction be telling the truth even if the experiences he represents
were not had by the historical Socrates. To accuse the fictional
Socrates of lying would in that case be to confuse :fiction with
biography.
Obviously this kind of approach rests on the assumption that
Plato's Apology might be a literary :fiction. That is a large question,
not to be dispatched in a single paragraph, but deserving a separate
paper or chapter. I shall be tackling the general question elsewhere;
I hope readers of this book will bear with the assumption for now of
the theoretical possibility that Plato was as much creative writer as
biographer, and be prepared to leave its defence against the current
majority opinion to another occasion. 39 The general defence of such
an approach to Plato's Apology would take up too much time and
space in this present context, which concentrates on the sense of
mission which Plato's Socrates in this work appears to say he owes
to the Oracle. If in the end the story of the oracle for Socrates turns
out to be fictitious, that would in itself settle the issue whether the
Apology is a fiction, and precisely for that reason I expect fierce
resistance to doubts of the oracle's historicity. But the reader should
not run away with the notion that this is the first broaching of
the question in recent times: scholars such as Montuori, Armleder,
Toole and Fontenrose (the last very hesitantly) 40 have ventured to
express doubts. But their arguments (most of them Montuori's) have
not in general found acceptance and do need careful attention.
Chronology ·
One set of arguments in Montuori's writings 41 depends on the date
of the oracle or, more precisely, on the difficulty of determining its
exact date. Scholars accepting the oracle as historical generally place
it in one of the periods of peace, either before the outbreak of the
Peloponnesian War in the late 430s or between the Archidamian War
and the campaign of Mantinea, around, say, 420. It is a question,
on the usual assumptions, whether it is better dated before or after
the spate of comic uses of and references to Socrates in the late
420s. The late 430s are the most popular dating, since (among
other pieces of evidence) the opening scene of Plato's Charmides
suggests that Socrates' dialectical activity dates from before the siege
52
SOCRATES' MISSION
of Potidaea at that time. Specific difficulties in dating the oracle
precisely with reference to that opening scene, raised by Montuori,
carry no weight: it ·is not the oracle which that scene mentions with
reference to Socrates' delay before finally approaching Alcibiades,
but rather Socrates' 'divine sign', pretty certainly to be regarded
as quite distinct from the Oracle's response. But the whole line
of argument from chronological difficulties is dubious. Whatever
the difficulties of dating the oracle to Chaerephon, chronological
difficulties are a familiar feature of events in the fifth century BC,
and Plato in particular was not a careful chronologer. Moreover, if
we are going to pay attention to things in Plato with chronological
import, we should consider a passage in the Laches.
In the Laches' opening scene, the general Nicias has heard the
elderly L ysimachus agree to him and Laches answering Socrates'
questions. Nicias replies: 'L ysimachus, I think you really and truly
know Socrates only from [your acquaintance with] his father, and
have not met him except as a boy, if in his father's company
somewhere among his demesmen he came near to you at a rite or
some other occasion for the demesmen to congregate; but obviously
you haven't met him up to now since he has grown older.' When
L ysimachus replies: 'Why in particular, N icias ?' the general adds:
'I don't think you realise that anyone coming very close to Socrates
and approaching him in conversation must necessarily not, even if
after all he starts the conversation on some other subject, stop being
dragged around in his talk by this man until he falls into giving an
account of himself, of the manner of life he is leading at the time and
has led in the past; and when he does fall into that, that Socrates will
not let him go be£ ore subjecting that to a good and proper test - all
of it' (Laches 187d6-188a3).
On this passage we may start from Reeve's brief discussion, 42
which says: 'Socrates began his elenctic mission sometime after the
oracle to Chaerephon ... [This] passage from the Laches suggests
that he was then in early adulthood'; after quoting, Reeve adds:
'This would date the oracle in the 430s or some thirty years prior
to Socrates' trial in 399. And most scholars now accept that rough
date.' But this date is not what the Laches text points to. As the 430s
neared their end, so Socrates approached the age of 40 (perhaps 39,
if one wishes to be pedantic). What the Laches indicates is that
Socrates was engaged in elenctic practice soon after he ceased to
be a boy. 'Older' here means 'older than he was in the preceding
sentence'. The word 'older' cannot be taken out of its context, given
53
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
some absolute meaning and then be put back into the context. If
Nicias had been thinking of Socrates developing his dialectic in
the 430s, he would have had to say 'You obviously haven't met
Socrates since he was a young(ish) man', not ' ... since he was a
boy', for otherwise Lysimachus' friend Melesias could in certain
circumstances have interjected in surprise: 'But I ·met him when
he was [say] 28 and he wasn't known then for any such practice
as you mention.' In no context would an Athenian of the Classical
period have been called a 'boy' into his thirties - to say nothing
of his late thirties, nor would he have had to be in his father's
company at deme ceremonies after the age of 18 or (at the latest)
20. This passage certainly does not date the oracle in the 430s; if it
dates it at all, it dates it around 450, but it mentions neither Oracle
nor mission, ref erring only to Socrates' elenctic practice, for whose
date of origin we have no good separate evidence. If the Oracle was,
as some suppose, closely linked with Socrates' 'divine sign', then as
Apology 31d dates the sign from Socrates' boyhood, the oracle must
also have been early; but the link is unconvincing.
Nor is the other evidence still convincing which was produced
by A. E. Taylor in the 1917 Proceedings of the British Academy
in favour of a date as late as the 430s. Taylor's passages 43 offer,
apart from the evidence of the Charmides, which gives no terminus
post quern, an allowance of time for Socrates to develop through a
'scientific' phase (doubted now by, for instance, Reeve44) and for
him to have gathered a devoted circle (when all we need is the
'imp~tuous' Chaerephon) and to have acquired a reputation for
'wisdom' ( of -which Chaerephon may have had an exaggerated
notion, and see further below on whether a reputation would
have been a desideratum). I doubt if many people would now
accept Taylor's portrait of Socrates as a famous head of a scientific
school suddenly converted by the oracle. 45 Altogether the dating of
the oracle may seem curiously vague, but that is not in itself a good
reason for doubting its historicity.
Ancient scholarship
Nor, come to that, should we be weighed down by the evidence
of disbelief in the story of the oracle about Socrates by certain
ancient scholars cited by Montuori, such as Athenaeus or Colotes
as quoted by Plutarch. 46 These are no better for our purposes than
the arguments they present, which amount in Colotes' case as cited
54
SOCRATES' MISSION
by Plutarch to nothing but abuse, and in Athenaeus' to a sustained
piece of tendentiousness suggesting a limited knowledge of and/or
a careless approach to Plato's Apology. Most ancient scholarship on
this theme is suspect of derivation from Plato's and/or Xenophon's
Apologies, apart from the occasional citation of a spurious metrical
version of the oracle.
The argument from silence
A much more significant group of arguments centres on the absence
of references elsewhere to the oracle, . except for the probably
derivative Xenophontine Apology of Socrates. Montuori instances
the Gorgias and Plato's Seventh Letter as places where one might
have expected a historical oracle to be mentioned. 47 One could
add such places as Meno 71b-c, where Meno expresses great
surprise at Socrates' claim to total ignorance of what goodness
is, or even Republic I (337a), where Thrasymachus attacks Socrates
for his unwillingness to answer questions. On both occasions the
oracle of the Apology would have supplied a devastating answer to
implied or actual criticism. The Oracle is not said or implied to have
enjoined silence. Nor is it reported even to have suggested that the
only method of spreading its message was by elenchus. One could
argue that in maintaining silence Socrates and his close friends, if,
as one presumes, they would have been in the know, were failing
in their duty to promote the spread of the true message to all men
which they believed the oracle to convey. And was the 'impetuous'
or 'over the top' Chaerephon silent all his life about the remarkable
response , he received from Apollo, except for telling his brother
Chaerecrates conveniently so that Socrates could cite the latter as
witness (Apology 21a)? If not, then, granted the majority dating of
the oracle before the Peloponnesian War, hoW could the oracle fail
to become known to the comic poets who made Socrates the butt
of so many jokes? Was there no material for comedy in the man
who was wiser than others with Socrates' strange 'wisdom'? Plato's ·
dialogues do, it is true, display certain reticences hard to explain,
but the absence of the oracle from the whole extant literature of
Socrates' lifetime and from all but two related works of the next
generation is, humanly speaking, extraordinary. Was it really the
best -kept secret of a lifetime? And that with no obvious reason for
keeping it? It seems to me improbable.
55
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
A discrepancy between Plato and Xenophon
A passage of Xenophon's Apology of Socrates falls to be considered
next. This is not the place for a full discussion of the exact nature of
the relation between the two Apologies. Adopted here is the rather
widespread view that Xenophon' s was written by him after, and in
the knowledge of, Plato's. This does not exhaust the problems. The
difficulty that particularly concerns us now arises from the very
different accounts they give of the oracle they have in common.
Plato's oracle says, in response to the question 'Is any man wiser
than Socrates?', that no man is wiser than Socrates. Xenophon's
account does not specify the question, but gives the Oracle an
answer different enough to suggest a different question - and if
the Oracle in such contexts gave merely a yes-or-no answer, as
some have supposed, then Xenophon's Chaerephon's question was
certainly different. The Oracle's response in Xenophon is that no
man is more generous or more just or more sophron than Socrates.
That word sophron presents many difficulties to the interpreter: in
some contexts it is clearly a term of moral evaluation, commending
moderation or temperance; in others it has a ·much more prudential
colouring, ref erring to good sense and meaning something like
'sensible' or indeed 'prudent'. One further c,omplication: the Greeks
in general, and Plato in particular, were aware that there are many
occasions when the temperate or moderate is sensible and prudent.
Doubts about the text of the Xenophontine account do nothing to
simplify matters: in Xenophon ( according to the manuscripts) the
Oracle does not use the word 'wise' but does say that nobody
is more sophron than Socrates; Socrates himself, in detailing with
insufferable boastfulness how right the Oracle was, does not use
the word sophron but declares by rhetorical questions that nobody
is more in control of his desires than he, more generous, more just
or more wise. It _is possible that for Xenophon's Oracle being
sophron included wisdom; possibly von Arnim 48 was right to
insert in the text of the oracle the words 'or wiser'. But it is
clear that Xenophon's Oracle either spoke with different words
from Plato altogether or at least added much. One could argue that
Plato included the other virtues under 'wisdom' because he thought
all virtues were the same, namely 'wisdom'; and/or that Xenophon
separated out the different virtues because he disbelieved in the
paradox of the unity of the virtues. But this seems unsatisfactory.
Socrates' wisdom in Plato's Apology is an awareness of ignorance;
56
SOCRATES' MISSION
the ignorance has for its subject-matter the answers to moral questions,
but is not itself a moral quality for praise or blame - rather a
universal property of human beings; and it was not the awareness
of ignorance which for Plato constituted the possession of virtue or
goodness. If the Oracle in historical fact gave the response we find
in Xenophon, then Plato has missed half the strength of his case -
for how could a man divinely so described be guilty of corrupting
the young? And if the Oracle actually gave the Platonic response,
then Xenophon's account is largely fictitious - for Xenophon did
not so much take for granted the unity of the virtues in wisdom
as to have that particular excuse for rewriting in terms of the other
virtues an original response mentioning 'wisdom'.
How should we now respond to the cliffe rences between the
Platonic and Xenophontine oracles? One way is to suppose simply
that Plato correctly put into his Socrates' mouth the plain truth,
whereas Xenophon was an arrant and apparently unblushing liar.
Those who do not quite like this sometimes suppose the Apology
in the Xenophontine corpus to be not the work of Xenophon.
But no less easy a solution is to stop talking about 'truth' and
'lies' in this black-and-white fashion and start thinking in terms of
fiction. Suppose that Xenophon read Plato's Apology not as faithful
reportage from which to differ was to lie but rather as a piece of
creative writing. That would mean, in Greek literary terms, that
it was there to be drawn upon, imitated, over-trumped, just like
any other piece of literary :fiction.49 Xenophon's procedure would
on this hypothesis be perfectly natural - and so would Plato's, for
that matter. If Plato's early readers, as is often supposed, checked
the Platonic 'account' of Socrates' defence against their own or
others' recollections of the trial, and thus guaranteed that Plato
could not produce a substantially false 'report', then this would
naturally have been fairly widely known: 'Plato got it right' would
have been the established view. To attempt to overthrow it with
an 'account' which invited the response 'Well, if that was how
it went, why on earth didn't Plato say so, and why should we
believe this Johnny-come-lately?' ~ould have been more than
usually insensitive and unwary a proceeding for Xenophon. It
would have been specially awkward for Xenophon to assert in
the face of Plato's account guaranteed by people's recollection that
his version of the oracle was given 'in the presence of many people'
(Xenophon, Apology 14). To respond to these points by declaring
the Xenophontine Apology spurious would be (in what I believe to
57
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
be the absence of independent and cogent arguments for that view)
a counsel of despair. There are of course many other questions to
be settled and arguments to be met before one can have confidence
in scholarly acceptance of an understanding of Plato's Apology, let
alone the Socratic literature in general, as fictional to an important
degr.e e; but the evidence concerning the oracle by no means tells . .
against 1t.
Questions concerning oracular practice
The rest of the arguments about the oracle's historicity concern
the uniqueness, the motivation, the method, and the occasion of
the Oracle's declaration of Socrates' 'wisdom' as pictured by Plato.
This too is a complex matter, depending in part on one's view of
the g~neral probabilities of the Oracle's history and practice. Of
these · there are very varied estimates on the market, from the
·painstaking and valuable amassing of evidence by P. Amandry
and by H. W. Parke and D. E. W. Wormell to the equally valuable
and no · less wide-ranging sceptical scholarship of J. Fontenrose. 50
This, again,. is not' the right moment for the renewed comprehensive
re-examination of the material which my studies suggest would
serve scholarship well, but rather for a cautious treatment of the
evidence as it concerns Socrates.
How was the Socratic oracle given? A. E. Taylor 51 suggested that
the response was merely what those running the Oracle thought
the questioner wanted. There may be some truth in this; but, as
we shall see, the Oracle did not always respond as the questioner
desired, and some · examples exist to show that responses at least
were thought to show an exactly opposite tendency, to avoid the
clearly expected and wanted answer.
A suggestion which has found more favour is the use at Delphi
of divination by drawing lots in some way under the auspices of
Apollo. If this is the right account of the oracle about Socrates, then
the answer Chaerephon received was the result of pure chance; it
might just as easily have been 'Yes, there is somebody wiser than
Socrates' - at which point the response would have sunk into
oblivion. On this interpretation, to its credit, two things need no
further explanation: first and most obviously the Oracle's priests'
motivation for singling out Socrates, since on this hypothesis they
did no such thing; second Xenophon's point cited above that
the oracle about Socrates was dispensed 'in the presence of many
58
SOCRATES' MISSION
people', since lots could have been drawn in a place more public
than that where the Pythian priestess normally offered the supposed
divine wisdom. But Xenophon's remark may have been meant more
loosely, for example of Chaerephon's telling many people as he
rushed out from the room where the consultant listened to the
Pythia; and to abolish the problem of motivation in this way may
not be the only way to solve it.
Further, the actual evidence for the use of the lot in Classical
Delphi is less than cogent. It consists of (1) a disputable inscription;
52 (2) sundry special cases where the Oracle was asked to
choose from a list of names with or without a choice of lots supplied
by the consultant(s); (3) the expression 'you bestow speech by lot',
addressed to Delphian Apollo by Euripides' Creusa, Ion 908; (4) the
use of the word anheilen ('took up'?) for '[the Oracle] said'; and (5)
various vases usefully pictured and analysed by Amandry. The first
two of these are less than secure; the third is ambiguous, referable
either to the Oracle itself or to the ballot for a place in the queue to
consult it.53 We may helpfully take the last two together. Item (4)
has been popular evidence ever since Lobeck 54 in 1829 conjectured,
adducing no evidence whatever, that the special use of this word for
an oracle's pronouncing referred to the 'taking up' or drawing of
lots. The conjecture would be more convincing if examples occurred
of this verb _being used in non-oracular or otherwise clear contexts
of lot-drawing; but Amandry cited in this context only oracular
ones where the verb has its normal sense for such surroundings,
and I have seen no others. Iliad III. 316 and similar Homeric lines
have the simple verb heilen, 'took', in a context to do with lots and
not oracles, but the verb clearly describes an action that takes place
before the lots are shaken up or shuffled and does not denote the
'drawing'. Further, the Oracle, i.e. the god, is said to 'take up' - or
whatever the verb means in such contexts - but Amandry's vases
do not show the god but rather the consultant doing something
Amandry interprets as drawing lots. This inherent contradiction
in the evidence adduced leaves one wondering ~hether Amandry's
interpretation of the vases is correct and whether we have yet got
to the bottom of the semantic issue concerning the verb 'take up'.
K. Latte's very different explanation of the verb deserves more
respect than Amandry gave it, but any explanation can only be
conjectural. 55 The use of the lot at Delphi in the Classical period
cannot be taken as established, and Fontenrose 56 brings arguments
against it based on the lack of negative answers. We should not
59
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
abandon the search for a proper motive for the particular oracle
about Socrates in misplaced confidence that it was the result of
chance. -
Possible literary motives
Genuine motivation is best found in the context of a group of oracles
noticed by R. Herzog and further analysed by Montuori and especially
by Parke and Wormell. 57 These concern the type of question
'Who is the most x man?' where x may be replaced with 'pious',
'happy', 'wise' or 'prudent', or indeed 'fortunate'. The pattern of
answer is no less easily discernible than that of the questions. The
enquirer has what he thinks is a good reason to think himself the
most x of men: Theopompus' anonymous Magnesian the wealthiest,
Gyges of Lydia the most fortunate, Chilon or Anacharsis most wise,
and perhaps most fortunate, an unknown figure in the story Pliny
tells of Pedius; and on~ compares 58 Herodotus' story of Croesus
and Solon, in which Croesus seeks the title of 'most fortunate' and
Solon plays as it were the part of an Oracle, and that in a story replete
with Delphic themes. In this chain of stories the Oracle disappoints
the conceited enquirer: it does not, contrary to A. E. Taylor's view
mentioned above, give the answer the consultant expects. Instead
the Oracle names an insignificant person who is surely intended
as typical of a range of undistinguished worthies who are none
the less worthy for their lack of apparent distinction - Clearchus
in the Magnesian story, Aglaus of Psophis for Gyges, and Myson
of Oeta for Chilon or Anacharsis. Again Pedius may be a similar
case. One may compare Tellus and also Cleobis and Biton in the
Croesus-Solon legend. The enquirer expresses surprise, implicitly
in Theopompus' story of the Magnesian, explicitly 59 in the similar
tale of Croesus. After the oracle, two enquirers, the Magnesian and
Anacharsis, each visit the man deemed by the god more x than they,
and in the story of Gyges there follows a description of the pref erred
Aglaus, a visit being in this case, one imagines, ruled out by Gyges'
Lydian remoteness and kingly preoccupations. In two of the three
stories this visit elicits an explanation, direct (Aglaus) or indirect
(Myson) of the oracle, which was at first not understood by the
• enquirer.
Now all the obvious points laboured above about this group
of oracles are highly relevant to the oracle in Plato's Apology.
For it presents a very sharp and consistent contrast to them.
60
SOCRATES' MISSION
(1) The enquirer is not enquiring in conceited expectation of
receiving the answer 'himself'; Socrates is not the enquirer, but
the 'impetuous' Chaerephon, who, however, on this occasion lays
no claim to wisdom of his own. (2) The oracle does not disappoint
the enquirer; it gives the 'expected' answer. (3) The person named is
accordingly not a figure remote from and unknown to the enquirer.
(4) It is not the enquirer who visits the person named and receives
there an explanation of the oracle. It is rather the person named
who visits numerous other people and thus ultimately receives an
indirect explanation of the oracle's naming of himself. (5) The
surprise one would expect is that of the enquirer; but in Plato it
is not Chaerephon who is amazed - he has received the expected
answer; rather, the named person, Socrates, is amazed. ( 6) The story
is told not by some third party but by the actual person named.
Furthermore, in most cases of riddling oracles, the straight£ orward
sense is the one accepted by the person most nearly concerned;
it mostly makes a better story that way. One compares Oedipus
and Macbeth, and recalls Croesus, who interpreted the · -Oracle's.
doubtless legendary pronouncement that on invading Persia he
would destroy a mighty empire as a prophecy of success, -and
protesting on his defeat was told - too late - that the mighty
empire destined for destruction was his own. But Socrates in
Plato's Apology doubts at once the literal truth of the oracle, is
not deceived by it, and eventually works out for himself what it
means and how it is true.
One might argue, but the argument would hardly be cogent by
itself, that the case of Socrates is so untypical that it could not be
genuine; 60 to this by itself the counter-argument is too obvious: 'I
believe just because it is absurd', as St Augustine is popularly quoted
as having said of the Crucifixion of the Son of God. What impresses
is the neatness and comprehensiveness with which Plato's story
reverses every single major feature of the story-pattern. Truth can
be stranger than fiction; but it does not normally exhibit an attention
to the detail of the fiction. Plainly put, th -e exactitude with which
Socrates' story reverses, turns upside-down, a standard Delphian
story presents evidence of a design to turn the pattern upside-down.
Such inversion of known patterns is a Standing feature of Greek
literature, as generic studies in our time have shown. Those of us
who believe that Socrates himself was no literary creator of :fiction,
and certainly not on so solemn an occasion a liar and perjurer, may,
and in my judgement should, conclude that the story of the oracle
61
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
in Plato's Apology is likely to be Plato's fiction, executed with a
master's hand. The motivation we should look for is not that of
the Oracle, but that of Plato. We should look for literary motives.
Literary effectiveness
What literary motives, apart from sheer delight in creative ingenuity,
off er themselves? That depends in part on the motives other than
the religious one which one can attribute to the Socrates, if not
of history, then of Plato's Apology. We must see if there are any
ways, other than by his account of a mission from Apollo, by which
Socrates could justify his sense of a duty to spend, and ultimately
to lay down, his life in the cause of dialectical philosophy; and
we must take a good look at what Plato might reasonably think
of their likely effectiveness. True, these enquiries presuppose the
possibility of Plato's willingness to put rhetorical effectiveness
above truth - and perhaps even above plausibility to his more
intelligent and better-educated readers, for it is hard to tell . how
many would have believed in the writer's own time a story of this
kind crafted thus. The issue here is not so much Plato's credibility
or integrity or honesty or anything of that sort; the question is
rather what type of literature was Plato writing, and what were
the canons of the ·genre? Was it biographical, in a quasi-modern
sense? Was it 'historical'? What did Plato's contemporaries expect
of a 'Socratic logos' (here 'tale' or 'discussion'), a genre mentioned
apparently as such by Aristotle in his Poetics and elsewhere perhaps
a couple of generations .later? I hope to study these questions in
another publication, and admit that no answer to them is likely
to achieve finality . . My concern here is that a literary origin for
the Apolline oracle of Plato's Apology be not ruled out by a priori
judgements such as the one cautiously framed by Fontenrose: 'Or
could this response be a pious fiction of the Socratic circle? That is
not impossible, though perhaps incredible. '61 On the present view
the oracle may have found a place in a literary work because it was
effective as literature. It can hardly be denied that it is effective
literature, and none the less so for being a neat inversion of a
probably well-known type of story.
But what alternative defence could the Platonic Socrates have
offered? What explanation is there other than the dubiously historical
oracle for his way of life, and for his persistence in it to
the end? We may start 62 with Socrates' opinion that his practice of
62
SOCRATES' MISSION
refutation confers a benefit on those he refutes. Gorgias 470c offers
the following exchange: 'Polus. It is hard to refute you, Socrates;
but wouldn't even a child be able to refute you for not telling the
truth? Socrates. Then I shall be grateful to the child, and equally
to you, if you will refute me and rid me of nonsense. But don't
weary of benefiting a friend, but refute me.' At least on the moral
issue between Polus and himself, and presumably on other moral
issues, Socrates regards as a benefactor anyone refuting him. The
Platonic Socrates must therefore think his refutation a benefit to
the person refuted.
Socrates also makes clear that he regards his services to individual
Athenians as a service also to 'the Athenians' collectively. This much
comes out clearly, in a context whose relationship to refutation
in particular stands admittedly in need of further discussion, at
Apology 29d-30b. It emerges also from the Gorgias (502d10 ff.)
that the politician's proper public function is to better the characters
of individual citizens. If Socrates viewed his refutations as a benefit
to the individuals concerned, he will almost certainly have seen them
as improving the individuals' moral standing, and a life spent in
thus improving them as a life spent not merely in the service of
individuals but in the service of the state. Plato's Apology 30b
finds him, we note, treating goodness of the soul as the source
of the goodness of everything else to man both individually and
publicly. Socrates might, then, have pursued his way of life with
determination to the end for the benefit of individual Athenians
and of their state.
But this leads naturally to a further question: why should Socrates
be so determined to benefit his fellow citizens in their individual and
corporate capacities? What obligation weighed so heavily ,upon him?
Now one may or may not think Socrates lay under any obligation
to individual Athenians he had perhaps never met before; but there
should be no doubt whatever of his own patriotic and well-founded
belief in his deep indebtedness to the Athenian state. In the Apology
he does not spell this out in detail, but he does give the very broadest
of hints: he tells the jury at 29d, 'Men of Athens, I salute you and am
your friendc ... ' The Greek word for 'friend' here is a notoriously
complex one; but standing in a relationship of 'friendship' might,
and here beyond doubt does, include standing in a relationship of
mutual benefit and obligation. But the nature of the state's benefits
to Socrates emerges in detail only in the Crito. There ·'the common
of the city' or 'the city as a community' (50a) joins with the city's
63
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
laws, which (51c-d) in effect 'gave [him] birth, educated [him], and
gave [him] a share with every other citizen of all the fine things they
could'. The reader may want to argue that Socrates in Republic I
refutes the notion from· Cephalus that it is always just, that there
is always a moral obligation, to repay a debt. To be sure, one may
reply; but that refutation consists of a counter-example where the
repayment would do harm, or what the repaying agent would think
a harm. This in no way affects the general (not universal) truth that
it is just to repay a debt; and there is no reason to doubt that Socrates
would have regarded it as just to return benefit to the city which had
benefited him. Indeed it would be unjust not to repay such a debt.
We can hardly suppose that Socrates' standards in the matter of
justice and injustice were lower than those of his contemporaries.
One can go a step further, I think, though here a priori argument
is easier to find than evidence from the texts. If Socrates were to
stop doing to his fell ow citizens individually and collectively what
he thinks is a good, he would in effect be depriving them wilfully of
that good. And to deprive someone wilfully of a good is to do him
harm. One can show that Socrates would have regarded his cessation
of activity as depriving the Athenians of a benefit: at Apology
31d6-e1 he says that political activity on his part would have led
to his early demise 'and I would not have been any benefit to you
or to myself'. This notion is repeated at 36c2-3. It is a plausible view
that Socrates regarded this deprivation of these people of this benefit
as wrong: not so much because he says at 30c that the Athenians will
be doing themselves no less harm than they do him if they kill him,
being the kind of man he is - since that could be the harm that their
own injustice will do to their souls - as because he goes on at 30d to
warn them not to make a mistake concerning the god's gift to them.
He is the god's gift to the city in its need (30e5), and if the god sent
them such another, it would be in his care for them (31a6-7); if it
would be a mistake, wrong, for the Athenians to deprive themselves
of him, it would be a -damage to them if he were to deprive them
of himself, and he could not plead that he was doing such damage
other than deliberately. Then again: if in exile (3 7 e3 ff.) Socrates
were to remain silent, that would be disobedient to the god, and,
leaving that on one side, to discuss in this way goodness and allied
topics is the greatest good to human beings, and, especially, 'The
unexamined life is not liveable for a human being.' To remain silent
in Athens would, it follows, deprive the Athenians of the greatest
good, and so far as Socrates is concerned, would condemn them
64
SOCRATES' MISSION
to a life not worth living. And Socrates does not need to give any
other reason for not living on in silence; it is clear that he regards
it as wrong thus to leave his fellow men in the lurch. Socrates, it
is entirely reasonable to suppose, thought that voluntarily not to
pursue his practice of dialectic was deliberately to injure and to
wrong his fellow Athenians. It would be deliberately to wrong
those who - at least in the overwhelming majority of cases - had
done him no wrong, except perhaps to repeat slanders against him of
whose falsehood the majority were presumably unaware. To wrong
those who had done one no wrong was certainly 'unjust', adikos, in
Socrates' Greek.
So it was just, in Socrates' belief, to pursue dialectic and go
about refuting Athenians on ethical matters, and it would have
been unjust for him to have stopped. But the questions do not quite
stop there. Did Socrates feel an overwhelming obligation to behave
justly .and to refrain from intentional injustice? To this the answer
is a resounding and obvious 'Yes!' Death, he says at 28d6-10, is
preferable to the shameful - and that for Socrates certainly includes,
if indeed it is not coterminous with, the unjust. To attempt an unjust
killing, he says at 30d5, is a great harm, a great kakon. At 32c8-d3
he insists, having just previously cited actions of his that tend to
prove -the point, that he is not concerned about dying, but is wholly
concerned with doing nothing unjust or impious. He refuses to
plead irrationally for the jury's favour partly on the ground that
it would not be just (35b9-d1). The Platonic Apology itself makes
pretty clear just how important, how all-important, just behaviour
was to the Platonic Socrates. It certainly makes it clear that on his
scale of values death paled into insignificance beside injustice, and it
also explains why (29a-b ). For the Platonic Socrates in general there
is clearer evidence elsewhere, notably in the Crito (49a-c); but the
Apology is clear enough for our present purposes.
We set out to find a plausible explanation other than the oracle
for Socrates' sense of mission, for his determination to die rather
than abandon the elenchus of Athenians at large. We have found
one, in Socrates' firm belief that his elenchus conferred a genuine
benefit on his victims and his probable judgement that to refrain
deliberately from offering that benefit would be wrong and unjust,
and his absolute and iron conviction that wrongdoing and injustice
were evils and indeed harms to be avoided at all earthly costs.
What is more, there is more than a suspicion that a reasonable
proportion of his audience in the actual or fictional jury would have
65
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
been convinced by the argument that there are divine ordinances
supporting and enjoining just behaviour on mankind. Classical
Athenians of an unsophisticated stamp were likely to believe that
the gods approved of and duly rewarded justice and had their
sanctions against injustice. 63 In brief, passages in late fifth-century
BC literature of a thoughtful kind suggest that a belief in the gods
went with and supported a belief in moral imperatives (including, of
course, justice); that a disbelief in the gods of tradition was worrying
in part because it suggested the undermining of moral imperatives;
and that it can hardly be coincidental that the indictment on which
Socrates was before the court was that he did not believe in the
city's - i.e. the traditional - gods and that he corrupted the young.
The combination of irreligion ( or new-fangled religion) and dubious
moral teaching is a significant feature of the indictment, and one
which we may be sure Socrates' accusers thought rhetorically and
politically useful. Socrates could therefore assume, and Plato could
legitimately have him assume, that his audience would suppose him
to be under a divinely supported obligation not to behave unjustly
in omission or commission. Assuredly not many people on the
jury would have felt like rising to their feet and proclaiming their
doubts whether Socrates, given the chance, ought to have benefited
his fell ow men.
They would, however, have been much more inclined to react
by doubting that Socratic refutation was really a benefit. Socrates'
reasons for believing that would take us too far afield, but it is worth
the trouble to point out that Socrates suggests in the Apology that
they would have taken him also too far afield. Not only does he
complain that he has but a short time to deal with slanders that have
been going the rounds for many years (19a1-2 and 37b1--2); at 38a
he declares pretty roundly that though the pursuit of dialectic is the
greatest human good, and life unexamined is not liveable, the jury
will not believe him if he says so. 'That is how things are, as I say,
gentlemen; but it is not easy to persuade [you of this].' Accordingly
he offers it simply as his own judgement that he is better off with
his awareness of ignorance than those who know more but are
unaware of their ignorance (22e); and at 29b he merely suggests,
in a rhetorical question, that to be unaware of one's own ignorance
is culpable; the only semblance of an argument that appears in the
Apology for the benefits of his refutations is at 3 la7 ff. There he
argues on grounds other than the oracle-story that he is the sort
of man to be given to the city by a presumably benevolent deity.
66
SOCRATES' MISSION
The argument runs that it looks like something divinely sponsored
that he has so neglected his own affairs for so long in the service of
the Athenians, and at that without even the humanly understandable
reason that he was being paid for it - witness his poverty. Socrates
was doubtless right: it is not this easy to persuade a sceptical jury.
Socrates, they will have said at this point, always was an odd man.
To convince people that Socrates' refutatio .ns were beneficial to the
victims would have meant convincing them that their souls were
what mattered, that goodness (the quality or group of qualities
required for success) was knowledge, and that refutation was a
necessary step on the way to the relevant knowledge. This is quite
a task for a single day in court or for a correspondingly brief work
of literature; and nobody would have found it easy to construct a
persuasive defence on these lines.
How much less philosophically difficult it would have been, or
was, to construct the speech as we have it. That is not meant to
belittle Plato's artistry; on the contrary, it is meant in praise of the
unerring literary skill of his youth and middle age. If indeed the
oracle is a :fiction, it is one designed to persuade Plato's readers of
Socrates' fundamental innocence of the charges - or Plato's own
innocence of corrupting the young and propagating irreligion -
without stating and arguing the whole Socratic or Platonic case in
consecutive detail. In this, over the centuries, it has been remarkably
. successful. At least on the surface of the text it offers . the backing of
Apollo's Oracle for Socrates' practice. It thus supports the elenchus
which so vexed the -victims, and which could well have impressed
others as essentially subversive of ordinary people's ordinary moral
beliefs, inconsistencies and all. It gives Socrates an arguable case,
without going into too much philosophical detail, for his good
faith if (in sceptical eyes) for little else. It backs up and giv.es
substance to the _ Platonic Socrates' habitual annoying disclaimer
of knowledge; and it manages to do so without diminishing,
and even while enhancing ( at least for the more credulous of
conventional religion), Socrates' stature as a sage. It serves . to
explain, in the context in which Plato introduces it, that what
Socrates was about was different from what other would-be sages
were about; and in the process it lends to his proceedings not
only an air of appealing innocence but, more significantly in the
presence of Meletus' charges, an appearance of wholly conventional
but unusually persistent piety. If it is not true, it is tres bien trouve.
As a fiction, or perhaps one should say as a deliberate~y constructed
67
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
myth, it is brilliant. But brilliant fictions - or even, come to that,
factual truths - deserve plausible presentation; and we have not
yet finished examining Plato's version of Socrates' mission for
plausibility.
PROBLEMS IN PLAUSIBILITY
Why Chaerephon's question?
From this point of view there are still problems about the start of the
whole process. The first problem is, why should Chaerephon have
asked the original question? A few have supposed that be£ ore he
can reasonably have asked Apollo this particular question, Socrates'
repute must already have been widespread and formidable, and
hence that -as an account of Socrates' beginning . on his life's
work, the whole is incoherent. It is indeed possible, whether
Plato's Apology is a true or a fictitious story, that Plato hoped
his readers would not think of asking the relevant questions. To
suppose Socrates to have acquired a reputation for knowledge
before the incident at Delphi would be to demolish the defence
rather effectively. The way out of this by supposing that Socrates
had had extensive knowledge but had not thought it of any value
leads to further difficulty. For in that case either Socrates' immediate
response to the Oracle, that in nothing, great or small, was he aware
of being wise, was disingenuous or he had already concluded that
what was normally called wisdom was of no value ( an estimate
he appears in the Apology to owe to Apollo). Perhaps he already
thought ordinary human knowledge of little or no ; account, and
the oracle as finally interpreted was simply making an example of
him in a perspective he came to by the light of nature? That would
make only a rather difficult sense of his long and roundabout quest
for the oracle's meaning. These difficulties are not to be lightly
dismissed. To suppose Socrates, on the other hand, to have gained
already a reputation for skill in argument would argue either skill
in attaining positive conclusions (which would have the same effect
on the story as the first supposition above) or skill in refutation
(which would involve his having practised it before the oracle).
The question will not go away; but Socrates has answered the basic
problem here after a fashion in the text, in a way I have not seen
noticed, though it appears obvious enough: he expressly mentions
68
SOCRATES' MISSION
Chaerephon's character as one of a man liable to go over the top in
everything he did. The reason why this is mentioned is presumably
not because the supposed or real jury are interested in Chaerephon;
it is rather, one may suppose, that Plato's Socrates is excusing what
would otherwise have been an absurd question to put to Apollo. We
may reasonably view the picture Plato thus offers as a plausible one,
of a Socrates known perhaps to a few close friends as clever and full
of good advice, and of one friend whose over-enthusiasm took him
to Delphi.
Why start with public refutations?
Why, to broach the second problem, did Socrates start refuting
people? We have seen that interpretation of the oracle required
discovery of people's inconsistencies, but not their demonstration to
the individual concerned. Once Socrates had understood the oracle
and found that it meant him as a paradigm for the transmission of
a general message, it made sense for him to promote the message by
showing people in detail how inconsistent, and hence ignorant, they
were. The purposes attributed to the god could be furthered also by
such demonstration in public. On this basis the Socratic procedure
as pictured in Plato's earlier dialogues is perfectly intelligible. But it
remains hard to see why Socrates should have begun the practice of
public refutation before reading, as it were, the god's message. Yet
Plato's Apology is quite clear: Socrates' refutations were conducted
in public from the start - witness the references to bystanders at
21d1 and 22b7, with reference to the politicians and the poets
respectively. (It is perhaps curious that Socrates mentions nobody
else present at his examination of the handcraftsmen.) If the Apology
were straight£ orward biography it would be possible to believe he
was that sort of argumentative, not to say simply cussed man, .but
that can hardly have been the sort of impression Plato wished to
create. If Plato's Socrates did feel that the best way to discover
people's real thoughts is to try and refute them, one would be
entitled to expect some justification for that belief. Justification
could be required to start by defending his decision to attempt
discovery of the oracle's meaning by finding a counter-example
to its surface statement. In sum, Socrates in Plato's version seems
to start on his life's work before understanding the oracle which
gives it meaning. That is exactly the sort of thing one might expect
if the oracle were an adventitious short cut to justification of a
69
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
career for which the full genuine motivation was quite different.
It is worth adding that such a gap in the argument is perhaps the
best support for Guthrie's mention of Socrates' feelings (see p.30
above), as opposed to his reasoning. But to fall back on feelings
· remains unsatisfying.
Socrates' knowledge of his mission
Does Socrates have anything more to say about his mission ·? Yes,
and indeed not the least problematic things about it are to be found
in other pages of Plato's version of his Defence. The question being
considered at 29c-d is whether Socrates would be willing to give up
what he calls philosophizing in return for the sparing of his life. I
do not now delve into the wider problem of the consistency of the
Apology and the Crito on this point; 64 there is another difficulty
demanding attention. Socrates here compares his orders from the
god to the orders of the Athenian generals who set him in the ranks
in battle. It would be dreadful if he obeyed the generals, but did not
obey the god, who, as he 'thought and understood', ordered him to
live a life of philosophy examining himself and others, but rather
in fear of death or anything else forsook his ordered place. Notice
in that sentence the words 'thought and understood'~ Socrates does
not say he knew that the god had given him his marching orders
for a life of dialectic and philosophy; he says only that he thought
he had. What then are we to make of the next few lines? In these
Socrates says that if he disobeyed the Oracle for fear of death, he
would indeed be proving his atheism and his opinion that he was
wise when in fact he was not. For, he says, the fear of death is a case
of thinking one is wise when one is not. No man knows whether
death is a boon or a bane. Socrates, unlike other men, does not think
he knows this. But he does know that t~ do wrong (or act unjustly)
and to disobey a better than oneself, whether god or man, is bad and
shameful. He will not choose what he knqws to be bad in preference
to that of which he does not know whether it is good or bad. Hence,
if offered his life on condition of ceasing to philosophize or conduct
his search, he will not accept. 'I will obey the god rather than
you', he says. Now it is very tempting to read this argument as
advancing from the quite legitimate opinion that Apollo had given
him marching orders to the much more dubious claim that he knew
the oracle had done so. Indeed, if we are to reason strictly about
this, in order to know that to desist from philosophizing would be
70
SOCRATES' MISSION
wrong, and for his argument to take effect, Socrates must know
that desisting from philosophizing would be in disobedience to a
superior; and to know that desisting from philosophy would be
disobedience he has to know that he has received orders not to
desist from philosophizing, or, if you like, positively to continue
philosophizing all his life. But we have seen that the proposition
that the god has made him an example to men is modestly labelled
by Socrates himself - and with good reason - as probable, rather
than certain or known. There is a major discrepancy here.
The first possible solution to this discrepancy deserves inspection,
even though inspection may lead us to cast it aside: it has a certain
intrinsic interest. Socrates speaks at 29b6-7 of what it is he knows,
as opposed to the goodness or badness of death for men, which he
does not know. What is it he knows? He knows in that context
that it is bad and shameful to 'act unjustly and disobey somebody
better'. Most readers assume that the words 'act unjustly and' are
there because in general to disobey one's betters is unjust; that is
to say that one's betters have a just right to issue commands which
will be obeyed. On this reading Plato's Socrates is emphasising
disobedience to a better, saying that he can't give up his enquiries,
because to do so is thus disobedient, and because ·he knows such
disobedience is unjust. But there is another way of taking the phrase.
If we could suppose that to give up philosophizing would be unjust
in itself, and is only secondarily also a case of disobedience to the
god, the discrepancy between Socrates' judgement of the oracle's
probable meaning and his certain knowledge here would dwindle,
if not vanish. But in order to fit this idea to the text we have to
suppose Plato and his Socrates guilty of more than one rhetorical
sleight-of-hand. The first is in the injustice-and-disobedience passage
itself, where in context the audience ought to be expecting
more emphasis on the oracle than on morality - in view especially
of Socrates' specification eleven lines earlier of disobedience to the
oracle. Second, Socrates says very soon (29d1-3) apropos of
the hypothetical bargain of his life for ceasing his investigations,
'Athenians, . . . I will obey the god rather than you'; the Oracle
and not justice is verbally the prime interest here too. If the usual
reading is to be wrong, Socrates is twice suppressing 'justice' and
pushing f orwa_rd the Oracle alone when what he is actually saying
concerns justice more than the Oracle. Symmetry and rhetorical
continuity are against these implied rhetorical tricks. And they
would constitute this whole section of Socrates' argument a rather
71
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
too crude use of the Oracle as a cover for his reference to the dictates
of morality and of its divine sanction.
'Oracles and dreams'
The difficulty remains solid, that Socrates' de£ ence of his refusal
hypothetically to drive a bargain with the Athenians has a hole in
it: it makes Socrates imply that he knows something for which he
elsewhere rightly claims no more than probability. The hole gapes
especially wide in the context of a man desperate not to claim
knowledge he does not possess. Further, uncharitable solutions
such as a simple mistake by Plato or by his Socrates are unlikely
in so highly wrought a work by so careful and fastidious an artist.
People might want to resolve our original discrepancy by an
appeal to a later section of the speech; for Socrates later says
(34c4 ff.) that 'I claim that I have been ordered [to investigate
those thinking themselves wise] by the god both from oracles
and from dreams and in every way in which any other divine
dispensation ever ordered a mortal to do anything'; and this, if
true, would perhaps, in the Classical Athenian climate of thought,
have more readily entitled Socrates to claim knowledge of his orders
from Apollo. But there are difficulties about this.
First, as we have seen before, it is intolerable to be compelled to
read a speech backwards, and it is hard to think of a competent
writer causing his readers to imagine an audience listening to a
speech backwards. It is necessary rather to think of a way out of the
discrepancy which makes sense in the immediate context, if we are
to do justice to Socrates' speech as a developing argument addressed
in its fictional context to a not especially sophisticated jury likely to
have been much more numerous than our juries are.
Second, the passage is difficult in itself. Socrates in fact takes
the argument an unexpected route. This time he is explaining
the tendency of young men to spend time in his company; they
gather round and listen when he refutes people - as he says, a
not unpleasant experience for them. He says then that he has been
ordered by the god to do . this; ordered by oracles and dreams and
every means by which a divine providence ever ordered a mortal to
do anything. Perhaps he has, whether in fiction or in fact. But, if
so, why did he not tell us and the jury before? We required hard
evidence for Socrates' sense of having be1en ordered by the god
to refute people he met; we saw room for doubt whether the
72
SOCRATES' MISSION
Oracle had provided Socrates with hard evidence; and instead of
mentioning the evidence he has, and spelling out in detail how it
convinced him, Plato's Socrates passed over chunks of it, left· us
with a mere probability which he needed for his argument to know,
_ and brought out those chunks only later and only in passing. One
might legitimately wonder how Socrates could produce convincing
evidence of dreams he had had; but he could at least suggest that
he had mentioned them to his friends at the time. If true, such
a suggestion would have come in handy several pages earlier in
the Defence. As for 'oracles' in the plural, are we or a jury
supposed to take seriously the proposition that the gist of the
oracle Chaerephon received was repeated, or that Oracles on other
occasions gave responses which in different and perhaps more direct
terms gave Socrates his marching orders? If neither of these is the
case, did Socrates here speak loosely of 'oracles' when in fact only
the one was given? And, if so, what becomes of Socrates' recent
reputation for strict veracity and rejection of an advocate's tricks?
Furthermore, Socrates backed up the earlier account of the Delphic
oracle for Chaerephon by the hearsay evidence of Chaerecrates;
why not produce more evidence of the same kind? Socrates does
declare these hard sayings true and easy to test, and appears
('For if ... ' at 33c8) to foreshadow an explanation; but none is
forthcoming: all that comes forth is a challenge to produce anyone
he has corrupted. That is not, and could not be, evidence for the
divine command. Socrates' certainty of mission remains without a
plausible explanation, and indeed I have none to off er. Plato and his
Socrates seem merely to cover up the difficulty with rhetoric. This
passage, rather than supplying a solution, leaves Socrates' certainty
yet more problematic. 65
THE RHETORIC OF PLATO'S VERSION
What this passage does is to demote the oracle from its position
as chief evidence for Socrates' mission and make it just one among
many occurrences or deductions pointing in the same direction.
One of the deductions might be the argument mentioned above,
that Socrates' life must be a gift from the god. Why does Plato's
Socrates want at the same time to demote the oracle and lend
added evidence - if one can call it that - to the mission? The
suggestion lies ready to hand that the oracle was sufficient for the
speech's purposes at that earlier point in its development to give the
73
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
mission a dramatic start, and one not requiring too much by way
of philosophical argument. The oracle helps at that stage to account
for the mission's continuance even better than it accounts in detail
for its start. At no moment earlier in his clef ence did Socrates need,
rhetorically, the dreams and other oracles or divine commands; he
has a highly dramatic narrative and reasonably forceful argument
without. But he is now approaching the rhetorical climax of his
defence: this is the last paragraph of actual argument in his favour
before he makes the final very effective point of his reluctance to
produce what he labels unjust and impious sob-stuff. He wishes to
argue that the only reason the young flock around him - and that
not to their detriment - is the pleasantness of hearing those with a
conceit of wisdom examined. In awareness, one supposes, that this
leaves him open to suspicion of mere impish enjoyment himself,
he reminds his audience or Plato's readers that he has another and
better reason for his refutations. And so he deploys all the evidence
he can, and indeed some that he only very doubtfully can. Plato
doubtless hoped that reader or putative audience would not ask
the question why the dreams and plural oracles appear only at this
point in the speech; and certainly many readers have not asked it,
as they have been swept on by the rhetoric of a past master in both
style and literary construction.
SOCRATES' MORAL MISSION
One final problem seems to me to be less problematic than it has
appeared to some other critics. 66 Socrates launches at 29d into an
account of what he would be giving up if he were to bargain his
philosophy for his life, an account which differs at least on the
surface from our previous impressions. 'I will not stop', he says
exhorting you and showing each of you that I meet, saying
as usual 'My very good man, you who are an Athenian,
from the greatest and most famous city for wisdom and
strength, you are not ashamed of yourself for making an
effort to get as much money as possible, and reputation
and honour, but making no effort and taking no thought
for prudence and truth and for the soul's greatest possible
improvement?' And if one of you disputes this and claims
to make an effort [for his soul], I will not at once let him go
... but will question and investigate and refute him and if I
74
SOCRATES' MISSION
think he has not goodness, but claims it, I will reproach him
with taking things of the greatest value with little seriousness,
and things of lesser value more seriously ... This, you should ·
know, is the god's command, and in my opinion no greater
benefit has been conferred on you in the city than my service
to the god. I simply go around persuading young and old not
to make more effort for their bodies or their money than they
do for the greatest possible improvement of their souls.
This sounds indeed a rather different note from Socrates' previous
account of what he actually did. The reference to enquiry and
refutation echoes previous narrative, but there is far more positive
content here. In particular the paragraph quoted refers to Socrates
actively reproaching the Athenians for getting their values wrong.
This in turn implies his own belief that his values are right, that
he is right in regarding moral values as paramount over what may
broadly speaking be termed material ones. Does this make Socrates
or his story 'inconsistent?
The view is clearly tenable that it does not. Socrates, one recalls,
did not say that he knew that he knew nothing; he said he did not
think he knew what he did not know. He went about demonstrating
other people's false conceit of knowledge. Now they certainly
claimed or appeared to claim to know that their values were sound,
and it was no doubt mostly about these that Socrates questioned
them. These were, it makes sense to assume, the 'most important
things' of which the poets and craftsmen proved to be ignorant
despite their technical knowledge. But then if other people did not
know that their values were sound, how did Socrates know that
his were? If he can accuse them of not knowing values, then how
is it he can be so positive about his own? This problem presents
perhaps a special difficulty for our time, which tends to distinguish
fact sharply from value and then say that facts are knowable but
values are not, or are subjective. Clearly Socrates cannot have been
making the point that values are subjective; on the contrary, he is
strongly associated with the idea that goodness is knowledge. What
he would claim, I think, is that his values are, so far as he has been
able to discover, of an iron consistency, whereas other people's are
inconsistent. His values, as he makes clear both on and beneath
the surface of the Apology (to say nothing here of other works
of Plato's), are those of justice, of helping and certainly not of
harming others. He is not like others who pay lip-service to
75
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
· moral values of that sort but in fact pursue pleasure or wealth or
honour or power or technical expertise or whatever. He is not like
yet others whose values alter according to the convenience of the
moment. These people are the people he keeps reproaching, and
will continue, if released, to reproach. And he is not like other
species of the inconsistent who make their unfortunate appearances
in Plato's dialogues to have their self-contradictions shown up: one
thinks, for example, of Callicles in the Gorgias, who cannot in the
last analysis maintain a consistent hedonism. And Socrates knows,
as he says, that to commit injustice, to do something wrong, is
bad and shameful. He knows it, one may suspect on reading the
Apology, because nobody can refute or prove him inconsistent in
this belief and ( on reading other Platonic works) because that is,
in his view, what the gods wish and enjoin. And it is legitimate for
Socrates to represent his practice of refuting other people's values
as tending to establish his own; that is all that is required to explain
his report that he goes around exhorting people to fallow his own
anti-materialistic values. Many will have been found in his own time
to agree in principle, some of the time, with some or much of what
he says; but fewer will have been consistent, and fewer still of the
moral stature to continue courting a :finally fatal unpopularity in
the cause of any beliefs they shared with Socrates.
Plato's Apology paints a brilliant picture. It is a portrait which
might indeed have convinced a jury. It has convinced many critics
since. But the fact had to be faced: Socrates did, historically, fail
to convince the jury. It is by no means clear that the speech Plato
put into his mouth would have convinced the jury either. It might
not even have found favour with the historical Socrates. But that is
not because Plato failed to lavish upon it all the resources of his
literary art.
Others besides the young men of his time have found it a
'not unpleasant' experience to follow in Plato's pages Socrates'
refutations of the conceited. Others besides the young men of his
time have failed to see or to pay attention ~o the moral point. In
an age largely, in this country, godless and, it seeffis, increasingly
materialistic in its values, we could profitably learn from a Socrates
who is concerned to show how difficult it is to sustain, humanly
rather than philosophically, a consistent set of materialistic values,
and to show us by the example of his courage and his stubborn faith
the strength of his own values. True, Plato's Socrates is not quite
the guileless, unpractised speaker Plato has him suggest he is at the
76
SOCRATES' MISSION
outset of his defence; but the subtle nuances of language and rhetoric
he uses, in Plato's version, should not be allowed to obscure either
the essential moral force of his position or its continuing relevance
to normal human concerns. 67
NOTES
1 The Thucydides passage, I. 22, is quoted by Gregory Vlastos in his
1991: 49f., n. 15, and 253. It would be presumptuous of me even
to pretend to discuss this book thoroughly here, having received it
only shortly before completing this chapter: but it would equally be
discourteous to ignore it (a judgement I have not abandoned despite
receiving while this book was in the press the very sad news of Gregory
Vlastos' death).
Vlastos teases out with impressive detail the extensive cliff erences
between the Socrates of the early and of the middle dialogues, SocE
and SocM. Vlastos (especially 91ff.) reminds us that Aristotle's evidence
favours SocE as, in Aristotle's view, representing in outline (my italics) a
Socrates he could ref er to as, indeed, 'Socrates', in contra-distinction to
SocM, to whom he refers often as 'Plato'. But one needs to bear in mind
that Aristotle's reports about Socrates offer only a few very important
doctrines and salient points of method; the reports encompass only
a minute number of arguments. This is compatible with Vlastos'
view (1991: 50) that Plato was 'producing rather than reproducing'
Socratic philosophy; and it should restrain us from commitment to
the Socratic authenticity of any particular argument in Plato's early
works without careful sifting of the available evidence.
Vlastos (1991: 97, n. 67), like Deman (1942: passim), makes an
argument from the tenses used by Aristotle in his references to
Socrates. Past tenses, on their view, offer an indicatiori that the subject
is the historical Socrates; present tenses suggest a literary reference. The
latter one may accept; the former is more doubtful. A clear reference
to the Apology appears in Aristotle's Rhetoric 1419a8-12, with Socrates
the subject of two aorist tenses of verbs of speaking, and one could
argue (so Zeller, contra Maier, both cited by Deman 1942: 63) that
Aristotle believed in the essential and even detailed authenticity of
the Apology as a report. (Vlastos, I should say, does not discuss. this
passage individually, relying for the Apology's general authenticity
mostly on the arguments of Brickhouse and Smith in their 1989:
2-10 - arguments I hope to undermine elsewhere.) But the argument
is not cogent. At Rhetoric 1367b7-9 Aristotle used the past imperfect
of a near quotation from the Socrates of Plato's Menexenus (235d),
of which he uses the present tense when explicitly quoting the same
passage later in the same treatise (1415b30-2). One wonders whether
the historical Socrates should really be credited with the quoted phrase,
or Aristotle with independent knowledge of its Socratic origin, or
whether Aristotle has simply been careless in his use of tenses. By
the so-called 'Fitzgerald's canon', the presence at 1367b of the definite
77
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
article with the name 'Socrates' should indicate a reference to a literary
work; but this clashes with the past tense supposed to refer to the
Socrates of fact. These facts suggest an Aristotle unconcerned, over
this kind of detail, whether it was or was not the Socrates of history
who was talking in Plato. But in that case we should not "lean heavily
on the past tense at Rhetoric 1419a. The question whether the historical
Socrates said or did not say the things Aristotle quotes from Plato (the
Apology and elsewhere) is so utterly irrelevant to the concerns of the
Rhetoric that it would probably be a mistake to attribute to Aristotle as
he wrote it any high degree of interest in the question. (And one should
beware of laying too much stress on Aristotle's use in some places of
the imperfect - roughly iterative - tense and in others of the aorist -
roughly factual - tense, in .face of the apparent lack of any importance
to the distinction in the parallel passages Eudemian Ethics 1230a7 and
Nicomachean Ethics 1116b4.)
Vlastos and I differ in emphasis on the question how far to trust the
early Plato as an 'account' of Socrates. Vlastos treats Plato as writing
Socratic philosophy in a spirit largely faithful to the master's lines of
argument; to me the dialogues read like Platonic literature, written
within certain parameters of major Socratic method and doctrine but
otherwise free. Whatever the reader may think on this general question,
he or she cannot resolve it on the basis of Aristotle's testimony, which
does not deal in the appropriate level of detail. The way lies open
the ref ore to the arguments of the rest of this chapter. If Plato was
producing rather than reproducing Socratic rhetoric in the Apology,
as he does Socratic philosophy in the early dialogues (properly so
called), then we should weigh probabilities with care b.efore deciding
to assign or not to assign this or that individual argument in the Platonic
Socrates' defence to the historical Socrates.
If Aristotle's evidence is inconclusive on many points, so is the
agreement with Plato's SocE discernible from time to time in Xenophon
or in Aeschines of Sphettus. Examination of individual passages would
take us too far afield, but in general the dating of Xenophon's
and Aeschines' works is not on a footing enabling us to dismiss
the possibility that these writers plagiarised from Plato's fascinating
SocE. A single example may point up this possibility: Xenophon,
Memorabilia Socratis IV. 4. 9, the single Xenophontine passage Vlastos
quotes (1991: 105) on Socrates' refusal to answer questions, happens to
be about justice, also the topic in the context of Thrasymachus' very
striking attack on Socrates for the same thing at Plato, Republic I.
337a. Here, much the most likely explanation of the -facts is conscious
or unconscious reminiscence by a Xenophon momentarily unheedful
in literary excitement of the resultant conflict with his own general
portrayal of 'Socrates' in the Memorabilia.
Finally (so far as concerns this already over-long note), Vlastos (97,
n. 69) and others point out that Plato was not Aristotle's only source
for his judgements on Socrates. I think, however, that one can derive
Aristotle's testimony entirely from the combination of (a) Plato's
SocE, (b) Xenophon, and perhaps others' Socratic writings, and ( c)
78
SOCRATES' MISSION
anecdotes of a common type leading up to supposed sayings of
Socrates. There is little trace of any serious talk in the Academy
about Socrates ( and notoriously we know rather little of what did go
on in Plato's Academy), except for Aristotle's apparent certainty that
SocM represents, where he differs from or goes beyond SocE, Plato's
own contribution; and it is not difficult to imagine Plato, on one or
more semi-public occasions within the school, outlini~g the extent
of his own contribution. Evidence that Plato openly, informally and
conversationally discussed with Aristotle or other pupils exactly what
Socrates had said is hard to find. How much importance to attach to its
lack is for the reader to decide. And my readers should most certainly
read also Vlastos' book.
2 Notably not only Vlastos 1991 but also Brickhouse and Smith 1989;
Reeve 1989 is more cautious.
3 See, e.g., Hackforth 1933: 88-104.
4 Brickhouse and Smith 1989: 88ff.
5 Well brought out by Gladigow 1965.
6 I try to observe the distinction of Fontenrose 1978: 1 n. 1, between
'Oracle' (capitalised) for an institution such as the Delphic Oracle and
'oracle' (lower case throughout) for an oracular response.
7 E.g. Hackforth 1933: 89ff.; Brickhouse and Smith 1989: 88 (with
bibliography); Reeve 1989: 25; and, emphasising what he sees as the
subjective aspect of Socrates' interpretation, Vlastos 1991: 171f.
8 Wilamowitz-Moellendorff 1920: 54.
9 Gomperz 1905: 104-8; Hack.forth 1933: esp. 101ff.
10 Guthrie 1969: 408.
11 1989: 91-4.
12 1989: 25.
13 1989: 26f.
14 1989: 28.
15 At Apology 23d Socrates says that the victims of his refutations are
not angry with themselves for ignorance of which they had been
unaware, but with Socrates; and that suggests no inner acceptance
of his refutations.
16 Notably Coulter 1964: 303 n. 33 and (less explicitly) Meyer 1962: 72.
17 I include under the head of 'legend' the Herodotean oracle commending
'wooden walls' (ships) to the Athenians, despite Guthrie 1969: 40. See
on the whole subject Fontenrose 1978 (a controversial book).
18 So in effect Hack.forth 1933: 89 and others cited by Reeve 1989: 23,
n. 24. Jordan (1990: 61) perhaps hedges his bets: '[Socrates] set out as
if [my italics] to refute the oracle ... '; but for hos with future participle
meaning 'as if', see Euripides, Helen 1037.
19 See, e.g., Mikalson: 1983: 40 with nn.
20 See Apology 20e-21a.
21 Reeve (1989: 22) appears, without supporting argument, to accept the
prospective meaning of Socrates' participle here.
22 The most plausible I have found is Herodotus I. 80.4, where, however,
Godley's Loeb translation suggests he took the Greek differently. With
a main verb which is not one of motion, see, e.g., Aeschylus, Agam.
79
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
1320, Herodotus IX. 37.2, Euripides, Suppl. 464, Thucydides V. 43.3.
I owe these references to Stahl 1907: 722ff.
23 See Iliad XIV. 365, cited by Burnet 1924: 94 on 22a7.
24 See my list at Stokes 1971: 310, n. 78.
25 It is perhaps necessary to add that, though the similar passage at
Xenophon, Cynegetica XIII. 7 has a clearly purposive import, and
this chapter of the Cynegetica appears to borrow some ideas and even
phrases from Plato's Apology, Xenophon need be no reliable guide to
Plato's meaning.
26 Euripides, Ion 69-71 (with whole context) and again 1528ff. depict
Apollo as himself giving out a falsehood. An Athenian audience would
presumably have found this a deeply shocking depiction.
27 Notice the logical connective 'For', gar, at 21b5, and see Reeve 1989:
23 on the impossibility of doubt.
28 See, e.g., Laches 191b6-8.
29 See further below.
30 Adam 1897: 61.
31 See Sophocles, Oed. Tyr. 902£., Pindar, Pythians II. 21, and Herodotus
II. 120.5; and Archilochus 122 (West), all cited by Cameron 1940:
115ff.
32 See n. 16 above.
33 Vlastos 1985: 1ff.
34 See, e.g., Reeve 1989: 36.
35 See Vlastos 1991: 82f. and n. 4.
36 On both of these see p.32ff. above and pp.60ff. below.
37 See below, pp.52-4.
38 See Guthrie cited above, p.30 and n. 10.
39 See above, n. 1 for some relevant considerations.
40 Montuori 1981b: esp. 57-146; Armleder 1966; Toole 1973-4; Fontenrose
1978: esp. 34.
41 Montuori 1981b: 87-95.
42 Reeve 1989: 21.
43 See Taylor 1917: 115, and his 1933: 74-82.
44 Reeve 1989: 14-19.
45 Taylor 1917: 111-18.
46 See Athen. Deipnosophistae V. 218; Plutarch, Adv. Colotem 1116e.
Montuori accepts in his 1981b: 69 that these and other post-Classical
scholarly evidence derive from Plato's and Xenophon's Apologies,
except for the forged metrical version of the oracle.
47 Montuori 1981b: 66.
48 VonArnim 1923: 87.
49 Isocrates in his Antidosis over-trumps Plato's Apology, as I hope to
show elsewhere.
50 Amandry 1950; Parke and Wormell 1956; Fontenrose 1978.
51 Taylor 1933: 77, written before the fundamental works of scholars
mentioned above.
52 See on one side Amandry 1950: 7 and Parke 1967: 85; and for doubts,
Fontenrose 1978: 223 and Malkin 1987: 29ff.
53 See on one side LSJ s.v. kleroo; on the other, Owen 1939: 130.
80
SOCRATES' MISSION
54 Lobeck 1829: 814n., cited by Amandry. .
55 Amandry 1950: 25£., n. 2, on Latte 1940: n. 9 and 1942: cols. 831-2.
56 1978: 219-23.
57 Herzog in Horneffer 1922: 149-70; Parke and Wormell 1956: 1, 384ff.
with texts at 2, 97££. See also Montuori 1981: 133-9.
58 Parke and Wormell 1956: 1, 385.
59 Herodotus I. 30.4.
60 So Montuori 1981b: 133-9.
61 Fontenrose 1978: 34; elsewhere Fontenrose brings the Platonic oracle
as evidence in a way suggesting he views it as historical, 1978: 8.
62 I am glad to notice some points of resemblance between the explanation
which follows and Vlastos 1991: 175ff ., but Vlastos speaks in terms
of piety rather than justice. On Socrates' ideas of justice see Vlastos
1991: 179££.
63 See Stokes 1986: 219-26 and (much more weightily) Lloyd-Jones
1971 passim.
64 See, e.g., Brickhouse and Smith 1989: 137ff.; Reeve 1989: 115££.; and
Spiro Panagiotou's chapter in this volume.
65 It does not become any the less problematic for Vlastos' rendering
(1991: 72) of manteia, 'oracles', as 'divinations'. The only divinations
I know to be denoted by this word in normal Classical Greek are
oracular responses.
66 From at least as early as Gomperz 1905: 107.
67 I regret that 'Socrates' Elenctic Mission' by T.C. Brickhouse and N.D.
Smith, Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 9 (1991), 131-61, came
into my hands too late for consideration.
81
2
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Ian Kidd
Plato is one of those rarest and most rewarding of intellectual geniuses,
both a philosopher of the highest quality and also a supreme creative
literary writer. But these gifts create difficulties of their own. For
we are not dealing with a split personality: don in the daytime and
pseudonymous writer of novels or detective stories in the evening;
or yet, on a higher level, with a David Hume writing history for
literary fame. The two aspects of Plato are deliberately, inextricably
and organically entwined as matter and form where his philosophizing
is expressed in the literary dramatic form of the Socratic dialogue. So,
either to analyse the arguments and simply lay bare their relationships
in logical formulation without taking account of their literary formal
clothing or to read the plays without regard to their philosophical
direction is of course possible and has its own rewards, but is likely
to be wasteful and distorting, since one would then be dealing with
one aspect out of focus, instead of with the whole. Although this is
no doubt now the received view of Platonic scholarship, it cannot
be said that great agreement has been reached over the operation
and effect of the relationship of the two aspects, and over which is
the dominant factor, for emphasis is laid now on one side, now on
the other, usually objecting to over-emphasis of the opposite feature.
Part of the trouble is that the Socratic dialogue illustrates a curious
combination of art and science. Science aims at objectivity, and o~e aim
of the dialogues appears to be the pursuit of objective truth and reality,
as Socrates' hunt for certain infallible shared knowledge and a 'science'
of morality, and as the emergence of the Theory of Forms indicate. On
the other hand, an art form is especially characterised by the subjective
response of the individual audience, viewer or reader. And this, in my
view, was also intended by· Plato; indeed, whether intended or not,
that characteristic of the dialogues has certainly yielded rich fruit in
82
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
their subsequent study within the history of philosophy as well as
literature.
It is indeed the interpretative importance of the dramatic form
that has been the subject of much recent Platonic publication, and
it is a single thread arising out of this that I want to pursue. But first
I should make two things clear. By 'Socrates' in this context, I mean
the Platonic Socrates of the Socratic dialogues. And second, I regard
the Socratic dialogues not as historical reporting or biography, nor
as pure fiction or literary drama, but as philosophical faction: that is,
following the definition in the Oxford English Dictionary, a fictional
development from a base of real people, events or situations. But,
and this is important, Plato wrote, created and directed the whole
himself purposefully.
Now, the central dramatic feature of the Socratic dialogue is
Socrates asking questions examining various contemporaries. Or
so I thought until I was forced to reconsider the philosophical
function of these questions by Michael Stokes' stimulating book,
Plato's Socratic Conversations. 1 In his examination of the dramatic
form, he shifts all the stress from Socrates' questions to the role of
Socrates' interlocutors, which he thinks has been unduly ignored.
He makes a case that it is their views which are being examined, and
which are used as hypotheses for investigation, whereas Socrates
himself does nothing but ask questions. So we may not look for
Socrates', far less Plato's, views on philosophy in the dialogues (I
would put this the other way round: not even Plato's views, far less
Socrates'). In any case we must not confuse the dramatist with his
characters, or the play with the ·author's philosophy. What is going
on is an examination of currently held moral and social beliefs and
standards. This point of view leads to very acute and illuminating
exposition of detail, but to my surprise appeared to demote the
force of Socrates' questions as being colourless or neutral. 'We can
suppose', argues Stokes, 'that all Socrates' questions have the aim
of eliciting the respondent's view, and that any other purpose is, if
present at all, of secondary importance'. 2 Geared to the respondent,
Socrates asks genuine alternative questions to which the respondent
has . the right of personal response, and is capable of saying 'yes'
or 'no'. This rather qualified and predominantly dependent and
negative view of the function of Socratic questions seems to me at
least partly misleading, and I want to put · a case for a different side
of the question, for a more positive force in the directional quality
of Socrates' questions. I suggest that Plato uses them to lead the
83
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
movement of the argument to an end (not necessarily a conclusion)
that he has in mind.
But first a brief reaction in mild protest to an overall general
estimate of neutrality for Socrates' questions. In fact, the question
form in whatever language is really a most complex and treacherous
linguistic device. I am not persuaded that many of Socrates' questions
are colourless. Even alternative questions are, and are often
assumed to be, loaded. I have given up asking my wife · alternative
questions, because if I ask 'Are you going to Edinburgh tomorrow
or on Friday?', she answers 'yes' or 'no', always to my disgust
assuming that the first of the alternatives is the leading question to
which you expect the answer 'yes'. But is the Socratic respondent
capable of saying 'yes' or 'no'? Well, yes in theory and in implication;
but Plato's characters are not live, independent, autonomous
people. We must not confuse written dialogue with live television
interview, as if Meno, as Plato poised his stylus to write another
'yes', caught Plato's wrist and said, 'That's enough, write down
"no".' It is Plato who is writing it all, and his characters cannot
in fury get up and go like John Nott in the famous Falklands War
television interview, not even the aggrieved Callicles in the Gorgias,
without Plato's literary permission. Otherwise we confuse faction
and fact. The characters, although real people ( at least the originals
were real people), are Plato's own literary creations.
Nor do I believe that Socrates' questions simply spring from
respondents' answers. When Meno defines arete or goodness or
excellence as managing a city or a house well (Meno 73a6 ), that
certainly derives consistently from the character Meno ( and his
mentor Gorgias). But Socrates' next question, 'Is it possible to
manage a city or anything else well unless sophronos kai dikaios
[i.e. prudently and justly]?', surely springs from Socrates, or rather
from Plato, not from Meno. Meno may, and does, agree, because
the Greek words are ambiguous, but neither the historical nor
the dramatic Meno would have originated that point. And in that
sense it is a Platonic leading question. So Socrates' questions are
not always negative or responsive to his interlocutors, but can
be positively directive. If the dialogues were merely dependent
on respondents' views, they would be haphazard. But they are
not: unlike ordinary conversations, the Socratic dialogues are
organic developments. Plato himself is quite explicit about this
desired ideal quality of literary work in Phaedrus 264c, but the
description obviously applies to the early Socratic dialogues also.
84
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
But the organic control of a dialogue lies in the direction of Socrates'
questions . In the famous illustration in Meno 82b ff. eliciting from
an ignorant slave boy the answer to the problem of forming . a
square double in size to a given one, the boy is not instructed
by Socrates, as Plato correctly insists, in the sense of being told
the answer; he is questioned to develop what Plato thinks of as
latent knowledge, so that he understands for himself each step
as they proceed, eliminating the obviously wrong answers. This,
however, cannot be done haphazardly without order or direction,
as in the case of the notorious chimp who was expected on his own
eventually to type Shakespeare. Socrates, or rather Plato, knows
where he is going. The directive force is the questions; and this,
as teachers know very well from their experience in tutorials, is a
very difficult thing to achieve, and should not be attempted except
by someone who knows what he or she is doing. Plato's Socrates
may profess ignorance, but Plato uses him as an active and positive
dialectical force, even by, or rather especially by, asking questions.
I should like to try to illustrate this, however superficially, from
the Laches, a shortish early Socratic dialogue that is fairly clear,
beautifully written, amusing and provocative. I see it less as a drama
of character, where the beliefs of the generals Laches and Nicias
are examined and tested ( although certainly those of 'Laches' and
'Nicias' are involved), than as a dynamic dramatic philosophical
dialogue orchestrated by Plato through the medium of his chief
character Socrates to a problem which he feels that we (and he)
should face. I am not concerned with detail ( on which Stokes
has often been so illuminating), but with the operational plan and
structure.
The Laches is concerned with courage. But we only gradually
come to see this through the development of the dramatic form
from a particular situation. This is how faction works. Two anxious
fathers, Lysimachus and Melesias, conscious of themselves having
been allowed to run wild in their youth by their own famous fathers,
Aristides and Thucydides, are worried about their sons' education.
There is a new lecturer in town teaching weapon drill. Should they
spend their drachmas on that? They sensibly consult their friends
Laches and Nicias, two famous and successful generals who should
know what they are talking about. Nicias, an enthusiast for the
new intellectual enlightenment, is all for it. One skill will lead to
another; before long the boys will find a general's baton in their
chiton (181e-182d). Laches, a bluff practical soldier, is sceptical;
85
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
he has seen this Stesilaus make a bit of a fool of himself in actual
battle. Anyway, mere technical skill is not enough in a tight
spot (182d-184c). Impasse results. The distraught fathers turn
to Socrates, who is hovering . as usual, a gadfly or cleg disguised
in human form. Would he like to give the casting vote? Instead,
of course, Socrates starts asking questions (184d ff.). Would they
actually settle this, or any other crucial issue, simply on a majority
decision of Tom, Dick and Harry (in the guise of Laches, Nicias
and Socrates), or rely on the advice of one expert who knows and
is right? This important point comes from Plato, as is obvious from
a whole series of dialogues. It is directed by Socrates' question, not
from the respondents. Very well. But, asks Socrates indefatigably,
do we know what we are talking about (185b)? Weapon-training,
of course, say the others impatiently. But isn't that just a means to
an end? If we are debating which eye lotion to apply or not, isn't it
the condition of the eyes we are concerned about? What then? And
here Plato hurries things on: well, are we not talking about weapontraining
in relation t9 the end product of the youngsters' education,
and isn't that the care of their minds (therapeia tes psyches heneka,
185d-e)? Surely that is a leading question, and from Plato through
Socrates, even though it may have been prehinted; and by it the
switch has been made from physical to mental or intellectual and
moral education.
But isn't arete or moral goodness a large question, pursues
Socrates. Shall we confine it to the appropriate part of arete,
namely manliness, andreia, courage (190c-d)? It is Socrates who
initiates that move, which turns out to be crucial. He makes no
statements, but only asks questions. But these questions are vital. If
the discussion is to go anywhere, it is important that the participants
must agree (or disagree) each step; but clearly for the direction of the
discussion, what is important is not the respondents' answers, but
the kind of questions Socrates asks them, his leading questions.
Laches and Nicias, the supposed experts, agree to be questioned
by Socrates on this subject, but at this point Plato permits himself
a wry ironic thrust against himself. Nicias, who has some
acquaintance with Socrates, ruefully remarks that he knows very
well what this means (187e ff.), stringent self-examination under
Socratic questioning. But benefit will result.
Laches goes in to bat first, full of confidence. Socrates asks
innocently (190c): if he knows what a thing is, can he say what
it is? This is a dreadful trap, but Laches agrees without hesitation.
86
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
So can he say what courage is? Laches sees no difficulty about
that whatever; a man who stands fast in the ranks and fights
off the enemy is brave (190e). Now in the Laches examination,
while very dramatically characteristic, that is consistent, answers
come from Laches, Socrates' (that is Plato's) questions make a
Platonic philosophical point. In attempting to define something,
Plato thinks that we can go wrong in two ways: we can set about
it in the wrong way, in other words get the form of our answer
wrong, and/or the content of our answer can be wrong. Laches'
first answer is from Plato's point of view formally wrong, because
he merely gives an example of courage, instead of defining it. We
are not talking here ·about universals and particulars, 3 but about
definition and example. Laches is saying that x is courageous,
rather than courage is x. Socrates' questions quickly convince
him of the inadequate narrowness of this procedure (191a ff.). He
can, and does, produce contrary examples, including the Spartans
courageously breaking ranks at Plataea to win the battle. Also
courage has, has it not (Socrates leads with questions as usual), an
extraordinarily wide field, covering, for example, illness, poverty,
affairs of state, pain, fear; and courage can even be shown in the
face of desires and pleasures (191d). Laches has to agree and tries
again. This time he finds the right form ( or at least the form that
Plato is looking for): courage is karteria tis tes psyches, a kind of
mental endurance (192b-c). But is this, that is the content, right?
We know what he means by karteria, sticking it out, guts, bottle.
But he said 'a kind of guts'. Would he accept all guts as courage?
Well, no; this time it looks too broad. Socrates prods interrogatively
(192c ff.): isn't courage a fine thing (kalon, something we admire
or value)? Intelligent (phronimos) endurance is a fine and good
thing; but foolish endurance is surely the opposite, a hurtful and
vicious thing. Therefore foolish endurance cannot be courage (that
follows); therefore intelligent endurance is courage (that does not
follow, but it will do as a working hypothesis). But what does that
mean? Does 'intelligent' mean prudent, sensible, opposed to foolish
or foolhardy? Or does it mean technically skilled as opposed to
inexpert, incompetent? So Socrates (Plato) asks, intelligent in what
(he eis ti phronimos, 192e)? He produces some examples, asking
Laches whether they are examples of courage: if a City yuppie, with
insider dealer knowledge, knows that by buying shares and holding
out he will make money, is that courage? No. What about a doctor
knowing that he will kill his patient if he gives in to his pleas for a ,
87
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
drink, and so intelligently sticks out against it? No again. Or take
Laches' own field: two armies face each other. One general knows
that reinforcements are coming, that he outnumbers the enemy, that
he holds the stronger position. He clearly sticks it out intelligently.
But his opposite number, with the odds against him, is in a sense
foolish or. stupid if he sticks it out. Yet Laches thinks the latter is
brave in doing so, not the former. But in that case, we now seem
to be saying that the more foolish or stupid guts is courage; so
intelligent guts, at least in the sense of prudence based on expert
knowledge and reckoning the odds, isn't courage after all, is it?
Now, the answers given through this passage are certainly dramatically
consistent with the character Laches, but it is not so much
the answers that are interesting, but the questions which lead to
the answers. So we notice not just Laches' dramatic discomfiture
under examination of his own beliefs, but how Socrates' (Plato's)
questioning is swinging attention to this peculiar and genuinely
puzzling mental aspect of guts in courage. Just guts, sticking it
out, is not apparently enough. But what is this key element of
mind involved?
Laches retires hurt and frustrated. Socrates admonishes him; we
must have the guts to continue, or Courage itself will laugh at us
(194a). Nicias, the other general, whose ears have pricked up during
this latter exchange, now moves in with what he thinks is a clever
sure-fire winner in present company, because - and Plato makes a
point of this, and it is Plato after all who is writing the whole of it: it
is not a tape-recording- he suggests that the key may be a mot which
he has heard Socrates himself say over and over again (194d). Ah,
what is that? Well, says Nicias, you keep saying that a man is good
(agathos) at what he is wise (sophos). So if the courageous man is
good, he is wise; that is, courage is a kind of wisdom (sophia). Thus
baldly and suddenly put the argument is startling, to say the least of
it. For the first premise appears to mean: a man is good at what he
is clever (skilled) at. But the following hypothesis seems to mean:
so if the courageous man is a good man, he is an intellectually wise
man. On the face of it, there is equivocation, or at least ambiguity
in the use of both Greek terms, agathos and sophos. Laches at
once ridicules the suggestion, not without reason. But Plato makes
Socrates think it interesting and worth investigation.
Now, again what impresses here is the planned pattern of
developing structure in the dialogue. The Laches episode, it is
true, finishes ostensibly by showing the contradictory incoherence
88
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
of Laches' views in attempting to define courage. But it does not
really end in a negative blockage or aporia of defeat, but surely in
the opening of a new question. What brought about the demolition
of Laches was not the guts element, but the intellectual (phronimos)
or mental aspect of courage; and Plato now makes the design of the
dialogue concentrate on precisely that with Nicias.
So what kind of sophia could courage be or involve? Nicias
suggests that of the terrible or fearful and encouraging (he ton
deinon kai tharraleon, 195a). But then what is its sphere or
relevance? Under questioning it appears to be a very odd one
(195b ff.). It is not what is to be feared in disease, for that is
the doctor's sphere; or in agriculture, for that is the province of
the skill of the farmer. Why is it. different? Because the doctor's
skill, we are told, lies in his knowledge of illness and health, but
not in whether it is better for a patient to live or die, which is
where the fear lies. Again, the professional prophet may have the
technical skill to foretell the future, but not the knowledge whether
the predicted event is better or worse, and so to be feared or not, for
the enquirer. So if the brave man has a sophia, it is a very peculiar
kind of sophia, not a skill in a sphere, but apparently a knowledge
of better and worse; that is he has a knowledge of values, or in other
words he makes a value-judgement. This line of questioning is surely
driving not only Nicias, but also the reader to distinguish moral
'knowledge' from knowledge as some kind of technical skill.
This intellectual link of courage with values as distinct from
intellectual skill, which had been confused by both Laches and
Nicias, is now strengthened in Socrates' questions by classifying
courage not as being good at something or as a prudential calculating
of the odds, but as being good in the sense of moral goodness, and so
aligning it with the other virtues as part of 'goodness', i.e. morality
(198a). Courage is still being examined as knowledge of the fearful,
but Plato now makes Socrates proceed with another set of leading
questions (1986 ff.): fear is for the future, isn't it, because it is
expectation of bad to come? So it is informed judgement of future
good and bad. But Socrates suggests that knowledge of one time
aspect entails knowledge of other time aspects (198d-e). If you
know what is healthy and what was healthy, you will know what
will be healthy, and vice versa. This is the whole point of science
in the broadest terms. So a 'science' of morality, if there is such a
thing, would be timeless. But then, if they are on the right track,
Nicias has not, has he, defined the courageous man, but apparently
89
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
-the good man, although it was earlier agreed that courage was only
a part of goodness. Nicias is baffled, much to Laches' joy, and here
Plato stops, apparently with an aporia. But it is hardly negative;
because what results from the impasse is not so much that they
have not managed to define courage, but it would seem to follow,
if their arguments in agreement so far have been correct, or at least
acceptable, that before they can define courage, they would have
to be able to define goodness or virtue itself, and what they mean
by that.
So what are we left with? Not, I think, at the purely dramatic
level, the rubble of demolition. It seems to me that greater interest
from the Laches comes not from the exposure of the incoherence
of popular current views such as Laches and Nicias held, but in the
consequent problems which such aporia from the exposure reveals.
It is the question or questions at the end of the Laches that are the
important ones; and since Plato planned and wrote the whole of
the Laches, it is to the ultimate question hanging in the air, not the
answers we have had, that Plato has been leading us from the start,
and so it has the final emphasis.
Are Socrates and Plato then involved? I believe so. In the first
place, that the equation of value and rationality comes from the
historical Socrates seems to me very arguable from the famous
account from the Platonic Socrates of his intellectual development
in Phaedo 96a ff. The much-discussed deuteros pious, or second
voyage or tack that Plato finally embarks on in the last argument of
that dialogue, -surely derives from Plato himself, with its dependence
on the Theory of Forms. But the abandoned protos plous, or first
tack, which attempts to posit a straight rational value explanation
for everything, surely then comes from the historical Socrates, or at
least the picture Plato had of him. And indeed the value-rationality
equation has been thought to be one of the most momentous
legacies of Plato's Socrates to subsequent Greek philosophy. But
in any case, in the Laches itself, Plato made a point of linking
Nicias' starting point with Socrates, and the last section looks
like an exploratory probing by Plato of a rudimentary Socratic
epistemology of value. There has been much written about the
Socratic dialogues exposing puzzles over the confusion between
the different kinds of knowing, such as skill and expertise on the
one hand and theoretical knowledge on the other. No do·ubt this
is involved, but I would rather suggest that the basic problem
confronting Plato was the identification of the very peculiar and
90
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
puzzling characteristics of moral knowledge and value-judgements
and standards. And so the questioning aporia at the end of the
Laches exposes some of the puzzles and inadequacies of what he
took to be Socrates' approach. But the questions he left us with, and
they were real questions, were also there for himself, and although
the dialectic unpeels some of the difficulties, and may even point
to future ways of tackling these, as Plato himself did later, in the
Republic for example, I doubt whether Plato at this point had an
answer for himself, although he was facing himself as well as his
characters with the question.
Finally, let me return to my starting point, and to some aspects of
the dramatic form which Michael Stokes amongst others has made
us face. It doe~ not seem to me generally that 'Plato, like other
writers of drama, keeps aloof from his readers.' 4 The dramatic
form by itself does not exclude him. Plato is surely a philosopher
using dramatic form rather than a dramatist using a philosophical
theme. In any case, in the middle and late dialogues the . personal
significance of interlocutors can fade. It does not greatly matter in
the Symposium who Diotima is; while 'Theaetetus' in the dialogue
named after him is simply an intelligent young man, and Plato seems
to be arguing mainly with himself. But the dialogue form is retained,
and must then be for a dialectical rather than for a purely dramatic
purpose.
So the dramatic form is exemplary Platonic philosophizing,
neither historical record nor theatrical play, and cannot have
been there for show, fashion, entertainment or fun, but was
created because it was actually necessary for Plato, when writing,
to philosophize thus. The actors in his dramas represent real people,
partly at least because Plato was a humanist, and b·elieved that the
questions of philosophy, as he understood philosophy, were not
esoteric games, but crucial for all of us and the way we live; and
indeed that attitude he took from Socrates. But Laches, Nicias and
the rest were of course dead by the time he wrote the dialogue.
Laches died in battle before Plato was ten, most likely. They and
their answers are no more than the matter or hyle on which he
imposed the form of Socratic questioning, by which he involves us,
his readers and himself. For since philosophy for Plato is maieutic
or zetetic (as Diogenes Laertius (III. 49) put it), not dogmatic like
sophistic instruction, but a questing self-examination, and so
self-discovery, for latent knowledge and truth, a natural model
is the dramatic form of the progressive Socratic conversation or
91
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
dialectic as the dynamic operational mode. The dialogue form
illustrates the importance of three things: (1) the elicitation of
latent knowledge, which requires prodding; (2) the testing in
agreement of each step in the process of the developing argument
as it occurs; (3) the direction of the argument. For the movement
and development is not haphazard, but purposefully )ed. And what
I have been suggesting is that the directive spring or arche of this
material is Socrates' questions: that is Plato's questions. If they had
been primarily directed to that fascinating but dead fifth-century
society of Socrates, they would be barren. They are directed partly
· to himself, because apart from a rather more dogmatic phase in
the middle period of his writing, which the splendour of a work
like the Republic puts in false perspective for us, Plato remained
zetetic, self-critical and exploratory to the end. But presumably
the published exoteric Socratic dialogues are mainly directed to the
reader, to stimulate us to examine the flow of the argument, and
face those ultimate questions to which we are led, for ourselves.
-NOTES
1 Stokes 1986.
2 Stokes 1986: 30.
3 As has been suggested by Nehamas 1975-6.
4 Stokes 1986: 29.
92
3
SOCRATES AND CIVIL
DISOBEDIENCE
Spiro Panagiotou
I
In this chapter I am concerned with the interpretation of Plato's
Crito. My principal thesis is two-fold. I shall argue, first, that in
the speech he is made to rehearse on behalf of the Personified
Laws of Athens (henceforth, PLA), Socrates contends that on all
occasions the good citizen must ultimately obey the state. I shall
then suggest that this view on the good citizen's obligation to the
state cannot and must not be attributed also to Socrates himself,
by showing that the views he expresses in his own person cliff er
fundamentally from the views he expresses on behalf of the PLA.
The principal thesis of this chapter forms part of a much larger
thesis, concerning the interpretation of Plato's Apology and Crito,
which has intermittently engaged my attention over the past few
years. I think that I ought to sketch out this larger thesis in the
hope that the reader may appreciate the connection between the
concerns of this chapter and the larger issue of Socrates' position
on 'civil disobedience'.
The larger thesis goes along the following lines. In the Crito,
Plato canvasses three distinct positions as to the obligation, on
the part of a virtuous citizen, to obey the laws or orders of
his state. Crito's own speech (44b5-46a4) represents the position
that, when confronted with a law or order he considers unjust,
the virtuous citizen must disobey it. Indeed, Crito proclaims that
in such circumstances the virtuous citizen must disobey in the
name of virtue (45d-e). When talking in his own person, Socrates
represents the position that, when confronted with a law or order
93
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
he considers unjust, the virtuous citizen must disobey it, provided
that his so doing treats the state neither 'unjustly' nor 'badly'. The
cliff erence between Crito and Socrates is over what they mean by a
'virtuous' citizen. Socrates' virtuous citizen adheres strictly to the
two principles enunciated at 49a-e: (1) one must never treat anyone
( a) 'unjustly' or (b) 'badly', 1 even in retaliation, 2 and (2) one must
abide by one's just agreements. 3 Crito's virtuous citizen also would
certainly embrace (2) and (la), but I very much doubt that he would
embrace also (lb) or the qualification 'not even in retaliation' . 4
Finally the position of the PLA is that the virtuous citizen, as
understood by Socrates, is obliged to obey any and all laws or
orders of the state. That is, the PLA contend that notwithstanding
his sincere belief that what he is being required to obey is unjust,
the virtuous citizen must obey, unless he manages in fact to convince
the state that his perception of the issue is correct or the state's
own perception wrong. The position of the PLA amounts to
what we may call the blind-obedience -to-the-state position. 5 The
fundamental cliff erence between the Socratic position and that of
the PLA is that whereas Socrates thinks that a virtuous citizen may
disobey in consistency with the two principles of 49a-e, the PLA
think that he cannot. As far as they are concerned, disobedience to
the state cannot fail to treat the state either 'unjustly' or 'badly'
(indeed both), and, hence, the virtuous citizen cannot disobey
without violating one or the other of the moral principles which
supposedly circumscribe his life of virtue.
In canvassing the three positions outlined above, Plato intends
to off er the Socratic position as the compromise between the
Individualist (in some sense) position of Crito and the Collectivist
position of the PLA. Underneath the tension between these two
positions, there lies for Plato the conflict between morality and law,
as well as the matter of their possible reconciliation. Crito believes,
obviously, that there may well be conflicts between morality and
the law .and that in such cases morality is paramount. The PLA, on
the other hand, believe that there is, and can be, no such conflict,
since the pronouncements of the state (i.e. laws, judgements, orders)
are prima facie just (i.e. in accordance with morality) or, after
successfully meeting challenges by citizens or going unchallenged,
in fact just. Hence, on their view, the virtuous citizen never has any
principled reason for disobeying, since the state never requires its
citizens to do anything unjust. 6 The good (obedient) citizen is also
a good (virtuous) person.
94
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBED IENCE
Socrates himself believes, with Crito, that there may well be
conflicts between morality and law and that in such cases morality
is paramount. However, unlike Crito, Socrates would also insist
that the highest moral life should embrace the two principles of
49a-e. Though embraced on the ground that any act of 'injustice'
or 'bad treatment' of others redounds on the agent (49b4-6),
the two principles commit their holder to the position that the
good person, contrary to what Crito suggests, cannot throw to
the wind the claims others have not to be treated 'unjustly' or
'badly' ( the 'others' include also those one may regard as one's
enemies). Accordingly, if he is to disobey, the good person must
do so in a way which treats the state neither 'unjustly' nor
'badly'.
That it is possible, according to Socrates, to disobey the state
without treating . it in either way is evident, on certain assumptions,
from Socrates' own defiant stand against the hypothetical
proposal of the court at Apology 29c ff. Assuming that the
defiant Socrates of the Apology operates under the two prin ciples
of the virtuous person in the Crito,7 then obviously he
thinks that his would -be non-compliance treats the state neither
'unjustly' nor 'badly'. However, how exactly, on his view, vir~
tuous disobedience accomplishes such a thing is a much more
complex and contentious issue. For neither the text of the Crito
nor that of the Apology tells us anything directly on the issue.
For this we must rely on scholarly ingenuity and the hints of
the text.
There are hints in both dialogues which together point to the
interpretative position that Socrates believes that the disobedient
citizen treats the state neither 'unjustly' nor 'badly' as long as:
(i) he disobeys only what he considers to be unjust laws, orders
or judgements, 8 but (ii) he abides ultimately by the penalties or
sanctions imposed for non -compliance. 9 In explaining the above
conditions, suffice it to say the following. (i) In disobeying an
unjust law (order, judgement), the citizen is not himself doing
anything unjust to the state. He is refraining from injustice and
may well be doing something just. 10 (ii) Still, this does not mean
that the disobedient citizen may not be treating the state 'badly' .11
There is a sense in which disobeying the pronouncements of the
state is, or becomes, destructive of its authority. Since he holds
the absolute principle that one must never treat anyone badly, the
virtuous disobedient person must obey ( accept, abide by, acquiesce
95
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
in) the state's pronouncements at the level at which their violation
becomes destructive of it. This is reached at the level of the penalties
or sanctions the state may impose for non-compliance with its
pronouncements. However, an important qualification must be
understood here. The virtuous disobedient citizen cannot obey
(accept, abide by, acquiesce in) any and all sanctions the state may
see fit to impose. He cannot and must not accept sanctions which
require him to violate the moral principles for the sake of which he
is disobeying in the first instance. 12
The position on 'civil disobedience' I ascribed to Socrates in the
previous paragraph will not be found directly in the text of the
Apology or of the Crito. I believe that the various component
elements of this position are indeed present therein, but they
are not put together by Socrates himself as I have suggested
here. Nevertheless, it is a position which students of Socrates'
thought, particularly as portrayed in the Apology and the Crito,
should find plausible and in some sense natural, were it not for
the speech of the PLA in the Crito. For in it they argue for
-blind obedience to the state and thereby contradict the defiant
stand of Socrates in the Apology and the stand of anyone
who adheres strictly to the principles of Crito 49a-e. Whereas
he feels the need for principled disobedience, the PLA absolutely
do not.
Evidently my larger thesis regarding the interpretation of the
Apology and the Crito depends for its very plausibility on drawing,
in the first place, a very sharp line in the Crito between the views
of Socrates, when he speaks in his own person, and the views
of Socrates when he speaks on behalf of the PLA. Accordingly,
drawing and defending such a line is the main task I have set
for myself in -this chapter. This is of course easier said than done,
especially since some serious objections may be and have been raised
against such a project.
First, the motive for drawing such a line, namely the alleged
contradiction between the views of Socrates and the views of the
PLA on obedience to the state, may seem otiose. The alleged
contradiction turns also on attributing to the PLA the blindobedience
view, and such attribution is, it may be felt, far from
being textually warranted. Second, such a sharp line seems to fly
directly in the face of the text. The Socrates who talks throughout
the Crito in his own person seems to agree with the Socrates
who, subsequent to 49e, talks also on behalf of the PLA. Indeed,
96
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
in explaining at the end of the dialogue his decision to heed
the PLA's exhortations (54d2 ff.), Socrates (in his own person)
says that the 'sound of their words' drowns all other considerations
out of his mind (54d4-5). Accordingly, the objection
may continue, unless some argument is offered to show that
Socrates, despite appearances, does not see eye to eye with the
PLA, any contradictions or conflicts one is bent on descrying
between his and the PLA's position would have to be regarded
as arising within the Socratic position itself. Furthermore, the
kind of arguments one might offer must be independent of the
argument that Socrates and the PLA hold opposing views regarding
obedience to the state. For, showing that the PLA argue for blind
obedience does not also show necessarily that Socrates would
not or does not agree with it. The blind-obedience view need
not on its own be inconsistent with the Socratic principles of
Crito 49a-e. Whether or not it is inconsistent depends also_ on
the sorts of considerations and· -arguments the PLA add~ce for
• • . t
• ' I • - • It. -- . · . · -.
. .
Obvio ·usly, I need to address the cluster ·of ,co11cerns and objec -
tions raised above. I shall try to do so in the fallowing sections
of the chapter. In section II, I shall take up the issue of the
textual warrant for attributing the blind-obedience view to the
PLA. In section Ill, I shall try to show some aspects of the
fundamental way in which Socrates' views cliff er from those of
the PLA.
II
In his valuable study on Socrates, Richard Kraut 13 argues against
understanding the speech of the PLA as enjoining blind obedience
to the state. He contends that the speech may be interpreted as
allowing room for justified disobedience under certain circumstances.
Kraut is led to this view by his desire to remove at once
two inconsistencies which, in his opinion, confront any reader of
the dialogue who is bent on descrying the blind-obedience view in
it. The first inconsistency is between the Apology and the Crito. The
Socrates of the Crito who, on the blind-obedience reading, urges
that a citizen must obey all the laws or orders of the state, comes
into conflict with the Socrates of the Apology who declares that he
would defy an order of the court prohibiting him from practising
philosophy (Apology 29c-d). The second inconsistency is internal
97
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
to the Crito. At 49a-c Socrates embraces the absolute principle
that one must never do anything unjust. Now, if he is committed,
along with the PLA, to the view that a citizen must comply with
any and all laws or orders of the state, Socrates finds himself in
the uncomfortable position of being unable to live up to both
commitments on those occasions on which he sincerely believes
that what the state · orders him to do is unjust. Either, consistently
with his commitment to blind obedience, he must always obey the
state in ( occasional) contradiction to his principle of never doing
anything unjust, or else, consistently with the latter principle, he
must (occasionally) do something unjust in contradiction to his
commitment to blind obedience.
On Kraut's view, the source of both inconsistencies is the
scholarly insistence on interpreting the speech of the PLA as
advancing the blind-obedience view. Hence, he believes, if we
abandon this interpretation in favour of his own, we eliminate
both inconsistencies at once. Kraut offers both logical and textual
grounds for rejecting the blind-obedience interpretation. His
logical grounds have to do with his thinking that the blindobedience
reading of the Crito is inconsistent with Socrates'
commitment in the same dialogue to the principle of never doing
anything unjust, and with Socrates' determination in the Apology
to defy an unjust order of the court. Or, as Kraut · might put
it more generally, the blind-obedience interpretation is inconsistent
with the Socratic recognition of the need for disobedience.
14 When it comes to textual evidence, Kraut does what
is, I suppose, the only thing one could do under the circumstances:
he constructs a negative case against the main prop in
the blind-obedience interpretation, namely understanding the verb
'to persuade' in the PLA's formula 'persuade or obey' (peithein
e poiein) to mean 'to persuade successfully'. On this understanding
of the formula, the PLA mean to assert that, when
confronted with a law or order he considers unjust, the citizen
either must convince the state that his view is right or else, if he
fails to convince, he must obey.15 According to Kraut, we are not
warranted in taking peithein to mean 'persuade' as opposed to
'try to persuade' and, in any , case, even the sense of 'persuade'
does not necessarily lead us to the blind-obedience interpretation.
How so?
In his opinion, one's understanding of peithein as 'persuade
successfully' proceeds on two 'mistakes':
98
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
First, it is simply not true that whoever says 'persuade
so-and-so' will tolerate no failure. Imagine a government
official telling his subordinate, 'You must persuade Mr Jones
to vote for · our bill.' Nothing in this command suggests that
the subordinate will be blamed for anything less than success.
There is only the smallest of differences between 'you must
persuade' and 'you must try to persuade'. The latter expresses
the speaker's awareness that persuasion is not entirely in the
hearer's power, and it signals a willingness to tolerate honest
failure. But someone who says 'you must persuade' may be
equally tolerant. We do not have to say 'try to do X' every time
we realize that the hearer may not be able to do X through no
fault of his own. There£ ore, even if the Laws [i.e. the PLA]
say 'persuade or obey' rather than 'try to persuade or obey',
that fact does no damage to my interpretation. They are not
thereby making successful persuasion a necessary condition of
justified disobedience. 16
And second:
In the present and imperfect tenses, Greek verbs can have ... a
'conative' force; that is, a word that means 'to do X' can in the
right context mean 'to try to do X' ... Wherever the Laws tell
the citizen that he must persuade or obey, the tense of peithein
(persuade) is present, and so the Greek is more ambiguous
than we may have realized. That is where the second mistake
occurs: the Laws do not necessarily mean 'persuade or obey'
rather than 'try to persuade or obey' ... For reasons I have
just given [i.e. in the first passage above], even if the Laws
mean 'persuade or obey' rather than 'try to persuade or ·
obey', their doctrine makes room for disobedience. So I
think it is an arbitrary matter whether we translate peithein
by 'persuade' or by 'try to persuade'. 17
Let us examine how Kraut shows that peithein in the formula is
linguistically ambiguous. His argument in the first passage above
is, I suppose, this: since in the present tense Greek verbs can have
a conative force, and since wherever the PLA use the formula, the
tense of peithein is present, peithein in the formula may have a
conative force. Hence, 'the Greek is more ambiguous'. Formally
this is a valid argument. But what exactly does it show? That
the Greek is ambiguous? Well, 'is ambiguous' is here being used
99
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
ambiguously. Does Kraut mean that the Greek is potentially or in
fact ambiguous? If the first, he is surely right. His argument does
show that the word is ambiguous and, hence, that any linguistic
context containing it may be ambiguous. But this argument does
not show what Kraut requires for his interpretation, namely that
each and every one of the three particular contexts in which peithein
in the formula occurs is in fact ambiguous or, what comes to the
same thing, that none of the three contexts can help us to resolve
the ambiguity and determine the sense of peithein.
I am prepared to admit that the last of the three occurrences of
the formula, the one at 52a2-3, is indeed irremediably ambiguous
in the sense that there are, as far as I can see, no specific indications
in the immediate textual context to help us decide on the sense of
peithein therein. There is, however, a fairly broad textual indication
which should incline us to think that here too peithein means 'to
persuade'. In any case, there are specific indications in the text
which are decisively in favour of 'persuade successfully' in the first
two occurrences of the formula, at 51b3-4 and 51b9-c1.
We ought to bear in mind that the speech of the PLA is solicited
as a response to a question raised by Socrates at 49e9-50a3. The
question is whether a citizen does or does not violate the principles
enunciated at 49a-e whenever he escapes from prison 'without
having convinced the city' (me peisantes ten polin, 49e9-50a1). 18
That is, the problem is posed by or for someone who ·has already
tried but failed to persuade the state of his innocence. This circumstance
informs the response of the PLA throughout their speech.
They develop their own position in response to, and in the light
of, Socrates' own particular situation. Accordingly, any plausible
interpretation of their speech must start with and account for the
fact that they in effect tell Socrates in particular ( as opposed to
any would-be disobedient in general), 'You must obey because,
among other things, you have failed to persuade th.~ state of
your innocence.' This, admittedly broad, textual feature should be
sufficient warrant for thinking that even the peithein at 52a2-3 is
meant as 'persuade'.
Turning now to the specific textual indications, consider the
first occurrence of the formula, at 5163-4, which reads as 'either
persuade the state or do what it orders you'. The formula is offered
here as part of a long list of propositions which, according to the
PLA, the virtuous would-be disobedient citizen has forgotten in
his 'wisdom' (51a6 ff.). In other words, the PLA are saying to the
100
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
disobedient citizen, 'You have forgotten, among other things, that
you must persuade or do.' Now, surely, one thing the PLA cannot
accuse Socrates of ( or the citizens on whose behalf Socrates poses
the question of 49e9-50a) is that he has forgotten to try to persuade,
since he did try to persuade at his trial, albeit unsuccessfully.
Accordingly, at this juncture the PLA must be reminding the
would-be delinquent citizen not that he must try to persuade or
do but rather that he must succeed at persuading or else do. 19 There
is a yet more telling piece of evidence for this.
It is obvious that the PLA address their remarks specifically
to those citizens who entertain the possibility of disobeying on
moral principle, i.e. to those who claim to have moral objections
to what the state requires them to do. Now, depending on which
understanding of peithein we attribute to them, the PLA would be
addressing their remarks to two different sub-groups of would-be
conscientious disobedient people. If they were informed merely by
the necessity of the citizen's trying to persuade the state, the PLA's
remarks would be properly addressed to those who have objections
but who do not voice them. In contrast, if they were informed by
the necessity of successfully persuading ~he state, the PLA's remarks
would be addressed to those who not only have objections but also
voice them, i.e. to those who engage in the process of persuasion.
In the case in hand, the PLA clearly address their remarks to the
would-be vocal disobedient people. If this were not so, it would be
pointless for the PLA to remind the citizen, as they do immediately
after they list the formula 'persuade or obey', that he must suffer
whatever the state commands 'holding his peace' .(hesuchian agonta,
51b4-5). Those who do not voice their objections cannot be urged
to obey without demur. It will not do to suggest that the PLA's
present reminder is of a more general nature in that it is addressed
to all citizens, informing them that they are to obey quietly, in the
first instance, whatever the state commands. Given their invitation
to the citizens to challenge whatever law or order they consider
unjust, the PLA cannot be understood to be saying also that citizens
are, in the first instance, to obey quietly. Allowing challenge and
requiring acquiescence in the first instance cannot go hand in hand.
The reminder 'holding your peace' must therefore be directed to
those citizens who have already voiced their objections but who
have failed to move the state. It is these citizens who must now
obey without demur; who must obey despite their objections.
The second occurrence of the formula comes at the end of the
101
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
list of the supposedly forgotten propositions. The citizen is now
to 'do everywhere what the city and the fatherland command or
persuade (peithein) it where justice lies' (5169-cl). The point that
persuasion is about 'where justice lies' is necessitated by, and looks
back to, another item in the list of 'forgotten' propositions. Having
told the citizen that he must quietly do or suffer what the state
commands (51b4-6), the PLA go on to claim, and add as yet
another proposition that the disobedient citizen should do well to
remember, that 'that's how justice is' (5167).20 Given this claim by
the PLA, it would be extremely odd for them to invite the citizen,
barely t~o lines later, 'to do what the state commands or to try to
persuade it where justice lies'. Unless they lost their nerve in the
intervening lines, the PLA are now telling the citizen that he must ,
either do what the state commands or else convince it in fact that
it is wrong in thinking that justice lies with what it is requiring
him to do.
The textual considerations adduced above are sufficient to show
that peithein in the first two occurrences of the formula has the
'achievement', not the conative, sense. Given the fact that nothing
changes in the PLA's sentiments between the first two and the third
occurrence of the formula, I should think that we must understand
peithein at 52a2-3 also to have the 'achievement' sense. Let us now
turn to Kraut's claim that even this sense does not necessarily lead
to the blind-obedience interpretation of the PLA's position. He
argues to this effect by considering a number of examples which,
I suppose, he thinks are analogous to the Crito formula, 'persuade
or obey'.
The example in the first of the two passages quoted earlier, 'You
must persuade Mr Jones to vote for our bill', is irrelevant, since it
is not analogous to the Crito formula. What would be analogous is,
I suggest, the following variant of his example: 'You must persuade
Mr Jones to vote for our bill or tender your resignation.' The natural
interpretation of this and of the Crito formula is that the speakers
are after success, that they will tolerate no failure on the part of
the addressee. It is, in part, a sign of their intolerance of failure
that they stipulate an alternative as a kind of penalty or price to
be paid for failure at the first task. Furthermore, their intolerance
of failure is reflected in the fact that the alternative they stipulate
is indeed something the addressee can successfully do, because it
is something completely within his power to do, i.e. to tender his
resignation or to obey, however much he may dislike it or think
102
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
it unfair or unreasonable. The failure the PLA are intolerant of is
failure at both persuasion and obedience (see 51e7; 52a2-3). On
their view, the citizen must do · one or the other, and he is certainly
able to do one of them.
Kraut will no doubt point out that my reading of the formula
and my objections to his position proceed on the assumption that
the command peithein e poiein is of the type: 'either do A or else,
if you fail, do B'. But, he will continue, the Crito command is of the
'far more indefinite type', namely 'do A or B', and such commands
may be ambiguous in the sense that 'someone who is told to do A
or B does not necessarily have to do B if he fails at A'. He may ask us
to consider his example of the father who tells his son to 'clean either
the kitchen or the dining room floor'. Supposing that he chooses the
first task and that, after much effort, he fails to remove the dirt spots,
the boy, according to Kraut, is not required now to clean the other
floor. For, 'the father ... has simply failed to say what is expected
of his son should the floor prove uncleanable; and similarly, we have
to admit that the Laws do not tell the citizen what to do if he tries
to persuade but the jury proves unpersuadable. '21
Leaving aside for the moment the fact that the father's command
is not quite analogous to 'persuade or obey', the following may be
said. The plausibility of the claim that 'the father has not stipulated
what is expected of the boy should the floo_r prove . uncleanable'
depends on what 'floor' refers to. If it refers to both the kitchen
floor and the dining room floor, then Kraut is right. But, I should
think, the father's command does stipulate what is expected of the
boy in the event where whichever of the two floors he tries first
proves uncleanable. If, say, he tries the kitchen floor first and it proves
uncleanable, then he is certainly expected at least to try to clean the
dining room floor. Think of the analogous example where · X says
to Y: 'Close the door or the window.' Suppose that the door is
hopelessly stuck. Would we normally think that Y has complied
with the request if, after trying unsuccessfully for some time to
close the door, he walks away without doing anything at all about
closing the window? It is true that in extreme cases, where the
addressee may spend inordinate time or effort at the first task
without accomplishing anything, we may excuse him from trying
to deal with the second task, though our motive for so doing would
typically be pity or frustration or irritation. In general, however,
Kraut's point that the father has not stipulated what is expected
of the boy applies only to the eventuality of . both floors proving
103
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
uncleanable, but not also, as Kraut thinks, when one or the other
proves so.
If we follow my analysis of Kraut's example, we must say
analogously that if the state proves 'unpersuadable', then the
citizen is required at least to try to obey. Furthermore, and here
the two cases are not analogous, the command in the Crito does not
envisage any such eventuality where both tasks prove 'undoable'. It
would be a complete misunderstanding of the PLA's speech to raise
the question, 'What happens if both the state proves unpersuadable
and the law, or order, in dispute is unobeyable?' and to answer
it by saying, 'Well, the PLA do not stipulate what is expected
of the citizen in that event.' The PLA do not entertain such an
eventuality because for them the task, as it were, of obedience is.
within the power of the citizen to carry out, regardless of any moral
impediments he may feel to be in the way of doing the particular
thing commanded (see Slb-c).
We must keep apart two very different things: the particular task
the citizen is commanded to do and the citizen's obedience to the
command. Particular tasks commanded, for example 'take the hill',
may not be entirely within the citizen's own power to accomplish.
All he can do is to try to accomplish them, and the PLA themselves
would expect no more. However, obeying or complying with the
command issued is itself entirely within the citizen's own power.
The citizen does obey or comply with the command whenever he
tries to carry out the task commanded. It is crucial to realise that
the PLA believe that there are no occasions on which a citizen
finds it impossible to obey. They are not interested in the mental
state, intentions, feelings, attitudes and so on of the citizen vis-a-vis
the task commanded. The PLA are concerned with the citizen's
actions. Indeed, they define the citizen ultimately by his actions
(see 51c6-53a7, and especially 51e3 and 52d5). In so doing, they
proceed on the Hobbesian notion of freedom of action as the
'absence of external impediments to motion'. In the case of the
task of obeying a given command, as opposed to the task of carrying
out the activities commanded, there are, according to the PLA, no
such external impediments and hence no impediments at all. In a
sense, then, the act of obeying, for the PLA, is not a task at all,
and certainly not a task at which the citizen may fail through no
fault of his own. ·In their view, whoever disobeys does so not because
he cannot but because he does not wish to obey. The PLA's formula
'persuade or obey' requires of the citizen that he produces by his
104
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
actions one or the other of two states of affairs: either obedience
or persuasion. The good citizen is one who does produce one or the
other, while the delinquent citizen is the one who produces neither.
And he is so delinquent because one of the alternatives - obedience
- is certainly always within his own power to produce.
III
No doubt there are some views Socrates shares with the PLA. But
I deny that they see eye· to eye on everything, or that they share the
same moral outlook and hence that they are to be identified. · The
speech of the PLA could not and would not have been delivered
unaltered by Socrates. His intimating that the words of the PLA
drown everything else from his mind and his eventually heeding
their exhortation to stay need mean no more than that he agrees
with their advice to stay and die, but not also that he agrees with
all the reasons they off er. 22 There is a dramatic feature of the text
in the last third of the dialogue which, though admittedly puzzling,
does seem to militate against identifying Socrates with the PLA in
any case. The PLA consistently direct their remarks to Socrates (by
using the second person singular), and this in spite of the fact that
Socrates has already set up the hypothetical escape as a joint project
between himself and Crito. Not only that, but whenever he is about
to respond in his own person to the PLA's remarks, Socrates makes
a point of asking Crito how 'they' are to reply. There is only one
exception to this practice, but it is the sort which proves the rule.
For it concerns something unique to Socrates, his not going away
from Athens (see 52a5). Dramatically, Socrates, as the mouthpiece
of the PLA, does not seem to know what Socrates says in his own
person.
It is part of Kraut's view that the PLA are not to be identified
with the sum total of the ordinary, specific laws of a state or with
the state itself.23 In his opinion, they operate at the higher level
of jurisprudential thinking. They articulate the legal philosophy
of Plato's Crito. Kraut also thinks that the PLA carry out their
jurisprudential function in an ideal context. And it is in this lofty
capacity, as ideal legal philosophers, that they are to be identified
with Socrates. For they, just like Socrates, recognise that there is a
fundamental distinction between virtue and law, that law and virtue
may come into conflict and, finally, that one may disobey the law
in the name of virtue. 24
105
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
I myself do not think that the PLA operate, or are meant to
operate, at an ideal level. They are doing legal philosophy, all right.
But the principles and views they expound are meant to explain and
justify the position that the state of Athens of Socrates' time ( or
of any state of the same type) would take against any disobedient
citizen. In any case, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Does
their speech reveal that they share Socrates' recognition of the fact
that virtue and law may come into conflict, or do they accept in
the same spirit the principles by appeal to which Socrates himself
thinks that the conflict ought to be resolved?
· .. The possibility of conflict, and hence the fundamental distinction,
between law and virtue is raised explicitly by Socrates and Crito
in their rejoinder to the PLA's first argument (50a8-b5). Their
rejoinder is that the state has wronged them (edikei hemas he
polis) in not judging their case correctly (S0cl-2). Socrates and
Crito draw attention to the fact that the pronouncements of the
state, represented here by the court, may not, and in Socrates' own
case do not, coincide with what they themselves at any rate believe
to be just_. How do the PLA respond to this charge?
They do not, initially at all events, deny it. Indeed, the way
they respond immediately, at 50c4-6, gives the impression that
they accept the charge and that they will in the sequel go on
to try to defuse it by appealing to the Citizenship Agreement
Argument. I take it that in supposedly accepting the charge at this
juncture, the PLA would also evince their own recognition of the
possible conflict and, hence, distinction between law and virtue.
They continue to give this impression throughout their speech. At
51e7. they appear to concede that the state ( or its laws) may do
some things 'not well'. At 52e4-5 they a:gain appear to concede
that the 'agreements', or the things which the citizen has agreed
to perform, may not be just. Finally, in their summation of their
speech (54b2-d1 ), the PLA claim that in escaping, Socrates would
be 'returning injustice with injustice and bad treatment with bad
treatment' (54c2-3), and this clearly suggests that they themselves
think that Socrates has suffered an injustice. Given all this, one may
be inclined to find the same sentiment expressed in the PLA's second
argument (50d1-51c4). That is to say, one may be inclined to think
that the PLA' s intention here is to allow, on the one hand, that the
state may sometimes treat citizens unjustly but to insist, on the
other hand, that the aggrieved citizen must nevertheless not retaliate
in kind. All indications so far cited give the reader the impression
106
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
that the PLA recognise and accept the distinction between law and
virtue, that they concede the possibility of conflict between the two,
and that they accept that in Socrates' own case they have in fact come
into conflict.25
In one respect and after a certain fashion, this impression is correct;
otherwise, quite erroneous. The PLA recognise and accept the distinction
between law and virtue. They do not, however, concede the
possibility of conflict between them, nor, of course, do they accept that
there is such a .conflict in Socrates' own situation. It is an absolutely
crucial item in the text of the Crito, and one which any plausible
interpretation of the text must take into -account, that between the time
they supposedly accept the charge of state wrongdoing (i.e. 50c4--6)
and the time they sum up their speech, the PLA certainly appear to
shift their ground. For they claim in their summation that Socrates has
been wronged not by the laws or the state,26 but by particular men. It is
not necessary to assume that the reference here is to the jury sitting on
Socrates' own case. Almost certainly, the PLA are thinking of Socrates'
prosecutors. 27 In any case, it should strike us as odd that the PLA begin
by accepting, albeit by implication, the charge of state wrongdoing and
conclude by denying it. Have they changed their tune, or do they hold
inconsistent views on this score? Neither.
The problem is our inclination, understandable under the circumstances,
to think that the opening lines of the PLA's response to the
charge concede the facts contained therein, when in truth they seek
to deny them by suggesting that the bringing of the charge does
not ultimately square with their understanding of the Citizenship
Agreement. The dialectical move used is the one where you counter
your opponent's claim by suggesting that it contradicts a point yet
to be made or a conclusion yet to be reached. If your opponent is
unable to appreciate the move, you then go on to spell it out for
him. Socrates is lost, hypothetically, for words (50c6-7), and the
PLA embark now (S0d) on the long series of considerations which
will culminate in the Citizenship Agreement Argument. The PLA
entertain the charge of state wrongdoing not in order to go around
it but in order eventually to deny it.
The PLA's considerations against retaliation .vis-a-vis the state,
which are developed in terms of the analogy of retaliating against
one's father or master, are interesting, especially for what they
neglect to mention. Contrary to what one might expect in an
argument supposedly on the evils of retaliating in kind (for example
against injustice), the PLA do not mention, let alone concede, even
107
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
indirectly, the fact that the state may and sometimes does treat
citizens unjustly. When they ref er specifically to Socrates' own
case, they phrase their question (51a2-7) with, 'if we try to kill you,
thinking it to be just' (51a3-4 ). It does not occur to them to phrase
their question along some such lines as: 'if we try unjustly to kill
you', or 'if we try to kill you, even unjustly', or 'if we try to kill
you, thinking it, incorrectly, to be just' and so on. It does not occur
to them because they are already on the way to arguing that the
pronouncements of the state are, in the first instance, prima f acie
just and ultimately just in fact. This is exactly what they argue in
the sequel (51a7 ff.), when they claim not only that a citizen must
do and suffer whatever the state commands (51b3-c1) but also that
'this is how justice is' (51b7). The latter point amounts to the claim
that whatever the state commands is just. This, as we saw earlier, is
made abundantly clear by the PLA's qualification that the citizen
must do what the state commands, or else persuade it 'where justice
lies' (51 cl ).28
This way of putting the matter may seem unfair. For the PLA
concede that a citizen may disagree that a particular command of
the state is just and, more importantly, they seem to recognise that
the citizen may well be right in so thinking. True enough~ However,
they als<:"c)o ntend that in such cases of disagreement the onus of
proof is on the citizen, while the success of the proof lies entirely in
the judgement and discretion of the state. This suggests the following
interpretation of the PLA's position. There is just the theoretical
possibility of conflict between the demands of the state and those of
justice and morality. However, in a state in which laws are generally
framed well, or for the benefit of all citizens (see 50d1-e2; 51c9-d1),
there is a natural presumption that any particular law or order of the
state will be in accordance with justice. In the event that a citizen
thinks otherwise, we do not immediately have a conflict between
law and morality but, rather, given the fundamental citizenship
facts presented in the Citizenship Agreement Argument, a dispute
between two different perceptions as to where virtue lies: the
citizen's and the state's. The Citizenship Agreement, furthermore,
· specifies how such disputes are justly resolved.
One cannot over-emphasise the importance of the fact that the
PLA pit only what the citizen thinks or claims is just against what
the state thinks on the matter. In the instances I cited earlier, in
support of the view that the PLA allow the possibility of state
wrongdoing, they allow it only in so far as it is something the
108
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
citizen may think or claim. The point is patently obvious at 52e4-5.
The 'agreements' may appear to be unjust to the citizen (ephainonto
soi). At 51e7, where they appear to concede that the state may do
some things 'not well', they simply state that the disobedient citizen
'neither obeys nor convinces us that29 we are doing some things not
well'. At 51a6 the disobedient citizen, regarded as retaliating against
the state, is said to be trying to kill the state and claiming that in
so doing he does right. The citizen's behaviour is contrasted with
the state's treatment of the citizen and his claim to its claim that
its treatment of him is just (51a3-5). The PLA concede not that the
state may · do, or ever does, wrong but rather that the citizen may
think that it does.
At the same time, the PLA contend that the burden of proof is
upon the citizen and that he may be said to succeed only if he brings
the state, by means of arguments, around to his way of thinking.
Whatever happens, the state will act justly or rightly. If, on the one
hand, the citizen convinces it, it will presumably act in accordance
with his view.30 If, on the other hand, the citizen fails and the state
remains unconvinced, the original law or order stands, 31 because
it is now in fact just. This doctrine finds its ultimate and natural
conclusion in the claim, made indirectly in the summation of the
PLA's speech, that the state is blameless.
The PLA also contend that a disobedient Socrates would violate
his principle (2), that 'one must abide by those things one has agreed
to, provided they are just'. I believe that the PLA can plausibly
so contend only by proposing a, or interpreting the, Citizenship
Agreement in such a way as to make it inevitable and necessary
that any and all acts of disobedience are inconsistent with this
principle.
In the Citizenship Agreement Argument (51 c6 ff.), the PLA
argue that the citizen agrees, implicitly, to obey all laws and
commands of the state (51e3-4) or, generally, to conduct his
civil life (politeuesthai) in accordance with the standing laws and
practices of the state (52d3-5). This contention is not sufficient in
itself for justifying the claim that in disobeying the sentence of the
court Socrates would be acting in violation of his principle (2). For
the principle refers to the 'justice' of what the citizen has agreed to
and, hence, certainly at least to the citizen's own perception of the
justice of the things he has agreed to. 32 For this reason, the PLA
contend also that in agreeing to abide by the laws and practices of
the state, the citizen agrees that such laws and practices are just.
109
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
They argue that a citizen's acts of omission (his continued residence
in the state, 51e1) or commission (his begetting future citizens, 52c3)
are signs not merely of his agreement to abid_e by the standing laws
and practices but also, and in the first instance, of his own approval
of such laws and practices. For his acts of omission or commission
arise out of his own liking of such laws and practices (51d4; 52h1-c3)
and out of his thinking that the things he has implicitly agreed to are
just (52e3-5). 33
However, even when armed with this contention, the PLA still
cannot argue that Socrates is contradicting his own principle. In
order to establish that conclusion, the PLA must show that Socrates
has himself agreed that the judgement of the court is just. How, then,
can the PLA possibly argue that a disobedient Socrates would be
contradicting his own principle, when Socrates himself thinks that
the judgement of the court is unjust? 34 They might contend that
Socrates has implicitly agreed that any and all judgements of a court
are just and, he~ce, that the judgement or sentence in his own case
is just. Accordingly, their point might be that Socrates' express
charge that the state treated him unjustly (in not judging his case
correctly) contradicts his standing, though implicit, admission in
the Citizenship Agreement that all court decisions are just. This
is, I think, exactly what they wish to argue, and it fits in with the
opening lines of their response at 50c4-6. However, how· exactly
they argue to it I am not certain, though I believe that they proceed
along the following lines.
They do not argue simply that a citizen enters into an agreement,
which he himself considers just, to do anything the state commands
him to do, even things he might consider to be unjust. Their
argument is much more subtle and devious. The citizen enters
the agreement recognising and admitting that whichever particular
thing the state commands is itself prima f acie just. In the PLA's
view, the Citizenship Agreement is to the effect not merely that
a citizen must do what the state commands but also that in case
of dispute the citizen must either persuade or obey. The 'persuade
or obey' formula is part and parcel of the Citizenship Agreement.
This is most clearly brought out where the PLA point out the three
ways in which the would-be disobedient citizen offends the state
(51e5). The third way is, as they put it, 'that though he has agreed
to obey us, he neither obeys nor persuades us that 35 we are doing
something not well' (51e6-7). 36 On the PLA's view, in entering
into the Agreement the citizen realises and accepts that what the
110
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
state commands is presumed to be just, that in case of dispute he
carries the burden of proof, and that his proof is successful only
if he manages to persuade the state. Accordingly, whenever .. there
is a dispute as to the justice of a particular command, then the
issue, as determined by the terms of the Citizenship Agreement, is
simply whether the citizen can persuade the state that its command
is not just. Unless he convinces the state to this effect, the citizen is
bound, in virtue of the Agreement, to do what the state commands,
because the thing commanded is now in fact just, notwithstanding
his continuing perception that it is not.
Would Socrates or the good man agree with this position? The
question does not admit of a simple 'yes' or 'no' answer. Socrates or
the good man might agree that the citizen does indeed enter into the
Agreement admitting that whatev~r the state does or will command
is - or may be - generally presumed to be just. He would accept
this presumption in view of his knowledge, as a mature person, of
the current and past performance of the state and of his implicit
recognition of this record as being up to now generally good ( see
51d3-e3). However, on the evidence of problematic instances in the
state's record and out of his own awareness that no state is morally
per£ ect or infallible, the good and · sensible person would insist that
this general presumption holds op.ly for as long as no citizen objects,
in point of moral principle, to a particular edict of the state. When a
citizen so objects, we then have a dispute with no presumption in
favour of either party. 37 What does or does not follow from here
on depends on the method used for resolving disputes between
state and citizen. Though they proclaim that theirs is the method
of persuasion and not force, the PLA have, as I shall try to show
presently, a rather un-Socratic conception of what is involved in the
dialectico-persuasive enterprise.
Socrates refers to the escape from prison in a number of ways: 'to
go out of here without the permission of the Athenians' (48b12-c1);
'to go out of here while the Athenians are unwilling' ( 48e3); 'to go
out of here without convincing the Athenians' ( 49e9-50a1 ). He
recognises that these locutions mean no more than 'break out of
prison', since he refers to the escape also as apodidraskein, though he
does also suggest that it does not matter what one calls it (50a6-7).
However, the very terms he uses are important because they allude
to his views regarding the place of persuasion in one's relations
with the state. Obviously, he regards as an indispensable element
in his decision his considering whether or not the Athenians are
111
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
'willing' or 'convinced'. But how much weight does he allow to
such considerations? We have some evidence to help us with this
question, though it is concerned with the place of persuasion in
one's private associations.
Looking back to their previous discussion, Socrates invites Crito
at 48d8 ff. to argue, if he has any arguments, against what he -
Socrates - will be saying presently on the crucial issue before
them: 'is escaping right or wrong?' (see 48c-d). Indeed, Socrates
promises, 'you argue successfully against it and I will be convinced'
(48e1). However, if Crito has no such arguments, he must really
stop telling Socrates the same old thing, that he should get out
of prison · 'against the will of the Athenians' ( 48e3 ), because, as
Socrates puts it, 'I myself place a lot of weight on our doing these
things after persuading you and not against your will' (48e3-5). A
number of things should be noted here. Socrates' promise that he
will be persuaded by a successful opposition is really an avowal of
his openness to reason and argument, provided that the arguments
are on what he considers crucial to the issue at hand. It is no more
than a reiteration of the principle, with which he introduces his
response to Crito's speech, that he will be convinced by nothing
except the reason or argument that appears best to his own way
of thinking (46b4-6). At the same time, however, he places a great
deal of importance on persuading his dialectical opponent. Indeed,
he believes that this concern should be reciprocated, and implicitly
accuses Crito of not doing so, in so far or as long as he fails to
present arguments on what is crucial to the issue before them. The
reason why we should place weight on persuading our dialectical
partners has to do, apparently, with the fact that 'acting without
being persuaded' is tantamount to 'acting against one's will'. This
is, I take it, the force of the contrast between peisas se and alla me
akontos at 48e4-5. I shall elaborate on this reason below.
Having done all this, Socrates next invites Crito to consider the
'starting point' of their enquiry, which of course will turn out to
be the two principles of 49a-e, in order to see whether 'it is to his
satisfaction' ( 48e5-49a1 ). That Crito should himself find the starting
point to his satisfaction is related to the requirement, brought out by
Socrates a bit later, that Crito should agree to the Socratic principles
out of his own heart-felt conviction. Or, as Socrates tells him, 'make
sure that in agreeing to these you do not agree against your own
opinions' ( 49d1 ). When generalised with respect to the dialectical
participants, this requirement is to the effect that all participants
112
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
must be personally convinced of whatever propositions they are
• agreeing to.
It may be felt that I have also generalised with respect to the
propositions involved, and illegitimately so, since the text is concerned
only with 'first principles'. Though admittedly the concern
is specifically with first principles, the requirement is surely meant
to apply also to any and all the steps in the dialectico-persuasive
process. When he invites Crito at 49a1-2 to respond to what is
being asked in the way he thinks best, Socrates surely has in
mind the following two things. First, what Crito thinks best is
what ~rito is personally convinced of. Second, the invitation is
not confined to the enquiry into first principles but is extended
to the enquiry subsequent to their enunciation. This does not mean
that the participants ·hold their heart-felt principles tentatively but
rather that, even after they embrace the same principles, there
may well be items with respect to which any one of them may
raise the question, 'Am I personally convinced of ·this?' This is
one reason why throughout the PLA's speech Socrates asks for
Crito's own responses. Agreeing to first principles is merely a
necessary condition for any subsequent 'common deliberation' (see
49d2-4).
The requirement that each participant be personally convinced
of what he is agreeing to is necessitated by the fact that the aim
of the dialectical exercise is action. To act on opinions one does
not really hold, or which are contrary to one's own opinions, -is
to act against one's own will or, at the ·very least, against one's
best judgement. The requirement that all participants must be so
convinced is -necessitated by the fact that the action is supposed
to be common or joint (see 48d6-8). Accordingly, participants
must all agree not only about first principles but also to every
step in the process, since the action undertaken, the very last
step in the process, must be one they could all live with. It is
important to note that Socrates treats the dialectical exercise as a
joint deliberative process which ensues in 'common directives for
action' ( see 49d3 ). 38
But even in this special context, in which the dialectical exercise
aims at a common project, 39 Socrates says merely that he places
considerable, not absolute, weight on persuading his dialectical
partner on the course of action to be chosen. What he places
absolute value on, in so far as he regards it as an indispensable
element in the exercise, is one's trying to persuade one's partner.
113
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Even if he should fail to persuade Crito, Socrates may still go on
to do what he considers best. Now, is the Socratic requirement of
merely trying to persuade applicable also when one's dialectical
partner is the state? I cannot see any reason why it could not be,
apart from the fact that in their own speech the PLA insist that
the citizen must succeed at persuading the state. 40 The fundamental
context in which one tries to persuade the state is certainly the
same as when one tries to persuade one's private partner. When
the state requires a citizen to do some thing or other, the citizen
does indeed become involved in a joint or common project with it,
unless of course one thinks of the citizen, along with the PLA, as
being merely an instrument of the state. I should think that, as far
as Socrates is concerned, just as he and Crito are conspirators in
the escape, the citizen and the state are prospective 'co-doers' of
the action the citizen is at any time required to perform. Given
that the citizen is invited to participate in a dialectico-persuasive
process and that he is not a mere instrument of the state, Socrates
would apply the same requirements to public as he does to private
dialectic. 41
It may be felt that in the very passage where he juxtaposes,
in order to contrast, 'persuading someone' and 'acting against
someone's will', Socrates accuses Crito not only of not trying
to persuade him - on account of his using irrelevant arguments
- but also of pressing him to act against the will of the Athenians
( 48e ). Given the latter complaint and Socrates' own situation, i.e.
his having tried unsuccessfully to persuade, one may be tempted
to claim that Socrates is here telling Crito to stop urging him to
escape against the will of the Athenians precisely because he -
Socrates - has failed to persuade them. This understanding of the
text implies either that Socrates places absolute value on persuading
one's dialectical partner or that he places relative value on 'private'
but absolute value on 'public' persuasion. The first alternative is
clearly at odds with the text. The second alternative proceeds from
misunderstanding both the tenor and structure of Socrates' remarks
to Crito. His complaint is that Crito's reasons for escaping are
misdirected. It is in the light only of this miscarriage of Crito's
project that Socrates asks him to refrain from pressing him to act
against the will of the Athenians, and not because, supposedly,
Socrates has already failed to persuade them. 42
It is interesting to see what the PLA contrast 'persuade' with.
It may be recalled that they remind the citizen that he must obey
114
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
the state or else 'persuade it where justice lies' (51c1). Immediately
after, they continue, 'Forcing (biazesthai) your mother or father is
impious; forcing the fatherland is much worse than forcing them'
(51c2-3). There is no doubt that 'forcing' is contrasted to 'persuade'
in the previous line. The PLA are of the view that when X acts
without convincing Y, X does violence to Y when, at any rate, Y
happens to be the state. 43 This view is often used in a democracy
to bamboozle dissidents into submission~ The political philosopher
Plato sees the same contrast between persuasion and force, but then
he thinks that force is _all right provided that it aims at and produces
benefit. Socrates, on the other hand, seeks to persuade and wishes, in
return, to b~ persuaded. 44 If the persuasive enterprise fails, then one
must act as qne sees fit, provided one treats others neither unjustly
nor badly. To act without convi~cing others is not to force them but
to act as they would not. This means simply that they and you no
longer have a common proje~t. 45 Socrates would not deny the state's
claim to obedience from the unpersuaded citizen, but he would also
grant the citizen the right to refuse it. I very much doubt that he
would accept the PLA' s understanding of the dialectical exercise,
for, according to it, he would be breaking one of his cardinal rules
every time he acted contrary to the views of his dialectical partners.
His speech on the counter-penalty in the Apology, especially his
first and outrageous proposal (36d), is informed by his sense
of the enormous incongruity involved in acting against his own
convictions (37b2-5), despite what the court thinks or is convinced
of (37a5-6). Similarly, I very much doubt that he would accept the
PLA's conception of the Citizenship Agreement, for according to
it he would be breaking both of his principles every time he acted
on moral principle contrary to what the state required him to do.
It may be thought that we should understand the PLA's comments
about the citizen forcing the state in the light of their already
expressed belief (50a8 ff.; 51a5) that the disobedient citizen destroys
or harms the state. However that may be, the reason for appraising
the dissident's action as violent is not, and cannot be, the fact that
he is acting without convincing the state but, rather, the fact that
his action turns the state upside-down and in some sense destroys
it. ,The PLA suggest that apart from its harmful consequences, the
dissident's action is also violent on account of its being undertaken
de~pite his failing to convince the state. Socrates may well agree that
disobedience is at some level violent or harmful to the state. in so
far as it upsets it. But he cannot agree that disobedience is violent
115
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
or harmful on account of its being supposedly action undertaken
without first convincing the state. 46
NOTES
. 1 The terms kakos poiein and kakourgein, which I translate as 'to treat
badly', mean in the present context 'to injure', 'to do harm' or 'to
damage' as opposed to benefiting someone in a palpable way. Some
commentators think that the terms mean, much like adikein, 'to wrong'
someone in a fairly broad sense. See, e.g., Kraut 1984: 25 n. 1; 26
nn. 2, 3; 27-8; Bostock 1990: 2. Socrates' statement at 49c7-8 that
'kakos poiein does not differ at all from adikein' need not imply the
semantic identity of the terms or, surely, the identity . of the formal
criteria for assessing bits of behaviour as examples of either 'unjust'
or 'bad' treatment of others. It may amount simply to the claim
that 'unjust' and 'bad' actions are indistinguishable from the point
of view of moral evaluation: e.g. that 'bad' actions are, like 'unjust'
actions, evil and shameful to the agent (see 49b4-5). This reading of
49c7-8 fits in with the sense of the immediately preceding question,
at 49c4-5, 'is antikakourgein dikaion or not dikaion ?', if we take, as
we may, its sense to be 'is antikakourgein [ or kakourgein] a kind of
just or unjust action?'. In general, the tenor of the entire passage
(49a-e), especially the language used regarding retaliation, with its
liberal use of the oute . . . oute construction, makes it reasonably
certain that adikein and kakos poiein are used to designate different
notions. Without such difference the PLA's argument later on, at
50e5-51a7, would be nonsensical. In assuming this cliff erence the
PLA follow earlier Socratic usage. They do differ from Socrates
on this issue in thinking that the two notions are indeed morally
distinguishable. For example, they seem to think that one ( or, at
any rate, the state) may treat another 'badly' provided that one does
so 'justly'. _
2 Socrates qualifies (la), but not explicitly (lb), with 'intentionally'
(hekontas, 49a4). Given the notion involved in (la), I should think that
hekontas here means 'wittingly' . I suppose that (lb) is to be ·similarly
qualified.
3 'One must do the things he has agreed to, provided that they are just'
(49e6-8; S0al-2). I should think that this is a special case of (la) above.
One way in which you may treat another 'unjustly' is by violating a
substantially and procedurally just agreement with him. As stated here,
the principle distinguishes between the agreement to do x and the moral
quality of x. As far as the Citizenship Agreement itself is concerned,
the PLA seem to preserve this distinction. For they eventually adopt
(implicitly) the position that the Agreement itself is procedurally just,
because effected in the absence of the 'duress' conditions outlined at
52e1-3, and substantively just, because the things the citizen (implicitly)
agrees to are things he is presumed to like ( or, at least, find bearable).
4 Crito would not and does not consider the escape unjust. Only in that
116
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
case would he regard it as a retaliatory action, i.e. as returning injustice
with injustice. See 45c5-d8. There is an ambiguity in Socrates' terminology
about retaliation. He uses only the formulae 'returning injustice
with injustice' and 'returning bad treatment with bad treatment'. Surely
he is, and must be, also against 'returning injustice with bad treatment'
and 'returning bad treatment with injustice'. I am not sure that Crito
would think it wrong to return injustice with bad treatment.
5 For what I mean in ascribing this position to the PLA, see p.98 and
n. 15 below.
6 See n. 28 below.
7 This assumption would be readily granted in connection with the
principle of not treating others unjustly. See n. 10 below. It should
also be granted in connection with the principle of not treating others
badly. It is true that Socrates is not made to say anything in the
Apology about treating others badly (harming) or about retaliation.
I should think this is natural under the circumstances. The Apology
is especially concerned about justice because the indictment against
Socrates was about his 'injustice' to the city. Quite properly, Plato
is not concerned in the Apology, as he is in the Crito, to outline the
virtuous person's reasons for acquiescing in an unjust sentence, which
would occasion the introduction of the principles about not harming
and about retaliation. But we are bound to assume that the Socrates
of the Apology holds these two principles, if only because he is made
to hint in the Crito that (la) and (lb) are principles he has held for
some time now (see 49a6-8 and 49d-e).
8 This condition stipulates that the disobedience is principled; that . it
proceeds from the citizen's sincere wish to act so as to avoid violating
any one of the principles of Crito 49a-e. When the disobedience is
to a court judgement, appropriate qualifications are to be understood,
depending on whether the judgement requires the citizen to act in a
certain way or imposes certain sanctions on him.
9 In the Apology Socrates declares his willingness to accept both the
penalty of death already imposed by the court (39b4-6) and the penalty
of death attached to non-compliance (30c1) with the hypothetical
condition . that he refrain from philosophizing (29c6-d1 ). He offers
no reason here for accepting or acquiescing in such penalties apart
from the cryptic 'perhaps it was meant to be so and I think it fair'
(39b7-8). But we do have some clues as to his reasons in the Crito.
See n. 11 below.
10 In the Apology Socrates defends all the instances of his non-compliance
with the authorities on the general grounds that he is 'fighting for
the just' (32a1), or 'siding with law and justice' (32b8-c1), or that
his ultimate concern is 'to refrain from doing anything unjust or
impious' (32d2-3). At 35c7-d1 he asks the jurors not to require of
him to engage in practices which he himself considers to be 'neither
good nor just nor pious'.
11 I take it that the PLA's first argument (50a8-b5) impresses Socrates
at some level. The argument is directed at all acts of disobedience,
principled and unprincipled. It suggests that ignoring, for whatever
117
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
reason, the authority and finality of a court's disposition of a case
leads to lawlessness and, hence, to the destruction of the state.
See Panagiotou 1987a: 38--44. Tas dikas tas dikastheisas in 50b8 is
ambiguous in that it refers to a 'disposition' which may involve (at least)
the constitutionality or legality of a specific law, or the application of
specific laws to particular instances, or the verdict of guilt or innocence,
or the penalties or sanctions to be imposed. In addressing Socrates' own
case, the PLA may be thinking specifically of the last alternative. In any
case, I think that Socrates would find it persuasive only in so far as it
concerns the violation of court decisions regarding sanctions. This is,
in my opinion, the reason why he does not escape: that is, so that he
does not violate principle (lb).
12 See Panagiotou 1987b: 58-60.
13 Kraut 1984.
14 This recognition is explicit in the Apology but implicit in the Crito (in
the espousal of the principles of 49a-e).
15 See Allen 1980: 104; Grote 1865: 300; Guthrie 1969: 146, 412-13;
Santas 1979: 25; Taylor 1937: 168; Woozley 1979: 71. This is how I
understand the blind-obedience view. ·
16 Kraut 1984: 71-2.
17 Ibid., 72-3.
18 Socrates is not necessarily talking literally about a possible attempt
to persuade the state to let him now out of prison. The reference to
peisantes may be to the or~ginal trial, and not to any possible current
attempts to convince the state to release him. The sense of this part
of his question would then be: 'If we get out of here, after failing to
convince the court of my innocence .... ' The use of the aorist participle
probably supports this reading.
19 Unless, of course, one thinks that the PLA are referring not to the
attempt at persuasion at the trial but to an attempt now to secure his
release from prison. See n. 18 above.
20 My understanding of kai to dikaion houtos echein (51b7) may strike
some as dubious. It may be thought that the Greek sentence may
mean simply that it is just for the state to command the sorts of
things mentioned in the text. That is, the state does justly command
citizens to fight and die for it, etc.; and the state commands justly
that sentences be deemed valid and carried out ('justly' in the sense
that it is just for the state to command it, not that it is just for this
or that particular sentence to be carried out). This understanding of
the sentence is, to my mind, most unnatural in the context of Slb-c.
It makes the PLA unconcerned about the justification of the things
the state asks its citizens to do; they are rather concerned about the
'propriety' of the state's having certain powers. That may well be true.
But it is not and cannot be their only concern .. The charge at S0cl-2
raises the issue of justification, and the above understanding of 51b7
would make the PLA's response irrelevant .. But the PLA themselves
show their concern for justification when they disclose their belief that
the sentence of death is just. So, they are concerned not merely (if at all)
about the propriety of the state's having certain powers (a fact which
118
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
neither Socrates nor Crito seem interested in disputing) but also, if not
exclusively, about the justification of particular edicts or actions of the
state. Otherwise, their talk about 'persuading the state where justice
lies' would make no sense.
21 Kraut 1984: 74.
22 See Calvert 1987: 21-2. The view, held by Grote (1865: 302) and
Kraut (1984: 57-8, 79), that Socrates 'applauds' or 'endorses' the
PLA's position is an exaggeration.
23 My current concern is independent of this issue, since my point is that
the PLA, whatever their precise function, do not agree that Socrates
has been treated unjustly by the state (court).
24 Kraut 1984: 66-9, 81-2.
25 They certainly give this impression to Kraut (1984: 66 ). Reeve also
(1989: 119-20) takes S0cl-6 to indicate the PLA's agreement that the
_ court was wrong to find Socrates guilty.
26 Throughout their speech, the PLA, which I regard as representing the
totality of Athenian laws and public practices, do not distinguish
between themselves and the state, or between themselves and the
judicial system. At 51a2-7 they treat Socrates' condemnation to death
by the court as something which they themselves are doing to him. The
context makes it absolutely clear that they have Socrates and his own
case in mind (see 51a6-7). In their references to the polis or the nomoi,
the PLA, I reckon, lump together every aspect of what we may call the
Public Domain (to demosion or to koinon - see 50a8) and pit it.against
the Private (to idion). By the by, the disclosure at 51a3-4 of their belief
that the sentence of death is dikaion is proof positive that the PLA do
not agree with Socrates on this issue.
27 See Taylor 1933: 121, and Taylor 1937: 173. The Athenians viewed the
state, represented by the courts, as being above the disputes going on
in the courtrooms. Even in public cases, i.e. where the public interest
was involved, the dispute is seen as being between private litigants.
There were no 'crown attorneys' or 'public prosecutors' as such. In
this sort of ideological climate, it would be natural to regard the state
as blameless.
28 I think that the PLA also see the state as morally continent: that is,
it would never do, or require citizens to do, what it believed were
unjust things. If a citizen succeeded in persuading the state that what
he was being required to do was unjust, it would no longer require
him to do it.
29 So Fowler in the Loeb edition and Allen 1980: 125. This reading of
the line is the only one that makes sense, if peithein here does mean,
as I think it does, 'persuade' and not 'try to persuade'.
30 In other words, the state is assumed to be 'continent'. See n,
28 above.
31 In the case of court judgements, it is understood in advance that the
outcome of the persuasive exercise is or will be just, unless the litigant
challenges the court's decision. According to actual Attic legal practice,
such a challenge must be issued during the trial and before the verdict
is known. See Harrison 1968-71: 192-3.
119
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
32 The 'justice' of what the citizen has agreed to refers to the justice as it
is perceived jointly by all the parties to the agreement (i.e. the state
and the citizen).
33 I am not sure what the PLA refer to by their frequent use of the terms
homologias and sunthekas: 'things agreed to' or 'the agreement itself'? It
appears that, on their view, liking x is tantamount to believing that x is
substantively just, while the absence of the 'duress' elements outlined at
52e1-2 accounts for the procedural justice of the agreement to do x.
34 At 50c1-2 Socrates and Crito suggest that the city treated them unjustly.
The Socrates of the Gorgias reveals, by one of his examples at 480b8,
that he himself thinks the state capable of 'injustice'. In the same
sentence he mentions also that one's parents may be unjust!
35 For reading that here, see n. 29 above.
36 The sense is: 'though he has agreed to obey or persuade us, he does
neither'. Their referring to only one alternative - obey - may be
explained by the fact that they look back to Slel (' ... but whoever
stays here ... '), which outlines the condition which signals one's
implicit agreement to obey what the state commands. The PLA are
now sketching another of the many ways in which, or principles by
which, the city conducts its affairs and which the mature citizen is
presumed to know and to agree to: the principle of 'persuade or obey'.
See n. 40 below.
37 The PLA derive the presumption in favour of the justice of the state's
edicts from two very different sources. In the second argument
(50d1-51c4) they apparently derive it from the state's natural and
inherent superiority over the citizen. In the third argument (51c6
ff.) they apparently derive it from the state's record of performance
and the citizen's own appreciation of its record. The latter source
of course opens a 'can of worms', which the PLA promptly seek
to seal by incorporating the formula 'persuade or obey' into the
Citizenship Agreement. This allows them to claim that though it
may be questioned by the citizen, the state's record does ultimately
contain only just items!
38 In view of ta bouleumata in 49d5 I doubt very much that koine boule
means, as it is sometimes translated, 'common ground'.
39 Come to think of it, the present context is not that special for Socrates.
All dialectical endeavour aims at common action, the discovery and
pursuit by all participants of the Good Life.
40 In Demosthenes 24 (Against Timocrates). 76, it is said that democracy,
contrasted to oligarchy and identified with the rule of law, enacts laws
which 'speak to the conduct of future affairs [but] ... meta tou
peisai tithentes'. In the Statesman Plato refers to the doctrine, held
by hoi polloi, that 'if anyone knows of any better _la ws than the old
[ standing] ones, he must legislate having first persuaded his own city,
but not otherwise' (296a4-9). In insisting on successful persuasion of
the public, the PLA simply fallow a general democratic principle.
41 This may sound far-fetched to some modern ears. But we should bear
in mind that Socrates is thinking of a fairly narrow field over which the
citizen may legitimately claim absolute autonomy: the Good Life. His
120
SOCRATES AND CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE
Good Life has nothing to do with life, physical liberty, or property,
claims of absolute autonomy over which would render the position I
am imputing to him quite eccentric.
42 The explanatory clause hos ego peisas se ... all me akor7:toast 48e4 looks
back not to the preceding clause hos chre ... apeinai, but to the clause
at 48el, ... antilege kai se peisomai.
43 Though they do not explicitly say so, the PLA believe, I suppose,
that the state's acting without convincing the citizen does not count
as 'violence'. If the unpersuaded citizen refuses to obey and the
state intervenes to punish him, then, given their conception of the
Citizenship Agreement, the punishment is not 'forcing' him, because
'just', but merely treating him 'badly'. 'Violence', on their view, is
unjust bad treatment or harm.
44 See didaskein kai peithein (Apology 35c2); lege kai didaske (Crito 49e2);
antilege kai se peisomai (48e1). See also the connection made in the
Gorgias between episteme/ didaskein and peithein.
45 This might explain at a deeper level Socrates' hesitation to take part in
conventional political life. His sentiments and views are rather suited
to the life of a society of friends who at the end of the day may agree
to disagree and go their own ways. Given this fact, the only concrete
political project he might congenially undertake for the benefit of his
fellow citizens would be precisely the sort of social mission he did in
fact and so religiously pursue: approaching people individually or in
small groups and trying to persuade them what is best for them as
human beings.
46 , .I am grateful to Brian Calvert and, especially, Michael Stokes for their
numerous and frank comments on earlier versions of this chapter. I
am sure they are still not convinced. I made the final revisions during
one term I spent as Research Fellow at St John's College, University
of Durham. My thanks to the University, to the Principal, Dr Anthony
Thiselton, and to Dr Peter Forster.
121
4
SOCRATES VERSUS
PR OTA GO RAS
Malcolm Schofield
INTRODUCTION
What is the Protagoras about? An obvious and correct answer is:
virtue. But it is an answer derived from consideration solely of the
content of the arguments of the dialogue. -Does reflection on its form
yield another answer?
In the bad old days questions about the literary properties of
the Platonic ·dialogue were not much canvassed by philosophical
readers - unless they happened to be Straussians or (in even
older days) N eo-Platonists. The flavour of the 1980s was rather
different: the relation of form to content has become a prime
subject of philosophical interest, sometimes handled gushingly or
flat-footedly, but at best with tact and sophistication, as in the
books of C. Griswold and G. R. F. Ferrari on the Phaedrus.1
There£ ore no apology is needed either for posing the question
about form with regard to the Protagoras or for expecting it to yield
dividends, especially given universal agreement on the exceptional
literary brilliance of the dialogue.
THEFRAME
Some dialogues are written as dramas, with parts assigned to a
cast of characters: for example Laches, Gorgias, Meno. Others are
narrations by Socrates of conversations to which he had been party:
for example Charmides, Republic. These give Plato the opportunity
for elaborate scene-setting, sometimes rich in philosophical significance,
and for lavish authorial irony and other forms of charm.
122
SOCRATES VERSUS PR OTA GO RAS
The Protagoras resembles the Symposium in beginning with a
short dramatic encounter between two characters (Protagoras:
Socrates and an unnamed companion; Symposium: Apollodorus
and a similarly unnamed companion) framing the main dialogue,
which is reported by one of them - although in the Symposium
this is a report by Apollodorus of a report by Aristodemus
(anticipating the Chinese box effect of the Parmenides). These
degrees of complexity in presentation are presumably designed for
more layers of textual self-reference and self-interpretation than is
possible in the straightforward narrative form.
In the Protagoras the frame conversation (309a-310a) has a clear
and simple point: to initiate the warnin ,gs about the reality of
Protagoras' alleged wisdom and about its attractiveness which
continue through the conversation with Hippocrates that follows.
But the frame frames the whole of the rest of the dialogue, not
just this first stretch. A hypothesis suggests itself. The Protagoras
will explore the cliff erence between the true Socratic wisdom and the
mere reputation for wisdom which Protagoras has acquired and in
his final words in the dialogue (36 le) predicts Socrates will acquire.
True Socratic wisdom is what is illustrated in the discussion with
Hippocrates, and particularly by the demonstration of the Socratic
method of argument it embodies. The parade of the shadow of -
wi~dom is introduced by the echoes of the Homeric Hades and its
shades which punctuate the description of Protagoras' promenade in
the house of Callias (314e-316a), and is epitomised by the agonistic
conception of argument that is illustrated throughout the discussion
with the sophists and thematised in the interlude on procedure set
at the dead centre of the dialogue (334-8: the Protagoras is 309-62
in the Stephanus edition).
THE CONVERSATION WITH HIPPOCRATES
The beginning of the encounter with Hippocrates is one of the
most hilarious in a highly entertaining piece of writing (310a-311a):
I commend the sparkling English version of B. A. F. Hubbard and
E. S. Karnofsky. 2
Early this morning, when it was still pitch dark, Hippocrates,
Apollodorus' boy, the brother of Phason, started hammering
at my door with his staff; and when someone opened up,
he came rushing straight in and said at the top of his voice:
123
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
'Socrates, are you awake or asleep?' And recognising his voice
I said: 'Oh, it's Hippocrates. Nothing up, is there?'
'Nothing but good', he said.
'That', I said, 'really would be good news. But what is it, and
why have you come round at this hour?'
'Protagoras has come', he said, standing beside me.
'Yes', I said, 'the day before yesterday. Have you only just
found that out?'
'Of course', he said; 'well, yesterday evening, that is.' And
groping for my camp bed, he sat down by my feet and said:
'Yes, in the evening, rather late actually, after I got back from
Oenoe. Satyrus, my slave, was on the run, you see, and I was
.going to tell you that ·I was after him, when something came
up and put it out of my head. And after dinner, when we were
off to bed, my brother tells me Protagoras has come. And even
then I set out to tell you straight away, but then it occurred
to me that it was too late. But as soon as I had slept off my
fatigue, I got straight up and was on my way here, as you see.'
Kn·owing how bold and volatile he is, I remarked: 'But what
has this got to do with you? You don't have some charge to
bring against Protagoras, do you?'
'Indeed I do, Socrates', he laughed: 'that he alone is wise
(sophos), but is not making me wise.'
'Oh yes he will, by Zeus', I said; 'if you give him money and
persuade him, he will make you wise too.'
'Oh by Zeus and all the gods, if it were just a question
of money', he said, 'I should spare none of my own or
my friends' possessions. But that is just what I · came to
see you about - to get you to talk to him for me. I am
rather young, and I have never seen Protagoras before, or
ever heard anything he has said. I was still a child when he
was last in town. But after all, Socrates, everyone is praising
him and saying that he is. very clever (sophotatos) at speaking.
But why don't we go there so that we can catch him in? He
is staying with Callias, the son of Hipponicus, so I've heard.
Come on.'
And I said: 'Let's not go there yet, my dear fellow; it's still
early. Let's . get up instead and go out into the courtyard where
we can take a few turns until it gets light. Then we can go.
After all, Protagoras spends much of his time indoors; so you
needn't worry; we shall probably catch him in.'
124
SOCRATES VERSUS PROTAGORAS
Notice the studied informality of the scene. Notice the irony of
making the naive teenager go to Socrates not as sophos but as
friend and father confessor. Notice the illu~ion of his thought that
Protagoras, of whom he knows nothing, is the only true sophos.
Notice the Socratic jibe at Protagoras' mercenary motives. Plato
has quickly constructed an opposition between Socrates' lack of
pretension and a grandee whose credentials are already under
• • susp1c1on.
Now follows a paradigmatic Socratic conversation, sadly neglected
by scholarship. 3 That is, what Socrates goes on to say to
Hippocrates is not only precisely the sort of thing we expect of the
Platonic Socrates, but a sequence of conversations designed specifically
to demonstrate the true nature of philosophical discourse as
it should be practised: in a cooperative spirit of enquiry into ·the
truth. The paradigm consists of three elements. It is unemphatically
presented, and indeed understated, with the lightness and gentleness
of touch appropriate to the ingenuousness of the interlocutor. But
it is a paradigm for all that.
First comes a cross-examination by Socrates of his young companion
in familiar style (311a-312e). It is in fact a classical example
of the Socratic elenchus: not in extracting from an interlocutor a
series of admissions which turn out to conflict with a thesis sincerely
adva~ced by him, but in proving to Hippocrates that something he
thinks he knows is actually something he really has no idea about.
The key passage is 312b-e:
'Well, do you know what you are about to do, or don't you
realise?' I said.
'How do you mean?'
'That you are about to place your own soul (psuche) in the
care of a man who is, as you say, a sophist; although I
should be amazed if you knew just what a sophist might
be. And yet if you don't know that, you don't know whether
the thing to which you have entrusted your soul is good
or bad.'
'I think I know', he said.
'All right, tell ~e: what do you consider a sophist to be?'
'So far as I am concerned', he said, 'he · is what the word
implies: someone who has knowledge of wise things (sopha).'
Wise at what? He knows how to make people clever at speaking,
says Hippocrates. About what?
125
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
'What is this subject about which, being knowledgeable himself,
the sophist makes his student knowledgeable as well?'
'Oh dear', he said, 'now I have nothing left to say.'
In a recent article Hugh Benson rightly argues that the immediate
aim of the Socratic elenchus is the testing of the interlocutor's
knowledge, and in practice the elimination of the false conceit of
knowledge. He goes on to suggest that, with two possible exceptions,
the short elenctic dialogues give no evidence for Socrates'
method once false conceit has been purged. 4 The Protagoras supplies
the deficiency: the next stage is exhortation or protreptic (313a-
314c ), which must accordingly not be reckoned proprietary to the
Euthydemus and dialogues later than the Euthydemus. Having got
Hippocrates into a chastened and receptive frame of mind, Socrates
warns him in a sustained and eloquent passage of the danger he is
in, proposing as he does to entrust his soul to someone of doubtful
credentials. The sophist is like a retailer who has no notion whether
his wares are really good for the consume r .. But you cannot examine
the sophist's wares prior to consumption as you can with food and
drink. They have already entered the soul and had their effect before
scrutiny is possible. A later section of the chapter will comment
further on the dangers of exposure to sophists. For the present
we may note Socrates' concern for the soul of his interlocutor,
familiar to us from, for instance, the Apology and the Charmides,
and reflect on the moral he draws, which is unhelpfully unspecific
and ironically self-deprecating (314b):
'Let us consider all this, then, and with those older than us. For
we are still rather too young to sort out so great a matter.'
There is still a final stage of the conversation. On their way to
Callias' house Socrates and Hippocrates engage in philosophical
discussion, not further described, which they do not interrupt
but pursue in the porch of the house until they reach agreement
(314c; compare the famous case of Socratic concentration during the
Potidaean campaign retailed by Alcibiades in the Symposium, 220ad
). 5 Plato here gives us the merest hint of what might lie beyond loss
of false conceit and response to protreptic: a cooperative exercise,
resulting in agreement between the parties concerned, and pursued
to completion. We are surely to contrast the end of the conversation
with Protagoras, who bids Socrates finish the argument on his own
(360d), accuses him of a competitive motivation which is elsewhere
126
SOCRATESVERSUSPROTAGORAS
in the dialogue portrayed as the hallmark of the sophist (360e ),
and has better things to do (361e) than try to get to the bottom
of questions Socrates takes to be fundamental to the Good Life
(361c-d).
It is of course something of a paradox that after insisting
so on the dangers of sophists Socrates still allows Hippocrates
to meet and listen to Protagoras. But after initial introductions
(316b-c, 317e-318e), Plato forgets Hippocrates. The young man has
served his turn, which was to be the partner in a proper Socratic
conversation. 6
THE DOOR
Entry to the house of Callias is prefaced by a scene of low
comedy (314c-e) in which Socrates argues with the doorman, and
obtains admission only at the second attempt, having had the door
slammed in his face and then locked first time round. This is not
the only significant passage through a door in Greek philosophy.
Parmenides had left the realm of mortal opinion for that of divine
logos through the gates of the paths of day and night, which Justice
had to be persuaded to open. 7 In its humble way the episode in
the Protagoras likewise emphasises the huge difference between the
Socratic discourse we have just heard and the sophistic debate we
are about to witness.
Hippocrates has been given to understand that consorting with
Protagoras may threaten his soul with danger. Is Socrates too in
danger? Plainly he is too adroit and wary a dialectician to imbibe
Protagoreanism uncritically. A subtler problem confronts him.
The conversation with Hippocrates has taken place on Socrates'
ground: literally, since it begins in his house and continues in
the public space where Socratic dialogue is habitually conducted;
metaphorically, for it is a private talk between friends, undertaken
for the moral and intellectual benefit of the interlocutor. The
conversation with Protagoras, by contrast, is conducted on alien
territory in someone else's private house, indoors - that is no
accident, but Protagoras' frequent custom (31 la). And although
Socratic elenchus eventually dominates the occasion, it begins
not exactly on Protagoras' terms, but certainly in the style of a
public debate between intellectuals competing for the attention of
an audience.
127
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Private faces in public places
Are wiser and nicer
Than public faces in private places.
There is much in Socrates' performance that is just that - a
performance, by a Socrates who is not altogether himself, if
we judge by the standard of the shorter elenctic dialogues ( and
the Apology) which the conversation with Hippocrates has called
to mind. ·
Consider briefly three of the contributions he makes to the
discussion in the house of Callias. After some prodding Protagoras
defines his prospectus. He promises to teach a pupil 'good judgement
( euboulia) both about his own affairs, to the end that he might
best manage his personal estate, and about the city's, to the end that
he might be in the strongest position to conduct, in speech and
action, the common business of the city' (318e-319a). How does ·
Socrates challenge this? Not as ·a Socratic Socrates would, with an
elenchus. He develops on his own account two counter-arguments
for the proposition that virtue cannot be taught (319a-320c ). It
seems unlikely that the case he puts is original. The teachability
of virtue was a vyell-known topic of sophistic debate; 8 and at any
rate the second of the two arguments is found in the sophistic
compendium Dissoi logoi (Diels-Kranz 90.6).9 No less un-Socratic is
Socrates' conduct in the interlude on procedure (334c-338e), which I
shall discuss shortly: gamesmanship is the only word for it. Finally,
in the episode devoted to criticism of Simonides' poem (338e-347b)
Socrates first adopts blatant · delaying tactics (339e ff.) until he has
thought out a line of defence, and then launches at Protagorean
length into an outrageous parody of sophistic expository method
(342a ff.), offering an even more perverse reading of Simonides
than Protagoras'. At the end of it all he remarks that the sort of
exercise they have been engaging in is not worth anything very much
(347b-e).
These un-Socratic practices allow Socrates to outshine Protagoras
and outmanoeuvre him. There lies the danger. The Socratic method
is meant to be cooperative, not competitive, intent on truth, not
victory. Competitive success is for the true Socrates no success at
all. If he beats the sophist at his own game, he fails - it is the sophist's
game, not his.
128
SOCRATES VERSUS PROTAGORAS
THE INTERLUDE ON PROCEDURE
The debate on procedure is occasioned by a breakdown in the elenchus
which Socrates has been directing at Protagoras' views about
the relation between the parts of virtue (329c-333e). Protagoras has
had enough of the cross-questioning, and launches into a speech
about the relativity of the beneficial, designed to show that the
good is a diverse and complicated thing (333e-334c). Socrates
requests shorter answers, affecting a bad memory; and after a
little skirmishing Plato gives us the following revealing exchange
(334e-335a):
'They do tell me', I said, 'that you are adept both as an
exponent and as a teacher of the art of speaking either at
length, if you choose, so that you never run dry, or briefly,
so much so that no one could be more concise. So if you want
to hold a discourse with me, please use the second mode - the
brief one.'
'Socrates', he said, 'I have entered into a contest (agon) of
logoi with many people in my time; and if I had done what
you are telling me to do, discussing as my opponent told me
to, I should have proved no better than the next man, and
the name of Protagoras would not be celebrated throughout
Greece.'
_ Socrates then argues that Protagoras should none the less accede to
his request, pleads ·urgent business, and makes as if to leave.
Protagoras could scarcely have given a clearer articulation of
a competitive conception of argument. His characterisation of
discussion as a 'contest of logoi' and his related concern for his
own standing as a sophist sum up the whole spirit of that part
of the dialogue which takes place in the house of Callias. In case
we have not got the message, Plato has Socrates go on to compare
discussion between him and Protagoras to an unequal competition
in a foot-race (335e-336a). Hardly less obvious, however, is Socrates'
complicity in this competitive ideology. Presumably his real interest
in brief answers ought to be that only so can an elenchus be
conducted, and only by means of the elenchus can false pretensions
to knowledge be stripped away, and only in this way can the soul
be properly cared for. But he is made to treat the issue of brevity
in Protagorean style, as a matter of what technique he can best
cope with. This is itself gamesmanship, all of a piece with the tactics
129
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
he uses here to get his way. Once again the sequel reinforces the
point. Callias, Alcibiades and the other sophists join in an elaborate
argument about the proper rules for discussion, all competing with
each other to propound a more impressive suggestion, culminating
in Hippias' idea of a chairman (as in a public meeting: 338a),
wickedly glossed by Socrates as the proposal of an umpire ( as
in the games: 338b) - which he succeeds in defeating mostly by
the grossly insincere argument that it would be impossible to find
one wiser than Protagoras (338c). Everything Socrates says and
does in this interlude on procedure will have confirmed in their
interpretation readers inclined to construe Socrates' conduct of the
elenchus (329c-333e) as competitive in motivation.
It has in fact often been felt that the elenchus in the Protagoras
falls short of the disinterested ideal of cooperative enquiry it is
officially meant to fulfil. This is mostl y because some of the
argumentation is palpably slick and shallow: for example several
of the moves in the section on justice and holiness, 330c-331e; the
final steps in the first argument on wisdom and courage, 349e-350c;
and the equivalences asserted between the fine, the good and the
ple~surable in the final argument on the same subject, 358b-360e.
Partly it is because Socrates seems not to be content until he has
forced Protagoras into explicit submission. Sympathy is evokedlO
by Protagoras' remark at the very end of the last elenchus (360e):
'You seem to me greedy for victory, Socrates, in this business
of my being the answerer. Well, I will satisfy your
d
. ,
es1re ...
Of course, it is Plato who puts this dignified response in his mouth,
just as earlier he furnishes him with prima f acie reasonable objections
to some of Socrates' slippery inferences (331b-c, 331d-332a,
350c-35 tb ).
Sometimes dissatisfaction with Socrates' arguments has taken
the form of a suggestion that Plato deploys deliberate fallacies
in the Protagoras.11 Scholarship has found it hard to evaluate the
suggestion. What seems more promising is the idea that Plato
has deliberately portrayed Socrates as more competitive than the
cooperative ideal would lead one to expect, and that the style of
his arguments in the house of Callias fits that picture. For it is
characteristic of competitors ( or at least of the paradigm ancient
Greek competitors of Iliad XXIII) to score points off each other,
and to take short cuts to achieve their objects. The short cuts in
130
SOCRATES VERSUS PROTAGORAS
argument may or may not be defensible in the light of fuller and
more thoughtful consideration: the point is that the circumstances
of the competition make it tempting to take the short cut. I think
it is significant that while Plato never in any dialogue presents
a diagnosis of a fallacy (except ambiguity once, in Euthydemus
277d-278b: the Euthydemus is principally about sophistry, a quite
clifef rent thing), a concern with alternative routes to the same
philosophical goal, and particularly with short cuts and longer ways
round, becomes thematic and indeed almost obsessive in dialogues
like the Phaedo, Republic, Parmenides and Theaetetus.
We should distinguish between a competitive or eristic and an
adversarial style of elenchus. Gilbert Ryle in Plato's Progress
obliterated the cliff erence, and actually defined the elenctic dialogues
of Plato as eristic. 12 The mistake here was pointed out recently by
Gregory Vlastos - who is himself responsible for something unhelpful,
in building the notion of 'adversary argument' into his definition
of elenchus. 13 He does not think that Socrates necessarily conceives
of the interlocutors whose beliefs he examines -as opponents, but
is simply trying to capture the point that in an elenchus Socrates
always argues against someone. Even that is too strong: young
Hippocrates is the subject of probing, scarcely of counter-argument.
It would probably be better to reserve 'adversarial' to describe the
use of the elenchus against a stubborn and/or versatile interlocutor,
with a strongly ingrained conceit of knowledge. Here the elenchus,
always liable to be intimidating, may need to become aggressive -
to attack an articulated or tenaciously held position, rather than just
examine a sincere view. So long as the goal is the elimination of false
belief, not victory, it will be adversarial without being competitive.
The adversarial elenchus may for that end use reasoning which is
from some points of view too slick by half ( as, for instance, against
Polus in the Gorgias ), so short cuts are not an infallible sign of the
competitive use of argument, even if that is what they are evidence
of in the Protagoras.
THE ARGUMENT AGAINST THE MANY
From the perspective we have been adopting, and on the evidence
reviewed so far, the Protagoras looks like a literary success but a
philosophical failure. I do not mean to deny that Protagoras is
portrayed as the subject of a successful elenchus, albeit an elenchus
pursued more competitively than ideally it should be. It may be that
131
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
by the end of the dialogue we are meant to suppose that Protagoras'
conceit of knowledge has been punctured. Certainly he is made to
revise his original position on the unity of the virtues (349d), and
at 360e concedes, painfully but eventually with a little grace, that
the argument he has just agreed to entails that wisdom and courage
are the same. Nor does his reluctance to concede this show that the
elenchus is somehow vitiated, whether by fallacy or otherwise. The
unsettling of one's beliefs is intrinsically liable to be disconcerting.
But Protagoras, after all, is only a character in a fiction. What
really matters for a piece of writing to be profitable as philosophy
is its ability to engage the reader in the appropriate way: it is one
of Plato's enduring achievements to have taught us that. Yet he
so writes the conversation between Socrates and Protago~as as to
make the reader continually aware of its properties as. performance
- brilliant, complicated, competitive performance. If philosophy
involves immersion in the pursuit of argument for its own sake, the
coruscating surface of the text and its focus on performance obstruct
a properly philosophical response to the issues being presented. To
put it another way, Socrates' conception of philosophy has not been
recommended to us here strongly enough in its own terms: which,
as the con·versation with Hippocrates was designed to remind us, are
as far removed as could be from preoccupation with performance.
One might infer not only that the Protagoras is a philosophical
failure but that Plato has constructed it exactly as such.
It would not be the only Platonic dialogue to have elicited this
sort of diagnosis. Republic I is sometimes read as a failure of this
kind. On this view, Socrates is not allowed to take the full measure
of Thrasymachus' cynical position on justice, but is made to defeat
it and advance his own conception of virtue by a sequence of slick
and otherwise unsatisfactory arguments which persuade neither
Thrasymachus nor the reader. Hence Plato's decision to make
Glaucon and Adeimantus demand something better by way of
response to Thrasymachus at the beginning of Book II. It is tempting
once again to suppose that the failure is deliberate. Scholars
have guessed that it effectively signals Plato's abandonment of the
elenchus or at any rate the elenctic dialogue. 14 Perhaps he had come
to the conclusion that if positive understanding of truth is ever to be
attained, it will not be achieved by elenctic examination of the views
of sophists, since they share too little in common with Platonic
philosophy either in their sense of where truth is to be located or in
the spirit in which they conduct discussion. Given an interpretation
132
SOCRATES VERSUS PROTAGORAS
on these lines, the Protagoras and Book I of the Republic could
be seen as similar demonstrations of the · impossibility of fruitful
dialogue · between sophists and philosophers. Thrasymachus and
Protagoras even sulk in the same style.
I think there are indeed in the Protagoras seeds of the apostasy
from the elenchus which Republic I was to make final ~ but
only seeds, or perhaps an embryo. For the Protagoras contains,
as Republic I does not, an elenctic passage in the discussion with the
sophists which manages to escape the twin perils of competitiveness
and superficiality. In this passage, at least, the Protagoras attains the
kind of philosophical success which I have argued is in general not
achieved. It is as though Plato still sees in the elenctic dialogue a
literary vehicle for philosophy capable of properly commanding
the reader's philosophical attention and concern. The text I have
in mind is the long argument from hedonistic premises to the
impossibility of doing knowingly what one knows or believes to
be against one's own best interests (351b-357e).
This is the one stretch of Socratic argument in the dialogue which
in my experience as a reader of articles and commentaries and
especially as a teacher is found wholly compelling and absorbing
as philosophy. It is a sustained and theoretically ambitious piece
of thinking, palpably careful and devoid of slick short cuts ( even if
it doesn't work). The issues raised, particularly regarding the truth
of hedonism and the commensurability of values, no less than the
way they are raised, succeed in challenging our deep-seated beliefs
and prejudices. 15 There is, of course, interest in whether Plato
is here representing Socrates and/ or Protagoras as committed to
hedonism, and indeed whether he is a hedonist himself at this stage
in his philosophical development. 16 But - again in my experience -
interpretative questions such as these concern readers (qua readers)
much less than the philosophical problems themselves.
How does the intensely competitive framework and ethos of the
debate in the house of Callias accommodate a passage such as this?
In a word: by indirection. What Plato engineers is a conversation in
which Protagoras is no longer cross-examined directly by Socrates,
but is persuaded- partly no doubt by Socrates' explicit appeal a little
earlier to a cooperative conception of enquiry (348c-349a) - to join
with him in a cross-examination of popular views about pleasure
and knowledge. The elenchus here is an elenchus of the many
by Socrates and Protagoras together. In other words, Plato makes
Socrates finally secure Protagoras' cooperation in the elenchus by
133
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
the simple but ingenious device of coopting Protagoras to the same
side as Socrates - or to what a competitor like Protagoras would see
as the same side: the cross-examining side, and thereby, of course,
the side any competitor would wish to be on, the side with the
initiative. A similar device is employed for similar purposes in the
Hippias Major.17 The sophist Hippias is not a natural or cooperative
respondent, so Plato again avoids direct cross-examination, and
invents a fictitious interlocutor who is imagined by Socrates as
putting awkward questions both to himself and to Hippias . (286.c
ff.). Once again Socrates and a sophist are bound together in an
artificial solidarity, this time not as questioners but as fell ow
examinees, and the dialogue can proceed uncompetitively, without
the distracting intrusions of amour propre.
In the Protagoras the device is made plausible by the fact
that Socrates and Protagoras, i.e. the historical Socrates and the
historical Protagoras ( at least as Plato seems to have understood
them), are intellectuals who genuinely share a common premise
which ordinary people do not: viz. the thesis that knowledge is
something possessing supreme power and authority. Where they
differ is in the degree of their perception of the consequences of
that version of this thesis which is concerned with knowledge of
good. Socrates saw that it leads directly to the paradox that no
man does wrong willingly, and that all the virtues come to the
same thing: wisdom or knowledge or understanding. Protagoras
apparently did not draw these consequences. So in the passage of the
Protagoras with which we are concerned, the character Protagoras
has to be got to appreciate them carefully and slowly, in the right
stages, and initially and most importantly by realising that _ even
a hedonist must under cross-examination admit that knowledge
cannot be undermined by pleasure. It is only in the later stages
that Protagoras is made to realise that he, the examiner, is actually in
the same boat as those he is cross-examining: outmanoeuvred again,
one might say, by a superior competitor.
What matters for the philosophical vitality and force of the
Protagoras, however, is that the substitution of indirect for direct
elenchus permits Plato to write a substantial stretch of dialogue in
which personalities and their competitive ambitions are forgotten
by the reader - who can simply concentrate on some philosophy.
We must add that this is not the note on which the dialogue ends.
At 358a Plato reminds us again that we are in the house of Callias
in the company of sophists, and thereafter the discussion resumes
134
SOCRATES VERSUS PROTAGORAS
the style which is more generally characteristic of the Protagoras.
Socrates reverts to a final direct elenchus, in which one or two
argumentative corners are cut, and sums . up with some further
urbane sparring. The sense of bathos registered by readers of the
last four pages of the work is itself testimony to what the dialogue
with the many at 351-7 succeeds in achieving. In those pages the
Protagoras becomes no longer an encounter between Socrates and
Protagoras but an elenctic dialogue in the reader's own soul. 18
NOTES
1 Griswold (1986) and Ferrari (1987).
2 Translations from the Protagoras in this essay are mostly borrowed
or adapted from Hubbard and Kamofsky (1982). I shouJd add that
they are more interested in literary questions about the dialogue than
is C. C. W. Taylor in the otherwise excellent Clarendon Plato edition
(Taylor 1976).
3 For the notion of the paradigmatic employed here see further my 1986:
5-31, at pp. 22-5, and more generally Griffin 1980: eh. 1.
4 Benson 1990: 19-65, at pp. 44-64. 'Two possible exceptions': p. 63,
n. 84.
5 This point of affinity between the Protagoras and the Symposium,
together with that noted on p. 123, should be added to the list compiled
by Kahn 1988: 98-9. Note also the stylistic affinity between the two
dialogues detected by G. R. Ledger's computer - Ledger 1989: 155.
6 Some commentators think that Hippocrates remains important for the
interpretation of important aspects of the debate between Socrates and
Protagoras. For a moderate statement of this viewpoint see Stokes
1986: 203-6, 209-12, 309-10, 370-91. Incidentally, to the interesting
question raised by Stokes (194), 'Why does Socrates tell Protagoras that
Hippocrates wishes to become "famous in the city" (315b-c) - when
Hippocrates has said nothing of the kind?-', I answer: because being
notable or reputed is what Protagoras most values and understands, as
is evidenced by the prediction for Socrates' future (316e) already noted
on p. 123 above.
7 See Kirk, Raven and Schofield 1983: no. 288, with discussion on
pp. 243-4.
8 See, e.g., O'Brien 1967: eh. 2; Guthrie 1969: eh. X.
9 See Sprague 1972: 289-90 (the 'third proof'). See also Kerferd
1981: 131-3.
10 As Gregory Vlastos noted (p. xxv, n. 4) in what remains the best
approach to the Protagoras available in the literature, his introduction
to Martin Ostwald's 1956 revision of the Jowett translation
(Indianapolis and New York: Liberal Arts Press).
11 The most thorough working out of this view is by Klosko 1979:
125-42; cf. his 1983: 363-74.
12 Ryle 1966: 119-20, 193.
135
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
13 Vlastos 1983a: 31, n. 14, 30.
14 Annas 1981: 56-7; Reeve 1988: eh. 1.
15 See Nussbaum 1986: eh. 4.
16 ·see Zeyl 1980: 250-9; subsequently debate on the issues appears to
have largely exhausted itself.
17 See Woodruff 1982: 97-8; cf. 107-8.
18 Thus I make the ultimate philosophical aim and also the technique of
the Protagoras something analogous to what Myles Burnyeat postulates
- in a richer and more complex version - for Parts · II and III of the
Theaetetus. See his 1990.
136
5
SOCRATIC ETHICS 1
C. C. W. Taylor
First a word in elucidation of my title. By 'Socratic Ethics' I intend,
not 'the ethical theories of the historical Socrates' but 'the ethical
theories of Plato's Socratic dialogues', and by 'Socratic dialogues'
I ref er to those dialogues, generally reckoned to be early, in -which
(a) there is no mention of the Theory of Forms, and (b) Socratic
elenchus is a central or at least prominent feature of the discussion. 2
I do not, the ref ore, propose to grapple directly with the classical
'Socratic question', viz. the question of how much of the historical
Socrates may be recovered from our literary sources. Rather, I shall
be exploring the internal connection between certain items of Plato's
presentation of Socratic ethics, on the one hand the attempt to reach
definitions and on the other the two theses which have come to be
labelled as 'the Socratic paradoxes', (i) that virtue is knowledge and
(ii) that no one does wrong willingly or intentionally . Yet this
enquiry, though not· directly historical in intention, is not totally
without historical interest, in that all those items are ascribed to
Socrates by Aristotle. The two theses are attributed to him, directly
or by implication, in the Nicomachean Ethics. At 1144b19-20
Aristotle says that Socrates thought that all the virtues were sorts
(or perhaps instances) of phronesis, and a few lines later (29-30)
that they were kinds ( or instances) of knowledge, which I take
to be in the context equivalent statements. Earlier (1116b4-5) he
has attributed to Socrates an instance of this generalisation, viz.
the thesis that courage is a kind ( or instance) of knowledge. As
regards the second thesis, Aristotle famously sets up his discussion
of akrasia in part via the claim, on which Socrates used to insist, that
'no one acts contrary to what is best in the belief that he is doing
so, but through error' (1145b26-7), which Gerasimos Santas3 has
shoWn to be the foundation of the doctrine that no one does wrong
137
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
willingly. In a well-known passage of Metaphysics A 6 Aristotle
singles out the search for ethical definitions as central to Socrates'
contribution to the development of philosophy: 'Socrates ... was
occupying himself with ethical matters, neglecting the world of
nature as a whole but seeking the , universal in ethical .matters; he
was the first to concentrate attention on definitions' (987b1-4). He
repeats this information in Metaphysics M 4 1078b 17ff. with some
important additions (b27-32): 'ther e are two things which may
justly be ascribed to Socrates, inductive arg.uments and general
definitions, for both are concerned with the starting point of
knowledge; Socrates did not, however, separate the universal or
the definitions, but they [ viz. Plato and his followers] did, calling
them the Forms of things.'
Of course, we cannot simply take it for granted that Aristotle's
evidence '-is independent of Plato. That the evidence for the Socratic
denial of akrasia is derived from the dialogues is suggested by
Aristotle'-s opening statement (1145b23-4) that 'it would be aston~
ishing, · as Socrates thought, _if though knowledge were present
something else overcame it and dragged it about like a slave', where ·
the picturesque metaphor is a verbal echo of Protagoras 352c1-2.
Nothing in the contexts of the other Nicomachean Ethics passages
requires that they should be independent of Platonic texts. On the
other hand, ·in the Metaphysics Aristotle is attempting to · identify
the contribution of the historical · Spcrates to the development of
philosophy, and in particular to the development of Platonism,
and he distinguishes Socrates from Plato by a criterion which is
not derived from the Platonic dialogues, viz. that Socrates did not
separate the Forms, whereas Plato did.4 We .are therefore justified in
believing that not merely the Platonic but also the historical Socrates
did seek ethical definitio .ns, and that in his search for them he made
use of inductive arguments (and also elenchus of his interlocutors). 5
Beyond that I do not think we can go far in reconstructing the views
of the historical Socrates. It seems to me quite likely that he did
maintain the . Socratic paradoxes in some form or other. 6 On the
question of what kind of · definition he sought, we have virtually no
information from any source other than Plato, 7 and are therefore
systematically debarred from being able to determine how much is
Plato and how much Socrates.
From now on, therefore, I shall have no more to say about the
historical Socrates. I shall instead consider what Plato's Socrates
is looking for when he looks for an ethical definition, and how
138
SOCRATIC ETHICS
the search for definitions connects with the Socratic . paradoxes. I
shall suggest that while Plato falls short of- presenting Socrates as
possessing a single clear conception of definition, one paradigm
of definition predominates. Further, that paradigm has an intimate
connection with the paradoxes; more precisely, ·the demand for
definition is satisfied via the development of a psychological theory
in which the paradoxes have a central position. I shall be focussing
primarily on the Meno, which, though probably one of the latest
of the Socratic dialogues, and in its introduction of the theory of
recollection transitional to the metaphysical dialogues of the middle
period, is none the less Socratic by my criteria of . the prominence
of elenchus and the absence of Forms, and is of all the Socratic
dialogues the richest in evidence for the Platonic/Socratic theory
and practice of definition.
What is a Socratic definition a definition of? Not, in the first
instance, of any of the items that might spring to the mind of the
modern reader, such as a term, the meaning of a Word, or a concept.
Ideally, a Socratic definition answers the question 'What is ... ?',
where the blank is filled in by a word designating some quality or
feature of agents, such as courage or excellence. So literally, what
are to be defined are those qualities or .features themselves, not
anything standing for them, as words or . perhaps concepts might
be thought to do. But, of course, we cannot in general draw a sharp
distinction between specifying -what something is and defining or
elucidating the concept of that thing. The concept of F (where
'F' is some general term) is what we understand or possess when
we use the term 'F' with understanding, and in some cases saying
what F is just is defining or elucidating the concept of F. Thus
if I answer the question 'What is justice?' by saying that justice
is giving everyone their due, I have thereby attempted (however
inadequately) to elucidate the concept of justice, in that the answer
is intended to make explicit what is standardly conveyed by our talk
of justice. The ultimate authority for the correctness of that sort ,of
definition is the competent speaker of the language in which the
elucidation is expressed, and the ultimate test which that authority
applies is conformity with his or her linguistic intuitions. In other
cases, however, the question 'What is F ?' is aimed to elicit, not
an elucidation of the ordinary concept of F, but an account of the
phenomenon couched in terms of the best available scientific theory.
For example, 'light is a stream of photons' is not an elucidation of
the ordinary concept of light, i.e. of what the standard speaker of
139
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
English understands by the word 'light'. It is an account of what
light is, i.e. of what science has discovered light to be, and that
account presupposes, but is not exhausted by, the grasp of the
concept which is available to the competent but pre-theoretical
speaker of the language. Hence the ultimate test of its adequacy is
not its fit with that speaker's linguistic intuitions, but its explanatory
power, empirical testability, or whatever else constitutes the test of
a good scientific theory. The form of words 'What is ... ?' may
express ·the search for a definition of either kind (and in any case
the distinction between the two is less sharp than the foregoing
over-simplification has suggested 8). Precisely what kind of search
is afoot has to be determined by the context, which cannot be
guaranteed to provide an unambiguous result.
We learn from the Euthyphro that a Socratic definition of a given
quality should (a) specify what is common to all and only those
things to which the name of the quality applies (Sd), (b) specify
that in virtue of which the name applies to them (i.e. give the
nature of the quality, not merely a distinguishing mark of its
presence) ( 6d, 1 la), and ( c) provide a criterion by reference to
which disputed cases may be determined (6e). Requirements (a)
and (b) are explicitly endorsed at Meno 72c, where Meno is invited
to specify 'the single nature they [i.e. the various types of human
excellence] all have in virtue of which (di' ho) they are excellences',
and though _ the Meno has nothing to say about disputed cases of
arete, we have no reason to suppose that the third requirement has
been abandoned. These three requirements are satisfied alike by
conceptual elucidations and by that kind of account which we have
contrasted with those, and which we might call, traditionally, 'real
definitions' o~, perhaps more informatively, 'substantive scientific
accounts'. But t~e specific context of the Meno in which Socrates
is prompted to ask 'What .is excellence?' suggests that elucidation of
the ordinary concept is unlikely to be sufficient for the purpose of
the dialogue. The conte ·xt is provided by Meno's opening question
(70a): 'Is excellence something which can be taught, or is it rather
acquired by practice, or is it a natural endowment, or is it acquired in
some other way?' That is to say, Meno wants to know how one may
come to acquire excellence, i.e. how one can come to be an excellent
or outstanding person, to which Socrates correctly replies (71b) that
one cannot answer that question unless one first understands what
excellence is.
Now, what kind of understanding of the nature of a quality is
140
SOCRATIC ETHICS
required if one is to know how to acquire that quality? Socrates
generalises Meno's question, maintaining (cf. Republic I: 354b-c)
that in general one cannot answer the question 'Is x F ?' unless one
can first answer the question 'What is x ?' and glossing that requirement
as analogous to the requirement that one should know who
Meno is in order to know whether he is, for instance, handsome.
The • gloss is unhelpful: in order to know whether some predicate
holds of an individual subject such as Meno one must indeed be able
to individuate that subject, but the ability to individuate Meno does
not require that one possess any uniquely individuating specification
of Meno; one might, for instance, individuate Meno ostensively, just
as 'that man over there'. The analogue in the case of a universal such
as excellence seems to be no more than the minimal requirement
to know what we are talking about · when we use the word, a
requirement which again does not presuppose the ability to give
a verbal specification, but which might be satisfied by the ability
reliably to recognise typical instances. But that minimal knowledge
of what excellence is (which Socrates and Meno obviously have
already, otherwise the conversation could not even start) is clearly
no help at all when it comes to the question of how to acquire
excellence.
An analogy with another evaluative predication may help to make
the point clearer. Asking how to acquire excellence at tennis, I am
told by Socrates that I must first know what excellence at tennis
is, just as in order to know whether Meno is handsome I must
first know who Meno is. But in that sense, i.e. that I must be
able to identify Meno, of course I know what excellence at tennis
is. Unless I could recognise it when I came across it, how could
I ever raise the question of how to acquire it? So I need more
than the bare ability to know what I am talking about. Perhaps,
then, I need an elucidation of the concept. But now what counts
as such an elucidation? A bare specification of the meaning of the
expression 'excellence at tennis', for example 'ability to play tennis
to a high standard', is plainly no help in- guiding me towards the
acquisition of excellence at tennis. For that I need some substantive
knowledge of what excellence at tennis . consists in, i.e. of what
qualities go to make a first-class tennis player. There are at least
two kinds of qualities which excellence at tennis may be said to
consist in: first of all, since the game is composed of a variety
of kinds of stroke, one might analyse excellence at tennis into the
excellent performance of each of those kinds, having a good service,
141
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
a good forehand, etc. That kind of analysis would be of some use
to the novice, in so far as it articulates the undifferentiated goal of ·
acquiring excellence at tennis into a number of subordinate goals.
But it provides no guidance as to how each of the subordinate goals
is to be pursued. For that, the general notion of excellence at tennis,
and thereby the specific excellences constitutive of that excellence,
excellent service, etc., have to be analysed via a specification of that
complex of qualities which are causally necessary and sufficient for
success at the game: for instance excellence in tennis is achieved
via a complex of attributes such as hand-eye coordination, speed
of reaction, stamina, tactical insight and motivation. That is to
say, I need to have the rudiments of a theory of tennis, which
explains excellence by identifying its causes and thereby indicating
appropriate methods of acquiring it.
The practical orientation of the discussion in the Meno thus
suggests that the account of excellence which is being sought ought
to . be an explanatory account of the type exemplified immediately
above. Such . an account woμld not only fulfil the -requirements
stated in the Euthyphro, but would give Meno the practical guidance
he is looking for, as an elucidation of the ordinary concept of excellence
would not. The text of the dialogue does, I believe, confirm
that that type of account is predominant in Plato's mind, but the
evidence is by no means unambiguous: indeed the complexities are
such as to force us to acknowledge that the distinction between
conceptual elucidation and explanatory theory emerges with less
than total clarity.
Invited to say what excellence is, Meno first responds by the
suggestion that . there are various forms of human excellence,
corresponding to certain primary social roles held by various
kinds of person, the adult male, adult (married) woman, child,
etc. (71e-72a). Socrates then poses ·his usual challenge to say what
all these kinds of excellence have in common in virtue of which
they all count as types of excellence (72a-d), and himself takes
what is presumably the first step towards meeting this challenge
by pointing out that excellence in each of Meno's primary social
roles requires the possession of justice and self-control (73a-c). This
looks like a move towards the first of our two patterns of analysis
of the conception of excellence at tennis, in which a complex
characteristic is decomposed into its constituents; completed to
Socrates' satisfaction it would exhibit human excellence of each of
Meno's primary types as consisting in the possession of the same
142
. SOCRATIC ETHICS
set of specific excellences or virtues, justice, self-control, courage,
wisdom and perhaps some others (cf. 74a, 88a; Protagoras 349b).
But, as in our tennis example, the practical question of how to
acquire excellence would still require a further account · of each
of those specific virtues, which would, it seems, have to be of
the causally explanatory type. Socrates, however, is dissatisfied
with this account for a quite cliff erent reason, viz. that it, like
Meno's original suggestion, fails to meet the requirement to say
what all the instances (in this case all the specific virtues) have
in common (74a). Prima facie the application of that requirement
to this case is extremely puzzling. Surely what the specific virtues
have in common is precisely that they are all constituents of overall
human excellence: what more could Socrates possibly expect by
way of answer? It is as if, being told that hand-eye coordination
and motivation are constituents of excellence at tennis, one were
to ask what they have in common. Plainly, they need have nothing
in common other than that both are required in order to excel at
tennis. If (implausibly) it were to turn out that coordination and
motivation are themselves manifestations of some further, common
power or property, that would have to be discovered empirically,
not guaranteed a priori by the fact of our counting both these
attributes as constituents of excellence at tennis.
Socrates nevertheless presses his demand for a specification of
what the specific virtues have in common, elucidating this demand
by providing a model of the kind of specification he is looking
for, a definition of shape (75b ). This procedure is flawed, since
the model is appropriate only if justice and self-control stand to
overall human excellence as circularity and squareness stand to
shape, but in fact they do not. Whereas specific shapes are all
determinates of a common determinable, justice and self-control
are not determinates of the determinable excellence, but constituents
of excellence. 9 There is no determinable of which they are
determinates. There is indeed a general concept of which they
are instances, viz. 'constituent of overall human excellence', but
Socrates and Meno have already agreed that that concept applies to
justice and self-control, so giving that definition would not advance
the discussion. But although Socrates has taken a wrong turning
in looking for a general account of excellence analogous to his
definition of shape, there is some interest in seeing what kind
of definition the latter is. In fact Socrates gives two definitions
of shape. The first, 'the only thing which always accompanies
143
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
colour' (75b10-11), does not appear to satisfy the requirement
that a definition should specify what the thing to be defined is,
and not merely give a distinguishing mark. One does not say what
a property is by pointing to another property of which it is the
invariable accompaniment, any more than one explains what night
is by saying that it is the only thing which invariably fallows day. (In
fact, since a number of properties, for example visibility, extension,
size, luminosity, always accompany colour, the so-called 'definition'
is true of nothing.) However, nothing in the text indicates that this
account is recognised as failing to meet the standard requirements
for a definition; indeed Socrates says (75 b 11-c 1) that he would
be content if Meno could define excellence in that way. Meno
demurs indeed, describing the definition as 'silly', but for an
altogether different reason, viz. that it would not be informative
to someone who did not understand what colour is (75c). He
states a requirement of the informativeness of any definition, viz.
that it should not contain any term which is not understood by
the person to whom the definition is given, but that requirement
is not an objection to the correctness of this or any definition. In
reply Socrates gives another definition of shape, having first made
sure that Meno understands all the component terms, viz. 'shape is
the limit of a solid' (76a7). This account of shape, as the external
boundary or limit of a body, does appear to be an elucidation of the
concept. And since that is given by Socrates as a model of the kind
of definition of excellence he is looking for, we have to recognise a
divergence between the kind of account suggested by the practical
direction of the enquiry, viz. a causally explanatory account, and the
pref erred Socratic model. A similar situation occurs in the Laches,
where the practically motivated search for a definition of courage is
illustrated by a model definition of quickness as 'the power of doing
many things in a short time' (192b1-2), which is also a conceptual
elucidation.
The situation is complicated even further by Socrates' offer of
yet another definition, this time (in deference to Meno's insistence)
of colour. This is not a conceptual elucidation, but an explanatory
account of colour in terms of a scientific theory, viz. the physiology
of Empedocles: 'Colour is a flowing out [ sc. from the coloured
object] of shapes [i.e. physical particles of various shapes] symmetrical
to vision [i.e. of such shapes and sizes as enable them to penetrate
the channels in the eye] and perceptible' (76d4-5). 10 (The modern
analogue would be an account of colour in terms of light waves of
144
SOCRATIC ETHICS
different lengths.) Here we have an example of just the kind of
explanatory causal theory suggested by the practical motivation of
the dialogue; were Socrates to say that this is the most satisfactory
of the definitions he has offered, we should have a nice fit between
the shape of the dialogue and the explicit witness of the text. In fact
he says that it is inferior to the definition of shape (76e; presumably
it is the second of the two definitions of shape that he refers to, but
the text does not make that explicit). But he does not say why it is
inferior. Perhaps Plato is aware of the distinction between conceptual
elucidation and causally explanatory account, and regards the
former as in general the pref erred sort of definition. But Socrates
does not say so, and the text suggests other possibilities. Socrates
offers the definition of colour as one in the manner of Gorgias,
which will therefore be familiar to Meno (76c), 11 and remarks on its
'high-flown' character, which he thinks pleases Meno (76e3-4 ). This
suggests that Socrates may regard this definition as inferior to the
other, J:?-Obte cause causally explanatory accounts are as such inferior
to conceptual elucidations, but because this particular account is
couched in over-elaborate technical terminology. Perhaps, too, he
thinks that it is simply false, but has merely picked on it to gratify
Meno by citing something familiar. Given these hints, it would
be rash to conclude that Socrates' preference for the definition of
shape indicates a preference for one type of definition, conceptual
elucidation, over another, a causally explanatory account. Indeed,
the text thus far gives no indication that Plato is even aware of the
distinction between the two types of definition.
Let me sum up the position so far. Socrates responds to Meno's
practical question of how excellence is to be acquired by stating
a minimal requirement for any enquiry, viz. that the object of
the enquiry should be identified. But that requirement is already
fulfilled from the outset. Socrates is in fact demanding the fulfilment
of a stronger requirement, viz. to provide an account of excellence
which will meet the standards set out in the Euthyphro. Those
standards do not differentiate between a conceptual elucidation
and a causally explanatory account, but the practical ends of
the enquiry would be better served by the latter. In the course
of the discussion Socrates gives samples of accounts: the first,
which gives a distinguishing mark of the object 'defined' rather
than specifying what the object is, fails to meet the Euthyphro
standard, the second is a conceptual elucidation, the third a causally
explanatory account. Socrates gives no sign of regarding the three
145
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
as belonging to cliff erent kinds, but merely states that, for reasons
unspecified, he prefers the second to the third. Thus far, then, the
question 'What kind of definition is Socrates looking for in the
Meno?' has no unambiguous answer. If such an answer is to be
had, we must take into consideration the rest of the dialogue. That
may seem unpromising, since in that portion of the dialogue nothing
more is said about the methodology of definition, nor are any more
examples given. The dialogue does, however, reach an answer, or
rather answers, to the question 'What is excellence?' Excellence is
first (87c-89a) argued to be knowledge, then another argument leads
to the revision of that account in favour of the answer 'Excellence
is true opinion' (99b-c ), an account , which is further qualified by a
strong hint at 1 00a that the former answer gives the true account of
genuine excellence, while the latter gives an account of what passes
for excellence by ordinary standards. What kind of definition is
represented by these answers?
What these answers share is a conception of excellence as a
cognitive state, or more portentously, a grasp of truth. We are not
concerned with the details of the distinction between knowledge
and true opinion, but its essence is the firmness or reliability of
the grasp; knowledge is a reliable (because systematic) grasp of
the truth, true opinion is an unreliable (because unsystematic)
grasp of truth. What sort of account of excellence is provided
by the conception of it as a cognitive state? Note that Socrates
and Meno are not discussing excellence in some theoretical sphere,
such as excellence at mathematics; the paradigms of excellence in
this final stage of the discussion are individuals such as Pericles
who embody the same ideal of success in public and private affairs
as Meno had assumed from the outset. That is to say, cognitive
states are presented as giving an account of all-embracing social and
political merit, of the state of the totally well-rounded, successful
and admirable person ( = man, by this stage of the discussion). In
what sense is that person's admirable state a cognitive one? The
sort of excellence in question is above all practical, manifested
in action and a whole style of behaviour; it does not seem that
specification · of a cognitive state could give an account of the
manifestation of excellence. That is to say, 'knowledge or true
opinion' does not offer the same kind of account of excellence
as 'having a good service, ground strokes and volley' does of
excellence at tennis, since the latter account does precisely specify
the kind of actions which manifest that excellence, whereas the
146
SOCRATIC ETHICS
former does not. Rather, it gives an account of what is manifest
in excellent performance, as 'coordination, stamina, courtcraft, etc.'
does of what is manifested in excellent tennis-playing . And as that
account · expresses, not an elucidation of the concept of excellent
tennis-playing, but an empirical theory of the causes of the type
of play which we count as excellent, so the cognitive account
of overall human excellence expresses, not an elucidation of that
concept, but a causally explanatory theory, what we may call the
Cognitive Theory of Virtue. We find, then, that despite Socrates'
expressed preference for the conceptual definition of shape over the
causally explanatory account of colour, the account of excellence
which he endorses in the concluding section of the dialogue is of
a type represented, not by the former, but by the latter.
The aim of our enquiry into the nature of definition in the Socratic
dialogues was the elucidation of the connection between definition
and the Socratic paradoxes. That aim has now been achieved in part,
since the first paradox, the thesis that virtue is knowledge, has now
turned out to be the Cognitive Theory. But that elucidation lacks
content without further exploration of just what the Cognitive
Theory claims. That exploration will also, I hope, indicate the
connection between the Cognitive Theory and the second paradox,
the thesis that no one does wrong willingly.
The Cognitive Theory is a theory to the effect that overall success
in human life is guaranteed by the possession of certain cognitive
states. This theory in turn rests on a theory of the explanation of
intentional action which combines to a remarkable degree a staggering
audacity and simplicity with a high degree of plausibility. It
states that provided that the agent has a conception of what is overall
best for the agent, or (equivalently) what is maximally productive of
eudaimonia (for the agent), that conception is sufficient to motivate
action with a view to its own realisation. That is emphatically not
to say that motivation does not require desire as well as belief. On
the contrary, Socrates makes clear his view (77c1-2; 7864-6) that
everyone desires good things, which in context has to be interpreted
as the strong thesis that the desire for good is an invariable motive.
That desire is then conceived as a standing motive, which requires
to be focussed in one direction or another via a conception of the
overall good. Given that focus, desire is as it were locked on to
the target which is picked out by the conception, without the
po~sibility of interference by conflicting desires. Hence, given the
standing desire, all that is required for correct conduct, i.e. for the
147
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
manifestations of excellence, is the correct focus. And that focus has
to be a correct conception of the good for the agent, i.e. a correct
conception of eudaimonia.
I have just stated the theory underlying the Cognitive Theory in
a conditional form, viz. provided that the agent has a conception of
what is overall good, that conception provides uniform motivation.
That form allows the possibility that an agent might lack the
conception of such a good altogether, and simply be motivated
in a haphazard way by considerations of particular goods on
each occasion of action. A stronger version of the theory would
be the thesis that on every occasion every agent is motivated by
his or her conception of what is best overall. That version has the
disadvantages (a) of going beyond the letter of the relevant texts
(Meno 77-8; Protagoras 358), and (b) of extreme implausibility. On
the other hand, the weaker thesis has the disadvantage that it leaves
the uniformity of motivation, given the conception of overall good,
virtually unexplained. If agents are capable, lacking the conception
of overall good, of being motivated towards different, and the ref ore
potentially conflicting goods, what guarantees that the conception
of overall good, once in place, will be sufficient to silence conflicting
motivations? Protagoras 358c-d states that it is impossible (literally,
'not in human nature') to choose what you think bad (sc. for you)
instead of what is good, but gives no argument or explanation. Meno
77e-78a gives an argument, but an unsound one: to want things
which you think bad for you is to want to be harmed, and to want
to be harmed is to want to be wretched and unfortunate, but no one
wants to be wretched and unfortunate. (The first premise is false,
because wanting does not cross envisaged causal connections: from
the fact that I want x, and believe that x causes y, it does not follow
that I want y.) Plato might perhaps rely on that argument, faced with
the objection which I have just raised. I suspect, however, that the
objection would not have occurred to him, because he may not
have made the distinction between the desire for particular goods
and desire for the good overall on which the objection depends.
The argument of Protagoras 355c~d, leading to the conclusion that
it would be absurd to describe someone as knowingly doing bad
things (i.e. things bad for him) because he is overcome by the
desire for goods, depends on failure to make that distinction. It
is absurd to describe someone as abandoning the conception of
the overall good because he is seduc~d by the attractions of the
overall good, but not absurd to describe one as doing so because
148
SOCRATIC ETHICS
he is seduced -by particular goods which are incompatible with the
overall good (for example short-term pleasures which are believed
to be harmful in the long run). It is therefore quite likely that Plato
was not sensitive to the distinction; and with the distinction goes the
distinction between the weaker and the stronger forms of the theory
of motivation on which the Cognitive Theory rests. On the weaker
form, motivation is (a) always towards some envisaged good, and
(b) towards the envisaged overall good when the conception of
that good is present. On the stronger form, motivation is always
towards the envisaged overall good. On either form, excellence in
human performance is guaranteed by possession, with greater or less
reliability, of the correct conception of the good.
In turning to the second Socratic paradox I shall assume Santas'
distinction between the self-interested paradox, 'No one acts intentionally
against his or her overall interest', and the moral form, 'No
one does intentionally what is morally wrong.' The former falls
directly out of the theory of motivation which we have seen to
underly the · Cognitive Theory. The latter, as Santas demonstrates,
follows from the former, together with the thesis, argued for in
the Gorgias, that it is always in the agent's interest to do what is
morally right. The agent must, of course, believe that it is in his or
her interest to do what is morally right, but the correct conception
of the good for the agent will guarantee that he or she has that belief.
For the correct conception of the agent's good (see Gorgias 504a-d)
is that it is a state of the personality organised in accordance with the
requirements of virtue, analogous with bodily health (cf. Crito 47e).
Given that conception, together with true beliefs as to what actions
will realise it, the prudential thesis guarantees that the agent will
be motivated to do those actions. Hence, by contraposition, if the
agent is not thus motivated, he or she either lacks that conception
or lacks those true beliefs. In either case, the agent's wrongdoing
is due to error, and is there£ ore unintentional, which is what the
moral paradox states.
The practical orientation of the initial enquiry in the Meno, then,
suggests that the kind of account of excellence which is required is a
causally explanatory account. That hypothesis is neither confirmed
nor refuted by Socrates' model definitions, which are of diverse
kinds, including both a causal account and a conceptual elucidation,
without any clear recognition of the distinction between those
kinds. On the other hand the alternative accounts of excellence
which are finally arrived at are in fact causal accounts. Cognitive
149
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
states explain how practical excellence is achieved, the explanation
being embedded in a theory of motivation which also yields the
Socratic paradoxes.
To guard against possible misunderstanding, I do not of course
deny that the Socratic conception of excellence, as mentioned in the
Crito and spelt out in the Gorgias, is revisionary. The 'Periclean'
paradigm of -excellence is assumed in the Meno only for the sake
of argument, and in fact represents at best an approximation to
real ·excellence. But that does not affect my central contention,
that the relation of the cognitive grasp of the good to excellence
itself is-in the Socratic dialogues a causal one, the causal mechanism
being that described in the theory of motivation which I have just
sketched. In the authentic Socratic conception the good of which
the excellent person has knowledge is itself a state of the personality,
analogous to bodily health, in which the various impulses to action
are harmonised under the direction of the agent's conception of the
supreme good. But now the theory collapses into inconsistency. By
the Cognitive Theory excellence is knowledge of how to achieve
the good, ·while by the analogy with health excellence is the health
of the soul and therefore the good itself which is to be achieved via
knowledge. On the former account excellence should, like medicine,
be valuable only instrumentally, whereas by the latter it is valuable
intrinsically. Further, the theory of the Gorgias requires that the
person ·ality should be organised in such a way as to realise a prior
· conception of the good, whereas the only conception of the good
envisaged in the Cognitive Theory is the conception of the state of
the personality itself. The conception of the supreme good as the
Form of the Good, developed · in the middle dialogues, gives Plato
at least the sketch-plan of an-escape from this dilemma.
In the foregoing I have dealt largely, though not exclusively,
with the Meno. The causal character of Socratic accounts of
the virtues is also discernible in the Protagoras, where Socrates
argues for the thesis that all the virtues are forms of knowledge,
and is suggested by the Laches and the Charmides, where the
respective discussions indicate, without definitively enunciating,
a·ccounts of courage as 'knowledge of what is fearful' (an account
adopted at Protagoras 360d) and sophrosyne as 'knowledge of
the good'.
In conclusion, all that I hope to have-shown is that in the mos.t
extended treatment of Socratic definition, the definition sought
and arrived at is not a conceptual elucidation, but a causally
150
SOCRATIC ETHICS
explanatory account, that that sort of definition is prominent in
other Socratic dialogues, and that, given the theory of motivation
presupposed in the particular definition which _ is given in the Meno,
the connection between that definition and the Socratic paradoxes
is both intimate and reasonably perspicuous. To repeat myself, I do
not think that there is any indication that Plato made any explicit
distinction between conceptual elucidation and causal account;
the distinction which I have emphasised ( and whose sharpness I
may have exaggerated) emerges, not in Plato's theory, but in his
dialectical practice.
NOTES
1 Some material from this chapter appears in my 'Platonic Ethics', in
Everson (forthcoming).
2 The dialogues discussed in this chapter are Charmides, Crito, Euthyphro,
Gorgias, Laches, Meno and Protagoras.
3 Santas 1964; Santas 1979.
4 As was argued long ago by Ross in his 1924: vol. 1, xxxiii-xiv.
5 In his Memorabilia Xenophon . ascribes all three to Socrates. For
definitions see 1.1.16, III. 9.4-9, IV.6, esp. sect. 1; inductive arguments
and elenchus are pervasive features of Socrates' argumentative
technique, as reported by Xenophon, e.g. Il.3 (induction), IIl.6
(elenchus). I do not assume that Xenophon's portrait is historically
more accurate than Plato's, but merely cite these passages as further
evidence, probably independent of Plato, for Socrates' practice of
argument.
6 At Memorabilia III.9.4, Xenophon's Socrates maintains that everyone
does what seems to him to be most advantageous to him, a claim which
leads to the first paradox, that no one does wrong willingly. (The claim
is repeated at IV.6.6.) The second paradox, that virtue is knowledge, is
maintained at 111.9.5; 'he said that justice and all the rest of excellence
is wisdom'. (For the explicit identification of wisdom with knowledge
see IV.6.7.)
7 The passages from Xenophon cited in n. 5 above contain instances of
both types of definition distinguished in the chapter, viz. conceptual
elucidation and s_ubstantive account, without any sign of a distinction
between the two. Nor do these . passages provide any clear evidence
of Xenophon's view of what the theoretical role of Socratic definition
was. In general, Xenophon's examples of Socratic definition are so
few, and his treatment of them so cursory, that it is unsafe to base
any conclusions on them.
8 See Putnam 1975.
9 Determinates of a single determinable, such as specific shapes and
specific colours, are mutually incompatible; constituents of a complex
property are (a) mutually compatible, (b) such that every instance of the
151
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
complex property in fact instantiates some sub-set of the constituents.
See Searle 1967.
10 Cf. Diels - Kranz 31 A 86 (Theophrastus) and 92 (Aetius).
11 Gorgias had reputedly been a student of Empedocles (Diogenes
Laertius VIIl.58: Diels - Kranz 82 A 3), and Meno had studied with
Gorgias (71c).
152
6
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
P. ]. FitzP atrick
A shorter form of this chapter was written for oral delivery. I
have not tried to disguise the fact, but have added notes, which
I hope may serve as guides through a variety of materials. I
express my gratitude for the facilities provided by libraries in
Durham and in London - above all by the Warburg Institute.
The editorial help given me by my colleague Dr B. S. Gower is
much appreciated. Some titles in works consulted were prolix: the
bibliography abbreviates them.
INTRODUCTORY
In my contribution I have an impossible task. Twenty-four centuries
separate us from Socrates, and it falls to me to evaluate what those
centuries have made of him. And, clearly, that cannot be done in a
way that will do justice to the topic: I shall have to over-simplify,
to cut corners, and to make brutal omissions of important material.
But I think the attempt is worth making. Not only can it teach
us something, but its very incompleteness will show just how
wide-ranging is the theme allotted to me.
I begin by asking you to look at two illustrations. Figure 1 is
David's masterpiece, The Death of Socrates, exhibited by him in
1787; we shall see later that he has followed the account given
in Plato's Phaedo, but with one remarkable addition. Figure 2 is
Raphael's The School of Athens, a fresco painted for the Stanza
della Segnatura in the Vatican, about 1510; its very familiarity may
obscure what will turn out to be quite a complex structure and
design. ·
Having noticed the two pictures, I practise the first of my brutal
omissions. I pass over the whole theme of what was made of
153
#
\Jlfl8-·-
•· ·• ··~-~.1-. ~ ~-• •.
_..
Figure 6.1 The Death of Socrates, David, 1787.
(All rights reserved, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.)
Figure 6.2 The School of Athens, Raphael, c.1510.
(All rights reserved, Monumenti Musei e Gallerie Pontificie, Vatican City.)
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Socrates by writers in the ancient world: the different versions
in Plato and Xenophon; the very earliest presentation of him by
Aristophanes; the multiplicity of anecdotes and judgements preserved
by later Greek and Roman writers. This theme is notorious
for the controversies it has aroused and is still arousing, and it
demands a fuller treatment than it could receive as part of a wider
survey.1 I want to go rather to stages in the legacy of Socrates that
are not so well known, and to see what they have to teach us.2 And
so I pass to the first stage I consider: what was made of Socrates by
some of those Christian writers of the early centuries known as the
'Fathers of the Church'.
SOCRATES AND THE FATHERS3
About the year AD 160, when the philosophically-minded Marcus
Aurelius was Emperor at Rome, two addresses were composed -
one to him, and a second to the Senate - by Justin, a native of
Palestine. Both were defences (Apologiae) of the new religion that
was spreading through the cities of the Empire, and whose adherents
were being accused of atheism because they would not take part in
the worship of the official gods of the state. Justin appeals to the
example of Socrates, in his second defence of his fellow Christians.
Socrates faced a similar accusation, simply because he had rejected
the fables to do with the gods of Olympus, banished from his ideal
state the poets who sang of them, and taught that one creating God
should be worshipped. Christ had been partly known by Socrates,
for whatever has been taught or well said by philosophers has been
reached by some sharing in the Word, the Word that is in all things
and that spoke through the prophets (II Apo/. 10; 6 PG 460-1).
What contradictions there are among philosophers come from their
imperfect grasp of unseen wisdom; whatever has been well said by
them 'belongs to us Christians' (II _Apo!. 13; 6 PG 465).
I note here a point of logic that is fraught with consequences. If
whatever has been well said belongs to the Christians, it follows
that whatever does not belong to them cannot have been well said.
Consequently, whatever pagans say must either be false (because
not well said); or in some way borrowed (because ·well said).
These consequences were not universally drawn, but they were
drawn both readily and repeatedly. Socrates had claimed negative
guidance by some inner voice, to which the name daimonion was
usually given. The etymology was not happy for Christians, given
156
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
what they thought of demons, and Socrates was at times condemned
for having a familiar spirit. He was also condemned for requesting
at the hour -of his death that a cock be sacrificed to Aesculapius, the
god of healing. 4 On the other hand, things had been said by him and
by other Greek philosophers that resembled things to be found in
the Bible. For Justin, as we saw, those philosophers had some share
in the wisdom of the Word. But for others, such philosophers must
have taken the good things from the Old Testament - stolen them,
• as some put 1t.
The crudity of this pattern of reasoning should not obscure the
real tension that prompted it, a tension that is already present in
Justin. His claim that whatever has been well said belongs to the
Christians could be taken in a 'widening' sense, a sense in which
Christians can welcome good things found among the pagans; but
it could be and often was taken in the 'narrowing' sense we have
seen - whatever pagans have said well is at best borrowed. The
tension was bound to be acute in the variety of judgements passed on
Socrates, whose teaching and behaviour seemed to off er excellences
that were independent of what the Fathers regarded as necessary
for true goodness and eternal salvation. The tension expressed itself,
we might say, in an unwillingness to acknowledge the Diversity
of Goods - and this is a theme which we shall be meeting time
and again.
Here and now, we can notice a recurrence of the theme by
moving from Justin to the one whose writings were to have the
most influence of all in the Western Church - St Augustine (t
430). Augustine gives his views on Greek philosophy at the start
of the eighth book of his The City of God, but they are derivative
in more than one sense. He had little or no Greek, acquiring at
most a small amount in his old age.5 His acquaintance was with
later writers in the Platonic tradition, not with Plato himself. His
account there of the progress of Greek philosophy reads dismally
like the summaries and surveys the Ancient World liked so much
(De civitate Dei VIIl.1-2; 41 PL 223-6 ), and elsewhere in the
work he retails an anecdote to do with Socrates and Alcibiades
while hesitating over the latter's name (XIV.8; 41 PL 413). His
praise of Socrates and his account of his 'philosophical descent' from
earlier thinkers are also in the eighth book (VIII. 2-3; 41 PL 226-7).
On the one hand, he is ready to praise Socrates and to ascribe his
condemnation to calumny, calumny prompted by rancour among
those he had shown to lack the wisdom they claimed; indeed,
157
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Augustine adds for good measure the tale that Socrates' accusers
came to miserable ends. For Augustine, Plato is the writer who
. comes nearest to Christianity, and he speculated at one time whether
Plato might have become acquainted with teachings of the Old
Testament while in Egypt (VIII.9-11; 41 PL 235). It is when he
considers the eternal salvation of pagans that the limited nature of
his praise becomes clear. It would be wrong ·, he says, to claim that
nobody outside Israel in the ages before Christ could belong to
the heavenly Jerusalem - which sounds hopeful . Less hopeful is
the way he continues: Job must be so admitted, even though not
a Jew, because of the justice and piety expressed in his utterances.
And others outside the chosen people may also have belonged to
the heavenly Jerusalem - but nobody can so belong unless Christ
has been revealed to him. Which, once more, brings us back to the
Diversity of Goods.
SOCRATES AND THE MIDDLE AGES
When Augustine died in 430, the Vandals were besieging the city of
Carthage, where he had been bishop. Within fifty years of his death
the Roman Empire in the West had collapsed and it looked as if all
knowledge of Socrates - and indeed all knowledge of the Ancient
World - would perish with it. The story of what was saved, and of
the revival of knowledge, has often been told. One way of grasping
the pattern of loss and recovery in philosophical matters is to move
forward for a moment as far as 1310, the year in which Dante
composed the first part of his Divina Commedia - the Inferno, a
journey through hell. In its fourth Canto he visits a 'Noble Castle'
where dwell virtuous pagans - barred from heaven because they lack
faith, though not otherwise tormented. But now the philosophical
scene has greatly changed. For the authors we have seen so far,
it is Socrates and Plato who claimed most attention, and it is
the Platonic tradition that represented for them the philosophical
thought nearest to their own beliefs. Things are very different for
Dante. The central figure now is Aristotle, 'the master of those who
know', who is 'seated amid the philosophical family' and honoured
by all; Socrates and Plato are no more than 'those who stand nearest
to him' . What had happened over the centuries to change things
so much?
In the centuries following the collapse of the Roman Empire in
the West (its last Emperor was deposed in 476), learning of all sorts
158
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
disintegrated in many places. We owe to the monks above all the
preservation of what did survive, and that this preservation of a
pagan inheritance was at times reluctant and unplanned does not
diminish our debt of gratitude. 6 Knowledge of Greek itself had
. already been declining - we saw that Augustine had very little,
and in the next century the future Pope Gregory the Great was
to spend years in Constantinople as envoy to the Eastern Roman
Emperor without acquiring any. Inevitably, the disturbed years
saw its extinction in most places, along with the loss of so much
else. But not every place lost it totally. There were Greek-speaking
immigrants to Rome, people who were at odds with the religious
disturbances of the Eastern Empire. Greek continued to be used as
a liturgical language in parts of Italy. Greek writings were available
in some, but not many, places, and some people there, but not
many, could read them. What was undoubtedly lost was the range
of Greek writing, whether in the original or in translation. It was
predictable that literature and history should disappear, but even
the philosophical texts available were late and few. Moreover, the
popularity of florilegia - collections of summaries and of extracts
from authors - makes it difficult to tell just what earlier sources
had been read in extenso. As time went on, it was in some
passages of Cicero, and in writers of the later Roman Empire
such as Macrobius (t c. 420) and Martianus Capella (fl. c. 450),
that philosophical speculations of the Greeks were available. The
Platonic tradition itself underwent transformations, and elements
from Stoicism and from Aristotle were integrated into various
forms of what is known as 'N eo-Platonism'. Some writers in this
(still largely pagan) tradition were read, such as Proclus (t 485) and
the author known as 'Dionysius the Areopagite' ( c. 500). However,
what Proclus wrote was ascribed to Aristotle, and Dionysius was
erroneously supposed to have been a Christian - indeed, a disciple
of St Paul.7
Of Plato himself, part of one dialogue (the Timaeus) had some
. circulation in Latin, while of Aristotle there survived early works
on logic. Later on, Latin versions were made of other Platonic
dialogues, but it was not until the fifteenth century that a translation
of the complete text of Plato became available in Western Europe.
For centuries, therefore, it was rather Plato as interpreted by the
later Platonic tradition who was in any measure known; it was
this tradition that had coloured the writings of Augustine; and
Augustine's writings were to be more widely diffused in the
159
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
West than any book except the Latin Bible. 8 The character of
this 'mediated Plato', if I may so call it, can best be seen if we
go back for· a moment to the illustration of Raphael's School of
Athens. Here I direct your attention to the hands of Socrates and
Plato: those of Socrates are marking off points in an argument;
Plato is simply pointing upwards, and he is not arguing at all. It
is this 'non-Socratic' side to Plato that we find in the Neo-Platonic
tradition. The tradition was systematic where Socrates had been
tentative, and expository where he had questioned. It taught a
theology of ascent to the divine, where he had professed ignorance.
And it was this side of the Platonic tradition that became an essential
part of what intellectual life there was in Western Europe over the
seven centuries that followed Augustine's death.
Then, in the later years of the twelfth century, things began to
change. Contact with the East became greater, and to the earlier and
limited inheritance from the philosophical past there began to be
added the massive corpus of Aristotle's writings, with commentaries
thereon by pagan, Moslem and Jewish writers. 9 Understandably,
the long and complex story of the reception of Aristotle into the
West involves the story of the tensions the reception produced
with the earlier pattern of thought. The new material was touched
with Neo-Platonic elements; and the older traditions in theology,
associated with names like Augustine and Anselm, were combined
in different ways. It is not surprising that the thirteenth century
saw fierce debate over the mixtures produced. For our purposes
here, it is enough to notice that the sheer bulk of the new material
- it ranged from logic to metaphysics, and from natural history to
theology and politics - overshadowed all else from Antiquity. 10
But the arrival of the Aristotelian texts and commentaries did more
than give philosophy a new bulk and independence. It changed the
balance of learning in Europe, arresting the literary flowering of the
twelfth century and turning attention to more abstract studies. The
temperature dropped, we might say, and we can in consequence
expect little concern with the person of Socrates in the Middle
Ages. A writer like Aquinas knew of his death, and of some things
to do with his teaching. 11 Aquinas here had at his disposal some
works of Cicero, Augustine's City of God, and also that incurably
popular farrago of anecdotes, Valerius Maximus (first century AD),
but his main source of information was Aristotle, and there was
little personal detail to be found there. Indeed, the impersonality of
the figure of Socrates in the Middle Ages shows itself in the words
160
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
'Sor' and 'Sortes' used then as standard names in logical examples
- they are simply abbreviations of the name 'Socrates', apparently
not recognised for what it was. 12 Dante, as we saw, gives pride ·of
place to Aristotle, and only attendant roles to Socrates and Plato.
For anything more, we must go beyond the Middle Ages - and so
into the next section.
SOCRATES AND THE RENAISSANCE 13
I turn to consider what was made of Socrates when, towards the end
of the fifteenth century, a Latin version of Plato by the Florentine
Marsilio Ficino (t 1499) became available in Western Europe. 14 My
considerations will lead naturally to seeing something of how the
Platonic dialogues themselves were then interpreted. Having done
all that, I will resume the general theme in the next section, and
look at the figure of Socrates in the sixteenth century - and in the
intellectual turmoil of the seventeenth.
Ficino's translation of Plato was published in 1482; among his
other writings was a commentary on the Symposium (1469), and (the
man was a prodigy of industry) a translation of Plotinus (1492). But
his version of Plato was preceded in 1463 by a translation of writings
ascribed to the legendary Egyptian sage Hermes Trismegistus. To
see the reason is to understand more of what was then made of Plato
and Socrates.
We saw in the preceding section that the arrival of the Aristotelian
writings in Western Europe led to disagreements over their use in
theology. We also saw that Dante gave pride of place to Aristotle
where a writer like Augustine had given it to Plato. And we noticed
a speculation of Augustine: that Plato had become acquainted with
the . Mosaic revelation during his visit to Egypt. Such a speculation
was not surprising, given what Augustine made of the theme I have
called 'The Diversity of Goods'. He could find in the Platonic
tradition traces of a doctrine of creation, in which visible things
represent their maker; he could find the survival of the soul and
the notion of its judgement; he could even find expressions like
'Father', 'Maker', and 'Soul of the World' that seemed to resonate
with what Christian belief itself proclaimed. Aquinas, as we know,
gave a place to Aristotle that Augustine did not, yet he still finds
this speculation by Augustine plausible - see at all events his early
work, Commentary on the Sentences Pars I, dist. 3, qu. 1, art. 4, ad
1. But neither Aquinas, nor any other Christian writer of the Middle
161
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Ages known to me, makes any such speculation about Aristotle.
There seemed to be no need for any: Aristotle was silent over
creation, had only fragmentary and much-debated passages over
the survival of the soul, and had no resemblances in his vocabulary
to what was said of the Trinity by Christians. Aristotle's writings
did indeed achieve a place in Western thought that Dante's picture
fairly represents, but the deficiencies in them were not forgotten,
and neither were the likenesses in Plato to Christianity. Then, as
the text of all the Platonic dialogues became generally available, a
reading that stressed the likenesses was encouraged by a miscellany
of writings also becoming available. These were ref erred to in a
general way as prisca gentilium theologia, or 'primitive theology
of the pagans'; a common name now is 'the Ancient Theology'.
They were ascribed to venerable or mythical figures of Antiquity,
such as Hermes Trismegistus in Egypt, Pythagoras and Orpheus in
Greece and Zoroaster among the Chaldeans. 15 They were believed
to contain a revelation made by God to the · pagans, and so
were seen as a precious confirmation of the Bible. And they,
like Plato and writers in the Platonic tradition, were read as
teaching (even if imperfectly) .Christian doctrines like the Trinity
of God and the immortality of the soul. The seventeenth century
eventually saw them placed historically - they are a hodge-podge
of N eo-Platonism, Gnosticism, Christianity and magic, going back
to the early centuries of our era. 16 That was yet to come when
Ficino translated Hermes; for him and for many others, the Ancient
Theology could rein£ orce the closeness of Plato to Christianity. But
in doing so, it also reinforced the reading of Plato as transmitted
in the tradition of Neo-Platonism, what I called in the preceding
section 'the non-Socratic' side to Plato. I want to suggest that the
implications of reading Plato in this way, and of accepting the
Ancient Theology, can be perceived in a visual manner if we go
back to Raphael's School of Athens.
Consider the wider structure of the design. There are two niches
on the wall of the building, and in the niches are statues: on Plato's
side is Apollo, the .god of heavenly inspiration; on Aristotle's
side is Athene, the patron of intellectual skills. Some of these
skills - mathematical and physical - are being exercised on this
side in the foreground, where Euclid is explaining a geometrical ,
diagram, and two sages, Ptolemy and Zoroaster, are holding up
respectively a terrestial globe and a celestial sphere. But above
them, on a higher level, are philosophers, and among these one
162
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
is conspicuous. Wrapped in a dark cloak, he stands alone and in
silence, in a position occupied by nobody on the other, 'Platonic'
side. -He points towards the groups below him; he gazes towards
the group on the other side in the foreground. This figure is
Pythagoras, reputedly the teacher of Plato and the first to describe
himself as a philosopher; Pythagoras, who placed the harmony
of the world in mathematical proportion, and whose utterances
concerning the number three were taken as adumbrations of the
Trinity; Pythagoras, who saw wisdom as consummated in silence.
It is Pythagoras, himself an 'Ancient Theologian', who is indicating
the ultimate resolution of the tension at the heart of the picture.
For there, Plato is pointing upwards; his right hand fallows the
upward thrust of the arch behind him. But Aristotle's right hand
is extended, palm downwards; if the curve of the same arch were
continued as a circle, it would pass through this hand. Where Plato
indicates an ascent, Aristotle exhibits a recall to earth. It is the two
gestures of Pythagoras that show how this tension may be resolved
by incorporation into something of a higher order. He is pointing to
studies conducted by the gentiles, studies represented by Ptolemy,
Euclid and Zoroaster - who came respectively from Egypt, Greece
and Chaldea, the three homes of the Ancient Theology. But if it is
to all this that Pythagoras is pointing, his gaze directs us elsewhere
- to a group on Plato's sid~.
If we look closely at that group, we shall notice that something
Pythagorean is there too: a diagram that includes the 'Tetractys',
the figure representing ten as the sum of the numbers one to four,
• • • •
• • •
• •
•
together with lines expressing musical intervals. This diagram is
being presented before the seated figure writing in a large volume.
His writing is in columns, it is not diagrammatic, and the volume
itself is firmly bound in a way that contrasts with the loosely
secured books carried by the figure on the extreme left. The
volume is a Gospel and the seated figure is an Evangelist; the
Pythagorean diagram is in a sense a message submitted to him
from the other side; it is, we might say, the fruit of the Ancient
Theology. Pythagoras himself is indicating by his gaze where that
theology can lead us - to the Gospel, with its revelation of what was
163
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
but imperfectly grasped among the pagans. And notice how just the
same culminative role of the Gospel is displayed in the two figures
- one wearing a turban - who are devoutly attentive to what the
Evangelist is writing. We have already seen that, when Aristotle's
works came to Western Europe, Moslem and Jewish commentaries
came with them. The two figures represent these two sources of
human wisdom, which find their fulfilment in the revelation given
in the Gospel. Nearby stands another Evangelist - see once again
that the volume he holds is securely bound. And between the two,
clad in a luminous white robe, stands a beautiful youth representing
the Evangelist St John, whose Gospel opens with the declaration
concerning the Word of God, the Logos, the light that enlighteneth
everyone born into this world, be he or she Christian or not - that
is to say, we are invited to see that the search for traces of the
truth among the pagans is not impious. John carries no volume
- his Gospel ends with a denial that any accumulation of books
could contain what can be said of Christ, the Word made flesh.
But John's position in the picture displays the power of the Gospel.
In the seventh book of his Confessions, Augustine had written that
he had found in 'Platonic' books some things John wrote about the
Word, but not that the Word was made flesh (VIl.9; 32 PL 740-1).
Here, John stands directly beneath the line of the nearest arch, just
as Plato's upraised hand lies along the line of the most distant.
We are invited to see that it is in . the Gospel that the strivings
of Platonism, its tensions with Aristotle's teaching, the content of
the Ancient Theology, and Moslem and Jewish speculation, affected
by both Plato and Aristotle, all find solution and satisfaction. The
circular movement of the picture is complete. 17
The design is indeed noble, and so could seem the hope expressed
in it. 18 But such a reading of Plato and the Ancient Theology
raised difficulties - theological, philosophical and moral. Each kind
affected what was made of Socrates.
The theological difficulties were partly a matter of the lack of fit
between the Christian doctrine of the Trinity and what could be
found in Plato or the other authors. Thus, Plato himself holds a
copy of the Timaeus, and that dialogue does contain phrases and
statements which could be taken as pointing to Christian belief. But
the pointing was equivocal, in that the second and third members of
the 'triad' were unduly subordinated to the first. And unease went
deeper - did not the quest for seeking Christian belief outside the
Scriptures compromise their uniqueness, and blur the line between
164
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
nature and grace? Some of Ficino's expressions-his version of Plato
included a Preface and Introductions - would have given colour .to
the charge . His description, given in a letter, of Plato as 'Moses
speaking Greek' could at least claim a long pedigree; it seems to have
started with the Neo-Platonist Numenius and was cited by Clement
of Alexandria, about AD 200 (Stromat. I.22; 8 PG 395). But in the
same letter Ficino went further, and in a way that would have grated
on some ears. Exhorting his friend to the study of Plato, he promises
him mysteries too great for expression in a letter, and thinks they
will make him exclaim 'It is good for us to be here; let us make
three thousand tabernacles.' When Ficino printed his letters in 1495,
unfriendly readers of this one would have recalled that St Peter used
a similar phrase on witnessing the Transfiguration of Christ, but
was content to suggest building only three of them . Another letter
would have grated still more. The Latin version of .Plato allowed all
who wished to encounter the vivid pictures of Socrates to be had
there. Ficino - in a way oddly similar to the more extravagant mode
of medieval Bible -interpretation - rummages among the stories to
produce analogies between Socrates and the story of Jesus. They
include appearances before an unjust judge; prophecies fulfilled
after death; an exhortation to virtue delivered in the evening, and
going with a thanksgiving and drinking of a cup; the mention of a
cock; and a price of thirty pieces - where Ficino sets the fee paid
to Judas beside the thirty minae proposed by Socrates at his trial as
an alternative penalty (Apology 38b ). Ficino admits - disarmingly -
that the analogies have aroused opposition.
The theological difficulties, we might say, bring us back to what
I have called the theme of the Diversity of Goods. The diversity is
proving as hard as ever to admit - how hard, interpretations like
Ficino's bear witness. What Plato says must in some way be of a
piece with a revelation already admitted - if it is not, then it must
be condemned as a distortion of it. And if curious analogies can
bring Socrates nearer to the figure of Jesus, then they can be drawn.
But the philosophical difficulties went further than the theological .
They lay in the fact that, while some of the dialogues might be
taken to off er analogies to Christian belief, others seemed quite
unconnected with such topics. The answer was thought to lie in
a way of reading Plato that went back to earlier Neo-Platonists:
Plato's text needed 'deciphering', for its surface content concealed
high mysteries. 19 A famous example was his dialogue Parmenides:
the logical cut -and-thrust of it had been taken by the Neo-Platonist
165
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Proclus (t 485) as enshrining teachings to do with a mystery that
lay beyond Being itself. Ficino followed Proclus here, despite
the opposition of his nephew Pico della Mirandola (t 1495 ),
who collaborated in the translation of Plotinus. Pico's plea for a
straightforward reading of the Parmenides went unheeded, such was
the authority of Ficino and of the tradition with which he aligned
himself. In short, the philosophical difficulties in a 'christianising'
reading of Plato demanded that Socrates be seen as propounding
in a concealed way high mysteries, mysteries to do with the soul's
ascent to God, and with the divine nature. This is an obviously
awkward reading of Socrates, and the awkwardness can best be
put in terms already used in the preceding section: the hands of
Socrates are indicating argument, the hand of Plato is not, and the
proposed reading amounts to ignoring the cliff erence. In fact, now
that we have seen more of the structure of The School of Athens,
we can add that Socrates does not fit at all well into the 'circular
movement' I have invited readers to discern in Raphael's fresco: he
has his back to Plato as he argues away, and is paying no attention
whatsoever to the Evangelists below him.
The moral difficulties were greatest of all, for they called into
question this whole project of reconciliation and cumulation in
the Gospel. There was an uncomfortable element, both in the
Ancient Theologians and in the Platonic tradition, . of magical
practices involving the cult of beings intermediate between God
and man - daemones, in fact. The discomfort was all . the greater
because Augustine was known to have denounced in the City of
God writings such as those of Hermes Trismegistus (De civitate Dei
VIIl.23£.; 10 PL 247-9); to have spoken slightingly of a Chaldean
(that would be Zoroaster) who tried to purify his soul by practising
the cult (X.10; 10 PL 288); and to have extended his denunciation
to the Platonic tradition itself. For he had, while commending the
great Neo-Platonist Plotinus, denounced the magical and idolatrous
practices recommended by his disciple Porphyry (X.2,9£.; 10 PL
279-80, 286£.). Now that the texts themselves of these writers were
available, and not just Augustine's reports, some defensive moves
were possible. But the texts called for a measure of violence if they
were to be assets rather than liabilities. The daimonion of Socrates
could be seen as a· divine admonition, but it could also be seen
as an embarrassment. The whole Platonic setting of Socrates, in
fact, was called into question, not just by the imperfections in
Plato's supposed adumbrations of the Trinity, but by texts like
166
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
the discourse of Diotima in the Symposium, with its account of
daem ·ones as intermediaries (202d), or the part of the Epinomis
that talks of intermediate beings and of their cult of heaven
(986 ). Christian belief, so some thought during the Renaissance,
had received a powerful confirmation from these 'neutral' sources.
For others, the material was a mixed blessing. I go on to note, very -
briefly, something of the two attitudes.
The brutality of the over-simplifications I am having to practise
must not make us forget the complexity of the attitudes. Ficino's we
have already sampled, but other texts of his are more cautious; even
in the Introduction to his translation of Plotinus (where he speaks of
him as theios, 'divine', and as very near Christianity), he is careful to
prescind from the question of his salvation. Conversely, the rigidly
Thomistic Antoninus, the Dominican Bishop of Florence who made
Ficino read a work of Aquinas before beginning his translations, is
quite prepared to discern the doctrine of the Trinity in Hermes
Trismegistus. 20 The complexities seem embodied in the hopes of the
French Neo-Platoriist, Symphorien Champier (t 1539). He wanted
to exhibit substantial identity between Plato and Aristotle; he was
anxious to dissociate Plato from Hermes Trismegistus; _ he gave to
one of his books a mouthful of a title, claiming that the work
offered 'compelling vindications of Christianity, drawn from poetic
and philosophical writings among the pagans'. Also in the sixteenth
century, it had been possible for the Vatican Librarian, Agostino
Steuco, to hold that there was but one wisdom, knowable to all, be
they Christian or pagan, a 'perennial philosophy' handed down over
the centuries. 21 Now, things were changing, as the sixteenth century
brought with it the Reformation and the Council of Trent. The
medieval employment of Aristotle had been a target for some attacks
of the Reformers ~ it was natural that the scholastic heritage should
be defended by their opponents, and Trent itself used terminology
found in Aquinas, in its decree on the Eucharist. Back in the
thirteenth century, Aquinas had given a welcome to the use of
Aristotelian concepts in theology that some of his contemporaries
had not. Now, in the harsher climate of the Counter-Reformation,
the favour he had shown Aristotle was made into a model for
general imitation. Indeed, it became a credit to Aristotle that his
speculations did not include the approaches to Christian belief seen
in Plato and the Ancient Theologians. His defects were simply
negative and could - it was believed - be simply remedied. He
offered no deceptive analogies, but a copious set of terms and
167
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
distinctions that could be put to use anywhere. Dante's placing
of Aristotle · turned out to be a vote on the winning side.
It is strange, then, that an effort in the other direction was made as
late as the pontificate of Gregory XIV (1590-1). Francesco Patrizi (t
1597) addressed to him a plea for a sound philosophy in the Church
to combat the disorders of Christendom, and submitted that the
philosophy should be Plato's, as interpreted in the Neo-Platonist
tradition. 22 To favour this philosophy would be to return to the
mind of the Fathers, who never mentioned Aristotle without
denouncing him. The shift in allegiance was due, he goes on, to
pressure exercised four hundred years ago by Aristotelians upon
'scholastic theologians' - scholastici theologi; see how the medieval
synthesis has receded into the past. Patrizi's effort was, of course,
made in vain; but that it should have been made at all is of interest.
Of interest too is that, one year after the appearance of Patrizi's
book, another and very different work should have been published
on philosophy in the Chutch. The author was Giambattista Crispo,
and the title shows the drift of what he wrote: On the Need
for Caution in Reading Pagan Philosophers. 23 Crispo's work is
not concerned with vindicating Aristotle against attractive but
ambiguous resemblances in Plato to orthodox belief. Rather, it
contends that all ancient philosophical thought, whether it be from
Socrates, Plato or Aristotle, is a mixed blessing to the Church. We
have come a long way from the confidence of the medieval synthesis
of Christian theology with philosophical concepts of other origins.
What lay ahead, the next section will try to show.
SOCRATES INTO THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
We associate the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries with exploration
and disagreement. A recovery of Classical texts went with the
Renaissance, and a wish to recover the original texts of Scripture was
among the causes of the Reformation and its divisions. The voyages
to new lands in the sixteenth century find analogies in the advances
made in the sciences during the seventeenth. And it was this century
which saw the beginnings of a more coherent understanding of the
past, whether in the growing exactness of scholarship exercised
upon the materials recovered in the Renaissance, or in the first
attempts to apply critical techniques in biblical settings. 24 I want
to trace the effect of this increased understanding in what was made
of the figure of Socrates, but it is proper to notice first a shift of
168
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
opinion concerning two matters mentioned in the previous section.
The first is that, with the growth of critical methods, belief began
to die out in the authenticity of the 'Ancient Theology' - those
texts which had once seemed of such prophetic significance. The
second is that a demand was made for an exegesis of Plato that
would respect his text for its own structure and content, instead of
taking it as the starting-point for decipherment and allegory. I have
already noticed the resemblance between allegorical interpretations
practised by Neo-Platonists and the styles of exegesis so popular
in the Middle Ages; there is a corresponding resemblance between
changes proposed in reading Plato and the changes in biblical
exegesis associated with the Reformers. 25
The figure of Socrates himself became more 'palpable', now
that more material was available. Not only was Plato available
(in Ficino's version of 1482, and in the original from 1513), but
the accounts of Socrates by Plato's contemporary Xenophon, in
his Memorabilia, and the gossipy life by 'Diogenes Laertius' ( c. AD
220) were also put into Latin.26 Diogenes had preserved the story
that Socrates had been twice married, with the alternative version
that he had the two wives simultaneously. Given this - and given
the tales told of his wife Xanthippe in the sources - it was natural
that his domestic life should provide themes for composition. A
comic opera in 1680 portrayed him as a bigamist; the popular
novelist Mme de Villedieu devoted to him iri 1671 one instalment
of her Les Amours des grands hommes, a work that soon received
an English translation. 27 A third portrayal of the sage as a bigamist
is by the Dutch painter Caesar van Everdingen (t 1678) - the
picture (at Strasburg) is not only pleasing, but embodies with
some wit several anecdotes to be found in Diogenes Laertius. The
two wives, apparently identical twins, are exuberantly Flemish and
symmetrically displayed. One (this will be Xanthippe) is pouring
water on to Socrates, while the other looks on approvingly. But the
philosopher remains unmoved, partly because he seems half-drunk,
and partly because he is gazing at a beautiful youth, whose identity
can be discerned if we look carefully at the dog that accompanies
him - the collar has inscribed upon it 'Alcibiades'.
Something of a very different order is to be found in Erasmus (t
1536), who cast into the form of a letter to his friend John Colet
(t 1519) a comparison between the figures of Socrates in his cell
and Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane. Erasmus epitomised for
many the project of humanism that would do justice both to pagan
169
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Antiquity and to the Christian revelation. His comparison between
Socrates and · Christ is of a piece with such a humanism, and with
a belief that the past needs examining on its own terms, and by
whatever critical means we have. It is a pity that the prolixity of
the essay should obscure the range and sensitivity of the analysis
offered in it. The general drift of what Erasmus writes is that
Christ's beginning to grow sorrowful and to be sad, in contrast
with the calm exhibited by Socrates, has not of itself any moral
significance, but is a matter of difference between two temperaments
(Erasmus 1704). The implications of this, and of what else Erasmus
wrote in the essay, will occupy us later; they go far beyond what
anyone else was to grasp at the time.
But that time is associated, not only with progress in physical
and historical knowledge, but with sanguinary disputes in religion
and with outbreaks of witch-burning. It was natural therefore that
the daimonion or tutelary sign of Socrates should prove an embarrassment.
Some sought to reduce it to manageable proportions.
In his Essais (1580-8), Montaigne professes his antipathy to the
demonneries and seeks at one point to interpret the daimonion as
no more than exercises by Socrates of a sub-rational but valuable
sagacity. Predictably he says he has found and used a similar gift
in himself - indeed, we shall see that he professes to find in
Socrates something like his own professions of ignorance and
scepticism. 28 But arguments about the nature of the mysterious
sign persisted throughout this period, as we can see if we examine
two doctoral theses of the later seventeenth century. In one (Gerold
1658), defended at Strasburg, the candidate praises the merits of
Socrates, and even has Aristophanes' anti-Socratic comedy· The
Clouds subsidised by the philosopher's enemies. But he also claims
that there is a whiff of the daimonion in the proposal (Republic
V.457c) for a community of wives. The conclusion he reaches is
that nothing more was present than a native shrewdness which had
been cultivated philosophically. A more expansive judgement was
passed in another thesis (Sjliestrom 1686), defended at Stockholm.
The candidate admits that there have been disagreements over the
daimonion, submits that there are both good and evil tutelary spirits,
concedes that in some cases we have no more than exercises of good
sense by Socrates, but holds that in other cases we have to do with
a genuine inspiration from God.29
This points to the fact that the greater knowledge possessed of
Socrates, together with a greater awareness of the complexity and
170
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
distinctiveness of the past, was sharpening the question concerning
what was to be said of his eternal salvation - indeed, the life and
death of the sage seemed to embody a challenge to the inherited
opinions about paganism that we have already ·met. Religious
controversies in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries laid stress
upon the need for divine grace through Christ, and older attitudes
were still maintained. But they were sometimes maintained in a
way that went with other characteristics of seven~eenth-c ·entury
thought, and so provided a contrast with earlier expressions .. F~r
a medieval writer like Aquinas, virtuous pagans were not excluded
from heaven because they lacked virtues, but because their virtuous
conduct was not ordered by divine grace towards the ultimate end
to which that grace calls us. But for Malebranche, who gave in 1674
a classic account of the philosophy of Descartes, the exclusion had
a different explanation. Without the habit of the love of God -
bestowed by his grace and the sacraments - we persist in self-love;
so Socrates, even in the act by which he heroically accepts death, still
retains self-love as an inward habit and cannot be saved. Notice here
how Malebranche's account, by exchanging talk of final causality
for talk of inward habit, illustrates the ultimately sceptical dualism
of the philosophical tradition to which he belonged: a gulf is
fixed between observable actions and the content of the soul.
Malebranche is associated with what is called 'Occasionalism' -
the theory that what seems like causality is really only an occasion
for God to exercise his almighty power. Occasionalism takes on
theological consequ .ences when faced with the challenge of Socrates'
behaviour and death: his actions are evacuated of what seems their
natu -ral content; he was really held by self-love all the time. 30
But newer verdicts also began to be heard. A work published in
1642 by La Mothe le Vayer (t 1672) opened heaven to virtuous
pagans by invoking the justice of God that bestows recompense. It
was indeed condemned by the Sorbonne; but for all that, the author
was later appointed, and by the pious Queen-Mother, tutor to the
Duke of Orleans and then tutor to the Duke's brother, the boy-king
Louis XIV. Indeed, according to one report, the condemnation itself
was engineered by the author himself in order to boost the book's ·
flagging sales.31 There were other manifestations of the wish to open
salvation to virtuo1:1s pagans, and they too can be seen as so many
responses to the challenge made by the figure of Socrates. 32 But I
now turn to another topic: Socrates' attitude to investigations into
the physical world. It will lead us to see something more of the
171
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
change then occurring, and in terms of two judgements passed on
Socrates.
The two judgements are those of Montaigne (t 1592) in his Essais
(1580£.) and of Bayle (t 1706) in his Dictionnaire (1697). A century
and more separates the two, both of whom were acquainted with the
ancient sources for what Socrates thought of physical investigations
~ Xenophon in his Memorabilia, Plato in the Phaedo. Both of them
are associated with scepticism. But the settings and force of their
scepticisms are very different, and the difference exhibits the change
I have in mind.
According to the Memorabilia, Socrates recommended that astronomical
studies should be limited to what was of practical value,
while strongly dissuading pupils from further investigation, offering
the philosopher Anaxagoras as an example of the madness which
can go with attempts to scrutinise the devices of the gods, matters
which they have not wished to make manifest (IV.7.4-7). Montaigne
approves, and uses terms that recall some opinions held about
Socrates among the Fathers. For Montaigne, it is not for us to
pass judgement on 'the heaven' - so I translate his le ciel, which has
the same ambiguity. Nor is this the only resemblance to patristic
thought in the Essais, for he excludes pagans from salvation with
a :firmness that would have delighted Augustine himself: Socrates
and Cato are virtuous in vain because they lack grace. For all
that, the resemblances turn out not to be deep, while what does
. lie deep brings out the distinctiveness of Montaigne's scepticism.
For him, ignorance and unconcern for physical investigations are
'a soft pillow', and we should rather strive to know ourselves -
a topic which the whole drift of the Essays presents as endless,
endlessly entertaining, and conducive to a general suspension of
judgement. The sceptical turn is also given to what he writes of
the lack of grace in Socrates and Cato, for he draws an analogy
between their position and the position of arguments in favour of
Christianity. Just as Socrates is virtuous in vain because he lacks
grace, · so arguments for Christianity need grace if they are to be
effective; ,without grace they lack solidarity and firmness. So what
looked like a call to reflection and an insistence on the salvific
power of grace turns out to be an invitation to muse upon one's
own oddities and to doubt all conclusions drawn from arguments,
including arguments in favour of religion. Whatever may be thought
of Montaigne's position, his commendation of Socrates here is part
of a scepticism that is essentially generic. What we shall now find in
172
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
Bayle is also sceptical, but the scepticism has become specific. The
change will show itself in what Bayle writes about Socrates, and it
is a symptom of the many changes that had occurred in the century
separating the two judgements. 33
Between Montaigne and Bayle lie the cessation of wars of religion,
and a growing sense of the futility of the arguments used in religious
controversy; progress in mathematical and physical science, and the
promise of more to come; the growth of greater freedom in printing;
the beginnings of historical criticism; and its application to the
mixed inheritance of beliefs and legends, sacred and profane, from
earlier days. Over those years, Montaigne's general disregard for
questions to do with the physical world had in effect been answered
by the achievements of those who had actually put such questions
and tried to answer them. His analyses of the human spirit remained
and remain classic, but it was no longer possible to take seriously
a scepticism bound up with so uncritical an accumulation of tall
stories from ancient authors like Pliny the Elder. Bayle, in other
words, was writing at a time when critical and sceptical views had
to be more than a recital of quaint anecdotes and a general dismissal
of interest in the physical world: the power of investigation into
that world had become manifest, and the need for discrimination
and scrutiny in our attitude to inherited beliefs had become just as
plain. His contemporary Van Dale (t 1708) had impugned the very
existence of genuine oracles among the ancients, and Bayle himself
exhibits a critical detachment towards the claims made earlier for
them (we have come a long way from the Neo-Platonism of the
Renaissance!). It is in this spirit that he examines the opinion ascribed
to Socrates in Plato's Phaedo (97c). Once again, Socrates is referring
to Anaxagoras. He narrates the disappointment he felt as a young
man on reading the treatise published by him. He had heard that
it gave a place to nous or mind in the ordering of the visible world;
he hoped therefore to find in it an explanation of the purpose of all
things in that world; but he found that the place given to nous was
no more than preliminary, because the treatise itself was couched
in mechanical terms. Bayle will have none of this complaint.
Anaxagoras was under no obligation to offer explanations in terms
of final causality. Indeed, the explanations he did off er were all the
better for not appealing to the ordering function of nous, for that
would be no better than the medieval scholastics' invocation of
God when unable to off er any other reason. Final causality can be
legitimately sought, but to seek it for the visible world as a whole is
173
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
to go beyond what human intelligence can achieve. 34 Bayle's attitude
to Socrates is not only different from Montaigne's; he is able to
adopt it because he writes in the setting of what had been achieved
in the interval by a mechanical and mathematical investigation of the
world. Investigations of this sort were to be the paradigm of success
for the century . that was to follow.
SOCRATES IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
In the Spectator for 9 July 1711, we are shown Sir Roger de Coverley
at Sunday worship, surrounded by his tenantry. The motto prefixed
by Addison to this urbane essay is taken from 'Pythagoras' - that
is, from the Carmina aurea once erroneously ascribed to him. We
have here what must be one of the last appeals made in England to
the 'Ancient Theology'; but we also have what can serve as a text
for much that was to follow. The motto commands the reader to
'honour first the immortal gods as is established by the law', and
the scene in Sir Roger's parish church fallows, as one way of doing
so. One way. That there will be others is taken for granted in many
of Addison's contributions, and he admits in an essay of the same
year . that many of his readers are 'unreasonably disposed to give a
fairer reading to a Pagan Philosopher than to a -Christian writer'
(3 November 1711). The general pattern here will be familiar to ·
readers. The eighteenth century was witnessing, not only changes
in political and social structures, but the successful application and
development of the mathematical and physical techniques which had
been devised in the century before. The clarity and decidability of
topics like these set them apart from the interminable brawlings
about religion by which the preceding century had been disfigured.
The moral was not hard to draw. A worship of the 'immortal
gods' was proper and should be directed by us to the Author of
all things. But th.at direction was dictated by reason; theological
disputes and religious fanaticism were dictated by superstition
and fostered by priests. Socrates, with his calm resignation and
con£ ession of ignorance in the face of death, was taken . as a pattern
for what rational religion - 'Deism', whether or not the name was
acknowledged - ought to be.35 A rational religion was attractive
because it seemed of a piece with so much else that was rational.
Partial the picture may have been, but it was undoubtedly
popular. Even some who defended Christian belief accepted it.
One of them, in a work published in the 1730s, describes Socrates
174
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
as 'The best Deist on record, excepting Job'. Socrates shows himself
open to further instruction, and exhibits belief in future rewards
and punishments; as such, he can be counted as having implicit
faith in Christ. It is 'the modern Deist' who insolently rejects
that faith (Smith 1740: 89).36 The real trouble surely lay not so
much in insolent rejection as in a presentation of religious belief
that made its · specifically biblical elements into an appendage - an
appendage to be spoken of with respect but kept strictly within
bounds. The story of Socrates could be narrated in a way that
embodied such a presentation, and the very popular biography of
him by Cooper is a classic example (it appeared in 1749, and by
1771 had reached its fourth edition): Socrates protested against the
Athenian gods because 'False Religion is always a Bane to Morality';
his fate shows how such religion can inflame and blind the eyes of
the understanding. Similar sentiments are found in France, where
Voltaire put the last hours of Socrates into a play with a similar
lesson, in 1759. Anytus (his accuser) is now a priest, annoyed at
those who, like Socrates, do not pay for sacrifices but worship
God by living virtuously - for good measure, Anytus is given a
toady called 'Nonoti', after Nonotte, one of Voltaire's pet hates. 37
Perhaps the most extreme example of this treatment of religion is the
deistic liturgy published by John Toland in 1720. Readers are invited
to follow reason rather than custom, to leave the mob and join in
a Symposium or 'Socratic Sodality'. There are invocations ('may
Philosophy flourish'), a Collect (for freedom from superstition)
and a Litany (where Socrates' name leads all the rest). Toland, be it
said, came from Ulster.
Even by polemical standards there was more to be said than all
this, and we shall see in due course how authors said it. But first we
must notice the general principles of historical method discernible
in what was being written about Socrates, for his figure serves yet
again to indicate what changes of thought were occurring. A thesis
presented in 1735 at the University of Leipzig on the character of
Socrates makes the important admission that we must not judge
one age by the standards of another (Ibbeken 1735). Several writers
stress the need for critical discernment among the texts we do
possess, if we are to reach Socrates himself. One was Brucker,
whose History of Philosophy (1714£.) is the first of its kind in our
sense; another is Mosheim, who, in 1733, translated into Latin the
True Intellectual System of the Universe by Ralph Cudworth, a
seventeenth-century Neo-Platonist at Cambridge. Brucker's History
175
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
and Mosheim's Notes to Cudworth alike insist on distinguishing
Plato and Socrates from later developments. Still further distinctions
were demanded by Stapfer in 1786, who points to the difficulty of
extracting what is genuinely Socratic from texts like those of Plato
and Xenophon: the 'Socratic problem' has arrived.
But still more had arrived - the growth of awareness as to what
was involved in trying to understand the past. Mauvillon (t 1794; a
friend of Mirabeau) published in 1777 an anonymous essay on the
daimonion of Socrates. He sets the accounts of it beside the accounts
of miracles in the Gospels, and claims that, since the religions of
Socrates and Jesus contradict one another, both accounts .cannot
be true. He concludes that accepting the truth of a religion on
the grounds of the truth of its miracles is something incomplete
- it needs complementing by accepting the truth of the miracles on
the grounds of the truth of the religion. For all the crudity of the
argument, we can surely see it as an anticipation of what the next
century was to call 'the hermeneutical circle'. And indeed another
author anticipates the whole hermeneutical enterprise: this is the
Abbe Garnier (t 1805) in an essay of 1761 (reprinted in Montuori
1981a). Garnier acknowledges the heterogeneity of what is found
in Plato's text, and acknowledges also the simplicity of the method
of discernment proposed by Brucker - that we should accept as
authentically Socratic only what is common to both Plato and
Xenophon. But he goes on to put questions about conservation and
alteration that are strikingly modern, however we judge his answers.
Conservation in philosophy is not the same as conservation in a
legal system, where an order of magistrates interprets. Philosophy is
concerned with conviction, and what matters for conservation there
is that the true principles of a master should not be betrayed; the
force and joy in what we read helps to serve as a measure of what has
been conserved. Xenophon's accounts of Socrates may give us the
principles of morality, but it is in Plato alone that he lives, breathes
and inspires us.
The attempt to estimate what had been conserved meant that,
although the matter of Socrates' salvation was still raised, attention
was given less to questions of nature and grace, and more to a study
of the limitations of Socrates as an individual. We find then that
the homosexual imagery found in Plato's dialogues was sufficiently
embarrassing for the obvious inference to be dismissed without
comment in the Encyclopedie (vol. XV, 1765; s.v. 'Socratique').
The Gentleman's Magazine for December 1786 also dismisses the
176
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
charge of pederasty, but goes on to remind its English readers that
in a country of 'more genial climate', 'the affections are stronger, and
will express themselves in warmer terms than such as are usual with
us of Northern Latitude'. But, a good deal earlier in the century,
more thorough examinations had been made of Socrates' character
and behaviour, sources had been examined, and verdicts reached.
The first I have found is Mentz and Sommer 1716, in which the two
joint authors claim that Socrates was deficient both as a husband and
a father. Xanthippe was right to warn him of Alcibiades; he should
have corrected her shrewishness; he did not give her the love and
faithfulness that was her due; his refusal to accept fees meant that
his household was poor; those who would admit him to heaven
should recall the condemnation by St Paul (I Tim. v.8) of 'any who
provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house'.
In another item - it is a disputation from 1735 - the very fortitude
of Socrates in the face of death is unfavourably judged by one of
the parties (Ibbeken 1735). After noticing that Socrates has been
the object of both calumny and adulation, the proponent follows
Seneca in distinguishing bravery (fortitudo) from bravado (audacia).
Socrates should have accepted exile as a penalty; or sought help in
the making of a proper defence; or taken the opportunity offered to __
escape. He ended by laying violent hands on himself; he provoked
his accusers and judges alike to anger; he neglected his duties to his
wife and children, and on the evening of his death behaved coldly
to Xanthippe when she was weeping. The conclusion is that his
bravery was at best imperfect, while the moral for us is that human
nature is weak and needs grace and revelation.
All those works considered Socrates in his personal life, but
others examined his conduct as a citizen. Montuori 198 la has
reprinted two items from the eighteenth century which de£ ended
his condemnation. Both attacks appeared about the same time, and
were independent of each other. The first was by Freret in 1736, the
second by Dresig or Dresigius in 1738. As we shall see, the general
drift of both was the same. 38
For Freret (t 1749), the charge of impiety was only a mask for
a political accusation. The democratic party in Athens, restored in
403 BC after the down£ all of the oligarchical Thirty, feared that
Sparta might support an anti-democratic revolution. Socrates was
known to ridicule popular government; Critias, the most extreme
among the Thirty, had been a pupil of his; another pupil had been
Alcibiades, the brilliant but unscrupulous soldier who had changed
177
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
sides during the Peloponnesian War. A direct denunciation on
political grounds was impossible, as an amnesty had been declared.
But knowledge of the real reason persisted at Athens, and fifty-four
years after Socrates' condemnation, the orator Aeschines could
remind an Athenian jury that 'Socrates the sophist' had been
executed because he was responsible for the education of Critias.
So much for Freret; Dresigius treats the charge of impiety in the
same fashion, and adds that Socrates' conduct under the rule of the
Thirty was not for the most part one of resistance - if it had been,
they would have killed him. For Dresigius, the accusation of impiety
would be sure to win popular support; and it could be supported
by what Socrates had said - and said to the young - about their
inherited myths, in his attacks upon poetry.
Both Freret and Dresigius exhibit a good acquaintance with the
ancient sources. To evaluate their charges lies beyond the scope of
what I write here, but it may be of interest to notice that different
'political' verdicts were reached by others. For Rousseau, in his
contribution on political economy to the Encyclopedie, Socrates is
to be set below Cato of Utica precisely because his teachings were
not political, but essentially private and philosophical, while Cato
spent himself in defending the state, freedom and the law (vol. V,
1755; s.v. 'Economie politique'). By 1795, the French Revolution
had led to war and to the invasion of Holland by the French.
Luzac, the out-going Rector of the University of Leyden, offered
Socrates in that year to his fellow citizens as an example of one
who, instead of taking refuge in exile, stayed on amid disorder to
offer advice to his fellow citizens, and who, while obeying the laws,
would not commit injustice at a tyrant's behest. Dresigius and Luzac
embody the different answers put to the dilemma: to stay or not to
stay? It is a dilemma we shall meet again, when we come to what
our own century has made of Socrates.
Some eighteenth-century writers were, it is true, content to
repeat older positions without modification. One was Voltaire's
bete-noire Nonotte, in his Dictionnaire antiphilosophique (1771; s.v.
'Payens'). Another combined the rigidity of the past with a delightful
modernisation of the imagery he employed. We saw earlier how
Malebranche the Cartesian wrote of the self-love that lies in the heart
untouched by grace. Bernholdus in 1711 uses a mechanical analogy
for the same purposes - the automata at Nuremberg perform all
manner of activities, but without any intrinsic planning or intention
of their own; a similar defect lies in Socrates and other pagans. 39
178
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
I now turn to two themes that were characteristic of the later
eighteenth century: one is the debate over Marmontel' s novel
Belisaire, and the other is the making of comparisons between
Socrates and Jesus.
It is not easy for us to understand the popularity of Belisaire
(1767) or the scandal it caused among some of the pious. It is
a rather dull 'historical' novel about Belisarius (t 565), the great
general of the Eastern Roman Empire. But it went through edition
after edition; the English translation was still being reprinted in the
1830s; it was translated into a variety of languages - Catherine the
Great and her ladies-in-waiting even put it into Russian. 40 Perhaps
its popularity was due to the offending fifteenth chapter, where the
old general, now blind (the novel follows this untrustworthy variant
of the story), expresses a hope that he will meet the great pagans in
heaven, stresses the loving kindness of God, and reminds those who
would use the sword in the cause of religion that their opponents
have swords as well. The book appeared with the approval of the
Censor . (a position occupied at the time by the soft pornographer
Crebillon fils ), but aroused the wrath of the theologians of the
Sorbonne, who protested alike at its opening heaven to pagans and
at its denying to the Church the power of the sword to enforce
decisions. But things had changed since the days of La Mothe le
Vay er, and the whole affair blew over when Louis XV ( a monarch
one does not readily associate with theology) forbade the Sorbonne
to persist in its course. 41
The comparison bet\:veen Socrates and Jesus is yet another example
of how cliff erences in attitudes to the philosopher can represent
changes in how people think and feel. I contrast two attitudes:
that of Diderot and other contributors to the Encyclopedie, and
that of Rousseau. As we might expect, Diderot shows himself
as very much a man of the eighteenth century, while Rousseau
points towards what still lay in the future. For Diderot in his
article 'Socratique' (vol. XV, 1765; 261£.) Socrates is a pattern of
virtue and a martyr for belief in the unity of God; his benevolence
resembles that of the Supreme Being; a prayer is addressed to him,
con£ essing unworthiness and asking for assistance; and at his death
his disciples 'divided his garment among them'. Another echo of
the Gospel - this time concerning the burial of Jesus - is found in
the article by J aucourt, 'Ornemens funebres': Apollodorus brings
a precious robe to Socrates in the condemned cell, for him to wear
in death - the action of Joseph of Arimathea is clearly suggested to
179
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
the reader (vol. XI, 1765; 657).42 With Rousseau, things are very
different. The comparison is made in the discourse on religion put
into the mouth of the 'Vicaire Savoyard', in the fourth book of
Emile (1762), Rousseau's work on education. Here, as elsewhere
in the discourse, what matters is the appeal to the heart made by
the pattern of a life. Rousseau aligns himself with those Fathers of
the Church who saw a prophecy of Christ in what Plato writes in
the Republic of the sufferings of the just man; the death of Socrates
is calm, and he dies surrounded by friends; Jesus dies in torments,
mocked and cursed by the people. In one we have the life and death
of a sage, but in the other the life and death of a God. 43
Rousseau's comparison between the two deaths leads us to
consider something that I have so far kept in the background -
what the eighteenth century made of elements in Socrates that did
not fit well into its pattern of rationality. To consider these will bring
us to the writer who - in this matter as in so much else - wrote in
terms that were to be taken up in the century that was to follow. The
writer is Johann Georg Hamann (t 1788), a fellow citizen of Kant
in Konigsberg; but first for the things about Socrates that made the
eighteenth century uneasy - as indeed Hamann himself did.
One, obviously, was the daimonion. The occasional voice was
raised against those who reduced it to no more than native sagacity
- Herbst 1720 makes this protest - but reduction can be found in
Cooper, as in many others. Voltaire was just as uneasy - it is no
accident that, for all his admiration of Socrates, he also mentions
him in his Dictionnaire philosophique s.v. 'Charlatan'. There he
asks whether there was not something of the sort in the daimonion,
and suggests that Socrates would have fared better if he had lived
a century earlier. Another embarrassment was the hope expressed
of immortality and the sacrifice to Aesculapius. Voltaire announces
in a foot-note to his play that he has simply cut out much from
the dialogue; Mosheim suggests that the request for the sacrifice
was due to the clouding of Socrates' mind by the hemlock; for
Cooper, Socrates spoke in religious terms before his death by way
of condescension to the idolatrous ignorance of the Athenians. A
third awkwardness was Socrates' talk of knowing nothing, and it
was ascribed to irony - by one, in the course of an attack on
Bayle's scepticism, to 'an elegant and modest exaggeration'. Once
more, Rousseau shows himself to be out of . tune with what his
contemporaries took for granted - as early as 1749, in his discourse
on the Sciences and Arts, he commends the severity of Socrates
180
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
towards poets and artists, and sees him as despising our 'vaines
sciences' and our piling up of books. But it is in Hamann that we
find the greatest dissent from what has gone before, and another
reading of Socratic ignorance. To Hamann I now turn.
. For Hamann, we must take seriously what Socrates says of his
own ignorance. He is not an eighteenth-century thinker indulging
in irony. But neither is he a Christian. Nor can he be taken as a
rational alternative to Christianity. Rather, he is a forerunner of it.
He is essentially incomplete: his seeking to know himself and his
confession of ignorance represent an urge within him that carries
him beyond the intellect to faith. He is a genius, and so escapes
the rules of his time. He cannot be 'reduced' in the way Cooper
and others seek to reduce him. And Hamann relates what he is
claiming about Socrates to his own view of human existence.
Neither reductive rationalism nor romantic feelings are enough
(he takes Newton and Rousseau as the respective types of these
attitudes) - we must respond to reality with all our being. 44
SOCRATES IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
I begin by seeing what encyclopaedias in our own country had to
say of Socrates. His conduct is commended in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, where it is said that the daimonion is irreducible
to unbiased reason, and the command to make a sacrifice to
Aesculapius probably due to a wish to 'refute a calumny' which
might injure his friends (vol. XIX, 1815, s.v. 'Socrates'); the calumny
is presumably atheism. Socrates is commended also in the article
'Sophists'; the pernicious influence of the sophists on the youth
is said to have been exposed by him. For the Encyclopaedia
M etropolitana, the daimonion is no more than eminence in right
judgement, and Socrates' language about it is ironic. As for the
sacrifice, Mosheim's explanation is adopted - the poison had
begun to work. These harsher judgements may be due to the
clerical editorship of the enterprise; certainly the failure of Socrates
to produce a reform in Greek morals is said to point to our need for
a Saviour (vol. X, 1845).45
It is when we pass to the Penny Cyclopaedia (1833£.) that we
find a treatment of something more than the personal qualities and
circumstances of Socrates. He is commended for his stand in 406
BC after the battle of Arginusae, when he refused to let the generals
be condemned without a trial. But he did not leave Athens when
181
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
the Thirty ruled from 404 to 403 BC, and his sympathies seem to
have been with the moderate oligarchs like Theramenes; his refusal
to obey the Thirty's command to arrest Leon was due to kindness
of heart rather than to political disagreement. Socrates was not
a good citizen, because he could not bring his mind to accept
public opinion, whereas laws in a democracy are made by the
majority (vol. XXII, 1842, s.v. 'Socrates'). 46 It is this matter of
political rectitude that we shall now meet in another source of
the time.
Five years earlier, a notorious work by Forchhammer had developed
this theme of incivisme. Both charges made against Socrates,
it claimed, were justified. In one sense he deserves our praise, for
the gods in whom he refused to believe were not worthy of belief;
others swore as he did the oath of reverence to them, and then
accommodated what they had sworn to their own persuasions, but
Socrates would not. Yet in another sense, he was a bad citizen
(Staatsverbrecher) by refusing belief - he cannot be excused on
the grounds that he would have accepted a higher faith, because
hypotheses of . the sort mean nothing in politics: whatever God
allows to happen is the best. Socrates' personal daimonion was no
substitute for the ancient divinities embodied in springs and other
natural forms; it was to those gods that the state attributed its past
achievements. The other charge - that of corrupting the youth -
was just as well founded. The example of Alcibiades shows as
much, and Critias, the most extreme oligarch, was also a disciple
of Socrates. The Thirty did not molest him, nor did he off er Leon
any positive help. The book caused much indignation: the historian
Bishop Thirlwall wrote against it, and the Bishop's attack received
approval in Grote's History of Greece.47
The year after Forchhammer's book, 1838, Brouwer pointed to
the gap between what was claimed in it and what Socrates actually
did - served as a good soldier, sought justice when assigned public
office, and offered sacrifice. But he then makes a remark which
shows again what we have seen so often - that the figure of Socrates
serves as a measure of change. Brouwer wrote at a time when
inherited religious belief was being questioned (Strauss' Leben ]esu
had appeared in 1835). The Athenians' treatment of the oath they
had taken, he writes, resembles the mental reservations with which
people nowadays quieten their consciences in religious matters.
Why should we impose upon Socrates a burden of literal fulfilment
in a way worthy of the Council of Trent? And religion is also
182
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
involved in what another writer has to say of Socrates' political attit~
des. Twenty years after the publication of Forchhammer's book,
Lasaulx objected to its extreme conclusions, while agreeing that no
speaking against the monarchy would be allowed in Vienna or in
Berlin - obviously the spectre of 1848 had not yet been exorcised
by 1857. But Lasaulx, after making this political observation, turns
to religion. He elaborates parallels between Socrates and Jesus in
a way that recalls the N eo-Platonists (he does in fact cite both
Ficino and Champier). Both had an attraction for those who
met them; both taught and lived the truth; the touch of both
was seen as invigorating (the Platonic analogue is Theages 130d);
both were willing to converse with women of doubtful repute;
the 'heart-burning' of a listener found in the story of the walk to
Emmaus in the Gospels is also found in Plato's Symposium (215e);
both taught that it is better to suffer wrong than to inflict it; and
the friendships with the Beloved Disciple and with Alcibiades form
another parallel. Lasaulx' own essay contained an admission that
he knew the analogies would anger; his prophecy received prompt
fulfilment in the angry Lindenbaur (1859), where at all events ·the
irreducibility of grace to nature is once more stressed. 48 But some
English examples can fill out what was felt about the relationship;
and some of them, in ways that can still call for a response.
The year after Lasaulx' essay, Edward Goulburn addressed the
YMCA on Socrates (Goulburn 1858). He reminds his audience
that Athens was essentially an 'oral' community ('no reading
rooms or Mechanics' Institutes for the lower classes'), and he
lays stress upon the sincerity with which Socrates used his mode
of cross-questioning and believed in an 'oracular voice'. He concedes
that the effect of Socrates' questioning may have been to puzzle
his listeners over right and wrong, but he finds the great lack in
Socrates' character to be a love of sarcasm and a lack of sympathy.
The endurance of Socrates is that of 'self-sufficient resolve' rather
than of loving submission to God; which is what distinguishes his
death from that of Jesus. It is worth recalling that Forchhammer
himself brought yet another charge, and of a piece with this -
that Socrates lacked love. We have already met something of the
sort in Erasmus, in some of the eighteenth-century 'theses', and in
Rousseau's Emile. We might call it the 'Socratic Chill'. We meet it
more than once.
We find it, for example, in Matthew Arnold's distinction between
'Hebraism' and 'Hellenism' - between the ideals of the Bible and
183
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
those of the civilisation we inherit from Athens. When he drew the
distinction (in his Culture and Anarchy), Arnold quoted a saying of
Carlyle, that 'Socrates is terribly at ease in Zion'; and he observed
that Hebraism is preoccupied with the impossibility of being at ease
there. I hope it is not fanciful to fill out Arnold's distinction with yet
another example of how the :figure of Socrates marks change: this
time the example touches a novel with Arnold's own father in it, the
great liberal churchman and headmaster of Rugby. Thomas Hughes'
Tom Brown's Schoo/days (1857) has its hero pull himself together
under the good influences of Arthur, a companion assigned him by
Dr Arnold; he works at his Latin and Greek, and ends as captain of
the Eleven. But the book's sequel, Tom Brown at Oxford (1861), is
more sombre. Tom, guilty at his own conduct, turns to the last book
he read at Rugby - Plato's Apology. He finds that Socrates' talk of
th~ daimonion speaks to his condition, but wonders where the voice
is to whom he can submit. And he is then reminded by a sterner
companion that St Paul would have spoken to his condition too,
but with .-~he advantage that we, unlike Socrates, know the source of
the voice, an~ the urgency of the demands it makes. As for Arthur,
we read elsewhere that he is .,;reading Moral -Sciences at Cambridge;
and that Tom writes him ~ letter suggesting that his time could be
better spent. We are not at all at ease in Zion.
Lasaulx, Goulburn and Hughes have this much in common: they
see a resemblance between Socrates and Christianity, but they deny
an identity between them. They can be complemented by two
farcical examples, which respectively deny the resemblance and
assert the identity. The first, Highton (1873), is directed against
the liberal Dean of Westminster, Arthur Stanley (prize-pupil of
Dr Arnold - and, I understand, the original of 'Arthur'). We
read there that Stanley, on the very day he had been appointed
Select Preacher at Oxford, addressed a Working Men's Institute
on Socrates, and spoke of him in terms that set him up as a rival
to 'the heroes and martyrs of Christianity and Protestantism'. In
fact Socrates' death was almost suicide, his morals were debased,
he was frivolously superstitious (the cock sacrificed to Aesculapius),
and he dealt with a familiar spirit. Schools and universities already
offer the filthy pages of the classical poets to their students; is the
pollution to extend to our mechanics' and workmen's institutes? But
if Highton goes one way, a small and anonymous Russian work goes
the other (Anonymous 1886). It imitates the studied simplicity of
the style Tolstoy was using in the 1880s for his religious stories,
184
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
and narrates the story of Socrates accordingly. The sage comes to
accept monotheism and to reject idolatry. He is denounced by the
rich and idolatrous for proclaiming his beliefs, and dies a martyr. An
illustration shows him holding the cup of hemlock like a liturgical
vessel, and his request about Aesculapius has become 'My brethren,
I die; do ye bless God. '49
The daimonion has been mentioned in passing by more than one
nineteenth-century author so far, but there are two more works
concerned with it that deserve a mention. One is Orlov (1897),
which gives a balanced view of the accusations against Socrates,
offers four hypotheses about the daimonion (an 'angel guardian';
the voice of conscience; hallucination; a wish to mystify), and says,
disarmingly, that the reader is not likely to invent an explanation
odder than some suggested already. 50 The other text I have in mind
is by Archbishop (later Cardinal) Manning, and prints a paper read
by him in January 1872 to the Royal Institute, 'The Daemon of
Socrates'. He favours the view that it was an unanalysed act of
judgement. Socrates ascribed to divine guidance what was the
normal activity of his own intellectual and moral state; but a
special providence may well have attended on him. And for good
measure he mentions the Aristotelian phronesis, a power of sight
which can discern with intuitive rapidity what is right or expedient
in practice. 51
Two themes have recurred in the texts we have seen so far. One
is the relationship between Socrates and Athens - we might call it
the Individual and Society. To the other theme I have already given
a name - the Chill of Socrates: it has been associated with what was
said of his relationship to Christianity. The two themes direct us to
three dominant figures of the nineteenth century who are powerful
in the twentieth: Hegel, Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. I have left them
till now so that they can link this section with the next and final part
of my chapter, in which we reach our own time.
Hegel is associated with the thesis that Socrates was justly
condemned. By this time his opinion will not seem as unusual
to us as it is sometimes claimed to be, but it does need to be put
into the setting of Hegel's philosophy. He sees human thought and
society as passing through successive stages, each taking up what
has preceded (sometimes not without violence), and all part of a
progress that cannot be reversed: Renaissance N eo- Platonism is no
more than a mummy for Hegel. We cannot go back to the Athens
that Socrates disturbed, for we have eaten of the fruit of knowledge
185
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
he gave us. We can now appreciate him; the Athenians could not,
and were right to condemn him. Just as Socrates embodies the shift
from physical investigations to reflection on human thought and
action, so he also embodies the shift to an individualistic appraisal
of conduct. Athens up to then had an inherited code of behaviour,
unreflectively practised - what Hegel calls Sittlichkeit. Socrates
taught individuals to examine this code and to question it, and
to find in their own reflective conscience how they should live -
and this Hegel calls Moralitat. Conflict was inevitable and tragic.
The heroism of Socrates does not diminish the intolerable nature
of what he said: his daimonion, in its privacy and absoluteness, is
irreconcilable with the inherited oracles and gods of Athens. No
people (Volk) can allow the tribunal of conscience, for there is no
higher reason (Vernunft) than what the state declares to be right. 52
We can see in all this one source of what Forchhammer wrote,
and we can see all too much of what our own century has taken
up. Nietzsche's estimate of what Socrates did to Athens resembles
Hegel's, but he incorporates it into other claims that he makes.
Here as elsewhere Nietzsche is not always self-consistent, but the
general thrust of some of his contentions is plain enough. Socrates
is the despiser of instinct, the jeering rationalist, the pessimist
who is tired of life. His dialectic embodies the shift from the
instinctive, healthy life of archaic Greece to the harsh daylight
of queries and doubtings that are indeed a sickness; Euripides is
seen by Nietzsche as perf arming a similar office for Greek drama.
Socrates' use of irony shows his lowness of origin; irony needs to
be used with finesse and restraint, if pupils are to receive benefit.
Dialectic for Socrates is almost a revenge by one who is low and
ugly; his requesting a sacrifice to Aesculapius, the god of healing,
shows him as the pessimist who thinks death is a cure for life's
sickness. 53
Kierkegaard had read Hamann when he wrote his dissertation
on irony 'with constant reference to Socrates'. Like Hamann,
Kierkegaard sees Socrates as essentially incomplete and as pointing
to Christianity by his very incompleteness. The irony he practises
in his claims to ignorance serves to destroy the self-assurance of his
listeners, and frees them from the captivity of what they wrongly
take as satisfactory. But the 'nothingness' of Socrates is not as deep
as the 'nothingness' that goes with Christianity. For Socrates, the
sophists were wrong to say that excellence (arete) could be taught;
it had to be extracted from the pupil, ·who had to be taught to
186
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
know himself. For Christianity, salvation does not so come: it is
something from without. Kierkegaard sees what he calls anguish as
leading us away from a rationally ordered view of life where beauty
and availability are what count, and bringing home to us our radical
instability and our need for faith. Tom Brown, we might say, has
passed from Rugby to Oxford. 54
Hegel, Nietzsche and Kierkegaard all wrote at times as if they had
our century in mind rather than their own, and it is a testimony to
the perennial force in the figure of Socrates that each should have
made him an object of study ('I constantly fight with him because
he is so close to me', Nietzsche once claimed). I end this section
by noticing two other sources that can also speak to us in our own .
century.
One is from the biblical scholar F. C. Baur. Edward Zeller
the Platonic scholar was ·his son-in-law, and in 1876 edited his
posthumous · work on Socrates and Christ. Baur, who had used
Hegelian categories on the Bible, uses them here too. Socrates, as
Hegel put it, is the culmination of the individual, of subjectivity.
For him, Man stands at the centre, and Baur claims that it was
for Christianity to pass from self-knowledge to conviction of sin.
But Christianity presupposes Plato, because Plato goes further than
Socrates; he advances from the individual to the state.· Allowing for
all differences, Plato's state is a moral community similar in kind to
the Christian Church. Baur's claim, whether viewed as philosophy
or as religion, may make us uneasy; I set beside it a. claim made
by the Russian thinker Solovyov in 1898, in his book on Plato. 55
Plato's philosophical journey terminates in the state described in the
Laws, and the society described in the Laws is a direct renunciation
of Socrates; it is now with Anytus and Meletus that Plato takes his
stand, the men whose accusation led to the trial and the hemlock
for his old master. Once _more, as we pass into our own century,
Socrates will not leave us alone.
SOCRATES IN OUR OWN TIME
Socrates denounced for an excessive rationalism and for an insufficient
regard for instinct; Socrates condemned as an offender against
the state; Socrates found fault with for seeking within himself a
salvation that must come from without: we have indeed reached our
own century, and I have reached the final section of my chapter. In
it I want first to give a few glimpses - only a few - of how Socrates
187
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
has been regarded in our own part of the Cave, to speak in terms of
Plato's great parable. And then I want to draw together some things
we have seen on our journey, and to draw some morals from them.
So first for the glimpses. Some are no more than ludicrous. Thus
the Great Soviet Encyclopaedia (Russian edition of 193 7) describes
Socrates as sympathising with the oligarchical, slave-owning class.
Well and good; but I did not expect to find that, twenty-three
years later, the treatment of Socrates in a standard Russian history
of philosophy would transcribe quite so much of the article as it
does. 56 But other glimpses are less amusing, have more to teach us,
and deserve a longer treatment.
The waters came flooding in very quickly after 1933 in Germany.
The volume for 1935 of the Rheinisches Muse um, the esteemed
periodical for Classical learning, not only announced the resignation
'for reasons of health' of the editor Friedrich Marx, but announced
it with effect from the end of the preceding volume. What had
happened in the interval seems obvious enough, for Marx was a
Jew - it is something that the notice about him at least set down
his labours and faith in building up the journal after the First World
War. I spoke a moment ago of 'our part of the Cave', so it is
fitting here to see what was made of the image, and about that
time, by two fellow countrymen of Marx. One, D. Roser, using a
style more mystical than intelligible, distinguished in 1936 between
upbringing (Erziehung, · associated with Socrates) and leadership
(Fuhrung, associated with Plato). Present circumstances demand
that a teacher be a leader (Fuhrer) for youth and people; Fuhrung
calls for violence, just as the released prisoner in the Cave is
compelled to turn around to the fire and then forcibly dragged
up to the daylight; it is not through Classical studies that we
shall arrive at what Plato meant, but by an ordering of our
lives according to his spirit, and only thus can Plato be our
Fuhrer (Roser 1936 ). I turn to another use of the Cave, made by
Heidegger in a seminar of 1931-2 (Heidegger 1988). He who, like
the returned prisoner in Plato, would set others free must face the
fact of his own death. Philosophy is powerless against the prevailing
sense of 'obviousness' in the Cave; the· honours bestowed there
include praise and reputation and all the other things that can
captivate and put an end to the philosopher. Nor can he escape
by ironic detachment - that only makes him an accessory to his
own poisoning. Rather, he must accept his incapacity to share in the
prisoners' game of guessing at the shadows; he must fasten on one
188
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
or two and seek to release them by his strenuous activity; and in
moments of decision he must in his loneliness stand his ground.
Heidegger's own conduct makes this text an obvious if unkind
choice. But it is a choice which also enables me to mention someone
who did behave in the way Heidegger said a philosopher should.
In 193.8, there was published in the Proceedings of the Prussian
Academy of Sciences an article devoted to Hegel's judgement on
Socrates. After rehearsing the view, the author turns to criticism of
it. Family, laws and society can survive only if they are supported
and developed by what Hegel associates with Socrates - subjective
consciousness. The individual's conscience is indispensable for the
realm of ethics, and must stand its ground and do battle. But while
doing so, it must accept that, being bound to a simple individual,' it
will be bruised and will perish. And the author uses Hegel's own
words: if a higher life is to be manifested in the world, then the
world's heart must first be broken (Spranger 1938). The author was
Eduard Spranger, a wise and courageous man; let his name close the
series of names we have met in following the posthumous fortunes
of Socrates over twenty-four centuries. 57
It has had to be a long journey: the early Christian writers, with
their polemic against Socrates' fell ow pagans; the Middle Ages, with
the dominance of Aristotle leaving Socrates little more than a name;
the recovery of Plato and of other ancient texts at the Renaissance,
and the growth in critical appraisal of them into the seventeenth
century, with new questions put about Socrates; the cool rationalism
of the eighteenth century, accommodating Socrates to a deistic view
of religion but feeling uneasy at things in him that did not square
with its own preferences, and the same century growing more
aware of just what is involved in making sense of the past; and the
nineteenth century, with its philosophical exaltation of the state, its
doubts over religion, and its seeing in Socrates a figure that cannot
be ignored. After so long a journey, what response are we ourselves
to make to Socrates, in a century which has been acting out so
direly what philosophers were debating a century or more ago as
they argued over the man? At the start of my chapter, I warned
you that I should have to make brutal over-simplifications, and
the warning is peculiarly appropriate with respect to the morals
I shall now try to draw. I have allotted labels to them, some of
which I have used earlier. They are: the Diversity of Goods, the
Diversity of Temperatures, the One and the Many, Within and
189
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Without, the Survival of the Word. To these I add a refrain from
Vergil - 'non omnia possumus omnes' (more or less, 'We cannot all
do everything'); and a final picture - the Marketplace. All these are
linked, and they intertwine with each other as I come to this, the
conclusion of my chapter.
What I call 'the Diversity of Goods' we met in the section to
do with the Fathers, with their varied and discordant claims that
all things well said belong to the Christians; that Plato had been
acquainted with the Mosaic revelation; that Plato and Socrates and
all the rest were deceivers; that Socrates perished for refusing to
worship false gods; that Socrates had a familiar spirit. We met the
theme again in the Renaissance Neo-Platonists, for they read Plato
( and the Ancient Theology) as prophetic of Christianity, as needing
only a suitably allegorical reading for the prophecy to be made plain.
And we met it in the enduring debate about the salvation .of pagans,
down to the condemnation of Belisaire for its plea in their favour,
or Highton's denunciation of Stanley for his praise of Socrates. All
these - and much else - rest on an initial decision to exclude a
certain level of diversity in good things: a refusal to acknowledge
. that there may be good things which are simply different in kind
from and irreducible to some other good things - things which our
own upbringing encourages us to make the basis of everything else.
It is a tribute to Socrates ( and incidentally a tribute to the coherence
of the picture that we form from the reports of Plato and Xenophon)
that he has proved so resistant to so many well-meant attempts at
homogenisation. Plato is not so resistant. He could, as we saw, be
incorporated into Raphael's pictorial reconciliation of the tensions
within the ancient wisdom, by means of the Christian tradition.
He is majestic in Raphael's fresco, with his silent gesture; but he
is silent. In the same picture, Socrates persists in his arguings and
questionings. He obstinately remains himself.
The self he does remain has been found cold by more than one
author - which brings me to what I have called 'the Diversity of
Temperatures', just as I wrote earlier of 'the Chill of Socrates'.
Whatever we think of the Fathers, Christianity was able to speak
to the condition of the masses in a way that the tradition associated
with Socrates could not. And things in what we have seen since can
show why. The perceptive comments of Erasmus on the Agony in
the Garden show how the figure of Christ can reach the heart in a
way that is cliff erent from the way in which the figure of Socrates can
reach it. All this is true, but the difference is just as true - we have
190
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
here yet another example of the Diversity of Goods. Comparisons
between Socrates and Jesus fail, not because of artificiality or
irreverence, but for a deeper reason: what could be the common
measure of the two that would not omit things we want to retain
from each? Rousseau's contrast in Emile between the two deaths is
a deserved rebuke to eighteenth-century elegance. But Socrates still
does represent a willingness to question, to argue, and to confess
ignorance - qualities essential if we are to live as we should, but
qualities for which we shall look in vain in the Gospels.
We cannot all do everything, non omnia possumus omnes: that is
the melancholy fact of the matter. It is no accident that dramatists
and poets have tried to warm the figure of Socrates a little
- even Mme de Villedieu's giving him a female disciple is an
instance of something persistently and justifiably felt. The tales
told of Xanthippe's shrewishness may be no more than the kind
of ludicrous gossip that attaches itself to the private life of the
illustrious. It is the parting between her and Socrates in the Phaedo
(60a) that appals, with its presentation of the pair as having very little
to say goodbye about. Socrates' habits of questioning and debating
provide an example that we desperately need - but they had to be_
paid for. And there are testimonies from the Ancient World which
indicate why.
'Paederast, drunkard, violent' - so ( according to some sources)
exclaimed a physiognomist visiting Athens, when introduced to
Socrates. Socrates checked the indignation of his disciples - 'I
am all these things: but I control myself. '58 I complement the
anecdote with three pictures. Figure 3 shows the face of the statue
of Socrates in the British Museum. From this I have had figures
4 and 5 prepared; they exhibit likenesses made up respectively
of the right and left sides of his face. The contrast is startling .59
Perhaps the physiognomist saw something like that - if he did,
Socrates may well have had to pay a high price for the detachment
and self-sufficiency he notoriously possessed. And I support my
conjecture with another testimony, this time a passage near the start
of the Phaedo ( 60e ). One of his friends, who has come to be with
his master when he dies, asks about some poems he is said to have
been writing. Socrates explains that earlier in his life he had often
been commanded in a dream to 'make music (mousike) and work
at it'. M ousike is a wide term, covering all literary as well as musical
creation, and Socrates says that he had taken his own pursuit of
abstract argument - philosophia - to be the best mousike. But he
191
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
now feels that it is safer, before his departure, to obey the dream
by making mousike in the usual sense. And so he first composed
a hymn to Apollo, whose feast it was. Then, knowing that a poet
should make up tales (mythoi) rather than speeches (logoi), but not
having the skill to compose tales, he versified some of Aesop's
fables. And there I see the lesson, for these were animal tales, tales
about the birds and beasts of the field. Socrates was right to think
that poets deal in mythoi rather than logoi, so cannot his venture
into poetic composition be taken as an acknowledgement that logoi
are not always enough? If so, cannot we take the venture as also an
acknowledgement that coolness is not always enough either? The
birds and the beasts in the mythoi show that Socrates cannot do
without warm-blooded things any more than we can - was not his
repeated dream telling him as much?
If it was, he would not have been altogether surprised at its
mess-age. Throughout our journey we have seen that there is a side
to him distinct from the pattern of argument and detachment. It
is the side that embarrassed the eighteenth century: the claim to
know nothing, the sacrifice to Aesculapius, and obviously the talk
about the daimonion. But there are other things as well which show
this side to Socrates. In all Athens, what could seem more alien to
him in 'temperature' than the frenzied dancing and music of the
Corybantes as they worshipped? And yet it is to them that he goes
for an image, when declining the off er of a chance to escape from
prison. He seems, ·he says, to hear the laws of Athens demanding
that he stay and pay the penalty - just as the Corybantes hear
things; he can hear nothing else (Crito 54d). Just so, when the
long conversation about immortality is over in the Phaedo (114d),
he says that we should repeatedly intone (epadein) such things, in
order to produce conviction in oμ.rselves. Once more, there is this
side to Socrates too, and there has to be. Just as there has to be in
all of us.
I turn to the theme I have called 'the One and the Many'.
We found in Hegel and in Forchhammer a contrast between the
individual's conscience and the state's decisions and customs. With
that contrast we today have become all too familiar, and it would
have been easy to find still more examples of it from sources in our
own century. We need to recall that the contrast is perennial, and
that it too can be seen as an example of the Diversity of Goods:
if it is true that no man is an island, it is also true that no state
forms only one person. Not that the contrast is confined to state
192
V
..
...
t
f : ~
'-•••• •~•"•"'-- •••u••••••••••••••••• ••• • ••••• m•••••-- •• ••• u•..-.•• ••• • •• ••••••• •• •• • ,,.,,, out•• •• • •••00101 •••- ••• t
Figure 6.3 Head of statuette of Socrates from the British Museum.
(All rights reserved, The British Museum, London.)
Figure 6.4 Likeness made up of right side of Socrates' face.
(All rights reserved, The British Museum , London.)
Figure 6.5 Likeness made up of left side of Socrates' face.
(All rights reserved, The British Museum, London.)
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
and individual, for the history of religion provides classic examples
of it. We saw that Baur offers a cheerful -picture of Christianity as
presupposing the step made by Plato beyond Socrates - the step
from . the individual to the state; Solovyov can remind us that
Plato's own journey took him to proposing a state in which
Socrates would not have survived. Baur still more cheerfully insists
that Christianity, unlike Plato, allows a subjective freedom; we
are entitled to ask how long Socrates would have survived in the
Christian Church. There is indeed a Diversity of Temperatures, and
the Chill of Socrates can disconcert; but higher temperatures have
to be paid for at higher prices.
And so to the theme I have called 'Within and Without'. Socrates'
claim to know nothing was, time and again at Athens, a prelude to
the discomfiture of a fellow citizen who believed himself to know
something. The discomfiture would often be witnessed by young
men, who were glad to watch the exposure of their elders. 'It is
not lacking in pleasure' is the description Socrates gives in the
Apology (33c), and the comment repels by its complacent chill.
But the avowal of ignorance has been praised as a refusal to meddle
with what is above us. We saw this in Montaigne, and similar things
are found in the Fathers. Indeed, this view of the matter could be
supported by an appeal to the way in which Socrates deprecated
investigation into the physical world. I have already submitted that
Montaigne's posture of universal scepticism is, even if entertaining,
too generic to be substantial. I now suggest that the discipline of
observing natural phenomena would have served as a corrective to
Socrates and his followers. It would have lessened the destructive
effects of his interrogations and arguments, by making them a part
of a wider pattern of enquiries. The opinion was put forward in
ancient times (Aquinas followed it) that Socrates betook himself
to moral philosophy because he despaired of attaining certainty ·
through the senses. To the extent that this is true, it does not
represent the best of motives for studying ethics; Socrates would
have done better to give the senses a chance and to see what could be
attained by them. The suggestion is not the anachronism it looks, for
others were then making intelligent guesses at the causes of things.
And the investigation would have been eminently Socratic, given
the respect he always shows for the skills of craftsmen. We need,
if . I may so speak, a Without as well as a Within. As it was, there
were f oll~wers of Socrates who (like the vast majority of human
beings) could not share in the austere restraint of his avowal of
196
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
ignorance. If their certainty over some things had been loosened
by his questions, they would find certainty elsewhere, if only the
certainty of self-aggrandisement. We are ·back to the Diversity
of Temperatures: it was a matter of who was listening when
Socrates put his questions, a matter of who heard him or overheard
his words.
Which brings us to the various senses of my last theme - the
Survival of the Word. First, in the sense just mentioned: the ~earers
of what is spoken matter as well as the speaker. And with what
Socrates said, the hearers mattered all too much. Whatever we
think of the justice of accusations made against him, the making
of them was surely not surprising. Wise men concerned with the
individual's betterment are not usually far-sighted in political and
social matters.Jesus was not, either - the Sermon on the Mount is no
more a recipe for the running of society than was the communism of
the first Christians. Once more, non omnia possumus omnes: it is as
simple and as sad as that. But not just sad, because talk in terms of
running society can never be enough - that way lie Forchhammer,
and Hegel, and so much else we know so much about. The One
and the Many, as Spranger reminded us, cannot easily co-exist; it
is no accident that neither Socrates nor Jesus died a natural death.
But there are other senses to this theme of the Survival of the
Word. First, the sheer, material persistence of evidence, and here
we can be both disconcerted and saddened by the fragmentary
randomness of what has come down to us from the Ancient World~
the endless debates over the evidence concerning Socrates are proof
of that. But there is also the human side to survival, and our journey
has shown us how real it is. If there is the permanent temptation to
homogenise what we do not know with what we do, so there is the
permanent need to let what we have recovered from the past put its
questions to us in the present and be questioned by us in return - a
need, that is, if we think that what we are trying to understand still
lives for us. This tension between what we might call understanding
and confrontation is inevitable, and makes our stance inevitably
awkward, for we are not wholly of· the past or of the present in
what we are trying to do. And I submit that the awkwardness of
our stance is complemented here by the unique awkwardness of the
unique figure of Socrates - persistent, exasperating, imperturbable;
undercutting what he had said with claims to ignorance, persevering
even unto death in that questioning he had practised in the Athenian
agora or marketplace.
197
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
And the Marketplace is the image we can bear away with
us. It is essentially draughty: a meeting place for the diverse, a
place for exchanges, a spot for conversations as we go on our
different journeys. We must accept the Diversity of Goods in the
marketplace: making Socrates a prophet of Jesus makes as much
and as little sense as making Jesus a prophet of Socrates. We need
Socrates for his own sake - his questionings, his solitary obstinacy,
his courage. There will be complaints we shall want to make about
him, and I have made some of mine, and there is more to what we
need than what Socrates can give us. But beyond any question we
do need what he does give; and twenty -four centuries on, we need
it as much as ever.
And so we come back to where we started, to David's great
picture of the death of Socrates (see Figure 1).60 When David was
planning the work, he sought advice from a classically minded
friend, a priest called A dry. His friend gave him the in£ ormation
he wanted, but suggested that he add to the picture the figure of
Plato. Now, as we know from Plato himself (Phaedo 69b), he was
ill at the time and not present - presumably Adry was working on
the hagiographical principle that, if certain events narrated in the
lives of saints never occurred, then (I quote Newman) they ought to
have occurred. 61 But David's reaction was, while putting in Plato,
to depict him as an old man. There he sits apart, at the foot of the
bed; he is the one figure in all the group who reacts to the death of
Socrates, not by a gesture of grief, but by silence and recollection.
And, to show that the figure is indeed Plato, David has put beneath
his chair what Plato employed to make the scene still unforgettable
after nearly 2,400 years: he has shown there scrolls, ink and pens.
The painter's genius has turned the proposal for a pious fable into
an embodiment of our understanding of the past. In that sense
Plato must be there, for it is Plato who has woven the golden
web of words in which we come to read the story of Socrates,
to think about his questions, and to watch him as he comes to
die. And just as Plato must be there in the picture, so he must, I
submit, be also in the conclusion of what I have to say, which is
his story of the death of his master. Many will know the passage
at the end of the Phaedo; bear with me as I abbreviate it a little and
recall it for those who do not. This book would not be complete
without it. ·
The man has presented Socrates with the cup of hemlock, and
Socrates puts a question to him:
198
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
'What would you say to my pouring out a libation to the gods
from this drink?'
'Socrates', the man answered, 'we prepare just what we
think will be sufficient.'
'I understand', said Socrates, 'but it is lawful and fitting that
I should at least utter a prayer to the gods, that my passing
over may be fortunate. Thus I do pray; and so be it.' Then he
put the cup to his lips, and very cheerfully and calmly drained
it off. At this we could no longer restrain ourselves. I covered
my face and wept - not for Socrates himself, but for my own
loss of such a man for my friend. He exhorted us not to give
way so; in our shame we ceased from weeping. He walked for
a while, then said his legs felt heavy, and lay down. The man
showed us how he was gradually growing cold and said that
when it reached the heart he would be gone. As it drew near he
uncovered his face and spoke these last words: 'Crito, we owe
a cock to Aesculapius. Pay it, and do not neglect the matter.'
'It shall be done', said Crito. 'But have you anything else
to say?' There was no answer. A little time later, he gave a
movement. The man uncovered his face and his gaze was fixed.
Crito, seeing this, closed his mouth and eyes.
Such was the death of our friend, a man whom we might
call, of all we then knew, the best, and the wisest, and the
• most Just.
NOTES
1 The ancient testimonies concerning Socrates have been assembled by
J. F·erguson in translation, but with references to the original texts, in
his admirable work (1970).
2 Two Socratic bibliographies are Patzer 1985 and Navia and Katz 1988.
The British Library's catalogues give much material under 'Socrates'. I
regret that I have not been able to consult Herbert Spiegelberg's work
on this subject.
3 It is customary to add to locations of passages from the Fathers the
numbers of the volume and column in the two lengthy series Patrologia
Graeca and Patrologia Latina, edited in the last century (1857£.;
1844£.) by the Abbe J.-P. Migne. I cite the two series as 'PG' and
'PL' respectively, with volume-number preceding and column-number
following. I naturally give references also by book and chapter; these
apply to all editions. The whole question of the relation between the
Fathers and Greek thought ( especially Platonism) is a vast topic. One
of the best accounts is still Arnou 1933. Another account, serviceable
199
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
both for its text and its bibliography, is Gilson 1955 - its title is rather
misleading, for the book goes further back than the Middle Ages.
4 Justin also writes of the daimones, whom he believes to have been
begotten by fallen angels (II Apo/. 5; 6 PG 452). They are evil, and
persecute good people like Socrates (II Apol. 7; 6 PG 456). Justin does
not explain how he keeps Socrates' own talk of his daimonion apart
from this - he makes the casting out of the fables and poets an attack
upon the daimones by Socrates (II Apol. 10; 6 PG 461). It is to the
horrible Tertullian (t c. 225) in his Liber Apologeticus that we owe the
accusations that Socrates' daimonion was some kind of familiar spirit,
inciting to evil (22; I PL 405); that his last request for a sacrifice to
Aesculapius was a gesture of human respect to the Athenians; that his
constancy in the face of death was affected indifference, not faith in
a discovered truth; and that the charge that he ccorrupted the youth'
was a proof of his unchastity (46; IPL 509).
5 There are references in Brown 1967: 36.
6 The survival of writings from the Ancient World into the Middle
Ages has been surveyed in many works. Marrou 1938-49 is a classic
account; as its title suggests, it lays stress upon the part played by
Augustine as a link between earlier and later times. Gilson 1955 is
again useful, both for its text and its bibliography. More recent, and
containing a remarkable amount of information for its size, is Haran
1985. Bolgar 1973 is only one of the several valued contributions made
by this author to the topic. I add two observations. The first is that
writings by Cicero to do with rhetoric, and later text-books concerning
it, preserved information about ancient philosophy (Halm 1863, since
reprinted, conveniently assembles texts). For the part played by such
things, and for much else, see Curtius 1953. My second observation is
very simple, but is sometimes forgotten: the very concept of 'survival'
needs treating by us with some caution, for we think in terms- of easily
reproducible material. Survival in those days had a local quality that it
now lacks. ·
7 The fate of Greek in the West as far as the sixth century can be followed
in Courcelle 1969. Noble 1985 is a short but illuminating study of its
later fortunes in Rome itself, until the ninth century. Gregory the
Great's Moralia could be put into Greek there in the 740s, for the
immigrants' use (poor immigrants!); Greek books could be sent to Gaul,
at the request of Pepin (t 768) - their content was entirely religious.
The Irishman Eriugena (t c. 875) translated Dionysius the Areopagite
when in Gaul, from a text provided in 827 by the Eastern Emperor.
He seems to have known nothing of Plato's text at first hand. For all
this, and much else, see O'Meara 1988.
8 The translation in which Augustine read Plotinus was made by
the fourth-century Neo-Platonist Marius Victorinus, who eventually
became a Christian. Boethius, whose Platonic Consolation of Philosophy,
written in the face of death, has secured an unrivalled succession
of translators into English, planned to render all Plato and Aristotle
into Latin. He got no further than portions of Aristotle's logic, while
also translating a commentary on one of them by the N eo- Platonist
200
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
Porphyry. Details are in Wallis 1972. This is a rich source of
in£ ormation about the whole N eo-Platonic tradition, from its origins
in the Academy down to the suppression by the Emperor J ustinian
in 527 of the school at Athens; his final chapter gives a survey of the
further endurance of the tradition.
9 Klibansky 1939 among many others traces the later fortunes of ancient
philosophy, and how texts of Plato and Aristotle were translated and
studied among Moslems and Jews. I learn from Bergmann 1936 that
some Jewish thinkers held that Plato had derived his teaching from
Moses; that Socrates was an ascetic who lived in a barrel; and that
Aristotle was a Jew. The development of the Platonic and Aristotelian
traditions there is also considered by Klibansky; it can naturally he
followed as well in all general works. The most enduring consequence
was that, when the corpus of Aristotle's works reached Western
Europe towards the end of the twelfth century, the arrival brought
Neo-Platonic elements with it.
10 The arrival of Aristotle's works in the West -- the works of a pagan,
accompanied by commentaries from other pagans, or from Moslems
· and Jews - is surely the greatest culture-shock that Europe has ever
undergone. The complexity and diversity of reactions to the arrival
are given a masterly survey in van Steenberghen 1966, which draws
on many earlier writings of his. As I read him, I take the sheer bulk
of the material that arrived to have altered, not so much the balance
within existing disciplines, as the notion of what disciplines were
available. Philosophical speculation ( and we must never forget that
the word had a far wider connotation then than it has now) acquired
a 'massiveness' and independence, because of the quantity and range
of the material on which it could now be exercised. Earlier, the only
texts of Aristotle available for exposition at the University of Paris, in
its Faculty of Arts, were parts of his logic. Things were different now,
and by the 1220s these quasi-Aristotelian speculations there had begun
to affect the teaching of theology.
11 Aquinas had no Greek, but encouraged his fellow Dominican William
of Moerbeke to make closer translations of Aristotle than some then in
· circulation. William produced word-for-word renderings; it is a tribute
to Aquinas that he made such good sense of so odd a result. Deman
1940 collects and surveys texts to do with what Aquinas writes of
Socrates.
12 Details in Nelson 1948; further details in Maravall 1957.
13 The whole topic of Renaissance philosophy has recently been given
extensive and scholarly treatment in a volume of the Cambridge
histories of philosophy (Schmitt, Skinner and Kessler 1988); the
book is a fitting conclusion to the labours of C. B. Schmitt, to
whose investigations into this period so much is owed.
14 Ficino was supported by Cosmo de' Medici, who took advantage
of the presence of scholarly Greeks at the Council of Florence
(1439-45) to encourage the study of the language and of its written
remains. A volume of essays edited by O'Meara (1982) deals with the
tensions between religious belief and philosophical speculation among
201
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Neo-Platonists at that time. Tigerstedt 1974 deals with the endurance
of this tradition of interpreting Plato.
15 For 'the Ancient Theology' we have interesting and informative essays
in Walker 1972 - indeed, the term 'Ancient Theology' is of his devising.
He gives details and references to do with the very complicated story of
the origin of .the texts, the use ·made of them, and the varied estimates of
their authenticity. Our own time has seen the publication of a critical
text of Hermes Trismegistus (1945f.) by Festugiere, who deals with the
content and literary fate of this strange material in his 1950-3, a mine
of in£ ormation.
16 The magical element in the Platonic tradition and in the Ancient
Theology is a vast theme. Dodds 1951 has an Appendix devoted to
these practices in late Antiquity - 'theurgy', to use a term going back
to the second century of our era. His later work, Dodds 1965·, analyses
and reflects upon the growth of the practices between Marcus Aurelius
and Constantine ---an age in which religious beliefs laid stress upon the
transitory nature of material things, the gap between the human and
the divine, and the quest for powers and intermediaries by which the
gap might be bridged. The account in Bevan 1920 is brief and very
readable.
17 I have taken the main constituents of this interpretation - the gestures
of Pythagoras, the presentation made to the Evangelist and the figures
- round him ~ from Gutman 1941. But that it should be the Ancient
Theology that is finding completion in the Gospel is a contribution of
my own, as is the symmetry of John's figure with Plato's raised hand. I
add at once that this interpretation differs from those offered by others,
including Dussler, and also Gombrich and Wind, authors to whom so
much is owed in the field of iconography. Gombrich 1972-: 98 takes
the figure I see as a seated Evangelist as a 'writing sage'. Wind 1968: 54,
n. 4 takes as Pythagoras the figure painted in the style of Michelangelo,
seated in the foreground by a block; the figure was not in Raphael's
original design, as may be seen from the reproduction of the cartoon
in Cuzin 1985: 118-19. I am not persuaded that the matter is closed,
for Wind adds something that - or so I think - ·tells in my favour.
He mentions a Latin poem by one of Raphael's sitters, the Venetian
scholar Andrea Navagero (the portrait can be seen in Jones and Penny
1983: 164). The poem is on an image of Pythagoras, and Wind suggests
that phrases in it may have been inspired by the Pythagoras of Raphael's
fresco. I have traced the poem, which is most conveniently available in
Perosa and Sparrow 1979: 231-2, and I translate some lines from it:
'He is certainly meditating on something worthy, such gravity is in
his face, so hath he quite retreated into himself with his great heart;
he could utter the high themes of his mind - but, bound by his ancient
vow, he is silent.' I like Wind's suggestion (though his text might have
been more explicit. here; the object in Navagero's poem was a piece
of sculpture). But I submit that the figure I see as Pythagoras in the
fresco fits Navagero's words better. Wind's figure is not really silent;
just as Gombrich's is busy writing, and having what he writes looked
at and copied, so Wind's is seated at a marble block, on which he is
202
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
drawing a diagram. Mine, as we have seen, does nothing but point
and gaze.
18 Gombrich examines the fresco in one of the essays in his 1972 - I
have, needless to say, learnt very much from it, nor ( even if I had
the competence) should I want to dispute the account he gives. His
· first objection to the -theme of 'presentation' in what Gutman writes
takes up what has been objected earlier - that the interpretation sets
together Christian and pagan imagery. To this I have two responses,
the first of which I draw from Gombrich's own essay. The decoration
of the Stanza della Segnatura, he insists, has to be interpreted as a whole,
from the ceiling downwards, ·and to treat any one wall in isolation is
to miss the point. I wholly agree - but if the room is to be taken ~s a
whole, then the imagery of this whole includes not only the Christian
Eucharist, but the philosophers of Greece, and Apollo and the poets
on Parnassus. To blame an interpretation of The School of Athens for
making it set together Christian and pagan imagery is hardly fair; they
are set together by the room itself. My second reply develops the first:
to read as I do the 'Ancient Theology' into the fresco is to accept such
a setting of them together ~ not in any sense that would have Raphael
put paganism on a level with Christianity, but in the sense that some
pieces of pagan wisdom are displayed as finding their fulfilment in the
Gospel.
But Gombrich also raises a wider objection . He _points to the variety
of interpretations the . fresco has received, gives salutary warnings
against pressing iconographic investigations to absurdity, and shows
by illustrations that Raphael was glad to use motifs and elements from
earlier paintings. He rightly insists that he would above all have sought
decorum and splendour in depicting such a scene; his aim would not
have. been to produce a. catalogue raisonne of Greek philosophy. And,
once more, I agree; but, again once more, I go to Gombrich himself for
a further reply. He describes the detailed demands for 'significance' that
could be made then by patrons, and the programmes which were drawn
. up for the symbolic presentation by painters of this or that meaning,
printing one at pp. 23ff. Of course we possess no such programme for
Raphael's fresco, but there seems an ambiguity in what Gombrich and
others have written about identifying figures in it. Are identifications
rejected because we lack information, or because the whole notion
makes no sense? Identifications have been made for various figures
elsewhere on the walls; why should not some 'programme' or other
have been given to Raphael, whatever degree of fidelity to it he may
have observed? Nor does the fact, rightly stressed by Gombrich, that
he incorporated earlier motifs mean that he attached no significance
to them. Once more, I am wholly in agreement with Gombrich's
insistence that it is a picture we have, with all the needs of a picture
for balance and colour. It is a matter of degree - of how detailed an
exegesis can be attempted. For me, the general 'sweep' of the fresco
can combine both splendour and a lesson. I add that Cuzin 1985 gives
a good reproduction of the fresco; that the Vatican Museum provides
a poster which, being bigger, is even better; but that for the detail on
203
·soCRATIC QUESTIONS
what is being 'presented' to the Evangelist, we must still go to the
drawings in Springer 1883 - a work ·which is a mine of information
about interpretations of the fresco.
19 Such a treatment of Plato, here and elsewhere, raises wider issues.
To read Plato's text as in some way cloaking mysteries, and so as
needing deciphering, . is to muffle the delicacy, tautness and wealth
of the language he actually · used . . Such, at all events, is -my own
diagnosis; and, having made it, I have to add that I find Renaissance
N eo-Platonism virtually unreadable.
20 Details of this work are in Walker 1972.
21 To this day, frescos in the exhibition-gallery of the Library exhibit
founders of alphabets. The founders include Adam, Christ, the Emperor
Claudius and Hercules.
22 Patrizi's -final plea for a philosophy based on Plato for -the Church
(Patrizi 1593) is of a piece with other writings of his - translations
· of the 'Chaldean Oracles', supposedly by Zoroaster; of the Elements
of Theology of Proclus; and of Hermes Trismegistus.
23 The work is notable for one image: Plato was captured by the Christian
Church in its victory over paganism; . but, kept a prisoner, he did
grievous damage to the · camp of his enemies. Which brings us back
to the views of some acquaintances of Ficino, a century earlier ( details
once more in Walker 1972).
24 The growth of Classical scholarship, and its chequered career in an age
of war and strife, is described - with much material to do with ·the links
between that scholarship and the religious movements .of the time ..;_in
Pfeiffer 1978.
25 Walker 1972 is again useful for the topic of how belief dwindled in the
'Ancient Theology'. Of the demand for an exegesis of Plato that would
not allegorise, Leibniz himself provides an ·example. He had read- just
as he had read everything else - the Renaissance Neo-Platonists, and
called for something more simple and solid than elaborations of Plato's
more '-hyperbolic' ideas. Writing to Simon Foucher in 1686, he says that
Plato himself had endeavoured to give exact definitions, and that we
should endeavour to imitate them (Gerhardt 1875-90: vol. 1, 380).
26 The earliest modern life of Socrates was composed as far back as 1440
by Manetti; it relies largely upon Diogenes .· Laertius, and has been
edited in our own time by Montuori 1981a.
27 The comic opera (first performed in Prague of all places) was called
The Madness of Socrates with his Two Wives. The ·romantic novelette
by Mme de Villedieu is of no intrinsic value, but shows Socrates to
have been a figure her readers would know. It makes him have a female
pupil; who loves Alcibiades; and so on.
28 The reduction of the daimonion to instinctive sagacity comes at the
end of the eleventh essay of the first book, 'On Prognostications';
and th~ most prominent place of all is given to his unease at talk of
demonn~ries - it comes at the very end of the final essay (Montaigne
1930: vol. 1, 73; vol. 3, 479). Schuhl 1956 is devoted to the place of
Socrates in Montaigne's writings.
29 Gerold shows a fair acquaintance with Classical and patristic literature
204
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
-on the point, and also cites the Epicurean Gassendi, then recently
deceased, but gives no reference. Sjliestrom cites ancient authorities
- but it is significant, given the milder interpretation, that he shows
familiarity as well with Ficino.
30 The reference to what Malebranche writes of Socrates' salvation is to
the fourth chapter of his Traite de morale (1684: vol. 11, 55-6); _th e
passage in Aquinas with which I contrast it comes in his Summa
theologiae, 1/2~65.2.
31 The tale of his securing a condemnation for commercial purposes I
take from a note pencilled into the British Library's copy. I cannot
pronounce on its historical value - the book was certainly denounced
by the grace-obsessed theologian Antoine Arnauld (t 1694), but then
he was by nature a great denouncer.
32 Milder opinions had been ·expressed in the preceding century. Zwingli
(t 1531), the Swiss reformer, expressed them (his heaven incorporates
Hercules and Theseus). So did - more tentatively, and yet reproved -
Roman Catholics like Vives (t 1540; tutor to Bloody Mary) and Payva
d' Andrada (t 1578; a preacher at the Council of Trent). Erasmus is
associated with 'Saint Socrates, pray for us!', but as Marcel 1951 points
out, the invocation has a tentative setting and is part of a dialogue.
33 Montaigne's Essais are divided into three books. The locus classicus for
his scepticism is the long twelfth essay in the second book,--where he
· reflects upon a work of Christian apologetic by Raimond Sebond: his
pronouncement on Socrates and Cato (and the analogy with religious
argument) is near the start of it, and· his siding with Socrates -about
astronomy is about two-thirds of the way through. The final essay of
· the last book, 'On experience', contains his preference for ignorance
and a concentration upon the infinite theme of 'know thyself': these
. come about a fifth of the way through. .-
34 Bayle's distinctive opinions are usually in the 'Notes' to articles. What
he has to say of Socrates and Anaxagoras and about oracles is 'to be
· found in Note R to the article 'Anaxagore' and Note A to 'Agesipolis'
and Note E to 'Amphiarus'. Bayle was a born journalist, and to read
him on authors I have mentioned in this section ('La Mothe le Vayer' is
particularly amusing) is to see what awaits us in the century to come.
35 The Everyman edition of the Spectator has a useful index, which gives
an idea of how prominent a place Socrates had in the mind of a writer
like Addison - even the invocation by Erasmus we met earlier appears,
in the number for 3 November 1711.
36 When Smith writes that Socrates shows himself open to instruction,
he is referring to the Second Alcibiades, a dialogue on worship that
is now regarded as not by Plato; references to it are not uncommon
in the eighteenth century.
37 Voltaire's Socrate is destitute of any literary merit except for one remark
given to Xanthippe - it can serve to show Voltaire's mixed feelings
about his hero. She makes it when Socrates declares the soul to be
immortal because we are now thinking and so shall think for ever:
'I don't understand. I am now wiping my nose - am I to wipe that
for ever?'
205
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
38 Freret was better known than Dresigius: it seems that, confined for
some time to the Bastille, he devoted himself to Bayle's Dictionnaire
and emerged a convinced sceptic. His learned writings were a quarry
for others, but I have not found any reference to this work on
Socrates.
39 He cannot be thinking of the moving figures on the great clock at
Nuremberg: he seems to have seen a whole 'town' of such things. His
essay was already rare when it was reprinted in the edition I have used,
as its Preface states.
40 Catherine the Great undertook the ninth chapter of the Russian
translation. I have found one addition made by her, to a list of things
that tyrants have on their minds in their countries: 'the partiality of
its laws' ('po pristrastiyu eya zakonov').
41 For the trouble at Paris over Belisaire, see Renwick 1967. The novel
led to controversy in Germany also, where Eberhard (t 1809) wrote
in a liberal sense concerning pagans in 1770_. He was reproved - on
the grounds of contradicting Christian teaching - by none other than
Lessing. But in 1774 Lessing published the famous fragments of the
rationalistic work by Reimarus on the Gospels, and with notorious
consequences. So I think I am entitled to entertain the hypothesis that
his reproof of Eberhard was Socratically ironic.
42 The figure of Socrates for Diderot was of central importance, and the
biography by Wilson 1972 gives several examples - including Diderot's
having used a seal depicting Socrates as a signet-ring. Diderot's own
imprisonment in Vincennes, and his abjuration of errors there, would
have made the relationship all the more poignant. His later quarrel
with Rousseau will explain why, in the article 'Socratique', he makes
one of his disciples the gloomy Timon, who abandons mankind and
takes to the woods; this is said to be Rousseau, with his attack on
civilisation.
43 We can set what Rousseau writes of Socrates and Jesus in Emile beside
his advice given, in a letter of 15 January 1769, to a correspondent
inclined to atheism. Similar distinctions are drawn there, but this
time the suggestion is made that Jesus stands at a disadvantage to
Socrates because of their respective chroniclers - what would we make
of them if Plato and the Evangelists had changed places (Correspondence
XXXVII: 13f.)?
44 'Hamann does not have a style; he is one' - that is one pronouncement
by Hegel with which all can agree. O'Flaherty's edition of Hamann's
Socratic Memorabilia is the ref ore all the more valuable - it has the
original text, an English translation en regard, and very helpful
notes and references. One 'rationalist' with whom Hamann engaged
in polemic was Moses Mendelssohn, the liberal Jewish thinker - it is
worth recording that while Mendelssohn, in his Jerusalem, had taken
his account of Socrates from Cooper, Hamann dismissed that work as
'a school-exercise'. Hamann's part in the controversy can be followed
in his Golgotha und Schlebimini. If 'followed' be the verb.
45 The Encyclopaedia M etropolitana, to judge by its editorial board and its
name, had links with the newly established King's College in London.
206
THE LEGACY OF SOCRATES
It is arranged by a rational division of topics rather than alphabetically,
which makes it excessively hard to use. I understand that it was the
brain-child of Coleridge in the first place.
46 The Penny Cyclopaedia is notable for the excellence of its articles on
mathematics; these are by De Morgan, who is said to have furnished
up to one-sixth of the total bulk. Its line is not always consistent:
'Philosophy' gets little praise, 'Plato' a good deal.
47 Forchhammer's style as well as his thesis may have annoyed - it is
rollicking and not reverent. He refers to a recent disaster to which
noble youths have been led by the anti-social example of Socrates -
as he was writing in Kiel in 1837, this must refer to the disturbances
that followed the accession to the throne of Hanover of Ernest, Queen
Victoria's wickedest uncle. ·
48 Lasaulx wrote on a variety of Classical topics, and can be encountered
in Burckhardt's foot-notes. Lindenbaur, a parish priest, does not help
his cause by claiming that all the leading Classical scholars of every
nation were loyal adherents of the Church, and that the early Christian
leaders had brought more or less all the fruit of Classical civilisation
into the order of Christianity (Lindenbaur 1859: vii).
49 The cover advertises other works of piety. Given the pamphlet's
dishonesty, it is good to see that one of them is Fabiola, Cardinal
Wiseman's tawdry and disingenuous novelette about early Christians
in Rome.
50 The cover of Orlov's book shows that G. H. Lewes' History of
Philosophy was available in Russian, and that Grote too had been
translated. Plato apparently had not been; presumably he would be
read in French or German.
51 Manning associates his own view of the daimonion with that of the
Balliol Classical scholar James Riddell, editor of Plato's Apology. He
does not mention the resemblance of all this to what Newman had
written about drawing conclusions in concrete matters. (The Grammar
of Assent had appeared in 1870.)
52 Hegel writes of Socrates in various places, but the most accessible are
in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy. His general principles can
be found in the introductory portion; his specific treatment of Socrates
later, in the second chapter of Part I. I notice at this point a Russian
prize-essay on Socrates, written in an Hegelian manner. The author
was A. Velikanov, gold-medallist in 1842 at the Lycee Richelieu in
Odessa. It states the conflict, but it goes on to say that Athens after
the Peloponnesian War was sinking 'into anarchy and despotism', and
that 'when any government is on the verge of collapse, virtue and
morality will be degraded'. How the Censor let these sentences by I
cannot think - the ruthless autocrat Nicholas I then reigned. I have
looked in vain for 'Velikanov' in Russian works of reference; he cannot
have survived long.
53 Nietzsche writes of Socrates in many places; Sandvoss 1966 gives
a useful collection of the texts, with lucid and sensible comment.
The early work On the Birth of Tragedy (splendidly translated and
elucidated in 1981 by Silk and Stern) is one locus; another is the late
207
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
work, Twilight of the Idols, which has an essay on 'The problem of
Socrates'.
54 Of commentaries on Kierkegaard, I found Burnier 1943 a luminously
helpful piece of critical sympathy.
55 I also notice here that Solovyov was responsible for philosophical
articles in the enormous Russian Encyclopaedia (1890£.). The article on
Socrates there by Radlov records the interesting suggestion made by a
Russian contemporary that Socrates can be seen as a social reformer.
56 The passage can be found in Yovchuk et al. 1960 : 58, a work also
remarkable for its division of philosophy into two main periods,
pre -Marxist and Marxist.
57 The story of Eduard Spranger is worth recalling (he has an entry in
the Encyclopaedia of Philosophy). He was Professor of Paedagogy at
Berlin and resigned when the Nazis came to power. He was persuaded
by his friends to stay on and to do what he could . ( one thinks of
Luzac on Socrates). In 1944 he was arrested but was released at the
intercession of the Japanese Ambassador - he had lectured in Tokyo
before the war. In 1945 the Allied Powers made him Rector of the
University of Berlin, but he found . academic life under communism just
as uncongenial, and eventually moved to the University of Tiibingen for
the rest of his career. · ·
58 There are several sources for the physiognomist's remark, varying
slightly among themselves. The most easily accessible are in Cicero's
Tusculan Disputations (IV.37) and Cassian 's Conferences (XIII.5.3); all
can be found in Ferguson 1970. It is worth noticing here that Socrates'
ugliness was linked by Nietzsche with the other things he said about
him in Twilight of the Idols. However, Nietzsche does not give the
reply made by Socrates about self-control.
59 I have compared the right and left sides of other images of Socrates
in, for instance, Richter 1965. None yielded the contrast that the
British Museum's statue yields: could this speak in favour of what
the Museum has? .
60 For David's painting, Salmon 1962 and Brook.ner 1974 are useful and
informative. ·
61 The remark can be found in Newman's 'Sermon on the Theory of
Developments in Religious Doctrine'. He qualifies his words with 'If
I may so speak'. Not all will agree that he may. ·
208
REFERENCES
Anonymous {1886) Socrates (in Russian), Moscow: Sytin.
Adam, J. (1897) Platonis Apologia Socratis, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Adkins, A. W. H. (1960) Merit and Responsibility: a study in Greek values,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Allen, R. E. (1980) Socrates and Legal Obligation, Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
Amandry, P. (1950) La Mantique apollinienne a Delphes, Paris: Bibliotheque
des Ecoles Fran~aises d' Athenes et de Rome.
Annas, J. (1981) · An Introduction to Plato's Republic, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Armleder, P. (1966) 'Death in Plato's Apology', Classical Bulletin 42:
46.
Arnim, H. von. (1923) Xenophons Memorabilien und Apologie des
Sokrates, Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy of Science.
Arnou, · R. (1933) 'Platonisme des Peres', in Dictionnaire de theologie
catholique, vol. XII, cols. 2258-395, Paris: Letouzey & Ane.
Baur, F. C. (1876) 'Das Christliche des Platonismus, oder Sokrates und
Christus', in Drei Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Alten Philosophie
und ihres Verhaltnisses zum Christentum, ed. E. Zeller, Leipzig: Fue's
Verlag.
Benson, H. (1990) 'The priority of definition and the Socratic elenchus',
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 8: 19-45.
Bergmann, J. (1936) cSokrates in der jiidischen Literatur', Monatsschrift
fur Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums 80: 3-13.
Bernholdus, B. (1731) De probitate Socratis sive modica sive nulla (1711).
Reprinted in F. J. Beyschlagius, Sylloge variorum opusculorum, vol. ii,
item iv, Halae Suevorum: Mayer.
Bevan, E. (1920) Hellenism and Christianity, New York: George H.
Doran.
Bolgar, R. R. (1973) The Classical Heritage and its Beneficiaries, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bostock, D. (1990) 'The interpretation of Plato's Crito', Phronesis 35:
1-20.
209
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Brickhouse, T. C. and Smith, N. D. (1989) Socrates on Trial, Oxford:
Clarendon Press. ·
Brookner, A. (1974) 'Jacques-Louis David: a personal interpretation',
Proceedings of the British Academy 60: 155-71.
Brouwer, P. van L. (1838) Apologia Socratis contra ... calumniam ...
Forchhammeri, Groningen: Van Boekeren.
Brown, P. (1967) Augustine of Hippo, London: Faber & Faber.
Brucker, J. (1767) Historia critica philosophiae, .Lipsiae: Weidmann &
Reich.
Burnet, J. (1924) Plato's Euthyphro, Apology of Socrates and Crito, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Burnier, A. (1943) 'La Pensee de Kierkegaard', Revue de theologie et de
philosophie, n.s. 311 101-13.
Burnyeat, M. (1990) The Theaetetus of Plato, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Calvert, B. (1987) 'Plato's Crito and Richard Kraut' in S. Panagiotou (ed.),
justice, Law and Method in Plato and Aristotle, Edmonton: Academic
Publishing and Printing, 17-33.
Cameron, A. (1940) cAn epigram of the fifth century B.c.', Harvard
Theological Review 33: 97-130.
Champier, S. (1516) Symphonia Platonis cum Aristotele, Parrhisiis: a
Iodoco Badio.
Cooper, J. G. (1749) The Life of Socrates (4th edn 1771), London: J.
Dodsley.
Coulter, James (1964) 'The relation of the Apology of Socrates to Gorgias'
Defence of Palamedes and Plato's defence of Gorgianic rhetoric',
Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 68: 269-303.
Courcelle, P. (1949) Late Latin Writers and their Greek Sources (Eng. tr.
1969), Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Crispus, J. B. (1594) De ethnicis philosophis caute legendis, Romae:
Zanetti.
Curtius, E. R. (1973) European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages,
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Cuzin, J.-P. (1985) Raphael: his life and works, London: Alpine Fine Art
Collections.
Deman, T. (1940) 'Socrate clans l'ceuvre de saint Thomas d'Aquin', Revue
des sciences philosophiques et theologiques 29: 177-205.
--(1942) Le Temoignage d'Aristote sur Socrate, Paris: Les Belles
Lettres.
Dodds, E. R. (1951) The Greeks and the Irrational, B.erkeley: University
of California Press.
--(1965) Pagan and Christian in an Age of Anxiety, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dover, K. J. (1974) Greek Popular Morality in the Time of Plato and
Aristotle, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Eberhard, A. (1772) Neue Apologie des Socrates ... , Berlin & Stettin:
F. Nicolai.
Ehrenberg, V. (1973) From Solon to Socrates, 2nd edn, London: Methuen.
Encyclopaedia - Britannica (1815f.) Encyclopaedia Britannica, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
210
REFERENCES
Encyclopaedia - Encyclopedie (1751£.) Encyclopedie ou dictionnaire
raisonne. Mis en ordre par M. Diderot ... M. D'Alembert, Paris:
Briasson & c.
Encyclopaedia - Metropolitan (1845) Encyclopaedia metropolitana, vol. X:
History and Biography; vol. 2. London: B. Fellowes & c.
Encyclopaedia - Penny (1833£.) Penny Cyclopaedia, published by the
Society for diffusion of useful knowledge, ·London: Knight.
Encyclopaedia - Russian (1890£.) Encyclopaedic Dictionary (in Russian),
St Petersburg: Brokgaus & Efron.
Encyclopaedia - Soviet (1937) Great Soviet Encyclopaedia (in Russian),
Moscow: Gossudarstvenii Nauchnii Institut.
Erasmus, D. (1704) 'Disputatiuncula de taedio et tristitia Jesu ... ', in
his vol. V, cols. 1265-92 of Erasmi Opera, Lugduni Batuvorum:
Van der Aa.
Everson, S. (ed.) (forthcoming) Companions to Ancient Thought 4: Ethics,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ferguson, J. (1970) Socrates.· A Source Book, London: Macmillan.
Ferrari, G. R. F. (1987) Listening to the Cicadas, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Festugiere, A. J. (1950-3) La Revelation d'Hermes Trismegiste, Paris: J.
Gabalda.
Fontenrose, J. (1978) The Delphic Oracle, Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Forchhammer, P. W. (1837) Die Athener und Sokrates, Berlin: Nicolaische
Buchhandlung.
Gerhardt, C. I. (ed.) (1875-90) G. W. Leibniz: die Philosophischen
Schriften, 7 vols., Berlin.
Gerold, J. J. (1658) Socrates quern examini sistet, Argentinae: J. Pickel.
Gill, C. (1973) 'The death of ,Socrates', Classical Quarterly 23: 25-9.
Gilson, E. (1955) History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages,
London: Sheed & Ward.
Gladigow, B. (1965) Sophia und Kosmos, Hildesheim: Olms.
Gombrich, E. H. J. (1972) Symbolic Images: studies in the art of the
Renaissance, London: Phaidon.
Gomperz, T. (1905) Greek Thinkers, vol. 2, tr. G. G. Berry, London:
Murray.
Goulburn, E. M. (1858) Socrates.· a lecture delivered to the Young Men's
Christian Association in Exeter Hall, London: Rivingtons.
Griffin, J. (1980) Homer on Life and Death, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Griswold, C. (1986) Self-knowledge in Plato's Phaedrus, New Haven &
London: Yale University Press.
Grote, G. (1865) Plato, an·d the Other Companions of Socrates, London:
John Murray.
Guthrie, W. K. C. (1969) A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 3,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
--(1971) The Sophists, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. First
published as Part I of A History of Greek Philosophy, vol. 3. ·
Gutman, H. B. (1941) 'The medieval content of Raphael's "School of
Athens"', journal of the History of Ideas 2: 120-9.
211
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Hackforth, R. (1933) The Composition of Plato's Apology, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Halm, C. (1863) Rhetores Latinim inores,_L ipsiae: Teubner. .
Hamann, J. G. (1967) Hamann's 'Socratic memorabilia' [with] a translation
and commentary by]. C. O'Flaherty, B·altimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Haran, M. (1985) Medieval Thought from Antiquity to· the .Thirteenth
Century, London: Macmillan.
Harrison, A. R. W. (1968-71) The Law of Athens, 2 vols, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1971) Vorlesungen uber die Geschichte der Philosophie,
in his Werke, vol. 18, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Heidegger, M. (19.88) Zu Platons Hohlengleichnis und Theatet,. in
Gesamtausgabe, vol. 34, Frankfurt: Klostermann.
Herbst, J. (1720) De Socratis daemonio, Lipsiae: Litteris schedianis.
Hermes Trismegistus (1945f.) Corpus H ermeticum, Collection Bude, Paris:
Les Belles Lettres.
Herzog, R. (1922) 'Das Delphische Orakel als ethischer Preisrichter', in
Horneffer 1922: 149-70.
High ton, H. (1873) Dean Stanley and Saint Socrates: the ethics of
the philosopher and the philosophy of the divine, London: Elliot
Stock.
Horneffer, E. (1922) Der junge Platon I: Sokrates und die Apologie,
Giessen: A. Topelmann.
Hubbard, B. A. F. and Karnofsky, E. S. (1982) Plato's Protagoras: a Socratic
commentary, London: Duckworth.
Ibbeken, G. C. (1735) De Socrate mortem minus fortiter subeunte ...
disputabunt ... et respondens D. G. Langre·uter, Lipsiae: I. C. Langenheimii.
-
Jones, R. and Penny, N. (1983) Raphael, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Jordan, W. (1990) Ancient Concepts of Philosophy, London: Routledge.
Kahn, C. (1988) 'On the relative dates of the Gorgias and the Protagoras',
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 6: 69-102. ·
Kerferd, G. B. (1981) The Sophistic Movement, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kierkegaard, S. The Concept of Irony, with constant reference to Socrates
(tr. L. M'. Capel), London: Collins.
Kirk, G. S., Raven, J. E. and Schofield, M. (1983) The Presocratic
Philosophers, 2nd edn, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Klibansky, R. (1939) The Continuity of the Platonic Tradition in the
Middle Ages, London: Warburg Institute.
Klosko, G. (1979) 'Towards a consistent interpretation of the Protagoras',
Archiv fur Geschichte der Philosophie 61: 125-42.
--(1983) . 'Criteria of fallacy and sophistry for use in the analysis of
Platonic dialogues', Classical Quarterly 33: 363-74.
Kraut, R. (1984) Socrates and the State, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Kristeller, 0. (1943) The Philosophy of Marsilio Ficino, Columbia Studies
in Philosophy, New York: Columbia University Press.
212
REFERENCES
· . (1944) 'The scholastic background of Marsilius Ficino', Traditio 2:
259-318.
Lacey, A. R. (1971) 'Our knowledge of Socrates_', in G. Vlastos (ed.), The
Philosophy of Socrates, New York: Doubleday.
Lasaulx, E. von (1857) Des Sokrates Leben, Lehre, und Tod nach den
· Zeugnissen der Alten dargestellt, Miinchen: J. G. Cotta.
Latte, K. (1940) 'The coming of the Pythia', Harvard Theological Review
33: ,9-18.
Ledger, G. R. (1989) Re-counting Plato, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lindenbaur, A. (1859) Apologie des Christenthums gegen Uebergriffe der
Philologie und Philosophie, oder des Sokrates Leben, Lehre und Tod . .. ,
Augs.burg: Kleinle.
Lloyd-Jones, P. H.J. (1971) The justice of Zeus, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Lobeck, C. A. (1829) Aglaophamus, n.p.: Regiomontii Prussorum.
Luzac, J. (1796) Oratio de Socrate cive, Lugduni Batavorum: Hontzkoop.
MacDowell, D. M. (1978) The Law in Classical Athens, London: Thames
& Hudson.
Malebranche, N. (1966) Traite de morale (1684), in CEuvres de Malebranche,
vol. XI, 55-6.
Malkin, I. (1987) Religion and Colonization in Ancient Greece, Leyden:
Brill.
Manetti, J. (1974) Vita Socratis, prima edizione . . . a cura di Mario
Montuori, Firenze: Sansoni.
Manning, H. E. (1872) The Daemonion of Socrates ... , London:
Longman, Green.
Maravall, J. (1957) 'La estimaci6n de S6crate en la edad media espanola',
Revista de archivos, bibliotecas y museos 63: 5-68.
Marcel, R. (1951) '"Saint" Socrate, patron de l'humanisme', Revue
lnternationale de Philosophie 5: 135-43. ·
Marmontel, J. F. (1785) Belisaire (in Russian), Moscow: Novikoff.
--(1825) Belisaire, London: Low.
Marrou, H. I. (1938-49) $aint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique,
Paris: Bibliotheque des Ecoles Fran~aises d'Athenes et de Rome, 145.
[Mauvillon, E.] (1777) 'Vom Genius des Sokrates', Deutsches Museum
January-June 1777: 481-510.
Mentz, M. F. and Sommer, F. W. (1716) Socrates nee officiosus maritus nee
laudandus paterfamilias ... exhibitus ... , Lipsiae: Titius.
Meyer, Thomas (1962) Platons Apologie, Stuttg~rt: Kohlhammer.
Migne, J.-P. (1844-90) Patrologiae cursus completus ... ser. Latina, 221
vols. Paris.
--(1857-66) Patrologiae cursus completus ... ser. Graeca, 162 vols.
Paris.
Mikalson, J. D. (1983) Athenian Popular Religion, Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press.
Montaigne, M. de ( c. 1930 ?) Essais, 3 vols. Paris: Nelson.
Montuori, M. (1981a) De Socrate juste damnato: the rise of the Socratic
problem in the eighteenth century, London Studies in Classical Philology
7, Amsterdam: J. Gieben.
213
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
--(1981b) Socrates: physiology of a myth, tr. J M P. Langdale and
M. Langdale, Amsterdam: J. Gieben.
Mosheim, J. (1733) Systema intellectuale hujus universi (Translation of
R. Cudworth's True Intellectual System of the Universe, with notes),
Lugduni Batavorum: Luchtmans.
Navin, L.E. and Katz, E. L. (1988) Socrates: an annotated bibliography,
New York: Garland.
Nehamas, A. (1975-6) 'Confusing universals and particulars in Plato's
early dialogues', ~.eview of Metaphysics 29: 288-306.
Nelson, A. (1948) 'Uber den Ursprung des lateinischen Terminus Sortes,
Sor', Eranos 46: 161-4. ·
Noble, F. X. (1985) 'The declining knowledge of Greek in eighth and ninth
century Papal Rome', Byzantische Zeitschrift 68: 56-62.
Nussbaum, M. (1980) 'Aristophanes and Socrates on learning practical
wisdom', Yale Classical Studies 26: 43-97.
--(1986) The Fragility of Goodness, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
O'Brien, M. J. (1967) The Socratic Paradoxes and the Greek Mind, Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ·
O'Meara, D. J. (ed.) (1982) Neo-Platonism and Christian Thought,
Norfolk, Virginia: International Society for Platonic Studies.
O'Meara, J. J. (1988) Eriugena, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Orlov, E. N. (1897) Socrates: his life and philosophical activity (in Russian),
St Petersburg: Obshchestvennaya Pol'zya.
Ostwald, M. (tr.) (1956) Plato's Protagoras, with introduction by G.
Vlastos, New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Owen, A. S. (1939) Euripides: Ion, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Panagiotou, S. (1987a) 'Justified disobedience in the Crito ?' in S. Panagiotou
(ed.), Justice, Law and Method in Plato and-Aristotle, Edmonton:
Academic Publishing and Printing, 35-50.
--(1987b) 'Socrates' "defiance" in the Apology', Apeiron 20: 39-61. ·
Parke, H. W. (1967) Greek Oracles, London: Hutchinson.
Parke, H.· W. and Wormell, D. E.W. (1956) The Delphic Oracle, 2 vols.,
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Patrizi, F. (1593) Nova de universis philosophia, Venetiis: R. Meiettus.
Patzer, A. (1985) Bibliographica Socratica: die wissenschaftliche Literatur
... von den Anfangen bis auf die neueste Zeit ... , Freiburg: Karl Alber.
Perosa, A. and Sparrow, J. (eds) (1979) Renaissance Latin Verse: An
· Anthology, London: Duckworth.
Pfeiffer, R. (1978) History of Classical Scholarship from 1300 to 1850,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Putnam, H. (1975) 'The meaning of "meaning"'', in his Mind, Language
and Reality: Philosophical Papers, vol. 2, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 215-71.
Reeve, C. D. C. (1988) Philosopher-Kings, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
--(1989) Socrates in the Apology, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Renwick, J. (1967) 'Reconstruction and interpretation of the Belisarius
affair', Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century 52: 171-222.
214
REFERENCES
Rhodes, P. J. (1985) What Alcibiades Did or What Happened to Him: an
inaugural lecture, Durham: University of Durham.
--(1986) The Greek City States: a source book, London: Croom Helm.
Richter, G. (1965) Portraits of Greeks, London: Phaidon.
Roser, D. (1936) Erziehung und Fuhrung. Versuch uber Sokrates und
Platon, Stuttgart: Kohlhammer.
Ross, W. D. (1924) 'Socrates, Plato, and the Platonists', in his Aristotle's
Metaphysics, 2 vols., Oxford: Clare!ldon Press, vol. 1, xxxiii-lxxvi.
Rousseau, J. J. (1762) Emile: ou de /:,Education, Amsterdam: J. Neaulme.
-
1-(1980) Correspondancec omplete,v ol. 37, Oxford: Voltaire Foundation.
Ryle, G. (1966) Plato's Progress, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. .
Salmon, A. (1962) 'Le "Socrate" de David et le "Phedon" de Platon', Revue
belge de philosophie et de l'histoire 40: 90-111.
Sandvoss, E. (1966) Sokrates und Nietzsche, Leiden: Brill.
Santas, G. X. (1964) 'The Socratic paradoxes', Philosophical Review
73: 147-64.
--(1979) Socrates: philosophy in Plato's early dialogues, London:
Routledge.
Schmitt, C. B. (1966) 'Perennial philosophy: from Steuco to Leibniz',
journal of the History of Ideas 27: 505-32. ·
Schmitt, C. B., Skinner, Q. and Kessler, E. (eds) (1988) The Cambridge.
· History of Renaissance Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Schofield, M. (1986) 'Euboulia in the Iliad,, Classical Quarterly 36:
5-31.
Schuhl, P. M. (1956) 'Montaigne et Socrate', France-Grece 15.
Searle, J. (1967) 'Determinables and determinates', in P. Edwards (ed.),
The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, London & New York: Macmillan,
vol. 1, 357-9.
Silk, M. S. and Stern, J. P. (1981) Nietzsche on Tragedy, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Sjliestrom, L. (1686) Socrates philosophus ... quod publico examini sistet
... , Holmiae: Eberdts.
Smith, E. (1740) The Cure of Deism: in answer to 'Christianity as old as
the creation', 3rd edn, London: J. Wyat.
Solovyov, V. (1853) The Drama of Plato's Life, 1935 reprint of Eng. tr.
(1890), London: Nott.
Sprague, R. K. (ed.) (1972) The Older Sophists, Columbia, SC: University
of South Carolina Press.
Spranger, E. (1938) 'Hegel iiber Sokrates', Sitzungsberichte der preussischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften.P· hilosophisch-historischeK lasse, 284-96.
Springer, A. (1883) 'Raffael's "Schule von Athen"', Die graphischen Kunste
5: 53-106.
Stahl, J. M. (1907) Syntax des griechischen Verbums, Heidelberg: Winter.
Stapfer, E. (1786) De philosophia Socratis, Bernae: ex officina typographica
Illustr. Reipublicae.
Steenberghen, F. van (1966) La Philosophie au XII I e siecle, Lou vain:
Publications Universitaires.
215
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Stokes, M. C. (1971) One and Many in Presocratic Philosophy, Washington
& Cambridge, MA: Center for Hellenic Studies.
--(1986) Plato's Socratic Conversations, London: Athlone Press.
Stone, I. F. (1988) The Trial of Socrates, London: Jonathan Cape.
Taylor, A. E. (1917) 'Plato's biography of Socrates', Proceedings of the
British Academy, 93~132~ · .
--(1933) Socrates: the man and his thought, London: Peter Davies.
--(1937) Plato: the man and his work, 4th edn, London: Methuen.
Taylor, C. C. W. (1976) Plato: Protago!as, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Tigerstedt, E. N. (1974) The Decline and Fall of the Neo-Platonic
Interpretation of Plato, Societas Scientiarum Fennica, commentationes.
Toole, H. (1973-4) ·'H tcri-optKOTTJ<; TT]'i Il)\.a,-wvLKT]<; 'A 1roX.01Ca<;',
'E1rtaTTJJLOVLK'ET1Jr ETTJpi<;T<ij"/J iAouocpiKi!jx"o J\ ij" Tov Ilave1riaT'YJJLtov
'A017viiJv 24: 383-96.
Velikanov, A. (1842) Concerning the Reform Brought by Socrates into
Philosophy (in Russian), Odessa: V. Gorodskoi Tipografii.
Vlastos, G. (ed.) (1971) The Philosophy of Socrates, New York: Doubleday.
-- .(198~a) 'The Socratic elenchus', Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy
·. 1:: 27-58.
_ . (1983b) 'The historical Socrates and Athenian democracy', Political
Theory 11: 495-516.
--(1985) 'Socrates' disavowal of knowledge', Philosophical .Quarterly
35: 1-31.
--(1991) Socrates: ironist and moral philosopher, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Walker, D. P. (1972) The Ancient Theology, London: Duckworth.
Wallis, R. T. (1972) Neo-·Platonism, London: Duckworth.
Wilamowitz-Modlendorf,. U; von (1920) Platon, vol. 2, 2nd edn,-Berlin:
Weidmann.
--(1931-2) Der Glaube der Hellenen, 2 vols., Berlin: Weidmann.
Wilson, A.-M. (1972) Diderot, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wind, E. (1968) Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance, 2nd edn, London:
Faber & Faber.
Woodbury, L. (1973) · 'Socrates and the daughter of Aristides', Phoenix
27: 7-25.
Woodruff, P. (1982) Plato: Hippias .Major, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Woozley, A. D. (1979) Law and Obedience: the arguments of Plato's Crito,
London: Duckworth.
Yovchuk, M. T. et al. (1960) Short Sketch of the History of Philosophy (in
Russian), Moscow: -Izdatel'stvo Sotsial'no-ekonomicheskoi Literaturi.
Zeyl, D. (1980) 'Socrates and hedonism', Phronesis 25: 250-9.
216
INDEX LOCORUM
AESCHYLUS, Agamemnon:
1320: 79£. n. 22
AETIUS, I, 15.3: 152 n. 10
ANONYMUS, Dissoi Logoi: 6:
.128
ARCHILOCHUS, 122(W):
80 n. 31
ARISTOTLE, Eudemian Ethics:
l230a7: 78 n. 1; Metaphysics:
987b1-4: 138: 1078b17ff:
138; ·Nicomachean -Ethics:
1116b4-5: 137; 1116.b4':
78 n. 1; 1144b19-20: 137;
1144b29-30: 137; 1145b23-4:
138;-1145b26-7: 137; Rhetoric:
1367b7-9: 7-8 n. 1; 1415b30~32:
· 77 n. 1; 1419a8-12: 77 n. 1
ATHENAEUS, Deipnosophistae:
. V, 218: 54, 80 n. 46
AUGUSTINE, De civitate Dei:
VIII, 1-2: 157; 2-3: 157;
9-11 : 15 8 ; 2 3£. : 166; X, 2. 9£. :
166; X, 10: 166; XIV, 8: 157;
Con[ essions: VII, 9: 164
CASSIAN, Conferences: XIII, 5.3:
208 n. 58
CICERO, Tusculan Disputations:
IV, 37: 208 n. 58
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA,
Stromateis: I, 22: 165
DEMOSTHENES, XXIV, 76:
120 n. 40
DIOGENES LAERTIUS,
Vitae Philosophorum: II,
40: 1; III, 49 ·: 91; VIIl.58:
152 n. 11
EURIPIDES, Helen: 1037: 79 n.
18; Ion: 69-71: 80 n. 26; 908:
59; 1528££: 80 n. 26; · Supplices:
464: 80 n. 22
HERODOTUS, I, 30.4: 6·o, 80 n.
59; 80.4: 79 n. 22; II, 120.5; 80
n. 31; IX, 37.2: 80 n. 22 ·
HOMER, Iliad: III, 316: p.· 59;
XIV, 365: 80 n. 23-
INSCRIPTI ON: Bulletin de
Correspondance Hellenique 63·
(1939) 184 (Amandry 1950 XVI
on his 245): 59, 80 n. 52
JUSTIN, II Apologia: 5: 200 n. 4; . . 7: 200 n. 4; 10: 156, 200 n. 4:
13: 156-7
PARMENIDES, Bl 11-21: 127,
135 n. 7
PAUL, I Timothy: V.8: 177
PINDAR, Pythians: II, 21: 80
PLATO·, Apologia Socratis:
19a1-2: 66; 20eff: 28-;20e-21a:
34, 79 n. 20; 20e7: 29; 21a: 55,
67; 21b-c: 34, 39, 41 79 n. 18;
21b: 33, 38, 46, 55; 2164-5: 39;
21b5: 80 n. 27; 21b9f: 34-37;
21c: 48-9; 21c7:41-2;21dl: 69;
21e6f: 47; 22a: 43, 47; 22a8: 36;
22b-c: 37;22h7: 69;22c2: 33;
22d: 75; 22dl: 46; 22e: 66; 22e1:
43;23a-b:44,46,48;23b1: 32;
23b3-6: 32; 23d: 79 n. 15; 23d6:
217
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
29; 26b.2-9: 37; 26e-27d: 42;
27a1: 37;27d4~7:37;28d6-10:
, 65; 28e: 70; 29-30: 17; 29a~b:
65;29b: 66;29b6-7: 71;29cff:
95; 29c~4; 97; :29c6-d1: 117 ·
n. 9; 29d1-3: 71; .29d-30b: 41,
63-6, 74-5; 30c1: 117 n. 9;
30c-31a: 64; 30d5: 65; 31a7ff:
66; 3ld6-el: 64; 32a1: 117 n. 10;
32b8-c1: 117 n. 10; .32c8-d3:
65; 32d2-3: 117 n. 10; 33c:
81 n. 65, 196; 33c8: 73; 34c4ff:
72;35b9-d1: 65; 39b7-8: 117
n. 9; 35ci; 121 n. 44; 35c7-d1:
117 n. 10; 36c2-3: 64; 36d:
115; 37a5-6: 115; 37b1-2: 66;
37b2-5: 115; 37e3ff: 64; 38a:
66; 38b: 165; 39b4-6: 117 n.
9; Charmides: 161c-162d:
38; 165b-166a: 39; Cratylus:
411b: 41; Crito, 44b5-46a4:
93; 45c5-d8: 117 n. 4; 4Sd-e:
92; 46b4-6: 112; 47e: 149;
48b12-c1: 111; 48c-d: 112;
48d6-8: 113; 48e: 114; 48e1-5:
112; 48el-4: 121 n. 42; 48e1:
121 n. 44; 48e3: 111; 48e4-5:
112; 48e5- 49al: 112; 49: 50;
49a-c: 65; 49a-c: 97, 98;
49a6-8: 117 n. 7; 49b4-6: 95;
49b4-5: 116 n. 1; 49c4-5: 116 n.
1; 49c7-8: 116 n. 1; 49a-e: 94,
96, 112, 116 n. 1, 117 n. 8, 118
n. 14; 49d-e: 117 n. 7; 49d1-2:
112; 49a2-4: 113; 49d3-5:
113, 120 n. 38; 49d3: 113;
49e9-50a1: 111; 49e1-3: 117 n.
7; 49e2: 121 n. 44; 49e6-8: 116
n. 3; 49e9-50a3: 100; 50a: 63;
50a1-2: 116 n. 3; 50a6-7: 111;
50a8: 119 n. 26; 50a8-b5: 106;
50a8-b5: 117 n. 11; 50a8ff: 115;
50b8: 117 n._ 11; 50c1-2: 106,
118 n. 20, 120 n .. 34; 50c4-6:
106, 110; 50d1-51c4: 106, 120 n.
37; 50d1-e2: 108; 51a2-7: 108,
119 n. 26; 51a3-5: 109; 51a3-4:
119 n. 26; 51a5: 115; 51a6ff:
100; 51a6: 109; 51b-c: 104, 118
218
n. 20; 51b3-cl: 108; 51b3-4:
100; 51b4-6: 102; 51b4-5: _
101; 51b7: 102, 118 n. 20;
51b9-c1: 100,102; 51c-d:
64; Slcl-3: 115; 51c6ff.: 109,
120 n.37; 51c6-S3a7: 104;
51c9-d1: 108; 57d3-e3: 111;
51d4: 110; Stet: 20 n. 36; 51e1:
110; 51e3-4: 109; 51e3: 104;
51e5: 110; 50e5-51a7: . 116 n.
1; 51e6-7: 102-105, 120 n. 36;
51e6-7: 110; 51e7: 103, 106, 109,
119 n. 29, 151 n. 24; 52a2-3:
100, 102; 52b1-c3: 110; 52c3:
110; 52d3-5: 109; 52d5: 104;
52e1-2; 120 .,n. 33; 52e1-3: 116
n. 3; 52e3-5: 110; 52e4-5: 106,
109;· 54b2-dl: 106; 54c2-3: 106;
54d-e: . 97; 54d;. 192; Epinomis:
986: 167; Epistle: VII, 324b~d:
9; Euthydemus: 277d-8b: 130;
Euthyphro: Sd: 140; 6d: 140;
6e: 140; 11a: 140; Gorgias: 457e:
42;470c:42;470c: 63;502d10ff:
63;_504a-d: 149; Hippias ma:
286cff: 134; Laches: 181e-182d:
85; 182d~184c: 86; 184dff.
86; 185b: 86_; 185d-e: 86;
187d6-188a3: 53-54; 187eff.:
86; 1S8a-b: ·42; 190c-e: 86;
_l91aff.: 87; 191b6-8: 80 n.28;
191d: 8.7; 192b-c: 87; 192bt-2:
144; 1'92cff: 87; 192eff: 87£;
194d: 88; 195a: 89; 195bff: 89;
198a: 89; 198bff: 89; 198d-e:
89; Menexenus: 235d: 77 n.
1; Meno: 70a: 140; 71b-c: 55,
140~142; 71c: 152 n. 11; 71e-2a:
142; 72a-d: 142; 72c: 140;
73a-c: 142£; 73·a: 84; 74a: 143;
75b10-ll: 144; 75b11-c1: 144;
75c: 144; 75d-76a: 144; 76a7:
144; 76c: 145; 76d4-5: 144;
76e: 145; 76e3-4: 145; 77-8:
148; 77c1-2: 147; 77e-78a:
148; 78b4-6: 147; 82bff: 85;
87c-89a: 146; 99b-c: 146; 100a:
146;Phaedo: 60e: 191; 96aff:
90; 97c: 173; 101d: 47; 114d:
INDEX LOCORUM
192; 117b-118: 198£.; 118: 2; 80 n.25; Memorabilia Socratis:
Phaedrus: 264c: 84; Protagoras: I, 1.16: 151 n. 5; 2.12: 2; II, 3
309a-310a: 123; 310a-311a: 123; 151 -n. 5; III, 6: 151 n. 5; 9.4-9:
311a-312e: 125; 311aff: 125-128; 151 n. 5; 9.5: 151 n. 6; IV, 4.9:
311a: 127; 312h-e: 125; 78 n. 1; 6: 151 n. 5; 6.6 -151 n.
313a-14c: 126; 314b: 126; 314c: 6; 6.7: 151 n. 6 -7. 4-7: 172;
126; 314c-e: 127; 314e-316a: Symposium: 5.1-8: 4
123;316b-c: 127; 317e-318e:
127; 318e-319a: 128; 319a-320c:
128; 329c-333e: 129; 329c-333e:
130; 330c-331e: 130; 331b-c:
130; 331d-2a: 130;333e-4c:
129; 334-8: 123; 334c-8a: 128;
334e-335a: 129; 335c-338e:
129-30; 335e-6a: 129; 338a-b:
130; 338c:-130; 338e-347b:
128; 339eff: 128; 342aff: 128;
347b-e: 128; 348c-349a: 133;
-349d: 132; 349e-350c: 130;
350c-351b: 130; 351b-357e:
1_33-135; 352c1-2: 138; 355c-d:
148; 358: 148; 358a: 134; _
358b-360e: 130; 358c-d ·: 148;
360d-e: 126; 360d: 150;360e:
130, 132; 361c-d: 127; 361e:
123, 127; Republic: 331c-d: 64;
331d-332b9: 37;332b9: 38;
337a: 55, 78 n. 1; 338c-339a:
38; 354b-c: 141; 457cff.: '170;
Statesman: 296a4-9: 120 n.
40; Symposium: 215e: 183; : ·
219e5-220e7: 6;220a5-b7:
4; 220a-d: 126; Theaetetus:
151e-152d: 38; 160d-161e: 38;
Theages: 130d: 192
PLUTARCH, Adversus Colotem:
- 1116E: 80 n. 46
SOPHOCLES, Oedipus Tyrannus:
902£.: 80 n.31
TERTULLIAN, Liber Apolo
geticus: 22: 200 n. 4; 46:
200 n. 4
THEOPHRASTUS, De Sensu: 7:
152 n. 10
THUCYDIDES, I, 22: 77 n. 1; -
II, 40: 5; 65: 3; V, 43.3: 80 n.
22; 89: 7
XENOPHON, Apologia Socratis:
14: 56-7; Cynegetica: XIII, 7:
219
GENERAL INDEX
Academy 79 n. 1, 201 n. 8
Addison, J. 174, 205 n. 35
Adeimantus 132
Aeschines the Orator 178
Aeschines of Sphettos 78 n. 1
Aesculapius 157, 180-1, 184-6,
192, 199, 200 n. 4
Aesop 192
agathos see good
Aglaus 60
agreements: between citizens and
the state 94, 106 - 12, 115, 116 n.
3, 120 nn. 32-3, 120 n. 37, 121
n. 4 3; as 'result of discussion
90, 92,126
akrasia 23, 137-8
Alcibiades ·s, 53, 126, 130, 157,
169, 177, 182-3, 204 n. 27
amnesty 15, 178
Amphipolis 8
Anacharsis 60
Anaxagoras 172-· 3, 205 n. 34
andreia see courage
Antoninus of Florence 167
Anytus 12, 17, 175
Apollo 19, 162, 192, 203 n. 18;
meaning of 40-1 ; and his Oracle ·
20,27, 29, 31-2, 55, 58-9, 67-9;
uses Socrates as example 45;
and Socrates' mission 50, 62,
70, 72; truthfulness of 33-5,
37, 80 n. 26
Apollodorus 123, 179
aporia 89-91
arete see goodness
Arginusae 8-9, 181
arguments: adversarial 131; in
agreement 90, 92; competitive
conception of ·129-32;
cooperative · conception of
133~5; of Crito 112, 114;
inductive 138, 151 n.-5; of the
Personified Laws of Athens
106-10; of Plato 20-1, 30,.
82, 84, 88-; of Socrates 4, 10,
19-30, 41-2, 49, 51-2, 66-73,
7-7 n. 1, 123, 126, 128, 148, 150,
160, 166, 191, 196; Socrates
and sophists believe in 22;
weaker/stronger 12
Aristides 85
Aristodemus 123
Aristophanes 2, 8, 10, 14, -156, 170
Aristotle: and the Middle Ages
158-61, 200 n. 8,201 nn. 9-11;
Poetics 62; and the Renaissance
161-4, 167-8; on Socrates 19,
77-9 n. 1, 137-8
Arnold, M. 183-4
artisans 47
atheism 70, 156, 181, 206 n. 43
Athenaeus 54-5
Athene 162
Athenians: as democrats 5, 7-10,
13-15; ·objects of Socrates ·'
attention 11, 15, 20- 2, 30, 63-5,
67, 74-5, 200 n. 4; religion
of 66, 175, 180, 182; Socrates'
220
GENERAL INDEX
obedience to 70-1, 111-12, 114;
and sophists 12-14
Athens: climate of thought in
49-50, 54, 72; democrats in 177;
as intellectual centre 3, l l, 13;
internal politics of 7, 9, 11.-12;
Personified Laws of 93- 116,
192; political power of 3, 5-7;
and Socrates 4-10, 181, 178,
185-6, 191, 196-7
audience: at Socrates' conversations
69, 127; at Socrates' trial
29, 31, 48, 51, 65- 6, 71-4; see
also jury
Baur, F. C. 187, 196
Bayle, P. 172-4, 180, 205-n .. ,34,
206 n. 38
beliefs: Christian 161, 164-5,
167-8, 173-5, -182; and desires
147, 149:; of Personified .Laws
of Athens . 115; of Socrates 63,
65, 69, 75- 6, 94, 175, 182; of
Socrates' interlocutors 131-:-3;
traditional, :moral .and political,
1-3, 12~13, 67, 83, 85, 88
Bernholdus, B. 178, 206 n . . 39
Boethius 200 n. 8
bravery see· courage
Brouwer, P. van L. 182
Brucker, J. 175-6
Callias 123-4, 126~30, 133-4
Callicles 76, 84
Catherine the Great 179, 206 n. 40
Cato 172, 178, 205 n. 33
causal explanation 143-5, 147-51
causality, final 171,. 173 .
Cephalus 64
Chaerecrates 55, 73 . .
Chaerephon 29, 32, 34, 5,3-6,
58-9, 61, 68-9, 73
Champier, .S. 167, 183
Charmides 39
Chilo ·n 60
Christ 156, 158, 164-5, 204 n.
21; compared with Socrat~s 24,
169-71, 175-6, 179-80, . 183,.
187, 190-1, 197-8, 206 n. 43
Christianity, Christendom: of
Church Fathers 156-8, 189-90;
in eighteenth century 174, 181;
in Renaissance 162, 164-5,
167-8, 190; in .seventeenth
century 172; Socrates' relation to
184-7, 189-90, 196
Cicero 159-60, 200 n. 6
citizen/s: Socrates as 177, 182;
Socrates' fellow 1-3, 6-7, 10,
13-16, 20- 2, 63-4, 196; the
state a.nd 93- 5, 97- 106, 108-11,
114-15, 117 n. 8, 118-19 n. 20,
119 n. 28, 120 nn. 32, 36, 37, 41,
. 121 n. 42
city see state
Clearchus 60
Cleobis and Biton 60
cleverness 12, 88, 125
collectivism 94
Colotes 54
comedy, comedies 8, 14, 55,
127, 170
conceptual elucidations 139-51
contradiction: in Apology 36-7,
42; among philos ·ophers 156;
of Socrates' interlocutors 76,
88; between Socrates' :views
and those of Personified -Laws
of Athens 96-8, 110; see also
• • 1ncons1stency
conventions, moral and religious
10, 67, 83
Cooper, J. G. 175, 180-1
Corinth 7
counter-example: to the Oracle 31,
34-5, 37, 40, 43, 47, 69; used to
refute interlocutors 37-8, 50, 64
courage 20, 85-90, 130, 132,.
137, 143-4, 150; of Socrates
76, 177, 198
court: Athenian 16-17; for
Socrates' trial 17-18, 28, 51,
66-7, 95-8, 106, 109-10, 115,
118 n. 18 ·
craftsmen 43, 46-7, 50, 69, 75, 196
creation 161-2
Creusa 59
Crispo , G. 168
221
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Critias 39, 177-8, 182
Crito 21-2, 27, 93-5, 105-6,
112-14, 116-17 n. 4, 199
Critobulus 4
Croesus 47, 60-1
daimonion see Socrates
Dante 158, 161-2, 168
David, F. 153, 198, 208 n. 60
De Morgan, A. 207 n. 46
death: fear of 70-1, 188; preferable
to injustice 65
definitions: as causal explanations
23, 139-40, 143-5, 147-51, 151
n. 7; as conceptual elucidations
23, 139-51, 151 n. 7; Socratic
39, 87, 137-40, 151 n. 5,
204 n. 25
deism 174-5, 189
Delium 8
Delos 19
Delphi, Delphic 27, 29-31, 33, 38,
47, 51, 58-61, 68-9, 73, 79 n. 6;
see also Oracle
democracy: and civil disobedience
115, 120 n. 40, 182; see also
Athens, Athenians
desires: for good 14 7- 8; and
self-control in Socrates 56
dialectic: Socrates' belief in 62,
65-6, 70; Socrates' use of 85,
91-2, 107, 111-15, 120 n. 39,
151, 186
dialogue form 82-5, 88-92,
122-3, 127, 135 n. 2; see also
dramatic form
Diderot, D. 179, 206 n. 42
Diogenes Laertius 1, 91, 169,
204 n. 26
Dionysius the Areopagite
159, 200 n. 7
Diotima 91, 167
disobedience see obedience
divine interventions see gods
divine law see law
doctors 47, 87, 89
dramatic form, of Plato's dialogues
· 21, 74, 82-5, 87-8, 90-1, 122-3
dreams 72-4, 191-2
Dresig 177-8, 206 n. 38
education 125-7; aim of 85-6; and
sophists 10-11
elenchus, elenchos: adversarial 20,
40-1, 130-1; and clarification
37-40 ·; competitive 2~, 126,
128-34; cooperative 22, 125-6,
128, 130, 133-5; and the oracle
31, 53-5; positive in effect 20;
Socrates' attachment to 26, 53-5,
65, 137-9
Empedocles 144, 152 n. 11
encyclopedias 181, 188, 206-7
nn. 45-6
epistemology 90
Erasmus, D. 169-70, 183, 190, 205
nn. 32, 35
eristic 131
Euclid 162-3 ·
Euripides 3, 186
Everdingen, C. van 169
excellence see goodness
experts 3, 11, 47, 86- .8; and
expertise 10, 76, 90
explanation: in oracle stories 60-1 ;
see also causal explanation
fallacy 130-2
farmers 89
fear: courage in face of 87, 89, 150;
of death 70- 1, 188
Ficino 161- 2, 165-7, 169, 183, 201
n. 13, 204 n. 23, 205 n. 29
fiction: the Oracle as 57-68;
Plato's Socrates as 18, 20,
31, 52, 72, 83; Xenophon's
Socrates as 5 7
Fitzgerald's canon 77 n. 1
Forchhammer, P. W. 182-3, 186;
192, 197, 207 n. 47
Forms, theory of 19, 82, 90,
137-9, 150
freedom of action 7, 14, 104, 178
Freret 177-8, 206 n. 38
future participle, meaning of 34-6
gamesmanship 91, 128-30
Garnier, Abbe 176
Gerold, J. J. 170, 204 n. 29
Glaucon 132
222
GENERAL INDEX
gnosticism 162
God 156, 164, 166, 170-1, 173,
179-80, 182-3, 185
gods: and divine intervention
44, 60; and justice 66; see also
Aesculapius; Apollo
good: and awareness of ignorance
50, 64, 66, 70; citizens 22, 93-6,
105, 111; and civil disobedience
117 n. 10; correct conception
of 149-50; desire for 147;
hedonistic 76, 133-4; overall
and particular 148-9; and
pursuit of virtue 30; and wisdom
87-90, 134
goodness, virtue, excellence, arete:
Christian standards of 24, 157,
171; and civil disobedience 93-4,
105-8; definition of 23, 84,
89-90, 139-51; without divine
grace 171-2; and knowledge 22,
67, 75, 134, 137, 147, 151 n. 6;
parts of 23, 56, 89, 122, 129,
143; in Protagoras 122; Socrates
as example of 165, 179; Socrates'
ignorance of 55; of the soul
63-4; teachability of 11, 23, 28,
128, 186; traditional standards of
5; unity of · 56-7, 132, 134, 137;
see also paradox
Gorgias 11, 84,145,152 n.11
Goulburn, E. M. 183-4
grace, divine 165, 171-2, 1767"8,
183
Gregory XIV 168
Gregory the Great 159, 200 n. 7
Gyges 60
Hamann, J. G. 180-1, 186,
206 n. 44
happiness see goodness
hedonism see good
Hegel, G. W. F. 2, 185-7, 189, 192,
197, 206 n. 44, 207 n. 52
Heidegger, M. 188-9
hekon 116 n. 2
Herbst, J. 180
Hermes Trismegistus 161-2,
166-7, 202 n. 15, 204 n. 22
Herodotus, Herodotean 60,
79 n. 17
Highton, H. 184, 190
Hippias 11, 130, 134
Hippocrates 22, 123-8, 131-2, 135
n. 6
Hobbes, T. 104
holiness see piety
homosexual, pederast 176-7, 191
honour 74, 76
Hughes, T. 184
humanism 91, 169-70
Hume, D. 82
Ibbeken, G. C. 175, 177
ignorance: as impediment to
virtue 23; of Socrates 21, 26,
28, 41, 55-7, 160, 174, 180-1,
186, 191, 196-7; of Socrates'
fellow-citizens 21; of Socrates'
interlocutors 20-2, 41-2, 49, 79
n. 23, 85; and Socrates' mission
24,42,45, 50, 66, 196-7
imitation 167
impiety: alleged charge of 15,
20-1, 28, 66- 7, 177-8; Socrates'
. avoidance of 65, 74, 115, -
117 n. 10 .
inconsistency: detection and _
demonstration of 42, 69, 75-6;
of Socrates 21-2, 43, 97-8, 107;
traditional teachings as 9
individualism 3, 94, 186-7, 189,
192, 196-7
induction 138, 151 n. 5
injustice: as bad and shameful
70-1, 76, 95, 106-7, 116 nn. 1,
4; and disobedience 93-4, 98,
101, 107-10, 112, 115, 119 n. 23,
121 n. 43; as harmful and evil
64-6; Socrates' avoidance of 9, _
74, 117 n. 10; state capable of
21, 65, 120 n. 34
intellectualism see rationalism
interlocutor see respondent
irony 30, 40, 122, 125, 180-1,
186, 188
irreligion see impiety
Isocrates 80 no. 49
223
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
J aucourt 179
Job 158, 175 ·
judgement, sentence: of the jury
in Socrates' trial 18-19, 26,
109-10, 118 .no. 11, 118 n. 20,
119 nn. 25, 26
jury: Athenian 16-17, 103, 178; at
Socrates' trial 1-2, 18-19, 21, 26,
28, 31, 34, 42; 51, 63, 65-7, 69,
72-3, 76
justice: as con£ erment of benefit
50, 65, 117 n. 7; and divine
ordinances 66; as giving
everyone their due 139; and
goodness 84; nature of 38; and
obedience .71, 94-5, 102, 106,
108-11, 115, 116 nn. 1-3, 117
n. 10, 118-19 n. 20, 119 nn.
26, 31, 120 nn. 32, 37, 121 n.
43; as part of virtue ·143, 151
n. 6; procedural 116 n. 3, 120
n. 33; as repayment of debt
64; Socrates' ideas of 81 n. 62;
Thrasymachus on 132
Justin 156-7, 200 n. 4
kalon 87
karteria 87
Kierkegaard, S. 185-7, 208 n. 54
knowledge: claims to 31, 43,
125-6; false conceit of 45,
50, 75, 126, 129, 131-2; and
perception 38; technical 46,
50-1, 75, 87, 89-90;.of values
82, 86-92, 146-7, 150; and
virtue 22, 67, 87, 134, 137, 141,
146, 151 n. 6
La Mothe le Vayer 171, 179,
205 n. 34
Laches 8, 20, 47, 53, 85-91
Lasaulx, E. von 183-4, 207 n. 48
law: of Athens 2, 16-17, 21, 64,
192; divine, 37, 66, 72-4; ·
and justice 117 n. 10; obedience
to 93-5, 97-8, 104, 109-10,
117 n. 11, 178; personified 22,
93-4, 96-111, 113-15; rule of
15, 94-5, 101, 105-10, 120 n.
40, 178, 182, 189; unjust, 21,
93-5, 98, 101, 109-10; see also
obedience
Leibniz, G. W. von 204 n. 25
Leon of Salamis 9, 182
Lessing, G. E. 206 n. 41
Lindenbaur, A. 183, 207 n. 48
Luzac, J. 178, 208 n. 57
Lycon 17
Lysimachus 53-4, 85
Macbeth 61
Macrobius 159
magic 162, 166, 202 n. 16
Malebranche, N. 171, 178,
205 n. 30
Manetti, J. 204 n. 26 .
Manning, H. E. 185, 207 n. 51
Mantinea 52 .
Many, the 120 n. 40, 192, 197
Marmontel, J. F. 179,206 n. 41
Martianus Capella 159 ·
mathematics 146, 162--3, 173-4
Mauvillon, E. J. 176
Melesias 54, 85
Meletus 16-18, 37, 40, 42, 67, 187
Melissus 6 .
Mendelssohn, M. 206 n. 44
Meno 55, 84, 140-6, 152 n. 11
Mentz, M. F., and Sommer,
F. W. 177
metaphysics 139, 160
midwifery, maieutic 4, 91
Miletus 6
Montaigne, M. de 170, 172-4, 196,
204 n. 28, 205 n. 33
morality: divine sanction for 71-2;
knowledge of 82; law and 94-5,
108; and rationality 10, 12; and
society 10-11, 13-14; see also
goodness
Moses, Mosaic 161, 165, 190, 201
n. 9
Mosheim, J. 175-6, 180-1
motivation, theory of 23, 147-51
Myson 60
natural philosophy 3, 6,-10, 28
Neo-Platonism 159-69, 175-6,
224
GENERAL INDEX
190, 201 nn. 8-9, 201-2 n. 14,
204 _n. 19; rejected 183, 185,
204 n. 25
Newman, Cardinal 198, 207 n. 51,
208 n. 61
Nicias 20, 42, 47, 53-4, 85-6,
88-91
Nietzsche, F. W. 185-7, 207 n. 53,
208 n. 58
Nonotte 175, 178
obedience, disobedience: civil
21-2, 93-116, 120 nn. 36-7, 178;
to the god Apollo 27, 64, 70-1;
to the Thirty Tyrants 9, 182
Oedipus 32-3, 47, 61
oligarchic, oligarchy 9, l 4, 120 n.
40, 177; 182, 188
Oracle, oracles: credibility 33-7,
173, 205 n. 34; date of response
52-4; historicity of response
51-62, 81 n. 61; metrical version
of response 80 n. 46; plural,
in Apology 72-3, 81 n. 61;
procedures 58-60; response of,
in Apology 20, 27-62, 65-74;
Socrates' reaction to, in Apology
27-51; Xenophon's version of
response 56-8
Orestes 32
Orlov, E. N. 185, 207 n. 50
Orpheus 162
pain 87
paradigms; of definition 139; of
excellence 146, 150; Socrates
as 44-50, 69; of Socratic
conversations 22, 125, 135 n. 3
paradox: in Apology 28-9, 45-6;
in Protagoras 127; Socratic 22-3,
56, 134, 137-9, 147, 149-51
Patrizi, F. 168, 204 n. 22
Pedius 60
Peloponnesian war 6-8, 14, 52, 55,
178, 207 n. 52
Pericles 3, 5, 7, 146, 150
personality, of Socrates 2, 14, 82
persuade: or obey 21, 98-105, 108,
112-16, 118 nn. 18-19, 119 nn.
28-9, 119 n. 31, 120 nn. 36-7;
opposed to 'force' 115, 121, 43;
opposed to 'teach' 119 n. 44;
and Socrates as persuader 10,
66~7, 76-7, 121 n. 45; and try
to persuade 98-105, 113-16, 119
nn.28-9
Phaenarete 4
philosophia perennis 167, 191
philosophy, philosophising: and
drama in Plato 83, 91, 132-4;
and law 176; and pagan religion
201 n. 14; range of 201 n. 10;_
Socrates' attachment to 117 n.
9; Socrates' contrib -ution to 90,
138; Socrates' dialectical 62,
70-1; and sophistry 22, 132-4;
and theology 24, 165, 167-8
phronesis 137, 185
phronimos 87, 89
Pico della Mirandola 166
piety: in Euthyphro 16; -in
Protagoras 130; of Socrates 30,
32, 67, 81 n. 62
Plataea 5 _
Plato: and Apology 6, 9, 14,
17-22, 26-81, 93, 95-8, 117
n. 7, 126, 128, 184; awareness
of distinctions 145,. 148, 15-1;
biographical intentions 26-8,
51-2, 62, 69, 83; biographical
reliability 6, 9, 17-20, 23,-26-7,
30, 33, 40-4, 51-62, 67-79, 90,
92,134, 137-8, 166-7; cave in
188-9; and Charmides 19, 52,
54, 122, 126, 150; Christianised
158, 161-2, 164-5, 168, 180,
183, 187, 190-1; and Crito 19,
21-2, 27, 70, 93-121, 150; in
Dante 158, 161; in David 198;
deciphering of 165, 169, 204 n.
19; deliberate fallacies in 130-1;
dramatic structure of dialogues
20-1, 82-92, 105, 122-3,
125-35; early dialogues 19-20,
69, 84-5, 137; and Euthydemus
126, 131; and Euthyphro 16, 19,
30-1, 142, 145; and Gorgias 19,
23, 55, 76, 84, 122, 131, 150;
225
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
homosexuality in 176-7; and
Laches 19, 20, 85-81, 122, 150;
and Letters 9, 55; and Meno ·
12, 17, 19, 22-3, 122, 139-51;
and Phaedo 19, 131, 153, 172,
· 198; and . Phaedrus 122; Platonic
tradition 157-62, 164, 168;
portrayal of Socrates 2, 4, 6, 8,
130-4, 172,176,190,198; and
Protagoras 122-36; in Raphael
155, 162-4, 166; and Republic
19, 36-7, 91-2, 122, 131-3, 180;
and Second Alcibiades 205 n. 36;
and Symposium 19, 91, 123, 161,
167; and Theaetetus 4, 19, 91,
. 131; and Timaeus 159, 164; see
also Xenophon
pleasure: and courage 87; as
a good 149; and knowledge
133-4; of watching refutations
74, 76, 196
Pliny the Elder 60, 173
Plotinus 161, 166-7, 200 n. 8
poets: in Athenian culture 3; as
experts 11-12, 3 7, 4 3; Socrates
as poet 191-2; Socrates in ·8-9,
14, 181--2; attacked by Socrates
156, 178, 180-1, 200 n. 4;
interrogated by Socrates 43,
47, 69, 75
Jlolemarchus 37-8
polis 5, 10, 106
politicians, interrogated by
Socrates 41-3, 46-7, 69
politics: Athenian 3, 5, 8-10,
14-15; Socrates' attitude to
63-4, 146, 177-8, 181-3;
Socrates in 8-9, 14, 181-2;
in Socrates' indictment 66,
177-8, 197
Polus 63, 131
Porphyry 166, 200-1 n. 8
Potidaea 6, 8, 53, 126
Proclus 159, 166, 204 n. 22
prophet/s: biblical 156; Greek
89; Plato on Socrates as 180,
190, 198
Protagoras 11, 22, 38, 123-35
protreptic 126
prudence: and good management
84; obligations of 47, 49;
prudential paradox 149; renders
phronimos and derivatives 87~9;
renders sophron and derivatives
56, 60, 74, 84
psychology, moral 23, 139
Ptolemy 162-3
punishment: in future life 175;
state 121 n. 43
Pythagoras 6, 162-3, 174,
202 n. 17
questions: to the Oracle 56-61,
68-9; rhetorical 56, 66; Socrates'
26, 30, 49, 53, 74-5, 134; of
Socrates as clari:ficatory 37-40,
43-4; of Socrates as habitual
190-1, 198; of Socrates as
having positive effect 20-1,
83-92; of Socrates as seeking
definitions 139-41, 146; of
Socrates as tiresome, persistent,
challenging, puzzling 15, 24,
183, 186, 197
Radlov 208 n. 55
Raphael 153, 160, 162, 166, 190,
202 n. 17, 203 n. 18
rationalism, intellectualism 3,
12-14, 22, 85, 89, 186-7, 189,
206 n. 44
rationality 10, 51, 90, 180-1
refutations 31-2, 34-7, 41-3, 47,
68, 72, 74-6; as benefit 51,
63-7; see also elenchus
religion: in late antiquity 156,
202 n. 16; and morality
66-7; religious controversy
170, 172-6, 205 n. 33; and
scholarship 204 n. 24
reputation: of interlocutors 34-5,
42, 4 7, 123; of Socrates 10, 28-9,
36, 54, 68; as a value 5, 74
respondent, interlocutor: fictitious
134; ignorance of 32-3, 45,
49, 75, 79 n. 15, 125-7; led by
Socrates 20-1, 83-6; provoked
by Socrates 125-7, 131
226
GENERAL INDEX
retaliation, retaliatory 94, 106-7,
109, 116 nn. 1, 4, 7
revelation 161-5, 170, 177, 190
rhapsodes 11, 4 7
rhetoric: Plato's 62, 71, 73-4,
77; sophistic, assimilated to
Socrates' 2, 10
riddles 33, 37-40
Roser, D. 188
Rousseau, J.-J. 178-81, 183, 191,
206 nn. 42-3
St Anselm 160
St Augustine of Hippo 157-61,
164, 166, 172, 200 n. 8
St John the Evangelist 164,
202 n. 17
St Paul 159, 177, 184
St Peter 165
St Thomas Aquinas 160-1, 167,
171, 201 n. 11, 205 n. 30
salvation 157-8, 167, 171-2, 176,
187, 190
Samas 6
seers 3, l 1
Seneca the Younger 177
shameful 65, 70-1, 74, 76, 116 n. 1
Simonides 37, 128
Sjliestrom, L. 170, 205 n. 29
Smith, E. 175
Socrates: atheism 70, 181;
awareness of ignorance 50,
55-7, 66; belief in veracity of
god 33-7; biography 1, 27-8,
51-2, 62, 69, 83; charges 1-2,
13-18, 26, 28, 57, 6·7, 73, 117
n. 7, 177-8, 182; and Christ 24,
169-71, 175-6, 179-80, 183,
187, 190-1;197-8, 206 n. 43;
chronology 4, 48, 52~4; claim
of ignorance 20-1, 26, 28, 45,
85, 160, 170, 174, 181, 186,
191, 196-7; and corruption of
young 1-2, 13, 15, 28, 57, 66-7,
73, 182; courage 8, 76, 198;
daimonion of 53-4, 156-7, 166,
170, 176, 180-6, 192, 200 n. 4,
204 n. 28, 207 n. 51; death and
execution 1-2, 14, 18-19, 21,
24, 160, 165, 171, 174, 179-80,
184, 191, 198-9; defence of 17,
20, 26-81, 177; elenchus 20,
22, 38-41, 55, 65, 67, 79 n. 15,
125-35, 137-9, 151 n. 5;
endurance of 6, 183; as example,
paradigm 32-3, 44-5, 48-9,
68-9, 71, 76, 156, 178; historical
1-2, 9, 19-20, 27, 40, 43, 51-62,
67-79, 83, 90-2, 134, 137-8, 151
n. 5, 176; irony of 30, 126, 180,
181, 186, 188; jury 1-2, 16-19, .
21, 28-9, 31, 34, 51, 63-7, 69,
72-3, 76, 107; legacy of 24, 156;
meets people in public places
43, 69, 127-8; and midwifery 4,
91; military service 4-6, 9, 182;
mission 14, 20-1, 24, 26-81, 121
n. 45; paradoxes of 22-3, 56-7,
134, 137-9, 147-51, 151 nn.
6-7; patriotism 2, 63; penalty
16, 18, 25 n. 17, 26, 115, 165,
177; and the physical world
10, 28-9, 54, 138, 171-2, 186,
196, 205 n. 33; physique and
physical appearance 4, 25 n. 4,
208 nn. 58-9; piety 30, 32, 67;
poverty 5, 31, 67; prosecutors,
'first accusers' 28; prosecutors
as portayed in tradition 156,
158, 175, 177, 187; prosecutors
proper 12-18, 28, 66, 107, 197;
'scientific' activity, alleged 2,
10; sense of humour 41 ; as
social reformer 208 n. 55; trial
5, 14-19, 24, 26-7, 48, 57, 101,
165; unpopularity 20, 31, 40, 42,
76; witnesses/testimony at trial
17, 29, 34, 51, 55
soldier 6, 8, 47, 85, 177, 182
Solon 60
Solovyov, V. 187, 196, 208 n. 55
sophia see wise, wisdom
sophists 10-13; Socrates against
22, 181, 186; Socrates assimilated
to 2, 22, 28-9, 178; Socrates
competes at their game 123-34
Sophocles 3, 6, 33
sophos 88, 124-5
227
SOCRATIC QUESTIONS
Sophroniscus 4
sophronos 84
sophrosyne 39, 150
soul; Christian views of 161,
166, 171; and education 125-7;
harmed by injustice 64; health of
150; immortality of 162, 205 n.
37; Socrates' concern for 63, 67,
74-5, 126, 129
Sparta, Spartan 5, 7-9, 87, 177
Spranger, E. 189, 197, 208 n. 57
Stapfer, E. 176
state; ideal 156, 187; and individual
21, 93-121, 192, 196
statesman 43, 47
Stesilaus 86
Steuco, A. 167
teacher 28, 66, 129, 163, 188
Tellus 60
Tertullian 200 n. 4
tetractys 163
Theaetetus 38, 91
Theopompus 60
Theramenes 182
Thrasymachus 11, 38, 55, 132-3
Thucydides 3, 6-7, 27
Thucydides, son of Melesias 85
Toland, J. 175
tragedy, tragedies 3
true opinion 146, 149
truth; as aim of Socrates' dialectic
128
tyranny, tyrants 3, 9, 14-5, 178
universals, particulars 87, 138, 141
Valerius Maximus 160
values: and knowledge 89-90;
popular 12-13, 28; in Protagoras
133; questioned 12-13, 15;
Socrates' 51, 65, 75-6
value-judgement 31, 89, 91
Van Dale 173
Velikanov, A. 207 n. 52
Villedieu, Mme de 169, 191,
204 n. 27
virtue see goodness
virtuous person 22, 93-6, 100, 117
n. 7, 158, 171-2, 175
Voltaire 175, 178, 180, 205 n. 37
weakness of will see akrasia
wealth 5-6, 60, 76
wisdom: applied to Athens 7 4;
applied to Protagoras 123-5;
applied to Socrates 20, 28, 33,
36, 43-6, 50-1, 54-6, 58, 60-1,
68, 100, 123, 199; applied to
others 31-2, 34-5, 37, 42, 44-7,
50-1, 60-1, 72, 74, 157; of
Christians 156; of Christians
and pagans 167; courage as 88,
130, 132; human/superhuman
29-31, 48, 68, 164; identified
with knowledge 28, 89, 151 n.
6; renders sophia 28, 51, 88-9,
125; in silence 163; as a virtue
56-7, 130, 132, 143; virtues as
134, 151 n. 6
wrong, wrongdoing; in Socrates'
paradoxes 23, 134, 137, 147, 149;
see also injustice
Xanthippe 5, 169, 177, 191,
205 n. 37
Xenophon; 'the accuser' in
2; authorial autopsy in 27;
independent of Plato 80 n. 25,
151 n. 5; imitates Plato 78 n. 1;
the oracle in his Apology 55-9;
on Socrates 41, 43, 80 n. 46,
151 nn. 6-7, 156, 176, 190; not
present at Socrates' trial 17; on
Socrates' interest in science 172
Zoroaster 162-3, 166, 204 n. 22
Zwingli 205 n. 32
228