SOME PROBLEMS 
OF PHILOSOPHY 

BEGINNING OF AN INTRODUCTION 
TO PHILOSOPHY 

BY 
WILLIAM JAMES 



LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO 
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON 

NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND r\L(UrTA 

1911 



ALL rlCHTS RESERVF 



PREFATORY NOTE 

1 OR several years before his death Professor Wil- 
liam James cherished the purpose of stating his 
views on certain problems of metaphysics in a 
book addressed particularly to readers of phi- 
losophy. He began the actual writing of this 
'introductory text-book for students m metaphys- 
ics/ as he once called it, in March, 1909, and to 
complete it was at last his dearest ambition. 
Bt u illness, and other demands on his diminished 
strength, continued to interfere, and what is now 
published is all that he had succeeded in writing 
when he died in August, 1910, 

Two typewritten copies of his unfinished manu- 
scpipt were found. They had been corrected sep- 
arately * A comparison of the independent alter- 
ations in the t^a copies showed few and slight 
diift lonces of phrase and detail, and indicated no 
formed intention to make substantial changes; yet 
the author perhaps expected to make some further 
alterations in a final revision if he could finish the 
book, for in a memorandum dated July 26, 1910, in 
which he directed the publication of the manu- 
script, ie wrote: 'Say li is fragmentary and unre* 



This memorandum continues, *CWZ it "A 


vu 



PREFATORY NOTE 

ning of an introduction to philosophy " Say that I 
hoped by it to round out my system, which now is too 
much like an arch built only on one side ' 

In compliance with the author's request left in 
the same memorandum, his pupil and friend, Dr. 
H. M. Kallen, has compared the two versions of the 
manu&cupt and largely prepared the book for the 
press. The divisions and headings m the manu- 
script were incomplete, and for helpful suggestions 
as to these grateful acknowledgments are also due 
to Professor R. B. Perry. 

HENRY JAMES, R. 

CAMBRIDGE, March 25, 1911. 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER I 

PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 3 

Philosophy and those who write ifc, 3, "'What philosophy is, 
4 * Its value, G Its enemies and their objections, 8 Objec- 
tion that it is unpractical answered, 9 This objection in the 
light of history, 10 ^Philosophy as ' man thinking/ 15 Origin 
of man's present ways of thinking, 10* Science as specialized 
philosophy, 21. Philosophy the residuum of problems unsolved 
by scienooj 23 Philosophy need not bo dogmatic, 25 Not 
divorced from reality, 26 Philosophy as " metaphysics, " 27 

CHAPTER II 

THE PBOBLKMS OF MFTAHIYSICS 29 

Examples of metaphysical problems, 29, Metaphysics de- 
fined, 31, Nature of me taphyausal problems, 32/ nationalism 
and empiricism in raetaphymcH/4 

CHAPTER III 

THE PKOBira OF BEINO .,,*..,,. 38 

Schopenhauer on the origin of the problem, 38, Various 
treatments of the problem, 40. Kationaliat and empiricist 
treatments, 42. Same amount of existence must be begged by 
all, 45 Conservation VB, creation, 4& 

CHAPTER IV 

PERCEPT AKI> CoNCKH 1 Tan IMPORT OF CONCEPTS . 47 

Their difference, 47* The conceptual order, BO* Concept- 
ual knowledge j the rationalist view, 56- Conceptual know- 
ledge ; the empiricist view, 67, The content and function o! 
concepts, 58, The pragmatic rule, 59. Examples, 62 0r> 
gin of concepts in fcheir utility, 63, The theoretic uae of con- 
cepts, 65 In the a priori aoiencea, 07, And in physics, 70. 
Concept* bsing new values^ 71. Summary, 73, 

Sx 



CONTENTS 

i 
CHAPTER V 

PEECEPT AND CONCEPT THE ABUSE OF CONCEPTS . 75 

The intellecttuhst creed, 75 Defects of the conceptual 
translation, 78 The insuperability of sensation, 70. Why con- 
cepts are inadequate, 81 Origin of mtelleetuahsm, 83 Inad- 
equacy of mtelleetuahsm, 84 Examples of puzzles introduced 
by the conceptual translation, 85 Relation of philosophers 
to the dialectic difficulties, 01 The sceptics and Hegel, 92 
Bradley on percept and concept, 92 Criticism of Bradloy, 95. 
Summary, 96 

CHAPTER VI 

PEKOEPT AND CONCEPT SOME COROLLARIES * , , 98 

I Novelty becomes possible, 98 II Conceptual systems 
are distinct realms of reality, 101 III The self-sameness of 
ideal objects, 102. IV Concepts and percepts are cowsubstan- 
tial, 107, V An objection replied to, 109, 

CHAPTER VII 

THE ONE AND THE MANY . 1 13 

Pluralism vs. monism, 13 & Kinds of monism, 110* Mys- 
tical monism, 110 Monism of substance) 119, Critique of 
substance, 121. Pragmatic analysis of oneness, 124. Kinds 
of oneness, 126. Unity by concatenation, 120, Unity of pur- 
pose, meaning 1 , 131. Unity of origin, 132. Summary 132* 

CHAPTER VIH 

THE ONE AND THE MANY (COMNTOD) ~~ VALXTES AHB 

DEFECTS , . , . , 135 

The momrtio theory, 136. The value ojc absolute oneness, 
136, Its defects, 138 The pluralistic theory, 140, Its de- 
fects, 142. Its advantages, 142. Monism, pluralism aad nov- 
elty, 145, 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER IX 

THE PROBLEM OF NOVELTY ....... 147 

Perceptual novelty, 148 bnenup and novelty, 14*K Punoiui 



experience and novelty, 151 Novelty and the lufamte, 13 
CHAPTER X 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE TUB C 

VIEW . . , , . . , 154 

The discontinuity theory, 1.1-1 Tlio continuity tlipwry, 15." 
Zone's paradowb, 1.17 Kent's antinomies, !<>() Ambiguity 
ol Kant's statement of the problem, 16U. llewwvu'r'h solu- 
tion, 164 His solution favor* novelty, 

CHAPTER XI 

NOVELTY AND THE INKWITK THK 

VIEW .,,,.,.<,.,,., IW 

Tho standing inJluite, 107, Ita f>mgmati<j deflRitittii^ liJB, 
The growing miituto, 170 The growmgf infinite mui b 
treated ua discontinuous, 172, Objectmniu IT& (1) The 
uumber-contiuuum, 173. (^} The u nuw infinite, 1 * 175 
The new infinite is para4oxi0ftl, 170 t "TwawfiiwfcB mtmb<t*V* 
177, Theip mm and defeats, 178. EuwelFa solution of Lena's 
patadox by their mean, 180. The solution criticized, 181 
Conclusions, 184, (1) Ccmeaptiml trattifommtion of pejrep* 
tuai expanenco tunje the mftoite mto a problem, 1S& (S) It 
leaves the problem of novelty where it wa*> 187. 

CHAPTER XII 

NOVELTY Am> CAUSATION THK 
Vmw -.*.*,.,, 
Tho principle of fflurtfity t 180, Ari*totle &n ewawtioo, 190. 
Scholastioiam on tbe efftoient saute, 1S1 Oc^miioma 
leibnitz, 105. Hums, 196. Crlttoitm of Hum*, 190. 

xi 



CONTENTS 

201 Positivism, 203. Deductive theories of causation, 204 
Summary and conclusion, 205 

CHAPTER XIII 

NOVELTY AND CAUSATION THE PERCEPTUAL 

VIEW . . 208 

Defects of the perceptual view do not warrant skepticism, 
209 The perpetual experience of causation, 210 In it ' final ' 
and 'efficient' causation coincide, 212 And novelties arise, 
213 Perceptual causation sets a problem, 215 This is the 
problem of the relation of mind to bram, 217 Conclusion, 
217 

APPENDIX 

FAITH AND THR RIGHT TO BIXIFVE .... 221 

INDEX 233 



ME PROBLEMS OP 
PHILOSOPHY 



CHAPTER I 

PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

THE progress of society is due to the fact that 
individuals vary from the human average in 
all sorts of directions, and that the originality 
is often so attractive or useful that they are 
recognized by their tribe as leaders, and be- 
come objects of envy or admiration, and set- 
ters of new ideals. 

Among the variations, every generation of 
men produces s some individuals exceptionally 
preoccupied with theory. Such men 



matter for puzzle and astonish- 



wnteit ment where no one else does. Their 
imagination invents explanations and com- 
bines them. They store up the learning of their 
time> utter prophecies and warnings, and are 
regarded as sages. Philosophy, etymologic* 
ally meaning the love of wisdom, is the work 
of this class of minds, regarded with an indul- 
gent relish, if not with admiration, even by 
those who do not understand them or believe 
much in the truth which they proclaim. 
S 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Philosophy, thus become a race-heritage, 
forms in its totality a monstrously unwieldy 
mass of learning. So taken, there is no reason 
why any special science like chemistry, or as- 
tronomy, should be excluded from it* By com- 
mon consent, however, special sciences are 
to-day excluded, for reasons presently to be 
explained; and what remains is manageable 
enough to be taught under the name 



philoso- 

phy is of philosophy by one man if his in- 
terests be broad enough, 

If this were a German textbofik I should first 
give my abstract definition of the topic, thus 
limited by usage, then proceed to display its 
'Begriff, und Eintheilung^ and its 'Aufgabe 
und Mcthode.* But as such displays are usu- 
ally unintelligible to beginners, and unneces- 
sary after reading the book, it will conduce to 
brevity to omi I that chapter altogether, useful 
though it might possibly be to more advanced 
readers as a summary of what is to follow* 

I will tarry a moment, however, over the 
matter of definition* Limited by the omission 

of the special sciences, the name of philosophy 

4 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

has come more and more to denote ideas of 
universal scope exclusively. The principles of 
explanation that undeilie all things without 
exception, the elements common to gods and 
men and animals and stones, the first whence 
and the last whither of the whole 



cession, the conditions of all knowing, and the 
most general rules of human action- these 
furnish the problems commonly deemed phi- 
losophic par excellence; and the 



the man who finds the most to say about them, 
Philosophy k defined in the usual scholastic 
textbooks as 'the knowledge of things in gen- 
eral by their ultimate causes, BO far as natural 
reason can attain to such knowledge/ This 
means that explanation of the universe at 
large, not description of its details, is what 
philosophy must aim at; and so it happens that 
a view of anything is termed philosophic just 
in proportion as it m broad and connected with 
lOther views, and as it uses principles not proxi- 
mate* or intermediate* but ultimate and all* 
ml* to justify itseli Any very sweep* 
i tkw of tfe world ia a philosophy In tfaii 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

sense, even though it may be a vague one. It is 
a Weltanschauung, an intellectualized attitude 
towards life. Professor Dewey well describes 
the constitution of all the philosophies that 
actually exist, when he says that philosophy 
expresses a certain attitude, purpose and tem- 
per of conjoined intellect and will, rather than 
a discipline whose boundaries can be neatly 
marked off. 1 

To know the chief rival attitudes towards 
life, as the history of human thinking has de- 
lta value veloped them, and to have heard 
some of the reasons they can give for them- 
selves, ought to be considered an essential 
part of liberal education, Philosophy, indeed, 
in one sense of the term is only a compend- 
ious name for the spirit in education wMeh 
the word 'college' stands for in Amerfea* 
Things can be taught in dry dogmtatic wsys 
or in a philosophic way. At a technical school 
a man may grow into a first-rate instrum^ 
for doing a certain job, but he may mias all 

1 Compare the article * Philosophy' in Baldwia'i Zto&tttty of 
Phifacyky 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

the graciousness of mind suggested by the 
term liberal culture. He may remain a cad, 
and not a gentleman, intellectually pinned 
down to his one narrow subject, literal, unable 
to suppose anything different from what he 
has seen, without imagination, atmosphere, or 
mental perspective, 

Philosophy, beginning in wonder, as Plato 
and Aristotle said, is able to fancy everything 
different from what it is. It sees the familiar 
as if it were strange, and the strange as if it 
were familiar. It can take things up and lay 
them down again* Its mind is full of air that 
plays round every subject. It rouses us from 
our native dogmatic slumber and breaks up 
our caked prejudices, Historically it km d 
ways been a sort of fecundation of four differ- 
ent human interests, science, poetry, religion* 
and logic, by one another. It has sought by 
hard reasoning for results emotionally valu- 
able* To have some contact with it, to catch 
its influence, is thus good for both literary &*id 
scientific students* By its poetry it appeals to 
Htetety minds; but it* logic stiffens them wp 

7 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

and remedies their softness By its logic it 
appeals to the scientific, but softens them by 
its other aspects, and saves them from too dry 
a technicality. Both types of student ought 
to get from philosophy a livelier spirit, more 
air, more mental background. 'Hast any phi- 
losophy in thee, Shepherd?* this question 
of Touchstone's is the one with which men 
should always meet one another, A man with 
no philosophy in him is the most inauspicious 
and unprofitable of all possible social mates. 

I say nothing in all this of what may be 
called the gymnastic use of philosophic study, 
the purely intellectual power gained by defin- 
ing the high and abstract concepts of the phi- 
losopher, and discriminating between them* 

In spile of the advantages thus enumer- 
ated, the study of philosophy has systematic 
enemies, and they ware never as 
^ um ^ous^ at the present day* The 
definite conquests of science and tiae 
apparent indefiniteness of philosophy's results 
partly accouat for this; to say nothing of man's 
native rudeness of mind, which maliciously 
8 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

enjoys deriding long words and abstractions. 
"Scholastic jargon,' 'mediaeval dialectics/ are 
for many people synonyms of the word phi- 
losophy. With his obscure and uncertain spec- 
ulations as to the intimate nature and causes 
of things, thej^ilo^opher is likened to a m 
'blind man in a dark room looking for a black ^ 
hatjthat is not there.'_ His occupation is de- 
scribed as the art of 'endlessly disputing 
without coming to any conclusion/ or more 
contemptuously still as tlw'tfytttematixcheMm" 
brauch einer eben zu dmem Zwecke erfundenen 
Terminologies 

Only to a very limited degree is this sort of 
hostility reasonable* I will take up some of the 
current objections in successive order* since to 
reply to them will be a convenient way of 
entering into the interior of our subject, 

ObjeGtion L Whereas the sciences make 
^ steady progress and yield applica- 
tion that tions of matchless utility, philosophy 
makes no progress and has no practi- 
cal applications. 

Reply* The opposition is unjustly founded* 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

f pr the sciences are themselves branches of the 
tree of philosophy/ As fast as questions got' 
accurately answered, the answers were called 
'scientific/ and what men call * philosophy* 
to-day is but the residuum of questions still 
unanswered. At this very moment we are see- 
ing two sciences, psychology and general biol- 
ogy, drop off from the parent trunk and take 
independent root as specialties. The more 
general philosophy cannot as a rule follow the 
voluminous details of any special science. 

A backward glance at the evolution of phi- 
losophy will reward us here. The earliest phi- 
TO* ot>- losophers in every land were ency* 
L> ugh? clopaedic sages, lovers of wisdom, 
of wetory sometimes with, and sometimes with- 
out a dominantly ethical or religious interest. 
They were just men curious beyond immedi- 
ate practical needs, and no particular problems, 
but rather the problematic generally, was 
their specialty, China, Persia, Egypt, In4i$, 
had such wise men, but those of Greece are the 
only sages who until very recently have In* 
fluewced the course of western thinking* The 
10 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

earlier Greek philosophy lasted, roughly speak- 
ing, for about two hundred and fifty years, 
say from 600 B, c onwards Such men as 
Thale^ Heraeleitus, Pythagoras, Parmemdes, 
Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Democnttib, were 
mathematicians, theologians, politicians, as- 
tionomers, and physicists. All the learning of 
their time, such as it was, was at their disposal 
Plato and Aristotle continued their tradition, 
and the gieat medieval philosophers only 
enlarged its field of application. If we turn to 
Saint Thomas Aquinas's groat 'Sumrna,* writ* 
ten in the thirteenth century, we find opinions 
expressed about literally every thing* from God 
down to matter, with angels, men, and dei&s 
taken in on the way. The relations of jtltnost 
everything with everything else, $f the cre- 
ator with his creatures, of the knower with 
the known, of substances with forms* of mind 
with body, of yin with salvation, come success- 
ively up for treatment* A theology, a psy- 
, a system of duties and morals, are 
in fullest detail, while physiei &ad logic 
toe established in their imivers&l 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

The impression made on the reader is of al- 
most superhuman intellectual resources It is 
true that Saint Thomas's method of handling 
the mass of fact, or supposed fact, which 
he treated, was different from that to which 
we are accustomed. He deduced and proved 
everything, either from fixed principles of 
reason, or from holy Scripture. The properties 
and changes of bodies, for example, were ex* 
plained by the two principles of matter and 
form, as Aristotle had taught* Matter was the 
quantitative* determinable, passive element; 
form, the qualitative, unifying, determining, 
and active principle. All activity was for an 
end. Things could act on each other only when 
in contact. The number of species of things 
was determinate, and their differences dis- 
crete, etc., etc. 1 

By the beginning of the seventeenth century, 
men were tired of the elaborate a priori methods 
of scholasticism. Suarez's treatises availed not 

1 J Rfokaby'ft Qtntral Metaphysics (Longmans, Green and Co ) 
gives a popular account of the essentials of St Thomas's phtlcwophy of 
nature, Thomai J, Harper's Metaphysics of the School ( 
goei into minute detail, 

IS 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

to keep them in fashion But the new phi- 
losophy of Descaitcs, which displaced the 
scholastic teaching, sweeping over Euiope like 
wildfire, pieserved the same encyclopedic 
chaiactei We Lhink of Desc.trlcs nowadays 
as the metaphysician who said 'OogiLo, ergo 
sum,' separated mind fioin mailer as two con- 
trasted substances, and g*ive a renovated proof 
of God\s existence. But his contemporaries 
thought of him much more us we think of 
Herbert Spencer in our day, as a great cosmic 
evolutionist, who explained, by *the redistri- 
bution of matter and motion/ and the laws of 
impact, the rotations of the heavens, the circu- 
lation of the blood t the refraction of light, ap- 
paratus of vision and of nervous action, the 
passings of the soul, and the connection of the 
mind and body, 

Descartes died in 1850* With Locke's 
'Essay Concerning Human Understanding/ 
published m 1090* philosophy for the first time 
turned more exclusively to the problem of 
knowledge, and became 'critical/ This sub* 
jective tendency developed; and altkwgh 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

school of Leibnitz, who was the pattern of a 
universal sage, still kept up the more universal 
tradition Leibnitz's follower Wolff published 
systematic treatises on everything, physical 
as well as moral Hume, who succeeded 
Locke, woke Kant 'from his dogmatic slum- 
ber/ and since Kant's time the word 'philoso- 
phy' has come to stand for mental and moral 
speculations far more than for physical the- 
ories. Until a comparatively recent time, 
philosophy was taught in our colleges un- 
der the name of 'mental and moral philoso- 
phy/ or ' philosophy of the human mind/ 
exclusively, to distinguish it from 'natural 
philosophy/ 

But the older tradition is the better as well 
as the completer one* To know the actual 
peculiarities of the world we are born into is 
surely as important as to know what makes 
worlds anyhow abstractly possible. Yet this 
latter knowledge has been treated by many 
since Kant's time as the only knowledge worthy 
of being called philosophical Common xoea 
(eel the question 'What is Nature likef * 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

as meritorious as the Kantian question c llow 
is Natuie possible'^ So philosophy, in order 
not to lose human respect, must take some 
notice of the actual constitution of reality. 
There are signs to-day of a return to the more 
objective tradition 1 

Philosophy in the full sense is only man 

thinking, thinking about generalities rather 

than about particulars. But \\ helher 

Philoso- 

phy is about generalities or particulars, 
<man man thinks always by the same 
n& methods He observes, discriminates, 
generalizes, classifies, looks for causes, traces 
analogies, and makes hypotheses. Philosophy, 
taken as something distinct from science or 
from practical affairs, follows no method 
peculiar to itself. All our thinking to-day has 
evolved gradually out of primitive Jnn^aa 
thought, and the only really important changes 
that have come over its manner (as distin- 
guished from the matters to which it believe) 
are a greater hesitancy in asserting its couvio 

1 For an excellent defeats* of it I **ter my teadew to Paulwa's 
ttwlttod by Th% (1884), pp. 1W4 
U 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

tions, and the habit of seeking verification l for 
them whenever it can. 

It will be instructive to trace very briefly the 
origins of our present habits of thought* 

Auguste Comte, the founder of a philosophy 
which he called 'positive,' 2 said that human 
Onginof theory on any subject always took 
m * n ' s three forms in succession. In the 

present 

ways of theological stage of theorizing, phe- 



nomena are explained by spirits pro- 
ducing them; in the metaphysical stage, their 
essential feature is made into an abstract idea, 
and this is placed behind them as if it were an 
explanation; m the positive stage* phenomena 
are simply described as to their coexistences 
and successions* Their 'laws' arc formulated, 
but no explanation of their natures or exiate&ce 
is nought after. Thus a 'spiritus rector 9 would 
be a theological, a * principle of attraction' 
a metaphysical, and a 'law of the squares* 
would be a positive theory of the planetaiy 



Compare G. H. Lewer Anttitld (1864), otap 4. 

Cours <U pAtoioyAw jwfow, 6 volume*, Part*, 18SO-1S4& 

16 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

Comte's account is too sharp and definite, 
Anthropology shows thai the caihcst attempts 
at human theoiizing mixed the theological and 
metaphysical together Common t hings needed 
no special explanation, remaikahle things 
alone, odd things, especially deaths, calami- 
ties, diseases, called for it, What made things 
act was the mysterious energy in them, and 
the more awful they were, the moie of this 
mana they possessed The great Hung nas to 
acquire mana oneself 'Sympathetic magic* 
is the collective name for what seems to have 
been the primitive philosophy here You could 
act on anything by controlling anything else 
that either was associated with it or renembled 
it, If you wished to injure an enemy, you 
should either make an image of him, or get 
some of his hair or other belongings, or get his 
name written. Injuring the substitute, you 
thus made him suffer correspondingly. If you 
wished the rain to come, you sprinkled the 
ground, if the wind, you whistled, etc. If you 
would have yams grow well in your g&wka* 
pttt & stone there that looks like a yam* Wotddl 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

you cure jaundice, give tumeric, that makes 
things look yellow, or give poppies for troubles 
of the head, because their seed vessels form n 
'head.' This "doctrine of signatures' played 
a great part in early medicine. The various 
'-mancies' and '-mantics' come in here, in 
which witchcraft and incipient science are 
indistinguishably mixed. 'Sympathetic' the- 
orizing persists to the present day. 'Thoughts 
are things,' for a contemporary school -^ and 
on the whole a good school of practical 
philosophy. Cultivate the thought of what 
you desire, affirm it, and it will bring all sim- 
ilar thoughts from elsewhere to reinforce it, 
so that finally your wish will be fulfilled* 1 

Little by little, more positive ways of con- 
sidering things began to prevail. Common ele- 
ments in phenomena began to be singjcd out 
md to form the basis of generalizations. But 
Jhese elements at first had necessarily to be the 

i Compare Prentiw Mulford and othert of the * new thtmjht * 
fpc For primitive iymp*thetic magic cotuult J, Jwtrw in Poet 
nd Fable in Ptyvkofoflft the chapter on Analogy; F B, Jevoai, In* 
wfed&ft to th* Bittory of Rtlifion, chap, iv f J, a fttaet i fkt 
Wan Bought r E E Maretti Tfo Threshold of falyim, pot- 
im ; A Lovejoy : Ths Moniit, ivi r 557 

18 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

more diamatic 01 humanly interesting ones, 
The hot, the cold, the wet, the dry in things 
explained their behavior. Some bodies were 
naturally warm, others cold. Motions were 
natural or violent The heavens moved In 
circles because circulai motion was the most 
perfect, The lever was explained by the greater 
quantity of perfection embodied in the move- 
ment of its longer arm 1 The sun went south 
in winter to escape the cold. Precious or 
beautiful things had exceptional properties, 
Peacock's flesh resisted putrefaction, The 
lodeatone would drop the iron which it held if 
the superiorly powerful diamond was brought 
near, etc. 

Such ideas sound to us grotesque, but im- 
agine no tracks made for us by scientific an- 
cestors, and what aspects would we single out 
from nature to understand things by? Not till 
the beginning of the seventeenth century did 
the more insipid kinds of regularity in things 
abstract men's attention away from the prop- 



1 On Greek scicnca, we W, WhewelTs Hitf&ry cf the 
l. J, book 1, G E Lewe*, Anttotle, putim 



SOME PROBLEMS O* 1 I'JilL.ObUJb'Jtiy 

erties originally picked out* Few of us realize 
how short the career of what we know as 
* science' has been Three hundred and fifty 
yeai s ago haidly any one believed m the Coper- 
nican planetary theory. Optical combinations 
were not discovered. The circulation of the 
blood s the weight of air, the conduction of 
heat, the laws of motion were unknown; the 
common pump was inexplicable, there were no 
clocks; no thermometers; no general gravita- 
tion; the world was five thousand years old; 
spirits moved the planets; alchemy, magic, 
astrology, imposed on every one's belief. Mod- 
ern science began only after 1000, with Kep- 
ler, Galileo, Descartes, Torrieelli, Pascal, liar* 
vey, Newton, Huygcns, and Boyle. Five men 
telling one another in succession the discover- 
ies which their lives had witnessed, could de- 
liver the whole of it into our hands: Harvey 
might have told Newton, who might have told 
Voltaire; Voltaire might have told Dalton, 
who might have told Huxley, who might have 
told the readers of this book. 
The men who began this work of emancipa- 
te 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

tion weie philosophers m the original sense of 
the word, universal sages Galileo said that 
Science is ^ e h&d spent more years on philoso- 
spe 4 Cza l": phy than months on mathematics* 

ized phi- ^ J 

losopfcy Descartes was a universal philoso- 
pher m the fullest sense of the term* But the 
fertility of the newer conceptions made special 
departments of truth grow at such a rate that 
they became too unwieldy with details for the 
more universal minds to carry them, so the 
special sciences of mechanics, astronomy, and 
physics began to drop off from the parent stem. 
No one could have foreseen in advance the 
extraordinary fertility of the more insipid 
mathematical aspects which these geniuses fer- 
reted out. No one could have dreamed of the 
control over nature which the search for their 
concomitant variations would give. 'Laws' de- 
scribe these variations; and all our present laws 
of nature have as their model the proportion- 
ality of v to t, and of s to t z which Galileo first 
laid bare, Pascal's discovery of the proportion* 
ality of altitude to barometric height, New/* 
ton's of acceleration to distance, Boyle's of 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

air-volume to pressure, Descartes' of sine to 
sine in the refracted ray, were the first fruits of 
Galileo's discovery. There was no question of 
agencies, nothing animistic or sympathetic in 
this new way of taking nature. It was descrip- 
tion only, of concomitant variations, after the 
particular quantities that varied had been 
successfully abstracted out. The result soon 
showed itself in a differentiation of human 
knowledge into two spheres, one called * Sci- 
ence,* within which the more definite laws 
apply, the other ' General Philosophy/ in which 
they do not. The state of mind called positi- 
viatic is the result, 'Down with philosophy!' 
is the cry of innumerable scientific minds, 
'Give us measurable facts only, phenomena, 
without the mind's additions, without entities 
or principles that pretend to explain/ It is 
largely from this kind oi mind that the objec- 
tion that philosophy has made no progress, 
proceeds, 

It is obvious enough that if every step for* 
ward which philosophy makes, every question 
to which an accurate answer is found, gets ac- 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

credited to science the residuum of unan- 
swered problems will alone remain to consti- 
phl ^ tute the domain of philosophy, and 



phy is the w ji a l ne bear her name* In point of 

residuum 

of prob- fact this is just what is happening. 
solved by Philosophy has become a collective 
science name for questions that have not 
yet been answered to the satisfaction of all by 
whom they have been asked It docs not fol- 
low, because some of these questions have 
waited two thousand years for an answer* that 
no answer will ever be forthcoming. Two 
thousand years probably measure but one para- 
graph in that great romance of adventure called 
the history of the intellect of man. The ex- 
traordinary progress of the last three hundred 
years is due to a rather sudden finding of the 
way in which a certain order of questions ought 
to be at Lacked, questions admitting of mathe- 
matical treatment. But to assume therefore, 
that the only possible philosophy must be 
mechanical and mathematical, and to dispar- 
age all enquiry into ilm other sorts of question, 
i? to forget the extreme diversity of 



SOME PBOBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

under which reality undoubtedly exists. To 
the spiritual questions the proper avenues of 
philosophic approach will also undoubtedly be 
found. They have, to some extent, been found 
already In some respects, indeed, 'science' 
has made less progress than * philosophy* 
its most general conceptions would astonish 
neither Aristotle nor Descartes, could they 
revisit our earth The composition of things 
from elements, their evolution, the conserva- 
tion of energy, the idea of a universal deter- 
minism, would seem to them commonplace 
enough the little things, the microscopes, 
electric lights, telephones, and details of the 
sciences, would be to them the awe-inspiring 
things* But if they opened our books on meta* 
physics, or visited a philosophic lecture room, 
everything would sound strange, The whole 
idealistic or 'critical' attitude of our time 
would be novel, and it would be long before 
they took it in. 1 
Objection 8. Philosophy is dogmatic, and 

1 The reader will find all that I have said, and much more* wt forth 
in an excellent article by James Ward in Mind t vol. 10, no. Iviil: *Tht 
Progrew of Philo*ophy/ 

34 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

pretends to settle things by pure reason, 
whereas the only fruitful mode of getting at 
truth is to appeal to concrete experience. Sci- 
ence collects, classes, and analyzes facts, and 
thereby far outstrips philosophy 

Reply This objection is historically valid. 
Too many philosophers have aimed at closed 
piuioso- systems, established a priori, claim- 
noi-bQ 66 i n infallibility, and to be accepted 
dogmatic or re j ectec } on i y as tota j s- The sci- 
ences on the other hand, using hypotheses only, 
but always seeking to verify them by experi- 
ment and observation, open a way for indefi- 
nite self-correction and increase, At the pres- 
ent day, it is getting more and more difficult 
for dogmatists claiming finality for their sys- 
tems, to get a hearing in educated circles* 
Hypothesis and verification, the watchwords 
of science, have set the fashion too strongly in 
academic minds. 

Since philosophers are only men thinking 
about things in the moat comprehensive pos- 
sible way, they can use any method whatsoever 
freely, Philosophy must, in any case, com* 
25 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

plete the sciences, and must incorporate their 
methods One cannot see why, if such a policy 
should appear advisable, philosophy might 
not end by forswearing all dogmatism what- 
ever, and become as hypothetical in her man- 
ners as the most empirical science of them all* 

Objection 3. Philosophy is out of touch with 
real life, for which it substitutes abstractions* 
The real world is various, tangled, painful 
Philosophers have, almost without exception, 
treated it as noble, simple, and perfect, ignoring 
the complexity of fact, and indulging in a sort 
of optimism that exposes their systems to the 
contempt of common men, and to the satire 
of such writers as Voltaire and Schopenhauer, 
The great popular success of Schopenhauer is 
due to the fact that, first among philosopher*, 
he spoke the concrete truth about the ills of life, 

Reply. This objection also ia historically 
valid, but no reason appears why philosophy 
Nor it it should keep aloof from reality per* 
manently. Her manners may change 
^ g}^ || UCC essfully develops* The 
thin and noble abstractions may give way to 
36 



PHILOSOPHY AND ITS CRITICS 

more solid and real constructions, when the 
materials and methods for making such con- 
structions shall be more and more securely 
ascertained In the end philosophers may get 
into as close contact as realistic novelists with 
the facts of life. 

In conclusion In its original acceptation, 
meaning the completest knowledge of the uni- 
phiioso- ver&e, philosophy must include the 
Jneta- 8 results of all the sciences, and cannot 
physics k e con trasted with the latter. It 
simply aims at making of science what Herbert 
Spencer calls a 'system of completely unified 
knowledge.' 1 In the more modern ,sc % nse, of 
something contrasted with the sciences, phi- 
losophy means * metaphysics/ The older sense 
is the more worthy sense, and as the results of 
the sciences get more available for co-ordina- 
tion, and the conditions for finding truth in 
different kinds of question get more methodic- 
ally defined, we may hope that the term will 
revert to its original meaning. Science, mete* 

1 See the excellent chapter in Spencer 1 * Firai Pfvwplet, sathtocli 
'Philoiophy Defined/ 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

physics, and religion may then again form a 
single body of wisdom, and lend each other 
mutual support. 

At present this hope is far from its fulfill- 
ment, I propose in this book to take philoso- 
phy in the narrow sense of metaphysics, and 
to let both religion and the results of the sci- 
ences alone. 



CHAPTER II 
THE PROBLEMS OF METAPHYSICS 

No exact definition of the term 'metaphys- 
ics * is possible, and to name some of the prob- 
Eiampies Jems it treats of is the best way of 
Jhyswai" getting at the meaning of the word, 
problems jf. means the discussion of various 
obscure, abstract, and universal questions 
which the sciences and life in general suggest 
but do not solve; questions left over, as it were; 
questions, all of them very broad and deep, and 
relating to the whole of things, or to the ulti- 
mate elements thereof. Instead of a definition 
let me cite a few examples, in a random order, 
of such questions: 

What are 'thoughts/ and what are 'things'? 
and how are they connected? 

What do we mean when we say 'truth*? 

Is there a common stuff out of which all 
facts are made? 

How comes there to be a world at all? and. 
Might it as well not have been? 





JDUJYLH, JfitUtfi.&Mb UJb 1 PHILOSOPHY 



Which is the most real kind of reality? 

What binds all things into one universe? 

Is unity or diversity more fundamental? 

Have all things one origin? or many? 

Is everything predestined, or are some things 
(our wills for example) free? 

Is the world infinite or finite in amount? 

Are its parts continuous, or are there vacua? 

What is God? or the gods? 

How are mind and body joined? Do they 
act on each other? 

How does anything act on anything else? 

How can one thing change or grow out of 
another thing? 

Are space and time beings? or what? 

In knowledge* how does the object get into 
the mind? or the mind get at the object? 

We know by means of universal notions. 
Are these also real? Or are only particular 
things real? 

What is mea,nt by a ' thing*? 

'Principles of reason/ are thej inborn 
or derived? 

Are * beauty* and 'good* matters of opinion 
SO 



THE PROBLEMS OF METAPHYSICS 

only? Or have they objective validity? And, 
if so, what does the phrase mean? 

Such are specimens of the kind of question 
termed metaphysical. Kant said that the three 
essential metaphysical questions were* 

What can I know? 

What should I do? 

What may I hope? 

A glance at all such questions suffices to rule 
out such a definition of metaphysics as that of 
Christian Wolff > who called it e the 



physics 

defined science of what is possible/ as dis- 
tinguished from that of what is actual, for most 
of the questions relate to what is actual fact One 
may say that metaphysics inquires into the 
cause, the substance, the meaning, and the out* 
come of all things Or one may call it the sci- 
snce of the most universal principles of reality 
(whether experienced by us or not) in their 
connection with one another and with our pow* 
3rs of knowledge. * Principles* here may mean, 
either entities, like 'atoms/ 'goals,* or logical 
aws like : * A thing must either exist or not et * ; 
# generalized facts, like * things can a#t only 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

after they exist/ But the principles are so num- 
erous, and the 'science* of them is so far from 
completion, that such definitions have only a 
decorative value. The serious work of meta- 
physics is done over the separate single ques- 
tions. If these should get cleared up, talk of met- 
aphysics as a unified science might properly be- 
gin. This book proposes to handle only a few 
separate problems, leaving others untouched. 
These problems are for the most part real; 
that is, but few of them result from a misuse 
Nature of of terms in stating them. 'Things/ 

physical ^ or exam pl e are or are n t composed 
problems O f one s t u ff j fa e y either have or have 

not a single origin; they cither are or are not 
completely predetermined, etc. Such alterna- 
tives may indeed be impossible of decision; 
but until this is conclusively proved of them, 
they confront us legitimately, and some one 
must take charge of them and keep account of 
the solutions that are proposed, even if he does 
not himself add new ones. The opinion* of the 
learned regarding them must, in short, be 
classified and responsibly discussed* For in* 



THE PEOBLEMS OP METAPHYSICS 

stance, how many opinions are possible as to 
the origin of the world ? Spencer says that the 
world must have been either eternal, or self- 
created, or created by an outside power So 
for him there are only three, Is this correct? 
If so, which of the three views seems the most 
reasonable? and why? In a moment we are in 
the thick of metaphysics. We have to be meta- 
physicians even to decide with Spencer that 
neither mode of origin Is thinkable and that 
the whole problem is unreal, 

Some hypotheses may be absurd on their 
face, because they are self-contradictory, If f 
for example, infinity means 'what can never 
be completed by successive syntheses/ the 
notion of anything made by the successive 
addition of infinitely numerous parts, and yet 
completed, is absurd. Other hypotheses, for 
example that everything in nature contributes 
to a single supreme purpose, may be insuscep- 
tible either of proof or of disproof. Other 
hypotheses again, for instance that vacua 
exist, may be susceptible of probable solution, 
The classing of the hypotheses k thus as 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

sary as the classing of the problems, and both 
must be recognized as constituting a serious 
branch of learning. 1 There must in short be 
metaphysicians* Let us for a while become 
metaphysicians ourselves, 

As we survey the history of metaphysics we 
soon realize that two pretty distinct types of 
mind have filled it with their war- 
* are ' ket us Cft H tliem tlte rationalist 
and the empiricist types of mind. A 
physics saying of Coleridge's is often quoted, 
to the effect that every one is born either a 
platonist or an aristotelian. By aristotelmn, he 
means empiricist, and by platonisl, he means 
rationalist; but although the contrast between 
the two Greek philosphers exists in the sense 
in which Coleridge meant it, both of ttad, 
were rationalists as compared with the Jdtod of 
empiricism which Democritus and Protagoras 
developed; and Coleridge had better have 
taken either of those names instead of Aris- 
totle as his empiricist example. 

1 Consult here Paul Met; Pnnaipu fo Mfapkyffiqut t etc* 1887, 



THE PROBLEMS OP METAPHYSICS 

Rationalists are the men of principles, empiri- 
cists the men of facts, but, since principles are 
umversals, and facts are particulars, perhaps 
the best way of characterizing the two ten- 
dencies is to say that rationalist thinking pro- 
ceeds most willingly by going from wholes to 
parts, while empiricist thinking proceeds by 
going from parts to wholes* Pluto, the arch- 
rationalist, explained the details of nature by 
their participation in 'ideas/ which all de- 
pended on the supreme idea of the *good * 
Protagoras and Democntus were empiricists* 
The latter explained the whole cosmos, includ- 
ing gods as well as men, and thoughts as well 
as things, by their composition out of atomic 
elements; Protagoras explained truth, which 
for Plato was the absolute system of the ideas, 
as a collective name for men's opinions , 

Rationalists prefer to deduce facts from 
principles. Empiricists prefer to explain prin* 
ciples as inductions from facts. Is thought for 
the sake of life? oris life for the sake of thought? 
Empiricism inclines to the former, rationalism 
to the latter branch of the alternative* God's 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

life, according to Aristotle and Hegel, is pure 
theory. The mood of admiration is natural to 
rationalism. Its theories are usually optimis- 
tic, supplementing the experienced world by 
clean and pure ideal constructions. Aristotle 
and Plato, the Scholastics, Descartes, Spinoza, 
Leibnitz, Kant, and Hegel are examples of 
this* They claimed absolute finality for their 
systems, in the noble architecture of which, as 
their authors believed, truth was eternally 
embalmed* This temper of finality is foreign 
to empiricist minds, They may be dogmatic 
about their method of building on 'hard facts,* 
but they are willing to be sceptical about any 
conclusions reached by the method at a given 
time* They aim at accuracy of detail rather 
than at completeness; are contented to be 
fragmentary; are less inspiring than the ra- 
tionalists, often treating the high as a case of 
'nothing but* the low ('nothing but' self-in- 
terest well understood, etc*), but tkey usually 
keep more in touch with actual life, are less 
subjective, and their spirit is obviously more 
'scientific' in the hackneyed sense of that 



THE PROBLEMS OF METAPHYSICS 

term Socrates, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, the 
Mills, F A Lange, J Dewey,F C S Schiller, 
Bergson, and other contemporaries are speci- 
mens of this type Of course we find mixed 
minds in abundance, and few philosophers are 
typical in either class. Kant may fairly be 
called mixed Lotze and Royce are mixed. 
The author of this volume is weakly endowed 
on the rationalist side, and his book will show 
a strong leaning towards empiricism. The 
clash of the two ways of looking at things will 
be emphasized throughout the volume. 1 

I will now enter the interior of the subject 
by discussing special problems as examples of 
metaphysical inquiry; and in order not to con- 
ceal any of the skeletons in the philosophic 
closet, I will start with the worst problem 
possible, the so-called *ontological problem/ 
or question of how there comes to be anything 
at all 

1 Compare W James; "The Sentiment of Rationality/ in Tfa Witt 
to Mim QOongmana, Green and Co* 1899), p 0S f ; Pragmotim, 
, ch*p, I; 4 pjMufifr Unimt* (ibid ), chap, i 



CHAPTER III 
THE PROBLEM OF BEING 

How comes the world to be here at all instead 
of the nonentity which might be imagined in 
its place? Schopenhauer's remarks on this 
question may be considered classical. * Apart 
from man, 9 he says, *no being wonders at its 
own existence. When man first becomes con- 
scious, he takes himself for granted, as some- 
thing needing no explanation. But not for 
long; for, with the rise of the first reflection, 



Schopen- won( kr begins which is the 



mother of metaphysics, and which 

the origin 

of the made Aristotle say that men now 
^ and always seek to philosophize 

because of wonder The lower a man stands 
in intellectual respects the less of a riddle does 
existence seem to him . . , but, the clearer his 
consciousness becomes the more the problem 
grasps him in its greatness. In fact the unrest 
which keeps the never stopping clock of meta- 
physics going is the thought that the non-ex* 
istence of this world is just as possible aa its 
98 



THE PROBLEM OF BEING 

existence Nay more, we soon conceive the 
world as something the non-existence of which 
not only is conceivable but would indeed be 
preferable to its existence, so that our wonder 
passes easily into a brooding over that fatality 
which nevertheless could call such a world into 
being, and mislead the immense force that 
sould produce and preserve it into an activity 
so hostile to its own interests. The philosophic 
wonder thus becomes a sad astonishment, and 
like the overture to Don Giovanni, philosophy 
begins with a minor chord.' 1 

One need only shut oneself in a closet and 
begin to think of the fact of one's being there, 
)f one's queer bodily shape in the darkness (a 
,hmg to make children scream at, as Steven- 
son says), of one's fantastic character and all, 

have the wonder steal over the detail as 
nuch as over the general fact of being, and to 
see that it is only familiarity that blunts it, 
Vot only that anything should be, but that this 
/ery thing should be, is mysterious ! PhilosO'- 

1 Tto World as W$ and foprwwMon, Appendix 17, 'On tfc 
Qetaphyaical need of man, 5 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPH 

phy stares, but brings no reasoned solutio 
for from nothing to being there is no logic 
bridge. 

Attempts are sometimes made to banish tl 
question rather than to give it an answe 
Those who ask it, we are told, extend illegi 
imately to the whole of being the contra* 
Various to a supposed alternative non-bein 

tfftflt016tlts 1*1 i t*i i* 

of the which only particular beings posses/ 



These, indeed, were not, and w 
arc. But being in general, or in some shape 
always was, and you cannot rightly bring th 
whole of il into relation with a primordial non 
entity* Whether as God or a& material atoms 
it is itself primal and eternal But if you cal 
any being whatever eternal, some philosopher) 
have always been ready to taunt you with th< 
paradox inherent in the assumption. Is pasi 
eternity completed? they ask; If so, they go on, 
it must have had a beginning; for whetbei 
your imagination traverses it forwards or back- 
wards, it offers an identical content or stuff to 
be measured; and if the amount comes to an 
end in o&e way* it ought to come to an end its 
40 



THE PROBLEM OF BEING 

the other In other words, since we now witness 
its end, some past moment must have wit- 
nessed its beginning If, however, it had a be- 
ginning, when was that, and why? 

You are up against the previous nothing, and 
do not see how it ever passed into being This 
dilemma, of having to choose between a regress 
which, although called infinite, has neverthe- 
less come to a termination, and an absolute 
first, has played a great part in philosophy's 
history. 

Other attempts still are made at exorcising 
the question Non-being is not, .said Parmen- 
ides and Zeno; only being is. Hence what is, is 
necessarily being being, in short, is neces- 
sary Others, calling the idea of nonentity 
no real idea, have said that on the absence 
of an idea can no genuine problem be founded. 
More curtly still, the whole ontological wonder 
has been called diseaaedj a case of Grdbelmcht 
like asking, 'Why am I myself?' or * Why is a 
triangle a triangle?* 

nationalistic minds here and there have 
sought to reduce the mystery, Some forms of 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

being have been deemed more natural, so to 
say, or more inevitable and necessary than 
Rational- others. Empiricists of the evolution- 
ImpSicist ary type Herbert Spencer seems 
treatments a g 00< j example have assumed 
that whatever had the least of reality, was 
weakest, faintest, most imperceptible, most 
nascent, might come easiest first, and be the 
earliest successor to nonentity. Little by little 
the fuller grades of being might have added 
themselves in the same gradual way until the 
whole universe grew up, 

To others not the minimum, but the maxi- 
mum of being has seemed the earliest First for 
the intellect to accept, 'The perfection of a 
thing does not keep it from existing,' Spinoza 
said, *on the contrary, it founds its existence,* l 
It is mere prejudice to assume that it is harder 
for the great than for the little to be* and that 
easiest of all it is to be nothing* What makes 
things difficult in any line is the alien obstruc- 
tions that are met with, and the smaller and 
weaker the thing the more powerful over it 

1 EtMes, part i prop, xi, wholium, 



THE PROBLEM OF BEING 

these become Some things are so great and 
inclusive that to be is implied in their very na- 
ture The anselmian or ontological proof of 
God's existence, sometimes called the caitesian 
proof, criticised by Saint Thomas, rejected by 
Kant, re-defended by Hegel, follows this line of 
thought. What is conceived as imperfect may 
lack being among its other lacks, but if God, 
who is expressly defined as Ens perfection- 
mum, lacked anything whatever, he would 
contradict his own definition He cannot lack 
being therefore. He is Ens necessarium, Ens 
reahssimum, as well as Ens perfcdimmum* 1 

Hegel in his lordly way says: *It would be 
strange if God were not rich enough to embrace 
so poor a category as Being, the poorest and 
most abstract of all * This is somewhat in line 
with Kant's saying that a real dollar does not 
contain one cent more than an imaginary dol- 
lar. At the beginning of his logic Hegel seeks in 
another way to mediate nonentity with being, 

1 St Auselra Pmlogtwn* etc Traail&ted by Doaae Chicago, 
1903, Deaeartea: Meditations* p 5, Kjt&t' Cniiqu.it o/ Pure R&mn, 
Tranto&tdmtal DtdacUc, 'On the impossibility of an ontological 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Since 'being ' in the abstract, mere being, means 
nothing in particular, it is indistinguishable 
from 'nothing*, and he seems dimly to think 
that this constitutes an identity between the 
two notions, of which some use may be made 
in getting from one to the other. Other still 
queerer attempts show well the rationalist 
temper. Mathematically you can deduce 1 
from 0* by the following process: =111=1. 
Or physically if all being ha& (as it seems to 
have) a 'polar' construction, so that every 
positive part of it has its negative, we got the 
simple equation: +1-1=0, plus and minus 
being the signs of polarity in physics- 
It is not probable that the reader will be 
satisfied with any of these solutions, and con- 
temporary philosophers, even rationalisticaUy 
minded ones, have on the whole agreed that no 
one has intelligibly banished the mystery of 
fact. Whether the original nothing burst into 
God and vanished, as night vanishes in day, 
while God thereupon became the creative 
principle of all lesser beings; or whether ail 

things have foisted or shaped themselves im* 
44 



THE PROBLEM OF BEING 

perceptibly into existence, the same amount 
of existence has in the end to be assumed 
The same and begged by the philosopher* To 
comminute the difficulty is not to 



are a rationalist 
fll1 you beg a kilogram of being at once, 

we will say, if you are an empiricist you beg a 
thousand successive grams, but you beg the 
same amount in each case, and you are the 
same beggar whatever you nuy pretend* You 
leave the logical riddle untouched, of how the 
coming of whatever is, came it all at once, or 
came it piecemeal, can be intellectually under- 
stood l 

If being gradually grew, its quantity was of 
course not always the same, and may not be 



Coaser- y ie same hereafter, To most phi- 

vationm 

creation losophers this view has seemed ab- 
surd, neither God nor primordial matter, nor 
energy being supposed to admit of increase or 
decrease* The orthodox opinion is that the 

1 In more technical language, one may say that fact or befog is 
'contingent,' or matter of ' chance, ' BO far as our intellect la concerned, 
The conditions of ita appearance are uncertain, unforeseeable, when 
future, and when part, dtuivc, 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

quantity of reality must at all costs be con- 
served, and the waxing and waning of our 
phenomenal experiences must be treated as 
surface appearances which leave the deeps un- 
touched. 

Nevertheless, within experience, phenomena 
come and go. There are novelties; there are 
losses. The world seems, on the concrete and 
proximate level at least, really to grow. So the 
question recurs: How do our finite experiences 
come into being from moment to moment? 
By inertia? By perpetual creation? Do the 
new ones come at the call of the old ones? Why 
do not they all go out like* a candle? 

Who can tell off-hand? The question of be- 
ing is the darkest in all philosophy. AH of us 
are beggars here, and no school can sjxjak dis- 
dainfully of another or give itself superior airs, 
For all of us alike, Fact forms a datum, gift, or 
Vorgefundenes* which we cannot burrow under, 
explain or get behind* It makes itself some- 
how, and our business is far more with its 
What than with its Whence or Wliy. 



CHAPTER IV 

PERCEPT AND CONCEPT^-THE IMPORT 
OF CONCEPTS 

THE pioblem convenient to take up next in 
order will be that of the difference between 
thoughts and things ' Things ' are known to us 
by our senses, and aie called 'presentations' 
by some authors, to distinguish them from the 
ideas or 'icpresenta lions' which we may have 
when our bouses arc closed, I myself have 
grown accustomed to the words 'percept* and 
' concept' in treating of the contrast, but con- 
cepts flow out of percepts and into them again, 
xheju they are so interlaced, and our life 
difference pcg j g on ^ m go interchangeably and 

undiscriminatingly, that it is often difficult to 
impart quickly Lo beginners a clear notion of 
the difference meant. Sensation and thought 
in man are mingled, but they vary independ- 
ently. In our quadrupedal relatives thought 
proper is at a minimum, but we have no reason 
to suppose ttat their immediate life of feeling 
is either less or more copious than ours, Feel*- 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

ing must have been originally self-sufficing; 
and thought appears as a superadded function, 
adapting us to a wider environment than that 
of which brutes take account. Some parts of the 
stream of feeling must be more intense, em- 
phatic, and exciting than others in animals as 
well as in ourselves, but whereas lower animals 
simply react upon these more salient sensa- 
tions by appropriate movements, higher ani- 
mals remember them, and men react on them 
intellectually, by using nouns, adjectives, and 
verbs to identify them when they meet them 
elsewhere. 

The great difference between percepts and 
concepts 1 is that percepts are continuous and 
concepts are discrete* Not discrete in their 
being, for conception as an act is part of the 
flux of feelings but discrete from each other in 
their several meanings. Each concept means 

1 In what follows I ihall freely me synonym* for then two termi, 
'Idea*' 'thought/ and ^ intellect ion* are aynonymou* with 'concept/ 
butaftd of 'percept ' I ihall often apeak of * Mutation/ ' feeling/ * Intui- 
tion/ and flometlmef of ' letuible experience ' or of the * immediate 
low ' of coniciooi Hf& Since Hegel'* time what is limply parodied 
taa been called the ' immediate/ while the 'mediated ' i 
frith what is conceived 

48 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

just what it singly means, and nothing else, 
and if the conceiver does not know whether he 
means this or means that, it shows that his 
concept is imperfectly formed The perceptual 
flux as such, on the contrary, means nothing, 
and is but what it immediately is. No matter 
how small a tract of it be taken, it is always a 
much-at-oncc, and contains innumerable as- 
pects and characters which conception can 
pick out, isolate, and thereafter always intend, 
It shows duration, intensity, complexity or 
simplicity, intcrestingness, exeitingness, pleas- 
antness or their opposites, Data from all our 
senses enter into it, merged in a general ex- 
tensiveness of which each occupies a big or 
little share Yet all these parts leave its unity 
unbroken. Its boundaries are no more distinct 
than are those of the field of vision. Boundaries 
are things that intervene; but here nothing 
intervenes save parts of the perceptual flux 
itself, and these are overflowed by what they 
separate, so that whatever we distinguish and 
Isolate conceptually is found perceptually to 
telescope and compenetrate and diffuse into 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

its neighbors. The cuts we make are purely 
ideal. If my reader can succeed in abstracting 
from all conceptual interpretation and lapse 
back into his immediate sensible life at this 
very moment* he will find it to be what some- 
one has called a big blooming buzzing confu- 
sion, as free from contradiction in its *much- 
at-oncenesa* as it is all alive and evidently 
there. 1 

Out of this aboriginal sensible muchness 
attention carves out objects, which conception 
thecon- then names and identifies forever 

CQptUtl 

ordr in the sky * constellations,* on the 
earth * beach,* *sea/ *cli&V * bushes,* * grass.* 
Out of time we cut 4 days* and * nights/ * sum- 
mem* and * winters.* We say what each part 
}f the sensible continuum is, and all these ab- 
jtracted wka&t are concepts. 2 



i Compare W IMAM- A PbmlMo t/nwr, pp, 
'fpfe&W, Bruftr COUTH, pp. 1*7- 1M 

* On the function of cxmooptloa oontult. Sir William Hjuolltoa't 
*uru m Loyio. > 10; H. L, Mftud* Pro^twuna Loffita, ohtp 1; 



'. Jam, Primnpiw ofPty^lo^. dap. xtl> B 
nMitf^fckto^ 



nwaAok^dM^fm^ohap.vlU 
50 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

The intellectual life of man conshts almost 
vholly in his substitution of a conceptual order 
or the perceptual order in which his experience 
^nginally comes But before tracing the conse- 
(uences of the substitution, I must say some- 
hmg about the conceptual order itself. 1 

Trains of concepts unmixed with percepts 
,TOW frequent In the adult mind, and parts of 
hese conceptual trams arrcvst our attention 
ust as parts of the perceptual flow did, giving 
ise to concepts of a higher order of abstract- 
less. So subtile is the discernment of man, and 

great the power of some men to single out 

sophie, part 2, lesson 12 The account I give directly contradicts that 
rhich Kant gave which liaa prevailed aince Kant'a time Kant 
Iways speaks of the aboriginal sensible flux iui a * manifold ' of which 
e considers the essential character to \ ita disconnectedness To get 
ny togethemeaB at all into it requires, h<s thmki, the agency of the 
transcendental t #o of apperception/ and to g?t any definite conaec- 
ions requires the agency of the understanding, with its synthetmng 
tmcepts or 'categories ' ' Die Verbmdung (conjunctio) emea M&u- 
igfaltigen kann tiberhaupt niemals (lurch Smne m uns komrnen, und 
ann also auch nicht m dor remen Form der amnhchea Anachnuung 
ugleich mit enthaltcn sm, denn sie lat ein Actus der Spontaticitilt 
er Embildungflkraft, und, da man dieae, zura UnterfltUwsde von der 
iinnlichkot, Verstand nennen muaa, so ist alle Verbmclung > , esln 
^erstaudeflhandlung * K d r V , 2te, Aufg , pp IKEMSQ Thft reader 
aust decide which account agrees best with his own actual experience 

1 The substitution was first dumbed in these tcrme by S, H* Hodg- 
on in hw Phifotophy of Ht$wM<m> i 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

the most fugitive elements of what passes 
before them, that these new formations have 
no limit. Aspect within aspect, quality after 
quality, relation upon relation, absences and 
negations as well as present features, end by 
being noted and their names added to the store 
of nouns, verbs, adjectives, conjunctions, and 
prepositions by which the human mind inter- 
prets life. Every new book verbalizes some 
new concept, which becomes important in pro- 
portion to the use that can be made of it. Dif- 
ferent universes of thought thus arise, with 
specific sorts of relation among their ingredi- 
ents. The world of common-sense * things * ; the 
world of material tasks to be done; the mathe- 
matical world of pure forms; the world of 
ethical propositions; the worlds of logic, of 
music, etc., all abstracted and generalized from 
long forgotten perceptual instances, from which 
they have as it were flowered out, return and 
merge themselves again m the particulars of 
our present and future perception* By those 
whois we apperceive all our thi$e$. Percepts 

and concepts interpenetrate and melt together, 
58 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

impregnate and fertilize each other. Neither, 
taken alone, knows reality in its completeness. 
We need them both, as we need both our legs 
to walk with. 

Prom Aristotle downwards philosophers 
have frankly admitted the inclispensability, for 
complete knowledge of fact, of both the sensa- 
tional and the intellectual contribution. 1 For 
complete knowledge of fact, I say; but facts 
are particulars and connect themselves with 
practical necessities and the arts; and Greek 
philosophers soon formed the notion that a 
knowledge of so-callecl * universal?*/ consisting 
of concepts of abstract forms, qualities, num- 
bers, and relations was the only knowledge 
worthy of the truly philosophic mind* Particu- 
lar facts decay and our perceptions of them 
vary, A concept never varies; and between 
such unvarying terms the relations must be 
constant and express eternal verities* Hence 
there arose a tendency, which has lasted all 
through philosophy, to contrast the know- 

1 See, for example, book I, chap, !i of Aristotle's 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

ledge of universals and intelligibles, as god- 
like, dignified, and honorable to the knower, 
with that of particulars and sensibles as some- 
thing relatively base which more allies us with 
the beasts. 1 

1 Plato in numerous places, but chiefly in books 6 and 7 of the Re* 
puMic, contracts perceptual knowledge as * opinion* with real know- 
ledge, to the latter's glory. For an excellent historic sketch of ttm 
platonistic view see the first part o! E, Lima's Idealimus und Positimt- 
mwt, 1879. For expressions of the ultra-intellcetuafaic view, read the 
passage from Pfotinwt an the Intellect in 0. M BakewelPs Source-book 
in Anrnmt Philosophy, N. V. 1907, pp. S5S f.; Boasuet, Traiti fa la 
<mnaiamnee de Dieu, chap. iv, v, vi; R. Cud worth* A Treatise con- 
cerning eternal amd immutafde Morality, book* iii, iv. * Plato/ writes 
Prof* Santayana, * thought that all UN* truth and meaning of earthly 
things was the reference they contained to a heavenly original. Thi* 
heavenly original we remember to retnignijx* <ven nmnag the dbtor- 
titmajdi^ppeurariwH, anrl muHipIirtitiorwof iUepht-rncral twpit'fl. . . . 
The imprewiiom thmadvefl have no pcrmant*ii<N.% no intelligible e- 
flfncc but are always either arfoing or waning to bo. There raiwt be, 
hr t^lifl us, an eternal and clearly (icfinahlt* <>i>j(^t of which the vfoibto 
appearance to m an* tin' multiform wmblum-e; now by one trait* 
now by another, the phantom before UK remind* in of that half- 
forgotteB eelestial reality and maken iw utter iU name. . . , We and 
the whole univere exist only in the attempt to return to oar perfec- 
tion, to io*e ourfdves ftgiun in God. That ineffable good i* our natu- 
ral potwaaion; and all we honor in thb life ia but a partial recovery 
of our birthright; every delightful thing it like a rift in the cloucU, 
tiirough which we catch * glimpte of our native heaven. And If that 
$*eavea 9eem*io far away, and the idea of it BO dim and unreal, it is 
because we are to far from perfect* BO unversed in what ifl alien and 
destructive to the foul,' ('Platonic Love in aome Italian Poet*/ in 
Inierpnto&mt <af Poetry and Relifrion, 1806.) 

Thia is the bterpretaUo0 of Plato which has been current ainoe 
14 



PEKCEPT AND CONCEPT 

For rationalistic writers conceptual know- 

ledge was not only the more noble knowledge, 

but it originated independently of 

uai know- all. perceptual particulars. Such con- 

ledge the . . 

rational- cepts as God, perfection, eternity, m- 
Iew finity, immutability, identity, abso- 
lute beauty, truth, justice, necessity, freedom, 
duty, worth, etc., and the part they play in 
our mind, are, it was supposed, 'impossible to 
explain as results of practical experience* The 
empiricist view, and probably the true view, is 
that they do result from practical experience* 1 
But a more important question than that as to 
the origin of our concepts is that &&. to their 

Aristotle, It should be said that its profundity has been chatkmgtsd by 
Prof. A. J. Stewart. (Plato's Doctrine qf Idm, Oxford, 1000.) 

Aristotle found great fault with Bato* trmtmeftt of idem as hwv- 
enly originals, but he agreed with him fully at to th (wj^eriar exm\r 
lence of the conceptual or theoretic life. la chapters irli and viii of bode 
at of the Nusomaekean Bthws he extols watarapUtioa of uodvemal rela- 
tions M atotia yktdiftg pure happiness. ' The Ufa of God in all its ex- 
ceeding hl^aednesi, will consist b th exewiie of phtloiaphic thought; 
and of all human activities, that will ba the happiest which b most 



J John Locke, In his Et my tm&mdng Human Und&rttandin$ f boeka 
i ii, waa the great popularize of thk (kx^trine. Condttlac'fl TrmU 
to Si%#<$m& H^wtto's wfk D& flTdWM, and litmti MilFt 
Analysis <jf tftd Human MM* wet mow radical auo^uowi of Lodb*i 
great book. 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

functional use and value; is that tied down 
to perceptual experience, or out of all relation 
to it? Is conceptual knowledge self-sufficing 
and a revelation all by itself, quite apart from 
its uses in helping to a better understanding 
of the world of sense? 

Rationalists say, Yes, For, as we shall see 
in later places (page 68), the various conceptual 
universes referred to on page 52 can be con- 
sidered in complete abstraction from percept- 
ual reality, and when they are so considered* 
all sorts of fixed relations can be discovered 
among their parts. From these the a priori 
sciences of logic, mathematics, ethics, and 
aesthetics (so far as the last two can bewailed 
sciences at all) result. Conceptual knowledge 
must thus be called a self-sufficing revelation; 
and by rationalistic writers it has always been 
treated as admitting us to a diviner world, the 
world of universal rather than that of perish- 
ing facts, of essential qualities, immutable rela- 
tions, eternal principles of truth and right* 
Emerson writes: 'Generalization is always a 
new influx of divinity into the mind: hence the 
6 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

thrill that attends it/ And a disciple of Hegel, 
after exalting the knowledge of 'the General, 
Unchangeable, and alone Valuable 9 above that 
of 'the Particular, Sensible and Transient/ 
adds that if you reproach philosophy with 
being unable to make a single grass-blade grow, 
or even to know how it does grow, the reply is 
that since such a particular * how * stands not 
above but below knowledge, strictly so-called, 
such an ignorance argues no defect* 1 

To this ultra-rationalistic opinion the em- 
piricist contention that the significance of eon- 
Concept- c0pt$ consists always in ikeir relation 
*^" to perceptual particulars has been op- 
P se< 3- Made of percepts* or distilled 
view from parts of percepts, their essen- 

tial office, it has been said f is to coalesce with 
percepts again, bringing the mind back into 
the perceptual world with a better command of 
the situation there. Certainly whenever we 
can do this with our concepts, we do more with 

1 Michelet, Hegel's W&rk^ vft, IS, <pot&d by A. Gmtxy, $* la 
da PAw, i, 81. Compart the similar claim for phi- 



losophy m W. Wallace's PraUpmena to tttgel &1 edL, 18&4, pp, 
Sfc8-#$ and the long and radical ttattmmt of tltft mmt vkw In book 
iv <il Ralph Cudworth's Treatise m Kbrnat and Immutable Morality. 

trt 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

them than when we leave them flocking with 
their abstract and motionless companions. It 
is possible therefore, to join the rationalists in 
allowing conceptual knowledge to be self-suffic- 
ing, while at the same time one joins the em- 
piricists in maintaining that the full value of 
such knowledge is got only by combining it 
with perceptual reality again. This mediating 
attitude is that which this book must adopt. 
But to understand the nature of concepts 
better we must now go on to distinguish their 
function from their content 

The concept 'man,* to take an example, is 

three things: 1 the word itself; SS a vague 

picture of the human form which has 

The con- 

tent *a<j its own value in the way of beauty or 
of con- not; and 3, an instrument forsym- 



bolfeing certain objects from which 
we may expect human treatment when occa- 
sion arrives* Similarly of *triaagle/ * cosine/ 
they have their substantive value both as words 
and as images suggested, but they also have a 
functional value whenever they lead us else** 
where in discourse* 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

There are concepts, however, the image-part 
of which is so faint that their whole value 
seems to be functional. "God/ 'cause/ * num- 
ber,* * substance/ c soul,' for example, suggest 
no definite picture; and their significance 
seems to consist entirely in their tendency* in 
the further turn which they may give to our 
action or our thought. 1 We cannot rest in the 
contemplation of their form, as we can in that 
of a 'circle' or a "man'; we must pass beyond. 

Now however beautiful or otherwise worthy 
of stationary contemplation the substantive 
part of a concept may be, the more important 
part of its significance may naturally be held 
to be the consequences to which it leads. These 
^ a ^ may He either in the way of making 
matic rule us think, or in the way of making us 
act. Whoever has a clear idea of these knows 
effectively what the concept practically signi- 
fies, whether its substantive content be inter- 
esting in its own right or not. 

This consideration has led to a method of 

1 0% tbia f unctiomd tendency compare H. TftWW, On Intelligenct, 
p. 11(1870), 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

interpreting concepts to which I shall give the 
name of the Pragmatic Rule. 1 

The pragmatic rule is that the meaning of a 
concept may always be found, if not in some 
sensible particular which it directly designates, 
then in some particular difference in the course 
of human experience which its being true will 
make. Test every concept by the question 
'What sensible difference to anybody will its 
truth make? ' and you are in the best possible 
position for understanding what it mcwis and 
for discussing its importance. If, questioning 
whether a certain concept be true or false, you 
can think of absolutely nothing that would 
practically differ in the two cases, you may as- 
sume that the alternative is meaningless and 
that your concept is no distinct idea* If two 
concepts lead you to infer the same particular 
consequence, then you may assume that they 
embody the same meaning under different 
names. 

This rule applies to concepts of every order 

1 Compare W. Jam**, Pragmatism, chap, ii and pattim; abo Ba& 
wk'i Dictionary of Philctopky, article * Pragmatism/ by C 

60 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

of complexity, from simple terms to proposi- 
tions uniting many terms. 

So many disputes in philosophy hinge upon 
ill-defined words and ideas, each side claim- 
ing its own word or idea to be true* that any 
accepted method of making meanings clear 
must be of great utility. No method can be 
handier of application than our pragmatic* 
rule. If you claim that any idea is trues assign 
at the same time some difference that its being 
true will make in some possible person's his- 
tory, and we shall know not only just what you 
are really claiming but also how important an 
issue it is, and how to go to work to verify the 
claim. In, obeying this rule we neglect the sub- 
stantive content of the concepts and follow its 
function only* This neglect might seem at first 
sight to need excuse, for the content often lias 
a value of its own which might conceivably add 
lustre to reality, if it existed, apart from any 
modification wrought by it in the other parts 
of reality* Thus it is often supposed that 
* Idealism 9 is a theory precious in itself f even 
though BO definite change in the details of our 
01 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

experience can be deduced from it. Later dis- 
cussion will show that this is a superficial view, 
and that particular consequences are the only 
criterion of a concept's meaning, and the only 
test of its truth. 

Instances are hardly called for, they are so 
obvious. That A and B are * equal/ for example. 
Examples means either that *y u will find no 
difference' when you pass from one to the 
other, or that in substituting one for the other 
in certain operations *you will got the same 
result both times/ * Substance* means that *a 
definite group of sensations will recur/ 'In- 
commensurable* means that *you are always 
confronted with a remainder/ * Infinite* 
means either that, or that 'yon can count as 
many units in a part as you can in the whole/ 
'More* and "less* mean certain sensations, 
varying according to the matter. * Freedom* 
means *no feeling of sensible restraint/ *Ne~ 
eessity * means that 'your way is blocked in all 
directions save one/ * God * means that *you 
can dismiss certain kinds of fear/ 'cause' that 
*you may expect certain sequences/ etc. etc. 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

We shall find plenty of examples in the rest of 
this book; so I go back now to the more general 
question of whether the whole import of the 
world of concepts lies in its relation to percep- 
tual experience, or whether it be also an inde- 
pendent revelation of reality. Great ambiguity 
is possible in answering this question, so we 
must mind our Ps and Qs. 

The first thing to notice is that in the earliest 
stages of human intelligence, so far as we can 
guess at them, thought proper must have had 
an exclusively practical use* Men classed their 
origin of sensations* substituting concepts for 

2*2* them > * in order to * work them foj? 
utility what they were worth/ and to pre- 

pare for what might lie ahead. Class-names 
suggest consequences that have attached 
themselves on other occasions to other mem- 
bers of the class consequences which the 
present percept will also probably or certainly 
show, 1 The present percept in its Immediacy 
may thus often sink to the status of a bare sign 

1 For practical mm of ccmceptka compare W Jawe 



pom'm, but especially chaps, xv, xvi, ami. 

6S 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

of the consequences which the substituted con- 
cept suggests* 

The substitution of concepts and their 
connections, of a whole conceptual order, in 
short, for the immediate perceptual flow, thus 
widens enormously our mental panorama. Had 
we no concepts we should live simply * getting' 
each successive moment of experience, as the 
sessile sea-anemone on its rock receives what- 
ever nourishment the wash of the waves may 
bring- With concepts we go in quest of the ab- 
sent, meet the remote, actively turn this way or 
that, bend our experience, and make it tell us 
whither it is bound. We change its order, run 
it backwards, bring fur bits together and sepa- 
rate near bits, jump about over its surface in- 
stead of plowing through its continuity, string 
its items on as many ideal diagrams as our 
mind can frame. All these are ways of handling 
the perceptual flux and meeting distant parts of 
it; and as far as this primary function of con- 
ception goes, we can only conclude it to be 
what I began by calling it, a faculty superadded 
to our barely perceptual consciousness for its 
64 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

use in practically adapting us to a larger en- 
vironment than that of which brutes take ac- 
count. 1 We harness perceptual reality in con- 
cepts in order to drive it better to our ends* 

Does our conceptual translation of the per- 
ceptual fiux enable us also to understand the 
The theo- latter better ? What do we mean 
by making as * understand"? Apply- 
ing our pragma! ic rule U> the inter- 
pretation of the word, we nee that the hotter 
we understand anything the more we are 
able to tell about iL Judged by this test* 
concepts do make us understand our percepts 
better: knowing what these are, we can tell all 
sorts of farther truths about them* based 00 the 
relation of those whats to other whats. The 
whole system of relations, spatial* temporal* 
and logical, of our fact, gets plotted out* An 
ancient philosophical opinion, inherited from 
Aristotle, is that we do not understand a thing 
until we know it by its causes- When the maid- 
servant says that *the cat* broke the tea-cup* 

1 Htrbtrt Spoicer to Mi P*$3hkg&, parts til m& iv bui &t grwtt 
to ahow that yttdb adaptation k the o!e running of our 

65 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

she would have us conceive the fracture in a 
causally explanatory way* No otherwise when 
Clerk-Maxwell asks us to conceive of gas-elec- 
tricity as due to molecular bombardment* An 
imaginary agent out of sight becomes in each 
case a part of the cosmic context in which we 
now place the percept to be explained; and the 
explanation is valid in so far as the new causal 
that is itself conceived in a context that makes 
its existence probable, and with a nature 
agreeable to the effects it is imagined to pro- 
duce. All our scientific explanations would 
seem to conform to this simple type of the 
* necessary cat/ The conceived order of nature 
built round the perceived order and explain* 
ing it theoretically, as we say, is only a system 
of hypothetical^ imagined iftats, the whate 
of which harmoniously connect themselves 
with the what of any that which we immediately 
perceive* 

The system is essentially a topographic sys- 
tem, a system of the distribution of things. It 
tells us what *s what, and where *s where. In so 
far forth it merely prolongs that opening up of 
6 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

the perspective of practical consequences 
which we found to be the primordial utility of 
the conceiving faculty: it adapts us to an im- 
mense environment. Working by the causes of 
things we gain advantages which we never 
should have compassed had we worked by the 
things alone, 

But in order to reach such results the con- 
cepts in the explanatory system must, I said, 
in the a * harmoniously connect/ What does 
sciences that mean? Is this also only a prac- 
tical advantage, or is it something more? It 
seems something more, for it points to the fact 
that when concepts of various sorts are onoc 
abstracted or constructed , new relations are 
then found between them, connecting them in 
peculiarly intimate, * rational/ and unchange* 
able ways. In another book 1 I have tried to 
show that these rational relations are all prod- 
ucts of our faculty of comparison and of our 
sense of *more/ 

The sciences which exhibit these relations 
are the so-called a priori sciences of 

1 Prindpim <tf Psyckot&gy* 1890, chap* xxviii* 

m 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

the perceptual flux; but in their abstract shape 
we note relations between them (and again be- 
ween these relations) which enable us to set 
up various schemes of fixecf serial orders or of 
*more and more/ The terms are indeed man- 
made, but the order, being established solely 
by comparison, is fixed by the nature of the 
terms on the one hand and by our power of per- 
ceiving relations on the other* Thus two ab- 
stract twos are always the same as an abstract 
four; what contains the container contains the 
contained of whatever material either be made; 
equals added to equals always give equal re- 
sujti* in the world in which abstract equality 
Is the oaly property the terms are supposed to 
possess; the more than the more is more than 
the less, BO matter in what direction of more- 
nasg we advance; if you dot off a term in one 
series every time you dot one off in another^ the 
two series will either never tiwl* or will come 
to MI ead together, or one wffl fet ti3i&iiitf 

etc* etc, ; the 
t tt, "wtiomil 1 Of 

' 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

our philosophy-books) arrange their universal 
terms , 

The * rationalization' of any mass of per- 
ceptual fact centrists in assimilating its con- 
And in crete terms, one by one, to so many 
pfcyie terms of the conceptual series, and 
then in assuming that the relations intuitively 
found among the latter are what connect the 
former too* Thus we rationalise gas-pressure 
by identifying it with the blows of hypothetic 
molecules; then we see that the more closely 
the molecules are crowded the more frequent 
the blows upon the containing walls will be- 
come; then we discern the exact proportion- 
ality of the crowding with the number of blows; 
so that finally Mariotte's empirical law gets 
rationally explained* All our transformations 
of the sense-order into a more rational equiva- 
lent are similar to this one* We interrogate 
the beautiful apparition, as Emerson calls it, 
which our senses ceaselessly raise upon our 
path, and the items there refer us to their 
mterpretants in the shape of ideal construe** 
tions in some static arrangement which our 
TO 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

mind has already made out of its concepts 
alone. The interpretants are then substituted 
for the sensations, which thus get rationally 
conceived. To 'explain' means to coordinate, 
one to one, the thises of the perceptual flow 
with the whats of the ideal manifold, whichever 
it be. 1 

We may well call this a theoretic conquest 
over the order in which nature originally comes. 
The conceptual order into which we translate 
our experience seems not only a means of prac- 
tical adaptation, but the revelation of a deeper 
level of reality in things. Being more constant, 
it is truer, less illusory than the perceptual 
order, and ought to command our attention 
more. 

There is still another reason why conception 
appears such an exalted function. Concepts 
Concepts no on jy g u ide us over the map of 

bring new 

values life, but we revalue life by their use. 

Their relation to percepts is like that of sight 
to touch. Sight indeed helps us by preparing 

1 Compare W. Ostwald: Vorlesmgen tib&r Naturphilosophie, Stchste 
Vorlesung. 

71 



SOME* PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

us for contacts while they are yet far off f but 
it endows us in addition with a new world of 
optical splendor, interesting enough all by 
itself to occupy a busy life. Just so do concepts 
bring their proper splendor. The mere pos- 
session of such vast and simple pictures is an 
inspiring good: they arouse new feelings of 
sublimity, power, and admiration, new inter- 
ests and motivations. 

Ideality often clings to things only when 
they are taken thus abstractly. ** Causes, as 
anti-slavery, democracy, etc-, dwindle when 
realized in their sordid particulars. Abstrac- 
tions will touch us when we are callous to the 
concrete instances in which they lie embodied. 
Loyal in our measure to particular ideals, we 
soon set up abstract loyalty as something of 
a, superior order, to be infinitely loyal to; and 
truth at large becomes a * momentous issue* 
compared with which truths in detail are 
'poor scraps, mere crumbling successes/" 1 

1 Jf, Hoyw: 77w Philosophy tf Ioy<%, 1006, perticukriy Uctuns 



Emerson write*; 'jEach man we over hit own experience * etatftfa 
rtftb erf enw, wMlrt that cl othw m Let toy 

W 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

So strongly do objects that come as universal 
and eternal arouse our sensibilities, so greatly 
do life's values deepen when we translate per- 
cepts into ideas! The translation appears as 
far more than the original's equivalent* 
Concepts thus play three distinct parts in fau- 

Summary man life. 

L They steer us practically every day, and 
provide an immense map of relations among 
the elements of things, which* though not now, 
yet on some possible future occasion, may help 
to steer us practically; 

2, They bring new values into our perceptual 
life! they reanimate our wills, and make our 
action turn upon new points of emphasis ; 

8* The map which the mind frames out of 

mtn go tmck to tho& delicious relation* which mule Iks beauty of Mi 
life, whirh have given him int^rft instruHion and nourishment, fee 
will shrink &a<$ moan, Ahw! 1 know not why, but infinite fomptm(> 
ticras embitter in mature life the remembrance 0! fettddlttg joy, tod 
wverevtrry belovtxinartw. Ev^ry thing w Wuutiful w?en from the point 
ot vww of the iniottaet, or M tmth, hut All is gout, \t mm mmy^tfmm* 
Dct&ili am mland^)ly; the pbn HI g*emly aod nobb. In tb< nctiwii 
painful Mugctoftol HUM tad pbc*"dwdl <!*f% aad 
r, ftud foiir. With thought, *Ufa tbc i<Wl t k itnmorUl hiUrity, 
Joy. I^unaitaUthemiuw^itm^ But grw! dmg to 



TS 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

them is an object which possesses, when once 
it has been framed, an independent existence. 
It suffices all by itself for purposes of study* 
The 'eternal* truths it contains would have to 
be acknowledged even were the world of sense 
annihilated* 

We thus see clearly what is gained and what 
is lost when percepts are translated into con- 
cepts. Perception is solely of the here aad now ; 
conception is of the like and unlike, of the 
future, of the past, and of the far away. But 
this map of what surrounds the present* like 
all maps* is only a surface; its features are but 
abstract signs and symbols of things that in 
themselves are concrete bits of sensible experi- 
ence* We have but to weigh extent against 
content, thickness against spread* and we see 
that for acme purposes the one, for other p w 
poses tbe other, has tie higher valus. Who 



We mu*t do bo tk 
alternately, ajad a mil can m mm Kmit Ite* 

*#itiitei^ 

a single one of Jts blades. 



CHAPTER V 

PERCEPT AND CONCEPT - THE ABUSE 
OF CONCEPTS 1 

IN spile of this obvious need of holding our 
percepts fast if our conceptual powers are to 
mean anything distinct, there has always been 
a tendency among philosophers to treat con- 
ception as the more essential thing in know- 

ft* ** ledge. 2 The Platonizmg persuasion 
triiectu*!" f , 

1st creed has ever been that the intelligible 

order ought to supersede the senses rather than 
interpret them. The aceordiig to thii 

opinion* are organs of wavering illusion that 
stand in the way of * knowledge/ ia the unal 
terable sense of that term* They are an unfor- 
tunate complication on which phic^pliers 
may safely turn their baeki* 
*Your sensational modalitiet,' writes 0nt erf 



thft nmniiseript 



m* 

a ^a r g^i^ 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

these, 'are but darkness, remember that* 
Mount higher, up to reason, and you will see 
light. Impose silence on your senses, your 
imagination, and your passions, and you will 
then hear the pure voice of interior truth, the 
clear and evident replies of our common mis- 
tress [reason]. Never confound that evidence 
which results from the comparison of ideas 
with the vivacity of those feelings which move 
and touch you. ... We must follow reason 
despite the caresses, the threats and the in- 
sults of the body to which we are conjoined, 
despite the action of the objects that surround 
us. , * , I exhort you to recognize the differ- 
ence there is between knowing and feeling, 
between our clear ideas, and our sensations 
always obscure and confused** 1 

This is the traditional intellectualist creed. 
When Plato, its originator, first thought of 
concepts as forming an entirely separate world 
and treated this as the only object fit for the 
study of immortal minds, he lit up an entirely 

MfebrftBdb; Enk&m* w la Mfapkytiqu*, tae, Eotretk*. 
viiU, 

78 



PEECEPT AND CONCEPT 

new sort of enthusiasm In the human breast. 
These objects were precious objects, concrete 
things were dross. Introduced by Dion, who 
had studied at Athens* to the corrupt and 
worldly court of the tyrant of Syracuse, Plato* 
as Plutarch tells us, *was received with won- 
derful kindness and respect. . , * The citizens 
began to entertain marvellous hopes of a speedy 
reformation when they observed the modesty 
"^hiefa now ruled the banquets, and the general 
decorum which reigned in all the court, their 
tyrant also behaving himself with gentleness 
and humanity* . * . There was a general pas- 
sion for reasoning and philosophy, so mudfa so 
that the veiy palace, it is reported, was filled 
with dust by the concourse of the students in 
mathematics who were working their problems 
there * in the sand, Some * professed to be 
indignant that the Athenians, who formerly 
had come to Syracuse with a great fleet and 
numerous army, and perished miserably with- 
out being able to take the city* should now, by 
meajw of oae sopMstev overtmra the serrat^* 
eignty of Dionysius; inveigling him to cashier 
Tf 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

his guard of 10,000 lances, dismiss a navy of 
400 galleys, disband an army of 10,000 horse 
and many times over that number of foot, and 
go seek in the schools an unknown and imagin- 
ary bliss, and learn by the mathematics how 
to be happy/ 

Having now set forth the merits of the con* 
ceptual translation, I must proceed to show 
*** shortcomings* We extend our 
v j ew when we insert our, percepts 
into our conceptual map. We learn 

'rtftfi 

about them, and of some of them we 
transfigure the value; but the map remains 
superficial through the abstractness, and false 
through the discreteness of its elements; and 
the whole operation, so far from making thing* 
appear more rational, becomes the source of 
qaite gratuitous unintelligibilities, C0&eepto*l 
knowledge is forever inadequate to tfct f utoeaa 
of tbeTeaKtytobeknown, Reality coaabta of 
e:riateatifr! particulars as well at of eaacacet 
and uoitsraak and cl*t*3Haaox*es, and of exist- 
ential pi^m*tar* we become aware only in 
the perceptiul iiau Tit flus can never be 

n 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

superseded. We must carry It with us to the 
bitter end of our cognitive business, keeping it 
In the midst of the translation even when the 
The insu- latter proves illuminating, and fall- 
of sensa- * n ff back on it alone when the trans- 
^ on lation gives out. * The insuperability 

of sensation * would be a short expression of 
my thesis. 

To prove it, I must show: 1. That concepts 
are secondary formations, inadequate, and 
oaly ministerial; and 2* That they falsify as 
well as omit, and make the flux impossible to 



L Conception is a gecoEdsry process* not 

i 
iiidispenaable to life. II presupposes percep- 

tion, which is sdf-sufficmg, aa all lower ere** 
tares, in whom coascloui life goes o& by reflex 
adaptations, show* 

To understand a concept yim must know 
what it meant. It means always some thia, or 
ioma abstract portion of a tkii, with wMeh 
we first made acquaintance in the perceptual 
world, or else some grouping of such abstract 
portion AU conceptual content h borrowed : 
ft 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

to know what the concept 'color* means you 
must have seen red or blue, or green* To know 
what 'resistance* means, you must have made 
some effort; to know what * motion ' means, you 
must have had some experience, active or pas* 
sive, thereof* This applies as much to con- 
cepts of the most rarified order as to qualities 
like * bright' and *Ioud/ To know what the 
word 'illation* means one must once have 
sweated through some particular argument. 
To know what a * proportion* means one must 
have compared ratios in some sensible case* 
You can create new concepts out of old ele- 
ments, but the elements must have been per- 
ceptually given; and the famous world of 
universals would disappear like a soap-bubble 
if the definite contents of feeling, the thues&nd 
thate, which its terms severally denote, could 
be at once withdrawn, Whether om concepts 
lrt fey returning to the perceptual world or 
not, they live by haying come from it. It is 
the nourishing ground from which their sap is 
drawn* 

& Conceptual twatment of perceptual real- 
80 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

ity makes it seem paradoxical and incompre- 
hensible; and when radically and consistently 
carried out, it leads to the opinion that per- 
ceptual experience is not reality at all, but an 
appearance or illusion, 

Briefly, this is a consequence of two facts: 
First, that when we substitute concepts for 
con- percepts, we substitute their rela- 



concepts are of static comparison 
only, it is impossible to substitute them for the 
dynamic relations with which the perceptual 
flux is filled. Secondly, the conceptual scheme, 
consisting as it does of discontinuous terms* can 
only cover the perceptual flux in spots and 
incompletely. The one is no full measure of 
the other, essential features of the flux escaping 
whenever we put concepts in its place. 

This meeds considerable emanation, for we 
have concepts not only of qualities and rela- 
tions, but of happenings and actions; and it 
might seem as if these wild make the con- 
ceptual order active* 1 Bat tMi would be a falie 

*IM,HfttafeluoiarM 

SI ' , 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

interpretation. The concepts themselves are 
fixed, even though they designate parts that 
move in the flux; they do not act, even though 
they designate activities; and when we substi- 
tute them and their order, we substitute a 
scheme the intrinsically stationary nature of 
which is not altered by the fact that some of 
its terms symbolize changing originals. The 
concept of * change/ for example, is always that 



. (1910), seeks to defend the conceptual order against attacks 
similar to those in the text, which, be thinks* came from misapprehen- 
sions of the true function of logic. ' The peculiar function of thought 
is to represent the continuous/ he says, and he prows it by the exasa* 
pie of the calculus. I reply that the calculus, in substituting for cer- 
tain perceptual continuities its peculiar symbols, lets us follow changes 
point by point, and is thus their prttrticat, but not their *fn*t&/t equiv- 
alent It cannot reveal any change to on* 1 who never frit it, but it can 
lead him to where the change would lt*ad him, It may practically re- 
place the change, but it cannot rfjroduPt it, What ! am gontafedkf 
for is that the non-rrproducible part of reality is an essential part of 
the content of philosophy, whilst Hibhen and the fofMbfe *M to 
belkw that conception, if only adequately attakad tc, might to *B~ 
sufficient. ' It U the peculiar duty and pdvffeft of phflworffr/ Hr, 
* to exaJt tht ptt^tit** fcfriU*.' H**fat2t 
imiybl*to 

Ota of 



yi|^ 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

fixed concept. If it changed, its original self 
would have to stay to mark what it had changed 
from; and even then the change would be a 
perceived continuous process, of which the 
translation into concepts could only consist in 
the judgment that later and earlier parts of it 
differed such * differences * being conceived 
as absolutely static relations. 
Whenever we conceive a thing we define it; 



Origin of an( j if we s tju don't understand, we 

intellect- 

define our definition. Tims I define 



a certain percept by saying *this is motion/ or 
*I am moving"; and then I define motion by 
calling it the * being in new positions at new 
moments of time/ This habit of telling what 
everything is becomes inveterate. The f axtber 
we push it* the more we learn afemrf our subject 
of discourse, and we end by thinking that 
knowing the latter always consists in getting 
farther and farther away from the perceptual 
type of experience. This uncritiei&ed habit* 
added to the mtrimic clwra of the conceptual 
fora, is the source of f iutellectua!ism f in 



63 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

But intellectualism quickly breaks down. 
When we try to exhaust motion by conceiving 
it as a summation of parts, ad in- 
fintiu** we find only insufficiency. 
Although, when you have a contin- 
uum given, you can make cuts and dots in it, 
ad libitum, enumerating the dots and cuts will 
not give you your continuum back. The ra- 
tionalist mind admits this; but instead of see- 
ing that the fault is with the concepts, it 
blames the perceptual flux. This, Kant con- 
tends, has no reality in itself, being a mere 
apparitional birth-place for concepts, to be 
substituted indefinitely* When these them- 
selves are seen never to attain to a completed 
sum, reality is sought by such thinkers outside 
both of the perceptual flow and of the concept- 
ual scheme, Kant lodges it before the flow, in 
the shape of so-called "things in 



others place it beyond perception, ag a& Abso- 
lute (Bradley), or represent it as a Hindi whose 



to th ojbfftctfr* validity of 6en*^kru>wl^' (KrU. d. m'rwn F*r- 
3d &, p, WO)- H old nwrftl Deed of fomehow rebuking 



84 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

ways of thinking transcend ours (Green, the 
Cairds, Royce). In either case, both our per- 
cepts and our concepts are held by such phi- 
losophers to falsify reality; but the concepts 
less than the percepts, for they are static, and 
by all rationalist authors the ultimate reality 
is supposed to be static also, while perceptual 
life fairly boils over with activity and change* 
If we take a few examples, we can see how 
many of the troubles of philosophy come from 
Examples assuming that to be understood (or 
* * known* in the only worthy sense of 



word) our flowing life must be 

j n t o discrete bits and pinned 

t r 

upon a fixed relational scheme. 
Example L ActMty and carnation are in~ 
comprehensible, for the conceptual scheme 
yields nothing like them* Nothing happens 
therein: concepts are * timeless/ and can only 
be juxtaposed and compared. The concept 
*ddg* does not bite; the concept *cock* does 
not crow. So Hume s$4 Kant translate the 
fad; of causation into tfat t erode jnxtapoiti 
of two phenoEti^ authors wishiiif to, 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

mitigate the crudeness, resolve the adjacency, 
whenever they can, into identity: cause and 
effect must be the same reality in disguise, and 
our perception of difference in these successions 
thus becomes an illusion, Lotze elaborately 
establishes that the 'influencing* of one thing 
by another is inconceivable, * Influence * is a 
concept* and, as such, a distinct third thing, 
to be identified neither with the agent nor the 
patient. What becomes of it on its way from 
the former to the latter? And when it finds the 
latter, how does it act upon it? By a second 
influence which it puts forth in turn? But 
then again how? and so forth, and so forth till 
our whole intuition of activity gets branded as 
illusory because you cannot possibly reproduce 
its flowing substance by juxtaposing the dis- 
crete, Intellectualism draws the djnga^micocm* 
tinuity out of nature as you draw tilt thread 
out of a string of beads * 

Example . Knowledge is impossible; for 
knower is one concept, and known is another, 
Discrete* separated by a chasm, they are mu- 
tually 'traoisoeDident' things, so that how an 
86 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

object can ever get into a subject, or a subject 
ever get at an object, has become the most 
unanswerable of philosophic riddles. An insin- 
cere riddle, too, for the most hardened *epis- 
temologist' never really doubts that know- 
ledge somehow does come off. 

Example 3. Personal identity is conceptually 
impossible* * Ideas' and * states of mind' are 
discrete concepts, and a series of them in time 
means a plurality of disconnected terms. To 
such an atomistic plurality the associatioEusts 
reduce our mental life* Shocked at the discon- 
tinuous character of their scheme, the spiritu* 
aliita assume a *aour or *ego* to melt the 
separate ideas into one collective coasciousni- 
But this ego itself is but another discrete con- 
cept; and the only way not to pile up more 
puzzles is to endow it with an iBcomprelieasi'- 
fofe power of producing tiist very character of 
tesmyness-m-oneaesi of wliidb rationalists re- 
fuse the gift when ofterad in itf immediate per* 
<3eptnal form. 

Example 4* Motion and change art 

Perception pulse wise, but the 

,*f ' ' 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

pulses continue each other and melt their 
bounds. In conceptual translation, however, a 
continuum can only stand for elements with 
other elements between them ad infinitum, all 
sepajjitely conceived; and such an infinite 
serie$ tgin never be exhausted by successive 
addition, From the time of Zeno the Eleatic, 
this intrinsic contradictoriness of continuous 
change has been one of the worst skulls at 
intellectualism's banquet. 

Example 5, Resemblance, in the way in 
which we naively perceive it, is an illusion. He- 
semblance must be defined; and when defined 
it reduces to a mixture of identity with other- 
ness* To know a likeness understandingly we 
must be able to abstract the identical point 
distinctly* If we fail of this, we remain ill our 
perceptual limbo of 'confusion/ 

Example 6* Our immediate Itfe is/nU of the 
im#* qf direction, but no cmcept of tk# dirertion 
of 4 process i$ possibk until the procet* iff com- 
pl&ted* Defined as it is by a beginning and an 
endiog, a direction can never be prospect! vely 
but ooJ^ ^tix>epectively kiiown. Ourpercept- 
88 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

ual discernment beforehand of the way we are 
going, and all our dim foretastes of the future, 
have therefore to be treated as inexplicable 
or illusory features of experience. 

Example 7, No real thing can be in two rela- 
tions at once; the same moon, for cxampil, can* 
not be seen both by you and by me. For the 
concept 'seen by you' is not the concept 'seen 
by me*; and if, taking the moon as a gram- 
matical subject and s predicating one of these 
concepts of it, you then predicate the other 
also, you become guilty of the logical sin of 
saying that a thing can both be A and not-A 
at once, Learned trifling again; for dte&r 
though the conceptual contradictions be* no- 
body sincerely disbelieves that tw maa see tfee 
same thing. 

Example 8* Norelc^onmn^comprehmd^d 
or hdd to be real in the form in which we inn& 
cmtly assume it. A relation Is a distinct con- 
cept; and when you try to ai&ke two other eon* 
continuous by putting & illation between 
you oofer iQiawt the discontiniiity. 
lit! BO* tkee tMap 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

of two, and have two gaps instead of one to 
bridge over. Continuity is impossible in the 
conceptual world. 

Example 9. The very relation of subject to 
predicate in our judgments 9 the backbone of con- 
ceptual thinking itself, is unintelligible and self- 
contradictory. Predicates are ready-made uni- 
versal ideas by which we qualify perceptual 
singulars or other ideas. Sugar, for example, 
we say 4 is * sweet. But if the sugar was already 
sweet, you have made no step in knowledge; 
whilst if not so already, you are identifying it 
with a concept, with which, in its universality, 
the particular sugar cannot be identical Thus 
neither the sugar as described, nor your de- 
scription, is comprehensible. 1 

* 1 haw dfc*J ia the text only iuch craceptu^ pu*d* * lTtt b* 
coBMcbictophUoeop^ 

few* ako <Mbped mutual oppose** wfcich {afttonh ao y*t 
<ji*itccx3mmoiapU^ 

donbt whether guch notions derelop unconditional 'tratfc.' 
now t!fak|bftt tlw concepts ol*wMsHr/ **,* ' 
wstU,' 'force/ etc, m aot eo much dnpiktt of 
in 



'i^ The litrtur here ij 

J.B.9^Io'fOwo^an^ r^^ 
pp, 1&440 ii^atrvg^ fuioratia. Mich, Ottw14 Ptoim 

16 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

These profundities of inconceivability, and 
many others like them, arise from the vain 
Attitude attempt to reconvert the manifold 
losophers ' in ^ which our conception has re- 
S*? 6 *: solved things, back into the con- 

Ql&l&CtlC 

difficulties tinuum out of which it came. The 
concept 'many' is not the concept *one ? ; 
therefore the manyness-in-oneness which per- 
ception offers is impossible to construe intel- 
lectually. Youthful readers will find such 
difficulties too whimsical to be taken seriously; 
but since the days of the Greek sophists these 
dialectic puzzles have lain beneath the surface 
of all our thinking like the shoals and s&agi in 
tibe Mississippi river; and the more intellectu- 
ally conscientious the thinkers have been* the 
less they have allowed theimelves to disaregard 
them- But most philosophers have noticed 
this or that puzzle only, and igaored the others, 
The pyrrhomaa Sceptics first,, then Hegel, 1 
then in our day Bradley mad Bergson, are the 
ly writers I know wfco hare faced them col* 

Ehihsm, Mi&aud, Id^r, 



1 1 omit HerWt T porhAp* wroagly . 

fl 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

lectively, and proposed a solution applicable 
to them alL 

The sceptics gave up the whole notion of 
truth light-heartedly, and advised their pupils 
The seep- not to care about it. 1 Hegel wrote so 

tics and . 

Hegel abominably that I cannot under- 
stand him, and will say nothing about him 
here. 2 Bradley and Bergson write with beauti- 
ful clearness and their arguments continue all 
that I have said* 

Mr. Bradley agrees that immediate feeling 
possesses a native wholeness which conceptual 
Bradley treatment analyzes into a many, but 
ceptand cannot unite again* In every 'this* 
concept ^ mere ]y f e it, Bradley says, we 'en- 
counter* reality, but we encounter it only as a 
fragment, see it, as it were, only Hhrotifli n 



* See any hiatory of philosophy, tub vow 'Pyrrho.* 
"Hag^coonectjimm^^ 
of totarmadUry concept* at i^^ Tb* 

^ 



After him wbilgifti to th top, aod may therefor* beoounted at* 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

hole.' 1 Our sole practicable way of extending 
and completing this fragment is by using our 
intellect with its universal ideas. But with ideas, 
that harmonious compenetration of manyness- 
in-oneness which feeling originally gave is no 
longer possible. Concepts indeed extend our 
this., but lose the inner secret of its wholeness; 
when ideal c truth' is substituted for ( reality * 
the very nature of 'reality ' disappears. 

The fault being due entirely to the concep- 
tual form in which we have to think things, one 
might naturally expect that one who recognizes 
its inferiority to the perceptual form as clearly 
as Mr. Bradley does, would try to save both 
forms for philosophy delimiting their scopes, 
and showing how, as our experience works, 
they supplement each other. This is M. Berg- 
son's procedure; but Bradley, though a traitor 
to orthodox intellectualism in holding fast to 
feeling as a revealer of the inner oneness of 
reality, has yet remained orthodox enough to 
refuse to admit immediate feeling into 'philos- 
ophy' at all. *For worse or for better/ he 

:ftft*JPriM^ 
0S 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

writes, 'the man who stays on particular feel- 
ing must remain outside philosophy/ The 
philosopher's business, according to Mr- Brad- 
ley, is to qualify the real 'ideally ' (L e. by con- 
cepts), and never to look back. The * ideas * 
meanwhile yield nothing but a patchwork, and 
show no unity like that which the living per- 
ception gave. What shall one do in these per- 
plexing circumstances? Unwilling to go back, 
Bradley only goes more desperately forward- 
He makes a flying leap ahead, and assumes, 
beyond the vanishing point of the whole con- 
ceptual perspective, an 'absolute' reality, in 
which the coherency of feeling and the com- 
pleteness of the intellectual ideal shall unite la 
some indescribable way. Such an absolute 
totality-m unity can be, it mwt be, it $AaH tm $ 
it is he says. Upon this incomptdbeiuNlbli 
metaphysical object the Bradleyan metepiyaie 
establishes its domain. 1 

The sincerity of Bradley*^ criticisms has 
cleared the air of metaphysics &ad made havoc 

* Mr, Bradley iuus expressed himself most pregnantly in an article 
in volume xviii, N, S. <rf Mind, p. 489. See ftto hif Appear anc^ and 
Rtattty* fw^m, (specialty the Appendix to the second ftditba. 
94 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

with old party lines. But, critical as be is, 
Mr. Bradley preserves one prejudice uncriti- 
Criticism cized. Perception 'untransmuted/ 
of Bradley j^ belie ves, must not, cannot, shall 
not, enter into final "truth/ 

Such loyalty to a blank direction in thought, 
no matter where it leads you, is pathetic: con- 
cepts disintegrate no matter, their way 
must be pursued; percepts are integral no 
matter, they must be left behind. When anti- 
sensationalism has become an obstinacy like 
this, one feels that it draws near its end. 

Since it is only the conceptual form which 
forces the dialectic contradictions upon tbte in- 
nocent sensible reality, the remedy would 
to be simple. Use concepts when they help, 
and drop them when they Mndar imderttaad- 
ing; and take reality bodily and integrally up 
into philosophy in exactly tfce perceptual shape 
in which it comes* The ilKfrdypnal flow of feel- 
ing dboa only by & qu&atit&tiTt dtfeet* There is 
always muefa^t-o&oe of it but tJbteire is nerw 
oatfofh, ^Eid we dtsldteraft the rest* The mfy 
way to get the rest without wading through all 
95 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

future time in the person of numberless per- 
ceivers, is to substitute our various conceptual 
systems which, monstrous abridgments though 
they be, are nevertheless each an equivalent, 
for some partial aspect of the full perceptual 
reality which we can never grasp. 

This, essentially, is Bergson's view of the 
matter, and with it I think that we should rest 
content. 1 

I will now sum up compendiously the result 
of what precedes. If the aim of philosophy 
Swmmaiy were the taking full possession of all 
reality by the mind, then nothing short of 
the whole of immediate perceptual experience 
could be the subject-matter of philosophy, for 
only in sucE experience is reality intimately 
and concretely found* But the philosopher 
although he is unable aa a finite being to ep&a* 
pass more than a few passing momenta of stick 
experience, is yet able to extend Ms knowledge 
beyond such moments by the idt&I symbol of 

1 B^rgson's moat compendious statement of his doctrine is in the 
Introduction t la M&apbysique/ In the Emte d$ M&iaphysiquc d d 
Mantle, 1903, p. i. For ft brief comparison between Elm and Br&dtey, 

kifowphy, vol. vii> 
96 



PEECEPT AND CONCEPT 

the other moments. 1 He thus commands vi- 
cariously innumerable perceptions that are out 
of range. But the concepts by which he does 
this, being thin extracts from perception, are 
always insufficient representatives thereof; and, 
although they yield wider information, must 
never be treated after the rationalistic fashion, 
as if they gave a deeper quality of truth* The 
deeper features of reality are found only in 
perceptual experience* Here alone do we ac- 
quaint ourselves with continuity* or the im- 
mersion of one thing in another, here alone with 
self, with substance, with qualities, with ac- 
tivity in its various modes, with time* with 
cause, with change, with novelty, with tend- 
ency, and with freedom. Against all sudbt fea- 
tures of reality the method of conceptual trans* 
lation> when candidly and critically followed 
out, can only raise its nan jmsumw* and brand 
them as unreal or absurd* 



* It wodd seem that in 'myfUofci* wa^ lbmay fflxtead fell "Mm to 
8 even wider perceptual paaoramA t&&& tttftt usually opn to the ci~ 
entiicmmd. 1 understand Bergsoa to jkm torn tuob i&ft tU$ 
a^ 

'JMite 



CHAPTER VI 

PERCEPT AND CONCEPT SOME 
COROLLARIES 

THE first corollary of the conclusions of the 
foregoing chapter is that the tendency known in 
philosophy as empiricism, becomes confirmed. 
Empiricism proceeds from parts to wholes, 
treating the parts as fundamental both in the 
order of being and in the order of our know- 
ledge, 1 In human experience the parts are per- 

i.Hwttty cepts, built out into wholes by our 

becomes 

possible conceptual additions. The percepts 

are singulars that change incessantly and never 
return exactly as they were before. This brings 
an element of concrete novelty into our experi* 
ence* This novelty finds no repreaentatsoia in 
the conceptual method, for concepts are &b<* 
itracted from experiences already seen or gt WE, 

* Naturally tbi* appUee in t&& prsaerxt place only to the greater 
wMt whidi philosophy considers; the igoiwffe namely, wd Its pnrl% 
f or thre we ptety cvf minor wboles (animal nd $&M <irgartkm t for 
example) in whicb both the being of the part* aad our understaatliag 
of thf parts are fouiKkd. 

08 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

and he who uses them to divine the new can 
never do so but in ready-made and ancient 
terms. Whatever actual novelty the future 
may contain (and the singularity and individu- 
ality of each moment makes it novel) escapes 
conceptual treatment altogether. Properly 
speaking, concepts are post-mortem prepara- 
tions, sufficient only for retrospective under- 
standing; and when we use them to define the 
universe prospectively we ought to realize that 
they can give only a bare abstract outline or 
approximate sketch, in the filling out of which 
perception must be invoked* 

Eationalistic philosophy has always aspii^ed 
to a rounded~in view of the whole of tkbgi* a 
closed system of kinds, from which the notion 
of essential novelty being possible ia rated oirt 
in advance. For empiricism, on the other haitd, 
reality cannot be thus confined by a conceptual 
ring-fence. It overflows, exceeds* and alters. 
It may turn into noveltiai f and ean be known 
adequately only by f dOtewfeg its aE 



moment to mattM&t as our experieact 

EmpMdtet pMbiophy thin 

m 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

the pretension to an all-inclusive vision. It 
ekes out the narrowness of personal experience 
by concepts which it finds useful but not 
sovereign; but it stays inside the flux of life 
expectantly, recording facts* not formulat- 
ing laws, and never pretending that man's 
relation to the totality of things as a philoso- 
pher is essentially different from his relation 
to the parts of things as a daily patient or 
agent in the practical current of events* Phi- 
losophy, like life, must keep the doors and 
windows open* 

In the remainder of this book we shall hold 
fast to this empiricist view. We shall insist 
that, as reality is created temporally clay by 
day 9 concepts, although a magnificent sketch- 
map for showing us our bearings, can never 
Itly supersede perception, and that the *etei> 
mi* systems which they form should least of 
all be regarded as realms of being to know 
wliiduft & Mad of knowing that e&sts the know- 
ledge of particulars altogether into the shade. 
That i*tiottti^0t assumption is quite beside the 
mtrk, Tto4<W|>MIoiOpliy prove again that 
10ft 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

essential identity with science which we argued 
for in our first chapter. 1 

The last paragraph does not mean that con- 
cepts and the relations between them are not 
2 Con- J us ^ as * rea ^ * * n ^ e * r e eternal * way as 



ceptuai percepts are in their temporal way. 

systems x r * " 

aredz*. What is it to be 'real'? The best 
realms of definition I know is that which the 
7 pragmatist rule gives: 'anything is 
real of which we find ourselves obliged to take 
account in any way/ 2 Concepts are thus as 
real as percepts, for we cannot live a moment 
without taking account of them- But the 
'eternal * kind of being which they enjoy is in- 
ferior to the temporal kind, because it is so 
static and schematic and lacks so many charac- 
ters which temporal reality possesses. Philoso- 
phy must thus recognize many realms of reality 

1 One way of stating the empiridtt #$atatl0tt \$ to my tlmt th$ 
'aloglc&J * enters into philosophy o an w$wl footing with the * logical .* 
Mr, Belfort Sax, in his book, Tks Mwttt t$ $W% (1 $07% formulates 
fafo tmpiriebm (such a it k) In tMs m$* (ht pmrtlcularly ch&p, til.) 
Compare also E. 0. Fawcctt: f%# Individual and R&ality, patsim, but 
eapeci&Hy part H t chaps, IT and v. ' 

9 Prof. A, E.Taylor gives ttm pt^gi^tist dftfiniUon fa hw Kitnefte 
vfMetaphytwdm),?,^. On the nature of logical reality, cf. B, 
K^ti: Priwpl** tf Math<mrtit9, 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

which mutually interpenetrate. The concept- 
ual systems of mathematics, logic, aesthetics, 
ethics, are such realms, each strung upon some 
peculiar form of relation, and each differing 
from perceptual reality in thai in no one of 
them is history or happening displayed. Per- 
ceptual reality involves and contains all these 
ideal systems, and vastly more besides. 

A concept, it was said above, means always 
the same thing: Change means always change, 

The white always white, a circle always a 
self-same* circle. On this self-sameness of eon* 

ness of , , 

ideal eeptual objects the static and eter- 
nal * character of our systems of ideal 

truth is based; for a relation* once perceived to 
obtain, must obtain always* between terms 
that do not alter. But many find 

difficulty in admitting that & concept 
different contexts can be intmaieiillyllie ianae* 
When we call both snow and paper * white * it is 
fiipjposed by these thinkers tJist there must be 
two predicates in the field* As lames Mill 
says; 1 * Every colour is an individual colour, 

* Artalvtitqftfit Human Mind (1&09), i, m 
10* 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

every size is an individual size, every shape is 
an individual shape. But things have no indi- 
vidual colour in common, no individual shape 
in common; no individual size in common; that 
is to say, they have neither shape, colour, nor 
size in common. What, then, is it which they 
have in common which the mind can take into 
view? Those who affirmed that it was some- 
thing, could by no means tell. They substi- 
tuted words for things; using vague and xnys* 
tical phrases, which, when examined, meant 
nothing/ The truth, according to this nominal- 
ist author, is that the only thing that can be pos- 
sessed in common by two objects is the same 
name, Black in the coat and black in the shoe 
are the same In so far forth as both shoe and 
coat are called black the fact that on this 
view the name can never twice be the *ssme* 
being quite overlooked* What BOW does the 
concept *same* signify? Applying, as usual, 
the pragmatic rale, we find th&t when we call 
two objects the same we mean either (a) tfast 
no differanoe caa bt I <ftnd bet ween them wtea 
compared, or (b) that we can substitute the oii 
4*0 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

for the other in certain operations without 
changing the result. If we are to discuss same- 
ness profitably we must bear these pragmatic 
meanings in mind* 

Do then the snow and the paper show no 
difference in color? And can we use them in- 
differently in operations? They may certainly 
replace each other for reflecting light, or be 
used indifferently as backgrounds to set off 
anything dark, or serve as equally good samples 
of what the word * white* signifies. But the 
saow may be dirty, and the paper pinkish or 
yellowish without ceasing to be called white * ; 
or both snow and paper in one light may differ 
from their own selves in another and &5till be 
* white/ so the no-difference criterion seems 
to be at fault- This physical difficulty (which a]l 
house painters know) of matching twoti&ta & 
exactly as to show no difference to be 

the sort of fact that nominalists have in mind 
whan they s&y that our Ideal meanings are 
new twice the same* Must we therefore ad- 
mit that mob & concept as * white* can never 
keep &&Q$y tiba iame meamxig? 

104 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

It would be absurd to say so, for we know 
that under all the modifications wrought by 
changing light, dirt, impurity in pigment, etc., 
there is an element of color-quality, different 
from other color-qualities, which we mean that 
our word shall inalterably signify. The impossi- 
bility of isolating and fixing this quality physi- 
cally is irrelevant, so long as we can isolate 
and fix it mentally, and decide that whenever 
we say * white/ that identical quality, whether 
applied rightly or wrongly, is what we shall be 
held to mean. Our meaningscan be the same as 
often as we intend to have them so ? quite Irre- 
spective of whether what is meant be a physi- 
cal possibility or not* Half the ideas we make 
use of are of impossible or problematic tibmgs* 
zeros, infinites, fourth dimensiom, limits 
of ideal perfection, forces, relations sundered 
from their terms, or terms defined oaly eo&- 
eeptually* by their relations to other terms 
wWch may be equally fictitious* * White* 
m^m a color quality df whidb the mind a$>* 
points the standard, and which it can decree to 
"b& ,i pbytfcftl ditguiw* 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

white is always the same white. What sense 
can there be in insisting that although we our- 
selves have fixed it as the same, it cannot be 
the same twice over? It works perfectly for 
us on the supposition that it is there sell- 
identically; so the nominalist doctrine is false 
of things of that conceptual sort, and true only 
of things in the perceptual flux- 

What I am affirming here is the platoaic 
doctrine that concepts are singulars, that con- 
cept-stuff is inalterable, and that physical 
realities are constituted by the various con- 
cept-stuffs of which they * partake/ It is known 
as * logical realism * in the history of philosophy ; 
and has usually been more favored by rational- 
istic than by empiricist minds* For rational- 
ism, concept-stuff is primordial and perceptual 
tMngi are secondary in nature* The present 
book* which treats concrete percepts as pri- 
mordial and concepts m of secondary origin, 
may be regarded aa somewhat eccentric in its 
attempt to combine logical jrealism with an 
otherwise eapMeist mode of thought* 1 

1 For a4didoa^ renmrk* m favx>r of the samenefM of eonceptutl ob 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

I mean by this that they are made of the 
same kind of stuff, and melt Into each other 
4. Con- when we handle them together. How 
percepts could it be otherwise when the eon- 
are con- ce pts are like evaporations out of the 

substan- ^ * 

tial bosom of perception, into which they 

condense again whenever practical service 
summons them? No one can tell, of the things 
he now holds in his hand and reads, how much 
conies in through his eyes and fingers, and how 
much, from his apperceiving intellect, unites 
with that and makes of it this particular 
* book 7 The universal and the particular 
parts of the experience are literally immersed 
in each other, and both are indispensable* 
Conception is not like a painted hook, on 
which no real chain can be hung; for we hang 
concepts upon percepts, and percepts upon 
concepts interchangeably and indefinitely; and 
the relation of the two Is much more like 
what we find in those cylindrical * panoramas* 

jsct*, *e W. Jftmc* k Uind,vd. IT, 1879, pp. 331 -3S5 ; F, H. Bradley ; 

jSWw (m0), w, m-I54 **4 JPtinrfpto of Lopw (1888), ^ 

M*& ** tf, H ftmfaftlfc* vfc* fe pwaettfosd by Jme 10& m 

1 above, aad by John Stuart Mill in his Si/^rrt o/ J^yic;, Bth ed. I 77. 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

in which a painted background continues a real 
foreground so cunningly that one fails to de- 
tect the joint. The world we practically live 
in is one in which it is impossible, except by 
theoretic retrospection, to disentangle the con- 
tributions of intellect from those of sense. They 
are wrapt and rolled together as a gunshot in 
the mountains is wrapt and rolled in fold on 
fold of echo and reverberative clamor. Even 
so do intellectual reverberations enlarge and 
prolong the perceptual experience which they 
envelop, associating it with remoter parts of 
existence. And the ideas of these in turn work 
like those resonators that pick out partial 
tones in complex sounds. They help us to 
decompose our percept into parts and to ab- 
stract and isolate its elements. 

The two mental functions thus play into 
each others hands- Perception prompts our 
thought, and thought in turn enriches our per- 
ception The more we see, the more we think; 
while the more we think, the more we see in 
our imme<iiate experiences, and the greater 
grows the detail and the more significant the 
108 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

articulateness of our perception. 1 Later, when 
we come to treat of causal activity, we shall see 
how practically momentous is this enlargement 
of the span of our knowledge through the wrap- 
ping of our percepts in ideas. It is the whole 
coil and compound of both by which effects are 
determined, and they may then be different 
effects from those to which the perceptual 
nucleus would by itself give rise. But the point 
is a difficult one and at the present stage of our 
argument this brief mention of it must suffice. 
Readers who by this time agree that our con- 
ceptual systems are secondary and on the 
5. An ob- whole imperfect and ministerial forms 

Jecticm 

replied to of being, will now feel able to return 
and embrace the flux of their hourly experience 
with a hearty feeling that, however little of It 
at a time be given, what is given is absolutely 



1 Cf. F. C, S. Schiller: * Thought and IimnadiMgr/ b the 
cf PMowphfr etc., Iii S4, The kt^wt^tkm goes so dwp tfc&t 
we may even act as if experience consisted of nothing but the 
different kinds of ooacept>stu? into which we arxaly?^ it. Such 
concept-stuff may often be timted, for purposes of action and &tm 
*f 4ltorita * If It ww a full cqtifatat for reality, But It 3* 
needles* to repoat, after what precedaa, that no amount of it c&a 
ever %>' JHf oquivalent, m& that in point of gcrwwiia it renmins 

' ' ' 



W 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

real Rationalistic thought, with its exclusive 
interest in the unchanging and the general, 
has always de-realized the passing pulses of 
our life* It is no small service on empiricism's 
part to have exorcised rationalism's veto, and 
reflectively justified our instinctive feeling 
about immediate experience. * Other world ?* 
says Emerson, "there is no other world/ 
than this one, namely, in which our several 
biographies are founded. 

* Natur hat we<lt*r Kern noch Soh&le; 
Alles iat si< mit eincm male, 
Dich pnift* <iu utir 
Ob du Kern odor Be*li*il<* 



The belief in the genuineness of each particular 
moment in which we feel the squeeze of thm 
world's life, as we actually do work here* or 
work is done upon us, is an Eden from which 
rationalists seek in vain to expel us f now that 
we have criticised their state of mind. 

But they still make one last attempt, and 
charge us with self -stultification* 

* Your belief in the particular momenta/ thay 
maist, * so fa? as It Is based on reflective argu- 
110 



PERCEPT AND CONCEPT 

ment (and is not a mere omission to doubt, like 
that of cows and horses) is grounded in abstrac- 
tion and conception. Only by using concepts 
have you established percepts in reality. The 
concepts are the vital things, then, and the 
percepts are dependent on them for the char- 
acter of "reality" with which your reasoning 
endows them. You stand self -contradicted: 
concepts appear as the sole triumphant instru- 
ments of truth, for you have to employ their 
proper authority, even when seeking to install 
perception in authority above them/ 

The objection is specious; but it disappears 
the moment one recollects that in the last 
resort a concept can only be de$ign<Mn; and 
that the concept * reality/ which we restore to 
immediate perception, is no new conceptual 
creation, but only a kind of practical relation 
to our Will, perceptively experienced, 1 which 
reasoning had temporarily interfered with, 
but which, when the reaaoni&g was neutralised 
by still further reasom&g, reverted to its 



W* Iftmetj JVforfpfa* $ PwMfoffit* chap* arad, 

111 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

original seat as if nothing had happened. That 
concepts can neutralize other concepts is one 
of their great practical functions. This an- 
swers also the charge that it is self-contradic- 
tory to use concepts to undermine the credit 
of conception in general The best way to show 
that a knife will not cut is to try to cut with it. 
Rationalism itself it is that has so fatally un- 
dermined conception, by finding that, when 
worked beyond u certain point, it only piles up 
dialectic contradictions. 1 

1 Compart* further, AS to this objection, a nott* in W, James; A Plu* 
Vniverttt pp* 



CHAPTER VII 

THE ONE AND THE MANY 

THE full nature, as distinguished from the full 
amount, of reality, we now believe to be given 
only in the perceptual flux. But, though the 
flux is continuous from next to next, non- 
adjacent portions of it are separated by parts 
that Intervene, and such separation seems in a 
variety of cases to work a positive disconnec- 
tion, The latter part, e. g. may contain no 
element surviving from the earlier part* may 
be unlike it, may forget it, may be shut off 
from it by physical barriers* or whatnot- Thus 
when we use our intellect for cutting 



va, mon- 

ism up the flux and mdividualizing Its 

members, we have (provisionally and prao 
tically at any rate) to treat an enormous num- 
ber of these as if they were unrelated or related 
jjttjy remotely, to one another. We handle 
J|ii piecemeal or diatrifoitively, and look at 
ftox a if it wwe their sum or coltac* 
noo^ tite empiricist 
us 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

that the parts are distinct and that the whole 
is a resultant. 

4 This doctrine rationalism opposes, contend- 
ing that the whole is fundamental, that the 
parts derive from it and all belong with one- 
another, that the separations we uncritically 
accept are illusory, and that the entire uni- 
verse, instead of being a sum, is the only gen- 
uine unit in existence, constituting (in the 
words often quoted from d'Alembert) *un $md 
fait et une grande ve.rite.* 

The alternative here is known as that be- 
tween pluralism and monism. It is the most 
pregnant of all the dilemmas of philosophy* 
although it is only in our time that it has been 
articulated distinctly* Does reality exist die- 
tributively? or collectively? in the shape of 
tachet,* everyi r anpt, @itk$T$? or only in tbt 
ib&pe of an aU or whole f An ideatfaftl osmtoit 
Is compatible with either form tit 

LaHa 0mm# 9 or gnncti, or the 

expressing the dtematitw 
iarly* PluraUftm $1md lot the distributive* 
monism lot tito aoltetive form of being, 
114 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

Please note that pluralism need not be sup- 
posed at the outset to stand for any particular 
kind or amount of disconnection between the 
many things which it assumes. It only has the 
negative significance of contradicting mon- 
ism's thesis that there is absolutely no discon- 
nection. The irreducible outness of am^hing, 
however infinitesimal, from am/thing else, in 
any respect, would be enough, if it were solidly 
established, to ruin the monistic doctrine. 

I hope that the reader begins to be pained 
here by the extreme vagueness of the terms I 
am using* To say that there is *no disconnec- 
tion/ is on the face of it simply silly, for we find 
practical disconnections without number. My 
pocket is disconnected with Mr. Morgan^ 
bank-account, and King Edward VIFi mind 10 
disconnected with this book. Monism mut 
mean that all such apparent disconnectioni 
are bridged over by some deeper absolute union 
in which it believes* and tbif union must in 
way be more tml tb*a the practical 
&ppr upon the surface* 

In point of historical fact monism has 
, 4W 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

erally kept itself vague and mystical as regards 
tlie ultimate principle of unity. To be One is 
Kinds of more wonderful than to be many, so 
momsm ^^ principle of things must be One, 
but of that One no exact account is given. 
Plotinus simply calls it the One* * The One is 
all things and yet no one of them* . * . For 
the very reason that none of them was in the 
One, are all derived from it. Furthermore, in 
order that they may be real existences, the One 
Mystical is not an existence, but the father 
mo sin () | ex istences. And the generation of 
existence is as it were the first act of gener- 
ation* Being perfect by reason of neither 
seeking nor possessing nor needing anything, 
the One overflows, as it were* and what over- 
flows forms another hypostask. . * , How 
should the most perfect and primal good 
$tay shut up in itself as if it were envious or 
Impotent? * , . Necessarily then gomefJodBg 
eomea from it- n 
TMs it like the Hindoo doctrine of the BraJb- 



1 Compare the pamges in C. M. BakewellVSaurca-BooA; in Ancient 

pp 6$**W ov tb* fat fair boola ctf the Vth 
j, in F. Bouillier s tmnaUtion. 

tie 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

man, or of the At man. In the Bhagavat-gita 
the holy Krishna speaking for the One, says; 
* I am the immolation. I am the sacrificial rite. 
I am the libation offered to ancestors, I am the 
drug. I am the incantation, I am the sacrificial 
butter also. I am the fire. I am the incense. I 
am the father, the mother, the sustuincr, the 
grandfather of the universe- the mystic doc- 
trine, the purification, the syllable **Om'* . - . 
the path, the supporter, the roaster, the wit- 
ness, the habitation, the refuge, the friend, the 
origin, the dissolution, the place, the receptacle* 
the inexhaustible need- I beat (the world) 1 
withhold and pour out the rain* I am ambrosia 
and death, the existing and the non-exfsting* 
. . I am the same to all beings* I have neither 
foe nor friend. * . * Place thy heart on tne f wor- 
shipping me, sacrificing to me, saluting me/ 1 
I call this sort of monism mystical, for it not 
only revels in formulas that defy understand- 
ing, 2 but it accredits itself by appealing to 
states of illumination not vouchsafed to eom* 

* I, C. T&wsoia'a traafktfosi, elmp, !v. 

the Mohammedan philosopher aadl mystic, git**)* * 



W 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

inon men. Thus Porphyry, in his life of Plo- 
tinus, after saying that he himself once had 
such an insight, when 68 years old, adds that 
whilst he lived with Plotinus, the latter four 
times had the happiness of approaching the su- 
preme God and consciously uniting with him 
in a real and ineffable act. 

The regular mystical way of attaining the 
vision of the One is by tocetic training, funda- 
mentally the same in all religious systems* But 
this ineffable kind of Oneness is not strictly 
philosophical, for philosophy is essentially 
talkative and explicit, so 1 must pass it by. 

The usual philosophic way of reaching deeper 
oneness has been by the conception of sub- 
stance* First used by the Greeks, this notion 



aritfht and Hie Iideriwtray;he d< wimt In- wills aad dmdew what ho 

withes; th&re 1$ no opponer of hw dmm&n and 00 repel !er of Ml decree 

He created the Gwpekti, and ereftttxl lor it ft people* then luwd Item In 

obQi&mm, And he ereatad tbe Fiw* mad oreatad lot it a pQ$fe tiMW 

tnd them in rebellion, . , . Then h aid ( has bswt handed down 

frorattePfr>ph<rt:"T^e^ 

are in the Fire, and I care not," So fa Is Allah, the Most High, thd 



are asked/ (0, B, MAcDoa&id'a tratislitlcm, 

Compare for other quotation*, W. Janxe: The 



118 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

was elaborated with great care during the 
Middle Ages. Defined as any being that exists 



Monism pe r se so fy$fc ft needs no further sub- 

of sub- . . 

stance ject in which to inhere (Ens ita per 
se existenS) ut non indigeat olio tamquam $ub~ 
jecto 9 cui inhaereat, adexistendum) a * substance * 
was first distinguished from all * accidents* 
(which do require such a subject of inhesion 
cujus esse est inesse). It was then identified 
with the * principle of individuality* in things* 
and with their * essence/ and divided into va- 
rious types, for example into first and second, 
simple and compound, complete and incom- 
plete, specific and individual* material and 
spiritual substances. God, on this view* 1$ a 
substance, for he erists per $0, as well as a $$; 
but of secondary beings* he is the creator, not 
the substance, for once created, they also eieiit 
per se though not a $e* Thus, for scholasticism* 
the notion of substance Is only a partial unifier* 
and in its totality, the universe forms a plund- 
ism from the substaace-poiat-of-view, 1 

1 Consult the ward 'mbitiwe * in th mdx of any idbdbitk 
. W4 ittdt I. Rickaby; General MttapftyKC*; A, 3Uk<k!: 
Phil.; or P, M, Lilxiratore: Qmpmlium 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Spinoza broke away from the scholastic doc- 
trine. He began his * Ethics ' by demonstrating 
that only one substance is possible, and that 
that substance can only be the infinite and 
necessary God. 1 This heresy brought reproba- 

1 Spinoza has expressed his doctrine briefly in part i of the Appendix 
to hut Ethiea; ' I have now explained,' he aay r 'the nature of God, and 
his properties; such as that he exists necessarily; that he i# unique; 
that what he it and d*w8 Rowa from the sole necessity of his nature; 
that he in the free cause of all things whatever; that all things are in 
God and depend on him in mich wise that they can neither b nor be 
conceived without him; and finally, that all thinp have been predeter- 
mined by God, not indeed by the freedom of his will, or according to 
hfo good plenums, but in virtue of his absolute nature or his infinite 
potentiality/ Spinoza ponton to refute the vulgar notion otjtnat 
mmm. God pursues? no ends if he did lie would Iwk something. He 
net out of the logics! necwity of the fulne#s of his nature, I find 
snother |?t>od monistic statement in a Inwk of the Hpuiozbtic type; * 
", . - The cxbtcnce of isvery compound objwt in manifestation does 
not lie in the object itielf* bit Keg m thu universal existence which 
b art abnolute unit, eontnmmg in it^-if ail that in munifrHtrd. All th@ 
partitriilarisEed beings, therefore. . . . art) inn-smmtly changing one 
into tb@ other, coming and going, forming and dissolving through the 
one universal wise of the* patmtM univvw, which ti the absolute unit 
of universal existence, de-jHwdrng on the one gtiteml taw, the OHM math- 
etoatical botid, which U the ab0iut0 U'tng r and it change* not In all 
eternity, Tinw r . . , it is ti* univcm- as a whole, *** ^ po^rtio/ 
w% from which the physical uni ventc b indi viduaHjMKi ; and iti blng 
k i m*th*mitticl inference from a mathematical or an mtellectual 
univerw which m& and @vw l previomily formed % ft n mt!l^t 
*Unaingaaarxi*tiDgbyiUIf, lliia m thematic! or in teiWtuaUai- 
vttm I call Alwwtut* Ijalcn^uality f tlie God of the Uni vt>re.' 

@0fe |, Silber.teh: 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

tion on Spinoza, but It has been favored by 
philosophers and poets ever since. The panthe- 
istic spinozistic unity was too sublime a pros- 
pect not to captivate the mind. It was not till 
Locke, Berkeley, and Hume began to put In 
their 'critical* work that the suspicion began 
to gain currency that the notion of substance 
might be only a word masquerading in the 
shape of an idea. 1 

L^cke believed in substances, yet confessed 
that * we have no such clear idea at all, but only 

Critique an uncertain supposition of we know 

of mty* ^ ** 

ttjmee not what, which we take to be the 

substratum, or support of those ideas we do 
mot know/ 2 He criticised the notion of per- 
sonal substance as the principles of self-same- 



1 No one believes that such words as l wtosr/ 't 
note substances. They designate collective fact** f which th parti 
are held together by marns that can be arpwiEflwttalJy trao&i Bvwk 
when we can't define what groups the effects together, m m 'poison/ 
'sickness/ 'strength/ we don't assume a aub&Unce. but are willing 
that the word should designate flome phenom<5nal agency yet to be 
found out* Nominalkts treat ait tiiibtancM* after thin analogy, and 
consider 'matter/ 'gold/ 'soul/ at but the names of so many grouped 
ptx^rtKsg, of which the bond of union must be, net om unknowabk 
^SMm corresponding to the name but rather aome hidden portion 
of the whole phenomenal fact, 

1% 

181 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

ness in our different minds, Experientially, our 
personal identity consists, he said, in nothing 
more than the functional and perceptible fact 
that our later states of mind continue and re- 
member our earlier ones, 1 

Berkeley applied the same sort of criticism 
to the notion of bodily substance. *When I 
consider,* he says, "the two parts (** being 1 * in 
general* and "supporting accidents*') which 
make the signification of the words * material 
substance," I am convinced there is no distinct 
meaning annexed to them. . . . Suppose an 
intelligence without the help of external bodies 
to be affected with the same train of seasmtio&s 
that you are* imprinted in the same order, and 
with like vividness in his mind* I ask whether 
that intelligence hath not all the reason to be** 
lieve the eiiitenee of corporeal substances* 
represented by his idesi # and exciting them' in 
lit mind* that you can possibly haw for ba~ 
/^ ^ri&\n grouped sewd- 



tions, in short, are all that corporeal sub- 

* im, tak tt, <$*> WB, if MRT. 
Ii 

im 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

stances are known-as, therefore the only mean- 
ing which the word * matter 9 can claim is that 
it denotes such sensations and their groupings* 
They are the only verifiable aspect of the word* 
The reader will recognize that in these criti- 
cisms our own pragmatic rule is used. What 
difference in practical experience is it supposed 
to make that we have each a personal substan- 
tial principle? This difference, that we can re- 
member and appropriate our past, calling it 
* mine.* What difference that in this book there 
is a substantial principle? This, that certain 
optical and tactile se&satkms cling permanently 
together in a cluster- The fact that certain 
perceptual experiences do seem to b$lmff ft>* 
g ether is thus all that the word substance means. 
Hume carries the criticism to the Imi degree of 
clearness, * We have no idea ol substance/ he 
says* * distinct from that of a collection of par- 
ticular qualities, nor hava we any oifa&t mean- 
ing when we either talk or reason concerning it. 
The idea of a substance * * * is nothing but a 
collection of simple ideas that are united by 
the Imagination and have a particular name 
1M 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

assigned them by which we are able to recall 
that collection/ 1 Kant's treatment of sub- 
stance agrees with Hume's in denying all posi- 
tive content to the notion. It, differs in insist- 
ing that, by attaching shifting percepts to the 
permanent name, the category of substance 
unites them necessarily together, and thus 
makes nature intelligible. 2 It is impossible to 
assent to this* The grouping of qualities be- 
comes no more intelligible when you call sub- 
stance a * category* than when you call it a 
bare word* 

Let us now turn our backs upon ineffable 
or unintelligible ways of accounting for the 
world's oneness, and inquire whether* 
instead of being a principle, the * one* 
Bess* affirmed may not merely be a name like 
*subtaaee/ descriptive of the fact that certain 
d mijioble cmmtim$ are fonad 
the parts of the experiential flux, This 



For further 

critk&m of the *ubt*nc*-c<>r*pt m I S. MBB* 4 



H4 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

brings us back to our pragmatic rule: Suppose 
there is a oneness in things, what may it be 
known-as? What differences to you and me 
will it make? 

Our question thus turns upside down, and 
sets us on a much more promising inquiry. We 
can easily conceive of things that shall have 
no connection whatever with each other* We 
may assume them to inhabit different times 
and spaces, as the dreams of different persons 
do even now. They may be so unlike and in- 
commensurable, and so inert towards one an- 
other, as never to jostle or interfere, Evea now 
there may actually be whole universes so dis- 
parate from ours that we who know ours have 
no means of perceiving that they exist We con- 
ceive their diversity, however; and by that fact 
the whole lot of them form what la known in 
logic as one 'universe of discourse/ To form 
a universe of discourse argues, as this example 
shows, no further kind of connection. The im- 
portance attached by certain monistic writer* 
to the fact that any chaos may become a uiti 
by being mwely named* is to me 
im 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

prehensible. We must seek something better in 
the way of oneness than this susceptibility of 
being mentally considered together, and named 
by a collective noun. 

What connections may be perceived con- 
cretely or in point of fact, among the parts 
of the collection abstractly designated as our 
* world *? 

There are Innumerable modes of union 
among its parts, some obtaining on a larger, 
some on a smaller scale* Not all the parts of 
our world are united mechanically , for some 
can move without the others* moving* They all 
seem united by gravitation, however, so far as 
they are material things. Some again 
of these are united chemically^ while 
others are not; aiwl the like istrue of thermic^ 
optical, electrical* and other phymcd eonjaec* 
tions, These miiiieetioas are specification of 
what we mmn by the word oneness when wt 
tpply it to out world. We should not edl i 
unless its parts were connected in these 
other ways, Bui then it is clear that by the 
same logic we wight to call it * nmay / far tf 

im 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

its parts are disconnected in these same ways, 
chemically inert towards one another or non- 
conductors to electricity, light and heat. In 
all these modes of union, some parts of the 
world prove to be conjoined with other parts, 
so that if you choose your line of influence 
and your items rightly, you may travel from 
pole to pole without an interruption. If, how- 
ever, you choose them wrongly, you meet 
with obstacles and non-conductors from the 
outset, and cannot travel at alL There is 
thus neither absolute oneness nor absolute 
manyness from the physical point of view, 
but a mixture of well-definable mode uf 
bath* Moreover, neither the oneness nor the 
manyness seems the mom essential attribute, 
they are co-ordinate fe&toet of the E&tmtaJ 
world. 

There are plenty of other practical differ 
ences meant by calling a thing Ctee* GEF world* 
being strung along in time und spmce f has fern* 
$$l and spatial uni$$* But time and sp&oe 
relate things by dcterminately sundering them, 
so it is hard to my whether the world ought 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

more to be called ' one * or * many * in this spatial 
or temporal regard. 

The like is true of the generic oneness which 
comes from so many of the world's parts being 
similar. When two things are similar you can 
make inferences from the one which will hold 
good of the other, so that this kind of union 
among things, so far as it obtains, is inexpres- 
sibly precious from the logical point of view. 
But an infinite heterogeneity among things 
exists alongside of whatever likeness of kind 
we discover; and our world appears no more 
distinctly or essentially m a One than as a 
Many, from this generic point of view. 

We have touched on the noetic unity pre~ 
dicable of the world in consequence of our 
being able to mean the whole of it at o&ce 
Widely different from unification by an ab- 
ifcmet designation* would be the concrete noetie 
union wrought by an all-knowar of percejptiial 
type who should be acquainted at erne stroke 
witib wtiy part of what exfota. In iudb aitab** 
solute all-knower idealists believe. Kant, they 
say, virtually replaced the notion of Substance, 
WS 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

by the more intelligible notion of Subject. The 
*I am conscious of it,* which on some witness's 
part must accompany every possible experi- 
ence, means in the last resort, we are told., one 
individual witness of the total frame of things, 
world without end, amen. You may call his 
undivided act of omniscience instantaneous or 
eternal, whichever you like, for time is its ob- 
ject just as everything else is, and itself is not 
in time. 

We shall find reasons later for treating noetic 
monism as an unverified hypothesis* Over 

Unity by against it there stands the noetic 
ooooatd" 

oatto pluralism which we verify every 
moment when we seek information from 
friends. According to this, everything k 
world might be known by somebody, yet not 
everything by the same knower, or in one single 
cognitive act, much as all mankind is kail 
in one network of acquaintance, A knowing B 
B knowing C> Y knowing Z and Z possibly 
knowing A again, without the possibility of 
jtifipm* knowing everybody at once. TM 
'concatenated* knowing, going from next to 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

next, Is altogether different from the * consoli- 
dated* knowing supposed to be exercised by 
the absolute mind. It makes a coherent type 
of universe in which the widest knower that 
exists may yet remain ignorant of much that 
is known to others, 

There are other systems of eoneatenation 
besides the noetic concatenation. We ourselves 
are constantly adding to the connections of 
things, organising labor-unions^ establishing 
postal* consular, mercantile* railroad* tele*- 
graph, colonial, and other systems that bind 
us and things together in ever wider reticula- 
tions, Some of these systems involve others, 
some do not* You cannot have a telephone 
system without air and copper coEneetioiQS, 
but you can have air and copper 
without telephones. You e&nrot 
without acquaintance, but you awt tawTM* 
without love, etc, The tft&ag, 
r* can belong to many syitems* & 
mhm a man is coEaecfceci witib other objects by 
ieat t by ita^tatiom, by low, Mid by know- 
ledge, 

ISO 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

From the point of view of these partial sys- 
tems, the world hangs together from next to 
next in a variety of ways, so that when you 
are off of one thing you can always be on to 
something else, without ever dropping out of 
your world. Gravitation is the only positively 
known sort of connection among things that 
reminds us of the consolidated or monistic 
form of union. If a 'mass* should change any- 
where, the mutual gravitation of all things 
would instantaneously alter* 

Teleological and esthetic unions are other 
forms of systematic union. The world is full 
of partial purposes, of partial $torie$ 



purpose, 

That they all form chapters of 



supreme purpose and inclusive story is the 
monistic conjecture* They seem* meanwhile, 
simply to run alongside of each other either 
irrelevantly, 0^ where they interfere, leading 
to mutual frustrations, so tlie appearance 
of things is invincibly pluralistic from this 
point of view* 

feelitf &*t 11 particukr b0- 

NMf6e, eitte 
tit 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

or in atoms all equally old. There is no 
real novelty, it is believed, in the universe, 
Unity of the new things that appear having 
origin either been eternally prefigured in 
the absolute, or being results of the same pri- 
mordia reruftii atoms, or monads, getting into 
new mixtures. But the question of being is so 
obscure anyhow, that whether realities have 
burst into existence all at once, by a single 
*bang/ as it were; or whether they came piece- 
meal^ and have different ages (so that real 
novelties may be leaking into our universe all 
the time), may here be left an open question* 
though it is undoubtedly intellectually eco- 
nomical to suppose that all things are equally 
old,, **/d that no novelties leak in* 

These results are what the Oneness of the 
Universe is knmm-m* They an the oneness, 
tomyury pragmatically considered* A world 
eoteeat In any of these ways would fot mo 
dhuoi* but a universe of such Of n 

gradf - (The grades might differ, bowtwir* ''Wit 
e. g** mlg fat have ^$^mhtww but 
moire; or t&ey might also gravitate; or 
im 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

exchange heat; or know, or love one another, 
etc*) 

Such is the cash- value of the world's unity, 
empirically realized. Its total unity is the sum 
of all the partial unities. It consists of them 
and follows upon them. Such an idea, however, 
outrages rationalistic minds, which habitually 
despise all this practical small-change. Such 
minds insist on a deeper, more through-and- 
through union of all things in the absolute, 
'each in all and all in each/ as the prior con- 
dition of these empirically ascertained connec- 
tions* But this may be only a case of the usual 
worship of abstractions, like calling *bad 
weather* the cause of to-day's rain, etc., or 
accounting for a man's features by his *faee/ 
when really the rain is the bad weather, is 
what you mean by *bad weather/ just as the 
features are what you mean by the face. 

To sum up, the world is *one' in some re- 
spects, and * many ' in others. But the respects 
must be distinctly specified, if either statement 
10 to be more than the emptiest abstractioa* 
we ar$ committed to this soberer 
If* 



SOME PEOBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

the question of thfc One or the Many may well 
cease to appear important. The amount either 
of unity or of plurality is in short only a matter 
for observation to ascertain and write down, 
in statements which will have to be compli- 
cated, in spite of ewry effort to be concise* 



CHAPTER VIII 1 

THE ONE AND THE MANY (continued) 
VALUES AND DEFECTS 



might dismiss the subject with the pre- 
ceding chapter 2 were it hot for the fact that 
further consequences follow from the rival 
hypotheses, and make of the alternative of 
monism or pluralism what I called it on page 
114, the most * pregnant' of all the dilemmas 
of metaphysics. 

To begin with, the attribute 'one* seems 
for many persons to confer a value, an ineffable 
^ illustriousness and dignity upon the 
world, with wMch the conception of 



it as an irreducible * many * is believed to dtadi. 
Secondly, a through -and -through noetic 
connection of everything with absolutely ev- 
erything else is in some quarters held to be 
indispensable to the world's rationality- Only 
then might we believe that all things really do 

* [This chapter was not indicated as a separate chapter In themanu- 

8fr.) 

For m amplification of what precedes, the lecture on 'The OGC 
Ma W, !**: Ff^m^t*m (1007), my to 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

belong together, instead of being connected by 
the bare conjunctions 'with* or 'and/ The 
notion that this latter pluralistic arrangement 
may obtain is deemed * irrational* ; and of 
course it does make the world partly alogical 
or non-rational from a purely intellectual point 
of view, 

Monism thus holds the oneness to be the 
more vital and essential element. The entire 
ilia value cosmos must be a consolidated unit* 



tut* ooe~ within which each member is deter* 



mined by the whole to be just that* 
and from which the slightest mcipiency of in- 
dependence anywhere is ruled out. With Spin- 
oza, monism likes to believe that all things 
follow from the essence of God as necessarily 
as froEi the nature of a triangle it follows that 
the angles are equal to two right angles* The 
whole is what yields the parts, not the parts the 
whole. The universe is tight* monism dlatms* 
Bot loose; and you must take the iiredudlble 
whole of it just aa It is offered* or have EO 
part or lot in it at all. The only alternative 
allowed by momitic writers is to eoafeti the 
ise 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

world's non-rationality and no philosopher 
can permit himself to do that. The form of 
monism regnant at the present day in phi- 
losophic circles is absolute idealism. For this 
way of thinking, the world exists no otherwise 
than as the object of one infinitely knowing 
mind. The analogy that suggests the hypothe* 
sis here is that of our own finite fields of con- 
sciousness, which at every moment envisage 
a much-at-once composed of parts related va- 
riously, and in which both the conjunctions 
and the disjunctions that appear are there only 
in so far as we are there as their witnesses, so 
that they are both Poetically * and moialsti- 
cally based. 

We may well admit the sublimity of this 
noetic monism and of its vague vision of an 
underlying connection among all phenomena 
without exception. 1 It shows itself also able to 
confer religious stability and peace, and it in- 
vokes the authority of mysticism in its favor* 
Yet, on the other hand, like many another coa* 

1 In ita essential features, 8pinoA was its tet prophet, Ficfete aad 
U middle expo^^ 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

cept unconditionally carried out, it introduces 
its defects j^to philosophy puzzles peculiar to 
itself, as follows; 

1. It does not account for our finite con- 
sciousness. If nothing exists but as the Abso- 
lute Mind knows it, how can anything exist 
otherwise than as that Mind knows it? That 
Mind knows each thing in one act of know- 
ledge, along with every other thing. Finite 
minds know things without other things, and 
this ignorance is the source of most of their 
woes. We are thus not simply objects to an all- 
knowing subject: we are subjects on our own 
account and know differently from its knowing, 

& It creates a problem of eviL Evil* for plu~ 
ralism* presents only the practical problem of 
3bow to get rid of It. For monism the pusde is 
theoretical : How if Perf action be the tonroe* 
h<nild tib 1*6 be Imperfection? If tib 
as IPWWE to the Absolute be jrfeef 

It be k&om otherwise* in wyAnH> of : 
ditiOTts also? Tte dtt* 

tiott mmlj WM enough* How do 
and! <ia|wwoa i1i|awiimoe get 
us 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

3. It contradicts the character of reality as 
perceptually experienced. Of our world, change 
seems an essential ingredient. There is history. 
There are novelties, struggles, losses, gains, 
But the world of the Absolute is represented 
as unchanging, eternal, or 'out of time/ and is 
foreign to our powers either of apprehension 
or of appreciation. Monism usually treats the 
sense-world as a mirage or illusion. 

4. It is fatalistic* Possibility, as distin- 
guished from necessity on the one hand and 
from impossibility on the other* is an essential 
category of human thinking- For monism* it is 
a pure illusion; for whatever is is neeeasaiy, 
and aught else is impossible, if the world be 
such a unit of fact as monists pretend. 

Our sense of * freedom* supposes that $ome 
things at least are decided tee and now* that 
the passing moment may oont&in some nov- 
elty, be an original star^tag-|x>int of events* 
tndfcnot merely transmit spwh from elsewhere* 
We imagine that in some yeipacts at least the 
may not b eo4$>^ with the JMI| 
but may be really addable to it, and indeed 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

addable in one shape or another* so that the 
next turn in events can at any given moment 
genuinely be ambiguous, i. e., possibly this, 
but also possibly that* 

Monism rules out this whole conception of 
possibles, so native to our common-sense. The 
future and the past are linked, she is obliged 
to say; there can be no genuine novelty any- 
where* for to suppose that the universe has a 
constitution simply additive, with nothing to 
link things together save what the words 
'plus/ *with f * or *and* stand for* is repugnant 
to our reason, 

Pluralism, on the other hand, taking per- 
ceptual experience at its face-value, is free from 
all these difficulties* It protests against work- 
ing our ideas in a vacuum made of coaeeptiml 
abstractions. Some parts of our world* it ad- 
mits* cannot eidst out of their wholes; 



fk #* others. It says, can* To 

ralifftic 

the world 8$&m$ genuinely 



it may really be so* We c&anot explain 
eeptiialy Jiw genuine novelties cm come; but 
if orndid COBM W wild expedience to it came* 

140 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

We do, in fact, experience perceptual novelties 
all the while. Our perceptual experience over- 
laps our conceptual' reason: the that transcends 
the why. So the common-sense view of life, as 
something really dramatic, with work done, 
and things decided here and now, is acceptable 
to pluralism. 'Free will* means nothing but 
real novelty; so pluralism accepts the notion 
of free will 

But pluralism, accepting a universe unfin- 
ished, with doors and windows open to possi- 
bilities uncontrollable in advance, gives us less 
religious certainty than monism s with its abso- 
lutely elosed-m world* It is true that monism's 
religious certainty is not rationally based, bit 
is only a faith that *sees the All-Good in the 
All-Real* In point of fact* however, monism 
is usually willing to exert this optimistic faith: 
its world is certaia to be saved, yes* is saved 
already* unconditionally and from etemity f 
IB spite of all tike phanomeMl appearances of 



F<w ira ebqtimt etp?^i<^ 



141 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

A world working out an uncertain destiny, 
itsde- as the phenomenal world appears 
ects to be doing-, is an intolerable idea 
to the rationalistic mind, 

Pluralism, on the other hand, is neither 
optimistic nor pessimistic, but melioristic, 
rather. The world, it thinks, may be saved, 
on condition that its parts shall do their bent, 
But shipwreck in detail, or even on the whole, 
is among the open possibilities* 

There is thus a practical lack of balance 
about pluralism, which contrasts with mon- 
ism *s peace of mind* The one is a more moral, 
the other a more religious view; and different 
men usually let this sort of consideration date* - 
mine their belief* 1 

So far I have sought only to show the J?t8fwt> 
ive implications of the rival doctriati wiftbout 
it* *d~ dogmatically deciding is 

more true- It 



. It it mom ' ade&tifie** k tikat It 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

that wlien oneness is predicated, it shall mean 
definitely ascertainable conjunctive forms. 
With these the disjunctions ascertainable 
among things are exactly on a par. The two 
are co-ordinate aspects of reality. To make 
the conjunctions more vital and primordial 
than the separations, monism has to abandon 
verifiable experience and proclaim a unity that 
Is indescribable, 

& It agrees more with the moral and dra- 
matic expressiveness of life, 

S* It is not obliged to stand for any particu- 
In amount of plurality, for It triumphs over 
momsm if the smallest morsel of dieeoaaeeted- 
nem is once found undeniably to exist. 'Bvar 
not quite* is all it says to monism; wMle moa- 
Ism is obliged to prove that what pluralism 
asserts can in no amount whatever j>osibly be 
true aa Infinitely iwyrder task* 

I%e advantages of momsii^ m turn, are Its 
atteal affinity with a earfwi Bad of reli- 
giou3 f&Mi f md tibe peeuiiw emotional value 
nt tito 0Bpti0n timt tib worfd fa a 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

So far has our use of the pragmatic rule 
brought us towards understanding this di- 
lemma. The reader will by this time feel for 
himself the essential practical difference which 
it involves. The word * absence* seems to in- 
dicate it. The monistic principle implies that 
nothing that is can in any way whatever be 
absent from anything else that is. The plural- 
istic principle, on the other hand, is quite com- 
patible with some things being absent from 
operations in which other things find them- 
selves singly or collectively engaged, Whwk 
things are absent from which other things* and 
when, these of course are questions which a 
pluralistic philosophy can settle only by an 
exact study of details. The past, the present, 
and the future in perception* for example 
absent from one another, while in i 



they are present or absent as the caae may b$* 
If the time-content of the world be not ome 
monistic block of being, if tome part, at least, 
of the ftrtare, is*added to the past without be* 
kg virtually one therewith* or implicitly con- 
tained therein* then it is absent really as well 



THE ONE AND THE MANY 

as phenomenally and may be called an abso- 
lute novelty in the world's history in so far 
forth. 

Towards this issue, of the reality or unreal- 
ity of the novelty that appears, the pragmatic 
Monism, difference between monism and plu- 
dno' ralism seems to converge. That we 
eity ourselves may be authors of genuine 

novelty is the thesis of the doctrine of free-will 
That genuine novelties can occur means that 
from the point of view of what is already given, 
what comes may have to be treated as a matter 
of chance, We are led thus to ask the question: 
In what manner does new being come? Is it 
through and through the consequence of older 
being or is it matter of chance so far as older 
being goes? - which is the ame thing as 
asking; Is it original, in the strict sense of 
the word? 

We connect again here with what was said 

at the end of Chapter DX. We there agreed 

that being is a datum or gift and has to be 

btygptd by th pMIct^piwr; but we left the 

0pn us to wbcfefctip he must beg it &i 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

at once or beg it bit by bit or in instalments* 
The latter is the more consistently empiricist 
view, and I shall begin to defend it in the chap- 
ter that follows* 



CHAPTER IX 

THE PROBLEM OF NOVELTY 

THE impotence to explain being which we 
have attributed to all philosophers is, it will 
be recollected, a conceptual impotence. It is 
when thinking abstractly of the whole of being 
at once, as it confronts us ready-made, that 
we feel our powerlessness so acutely* Possibly, 
if we followed the empiricist method, consider- 
ing the parts rather than the whole, and im- 
agining ourselves inside of them perceptually, 
the subject might defy us less provokingly; 
We are thus brought back to the problem with 
which Chapter 11 left off. When perceptible 
amounts of new phenomenal being come to 
birth, must we hold them to be in all points 
predetermined and necessary oirtgrcmths of 
the being already there, OT ihall we rather 
admit the possibility that originality may t&tia 
toatil itself into reality? 

If we take coi&srete pen^u*! experieEee 
H fe^st!0i em bt tuwMttA in only one way* 
Nfaiint not* wn to bmg th* 4&1 
W 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 



ferent/ Time keeps budding into new 
ments, every one of which presents a content 
Percept- which in its individuality never was 

nal HQV* 

eity before and will never be again. Of 

no concrete bit of experience was an exact du- 
plicate ever framed. * My youth/ writes Del- 
boeuf, *has it not taken flight, carrying away 
with it love, illusion, poetry, and freedom from 
care, and leaving with me instead science, aus- 
tere always* of ten sad and morose, which tome- 
times I would willingly forget, which repeats to 
me hour by hour its grave lessons, or chills ma 
by its threats? Will time, which untiringly piles 
deaths on births, and births on deaths, ever re* 
make an Aristotle or an Archimedes* a Newto 
or a Descartes? Can our earth ever cover itself 
again with those gigantic feras, those immense 
equisetaceaus, in the midst of which the same 
antediluvian monsters will crawl and wallow 
as they did of yore? , . , No, what has bean 
will apt, cannot* be again* Time moves on 
with an unfaltering tee&d, and aever strttui 
twice an identical hour. The instants of which 

the eadbteooe of tie worfd Is 00na|X*dl tjrt aJU 
148 



THE PROBLEM OP NOVELTY 

dissimilar, and whatever may be done, some- 
thing remains that can never be reversed/ 1 

The everlasting coming of concrete novelty 
into being is so obvious that the rationalizing 
intellect, bent ever on explaining what is by 
what was, and having no logical principle but 
identity to explain by, treats the perceptual 
flux as a phenomenal illusion, resulting from the 
unceasing re-combination in new forms of mix- 
ture, of unalterable elements, coeval with the 
world. These elements are supposed 
to be the only real beings; and, for 
|he intellect once grasped by the vision of them, 
there can be nothing genuinely new under the 
sun* The world's history, according to molecu- 
lar science^ignifies only the * redistribution* 
of the unchanged atoms of the primal firemist, 
parting and meeting so as to appear to us spec- 
tators IE the infinitely diversified configura- 
which we name as processes and things* 1 



' * I* Dtlboraf : mM Phftoaophiqw, wi fac, p. 188 (1880). Ota tht 

infinite variety of reality, compare also W. T. Marvin : An Introduction 

to8y*t#natic Philwphy, Nw York, 1&()S, pp. 22~3G, 

" Hi* Atomistic philosophy, wh ich has proved so potent A cintiftc d 

of expianation, WA first formulated by Democ-rittui, who 

140 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

So far as physical nature goes few of us ex- 
perience any temptation to postulate real 
novelty. The notion of eternal elements and 
their mixture serves us in so many ways, that 
we adopt unhesitatingly the theory that pri- 
mordial being is inalterable in its attributes as 
well as in its quantity, and that the laws by 
which we describe its habits are uniform in the 
strictest mathematical sense. These are the 
absolute conceptual foundations, we think, 

died 870 B, c* His life overlapped that of Aristotle, who took what on 
the whole may be called a biological view of the world, and for whom 
* forms ' were as real as elements. The conflict of the two modes of ex- 
planation has lasted to our day, for some chemists still defend the 
Aristotelian tradition which the authority of Descartes had inter 
rupted for so long, and deny our right to say that 'water * is not s 
simple entity, or that oxygen and hydrogen atoms persist in it un 
changed. Compare W. Ostwald: Die Ueberwindung ties mssenschafl 
lichen MateMi$mus (1895), p. 12. 'The atomistic view assumes tha 
when in iron-oxide, for example, all the sensible properties both o 
iron and oxygen have vanished, iron and oxygen are neverttieles 
there but now manifest other properties. We are so used to this as 
sumption that it is hard for us to feel its oddity, nay, even its afc 
smrdity* When, however, we reflect that all we know of a gives* kin< 
of matter is its properties, we realize that the assertion that the matte 
is still there, but without any of those properties, is ftot far remove 
from, nonsense,* Compare the same authors Prmci^es of Iwrgm 
y* English translation, 2d ed. (1004), p. 149 i Ateo ) 
tt2 *3U Notion de Mixte,' in the Rtm& $6 PMo^op^ vol J, ] 
. (1001). -* The whole action of the eternal fixity of ele^aien 
is mettSng away before tfce aew discoveries about radiant matter. S 
foi radical stitteuaeiits 0* Le Boa: KftvofaMon d$ fa Uoti&re, 



THE PROBLEM OF NOVELTY 

spread beneath the surface of perceptual vari- 
ety. It is when we come to human lives, that 
Personal our point of view changes. It is hard 
experience ^ imagine that * really* our own 
novelty subjective experiences are only mo- 
lecular arrangements, even though the mole- 
cules be conceived as beings of a psychic kind. 
A material fact may indeed be different from 
what we feel it to be, but what sense is there in 
saying that a feeling, which has no other na- 
ture than to be felt, is not as it is felt? Psycho- 
logically considered, our experiences resist con- 
ceptual reduction, and our fields of conscious-* 
Be&s, taken simply as such^ remain just what 
they appear, even though facts of a molecular 
order should pro^ to be the signals of the 
appearance* Biography is the concrete form 
in which all that is is immediately given; the 
perceptual flux is the authentic stuff of each of 
our biographies, and yields a perfect effervei** 
ce&ce of novelty all the time. New men and 
women, books* accidents* events, inventioai, 
filtefpmes, burst unceasingly upon the world* 
II? it vim to tesolve these Into aadtttl 
101 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

ments, or to say that they belong to ancient 
kinds, so long as no one of them in its full indi- 
viduality ever was here before or will ever come 
again. Men of science and philosophy, the 
moment they forget their theoretic abstrac- 
tions, live in their biographies as much as any 
one else, and believe as naively that fact even 
now is making, and that they themselves, by 
doing "original work,' help to determine what 
the future shall become. 

I have already compared the live or percept- 
ual order with the conceptual order from this 
point of view. Conception knows no way of 
explaining save by deducing the identical from 
the identical, so if the world is to be concept- 
ually rationalized no novelty can really come. 
This is one of the traits in that general bank- 
ruptcy of conceptualism, which I enumerated 
in Chapter V conceptualism can name 
change and growth, but can translate them 
into no terms of its own, and is forced to con* 
tradict the indestructible sense of life withix* 
us by denying that reality grows. 

It may seem to the youthful student a wilier 
im 



THE PROBLEM OP NOVELTY 

'far cry' from the question of the possibility 
of novelty to the 'problem of tHe infinite/ but 
in the history of speculation, the two problems 
have been connected. Novelty seems to vio- 
late continuity; continuity seems to involve 
Novelty ' infinitely 5 shaded gradation; infin- 

andthe 

infinite ity connects with number; and num- 
ber with fact in general for facts have to 
be numbered. It has thus come to pass that 
the nonexistence of an infinite number has 
been held to necessitate the finite character 
of the constitution of fact; and along with this 
its discontinuous genesis, or* in other word% 
its coming into being by discrete increments 
of novelty however small 

Thus we find the problem of the infinite 
already lying across our path* It will be better 
at this point to interrupt our discussion of the 
more enveloping question of novelty at large, 
and to get the minor problem out of our way 
Irst I turn then to the problem of the infinite* 



CHAPTER X 

NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE THE 
CONCEPTUAL VIEW 1 

1 HE problem is as to which is the more rational 
supposition, that of continuous or that of dis- 
continuous additions to whatever amount or 
kind of reality already exists. 

On the discontinuity-theory, time, change, 
etc., would grow by finite buds or drops, either 
nothing coming at all, or certain units of 
Thedis- amount bursting into being 'at a 

continuity- 

theory stroke/ Every feature of the uni- 
verse would on this view have a finite numer- 
ical constitution, Just as atoms, not half- or 
quarter-atoms are the minimum of matter that 
can be, and every finite amount of matter con- 
tains a finite number of atoms, so any amounts 
of time, space, change, etc-, which we might 
assume would be composed of a finite ntiiber 
of mimmal amounts of time, space* &E<! change* 
Such a discrete composition is what actually 

1 [in the author's manuscript this chapter and the succeeding chap- 
ters wew labelled '^problems/ and this chapter was entitkd 'The 
Continuum and the Infinite/ ED.] 
154 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

obtains in our perceptual experience. We 
either perceive nothing, or something already 
there in sensible amount. This fact is what 
in psychology is known as the law of the 
'threshold/ Either your experience is of no 
content, of no change, or it is of a perceptible 
amount of content or change. Your acquaint- 
ance with reality grows literally by buds or 
drops of perception* Intellectually and on re- 
flection you can divide these into components, 
but as immediately given, tfiey come totally 
or not at all. 

If, however, we take time and space as con- 
cepts, not as perceptual data, we don't well 
see how they can have this atomistic constitu- 
tion* For if the drops or atoms are themselves 
without duration or extension it is inconceiv- 
able that by adding any number of them to* 

The con- gether times or spaces should accrue* 
tiatiity 

thoty If, on the other hand, they are mi- 
nute durations or extensions, it is impossible 
to treat them as real minima* Each temporal 
drop must have a later and an earlier half, each 
unit a right and a left half, &nd 
us 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

halves must themselves have halves, and so on 
ad infinitum, so that with the notion that the 
constitution of things is continuous and not 
discrete, that of a divisibility ad infinitum is 
inseparably bound up. This infinite divisibil- 
ity of some facts, coupled with the infinite 
expansibility of others (space, time, and num- 
ber) has given rise to one of the most obstinate 
of philosophy's dialectic problems. Let me 
take up s in as simple a way as I am able to, the 
problem of the infinite. 

There is a pseudo-problem, *IIow can the 
finite know the infinite?* which has troubled 
some English heads. 1 But one might as well 
make a problem of 'How can the fat know the 
lean?* When we come to treat of knowledge, 
such problems will vanish- The real problem 
of the infinite began with the famous argu- 
ments against motion, of Zeno the Eleatie 
The school of f*ythagoras was pluralistic. 
*Tiuboiga are numbers/ the master had said, 
meaning apparently that reality was made of 

* J H, Ca!dewood* Ph&owfhp of ih 



subordinate difficulties discussed, mtb almost no consciousness sbown 
of tib& important ones, 

we 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

points which one might number. 1 Zeno's argu- 
ments were meant to show, not that motion 
could not really take place, but that it could 
not truly be conceived as taking place by the 
successive occupancy of points. If a flying 
Zeno's arrow occupies at each point of time 
paradoxes a determinate point of space, its 
mdtion becomes nothing but a sum of rests, for 
it exists not, out of any point; and in the point 
it does n't move. Motion cannot truly occur 
as thus discretely constituted. 

Still better known than the * arrow' is the 
* Achilles* paradox. Suppose Achilles to race 
with a tortoise, and to move twice as fast as 
his rival, to whom he gives an inch of head- 
start. By the time he has completed that inch, 
or in other words advanced to the tortoise's 
starting point, the tortoise is half an inch 
ahead of him. While Achilles is traversing 
that half inch, the tortoise is traversing a 
quarter of an inch, etc. So that the successive 
pomta occupied by the runners simultame- 

* I Mlow Eere J. Bfiroei: Early @r$ek Ph$o>M'ph$r8 (the eluipte m 
the Pythagorean*}, and Paul Tannery: *Le concept scieutifique ctu 
* in the Enw* Phihwphique, xx, $85. 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

ously form a convergent series of distances 
from the starting point of Achilles. Measured 
in inches, these distances would run as follows : 

1+1+i + i+A . ... +5 .... ^ 

Zeno now assumes that space must be infinitely 
divisible. But if so, then the number of points 
to be occupied cannot all be enumerated in 
succession, for the series begun above is inter- 
minable. Each time that Achilles gets to the 
tortoise's last point it is but to find that the 
tortoise has already moved to a further point; 
and although the interval between the points 
quickly grows infinitesimal, it is mathematic- 
ally impossible that the two racers should 
reach any one point at the same moment. If 
Achilles could overtake the tortoise, it would 
be* at the end of two inches; and if Ms ipoed 
were two inches a second, it would be *& |ltf 
end of the first second;* but the wgipcwmt 
shows tibat he simply canaot overtake 'tfet nl- 
To do so would oblige Mm to 

* of 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

by traversing one by one, the whole of them, 
a series of points which the law of their forma- 
tion obliges to come never to an end, 

Zeno's various arguments were meant to 
establish the 'Eleatic* doctrine of real being, 
which was monistic. The 'minima sensibtlia* 
of which space, time,, motion, and change con- 
sist for our perception are not real * beings, 
for they subdivide themselves ad infwitum* 
The nature of real being is to be entire or con* 
tinuous. Our perception, being of a hopeless 
'many/ thus m false. 

Our own mathematicians liave meaiawMle 
omstweted what they regard as an 
continuum, composed of points or numbers. 
When I speak again of that I shall haire occa- 
sion to return to the AeMUes-fallacy* so called. 
At present I will pass without transition to tte 
neit great historic attack upon the problem 
of the infinite* which is the section on the * An- 
tinomies * in Kant f s * Critique of Pure Reuon/ 

Klines views need a few points of pfepam* 
as follows;* 

1* That real or objective existence must be 

159 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

determinate existence may be regarded as an 
axiom in ontology. We may be dim as to just 
K&ttfs how many stars we see in the Pleiades, 

antino- 
mies or doubtful whose count to believe 

regarding them; but seeing and belief are 
subjective affections, and the stars by them- 
selves, we are sure, exist in definite numbers. 
'Even the hairs of our head are numbered,* we 
feel certain, though no man shall ever count 
them. 1 Any existent reality, taken in itself * 
must therefore be countable, and to any group 
of such realities some definite number must be 
applicable. 

2, Kant defines infinity as 'that which can 
never be completely measured by the succes- 
sive addition of units' in other words, as 
that which defies complete enumeration* 

$, Kant lays it down as axiomatic that if 
anything is 'given/ as an existent reality* the 
whole sum of the * conditions' required to ac- 
count for it must similarly be given^ or have 
been given* Thus if a cubic yard of space be 

1 Of the origin in our experience of this singularly solid postulate, I 
will say nothmg here* 

160 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

* given/ all its parts must equally be given* If 
a certain date in past time be real, then the 
previous dates must also have been real If an 
effect be given, the whole series of its causes 
must have been given, etc., etc. 

But the * conditions* in these cases defy 
enumeration: the parts of space are less and 
less ad inftnitum, times and causes form series 
that are infinitely regressive* for our counting, 
and of no such infinite series can a * whole* be 
formed* Any such series has a variable value* 
for the number of its terms is indefinite; where* 
as the conditions under consideration ought, 
if the * whole sum of them* be really given, to 
exist (by the principle* 1 above) in fixed auaier* 
leal amount** 

1 Tbe ccmtra-dktiGa betwoen tfee Infinity In tfae>m erf $m OOM&- 
tkrau, ami the numerical detarflatafttauii Implied m t&e/odf of t&em, 
was ascribed by Kant to th * antinomic * form of our expwtatcft* lib 
solution of tho puzzle wfts by the way of " icb&tifm,* and { MM t>f ttwt 
prettte itrokea in hb philMopb^. Si aw tlift oa&dilioni fAGnot idbt 
In the sh&pe of a tointissed wmaunt. It must b@ t he Myi f that they ti< 
not exist bdbpraidmtty or ait M t but only at ptetomtna, or /of ui , 
Itjtdefimtertfaw of amount b not incompatible with ra^rcly pkenommil 
existence. /Id^ol pheaoinf-na, whether ooadilb^d or condition)^ 
ft thetre % Hi only In finite ftroount, a j^i vrn to p^rwpti<m at any 
given mofoait ; mail the infinite form d tiimn m#frns only t hat we am 

101 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

Such was the form of the pimle of the in- 
finite, as Kant propounded it. The reader will 
observe a bad ambiguity in the statement. 
When he speaks of the ' absolute totality of the 
synthesis' of the conditions, the words suggest 
that a completed collection of them must exist 
or have existed. When we hear that * the whole 
sum of them must be given,* we interpret it to 
mean that they must be given in the form of a 
whole sum, whereas all that the logical situa- 
tion requires is that no one of them shotdd be 
lacking, an entirely different demand, and one 
that can be gratified as well in an infinitely 
growing as in a terminated series. The same 
things can always be teken either 



Kant's collectively or distributively, can be 



talked of either as 'all/ or as * 
problem or as "any/ Either statement can be 
applied equally well to what exists In finite 

World without end, It does not mean that what we f m this to &* 
present shall have been there already by itself, apart from our nets of 
representation. Experience, for idealism, thus falls into two parts, & 
l gifen part which fa finite, and a <ncHtioaSB# faifiato piit 



which i not $vm, but only possible to spriace hemfler* 
dktiaguyte this second part, as only aufgegebtn (or set to tw a* a 
task), from tire first part as gegebm (or already extant). 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

number; and *all that Is there* will be covered 
both times. But things which appear under 
the form of endless series can be talked of only 
distributively, if we wish to leave none of them 
out. When we say that * any/ * each/ or * every ' 
one of Kant's conditions must be fulfilled, we 
arQ therefore on impeccable ground* even 
though the conditions should form a series as 
endless us that of the whole numbers, to which 
we are forever able to add one. But if we nay 
that *all' must be fulfilled, and imagine *aIP 
to signify a sum harvested and gatheredUin, 
and represented by a number* we not only 
make a requirement utterly uncalled for by tht 
logic of the situation, but we create puzzles arid 
incomprehensibilities that otherwise would not 
exist, and that may require, to get rid of them 
again, hypotheses as violent aa Kant* ideal- 
ism* 

In the works of Charles BenouvJer^ th6 

ttrongest philosopher of France during the 

$i<sond half of the nineteenth century, tfct 

poWem of the Infinite again played a plirotil 

Starting from the principle of the au- 

103 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

merical determinateness of reality (supra, page 
160) the 'principe du nombre,* as he called 
it and recognizing that the series of num- 
bers 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . etc., leads to no final * in- 
finite* number, he concluded that such reali- 
Renou- ties as present beings, past events 

vier's 

solution and causes, steps of change and parts 
of matter, must needs exist in limited amount* 
This made of him a radical pluralist* Better, 
he said, admit that being gives itself to us ab- 
ruptly, that there are first beginnings, abso- 
lute numbers, and definite cessations, however 
intellectually opaque to us they may seem to 
be, than try to rationalize all this arbitrariness 
of fact by working-ill explanatory conditions 
which would involve in every case the self- 
contradiction of things being paid-in and com- 
pleted, although they are infinite in foraial 
composition. 

With these principles, Renouvier conic! be* 
lieve in absolute novelties, unmeditated be* 
gumingg, gifts, chance, freedom, and 

ooo 

acts of faith. Fact, for him, over- 
lapped; conceptual explanation fell ihort; real* 
164 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

ity must in the end be begged piecemeal, not 
everlastingly deduced from other reality. This, 
the empiricist, as distinguished from the ra- 
tionalist view, is the hypothesis set forth at the 
end of our last chapter. 1 

1 I think that Renouvier made mistakes, ami I find bin whole philo- 
sophic inanmT ami apparatus too wholaitk', But he was one of the 
greatest of philosophic ehaructera, and but for the* deewive imprwwion 
made on me in the seven tieshy h in mash-Hy udytK-ury of pluralism, I 
might never have got fret* from the moiustie superstition umicr whirh 
I had grown up. Tin 1 present volume, in fthurt tiu^hl wvrr hnv* Inf'n 
written. Tliis is why, fwHugendlt'HHly tlsiinkfui HH I iln, I dedicate thui 
tc'xt-boak to the grout Rc'twuvw i r* memory. !irniuvicr*M wt>rk mnkt 
a very long liwt. The f undnme nta! one in the* Kanain de Critiqw (^n^ra^ 
(first edition* 18$4-!B(i4 b in four, wconci edition, IB75, m MIX vol 
um#g), Of hm tatcvt opinions /> PwMmn&lime (1003) | 
the most manageable awotiut; while thi? k| (Chapter of hit 
d'une ClaxttificQiion dm $y#t&nwg (entitlwi 'Comment jt ink Arriv^ 4 
ces concluutcma') k an autobiographic sketch of Fib dtmlings wftlt tb 
pvdl>im of the infinite, Dffitfrnr ^^^tif r dSetatad wMk 4yin| , l 
the age of eighty-eight, is a most impressive document. oamijQg ii H 
from a man out of Pluterch. 



CHAPTER XI ' 

NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE THE 
PERCEPTUAL VIEW 

KANT'S and Renouvier's dealings with the in- 
finite are fine examples of the way In which 
philosophers have always been wont to infer 
matters of fact from conceptual considerations. 
Real novelty would be a matter of fact; and so 
would be the idealistic constitution of experi- 
ence; 2 but Kant and Renouvler deduce these 
facts from the purely logical impossibility of 
an infinite number of conditions getting com- 
pleted. It seems a very short cut to truth; but 
if the logic holds firm, it may be* a fair cut, 1 
and the possibility obliges us to scrutinize the 
situation with increasing care. Proceeding BO 

1 [This chapter was not indkatai m a epj*n*fce diapler in t&0 mm* 
script Ex>J 

* For an account of idealism the reader w retewdl to chapter btbw, 
INever written, E.] 

1 Let me now say that we ahall ouraelw* eoneludf that dump 
completed by steps infinite in number la Imulmisflihlo, Thk ii btrdly 
inferring fad: from conceptual canHKierntions, It i* anly ccmdtidlfif th*t 
a certain conceptual hypothoi* r@prdmg the fruit of change wH! not 
work satisfactorily. The Md fe thus opeti lor any oth<*r hypoth*w; 
and the one which we ehall adopt b *imp!y that which the face of per- 
ceptual exp@teM30 euggesta. 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

to do, we immediately find that in the class of 
infinitely conditioned things, we must distin- 
guish two sub-classes, as follows ; 

1. Things conceived as standing , like space, 
past time, existing beings, 

2. Things conceived Bsgrowitig* like motion* 
change, activity. 

In the standing class there seems to be no 
valid objection to admitting both real exist- 
The stand- cnce, and a numerical copiousness <U* 
aStlT manding infinity for its description. 
If, for instance, we consider the stars, and 
assume the number of them to be infinite, we 
need only suppose that to each several term of 
the endless series 1, 2 8 f 4, * . * n . * * , tfcere cor- 
responds one star. The numbers, growing end- 
lessly, would then never exceed the stars stand* 
ing there to receive them, Each number would 
find its own star waiting from eternity to be 
numbered; and this in iw$nitnm* some star 
that ever was, matching each number that shall 
be used* As there is no l all * to the numbers ao 
there need be none to the stars, One eaurot 
well tee how the existence of each star should 
191 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

oblige the whole class 'star' to be of one num- 
ber rather than of another, or require it to be 
of any terminated number, What I say here 
of stars applies to the component parts of 
space and matter, and to those of past time. 1 
So long as we keep taking such facts piece- 
meal, and talk of them disiribu lively as *any* 
itsprag- or 'each/ the existence of them in 

matic 

definition infinite form offers no logical diffi- 
culty. But there is a psychological tendency to 
slip from the distributive to the collective way 
of talking, and this produces a sort of mental 
flicker and dazzle out of which the dialectic 
difficulties emerge. * If each condition be there/ 
we say, *then all are there, for there cannot 



1 Fast tim may offer difficulty to the student mi it hs* 
men! It has terminated m the present moment, paid itself out and 
made an 'itmoimt/ But this amount can be counted in both directions; 
a,ttd in both, OIKS may think it ought to give tb ae result I& wtia 
counted forward, it came to m end 'm the present, tta wtieat tttmttdi 
irnebwd, it mugt, we are told, oome to & like md in th past It mi^l 
have had ft beginning, therefore, ami its Amount must be finite. The 
sophism here is gross, and amounts to saying that what has one bound 
mwfc hn^fe two, The *m& * of t& forward ommting is tlt * begk&ing * 
of to Wbwfd oountlng, and is tbe on% 1>^b0iag logbally implied, 
flie 4odog of & serial b ao wity pr^ftidloe tfee ^uesticm whether ft 
were beginnbgleas or not; and thb applk aa wall to tracts of time as 
to th* ab^tr&ct regression which ' n<igativ^ * aumb^ra form. 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

be caches that do not make an all.* Rightly 
taken, the phrase 'all are there/ means only 
that 'not one is absent/ But in the mouths of 
most people, it surreptitiously foists in the 
wholly irrelevant notion of a bounded total. 

There are other similar confusions, 4 How/ 
it may be asked, in Locke's words, can a 
'growing measure' fail to overtake a 'standing 
bulk '? And standing existence must some t irne 
be overtaken by a growing number-series, 
must be finished or finite in its numerical 
determination* But this again foists in the 
notion of a bound. What is given as * standing* 
in the cases under review is not a 'bulk/ but 
each star, atom* past date or what not; and to 
call these eaches a 'bulk/ is to beg the very 
point at issue. But probably the real reason 
why we object to a standing infinity is the 
reason that made Hegel speak of it as the 
* false ' infinite. It is that the vertiginous chase 
after ever more space, ever more past time* 
ever more subdivision* seems endlessly stupid* 
Wliat need is there, wiiat use is there* for o 
tamdb? Not that any amount of southing fa 

100 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

absolutely too big to be ; but that some amounts 
are too big for our imagination to wish to ca- 
ress them. So we fall back with a feeling of 
relief on some form or other of the finitist hy- 
pothesis. 1 

If now we turn from static to growing forms 
of being, we find ourselves confronted by much 
more serious difficulties. Zeno's and Kant*s 
dialectic holds good wherever, before an end 
tfce grow- ean be reached , a succession of terms, 

ing in- 
finite endless by definition, must needs have 

been successively counted out. This is the 
case with every process of change, however 
small; with every event which we conceive as 
unrolling itself continuously* What is contin- 
uous must be divisible ad infinitum ; and from 
division to division here you caimot proceed 
by addition (or by what Kant calk the fuoow- 

1 The reader will note how emphatically in alt this dbcuMtott* I am 
laiistitig on the distributive or piecemeal point d vkw, $1* dtotrib- 
uttat Is Identical with the pluralistic, t&e eofeetii* l w$H* list 
monistic conception, We shall, I think, perceive morp ami more dearly 
as this book proceeds, that pitce-motd Gmgtwm it independent ofoompltte 
Qottdditriltty, and Dint 0ome facts, at any rate, erist only distributively, 
arm fwmof aeet of f^ohejs which (even if in bfinite number) need not 
b my intelligible mm either flxpw-rience tlbamseli^i, or get experi- 
enced by anything elae, as members of an All 

170 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

sive synthesis of units) and touch a farther 
limit* You can indeed define what the limit 
ought to be, but you cannot reach it by this 
process. That Achilles should occupy in suc- 
cession c aIP the points in a single continuous 
inch of space, is as inadmissible a conception 
as that he should count the series of whole num- 
bers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc*, to infinity and reach an end. 
The terms are not * enumerable' in that order; 
and the order it is that makes the whole diffi- 
culty. An infinite * regression * like the rear- 
ward perspective of time offers no such con- 
tradiction, for it comes not la that order. Its 
'end* is what we start with; and each succes- 
sive note *more* which our imagination hm to 
add, ad infinitum* is thought of as already hav- 
ing been paid in anid not as having yet to be 
paid before the end can be attained. Starting 
with our end, we have to wait for notMag, The 
infinity here is of the * standing* variety. It is, 
in the word of Kant's pun* g$geb$n not at^f- 
gngebm: in the other case, of a continuous pro* 
cfesi to be traversed* it is on the co&trmy at$f* 
: it is a task - not only for our 

171 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

sophic imagination, but for any real agent who 
might try physically to compass the entire 
performance. Such an agent is bound by logic 
to find always a remainder, something ever 
yet to be paid, like the balance due on a debt 
with even the interest of which we do not 
catch up. 

'Infinitum in actu pertransiri nequit? said 
scholasticism; and every continuous quantum 
the grow- ^ ^ e gradual ty traversed is conceived 



ing infin- ag ^^ an j n g n jte. The quickest way 

ite must * 

be treated to avoid the contradiction would 

as dis- 

coatiim* seem to be to give up that concep- 
tion, and to treat real processes of 
change no longer as being continuous, but as 
taking place by finite not infinitesimal steps, 
like the successive drops by which a cask of 
water is filled, when whole drops fall into it at 
once or nothing* This is the radically pluralist, 
empiricist, or perceptualist position which I 
eharacjterized in speaking of Renoimer (above, 
pages 164-165) . We shall have to end by adopt- 
ing it in principle ouraehes, qualifying it so aa 
to fit it eloaely to pare$pttal experience, 
in 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

Meanwhile we are challenged by a certain 
school of critics who think that what in mathe- 
Objec- niatics is called "the new infinite' 
tioBs k ag q uas | ie( j ^j ie o i$ antinomies, and 

who treat anyone whom the notion of a com- 
pleted infinite in any form still bothers, as a 
very navf person, Nai/ though I am in mathe- 
matics, I must, notwithstanding the dryness of 
the subject, acid a word in rebuttal of these 
criticisms, some of which, as repeated by nov- 
ices, tend decidedly towards mystification. 

The *new infinite* and the * number-con- 
tinuum* are outgrowths of a general attempt 

T&0 to accomplish what has been called 
the * arithmetkation * (df>t,di*&$ mean- 
ing number) of all quantity. Certain qmnta 
(grades of intensity or other difference* am0unts 
of spact) have until recently been supposed to 
be immediate data of perceptive sensibility or 
* intuition*; but philosophical mathematicians 
have now succeeded ift getting a conceptual 
equivalent for them in the shape of collections 
of numbers created by interpolation betweaa 
indefinitely* We can Imlire 
ITS 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

line in space, and halve its halves and so on, 
But between the cuts thus made and numbered, 
room is left for infinite others created by using 
3 as a divisor, for infinite others still by using 
5, 7, etc., until all possible * rational* divisions 
of the line shall have been made. Between 
these it is now shown that interpolation of cuts 
numbered 'irrationally' is still possible ad 
infinitum, and that with these the line at last 
gets filled full, its continuity now being wholly- 
translated into these numbered cuts, and their 
number being infinite. * Of the celebrated f or- 
irmla that continuity means "unity in multi- 
plicity," the multiplicity alone subsists, the 
unity disappears/ 1 as indeed it does in alJ 
conceptual translations and the original in- 
tuition of the line's extent gets treated, from 
the mathematical point of view, as a 'mats of 
uncritidzcd prejudice* by Russell v or sneered 
at by Cantor as a * kind of religious dogm*** 
So much for the number-coBtkuuiB* As for 
new infinite*: that means only & new del* 



* H. Pofaaiffi: La J06m0* *t r&ftp0A**i, p. S0 

* 1, KuswlJ ; The Philowphy tf Mrtbtmatict, i, *00, 237. 

m 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

mtion of infinity. If we compare the indefi- 
nitely-growing number-series, 1, 2, 3, 4, n, 

in its entirety, with any component part of 
(2) The it, like ' even ' numbers prime ' num- 

new 

infinite' bers, or * square* numbers, we are 
confronted with a paradox. No one of the parts, 
thus named, of the number-series, is equal to 
the whole collectively taken; yet any one of 
them is * similar * to the whole, in the sense that 
you can set up a one-to-one relation between 
each of its elements and each element of the 
whole, so that part and whole prove to be of 
what logicians call the same * class/ numeri- 
cally* Thus, in spite of the fact that even num- 
bers, prime numbers, and square numbers we 
much fewer and rarer than numbers in general, 
and only form a part of numbers ilberhanpt 
they appear to be equally copious for purposes 
of counting. The terms of each such partial 
series can be numbered by using the natural 
integers in succession* There is, for instance, a 
first prime* a second prime, etc, ad in$nitum; 
&ad quaerer-soundmg still, since m&ry integer, 
odd of @wi cm. be doubled, it would seem tibut 

174 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

the even numbers thus produced cannot in the 
nature of things be less multitudinous than 
that series of both odd and even numbers of 
which the whole natural series consists. 

These paradoxical consequences result* as 
one sees immediately, from the fact that the 
The new infinity of the number-series is of the 

infinite t * . * 

paradoxi- growing variety (above, page 170), 
^ They were long treated us a reductio 

ad absurdum of the notion that such a variable 
series spells infinity in act, or can ever be 
translated into standing or collective form. 1 
But contemporary mathematicians have taken 
the bull by the horns. Instead of treating such 
paradoxical properties of indefinitely growing 
aeries as reductions ad absurdum* they have 
turned them into the proper definition of IB* 
finite classes of things. Any class is now 

1 The fact that, taken difltributi vdy, or paired tdb to each, the 
ttrms 1$ one endlessly growing series should b stiwk & ttfctdb tor t&tilft 
in another (or 'fimifor* to them) Is quite compatible with the two 
series being collectively of vastly unequal amount*. You need only 
make the steps of difference, or distances, bialwtMl the terms much 
t<m#<^ h <me em<^ t&tm i^ 
tttdes, 



moment either wrie should stop growbg, te *eimilarity ' 
to exist. 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

infinite if its parts are numerically similar to 
itself. If its parts are numerically dissimilar, it 
is finite. This definition now separates the 
conception of the class of finite from that of 
infinite objects. 

Next, certain concepts, called * transfinite 
numbers/ are now created by definition. They 
* Trans- are decreed to belong to the infinite 

finite 

numbers' class, and yel riot to be formed by 
adding one to one ad injinitunn^ but rather to 
be postulated outright as coming after each and 
all of the numbers formed by suck addition. 1 
Cantor gives the name of * Omega* to the low- 
est of these possible traasfimte numbers. It 
would, for instance, be the number of the point 
at which Achilles overtakes the tortoise if 
he does overtake Mm by exhausting all the 
intervening points successively. Or it would 
be the number of the stars, 50 case their count- 

1 The class olf all numbaru that * com Wore tfae fN traaufbifce * Is & 
definitely limited conception, provided w take tine sumter &s <wto 
or anyi for then arty one and very of t&@m will h&v by ddfoition to 
oontt ^|fer Use trancfinlte iaurabr wmm mo th0ugii tly form J 
whole and there be no lust one of them, and though the transfmi te h&ve 



at least it dt>e,i not continue the order of entire numbers. 

IT? 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

ing could not terminate. Or again it would be 
the number of miles away at which parallel lines 
meet if they do meet. It is, in short, a 
"limit ' to the whole class of numbers that grow 
one by one, and like other limits, it proves a 
useful conceptual bridge for passing us from 
one range of facts to another, 

The first sort of fact we pass to with its 
help is the number of the number-continuum 
Their uses or point-continuum described above 
fects e " (page 1^3) as generated by infinitely 



repeated subdivision. The making of the subdi- 
visions is an infinitely growing process; but the 
number of subdivisions that can be made has 
for its limit the transfinite number Omega just 
imagined and defined; thus Is a growing assimi- 
lated to a standing multitude; thus is a number 
that is variable practically equated (by the 
process of passing to the limit) with one tinrt 
i$ feed; thus do we circumvent the law of in* 
definite addition, or division wMefa piwicmsly 
wat th only way in. which infinity was eon* 
structable^ &&d re&et a constant Mbite at a, 
bound. TM& i&lbaite nnmbw may now be tub* 
IW 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

stituted for any continuous finite quantum, 
however small the latter may perceptually ap- 
pear to be. 

When I spoke of my 'mystification/ just 
now, I had partly in mind the contemptuous 
way in which some enthusiasts for the 'new 
infinite * treat those who still cling to the super- 
stition that 'the whole is greater than the 
part/ Because any point whatever in an im- 
aginary inch is now conceivable as being 
matched by some point in a quarter-inch or 
half "inch, this numerical * similarity* of the 
different quanta* taken point-wise* is treated an 
if it signified that !udf<4nches quarter-inehei, 
and inches are mathematically identical things 
anyhow, and that their differences are facts 
which we may scientifically neglect. I may 
misunderstand the newest expounders of 
Zeno*s famous 4 sophism/ but what they say 
seems to me virtually to be equivalent to this, 

Mr. Bertrand Bussell (whom I do not accuse 
of mystification, for Heavoa knows he tries to 
make things clear!) treats the Achilles-puzzle 
M tf th* difficulty lay only k tow tte 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

paths traversed by tlie two runners (measured 
after the race is run, and assumed then to con- 
Russell's sist of nothing but points of position 

solution * i i * 

of zeno's coincident with points upon a corn- 
paradox mon sca j e o f time) should have the 

by their ' 

means same time-measure if they be not 
themselves of the same length. But the two 
paths are of different lengths; for owing to the 
tortoise's head-start, the tortoise's path is only 
a part of the path of Achilles* How,, then, if 
time-points are to be the medium of measure- 
ment, can the longer path not take the longer 
time? 

The remedy, for Mr. Russell, if I rightly 
understand him> lies in noting that the sets of 
points in question are conceived as being in- 
finitely numerous in both paths, and that 
where infinite multitudes are in question, to 
say that the whole Is greater than the part is 
For each and every point traversed by 
', tortoise there is one point traveaewd by 
AdfelJtei* at the corresponding point of time; 
tncl flw> eta$t correspondence* point by point* 
of eititaff <M& of the tlwee sets of points with 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

both the others, makes of them similar and 
equally copious sets from the numerical point 
of view* Tliere is thus no recurrent * remainder * 
of the tortoise's head -start with which Achilles 
cannot catch up, which he can reduce indefin- 
itely, but cannot annul. The books balance to 
the end. The last point in Achilles \s path, the 
last point in the tortoise's, and the last lime- 
instant in the race arc .terms which mathe- 
matically coincide. With I his, which seems lo 
be Mr, Russell's way of analyzing the *tit tui- 
tion, the puzzle is supposed to disappear. 1 

It seems to me however that Mr, Russell's 
statements dodge the real difficulty* Vbidb 
2k* o- concerns the * growing* variety of 

lution 

infinity exclusively, and not the 



* standing* variety > which is all that he envis- 
ages when he assumes the race already to have 
been run and thinks that the only problem 
that remains is that of numtrieally equating 
the paths. The real difficulty may almost be 

1 Mr. Ru#i*fir own BtatnnfiiUof thtt pmssk m iraQ aidf tb(m>ittwiy 
AW too toeimlcil t* t^ followed verbatim la a book like thb* & he 
fmd& it n*ce*sary to pumphram the pvjsw-Je, m 1 find it (N>nv^im)t to 
hoping tibt no mjiwtke h& tern dbtt*. 

181 



SOME PEOBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

called physical, for it attends the process of 
formation of the paths. Moreover > two paths 
are not needed that of either runner alone, 
or even the lapse of empty time, involves the 
difficulty, which is that of touching a goal 
when an interval needing to be traversed first 
keeps permanently reproducing itself and get- 
ting in your way* Of course the same quantum 
can be produced in various manners* This page 
which I am now painfully writing, letter alter 
letter, will be printed at a single stroke* God, 
as the orthodox believe, created the space- 
continuum, with its infinite parts already 
standing in it, by an instantaneous fiat. Past 
time now stands in infinite perspective, and 
may conceivably have been created go, as 
Kant imagined, for our retrospection only* &*i<J 
all at once. * Omega* was created by a 
decree, a single act of definition in Prof, 
tor's miad. But whoso actually mww$ a 
tidiuiim, can do so by no process contianous io 
tfee mathematical sense. Be it short of long* 
each point must be occupied in its due order of 
succession; md if tie points we necessarily 

tm 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

infinite, their end cannot be reached, for the 
'remainder/ in this kind of process, is just 
what one cannot "neglect. 5 * Enumeration ' is, 
in short, the sole possible method of occupa- 
tion of the series of positions implied in the 
famous race; and when Mr, Hussell solves the 
puzzle by saying as he does, that s the defini- 
tion of whole and part without enumeration is 
the key to the whole mystery/ 1 he seems to me 
deliberately to throw away his case. 2 

1 The PhUotophy of Mathmotic^ i ML Mr, Hiuw*li giw % 
Ttutmm Shandy paradox as a counterpart to the A^billw. Bia^t li 
took T. 8. (ftccoftUag to Sterne) two yra t write the biftory of the 
first two days of his life, common nmm would condtKk that &t that rat* 1 
Hit if ntw ecmld l>e writteft. But Mr. tiiNMil fjfowt the cootmry; 
Ion a days and y^ura have no bit term, ami the nil day 1$ written la 
the ml ywu% any assignee! day will be written fttxmt, and no part nf thi^ 
life remain unwritten. But Mr. Rus^Il's proof <mnnot \w appH^J to 
the real world without the phymoal hypothesis which h* jxpreAt* by 
saying; *!! Triitrnm Stiaady II vet foiww* mid db aol wetty 0! Itte 
task,* In all rwl cmesof wutiaii0idiiMai)ii iivdir|yb0itrd lyp^ 
sk must be mad : the agmt of tlM di^tfi tniwt live lmv9W* In tb<? 
ieme of outlivimg ant dls net of pdbat# ol time, *ad "TO! weaiytef * 
of his fmpoesihlc tunk. 

1 Being almost blind mtheraati(>ally and logically, ! f^-1 ct>n*itJrra- 
blc whynt^ lit differing twm such tif>erior mindu, yrt what can f>oi> do 
kit follow one's own dim light? Th Itarftture of the ww infimtt' i* an 
technical that i t IH im^^ihlo txi cit* ^t^iU <>f it m A n<m-amth^rnftLi^ 
$$ work like this, Student* who are kteraMt whotilcl 



Ublcs of ocmtrab* of B. Eu8di f Pkilwopfy of M$$km&$i$$ of 
e, c,r h 

183 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

After this disagreeable polemic, I conclude 
that the new infinite need no longer block the 
Conclu- wa y ^ *ke empiricist opinion which 
sions we reac li ec j provisionally on page 
172. Irrelevant though they be to facts the 
'conditions' of which are of the * standing' 
sort, the criticisms of Leibnitz, Kant, Cauehy, 
Renouvier, Evellin and others, apply legiti- 
mately to all cases of supposedly continuous 
growth or change. The * conditions ' here htaw 
to be fulfilled seriatim; and if the series which 
they form were endless, its limit, if * successive 
synthesis * were the only way of reaching it, 
could simply not be reached Either we must 

A still more rigorous exposition may he found m E, V. Himimgton, 
The Continuum, cw a Type f>f Order t in the Annals of AftttkfmtUif^ vols. 
vi and vn (reprint for sale at publication-office* Harvard Utitveritty}. 
Compare also C. S Peiree'H paper m the Monutt, n, $87-546, ft well m 
the, presidential address of K. W. Hobnon in the Prottwlingi of tk& L&n 
donM&thmatwal Sandy, vol. XKXV, For more papular dmummm aee 
J Royce, T. he World and the Indiindml* vol. i, Supplementary 
Kisyser : Journal of Philosophy, etc,, i 9, an<l Uib^irtJhum 
800 ; S, Watarton in ArutoMian SOP, Prm$ding8 f 1010; 
Pk$&mpkid Rmew, xHi, 407; and finally the tablwi of ccmiwits el E* 
?amcw^*s t&ree recent little books t La ssiswe e* f %|xx^lt^ Aute ; 
fh* Folw of ScieM* (authariaed tmniktian by 0, B, Elt t@d) t New 
York, I&07 j Beiwm d M&hofa FHs 1008. Ilia Mwlltsfe abort a^ 
tsck whkih I bacm* upon infinites compltt^dl by t3wtslw ngntfamlfa 
h that in 0. M* fulertan 1 ! 8y$tm qf M^a|?%tla clutptar xt* 
184 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

stomach logical contradiction, therefore, in these 
cases; or we must admit that the limit is reached 
in these successive cases by finite and perceptible 
units of approach drops, buds, steps, or wlui f - 
ever we please to term them, of change, coming* 
wholly when they do come, or coming not at nil, 
Such seems to be the nature of concrete experi- 
ence, which changes always I >y sensible amoun t s, 
or stays unchanged. The infinite ehurucler ur 
find in it is woven into if by our later concep- 
tion indefinitely repeating the act of sulwlivKliufj 
any given amount supposed. The facts do not 
reslat the subsequent conceptual treatment; but 
we need not believe that the treatment necesBa* 
rily reproduces the operation by which they 
were originally brought into existence* 

The antinomy of mathematically continuous 
i. Con- growth IA thu but one more of those 

eptual 

transform* many ways in which our conceptual 
percept- transformation of perceptual expe ri- 



ence 

than ever. That being should im* 

toto a 

mediately and by finite 
itaell to being, may be 

IBS 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

.which an onlooking intellect fails to under- 
stand; but that being should be identified 
with the consummation of an endless chain 
of units (such as 'points'), no one of which 
contains any amount whatever of the being 
(such as c space') expected to result, this is 
something which our intellect not only fails 
to understand, but which it finds absurd* The 
substitution of 'arithmetization' for intuition 
thus seems, if taken as a description of reality, 
to be only a partial success. Better accept, 
as Renouvier says, the opaquely given data of 
perception, than concepts inwardly absurd* 1 

1 The point-continuum illustf-ates beautifully my complaint that 
the inteilectuaiist method turns the flowing into the static and discrete* 
The buds or steps of process which perception accepts its primal gift* 
of being, correspond logically to the * infinitesimals * (minutest quanta 
of notion, change or what not) of which the latest mathematics in sup- 
|xmd to have got rid. Mr. Russell accordingly find* hitomlt obliged, 
fust like Zeno, to treat motion as an unreality: * Weier8fcras/ late unp, 
*by strictly banishing all infinitesimal has at last shown that we Mw 
la an unchanging woirld, and that the aw at every Bowatat of Iti 
$j$& t k truly at rest * (033, <n, p. 847)- * We must entirely reject Hie 
notion of a state of motion/ he says elsewhere; 'motion 
W^Jjf || % *xwEpatba of different pkoes at d&ftowt 
T1W$ la lio transition from place to place, no comsecutSw 
or cojQjsekrt^ position, no adt tiling m wSodty e^oept fc Hie maw 
of a real number which is the limit of a certain set of quotients' (p. 
47S). The mathenaatieal 'continuum/ so called, becomes thus an 
absolute <|femyiite'^lt mi$s&tM ov t|wrlem^ mm* 9^ 



NOVELTY AND THE INFINITE 

So much for the 'problem of the infinite/ 
and for the interpretation of continuous change 
by the new definition of infinity. We find that 
the picture of a reality changing by steps finite 
in number and discrete, remains quite as ac- 
ceptable to our understanding and as congenial 
to our imagination as before; so, after these 
dry and barren chapters, we take up our main 
topic of inquiry just where we had laid it down, 
Does reality grow by abrupt increment* of 

3 it leaves novc ^y> or no ^ The contrast be- 
tween discontinuity and continuity 



btera of . 

novelty now confronts us in another form* 
The mathematical definition of eon* 
tinuous quantity as *that between any two 
elements or terms of which there ia another 
term * is directly opposed to the more empirical 
or perceptual notion that anything ii continu- 
ous when its parts appear as immediate neit 
neighbors, with absolutely nothing between, 

treraea meet; and although Riuwell and &mo agttse to doqrittf per- 
ceptual motion, for th on@ & pure unity, for th other ft pure 
plicity Into iti place. It i.i prolmble tbat 1 wtt* (kniJ 
etc. Ii m^nt to apply only to the raAtb*matu-l world- Ii 
ba aafair to charge Mm with writing mflUphyi<?a m tha*e 
althoagb be giv^ m> warning tlt tbb may ot b the < 

187 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Our business lies hereafter with the perceptual 
account, but before we settle definitively to its 
discussion, another classic problem of philoso- 
phy had better be got out of the way. This is 
the 'problem of causation/ 



CHAPTER XII ' 

NOVELTY AND CAUSATION THE 
CONCEPTUAL VIEW 

IF reality changes by finite sensible steps, the 
question whether the bits of it that come are 
radically new, remains unsettled still. Remem- 
ber our situation at the end of Chapter II L Bo- 
ing iiberfiaupt or at large, we there found to be 
undoduccublc. For our intellect it remains a 
casual and contingent quantum that is simply 
found or begged. May it be begged bit by bit* 
as it adds itself? Or must we bag it only onee, 
by assuming it either to be eternal or to have 
eome in an instant that co-implicated all the 
of time? Did or did not 'the 



cipleof f 

first morning of creation write what 



the last dawn of reckoning shall read*? With 
these questions monism and pluralism stand 
face to face again* The classic obstacle to plu- 
ralism has always bee whit is kwown m the 
'principle of causality/ 



* (In the authors mano^ript to d*pt*r hut the 
'Second Sub-p^btcm - a^ ^d Meet' 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

taken to mean that the effect in some way al- 
ready exists in the cause. If this be so, the 
effect cannot be absolutely novel, and in no 
radical sense can pluralism be true. 

We must therefore review the facts of causa- 
tion. I take them in conceptual translation 
before considering them in perceptual form. The 
first definite inquiry into causes was made by 
Aristotle. 1 

The 'why * of anything, he said* Is furnished 
by four principles; the material cause of it (as 
Aristotle when bronze makes a statue); the 

on causa- 
tion formal cause (as when the ratio of 

two to one makes an octave); the efficient 
cause (as when a father makes a child) and the 
fiial cause (as when one exercises for the sake 
of health)* Christian philosophy adopted the 
four causes; but what one generally means by 
the oause of anything is its * efficient* cause, 
&Bd in what immediately follows I shall speak 
of tiiat alone. 
An efficient cause is scholastically defined as 

1 Book 2, OT book 5, chap, ft of Ms M*taphytic*> or ch&p. iti of hb 
, give what is e^euttal in his views, 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

"that which produces something else by a real 
activity proceeding from itself.' This is unques- 
Schoksti- tionably the view of common sense; 
effident an< ^ scholasticism is only common 
cause sense grown quite articulate, Passing 
over the many classes of efficient cause which 
scholastic philosophy specifies, I will enumer- 
ate three important sub-principles it is sup- 
posed to follow from the above definition* 
Thus: 1, No effect can come into being with- 
out a cause* This may be verbally taken; but 
if, avoiding the word effect* it be taken in 
the sense that nothing can happen without a 
cau$e tf it is the famous * principle of causality* 
which* when combined with the next two prin- 
ciples, is supposed to establish the block-uni- 
verse, and to reader the pluralistic hypothesis 
absurd* 

2* The effect is always proportionate to the 
cause, and the cause to the effect* 

8* Whatever m in the effect must in some 
* whether formally, iirtiutl|j% or endnen% f 
bw also in thtetiiie* ('Fwnftlljr* ItMNT 
th&t the c&u$6 fMMi^il the ^flfe^t, |p ' 

m . 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

when one motion causes another motion; vir- 
tually means that the cause somehow involves 
that effect, without resembling it, as when an 
artist causes a statue but possesses not himself 
its beauty; 'eminently* means that the cause, 
though unlike the effect, is superior to it in 
perfection, as when a man overcomes a lion's 
strength by greater cunning.) 

Nemo dat quod non habct is the real principle 
from which the causal philosophy flows; and 
the proposition causa atquat effedum practi- 
cally sums up the whole of it 1 

It is plain that each mdnient of the universe 
must contain all the causes of which the next 
moment contains effects, or to put it with ex- 
treme concision, it is plain that each moment 
in its totality causes the next moment*^ But 

1 Read for & conciw statement of the Hch<x>!-doctritui of causation 
the account in J, Hicknby: General Mt'tapkyxi, b@o& ft, ch&p, tit. 1 
omit from my text various subordinate maxima which faiWI pk$r*di & 
great part la causal philosophy, m 4 Tht* caiu^ of a enua i* tfetf t-aiwe 

ol ltd effects f ; *Thft same causes produce the mmt HM$ '; *iltf^l 
ltd; only when present '; 'A cmm most exist bdfw It can i^ etc. 



ctimstances befeg at bot^m aa mdiBp^/*abk 4 causes for 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

if the maxim holds firm that quidquid est in 
effectu debet esse prius aliquo moclo in causa, it 
follows that the next moment can contain 
nothing genuinely original, and that the nov- 
elty that appears to leak into our lives so un- 
remittingly, must be an illusion, ascribable to 
the shallownosR of the perceptual point of view. 
Scholasticism always respected common 
sense, and in this case escaped the frank denial 
of all genuine novelty by the vague qualifica- 
tion * aliquo ruodo/ This allowed the effect 
also to differ, aliquo modo, from its cause. But 
conceptual necessities have ruled the situation 
and have ended, as usual* by driving nature 
and perception to the wall A cause amd its 
effect are two numerically discrete concepts* 
and yet in some inscrutable way the former 
must * produce' the latter* How can it intel- 
ligibly do so f save by already hiding the latter 
in itself? Numerically two, cause and effect 

$83). Thk is equivalent to the entire etate of the w$vmm at the w&* 
ttirttirtpm^lbtdta. Bit *&$*i^ b to **fc* * la that case 
the one fragmentary event which cmr att^tion first abfltmHed under 
thtttiuim*. It It tiiiit Ikttf^^ 
ino&erwar^flitbtheento 
meat <k*&e<i, 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

must be genetically one, in spite of the per- 
ceptual appearances; and causation changes 
thus from a concretely experienced relation 
between differents into one between similars 
abstractly thought of as more real. 1 

The overthrow of perception by conception 
took a long time to complete itself in this field, 
Occasion- The first step was the theory of *oc- 
alism casionalism/ to which Descartes led 
the way by his doctrine that mental and phys- 
ical substance, the one consisting purely of 
thought, the other purely of extension , were 
absolutely dissimilar. If thin were so, any such 
causal intercourse as we instinctively perceive 
between mind and body ceased to be rational, 

* Sir William Hamilton %xprestm tht veij compactly: * What i* tto 
kw of Causality? Simply this, ~~ that whm m objet Is pvNNOfttd 
phenomenally as fommeneing, we cannot but suppose that t&t com- 
plement (L e. the amount) of existence, which it now c-antftin*, has 
previously been; to other words, thttt all that m at pwwt know *s 
an effect must previously haw existed ia iti cauj^a; though ifrh&t Utt*e 
cauaes are we may i>crhapa be altogether urutble to irraw>/ (Bad of 



; wid ftiace logical con*eqiH3*KX foiiow oa% fewfl 

imtit to tlw IMOT.^> tjaf* oldtoc ys&gtiff <rftitgfiH<w^bB^iot) 

dogm. that c*uic aad ^^ am ttro 

verse b <m$i% conaected, no Centime tt<wity kaks b. 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

For thinkers of that age, "God* was the great 
solvent of absurdities. He could get over 
every contradiction. Consequently Descartes* 
disciples Regis and Cordemoy, and especially 
Guelincx, denied the fact of psychological in- 
teraction altogether. God, according to them, 
immediately caused the changes in our mind 
of which events in our body, and those in our 
body of which events in our mind, appear to be 
the causes, but of which they are in reality ouly 
the signals or occasions. 

Leibnite took the next step forward in 
quenching the claim to truth of wr perwp- 
j^lMte tions. He freed God from the duty 
of lending all this hourly assktaaee* by sup- 
posing Him to have decreed on the day of eret- 
tion that the chaagei in our ieverd ndtadt 
should coincide with thoie in our several bodiet* 
after the maimer in which doeki* wound up 
on the same day, thermite teep tittif with one 
another, With thii 4 piwlafe&h^d htraaony f 
the ocw^ptiid topAtl0ii of thf 
i?nfc wftb it 
botfe 'iwi k 

Mi 1 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

complete. Instead of the dramatic flux of per- 
sonal life, a bare 'one to one correspondence' 
between the terms of two causally uncon- 
nected series is set up. God is the sole cause of 
anything, and the cause of everything at once* 
The theory is as monistic as the rationalist 
heart can desire, arid of course novelty would 
be impossible if it were true. 

David Hume made the next step in discredit- 
ing common-sense causation* In the chapters 
on 'the idea of necessary connection* both in 
his 'Treatise on Human Nature/ and in his 
'Essays/ he sought for a positive picture of 
the s efficacy of the power * which causes are 
Hum assumed to exert and foiled to find 
it. He shows that neither in the physical nor 
in the mental wonu can we abstract or isolate 
the * energy ' transmitted from causes to effects. 
This is as true of perception as it is of imagina- 
tion- * All ideaa are derived from and 
Impressions, We never have any 
that 'eoatains any power or effie&^j Wf 
therdfom h*v* any idea of powa?*' * We atwr 
cam by 'Ot|? 'tteott tewtitgr 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

but one event following another; without being 
able to comprehend any force or power, by 
which the cause operates, or any connection 
between it and its supposed effect. . . . The 
necessary' conclusion seems to be that we have 
no idea of connection or power at all, and that 
these words are absolutely without any mean- 
ing, when employed either in philosophical 
reasonings or in common life/ 'Nothing is 
more evident than thai the mind cannot form 
such an idea of two objects as to conceive any 
connection between them, or comprehend dis- 
tinctly that power or efficacy by wMch they 
are united/ 

The pseudo-idea of a connection whidb we 
have, Hume then goes 00 to show. Is nothing 
but the misinterpretation of a mental custom* 
When we have often experienced the same 
sequence of events, *we are earned by habit, 
upon the appearance of the Irst one f to expect 
its usual attendant, and to IWIeTe th&t it will 
ewat* * . . TMs cuatomiwpy transition of the 
imagination Is the sentiment or impression 
we foanq tit fetal <ol power of 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

sary connection. Nothing farther is in the case. * 
6 A cause is an object precedent and contiguous 
to another, and so united with it that the idea 
of the one determines the idea of the other.' 

Nothing could be more essentially plural- 
istic than the elements of Hume's philosophy. 
He makes events rattle against their neighbors 
as drily as if they were dice in a box. He might 
with perfect consistency have believed in real 
novelties, and upheld freewill. But I said 
awhile ago that most empiricists had been half- 
hearted; and Hume was perhaps the most 
half-hearted of the lot. In his essay * on liberty 
and necessity/ he insists that the sequence** 
which we experience* though between events 
absolutely disconnected, are yet absolutely 
uniform, and that nothing genuinely new can 
flower out of our lives* 

The reader will recognize in Hume's famous 
pages a fresh example of the way in whieh $$* 
ceptual translations always 
fuet* Perceptually or oonarctdf ( 
we dial] aotiee m more detei li^ft^iiiiti 
mmm the iMxuser i& which of 

im 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

sciousness introduce other fields. It is but one 
of the forms in which experience appears as a 
continuous flow. Our names show how suc- 
cessfully we can discriminate within the flow. 
But the conceptuuILst rule is to suppose that 
where there is a separate name there ought to 
be a fact as separate; and Hume, following this 
rule, and finding no such fact corresponding to 
the word " power,' concludes that the word is 
meaningless. By this rule every conjunction 
and preposition in human speech is meaning- 
less in, on, of 9 with* but* and* tf are an 
meaningless as /or* and became. The truth is 
that neither the elements of fact nor the mean- 
ings of our words are separable as the words 
are. The original form Jut which fact comes is 
the perceptual durcfmnandw, holding terms m 
well as relations JB solution* or interfused and 
cemented. Our reflective mind iJbttraete divers 
aspects in the mucbiiesi, a* a laaa by looking 
through a tube may limit Mi fttte&tion to om 
prt irfter anotte of ft]BHJ0aip4k But ab$tr- 
tion 1$ mot insulation; and it no more breaks 
reality than the tube breaks tilt landscape. 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

Concepts are notes, views taken on reality, 1 
not pieces of it, as bricks are of a house. Causal 
activity, in short, may play its part in growing 
fact, even though no substantive 'impression' 
of it should stand out by itself. Hume's as- 
sumption that any factor of reality must be 
separable, leads to his preposterous view, that 
no relation can be reaL * All events/ he writes, 
'seem entirely loose and separate. One event 
follows another, but we never can observe any 
tie between them, They seem conjoined, but 
never connected/ Nothing, in short, belongs 
with anything else. Thus does the intellectual" 
ist method pulverize perception and triumph 
over life. Kant and his successors all espoused 
Hume's opinion that the immediately given is 
a disconnected * manifold/ But unwilling sim- 
ply to accept the manifold, as Hume did, they 
invoked a superior agent in the shape of what 
Kant called the * transcendental ego of &pfw* 
ception* to patch its bits together by 
* categories/ Among these categories Kant IB* 
scribes that of * causality/ tod in many 

1 These expressions are 

m 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

ters he passes for a repairer of the havoc that 
Hurae made. 

His chapter on Cause 1 is the most confusedly 
written part of his famous Critique, and its 
meaning is often hard to catch. As I under- 
stand his text, he leaves things just where 
Hume did, save that where Hume says * habit* 
Kant he says 'rule.* They both cancel the 

notion that phenomena called causal ever ex- 
ert * power/ or that a single case would ever 
have suggested cause and effect, In other 
words Kant contradicts common sense as much 
as Hume does and, like Hume, translates cans* 
ation into mere time-succession; only, whereaa 
the order in time was essentially * loose* for 
Hume &rid only subjectively uniform, Kant 
calls its uniformity * objective as obtaining in 
conformity to a law, which ow Sinfdiehkmt 
receives from our Verstand.* Non-causal se- 
quences can be reversed; causal one follow in 
conformity to rale, 1 

, * Entitled 'The Smdl An*%y of Expend/ it t*in& on p^ 



- * KaQtWhok-notUmtf*^ 

whom do* t} ruie bmd? I ft IM Hi $immi&m ft* ** 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

The word Verstand in Kant's account must 
not be taken as If the rule it is supposed to set 
to sensation made us understand things any 
better. It is a brute rule of sequence which 
reveals no Hie/ The non-rationality of such a 
4 category' leaves it worthless for purposes of 
insight. It removes dynamic causation and 
substitutes no other explanation for the se- 
quences found. It yields external descriptions 
only, and assimilates all cases to those where 
we discover no reason for the law ascertained. 

Our laws of nature" do indeed in large part 
enumerate bare coexistences and successions. 
Yellowness and malleability coexist in gold; 
redness succeeds on boiling in lobsters; eoagu- 

(the *eeet ') w fall b&dk mto tbi f>opukr dynamic view* &cl my 
gftt^ks GSM would exhibit causa! action, even wt there no nther CIUNSS 
b tJto world, Or dom it ted tli obwrvw df this lagb ? But 
his own -Hc-asatiorifl of w^iuptiw am what bind him."" B *er}uen(x? 
cauaa,! or aon-c&uaal, if It b sftrwible, he mms0t ttmt It tx^kwartis as | 
am kk kiiaii, Or dB Ihe ruk bind fatuw qwiia^ ftttd dbfcwwkt 
them to follow in the same order which the lift w^u^Gce obrv<?d? 
Since it obviously does not do this when the observer jucigwt wr<sftgly 
that the first s^uertco is causal, all we c.-an wty U that It i a rule wtet* 
byhbeipectationflofimifarmityfolicm^hiflc^uwlji.dga^flt^ 
latLertnt^orfftlfte, But wherem would this differ frt>mt}>ohumea0 ixv- 
sitioa? 
rq^ating the^t he Lw 'refuted Hume.' 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

lation in eggs; and to him who asks for the Why 
of these uniformities, science only replies: 
Positivism 'Not yet'! Meanwhile the laws are 
potent for prediction, and many writers on 
science tell us that this is all we can demand. 
To explain, according to the way of thinking 
called posilivistic, is only to substitute wider 
or more familiar, for narrower or less familiar 
lawsi and the laws at their widest only express 
uniformities empirically found. Why does the 
pump suck up water? Because the air keeps 
pressing it into the tube* Why does the air 
press in? Because the earth attracts it* Why 
does the earth attract it? Because it attracts 
everything gueh attraction being in the md 
only a more universal sort of fact. Laws, ac- 
cording to their view y only generalize facts* 
they do not connect them in any intimate 
sense. 1 

Against this purely inductive way of treat- 
ing causal sequences, a more deductive inter* 

1 For ^xpiwiiaBi of thii vi@w t&e stiide&t m&y coofuH X B, IIHTs 
ifl^V book $* chap. iii; W, 8. Jem* ** PnndfUs <f 8c$m0$, book 
$& I, fuss 1 ! Em$rwd L&i t chp, jpd w& & 
of Svitrw, chap, ill 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

pretation has recently been urged. If the later 
member of a succession could be deduced 
Deductive by logic from the earlier member, 

theories of 

causation in the particular sequence the *tie* 
would be unmistakable. But logical ties carry 
us only from sames to samos; so this last phase 
of scientific method is at bottom only the 
scholastic principle of Causa ceguat effectum* 
brought into sharper focus and illustrated 
more concretely- It is thoroughly monistic in 
its aims, and if it could be worked out in detail 
it would turn the real world into the procession 
of an eternal identity, with the appearances, 
of which we are perceptually conscious, oc- 
curring as a sort of by-product to which no 
* scientific* importance should be attached. 1 
In any case no real growth and no real novelty 
could effect an entrance into life. 1 

1 * OoTisciousm 1 **/ writes M. Couturat, tc* die & handy expreiikm of 
this mode of thought, ' IB properly shaking, the- rwUmof this animal. . 
What remain* in our subjective eonsciousmtssi, after at! objective f jtfte 
l^veUftn projV-ietl md located in space ami tlans, t the rtibMnk fcnd 
residuum of the construction of the universe the formlfraa m^ss of 
images tb&t were utmble to enter Into the tystem of imtam and put on 
the garment of reality ' (Rw,t d# M&aphy*iq*&, etc,, v. M). 

1 I avoid amplifying thUcottcq>tion(>f<^ajfid^< 
number of catisal f &oU can trxdeed It expkiaed wtbf&ctorily 

HI 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

This negation of real novelty seems to be 
the upshot of the conceptual is t philosophy of 
causation. This is why I called it on page 189 



Summary th e classic obstacle to the acceptance 

and con- 

clusion of pluralism's additive world. The 

principle of causality begins as a hybrid be- 
tween common sense and intellectualism: 
what actively produces an effect, it says, must 
*in some way * contain the * power * of it already* 

so ming that the offset JH only a later poaition of the cftuw; and for the 
remainder we ran full Imck on the ttliqtuo mod which gave such torn- 
fort tn the pint, Such an interpretation of nuture would, of roune, 
relegate variety, activity, and novelty to the litnba of illusion*, & fiutt 
as It succeeded in making its aUtic concept* ctaed living faete. It is 
hard to be sincere, however, in following the ot*aeptisiii HMthodl ruth- 
lessly ; arid of the writer* who think that in cienae caitMlity must 
irmtn Identity, nome willingly allow that all uch gdbaHie eKplftnAtion 
If mere or 1m art i Bcmi, that identical * molwules ' &nd * atoms v are like 
identical ' poundii ' and * y&rd/ only p^ in & e<aftfm! ^wit 
for hanging pm*pU cm in 'OM to otse itlftticffia, 1 o at to ppfcdkt foett 
In *eleptnt* or expadltioti* w&yn* Thfo in tba vtow of tlie <jooe^tad 
uni vewe which our own dbeufftbfi ha* kitted mi and, takm# fedeatifie 
logic in thti w&y no harm ts done, Almost no one i* rftdieal in luring 



th mcmiitfe viaw of m*m# m$ comwH 0* S. Lwwtt 

s 1^ 

$ 0* H^ymaai: IH> Q**&M u. 
Den ken* t p^p, 85-S5, Comrmre aUo B. P. 

. Ferbap* th* moat m truo 



ti vc genwl cJm^Jon of ww*tiott til fa 0. Bigvrart i 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

But as nothing corresponding to the concept 
of power can be insulated, the activity-feature 
of the sequence erelong gets suppressed, and 
the vague latency, supposed to exist aliquo 
modo in the causal phenomenon, of the effect 
about to be produced, is developed into a sta- 
tic relation of identity between two concepts 
which the mind substitutes for the percepts 
between which the causal tie originally was 
found* 1 

The resultant state of * enlightened opinion* 
about cause, is, as I have called it before, con- 
fused and unsatisfactory. Few philosophers 
hold radically to the identity view* The view 
of the logicians of science is easier to believe 
i 

1 I omit sayini? anything in my text about 'efierjgetioi/ Popular 
writers often appear to think Lh&t " science* haa (.bmtmHtratwi & mont- 
tic principle called 'energy/ which they connect witli activity on tbt 
OH hand aad with quantity cm the oilier* So far tu I urulcrwUmi tlm 
difficult subject, * energy * is not a principle at all, still taw m active 
otie. It J only & collective aame for et'rtain a.mounts of immediate 
perceptual reality, whea i uch reality b mawuretl la defiaite way* dmt 
^low its chaages to be written <>iuj t<) get constant sum. It i not an 
6atological tix^o-y at all but a magnificent <>coaomic fcbemtic devioft 
for keeping &o<jount of the functional variation* of the turt&CQ phe- 
norneoft. It is yi<leGtly a caae of 'nonfmgo hypothecs/ and inc 
talemt^ perceptwal reality /it c^ht to b^ in our 

causal debate. 

506 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

but not easier to believe metaphysically, for it 
violates instinct almost as strongly. Mathema- 
ticians make use, to connect the various inter- 
dependencies of quantities, of the general con- 
cept of function. That A is a function of B (A 
equals B) means that with every alteration in 
the value of A, an alteration in that of B is 
always connected. If we generalize so as also 
to include qualitative dependencies, we can 
conceive the universe as consisting of nothing 
but elements with functional relations between 
them; and science has then for its sole task the 
listing of the elements and the describing in 
the simplest possible terms the functional *re- 
la&oos.* ! Changes, in short* occur, and nog 
throughout phenomena, but neither reasons, 
nor activities in the sense of agencies* have 
any place in this world of scientific logic, 
which compared with the world of common 
sense, is so abstract as to be quite spectral, 
and merits the appellation (BO often quoted 
from Mr, Bradley) of *aa unearthly ballet 
of bloodless categories/ 

* W, Jerusalem : FM&ung in du PMhtophi*, Aufl. US, 



CHAPTER XIII 

NOVELTY AND CAUSATION THE 
PERCEPTUAL VIEW 

MOST persons remain quite incredulous when 
they are told that the rational principle of 
causality has exploded our native belief in nai'f 
activity as something real, and our assumption 
that genuinely new fact can be created by 
work done* *Le sens de la vie qui s'indigne de 
tant de discours/ awakens in them and snaps 
its fingers at the 'critical* view* The present 
writer has also just called the critical view an 
incomplete abstraction. But its * functional 
laws* and schematisms are splendidly useful, 
and its negations are true oftaner than is com* 
monly supposed* We feel as if our VIM* in* 
mediately moved our members, aad we 
the brain-cells whose activity that witi 
first arouse; we think we cause tibe 
but we only close a contact md tit fat 

the cellar rings the bell; we 9 certain 

^ 

rtar's light 1$ tike ettitt of ooPXKRtfeeiz^ it, 

but etib^wtfw $ the cj|i^r > ad tie 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

may have been extinguished long ago. We call 
the 'draft/ the cause of our 'cold *; but without 
co-operant microbes the draft could do no harm. 

Defects of ^^ Sa ^ S "^at causes DftUSt be Un- 

the percept- conditional antecedents, and Venn 

ual view do 

not warrant that they must be * close * ones. In 
scepticism 

nature s numerous successions so 
many links are hidden, that we seldom know 
exactly which antecedent is unconditional or 
which is close. Often the cause which we name 
only fits some other cause for producing the 
phenomenon ; and things, as Mill says, are fre- 
quently then most active when we assume 
them to be acted upon. 

This vast amount of error in our instinctive 
perceptions of causa! activity encourages the 
2onceptualist view- A step farther, and we sus- 
;xx't that to suppose causal activity anywhere 
my be a blunder, and that only consecutions 
md juxtapositions can be real Such sweep- 
jag scepticism is, however, quite uncalled for. 
Jtfaer parts of experience expoee us to error* 
ret we do not say that in them is no truth* We 
m trains moving at stations, when they 
200 



SOME PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 

really standing still, or falsely we feel ourselves 
to be moving, when we are giddy, without such 
errors leading us to deny that motion anywhere 
exists. It exists elsewhere; and the problem is 
to place it rightly. It is the same with all other 
illusions of sense* 

There is doubtless somewhere an original 
perceptual experience of the kind of thing we 
mean by causation, and that kind of thing 
we locate m various other places, rightly or 
wrongly as the case may be. Where now is the 
typical experience originally got? 

Evidently it is got in our own personal aetiv* 
ity-situations, In all of these what we feel is 
that a previous field of *cortscioU8ne&s* con- 
taining (in the midst of its complexity) the 
^ a resu ^> develops gradually 



cptuai {0to another field in wfaieli thst re- 

experience 

of cm*s& suit either appears as 



^wi 

or else is prevented by 

tgtinat wMch we still feel ourselvet to 

Ai 1 now write* I am in one of these activity 

situations* I * strive' alter words* wMefo I 
half prefigure* but wMeh* wbe a they ihall luwt 




NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

come* must satisfactorily complete the nascent 

sense I have of what they ought to be, The 

words are to run out of my pen, which I find 

that my hand actuates so obediently to desire 

that I am hardly conscious either of resistance 

or of effort. Some of the words . 

and then I do feel a resist 

but mental, which insti 

of my activity, accom,' 

feeling of exertion. \ 

my muscles, the ear 

ment of strain or sq 

where the resistance is o 

considerable in either kind * 

ing to overcome it; or, on the othei 

sustain my effort till I have succt 

aim* 

It to me that in such a 

developing experiential series ow 
perception of causality i$ found m 
If the word haw amy me&mtg at all it 
mum what there w Itw tirougk* What * 
eacy* and 'activitj* ara is 

these appear, 

$11 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

The experience? of such a situation feels the 

push, the obstacle, the will, the strain, the 

triumph, or the passive giving up, just as he 

feels the time, the space, the swiftness of intens- 

'ty, the movement, the weight and color, the 

''* l x^gasure, the complexity, or what- 

***-racters the situation may 

*ough all that can ever 

'vity is supposed* The 

> content save these 

\gjtrtiction, striving, 

jnalia as they are of 

aown. No matter what 

/ there may really be in 

B extraordinary universe it is im- 

ssible to conceive of any one of 

them being either lived through or 

^thentieally known otherwise than in tMa 

dramatic shape of something sustaining a fait 

purpose against felt obstacles, and oveiwjQoybf 

or being overcome. What * sustaining* 

here ii clear to anyone who has lived tlwoiigh 

tie >m^nmm 9 but to no oat jmi m 

*lot*d/ *wd/ *we0t/ meaa wmdttybg only to 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

beings with ears, eyes, and tongues. The per- 
dpi in these originals of experience is the erne; 
the curtain is the picture. If there is anything 
hiding in the background, it ought not to be 
called causal agency, but should get itself an- 
other name. 

The way in which we feel that our successive 
fields continue each other in these cases is evi- 
dently what the orthodox doctrine means when 
it vaguely says that 'in some way* the cause 
* contains* the effect. It contains it by propos- 
ing it as the end pursued. Since the desire of 
that end is the efficient cause* we see that in 
the total fact of personal activity final md 
efficient causes coalesce. Yet the effect is often- 
est contained aliqw mod only, and seldom 
explicitly foreseen* The activity sets tip more 
effects than it proposes literally. The end Is 
defined beforehand in most cases only as a 
ta4*wei- gsneral direction, aloog wMcfa all 
ties arise S0f g | Eove i^ es m^j surprises lie in 

wftft* These words I write even BOW surprise 
vw; yet I adopt them as el wti of my scripts* 
, Their btiag *eontaiucl* 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

only their harmony and continuity with my 
general aim. They 'fill the bill* and I accept 
them, but the exact shape of them seems deter- 
mined by something outside of my explicit will 
If we look at the general mass of things in 
the midst of which the life of men is passed, 
and ask 'How came they here?* the only broad 
answer is that man's desires preceded and pro* 
duced them* If not all-sufficient causes, desire 
and will were at any rate what John Mill calls 
unconditional causes, indispensable causes 
namely, without which the effects could not 
have come at all. Human causal activity is the 
only known unconditional antecedent of the 
works of civilisation; so we find, as Edward 
Carpenter says* 1 something like a law of na- 
ture, the law that a movement from feeling to 
thought and thence to action f from the world 
of dreams to the world of things, is 
<$oi]Rg on- Since at each phase of thin 
Mweltiea turn up, we may Mrfy 
whether we are act hare 

is 



"AM 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

the essential process of creation. Is not the 
world really growing in these activities of ours? 
And where we predicate activities elsewhere, 
have we a right to suppose aught different in 
kind from this? 

To some such vague vision are, we brought 
by taking our perceptual experience of action 
at its face-value, and following the analogies 
which it suggests. 

I say vague vision, for even if our desires be 
an unconditional causal factor in the only part 
of the universe where we are inti- 



sets & m mately acquainted with the way 



creative work is doae, desire Is any- 
thing but a close factor, even there* The part 
of the world to which our desires lie closest is* 
by the consent of physiologists, the cortax of 
the brain. If they act causally, their first effect 
is there* and only through innumerable neural* 
muscular, and instrumental Intermediaries is 
that lait effect which they coaseiowly 
it brought to birth, Our treat in the f ace-value 
'if perception WES apptwatly mmlmdm^ 
' no auch continuity between <mme*and- 

ns 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

effect as in our activity -experiences was made 
to appear. There is disruption rather; and 
what we nai'vely assume to be continuous is 
separated by causal successions of which per- 
ception is wholly unaware* 

The logical conclusion would seem to be that 
even if the kind of thing that causation is, were 
revealed to us in our own activity, we should 
be mistaken on the very threshold if we sup- 
posed that the fact of it is there. la other 
words we seem in this line of experience to start 
with an illusion of place. It is as if a baby were 
born at a kinetoscope-show and his first experi- 
ences were of the illusions of movement that 
reigned in the place, The nature of movement 
would indeed be revealed to him, but the real 
facts of movement he would have to seek out- 
side. Even so our will-acts may reveal the na- 
ture of causation, but just where the facts of 
causation are located may be a furttMor 
t>lem** With this further problem^ 



1 Wltli thw caus^and^flect are in what is (^IM A triuiwtm r^^ 
tttas'morettoimorsis 

*Iftft<&lto<fti6*^ 

least) the rek^^^ , 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

leaves off comparing conceptual with percept- 
ual experience, and begins enquiring into 
physical and psychological facts. 

Perception has given us a positive idea of 
causal agency but it remains to be ascertained 

_. , t t whether what first appears as such, 
This Is tfce rr 

problem of is really such ; whether aught else is 

the relation 

of mind to really such; or finally, whether no- 
thing really such exists. Since with 
this we are led immediately into the mind- 
brain relation, and since that is such a compli- 
cated topic,, we had better interrupt our study 
of causation provisionally at the present point, 
meaning to complete it when the problem of 
the mind's relation to the body comes up for 
review* 

Our outcome so far seems therefore to be 
only this, that the attempt to treat *caufe* 
Omdwsio& for conceptual purposes, as a sepa- 
rable link, has failed historically, and has led 
to the denial of efficient c&usstioa, mud to the 

wider CAUMUpjm^vebpmg, without altering tiic*cloter'<>ne. Thb 
e<m*i<kration may provisionally rmti|fttft tins imprewioa of falsehood 
vrkkh payebophysicrtl entidsm finds Id our eonactoujm of activity. 
Tlie subject wiU come up later ia mow detail. 



SOME PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY 

substitution for it of the bare descriptive no- 
tion of uniform sequence among events. Thus 
intellectualist philosophy once more has had 
to butcher our perceptual life in order to make 
it 'comprehensible/ Meanwhile the concrete 
perceptual flux, taken just as it comes, offers 
in our own activity-situations perfectly com- 
prehensible instances of causal agency. The 
transitive causation in them does not, it is 
true, stick out as a separate piece of fact for 
conception to fix upon. Rather does a whole 
subsequent field grow continuously out of a 
whole antecedent field because it seems to yield 
new being of the nature called for, while the 
feeling of causality-at-work flavors the entire 
concrete sequence as salt flavors the water in 
which it is dissolved* 

If we took these experiences as the type of 
what actual causation is, we should have to a* 
eribe to cases of causation outside of 0ypr $wn 
Iife t , to physical ca$ea also, an iawiwlly 

In other words we shotiMlfeOTe to 



This cdmflidatlc^^ ind the fart tluit 
80 . 



NOVELTY AND CAUSATION 

brain-events appear to be * closer' effects than 
those which consciousness directly aims at, lead 
us to interrupt the subject here provisionally- 
Our main result, up to this point, has been the 
contrast between the perceptual and the intel- 
lectualist treatment of it, 1 

1 Almost no philosopher has admitted that perception can give us 
relations immediately. Relations have invariably ht*em <*a!led tht* work 
of * thought/ so cause must be* a 'category.* Th** result is well shown 
in such a treatment of the subject as Mr. Shodworth HtxigHun'a, in his 
elaborate work the Metaphyrie of Experience, * What we call eonaciou* 
activity b not a consciousness of activity in the nenae of an immediate 
perception of it. Try to perceive activity r effort immediately, and 
you will fail; you will find nothing there to perceive * { i, !$$} As 
there i nothing there to conceive either, fa the discrete maaiaer 
which Mr. Hodgion desiderates* he has to conclude that *C&tlaIity 
per iff (why ntvd it \^p^rsef)h^tiO scientific or philosophic justifica- 
tion. . . , All emm of Gommm-imm mu^allty r<w>l v* thenu*elv, on 
anatyais, into CUBCH of pott hoQ* mm itlo, tvenit iirtud. Hence we say that 
th<- ee&rch for crania b given up In mmm and philotophy, sod ft^ 
plawd by th nwrrh for realcotiditfoaa (I . pheaoKial aat^edbats 
merely) t&d Uie lawi df rail conditioning/ It mutt &te ba rtijcogrtisswl 
that rtalitiea answering to the terms cnuse and causality p<rf * arc 
impcMurible and non-^xisteat* (IS, $74-878), 

The author wh$ dmumlm mo*t mmMm my own (apart from 
tarpon's, of which mopa lat>r) ii Prof. Jauaw Ward in Us N&turoMm 
and Agnosticism (m& the words 'activity * and ^c-auwility J In the in- 
dex }. Consult jtJio the chapter on ' MeaUl Activity ' m G. F. Stout's* 
Anatyth Psychology, vol. i. W. Jates'8 Plurdutic Urtivtrw, Appmik 
B, may also lx> consulted. BomauthoriM>mtothinkUiatwftdohavtt 
an idea! omeoptiori of gnuia* activity which aone df our ftxp^ritm*^* 
match. HftQ^ and not because activity la a 
T, arc ail the ttcUvitlesw^imi^^ Mr.?, 

^@^ 



APPENDIX 
FAITH AND THE RIGHT TO BELIEVE 1 



* is the belief that our mind 
comes upon a world complete in itself, and has the 
duty of ascertaining its contents; but has no power 
of re-determining its character, for that is already 
given* 

Among intellectualists two parties may be dis- 
tinguished. Rationalizing intellectualists lay stress 
on deductive and 'dialectic* arguments, making 
large use of abstract concepts and pure logic (Hegel, 
Bradley, Taylor, Royee), Empiricist intellectual- 
iits we more * scientific/ and think that the char- 
acter of the world must be sought In our sensible 
eirparie&ees, and found in hypotheses bad exclu- 
sively thereon (Clifford, Pearson) - 

Both aides insist that in our conclusions personal 
preferences should play no part* and that no argu- 
ment from what ought to fa to what i* f Ii v&lldl 
* Faith/ being the greeting of our whole nature to 
a kind of world conceived as well adapted to tlt&t 
nature* is forbidden, until purely iatelectual $$r 

1 [Th following pages, p&rt of & wyiUbus printed for the *e of 
rtu&mU in m introductory course b pbiiottypby, wcr foutxd with 
tUMS^thi*lM><)k t mththcwor^/Tobcprmt^]aiii>^^ 
troducUoa to Fhitcxtophy/ note! thereoa to lib authar'i handwrit- 

mi 



APPENDIX 

dence that such is the actual world has come in. 
Even if evidence should eventually prove a faith 
true, the truth, says Clifford, would have been 
' stolen,' if assumed and acted on too soon. 

Refusal to believe anything concerning which 
'evidence* has not yet come in, would thus be the 
rule of intellectualism. Obviously it postulates cer- 
tain conditions, which for aught we can see need 
not necessarily apply to all the dealings of our 
minds with the Universe to which they belong, 

1. It postulates that to escape error is our para- 
mount duty. Faith may grasp truth; but also it 
may not. By resisting it always, we are sure of 
escaping error; and if by the same act we renounce 
our chance at truth, that loss is the lesser evil, and 
should be incurred, 

2, It postulates that in every respect the uni- 
verse is finished in advance of our dealings with it; 

That the knowledge of what it thus IB, is best 
gained by a passively receptive mind, with ao 
native sense of probability, or good-will toward 
aay special result; 

That * evidence* not only needs no fcx^di-iflj lor 
Its Kftoqptfoa; but is able, if patiently wifttd tab t& 

, '. , , ( 

p&rti of tt* fw!4 and 

&&& 



APPENDIX 

although the world without them is unfinished, are 
yet such mere externalities as not to alter in any 
way the significance of the rest of the world when 
they are added to it* 

In our dealings with many details of fact these 
postulates work well Such details exist in advance 
of our opinion; truth concerning them is often of no 
pressing importance; and by believing nothing, we 
escape error while we wait. But even here we often 
cannot wait but must act, somehow; so we act on 
the most probable hypothesis, trusting that the 
event may prove us wise* Moreover, not to act on 
one belief, is often equivalent to acting as if the 
opposite belief were true, so inaction would not 
always be as * passive* m the intellectualists as- 
sume* It is one attitude of will. 

Again, Philosophy and Religion have to interpret 
the total character of t&e world, and it is by no 
means clear that here the intelleetualist postulates 
obtain. It may be true all the while (even, tkmgfa 
the evidence be still imperfect) that* m fmi$m 
says, * the natural order is &t bottom & mml dr ** 
It may be true that work it itSldotftf to tfa w!4* 
process, and that in that work we are called to bear 
Mttr.ifave. Tkectojieter^ 
in piirt depend upon our act^. Our acta may depend 

itt OW 



APPENDIX 

tendencies, or on our sustaining them in spite of 
'evidence' being incomplete. These faith-tenden- 
cies in turn are but expressions of our good-will 
towards certain forms of result. 

Such faith-tendencies are extremely active psy- 
chological forces, constantly outstripping evidence. 
The following steps may be called the * faith-ladder * ; 

1 , There is nothing absurd in a certain view of the 
world being true, nothing self -contradictory; 

2, It might have been true under certain condi- 
tions; 

3. It may be true, even now; 

4. It is fit to be true; 

5. It ought to be true; 

6, It mmt be true; 

7* It shall be true, at any rate true for me, 
Obviously this is no intellectual chain of infer- 
ences, like the sorites of the logic-books. Yet it is 
a slope of good- will on which in the larger questions 
of life men habitually live* 

Intellectualism*s proclamation that our f good-wii f 
our *will to believe/ is a pure disturber of truth* i$ 
itself aa act of faith of the most arbifcr siy Idad* It 
implies the will to insist on a universe of intellects 
alist constitution, and the willingness to stand io 
tbe w&y of & pluraJ&tie uaivme't tw#, 
tibe goodi-wiB mi fNSffre 



APPENDIX 

theoretical as well as practical, of all concerned, to 
make It *eome true/ 

Intellectualism thus contradicts itself. It is a 
sufficient objection to it, that if a 'pluralistically* 
organised, or * co-operative* universe or the *melio- 
ristie* universe above, were really here, the veto 
of intelleetualism on letting our good-will ever have 
any vote would debar us from ever admitting that 
universe to be true. 

Faith thus remains as one of the Inalienable birth- 
rights of our mind. Of course it must remain a 
practical, and not a dogmatic attitude. It must go 
with toleration of other faiths, with the search for 
the most probable, and with the f uU coasdousaess 
of responsibilities and risks. 

It may be regarded as a formative factor in the 
universe, if we be integral parts thereof, and co- 
determinants, by our behavior, of what its total 
character may be. 

How WB ACT OH PEOBABIIOT im 

In most emergencies we have to act on probabil- 
ity, and incur the riik of error* 
* Probability* aad 'poitibiUty' are terra &p* 

plted to things of tfad omditfoBi of wtow wiateg 

W* in* (to some depee tt Itast) igaofftat 

, If we are entirely ignorant of the conditions that 

m 



APPENDIX 

make a thing come, we call it a 'bare' possibility. 
If we know that some of the conditions already 
exist, it is for us in so far forth a 'grounded* pos- 
sibility. It is in that case probable just in propor- 
tion as the said conditions are numerous, and few 
hindering conditions are in sight. 

When the conditions are BO numerous and eon- 
fused that we can hardly follow them, we treat a 
thing as probable in proportion to the frequency 
with which things of that Mnd occur. Such fre- 
quency being a fraction, the probability is expressed 
by a fraction. Thus, if one death in 10,000 is by 
suicide, the antecedent probability of my death 
being a suicide is 1-1 0,000th. If one house in 5000 
burns down annually, the probability that my house 
will burn is l~5000th, etc. 

Statistics show that in most kinds of thing the 
frequency is pretty regular. Insurance companies 
bank on this regularity, undertaking to pay (say) 
5000 dollars to each man whose house bums, pro- 
vided he and the other house-owners each pay 
enough to give the company that mm* pint $$e* 
more for profit! md expen$ei* 
,copaay hedging on the large mtttdw erf 
it with* md wrfckg by tfct.tetf *^m* 
.Mftdnm $ low fey tbe &m* 

The individual householder deals witi Ml ovni 



APPENDIX 

single case exclusively. The probability of his house 
burning is only 1-5000, but if that lot befall he 
will Jose everything* He has no * long run * to go by, 
if his house takes fire, and he can't hedge as the 
coppany does, by taxing his more fortunate neigh- 
bors. But in this particular kind of risk, the com- 
pany helps him out. It translates his one chance in 
5000 of a big loss, into a certain loss 5000 times 
smaller, and the bargain is a fair one on both sides. 
It is clearly better for the man to lose certainly, but 
fractionally* than to trust to his 4999 chances of no 
loss, and then have the improbable chance befall. 
But for most of our emergencies there IB no insur- 
ance company at hand, and fractional solutions are 
Impossible. Seldom can we oef fractionally. If the 
probability that a friend is waiting for you in Boi- 
tion ia 1-4, how should you act on that probability? 
By going as far as the bridge? Better stay at home! 
Or if the probability is 1-2 that your partner is a 
villain, how should you act on that probability? 
By treating him as a villain one day* and confiding 
your money and your secrets to Mm the 110*? 
That would be the worst of B MJutfora. In all ndb 
cmsas we smuft set wholly for out or tib otter bora of 
ite dflemmft. Wemwtgoktwtfetmow 
alternative as if the other one did not exist, and 
suffer the full penalty if the event belie our faitli. 



APPENDIX 

Now the metaphysical and religious alternatives 
are largely of this kind. We have but this one life 
in which to take up our attitude towards them, no 
insurance company is there to cover us, and if we 
are wrong, our error, even though it be not as great 
as the old hell-fire theology pretended, may yet be 
momentous. In such questions as that of the char** 
acter of the world, of life being moral in its essential 
meaning, of our playing a vital part therein, etc.* 
it would seem as if a certain wholeness in our faith 
were necessary* To calculate the probabilities and 
act fractionally, and treat life one day as a f&ree* 
and another day as a very serious business, would 
be to make the worst possible mess of it. Inaction 
also often counts as action* In many issues the 
inertia of one member will impede the success of 
the whole as much as his opposition will* To refuse^ 
e* g n to testify against villainy, is practically to 
help it to prevail, 1 

THE PtrUEALisTic OE MELIQHJSTIC UNXVBBSII 

Finally* if the *mellorfstic* universe were wafljp 
here. It would require the active good-win of &E of 
126, m the way of belief as well as of our otto *o 

tivftlei, $o bring it to a prosperous issue. 

The mtKoristic miverse is coiaodwd aftot 6 

1 Cf . Wm. James; ThtWillb Beliw, etc. pp, 1-Sl, and iXMlO 



APPENDIX 

analogy, as a pluralism of independent pow- 
ers. It will succeed just in proportion as more of 
these work for its success. If none work, it will fail. 
If each does his best, it will not fail. Its destiny 
thus hangs on an if, or on a lot of ifs which 
amounts to saying (in the technical language of 
logic) that, the world being as yet unfinished* its 
total character can be expressed only by hypotheti- 
cal and not by categorical propositions. 

(Empiricism, believing in possibilities, is willing 
to formulate its universe in hypothetical proposi- 
tions, Rationalism, believing only in impossibili- 
ties and necessities* insists on the contrary on their 
being categorical) 

As individual members of & pluralistic universe, 
we must recognize that, &ven though we doom* bast* 
the other factors aJbo will have a voice in the r^estiJt, 
If they refuse to conspire, our good-will and labor 
may be thrown away* No insuraaee company n 
here cover ua or save u from the risks we inn in 
being part of such a world 

We mrni take one of four sttitudes m tegard to 
the other powers: itJber 

1* Follow mtellectualist advice: wait for evi- 
dence; and while waiting, do nothing; or 

f Mistrust the other powers arid, sure that the 
wlU &0, MH Ml or 



APPENDIX 

8, Trust them; and at any rate do our best. In 
spite of the if; or, finally, 

4. Flounder* spending one day In one attitude, 
another day in another, 

This 4th way Is no systematic solution. The d 
way spells faith in failure. The 1st way may In 
practice be Indistinguishable from the 2d way, 
The 3d way seems the only wise way. 

* // we do our best, and the other powers do their 
best, the world will be perfected* this proposi- 
tion expresses no actual fact, but only the com- 
plexion of a fact thought of as eventually possible. 
As it stands, no conclusion can he positively de* 
duccci from it. A condmwn would require another 
premise of/act) which only we can supply. The origi*- 
rial proposition per se has no pragmatic value wkatoto* 
ever* apart from U ptywer to challenge our will to 
produce the premise of fad required* Then indeed 
the perfected world emerges as a logical conclusion 

We can create the conclusion* then. We can aadt 
we may, as it were* jump with both feet off tht 
ground into or towards a world of wMefa wt trait 
the other parts to meet our jump - mad 
ean the maMng of a perfected world of 
tic pattern ever take place* Only ttooug fat ow 
cursive trait ia It eaa it coma into l^eiag* 

if &o iaoottslitai^jr tuywtea k tU wid 



APPENDIX 

no * vicious circle' unless a circle of poles holding 
themselves upright by leaning on one another, or a 
circle of dancers revolving by holding each other's 
hands, be Vicious.* 

The faith circle is so congruous with human 
nature that the only explanation of the veto that 
intellectualists pass upon it must be sought in the 
offensive character to them of the faiths of certain 
concrete persons. 

Such possibilities of offense have, however, to be 
put up with on empiricist principles. The long run 
of experience may weed out the more foolish faiths. 
Those who held them will then have failed: but 
without the wiser faiths of the others the world 
could never be perfected, 

(Compare G, Lowes Dickinson: "Religion* a 
Criticism and a Forecast/* N, Y. 1905, Introduc- 
tion; and chaps. iii iv,) 



INDEX 



Absolute idealism, 137; defects of, 

138, 
Activity, intellectually incompre- 

hensible, 85. 
Abmbert, d*, 114. 
AI-Ghazsali, 117 note* 
Anaxagonia, 11. 
Auaelm, St., 48 note. 
Antinomies, Kaat*, 160, 
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 11, 1, 4S. 
Archimedes, 148. 
Ariitotle, 7, 11, 12, 24, $4, 36, $8, 

58, 55 note, 65, 148, 150 note, 

100, 

Bakwetl C, M., 54 wif, 1 16 rao&? 

Baldwin, 1. M-, 6 not*. 

Bat, lk<i/ort, 101 mfe. 

Being, problem of, $8; various 
trnfttowtts of problem of, 40; 
rationalist and empiridft treaL- 
at* 4t i Hegei'i madiatlcw 
of with non-i^in^, 44 ; mTM 
amount of must ba txjggftd by 
all, 45; conservation m, 
tion of r 45, 



87, 121 f 
4 rw 
F, 
P.. 



1, 9^ F OS, &4, 107 



Cantor, 174, 177, 182. 

Carpenter, E., 214. 

Caucby, 184. 

Causation, 85; Aristotle on, 190; 
sdbolastiebm on efficient, 191; 
occasionalistic theory of, 194; 
Leibmtzon, 105; Humeon, 196; 
criticism of Hume on, 198; Kant 
OB, 200; positivism on, 203; de- 
ductive theories of, 204; eon- 
cfptuai view of aegatea novelty, 
05; <ldfect of perceptual view 
of <lo not warrant #eeptieim 
09; naturt* of jwjpceptual expe- 
rience of, 210; * $rml* and 
* efficient * mingle ia pcreeptiml 
experience, i; pemeptual, 
$ti it problem, ^15. 

Change, conceptually impoeible r 
87. 



Cliff or4 W. ^* 

Golmdgc-, S4. 
, P 10. 

unity by, 
Conwptioo, ft secomkry 



Concept*, di^tiogubhftd tat per- 
cept, 4S; dUcwU>n<*8<>f t 48;b- 
t^rpeatitrate with pcroept*, M; 
dignity of knowtedgoof, 54; con- 
tent &n<HunctitfG^ f 56; origin- 
ate in utility, 63; theoretic me 
of,^; m the a 



7$; 



fornmUoo*, 



INDEX 



conaubstantial with percepts, 

107 ; designative only, 111. 
Conceptual knowledge, rational- 

ist view of, 55; empiricist view 

of, 57. 
Conceptual order, the, 50; unlim- 

ited, 52; a topographic system, 

66. 
Conceptual systems* distinct 

realms of reality, 101. 
Conceptual translation, defects of, 

78; examples of puzzles intro- 

duced by, 85, 

Conservation vs. creation, 45, 
Continuity theory, the, 155, 
Cordemoy, 105, 

Cotiturnt, &, 18& note, 204 wfa* 
Ciwd, the mtetlectualist, 75, 
Cudworth, H. 54 note, 



Dalton, 20. 

0elbo3uf 148, 149 nati. 
Dcmocritus, II, 84, $5, 149 note, 
Descartes, IB, 20, 81, <2, 24, 80, 

48 not, 148, 150 note, 104, 

105, 

Dewey, J, 6, 87. 
0iekm#on O Lows 281, 
Direction, concept of, impossible 

till prowis completed, 88* 
Discontinuity theory^ the, 154. 
r, H. W, $2 ^^ 
Hto, 150 note, 



Emerson, SC, 70, 72 no^. 
f 11, 

cttnB0d by de- 
(eeU of concepts, OS; willing to 
uee hypotheticab, ^0. 
|IMt% cntrwtd will ra- 
tionalists, 85. 



Evellin, 184. 

Evil problem of, 1SB. 

Faith, w. evidence, fSl ; ten* 
dencies, 44; a practical &tti* 
tude, 25. 

Fawwtt, B. D., 101 note. 

Fichte, 137 note, 

Fraaer, J, G,, 18 nob. 

Freedom, 1S9; oppotfed by mon- 
ism, 140, 

Fullertoa, G, M. f 184 3Wte 

Galileo, 0, ^1, i2. 
Gre^85, 
Guelincx, 105* 

Habits of thought, origins of, 14 
Ha.mtttea Sir W. 50 



Ifetpw, T. J., 
Harvey, 20. 

Hegel, Sfl 48, 4H note, 57* 01, 
137 mtff, I0 r 228, 



ituiiv 11. 

, <*. 205 nol^, 
Hibbrn, 81 ^, at #&. 
Hobflon E, W, ( 184 ttoto. 

B. H., />! 7 



Hume, 14. S7 # 85, 121, 12$, it*, 



, E. V,, 



Huxley, 



definition of, 168; the 
growing, 170; mtiKt IMS treatdl 
Hi dbcontiauou*/17i; ' th* iww/ 



INDEX 



174, 175; is paradoxical, 176; 
It tamed into problem by coa- 
trarnformatba of per- 
, 185. 

Infinity, S3; Kant's definition of, 
160; ambiguity of fab itelement 
of problem of, 16$; Rraouvier's 
solution of, 104. 

*laaupembt!Hy of jM*tuutttcm" 70. 

IstelbHualusm* origin of, 83; in- 
adequacy of, 84; role of* *$; 
wif-contradk'tory, 5&S, 

Jttm<^, W., $7 nt>tt\ 50 note, 60 
mt&< 63 wote, 06 n^, S7 ^ofe, 
107 note, 111 noto, 112 no^ p 118 



Janet, I*,, S* natn. 
, J. f IS n^ 
, W., i(J 
f F, B, f IS 



Kant, li f 31, g, 37, 



J. C., 



a no, 171* 



tblf on irUl- 



14 m, m, m. 

f 1 unto* 
. H, 16 



. M, lid tt^. 



7 f 88, 
Lovejoy, A, 0., IB 



D, B,, 118 
Macb, ^0 note. 
Malebiwache, 78 w^f. 

17. 

, H. L t 50 nde. 
Mariotte, 70, 
Mareti, K, It, 18 
Marvin, 140 not& 



, the, 

Metaphysical problema, 
^ nature of, S5i, 
, defirisd 31; raticm- 
and empiricism in, S4. 
* 57 no<e, 
Milhaud, 0! ncff^ 
Mill W, 107 m;/r, 1*4 r,o^. IM 
note, 03 m^ W 



Mil! r James, 5f> nrir, \W, 107 rtoif. 

Miller, 1, 1,, m moH>. 

Monism, pff. pluralism, 118; mtfin- 
ing of, M/5; kindsof.Itfi; mysti- 
<ml, 110; of substanw% lit; an 
absolute idcalbm, 17; defect* 
of, 138; ftdvn&tge of, 14$; and 
novelty, Ii5. 

Motion, o^c@|)lm 
87- 

Mulford, Pmitic^, 18 nrts. 



an-d plumlwm and, 145; pro- 



111; and <*>noepti0n, 
d th^ InfinUt, 159; f^ 
by Rctiouvter 1 * 
$ ip^^ktt w 
problwa af wwlftctod by B#W 



INDEX 



definitions of infinite, 187; and 
causation, 189; negated by con- 
ceptual view of causation, 205; 
arises in perceptual experience 
of causation, 213, 
Number-continuum, the, 178, 

Objection, an, replied to, 109. 

Occasionalism, 194. 

'Omega/ 177; its value, 178, 

Oneness, pragmatic analysis of, 
124;kindsof,120; concatenated, 
129; value of absolute, 1S6, 

Ostwald, W., 71 nab, 00 note, 150 
note, 

Paradoxes, Zmo's, 157; Russell's 
solution of, 180; criticism of 
Russell's solution of, 181. 

Parmenides,. 11, 41. 

Pascal, 20, 21. 

Paulsen, F,, 15 note, 228. 

Pearson, 90 note, 208 note, 221, 

Peircc, C. S,, 184. note. 

Percepts, distinguished from con- 
cept, 48; complexity of, 40; in- 
terpenetrate with concepts, 52; 
Bradley on, 02; consubstantial 
with concepts, 107* 

P&rtoaal identity, conceptually 
impossible, 87, 

J^ikrophera, attitude of, to di 
tectical difficulties, 91. 

Philosophy, defined, 4, 5 ; its value, 
$; lt$ enemies, 8; first objection 
to> 9 ; as man tkvnking, 15; * pom* 



17; 

oi 



; as residuum 
pro- 



4; third, 

Oft 



Plato, 7, 11, 35, 36, 54 note, 76, 77. 

Plotinus, 118. 

Pluralism, vs, monism, 113; mean- 

ing of, 114, 140; defects of, 142; 

advantages of, 142; and novel- 

ty, 145. 
Plutarch, 77. 
Poincar^ H., 91 note, 174 no^, 

184 note. 
Porphyry, 118. 
Positivism, 203. 
Pragmatic Rule, the, 00; examples 

of application of, 62; used in 

critique of substance, 121. 
* Principe du nombre,* 164. 
'Principle of Causality,' t&fc, 180* 

101, 

Principles, me^aiag of, $1. 
Probabilities, how acted on, $25* 
Protagoras, 84, $5, 
Pyrrho, 92 note. 
Pythagoras, 11, 150. 

Rationalists, contrasted with em- 

piricists, 85 
Reality, 78; conceptual y#tna 

distinct realms of, 101. 
R4gis, 197. 
Relations, multiplicity 01, of rail 

things, 80; unreality of appear*- 

anceof,80; of subject and predi- 

cate, uniatelfi^ble* 70, 
Renouvier, ., 163; flolution of 

problem ol 



Resemblance, ao, illujsion, S3, 



i* 



note, 
Bf&J, 



ff, ft 



117 



INDEX 



Russell B., 174, 179, 180, 181, 
l^f, 186 note. 

, Th., 50 note. 



* Same/ meaning of, 108. 
Santayaua, G., 54 note. 
Sceptics, pyrrhonian, 91. 
Schiller, F. C. S., $7, 109 note. 
Schopenhauer, 26; on the origin 

of the problem of being, 88, 50 

note. 
Science, history of, 20; as special- 

ized philosophy, 21; and nov- 

elty, 149. 

Self-sameness of ideal objects, 102. 
Sigwart, C., 205 note. 
Silberstein, S. J., 120 note. 
Socrates, 37. 
Spencer, Herbert, 13, 27, 33, 42, 

65 note. 
Spinoza, 36, 42, 120 note* 121, 

1S6, 137 




Sympathetic magic, the primitive 
17. 



'1&o& A. X, 
StSdd, A^ 119 note. 
Stout, G. F., 219 note. 
Swtrez, 12. 

Substance, monism of, 119; cri- 
tique of, 121. 



Taine, H. 59 note. 
Tannery, Paul, 157 note. 
Taylor, A. B., 101 note, 228. 
Thales, 11. 

Thomson, J. C., 117 note. 
Tomceffi, 20. 
'Transfinite numbers/ 177. 

Unity, by concatenation, 129; of 
purpose, 131; of origin, 132; 
cash value of, 133; value of, 
136 

Values, of philosophy, 6; new, 

brought by concepts, 71. 
Voltaire, 20, 26. 

Wallace, W., 57 note, 75 note. 
., 24 note, 219 note. 
184 mote. 



nofo. 
, C, 14, 81, 



Zeno, 41, p8, 1% 157, 158, 
170, 17$, 186 mote. 



