THE STORY 
OF A GREAT | 
DISCOVERY | 


Vitali Solomonovich Vygodski 


THE STORY 
OF A GREAT 
DISCOVERY 


How Warl Marx wrote “ Capital’ 


~ 


as 


VERLAG DIE WIRTSCHAFT BERLIN 


Translated by Christopher S. V. Salt, B. A. (Hons.) 

Revised by Dr. Maurice Dobb, D. Litt., F.B.A., Cambridge 
Prof. Dr. rer. oec. habil. Peter Hess, Berlin 
Dipl. Phil. Wolfgang Winkler, Berlin 


on the basis of the Ist German edition 
Witali Solomonowitsch Wygodski 

Die Geschichte einer grofen Entdeckung 
Verlag Die Wirtschaft, Berlin 

and the 1st Russian edition 


Butaaznit Coromonosny Berrozckal 
Actopna ofnoro BernKoro oTKpHTHA Kapaa Mapxca 
H3qateanctTso «Msicab», Mocksa 


Ww Published in the German Democratic Republic in 1973 

by Verlag Die Wirtschaft, 1055 Berlin, Am Friedrichshain 22 
Licence No. 122; Print Permit No. 495/122/73 

All rights reserved, 

over design by Otto Kietzmann, Berlin 

I inted in the German Democratic Republic 


i it ee 


CONTENTS _ 


13 


19 


35 


47 


Foreword to the German Edition 


INSTEAD OF AN INTRODUCTION 
How “Capital” was created 


Is it necessary to know the background to “Capital”? The main stages. Why 
is the period from 1850 to 1863 so interesting ? Marx's creative laboratory. 


CHAPTER 14 
Standpoint for observing bourgeois society 


The theoretical luggage with which Marx arrived in London in August 1849. 
“The Poverty of Philosophy” and ‘‘Wage-Labour and Capital’’—the 
nucleus of hts economic theory and the point of departure for further 
research. The theory of value and surplus-value of the classic bourgeois 
economists and their fundamental shortcomings. Marx’s application of the 
materialist conception of history to political economy. Why the study of 
the subject-matter had to begin again “right from the start”. 


CHAPTER 2. 


A Mont Blanc of facts 


Marx’s economic studies. Investigation of crises. The Notebooks. “... one is 
received not with compliments but with economic categories’’. First results 
of the economic investigations. “Basically, there has been no progress in 
this science since A. Smith and D. Ricardo”. The presuppositions for revolu- 
tionary transformation in political economy. The “Grundrisse der Kritik 
er politischen Okonomiec”. Critique of Proudhonism. “Communism F 
d litischen Ok ”. Critiq f Proudl Com must 


999 


rid itself above all of this ‘false brother’”’. 


CHAPTER 3 


The “economic cell-form” 
of bourgeois society 


Why the “ Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy” begins with the 


“Chapter on Money”. On the track of value. The ‘degradation’ of money 
by the Proudhonists. The concept of necessary labour. Value and price, The 


5 


69 


81 


97 


divisibility of a commodity and its two factors. The two-fold character of 
labour in bourgeois society. In search of the “economic cell-form”. The 
material content and social form of each and every economic phenomenon. 


CUAPTER 4 


Tlow “he caught the surplus-value 
robbers red-handed ” 


“By the way, things are developing nicely.” From value to surplus-value. 
The analysis of exchange between labour and capital. Labour-power as 
a commodity. The mechanism of capitalist exploitation. The theory of sur- 
plus-value. What Marx really did discover. 


CILAPTER 5 


Why the second volume of * A Contribution to the 
Critique of Political Economy” was not published 


A few words about the first volume. The result of fifteen years research. 

. these parts still contain nothing about capital”. The revolutionizing 
of science. The manuscript of 1861/63. Work on the second part. January 
1862: everything from the beginning again, A new stage in the investi- 
gations. The “inner” categories and their metamorphosed forms. The 
necessily for the completion of the theory of surplus-value. The theory 
of profit in “ Grundrisse”. The theory of average profit and of production- 
price in the manuscript of 1861/63. A statement by Engels, 


CHAPTER 6 
From value to price of production 
Market-value and its law of motion. The “false social value”, The dis- 


covery of production-price. Two kinds of competition and the twofold 
movement of the equalization of prices. The method of scientific abstraction 


in Marx’s investigations. 
CHAPTER 7 
The completion of the theory of surplus-value 


What did Marx have to prove ? Rent as an illustration of the difference 
between value and price of production. The theory of capitalist monopoly. 
Monopoly-price and the theory of value. The breaking of monopoly 


139 


/ 
11 
125 


in capitalist agriculture. Examples of scientific abstraction in the theory 
of rent. 


CHAPTER 8 
How “Capital” took shape 


An artistic whole. Logical and historical aspects. “Theories of Surplus- 
Value” —the beginning of the real work on * Capital”. *‘ The second part... 
will appear independently under the title Capital ...”. From six to four 
books. ‘‘Confidentially, I indeed began ‘Capital’ in exactly the opposite 
sequence ...”. The theoretical and the historical part of “Capital”. 


CHAPTER 9 


Marx’s economic theory 
and the working class 


The political economy of the working class. The dissemination of economic 
theory in the ranks of the working class. “ Value, Price and Profit’: from 
political economy to economic policy. Comparison with the 1840's : “ Wage- 
Labour and Capital” and “ Manifesto of the Communist Party ”, “Once the 
interconnection is grasped”. Justification of the struggle of the workers for 
higher wages and a shorter working day. Analysis of the value of labour- 
power. “ Down with the wage system !”’ Scientific critique of Proudhonism. 


CONCLUSION 


At the centre 
of the historic events of his time 


Forty years of work on “Capital”. “T laugh at the so-called ‘practical’ men 
with their wisdom.” The topicality of “Capital”. ‘Capital’ and present- 
day capitalism. The prospects of a new economic social formation. Marx’s 
views of communist political economy. 


FOREWORD TO THE GERMAN EDITION 


“August 16, 1867. 2 o’clock at night 
Dear Fred, 


Ilave just finished correcting the last sheet (49th) of the book .. . So this 
volume is finished. It was thanks to you alone that this became possible. 
Without your self-sacrifice for me | could never possibly have done the 
enormous work for the three volumes."* 

This letter from Marx to Engels marked the completion of the great work 
on “Capital”. That is to say, 1967 marks the full century since this first 
volume of “Capital” was completed and published. It is consequently very 
satisfying that it is precisely in this year that German readers have the 
chance to read the important and interesting work on Marx by the Soviet 
economist V. S$. Vygodski. 

After the publication of “Capital”. Frederick Engels wrote that no book 
of such importance for the working class had been published prior to this. 
Its significance for the struggle of the working class, liberation from capitalist 
exploitation and the building of socialist society is fully in accord with the 
energy which Marx spent on this book. He devoted 40 years of his life to it 
and, in the literal sense of the word. worked on it up to the last day of his 
life. As we know, he was only able to see the first volume through to the 
publication stage and the other volumes appeared only after his death, The 
publication of these volumes of “Capital” was primarily the great merit of 
Engels. Without exaggeration. “Capital” may be termed as the major work 
of Marxism. 

A great deal has already been written about the history of this work. 
However. this hook by V. S. Vygodski obviously has some important features. 
It provides a comprehensive idea of the conditions. publications, stages of 
development and confrontations which ultimately led to the formulation of the 
most important theoretical findings of the political economy of capitalism. 
Since Marx spent most of his time throughout his life working on “Capital” 
and himself regarded it as his life’s work. the history of the elaboration of 
this work reflects in many aspects biographical features of the man who 
created it. 

In addition to a popular presentation of the most important elements of 
Marx’s economic theory. this book provides an excellent account of Marx’s 
methods of work and research which even today is of great topical significance 
for the Marxist-Leninist social sciences, 

Many facts help to show how Marx and Engels always combined their 
research work with practical revolutionary activities. With a large number 


4 Marx to Engels. letter of 16 August 1867. in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, Foreign 
Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1953, p. 231. 


\ 


of articles, lectures, contributions to discussions and notes, they took part in 
the class-struggle, exerted a decisive influence on it, checked the effective- 
ness of their theses in practice and constantly drew new conclusions for 
generalization. It is precisely the story of how * Capital” was written which 
illustrates the relationship of the classic authors of Marxism with crealive 
theoretical work. Frederick Engels subsequently formulated this in the follow- 
ing words: * Our theory is not a dogma but the exposition of a process 
of evolution, and that process mvolves successive phases.’ — - 

V. S. Vygodski shows in very lucid manner how Marx, before he drew 
new theoretical conclusions, carried out an analysis of the bourgeois htera- 
ture available. It was for this reason, of course, that he gave “ Capital” the 
sub-title of “A Critique of Political Economy”. But it is not only the fact of 
confrontation as a constant element of research work which is important here. 
The manner of this confrontation is of great significance, too. Marx was al- 
ways opposed to just arguing about dogmas since in general this was of no 
great significance for the class-struggle : “It is only by substituting for con- 
flicting dogmas the conflicting facts and real antagonisms which form their 
hidden background that political economy can he transformed into a positive 
science, ’”* 

In the present book. many examples are used to show how Marx utilized 
abstraction as a method of research. He exposed the character of economic 
relations — the laws of economics — by eliminating all the phenomena which 
were of subordinate and secondary importance. But for Marx this was never 
a case of abstraction pure and simple. The division into essential relations 
and relationships and subordinate phenomena was never somcthing which 
was absolute for him and he always proceeded from the specific circum- 
stances and conditions in question. With changed circumstances and con- 
ditions, what was of subordinate importance now became an essential fact. 
Only through this was it possible for Marx in his theoretical work to exert a 
great influence on the course of the class-struggle at the same time. 

Without doubt, this book by Vygodski will be a great help to all students 
of Marxism-Leninism in understanding Marx’s work and methods of research. 
An understanding of Marx’s work and methods of research is of great practical 
importance for us since even today it is not possible to come to new theo- 
retical findings in the social sciences without utilizing these methods. 

As noted already, a hundred years have passed since the first volume of 
“Capital” was published. It is scarcely possible to count those bourgeois 
and petty-bourgcois ideologists who in this time have ascertained or predicted 
the death of the theories developed in it. V. S. Vygodski quite rightly refers 
to those ‘great’ economists of the ‘Establishment’ who attempted to deal a 
death-blow to the theories of Marx while he was still alive, such as Roscher 
and others, and who are now totally forgotten. But now, a century later, 


Lo 


Engels, Jetter to Kelley-Wischnewetzky of 28 December 1886, in: Marx/Engels, Selected 
Correspondence, 1. c., p. 474. 


3K. Marx, letter to Engels of 10 October 1868, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 
l.c., p. 256. 


10 


there is hardly any other theoretical work which has been translated into 
so many languages, distributed in so many countries of the world and has 
been printed in such big editions. With its vitality and social topicality, 
“ Capital” is continuing to make an impact on people all over the world. 

The genius of Marx is that he was able to recognize the essential nature of 
capitalism and to formulate the laws governing it at a time when it was be- 
ginning to cimerge on an international scale. ‘This is why, in the course of 
history the significance and influence of this great theoretical achievement 
has not faded but constantly increased. 

V.S. Vygodski examines how “Capital” was written. Of no less interest 
would be a record of events since it was published for this confirms that 
Marx’s theories have not only stimulated science but have increasingly be- 
come a guide for the practical shaping of the present. 

The greatest confirmation of the correctness of Marx’s theories—in associa- 
tion with Lenin’s theory of imperialism and the socialist revolution—came 
almost exactly 50 years after the appearance of the first volume of “ Capital” 
with the Great Socialist Revolution. On 7th November 1917, the working- 
class of Russia. in alliance with the impoverished peasantry and under the 
leadership of the party of the Bolsheviki overthrew capitalism in their 
country, set up the first state controlled by the workers and peasants and 
initiated the transition of mankind from capitalism to socialism. 


OTTO REINHOLD 


11 


INSTEAD OF AN INTRODUCTION 


How “ Capital” was created 


Is it necessary to know the background to “Capital” ? The 
main stages. Why is the period from 1850 to 1863 so interest- 
ing ? Marz’s creative laboratory. 


Like people, books also have their destiny and their biography and we 
decided to follow the history of “Capital” in its culminating period from 
1850 to 1863. Although none of the volumes of “ Capital” had yet appeared, 
it was nevertheless in this period that Marx had evolved all the major parts 
of his theory of economics. The history of “‘ Capital” is essentially the history 
of the background of this theory and how it was evolved. 

The history of the economic doctrine of Marx is so dramatic and so full 
of facts that it makes very interesting reading and is not at all just for those 
specializing in the history of Marxism. 

But why should one know the history of Marx’s economic theory any- 
way ? Isn’t it enough to study this theory of economics itself, as set out in the 
four volumes of “Capital”? This history must be known since the economic 
doctrine of Marx can only be correctly understood in its development, in its 
evolution, Otherwise, it will certainly be understood only in a dogmatic sense, 
i. e. in a way which is distorted, false and superficial. 

Studying the history of “Capital” provides an opportunity of fixing the 
periods of time in which Marx wrote the individual volumes of it. It will be 
found that the manuscript of the fourth volume was completed at the be- 
ginning of the 1860's and that of the third volume halfway through the same 
decade. The first volume was published in 1867 and the second was prepared 
for printing by Engels mainly on the basis of manuscripts compiled by Marx 
in the 1870’s. So Marx wrote “ Capital” from back to front, so to speak, from 
the fourth volume to the first (although the second volume docs not fit in 
with this scheme of things). It will subsequently be seen that this really was 
the case and we will try to show the reasons for this. For the start, it may be 
noted that the knowledge and understanding of this fact which is so impor- 
tant for the history of “ Capital” is also of significance for the thorough study 
of this work. Marx’s economic theory was developed in a rather tumultuous 
fashion. Its level of development, its degree of maturity, changed very greatly 
not only in the 1840’s, 1850’s and 1860’s but also within the period of each 
decade. This is also reflected in the terminology used by Marx. 


13 


By studying the history of “ Capital” we can follow how Marx elaborated 
his economic doctrine, how he discovered the laws of the capitalist mode of 
production, how he overcame the shortcomings of bourgeois political econo- 
my and how he revolutionized the science of economics from the standpoint 
of the working class. Studying the history of Marx’s theory of economics 
reveals his creative method and takes us into his ‘ creative laboratory’. Mas- 
tery of Marx’s methodology of scientific research is the key problem if one 
Wishes to acquire Marxist-Leninist theory in a creative way and to apply it 
correctly in explaining the phenomena of life in the human society of our age. 

In the Soviet Union, V. V. Adoratski. V. IX. Brushlinski, I. A. Leontyev, 
A.L. Reul, D. I. Rosenberg and other scholars have devoted and are devot- 
ing great attention to the history of evolution of Marx’s theory of economics 
and have thrown a great deal of light on the subject. In recent years, scholars 
in the German Democratic Republic have also concerned themselves with the 
history of ‘ Capital’’. 

The history of the evolution of Marx's economic doctrine is somewhat 
complicated. This has led to a lot of arguments among investigators since 
what has to be done here is to classify this history into scientific periods, to 
break it down into a number of stages in agreement with the level which Marx 
had reached in each of these stages when elaborating his theory. To illustrate 
this, the various schemes may be quoted which historians of Marxism from 
the German Democratic Republic have put forward as a )asis for assigning 
dates to the various periods.* 

Professor Alfred Lemmnitz divides the development of Marx’s theory of 
economics into four stages : 1843 to 1848/49, 1850 to 1860, 486 to 1867 and 
1868 to 1883. 

A. Benary and H. Graul divide it into three stages : 1843 to 1846, 1847 
to 1860 and 1861 to 1883. 

Finally, Wolfgang Jahn suggests the following periods : 1842 to 1846. 
1847 to 1862. 1863 to 1867 and 1868 to 1895. 

Tt will be noted that there is a considerable variation in the dates sug- 
gested and we would like to add that none of the schemes proposed seems to 
us to be completely acceptable. 

In our view, the real criterion which would have to be taken as a basis 
for dating the various periods in the history of the economic doctrine of Marx 
is the level which Marx had attained at any given period in the elaboration 
of his theory, especially the theory of value and the surplus-value theory. 

Ilow is it that the historians have come to such divergent conclusions ? 
A special characteristic of Marx’s creative method was that in the field of 
political economy his work always progressed in two parallel directions : the 
critique of capitalism, especially the critique of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 


1 A list of the publications by historians of the GDR on this question is given by W. Tuch- 
scheerer: Zur Marx-Engels-Forschung in der DDR auf dem Gebiet der politischen Ukonomie, 
Beitrige zur Geschichte der deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, Sonderheft “© Beitrage zur Marx- 
Engels-Forschung in der DDR”’, 1962. 


14 


theorics, and the elaboration of his own theory of economics. In Marx’s 
economic research, the solving of these two tasks was really a single process. 
This characteristic of Marx’s method of research is also reflected in the 
dual title which he gave to his work on economics : “Capital. Critique of 
Political Economy”. Marx originally intended to call his work “Critique of 
Political Economy ” or “ On the Critique of Political Economy”. In the letter 
of 22nd February 1858 to Lassalle, he characterizes his work in these words : 
“The first work in question is critique of the economic categories, or, if you 
like, the system of bourgeois economy critically presented”.’ It is both a 
description of the system and, through the description, a criticism of the 
system. 

In this connection, the argument of A. Benary and H. Graul does not 
hold water at all since they assert that between 1847 and 1860 Marx exploded 
the bourgeois theories of political economy and from 1864 to 1883 worked 
out the Marxist scheme of political economy. Attempts to split up the homo- 
geneous process in which Marx claborated his theory of economics lead to 
a distortion of the actual development of Marxism. 

If we take the period from 1850 to 1863, we assume that it was precisely 
in this period that Marx evolved his theories of value, surplus value, average 
profit and price of production, which supplemented his surplus-value theory. 
Evervthing which Marx did before this period, i.e. between 1843 and 1849, 
in the field of political economy, may be designated as the pre-history of his 
theory of economics. 

First of all. a few words about this pre-history. In the development of the 
Marxist theory of economies, the 1840's are an important period, During this 
time, Marx and Engels worked out their dialectical and materialist view of 
history in such works as the “ Philosophic-Economic Manuscripts”, “The 
Holy Family”, “The Position of the Working Class in England”, “The 
German Ideology”, “The Poverty of Philosophy”, ‘“ Wage-Labour and 
Capital”. “Speech on the Question of Free Trade”, “ Manifesto of the Com- 
munist Party” and others. They extended dialectical materialism to the 
understanding of human society. From the totality of social relations, they 
emphasized the matcrial economic relations, the relations of production, 
which are formed independently of the will and consciousness of people, as 
the original and determining factors—in contrast to the ideological relations 
which pass through the human consciousness before they emerge. The rela- 
tions of production as such are determined by the level of development of the 
productive forces. 

By emphasizing the relations of production and isolating them from all 
other social relations. Marx and Engels were enabled to discover the common 
features in the social development of different countries and to gencralize the 
economic relations which prevailed in these countries in the concept of the 
economic formation of society. The objective character of the relations of 
production which are dependent on the level of development of the pro- 


2 K. Marx, letter to F. Lassalle of 22 February 1858. in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence. 
Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow 1953. p. 124. 


15 


LS Sarr 
a 


ductive forces enabled the development of the economic formation of society 
to be considered as an historical process, i.e. strictly in accordance with the 
natural laws of development. As a consequence of this, the science of society 
was given a scientific foundation for the very first time. 

This was—by and large—the clement of genius in the “Idea of Mate- 
rialism in Sociology” with which Marx and Engels achieved prominence in 
the first half of the 1840's. 

At this point, mention must be made of the predecessors of Marx and 
Engels : of Hegel, who attempted to describe the internal development of 
the history of human society, of the French historians Thierry, Guizot and 
Mignet. who discussed the English Revolution of the 17th century and the 
French Revolution of the 18th from the standpoint of the class struggle. and 
of the English economists Petty, Smith and Ricardo who investigated the 
economic anatomy of the classes of bourgeois society. All this justified Lenin 
in characterizing Marxism as the highest level of development of all the really 
great achievements of the historical, economic and philosophical sciences 
of Europe. 

The materialist conception of society advanced by Marx and Engels was 
at first only a scientific hypothesis which still had to be proved. “ Naturally, 
for the time being,” wrote Lenin, “it was only a hypothesis, but one which 
first created the possibility of a strictly scientific approach to historical and 
social problems.’* 

Without having been fully demonstrated at the time, this hypothesis 
enabled Marx and Engels as carly as the 1840's to develop a consistent 
criticism of bourgeois society from the proletarian standpoint, which was 
totally different from a petty-bourgeois one. Already in the works referred to 
above, which were produced during the 1840's, Marx and Engels set out the 
arguments for their doctrine of class-struggle. They revealed the nature of 
class antagonisms in capitalist society and demonstrated that socialism is the 
unavoidable result of the economic laws operative in capitalist society. They 
showed that capitalism, in the shape of the working class, is its own grave- 
digger. They also proved that the periodic crises of over-production are the 
expression of the irreconcilable contradictions of capitalism and are inevitable. 

From the materialist conception of history, there also followed the ex- 
ceptionally important position of economic theory in the system of Marxism 
as a whole. When the relations of production are the original and determining 
relations, it is only the investigation of these economic relations and the 
analysis of the laws of the functioning and development of the economic 
formation of society which enable the real driving forces of social develop- 
ment to be identified and the tendencies of this development to be indicated. 

This is why Marx, once he had formulated the basic theses of the dialectic 
and materialist concept of history. devoted the whole of his attention to the 
investigation of the relations of production of the capitalist formation of 
society. 


3 Lenin, What the ‘Friends of the People’ Are and Ilow They Fight the Social Democrats, 
Collected Works, Vol. I, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow 1961, p. 139. 


16 


Lenin made the following remarks about this : ‘‘ Now, however, Marx, 
who had expressed this hypothesis in the forties, set out to study the fac- 
tual... material. He took one of the social-economic formations—the system 
of commodity production—and on the basis of a vast mass of data (which 
he studied for not less than twenty-five years) gave a most detailed analysis 
of the laws governing the functioning of this formation and its development.’ 

In the explanation of the capitalist formation of society, Marx concen- 
trates on the relations of production but also follows the superstructure 
phenomena corresponding to these. ‘ Now—since the appearance of Capi- 
tal—the materialist conception of history is no longer a hypothesis but a 
scientifically proven proposition .. .”* 

Marx’s intensive work in the field of political economy began in July 
1850. The study of the “factual material’, as Lenin put it, lasted until the 
autumn of 1857. Marx studied bourgeois political economy and the history 
of economic relations and investigated capitalist reality in its actual and 
specific form. The numerous ‘ Notebooks’ give an idea of Marx's activities 
during this period. 

In the period from October 1857 to May 1858, Marx wrote a manuscript 
of about 50 printed sheets, the result of seven years of research and the first 
draft of what was to be “Capital”. In this manuscript. Marx elaborated the 
most important aspect of his theory of economics for the first time : the theory 
of value and the theory of surplus value. 

Engels said that Marx had made two great discoveries : the first was the 
matcrialist conception of history, the second the theory of surplus value. It 
was precisely while working on the manuscript of 1857.58 that Mara made 
his second great discovery. 

In 1859. Marx published the first results of this research work, This was 
Part I of his book “A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy” 
which at first only contained a description of his theory of value. 

In 1861. Marx began the preparation of the second volume of “ A Contri- 
bution to the Critique of Political Economy” but soon interrupted this work 
and started on a great new programme of research work, a critical review of 
the entire field of bourgeois political economy. The result of this work was the 
mighty manuscript of 200 printed sheets of 1861/63 which contains the first 
systematically formulated version of all four volumes of “ Capital”. While 
working on this manuscript. Marx developed his theory of average profit and 
of the production process, thus putting the finishing touches to his theory of 
surplus value. 

From 41864 to 1865, Marx compiled new versions of the first three 
volumes of “Capital” and then began to prepare the first volume for 
printing. 

While working on his theory of economics, Marx also worked out the 
structure of the future “Capital”, The elaboration of the structure of “Capi- 


4 Ibid., p. 141. 
5 Ibid., p. 142. 


2 Discovery 47 


tal”, as regards both the complicated nature of the task and its significance, 
can certainly be ranked with Marx’s great discoveries in the field of economic 
theory. Marx intended “theoretically to give the bourgeoisie a blow from 
which it will never recover.”® This blow had to be delivered with a perfect 
weapon, perfect not only in content but also in form. This weapon was 
“Capital”. 

When studying the history of “ Capital’, we should always bear in mind 
the apt character-sketch which Frederick Engels gave of his great friend when 


' he said that Marx was not at all a bookworm but first and foremost a revolu- 


tionary. This remark will help us to avoid too narrow an approach when 
following the evolution of Marx’s economic doctrine. His theoretical work 
was always subordinated to the interests of the working class, to the interests 
of the proletarian revolution. The thorough economic studies of 1850 to 1857 
were just as much directly associated with the defeat of the Revolution of 
1848/49 as the preparation of the manuscripts of 1857/58 and the elaboration 
of the surplus-value theory with the expectation of a new revolutionary crisis. 
But there was no revolution and Marx. who had been working feverishly to 
finish the basic theses of his theory of economics before ‘the flood”, before 
the outbreak of the revolution, once again turned to the detailed investigation 
of economic problems, regardless of Engels’ persistent requests to publish the 
theoretical results already obtained. despite the turn of events. It was not 
until 1867, in the first volume of “ Capital”, that Marx published his theory 
of surplus-value. i.e. a good ten vears after its elaboration! This was an 
instance of Marx's conscientiousness in theoretical matters. 

The period from 1850 to 1863. which we have taken as the subject of our 
observations. supplies us with all that we need to learn about Marx's method 
of work and his ‘creative laboratory’. This includes his ‘Notebooks’ and his 
draft manuscripts. his published works and his extensive correspondence. All 
these works and documents enable us to follow the development of Marx’s 
economic ideas in detail and to reproduce his train of thought in full, 


6 K. Marx. Ictter to C. Klings of 4 October 1864, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 31. Dietz 
Verlag, Berlin 1965, p. 418. 


18 


CHAPTER 1 


Standpoint 
for observing bourgeois society 


The theoretical luggage with which Mara arrived in London 
in August 1849. “ The Poverty of Philosophy” and “ Wage- 
Labour and Capital” —the nucleus of his economic theory 
and the point of departure for further research. The theory 
of value and surplus-value of the classical bourgeois econo- 
mists and their fundamental shortcomings. Marx’s applica- 
tion of the materialist conception of history to political 
economy. Why the study of the subject-matter had to begin 
again “right from the start”. 


Expelled from Paris, Marx arrived in London at the end of August 1849 and 
lived there for the rest of his life. In the middle of September he was joined 
by his wife and children from Paris and Frederick Engels also came during 
the first half of November. This was the start of a new period in Marx’s 
theoretical activities, the period of the 1850's. 

This new period can only be understood and comprehended when it is 
considered together with the preceding period of the 1840’s with which it is 
inseparably associated. 

As regards the science of economics, the greatest achievements of the 
1840’s were Marx’s ‘The Poverty of Philosophy’, published in 1847 in 
Paris and Brussels, and his lectures on * Wage-Labour and Capital”, held in 
December 1847 at the German Workingmen’s Club of Brussels and printed 
as a series of leading articles in the “ Neue Rheinische Zeitung” in April 1849. 

In these works and on the basis of his materialist concept of history, Marx 
began to work out his theory of economics in detail. At the same time, he 
included in this his critique of the bourgeois economists. 

In “The Poverty of Philosophy”, Marx exposed the fundamental 
methodological faults of the entire system of bourgeois political econo- 
my —its ahistorical character, its endeavours to represent the economic laws 
of capitalism as eternal laws of Nature. “ Economists express the relations of 
bourgeois production... as fixed, immutable, eternal categories... Econo- 
mists explain how production takes place in the above-mentioned relations, 


= 19 


but what they do not explain is how these relations themselves are produced, 
that is, the historical movement which gave them birth.”* 

As a result of his historical approach to social relations, Marx formulated 
in “The Poverty of Philosophy’ 
economic doctrine : The relations of production are not, as is the opinion of 


> one of the most important theses of his 


hourgeois economists, relations between things but relations between people 
with reference to things. This view of the relations of production enabled 
Marx to overcome the ahistorical character and empiricism of bourgeois 
economists. 

In “The Poverty of Philosophy”. Marx clarified the real position of 
Smith and Ricardo in the history of the science of economics and showed 
that Proudhon’s theory of economics, which was claimed to be the last word 
in political economy, was a step back in comparison with Smith and Ricardo, 
“Ricardo’s theory of value is the scientific interpretation of actual economic 
life ; M. Proudhon’s theory of value is the utopian interpretation of Ricardo’s 
theory.’”? 

An idea of the qualitative advance achieved by Marx in his appreciation 
of the nature of the capitalist mode of production is conveyed by his critical 
commentaries on Ricardo’s “On the Principles of Political Economy” in 
1844. In these commentaries. Mars still rejected Ricardo’s theory of labour- 
value from an incorrect standpoint. In his “Outlines of a Critique of Po- 
litical Economy ”, Engels likewise attacked the labour-value theory. He wrote 
that “The difference between real value and exchange value is based on the 
fact—namely. that the value of a thing differs from the so-called equivalent 
given for it in trade: i.e.. that this equivalent is not an equivalent.” Mars 
later made the following comment at this point : “ Engels is trying to explain 
the difference between exchange-value and price by (postulating) that trade 
is impossible when goods are exchanged on the basis of their value.”> Marx 
had dealt with this error in all its aspects in 1847. In “The Poverty of Phi- 
losophy*. he outlined. as it were, the point of departure for the next in- 
vestigations in political ceonomy. Above all, a eritical analysis had to be 
made of the theories of Smith and Ricardo and the investigation of English 
economic conditions in general had to he begun since the English bourgeoisie 
“is itself the type of the modern bourgeoisie ”.® This important thesis resulted 
from the concept of the economic social formation. it signified a practical 
aspect of this concept. and in the letter to Engels of 2nd April 1854 Marx 


1 K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, Foreign Languages Publishing House. Moscow 1956, 
p. 116/147. 


Ibid., p. 54. 


3 Cf. K. Marx/F. Engels. Wistorisch-kritische Gesamtausgabe (MEGA), Erste Abteilung. Bd. 3, 
Marx-Engels-Verlag, Berlin 1932, p. 502, 494. 


4 F. Engels, Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy, in: K. Marx, Economic and Philosophie 
Manuscripts of 1844, Appendix, Moscow 1959, p-. 187. 


Manuscript of 1861/63 Heft I. p. 42. 
6 WK. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, 1. c., p. 48. 


Ww 


a 


20 


quite specifically refers to the English economists A. Smith and D. Ricardo 
as marking the pinnacle of bourgeois economics.” 

In “The Poverty of Philosophy” Marx had already shown that the pro- 
duction relations of mankind are part of political economies and that the 
economic categories express these production relations.® 

OF fundamental significance in this connection was the statement of the 
primacy of social production, of production relations forming a single entity 
with the productive forces as compared with the other social relations : ‘The 
mode of exchange of products depends upon the mode of exchange of the 
productive forces... Thus in the history of society we see that the mode of 
exchanging products is regulated by the mode of producing them.’”® 

The question which must now be raised is to What extent did Marx work 
out his own theories of value and surplus-value in “The Poverty of Phi- 
losophy” and “ Wage-Labour and Capital”. But before this is attempted, 
it is still necessary to examine the value and surplus-value theories of the 
classical bourgeois economists. ‘his will enable us to draw a clear comparison 
between the content of the two works by Marx and the conclusions which had 
already been arrived at by Smith and Ricardo. 

A detailed review of bourgeois political ceonomy is given in the four 
volumes of ‘‘ Capital” and in “A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy”. Only the conclusions to which Marx came in his analysis of 
bourgeois political economy are set out here. 

The greatest merit of the standard authors of bourgeois political economy 
was their effort “to grasp the inner connection”, to comprehend “ the inner 
connection in contrast to the multiplicity of outward forms’*®. This is evident 
above all in the fact that they postulated the theory of labour-value. 

Even the bare statement that human labour is the souree of value was an 
epoch-making event in the history of political economy. From the example 
of the English economist W. Petty. Marx showed, however, “ that recognition 
of labour as the source of material wealth by no means precludes misappre- 
hension of the specific social form in which Jabour constitutes the source of 
exchange value”.** This misapprehension, though. is characteristic to a 
greater or lesser extent of all bourgeois economists. It follows from the 
apologetic concept of bourgeois political economy which regards the capitalist 
mode of production as an eternal natural form of production. 

The most important condition for comprehending the specific historical 
character of value-creating labour is in distinguishing both in labour itself 
and also in its product between the matcrial content (useful activity, labour 
in a specific, tangible form and use-value as the product of his labour) and 


7 Cf. K. Marx. letter to Engels of 2 April 1851, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 27, Dietz 
Verlag, Berlin 1963, p. 228. 


8 Cf. K. Marx. The Poverty of Philosophy, Ll. c., p. 90, 413/114. 

9 Ibid., p. 86. 

40 Cf. K. Marx, Theories of Surplus Value, Part III, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1971, p. 500. 

41 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Progress Publishers, Moscow 
1970, p. 54. 


24 


the social form (expenditure of human labour in general, no matter in what 
specific form, and value as the product of this labour). 

But classic bourgeois political economy was only beginning to unterstand 
the dual character of labour and the product of labour in capitalist society. 
“The decisive outcome of the research carried on for over a century and a 
half bv classical political economy... is an analysis of the aspects of the 
commodity into two forms of labour...”** The bourgeois economists, however, 
were not able to make a consistent distinction between use-value and value, 
between concrete and abstract labour, and even when this distinction emerged 
in their considerations they were usually unaware of it and it remained an 
isolated phenomenon. 

The identification of use-value and value by bourgeois political economy 
expresses its own peculiar fetishism. This fetishism, in turn, is a consequence 
of the objective fact that the relations of production in the capitalist mode 
of production necessarily assume the form of a relation between things. For 
the bourgeois economists, wrote Marx, “‘ the material element of capital is... 
integrated with the social form as capital’’.* 

In this analysis of bourgeois political economy, Marx carefully investi- 
gated all the elements of a scientific understanding of the dual character of 
labour and its product in capitalist society which were to be found in the 
standard authors (in Ricardo especially) and through which the labour-value 
theory of the classical economists could at all become the source for Marx’s 
theory of value. Marx remarked on the twentieth chapter of Ricardo’s “ On 
the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation” that it is “‘ nothing but an 
investigation of the difference between use-value and exchange-value”.™* In 
another place, he writes that “ Like all economists worth naming, (including) 
Adam Smith..., Ricardo emphasises that labour as human activity, even 
more as socially determined human activity, is the sole source of value.”*® 
Marx notes here the factual distinction of the dual character of labour in 
Ricardo. 

These comments by Marx should not be unterstood as if the discovery of 
the twofold character of labour was not his merit but was due to Ricardo, 
for instance. or other bourgeois economists. To use his own words, Marx 
distinguished that which Ricardo himself had not distinguished. (This applies 
not only to the theory of value but also to the theory of surplus-value of the 
standard authors of bourgeois political economy.) But apart from this Ricardo 
in his investigation of the ‘separation’ of value from use-value did not 
appreciate either the qualitative contradiction between them and thus be- 
tween concrete and abstract labour. 

By and large. Ricardo restricted himself to determining the magnitude 
of labour by labour-time and Marx, from the ‘father’ of French classical 
political economy, Boisguillebert, showed “... that it is possible to regard 


412 Ibid., p. 52. 

43 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, 1. c., p. 332. 

44 K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1962, p. 158. 
45 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, 1. c., p. 181. 


labour-time as the measure of the value of commodities, while confusing the 
labour which is materialized in the exchange-value of commodities and 
measured in time-units with the direct physical activity of individuals. ..”*° 
Ricardo did not understand the most important aspect of the theory of 
labour-value—the special character of labour which creates value. 

The special qualitative nature of labour which produces value is that in 
capitalist society all labour which is social labour is a link in the system of 
social production, in the system of the social division of labour, but is not a 
direct link. On the contrary, under the conditions of private ownership of the 
means of production, it is directly private labour. Private labour can only 
express its social nature by abstraction from the concrete form of labour which 
produces a certain use-value, only by representation as abstract labour, as 
part of the totality of social labour. Concrete private labour is thus reduced 
to abstract social labour since the product of concrete labour is realized, 
i.c., is turned into money. Use-value therefore appears as the product of 
abstract labour, as value. 

Ricardo did not perceive this specific character of social labour in capi- 
talism since he considered the capitalist mode of production as the natural 
form of all production. This is why he also missed the special characteristic 
possessed bv labour precisely in a capitalist society. 

“Ricardo does not sufficiently differentiate between labour insofar as it 
is represented in use-value or in exchange-value.”*? The inability of Ricardo 
to provide a correct explanation of the nature of money also follows from 
this. The fact that Ricardo in his theory confuses abstract and concrete labour 
allowed vulgar economists to regard use-value and value as completely iden- 
tical. “Thus, with the identification of use-value and exchange-value ends 
this vulgarisation of Ricardo . . .”"8 wrote Marx. 

Consequently, the theorv of the twofold character of labour could not be 
substantiated from the position of bourgeois political economy because this 
necessitated overcoming the bourgeois viewpoint and comprehending the 
specific historical nature of the capitalist mode of production. 

In the theory of labour-value, this is manifested by the imability of bour- 
geois economists to draw an exact distinction between labour which produces 
use-value and labour which produces value. ‘It is true that the latter species 
of labour is only the former species expressed in an abstract form.’ This 
abstraction remained incomplete in the classical economists and there also 
followed from this their inability to find a complete division between labour 
and its product, to separate the commodity form of the product as the result 
of abstract labour from the use-value of the product as the result of concrete 
labour. 

The standard authors of bourgeois political economy attempted to explain 
the exploitation of labour by capital on the basis of the theory of labour-value. 


16 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 1. c., p. 55. 
47 KK. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part HI, 1. c., p. 138. 

18 Tbid.. p. 185. 

49 Ibid., p. 138. 


23 


Their principal contribution to the elaboration of the theory of surplus-value 
was that they attributed surplus value to surplus labour. “ Important as it 
was”’, wrote Marx, “to reduce value to labour, it was equally important to 
(present) surplus value, which manifests itself in surplus product, as surplus 
labour. This was in fact already stated by Adam Smith and constitutes one 
of the main elements in Ricardo’s argumentation. But nowhere did he clearly 
express it and record it in an absolute form.” 

Understanding surplus value as surplus labour meant explaining its origin 
from the exploitation of the working class and, in particular, from appropri- 
ation by the capitalists of the unpaid labour of the proletarians. In this 
connection. Rieardo wrote that “... if the reward of the Jabourer were alwavs 
in proportion to what he produced. the quantity of Jabour bestowed on a 

.commodity, and the quantity of labour which that commodity would 
purchase, would be equal... but they are not equal. . .”?1 Here (in the 
language of bourgeois political economy) it is found that the total newly- 
created value of the labour-product is greater than the part of the value which 
the worker receives. Thus it is stated in fact that the unpaid labour of the 
worker is the source of surplus value. 

But Ricardo stops at this point. Taking the theory of labour-value to its 
logical conclusion means expanding it to surplus value as well, deriving 
surplus-value from value and explaining capitalist exploitation and the 
appropriation of unpaid labour on the basis of the law of value, Bourgeois 
political economy was not able to solve this problem. 

The bourgeois economists formulated the problem of explaining surplus- 
value on the basis of the law of value as the problem of the exchange of labour 
for capital or the exchange of a larger amount of living labour for a smaller 
amount of materialized labour. 

There are weighty reasons for this formulation. In capitalism. the ex- 
change between labour and capital (between living and materialized labour) 
is the basic relation of production, the main form of the ‘exchange of ac- 
tivities’. “ Materialized labour and living labour are the two factors on the 
contraposition of which capitalist production is based.””? Under the conditions 
of the simple exchange of commodities where the actual producer appears 
as the owner of product of his labour, the quantum of living labour involved 
in the exchange is equal to the quantum of materialized labour. One could 
also speak here of the selling of labour which would mean the selling of the 
labour-product. In capitalism, the worker is separated from the conditions 
of labour and thus neither labour (on the contrary, in the production process 
the conditions of labour ‘use’ the worker) nor the labour-product are his 
property. 

On the commodity market, the capitalist is confronted not by labour but 
by the worker who sells the only thing he has to sell, namely his labour- 


20 Ibid., p. 238/239, 

24. D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, in: The Works and 
Correspondence of David Ricardo, Vol. 1, Cambridge, At the University Press 1953, p. 44. 

22 K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, II. Teil, 1. c., p. 142. 


24 


power, his capacity for work. The exchange between labour and capital is 
thus arranged by the selling of labour-power. “It is likewise impossible to 
pass directly from labour to capital, that is, from the different races of man 
directly to the banker or from Nature to the steam engine.”* 

This necessary intermediate member in the exchange between labour and 
capital was not identified by bourgeois political economy. It was not in a 
position to do this hecause the fact of the selling of labour-power results from 
the specific features of capitalist production-relations since the capitalist, as 
the owner of the labour conditions, is faced on the commodity market by the 
doubly ‘ free’ worker who ‘freely’ disposes of his labour-power and is ‘ free’ 
from means of production. The transition to the capitalist mode of production 
is characterized by the fact that labour-power is changed into a commodity. 

As a consequence of their bourgeois limitations, neither Ricardo nor the 
other bourgeois economists perceived this special aspect of the capitalist mode 
of production. They did not perceive it because they regarded capitalism as 
the natural form of all production. Smith was more keenly aware of the 
specific historical nature of bourgeois society and realized that capitalism, in 
contrast to a simple commodity economy in which equivalents were ex- 
changed. is based on unequal exchange. This also misled Smith into denying 
the effectiveness of the law of value in capitalism. 

The inability to proceed from labour to labour-power as the commodity 
sold also followed from the rough-and-ready empiricism which is particularly 
characteristic of bourgeois political economy. Indeed, on the surface of capi- 
talist society it is not labour-power but labour which appears as a commodity 
and the wages of labour are represented as the price of labour.™ This empir- 
icism of bourgeois political economy is also reflected in the fact that it con- 
fused surplus-value.and profit. that it ecrtainly understood surplus-value as a 
general category of the capitalist mode of production (this circumstance was 
covered by the classical authors when thev attributed surplus-value—even if 
this was in the form of profit—to the unpaid surplus labour of the worker) 
but did not investigate it as a special category in addition to the categories of 
profit, rent and interest. This alone made it impossible for the bourgeois 
economists to explain the origin of surplus-valuc. 

Indeed, the equating of surplus-value with profit (average profit) misled 
the bourgeois economists into identifving the law of surplus-value with the 
law which states that profit is proportional to the magnitude of the capital 
advanced—in other words. misled them into regarding value and price of 
production as the same. In this identity. the surplus-value appears to be 
derived from the whole of the capital advanced. as an addition to the price of 
production but not as a result of the unpaid labour of the worker. This reflects 
the “lack of theoretical understanding for the comprehension of the dif- 
ferences in form of the economic relations .. .” which without exception is 


23° K. Marx. Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okonomie. Dietz Verlag. Berlin 1953, p. 170. 


24 In Chapter 18 of the first volume of Capital, Marx investigates the circumstances which 
produce such irrational forms of bourgeois society as ‘labour as a commodity”’, ‘ value of 
Jabour’’, etc. 


25 


characteristic of all bourgeois economists and their clumsy “seizure of and 
interest in material which is empirically available”’.”° 

Furthermore, the analysis of labour-power as a commodity assumes that 
the two factors of the commodity as such—use-value and value—and the dual 
character of commodity-producing labour have been correctly understood. 

The category ‘labour-power as a commodity’ presupposes that an exact 
distinction is drawn between its value and its use-value, that it is understood 
that the capitalist, as with every purchase, buys the use-value of this com- 
modity and pays for its value; that it is clear that the use-value of this specific 
commodity ™ has nothing to do with its exchange-value but is itself the energy 
which creates the exchange-value”’.”® And this newly-created value is greater 
than the value of the actual labour-power as a commodity. The dillerence 
between the value which has been created by the use of labour-power as a 
commodity and the value of the labour-power itself represents the surplus- 
value. Thus Marx, by distinguishing between the use-value and the value of 
the labour-power as a commodity, was able to explain the surplus-value in 
accordance with the law of value. 

The realization of the dual character of the labour which produces com- 
modities also enabled Marx to explain the capitalist production process which 
forms the unity of the labour-process (concrete labour) and the process of 
creating surplus-value (as the result of the expenditure of abstract labour 
under capitalist conditions). This also permitted an explanation of the circum- 
stance so disastrous for bourgeois political economy that the value of the 
total social product includes not only the living Jabour expended (v + s) but 
also expenditure of past materialized labour (c). Marx showed that “ this two- 
fold nature of the result can be explained only by the two-fold nature of his 
(tthe worker's) labour”.”’ In its quality of conerete labour, the same labour 
transfers the value of the means of production consumed to the product 
whilst as abstract labour it produces new value. 

By reason of this distinction between abstract and concrete labour, it was 
also possible to reveal the fundamentally different functions of the constant 
and variable components of capital in the production of surplus value. Marx 
wrote “ Therefore in order that our investigation may lead to accurate results, 
we must make abstraction from that portion of the value of the product, in 
which constant capital alone appears.””® 

Thus the basic shortcomings of the theory of labour-value claborated by 
the standard authors of bourgeois political economy meant that right from the 
start they were not in a position to solve the cardinal problems of the theory 
of surplus-value. 

Since the bourgeois economists consider surplus value as something 
existing from the very beginning which is characteristic of the capitalist mode 
of production in a perfectly natural way, they make it impossible to distinguish 


25 K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwertt, 1. Teil, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1956, p. 58. 

26 Ibid., p. 54. 

27 ~+K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow 1959, p. 199. 
28 Ibid., p. 214. 


in any way between absolute and relative surplus value and thus to analyse 
the emergence and development of surplus value. Ricardo proceeded imme- 
diately from a given commodity value which surpasses the ‘ value of labour’. 
The difference between the two constitutes surplus-value. Ricardo was 
interested exclusively inthe magnitude of this difference. Without discovering 
the origin of surplus-value and without analysing absolute surplus value. he 
passed directly to the consideration of the change in the magnitude of the 
surplus-value but only examined relative surplus-value. For hin, the devel- 
opment of the productive forces of labour only signified an increase in 
relative surplus-value. 

To be able to investigate absolute surplus-value, however, it was necessary 
te proceed not from the result of production nor from a given commodity- 
value corresponding a priori to the surplus-value but from the capitalist 
production process as the unity of the labour process and of the process 
creating surplus-value. 

The worker spends one part of the working day in reproducing the value 
of his labour-power ‘necessary working time) and, during the rest of his 
working time, he produces surplus-value. From this point of view, the devel- 
opment of the productive forces appears primarily as a condition for the 
existence of surplus-value and only then as a factor in its multiplication. 

We have described the characteristics of bourgeois political economy and 
have compared it with the fundamental theses of Marx’s theories of value 
and surplus-value. We will now turn our attention to “The Poverty of 
Philosophy” and “ Wage-Labour and Capital” to ascertain which of these 
theses can already be found in these books. 

Careful study of ‘ The Poverty of Philosophy” reveals that Marx already 
at this time had fully identified the position of the theory of surplus-value in 
the political economy of bourgeois society : “ Ricardo’s theory of value is the 
scientific interpretation of actual economic life...”** Generally speaking, 
Marx still based his views here on Ricardo’s theory of value. From this stand- 
point, he vigorously opposed Proudhon and his predecessors in “ The Poverty 
of Philosophy ”. 

In “ The Poverty of Philosophy”, Marx quotes many lines from Ricardo’s 
“ Principles” which summarize Ricardo’s theory of value and he does this 
without any critical comment. All the basic definitions of value listed by 
Marx correspond to the definitions given by Ricardo. Thus Marx says “...that 
what determines value is not the time taken to produce a thing but the 
minimum time it could possibly be produced in. . .”°° Value is characterized 
here as the product of the labour necessary. But this definition of value can 
also be found in one of the quotations from Ricardo used by Marx : “In 
making labour the foundation of the value of commodities and the com- 
parative quantity of labour which is necessary to their production, the rule 
which determines the respective quantities of goods which shall be given in 


29 K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, |. c., p. 54. 
30 Ibid., p. 73. 


ew F 


exchange for each other...’** In “The Poverty of Philosophy”, Marx also 
speaks of the loss of value as a result of technical progress yet even here he 
stresses that “ This fact was already pointed out by Ricardo...” 

“The Poverty of Philosophy” still lacks the fundamental definition of 
value which distinguishes Marx’s theory of labour-value from Ricardo’s 
labour-value theory—the definition of value by the expenditure of that 
socially necessary labour whose social nature is only proved by the fact that 
it is sold in the process of exchange. In other words, the concept of abstract 
labour as labour which creates value is still missing in “The Poverty of 
Philosophy”. 

Just as he subscribed to the basic viewpoint of Ricardo’s theory of value, 
Marx also accepted the latter’s theory of money. In “ The Poverty of Phi- 
losophy”’, Marx’s thinking is still based on the quantity theory of money 
which regards money solely as a means of circulation. In a letter to Engels 
of 25th February 1859, Marx himself refers to this.* In “The Poverty of 
Philosophy”, he still wrote “that precisely gold and silver, as money, are of 
all commodities the only ones not determined by their cost of production; 
and this is so true that in circulation they can be replaced by paper.”™ Later, 
in his “Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy”, he makes a 
detailed criticism of the quantity theory of money. 

YLowever, it must be noted that already in “ The Poverty of Philosophy” 
Marx had raised the question of the necessity of money in a mode of pro- 
duction which is based on individual exchange of labour-products. At the 
same time, Marx stressed that the problem which concerned Proudhon—why 
it is precisely gold and silver which perform the functions of money—is “a 
secondary question, which is explained not by the chain of production rela- 
tions, but by the specific qualities inherent in gold and silver as substances ”.° 

Marx had certainly raised the question of the necessity of money in a 
commodity cconomy but did not yet provide an answer to it in “ The Poverty 
of Philosophy” (the theory of value had to be first worked out for this), He 
only stressed that money follows necessarily from the overall system of the 
production relations of bourgeois society and that money corresponds to the 
capitalist mode of production. 

Like Ricardo. Marx took as his starting point the fact that the whole of 
modern society is based on Jabour as a commodity, i.e., on wage-labour. He 
argued here against Proudhon who asserted that labour could have no value. 
But. in the way that Proudhon looked at the fact, this assertion was utopian 
in character since it totally avoided the necessity of distinguishing between 
labour and labour-power. It was rather the case that Proudhon contested the 
fact of wage-labour and declared this basic fact of capitalist reality to be 


31 Tbid., p. 52. 

32 Ibid., p. 72. 

33. Cf. K. Marx. letter to Engels of 25 February 1859, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29. p. 404. 
34 K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, 1. ¢., p. 97. 

35 Ibid., p. 90. 


28 


absurd. This polemic thus referred to the specific character of the modern 
order of society™. 

When Marx in ‘The Poverty of Philosophy” criticized the reactionary 
and utopian position of Proudhon, like Ricardo he considered wage-labour 
as a fact, without noticing any contradiction of the law of value in the ex- 
change between labour and capital. This is why one cannot at all agree with 
the assertion of D. I. Rosenberg who writes that “ The theory of surplus-value 
was not yet formulated in ‘ The Poverty of Philosophy’. However, its founda- 
tion was already laid with the new concept of ‘labour as a commodity’, It is 
irue that Marx still speaks of the ‘ value of labour’ but he had already discov- 
ered the particular quality of this specific commodity : namely, that it pro- 
duces value which is greater than its intrinsic value. Furthermore, Marx 
showed that the capitalist appropriates this surplus in the form of profit 
without violating the law of value.” *” 

In the light of all that which has now been said, there can be scarcely 
anv question of a new concept of ‘labour as a commodity’ in “ The Poverty 
of Philosophy’. As regards the circumstance that ‘labour as a commodity’ 
produces a value which is greater than its intrinsic value, this had already 
been perceived by Smith and Ricardo. Marx wrote that Smith had “ recog- 
nized the true origin of surplus value’’.*® 

But neither Smith nor Ricardo were able to show that the surplus-value 
produced by ‘labour as a commodity’ and appropriated in the shape of 
profit by the capitalist is produced and appropriated in accordance with the 
law of value. Indeed, at first sight, the surplus of value contradicts the law 
of value but in reality it is in agreement with the exchange of equivalents. 
Neither in “ The Poverty of Philosophy” nor in “ Wage-Labour and Capital” 
did Marx provide evidence of this either although in the latter book he was 
on the point of solving the problem of the ‘exchange between wage-labour 
and capital on the basis of the law of value’. 

In “ Wage-Labour and Capital”, Marx concentrated his attention on an 
analysis of ‘labour as a commodity’ and the relations between capital and 
wage-labour. He criticizes the bourgeois political economy which regards 
capital not as a social relation but as accumulated labour, as a specific quan- 
tity of raw materials. instruments of labour and means of subsistence. Marx 
stresses that capital is a production-relation of bourgeois society. A certain 
sum of commodities only becomes capital when exchanged for direct, living 
labour. Through this exchange, this sum maintains and increases itself as a 
power which belongs to one part of socicty. 

“The existence of a class which possesses nothing but the ability to work 
is a necessary presupposition of capital.’ As a result of the exchange be- 
tween capital and wage-labour, the capitalist acquires labour, “...the creative 


36 Cf. ibid., p. 64. 


37 1.1. Rosenberg, Die Entwicklung der Skonomischen Lehre von Marx und Engels in den 
vierziger Jahren des 19. Jahrhunderts, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1958, p. 304. 


38 K. Marx. Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. ¢., p. 43. 


force ... by which the worker ... also gives to the accumulative labour a 
greater value than it previously possessed.’ 

We can conclude here that Marx—for the time being still in the termi- 
nology of bourgeois political economy—considers that the most important 
characteristic of labour-power as a commodity is its use-value, which consists 
in the ability of the worker to produce a value which is greater than the value 
of his labour-power. Marx is very close at this point to solving the problem 
of exchange between wage-labour and capital. But the actual solution is still 
missing and again we cannot share |. I. Rosenberg’s view when he writes 
that “ the essentials of the theory of surplus-value” can be found in “ Wage- 
Labour and Capital”. “Tt is shown here that it is precisely on the basis of the 
Jaw of value and not at all as a consequence of its violation that... the profit 
of capital (surplus-value) is achieved.’*° Marx still had to do all this and. to 
be able to do it. he had to elaborate, above all. his theory of value: he had to 
identify the two-fold character of commodities, including labour-power as a 
commodity, and the two-fold character of commodity-producing labour. 

The 1840's are an important stage in the development of Marx’s theory 
of economics. In an assessment of the results arrived at by the classical bour- 
geois economists in the determination of the laws of bourgeois society, Marx 
wrote that “ Classical Political Economy nearly touches the true relation of 
things. without, however, consciously formulating it. This it cannot do so 
long as it sticks in its bourgeois skin.”** It was left to Marx to make the 
conscious formulation of the “true relation of things”. For this Marx and 
Engels had to elaborate, above all, the dialectical and materialist conception 
of history. 

In his works of the 1840's, Marx worked out the necessary conditions and 
also individual elements of his future theories of value and surplus-value 
which had to be extended and taken further before they could form a co- 
herent theory of economics. But the leap from the bourgeois to the Marxist 
approach to the exchange between labour and capital which was to charac- 
terize the revolutionary transformation of political economy was not made 
here. In his studies at the end of the 1840's. Marx was approaching this point 
and was so close to it that Engels considered that “The Poverty of Phi- 
losophy” and “‘ Wage-Labour and Capital” indicate this. 

* That on the other hand Marx had known very well already at that 
time. ... not only whence but also how ‘the surplus-value of the capitalist’ 
came into existence is proved by his Poverty of Philosophy, 1847, and by 
his lectures on wage-labour and capital.’*? Despite this, Marx still needed 
ten vears (1847—1857) before he actually made this leap and was able to 
revolutionize political economy. Later, Marx himself said of “The Poverty 


39 K. Marx, Wage-Labour and Capital, Martin Lawrence Ltd., London 1932, p. 31. 
40 D. 1. Rosenberg, ]. c., p. 328. 
44 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, 1. c., p. 542. 


42 Engels, Foreword to Vol. 2 of Capital, in K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 24, Dietz Verlag, 
Berlin 1963, p. 45. 


39 66 


of Philosophy that it contains the germs of the theories developed in 
‘Capital’ after 20 years’ work’. 

We have attempted to give a serious answer to the question raised at the 
beginning of the chapter—what was the theoretical luggage with which Marx 
arrived in London in August 1849? This answer also indicates why an 
examination of the subject-matter had to siart from scratch. In the Preface 
to “A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy”, Marx wrote that 
“The enormous amount of material relating to the history of political econo- 
my assembled in the British Museum. the fact that London is a convenient 
vantage point for the observation of bourgeois society, and finally the new 
stage of development which this society seemed to have entered with the 
discovery of gold in California and Australia, induced me to start again from 
the very beginning and to work carefully through the new material.’ These 
remarks require some explanation. 

The investigation of the history of political economy always formed a 
basic part of the economic studies of Marx and was an important means of 
determining capitalist reality. Engels wrote the following words about this : 
“Since in the course of history, as in its literary reflection, the evolution 
proceeds hy and large from the simplest to the more complex relations, the 
historical development of political economy constituted a natural clue, which 
the critique could take as a point of departure...” 

In Paris. between 1844 and 1845. Marx studied bourgeois political econo- 
my and took excerpts from the works of eight bourgeois economists on which 
he wrote critical notes.**® Between 1845 and 1847, he carried on this work in 
Brussels and Manchester and extended considerably the range of the sources 
he used for his studies.*” 

In 1849. Marx came to London where he had the opportunity to work in 
the library of the British Museum and to make a systematic study of the 
history of political economy in general and of English political economy in 
particular. English classical political economy (William Petty, Adam Smith, 
David Ricardo) was the ultimate in bourgeois political thinking which is also 
why it became one of the sources of Marxism. It is consequently not astonish- 
ing that soon after his arrival in London Marx hegan an extremely thorough 
study of the history of political economy. 

The period in London was also fruitful for the development of Marx’s 
theory of economies because London at that time was the uncontested centre 
of the capitalist world. At that period. the fate of capitalism was decided in 
England. "If. therefore, the crises first produce revolutions on the Continent, 


43. K. Marx. on ‘‘Misére de la philosophie’’, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 19, Berlin 
1962. p. 229. 

44K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. 1. ¢., p. 31. 

45 F. Engels. ibid., p. 225. 

46 Cf. K. Marx/F. Engels. 'listorisch-kritische Gesamtausgabe (MEGA), Erste Abteilung. Bd. 3. 
p. 409 ff. (These excerpts and Marx’s critical notes are discussed by D. 1. Rosenberg in his 
hook “Die Entwicklung der ékonomischen Lehre von Marx und Engels in den vierziger 
Jahren des 19. Jahrhunderts’’, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1958.) 

47 Cf. K. Marx, F. Engels, Historisch-kritische Gesamtausgabe (MEGA), Ersie Abteilung, Bd. 6, 
Marx-Engels-Verlag, Berlin 1932, p. 597 ff. 


3f 


the foundation for these is, nevertheless, always laid in England... .”, Marx 
wrote in 1850. “On the other hand, the degree to which the Continental 
revolutions react on England is at the same time the thermometer on which 
is indicated how far these revolutions really call in question the bourgeois 
conditions of life, or how far they only hit their political formations.’”* 

The need to continue and extend the investigations of economic matters 
was also dictated by the struggle which Marx and Engels waged for the 
foundation of a revolutionary theory of the working class and for the founda- 
tion of scientific socialism. The defeat of the revolution of 1848/49 led to the 
banning of the “ Neue Rheinische Zeitung”. the only newspaper which at 
that time represented the standpoint of the working class. The Jast edition, 
printed in red. was published on 19th May 1849. Its editors, addressing the 
workers of Cologne, said of themselves : “ Their last word will always and 
everywhere be : The Emancipation of the Working Class”. 

Following his arrival m London, Marx’s first efforts were devoted to 
establishing a new publication as a continuation of the “Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung”. This publication was the “Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch- 
ékonomische Revue”. This journal was edited in London and printed in 
Hamburg. In the six issues which appeared between March and November 
1850, Marx carried out the task which he had formulated in the * Announce- 
ment’ — “... to explain the period of the revolution through which we have 
passed, the character of the partics involved in this and the social relations 
which oceasion the existence and the struggle of these parties”. Marx con- 
sidered that the particular advantage of a journal as compared with a news- 
paper was that it permitted ‘a detailed and scientific examination of the 
economic relations which form the foundation of the entire political move- 
ment.’ 

This very important remark enables us to conclude that Marx had set 
himself the task of further developing his theory of economics immediately 
after moving to London. although the intensive work in this field only began 
later. in 1850. In his Preface to “ A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Feonomy” (January 1859), Marx wrote that “The publication of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung in 1848 and 1849 and subsequent events eut short mv 
economic studies. which I could only resume in London in 1850. 

Tn the “ Politisch-dkonomische Revue”. Marx provided brilliant examples 
of how the materialist conception of history he had evolved could be applied 
to the analysis of conercte historical events. The first issue of the journal 
contained the first instalment of his outstanding work “The Class Struggles 
in Franee 1848—1850” which. as Engels said. was Marx’s first attempt “to 
demonstrate the inner causal connection in the course of a development 
which extended over some vears. a development as critical. for the whole of 


48 K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France 1848—50. Selected Works Vol. 2. Lawrence & Wishart 
Ltd., London, p. 298/299. 

49 K. Marx/F. Engels, article from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. thid.. p. 37. 

50 K. Marx/F. Engels, Announcement of the ‘Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-Gkonomische 
Revue”, in: K. Marx F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 7. p. 5. 

51 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Preface, I. ¢., p. 22. 


32 


Europe, as it was typical ; that is, in accordance with the conception of the 


author, to trace political events back to the effects of what are, in the last 


resort, economic causes.” : 


In this work and also in the three significant international ‘ Revues’ that 
he wrote in association with Engels, Marx set himself the task of explaining 
the defeat of the revolution of 1848/49. The petty-bourgeois democrats as- 
serted that “the revolution had failed because of the ambitious jealousy of the 
individual leaders and the antagonistic opinions of the various teachers of 
the people.” Marx and Engels termed this opinion “an extremely vulgar 
Philistine view” and presented their appreciation of the revolution. {n accord- 
ance with the principles of the materialist conception of history which they 
had developed earlier, Marx and Engels showed that revolution is the result 
of the contradictions between the productive forces and the production rela- 
tions of bourgeois society. “A revolution such as this is only possible when 
these two factors, the modern productive forces and the bourgeois forms of 
production are at variance with each other.” The economic crisis is the ex- 
pression of this contradiction between productive forces and productive 
relations. From this, it was concluded that “ A new revolution is only possible 
following a new crisis. But it is just as certain as this is." 

These conclusions were completely contrary to the views of the petty- 
bourgeois socialists such as Proudhon who dreamed of bringing about the 
socialist transformation of society by the introduction of an economic policy 
directed towards the forcible retardation of capitalist development, i.e. by 
reformist methods. In contrast to petty-bourgeois socialism which Marx and 
Engels characterize as utopian and doctrinaire, scientific or revolutionary 
socialism is “...the class dictatorship of the proletariat as the inevitable 
transit point to the abolition of class differences generally, to the abolition 
of all the production relations on which they rest, to the abolition of all the 
social relations that correspond to these relations of production, to the revo- 
lutionizing of all the ideas that result from these social connections. ””® 

Marx and Engels considered the struggle against petty-bourgeois social- 
ism, this ‘false brother’ of scientific socialism, to be a matter of first-rank 
importance. Marx’s works from the 1840’s and “ The Poverty of Philosophy” 
in particular indicate, however, that at first in this struggle he was still 
obliged to rely on classical bourgeois economics to a significant degree. This 
circumstance is considered here as one of the major driving forces in the 
continuation of Marx’s works on economics, but of course it was not the only 
factor in this. 

The most important conclusion resulting from the materialist conception 
of history evolved by Marx and Engels was the realization that the socialist 
revolution is the inevitable consequence of the development of the economic 
contradictions of capitalist society. 


52 K. Marx. Selected Works, Vol. 2, 1. c., p. 170. 

53. K. Marx/F. Engels, Revue, May to October 1850, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 7, p. 400. 
54 Ibid., p. 440. 

55K. Marx, Selected Works, Vol. 2, Lawrence & Wishart, London 1945, p. 289. 


3 Discovery 33 


From this it also followed that Marx had to direct most of his attention 
to investigating the economic law of motion governing bourgeois society. 
Bourgeois political economy had not discovered this law. It could not even 
get on the track of this law since it did not consider the bourgeois 
mode of production in its movement and development but regarded it as 
something fixed, eternally true and unchangeable. But in the 1840’s Marx 
had not yet discovered this law either. All these factors called for a thorough 
investigation of the capitalist mode of production. In addition to this, Marx 
was also obliged to devote serious thought to some new phenomena in the 
economics of capitalism. 

In their analysis of the reasons for the defeat of the revolution of 1848/49, 
Marx and Engcls directed attention to the discovery of gold in California in 
1848. “It can be predicted already, after scarcely eighteen months,” wrote 
Marx and Engels in February 1850, “that this discovery will have much 
more splendid results than even the discovery of America”.*® Marx and 
Engels meant the upswing in the development of the productive forces which 
was associated necessarily with the discovery of new gold deposits. 

In November 1850 they wrote that “The discovery of the Californian 
gold-mines set the crown on American prosperity. At an earlier date than 
any other European journal ... we have already drawn attention to the 
importance of this discovery and its unavoidable consequences for the whole 
of world trade. This importance does not lie in the increase in gold through 
the newly-discovered mines although even this inerease in the means of 
exchange will not at all be without a favourable influence on general trade. 
It lies in the spur which the mineral wealth of California gave to capital on 
the world market, in the activity which characterized the entire West Coast 
of America and the East Coast of Asia, in the new market which was created 
in California and in all countries affected by the influence of California’. 

Thus at the beginning of the 1850’s intensive studies in the sphere of 
political economics had become a sheer necessity for Marx. His stay in 
London offered very favourable conditions for this and he immediately began 
to use them. 


56 K. Marx/F. Engels, Revue, Jan./Feb. 1850, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 7, p. 220. 
57 K. Marx,F. Engels, Revue. Mai bis Oktober 1850. 1. c., p. 435. 


34 


CHAPTER 2 


A Mont Blane of facts 


Marx's economic studies. Investigation of crises. The Note- 
books. “... one is received not with compliments but swith 
economic categories.” First results of the economic investi- 
gations. “ Basically, there has been no progress in this science 
since A. Smith and D. Ricardo.” The presuppositions for 
revolutionary transformation in political economy. The 
“Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okonomie”. Critique 
of Proudhonism. “Communism must rid itself above all of 
this ‘false brother’. ” 


In July 1850 or thereabouts. Marx made a start with new and intensive 
studies of political economy and the political history of the last ten vears. 
For this purpose, he utilized not only the theoretical works of the economists 
but also specialist literature dealing with the history of prices, the banking 
system and the economic crises in England and on the Continent of Europe. 
I “want to use my time as productively as possible, Marx wrote to Engels 
at the beginning of December 1850. Already by 7th January 1851 he sent 
Engels a letter which contained a comprehensive critique of Ricardo’s theory 
of land-rent.? This letter is evidence that Marx's hard work in the field of 
economic theory was bringing its first results. 

Marx's studies were exceptionally wide-ranging and covered all the 
spheres of the science of economics, from economic theory and history to 
the concrete economy and economic policy of various capitalist countries. 
He consequently studied all the aspects of the capitalist mode of production 
and its superstructure. And when Marx. as he himself admitted. became 
aware of his lack of factual knowledge in 1842/43. his economic studics 
during the 1850’s resulted in his becoming an expert in questions of economic 
theory and practice in the true sense of the word. This was stimulated by his 
long association (1851 to 1862) with the “New York Tribune”, a radical 
American newspaper. “Since a considerable part of my contributions con- 
sisted of articles dealing with important economic events in Britain and on 
the Continent”. remarked Marx. ‘I was compelled to become conversant 
with practical details which, strictly speaking, lie outside the sphere of po- 


1K. Mars. letter to Engels of 2 December 1850. in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. Bd. 27, p. 146. 
2 Cf. K. Marx. letter to Engels of 7 January 1851, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, ibid., p. 157 ff. 


3° 35 


litical economy.’ It is enough just to list a few of the headlines of articles 
by Marx for the “ New York Tribune” and other newspapers to see the 
range of the economic problems with which Marx concerned himself: pauper- 
ism and Free Trade—the impending slump, Disraeli’s Budget, trade pros- 
perity, the bleak financial situation, the decrees of the Bank of England, 
finances, the clergy and the fight for the ten-hour day, new financial trickery 
or ‘Gladstone and the Pennies’, the Budget, pounds, shillings, pennies: or 
class budgets and who profits from them, conversion of the British National 
Debt, tax on newspaper supplements, the East India Company, its history 
and the results of its activities. Irish Tenant Right, the working-class move- 
ment in England, the fight for the Ten-Hour Bill, the financial failure of the 
Government, etc. 

In these articles and in the letters of the L850’s Marx paid great attention 
to the problem of slumps. This was not by chance since by 1858/59 Marx 
and Engels had identified a direct link between the occurrence of slumps 
and the emergence of revolutionary situations. This also explains the enor- 
mous interest they showed in the analysis of economic cycles. “... aprés les 
derniers événements je suis plus convaincu que jamais”, wrote Marx on 
27th December 1851, “qu’il n’y aura pas de révolution séricuse sans crise 
commerciale”’.* (“... from the recent events I am more convinced than ever 
before that there can be no serious revolution without a slump.”) 

As early as 1855 Marx predicted the approach of a new economic crisis 
(as is well-known, this was the slump of 1857). The untiring, day-in, day-out 
analysis of the state of the capitalist economy bore fruit. “ As regards the 
various economic questions which you submitted to me”, Marx wrote to 
Lassalle on 23rd January 1855, “up till now, to my knowledge, there exist 
neither official nor scientific surveys ... It will now certainly rain with works 
on these questions. In England, the time of the slump is simultaneously that 
of theoretical investigation.’”® 

And in actual fact a serious slump occurred in the autumn of 1857. ‘‘ The 
American slump—predicted by us in the November Revue of 1850 as break- 
ing out in New York—is beautiful’® wrote Marx. “Though myself in such 
financial distress, I have not felt so cosy since 1849 as in this outbreak.” 
T'rom the middle of October onwards, Marx worked “as though crazy”, as 
he put it, on the completion of his economic studies, At the same time, he 
had collected such a wealth of material on the problem of slumps that, in 
addition to a whole series of articles for the ““New York Tribune”, he 
intended to write a special work on this subject.® Apart from the interest 


3K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Preface, |. c., p. 23. 

4 XK. Marx, letter to Freiligrath of 27 December 1851, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 27, 
p. 597. 

5 K. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 23 January 1855, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 28, Dietz 
Verlag, Berlin 1963, p. 612. 

6 XK. Marx, letter to Engels of 20 October 1857, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, p. 198. 

7 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 13 November 1857, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, p. 207. 

8 Cf. K. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 21 December 1857, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, 
p. 548. 


36 


which the slump as such attracted, however, it also spurred on Marx above 
all in the rapid elaboration of his theory of economics. 

It is now appropriate to give a characterization of Marx’s theoretical studies 
during the 1850's, the studies which are of most interest to us here. 

Mention must first be made here of the numerous “ Notebooks” in which 
Marx wrote down excerpts from the works of bourgeois economists. From 
August 4850 to June 1853, Marx filled twenty-four of these notebooks which 
he himself numbered from I to XXIV (apart from these 24 notebooks there 
is also a series of notebooks without numbers). From this period and later, 
there are also a few notebooks in which Marx collected quotations on ecrtain 
subjects, to some of which he added a commentary. This was the first pro- 
cessing, as it were. of the material he had collected. These include the note- 
books with the headings “ Notes” (containing a collection of quotations on 
land-rent problems), ‘Money, Credit. Crises’, ‘Three Books on Crises”, 
“TL have started three big books—England, Germany. France’”®, Marx wrote 
to Engels on 18th December 1857), the “ Quotation Book” (which contains 
a collection of quotations for the chapter on “ Capital” in the ‘ Outlines’ 
‘Grundrisse’ for A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy), 
“Completion of the system of monetary relations” and some others.” 

The “ Notebooks” form an important part of the foundation of facts on 
which Marx then constructed his theory of economics. The history of bour- 
geois political economy is the reflection of the history of capitalism and was 
consequently for Marx one of the principal sources for the all-round investi- 
gation of the capitalist mode of production. 

How did Marx’s theoretical work progress during this period ? Wilhelm 
Pieper, the German philologist and journalist and a member of the Commu- 
nist League wrote the following to Engels in January 1851 : ‘ Marx leads a 
very withdrawn life, his only friends are John Stuart Mill and Loyd (this 
refers to the works of these bourgeois economists—V. V.) and when one 
comes to him one is reccived not with compliments but with economic cate- 
gories.”"* By January 1851, Marx had already achieved the first results in 
his economic studies. Two of his letters to Engels testify to this. 

In the letter of 7th January. Marx states that the task is “to square the 
law of rent with the progress of the fertility of agriculture in gencral ; this 
is after all the only way to explain the historical facts and on the other hand 
to scrap Malthus’s theory of the deterioration not merely of the ‘hands’ but 
also of the land”.” The theory of differential rent, as developed by Ricardo, 
was based on the hypothesis that soil fertility decreased. “This is where 
Malthus found the real ground for his theory of population...” In his 


9 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 18 December 1857, in: K. Marx/F. Engels Werke, Bd. 29, p. 232. 
10 The headings are translated from the German—the Translator. 


it W. Pieper. postscript to the letter from Marx to Engels of 27 January 1851, in: K. Marx/ 
F. Engels. Werke, Bd. 27, p. 169. 


412 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 7 January 1851, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 
Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow 1953, p. 61. 


43° K. Marx, ibid., p. 60. 


letter, Marx shows that this condition was not essential for Ricardo’s theory 
of rent and that land-rent can rise when agriculture is improved although 
the price of the product of the land falls. 

In the letter of 3rd February, Marx criticizes Ricardo’s theory of circula- 
tion which was based on the quantity theory of money. According to this 
theory, the amount of money in circulation is the regulator of commodity 
prices and thus the regulator of the trade balance and of the rate of exchange. 
Marx indicates that the increase and decrease of the amount of money in 
circulation are associated neither with the trade balance nor with the rate of 
exchange. From this Marx draws the important conclusion that “the course 
of slumps, even though the system of credit is very much a condition for 
these, is only associated with the currency to the extent that foolish inter- 
ference hy the state authority in the regulating of these can make the exist- 
ing crisis worse, as in 1847." In other words, the circulation of money is 
“last affected” by the slump. In addition to their theoretical significance. 
these questions were also of topical importance in the struggle against 
Proudhonism which preached a reform of the circulation of money as a cure- 
all for economic crises. 

Both letters show that at this point of time Marx had not yet worked out 
his theory of rent and the theory of money and circulation. What is in- 
teresting, however. is that Marx had begun the critique of bourgeois political 
economy in the theory of rent and in the theory of money circulation. This 
circumstance should not at all be regarded as fortuitous ; on the contrary 
it was fully in keeping with the method of research used by Marx. It can he 
seen here how Marx approached the investigation of capitalist reality. 

Tt is understandable that the categories of money and lJand-rent. corre- 
sponding to the more concrete production relations of capitalism. were the 
first object of his analysis. Marx subsequently proceeded to the ‘deeper’ 
categories of the capitalist mode of production—to value or surplus-value. 
He took these as the point of departure and followed them in their develop- 
ment to the ‘surface’ categories—money., profit, average profit. market value, 
price of production and Jand-rent. At the beginning of the 1850’s. however. 
Marx was of the opinion that he had already completed most of the work of 
revolutionizing economy. “T have got to the stage”. he wrote to Engels on 
2nd April 1851. “where I can be finished with the whole economic crap 
within five weeks.’® When that is done. T will work out the economy at home 
and plunge into another science at the Museum. It is beginning to bore me. 
Basically. there has been no progress in this science since A. Smith and 
D. Rieardo. even though much has heen done in individual and often super- 
subtle investigations.””” “T am glad vou are at last finished with the econo- 
my”. answered Engels. “Tt really did take too much time and as long as you 
have a book in front of you which vou think important and haven't read you 


14 KK. Marx, letter to Engels of 3 February 1851, in: K. Marx/F. fingels, Werke, Bd. 27, p. 174. 
15 Ibid., p. 177. 

146 Marx refers to his ‘ Notebooks’ on the warks of bourgeois economists. 

17 Kk. Marx, letter to Engels of 2 April 1853, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 27, p. 228. 


38 


don’t get round to writing.”** But Marx still had to travel a hard and harrow- 
ing road before he was able to write his immortal “ Capital”. 

What is important for us here is how accurately Marx assesses the posi- 
tion of Smith and Ricardo in the history of political economy. It must be said, 
however, that at this period Marx had not yet completely freed himself of 
a concept of classical bourgeois economics which in a certain sense may be 
termed as not fully objective. 

In his correspondence for the “ New York Daily Tribune”, Marx wrote 
on Ath March 1853 that “First, therefore, the population of a country is 
driven into poverty and when no more can be sweated out of it, when they 
are a burden on the country, they are driven away and the sum of the net 
takings is reckoned out! Such is the doctrine laid down by Ricardo in his 
celebrated work. the Principles of Political Economy. The annual profits of 
a capitalist amounting to £ 2,000. what docs it matter to him whether he 
emplovs 100 men or 1.000 men? ‘Is not’, says Ricardo, ‘the real income 
of a nation similar?’ The net real income of a nation. rents and _ profits, 
remaining the same, it is no subject of consideration whether it is derived 
from ten millions of people or from twelve millions.” Immediately follow- 
ing this. Marx quotes a place in Sismondi’s “ Nouveaux principes d'économie 
pohtique” in which Sismondi likewise criticizes this thesis by Ricardo. Marx 
then indeed declares that he does not share the view of Sismondi. who at- 
tempted to conserve outdated production relations, but he also polemizes 
here against Ricardo. In 1862, when working on the “Theories of Surplus- 
Value”. Marx quotes the same place from Ricardo but now as an example 
of the “scientific impartiality of Ricardo’. 

The reason why so much space has heen devoted to this question here is 
that the relationship to classical bourgeois economy is also in a certain sense 
a criterion for the maturity of the economic views of Marx himself. We have 
seen that Marx at the end of the 1840’s had already arrived at an overall 
correct estimate of bourgeois political economy. In 1852. Marx designated 
Ricardo as the most classic representative (interpreter) of the bourgeoisie and 
the most stoical adversary of the proletariat.2* But the most profound and 
universal analysis of the opinions of Ricardo is to be found in the * Theories 
of Surplus-Value“: “Thus the ruthlessness of Ricardo was not only scien- 
tifically honest but also scientifically necessary for his standpoint. But for 
this reason it is also of no coneern to him at all whether the continucd 
development of the productive forces kills landed property or workers. When 
this progress devalues the capital of the industrial bourgeoisie. this is just as 
welcome to him... When the opinion of Ricardo largely coincides with the 
interests of the industrial bourgeoisie. this is so only because and to the 


18 F. Engels. letter to Marx of 3 April 1851, in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Werke, Bd. 27. p. 233 f. 

19 First sentence is re-translated fram the German, Otherwise; K. Marx, Fareed Emigration— 
Kossuth and Mazzini—The Refugee Question—EFlection Bribery in England—Mr. Cobden. in: 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow 1971. p. 55. 

20K. Marx. Thearien iiher den Mehrwert. 2. Teil. 1. ¢.. p. 115. 

21 Cf K. Marx, letter to Weydemever of 5 March 4852. in: Marx'Engels, Selected Correspon- 
dence. Foreign Languages Publishing Ilouse, Moscow 1953. p. 83. 


39 


extent that their interests coincide with those of the production or the pro- 
ductive development of human labour. When it is contrary to these, he is Just 
as ruthless against the bourgeoisie as he is otherwise against the proletariat 
and the aristocracy.” 

Although in April 1851 Marx assumed he could complete his studies of 
bourgeois political economy within five weeks. this work continued. “IT am 
usually at the British Musetyn from 9 o’clock in the morning until 7 o'clock 
in the evening”, Marx wrote to Weydemeyer on 27th June 1851. “ The 
material which I am working on is so damned involved that despite all my 
efforts it will not be completed before six or eight weeks... Despite all this 
and everything the thing will soon be finished.”” “...now when Tam fally 
occupied with the economy .. "4 is how Marx refers to this on 44th August. 
In November L851. Marx and Engels discuss their plan of publishing “ co- 
nomy”.” In May 1852 Engels informs Marx about the negotiations which 
are “still” being held on the publication of this work on economics.” In 
December 1852 Marx’s last hopes of finding a publisher in Germany for his 
“Economy” came to nothing.” And. since the economic crisis was slow in 
developing. Marx also slowed down his cconomie studies somewhat. Engels 
nevertheless continued to put pressure on Marx. “ You should finish your 
‘Economy’. he wrote to him in March 1853.78 This was the wish of Marx. 
too. He wrote the following lines to Adolf Cluss. a member of the Communist 
League : “T still hoped... to be one day in such a position that T could spend 
a few months by myself and complete my ‘Economy’. It seems I will not 
manage to do this,’’”? It was only in October 4857 that Marx was able to 
begin the formulation of his political economy although he had already made 
two attempts—in the summer of 1857—to start on the description of his 
theory of economies but on both occasions had had to break off the work. 

In July 1857. Marx wrote the uncompleted sketch about the work of the 
vulgar economists. Bastiat and Carey. Since Marx chose as a headline “ Har- 
monies Economiques”. the title of the book by Bastiat mentioned in the 
sketch, it can he coneluded that Marx had intended to write a comprchensive 
review of this book but had then decided it was not worth detailed con- 
sideration and had consequently abandoned his original intention. 

This sketch which Marx has left us goes far beyond the scope of a review. 
In the “ Avant-propos” at the start of the sketch, Marx briefly sets out the 
state of bourgeois political economy at that time. For the first time, he gives 
an accurate indication of the limits of classical bourgeois economy which 


22K. Marx. Theorien tiber den Mehrwert. 2. Teil. 1. ¢., p. 107. 

23K. Marx. Ietter to Weydemeyer of 27 June 41851, in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Werke. Ba. 27, 
p. 559. 

K. Marx. letter to Engels of 14 August 1851, in: K. Marx’ F. Engels, Werke. Bd. 27, p. 344. 

Cf. K. Marx. letter to F. Engels of 24 November 1851. in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 27, 
p. 370: ef. F. Engels. letter to Marx of 27 November 1851, in: K. Marx, F. Engels. Werke, 
Bd. 27, p. 973 f. 

26 Cf. Engels, letter to Marx of 4 May 1852, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 28. p. 67. 

27° «Cf. K. Marx. letter to Cluss of 7 December 1852, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 28. p. 560. 
28 F. Engels, letter to Marx of 44 March 1853, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. Bd. 28, p. 226. 
29K. Marx, letter to Cluss of 15 September 1853, in: K. Marx’. Engels, Werke, Bd. 28, p. 592. 


began at the end of the 47th century with the works of Petty and Boisguille- 
bert and terminated in the first third of the 19th century with the books 
by Ricardo and Sismondi. As demonstrated by Marx, the later bourgeois 
economists were either their imitators or reactionary critics of the classical 
authors. The books by the French economist Bastiat and the American Carey 
are examples of this reactionary criticism of the standard authors of political 
economy, especially of Ricardo. Both consider it necessary “‘to demonstrate 
the harmony of the relations of production where the classical economists 
naively described their antagonisms.’”*° 

In masterly fashion, Marx analyses the economic conditions which pro- 
duced the views held by these two economists and notes that “ The national 
environments. which are certainly different. even contradictory. and con- 
stitute the backgrounds against which these two write. cause them never- 
theless to undertake the same endeavours.” Carey compared American 
economic relations with the English ones and asserted that bourgeois society 
did not exist in its pure form in England and that its development was 
hampered and affected by the relations of the feudal period. reflected prin- 
cipally in the intervention on the part of the State in the ceonomice life of the 
country. He claimed that from this resulted the antagonisms which split 
English society and the disharmonies which England brought into the world 
market. In America, on the other hand, where there were no feudal remain- 
ders, Carey considered that the production relations developed in complete 
harmony. 

Here it was a question of the general character of the economic laws of 
capitalism. Marx refuted Carey and showed. firstly, that American capitalism. 
apart from certain developmental features, in its essentials differed in nothing 
from English capitalism. 

Secondly, Marx showed that the disharmonies of the world market of 
which Carey spoke are merely the most advanced expression of the inner 
contradictions of capitalist socicty in one country or another. 

In contrast to Carey. Bastiat explained the antagonism of French bour- 
eeois society by the backward character of economic relations in France and 
considered that England represented the ideal example of an harmonious 
capitalist development. In this connection. Bastiat. who—as Marx noted— 
“just imagines harmonv’®?. is on a lower level than Carey. However. in 
Marx's opinion. both were ahistorical in the same way when they considered 
capitalist. production as the eternal and natural ideal of an harmonious 
development of socicty. 

Marx opposed the views of these two vulgar economists with his doctrine 
of the economic formation of society. according to which the more highly in- 
dustrialized capitalist country only shows the image of its own future to the 
less advanced state. This is why Marx’s economic theory. although largely 


20K. Marx. Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okanomie. J. ¢.. p. 844. 
31 hid. 
32 Ihid.. p. 847. 


Al 


elaborated on the basis of facts from the economic development of England, 
really does possess a general validity. 

The other fragment—the famous Introduction to “A Contribution to the 
Critique of Political Economy ’—was written by Marx at the end of August 
and the beginning of September 1857. He interrupted his work on the In- 
troduction in the middle of September. 

Marx later wrote these words: “A general introduction, which I had 
drafted, is omitted, since on further consideration it seems to me confusing 
to anticipate results which still have to be substantiated, and the reader who 
really wishes to follow me will have to decide to advance from the particular 
to the general.” Although this ‘Introduction’ is in the nature of a draft 
and was never completed, it is nevertheless enormously important since it is 
here that Marx sets out in more detail than anywhere else his ideas on the 
subject and the method of the theory of economics which he had founded. 

In his observations. Marx takes as his starting point the basic theses of 
the materialist conception of history, especially the thesis that social pro- 
duction is given primacy. Unlike the bourgeois economists who consider 
bourgeois production to be eternal and reason about production in general. 
Marx designates socially determined production. modern bourgois produc- 
tion. as the subject of his theoretical analysis. 

Marx carries out a critical investigation of the division of the subject of 
political economy customary in bourgeois literature into production, distri- 
bution. exchange and consumption and substantiates in detail the thesis of 
the primacy of production. Te demonstrates that social production is the 
subject of economic research. and shows that production. distribution, ex- 
change and consumption are parts of a single whole and that one acts on the 
other. as is the case in every organic whole. 

Marx sueceeded in explaining an important though paradoxical parti- 
cularity of classical politieal economy. The classical economists subscribed 
to the labour-value theory. were ‘theoreticians of production’ and never- 
theless declared that distribution was the only subject of political economy. 
As Marx showed. this was because they considered production as cternal 
and unchangeable but considered the forms of distribution as being separate 
from the forms of production and thus could not take account of them in 
their change and development. Secondly, in their endeavour to identify the 
structure of social production, the classical economists instinctively felt that 
the distribution of the instruments of production and of the members of 
society among the various spheres of production is an inner moment of pro- 
duction and determines the structure of the latter. It was precisely for this 
reason that Ricardo declared that it was not production but distribution 
which was the real subject of political economy. The analysis of the dialect- 
ical unity of all clements of social production enabled Marx to overcome the 
narrowness of bourgeois political economy in understanding the subject that 
it investigated and to pass from the forms of distribution, which are only an 


33° K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Politieat Economy, 1. ¢.. Preface, p. 19. 


A2 


expression of the forms of production, to analysis of the relations of produc- 
tion as the actual subject of political economy. 

The section in the ‘Introduction’ about the method of political economy 
is of great importance. Here, for the first time, Marx characterizes the 
scientific method of progressing from the abstract to the concrete; at the 
same time, he criticizes the idealist Hegelian understanding of this method. 
The dialectical matcrialist interpretation of the method of progressing from 
the abstract to the conerete means that the concrete, which forms the 
starting point for analysis, appears at the end of the investigation as the 
unity of diverse aspects, as the synthesis of many definitions. Scientific 
abstraction is here inseparably associated with the concrete, with reality, as 
its presupposition and the course of abstract thinking must correspond to the 
actual historical process. 

The ‘Introduction’ shows that Marx had already worked out the method- 
ological fundamentals of his theory of economics in detail by the autumn 
of 1857. 

At the end of 1857, under the direct influence of the slump which had 
occurred in the meantime. Marx finally began to sum up the results of his 
research work of the 1850's. On the 21st December 1857, he wrote to Lassalle 
that “The present commercial crisis has stimulated me to give serious atten- 
tion now to the formulation of my principles of economy...” 

Engels, who provided Marx with regular information on the course of 
the crisis, wrote that “In this crisis, over-production has been so gencral as 
never before .. °° Modern investigators of the history of crises fully confirm 
these remarks bv Engels. 

Marx made haste in every wav imaginable with the elaboration of his 
theory of economics. “I am working like mad all through the night on the 
summing up of my Economic Studies so that I can at least have the outlines 
clear before the déluge.’’* This was on 8th Deeember, while on the 18th of 
the same month he wrote “I am doing a colossal amount of work, mostly 
until four in the morning.”’” 

The crisis of 1857 did not lead to the revolutionary situation awaited 
with such great impatience. Subsequently, when Marx worked out his theory 
of economic crises. he noted that one of the chief features of crises caused 
by over-production in capitalism consists in their periodicity which is based 
on the renewal of fixed capital. “ There are no permanent crises”. commented 
Marx.** He showed that the economic crisis is the real concentration and the 
violent settlement of all the contradictions of bourgeois economics and. at 
ithe same time. a mighty accelerator of the growth of the productive forces.” 
Marx stressed that “Hence crises arise. which simultaneously drive it [capi- 
talist production] onward and beyond [its own limits] and force it to put on 


34 K. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 24 December 1857, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. Bd. 29, p. 548. 
45 F. Engels, letter to Marx of 11 December 1857, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. Bad. 29. p. 
36 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 8 December 4857, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. Bd. 29, p. : 
37. KK. Marx, letter to Engels of 18 December 4857, in K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, yy. 232. 
38°) K. Marx. Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c., p. 493. 

39 «CE. ibid., p. 506. 


seven-league boots, in order to reach a development of the productive forces 
which could only be achieved very slowly within its own limits.’”° This ex- 
presses the antagonistic nature of capitalist production. 

As the expression of the economic contradictions of capitalist society, the 
economic crisis as such docs not vet indicate therefore that the capitalist 
mode of production has exhausted all its possibilities of development. 

In January 1859, in his Preface to “A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy”, Marx drew the important conclusion that “No social 
order is ever destroyed before all the productive forces for which it is suf- 
ficient have been developed ...’** In our opinion, the concrete study of the 
crisis of 1857 carried out by Marx in 1857/1858 was of major significance in 
enabling him to formulate this thesis. (Marx had even planned to write a 
special work. together with Engels, on this crisis.’”) But the most important 
thing was that it was precisely during these years that Marx discovered the 
law of motion of bourgeois society and formulated his theory of surplus- 
value. 

For the time being, however, Mars regarded all this in a somewhat differ- 
ent way, “A new revolution is only possible following a new crisis. But it is 
just as certain as this is.”** Marx correctly stresses the objective character of 
the revolution but here still follows too direct an approach to the relationship 
between revolution and the cyclical development of the capitalist mode of 
production. 

But be this as it may, it is precisely to the crisis of 4857 that we owe a 
work of genius by Marx, the “ Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okono- 
mie” (Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy). Whilst working on this, 
Marx made many outstanding discoveries. 

Marx wrote the “ Grundrisse”’. which amounted to no less than 50 printed 
sheets. within an exceptionally short time, between the middle of October 
41857 and May 1858. In this, and for the first time in detail. Marx formulated 
his theory of value and surplus-value and made his second great discovery 
{after the elaboration of the materialist concept of history). The ‘“ Grund- 
risse ’ takes us into Marx’s ‘ creative laboratory’ and enables us to follow step 
by step the process in which Marx worked out his economic theory. 

Ata later date. Marx set out his theory of value and surplus-value in the 
first volume of “ Capital”. But. as emphasized by Marx himself—and it was 
precisely this which was important—,‘‘ Of course the method of presentation 
must differ in form from that of inquiry. The latter has to appropriate the 
material in detail, to analyse its different forms of development. to trace out 
their inner connexion. Only after this work is done, can the actual movement 
be adequately described.’ The method of inquiry of which Marx speaks 


40 IX. Marx. Theories of Surplus-Value, Part ITI, 1. c., p. 122. 
44 Kk. Marx. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Cconomy, |. c., Preface. p. 21. 


42 Cf. K. Marx. letter to Engels of 148 December 1857, in: K. Marx/l. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29. 
p. 232. 


43° WK. Marx’F. Engels, Revue, May to October 1850, 1. ¢., p. 440. 
44 K. Marx. Capital, Vol. I, Afterword to the second German edition, 1. c., p. 19. 


is retained in the “ Grundrisse”. When we study this, we can be present, as 
it were, at the birth of a new theory. 

Marx began work on his theory with a critique of the petty-bourgeois 
economic views of Proudhon. There was good reason for this. Marx con- 
sidered that the critique of Proudhonism, the definition of this pseudo- 
socialist ‘false brother’, was an important task of scientific socialism. Later, 
Marx wrote that it was necessary, “‘in order to prepare the way for critical 
and materialist socialism, which sets out to make the real, historical develop- 
ment of social production understandable, to make an abrupt break with that 
ideology in economy whose last embodiment Proudhon unwittingly was.’*° 
The revolutionary situation which Marx and Engels had expected in connec- 
tion with the crisis of 1857 called for complete clarity about the necessity to 
overthrow the bourgeois order of society by revolutionary means, This is 
why the thesis of the Proudhonists on the possibility of eliminating the 
antagonistic contradictions of capitalism by a bank reform had to be theo- 
retically refuted. 

Marx had already criticized, in ‘The Poverty of Philosophy”, Proud- 
hon’s theory which aimed at the reformation of bourgeois society but on 
that oceasion still had to rely to a significant extent on the economic views 
of Ricardo. It was now a question of overwhelming Proudhonism from the 
position of Marx’s economic theory, from the standpoint of scientific so- 
cialism. It had to be proved that the antagonistic contradictions of capitalist 
society are “never to be exploded by silent metamorphoses”“* and that the 
attempts of the Proudhonists to maintain bourgeois society and remedy ils 
“faults” implied a scandalous Utopia which disorganized the working class 
and distracted it from the preparation of the socialist revolution. How im- 
portant this task was may be judged from Engels’s introduction to Marx’s 
“The Civil War in France”. In this introduction, Engels makes the Proud- 
honists directly responsible for the economic mistakes of the Commune. He 
wrote that the Commune was “the grave of the Proudhon school of Social- 
ism”, 

In the ‘‘Grundrisse”, Marx carried out the task set. In this work. he 
formulated his own theory of value and surplus-value and at the same time 
inflicted a decisive defeat on Proudhonism. 

But the main object of this ‘ constructive’ critique in “ Grundrisse” was, 
of course, classical bourgeois economy since Marx, in his inquiries, always 
took the best achievements of his predecessors, the bourgeois economists. as 
his starting point. 


45 K. Marx, On ‘'Misére de la philosophie”, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 19, p. 229. 

46 K. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, 1. c., p. 77. 

47 F. Engels, Introduction to Karl Marx’s ‘‘The Civil War in France”, Martin Lawrence Ltd., 
London 1933, p. 149. 


45 


CHAPTER 3 


> 


The *“ economic cell-form * 
of bourgeois society 


Why the “Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy” 
begins sith the “Chapter on Money”. On the track of value. 
The ‘degradation’ of money by the Proudhonists. The con- 
cept of necessary labour. Value and price. The divisibility 
of a commodity and its two factors. The tsvo-fold character 
of labour in bourgeois society. In search of the “economic 
cell-form”. The material content and social form of each and 
every economic phenomenon. 


The “ Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy (Grundrisse der Kritik 
der politischen Okonomie) begin with the “Chapter on Money”, to which 
Marx gave the number ‘II’. This is explained by Marx’s intention to place 
a chapter in front of it which he first wanted to call ‘ Value’ but later—in “A 
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy ”—changed to ‘The Com- 
modity ”. 

As mentioned already, Marx began work on his theory of value with the 
critique of Proudhon’s theory of money. This circumstance should not be 
regarded as fortuitous. Here we come across another important feature which 
distinguishes Marx’s method of inquiry from the method of presentation. 
Money is namely the most precise manifestation of the value of a commodity. 
“In fact we started from exchange-valuc. or the exchange relation of com- 
modities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it.”* Money, or 
the monetarv form of value, is the most advanced form of value. the form 
appropriate for capitalism. Accordingly, the theory of money follows directly 
from the theory of value. In the critique of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
political economy and thus also in the investigation of the subject itself (for, 
as we know. this is one and the same process with Marx). Marx first of all 
proceeds from the outward manifestation to the inner nature of things. For 


4 Published by the Institute for Marxism-Leninism of the Central Commitee of the CPSU, 
‘*Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie”’ was first printed in German between 1939 
and 1941. 

2 The beginning of this chapter can be found right at the end of ‘‘Grundrisse’’: cf. K. Marx, 
Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okonomie"’, 1. c., p. 763 f. 

3  K. Marx. Capital, Vol. I, 1. ¢., p. 47. 


47 


this reason, after adding ‘II’ to the “* Chapter on Money”, he began “ Grund- 
risse”’ with an investigation of the theory of money. 

We are speaking here of a specific stage in the process of investigation. 
When the process of investigation is regarded as a whole, then the progres- 
sion from the abstract to the concrete applies here, too, of course. Thus, for 
instance, Marx formulated the theory of value before working out the theory 
of surplus-value. ‘d 

If, however, the individual stages in the investigation are considered, 
Marx starts here with the outward manifestations in order to progress to the 
inner nature of the things, for example, from money to the commodity and 
not conversely, as is characteristic of the process of representation. 

Marx regarded the understanding of the category ‘money’ as the criterion 
for whether the nature of value was appreciated in actual fact. When he later 
criticized Ricardo’s theory of value. he remarked that Ricardo “docs indeed 
concern himself with labour only as a measure of the magnitude of value 
and on account of this found no relation between his theory of value and the 
nature of money.” In the ‘“ Grundrisse”’ and on the basis of the theory of 
value that he had developed. Marx made a detailed criticism of the quantity 
theory of money and noted “that Ricardo’s monetary theory is completely 
refuted... .’° 

In “Grundrisse”, Marx directly states that the critique of Proudhon’s 
theory of moncy will “allow us to look into the most profound secret which 
binds Proudhon’s theory of circulation with his general theory—his theory 
of the determination of value.”® Let us follow Marx into the thicket of 
Proudhon’s utopian theory of money and see how he works out his own 
theory of value, step by step. 

The ‘“ Chapter on Monev” begins with a detailed assessment of the book 
“De la réforme des banques” (On the reform of the banks). written by 
Darimon, a follower of Proudhon, and published the year before. In “A 
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy”, Marx characterized this 
book as a compendium of Proudhon’s “ melodramatic monetary theory”.’ 
The Proudhonists considered the privileged position occupied by gold and 
silver, as compared with all other commodities, as the cause of economic 
crises and. indeed, of all the evils of the capitalist system. ‘ But it was left 
to M. Proudhon and his school to declare seriously that the degradation of 
money and the exaltation of commodities was the essence of socialism...’ 
To get out of the difficulty. the Proudhonists wanted to replace gold and 
silver by ‘labour money’ or ‘hour-slips’, i-e., by vouchers which were to be 
handed to the worker and were supposed to certify how many hours he had 
worked. 


4 K. Marx. marginal notes to Adolph Wagner’s ‘‘Lehrbuch der politischen Ukonomie”, in: 
K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 19, p. 358. 


5 K. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, |. c., p. 46. 

6 {bid., p. 55. 

7 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, }. c., p. 86. 
8 Ibid., p. 86. 


In this way, they believed they could kill two birds with one stone. On 
the one hand, the * privilege’ of gold and silver could be eliminated since the 
Proudhonists asserted that ‘labour money’ did not need to be convertible 
into gold and silver like the usual paper-money since ‘labour money’ was 
supposed to be the direct expression of the labour expended. This, so they 
believed, overcame the basic ‘cause’ of economic crises, which they con- 
sidered to be the lack of gold. Secondly, the introduction of ‘labour money’ 
was supposed to give every commodity the form of direct exchangeability, 
thus solving once and for all the problem of the realization of commodities. 
In short, the Proudhonists proposed that money should be abolished but that 
commodity production and commodity relations should be retained. The 
critique by Marx of the Proudhonists had to show the inner relationship be- 
tween commodities and money, i.e., it had to prove that the existence of 
money necessarily follows from the relations of commodity production. The 
revealing of this unavoidable relationship is one of the most important 
aspects of the theory of value. 

‘Labour money’ was not the invention of Proudhon. Robert Owen was 
another who advanced the idea of it but for him it was clear that capitalist 
production had first to be eliminated and communist relations established 
before the essential conditions for the concept of ‘labour money’ could 
emerge. The Proudhonists, however, regarded ‘labour money’ as the means 
by which the ‘shortcomings’ of capitalist production could he eliminated. 
Through his analysis, Marx showed that these ‘shortcomings’ are in reality 
the necessary consequence of capitalist production. 

The Proudhonists proposed a bank reform as the practical measure with 
which they intended to implement their theory of ‘labour money’. Marx’s 
critique begins with an analysis of this project. 

Using the statistical material quoted by Darimon in his book, Marx 
proves in particular that Darimon confuses credit and the circulation of 
money and accordingly wildly exaggerates the role of the banks in capitalism 
in that he has them check the circulation of money and regulate credit and 
the money market in a monopolistic manner. This is why the Proudhonists 
also assumed that it was sufficient to do away with the metal basis of money 
circulation (gold) to enable the banks to carry out their function correctly 
as a regulator of circulation ; as a result of these measures, it was believed 
that crises could be avoided. Marx showed that even if the metal basis of 
money circulation was totally lacking, under capitalist conditions no bank 
would be able to prevent economic crises from breaking out. 

It was the view of Proudhon and his followers that the bank reform would 
“create completely new production and circulation conditions. ..°" Marx 
showed that through this the Proudhonists proclaimed the primacy of circu- 
lation over production and proved their “lack of understanding of the inner 
connection of the relation of production, distribution and circulation”’**. The 


9 Kk. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomic, L.c., p. 4t. 
10 Ibid., p. 42. 


4 Discovery 49 


main objective of Marx’s analysis is the clarification of precisely this inner 
connection. It follows from the gencral logic of Marx’s analysis that the first 
important step in an examination of this connection was to explain money 
by the inner relations unavoidable in commodity production. Marx also 
formulates the problem in this manner and thus builds a bridge from mone- 
tary theory to the theory of value. “‘ The real question is : is it not the bour- 
geois system of exchange itse]f which makes a specilic instrument of exchange 
necessary ? Does it not inevitably create a special equivalent for all values ?”""* 
Marx raises here the question of the nature of money, of the necessary rela- 
tionship between commodities and money. 

Classical bourgeois political economy, on the other hand. was not even 
in a position to raise this question, to say nothing of solving it. The bourgeois 
economists assumed that capitalist relations were eternal. The necessity of 
money and other categories of bourgeois economy were self-evident for them 
and required no special proof. IL was only from the standpoint of the mate- 
rialist conception of history that Marx was able to raise the question of the 
necessary relationship between commodities and money. Marx posed. this 
question for the first time in “ The Poverty of Philosophy” but found the 
answer to it only eleven years later—in “‘ Grundrisse”. 

Proudhon considered that the main advantage of ‘labour money” was 
that it did not necd to be convertible into gold and silver at all. Marx begins 
his proof of the necessity of money by refuting this thesis : “ Converttbility 
—legal or otherwise—... must still he represented by every kind of money’, 
whether it be paper money, ‘labour money’ or any other money. Marx proves 
that “the convertibility of the banknote into gold remains an economic law. 
whether it exists politically or not”.’* “Convertibility into gold and silver 
is thus a practical measure of the value of all paper money which derives its 
denomination from gold or silver. . .””"* 

Paper money is only representative of gold or silver and is consequently 
not at all identical with them. Consequently, if the quantity of paper money 
issued were to exceed the quantity of gold necessary for circulation (when 
gold was in circulation), the paper money would be devalued and there could 
be no question anv longer of its previous convertibility. “ ... convertibility”. 
wrote Marx. “ineludes its converse. inconvertibility ...7° We may also add 
that even money in the form of gold can deeline in value. as in periods in 
which there is a general rise in prices. 

Having dealt with the problem of the convertibility. of paper money. 
Marx assumes the case when gold is replaced by ‘labour money’. If. prior 
to this. the gold coin—for instance. the English sovercign—corresponded to 
a certain quantity of gold. an ‘hour-slip’. representing a certain sum of ex- 
pended contemporary labour. would now correspond to this quantity of gold 


ii Thid., p. 46. 
$20 Thid.. p. 53. 
43 Thid.. p. 50. 
14% Ibid., p. 51 f. 
15 Ibid., p. 53. 


which incorporates past labour. Marx comes to the conclusion that “... ac- 
cording to the general cconomic law, production costs consistently fall, living 
labour becomes consistently more productive, ie., the labour time mate- 
rialized in products consistently depreciates. which would mean that con- 
sistent depreciation would be the unavoidable fate of this golden labour 
money.’*® The past labour time (as a constant magnitude) contained in a 
certain quantity of gold would consistently rise as compared with the present 
living labour time represented in the ‘hour-slip’. There would be no change 
in this situation even if ‘labour money’ were to take the place of paper 
money based on gold. In this ease. the “hour-slip’ would not be compared 
with a certain quantity of gold but with a certain quantity of paper money as 
the representative of this gold. 

From his analysis of the ‘hour-slip’. Marx now drew an important con- 
clusion which was of fundamental significance for his theory of value : “ Tt is 
not the labour time incorporated in products which determines value but the 
labour time necessary at the present time.” 

The concept of necessary labour in its general form was already formu- 
lated by Marx in “The Poverty of Philosophy” where he noted that this 
thesis was also advanced by Ricardo. The latter. however, regarded the con- 
cept of necessary labour. the labour time required. as being part of the con- 
cept of labour in general whilst Marx made this coneept an element of his 
theory on the specific character of social labour in capitalism. 

The determination of the value of a commodity by the quantum of neces- 
sary labour time expended in its production reflects the inner relationship 
which exists between value as an element of the production relations and the 
actual level of the productive forces. By its very nature. Proudhon’s theory 
of ‘labour money? assumes that value is not determined by the socially 
necessary labour but by labour in general. In other words. with their theory 
of value. the Proudhonists were back to one stage before Ricardo for whom 
value includes the concept of necessary labour time. 

Marx now took the next step in formulating his theory of value and 
demonstrated that there is a basic differenee between value and price. The 
theory of ‘labour money’ assumed the converse of this. that value and price 
are identical. In actual fact. the Proudhonists demanded the abolition of 
paper money although the price is nothing but the exchange-value of the 
commodity, expressed in money. 

In analvsing the difference between price and value, Marx introduced an 
important new element in the definition of value. “ The value of commodities 
determined by labour time is only their average value’”™® which differs 
from the ‘nominal’ value, the ‘money value’, i.e.. from the price. The 
value is determined by the labour time which is socially necessary for a 
greater ar lesser period (e.g.. several years). The price, on the other hand, 


16 Ibid., p. 54. 
47. Ibid. 
18 Ibid., p. 56. 


in addition to the socially necessary labour expended, also expresses 
the relation which exists at any given moment between supply and 
demand. This results in consistent deviations of prices from valucs. The 
introduction of ‘labour money’ would change nothing in this. If, instead of 
“a 1 lb loaf of bread costs 8 pennies’, one says ‘a 1 Ib loaf of bread = so 
many hours of labour time (in the form of ‘hour-slips’)’, the right half of 
this equation would represent the expenditure of average ‘ideal’ labour time 
which usually differs from the actual labour time represented in the price 
in exactly the same way as the money price differs from value. In this case. 
the Shour-slip’ would not perform its function, it would not state how many 
hours of labour time had really been expended for the manufacture of the 
product concerned. “The hour-slip represented, in contrast to all commo- 
dities, an ideal labour time which would soon be exchanged for more or for 
less than the actual (time) ...”2° 

The next important clement in the theory of value as developed by Marx 
in “ Grundrisse ” consists in the change from the quantitative characterization 
of value (measurement of value by the socially necessary labour time) to the 
determination of value as the social relation which marks the “economic 
quality”. the “exchangeability of commodities”. In this connection, Marx 
formulates for the first time one of the fundamental theses of his theory of 
value: “As values, all commodities are qualitatively equal and only quanti- 
tatively different .. 7° Tt is precisely this qualitative uniformity which 
enables them to be exchanged for cach other in certain quantitative propor- 
tions. With this thesis, Marx firstly comes to the analysis of the two factors 
of commodities—he divided commodities into use-value and value—and 
secondly to the conclusion that duplication of commodities (actual in the 
exchange-process. ideal before the exchange) as commodity and money is 
necessary. The logical consequence of all this is that Marx discovers the two- 
fold character of commodity-producing labour. 

As value. a commodity does not possess any special qualitative features 
or natural qualities at all. This economic equivalence, this uniformity of 
commodities. contradicts the qualitative diversity with which commodities 
are able to satisfy different human needs, Commodities are only exchanged 
for each other for the very reason that they are different, of course. This is 
why commodities as objects and things are qualitatively different from their 
own value. 

This contradiction between the economic uniformity of commodities and 
their natural diversity or, to put it in other words, this contradiction between 
value and use-value, leads in the exchange-process to the isolation of the 
value of the commodity from the commodity itself, to the duplication of 
commodities as commodities and money. Marx stresses that the characteristic 
of a commodity “as value not only can but at the same time must acquire 
an existence which is different from its natural one. Why > Because com- 


19 Thid., p. 58. 
20 fbid., p. 59. 


a2 


modities as values only differ quantitatively from each other, each commodity 
must be qualitatively different from its own value. Its value must therefore 
also possess an existence which can be qualitatively distinguished from it 
and. in actual exchange. this divisibility must become an actual division. , .””* 

In itself and by its natural characteristics, a commodity does not possess 
any exchangeability. It is only when a commodity is exchanged for money 
that its exchangeability, its social nature. its value, becomes apparent. This 
exchange for money is the necessary intermediate link in the exchange, of one 
commodity for another. Marx writes “that the commodity in the actual ex- 
change appears in two ways : as a natural product on the one hand and as an 
exchange-value on the other. That is, its exchange-value acquires an existence 
which is materially separate from it.”?? 

The inner contradiction of commodities, the contradiction between the 
qualitative uniformity of the commodities as values and their natural diver- 
sity as use-values, is thus outwardly solved in the process of exchange in the 
duplication of commodities as commodities and money, in the fact that the va- 
Ine of the commodity acquires an independent existence in a special commo- 
ditv—in money. On the basis of an analysis of the two contradictory factors 
in commodities, Marx comes to the conclusion that exchange-value is the 
necessary outward form of value—in other words, that money is necessary. 
Marx demonstrates that money is the necessary product of those social 
relations which mark the labour-product with the social form of exchange- 
value. This proved that the attempt of the Proudhonists to convert commo- 
dities directly into money by means of ‘labour-monev’, to identify commo- 
dities and money with each other and to guarantee the direct cxchange- 
ability of all commodities was an absolute utopia. 

Marx also notes that money, which is the solution of the contradiction 
between usc-value and value of commodities, intensifies all the contradictions 
of commodity production at the same time and raises them to a new level : 
“We see thercfore that it is an inherent quality of moncy that it fulfils its 
purpose by negating it at the same time; that it becomes independent in 
relation to commodities : that from a means it becomes an end ; that it realizes 
the exchange-value of commodities by separating them from it; that it 
facilitates exchange by dividing it ; that it overcomes the difficulties of direct 
commodity-exchange by generalizing them ; that it makes exchange indepen- 
dent in relation to the producers to the same extent as the producers are 
dependent on exchange.” These contradictions also make it possible for 
economic crises to occur. 

The division of a commodity into use-value and value, the analysis of 
these two factors and the proof that in the process of exchange the duplication 
of commodities as commodities and money is necessary —all this led Marx 
to the discovery of the two-fold character of commodity-producing labour. 


t Ibid., p. 60. 


2 
22 Ibid., p. 63. 
23. Ibid., p. 69. 


53 


The doctrine of the two-fold character of labour in commodity production 
forms the foundation of Marx’s theory of value. It is precisely this which 
marks the point at which Marx’s theory differs from the labour-value theory 
of the classics of bourgeois political economy. Not a single economist before 
Marx had discovered the two-fold character of labour. Marx stressed that 
“ All understanding of the facts depends on this”, on the doctrine of the 
two-fold character of labour. 

In “ Grundrisse”, Marx initially describes the two-fold character of labour 
as the difference between quantity and quality : abstract labour as “ separated 
from its quality, only quantitatively different labour” and concrete Jabour 
as “specific. naturally specific labour. qualitatively different from other kinds 
of labour”’.”® 

Marx proceeded with his analysis of commodity-producing labour and 
then characterized it as being social labour on the one hand and private on 
the other. This antagonistic contradiction of a commodity economy based 
on private ownership of the means of production was formulated by Marx 
as follows : Individuals still only produce “ for the society and in the society” 
but “their production (is) not directly social ...”?* And in another place he 
writes “that private interest itself is already a socially determined inter- 
est... .””?? 

Marx identifies here the specific nature of labour in capitalist society. 
Although social like all labour, under the conditions of private ownership of 
the means of production it does not. however, have a directly social character. 
It is rather the case that it is directly private labour. In the process of realiza- 
tion, in the conversion of commodities into money. the social character of the 
labour which produced these commodities is revealed and concrete labour is 
traced to abstract labour and private labour to social Jabour. 

This characteristic of labour in hourgeois society being of both a private 
and social nature at the same time is mentioned by Marx in association with 
the fact that the Proudhonist theory of ‘labour-money’ tacitly assumed the 
“social character of production” whilst on “the basis of the exchange- 
values ... it is only by exchange that labour (is) postulated as general”. 

Thus Marx worked out the principal elements of his own theory of value 
in the critical confrontation with Proudhon’s monetary theory. He demon- 
strates how. with the development of social production and the social division 
of labour, the product is changed into a commodity. the commodity into 
exchange-value and the exchange-value into money. At the same time this 
leads to a greater contradiction between the use-value and the value of the 
commodity. In connection with this. Marx gives some important method- 
ological advice on the manner in which the theoretical results which he had 
arrived at in the course of the investigation should he presented : “It will 


24 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 24 August 1867, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, I. c., 
p. 232. 

25 K. Marx. Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okonomie, I. c., p. 62. 

26 Ibid.. p. 76. 

27° Ibid., p. 74. 

28 Thid., p. 88. 


be necessary later... to correct the idealist manner of the presentation which 
gives the impression that it is only a question of definitions of terms and the 
dialectic of these terms.”*? Marx points out that in particular expressions 
such as “the commodity is exchange-value” must be corrected or defined. 
A commodity exists as a perceptible, independent object but the exchange- 
value is only a certain social relation associated with commodities. In connec- 
tion with this, Marx notes that the value-relation of commodities at first 
exists only in the tmagination since relations in general can only be imagined 
and not pereeived with the senses when it is a question of definmg them, in 
contrast to the objects on which they are based and of which we say that they 
are in this or that relationship with cach other.*° 

This is why Marx had to begin analysing the economic structure of bour- 
geois society not with value but with commodities as the “cell” of this 
society. It was a question here of commodities as the point of departure of 
the analysis, as the “ economic cell-form” of bourgeois society. It has already 
been observed that Marx always worked out his theory of value on the 
foundation of the analysis of commodities and of the two factors they 
embody. Now, in the remark just quoted, it is a question of defining this in 
the presentation as well. In “Grundrisse”, Marx sometimes still proceeds 
from exchange-value. Thus he writes that “the exchange-value of the com- 
modity exists in a double form, as the specific commodity and as money...” 
In the later presentation, Marx always starts from the commodity as the 
vehicle of value. ‘‘ The first category in which bourgeois wealth is represented 
is that of commodities’’. In “ Grundrisse”, the first chapter was to have 
been called “Value” but in “A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy” the title then used was ‘‘ The Commodity”. Of course. this is not 
at all merely a formal change. It expresses above all the materialist character 
of the dialectic and economic theory of Marx. He takes as his starting point 
the simplest relation of reality, commodity cconomy—the exchange of labour- 
products. Material commodities are, of course, the medium of this relation. 
In this connection, Marx later wrote “that with me neither ‘ value’ nor ‘ ex- 
change-value’ are subjects but the commodity is”’.** Political economy takes 
the category of commodity as the starting point of its analysis since “ The 
point where this history begins must also be the starting point of the train of 
thought...” 

Marx’s analysis of the commodity as the “ economic cell-form™ of bour- 
geois society forms the hasis for the methodologically important thesis that 
a distinction must be drawn between the social form and the material content 
of every single economic phenomenon. 


29 Ibid... p. 69. 
30 Cf. ibid., p. 6t. 
3L Thid., p. 66, 
32 Ibid., p. 763. 


33° K. Marx, marginal notes on Adolph Wagner’s ‘‘Lehrbuch der politischen Ukonomie’’. in: 
IX. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 19, p. 358. 


34 F. Engels, Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 1. ¢., p. 225. 


Under no circumstances may abstractions be made from this social form in 
the investigation of economic phenomena. The economic categories as the 
reflection of economic phenomena cannot be derived from the material con- 
tent but only from the production relations which are precisely this social 
form of the economic phenomena. 

It was characteristic of bourgeois political economy that it abstracted from 
the antagonistic form of bourgeois society and regarded the laws of this pro- 
duction as natural and dominating in all formations, It was precisely this 
circumstance which prevented it from discovering the “ economic cell-form” 
of bourgeois society and from analysing it. The problem of the “ economic 
cell-form” of bourgeois society is the question of the starting point for pro- 
ceeding from the abstract to the concrete. The initial position of bourgeois 
economists who considered the capitalist mode of production to be eternal 
and natural misled them into abstracting from the social form of the com- 
modity, from value as a socially determined form, and discussing only the 
magnitude of value. Yet it is just this form of value of the labour-product, 
writes Marx, which “is not only the most abstract but is also the most uni- 
versal form. taken by the product in bourgeois production, and stamps that 
production as a particular species of social production, and thereby gives it 
its special historical character”. In its investigations, bourgeois political 
economy did not advance so far that it was in a position to divide up the 
commodity and separate its social envelope from its material content. Thus 
it was unable to take the social form of the commodity, the value-form of 
the product of labour-—as Marx did—as the point of departure for analysing 
the capitalist economic system, for proceeding from the abstract to the con- 
erete, for passing from the category of the commodity to the categories of 
money, capital and so on. At the same time, however, Marx showed that the 
social envelope of the labour-product under conditions of commodity pro- 
duction, i.c., the value-form of the labour-product, is the limit which may 
not be crossed by the process of scientific abstraction ; otherwise it would be 
precisely from the basic characteristics of the mode of production in question 
that one would abstract. In short, the value-form of the labour-product is the 
point at which to begin if the intention is to set up the structure of the poli- 
tical economy of the capitalist mode of production. 

When Marx in his theory of value divided the commodity, separated the 
social form of the commodity from its physical content and drew a distinc- 
tion between use-value and value and between the magnitude of the value 
and its form, he created the essential condition for overcoming the com- 
modity-felishism of bourgeois political economy for which use-value and 
value had ‘ grown’ together. On the surface of bourgeois society this is indeed 
the case but for the bourgeois economists the social characteristics of the 
things in general had grown together with these things themselves. Marx 
wrote that with them “...the material element of capital is so integrated 
with its social form as capital...” But neither the use-value of the com- 


35 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Footnote 2), I. c., p. St. 
36 K. Marx. Theories of Surplus-Value, Part 3, 1. c.. p. 322. 


56 


modity nor its magnitude of value can form the foundation on which the 
system of categories has to be built which characterizes the capitalist mode of 
production. Only the social envelope of the commodity, the valug-form of 
the product of labour, can provide this foundation. 

A detailed report has been given of how Marx discovered the “ economic 
cell-form” of bourgeois socicty and formulated his theory of value in the 
“Chapter on Money”, the first chapter of “ Grundrisse’’. In this way, he 
created the foundation which enabled him to proceed further with the state- 
ment of the arguments of his theory. He was obliged to do this since, of 
course, the category of value says nothing about the inner nature of the 
capitalist mode of production. The relations of a commodity economy are of 
a fairly comprehensive character and they are not exclusive to capitalism 
although it is precisely in capitalism that they attain their highest level of 
development. But capital as a production relation differs both in form and in 
content from the simple valuec-relation and from the relations of the simple 
commodity-economy. 

The relations of value form the starting point for analysing capitalism. 
Because, both in theory and in capitalist reality, “the concept of value pre- 
cedes that of capital’’*’, it has been necessary to make a thorough examina- 
tion of how Marx substantiated his theory of value. It was not merely by 
chance that a German vulgar economist wrote in 1868: “The refutation of 
the theory of value is the sole task of those fighting Marx : for when this 
axiom is acknowledged. one must accept almost all of the conclusions which 
Marx draws with the strictest logic.””** 

We will now take a look at the ‘ really important thing’, the second great 
discovery made by Marx—the discovery of surplus-value. 


37 K. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der polilischen Ukonomie, 1. c., p. 163. ; . 
38 K. Marx, Mein Plagiat an F. Bastiat, in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Werke, Bd. 16, Dietz Verlag, 
Berlin 1962. p. 312 (footnote). 


57 


CHAPTER 4 


Hlow “he caught the surplus-value robbers 
red-handed ” 


“ By the way, things are developing nicely.” From value to 
surplus-value. The analysis of exchange between labour and 
capital. Labour-power as a commodity. The mechanism of 
capitalist exploitation. The theory of surplus-value. What 
Marz really did discover. 


On 16th January 1858 or thereabouts, Marx wrote in a letter to Engels the 
noteworthy words : “ By the way, things are developing nicely. For instance, 
I have thrown overboard the whole doctrine of profit as it has existed up to 
now.”? If this letter is compared with the section of “ Grundrisse” on which 
Marx was working at the time, it can be concluded that Marx was informing 
his friend of no less than the fact that he had formulated the theory of sur- 
plus-value. Let us take another look at “ Grundrisse” and see how Marx 
worked out this theory. 

Marx had made‘a critical analysis of the teachings of Proudhon and 
proved that Proudhon’s monetary theory had to follow from the latter's in- 
correct theory of value. At the same time Marx developed his own theory of 
value, after which he investigated the functions of money in commodity- 
money circulation. 

Marx analysed money in its function as a means of circulation and 
showed that the cycle of commodities and money in this case can be repre- 
sented not only by the formula e — m — m — c but also by the formula 
m — e — ec — m. In the second formula, money is changed from a means of 
exchange to an end while the commodity, on the other hand, instead of 
being the purpose of the exchange becomes the means of it. Marx speaks 
here of the merchant class and of trade relations. He himself stresses at this 
point in “ Grundrisse”: *... we are not yet concerned at all with the category 
of profit”, the formula mentioned is derived “from the analysis of circu- 
lation’”®. This analysis showed. however, that money is not only an instru- 
ment of circulation but can also play an independent role in the process of 


1K. Marx, letter to Engels, about 16 January 1858, in: Marx;Engels, Selected Correspondence, 
Foreign Languages Publishing Ilouse, Moscow 1953. 
2 Wk. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, 1. c., p. 116. 


59 


circulation ; in this case, the point of the process consists in ‘‘ exchanging less 
money by means of the commodity for more moncy .. .’”* 

This section of “ Grundrisse” is of very great significance in explaining 
how Marx progressed from the theory of value, which indced he had only 
just discovered, to the theory of surplus-value. Of course. it does not vet 
provide the answer to the question but the general form in which the process 
of capitalist exploitation takes place is shown and analysed here. In actual 
fact. capitalist exploitation consists precisely in the exchange of “less money” 
(variable capital) ‘““by means of the commodity” (labour-power) “for more 
money” (variable capital plus surplus-value). 

Marx analysed this form of circulation and promptly showed that the new 
exchange-value (the last m in the formula m — ¢ — c — m) obtained in his 
findings can only have been created in the production-process, that here 
“circulation no longer appears in its initial simplicity as a quantitative ex- 
change but as a process of production, as the real metamorphosis”’.* The 
conclusion which decides the matter immediately follows : “It is part of the 
simple character of money itself that as a developed element of production 
it can only exist where wage-labour exists..." This means that when, in the 
m —e—c— mcyele, exchange-value or “general wealth” is the purpose 
of social production, the worker can only acquire his wages in the form of 
money. In this part of “ Grundrisse”, Marx considers wage-labour for the 
time being only from the formal side since the only characteristic of it that he 
mentions is that it is paid for with money. This characteristic also tacitly 
includes the selling of labour. Concerning money, Marx says here that “in 
the same way, labour, the productivity itself, potential wealth. is exchanged 
for it and bought with it”. 

As Marx demonstrates at this point, the developed form of commodity 
production under the conditions of private ownership of the means of pro- 
duction necessarily includes capitalist relations. In this fact lies the inner 
relation between commodity production and capitalist production. In the 
theory, the inner relation between value and surplus-value corresponds 
to this relation. 

The theory of surplus-value is the logical completion of the theory of 
value. The derivation of surplus-value from value by Marx is based on the 
development of commodity production into capitalist production as an ob- 
jective fact. The developmental tendencies of commodity production and 
exchange-value necessarily lead to the “separation of labour and property ; 
so that labour = will produce property owned by another and property — will 
command labour owned by another”.’ In these concluding lines of the “ Chap- 
ter on Money”, the central problem of the theory of surplus-value is already 


Ibid. 

Ibid., p. 130. 
Ibid., p. 134 f. 
Ibid., p. 129. 
Ibid., p. 148. 


127 TO BW w 


60 


formulated in a completely specific manner: the necessity to explain sur- 
plus-value on the basis of the law of value. This problem was solved by Marx 
in the next chapter of “‘ Grundrisse ”, in the “ Chapter on Capital”. 

The bourgeois economists had attempted in vain to pass directly from 
value to capital and they explained capital as a simple sum of values. In 
reality, however, a qualitative leap forward takes place here which is why a 
leap like this is also necessary in theory. It is clear, Marx emphasized, “ that 
the simple movement of exchange-value, as present in circulation as such, 
can never realize capital ”’.® 

From its form, capital is a self-reproducing value. From this, it follows 
that in contrast to simple commodity circulation, for which production is the 
external condition, commodity circulation under capitalist conditions must 
be brought about by the production-process itself. In relation to circulation, 
production is not an external factor here. It is an integral part of production 
and is not only the basic condition but also the result of circulation. The 
analysis of the form of movement of capital thus led Marx to pass to an 
investigation of the process of capitalist production. 

The relation of capitalist production is the relation between worker and 
capitalist, between labour and capital. Labour and capital confront each other. 
An exchange takes place between them. The difficulty in the analysis of this 
exchange is that there is a particularly crass contradiction here between the 
outward form and the nature of this exchange. (Incidentally, in Volume III 
of Capital, Marx noted that “. . . all science would be superfluous if the 
outward appearance and the essence of things directly coincided”.® The 
essentially unequal exchange between the worker and the capitalist takes 
place (and must therefore be explained) on the basis of the law of value. on 
the basis of the exchange of equivalents. As Marx says, capital is ~ the 
power... to appropriate labour of another without exchange, svithout equi- 
valent, hut with the appearance of exchange*.’® The analysis of this exchange 
is hased to a significant degree on the twofold character of labour described 
in the ‘Chapter on Money”, on the realization that the commodity repre- 
sents the union of use-value and value. 

To begin with, Marx divides exchange between capital and labour into 
two qualitatively different and opposed processes: 1. into the actual ex- 
change between the worker and the capitalist who acquires by exchange the 
productive force “ which maintains and multiplies capital’, and 2. into the 
labour process itself, in which this maintenance and multiplication of capi- 
tal takes place. “In the exchange between capital and labour, the first act ts 
an exchange (which) falls entirely within the usual circulation ; the second 
is a process which is qualitatively different from eachange .. .”” 


Ibid.. p. 165. 
9 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. IH, Foreign Languages Publishing IIouse, Moscow 1959, p. 797. 
10 Kk. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, 1]. c., p. 449. 
iL Ibid., p. 185. 
12 Ihbid., p. £86. 


GA 


The first stage in the exchange between capital and labour therefore con- 
sists in the capitalist and worker concluding a contract with each other on 
the basis of the exchange of equivalents. Marx immediately directs his atten- 
tion now to the commodity, which is the object of the contract between the 
capitalist and the worker, and especially to the use-value of this commodity. 
In this connection, Marx raises the important question of “how far the use- 
value, not only as an essentiak component, remains outside the economy and 
its specifie forms and how far it is integrated in these. ’’* “‘ Does not the use- 
value as such appear in the very form in which it determines the economic 
form itself. e.g. in the relation of capital and labour ?”"* 

Marx provides the answer with the thesis that “In the relation of capital 
and labour. exchange-value and use-value are set in a relation to each other : 
one side (capital) is first of all set against the other side as eachange-value 
and the other (labour) is set against capital as use-valuc.’”* It is here that 
Marx takes the first step away {rom the usual formula of the bourgeois econo- 
mists—“‘ labour as a commodity”. “selling of labour” —and progresses to 
lahour-power as a commodity. In this examination. labour is no longer 
represented as a commodity but as the use-value of the commodity which 
the worker sells to the capitalist. 

What is the use-value, for the capitalist, of labour-power as a commodity ? 
This obviously lies in the ability of this commodity to produce exchange- 
values in the labour process, in its ability to maintain and multiply capital. 
It is likewise just as obvious that this use-value is the living labour of the 
worker. This use-value which the worker offers to the capitalist—and it is this 
which is his special characteristic—“. . . is not materialized in a product. does 
not exist at all away from him; it therefore (exists) as his ability not in 
actual fact but only as a possibility ”.** Here Marx has taken the next decisive 
step towards labour-power as a commodity. The worker does not sell labour 
to the capitalist but his ability to work, his labour-capability. 

Marx then also speaks of the worker selling “the right to dispose of his 
labour”, “the temporary right to dispose of his labour-power”. It is not a 
question here of the terminology either. although it is of quite exceptional 
importance for every theory that an adequate terminology is worked out. It 
is a question of the realization of the fact that the living labour of the worker 
is not something which can be sold. The term ‘labour-power’ was already 
employed by Marx in “ Wage-Labour and Capital”*” but there he did not 
yet consider labour-power as a commodity. 

Labour-power as a commodity is inseparably associated with capitalist 
production relations. With brevity and precision, Marx said about this that 
“ Separation of ownership from labour appears as the necessary law of this 


13 Ibid., p. 179. 

14 Ihbid., p. 178. 

45 Ibid., p. 178 f, 

16 Ibid., p. 178. 

17) kK. Marx, Wage-Labour and Capital, Martin Lawrence Ltd., London 1932, p. 30. 


62 


exchange between capital and labour.”** Since the worker is not the owner 
of the means of production, he cannot be the owner of his labour or the 
product of his labour. He is only the owner of his labour-power and it is this 
which he sells to the capitalist.” 

“The separation of labour and ownership in the labour-product, of labour 
and wealth’. continues Marx. “is thus set in this act of exchange itself. What 
appears paradoxical as the result is in fact already contained in the pre- 
condition itself.”?° The analysis of labour-power as a commodity enabled 
Marx to explain one of the most difficult aspects in exchange between capital 
and labour. Indeed. when one starts with the fact that labour is sold, the 
result of the exchange really is paradoxical : the worker is then the owner of 
his labour but at the same time not the owner of the product of his labour. 
This would be a crass violation of the equivalence of exchange, of the law 
of value. 

In the first stage of the exchange between capital and labour, the right 
lo dispose of the living labour of the worker passes into the hands of the 
capitalist. ‘The process of this living labour is now the process of exchange- 
value production itself. as a result of which capital is maintained and multi- 
plied. 

Marx sums up the findings of the analysis of the first stage in the ex- 
change between labour and capital in the words : “Labour ... not as value 
itself but as the living source of valuc.*** However. in his investigation of 
the second stage. Marx came across surplus-value. 

The objective result of the first stage in the exchange between capitalist 
and worker. as Marx noted*’. consisted in the capitalist appropriating the 
ability of the worker lo work (abour-power) and thus the actual labour as 
well. In the labour-process. capital is now maintained and multiplied, Le., 
surplus-value is produced. Marx was now confronted by the task of discover- 
ing the mechanism of this process. the process of capitalist exploitation. 

Marx criticizes the attempts of bourgeois economists to derive the increase 
in capital value directly from simple commodity circulation and now in- 
troduces the term ‘surplus-value’ for the first time.”* How docs surplus-value 
result in the capitalist production process ? 

Marx had established all the conditions necessary for the solving of this 
problem and it was only the division of capital into constant and variable 
components which had still to be worked out. Marx only adopted these ex- 


18 K. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okonomie, b. c.. p. 203. 

19 The value of this labour-eapability. the labour-power of the worker, is determined by the 
quantum of materialized labour which is necessary for the reproduction of the labour-power, 
i. ec. by the labour-quantum which is needed for producing the worker himself since the 
use-value of the commodity which the worker sells cannot be separated from the worker 
himself. 

20 WK. Marx. Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okonomie, 1. ¢.. p. 214. 

21 Ibid., p. 203. 

22° Ibid... p. * 


63 


pressions at a somewhat later date but in fact he makes this distinction 
already in his analysis of the conditions for the existence of surplus-value. 

Marx examines the surplus of value of the product which is present as 
the result of the expenditure of living labour as compared with the value of 
the raw material, the auxiliary materials and the instruments of labour 
(constant capital). He raises the question of the relationship of the value 
which the capitalist pays lo,the worker in the form of wages (variable capi- 
lal!) to the value which the living labour creates in the production process. 
Obviously, surplus-value only exists when the first value is less than the 
second. 

The capitalist mode of production establishes the necessary conditions 
for meeting this requirement. The capitalist relations of production on which 
the exchange between labour and capital, the selling of labour-power to the 
capitalist, is based necessarily leads to the worker disposing of his labour. 
The labour of the worker and thus the labour-product as well belong to the 
capitalist. The worker “exchanges his value-producing activity for a pre- 
determined value, regardless of the result of his activity’’.” 

The capitalist relations of production therefore include ‘from the stand- 
point of the law of value, the exchange of equivalents) the possibility that 
the value which results through the expenditure of living labour execeds the 
value of the labour-power, i.e., they permit the existence of surplus-value. 
The transformation of this possibility into reality depends on the productivity 
of social labour, on the level of development of the productive forces. “ If 
one working day were needed to keep a worker alive for one working day, 
capital would not exist since the working day would be exchanged for its 
own product, i.c., capital as capital could not be realized and consequently 
could not be maintained either... If, on the other hand, for instance, only 
half a working day is needed to keep a worker alive for a whole working 
day, then the surplus-value of the product results by itself since the capitalist 
has only paid for half a working day in the price and receives a whole dav 
in materialized form in the product...” However, the capitalist mode of 
production is characterized precisely by the fact that the development of the 
productive forces attains a level at which productive labour is represented 
as labour which produces surplus-value. Marx writes about capital in the 
following words: “As the never-ending driving force of enrichment, it 
therefore strives for the never-ending multiplication of the productive forces 
of labour and calls them into being.”’”* In this connection. he also develops 
the concepts of absolute and relative surplus-value in “ Grundrisse” and 
discovers the discordant tendency of capital: the tendency to extend the 
working day and at the same time to reduce the working time necessary. 

“When the absolute surplus-value is considered, it appears as determined 
by the absolute extension of the working day beyond the working time 


Ibid., p. 2 
Ibid., p. 230. 
Ibid.. p. 2 


www 
cos es 


a 


jor) 
= 


necessary ... In the second form of surplus-value, however, as relative sur- 
plus-value, which appears as the development of the productive force of the 
workers, in relation to the working day as a reduction of the necessary work- 
ing time and in relation to the population as a reduction of the necessary 
working population... in this form there directly appears the industrial and 
distinctively historial character of the mode of production based on capital . . . 
The tendency of capital is to combine the absolute with the relative surplus- 
value ; i.e, the greatest expansion of the working day with the greatest 
number of simultaneous working days, at the same time with the reduction 
of the necessary working time to the minimum .. .”?" 

In “ Grundrisse”, Marx solved the problem of the exchange between 
labour and capital on the basis of the law of value and thus established the 
foundations of his theory of surplus-value which forms the cornerstone of 
his entire economic doctrine. In Marx’s theory, surplus-value appears as the 
necessary result of capitalist production relations, representing the essential 
basis of these relations. It determines the other categories and relations of 
capitalist society and implies the law of motion of the capitalist mode of 
production, the inevitability of its downfall and its replacement by com- 
munism. “... within bourgeois society on the basis of exchange-value”, 
writes Marx in “Grundrisse”, “there are produced both trade and produc- 
tion relations which are just like mines with which to blow it up... (... if we 
did not find in society, as it is, the material production conditions and the 
trade relations corresponding to them for a classless society in a veiled form, 
all attempts to blow it up would be quixotism.) ”.?® These remarkable words 
agree with the conclusion concerning the expropriation of the expropriators 
drawn by Marx in the course of the further development of his theory and 
formulated in the 24th chapter of the first volume of “ Capital”.” 

The discovery of surplus-value was the greatest revolutionary event in 
the science of economics. It enabled Marx, for the first time in the history 
of political economy, to uncover and scientifically explain the mechanism of 
eapitalist exploitation. In the vigorous language of Vladimir Mayakovsky, 
Marx “caught the surplus-value robbers red-handed”.” 

Marx was the first in the history of the science of economics to show that 
the acquisition by the capitalist class of the surplus-value created by the 
workers is the basis of the capitalist mode of production and takes place in 
complete agreement with its inner laws, especially with the law of value. 

Insofar as capitalist exploitation follows from the nature of capitalist pro- 
duction relations as such, the direct result of this is that no liberation at all 
of the working class is possible within the capitalist order of society. “ The 
expropriated masses have no other prospect of obtaining possession than to 


27 Thid., p. 654 ff. 

28 Ibid., p. 77. 

29 Cf. K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, 1. ¢., p. 763. 

30 V. Mayakovsky, Ausgewdhlite Gedichte und Poeme, Berlin 1953, p. 315. 


5 Discovery 65 


transfer the means of production to society in a revolutionary way, Le., to 
make them the common property of the entire nation.” 

The socialist revolution is consequently not just possible but also neces- 
sary—this is the decisive conclusion which follows from Marx's theory of 
surplus-value. Thus the scientific hypothesis advanced in the 1840's became 
a scientifically substantiated thesis by the end of the 1850's. 

The discovery of the category of “ surplus-value”’ should not be regarded 
as merely the discovery of ihe appropriate term. This was what the bourgeois 
economists did. however, who wanted to discredit Marx’s theory and ascribe 
its merits to the Ricardo socialists, for example. Some Soviet researchers 
take the view that the term “surplus-value” was invented by Marx.” This 
view cannot be shared at all. The term “ surplus-value”’ was already employed 
by the Ricardo socialist William Thompson in his book “An Inquiry into 
the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most Conducive to Human 
Happiness” (1824).°* As was shown by F. Engels in the article on “ Lawyers’ 
Socialism” which he wrote in association with K. Kautsky, Thompson used this 
term to designate the surplus-profit which the capitalist who used machines 
obtained in comparison with the craftsman whose work was deve by hand. 
In addition to the term ‘surplus-value’, Thompson also used the expression 
‘additional value’ which he applied to the whole of the value newly created 
(v + m). Engels also drew attention to the fact that the “expression ‘ plus- 
value’ for every increase in value which costs the owner of the goods nothing 
hasbeen customary from time immemorial in normal business circles in 
France.’ It is also of interest that Marx. long before the publication of 
“Capital” made use of the term ‘surplus-value’ a few times in one of his 
early articles (written in October 1842). On that occasion he used it in the 
sense of additional value, of fines. by which the owner of woodland was com- 
pensated for thefts of timber.* 

The fact that Marx introduced the term ‘surplus-value’ to designate the 
corresponding category was naturally of considerable importance for the 
elaboration of the theory of surplus-value itself. Engels wrote about the 
significance of terminology in the development of science as follows : “‘ Every 
new aspect of a science involves a revolution in the technical terms of that 
science ... Political Economy has generally been content to take, just as they 
were, the terms of commercial and industrial life, and to operate with them. 
entircly failing to see that by so doing, it confined itself within the narrow 
circle of ideas expressed by those terms. Thus. though perfectly aware that 
both profit and rent are but sub-divisions. fragments of that unpaid part of 


31 Programm und Statut der Kommunistischen Partei der Sowjetunion, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 
1961, p. 28. 

32 Cf. E. A. Messerle, in Yuensie sannckn Anma-atnucKoro rocy,apeTReHHOrO Megarornyec- 
KOrO HHCTHTYTa HHOCTPAHUBIX aabrKos, VO. 1, Alma-Ata, 1956. p. 46. 

33. W. Thomson. An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most Conducive 
to Human Happiness, London 1824, pp. 167, 169. 

34 Juristen-Sozialismus, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 2t. Dietz Verlag. Berlin 1962, p. 506. 

35 K. Marx. Debatten iiber das Holzdiebstahlgesetz, in: Kk. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 1, 
pp. 135, 136, 139. 


the product which the labourer has to supply to his employer (its first appro- 
priator, though not its ultimate exclusive owner), yet even classical Political 
Economy never went beyond the received notions of profit and rent. never 
examined this unpaid part of the product (called by Marx surplus-product) 
in its integrity as a whole and therefore never arrived at a clear comprehen- 
sion, either of its origin and nature, or of the laws that regulate the subse- 
quent distribution of its value.” * 

That the term ‘ surplus-value’ is not to be found with the bourgeois econo- 
mists is demonstrated by the fact already mentioned that bourgeois political 
economy was unable to identify the category of surplus-value as a special 
category of the capitalist mode of production. Marx showed what confusion 
had been caused in economic theory by the circumstance that the bourgeois 
economists. or their opponents who were influenced by Ricardian theory, in 
practice understood surplus-value under the categories of profit or interest. 

Thus the author of an anonymous pamphlet which appeared in 1824 and 
was directed against bourgeois political economy made “an important ad- 
vance on Ricardo’’®”’, as Marx stressed, in attributing surplus-value to sur- 
plus-labour. **... whatever may be due to the capitalist”, quotes Marx from 
the pamphlet, “he can only receive the surplus labour of the labourer ; for 
the labourer must live...’”** In the pamphlet, however, the category of sur- 
plus-value is designated as ‘capital interest’ (to distinguish it from the in- 
terest for loaned capital, profit, etc.) and this alone “leads to undesirable 
contradictions ’”*® on the part of the author “ and suffices to make him relapse 
into economic slang.’”*° 

By the “level of the rent in general”, Rodbertus—a German bourgeois 
economist—actually understood the profit-rate and puzzled over the dif- 
ference between surplus-valuc and its special forms. But, as Marx noted, 
“he races past the correct (answer) because for him, right from the start, it is 
a question of the interpretation of a specific phenomenon (land-rent) and not 
of the discovery of the general law.’** 

Consequently, the introduction of the term ‘surplus-value’ into scientific 
usage was of enormous importance for the development of political economy. 
But the outstanding merit of Marx was not his use of the term ‘surplus- 
value’ but the fact that he formulated a coherent, scientific theory of sur- 
plus-value which explains the nature of capitalist exploitation. 


36 F. Engels. Preface to the English edition of Capital, l.c., p. 4. 
37 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, 1. c., p. 238. 

38 Ibid., p. 239. 

39 Ibid., p. 254. 

40 Ibid., p. 254. 

44 K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c., p. 54. 


CHAPTER 5 


Why the second volume of “ A Contribution 
to the Critique of Political Economy” 
was not published 


A few words about the first volume. The result of fifteen 
years’ research, “... these parts still contain nothing about 
capital”. The revolutionizing of science. The manuscript of 
1861/63. Work on the second part. January 1862 : everything 
from the beginning again! A new stage in the investigations. 
The “inner” categories and their metamorphosed forms. The 
necessity for the completion of the theory of surplus-value. 
The theory of profit in “Grundrisse”’. The theory of average 
profit and of production-price in the manuscript of 1861/63. 
A statement by Engels. 


\ 
In May 1858. Marx completed the work on “ Grundrisse™” which we at- 
tempted to analyse in the preceding chapters and, on 26th January 1859. 
he sent the Berlin publisher. Duncker, the manuscript of the first part of 
“A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy”. The book appeared 
in the summer of 1859. A special chapter has not been devoted to this work 
hy Marx here for the simple reason that the first part of “ A Contribution to 
the Critique of Political Economy” only contains the chapter on the com- 
modity and the chapter on money. The chapter on capital, where he had 
intended to describe his theory of surplus value. was to be the subject of the 
second part but this was never published. In place of this, the first volume 
of “ Capital” appeared in 1867. 

The answer to the question of why the second part of Marx’s work was 
never published is of considerable significance since it can explain how he 
took his theory of surplus-value a stage further. 

In “A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy”, Marx pro- 
vided for the first time a systematic description of his theory of value. He 
himself had a high opinion of this work which was the result of fifteen years 
of research. This book, wrote Marx, represents “for the first time an im- 
portant view of social relations (from a) scientific (standpoint).”” “I hope to 


1 K. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 12 November 1858, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, p. 566. 


69 


win a scientifie victory for our Party.”’? “In these two chapters... the founda- 


lion of the Proudhonist socialism now fashionable in France is destroyed.”* 

Although the first part did not include the theory of surplus-value, the 
foundations for the analysis of the capitalist mode of production were never- 
theless already set out in it. Marx noted in this connection “that the spect- 
fically social but not at all absolute character of bourgeois production 1s 
analysed forthwith in the simplest form, that of the commodity ”.* 

Mars realized very well that he had achieved a revolutionary transfor- 
mation in political ceonomy. In an answer to the reproach (made even by 
friends and fellow-militants such as Wilhelm Liebknecht, for instance) that 
the mode of presentation was not on a popular level, Marx emphasized that 
~ Scientific attempts to revolutionize a science can never be really popular.”* 

Later, in the letter to Engels of 16th May 1868, Marx explained this 
thesis and stated that in political economy there was a great divergence be- 
tween that which was of interest for practical aspects and that which was 
theorctically necessary. The painstakingly exact analysis of the “ economic 
cell-form” of bourgeois society seems to be one subtlety after another.” For 
the theory of surplus-value, howevcr, these ‘subtleties’ were of fundamental 
importance. At the same time. Marx expressed the opinion that the second 
part would be more readily understood since it would deal with more con- 
crete relations." 

The chapter on capital. containing the theory of surplus-value, rightly 
occupied a central position in Marx’s work as a whole. Marx made repeated 
references to this when he said that this chapter “is really the most im- 
‘portant part of the first book’® and stressed that it has “a directly revolu- 
lionary task??? and that with it “the actual battle’? begins. This also ex- 
plams the somewhat apologetic tone which runs through the letter Marx 
wrote to Engels shortly before he sent the manuscript of the first part 
to the publisher: “The manuscript is about 12 signatures (three parts) 
and—don't faint—although its title (is) “Capital in general”. these parts 
still contain nothing about capital. ..’%? In the same letter, Marx informs 
him that the chapter on capital has been prepared in detail and would soon 
follow, immediately after the publication of the first part. 

Thus there is every reason to assert that it was Marx’s intention that the 


w 


K. Marx, letter to Weydemeyer of 1 February 1859, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, 

p. 573. 

3) Ibid. 

4 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 22 July 1859, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29. p. 463. 

5 K. Marx, letter 10 Kugelmann of 28 December 1862, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 30, 
Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1964, p. 640. 

6 x, Marx, letter to Engels of the 16 May 1868, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 32, Dietz 
Verlag, Berlin 1965, p. 88. 

7 Cf WK. Marx, Capital Vol. 1, Preface to the first German edition, 1. ¢., p. 8. 

8 Cf. K. Marx, letter to Kugelmann of 28 December 1862, l. c., p. 640. 

9 Cf. K. Marx, letter to Engels of 2 April 1858, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 1. c. 

0 Kk. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 15 September 1860, in: K. Marx/¥, Engels, Werke, Bd. 30, 
p. 565. 

41 K. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 28 March 1859, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, p. 586. 

42 K. Marx, letter to Engels, written between 43 and 15 January 1859, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, 

Werke, Bd. 29, p. 383. 


first part of his work should be followed as rapidly as possible by the second. 
Both the nature of the matter and also the task of propagating the Marxist 
economic theory and of disseminating it in the working-class movement 
necessitated this. The first part only contained the first two introductory 
chapters and even these were by no means understandable for everybody. 
Marx wrote to Engels that “ Mr. Licbknecht has told Biskamp that ‘he was 
never so disappointed by a book’ and Biskamp himself said to me that he 
did not see ‘a quoi bon’ (i.c., the use of it)”. 

And Engels, who was keenly aware of all these circumstances, urged his 
friend on 31st January 1860 to prepare the second part of his work for print- 
ing as quickly as possible. “I consider this to be the most important thing 
for the time being... Be a little less conscientious for once in your own 
alfairs... That the thing is written and will be published is what matters 

.and if eventful times occur, what good is it if the whole thing is inter- 
rupted before you are yet finished with capital in general? I am very well 
aware of all the other interruptions which come between but I also know 
that the principal delay is always caused by vour own scruples. After all, it’s 
better that the thing appears than that it is not published at all for the same 
inisgivings.””™ 

But the whole of 1860 passed and it was only in August L861 that Marx 
at last began work on the second part of “ A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy”. This work was the beginning of a mighty manuscript 
covering 200 printed sheets which Marx called, like the first part, “A Con- 
tribution to the Critique of Political Economy” (Zur Kritik der politischen 
Okonomie). Marx wrote this manuscript between August 1861 and July 1863. 
It consists of 23 parts and the pages are numbered consecutively from 1 to 
{.472. Its composition, however, is quite heterogeneous. 

The first five parts. which Marx wrote in the period from August to 
December 1861. reflect his work on the second part of “ A Contribution to 
the Critique of Political Economy”. Here he dealt with the transformation 
of money into capital and the production of absolute and relative surplus- 
value. But when he reached the section on machines. Marx interrupted the 
positive description of his economic theory and. in January 1862, began a 
searching critical analysis of the history of bourgeois political cconomy, which 
forms the greater part of the manuscript from {861 to 1863 and comprises 
more than {00 printed shects. Marx called this historical-critical part of the 
manuscript “ Theories of Surplus-Value”. Ife had originally intended that 
this historical digression should complete the section on the production- 
process of capital in the same way that the chapters on the commodity and 
on money are followed by historical notes in the first part of * A Contribution 
to the Critique of Political Economy”. 

Marx’s work on the * Theories of Surplus-Value” was indeed a tremen- 
dous critical analysis of the whole of bourgeois political economy. As such, 


13 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 22 July 1859, in: K. Marx F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29. p. 463. 
14 F. Engels, letter to Marx of 31 January 1860, in: K. Marx F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 30, p. 15. 


74 


Sad 


it marked a new stage in his scientific investigations. However, Marx did not 
simply carry out an historical-critical examination of bourgeois political 
economy but. following his method of inquiry. also continued to work on 
his theory of economics. This also explains the numerous theoretical digres- 
sions in the “Theories of Surplus-Value” which sometimes account for 
hundreds of pages and are devoted to the cardinal problems of political 
economy. In the letter of 15th August 1863. Marx informed Engels about 
his work on this manuscript and remarked : “ By the way, when | now look 
at the concoction and see how I have had to throw everything overboard and 
had to put even the historical part together from material which was to some 
extent completely unknown...” 

What did Marx have to “throw overboard” in the course of the work 
on the “ Theories of Surplus-Value” and what was the “ material which was 
to some extent completely unknown” of which he speaks ? 

The crux of the matter was that the theory of surplus-valuc. in the form 
in which it had been elaborated in * Grundrisse”. could not be regarded as 
complete. With the discovery of surplus-value, Marx had got to the most 
profound secret of capitalist economics. Having got this far, however, he had 
to retrace his steps and demonstrate how surplus-value ‘regulates’ all the 
other categories of the capitalist mode of production : profit. average profit, 
land-rent. interest, etc. This had to be done beeause on the surface of bour- 
geois society there is neither value nor surplus-value. There it is a question 
of market-prices. prices of production. profit and so on. [Tt had to be shown 
that these categories acting on the surface of bourgeois society are regulated 
by value and surplus-value. Only after this could the theory of surplus-value 
be regarded as complete and the law of motion of capitalist society as 
adequately substantiated. In short. the theory of surplus-value had to be 
supplemented by the theory of average profit and of price of production, This 
was the task which Marx performed in the course of his work on the “ Theo- 
ries of Surplus-Value”’, 

Let us take another quick look at “ Grundrisse™ to check that Marx had 
not yet developed his theory of average profit and of production-price in this 
manuscript. Some Soviet scholars take the contrary view. L. A. Leontvev 
writes in a book on “Grundrisse” that “the most important theses of the 
doctrine of the rate of profit and of price of production which are developed 
in the third volume of ‘Capital’ had already been elaborated in ‘Grund- 
risse’ "78 We take the view that this was not the case and we will try to show 
why. Itis sufficient to note here that the basic theses of the doctrine of profit- 
rate and production-price were not deleloped for the first time hy Marx in 
the third volume of ‘Capital’ (1865), as asserted by L. A. Leontyev in his 
hook. but in the “ Theories of Surplus-Value” (1862). What is to be found 


in “ Grundrisse” about this ? 


45 K. Marx, Jetter to Engels of 15 August 1863, in: K. Marx F. Engels. Werke, Bd. 30. p. 363. 
16 L.A. Leontyev, O npeasaputTesnHoM BapHanre ,,Kanntasja’' Mapxea, Hag-so AH CCCP, 


Moscow 1946, p. 75 


To begin with, it can be stated that Marx in “ Grundrisse” advances his 
theory of profit as the melamorphosed form of surplus-value on the basis of 
the distinction he makes there between variable and constant capital. Marx 
notes that the category of surplus-value is missing in the bourgeois eccono- 
mists and writes: ".... au fond (— strictly speaking) surplus-value—insofar 
as it is indeed the basis of profit but is still distinguished from the commonly 
so-called profit—has never been developed.” 

In an analysis of the theory of Ricardo, Marx said that “‘ The difference 
between profit and surplus-value does not exist for him...’** Marx also 
noted the errors and contradictions which follow from this in the bourgeois 
economists. “that profit is not understood as a self-derivative, secondary 
form of surplus-value”.*° 

He explains that “In its direct form profit is nothing but the sum of the 
surplus-value expressed in proportion to the total value of the capital.” The 
“profit of the capitalist class... can never be greater than the sum of the 
surplus-value”.”° 

In “Grundrisse”, Marx formulates “two... laws which are apparent in 
this transformation of surplus-value into the shape of profit...” The first 
is that the profit-rate is always less than the rate of surplus-value, the second 
states that “ the profit-rate decreases ”’.”* 

Marx also propounds in “ Grundrisse” the laws of the change in the 
profit-rate and in the rate of surplus-value : “. . . . the greater the growth . . . in 
the relative surplus-value, ... the greater the drop in the rate of profit.”” 

In “ Grundrisse”. Marx worked out in detail the law of the tendency of 
the profit-rate to fall and characterized it as “the most important law of 
modern political economy”, ‘which despite its simplicity has never been 
understood up till now and even less has been consciously expressed ”.”* The 
consequence of this law is that “ beyond a certain point, the development of 
the productive forces is a barrier for capital; this means that the capital 
relation is a harrier for the development of the productive forces of labour.” 
“The growing unsuitability of the productive development of socicty for its 
prevailing production relations is expressed in the slashing contradictions, 
crises and convulsions.’ “... the highest development of productive power 
together with greatest expansion of existing wealth will coincide with depre- 
ciation of eapital. degradation of the labourer, and a most straightened ex- 
haustion of his vital powers.” “...these regularly recurring catastrophes 
lead to their repetition on a higher scale, and finally to its (ie., capital) 
violent overthrow.”” 


” 


47. K. Marx. Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Okonomie, 1. c., p. 288. 
18 Ibid., p. 450. 

19 Thbid., p. 4° 
20) Ibid., p. G53, 
21 Ibid, p. 648 ff. 
22) Thid., p. 633. 

3 Thid., p. 634. 

4 Thid., p. 635. 

5 Ibid., p. 636. 


It is thus evident that Marx, in “ Grundrisse”’, did not stop at the dis- 
covery of surplus-value but proceeded with the explanation of forms, meta- 
morphosed on the basis of surplus-value, which take effect on the surface 
of capitalist society. Above all, he developed the theory of profit but did not 
come to a halt here either. 

In “ Grundrisse”, Marx notes a fact of fundamental significance. Since 
the organic composition of capital differs in the individual branches, the 
“proportions of surplus-labour” (i.e., the individual rates of profit) are 
also unequal. “Equal surplus-value, i.e., an equal relation of surplus-labour 
and necessary labour, being assumed, profit can thus be unequal and must be 
unequal in relation to the magnitude of the capital.””* The same profil-rate 
for capital investments of the same magnitude would only be possible if the 
whole of the surplus-value were distributed in proportion to the magnitude 
of the capital sums invested. Marx draws attention to the fact that a distri- 
bution of this kind «does take place in various branches as a result of com- 
petition between the capitalists. In one branch prices fall below the value. 
in another they rise above it.” However, the capitalists ‘can divide among 
themselves nothing but surplus-value”.”* Marx emphasizes that “the distri- 
bution of the surplus-value among the capital sums, the calculation of the 
total surplus-value among the individual capital sums,” is a “secondary eco- 
nomic operation’’.”° 

The material quoted here justifies the assertion that Marx in ‘“ Grund- 
risse”’ comes very close to the discovery of the law of average profit and of 
production-price: he comes to the conclusion that unequal individual profit- 
rates necessarily exist in the different branches of production and that profits 
must be redistributed at a general profit-rate as a result of the competition 
between different branches. The general profit-rate is established by the 
redistribution of the surplus-value produced in all branches of capitalist 
production in proportion to the magnitude of the invested capital. Com- 
modities are sold at prices which differ from their value, ie., from the facts 
as such. at production-prices which in one branch are above and in another 
below the value of the commodities. 

Marx is very close to the theory of price of production here but does not 
vet comprehend it in its full significance. This is also the reason why the 
theory of average profit and of price of production is not taken further in 
‘Grundrisse ”. Price of production as a category does not appear in “ Grund- 
risse”’ either” : the production-price here is not yet developed as a metamor- 
phosed form of value. To be able to do that, Marx had first to show that 


26 Ibid., p. 633, 

27°) «CE. ibid., p. 338 f. 

28 Ibid.. p. 327. 

29° Ibid., p. 525. 

30 Careful study of the text of the manuscript revealed that on page 220 of ‘‘Grundrisse"’, 
where the term ‘Produktionspreis’ appears three times (in lines 7, 30 and 40°, a mistake in 
the deciphering of the text had been made. In all three cases, Marx had not written ‘Pro- 
duktionspreis’ (price of production) but ‘Produktionsprozess’ (production-process), On 
page 114 (line 45), Marx uses the term ‘price of production’ in the sense of the immanent 
costs of production of the commodity which are equal to its valuc, 


~1 
_ 


competition within a particular branch transforms the individual value into 
the market-value and how the competilion between different branches changes 
market-values into prices of production. In capitalism, the centre around 
which market-prices fluctuate is no longer the value but the price of pro- 
duction. It is precisely this fundamental distinction in price-formation which 
occurs with the transition from a simple commodity economy to capitalist 
production which is not yet explained by Marx in “ Grundrisse”. It is at a 
later date, between 1861 and 1863, that Marx deals with this problem ex- 
haustively in the course of his work on “ Theories of Surplus-Value”’. 

There is a great deal of indirect evidence for the validity of this thesis. 
At the end of the first chapter of ‘A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy”, Marx lists the basic problems of political economy but does not 
include average profit or price of production. The problem of Jand-rent, 
which is closely connected with the question of price of production, is merely 
reduced here to “... how does the exchange-value of natural forces arise ?’”* 

In the letter to Lassalle of 44th March 1858, Marx speaks about the con- 
tradiction between Ricardo’s profit and labour-value theories. “I believe I 
have cleared up the matter”®’, is what he writes. The same contradiction is 
also discussed at the end of the first chapter of “A Contribution to the Critique 
of Political Economy ’’**. Obviously. it is a question here of the first of the 
two contradictions in Ricardo’s theory which subsequently resulted in the 
downfall of the Ricardian School of bourgeois political economy (as noted by 
I’. Engels in the foreword to the second volume of “ Capital”). 

This contradiction consisted in the inability of Ricardo and his followers 
to bring exchange between labour and capital into harmony with the law of 
value and to explain the production of surplus-value with the exchange of 
equivalents as a basic condition. But neither in the letter mentioned nor at 
the end of the first chapter of “A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy” is there any mention of the second contradiction in Ricardo’s 
theory, of its inability to explain average profit and price of production 
within the framework of the law of value. Instead of giving this explanation, 
Rieardo and his school, like A. Smith, identified value with the price of 
production. 

Tt is only after 1862 that Marx speaks of this “dogma of Smith and 
Ricardo” after he had discovered and criticized this contradiction in the 
theory of Ricardo and. at the same time, provided the positive solution of 
the problem.™ 

Marx mentions the law of average profit and of the price of production for 
the first time in ‘Theories of Surplus-Value’’. to be exact, in the chapter de- 
voted to A. Smith: “Yes, as I shall prove below, even the average price of com- 
modities (this is how Marx often refers to price of production in the manu- 


31 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, ]. c., p. 62. 

32 K. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 11 March 1858, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, p. 554. 
33 Cf. K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, I. c¢., p. 62. 

34 Cf. K. Marx, letter to Engels of 9 August 1862, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, I. c. 


75 


script of 1861/63—V. V.) is always different from their value.”* This shows 
that Marx had already solved the basic problem of the theory of average 
profit and price of production—at least in his head—in January 1862. 

It may be assumed that he found the answer to this problem between 
1860 and 1861. The first elaboration of the law of average profit dates from 
the spring of 1862.°° Marx formulated the law of average profit and price of 
production between June and August 1862 (similarly in “Theories of Sur- 
plus-Value”). It is to this time that the letters also refer in which Marx and 
Engels provide detailed information about the discoveries made concerning 
the theory of average profit and price of production and the theory of land- 
rent which is closely associated with it.*” 

By the end of 1862, Marx saw that the basic problems of the theory of 
surplus-value had been solved and this caused him once again to think about 
continuing the publication of his theory of economics. On 28th December 
1862, he wrote to Kugelmann : “I was very glad to learn from your letter 
that vou and vour friends take so warm an interest in my Critique of Political 
Economy. The second part is at last finished, apart from making a fair copy 
and the final polishing for the press. It will be about thirty printed sheets. It 
is actually a continuation of Part I, but will appear independently under the 
title Capital. with A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy only 
as a sub-title.”** 

The “ fair copy and the final polishing for the press” alone still took more 
than four vears and the 30 printed sheets referred to were consequently trans- 
formed into the four volumes of “Capital”. All this only shows that the 
transition from research to the description of problems which have already 
been examined and the arrangement of the layout of “Capital” was a no 
less complicated process than the task of research itself. 

Ilow Marx claborated his theory of economies in the 1850’s was de- 
scribed by F. Engels in 1893 : “ Marx worked out,the theory of surplus-value 
quietly and entirely by himself during the Fifties and stubbornly refused to 
publish anything about it until he was fully clear about it and all the con- 
sequences. Thus the non-appearance of the second and following parts of ‘A 
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy’. . .””*° 

After everything which has been said so far, there is no longer anv doubt 
that Engels. when he refers to the “‘ consequences” of the theory of surplus- 
value, means the further development of this theory. the explanation of 
average profit. price of production. land-rent and so on. All these problems 
were solved by Marx in the course of the work on the manuscript of 1861/63, 


35 K. Marx. Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. c., p. 61. 

36 Cf. K. Marx. Theories of Surplus-Value, Part. III, 1. ¢., p. 237. 

37- Cf. K. Marx. letter to Engels of 18 June 1862, in: Marx’Engels, Selected Correspondence. }. ¢., 
p. 156; ef. K. Marx, letter to Engels of 2 August 1862, in: ibid., p. 157; ef. KK. Marx, letter 
to Engels of 9 August 1862, in: ibid., p. 126. 

38 K. Marx, letter to Kugelmann of 28 December 1862, in: K. Marx. Letters to Dr. Kugelmann, 
Martin Lawrence Ltd., London (no date available). 

39 F. Engels. Ietter to Schmuilow of 7 February 1893, in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Briefe ther ‘‘ Das 
Kapital’, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1954. p. 360. 


when he again carried out a critical examination of the entire ficld of bour- 
geois political economy. While making this examination. Marx wrote the 
historical part of the future “‘ Capital’’—the “Theories of Surplus-Value”— 
and at the same time completed his own theory of surplus-value. This meant 
that publication of the second part of “A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy” was now possible. But at the end of 1862, Marx decided 
to change the title of his work on economics which was now to be published 
immediately in one volume and no longer in the form of separate parts. 

The critical analysis of bourgeois political economy in “Theories of Sur- 
plus-Value” is a brilliant illustration of Marx’s method of economic research. 
When Marx investigated bourgeois political economy, he did not demand 
at all from this or that bourgeois political economist that he should take the 
standpoint of the working-class. Thus Marx defended Ricardo who was 
aceused by his ‘‘ sentimental opponents” of sacrificing the interests of the 
workers to the interests of production and of wanting production for the sake 
of production. Marx stressed that Ricardo, for his time, was correct and that 
from the bourgeois standpoint his position “ was not only scientifically honest 
but scientifically necessary.’*° Marx criticized the bourgeois economists only 
because they did not pursue their original theses—formulated from the purely 
bourgeois standpoint—, such as the labour-value theory, to the logical con- 
clusion. 

In his analysis, Marx always follows the standpoint of bourgeois political 
economy in this or that question right to the end. Since he did this {rom the 
position of the working-class, he was free from the narrowness which pre- 
vented bourgeois political economy from pursuing its own theory—the labour- 
value theory—to the logical conclusion. Marx drew the conclusions from the 
labour-value theory and in this way—as we have seen—arrives at his theory 
of surplus-value. 

This can be illustrated by two examples from the manuscript of 1861/63. 

1. In a gencral analysis of classical bourgeois economy. Marx notes that it 
has “reduced to the one form of profit all forms of revenue and all indepen- 
dent shapes and titles under which the non-labourer participates in the value 
of the commodity.’* At this point, the bourgeois economists stopped. They 
were unable to distinguish “ surplus-value” as a separate category in its true 
form and identified it with the category of “ profit”, Marx’s analysis begins 
at that point where bourgeois political economy came to a halt. 

To begin with, Marx shows that in fact a theory of surplus-value can be 
found in Ricardo. “In the critique of Ricardo, we must now distinguish what 
he himself did not distinguish. (Firstly) his theory of surplus-value, which 
naturally exists in him, although he does not fix surplus-value as dilfering 
from its special forms of profit, rent and interest.’*? At another place. Marx 
declares that where Ricardo in his remarks abstracts from constant capital, 
40 K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, I. c., p. 107. 

44 K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c., p. 160. 


42 K. Marx, ibid., 2. Teil, 1. c., p. 160. 


77 


i.c., Where profit is shown as a product of variable capital, he is in fact talk- 
ing about surplus-value.”* 

Marx also shows that classical bourgeois economy represents surplus- 
value as the result of unpaid labour. In the classical authors, says Marx. 
“Profit, however, is reduced to surplus-value since the value of the whole 
commodity is reduced to labour; the amount of paid labour embodied in 
the commodity constitutes, wages, consequently the surplus over and above 
it constitutes unpaid labour...”“* But to determine the surplus value it was 
first of all necessary to determine the ‘ value of labour’ (a term coined by the 
bourgeois economists), for the surplus value appears as a surplus above and 
beyond the ‘value of labour’. In Ricardo’s theory, the value is determined 
by the food necessary for the maintenance of the workers and the repro- 
duction of their kind. But why was the value of labour determined in pre- 
ciscly this way ? Ricardo explained this by saying that the law of supply 
and demand reduces the average price of labour to the means of existence 
necessary for the maintenance of the worker. ‘“‘ He determines here the value, 
in a basic point of the system as a whole, by supply and demand’™, i.e., 
Ricardo really disassociates himself from the theory of labour value. 

Marx analyzed the theory of the standard authors in this decisive ques- 
tion and remarked that Ricardo “instead of labour. should have spoken of 
labour power. But this would have represented capital as the real conditions 
of work confronting the worker as an independent power. And capital would 
have immediately been represented as a specific social relation. Thus for 
Ricardo it is distinguished only as ‘accumulated labour’ from ‘immediate 
labour’. 

“And (it) is something merely factual. merely an element in the labour 
process. from which the relation of labour and capital, wages and profit. can 
never be developed.’** Here we have a model example of Marx’s construc- 
tive critical approach. In the confrontation with Ricardo, Marx developed 
his own theory of labour-power as a commodity which, as noted before, had 
already been claborated in “ Grundrisse”’. 

2. Marx analyzes the “dogma of Smith and Ricardo”, which states that 
value and price of production are identical. and shows that in Ricardo there 
is in actual fact a distinction hetween these two terms. “It is curious”, savs 
Marx. ‘‘how Ricardo at the end almost touches on what is correct with the 
word but does not take it further...’*? Marx quotes the places in Ricardo’s 
book in which there is in fact a distinction between value and price of pro- 
duction (a distinction which Ricardo himself did not grasp and did not 
develop) and then goes on to give his own answer to the problem, formulat- 
ing his theory of average profit and of the price of production.”* 

From these examples, it is clearly evident that Marx worked out the 


43 Cf. ibid.. p. 370. 

44 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part IIT, 1. ¢., p. 500. 
45 K. Marx. Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, I. c., p. 397. 
46 Ibid... p. 397 f. 

47 Ibid., p. 189. 

48 Cf. ibid.. p. 189 f. 


political economy of the working class by overcoming the limitations of 
bourgeois economic theory. 

Now. after everything which has heen said. we can turn our attention to 
the main part of the manuscript of 1861/63—the “Theories of Surplus- 
Value”—and follow the process in which Marx elaborated his theory of 
average profit and price of production and his theory of land-rent. 


79 


Karl Marx 


Frederick Engels 


Yb =Sp vase i. 
Dons ay 
fhm Bm Las Leyes (42) O81 
LAr Caresagth oe Osteen =a 
Bando shhh A ae 


thy Ls Dene : ba : ‘ 
oy Mat : a 


Letter of thanks by Karl Marx to Frederich Engels 


Reading room in the British Museum 


Jenny Marx 


Das Kapital. 


Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. 


Karl Marx. 


Erster Band. 


Buch I: Der Produktionsprocess des Kapitals. 


Dae Recht der Veberaetzung wird vorbehalten 


Hamburg 
Verlag von Otto Meissner. 
1867. 


New-York: L. W. Schmidt. 24 Barclay-Street. 


Title page of the first edition 


Jape 
re kb aunt 544 Lectin gee 
Hepa 2 Wave? (is Leg) Aaa RAL Hee BE Lr foe. OP -F . 
See Ae ht mppe tytn 2 be oH a Gh~ Spple ot  K Sage: aR 
Ly te nen den eenrttie b aut. Qt tm eA Axe betnke baa pypte, fo 
| wae atop t te Stl * Lams) yin tein ‘yo 1 Op ome “ae 2 bpp abn” 
| Ea apne eet WA mime ce SEY A 2A eee Ye Ae 


oan est "Fae Bi 2 Had Ge P09, Gortne Dg yen 
eh Bi. pits Sy Se 
Sn al a era a sare are 
: Op sa Ph. ce 


Carey oleh. 
tans AIS arte fg pe ae aa 
ay payat oy A BR uy te wi ew eet 
aie Baths Ye Cytnenen Meets a etid\ ol at os a 
weet eth ser yenieks 2M ot 3 SVP LL cota Goes 
ad moe 


sorte. DS b een 
wih Covina 4 hry thee Ate easily a thay Z 1ja es 


PeScte Re 


oe “RS i“ okt Pa 
ENG, agate ee, MP Gigs ty 
hey Pe} ee ty Ae da $ COD, 10 omcttan 
oalenwee HA wt os sds 4 re Ey 
ye eo siniueee wo be eh Lary. i 
eles sa Geen Sm Angs) "(ea pes > 


Serie Se Ape ty. 


* % “oo aS ann de 


First page of the manuscript of what was to be volume 3 


HAW MTA. 


KPHTHKA DOJHTHYECKOM SKOHOMIH, 


COMMEMIB 
KAPHA MAPKCA 


NEPEBO4D Ce HBMEUKATO. 


TOMS DEPaHRe 


KAHTA I. DPONECCL MPONSBOACTRA KADETAIA. 


C.-NETEPBYPTS. 
HOTAHIE Il Ml. HOAAKOBA. 


aBa78 


Title page of the first Russian editton 


CHAPTER 6 


From value to price of production 


Market-value and its lav of motion. The “ false social value”. 
The discovery of price of production. Two kinds of com- 
petition and the twofold movement of the equalization of 
prices. The method of scientific abstraction in Mara’s in- 
vestigations. 


We turn now to the parts of “ Theories of Surplus-Valuc” in which Marx 
worked out the theory of average profit and price of production. We shall 
see how Marx, step by step, progressed from value to market-value and 
from this to the price of production. 

In “ Theories of Surplus-Value”, Marx characterizes value as “‘a specific 
social form of human activity (labour) ...’' The social character of labour 
is quite definitely stressed here. “ As values”, says Marx, * commodities are 
social magnitudes, that is to say, something absolutely different from their 
‘ properties’ as ‘things’. As values, they constitute only relations of men in 
their productive activity.” 

When value-creating labour is characterized in the qualitative respect as 
social labour, its quantitative distinctness automatically follows from this. 
It consists in the fact that commodities only contain that quantum of labour 
or labour-time which is socially necessary to produce them. 


To be able to progress from value to price of production, Marx first of 
all had to specify the concept of value for the conditions of the capitalist 
mode of production since under these conditions value continues to develop. 
Marx noted that “thus the full potential of this quite simple category does 
not emerge historically in the most advanced phases of society ...”* Indeed, 
only in capitalism does the commodity form of the labour-product become 
gencralized, only here does it become the basis of the mode of production 
itself. Even labour-power becomes a commodity. “Thus in capital”, writes 
Marx, “the independent existence of value is raised to a higher power than 


K. Marx, Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. ¢., p. 42. 
K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part I!f, 1. ¢., p. 129. 


A Sl 


K. Marx, Introduction to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 1. ¢., p. 208. 


€ Discovery at 


in money.” This is why it is precisely from the conditions of capitalist pro- 

duction that Marx develops the law of value.® 

Marx shows that commodities, as products of capitalist production, differ 
considerably from the commodities produced in a simple commodity economy, 
The product of private labour appears in the capitalist mode of production 
as part of the total social production not just because it is some part of the 
total quantity of goods. This was also the case before the predominance of 
capitalist production relations. In capitalism, * Each individual commodity 
represents a definite portion of capital and of the surplus-value created by 
it.” In capitalism, social division of labour develops to such an extent that 
the mass of Jabour-products enter the production process as commodities. as 
articles of trade, and emerge again from it as commodities. This establishes 
a close connection between all branches of capitalist production. To realize 
the whole of the surplus-value created in the production process and em- 
bodied in the commodities. the whole mass of the commodities of the branch 
in question must be sold at a social value corresponding to the value of the 
capital advanced in this branch plus the surplus-value. It is necessary here 
that all the commodities of the branch should be sold at this value. If only 
some of the commodities are sold, this means in actual fact that each com- 
modity is sold at less than its value and that consequently the surplus-value 
is not realized. or not in full. in the branch in question. Jt may even be that 
the capital advanced cannot be fully replaced. 

Therefore. in the capitalist mode of production, the concept of socially 
necessary labour-time undergoes a fundamental change. Even when only the 
socially necessarv labour-time has been expended for the individual part of 
the total product of the branch in question but the quantity of labour for the 
branch as a whole was too much. i.c., exceeded the socially necessary quan- 
tum, then the social value of the commodities of this branch is less than the 
sum of their individual values. 

Marx thus investigates how the value is specified by the conditions of 
capitalist production, drawing a distinction between the social and the in- 
dividual value of the product. The value of the individual product is con- 
stituted by the social value of the total mass of products of the branch in 
question, The social value of the product-unit is equal to the total social 
value produced in the branch divided by the number of product-units. 

As Marx shows. it is also necessary to distinguish between socially neces- 
sary and individually necessary labour-time.’ The one is based on the social, 
the other on the individual value. When a surplus quantum of products is 
produced in the branch in question, although only the (individually) neces- 
sary labour-time has been expended for every product-unit, the total quan- 
4 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, 1. ¢., p. 131. 

5 Cf. ibid., p. 7 (Cf. in this connection the beginning of the first volume of Capilal which reads: 
“The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails, presents 
itself as an ‘immense accumulation of commodities’... Our investigation must therefore 
begin with the analysis of a commodity.’’ The uncompleted chapter on “ Value” in ‘* Grund- 
risse’’ alsa begins in a similar wavy.) 


Thid., p. 413. 
Cf. K. Marx, Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. ¢.. p. 119. 


i) 


tum of the individually necessary labour-time is greater than the socially 
necessary labour-time. In this case, the social value of the product of the 
branch in question is less than its individual value. } 

The social value of the commodities of a branch determined in this 
manner was termed ‘market-value’ by Marx. ‘This common value is the 
marhet-value of these commodities. the value at which they appear on the 
market.”* 

Marx stresses above all the social character of market-valuc. 

Market-value is the product of specifically capitalist conditions, the result 
of capitalist competition within the branch in question. “ But the fact that 
the average of production conditions determines the market-price and thus 
raises the price of production. which is less than this average. above its price 
and even value (Marx means here the individual value of the product—V. V.) 
derives from the competitive nature of capitalist production and is con- 
sequently not a natural but a social law.’”” 

Marx speaks here of the “average of the production conditions” which 
determine the market-value in the branch in question when they coincide 
with the general conditions of production of the branch in question. Market- 
value in thus not always and under all conditions determined by average 
conditions. Marx divides the individual or special production conditions of 
the branch in question into three main groups: 4. Producers who produce 
under better conditions than the average: the productivity of their labour 
is above the average of their branch : 2. Producers who work under individual 
conditions of production which coincide with the general or average con- 
ditions of the branch : the productivity of their Jabour is at the average level 
of the branch : 3. Producers who work under conditions which are worse than 
the average : the productivity of their labour is less than the average of the 
branch. The market-value can fluctuate within the limits which are set by the 
individual value of the products of the first group and the individual value 
of the products of the third group. 

Competition within the branch establishes a certain level of market-value 
within these limits. In this connection, Marx notes that “It will accordingly 
depend on the numerical relation or the proportional ratio of size of the 
classes (as to) which (of them) definitively settles the average value.’”?° 

Marx stresses that market-value cannot exceed the limits mentioned : 
“This market-value itself can never be greater than the individual value of 
the produet of the least productive class. If it were higher. this would only 
show that the market-price is higher than the market-value. The market- 
value. however. must represent real value.”* 

It is. of course. clear that market-value can never be Jess than the in- 
dividual value of the most productive class either. 


8 Thid., p. 196 f. 
9 Thid., p. 86. 

10 Ibid., p. 196 (By ‘‘the numerical relation or the proportional ratio of size’’ of the various 
groups of capitatists, Marx understands the proportional share which these groups have in the 
total product which comes on the market.) 

11 Ibid... p. 260. 


ms 83 


| 


The limits within which market-value can fluctuate are determined by 
the determination of market-valuc itself since market-value is determined 
by “the total of the social labour-time which the total of commodities of this 
particular social production sphere requires ...’?? Within which limits docs 
the total social labour-time vary ? If it is assumed that all the capitalists of 
the branch in question belong to the third group, then the total social labour- 
time is equal to the sum of the individual labour-times which all the capi- 
talists have expended. 

This is the maximum total amount of social labour-time which is possible 
at all. Conversely, if all the capitalists of the branch in question belong to the 
first group. the total social labour-time is at the minimum level and is equal 
to the sum of the individual labour-times which the capitalists of this group 
have expended. In the normal state of affairs where all three groups of 
capitalists exist in the branch of production in question, the total social 
labour-lime is somewhere between the minimum and the maximum levels. 
Tt then depends on the share of the one or other group of capitalists in the 
total product of the sphere of production as to whether the total labour-time 
tends towards its minimum or maximum figure. 

From Marx’s definition of market-value, it follows that the magnitude of 
total socially necessary labour-time and thus the magnitude of market-value 
also depend on the specific importance of the particular branch in the system 
of social production as a whole, When average production conditions pre- 
dominate in the branch in question but the total quantity of products exceeds 
the socially necessary time which has been ‘allocated’ to this branch in the 
system of social production. the market-value of the products is not measured 
by the average but by the best production conditions. irrespective of the 
fact that the majority of products of the branch have been produced under 
average conditions. 

But be that as it may. the market-value can only vary within the same 
limits as the individual value of the products of the branch in question. 
“Market-value”’. Marx emphasized. “cannot be higher than itself.” The 
difference between market-value and individual value accordingly does not 
at all imply a violation of the law of value—it “can never follow from the 
value being independently determined by the labour quantum which is used 
in this sphere in general.””** 

Having defined in this way market-value and the limits within which it 
can fluctuate, Marx analyzes competition within a branch of production, This 
competition establishes the standard market-value for the branch in question 
and enables capitalists belonging to the first group to achieve a surplus profit. 
an extra surplus-value. Under the conditions of free competition, this surplus 
profit is of a temporary, transient character: it disappears as soon as the 
‘backward’ groups of capitalists succeed in introducing new technical develop- 


12) Ibid... p. 197. 
13 Thid.. p, 263, 
14 Ibid. 


ments, in improving production conditions, in overcoming their backward- 
ness and thus in drawing level with the capitalists of the first group. But the 
fact that the extra surplus-value is transient in nature does not mean that it 
disappears as such, It is only that now it is no longer the prerogative of the 
individual capitalist but of all the capitalists. 

In other words, there is a constant change in the composition of the three 
main groups of producers mentioned above. Under the conditions of totally 
unrestricted competition, it is possible for every capitalist to achieve surplus 
profit. The struggle for this surplus profit is the chief driving force of com- 
petition within each sphere of production. 

The capitalists of the first group have the best conditions for the com- 
petitive struggle within the branch. They have the highest labour productivity 
and dominate the market from which they force out the products of other 
capitalists since the market-value tends towards the individual value of the 
first group. 

From all this there follows an important characteristic of market-value : 
it is not a factor in the redistribution of value and surplus value : it represents 
the value actually produced. but produced under capitalist conditions with 
all the contradictions which result therefrom. 

Under the conditions of capitalist competition. the social character of value 
can be expressed solely by the fact that a uniform market-value emerges 
for commodities of the same kind. As is shown by Marx, this necessarily 
follows from the fact that market-value in capitalism is not infrequently 
a “false social value”. In the third volume of “ Capital”. Marx writes that: 
“This is determination by market-value as it asserts itself on the basis of 
capitalist production through compctition; the latter creates a false social 
value.”® 

In the capitalist mode of production. the market-value of the product is 
dissociated from the labour-time actually contained in it; social value, 
market-value. becomes distinct from individual value. This results from the 
fact that the contradictions inherent in capitalism between abstract and con- 
erete labour. between value and use-value, have developed further. 

Marx illustrates the process in which the “ false social value” is formed 
by two examples.” 

Assuming that there are four groups of capitalists with different pro- 
duction conditions in the branch in question; let us say that the second 
group supplies 60 % of all the products of the branch, which is why it will 
also determine market-value. : 

The market-value of a product-unit is equal to 30 money-units while the 
average value (540 : 20) only equals 27 units. The gap between the market- 


15 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, 1. c., p. 645. (although the term ‘false social value"? does not yet 
appear in ‘Theories of Surplus-Value’’, Marx makes a detailed analysis here of how the 
market-value is disassociated from the individual value in capitalism.) 

16 Cf. K. Marx. Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. ¢., p. 263—265, 447-449. (For the sake 
of simplicity, the flgures which Marx used have been slightly changed.) 


With the aid of the following table, Marx now explains how market-value 
is established. 


Groups of Number of Individual Market- Individual Market- 
capital- product- value of value of value of value of 
ists units product- product- total total 

unit s unit product product 
I 1 60 30 60 30 
II 12 30 30 360 360 
III 3 20 30 60 90 
IV 4 15 30 60 120 
total 20 average value 540 600 

of product- 

unit = 27 


value and the individual value appears here as a difference in relation to 
the amount of 60 money-units. In forming differential rent under the specific 
conditions of capitalist agriculture, this gap is significantly greater, 

From this gap between individual and market-value, it follows that the 
products of the branch in question are not sold for the labour-time actually 
expended but for a higher price. Society loses part of its resources with which 
it pays the surplus profit of the capitalists. This explains the contradictory 
character of market-value as well and led Marx to call it “false social value’’. 

Another example. Let it be assumed that the market-value of the product- 
unit is equal to 20 money-units ; the capital, for which the individual value 
of the product coincides with the market-value, may be said to create a value 
of 80c + 20v + 20s = 120 and to produce 6 product-units. The value of 
the product-unit is 20 units : four units replace the constant capital. Assuming 
that new machines are brought in so that with the same quantum of constant 
capital 10 instead of 6 product-units could be produced, the individual value 
of the product-unit in this case is 12 while the market-value is 20. as before. 
To replace the constant capital, 4 product-units are required as before and 
not 62/3 (80:42) which would be necessary if the product were not sold at 
the market-value but at an individual value. In this way, the part of the 
product which under the previous conditions was needed to replace the value 
of the constant capital—assuming that the product was sold at its individual 
value—is converted into surplus-product. 

How is this calculated ? 67/3 — 4 = 2?/3 product-units with an (indi- 
vidual) total value of 27/3 X 12 = 32 money-units is converted into surplus- 
product. Previously, 80 money-units of constant capital were required for 
the production of 6 product-units ; now only (80: 10) X 6 = 48 money-units 
are needed. Consequently 80 — 48 = 32 money-units of the constant capital 

_ become available for conversion into surplus-product. 


86 


Marx notes the general character ,of this change which is present “ with 
all surplus-profit”’.*” It illustrates the contradictory character of market-value 
which, in capitalism, is a means for individual capitalists to enrich themselves 
at the expense of society. 


Even in “ Grundrisse” Marx draws attention to the fact that with the 
same amount of capital invested in the various branches of production the 
quantity of surplus-value which is produced will vary and that the main 
reason for this is that the organic composition of this capital is not the same 
in every case (Marx abstracts here from the sphere of circulation). From this 
it follows that the values of the commodities which are produced by capital 
advancements of the same magnitude differ considerably from each other and 
that when the commodities are sold at their values this would lead to different 
profit-rates. Now, in the manuscript of 1861/63 (in the “ Theories of Surplus- 
Value”), Marx works out the basis which enables him to make a more 
thorough investigation of the problem of average profit and price of pro- 
duction. 


While Marx was investigating market-value, he took competition within 
the branch of production in question as his point of departure. Now he 
analyzes competition between capitalists of different branches of production 
where the capital advancements in the various branches appear as parts of 
the total social capital. 


The share of the capital of a particular branch in total surplus-valuce, its 
profit, is regulated bv its share in total capital. This regulating process follows 
from the compctition between capitalists of the different branches of pro- 
duction and effects a redistribution of the surplus-value already produced. 
Marx writes “that it is the endeavour of the capitalists (but this endeavour 
is the competition) to distribute among themselves the quantum of unpaid 
labour which they squeeze out of the working class, not in the ratio in which 
a particular capital direetly produces surplus labour but in the ratio, firstly, 
in which this particular capital forms an aliquot part of total capital, 
secondly, in the ratio in which the total capital itself produces surplus 


labour”’.*® 


Marx consequently shows that the calegory of “average profit”, unlike 
the category of “market-value’’, is a category of the distribution of the 
surplus-value between the different branches of production. The levelling 
of the surplus-value as average profit changes nothing as regards the total 
mass of surplus-value : the sum of the average profits is equal to the total 
surplus-value. Thus there is no violation here of the law of value. The average 
profit—through the agency of tolal surplus-value—is based on the fact that va- 
lue is determined by labour-time. The magnitude of the average profit is also 
fixed by this. Marx writes that “The determination of this surplus-value 
follows only from the determination of the value of the labour-time. Without 


17 Ibid., p. 449. 
418 Jhid., p. 21, 


this, average profit is the average of nothing, mere fancy. And it could then 
be just as easily 1,000 as 10 p.c.””” 

Marx had now established all the conditions necessary for investigating 
the category of “price of production”’, ie.. the converted form of value 
which, in the capitalist mode of production, forms the centre around which 
market-prices fluctuate. In capitalism (assuming unrestricted competition), 
commodities cannot be sold at their values—they have to be sold at their 
prices of production. Marx’ writes “that it is precisely because the value of a 
commodity is determined by labour-time that the average price of a com- 
modity ... can never be equal to its value, although this determination of 
average price is only derived from the value based on the determination by 
labour-time.’””° . 

Price of production is equal to cost-price plus average profit. If Marx 
spoke before of individual and market value, he now draws a distinction be- 
tween individual and market production price. Later (in Volume III of 
‘**Capital”), he stresses that “everything said concerning it (i.e., market- 
value) applies with appropriate modifications to the price of production . . .””?* 

Marx demonstrates that the surplus profit (extra surplus-value), which 
individual groups of capitalists in the various branches of production achieve. 
is equal to the difference between the individual and the market price of 
production. “Individual cost-price ...varies ...in the same ratio as in- 
dividual value". “. .. surplus-profit” is “always only excess of the market . 
cost-price over individual cost-price, or excess of market value over in- 
dividual value...” 

Let us take an example to explain this thesis of Marx. The market-value 
of the product of a particular branch is assumed to be 80c + 20v + 20s 
= 120. When in this branch a particular individual capital includes ma- 
chines of a more advanced standard. its organic composition is conse- 
quently above the average in the branch (it can be double the average, 
for instance) and so its surplus-value rate is also higher. The individual value 
of the product of this capital is then 80c + 10v + 20s = 110. The difference 
between individual value and market-value is 10. This difference coincides 
with the difference between market cost-price and the individual cost-price 
(100—90). 

Let it be assumed that the average profit rate is 15%. The market price 
of production is then 115 while the individual production-price is 103.5 
(90 + 15/100 X 90). The difference between the individual and the market 
price of production is 11.5. i.e., it does not coincide exactly with the difference 
between the individual value and the market-value of the product and is 
not the same as the difference between the individual cost-price and the 
market cost-price cither. This is explained by the fact that the difference 


19 Thid.. p. 182. 

20) Ibid.. p. 26. 

21 K. Marx. Capital. Vol. TIT. J. ¢.. p. 206. 

22°) ~K. Marx. Theorien iiber den Mehrwert. 2. Teil. 1. ¢.. p. 262. 

23) Thid.. p. 3tl. (Marx often uses the terms ‘cost-price’ or ‘average price’ in the same sense as 
‘price of production’. 


between the individual and the market price of production is regulated not 
only by the difference between the individual and the market cost-price but 
also by the level of the general profit rate. With a low general profit rate 
(say 10%), this difference would amount to 11; if the general profit rate 
were 5%, the difference between the individual production-price and the 
market production-price would be 104/2, i.e., it would be closer still to the 
difference between the individual and the market value of the product. 

A brief indication can now be given of the results which Marx obtained 
in his investigation of average profit and price of production. In “Theories 
of Surplus-Value”, he states that the twofold effect of competition (within a 
particular branch and between different branches) results in two kinds of 
capital migration and a “twofold movement in the levelling” of prices. 

The first kind of capital migration produces “the general level of price 
in the same employment and the general level of profit between different 
employments.” The individual values of the commodities are converted 
into market-values and prices of production. These movements should not 
be conceived as though the individual values were first converted into market- 
values and that then market-value was converted into market price of pro- 
duction. 

Competition within the various branches and competition between them 
act simultaneously. The most important consequence of this simuwtaneous 
action is that the values are converted into prices of production, So that a 
correct analysis of these relations can be made. Marx first examincs com- 
petition within the various branches and then between them. This clearly 
shows that competition within the individual branches converts the in- 
dividual values into market-value and that competition between the various 
branches. on the ather hand, converts individual values into individual prices 
of production and market-value into the markct price of production, The 
overall result of the twofold action of competition is that the values are con- 
verted into prices of production but this is not the total effect. 

The second kind of capital migration, which is likewise the result of the 
twofold action of competition and was called a “surface movement’”* by 
Marx, causes market-prices (Marx terms them “real market-prices ””’ hecause 
they are the prices which actually exist on the surface—on the commodity 
market) to be levelled out with the prices of production which now form the 
centre around which market-prices fluctuate. 

In its totality. the effect of this migration of capital is that it converts the 
values into prices of production and levels out deviations of the market-prices 
from the prices of production under the concrete conditions of capitalist 
competition so “that the total mass of the social labour-time is distributed 
according to social need among the different spheres of production ”.”* 


2% Ibid.. p. 115. 
95 Thid.. p. 200. 
26 Ibid. p. 201. 
°7 Thid. 
28 Ibid. 


89 


It will have already been noted that, from time to time and to the extent 
that the material accumulates, digressions from the gencral course of the 
description are made to illustrate the method used by Marx in his economic 
enquires. This is also the case at this point. 

Of course it is primarily the task of philosophy to study Marx’s method 
in all its aspects. In the present book, only a few of the characteristic features 
of Marx’s method of concrete economic research will be examined. 

The point of interest here is how Marx applies the method of abstraction 
in concrete economic research, Marx and Lenin have described this method 
of economic research in a number of places. Marx writes that “In the analvsis 
of economic forms, moreover, neither microscopes nor chemical reagents are 
of use. The force of abstraction must replace both.” And Lenin remarks that 
“Thinking which progresses from the concrete to the abstract—when it is 
correct—does not move away from the truth but moves closer to it... all 
scientific .. . abstractions reflect Nature more profoundly, more correctly and 
more completely. From actual observation to abstract thinking and from this 
to action—this is the dialectical approach to the perception of truth, to the 
perception of objective reality.”* This indicates that Lenin considered the 
method of abstraction to be a correct method of theoretical research, correct 
also in the sense that a theory evolved from the correct application of this 
method is also a true reflection of reality. Marx repeatedly states that political 
economy is the theoretical expression of the capitalist mode of production. 
referring of course to the scientific political economy of capitalism. 

Why is it not possible to do without abstraction in scientific investi- 
gations ? Because the essential nature and the outward manifestations of 
things do not coincide. Understanding the essential nature of things is pre- 
cisely the task of science. One way of performing this task is the use of the 
method of scientific abstraction. 

OF course, it is not enough simply to characterize Marx’s method of 
economic research as a method of scientific abstraction, If this method is to be 
described in full, special attention must be devoted to the question of the 
extent to which abstraction is employed in any particular case. 

There is no ready-made answer to this problem, but one thing is certain : 
Marx alwavs abstracts only from those circumstances which are of secondary 
importance for the case in question and only hinder investigation of econo- 
mic phenomena. Without this abstracting, it would simply be impossible to 
study economic problems since the nature of the phenomenon would remain 
hidden under numerous features of minor significance. It should be noted, 
however, that the secondary circumstances from which Marx abstracts are 
only secondary in a specific connection, Seen from another aspect, on the 
other hand, they can be of first-rate importance so that abstracting from them 
would be quite inadmissible. 


29 KK. Marx, Capital, Preface to the first edition, 1]. ¢., p. 8. 
30 V.1. Lenin, Philosophische Hefte, in: Werke, Bd. 38, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1964, p. 160. 


90 


Let us take an example which illustrates this. If it is a question of abstract 
examination of bourgeois society, foreign trade must be disregarded.™ Foreign 
trade does indeed play a mighty role in capitalism but is an external factor 
as regards this question. This is why Marx, in all major aspects, sets out the 
theory of the capitalist mode of production without reference to foreign 
trade. It is sufficient to recall how successfully Marx was able to explain the 
process of extended reproduction in capitalism solely from its internal con- 
ditions. Lenin defended and justified this thesis of Marx in his struggle 
against the Narodniki. 

Marx certainly abstracts from foreign trade but emphasizes at the same 
time that foreign-trade and the world market are “at once the pre-condition 
and the result of capitalist production’. Considered realistically, in its con- 
erete conditions of existence, it would be extremely difficult for capitalist 
production if there were no foreign trade. Marx writes as follows about this: 
“Tf surplus labour or surplus-value were represented only in the national 
surplus product, then increase of value for the sake of value and therefore 
exaction of surplus-labour would be restricted by the limited, narrow circle 
of use-values in which the value of the (national) labour would be represented. 
But it is foreign trade which develops its (the surplus product’s) real nature 
as value .. .”°* Without foreign trade and the world market, it would he ex- 
tremely difficult for capitalists to make a profit. 

The concrete, historical character of the scientific abstractions which Marx 
makes is clearly evident in this example. Foreign trade, which is a secondary 
and incidental factor in the theory of extended reproduction, for instance, 
moves to the fore when it is a question of the concrete examination of the 
operating mechanism of capitalist production. 

The function of abstraction is thus, at each stage of economic research, 
to disregard those factors which are external to the subject of investigation in 
question and to concentrate attention on the essential (inner) features of the 
phenomenon. For Marx, the general methodological principle was that capi- 
talist production had to he analyzed in a pure form and this is apparent in 
his analysis of surplus-value in particular. As we have already seen. the 
starting point for Marx here is that surplus-value is to be considered in its 
‘pure’ state. apart from its special forms. 

Like many natural laws as well. all economic laws and categories and 
indeed all social laws take effect in real life as tendencies. Marx assumes. 
however. that the theoretical categories exactly reflect economic phenomena 
and accurately correspond to them. without forgetting for even a second that 
this agreement is only approximate. 

Without this exception. theoretical analysis would be completely impos- 
sible. This is illustrated by the example of average profit of which Marx 
says that it “never appears as something directly given. but only as the 
average result of contradictory oscillations” and exists “only as a deter- 


31 Cf. K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. ¢., p. 14. 
32 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, l. c., p. 253. 
33 Ibid., p. 253. 


OL 


mining tendency in the movement of equalisation of the real, different rates of 
profit”’.** Nevertheless, Marx assumes in theory that average profit is a quite 
specific magnitude which can be measured exactly. 

This special feature of Marx’s method of abstraction is expressed most 
clearly in his assumption of the identity of the value and market-price of 
commodities. He says that “ The price of these commodities may be assumed 
as equal to their value” and that the value and price of commodities are 
“still set as identical here .. .”"° This “here” applies not only to the “ Theo- 
ries of Surplus-Value” but also to the first three volumes of “ Capital”, 

In the third volume of “ Capital”, Marx writes that “ We proceed in this 
entire analysis from the assumption that the rise or fall in prices expresses 
actual fluctuations in value. ’?? He does not yet consider here the conversion 
of value into prices of production. In the latter case, it would have had to be 
mentioned in the theory that markct-prices and prices of production coincide. 

At first sight, it seems that this condition contradicts the foundations of 
the Marxist theory of value. As we know. a basic thesis of this theory states 
that value and price are fundamentally different. In the first volume of 
“ Capital’. Marx writes that the “ possibility. therefore, of quantitative incon- 
gruity between price and magnitude of value, or the deviation of the former 
from the latter. is inherent in the price-form itself.’% It is precisely this 
difference between market-prices and value which illustrates the law of 
value under the conditions of a spontaneous capitalist commodity economy. 
Nevertheless. the pre-condition that the market-prices and the values of the 
commodities er—on a higher level of analysis—the market-prices and the 
prices of production of the commodities coincide is of major significance for 
Marx's theory of value. What is Marx saying exactly? 

Primarily. he is saying that in the capitalist commodity economy the 
value of a commodity can only be expressed by its price. i.c.. by the money- 
form of valuc. Value as such cannot be represented except by price. Price is 


the expression of the value sinee, to use Marx's words. “ 


... the expression of 
the equivalence of a commodity with the sum of money constituting its 
price. is a lautology .. .’*° What causes the deviations of prices from values ? 
These follow from the spontaneity of the capitalist commodity economy. 
from the conditions under which commodities are realized. from the conditions 
under which they are sold. “. .. This exchange ratio of the commodity”. 
writes Marx. “may express either the real magnitude of that commodity’s 
value or the quantity of gold deviating from that value. for which. according 


to circumstances. it may be parted with.’’** When price deviates from the 


34 Ibid., p. 465. 

35 K. Marx. Theorien iber den Mehrwert, 4. Teil, lL. c.. p. 
36 Ibid., p. 63. 

87K. Marx, Capital, Vol. HT. loc.. p. ail. 

38 Kk. Marx. Capital. Vol. I. 1. ¢.. p. 102. 

39 cf. ibid... p. LOL. 

40 Ibid. 

41 Ibid., p. 102. 


79. 


value of a commodity, it is naturally no longer an adequate expression of 
the value. 


When Marx sets himself the task of developing the theory of value al- 
though value, in capitalist commodity production, exists only in its expression 
as money, in the price-form, it is clear that he has to assume the coincidence 
of price and value since only in this case is the price an adequate form of 
expression of value. 

Just as market-prices inevitably deviate from values in capitalist pro- 
duction, it is absolutely necessary to disregard these deviations and to assume 
that value is identical to market-price when it is a question of formulating 
the theory of abstract value. In this case, the conditions of realization of 
commodities—like foreign trade in the analysis of reproduction—are an in- 
cidental feature which obscures the real relationship. 

With the theory of labour-value, Marx bases all the processes which take 
place in capitalist production on value. From this it follows that the categories 
associated with the direct production process must adequately reflect value 
(or the surplus-value as part of value). In the theory, account is taken of 
this requirement by the assumption that such categories directly express 
value. Tf they differ from value. then this is already a factor of distribution or 
redistribution, i.c., a circumstance of secondary importance. In this case. the 
theory of value requires that the total sum of the prices of production. for 
instanee. or of market-prices is equal to the sum of values. An analogy ean be 
drawn with the relation between value and market-price. Any deviation 
of the price from value means that value which has already been produced 
is redistributed. Only on the condition that price coincides with value does 
the price adequately express value and is a category of the direct production 
process. The theory of value can specify this requirement for the category 
of “market-price” because, under normal conditions of free competition, 
it is impossible for market-price to deviate permanently from the value. If the 
converse were true, price would cease to be the adequate expression of 
value. 

This also applies to the other categories of political economy which 
reflect the direct production process. Profit, for example, although the con- 
verted form of surplus-value, is equal to the surplus-value and Marx notes 
that “surplus-value and profit are actually the same thing ...’"? As regards 
the conversion of profit into average profit and value into production-price, 
this is—as Marx proves—only a question of “the distribution of the surplus- 
value made by capital as a whole among the different trades or different 
capitals in different spheres of production . . .”** Thus, in contrast to market- 
value and profit, average profit is a category of distribution; the total sum 
of the average profits is, fully in accordance with the theory of value, equal to 
the total sum of the surplus-values. Consequently, average profit is ultimately 


42 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. Hf, l.c., p. 47. 
43 KK. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c., p. 191. 


93 


a et ee 


determined by value and surplus-value. If it is not determined in this way, 
“average profit is the average of nothing, mere fancy’’.** 

Price of production, on the other hand, is of a twofold character, It 
expresses the direct production process since one of its component-parts is 
the cost-price but, at the same time, it is also a category of distribution since it 
includes the average profit. The same applies to the relation between profit 
and surplus-value. Here it becomes apparent that distribution is only another 
aspect of production which is why exactly the same categories express both 
the production und also the distribution relations. 

There is. however, a considerable difference between the categories of 
market-price. market-value and profit on the one hand and the categories of 
average prolit and production-price on the other, Assuming normal condi- 
tions of competition, market-price is usually equal to value and profit equal 
to surplus-value. Average profit and production-price. however, are only the 
sanic as surplus-value and value in exceptional cases; as a rule, they deviate 
from surplus-value and from value. This also characterizes them as categories 
of distribution. 

Two quotations of very great methodological interest from “ Grundrisse ” 
may supplement these remarks : “ The fact that in practice, both as a general 
tendency and directly by means of price. . ., capital seeks to cheat necessary 
labour by reducing it to below its level. both its natural level and that at a 
certain state of society, is not relevant here. We have to assume everywhere 
here that the economically justified labour-wage is paid. i.c.. the wage deter- 
mined by the general laws of economics. The contradictions must follow 
here from the general relations themselves; not from the swindles of indi- 
vidual capitalists. What further shape this takes in reality belongs to the 
doctrine of wages.’”** The second quotation reads as follows : “ In the determi- 
nation of price (as we shall see from profit as well) fraud. mutual ssvindle. 
is added to this. The one can gain in exchange what the other loses; they can 
distribute only the surplus profit among themselves . . .’° 

The condition that market-prices are equal to values appears here as one of 
the most important requirements of Marx’s theory of economics. The antago- 
nistic contradiction between the working-class and the class of capitalists 
does not follow from the capitalist cheating the worker by selling him com- 
modities at prices which are above their value, although this swindle too is 
widespread in capitalist reality. The antagonism between labour and capital 
derives from the surplus-value which the capitalist appropriates for himself 
without equivalent and, as Marx shows. despite this in strict accord with 
the law of the exchange of equivalents, with the law of value. The profit of 
the capitalists is also based on surplus-value. The profit which results from 
the fact that the market-prices of the commodities do not coincide with their 
values signifies only a redistribution of surplus-value. 


44 Tbid., p. 182. 
45 Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, 1. c., p. 329. 
46 Ibid., p. 337. 


94 


In analysing the reproduction process, Marx abstracts from the dispro- 
portions associated with the capitalist form of this process. In capitalist 
reality, however, proportional production is “ naturally never exactly the 
case ...°"? Nevertheless, in his investigations Marx assumes that proportional 
production docs take place in capitalism: “... in this entire enquiry” it 
is “naturally always assumed that commodities are sold and sold at their 
values. ’* Realization as the main question of the theory of reproduction is 
therefore not a roughly understood problem of sales, as can be understood 
from the remarks made by Marx just quoted, In the theory of reproduction, 
it is much more a question of how all the component-parts of the product 
in their natural form and in a value-form are to be replaced and how the 
mutual agreement between the component-parts of the total social product can 
be established. : 

In his analysis of the process whereby average profit and production- 
price are formed. Marx abstracts from the fact that the working day is not 
equally long in the different branches of production.” If account is taken of 
these differences, it must also be accepted that the masses of surplus-value 
in the different branches are not the same either. ‘The task. however, is to 
demonstrate what influence the different organic compositions have on the 
mass of surplus-value produced in the individual branches. This is why one 
must abstract from all the other factors which likewise have an effect on the 
magnitude of the surplus-value achieved in the branch in question. 

In the theory of surplus-value and of profit, Marx also abstracts from 
“profit on alienation”. But the real profit which the capitalists achieve 
in actual fact is “largely profit on alienation”.®° But in this case only 
the total profit is redistributed among individual capitalists which is why 
“profit on alienation” must be disregarded in the examination of the 
profit derived from the creation of surplus-value. 


K, Marx, Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. c., p. 194. 
Thid.. p. 99. 

Cf. K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c., p. 19. 
K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, p. 498. 


aN 


oem. 


Qt ty 


CHAPTER 7 


The completion 
of the theory of surplus-value 


What did Marx have to prove? Rent as an illustration of 
the difference between value and price of production. The 
theory of capitalist monopoly. Monopoly-price and the theory 
of value. The breaking of monopoly in capitalist agri- 
culture. Examples of scientific abstraction in the theory of 
rent. 


When we turn to the sections on “Theories on Surplus-Value” in which 
Marx elaborates his theory of average profit and price of production, it will 
be seen that the main place in these sections is taken by the theory of rent 
and especially by the theory of absolute rent. ‘This is because Jand-rent plays 
a very special part in the economic theory of Marx. This is because the 
theory of absolute rent is primarily an inference from the theory of average 
profit and price of production and thus forms, as it were, the touchstone for 
the correctness of the latter. Marx's theory of average profit and price of 
production is based on the fundamental fact that value and price of produc- 
tion do not directly coincide and that only the sum of the prices of production 
is equal to the sum of the values. 

The difference between value and price of production of agricultural 
products is absolute rent. Ricardo’s theory of average profit and price of 
production is based, in contrast, on the assumption that value and price of 
production are identical. Thus. in contradiction with the facts. Ricardo denics 
the existence of absolute rent. In actual fact, if the price of agricultural prod- 
uets were also to yield an absolute rent in addition to the average profit, 
this price would then exceed the price of production and—according to the 
dogma which asserts the identity of value and price of production—ihe value 
as well. The result of this would be that the same quantum of Jabour in 
agriculture would create greater value than in industry, which would be an 
obvious violation of the law of value. ‘ Consequently the value of commodities 
would not be determined by the quantum of labour which they contain. The 
whole foundation of economics would be overturned by this.”* In the view 
of Ricardo, since absolute land-rent was impossible and only differential rent 


1 K. Marx, Theorien iber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. ¢., p. 235. 


7 Discovery 97 


could exist, this confirms the general validity of the law of value. In the desire 
to ‘save’ the law of value, Ricardo did not admit of absolute land-rent 
although capitalist reality obviously contradicted this. 

In his theory of absolute rent, Marx found confirmation of the theory of 
average profit and price of production. At the same time, the theory of abso- 
lute rent is evidence that the initial thesis of Smith and Ricardo, which asserts 
the identity of value and production-price, is incorrect. ‘The function per- 
formed by the theery of rent in the substantiation of the theory of average 
profit and production-price is described by Marx in a letter to Engels of 
9th August 1862 in the following words : “ The only thing I have got to prove 
theoretically is the possibility of absolute rent, without violating the law of 
value. This is the point around which the theoretical controversy has turned 
from the days of the physiocrats up till now. Ricardo denies this possibility, 
I affirm it. ] maintain at the same time that his denial is based upon a theo- 
retically false dogma taken over from Adam Smith—the assumed identity of 
cost-prices and values of commodities. ”” 

Marx defines absolute rent as the difference between value and price of 
production and thus demonstrates that the law of average profit and price 
of production operates on the basis of the Jaw of value and therefore does 
not contradict this at all. which was what the standard authors of bourgeois 
political economy believed. This is an important clement in the developinent 
of the Marxist theory of value and surplus-value and in the substantiation of 
the Marxist theory of economics in general. 

All this explains why Marx, in “ Theories of Surplus-Value *, concentrated 
his attention on the problem of absolute rent while in the third volume of 
“Capital” it is principally a question of differential rent. In the third volume 
of “ Capital”. Marx presents land-rent as one of the derived forms of surplus- 
value. He begins with differential rent. which is an adequate expression of 
the capitalist mode of production, while absolute rent and the class of land- 
owners based on it appear as superfluous from the standpoint of capitalist 
production. The particular structure of “ Theories of Surplus-Value”, in which 
the specific problems of the theory of rent are linked with general questions 
of the theory of value and surplus-value. of average profit and price of pro- 
duction. accordingly results from the task assigned to the theory of rent in 
substantiating Marx's economic theory in general. 

An analogy can be drawn here with the theory of money. The theory of 
moncy performs the same function in substantiating the theory of value as 
the theory of rent in substantiating the theory of average profit and price of 
production. And in the same way that Marx began to elaborate his theory of 
value in the course of his criticism of Proudhon’s theory of money, it is the 
critique of the theory of rent formulated by the German bourgeois economist 
Rodbertus that precedes the theory of average profit and price of production. 
Rodbertus tried to draw up a theory of absolute rent. Marx gives a detailed 


2K. Marx, letter to Engels of 9 August 1862. in: Marx, Engels. Selected Correspondence. Foreign 
Languages Publishing House, Moscow 1933. 


98 


analysis of this attempt in a special chapter of “ Theories on Surplus-Value”’ 
centred on absolute rent.* Marx demonstrates that Rodbertus’s failure stems 
from his acceptance of the “dogma of Smith and Ricardo” in the question 
of the relation of value and price of production which forms the starting point 
for the theory of absolute rent. 

Here, too, Marx procceds in his analysis first from the conerete to the 
abstract: as from moncy to value, so from rent to average profit and price 
of production. 

The theory of average profit and price of production assumes in it general 
(abstract) form that there are no obstacles at all to free competition in either 
of its forms. 

Capitalist agriculture is a branch of capitalist production in which the 
monopoly of private ownership of land leads to a partial restriction of com- 
petition. In the theory of land-rent. as described in “Theories on Surplus- 
Value”, the general theory of average profit and price of production is ap- 
plied to a specific case which is characterized by the fact that monopoly 
exists and is operating. In the draft for the third part. i.e.. for the future 
third volume of “ Capital“, dating from the period when Marx was working 
on the manuscript of 1861/63, Marx gives the heading of “ Land-rent (illus- 
tration of the difference between value and price of production)”* to the 
section on rent. Also ina letter to Engels of 2nd August 1862. Marx designates 
rent as an “ illustration’”® of the law of average profit and price of production. 
In “ Theories on Surplus-Value”’, Marx sets out his law of absolute land-rent 
and makes the following remark : “ This would be the law developed by me in 
general applied to a specific industry”’,® namely, the law of average profit 
and production-price. Thus, in the form in which it was developed in the 
manuscript of 1864/63, the theory of rent is directly related to the theory of 
average profit and price of production and consequently to the completion of 
Marx’s theory of surplus-value as well. All this obliges us to examine in detail 
how Marx worked out this theory but only, of course, to the extent that this 
is done in the manuscript of 1861/63 and then only as regards those parts 
which are directly related to the problem of average profit and price of 
production. 

The functton performed by the theory of rent in Marx’s economic theory 
in general does not solely consist. of course. in what has already been said. 
Tn the theory of rent. Marx developed his theory of monopoly in capitalism. 
his theory of capitalist monopoly within the capitalist mode of production, 
on the basis of a specific example. 

Pre-monopolistic capitalism is often described as the capitalism of free 
competition but this does not signify that such competition exists apart from 
and without monopoly. In fact. the capitalist mode of production as a whole 
is based on monopoly of ownership of the principal means of production by 


3. Cf. K. Marx. Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c., chapter 8. 

Kx. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. c., p. 378. 

5K. Marx, letter to Engels of 2 August 1862, in: Marx, Engels, Selected Correspondence, |. c. 
K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c¢., p. 84. 


7 99 


the entire ruling class—the class of capitalists. Marx writes that “the 
monopoly of capital alone enables the capitalist to extract surplus-labour 
from the worker . . .””’ This is why the theory of rent, as developed in 
“Theories of Surplus-Value”, goes far beyond the limits of its actual sub- 
ject. For Marx, it significd the completion of his theory of value and surplus- 
value. 

In the theory of absolute rent, Marx takes as his point of departure two 
fundamental facts which characterize capitalist agriculture : private ownership 
of the land (the monopoly of private ownership of the land as the most 
important production-condition) and the circumstance that the organic 
composition of capital here is lower than in industry. The second fact 
means that capitalist agriculture, as regards the level of development of 
the productive forces, of labour productivity, lags behind industry. The 
consequence of the low organic composition of capital in agriculture is 
that the surplus-value which is produced in it exceeds the level of average 
profit in capitalist production as a whole and that, as a result, the market- 
value of agricultural products is greater than their social price of production. 

Private ownership of the land prevents the extra surplus-value achieved 
in agriculture from coming within the control of the capitalist class as a 
whole and thus increasing average profit. Agriculture, as a branch of capitalist 
production, does not participate in forming the general profit-rate and agri- 
cultural products are sold at their market-value, not at their production-price. 
Like the wall of a fortress, monopoly of the private ownership of the Jand 
protects the agricultural sector, as a sphere of capitalist production, from the 
action of competition between the various branches of production, But this 
competition is raging in front of the walls of the fortress which means that 
the difference between market-value and social price of production does not 
benefit the agrarian capitalists at all since, if this were so, they would be ina 
privileged position as compared with the capitalist class as a whole: but 
competition between the different branches cannot permit this. This is why 
the whole of the extra surplus-value passes as absolute rent into the control 
of the landowners who only then enable agriculture, as a branch of production, 
to occupy a genuine monopoly position. 

Tt may be scen here that Marx derives his theory of absolute rent directly 
from the theory of average profit and price of production. especially from 
the principal fact on which this theorv is based, i.e. the difference between 
value and price of production. 

Whereas absolute rent results from monopoly of the private ownership of 
land and from the lower labour productivity of agriculture as compared with 
industry, differential rent—as Marx shows—results from the monopoly of 
the capitalist cultivation of the land (from the predominance of capitalist 
relations in agriculture) and from the better areas of land with higher pro- 
ductivity being limited and being unable, at the prevailing price of pro- 
duction, to satisfy the social demand for agricultural products. 


1 Ibid., p. 85. 


100 


Under these conditions, it is the individual value and the individual price 
of production of the products of the worst areas of land which determine the 
market-value and the social price of production of agricultural products. The 
consequence of this is that the capitalists who farm on more fertile areas 
achieve a surplus-profit (extra surplus-value) which is equal to the difference 
between the social and the individual price of production. This surplus-profit 
forms the differential rent which, under conditions of private ownership of 
the land, is appropriated by landowners. 

From Marx’s theory of rent it follows that both the absolute and the 
differential rent as well result from the labour of the agricultural worker. 
With absolute rent this is obvious since it originates from the surplus of the 
value of the product obtained in agriculture by way of its price of pro- 
duction. Absolute rent. writes Marx, derives from the fact “ that agricultural 
capital. in relation to the constant part of capital, sets a greater quantity of 
labour in motion than does average capital in non-agricultural industry. ”* 

Differential rent. on the other hand, results from the higher productivity 
of agricultural workers on more fertile areas of land. In connection with this, 
Marx notes that “ The work of the labourer working on more fertile soil is 
more productive than that of a man working on less fertile soil... The sur- 
plus-value contained in the additional amount of his product. the greater 
relative productivity of his labour, or the differential surplus-labour per- 
formed by him. is pocketed by the landlord. 

Marx reveals here the essential difference between absolute rent and 
differential rent: whereas absolute rent is due to the lower productivity 
of agriculture as a branch of the economy in comparison with industry, 
differential rent reflects the greater productivity of some capital advance- 
ments in agriculture in comparison with other capital advancements in the 
same branch of production. 

Marx’s theory of land-rent is based on the distinction which is drawn in 
agriculture between two kinds of monopoly : the monopoly of the private 
ownership of land and the monopoly of eapitalist cultivation of the land, It 
may be recalled here that Lenin. in “The Agrarian Question and the ‘ Crities 
of Marx?” which was published in 1901, examined the two kinds of mono- 
polies in agriculture independently. (The “Theories of Surplus-Value” had not 
been published at that time and consequently could not have been known to 
Lenin). The expression “ monopoly of the capitalist cultivation of the land” 
comes from Lenin. In a note to the new edition of his book. Lenin wrote that 
“Marx gives an explanation of absolute rent which confirms the correctness 
of my interpretation (particularly in regard to the two forms of monopoly) ” 
in capitalist agriculture.” 

The fact that Marx distinguishes between two kinds of monopoly in 
capitalist agriculture is of great significance since by this it is possible to 


8 ITbid., p. 372. 
9 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part If, 1. c., p. 361. 


40 V.¥. Lenin. “The Agrarian Questian and the ‘Critics of Marx'", Collected Works, Vol. 5, 
Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow 4961, p. 421. 


101 


draw an exact line between absolute rent and differential rent and to deter- 
mine the character of the production relations which are expressed in the two 
kinds of rent, 1e., the specifically capitalist character of differential rent and 
the feudal character of absolute rent. This distinction was the theoretical 
foundation on which Lenin claborated his programme of land nationalization. 

So far as absolute rent and differential rent are based on private ownership 
of landed property, they are, as Marx says, a “necessary product” of the 
‘apitalist mode of production.”* In eapitalism, of course, since it is based on 
private ownership of the means of production, it is impossible completely to 
eliminate private ownership of land. ‘Lf landed property were national pro- 
perty’, says Marx, “the basis of capitalist production would completely 
cease to exist...” 

Marx shows that differential rent in capitalism is determined by capi- 
lalist forins of ownership and to this extent is characteristic of capitalism. 
Absolute rent, however, is closely associated in capitalism with the relation 
between labour productivity in agriculture and labour productivity in in- 
dustey. He remarked that the more rapid development of industry in compari- 
son with agriculture is “an historical phenomenon” which demonstrates 
“the extremely queer development of bourgeois production and the contra- 
dictions inherent in it’.447 Marx draws attention to the fact that originally 
‘ain Antiquity and the Middle Ages) agriculture was more productive than 
industry * because here a machine set up by Nature ”,” i.e., the earth, the soil, 
was involved whereas production with machines did not yet exist. In the 
period in which large-scale mechanized production then developed, the indus- 
trial sector grew more rapidly than agriculture even though this was to a 
limited extent due to the expropriation of the rural population and a signi- 
ficant improvement in the organic composition of capital in agriculture. In 
the future, however, as Marx notes, to the extent that concentration of capi- 
tal in agriculture increases and chemistry, geology and physiology develop 
—*seiences which to a fairly high degree are directly specific foundations for 
agriculture as much as for industry” of which the “really scientific foun- 
dation” ts mechanies—, to this extent “ the productivity of agriculture” must 
“inerease relatively more rapidly than that of industry.” If productivity in 
agriculture were to equal that of industry and as a consequence the organic 
composition of capital in agriculture were to attain the same level as in in- 
dustry. absolute rent would have to disappear. Marx quite definitely says 
about this that land-rent results from ° an historical difference in the organic 
component-parts of capital (in industry and in agriculture—V. V.) which can 
he levelled out lo some extent and ean even disappear completely with the 
development of agriculture.””* 


{t K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part IIT, 1. ¢., p. 360. 
12 KK. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil. |. ¢., p. 94. 
43° Ibid., p. 10, 
14 Thid.. p. 1. 
45 Ibid. p. 100, 
16 Ibid.. p. 96. 


102 


Waving developed the theory of rent, Marx then shows that the two kinds 
of monopoly existing in capitalist agriculture are two kinds of a specifically 
capitalist monopoly, special cases of the monopoly which is characteristic of 
capitalist production as a whole. (Le states that it concerns a monopoly “as 
found in all spheres of industry” which “establishes itself only in this one 
(i.e. in agriculture) and thus assumes the form of rent which differs from 
surplus-profit 7 

Marx refers here to the process whereby the market-value and the social 
price of production are formed. Both are formed as a consequence of capi- 
talist competition—within a branch and between dilferent branches. But this 
competition operates under conditions of monopoly of capitalist ownership 
of the means of production ‘under conditions of the monopoly of capitalist 
cultivation). For this reason, products of the same kind which are on the 
market at the same time must have the same market-value, the same social 
price of production and. consequently, the same market-price as well, The 
sum of the social prices of production of the products of all branches here 
is equal to the total market-value of these products. The social price of pro- 
duction ensures that the entire capitalist class achieves an average profit. The 
Jevel of market-value and of social price of production is fixed. however. by 
the group of capitalists which dominates the market and achieves a surplus- 
profit. 

These are manifestations of capitalist monopoly. They express : 1. the 
monopoly of ownership of the means of production possessed by the entire 
capitalist class and 2. the monopoly position of individual groups of capitalists 
within this class which dominate the market. The special feature of this 
monopoly of capitalist cultivation is that it is not tied to certain individual 
capitalists or groups of capitalists. ALL capitalists here have formally the same 
opportunities, theoretieally they all have a chance of finding themselves in a 
monopoly position for a certain ime and they can all achieve surplus-profit. 
The only exception here is agriculture in which the monopoly position of 
Jandowners (the owners of the main condition of production condition) and, 
through the landowners, the monopoly position of all agrarian capitalists— 
also of the group of capitalists which farms better areas of land—is fixed by 
the special features of capitalist agriculture and by natural conditions. This 
is why the two kinds of capitalist monopoly in agriculture are of a stable and 
not momentary character. They are thus a suitable subject for studying 
capitalist monopoly in its general form. 

‘Lhe only effect of the special features of capitalist agriculture is that this 
monopoly is stable, the monopoly itself resulting from the operation of the 
laws of capitalist production.”® Marx writes that “flere manufacturing and 
agriculture are different only in that in the one the surplus-profits are pocketed 
by the capitalist himself and in the other by the landowner and also in 


17 Tbid.. p. 154. 
48 Cf. ibid., p. 10. 


103 


| 


eT 


that in the first they flosv, do not achieve any consistency, at one moment are 
made by this capitalist and at the next by that one and are regularly climi- 
nated again while in the second they become established on account of their. 
lasting (at least lasting for a fairly long period) natural basis in the different 
features of the land.” 

Marx shows, in “ Theories of Surplus-Profit”, that monopoly is chiefly 
reflected in monopoly-price which, in addition to the average profit, also 
includes a certain monopolistic surplus-profit. He concludes that in agricul- 
ture this monopolistic surplus-profit is fixed in the shape of rent and that 
consequently land-rent is a special case of monopolistic surplus-profit while 
the price of agricultural products, as soon as it includes rent (absolute or diffe- 
rential rent) is a monopoly-price. 

Marx demonstrates that the monopoly character of the price of agricul- 
tural products primarily results from the monopoly of the private ownership 
of land. “Tt is in fact a price”, writes Marx, “which is extorted only by the 
monopoly of landed property and differs in this as a monopoly-price from 
the price of industrial produets. ’?? Lenin also stresses this aspect ; ** Absolute 
rent derives from private ownership of landed property. This rent contains 
an clement of monopoly, the element of monopoly-price.’””* 

[t follows from the monopoly of the private ownership of the land that 
agricultural products. in contrast to industrial products, are sold at their mar- 
ket-value but not at their social price of production. 

Monopoly of the private ownership of land prevents the values of agri- 
cultural products from being converted into prices of production and in this 
Way maintains prices for agricultural products artificially at a monopolistical- 
ly high level. Marx characterizes the special nature of land-rent as a form of 
extra surplus-value (surplus-profit) with the words : “ Incidentally, no matter 
how land-rent itself is explained, the significant difference in comparison 
with industry is still the fact that here an excess surplus-value results through 
cheaper (production), there through dearer production,” If the monopoly 
of private ownership of landed property and absolute rent were to be climi- 
nated by nationalization of the land. the prices of agricultural products would 
drop; the prices of production of industrial products, however, would rise 
since the average profil rate would have increased. 

In connection with this. Marx writes that “...an abandonment of ab- 
solute rent would reduce the price of agricultural products and increase that of 
industrial products to the extent that the average profit rose by this process.” 

The average profit rate would rise because the profit achieved by agrarian 
capitalists. after eliminating monopoly of the private ownership of the land, 
would flow into the ‘communal fund’ of the capitalist class. Since the profit 
rate in agriculture, on account of the low organic composition of capital, is 


19 Ihbid., p. 233. 

20) Thid., p. 336. 

2 V.1. Lenin. Das Agrarprogramm der Sozialdemokratie in der ersten russischen Revolution 
von 1905 bis 1907, in: Werke. Bd. 13, Dietz Verlag, Berlin £963. p. 296. 

9 K. Marx, Theorien itiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. c¢.. p. 9. 

3 Ibid., p. 308. 


104 


higher than the average profit rate, its incorporation in the process of equal- 
izing profits must result in a rise in the average profit rate. 

But elimination of the monopoly of private ownership of land, abandon- 
ment of absolute rent and the reduction of the price of agricultural products 
to the level of their price of production does not signifv—and this is also indi- 
cated by Marx—that the monopolistic character of the price of agricultural 
products is abolished. There still remains the monopoly of the capitalist 
cultivation of the land, there still remains differential rent as a consequence 
of this monopoly. This is why the price of agricultural products is still a 
monopoly-price, even when it includes only differential rent. Here, too. the 
price of products carrying differential rent is a monopoly-price .. .”** “In 
regard to differential rent. it may be said, that it is the effect of * high value’ ; 
so far as by ‘high value’ is understood the excess of the market value of 
the produce over its real or individual value, for the relatively more fertile 
classes of land or mine. ””® 

Differential rent stems from the monopoly of the capitalist cultivation of 
the land and from the competition of agrarian capitalists associated with this. 
This competition is expressed in the fact that a uniform market-value, a 
uniform social price of production and consequently a uniform market-price 
as well are established. 

From the conditions of capitalist competition. it follows that the indi- 
vidual price of production on the worst areas of land is the determining price 
of production. 

This produces the “false social value” already mentioned—a market-value 
artificially inflated by the capitalist monopoly of the cultivation of the land, 
a social production-price “what society overpays for agricultural products 
in its capacity of consumer...” The “false social value” is a monopoly- 
price ; it is the realization of the monopoly of capitalist cultivation of the 
land. 

Marx comes to the conclusion that in a communist society in which the 
category of “price” will cease to exist, there will no longer be any differen- 
tial rent either. As in the past, social Jabour will be used in agriculture to 
cultivate areas of varving fertility but the expenditure which is saved on 
better areas can be used for improving the less productive areas, from which 
it then follows that the total quantum of labour expended in agriculture 
will be reduced. ” 

Within the capitalist mode of production, however. it is not possible to 
climinate the monopolistic character of prices for agricultural products. Bour- 
geois nationalization of the land can only cause differential rent to pass from 
the purse of the landowner to the purse of the bourgeois state. but the price 
of agricultural products will remain the same. 


4 Thid., p. 154. 

3 Ibid., p. 320. 

26 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, 1. ¢., p. 646. 

27° «Cf. K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert. 2. Teil, 1. c., p. 96. 


105 


The main problem of the theory of monopoly-price developed by Marx 
in “ Theories of Surplus-Value” is the relation between monopoly-price and 
value. In particular, he shows that just as a distinction must be drawn between 
monopoly-price on the one hand and price of production and value on the 
other a distinction must also be made between market monopoly-price and 
a monopoly-price which is equal to the market-value or the social price of 
production. In the latter case, one could speak of a ‘monopolistic market- 
value’ and a ‘monopolistic price of production’. 

Marx deseribes the market monopoly-price, which he also calls the * actual 
monopoly-price”,”* as a price which is “ only limited by the state... of the 
demand backed by the ability to pay ...””* As an example of the conditions 
under which the product could be sold at a market monopoly-price. Mars 
gives an example of a small island in which there is no external trade with 
grain or other agricultural products. 

Tn contrast to market monopoly-prices. which may deviate to any extent 
from value, the monopoly-price of agricultural products incorporating ab- 
solute rent is equal to their market-value (monopolistic markct-value), i.e. 
it exceeds only their soeial price of production. (But in this case the social 
price of production—insofar as it is determined by cost-price on the pooresl 
soils—is also a monopolistic price of production.) 

Marx explains why the monopoly-price of agricultural products cannot 
exceed their value as a rule. Value is the direct foundation of this price. In 
the pre-capitalist period (up to the 15th century), commodities were exchanged 
at their values. At this time, private ownership of landed property also 
existed. With the development of industrial capitalism. a fundamental change 
in price-formation took place and market-prices no longer fluctuated around 
value as their pivot but around price of production. In agriculture. however. 
this change in price-formation was prevented by private ownership of the 
land and value continued to be the direct basis for the price of agricultural 
products. ‘Thus, as in the past, the markct-prices of these products still 
fluctuated around valuc. “Those who derive rent from monopoly”, writes 
Marx, “are mistaken when they believe that monopoly enables the land- 
owners to force up the price of commodities beyond their value. Conversely, 
it consists in maintaining the value of commodities at above their average 
price ; of selling commodities not above but at their value.’ 

An important factor in substantiating the relation between monopoly- 
price and value is, as Marx shows, the thesis formulated by bourgeois 
political economists as early as the beginning of the 19th century : “It is not 
the rent of land which determines the price of its product but the price of 
this product which determines rent. ** Rent as a form of monopolistic surplus- 
profit is consequently based on the value of agricultural products and is thus 
not an additional charge on this value. 


28 Ibid., p. 27. 
29 Ibid., p. 3%. 
30 Ibid., p. 85. 
31 Ibid., p. 152. 


106 \ 


The monopoly of private ownership of landed property is a barrier which 
prevents the free penetration of capital into agriculture but, as Marx demon- 
strates, no monopoly is an absolute monopoly. As an example of the under- 
mining of private ownership of land, he quotes the case in which the land- 
owner and the capitalist farmer are one and the same person. Marx writes 
that “the landowner puts no obstacle in the way .. .” of this farmer, 
“makes no resistance, because he (the farmer) has him in his power, not as 
a capitalist but because he is the owner of the land.”* Here the rule applies 
that “landed property . . . disappears in the face of capital...“ This 
capitalist. could be content with the average profit since he does not have to 
pay rent to anybody. 

In this case. it is possible to lower the price of agricultural products to 
the level of the price of production. In general, it is the result of the compe- 
titive struggle between the landowner and the capitalist which determines 
the extent to which the landowner is able to realize his economic position, 
whether he is able to take the whole of the absolute rent from the capitalist 
farmer or whether he must content himself with only a part of it. 

Marx also gives another example: absolute rent does not exist where 
“the supply at an adequate price is so great that landowners are unable to 
resist the equalization of capitals ...”°* From an economic point of view, 
ownership of land does not exist here although it can exist juridically, 

With the examples given above, Marx characterizes competition between 
agriculture and other branches of production leading to an undermining of 
the monopoly of the private ownership of land. The competitive struggle 
within the capitalist class can also result in the monopoly of capitalist culti- 
vation of land being undermined. When Marx says that in agriculture it 
is the price of production on the poorest areas of land which determines 
price of production, he is assuming that capitalist monopoly of the cultivation 
of the land is 100% effective. Le.. it is assumed that the products of 
the whole of the land available are required to satisfy the demand. 
When it is a question of the theoretical definition of differential rent. it is 
completely correct and necessary to abstract from market relations since 
differential rent can only be completely realized under these conditions. 

However, in “Theories of Surplus-Value”, Marx also formulates the 
law of motion of the market-value of agricultural products which takes 
account of possible fluctuations in the state of the market.* According to 
this law, market-value can vary within wide limits: from the individual 
value of the product of the poorest arcas of Jand up to the individual value of 
the product of the most fertile areas. 

Marx shows that agriculture, as a branch of capitalist production. pos- 
sesses the privilege of selling its product not at the price of production but at 
its value. But this privilege “does not at all apply ... to the products 
32 Jhid., p. 294. 

33. Thid., p. 295. 


34 Ibid., p. 356. 
35 Cf. ibid., p. 260 C. 


107 


ee 


produced at different values within the same sphcre of production.”** Within 
agriculture itself, the price-level is determined by whatever part of the total 
product of the more fertile areas is put on the market. It depends on the 
fertility of the better areas as to whether the poorer areas can realize a 
certain part of the difference between the individual value and the individual 
price of production of their products or whether competition from the more 
fertile areas is so great that the inferior areas cannot even realize the average 
profit. _ 

In this way, Marx demonstrates that the more fertile areas play a 
dominating role on the market, assuming, of course, that the quantity of 
their products is such that a surplus can be created and the price forcibly 
lowered. Competition within agriculture can thus have the effect that land- 
rent is merely a deduction from the profit of the capitalist farmer who, on 
the one hand, endeavours to remain competitive by cutting back the wages 
of his agricultural workers. 

Marx also employed the mcthod of abstraction in the course of the eco- 
nomic enquiries he carried out in the manuscript of 1861/63 on the theory of 
land-rent. 

When capitalist agriculture is examined, the monopoly of private landed 
property characteristic of it cannot be disregarded. In this connection, Marx 
notes that “... were the Earth at the free disposal of everybody, a principal 
element in the formation of capital would be lacking.”** The monopoly of 
ownership of land in its capitalist form and land-rent as the realization of 
this monopoly are the “necessary product’ of the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction. 

Ricardo’s theory of rent assumes that there is no restriction on the move- 
ment of capital in agriculture. His opponents raised the objection that his 
theory of rent did not consider how difficult it is for a farmer who invests a 
lot of fixed capital to withdraw capital from agriculture. Marx agrees with 
this objection and emphasizes that “ English history between 1815 and 1830 
proves this to a great extent.”’ Nevertheless, says Marx. this objection does 
not apply to “the theory at all, leaves it completely untouched, since it is 
always a question here only of a more or less quick or slow implementation of 
the economic law.’® The difficulties involved in the withdrawal of capital 
do not affect the essence of the economic law—the law of land-rent—but the 
form in which it appears, the character of its action. These are external 
factors which must be disregarded in this context. 

However. Ricardo’s theory of rent also assumes that there is no restric- 
tion on investment of capital in agriculture. In this question, Marx unequivoc- 
ally takes the side of the opponents of Ricardo when he points out that 
investment of capital in agriculture will meet with resistance from landowners. 


36 Ibid., p. OL. 

37 Ibid., p. 35. 

38 K. Marx. Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, 1. ¢., p. 360. 
39 K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, }. c., p. 374, 


108 


Ricardo, on the other hand, abstracted in fact from the private ownership 
of land. Marx called this abstraction “totally wrong’’.*® 

This example clearly shows what should be done and what not when 
using the method of abstraction. 

We have attempted here to give a detailed account of how Marx, in the 
manuscript of 1861/63, devcloped his theory of value and surplus-value 
a stage further by claborating the theory of average profit and price of 
production and the theory of rent—the converted forms of value and surplus- 
value. He shows how value and surplus-value appear on the surface of capi- 
talist society, how they are modified under the concrete conditions of capi- 
talist competition and capitalist monopoly. And with this he also completed 
his theory of value and surplus-value. 

In actual fact, after 1863, Marx concentrated all his attention on preparing 
the work he had carried out on economies for publication. In 1863, he com- 
pleted the manuscript of the third volume of “Capital” where, in harmony 
with the overall structure of his economic work, he describes the theory of 
average profit and price of production and the theory of land-rent. 

As already noted, Marx elaborated his theory of value and surplus-value 
for the first time in “ Grundrisse”; le subsequently describes it in “A 
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy” and in the first volume of 
“Capital”. These later descriptions of the theory of value and surplus-value 
are more complete in content than those in “ Grundrisse”’. But this does not at 
all affect the importance of ‘“ Grundrisse” when it is a question of finding out 
about Marx’s ‘creative laboratory’ and learning how he worked out his 
economic theory. It is quite different with the manuscript of 1861/63 and 
with “ Theories of Surplus-Value”. The “ Theories of Surplus-Value” supple- 
ment the first three volumes of “Capital” in a series of basic questions, 


40 Ibid. 


109 


CHAPTER 8 


How “Capital” took shape 


sin artistic whole. Logical and historical aspects. “ Theories 
of Surplus-Value”—the beginning of the real sork on 
“Capital”, “The second part... sill appear independently 
under the title ‘Capital’... From six to four books. “ Con- 
fidentially, I indeed began ‘Capital’ in exactly the opposite 
sequence...’ The theoretical and the historical part of 
* Capital”. 


At the same time as he developed his economic theory. Marx also worked 
out the structure of his work on economics. ‘The task of drafting the structure 
of * Capital” was no less difficult and agonizing than the substantiation of 
the theory of surplus-value. But every success is based on hard work. At last, 
Marx found a form for his work on ceconomics which matched the brilliance 
of its content. Marx was aware of the intrinsic perfection of his work. 
It is clear. he wrote to Engels in February 1866 “that many shortcomings 
in detail must exist in a work like mine. But the composition, the coherence, 
is a triumph of German science which an individual German can admit since 
it is in no way his merit but rather belongs to the nation.’* 

As everybody knows, “Capital” consists of four volumes. Jlowever, it 
would not be correct to assume that Marx sets out the positive representation 
of his theory in the first three volumes while the fourth volume is devoted 
solely to a critique of bourgeois political economy. This is indicated by the 
full title of the work : ‘Capital. A Critique of Political Economy”. It is quite 
clear that the second part of this title—*‘ A Critique of Political Economy’ — 
applies to all four parts of “ Capital”. By ‘critique’*. Marx understood the 
refutation of the theories of bourgeois political economy. It is a question here 
of a critique which is constructive in the highest degree. Marx himself never 
drew a sharp distinction between a theorectical and a critical part of 
“Capital”. In a note to the first volume of “ Capital”. it is stated that “The 
insufficiency of Rieardo’s analysis of the magnitude of value ... will appear 
from the 3rd and Ath books of this work.”? Even from this it is apparent 
that the critique of bourgeois political economy is not only the subject of the 
fourth volume of “ Capital” but of the others as well. 


1 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 20 February 1866. in: K. Marx’F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 31, p. 183. 
2 XK, Marx. Capital, Vol. I. 1. c.. p. 80 (footnote 1). 


144 


ee 


| 
i 


»* 


The relation between the first three volumes and the fourth ean be de- 
scribed essentially as a relation between the logical and the historical. In 
volumes I to HI of “Capital”, bourgeois political cconomy is mainly 
criticized from the logical standpoint whilst in the fourth volume (in © ‘Uheo- 
ries of Surplus-Value’’) this is chiefly done from the historical point of view 
since the history of economic theory reflects the history of bourgeois socicty. 
Of course, when considered, historically, bourgeois political economy was 
necessarily a valuable source of theoretical material for Marx. 

It is consequently no accident that Marx elaborated fundamental parts 
of his theory of economics for the first time in the course of his work on 
“Theories of Surplus-Value”, for instance the theory of productive and 
unproductive labour, the theory of average profit and price of production, 
the theory of land-rent, the theory of capitalist reproduction and the theory 
of crises. 

The original structure of “ Capital”? was not at all in the form which we 
know today. In the course of his labours, Marx modified and perfected it 
step by step until he ultimately achieved the layout which best corresponded 
to the brilliant content of his economic theory. 

From the structure of ‘“ Capital”. various stages can be distinguished in 
Marx’s work. Nevertheless. by the 1840’s, Marx had already divided his 
work on economics into two main parts: a theoretical part, in which a 
positive description of the subject of his work is given, and a part “ which 
is more historical. . .”* 

In 1857. in connection with the actual writing of “ Grundrisse’’, he began 
to concern himself intensively with the lavout of his “ Economy”. His first 
provisional plan was set out in his “Introduction, A contribution to the Cri- 
tique of Political Economy” (written about the beginning of September 
1857). which he never completed and which was originally intended as an 
introduction to his work on economies. “ The disposition of material”, wrote 
Marx, “has evidently to be made in such a wavy that (section) one comprises 
general abstract definitions, which therefore appertain in some measure to 
all social formations... Two, the categories which constitute the internal 


‘structure of bourgeois society and on which the principal classes are based. 


Capital. wage-labour. landed property and their relations to one another. 
Town and country. The three large social classes ; exchange between them. 
Circulation. The (private) eredit svstem. Three. the State as the epitome of 
bourgeois societv. Analvsis of its relations to itself. The ‘unproductive’ 
classes. Taxes National debt. Public credit. Population. Colonies. Emigration. 
Four, international conditions of production. International division of labour. 
International exchange. Export and import. Rate of exchange. Five, world 
market and crises.’ 

In the “ Chapter on money”. Marx likewise puts forward a plan for 
the description of the theory: in the “first section”, “ exchange-values, 


3 KK. Marx. letter to Leske of 1 August 1846, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 27. p. 450. 
Cf. also ibid., p. 448 f. 
4K. Marx, Introduction, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 1. c., p. 244. 


112 


money, prices” are to be examined. “ The internal structure of production 
forms ...the second section, the State as the epitome of this the third, the 
international relationship the fourth, the world market the last one...’ 

At the beginning of the “ Chapter on Money”, however, Marx has already 
set out a detailed version : 

“1. 4) General concept of capital.—2) Special nature of capital : circulating 
capital, fixed capital. (Capital as food, as raw material, as instrument of 
labour 3) Capital as money. II. 4) Quantity of capital. Accumulation.—2) 
Capital measured against itself. Profit. Interest. Value of capital: capital as 
distinguished from itself as interest and profit. 3) The circulation of capitals. 
a) Exchange of capital for capital. Exchange of capital for revenue. Capital! 
and prices. b) Competition of capitals. c) Concentration of capitals. U1. Capital 
as credit. IV. Capital as share-capital. V. Capital as money-market. VI. Capital 
as a source of wealth. The capitalist. Landed property would then be dealt 
with after capital. After this, wage-labour. After all three, the movement of 
prices as circulation determined in its inner totality. On the other side. the 
three classes as the three basic forms of production and the conditions of 
circulation. Then the State. (State and bourgeois society.—Taxes or the 
existence of the unproductive classes.—The national debt.—The popula- 
tion.—The State and its relations with other countries : colonies, Forcign 
trade. Rate of exchange. Money as international currency.—Finally. the 
world-market. Extension of bourgeois society beyond the limits of the State. 
Crises. Disappearance of the mode of production and form of society based 
on exchange-value. Realistic definition of individual labour as social labour 
and vice-versa.) ** 

This truly grandiose plan. drawn up in November 41857. indicates 
that Marx intended to explore all the important aspects of bourgeois 
society—up to the conditions under which it could be abolished and replaced 
by a superior form of society, communism. The historical part is missing in 
this plan since only the logical strueture of the theory of economics itself is 
given here. The section on capital is divided into six large parts. marked by 
Roman numerals. But a few pages further. Marx sets out another plan for 
the section on capital: Capital. 1. General: 1) a) Development of capital 
from money. b) Capital and labour. c) The elements of capital. grouped 
according to their relationship with labour... 2) Differentiation of capital : 
a) circulating capital, fixed capital... 3) Individual features of capital : 
Capital and profit... IL. Special features: 1) Accumulation of capitals. 2) 
Competition of capitals. 3) Concentration of capitals... TT. Individual 
features: 1) Capital as eredit. 2) Capital as share-capital. 3) Capital as 
money-market.”” 

In the “General” section (Marx later called this section “Capital in 
general”), the arrangement of the material in three parts, which was sub- 


5 K. Marx. Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, }. ¢., p. 138 f. 
6 Thid.. p. 175. 
7 Thid.. p, 186. 


8 Discovery 113 


sequently to play such an important role in the structure of the theoretical 
part of “Capital”. is already clearly outlined. This arrangement is still 
formulated in the terms of Jlegel’s “ Logic”. Two months later, on or about 
14th January 1858, Marx wrote to Engels that “In the method of treatment 
the fact that by mere accident [again glanced through Hegel’s Logie has been 
of great service to me." When we see how Marx evolved the structure of 
“Capital”. it is apparent that he gradually freed this structure from the 
philosophical scaffolding with which he had originally surrounded it. 

On 22nd February 1858. Marx advised Lassalle of the plan for his work 
on economies which was to cover six books: “1) Capital (contains some 
introductory chapters), 2) Landed property. 3) Wage-Labour, 4) The State. 
5) International ‘Frade. 6 World Market.” He then continues with these 
words : “Naturally. T cannot refrain from criticizing other economists now 
and then. and particularly not from polemizing against Ricardo ... [lowever, 
the critique and history of political economy and of socialism as a whole 
was to form the subject of another work. Finally, the brief historical sketch 
of the development of the economic categories, or relationships, was to be a 
third work.”? This shows, therefore, that Marx intended even at this time to 
set out his work ina theoretical and in an historical part, the latter containing 
a section on the history of political economy and another on the history of 
economic categories and relations. 

In his letter to Lassalle of Lith March 1858, Marx set out the plan for 
the first volume of his werk on economies : “4. Value, 2. Money, 3. Capital 
in general (production-process of capital, circulation-process of capital, unity 
of the two or capital and profit, interest).” Marx then writes that “It is not 
al all my intention to write all six books, into which I shall divide the work, 
at a uniform level but in the three latter ones to give just the general facts 
whilst in the first three, which contain the actual basic development in econo- 
mies. it will not be possible to avoid detailed explanations in every case.’"*° 

This version of the plan is interesting in that it contains an exact arrange- 
ment of the seetion on “ Capital in general” which Marx subsequently used 
as a basis for the arrangement of the whole of the theoretical part of his work 
in three volumes. lt may also be noted that Marx now reduced the scope of 
his task somewhat. This is indicated by his intention not to go mto the same 
degree of detail in all six volumes. 

In the letler to Engels of 2 April 1858, Marx lists these six books and 
divides the content of the first book—“ About Capital’’—into four sections : 
“a) Capital in general... b) Competition, or the action of the many capitals 
upon one another. c) Credit. where capital appears as the general element as 


8 ok. Marx. letter to Engels. written about 14 January 1858, in; Marx/Engels, Selected Corre- 
spondence. 1. ¢., p. 124. 


® Kk, Marx. Jetter to Lassalle of 22 February 1858, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 
hoe. p. £2h. 
40 IX. Marx. letter to Lassalle of 14 March 1858, in: K. Marx;F. Engels, Werke. Dd. 29, p. 554 


114 


opposed to individual capitals. d) Share capital as the most perfect form 
(leading to communism) together with all its contradictions.” 

In a detailed plan of the first volume, “‘ A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy”, which Marx sent to Weydemeyer on 1 February 1859, 
historical digressions are added to the first chapter and to various sub-sections 
of the second. The chapter on “ The Commodity” carries “ Historical Notes 
on the Analysis of Commodities ”’, the sub-section on the “ Measure of Value” 
the digression “Theories on the Standard of Money” and the sub-seetion 
“The Precious Metals” the digression on “ Theories of the Medium of Cir- 
culation and of Money ”.*? This plan was then also used by Marx in “ A Con 
tribution to the Critique of Political Economy” which was published shortly 
afterwards. He pursued this idea of distributing the historical and critical 
material among the theoretical sections of his work in the course of the 
whole of his labours on the manuscript of 1861/63. The draft-plans drawn 
up in January 1863 for the first and third parts of “Capital” are evidence 
of this. 

Thus, in the years between 1858 and 1862, Marx worked out the plan 
for a work on economics covering six volumes. Summing up all the remarks 
which he made regarding this question, one obtains the following plan of his 
work on economics (s. page 114). 

In the first volume of “A Contribution to the Critique of Political Econo- 
my ”’, Marx was only able to put the first part of this plan into effect, i-e., the 
introduction : The Commodity and Money. 

When he then began work on the manuscript of 1861/63, he started—fol- 
lowing this plan—with the chapter on the conversion of money into capital, 
ie., with the first chapter of the section on the production-process of capital. 
It was Marx's intention to use the “Theories on Surplus-Value” as a con- 
cluding historical digression for this section in the same way that he had 
added the historical notes to the chapters on the commodity and money in 
the first volume of “ A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy”. 

It may he said that the beginning of the work on “ Theories of Surplus- 
Value” marked a turning point in Marx’s economic investigations. 

In fact. the “ Theories of Surplus-Value” is the start of Marx’s direct work 
on “ Capital”. At this time. Marx had not vet thought of dividing the entire 
work into four volumes with “Capital” as the general title. This idea 
gradually emerged in the course of his labours on “Theories of Surplus- 
Value’. It was only towards the end of 1862 that Marx chose “ Capital” 
as the title. This is shown by his letter to Kugelmann of 28th December 1862 
in which he tells of his intention to publish the continuation of the first 
volume of “A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy” in the 


44. K. Marx. letter to Engels of 2 April 1858. in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 1. c., 
p. 126. 


42 Cf. K. Marx. letter to Weydemeyer of 1 February 1859, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 29, 
p. 573. 


43 Cf. K. Marx. Theorien aber den Mehrwert, 4. Teil, 1]. c., p. 377 f. 


8 415 


form of a separate book with the title of “ Capital’? and the sub-title of 
* A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy." 


PLAN OF “A CONTRIBUTION TO THE CRITIQUE OF POLTTICAL 
ECONOMY” AS OUTLINED BY MARX BETWEEN 1858 ANI) L862 


1, Capital : ' 1. Production- 1. Conversion of Money 
(Introduction : Process of ALaGApitel ‘ 
The Commodity Capital : 2. Absolute Surplus-Value 
and Money) 3. Relative Surplus-Value 
a) Capital in 4. Combination of Absolute 

general and Relative Surplus- 
Value 
} 5. Theories on Surplus- 
Value 


2. Circulation- 
Process of 
Capital 
3. Unity of the 
two or Capital 
and Profit 
b) Compctition 
of Capitals 
ce) Credit 
d) Share 
Capital 


If. Landed Property 
IW. Wage-Labour 
TV. State 

V. Foreign Trade 


VIL World Market 


Thus it was right at the end of his work on “ Theories of Surplus-Value” 
that Marx thought of writing “ Capital” as a coherent work. 

In August 1863 he returned to his original plan of writing the historical 
part of his work in a separate volume. In the letter of 15th August 1863. 
Marx informed Engels of his work on “Theories of Surplus-Value” and 
noted that ‘“‘. . . when I now look at the concoction and see how [ had to 
change everything and even had to put the historical part together from 
material which was in part quite unknown . . .’° Here, for the first time. 
he calls ‘Theories of Surplus-Value” the “historical part” of his work on 
economics. 


14 Cf. K. Marx. letter to Kugelmann of 28 December 1862, in: K. Marx, Letters to Dr, Kugel- 
mann. Ie. p. 23. 
15K. Marx, letter to Engels of 15 August 1863, in: K. Marx,F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 30, p. 368, 


116 


After this, Marx regarded the manuscript of ‘“‘ Theories of Surplus-Value”’ 
as the first version of the fourth and last volume of “ Capital”. 

Although it was only from 1863 onwards that Marx regarded ‘“ Theories 
of Surplus-Value” as the fourth volume of “ Capital’’, it can still be said 
that right from the start the work on “ Theories of Surplus-Value” was work 
on the fourth volume of “ Capital”. In the course of this work, Marx modified 
his original intentions to a considerable extent and greatly increased the scope 
of his investigations. The critical analysis of the views of the bourgeois 
economists on surplus-value was linked with the analysis of their ideas on 
profit, rent and so on. Furthermore, in critical confrontation with bourgeois 
political economy, Marx was obliged to explain one or other of the sections 
of his own theory on economies which, as we know, he had not yet completed 
at this time. 

The consequence of all this was that a notable expansion took place in 
the range of problems under investigation by Marx. The historical digression 
of “Theories on Surplus-Value” reached an enormous length (about 110 
printed sheets) and became a critical investigation of the whole history of 
development of bourgeois political economy. Finally, it occurred to him that 
the whole of the historical and critical material had to be put together in a 
separate volume as the fourth book of “‘ Capital”. At the same time, in the 
course of the work on the manuscript of 1861/63, the decisive importance 
of the arrangement of the material in three parts, which at first Marx had 
only intended for the chapter on “ Capital in general”, became increasingly 
apparent. Marx gradually arranged the whole of the material in “ Capital” 
in these three groups. Thus. on 18th June 1862. he informed Engels about 
the progress of his investigations : “... lam stretching out this volume... 
By the way. I am now at long last through with that sickening ground rent 
(which I do not want even to hint at in this part).”** But a month and a 
half later. on 2nd August 1862. he had already changed his mind: “1 now 
intend after all to include the theory of rent by putting in a chapter in this 
volume.” According to the original plan, the theory of rent was to have 
been the subject of the second book (“Landed Property”). It was now Marx’s 
intention to include it in the first section (“Capital in general”) of the first 
hook (“ About Capital”). 

In the letter to Kugelmann of 28th December 1862. 10 which reference has 
already been made. and where it was mentioned that the second part of “A 
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy” was to be published 
under the title of “ Capital”, Marx wrote the following about the content of 
this second part : “ Really it only deals with those matters which should form 
the third chapter of the first section, namely. capital in general, and does 
not therefore include the competition of capitals or the eredit system. This 
volume contains what the English call the principles of political economy. 
It is the quintessence (together with the first part) and the development of 


46 K. Marx. Ictter to Engels of 18 June 1862. in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, I. ¢., 
p. 156, 
147. K. Marx. letter to Engels of 2 August 1862, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 30, p. 263. 


417 


the rest (with the exception perhaps of the relations of different state forms to 
different cconomic structures of society) could be easily accomplished by 
others on the basis thus provided.’’** Regarding his further plans, Marx 
stated that he intended “.. . either to write the continuation, that is, the 
conclusion to my treatment of capital, competition and credit, in German, 
or else to combine the first two books into one volume for the English 
public...’ ‘ 

‘These lines indicate that Marx at this time had already definitely 
abandoned the idea of writing six books and had almost made up his mind 
to restrict himself to the first section of the first book, the section on “ Capital 
in general’’, ‘This section was to be divided into three parts : ” Production- 
process of capital”, “ Circulation-process of capital” and “ Unity of the two, 
or Capital and Profit”. 

In the same letter, he also remarks that “Capital” comprised about 
30 printed shects. In actual fact, however, there are about five times as many 
sheets as this in the three volumes of “ Capital”. 

This is the best evidence that Marx, in the period following. really did 
include in the section on “ Capital in general” many of the problems which 
were actually intended to be the subject of the following sections of the first 
book and the other volumes of his work on economics. This is how the plan 
of “ Capital” was evolved in the course of Marx’s work on the manuscript of 
1861/63, this is how the three theoretical parts took shape while “ Theories 
of Surplus-Value”, by reason of its structure and content, became the fourth 
volume of “ Capital’. 

As a whole, the manuscript of 1861/63 represents the rough draft of all 
four volumes of “ Capital”. Between 1864 and 1865, Marx rewrote the first 
three volumes of “ Capital” while the historical part retained the original 
form in which it had been written between 1862 and 1863. Consequently, on 
account of the new arrangement of the first three books, this part had to be 
revised. In his letter of 31 July 1865, Marx informed Engels about the 
course of the work on “ Capital” : “ Three chapters still have to be written to 
complete the theoretical part (the first three books). Then there is still the 
fourth book, the historical and literary part, which has to be written which 
is relatively the easiest part for me since all the questions are solved in the 
first three books. this last one is therefore more a repetition in historical 
form.’® Marx never succeeded in rewriting the fourth book but never- 
theless regarded the manuscript of “ Theories of Surplus-Value”’ as the con- 
cluding, historical part of “ Capital”. 

In the letter to Siegmund Schott of 3rd November 1877, Marx wrote the 
following words in connection with this: “Confidentially, I indeed began 
“Capital” in exactly the opposite sequence (beginning with the third and 
historical part) to which it was submitted to the public, only with the quali- 


48 K. Marx, Jetter to Kugelmann of 28 December 1862, in: K. Marx, Letters to Dr. Kugelmann, 
lc., p. 23. 


49 Ibid., p. 24. 
20 XK. Marx, letter to Engels of 34 July 1865, in: K. Marx/F. Engela, Werke, Bd. 31, p. 132. 


118 


fication that the Ist volume, which was started last, was prepared for print- 
ing straightaway whilst the two others remained in the rough form which 
all research has at the beginning. . .””?* 

One year before the publication of the first volume of “ Capital”, Marx 
gave the first clear outline of the new structure of “ Capital” in his letter to 
Kugelmann of 13th October 1866: “The whole work is divided as follows : 


Book I. The Production Process of Capital. 
Book II. Circulation Process of Capital. 
Book III. Form of the Process as a Whole. 
Book IV. Contribution to the Ilistory of 


Economic ‘Theory.’ 


This is, in as few words as possible, the history of the structure of ‘“ Capital”, 
the most fearful missile ever “ hurled at the heads of the bourgeoisie (landed 
proprictors included)’. But for this missile to be really fearful for the 
bourgeoisie it had to be not only filled with explosive of the necessary de- 
structive power but also had to be given a shape which ensured the neces- 
sary power of penetration. It may certainly be asserted that “ Capital’ owes 
its immortality to both its brilliant content and its wonderful form. 

The efforts which it cost Marx to achieve this form have been described. 
It is appropriate here to stress just once more the already obvious fact that 
Marx worked out the structure of “Capital” at the same time as he elabo- 
rated the actual theory of economics. This is understandable, too. Form 
cannot be separated from content. 

Tf we wish to see in more detail how Marx evolved the logical structure 
of “Capital”, it is necessary to spend somewhat more time on the question 
of why Marx began with the historical part when he started writing his work 
on economics. This brings us back to the method which Marx used in his 
investigation of capitalist reality. 

In the “Introduction” for “A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Kconomy ”’. Marx characterizes the method of scientific research as a “ method 
of advancing from the abstract to the concrete” which leads from abstract 
definitions to the reproduction of the concrete in thinking. Advancing from 
the abstract to the conerete has the converse process as a basie condition : 
the transition from the concrete fact in the idea to the simplest abstract 
definitions. 

This method is materialistic because it takes the concrete not as the result 
but as the presupposition. the point of departure. for research. Marx stresses 
that advancing from the abstract to the concrete is the method hy which to 


24K. Marx, letter to Schott of 3 November 1877, in: K. Marx/F, Engels. Letters on ‘Capital’, 
Rd. 34, p. 235. (Marx calls the historical part the third here because at this time, 1877. he 
intended to publish the second and third books of ‘Capital’? in one volume, the second, 
while the fourth book, the ‘'‘ History of Economic Theory’, was to be the third volume.) 


WwW 
Lo 


K. Marx, letter to Kugelmann of 13 October 1866, in: K. Marx. Letters to Dr. Kugelmann, 
l.c., p. 43. 


23. ~K. Marx, letter to Becker of 17 April 1867, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 31, p. 541. 


119 


assimilate the concrete but “ This is, however, by no means the process of 
evolution of the concrete world itself.” 

The starting point for Marx’s theory of economics was capitalist reality 
itself. Lenin observed that ‘‘ Capital’? contained the “history of capitalism 
and the analysis of the terms summarizing it’’.” The history of capitalism, 
of capitalist production-relations, is the source of Marx’s theory. Marx found 
the reflection of this history in the history of bourgeois political economy. 
~The development of political economy”, as Engels wrote when explaining 
Marx’s method of enquiry, “ constituted a natural clue, which the critique 
could take as a point of departure, and then the economic categories would 
appear on the whole in the same order as in the logical exposition.” In this, 
it is “the actual development” which is traced.” 

Naturally, the development of the science of economics does not at all 
correspond exactly to the development of cconomic reality. It has its 
peculiarities which caused Marx, in “A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy’’, to note that “Science, unlike other architects. builds 
not only castles in the air, but may construct separate habitable storeys 
of the building before laying the foundation stone.’”’ But the zig-zag and 
contradictory development of science does not prevent the history of poli- 
tical economy, in one way or another, from reflecting the history of the 
economic development of society. This only means that a particularly critical 
approach must be employed in analysing the history of political economy. 

That the development of the science reflects the development of economic 
reality is confirmed by Marx in the letter to Kugelmann of 411th July 1868 : 
“On the other hand ..., the history of the economic theory certainly shows 
that the concept of the value relation has always been the same, whether more 
or less clear. hedged with illusions or scientifically precise. Since the thought 
process itself grows out of the conditions, is itself a natural process, thinking 
that really comprehends must always be the same, and can only vary gradually 
according to maturity of development, including that of the organ by which 
the thinking is done.” It is obvious that Marx is referring here to classic 
bourgeois political economy, the outstanding figures of which represent the 
“thinking that really comprehends”. In these lines, Marx sets out the 
materialist thesis that scientific theory reflects reality and the history of 
the theory the development of this reality, including as well the development 
of thinking as a part of reality. 

When Marx began to elaborate his theory of economics. he had to start 
with a critical historical investigation since his theory and its theses had to 
be substantiated by the historical reproduction of the theory. We may recall 
here once more the noteworthy spot in the epilogue to the second edition of the 


4 KK. Marx. Introduction, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 1. c.. p. 206. 
V. 1. Lenin. Philosophische Hefte, in: Werke, Bd. 38. p. 319. 
F. Engels. Karl Marx, ‘A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy ’’, 1. c., p. 225. 


Pr 


Kk. Marx. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 1. c., p. 57. 


K. Marx. letter to Kugelmann of 41 July 1868, in: K. Marx, Letters to Dr. Kugelmann, I. ¢., 
p. 73. 


mw www 
10 


foe) 


120 


first volume of “ Capital” where Marx characterizes the difference between 
the method of inquiry and the method of presentation. “‘ Of course the method 
of presentation must differ in form from that of inquiry. The latter has to 
appropriate the material in detail, to analyse its different forms of devel- 
opment, to trace out their inner connexion. Only after this work is done, can 
the actual movement be adequately described. If this is done successfully, 
if the life of the subject-matter is ideally reflected as in a mirror, then it may 
appear as if we had before us a mere a priori construction.” ‘he critical 
historical analysis of the development of the science. the historical reproduc- 
tion of the theory, is of enormous importance when it is a question of 
assimilating the subject-matter and of analyzing its different forms of 
development. 

A critical analysis of the history of bourgeois political economy shows 
that Marx’s eceonomie theory solved all the contradictions in which bour- 
geois economy had become entangled and provided an answer to all the 
questions which the entire course of development of human society had al- 
ready put on the agenda. This is also the historical proof of the correctness 
of Marxist theory. 

Properly speaking, the advance from the abstract to the concrete also 
reflects the actual historical process. ‘‘ The procedure of abstract reasoning 
which advances from the simplest to more complex concepts’, writes Marx. 
ie . conforms to actual historical development.’ Reasoning which ad- 
vances from the abstract to the concrete is therefore correct because it corre- 
sponds to the historical development of economic reality. This is reinforced 
still further by the fact that at every stage of this advance reference can be 
made to the reflection of this actual process in the history of the science 
itself. 

The history of political economy, as described in the fourth volume of 
“Capital” (in “Theories of Surplus-Value”), chiefly shows how Marx’s 
theory of surplus-value developed. Naturally, as far as the method and 
manner in which he investigates the historical subject-matter is concerned, 
Mars first abstraets at every stage from the concrete categories which 
express the character of the capitalist mode of production. Any other approach 
was not even possible since Marx was always obliged to take this or that 
bourgeois economist as his basis. However, not a single bourgeois economist 
had been able to isolate the category of surplus-valuc. for instance, in its pure 
form. This transition from the concrete to the abstract at every individual 
stage of inquiry is associated with the advance from the abstract to the con- 
ercte in the process as a whole. This is also the case with the fourth volume 
of “Capital”. In accordance with the nature of the subject and as in the 
first three volumes, the reasoning here advances from the abstract to the 
concrete. only with the difference that the problems are described from the 
historical viewpoint. 


29 K. Mars. Capital, Vol. I, Afterword to the 2nd German edition. J. c., p. 19. 
30 K. Marx, Introduction, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, l. c., p. 208. 


124 


In the first part of * Theories of Surplus-Value”, most attention is paid to 
a critical historical investigation of the problem of exchange between labour 
and capital on the basis of the law of value. This corresponds to an analysis 
of value and by and large to that of surplus-value as well in the first volume 
of ‘‘ Capital”. 

In “ Theories of Surplus-Value”, this analysis concludes with the exami- 
nation of the attempt of the bourgeois economists to describe the capitalist 
mode of production as a whole; this corresponds to the analysis of the 
capitalist reproduction-process in the second volume of “ Capital”. In the 
other parts of * Theories of Surplus-Value”’, Marx investigates how surplus- 
value is converted into profit, how the general profit-rate is formed and 
how the price of production is related to the value ; this corresponds to the 
transition from surplus-value to profit, from profit to average profit and from 
value to price of production in the third volume of “ Capital’. Finally. in 
the concluding part of ‘Theories of Surplus-Value”, he investigates the 
process of vulgarization of bourgeois political economy and this corresponds 
to the critique of vulgar economy in the third volume of “ Capital”. 

If the structure of “ Theories of Surplus-Value” is examined more closely, 
it is naturally apparent that this is only roughly comparable with the 
structure of the first three volumes of “Capital”. Indced, the range of 
problems examined in the first volume of “ Capital” is dealt with not only 
in the first but also in the second and third parts of “Theories of Surplus- 
Value”. Thus in the tenth chapter of the second part of “ Theories of Surplus- 
Value”, for instance, Marx investigates how value is determined by labour- 
time, i. ¢., the main thesis of Ricardo’s theory. He shows how Ricardo is 
confused on the question of absolute and relative value and how he fails 
to appreciate the nature of the form of value. In the fifteenth chapter, Marx 
explains that the problem of exchange between labour and capital is insoluble 
in the way in which it is formulated by Ricardo. Ile also shows that Ricardo 
confuses labour and labour-power and does not analyze the origin of surplus- 
value. In the eighteenth chapter, Marx devotes great attention to the capi- 
talist application of machinery. In almost every chapter of the third part of 
“Theories of Surplus-Value”. Marx discusses problems of the first volume 
of “ Capital” such as value. constant and variable capital. wages and so on. 
Lastly. in the second and third parts of “ Theories of Surplus-Value’’, there 
are sections relating to the analysis of the capitalist mode of production as a 
whole and to the analysis of capitalist reproduction, The explanation of all 
this is that Marx. when he investigates the views of a hourgeois economist, 
always has to analyze the entire svstem of the latter. This circumstance, how- 
ever. does not at all alter the fact that the internal structure of the historical 
part largely reproduces the structure of the theoretical part of Marx’s work. 

But when the structure of “ Theories of Surplus-Value”. which reflects 
the history of the internal development of bourgeois political economy, 
reproduces the development of Marx’s economic theory from the histori- 
cal aspect, the subject-matter of the fourth volume of “Capital” is a major 
contribution to the historical substantiation of this theory. 


122 


J 


It the same way as description progresses from the first to the second 
and third volumes of “‘ Capital”’, capitalist relations of production “ approach 
step by step the form which they assume on the surface of society, in the 
action of different capitals upon one another, in competition, and in the 
ordinary consciousness of the agents of production themselves”’.* The histori- 
cal part of “ Capital” also completes the advance to the surface of bourgeois 
society since it provides critical proof of how capitalist relations of pro- 
duction are reflected in the heads of the apologists of this society, in the 
heads of the bourgeois economists. Naturally, individual representatives of 
hourgeois political economy described capitalist reality and capitalist pro- 
duction-relations in various ways. The vulgar economists—deliberately or 
unintentionally—stay on the surface of economic relations, but the classical 
economists succeeded to a certain degree in penetrating the economic pro- 
cesses in depth and in tracing the internal relationship of the phenomena. 
Marx always assessed this very highly. 

In the historical part of ‘‘ Capital’, Marx follows the interpretation of the 
laws of capitalism by bourgeois ideologists. He considers the progress of 
bourgeois political economy as a reflection of the progress of bourgeois 
society itself and of its internal contradictions. For the understanding of the 
natural laws of capitalism in all their aspects, Marx also had to explain how 
the base influences the superstructure and how capitalist reality is reflected 
in the ideological sphere, especially in the science of economics. 

All this explains why the critical analysis of the history of political eco- 
nomy—although it was for Marx an important starting point for the elabo- 
ration of his theory of economics—is at the same time the necessary com- 
pletion of the theoretical structure which he put together in the first three 
volumes of “ Capital”’. 


34 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. IT, p. 25. 


123 


CHAPTER 9 


Marn’s ceonomic theory 
and the working class 


The political economy of the working class. The dissemina- 
tion of economic theory in the ranks of the working-class. 
“Value, Price and Profit” : from political economy to eco- 
nomic policy. Comparison with the 1840's : “Wage-Labour 
and Capital” and “Manifesto of the Communist Party”. 
“Once the interconnection is grasped”. Justification of the 
struggle of the workers for higher wages and a shorter working 
day. Analysis of the value of labour-poswer. “ Down sith the 
wage system !”. Scientific critique of Proudhonism, 


The enormous significance and the full content of Marx’s work can only be 
grasped when it is remembered that Marx was no mere book-scholar but first 
and foremost a revolutionary. He created his economic theory not for a 
select group of specialists but directly for the working class. “ The appreci- 
ation which ‘ Das Kapital’ rapidly gained in wide circles of the German work- 
ing-class is the best reward of my labours ”* wrote Marx in the Afterword to 
the second edition of the first volume of “ Capital”. And if he spent many 
vears in the Library of the British Museum or, bent over his desk. analyzed 
the subtleties of past political economists. then he did so because he knew 
that the working-class needed his work. “ Although I am devoting a great 
deal of time to the preparation for the Geneva Congress (this was the first 
congress of the {st International in September 1866—V. V.)”, Marx wrote 
to Kugelmann, “IT cannot and do not want to go there. since no such pro- 
longed interruption of my work is possible. T think that this work which I am 
doing is of far greater importance to the working class than anything that I, 
personally. could do at a Congress quelconque (of any sort).””? 

In the sphere of economic theory. Marx claborated the political economy 
of the working-class. “Tt is the political economy of the working class. re- 
duced to its scientific expression ”.? to quote Engels’s words about “‘ Capital”. 
Marx is “the man to whom the whole working class of Europe and America 


1 1K. Marx. Capital. Vol. T. Afterword to the 2nd German edition. 1. ¢.. p. 13. 

K. Marx, letler to Kugelmann of 23 August 1866. in: K. Marx, Letters to Dr. Kugelmann, 
1. ¢.. pp. 37-38. 

3. F. Engels, Karl Marx, in: K. Marx,F. Engels, Werke, Bd. £6, p. 365. 


1 


125 


owes more than to anyone else...”* “ As long as there have been capitalists 


and workers in the world, no book has been published which is of such im- 
portance for the workers as this one.’ With these words, Engels characterized 
the significance of “ Capital” for the working-class movement. 

Above all, with his economic theory, Marx supplied the scientific founda- 
tion for the international working-class movement, “the scientific base” for 
“the socialist efforts” of the proletariat which up till then had been lacking.® 
Marx exposed the mechanism of capitalist exploitation and thus showed 
“that the entire capital of our bankers, merchants, industrialists and big 
Jandowners is nothing but the accumulated and unpaid labour of the work- 
ing-class !’7 In this review of the first volume of “ Capital” from which these 
lines are taken, Engels recalls that the “‘ Neue Rheinische Zeitung”, which 
he and Marx had published, had demanded in 1849 in the name of the 
Silesian peasants that a thousand million talers which the great landed pro- 
prictors had illegally appropriated when serfdom and feudal services were 
abolished should be returned to these peasants. The series of articles printed 
in this connection by their friend and fellow-militant W. Wolff, was also 
called ** Schlesische Milliarde” ( Silesian Thousand Million’). 

“What are a thousand million”. wrote Engels, “in comparison with this 
colossal reclamation which is now being made in the name of the entire 
working-class—for this is how it must certainly be understood ! If the entire 
accumulated capital of the possessing classes is nothing but ‘unpaid labour’, 
it seems to follow directly from this that labour will be paid later, ie., that 
the entire capital in question will be transferred to labour.’ Engels wrote in 
a review of “ Capital” that “... who has eyes to see sees here clearly enough 
the demand for a social revolution’’.® 

One of the most important things to be realized from the study of Marx’s 
economic theory is that the capitalist mode of production is progressive in 
comparison with pre-capitalist forms. Only this form of society could aceumu- 
late that wealth and ensure that development of the productive forces which 
established the basic condition for the transition to socialism in which mem- 
bers of society can develop their abilities to the full. In this. there is an 
essential difference between Marx’s theory and the utopian views of pre- 
Marxist socialism. between his ideas and the petty bourgeois theories of that 
time. Engels notes that “As compared with the ordinary socialists. it is to be 
recognized as the merit of Marx that he also demonstrates an advance just 
where the extremely one-sided development of present conditions is accompa- 
nied by dircetly discouraging consequences. As everywhere in the descrip- 


4 F. Engels. Preface to the ‘‘ Manifesto of the Communist Party”’, Foreign Languages Publishing 
House, Moscow (year unknown), p. 45. 

5 F. Engels. review of the first volume of ‘‘Capital’’ for the ‘‘ Demokratisches Wochenblatt”, 
in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 16. p. 235. 

6 F. Engels, review of the first volume of ‘‘ Capital’’ for the ‘‘ Elberfelder Zeitung”, in: K. Marx/ 
FP. Engels. Werke, Bd. 16, p. 215. 

7 Thid., p. 214. 

[bid. 

9 F. Engels. review of the first volume of ‘Capital’? for the ‘* Diisseldorfer Zeitung *’, in: 
Kk. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 16, p. 216. 


loo] 


126 


tion of the extremes of wealth and poverty resulting from the factory ¢ystem 
in general. etc.”*° In the Instructions for Delegates of the Provisional Central 
Council at the ist Congress of the Working Men's [International Association, 
Marx writes the following about child labour in capitalism : ““ We consider 
the tendeney of modern industry to make children and juvenile persons of 
both sexcs co-operate in the great work of social production. as a progressive, 
sound and legitimate tendency. although under capital it was distorted into 
an abomination.””* 

When capitalism has fulfilled its historical mission and socialized all 
aspects of labour, it becomes. as Marx also shows, an obstacle for the progress 
of society. It thus compels the working-class lo take power into its own hands 
and, in the interests of the whole of society. to abolish the form of appropria- 
tion of wealth which prevails in capitalism. Marx comes to this conclusion 
after discovering the economic law of motion of capitalist society. 

In contrast to the pseudo-socialists Lassalle and Proudhon, Marx provided 
an all-round substantiation of the thesis that the socialist revolution is neces- 
sary for the complete liberation of the working-class. Other measures, if they 
do not attack the monopoly of the capitalist class. the owners of the means 
of production. cannot liberate the working-class from wage slavery. This does 
not mean at all that Marx contested the usefulness of such actions. Tle only 
considered that they are of secondary importance when it is a question of 
the liberation of the working-class from capitalist exploitation. Here is a 
characteristic example of this. 

Marx analyzes the co-operative movement in capitalism and states that 
“We acknowledge the co-operative movement as one of the transforming 
forees in the present society based upon class antagonism. Its great merit is 
to show practically. that the present paupcerising. and despotic system of the 
subordination of labour to capital can be superseded hy the republican and 
beneficial svstem of the association of free and equal producers ... We recom- 
mend to the working men to embark in co-operative production rather than 
in co-operative stores. The latter touch but the surface of the present econom- 
ical svstem. the former attacks its groundwork.’ In the third volume of 
“Capital”. and in “Theories of Surplus-Value”. Marx repeatedly speaks of 
the co-operative factories of the workers in England’? who thus showed that 
the capitalist as such had ceased to be a necessary figure in the production- 
process. In the “Inaugural Address of the Working Men’s International 
Association”. Marx assesses the co-operative movement. and especially co- 
onerative factories. as a“... victory of the political economy of labour over 
the political economy of property... The value of these great social ex- 
periments cannot be over-rated. By deed. instead of hy argument. they have 


10 F. Engels. review of the first volume of ‘Capital’ for the “ Beobachter”. in: K. Marx’ 
F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 16. p. 227. 

41 Ik. Marx, Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional Central Council. in; ‘The Tnter- 
national Courier’, 20 February and 13 Mav 1867, Nos. 6. 7, 8. 9 et 10. 

120 Thid. 

143° Cf. K. Marx. Das Kapital, Bd. TIT. in: &K. Marx F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 25. Dietz Verlag, Berlin 
1964. pp. 400, 456; ef. K. Marx. Theorien tiber den Mehrwert. 3. Teil. 1. c.. pp. 351. 494, 502. 


127 


shown that production on a large scale, and in accord with the behests of 
modern science, may be carried on without the existence of a class of masters 
employing a class of hands ; that to bear fruit, the means of labour need not 
be monopolised as a means of dominion over, and of extortion against, the 
labouring man himself ; and that. like slave labour, like serf labour, hired 
labour is but a transitory and inferior form, destined to disappear before 
associated labour plying its foil with a willing hand, a ready mind and a 
joyous heart.’ 

The co-operative factories of the workers in England confirm the im- 
portant conclusion which followed from Marx's economic theory that un- 
portant basic conditions for the communist mode of production evolve pre- 
eisely in the very heart of capitalism. In the co-operative factories, “ social 
production controlled by social foresight’ had proved, already in capitalism, 
its advantages over the capitalist economic system. ‘‘... social production 
controlled by social foresight” is how Marx defines in the Inaugural Address 
the political economy of the working-class by which he means the cconomy 
of the future communist society. Nevertheless, Marx warns the workers “ that. 
however excellent in principle and however useful in practice, co-operative 
labour, if kept within the narrow circle of the casual efforts of private work- 
men, will never be able to arrest the growth in geometrical progression of 
monopoly, to free tne masses, nor even to perceptibly lighten the burden of 
their miseries.’** Only when the working-class has seized political power can 
it develop co-operative labour on an all-national scale, i.c., really Liberate the 
working classes. “‘lo convert social production into one large and har- 
monious system of free and co-operative labour, general social changes are 
wanted, changes of the general conditions of society, never to be realised save 
by the transfer of the organised forces of society, viz : the State power, from 
capitalists and landlords to the producers themselves.””” 

In his reviews of “ Capital”, Engels expressed the hope that the Social 
Democratic deputies would turn this work into their “ theoretical Bible” and 
make it “the armoury... from which they take their best arguments ”’.”° 

With regard to the discussion about to be held at that time in the North 
German Reichstag on trade and factory regulations, Engels wrote that “ We 
expect none of the deputies elected by German working men to go to the 
discussion of this law without first fully familiarizing himself with Mare’s 
book ... Under these conditions, four or five representatives of the proletariat 
are a power when they know how to use their position, when above all they 


4% K. Marx, Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association, in: Kark Marx, 
Selected Works, Vol, 2, Lawrence & Wishart, London 1945, p. 439. 


{5 Ibid. 
46 Ibid. p. 440. 


47 K. Marx, Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional Central Council, in: ‘‘The Inter- 
national Courier’, 20 February and 13 May 1867, Nos. 6. 7, 8. 9 et 10. 


18 F. Engels, review of the first volume of ‘Capital’? for the ‘‘Rheinische Zeitung”, in: 
K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 16, p. 210. 


128 


know what it is all about. which is what the people do not know. And. for 
this, Marx’s book provides them with all the material ready for use." 

Mars took a great deal of trouble to popularize his economic theory in the 
ranks of the working-class and he demanded this from his fellow-militants, 
too. Concerning Wilhelin Liebknecht. he wrote “that itis in fact his duty to 
direet allention to my book at meetings of workers. If he does not, the 
Lassalleans will take charge of the affair, and in the wrong way."?? 

In June 1865. at two sessions of the Central Council of the Kirst Tnter- 
national, Marx held a lecture on 7 Value. Price and Profit™ in which he 
described the foundations of his theory of surplus-value. Tle informed 
Engels that“... in the seeond part, in extremely compressed but relatively 
populae form, the thing contains much new material which anticipates 
my book ”.24 Marx's elTorts to communicate his scientilie discoveries 
primarily to a working-class audience is the best evidence that with his 
economic theory he had ereated the political eceonomy of the working- 
class. As he wrote to the metal-worker Carl Wings. “... you can be sure that 
in me the working-class will always find a true protagonist.” For the whole 
of his life, Marx proved how justified these words were. 

1865 does not fall within the scope of this book since it deals with the 
period up to 1863. However, in this chapter an exception is made. especially 
for Marx’s book “ Value. Price and Profit” in which he uses his theoretical 
principles to solve specific questions of the working-class movement. ‘The 
analysis of this work, the evidence of how Marx proceeded (rom theory to 
practice, concludes those chapters in the present book which examine how 
Marx claborated his theoretical theses. 

The manner in which Marx presents his economic theory in “ Value, Price 
and Profit” differs considerably from that in which he wrote “ Wage-Labour 
and Capital” in 1847. This is only to be expected since between 1847 and 
1865 Marx had worked out the theories of value and surplus-value, the theory 
of average profit and price of production and the theory of land-rent. in short, 
his entire economic theory. And now we have before us a work in which the 
general principles of politieal ceonomy are used to solve the practical 
problems of the working-class. 

Marx gave his lecture on value. price and profit for a quile specific reason. 
Jolin Weston. a member of the General Council and a carpenter by trade. 
was endeavouring lo prove to the General Council that it was useless for the 
workers to try’and achieve an inerease in the general wage-level since this, 
so he believed. would lead to a general rise in prices. From this, Weston drew 
the conclusion that trade unions were ‘harmful’. The refutation of the views 
of Weston was made even more urgent by the fact that they were expressed 
at a time when the working-class in general was demanding an inerease in 


‘Is, review of the first volume of “Capital” for the ‘‘Demokratisches Wochenblatt"’, 
in: K. Marx F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 16. p. 240. 

20° Ok. Marx. letter to Kugelmann of 30 November 1867, in: K. Marx, Letters to Dr. Kugelmann, 
Le. p. 54. 

21° K. Marx, letter to Engels of 24 June 1865, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 31. p. 125, 

22) K. Marx, letter to Klings of 4 October 1864, in: K. MarxF. Engels, Werke, Bd. 34, p. 418. 


9 Discovery 499 


| 


wages. Furthermore. the Proudhonists and Lassalleans shared the opinion 
of Weston. Lassalle’s thesis of “ the iron law of wages” resulted in a negative 
relationship with the trade unions and with the economic struggle of the 
working-class in general. An answer to it had to be given and Marx used all 
of the main theses of his economic theory to give a convincing answer. 

We proved that the views referred to above implied the same thing as the 
assertion of the vulgar cconomists that value was determined by costs of 
production. ; 

Ricardo likewise determined value by the costs of production but. by 
this term understood the labour-time which is necessary for the production 
of a commodity. However, the formula which states that the value of a com- 
modity is determined by its production-costs also allows of the denial of the 
theory of labour-value in general, 

The vulgar ceonomists took advantage of this and by production-costs 
understood that which the production of the commodity costs the capitalist, 
ne. the value of the invested capital (¢ + v). 

Surplus-value (profit) then appears as an addition to value. as “ profit on 
alienation”. The value of a commodity is then determined by the “ value 
of the labour”. Le.. by the wage. Other vulgar economists, such as Say. for in- 
stance, understood by production-costs the sum of the “services” which 
capital, earth and Jabour contribute to production. They determined the 
magnitude of these costs by the relation between supply and demand, The 
fact that Ricardo and the vulgar economists had different views on pro- 
duction-costs led to “a mass of later fellows post Ricardum (after Ricardo). 
such as Say himself, being able to assume that the cost of production was 
the final regulator of prices without having the slightest idea of the deter- 
mination of value by labour-time and even directly denying this while others 
assert it.” 

It must be stated that Marx. in “Wage-Labour and Capital”, sub- 
scribed to Ricardo’s interpretation of the formula which states that the value 
of a commodity is determined by the costs of production. “We have just 
seen how the fluctuations of supply and demand always bring the price of a 
commodity back to its price of production.”"* Marx then established the 
relationship of production-costs with value: “The determination of price 
by cost of production is tantamount to the determination of price by 
the labour-time required to the production of a commodity. for the cost of 
production consists, first of raw materials and wear and tear of tools. ete.. 
ie., of industrial products whose production has cost a certain number of 
work-days which therefore represent a certain amount of Jabour-time, and. 
secondly. of direct labour, which is also measured by its duration.” 

There is no doubt that Marx in 1847 could not have criticized Weston 
so convincingly and thoroughly as in 1865, since for this, in the theory of 
value and surplus-value. he had to go hevond Ricardo. 


23° K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, 1. ¢.. p. 207. 
24 K. Marx. Wage-Labour and Capital, Martin Lawrence Ltd.. London £932, p. 24. 
25 Ibid., p. 25. 


130 


Now, in “Value, Price and Profit”, Marx points out the vicious circle 
in which Weston is caught up by following the vulgar economists, who 
determined the value of a commodity by the value of labour, and emphasizes 
that here “we... arrive al no conclusion at all.’ 

Marx had already solved this problem in his theory of value and surplus- 
value. This is why he now gives a concise and wonderfully clear deseription 
of his economic theory. Ile breaks the vicious circle and also explains the 
contradictions which follow from the fact that the nature of things and the 
form in which they appear do not coincide. Marx shows that profit. although 
it appears on the surface of the phenomena as an addition to the value, can 
only be comprehended when it is assumed that commodities are sold at their 
value. Marx also discovered another contradiction which is the other side of 
the coin of that just mentioned. Although the wage docs actually appear as 
the value of labour on the surface of bourgeois society. it is nevertheless in 
reality only the value of the labour-power, which is obviously less than the 
value of the labour or. more accuraicly. than the value of the product which 
the labour produces. 

Concerning this. Marx says that ‘This seems paradox and contrary to 
everyday observation. It is also paradox that the earth moves round the 
sun, and that water consists of two highly inflammable gases. Scientific truth 
is always paradox, if judged by everyday experience, which catches only the 
delusive appearance of things.” 

There is no intention here of giving a detailed examination of how 
Marx presents the theory of value and surplus-value in “ Value, Price and 
Profit”. Our main interest here centres on the practical conclusions that 
Marx draws from his theory. First of all. however. the comparison of this 
work with “ Wage-Labour and Capital” has to be continued. For this, the 
“Manifesto of the Communist Party” will also be consulted and it will be 
demonstrated that without a scientific political economy there can he no 
correct political ceconomy of the working-class. But in the 1840’s Marx had 
not vet created a scientific political economy. In the “ Manifesto of the Com- 
munist Party”, he was still speaking of the selling of labour and. like Ricardo, 
determined the price of all commodities. i.e.. of labour as well. by their 
costs of production.” It has already been noted that this formula was ambi- 
guous and enabled the theory of value to be interpreted in their own way 
by the vulgar economists. It was precisely this aspect which was seized upon 
hy petty bourgeois socialists of the Proudhon type. Marx subsequently wrote 
that Proudhon in the theory of value “has completely confused people. 
They believe that a commodity is sold at its value when it is sold at its 


26 K. Marx. Wages, Price and Profit, in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow 1970, p. 200. (Translator’s note: the original German title of 
Lohn. Preis und Profit is sometimes translated as Value, Price and Profit (e. g., as in the 
book of the same name published by George Allen & Unwin of London in 1938); quotations 
from the latter publication also appear in the present book.) 

27° «Ibid.. p. 206—7. 


28 Cf. K. Marx/F. Engels. Manifesto of the Communist Party, Foreign Languages Publishing 
Ilause, Moscow (year not stated). 


7 131 


prix de revient = price of the means of production used for it + the wage of 
the labour. They do not see that the unpaid labour contained in the com- 


just as important ao value-forming element as that) which is 
20 


modity 


pire gat 

In * Wage-Labour and Capital”. he gives an example to explain the 
mechanism of capitalist exploitation. the source of profit. * For one shilling 
a tabourer works all day long in the fields of a farmer. as a result of which the 
farmer secures a return of two shillings. The farmer not only reecives the 
replaced value which he has given to the day-labourer ; he has doubled it... 
For the one shilling he has bought the labour-power of the day-labourer. 
which ereates products of the soil of twice the value. and out of the shilling 
makes two. Tt is not diffieult to understand here that the mechanism of 
capilalist exploitation is not explained on the basis of the law of value. 

When the labourer sells his labour to the capitalist. it is ineomprehen- 
sible why he receives for tt only half the value which is produeed by it. This 
is an obvious violation of the law of value. the law of equivalent exchange. 
Ata later date, Marx was only able to explain this contradiction by distin- 
euishing between labour and labour-power, ‘This is because the key to the 
problem is that the value of the labour. ie.. the value of the product of this 
labour. is greater than the value of the labour-power. In “ Value. Price and 
Profit. Marx quotes a similar example and states that “The value of the 
labouring power is determined by the quantity of labour necessary to main- 
lain. or reproduce it. but the use of that labouring power is only limited by 
the active energies and physical strength of the labourer... As he has sold 
his labouring power to the capitalist. the whole value or produce created by 
him belongs to the capitalist..." Marx succeeded in solving this parti- 
cularly important problem by distinguishing between use-value and the value 
of labour-power as a commodity. 


Maex analyzes the value of labour-power and points out that it is not the 
same in all of the various branches of production, ‘rom this. he immediately 
draws the practical conclusion that “The ery for an equality of wages rests. 
therefore. upon a mistake. is an insane wish never to be fulfilled... What 
you think just or equilable is out of the question, The question is: what is 
necessary and unavoidable with a given system of production ?”’” This shows 
in remarkably clear words how Marx elaborated the scientific economic 
policy of the working-class. in the straggle with the capitalist class. on the 
basis of a scientific political economy. Furthermore. the analysis of labour- 
power as a commodity leads to the conclusion that the value of this com- 
modity on the surface of bourgeois socicty necessarily appears as the value 
of the actual labour. This is explained by the fact that the worker reecives 
his wage after he has done his work and also that he actually allows the eapi- 


29° Wk. Marx. leller to Schily of 30 November 1867. in: K. Marx/F, Engels, Werke, Bd. 31. p. 473. 
300K. Marx, Wage-Labour and Capital, 1. c., p. 31. 

St K. Marx, Value, Price and Profit. London 1938, George Allen & Unwin, pp. 59-61. 

32 Ibid.. p. 57,58. 


132 


talist to take his work. This is why the unpaid labour appears as paid labour 
although the capitalist in reality only pays for a part of the labour of the 
worker, This is how Marx exposes one of the most deceptive (or, as he said, 
* irrational) categories of the capitalist mode of production : wages. For the 
working-class and the working-class movement. this was of enormous signifi- 
cance. 7 Onee the interconnection is grasped”, wrote Marx. “all theoretical 
belief in the permanent necessity of existing conditions collapses before their 
collapse in practice.” And this is why Marx also took such great pains to 
explain this interconnection to the workers. “ We wish to be understood by 
the workers “4 he wrote in * Wage-Labour and Capital”? and he noted with 
pride that ‘*... workers ... understand my book and find their way about 
TD AES cog 

But “to grasp the intereonnection” was of no less importance when il 
was a question of determining the correct economic policy of the working- 
class. Vhis is clearly shown in the question of the struggle of trade unions 
for higher wages and a legal limitation of the length of the working day. Let 
us see how Mars solves this cardinal problem of the working-class movement 
in * Value. Price and Profit” and compare this with his treatment of it in 
“Wage-Labour and Capital” and in’ the “ Manifesto of the Communist 
Party”. 

Above all. Mars shows why it is also important from the practical point 
of view to define the category of surplus-value in its pure form, Naturally, the 
whole of the surplus-value does not flow as industrial profit into the pocket 
of the industrial capitalist. He must share it with the loan-capitalist and the 
landowner. But. for the working-class, this is of minor importance. “ It is the 
emploving capilalist who immediately extracts from the labourer this surplus- 
value. whatever part of it he may ultimately be able to keep for himself. 
Upon this relation. therefore. between the employing capitalist and the wage 
labourer the whole wages system and the whole present system of production 
hinge." 

Marx also draws attention to the difference between profit-rate and rate 
of surplus-value. In “Value. Price and Profit’. he also calls the rate of sur- 
plus-value the profit-rate. Here he is speaking of two expressions for profit- 
rate and stresses that only the relation of profit to that part of the capital 
which is advaneed for in wages indicates the actual degree of exploitation of 
labour. the real relation between paid and unpaid labour. “ A general rise of 
wages would. therefore. result in a fall of the general rate of profit, but not 
affect values” (rate of profit’? means ‘rate of surplus-value* here—V. V.) 
This is the first important conclusion that Marx draws on this question from 
the theory of surplus-value. 


letter to Kugelmann of 11 July 1868, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 
Loe. p. 23: 
34 WK. Marx. Wage-Labour and Capital, 1. c.. p. 16. 

5 K. Marx. letter to Kugelmann of 11 July 1868, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 
1 Oar eras tee 
36 K. Marx. Value. Price and Proftt. 1. c., p. 67,68. 
370 Ibid... p. 73. 


133 


In “ Wage-Labour and Capital”, Marx still speaks—like Ricardo—of the 
inverse proportionality between wages and profit : “ Profit rises in the same 
degree in which wages fall ; it falls in the same degree in which wages rise.” 

Marx now takes this thesis a great deal further. An inverse relationship 
of this kind exists between wages and surplus-value. Since the law of the 
tendency of the profit-rate to fall applies here, the profit-rate can become 
less although wages do not rise and, consequently, although the rate of 
surplus-value does not become less. (Conversely, with the development of 
capitalism and with the rise in labour productivity, there is a tendency for 
the rate of surplus-profit to increase.) “The profit-rate falls ... not because 
labour is exploited less but (because he is exploited) more .. 

In “Value, Price and Profit”, Marx investigates the principal allempts 
of the workers to raise Wages or stop them from falling. 

When food becomes more expensive or the value of money becomes less. 
the value of labour-power increases and the worker must fight for a rise in 
wages. If the value of labour-power falls, he must oppose the reduction of 
wages since “...he would only try to get some share in the increased pro- 
ductive powers of his own labour, and lo maintain his former relative position 
in the social scale." 

Finally. Marx concerns himself with the length of the working day. JTe 
describes the constant tendency of capital to inerease the working day and 
to increase the intensity of labour. From this he draws the following con- 
clusion : “In their attempts at reducing the working day to its former rational 
dimensions, or, where they cannot enforce a legal fixation of a normal work- 
ing day, at checking overwork by a rise of wages, a rise not only in proportion 
to the surplus time exacted, but in a greater proportion, working men fulfil 
only a duty to themselves and their race. They only set limits to the tyranni- 
cal usurpations of capital.’“* When the worker opposes the tendency of 
capital lo increase the intensity of labour “... by struggling for a rise of 
wages corresponding to the rising intensity of labour, the working man only 
resists the depreciation of his labour and the deterioration of his race.” 

It must he said that in the 1840°s Marx and Engels did not assess the 
struggle of the trade unions for higher wages and a shorter working day in 
this light. It is true that even at this lime Marx recognized the trade unions 
as a means of uniting the working-class but he assumed that the “ costs which 
they cause working men are mostly greater than the inerease in wages which 
they want to achieve. In the long run, thev cannot resist the laws of com- 
petition.” While Marx and Engels denied the economic importance for this 
period of the strike actions of the working-class, they still regarded the poli- 
tical significance of this struggle for the 1840’s as being extremely important 
in preparation for the overthrow of the whole of the old society. 


38 K. Marx, Wage-Labour and Capital, }. c., p. 37. 

39 K. Marx, Theorien tiber den Mehrwert, 1. c., p. 436. 

40 WK. Marx, Value, Price and Profit, 1. c.. p. 76. 

41 thid.. p. 80. 

42 Whid., p. 82. 

43° K. Marx, Arbeitslohn, in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 6. p. 554. 


134 


It was at this time that Engels opposed the struggle of the working-class 
for the ten-hour day and spoke out against strike action in general. Referring 
lo the Act passed in 1847 by Parliament, which limited the working day to 
ten hours for juveniles and women, he wrote in 1850 that “The Ten-Hour 
Bill was in principle and as a concluding measure quite definitely a false step, 
an unpolitical and even reactionary measure which incorporates the germ of 
its own destruction.“ When, at the end of December 1851, English engineer- 
ing workers began a strike. demanding the abolition of overtime work and 
better working conditions, Engels assumed that this strike would delay the 
spread of the economic crisis and thus the outbreak of the revolution. This 
is why he ealled it “stupid.” 

‘That Marx and Engels took up this position resulted directly from their 
views on economies at that time. In “ Wage-Labour and Capital”, Marx 
described wages as the value or price of labour and wrote that “ Now, the 
same general Jaws which regulate the price of commodities in general, natu- 
rally regulate wages. or the price of labour-power. The price of labour-power 
will be determined by the cost of its production, by the labour-time necessary 
for production of this commodity : labour-power... Thus the cost of pro- 
duction of simple labour-power amounts to the costs of existence and pro- 
pagation of the worker. The price of this cost of existence and propagation 
constitutes wages. The wages thus determined are called the minimum of 
wages.’"® In the “Manifesto of the Communist Party”, Marx and Engels 
likewise remarked that the average price of wage labour is the minimum 
wage.’? Tt must be said that the theory of the minimum of wages is a purely 
hourgeois approach to the problem which dates back to the Physiocrats. Marx 
subsequently wrote that “The minimum of the salary forms... the axis of 
physiocratic doctrine”. The Physiocrats went wrong in “that they regarded 
this minimum as an unvarving magnitude which, with them, is determined 
entirely by Nature, not by the stage of historical development, which is itself 
a magnitude subject to movements ...’** 

In “ Value. Price and Profit”, Marx took a different view of this important 
problem. Tere. too, he first of all determines the value of labour-power by 
the quantum of labour which is needed to produce the food which the worker 
needs lo maintain himself and for the reproduction of labour-power. Later, 
however. he savs that “there are some peculiar features which distinguish 
the value of the labouring power, from the values of all other commodities. 
The value of the labouring power is formed by two elements—the one merely 
physical. the other historical or social.’"® The value of the food needed is 
only the lowest limit of labour-power. The value of labour-power is also 
determined by the “traditional standard of life”®® which has become estab- 
44 ¥V. Engels. Die Zehnstundenfrage. in: K, Marx/F. Engels. Werke. Bd. 7. p. 228. 

45 ¥. Engels. letter to Marx of 2 March 1852, in: K. Marx/I. Engels, Werke, Bd. 28. p. 35. 
40K. Marx. Wage-Labour and Capital, 1. ¢.. p. 26/27. 
47 GE. KK. Marx/F. Engels. Manifesto of the Communist Party. Foreign Languages Publishing 

Tlouse, Moscow (vear not stated). 

48 K. Marx. Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. c., p. 11. 


AQ K. Marx. Value, Price and Profit, 1. ¢. 
50 Ibid. 


lished in the particular country in question. What is the maximum of the 
value of labour-power ? It is Just as impossible to determine this as it is to 
determine the minimum rate of surplus-valuc. ‘The capitalist always strives 
for a maximum profit, Le., he endeavours to reduce wages lo the physical 
minimuin and to extend the working day to the physical maximum. Fixation 


of the actual level of wages and the actual Jength of the working day “.. . is 
only settled by the continuous struggle between capital and labour... The 


matter resolves itself into a question of the respective strength of the com- 
batants.** 

It should be pointed out that Marx assessed the struggle of the workers 
for higher wages in 1853 in an article published in the “ New York Tribune” 
differently than he did in the 1840's. * There is a sort of philanthropes and 
even socialists who believe that strikes damage the interests of the ‘worker 
himself? and who claim that their main task is to find a method to secure 
constant average wages.” Marx based his arguments on the cyclical develop- 
ment of capitalism, which “makes all such average wages impossible” and 
which causes “the sequence of the rise and fall in wages and the resulting 
never-ending conflicts between capitalists and workers.’”*? 

It is indeed true that the problem is formulated in different terms from 
the words used in the 1840's but it was only when Marx had distinguished 
between labour and labour-power that he was in a position to make a thorough 
analysis of labour-power, this commodity which is fundamentally different 
from all other commodities. Marx noted that “The entire world of ‘ commo- 
dities’ can be divided into two great parts. Firstly, labour capacity—secondly. 
the commodities differing from labour capacity itself." Only after an analysis 
of labour-power as a commodity was it possible to comprehend the relation 
between labour and capital, not as a physical relation between accumulated ” 
and “ direct” Jabour which is how the bourgeois cconomists viewed it, but 
as a specifically social relation, i.c., as a class-relation, which cannot be under- 
stood apart from the class-struggle between workers and capitalists. From 
Marx's theory it follows that the struggle of the working-class for higher 
wages and shorter hours is directly dictated by ceonomic necessity and results 
directly from the general tendency of capital to foree wages down to the 
physical minimum. ({t is in this direction that the law of capitalist aecumula- 


tion operates.) Should “the working class... renounce their resistance 
against the encroachments of capilal... they would be degraded to one 


uniform mass of broken wretches past salvation.”™ 

It is consequently not at all astonishing that Marx and Engels should 
have assessed the Ten Ifours’ Bill. which was passed by Parliament on 8th 
June 1847, quite differenUy in the 1860's from the 1840's. “The immense 
physical, moral and intelicctual benefits hence accruing to factory operatives. 
half-yearly chronicled in the reports of the inspectors of factories. are now 


541. Ibid. 

52 WK. Marx, Die russische Politik gegeniiber der Tiirkei — Die Arbeilerbewegung in England, 
in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. Bd. 9, Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1960, p. 170. 

530 IN. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, 1. c¢., p. 130. 

o4 W. Marx, Value, Price and Profit, I. c., p. 92. 


136 


ae ee <2, « 


acknowledged on all sides”’, wrote Marx in the Inaugural Address. “‘ Hence 
the Ten Hours’ Bill was not only a great practical success ; it was the victory 
of a principle, it was the first time that in broad daylight the political econo- 
my of the middle class succumbed to the political economy of the working 
class.”™ 

Marx continued with this approach when in 1866 he raised the demand 
for legal enactment of an eight-hour working day. In the Instructions for the 
Delegates of the Provisional Central Council to the 1st Congress of the Work- 
ing Men's International Association, he wrote that “ A preliminary condition, 
without which all further attempts at improvement and emancipation must 
prove abortive, is the limitation of the working day... We propose § hours 
work as the legal limit of the working day.” This demand became one of 
the principal slogans in the struggle of the working-class throughout the 
world. 

It is also quite understandable why Marx in the 1860's had such an excep- 
tionally high regard for the activities of trade unions: “If the Trades’ 
Unions are required for gucrilla fights between capital and labour, they are 
still more important as organised agencies for superseding the very system of 
swages labour and rule by capital.”*” 

Marx regarded the daily struggle of the working-class for the improve- 
ment in their economic position as an important aspect but not the principal 
direction of struggle against the capitalists. He stressed that the working-class 
in this everyday struggle are only “... fighting with effects, but not with the 
causes of those effects ... They ought to understand that. with all the miseries 
it imposes upon them. the present system simultaneously engenders the 
material conditions and the social forms necessary for an economic recon- 
struction of societv.’%% This is the scientific reason why the conservative 
slogan “A fair day's pay for a fair day’s work” must be replaced by the 
revolutionary slogan “ Down with the wages system !7? 

A detailed description has been given here of how Marx criticized Proud- 
honism and how significant this critique has been for the working-class 
movement. However. it was only when Marx had formulated his own theory 
of economies that he was able to complete this critique. 

This is why it was only at the end of the 1850’s that he drew up a scien- 
tifie critique of the idea of an interest-free credit that Proudhon had had 
already at the beginning of the 1850’s. By the end of this decade. Marx was 
able to show why this idea was unworkable in practice and that it was because 
of this that Proudhon had not understood the necessity for the existence of 
money in capitalist society. 

Marx later wrote that “ Proudhon’s discovery of ‘crédit gratuit’ (interest- 
free credit) and of the people’s bank (banque du peuple’) based on it were 


55 K. Marx, Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association, 1. c., p. 439. 
56 K. Marx, Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional Central Council, 1. c. 

57 Ibid. 

58 K. Marx, Value, Price and Profit, 1. c., p. 93. 

59 Cf. ibid. 


40 Discovery 437 


his last economic ‘deeds’. In my book ‘A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy’... the proof will be found that the theoretical foundation 
of his view stems from a misunderstanding of the first elements of bourgeois 


‘political economy’, namely, the relation of commodities to money ...”° 


Marx understood very well indeed the significance of his economic theory 
for the struggle against various psgeudo-socialist influences on the working- 
class. Marx concerned himself with the translation of the first volume of 
“Capital” into French and explained why it was essential for confrontation 
with Proudhon : “I consider it of the very greatest importance to emancipate 
the French from the false views in which Proudhon with his idealized pelty- 
bourgeois standpoint has buried them. At the recent Congress in Geneva and 
in the relations which, as a member of the General Council of the working 
Men’s International Association, I have with the Paris branch, one is con- 
stantly confronted with the vilest consequences of Proudhonism.”™ 

Many similar documents could also be quoted. but this is scarcely neces- 
sary. “‘ Minds are always connected by invisible threads with the body of the 
people’’, wrote Marx.” His theory of economies expresses the basic interests 
of the working-class, reveals the objective tendencies of social development 
and—no longer merely by invisible threads—is inseparably associated with 
the international working-class movement and this has brought rich rewards. 


60 K. Marx, On P.-J. Proudhon. in: K. MarxiF. Engels. Werke, Bd. 16. p. 30. 

Gt K. Marx, letter to Biichner of 1 May 1867, in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Werke, Bd. 31. p. 544. 

62 K. Marx, letter to Meyer of 21 January 1487!. in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, 
Lc., p. 310. 


138 


CONCLUSION 


At the centre 
of the historic events of his time 


Forty years of work on “Capital”, “I laugh at the so-called 
‘ practical’ men swith their wisdom.” The topicality of ° Capi- 
tal”. “Capital” and present-day capitalism. The prospects 
of a new economic social formation. Marx's views of com- 
munist political economy. 


Marx worked on “ Capital” for forty yvears—from 1843 until the last day of 
his life. Was this conscientious and Jong drawn-out work necessary ? Engels 
gave the answer to this question : “In all these scientific investigations which 
cover such a wide field and such a mass of material. it is only at all possible 
lo achieve something tangible by studying the subject for many years, In- 
dividual aspects which are new and correct... can be discovered more easily ; 
but the grasping and interpretation of it in a new manner is only possible 
after an exhaustive investigation, Otherwise, books such as “ Capital” would 
be far more numerous.’* This truly titanic task was not easy for Marx. The 
ery of a soul in torment is evident in the profoundly moving letter to Sigfrid 
Meyer : “ Well. why didn’t I answer you ? Beeause [ was constantly hovering 
at the edge of the grave. Hence I had to make use of every moment when I 
was able to work to complete my book. to which T have sacrificed health, 
happiness. and family. I trust that this explanation needs no supplementation. 
T laugh at the so-called ‘ practical’ men with their wisdom. If one chose to be 
an ox, one could of course turn one’s back on the sufferings of mankind and 
look after one’s own skin. But I should have really regarded myself as un- 
practical if T had pegged out without completely finishing my book, at least 
in manuscript.” 

History has shown that Marx was right. Who still recalls today the 
German economist Professor Wilhelm Roscher who made a name for himself 
in Marx’s day? He is known only to specialists in the history of political 
economy. Marx said that Roscher was “not honest” in what he wrote but 
“always with an eve to the prejudices and the interests of his paymasters ! 


4 F. Engels, letter to Kautsky of 18 September 1883, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Briefe tiber “‘ Das 
Kapital’. Werke, Bd. 36, p. 279 f. 


2 K. Marx, letter to Meyer of 30 April 4867, in: Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence. 1. ¢., 
p. 294. 


10° 439 


A stone-breaker is respectable compared with such rabble.’* Nobody remem- 
bers Roscher today, nobody reads his books any longer. Marx's name, how- 
ever, is known to everybody and “Capital” has become a handbook for a 
million people. This is because Marx served a just cause. It was precisely in 
this that Marx regarded his work as ‘practical’ and he linked his destiny 
with the cause of the working-class. Through this, he achieved immortality, 

“Capital” is a star with a radiance of its own. Why is “Capital” im- 
mortal ? Why do the people of today need it as much as those of a century 
ago? 

In “ Capital”, not only are those problems solved which appeared on the 
stage of history a hundred years ago, but there are also the answers to many 
questions which affect the people of today. And the most important and most 
valuable aspect of “Capital” is that it sets out the method by which these 
problems can be solved. 

In the 19th century, bourgeois economists made no mention at all of 
“Capital” and ignored the economic theory worked out by Marx. In the 20th 
century, this is impossible. Emile James, the l*rench bourgeois economist, 
writes that “ Never before has so much attention been devoted to the works 
of Karl Marx as in our epoch and not only in Soviet Russia but also in the 
countries of the West.’”* Our century is marked by innumerable attempts of 
bourgeois economists and revisionists of all shades to refute Marxism or to 
rob it of its revolutionary content. 

Bourgeois economists and revisionists are trying to prove that capitalism 
in the 20th century has not developed in the way predicted in Marx’s 
economic theory. For instance, G. D. H. Cole, the well-known Labour ideolo- 
gist, asserts that Marx’s views have not been confirmed by the subsequent 
course of events,” that Marx was mistaken in his analysis of the basic trends 
in the development of capitalism. G. Myrdal, the Swedish bourgeois econo- 
mist, writes that “the prognosis of the future development of capitalist 
society which Marx formulated a hundred years ago has naturally proved 
totally untenable’’.® ‘These assertions are completely refuted by the course 
of historical development itself and also by the Marxist analysis of the 
economic development of capitalism in the 20th century, especially by Lenin’s 
theory of imperialism. Lenin showed that imperialism, as the highest stage of 
capitalism, is the further development of the basic tendencies of capitalism. 
He emphasized the fact that the theory of imperialism is a direct conclusion 
from the analysis of the capitalist mode of production worked out by Marx.’ 
In the Programme of the CPSU in which the phenomena now apparent in 
reality are generalized, it is said that “The development of world capita- 
lism... has fully confirmed... the Marxist-Leninist analysis of capitalism 
and of imperialism as its highest stage.’”® 


K. Marx, letter to Lassalle of 16 June 1862, in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. 3d. 30, p. 628. 

E. James. Uctopua 9xonomMHM4ecKoR MEICAH XX Beka, Moscow 1959, p. 538. 

G. D. H. Cole, Kannrannom B coppeMenHom Mupe, Moscow 1958, p. 27 

G. Myrdal, Maposas skoHomuka, Moscow 1958, p. 486 

Cf. V.I. Lenin, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1970. 
Programm und Statut der Kommunistischen Partei der Sowjetunion, |. c., p. 6f. 


am om 


140 


In “Capital”, Marx revealed the fundamental and most profound ten- 
dencies in the development of the capitalist mode of production. He met 
in full the conditions which he himself had set for political economy : 
“Only by putting the conflicting facts and the real contradictions which 
form the hidden background to them in place of the conflicting dogmas, can 
political economy he changed into a positive science. ”* In “ Capital”, Marx 
characterized capitalism so correctly and described its tendencies of develop- 
ment so thoroughly that Academician E. Varga could justly write that “In 
its social structure, modern capitalism in the highly developed countries 
recalls much more the capitalist society consisting exclusively of two clas- 
ses—bourgeoisie and proletariat on whose assumed existence Marx based 
his theoretical analysis than the actual capitalist society which existed during 
Mary's lifetime.’’”° 

In ‘Capital’, Marx deseribed the capitalist mode of production as a 
living whole, as an historically determined and thus historically transient 
stage of development of human society. He systematically compared capi- 
talism both with pre-capitalist formations and also with the coming com- 
munist mode of production. On the one hand. this method enabled Marx to 
gain a more profound understanding of the specific nature of capitalist 
society and. on the other. to reveal its tendencies of development. i.c., to 
prove also that the socialist revolution is inevitable. In “ Capital”, Marx 
did not provide any detailed picture of future society and. indeed. this was 
impossible for him. “This book will be a great disappointment to many 
readers”, wrote Engels. “... many may have imagined ... that here they 
would learn what it would actually be like in the communist Thousand-Year 
Community ... Marx is and remains the same revolutionary that he always 
was ... But as to what will be after the social transformation—he gives us 
only very obscure hints about this.” 

Nevertheless. Marx often made remarks about communism and described 
a series of its basic features. These comments are of especially great interest 
in our epoch in which the building of communist society has become the 
immediate practical task of the Soviet people. 

Tf we sum up what Marx has te say about communism in the four volumes 
of “ Capital”? and in “Grundrisse”, a reasonably harmonious and complete 
picture is obtained of communist society as Marx saw it. 

In “ Capital”. Marx demonstrated that it is the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction itself which produces the material conditions that make its downfall 
inevitable. In capitalism, the contradiction between the productive forces 
and the relations of production develops as a contradiction hetween the social 
character of production and the private form of appropriation. “The con- 
tradiction of the capitalist mode of production, however, lics precisely in its 


9 K. Marx, letter to Engels of 10 October 1868, in: K. Marx/F. Engels. Werke, Bd. 32, p. 181. 


10 FE. Varga, Der Kapitalismus des zwanzigsten Jahrhunderts, Verlag Die Wirtschaft, Berlin £962, 
p. 62. 


11 F. Engels, review of the first volume of ‘'Capital’’ for the ‘‘ Diisseldorfer Zeitung"’, 1. ¢., 
p. 216. 


141 


tendency towards an absolute development of the productive forces, which 
continually come into conflict with the specific conditions of production in 
which capital moves. and alone can move.””*? 

The basic contradiction of capitalism and the forms in which it unavoid- 
ably appears—the anarchy of social production and of the periodie economic 
crises—sct limits to the development of the productive forees within capitalist 
relations of production. “Tt is for this reason that the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction meets with barriers at a certain expanded stage of production which. 
if viewed from the otherepremise, would reversely have been altogether 
inadequate. It comes to a standstill at a point fixed by the production and 
realization of profit. and not the satisfaction of requirements.”7% 

Marx showed that the productive forces developing in the bosom of eapi- 
talism are irreconcilable with capitalist relations of production, The growing 
concentration and centralization of production and of capital increasingly 
separated the conditions of social production from the direct: producers. 
Joint-stock companies appeared. regarding which Marx wrote that” Phis 
result of the ultimate development of capitalist production is a neces- 
sary transitional phase towards the reconversion of capital into the property 
of producers, although no longer as the private property of the individual 
producers, but rather as the property of associated producers. as outright 
social property.” Ina supplement to the third volume of 7 Capital’, Engels 
described the new forms of industrial enterprises which had developed in 
the meantime : eartels. trusts and international cartels monopolizing entire 
branches of industry. Engels pointed out that in this way “...the road has 
been paved. most gratifyingly. for future expropriation by the whole of 
socieLy, the nation.” Marx wrote that “The contradiction between the gen- 
eral social power into which capital develops. on the one hand. and the private 
power of individual capitalists over these social conditions of production. on 
the other. becomes ever more irreconcilable. and vel contains the solution of 
the problem. because it implies at the same lime the transformation of con- 
ditions of production into general. common, social conditions.’ 

The transition from capitalism to communism does not take place by 
itself. For this. the working-class must break the dominance of the capitalist 
class ina revolutionary manner and seize political power by establishing the 
dictatorship of the proletariat, The thes 
lution is necessary to replace the eapitalist by a communist mode of pro- 
duction is the most important conclusion to be drawn from the ceonomic 
theory of Marx. In this connection. Marx and Engels pointed out that the 
“2. revolution might be effected entirely by peaceful and legal means...” 
but they did not forget to add that they scarcely expected “. .. the ruling 


s that the socialist. proletarian revo- 


420K. Marx, Capital, Vol. IT. 1. e.. p. 252 
130 Wbid.. p. 25% 

14 Ibid.. p. 4 
15 Ibid.. p. 4 
16 Ibid., p. 259. 


142 


classes to submit, without a ‘pro-slavery rebellion’, to this peaceful and 
legal revolution.”” 

The antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat is generated by 
the basic contradiction of capitalism. Marx stated that “It follows therefore 
that in proportion as capital accumulates, the lot of the labourer. be his 
payment high or low, must grow worse.” * At the same time. there develops 
“).. with the accumulation of capital, the class-struggle, and, therefore, the 
class-consciousness of the workingmen. . .”’%* 

Ile remarked that the process of capitalist accumulation affects the worker 
negatively in three ways :— 

“*4) The perpetuation of the means of production as property alien to him. 
as capital, perpetuates his condition as wage-worker and henee his fate of 
always having to work part of his labour-time for a third person for nothing. 
9) The extension of these means of production, alias accumulation of capital, 
increases the extent and the size of the classes who live on the surplus labour 
of the worker ; it worsens his position relatively by augmenting the relative 
wealth of the capitalist and his co-partners, by further increasing his relative 
surplus labour through the division of labour, etc.. and reduces that part of 
the gross product which is used to pay wages ; finally, since the conditions of 
labour confront the individual worker in an ever more gigantic form and 
increasingly as social forces. the chance of his taking possession of them 
himself as is the case in small-scale industry. disappears.’ The working- 
class must therefore carry out the social revolution to free itself and it is 
this which constitutes its historical mission. Marx stressed that *... when 
the working-class comes into power. as inevitably it must.* ... the evil of 
hourgeois socicty ...”’ cannot be remedied “... by bank ‘conversions’ or 
the establishment of a rational ‘monetary system’. . .”” 

The conclusion that the downfall of the capitalist mode of production is 
inevitable was expressed hy Marx in the following words : “ Along with the 
constantly diminishing number of the magnates of capital . . . grows the 
mass of misery. oppression, slavery, degradation, exploitation. but with this 
too grows the revolt of the working-class, a class always increasing In muim- 
bers. and disciplined. united. organised by the very mechanism of the process 
of capitalist production itself. The monopoly of capital becomes a_ fetter 
upon the mode of production, which has sprung up and flourished along 
with. and under it. Centralisation of the means of production and sociali- 
sation of labour at last reach a point where they become incompatible with 
their capitalist integument. This integument is burst asunder. The knell of 
capitalist private property sounds, The expropriators are expropriated.” 


417 F. Engels, Preface to the English edition of the first volume of “Capital”, 1. ¢., p. 6. 
18 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I. 1. ¢., p. 645. 

19 Ybid., p. 653. 

20 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part TH, 1. ¢., p. 352/3. 

24 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, 1. c., p. 488. 

22° K. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, 1. c., p. 53. 

23° «KK. Marx, Capital, Vol. }. c., p. 763. 


143 


As a result of the socialist revolution, the means of production are con- 
verted into social property, thus establishing the unity of the producers and 
the conditions of production. ‘The conditions of production lose their 
alienated form for the working people. The “ruling principle” of communist 
society is “... the full and free development of every individual . . .”?* 
Human society becomes consciously transformed. ‘ Free individuality, based 
on universal development of individuals and the subordination of their 
common, social productivity as their social property ”*°—this is how Marx in 
“Grundrisse” described the development of personality in communism. 

And. in the first volume of “Capital”, Mars characterized communist 
society as follows : “ Let us now picture to ourselves... a community of free 
individuals. carrving on their work with the means of production in common. 
in which the labour-power of all the different individuals is consciously 
applied as the combined labour-power of the community ... The total prod- 
uct of our communily is a social product. One portion serves as fresh 
means of production and remains social. But another portion is consumed by 
the members as means of subsistence. A distribution of this portion amongst 
them is consequently necessary. The mode of this distribution will vary 
with the productive organisation of the community. and the degree of histor- 
ical development attained by the producers. We will assume. but merely 
for the sake of parallel with the production of commodities. that the share 
of each individual producer in the means of subsistence is determined by his 
labour-time. Labour-time would. in that case, play a double part. Its appor- 
tionment in accordance with a definite social plan maintains the proper pro- 
portion between the different kinds of work to be done and the various wants 
of the community. On the other hand. it also serves as a measure of the por- 
tion of the common labour borne by each individual. and of his share in the 
part of the total product destined for individual consumption. The social 
relations of the individual producers, with regard both to their labour and to 
its products. are in this case perfectly simple and intelligible, and that with 
regard not only to production but also to distribution.””® 

Marx is referring here to socialism. the first phase of development of 
communist society. In this phase, it is a question of “ From cach according 
to his ability. to each according to his work!” Marx provides a detailed 
description of the concept of the two phases of communist society in the 
“Critique of the Gotha Programme” of 1875.77 

Under communist relations of production. no limits are set to the develop- 
ment of the productive forees since in this case social production “is... 
regulated immediately. by the wants of society. and controlled by it...” 
The findings of science and technology can be applied without restriction 
both in industry and in agriculture. Tn communist society. machines are a 
means of saving social labour and of making work easier. Marx writes that 
Thid.. p. 592. 

K. Marx. Grundrisse der Krilik der politischen Ukonomie. |. ¢.. p. 74. 
K. Marx. Capital. Vol. T. 1. ¢.. p. 78/79. 


Cf. K. Mary. Critique of the Gotha Programme. Lawrence & Wishart. Londan ‘vear unknown’, 
W. Marx. Theories of Surplus-Value. Part If. 1. ¢., p. 118. 


WhwWwy 
BARS 


144 


“The use of machinery for the exclusive purpose of cheapening the product, 
is limited in this way, that less labour must be expended in producing the 
machinery than is displaced by the employment of that machinery.’ The 
criterion of whether there is an increase in labour productivity and conse- 
quently of whether the machines can be used or not consists here in the reduc- 
tion of the quantum of total labour associated with the product-unit. For the 
capitalist. this criterion is unacceptable since he does not pay for the labour 
used but for the value of the labour-power used. This is why for him the use 
of machines is limited by the difference between the value of the machines 
and the value of the labour-power which they replace. tlence in a com- 
munistic socicty’, notes Marx. “there would be a very different scope 
for the employment of machinery than there can be in a bourgeois so- 
ciety “°° 

In communist society, “a rational agriculture” will be possible for the 
first time. “...a common, all-embracing and far-sighted control of the pro- 
duction of raw materials” whilst. as Mars stresses, “the capitalist system 
works against a rational agriculture...’ Above all. the socialist revolution 
will eliminate private ownership of land and. with it, absolute land-rent, ie., 
the basis of existence of the parasitic class of landowners. ‘“ From the stand- 
point of a higher economic form of society, private ownership of the globe by 
single individuals will appear quite as absurd as private ownership of one 
man by another.” As early as 1851. Marx told Engels that in the course of 
his studies he had become increasingly more certain that “the reform of 
agriculture. i.e.. also of the ownership nonsense based on it. is the alpha and 
omega of the coming transformation. Without this, old Malthus is. still 
right.” 

Capitalism divorees industry from agriculture. “Jt is in the nature of 
capitalist production that it develops industry more rapidly than agriculture. 
This is not owing to the nature of the land. but to the fact that, in order to 
be exploited really in accordance with its nature. land requires different social 
relations.” It is only communist society which will establish a new and 
superior synthesis by uniling agriculture and industry.” 

The spontancous action of the law of value will be replaced by reasoned 
economic planning on the basis of objective economic laws. “... That same 
bourgeois mind denounces with equal vigour every conscious attempt to 
socially control and regulate the process of production” in capitalist society 
“as an inroad upon such sacred things as the right of property, freedom and 
unrestricted play for the bent of the individual capitalist ”.*° Under conditions 
of social ownership, social control will be an objective necessity, In com- 


29 K. Marx. Capital. Vol. I, l.c¢., p. 392. 

30 Thid., p. 395, footnote 1. 

31 K. Marx. Capital, Vol. IIL, I... p. 405. 

32 Thid., p. 757. 

33K. Marx, letter to Engels of 44 August 485f. in: K. Marx/F. Engels, Werke. Bd. 27, p. 3t4. 
34 K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part ITE. 1. ¢.. p. 300/301. 

35 Cf. K. Marx. Capital, Vol. I., lo c., p. 505. 

36 Ibid., p. 356. 


445 


munism, the social forces would bring “the productive process under their 
joint control” as a law “understood and hence controlled by their common 
mind”’,*” 

One of the most important functions of communist society in the repro- 
duction process consists in the distribution of social Jabour in a conscious 
manner among the various branches of production on the basis of collective 
requirements. “ [t is only where production is under the actual, predetermin- 
ing control of society that the latter establishes a relation between the volume 
of social labour-time applied in producing definite articles, and the volume 
of the social want to be satisfied by these articles.” The ability to establish 
this relation presupposes a fully developed proceedure for calculating how 
social labour is expended. Marx notes that book-keeping is “‘ more necessary 
in collective production than in capitalist production”. In communist 
society, writes Marx, “... the determination of value continues to prevail in 
the sense that the regulation of labour-time and the distribution of social 
labour among the various production groups, ultimately the book-keeping 
encompassing all this, become more essential than ever.7*°"! 

In “ Grundrisse”, Marx also formulates his famous law by the eeonomy 
of time, which plays an especially important role in communist society. 

“Assuming collective production, the determination of time naturally 
remains important. The less time society needs for producing wheat, live- 
stock, etc., the more time it gains for other production, material or intellectual. 
As with a single individual, the universality of its devclopment, its pleasure 
and its activities depends on the saving of time. Society must also divide up 
its time uscfully in order to attain a production appropriate to its require- 
ments as a whole ; as the individual person must divide up his time correctly 
in order to acquire knowledge in balanced proportions or to satisfy the re- 
quirements he has to mect in his activities. Economy of time and the planned 
distribution of labour-time among the various branches of production thus 
remains the first economic Jaw on the basis of collective production. It will 
even beeome a law on a much higher level. ‘This is, however. considerably 
different from the measurement of exchange-value (labour or labour-products) 
by labour-time.”’? 

In communist socicty. labour will be uniformly distributed among all the 
members of society, 1e., “ generalisation of labour’ will prevail. ‘Through 
this alone there will be a shortening of the working day and an increase in 
Ictsure-time. “Uniformly distributed, all would have... more time for un- 
productive labour and leisure.” 


37K. Marx, Capital, Vol. TI, 1. ¢., p. 252. 

38 Ibid., p. 184. 

39 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, ¥. ¢., p. 135. 

40/41 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. UL. 1. ¢., p. 830. 

42 K. Marx, Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ukonomie, 1}. c., p. 89. 
43 Kk. Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, 1. c., p. 530. 

44K. Marx, Theorien iiber den Mehrwert, 1. Teil, }. ¢., p. 181. 


146 


Even in communism, material production remains a natural necessity. 
For this reason and as in the past, a part of the working day must be devoted 
to productive labour in the sphere of material production. 

The limit of labour-time will be determined by the fact that expanded 
reproduction will be carried on. this being associated with a continuous in- 
crease in the needs of people. This is why surplus-labour will continue to 
exist in communism, too. “Surplus-labour in general, as labour performed 
over and above the given requirements. must always remain... A definite 
quantity of surplus-labour is required as insurance against accidents, and by 
the necessary and progressive expansion of the process of reproduction. . .”"* 
Marx states that the insurance fund. the accumulation fund and the fund 
for the support of those unable to work form a part of the surplus-product 
which must still continue to exist “even after the abolition of the capitalist 
mode of production.““® But in communism “all labour to support those who 
do not work would cease.""? Surplus-labour is a necessary part of productive 
labour in communism. “ Assuming. however. that there is no capital’, writes 
Marx in “Theories of Surplus-Value”. “and that the worker appropriated 
his surplus-labour himself. the excess of value which he produces above the 
excess of value which he consumes. Of this labour. it could only be said that 
it is truly productive, i.e., that it creates new value.”* 

When the capitalist mode of production is abolished, the surplus-value 
which in capitalism is the main criterion of productive labour is also elimi- 
nated. But the elimination of surplus-value does not mean that surplus-labour 
and surplus-produet also disappear. Marx says about this that “ Although all 
surplus-value takes the form of surplus product, surplus product as such does 
not represent surplus-value.””” 

In communism. the boundary between necessary and surplus labour is 
conditional to a certain extent because surplus labour is just as necessary. for 
the working people of a communist society, as necessary labour. For this 
reason. in necessary labour carried out in the communist mode of production, 
Marx also includes “ the labour of forming a fund for reserve and accumula- 
tion’”®°, i.¢., surplus Jabour. 

As Marx notes. in communism necessary labour would also increase 
“because the notion of ‘means of subsistence’ would considerably expand, 
and the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life.” 
The “volume of consumption” would be determined on the one hand “by 
the existing productivity of socicty” and. on the other, by that which “ the 
full development of the individuality requires.’ 

Marx also investigates the most important aspects of the process of repro- 


45 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. 111, 1. c¢., p. 799. 

46 Ibid. p. 826. 

47 Ibid. 

48 K. Marx, Theorien tiher den Mehrwert, 4. Teil, 1. ¢.. p. 116. 
49K. Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, 1. c., p. 370. 
50 K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, 1. c., p. 530. 

St Thid. 

p2 K. Marx. Capital, Vol. II, }. ¢., p. 854. 


147 


—_——— 


duction in communist society. The objective laws of capitalist expanded 
reproduction, which arise “from the material character of the particular 
labour-process, not from its social form”, are also valid for the communist 
mode of production. In communism, the fundamental division of production 
into two departments remains, i.c., the production of means of production 
and the production of means of consumption. Thus the basic proportions 
also continue to exist within thes¢ departments and between them. or com- 
munist production, ‘these products of department I would evidently just as 
regularly be redistributed as means of production to the various branches of 
this department, for purposes of reproduction, one portion remaining directly 
in that sphere of production from which it emerged as a product. another 
passing over to other places of production, thereby giving rise to a constant 
to-and-fro movement between the various places of production in this depart- 
ment.”** Marx speaks here only of the movement within department I (pro- 
duction of means of production) but it is obvious that in communism move- 
ments such as these would also take place within department II and between 
departinents I and II. 

Marx analyzes the conditions which permit a continuous process of repro- 
duction and shows that as a result of the varying magnitude of the fixed 
capital which has to be replaced every year in kind a continuous, relative 
over-production (in other words, the establishment of a permancnt reserve- 
supply) of means of production. raw materials and food is necessary. “This 
sort of over-production is tantamount to control by society over the material 
means of its own reproduction. But within capitalist society it is an element 
of anarchy.” “Such surplus is not an evil in itself, but an advantage ; 
however, it is an evil under capitalist production ”’.*® 

Communism changes the character of labour in material production. 
The worker becomes a “fully developed individual ... to whom the 
different social functions he performs are but so many modes of giving free 
scope to his own natural and acquired powers ”.” Labour itself will be placed 
under the common control of the producers, it will become rational and truly 
free labour. Nevertheless, in material production, labour remains the realm 
of necessity. Regarding this, Marx notes that “In fact, the realm of freedom 
actually begins only where labour which is determined by necessity and 
mundane considerations ceases; thus in the very nature of things it lies 
beyond the sphere of actual material production, just as the savage must 
wrestle with Nature to satisfy his wants, to maintain and reproduce life. so 
must civilized man, and he must do so in all social formations and under all 
possible modes of production. With his development this realm of physical 
necessity expands as a result of his wants ; but, at the same time. the forces 
of production which satisfy these wants also increase. Freedom in this field 


53) KK. Marx. Capital, Vol. IT, 1. c., p. 358. 
54 Ibid... p. 424/425. 

55 Ibid., p. 469. 

56 Ibid.. p. 468. 

57) kK. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, loc., p. 488. 


148 


can only consist in socialized man, the associated producers, rationally regu- 
lating their interchange with Nature, bringing it under their common contro}, 
instead of being ruled by it as by the blind forces of Nature ; and achieving 
this with the least expenditure of energy and under conditions most favour- 
able to, and worthy of, their human nature. 

“ But is nonetheless still remains a realm of necessity. Beyond it begins 
that development of human energy which is an end in itself, the true realm 
of freedom, which, however, can blossom forth only with this realm of 
necessity as its basis. The shortening of the working-day is its basic pre- 
requisite.’ °° 

The most important means of shortening the working-day is the raising 
of labour productivity. ‘The more the productiveness of labour increases, 
the more can the working-day be shortened .. .”** “For, depending on the 
development of labour productivity, surplus-labour may be large in a small 
total working-day ... The actual wealth of society, and the possibility of con- 
stantly expanding its reproduction process, therefore, do not depend upon the 
duration of surplus-labour, but upon its productivity and the more or less 
copious conditions of production under which it is performed.’ 

Leisure-time, in turn, exerts a considerable influence on the character of 
labour-time ; “... the more the working-day is shortened, the more can the 
intensity of labour increase.’** Marx also notes that “... the labour of a man 
who also has disposable time, must be of a much higher quality than that of 
the beast of burden.” 

In “Capital”, Marx also commented on how education, family relations 
and so on will develop on the basis of communist economics. He indicates 
that in communism “in the case of every child over a given age, productive 
labour ...”’ will be combined “ with instruction and gymnastics, not only as 
one of the methods of adding to the efficiency of production, but as the only 
method of producing fully developed human beings.“ In the schools of the 
future, “technical instruction, both theoretical and practical“ will be given 
the importance it deserves. 

Marx also recalls that “... modern industry, by assigning as it does an 
important part in the process of production, outside the domestic sphere, to 
women, to young persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new econo- 
mic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations between 
the sexes.”® If in capitalism the inclusion of people in the sphere of social 
production without regard to age or sex is “a pestiferous source of corruption 


. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, 1. c., p. 799. 

. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, 1. c., p. 530. 

. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, }. c., p. 799. 

. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, I. c., p. 530. 

Marx, Theories of Surplus-Value, Part III, 1. ¢., p. 257. 
. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, l.c., p. 484. 

4 Ibid., p. 488. 
65 Ibid., p. 489/490. 


a 
oe 
nm A 


for} 
w 
ARR A 


149 


and slavery’, in communism it must “... become a source of humane devel- 
opment...” 


* 


In a letter to W. Sombart, written shortly before his death, Engels gave 
a quite remarkable description of Marxist theory. He wrote that “this way 
of viewing things is not a doctrine but a method. It does not provide ready- 
made dogmas, but criteria for further research and the method for this 
research.“*” The revolutionary theory of Marx, Engels and Lenin is for us 
a real “ guide to action” in the great work of building a communist society. 


66 Ibid., p. 490. 
67 F. Engels, letter to W.Sombart of 11 March £895, in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected 
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1970, p. 506. 


150 


