co > CD ? 

C Q: 73 < 

u< OU_1 66081 >5 

m ^ 



ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 
Philosophical Texts 



SELECTED AND TRANSLATED 

WITH NOTES 

AND AN INTRODUCTION 

BY 

THOMAS GILBY 



GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

L.ONPON NEW YORK TORONTO 



ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 

Born, Castle of Rocca Secca, Kingdom of Sicily 

about 1225 

Died, Abbey of Fossa Nova, States of the Church 
7 March 1274 



First published 1951 
Second impression 1952 



PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 



Preface 

ST. THOMAS AQUINAS left nearly one hundred works 
behind him, some of great size: nine of biblical exegesis, 
twelve commentaries, some incomplete, on the Aristo- 
telean corpus, eight large systematic works of his own, 
apart from the long expositions included among the 
forty-five opuscu/a, numbered in this collection accord- 
ing to the arrangement of Pierre Mandonnet. By their 
circumstances of composition they may be divided into 
his prepared lectures, thus his commentary on the 
Sentences \ his debates, thus the Quaestiones Disputatae 
or ordinary discussions that were weekly features of his 
lecturing and the Quaestiones Quodlibetales which are 
the record of his disputations on special occasions; and 
his own free compositions, which are either systematic 
studies, such as the Summa TAeoIogica y or monographs 
in response to a demand, such as most of the opuscula. 
Some he wrote down himself, others he dictated, others 
we owe to a reporter. 

As the text references will show, the philosophy of 
St. Thomas should be sought even in his mystical and 
biblical works. The major sources. can be grouped 
under five headings. First, the early commentaries on 
Boethius and the Pseudo-Dionysius composed between 
1257 and 1261, namely the Expositio in librum Boethii 
de Hebdomadibus, Expositio super librum Boethii 
de Trinitate, and Expositio in Dionysium Je Divinis 
Nominibus, Secondly, the commentaries on Aristotle 
composed between 1 266 and 1 272, notably in libros de 
Anima, lectura in librum I (written up by his secretary), 
and expos it to in libros II et ///; in XII libros Met a- 
physicorum exposition in VII libros Physicorum exposition 



vi PREFACE 

in X libros Ethicorum expositio ; in libros Perl Hermeneias 
expositio (completed to Book n, lect. 2 inclusively); 
in libros Posteriorum Analyticorum expositio; in liiros 
Politicorum expositio (completed to Book in, lect. 6 
inclusively). To these may be added in Librum de 
Causis expositio, a commentary on an extract from the 
Elementary Theological Instructions of Proclus, credited 
before St. Thomas's days to Aristotle. 

In the third place come the three great systematic 
treatises, the Scrip turn in IF 'libros Sententiarum magistri 
Petri Lorn bar di, written about 1255; tne Sum ma contra 
Gentes (Book i, 1259; Books m-iv, 1261-3); and 
the Summa Theologica, started in 1266 and completed 
as far as the Third Part, question xc inclusively, in 
1273. Fourth come the disputations which often 
offer St. Thomas's most developed treatment of a 
subject: de Veritate (12569), de Potentia (12657), 
de Ma/o, de Spiritualibus Creaturis, de minima, de 
Firtutibus in com muni, de Firtutibus cardinalibus (all 
after 1266 and before 1272). Mandonnet reckons 
1259-63 for de Potentia, and 1263-8 for de Malo. 
The twelve groups of Quaestiones Quodlibetales 
were probably reported at various dates between 1265 
and 1272. 

The fifth heading covers the opuscula\ the authenticity 
of thirty-one of these is generally accepted, including 
the Compendium Theologiae ad fratrem Reginaldum 
socium suum carissimum, de Unitate Intellectus contra 
Averroistas Parisienses, de Perfectione Fitae Spiritualis, 
de Regimine Judaeorum ad ducissam Brabantiae, de 
Aeternitate Mundi contra murmurantes, and de Ente et 
Essentia ad fratres socios. The authenticity of the de 
Regimine ad regem Cypri has been questioned on 
internal evidence; Ptolemy of Lucca is certainly the 
author from Book n, chap. 5. 



PREFACE vii 

The translation is a compromise between a para- 
phrase and an exact and literal rendering such as will 
be found in the versions of the Summa Theohgica, 
the Summa contra Gentes, and the de Potentia made 
by Laurence Shapcote and published by the English 
Dominicans. Sometimes sentences have been transposed, 
at other times clauses have been omitted to avoid 
repetition. St. Thomas is his own best interpreter; 
consequently cross-references have been preferred to 
footnotes, 1 and even to parentheses in the original.Terms 
have been inflected from their sense in parallel passages 
and occasionally according to the living tradition of his 
school. Many of the texts are taken from works not yet 
critically edited. 

I gratefully acknowledge the help of David Slattcry, 
Elizabeth Gully, Drostan Maclaren, and Stanislaus 
Parker in preparing this collection. To Henry St. John 
and Ricrnrd Kehoe it is inscribed with affection. 

T. G. 

BLACKFRIARS, CAMBRIDGE 
1950 

1 Cross-references, to other sections of this book by number, 
are given immediately below the text at the left. Biblical references 
(in the footnotes) are to the Vulgate: this should be noted parti- 
cularly with the Psalms, where the numbering from Psalms 10 
to 146 in the Vulgate is one less than in the Authorized and 
other English versions, and 1-4 Kings, which arc called I and 2 
Samuel and i and 2 Kingb in the Knglit.li versions. 



Contents 



PREFACE v 

INTRODUCTION xiii 

I SCIENCE AND WISDOM i 

i. Theory and Practice ...... 3 

II. Division of the Sciences ..... 7 

in. Logic and Natural Science . . . . .12 

iv. Natural Philosophy, Mathematics, and Metaphysics 18 

v. Theology. ....... 29 

II. EXISTENCE OF GOD 36 

i. Unreasoned Theism . . . . . 37 

ii. Demonstration and Causality . . . .41 

in. Argument from Change ..... 4.8 

iv. Argument from Efficient Causality ... 54 

v. Argument from the Ground of Necessity . . 56 

vi. Argument from the Degrees of Being ... 57 

vn. Argument from Purpose ..... 62 

vin. Convergence of the Five Ways . 65 

III. NATURE OF GOD 67 

x. Initial Knowledge ...... 68 

ii. Simplicity and Unity. ..... 69 

in. Perfection ....... 73 

iv. Goodness and Beauty . . . . -75 

v. Infinity ........ 79 

vi. Eternity 82 

vn. Human Knowledge of God . . . .85 

vin. The Names of God 88 

IV. ACTIVITY OF GOD 08 

i. Divine Mind ....... 98 

ii. Divine Will . , . . . . . 1 1 1 



x CONTENTS 

in. Providence . . . . . . 117 
iv. Divine Power and Action . . . . . 1 20 

V. CREATION 127 

i. Creatures . . . . . . .127 

n. Creative Action 131 

in. Sustaining Action . . . . . .136 

iv. Eternity of the World 138 

VI. VARIETY 148 

i. Monism and Pluralism . . . . .148 

ii. Essence and Existence . . . . . 151 

nr. Diversity. . . . . . . . 157 

iv. Individuation . . . . . . .158 

v. Inequality . . . . . . .160 

VII. PROBLEM OF EVIL 163 

i. Nature of Evil ....... 163 

n. Dualism . . . . . . . .170 

in. Physical and Moral Evil . . , . .172 
iv. Cause of Evil . . . . . . .174 

v. Effects of Evil 177 

VIII. BODY AND SPIRIT 181 

I. The Scale of Being 182 

ii. Living Substance . . . . . ,184 

in. Bodies . . . . . . . .185 

iv. The Universal Frame 187 

IX. HUMAN NATURE 193 

. i. Souls 103 

n. Psycho-Physical Unity 197 

in. Physjque and Temperament .... 202 

iv. iyi Single Soul 204 

Vydrersonal Mind . . . . . . .206 

^^f Birth, Decay, Immortality ..... 209 

vii. Faculties 212 



CONTENTS xi 

X. CONSCIOUSNESS 215 

i. The Problem of Knowledge . . . .216 

n. The Problem of Error 221 

in. Sensation . 226 

iv. Sense and Intelligence . . . . .231 
v. Reasoning from Experience . . . .236 

vr. Knowledge of Singulars 247 

vii. Self- Knowledge 249 

vin. Functions of Intelligence ..... 250 

XI. LOVE 252 

i. Appetition ....... 252 

n. Emotion . . 254 

in. Volition 256 

iv. Freewill . . . . . . . . 259 

XII. HAPPINESS 263 

i. Purpose and End ...... 263 

ii. The Objective Good 265 

in. The Act of Happiners 269 

iv. Integrity of Happiness ..... 274 

XIII. MORALITY 280 

i. Natural Foundations . . . . . .281 

n. Moral Kinds ....... 285 

in. Moral Circumstances ..... 287 

iv. Intention ....... 289 

v. The Measure of Mind 289 

XIV. FEELING AND TRAINING .... 293 
i. Passions ........ 294 

ii. Habits ........ 297 

XV. VIRTUES 3 

i. Notion of Virtue . . . . . .301 

n. Intellectual Virtue 302 

in. Moral Virtue 306 



xii CONTENTS 

IT. The Virtuous Mean ...... 309 

v. Vice 3II 

XVI. LIVING BEYOND REASON . . . .317 
z. Superhuman Virtue . . . . . .318 

ii. Belief and Trust . . . . . .320 

in. Friendship . . . . . . .323 

iv. The Life of Perfection 325 

XVII. REASONABLE VIRTUES .... 332 
i. Prudence . . . . . . . 33- 

ii. Courage . . . . . . . . 336 

in. Temperance . . . . . . -337 

XVIII. JUSTICE 34.1 

i. The Objective Standard . . . . .341 

n. Ownership ....... 342 

in. War and Peace ...... 348 

iv. Religion 349 

XIX. LAW 353 

i. Concept of Law . t . . . 354. 

ii. Eternal and Natural Law . . . . .357 

in. Positive Law . . . . . . .359 

iv. Equity ........ 364. 

XX. COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY . . .367 
i. Political Science . . . . . .368 

ii. The Natural Community . . . . . 371 

in. Education . . . . . . . 376 

iv. The Political Community . . . . .380 

v. The Common Good 388 

INDEX 395 



Introduction 

FEW voluminous writers have been less autobiogra- 
phical than St. Thomas. An impersonal and self-effacing 
disposition is suggested but not much more of his 
character, except that he was singularly free from bad 
temper in controversy, took an interest in everything, 
found nothing incongruous in the works of nature, and 
combined an immense reverence for his predecessors 
with an originality eased, and perhaps sometimes dis- 
guised, by the traditional phrases he adopted. He was, 
however, a famous figure among his contemporaries 
and greatly loved, seemingly more by the arts students 
than the divinity professors. A giant of a man, with 
a complexion compared to corn, large regular features 
and a steady gaze, he was lordly yet gentle of bearing; 
frightened only of thunderstorms. The tales of his 
absent-mindedness testify to his powers of abstraction: 
that he was remote and ineffectual is not confirmed by 
the consultative demands made on him by rulers of 
Church and State, nor by his interests when he lay 
dying a treatise on aqueducts, a commentary on the 
Song of Songs, and a dish of herrings. 

He was born in the castle near Aquino commanding 
the Liri Valley. His family, probably of Lombard 
origin, was related by service, and probably by mar- 
riage, to the Hohenstaufens. His mother, it has been 
said, was of Norman stock. The influence of his people, 
though considerable, was uneasy in those marches 
between the Patrimony of Peter and the Kingdom of 
Sicily; its allegiance was not to be easily settled in the 
imbroglios of Papalists, Suabians, and Angevins. He 
was sent to the neighbouring Abbey of Monte Cassino 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

for his early education. The Benedictine peace seems 
rarely to have deserted him, though after leaving the 
monastery for the university his life was to be lived 
trudging the roads of Europe and busied in the throng 
of lecture-rooms and courts. He was not to know this 
cloistral calm again until he returned to die, thirty-four 
years later, among the monks of an abbey in the hills 
south-east of the beaches of Anzio. 

The University of Naples was about as old as the 
young undergraduate. Founded in 1 224 by the Emperor 
Frederick II at the meeting-place of Greek, Latin, 
Saracen, and Norman cultures, and Suabian customs, 
it was to shine perhaps more with the glint of a State 
service than with the glow of passion for science, juris- 
prudence excepted. Yet nearly four centuries later 
another Dominican Thomas was to come from Naples 
to startle the conventions in the name of a fresh and 
candid study of nature. Thomas Campanella, however, 
was more careless and erratic than his master, and his 
works were not to become part of the canon. 

Though by temper Thomas Aquinas was to be a 
man of Paris rather than of Naples, or even of Bologna, 
a philosopher and theologian rather than a lawyer or 
official; already as an undergraduate he studied scientific 
method under Martin of Dacia and natural science 
under Peter of Ireland. Then to the energetic dis- 
pleasure of his powerful family he joined the Order of 
Preachers, an association of wandering scholars, Guelph 
by sympathy, urban-minded, not at all feudal in temper, 
clerical in status, disinclined to dance attendance on 
magnates. Neither violence nor allurements from curia 
and courtesan could shift him from his purpose, and 
after various adventures the Dominicans kept their 
prize, but sent him out of reach beyond the Alps, 
first to Paris, probably, and then to Cologne for his 



INTRODUCTION xv 

professional studies under Albert the Great, a wizard 
in legend but a dogged experimentalist in fact, whom 
he was to surpass in power of synthesis, though not in 
learning. 

His teaching qareer, which began in 1252, falls into 
four periods Paris, Rome, Paris again, Naples. Aca- 
demic politics were factious and suspicious, and papal 
pressure had to be applied before he was admitted as 
a Master of Theology by the Faculty of Paris, jealous 
for its privileges and hostile to the new religious orders. 
Yet his intellectual work began quietly enough with 
a commentary in the approved manner on the Sentences 
of Peter Lombard, expositions of Scripture, and of 
traditional texts of Boethius and the Pseudo-Dionysius. 
Moreover, he was much occupied with the general 
organization of studies for his Order. Nevertheless three 
works of the period presage the change that was to 
come, the tractate de Ente et Essen tia, the disputations 
de Feritate, and the start of the Summa contra Gentes, 
addressed to the Muslim and Jewish world. 

In 1 259 he was called to the papal court, and the ten 
years that followed were the period of his most massive 
work, challenging alike the current Platonism of the 
schools and the new Latin Averroism. He was presently 
joined by his old master, Albert, and by his friend the 
Flemish Hellenist William of Moerbeke, who provided 
him with revised and fresh versions of the texts of 
Aristotle. His scientific philosophy grew at once more 
adventurous and confident with the commentaries on 
the de Anima, the Metaphysics, and the Physics, the 
disputations de Anima, de Potentia, and de Spiritualibus 
CreaturiSj the completion of the Summa contra Gentes 9 
and the beginning of the Summa Theologica. The legacy 
of credit left by the great Innocent was still unspent, 
and Thomas enjoyed the confidence of Rome: from 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

this centre he was always to receive understanding and 
unwavering support, whatever might be the condemna- 
tions of provincial authorities for his profanity, novelty, 
and materialism. 

The third period opens with his return to the Priory 
of the Jacobins at Paris. The current controversies had 
come to a head. The attack on the friars may be 
neglected: it was the flood of Averroism that was the 
threat, the spread of the doctrine that the light of intel- 
ligence was not personal to men and that matter lay 
outside creation and providence, of the suggestion that 
we could hold by divine faith what is unfounded in 
reason. Yet Thomas was fighting on two fronts, for be- 
hind him the cautious theologians objected to his readi- 
ness to engage the Averroists without privilege on their 
own ground and to his thoroughgoing conclusions that 
the spiritual soul is primarily the substantial form of the 
human body, and that creation does not involve a 
beginning in time. Their objections were to culminate 
in his censure by the Bishop of Paris three years after his 
death, a ban afterwards lifted. The two spirited treatises 
de Unitate Intellects contra Averroistas Parisienses and 
the de Aeternitate Mundi contra Murmurantes are typical 
of this period, but throughout these controversies he 
was pushing on with the Summa Theologica, conducting 
the disputations de Ma/Oj composing his commentaries 
on the Nicomachean Ethics and the logical works of 
Aristotle. 

Three years later he was back in Italy, directing the 
studies of his own provincial group, dictating the Com- 
pendium Theologiae to his secretary, Reginald of Piperno, 
preaching in the Neapolitan vernacular, treating his 
students to a gaudy, busied with the troubles of his hot- 
blooded and tragic family. Then towards the end of 
1273 he fell into a trance, and on coming to declared 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

that his writings now seemed to him like so much chaff 
compared with what he had experienced. Courteous 
but rather remote, he still continued to work. Early in 
the following year, on his way to assist at the Council of 
Lyons, he fell sick and died, not many miles from his 
birthplace: in the words of an early biographer, ut 
cantando moreretur et moriendo cantaret rogatu mona- 
chorum Fossae Novae cantica canticorum exponent majoris 
vi amoris quam morbi ad caelum raftus. 

Hellenism had re-entered the West, bearing with it 
the stranger learning of Arab schools from Baghdad to 
Cordova. Aristotle was the Philosopher, Averroes the 
Commentator, Maimonides a revered guide in divinity. 
From Avicenna, high and clear, came the first notes of 
the metaphysical reality of many things and the trans- 
cendence of their Creator. In the sudden mingling of 
wilder strains with patristic theology, Neo-platonic 
philosophy, Stoic morals, and Roman jurisprudence, 
one fact was certain. The frontiers were open. 

Christian thought henceforth was never to lose the 
temper of science, nor science the sensibility of matter. 
Nature was recovered from pledge, invective was 
replaced by irony, devotion was to be matched with 
irreverence. What Thomas had done seems to have 
been appreciated more keenly by his opponents than by 
many of the orthodox. Whatever its reputation some 
centuries later Aristoteleanism stood in the thirteenth 
century for a free and impenitent spirit of rationalism 
and unfettered investigation, a strong sense of the truth 
here and now, a dialectic of control, not of escape from 
the present world: all this had been practised by 
religious men before, but in future it was to be defended 
as well. To the great prelates who had administered a 
world they did not believe in and the lawyers who had 
run the machinery of a Rome salvaged from the scrap- 

B 628 b 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

heap of the Caesars were added the clerks of the new 
universities, humanists more convinced, if less graceful, 
than the men of the Renaissance. 

In the lifetime of St. Thomas his great antagonist, 
Siger of Brabant, became one of his admirers; after 
some hesitation the English Dominicans swung over to 
his side, and Oxford bred some of the greatest of his 
followers in the generation after his death. Neverthe- 
less, it may appear to the historian of philosophy that 
his friends have recognized his true stature only within 
the last few decades. He was canonized, true, declared 
a Doctor of the Church, and by the sixteenth century 
his Summa Theologica had displaced the Sentences as the 
classical work for scholastic commentary. But while he 
was now the major authority among Latin theologians, 
his philosophical thought had become, as it were, 
tamed. Most of his followers expounded it rabbinically, 
or treated it as a utility for something else. It was not 
until after the revival inaugurated by Leo XIII that the 
grand whiggery was recovered; a system that might 
be recommended, but not demonstrated, by official 
reception; the spirit of a patrician, not of a functionary. 
Many of his present admirers, incidentally, would not 
claim that they had a system, still less that they belonged 
to a school, since the sectarianism suggested does not 
accord with the philosophia perennis for which they 
follow him. 

Without distorting their proper natures, St. Thomas 
sees parts steadily in the whole. The entire universe is 
all of a piece, the most fugitive phenomenon is not a 
metaphysical outcast; there are tensions, but not contra- 
dictions, in the order of being. This is the background 
to the universal method of analogy he uses with such 
effect in his approach to the meaning of the world and 
its maker. Contrasts are struck for the harmony of 



INTRODUCTION xix 

extremes in a higher principle, not as a prelude to the 
rejection of one or the blurring of both. Synthesis, 
rather than compromise, is the result from such issues 
as that of the One and the Many in metaphysics, deduc- 
tion and experiment in scientific method, nature and 
grace in theology, pleasure and duty in moral philo- 
sophy, law and liberty in social philosophy, body and 
spirit in psychology. Though the refinements and 
complications of sensibility and empiricism had not 
then reached their present pitch, and his world was 
simpler than ours, his vast work is a feat of coherence: 
there are so many and such various parts, yet all are 
quickened by the same reasons and values and compose 
interlacing societies of the sciences free alike from 
eclecticism and totalitarianism. 

The systematic exploration of different branches of 
knowledge is called science, their arrangement into 
a unity is the work of wisdom, the knowledge of things 
by their ultimate causes. There are two wisdoms, he 
held, natural and supernatural; the acquired knowledge 
of things in their highest rational causes, and the infused 
knowledge of things in the revelation of the divine 
mysteries. The texts that follow are selected to illustrate 
the former; it is hoped that they may be succeeded by 
an anthology of his Christian theology, or sacra Joctrina. 
The supernatural he preaches is gracious in the ordinary 
sense of the term; morbidities, violences, and many 
miracles he would relegate to the preternatural. His 
theology starts with an examination of the truly scientific 
status of argument from the premisses of revelation, and 
then successively considers the intimate life of the three 
blessed persons in the Trinity, the primitive production 
of man aright in a state of integrity, the lapse into 
original sin, and the new birth into grace; the activity 
of the supernatural virtues, with particular reference to 



xx INTRODUCTION 

the assent of faith, obedience to Church authority, the 
adultness and heroism of charity; finally the Incarna- 
tion and the sacramental economy. 

But it is impossible to understand his theology with- 
out appreciating the rational foundation on which he 
built. The distinction of nature and grace is a question 
that calls for the greatest delicacy of treatment. Cer- 
tainly the corresponding conditions cannot be separated 
like different phases of history. Man has always lain 
under the law of grace, and though this may not require 
a clearly articulated awareness of the Christian covenant, 
his state has always been one either of acceptance or 
rejection of the revelation of God. There never was 
a purely natural man for St. Thomas; though scientific 
generalization demands reference to pure types, his 
abstract and concrete terms, the philosophical deduc- 
tions, and the statements of a theology based on the 
gesta Dei are often as textually intermingled as men 
and women in a crowd. 

Moreover, he possessed a ranging and communicative 
mind; ideas in one department are shot through with 
likenesses from another. Analogy is used, not merely as 
rhetorical comparison or as a logical method of sampling 
from particulars in order to frame a general law, but as 
standing for a complexion of being itself, revealing the 
kinship in difference of all things and calling for a 
sympathy rather than a technique. Consequently natural 
philosophy is written in the theological scene, and hum- 
drum facts are not awkwardly taken along with the 
highest mystical contemplation. He has no special tone 
of solemnity, no consciousness of bathos. His teaching 
on a point is not always best consulted by turning to the 
appropriate section-heading: biology is likely to appear 
under law, and the analysis of knowledge under 
spiritual substances. And for a connected reason he is an 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

intractable author for an anthologist; he rarely goes in 
for passages of fine writing, epigrams are few, and often 
these are echoes of Aristotle or Augustine; his mind 
works laconically at a level and sustained speed, not in 
a series of spurts; the unit of thought is the treatise, 
not the phrase; the style is sober, expository, and repeti- 
tive; the ideas more exciting than the images and richer 
than the vocabulary. Extracts cannot show the close 
backing of the whole to every part; they should be 
taken more as manifestoes than as complete proofs in 
themselves. 

Nevertheless, it is possible to perform an excision of 
the purely rational organs incorporated in the living 
unity, and find oneself then faced with a prospectus of 
pure philosophy, coherent, consistent, and as complete 
as can be expected ; an independent prologomenon to 
belief which may be of special, and even urgent, interest 
to those who find themselves alien to the official 
organization of Christianity. Here also may be asso- 
ciated, if not for agreement then at least for conversation, 
not only Christians of different loyalties, but also those 
with no religious convictions but who would accept the 
reasonable life and are not insensitive to hints that there 
may be something more generous beyond it. A philoso- 
phical attitude may not be enough for health and hap- 
piness or for complete adaptation to reality, but it is 
a sound beginning. 

This selection is offered in the hope that it will not 
be scanned as a set of archaeological fragments, but that 
the crabbed words will not be allowed to hide the 
ardour and generosity of a mind marked by the dis- 
interested curiosity of the Greeks and the practical 
good sense of the Romans, and uttering convictions that 
may be heard echoing through wider regions and more 
lasting periods. Perhaps St. Thomas himself had little 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

sense of history, at least as we understand the word; 
certainly he treats his great forerunners as though they 
were speaking to him then and there. His own writing 
attempts, not a personal proclamation, but a tracing of 
the perennial patterns of reality; his debates expose the 
permanent crises for the human spirit. 

The texts themselves are arranged according to the 
order of subjects in his final systematic work, the Summa 
TAeoIogica, though many are from other places, and 
have not hitherto been translated into English. The 
plan begins by broaching the possibility of a rational 
science, or sciences, able to deal authentically with our 
environment, and then proceeds to the question of the 
existence of God, who is the ground of reasonableness, 
and to the examination of his being and activity. The 
world itself is seen streaming out of God, wholly 
dependent by creation and contrived by him in all its 
distinctions, though the fissures of good and evil run- 
ning throughout set up a special problem. We are on 
the frontier between matter and spirit; the treatment 
of human nature constitutes the philosophical psycho- 
logy of the Summa Theologtca, and contains the thesis 
on the psycho-physical unity of man which was St. 
Thomas's most dramatic entrance into the play of 
religious philosophy. In this part may also be placed 
his analysis of the problem of knowledge and of the 
limits of human freedom. Then man is seen returning 
to God as to his home; the moral theory that is de- 
veloped is founded on scientific humanism. Right 
activity is considered first in general terms, and after- 
wards in the details of the four cardinal virtues and 
their auxiliaries. The good life does not lie in conformity 
to an artificial scheme however august; the essential 
rational measures are not civilized mannerisms ; friend- 
ship is the climax of the code. 



The translator's task is to keep the mean- 
ing while changing the turn of speech. A 
word-for-word version is unsuitable when 
putting Latin into the vulgar tongue. 

Opusc. xxvn, Contra Error es Graecorum^ Introduction 



I 
Science and Wisdom 1 

I. First run to thy house, and there withdraw thyself, take 
thy pastime, and do what thou hast a mind. 2 The more 
pursued the more self-contained it shows itself, that is 
the prerogative of wisdom. In external works a man 
relies on assistance from many others, but with con- 
templation he operates more expertly by dwelling alone. 
Therefore the text recalls a man to himself, bidding 
himyfrj/ run to his house and be set on avoiding outside 
worries before he can be caught up by them. Therefore 
it is said, when I go into my house I shall repose with her, 3 
that is with wisdom. The whole mind should be bent 
on her presence and not wander; consequently the text 
adds, there withdraw thyself, that is having desire con- 
centrated entire. The house being still and the man 
intent and eager, what next must be done is then set 
out; there take thy pastime. 

Notice how aptly contemplating is compared with 
playing, and because of two characteristics. First, play 

1 Distinguish in order to unite. Throughout the analyses runs 
a singleness of puipose to possess existents in simplicity and rich- 
ness. The distinction of the various abilities and sciences according 
to their special abstractions and interests is corrected by the sense 
of concrete wholes. Analogies penetrate all things and many 
different notes are combined in the strong and gentle rule of 
wisdom. There is no hint of violence or of suppression. St. 
Thomas's most spirited polemic is directed against those of his 
contemporaries who taught that a religious value could be scienti- 
fically improbable, and his chief offence in the eyes of some divines 
is his insistence on the dignity of what to them are 'profane 
vanities and secular novelties'. 

2 Ecclus. xxxii. 15. 3 Wisd. viii. 16. 

B028 B 



2 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

is delightful, and the contemplation of wisdom brings 
the greatest joy; my spirit is sweet above honey. 1 Second, 
sports are not means to ends but are sought for their 
own sake, so also are the delights of wisdom. When a 
man takes pleasure in thinking about an object he 
desires and for which he proposes to act, his pleasure is 
conditional on what in fact may fail or be delayed. Then 
to the joy supervenes no less a grief, according to the 
proverb, laughter shall be mingled with sorrow? But 
wisdom holds the cause of its own delight and suffers 
no anxiety, for there is no waiting for something to 
arrive ; her conversation hath no bitterness nor her company 
any tediousness? Divine wisdom compares its joy with 
play; / was delighted every day, playing before him at all 
times f and suggests many gazings on a variety of 
truths. 

16, 516, 731, 1003 Opusc. ix, Exposition de Hebdomadi- 
bus t Prologue 

2. Doctrinal instruction is nobler than chant as a 
method of rousing men to devotion. 

94 Sutntna Theologica, 2a~2ae. xci. 2, ad 3 

3. Song is the leap of mind in the eternal breaking out 
into sound. 

287, 602 Exposition in Psalmos, Prologue 

4. As dawn is the opening and dusk the close of the 
ordinary day, so the knowledge of the original being of 
things in the Word is described as the morning light, 
while the knowledge of them as they stand in their own 
natures is described as the evening light. 5 The Word is 
the source, as it were, from which realities stream, 

1 Ecclus. xxiv. 27. 2 Prov. iv. 13. 

3 Wisd. viii. 16. 4 Prov. viii. 30. 

5 St. Augustine, de Genesi ad Utter am, ii. 8. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 3 

flowing into the very being things have within them- 
selves. 

65, 312, 516 Summa Theologica> la. Iviii. 6 

I. THEORY AND PRACTICE 

5. The theoretical and practical casts of mind are not 
diverse faculties. For faculties are not diversified by 
conditions extraneous to their essential objects; one and 
the same faculty of sight apprehends coloured surfaces 
whether these be large or small, or human or not. 
Whether or not a truth can be directed to a job of work 
is quite incidental to purely intellectual apprehension. 
The practical reason parts from the theoretical when 
what is apprehended is turned to account: the two 
differ in their ends, 1 the former is executive, the latter 
contemplative. 

575, 1080 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxix. n 

6. When findings are desired for their own sake then 
the sciences engaged are theoretical, not practical. 

41, 612 Commentary, / Metaphysics, lecf. 3 

7. The theoretical sciences are present in their own 
right whereas the practical sciences are expected to be 
useful. The former are fine and honourable, the latter 
merely laudable. 

215, 854, 1080 Commentary, I de Anima, lecf. I 

8. The theoretical sciences are ranked by their certi- 
tude, also by the dignity of their subject-matter. Of the 
practical sciences, the most valuable is the one that 
serves the most far-reaching purpose: hence political 
science is set over military science, for the efficiency of 
an army is subordinate to the good of the State. 

6 z, 1078 Summa TAeologica, la. i. 5 

1 de Anima, 433*14. 



4 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

9. Better to build a house than to make a bed. 

Commentary, / de Anima, lect. i 

10. The more detailed its application the more suc- 
cessful a practical science will be. 

Summa Theologica, la. xxii. 3, ad i 

11. Practical sciences proceed by building up; theo- 
retical sciences by resolving into components. 

106, 1078 Commentary, I Ethics, lect. 3 

12. For God the whole fullness of intellectual know- 
ledge is contained in one object, namely the divine 
essence, in which he knows all things. Rational creatures 
achieve a lower and less simple completeness. What he 
knows in single simplicity they know in many forms. 
How a less exalted mind needs more ideas is partly 
illustrated by the fact that people of lower intelligence 
need to have things explained to them point by point 
in detail, while those of stronger mind can grasp more 
from a few hints. 

280 Summa TAeologica, la. Iv. 3 

13. In contemplation the mind is not at pause but fully 
active. 1 

136 Summa Theokgica, la. Iviii. i, sed contra 

14. Yet speculative science awakens the mind to some 
degree of actuality ; not however to its ultimate and 
complete actuality. 

190, 652 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. iii. 6, ad 3 

15. Speculation, as the Gloss of Augustine remarks, 
comes from speculum^ looking-glass, not from specula, 

1 Active and productive are not equivalent terms. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 5- 

watch-tower. 1 Seeing a thing in a mirror is like seeing 
cause through effect. 

744 Summa Theohgica, 2a-zae. clxxx. 



1 6. Contemplation can be delightful both as a function 
and for its content. The activity itself is congenial to 
human nature and instinct, and especially when a man 
thereby holds a thing he loves. Thus seeing is enjoyable 
itself, and more so when it gazes on the form of the 
beloved. 

i, 374 Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. clxxx. 7 

17. Better to light up than merely to shine, to deliver 
to others contemplated truths than merely to con- 
template. 2 ' 

516, 1083 Summa Theologica, 2a 2ae. clxxxviii. 6 

1 8. Primarily and directly a science is directed on the 
general types that are the foundations of its inquiry; 
secondarily and rcflexively, aided by the application of 
humbler senses which deal with fact, it applies itself 
to the things in which these formal reasons are embodied. 
Consequently a scientist employs the concept of a 
general nature both as an article and as a medium of 
knowledge. 

647, 967 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate^ v. 2, ad 4 

19. Contingent events cannot be resolved into pure 
meanings which are the proper affair of theoretical 
understanding; they are known in some other way. 

308, 659, 1068 Disputations, xv de Veritatc, 2, ad 3 

20. The sufficient cause of any particular being cannot 

1 St. Thomas's etymologies, often taken from Isidore of Seville, 
are usually of greater metaphorical than linguistic interest. 

2 From the argument that the perfect life is neither exclusively 
contemplative nor exclusively active. 



6 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

be deduced from the common principles of being as 
being. 

307, 969 Commentary, IV Metaphysics, lect. ^ 

21. A singular truth is never produced no matter how 
many generalities are assembled. 1 

658, 66 1 Disputations, de Anima, 20 

22. To appreciate existing human nature we must 
reckon with the particular physique and mentality of 
Peter and Martin. 

533 Summa Theologica, la. cxix. i 

23. The intellectual virtues are mental habits through 
which the soul expresses what is true. They are five in 
number; the understanding of principles, the science of 
conclusions, the wisdom of judging by the highest 
causes involved in a given situation, the prudence of right 
doing, and the art of right making. Suspicion, which 
guesses at particular facts, is not included, nor is opinion, 
which reaches general judgements by corjecture. 

548, 852 Commentary, VI Ethics, lect. 3 

24. A truth may be accepted as evident either in itself 
or through another truth. What is self-evident is like 
a first principle; the quality of mind perfecting know- 
ledge at this stage is termed understanding, or sense of 
principle. What is evident through another truth is not 
perceived immediately but arrived at by inference. The 
conclusion may be confined to one department or it 
may embrace all human learning; in the former case 
the appropriate habit is termed science, in the latter 
case wisdom. Scientific habits differ according to the 
various branches of inquiry, whereas wisdom is single. 

1 06 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. Ivii. 2 

1 A particular, e.g. a man ; a singular, e.g. Paul of Tarsus, Peter 
Abelard. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 7 

25. In the field of human science the argument from 
authority is weakest. 

936, 1096 Summa Thcologica> la. i. 8, ad 2 

26. What a pity if philosophers, who are expected to 
be the chief seekers and lovers of truth and to see as 
much of it as can be seen by man, should decide after 
all that truth cannot be discovered. How they should 
then grieve that their studies have been all in vain. 

585, 604 Commentary, IV Metaphysics, lect. 12 

27. Theoretical habits of mind can be called virtues 
inasmuch as they render a man prompt to consider 
truth, the right and proper function of mind. But they 
do not ensure that either they or the mind will be used 
aright. Just because a man has a scientific training he is 
not necessarily bent on making good use of it. He is 
equipped to consider a special province of truth, but 
when goodwill is absent he may fail to turn his science 
to human betterment. The right use of speculation is 
decided by some virtue perfecting the will, such as 
justice or friendship. 

859, 964 Summa Theclogica> ia-2ae. Ivii. I 

II. DIVISION OF THE SCIENCES 

28. A theoretical interest is properly distinguished from 
a practical interest in that it is bent on a truth considered 
in itself, not as directed to the doing of something. 
The purpose of the former is truth which we do not 
produce; the purpose of the latter is action about some- 
thing in our capacity to do or to make. The preoccu- 
pation of theory is not with driving a trade or with 
contriving means to ends. Accordingly, the distinction of 
the theoretical sciences should leave their usefulness out 
of account. 



8 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

Keep in mind that not any sort of distinction in 
objects serves to differentiate the abilities or habits 
dealing with them, but only those distinctions that are 
essential to the objects as objects: for instance, a sense- 
object may happen to be a plant or an animal, but this 
does not multiply the senses engaged. It is otherwise 
with the difference between colour and sound. The 
theoretical sciences therefore should be divided by 
the different pitch of truths in the very medium of 
theory. 

Now there are two notes in a theoretical truth, its 
spirituality responding to a non-material faculty, and 
its necessity responding to a scientific habit. Any object 
of theory, precisely as such, is free from matter and 
mutability, and consequently the theoretical sciences 
are divided according to the degree of their abstraction 
from matter and motion. 

Some objects of theory, however, depend on matter 
for their existence. These are subdivided into two 
groups. Some depend on matter both for their being 
and for their being understood, for they include 
sensible material in their definition and cannot be 
understood apart from it, thus the definition of man 
involves flesh and bones: with such objects natural 
science is concerned. But others, though dependent on 
matter for their existence, can be defined and grasped 
without reference to sensible matter, thus lines and 
numbers: with such objects mathematical science is 
concerned. 

There are furthermore some objects of theory in- 
dependent of matter in their being, for either they 
always exist without matter, thus God and spiritual sub- 
stances, or they are sometimes in matter and sometimes 
not, thus substance, quality, ability, actuality, plurality, 
unity, and so forth. Such objects are engaged by the 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM g 

divine science 1 which by another title is called meta- 
physics, that is beyond physics, for we who perforce 
must work from sensible to suprasensible objects must 
tackle it after physics. It is also described as prime 
philosophy, for all the other sciences suppose it. 

55, j;6, 77, 806 Opusc. xvr, Exposition,. <& Trinitate, v. I 2 

29. Different kinds of evidence in a common object 
induce diversity of sciences. The same conclusion, for 
example that the earth is round, may be demonstrated 
by astronomer and physicist alike; the former, however, 
uses a mathematical medium abstract from matter, 
while the latter uses the medium of material processes. 

Summa Theohgica, i a. i. i,ad 2 

30. Each science has its own appropriate questions, 
replies, and arguments; and correspondingly its own 
snares and ignorances. 

Commentary, I Posterior Analytics, lect. 2 1 

31. The same sort of certitude is not to be expected 
in all fields of scientific inquiry. The well-disciplined 
mind will not demand greater certitude than the sub- 
ject will offer, nor be content with less. To accept 
mathematical truth on rhetorical persuasions is almost 
a crime; so also to exact mathematical demonstrations 
from an orator. 

69 Commentary, I Ethics, lect. 3 

32. Decision about what is possible and what impos- 
sible is settled by two calculations, one working from 
the character of the science concerned, the other from 
the character of the object under review. 

1 Metaphysics and natural theology, not to be confused with 
sacra doctrina, or the theology of revelation. 

2 Based on Boethius, Liber quomodo Trinitas unus Deus ac non 
(res tin. 



10 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

As regards the first, bear in mind that when two 
sciences are engaged, of which one takes die wider and 
the other a narrower view, their respective conclusions 
are not counterbalancing but should be rated according 
to their own systems of reference. Observe one difference 
between astrophysics and medical science, the former 
treats decay in terms of distant cosmic conditions, the 
latter sticks to the pathology of organisms. A similar 
difference lies between secular wisdom or philosophy 
which considers and judges by caused causes, and sacred 
wisdom or theology in which higher and divine causes 
are the criteria. Also bear in mind that the effects of 
higher causes cannot be measured by the estimated 
power of lower causes. When broaching the problem 
about the possible effects of secondary causes we should 
allow for the influence both of higher and lower causes. 
In deciding what is feasible the theologian refers to the 
former, the philosopher to the latter. 

When the judgement is based on the nature of the 
event under review, then emphatically the reference 
should be to the proximate causes, which stamp their 
likeness and modify the remote causes at work. The 
point may be illustrated from raw material: we do not 
say with propriety that a subject can be made into 
something when its matter is remote, for instance that 
earth can be made into a goblet; but we require the 
material to be disposed and ready to be formed by one 
cause, thus gold is potentially the goblet into which it 
can be fashioned by the processes of a single art. 

360 Disputations, I de Potentia, 4 

33. The appropriate course of education will be as 
follows: the instruction of the young in logical topics 
to begin with, for logic teaches method for all scientific 
inquiry; then a training in mathematics, which neither 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM n 

need experiment nor lie beyond the range of the 
imagination ; thirdly, in physics, where much experi- 
mentation is demanded though sensation is not sur- 
passed; fourthly, in moral science, which requires 
experience and a mind free from passion; finally, in 
wisdom or theology, which transcends imagination and 
demands robust understanding. 1 

1091 Commentary, PI Ethics, lect. 7 

1 The distribution of the scholastic sciences may be outlined as 
follows. Since all are directed at real objects, logic stands apart 
as the study of scientific method and the ordered reflection on 
purely mental constructions as such, though its activity runs 
through the other sciences. The first division is between 
I theoretical science and 
\ practical science (cf. 5-27). 

By its predominant function a theoretical science may be either 
I particular and experimental or 
I general and explanatory. 

The former, which may be mingled with the practical sciences, 
frames laws from facts sufficiently observed and tested, and 
imposes hypotheses to rationalize the findings and to discover 
fresh facts and laws. Starting with inductions it ends with pro- 
visional deductions, and so verges on the condition of a general and 
explanatory science, scientia in the strict scholastic sense, which 
demonstrates the particular from the general, and explains details 
in the light of a universal meaning. This type of science is divided 
according to the three degrees of abstraction (cf. 28, 55, 56) into 
I natural philosophy, 
/ mathematics, 
(metaphysics. 

The part of natural philosophy that studies inanimate things is 
currently termed cosmology, the part that studies animate 
things is termed psychology and is restricted usually to human 
animals. Metaphysics has three sections, epistemology or the 
criticism of knowledge, the general philosophy of being, and 
natural theology. 

The chief practical science is moral philosophy, of which 
political philosophy is the final part. Yet its premisses are 
theoretical and derived from psychology and metaphysics. Here 
also may be added the technical sciences and the dialectics of 
argument. 



12 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

III. LOGIC AND NATURAL SCIENCE 

34. A student should address himself to logic before 
the other sciences, because it deals with their common 
procedure. 

Commentary, II Metaphysics, lect. 5 

35. Mistakes are made on two counts: an argument is 
either based on error or incorrectly developed. 

Disputations, xvn de Veritate, 2 

36. Logical theory takes mental categories and estab- 
lishes the modes of inference; as such it has the status of 
a strict and demonstrative science. Practical dialectic 
applies the rules of working with probabilities in 
various fields of knowledge, and therefore falls short of 
this status. 

Commentary, IV Metaphysics, lect. 4 

37. The logician considers, not the existing of things, 
but the manner of attributing predicates to them. 1 

589, 594, 600 Commentary, VII Metaphysics, lect. 17 

38. The term being can be employed in two senses. It 
can signify either what is divided into the ten categories 
of reality 2 or what denotes the truth of propositions. 3 
There is this difference between them: in the latter 
sense anything about which affirmative propositions 
can be formulated can be regarded as being, even 
though nothing thereby is posited in reality, thus in 

1 Logical being, ens rationis, is what can exist only in the reason* 
e.g. the negativeness of a proposition, or its implication in pre- 
misses. Figures of fiction or fantasy are not examples. 

2 Substance and the nine types of accident, the ten predica- 
ments of Aristotle. 

3 The copula is uniting subject and predicate. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 13 

the case of negative and privative terms, 1 as when we 
say, negation is the opposite of affirmation, or, blind- 
ness is in the eye: but in the first sense of the term, that 
only can be called being which declares an existent; in 
this sense blindness and so forth are not things. 

109, 589 Opusc. vin, de Ente et Essentia, I 

39. In every true affirmative proposition subject and 
predicate, though diverse as thoughts, signify in some way 
the same thing in reality. This is verified in contingent 
judgements as well as in necessary judgements. Subject 
and predicate answer to the diversity of notes; the 
affirmation states the thing's identity. 

606 Summa Theo1ogica> la. xiii. 12 

40. Distinctions drawn by the mind are not necessarily 
equivalent to distinctions in reality. 

190 Summa Theologica t la. 1. 2 

41. Theoretical science is about things we desire to 
know for their own sake. Logical entities are not such 
objects: they are more like props. Therefore logic is 
not a major interest in philosophy, though it must be 
brought in to provide the instruments of speculative 
thought. Boethius thought logic was rather the method 
of science than a science itself. 

295 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate^ v. i, ad 2 

42. To the query whether the little hands of the new- 
born Christ created the stars, I reply that it is not 
properly couched, for they are human hands without 
the power of creation. Nevertheless, because one and 
the same person dwells in divine and human nature, we 

1 Privation, the absence of a note that should be present, or of 
a due form, e.g. blind man, not mere absence or negation, e.g. 
featherless man. 



14 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

do not have to strain the sense to make the sentence 
mean that he who is this baby with hands is also he who 
created the stars. The phrase can be paralleled by others 
used by theologians and liturgies, for example, that the 
hands that formed us were pierced by nails. Such 
expressions, however, are better not enlarged on and 
broadcast. When they are traditional I do not think they 
need be retracted, unless they be the occasion of scandal 
or error, in which case their sound sense should be 
explained. As far as possible in such matters the un- 
sophisticated should not be upset. 

Opusc. xxiv, Declaratio sex Quaestionum ad lectorem Bisuntinum 1 

43. As a friend 2 you have sought my opinion concern- 
ing physical phenomena which appear natural enough 
though their factors are beyond our apprehension. 
Some effects result from the dominant elements, for 
example the gravitation of bodies and the temper of 
metals, and their origins present little problem. Other 
physical actions, however, are inexplicable by the 
theory of elements, for example magnetic attraction 
and the special therapeutic properties of certain 
drugs; these, it seems, must be referred to higher 
principles. 

Remember at the outset that a lower active principle 
may act under the influence of a higher in one of two 
ways: either the action may proceed from an inherent 
form impressed on the lower by the higher, as when the 
moon is lit by the sun; or the action may proceed from 
the lower, which though set in motion by the higher, is 
endowed with no form thereby, as when a carpenter 
uses a saw : he is the principal cause and the saw is 
merely the instrumental cause in virtue of the motion 

1 Gerard of Besan^on. 

2 The soldier to whom the letter is addressed. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 15 

lie imparts; the skill does not reside in any form or 
power remaining in the tool after it is laid aside. 1 

Well then, if material elements do share in the actions 
of higher principles, this must come about in one of 
these two ways. 

The heavenly bodies 2 and purely spiritual substances 
are the principles of observed phenomena resulting, not 
from any settled active form in the material bodies 
concerned, but from the motions these receive from 
above; the ebb and flow of tides is from the moon's 
influence, not from the inherent properties of water; 
similarly enchantments may be produced by demons, 
and sometimes, I believe, by good spirits. That the 
shadow of the apostle Peter or the touch of holy relics 
should heal sickness is through no inherent virtue, but 
by the application of divine power turning these bodily 
influences to such an effect. 

Clearly every mysterious operation of nature is not 
preternatural after this fashion. Many are regular and 
constant, whereas not every saintly relic is endowed 
with healing power, but only some and then only on 
occasion; nor are all fetishes harmful, nor does all water 
ebb and flow. Some mysterious forces seem to belong 
to all bodies of the same kind, thus every magnet 
attracts iron. Consequently we are left to suppose that 
they must result from some intrinsic principle common 
to all things of that kind. Moreover, preternatural 
phenomena are not uniform, an evident sign that they 

1 Efficient causes are divided into the first cause which 
transcends the classification and secondary causes. Secondary 
causes are divided into principal causes, which are active by their 
own proper and stable forms, and instrumental causes, which are 
active by a transient motion communicated to them. 

2 The argument depends on no special theory of medieval 
astronomy. These substances may be taken as physical factors 
outside our immediate environment. 



16 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

do not derive from an inborn and permanent quality, 
but from the activation of a superior power; a saw cuts 
wood on which it is placed only when it is moved by 
the carpenter. Yet there are some rather mysterious 
actions of lower bodies that produce constant effects, 
rhubarb always purges certain humours, for instance; 
and therefore the inference is that they are elicited by 
stable powers intrinsic to those bodies. 

Such powers are the natural result of forms embodied 
in such and such matter. The reading of the Platonists 
is that the principles engaged are bodiless substances, 
which they call species or ideas, natural forms being 
the images of these impressed on matter. This, however, 
fails to meet the situation at two points. First, maker 
and made are like one another; a physical reality is not 
merely a form but a compound of form and matter; and 
so likewise its immediate producer. Secondly, a form 
existing apart from matter would be unchanging and 
would regularly act to produce an unvarying form, not 
a bodily thing that comes to be and afterwards dies 
away. 

II 7, 359, 516 Opusc. i, de Operationibtts occultis Naturae ad 
quemdam mititem ultramontanum 

44. On account of the difficulty of fixing any certainty 
in the flow of phenomena, Plato was driven to postulate 
that ideas, or substances apart from sensible things, are 
the objects we can know scientifically and define. Here 
also other shrewd judges were deceived from not dis- 
cerning between what is essential and what is incidental. 
For in our immediate environment there is a contrast 
between integral things which are compounds, and 
pure meanings which are forms. The processes of 
generation and corruption directly attack the former, 
while the latter are affected only indirectly because of 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 17 

mutations in their subjects: you build this particular 
house, not house as such. 

Now anything can be examined free from non- 
essential involvements, and therefore the forms and 
meanings of things, though committed to a changing 
reality, can be considered as invariable in themselves 
and ascertainable by scientific definition. Yet natural 
science is not thereby based on the knowledge of sub- 
stances existing apart from sensible reality. 

When significant forms are considered apart from 
movement they are also isolated from the conditions of 
time and place, which are the corollaries of reality 
individuated by matter having determinate dimensions. 
It follows that these objects of our scientific knowledge 
about a changing reality should be studied without 
reference to determinate matter and its consequences; 
not, however, without reference to matter in general, 
for the very notion of substantial form entails the 
appropriation of matter. What man means, the 
definition from which any anthropological science 
must start, may be taken without reference to this 
flesh and these bones, but not without reference to 
flesh and blood in general. A singular term implies 
determinate matter, a universal term merely vague 
matter. The scientific process of natural science 
abstracts universal from particular, not form from 
matter. 

The resulting abstract meanings can be considered 
consequently in two ways. First, in themselves, leaving 
motion and individual matter out of the picture; as such 
they exist only in the human mind. Secondly, in rela- 
tion to the changing and material things of which they 
are the meaning and the principle of evidence, for 
things are known by their forms. Through unvarying 
reasons studied in isolation from particular matter, 

B628 C 



18 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

natural science may know changing and material 
existents outside the mind. 

112, 520, 659 Opusc. XTI, Exposition, de Trinitate, v. 2 

45. Natural things lie midway between God's know- 
ledge and ours. Human science derives from them, and 
they derive from God's own vision. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xiv. 8, ad 3 

46. What is false to nature is false from every point 
of view. 

604 Disputations, i de Potentta, 3,^4, / 

IV. NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, MATHEMATICS, 
AND METAPHYSICS 

47. Explanation is of two kinds. One goes to the root 
of the matter, as in natural science when a sufficient 
proof is advanced to show that the velocity of astro- 
nomical motion is constant. The other is less radical, 
but lays down an hypothesis and shows that the 
observed effects are in accord with the supposition, as 
when astronomy employs a system of eccentrics and 
epicycles to justify our observations about the motions 
of the heavenly bodies. It does not carry complete 
conviction, because another hypothesis might also 
serve. 

77 Summa Theologica, la. xxxii. i, ad z 

48. Because we are unacquainted with the inner 
natures of things we have to make use of their accidental 
differences to designate their substance; to be two- 
legged, though not essential, may serve to describe 
what man is. The situation is not straightforward, for 
we should previously know what the soul is in itself if 
we are to discover without trouble what its derived 
properties are thus in mathematical theorems the 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 19 

advantage of previously understanding lines and sur- 
faces. Yet conversely, accidents are a present help in 
providing postulates for the definition of essential 
natures. If anybody advances a definition that does not 
lead him to the properties of a thing, his definition is 
fanciful, off the subject, merely a debating point. 

107, 517 Commentary, 1 de Anima> Icct. i 

49. Though mathematical truths are verified in natural 
objects, these latter have about them something outside 
mathematics, namely sensible matter. Here physical 
science can indicate reasons that mathematics cannot 
touch. 

647 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate^ iv. 3 

50. The difference between snub-nosed and curvature 
is a good example of the difference between physical 
and mathematical objects. For an uptilted nose exists 
in sensible matter, as do all the objects of natural 
science, from men to stones. But the meaning of curva- 
ture prescinds from the investing sensible matter; so 
does the meaning of mathematical objects, such as 
numbers, magnitudes, and figures. 

653> 654 Commentary, I Physics, lect. i 

51. A blacksmith should be a metallurgist, and a natural 
scientist should study the natures of stones and horses as 
pure meanings appearing in sensation. Nevertheless, 
a blacksmith who does not know how a ploughshare is 
used will be incompetent, and a natural scientist with- 
out feel for sensible qualities will not do justice to 
physical things. 

Summa Theologica, la. Ixxxiv. 8 

52. A definition that concentrates on pure form belongs 
rather to logic than to natural science. A definition 



20 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

about material conditions without reference to form 
could come only from physics, for it takes a physicist to 
deal with matter like that. Nevertheless a definition 
covering what is from both, namely matter and form, 
has a more authentic ring of natural science. 

511, 647 Commentary, I de Anima, lect. 2 

53. Some sciences are intermediate between physics 
and mathematics. They accept purely mathematical 
propositions and apply them to sensible matter. In 
musical theory, for instance, arithmetical reflections on 
numerical proportions are turned to sound. 

423 Commentary, // Physics, lect. 3 

54. Accidents arrive in the following sequence. 1 First 
quantity, afterwards quality, then transmutation and 
change. Hence, quantity can be conceived as investing 
substance without implying sensible qualities. Its mean- 
ing does not depend on sensible but on intelligible 
matter. When accidents are removed, the naked sub- 
stance can be grasped only by the mind. The senses 
cannot reach it. The mathematician deals with such 
abstractions as quantities and their consequences, 
namely figures and so forth. 

Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate, v. 3 

55. Mathematical demonstrations are analytic and 
explicate the formal cause, but when, as in the natural 
sciences, the proof proceeds by outside causes, a pecu- 
liarly rational measure is set, namely the discursive 
process from one object to another. Hence it has been 
remarked how the ratiocinative process is appropriate 
to natural science, not exclusively, but as being most 
strongly emphasized there. In much the same way the 
didactic process is appropriate to mathematics, for we 

1 Not necessarily chronological. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 21 

are said to proceed didactically when our argument is 
purely deductive. 

Mathematics comes midway between physics and 
metaphysics, and is more certain than either of them. 
It is more certain than natural science because its 
reflections are above matter and motion. Natural science 
should take into account many material factors and 
physical dispositions, and therefore its reckonings are the 
more difficult; it must envisage as well things that are 
moving and inconstant, and therefore its findings are the 
less fixed. Often it should attempt the proof of things 
that could be otherwise. The closer it gets to singular 
cases, as in practical sciences such as medicine, chemistry, 
and morals, the less certain it becomes owing to the 
variety and number of the elements that must be 
allowed for; if one be left out error will creep in. 

Mathematical processes also enjoy more certainty 
than do the processes of metaphysical science, for meta- 
physical objects are more withdrawn from sensation 
whence our knowledge starts. Spiritual substances are 
imperfectly known from sense-evidence; moreover, the 
general conceptions of being are highly universal and 
remote from particular events registered by the senses. 
Mathematical objects, on the other hand, fall under the 
senses and imagination; therefore the human mind, 
which takes its knowledges from sense-images, has 
greater facility in working with them than with sub- 
stantial essence, potentiality, actuality, and so on. We 
find mathematical knowledge clearer and more assured 
than the findings of physical or metaphysical science, 
indeed even more so than those of practical science. 

The processes of metaphysical science are said to be 
marked with insight, for there most of all is found the 
fullest understanding. Reasoning differs from under- 
standing as multitude from unity, as time from eternity, 



22 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

as a circumference from a centre. Reasoning is charac- 
teristically busied about many things, but understanding 
rests on one simple truth and there covers all the sections. 

28,497, 1053 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitatc t vi. i 
/ // 

56. Let us pause at two periods in knowing, one at the 
start and the other at the finish, corresponding respec- 
tively with the apprehending and the judging. The 
beginning or principle of every scientific inquiry lies 
in the senses, and all our intellectual apprehension is 
abstracted from their data. The boundary or term, 
however, is not so invariable, for sometimes it is reached 
in the senses, sometimes in the imagination, sometimes 
in the pure reason. 

When the properties disclosed in sensibility ade- 
quately express the nature of a thing then the judge- 
ment of the mind should subscribe to the witness of the 
senses. The natural sciences operate at this stage, for 
they deal with truths whose existence and meaning 
involve sensible matter. Therefore their findings should 
be checked by sense-observation and experiment, and 
they lapse into error when this empiricism is neglected. 

Secondly comes the class of mathematical truths. 
Their meaning is independent of sensible matter, 
though they exist in it, and judgement about them does 
not depend on sense-perception to the same extent. Yet 
their definitive meaning does not abstract from matter, 
but merely from sensible matter. When sensible condi- 
tions are set aside an imaginable residue still remains 
and, consequently, mathematical judgements arising at 
this stage should square with the data of the imagination. 

Lastly there are objects transcending sense and 
imagination alike, wholly independent of matter as 
regards both their being and their being understood, 
and the relevant judgement stays neither in the 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 23 

senses nor in the imagination. Since we reach meta- 
physical truths through sensible and imaginable entities 
we can say that their origins and principles rise from 
them. On the other hand, we should neither deal with 
the results according to the appreciation of the senses 
and imagination nor mistake their images for the terms 
of metaphysical thinking. 

627, 630, 647 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate> vi. 2 

57. The accomplishments of wholly spiritual sub- 
stances are beyond all the compositions of sense our 
minds are able to master. Theoretical research can tell 
us that such things exist, but not what are their inner 
natures. It is idle to urge that we may yet establish a 
theory properly devoted to them though hitherto it has 
not been discovered. For so long as we work with the 
scientific principles accessible to us, all of which depend 
on knowledge acquired from material phenomena, com- 
plete spiritual understanding is bound to escape us. 

105, 504 in Contra Genfts, 41 

58. To strive for an end that cannot be secured is 
futile, and the hope of satisfaction there is illusory. 

in Contra Gentes, 44 

59. Gradually, and as it were step by step, the old 
philosophers advanced to the knowledge of truth. They 
floundered at first and mistook bodily things for entire 
reality. Those who allowed for movement allowed for 
no more than accidental changes, such as rarefaction 
and condensation, commingling and separation. On the 
supposition that bodily substance is uncaused they 
attempted to assign various causes for these accidental 
changes attraction and repulsion, or perhaps a Mind 
regulating brute matter. 1 

1 The reference is to Empedocles and Anaxagoras. 



24 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

A further advance was made when they discerned 
between substantial form and matter. They recognized 
that essential changes take place in bodies with regard 
to essential forms though they still held that matter was 
uncreated. These transmutations they attributed to 
more universal causes, such as geometrical forms or 
bodiless ideas. But taking into account that matter is 
limited by form to a special type of being, just as sub- 
stance is modified by a supervening accident to one 
determinate mode of existence man, for instance, by 
whiteness we can tell that these opinions were restricted 
to a sectional reality, namely to this or that kind of 
thing, and so did not go beyond the departmental 
efficient causes. 

Finally others climbed higher and recognized being 
as such. They considered the cause of things simply 
speaking, not just the cause of this or that. Whatever 
is the cause of things considered as beings must be the 
cause of things with respect to everything that belongs 
to them in their entirety, not merely with respect to 
characteristics resulting from their accidental forms, or 
with respect to their essential types as determined by 
their substantial forms. 

387, 936 Summa Theologica, la. xliv. 2 

60. In meditating on the universal truth of beings, 
primary philosophy must also scrutinize the general 
setting of truth. 

585, 604 Commentary, // Metaphysics, lect. z 

61. Among the arts we observe that one governs 
another whose end it controls. Medical art rules and 
commands the technique of applying medicaments and 
surgical dressings, because health, which is the proper 
concern of medicine, is the end of the subordinate arts 
engaged; similarly with regard to the art of politics in 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 25 

relation to naval construction, or military art in relation 
to the cavalry arm and ordnance. Such ruling arts are 
termed architectonic; those who work at them are 
termed masters and deserve the title of wise. When 
they are occupied with special sections that do not 
touch human destiny in the main they are called wise 
in a qualified sense. The title without qualification 
should be reserved to him who envisages the end, 
which also is the principle, of the whole universe. 

I Contra Genfes, I 

62. One science may be subordinate to another in two 
ways. First, as a part, when its special subject is con- 
tained in a more general field: plants are included 
among natural bodies, and therefore botany is a species 
of natural science. Second, as subaltern, when the 
higher science provides the postulates of the lower 
science yet not its special subject: for instance, the 
human body as curable by art, not by nature, is the 
special interest of medical science. Thus arithmetic 
rules musical theory, and natural science rules medicine, 
chemistry, and agricultural science. 

Though, in a sense, all scientific subjects are parts of 
general reality, which is the proper study of meta- 
physics, it does not follow that all the sciences are 
departments of metaphysics. For they employ their 
special methods and examine a part of being in a style 
quite their own and different from that of metaphysics. 

302, 307,396 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate, v. i, 
a</5, 6 

63. Since the wise man's office is to set things in order 
and pass judgement on them, and since lesser affairs 
should be measured by greater, he is called wise in any 
sphere who studies there the highest causes, like the 
architect in comparison with the builder's men who 



26 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

hew the timber and trim the stones. In the human scene 
prudence becomes wisdom when all conduct is con- 
trolled by the proper end of human living. He then 
who considers the highest cause of the whole universe, 
namely God, deserves the title of wise man with least 
reservation. 

1067 Summa Theohgica, la. i. 6 

64. What is regulated by the human reason is regulated 
also by the divine law, but not conversely. 

1094 Summa Theologica, la zae. Ixiii. 2 

65. The higher reason and the lower reason, of which 
Augustine speaks, 1 are in no wise distinct faculties. For 
he says that by the former a man is intent on things 
eternal, contemplating them in themselves and con- 
sulting them for his rule of conduct, while by the latter 
he is intent on things temporal. Now these two, namely 
eternity and time, are so related that one is the medium 
in which the other is known. For in the order of dis- 
covery, we come to the knowledge of things eternal 
through things temporal, according to the words of 
St. Paul, the things of God are clearly seen, being under- 
stood by the things that are made.' 1 On the other hand, 
in the order of interpretation, we judge of temporal 
things in the light of eternity and dispose of temporal 
matters according to eternal laws. The higher and the 
lower reason, then, are one and the same faculty, dis- 
tinguished only by different habits and active functions. 
Wisdom is attributed to the higher reason, scientific 
knowledge to the lower. 

4, 238 Summa Theohgica, la, Ixxix, 9 

66. Because philosophy arises from awe a philosopher 
is bound in his way to be a lover of myths and poetic 

1 de Trinitate, xii. 4. 2 Rom. i. 20. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 27 

fables. Poets and philosophers are alike in being big 
with wonder. 

632 Commentary, I Metaphysics t lect. 3 

67. The final joy of man consists in the superlative 
activity of his supreme power, namely the activity of ' 
mind engaged with incomparable truth. Since effect is 
known through cause, obviously cause in itself is more 
lucid than effect, though sometimes effects appear 
more manifest to us. We draw our knowledge of uni- 
versal and intelligible causes from particular events 
registered in our sensations. Absolutely speaking, the 
first causes of things should possess the most and noblest 
meanings, for they are superlatively real and conse- 
quently the truest. Though these first causes of all other 
realities and truths may appear less evident to us, the 
most complete happiness open to us in our present life 
really consists in considering them. The glimpse we 
catch is lovelier and more sublime than any under- 
standing of lesser things. 

99 Opusc. x, de Causis, lect. I 

68. When asked what he professed himself to be, 
Pythagoras was unlike his predecessors and would lay no 
claim to be a wise man, for to him that appeared pre- 
sumptuous; he professed to be a philosopher, that is 
a lover of wisdom. 

Commentary, I Metaphysics, lect. 3 

69. There were wise students among the Greeks who 
brought in gods in order to hide the truths of divinity 
under the guise of fables. So also Plato clothed philo- 
sophy in mathematics. 

256, 496, 648 Commentary, /// Metaphysics, lect. n 

70. The literal sense is what words stand for, and this 



28 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

significance may come either from the proper force of 
the words themselves, as when I say a smiling man, or 
from likeness or metaphor, as when I say a smiling 
meadow. The mystical sense is engaged with the things 
signified by the things signified by the words. 

287 Commentary, Gala f tans, iv, lect. 7 

71. When we assert that the Passover was a sign of 
delivery from the land of Egypt, or that circumcision 
was a sign of God's covenant with Abraham, we assign 
the literal cause. 

Summa Theologica, xa 2ae. cii. 2, ad i 

72. The original meaning whereby a word stands for 
a thing is its historical or literal sense. The meaning 
whereby one thing symbolizes another belongs to the 
spiritual sense; it presupposes and is based on the 
literal sense. 

Summa Theohgica, I a. i. 10 

73. History, aetiology, and analogy are grouped under 
the literal sense: for history, as Augustine says, 1 simply 
relates what happened; aetiology assigns the cause of the 
facts; analogy combines different truths; and allegory 
alone comes under the spiritual sense. 

Summa Theologica, la. i. 10, ad 2 

74. The parabolic sense is contained under the literal. 
Words may signify something properly or something 
figuratively. The literal sense of a parable is not the 
figure itself but the object figured. When the Bible 
speaks of God's arm the literal sense is not that he has 
such a physical member, but what is signified by it, 
namely the might of action. 

270 Summa Taeologica, la. i. IO, ad 3 

1 de Ut Hit ate Credendi, 3. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 29 

V. THEOLOGY 

75. Some hold that our views about creatures are 
irrelevant to the truth of faith so long as our religious 
attitude is correct. They have adopted a thoroughly 
unsound position. 

374, 633 n Contra Gentes, 3 

76. A man should remind himself that an object of 
faith is not scientifically demonstrable lest, presuming to 
demonstrate what is of faith, he should produce incon- 
clusive reasons and offer occasion for unbelievers to scoff 
at a faith based on such grounds. 

Summa Theologica y la. xlvi. 2 

77. There are two methods of argument, demonstra- 
tive and persuasive. Demonstrative, cogent, and intel- 
lectually convincing argument cannot lay hold of the 
truths of faith, though it may neutralize destructive 
criticism that would render faith untenable. Persuasive 
reasoning drawn from probabilities, however, does not 
weaken the merit of faith, for it implies no attempt to 
convert faith into sight by resolving what is believed 
into evident first principles. 

47, 105 Opusc. xvi, de Trinitate, ii. I, W 5 

78. There is a double canon for the theological truths* 
we profess. Some surpass the ingenuity of the human 
reason, for instance the Trinity. But others can be 
attained by the human reason, for instance the existence 
and unity of God, also similar truths demonstrated in 
the light of the philosophical reason. 

I Contra Genfes, 3 

79. I say a double truth about divine things, double, 
not on the side of God who is single and simple truth, 



3 o SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

but on the side of our knowledge which variously re- 
sponds to the truths of divinity. 

I Contra Gentes, 9 

80. Christian theology issues from the light of faith, 
philosophy from the natural light of reason. Philo- 
sophical truths cannot be opposed to the truths of 
faith, they fall short indeed, yet they also admit com- 
mon analogies; and some moreover are foreshadowings, 
for nature is the preface to grace. 

Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate, ii. 3 

81. From bare acquaintance with the commentary of 
Averroes it is strange how some have presumed to pro- 
nounce that his sentiments are shared by all philosophers, 
the western Christian philosophers excepted. It is an 
occasion of greater surprise, indeed of indignation, how 
any professing Christian can talk so irresponsibly about 
his faith as to contend that these westerners do not 
accept the doctrine of an unique intelligence because 
their religious belief happens to be against it. 

Here two mischiefs are at work. First, that the 
repugnance of religious faith to such teachings should 
be left in doubt. Second, that their irrelevance to the 
creed should be alleged. Nor is another assertion less 
rash, namely that God himself could not produce a 
multitude of intelligences, for that implies a contra- 
diction. More serious is a later statement, 'Rationally 
I infer of necessity that intelligence must be numerically 
one, but by faith I firmly hold the opposite.' This is 
tantamount to holding that belief can be about things 
whose contrary can be demonstrated. Since what can 
be so demonstrated is bound to be a necessary truth 
and its opposite false and impossible, the upshot would 
be that faith avows what is false and impossible. This 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 31 

is intolerable to our ears, for not even God could con- 
trive such a situation. 

4 2 7 559 Opusc. vi, de Unitafe Intellectus contra Averroistas 1 

82. What is natural cannot wholly perish. 

441 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. cxxvi. I 

83. Nature is to blessedness as first to second. Blessed- 
ness is grounded on nature. The groundwork is safe- 
guarded in the achievement, and therefore nature is 
preserved in blessedness, likewise the activity of nature 
in the act of bliss. 

744 Summa Theologica> la. Ixii. 7 

84. The divine rights of grace do not abolish the human 1 
rights of natural reason. 

1047 Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. x. 10 

85. Grace and virtue copy the order of nature insti- 
tuted by divine wisdom. 

Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. xxxi. 3 

86. There are two classes of science: some enlarge on 
principles evident to the natural light of the reason 
while others develop principles taken from elsewhere. 
In this last way Christian theology proceeds from the 
principles of the high knowledge enjoyed by the 
blessed. As musical theory accepts principles delivered 
by mathematics so Christian theology believes principles 
divinely revealed. 

928 Summa Theologica t la. i. 2 

87. From doctrines held by faith the knowledge of 
other truths can be developed by discourse from 
principles to conclusion. The truths of faith are the 

1 This pamphlet, directed against the double- truth theory of 
the Latin Averroists of Paris University that true in religion 
can be false in science is written with unusual temper. 



32 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

first principles, as it were, of the science of Christian 
theology, the others are like conclusions. Christian theo- 
logy is nobler than divine metaphysics for it derives 
from higher principles. 

1033 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate, ii. 2 

88. I think our hesitation over some of the sayings of 
the old Greek Fathers comes from two causes. When 
errors against faith crop up theologians are then put on 
their guard and write more warily: the ante-Nicene 
Fathers did not expound the unity of the divine nature 
so accurately as did the later Fathers; and we may also 
recall the case of Augustine, an eminent authority, who 
proceeds more circumspectly about freewill in the 
books he composed after the rise of Pelagianism than 
beforehand when he was attacking the Manichees. 
Moreover, some expressions ring well in Greek but are 
not so happy in Latin. 

Opusc. xxvn, Contra Errores Graecorum y Introduction 1 

89. It would scarcely accord with the character of 
divine goodness were God to keep his knowledge to 
himself without intimately disclosing himself to others, 
since to be generous is of the nature of good. 

208 Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus, i, lect. i 

90. Instruction by divine revelation was necessary even 
concerning truths about God accessible to rational 
investigation, for otherwise they would have been 
arrived at only by few, and after a long period, and then 
mixed with errors; more especially when we consider 
that man's entire salvation, which is God, depends on 
such knowledge. 

516 Summa Theologica, la. i. i 

1 Addressed to Pope Urban IV. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 33 

91. Alexander 1 and Averroes alike recognized that 
man's ultimate happiness does not lie in knowledge 
acquired by scientific means, but in continuous con- 
junction with an unearthly substance. Yet, as Aristotle 
was aware, there seems no other way open at present 
save the scientific, and so the happiness in our power is 
qualified and not complete. This goes to show how 
great minds have been hemmed in. We shall be free of 
these straits, however, if we suppose that the human soul 
is immortal and that men can reach perfect happiness 
after this life, when their understanding will be like 
that of spirits. 

527, 744 in Contra Genfes, 48 

92. Not merely learning about divine things but also 
experiencing them that does not come from mere 
intellectual acquaintance with the terms of scientific 
theology, but from loving the things of God and cleav- 
ing to them by affection. Fellow-feeling comes from 
fondness rather than from cognizance, for things under- 
stood are in the mind in the mind's own fashion, whereas 
desire goes out to things as they are in themselves; love 
would transform us into the very condition of their 
being. Thus, by the settled bent of his affections, a 
virtuous man is well apt to judge straightway the 
affairs of virtue; so also the lover of divine matters 
divinely catches their gist. 

916, 957 Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nomtnibus, 

ii, lect. 4 

93. There is a twofold wisdom, according to the two 
modes of judgement. A man may judge from sympathy, 
because by virtue he is already inclined that way, or he 
may proceed by theoretical reasoning, as when a man 

1 Alexander of Aphrodisias. 

BC28 D 



34 SCIENCE AND WISDOM 

well instructed in moral science may judge of the virtue 
he lacks. 

863, 919, 954 Summa Theohgica, la. i. 6, ad 3 

94. He learns who takes a meaning in the spirit of its 
utterance. The Word of God the Father breathes love. 
A loving welcome is a condition of learning. // moves 
into holy souls and makes saints and friends of God. 1 

4, 286, 314 Commentary, in Joannem > vj, lect. 5 

95. The main effort is directed to yield knowledge 
about God, not exclusively as he is in himself but also 
as the alpha and omega of things, especially of rational 
beings. Consequently this exposition will treat: 

first, of God; 

second, of the motion of rational creatures into him; 2 
(third, of Christ, who as man is the way of our going 
to God). 

The first part will be divided into three: 
one, the divine nature; 
(two, the trinity of persons;) 
three, the coming forth of creatures from God. 
The first section will be taken under three 
headings: 

first, whether God exists at all; 
second, how he exists, or rather in what 

manner he does not exist; 
third, his active characteristics, namely his 

knowledge, will, and power. 
The third section will be taken under three 
headings: 

1 Wisd. vii. 27. 

2 The Prima Pars and the Secunda Pars of the Summa Theologica y 
corresponding respectively to Chapters II-XI and Chapters XII- 
XX of this anthology. Phrases bracketed represent theological 
sections omitted. 



SCIENCE AND WISDOM 35 

first, the production and first cause of things; 
second, their distinction in general and in 

detail; 

third, their preservation and government. 
The second part will study: 

first, the destiny and blessedness of man; 
second, morality in human acts, or how man 
can succeed or fail in arriving at this end. 

Summa Theokgica, I a. ii & xliv: ia-2ae. i & vi. Prologues 



II 
Existence of God 1 

96. Truth is a divine thing, a friend more excellent 
than any human friend. 

Commentary, / Ethics* lect. 6 

97. Nobody is blamed for lacking happiness; on the 
contrary those who lack it and seek it are commended. 
Yet seemingly a man who has reached no general 
theological conclusions should be gravely censured for 
his dullness in failing to perceive the evident signs 
of God's existence similarly if from his experience 
of men he fails to allow for the existence of the 
soul. Hence the verse in the psalm, the fool hath 
said in his heart, there is no Goo 1 . 2 One conclusion, 
however, that can be drawn is that final happiness 
does not consist in merely rational knowledge about 
God. 

744 ui Contra Gentes, 38 

1 St. Thomas decides that, for the religious philosopher, the 
existence of God is neither axiomatic nor a postulate. It is a con- 
clusion to be rigorously proved, though a priori demonstration is 
not to be expected. The arguments are summarized in the famous 
quinque viae which combine in their premisses a judgement of 
necessity with a judgement of fact. The first approach presupposes 
the fact of change, which is elucidated by the concepts of poten- 
tiality and actuality backed by the principle of contradiction} the 
others enter more fully and freely into the metaphysical medium 
of causality. These five ways lead immediately to five different 
truths under the same name of God, but they are drawn together 
in a subsequent argument when the revelation I am who am is set 
in the philosophy of Pure Act. 

2 Ps. liii. i (Vulgate). 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 37 

I. UNREASONED THEISM 

98. The attempt to demonstrate the existence of God 
seems superfluous to some people, who assert that there 
can be no debate about a self-evident and indemonstra- 
ble truth, the contrary of which is unthinkable. 

They are persuaded partly by tradition. From infancy 
men are accustomed to hear and invoke the name of God. 
Now custom becomes second nature, especially when 
its influence has been at work on us from a tender age; 
doctrines instilled then come to be taken for granted. 
In addition some confusion between what is evident in 
itself and what is evident to us should be allowed for. 

Others also profess that the attempt to prove the 
existence of God is useless, but for very different 
reasons. Impressed by the weakness of the arguments 
sometimes adduced, they hold that this truth cannot be 
discovered by the reason. What is needed, they say, is 
an act of faith in divine revelation. 

i Contra Gentes, 10-12 

99. Whether God's existence 1 is self-evident. . . . We 
advance on this point as follows. 2 

1 Deum esse, that God is. The usual sense of existing as meaning 
being established extra causas, or as we might say, past undoing, 
does not apply to God who has no cause. Yet it is easier to speak 
of his existence than of his is-ness. So esse when it stands for 
ultimate substantial actuality has been translated as existence or 
existing. Even in the case of creatures, these terms are too meagre 
and adventitious to stand for what St. Thomas meant by esse\ yet 
they seem preferable to the vaguer being or even actual being^ and 
to the more pedantic is-ness. 

2 An article of the Summa Theologica is here set out in full. It 
shows the typical structure of I. Title , which advances an open 
question ('Whether, &c.') ; 2. Objections ('It appears, &c.') 5 
3. Sed Contra ('But on the contrary, &c.') j 4. Body of the Article 
('I give judgement that, &c.') j 5. Replies to the objections ('To the 
first, &c.'). 



38 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

It appears to be self-evident that God exists. For 
those truths are self-evident about which our knowledge 
is innate. Now, as Damascene says, 1 the knowledge that 
God exists is implanted naturally in all men. 

Moreover, those truths are called self-evident which 
are at once assented to when the meaning of their 
terms is recognized. When we know the meaning of 
whole and part we instantly agree that every whole is 
greater than any one of its parts. Well then, as soon as 
we grasp the meaning of this term G0*/we are bound to 
see immediately that his existence is implied. For it 
signifies that than which nothing greater can be con- 
ceived. Now what exists really as well as mentally is 
greater than what exists merely in our mind. When the 
term Godis understood, an object with mental existence 
is present which must also be credited with existence in 
reality. Therefore that God exists is a self-evident 
proposition. 2 

Moreover, the existence of truth is self-evident. The 
denial that truth exists is an assertion that truth does 
not exist, and this, if well-founded, is itself a true 
proposition. If anything be true, then truth must exist. 
But God is truth. Therefore his existence is self-evident. 

But on the contrary: nobody can conceive the opposite 
of what is self-evident. The denial of God's existence 
can, however, be entertained by the mind. Therefore 
his existence is not self-evident. 

I give judgement by saying: a truth can be self- 
evident in two manners, in itself but not to us, or in 
itself and to us as well. A proposition is self-evident 
when the predicate is contained in the very notion of 
the subject. If, therefore, the meaning of both subject 
and predicate be well recognized the proposition will 

1 de Fide orthodoxa^ i. I. 

2 The famous Anselmic argument from the Proslogion. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 39 

be unanimously admitted, as in the case of the first 
principles of thought where the terms, such as being, 
non-being, whole, part, and the like, express hackneyed 
notions with which everybody is familiar. But to those 
who are unacquainted with the meaning of its subject 
and predicate, a proposition, though indeed evident in 
itself, may not so appear; as Boethius says, some notions 
are commonplaces and self-evident only to experts, for 
instance that incorporeal things do not occupy place. I 
declare then that this proposition, God exists, though of 
itself self-evident since subject and predicate are 
identical, for God is his existence, as will be shown 
hereafter is nevertheless not self-evident to us, be- 
cause we do not know what the essence of God is; it 
requires to be demonstrated by truths more evident to 
us though less evident in themselves, namely by his 
effects. 

To the first objection: an undifferen dated knowledge 
that God exists is implanted by nature, for he is the 
health we instinctively desire, and what we naturally 
desire that also we somehow know. But this does not 
amount to a knowledge of God's existing as such, any 
more than to know that somebody is approaching is to 
know Peter, though in fact it is Peter. For there are 
many who imagine that man's perfect good, or bliss, 
lies in riches or pleasures or something of the sort. 

To the second objection: he who hears this term God 
perchance may not understand it to signify that than 
which nothing greater can be conceived. Some have 
thought that God was a body. But granting that every- 
body accepts the term in this sense, it still does not 
follow that something existing in reality is entailed, or 
anything more than an object of mind. Nor can we 
urge that it must exist in reality, unless we concede that 
there is in reality a being than which nothing greater 



40 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

can be thought of, and this is not assumed by those who 
deny the existence of God. 

To the third objection: the existence of abstract 
truth in general is self-evident, but the existence of 
a primary true thing is not self-evident as far as we are 
concerned. 

179 Summa Theologica, la. ii. I 

100. Though God is at the spring of natural desire and 
is the last end in achievement, it does not follow that he 
comes first in the content of consciousness. 

589, 74.4 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate, i. 3, ad 4 

1 01. The sun shines from outside us, but the sun of the 
mind, which is God, lights from within. 

Summa Theologica y ia-2ae. cix. i, ad 2, 

102. Some have taught that the first object of know- 
ledge even in this life is God himself who is the first 
truth, and that through him everything else is known. 1 
Others have professed what is less obviously unwar- 
ranted, that the divine essence, though not in itself the 
original object of consciousness, is yet the light in which 
everything is seen. Yet they cannot be supported. To 
begin with, the light divinely shed within us is the 
natural light of our intelligence, which is not the first 
object of knowledge, either as regards its nature, for 
elaborate analysis is required to know the nature of 
mind, or as regards its existence, for we do not perceive 
that we have an intelligence except when we perceive 
that we are understanding something else. Nobody 
knows that he is knowing save in knowing something 
else, and consequently the knowledge of an intelligible 
object precedes intellectual self-consciousness. 

48, 662 Opusc. xvi, de Trinitate, i. 3 

s A doctrine commonly called ontologism. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 41 

103. In the light of the first truth we see and discern 
all things because the light of our mind, whether innate 
or infused, is naught but the reflectipn of that truth. 
The light of our intelligence is not the first object of our 
understanding but its medium: with still less justifica- 
tion can we claim that God is the first object we know. 

650 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxxviii. 3, ad I 

104. In replying to the inquiry whether the human 
spirit knows all things in the eternal exemplars, a dis- 
tinction should be drawn between the two ways along 
which one, thing may be known in another. First, as in 
an object which is itself known, as when we see a mirror 
and also the objects reflected therein. At present our 
spirit cannot see all things in the divine exemplars in 
this manner. Secondly, as in the principle of knowledge, 
as when we say we see things in the rays of the sun. In 
this manner we must needs grant that the human spirit 
knows things in the eternal exemplars from which they 
derive and that our light of intelligence is lit by the 
uncreated light holding the eternal exemplars. 

in, 1 60, 192, 203 Summa Theokgica, la. Ixxxiv. 5 

II. DEMONSTRATION AND CAUSALITY 

105. There can be two procedures in demonstration: 
one is through the cause, and is termed a proof for-the- 
reason-that; this type of argument works from what is 
prior in reality. The other is through an effect, and is 
termed a proof inasmuch-as; and this type of argument 
works from what strikes us first. 1 When an effect is 

1 These two procedures are known as demonstration propter 
quid (8tort) and demonstration quiet (on). 
The modes of proof are divided into 

( induction and 

I deduction. 
The former is an argument from the particular to the general, 



42 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

better known to us than its cause then we proceed 
through the effect to the knowledge of the cause. From 
any effect we can demonstrate the proper cause 1 of its 
being, so long as the effect is more palpable; because if 
the effect exists the cause must pre-exist, since every 
effect depends upon its cause. Hence the existence of 
God in so far as it is not self-evident to us is open to 
demonstration from those of his effects which are 
known to us. 

55> 181 Summa Theologica, la. ii. 2 

106. In the building up of scientific knowledge the 
elements and principles are not always present from the 
beginning. Sometimes we have to reach to principles 
and intelligible causes from sensible effects. In the com- 
pleted construction of science, however, the knowledge 
of effects depends on the knowledge of principles and 
elements. 

666 Summa Theologica t la. Ixxxv. 8, ad i 

107. Effect supplies the place of the cause's definition 
when a cause is demonstrated by an effect. This is 
noteworthy when we would address ourselves to the 
existence of God, for in order to prove that something 
exists, what has to be assumed as the middle term of die 
proof is the nominal definition, not the real definition, 
of the thing. The question, what kind of thing is it ? 

the latter conversely is from the general to the particular. Deduc- 
tion may be either 

I a priori or 
I a posteriori. 

The former is from cause to effect, the latter from effect to 
cause. Though not precisely the same, the distinction may be taken 
here as corresponding to that between demonstrate propter quid and 
demonstratio quia. 

1 i.e. the direct and immediate sustaining antecedent. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 43 

follows the question, does it exist? Now the names 
ascribed to God are drawn from his effects, as will be 
shown later, 1 and therefore a nominal definition must 
be used as a middle term in demonstrating his existence. 
1 80, 605 Summa Theologica, la. ii. 2, ad 2 

1 08. Reasoning cannot stretch to a simple form as 
though to grasp its essence, but only to touch its 
existence. 

199 Summa Theologies* ra. xii. 12, ad I 

109. Existence is taken in two senses, signifying cither 
the actuality of being or the propositional affirmation 
effected by the mind in joining subject and predicate. 
In the first sense the existence of God can no more be 
known than his essence; but in the second sense we 
might be able to know that the statement we formulate, 
namely that he exists, is true. 

38 Summa Theologica, la. iii. 4, ad 2 

HO. The existence of God and similar truths about 
him attainable by strict rationalism are not articles of 
faith, but preambles to them. Faith presupposes natural 
knowledge, even as grace presupposes nature, and per- 
fection the capacity for it. Nevertheless there is nothing 
to prevent a man from accepting as an article of belief 
something that can be scientifically known and demon- 
strated, though perchance not by him. 

929 Summa Theologica, la. ii. 2, ad I 

III. Aristotle enumerates the varieties of causes and 
reduces them to four kinds. 2 

He observes first that cause means the immanent 

1 264-88. 

2 These four types, with their sub-headings, may be set out as 
shown overleaf: 



44 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

material in which a thing comes into being, that is 
existing within it. He says this in order to stress its 
difference from a contrary state or a privation, from 
which something is said to come about but which does 
not remain in the event, as when something white is 
produced from something black or non-white. But 
when a statue is made from bronze, or a cruet from silver, 
these materials are intrinsic to the product, for statue 
does not abolish bronze nor cruet silver. Such are causes 
after the manner of matter. 



Intrinsic cause 
^material cause 

Imateria prima, the potential and partial substantial 
principle in all bodily substances; 
mater ia secunda, an existing body as a subject of change. 
Here also may be added causal dispositions and 
conditions, 
formal cause 

f substantial form, the primary actuality of a physical 
| thing; 

\ accidental form, its supervening determinants. 
v Extrinsic cause 

efficient cause 
f first cause 
I secondary cause, or causal cause 

'principal cause, causative by its form 
instrumental cause, causative by the motion of a 
principal cause. Here for convenience may be 
added such incidental factors as occasions and 
opportunities 
Vfinal cause 
end 

(ultimate 
non-ultimate. This distinction corresponds to the 
I distinction above between first and secondary 
principal causes, 
means 

The exemplar cause is the idea or formal cause of the effect in 
the mind of the maker $ as such it is an extrinsic cause. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 45 

Secondly, cause means the form or pattern or type 
of a thing. This is the formal cause, and it effects a 
thing in two ways; either as its intrinsic form, and this 
is called its species, or as the extrinsic form to whose 
likeness it is made, thus the exemplar of a thing is 
termed its form, which is why Plato said that ideas 
were forms. The genus and kind of a thing, stated by 
the definition of its nature, is settled by the form. 
Therefore the form, which is the meaning of the 
Aristotelean 'what it was for it to be', 1 is the deter- 
minant of what a thing is. For though definition 
includes the material parts its emphasis is on form. 

Thirdly, cause means the first principle of change and 
rest, and this is the moving or efficient cause. 2 Aristotle 
speaks of change and rest in the same breath, for 
natural motion and rest must be resolved into the same 
cause, as also violent movement and forced repose. He 
gives two examples, of the counsellor whose advice 
is the cause of a line of policy, and of the father who is 
the cause of his child; these touch the two principles of 
efficient motion, namely, will and natural determinism. 
In general every maker is the cause of the thing made, 
and every change-producer the cause of the thing 
changed. Anything which makes something in any kind 
of way whatsoever, whether as to substance or accidents, 
should be classed as an efficient cause. So therefore 
Aristotle couples maker and changer; the former is the 
cause of a thing, the latter of its variations. 

Fourthly, cause means the end, that for the sake of 
which something is. For example, health is the cause 
of going for a walk. The question, why? seeks a cause. 

1 The formula of the essence, o Aoyoy rov rl fy cfvai, literally 
translated in medieval Latin, ratio ipsius quod quid erat esse. 

2 Unless otherwise qualified, the term cause means the efficient 



46 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

And this includes not only the last end for which the 
efficient cause acts but also all the means that interpose. 

212, 360, 487, 689 Commentary, V Metaphysics, lect. 2 

112. There are three kinds of definition. One allots the 
species and its meaning; this is purely formal, as when 
a house is explained as a shelter against rain, wind, and 
sun. Another allots the matter, as when a house is 
described as a shelter made of brick, stone, and beams. 
The third includes both form and matter, saying that it 
is such a shape in such material and also assigning its 
purpose. The natural philosopher requires all these 
three notes for a good definition. 

52, 55 Commentary, / de Anima, lect. 2 

113. Action comes from the efficient cause; longing and 
desire from the final cause. 

Disputations, xxn de Veritate, 

114. Every composite thing has an efficient cause, for 
realities of themselves diverse cannot unite to constitute 
one single thing save by some cause binding them 
together. 1 

Summa Theologica, la. iii. 7 

115. Whatever belongs to a thing otherwise than of its 
very nature belongs to it through some efficient cause. 

What is essentially so is the efficient cause of things 
that are so by sharing. 

1 8 1, 435, 1091 ii Contra Gentcs, 15 

1 1 6. A proper cause sustains its dependent effect. 
1901 Summa Theohgica, la. civ. 2, ad ^ 

1 The argument is dealing with partial principles in the 
depth of being rather than about parts displayed dimensively 
though these are not excluded : it is concerned with things not 
utterly simple rather than with constructions in quantity. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 47 

Iiy. An effect depends on its cause just in so far as that 
is its cause. Note that a cause may be the cause of the 
coming to be of the effect, yet not directly of its existing. 
Examples can be taken from artificial and natural pro- 
cesses alike. A builder causes the constructing of a 
house, but not the enduring construction; that depends 
on the consistence of the components. Any efficient 
principle that is not the cause of a natural form as such 
is the cause of a becoming; it is not the direct cause of 
the being that results. It stands to reason that with two 
things of the same species one cannot be the direct 
cause of the specific form of the other; this would be 
equivalent to causing its own specific form, for on that 
head they are identical. Yet one may be the cause of the 
other's coming to exist in this or that determinate 
matter, as when one man begets another. In other words, 
it is the cause of a becoming. 

But when an effect derives from a cause of a different 
nature then the latter may be the cause of the form as 
such and not merely of its arriving in such material. It 
will then be the cause of a being and not merely of a 
becoming. The becoming of a thing must stop when 
the action of its cause is over, similarly the being of a 
thing cannot persist when the action of its cause has 
ceased. 

406, 427 Summa Theologica^ la. civ. I 

118. Though the first cause flows more strongly into 
an effect than does the secondary cause, the effect is not 
completed without the latter's operation. 

324, 359 Disputations, n de Veritate, 14, ad 5 

119. The thesis that natural things are not causes, but 
that God effects everything by himself alone, is clearly 
contrary to experience. 

360 Disputations, in de Potentia^ 7 



4.8 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

120. Three points of comparison of the first cause with 
secondary causes: its influence arrives sooner to the 
effect, goes deeper, and lasts longer. 

388 Opusc. x, Exposition, de Causis t lect. I 

121. It may be argued that God does not exist. For if 
one of two contraries is unbounded its opposite is alto- 
gether ousted. But the word God means that he is exist- 
ing infinite goodness. Were he to exist no evil could 
remain. But we come across evil in the world. There- 
fore he does not exist. 

Moreover, explanations should be economical. 1 It 
seems that everything that appears in the world can be 
accounted for on the supposition that God does not 
exist. Natural processes can be resolved solely into 
physical determinism, and design can be resolved solely 
into the factors of human reason or will. There is no 
need then to postulate the existence of God. 

But on the contrary, God said in person, lam who aw. 2 - 
I explain by saying that the existence of God can be 
proved in five ways. . . . 

475 Summa Theologica, la. ii. 3 

III. PRIMA VIA, THE ARGUMENT FROM CHANGE 

122. The first and most open way is presented by 
change or motion. 3 It is evident to our senses and certain 
that in the world some things are in motion. 

Whatever is in motion is set in motion by another. 
For nothing is in motion unless it be potential to that to 
which it is in motion; whereas a thing sets in motion 

1 Ockam's Razor was a truism long before the fourteenth 
century. 

2 Exod. iii. 14. 

3 Motion, movement, change, mofus, are synonymous through- 
out. Note, the argument is not restricted to local motion. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 49 

inasmuch as it is actual, because to set in motion is 
naught else than to bring a thing from potentiality to 
actuality, and from potentiality a subject cannot be 
brought except by a being that is actual; actually hot 
makes potentially hot become actually hot, as when 
fire changes and alters wood. Now for the same thing 
to be simultaneously and identically actual and poten- 
tial is not possible, though it is possible under different 
respects; what is actually hot cannot simultaneously be, 
potentially hot, though it may be potentially cold. It i 
impossible, therefore, for a thing both to exert and to 
suffer motion in the same respect and according to the 
same motion. 

If that which sets in motion is itself in motion then 
it also must be set in motion by another, and that in its 
turn by another again. But here we cannot proceed to 
infinity, 1 otherwise there would be no first mover, and 
consequently no other mover, seeing that subsequent 
movers do not initiate motion unless they be moved by 
a former mover, as stick by hand. 2 

Therefore we are bound to arrive at the first mover 
set in motion by no other, and this everyone underi 
stands to be God. 

Sttmma Theologica t la. ii. 3 

123. Having indicated that the attempt to prove God's 
existence is not hopeless from the outset, we proceed 
now to fix on the arguments of philosophers and theo- 
logians alike, beginning with Aristotle who sets off from 
the concept of change. His argument takes two direc- 
tions, 3 of which the first is as follows. 

Everything in a process of change is set in motion by 
another. Our senses tell us that things are in motion, the 

1 Cf. 145, 423. * Pfysics, 256*6. 

3 Cf. Physics, 24^24, 257*33. 

B628 E 



50 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

sun for instance. Therefore they are set in motion by 
another. Now this setter-in-motion is either itself in 
motion or it is not. If not, then we have our conclusion, 
namely the necessity of inferring a motionless mover 
which we term God. But if it is itself in motion then it 
must be set in motion by another. Either we have an 
infinite series or we arrive at a changeless mover. But 
we cannot go back infinitely. Therefore we must infer 
a first changeless mover. 

There are two propositions to be proved; first, that 
everything in motion is set in motion by another; 
second, that an infinite series of things setting and set 
in motion is impossible. 

I Contra Gentcs, 13 

124. Since anything set in motion by another is a kind 
of instrument, all things in motion would be instru- 
ments were there no first mover. Furthermore if there 
were an infinite series of movers and things in motion 
and no first mover all these infinite movers and things 
moved would be instruments. Even without expert 
information one can see something ridiculous in the 
notion of an instrument that is not moved by a princi- 
pal: it would be like saying that a saw or axe had been 
at work in the making of a bunk or chest, but workman 
none. 

145 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theologiac, 3 

125. A thing must exist before it can set another in 
motion. Motioning presupposes being. If that thing in 
its turn is subject to motion, well then, some principle 
that sets it in motion must then be presupposed, and so 
again and again until we arrive at a being that is motion- 
less in itself though the rhover of all others. 1 

239, 252 Opusc. x, Exposition, de Causis, lect. 18 

1 Not inert, but so actual as to be still. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 51 

126. Were a thing in motion to move itself this would 
come about in one of two ways. Either because it was 
actively initiating motion and passively receiving motion 
at the same point, or because it was active at one point 
and passive at another. The former hypothesis is out of 
the question since it involves being identically actual 
and potential. Neither will the second hypothesis meet 
the situation, for given something actively moving by 
one part and passively set in motion by another part, it 
would not be singly and wholly the first active mover. 
What is wholly and essentially so, is prior to what is 
partially and indirectly so. Consequently a thing that is 
an active mover through one of its parts cannot be the 
first mover, for this must be wholly unmotioned. 

245 Opusc. xni, Compendium Thcohgiae, 4 

127. A thing is not subject to motion because it is an 
agent of motion. 

Commentary, /// Physics^ lect. 4 

128. The healer has not necessarily been healed him- 
self. What ultimately initiates motion is itself motionless. 

Commentary, VIII Physics, lect. 9 

129. Enduring steadfast, yet changing all things. 

Exposition, in Psalrnos, xxxii. i 

130. All mutables bring us back to a first immutable. 

Disputations, xvi de Veritate> z 

131. Those who define change as the process from 
potentiality to actuality without suddenness anticipate 
too much. For any process is a kind of change and what 
happens suddenly is temporal, for it is what happens in 
a moment cf time. Time itself is defined in terms of 
change. 

411 Commentary, /// Physics^ lect. z 



52 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

132. Note that Plato, who says that movers are in 
motion, 1 takes the term motion in a wider sense than 
does Aristotle who keeps to its narrowest sense, meaning 
the actuality still potential of a subject in potentiality, 
which applies only to quantified and corporeal reality. 2 
Whenever Plato speaks of a thing that moves itself not 
being a body he includes in motion such operations as 
understanding and thinking. In other contexts Aristotle 
also adopts this usage, as when he speaks of the first 
mover moving itself by understanding and willing and 
loving itself. 3 There is no embarrassment here, for it 
amounts to the same whether with Plato we arrive at 
the first thing that moves itself or with Aristotle at the 
first thing that is altogether motionless. 

241, 519 i Contra Gentes, 13 

133. The Platonists held that material things do not 
move themselves, but that spiritual substances alone are 
self-moving because they can understand and love 
themselves. They treat all operations as motions. So 
also does Aristotle in the de Anima when he names 
sensation and understanding as motions. 4 In that con- 
text motion means achieved activity. But in the present 
proof it means the activity of a thing still in a process of 
becoming, that is not yet out of potentiality. This does 
not apply to simple realities. The two doctrines do not 
disagree in sense, but only in phraseology. 

Commentary, VII Physics, lect. i 

134. Movement received from another is termed 
passion; its origin, as implying a beginning from one 
and a terminating in another, is termed action. Take 

1 Phaedru*, 245; Laws, 893 b -896 b . 2 Physics, 201*10. 
3 Dg Aniwa, 433 b i5. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 53 

away the process of motion, and action will still retain 
the sense of origin. 

Summa Theologica, la. xli. 



135. As meaning the actuality of a thing not yet out of 
potentiality, motion carries a note of imperfection ; as 
meaning the application of power, motion carries a note 
of perfection. 

344 Summa Theokgica, la. liii. I, adz 

136. Rest should be contrasted with the start of motion, 
not with the climax. 

13, 252, 747, 821 Commentary, V Physics, lect. 9 

137. Aristotle was convinced that motion was everlast- 
ing, and time likewise. But his arguments [in the eighth 
book of the Physics] are probable and not cogent, except 
perhaps as disproofs of some early physical theories 
about the inception of motion. 

Commentary, XII Metaphysics, lect. 5 

138. The most effective proof for God's existence will 
even allow for the eternity of the world, despite the 
apparent handicap. For the argument would un- 
doubtedly run more easily on the supposition that there 
is a start to the world of change. For then there would 
obviously be a producing cause, for what is new must 
be made by something else. 

411 z Contra Gentes, 13 

139. Perfect immortality implies complete immuta- 
bility: as Augustine says, every change is a kind of 
death. 1 

Summa Theohgica, I a. 1. 5, ad I 

1 Contra Maximinum, ii. 12. 



54 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

I40.| Immutability is the strength of God. 

Summa Theologica, la 2ae. Ixi. 5 

141. Stability is a necessary condition of happiness 
as Aristotle remarks, we do not look upon the happy 
man as a kind of chameleon. 1 

244 in Contra Gentes, 48 

142. God wakens and causes the motions of things. 
Therefore is he love and the creator of love in others. 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus^ iv, lect. 1 1 

IV. SECUNDA VIA, THE ARGUMENT FROM 
EFFICIENT CAUSALITY 

143. The second approach starts from the nature of 
efficient causality. 2 Among phenomena we discover an 
order of efficient causes. But we never come across, nor 
ever shall, anything that is an efficient cause of itself; 
such a thing would be prior to itself, which is impossible. 
It is also impossible to go on to infinity with efficient 
causes, for in an ordered series 3 the first is the cause of 
the intermediate and the intermediate is the cause of 
the last. Whether or not the intermediate causes be one 
or many is irrelevant. Take away the cause and the 
effect also goes. Therefore if there were not a first 
among efficient causes which would be the case in an 
infinite series there would be no intermediate causes 
nor an ultimate effect. This plainly is not the case. A 



1 Ethics, noi^. Cf. Commentary, / Ethic, lect. 15. 

2 The argument follows the plan of thcprima via, but deepens 
to include the being as well as the becoming of the realities about us. 

3 That is a series in essential subordination, or causes depending 
on another for their causality. The argument abstracts from 
whether or not a series in accidental subordination, or of events in 
succession, need ever be closed. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 55 

first cause, generally termed God, must therefore be 
inferred. 

117, 394, 425 Summa Theokgica> la. ii. 3 

144. The intervening causes may be one or many, but 
the conclusion is not affected. If they be many, then they 
are all classed together as possessing the character of 
being intermediaries. Similarly it makes no difference 
whether they be limited in number or infinite, for so 
long as they are intermediate causes they never possess 
the character of a first cause. 

If efficient causes were imagined as stretching to 
infinity it would follow that all causes would be inter- 
mediate. For in general one is bound to say that all 
parts in any infinite system of magnitude or causality 
must be middle parts, otherwise one part would be 
first and another part last; both notions are irrecon- 
cilable with the infinite, which excludes every limit, 
either of beginning or of end. 1 

162, 418 Commentary, HI Metaphysics, lect. 3 

145. An infinite series of efficient causes in essential 
subordination is impossible. Causes essentially required 
for the production of a determinate effect cannot con- 
sequently be infinitely multiplied, as if a block could be 
shifted by a crowbar, which in turn is levered by a 
hand, and so on to infinity. 

But an infinite series of causes in accidental sub- 
ordination is not reputed impossible, so long as all the 
causes thus multiplied are grouped as one cause and 
their multiplication is incidental to the causality at 
work. For instance a blacksmith may work with many 
hammers because one after another breaks in his hand, 
but that one particular hammer is used after another 

1 Metaphysics, 994"i- b 3l. 



56 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

particular one is incidental. Similarly that in begetting 
a child a man was himself begotten by another man; 
for he is father as man, not as son. In a genealogy of 
efficient causes all men have the same status of particular 
generator. Hence, for such a line to stretch back to 
infinity is not unthinkable. 

419, 423, 492 Summa Theokgica, la. xlvi. 2, ad 7 

146. Man's natural reason tells him that he is under a 
higher power because of the deficiencies he feels in 
himself crying out for care and comfort. Whatever that 
higher may be, it is what all men term God. 

332 Summa Theologica t 2a 2ac. Ixxxv. i 

V. TERTIA VIA, THE ARGUMENT FROM THE 
GROUND OF NECESSITY 

147. We observe in our environment how things are 
born and die away; they may or may not exist; to be or 
not to be they are open to either alternative. All 
things cannot be so contingent, for what is able not to 
be may be reckoned as once a non-being, and were 
everything like that once there would have been 
nothing at all. Now were this true, nothing would ever 
have begun, for what is does not begin to be except 
because of something which is, and so there would be 
nothing even now. This is clearly hollow. Therefore 
all things cannot be might-not-have-beens ; among 
them must be being whose existence is necessary. 1 

Summa Theologica, la. ii. 3 

148. Necessary reality is always actual; it is never 
poised between existence and non-existence. It is 
primary, and were it to disappear nothing would 
remain. 

Commentary, IX Metaphysics^ lecf. 9 
1 The argument derives from Avicenna, Metaphysics, n. i. 2, 3. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 57 

149. Everything that is a possible-to-be has a cause, 
since its essence as such is equally uncommitted to the 
alternatives of existing and not existing. If it be credited 
with existence, then this must be from some cause. 
Causality, however, is not an infinite process. There- 
fore a necessary being is the conclusion. The principle 
of its necessity is either from outside or not. If not, then 
the being is inwardly necessary. If necessity comes 
from without, we must still propose a first being neces- 
sary of itself, since we cannot have an endless series of 
derivatively necessary beings. 

i Contra Gentes, 15 

150. Substances are the primary realities. Destroy what 
is primary and everything else goes as well. Were all 
substances mortal and none of them everlasting, nothing 
would be permanent and everything would be transient. 
This is inconceivable. 

Commentary, XII Metaphysics* lect. 5 

VI. QUARTA VIA, THE ARGUMENT FROM THE 
DEGREES OF BEING 

151. Imaginable objects are congenial to our minds. 
The notion of growth, like other notions born of 
quantity and bodies, can be accommodated to spiritual 
and intellectual things. In bodily quantities greatness 
is proportionate to seemly perfection; a quantity great 
in a man would be small in an elephant. Forms are 
called great when they are perfect. As Augustine 
remarks, the terms greater and better amount to the 
same in things not great by weight. 1 

497 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. Hi. i 

152. Quantity is twofold, dimensive quantity or bulk, 

1 de TrinitatC) vi. 8 



58 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

which is found only in bodily things, and virtual 
quantity, which is estimated according to perfection of 
form or nature. 

882 Summa Theologica, la. xlii. i, ad i 

153. The fourth argument is taken from the degrees of 
reality we discover in things. Some are truer and better 
and nobler than others, so also with other perfections. 1 
But more or less are attributed to different things in 
proportion as they variously approach something which 
is the maximum. Hence, there is something truest, and 
best, and noblest, and in consequence the superlative 
being, for the greatest truths are the greatest beings. 
Now the maximum in any order is the cause of all the 
other realities of that order. Therefore there is a real 
cause of being and goodness and all perfections what- 
soever in everything; and this we term God. 

497 Summa Theologica, la. ii. 3 

154. The argument can be gathered from words let 
fall by Aristotle in the Metaphysics. 2 He says that the 
truest things are also the most real; and again, that 
there is a superlative truth. 3 One piece of architecture 
is more sham than another, one more genuine; through- 
out a comparison is implied with what is true without 
qualification and most of all. We can go farther and 
conclude that there is something most real, and this 
we call God. 

i Contra Gentes^ 13 

155. That there is a universal cause from which all 
other things go forth into reality can be established on 
three bases. 

1 The argument applies only to analogical perfections, forms 
admitting more or less within themselves, not to fixed or univocal 
meanings differentiated from without. All strictly metaphysical 
concepts are analogical. 2 993 b 3' 3 Cf. 1009*1. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 59 

First, a perfection common to many things must be 
caused in them by a unique cause. A common perfec- 
tion cannot belong to two things of themselves because 
of themselves they are distinct from one another; diver- 
sity of cause would produce diversity of effect. Now 
since existence is common to all things, which yet con- 
sidered of themselves are distinct from one another, it 
must be attributed to them, not of themselves, but from 
one cause. This seems to be Plato's line of reasoning, 
when before all multitude he expects a unity, a unity 
not merely of number, but of reality. 

Secondly, when one perfection held by many things 
is shared in differing intensities, then it comes to those 
imperfectly possessing it from that being which per- 
fectly possesses it. A note positively predicated accord- 
ing to degrees of more or less is judged by close or 
distant approximation to a constant. For if each thing 
essentially possessed it, there would be no reason why its 
strength should be greater in one than in another. 
The inference is inevitable; that there is one being, 
most perfect and truly being. This may also be 
proved from the conclusion that there is a principle 
of motion wholly motionless and most perfect, from 
which all other less perfect things must receive their 
being. 1 

Thirdly, that which is by another must be resolved 
into that which is of itself. We must affirm a being that 
is its own very being, proved because there must be 
some one first being, pure act, devoid of composition, 
from which all other beings are. They are beings by 
sharing, and their essence is not identical with their 
existence. This is the argument of Avicenna. 2 

Disputations, in de Potently 5 

1 Cf. Metaphysics, 99 3 b . 

* Working from Metaphysics, I045 b , 



6o EXISTENCE OF GOD 

156. What is observed to be in something by participa- 
tion must necessarily be caused there by that to which 
it belongs essentially, as when iron is made red-hot by 
fire. God is his very existence, moreover such subsist- 
ing existence cannot but be unique. Consequently all 
things other than God are not their existence, but share 
in existence. Things diversified by different degrees of 
existence, so as to be more or less perfect, must be 
caused by one first and most perfect being. 

175, 204, 207, 436 Summa Thcologica, la. xliv. I 

157. Did eternal mind not exist then no truth would 
be eternal. 

Summa Theologica, la. xvi. 7 

158. If all created being were wiped out, the pure 
meaning of essence would still persist; if all human 
individuals were destroyed, rationality would still 
remain a predicate of human nature. 

vni Quodtibet, I, ad I 

159. Because theoretical truths are eternal in their 
content it does not follow that our minds are eternal, 
but that there is an eternal foundation somewhere, 
namely the first truth which is the universal cause con- 
taining every truth. 

1046 II Contra Gentes, 84 

160. Above the human mind there must be set a higher 
mind, from which our mind receives its powers of 
understanding. To that which shares and which is 
mutable and imperfect there must always be presup- 
posed that which is perfect essentially and which is 
unchanging and perfect. The human spirit is called 
intellectual by sharing in intellectual power. A sign 
thereof is that the human spirit is partially and not 
wholly intellectual; also that it comes to an under- 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 61 

jtanding of truth by research and discussion; also that 
it enjoys imperfect understanding, for it does not under- 
stand everything, and even if it did there would have 
been a transition from potentiality. Therefore some 
higher mind must exist to kindle our soul into under- 
standing. 

2 93> 645 Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxix. 4 

[6l. Plato held that the forms of things subsist in 
themselves apart from matter, and that by sharing in 
these ideas, as he called them, the mind knows things; 
bodily matter becomes a stone by sharing in the idea of 
stone, our mind knows stone by sharing in the same 
idea. But since it smacked of heterodoxy to teach that 
the forms of things existing apart from matter should 
be creative substances such as pure life and pure 
wisdom, Augustine, who was imbued with the doctrine 
of the Platonists, in place of these ideas substituted 
exemplars existing in the divine mind according to 
which all things are formed and by the human soul also 
known. 

630, 642, 647 Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxxiv. 5 

162. Whatever is good yet not identified with its good- 
ness is said to be good by sharing. A previous good must 
then be presupposed, from which is received the real 
form of derivative goodness. To go back to infinity is 
not possible especially as regards final causes, for 
indefiniteness is repugnant to the nature of purpose 
and the good has the force of a purpose or end. We 
must therefore reach some first good thing, which is 
not a derivative good by sharing, nor a good by refer- 
ence to something else, but which is good essentially of 
itself. And this is God. 

145, 690, 1047 l Contra Gentes, 38 



62 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

163. Human bliss cannot consist in any created good, 
for it implies perfect good entirely satisfying the desire; 
were there still something left to desire it would not be 
the ultimate end. The object of the will or human 
appetite is universal good, just as the object of the 
mind is universal truth. Hence, nothing can still the 
desire of the will save universal good. There is no 
repose in any creature, but in God alone. A creature 
has only a share of good. Therefore God alone can 
satisfy the will of man, He who Jills thy desire with all 
good things. 1 

145, 744, 767 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ac. ii. 8 

VII. QUINTA VIA, THE ARGUMENT FROM 
FINAL CAUSES 

164. Another proof, taken from the governance of 
things, is introduced by Damascene 2 and mentioned by 
Averroes. 3 Contrary and discordant elements, it runs, 
cannot always, or nearly always, work harmoniously 
together unless they be directed by something providing 
each and all with their tendencies to a definite end. 
Now in the universe we see things of diverse natures 
conspiring together in one scheme, not rarely or hap- 
hazardly, but approximately always or for the most 
part. There must be something, therefore, whose 
providence directs the universe. 4 

703, 1093 i Contra Gentes^ 13 

i Ps. cii. 5 (Vulgate). 2 De Fide Orthodoxy i. 3. 

3 Commentary, // Physics. 

4 Two distinct arguments, of which the second is independent, 
are engaged in the quinta via. The first is the argument from 
design, based on the concept of external finality, that is the 
arrangement of different things in a working pattern. The second 
is the argument from purpose, based on the concept of internal 
finality, the rationalization of any activity in the light of an end 
which, at the last analysis, is intellectually appointed. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 63 

165. We observe that things without consciousness, 
such as physical bodies, operate with a purpose, as 
appears from their co-operating invariably, or almost 
so, in the same way in order to obtain the best result. 
Clearly then they reach this end by intention and not 
by chance. Things lacking knowledge move towards 
an end only when directed by someone who knows and 
understands, as an arrow by an archer. There is conse- 
quently an intelligent being who directs all natural 
things to their ends; and this being we call God. 

336 Summa Theologica, la. ii. 3 

1 66. An end must be prefixed to everything that acts 
by natural necessity; wherefore, say philosophers, the 
work of nature is the work of intelligence. 

Disputations, I de Potentia, 5 

167. When diverse things are co-ordinated the scheme 
depends on their directed unification, as the order of 
battle of a whole army hangs on the plan of the com- 
mander-in-chief. The arrangement of diverse things 
cannot be dictated by their own private and divergent 
natures; of themselves they are diverse and exhibit no 
tendency to make a pattern. It follows that the order of 
many among themselves is either a matter of chance or 
it must be resolved into one first planner who has a pur- 
pose in mind. What comes about always, or in the great 
majority of cases, is not the result of accident. There- 
fore the whole of this world has but one planner or 
governor. 

3S4> 4S7 x Contra Gentes, 42 

168. The principle of things is outside the world; so 
also is their end. 

320, 321 Summa Theohgica, la. ciii. 2 



64 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

169. One expects the best cause to produce an effect 
which is best on the whole. However, this does not 
mean that each part is best when taken in isolation by 
itself, but only in proportion to the whole. In the case 
of a higher organism, for instance, its value would be 
impaired were every part to have the excellence of an 
eye- 

353 Summa Tkeologica t la. xlvii. 2, ad I 

170. A bodily creature is good in its nature, not un- 
boundedly so, but in a partial and contracted manner. 
Hence the conflict of one thing with another, though 
both in themselves are good. Now because they judge 
things, not in their objective natures, but according as 
their own private convenience is affected, some people 
reckon those things to be absolutely evil which are 
harmful to them, not recognizing that what is harmful 
in one respect is beneficial in another, as regards either 
itself or something else. 

476 Summa Theologica> la. Ixv. i, ad ^ 

171. If we wish to register the purpose of any whole 
and of its parts we should mark first, that each part is 
for its own proper activity, thus eye for seeing; second, 
that the lower is for the higher, thus senses for mind, or 
lungs for heart; third, that all parts are for the perfec- 
tion of the whole, thus matter for form ; fourth, that the 
whole man is for an extrinsic end, namely his enjoy- 
ment of God. 

So it is with the parts of the universe: each creature 
exists first for its own proper activity and well-being; 
second, the lower creatures are for the higher, as plants 
and beasts are for men; third, each is for the integrity 
of the whole ; last, the whole universe with all its parts 
is ordered to God as to its end, by copying and showing 
forth divine goodness to the glory of God. 



EXISTENCE OF GOD 65 

Transcending this subordination, rational creatures 
in a special way have God as their end, for knowing 
him and loving him, they can reach him by their own 
activity. 

744, 1117 Summa Theologica, I a. Ixv. 2 

172. Organs are judged to be homologous or otherwise 
by the functions that are their purpose, thus the roots of 
plants, though at the bottom, are like the heads of 
animals. 

Commentary, // de Anima, lect. 8 

173. The causality of an end consists in this, that other 
things are desired for its sake. The more perfect the end 
so much the more does the desire for it embrace many 
more things and the farther does it go. 

213 i Contra Gentes> 75 

174. The art of sailing governs the art of shipbuilding. 

in Contra Gentes, 80 
VIII. CONVERGENCE OF THE FIVE WAYS 

175. A thing whose existing is other than its essence 
has its existence caused by another. God is the first 
efficient cause, and therefore his essence cannot be 
distinct from his existence. 

Existence is the actuality of every form and nature. 
Goodness and humanity do not signify actual things 
unless they refer to existents. Existence, therefore, is 
related to essence as actuality to potentiality. Since 
there is nothing potential in God, for he is motion- 
less, his essence is not distinct from existence: on the 
contrary, his essence is his existence. 

That which has existence, but is not existence, is a 
being by sharing. Were the divine essence not the 

B628 F 



66 EXISTENCE OF GOD 

divine existence, God would be an existent by borrow- 
ing and not by owning. He would not be the first being. 
204, 206, 208, 231, 591 Summa Theologica, la. iii. 4 

176. The arrangement of efficient causes corresponds 
to the arrangement of final causes. Man is directed to 
his ultimate end by the motion of the first cause, and to 
his proximate ends by the motion of subordinate 
movers, as the soldier is directed to victory by the high 
command, and to his tactical dispositions by the regi- 
mental commander. 

Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae, cix. 6 



Ill 
Nature of God 1 

177. The existence of a thing having been ascertained, 
the manner of its existence remains to be inquired into 
if we would know about its nature. Since we cannot 
know what God is, but rather what God is not, our 
method has to be mainly negative. 

First, therefore, we shall take treat in what manner 
he is not; 2 secondly, how he may be known; 3 and 
thirdly, how named. 4 

What manner of being God is not may be known by 
eliminating characteristics that cannot apply to him, 
such as composition, change, and so forth. There- 
fore the first question to be raised concerns his sim- 
plicity, which rules out composition. And because 
simple things are imperfect and partial realities 
when they are bodies, the next question concerns his 
perfection. 

Summa TAeohgica, la. iii, Prologue 

1 After touching what is the essential note of godhead to the 
natural theologian, the argument moves on to the perfections of 
the divine being before discussing the nature of divine activity. 
The key to the grammar is found in the treatise on the names of 
God which inquires into the validity of predication when God is 
the subject, and strikes a balance between agnosticism at one 
extreme and anthropomorphism at the other. St. Thomas uses 
the phrases of the negative theology of Maimonides and the 
mystical writers, but surpasses its findings through the sustained 
application of analogy. Terms denoting pure perfections apply to 
God with greater force and propriety than to other things. 

2 178-252. 

3 253-63. 
264-88. 



68 NATURE OF GOD 

I. INITIAL KNOWLEDGE 

178. The question what is so-and-so? compares with 
does it exist? as the question what is its reason why? 
with how did it come about? 

107 Commentary, VII Metaphysics^ lect. 17 

179. We cannot be aware of a thing's existence without 
in some way, at least vaguely, perceiving what it is. 
Knowledge of existence implies some knowledge of 
nature. 

206 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate> vi. 3 

1 80. Neither Christian nor pagan grasps the meaning 
of what God is in himself. The meaning that does duty 
is inferred in the medium of causality, using the method 
of enhancing perfections and eliminating imperfections. 
Both men use the same nominal definition when one 
denies, and the other affirms, that an idol is God. Were 
there a man entirely ignorant about God he could not 
even name God, except in the fashion of one who 
bandies words whose meaning he does not know. 

99, 109 Summa Theohgica, la. xiii. 10, ad 5 

181. When effects fall short of their causes any words 
applied to them both do not exactly coincide in signi- 
ficance. Nevertheless, some likeness can be discerned, 
for the genius of an efficient cause is to produce some- 
thing somewhat like itself, since it is productive inas- 
much as it is actual. The effective form in such a 
transcending cause is somehow reproduced in the pro- 
duct, with a variation of manner and meaning. Hence 
the epithet, equivocal cause. The perfections of all 
things are communicated by God; between them and 
him there is simultaneous likeness and unlikeness. 

I Contra Gentes> 29 



NATURE OF GOD 69 

182. Similitude, but no adequation. 

Disputations, m de Potentta, 16, ad 7 

183. That a creature in some way is like God may be ' 
granted, but not at all that God is like any creature. 
There is a mutual likeness when things are in the same 
class, but not between cause and effect: 1 we say that 
a statue is like a man, but not conversely. 

Summa Theologica, la. iv. 3, ad 4. 

184. God and creatures are not comparable even like 
things of different kinds, for he is at once before and 
beyond all classification. 

270, 436 Summa Thtohgica, la. iv. 3, ad 2 

185. The name for a perfection should be applied; 
more forcibly to the cause than to the effect. 

Commentary, / Posterior Analytics, lect. 6 

II. SIMPLICITY AND UNITY 

1 86. The essence of God is his existence. Moses was 
taught this sublime truth when he asked: If the children 
of Israel say to me, what is his name; what shall I 
answer them? The Lord replied: / am who am; so shalt 
thou say to the children of Israel: he who is has sent me 
to you? 

288 I Contra Gentes, 22 

187. Existence itself is the most perfect reality, related 
to everything as actuality. Therefore existence is the 
actuality of all beings, even of forms, and must be re- 
lated to all else as received, not as receiving. 3 

435 Summa Theohgica, la. iv. I, ad 3 

1 Pseudo-Dionysius, de Divinis Nominibus, x. 7. 

2 Exod. iii. 13-14. 

3 Existence and essence are really distinct as real actuality 
from real potentiality, not as distinct things. 



70 NATURE OF GOD 

188. Since there is no composition of quantitative parts 
in God, for he is not a body; nor a composition of 
matter and form; nor are his nature and complete 
substantiality distinct; nor his essence and existence; 
nor is there a composition of genus and difference; nor 
of subject and accidents it is plain that God is alto- 
gether simple and nowise composite. 

Suntma Theologica, xa. iii. 7 

189. The plurality of names for divine perfections does 
not militate against divine simplicity. Perfections which 
are diversified in other things by different forms exist 
in God by identical virtue. An analogy may be drawn 
from the faculties of knowing. The single ability of 
mind knows all things which the sensibility knows by 
diverse abilities and many other things besides. Every 
kind of perfection, which other things obtain only in 
varied diversity, is possessed by God in his own single 
and simple being yea and many more. 

439 i Contra Gentes, 31 

190. It is not profitless for the mind to formulate com- 
pounding or dividing judgements about God despite 
his entire simplicity. Though we come to know about 
him through intricate thoughts, we appreciate well 
enough that the object corresponding to them is simply 
one. For the mind does not attach to its objects the 
mode of its own understanding; it does not suppose 
that a stone is spiritual because it is understood spiri- 
tually. The verbal composition of a judgement is a 
sign of unity, for it proposes the unity of a thing. 

39, 40, 616 I Contra Gcntes, 36 

191. Some have taught that God is the world-soul this 
is supposed to have been the theory of the followers of 
Amaury de Bnes while others that he is the formal 



NATURE OF GOD 71 

principle of all things ; others, most foolishly, taught that 
he is primary matter. 1 All make the same mistake of 
thinking that in some way God can enter into composi- 
tion with other things. He is the first efficient cause, 
and an efficient cause is not numerically identical with 
its effect. He is the essential efficient cause, immediately 
and directly active. This cannot be said of any part of 
a composite, where the whole thing is the active cause; 
to speak with accuracy, it is not the hand that acts, but 
the man through his hand. God is the first thing abso- 
lutely speaking, and no part of a whole can be that. 
234 Summa Theologica, la. iii. 8 

192. Divinity is said to be the being of all things, not as 
their pith, but as their maker and exemplar cause. 

102 Summa Theokgica, la. iii. 8, ad i 

193. One signifies, not only that which is indivisible or 
continuous, but also that which is perfect, as when we 
say one man or one house. 

Summa Thcologica, 3 a. Ixxiii. 2 

194. The unity convertible with being does not add 
anything to being, but the unity which is the principle 
of number adds a reality in the category of quantity. 

429 Summa Theologica^ la. xi. i, ad I 

195. Unity as the principle of number is contrasted 
with numerical multitude. But unity as convertible 

1 Amaury de Benes (d. 1206-7) and his contemporary David de 
Dinant (or Dinan), who were condemned together during the 
period of the first official reactions to the revival of Aristotle. 
Thery suggests that St. Thomas's unwonted fling was in order to 
show that the cause of true Aristoteleanism was not compromised 
by the censures: it is possible that the term folly is not so much a 
piece of invective as a conventional expression for what was untu- 
tored and silly in the archaic sense. 



72 NATURE OF GOD 

with being is contrasted with the kind of multiplicity 
that spells defect; thus what is single is contrasted with 
what is in pieces. 

448 Summa Theologlca y la. xi. 2 

196. The number relevant to pure spirits is not that of 
discrete quantity caused by division of continuous 
quantity, but the number arising from distinction of 
forms: in this sense plurality is reckoned among the 
transcendentals. 1 

432 Summa Theologica> la. 1. 3, ad i 

197. Taken as a principle of number, unity is not to be 
predicated of God; it applies only to things having 
existence in matter. 

447 Summa Theologica^ la. xi. 3, ad 2, 

198. Were there two or more gods they would differ. 
One would have something the other lacked. In this 
case the perfection of one would be wanting in the 
other. Neither would be absolutely perfect. 

436 Summa Theologica, la. xi. 3 

199. Though God is wholly simple we must still 
address him with a multitude of names. Our mind is not 
able to grasp his essence. We have to start from the 
things about us, which have diverse perfections though 
their root and origin in God is one. Because we cannot 
name objects except in the way we understand them, 
for words are the signs of concepts, we can name God 
only from the terms employed elsewhere. These are 
manifold, therefore we must make use of many terms. 
Were we to see God in himself we would not call on 
a multitude of words; our knowledge would be as 

1 Realities or forms, such as truth and goodness, not limited 
vO specific classes. 



NATURE OF GOD 73 

simple as his nature is simple. We look forward to this 
in the day of our glory; in that Jay there shall be one 
Lord and his name one. 1 

40, 258 Opusc. xnr, Compendium Theologiae, 24 



III. PERFECTION 

200. We praise God, not for his benefit, but for our 
own. 

Summa Theohgica^ 2a-2ae. xci. i, ad 3 

201. Though our lips can only stammer, says Gregory, 
we yet must sing the high things of God. 2 What is not 
made cannot be called perfect in the original sense of 
the word. 3 Yet because we speak of perfection in con- 
nexion with things which are achieved from poten- 
tiality, the term can be extended to mean whatever is 
not wanting in actual being, whether produced or not. 

Summa Theologica, la. iv. I, ad i 

202. All perfections whatsoever and wherever dis- 
covered exist primordially and superabundantly in God. 

Opusc. xnr, Compendium Theokgiae^ 21 

203. The divine essence is a universal medium, not ir\ 
the style of a universal form, but of a universal cause. 

104 Disputations, n de Pert'tate, 4, ad 7 

204. When God is called universally perfect because 
no kind of perfection is wanting in him, the statement 
can be supported on two counts. First, everything 
brought to perfection pre-exists in the producing cause 
in a more excellent mode. Dionysius touches this when 
he declares that God is not this or that, but is all as the 

1 Zach. xiv. 9. 2 Moralla^ v. 36. 

3 Perfectus, f rom per f do, focio, to make. 



7* NATURE OF GOD 

cause of all. 1 Secondly, God is pure existence subsisting 
essentially and consequently contains within himself 
the whole perfection of existence: all perfections are 
embraced in the perfection of existence, and therefore 
no single perfection is lacking in God. Dionysius also 
refers to this in maintaining that God does not exist in 
any special manner, but holds beforehand within him- 
self all being, absolutely, boundlessly, uniformly. 2 

2 9*> 5*5 Summa Theokgica^ la. iv. 2 

205. Mingled things are more pleasing than simple 
things, a chord more so than a single bass or treble note. 

Commentary, /// de Anima, lect. 2 

206. Though sheer existence is more perfect than life, 
and life itself more perfect than wisdom, yet if these 
terms be taken to represent different levels, a living 
thing is more perfect than a merely existing thing, 
because it is also existing, while an intelligent thing is 
more perfect than either, because it is both existing and 
alive. Existence, then, in this vaguest sense does not 
necessarily include life and consciousness; that which 
shares in existence need not share in every mode of 
existence. Nevertheless, the very existence of God 
embraces lite and wisdom, because not one of the per- 
fections of full existence can be wanting in him who is 
essential existence himself. 

J 75> 5 3 Summa Theologica y la. iv. 2, ad 3 

207. It is true that things that both exist and live are 
more perfect than those that merely exist, nevertheless 
God is really and completely perfect because he is his 
existence. And when I say completely perfect, I mean 
that nothing of any kind of excellence is lacking. Every 
excellence in things is existential; wisdom would be no 

1 de Divinis Nominibus, v. 8. 2 Ibid. v. 4. 



NATURE OF GOD 75 

virtue unless thereby a man was actually wise, and 
similarly with other virtues. 

The manner of a thing's being is that also of its 
excellence, for in proportion that a thing is limited to 
a special style, greater or less as the case may be, so also 
is it said to be more or less excellent. But if there is a 
thing possessing the whole virtue of existence, no nobility 
present anywhere else can there be absent. God is 
wholly his being and possesses existence to the full 
power of existence itself. Every excellence and perfec- 
tion belongs to a thing inasmuch as it is, every defect 
inasmuch as somehow it is not. God is totally existence, 
and is therefore unflecked with any imperfection. 

397, 435, 498 i Contra Gentes, 28 

IV. GOODNESS AND BEAUTY 

208. Whatsoever is good is called good by the divine 
goodness, as by the first exemplar, effective, and final 
cause of every good. 

in Summa Theohgica, I a. vi. 4 

209. Goodness and being are identical in reality, but 
the term goodness conveys what the term being does not, 
namely, the quality of being desirable. 

Summa Theokgica^ la. v. I 

210. Every being as being is good. 

458 Summa Theokgica, la. v. 3 

211. Since goodness is what strikes us as desirable, it 
affects us as a final cause. Initial causality is final causa* 
lity, for a producer does not act except for some end, 
and by a producer is matter moved to form. Hence the 
end is called the cause of causes. 

462 Summa Theokgica^ la. v. 2, ad I 



76 NATURE OF GOD 

212. Goodness extends to non-existing things, not 
because it can be predicated of them but because it can 
cause them if, indeed, by non-existents we mean 
those objects that are potential, not those utterly with- 
out being. For goodness compasses every goal, not only 
in which actual things find their completion, but also 
towards which tend even things merely potential. 
Being does not carry this sense; it implies the condition 
of a formal cause only, either intrinsic or exemplary, 
and its causality does not spread beyond existents. 

Summa Theologies, la. v. 2, ad I 

213. All things desire God himself in desiring their 
own proper perfections, inasmuch as these are so many 
likenesses of him. Some know him for himself, and this is 
proper to rational creatures; others know some share of 
his goodness as stretching into the life of the senses; 
others have purely natural and unconscious appetites 
for him, because they are directed to their ends by a 
higher intelligence. 

725 Summa Theohgica, la. vi. i, adz 

214. Divine goodness neither depends on, nor can gain 
from, the goodness of the universe. The perfection of 
the universe is necessarily committed to the particular 
goods of its essential components, and its well-being 
is supplemented by factors of safety and adornment. 
The idea behind divine volition may be sometimes of 
what is fitting, sometimes of what is useful, sometimes 
of what is hypothetically necessary on the supposition 
that the present scheme of things should work. But abso- 
lute necessity is present only when God wills himself. 

429 I Contra Gentcs, 86 

215. Goodness is an analogical idea, divided into the 
honourable, the delightful, and the useful, and not 



NATURE OF GOD 77 

predicated of them equally, but according to that order 
of priority. The division is rather of contrasted notions 
than of different things. Those goods are honourable 
and of true worth which are dear in themselves. Those 
things are delightful that give us pleasure, though some- 
times they may be harmful or unworthy. Utilities have 
no attraction in themselves, but are desired, rather like 
bitter medicine, as leading to something else. 

374 Summa Theologita, la. v. 6, ad 2, 3 

21 6. Augustine declares that nobody rightly uses God, 
for he is to be enjoyed. The last end is not a utility. 

Summa Tkeokgica^ ia-2ae. xvi. 3, ted contra 

2iy. What is worthy and what useful, is for the reason 
to decide; what is delightful is decided by the desire, 
which may not match the reason. Therefore every 
delight may not have moral goodness. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. xxxiv. 2, ad i 

218. Delight is not best just because it is delight, but 
because it is repose with the best. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xxxiv. 3, ad 3 
/ 

219. The desire for goodness, beauty, peace, does not 

end up with different things. 

Disputations, xxn de Verttatc> I, ad 12 

220. The good and the beautiful are the same in sub- 
stance, for they are established on a single real form; 
but they are different in meaning, for the good answers 
to appetite and acts like a final cause, while the beautiful 
answers to knowledge and acts like a formal cause. 
Things are called beautiful which give delight on being 
seen. 

Summa Theohgica, la. v. <f, <*</ I 



78 NATURE OF GOD 

221. There is nothing that does not share in goodness 
and beauty. Each thing is good and beautiful by its 
proper form. 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, Je Divinis Nominibus, iv, lect. 5 

222. Three conditions of beauty first, integrity or 
completeness, for broken things are ugly; second, 
due proportion and harmony; third, brightness and 
colour. 

1 1 22 Summa Theohgica, la. xxxix. 8 

223. Clearness and proportion go to compose the 
beautiful or handsome. Dionysius says that God is 
beautiful for he is the cause of the consonance and 
clearness of all things. Bodily beauty consists in well- 
shaped members with freshness of complexion; spiritual 
beauty, which is the same as honourable good, in fair 
dealing according to the candour of reason. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. cxlv. 2 

224. Clearness and proportion are both rooted in mind, 
whose function it is to order and light up a symmetry. 
Hence beauty, pure and essential, dwells in the con- 
templative life, wherefore it is said of the contempla- 
tion of wisdom; and I became a lover of her itauty. 1 
Beauty is shed on the moral virtues in so far as they 
shine with the order of reason, especially on temperate- 
ness, which clears the lusts that fog the light of intel- 
ligence. 

Summa Theologica> 2a-2ae. clxxx. 2, ad 3 

225. Delight of mind does not clog the use of reason; 
on the contrary we are more intent on what we more 
enjoy. 

751, 1004 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ac. xxxiii. 3 

1 Wisd. viii. 2. 



NATURE OF GOD 79 

226. Then does sense act best when bent on its most 
congenial object. 

988 Commentary, X Ethics, lect. 6 

227. The senses most charged with knowledge are the 
most set on beauty. The beautiful is the same as the 
good, but with a difference of accent. Good is what all 
desire; therefore is it of the essence of beauty that at 
the knowledge and sight of it the desire is stilled. The 
senses closest to mind, namely sight and hearing, 
are most engaged by beauty. We speak about beautiful 
sights and sounds, but not about beautiful tastes and 
smells. And so beauty adds to the meaning of goodness 
a relationship to the power of knowledge. The good is 
that which simply pleases desire, the beautiful that 
which pleases on being perceived. 

628 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. xxvii. I, ad $ 

228. Variety belongs to beauty; as the Apostle says, in 
a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, 
but also of wood and earth. 1 

428 Summa Thiologica, 2a-2ae. clxxxiii. 2 

229. Homes are not beautiful if they are empty. 
Things are beautiful by the indwelling of God. 

Exposition, in Psalmos, xxv. 5 

V. INFINITY 

230. Infinite is used in two senses, first to mean the 
privative infinite attributed to things which should have 
limits naturally but which lack them; this applies only 
to quantities. Secondly, to mean the negative infinite 
which simply has no limit. In the first sense God is not 
infinite, because he is without quantity and further- 

1 2 Tim. ii. 20, 



NATURE OF GOD 

more is exempt from the imperfection it denotes. In the 
second sense infinite applies to all his perfections. 

418, 423 Disputations, i de Potentia, 2 

231. Matter is perfected and made definite by form. 
Infiniteness attributable to matter is imperfect and 
amorphous. On the other hand, form as such is not 
perfected by matter but contracted rather; hence 
infiniteness attributable to form is perfection. Now 
of all realities existence is most form, and since the 
divine existence is not a reality received in a subject, 
for God is his own subsisting existence, it is clear that 
he is infinite and perfect. 

175, 292 Summa Theologica^ la. vii. I 

232. Boundlessness does not exclude plurality, except 
in so far as it rules out determinateness, which is the 
first principle of plurality. There are two kinds of 
determinateness, namely of limitation and of distinc- 
tion. In the divine nature there is no kind of limitation, 
but there is distinctiveness, and in two ways: first, as 
being distinguished by essence from creatures, as the 
unlimited from the limited; second, according to the 
distinction of persons by the relation of origin, which 
distinction is because of the contrast in relations, not 
because of limitation. 

447 vii Quodlibet) 6 1 

233. Within God there can be an opposition of relation, 
for that does not imply imperfection in either relative: 
but no other kind of opposition is possible, because then 
one of the extremes is always by way of being imperfect, 

1 Quodlibets, quaesf tones quodlibctales, debates on special occa- 
sions about a selected topic, freely arising and willingly debated, 
additional to the series of connected disputations, the quaestiones 
disputatae, forming part of a course for an academic term, or year. 



NATURE OF GOD 81 

either as a non-being, as in the case of simple negation, 
or as mixed with non-being, as in the case of privation. 
Disputations, vin de Potently I, ad 13 

234. Since the infinite must be everywhere and in all 
things, we have now to consider whether this applies 
also to God. God is in all things, not, indeed, as part of 
their essence, or as a quality, but in the manner that an 
efficient cause is present to that on which it acts. An 
efficient cause must be in touch with the product of its 
action immediately, and this by its own power. Now 
since God's very essence is his existence, created 
existence is his proper effect. This effect God causes, 
not only when things first begin to be, but so long as 
they continue to be. While a thing endures, therefore, 
God must be present to it according to its mode of 
being. Existence is most intimate to each and deepest 
in all reality since it is die heart of all perfection. Hence, 
God is in all things, and intimately. 

2 85> 359 Summa Theologica, la. viii. I 

235. Were the divine being the formal being of every- 
thing, all things would be absolutely speaking one. 

429 I Contra Gentes^ 26 

236. God is everywhere and in every place, first be- 
cause he is in all things giving them substance, power, 
and operation. Since place is real he is present there. 
Also things are in place because they fill it, and God 
fills every place, but not as a body, for so one occupant 
excludes another, whereas he displaces nothing. 

229, 361, 376 Summa Theologica, ra. viii. 2 

237. Spiritual things are in place, not like bodies by the 
contact of dimensive quantity, but by the contact of 
power. 

533 Summa Theokgica^ la, viii. 2, ad I 

B628 G 



82 NATURE OF GOD 

238. In two senses creatures are said to be in God. First, 
in so far as they are contained and preserved by the di- 
vine power, even as we say that things within our power 
are in us. So by their own very reality are creatures in 
God. This is the meaning of the Apostle's words; 
in him we live and move and have our being. 1 Secondly, 
things are said to be in God as in the one who knows 
them, in which sense they are in God by their especial 
meanings, which in God are none other than the divine 
essence. Things in God are the divine nature. And 
because the divine essence is life, though without a pro- 
fess of coming to be and dying away, we can say in this 
fcontext that things are living and deathless in God. 

374> 375 Summa Theologica, la. xviii. 4, ad i 

VI. ETERNITY 

239. God is pure act without alloy of potentiality. 

175 Opusc. xiii, Compendium Thcologiac, n 

240. He is infinite and comprehends within himself 
the plenitude of all perfection of all being; he cannot 
Acquire anything new or attain to what has not already 
been achieved. 

369 Summa Theologica, la. ix. i 

241. God alone is wholly immutable. Every creature 
is mutable, at least in the sense that it is drawn out of 
nothingness by divine will and could be allowed to 
fall back. 

408 Summa Theologica, la. ix. 2 

242. Nothing wanes or waxes in God, for he is un- 
changeable and his being is entire all at once. 

386 Opusc. xni, Compendium Thtologiae, 8 

1 Acts xvii. 28. 



NATURE OF GOD 83 

243. We can mark three general levels of reality: first, 
above eternity, proper to the first cause; second, with 
eternity, proper to intelligences; third, under eternity 
but above time, proper to souls. 

53 1, 568 Opusc. x, de Causts, Itct. 6 

244. As we have to penetrate composite things in 
order to reach simple things, so we must go through 
time to come to the knowledge of eternity. In successive 
changes where one part follows another we apprehend 
time by numbering the before and after in movement. 
There is no before and after to be reckoned in constant 
and changeless reality. The form of eternity lies in the 
apprehension of that uniformity. Furthermore those 
things are measured by time which have a temporal 
beginning and end; what is wholly invariable and with- 
out succession has neither beginning nor end. So there- 
fore eternity is signified by these two clauses: first, that 
a thing in eternity can be closed neither prospectively 
nor retrospectively; secondly, that it is entire all at once 
without any successiveness. 

126, 664 Summa Thtologica, la. x. I 

245. Some seize on this as the difference between time 
and eternity, that time has beginning and end, but 
eternity not. This difference, however, is quite inci- 
dental and not essential; for even granting that time 
always was and always will be, there still remains this 
difference between them, that eternity is simultaneously 
whole, whereas time is not. Eternity is the measure of 
permanence; time the measure of change. 

413 Summa Theokgica^ la. x. 4 

246. We determine the reality of time when we divide 
motion into two terms with a midway between them. 

Commentary, lyPhync^ Itct. 17 



84 NATURE OF GOD 

247. In time there are two notes to be thought of: 
time itself, which is successive; and the now of time, 
which is imperfect. 

Summa Theologica^ la. x. I, *</ 5 

248. The apprehension of time is caused by the per- 
ception of the changing instant, the apprehension of 
eternity by that of the enduring instant. 

766 Summa Theologica^ la. X; 2, ad I 

249. The now of time is not time, the now of eternity is 
really the same as eternity. 

Commentary, 1 Sentences, xix. ii. 2 

250. In appreciating what happens in time, we should 
remark that a mind bound up in it is differently placed 
from a mind entirely outside its series. When many are 
travelling the same road, each of the company knows 
those ahead and those behind; he sees his immediate 
companion, he has seen those who have gone ahead, 
but those well behind he cannot see. But he who is no 
part of the throng but watches from high above is in 
a position to take in the whole convoy. He is able to see 
simultaneously all who are on the march, not as met 
before and after, but as all together in their order. 

Because our knowledge is enclosed in the order of 
time, either directly or indirectly, the time-factor enters 
into our calculations, and our knowledge reckons things 
as past, present, or future. Past, in memory; present, 
in experience; future, by anticipation in present causes. 
Future events are either certainties, when they are 
wholly predetermined in their causes, or conjectures, 
when they can usually be forecast, or unknown, when 
their causes are not yet committed to action. 

God, however, is entirely above the order of time. 
He is at the peak of eternity, surmounting everything 



NATURE OF GOD 85 

all at once. Thence the stream of time can be seen in 
one simple glance. 

305, 310 Commentary, / Perihermcnias, lect. 14 

251. Eternity is compared to time as an indivisible to 
a continuous stretch. There is diversity of parts in time 
according to a before and after of successive events, as 
in a line there are points in different places yet related 
to one another. Eternity, however, has no before and 
after, and is simultaneously entire. 

Opusc. xxvi, de Rationibus Ft Jet ad cantor em Antiochenum^ xo 1 

252. Delight as such is not in time, for it is of a good 
possessed, which is like the term and end of change. 

369, 767 Summa Tkeologka^ ia-2ae. xxxi. 2 

VII. HUMAN KNOWLEDGE OF GOD 

253. God is not in a class; so it is clear that he cannot 
be defined, or given a formula by genus and difference. 

390 i Contra Gentes, 2$ 

254. Though in himself supremely knowable, God 
surpasses the power of a limited intelligence by very 
excess of truth. The bat blinks in the blaze of the sun. 
Impressed by this thought, some have concluded that 
no created intellect can see the nature of God. 

But it is an awkward conclusion. For since man's 
ultimate happiness consists in his highest activity, were 
he never able to see God, then either he could never 
reach his bliss or this would lie in something other than 
God, which is alien to Christian belief. Moreover, it is 
philosophically unsound, for there is an inborn desire 

1 Written in 1264, four years before Antioch ceased to be an 
outpost of the West, for discussions with Saracens, Greeks, and 
Armenians. 



86 NATURE OF GOD 

of knowing cause when effect is seen this is the spring 
of wonder. If, therefore, the mind of rational creatures 
could never see the first cause of things this natural 
desire would be pointless. 

744, 912 Summa Theologica^ la. xii. I 

255. But through no created likeness can the nature of 
God be seen. 

Summa Theokgica^ la. xii. 2 

256. What is seen in imaginative visions is not God's 
nature, but images which represent him after a fashion, 
as do the metaphorical figures in holy writ. 

Summa Theologica, la. xii. 3, ad 3 

57. By native power no created mind can see the 
essence of God. Knowledge implies the presence of the 
known in the knower in the knower's own way. To 
know subsisting being is natural to the divine mind 
alone. It is above the natural ability of created mind. 
^Therefore a created mind cannot see the divine essence 
Except God by his grace shows and gives himself. 

496 Summa Theologica^ za. xii. 4 

258. The divine essence is being itself. As other intel- 
ligible forms, which are not their own very being, are 
united to the mind through a mental likeness whereby 
they inform and make actual the intellect, so the divine 
essence can be united to created intellect as that which 
is both actually understood and of itself making the 
intellect actual. 

293 Summa Theohgica, la. xii. 2, ad 3 

259. God is not to be comprehended, for he is infinite 
and cannot be contained in any finite being. So much 
for comprehension in the strict and proper sense. But 
when the word is used more widely in contrast to non- 



NATURE OF GOD 87 

attainment, God is reached by the blessed, according to 
the words of the Song of Songs ; / held him and will not 
let him go. 1 

Summa Theologica^ la. xii. 7, ad I 

260. God is called incomprehensible because he 
cannot be seen by us as perfectly as he is capable of 
being seen, not because anything about him will escape 
sight. 

Summa Tkeologica y la. xii. 7, ad 2 

261. The difference between that blessed vision and the 
present argument is like that between seeing and not 
seeing, not like that between seeing better and not see- 
ing so well. 

Disputations, xvm de 



262. Our natural knowledge begins with sensation, and 
therefore can be led as far as sensible things can take us. 
Through these effects, which do not equal the virtue of 
their cause, we cannpt know the full power of God or, 
consequently, see his essence. Nevertheless they are 
his effects and dependent on their cause. We can be led 
by them so far as to know of his existence and some 
necessary attributes. He is the first universal cause sur- 
passing all his effects, and we can know his relationship 
to creatures and their difference from him. 

903 Summa Theologica, la. xii. 12 

263. When you reach a proper appreciation of a thing 
through negative demonstration you know where it 
differs from other things, but not what it is in itself. We 
have such knowledge about God through demonstra- 
tion. It is not enough for our contentment. 

105 HI Contra Gentes, 39 

1 Cant. iii. 4. 



88 NATURE OF GOD 

VIII. THE NAMES OF GOD 

264. A thing can be named to the measure that it can 
be known. In this life we cannot see God's nature, but 
we can know about him from the bearing he has on 
creatures as their principle. The method we employ 
will require intensification of perfections and elimina- 
tion of imperfections. 1 

631 Summa Theologica^ la. xiii. i 

265. We come to the knowledge of God from creatures 
and so we name him; the sense of the terms employed 
is appropriate to material creatures at the level of our 
natural knowledge. Now because perfect and subsisting 
things in our present environment are composite, their 
form being but a partial reality whereby they are things 
of a certain kind, terms used to signify a thing in the 
round are concrete, whereas terms that signify pure 
forms are abstract. 2 

Summa Theologica^ la. xiii. i, 



266. We can discuss simple things only as if they were 
like the composite things about us from which we draw 
our knowledge. In speaking of God, then, we must use 
concrete names to signify his complete existence, for 
the only things that are complete existents in our 
environment are composite things; and we must use 
abstract names to signify his simplicity. 

69 Summa Theologica, la. iii. 3, ad i 

267. What is most strikingly certain is that the first 
cause surpasses human wit and speech. He knows God 

1 The 'via excellentiae of affirming perfections at their highest 
strength; the via remotfonis of denying any creaturely mode. Thus 
God is supreme mind, but his mind is not a faculty distinct from 
his substance. 

a Thus, a good thing and goodness. 



NATURE OF GOD 89 

best who owns that whatever he thinks and says falls 
short of what God really is. 

Opusc. x, Exposition, de Caust's, lect. 6 

268. It is not merely that God is not a stone or a sun or 
any such thing we perceive by our senses, but that he is 
not such life or essence as can be perceived by the mind. 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus, Prologue 

269. We postulate substance and existence in God; 
substance to mean what is self-supporting, but not a 
substrate to supervening reality; existence to mean 
what is simple and perfect, not inhering. 

Disputations, i de Potentia^ I 

270. Obviously negative and relative terms do not 
signify the substance of God at all; they respectively 
rule out something or indicate the relationship some- 
thing bears to him. 

The controversy hinges on affirmative and absolute 
terms, such as good and wise. Notwithstanding the 
positive force of these terms, some hold that when they 
are used about God they serve to remove rather than to 
attribute something to him. They say that when we 
talk about the living God we mean that he is not like a 
dead thing, and so, likewise, with other terms. Mai- 
monides speaks in this sense. 1 Others hold that these 
terms are used to signify his bearing to creatures: when 
we say that God is good, the sense is that he is the cause 
of goodness in things, and so likewise with other terms. 2 

Both these positions, however, present difficulties, 
which may be grouped under three headings. First, 

1 The Guide for the Perplexed, i. 58. Moses Maimonides, the 
Rabbi Moses, born at Cordova, 1135, died in Egypt, 12049 of 
whom St. Thomas always speaks with respect. 

a Alain of Lille. Died as a Cistercian, 1202. 



9 o NATURE OF GOD 

neither can explain why one name should be used in 
preference to another; God is the cause of bodies as 
he is the cause of goods, and therefore with equal force 
might be called a body. In fact, calling him a body 
might even have the advantage of clearing him from 
being a purely potential reality, such as primary matter. 
Secondly, it would follow that all the names pre- 
dicated of him would be used in a secondary sense, as 
health is applied to a drug in a derivative sense, for it 
is merely an agent of health in an animate organism, 
which latter is primarily the healthy thing. Thirdly, the 
suggested interpretation runs counter to the intention 
of those who speak of God, for when they speak of the 
living God they mean more than that he is the cause of 
life, or that he differs from dead things. 

Therefore we must conclude otherwise. Such abso- 
lute and positive terms signify the divine substance and 
are predicated essentially of God, though they repre- 
sent him inadequately. Let me explain what I mean. 
Terms signify God to the extent that the mind knows 
him. In knowing about him from creatures, the mind 
knows him to the extent that they represent him. God 
in himself possesses beforehand all the perfections of 
creatures; he is unrestrictedly and universally perfect. 
Every creature represents him and is like him to the 
measure of its perfection; though God is their sur- 
passing principle and not in the same class, nevertheless, 
some likeness is present. Creaturely terms can signify, 
though imperfectly, the divine substance, even as crea- 
tures imperfectly represent him. 

When it is said God is good, the sense is not that God 
is the cause of goodness, nor yet that God is not evil, 
but, that what is meant by goodness in creatures pre- 
exists in God, and indeed more intensely. It does not 
follow that goodness is attributed to God because he 



NATURE OF GOD 91 

causes goodness, but rather conversely, that because he 
is good he diffuses goodness. 

155, 1074 Summa Thcologica, la. xiii. 2 

271. The understanding of negatives is always based on 
affirmatives, as is shown by the rule of proving one by 
the other. Unless the human mind could make affirma- 
tions about God it would be unable to deny anything 
about him. Something must first be verified in a posi- 
tive sense. 

Disputations, VH de Potentta, 5 

272. Two shades of meaning should be distinguished 
in any name we attribute to God, the very perfection 
signified, goodness or life as the case may be, and the 
mode of signification. As regards the former, perfections 
belong to God properly, and more properly than they 
do to creatures, for they are his in the primary sense. 
But as regards the latter, no human term is attributable 
to God, for it has a mode of signification befitting 
creatures. 

Summa Theologica, la. xiii. 3 

273. Terms that designate unadulterated perfection, 
such as goodness, wisdom, being, may be predicated of 
God and of other things as well, because every perfec- 
tion of creatures resides in God, though in another and 
more eminent way. Terms that designate perfections 
bound up with a creaturely mode of existence cannot 
be applied to God save by a figure of speech or meta- 
phor, as when a man is called a blockhead on account 
of the hardness of his understanding. All terms express- 
ing created types are of this sort, such as man or stone; 
also terms expressing specific properties. Such terms as 
first being, supreme good, which express perfections at 
their highest, are used of God alone. 



92 NATURE OF GOD 

When I say that terms may express perfection with- 
out defect, this must be taken with regard to their core 
of meaning, because at present we surround our mean- 
ings with imperfection. We can express things only in 
the manner we can conceive them in the mind. Such 
terms, as Dionysius notes, can be affirmed as well as 
denied of God; affirmed because of the meaning of the 
word, denied because of the mode of meaning. 

The manner of superexcellence according to which 
pure perfections are found in God cannot be signified 
by the names we impose unless they are qualified by 
a negation, as when we speak of the infinite good, or by 
a relationship, as when we speak of the first cause or the 
supreme good. 

509 I Contra Gentes, 30 

274. Some terms signify perfections deriving from God 
into creatures in such a way that the imperfect creaturely 
mode according to which the divine perfection is shared 
is involved in the very meaning; stone, for instance, is 
entirely committed to material being, and cannot be 
attributed to God save metaphorically. But there are 
other terms, such as being, good, alive, which signify 
perfections having no particular mode of sharing in- 
volved in their meaning, and these can be applied to 
God in their proper sense. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xiii. 3, ad I 

275. What are the signs of passion in us are credited 
metaphorically to God by the names for those passions. 

Summa TAeologica, la. xix. n 

276. Some emotions, though not existing as such in God, 
contain in their specific meaning nothing repugnant to 
divine perfection, and among them are delight and joy. 

821 x Contra Gentes, 90 



NATURE OF GOD 93 

277. Terms that are applied metaphorically to God, 
are primarily used of creatures, not of God; whereas 
terms that signify pure perfections as regards the very 
value signified are primarily used of God and not of 
creatures, for these perfections derive from him, though 
on the point of linguistics they may have been applied 
to creatures m the first place. 

Summa Theologica> la. xiii. 6 

278. In language the subject of the etymology is some- 
times other than the object of the real definition. 

Summa Tkeologica> la. xiii. 2, ad ^ 

279. A term may be predicated of various subjects in 
three ways, univocally, equivocally, and analogically. 
Univocally, if the same term and meaning is used in 
exactly the same sense, as when animal is predicated of 
a man and a donkey, for to both the definition of animal 
applies, namely sensitive animate su bstance. Equivocally, 
if the term is the same but the meaning and definition 
different, as when Jog is used of an animal and a star. 
Analogically, if various objects, though diverse by 
meaning and definition, bear on some one common 
meaning, as when health is ascribed to organic body and 
urine and drink, but not with the same force, for in the 
first case the subject is given, in the second a symptom, 
in the third a cause. 

Opusc. n, de Principiis Naturae aafratrem Silvestrum 

280. It is impossible for a term to be predicated uni- 
vocally of God and creatures. For every effect which 
does not exhaust the power of the cause receives the 
likeness of that cause incompletely. When a term of per- 
fection is applied to a creature it signifies that perfection 
as distinct from another, thus human wisdom signifies 
a certain quality distinct from human substance, being, 



94 NATURE OF GOD 

and power. But when we apply it to God we imply no 
such limitations. Man it fixes and stylizes, but not God, 
who is left unenclosed and escaping the bounds of the 
term's significance. Consequently it is clear that wise is 
not given exactly the same sense when applied to God 
and to men, and the same holds true with other per- 
fections. Therefore terms are not univocal between 
them. 

Nevertheless, they are not purely equivocal, as some 
have thought. This would mean that nothing could be 
known or proved about God from creatures, for we 
should always fall into the fallacy of equivocation in the 
attempt. 

It should be concluded that these terms are used 
according to analogy. Creatures are shaped to God as 
to their principle; their perfections surpassingly pre- 
exist in him. This method in common use lies midway 
between pure equivocation and simple univocation. 
The meaning is not fixed and identical, as with univocal 
terms, nor wholly different, as with equivocal terms, but 
is used flexibly to signify different proportions to one 
constant, as health is used of urine to mean the sign, 
and of medicine to mean the cause, of animal health. 

Summa Theologica, xa. xiii. 5 

281. All divine perfections in reality are identical. A 
comparison with the faculties of knowledge will make 
this clearer; a higher power by one and the same idea 
understands what a lower power must needs take in 
many pieces. 

295 Opusc. in, Compendium Theologiae t 22 

282. Yet the diverse names we give to God are not 
synonyms, for they convey diverse meanings, though 
everything is one in his reality. 

315 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theokgiae, 25 



NATURE OF GOD 95 

283. Though they signify one identical thing, never- 
theless the names attributed to God signify him accord- 
ing to many and various aspects, and are therefore not 
synonymous. 

Summa Theologica, la. xiii. 4 

284. Perfections manifold and divided in other things 
are simple and united in God. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xiii. 4, ad 3 

285. Since God is outside the whole scheme of crea- 
tures, though all of them are ordered to him, and not 
conversely, it is clear that while creatures are really 
related to God, in God there is no real relation to 
creatures, but only a logical one. However, there is 
nothing to prevent the attribution to God of terms 
implying relationship in time. They denote a change in 
his creatures, not in him: thus a column becomes on the 
right-hand side of an animal without undergoing change 
in itself, through the animal's shift of position. 

234 Summa Theologica t la. xiii. 7 

286. The sole word that perfectly utters God is the 
Eternal Word. 

3 14 Commentary, / Sentences, 11. i. 3 

287. Having pondered on how God is apart from all 
and yet the cause of all, theologians sometimes have 
said that he is ineffable and at other times have attri- 
buted to him all manner of names. Such was demanded 
of the angel who had the appearance of God: Tell 
me, by what name art thou called ? But he answered, 
to forestall misunderstanding that might come from 
naming God, Why dost thou ask my name? 1 Truly 
this name is exalted 2 and above every name that is 

1 Gen. xxxii. 29. * Phil. ii. 9. 



g6 NATURE OF GOD 

named, not only in this world but also in the world that 
is to come. 1 

Yet God is praised in holy writ not only as ineffable 
but also as having many names. God calls himself, I 
am who am; 2 the way, the truth, and the life; 3 the 
light of the world; 4 the God of Abraham. 5 Prophets 
and apostles praise him as good, 6 beautiful, 7 the beloved 
of the beloved, 8 the God of gods. 9 As great and 
terrible, 10 remaining for ever, 11 thou who alone art, 12 
before the ages began. 13 As the giver of life and breath, 14 
as wisdom, 15 understanding, reason, righteous and 
mighty to save. 16 As inspiring, 17 and yet in whom are 
hid the treasures of all knowledge. 18 As our witness, 19 
declaring his strength, 20 the king of kings and lord of 
lords, 21 the ancient of days, 22 without change or shadow 
of alteration. 23 As God with us, 24 sanctification and 
redemption, 25 as greatness walking above the poles of 
heaven. 26 As after the earthquake and the fire in a still 
small voice. 27 He is in our hearts, and souls 28 and bodies; 29 
he fills heaven and earth, 30 he is in the world, 31 and above 
all his works. 32 His kingdom is over all; 33 heaven is his 
throne and earth his footstool. 34 He is compared to the 
sun, 35 the bright and morning star; 36 to fire, 37 water, 38 

1 Eph. i. 21. 2 Exod. iii. 4. 3 John xiv. 6. 

4 John viii. 12. 5 Exod. iii. 6. 6 Luke xviii. 19. 

7 Cant. i. 4. 8 Cant. v. I. 9 Ps. xlix. i. 

10 Dan. ix. 4. " Baruch iii. 3. 12 Job xiv. 4. 

13 Ecclus.xxiv. 10. I4 Acts xvii. 25. IS i Cor. i. 21. 

16 Isa. ixiii. i. I7 2 Tim. iii. 16. l8 Col. ii. 3. 

19 i Cor. iv. 9. 20 Ps. Ixxviii. 14. 2I Apoc. xix. 16. 

22 Dan. vii. 9. 23 James i. 17. 24 Matt. i. 23. 

25 I Cor. i. 30. 26 Job xxii. 14. 27 3 Kings xix. 12. 

28 Eph. iii. 17. Wisd. v 27. 

29 i Cor. vi. 19. 30 Jer. xxiii. 24. 3I John i. 10. 
** Ecclus. xliii. 30. 33 Ps. cii. 19. 34 Isa. Ixvi. I. 
M Mai. iv. 2. 36 Apoc. xxii. 16, 37 Deut. iv. 12. 

38 John iii. 5. 



NATURE OF GOD 97 

wind, 1 dew,* cloud; 3 to the corner-stone 4 and the 
rock. 5 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus, i, lect. 3 

288. This name, He Who Is, is the most proper name 
for God, and for three reasons. First, for denotation; it 
does not signify a kind of form, but being itself. Second, 
for universality; it determines no mode of being, but 
names the boundless sea of substance. Third, for con-* 
notation; it intimates being entirely present, free of 
past and future. 

J 7S> 435 Summa Theohgica, la. xiii. n 

1 Joel ii. 28. 2 Hos. xiv. 6. 3 Hos. vi. 3. 

4 Ps. cxvii. 22, s i Cor. x. 4. 

(The references are to the Vulgate.) 



B628 



IV 

Activity of God 1 

289. Leaving behind truths about the divine substance, 
let us now turn to truths about divine operation. Since 
operations in general are divided into those that remain 
within and those that issue into external effects, we 
shall treat first of the activities of mind and will, for 
knowing is in the knower and loving in the lover, and 
then afterwards of divine power taken as the principle 
of productive activity. 

497 Summa Theologica, la. xiv, Prologue 

290. The absolute and the relative differ logically in 
God, but not really. 

Disputations, vn Je Potentia, i, ad 6 

I. DIVINE MIND 

291. Hold steadily to the truth that God has most 
assured knowledge of all things knowable at any time 
and by any mind: it cannot be otherwise. 

1 The divine stillness is the immobility of perfection, not 
imperfection j of full activity, not inertia. With safeguards against 
introducing our own divisions into the godhead, the divine powers 
and operations are specifically studied. They are grouped round the 
two abilities of mind and will. True to his intellectualism St. 
Thomas takes knowledge first; in marking its special quality of 
possessing without destroying and its immunity from the fatal 
generations of physical processes, he firmly rejects the notion of 
an unconscious deity. On the contrary, divine knowledge runs 
from the comprehending identity of God with himself to the 
creative perception of the feast and most fugitive reality. 

Mind sets the measure for will, the joy of God in himself and 
the artist's love whereby he freely and generously establishes good 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 99 

His being is identical with his understanding. As his 
substance is pure existence so also is it pure understand- 
ing. Here nothing is lacking that can relate to know- 
ledge, for every hint of knowledge is held in the sheer 
form of knowledge. Since his being is one, simple, firm, 
and enduring, it follows that by one single insight God 
enjoys eternal and unwavering knowledge of every- 
thing. 

Indeed in the first cause things exist more nobly even 
than they do in themselves, for what exists in another 
exists according to the mode of that one's substance, 
and the substance of God is his understanding. Every- 
thing that is in any way real, therefore, exists intelligibly 
in God at the height of his substance, and is there 
known completely. 

Were the godhead unconscious it would be like a 
man who slumbers and worthy of no great reverence. 

587, 639, 662 Opusc. vn, de Substantiis Separatis adfratrem 
Reginaldum socium carissimum^ i2 l 

292. In God knowledge is consummate this grows on 
us when we reflect that unconscious things have no 
other form but their own, whereas conscious things 
have a natural capacity to possess the forms of other 
things as well. That is the root difference between 
them. Unconscious nature is more restricted and 
limited, while conscious nature has a greater breadth 
and reach. Aristotle had this in mind when he spoke of 
the soul as being somehow all things. 2 

Now the restriction of form comes from matter, and 
therefore the less material a form the ampler it is. The, 

things outside himself. His omnipotence is able to play with all the 
possibilities of being ; his providence to direct them in every detail j 
his life to communicate its happiness. 
1 Reginald of Piperno, his secretary. 



ioo ACTIVITY OF GOD 

non-materiality of a thing is the reason why it can know, 
and the mode of its non-materiality sets the measure of 
its knowledge. Plants are unable to know because they 
are earthbound, but sense is cognitive for it receives 
non-material impressions, while the mind is freer still 
and less involved in matter. Since God is at the summit 
of non-materiality he is at the summit of knowledge. 
2 3 r > 3 5 Summa Theokgica^ la. xiv. I 

293. Since there is no potentiality in God, for he is 
pure act, knower and known must there be identical in 
every way, so much so that his mind neither lacks a con- 
cept, as our mind does before it knows, nor is this 
concept other than his substance, as it is with us. The 
intelligible form is the divine mind itself, understanding 
itself by and through itself. 

497 Summa Theologica^ la. xiv. 2 

294. The knowing mind and the object of knowledge 
and the concept and the activity, all these are here 
wholly identical. 

Summa Theologica, la. xiv. 4 

295. He knows all things by knowing his own essence, 
and this he does without forming a judgement. For he 
knows himself just as he is without any composition. 1 It 
does not follow that he is ignorant of logical statements, 
for his essence, though one and simple, is yet the exem- 
plar of all multiple and compound things. 

34 i Contra Gentes, 58 

296. As he knows material things spiritually and com- 
pound things simply, so he knows propositions by 
simple intelligence, not by passing affirmative or nega- 
tive judgements. 

Summa Theologica xa. xiv. 14 
1 Of subject and predicate. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 101 

297. He does not consider one thing after another 
successively, but everything simultaneously. His know- 
ledge is not reasoned or discursive, though he knows all 
reasonings and processes. 

250 I Contra Gentes, 57 

298. Let us make quite clear that there is no discur- 
siveness in divine knowledge. In our knowledge there 
is a double process; one of succession only, when from 
actually understanding one object we turn our attention 
to another; the other of causality, as when we arrive at 
conclusions through principles. The first process cannot 
apply to God, for the multiple objects we understand 
successively when they are taken in themselves, can be 
understood all at once when they are seen in one prin- 
ciple. God sees everything in one, namely, in himself 
alone. Nor does the second process apply; first, because 
it entails succession, for in working from principles to 
conclusions we do not simultaneously consider them 
both; secondly, because it is a process from the known 
to the unknown. 

324., 582, 666 Summa Theohgica, la. xiv. 7 

299. He knows himself perfectly. To know a thing its 
power must be gauged perfectly, which involves the 
knowledge of all things to which its power can extend. 

Summa Theokgica^ la. xiv. 5 

300. Lest anyone should fancy that God stands utterly 
aloof and apart from everything, that on our part he is 
beyond our ken, while he for his part does not cherish 
what is below him, Dionysius adds that divine know- 
ledge is circumapprehensive of all things because it 
knows all properties and circumstances, and compre- 
hensive because it perfectly knows all natures, and 



102 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

pre-apprehensive because it does not acquire knowledge 
from things but as their cause forestalls them. 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus, i, kef. 3 

301. Some would withhold the knowledge of singular 
facts 1 from the perfection of the divine mind and they 
would maintain their position along seven lines of 
reasoning. 

First, from the very condition of singularity. It is 
alleged that no spiritual power can know determinate 
matter which is the principle of singularity, for know- 
ledge results from an assimilation of knower and known; 
whence in our case only those powers using material 
organs can apprehend singulars. The pure intellect can- 
not know them because it is spiritual, much less there- 
fore can the divine intellect, which more than any other 
is far away from matter. 

Second, singulars are not eternal. Either they are 
always known by God or they are known at one time 
and not known at another. The former alternative is 
ruled out because there is no true science of what is not, 
science being about true things, and non-existents are 
not true things. The latter alternative is ruled out be- 
cause divine knowledge is altogether invariable. 

Third, some singulars happen contingently and are 
not produced of necessity. They can be objects of 
certitude only after they have actually happened. Certi- 
tude is infallible, whereas the anticipation of a con- 
tingent event is fallible; if the opposite could not come 
about the event would be already necessary. We can 
enjoy no certitude about a future contingency, though 
we may hazard a shrewd guess. But all divine knowledge 
must be supposed to be most certain and infallible. 

1 Real individuals, such as Justinian j not merely particularized 
generalities, such as an emperor. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 103 

Fourth, some of these singular effects are caused by 
will. Now before it has taken place an event can be 
known solely in its cause. But the motion of will can be 
known with certitude by him alone in whose power the 
decision lies. Therefore God cannot have certain fore- 
knowledge of singular events that depend on what we 
are freely going to do. 

Fifth, an argument from the very infinity of singulars. 
The infinite, that is the indefinite, is unknowable as 
such, for everything known is measured by mind; on 
this account art scorns shapelessness. Singulars, how- 
ever, are infinite, at least potentially. Therefore it seems 
impossible that God should know them. 

Sixth, from the paltriness of singulars. Since the 
nobility of a science is pitched according to the dignity 
of its object, so the triviality of an object redounds on 
the corresponding knowledge. The divine mind, how- 
ever, is of all the most elevated and the least tolerant of 
pettiness. 

Seventh, from the wickedness present in some singu- 
lar events. Since the known is somehow in the knower 
and evil cannot exist in God, it seems to follow that God 
simply does not know the evil and deprivation appropriate 
to imperfect minds. 

Let us sift these arguments so that we may throw 
away what is contrary to the truth and show forth the 
perfection of divine knowledge. We shall show, first, that 
the divine mind knows singulars; 1 second, and things 
not yet actual; 2 third, and future contingencies with in- 
fallible knowledge ; 3 fourth, and the motions of the will ; 4 
fifth, and infinites; 5 sixth, and the humblest and vilest 
things; 6 seventh, and all evils, deprivations, and defects. 

I Contra Gentes, 63-4 

1 302. a 303-7. 3 308-10. 

4 3"- 5 33- 6 3' 2 - 7 3'3- 



104 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

302. To know things properly means knowing them, 
not merely in the mass, but also in their distinctiveness 
from one another. So does God know things, piercing 
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the 
joints ana* marrow, a discerner of the thoughts and intents 
of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not 
manifest in his sight. 1 

Some have slipped into the mistake of thinking that 
God knows things in general because everything shares 
in the common nature of being, and that by knowing 
himself as the fount of being, he knows the nature of 
being and all things in so far as they belong to being. 2 
But this will not do, for to know something in general 
and not in its peculiarities is to know it imperfectly. 
Our mind, bringing out what is latent to begin with 
and going on to develop its full activity, starts with 
universal and confused knowledge before reaching to 
proper understanding. 

We should say, then, that God knows things other 
than himself, not only inasmuch as they share in the 
general nature of reality, but also according to their 
special characteristics. Some have attempted to illustrate 
how God can understand many things in one know- 
ledge by the example of a conscious centre that would 
know all radii, or a conscious light that would know all 
colours. But such examples, though well enough as 
illustrations of universal causality, fail here because 
multiple and diverse things derive from such a unitary 
principle in wliat they share in common, not in what 
makes them peculiar; and so by it they would be known 
in general, not in detail. 

In God it is otherwise. Whatsoever is of value in any 
creature pre-exists in God; all perfections are all to- 

1 Hebr. iv. 12. 

a An opinion attributed to Averroes, 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 105 

gether and contained in him superbly, not only for what 
they have in common, namely being, but also for their 
special notes of difference. Every kind of form is a 
perfection. So all are anticipated in God, not merely 
where they agree with one another, but also where they 
are exclusively themselves. Consequently God, who 
contains all perfections, should not be compared to 
created natures as common to proper, nor as unity to 
number, nor as centre to radii, but as perfect actuality 
to imperfect actualities. 

It is clear that imperfect realizations can be known by 
a perfect actuality with distinctness, not merely in a 
sweeping generalization. The essence of God contains 
whatever is of value in other things, and much more 
besides, and so God can know things other than him- 
self with proper knowledge. The proper nature of each 
consists in this, that in some degree it participates in the 
divine perfection. God would not know himself per- 
fectly did he not also know how his perfections could 
be shared; neither would he perfectly know the very 
nature of being unless he knew all the variations on 
being. 

21, 62, 436 Summa TAeologica, la. xiv. 6 

303. Gcd knows all things that are real in any way 
whatsoever. Things that are not real absolutely may be 
real relatively. Things are real absolutely when they are 
actual and exist. Things that are not actual may be in 
the power of God or in the power of the creature, 
whether in active power or passive potentiality, whether 
in the ability of thought or imagination to invest an 
object with any sort of meaning or interest. Whatever 
they are and however they can come about or be thought 
of or alluded to, all are known by God, though actually 
they do not exist. 



io6 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

Yet some difference should be noted among the 
things that are not actual. Though some of them are not 
actual now, nevertheless they have been or will be actual, 
and all these are said to be known by the knowledge 
of vision. For since God's act of understanding, which 
is his being, is measured by eternity which is without 
succession and comprehends all time, the instantaneous 
glance of God falls on all things in any period of time as 
on things present to him. But there are other things in 
the power of God or the creature which are not, nor 
have been, nor ever will be ; these he is said to know by 
the knowledge of simple intelligence, not of vision, for 
vision implies a real object apart from the viewer. 

254, 346 Summa Thcologica^ la. xiv. 9 

304. By his art an artist may know even those things he 
has not yet wrought. The forms of art flow from his 
knowledge into external material there to constitute 
works of art. There is nothing to prevent his enter- 
taining thoughts about forms that have not yet out- 
wardly appeared. 

i Contra Gentes, 66 

305. The divine essence contains all real nobilities by 
transcending rather than by combining them all. Every 
form, peculiar and generic alike, is a perfection, for it 
accentuates reality, and betrays imperfection only when 
it falls short of authentic reality. The divine mind, 
therefore, in its own essence can comprehend what is 
innermostly peculiar to all things, understanding where 
they succeed and where they fail in rendering divine 
perfection. So the divine essence, itself sheerly perfect, 
can be taken as the proper reason of singular things. 
Now because the special character of one thing is 
distinct from the special character of another, we can 
attribute to the divine mind a distinction and plurality 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 107 

as regards the objects understood, for within the divine 
mind is the proper reason of each and all. This is be- 
cause God understands the proper relation of similarity 
which they bear to him. In consequence the reasons of 
things in the divine mind are many and distinct just 
because God knows how things are assimilable to him 
in many and diverse ways. Augustine speaks about God 
making a man by one reason and a horse by another; he 
says also that the reasons of things are many in the 
divine mind. This in some measure safeguards the 
opinion of Plato, who postulated ideas according to 
which are formed all things existing in matter. 

582 I Contra Gentes, 54 

306. God knows singulars, not merely in their uni- 
versal causes, but also according to the proper and 
unique nature of each one of them. 

658 Disputations, n de Veritate^ 5 

307. Some maintain that God knows singular things 
through universal causes, and they cite the example of 
the astronomer who can foretell future eclipses from 
his complete information about the general orbits of 
the heavenly bodies. But this will not serve, for the 
forms and powers of singular things deriving from 
universal causes, howsoever they be associated, are not 
individuated except by individual matter. He who 
knows Socrates because he is white, or the son of Sophro- 
niscus, or for some such characteristic, does not know 
Socrates intimately as this individual man. On this 
theory God would not know singular things in their 
singularity. 

Then others aver that he knows singular things by 
applying universal causes to particular effects. Neither 
will this serve, for no one can apply something to 
another unless he first knows the other. Far from giving 



io8 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

the reason why particulars can be known, the applica- 
tion they invoke presupposes the knowledge of singulars. 
Therefore another explanation must be proposed. 
Since God is the cause of things by his knowledge, his 
'knowledge reaches as far as his causality. The active 
power of God extends not only to forms, the sources of 
general meaning, but also even to matter. Therefore 
divine knowledge must extend even to singulars indi- 
viduated by matter. His essence is the sufficing principle 
of knowing all things made by him, in general and in 
detail. The same would hold true of a human artist's 
knowledge were it productive of the whole being of 
his effect and not merely of the form. 

387, 447, 655 Summa Theohgica, la. xiv. II 

308. A contingent event can be considered either in 
itself or in its cause. In itself it is already actual and as 
such is present, not future; it is already settled, not held 
in suspense: accordingly it can fall under infallibly cer- 
tain knowledge, as when I see that Socrates is sitting 
down. In the light of its cause it is still a future event, 
for the cause is not yet committed to one alternative 
and being a contingent cause can take opposite courses; 
accordingly the event does not fall within the range of 
human certitude. Hence, when we know a contingent 
effect in its cause we cannot go beyond conjecture. 

Now God knows all contingent events, not merely 
as they are in their causes, but also as each one of them 
is actually in itself. Though they become actual suc- 
cessively, God knows them, but not as we do, that is 
successively as they happen, but simultaneously. His 
knowledge is rated by eternity, and eternity, being 
simultaneously entire, comprises all time. All things in 
time are present to God in eternity, not only, as some say, l 

1 e.g. Avicenna. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 109 

because he grasps the reasons of all things, but also 
because his glance takes in everything as present. Yet 
events remain future contingencies if their proximate 
causes are taken as the system of reference. 

3 2 3 359 Summa Theologica^ la. xiv. 13 

309. A contingent event escapes certitude because it 
is future, not because it is present. 

i Contra Gentes, 67 

310. At the height of eternity God regards all things 
from above the movement of time. Events that come to 
be in time are already present to him. When I see 
Socrates sitting down, my knowledge is certain and 
infallible, but it imposes no necessity on Socrates to sit. 
And so God, in looking at things which to us are past, 
present, or future, infallibly and certainly knows them 
as present realities, yet without imposing on them the 
necessity of existing. 

Opusc. xxvi, Je Rationibus FiJei ad cantor em Antiochenum, 10 

311. The will's mastery over its own activity, its inner 
poise to decide or not, excludes predetermination by 
another particular cause and violence from an external 
agent, but not the influence of a higher cause which is 
the principle alike of its being and of its activity. The 
causality of the first cause flows into movements of will, 
and so God in knowing himself knows these as well. 

362, 692 I Contra Gertes, 68 

312. The knowledge of base things does not detract 
from the fineness of divine knowledge, but rather 
attests it. 

For since the divine mind is of infinite strength 
fittingly does it penetrate into the remotest corners. 

Everything considered in itself is noble enough. 
Lower only makes sense in comparison with a higher, 



no ACTIVITY OF GOD 

and from this point of view the noblest creature falls no 
less short of God than the lowest creature falls short of 
the highest. 

The meanness of objects does not necessarily cheapen 
the knower, but only accidentally when his mind is 
distracted from nobler thoughts or contaminated by 
inordinate affections, neither of which situations can 
occur for God. 

Power is not called slight because it can deal with 
slight things, but because it is limited by them. Ability 
to do mighty things spells ability to do puny things 
as well. 

All this agrees with what is said of divine wisdom 
reaching everywhere by reason of her purity, for she is a 
vapour of the power of God and a certain pure emanation 
of the glory of the almighty God: and therefore no defied 
thing cometh into her. 1 

i Contra Gentes^ 70 

313. It does not follow that the divine knowledge is 
discursive for knowing evil through good. The good is, 
as it were, the reason for the knowledge of evil, since 
evil is naught else but the deprivation of good. Evil is 
known in good as an implication in a definition, not as 
a conclusion in premisses. 

459 I Contra Gentes> 71 

314. The Logos implies a relationship to creatures, for 
God in knowing himself knows them all. The word 
conceived in the mind represents everything actually 
understood. Whereas in our minds there are diverse 
words for the diverse things we utter, God knows him- 
self and all other things besides in one act by a unique 
word, and that word is expressive of God and of crea- 

1 Wisd. vii. 24-5, 



ACTIVITY OF GOD in 

tures. Of himself his knowledge is contemplative; of 
other things both contemplative and productive. The 
Word in the Father is expressive; with respect to 
creatures it is expressive and operative. For he spake and 
it was done? the poetic reasons of all things made are 
in the Word. 

4, 94, 286 Summa Theolcgica^ la. xxxiv. 3 

315. If we speak of an idea in the strict sense as a form 
producible in being, then one idea comprehends the 
singular together with the species and genus there 
individualized, for in a single reality Socrates, man, and 
animal are not distinct. But if we speak of an idea in 
the wide sense as a likeness or meaning, then there are 
correspondingly different ideas, since we can separately 
consider Socrates as Socrates, as man, and as animal. 

283 Disputations, HI de Veritatc^ 8, ad 2 

316. God's knowledge is the cause of things, related to 
creatures as any artist's is to his works of art. One intel- 
ligible form relates to opposites and the same science 
deals with contraries, and therefore knowledge does 
not produce a decision unless influenced by appetite. 
Hence the cause of things is the divine knowledge, but 
as having will conjoined. This is customarily called the 
knowledge of approbation. 

698 Summa Tktologica, la. xiv. 8 

317. Knowledge does not involve causality until the 
will joins in. 

913 Summa Theohgica, la. xiv. 8, ad I 

II. DIVINE WILL 

318. From its inner nature does one thing turn toward 
another; furthermore, according to the differences of 

1 PS. xxxii. 9 (Vulgate). 



H2 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

natural conditions are the differences of natural bents. 
Material things are, as it were, bound and stiffened 
with matter and so they are not self-directing; their 
tendencies follow a physical determinism and are 
shaped by the outside principle of their nature. But 
non-material substances are freer from matter; in 
various degrees they act and desire spontaneously and 
from within. Were the artist's idea of a house a natural 
form, 1 he would not be free to design or not to design 
a house, or to make it in this style or that. In sensitive 
substances forms are received to some extent without 
matter, yet they are not completely spiritual and with- 
out material conditions, for the play of physical organs 
is engaged. Their tendencies are not wholly free, 
though an imitation and likeness of freedom is there. 2 
But in intellectual natures, where forms are received 
without matter, the full play of freedom is ensured and 
with it the ability to will. To material things, then, 
natural appetite is attributed; to animals a sensitive 
appetite; to intellectual substances a rational appetite 
or will, and the more spiritual they are the greater the 
power of will. Since God is at the summit of spirituality, 
he possesses supremely and most properly the character 
of will. 

670, 692 Disputations, xxm 



319. Will belongs to every intelligent being as feeling 
belongs to every sensitive being. Because there is mind 
in God there is also will. His knowing is his being, and 
so is his willing. 

Summa Theolog'tca, la. xix. i 

1 Physical, as contrasted with intentional, ideal, volitional. 
Cf. 586, 595, 596, 670, 697. 

2 They are voluntary in the broad sense of the term, but not 
deliberate. Cf. 671, 682. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 113 

320. He wills himself and things other than himself; 
himself as the end, other things as ordered to that end., 
It befits the divine goodness that other things should be 
partakers therein. 

Summa Theclogica, la. xix. 2 

321. His own goodness is sufficient; but that he can 
will naught else is not a consequence. 

Summa Theokgtca^ la. xix. 2, ad 3 

322. Of necessity he wills his own perfect and inde- 
pendent goodness. He can gain no perfection from 
other things. Hence, he does not will them by absolute 
necessity but by hypothetical necessity, namely on the 
supposition that what he does will he cannot unwill. 

242 Summa Theologica, I a. xix. 3 

323. The will of God is the cause of things. That God 
acts through his will, and not, as some have supposed, 
from natural necessity, appears on three grounds. 

First, from the system of active causes. Mind and 
nature both act for a purpose. Ends are prefixed to 
natural forces by intelligence, as when an archer 
accurately flights an arrow to its target. An intellectual 
and voluntary agent must be prior to natural forces. 
Therefore, since God is first in the order of efficient 
causes he acts by mind and will. 

Second, from the very nature of efficient causes. A 
natural cause is determined to the production of one 
effect, for nature, unless interfered with, acts in a con- 
stant manner. But the divine being is not a special kind 
of thing, but contains within itself the whole plentitude 
of being. Unless it causes an indeterminate and infinite 
being, which is out of the question, it cannot act by 
necessity of nature. Determinate effects proceed from 
its infinite perfection by a decision of mind and will. 

B628 I 



xi4 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

Third, from the relationship of effect to cause. 
Effects pre-exist in the cause and according to its mode 
of being. Since the divine being is the divine under- 
standing, effects pre-exist there in an intelligible manner. 
They proceed from him intelligibly and consequently 
through will. 

167, 388 Summa Theohgica> la. xix. 4 

324. As in one act God understands everything in his 
essence, so by one act he wills everything in his good- 
ness. As his understanding of a cause is not the cause of 
his understanding the effect, though he understands the 
effect in the cause, so his willing an end is not the cause 
of his willing the means, though he wills means to be 
directed to end. In other words, he wills this to be for 
that, but his willing this is not because of his willing that. 

298, 694 Summa Theohgica, la. xix. 5 

325. An event may escape from the scheme of a parti- 
cular cause, but never from that of a universal cause 
which includes all particular causes. If any particular 
cause fails in its effect this is because of the hindrance 
of some other particular cause, itself contained in the 
universal scheme. Therefore no effect can possibly be 
a freak to the universal cause. Since God's will is the 
universal cause of things, it is quite impossible that it 
should fail in its projects. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xix. 6 

326. When a cause is vigorous the effect is covered 
not merely as to its substance, but also as to its manner 
of becoming or being done. Since the divine will is 
supremely effective, it follows not only that those 
things are done which God wills to be done, but also that 
they are done in the way that he wills. He wills some to 
come about necessarily and others contingently, so that 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 115 

there may be a pattern of things for the complement 
of the universe. And therefore he prepares necessary 
causes for some effects, unfailing causes whence effects 
derive of necessity, and contingent and defective causes 
for other effects, causes from which events derive con- 
tingently. 

Summa Theokgica, la. xix. 8 

327. The love for a thing may be measured either on 
the side of the act of will or on the side of the object 
loved. The act of will may be more or less intense, and 
from this point of view God does not love one thing 
more than another, for he loves all by one simple and 
always constant act of will. But as regards the object, as 
we may be said to love that person the more to whom we 
wish the greater good, though the intensity of the act, 
may not be greater, so we can say that God loves some 
more than others. Since his love is the cause of goodness 
in things, one thing would not be better than another 
did he not love it more. 

432, 961 Summa Theologica> la. xx. 3 

328. The evil of sin in no real sense is willed by God. 
It offends against the advance to divine goodness. He 
wills physical and penal evil by willing the good that is 
conjoined to them: the love of justice may imply 
punishment, and the love of the order of nature implies 
allowing some things to decay. 

488 Summa. Theologica, xa. xix. 9 

329. Hatred of anything cannot be ascribed to God. 
He wills things for their likeness to his goodness; this 
assimilation is the good of each and every thing. All 
active causes love their products after their fashion; 
parents their children, poets their poems, craftsmen their 
handiwork. Much less than any of them can God hate 



n6 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

a single thing, for he is the cause of everything. Thou 
lovest all things and hatest nothing of the things thou hast 
made. 1 

Yet he may be said to hate by using a figure of 
speech, and this for two reasons; first, by willing good 
to things he wills evil the contrary of good not to be; 
secondly, by willing a greater good ruling out a lesser 
good. So may he be said to hate, though in truth it is 
the greater love. 

407, 477 1 Contra Gentes, 96 

330. There are two kinds of justice, commutative 
and distributive justice. The former enters into the 
exchange of goods, and does not apply to God, since as 
the Apostle says, Who hath first given to him and recom- 
pense shall be made to him?* The other enters when 
things are shared out, as when a ruler or steward gives 
to each according to his deserts. In a well-ordered state 
or household this kind of justice is displayed by the 
lord and master. So the order of the universe, embracing 
natural and voluntary things alike, manifests the justice 
of God. 

454 Summa Theologica^ la. xxi. i 

331. Mercy is supremely God's effectively rather 
than affectively. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xxi. 3 

332. The work of divine justice always presupposes 
the work of mercy and is founded thereon. Creatures 
have no rights except because of something pre-existing 
or pre-considered in them, and since we cannot go back 
and back, we must come to something founded on the 
sole generosity of the divine will, which is the ultimate 
end. The possession of hands is owing to human nature 

1 Wisd. xi. 25. * Rom. xi. 35. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 117 

because of the rational soul, the possession of a rational 
soul is demanded if we are to be men, but why should 
we have human nature except because of divine 
generosity ? And so mercy is the root in each and every 
divine work, and its virtue persists in everything that 
grows out of that, and even more vehemently flourishes 
there. The first cause enters into effects more strongly 
than do secondary causes. Even with regard to things 
that are a creature's due, God more abundantly dis- 
penses them than the proportion of the claim demands. 
The order of justice would be served by much less than 
in fact is granted by divine generosity, which far exceeds 
what is owing. 

390, 392, 1074 Summa Theologica^ la. xxi. 4 

333. Presumption is less a sin than despair, for it is 
more characteristic of God to pity and spare than to 
punish. Mercy springs from himself, punishment is 
occasioned by our fault. 

940 Summa Theologica y za-zae. xxi. 2 

III. PROVIDENCE 

334. Everything is provided for in the scheme of the 
universal cause; nothing can evade it. 

1043 Summa Theologica, la. xxii. 2, ad i 

335. Divine causality reaches to all beings, not only in 
their specific but also in their individual principles, not 
only in immortal but also in mortal beings. In what- 
soever sense they can be said to exist, all things are 
divinely directed to their ends. 

Summa Theologica> la. xxii. 2 

336. When a master sends two servants to the same 
place, their meeting may seem to them a chance en- 
counter. So a happening may seem haphazard or casual 



n8 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

with respect to lower causes when it appears uninten- 
tional, but there is nothing fortuitous about such events 
with respect to a higher cause. 

Opusc. xii, Compendium Theobgiae, 137 

337. Providence, properly speaking, is the plan of order- 
ing things to an end and is the principal part of the 
virtue of prudence. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xxii. I 

338. There are two elements in providence, the plan 
and its execution, which is called government. As re- 
gards the former, God's plan is immediate to every- 
thing, for in his mind is the reason for everything, even 
for the very least. As regards the latter, there are inter- 
mediaries, for the divine rule governs lower by higher, 
not from any defect of power, but from abundance 
of goodness endowing creatures with the dignity of 
causing. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xxii. 3 

339. A twofold process can be watched at work, one 
according as things emerge from their principle, the 
other according as they are directed to an end. Disposi- 
tion concerns the former, for things are said to be dis- 
posed according as they are arranged in different grades 
by God, thus an artist variously arranges the parts of 
his work, and thus composition is a part of art. Provi- 
dence concerns the direction of things, and so it differs 
from divine art and disposing. Divine art is exercised in 
the production of things, disposition in their order, 
providence in their direction to an end. 

Disputations, v de Verttate^ I, ad 9, / 

340. Some of the ancient philosophers postulated 
merely a material cause, and since they did not accept 
efficient causality they could not admit final causality. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 119 

Afterwards others accepted the former, but said nothing 
of the latter. Both sets imagined that the world-process 
happens from the determinism of preceding causes, 
either material or efficient. This can be disproved by 
philosophical science. 

Disputations, v de ^erttate^ 2 

341. It may be said that in human affairs the same fate 
attends good and bad alike; All things happen equally to 
the just and the wicked; 1 and therefore that human 
affairs are not ruled by providence. It may indeed strike 
us that there is no rhyme or reason in the result because 
we are ignorant of the particulars of divine dispensa- 
tion, yet we need have no doubt there is a good reason. 
A man goes into a smithy and judges that the tools are 
needlessly numerous, but that is because he has no 
knowledge of the craft, for they are all serviceable and 
are designed for a proper purpose. 

Disputations, v de Veritate^ 5, ad 6 

342. Does divine predestination impose necessity on 
human acts? In this matter we must proceed cautiously 
so that truth may be strengthened and error avoided. 
For it is equally false to say that human acts and events 
do not fall under divine foreknowledge and that fore- 
knowledge and divine predetermination load human 
acts with necessity, for that would abolish freedom, the 
opportunity of giving counsel, the usefulness of laws, 
the care for acting aright, and the fairness of rewards 
and punishments. 

691 Opusc. xxvi, de Rationibus Fidei ad cantorcm 

Antiochenum y 10 

343. Fate is the ordering of secondary causes to effects 
foreseen by God, and so whatever is subject to secondary 

1 Ecclcs. ix. 2. 



120 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

causes is subject also to fate. But whatever is done 
immediately by God is not subject to secondary causes, 
nor therefore to fate, for instance the creation of things, 
the glorification of spiritual substances, and the like. 
Hence Boethius says that things nearest to godhead 
are steadfast and escape the changeable order of fate, 
and that the farther a thing is from the first mind the 
more deeply it is involved in the meshes of fate. 1 

1029 Summa Theokgica^ la. cxvi. 4 

IV. DIVINE POWER AND ACTION 

344. God is powerful, and strength of action is justly 
ascribed to him. 

Divine power is his substance, divine power his 
action. 

II Contra Gentes> 7, 9 

345. Power signifies a principle that puts into execu- 
tion what knowledge directs and will commands. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xxv. I, ad ^ 

346. God is the greatest actuality and the principal 
being, hence his action must close first of all on some- 
thing real, though non-being may be a consequence. 
Therefore omnipotence cannot make affirmation and 
negation to be simultaneously true, or anything else 
involving such a contradiction. 

Disputations, I de Potentia^ 3 

347. Whatever can have the nature of being is counted 
among the possibles, and God is called almighty with 
respect to these. Whatever implies contradiction does 
not fall within the scope of omnipotence, for it cannot 

1 de Consolations Philosophise, iv. 6, 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 121 

begin to look possible. It is more appropriate to say that 
such things cannot be done, rather than that God can- 
not do them. 

32, 303 Summa Theokgica^ la. xxv. 3 

348. To sin is to fall short of a perfect action; and to be 
able to sin is to be able to fail, which is no trait of 
omnipotence. 

480, 887 Summa Theologica^ la. xxv. 3, ad i 

349. To undo the past is no function of omnipotence. 

Summa Thcologica^ la. xxv. 4 

350. Divine wisdom is not so restricted to any one 
particular scheme of things that another could not be 
produced. 

32 Summa Theologica^ la. xxv. 5 

351. Concerning the institution of things we should 
discuss what their natures demand, rather than what 
God could have done. 

Opusc. xxi, Declarath XXXVI Quaestionum 
ad lee tor em Venetum^ 24 * 

352. When it is said that God could make things better, 
the proposition is true if better is taken subs tan tively, for 
he could always improve on any one thing. But if the 
term is taken adverbially, referring to the mode of 
divine action, then God could not make things with 
greater wisdom and goodness. 

925 Summa Theologica^ xa. xxv. 6, ad I 

353. Given the things that do in fact actually exist, 
the universe cannot be improved on. Were any one 
thing bettered in kind, the proportions of the whole 

1 Bassiano of Lodi. 



122 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

scheme would be ruined, just as when a harp-string is 
overstretched the melody is spoilt. 

Summa Thfologica^ la. xxv. 6, ad 3 

354. It is ridiculous to say that the power of the sun is 
for the sake of the worms that breed in its heat; divine 
power even less is for the sake of its effects. 

171 Disputations, I de Potentta, I, ad 13 

355. God does not seek his glory for his own sake, 
but for ours. 

Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. cxxxii. I, ad I 

356. The operation of a thing is twofold, as Aristotle 1 
teaches: one is immanent and is a perfection to the doer; 
the other issues into external reality and is a perfection 
to the thing made. Both belong to God: the first in that 
he understands, wills, loves, and rejoices; the other in 
that he produces things in being and sustains and fosters 
them. The first is termed an operation or activity, the 
latter rather a making. 

ii Contra 



357. All irrational nature is related to God as instru- 
ment to principal. 

Summa Theolog'tca, ia-2ae. i. 2 

358. As the impetus in the arrow's flight shows the 
archer's aim, so the spontaneous necessity of natural 
things declares the governance of divine providence. 

Summa Theologies, la. ciii. i, ad 3 

359. It must be granted without qualification that God 
operates in all natural and voluntary activity. Through 
not appreciating the situation accurately, some have 
made the mistake of attributing all action exclusively to 

1 Metaphysics, 1050*18. Cf. Commentary, ix, lect. 8. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 123 

God and denying that natural things perform by their 
proper powers, as though fire did not heat, but that 
God creates heat. 1 

1091 Disputations, in de Potentta, 7 

360. Similarly in other cases. Some have interpreted 
the workings of efficient causality as though no created 
power has any real effect on things, but that God alone 
is the direct cause. 

This, however, is impossible, for it would abolish the 
order of cause and effect among created things, and this < 
would reflect ill on the power of the creator; for to 
impart power of action to an effect comes from very 
strength of causality. Furthermore, the operative powers 
we notice in things would be futile were they destitute 
of real action. 

Therefore we must so understand God's action in 
efficient causes as to leave intact their own proper actions. 
In order to make this clearer, bear in mind that, of the 
four classes of cause, the material cause is not a principle 
of action, but rather the recipient. But the others, namely 
the final, efficient, and formal causes, are principles of 
action and according to a well-defined precedence. As 
regards all three of them, God operates in every action. 

First, as an end. Since every action is for the sake of 
some good, whether true or apparent, and since nothing 
is or appears good unless it shares in some likeness of the 
supreme good, which is God, it follows that he is the 
final cause of every action. 

Second, as efficient cause. When there are many 
subordinate causes, the secondary always act in virtue 
of the power of the first. And so God is the first efficient 
cause of the actions of every cause. 

1 The doctrine of occasionalism, i.e. that creatures are not 
true causes, but occasions of divine causality. 



124 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

Thirdly, as regards formal cause. Remember that 
God not only moves things to their actions by applying 
forms and powers to their activities, like a woodman 
setting his axe to cutting down a tree though he has not 
produced the form of axe, but that God gives created 
things their forms as well and preserves them in being, 
as the sun is said to be the cause of the display of colour. 
Now because form is intrinsic to a thing, and all the 
more so when it is comprehensive and primary, and 
because God himself is the proper cause of the very 
being of everything, it follows that he intimately works 
in everything. Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh; 
thou hast put me together with bones and sinews.* 

ill, 117, 119, 236, 326, Summa Thcologica, la. cv. 5 

442, 1047 

361. God has so communicated his goodness to crea- 
tures that one thing can shed on another what it has 
received. To detract from the proper actions of things 
is to disparage divine goodness. 

If creatures exerted no actions productive of real 
effects, we could never deduce their natures from their 
effects, and all natural science would go by the board. 

442 in Contra Gentes^ 69 

362. The same effect is not ascribed to God and to the 
natural cause engaged as though each were responsible 
for a part, for the whole effect proceeds from each, 
though in different ways. 

ill Contra Gentes, 70 

363. Divine art is not exhausted in the production of 
creatures, and therefore can operate otherwise than 
according to the customary course of nature. But it 
does not follow that by acting against the general run 

1 Job. x. ii. 



ACTIVITY OF GOD 125 

of things divine art contravenes its own principle, for 
an artist is well able to devise a work of art in a style 
different from his first production. 

325 Disputations, vi de Potenfia, I, ad 12 

364. When the three following rules are taken into 
account, namely that God is the cause of the being of 
natural things, that he has particular interest and care 
for each, and that he does not act by the compulsion of 
his nature, we can see how some particular effects need 
not agree with the usual course of nature. The effect 
may surpass the entire power of nature as regards the 
intrinsic being of the event, for example the quality of 
glory, 1 or as regards its happening in such and such a 
subject, for example sight in a blind man, or because it 
has demanded the suspension of the action of otherwise 
inevitable forces, for example the combustion of fire or 
the current of streams. 

43 Disputations, vi de Potentta, I 

365. Such an event is not against nature simply speak- 
ing, because it is consonant with nature by and large, 
which covers the order of all creatures to God. 

Disputations, vi de Potently I, ad I 

366. There are three characteristics of a miracle; first, 
that it is above the power of natural forces; second, that 
it is beyond the natural disposition of the subject; third, 
that it is beside the normal course of events. These three 
notes are somehow present in every miracle, namely 
of difficulty for the first, beyond expectation for the 
second, rareness for the third. Effects which immediately 
come from God alone but which follow the grain of 
things, for example the infusion of the rational soul or 
of grace, are not miraculous. 

1069 Commentary, IV Sentences^ xvn. i. 5, /// 

1 In the beatific vision. 



126 ACTIVITY OF GOD 

367. A miracle is an accredited witness pointing to 
divine power and truth. 

Disputations, vi de Potently 5 

368. Demons can work certain strange effects, but not 
miracles in the technical sense. 

Disputations, vi de Potentia, 3 

369. The perfect act of an intellectual nature is that 
activity whereby it grasps everything. 

73 T 737 Summa Theokgica, la. xxvi. 2 

370. The sum total of good things is in God, by mode 
of total simplicity, not of composition. 

1 86 Summa Theologica^ ja. xxvi. i, ad I 

371. Whatever the promise of any joy, whether it turns 
out to be well founded or illusory, pre-exists wholly and 
superlatively in the divine joy. As to contemplative 
happiness, God has the continuous and most certain 
contemplation of himself and everything else; as to 
active happiness, the government of the entire universe. 
As to earthly happiness, which lies in pleasures, riches, 
power, dignity, and fame, he possesses joy in himself 
and in all other things for his delight; instead of riches 
he has the complete self-sufficiency desired in riches; 
for power he has omnipotence, for dignity the sove- 
reignty over all, and for fame the wonder of creation. 

252, 767 Summa Thedogica, xa. xxvi. 4 



V 

Creation 1 

372. There are three phases in the going out of creatures 
from God. We ask first, what is their cause; second, 
how they come about; third, what is the principle of 
their staying. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xliv, Prologue 

373. God's spirit is said to move over the waters as an 
artist's will moves over the material to be shaped by 
his art. 

858, 860 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixvi. i,j^2, />' 

I. CREATURES 

374. By dwelling on creatures the mind is kindled into 
loving divine goodness. For all the perfections scattered 
throughout the universe flow together in him who is the 
spring of all goodness. If therefore the goodness, beauty, 
and freshness of creatures so draw our hearts, how much 
more then God who is their source? Creatures are but 
rivulets, he is the main stream. Thou hast given me, 
O Lord, a delight in thy doings: and in the works of thy 

1 The doctrine marks a decisive advance. It frees itself from 
physical incident or 'historic* fact; the philosophical theory is 
committed neither to the statement that once upon a time the 
world began nor to taking sides in the dispute about infinite num- 
bers. Nevertheless, it goes beyond anything that Aristotle had said ; 
causality is taken to the heart of being and not left with the trans- 
mutations of kinds or qualities of being, more or less profound. 
The need of a purely total cause is inferred, whose action pro- 
duces, sustains, and activates all derivative realities, extending to 
all things and penetrating to every mode and part. 



128 CREATION 

hands I shall rejoice. 1 And again: They shall be drunk 
with the plenty of thy house , that is the universe; and 
thou shalt make them drink of the torrent of thy pleasure. 
For with thee is the fount of life.* 

300, 386 II Contra Gentes> 2 

375. When affection is said to delight in something for 
its own sake, the phrase for its own sake can be under- 
stood either to mean the final cause, and in this sense 
nothing save the last end can be delighted in for its own 
sake, or to mean the formal cause, and in this sense one 
can take delight in whatever is delightful by its own 
form. A sick man delights in health for its own sake as in 
an end, and in pleasant medicine as having a good taste, 
though it is not the end he is after, but not in bitter 
medicine for its own sake, for it is a draught he takes 
solely on account of the end. Similarly one may say that 
man delights in God for himself as being the last end, 
and also in virtuous activities, not because they are 
ultimate, but because of the real worth held in pleasant 
things. 3 

215, 721 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. Ixx. i, ad i 

376. The being of creatures is not through anything 
else if the word through denotes the intrinsic formal 
cause; if it denotes the exemplar and efficient cause, 
then their being is through the divine being, not 
through themselves. 

238 Commentary, / Sentences, vm. i. 2, ad 2 

377. Science ensures right judgement about creatures. 
Their drawback is that they are occasions of our turning 

1 Ps. xci. 4. a Ps. xxxv. 8-9. 

3 There is an analogy between efficient and final causes. As 
efficient causes may be secondary yet principal and not merely 
instrumental, so final causes may be penultimate ends and not 
merely means to an end. 



CREATION 129 

away from God. Consequently the gift of science corre- 
sponds to the third beatitu ie: Blessed are they that weep, 
for thzy shall be comforted. 1 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. ix. 4 

378. Mortal creatures are not themselves direct causes 
of our sin, but occasions only, and accidental causes. 

Disputations, v dt Vcritate^ 3, ad I 

379. To curse irrational things as creatures of God is 
blasphemous, to curse them for themselves is valueless 
and vain* 

Summa Tkeohgica, 2a-2ae. IxxvL. 2 

380. To hold creatures cheap is to slight divine power. 

in Contra Gcntes, 69 

381. By faith in God a man may be guided to his final 
goal; and nevertheless he may imagine that he is sub- 
ject to certain forces when in point of fact he is above 
them, all because he is ignorant of nature and of his 
place in the cosmos. We are warned by Jeremiah: Be 
not afraid of the signs of heaven which the heathen fear* 

75 xi Contra Gtntes y 3 

382. The first cause, who is purely active without 
passivity, does not work to acquire an end, but intends 
solely to communicate his perfection. 

Summa Theohgica, I a. xliv. 4 

383. Art, the idea of a thing to be made in the mind 
of the maker, is possessed most authentically by God. 
Wisdom, which is the worker of all things, taught me* 
To give, not for any return but from the very excellence 

1 Matt. v. 5. * Jer. x. a. * Wisd. vii. ax. 

B628 K 



130 CREATION 

and consonance of giving, is an act of liberality. God 
is supremely liberal. 

I Contra Gentes, 93 

384. It is congenial to good that something should 
come from it, not that it should come from some- 
thing else. 

Summa Thcokgica, ia-2ae. i. 4, ad I 

385. When they desire any good whatsoever, whether 
by intellective, sensitive, or unconscious appetite, all 
things desire God as their end, for nothing attracts but 
for some likeness to God. 

164 Summa Theohgica, la. xliv. 4, ad 3 

386. Multiplicity can proceed from unity in three 
ways. First, by division, as when a whole is broken up 
into many parts; such multiplication takes away the 
integrity and completeness of the whole. Secondly, by 
common predication, as when many species issue from 
one genus, and many individuals from one species; what 
are here multiplied are not subsisting things, but general 
natures. Thirdly, by effusion, as when many rivers rise 
from one source, and water from a spring spills into 
many streams. In this last comparison there is some like- 
ness to the going out and distribution of distinct goods 
from the divine goodness, though here no lessening of 
the original is involved in the separation and multiplica- 
tion, for the divine goodness remains undivided in its 
essence, unspent, and simple. 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divtnjs Nominibus^ ii, lect. 6 

387. When they came to scrutinize the natures of 
things, the ancients recapitulated the sequence in indivi- 
dual processes of human knowledge, which begins from 
the senses and reaches to the understanding. The first 



CREATION 131 

philosophers were occupied with sense objects and step 
by step climbed to intelligible truths. Now because 
accidental forms are sensible, unlike substantial forms, 
they imagined that all forms were accidents, and that 
substance was matter. Because substance suffices to 
account for the accidents emanating from its principles 
they invoked no other cause save matter. This was sup- 
posed to explain the events we witness among sense 
phenomena. Furthermore, they were convinced that 
matter itself had no cause and they roundly denied the 
existence of any other causes. 

Later philosophers, however, began to address them- 
selves after a fashion to substantial forms, yet without 
reaching to a universal judgement, since their chief 
preoccupation was with special forms. They postulated 
certain active factors serving to transmute matter, but 
these were not regarded as imparting being as such. 
According to this reading some material reality was 
presupposed to the action of the efficient cause, but the 
whole of being was not considered to derive from it. 

Later philosophers still, such as Plato and Aristotle 
with their followers, reached the stage of considering 
being in general, and they were remarkable, as Augustine 
notes, 1 for professing a universal cause of reality from 
which everything issues forth into being. 

59, 655, 1091 Disputations, in dt Potentta, 5 

II. CREATIVE ACTION 

388. We must examine the emanation, not merely of 
particular things from particular causes, but also of the 
whole of being from the universal cause, designated by 
the name creation. 

Summa Theokgica^ la. xlv. I 

1 de Civitate Dei, viii. 4, where Plato is praised, Aristotle not 
mentioned. 



I 3 2 CREATION 

389. In studying the emanation of things in their 
entirety from the universal principle of being, matter, 
though not produced as a thing, must not be left out 
of account. 1 

398 Summa Theohgica, la. xliv. 2, ad i 

390. That God can and does make something from 
nothing should be steadfastly held. Every efficient 
cause acts inasmuch as it is actual, and consequently 
the mode of its action corresponds to the actuality 
of its being. Now a determinate being is determi- 
nately actual, and on two counts: first in itself, for the 
entire substance is not actual, since it is a compound 
of matter and form, actual through its form; secondly 
in its actuality, which is limited to one class or kind, and 
does not include the perfection of every other actuality. 
It is active as a being of a determinate kind, not as 
being merely a being. As an efficient cause is, so does 
it act; and therefore a natural cause does not produce 
being absolutely, but being in a subject and being as 
realized according to this or that kind. Consequently a 
natural cause acts by transmutation, requires material 
on which to work, and is unable to produce something 
from nothing. 

But God is otherwise; he is totally actual, both in 
himself, for he is pure act unmixed with potentiality, 
and with reference to actual beings, for he is their 
origin. The whole of subsisting being is produced by 
his action, to this action nothing is presupposed. He is 
the principle of being entire according to his entire 
simplicity; for which reason he can produce something 
out of nothing. 

427, 436, 1013 Disputations, in dt Potentia, i 

* Matter is a substantial reality, the potential principle in i 
complete material substance, or thing. 



CREATION 133 

391. In saying that a thing is produced from nothing, 
the preposition from does not denote material stuff, but 
precedence, as when we say, noon comes from fore- 
noon, that is it follows after. Note that the preposi- 
tion can either include or be included in the negation 
expressed by the term nothing: in the former case a 
priority of previous non-being to what exists now 
is stated; whereas in the latter case the sequence is 
disclaimed, and the sense of produced from nothing 
is not produced out of anything, as when we say, he 
speaks of nothing, meaning that he does not speak 
of anything. 

427 Summa Theologies, I a. xlv. I, ad 3 

392. Creation implies a thing's existence in fact, not 
that it has been achieved as the result of a preceding 
process. No approach to being is involved, nor any 
transmutation. What is stated is just initial reality 
coupled with a reference to the creator. In this sense 
creation is original freshness related to God. 

134 Disputations, m dt Potentia y 3 

393. In mutation there is a constant subject before 
and after. Therefore creation is not mutation, except by 
stretching the term. 

125 Summa Thedogica^ la. xlv. 2, ad^ 

394. Nothing is presupposed to the universal pro- 
duction of things; nothing to which anything could be 
owing. Only afterwards can claims be lodged. God 
depends on no other, nor looks to receive anything. He 
who acts because obliged by justice does not act simply 
from himself but because he is bound by something 
other than himself. The first cause owes no debt of 
justice. Who hath first given to him and it shall be 



134 CREATION 

recompensed unto him again ? For of him, and through 
him, and in him, are all things. 1 

332 n Contra Gentei, 28 

395. Nevertheless, in terms of a particular creature, a 
just due may appear by referring back from what 
comes after. 

II Contra Gentes, 29 

396. Being is what the mind first conceives as most 
evident, and into which it resolves all conceptions. No 
reality can be added to being as though it were some- 
thing extraneous to being, as a difference can be added 
to a genus or an accident to a substance. The only kind 
of addition that can be entertained is the making 
explicit of a special mode unexpressed in the general 
term being. 

This making explicit may take two forms. The mode 
stated may be a special grade of being, for there are 
degrees of being according to the different classes in 
which things can be ranged. Or it may state a general 
mode consequent on all being, whether in itself, thus 
essence and one, or by relationship, thus something, good, 
true. 

429 Disputations, I de Veritatc, I 

397. Existence is all-pervading. When a particular man 
comes to be, what first appears is existence, then life, 
then humanity, for he is an animal before he is a man. 2 
And so back again, he first loses the use of reason and 
life and breath remain, then he loses these, but existents 
are left. 

206, 207 Opusc. x, Exposition, de Causis, lect. i 

1 Rom. xi. 35. 

a The priority is in the arrangement of realities; a succession 
measurable by time is not alleged. 



CREATION 135 

398. Properly speaking, to be created applies to things 
which properly speaking can be said to be> namely com- 
plete substances. As accidents and substantial forms are 
not complete things, for they are co-existents rather than 
existents, it is more exact to refer to them as concreated 
rather than created. 

Summa Theokgica^ la. xlv. 4 

399. Bare matter does not exist alone in reality by 
itself, since it is purely potential, not actual being. 

510 Summa Theologica> la. vii. 2, ad j 

400. In its active sense creation signifies divine action 
invested with a certain logical relationship, and as such 
is uncreated itself. In its passive sense it signifies a real 
relation, which is a created entity; though to speak more 
precisely, a creature is a substance, and this real rela- 
tionship is not a thing, but a reality inhering in a thing, 
and therefore concreated rather than created. 

Disputations, in de Potcntia^ 3, 



401. As regards the thesis that the action of God is 
interior and exterior, and that the exterior ceases with 
the object if it be understood to mean that God acts 
by some exterior action that is not his substance, then 
the proposition is wholly false; but it can be defended 
when taken to mean that the action is exterior because 
of its object, not by reason of itself. 

As regards the thesis that to create posits an object in 
time, and that therefore the act is temporal and subject 
to the rules of time and may not be before it is this 
again refers to the object, but it is not happily phrased 
as seeming to signify the action. 

Opusc. XXIH, Dedaratio win dubiorum *d 
Magistrum Generalcm, 71, 72* 

1 Arising from a commentary on the Sentences by a fellow 



136 CREATION 

402. Creation is the primordial action, presupposing 
no other and presupposed to all others. Hence it is an 
action peculiar to God, who is the first cause. 

Moreover, he alone is the universal cause of being. 
The first and proper cause of existence neat is the first 
and universal cause; other efficient causes are not the 
cause of being absolute, but of being such or such a 
thing. 

204 II Contra Gcntes, 21 

403. While allowing that creation is the proper action 
of the universal cause, some have, nevertheless, supposed 
that inferior causes can be creative as instruments of the 
first cause. Even Peter Lombard 1 held that God can 
communicate creative power, in such wise that a 
secondary cause acts as a minister, not by its own 
authority. 

This, however, cannot be the case. For a secondary 
instrumental cause does not share in the action of a 
principal except by working dispositively through its 
own proper power to the effect intended. Otherwise it 
would be futile to adopt it. Now the proper effect of 
creative activity is presupposed to all others, and no 
instrument can predispose to its production. Creation 
works without raw material requiring to be prepared by 
an instrumental cause. 

43 Summa Theologica^ it. xlv. 5 

III. SUSTAINING ACTION 

404. Every creature is to God as the air to the sun that 
lights it. 

117, 234 Summa Theokgica^ la. civ. I 

Dominican, Peter of Tarentaise, afterwards Pope Innocent V. 
The 1^1 aster-General of the Order was John of Vcrcelli. 

1 The author of the Sentences^ the chief theological text-book 
of the scholastic period. 



CREATION 137 

405. Positively considered the twist in creatures to 
nothingness is but their dependence on the causal prin- 
ciple of their being. 

Commentary, n Sentences, xix. i. i>adj 

406. If things emanated from God from all eternity it 
would be impossible to assign an instant or period when 
they first began: either, therefore, they were never pro- 
duced, or their being is always emanating from God as 
long as they exist. 

Augustine 1 says that when a man is building a house 
the edifice remains after he has ceased his work and 
gone away, whereas the world would not stand for a 
single instant if God withdrew his support. Here is 
rejected the position of those who argue as though a 
thing did not need an active cause except while it was 
in process of being made. 

427 in Contra Gcntes, 65 

407. We can speak of the power of God either abso- 
lutely or relatively to his wisdom and prevision. To 
speak absolutely, God could withdraw his sustaining 
action and things would cease; but allowing for his 
wisdom and what he has freely disposed he will not 
have it so. For God made not death; neither hath he 
pleasure in the destruction of the living. For he created all 
things that they might be? not that they might fall into 
nothingness. 

329 iv Quodlibety 4 

408. As creatures come forth from nothing so could 
they go back there, did God permit. 

Disputations, v de Potentia^ 4, ad 10 

409. To be able to be denotes the active power of the 
creator, not a passive potentiality in a subject. To be 

1 de Genesi ad litteram^ iv. 2. 2 Wisd. i. 14. 



138 CREATION 

liable to lapse into nothingness does not imply a poten- 
tiality in the creature to non-being, but a power in the 
creator of not communicating being. 

43 5> 43*> Summa Theokglca^ la. Ixxv. 6, adz 

410. Were a thing to be annihilated, God could still 
restore it with the same numerical identity. 

iv Quodlibet) 5 

IV. ETERNITY OF THE WORLD 

411. Creation precisely states a principle of origin, but 
not necessarily a principle of duration. 

134, 250 Disputations, in de Potentta, 14, ad 8 

412. For time itself is contained in the universe, and 
therefore when we speak about creation we should not 
inquire at what time it happened. 

Disputations, in de Potentta, 17 

413. The statement that something was before time 
can be understood in two senses. First, before a period 
of time and before anything temporal; in this sense the 
world was not before time, for the instant of its begin- 
ning was temporal, though then it was not in time as in 
a section of time but as in a point of time. But the 
question can be directed to an instant before any other 
instant; in this sense the world was before time. It does 
not follow that the world is therefore eternal, for that 
temporal instant before time is not itself eternal. 

131, 144 Disputations, in de Potentta, 17, ad 5 

414. That the world must have existed always is not a 
necessary truth, nor can it be demonstratively proved. 

Summa Theologica y I a. xlvi. I 

415. That the world has had a beginning is credible, 
but not demonstrable; that is, a beginning cannot be 



CREATION 139 

strictly deduced either from the concept of an object of 
which the meaning is not temporal or spatial, or by an 
analysis of the causality involved in its production. 1 
138 Summa Theohgica, la. xlvi. 2 

416. Arguments for perpetual change and time are not 
cogent, yet even they necessarily imply an everlasting 
spiritual substance. 

Commentary, XII Metaphysics, lect. 5 

417. God is before the world in duration, yet before 
does not mean a priority of time, but of eternity, or 
perhaps, if you like, an endlessness of imaginary time. 

Summa Theclogica^ la. xlvi. I, ad 8 

418. To be infinite in substance is one case, to be 
infinite in magnitude quite another. Granting there 
might be a body infinite in magnitude, it would not 
thereby be infinite in nature, for it would still be limited 
to a definite kind by its form and to an individual thing 
by its matter. We assume then that no creature can be 
infinite in substance. The question now remains open 
whether it can be infinite in magnitude. 

Remember that a body, which is a complete magni- 
tude, can be considered under two aspects; as a mathe- 
matical body, in which case quantity only is engaged, 
or as a natural body, in which case matter and form are 
included. That a natural body cannot be infinite is 
manifest, for it must have a determinate substantial 
form, from which determinate accidents result, quantity 
among them. So every natural body has a determinate 
quantity, great or small as the case may be. The same 
line of argument touches a mathematical body; if it be 

1 Other arguments, e.g. from the energy-entropy cycle, what- 
ever their validity, would not be classed as demonstrations, but as 
'probable* arguments proper to physics. 



HO CREATION 

imagined as actually existing then it must be imagined 
as existing under some form. The form of quantity as 
such is figure, consequently such a body must have 
some figure. It would, therefore, be finite, for a figure 
is bounded by limits. 

232 Summa Theokgica, la. vii. 3 

419. A geometrician is under no necessity of assuming 
that a given line is actually infinite, but merely that 
from a given actually finite line he can always subtract a 
quantity as required, which line he terms an infinite 
line. 

Summa Theokgica y I a. vii. 3, ad I 

420. To be infinite is not irreconcilable with magni- 
tude in general, but with the notions of the various 
kinds of magnitude, two-dimensional, three-dimensional, 
and so forth* 

Summa Theokgica, I a. vii. 3, ad 2 

421. The quantitative infinite is associated with matter, 
since by division of a whole we approach to matter, for 
parts are like matter; while by addition we approach 
to the whole, which is like form. Infinity is found in the 
division, not the addition, of magnitudes. 

Summa Theokgica^ la. vii. 3, ad 3 

422. Change and time are not actually whole but suc- 
cessively, therefore they have potentiality mingled with 
actuality. Magnitude, on the other hand, is an actual 
whole. Indefiniteness or infinite dimensions are ruled 
out, therefore, in the case of actual sizes; they may be 
applied, however, to change and time. 

230 Summa Theokgica^ xa. vii. 3, ad \. 

423. Can there be an infinite number ? Concerning this 
question two opinions have been advanced. Some, like 



CREATION 141 

Avicenna and Algazel, while dismissing a multitude 
actually and essentially infinite, admit the possibility 
of a multitude accidentally infinite. A multitude would 
be termed essentially infinite when the very existence 
of something depended on an infinity of things, which 
is impossible, for its coming into existence would also 
depend on an infinity, and would therefore never be 
completed. A multitude is termed accidentally infinite 
when the infinity is not required but happens. The 
difference may be illustrated by an example. Black- 
smith's work displays a multitude of causes, art in the 
mind, skill in the arm, a hammer, and so forth. Were 
these infinitely multiplied, the smithing would never be 
finished. Yet the number of hammers employed, result- 
ing from the breaking of one after another, is a chance 
happening; it makes no difference whether one, or two, 
or many are used, or even an infinity if the work is per- 
formed in infinite time. 

The other opinion professes to find this impossible. 
For every multitude in fact must be some kind of 
multitude. The kinds of multitude are like the kinds of 
numbers, of which none is infinite, for every number is 
a multitude computed by units. An actually infinite 
multitude, even taken accidentally, is on this account 
impossible. But a potentially infinite multitude is pos- 
sible, for the increase of a multitude follows the division 
of a magnitude; the more you divide the more numbers 
result. Because there is a potential infinity in dividing a 
continuum (approaching as it were to matter), for the 
same reason there is a potential infinity in adding to a 
multitude. 

145, 447 Summa Theologica^ xa. vii. 4 

424. If it be urged that one conclusion may follow 
from another and so on and on, note that arguments do 



142 CREATION 

not go round and round in circles, but they tend to 
advance in a straight line, as Aristotle notices, along 
which infinite motion or process is impossible. 

Commentary, / de Anima, lect. 8 

425. A thing which exists always is not exempted from 
needing another in order to exist. 

117 Disputations, in de Potentta, 13, ad I 

426. Even had the world existed always it would not 
be co-eternal with God, for, as Boethius remarks, its 
existence would not have been entire all at once, which 
is the note of eternity, described by him as the perfect 
possession altogether of endless life. 1 The succession of 
time comes from change. 2 Variableness necessarily ex- 
cludes true eternity, but not indefinite duration. 

214 Disputations, in de Potentta, 14, ad I, /V 

427. Let us suppose, in agreement with Catholic 
belief and against some people's mistaken views, that 
in fact the world has not existed from eternity, but once 
had a beginning, as holy writ testifies. The doubt 
emerges, nevertheless, whether it could always have 
existed. 3 

In order to open out the truth of the matter let us 
begin by observing where we agree with our opponents 
and where we differ. If crediting eternity to something 
other than God is equivalent to meaning that it was not 
made by him, that would be an ungracious error, not 
against faith merely, but also against the doctrine of 

1 Consolatio Philosophiae^ v. 6. 

* Physics, 2i8 b . 

5 This opusculum de Aeternitatc Mundi is, together with the 
de Ente et Essentia and the de Unitate Intellectus, the most cele- 
brated of St. Thomas's smaller works, and is here quoted exten- 
sively as a typical example of his mode of arguing by methodic 
exclusion. 



CREATION 143 

philosophers, who teach and prove that anything exist- 
ing in any way whatsoever cannot exist unless caused by 
the greatest and truest being. If all that is meant, how- 
ever, is that a thing always was, though caused by God 
in its entirety, then we are on the point of the debate. 

Were this called impossible the reason alleged would 
be, either that God could not make something that 
always was, or that it could not be done even when 
allowances have been made for omnipotence. Both 
sides agree on the first proposition that God can do 
everything. What has to be looked into is the second 
proposition. 

That it cannot be done will be supported on one of 
two grounds; either because such a reality would ex- 
clude passive potentiality, or because it would involve 
a contradiction in terms. 

As to the first, let it be remembered that no process 
of becoming precedes the established being of a pure 
spirit; there is no passive potentiality before its existence, 
and no production of it from presupposed material. 
Nevertheless, God can produce a pure spirit in existence, 
and has done so. In this context it may be admitted that 
a thing caused by God could not exist always if this 
implied an eternally pre-existing passive principle. 
However, this is not entailed in the statement that God 
could make a reality that always was. 

As to the second, we speak of an impossibility on 
account of the inherent repugnance of the ideas in- 
volved, for instance that contradictories should be 
simultaneously true. Though some hold that God can 
do the impossible, while others deny it because of the 
nonentity of the impossible, in truth it is out of the 
question for God to produce what would be a self- 
destructive object. Yet to affirm that God could do it 
would not be contrary to faith, though I hold that it 



144 CREATION 

would be false. For instance, to assert that what has 
happened has not happened is a contradiction in terms, 
and similarly that omnipotence may cause things that 
have happened to be as if they had not happened at all; 
whoever says this, remarks Augustine, 1 does not notice 
that what he is saying is that some things are true inas- 
much as they are false. All the same some authorities 
have devoutly professed that God can so wipe out the 
past, nor were they deemed heretical. 

Therefore we should look closely to see whether these 
two notes, namely caused by God and always existing, 
are incompatible. Whatever the merits of the case the 
charge of heresy cannot enter here, though, were the 
ideas mutually exclusive, I hold that an everlasting 
creature would be a figment. But if the ideas do not 
clash it would be otherwise, and to deny its possibility 
would be a mistake. Furthermore, it would derogate 
from omnipotence, which exceeds our power and 
understanding, to say that we could conceive of some- 
thing God could not produce. Nor is sin at all relevant, 
for that as such is emptiness. The whole question, there- 
fore, boils down to this: Are the ideas entirely creature ly 
and without a beginning in duration mutually exclusive 
or not? 

That they do not cancel out may be shown as follows. 
Their mutual exclusiveness could only be on account of 
one or both of the following postulates; first, that a 
cause must precede its effect in duration; secondly, that 
non-being must precede being in duration, as when we 
say that creation is from nothing. 

Observe that there is no need for the efficient cause, 
in this case God, to precede his effects in duration, 
unless he so wills it. To start with, no cause instanta- 
neously producing effects necessarily antedates them in 

1 Contra Faustunt, 



CREATION 145 

duration, and God is a cause able to produce effects 
suddenly and not through a process of change. The 
major premiss may be made clearer by induction from 
sudden effects such as radiations and so forth, and may 
be proved by deduction as follows: when a thing is sup- 
posed to exist, at that very moment the beginning of its 
action can also be supposed, as appears even with things 
that come to be through natural processes, for at the 
very instant that fire begins so does heating. Now in 
an instantaneous action the beginning and the end are 
simultaneous, indeed identical. At the very instant an 
efficient cause is conceived of as producing its instanta- 
neous effect, the term of its action is also posited. The 
action and the finish are instantaneous. Well then, it is 
not contradictory to conceive of a cause producing an 
instantaneous effect and not preceding it in duration. 
This of course would be inconceivable in the case of 
a cause producing its effects through successive stages; 
here the beginning must precede the finish. Because 
people usually deal with causality working through a 
process, they do not readily recognize that an efficient 
cause is not necessarily antecedent to its effect in dura- 
tion laying down the law on special problems is rather 
apt to go along with lack of experience. 

It cannot be objected against this line of reasoning 
that God acts through his will, for the will does not 
necessarily precede its effects in duration, except when 
its action is deliberative, and far be it from us to attribute 
deliberation to God. 1 

Furthermore, a cause producing the whole substance 
of an effect is no less potent than is a cause producing 
the form, indeed, it is much more potent, for it does not 
merely educe a form from potential material. Yet a trans- 
forming cause may so act that whenever it exists its effects 

1 God does not calculate, or make up his mind in stages, as we do. 

B 028 L 



146 CREATION 

exist also, as with the light of thesun. With much stronger 
reason can God so act that his effect is whenever he is. 

Then again, a cause that could not produce a con- 
temporary effect would be lacking its complement, for 
a complete cause and its effect are simultaneous. But 
nothing is lacking in God. Therefore his effects may 
always be, on the supposition that he always is, and he 
is not bound to precede them in duration. 

Lastly, the will of the wilier does not diminish his 
power, least of all with God. The opponents of the 
Aristotelean argument to the effect that creatures have 
always existed because like always makes like urge that 
this is tantamount to treating God as a non-voluntary 
cause. But the same objection applies to what they 
would admit, namely that he is a voluntary cause but 
cannot unmake the things he has caused so as to make 
them as though they had never been. 

Hence, to say that an efficient cause need not ante- 
date its effect manifestly offers no violence to the mind. 
It now remains to inquire whether on account of its 
being made out of nothing it is impossible to conceive 
of a creature that never was not. 

In the Mono/ogion 1 Anselm shows that this is not a 
contradiction: the third interpretation, he says, of the 
words made out of nothing is when we understand 
that it is made, but that there is not anything out of 
which it is made. A similar turn of speech is employed 
when somebody grieving without cause is said to grieve 
about nothing. According to this construction no awk- 
wardness follows if we mean that all beings, apart from 
the supreme being, are made out of nothing, that is, 
not made out of anything. Nor is precedence implied, 
such as would mean that once there was nothing, and 
then afterwards there was something. 
1 Chapter 8. 



CREATION 14.7 

Even were precedence indicated, and die statement 
to bear the sense that the creature was made after 
nothing, this term after would mean precedence only 
in the most general sense. For precedence may be of 
nature or of duration. The general and universal does 
not imply the particular and proper. 1 That the creature 
is after nothingness does not imply that once in duration 
there was nothing and then afterwards something was, 
but merely that nothing is prior by nature to reality. For 
that which a thing has of itself is prior to what it receives 
from another; now a creature's reality is received from 
another; therefore left to itself and considered in itself 
it is as nothing, and there is nothing in it before being. 

Nor would it follow that non-being and being would 
be simultaneous unless nothing precedes being. For we 
do not say that if creatures always were there would be 
a time when there was nothing, but that creaturely 
beings are such that they would be non-beings were 
they left to themselves. 

Clearly, then, there is no contradiction in affirming 
that a thing is created and also that it never was non- 
existent. It is certainly strange that Augustine did not 
notice any, for it would have been a decisive disproof 
of the eternity of the world, which he attacked on many 
scores but not on that. On the contrary, he rather hints 
that no contradiction is present. 

There are other objections which I skip for the 
present, partly because they are dealt with elsewhere 
and partly because their very weakness lends force to 
the position they oppose. 

144, 145, 406 Opusc. iv, de Aetcrnitate Mwidi centra 

murtnurantes 

1 That is, the general category of precedence, in things' natures, 
docs not entail the sub-category of precedence in duration. 



VI 

Variety 1 

428. Having considered the production of things in 
being, we now turn to the variety they display, 
beginning with the distinction of things in general 2 and 
going on to their distinctions in detail, first as regards 
good and evil, 3 then as regards spirit and body. 4 

Summa TAeoIogica, la. xlvii, xlviii, Prologues 
I. MONISM AND PLURALISM 

429. Parmenides was among those who maintained 
that the whole world was one being. He seems to have 
clung to the meaning of formal unity. He argues as 
follows: whatever is outside being is non-being; now 
whatever is non-being is nothing; therefore whatever 
is outside being is nothing. But being is one. Whatever, 

1 Reflections about the spiritual value of the lyric and the 
metaphysical status of personality recoil on the perennial problem 
of the One and the Many. In St. Thomas, as in Aristotle, two 
streams converge; from the lonians the strong sense of reality in 
motion, from the Italikoi the appreciation of formal pattern. The 
dualism of potentiality and actuality is taken into the heart of 
being. Hence, the multitude of things perceived by experience is 
established in metaphysics, not by a mixture of being and non- 
being, but by a composition of partial realities. The real distinction 
between essence and existence in creatures provides for their 
separation from the One, while preserving intact their substance; 
they are true things, not merely appearances. This central thesis 
of his metaphysics supports his universal use of analogy. The 
criticism of monism is conducted beyond the levels of sensibility 
and ethics and is sustained in theology; there is no suggestion of 
pantheism in his mystical theory, nor of scorn for creatures in his 
ascetical discipline. 

* 429-57. 3 45 8 ~94- 4 495~5 l6 - 



VARIETY 149 

therefore, is outside this single reality is nothing. 
Evidently he banked on the formal notion of being, 
which seems to be one, so much so that anything 
supervening to diversify being is inconceivable, for it 
would be extraneous to being and therefore nothing- 
ness, which cannot diversify being. His mistake lay 
in treating the nature and meaning of being after 
the fashion of a generic object. But being is not a 
genus, but is predicated in manifold ways of different 
things. 

193, 230, 396 Commentary, / Metaphysics, Itct. 9 

430. The very differences that divide beings among 
themselves are real. God is not the author of the drift 
towards nothingness, but of being; he is the principle, 
not of fault, but of multitude. 

404. Disputations, in de Pofentia, 16, ad 3 

431. The fineness of the idiosyncrasies of created 
things within the pattern they make is missed by labour- 
ing the point that secondary causes are responsible for 
the variety, and they cannot match the simplicity of the 
first cause. 

228 ii Contra Gentes, 42 

432. The distinction of things has been ascribed to 
various causes, and by some to matter, either alone or 
in conjunction with an efficient cause. Democritus, for 
example, and the old natural scientists, allowed no 
cause but matter; in their opinion the distinctiveness 
of things comes from the chance motions of matter. 
Anaxagoras introduced mind, which defines things by 
separating them from the swirl. 

But this will not pass, and on two counts. First, 
because matter was created by God and consequently 
the distinctions flowing from matter must be traced 



150 VARIETY 

back to a higher cause. Secondly, because matter is for 
the sake of form, not form for the sake of matter. Now 
the distinction of things comes from their proper forms, 
matter of itself being amorphous. 

Others attributed the distinction of things to second- 
ary causes, as did Avicenna. He held that God pro- 
duced the first intelligence by understanding himself, 
and this, since it was not identical with its own being, 
consequently let in composition of potentiality and 
actuality. The first intelligence, by understanding the 
first cause, produced the second intelligence, and in 
understanding itself to be potential produced the 
heavenly bodies and motion, and in understanding itself 
to be actual produced soul. 

But neither will this pass, and also on two counts. 
First, because things which cannot be caused save 
through creation are produced by God alone, and to 
this class belong all things not subject to physical 
generation and corruption. Secondly, because the ex- 
planation proposed would amount to saying that the 
universe of tilings does not issue from the intention of 
the first cause but from the interplay of many efficient 
causes, in other words from chance. Therefore the 
finished arrangement of the universe, which requires 
a diversity of things, would consist in a random col- 
lection. 

Hence, we must conclude that the distinction and 
multitude of things is established by the intention of the 
first cause, which is God. For he brought things into 
existence in order to communicate his goodness to crea- 
tures and to be reflected in them. And because one 
creature alone was not enough for that manifestation, 
he produced many and diverse things, so that what was 
wanting in one might be supplied by another. 

302, 307 Summa Theologica, la. xlvii. I 



VARIETY 151 

II. ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE 

433. Actuality and potentiality are wider terms than 
form and matter. 

557 Opusc. xvr, Exposition, de Trinitate^ v. 4, a d 4 

434. Though there is pure actuality without poten- 
tiality, there is never in nature a potentiality that is not 
related to some actuality; thus there is always some 
form to primary matter. 

254 Disputations, de Spiritualibus Creafuris, i 

435. The difference of essence between compound and 
simple substances is that the former are composed of 
matter and form whereas the latter are pure forms. 

Two other differences ensue. One is that the nature 
of a compound substance can be signified as a whole or 
as a part, on account of individuation by matter; but 
the two significations are not interchangeable at choice; 
for instance, you cannot say that a man is his nature. But 
the nature of a simple thing, which is its form, cannot 
be signified except as a whole, for, save the form, nothing 
is substantial, for there is no material subject receiving 
the form. Therefore in whatever way you take it, the 
nature of a simple substance can be predicated of the 
thing. 

The second difference is this: the essences of com- 
pound things are received in determinate matter and 
multiplied by its divisions, so allowing for things that 
are the same in kind but diverse in number; whereas 
the essences of simple things are not so received, 
and consequently no such multiplication is possible; in 
their case many individuals of the same species cannot 
be found, but as Avicenna expressly says, 1 there arc 
as many species as individuals. 

S) v. 2* 



152 VARIETY 

Notwithstanding the absence of matter, however, 
these forms are not entirely simple substances, for they 
are not pure actualities but mingled with potentiality, 
as will presently appear. 

Whatever is not contained in the very concept of the 
essence or quiddity arrives from outside and enters 
into composition with the essence; no essence can 
be conceived without its essential parts. But every 
essence can be conceived of without postulating its 
existence in fact; I can talk about the natures of man or 
phoenix without deciding whether or not they do exist 
in real nature. Therefore it is plain that existence is 
different from essence, save in the case of a thing whose 
essence is existence. 1 

Such a thing necessarily would be unique and first. 
For plurality can result only from the addition of some 
difference, as when a genus is multiplied into its species, 
or when a form is propagated in diverse matters and 
hence a species is multiplied into many individuals, or 
when one reality is pure and another participates in it. 
But if there be a thing which is pure existence, and 
therefore subsisting existence, 2 this existence cannot 
receive the addition of a difference, otherwise it would 
not be pure existence but existence together with some 
other form besides. Still less can it receive the addition 
of matter, for then it would not be subsisting but 
material. Therefore we conclude that a thing identical 
with its existence must be unique. 

It follows that in everything else the existing is one 
reality and the essence or nature another and distinct 
reality. With pure intelligences, then, existence is dis- 

1 The argument is not for a distinction between the mental 
concept cf a thing's meaning and its reality, but between the 
principles respectively by which a thing can be and it. 

a Subsisting, i.e. in itself, not in a subject. 



VARIETY 153 

tinct from form; which explains why an intelligence has 
been pronounced to be a form and an existence. 1 

What belongs to a thing is either caused by the 
principles of its nature, as a sense of humour in man, or 
comes to it from an extrinsic principle, as the light in 
the air from the sun. It cannot be that the very existence 
of a thing derives from its form or essence, I mean as 
from an efficient cause, for then a thing would be the 
cause of itself and would produce its own existence, 
which is impossible. Therefore it must have existence 
from another. And because anything that is by another 
must be resolved into something that is of itself as into 
its first cause, so there must be a being which is the 
cause of existence in all things because it is itself pure 
existence. 

187, 204, 206, Opusc. vnr, de Ente et Essentia ad Fratres 
207, 231, 288 Socios, 5 

436. In substance there is a threefold manner of pos- 
sessing essence, namely as in God, as in spiritual sub- 
stances, as in material substances. 

God's essence is his very existing. Therefore we come 
across some philosophers who declare that God does not 
have a quiddity or essence, because his essence is none 
other than his existence. 1 From this it follows that he is 
not in a genus, for whatever is in a genus has a nature in 
front of its existence; generic or specific natures as such 
are not distinguished in diverse things but are repeated 
by diverse existences in them. Yet in saying that God is 
pure existence we should not fall into the error of those 
who hold that God is the universal existence whereby 
everything formally is. 3 For the very condition of God's 

1 An intelligence, i.e. a pure spirit. The argument repeats Avi- 
cenna. Note that essence and existence are not distinct ' thing* '. 
3 Avicenna. 
3 The followers of Amaury dc Benes. 



154 VARIETY 

existence is that no addition can be made to it. It is 
existence distinct from every other by its very purity, 
whereas the concept of common existence neither 
includes nor excludes any addition, otherwise something 
could not be conceived of that added to common exis- 
tence. So it is that no perfection or nobility is wanting 
in pure existence; rather God embraces the perfections 
found in all classes. The Philosopher 1 and the Com- 
mentator 2 call him the absolutely perfect, having all 
perfections in a more excellent manner than do other 
things: perfections that are diverse among them are one 
in him, and all agree together in his simple existence. 3 
In the second manner essence is possessed by created 
intellectual substances. Their essence is other than their 
existence, though their essence is without matter. For 
this reason their existence is not absolute, but received 
and limited and defined by the capacity of the receiving 
nature, though this last is unrestricted and unreceived 
by any matter. The Liter de Causis* notes that pure 
intelligences are finite from above, but infinite from 
below. They are finite as regards the existence they re- 
ceive from above, but they are not defined from below, 
because their forms are not limited by the capacity of 
any matter receiving them. Therefore, among such sub- 
stances, a multitude of individuals of the same species can 
be found. 

1 Aristotle, Metaphysics io2i b 3O. 
* Avicerma, in loco. 

3 The argument turns on the distinction between sheer 
existence, in which every value is implicit, and common, or as we 
say mere, existence, which is but a premiss to more vivid con- 
clusions. 

4 Cf. St. Thomas, Commentary, V Metaphysics, lect. 4. The 
Liber de Causis was an extract from Proclus, commented on by 
many scholastics, ascribed to Aristotle before the time of St. 
Thomas. 



VARIETY 155 

An exception, however, must be made in the case of 
the human soul, on account of its union with the body. 
Though the individuation of the soul depends on the 
body as the occasion for its starting off, for the soul 
does not obtain individualized existence except in the 
body of which it is the actuality, it does not follow that 
when the body is taken away the individuality of the 
soul also perishes, for since it has spiritual reality on 
which it gains the individual existence of being the 
form of this body, that existence still remains individual. 
Therefore Avicenna says that the individuation and 
multitude of souls depends on the body in the beginning 
but not in the end. 1 

Now because their essence is not existence, spiritual 
substances can be discussed according to the categories; 
genus, species, and difference can be applied to them, 
though their specific differences are unknown to us. 
Even in sensible things these differences are unknown 
and have to be signified by accidental differences spring- 
ing from essential principles, as causes are signified by 
effects and bipeds stand for men. The proper qualities 
of spiritual substances are unknown to us, and we 
can signify neither their specific nor their qualitative 
differences. 

Bear in mind that genus and specific difference do 
not apply in the same sense to intellectual and to 
sensible substances. With the latter, the genus is taken 
from what is material in the thing, the difference from 
what is formal. 2 (Hence, Avicenna, at the beginning of 
his first book de Ant ma, says that the form in things com- 

1 de Anima, v. 3. The expression is not found in so many words 
in Aviccnna's text. 

2 Thus material thing with the specific difference of vegetative 
life becomes plant, this in its turn is the material of the specific 
difference of sensitive life so becoming animal, and this with 
rationality becomes man. 



156 VARIETY 

posed of matter and form is the unmixed differentiation 
of that which is constituted from it; not, however, that 
form is itself the difference, for it is rather the principle 
of the difference, as he says in his Metaphysics. 1 The 
differentiation is said to be unmixed because it is taken 
from what is part of the nature of the thing, namely 
from the form.) 2 The position is not the same with 
spiritual substances. They are simple natures and the 
principle of differentiation cannot be sought in what is 
part of their nature. It must be from the whole nature. 
Therefore Avicenna says that only those natures have 
unmixed differentiations whose essences are composed 
of matter and form. 

So also the genus of spiritual substances should be 
taken from the whole essence, but differently indifferent 
cases. Bodiless substances agree with one another in 
spirituality, but they differ in degrees of perfection 
according as they draw away from potentiality and 
draw nigh to pure actuality. Inasmuch as they are 
spiritual a genus can be assumed in them; inasmuch as 
they are graded in perfection they take specific dif- 
ferences, but what these are we do not know. Note, 
however, that these differences are not of accidents, 
differences of more or less that do not diversify the 
species. The degree of difference in receiving a form 
does not make a difference in kind, as in the case of 
white and off-white: a different degree of perfection, 
however, within the forms or natures themselves makes 
a difference of kind. 

The third manner of possessing essence is found in 
substances composed of matter and form. In them the 
existence is received and limited, and also the nature or 
essence is received in dimensional matter. Therefore 

1 Metaphysics, v. 5. 

* Form as such is not mixed, or a composite of matter and form. 



VARIETY 157 

they are finite both from above and from below. In 
their case a multiplication of individuals within the 
same species is possible, because of the divisions of 
dimensional matter. 

43 3> 539 589 Opusc. vn, de Ente et Essentia ad Fratret 
S) 6 



III. DIVERSITY 

437. Multitude and distinction are not fortuitous, but 
decided and wrought by the divine mind in order that 
divine goodness might be shadowed forth and shared in 
many measures. There is beauty in the very diversity. 

233 Opusc. xin, Compendium Thcologiae, 102 

438. The divine ideas are set on the being of things. 
But singulars are real more truly than are universals, 
since universals do not abide save in singulars, which, 
therefore, better deserve to be held in the ideas. 

Disputations, in de Veritate^ 8 

439. That the effects of God should achieve his sim- 
plicity in their likeness to divine goodness is impossible. 
Accordingly his simple and unique reality is reflected 
from creatures by diverse and dissimilar facets. Diversity 
of things is therefore necessary, so that divine per- 
fection should be imitated. 

Opusc. xm, Compendium Theologiae^ 72 

440. A thing is known the more fully when its dif- 
ferences from others are appreciated. Each thing has its 
own proper being distinct from all others. 

I Contra Gcntes, 14. 

441. Nothing but his goodness moves God to produce 
tilings, 

II Contra Gentes, 46 



158 VARIETY 

442. Many embarrassments crop up from the conclu- 
sion that no creatures take an active part in the produc- 
tion of natural effects. To begin with, if God alone 
operated, and none of them bodies especially were 
causes, variegation would not be found among their 
apparent effects, for it is not God who is modified 
through working in various things. Empirically you 
do not expect fire to freeze, or anything but a baby to 
be born from human parents. The causation of lower 
effects should not be so attributed to divine power as to 
abolish the causality of lower causes. 

361 in Contra Gentes, 69 

443. From the first unique being proceeds multitude 
and diversity, neither because of the exigencies of matter 
nor because of any limitation of power, but because of 
the order of wisdom. 

Disputations, in de Potentia, 16 

444. How many things there are distinct from one 
another that cannot be made from pre-existing material. 
Therefore the first cause of the distinction of things 
cannot be diversity of matter. 

II Contra Gentes, 40 

445. Forms are not diverse so that they may belong to 
diverse materials, instead materials are diverse so that 
they may be charged with diverse forms. 

Opusc. xnr, Compendium Theologiae^ 71 

446. Matter acquires actual being by acquiring a form. 

Summa TAeologica, la. Ixxv. 6 

IV. INDIVIDUATION 

447. All plurality is a consequence of division. Now 
division is twofold. The first is material, through the 



VARIETY 159 

separation of continuous quantity; number, which is a 
species of quantity, is the result. This numeration is 
restricted to material things. The second is formal, by 
contrasted and diverse forms; the result is a multitude, 
not as such included in the physical categories, but 
ranged with the transcendentals 1 as when reality itself 
is divided into the one and the many. This kind of 
multitude applies to supra-material things. 

197, 1118 Summa Theologtca^ la. xxx. 3 

448. God should not be called an individual substance, 
since the principle of individuation is matter. 

196, 1119, 1120 Summa Theohgica, la. xxix. 3, ad 4 

449. There is a double distinction in things: one is 
material in things numerically distinct; the other is 
formal in things different in kind. 

In things subject to birth and death there are many 
individuals of the same kind, for the conservation of the 
species. 

436 Summa Theokgica^ la. xlvii. 2 

450. This flesh and these bones and this complexion 
are not implicit in the definition of man, nevertheless 
they are included in a thing called a man. Therefore 
that thing which is a man has in himself something that 
humanity does not have, and for this reason a man and 
humanity arc not convertible terms. Humanity signifies 
the formal part. 

35> 37> 539> 658 Summa Theologica^ la. iii. 3 

451. Numerically distinct substances do not differ 
merely by their accidents, but also by matter and form. 
If one asks why one form differs from another of the 
same kind, no other explanation can be offered except 

1 Realities not confined to a class of things 



160 VARIETY 

that they are in different determinate matters. Nor can 
it be discovered how matter comes to be earmarked 
otherwise than because of quantity. Therefore matter 
as subject to dimensions is indicated as the principle of 
this diversity. 

556 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate, iv. 2, ad 4 

452. Among all other accidents quantity has the 
peculiarity of being self-individuated, because the posi- 
tion or order of parts in the whole is implied in its very 
meaning. Wherever there is diversity of parts in the 
same species there also is individuation implied, for 
what are of the same kind are not repeated except 
individually. Because the category of dimensive quantity 
alone carries this separation of specifically similar units, 
dimensions would appear to lie at the root of individual 
multiplication. 

iv Contra Gentes, 65 

453. You misjudge quantity if you regard it as an 
obstacle, except incidentally, to a form's activity. 

in Contra Gentes, 69 

V. INEQUALITY 

454. When Origen wished to refute the theory that 
the distinction of things derives from a fundamental 
dualism of good and evil, he taught that in the beginning 
all rational creatures were equal, and that inequality 
sprang from free will, since some turned to God more 
and others less, and some others turned away more and 
others less. Those who turned to God were promoted 
to the different orders of angels according to their 
different merits, while those who turned away were 
imprisoned in bodies according to the diversity of their 
sins: this, he explained, was the cause of the creation 
and diversity of bodies. 



VARIETY 161 

This doctrine, which would have it that the corporeal 
universe came about as a punishment of sin, not for the 
communication of divine goodness, does not fit what is 
said in Genesis; 1 God saw all the things that he had 
made, and behold they were very good. 

As causing the distinction of things for the perfec- 
tion of the whole, the same divine wisdom is also the 
cause of inequality. The universe would not be perfect 
were there but one level of goodness. 

330, 432, 1098 Summa Thcokglca^ la. xlvii. 2 

455. The inequality of parts in the constitution of 
things is not from any antecedent inequality either of 
merit or of material predisposition. Inequality is de- 
manded for the perfection of the whole, as appears in 
works of art: the roof of a house does not differ from the 
foundations because made of different material, rather 
the builder selects different materials in order that the 
house may be perfect in its different parts, and indeed 
would manufacture such materials if he could not find 
them. 

516, 565 Summa Theolog'tca, la. xlvii. 2, ad 3 

456. All things issuing from God are ordered to one 
another and to God, and therefore all belong to one 
world. You can assert that many worlds exist on condi- 
tion that you do not acknowledge one directing wisdom 
as their cause. You may fancy that everything comes 
about by chance. Democritus, for example, thought 
that this world had happened from a collision of atoms, 
and that there was an indefinite number of other 
worlds. 2 

164 Summa Theologica, la. xlvii, 3 

1 Gen. i. 31. 

1 Cf. Aristotle, de Caclo, 3O3 4. 

B628 M 



i6z VARIETY 

457. According to Aristotle two systems can be con- 
sidered in the universe; 1 by the first the whole is 
ordered to something outside itself, as an army to its 
general; by the second the parts are ordered to one 
another, as the various formations of an army among 
themselves. The second co-ordination is on account of 
the first subordination. 

ill/ I Cotura GenteSy 78 

1 Metaphysics, I c 7 5 " 1 1 . 



VII 

The Problem of Evil 1 

458. Nothing appears more to impugn divine provi- 
dence in human affairs than the affliction of the innocent. 

341, 1106 Commentary, in Job, Prologue 

459. Though evil is neither good nor of God, never- 
theless to understand it is both good and from God. 

313 Commentary, / Sentences, xix, v. 2, ad 5 

I. NATURE OF EVIL 

460. Evil cannot be known simply as evil, for its core 
is hollow, and can be neither recognized nor defined 
save by the surrounding good. 

Summa Thedogica, la. xiv. 10, ad 4 

461. Evil precisely as such is not a reality in things, but 
a deprivation of some particular good inhering in a 
particular good. 

Disputations, i de Alalo, I 

1 The texts follow the order of the Summa Theologica. After 
defining the nature of evil, they turn to the distinction between 
physical and moral evil, then to the causes of evil, finally to the 
effects of evil. The universal causality of goodness and the tension 
between particular goods are the guiding principles. A theoretical 
dualism of good and evil is rejected, at least in the sense that two 
fairly equally matched contestants are here represented. Evil is 
wholly subordinate the conclusion is not a piece of wishful 
thinking, but is reached by rigorous analysis. Yet there is no 
indifference to the combat in practice, no easy optimism; nor is 
evil dismissed as a mere negation. The good that goes with it 
provides at once the specific interest and the tragedy. 



164 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

462. Let us inquire into evil, and then into its causes. 
And first as to whether it is a real form. Apparently it is. 

First, because every class represents a real nature, 
and evil is a class of things. As Aristotle says, good and 
evil are not in a class, but are themselves the classes of 
things. 1 

Second, a specific difference is a real form, and evil is 
a determinate difference in human conduct, for a good 
habit differs in kind from a bad habit, as liberality does 
from avarice or prodigality. 

Third, both extremes of two contraries are real forms. 
Now good and bad are contrasted, not as possession and 
deprivation, but as contraries. Aristotle proves this by 
showing that between them there is an intermediate 
condition, and that one can return from evil to good. 2 

Fourth, what does not exist does not act. But evil 
acts, for it corrupts good. 

Fifth, nothing else but real beings and real natures 
conspire to the perfection of the universe. Now evil is 
part of the perfection of the universe. As Augustine 
says, 3 the admirable beauty of the world is composed of 
everything; even what is called evil, well ordered and 
in its place, accentuates die goodness of things. 

On the contrary, Dionysius says that evil is neither 
an existent nor a good. 

I answer by explaining that one opposite is known 
from the other, as darkness from light. Hence the 
meaning of evil depends on the meaning of good. Now 
everything desirable is good, and since every nature 
loves its own being and perfection, it must be said that 
the being and perfection of any nature has the force of 
good. Consequently it cannot be that evil signifies a 
being, or form, or nature. We are left, therefore, to 

1 Categories, 14*33. 2 Ibid. 22% 22 b , 26. 

* Enchiridion x. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 165 

draw the conclusion that evil signifies some absence 
of good. 

To the first objection I reply: Aristotle is speaking 
according to the opinions of the Pythagoreans, who 
maintained that evil was a reality and that good and 
evil were genera; he was in the habit of citing con- 
temporary opinions that seemed plausible, especially 
in his logical works. Or alternatively, we may say with 
Aristotle 1 that the primary contrast is that between a 
positive condition and a privation, and this is verified in 
every contrast of contraries, for one extreme is always 
imperfect with respect to the other, as black to white, 
or bitter to sweet. Hence, good and evil may be termed 
genera, not absolutely, but relatively to the contraries 
in question, and thus every due form has the character 
of good and its absence that of evil. 

To the second: good and evil are not constitutive 
differences except in moral matters, where the end is 
the specific determinant, because the object of will is 
that on which morality depends. Good and evil are 
specific differences in morality; good in itself as an end, 
and evil as the absence of the required end. Not that the 
mere absence of a required good of itself constitutes 
a moral kind, an attachment to an improper end is also 
needed, by analogy with natural processes, where a 
privation of a natural form is not caused except by the 
invasion of another form. The evil that is the con- 
stitutive difference in moral matters is a particular good 
joined to the privation of another good; the end sought 
by the intemperate man is not the loss of the benefit of 
reason, but sense-delight involving rational disorder. 
Hence, evil as evil is not a constitutive difference, but 
evil as having a good conjoined. 

To the third : the above remarks may have cleared up 
1 Metaphysics, 1055^3 3- 



i66 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

this difficulty. For Aristotle is here referring to good and 
bad in morality, where an intermediate condition is 
possible if good be taken for rightly ordered activity and 
evil for activity that is not only out of right order but 
injurious to another as well. Hence, he says that a 
prodigal man is foolish, but not bad. 1 From moral evil 
there may be a return to good, but not from every sort 
of evil; from blindness there is no return to sight. 

To the fourth: a thing may be said to act in a three- 
fold sense. First, as a form, as when we say that white- 
ness makes something white, and in this sense evil as 
a privative result is supposed to destroy good, for it is 
that very corruption of good. Second, as an efficient 
cause, as when a painter is said to whitewash a wall. 
Third, as a final cause, as when an end is said to cause 
by moving the efficient cause. In these last two senses, 
evil when considered precisely as a privation, and not 
in terms of the good coupled with it, does not cause 
anything directly. For every action is from some form, 
and everything desired as an end is somehow a value. 
Therefore, as Dionysius says, 2 evil does not act, nor is it 
desired, except in virtue of some good conjoined; of 
itself it is indefinite and outside our will and intention. 

To the fifth: the parts of the universe are comple- 
mentary and interacting. One may be the purpose and 
pattern of another. But evil is contracted here only by 
reason of the good involved. Evil as such does not 
belong to the perfection of the universe, nor is it com- 
prised in the order of the universe, save accidentally, 
that is by reason of its incidental conjunction with good. 

in, 455, 610 Summa Theologtca, la. xlviii. I 

463. Pure evil, considered in the abstract, is not a specific 
determinant. Nevertheless, as occurring in a concrete 

1 Ethics^ 1121*25. 2 de Divinis Nominibus^ iv. 20. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 167 

subject, it is a differentiating characteristic. Moral acts 
are diversified by good or bad ends. 

Commentary, // Sentences^ rxxiv. i. 2, ad 3 

464. Initially and without qualification something may 
be judged to be good or evil, yet this decision may have 
to be reversed when additional circumstances are taken 
into account. It is good for a man to live, bad for him 
to be killed; but if we add that the man is a murderer 
and a public danger, then his death may be good and 
his living an evil. 

170 Summa Theologica^ la. xix. 6, ad I 

465. Evil denotes the lack of good. Not every absence 
of good is an evil, for absence may be taken either in 
a purely negative or in a privative sense. Mere negation 
does not display the character of evil, otherwise non- 
existents would be evil and, moreover, a thing would be 
evil for not possessing the goodness of something else, 
which would mean that man is bad for not having the 
strength of a lion or the speed of a wild goat. But what 
is evil is privation; in this sense blindness means the 
privation of sight. 

Now the subject alike of a form and of its privation 
is identical, namely potential being. This is either 
simply potential being, that is bare matter, which is the 
subject of a substantial form and of its contrasted 
privation, or being which is actual simply speaking, 
though potential relatively and from one point of view, 
thus a transparent body which can be the subject both 
of light and of darkness. 

Every being in potentiality as such is good, for to the 
extent that it is related to being to that extent is it 
related to good. We are left to draw the conclusion that 
the material subject of evil is good. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xlviii. 3 



i68 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

466. The material of evil is not, of course, the good 
which is opposed to it, but some other good ; the subject 
of blindness is not the sight, but the animal. 

575 Summa Theologica^ la. xlviii. 3, ad 3 

467. A thing is called evil for lacking a perfection it 
ought to have; to lack sight is evil in a man, but not 
in a stone. 

Opusc. xin, Compendium Theohgiae, 1 14. 

468. The drive to good is essential to every cause, 
natural and voluntary alike; and therefore evil is not 
directly purposed. 

But not everything besides what is intended is casual 
or fortuitous. It may be a regular or frequent con- 
sequence of what is directly intended. 

Evil is a deprivation of good, and a privation is not 
a nature or real essence, it is a negation in a subject. 

Evil cannot be caused except by good, and even then 
indirectly; this is clear both in physical and moral 
affairs. 

Every evil is based on some good, for it is present in 
a subject which is good as having some sort of nature. 
Evil cannot exist but in good; sheer evil is impossible. 

in Contra Gentes, 4, 6, 7, 10, II 

469. The subject of evil is good, not precisely the 
good opposed to evil but the good potential to it. From 
this it is clear that not any kind of good is the subject of 
evil, but that alone which is potential to a perfection of 
which it can be deprived. 

Opusc. XHI, Compendium Thcologiat, 117 

470. Evil is a by-product. 

Disputations, HI de Potentia, 6, ad 3 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 169 

471. Good enters every genus. 

208 Summa Theohgica, la. xlviii. 3, ad 3 

472. No evil as such can be desirable, either by natural 
appetite or by conscious will. It is sought indirectly, 
namely because it is the consequence of some good. This 
is the rule for every type of appetite. A natural force 
works for a form, not for the absence of form. Yet one 
form may extrude another. A lion kills for food, that 
means the death of the deer; a fornicator wants plea- 
sure, and incurs the deformity of sin. 

Summa Theologica y la. xix. 9 

473. The universe is for the best considering the 
present postulates, but not considering what God could 
have done. 

565 Disputations, m de Potcntta, 16, ad 17 

474. God and nature and every other cause work for 
the optimum total effect, and to the completion of each 
single part, not in isolation but in relation to the entire 
system. The whole itself, the universe of creatures, is 
better and the more perfect for the things that can fall 
short in goodness, and which sometimes do fall short in 
the event without God preventing them. It happens 
thus, for, as Dionysius says, the role of Providence is 
not to regiment but to respect nature. What may fail 
should fail sometimes. Also, as Augustine says, God is 
so powerful that he can make good even out of evil. 1 
Many good things would be missed if God permitted 
no evil to exist: fire would not burn unless air were con- 
sumed, lion would not thrive unless asses were killed, 
nor would just retribution be inflicted and long-suffer- 
ing patience praised but for the iniquity of persecution. 

147, 1107 Summa Theokgica^ la. xlviii. 2, ad 3 

1 Enchiridion, xi. 



170 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

II. DUALISM 

475. Under the good the Pythagoreans ranged light, 
unity, understanding, rest, the straight, male, right, 
definite, even, and square; and under evil as contraries, 
darkness, plurality, opinion, movement, the curved, 
female, left, indefinite, odd, and irregular. 

Commentary, I Ethics, lecf. j 

476. The goal of purpose is what is good, and to this 
responds the motion of desire. Government is conducted 
according to a scheme directed to an end. To this end all 
means are subordinate. Its purpose, therefore, is what is 
conceived to be good. There cannot be a ruling sove- 
reignty which seeks evil for its own sake. There is no 
justification for holding that there are two kingdoms, 
one of good, the other of evil. 

This error seems to result from the habit of lifting 
departmental considerations into the domain of universal 
causes. When people experience contrary particular 
effects proceeding from contrary particular causes, for 
instance, when they observe how water cools and fire 
heats, they are prone to believe that these opposed pro- 
cesses are continued back into the first principles of 
things. Then, because all contraries seem to be comprised 
under the headings of good and evil in that one of them 
by comparison is always deficient, they reckon that the 
primary active principles are the Good and the Evil. 

170 Opusc. vn, tie Substantiis Separatis, 15 

477. There is not one first principle of evil as there is of 
good. In the first place, the original principle of things 
is essential good. Nothing can be essentially bad. Every 
being as being is good; evil does not exist except in a 
good subject. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 171 

In the second place, the first principle of good things 
is supreme and perfect good containing all goodness in , 
itself. Now there cannot be a supreme evil, for though) 
evil lessens good, it can never totally destroy good ; while 
good remains, nothing can be an entire and unmitigated 
evil. For this reason Aristotle observes that a wholly evil 
thing would be self-destructive. 1 Were all good entirely 
destroyed and this would be required for evil to be 
complete evil itself would vanish since its subject, 
namely good, would no longer be there. 

In the third place, the very notion of evil is irrecon- 
cilable with the notion of a first principle, because evil 
is caused by good ; also because evil can be a cause only 
incidentally, and therefore cannot be the first cause, since 
the accidental is subsequent to the essential. 

Some have proclaimed that the two prime rulers 
are Good and Evil. Here lies a root of error from 
which other strange doctrines of the ancients have 
sprouted. In attending to the particular causes of parti- 
cular effects they failed to consider the universal cause 
of all being. When they found one thing by its natural 
force injurious to another, they reckoned that the very 
nature of the thing was evil; as if one were to say that the 
nature of fire is evil because it burns down the house of 
some poor man. The estimate, however, of a thing's 
goodness does not primarily depend on any particular 
reference, but on its being and on its relation to the 
whole universe, wherein every part holds its perfectly 
appointed place. 

Similarly, when they discovered two contrary parti- 
cular causes of two contrary particular effects they were 
at a loss how to resolve them into a universal common 
cause; therefore they pushed back the contrariness 
of causes into the first principles of things. Since all 
1 Ethics ) 1 126" 1 2. 



i 7 2 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

contraries have a common ground, we should instead 
look for one common cause above their proper contrary 
causes. 

121, 206 Summa Theologica, la. xlix. 3 

478. The devil is called the god of this world, not be- 
cause he created it, but because worldlings serve him. 
St. Paul uses the same turn of phrase: Whose god is their 
M/y.* 

54.1 Summa Theohgica, la. Ixv. I 

479. To shun evil and seek good are parts of the same 
process, like movement downwards and upwards. 

in Contra Gentes, 3 

III. PHYSICAL AND MORAL EVIL 

480. An evil in natural things is a privation of a due 
form, and therefore to receive a form which involves 
the loss of a proper form is an evil; thus to be set on fire. 
In moral matters, to attach oneself to an end which in- 
volves missing the due end is evil, not precisely because 
of the end desired but because of the coupled depriva- 
tion. Two moral acts directed to contrary ends differ 
from one another as right from wrong. 2 The two corre- 
sponding contrary habits are antagonistic, not precisely 
because of the privation by which one is termed vicious, 
but because of the end to which the privation is 
attached. 

777, 883, 908 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theohgiae, 116 

481. Since evil is deprivation and defect, and since de- 
fect can occur not only within a thing's natural condi- 
tion but also in its dynamism as directed to an end, it 

1 Phil. iii. 19. 

2 Morality is a general category of human acts, covering right, 
wrong, and indifferent. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 173 

follows that evil can have this double sense, namely of a 
deficiency of being, thus blindness is an organic defect, 
and of a deficiency of activity, thus limping is a func- 
tional defect. This evil in an activity, either physical or 
voluntary, which is not ordered to its appropriate end 
is called ptccatum, or sin. 1 So a doctor sins in his action 
when he does not operate for health, so also does nature 
sin in begetting a monster. 

Opusc. xnr, Compendium Tkeologiae^ 119 

482. In voluntary activity it is called not only a sin but 
also a culpa or fault, since the doer is responsible and 
therefore deserves blame and punishment. 

780, 781, 891 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theologize^ 120 

483. Evil is privation of good. Good is actuality, and 
this is double; primary actuality, which is the form and 
integrity of a thing, and secondary actuality, which is its 
operation. The incidence of evil is on both; on the 
former by a withdrawal of form or of any integral part, 
thus blindness or the lack of a limb; on the latter by 
a gap in the proper activity, either by non-performance 
or failure in execution or direction. 

Now since good for its own sake is the proper object 
of will, the evil of being deprived of it has a special 
relevance to rational creatures endowed with will. The 
evil which consists in the impairment of form and in- 
tegrity has the characteristic of penalty or pain; the 
evil which consists in bad operations has the charac- 
teristic of fault, for it is imputed to someone as a fault 
when he falls short in his proper and responsible activity. 

Summa Theologica> la. xlviii. 5 

1 Yet unless otherwise qualified by the context sin means 
moral disorder or fault, that is misdirection as regards man's 
ultimate happiness. 



174 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

484. Guilt and penalty are not the main divisions of 
evil in general, but of the special evil arising from a 
moral issue. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xlviii. 5, ad 2 

485. Fault, more than penalty, has the character of 
evil, even when penalty is given a meaning broader than 
that of a physical forfeit. Two reasons can be offered. 
First, a man is bad by the evil of fault rather than of 
penalty: as Dionysius says, 1 to be worthy of punishment 
rather than to be punished is evil. The reflection that 
God is the author of physical evil but not of moral evil 
prompts the second reason. 

328 Summa Theologica^ I a. xlviii. 6 

486. Considering the exigencies of the material from 
which he is made, death and disease are natural to man; 
but considering his form, immortality is his right, though 
the principles of nature alone are not sufficient to ensure 
this: the aptitude is inherent, but the achievement is 
a gift. 

5^5> 57 Disputations, v de Malo, 5 

IV. CAUSE OF EVIL 

487. We must say that every evil in some way has a 
cause. For evil is the deficiency of a good that is a thing's 
birthright. That anything falls short of its due and 
natural perfection can come about only from some 
cause dragging it out of its course. 

Yet only what is good can cause. If we consider the 
various kinds of cause, the efficient, final, and formal 
pauses, all spell a certain finish, which is a character- 
istic note of good; matter also, as being potential to 
good, verges on the nature of good. That good is the 
1 De D minis Nominibus, iv, 22. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 175 

material cause of evil has already appeared. As regards 
the formal cause, evil has none; instead it is rather the 
privation of form. Similarly, it has no final cause, but is 
rather the privation of due order to end ; good covers 
not only the end, but also the means. Evil has an efficient 
cause; this, however, is indirect, not direct. 

Let us make this clearer by observing the difference 
of causation as regards evil in the action and as regards 
evil in the effect respectively. In the action evil is caused 
by defect of some active principle, either in the principal 
or in the instrumental cause; an ungainly walk may 
result either from a defect of motive power, as in babies, 
or from a disability of the limb, as in the lame. On the 
other hand, evil is caused in the effect sometimes by the 
very energy of the agent not, however, in the proper 
effect of the agent and sometimes by the intractability 
of the matter. When the privation of one form is a 
necessary consequence of the form introduced by the 
agent, as when fire expels the form of air or water, the 
more energetic the agent the more forcibly it impresses 
itself and destroys the contrary. Destruction comes then 
from the very strength of the flames ; even so the energy 
is directly bent on mastering, not on destroying, though 
in effect it is incidentally destructive. But if there be a 
defect in the proper effect of fire, if, for instance, it fails to 
heat, then this is either because of weakness in the action, 
which throws us back on the defective principle already 
referred to, or from unsuitableness in the material, 
which does not receive the action of the flame playing 
on it. 

But the fact that a thing is deficient is incidental to 
the goodness by which it is active. Hence, it is true to say 
that evil has naught but an incidental cause; in this 
sense good is the cause of evil. 

Ill Sumna Tkeob^tca^ I a. xlix. I 



176 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

488. Augustine says that God is not the author of evil 
because he is not the cause of sagging to nothingness. 1 
The evil which consists in a defective action is always 
caused by some weakness in the agent. God's supreme 
perfection is flawless. Hence the evil which consists in 
defective action or which derives from a defect in the 
agent is not to be reduced to divine causality. 

But the evil consisting in the destruction of some- 
thing falls under divine causality, as appears in natural 
and voluntary affairs alike. A cause which by its power 
produces a form is also the cause of the consequent 
destruction and defect. The form principally intended 
by God among created things is the well-being of the 
general scheme, which requires that some can and will 
fail. And so in causing a good collective arrangement, 
God consequentially, and as it were indirectly, causes the 
corruption of things. The Lord killeth andmaketk alive* 
When we read, God made not death* the sense is that he 
does not will death for its own sake. Nevertheless, the 
demands of justice are bound up with the order of the 
universe, and they require that sinners should be 
punished. Thus God is the author of the evil of penalty, 
but not of the evil of fault. 

328, 1062 Summa Theologica, la. xlix. 2 

489. We should cast back to the first unfailing cause 
for all the reality and value present in the effect of a 
deficient secondary cause, but not for what is missing 
there. All the motion in the action of limping is caused 
by the power of walking; that the gait is lopsided does 
not come from the power but from the malformation 
of the limb. So, too, whatever being and act there 
is in an evil action, all must be resolved into God as 

i Lib. Ix-xxui Quaest. 21. * I Kings ii. 8 (Vulgate). 

3 Wisd. i. 13. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 177 

in its cause, but whatever defect is present there is 
caused, not by him, but by the defective secondary 
cause. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xlix. 2, ad TL 

490. In one respect a thing may be actual and 
causal, and in other respects lacking and deficient. 
Thus, a blind man has the power of walking, but 
because of his disability he may undergo the defect of 
stumbling. 

An evil action can have a proper effect by the good- 
ness and being that it possesses. Thus adultery causes 
human generation inasmuch as it is the mingling of man 
and woman, not inasmuch as the order of reason is 
wanting. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xviii. i, <*</ 2, J 
V. EFFECTS OF EVIL 

491. However greatly multiplied, evils can never con- 
sume the whole of good. 

in Contra Gentes, 12 

492. To make this clear we should distinguish three 
headings of good: the first is precisely that good totally 
taken away by evil, namely the good attacked by evil ; 
thus the light lost in darkness and the sight in blindness. 
The second is the good neither totally destroyed nor yet 
even lessened, namely the good which is the subject of 
evil; for example, the substance of air undiminished by 
darkness. The third is the good which is diminished but 
not destroyed, and this is the ability of the subject to act 
in the proper fashion. 

Now this diminution should be illustrated by com- 
parison with the slackening of qualities and forms, not 
with the subtraction of quan tides. This slackening of 

B028 H 



178 THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

ability may be tested by its contrary intensity. Ability 
grows more intense by dispositions toning the active 
faculty; the more multiplied the acts, the readier the 
subject becomes to receive the perfection and form of 
activity. And conversely, the more weakened the subject 
becomes by contrary dispositions induced by repeated 
and strong contrary acts, the slacker grows the power 
for right activity. 

But even were the contrary disposition piled up 
indefinitely, the aptness for right action would be but 
indefinitely weakened, not wholly destroyed. The root 
would always remain, namely the substance of the 
subject. If you interposed an infinity of opaque screens 
between the air and the sun you would immeasurably 
diminish the lucidity of air, but this quality would not 
be destroyed so long as air remained, which of its nature 
is transparent. Similarly, even if sins could be piled up 
infinitely, and the soul's ability for gracious activity 
thereby infinitely lessened (for sins are like obstacles 
interposed between us and God, our sins have separated 
between us and God}, 1 nevertheless, the aptness for virtue 
would not be totally destroyed, for it follows from the 
very nature of the soul. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xlviii. 4 

493. The schedule of human nature's good estate can 
be set out under three heads: first, the very principles, 
components, and resulting properties of human nature, 
such as the psychological abilities of the soul and so 
forth; second, the moral inclination to virtue; third, the 
original endowment of integrity. 

The first are neither destroyed nor diminished by 
moral evil; the third is entirely taken away, while 

1 Isa. lix. 2. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 179 

the second is weakened. Acts set up a tendency to 
do more of the same sort, and given a bias in one 
direction the trend to the opposite is correspondingly 
lessened. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. Ixxxv. I 

494. The capital of human nature diminished by sin 
is the natural inclination to virtue instinctive in man 
as a rational being; to act aright is to act according 
to reason. Now sin cannot destroy man's rationality 
altogether, for then he would no longer be capable 
of sin. 

To illustrate a continuous diminution an example has 
been drawn from quantity. A given quantity can be 
infinitely subtracted from and yet never wholly dis- 
appear. Aristotle says that if you continuously take away 
the same quantity from a given amount it will eventually 
disappear, 1 for instance if you keep on taking away a 
handsbreadth; but if instead the subtraction is always 
according to the same proportion, you can go on for 
ever, for instance if you halve what you start with, then 
again halve a half, and so on: what is subtracted is 
always less than what was subtracted just before. But 
this does not apply to the present case, for a later sin 
does not less diminish the virtue of nature than does a 
preceding one, but if anything rather more, especially 
if it be graver. 

Therefore we must illustrate the situation otherwise. 
The inclination to virtue should be taken as a kind of 
intermediate reality between two extreme terms; on one 
side supported by and rooted in rational nature, and on 
the other side climbing to the achievement of virtue as 
to its finish and end. Weakening may affect either side. 
But sin does not strike at the root, since it does not 

1 Physics^ 2o6 b j. 



i8o THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

diminish nature itself: what it does is to block the 
ability from reaching its end; the disability consists in 
the interposition of a barrier. Thus there can be an 
infinite lessening of virtue, for always another layer can 
be added, as when man piles sin on sin. Yet the instinct 
for right action always remains radically intact. 

905, 906, 907 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. Ixxxv. 2 



VIII 

Body and Spirit 1 

495. Now we must look at the distinction between 
spiritual and bodily creatures; and first we take the 
purely spiritual creatures, then purely bodily things, and 
finally.those composed of spirit and body, namely men. 

Summa Thcologica, la. 1, Prologue 

496. Every effect shows some trace of its cause. Some- 
times it may manifest the causality but not the form of 
the cause; there is no smoke without fire. This has been 
termed a footprint, which notifies that someone has 
passed, but not what manner of man he was. Other 
effects represent the form of the cause, as when fire is 
kindled or a statue carved of Hermes. Such a likeness is 
termed an image. 2 

There is an image of the Trinity in all conscious and 
loving creatures so far as they exhibit the analogy of 
conceiving a word and advancing in love. 

But in all creatures there is the footprint of the 
Trinity, inasmuch as each reveals realities to be re- 

1 The principles have been stated in previous chapters. All 
reality is kin; the division between mind and matter is not that 
between two utterly opposed worlds. Being is scaled down in 
degrees, from the sheer actuality of God to the bare potentiality of 
matter. There is no admission of uncreated and intractable stuff, 
independent of the first cause; no hint that the limited actuality 
of a spiritual form is contaminated by contact, or even by union, 
with body. On the contrary, the beauty of the world demands 
numerical multiplication within the same kind, possible only in 
material substances; moreover, there are minds which properly 
require the assistance of sense. 

2 St. Augustine, de Trinitate, vi. 10. 



i8z BODY AND SPIRIT 

solved necessarily into their causes, namely to the 
divine Persons. 

270 Summa Theokgica^ la. xlv. 7 

I. THE SCALE OF BEING 

497. The higher a nature the more intimate what 
comes from it, for its inwardness of activity corresponds 
to its rank in being. Inanimate bodies hold the lowest 
place of all; from them nothing emanates save by the 
action of one thing on another. 

Plants are higher; already in them there is an issuing 
from within, for the sap is converted into seed, and this 
when planted in soil grows into a plant. Here the first 
degree of life may be discerned, for living things are 
those that set themselves into activity, whereas things 
that are in motion only inasmuch as they are acted on 
from outside are lifeless. This is the index of life in 
plants, that within them there is a principle of motion. 
Nevertheless, their life is imperfect, for though the 
emanation is from within at the beginning, that which 
comes forth gradually becomes wholly extraneous in 
the end; the blossoms change into fruit distinct from the 
boughs on which they grow, and presently these, when 
ripe, fall to the ground and in due course become other 
plants. Scrutiny shows that the principle of this process 
is extrinsic to the plant. 

Above plants there is a higher grade of life, that 
namely of sensitive things. Their proper process, 
though initiated from without, terminates within; the 
more developed the process, the more intimate this 
result. A sensible object impresses a form on the 
external senses, this goes into the imagination and then 
deeper into the store of memory. What begins from 
without is thus worked up within, for the sensitive 



BODY AND SPIRIT 183 

powers are conscious within themselves. So this vital 
process is superior to that of vegetating proportionately 
to its greater immanence; but is not yet wholly perfect, 
since the emanation is always from one thing to another. 
The supreme and perfect grade of life is found in 
mind, which can reflect on itself and understand itself. 
But there are different degrees of intelligence. The 
human intellect, though able to know itself, must start 
from outside objects and cannot know these without 
sense-images. A more perfect intellectual life is that of 
pure spirits, where the mind does not proceed by intro- 
spection from outside things to know itself, but knows 
itself by itself. But not yet is the ultimate perfection of 
life achieved, for though the concept is wholly intrinsic, 
nevertheless it is not identical with the substance of 
their mind, since the being and understanding of 
spiritual creatures are not the same. The highest perfec- 
tion of life is in God, where acting is not distinct from 
being, and where the concept is the divine essence. 

153, 1 60, 294, 298 iv Contra Gentcs, n 

498. Production of one thing spells destruction for 
another. Consequently in human as in animal evolution, 
when the more perfect arrives the less perfect departs, 
yet in such a manner that the supervening form keeps 
the endowment of the preceding, and has much more 
besides. 

534> 553 Summa Thcokgica, ra. cxviii. 2, adz 

499. Some of the lowest animal kinds scarcely surpass 
vegetable life. Mussels, for instance, having only the 
sense of touch, are stationary and embedded like plants. 

II Contra Gtntc^ 68 

500. After the works of the six days of creation, none 
of the things subsequently made by God is so utterly 



184 BODY AND SPIRIT 

new as not to be there anticipated in some way. Some 
things pre-exist materially, others causally as well, as the 
individuals that are now generated pre-existed in the 
first individuals of the species. Fresh kinds that may 
emerge are present in forces already at work as animals 
of a new species are sometimes produced from the union 
of animals of different species, as a mule from an ass 
and a mare. 

Summa Theokgica, la. Ixxiii. i, ad 3 

II. LIVING SUBSTANCE 

501. Life is attributed to things observed to be in 
motion from themselves and not from another. When 
an outside mover is not perceived, simple folk call a 
thing alive quicksilver, for instance, or the waters of 
a gushing spring, but not the water in a cistern or 
stagnant pond. 

519 I Contra Gentes, 97 

502. Life is an abstraction from something alive. The 
real aliveness of a living thing is its very being. 

i Contra Gentes, 98 

503. The term life has two usages. It may signify the 
very being of the living thing, and in this sense happiness 
is not life, for to be human and alive is not necessarily 
to be happy; only in God is happiness identical with 
being. Life may also signify activity, and in this sense 
eternal life is termed our last end: This is life eternal, 
that they might know thee, the only true God. 1 

207 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. iii. 2, ad i 

504. In treating of bodiless substances we begin from 
conjectures that have been made from of old, accepting 

1 John xvii. 3. 



BODY AND SPIRIT 185 

them when consonant to Catholic belief, and dismissing 
them when contrary. 

57 Opusc. viz, de Substantiii Separatis^ Prologue 

505. The completeness of the universe requires the 
existence of intellectual and incorporeal substances. 

432 Summa Theologica, la. 1. I 

506. Through failing to free themselves from their 
imaginations, some have been unable to understand that 
anything can exist without being situated somewhere. 

56 Disputations, in de Potentia, 19 

507. It seems reasonable that the number of spiritual 
substances should incomparably exceed that of material 
substances. 

418, 423 Summa Thcologica^ it. 1. 3 

III. BODIES 

508. Quite untenable is the position that the visible 
things of this world are created by an evil principle, not 
by God. 

454, 761 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixv. I 

509. As Dionysius teaches, it is more fitting that divine 
truths should be expounded under the figures of 
humble and not of sublime bodies. 1 First, because the 
fancy is thereby preserved from error, especially in the 
case of those who cannot rise above the thought of 
bodily loveliness; the comparison will certainly not be 
mistaken for a literal description. Secondly, such por- 
trayal is better adapted to our present state of knowledge 
about God, when what he is not is clearer than what he 
is; therefore comparisons drawn from earthly things 
farthest away from him convey more truly that he 

1 De Coelestt Hterarc hia^ ii. i. 



186 BODY AND SPIRIT 

is beyond anything we can say or think about him. 
Thirdly, because they serve to veil divine mysteries 
from those who care not for them. 

69, 264 Summa Theologica, 11. L 9, ad 3 

510. Since we know through form, we cannot know 
bare matter in itself. 1 Matter, to begin with, is taken as 
the subject of form, but we can know it by analogy or 
proportion, for instance, when we judge that wood is 
a reality other than the form of a cabinet or a couch. 

Commentary, / Physics^ lect. 1 3 

511. Matter itself cannot be adequately known except 
through motion. Its investigation is the physicist's job; 
the philosopher should accept his findings. 

44 Commentary, VII Metaphysics^ lect. ^ 

512. Matter by itself is neither existent nor knowable. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xv. 3, ad 3 

513. In our present life one man's thoughts are hidden 
from another by two barriers, the grossness of the body 
and the secrecy of the will. The first will be removed at 
the resurrection; the second will remain and is present 
now among pure spirits. Nevertheless, the candour of 
body will display the quality of mind. 

565 Summa Theokgica^ I a. Ivii. 4, ad I 

514. In the renewal of things at the end of the world 
it is certain according to Catholic doctrine that all 
bodily creation will be improved. 

763, 764 Opusc. xxir, Dedaratio xlii Quaeitionum ad 

Magistrum Ordinis, 36 

1 Bare matter, i.e. primary matter, materia prima, the potential 
substantial substrate of bodies, formless of itself, and therefore 
as such not discoverable by experiment. Its presence is inferred. 



BODY AND SPIRIT 187 

IV. THE UNIVERSAL FRAME 

515. Concerning the inquiry whether hell is at or near 
the centre of the earth, my opinion is that nothing 
should be rashly asserted, not least because Augustine 
reckoned that nobody knows where hell is. The lower 
regions can mean whatever is meant by the term Inferior. 

For myself I do not believe that man can know the 
position of hell. 

Opusc. xxi, Declaratio xxxvi Quacsticnum ad 

Lector em Venetum^ 24, 25 

516. He watereth the high hills from his chambers; the 
earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works* 

From eternity the Lord King of Heaven made the 
law that the gifts of his providence should reach lowly 
things through intermediate principles, wherefore 
Dionysius says this to be the holy law of divinity, that 
they should be led by measured steps to divine light. 
This law is developed in bodily as well as in spiritual 
creatures. On this point Augustine remarks, that just as 
the crasser and weaker bodies are ruled by subtler and 
more potent bodies according to plan, so are all bodies 
ruled by the rational spirit of life. And therefore the 
psalm of our text sings this law, observed in the com- 
munication of spiritual truth, through metaphors drawn 
from things of sense. From the heights of the clouds 
showers fall and the mountains are watered; thence 
streams flow down and, drinking them in, the earth is 
made fruitful. So also from the heights of divine wisdom 
are watered the minds of teachers, signified by moun- 
tains, and through their ministry divine wisdom is shed 
on the minds of their hearers. Let us consider four 
points in the text we have cited: the height of spiritual 

1 Ps. ciii. 13. All references are to the Vulgate. 



i88 BODY AND SPIRIT 

doctrine the dignity of its teachers the condition of 
the hearers and the method of communication. 

(0 

The height is beckoned to by the words, from his 
upper rooms; the Gloss says, from his higher chambers. 
Three comparisons may illustrate how near sacred theo- 
logy is to the summit of knowledge. 

First, by its origin, for this is the wisdom described 
as descending from above? also, the word of God on high 
is the fount of wisdom. 2 

Secondly, because of the rarity of the air. / dwelt in 
the highest places? There are some heights of divine 
wisdom to which all may climb, though with difficulty; 
as Damascene says, some knowledge of God's being is 
naturally inborn. All men see Aim, everyone beholdeth 
him afar off* There are other heights to be reached 
only by the skill of experts, guided by their reason; that 
which is known to God is manifest to them? But the 
highest peaks are beyond all human reasoning; hidden 
from the eyes of all living? and again, he makes his 
covert in darkness. 1 These are the places where wisdom 
is said to dwell, and they are discovered to dedicated 
guides; thy spirit searcheth all things, yea even the deep 
things of God? 

Thirdly, because of the sublimity of the end, which 
is the highest of all, namely eternal life. These are written 
that you may believe that Jesus is the Christy the son of 
God, and that believing you may have life in his name? 
and again, seek the things that are above, where Christ is 
sitting at the right hand of God; mind the things that are 
above, not the things that are upon the earth. 

1 James iii. 17. 2 Ecclus. i. 5. 3 Ecclus. xxiv. 7. 

4 Job xxxvi. 25. 5 Rom. i. 19. 

6 Job xxviii. 21. 7 Ps. xviii. n (Vulg.). 

* i Cor. ii. 10. 9 John xx, 31* I0 Col. iii. r-2. 



BODY AND SPIRIT 189 

(") 

Because this doctrine is awe-inspiring, dignity is 
demanded of its teachers. They are signified by 
mountains, he watereth the high hills. And this also for 
three reasons. 

First, because of their loftiness, lifted above earth and 
nigh to heaven. Theologians should spurn earthly things 
and gaze with longing at the heights above. Our con- 
versation is in heaven. 1 And it is said of the teacher of 
teachers, namely Christ; he shall be exalted above the 
hills, and all nations shall flow unto him. 2 

Secondly, because of their splendour. For hills are 
the first to reflect the dawn, and similarly holy teachers 
are the first to catch the light of divine wisdom. How 
wonderful was thy dawning over the everlasting /tills; 
dismayed are the rash-hearted,* that is by teachers who 
are nigh to eternity. Among whom ye shine as lights in 
the world* 

Thirdly, because mountains are a bulwark and pro- 
tect a country from its enemies. So the teachers in the 
Church should be defenders of the faith against error. 
The children of Israel relied, not on lances and arrows, 
but on their hills; and for this they were sometimes 
taunted: You have not gone up to face the enemy, nor have 
you set a wall for the house of Israel, to stand in battle in 
the day of the Lord? Accordingly, all teachers of holy 
writ should stand out in virtue that they may be fitted 
to preach, for as Gregory says, it must needs be that the 
teaching will be contemned of those whose life is 
despised. But the words of the wise are goads, and nails 
deeply fastened in* The pulse cannot beat steadily in the 
fear of the Lord unless we are trained to heights. Guides 

1 Phil. iii. 20. 2 Isa. ii. 2. 3 p 8< i xxv . 5 (Vulg.). 

4 Phil. ii. 15. 5 Ezek. xiii. 5. 

* Ecclcs. xii. ii. 



190 BODY AND SPIRIT 

must be experienced if they are to be helpful and show 
us the way. Unto me, who am less than the least of all the 
saints, is the grace given, to preach among the gentiles the 
unsearchable riches of Christ, to make all men see what is 
the fellowship of the mystery, which hath been hid from 
the beginning of the worlds So also must they be well 
equipped to tackle errors. / will give you mouth and 
wisdom so that all your adversaries will not be able to 
gainsay nor resist* Concerning these three functions, 
namely preaching, studying, and disputing, it is said: 3 
that you may be able to exhort, as regards preaching; in 
sound doctrine, as regards study; and to convince gain- 
sayers, as regards disputation. 



The condition of the hearers is compared to earth, 
the text saying, the earth shall be satisfied. Here again 
there are three characteristics. The earth is lowest, 
the heavens above and the earth beneath.* Secondly, 
it is stable and firm, the earth standeth for ever* 
Thirdly, it is fruitful, let the earth bear fresh plants 
and herbs yielding seeds, and trees bearing fruit after 
their kind.** 

Therefore, like the ground should learners be low 
according to humility: where humility is there also is 
wisdom." 1 And firm in soundness of sense: be no more 
childish? And fruitful, that the words of wisdom may 
be taken and yield good fruit: what fell on good ground, 
these are they who in a good and honest heart hearing the 
word keep it and bring forth their fruit in patience* 
Modesty is required, for they are instructed through 
listening: if thou wilt incline thine ear thou shalt receive 

1 Eph. iii. 8-9. a Luke xxi. 15. 3 Tit. i. 9. 

4 Prov. xxv. 3. * Ecclcs. i. 4. 6 Gen. i. n. 

7 Prov. xi. 2. * Eph. iv. 14. Luke via. 15. 



BODY AND SPIRIT 191 

instruction, and if thou lovest to hear thou shalt be wise. 1 
Also judgement of the right sense of what is meant: 
doth not our ear try thy words ?* Finally, fruitfulncss of 
discovery, for a good listener takes much from the little 
he hears: give occasion to a wise man, and wisdom will be 
added* 



In conclusion the conditions of communication are 
touched on and at three points, the method, the 
quantity, and the quality. 

As regards the method of delivery, note that the 
minds of the teachers cannot grasp the complete plan of 
divine wisdom. It is not said that the high truths descend 
into the mountains, but that he watereth the high hills 
from his chambers. Lo, these are said in part.* Similarly, 
the teacher cannot communicate to his hearers all that 
he grasps. He heard unspeakable words which it is not 
lawful for a man to utter.* The text does not say that 
the fruit of mountains is given to the earth, but that the 
earth is satisfied with its own fruits. In expounding the 
text, he bindeth up the water in his clouds, so that they 
break not out and fall down together? Gregory says that 
a teacher should not teach all he knows to unlearned 
folk, for he himself cannot know of the divine mysteries 
all they be. 

Secondly, the manner of possession is here referred 
to, for God has wisdom of his nature, and wisdom comes 
from his own higher parts. With him is knowledge and 
strength, he has counsel and understanding.' 1 But enough 
of this knowledge is bestowed on teachers, therefore they 
are said to be watered from on high. / will water my 

1 Ecclus. vi. 33. 2 Job xii. n. * Prov. ix. 9. 

* Job xxvi. 14. * 2 Cor. xii. 4. 6 Job. xxvi. 8. 

* Job xii. 13. 



I 9 2 BODY AND SPIRIT 

garden of plants, with abundance the fruits of my meadow. 1 
The hearers share in this, signified by the fruitfulness of 
earth. / shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear* 

Thirdly, as regards the authority for teaching. God 
gives wisdom of his own power, therefore he is said 
to water the mountains. But human teachers impart 
wisdom only as ministers. Therefore, the fruits are not 
attributed to the mountains, but to God's activity: the 
earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. For who then 
is Paul, and who is dpollos, but ministers by wfom ye 
believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?* 

But who is sufficient for these things?* God demands 
upright servants; he that walketh in a perfect way, he 
shall serve me. 1 They must be intelligent; a wise servant 
is acceptable to the king: 6 and ardent; who makest thy 
angels spirits and thy ministers a burning fire? and 
disciplined \you ministers of his that do his will? Through 
and of himself no man is equal to such a ministry, but 
we hope for divine help. Not that we are sufficient to 
think anything of ourselves as of ourselves, but our suffi- 
ciency is of God. 9 It should be entreated of him. If any 
of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, t hat give th to all 
liberally andupbraideth not; and it shall be granted him. 1 * 

Let us pray that Christ may bestow this wisdom on 
us: Amen. 

Opusc. XL, Breve principium fratri* Tbomae 
de Aquino quando incepit Paristis ut Magitter 
/ft Theologia 11 

1 Eccluf. xxiv. 35. * Pa. xvi. 15 (Vulg.). 

* i Cor. iii. 5. 4 2 Cor. ii. 16. * Ps. c. 6. 

* Prov. xiv. 35. 7 Ps. ciii. 4. f Pi. cii. 21. 
9 ^ Cor. iii. 5. I0 James i. 5. 

11 St. Thomas's inaugural lecture at Professor in Paris Uni- 
versity. 



IX 

Human Nature 1 

517. Psychology is part of natural philosophy and 
physical science. 

43, 48 Commentary, I de Anima, lect. 2 

518. 1 he two notes of motion and sensation mark the 
difference of animate things from inanimate things. 
Correspondingly, the early psychologists diverged in 
following different interests, some stressing motion, 
others stressing consciousness. 

Commentary, / de Anima, lect. 3 

I. SOULS 

519. Let us agree on the meaning of the term. Soul is 
the first principle of life within living things about us: 
living things we term animate, things lacking life 
inanimate. 

1 The Summa Theologtca follows the order of the first chapter 
of Genesis. The treatise on man, rather an anthropology than a 
psychology, comes as a climax to the questions on the different 
days of creation and should be set against that zoological back- 
ground: farther back lies the study of spiritual substances. St 
Thomas works with two apparently irreconcilable principles; 
first, that man is a material and animal substance; second, that his 
single soul, composing a natural unity with his body, is spiritual. 
The contrasted themes run throughout his teaching : it was this 
part of it his contemporaries found most contentious. He has a 
clear scheme of the specific abilities of man, but his faculty- 
psychology does not lose sight of the single wholeness of the 
organism : 'actions come from the complete substance', this saying 
is frequently quoted* The appropriate method of inquiry is intro- 
spection, but it is based on, and controlled by, external data. 

B628 O 



I 9 4 HUMAN NATURE 

Now life is chiefly manifested in the two functions of 
motion and knowledge. According to some of the 
ancients its principle is bodily: this, however, was be- 
cause they had not developed far enough to appreciate 
what lies beyond the range of the imagination; bodies 
alone were real, they held, and anything else unreal. 

That they were at fault in their opinion may be 
shown in many ways, and we will take but one, con- 
fidently and in general terms. Obviously not every 
principle of vital operation is soul, otherwise the eye 
would be soul, since it is the principle of sight; and the 
same applies to other vital organs. The term should be 
reserved to the first principle of life, for though there 
may be bodily vital principles, the heart for instance, 
a body cannot be the first principle of life. 

For evidently to be the principle of life, or even to 
be alive, does not belong to body precisely as such, 
otherwise every body would be a principle of life or 
alive. Life is in a body because it is a special kind of 
body ; that body is in fact of such a kind comes from 
a factor which may be called its actuality. The soul, 
therefore, is not a body, but the actuality of a body, by 
analogy with heat where the principle of warmth, which 
is not itself a body, is a kind of actuality of body. 

Summa Theologica, it. Ixxv. I 

520. Some psychological investigations concentrated 
solely on the human soul. The Platonic philosophers 
held that bodiless universal forms and ideas were the 
causes both of the being and of the being known of 
particular things, and they sought the pure and essential 
soul, the cause and idea of all that is in particular souls. 
The physical philosophers, on the other hand, felt no 
hankering for universal substances and kept to facts. 
From these two conflicting opinions rises the issue 



HUMAN NATURE 195 

whether we should investigate soul as such or keep to 
this or that soul, of horses, men, and the heavenly 
bodies. Aristotle sought to keep the balance between 
the Platonist and the physical philosophers, between 
the general nature of soul and the specific characteristics 
of each type. 

44, 652 Commentary, / de Anima^ lect, I 

521. We should deal first with food, which is the 
burden, and of generation, which is the act, of vegetable 
soul. This part of the soul is primitive; it is, as it were, 
the foundation of the sensitive and intellective souls, 
for natural being is basic to sensible and intelligible 
being. 

498 Commentary, // Je Anima, lect. 7 

522. To inquire into the meaning of animal is one 
business, to inquire into the meaning of human animal 
quite another. 

Summa Theologica y i a. xxix. 4 

523. Some have barbarously spoken of the soul as 
though it were blood. 

Commentary, I de Anima^ Itct. 5 

524. Human souls and pure spirits are different kinds 
of things. 

Summa Thcologica> la. Ixxv. 7 

525. Sensation is not an activity of pure soul. Though 
not peculiar to man, it is truly human. It follows that 
man is not just soul, but a compound of body and soul. 

624 Summa Thcologica, la. Ixxv. 4 

526. The sensitive soul has no operation proper to 
itself in isolation. Sensitive activity is always that of soul 



196 HUMAN NATURE 

and body conjoined. We are bound to infer that animal 
souls are not completely substantial, since they are not 
independently active. 

Summa Theologica, I a. Ixxv. 3 

527. The principle of intellectual activity, which we 
term the human soul, is a bodiless and completely sub- 
stantial principle. 

This principle, also termed the mind or intellect, can 
act without the body having an intrinsic part in the 
activity. Nothing can act independently unless' it be 
independent. 

Summa Theologies la. Ixxv. 2 

528. Even though it be part of a substance, a thing may 
be called completely substantial 1 so long as it neither is 
bound up with matter, like a material form, nor inheres 
in a substance, like an accident. We can pass the state- 
ment that the human soul understands, though it would 
be more accurate to say that the man undefsta53s 
through his soul. 

5^ Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxv. 2, ad z 

529. Were the principle of intelligence inwardly a 
bodily principle, it would not be able to range over all 
bodies, for a bodily substance is pinned down to one 
determinate kind of body. 

586 Summa Theologtca^ la. Ixxv. 2 

530. Intellectual activity requires a body, not as an 
organ through which it operates, but in order that an 
object may be provided. 

Summa Theologica, xa. Ixxv. 2, ad 3 

1 That is, it is able to exist alone, though specifically incom- 
plete, e.g. a disembodied human soul. 



HUMAN NATURE 197 

531. The soul is part of time existing above time in 
eternity: it contains nature, but surpasses the physical 
principle of motion measured by time. 

239 Opusc. x, Exposition, de Causis, lect. 9 

II. PSYCHO-PHYSICAL UNITY 

532. Aristotle's doctrine, rather than Plato's, is corrobo- 
rated by experience. 

f Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxxviii. i 

533. Having shown that an intellective substance is 
neither a body nor a power dependent on the body, we 
now have to investigate whether it can be united to 
a body. 

In the first place the union obviously cannot come 
about in the manner of a mixture nor by touching 
properly so called, for contact is between bodies. 
Neither by merging nor by being fastened together can 
one perfectly single thing be constituted from intel- 
lectual and from bodily substance. There is, neverthe- 
less, a mode of contact by which spirit can be joined to 
body, not by a mutual joining of quantities, but by the 
touching implied in the action of one thing on another: 
thus we say that we are touched by another's grief. This 
is the touch of power, not of quantity; it is feasible 
between spirits and bodies: intellectual substances can 
act on bodies and set them in motion. Yet though spirit 
and body are united as regards action and reaction, they 
do not thereby make up one thing simply so called. 1 

Consequently we find ourselves inquiring whether 
one thing simply speaking can be constituted from spirit 
and body. Now a natural unity cannot be constituted 
from two permanent realities unless they be related as 

1 However pervasive and subtle the interaction of two things, 
they never compose one substance. 



198 HUMAN NATURE 

substantial form and matter. Hence, we are faced with 
the problem how an intellective substance can be the 
substantial form of a body. 

To some serious inquirers this seemed quite out of 
the question. Supported on several sides, they felt 
emboldened to declare that no intellectual substance can 
be the form of a body. At the same time they were well 
aware that such a statement appears to run counter to 
the simultaneously spiritual and material nature of man, 
and that the onus lies on them of devising hew this 
psycho-physical unity can be salvaged. Plato and his 
followers laid down that the intellectual soul is united 
to the body as mover to thing moved; the soul is in the 
body as the sailor in the ship ; the union of soul with body 
is by contact of power. 

But this is not without embarrassment, for man, made 
up from such a union of soul and body, would not be 
one thing simply speaking, or a substantial whole, but an 
accidental whole. 1 To avoid this consequence, Plato held 
that man was not a thing composed of soul and body, 
but that he was a soul, using the body. 

But this is impossible, for animals and men are natural 
and sensible things, which would not be the case were 
bodies and bodily organs not part of their essence, in 
other words, were they wholly souls. Moreover, it is 
impossible to have one single operation issuing from 
things which are diverse in being I say one single 
operation, not as regards the term or effect, but as regards 
the going out from the principle, for when many haul at 
a boat, though one effect is produced, there are many 
efforts and different heaves from the haulers. Now there 
are actions common to soul and body; for sensing and 
feeling are functions of soul and body simultaneously, 
which are here at one, and not diverse in their being. 

1 i.e. a close arrangement (an accident) of different substancci. 



HUMAN NATURE 199 

To obviate this reasoning, Plato agreed that these 
operations were common to soul and body, but to the 
soul as mover and the body as moved. 

But this will not do either, for, as Aristotle proved, 
sensation results from motion from sense objects; 1 at 
this point the sensitive soul is like a receptive, not an 
active, principle. Furthermore, were the sensitive soul 
the active principle and the body the passive principle, 
the operation of the soul would be other than the opera- 
tion of the body. The sensitive soul would then have its 
own proper activity, and therefore its own proper sub- 
sistence. It would not cease with the body, and the souls 
of animals would be immortal. Such a conclusion, 
though improbable, does not conflict with Plato's 
statements. 

Furthermore, after the departure of the soul, the 
body and its parts would remain specifically the same. 
Nor would the very being of the human body be 
quickened by the soul. Moreover, death, which consists 
in the separation of soul and body, would not be the 
dissolution of the animal. 

554, 761, 1 08 1 ii Contra Gentes^ 56, 57 

534. We should assert that the mind, the principle of 
intellectual activity, is the form of the human body. 
The body's first animating principle is the soul. And 
since life is manifested by various activities in the various 
grades of living things, that which is the first principle 
of these vital activities is the soul. For by soul primarily 
we take nourishment, feel, walk about, and also under- 
stand. Call it mind or intellective soul, this principle is 
the form of body. 2 If anyone wishes to deny this, let him 
explain how otherwise he can attribute the activity of 

1 de Anlma^ 417*18, 

2 Ibid. i a io. 



200 HUMAN NATURE 

understanding to the individual man. Everybody ex- 
periences in himself that it is veritably himself who 
understands. 

554, 634 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxvi. i 

535. Physical pain, more than sadness, prevents con- 
templation which demands quiet. Nevertheless, mental 
suffering, if protracted, so drains our interest that we can 
discover nothing further fresh. It was from sadness that 
Gregory broke off his commentary on Ezekiel. 

Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. xxxviim, *</ 3 

536. The soul's power is non-material though it be the 
cause of matter, spiritual though the cause of bodies, 
and dimensionless though the cause of quantities. 

Opusc. x, Exposition, de Causis, lect. 14 

537. Consider that the nobler a form the greater its 
domination over matter, the less imprisoned it is in body, 
and the more its virtue and activity transcend bodily 
functions. As we climb in the scale of forms the more we 
find their power exceeding elementary matter; a plant- 
form is more than mineral, an animal-form more than 
plant. The human soul is the last word in forms, exceed- 
ing bodily matter because its inward virtue and activity 
is free from matter. 

2 9 2 > 35 Summa Theokgica^ la. Ixxvi. i 

538. Of factors that can change man, some are physio- 
logical and others psychological. The latter may be 
sensible or intelligible, and the former again may be 
practical or theoretical. Of the first, the strongest is 
wine; of the second, women; of the third, the power of 
the government; of the fourth, truth. 1 They should be 
subordinate to one another in the reverse order. 

xii Quodlibct) 20 
1 Cf. 3 Esdras iii-iv. 



HUMAN NATURE zoi 

539. The proposition, souls are individuated by the 
matters of bodies, and they keep their individuality when 
disembodied, as wax the impression of a seal, can be under- 
stood aright though it is also open to misconception. 
If taken in the sense that bodies are the total cause of 
the individuation of soul, then the proposition is false ; 
but if the sense is that they are the partial causes, then it 
is true. The body is not the total cause of the being of 
soul, though the very being of soul is in relationship to 
body. Similarly, the body is not the total cause of the 
individuality of this soul, though it is this soul's nature 
to be joinable to this body, which relationship remains 
in the soul after the body's death. 

436,447 Opusc. XXIH, Declarath cviii Dubiorum ex 

commentarh fr. Petri de Tarentasia super 
Scntentiis ad Magistrum Generalem, 108 

540. Though generically the same, sensitive life is not 
specifically the same in beasts and men. In men it is 
much higher, as appears in the senses of touch and 
internal perception. 

623 Disputations, in dt Potentta, n, ad I 

541. Our body's substance is not from an evil principle, 
as the Manichees imagine, but from God. And therefore 
by the friendship of charity, by which we love God, 
should we cherish the body. 

475,904 Summa Thcokgica, 2a-2ae. xxv. 5 

542. The flesh rejoices in the living God, 1 not by carnal 
activity reaching up to God, but by the overflowing of 
the heart, as when feeling follows willing. 

Summa Theologica, 3 a. xxi. 2, ad I 

543. To be united to body is not to the detriment of 
soul, but for its enrichment. There is the substantial 

1 Ps. Ixxxiii. 2 (Vulgate). 



202 HUMAN NATURE 

benefit of completing human nature, and the accidental 
benefit of achieving knowledge that can only be acquired 
through the senses. 

630 Disputations, de Anima, i ad 7 ; 2 ad 14 

544. Neither the human soul nor the human body 
falls into a species or genus except indirectly, as parts 
are virtually classed with the species or genus of the 
whole. 

Disputations, de Anima, i, ad 13 
> 

545. Soul moves the body it vivifies; if any member 
of the body decays it does not obey the soul as to local 
motion. A disembodied soul does not quicken body, 
and therefore though a miraculous exception may be 
made it has no control over the local motions of bodies 
by its natural power. 

Summa Theologica^ la. cxvii. 4 

III. PHYSIQUE AND TEMPERAMENT 

546. The soul is the completion of an organic body. 
Such a body is not receptive of soul without biological 
predispositions. 

Disputations, in de Potentia, 12 

547. Two sorts of material conditions can be recog- 
nized. By one, matter is adapted to form, but the other 
follows as a necessary result of previous dispositions. 
The toolmaker selects steel to make a saw from, because 
it is tough and able to cut hard objects; but that the 
teeth can become blunt and the metal rusty follows 
from the necessity of the material. Similarly, a well- 
balanced organism fits the intellective soul; all the same 
it is corruptible from the necessity of the matter. 

455 Summa Theologica^ I a. Ixxvi, 5, ad I 



HUMAN NATURE 203 

548. A man is rendered apt of intelligence by the 
healthy disposition of the internal powers of the organ- 
ism, in which the good condition of the body has a part. 
Consequently intellectual endowments can be in the 
powers of sense, though primarily they are in the mind. 

852 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. 1. 4, ad 3 

549. Because some people have more finely tempered 
bodies their souls have greater strength of under- 
standing. 1 

996 Summa Theokgica, la. Ixxxv. 7 

550. There are animals with better eyesight, hearing, 
and sense of smell than man, but his sense of touch has 
greater assurance than theirs. Because he has the finest 
touch he is the most prudent of the animals. And 
among men themselves it is because of the sense of 
touch, rather than the other senses, that some are more 
ingenious than others. Rough-skinned and coarse- 
textured people are mentally rather inept, unlike those 
with a sensitive skin and delicate touch. 

Touch is the foundation of all the other senses. A 
good touch results from a good complexion or tempera- 
ment. Excellence of mind follows from bodily com-* 
plexion, for every form is proportioned to its matter. 
People with a good sense of touch are therefore of a 
higher soul and clearer mind. 

621, 622 Commentary, II Je Anlma^ lect. 19 

551. The intellective soul ranks lowest in the scale of 
intellectual substances in that it lacks the natural inborn 
knowledge of truth with which pure spirits are endowed, 
but must piece together the fragments of truth per- 
ceived through the senses. Nature does not fail in 
necessaries, and therefore the intellective soul has to 

1 dc Anima, 421*25. 



204 HUMAN NATURE 

possess the power of sensing as well as of understanding. 
Now the activity of the senses is not performed without 
physical organs. Therefore, the soul must be united to 
that kind of body which can be the instrument adapted 
to sense. All the senses are based on touch. Among all the 
animals man has the best-developed sense of touch, and 
among men those have the finer minds who have the 
more delicate sense of touch. A rare mind goes with 
bodily refinement. 
666 Summa Theohgica^ uf. Ixxvi. 5 

552. Man excels the other animals in the internal 
senses, but in some of the external senses he does not 
compare; thus his is the weakest sense of smell. 
582 Summa Theologies ra. xci. 3, 



IV. THE SINGLE SOUL 

553. The intellective soul confers on the human body 
all that the sensitive soul confers on animals, and like- 
wise the sensitive soul confers on animals whatever the 
nutritive principles confer on plants, and more. Any 
soul in man additional to his intellective soul would 
therefore be superfluous, for it contains the sensitive 
soul and with something to spare. 

533 i QuoJlibct, 6 

554. If we hold that the soul is united to the body as its 
substantial form, then the co-existence of several essen- 
tially different souls in the same body cannot be enter- 
tained. To begin with, an animal having several souls 
would not compose an essential unity, for nothing is 
simply one except by one form. Form gives being and 
unity. Were man alive by one form, namely by vege- 
table soul, and animal by another, namely by sensitive 



HUMAN NATURE 205 

soul, and human by a third, namely by rational soul, he 
would not be one thing simply speaking. 1 

Moreover, when one psychological activity is intense 
another is held up, which would not be the case were 
the principle of activity not essentially identical. There- 
fore the nutritive or vegetable, the sensitive, and the 
rational souls are numerically one in man. 

577 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxvi. 3 

555. The rational soul is the unique substantial form 
in mani*virtually containing the plant and animal souls, 
and all inferior forms as well, doing whatever these do 
in other things. The same can be said in general of all 
higher forms with respect to lower forms. 

Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxvi. 4 

556. The human soul communicates to bodily matter 
its own existence. Both make up one thing, so much so 
that the existence of the whole compound is also the 
existence of the soul. This is not the case with other 
substantial forms which are not subsistent. The human 
soul J^ecps its existence when the body breaks Ujx 

433 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxvi. I, ad 5 

557. Because united to body as form, the soul is in each 
part of the body and throughout the whole organism. 
It is not an accidental form of the body, but the sub- 
stantial form, which is the form and actuality, not 
merely of the whole, but also of each part. When a 
whole is just an assemblage of parts, the form of the 
whole does not give being to the parts, but consists in the 
pattern or shape of the whole, and is an accidental form. 

Therefore when the soul has departed, just as we do 
not speak of what remains as an animal unless in a pick- 
wickian sense, as we might of an animal in a painting or 

1 Metaphysics^ 1045**! 6. 



206 HUMAN NATURE 

a piece of sculpture so it is with the hand, the eye, 
the flesh, the bones. 1 One indication is that no part of 
the body keeps its proper working when the soul has 
gone; whereas anything that retains a specific nature 
retains the specific activity of that nature. Actuality is 
in that of which it is the actuality, and therefore the soul 
must be in the whole body and in each and every 
member. 

The soul is entire in each part of the body according 
to its wholeness of perfection and being, not of power; 
for it is not in each part by each of its powers, but by 
: sight it is in the eye, by hearing in the ear, and so forth. 

Summa Theologica y la. Ixxvi. 8 
V. PERSONAL MIND 

558. Since all men naturally desire to know the truth, 
there is a natural desire to avoid error and, given the 
ability, to confute it. Of all errors the most indecent 
attack our heritage of mind. One such has sprung from 
the words of Averroes, who announced that there is 
a universal and unique mind for all men. We have 
already argued against this doctrine elsewhere, but our 
purpose is to write again and at length in refutation, 
because of the continued impudence of those who gain- 
say the truth on this head. 

Not that we shall be at pains to show that it is contrary 
to the Christian faith, for this is sufficiently apparent 
to all. Since mind is the only deathless part of the soul, 
were the diversity of minds to be fused, the upshot 
would be that a unique mind alone remained after 
death, and so there would be no prospect of rewards 
and punishments. What we intend to do is to show that 
this error is no less opposed to the principles of philo- 

1 de Anlma^ 4i2 b io. 



HUMAN NATURE 207 

sophy. Because some of the advocates of this doctrine 
do not hold with the statements of Latin authorities, 
but base themselves on the positions of the Peripatetics, 
whose writings, except for those of Aristotle, they have 
never seen, we shall show that their teaching is clean 
contrary to his statements. . . * 

These, 1 then, are the points we have made to destroy 
this error, not by the documents of faith, but in the 
light of Aristotle. If anyone who falsely glories in the 
name oSphilosopher still wishes to oppose what we have 
written, let him not mutter in corners with adolescents 
who lack discrimination in such arduous questions, but 
let him come out into the open, and write if he dares. 
I am the least, but he will find others besides myself 
who are servants of truth and who will resist his errors 
and instruct his ignorance. 

64.5 Opusc. vi, de Unitatt Intellects contra 

Averrotstas Parisienscs 

559. That a unique mind should be shared by all men 
is quite out of the question. If Plato's doctrine be 
adopted, namely, that man is his mind, 2 then it would 
follow that, if there were one mind for Socrates and for 
Plato, there would be one man there, and they would not 
be distinct from one another except by something out- 
side their essence: the difference between them would 
be no more than that between the man in a tunic and 
the same man in a cloak. 

The thesis is also impossible on Aristotle's doctrine 
that the mind is a part or power of the soul, which soul 
is man's substantial form. 3 For there cannot be a unique 

1 The argument is summarized in the next extract from the 
Summa Theohgica, where, as in the de Unitate Intellect**) St. 
Thomas writes with unwonted informality and vigour. 

1 Alctbiadei /, 25. The authenticity of this dialogue is disputed. 

8 d* Anima^ 414*13. 



ao8 HUMAN NATURE 

form of several things numerically diverse, as it is 
impossible for them to possess one being. 

Indeed, it is an unworkable thesis howsoever the 
union of mind with this or that man be stated. For 
obviously, if there be one principal cause and two instru- 
ments, you can talk about one agent and many actions; 
as when a man touches different things with his two 
hands, there is one toucher, but two touches. Con- 
versely, if there be one instrument and many principal 
causes, you can talk about one action but manyragents; 
as when a ship is towed by the same cable, despite many 
towing there is but one pull. If, however, the principal 
and the instrument are identical, there is then one agent 
and one action; when the smith smites with one hammer 
there is one smiter and one smiting. Now it is clear that 
howsoever and in whatever fashion the mind is united 
to this or that man, mind is his chief part and the sensi- 
tive powers are subservient. If, therefore, you imagined 
that there were different minds but one sensorium for 
two men, for instance if two men had one eye in com- 
mon, there would be one vision, but two people seeing. 
But if the mind be one, no matter how the other powers 
used by the mind as instruments were diversified, in no 
sense could Socrates and Plato be called anything but 
one intelligence. And if we add that the activity of 
understanding comes from no other instrument than the 
power of the mind, it would follow further that there 
would be one agent and one action in other words, all 
men would be one intelligence producing one act of 
understanding, providing, of course, it was about the 
same intelligible object. 

You might be able to diversify my intellectual action 
from yours by the diversity of images, namely, because 
my picture of a stone was different from yours, but only 
on condition that the image were the form of the vital 



HUMAN NATURE 209 

intellect, which it is not. The mental form is not a sense- 
image, but a meaning abstracted from it. The same 
meaning may be abstracted by the same mind from 
diverse images; a man may have different images of 
stone and yet abstract from all of them but one meaning. 
Were there one mind for all men, a diversity of intellec- 
tual activity in this man and that man would not be caused 
just because there were two sets of images. We dismiss 
this fiction of the great commentator 1 and are left, there- 
fore, with the conclusion that it is quite impossible and 
highly inconvenient to postulate one mind for all men. 
8 1, 534, 1091 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxvi. 2 

560. Though they concede that the receptive mind is 
diversified among men, some hold that the factive intel- 
lect 2 is one and the same for all. This opinion, while 
more tolerable than the other, can be confuted bv 
similar reasonings. 

644, 650 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theologiae, 86 

VI. BIRTH, DECAY, AND IMMORTALITY 

561. That the soul's being is made of God's substance 
is demonstrably untrue. 

191 Summa Theologica^ la. xc. I 

562. Since the human soul cannot be produced by the 
transmutation of matter, it cannot but be produced 
immediately by God. 

388 Summa Theologica, la. xc. 3 

563. Since the soul is united to body as form and as 
a natural component of human nature, its creation does 



2 The intellects agens, vovs TTOIVJTIKOS. Cf. Je Antma 430*10. 
St. Thomas, Commentary III Je Anima^ lect. 10. Usually trans- 
lated, active intellect^ but factive intellect seems a happier rendering. 

B 628 P 



210 HUMAN NATURE 

not precede its union with the body. By creation God 
constitutes things in the perfection of their nature. 
Apart from the body the soul lacks its natural perfection, 
and it would be awkward for it to be created in this 
condition. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xc, 4 

564. The soul continues to be when separated from the 
body by the failure of body we call death. But the soul 
should not suffer this dislocation at its origin. 

Summa Theologica^ la, xcC'4, ad 3 

565. All natural things are produced by divine art, and 
may be called God's works of art. Now the artist intends 
to give his work the best dispositions, considered not 
absolutely but with regard to his proposed end. The 
artist cares not if this entails some accompanying defect. 
When a man makes a saw for the purpose of cutting, 
he tempers it of metal which suits his purpose; he does 
not choose glass, for this, though the more beautiful 
material, would defeat his purpose. Now the proximate 
purpose of the human body is the rational soul and its 
activities. I say therefore that God fashioned the human 
body in the disposition best suited to such a form and 
such activities. 

508 Summa Theologica, la. xci. 3 

566. The immortal soul can have a spiritual birth and 
spiritual maturity; bodily age is no prejudice to its life. 
It can attain a perfect age when the body is young, and 
be born again when the body is old. 

Summa Theohgica, 38. Ixxii. 8 

567. Youth and age can be in the soul both at once, 
though not in the body; the former for alacrity, the 
latter for gravity. 

Summa Thcokgica, 31. i. 6, ad l 



HUMAN NATURE 211 

568. Sense knows existence only as here and now, but 
mind apprehends it absolutely and as though transcend*' 
ing time. Therefore every intellectual being naturally 
desires to be always. But natural desire is not in vain^ 
Thereforfi-fiYery intellectual substance is deathless. 

244, 744 Swrtma Tk^kgica^ I a. Ixxv. 6 

569. Man is mortal like the other animals. 

Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxvi. 3, ad Z 

570. The cause of death and other physical defects in 
human nature is twofold, remote and proximate. The 
underlying cause results from the material principles of 
the human body, which is composed of warring ele- 
ments. Original justice would have counteracted this 
cause. Therefore the proximate cause of death is sin, 
which ruined the original integrity. 

486 Summa Theologka^ 33. xiv. 3, adl 

571. Three reflections about death. First, as regards its 
natural cause; here from the condition of his nature it is 
appointed for man once to die, for his components are 
contrary. Secondly, as regards his gracious endowment; 
here man was given the gift of original integrity, by 
which soul so possessed body that it was deathless. 
Thirdly, as regards the deserving of death; here man 
lost this benefit through his own fault and so incurred 
the penalty of death. 

Commentary, in Hebraeos, /#, led. 5 

572. Death is natural considering our material status, 
but penal considering how we lost the divine endow- 
ment of deathlessness. 

Summa Theologica^ za-zae, clxiv. I, ad l 

573. Nothing unnatural can be perpetual, and there- 
fore the soul will not be without the body for ever. 



212 HUMAN NATURE 

Since the soul is immortal the body should be joined to 
it again. This is to rise again. The immortality of the 
soul, then, would seem to demand the future resurrec- 
tion of the body. 

iv Contra Gentes, 79 

574. When the body is resumed, bliss will grow, not in 
depth, but in extent. 

745 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. iv. 5 

VII. FACULTIES 

575. Soul does not act; this man acts through the soul. 
554, 829 Commentary, X Ethics, lect. 6 

576. The habits of building and weaving and making 
music are in the soul and from the soul. But it is more 
accurate to say that the builder builds, and not that his 
art builds, though he builds through his art. So also it 
is better to say, not that the soul understands or feels 
pity, but that the man so acts through the soul. 

Commentary, I de Anima, lect. 10 

577. Though- a simple form, the soul is multiple in 
power. From its substance result diverse abilities, and 
therefore the soul correspondingly must have distinct 
parts. For it is the actuality organizing a body with 
different though interdependent parts. 

532 Commentary, / Sentences, vni. v. 3, ad ^ 

578. A psychological faculty is merely the proximate 
principle of vital activity. 1 

Summa Theologica, la. Ixxviii. 4 

579. The substance of the soul cannot be identified 
with any of its abilities, though some have maintained 

1 Not a 'thing*. 



HUMAN NATURE 213 

this. 1 For our present purpose two arguments will 
serve. 

First, a potentiality and its actuality are in the same 
category, so that if the actuality is not a substance then 
neither is the relevant potentiality. Now the activity of 
the soul is not a substance, for this belongs to God alone. 

Secondly, the soul by its essence is an actuality. Were 
its essential substance the immediate principle of activity, 
it would follow that an actually living thing would 
alway% be an actually acting thing. Now we observe 
that what has a soul is not always actual with respect to 
its vital activities. 

S u mm a Theologies, la. Ixxvii. I 

580. The substantial form is the first, but not the 
proximate, principle of activity; from it derive those 
accidental forms which are the proximate principles 
of activity. 

Summa Theologica, la. Ixxvii. I, ad $. 

581. Then only is the immediate principle of activity 
the very substance of the things when its activity is its 
existence. 

Summa Tkeokgica, Ixxix. I 

582. Many faculties of the soul should be postulated. 
To make this evident let us reflect on Aristotle's remark 2 
that the lowest things do not lay hold of full goodness, but 
reach limited goods by a few movements. Those that are 
higher reach full goodness by many movements. Still 
higher things hold perfect good by fewer movements. 
Highest of all is the possession of perfection without 
movement at all. Thus he is least disposed to health who 
can acquire imperfect health by a few remedies, better 

1 Peter Lombard and William of Auvcrgnc. 
* De Caeh) 292*22. 



214 HUMAN NATURE 

disposed is he who can acquire health by many remedies, 
better still is he who needs only a few remedies, and best 
of all is he who has perfect health without need of any 
remedies at all. 

It is said, therefore, that things below man acquire 
a certain limited goodness, and so have a few deter- 
minate abilities and activities, but man can acquire 
universal and perfect goodness, that is happiness with- 
out restriction. Nevertheless, he is at the lowest stage 
of those to which this is open, and therefor^, many 
diverse abilities and activities have to be brought into 
play. Less variety is required in pure spirits, and in 
God there is no ability or activity distinct from his 
substance. 1 

298, 621 Summa Tkeologica, la. Ixxvll 2 

1 The psychological faculties are classified according to the 
following scheme : 
' of cognition 

f in the body-soul compound 

/external senses (the five senses traditionally enumer- 

| ated, s ight, hearing, taste, smell, touch) 

\ internal senses (imagination, memory, sense of what 

is ben eficial and harmful, communal sense) 
Jn the splritu al soul 

the mind, intellect, or reason (to which may be attached 
the inttllcctus agens) 



(ot* 



petition 



in the body-soul compound 

the sensuality or sensitive appetite 
| concupiscible 
1 irascible 
in the spiritual soul 

the will, with its functions of volition and choice. 
(Note : the natural appetite is not limited to any one faculty but 
covers them all and the substance,) 



Consciousness 1 



583. All conscious things implicitly know God in 
everything they know. 

161,1744 Disputations, xxn dt Vcritatt, , ad I 

584, Knower and known are not agent and patient to 
one another, they are two things from which one 
principle of knowledge results. 

2 9 I > 73 1 Disputations, vm dt Veritatt^ 7, ad 1 

1 St. Thomas is sometimes called an intellectual!*! and, less 
often, a rationalist. Both epithets are fair enough, the former 
because of his insistence that the mind is sovereign to will, the 
latter because of his severely scientific method. In comparison 
with other religious philosophers his tone may seem dispassionate; 
it is certainly impersonal. His criticism of knowledge, however, is 
not the indirect realism of the seventeenth century and after; nor 
a correspondence theory of concepts requiring the inspection of 
allegedly faithful reproductions of reality. His position may be 
outlined as follows. The mind is not a marginal commentator on 
an outside world, still less an actor in a parallel order; it is the 
highest actuality within being. He speaks gently of the early 
lonians who treated knowledge as a physical assimilation. He 
studies the implications of pure knowledge in God and spiritual 
substances before turning to the sensibilities and distractions of 
knowledge meshed in a physical process. Knowing is a manner of 
being; in our case a manner of becoming. Yet knowledge as such 
is immune from the fatal consequences of natural generation: 
there is no loss, but only gain; the knower becomes the known 
without ceasing to be himself. It is at once an act of nature 
and an intimation of immortality. One might say that the 
problem of knowledge is not solved because it is not allowed 
to arise, except at the relatively superficial levels of judgement 
and inference. 



216 CONSCIOUSNESS 

I. THE PROBLEM OP KNOWLEDGE 1 

585. Some of the ancients, divining the truth yet from 
far away, reckoned that the soul knows things because 
it is composed of them. 2 

Commentary, / de Anima> lect. 12 

586. Assuming that they were bodily, the ancient physi- 
cists thought objects of knowledge existed materially in 
the soul that knew them, which, they said, has ajiature 
common to all of them. This explanation, however, 
can be disproved by the analysis of knowledge. When 
material objects are known they exist in the knower 
in some immaterial manner, and for the following 
reason: since knowledge lights on what is outside the 
knower, while matter constricts a thing within its 
own one nature, the conditions of materiality conflict 
with those of knowledge. When a form is received into 

1 Three lines of approach to the topic of knowledge may be 
marked, though they are not neatly exclusive, namely the logical, 
the epistemological, and the psychological. The logic of knowledge, 
the divisions and correct arrangements of terms, judgements, and 
arguments, has already been touched on (34-41). Epistemology 
is engaged with the real existence of truth 5 its critique of know- 
ledge eventually resolves itself into a metaphysical discussion (585- 
6 1 6). The psychology of knowledge is the natural science of the 
process at work. After noting the distinction of the faculties (582), 
this process may be roughly outlined as follows : an object in our 
environment, an existing individual material nature, through its 
sensible properties affects the senses of the subject knowing 
(617-23): an image is produced in the internal senses which, 
having been heightened and made actually intelligible by the 
factive intellect, intellects a gens, is impressed on the mind, intel- 
lectus possibilis, and vitally expressed as a concept (624-57). The 
impression and expression are covered by the term species intel- 
ligibilis : psychologically this is a quality of the knower, epistcmo- 
logically it is the spiritual form of the thing known. 

2 The reference is to the early Ionian philosophers. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 217 

the material texture, as in the case of plants, it is not 
known. 

291 Summa Theologica y la. Ixxxiv. 2 

587. To grasp a thing formally, not materially, is the 
noblest mode of holding and possessing; similarly, to 
set oneself into activity is the noblest mode of movement 
and the heart of life. 

231, 617 Opusc. x, Exposition, de Causis, lect. 18 

588. Kftower and known are one principle of activity 
inasmuch as one reality results from them both, namely 
the mind in act. I say that one reality results, for herein 
mind is conjoined to thing understood, whether imme- 
diately or through a likeness. The knower as such is not 
an efficient or material cause, except on account of 
special conditions when knowledge may require action 
or passion. 1 

731 Disputations, vm de Veritate, 6 

589. What is first precipitated in the mind's conception 
is being. A thing is knowable because existence is 
pointed to. Therefore being is the proper object of 
mind; it is the primary intelligible as sound is the 
primary audible. 

396 Summa Theokgica^ I a. v. 2 

590. Of its very nature our mind knows being and its 
essential attributes as such. Hereon is grounded the 
knowledge of first principles. 

H Contra Gentes, 83 

591. Of all realities existence is most form. 

! 7S4-33 Summa Theologica^ la. 7ii. I 

1 As when knowledge works through an organic process. 



2i8 CONSCIOUSNESS 

592. Existence is innermost in each and deepest in all, 
since it is formal with respect to all reality. 

Summa Theologica, la. viii. I 

593. Existence is the most perfect of realities, related 
to all others as their actuality. 

Summa Theologica, la. iv. I, ad 3 

594. The being of a thing, rather than its truth, causes 
truth in the mind. 

Summa Theologica^ la. x*i. I, ad 3 

595. Some have held that our cognitive powers know 
only the impressions made on them, for instance, that 
sense knows only the alteration of its organ. According to 
this reading, mental states are the objects of knowledge. 

This opinion seems to be false for two reasons. First, 
if the objects of intelligence and science are merely 
psychic conditions, it would follow that science does 
not deal with non-mental things, but merely with 
impressions in consciousness. 

Secondly, it would revive the ancient error of main- 
taining that whatever seems so is truly so, 1 and that 
contradictories are simultaneously tenable. Were a 
cognitive power able to perceive no more than its own 
proper states, then it could judge only about those. Now 
an object appears according to the manner the faculty 
is affected, and were modes of consciousness the only 
data, a faculty could judge merely its own proper 
impressions, and every judgement would be true; when 
a clean tongue judges honey to be sweet then it would 
judge truly, and when a dirty tongue judges it to be 
bitter then also would it judge truly, in each case going 
on its impressions. Every opinion would be equally 
valid ; so also in general would be whatever was fancied. 

1 Metaphysics, 1009*8, 



CONSCIOUSNESS 219 

This conclusion should be offset by explaining how 
a conscious impression is related to a cognitive power 
as a medium; it is a form by which the faculty knows. 
That in which the sight sees a thing is the likeness 
of the visible thing; that in which the intellect under- 
stands, namely the intelligible species, is the likeness 
of the thing understood. Admittedly the mind can reflect 
upon itself, and therefore can understand its own act of 
understanding together with the form through which 
it understands: thus the mental species can be a secon- 
dary object of knowledge. Nevertheless the primary 
object is the thing of which the species is a likeness. 

This theory is suggested by the ancient opinion that 
like is known by like. It was thought that the soul knows 
earth outside because of its own earthiness, and so also 
with the other elements. But if we take the concept of 
earth instead of physical earth, in agreement with 
Aristotle who says that what is in the soul is not stone 
but likeness of stone, 1 we shall recognize how the soul 
knows things outside through the medium of an intel- 
ligible likeness. 

1117 Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxxv. 2 

596. The intelligible species is the likeness of a thing's 
essence, and is, in some manner, the very essence and 
nature of that thing existing consciously, not physically. 

vin QuoJlibet, 4 

597. The known is in the knower through its likeness. 
This is the meaning of the remark that the actually 
known is the knower as actual. It does not follow that 
the abstracted idea is the thing actually understood, 
but that it is the likeness of the thing. 

244 Summa Theokgica^ la. Ixxxv. 2, ad I 

1 de Anima^ 431*29. 



220 CONSCIOUSNESS 

598. In speaking of the known as actual we imply 
a distinction between the thing known and its being 
known. Similarly, in speaking of an abstract universal 
meaning we imply a distinction between the very nature 
of the thing meant and its abstractness or universality. 
The nature itself, of which being understood is a cir- 
cumstance, exists only in singular things; but its being 
understood or abstracted, in other words its character 
of universality, exists in the mind. 

653 *>55 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxjfv. 2, ad ^ 

599. Something is said to be conceived by a bodily 
process when it is formed in the living womb by the 
quickening power and action and passion of male and 
female, and when it is like in kind to both. What the 
mind conceives is formed in the mind; from the thing 
is the action, as it were, and from the mind the passion; 
while the concept is like in kind to object and subject. 

639 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theohgiae, 38 

600. I call the idea or mental image that which the mind 
conceives within itself of the thing understood. With 
us this is neither the thing itself nor the substance of the 
mind, but a certain likeness conceived in the mind from 
the thing understood and signified by external speech, 
whence it is called the inner word. That this concept is 
not the thing understood appears from the fact that one 
activity is required to understand the thing and another 
to understand the concept, as happens when the mind 
reflects on its processes. On this account the sciences that 
treat of things are distinct from the sciences that treat of 
concepts. That the concept is not the mind itself 
appears from this consideration, that the being of a 
concept consists in being understood, which is not the 
case with the being of the mind. 

37 iv Contra Gentti, 1 1 



CONSCIOUSNESS zzi 

6oi. Whenever we understand, by the very fact of 
understanding, there proceeds something within us, 
a concept of the thing understood, issuing from the 
mind and proceeding from our knowledge of the thing. 
It is called the word of the heart, and is signified by the 
spoken word. 

Summa Thcokgica^ la. ^x 



602. Conceptions of heart and mind come forth in 
silence jyid without sound, but by audible words the 
silence of the heart is manifested. 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus^ iv, lect* i 

603. A thing is known in two ways, either by its proper 
form, as when eye sees stone through image of stone, or 
through the form of something else similar, as when 
cause is seen through the likeness in its effect, or man 
through the likeness of his image. 

Through its own form a thing is known in two ways, 
either by the form which is the thing itself, and so God 
knows himself always in his essence, or by a form which 
is abstracted from the thing. 

Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate, I. z 



II. THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 

604. Of the two phases of mental activity, the first 
is the understanding of essential meanings, while the 
second is a judgement, either affirmative or negative. 
A dual reality corresponds to these activities: to the 
former corresponds the nature of a thing, according to 
its state of being, complete or incomplete, part or 
accident, as the case may be; to the latter corresponds 
the existence of the thing. 

39 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitatt y v. 3 



222 CONSCIOUSNESS 

605. Concerning pure meaning the mind is not de- 
ceived, any more than the senses are about their proper 
objects. But in passing a judgement the mind can be at 
fault when it attributes to a thing, whose meaning it 
apprehends, a predicate neither concordant nor entailed. 
In this situation the mind is like the senses when they 
judge common or indirect sense-objects. 

However, error can be present accidentally even in 
simple apprehension, when it is mingled with com- 
plexity. This can come about in two ways: fi^t, when 
a definition is misapplied, thus when a definition of 
circle is misapplied to man; secondly, when mutually 
repugnant parts are combined in a definition, which is 
false both in application and in content, thus the notion 
rational quadrufed. 

Summa Theologica, xa. xvti. 3 

606. The first operation of the mind responds to the 
essence of a thing, the second to its existence. Now 
because existence rather than essence lies at the heart of 
truth, we say that truth properly speaking and error 
an attendance enters with the judgement and its ex- 
pression in a statement, rather than with simple appre- 
hension and its manifestation in definition. 

38, 49 Commentary, / Sentences, xix. v. I, <&/ 7 

607. Expect to find error in the senses to no greater 
extent than truth. Truth is in the senses not because 
they can know what truth is, but because they have 
a true perception of sensible objects. Similarly error 
enters when the senses apprehend and judge things to 
be other than what they are. 

Sense knows things from being impressed with their 
likeness. Now this likeness can be taken at three stages. 
First, immediately and directly, as when the likeness 



CONSCIOUSNESS 223 

of colour is in the sight; so also with other proper sense- 
objects in their appropriate senses. Secondly, directly 
but not immediately, as when the likeness of bodily 
shape or size is in the sight; so also with sense-objects 
shared through several senses. Thirdly, neither im- 
mediately nor directly but indirectly, as when the like- 
ness of man is in the sight; he is not there because he is 
a man, but because he is a coloured object. 

So then to apply this distinction: we say that the 
senses ajje not deceived regarding their proper sense- 
objects, except by interference and in abnormal cases 
and when the sense-organ is impaired. Regarding com- 
mon and indirect sense-objects, there can be erroneous 
sensations even in a healthy sense, for the sense is not 
immediately related to them, but only incidentally, 
namely in consequence of their being involved in its 
primary datum. 

660 Summa Theohgica, xa. xvii. 2 

608. First, about its proper object a sense is always 
true or only slightly false. Natural powers are not 
unable to perform their proper activities, except in the 
minority of cases on account of illness or injury. So the 
senses are not deficient in judging their proper objects, 
except sometimes because of impaired organs, as when 
the dirty tongue of a feverish patient makes sweet taste 
bitter. 

Secondly, a sense has to deal also with what is 
indirectly sensible, and here it may be deceived. In 
seeing white the sense may be deceived as to whether 
it be snow or flour or something of the sort. Mistakes 
are especially easy with regard to strange or distant 
objects. 

Thirdly, a sense also has to deal with common objects 
of sense and with inferences about the thing which 



Z24 CONSCIOUSNESS 

displays the proper object; size, for instance, an< 
motion are common sensible properties of bodies. Th 
judgement must vary according to the differences c 
distance, and misjudgement is easy. 

Commentary, /// de Anima^ lect. 

609. Truth is defined by the conformity of mind an< 
thing. Hence to know this conformity is to know truth 
Sense cannot know truth as such take sight, for instance 
it has the likeness of a visible thing, but does not see th 
correspondence between the perception and the thin; 
perceived. The mind, on the other hand, can know it 
own conformity with an intelligible thing, not by stay 
ing at the apprehension of a meaning but by going on t 
elicit an affirmation or denial, for only when the min< 
judges that a thing corresponds to the form apprehende< 
is human truth first known and articulated. 

The matter is put well by saying that sense and mine 
in their simple apprehending may be true but do no 
thereby know truth. Truth, of course, is present ii 
sensation or simple apprehension as in any true object 
but not and this is its essential point as in subjec 
knowing object known. Truth is the achievement o 
mind, and therefore, properly speaking, is reached b; 
judgement, not by simple sensation or intellectual per 
ception of a meaning. 

Summa Theohgica, la. xvi. 

610. What is true and what is false are opposed as con 
traries, and not, as some have thought, as affirmatioi 
and negation. 1 

462 Summa TAeoIogica, ia. xvii. . 

1 A contrary opposition black and white supposes a commo: 
subject : a contradictory opposition the affirmation black and th 
negation non-blackentails no real relationship. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 225 

611. Since true and false are contrasts affecting the 
same subject, we must needs seek falsity where truth 
can live, that is to say, in the mind. In things there is 
neither truth nor error except in relation to mind. 

Artificial things are called false simply and in them- 
selves in so far as they fall short of the artist's idea. In 
things dependent on God there is no falseness with 
regard to the divine mind, unless perhaps the term be 
allowed in the case of voluntary mistakes, or sins. Natural 
things may be called false in relation to our mind on two 
grounds: first, when an expected quality is lacking; 
secondly, byway of cause, when its nature is misleading, 
thus tin may be reckoned false silver. 

859 Summa Thtohgica, la. xvii. I 

612. The practical mind causes things, and therefore is 
their measure. But the theoretical mind is receptive; it 
is, as it were, modulated and measured by things. Hence 
it is clear that natural things, from which the mind 
takes its knowledge, measure our mind, but are them- 
selves measured by the divine mind, in which all things 
are as the works of art in the mind of the maker. So then 
the divine mind is a measure, but not measured; a 
natural thing is both measured and measuring; and our 
mind is measured and measures artificial things, not 
natural things. 

5 Disputations, I de Veritate> 2 

613. The truth caused in our mind by things does not 
come from the mind's own ingenuity, but from the 
existence of things. 

Disputations, I de Veritate^ 2, ad 3 

614. Truth is simply one in the divine mind, but many 
truths flow thence into the human mind, as one face 
may be mirrored with variety. 

189, 291 Disputations, x de Verltate^ 4 

B628 Q 



226 CONSCIOUSNESS 

615. A particular science studies truth in special depart- 
ments. But prime philosophy must envisage the uni- 
versal truth of things, and therefore must discuss our 
relation to the problem of knowledge itself. 

56 Commentary, II Mttaphysics, lect. i 

616. The proposition, that the mind is mistaken when 
it understands a thing otherwise than it really is, can 
have two meanings, for the adverb otherwise can qualify 
the verb understands as regards either the object known 
or the subject knowing. In the first sense the proposi- 
tion is true, but not in the second sense. For mode 
of mind in understanding is different from mode of 
thing in reality. The mind spiritually understands 
material things below it in the scale of being, not that 
it thinks they are spiritual because it conceives them 
spiritually. Similarly, as regards higher simple sub- 
stances, it knows them according to its own manner of 
composition but does not think that they are composite. 

190, 647 Summa Theohgica, la. xiii. 12, ad 3 

III. SENSATION 

617. Some wish to base the distinction and number of 
the external senses on the difference of their organs; 
others on the diverse natures of sensible qualities in the 
medium of sensation. 1 But neither attempt really meets 
the bill. For faculties are not for organs, but conversely; 
there are not diverse senses because there are different 
organs, instead nature provides diverse organs to match 
the diversity of powers. Similarly as regards the media 
of sensation. Moreover, it is for the mind to judge about 
the nature of sensible qualities. 

The basis for the distinction and number of the 

1 The reference is possibly to Albert the Great and Alexander 
of Hales. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 2*7 

external senses should be grounded on what is direct 
and proper to sense. Sense is a receptive power, the 
subject of change by an external sensible object. This 
external principle of action is what is directly perceived 
by sense, and the senses are diversified according to the 
diversity found here. 

There are two sorts of immutation, physiological and 
psychological. The former comes about by the physical 
reception of the agent in the patient, the latter according 
to a ceriain spiritual reception. Sensation requires this 
latter process, the entrance into the sense organ of a like- 
ness of, or relation to, the sensible thing. If physiological 
immutation alone sufficed, all natural bodies would 
have sensations when they underwent alteration. 

575 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxviii. 3 

618. The sense of touch is generically one, though 
specialized in many senses whose distinctness is not 
obvious, because they are not clearly separated in their 
organs, but diffused throughout the whole body. 

Summa Theologica> la. Ixxviii. 3, ad 3 

619. Taste is not separable from general touch, but 
only from the various other specific powers of touch 
distributed throughout the body. 

Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxviii. 3, ad $. 

620. Seeing and hearing, although they demand effort 
and induce strain on their physiological organs, induce 
psychological rest. 

Commentary, FH Ethics , lect. 14. 

621. Since nature does not fail to provide necessaries, 
one would expect as many actions of the sensitive soul 
as suffice for the proper functions of sensitive life. 
Diverse principles must be postulated for those actions 



328 CONSCIOUSNESS 

that cannot be referred back to one and the same 
immediate principle. We should next take into account 
that the activity of complete animals requires the 
apprehension of sensible objects in the absence as well 
as at the presence of these objects, otherwise animals 
would act only for what was immediately in front of 
them. But they exhibit anticipatory action, especially 
the higher animals which move by progressive stages. 
Therefore an animal should have the power of retain- 
ing and preserving perceptions. ft 

Then again we should consider that were an animal 
to be moved by pleasure and pain from impressions 
merely in the external senses, there would be no need 
to suppose that it has any other faculties besides the 
external senses, in which are conveyed the forms at 
which it takes immediate pleasure or fright. But an 
animal must be able also to seek or avoid things, not just 
because they are congenial or otherwise to the external 
senses, but also because of the benefits they offer or the 
harm they threaten: sheep stampede at the sight of a 
wolf, not because of any ugliness of odour or shape but 
because of the menace; birds likewise collect twigs, not 
because this is a pleasurable occupation to the senses, 
but because it serves for building a nest. An animal then 
perceives purposes not immediately apparent to the 
external senses, and therefore requires also the appro- 
priate faculties. 

The proper external senses are appointed to receive 
sensible forms, and so also is a common internal sense, 
which is like a joint root and principle for the external 
senses. The proper senses judge of their proper sensible 
objects, discerning one object from another within 
their proper field; for instance the sight distinguishes 
white from black or green. But to tell white from sweet 
cannot be done by the sight or taste, for to discern 



CONSCIOUSNESS 229 

between two things implies knowing them both. This 
discrimination is the work of a common sense, to which 
are referred as in a joint clearing-house the perceptions 
of the other senses. This sense is also able to sense sensa- 
tion itself, as when somebody sees that he is seeing. 
This cannot be done by the proper senses, which merely 
know the sensible forms that alter them. 

Then to hold and keep these images, the phantasy or 
sense-imagination is appointed; it may be described as 
the storjhouse of sense-impressions. In addition, and in 
order to perceive connexions that are not apparent in 
the immediate environment perceived by the external 
senses, there is appointed the estimative sense. Lastly, 
to retain what has been discovered the memory is ap- 
pointed that animals remember what has been bene- 
ficial or harmful is a sign of this faculty, to which any 
sense of the past also belongs. 

As regards sensible forms there is little difference 
between men and animals, for they are similarly worked 
on by external sense -objects. But there is a difference as 
regards the implications in the sense situation. For while 
animals perceive these purposes by a kind of natural 
instinct, men need to make comparisons. What is called 
the natural estimative power in animals is called the 
cogitative power in men, for these purposes are dis- 
covered by drawing comparisons: it is also called the 
particular reason. Then, as regards memory, man does 
not merely have the sudden recognition of the past, as 
in the sense-memory of animals, but also the power of 
reminiscence, which reproduces preceding individual 
consequences by an effort of recollection. 

Midway between the estimative power and the 
imagination, Avicenna assigns a fifth internal sense, 
which arranges imaginary forms, as when we assemble 
gold and mountain into an eldorado we have never 



230 CONSCIOUSNESS 

seen. There is no evidence for it in the other animals, 
and in man the power of the imagination seems enough. 
So there is no need to postulate more than four internal 
senses, namely the communal sense, the imagination, the 
estimative power, and the memory. 1 

575, 658, 659 Summa Theologica, la. bcxviii. 4, c. 6? ad 2 

622. Wonderful instances of sagacity are manifested in 
the behaviour of animals such as bees, spiders, and dogs. 
On coming to a crossing, a hound hunting a stag will 
cast about to discover whether the quarry has t&ken the 
first or second trail, and if he does not pick up the scent 
on either, being thus assured, he takes the third without 
sniffing about, as though arguing by the principle of 
exclusion. 

Animals act like this because they are naturally 
adjusted to complicated processes. We call them keen 
and clever, but this does not imply that they have 
reason and choice, as appears from the fact that animals 
of the same breed behave in a similar fashion. 

Summa Tkeologica, ia-2ae. xiii. 2, obj. & a d 3 

623. Man's superiority to beasts in animal shrewdness 
and memory does not result from anything proper to 
the sensitive part, but from an affinity and closeness to 
intelligence which, so to speak, flows into them. These 
powers in man are not so very different from those in 
animals, only they are heightened. 

550, 965, 1083 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxviii. 4, ad 5 

1 Of the four internal senses enumerated, namely the imagina- 
tion or phantasy, the memory, the sensus communis, and the 
'estimative', the third and fourth call for remark. Note that the 
sensus communis is not at all what is called common sense in English : 
it is a communal sense for the other senses, a clearing-house in 
which their impressions are sorted and arranged. The 'estimative 1 
is a kind of sense-prudence : its difference in animals and man if 
similar to that between horse-sense and common sense. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 231 

IV. SENSE AND INTELLIGENCE 

624. The senses are bodily powers and know singular 
objects tied down by matter, whereas mind is free from 
matter and knows universals, which are abstract from 
matter and contain limitless instances. 

836 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ac. ii. 6 

625. For man to understand he must also have sense, 
a sign of this being that he who lacks a sense is without 
the corresponding scientific knowledge of sense-objects, 
as a man born blind has no scientific knowledge of colours. 

44 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theokgiae^ 82 

626. Were man naturally a solitary animal, individual 
impressions would suffice for him to be aware of, and 
adapted to, his environment. But he is naturally a social 
animal, and therefore one man's thoughts should be 
made known to another through language. There must 
be significant speech if men are to dwell together. 
People of different tongues cannot settle down happily 
together. Furthermore, if men were restricted to sense 
knowledge, which deals with the here and now, it would 
be enough for them to emit such sounds as the animals 
use. But man can dominate his immediate environment; 
he is aware not merely of the present, but also of the 
future in time and the distant in place. To express this 
knowledge the use of writing is required. 

1083 Commentary, / Perihermenias, lect. z 

627. Some have held that science takes its rise from an 
outside cause entirely apart from matter. They are 
divided into two schools. Some are like the Platonists; 
they hold that the forms of sensible things are separate 
from matter and hence are actually intelligible, and that 
the human mind has scientific knowledge by intercourse 



232 CONSCIOUSNESS 

with these forms. This position is attacked by Ari- 
stotle, 1 who insists that the forms of sensible things 
can neither exist nor be understood apart from sensible 
matter, any more than snubness can be separated from 
nose. And therefore others postulate at the origin of 
science, not separate forms, but bodiless intelligences, 
which we call angels. Thus Avicenna proposed that 
intelligible forms are imprinted on the human mind by 
a bodiless substance, not through our active psycho- 
logical power, and that the role of our senses ij just to 
stimulate and modify the ensuing knowledge. 

But this opinion does not appear reasonable, espe- 
cially when we take into account the mutual dependence 
of intellective and sensitive knowledge. 

At the other extreme others held that the origin of 
scientific knowledge is entirely from an interior cause. 
They are grouped in two schools. Some held that the 
human soul contains all knowledge within itself, but 
that this has been darkened by going into a body. 
Disciplined study removes the black-out; learning is 
really remembering. But this opinion, which is con- 
sonant with the doctrine that souls are created before 
their union with bodies, does not appear reasonable. 
For if the union of soul and body be really natural it 
would not be an impediment to natural knowledge. 
Others again say that the soul is the cause of its own 
knowledge, which it evokes at the presence of sense- 
objects, but does not acquire from them. But this 
opinion is not entirely acceptable, for it comes back to 
the doctrine of innate ideas. 

Therefore in comparison the teaching of Aristotle 
appears preferable. He held that scientific knowledge is 
partly from within 2 and partly from without our mind, 

1 Metaphysics, 987*29. 2 By the spiritual power of the 

factive intellect lighting up the data of sense. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 233 

and from without, not only because a higher bodiless 
principle is at work, but also because sense-objects 
themselves are external. 

44, 50, 55, 645, 1091 Disputations, x de ^erit<zte t 6 

628. Senses are appointed to men not only for procur- 
ing the necessities of life, as in the other animals, but 
also for the sake of knowledge itself. Other animals take 
no pleasure in sense-objects unless they be related to 
food or sex, but man can delight in their very beauty. 

227 Summa Theologica, la. xci. 3, ad 3 

629. Through smell man enjoys the scent of lilies and 
roses; he finds them pleasing to him in themselves; 
whereas other animals take pleasure in smells dogs, for 
instance and colours only because they point to some- 
thing else. 

757> 998 Commentary, // de Coefa et Mundo, lect. 14 

630. Avicenna agrees with Plato that ideas are derived 
from bodiless forms, which Plato held to subsist in 
themselves, while Avicenna placed them in a world- 
mind. But neither hypothesis can show why our soul 
should be united to a body. Though the soul's intrinsic 
existence does not depend on the body, this union 
appears most necessary for the sake of its proper 
activity, which is to understand. Were it of the soul's 
nature to receive ideas from the influence of bodiless 
principles and not to acquire them through the senses, 
there would be no need of the body; for the soul to be 
united to body would serve no purpose. And if it be 
said that senses are necessary in order to awaken the 
soul to the ideas it has received from elsewhere the 
same difficulty remains: the need of such rousing would 
only arise because the soul is overcome by sleep, as the 
Platonists expressed it, or forgetfulness, both of which 



23+ CONSCIOUSNESS 

states would result from its union with the body. So 
senses would not profit the mind except to remove 
obstacles arising from its union with the body, the 
reason for which would still remain unexplained. 

532, 647 Summa Theokgica^ la. Ixxxiv. 4. 

631. Imagining goes with thinking so long as we are 
in this present life, however spiritual the knowledge. 
Even God is known through the images of his effects. 

262 Disputations, xvi de Mojo, 8, ad 3 

632. Human contemplation at present cannot function 
without images, for to see meaning in the play of fancy 
is connatural to us. The purity of intelligible being is 
contemplated there, though intellectual knowledge does 
not consist in these images. This applies to the truths of 
revelation as well as to those of natural knowledge. 

270, 279, 822 Summa TAeologica, 2a-2ac. clxxx. 5, ad 2 

633. The image is a principle of our knowledge. It is 
that from which our intellectual activity begins, not as 
a passing stimulus, but as an enduring foundation. When 
the imagination is choked, so also is our theological 
knowledge. 

Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinltate^ vi. 2, ad 5 

634. In its present condition the mind cannot actually 
understand anything except by reference to images. 
There are two indications of this state of affairs. First, 
the mind is a power which does not operate as part of 
a bodily organ, and so, were there no dependence on 
sense and imagination and faculties within bodily organs, 
its activity would be unimpaired by a bodily lesion. 
Yet in understanding, either freshly or summoning 
knowledge already gained, the mind's activity must be 



CONSCIOUSNESS 235 

accompanied by activity of imagination and of other 
sense-powers. When the imagination is warped, as in 
madness, or the memory is lost, as in amnesia either 
condition may result from bodily injury a man is 
prevented from understanding even those things he pre- 
viously knew. Secondly, each man experiences in him- 
self that when he attempts to understand a subject he 
must picture it and use images as examples to hold his 
attention. 

The reason is this: the proper objects of man's mind 
are the meanings existing in his material environment. 
These exist only in individuals, and cannot therefore be 
known completely and truly except as there embodied. 
Now the individual is perceived through sense and 
imagination. In order that it may actually understand 
its proper object, the mind must needs turn to the 
images of sense. This reference would be uncalled for 
were its proper object a bodiless form, or, as the Plato- 
nists say, a type existing apart from the individual. 

533 Summa Theologica^ I a. Ixxxiv. 7 

635. Scientific knowledge in the reason for the present 
has to go with images formed in our sensitive part. 
By repeated acts the mind grows in the ability of 
considering meanings, and the sensitive powers corre- 
spondingly improve and more readily promote specu- 
lation. Such intellectual knowledge is chiefly and 
formally in the mind, dispositively and materially in 
the lower powers of sense. 

56 Summa Tkeologica, I a. Ixxxix. 5 

636. Irrelevant daydreamings, which flourish when a 
man ceases to exercise intellectual habits, will distract 
him to contraries, so much so that unless the imagination 
be refined, by frequent use of intellectual habits, a man 



236 CONSCIOUSNESS 

will get out of practice in making right judgements, 
indeed sometimes will become quite impotent. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ac. 11 ii, 3 

637. There is no free play of mind except when the 
senses are fit and vigorous. 

Commentary, // ad Corinthios^ *//, lect. I 
V. REASONING FROM EXPERIENCE 

638. Reason in man is rather like God in the.. world. 

Opusc. xr, i de RfgnOy 12 

639. To be passive may be applied in the loosest sense 
to describe the condition of a potentiality receiving its 
actuality without being deprived of anything. What- 
ever passes from potentiality to actuality may be termed 
passive, even when it is perfected in the process. In this 
sense to understand is to be passive. 

The divine intelligence is not in potentiality but is 
pure act, whereas no created intelligence is actual with 
regard to every intelligible, but is potential to their actua- 
lity. Now there are two conditions of potentiality: 
one is that of potentiality which is always perfected, 
and another is that of potentiality which is not always 
actual but successively actuated. The angelic intelli- 
gence is always in act with regard to the things it can 
understand. The human intelligence, however, lowest 
in the scale of minds and most remote from the perfec- 
tion of the divine mind, is in potentiality with regard to 
things intelligible. To start with it is like a blank page 
on which nothing is written. 

2 93> 774 Summa Theokgica^ la. Ixxix. 2 

640. There is nothing that the divine mind does not 
understand actually, nor the human mind potentially. 

Disputations, I de Veritate> l^ad 4. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 237 

641. Substance is intellectual when able to embrace 
the whole of being. 

231 II Contra Gentes, 98 

642. In Plato's opinion there is no need to postulate 
a factive intellect in order to make things actually 
intelligible, though perhaps the knower has still to be 
enlightened. For he supposed that the forms of natural 
things, called species or ideas, subsisted apart from 
matter and consequently were intelligible, for a thing is 
actually intelligible in that it is immaterial. 

Since we agree with Aristotle in not allowing that 
forms of natural things exist apart from matter, and 
since forms existing in matter are not actually intel- 
ligible, we infer that the natures or forms of the sensible 
things we understand are not actually intelligible. Now 
no potentiality is actualized save by something in act. 
Therefore we should assign some power on the part 
of the intellect which can make things actually intel- 
ligible by the abstraction of the species from material 
conditions: this is why we postulate the active in- 
tellect. 

1 60 Summa Theokgica y la. Ixxix. 3 

643. The only difference of powers in the human intel- 
lect is that between the possible intellect and the factive 
intellect. 1 

585 Summa Theolog:ca> la. Ixxix. 7 

1 The intellectus agens has here been rendered 'factive 
intellect'. The translation 'active intellect* is misleading, since 
.it suggests a knowing faculty, whereas the role of the factive 
intellect is to 'make knowable* by raising the sensible to 
the intelligible, which is then received and conceived by the 
intellectus possibilis. This is not, as sometimes translated, the 
'passive intellect', but the inteliect-able-to-become all things. 
Cf. de Antma, 4.29*22. 



z 3 8 CONSCIOUSNESS 

644. The intelligence which is potential to all things 
intelligible we term, following Aristotle, the possible 
intellect. 

Summa Theokgtca y la. Ixxix. 2, ad 2 

645. The human soul is termed intellectual because it 
shares in intellectual power. One sign that its power is 
derived is that the soul is not entirely intellectual, but 
only partially so. Moreover, it reaches the understand- 
ing of truth discursively and by a process of reasoning. 
Furthermore, its imperfect understanding is 'betrayed, 
first because it does not understand everything, and 
secondly because when it does understand a passage 
from potentiality has been taken. Therefore there must 
needs be a higher intellect helping the soul to under- 
stand. 

For these reasons some 1 have held that this sub- 
stantially separate intellect is in fact the factive intellect. 
But even on the supposition that such a disembodied 
active intellect exists, it would still be necessary to ap- 
point to the human soul a special power which shared 
in the virtue of that superior mind, and served to make 
things actually intelligible to us. Consequently we should 
still postulate in the soul a power derived from a higher 
mind able to light up sense-images. Its function is 
experienced, since we perceive that we abstract uni- 
versal meanings from particular conditions, in other 
words that we make things actually intelligible. 

91, 558, 582, 627, 1091 Summa Theokgica, la. Ixxix. 4 

646. Consequently there are as many factive intellects 
as there are men, and they are numerically multiplied 
according to the number of men. The same power 
numerically one cannot exist in diverse subjects. 

558, 559, 660 Summa Theokgica^ la. Ixxix. 5 

1 Averroes, Avicenna. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 239 

647. Can the soul know bodies through the mind? 
Seemingly it does not, for the intellect is engaged with 
necessary and constant truths, while bodies are variable 
and subject to change. 

But on the contrary, scientific knowledge is in the 
intellect, and if the intellect did not know bodies there 
would be no scientific knowledge about them; in that 
case natural science, which is occupied with changing 
bodies, would have no standing. 

To cley up this question, I answer by saying that the 
first philosophers who inquired into the natures of 
things imagined that there was nothing in the world 
but bodies. And because they observed that all bodies 
are changing, they were persuaded that everything was 
in a continuous process of flux, and concluded that we 
could enjoy no certain knowledge about the truth of 
things. Truth cannot be fixed with certitude, they 
thought, but slips away before the mind can judge it; as 
Heraclitus said, it is impossible to touch twice the water 
of a flowing stream. 

After them came Plato, a greater authority. Wishing 
to safeguard the certainty of truth accessible to our 
intellect, he postulated besides bodies another class 
of things, aloof from matter and motion, which he 
called the species or ideas. It is by sharing in these ideas 
that a singular and sensible thing is called a horse or 
a man, as the case may be. So then, he said, scientific 
and exact knowledge and whatever pertains to the 
activity of mind does not bear on these sensible bodies 
themselves, but on these other spiritual and separate 
substances; in other words, the soul does not under- 
stand material things, but their bodiless ideas. 

But this appears unwarranted for two reasons. Since 
these ideas are spiritual and changeless, the knowledge 
of matter and motion, proper to natural science, would 



240 CONSCIOUSNESS 

be excluded from science. So also would demonstrations 
through efficient and material causes. Secondly, it would 
seem ironic that in seeking knowledge about what is 
fairly manifest we should have to treat of other things 
instead. Knowing about these other substances would 
put us in no sort of position for judging sensible things. 

Plato seems to have gone astray here. He held that 
knowledge is through a likeness, but he also held that 
the form of the thing known must be in the knower in 
that same manner as it is in itself. Observing how the 
form of a thing understood is in the mind universally, 
spiritually, and unvaryingly qualities which are re- 
vealed in the activity of understanding, for the mode of 
an activity follows the mode of the form's being he 
also assumed that the thing understood in itself existed 
in the same manner. 

But such equivalence is not called for. Even in sensible 
things we see that the same form exists differently in 
different objects; in one thing white is more intense 
than in another, and in one it goes with sweetness and in 
another it goes without. Similarly the form of a sensible 
object is in one manner when it is outside and in another 
manner when it is inside the sensibility, which receives 
the forms of sense-objects without matter, as golden 
without gold. So also mind possesses the spiritual and 
unvarying ideas of bodies which themselves are material 
and variable. This it does after its own fashion, for a 
thing is received according to the mode of the recipient. 
Consequently we conclude that the soul knows bodies 
through the mind with spiritual, universal, and neces- 
sary knowledge. 

44, 595, 598, 627 Summa Theohgica, xa. Ixxxiv. i 

648. Remember that when Aristotle disapproves of 
Plato's opinions, what he condemns in many cases is the 



CONSCIOUSNESS 241 

turn of the phrase rather than the main drift of the 
argument. Plato employed a defective teaching method; 
he speaks figuratively and symbolically and sometimes 
intends something other than the plain sense of his 
words, as when he says that the soul is a circle. 

Commentary, I de Anima, lect. 8 

649. Plato's position, that the human mind is filled with 
all ideas but is hindered from knowing them because of 
its union with the body, does not appear altogether well 
foundea, and may be criticized at two points. 1 First, it 
does not seem possible that the soul could fall into 
oblivion about such universal natural knowledge were 
it already really possessed: nobody forgets what he knows 
naturally, for example that whole is larger than part 
and so forth. Moreover the embarrassment is increased 
if we suppose that the soul is naturally united with the 
body, for that a natural activity should be completely 
choked by its natural condition is most unlikely. 
Secondly the weakness of the position appears from the 
fact that if one sense be deficient, then the knowledge of 
things that can be gathered through that sense is want- 
ing; for instance a man born blind is not acquainted 
with colours. This would not be the case if the soul had 
innate species of all intelligible things. We should there- 
fore conclude that the soul does not know bodily things 
through innate ideas. 

1091 Summa Tkeologica, xa. Ixxxiv. 3 

650. Is intellectual knowledge acquired from sense- 
objects? No; that seems the answer, since intellectual 
knowledge transcends the things of sense. But to the 
contrary we have the teaching of Aristotle* that the 

1 Cf. Metaphysics, 993*1. 

a Ibid., 981*2. Posterior Analytics^ 100*3. 

B628 R 



242 CONSCIOUSNESS 

beginning of our knowledge lies in the senses. I begin 
my explanation by noting three differing opinions of 
philosophers on this question. 

Democritus laid down that no other cause for any of 
our knowledge is required save the emission of bodily 
images from things and their entrance into our souls; 
the process of knowledge is an affair of images and dis- 
charges. The absence of any distinction between mind 
and sense underlies this opinion; the assumption is that 
all knowledge is like sensation, where a physiological 
change is induced by objects of sense. 

At the other extreme Plato held that the intellect 
differed from the senses and was a spiritual power making 
no use of a bodily organ in its thinking. Now since a 
spiritual thing cannot be changed by a bodily thing, he 
was convinced that intellectual knowledge does not 
come about because the intellect is transmuted by sense- 
objects, but because it shares in intelligible and bodiless 
ideas. Even the senses, he said, are powers acting apart 
from body; they are spiritual powers that are not 
transformed by sensible objects: though he allowed that 
the organs of sense undergo changes and immutations 
by which the soul is somehow stirred, and so formulates 
to itself the ideas of sensible things. Augustine touches 
on this opinion when he says that the body does not feel, 
but that the soul feels through the body, which it uses 
like a herald for announcing without what is expressed 
within. 1 Plato's own conclusion is that neither intel- 
lectual knowledge nor even sensitive knowledge entirely 
derives from material things, but that sensible objects 
excite the sensitive soul to sensation and the senses like- 
wise excite the intellectual soul to understanding. 

Aristotle, however, took a middle path. He agreed 
with Plato that intellect differs from sense, but he also 
1 de Genesi ad litteram, xii. 24, 



CONSCIOUSNESS 243 

maintained that there is no proper activity of sense into 
which the body does not enter; sensation is not the 
activity of soul alone, but of the body-soul compound. 
So also with regard to all the activities of the sensitive 
part. That sensible things outside the soul cause some- 
thing in the human organism is as it should be; Aristotle 
here agrees with Democritus that the activities of the 
sensitive part are produced by the impressions of sensible 
objects on the senses not, however, in the manner of 
a discharge, as Democritus had said, but in some other 
way. Democritus, incidentally, had also held that all 
action is the upshot of atomic changes. Aristotle, how- 
ever, taught that the intrinsic activity of mind was 
independent of intercourse with body. No corporeal 
thing can impress itself on an incorporeal thing. There- 
fore the mere impression of sensible bodies is not 
sufficient to cause intellectual activity. 

A nobler and higher force is required, for the agent 
is more honourable than the patient. 1 Not, however, in 
such a way that intellectual activity is caused in us by 
the sole influence of some higher being, as Plato held, 
but that there is a spiritual ability within us, called after 
Aristotle the factive intellect, which by the process of 
abstraction renders actually intelligible images taken 
from sense. As regards these images intellectual know- 
ledge is caused by the senses. Yet because an image 
alone is not sufficient to transform the receptive mind 
until it has been heightened and made actually intel- 
ligible by an active intellect, we should not say that 
sense-knowledge is the total and perfect cause of intel- 
lectual knowledge. Let us say instead that sense-data 
are by way of offering the material for the cause. 

44, 1 6 1, 560, 1091 Summa Theologica, xa. Ixxxiv. 6 

1 i.e. an active power is stronger than the receiver as such of its 
influence. 



244 CONSCIOUSNESS 

651. Since sensuous and intellectual being are poles 
apart, the material form is not immediately accepted, 
but is first worked up and spiritualized by an elaborate 
process and so brought to the reason. 

683 Disputations, de Anima^ 20 

652. Rational knowledge is in the middle stage between 
sensation and pure intellection. It is not the activity of 
an organ, and yet it rises from a faculty of the soul, 
which is the form of body. Accordingly rational know- 
ledge is properly concerned with forms that in fact exist 
individually in bodily matter, and yet are not known 
immediately as existing in such or such individual 
matter. This implies abstraction of the form from the 
individual matter represented by sense-images. Through 
material truths thus considered we can reach some 
knowledge of immaterial truths. 

Attending to the spirituality of mind and not to its 
union with body, Plato held that the object of mind is 
a bodiless idea, and that understanding results rather by 
sharing in ideas apart from phenomena than by making 
an abstraction from individual experience. 

519, 744. Summa Theologica, I a. Ixxxv. I 

653. There are two kinds of abstraction. First, by way 
of composition and division, as when we take one note 
to be inseparable or separable from another. Second, 
by way of simplicity, as when we consider one reality 
without attending to another. When things are not 
really separate from one another, and abstraction after 
the first method is performed, then the result is not with- 
out error. But no error is implied in the second method 
of abstraction, even when dealing with realities not 
really separate from one another. This appears in the 
case of the senses. For we should make a mistake if we 



CONSCIOUSNESS 245 

imagined and reckoned that colour is not in, or may be 
separate from, a coloured body. But there would be no 
mistake if colour and its properties were considered and 
stated without reference to the apple which is coloured, 
for to be in apple is not essential to colour, and colour 
can be treated independently of apple. I say similarly 
that the specific notes of a material thing, such as man, 
horse, stone, can be conceived without the individual 
principles, which are not essential to the nature. This is 
what ^ye mean by abstraction of the universal from the 
particular or the intellectual concept from the sense- 
image; in other words, the nature of the species is con- 
sidered apart from the individual principles represented 
in the senses. 

If the intellect is said to be false when it understands 
a thing otherwise than as it is, the statement may be 
granted if the term otherwise refers to the thing under- 
stood, for then the intellect is at fault by understanding 
a thing to be different from what it is, as would be the 
case if it abstracted the species of stone from matter so 
as to think, as Plato did, that the species does not exist 
in matter. But the criticism does not apply if the term 
otherwise be taken to refer to the knower, for assuredly 
the mode of understanding in the knower is not the 
same as the mode of the thing in the concrete, for the 
former is spiritual and the latter material. 

315, 598, 838 Summa Theohgica, ra. Ixxxv. I, ad I 

654. Some have thought that the species of a natural 
thing is a pure form, and that matter is not part of the 
species. If that indeed were the case, then matter would 
not enter into the definition of natural things. We must 
disagree, and remark that matter is twofold, common 
matter, such as flesh and bones, and marked out and 
individual matter, such as this flesh and these bones. 



24.6 CONSCIOUSNESS 

The mind abstracts the meaning of a natural thing from 
the individual sensible matter, but not from the common 
sensible matter: for example, it abstracts the species of 
man from this flesh and these bones, for since these do 
not belong to the species as such but as are individual 
parts, they need not be observed in the species: the 
species of man, however, cannot be discussed apart 
from flesh and bones in general. 

50 Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxxv. I, ad 2 

655. Concerning the difference between universal and 
particular ideas, let it be remembered in the first place 
that higher minds have more universal, and lower minds 
less universal, ideas. But such universality and particu- 
larity should not be misinterpreted to refer to the things 
known, nor should it be concluded that God under- 
stands only the universal nature of being. As regards 
other minds, one consequence of this reading would be 
that the higher the mind the more general the know- 
ledge, and this would be tantamount to saying that a 
superior intelligence knows merely the nature of sub- 
stance, an inferior intelligence the nature of body, a 
still lower intelligence a particular species, and so on 
down the scale. Obviously this calls for revision. For 
the knowledge of a thing in a generalization is imperfect 
by comparison with specific and peculiar knowledge; 
knowledge of a species includes knowledge of its genus, 
but not the other way round: the sweeping inference 
would be that the higher the mind the lower the know- 
ledge. 

Consequently the difference between universality 
and particularity should be set in the medium of know- 
ledge. The higher the mind the more universal its 
medium, yet in such wise that its knowledge covers the 
specific notes of an object more thoroughly than does 



CONSCIOUSNESS 247 

the knowledge enjoyed by a lesser mind. This can be 
confirmed from our own experience; we notice that 
people of excellent understanding grasp all the points 
of a problem from a few hints, whereas those of duller 
wit have to be shown them in detailed repetition. 
19, 307 Opusc. x, Exposition, de Causis, lect. 10 

656. To theorize about universal ideas without pre- 
vious induction is not possible. 

105 Commentary, / Posterior Analytics, lect. 29 

* 

657. Mental activity rises from sensation, yet in the 

very object of sense the mind perceives many notes that 
escape the senses. 

537 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxviii. 4, ad 4 

YI. KNOWLEDGE OF SINGULARS 

658. Rational knowledge lights primarily on the form 
of natural things, and secondarily on their matter as 
related to form. Form as such is universal, so the mind's 
bent to form does not enable it to know matter except 
in general terms. Matter as so expressed is not the 
principle of individuation. It is such only when taken 
in the singular, in other words as matter marked out and 
existing under determinate dimensions. Obviously then, 
the reason cannot know singulars directly. They are 
known by sensitive powers quickening bodily organs, 
and themselves existing under determinate dimensions. 
Intellectual knowledge brings the knowledge of uni- 
versal matter, but sense-knowledge brings the know- 
ledge of determinate matter which is the principle of 
individuation. 

Nevertheless, the mind is indirectly involved with 
singular facts inasmuch as it merges into the sense- 
powers, which are engaged with particular things. The 



248 CONSCIOUSNESS 

process works both ways. First in the direction from 
things to mind, corresponding to the movement of the 
sensitive part into the mind to reach its climax there. 
Thus the mind knows the singular by a sort of reflection, 
for from knowing its own object, namely some general 
type, it can bend back and be aware of its own activity, 
and then continue to the concept which is a principle 
of the activity, and thence to the image from which the 
concept is drawn: in this way the mind comes by some 
knowledge of the singular. The second direction/s from 
soul into things, starting from mind and leading into 
the sensitive parts. Because the mind governs the lower 
powers and the particular reason, which is the faculty 
of individual situations, it comes to entertain the know- 
ledge of singular things. 

305, 447, 621 Disputations, x de Vcritatc^ 5 

659. When a singular thing is perceived, as when I 
recognize that a coloured object is this man or that 
animal, the apprehension is elicited by the internal 
sense that appreciates particular situations, also called 
the particular reason, for it combines individual mean- 
ings in much the same way as the universal reason com- 
bines general meanings. This power is in the sensitive 
part of the soul. 

Sense and mind are conjoined in man, and the sensi- 
tive powers at their best share in the power of the 
intelligence. In irrational animals the perception of 
individual characteristics comes by natural sense-judge- 
ment; a ewe knows her lamb by hearing or sight. 
Here the human sense-judgement is rather different 
from the merely animal judgement. For the particular 
reason perceives an individual as being of a certain 
kind, for the faculty works alongside and in the same 
subject as the intelligence, and therefore may perceive 



CONSCIOUSNESS 249 

objects as being this man or this stone. Purely animal 
appreciation does not judge the individual to be of a 
certain kind, but only to be the principle or term of 
some action or passion; thus a ewe knows this lamb, 
not as being a lamb, but as something to be suckled, and 
this grass, not as grass, but as something to be eaten. 
18,621,662 Commentary, // de Anima^ lect. 1 3 

660. One and the same power can know flesh and the 
meaning of flesh, as when the mind relates universal to 
singular. The difference between jz^/and white would 
not be perceived unless there were one common clear- 
ing-house of sense in which both can be joined together. 
Similarly universal could not be related to particular 
unless the mind knew them both, though in different 
ways. 

621 Commentary, /// de Anima, lect. 8 

661. It is singular as material that is incompatible with 
being understood, not singular as singular. 

307 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxxvi. I, ad 3 

VII. SELF-KNOWLEDGE 

662. Because in its present life the mind is connaturally 
occupied with material and sensible things, it knows 
itself through its activation by ideas, abstracted from 
sensible things by the factive intellect lighting the mind. 
Therefore the mind knows itself through its activity, 
not through its essence. 

This knowledge is exercised in two ways, in the 
particular and in the universal. By their own individual 
awareness Socrates and Plato perceive themselves to 
possess an intellectual soul, because they perceive that 
they are actually understanding. But the self can also 
be considered in universal ideas, as when the nature of 



250 CONSCIOUSNESS 

the soul is inferred from the nature of its activity scienti- 
fically considered. 

There is a difference between the two knowledges. 
The presence of the mind to itself suffices for the 
former, since the mind itself is the principle of the 
activity wherein it perceives itself; hence it is said to 
know itself by its presence. 1 But this does not suffice for 
the latter, which requires further careful and scientific 
introspection. 

102, 103, 292, 295 Summa Theokgica^ j*. Ixxxvii. i 

663. Through the soul's consciousness we know that 
the soul exists, because we perceive its activity; then 
we go on to explore its nature by a scientific study of 
its acts and objects. Similarly, as regards psychological 
qualities, abilities, and habits, we know that they exist 
because we perceive their activities; but to know their 
characteristics we must measure them by their scientific 
types. 

in Contra Gentes y 4.6 

VIII. FUNCTIONS OF INTELLIGENCE 

664. If memory means the power of retaining ideas, 
then of course it is in the intellect; but if one insists 
that its object is the past precisely as past, then it is not 
in the intellective part of the soul, but in the sensitive 
part which perceives singulars. The past as such signifies 
existence at a determinate time, and therefore contracts 
the conditions of particularity. 

Fastness, however, can refer either to an object known 
or to an act of knowing. As regards the former, pastness 
is incidental, and not essential to an intelligible object: 
the mind understands man as man; whether this object 

1 The doctrine of immediate self-consciousness derives from 
St. Augustine, de Trinltate^ ix. x. 



CONSCIOUSNESS 251 

happens to be past, present, or future is quite irrelevant 
But as regards the latter, the pastness of an act can be 
essential to intellect, for our act of understanding is 
a particular activity at a certain time: accordingly we 
speak of a man knowing yesterday, to-day, or to-morrow. 
This is not inconsistent with intellectuality, for though 
particular the reality in question is also immaterial. 

244, 621 Summa Thcohgica, la. Ixxix. 6, c & ad 2 

665. Past and present can be proper differences to 
objects offense, but not to objects of mind. 

248 Summa Theokgica^ la. Ixxix. 7, ad 2 

666. The intellect and the reason cannot be diverse 
faculties. This clearly appears when their respective 
activities are considered. To understand is to apprehend 
an intelligible truth simply; to reason is to proceed from 
one understanding to another. Ratiocination is com- 
pared to intellection as motion to rest, or as acquiring 
to having. One is a process; the other an achievement. 
Human ratiocination proceeds according to the method 
of inquiry and discovery from certain objects simply 
understood, namely from first principles; following 
afterwards the method of judgement by analysis, it 
returns to its principles, in the light of which it examines 
what has been found. Now it is clear that to be in motion 
and to be at rest are not to be referred to different 
powers, but to one and the same power. 

244, 298, 696 Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxix. 8 

667. As Aristotle says, the theoretical mind by extension 
becomes practical. 1 But one faculty does not become 
another. Therefore the speculative and the practical 
reasons are not different faculties. 

5 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxix. II, led contra 

1 de Anima^ 43 y 14. 



XI 

Love 1 

668. The powers of appetition are now to be con- 
sidered, and under the following headings: appetite in 
general, emotion, will, choice. 

318 Summa Theokgica^ la. Ixxx, Prologue 

C' 

669. In every good the supreme good is desired. 

162, 725 Commentary, II Sentences^ I. ii. 3 

I. APPETITION 

670. Propensity follows form. In the case of things 
without knowledge, each possesses one form limiting it 
to one existence or condition of natural being. The 
resulting propensity is called natural appetite. But forms 
exist more perfectly in things that can know* they 
possess the determinate being and inclination we have 

1 St. Thomas frequently notes the difference between cognition 
and affection : both are immanent activities completed within the 
subject, both are intrinsically non-causal and lifted above the law 
that the birth of one thing is the death of another; yet with know- 
ledge the object is taken into the knower, while with love the 
lover goes out to the object. Even in desire working through 
knowledge the attraction is for a thing more than for a meaning. 
Hence the importance of the dialectic of love in the mystical 
and aesthetical theory of St. Thomas. The specialized appetite of 
will is based on natural desire and cannot disavow its origins; 
even within the field of its proper activity the area of choice is 
limited. Human liberty is neither an ultimate value nor the power 
of producing something entirely new. Yet, except in the final 
stages of human activity, psychological determinism is avoided in 
the thesis of the poise of the powers of mind and will before any- 
thing less than universal truth and goodness. 



LOVE 253 

mentioned, but in addition they can receive the forms 
of other things, whereupon they evince propensities 
above the mode of natural appetite. These come from 
the appetitive part of the soul, whereby an animal can 
desire the things it apprehends, not merely the thing 
which it is by its own natural form. 

693, 950 Summa Theohgica, la. Ixxx. I 

671. Within each power there is its own natural appe- 
tite for a suitable object; but over and above there is 
a special t^pe of appetite, termed the animal appetite, 
resulting from perception and going for an object, not 
merely because it is congruous to this or that power, as 
seeing for the sight or hearing for the ear, but also 
because it is wanted by the whole organism. 1 

Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxx. I, ad 3 

672. He who desires a good seeks to have it as it really 
is in nature, not as it is in his consciousness. 

732, 912 Disputations, xxn de f^erifate y 3, ad 4 

673. The will is taken up with things as they are in 
themselves, the intellect with things according as they 
exist spiritually in the soul. Action and movement are 

1 Motions of appetite may be usefully divided as follows : 
I the violent, or forced; movement imposed from without: 
I the natural, or spontaneous; movement from within: 

| unconscious; natural appetite: 

I with knowledge; the voluntary : 

I animal appetite; imperfect knowledge of purpose and im- 
perfect voluntary : 
rational appetite; knowledge of end as such and perfect 
voluntary : 
| volition, of ends : 

( choice, of means : a human act implying deliberation : 
( liberty of contradiction ; of acting or not acting : 
| liberty of contrariety ; of acting thus or thus : the issue 
\ may or may not be between right and wrong. 



254 LOVE 

excited for things existing as realities in nature, not as 
thoughts. 

323, 698 Disputations, xxn de Vcritate* 12 

674. All other motions of the appetite presuppose love 
as their first root. 

394 Summa Theologica> la. xx. i 

675. All fear springs from love. Ordered love is in- 
cluded in every virtue, disordered love in every vice. 

Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. cxxv. 2 

676. Love is absolutely stronger than hate. 

476 Summa Thcologica, ia-2ae. xxix. 3 

II. EMOTION 

677. Sensuality is the name of the sensitive appetite. 

815 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxxi. I 

678. The sensitive appetite is one generic power, but 
is divided into two kinds, namely the concupiscible and 
the irascible. By the former the soul works according to 
the pain-pleasure principle, by the latter it deals with 
emergency reactions. 

The irascible is, as it were, the champion of the 
concupiscible, attacking what hinders pleasure or inflicts 
harm, which respectively the concupiscible desires and 
shrinks from. Anger starts from desire and leads to it. 

819 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxxi. 2 

679. While natural and voluntary activities are spon- 
taneous and from an intrinsic principle, violent and 
forced motions are from an extrinsic principle. As 
violence makes an action unnatural in things lacking 
consciousness, so it makes an action non-voluntary in 
things with consciousness. 

703 Summa Tkeologica^ ia-2ae. vi. 5 



LOVE 255 

680. That rule is termed despotic when master governs 
slaves who are not able to resist, having nothing of 
their own. 1 But rule is royal and civilized when the 
prince rules free citizens who, though under govern- 
ment, have something of their own and are able to 
resist. The soul is said to govern the body by despotic 
rule; but the reason governs the emotional life by civil 
rule, because the sense-appetite has something of its 
own and thereby can resist the commands of the reason. 
For of its nature it is swayed, not only by the particular 
reason guided by the universal reason, but also by the 
imagination and the senses. We experience a resistance 
when we imagine something pleasant forbidden by the 
reason, or something unpleasant commanded by the 
reason. This does not exclude obedience. 

996, 1093 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxxi. 3, ad 2 

681. Of some motions the principle is outside, as when 
a stone is thrown up into the air; of others it is within, 
as when a stone gravitates downward. Among things in 
motion from within, some have not moved themselves, 
while others have set themselves in motion. In some 
cases, although there is an intrinsic principle of action, 
the principle of acting for a purpose is not within the 
thing, but in something else directing it. In other cases, 
however, given some knowledge of an end, things have 
within themselves the principle, not merely of acting, 
but also of acting for a purpose. Those motions are 
termed voluntary where the activity is both from within 
and purposed by the doer. 

703 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. vi. I 

682. An activity from within with some knowledge of 
purpose that is the mark of voluntary action. But there 

1 Politics, I254 b 2. 



256 LOVE 

is a twofold knowledge of an end, imperfect and perfect. 
Imperfect knowledge is merely perceiving a goal without 
understanding of purpose as such or of the adaptation 
of means to ends; animals enjoy that kind of know- 
ledge through their senses. Perfect knowledge requires 
more, namely, understanding of the meaning of purpose 
and of the relation of means to end; it is proper to an 
intelligence. Hence the complete character of voluntary 
activity, endowed with deliberation and freedom, is 
found in rational natures alone. From imperfect appre- 
ciation of purpose there follows incomplete voluntary 
Activity, the apprehension and spontaneous desire with- 
out deliberation which is typical of animals. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. vi. 2 

III. VOLITION 

683. Objects of sense and of intelligence are at different 
levels; in consequence the intellectual appetite 1 or will 
is a power distinct from the sensitive appetite. 

80 1 Summa Theologica, la. Ixxx. 2 

684. The will is contrasted with the merely natural 
appetite, as man is contrasted with animal. The opposi- 
tion is formal, not of things in the round for as mind 
includes animal, so does the will include natural 
appetite. 

Disputations, XXH de Verltate^ 5, ad 6, /; 

685. Mind influences will as a final cause, for a good 
understood is the object of will and acts like an end; 
but the will moves the mind, and also other psycho- 
logical powers, as an efficient cause. 

211 Summa Thcohgica, za. Ixxxii. 4 

1 The intellectual appetite, or will, a faculty distinct from the 
intellect; not to be confused with the natural appetite within the 
intellect. Cf. 671. 



LOVE 257 

686. A triple comparison may be drawn between intel- 
lect and will. First, in the abstract and generally speak* 
ing, without respect to this or that object: the intellect 
thus is higher than the will, for to possess the value 
of a thing is better than to be related to it. Second, with 
respect to sensible things: again the intellect thus is 
higher than the will, for it is better to know a stone than 
to will it, for the form of stone as understood exists more 
excellently than does form of stone in actual fact, and as 
so desired by the will. Third, with respect to divine 
things, higher than the soul: now thus it is better to love 
them than to understand them; it is better to love 
God than to know about him, for the divine goodness is 
most perfectly in God, which is how it is desired by the 
will, than it is as shared in us or conceived by the mind. 

731,913 Disputations, xxn Je Venialc^ 1 1 

687. Some have thought that the human will is moved 
to choice from necessity. However, they do not hold 
that the will is forced, for not all necessary motions are 
violent, but only those whose over-riding principles are 
from without. 

Disputations, vr de Malo t I 

688. Effects are denominated necessary or contingent, 
as the case may be, by the condition of their proximate 
causes. 

308 Opusc. xrrr, Compendium Tkeologiae, 139 

689. The term necessity has various usages. One is 
necessity from force, imposed by an efficient cause; 
another is necessity from the final cause, when a means 
is indispensable or convenient for an end; a third is 
natural or absolute necessity from intrinsic principles, 
either the formal or the material cause. 

Now necessity from force is entirely against the 

B028 S 



258 LOVE 

character of willing, for a violent action is induced 
against the natural inclination of the thing concerned. 
The motion of the will is spontaneous. A motion cannot 
be simultaneously violent and natural, nor similarly 
simultaneously coerced and voluntary. 

Necessity from an end is not inimical to the notion of 
will when an end cannot be reached except by one 
means; for example, the will is under the necessity of 
taking ship from the intention of making a sea-passage. 

Natural necessity likewise is not against the nature of 
the will; indeed just as the mind adheres to first prin- 
ciples of necessity so the will cleaves to happiness of 
necessity and to the last end. This is the constant founda- 
tion and spring of all its activities. 

Ill Summa Thcohgica, la. Ixxxii. I 

690. But let us consider the necessity from the end. 
The will does not will of necessity whatever it wills. To 
make this clearer, let us remark again that as the mind 
assents to first principles of necessity so does the will go 
out to the last end. There are some truths that have no 
necessary connexion with first principles, for example, 
contingent propositions which may be denied without 
a denial of first principles. The mind does not assent to 
them of necessity. Other propositions have a necessary 
connexion ; such are demonstrated conclusions to which 
the mind assents of necessity once they have been proved. 
Now the will is in like case. 

Some particular goods are not necessarily bound up 
with happiness. A man may be happy without them. 
To these the will is not determined of necessity. But 
there are others which have a necessary connexion with 
happiness. They are involved in our cleaving to God, 
in whom alone true happiness consists. Nevertheless, 
before this connexion strikes us in the certitude of 



LOVE 259 

vision, the will does not cleave to God or to divine 
things of necessity. 

213 Sumnta Thtologica, la. Ixxxii. 2 

691. The future disposition of a thing may concern 
either its constitution, as when an artist decides to 
design a house; or its use and administration, as when a 
man decides how to train a horse, and this is where pre- 
destination comes in. By its natural constitution a thing 
is not immediately directed towards an end, and there- 
fore natuial meanings do not fall under predestination 
properly speaking; we do not say that man is pre- 
destined to have hands. 

339, 342 Commentary, in Romanes, i, lect, 3 

IV. FREEWILL 

692. To be free is not to be obliged to one determinate 
object: as deriving from the mind's apprehension re- 
garding universal good, the appetite of an intellectual 
substance is not committed to one determinate good. 

242, 655 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theologiae, 76 

693. The term will has two senses: when it stands for 
the faculty it covers means and ends, but when it stands 
for the act of volition it is engaged with ends. 

As first principles of the mind are known naturally, so 
the principle of all motions of the will is something that 
is naturally, that is not deliberately, willed. This is 
goodness in general, to which the will tends of necessity 
as any faculty does to its own appropriate object. Again, 
it is the last end, and by and large it includes all those 
parts of the good estate appropriate to the nature of 
man who wills; they concern not his will alone, but 
also every power, and indeed the whole man. Know- 
ledge of truth, which responds to mind, to be and to 



260 LOVE 

live, which belong to his natural integrity all these 
are implied in the object of will. 1 

595 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. viii. 2 

694. The will addresses itself differently to ends and to 
means; to the former simply and absolutely, as to things 
good in themselves; to the latter calculatedly, as to 
things useful for something else. Therefore there is 
a difference in its manner of address to what is willed 
in itself, health for instance, and what is chosen for the 
sake of something else, medicine for instance.' The first 
activity is called thelcsis by Damascene, and willing-as- 
natural in the schools; the second is called ioulesis by 
Damascene, and willing-as-reasoned in the schools. 1 

214, 311, 977 Summa Theologica^ 34. xviii. 3 

695. Freewill is not a habit, but a faculty. 

Summa Theologica, la. Ixxxiii. 2 

696. As understanding and reasoning are from the 
same faculty of mind, so also are wishing and choosing 
from the same faculty of will. The will and the freewill 
are not two powers, but one. 

666 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxxiii. 4. 

697. As in physical things there is a form which is the 
principle of activity, and an active propensity con- 
sequent on that form, called the natural appetite, so in 
man there is an intellective form and a propensity of 
will, consequent on this form as apprehended, from 

1 Several stages are distinguished in the normal present activity 
of the will, voluntas : the wishing, velle of an end \ the willing, 
W/V/o, of an end ; the choice, clectio, of a means } the execution of 
the activity, and the consequent pleasure. 

* Expositio Accurata Fidei Orthodoxac, ii. 22. The scholastic 
terms are voluntas ut natura and voluntas ut ratio. The latter is 
freewill, the power of choice. 



LOVE 261 

which follows external activity. But there is a difference 
here, for the form of natural things is individuated by 
matter, on which account the consequent propensity is 
determined to one object. A form as understood, how- 
ever, is universal and can comprise many things. When 
activity is about to be directed on a singular object, 
which does not exhaust the power of the universal, the 
propensity of will in itself is poised indeterminately to 
many objects of action. It is as when the architect con- 
ceives the^form of a house, but his will is not yet made 
up as to its style and what lines it will take, angular or 
rounded. 

Disputations, vr de 



698. Motion and action do not spring from a universal 
conception, unless that be joined with an individual 
apprehension, because motion and action are for the 
particular. The human intellect by nature is cognitive 
of universals. For motion and action to be stirred, 
therefore, a general conception must be applied to a 
particular case. Potentially it contains many particulars, 
and it can be applied in consequence to many and diverse 
things. The judgement of the intellect about what should 
be done is not committed to any one course. All in- 
tellectual natures, therefore, possess freewill. 

316, 903 II Contra Gentes 48 

699. Man has free choice, otherwise counsels, exhorta- 
tions, precepts, prohibitions, rewards, and punishments 
would all be pointless. 

In explanation note that some things act without 
judgement, as when a stone falls; others with judge- 
ment, but more from natural instinct than deliberate 
adjustment, as when a sheep flees from a wolf. Man, 
however, can act from judgement and adaptation in the 



262 LOVE 

reason; a free judgement that leaves intact the power of 
being able to decide otherwise. The reason keeps an 
open mind, as appears in dialectical proofs and rhetorical 
persuasions. Particular lines of conduct are contingent. 
Concerning any one of them the practical reason is not 
committed beforehand. A man has free choice to the 
extent that he is rational. 

342, 969, 977 Summa Theologica, I a. Ixxxiii. I 

700. The will is actuated in two ways, as regards first 
the exercise and secondly the specification of its activity. 
In the first way, no object in a humane situation moves 
the will of necessity, for a man is always able not to think 
of an object and consequently not to react to it. But in 
the second way, some objects move the will of necessity, 
others not. If an object universally and in every respect 
good is proposed, then of necessity the will must go out 
in love if it acts at all. But if the object proposed is not 
good from every point of view, then the will is not 
moved of necessity. The lack of any good is equivalent 
to not-good. Only that good which is complete in itself, 
and without need of supplement, is the good which the 
will is not able not to will. This is happiness. Other parti- 
cular goods, in that they fall short of some goodness, 
can be regarded as not good; as appreciated in that 
light they can be approved or rejected by the will, 
which can conduct itself in the same situation according 
to different points of view. 

204, 1038 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. x. 2 

701. Choice is materially an act of the will, formally an 
act of the reason. 

The decision or judgement, drawn by the reason as 
a conclusion, is followed by choice in the will. 

Summa Theologica> ia-2ae. xiii. i, c 



XII 

Happiness 1 

702. Having proclaimed God as the exemplar, and 
having discussed the things issuing from his omnipotent 
will, it remains now to consider his image, that is man, 
studied as the principle of his own activity and the 
master o his own deeds. Here we must discuss the 
final goal of human life, first in general terms and then 
with reference to happiness. 2 

Summa Thcologica^ ia-2ae. i, Prologue 

I. PURPOSE AND END 

703. Only acts controlled by man through his reason 
and will are properly termed human: they proceed 
from deliberation. Others may be called acts of the 
man, but they are not human in the specific sense of 
the term. 

164, 682 Summa Theologica y ia-2ac. i, i 

1 St. Thomas's debt to the first and last books of the Nico- 
machean Ethics is clear and acknowledged : happiness or beatitude 
is taken as man's final and immanent perfection, his highest 
activity of mind. So much for his subjective well-being. But as \ 
regards objective happiness, the thing which gives this joy, the 
rudimentary natural theology of the Peripatetics is supplemented 
by ideas derived from Plotinus, Augustine, and especially from 
Boethius. Ultimately, existing sheer truth and goodness answer 
human desire. St. Thomas parts company with the Stoics, for he 
holds that virtue is not its own reward, and also with the Epi- 
cureans, for pleasure does not constitute the end of human pur- 
pose; yet the temper of both is found in his thought. 

2 BeatitudO) a more comprehensive term than happiness, and 
also stronger : it includes not only the active completion of the 
subject but also the objective causes and conditions of the state. 



264 HAPPINESS 

704. A thing tends to an end in two ways, either like 
a man setting himself in motion or like a missile shot 
off. To be self-acting and self-conducting to an end is 
proper to human nature. Irrational nature is rather 
acted on or conducted, whether the goal be appre- 
hended, as in the case of animals, or not, as in the case of 
things wholly lacking consciousness. 

679 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ac. i. 2 

705. Some acts do not appear to be purposeful, for in- 
stance playing and contemplating, also inattentf ve actions 
such as stroking your beard. Notice that contemplative 
activity, though not for an ulterior end, itself contains 
the end; playful activities are somewhat similar, as 
when we sport for the pleasure of it, though at other 
times we take recreation to make ourselves fit for work. 
Actions without attention, as when we scratch an itch, 
come from sudden sensations or from natural principles; 
their purposes lie off the map of deliberation. 

i, 694 in Contra Gentes^ 2 

706. An act is voluntary in two ways: as commanded 
by the will, such as speaking or walking; and as elicited 
from the will, such as the act of volition itself. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. i. I, J</2 

707. Happiness is the greatest human good, the end to 
which all others are subordinate. It would be pernicious 
to a degree were happiness a matter of good luck, for 
then all other goods would be even more fortuitous, 
and so any deliberate attempt to lead a good life would 
go by the board. 

Commentary, I Ethics, lect. 14 

708. A man need not be always preoccupied with his 
last end, any more than a wayfarer should always be 



HAPPINESS 265 

thinking about the end of his journey with every step 
he takes. 

Summa Thcologica^ ia-2ae. i. 6, ad 3 

709. The last end so satisfies the entire appetite that 
naught outside is left to be desired. For the appetite to 
be simultaneously attracted by two ends, both claiming 
to be ultimate, is quite impossible. 

213 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ac. i. 5 



II. THE OBJECTIVE GOOD 

710. Of the ultimate end we can speak in two senses, 
in the abstract and in the concrete. Concerning the 
former, which expresses the very concept of finality, all 
are of one mind in desiring their completion. Though 
as to where this may be found, which is happiness in the 
latter sense, there is no general agreement. Some set 
their heart on riches, others on pleasure, and so forth. 
Deliciousness is delightful to every taste, but some find 
it best in wine, others in candy, and so forth. 

Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ac. i. 7 

711. Then again in considering the ultimate end, we 
should draw a distinction between the object itself 
in which goodness lies and the obtaining and enjoy- 
ing of it. 1 

727 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ac. i. 8 

712. Wealth is jf two kinds, natural and artificial. 
Natural wealth, such as food, drink, clothing, and 

1 The term last end can have three meanings : 

I the objective end itself, taken 
( r. in the abstract, the formal object, divine truth; 
I 2. in the concrete, the Thing, God j 
3. the subjective end, the activity of possessing the end, the 
vision of God. 



266 HAPPINESS 

shelter, supplies natural needs. Artificial wealth, such as 
money, does not directly serve nature, but is invented 
by art to facilitate the exchange of goods. Natural 
wealth ought to support human nature, and therefore 
cannot be ultimate since it is subservient to man him- 
self. With much less reason is artificial wealth his last 
end, for it is but a means to natural wealth. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. ii. I 

713. Silly people think that money commands the 
bodily goods most worth having. t> 

Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. ii. i, ad I 

714. The lust for natural wealth is not boundless, 
because nature works within limits; but there is no end 
to the avarice for artificial wealth. 

145 Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. ii. i, ad 3 

715. The good life does not consist in renouncing 
wealth, though that is one method of finding it. Easier 
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for 
a rich man to enter heaven the impossibility is not 
alleged but the rarity is emphasized. 

Opusc. xxix, de Perfectione Vitae Spiritualis, 7 

716. There can be two virtues in the spending of 
money: liberality in day-to-day disbursing, magnificence 
in great expenditures. 

Summa Theologlca^ 2a 2ac. cxxxiv. 3, ad I 

717. Four general reasons can be brought forward to 
show that perfect happiness consists neither in riches, 
nor in honour or fame, nor in power. Of which the 
first is that perfect happiness is not compatible with any 
evil. The second is that happiness is self-sufficient; once 
obtained no other human prize is wanting, such as good 
health and wisdom. The third is that no harm results 



HAPPINESS 267 

from happiness, whereas sometimes riches are kept to the 
hurt of the owner? and this may also be the case with the 
other goods we have mentioned. The fourth reason is 
this; happiness wells up from within, but the goods we 
have mentioned come from external causes and often 
from good luck. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ac. ii. 4 

718. The dead can be honoured or disgraced, their 
descendants may be prosperous or unfortunate. And so 
happiness lies not even in the grave. 

Commentary, I Ethics, lect. i 5 

719. The overriding consideration of an admiral is not 
to keep his ships undamaged, for his fleet is meant to 
serve a purpose outside itself. As that is entrusted to him, 
so a man is commissioned by his reason and will, and 
since man is not himself the supreme good, his business 
is to serve another end. Consequently his own safety is 
not his ultimate end. 

171, 457 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. ii. 5 

720. The desire for joy is inherently stronger than the 
fear of sadness, though under certain circumstances 
men's preoccupation may be with avoiding the latter 
rather than seeking the former. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xxxv. 6 

721. Pleasure is naught but the repose of appetite in 
a good thing, and so if the phrase for the sake 0/indicates 
final causality we can admit that pleasure is desired for 
its own sake, for it is good. But if the phrase indicates the 
formal cause, or even the efficient cause, then pleasure 
is desired not on its own account, but because of some- 

1 Eccles. v. 12. 



268 HAPPINESS 

thing else, namely the good thing which is the object 
of appetite, and which in consequence is the principle 
and form-giver of pleasure. 

375, 800, 823 Summa Theokgica y ia-2ae. ii. 6, ad I 

722. There are two phases in pleasure: the percep- 
tion of what is congenial, which belongs to cognition, 
and the satisfaction in what is offered, which belongs to 
the appetite, where delight culminates. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xi. I, a</ 3 

723. An essential component is distinct from a resulting 
property; rational mortal is distinct from endowed 
with a sense of humour. Always bear in the mind that 
delight is a quality consequent on happiness. A man 
delights because he possesses the very thing he wants, 
if not in fact then in hope, or at least in memory. 
The substance of his happiness lies in that objective 
good. 

Summa Theokgica, xa 2ac. ii. 6 

724. Perfect enjoyment demands intelligence. 

998 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ac. xi. 2 

725. The ultimate end of everything is its completion. 
A part is for the whole as for its end. The whole universe 
of creatures, which is called the macrocosm, is related 
to man, who is called the microcosm, as the perfect to 
the imperfect. Therefore man's happiness is contained 
in the cosmos. 

Against this argument we must remark that if a whole 
is not itself an ultimate but subordinate to a higher end, 
then the ultimate end of a part is not the group itself, 
but something else outside. The universe of creatures, 
in which man is like a part in the whole, is not an 
ultimate end itself; it is ordered to God. Man's last end, 



HAPPINESS 269 

therefore, does not consist in the total and collective 
good of the universe, but in God. 

171, mi, 1117 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae, ii. 8, o&j. &P ad 2 

726. Creaturely good is not less than the happiness of 
which man is capable, when that is taken subjectively as 
being part of him. It is less than that happiness, when 
that is taken objectively, or as regards its object, which 
is infinite. 

Summa Theologica, la zae. ii. 8, ad 3 
III. THE ACT OF HAPPINESS 

727. End can be viewed under two aspects; the thing 
itself which we desire to have, thus money to the miser, 
and the laying hold and enjoyment of it, thus his 
clutching. Under the first aspect, the ultimate end of 
man is uncreated good, namely God who alone can 
perfectly fulfil the will of man because of his infinite 
goodness. But under the second aspect, the ultimate is 
a creaturely reality in man. The happiness of man, then, 
considered in its cause and object is uncreated, but con- 
sidered in its nature it is created. 

711 Summa Theologica> ia-2ae. iii. i 

728. And happiness is an activity in this sense. 

291, 447 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. iii. 2 

729. By saying that it was an estate replenished with 
all good things, Boethius described happiness in general 
terms. 1 Aristotle lays his finger on the point by indicat- 
ing its constitutive activity. 2 

371 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. iii. 2, adz 

730. The factors of happiness may be essential, ante- 
cedent, or consequent. 

1 Consolatjo Philosophiz^m, 2, 2 Ethics^ 



270 HAPPINESS 

Sense-activity is not an essential component of 
happiness; yet for the incomplete happiness of the 
present life it is an antecedent requirement, because 
understanding demands previous sensation. Moreover, 
it is a consequence of that perfect happiness in heaven 
to which we look forward: Augustine speaks about the 
happiness of soul flowing out into the body after the 
resurrection, and the quickening and perfecting of 
bodily senses. 

629 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. iii. 3 

731. I say that the essential moment cannot consist in 
activity of will. For happiness is the laying hold on the 
last end, and this is not an act of will, which equally 
desires a good when absent and enjoys it when present. 
Desiring is not the same as laying hold of, but is a move- 
ment thereto; enjoyment follows because the good is 
possessed. The converse is not true, a good is not present 
because the will delights in it. By an activity other than 
that of will, therefore, is the object made present to the 
will. This may be illustrated by a mundane example: if 
the possession of wealth were an act of will, desiring 
would be equivalent to having; to begin with, however, 
wealth is absent, and afterwards when it has been 
acquired, then is it enjoyed. So also with spiritual good. 
At the beginning we desire to have it, afterwards it is 
present to us in an act of mind, and then the will 
delights in it and is at rest. Therefore the activity of 
happiness consists in an activity of mind, though the 
consequent delight is in the will; Augustine calls it joy 
in the truth. 

686 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. iif. 4. 

732. Union of lover and beloved is twofold, real union, 
when the beloved is present, and union by affection. 



HAPPINESS 271 

This last is qualified by the knowledge preceding; love, 
alike of desire and of friendship, results from a percep- 
tion of the oneness of the beloved with the lover. When 
we love a thing by desiring it we apprehend it as 
demanded by our well-being; when we love another in 
friendship we wish good to him just as we wish it to 
ourselves, we apprehend our friend as our other self. 
Augustine remarks that well did a man say to his friend, 
'Thou half of my soul'. 1 

Love is like the efficient cause of real union, because 
it moves a person to seek and find the company of the 
beloved, who fits in as part of one's life. Love is the 
formal cause of union of affection, because love itself is 
this bond. In describing love as a uniting, Augustine 
refers to the union of affection without which there is no 
friendship, and in saying that // seeks to unite he refers 
to real union. 

Swnma Theologica^ ia-2ae. xxviii. I 

733. Knower and known are one this is universally 
true. 

588 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxxvii. I, ad ^ 

734. The first mover and author of the universe is 
Mind, and therefore its ultimate purpose is the good of 
mind: and this is truth. 

122 I Contra 



735. Were it truly final the attraction of delight would 
be based on itself. But this is not the case. What matters 
is the object that gives delight. Consequently delight 
has its goodness and attraction from elsewhere, and is 
not the ultimate end but its attendant. 

252, 723, 800 in Contra Gentes^ 26 

1 Confessions, iv. 6. Horace, Odcs^ ii. 7. 



27* HAPPINESS 

736. Delight is the resting of appetite in what is good. 
If that be unqualified good, then will it be delightful 
and rightful beyond demur. But if it be good only in a 
relative sense, then the delight will be qualified and the 
right conditional, or perhaps only putative. 1 

136, 215, 371 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. xxxiv. 2 

737. The best activity is of the best power about the 
best object. The best power is the mind, its best object 
the divine goodness. As to its best activity; contempla- 
tion is for its own sake, practical judgement seVves some 
purpose; therefore happiness lies in the theoretical 
rather than in the practical reason. 

I, 371 Summa Theologica, la 2ac. iii. 5 

738. Not that perfect happiness is found in the medita- 
tions of speculative science, which cannot go beyond 
inferences from sense-objects. 

263 Summa Thtohgica, ia-2ae. iii. 6 

739. Man's final happiness does not consist in moral 
activity, for it is ultimate and not subservient to a higher 
end, whereas moral activity is directed to something 
above itself. We may draw a comparison: a soldierly 
effort is subordinate to victory and peace; it is foolish 
to fight for the sake of fighting. 

in Contra Gentet, 34 

740. From which it follows that final happiness is not 
an activity of prudence. 

740 in Contra Gentes^ 35 

1 The simple Good is ultimate, honourable, and delightful: a 
particular good is right for the will only when it truly leads to the 
universal final good ; otherwise it only has an appearance of right- 
ness. A like subordination is also required for unambiguous 
delight. 



HAPPINESS 273 

741. At the sight of God the mind cannot but delight. 

253 Opusc. xin, Compendium Theologiae, 165 

742. The divine substance is not outside the capacity 
of created mind so as to be wholly beyond its range, as 
sound is outside sight or as spiritual substance is past 
sensation; on the contrary, that divine substance is the 
first principle and evidence of all intellectual knowledge. 

9 1 in Contra Gentes, 54 

743. In mch a vision the divine essence itself must be 
both medium and object. 

255 in Contra Gentes, 51 

744. There are two kinds of potentiality, the first is 
natural, and relates to a thing's actualization by a natural 
force, the second relates to a further actualization re- 
quiring a higher active principle. We observe this in 
natural things, for it is by natural potentiality that a man 
grows from a boy or that an animal develops from semen, 
but that a chest is carved from wood or sight is granted 
to blindness cannot come by mere natural potentiality. 
Now the same holds true of the human mind. 

Our mind is in natural potentiality to those objects 
which can be presented by the factive intellect, the 
inborn principle whereby our minds are made actually 
understanding. Such rational knowledge cannot com- 
prehend our last end, for it is limited to those things 
whose acquaintance we make through the senses. How- 
ever expert our knowledge about these material objects, 
there would always remain a desire to know more. 
There are many objects which are scarcely hinted at by 
sense-knowledge ; we may be aware of their existence 
but not of their nature, because spiritual realities are in 
a different class from bodily realities and surpass them 
exceedingly. Even among sensible objects, there are 

B 628 T 



274 HAPPINESS 

many whose inner constitution we cannot explain with 
any certainty, about others we have an inkling, but 
about some we are blankly ignorant. Hence our rest- 
lessness and desire for more perfect knowledge. Yet it is 
impossible for a natural desire to be pointless. Our last 
end can be achieved only if the natural desire of the 
mind to know is actualized and stilled by an active 
principle nobler than anything that is part of us or of 
our sort of world. This desire is such that, when an 
effect is perceived, we crave to know its cause. Whatever 
the situation may be, whenever we know something of 
the circumstances, we shall not rest until we reach the 
very heart of the matter. 

Our natural desire, therefore, will not be quieted until 
we know the first cause, not from reflections, but by its 
very essence. The first cause is God. Therefore the 
ultimate end of rational creatures is the vision of the 
essence of God. 

254, 650, 924 Opusc. xnr, Compendium Theohgiae, 104 

IV. INTEGRITY OF HAPPINESS 

745. The soul is filled with all good things by seeing 
God, and is plunged into the fount of goodness. I shall 
be satisfied when the glory shall appear. 1 And again, all 
good things came to me together with her, 2 that is with the 
contemplation of wisdom. 

I, 261 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. v. 4 

746. A desire that banishes boredom, not the desired 
object. 

139, 821, 822 Summa Theokgica^ la. Iviii. I, ad 7. 

747. These three run together: vision, the perfect 
knowledge of an intelligible end; comprehension, the 

1 Ps. xvi. 15 (Vulgate). a Wisd. vii. n. 



HAPPINESS 275 

presence of that end; delight or enjoyment, the ease of 

lover with beloved. 

Surnma Thcokgica> ia-2ae. iv. 3 

748. Vision reigns over delight. 

731 Summa TAeologica, ia-2ae. iv. 2. 

749. Righteousness of heart is required antecedently 
and concomitantly. None can reach happiness without 
goodwill, and the loves of one who sees God inevitably 
fall in w|th the divine plan. 

Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. iv. 4 

750. A requirement may enter at four stages: as a pre- 
amble or preparation, thus discipline for learning; as an 
essential constituent, thus soul for bodily life; as an out- 
side help, thus friends for a venture; and as a concomitant, 
thus delight for happiness. 

Summa Tfteokgica> ia-2ae. iv. I 

751. Delight perfects happiness as beauty does youth. 
827 Commentary, in Matthaeum, v, lect. 2 

752. No one can live without delight, and that is why 
a man deprived of spiritual joy goes over to carnal 
pleasures. 

Summa Thcokgica, 2a-2ac. xxxv. 4, ad 2 

753* Sense-pleasure attacks the practical judgement of 
prudence rather than the speculative judgement of 
understanding. 

891, 892 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. iv. I, ad $ 

754. Pleasure follows congenial activity, and therefore 
the more vehement the pleasure the more natural the 
activity. 

997 Summa Theokgica^ 2a-2ae. cxli. 4 



276 HAPPINESS 

755. The voluptuous life places its end in carnal plea- 
sure which is common to us and brutes; the taste is 
slavish, the life all very well for a beast. 1 

Summa Theologica, 2a 2ae. clxxix. 2, ad I 

756. In the state of integrity there would have been 
no lust unmoderated by reason. Not, as some say, that 
the pleasures of sense would have been less; indeed they 
would have been so much the greater to the extent that 
human nature was finer then, and the body more 
sensitive. The power of disorderly desire v/ould not 
have swamped this reason-tempered delight. The 
measure of reason implies, not weaker pleasure, but less 
embarrassed pleasure. A gourmet does not have less 
pleasure in his food than a gourmand. The words of 
Augustine are here to the point; he says that in the 
state of innocence the strength of pleasure would not 
have been suppressed, but only the heat of lust and the 
anxiety of mind. There would have been fruitfulness 
without lechery. Continence would not then have been 
laudable in the same way as now that is for the wild 
lust it banishes, not the sterility it incidentally imposes. 

990 Summa Theologica, la. xcviii. 2, ad 3 

757. Men alone take pleasure in the very beauty itself 
of sensible things; their faces uplifted, not downcast. 

62 Summa Theokgica, la. xc i.3, ad 3 

758. No man truly has joy unless he lives in love. 

1076 Opusc. xxxv, de Duobus PraeceptU 2 

759. A moral virtue enjoins due enjoyment and 
grief. 

Commentary, // Ethics, lect. 3 

1 Ethics, I095 b 20. 

a Lenten sermons, reported by Peter d'Andria. 



HAPPINESS 277 

760. The pleasure proper to an activity adds to its 
force, an extraneous pleasure obstructs it. Bodily plea- 
sure may hinder the use of reason on three counts. First, 
by distraction; things that give us pleasure hold our 
attention, and weaken or even entirely take away our 
interest in other things. Secondly, by antagonism; some 
strong pleasures are against the order of reason and can 
destroy the judgement of prudence, as Aristotle notes; 1 
though purely theoretical judgements may remain un- 
impaired,^ for instance that the angles of a triangle 
together equal two right angles: such judgements are 
hindered on the first count. Thirdly, by bondage; the 
bodily changes resulting from pleasure, greater than 
the effects of other passions, may bind the use of 
reason, as appears in alcoholics. 

892 Summa Theokgica y ia-2ae. xxxiii. 3 

761. In speaking of perfect happiness, some have said 
that no bodily conditions are present, indeed they would 
have the soul entirely disembodied. Augustine intro- 
duces Porphyry's words, that for the soul to be blessed 
everything bodily must be eschewed. 2 But this is un- 
seemly: it is natural for the soul to be united to the 
body, and one perfection should not exclude another. 
Therefore we conclude that integral happiness requires 
a perfect disposition of body, both antecedently and 
consequently. Antecedently, because, as Augustine de- 
clares, if the flesh, corruptible and a weight upon the 
soul when the mind is turned away from high heaven, 
is difficult to manage, nevertheless, he concludes, that 
very flesh, erstwhile a burden, will then be a glory. 3 
Consequently, because from the happiness of the soul 
there will be an overflow into the body, quickening it 

1 Ethics, H4.o b i5. 2 de Civitate Det\ xii. 26. 

3 De Genesi ad litter am, xii. 2$. 



278 HAPPINESS 

to perfection; as Augustine also says, the soul is made so 

powerful of its nature that from its fullness of happiness 

the vigour of deathlessness pours into the lower nature. 

827 Summa Theolog'tca, ia-2ae. iv. 6 

762. The body is required for the advantage, not the 
essence, of happiness; as bodily beauty or swiftness of 
mind for human perfection. 

Summa Theologica, la zae. iv. 5 

763. Complete contentment there cannot fye unless 
natural desire is wholly fulfilled. Everything craves 
what belongs to its nature, and therefore desires its parts 
to be reunited. Since the human soul is united by nature 
to the body there is within it a natural appetite for that 
union. The will could find no perfect rest until the soul 
and body are joined again. This is the resurrection of 
man from the dead. 

532 Opusc. xni, Compendium Theologiae^ 151 

764. The soul does not take an airy or heavenly body, 
or a body of another organic constitution, but a human 
body composed of flesh and bones and the same 
members enjoyed at present. 

Opusc. xin, Compendium Theokgiae, 153 

765. Corpulence will be cured, but not corporeity. 

Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate^ iv. 3, ad 2 

766. Hell is ruled by time, not by true eternity. 

245 Summa Theologica^ la. x. 3, ad 2 

767. In the perfect happiness of heaven nothing more 
will remain to be desired; in the full enjoyment of God 
man will obtain whatever he has desired in other things. 
Who fills tfiy desire with good things.* The desire is 

1 Ps. cii. 5 (Vulgate). 



HAPPINESS 279 

stilled; the desire not only for God, but also what lies at 
the heart of all other desires. Therefore the joy of the 
blessed is perfectly complete, and more than complete, 
indeed over-full, for there they find more than is enough 
for desire. // has not entered into the heart of man what 
God hath prepared for those that love him. 1 Good measure, 
and flowing over.' 1 Nevertheless, because no creature is 
capable of joy such as God's, the text says, not that man 
grasps this joy, but that he enters into it: Enter thou into 
the joy of the Lord. 3 

371 * Summa Theologica^ za zae. xxviii. 3 

1 I Cor. ii. 9. 2 Luke vi. 38. Matt. xxv. 21. 



XIII 

Morality 1 



768. Man has a natural urge towards complete good- 
ness. 

Disputations, xxn de Veritate^ 7 

1 The subject is not introduced abruptly. Behind the brief 
treatise devoted to it in the Summa Theologica stretch the questions 
on the nature of man and his environment; it is presided by the 
study of happiness and the detailed analysis of the structure of 
human activity, and followed by an examination of the emotions 
and habits. The arrangement is in keeping with the doctrine that 
moral science is not autonomous; there is no special faculty of 
right and wrong, duty is not for duty's sake, the right is a special 
aspect of the good, and the good is a quality of being. The moral 
imperative is not categoric, but conditional; act well if you would 
reach happiness. Yet without taking account of Christian ideals of 
selfless devotion, the rational theory surpasses utilitarianism, for 
it is dominated by the idea of God outside the scheme of the world 
and certainly not for our use, and is influenced by a dialectic of 
desire for things in themselves, not merely for reactions to them. 

The second major feature in the moral theory is the insistence 
on the measure of mind, from the eternal ideas through the 
demonstrations of reason down to the particular judgements of 
conscience. The existence of objective moral-kinds of action is 
a connected thesis. Motives and individual circumstances modify 
the morality of what we do. There is a large field that is morally 
neutral until we enter it, but some types of action are right in 
themselves, and others wrong independently of what we read into 
the situation. No end, however sublime, can justify means that 
are thoroughly inhuman. In this sense moral standards are as firm 
and impersonal as the principles of science; on that account they 
are no substitute for the flair for singular contingencies. Abstract 
theory is supplemented by a sense of the concrete situation 
expressed in the judgement of conscience, against which it is never 
lawful to act. A fundamental moral science is bound to be about 
men as they should be, not as they are; yet, touched alike by 
sympathy for sinners and by a sense of history, St. Thomas never 
gives the effect of writing a satire instead of a morality. 



MORALITY 281 

769. Happiness is secured through virtue; it is a good 
attained by man's own will. 

739> 749 m Contra Gentes, 28 



I. NATURAL FOUNDATIONS 

770. Finished moral science demands a knowledge of 
psychology. 

517 Commentary, I de Anima, lect. i 

771. Right and wrong in human acts should be dis- 
cussed irf the same temper as good and bad in things. 

480, 667 Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. xviii. i 

772. Though convertible with being, good carries a 
special accent in things with the power of choice. 

483 Commentary, II Sentences, xxvn. i. 2, ad z 

773. Good and evil should be set in the context of 
what is proper to man as man. This is his rational life. 
Therefore a good or bad human act is tested by its 
agreement or otherwise with reason instructed by the 
divine law, whose principles may be inborn, acquired, 
or infused. 

1044 Disputations, n de Malo, 4 

774. In point of fact most men seem to live according 
to sense rather than reason. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xlix. 3, ad $ 

775. The Lord is a great God, and a great King above 
all gods. He will not reject his people. In his hands are the 
ends of the earth; and the heights of the mountain are his. 
The sea is his, and he made it; and his hands formed the 
dry land. 1 The first being is one, possessing the full 
perfection of all being, and we call him God. He 

* Ps. xciv. 3-5 (Vulgate). 



2 g 2 MORALITY 

bestows reality on all existents from the abundance of 
his perfection. Therefore he is not merely the first 
being, but also the first principle of all beings. He gives 
of his own free-will, not by compulsion of nature. There- 
fore is he tfie lord of everything, because dominion is 
over things subject to will. His mastery is complete, for 
he needs neither outside assistance nor material to work 
on, since he is the maker of the whole of reality. Now 
everything produced by an efficient cause is directed to 
some end, for the good as end is the proper object 
of will. * 

A thing reaches its end by activity, which activity is 
directed by him who endows the thing with its active 
principles. God is the ruler of all, and he himself is 
ruled by none; nothing is exempt, for there is nothing 
that does not owe its being to him. As he is perfect in 
being and causing, so is he perfect in ruling. The effects 
of his rule appear differently in different things accord- 
ing to their differences of nature. For some are produced 
having minds that reflect his likeness and enjoy his 
image; these are not just directed, but also direct them- 
selves in their own proper activities to their appointed 
end. If in so doing they obey the divine ruling they 
are admitted; if not then they are excluded. 

361, 388, 1043, 1047 in Contra Gentes, I 

776. The human will is constrained by three orders: 
its own system of reason; the external law of human 
government, both spiritual and temporal, political and 
domestic; the comprehensive scheme of divine rule. 

1093 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. Ixxxvii. I 

777. Some 1 have maintained that a pure spirit, though 
by natural desire seeking to have divine good rather 

1 The reference is to William of Auvergne. 



MORALITY 283 

than its own good, and by friendship wishing a greater 
good to God than to itself for of course it wills God 
to be himself and itself to have its own proper nature 
nevertheless by unqualified natural affection loves itself 
more than God, because it naturally loves itself before 
loving God and loves itself more intensely. 

How baseless this opinion is plainly appears when 
we consider what is the object of natural movement in 
physical things. Unconscious drives provide evidence 
of the innjr workings of volition in the case of intellec- 
tual natures. Anything whose nature as such consists in 
being part of another is bent first and above all on that 
to which it belongs, rather than on itself. Instinctive 
manifestations are a pointer to this natural inclination; 
we observe that a member naturally exposes itself for 
the safety of the whole, as when without hesitation up 
goes the arm to ward off a blow. 

Now, since reason imitates nature, a similar tendency 
is displayed in the political virtues, as when the good 
citizen risks death for the safety of the commonwealth: 
this is a natural motion if we suppose that man is born 
to belong to a State. 1 God is the universal good, embrac- 
ing pure spirits and men and all creatures. Every creature 
is entirely of God. Consequently angels and men by 
nature love God before themselves and with greater 
love. If it were otherwise natural love would be perverse ; 
and it would be destroyed, not heightened, by charity. 

942, 1117 Summa Theohgica> la. Ix. 5 

778. Man is not the founder of nature; by art and 
virtue he makes use of natural things for his own 
benefit. 

Summa Tkeologica, la. xxii. 2, ad 3 

1 A view not shared by most contemporaries of St. Thomas : 
they saw political organization as a conventional institution. 



284 MORALITY 

779. It is foolish to say that somebody deserves what 
he cannot avoid. 

Opusc. xxv, Epistola ad Bernardum Abbatem Casinensem 

780. Evil is a wider term than sin, as good is wider 
than right. Any privation of good is termed evil; if we 
would be precise, however, sin consists in a purposed 
activity that falls short of its end. 

In voluntary activity the proximate measure is the 
human reason, the supreme measure the eternal law. 
When a human act goes to its end in harmony* with the 
order of reason and eternal law then the act is right; 
when it turns away from that Tightness it is termed sin. 

482 Summa TAeologica, ia-2ae. xxi. i 

781. Good or evil in human acts alone merits praise or 
blame. Hence fault, sin, and guilt there amount to the 
same. 

Summa Theohgica y ia-2ae. xxi. 2 

782. Sins are as preposterous in morals as monsters in 
nature. 

387 Commentary, III de Anima, lect. 16 

783. To disparage the dictate of reason is equivalent 
to contemning the command of God. 

804 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xix. 5, ad 2 

784. Aristotle has noted how in the arts the end is 
unconfined, but that bounds are set on means to ends. 
A doctor does not impose any limit to health, but tries 
to make it as complete as possible; yet he rations his 
physic, for he does not give as much medicine as he can, 
but just as much as is proportionate to the case; other- 
wise were the dose either excessive or deficient it would 
be immoderate. The love of God is the end of all 
human activity and desire, and here there are no limits. 



MORALITY 285 

By what more ultimate test are we to say it is too much 
or too little? The mode is the measure itself; no excess 
is possible; and therefore the more we love God the 
better. 

709, 877 Suntma Theologies 2a-2ae. xxvii. 6 

785. Our will can reach higher than can our intel- 
ligence when we are confronted by things that are 
above us. Whereas our notions about moral matters, 
which are below man, are enlightened by a cognitive 
habit for prudence informs the other moral virtues 
when it comes to the divine virtues about God, a will- 
virtue, namely charity, informs the mind-virtue, namely 
faith. 

9 1 3 Disputations, de Caritate, 3, */ 1 3 

786. Disquisitions on general morality are not entirely 
trustworthy, and the ground becomes more uncertain 
when one wishes to descend to individual cases in detail. 
The factors are infinitely variable, and cannot be settled 
either by art or precedent. Judgement should be left to 
the people concerned. Each must set himself to act 
according to the immediate situation and the circum- 
stances involved. The decision may be unerring in 
the concrete, despite the uneasy debate in the abstract. 
Nevertheless, the moralist can provide some help and 
direction in such cases. 

806, 814, 965, 1069 Commentary, II Ethics, lect. 2 

II. MORAL KINDS 

787. A fourfold good can be considered in any human 
act: first, its fundamental goodness considered as an 
activity; second, its specific moral goodness which is 
taken from its appropriate object; third, its accidental 
goodness according to its circumstances; fourth, its 



286 MORALITY 

relationship to the cause of goodness which is judged 
by its end. 1 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xviii. 4 

788. An action is not good, simply speaking, unless it is 
sound by all these tests. As Dionysius says, the good is 
from an integral cause, while evil results from any single 
defect whatsoever. 2 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae, xviii. 4, ad 3 

789. As the primary goodness of things is constituted 
by their forms, which make them things of a certain 
kind, so the primary goodness of a moral act derives from 
a reasonable object, which makes it a good kind of 
action; for instance, to use what is your own. And as in 
natural things the primary evil consists in lacking 
the appropriate specific form, for instance when instead 
of a man something else is generated, so the primary 
evil in moral activity comes from the object, for instance, 
to take what does not belong to you. 

480 Summa Theologica> ia-2ae. xviii. 2 

790. Proximate end and object are here synonymous: 
the ulterior motive is reckoned as a circumstance. 

Disputations, n de Malo, 7, ad 8 

791. A right volition and a wrong volition are specifi- 
cally different activities in morals. 

Summa Theologica> ia-2ac. xix. I 

792. Conjugal intercourse and adultery are specifically 
different acts, with specifically different effects, in their 
setting within the plan of reasonable living. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. xviii. 5, ad 3 

1 Thus a smile of welcome is physically good ; morally good as 
an expression of friendship; suitable as a greeting to a returning 
friend j ultimately good when prompted by charity. 

a de Divinis Nominibus, iv. zz. 



MORALITY 287 

793. Its moral nature is stamped on a human act by its 
object taken with reference to the principles of moral 
activity, that is according to the pattern of life as it 
should be lived according to the reason. If the object as 
such implies what is in accord with the reasonable 
order of conduct, then it will be a good kind of action; 
for instance, to assist somebody in need. If, on the other 
hand, it implies what is repugnant to reason, then it 
will be a bad kind of action; for instance, to appropriate 
to oneself what belongs to another. But it may happen 
that the object does not immediately involve the reason- 
able plan of life one way or the other, and then it is an 
action morally indifferent of its kind; for instance, to go 
for a walk or to pick up a straw. 

1056 Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. xviii. 8 

III. MORAL CIRCUMSTANCES 

794. To ensure the full perfection of a natural thing 
more is required than its essential components, namely 
the complement of supervening accidents, such as a 
proper figure and a healthy colour in man. If these are 
wanting something bad is the result. Human activity 
is similar: its perfection is not entirely guaranteed by 
what kind of action it is; additional accidents are also 
required, namely its due circumstances. 

1023 Summa Tkeokgica^ ia-2ae. xviii. 3 

795. An action may be morally neutral when con- 
sidered in itself; nevertheless, it may happen to be right 
or wrong when placed in its individual context. This is 
because a moral act derives its Tightness or wrongness, 
not only from the specific stamp of its object, but also 
from its circumstances, which are like its accidents. 
A person's individual condition calls for qualities that 
are not required by human nature as such. Similarly 



288 MORALITY 

an individual action has some circumstance, at least of 
motive, by which it is drawn into the condition of right 
or wrong. 

It is the office of the reason to set things in order, and 
so a deliberate act which serves no good purpose is by 
that very fact unreasonable and flecked by fault. On 
the other hand, if it is subordinate to a good end, 
it is then in harmony with the order of reason, and 
has the character of good. A human act either fits 
in or not with some good purpose. Therefore every 
deliberate human act in the individual case is either 
right or wrong. 

575 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ac. xviii. 9 

796. What is natural to things having an immutable 
nature always follows the same pattern without excep- 
tion. But the nature of man is variable, and what is 
normally natural is not to be expected on every oc- 
casion. Natural justice demands that a deposit should 
be restored. If human nature followed a rigid plan 
this would have to be inflexibly observed. But a 
case may crop up when a deposit must be withheld 
from the owner, for instance when a man in a 
rage, or a public enemy, demands the return of his 
weapons. 

833, 1067 Summa Thcokgica, za-2ae. Ivii. 2, ad I 

797. Means to ends are not narrowly limited in human 
affairs. They are multifarious according to the variety 
of persons and situations. Fixed ends are a matter of 
natural instincts. The appreciation of means, however, 
is not instinctive, though one man's temperament may 
be more practical than another's. Consequently the 
prudence here called for is not an hereditary trait. 

765 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. xlvii. 15 



MORALITY 289 

IV. INTENTION 

798. Morality depends on intention. 1 

in Contra Centes, 9 

799. A particular willing can be condemned if it springs 
from an evil intention. When a man wills to give alms 
in order to show off, he wills to do what is good in 
itself, but to him the good comes in the guise of bad, 
and therefore it is bad as willed by him. If, however, this 
motive occurs to him subsequently, then his will in the 
first place was good and the motive does not spoil that, 
but the acts that follow after. 

Sumnta Theologica, la 2ae. xix. 7, ad 2 

800. The Tightness or wrongness of will is determined 
by the end. That is reputed the end in which the will 
rests. The resting of the will, indeed of any appetite, is 
pleasure. Therefore a man is judged to be good or evil 
by what his will takes pleasure in. The pleasures of the 
sensitive appetite, however, are not good moral tests 
one way or the other: food, for instance, is appetizing 
alike to good men and bad; the virtuous man takes 
pleasure in it according to a reasonable way of life, 
about which a wicked man simply does not bother. 

721 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. xxxiv. 4 

V. THE MEASURE OF MIND 

801. The object of will is proposed to it by the reason ; 
for a good as understood, not as sensed or imagined, is 

1 There is some difference of opinion among the Thomist 
moralists on the relative importance of the natural moral purpose 
(finis oper is) and the personal intention (finis operands) in determin- 
ing the morality of an act. It is useful to distinguish between the 
dominating or overriding motive of a man's life and an incidental 
motive which may be reckoned among the moral circumstances. 

B628 U 



290 MORALITY 

the object proportionate to will. Therefore the good- 
ness of willing depends on the reason and on its object 
in the same way. 

682, 697, 1044 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. xix. 3 

802. The dictate of will should not be accounted the 
first rule of conduct, for will is directed by reason and 
mind, in God as well as in us. To say that justice 
depends on mere will is to say that the divine will does 
not act according to the order of wisdom, and is 
blasphemous. 

1038 Disputations, xxm de Veritate, 6 

803. Everything is measured by comparison with a 
rule. If a thing escapes this rule then it is unmeasured. 
The measure for human willing is double: one close 
and of the same nature, namely the human reason itself; 
the other, first and transcendent, namely the eternal 
law which is like the reason of God. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. Ixxi. 6 

804. The proximate rule is the human reason, the 
supreme measure is the eternal law. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xxi. I 

805. It is not of the essence of liberty that what is free 
should be its own first cause, any more than that a 
thing's cause has to be its first cause. 

692 Summa Tkeologica> I a. Ixxxiii. i, ad ^ 

806. As the speculative reason discusses the theory of 
things, so the operative reason debates the problems of 
practice; and as the principles of thought are inborn in 
the mind, so also are the principles of conduct. The first 
principles of thought are not elicited by a special 
faculty, but by a special habit of mind, called the under- 
standing of principles. Similarly, the first principles of 



MORALITY 291 

practice, naturally inborn in us, are not evoked by a 
special faculty or moral sense, but by a special natural 
habit of mind, called synderesis. 

5, 1039, 1047 Summa Theologies, la. Ixxix. 12 

807. Strictly speaking, conscience is not a faculty, but 
an activity, namely, the actual application of moral 
science to conduct. 

977 Summa Tkeologtca^ la. Ixxix. 13 

808. Evejy judgement of conscience, be it right or 
wrong, be it about things evil in themselves or morally 
indifferent, is obligatory, in such wise that he who acts 
against his conscience always sins. 

in Quodlibet^ 27 

809. A man does not make up a law for himself, but by 
his very act of recognizing a law enacted for him he 
binds himself to its observance. 

1041 Disputations, xvn de Veritate^ 3, ad I 

8 10. What is dictated by a mistaken conscience is not 
consonant with the law of God, nevertheless it is con- 
strued as the law of G od, and therefore, simply speaking, 
if a man goes against it he contravenes the law of God. 

1042 Disputations, xvn de Veritate, 4, ad I 

8l I. Though a prelate 1 be superior to a subject, never- 
theless God, in whose figure conscience binds, is higher 
still. 

1096 Disputations, xvn de Veritate, 5, ad 3 

8l2. Since conscience is the dictate of reason, the 
application of theory to practice, the inquiry, whether 
a will that disobeys an erroneous conscience is right, is the 

1 The word is used of a civil ruler, as well as of a church 
dignitary. 



292 MORALITY 

same as, whether a man is obliged to follow a mistaken 
conscience. 

Now because the object of a volition is that which is 
proposed by the reason, if the will chooses to do what 
the reason considers to be wrong, then the will goes out 
to it in the guise of evil. Therefore it must be said flatly 
that the will which disobeys the reason, whether true 
or mistaken, is always in the wrong. 

Summa Thcologica^ ia-2ac. xix. 5 

813. The inquiry, whether the will that oteys a mis- 
taken conscience is right, is equivalent to, whether a 
mistaken conscience is any excuse. 

If the reason or conscience is mistaken through 
voluntary error, either directly wished or tolerated by 
negligence, about what one is bound to know, then such 
an error does not absolve the will from blame. But it is 
an excuse if the error causing the non-voluntary wrong 
follows from ignorance of some circumstance without 
any negligence. For example, if a mistaken reason bids 
a man sleep with another man's wife, to do this will be 
evil if based on ignorance of a divine law he ought to 
know; but if the misjudgement is occasioned by think- 
ing that the woman is really his own wife, and she wants 
him and he wants her, then his will is free from fault. 

Summa Theologica^ ia~2ae. xix. 6 



XIV 

Feeling and Training 1 

814. Human qualities may be of two kinds, innate 
and induced. Innate qualities affect either the intel- 
lectual part of the soul or the living body and its powers. 
A man naturally desires his last end, namely happiness, 
by a quality modifying the mind. This appetite is 
so natural as not to be subject to freewill. Human 
character is also settled by qualities of the body and 
its powers, that is by temperamental dispositions 
subject to bodily influences as such not reacting 
to the bodiless life of the spirit. A man's physique 
and temperament will colour what he likes, and 
incline him to choose this or reject that. These 
inclinations can be controlled by the reason and they 
are not prejudicial to freewill. Induced qualities are 
passions and habits, in virtue of which a man has a bias 
towards one thing rather than towards another. And 
yet even these come under the reason to the extent 
that it lies in our power to cause them, or dispose 
ourselves to them, or reject them. 

S75 838 Summa Theologica^ la. Ixxxiii. r, ad 5 

1 St. Thomas returns to the psychology of human activity and, 
in the first place, to the motions of the human animal. The study 
of the passions or emotions, which incidentally offers the occasion 
for observations on the various states of affection in general, 
follows the Aristotelean distinction of the concupiscible and 
irascible appetites already referred to. The habits are then studied 
in the spirit of functional psychology, as a preliminary to treating 
of the virtues. Habits are qualities preparing abilities which are 
not wholly instinctive to act in one direction or another, either 
for the benefit or otherwise of the subject. 



294 FEELING AND TRAINING 

I. PASSIONS 

815. Augustine says that the motions of the soul, called 
passive conditions by the Greeks, are called distur- 
bances by some of our people, thus Cicero; affections 
or affects by others; and passions by some, more literally 
following the Greek. 1 They pertain to the affective part 
of the soul, not to the cognitive; to love, rather than to 
knowledge. 

677 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. xxii. 2, sed contra 

</ 

8 1 6. An organic change is the material part of the 
definition of emotion; thus anger includes a rush of 
blood about the heart. 

Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. xxii. 2, ad 3 

817. A distinction should be drawn between the ma- 
terial elements, namely the physiological change, and -the 
formal element, namely the psychological appetition. 

617 Summa Theokgica^ la. xx. i,<z</2 

818. Joy and expansion of heart; sorrow and con- 
traction. 

Summa Theokgica, 3. Ixxxiv. 9, ad 2 

819. The object of the concupiscible faculty is straight- 
forward sensible good or evil, namely what is pleasur- 
able or painful. But conflict and stress arise from time 
to time about obtaining the one or avoiding the other; 
the situation is not simple, and good and evil as invested 
with the qualities of hardness or difficulty are then the 
objects of the irascible appetite. Some emotions, such 
as love and hate, desire and aversion, pleasure and 
sorrow, answer to the former appetite, while others, 

1 de Civitate Z)*/, ix. 4, 



FEELING AND TRAINING 295 

such as boldness and fear, hope and despair, and anger 
answer to the latter. 

Summa Theologica^ la 2ac. xxiii. I 

820. Some passions imply imperfection, such as desire 
which is of an absent good, and sadness which is of 
a present evil; so also anger supposes grief. But some, 
such as love and joy, imply no imperfection. 

275 Summa Theologica^ la. xx. I, ad 2 

821. Pleabfcre lies in being, not becoming. 

136, 746 Summa Theologica, la 2ae. xxxi. i 

822. Why we grow weary of what we hitherto enjoyed 
is because the object causes some kind of change in us 
by weakening or impairing our power. Fatigue is 
incidental to the enjoyment of sensible activities; it 
comes from strain on their organs. On the same account 
we tire after prolonged and concentrated thought, be- 
cause the mind cannot work without employing instru- 
ments of sense. 

624 in Contra Gentes^ 62 

823. In the sequence of execution, that is prior which 
comes first in the process. In seeking an end the first 
phase is the aptness or proportion of appetite to an 
end, which is love; then the motions towards it of 
desire or lust; then the quiet after obtaining it, which is 
pleasure or joy. But in the sequence of intention the 
order is reversed, for intended pleasure causes desire 
and love. Pleasure is the enjoyment of a good, and is, in 
its way, final. 

721 Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. xxv. 2 

824. The sensitive appetite is at the stage between 



296 FEELING AND TRAINING 

natural appetite and the higher rational appetite which 
is termed will. 

677 Disputations, xxv de Veritate, i 

825. Considered in themselves as motions of the sensi- 
tive and non-rational appetite, passions are neither right 
nor wrong, for morality depends on the reason. They 
are covered by morality in so far as they are subject to 
the sway of reason and will. 

980, 988 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xxiv. I 

I* 

826. On the question of the moral evil of passions, the 

Stoics differed from the Peripatetics, for they professed 
that the passions were bad, while the latter maintained 
that moderated passions were good. The difference, 
though important in words, is in reality of little or no 
moment when we reflect on what both parties meant. 
In consequence of not discerning between sense and 
mind, the Stoics drew no distinction between the 
sensitive and intellective appetites; not discriminating 
between the passions of the soul and the motions of the 
will, they treated will as equivalent to any reasonable 
movement and passion as movement breaking the 
bounds of reason Cicero called passions diseases of 
the soul. The Peripatetics on the other hand gave the 
name of passion to all movements of the sensitive appe- 
tite, and they esteemed them as good when controlled 
by reason and will, and deprecated them as evil when 
not so controlled. Hence, it is clear that Cicero misses 
the point in criticizing their theory of the mean in the 
passions when he stresses that every evil, even though 
moderate, should be shunned. 

Summa Theologka^ ia-2ae. xxiv. 2 

827. Hence the Stoics held that emotion diminishes 
an action's goodness. This is true enough if passion 



FUELING AND TRAINING 297 

means the disorderly surges of the sensitive appetite. 
But if it simply means the motion of sensitive appetite, 
then it is better not merely to will good, but also to feel 
good about it. It is part of man's moral perfection to be 
moved thereto by his sensitive part as well as by his will. 
My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living God. 1 
761 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ac. xxv. 3 

828. The worth of virtue shines out when a man 
readily bears many and grievous blows of misfortune: 
not that !te is insensitive to pain and sadness, as the Stoics 
urged, but that he remains manly and great-hearted, 
and upright in his reason. 

980 Commentary, / Ethics^ lect. 16 

II. HABITS 

829. Habit is a quality. 

814 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ac. xlix. I 

830. The inner coherence and balance of a subject falls 
under the first species of quality, which is habit and 
disposition. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xlix. z 

831. By a faculty we are able to do something, but by 
a habit we are expert at acting well or ill according to 
the faculty, that is the difference between ability and 
habit. 

575 iv Contra Gentes, 77 

832. A habit is a settled disposition. 

Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. xlix. 2,0/3 

833. A habit is required when what is in potentiality 
can be disposed in several manners or to several objects. 

1 Ps. Ixxxiii. 3 (Vulgate). 



298 FEELING AND TRAINING 

When many factors are present a form or activity may 
be disposed well or ill. Health and beauty are called 
habits also, for they imply a happy adjustment of many 
factors which can be arranged in diverse manners. 

Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. xlix. 4 

834. A habit is not a disposition of the object towards 
the power, but of the power towards the object. 

Summa Theohgica> ia-2ae. 1. 4, ad i 

835. Active habits are in the soul according to its 
diverse faculties. 

575 Summa Theokgica, la 2ae. 1. 2 

836. The powers of the sensitive part are bent in one 
direction in so far as they work from natural instinct: in 
purely natural drives there are no habits. But in so far as 
they come under the command of reason, they can be 
trained to various objects, and so can be the subjects of 
habits, good or bad as the case may be. 

617 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. 1. 3 

837. Animals can be trained by the reason to perform 
in this way or that; to this extent we can credit them 
with habits, 

Summa Theokgica, ia-2ac. 1. 3, ad ^ 

838. A quality of a thing may be natural either with 
respect to its specific nature, thus the ability to laugh is 
natural to man, or with respect to its individual nature, 
thus to be prone to sickness or inclined to health ac- 
cording to the respective complexions of Socrates and 
Plato. Then again, under both respects, a quality may 
be natural either because it is entirely from nature or 
because it is partly from nature and partly from an 
extrinsic principle; a man healed of himself is an 



FEELING AND TRAINING 299 

example of the former, a man healed by medicine is an 
example of the latter. 

There are no habits in man entirely from nature. But 
there are natural habits owing their existence partly to 
some external principle. In the powers of cognition 
there are inchoate habits, with regard both to the 
specific and to the individual nature. Thus the under- 
standing of first principles is termed a natural habit, as 
though coming from the specific nature of the intellec- 
tual soul; having once grasped what is a whole and what 
is a part, 1 man immediately perceives that the whole is 
greater than the part. Yet what is a whole and what 
a part, this he cannot know except through ideas drawn 
from images. Hence, the knowledge of principles comes 
through the senses, and so, with respect to nature in 
the individual one man may be apter by his organic 
disposition to understand well. In the powers of appeti- 
tion, however, with respect to the specific nature of the 
soul there are no innate inchoate habits; these exist only 
as regards certain principles of general law, called the 
seeds of virtues. The clue here is that the inclinations 
to proper objects that look like inchoate habits are really 
from the very nature of the faculty concerned. With 
respect to individual natures, however, on the part of 
the body there are some inchoate appetitive habits. For 
some people from their bodily temperament are more 
disposed than others to chastity or meekness. 

539, 546, 814 Sumwa Theologica, ia-2ae. li. X 



XV 

Virtues 1 

839. Love is the form, mover, and root of the virtues. 

673 Disputations, de Caritate, 3 

840. When pressed to its utmost an ability deserves the 
tide and meaning of virtue. l% 

Opusc. i, de Operationibus Occultis Naturae 

841. A good object is more to the point than a difficult 
object. 

Summa Theologica, 2 a 2ae. cxli. 8, ad 2 

842. By and large every virtue is magnificent. 

Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. cxxxiv. 2 

1 The detailed moral science of the Summa Thcologica is de- 
veloped according to the positive course of the virtues. It does not 
share the preoccupations of systematic casuistry nor follow the 
conventional divisions according to the negative precepts; the 
vices are not cardinal, but treated in appendixes to the various 
sections. Yet sins are closely observed and differentiated, more 
however by the specific interest than the degree of depravity. The 
virtues are not seen as mechanisms of conformity to a code, but 
as perfections whose value begins even before they are given an 
ethical reference. The healthy and beautiful balance of a living 
and supple subject within its own nature, and the consequent 
adjustment to its end, implies the disposition of acting well, 
the tonic effect of intense and repeated activity. Hence virtue is the 
complement of ability. Purely intellectual skill is a virtue, but the 
term in its fullest sense applies only to those qualities of character 
that go to make up the good man simply so called. These are the 
moral virtues, of which more than twenty are enumerated and 
examined, hinging on the four main virtues of prudence, justice, 
courage, and temperance. 



VIRTUES 301 

I. NOTION OF VIRTUE 

843. Virtue is a good habit. 

829 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. Iv. 3 

844. This is a specific definition according to genus and 
difference, for habit is the proximate genus, and good 
the difference. 

Summa Theohgica, ia-2ac. Iv. j 

845. A virtue is in a faculty. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ac. Ivi. I 

846. It designates the complement of ability and 
demonstrates consummate mastery. 

Disputations, de Virtutibus in Comniuni, i 

847. Complete characters do not take scandal. 

Commentary, in Matthaeum^ xviii, lecf. i 

848. Virtue has three effects; it removes evil, works for 
good, and disposes to the best. 

Commentary, in Matthaeum^ v, //. 2 

849. It chooses and chooses again. Every virtuous act 
Jias these four traits: controlled knowledge, right inten- 
tion, unwavering purpose, and sense of situation. 

Disputations, de Virtutibus CardinalibusJ* 

850. Among objects in themselves lovable, some are 
loved solely for themselves and never for anything else 
thus happiness which is the last end while others 
are loved both for their own sake, in that they possess 
some intrinsic worth, and also because they serve the 
purpose of conveying us to a more perfect good thus 
are the virtues lovable. 

375 Summa Theologies 2a-2ae. cxlv. i, ad I 



302 VIRTUES 

851. Virtuous habits are needed on three scores. First, 
for regularity; activity is scarcely more than spasmodic 
unless stabilized by habitual inclination. Second, for 
promptness; decisions require a great deal of delibera- 
tion unless the faculties are already trained, as a man 
discovers if he has to make a scientific judgement when 
he is not scientifically equipped, or if he wishes to act 
virtuously but lacks the habit of virtue. Third, for 
pleasurable performance; since habit makes perfect 
activity congenial. 

680 Disputations, de Virtutibus in Communi, i 



II. INTELLECTUAL VIRTUE 

852. A virtue is a habit ensuring good performance. 
Now a habit sets a man to good activity in two manners 
or modes: first by providing the aptness, second the 
right use. By the first mode, a man has the ability 
of speaking correctly by his habit of grammatical 
knowledge, but this does not guarantee that he will 
speak aright, for a grammarian can be uncouth and 
commit solecisms in his speech; so also with the other 
sciences and arts. By the second mode, a habit not merely 
provides the faculty of acting well, but also ensures the 
right use of this power; thus justice makes the will 
prompt to deal fairly, and also sees to it that this inten- 
tion is carried through into execution. 

Just as we can speak without hedging only of a com- 
plete thing as real and good, so by this latter type of 
habit alone is a man said to be good without qualifica- 
tion; because virtue is that which makes its possessor 
good and likewise renders his deeds good ; consequently 
these latter habits alone can be called good without 
reserve. The former are not virtues simply so called, for 
they do not ensure that they will be used aright; because 



VIRTUES 303 

he is a good scientist or a good artist a man is not esteemed 
a good man without reserve; he is good in a relative 
sense, namely, a good grammarian or a good blacksmith 
as the case may be. 

The mind can be the subject of virtue in this relative 
sense, as regards both the theoretical and the practical 
reasons, without any question of goodwill entering in. 
Thus science, wisdom, and understanding, as well as 
art, are termed intellectual virtues by Aristotle. 1 

548, 971 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. Ivi. 3 

853. Prudence excepted, intellectual virtue can exist 
without moral virtue. 

27 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. Iviii. 5 

854. When Thales went out of his house to gaze at the 
stars he fell into a ditch; to his complaints a little old 
woman replied, 'Oh Thales, how can you hope to see 
things in the heavens when you miss what is under your 
feet?' Then also recall Anaxagoras, rich and noble, 
yet leaving his estate to devote himself to natural 
science: he was called negligent because he did not 
bother about politics. Once somebody said to him, 
'Where is your care for your country?' He replied, with 
a gesture to the sky, 'That is my love.' Prudence is about 
human goods, concerning which one must take counsel, 
for they can be otherwise; but wisdom is about good 
things better than men, things necessary and divine. 

Commentary, VI Ethics, lect. 6 

855. Art is the right idea of things to be made; their 
goodness does not depend on the disposition of the 
human appetite, but on the fact that the workmanship 
is sound. The merit of an artist is judged by the quality 
of his work; his state of will is irrelevant. Here art is 

1 Ethics, 



304 VIRTUES 

like the theoretical habits of mind, which are con- 
cerned with what things are in themselves, not with our 
reactions to them. Pleasant humour or spleen make 
no difference to a mathematical demonstration. Art is 
a virtue in the same sense; it does not ensure the right 
use of a thing, for this is proper to moral virtue. 

977 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. Ivii. 3 

856. Goodwill is required for a man to use his art 
aright, and this is induced by moral virtue. 

Summa Theologica> la 2ae. 'vii. 5, ad 2 

857. When artificial things cannot be used without sin 
then the artist sins by making them, for example idols 
or superstitious objects. If they can be used either well 
or ill, swords, arrows, and suchlike, then the craft is not 
necessarily sinful. As regards feminine ornaments that 
preserve decency, or even perhaps are extravagant in 
order to please men, the manufacturers do not sin, un- 
less they go in for harmful absurdities and curiosities. 

Summa Thcologica, 2a-2ae. clxix. 2, ad 4 

858. The value of art consists, not in the artist, but in 
the work of art, for making, which is an action going out 
into external material, is a perfection, not of the maker, 
but of the thing made. But the value of prudence is in 
the doer, who is perfected by his activity, for prudence 
is the right idea of deeds to be done. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ac. Ivii. 5, ad i 

859. A work of art and a moral situation are approached 
differently. In the former case we are expected to 
appreciate a particular end; in the latter case we are 
confronted with the general end of human life as a 
whole. Fault is a deviation from good purpose. A crime 
is perpetrated against art when the artist intends to 



VIRTUES 305 

make a good work but produces a bad one, or intends 
to make a bad thing but produces a good one. Here the 
artist is blamed. But to deviate from the common end of 
human life, as when somebody intends a bad job and 
succeeds, for instance, in misleading another, then the 
fault is proper to the doer considered as a man, not as 
an artist. 

27, 6 1 1, 971 Summa TAeoIogica y la 2ae. xxi. 2, ad 2 

860. A piece of furniture takes after the idea in the 
mind of tbe maker rather than after the tool. 

Summa Thcclogica> 33. Ixii. I 

861. Some effects are solely from an external principle, 
as when the structure of a house is shaped in matter. 
Others are partly from without and partly from within, 
for instance health after sickness depends partly on 
medical art and partly on nature. Art imitates nature in 
activity, for as nature heals a sick man by altering, 
checking, and purging his morbid humours, so also 
does art. Note that art does not act here as a principal 
cause ; it fosters the internal and principal cause, which 
is nature, strengthening it and ministering instruments 
used by nature to the intended effect; as when a doctor 
aids nature by prescribing suitable nourishment and 
comforts. 

1091 Summa Theologica^ la. cxvii. I 

862. Human art is not so powerful as the natural action 
able to produce a substantial form. Human art cannot 
go so far as that, for artificial forms are the configura- 
tions of accidental wholes. Yet art may apply a proper 
cause to its proper matter and so effect the alteration of 
substances, as for instance when heat is used in smelting 
or distilling. 

388 Summa Theokgica^ 31. Uvi. 4 

B628 X 



306 VIRTUES 

III. MORAL VIRTUE 

863. Loving draws us more to things than knowledge 
does. 

672, 913 Summa Theologicd, ia-2ae. xxii. 2 

864. Aristotle gives the definition of moral virtue: 
a habit of choice lying in a mean relative to us and 
determined by a rational principle. 1 Here there are 
four notes. First, the genus, touched on when he says 
that it is a habit. Second, the act of virtue, touched on 
when he says that it is of choice; habits are defined by 
acts, and the chief act of virtue is choice. Third, the 
object or term of the act, touched on when he says that 
it lies in a mean relative to us; this is important because 
activity is specified by its object. Fourth, the cause of 
goodness in virtue, touched on by the clause about its 
measure by a rational principle; moral virtue is in the 
appetite according as the latter shares in the life of 
reason. 

Commentary, II Ethics, lect. 7 

865. Well disposed, not only in mind to accept and 
grasp, but also in will to love and carry out. 

Commentary, i ad Corinthios, //, lect. I 

866. The gate to human life hinges on the cardinal 
virtues. The contemplative life is superhuman, the life 
of sensual pleasure beastly, but the active life is properly 
human, and humane activity turns on the practice of 
the moral virtues. 

Disputations, de Firtutibus Cardinalibus, I 

867. The moral virtues need not be accompanied by 
the intellectual virtues of wisdom, science, and art. But 

iio7 1 z. 



VIRTUES 307 

they cannot exist without understanding and prudence. 
For moral virtue is a habit making a good choice. Here 
two conditions are called for, a good intention of the 
end, which moral virtue provides by giving us a bias to 
what is reasonable, and a right taking of means, which 
implies that the reason takes good counsel, makes the 
right selection, and commands the correct course, all of 
which functions attach to prudence and its associate 
virtues. Moral virtue in consequence requires under- 
standing of principles. As theory works from true pre- 
misses so*prudence presupposes a true sense of back- 
ground, for it is the right idea of dealing with a human 
situation. 

*7 977 Summa Thcologlca^ ia-2ae. Iviii. 4 

868. Prudence concerns the whole of human life and 
its last end; art deals with a local end. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ac. Ivii. 4, ad 3 

869. One act cannot cause a habit, nor can many acts, 
for they are not all simultaneous, and what does not 
exist does not act. Therefore virtues are not acquired 
by acts. 

I reply, that as many drops of water may hollow 
a stone, the latest drips profiting by the power of the 
preceding ones which have appeared to do nothing, so 
the last act may cause the corresponding act of virtue 
when the effect of preceding acts be taken into account. 

1091 Commentary, /// Sentences, xxxiu. i. 2. /'/', ad 4 

870. The division of the moral virtues may be traced 
either by their formal principles or by their subjects. 
Four cardinal virtues appear when either course is 
followed. 

The formal principle of virtue is reasonable good for 
the philosopher. This is twofold, essential and applied. 



308 VIRTUES 

The former lies in the judgements of the reason, and 
here there is one principal virtue, namely prudence. 
The order of reason may be applied to what we do, and 
here there is justice; or to what we feel, and here there 
are two virtues, temperance when emotions would drive 
us to do what is unreasonable, and fortitude when they 
would hold us back. 

Division according to the faculties gives the same 
number. There is the reason itself, holding prudence, 
and the faculties that are derivatively reasonable, 
namely the will, which is the subject of justice, and the 
sensitive appetite, which contains temperance on the con- 
cupiscible side, and fortitude on the irascible side. 

55 3 > 819 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. Ixi. 2 

871. Virtue in the emotional appetites is their habitual 
conformity with reason. 

Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ac. Ivi. 4 

872. These appetites do not obey the nod of reason, 
but are like free men. On this account they need virtues 
in order to be well prepared for reasonable activity. 

680 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. Ivi. 4, ad 3 

873. Prudence essentially possesses reasonable good, 
justice makes it, courage and temperance preserve it. 

Summa Theokgica, 2a-2ae. cxxiii. 12 

874. The chief effective control of human activity is 
provided by prudence. Virtue springs from man's inner 
composure, but no less important is his bearing to other 
people, and here his intercourse is adjusted by justice. 
His poise when faced with the onset of passion for the 
pleasures of touch is assured by temperance, and when 
he would shrink from great perils courage makes him 
stand intrepid even before the danger of death. 

Disputations, de Virtutibut Cardinalibus^ i 



VIRTUES 309 

875. If the titles of virtue stand for their general 
conditions then they flow into one another: courage is 
temperate, and temperance is brave, and so with the 
others. 

Disputations, de Virtutibut Cardinalibus, i, ad I 

876. Artificial things of different classes have quite 
disparate principles, and therefore there is no reason 
why a man should not master one trade and be wholly 
lacking in another. But the principles of moral objects 
are so linked together that failure with one will lead to 
failure with another. Uncontrolled lust will lead to 
injury, intemperance to a violation of justice, as also in 
one and the same science a flaw in the principles will 
invalidate the conclusion. A man is not sufficiently 
reasonable about one virtue without being reasonable 
about them all. 

852 Disputations, de Virtutibus Cardinalibus, 2, 



IV. THE VIRTUOUS MEAN 

877. Evil comes from tilting the balance when there 
should be an equilibrium, the bad being either over- 
weight or underweight. The good of moral virtue lies 
in the poise of reason. The mean between excess and 
defect is an equality or conformity. 

1008 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. Ixiv. I 

878. The form of goodness in moral virtue derives 
from the measure of reason; its subject-matter lies in 
what we do and feel. As regards the former, virtue 
holds the position of one extreme, namely conformity 
to reason, while both excess and defect lie at the other 
extreme of non-conformity. As regards its matter, how- 
ever, it holds a midway position even-minded among 
the passions. Hence, Aristotle says that virtue is a mean 



310 VIRTUES 

in respect of its substance, but an extreme with regard 
to what is best and excellent. 1 

1031 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. Ixiv. I, ad I 

879. The mean and the extremes depend on a variety 
of circumstances. Nothing prevents one feature in a 
virtue from being an extreme according to one circu Di- 
stance and a mean according to another consideration, 
namely, its conformity with reason. Take magnanimity 
or magnificence. If we look at the objective size of the 
projects to which large-minded and splendidcharacters 
set themselves we shall praise it as an extreme and a 
maximum. But if we relate it to other circumstances, 
then it has the character of a mean, since these virtues 
are moderated according to the rule of reason, and ob- 
serve the due conditions of where and when and motive. 

Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. Ixiv. I, ad 2 

880. Justice deals with operations about external things, 
wherein the right has to be established absolutely and in 
itself. Hence, the mean of reason here is the objective 
mean: justice gives to each man his due, neither more 
nor less. But the other moral virtues deal with interior 
passions, wherein what is right cannot be established 
in the same way, since men vary in their tempers. 

1008 Summa TAeologica, ia-2ac. Ixiv. * 

881. Extravagance and niggardliness, between which 
moral virtues mediate, must not be taken according to 
absolute quantities, but in relation to right reason. 

Commentary, /// Sentences, ix. i. i. /'//, ad 3 

882. The size of a virtue depends either on the number 
of objects to which it extends, after the fashion of dis- 

1 Ethics, 



VIRTUES 311 

crete quantity, or on the intensity of its activity about an 
object, after the fashion of continuous quantity. 

152 Commentary, / Sentences, xvi. ii. i, ad 2 

V. VICE 

883. The theologian considers sin mainly as an offence 
against God; the moral philosopher as contrary to 
reasonableness. 

480, 800 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ac. Ixxi. 6, ad 5 

884. There is evil, and there is also something from 
which evil may follow. In the first respect God cannot 
be feared, since he is goodness itself. In the second 
respect he may be feared because from him, or with 
reference to him, some evil may come our way; the evil 
of punishment respectively and the evil of fault when 
we are separated from him. 

487 Summa Tkeologica, za-2ae. xix. I 

885. If a man cleaves to God through fear of punish- 
ment it will be servile fear; if through fear of offending 
him it will be filial fear. 

Summa Theologica, za-zae. xix. 2 

886. Servile fear is evil owing to its servility. For 
slavery is opposed to freedom. A slave is one who does 
not act as the cause of his own actions, but as though 
moved from without. But he who acts through love sets 
himself into motion. It is contrary to the very notion of 
servility to act from love. Consequently servile fear as 
such is contrary to charity; were servility essential to it 
it would be intrinsically wrong, even as adultery is in- 
trinsically wrong. Servility, however, is not part of the 
very essence of servile fear, for the object here is punish* 
ment, and it is incidental whether this be regarded 



312 VIRTUES 

as the greatest of all evils, which is the case with a man 
devoid of charity, or whether it is subordinated to the 
love of God. 

Summa Theologica, 2 a zae. xix. 4 

887. The offence of grave sin proceeds from this, that 
the will of man is turned away from God by being 
turned towards some perishable good. 

Summa Theologica, 3 a. Ixxxvi. 2 

888. Malice consists in emptiness. 

Disputations, m de Potefcta, 16, ad 3 

889. There is a double motion in grave sin, a turn- 
ing away from immutable good and an indulgence 
in mutable good ; the penalty is correspondingly eternal 
and temporal. 

Summa Theologica, 33. Ixxxvi. 4 

890. The turning away is common to all grave sins, but 
by their indulgence they are different from one another, 
and sometimes hostile. 

462 Summa Theologica, 33. Ixxxviii. I 

891. It was the opinion of Socrates that every virtue 
was a kind of knowledge and every sin a kind of 
ignorance. 1 To some extent he was right, because the 
will is never attracted by an evil unless in some respect 
it is perceived as good, and would never take an evil 
but for some ignorance or error in the reason. 

Experience, however, demonstrates that many act 
against their knowledge. Therefore it is necessary to 
draw a distinction. 2 For his right conduct man is 
directed by a twofold knowledge, namely, universal 
and particular, and a deficiency in either is enough to 
spoil the Tightness of will and deed. 

1 Ethics, H45 b 25. 2 Ethics, U46 b 2i. 



VIRTUES 313 

It is possible for a man to possess correct knowledge, 
in particular as well as in general, and yet not advert to 
his knowledge actually; in such a case it is not hard to 
see how he may act counter to what he does not actually 
consider. This lack of consideration may happen some- 
times through mere lack of attention, or perhaps be 
caused by some hindrance, as when somebody may be 
worked up by passion and prevented from considering 
what he knows in general. This may happen in three 
ways: by distraction, as already explained; by opposi- 
tion, because an emotion may conflict with rational 
judgement; and by physiological change, the result of 
which may be to fetter the reason, even as in sleep or 
drunkenness. When passion is very intense a man may 
lose the use of his reason altogether; many have gone 
out of their minds through excess of love or anger. 

760, 807 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. Ixxvii. 2 

892. The argument of the incontinent man has four 
propositions. On the side of the reason there is, for 
instance, the general prohibition of the inordinate eating 
of sweetstuff, commanding, say, that it should not be 
eaten out of due time. But on the side of desire there is 
the urge that it is pleasurable. Because concupiscence 
prevails over reason in the particular case, the situation 
is judged not by the general law of reason, saying that 
this is not good enough, but by the general law of 
concupiscence, saying that anyhow this is sweet. Hence 
follows his conclusion. 

Commentary, Vll Ethics^ lect. 3 

893. Sin falls short of the wisdom and prudence that 
should be in charge of what we do. Therefore a bad 
man is an ignorant man. 

Disputations, xv de Vcritate, 3, cd 2 



3 H VIRTUES 

894. The term foolishness conveys the meaning of a 
certain senselessness in judgement, chiefly in the face 
of the highest cause, the supreme good and last end. 
This may be the outcome of congenital disposition, tc 
which no blame attaches, or of such indulgence in 
worldly concerns that a man is rendered inept at per- 
ceiving divine values, and this foolishness is sin. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. xlvi. 2 

895. Sin expels love, not by its own force, but because 
a man voluntarily subjects himself to it. c 

Disputations, de Caritate, 6, ad 6 

896. Sin acts in virtue of deficient good. 

491 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xviii, i, ad i 

897. As regards the will, that comes first which is 
principally intended, and therefore, in those sins whose 
principal intent is to enjoy some perishable good in- 
temperance, avarice, and the like a turning to some- 
thing precedes the turning away; the latter is not 
principally intended but happens beside the intention 
and follows from undisciplined indulgence. But in sins 
which directly intend to turn away from God such as 
infidelity, despair, and the like the turning away is 
primary and the turning to other things a later conse- 
quence, as is noted in the Epistle to the Ephesians. 1 

vi Quodlibet, 16 

898. Though nobody is foolish by choice, we may will 
the things from which foolishness follows. 

Summa Theologica, 2a-zac. xlvi. 2, ad 2 

899. The worse the vice the better always the opposite 
virtue. 

Commentary, IV Ethics, lect. 1 5 
> iv. 1 8. 



VIRTUES 315 

900. Pride may be taken as an habitual inclination to 
every manner of sin, or as a general condition in all sins, 
or as the inordinate desire of one's own private excel- 
lence; it is in this last sense that pride is a special sin. 

Commentary, II Sentences, v. i. 3 

901. An inordinate fondness for oneself, and an in- 
ordinate conceit. 

Commentary, in Matthaeum, xviii 9 lect. I 

902. Well-ordered self-love is right and natural. 

Summa Theohgica> ia-2ae. Ixxvii. 4, ad I 

903. God can be apprehended either in himself or 
through his effects. By his essence he is very goodness 
from which nothing can shrink, and therefore it is 
impossible for a man to see him and hate him. Some of 
his effects cannot be repugnant to the human will; 
existence, life, intelligence, these are desired and loved 
by everybody. But there are other effects which an 
unruly will may dislike, for instance that sin is for- 
bidden, and punishment inflicted; when God is con- 
sidered as their author some thereupon may hold him 
in dislike. 

254, 698 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. xxxiv. I 

904. Vice comes to the body from the soul, and not the 
other way round. 

in Contra Gentes, 127 

905. Vice cannot entirely destroy the capacity and 
aptness for grace. 

493 Disputations, n de Malo, 12 

906. The desire for good is more corrupted than is the 
knowledge of truth. 

Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. cix. 2, ad $ 



3i6 VIRTUES 

907. To speak of unforgivable sin is to impugn divine 
power. 

Opusc. xiir, Compendium Theologiae, 144 

908. The order of divine justice does not treat those 
who are still travellers as though they had arrived. Now 
to be in an unchangeable state, either of good or of evil, 
is the end; whereas wayfaring is our present condition, 
as is evidenced by the mutability of body and soul. 
Divine justice, therefore, does not require that a man 
after falling into sin should lie there for eves 

488 Opusc. xni, Compendium Theohgiae, 145 

909. It would be foolish indeed to brood over what 
has already happened as though trying to make it as 
though it had not happened. A penitent does not do 
this; his sorrow is disapproval of the past, coupled with 
the intention of preventing the results. 

349 Summa Theologica^ 3 a. Ixxxv. I, tf</ 3 

910. God alone forgives and absolves from sin by his 
own authority. 

Summa Theohgica, 33. Ixxxiv. 3, ad 3 

911. Object and last end coincide in the case of a theo- 
logical virtue. 1 This is not the case with the virtue of 
penitence, whose material is the expiation of a wrong 
that has been done, and whose purpose is reconciliation 
with God. 

Commentary, IV Sentences, xiv. i. I. iv 

1 The distinction between a moral virtue and a theological 
virtue is this : the former is occupied with the measure of conduct 
set by the human reason, the latter reaches to God himself. 



XVI 

Living beyond Reason 1 

912. Love takes up where knowledge leaves off. 

92, 673 Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. xxvii. 4, ad I 

913. More is required for the perfecting of knowledge 
than for the perfecting of love. Knowledge is in the 
reason, v^iose function is to analyse what are united in 
reality and to compare and synthesize what are diverse. 
For a man's knowledge to be complete he must know, 
therefore, the nature of a thing, its parts and powers 
and properties one by one. But love is in the appetite, 
which takes the thing just as it is: enough that the thing 
is loved on being known. On this account an object can 
be loved more than it is known. 

92, 686, 785, 961 Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. xxvii. 2, ad 1 

914. In the reason the object is present as a specific 
likeness; in the will as a principle and term of motion. 

iv Contra Getttes, 19 

915. A thing can be immediately loved though 
mediately known. 

Disputations, de Caritatc, 2, ad II 

1 The moral system is not enclosed by the rules of reasonable 
living but is open to a mystery beyond. Even in the secular sections 
grace keeps breaking in, neither demanded nor merited by the 
principles of nature, but meeting a capacity for friendship which 
can be caught up into the personal life of God. Here are relation- 
ships surpassing the dependence of creatures, and parts of a whole, 
on the creator and integrator of the universe. The purely reason* 
able man is a historical fiction. The ideal of rational virtue has 
rarely been reckoned sufficient. This chapter deals with the frontier 
between nature and grace, and the texts give some account of the 
conditions of the anima naturaliter Christiana. 



3i8 LIVING BEYOND REASON 

916. Knowledge is achieved by the thing known being 
united through its meaning to the knower. But the 
effect of love is that the thing itself is somehow united to 
the lover. 

*Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. xxviii. I, ad 3 

917. Gratitude tries to return more than has been 
received. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. cvi. 6 



I. SUPERHUMAN VIRTUE 

918. There are two kinds of virtue, the one is the 
common sort adjusting man in a reasonable style, the 
other is rare and called heroic, crowning man to a super- 
human degree. When a brave man fears what should be 
feared he is virtuous; not to fear would be vicious. But 
when he trusts in divine help and fears nothing in the 
world, that is superhuman. Virtues with that kind of 
effect on a man are called divine. 

Commentary, in Matthaeum^ v, lect. 2 

919. Inspiration signifies a movement from without. 
Recall that there are two sources of motion in man, one 
within, namely his reason, the other without, and this 
is God. Anything set in motion must somehow be like 
the thing that moves it; moreover, the disposition 
making it easily and happily tractable is itself a per- 
fection. The higher the mover the more perfect 
should be the proportionate disposition; we notice 
this requirement when students come to be taught 
high doctrine. The human virtues are designed to 
fit a man to conduct himself reasonably in his 
inward and outward motions. But higher perfec- 
tions are required to dispose him to be divinely moved. 



LIVING BEYOND REASON 319 

Even Aristotle 1 notes that those who are moved by 
divine instinct have no need to take counsel accord- 
ing to the reason; they follow an intimate instinct and 
are moved by a better principle. 

838 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. Ixviii. I 

920. Heroic or divine virtue does not differ from the 
normal run of virtue except by its more perfect mode of 
activity, and because it disposes to values higher than 
those generally accessible. It is virtue above the usual 
course, cajled by Plotinus a certain sublime manner of 
virtue, and attributed to the purified soul. 

Summa Theologica^ 3 a. vii. 2, ad 2 

921. Prophets do not speak of their own will. 

Commentary, in Psalmos, <u. 7 

922. Some come to ampler goods than they ever dreamt 
of; they are called fortunate. Others fall short of what 
they have prudently planned and come to a bad end; 
they are called unfortunate. 

Opusc. xvm, de Sortibus 

923. The visitation of the Lord may be for condemna- 
tion, for correction, for consolation. 

Commentary, in Isatam, xxiv 

924. In the human soul, as in every other creature, a 
double passive potentiality should be allowed for, one is 
proportionate to a natural agent, the other is propor- 
tionate to the first cause, which can uplift any creature 
to an actuality higher than can be produced by a 
natural cause. This capacity is customarily termed the 
obediential potentiality of a creature. 

744. Summa Thcologica, 3 a. xi. I 

1 In the Liber de Bona For tuna, a favourite medieval compila- 
tion from a chapter of the Eudemian Ethics (i246 b 37~i24 
and a chapter of the Magna Moralia (i2o6 b 3O-i2O7 b i9). 



320 LIVING BEYOND REASON 

925. Bear in mind the twofold capacity of human 
nature; the first is according to the order of natural 
powers, which God always fulfils, giving to each accord- 
ing to natural capacity. The other is prescribed by the 
order of divine power, at whose beck every creature 
stands. Here belongs the capacity for grace. God does 
not necessarily fulfil this capacity in everyone, otherwise 
he would be able to do with creatures only what he has 
done, which is false. 

Summa Theologica^ 33. i. 3, ad 3 

926. That a perfection is present in the human mind, 
too high to be explained by anything less than the 
supernatural, is man's nobility. Irrational creatures are 
impotent here. It does not follow that the highest human 
perfection is gained by natural power, which may indeed 
reach to what accords with the state of nature, but not 
to the heroism of the state of grace. 

254 Disputations, xn de Veritate, 3, ad 12 

927. Lest so noble a creature should seem to be utterly 
void of purpose through being unable to obtain his 
proper end, man has been given the means of rising to 
the knowledge of God. 

iv Contra Gentes, i 
II. BELIEF AND TRUST 

928. Grace does not destroy nature but completes it. 
Hence the natural reason subserves faith as the natural 
desire of will is the undercurrent of charity. 

85, no Summa Theologica^ la. i. 8, ad 2 

929. As regards the intellect, the assent of faith is a 
lowly operation, for the intellect does not see what it 
believes. But as regards the object of the assent, the 
operation may be most sublime. 



LIVING BEYOND REASON 321 

The desire is not quieted but rather excited by the 
knowledge of faith, for everyone desires to see what he 
believes. Therefore man's happiness does not consist in 
believing things about God. 

in Contra Gentes, 4.0 

930. Wonder is a kind of desire in knowing. It is the 
cause of delight because it carries the hope of discovery. 

66 Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. xxxii. 8 

931. Wonder is impossible without reason, for it im- 
plies a corftparing of effect and cause. 

Summa Theologica^ 33. V. 4 

932. The slenderest acquaintance with high things is 
more worth having than the most expert information 
about low things. 

Summa Thcokgica, la. i. 5, ad I 

933. There are various kinds of silence; of dullness, of 
security, of patience, of a quiet heart. 

Commentary, in yeremiam^ viii. 7 

934. Faith is the foretaste of that knowledge which 
hereafter will make us happy. 

Opusc. xni, Compendium Theologiae, 2 

935. Believers do not lightly believe truths the human 
reason cannot verify experimentally. We have not fol- 
lowed cunningly devised fables * 

I Contra Gentes, 6 

936. Even in the grading of the sciences the science 
dealing with the highest truth, namely metaphysics, is 
the last the student arrives at. Nevertheless, the intro- 
ductory sciences suppose certain truths which will be 

' 2 Pet. i. 1 6. 
B628 Y 



322 LIVING BEYOND REASON 

more fully developed in metaphysics ; each science makes 
suppositions, which the beginner must believe. 

59 Opusc. xvi, Exposition, de Trinitate^ in. I, ad ^. 

937. The moral virtues do not essentially constitute the 
contemplative life, but dispose thereto. 

739 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. clxxx. 2 

938. Youth is the cause of hope on these three counts, 
namely, because the object of hope is future, is difficult, 
and is possible. For the young live in the future and not in 
the past, they are not lost in memories but full of con- 
fidence. Secondly, their warmth of nature, high spirits, 
and expansive heart embolden them to reach out to 
difficult projects; therefore are they mettlesome and 
of good hope. Thirdly, they have not been thwarted in 
their plans and their lack of experience encourages 
them to think that where there's a will there's a way. 
The last two factors, namely good spirits and a certain 
recklessness, are also at work in people who are drunk. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ae. xl. 6 

939. In the object of hope four notes are struck: that it 
is good, future, arduous, possible. Hence, respectively, 
hope differs from fear, joy, simple desire, despair. 

Disputations, de Spe, I 

940. Hopelessness about eternal life may come either 
because heaven is not accounted for much, or because it 
is reckoned impossible to obtain. Spiritual goods do not 
strike us as very valuable when our affections are sapped 
by love of bodily pleasures, and especially sexual plea- 
sures. By craving these a man comes to feel distaste for 
spiritual values. Thus, despair is caused by lust. We are 
also led to imagine that this noble prize is beyond our 
reach by an excessive dejection into which we sink and 



LIVING BEYOND REASON 323 

from which we feel we shall never be extricated. Thus 
spiritual boredom generates despair. 

333 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. xx. 4 

941. If anyone despairs of what he is not born for, or 
what he has no right to, that would be no sin. 

Summa TAeoIogica, 2a-2ae. xx. i, ad 3 
III. FRIENDSHIP 

942. Hum|n justice, which consists in the observance 
of laws, is consummated in one precept of charity; the 
fullness of this law is friendship. 

Opusc. xin, Compendium Theokgiae^ I 

943. Between friends there is no need of justice proper- 
ly so called. They share everything in common. A friend 
is an alter ego, and a man does not have justice towards 
himself. Let two men be together; justice is not enough, 
for something more is required, namely friendship. 

Commentary, VIII Ethics, lect. I 

944. Friendship is more permanent when the give and 
take is equal and identical, for instance, pleasure for 
pleasure. Since there are different kinds and quantities 
of pleasure according to the difference of objects, a 
settled friendship requires, not merely that pleasure 
should be repaid with pleasure, but that the pleasure 
should be in the same thing; thus, happiness in play 
when one delights in the sport of another, and not when, 
as sometimes in erotic love, a couple are not enjoying 
the same thing. 

204, 1087 Commentary, Vlll Ethics, lect. 4 

945. It is of the nature of friendship not to be hidden; 
otherwise it would only be a kind of well-wishing. 

Commentary, in Joannem^ xiii, 3 



324 LIVING BEYOND REASON 

946. If we compare loving our friends and loving our 
enemies, then the first is better as regards its object or 
term; but as regards the principle, which is the will, 
then there is the more merit where there is the greater 
effort. 

Commentary, /// Sentences^ xxx. i. 3 

947. You cannot make friends with people whose 
company and conversation you do not enjoy with 
people, for instance, who are harsh, quarrelsome, and 
addicted to back-biting. Crusty old men may*be benevo- 
lent in that they wish well and will do good at a pinch, 
but they are not truly friendly, for they do not share 
their lives and rejoice together in the company of 
friends. 

1003, 1004 Commentary, Fill Ethics, lect. 6 

948. Not every love has the quality of friendship. In 
the first place it is reserved to that love for another 
which wills his well-being. When what we will is not 
the other's good for his sake, but the desire of it as it 
affects us, that is not friendship, but self-regarding love 
and some sort of concupiscence. Neither does bene- 
volence suffice for friendship; in addition a mutual 
loving is required, for friend is friend to friend. This 
interplay of well-wishing is founded on companionship. 

775 Summa Theologica, 2a-2ac. xxiii. i 

949. To rejoice and to be sad on the same grounds is 
the sign of sharing. 

in Contra Gentes, 151 

950. Love goes out to another in two ways: one to 
a substantial good, as when we love a man for himself; 
the other to an accidental good or quality, as when we 
Jove virtue, not as an end in itself, but as making us 



LIVING BEYOND REASON 325 

good. The former movement of love includes the love 
of friendship, the latter the love of desire. 

Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus^ iv, lect. 10 

951. Friendship is love simply speaking; desire is love 
in a qualified sense. 

Summa Theokgica^ ia-2ae. xxvi. 4 

952. Love is a binding force, by which another is 
joined to me and cherished as myself. 

Summa Theologica^ la. xx. I, ad 3 

953 ^7 loving God a man glows to gaze on his beauty. 

Summa Theologica, 2a 2ae. clxxx. i 

954. Love works in a. circle, for the beloved moves the 
lover by stamping a likeness, and the lover then goes 
out to hold the beloved in reality. Who first was the 
beginning now becomes the end of motion. 

92 Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. xxvi. 2 

955. The lover is not content with superficial know- 
ledge of the beloved, but strives for intimate discovery 
and entrance. 

Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. xxviii. 2 
IV. THE LIFE OF PERFECTION 

956. Three things are necessary for man's well-being, 
the knowledge of what to believe, of what to desire, of 
what to do. The first is taught in the Creed, the second 
in the Lord's prayer, and the third by Law. Of this 
we intend to treat. We begin by distinguishing four 
kinds of law. 

The first is called the law of nature. It is no other 
than the light of intelligence set in us by God, showing 
us what we should do and what avoid. This light and 



326 LIVING BEYOND REASON 

law was given at creation, though many fancy that if 
they do not keep the law they may be excused through 
ignorance. Many say, who shall show us good things? as 
though they were doubtful what to do; and the reply 
is made : The light of thy countenance is shed upon us, 
O Lord, 1 the light, namely, of intelligence. 

But on top of this law the devil has sown another, 
the law of concupiscence. 2 At the beginning the soul of 
man was subject to God, and so flesh was subject to 
reason. Since the devil's suggestion withdrew us from 
our obedience the flesh has become rebellious; we may 
wish a reasonable decency, but lust pushes us away. I see 
another law in my members warring against the law of 
my mind, for the Apostle adds, bringing me into captivity 
to the law of sin. 1 The law of concupiscence frequently 
corrupts the law of nature and the plan of reason. 

Nature being in ruins, the law of Scripture now 
enters to recall man to deeds of virtue away from vice. 
Two influences are at work here, fear and love. First, 
fear; a man begins to avoid sin by the prospect of 
judgement and hell. The beginning of wisdom is the 
fear of the Lord. 4 And again, The fear of the Lord 
casts out si. s Though a man who avoids sin from 
motives of fear is not righteous, nevertheless righteous- 
ness starts here where the Mosaic Law lays its emphasis. 
Yet its force is not enough, the hand may obey but the 
mind is not held, and therefore the Gospel Law sets 
another measure to keep men away from evil and bent 
on good, namely, the power of love. 

There are three main differences between the law of 
fear and the law of love. First, the subjects of the former 
are treated like slaves, while those that observe the latter 
are treated like freemen. He who acts solely from fear is 

1 Ps. iv. 6. a The lex fomitis of Peter Lombard 

J Rom. vii. 23. 4 Ecclus. i. 16. 5 Ecclus. i. 27. 



LIVING BEYOND REASON 327 

like a slave; he who acts from love is like a freeman or 
son. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. 1 
Second, those who keep the first are promised temporal 
goods, If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the fat 
of the land, 2 whereas for the second heavenly good is 
promised ; If thou wilt have eternal life, keep the com- 
mandments. 1 Thirdly, the former is heavy: Why do you 
seek to lay on our necks a yoke which neither we nor our 
fathers could bear?*" But the latter is easy: My yoke is 
sweet and my burden light? 

1043 Opusc. xxxv, de Duobus Praeceptis 

957. Charity draws man to God; faith draws divine 
things to us. 

92 Disputations, vi de Pctevtia, 9, ad 6 

958. The object of charity is not the common good, 
but the highest good. 

1107 Disputations, de Caritate^ 5, ad 4. 

959. By nature we can love God above all things as the 
principle and end of all natural goodness. But in charity 
he is offered as our joy in a society of friendship. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ac. cix. 3, ad I 

960. God is the objective of the moral virtues in the 
sense of being their final cause, but he is the object of 
charity more as the formal cause. 

111,911 Disputations, de Caritate, 5, ad 2 

961. A man is judged to be unreservedly perfect in the 
life of the spirit by what belongs to its very heart, 
though his value in special spheres will be decided by 
supplementary qualities. He who is without love lacks 

1 2 Cor. iii. 17. 2 Isa. i. 19. 3 Matt. xix. 17. 

4 Acts xv. 10. 5 Matt. xi. 30. 



3 2* LIVING BEYOND REASON 

r 

the living heart of goodness; he should be diagnosed 

as spiritually dead. If I have prophecy and know all 
mysteries, and all knowledge, and have such faith as 
to move mountains, but if I have not charity, I am 
nothing* The blessed apostle John asserts that the 
whole spiritual life consists in friendship; we know 
that we have passed from death to life, because we love 
the brethren* 

There are two precepts of charity: Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with thy whole heart and with thy 
whole soul and with thy whole mind. This is tJie first and 
greatest of the commandments. And the second is like to 
it; thou skalt love thy neighbour as thyself* 

Let us ponder both in turn. Love's measure may be 
laid either on the beloved or the lover; on the former 
when loved as much as lovable, on the latter when the 
love is according to the full power of the lover. By the 
first measure God is infinitely worthy of love. To love 
infinitely, however, is beyond the creature's power, and 
therefore God alone can match his own goodness with 
his own power of loving. 

Yet creatures can fit the second measure of perfect 
loving; and in two ways. First, with a love so whole that 
nothing is lacking, for everything they do is actively 
turned on God. This is not for wayfarers, but for the 
blessed in heaven, whose love is always in full expres- 
sion, and is not merely habitual. Secondly, when there 
is nothing present that cannot be referred to God, at 
least by virtual intention. 4 This is the perfection of love 
now commanded us: Whether you eat or drink, or what- 
ever you do, do all for the glory of God* 

1 i Cor. xiii. 2. 2 i John iii. 14. 3 Matt. xxii. 37-9. 

4 St. Thomas is referring to one whose state is that of loving 
God, but who is not explicitly aware of his charity in all his every- 
day deeds. 5 I Cor. x. 31. 



LIVING BEYOND REASON 329 

The counsels inviting us to perfection are designed 
to free us from worldly affections and thereby set 
the spirit on God by contemplating, loving, doing 
his will. 

Of temporal goods to be given up external goods or 
riches come first. If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell all 
thou hast 9 and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure 
in heaven, and come follow me. 1 Next in the list are 
the people who are joined to us by kinship and affinity. 
If anyone comes to me and does not hate father and mother 
and wife <tnd children, and brothers and sisters, he cannot 
be my disciple? 1 Finally, as adding something greater, 
it is said, and even his own life. This also the Lord 
teaches. If any man wishes to follow me let him deny 
himself and take up his cross and follow me? The ob- 
servance of this generous denial and loving hate is in 
part necessary for salvation and in part the comple- 
ment of perfection. 

After the perfection of loving God the perfection 
of charity with regard to our neighbour remains to be 
considered. Here also there are degrees of perfection. 
There is the perfection necessary to salvation, falling 
under the necessity of precept, and afterwards the 
further and more abundant perfection falling under 
counsel. 

What is commanded is this, thou shalt love thy neigh- 
bour as thyself. There are three qualities here, for the 
friendship should be true, right, and holy. 

When we love our fellows only in so far as they are 
of use to us they are not truly loved ; w r e are really loving 
ourselves and using other people as though they were 
for our convenience. We do not truly love them as our- 
selves. He who loves another merely for his own profit 
or pleasure stands convicted of selfishness. Charity 

1 Matt. xix. 2i. 2 Luke xiv. 26. 3 Matt. xvi. 24. 



330 LIVING BEYOND REASON 

seeketh not her own, 1 but the good of the beloved. Then 
secondly, the love of another should be fair and right, 
which means that a greater good must be preferred to 
a less. The good of soul must hold the first place, then 
afterwards comes the body, and lastly external pos- 
sessions. This scale is instinctive in our self-love: who is 
there who would not rather be deprived of an eye than 
of the use of the reason, or who will not spend his 
possessions for the safety of his body ? And so, if some- 
body prefers his neighbour's possessions to his bodily 
health, or his body to his spiritual good, he* does not 
rightly love his neighbour as himself. Thirdly, it is com- 
manded that the love of our neighbour should be holy, 
in that it is ordered to God. 

327, 708, 1084 Opusc. xxix, dt Perfectione Vitae Spiritualis, 
1-8, 10, 13 

962. Special acts of perfection are counselled, but there 
is not one of them that may not be commanded in a 
crisis as necessary for salvation. 

Summa Thcologica^ za-zac. cxxiv. 3, ad i 

963. Directly and essentially, the perfection of the 
Christian life consists in chanty, primarily in the love of 
God, derivatively in the love of our neighbour; as is 
proclaimed in the two main precepts of the divine law. 
Now because there is a precept given it does not follow 
that a set amount is fixed, in this sense that a minimum 
is commanded and a surplus is left over for our option. 
The very statement rules this out, for love with thy 
whole heart it commands, and love as thyself. The end 
of the law is love, and there is no stinting about ends, 
but only with means. 

1 i Cor. xiii. 5. 



LIVING BEYOND REASON 331 

Secondarily and instrumental!/, perfection is reached 
through the counsels which, like the ten command- 
ments, are subordinate to love, though in different ways. 
For the commandments are designed to remove what 
is contrary to charity and to establish the conditions 
without which charity cannot exist. The counsels, how- 
ever, are designed to rule out what may be obstacles to 
charity. 

Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. clxxxiv. 3 



XVII 

Reasonable Virtues 1 

964. The word cardinal comes from hinge, on which a 
door opens, according to the saying, 2 As a door turneth 
upon its hinges, so doth the slothful upon his bed. So the 
cardinal virtues are those on which pivots the entrance 
into humane living. t 

Disputations, de Virtutibus Cardinalibus, I 

I. PRUDENCE 

965. Prudence furnishes the right plan for immediate 
conduct. 

Summa Theolog'tca, ia-2ae. Ivii. 4 

966. Not for its thoughtfulness alone is prudence to 
be praised, but also for the practical good sense of its 
application to conduct. 

806 Summa Theologica, 2a 2ac. xlvii. I, ad 3 

1 Standards are checked by experience. Despite his sense of 
ideal form, St. Thomas never seriously attempts to deduce facts 
from pure theory, least of all in his moral science. Without a 
philosophy there is no principle of enlightenment, yet theory alone 
cannot grasp individual situations. Hence the function of pru- 
dence, a moral virtue because it supposes good intentions and a 
bent to the good life, an intellectual virtue because it passes 
a shrewd judgement about means and ends and applies an idea to 
practice. All the other moral virtues are interconnected in this 
practical appreciation. Courage and temperance are general 
qualities that cover a multitude of virtues, yet they are also 
special virtues with a limited aim. At such they are not habits of 
will, but habits of the sensitive appetite. 

2 Prov. xxvi. 14. The play is upon the word cardo> hinge, 
socket. 



REASONABLE VIRTUES 333 

967. A proper application cannot be executed unless 
these two terms be known, that which is to be applied 
and that to which it is to be applied. Human conduct is 
always an affair of particular situations, and therefore 
the prudent man must appreciate both the general 
principles of moral science and the singular objects of 
his activity. 

699, 1067 Summa Thedogica, za-zae. xlvii. 3 

968. Applying the right plan for making something 
pertains TO art; prudence deals with matters of counsel 
when there are several ways of achieving a purpose. 
When the theoretical reason makes something, an 
argument for instance, then it proceeds according to 
fixed and classical methods, which is the role of art 
rather than of prudence. One may envisage a theoretical 
art, but scarcely a theoretical prudence. 

797> IO 53 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. xlvii. 2, ad 3 

969. The infinity of singulars cannot be comprehended 
by the human reason. Our counsels are uncertain. 1 
Nevertheless, they can be grouped and limited accord- 
ing to what usually happens, and this approximation 
suffices for prudence. 

306, 786, 1063 Summa Thcologica> 2a-2ae. xlvii. 3, ad 2 

970. Of the two sides to the rational soul, one of which 
is called the scientific and the other the opinative, 
prudence strengthens the latter. Opinion is about things 
that could happen otherwise, and so is prudence. 

23 Commentary, yi Ethics^ lect. 4 

971. Habits that ensure a right kind of deed without 
concern for whether or not it is performed in the right 

Wisd. ix. 14.. 



334 REASONABLE VIRTUES 

spirit are not such full virtues as those that ensure the 
right temper as well; these latter relate to good as 
formally humane, that is as taken into and quickening 
the doer, not merely as an objective and impersonal 
value. Now prudence devises the application of a right 
plan to conduct and also induces the right frame of 
mind; hence it is a virtue not only in the sense that 
the other intellectual habits are virtues, but also as 
having the character of the moral virtues, among 
which it is numbered. 

85 2 855 Summa Theokgica^ 2a-iae. xlvii. 4 

972. Prudence applies principles to particular issues; 
consequently it does not establish moral purpose, but 
contrives the means thereto. 

Summa Theokgica, 2a-2ac. xlvii. 6 

973. That we should live according to right reason is 
presupposed to prudence. But how, and through what 
means, our conduct may keep the reasonable measure, 
that is the affair of prudence. 

Summa Theokgica, 2a-2ae. xlvii. 7 

974. Prudence opens the way for the other virtues. 

Summa Theokgica, 2a-2ae. xlvii. 6, ad 3 

975. There are three kinds of prudence; solitary 
prudence directed to one's own benefit; 1 economic or 
domestic prudence directed to the good of a household 
or family; and political prudence ordered to the com- 
mon good of the State. 2 

1082 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ac. xlvii. n 

1 Also known as 'monastic* prudence. 

2 The State, called by St. Thomas the city, the kingdom, or 
the political community. 



REASONABLE VIRTUES 335 

976. What tvi do, the reasons for doing it, and how to 
doit. 

Disputations, xiv de Veritate, 4 

977. Three stages can be marked in the prudent con- 
trol of conduct. The first is to take counsel and discuss 
the question; the second is to judge about the findings 
in a speculative temper; the third goes farther and is the 
work of the practical reason, namely to apply counsel 
and judgement to what must be done here and now. 
This act is closer to the immediate issue ; it is the princi- 
pal function of the practical reason and, consequently, 
of prudence. One sign of this is that the psychological 
perfection of art consists rather in passing a judgement 
than in carrying it into effect, and therefore one man is 
esteemed the better artist who deliberately makes an 
artistic mistake than another whose mistake is involun- 
tary: the former seems at least to have a good judge- 
ment, which the latter lacks. But with prudence it is the 
other way round; a man is more imprudent who deli- 
berately fails, as being deficient in the principal act of 
prudence, than he whose error is involuntary. 

692 Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. xlvii. 8 

978. Some faults are manifestly hostile to prudence 
impulsiveness, inconsiderateness, inconstancy, also 
negligence which is against caution. Others are carica- 
tures which abuse the features of prudence worldly 
prudence, cunning and slyness, fraud, and over-anxiety. 

Summa Theokgica^ 2a-2ae liii, Prologue 

979. Acts of prudence are concerned solely with 
matters of moral virtue. But human happiness does not 
finally consist in the practice of moral virtue, nor conse- 
quently in the activity of prudence. 

739 in Contra Gentes, 35 



336 REASONABLE VIRTUES 

II. COURAGE 

980. The nearer a man is to God, who is ever consta; 
the more steadfast he is and the less fickle. 

140 in Contra Gentes, 

981. Courage can be taken to mean either a firmness 
spirit, and this is a general virtue or rather a conditi 
of every virtue, or a particular firmness in enduring a 
repulsing threats in situations fraught with conspic 
ous difficulty, namely in grave perils, and in this sei 
courage is a special virtue. 

Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. cxxii 

982. Holding steady in danger is more important tl 
taking the offensive. 

Summa Theokgica^ 2a-2ae. cxxii 

983. In the display of courage two characterisl 
should be considered, the premeditated deliberaten 
and the habit of discipline; it is the latter that m 
appears in emergencies. 

838 Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. cxxii 

984. Courage includes patience. 

Disputations, Je Virtutibus Cardinal'ibus^ I, aa 

985. Magnificence consorts with liberality in 
material, with courage in its mode. 

Commentary, /// Sentence* , xxxm. iii. 3. /, a 

986. The rush of anger chokes the free judgement 
truth. The virtue of meekness, which controls ang 
makes a man master of himself. 

Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. clvi 

987. Savagery takes delight in human suffering. Si 
pleasure is not human, but bestial. Cruelty is rat. 



REASONABLE VIRTUES 337 

different: it exceeds due measure in inflicting punish- 
ment, and differs from savagery as malevolence does 
from bestiality. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. clix. 2 

III. TEMPERANCE 

988. Justice and courage are more immediately related 
to the common good than temperance is, for justice 
controls transactions with others, while courage rides 
the dangers to be undergone for the common good. 
Temperance moderates merely one's own personal 
lusts and pleasures. Therefore the others are greater 
virtues, and prudence and the divine virtues are more 
potent still. 

756 Summa Theologica y 2a-2ac. cxli. 8 

989. Job begins his profession of innocence by declar- 
ing his freedom from the vice of lasciviousness, which 
involves many others. 

Commentary, in Job, xxxi, lect. i 

990. Temperance does not abolish all depraved lusts, 
but the temperate man does not tolerate them as does 
the intemperate man. 

826 Disputations, de Firtutibus Cardinalibus, i, a d 6 

991. Derangement when intelligence is obsequious 
to sensuality. 

in Contra Gentes, 81 

992. Among the perfections of animal nature included 
in human nature is the sensitive appetite, termed the 
sensuality. Even this is born to obey the reason, and 
so is called reasonable by sharing. It takes on the full 
quality of voluntariness only inasmuch as it is modified 
by the reason. 

677, 826 Summa TAeologica, 3 a. xviii. 2 

B 028 Z 



338 REASONABLE VIRTUES 

993. It is compared to the snake for its' sting, not its 
nature. 

Summa Theohgica, 33. xviii. 2, ad 2 

994. The commanded conformity of the human will 
with the divine will should be interpreted in terms of 
deliberate will. 

694 Summa Theokgica> 33. xviii. 5, ad 2 

995. If a man wills one thing by his reasonable desire 
and another by his sense-desire, there is no Conflict of 
contraries, unless the latter prevails. 

Summa Theokgica^ 33. xviii. 6 

996. The special object of temperance is healthy 
pleasure in the sensation of touch. The special form is 
from the reason, which appoints the measure; the 
material, however, is from the desires themselves. 

551 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. Ixiii. 4. 

997. What is contrary to the natural order is vicious. 
Nature provides pleasure in vitally necessary activities, 
and the natural order requires that a man should enjoy 
what is required for the well-being of the individual and 
the race. Were somebody to avoid pleasure so far as to 
omit what is a natural necessity he would sin, as though 
resisting the design of nature. This belongs to the vice 
of unfeelingness. 

735 Summa Thcokgica, 2a-2ae. cxlii. i 

998. A man cannot lead a reasonable life if he avoids 
all pleasure. He who abhors pleasures because they are 
pleasurable is boorish and ungracious. 

225 Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. cxlii. I, ad 2 

999. What is honourable is delightful to man, but 



REASONABLE VIRTUES 339 

what he finds pleasurable is not always honourable, for 
it may appeal to the senses and not to the reason. 
629 Summa Theologlca^ 2a-2ac. cxlv. 3 

1000. Intemperance is superfluous concupiscence, and 
is called childish on three grounds. First, for what 
intemperance and children alike desire, namely grace- 
less things. Our deeds are beautiful when they are 
ordered according to reason; as Cicero says, beauty is 
what is consonant with that excellence in man whereby 
he differs ^rom other living things. 1 A child does not 
bother about counsels of moderation ; as Aristotle re- 
marks, neither does lust listen to sobriety. 2 

Secondly, both agree in the event. A child is spoilt 
when left to his own devices: A horse not broken in 
becometk stubborn; and a child left to himself becometh 
headstrong* Concupiscence grows stronger with grati- 
fication; as Augustine says, when lust is served it be- 
comes custom, and when custom is not resisted it 
becomes necessity. 4 

Thirdly, both require the same remedy, namely, the 
use offeree. Withold not correction from a child, thou 
shalt beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul from hell? 
So also when lusts are resisted they may be tamed to the 
due manner of decency. 

755 Summa Thcologica y 2a-2ae. cxlii. 2 

1 001. Ornament should befit a person's condition and 
intention. If a woman decks herself out decently accord- 
ing to her rank and station, and comports herself unpre- 
tentiously according to the custom of her country, then 
she will be acting with modesty, the virtue that sets the 
style for making an entrance and sitting down and 
indeed for all deportment. This covers also her actions 

1 de Officiis, I. 2 Etklcs, 1 149*34. 3 Ecclus. xxx. 8* 

4 Confessions^ viii. 5. 5 Prov. xxiii. 13-14. 



340 REASONABLE VIRTUES 

to please the husband she has or shouldf have, and to 
keep him away from other women. Otherwise there 
will be showing off, and some infection of impurity if 
it panders to lust. 

Commentary, in. Isaiam, in 

1002. To know and appreciate your own worth is 
no sin. 

Vainglory directly clashes with magnanimity. 

Summa T/;-cologica^ 2 a zae. cxxxii. I 

1003. Jokes and plays are words and gestu/es that are 
not instructive, but merely seek to give lively pleasure. 
We should enjoy them. They are governed by the 
virtue of witty gaiety to which Aristotle refers and which 
we call pleasantness. 1 A ready-witted man is quick with 
repartees and turns speech and action to light relief. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-zae. clxviii. 2 

1004. It is against reason to be burdensome to others, 
showing no amusement and acting as a wet blanket. 
Those without a sense of fun, who never say anything 
ridiculous, and are cantankerous with those who do, 
these are vicious, and are called grumpy and rude. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. clxviii. 4 
1 Ethics, 1128*1. 



j 



XVIII 

ustice 1 



1005. A moralist should be more profoundly concerned 
with friendship than with justice. 

330, 332 Commentary, Vlll Ethics^ lect. i 

1006. Justice without mercy is cruelty, mercy without 
justice gc^s out into waste. 

Commentary, in Matthaeum^ v. 2 
I. THE OBJECTIVE STANDARD 

1007. Justice directs our deeds with regard to other 
people under the aspect of what is owing to them; 
friendliness under the aspect of what is demanded by 
pleasantness and courtesy and generosity. 

330, 1088 Summa Theolcgica y 22 2ae. xxiii. 3, ad I 

1008. While the other virtues perfect a man's own per- 
sonal state, justice stands out as rendering another man 
his due. What is correct in their activity is measured 
by reference to the doer, but what is correct in justice 
leaves aside this consideration and is measured by what 

1 Justice implies an equilibrium between different things. The 
mean of virtue is judged according to an amount set by an external 
measure, not, as in the other virtues, largely by the disposition of 
the person engaged. In its narrowest sense justice is between 
equals and pays what is owing. Yet there are many situations when 
fairness is demanded though one of these two conditions is absent. 
The requirements of common decency, if less stiffly defined, are no 
less imperative than those of strict right. In the service of God, for 
instance, or of one's country, there is no question of equality; in 
generosity, cordiality, and candour there is no contract. Hence 
arise the various virtues, religion being the chief, which are called 
potential parts of justice. 



342 JUSTICE 

is owing to another. Justice squarely meets this obliga- 
tion, for instance a fair wage for work done. A deed is 
termed just when it passes this fundamental test, without 
reference to the mood in which it is performed, which 
reference is the test for the other virtues. Rights are the 
special object of justice. 

880, 1068 Summa Theologica^ 2a-zae. Ivii. i 

1009. A right may be another's due on two titles, one 
from the very nature of things, this is termed natural 
right; the other from agreement, either private or 
public, and this is termed positive right. 

1050 Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. Ivii. 2 

1010. By common agreement human wills can establish 
a right in those matters where there is no conflict with 
natural justice. Wherefore, Aristotle remarks that in 
their principle legal rights may be such or otherwise, 
but once they are laid down it is different. 1 What is 
contrary to natural right cannot be made just by human 
will. Woe to those who make iniquitous laws. 2 

1053 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. Ivii. 2, ad ^ 

1011. The precise aim of justice is the administration 
of external things, not the making of them, for this is 
the affair of art. 

858 Summa Theologica y 2a-2ae. Iviii. 3, ad 3 

1012. Two main reasons why men fall short of justice 
deference to magnates, deference to the mob. 

1 10 1 Commentary, in Job, xxxiv, lect. 2 

II. OWNERSHIP 

1013. Whether the possession of external things is 
natural to man ? We proceed thus to this article. 

1 Ethics, U34 b 2O. 2 Isa. x. i. 



JUSTICE 343 

It would gfeem that it is not natural for man to pcsse ;s 
external things. For no man should arrogate to himself 
what belongs to God. Now dominion over all creatures 
is proper to God; the earth is the Lord's, Sec. 1 Therefore 
the possession of external things is not natural to man. 

Second objection: in expounding the words of the 
rich man in the parable, / will pull down my barns and 
build greater p , and there will I bestow all my fruits ana 
my goods? Basil exclaims, 3 Tell me, which are thine? 
Where did you take them from and bring them into 
your Iife4 Now what a man possesses naturally that can 
he call his own. Therefore man does not naturally pos- 
sess external things. 

Third objection: according to Ambrose, 4 dominion 
is the name of power. But man has no power over 
external things, for he can work no change in their 
natures; therefore the possession of external things is 
not natural to him. 

But on the contrary, it is written: thou hast subjected 
all things under his feet? 

My own explanation begins by drawing a distinction 
between an exterior thing considered in its nature and 
in its utilization. In its nature as subject to the will of 
God, whose nod all things obey, it does not fall under 
human power. But for its utilization, man has natural 
ownership of external things, because through his 
reason and will he can employ them for human benefit. 
They were made on his behalf. We can argue up to 
this conclusion by Aristotle's reasoning from the prin- 
ciple that the imperfect is always for the more perfect. 6 
Moreover, the rationale of this natural ownership 
is man's intelligence, where the image of God is found, 

1 Ps. xxiii. i (Vulgate). 2 Luke xii. 18. 

3 Homily on Luke xii. 1 8. 4 de Fide ad Gratianum^ L I. 

5 Ps. viii. 8. 6 Politics, 1254*20. 



344 JUSTICE 

as was declared at his creation: Let us make man in our 
image and likeness; and let him have dominion over the 
fishes of the sea, &C. 1 

Reply to the first objection: God, who has sovereign 
dominion over all things, has directed some of them to 
the sustenance of man's body; and on this account man 
has natural dominion over them as regards the power 
of using them. 

To the second objection: the rich man is reproved for 
treating external things as belonging to him by their 
origin and as though he had not received tliem from 
another, namely from God. 

The third objection argues from external things 
in their very natures, where admittedly ownership is 
limited to God alone. 

171, 388 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. Ixvi. i 

1014. Whether it is lawful for a man to possess a thing 
as his own ? We proceed thus to this article. 

It would seem that private property is not lawful. For 
whatever is contrary to the natural law is unlawful. 
Now according to the natural law all things are held in 
common, and the possession of property is contrary to 
this community of goods. Therefore it is unlawful for 
any man to appropriate any external thing to himself. 

Secondly, the words of the rich man already quoted 
are expounded by Basil 2 as follows: the rich who reckon 
that the common goods they have seized are their own 
properties are like those who go in advance to the 
theatre excluding others and appropriating to them- 
selves what is intended for common use. Now it would 
be unlawful to obstruct others from laying their hands 
on common goods. Therefore it is unlawful to appro- 
priate to oneself what belongs to the community. 

1 Gen. i. 26. 2 Homily on Luke xii. 18. 



JUSTICE 345 

Thirdly, Ambrose says, 1 and he is quoted in the 
Decretals: 2 let no man call his own that which is 
common. That he is speaking of external things appears 
from the context. Therefore it seems unlawful for a man 
to appropriate an external thing to himself. 

But on the contrary Augustine writes of the Apo- 
stolics, or those who gave themselves that name with 
extreme arrogance, who did not admit into commu- 
nion persons who use marriage or possess property of 
their own, people such as monks and many clerics in 
the Catholic Church. The reason why these Aposto- 
lies were heretics was that they separated themselves 
from the Church by allowing no hope of salvation to 
those who enjoyed the use of these things which they 
themselves went without. Therefore it is erroneous 
to maintain that it is unlawful for a man to possess 
property. 

In explanation let me declare that two elements enter 
into human competence in appropriating external 
things, the administration and the enjoyment. The first 
is the power to take care of them and manage them, and 
here it is lawful for one man to possess property: indeed 
it is necessary for human living and on three grounds. 
First, because each man is more careful in looking after 
what is in his own charge than what is common to many 
or to all ; in the latter case each would shirk the work and 
leave to another that which concerns the community, 
as we see when there is a great number of servants. 
Secondly, because human affairs are conducted in a more 
orderly fashion when each man is charged with taking 
care of some particular thing himself, whereas there 
would be confusion if anyone took charge of anything 
indeterminately. Thirdly, because a more peaceful 
state is preserved when each man is contented with what 

1 Sermo Ixix^ de tcmporc. a Dist. xlvii. 



346 JUSTICE 

is his own. Hence we observe that quarifes arise more 
frequently among people who share in common and 
without division of goods. 

The second element in human competence concerns 
the enjoyment of material things. Here man ought to 
possess them, not as his own, but as common, to the 
extent of being ready to communicate them to others in 
their need. Hence St. Paul says: Charge the rich of this 
world to give easily , to communicate to others, Sec. 1 

In reply to the first objection, it should be said that 
community of goods is attributed to the natural law, 
not in the sense that natural law dictates that all posses- 
sions should be in common and that nothing should be 
possessed as one's own, but in the sense that the division 
of possessions is not made by natural law but by human 
agreement, which belongs to positive law. Hence 
private ownership is not contrary to natural law, but is 
an addition to it devised by human reason. 

To the second objection: a man would not act un- 
fairly if he went beforehand to the theatre in order to 
prepare the way for others; what is unfair is blocking 
the enjoyment of others from going. Similarly, a rich 
man docs not act unlawfully if he encloses what was 
common at the beginning and gives others a share. But 
he sins if he indiscriminately excludes others from the 
benefit. Hence Basil says, How can you abound in 
wealth while another begs, unless it be that you may 
obtain the merit of good stewardship and he be crowned 
with the rewards of patience ? 

To the third objection: Ambrose is referring to 
ownership as regards enjoyment, wherefore he adds 
that he who spends too much is a robber. 

1050 Summa T hcologica, 2a-2ae. Ixvi. 2 

1 i Tim. vi. 17-18. 



JUSTICE 347 

1015. The main purpose of restitution is not to mulct 
him who has too much, but to supply him who has too 
little. 

Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. Ixii. 6, ad I 

1016. To lend money at usury is grave sin, not because 
it is forbidden, for rather is it forbidden because it is 
against natural justice. Consider its meaning. The word 
comes from usus: usury puts a price on a money-loan, 
and sells the use of money that is lent. 

Reflecfc that different things have different uses. In 
some cases their use involves the consumption of their 
substance: the proper use of wine is to be drunk, of 
bread to be eaten, in both cases their substance is con- 
sumed. Similarly, the proper use of money is to be 
expended in return for other things; as Aristotle re- 
marks, coins are minted to serve exchange. 1 There are 
other things, however, whose use does not involve the 
consumption of their substance. The use of a house is to 
serve as a dwelling, and the nature of dwelling does not 
require that the house should be pulled down; it is 
incidental whether the building is improved or becomes 
dilapidated from being dwelt in. So also with clothes and 
horses. Because such things are not necessarily con- 
sumed in their use, the thing itself and the use of it can 
be separately conveyed or sold. A man may sell a house 
and remain the tenant, or he can let the house and 
remain the landlord. 

But in the case of things whose use is their consump- 
tion, wherever the use is granted so also is the thing 
itself, and conversely. When someone lends money, 
therefore, on the understanding that he will receive his 
money back and in addition demands a charge for the use 
of it, it is clear that he is selling separately the substance 

1 Politics, 1257*33. 



348 JUSTICE 

of the money and the use of it. In consequence he 
is selling something that does not exist, or he is selling 
the same thing twice, which is manifestly against the 
notion of natural justice. Therefore to lend money at 
usury is a grave kind of sin, and the same holds true 
with other things whose use is their consumption, such 
as wine and flour. 

Disputations, xm de Malo^ 4 
III. WAR AND PEACE 

lOiy. There are three conditions of a just war. First, 
the authority of the sovereign by whose command the 
war is to be waged. For it is not the business of 
the private individual to declare war or to summon the 
nation. The second condition is that hostilities should 
begin because of some crime on the part of the enemy. 
Wherefore Augustine observes that a just war is wont 
to be described as one that avenges wrongs, when a 
nation or state has to be punished for refusing to make 
amends for the injuries done by its people or to restore 
what has been seized unjustly. The third condition is 
a rightful intention, the advancement of good or the 
avoidance of evil. It may happen that a war declared by 
legitimate authority for a just cause may yet be rendered 
unlawful through a wicked intention. Hence Augustine 
declares that the passion of inflicting harm, the cruel 
thirst for vengeance, a plundering and implacable spirit, 
the fever of turmoil, the lust of power and suchlike, all 
these are justly condemned in war. 

Suntma Theohgica, 2a-2ae. xl. i 

I0l8. If one man be at concord with another because 
he is coerced by the fear of penalty and not of his own 
free will, then his condition is not one of peace. 

Summa Theologies 2a-2ae. xxix. i, ad I 



JUSTICE 349 

1019. By pelce a man is single-minded in himself and 
of one mind with others. 

Commentary, in II TAessalonicenseSj //'/, lect. 2 

1020. Peace is opposed to conflict within oneself, as 
well as to conflict with others outside. 

Sumtna Theologica^ 2a 2ae. xxix. r, ad 2, 

1021. Peace is indirectly the work of justice, which 
removes the obstacles, but directly it is the work of 
friendship. 

492 '* Summa Theokgica^ 2a-2ae. xxix. 3, ad 3 

1022. Peace is not a virtue, but the fruit of virtue. 

Summa Theohgtca^ 2a-2ac. xxix. 4 

IV. RELIGION 

1023. Religion is neither a theological nor an intel- 
lectual virtue. It is a moral virtue, a part of justice, 
exhibiting a measure of conduct, not tested by emotion, 
but by the fairness of the actions we offer to God. There 
is not a sheer equality in it, for we cannot offer God 
what is due to him, but a relative equality is present, 
proportionate to human power and divine acceptance. 
There can be extravagance about religion, not by the 
circumstance of how much, but by other circumstances, 
for instance, if worship be offered to an unbefitting 
object, or at improper times, or according to other un- 
suitable circumstances. 

1007 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. Ixxxi. 5, ad 3 

1024. Religion has two kinds of acts: some are proper 
and immediate, whereby a man elicits what is directed 
solely to God, thus to adore and to offer sacrifice. 
Others proceed from other virtues commanded by 
religion and directed to the reverence of God, thus to 



350 JUSTICE 

visit children and widows in their tribulation, which 
is an activity elicited by mercy, and to keep oneself 
unspotted from the world, which is elicited by tempe- 
rance, but may be dictated by religion. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. Ixxxi. i,ad i 

1025. It is one thing to serve God, another to make an 
offering in recognition of a liability: the former is com- 
mon to all virtue, the latter is peculiar to religion. 

Commentary, /// Sentences, ix. i. i. /'/', ad 2 

1026. The prayer of which we speak here fc an act of 
intelligence, not of will. 

Summa Theokgica^ 2a-2ae. Ixxxiii. i 

1027. The interpreter of our desire before God. 

Summa Theologica> 2a-2ae. Ixxxiii. 9 

1028. We use language with God, not to manifest our 
thoughts to him, for he is the searcher of hearts, but to 
induce reverence in ourselves and others. 

Summa Theologica> 2a~2ae. xci. i 

1029. There are three hoary errors on the subject of 
prayer. Some maintain that human affairs are not ruled 
by divine providence, and consequently to worship and 
pray to God is silly. Others maintain that everything 
happens of necessity, whether from the immutability 
of providence or from cosmic determinism or from the 
system of interacting causes; they also rule out the 
usefulness of prayer. A third group is of the opinion that 
while human affairs are indeed ruled by providence and 
are not the result of necessity, nevertheless the disposi- 
tion of divine providence is variable and can be swayed 
by petitions and suchlike. All these postulates we have 
already disproved. In urging the importance of prayer 
we should neither load the course of human events with 



JUSTICE 351 

necessity nortyet reckon that the dispositions of the 
divine plan can be changed. 

The matter will be made clearer if we consider that 
divine providence settles not merely what effects shall 
come about, but also in what manner and from what 
causes. Human acts should be numbered among the 
operative factors. Man must needs act, not in order to 
change the divine dispositions, but in order to execute 
them according to the order arranged. The situation is 
very much the same with respect to natural causes. Such 
is the case *vith prayer ; we do not pray in order to change 
the divine disposition, but that we may ask for that 
which God has arranged to be granted. 

334 Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. Ixxxiii. 2 

1030. Religiosity religion observed beyond measure. 

Commentary, /// Sentences, ix. i. I. //'/, ad 3 

1031. Every moral virtue lies in a mean between 
extremes, and two classes of vice correspond to each of 
them, one by excess, the other by defect. Excess is not 
taken merely according to quantity, but also to other 
circumstances; with some virtues, such as magnificence 
or magnanimity, the contrary vices are excessive, not 
because they reach to something bigger for in fact they 
stoop to less, but because they go too far by not attend* 
ing to persons and conditions. Thus, superstition is a 
vice against religion by excess, not that it shows more 
worship than does true religion, but because worship is 
offered to the wrong objects or at the wrong time or in 
the wrong manner. 

877 Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ae. xcii. I 

1032. When in worship there is anything unbefitting 
the glory of God, when it neither helps man to God 



352 JUSTICE 

nor disciplines inordinate desire, or whwi it is against 
the rubrics and common custom, then it must be dis- 
missed as so much waste and superstition. 

Summa Theologica, 2a 2ae. xciii. 2 

1033. Much harm is done by asserting or denying 
points irrelevant to religious doctrine as though true 
religion were committed to them. 

Opusc. xxu, Declaratlo xlii Quaestionum ad 
Magistrum Ordinis, Introduction 

1034. Hypocrites are rarely so consummate but that 
their wickedness is discovered by word or deed. They 
may be guarded in their deliberate conduct, but sudden 
emergencies and frustrations find them out. So also 
their true colours are revealed when they are thwarted, 
and when they have obtained what they desire. 

Commentary, in Matthaeum^ v/V, lect. 2 



XIX 

Law 1 

1035. Law is not right exactly, but the norm of 
right. 

1007 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. Ivii. i, ad 2, 

1036. As the leading purpose of human law is to bring 
about the friendship of men among themselves, so 
divine law is chiefly intended to establish men in friend- 
ship with God. 

942 Summa Theologica, ia-2ac. xcix. 2 

1 Mind is the primary authority, and so the first emphasis is on 
the reasonableness of law. It is not a dictate of desire enjoying the 
might to take advantage of opportunity, but an intelligent plan 
directing human activity to happiness. No precept has any binding 
force except in the measure that the eternal ideas in the mind of 
God are reflected. Yet though the ultimate motive is to lead to 
personal happiness, the immediate object of public law is to estab- 
lish the general conditions which make the good life possible. Law 
is for the common good, and when the common good is taken as 
the community we meet another emphasis j the need of economy in 
the making of human laws. These pragmatic and approximate dis- 
positions, less august and searching than the divine and natural 
precepts, to which they are related less as the deductions of legal 
science than as the inventions of political art, are designed for what 
happens in the majority of cases. Though binding in conscience, 
they are bounded by the field of official justice and public peace. 
The consequences are that legality in its narrow sense needs to be 
supplemented by other virtues, and especially to be enlivened 
by the special virtue of equity. A long and detailed period in 
the Summa Thcologica is devoted to the Mosaic legislation; 
it is a prelude to the study of the Gospel law of love, which 
bursts out all the fresher and freer for the sustained burden of 
the older law. 

B 628 A a 



354 LAW 

I. CONCEPT OF LAW 

1037. The definition of law an ordinance of reason 
made for the common good by the public personage 
who has charge of the community, and promulgated 
can be gathered from the four following paragraphs. 

Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. xc. 4 

1038. First of all, law is a defined measure or rule by 
which we are led to act or withheld from acting. The 
rule and measure of human activity is the reason, the 
first principle of human activity, whose function it is 
to direct means to ends. In every class the first principle 
is the rule and measure of all else. Consequently law is 
something pertaining to the reason. Though reason 
itself receives its impulse from the will, for the reason 
issues its commands about means because the end is 
willed, nevertheless, the willing of what is commanded 
must be regulated by the reason to be endowed with the 
strength of law: this reasonableness must be read into 
the dictum that the will of the prince has the force of 
law; 1 otherwise would it be lawlessness rather than law. 

700, 775, 80 1 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xc. i, c. & ad 3 

1039. Secondly, as the reason is the first principle of 
human acts so also, within the reason, one interest works 
as the principle to others, and to this chief and main 
interest law must be referred. The first principle of the 
practical reason is our ultimate end, or happiness; law 
is chiefly concerned with planning for this. Since each 
part is for its whole as imperfect for perfect, and one 
individual is part of the perfect community, law is 
engaged mainly with the scheme of common happiness. 

1 The Lex Regia, usually so quoted in its truncated form, as a 
defence of absolute sovereignty. 



LAW 355 

Therefore AAstotle mentions both happiness and the 
political group when he says that those laws are called 
just which produce and preserve happiness and its 
particulars for the body politic. 1 For the State is the 
perfect community. 2 Every law is ordered to the com- 
mon good, and a precept has the force of law only when 
it serves this community benefit. 3 

725, 1107 Summa Theologies la-zae. xc. 2 

1040. To direct affairs for the common good is reserved 
to the wjjole people or to its vicegerent. So too the 
power to enact laws belongs either to the whole people 
or to the public authority who is the guardian of the 
community. 

1017, 1097 Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. xc. 3 

1041. To lay an obligation a law must be applied to the 
men who have to be regulated, and this means that it 
must be brought to their knowledge by promulgation. 

Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. xc. 4 

1042. No one is obliged to obey a precept unless he be 
reasonably informed about it. 

812, 813 Disputations, xvu de Vcritatc, 3 

1043. Divine providence extends to all things. Yet a 
special rule applies where intelligent creatures are in- 
volved. For they excel all others in the perfection of 
their nature and the dignity of their end: they are 
masters of their activity and act freely, while others are 
more acted on than acting. They reach to their destiny 
by their own proper activity, that is by knowing and 

1 Ethics* ii29 b i7. 

2 Perfect, i.e. self-contained. Politics, 1 252*5. 

3 A command of the head of a family group, or of the superior 
of an association within the political community, is not techni- 
cally a law. 



356 LAW 

loving God, whereas other creatures sh? w only some 
traces of this likeness. Now in any undertaking the 
procedure varies according to the purpose intended and 
the situation that has to be met, as the method of art 
varies according to the end proposed and the material 
employed. Consequently there is one kind of order for 
rational creatures under divine providence and another 
for irrational creatures. 

To begin with, rational creatures are governed for 
their own benefit, whereas other creatures are governed 
for the sake of men. Men are principals, n*>t merely 
instruments. It is true that parts are for the whole, not 
the whole for the parts. But rational creatures have an 
affinity to the whole, for, in a sense, each is all. They 
are not made for anyone's utility. 

Providence directs rational creatures for the welfare 
and growth of the individual person, not just for the 
advantage of the race. Many activities flourish that can- 
not be accounted for by the general urge of nature, as is 
evidenced by the fact that human inclinations are not 
the same for all, but are various in different individuals. 
Actions have a personal value, and are not merely from 
and for human nature. 

To crown his natural appetites man is given a 
directive for his personal acts, and this we call law. 
Law is the reason and rule of activity, and therefore 
is reserved to those who can know the reason of what 
they do. 

The intent of the divine law given to man is to lead 
him to God. The will cleaves to another either from 
love or from fear. But there is a great difference between 
these motives. In the case of fear the first consideration 
is not the loved object itself but something else, namely, 
the evil that would impend but for its presence. In the 
case of love the union is sought for the very sake of the 



LAW 357 

beloved. What is for its own sake is more primary than 
what is for an outside reason. Hence, love is our 
strongest union with God, and this above all is intended 
by the divine law. 

The entire purpose of the lawgiver is that man may 
love God. 

334, 956, 1095, 1123 in Contra Genfes, iu-i6 

II. ETERNAL AND NATURAL LAW 1 

1044. The idea existing in God as the principle of the 
universe and lying behind the governance of things has 
the force of law. Because naught in the divine reason is 
conceived in time, for the plan was set up from eternity 
and of old before the earth was made, 2 therefore is it 
called the eternal law. 

1 60, 239, 956 Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. xci. I 

1 Eternal law is the source and exemplar of all derivative law, 
which may be divided as follows : 

f natural law 5 

\ positive law. 

Natural law descends from the primary precepts to conclusions 
more or less cogent and admitted according to their closeness to 
moral first principles. Some of these conclusions are approximately 
equated with the jus gentium of Roman jurisprudence, though 
their legal condition verges into that of positive law. Positive law 
can be divided according to the person of the legislator into : 

1 divine positive law, e.g. the law of Moses j 
\ human law, which may be subdivided : 

I canon law 5 

I civil law. 

Precepts of the natural law may be backed by positive enactment. 
The supernatural laws of grace respect the above division; their 
mode is predominantly that of the natural laws, though their 
object and purpose surpass the range of the human reason. 
Ecclesiastical law may include civil law dealing with church 
matters. 

2 Prov. viii. 23. 



358 LAW 

1045. Some have believed that all justice is arbitrary 
and not in the nature of things, and have consequently 
judged injustice accordingly. 

Commentary, in Romanos, v, lect. 4 

1046. All plans of inferior government should be 
modelled on the eternal law, since it is the prototype. 
Hence Augustine says that in temporal law there is 
nothing just and lawful save what man has drawn from 
the eternal law. 1 

153, 1096 Summa Theohgica, ia-fiae. xciii. 3 

1047. Since law is a rule and a measure, it can be in 
a person in two ways: either as in the ruler and measurer 
or as in the ruled and measured. All things subject to 
divine providence are ruled and measured by the eternal 
law, and consequently it is clear that somehow they 
share in the eternal law, for under its influence they have 
their propensities to their appropriate activities and 
ends. Among all the rest, rational creatures most superbly 
come under divine providence, by adopting the plan and 
providing for themselves and for others. Thus they 
share in the eternal reason and responsibly pursue their 
proper affairs and purposes. This communication of 
the eternal law to rational creatures is called the natural 
law. The natural light of the reason, by which we 
discern what is right and wrong, is naught else but the 
impression on us of divine light. 

344, 360, 1095 Summa Thcologica, ia-2ae. xci. 2 

1048. Natural right is contained in the eternal law 
primarily, and in the natural judicial faculty of human 
reason secondarily. 

803 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. Ixxi. 6, ad ^. 

1 de Libero Arlltrio^ i. 6. 



LAW 359 

1049. The precepts of the natural law are to the 
practical reason what the first principles of science are 
to the theoretical reason. 

806 Summa Theologica, ia-2ac. xciv. 2 

1050. Natural right is what is fitting and commensurate 
to man's very nature. This may come about in two 
ways. First, without deliberate adjustment, as male 
is adapted to female for generation and parent to child 
for comfort in the very nature of things. 1 Secondly, by 
a judgen^snt of the consequences. Take ownership for 
example: in the abstract there is no reason why a field 
should belong to this man rather than to that man ; but 
if you consider its development and peaceful exploita- 
tion, then a piece of property may well be allocated to 
one rather than to another. To apprehend a thing 
absolutely and apart from its implications is not peculiar 
to man; to some degree it is present in animals as well. 
Taken in this sense, natural right is common to us and 
the other animals. But for the ordinary and rational 
human decencies more factors have to be allowed for. 
To appreciate a situation with an eye to how things will 
work out in practice is proper to the human reason. 
Natural rights may be dictated from a judgement of the 
consequences. The ensuing regulations may not require 
special legislation, for they are established by the evi- 
dence of their reasonableness. 

1013, 1014 Summa Theologies, 2a-zae. Ivii. 3, c. &? ad 3 



III. POSITIVE LAW 

1051. Law is a dictate of the practical reason, whose 
processes are similar to those of the theoretical reason. 
Both proceed from principles to conclusions. In the 

1 Ulpian, Institute*) D. i. i. 2-3. 



360 LAW 

theoretical reason the conclusions of 6he different 
sciences, which are not naturally self-evident but dis- 
covered by effort, are based on first principles. Similarly 
the practical reason proceeds to make concrete the pre- 
cepts of the natural law, which are like general and 
indemonstrable principles. These decisions are called 
human laws, so long as they fulfil the four conditions 
essential to law. 

1037 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae, xci. 3 

1052. All laws derive from the eternal law to he extent 
that they share in right reason. 

6 1, 62, 63 Summa Theologica, la 2ae. xciii. 3 

1053. Note that a regulation may be derived from the 
natural law in two ways, either as a conclusion or as 
a particular application. In the first case the process is 
similar to that of a demonstrative science, in the second 
case to that of art, as when common forms are given 
a particular shape; for example, when an architect 
builds a house in a special style. So some precepts are 
inferred from the natural law as conclusions, thus thou 
shalt not kill comes from thou shalt not harm. But others 
relate to the natural law as determinate embodiments; 
for though it may declare that criminals should be 
punished, the natural law does not settle the character 
of the penalty. 

Both processes are at work in human law. Laws that 
are declared as conclusions have their force from the 
natural law as well as from enactment. But laws that 
are decreed as applied decisions have their force from 
human legislation. 1 

24, 105, 855, 968 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xcv, 2 

1 According to this distinction, the jurist and statesman have 
a field of action that is not a department of moral science. 



LAW 361 

1054. A wrifcen code contains but does not institute 
natural right, where the force comes from nature, not 
from legality. Positive law contains and institutes a 
written code, giving it the weight of authority. 

Summa Theologica^ za-2ac. Ix. 5 

1055. In divine as in human law, some things are com- 
manded because they are good, or forbidden because 
they are evil. Others again are good because they are 
commanded, or evil because forbidden. 

9 Summa Theokgica> 2a-2ae. Ivii. 2, ad 3 

1056. A human act that is faulty and a sinful kind of 
act is wrong under any circumstances whatsoever. 
An act of vice, forbidden by a negative precept, is never 
to be committed by anyone. By contrast, in an act of 
virtue, which is commanded by an affirmative precept, 
many factors have to conspire to make it right, and so 
what falls under an affirmative precept need not be 
complied with persistently and in every case, but only 
when the due conditions of persons, time, place, and 
situation demand its observance. 1 

793 Disputations, dt Correctione Fraterna^ I 

1057. Human law is imposed on a crowd of men most 
of whom are not perfect in virtue. Therefore it does not 
forbid all vices, from which the virtuous keep them- 
selves, but only the graver ones which the majority can 
avoid, and chiefly those that are damaging to others and 
on prevention of which depends social stability. 

Summa Theologica^ la 2ac. xcvi. 2 

1058. Human law cannot forbid all and everything 
that is against virtue: it is enough that it forbids deeds 

1 For example, a man must never be murdering, but is not 
always bound to be keeping holy the sabbath day. 



362 LAW 

against community life ; the remainder it tolerates almost 
as if they were licit, not indeed because they are ap- 
proved, but because they are not punished. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a 2ac. Ixxvii. i, ad i 

1059. Every act of every virtue is not commanded by 
human law, but only those that can be enjoined for the 
sake of the public good. 

1107 Summa Theologica^ ia-2ac. xcvi. 3 

1060. The immediate end of human law is fnen's own 
utility. 

1099 Summa Thcologica, la zac. xcv. 3 

1061. In this life there is no punishment for punish- 
ment's sake. The time of last judgement has not yet 
come. The value of human penalties is medicinal and 
in so far as they promote public security or the cure of 
the criminal. 

485 Summa Thcokgica^ 2a-2ae. Ixviii. i 

1062. Nobody can be excommunicated except for 
grave sin, which is an act. Now usually an act is not 
done by the whole community, but by particular per- 
sons acting for themselves. Therefore persons belonging 
to a community may be excommunicated, but not the 
community itself. Even in those cases when an act is 
performed by a whole group, as for instance when 
several men haul at a boat which nobody by himself is 
able to shift, it is not likely that a whole community can 
so consent in evil but that some dissent. It is not God's 
way, who is judge of all the earth, to slay the righteous 
with the wicked. 1 And so the Church, which should 
model its judgements accordingly, has cautiously 

1 Gen. xviii. 25. 



LAW 363 

enough madi the statute 1 that a whole community 
should not be excommunicated, lest when gathering up 
the tares the wheat also be rooted up with them. 2 

302, 1081 Commentary, IP Sentences, xvur. ii. 3./V 

1063. The practical reason deals with activities in 
singular and contingent situations. Unlike the theo- 
retical reason it does not determine necessary truths. 
Consequently human laws cannot have the unerring 
quality of scientifically demonstrated conclusions. Not 
every rul^need possess final infallibility and certainty; 
as much as is possible in its class is enough. 

29, 965 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. xci. 3, ad 3 

1064. Aristotle remarks that the same precision is not 
to be sought in every topic. 3 In contingent matters that 
certitude suffices which is true in the majority of cases, 
though now and then it may fall short. 

55 Summa Theokgica, ia-2ae. xcvi. r, ad 3 

1065. Human authority can legislate only where it 
can judge. It cannot judge about man's inner motions 
which are hidden, but only about external behaviour 
which is manifest. Nevertheless, the good life requires 
Tightness in both. Therefore human law, which cannot 
adequately encourage or restrain our internal activity, 
needs to be supplemented by a divine law which can. 

Summa Theologica, ia-2ac. xci. 4 

1066. Human laws are proportioned to the common 
good, which is built up from many personalities, 
businesses, and occasions. Law must regard them all. 
Moreover, the well-being of the community is secured 

1 A reference to the ruling of Pope Innocent IV in 1246 that 
the supreme punishment for corporate delict, or so-called collective 
guilt, was henceforth illegal. 

* Matt. xiii. 29. s Ethics, 



364 LAW 

by this manifold activity, not for a short $ me, but over 
a stretch of centuries through a succession of citizens. 
Therefore human law makes general regulations rather 
than particular precepts. 

Summa Theokgtca y ia-2ae. xcvi. i 

IV. EQUITY 

1067. Wisdom differs from mere science in looking at 
things from a greater height. The same holds true in 
practical matters. Sometimes a decision has t# be taken 
that cannot follow the common rules of procedure; 
the situation then has to be appreciated beyond the 
contriving of conventional prudence. Consequently a 
higher judging virtue is called for, that kind of prudence 
called gnome, or the ability of seeing through things. 

' 6$ 794 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. li. 4 

1068. Laws are laid down for human acts dealing with 
singular and contingent matters which can have infinite 
variations. To make a rule to fit every case is impossible. 
Legislators have to attend to what happens in the 
majority of cases and should frame their laws accord- 
ingly. In some cases the observance of these enactments 
would upset the balance of justice and be against the 
common good intended by the law. For example, the 
law commands that deposits should be returned, but 
this, though just in most cases, may sometimes be 
damaging, as when a weapon is returned to a raging 
maniac. To follow the law as it stands would be wrong; 
to leave it aside and follow what is demanded by fairness 
and the common benefit will then be right. To such 
issues is directed the special virtue of epitikcia, which 
we call equity. 1 

Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. cxx. I 
1 Ethics, 1137*31. 



LAW 365 

1069. The h^man mind may flatly declare a general 
truth on matters admitting no exception. But this is not 
possible in contingent matters. Here there is a usual 
standard, but in some cases it is not verified. Human 
deeds, about which laws are passed, belong to this class. 
Now since the law-maker must deal in general terms, 
because of the impossibility of comprehending all 
particular instances, and since his general ruling cannot 
square with every case, he takes what happens in the 
great majority of cases, well aware that his directive 
will fail fn some instances. A zoologist says that the 
human hand has four fingers and a thumb, and yet he 
recognizes that a freak may display fewer or more. 

Commentary, V Ethics, lect. 16 

1070. When the disciples picked ears of corn on the 
sabbath they were excused from breaking the law by 
necessity of hunger. Nor did David transgress the law 
When he took the loaves it was illegal for him to eat. 1 

Summa T/ieofagica, 33. xl. 4, ad 3 

1071. What equity departs from is the letter of the law, 
not from plain justice. Equity should not be contrasted 
with just severity, which is a stickler for the letter of the 
law when that is demanded, not otherwise, for then 
stiffness would be vicious. 

Summa Theohgica, 2a-2ac. cxx. i, 



1072. The judgement that the letter of the law is not 
to be followed in certain given circumstances is not a 
criticism of the law, but an appreciation of a particular 
situation that has cropped dp. 

Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. cxx. i, ad 2 

1 Positive, or disciplinary, laws do not bind when virtue would 
suffer from their observance. 



366 LAW 

1073. In matters of doubt there is room /or legal inter- 
pretation. Yet here it is illegal to depart from the letter 
of the law without consulting the decision of sovereign 
authority in the state. Some issues, however, require 
instant action, not interpretation. 

Summa Theologica^ 2a zae. cxx. i, <z</ 3 

1074. Equity is a kind of justice. A universal nature can 
be predicated of any one of its specific kinds, though the 
field is narrowed. 1 Yet there are two manners of essential 
predication. A general nature may be predicated with 
the same meaning of different types, thus animal of 
horse and bull. Or it may be predicated of different 
realities with a difference of primary and secondary 
sense, thus being of substance and accident. 

Equity is authentic justice, and possesses the charac- 
ter of justice in a more primary sense than does legalistic 
justice. 2 Legal-mindedness should be directed by equity, 
which provides a higher rule for human activity. 

270, 280 Summa Theologica^ 2a-2ae. cxx. 2 

1 Thus the full essential meaning, but not the full extent, of 
animal is contained in horse. 

2 Equity, in other words, is here taken not as a department of 
justice, but as the peak of justice. 



XX 

Community and Society 1 

1075. Solitude is like poverty, an instrument for per- 
fection, not its essence. 

To embark on a solitary life without proper training 
beforehand is very risky. 

963 f Summa Theologicd, 2a 2ae. clxxxviii. 8 

1 Under the influence of the civil lawyers, State sovereignty 
was becoming stylized apart from the people} at the same time 
the canonists and 'Augustinist* theologians were tending to shift 
all allegiance to the ecclesiastical authority. Both secularists and 
clericals are enveloped by the position St. Thomas takes up; 
though he has little to say about the relations of the Sacerdotium 
and Imperium^ and never considers the Church and the State as 
separate and competing organizations. In the conflicts between 
the spiritual and temporal powers, broken shadows are cast from 
the more fundamental debate, between the life of a person know- 
ing no bounds and his regulation by the needs of his group. On one 
side he departs from the traditional doctrine that political sub- 
ordination is an arrangement forced on men because of their 
sinfulness ; together with the naturalism of Aristotle, he recovered 
the political temper of loyalty to the present city; the State is no 
mere conventional makeshift, but a natural fulfilment, the object, 
not just the occasion, of virtue. On the other side he insists on the 
rights of conscience and on the relationship of men as persons to 
God, the universal good transcending the collectivity, without 
intervention from anything less however large. Though nothing 
like a programme is offered, two lines of approach may be sketched 
to the question of the claims of the common good as against any 
private good. Corresponding to the conception of the universe 
after the fashion of an organic whole, the political community is 
taken as a collective group demanding at need the sacrifice of 
parts. Corresponding to the conception of an association after the 
fashion of a partnership, the political society is taken in the suppler 
and more distributive terms of a union of friendship, based on 
possession by knowledge rather than by physical appropriation. 
The former calls for the surrender of private inclination and ia 



368 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

1076. The effects of love should be atown as well 
as felt. 

945 Commentary, ad Romanos, AT//', lect. 2 

1077. Despite the company of angels and blessed souls, 
God would be alone and solitary were there not a 
plurality of persons in the divine nature. Dwelling with 
things of a different nature is no remedy for exile. Not- 
withstanding the plants and beasts in a garden, a man 
can be lonely there. 

196, 198 Summa Theologica, ra. xxi. 3, ad i 

I. POLITICAL SCIENCE 

1078. Aristotle teaches that art imitates nature on these 
grounds, that as origins are related to one another so 
correspondingly are their activities and results. 1 Now 
the origin of works of art is the human mind, the image 
and issue of the divine mind which is the origin of 
natural things. Therefore the processes of art should 
imitate the processes of nature, and works of art the 
works of nature. A pupil who would learn should watch 
how his instructor sets about making something, so that 
in his turn he may work with the same skill. So should 
the human mind be enlightened by the divine mind 
when it sets about making things, so should it study 
natural processes so that it may be in agreement with 
them. Hence Aristotle remarks that if art could make 

swayed by might and coercive law; the latter is already passing 
beyond the precepts to their purpose and enjoying an intercourse 
where gain is unaccompanied by loss. Social and civilized groups 
are mixtures of these two types. Law is reason controlling force 
in order to reach beyond justice, and the political group should 
combine respect for the non-rational conditions of community 
with an attempt to enlarge the field of freedom and agreement. 
1 Physics, I94 a 2i, 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 369 

natural thingt it would act like nature, and conversely, 
if nature could make artificial things it would act like 
art. 1 

Nature, however, does not finish off works of art but 
merely prepares the elements and after a fashion offers 
exemplars for the artist to match. Art for its part, while 
able to appreciate the works of nature, is unable to 
produce them. Concerning natural things the mind is 
contemplative, concerning artificial things it is pro- 
ductive as well. Science is theoretical with the former, 
practical #nd operative with the latter, without, how- 
ever, violating the claims of nature. 

Now natural processes develop from simple to com- 
pound things, so much so that the highly developed 
organism is the completion, integration, and purpose of 
the elements. Such indeed is the case with any whole in 
comparison with its parts. Similarly in building up from 
simple components, the practical reason starts from 
rudimentary and works to rounded-off realities. The 
human reason has at its disposal, not merely the means 
of human life, but also how lives should be lived when 
ruled by reason. Consequently the scientific genetic 
method applies alike when the reason would construct 
a ship from timbers or a house from stone and when it 
would organize a single community from many 
individuals. 

There are different degrees and arrangements in 
community-groups, but the final and most perfect is the 
political fellowship which provides all that is needful 
for civilized life. As men are more important than the 
means they use, so also is the political group superior to 
any other grouping the human reason can know about 
or constitute. 

Four features stand out in Aristotle's political 

1 Ibid. 1 99* 1 2. 
B 628 B b 



370 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

thought; its necessity, workmanship, Dignity, and 
method. First, its necessity. Full human wisdom, in 
other words philosophy, requires that a scientific 
statement should be attempted about anything the 
reason can touch. Now that kind of group called the 
city or State is a topic for reasoned judgement. There- 
fore the integrity of philosophy demands the exposition 
of a political doctrine and the science of citizenship. 

Secondly, its workmanship. Practical science differs 
from theoretical science in that it is meant to work. 
Now political science should be classed among the 
practical sciences because the political community is 
a group which the reason shapes as well as discusses. 
The practical influence of the reason may be exercised 
in two channels; either by productive action passing 
into external material, and this is mainly the affair of 
the mechanical arts such as metal-founding or ship- 
building, or by immanent activity such as counsel- 
ling or choosing, and this is the concern of moral 
science. Political science comes under moral science, 
for it is engaged with the ordered relationship of men 
among themselves, and with the morality of doing rather 
than the mechanics of production. 

Thirdly, we may enlarge on its dignity and standing 
by comparison with the other practical sciences. The 
political community is the sovereign construction of 
the reason; all other groupings are subservient. The 
mechanical arts are busied with utilities subordinate to 
human lives. The higher and nobler the subject-matter, 
the more overriding its interest. So political science 
must needs be the chief and governing practical interest, 
since it is occupied with the most final and complete value 
within the present world. Therefore Aristotle notes that 
politics rounds off the philosophy of human nature. 1 
1 Ethics n8i b i5. 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 371 

Fourthly, |fie method and system of political science. 
Any theoretical science reaches its conclusions about 
the behaviour of wholes by studying their elements and 
principles. The same procedure is followed by political 
science which studies the principles and elements in 
the community in order to explain the reaction of the 
whole group to the various influences at work. More- 
over, because it is a practical science, it shows how each 
part may be developed within the whole. 

612 Commentary, / Politics, lect. i 

1079. Political ideals will vary according to men's 
views on human destiny. Those who are persuaded that 
the purpose of life is pleasure, or power, or honour, will 
reckon that State best arranged in which they can live 
comfortably, or acquire great wealth, or achieve great 
power and lord it over many. Others who think that the 
crowning good of virtue is the purpose of our present 
life will want an arrangement under which men can live 
virtuously and peaceably together. In short, political 
judgement will be settled by the sort of life a man 
expects and proposes to lead by living in community. 

63 Commentary, // Politics, lect. I 

1080. Always remember that political science is 
supreme, not unconditionally, but in relation to the 
other practical sciences which deal with human matters 
and whose purposes are social. For theology, which 
considers the final end of the entire universe, is of 
all sciences the most important. 

28, 33 Commentary, I Ethics, lect. 2 

II. THE NATURAL COMMUNITY 

1081. Man is a social animal, having many wants he 
cannot supply for himself. He is born into a group by 



372 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

nature. By living with others he is helped to the good 
life. And this on two heads. 

First, as regards necessities without which life cannot 
be lived, he is supported by the domestic group. He 
depends on his parents for his birth, feeding, upbring- 
ing. Each member of the family helps the others. 

Secondly, as regards the conveniences without which 
life cannot be lived well, he is helped by the civil group, 
both for material benefit, for the State provides public 
services beyond the means of one household, and for 
moral advantage, thus public authority can chock young 
criminals when paternal warnings go unheeded. 

Bear in mind that family and civil groups are unities, 
not because they are single organisms, but because they 
are composed of different substances arranged in order; 
consequently there is a proper activity for a part of such 
a whole, and this is not a group-activity; a soldier may 
have interests that are no part of army life and discipline. 
Conversely the group as a whole manifests operations 
which are not proper to any of its members, for instance 
the tactical conduct of an army in battle or the general 
handling of a ship. 

For there are other wholes which are closer unities. 
The parts are continuous, compacted together, or com- 
bining to constitute one nature, and the result is one 
thing simply speaking, or one substance. In such cases 
no part is active without the whole being engaged. 
Movements of parts and of wholes involve one another, 
and consequently they should be discussed by one and 
the same science. 

In treating of artificial wholes the same department 
of science does not deal with the whole as well as with 
the parts. On this account moral science is divided into 
three sections: the first is individual and takes the 
activity of one man as directed to his own personal end; 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 373 

the second, ^rmed economic, takes the functional pur- 
pose of the family; and the third, termed political, 
takes the operations of the civilian group. 

533, 1062 Commentary, I Ethics, lect. I 

1082. Well-adjusted home and social relationships are 
indispensable for the proper welfare of each singular 
person. Nevertheless, domestic and political prudence 
do not supply the want of personal prudence. 

965 Commentary, VI Ethics, lect. 7 

1083. To be a social and political animal 1 living in a 
crowd is even more natural to man than to the other 
animals. His inherited needs declare this dependence. 
Nature provides food for other animals, covering, 
weapons of defence, teeth and claws, or at least swift- 
ness of flight. But with man it is different; instead he is 
endowed with his reason by which he can contrive these 
aids. Yet to see to all of them is beyond any one man's 
power; alone he cannot dispatch the business of living. 
Consequently that he should dwell in association with 
many is according to his nature. 

Furthermore, other animals have an inborn ingenuity 
with regard to what is beneficial or harmful; a sheep 
instinctively recognizes that a wolf is a menace, and 
other animals similarly take advantage of medicinal herbs 
and other things needful to life. But man's inbred know- 
ledge about these matters is limited to general principles ; 
he has to take pains to work from them to the provision 
of his needs in each and every case. One solitary man 
cannot discover everything for himself. He must com- 
bine in a team, so that one may help another and differ- 
ent men be reasonably engaged in different jobs, one in 
medicine, another in this, another in that. 

1 Note the addition of social to Aristotle's political. 



374 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

This is made plain by the fact that it/'s peculiar to 
man to use language, through which he can adequately 
disclose his thoughts to another. Other animals may 
express their common emotions to one another, a dog 
by barking and other animals by appropriate signs. But 
man is more communicative, even more so than the 
gregarious animals, such as storks, ants, and bees. With 
this in mind, Solomon says: // is better that two should 
be together than solitary; for they gain by their mutual 
companionship. 1 

626 Opusc. xi, i de Rcgimine Principum ad Regfai Cypri^ I 

1084. The greater the friendship the more permanent 
it should be. The greatest friendship is that between 
man and wife; they are coupled not only by physical 
intercourse, which even among animals conduces to 
a certain sweet friendship, but also for the sharing of 
domestic life. In sign whereof is it declared: a man 
should leave father and mother for the sake of his wife. 2 

961 in Contra Gentes, 123 

1085. Marriage is called true when it achieves its 
proper perfection. The perfection of anything is two- 
fold, primary and secondary. The first consists in a 
thing's form, which constitutes it as a thing of a definite 
kind. The second consists in the activity through which 
in some manner it reaches its end. The form of 
marriage lies in an inseparable union of minds by w r hich 
either is unalterably plighted to serve the other loyally. 
The end of marriage is the begetting and rearing of 
children. 

Summa Theologica, 33. xxix. 2 

1086. Promiscuity is contrary to human nature. 
Intimacy should be reserved to one man with one 

1 Ecclcs. iv. 9. * Gen. ii. 24. 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 375 

particular w<>man, with whom he remains, not briefly, 
but for a long period, or even for good: this is called 
matrimony. 

Summa Theologica, 2a 2ae, cliv. 2 

1087. Friendship demands a certain equality. While 
a child's right to a father rules out one woman having 
many husbands at the same time, it is in the name of 
liberal friendship that one man is not allowed to have 
many wives. The relationship would otherwise be ser- 
vile. This is borne out by experience, for when custom 
allows polygamy wives are treated like servants. 

943 in Contra Gentes, 123 

1088. When we talk about what is right and just we 
suppose commensurateness to another. But another has 
two senses. First, to mean someone who is simply other, 
as being altogether distinct; this appears between two 
independent citizens though both are under the com- 
mon ruler of the State, and here justice may enter in an 
unqualified sense. 1 Secondly, to mean someone who is 
not completely other, for in a sense two people merge 
into one another; thus in human affairs a child belongs 
to his father as being somehow a part of his father 2 and 
a slave belongs to his master as being his instrument and 
not a principal. 3 Since there is no independence in these 
cases unqualified justice does not enter, but a special 
sort of justice, called respectively the paternal and the 
dominative. 

Though wife is joined to husband and is compared to 
his own body, 4 she is, nevertheless, more independent of 
him than child of parents or slave of master. She is taken 
into the living companionship of marriage. The idea of 
justice is stronger between husband and wife than 

1 Ethics, ii34 a 27. 2 Ibid. n6i b 23. 

3 Politics, i253 b 33 4 Ej>h. v. 28, 



376 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

between parents and child, or betweeiy, master and 
slave. 1 All the same the rights involved belong rather to 
domestic fairness than to political justice, because both 
are caught up in the common life of the household. 

Summa Theologica, za-2ae. Ivii. 4 

1089. Aristotle recognized a twofold political justice, 
natural and legal. 2 This corresponds to the division 
between natural and civil rights made by the Roman 
jurists. A complication, however, comes in when the 
term civil is given the same meaning as political. For 
then what Aristotle discusses as a general heading, 
divided into what is natural and what is conventional, 
is restricted by the jurists to one department, for they 
treat civil law as a part of positive law. 3 

It is well to notice that the term political or civil is 
rather differently employed by philosophers and by 
lawyers. Whereas the former go to social usage, and 
take the politically or civilly just as being that which in 
fact the citizens enjoy, whether it be established by 
nature in the mind or instituted by legislation, the 
latter seek its legal titles, and take it as being that which 
the city has enacted for its own government. 4 

Commentary, V Ethics , lect. 12 



III. EDUCATION 

1090. A teacher must not be pictured as pouring his 
knowledge into the learner, as though particles of the 
same knowledge could pass from one subject to another. 

646 Disputations, xi de Veritate, i, ad 6 

1 Ethics, H34 b i5. 2 Ethics, H34 b i9. 

3 Positive, i.e. as contrasted with natural, not with negative* 

4 St. Thomas notes that, when he wrote, jus was the lawyer's 
texm,justum the moralist's. 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 377 

1091. The sajne difference of opinion is acute on three 
connected points, namely on the bringing forth of forms 
into being, on the acquisition of the virtues, and on the 
learning of knowledge. 

Some say that the forms of sensible things come com- 
pletely from outside, that is from a separate substance or 
form: this they call the giver of forms or active intel- 
lect, adding that all lesser factors help merely to prepare 
the material for the reception of a form. According to 
Avicenna, the virtuous habits are not of our own mak- 
ing, though we can remove the obstacles to them; like- 
wise scientific knowledge is caused by an intelligence 
above us, and intelligible forms flow into our mind 
from this universal intellect. 

Others profess the diametrically opposite doctrine 
that forms are innate and do not come from outside, 
though an external cause may well serve to release them. 
They hold that natural forms are latent in matter, and 
that an efficient cause works merely to bring them into 
the open. So also with virtuous habits: these, they say, 
are innate, and the exercise of good deeds is like rubbing 
away the rust covering the shine of the metal. Some also 
teach that the soul possesses the science of everything 
at its creation, and that teaching serves to remind the 
mind to attend to and recall the things it already knows. 
Learning, in their estimation, is naught else but 
remembering. 

Neither opinion, however, is well-founded. The 
first cuts out proximate causes by attributing inferior 
effects exclusively to the first cause. It spoils the fabric 
of the universe spun on the connexion of causes. The 
first cause of its noble goodness makes other things, not 
only to be, but also to be causes. The second opinion is 
similarly unseemly, since an obstacle-removing cause 
amounts to no more than an accidental cause. If lower 



378 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

causes served merely to unveil knowledge they would 
be no better than that. 

Therefore the middle and Aristotelean way is to be 
preferred. Natural forms pre-exist in matter, not 
actually, as the first opinion holds, but potentially. 
From matter they are educed into actuality by an 
extrinsic proximate cause, not by the first cause alone, 
as the second opinion holds. Likewise, virtuous habits 
pre-exist, not as achieved qualities of character, but as 
instinctive propensities. These are the beginnings of 
virtue, brought afterwards to completion &y appro- 
priate activities. It is the same with the acquisition of 
knowledge: the early conceptions of the mind are like 
seeds before they are cultivated. They are known 
directly in the light of the active intellect through mean- 
ings abstracted from sense-objects, whether they be 
simple concepts, such as being, unity, and so forth, or 
whether they be judgements, such as first principles 
knowledge is planted in these seeds of meaning. 
When it is raised from the knowledge of these general 
truths to the actual knowledge of particular truths 
(formerly known potentially and as it were in 
general) then the mind is said to acquire scientific 
knowledge. 

Remark, however, that to natural things pre-exist- 
ence may be credited in two ways: first, in the active 
power of the subject, when the intrinsic principle 
suffices to produce a complete actuality, as when a sick 
man is restored to health by the natural forces within 
him; secondly, in passive potentiality, when intrinsic 
principles alone are not sufficient to bring about the 
result. In the first case the extrinsic cause acts as a help, 
supplying the facilities for the process to issue into act; 
thus a doctor is a midwife to nature, strengthening it 
and applying medicines which nature uses as instru- 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 379 

ments. In th<j second case the extrinsic cause is the 
principal factor. 

Now science pre-exists in the student potentially, 
not purely passively, but actively; otherwise a man 
could not acquire science on his own. As a man may be 
healed in two ways, either by the operation of nature 
alone or by that assisted by medicine, so also there is 
a double way of acquiring knowledge: one, when the 
natural reason by itself arrives at the knowledge of a 
truth hitherto unknown, this is called discovery; the 
other, whin another person furnishes help, this is called 
discipline. 

In processes where there is a mingling of art and 
nature, art operates in the same manner and through 
the same means as nature does. Nature supplies heat to 
warm someone suffering from cold, and so does medical 
art; whence art is said to imitate nature. The procedure 
is copied in the acquisition of scientific knowledge: in 
leading a pupil to discover truths a teacher follows the 
same method that a man would adopt in finding things 
out for himself. The procedure is to apply certain ac- 
cepted general truths to a determinate subject, thence to 
particular conclusions and from them to others. Accord- 
ingly, one person is said to teach another in that he 
expounds his own processes of reasoning by signs, which 
serve as instruments for the natural reasoning of the 
student to arrive at conclusions previously unknown. 
As a doctor is said to cause health in a sick man through 
the operation of nature, so a teacher is said to cause 
science in another through the operation of the learner's 
natural reason. In this sense one man can be another's 
teacher and master. 

If he proposes statements that are not developed 
from self-evident principles, or if he fails to make the 
connexion clear, he does not cause scientific knowledge, 



380 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

but opinion, or perhaps faith. Even so Jiis exposition, 
such as it is, is based on innate principles, for it takes for 
granted that conclusions demonstrated from principles 
can be held with certainty, that contraries are to be 
rejected, while other topics may be left open. 

500, 516, 54.8, Disputations, xi de Veritate, \ 

649, 650, 838 

1092. An argument is not much use when it makes 
many suppositions. 

25 ii Contr^ Gentes, 38 

IV. THE POLITICAL COMMUNITY 

1093. If by nature men are to live together, then the 
group they form must needs be ruled. With many 
individuals each seeking what suits himself, the mass 
would disintegrate were there not one power within it 
caring for the common good. Any organism would dis- 
integrate were there no unifying force working for the 
common good of all the members. Solomon says, Where 
there is no governor, the people shall be scattered, 1 and 
with good warrant, for private and common pull 
different ways. People fall apart by their private 
interests and come together by their common interests. 
Of diverse things there are diverse causes. A ruling 
cause therefore is required, standing apart from interests 
of private gain, to act for the common good of the 
many. 

The purpose proper to a group of freemen is different 
from that of a group of slaves, for a freeman is his own 
master while a slave belongs to another. Therefore, if 
a group of freemen be directed by the ruler to the 
common good, the government will be fair and right, 
worthy of freemen. But if the aim be not the common 

1 Prov. xi. 14. 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 381 

good, but the fc private benefit of the ruler, then the 
government will be unfair and crooked. 1 Woe to shep- 
herds who feed themselves, that is, those who seek their 
own advantage. Should not the sheep be fed by the 
shepherd?* 

There are three types of deviation from fair govern- 
ment, corresponding to the ruling class that is out to 
secure its own private interests. If the government is 
run by one man then he is called a tyrant, a word having 
the sense of unregulated mastery in its derivation, for 
a tyrant bars down by sheer force and does not guide 
in accordance with law; hence in antiquity a man of 
might was called a tyrant. If it is in the hands of a few 
then the regime is called an oligarchy, when several 
men, taking advantage of their wealth, oppress the 
people like a tyrant multiplied. If power is wielded by 
the common masses at the expense of men of property 
then the regime is called a democracy, when the majo- 
rity amounts to a tyrant writ large. 

A fair constitution is similarly graded. When the 
administration is conducted by the whole community, 
and chiefly by those ready to defend the commonwealth, 
the regime is called by the general name of polity. If 
the administration is in the hands of a few but right- 
minded magnates, the regime is called an aristocracy, 
the rule of the best, and these therefore receive the title 
of nobles. If the government is one man's responsibility, 
then he is properly named king. And David my servant 
shall be king over them; and they shall have one shepherd. 3 
Hence it is essential to kingship that one man should 
be sovereign and that he should be a good shepherd, 

1 The argument turns on the difference between a slave, who 
is a utility, and a freeman, who is not a means to anyone's 
advantage. 

a Ezck. xxxiy. a. 3 Ezek. xxxviL 24. 



382 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

seeking the common good of the peojjf.e and not his 
own private profit. 1 

338, 680, 1109 Opusc. xi, i de Regimine Principum^ I 

1094. Two points should be observed concerning the 
healthy constitution of a state or nation. One is that all 
should play a responsible part in the governing: this 
ensures peace, and the arrangement is liked and main- 
tained by all. The other concerns the type of govern- 
ment; on this head the best arrangement for a state or 
government is for one to be placed in command, presid- 
ing by authority over all, while under him are others 
with administrative powers, yet for the rulers to belong 
to all because they are elected by and from all. Such 
is the best polity, well combined from the different 
strains of monarchy, since there is one at the head ; of 
aristocracy, since many are given responsibility; and of 
democracy, since the rulers are chosen from and by the 
people. 

1012- Summa Theohgica, ia-2ae. cv. i 

1095. Lordship may be taken in two senses: either as 
the opposite of slavery and then a lord means somebody 
to whom another is subject as a slave; or by and large 
with reference to subjects of any kind and then any 

1 These three classical types of political constitution, together 
with their three caricatures, are not dwelt on by St. Thomas. So 
long as the government is set on the common good, which of the 
three tolerable types is emphasized will depend on historical 
circumstances. He himself prefers a constitution well blent of all 
three. Elsewhere he notes that the mere numbers of the govern- 
ing class do not settle the type of constitution. An aristocracy is 
not necessarily an oligarchy, still less a plutocracy ; a democracy 
not necessarily the majority rule of a working class unable to 
enjoy leisure, still less the rule of the mob. Though he approves 
of status popularis, the word democracy still keeps the ugly sense 
it had for Plato. Populus, it should be noted, is not plebs, but 
includes all citizens of the commonwealth. 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 383 

man who has the office of ruling and directing freemen 
may be called a lord. In the state of innocence one man 
could have been another's master in the latter sense, but 
not in the former. 

The root of the matter is that a slave differs from 
a freeman because, as Aristotle says, 1 a freeman exists 
for himself, whereas a slave exists for another's sake. A 
slave-owner is one who disposes of other people for his 
own advantage entirely. Since each man desires his 
own proper benefit and feels it a grievous situation 
to abandon to another what belongs to himself, such 
domination inevitably implies hardship for the subject, 
and therefore would not have been present between 
man and man had there been no lapse into sin. 

But a freeman may have a ruler over him when he is 
directed for his own good or for the common good. 
Such dominion would have existed apart from sin, and 
for two reasons. First, because man is instinctively 
a social animal, and even in a state of innocence men 
would have lived sociably together. When many people 
are involved, one man should preside to watch over the 
common good, for many as such exert themselves for 
different things, whereas one keeps a single end in view. 
Hence Aristotle says 2 that when many work with a 
common purpose we always find a unified command at 
the head. Secondly, pre-eminent gifts of intelligence 
and character would be embarrassing unless they were 
serviceable for others, according to St. Peter, as every 
man hath received grace, ministering the same one to 
another? And St. Augustine speaks about the com- 
manders, who are indeed the servants of those they seem 
to command, ruling not in ambition, but as bound 
by careful duty; not in domineering, but in nourishing 

1 Metaphysics, g%2*26. a Politics, 1254*28. 

3 I Pet. iv. 10. 



384 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

pity. Tims hath nature's order prescribe^, and man by 
God was thus created. 1 

1043 Summa Theologica^ la. xcvi. 4 

1096. Obedience is commanded within the limits of 
due observance. The duty develops according to the 
gradation of authorities which have power, not only 
over temporalities, but also spiritually over the con- 
science. St. Paul says, 2 let every soul be subject unto the 
higher powers , for there is no power but of God. There- 
fore a Christian should obey power that is from God, 
but not otherwise. 

Power may not stem from God for two reasons: it 
may be defective either in its origins or in its exercise. 

Concerning the first, the defect may lie either in the 
personal unworthiness of the man or in some flaw in the 
manner of obtaining high position violence, bribery, 
or some other illicit practice. The former is no bar to 
the possession of legitimate authority; and because the 
very form of office is from God, who also causes the 
duty of obedience, it follows that subjects are bound to 
obey such a ruler, though as a man he is a good-for- 
nothing. The latter, however, is a bar, for a man who 
has snatched power by violence is no true superior or 
lord, and whoever has the ability may rightly reject 
him, unless perhaps the power has been subsequently 
legitimized by the consent of subjects or by higher 
authority. 

The abuse of power may take two directions. Either 
the ruler imposes what is contrary to the purpose for 
which authority is instituted, for instance if he dictates 
vices contrary to the virtues authority is supposed to pro- 
mote and sustain. In that event, not merely is a man not 
bound to obey, he is also bound not to obey, following 

1 De Cwit&tc Dti> xix. 14-15. a Rom. xiii. i. 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 385 

the martyrs, who suffered death rather than carry out 
the wicked Decrees of tyrants. Or the ruler may make 
demands where his warrant does not run, for instance 
in exacting tributes to which he has no title, or some- 
thing of the sort. In such cases a subject is not bound to 
obey, neither is he bound not to obey. 1 

538 Commentary, // Sentences, XLIV, ii. 2 

1097. There can be two conditions of peoples. One is 
that of a free people, able to frame laws for itself. Here 
the consent of the people to an observance, manifested 
by custdtn, is of greater force than the authority of the 
prince, who does not possess the power of framing laws 
except in so far as he is the public authority representing 
the people, for though no particular person can enact 
laws the whole people can. The other condition is that 
of a people who do not enjoy the unfettered power of 
making their own laws or of abrogating the laws of 
a higher ruler. Nevertheless, even here prevailing custom 
obtains the force of law so long as it is permitted, and 
therefore approved, by those whose business it is to 
legislate. 

Summa Theologica^ ia-2ae. xcvii. 3, ad 3 

1098. By nature all men are equal in liberty, but not 
in other endowments. One man is not subordinate to 
another as though he were a utility. Therefore, in a 
state of integrity there would have been no overlord 

1 St. Thomas has little to say on the legal title to sovereignty. 
It may be noted however that his sympathies did not seem to lie 
with those lawyers who held that the people had irrevocably 
transferred their powers to the prince. He gives no support to 
the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings. He is clearly opposed 
to political absolutism. Yet his ideal of the constitutional and 
representative monarch, together with his respect for order and 
well-distributed responsibility and property, may be read, too 
easily for the historian, in terms of democratic liberalism. 

B 028 C C 



386 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

ship of domination such as would have abolished the 
liberty of subjects, but only an authority o'f administra- 
tion without prejudice to liberty. 

454 Commentary, II Sentences, XLIV. i. 3, ad i 

1099. Laws are passed to ensure the smooth running of 
the commonwealth. Unrestricted rights are not allowed 
in any civil constitution. Even in a democratic state, 
where the whole people exercise power, rights are not 
absolute but relative, though from the equal liberty of 
all subjects under the law the state may be described as 
predominantly egalitarian. The statutes passed by a 
democracy may be just, not because they reach pure 
and perfect justice, but because they fit the purpose of 
the regime. 

1057 Commentary, V Ethics, lect. ^ 

1 100. There is no unfairness in dealing unequally with 
equal persons apart from what is strictly their due. 

Disputations, in de Potentia, 16, ad 19 

1101. The disregard of the common good is greater 
under an oligarchy than under a democracy, where, after 
all, the welfare of the majority has been attempted. But 
sorriest of all is a tyranny where the advantage of one 
man is sought. As the rule of a king is best, so the rule of 
a tyrant is worst. 

Security is banished and everything is uncertain 
when people are cut off from law and depend on the 
will, I would even say the greed, of another. A tyrant 
oppresses the bodies of his subjects, but, what is more 
damnable, he threatens their spiritual growth, for he is 
set on his own power, not their progress. He is suspi- 
cious of any dignity they may possess that will prejudice 
his own iniquitous domination. A tyrant is more fearful 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 387 

of good mefl than of bad men, for he dreads their 
strange virtue. 

Fearful lest they grow strong and so stout of heart as 
no longer to brook his wicked despotism, but resolve in 
companionship to enjoy the fruits of peace, a tyrant is 
constrained to destroy good men's confidence in one 
another, lest they band together to throw off his yoke. 
Therefore he sows discord among them, and encourages 
dissensions and litigation. He forbids celebrations that 
make for good fellowship, weddings and feastings and 
suchlike* that are wont to promote familiarity and 
mutual loyalty. 

When they are brought up under such a regime of 
fear men inevitably degenerate. They become mean- 
spirited and averse from many and strenuous feats. 

Opusc. xr, i de Regtmine Principum, 3 

1102. The man to be elected should be the best man 
for the task, not necessarily the person with the finest 
character, or the most full of charity. 

viii Quodlibety 6 

1103. It may happen that a manjwho is less devout or 
learned may serve the common good better because of 
his energy or capacity for taking pains or something of 
the sort. 

Summa Theologica, 2a zae. Ixiii. 2 

1104. In fostering the well-being of the whole, which 
is more important than that of a part, a prudent 
governor can well neglect a particular fault affecting 
one section of the community. 

4.59 ui Contra Gentes, 71 

1105. You have asked where your duty lies concerning 
the wealth that may, or may not, have come into your 
possession from the illegal extortions of your officials, 



388 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

This is the plain answer: if it has reached your hands 
then you must restore it to the persons concerned if you 
can, otherwise you must give it to good causes or spend 
it for the common benefit. If it has not reached you, 
even if the people who have been victimized are un- 
known to you, you must compel your officials to make 
equivalent restitution, lest they make a profit from 
injustice. 1 Furthermore, they are to be gravely punished, 
so that others will be deterred from such practices for 
the future: as Solomon says, smite a scorner, and the 
simple will beware? 

Opusc. XHI, de Regtmine Judaeorum ad ducissam Brabantiac* 

1106. Note the various kinds of permission. First, law- 
ful concession, as when the prior allows you to visit 
your parents. Second, dispensation, when he permits 
you to eat flesh-meat. Third, toleration, when the lesser 
of two evils is permitted lest a worse supervene. Fourth, 
indulgence, when something is permitted though the 
contrary is better, as when the Apostle allowed second 
marriage. Fifth, forbearance, as when God permits 
evil so that he may bring forth good. 

Commentary, in Matthaeum, v, lect. 9 



V. THE COMMON GOOD 

1107. The proper effect of law is to make its subjects 
good, either simply speaking or in a relative sense. If the 
law's essential purpose is the true good, namely, the 
common good ruled by divine justice, it will follow 
that those who observe it will be good men. But if the 
purpose is merely the lawmaker's own profit or pleasure 

1 In other worlds, personal justice should govern the conduct 
of a man in office. 
* Prov. xix. 25. 
3 Alix of Burgundy, wife of Henry III, Duke of Brabant. 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 389 

or is repugnant to divine justice, then the effect of the 
enactment v&l not be to make men to be simply good, 
but to be good in a certain kind of way, namely, 
subservient to the regime. Such goodness can be found 
in thoroughly bad men: thus we may refer to a good 
thief, meaning an expert robber. 

777, 1039, 1059 Summa Theologica, la 2ae. xcii. i 

1108. The common good of the state and the singular 
good of the person do not differ merely as many and 
one, for there is a formal difference. 

Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. Iviii. 7, ad 2 

1109. An individual who is governed for the sake of 
the species is not governed because of any inherent 
worth. But human persons come under divine provi- 
dence in their own right, for the activities of rational 
creatures alone are divinely directed for the sake of the 
individual as well as of the species. 

171 in Contra Gentes, 113 

1110. By sinning, a man falls back from the level of 
reason, and to that extent loses the dignity of a human 
person free within and existing in his own right. He 
falls into the slavish condition of the beasts, so that he 
can be disposed of and treated as a utility. Thus the 
scriptures express it: man, when he was in honour, did not 
understand; ht hath been compared to senseless beasts, and 
made like them; 1 and again, the fool shall serve the wise 2 
Hence, though it is intrinsically wicked to kill a man who 
has kept his worth, nevertheless it may be right to put 
a criminal out of the way, as it is to kill an animal. 
Indeed, an evil man is worse than a brute and more 
harmful, as Aristotle says. 3 

4.74 Summa Theologica, 2a-2ae. Ixiv. 2, ad 3 

1 Ps. xlviii. 21. 2 Prov. xi. 29. 

5 Ethics, ii5O"7j Politics, 1253*. 



390 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

1111. A man is not subordinate to the community in 
all that he is and by all that he has; hence it does not 
follow that every act should be recompensed by the 
body politic. But all that a man is and can be must be 
ordered to God, and therefore every act, whether good 
or bad, is meritorious or otherwise in his sight. 

285 Summa Theologica^ la 2ae. xxi. 4, ad 3 

1 1 12. In human affairs there is the common good, the 
well-being of the state or nation; there is also a human 
good which does not lie in the community, but is 
personal to each man in himself; not, however, that it is 
privately profitable to the exclusion of others. 

457 in Contra Gentes, 80 

1113. The common good is more important than 
private good when both are in the same class, but 
there may be a nobler private good of a different kind. 
Thus dedicated virginity is preferred to bodily fruit- 
fulness. 

958 Summa Tncuhgica, 2a 2ae. clii. 4, ad 3 

1114. Holy writ describes the company of the faithful 
sometimes as a household and sometimes as a city, 
between which there is a double difference: members of 
a household have intercourse in private matters and are 
guided by a father; citizens share in public transactions 
and are ruled by the head of the state. 

Commentary, ad EphesioS) //, lect. 6 

1115. Two conditions are implied in a collective term: 
a plurality of subjects and a corporative unity, as when 
we speak of a people. In the first sense, the term trinity 
of persons is like other collective terms, but not in the 
second sense. 

1062 Summa Theokgica, la. xxxi. i, ad 2 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 391 

II 1 6. Wheji the part and the whole are in a certain 
sense identical, the part may to that extent claim what 
belongs to the whole. 

Summa Theohica, 2a-2ae. Ixi. 



1 1 17. You may meet with a thing that is perfect in 
two ways. First, by the perfection of its own being, 
belonging to it according to its proper nature. Since, 
however, the specific being of one tiling is distinct 
from that of another, the more committed a thing is to 
being itself the less it will have of sheer perfection, a 
share or which is displayed in things of quite different 
natures. Indeed, the perfection of any one thing con- 
sidered in isolation is an imperfection, for one thing is 
merely one part of the entire integrity of the universe 
arising from the assembling together of many singular 
perfections. 

But to offset this limitation there is a second mode of 
perfection in creatures, according to which an excel- 
lence proper to one thing may show itself in another. 
This is the glory of a thing that can know, to the extent 
that it knows. For a thing is known inasmuch as it has 
come home to the knower; whence Aristotle says 1 that 
the soul is potentially everything and it is what it is by 
becoming all things. So it is possible for the perfection 
of the whole world to exist in one thing. Such is the 
fullness the soul may achieve. According to philosophers, 
the entire system of the cosmos, complete with all its 
causes, may be delineated in the soul. This, they main- 
tain, is the last end of man. We, however, set it in the 
vision of God, for, as Gregory remarks, for those who 
see him who sees everything, what is there they do 
not see ? 

585 Disputations, n de Veritate^ 2 

1 fa Anima, 429*19, b 3O, 430" ij. 



392 COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 

11 1 8. Among substances the individual merits a special 
name, and so is termed hypostasis, suppos'itum, or first 
substance. Particular individuals have a still more 
special and perfect existence in rational substances who 
are masters of their own activity and act of themselves, 
unlike other things which are acted upon. Therefore 
singular rational substances receive the special name of 
persons. 

437 Sumnta Theologica, la. xxix. I 

1119. Person signifies what is noblest in the jvhole of 
nature. 

Summa Theologica, la. xxix. 2 

1 120. Personality means completeness, not necessarily 
particularity in a common nature. 

Commentary, / Sentences, xxin. i. 2, ad 4 

1121. No possession is joyous without a companion. 

944 Commentary, / ad Corinthios, #, lect. 5 

1 1 22. Beauty establishes the integrity of things in 
themselves, and also their communication in the whole, 
each in its own style, not with uniformity. The higher 
are shared and the lower are ennobled by this inter- 
course. 

220 Opusc. xiv, Exposition, de Divinis Nominibus, iv, lect. 6 

1123. Since all good things lead to eternal felicity as to 
their last end, and this is the special object of charity, it 
follows that charity embraces in itself all human loves, 
those alone excepted that are supported on sin. So that 
love for relations and fellow-citizens and companions 
voyaging together or for anybody, however associated, 
can be from charity and worthy of heaven. 

Disputations, de Caritate, 7 



COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY 393 

1124. Finally, we must show that men can come to the 
kingdom, otherwise in vain would they hope and pray. 
It is possible because of the divine promise: Fear not, 
little flock, said the Lord, for it is your Father's gooa 
pleasure to give you a kingdom. 1 And the divine pleasure 
is well able to do what it disposes. My counsel shall 
stand, and I will do all my pleasure? And again, Who 
hath resisted his will?* 

Opusc. xi, Compendium Theologiae (n), 10 
1 Luke xii. 32. 2 Isa. xlvi. 10. 3 Rom. ix. 



INDEX 



(Numbers refer to quotations) 



abstract terms, 265, 266, 435, 

454 6 3 59 8 710- 
abstraction, 28, 559, 597, 598, 

616, 642, 645, 647, 651, 

652,653. 

three degrees of, 28, 55, 56. 
accidental, 436, 468, 470, 487. 



change, 59. 

difference, 48, 559. 

form, 580. 

whole, 533, 1081. 
accidents, 48, 54. 

action, 113, 134, 344, 401, 

487, 588. 

activity, 289, 356, 578, 579. 
actuality, 122, 239, 390, 432, 

433* 434 579 593> 6 39 

1091. 
affective knowledge, 92, 93, 

94. 

Alexander of Aphrodisias, 91. 
Al Ghazali, 423. 
allegory, 73, 516. 
Amaury de Benes, 191. 
Ambrose, St., 1013, 1014. 
analogical terms, 153, 215, 

270, 279, 436. 
analogy, 73, 151, 153, 172, 

181, 189, 215, 270, 279, 

280, 281, 429, 516, 655, 

697, 1074. 
Anaxagoras, 59, 432. 
angels, 436, 504, 505, 506, 

507, 627, 639. 
animals, 497, 499, 533, 540, 

621, 622, 628, 629, 659, 

682,703,837, 1083. 



annihilation, 407, 408, 409 

410,488. 

Anselm, St., 99, 427. 
Anselmic argument, 99. 
anthropomorphism, 273. 
appearance, 595. 
appetite, 318 sqq., 472, 

668 sqq. 

natural, 213, 318, 670, 
671 5 see natural desire. 

rational, 318, 670, 671, 
683, 684. 

sensitive, 318, 670, 671, 
824, 871, 872, 992, 
996. 

apprehension, simple, 56, 605, 

606, 609. 

aristocracy, 1093, 1094. 
Aristotle, 126, 132, 137, 387, 

436, 462, 520, 532, 533, 

S5 8 559 62 7 6 4 2 > 6 4 8 
650, 729, 760, 852, 878, 
1013, 1014, 1078. 

Aristoteleanism, 558, 826, 
1091. 

art,23, 61,117, 304, 314, 316, 
318, 339, 363, 373, 383, 
455, 565, 611, 784, 838, 
852, 855, 856, 857, 858, 
859, 860, 861, 862, 868, 
876,977,1015,1053,1078, 
1091. 

article in Summa Theologica, 
structure of, 99, 462, 1013, 
1014. 

Augustine, St., 88, 161, 305, 
387, 427, 462, 474, 496, 
515, 516, 650, 662, 730, 



396 



INDEX 



73'* 73 2 > 756, 761, 815, 
1095. 
authority, argument from, 25. 

political and social, 1040, 
1065, 1093, IO 96. 

Averroes, 81, 91, 164, 558. 
Avcrroism, Latin, 81, 558. 
Aviccnna, 155, 423, 432, 435, 

436, 621, 627, 630. 
axioms, 99 ; see principles, first. 

Basil, St., 1013, 1014. 
beauty, 219 sqq., 437, 455, 

628, 629, I 122. 

being, 59, 125,207,323, 376, 

3 8 7i 390 4 4*9> 5 8 9 
821. 

common, 20, 59, 62, 195, 
212, 219, 221, 302, 347, 
387, 396,429. 

subsisting, 175, 204, 207, 
288. 

blasphemy, 379. 

bodies, 170, 312, 418, 428, 

454, 495> 5o 8 59> 5*9- 
body, human, 22, 453, 513, 

53 533 54i, 542, 545, 
565, 630, 760,761,765. 
Boethius, 41, 99, 343, 426, 
729. 

cardinal virtues, 964 sqq. 

causality, 105, in, 114, 115, 
143, 155, 176, 180, 181, 
208, 262, 298, 316, 317, 

3 2 3 340> 3 6l 3 8 7> 4 6 > 

425,427,435,588. 
causes, the four, 1 1 1, 208, 360, 

462, 487, 689. 
certitude, 8, 31, 55, 301,647, 

1063, 1064. 
chance, 165, 325, 336, 456, 

707. 
change, 122 sqq., 487, 647. 



charity, 784, 785, 956 sqq., 

1123. f 

choice, 701. 
Cicero, 826. 
circumstances, 464, 787, 

794 sqq., 879, 1023. 
classification, 33, 184, 253, 

544- 

collective, 725, 1062, 1115. 
common good, 169, 214, 457, 

474, 488, 719, 725, 777, 

958, 1039, 1107, 1108, 

mi, 1112, 1113. 
community, 725, if 75 sqq., 

1083. 

commutative justice, 330. 
companionship, 1077. 
composition, 114, 115, 188, 

191,435. 

logical, 190. 

real, 188,435. 
comprehension, 259, 260, 747. 
concept, 293, 294, 497, 595, 

599, 600, 601, 602, 603. 
conclusions, 24, 690, 1051, 

1053. 
concrete terms, 42, 265, 266, 

450,463,710. 

concupiscence, 732, 948, 956. 
concupiscible appetite, 678, 

819, 870. 

connexion of virtues, 876. 
conscience, 781, 784, 804, 

807, 808, 809, 810, 8zx, 

812, 813. 

consciousness, 165, 291. 
conservation, 404 sqq. 
contemplation, i, 13, 16, 224, 

314, 632, 705, 737, 937, 

1078. 

contingent causes, 326, 689. 
contingents, 19, 147 sqq., 301, 

308, 326, 435, 647, 689, 

690. 



INDEX 



397 



contradictories,^ i, 122, 346, 

347,427, 610. 
contraries, 121, 316,462,492, 

610. 

counsels, 961, 962. 
courage, 828, 870, 873, 874, 

875, 980 sqq. 
creation, 372 sqq., 427. 
creatures, 75, 238, 291, 372, 

374, 376, 377, 378, 379> 

380, 38i,4oS>735. 
crime, 1057, 1058, 1059. 
custom, 98, 1097. 

Damascene, St. John, 99, 164, 

516, 694. 

David of Dinant, 191. 
'dawn knowledge', 4. 
death, 407, 486, 533, 539, 

55 8 > 5 6 4> 57> 57' 57^ 

718. 

deduction, 19, 105. 
definition, 44, 48, 52, 107, 

in, 112, 180, 253, 280, 

450, 605, 606, 844. 
degrees of being, 153, 155, 

189, 207, 273, 327, 396, 

436, 492, 497, 647, 882. 
deliberation, 427, 690, 693, 

694, 700, 703, 851. 
delight, 16,215 sqq., 22O, 252, 

748, 75i>75 2 - 
delightful, the, 215. 
democracy, 1093, 1097 sqq. 
Democritus, 432, 456, 650. 
demonstration, 76, 77, 105, 

414,415,424. 
design, 164, 214, 350, 351, 

353 354- 

desire, 213, 385, 746. 
despair, 940, 941. 
despotism, 680. 
determinism, 340, 363 sqq., 

1029. 



devil, 476, 477, 478. 

dialectics, 36. 

Dionysius, the Pscudo-, 223, 

273, 462, 474, 485, 516, 

788. 
discursus, 297, 298, 313, 

. 324 ' 
disease, 486. 

disinterested knowledge, 6, 

41- 

disputation, 232. 
distinction, 430, 436. 

mental, 40, 290. 

real, 43 1, 440, 449. 
distmctiveness, 432. 
distributive justice, 330. 
diversity of things, 432, 

437 sqq. 
division, 447. 

double truth theory, 81, 427. 
dualism, 475 sqq. 
duration, 41 1, 417, 427. 

education, 33, 1090, 1091, 
1092. 

effects, 107, in, 117, 143. 

efficient cause, 43, in, 113, 
II4Sqq., 143 Sqq., 176,181, 
I 9 I, 211, 234, 323, 340, 

359> 3 6 > 39 4^7> 435, 

462,487,685,721. 
egalitarianism, 327, 454, 455, 

1098, 1099, noo. 
emotion, 542, 677 sqq. 
Empedocles, 59. 
empiricism, 56, 520. 
end, 163, 166, 211, 216, 375, 

682, 703 sqq., 710, 711. 

last, 669, 708, 709, 710, 
711. 

ens rationis, 37, 41. 
epieikeia^ 1068. 
epistemology, 585 sqq., 600. 
equity, 797, 798, 1067 sqq. 



39 8 INDEX 

equivocal cause, 181. 
equivocation, 279, 280. 
error, 35, 604 sqq. 
essence, 99, 158, 175, 187, 

433 sqq., 435> 43 6 > 6 4 

606, 723, 750. 
eternal ideas, 104, 157, 158, 

238, 250, 305. 
eternity, 3, 65, 126, 239 sqq., 

250, 303, 308, 416, 426, 

427,531,665,766. 

of world, 137, 138, 406, 
411 sqq., 422, 426, 427, 
766. 

etymology, 15, 278, 1093? 

'evening knowledge', 4. 

evidence, 24, 29, 99. 

evil, 121, 170, 301, 312, 313, 
328, 341, 428, 458 sqq., 
474, 508, 781, 895, 896, 
1104, 1106. 

causes of, 328, 329, 462, 
487 sqq. 

effects of, 477, 491 sqq. 

moral, 328, 480 sqq., 
883 sqq. 

physical, 480 sqq. 
evolution, 498, 537, 553, 555, 

1091. 

exceptions, 1069. 
exemplar, 104, in, 192. 
existence, 99, 107, 109, 148, 



204, 206, 207, 231, 234, 
235, 266, 269, 288, 397, 
402, 433, 435, 436, 580, 

59 59 1 * 59 2 t 593> 6 4> 
606, 613. 
experience, 645* 

facts, 1 8, 520, 621. 
faculties, 533, 557, 575 sqq., 

621, 695, 696, 831, 835, 

336. 



faith, religious, 75, 76, 80, 

IIO, 381,928 sqq. 
falsity, 46, 605, 610, 6n. 
family, 1081, 1082, 1083, 

1084, 1085, 1086, 1087, 

1088, 1089. 
fate, 343. 
fault, 482, 483. 
fear, 884, 885, 886, 956, 1 101. 
feeling, 319. 
final cause, in, 113, 164, 173, 

176, 211, 220, 340, 360, 

375,462,487,685,721. 
finality, 121, 171, 323, 375, 

384. 
first cause, 1 18, 120, 311, 382, 

390,488,489, 775. 
forgiveness, 907, 908, 909, 

910,911. 
form, 220, 231, 390, 432, 

445 44 6 4 8 3 5 IO 59 1 . 
592, 652, 658, 789, 1085, 
1091. 

accidental, 48, 59, 557. 

intelligible, 293, 294, 559, 
586, 595, 603. 

material, 556, 586. 

pure, 108, 187, 265, 435, 

43 6 - 

substantial, 44, 59, 435, 

556, 557- 

foinial cause, in, 212, 235, 
360, 376,462,487, 721. 

object, 5, 28, 29, 789, 

793- 
freedom, 318, 682, 691, 806, 

886, 1093, 1095, 1097 
freewill, 88, 301, 311, 342, 

454, 692 sqq. 
friendship, 16, 541, 732, 778, 

942 sqq., 1036, 1077, 1084, 

1087. 
future contingents, 308 iqq,, 

34*- 



INDEX 



399 



game, i, 705. 

generalities, 21^99, 302, 655, 

1066. 

genius, 918, 919, 920, 922. 
genus, 315, 396, 429, 436, 

462, 844. 
gnome , 1067. 
God, activity of, 45. 

attributes, entitative, 186 

sqq-, 435- 

operative, 289 sqq. 

existence of, 78, 96 sqq. 

knowledge about, 178 sqq., 
258 sqq* 438, 631,903. 

names of, 264 sqq., 287. 

nature of, 175, 177 sqq., 

43>43 6 448. 

vision of, 199, 254, 258, 
261, 364, 371, 741 sqq. 

goodness, 89, 208 sqq., 215 
sqq., 270, 384, 428, 441, 
462, 468, 477, 492. 

government, 338, 476, 776, 
1093. 

divine, 167, 358, 775. 

human, 1046. 
grace, 80, 85, 486. 
Greek Fathers, 88. 
Gregory, Pope St., 201, 516, 

535 UI7- 
groups, 1081. 
guilt, 484. 

habits, 814, 829, 831 sqq., 

843, 869, 983. 
happiness, 83, 97, 141, 163, 

2i7 3 6 9 370, 37 r 53 
700, 702, 717, 727 sqq., 

73!979- 

divine, 202, 204, 369, 370, 

37 1 - 

human, 83, 574, 582, 690, 

7 I 7745 s qq->767- 
hate, 329. 



hedonism, 721. 
hell, 515, 766. 
Heraclitus, 647. 
heroic virtue, 744, 911, 918 
sqq. 

honour, 223. 

hope, 938, 939, 940, 941, 

1124. 

human act, 703. 
hylomorphism, 112, 436, 451, 

533- 

hypocrisy, 1034. 
hypothesis, 47. 

ideas, 258, 315. 

platonic, 44, 161, 642, 
647, 650. 

ignorance, 341, 813, 814, 

891,892,893. 
images, 151, 559, 631, 632, 

6 33 6 34, 635, 636, 637, 

650, 652. 
imagination, 56, 256, 621, 

634. 
immanence of activity; see 

operation. 

of God, 234, 235, 236, 238. 
immateriality, 586, 641, 66 1, 

670. 
immobility, 125, 128, 129, 

130, 140, 241, 252. 
immortality, 91, 139, 238, 

486, 528, 558, 561 sqq., 

761. 

incidental, 44. 
individual, 22, 307, 447 sqq., 

652, 653, 1043. 
individuation, 435, 436, 447 

qq- 539- 6 5 8 - 
induction, 188, 656. 
infinite series, 143, 144. 
infinity, 144, 230 sqq., 301, 

418,419,420,421,436. 
innate ideas, 627, 649, 650. 



400 



INDEX 



inspiration, 919. 
instantaneous action, 4.27. 
instinct, 621, 622, 798, 1083. 
instrumental cause, 43, 124, 

357. 43 559- 

intellect, 243, 548, 551,665. 
intellectualism, 588, 682, 686, 

692, 697, 722, 724, 731, 

747, 748, 801 sqq., 867, 

1038. 
intellects agens, 560, 627, 643, 

645, 646, 662. 
intellect us possibility 639, 641, 

6 43> 6 44> 662 - 

intelligence, 4.36, 624 sqq., 664. 
intemperance, 755, 1000. 
intention, 165. 
intercourse, 732. 
introspection, 662. 
lonians, 59, 520, 585, 586. 
irascible appetite, 678, 819, 

870. 

joy, 720, 820, 1 121. 
judgement, 39, 56, 109, 190, 

282, 283, 296, 315, 604, 

606, 609. 
justice, 330, 332, 394, 802, 

852, 870, 873, 874, 875, 

880, 942, 1005 sqq., IO2I, 

1045. 

kingship, 1093. 

knowledge, 227, 257, 291, 

292, 293 sqq., 316, 497, 

583 sqq., 670, 673, 731, 



acquired, 56,262,625,650. 

divine, 12, 45, 258, 291, 
293 sqq., 305, 497. 

human, 45, 262, 497, 
624 sqq. 

problem of, 26, 39, 60, 
585 sqq., 604 sqq., 653. 



language, 626, 1083. 
law, 773, 802,^809, 956, 1010, 
1035 sqq. 

eternal, 64, 781, 1044 sqq. 

human, 1010, 1046, 1051 
sqq. 

natural, 1009, 1010, 1014, 
1 044 sqq. 

positive, 1009, 1051 sqq., 
1070, 1071. 

legality, 1071, 1072, 1073, 

1074. 

liberality, 383, 462, 716. 
liberty, political, if>97, 1098, 

1099. 
life, 206, 207, 497, 501 sqq., 

5i9 534- 

likeness, 496. 

literal sense, 70 sqq. 

logic, 33 34 sqq., 295, 600, 
968. 

Logos, 4, 94, 286, 314. 

love, 92, 142, 327, 668 sqq., 
673, 686, 731, 784, 785, 
839, 863, 886, 895, 912, 
913, 914, 915, 916, 950 

sqq.,95 6 9 6l I0 43 I0 7 6 - 

for God, 213, 385, 669, 
778, 784, 886. 

magnitude, 418, 422, 608. 
Maimonides, Moses, 270. 
Manichees, 541. 
marriage, 1084 sqq. 
material cause, in, 340, 346, 

387,444,465,487,650. 
material substance, 436, 454. 
mathematics, 28, 33, 48 sqq., 

69,418,420,421. 
matter, 28, 1 12, 188,231, 301, 

3 8 7> 3 8 9 39* 4^i, 43 2 > 

43 6 443 S'Q* S'i> 5 I2 > 

658. 

primary, 399, 434, 465. 



INDEX 



401 



mean of virtue, 784., 877 sqq., 

963, 1031.% 
meaning, human, 634, 654. 

pure, 19. 

means, 375, 784, 850. 
memory, 627, 630, 649, 650, 
664. 

intellectual, 664. 

sense, 621, 664. 
mercy, 331, 332, 333, 1006. 
metaphor, 69, 70, 256, 274, 

*77 28 7> 59 5*6- 
metaphysics, 28, 33, 55, 302, 

615, (3^6. 
mind, 2 1 7, 224,227,611,685, 

686, 734. 

divine, 61 1, 639. 

human, 160, 639. 
miracle, 43, 363 sqq. 
modesty, 1001. 
monarchy, 1093, 1094. 
money, 712, 713, 714, 1016. 
monism, 156, 429 sqq. 
moral, kinds, 787 sqq., 1056. 

motives, 787, 790, 798, 

799, 79- 

science, 33, 55, 93, 770, 
786, 970, 1078, 

sense, 786,807, 838. 

virtue, 27, 224, 739, 
749, 852, 863 sqq., 964 

sqq. 



myth, 66, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 
509. 

natural cause, 427. 

desire, 99, 100, 254, 568, 



philosophy, 28, 112, 351, 

5i7' 

science, 47, 49, 52, 361, 

517, 595>H7- 

nature, 42, 82, 83, 84, 85, 166, 
838, 1901; see law, 
natural. 

and art, 117,714,861,862, 
1078, 1091. 

-- grace, 744, 777, 928, 

997- 
-- will, 323, 689, 775. 

as inward, 359, 679. 
-- specific, 43, 436, 838. 
naval strategy, 719. 
necessary being, 147 sqq. 

cause, 326. 

necessity, 147 sqq., 214, 310, 
322, 342, 687, 688, 689. 

negation, 38, 233, 271, 460, 
465. 

negative demonstration, 263. 

precepts, 1056. 

terms, 263, 270, 271. 

theology, 177, 263, 267, 
268, 270. 



morality, 462, 463, 480, 739, nominal definition, 107, 180. 
770 sqq., 791, 826, 852, nothingness, 390, 391, 408, 

427, 429, 488. 
number, 194, 195, 196, 197, 



856,857,859. 

mortality, 147, 569. 

motion, 28, 44, 55, 122 sqq,, 



608. 
multiplicity, 195, 196, 197 

198, 199, 386,429,452. 
multitude, 423, 430. 
mutation, 393. 
music, 53, 86. 

B 628 



418,423,447*45^ 57 

obedience, 680, 812, 1096. 
obedicntial potentiality, 744, 

924, 925. 
occasion, 378. 

occasionalism, 359, 360, 442. 
Ockam's razor, 121, 621. 



D d 



402 



INDEX 



old age, 566, 567. 
oligarchy, 1093. 
omnipotence, 346, 427. 
ontologism, 102, 103, 104. 
operation, 289, 356, 483. 

immanent, 289, 356, 1078. 

productive, 289, 356, 1078. 
opposition, 232, 233. 
optimism, 169, 352, 353, 473. 
Origen, 454. 

ownership, 775, 1013, 1014. 

pain, 535, 720. 
pantheism, 191, 192. 
parable, 74. 
Parmenides, 429. 
participation, 115, 155, 156, 

162,175,302,435,645. 
particular providence, 301, 

305. 
particulars, 20, 302, 305, 655, 

690, 891, 967. 
passion, 134, 275, 276, 588, 

8 15 sqq. 

peace, 219, 1017 sqq. 
penalty, 454, 483, 571, 572. 
perfection, 185, 206, 272, 274, 

302. 

creaturely, 274. 

divine, 189, 200 sqq., 270, 
273, 302. 

human, 756, 912 sqq., 956, 
1117. 

life of, 17, 715, 866, 956 
sqq., 961, 1075. 

permission, 1106. 

person, 232, 558, 1043, 1047, 

1108, 1118, ii 19, 1 1 20. 
personal mind, 558, 559. 
Peter Lombard, 403. 
phenomena, 44. 
philosophism, 19, 20, 21, 520. 
philosophy, 68, 511. 
physics, 511. 



physiology, 617, 620, 816, 

817. 

physique, 546 sqq. 
place, 236, 237. 
plants, 497, 586. 
Plato, 44, 69, 132, 1 6 1, 305, 

3 8 7 53 2 > 559> 6 3<> 642* 
647, 648, 649, 650, 652. 

Platonism, 43, 133, 520, 533, 
627, 634. 

play, i, 705, 944, 1003, 1004. 

pleasure, i, 225, 226, 721, 
722, 723, 724, 735, 736, 
753 sqq., 800, /?2i, 823, 
851, 944, 947, 997, 998, 
999. 

Plotinus, 920. 

pluralism, 232, 305, 386, 
429 sqq., 443, 447, 850, 
1109. 

political constitution, 1093, 

IIOI. 

politics, 8, 778, 975, 1078, 
1079. 

polity, 680, 1093, 1094. 

positivism, 56, 627. 

possibility, 32, 149, 303, 347, 
427. 

potentiality, 122, 160, 212, 
303, 409, 427, 432, 433, 
434, 465, 469, 579, 639, 
744, 924,925, 1091. 

poverty, 715, 1014. 

power, 135, 238, 299, 344, 

345 409- 

divine, 299, 344 sqq. 
practical reason, 5, 612, 667, 

1063. 

science, 5 sqq., 314, 1078. 
practice, 5, 737, 867. 
prayer, 1026, 1027, 1028, 

1029. 

precept, 1055, 1056. 
predestination, 342, 691. 



INDEX 



403 



predetermination, 311, 362. 
premotion, 31^, 362, 489, 

490, 805. 
presence of God, 229, 236, 

preternatural, 43, 364, 368. 
pride, 900. 
prima via, 122 sqq. 
principal cause, 43, 559. 
principles, first, 24, 86, 590, 

666, 689, 690, 806, 838, 

1039, 1049, 1091. 
privation, 465, 467. 
probability 77. 
proper cause, in, 116, 117. 
properties, 56, 723. 
proposition, 38, 39. 
providence, 301, 334 sqq., 474, 

1029, 1043. 

proximate cause, 32, 688. 
prudence, 23, 337, 740, 785, 

786, 798, 853, 854, 858, 

867, 868, 965 sqq., 1067, 

1081, 1082. 
psychology, 5 1 7,5 1 8 sqq., 617, 

620, 662, 663, 770. 
psychophysical unity, 532 sqq., 

543,544,545,554,630. 
punishment, 328, 333, 454, 

485, 889, 987, 1000, 1058, 

1060, 1061, 1062, 1105. 
purpose, 162, 171, 354, 355, 

682, 703 sqq. 
Pythagoras, 68, 462, 475. 

quality, 54, 814, 829, 830. 

quantity, 54, 151, 152, 188, 
194, 196, 230, 237, 418, 
419, 420, 421, 436, 447, 

45i, 45 2 , 453, 49 2 494 
608, 1031. 

quarta <via t 151 sqq. 5 see 
analogy, degrees of being, 
participation. 



quinque *viae, 121 sqq., 175. 
quinta via, 164 sqq. 5 see de- 
sign, final cause, teleology. 
quodlibetS) 232. 

ratio particular is, 19, 621, 

658, 659, 680. 
reason, 616, 635, 636, 637, 

638, 652, 666, 701, 804, 

805, 1038. 
higher and lower, 65; see 

practical reason, theoretical 

reason, 
reasoning, 12, 55, 87, 108, 

297,298,639, 645,666. 
reflexive knowledge, 595, 600, 

658. 
relation, 183, 232, 233, 285, 

290, 400. 

relative terms, 183, 270, 285. 
religion, 200, 1023 sqq. 
remote cause, 32. 
responsibility, 775. 
rest, 13, 136, 620. 
restitution, 1015, 1105. 
resurrection, 513, 514, 573, 

730, 763, 764, 765. 
revelation, 89, 90. 
right, 771. 
rights, 330, 332, 394, 395, 

455, 1007, 1008, 1009, 

1010, 1035, 1048, 1050. 

scale of being, 454, 582. 
scepticism, 26. 

science, 18, 23, 27, 65, 105, 
106, 301, 377, 442, 627, 

6 35, 6 47 73 8 > 8 93 I0 7 8 , 
1091. 
sciences, division of, 28 sqq., 

33-. 

scientific method, 77, 936, 
1078, 1092. 



404 



INDEX 



secondary causes, 32, 43, 1 19, 

33 8 > 359, 3 6o > 44 2 > 8o6 , 
1029, 1091. 

secunda *via^ 143 sqq. 
self-consciousness, 102, 103, 

662. 

self-evident, 98, 99. 
self-knowledge, 622 sqq. 
self-love, 778, 900, 901, 902, 

961. 
sensation, 56, 133, 497, 525, 

609, 730, 822. 
senses, 226, 227, 292, 540, 

549 55, 55 1 , 6 7> 617, 
634, 650, 730. 

external, 497, 617 sqq. 

internal, 497, 552, 621, 
659. 

sensible matter, 28, 44, 50, 

5i53- 

objects, 607, 608. 

properties, 54, 607, 608, 
617. 

series, causal, 122, 143, 144, 

145, 162,423,427. 
simplicity, 108, 177, 186, 189, 

199, 205, 266, 284, 370, 

435> 6l 4- 
sin, 328, 348, 378, 427, 472, 

481, 482, 489, 490, 492, 

780, 781, 782, 887 sqq., 

mo. 
singulars, 21, 55, 301, 305, 

307, 438, 598, 658, 659, 

661, 786, 849, 969, 1068. 
slavery, 1087, 1088, 1093, 

1095. 
society, 626, 1075 sqq., 1114, 

1116, 1117. 
Socrates, 891. 



soul, human, 160, 436, 524, 
527, 528. * 

intellective, 527, 533, 650. 

sensitive, 522, 526, 534, 
623. 

single, 498, 533, 534, 

553 sqq., 557, 559- 

vegetative, 521, 534. 
sovereignty, 775, 1040, 1065. 
species, intelligible, 595 sqq. 

logical, 112. 

real, 315, 435, 449, 500, 

653 6 54> II0 9- 
specific difference, 47-6, 462. 
spirit, 57, 91, 368, 427, 428, 

435, 43 6 504, 55> 5 6 > 

57> 524- 
spirituality, 292, 318, 529, 

536, 647. 

State, the, 538, 1075 sqq. 
Stoics, 826, 827, 828. 
subjectivism, 595, 597. 
subordination of causes, 145, 

559- 

of sciences, 62, 86, 174. 
substance, 54, 150, 269, 387, 

435 579* 
substantial form, 44, 387, 398, 

533> 554, 579- 

unity, 533, 554, 559 
succession, 244, 250, 251, 

422, 427. 
Summa Theokgica^ outline of, 

95- 
supernatural, 84, 85, 744, 

918 sqq. 
superstition, 1030, 1031, 

1032, 1033. 
sympathy, 92, 93. 
synderestS) 807. 
synonyms, 282, 283, 



song, 2, 3. 

goul, 243, 432, 5 19 sqq., 534, teleology, 51, 59, 164, 354, 



INDEX 



405 



temperament, 546 sqq. 
temperance, -24, 756, 826, 

870, 873, 874, 875, 988 

sqq. 

tertta via, 147 sqq. 
theology, 32, 75 sqq., 633, 

883, 1079, 1080. 

Christian, 80, 8b, 87, 516. 

natural, 28, 78, 90, 1 10. 
theoretical reason, 5, 667, 

1051. 

science, 5 sqq., 97, 612. 
theory, 5, 737, 855, 867. 
time, 65 f 131, 137, 244 sqq., 

25 28 5> 349 4'2 413, 

422, 531, 626, 664, 665. 
totalitarianism, 725. 
touch, 550, 551, 618, 619. 
traditionalism, 98. 
transcendentals, 196, 210, 

212, 396,465,471. 
truth, 39, 60, 96, 157, 585 

sqq., 604 sqq., 609. 
tyranny, 1093, noi. 

ubiquity, 236. 
understanding, 160. 

act of, 60 1, 604, 666. 

faculty, 666. 

habit of, 23. 

unity, 186, 193, 194, 195, 
429, 447. 

numerical, 195. 

transcendental, 193, 196. 
universal cause, 155, 203, 302, 

37 3 2 5 3 26 > 3 88 > 3 8 9 
402, 403, 477. 

good, 163, 204, 692. 

idea, 307, 315, 598, 626, 
6 47 653, 655, 660, 697, 
698. 



universe, 171, 214, 462, 474, 

477 5 l6 7 2 5734- 
univocal terms, 279, 280. 
useful, 214, 215, 216, 217. 
usury, 1016. 

vainglory, 1002. 

variety, 228, 428. 

via excellentiae et remotionh, 

177, 180, 264, 272, 273, 

274, 440. 
via invention}: et yW/V/V, 4, 24, 

65, 106, 277, 666. 
vice, 493, 883 sqq. 
violence, 679, 689. 
virtue, 27, 494, 839 sqq., 971 

1091. 

heroic, 918 sqq. 

intellectual, 23, 27, 852 
971. 

moral, 852, 971. 
volition, 683 sqq., 706, 778, 

791. 
voluntary, 68 1, 682, 706. 

cause, 427. 



war, 1017. 

wealth, 712, 713, 714, 715, 

1014. 
whole, 577, 777, 1081. 

will, 318 sqq. 673, 689, 693. 

divine, 318 sqq. 

human, 318. 

wisdom, i, 23, 24, 61, 63, 93, 

854, 1067. 

wonder, 66, 930, 931. 
wrong, 771. 



youth, 566, 567, 938. 



6834.2* 



PRINTED IN 
GREAT BRITAIN 

AT THE 

UNIVERSITY PRESS 
OXFORD 

BY 

CHARLES BATEY 
PRINTER 

TO THE 
UNIVERSITY 



