ALT nAban OTE UHR | Vr | Sate Ms 

jii AIHUI T A T | 
| ii i l i ji RIN uia vA 
| H i eh i i ‘i i i: tg i sl i tees 
i fi il | i ih l i (e p jii UR il il si 
| ‘hth i ii! rh | | A Ml he v iif il, 
fe ‘lt i j th hy l a 


ale WE i pli is Ph i Mik 


annm ae —— 
—_— 
—— 
> 
eel ps 
— r oe -< 
— ee - 
- — C -a 
-= = — E 
=A 
—_—, 
— 


| i 


i | | mic 


Se it | | HLA 


al 


i ni l | i i ? ki Í 1 i ik nN 


aiiin pl 


i) i By | i hi 
aM a bl orn | 
g? Ane é T ' i 
| i i mi | N, 4 4 aly 5, a i | 
| IN a i i ay ot it jit Mii phn H M i Pat 
| i | E % i Be end i Mah, 
| os : “i 4 K € , “ | rA 
b f p ve bys i 
ng Pri ier . l ; F i oi , rh | ý; 
| T ‘ d | Me h AN pe 7 rh, i s 
i Ny ‘eee Sib OF T Ki t i hi 
dies oi \ fi, FAS | 
10 x ye i | i l qt li Hy . 
vil i i i, na " y AR pi apn | 
Wie . 
I 
hi) | 


AINTED BY SIR J.RAYNOLDS. ENGRAVED BY W.E.TUCKER. 


Pub* by T Wardle. Philadelphia 1831. 


PRT See CT SO 


td aal 


LAUT 
‘By Sun 


PIMLADELPHIA PUBLISHED BY T WARDLE 


1830 


THE 


HISTORY 


oF 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


OF THE 


ROMAN REPU BLIC. 


EY 


ADAM FERGUSON, LL. D. 


PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH 


Complete in one Volume. 


PHILADELPHIA: 
THOMAS WARDLE; No. 15 MINOR STREET. 


STEREOTYPED BY L. JOHNSON. 


1841. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2014 ‘ an 


https://archive.org/details/historyofprogresOOferg 


TO THE KING. 
SIR, 


Tue history of the Romans, collected from the remains of ancient authors, 
has been often written in the different languages of Europe. But a rela- 
tion worthy of the subject, simple and unambitious of ornament, containing 
in the parts a useful detail, and in the whole a just representation, of the 
military conduct and political experience of that people, appeared to me 
to be still wanting. 

Having earnestly endeavoured to supply this defect, at least in what 
relates to the later times of the Republic, the intention, I hope, joined to 
the importance of the matter, will justify my humble desire to inscribe this 
performance to your Majesty. 

J am, with the most profound respect, 
Sir, Your Majesty’s most faithful Subject, and 
Most obedient humble Servant, 


ADAM FERGUSON. 


EDINBURGH, 
February 1, 1783. 3 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


Tue reader will be pleased to observe, with respect to the geographical 
names used in the following history, that the author has endeavoured to 
conform himself to common practice. This is so various as not to admit of 
any general rule. Rome, Athens, Italy, and Greece, are used for Roma, 
Athene, Italia, et Grecia; but France, Hungary, and Savoy, are not used for 
Gaul, Panonia, or the Allobroges. Cities and races of men have changed 
so much, that we cannot employ modern names in speaking of the ancients, 
except where custom absolutely requires it. But the natural features of 
the earth, as rivers, seas, and mountains, being unchanged, are expressed 
by the modern name, except where they are better known by their ancient 
appellations, as in the Geography of Greece, Asia, and Africa. This mix- 
ture of ancient and modern language may appear exceptionable, especially 
in the Maps; but it is hoped that the general intention, to render the sub- 
ject as clear as possible, will be an excuse for any particular difference of 
opinion in the choice of names. 

4 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK I. 
CHAP. I. 


Tus Subject—Supposed origin of the Roman State 


—Its Government—The King—Senate—People 
— Curie — Centuries —Tribes — Religion —The 
Triumph—Originial Maxims—Progress of the 
State under its Kings—Change to a eerie 
: : i : : AGE 


CHAP. H. 


Form of the Republic—Dissension of Parties—First 


S 


Dictator—Secession of the Plebeians—Tribunes 
of the People—Their Objects—Distribution of 
Corn—Division of Lands—Pretensions of the 
Plebeians—Commission to compile Laws—De- 
cemvirs—Twelve ‘Tables—Intermarriage of 
Ranks—Claiin of the Plebeians to the Consulate 
—Military or Consular ‘Tribunes—Censors— 
ZEdiles—Prefectus Annonex—Fortune of the Re- 
public—Reduction of Veizse—Destruction cf Rome 
by the Gauls—Rebuilding of the City 14 


CHAP. IH. 
cene of foreign War and domestic Dispute opened 


with reviving Rome—Faction or Conspiracy of | ° 


Manlius—Condemnation—Plebeians elected in- 
to the office of Consular Tribunes—Aspire to the 
Consulate—The first Plebeian Consul—Esta- 
blishment of the Prstor—Patrician /Ediles— 
The Plebeians qualified to hold all the offices of 
State—The measure of Roman Magistracy com- 
plete—Review of the Constitution—Its seeming 
Defects—But great Successes—Policy of the State 
respecting foreign or vanquished Nations—For- 
mation of the Legion—Series of Wars—With the 
Samnites—Campanians—The Tarentines—Pyr- 
rhus—Sovereignty of Italy—Different Footing on 
which the inhabitants stood : = 26 


CHAP: IV. 


Limits of Italy—Contiguous Nations—Ligurians— 


Gauls—Greek and Phoenician Colonies of Gaul 
and Spain—Nauons of Ilyricum—Of Greece— 
Achean League—Thebans—Athenians—Asiat- 
ic Nations—Pergamus—Syria—Egy pt—Carthage 
—The Mamertines of Messina—Occasion of the 
first War with Carthage— Losses of the Parties— 
Peace—State of the Romans—Political or civil 
Institutions—Colonies—Musters—Operation on 
the Coin—Increase of the Slaves—Gladiators— 
Different results of the War at Rome and Car- 
thage—Mutiny and invasion of the Mercenaries 
at Carthage—End of this War—Cession of Sar- 
dinia—War with the Illyrians—First Corres- 
pondence of Rome withGreece . . 34 


CITAP. V. 


Progress of the Romans within the Alps—Origin of 


the second Punic War—March of Hannibal into 
Italy—Progress— Action on the Tecinus—On the 
Trebia—On the Lake Thrasymenes—Battle of 


Cannze—Hannibal not supported from Carthage 
—Sequel of the War—In Italy—And Africa— 
Scipio’s operations—Battle of Zama—End of the 
War es 41 


CHAP. VI. 


State of Rome at the Peace with Carthage—Wars 


with the Gauls—With the Macedonians—Battle 
of Cynocephalae—Peace—Freedom to Greece— 
Preludes to the War with Antiochus—Flight of 
Hannibal to that Pince—Antiochus passes into 
Europe—Dispositions made by the Romans— 
Flight of Antiochus to Asia—His defeat at the 
Mountains of Sipulus—Peace and settlement of 
Asia—Course of Roman Affairs at Hoine, &c. 60 


CHAP. VII. 


State of Italy—Character of the Roman policy— 


Death of Scipio and of Ifannibal—indulgence of 
the Romans to the King of Macedonia—Com- 
plaints against Philip—Succession of Perseus, 
and Origin of the War—Action on the Peneus— 
Overtures of Peace—Progress of the War—De- 
feat of Perseus at Pidna, by Paulus A milius— 
His Flight and Captivity—Settlement of Macedo- 
nia and Illyricum—Manners of the Romans 170 


BOOK II 
CHAP. I. 


State, Manners, and Policy of the Times—Repeated 


Complaints from Carthage—Hostile Disposition 
of the Romans—Resolution to reniove Carthage 
from the Coast—Measures taken for this purpose 
—Carthage besieged—Taken and destroyed— 
Revolt of the Macedonians—Their Kingdom re- 
duced to the Form of a Roman Province—Fate 
of the Achman League—Operations in Spain— 
Conduct of Viriathus—State of Numantia— 
Blockade of Numantia—Its Reduction—Revolt 
of the Slaves in Sicily—Legal Establishments 
and Manners of the City qR 


CilAP. TI. 


Extent of the Roman Empire—Political Character 


of its Head—Facility with which it continued to 
advance—Change of Character, political as well 
as moral—Character of the People or Commons— 
Dangerous Humours likely to break out—Ap- 
pearance of Tiberius Gracchus—His Project to 
revive the Law of Licinius—Intercession of the 
Tribune Octavius—The Republic divided—Dis- 
putes in the Comitia—Deposition of the 'I'ribune 
Octavius—Commissioners appointed for the Di- 
vision of Lands—Tibcrius Gracchus sues to be 
re-elected Tribune—His Death—Immediate Con- 
sequences—Proceedings of Carbo—Embassy of 
Scipio—Foreign Affairs—Violence of the Com- 
missioners—Domestic Affairs . , : 90 


3) 


v CONTENTS. 


CHAP. III. 

State of the Italian Allies, and the Views which 
now began to be conceived by them—Appear- 
ance of Caius Gracchus—Resolution to purge the 
City of Aliens—Consulate and factious Motions 
of Fulvius Flaccus—Conspiracy of Frigelle sup- 
pressed—Caius Gracchus returns to Rome—Of- 
fers himself Candidate for the Tribunate—Ad- 
dress of Cornelia—Tribunate and Acts of Caius 
Gracchus—Re-election—Proposal to admit the 
Inhabitants of Italy on the Rolls of Roman Citi- 
zens—Popular Acts of Gracchus and Livius— 
The Senate begin to prevail—Death of Caius 
Gracchus and Fulvius . : : . 100 


CHAP. IV. 

State of Order and Tranquillity which followed the 
Suppression of the late Tumults—Appearance 
of Caius Marius—Foreign Wars—Complaints 
against Jugurtha—Appearance of the Cimbri— 
War with Jugurtha—Campaign and treaty of 
Piso—Jugurtha comes to Rome with a Safe-con- 
duct—Obliged to retire from thence—Campaign 
of Metellus—Of Marius—Jugurtha betrayed by 
Bocchus—His Death, after the Triumph of Ma- 
rius—This General re-elected, in order to com- 
mand against the Cimbri : : 106 


CHAP. V. 

Review of the Circumstances which revived the 
opular Party—Farther Account of Laws and 
egulations under their Administration—State 

of the Empire—Fourth Consulate of Marius— 

Continued Migrations of the barbarous Nations— 

Defeated by Marius at Aque Sextie—By Marius 

and Catulus in Italy . : m 117 


CHAP. VI. 

Character and immoderate ambition of Marius— 
Death of Nonius—Rc-election of the Tribune 
Saturninus—His Sedition and seizing the Capi- 
tol—Death of Saturninus—Reverse in the State 
of Parties—Recal of Metellus—Violent Death of 
the Tribune Furius—Birth of Caius Julius Cesar 
—Lex Cecilia Didia—Blank in the Roman His- 
tory—Sylla offers himself Candidate for the Of- 
fice of Preetor—Edict of the Censors against the 
Latin Rhetoricians—Bullion in the Roman Trea- 
sury—Present of a Group in Golden Figures 
from the King of Mauritania—Acts of Livius 
Drusus—Revolt of the Italian Allies—Policy of 
the Romans in yielding to tlle Necessity of their 
Affairs—The Laws of Plautius 3 ? 120 


CHAP. VII. 

Triumph of Pompeius Strabo—Progress of Sylla— 
War with the King of Pontus—Rise of that King- 
dom—Arpointment of Sylla to Command— Poli- 
cy of the Tribune Sulpicius—Sylla’s Commission 
recalled in Favour of Marius—His March from 
Campania to Rome—Expels Marius and his Fac- 
tion from the City—His operations in Greece— 
Siege of Athens—Battle of Cheronea—Of Orcho- 
menos—T'ransactions at Rome—Policy of Cinna 
—Marius recalled—Cinna flies, and is deprived 
—Recovers the Possession of Rome—Treaty of 
Sylla with Mithridates—He passes into Italy— 
Is opposed by numerous Armies—Various Events 
of the War in Italy—Sylla prevails—His Pro- 
scription, or Massacre—Named Dictator—His 
Policy—Resignation—And Death . . 129 


BOOK III. 


á CHAP. I. 
State of the Commonwealth and Numbers of the 
People—Character of Persons who begau to ap- 


pear in the Times of Sylla—Faction of Lepidus 
—Sertorius harbours the Marian Party in Spain 
—Is attacked by Metellus and Pompey—His 
Death, and final Suppression of the Party—First 
Appearance of C. Julius Cesar—Tribunes begin 
to trespass on the Laws of Sylla—Progress of the 
Empire—Preparations of Mithridates—War with 
the Romans—Irruption into Bithynia—Siege of 
Cyzicus—Raised—Flight of Mithridates—Lucul 
lus carries the War into Pontus—Rout and Dis- 
persion of the Army of Mithridates—His Flight 
into Armenia—Conduct of Lucullus in the Pro- 
vince of Asia : ; : : : 146 


CHAP. II. 


Escape and Revolt of the Gladiators at Capua—. 


Spartacus—Action and Defeat of Lentulus the 
Roman Consul—And of Cassius the Pretor of 
Gaul—Appointment of M. Crassus for this Ser: 
vice—Desiruction of the Gladiators—Triumph 
of Metellus and Pompey—Consulship of Pompey 
and Crassns—Tribunes restored to their former 
Powers—Consulate of Metellus and Hortensius 
—War in Crete— Renewal of the War in Pontus 
and Armenia—Defeat of Tigranes—Negotiation 
with the King of Parthia— Mutiny of the Roman 
Army—Complaints of Piracies committed in 
the Roman Seas—Commission proposed to Pom- 
pey—His Conduct against the Pirates—His Com- 
mission: extended to Pontus—Operations against 
Mithridates—Defeat and Flight of that Princee— 
Operations of Poinpey in Syria—Siege and Re- 


duction of Jerusalem—Death of Mithridates 154 


CHAP. III. 


Growing Corruption of the Roman Officers of State 


—The Love of Consideration changed for Ava- 
rice, Rapacity, and Prodigality—Laws against 
Extortion—Catiline, a Candidate for the Consul- 
ship—Conspiracy with Autronius—Competition 
for the Consulate—Election of Cicero and Anto- 
nius—Condition of the Times—Agrarian Law of 
Rullus—Trial of Rabirins—Cabals of the Tri- 
bunes—Of Catiline—His Flight from the City— 
Discovery of his Accomplices—Their Execu- 
tion o o : o o : : 169 


CHAP. IV. y 


Character of the Times—Philosophy—Opposite Te- 


nets and Vctaries—Proceedings of the Senate— 
Tribunate of Metellus, Nepos, and of Cato—Pro- 
posal to recal Pompey, at the Head of his Army, 
frustrated— His Arrival in Italy—And Tri- 
umph . ; : i : : 178 


CHAP. V. 


Transactions at Rome, and in the Provinces—Julius 


Cæsar appointed in the Quality of Proprætor 
to his first Province in Lusitania—Trial of Clo- 
dius—Proposed Adoption into a Plebeian Fami- 
ly, to qualify Him for the Office of Tribune— 
Cæsar a Candidate for the Consulship—The Tri- 
umvirate of Cæsar, Pompey, and Crassus—Con- 
sulship of Czesar—Motion of Vatinius, to confer 
on Cesar, for five Years, the Command in Gaul 
Marriage of Pompey to Julia—Of Cesar to Cal- 
purnia—Plot of Vettius—Consulate of Lucius 
Calpurnius and A. Gibinius—Attack made upon 
Cicero—His exile -. , : : 185 


CHAP. VI. 


Cesar takes Possession of his Province—Migration 


of the Helvetii—Their Defeat—War with Ario- 
vistus—Return of Cesar, for the Winter, into Italy 
—Great Concourse of Citizens to his Quarters— 
Motion to recal Cicero—Disorders that followed 
upon it--Consultations of Pompey and Cesar— 
Augmentation of the Army in Gaul—Second 


CONTENTS. vii 


Campaign of Cesar—Operations on the Aisne— 
On the Meuse and Sambre—Battle with the 
Nervii—Successful Attempt for the restoration 
of Cicero—Controversy relating to his House— 
Repeated Riots of Clodius—Trial of Milo 198 


CHAP. VIL. 

Return of Cato from Cyprus—His Repulse at the 
Election of Pretors—Arrival of Ptolemy Auletes 
at Rome—Visit of Pompey and Crassus to Ce- 
sar’s Quarters at Lucca—Renewal of their As- 
sociation—Military Operations in Ceesar’s Pro- 
vince—Violent Election of Crassus and Pompey 
—Provinces—Of Crassus in Syria—Of Pompey 
in Spain for five years—Crassus departs for Sy- 
ria. . . e 4 = . - 209 


oe 


BOOK IV. 


CHAP. I. 

State of the Commonwealth—Administration of the 
Provinces—Operations of Cesar in Gaul, Ger- 
many, and Britain—State of Pompey at Rome— 
Progress of Crassus into Syria—Kingdom of Par- 
thia—Invasion of Crassus beyond the Euphrates 
—Second invasion of Cesar in Britain . 216 


CHAP. II. 
Death of Julia, the Daughter of Cesar, and Wife 
of Pompey—Trial of Gabinius—Detection of an 
infamous Transaction of Memmius and Aheno- 
barbus—Revolt of the low countries—Military 
Execution against the Inhabitants of the Country 
between ‘ne Rhine and the Meuse—Operations 
of Crassus in Mesopotamia—His Death—Com- 
etition for the Consulate—Death of Clodius— 
iot in the City—Pompey sole Consul—Trial of 
Milo ye : ; z 5 , 224 


CHAP. III. 
Character of Pompey in Capacity of sole Consul— 
Privilege of Cæsar to be admitted as Candidate 
for the Office of Consul, without resigning his 
Province—General Revolt of the Gauls—Opera- 
tions in that Country—Blockade and Reduction 
of Alesia—Distribution of Cæsar’s Army in Gaul 
2 : o : ee tO 


CHAP. IV. 

Cesar remains in Ganl—Pompey assumes Piso into 
the Office of Consul—Succession of Servius Sul- 
picius and M. Claudius Marcellus—Arrange- 
ment for the Provinces—Motion to recal Cæsar 
—Continued Debates in the Senate—Operations 
of Cæsar in Gaul—Intrignes in the City—Affairs 
in the other Provinces—Caimpaign of Cicero— 
Succession of Consuls—State of Parties in the 
City and in the Senate—Arrival of Cæsar in Italy 
in the Spring—Return to Gaul—Parts with two 
Legions to Pompey and the Senate—Alarm of 
Cesar’s March—The Consul Marcellus commits 
his sword to Pompey . : : 244 


CIIAP. V. 
Return of different Officers from their Provinces— 
Decree of the Senate to supersede Cæsar—For- 
bidden by the 'Tribunes—Commission to the 
Consuls and to Pompey—Their Resolutions— 
Flight of the Tribunes Antony and Quintus Cas- 
sius—Speech of Cæsar to the Legion at Ravenna 
—Surprise of Arminum—March of Cæsar—Flight 
of Pompey and the Senate, &c.—Apprvach of 
Casar—Embarkation and Departure of Pompey 
from Brundusium—Return ef Cesar to Rome— 
Passes by Marseilles into Spain—Campaign on 
the Segra—Legions of Pompey in Spain con- 
ducted tothe Var . . T E] 


CHAP. VI. 


pe Sire of Marseilles continued—Its surrender 


æsar named Dictator—Return to Rome—Mn- 
tiny at Placentia—Cesar, with Servilius Isauri- 
cus, Consuls—Forces and Disposition of Pompey 
—Departure of Cesar to Brundusium--Transporis 
the first Division of his Army to Acroceraunus— 
Message to Pompey, and their several Operations 
—The Lines of Dyrrachium—Cesar baffled in 
his attempt to invest Pompey—Action and De- 
feat of Cæsar—His retreat—March of both Ar- 
mies in Thessaly—Battle of Pharsalia . 273 


CHAP. VII. 


Comparative Loss on the different Sides in the late 


Action—Pompey’s Flight—His Death—Arrival 
of Cesar at Alexandria—Cato, with the Fleet 
and Remains of the Army from Pharsalia, steers 
for Africa—State of Italy, and of the Republican 
Party—Adventures of Cesar in Egypt—Victory 
over Pharnaces—Arrival in Italy—Mutiny of 
the Legions—Cesar passed into Africa—His 
Operations, and Action with the Horse and Ir- 
regulars of the Enemy—Post at Ruspina—Siege 
of Uzita—Battle of Thapsus—Death of Cato 259 


BOOK V. 
CHAP. I. 


Arrival of Cesar at Utica—Wreck of the Repub- 


lican Party—Servility of the Roman People— 
Magnificence and Administration of Casar—His 
last Campaign in Spain—Death of the elder of 
Pompey’s Sons—Cesar’s Return, Triumphs, Ho- 
nour, and Policy in the State—Spirit of the 
Times—Source of the Conspiracy against Cesar 
—Its Progress—Death of Cæsar - 309 


CHAP. IT. 


General Consternation on the Death of Cw#esar— 


Tumultuary Assembly of the People—Declara- 
tions of Cinna and Dolabella—Appearance of 
Brutus and Cassius in the Forum—Their Retum 
to the Capitol—Meeting and Debate in the Se- 
nate—Act of Oblivion—Speech of Brutus to the 
People—Funeral of Casar—Insurrection of the 
People—Policy of Antony—A ppearance of Oc- 
tavius—His Difference with Antony—Both have 
Recourse to Arms—Aspect of Things—Antony 
proceeds to expe! Decimus Brutus from the Cis- 
alpine Gaul ž . : : : -, 32A 


CHAP. II. 


Situation and Address of Octavius—Meeting of the 


Senate—Progress of Antony—His March into 
Gaul—Message of Octavius to Decimus Brutus— 
New Consuls Hirtins and Pansa—Meeting of the 
Senate—Deputation to Antony—His Answer— 
Declared an Enemy—Advance of Hirtius and 
Octavius to raise the siege of Mutina—Brutus 
and Cassius confirmed in the Command of all 
the Eastern Provinces—Progress of the War in 
Gaul—Siege of Mutina raised—Junction of Anto- 
ny and Lepidus—Consulate of Octavius - 340 


CHAP. IV. 


Proceedings of the new Consul—State of the East- 


ern Provinces—Interview of Octavius, Antony, 
and Lepidus, with their Coaliticn—The Proscrip- 
tion or Massacre—Death of Cicero—Sequel of 
the Massacre—Succession of Consuls—Severe 
Lxaction of Taxes—State of Sextus Pompeius— 
Movements of Antony and Octavius—Both bend 
their Course to the East—Posture and Operations 
of Brutus and Cassius—Their arrival and Pro- 
gress in Europe—Campaign at Philippi—Firsf 


Vili’ 


Action and Death of Cassius—Second Action 
and Death of Brutus ‘ A 4 é 353 


CHAP. V. 

Immediate Consequences of the Event at Philippi 

—New Partition of the Empire made by Octavius 

' and Antony—Their Separation—Progress of Oc- 
tavius at Rome—His friends Mæcenas and Agrip- 

. pa—Alarm and Distress in Italy on the Dispos- 
session of the Inhabitants to make way for the 
Troops—Jealousy of Fulvia and Lucius Antonius 
—Blockade aud Reduction of Perusia—Progress 
of Antony in Asia—His stay at Alexandria—Re- 
turn to Italy—Accommodation with Sextus Pom- 
peius—Return of Octavius and Antony to Rome 
—Their policy T o -y a 


CHAP. VI. 

Alarm of the Parthian Invasion of Syria—Arrange- 
ments of Octavius and Antony—Departure of the 
latter, and Residence at Athens—State of the 
Commonwealth—Marriage of Octavius with Li- 
via—War with Sextus Pompeius—Actions near 
the straits of Messina—Agrippa succeeds to the 
Command of Octavius’s Fleet—His victory at 
Sea—F light of Sextus Pompeius—Breach be- 
tween Octavius and Lepidus oon 


CHAP. VII. 
weeen of Octavius after the Acquisition of Sicily, 
nid ile Junction of the Armies of Sextus Pom- 
pei aid Lepidus—Mutiny and Separation of 
these Forces—Arrival of Octavius at Rome— 
His Keform of the Army—Expedition of Antony 
agnuiust the Parthians—His Retreat—The Death 
of Sextus Pompeius—Open Breach between Oc- 
tavius and Antony—Progress of Antony and 
Cleopatra towards Greece—Operations of Antony 
and Octavius on the Gulph of Ambracia—Battle 
of Actium—Flight of Antony—Immediate Ar- 
rangements of Octavius after his Victory—Death 
of Antony—And of Cleopatra - « 387 


BOOK VI. 


CHAP. I. 

‘he Merit or Demerit of Parties in the later Period 
of the Roman Republic—Return of Octavius to 
Rome—His Triumphs and public Entertainments 
—Reform of the Army—Proposition to resign his 
Power—Consultation of Agrippa and Msecenas— 
Preludes to the pretended Resignation of Octa- 
vius—His Speech in the Senate—His Consent to 


CONTENTS. 


retain a Part in the Government of the Empire. . 
Distribution of the Provinces—Title of Augustus 
—The Establishment of Augustus e , 404 


CHAP. II. 


State of the Emperor—Condition of the Empire— 


Amount of the Revenue unknown—Mulitary 
Establishments, &c. : $ A 6 417 


CHAP. TI. 


The Family and Court of Augustus—His pretended 


Resignation of the Empire renewed—The Exer- 
cise of his Power becomes less disguised—Death 
of Agrippa z ` > : o - 422 


CHAP. IV. 


Marriage of Julia with 'Tiberius—Death of Drusus 


—Death of Mecenas—Disgrace of Julia—War 
in Panonia—Roman Legions cut off in Germany 
—Tiberius associated in the Empire—Death of 
Augustus . o o : o ; - 434 


CHAP. V. 


The Will of Augustus—Review of his Reign—And 


of his Character—Tiberius returns to Nola— 
Without Delay, issues his Orders throughout the 
Empire—But in the Senate affects Reluctance 
to charge himself with the Government—Mutiny 
in Panonia—On the Rhine—Second Mutiny on 
the Arrival of Deputies from the Senate—Impos- 
ture of Clemens—Plot of Libo—Description of 
Tiberius—Death of Germanicus, and Trial of 
Piso o 6 o ee « aa 


CHAP. VI. 


Review of the first Period in the reign of Tiberius 


—Applications of Penal Law—Disposition of Ti 
bertus to a recluse Life—Place and Character of 
Sejanus—Death of Drusus, Son of the Emperor— 
Retirement of Tiberius to the Island of Capree— 
Jealousy of the Emperor against Agrippina and 
her Children—Death of Livia Augusta—Design 
formed against Sejanus—His Death—Prosecution 
of his supposed Accomplices—Artifices, old Age, 
and Death of Tiberius . . . . 460 


CHAP. VII. 


Succession of Caius to the Empire—The first Ap 


pearances of his Reign—Conclusion of the His- 
tory—Observations on the Sequel—Accession of 
the Flavian Family—Vicissitudes of Character 
in the Emperors—Sources of Degradation in the 
Imperial Establishment—Preservatives of the 
Empire—Its real and continual though almost 
insensible Decline > - + >œ 475 


peose 


: d ee vce . >y (ao eRe 
s ahh LC Ag 


=~ Erhibiling is 


COASTS & IN TERNAL DIVISIONS 


———— 


25> 7 ere 


pa Station 


ot RUN the f Iringipal 


wy on 4 Milita: 


i] ' J a 


(3 


rT 


under 


AVG rr 


: ER MANLI 


Military Station 


a Milita Station) = a 
-m MIESE r 
|. 5 


<== 
ro ac Ek 


Brindusiuur = 


soy ODL POTIS 


Colani s 


such as he counuunitted tothe Senate. Tesuch as were 


by Claudius ovr Trajan. 6% Dependant Kingdoms 
| mM! SPAIN Chad an 
i) ee a COELESYRLE JF RICA 
| } LUN LINI PILENICLI NU MIDLI 
25 CARTILIGENENSLS CHACHA ASE 
| | BIRI CONENNIN CYPRUS GhRECH! 
| GAUL ECYPTUS DILMATEI 
| NIRBONENNIN MICEDONLI 
l LUCDUNENSNIN SICILI 
AYUTCINLI CRETA 
} CELTICA LYLLI 
| | | A. Ingu stus atterwants transtemed (vprus to the Senate & eavhanged the 


jiw 2P are those which Augustus reserved to liuselt. 3 A bhs 


papylor ~ 


PALESTINE 
SOR JUDE. \ 


CHS 


added to the Je — = 
and Principalitres. 


LYRIA 
__ GYRE VATCA 
Ey 


Ay a 


ph 
CYREN UC! BRITANNIA 


1” 


BYTHYNLAI ddded mider the 
PONTUS auspices ot Claudius 
SARDINI ILICI ARUIREIL 
METI MESOPOTAMIEI COMMAGENE | a 
aud CUIPLADOCH A | 
ITY LON 


by Trajan 


Gallia Vurbouen sis tor Dalmatia. 


3B 
ppe anao 


to 


eee ns ee NP 


CO 


Philadelphia Pablished bv T Wardle 1830. 


| 


RABYLONUA | 


30 


THE 


HISTORY 


OF 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


b 


OF 


THE 


ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


BOOK I. 


CHAPTER I. 


The Subject—Supposed Origin of the Roman State—Its Government—The King—Senate— 
The People—Curie—Centuries— Tribes—Religion— The Triumph—Original Maxims— 
Progress of the State under its Kings—Change to a Republic. 


THE Roman State was originally a small prin- 
cipality, and one of the many little cantons, which, 
under the denomination of Latins, occupied the 
left of the Tiber, from its confluence with the Anio 
to the sea, and from Ostia to Circeii on the coast. 
Within this narrow tract, reaching in breadth in- 
land no more than sixteen miles, and extending 
on the coast about fifty miles, the Latins are said 
to have formed no less than forty-seven indepen- 
dent states ;! each of whom had a separate capital 
or strong hold, to which they occasionally retired 
for safety, with their cattle and other effects, and 
from which they made frequent wars on each 
other.2 The country, divided into so many sepa- 
rate territories, we may consider as resembling 
some of the lately discovered islands in the South- 
ern or Pacific Ocean,3 where every height is re- 
presented as a fortress, and every little township, 
that can maintain its possessions, as a separate 
state. Among settlements of this description, 
the Romans, though they were originally no way 
distinguished in point of possessions or numbers, 
yet, in consequence of some superiority of insti- 
~~ or character, came to lave a decided ascen- 

ant. - 
Beyond the Tiber on the one hand, and the Li- 
ris on the other, the contiguous parts of Italy were 
possessed, in the same manner with Latium, by 
different races of men, who, under various deno- 


1 Dionys. Halicar. lib. iv. 2 Liv. lib. i. c. 5. &c. 
3 See Cook’s Voyage to New Zealand. 


B 


minations of Etrurians, Samnites, Campanians, 
and others, formed a multiplicity of little nations, 
united by leagues for common safety, and ranged 
under opposite interests, with a view to some ba- 
lance of power which they endeavoured to main- 
tain. The peninsula towards one extremity,4 was 
from time immemorial peopled with Grecian co- 
lonies. ‘Towards the other, it was, in the first 
ages of the Roman state, overrun by nations of 
aulish extraction.$ 

The land throughout, in respect to situation, 
climate, and soil, was highly favoured, diversified 
with mountain and plain, well wooded and wa- 
tered, replenished with useful materials, fit to yield 
pasture for numerous herds, and to produce abun- 
dance of corn, wine, and oil. And, what is still 
of more importance, was already become the flou- 
rishing nursery of ingenious men, ardent and 
vigorous in their pursuits, though, in respect to 
many arts and inventions, yet in a state of great 
simplicity or ignorance. 

The Romans, who made their first step to do 
minion by becoming heads of the Latin confede- 
racy, continued their progress to the sovereignty 
of Italy; or, after many struggles with nations 
possessed of resources similar to their own, united 
the forces of that country under their own direc- 
tion, became the conquerors of many kingdoms 
in Asia and Africa, as well as in Europe; and 
formed an empire, if not the most extensive, at 


4 Magna Grecia 5 Gallia Cisalpina. 


10 


least the most splendid of any that is known in 
the history of mankind. In possession of this 
seeming advantage, however, they were unable to 
preserve their own institutions; they became, to- 
gether with the conquests they had made, a prey 
to military government, and a signal example of 
the vicissitudes to which prosperous nations are 
exposed. 

This mighty state, remarkable for the smallness 
of its origin, as well as for the greatness to which 
it attained, has, by the splendour of its national 
exertions, by the extent of its dominion, by the 
wisdom of its councils, or by its internal revolu- 
tions and reverses of fortune, ever been a princi- 
pal object of history to all the more enlightened 
nations of the western world. To know it well, 
is to know mankind; and to have seen our species 
under the fairest aspect of great ability, integrity, 
and courage. There is a merit in attempting to 
promote the study of this subject, even if the ef- 
fect should not correspond with the design. 

Under this impression the following narrative 
was undertaken, and chiefly with a view to the 
great revolution by which the republican form of 
government was exchanged for despotism; aud by 
which the Roman people, from being joint sove- 
reigns of a great empire, became, together with 
their own provinces, the subjects, and often the 
prey, of a tyranny which was equally cruel to 
both. 

As in this revolution men of the greatest abili- 
tics, possessed of every art, and farnished with the 
most ample resources, were acting in concert to- 
paa or in opposition to each other, the scene is 
ikely to exhibit what may be thought the utmost 
range or extent of the human powers; and to 
furnish those who are engaged in transactions 
any way similar, with models by which they may 
profit, and from which they may form sound 
principles of conduct, derived from experience, 
and confirmed by examples of the highest au- 
thority. 

The event which makes the principal object of 
this history, has been sometimes considered as a 
rere of separation between two periods, which 

ave been accordingly treated apart—the period 
of the republic, and that of the monarchy. During 
a considerable part of the first period, the Romans 
were highly distinguished by their genius, mag- 
nanimity, and national spirit, and made suitable 
attainments in what are the ordinary objects of 
pursuit—wealth and dominion. In the second 
period, they continued for some time to profit by 
the attainments which were made in the former, 
and while they walked in the tract of the com- 
monwealth, or practised the arts and retained the 
lessons which former ages had taught, still kept 
their possessions. But after the springs of poli- 
tical life, which were wound up in the republic, 
had some time ceased to act; when the state was 
become the concern of a single person, and the 
vestige of former movements were effaced, the 
national character declined, and the power of a 
great empire became unable to preserve what a 
small republic had acquired. ‘The example, 
whether to be shunned or imitated, is certainly 
instructive in either period; but most so in the 
transition that was made from one to the other; 
and in the forfeiture of those public advantages, 
of which the Roman peanle, in some part of their 
course, availed themselves with so much distinc- 
tion, and which, im the sequel, they abused with 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor I. 


so much disorder at home, and oppression of their 
subjects abroad. 

With this object before me, I hasten to enter on 
the scenes in which it begins to appear; and shall 
not dwell upon the history of the first ages of 
Rome; nor stop to collect particulars relating to 
the origin and progress of the commonwealth, 
longer than is necessary to aid the reader in re- 
collecting the circumstances which formed the 
conjuncture in which this interesting change be- 
gan to take place. 

For this purpose, indeed, a general description 
of the state and its territory, such as they were in 
the beginning of this transaction, might have been 
sufficient; but as it is difficult to fix the precise 
point at which causes begin to operate, or at which 
effects are complete, I have ra la myself in 
looking back to the origin of this famous repub- 
lic, whether real or fabulous, and shall leave the 
reader to determine, at what time he will suppose 
the period of authentic history to begin, or at 
what time he will suppose the causes of this re- 
volution to operate, and to produce their effects. 

As it is impossible to give, in mere description, 
a satisfactory account of a subject which is in its 
nature progressive and fluctuating, or to explain 
political establishments without some reference to 
the occasions whence they arose, I have, upon 
these accounts, endeavoured to give, even to the 
first part of my labours, the form of narration ; 
and, together with the progress of political insti- 
tutions in the state, remarked its territorial acqui- 
sitions and conquests, in the order in which they 
were made. In proportion as the principal object 
of the history presents itself, I shall wish, as far 
as my talents and the materials before me allow, 
to fill up the narration, and give to every scene of 
the transaction its complete detail. "When this is 
done, and the catastrophe is passed, I shall wish 
again to contract my narration; and as I open 
with a summary account of what preceded my 
period, close with a similar view of its sequel. 

The Romans are said to have made their settle- 
ment in the end of the sixth, or beginning of the 
seventh Olympiad,! about two hundred years be- 
fore the accession of Cyrus to the throne of Per- 
sia, seven hundred years before the Christian era, 
and long before the date of any authentic profane 
history whatever. The detail of their story is mi- 
nute and circumstantial; but on this account is 
the more to be suspected of fiction : and in many 
parts, besides that of the fable, with which it is 
confessedly mixed, may, without any blameable 
scepticism, be rejected as the conjecture of inge- 
nious men, or the embellishments of a mere tradi- 
tion, which partakes in the uncertainty of all 
other profane history of the same times, and la- 
bours under the obscurity which hangs over the 
origin of all other nations.? 

hat the Roman state was originally a small 
one, and came by degrees to its greatness, cannot 
be doubted. So much we may safely admit on the 
faith of tradition, or in this instance infer, from 
the continuation and recent marks of a progress 
which the people were still making, after they be- 
came an object of observation to other nations,? 
and after they began to keep records of their 
own: that they had been an assemblage of herds- 
men ald warriors, ignorant of letters, of money, 
and of commercial arts, inured to depredation 


— I Dionys. Hal. lib. i. @ Liv. lib. vi 
3 Dieuys. Hal. hb. i. 


Cuar. L] 


and violence, and subsisting chiefly by the produce 
of their herds, and the spoils of their enemies, may 
bc safely admitted; because we find them, in the 
most authentic parts of their history, supplying 
these defects, and coming forward in the same 
direction, and consequently proceeding from the 
same origin, with other rude nations; being, in 
reality, a horde of ignorant barbarians, though 
likely to become an accomplished nation. 

In the first accounts of their settlement, it is 
said that they mustercd three thousand men on 
foot and three hundred on horseback.’ Their es- 
tablishment being effected by surprise or by force, 
and their people consisting of armed men who 
had every acquisition to make at the expense of 
their neighbours, they were naturally in a state 
of war with the country around them. They 
took post on the Palatium, a small height on the 
Tiber, which, according to former traditions, had 
been previously occupied by five different races of 
men, who, in a country so precariously settled, 
were frequently changing their places. ‘Their 
city was first the model of a Roman camp, fortified 
with a square breast-work and ditch, to scrve as 
an occasional retreat to themselves and their cat- 
tle. Their leader, or chief, was the sole magis- 
trate or officer, either civil or military. The mem- 
bers of the commonwealth were distinguislied into 
different classes or ranks, under the names of pa- 
trician and plebeian, patron and client. ‘“ The 
patron,” says Dionysius, “ was to protect, to give 
counsel; and, whether present or absent, was to 
his clients what the father is to his family. The 
clients, in return, were to contribute to the support 
of their patron, to aid him in placing his chil- 
dren in marriage; and, in the case of his being 
taken by an enemy, were to pay his ransom ; or o 
his being condemned in a fine, were to discharge 
it for him.’’6 

The limits of prerogative and privilege, as in 
other rude societies, were yet imperfectly marked. 
It was the prerogative of the king to lead in war, 
and to rule in peace; but it is probable that he no 
more wished to deliberate, than to fight alonc; 
and, though he may have done either occasion- 
ally, yet numbers of his followers were cver ready 
to attend him in both. The people acknowledged 
him as thcir leader, or prince; but they them- 
selves, as in other instances of the same kind, 
were accustomed, on remarkable occasions, to as- 
semble; and, without any concerted form of de- 
mocracy, became the sovereign power, as often as 
their passions engaged them to act in a body. 
The superior class of the people as naturally 
came to have thcir meetings apart, and may have 
assembled frequently, when the occasion was not 
sufficient to require the attention of the whole.’ 
Hence probably the establishments of the senate 
and of the popular assemblies, which were called 
the Comitia, and were both of so early a date as 
te be ascribed to the first of their kings. 

Even this founder of the state, we are told, 
was distinguished by his ushers or lictors carrying 
before him the axe and the rods, as the emblems 
of his power, and the instruments of his justice. 
The names of the senators were entered in a list, 
and they were separately called to their meetings. 


4 Liv. lib. i. c. 4. 

6 Ibid. lib. ii. c. 10. 

7 De minoribus rebus Principes, de majoribus omnes 
consultant. Tacit. de Moribus Germ. 8 Dionys. lib. i. 


5 Dionys. Hal. lib. i. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


11 


Assemblies of the people were intimated by the 
sound of a horn. ‘The citizens were distinguish- 
ed into curie, centuries, and tribes—divisions un- 
der which they formed their several compartments, 
for military array, religious ceremonies, or political 
deliberations. When met to decide on any public 
question, each division apart collected the votes of 
its members, from thence formed a vote for the cu- 
ria or century; and, by the majority of thes», dc- 
termined the whole. ‘The curiæ were fraternities, 
or divisions of the peop!c, which met for the per- 
formance of rcligious rites : cach had its separate 
pricst, and place of assembly. When the curi 
were called on matters of state, they retained part 
of their relizious forms; opened their meeting 
with observing the auspiccs, or sigus of futurity ; 
and if these were unfavourable, could not proceed 
on business. The augurs, therefore, in this mode 
of assembly, had a negative on the proceedings 
of the people. 

The centuries were formed on a more artful 
idea, to make power accompany wealth. The 
people were divided into classes, according to the 
rate of their fortunes : cach class was divided into 
centuries; but the number of centuries in the dif- 
ferent classes was so unequal, that thosc of the 
first or richest class made a majority of the whole ; 
and when the centurics of this class were unani- 
mous, they decided the question. By this institu- 
tion, the rich were masters of the legislature, 
though not without some compensation to the 
poor, as the several classes were charged with 
taxes and public services, in the same proportion 
in which they were vested with power. 

The people, when thus assembled, were distin- 
guished in their classes by their ensigns and arms, 
and, though called together on political affairs, 
were termed the army.’ 

In the first ages of this principality or common- 
wealth, the meetings of the people were held first 
by curia, and afterwards by centuries. The prac- 
tice of voting by tribes was of a later date than 
either, and was the device of a popular party to 
exclude the auspices, to level the condition of 
ranks, and by these means to turn the channels 
of power in their own favour. The people were 
formed into their classes and centuries, to clect 
their officers, to enact laws, or to deliberate on 
other affairs of state; but they did not without 
struggle or contest always acquicsce in this mode 
of assembly. The poorer citizcus often insisted 
to be called in the curis, and afterwards in the 
tribes, to decide on aftairs which the rich would 
have referred to the centuries alone. The qucs- 
tion on these occasions went to the foundation of 
the constitution, and implied a doubt whether the 
state was to be governed by the balance of num- 
bers, or the balance of property,” 


9 Dionys. Hal. lib. iv. c. 16, 17,18. Liv. fib. i.c. 43. 
10 State of the classes and centuries at the establige- 
ment of the census : $ 


VALUATION. 
Class. Romans. Sterling. No. of Cent. 
}. 100,000 £.322 18s. 98 
2 75,000 249 3 Zt 
3. 50,000 lul 9 21 
4. 25,000 80 14 21 
ay 11,000 35 10 31 
6. -— ~ J 
TOS), ~ ooo ay 193 From 
First dass T 2 ss ss ee 98 Sub. 
95 
Majority of the first class, 3 


12 


To these original springs of the political frame 
may be joined those of religion, which in all go- 
vernments must have a considerable force; and in 
this have always been supposed a principal power 
to regulate its movements. Here indeed, there 
being no distinction of clergy and laity, the autho- 
rity of the statesman, augur, and priest, was united 
in the same persons, or in the same orders of men: 
and as, in the mind of every citizen, notwithstand- 
ing the high measure of his superstition, the 
sword of state was preferred to the altar, the poli- 
tician and warrior availed himself of the respect 
which was paid to the priest, and made supersti- 
tion itself subservient to the purposes of state. 
With presages and prodigies he encouraged or 
restrained the people in their desires and pursuits; 
he bound them with vows and with oaths, to a 
degree that has not been equalled by mankind in 
any other instance ; and, with reference to this cir- 
cumstance in particular, it has been observed, that 
the seeds of Roman greatness were laid in the 
implicit respect with which every citizen revered 
the first institutions of his country.! 

The wants by which the Romans were impel- 
led in the first state of their settlement, made it 
necessary for them to vanquish some of their 
neighbours, or to perish in the attempt. Valour, 
accordingly, in their estimation, was the principal 
quality of human nature, and the defeat of an 
enemy the chief of its fruits. Every leader who 
obtained a victory made his entry at Rome in pro- 
cession; and this gave rise to the triumph, which 

.continued, from the first to the last age of the 
commonwealth, to be the highest object of am- 
bition. 

Historians, admiring the effect of this and of 
other practices of an early date among the Romans, 
have represented their founder, and his immediate 
successors, as philosophers, statesmen, and able 
tutors, who, with a perfect foresight of the conse- 
quences, suggested the maxims which gave so 
happy a turn to the minds of men in this infant 
republic. They are said to have taught, that by 
frugality and valour the Romans were to conquer 
the world: that they ought not to lay waste the 
lands which they conquered, but to possess them 
with colonies of their own people: that they ought 
not to slay the vanquished, but transport their 
captives to Rome, as an accession to the number 
of their own citizens: that they ought not to make 
war without provocation, nor to commence hosti- 
lities until they had demanded and had been re- 
fused reparation of wrongs. In whatever begree 
we suppose these maxims to have been expressed 
or understood in the councils of Rome, it is cer- 
tain that the successful conduct of the state in 
these particulars was sufficient to have suggested 
the idea that they were known. 

To the other fortunate customs which may be 
traced up to those early times of the state, we may 
join that of the census, by which the people, at 


A property of 100,000 asses or pounds of copper entitled 
the owner to a place in the first class, 75,000 to a place in 
the second, 50,009 to a place in the third, 25,000 to a place 
in the fourth, 11,000 toa place in the fifth, and the remain- 
der of the people, having no valuation, or having less than 
that of the fifth class, were thrown into the sixth or last 
class. The whole were divided into 193 centuries, of 
which the first class contained 80 centuries of foot, and 18 
of horsemen, in all 98; being a majority of the whole. 
The sixth class formed no more than one century, as ap- 
pears trom the inspection of the prect ding tabla. 

1 S:e Machiavel’s Discourses on Livy 


2 THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book I. 


every period of five years, took a regular account 
of the numbers and estates of their citizens, as the 
best measure they could have of their own pro- 
gress or decline, and the surest test of their polr 
cy and conduct asa nation. 

The Romans reckoned in the first period of 
their history, a succession of seven kings,? to each 
of whom they ascribed the invention of their se- 
veral institutions. To Romulus, the mixed form 
of their government, the establishment of the se- 
nate and assemblies of the people, the ranks of 
patrician and plebeian, the relations of patron and 
client. To Numa, the religion of the people, and 
their regard to oaths. To Servius Tullius, the 
census, or periodical muster; and so on.—But 
whether we suppose these institutions to have 
been the suggestion of particular occasions, or 
the invention of ingenious men, directed by a 
deep premeditation of all their effects, there is no 
doubt that such institutions existed in very early 
times, and served as the foundation of that policy 
which distinguished the Roman state. 

The monarchy of Rome is said to have lasted 
two hundred and forty-four years, a period in 
which the numbers of the people, and the extent 
of their settlement, had greatly mcreased. Durin 
this period, they had drawn many of their neigh- 
bours to Rome, and sent many of their own peo- 
ple to occupy settlements abroad, By the inrol- 
ment of aliens, they procured a certain increase 
of people; and by spreading their colonies around, 
they made acquisitions of territory, and extended 
the nursery of Roman citizens. We find, never- 
theless, that, by the last part of this policy, they 
incurred a danger of losing the people whom they 
thus established or bred up in new settlements, 
however little removed from the metropolis. Men 
had not yet learned to consider themselves as the 
citizens of one place, and inhabitants of another. 
In departing from Rome, the colonies ceased to 
be inrolled in any tribe or ward of that city, or 
of its district ; or to be ranked in any class of the 
people, ‘They ceased, of course, to be called up- 
on to vote in any of the assemblies, which they 
no longer attended. They formed notions of an 
interest separate from that of their original coun- 
try, so much, that the colonies which had been 
planted by one Tig resisted the power of his 
successors; and conquests, where the Roman 
citizens were mixed with the natives, in order to 
keep them in subjection, were sometimes in dan- 

er of being lost. The colony itself took a part 
in the discontents of the people-they were sent to 
restrain, and became parties with the vanquished 
in their quarrel with the victors.3 But, notwith- 
standing frequent instances of this sort among 
the Roman colonies, the memory of their descent 
and the ties of consanguinity, the pride of their 
distinction as Romans, the ik which every 
colonist retained of returning to Rome, and of 
being reinstated in the rolls of the people, for the 
most part preserved their attachment to Rome, 
and made them still a part of her strength, and a 
principal source of her greatness. 

During this period of the kingly government, 
the numbers that were inrolled in the city and 
its territory, increased from three thousand and 
two hundred to eighty thousand men of an age 


2 Romulus, Numa, Tullus Hostilius, Ancus Martius, 
Tarquinius Priscus, Servius Tullius, Tarquiniue Superbus 


3 Liv. lib. ili. c, 4. 


Cuar. 1] 


fit to carry arms.4 The number of Roman tribes 
or wards of the city was augmented from three 
to twenty-one. The kingdom itself extended 
over the greater part of Latium, and had an in- 
timate alliance with the whole of it. The city 
of Rome was become the principal resort of all 
the Latin confederates, the place of their meet- 
ings for devotion or pleasure, and the seat of 
their political consultations.5 
To accommodate and secure this populous and 
growing cominunity, several of the heights con- 
tiguous to their original settlement were, during 
the same period, successively occupied, the mar- 
shes between them were drained by excavations 
and works of great magnificence, of which a 
considerable part is still entire. The city itself, 
instead of an earthen rampart, was surrounded 
with towers and battlements of hewn stone.® 
So far it appears, that while 
Change to every successive prince gratified his 
republic. own ambition by subduing some 
neighbouring district or village, and 
brought an accession of riches or territory to his 
country, the genius of monarchy was favourable 
to the growth of this rismg empire. But when 
princes became satiated with conquests abroad, 
or began tomeditateschemes to increase their own 
importance at home, their ambition took a dif- 
ferent direction, and led them to aim at making 
the kingdom hereditary, and the people more sub- 
servient to their pleasure. Under this direction 
of the monarch’s ambition, the state, as Montes- 
quieu observes, was likely to become stationary, 
or even to decline. A revolution became neces- 
sary, in order to preserve it in its former progres- 
sive state. 
Such a revolution, we are told, 
U. C. 244. took its rise from the resentments 
of the people, excited by abuses of 
power, and was hastened by a momentary indig- 
nation, roused by an insult offered by a son of 
the king to a Roman matron. As the political 
evils which this revolution was intended to re- 
medy were, the state of degradation and weak- 
ness to which the senate had been reduced, the 
usurpation of hereditary succession to the crown, 
and the general abuses of government, suitable 
remedies were sought for to these evils, by re- 
storing the numbers and power of the senate, by 


4 Liv. lib. i. c. 44. 

5 Dionys. Hal. lib. iv. p. 258. 

6 The stones employed in building the walls of Rome, 
were said each to have been sufficient to load a cart. 

The common sewers were executed at a great expense. 
It was proposed that they should be of sufficient dimen- 
sions to admit a wagon loaded with hay, (Plin. lib. xxxvi. 
c. 15.) When these common sewers came to be obstruct- 
ed, or out of repair, under the republic, the censors con- 
tracted to pay a thousand talents, or about 193,000/. for 
clearing and repairing them, (Dionys. Hal. lib. iii. c. 67.) 
They were again in disrepair at the accession of Augustus 
Cesar, and the reinstating them is mentioned among the 
great works of Agrippa. He is said to have turned the 
course of seven rivers into these subterraneous passages, 
to have made them navigable, and to have actually pass- 
ed in barges under the streets and buildings of Rome. 
‘These works are still supposed to remain; but, as they 
exceed the power and resources of the present city to 
keep them in repair, they are quite concealed, except at 
one or two places. They were, in the midst of the Roman 
greatness, and still are, reckoned among the wonders of 
the world, (Liv. lib.i.c. 38;) and yet they are said to have 
geen works of the elder Tarquin, a prince whose territory 
did not extend, in any direction, above sixteen miles; and, 
on this supposition, hee must have been made to accom- 
modate acity that was culculated chiefly for the reception 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


-who refused to obey them.9 


13 


abolishing the royalty, and by substituting in its 
place an elective and temporary magistracy. 

The principal pat of the revolution consisted 
in substituting the consuls, two annual magis- 
trates, in place of the king. These officers were 
chosen in the assembly of the centuries. The 
officer who was to preside at the election erected 
his standard, and pitched his tent in the field of 
Mars,’ a meadow which lay on the banks of the 
Tiber, above the city. The people repaired to 
him in arms, and, distinguished by the ensigns 
and armour of their different classes, proceeded 
to make their election. 

That the city might not be surprised while its 
defenders were thus abroad in the fields, a guard 
was posted, with its colours displayed, on the Ja- 
niculum, a hill on the right of the Tiber, which 
overlooked the river and contiguous plain. If an 
enemy appeared during the election, the guard 
had orders to strike their ensigns; and on this 
signal every century repaired to its post of alarm, 
and questions of state were suspended until the 
danger was removed. As it became an article of 
superstition, that the centurics could not proceed 
in any business without having an ensign dis- 
played on the Janiculum, it was in the power of 
any person, by striking the ensign, to break up 
an assembly of the people: and this expedient 
for stopping the progress of any business was 
accordingly made use of at different times to the 
end of the republic® 

It was meant that the consuls should succeed 
to all the powers of the king; and in order to 
enforce their authority, a penalty of five oxen and 
two sheep was denounced against every person 
Their joint and di- 
vided command, with thc limited term of one 
year, which was to be the duration of their power, 
were thought sufficient securities against the 
abuse of it. 

The government, by this revolution, devolved 
on the senate and nobles. The plebeians, in the 
first formation of it, were favoured by the ad- 
mission of a ccrtain number of their order to fill 
up the senate, which had been reduced in its 
numbers by the tyranny of the late king; and 
they were declarcd, in case of any oppression, to 


——_ 


of cattle, herdsmen, and banditti. Rude nations some- 
times execute works of great magnificence, as fortresses 
and temples, for the purposes of war and superstition; 
but seldom palaces, and still more seldom works of mere 
convenience and cleanliness, in which, for the most part, 
they are jong defective. It is not unreasonable, therefore, 
to question the authority of tradition in respect to this 
singular monument of antiquity, which so greatly exceeds 
what the best accommodated city of modern Europe could 
undertake for its own conveniency. And as those works 
are still entire, and may continue so for thousands of 
years, it may be suspected that they were even prior to 
ihe settlement of Romulus, and may have been the re- 
mains of a more ancient city, on the ruins of which the 
followers of Romulus settled, as the Arabs now hut or 
encamp on the ruins of Palmyra and Balbeck. Livy 
owns, that the common sewers were not accommodated 
to the plan of Rome, as it was laid out in his time; they 
were carried in directions across the streets, and passed 
under buildings of the greatest antiquity. This derange- 
ment indeed he imputes to the hasty rebuilding of the city 
after its destruction by the Gauls; but haste, it is pro- 
bable, would have determined the people to build on thair 
old foundations, or at least not to change them so much 
as to cross the direction of former streets. 

7 Campus Martius. 

8 See Book TIT. Chapter TII. 

9 Plutarch, in Vit. Poplicola. 


It 


have a right of appeal from any sentence or com- 
mand of the magistrate to an assembly of the 
people at large. ‘This was understood to be the 
great charter of every citizen. But the patricians 
alone could be chosen into the newly established 
offices of state. ‘They alone were to furnish the 
ordinary succession of members to the senate, 
and, by their inrolment in the first and second 
classes, to have a decided majority in all the 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book I. 


meetings or comitia of the centuries;! that is, in 
all assemblies of the people that were called to 
elect officers of state, to enact laws, or to judge 
of appeals. By these several provisions ın their 
favour, they were in possession of a complete 
aristocracy, which they claimed as hereditary in 
their families, but which they were not likely to 
retain, without much discontent and animosity 
on the part of their subjects. 


CHAPTER II. 


Form of the Republic— Dissension of Parties—First Dictator—Secession of Plebeians— Tri- 
bunes of the People— Their Objects—Distribution of Corn—Division of Lands—Pretensions 
of the Plebeians—Commission to compile Laws—Decemvirs— Twelve Tables—Intermarriage 
of Ranks—Claim of the Plebeians to the Consulate—Military or Consular Tribunes—Cen- 
sors— Aidiles—Prefectus Annone—Fortune of the Republic—Reduction of Veie— Destruc- 
tion of Rome by the Gauls—Rebuilding of the City. 


THE government of Rome, as it 


U. C. 244. is represented after the expulsion of 
the king, was become entirely aris- 
tocratical. ‘The nobles had the exclusive posses- 


sion of office, without any third party to hold the 
balance between themselves and the people. ‘The 
consuls were the sole executive magistrates, and 
the only ministers of the senate; they were un- 
derstood to come in place of the king; performed 
all the functions of royalty; and, in the manner 
of the kings, to whom they succeeded, united in 
their own persons all the dignities of the state, 
those of judge, magistrate, and military leader. 

Such, at the first institution of the common- 
wealth, was, both in respect of government and 
manners, the simplicity or rudeness of this com- 
munity. The people, however, in their new situ- 
ation, were gradually and speedily led, by the ac- 
cumulation of their affairs, by the contest of their 
parties, and by the wants of the public, to a va- 
riety of establishments, in which they separated 
the departments of state, more equally distributed 
its powers, filled up the lists of office, and put 
themselves in a posture to wield with advantage 
their strength as it increased, and to avail them- 
selves of every circumstance that occurred in 
their favour. 

While the exiled king was endeavouring, by 
continual invasions, to recover his power, dis- 
putes arose between the parties who had joined 
to expel him;? creditors, supported by the aris- 


1 Dionys. Hal. lib. v. 

2 In these original disputes between the patricians and 
plebeians at Rome, it is implied that they frequently or 
commonly stood in the relation of creditor and debtor, as 
well as of patron and client. And we may account for 
this circumstance in either of two ways: first, by suppos- 
ing that the client was,in some degree, tributary to his 
patron, as the vassal was tributary to his lord in the origi- 
nal state of modern nations. Dionysius of Halicarnassus 
has laid some foundation for this supposition, in the pas- 
sage above cited. Or we may suppose, in the second 
place, that the debts in question were money or effects 
actually borrowed by the client and lent by the patron. 
The first supposition is most agreeable to the manners of 


tocracy, of which the nobles were now in full 
possession, became severe in the exaction of 
debts, or the patrons laid claim to more than the 
clients were willing to pay.3 The state was dis- 
tracted at once by its enemies from abroad, and 
by the dissension of parties at home. The au- 
thority of the new government not being suffi- 
cient to contend with these difficulties, the senate 
resolved to place themselves and the common- 
wealth, for a limited time, under the 
U. C. 452 power of a single person, who, with 
or 455.* the title of Dictator, or Master of 
the people,4 should at his pleasure 
dispose of the state, and of all its resources. 


modern times; but the last is more likely to have been 
the fact in the original state of the Romans, and of an- 
cient republics in general. Among them the great dis 
tinction of persons was that between freemen and slaves. 
The rich freeman was supplied with every thing he 
wanted by the labour of his slaves. The necessitous 
freeman toiled with his own hands in labouring a small 
piece of ground, or in tending a few beasts. He had no 
trade by which to supply the luxuries of the rich, or by 
which, as in modern times, to make them his debtors. 
When he wanted their aid he was obliged to borrow ; and 
there was, perhaps, but one occasion ou which he had 
credit for this purpose; when he was going to war, and 
when he both had a reasonable excuse for borrowing, and 
a probable prospect of being able to pay, perhaps with 
interest, from the spoils of an enemy. But when his 
hopes failed, he might become insolvent, and exposed to 
all the severities of which we read such complaints in the 
early part of the Roman history. : : 

There is, throughout this history, sufficient evidence 
that the popular party were on the side of the debtor. 
The prejudices of this party operated against the exaction 
of debts. Their influence was employed in reducing the 
interest of money; in having it abolished, and in having 
it detested, under the invidious appellation of usury. 
They even strove, on occasion, to abolish debts: the re- 
sult was far from being favourable to the necessitous bor- 
rower; he was obliged to pay for the risk, the penalties, 
and the obloquy to which the lender was exposed in 
transeressing the laws. 

3 Dionys. Hal. lib. 5. 

4 Magister Populi. 

* The date of the nomination of the first dictator is 
uncertain. Liv. lib. ii. Some place it nine years after 
the expulsion of the kings; Dionys. twelve years. 


Crap. IT.) 


This officer was invested with power to punish 
the disorderly without trial and without appeal; 
to arm the people, and to employ their forces on 
any service; to name his own substitute, or se- 
cond in command; and to act without being, 
even at the expiration of his office, accountable 
either to the senate or to the people. The cir- 
cumstances that were probably accidental in the 
first nomination of this extraordinary officer, 
were atterwards repeated as unalterable forms in 
every successive appointment of the same kind. 
it became the prerogative of the senate to resolve 
that a dictator should be named, and of the con- 
sul to name him. The ceremony was performed 
in the dead of night;5 and as soon as the nomina- 
tion was known, the lictors, or ministers of jus- 
tice, armed with their axes and rods, withdrew 
from the ordinary magistrate, to attend this 
temporary lord of the commonwealth. 

‘This was the first political expedient to which 
the state was directed by the exigency of its new 
government. ‘I'he precedent came to be repeat- 
edly followed in times of calamity or public 
alarm, and the whole powers of the state were 
occasionally entrusted to single men, on the sole 
security of their personal characters, or on that 
of the short duration of their trust, which was 
limited to six months, This institution was de- 
vised by the senate, to repress the disorders which 
broke out among the people, and to unite the 
forces of the commonwealth against its enemies. 
‘The next was of a different nature, and was 
meant to protect the plebeians against the op- 
pression of their lords. 

The inferior class. of the people, almost ex- 
cluded from any share in the new government, 
soon found that under its influence they had 
more oppression to fear from their patrons, than 
they had ever experienced from the prince they 
had banished. So long as the king and the se- 
nate shared in the powers of the state, the one 
took part with the people, when the other at- 
tempted to oppress them; and it was the ordinary 
interest and policy of the prince to weaken the 
nobles, by supporting the plebeians against them. 
‘This effect of the monarchy still, in some mea- 
sure, remained, so long as the exiled king was 
alive, maintained his pretensions, and made the 
united services of the people necessary to the 
senate. During this period the patricians were 
still on their guard, Fm were cautious not to of- 
fend the people; but upon the death of the king, 
and the security which the new government de- 
rived from this event, the nobles availed them- 
selves of their power, and enforced their claims 
on the people with extreme severity. In the ca- 
pacity of creditors, they imprisoned, whipped, and 
enslaved those who were indebted to them, and 
held the liberties and the lives of their fellow- 
citizens at their mercy. The whole body of ple- 
beians was alarmed; they saw more formidable 
enemies in the persons of their own nobility, 
than in the armies of any nation whatever. 
When the republic was attacked, they accord- 
ingly refused to arm in its defence. Many who 
had already suffered under the rod of their cre- 
ditors, when called upon to enlist, showed their 
limbs galled with fetters, or torn with the stripes 
which they had received by command of their 
merciless patrons. 


5 Liv. lib. viii. c. 20. & lib. ix. c. 98. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


15 


These distractions, Jcined to the actual pre- 
sence of a foreign enemy, obliged the senate to 
have recourse to their former expedient, and to 
entrust the republic again in the hands of a dic- 
tator. Having succeeded in their first nomina- 
tion, and having driven the enemy from their 
territories, they recurred to the same expedient 
again, on the return of a like occasion; but, in 
order to mix insinuation with the terrors of this 
measure, they made choice of Valerius, a person 
whose name was already known to the sufferers 
by some popular laws which they owed to his 
family. This officer had credit enough with the 
people to prevail on them to take arms, and had 
the good fortune to repel the enemy, by whom 
the state was invaded: but, upon his return, not 
being able to prevail on the senate to fulfil the 
hopes which he had given to the people, he made 
a speech to exculpate himself, and laid down his 
power. The citizens who had fought under his 
banner being still in the field, and, without any 
orders to disband, suspecting that the senate, un- 
der pretence of some war on the frontier, meant 
to remove them from the city, ran to their arms; 
and, if they had not been restrained by their mi- 
litary oath, and the respect they paid to the -A 
vernment of their country, must have entered the 
gates by force. But, under the impression of 
these motives, they fled from the walls instead 
of invading them, retired beyond the Anio, and 
took possession of a height about three miles 
from Rome,‘ afterwards known by the name of 
the Sacred Hill. Their officers followed, and 
endeavoured to persuade them to return to their 
duty; but were told, that no duty was owing to 
a government which had withdrawn its protec- 
tion, and encouraged oppression; that free citi- 
zens own no country in which they are not per- 
mitted to enjoy their freedom.—‘ To what 
purpose,” said Sicinius Bellutus, who was then 
at the head of this mutiny, “recall us to a city 
from which you have already forced us to fly by 
your extortion? By what new assurance can 
you persuade us to rely on a faith which you 
have repeatedly broken? By what charm can 
you engage us in support of a commonwealth, 
of which you will not allow us to be members? 
You mean to engross all the fruits which are to 
be reaped in your country, and it is well. We 
shall leave you to do so, and do not mean to in- 
terrupt your enjoyments.” 

This secession of a great body of the people 
having continued for several months, and in this 
time received a constant accession of numbers 
from the city and from the contiguous fields, 
threw the republic into the greatest disorder ; ex- 
posed its lands to be neglected or pillaged by its 
own inhabitants, and ravaged by numerous ene- 
mies, who took this opportunity to invade it with- 
out opposition. 

The patricians had sufficient force in their own 
body, and in that of their faithful retainers, to 
guard the avenues of the city, and to secure it 
from surprise: but being reduced to great dif- 
culties for want of their usual supplies of provi- 
sions, and D on i aw still greater from the 
interruption of labour and the suspension of go- 
vernment, they came to a resolution to negotiate 
with the leaders of the mutiny; and, for this 
purpose, raised Sp. Cassius, a person who, though 


6 Ciccro de Claris Oratoribus, c. 14. 


16 


of a patrician family, was in high favour with 
the people, to the office of consul. They agreed 
to mitigate the severities which they had hither- 
to practised against insolvent debtors, and to re- 
lease such of them as were actually in bonds, or 
had been destined to slavery. 

With these concessions, a deputation was sent 
to the camp, and a negotiation was opened, in 
which the plebeians obtained, not only a full ac- 
knowledgment of their privileges, but, what was 
of more consequence, a power of forming assem- 
blies apart from the nobles,! and of electing an- 
nual magistrates, to guard and watch over their 
own separate rights. “ Your consuls,” they said, 
“are not so much the officers of the common- 
wealth as the heads of a faction; and, in all 
questions that relate to the people, are parties 
rather than judges. It is reasonable that we 
too have a head or representation in the common- 
wealth, under which we may act, at least in our 
own defence.” 

In return to this well-advised and 
U. C. 260. specious requisition, the tribunitian 
power was established, and with it 
the foundations of some good, and of much harm 
laid in the commonwealth. Great part of the 
last might have been prevented, if the plebcians, 
now in possession of a right to nominate tribunes 
for the care of their interests, had from thence- 
forward been content with the power of election 
merely, had discontinued their own collective as- 
semblies for any other purpose, and increased the 
number of their tribunes, to a just representa- 
tive of their whole body. The return, however, 
was more agreeable to the spirit of the times. 
The people were allowed to assemble; and, in- 
stead of a representation to support and preserve 
their rights with steadiness and with moderation, 
they proceeded to elect a few leaders, who from 
thenceforward, were to head every popular tu- 
mult, and to raise up every wind oe contention 
into a storm. 

_The tribunes were authorised, at their first in- 
stitution, to forbid, or to restrain, any measures 
which they thought hazardous, or injurious to 
the rights of their constituents, but not to pro- 
pose any law, nor to move any positive resolu- 
tion. ‘They were not entitled to exercise their 
powers beyond the walls of the city, or to absent 
themselves from it for a whole day, except in 
their attendance on the festival of the Latin al- 
lies, where the presence of all the Roman magis- 
trates was required. A single tribune might stop 
the proceedings of his own body, and of the 
people themselves, as well as the proceedings of 
the senate and patrician magistrates. In the ex- 
ercise of this last part of their trust, though not 
permitted in this age of aristocracy to mix with 
the senators, they had places assigned them at 
the doors of the senate-house, from which, as 
from a watch-tower, they were to observe, and on 
occasion to stop, the proceedings of the lords. 

As the tribunes were destined to withstand the 
exertions of power, and were supposed, on the 
most dangerous occasions, to expose themselves 
to the axe and the sword of their adversaries, it 
was thought necessary to guard their persons 
with the most sacred fences of religion and law. 
For this purpose an inviolable rule was prescribed 
in the following terms: “Let no one offer vio- 
lence to the person of a tribune; neither kill 


aP Dionys. Hal. lib. vii 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


him, nor procure him to be killed; neither strike 
him, nor procure him to be struck. Let the per- 
son who offends against this law be accursed; 
let his effects be made sacred to pious uses, and 
let every one pursue him to death.” 

To render this act irrevocable, a solemn oath 
for the perpetual observance of it was imposed, 
and dreadful imprecations were denounced against 
any person who should propose to repeal it;? and 
such was the effect of these precautions, taken for 
the safety of the tribunes, that, under the republic, 
persons obnoxious to public justice could not be 
punished, while they continued to bear this sacred 
character. And the emperors themselves, after 
they had abolished all the other rights of the re- 
public, found, under this sacred title of tribune, 
a refuge to their crimes and oppressions, and a 
protection against the designs of assassins, or the 
resentment of those dey A offended by their 
tyranny. 

The college of tribunes, at its institution, was 
not limited to any precise number of members; 
it consisted at first of such persons as had been 
most active in procuring the establishment, and 
continued to be filled with the most zealous par- 
tizans of the people, the number being three or 
more, according as persons appeared to merit 
this honour. But in process of time both the 
plebeians who aspired to this distinction, and the 
patricians who were jealous of it, conspired to 
augment the numbers.—The first, in order to 
make way for their own preferment; and the 
second, to the end that they might be the better 
enabled, on occasion, to disunite their enemies, 
and to procure the negative of a part, to arrest the 
proceedings of the whole. The college of tri- 
bunes was accordingly augmented by ae to 
ten; and a law was made to provide that the elec- 
tions should not stop short of this number.’ 

Patricians could neither elect nor be elected 
into this office,* although, in the midst of irregu- 
larities incident to all unformed, especially to all 
popular governments, some exceptions are men- 
tioned, even to the last part of this rule. ‘The 
tribunes were at first elected in the assembly of 
the curiæ, where the vote of the poorest citizen 
was equal to that of the most wealthy. But 
even here the patricians, although not absolute 
masters, as they were in the assembly of the cen- 
turies, having great influence, and, by holding the 
auspices, having even a negative on all proceed- 
ings, it was thought necessary to alter the form 
of the assembly in which the tribunes were elected 
to that of the tribes; and by this means to enable 
the people to make their election, without any 
control trom the nobles, either in virtue of the 
authority of the senate, or the interposition of 
the augurs.§ à 

Such was the institution of the plebeian tri- 
bunes, while the state yet knew of no other ma- 
gistrate besides the consuls and the questors, of 
whom the last, even under the kings, had been 
employed as a species of commissaries, or pro- 
viders for the army. The expedient was adopted 
by the senate, to quiet the animosity of parties; 
but tended, in fact, only to render the contest be- 
tween them more equal, and to multiply the sub- 
jects of dispute. The tribunes being vested with 
power to assemble the people, could not long be 


2 Dionys. Halicar. lib. iv. p. 410. 
3 Lex Trebonia. Liv. lib. iii. e. 65. 
4 Dicnys. Hal. lib. vii. 5 Dionys. Hal. lib. ix. p.65 


Cuar. IL] 


confined to the mere negative with which they 
were at first entrusted; nor was it casy, on ever 
occasion, to distinguish the measures of attac 
from those of defence; and the party of the ple- 
beians, with these officers at their head, were then 
in a posture, not only to preserve their rights, but 
likewise to gain to their order continual accessions 
of privilege and power. Happily for the state, 
there was yet much ground of this sort to be 
gained, without transgressing the bounds of good 
erder, or encroaching on the authority of equit- 
able government. 

The popular leaders in this career had to break 
through the bar of hereditary distinction, which, 
it was pretended, contrary to the genius of the 
republic, that no personal merit and no measure 
of ability could remove. One of the first steps 
they made in pursuit of this object, was to pre- 
clude every other power in the state from a nega- 
tive on their own proceedings. For this purpose 
it was enacted, by the authority of the tribes, that 
no one, under pain of death, or of an arbitrary 
fine, should interrupt a tribune while he was 
speaking to the peoples Being thus provided 
against interruption, as they were by a former 
law against violence to their persons, they not 
only took up the complaints of their constituents, 
they suggested new claims to be made by them, 
and at every succession to office, endeavoured to 
signalize their term by some additional establish- 
ment for the benefit of the people: they even in- 
terrupted the state in its councils and military 
operations, and almost in every instance hung 
upon the wheels of government, until the griev- 
ances they complained of were redressed, or the 
demands they made were complied with. 

In order to increase the number of plebeian 
officers, whose aid the tribunes alleged were 
necessary to themselves, they soon after their 

own institution, procured that of 
U. C. 260. the Ædiles, who were to inspect 

the markets, and have charge of 
the public buildings and public shows. Being 
subordinate to the tribunes, as well as to the con- 
suls, they acted, upon occasion, in what related 
to the policy of the town, as assistants to both.” 

As Pome was a place of arms, and subsisted 
in some measure by public magazines; as settle- 
ments won from the enemy were often to be 
disposed of to citizens; as its institutions were 
yet new and incomplete ; and as the patricians 
stil] claimed an exclusive right to all the offices 
of state, there was much to occupy the cares of 
the public—the distribution of corn from the 

ranaries, the division of conquered lands, the 
efects of the laws, and the arbitrary proceedings 
of the magistrates. The qualifications of candi- 
dates for the office of consul furnished, during 
some ages, the subject of continual debates, and 
frequently exposed the parties concerned in 
them, if they escaped the swords of their ene- 
nues, to perish by their own dissensions. Their 
civil mi military transactions were constantly 
blended together. The senate frequently in- 
volved the state in war, in order to suspend its 
intestine divisions, and the people as often took 
occasion, from the difficulties in which the com- 
munity was involved by its enemies, to extort a 
compliance with their own demands. 

The first subject of contention that arose after 


6 Dionys. Hal. lib. vii. 7 Ibid. lib. vi. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


of the most plentiful season. 


17 


the institution of the tribunes was a sequel of 
the troubles which had preceded that establish- 
ment. The secession of the people took place in 
Autumn, the usual seed-time in Italy; and the 
labours of that season having been accordingly 
interrupted, the city was threatened with fa- 
mine; and the senate exerted all its industry in 
guarding against this evil.8 After the public 
granaries were filled for this purpose, it became 
a question, upon what terms, and at what price, 
the poorer citizens should be supplied from 
thence. Their insolence in the late mutiny, 
and the part which they themselves, by sus- 
pending the labours of the field, had taken, in 
bringing on the distress with which they were 
now threatened, were fully stated against them 
in this deliberation. The opportunity was 
thought to be fair, to recal the several conces- 
sions which had been extorted from the senate, 
and, in particular, to oblige the people to part 
with their tribunes, and to return within the for- 
mer bounds of their duty. 

Such was the substance of a contumelious 
speech, delivered in the senate by the celebrated 
Caius Marcius Coriolanus. The younger no- 
bility applauded his sentiments; but the greater 
part of the senate, having recently escaped from 
a popular storm, were unwilling to engage them- 
selves anew in the sanie dangerous situation. In 
order, therefore, to appease the people, who were 
greatly incensed at the proposal which had been 
made to subdue them, they agreed to deliver corn 
from the public granarics, at a price below that 
And, by this pro- 
ceeding, for the present pacified the tribunes, but 
flattered their presumption, and encouraged them 
to meditate still further demands. The distress 
with which their constituents had been threat- 
ened was prevented, but the insult they had re- 
ceived from Caius Marcius was not avenged; 
and they cited him to appear before the tribunal 
of the people, to answer for his conduct to the 
party he had offended. ‘The senate and patri- 
cians were disposed to protect him; but, trusting 
that by the majority of their votes they might be 
able to acquit lium in the comitia of the centuries, 
the only assembly before which, from the time 
of its first institution, any capital charge had 
been hitherto laid against a citizen, they suflered 
the trial to proceed. In this, however, they were 
disappointed, » The tribunes insisted, that the 
people should assemble in their tribes; and hav- 
ing prevailed in this previous question, the accu- 
sed, as being already condemned by this determi- 
nation relating to the form of his trial, withdrew 
from his sentence.’ 

Coriolanus, in resentment of this 

U. C. 262. prosecution, which forced him into 
exile, joined the enemies of his 

country, and by increasing the alarm of war 
from abroad, helped to suspend for a while the 
animosities of which he himself had furnished 
the occasion at home. The contest in which he 
had engaged the parties ended with his own 
exile, and was not attended with any other poli- 
tical effects; but it merits a place in these obser- 
vations, as a proof of the great influence which 
the plebeian party, under its new leaders, had ac- 
quired, and as an evidence of the singular state 
of the Roman policy, by which, in the uncertain 


8 Dionys. Hal. hb. vii. 9 Ibid. lib. i. 469. 


18 


choice of different modes of assembly, the very 
form of the government was left undetermined, 
until the occasion occurred on which this go- 
vernment was to act. 

The assembly of the centuries formed an aris- 
tocracy, that of the tribes a democracy. They 
did not partake in the sovereignty by any deter- 
minate rule, but each of them occasionally seized 
upon the whole of it; and, instead of balancing 
each other by regular checks and interruptions, 
threatened to render the administration of the 
Republic a continual scene of contradictions and 
inconsistencies. Such at least is the judgment 
which we are tempted, in speculation, to pass on 
this singular constitution, although, in the sequel 
of its history, it wili appear to possess at least 
one of the highest political advantages, in being 
the most excellent nursery of statesmen and war- 
riors, and in forming the most conspicuous ex- 
ample of national ability and success. 

The calm which the approach of Coriolanus, 
at the head of an army of Volsci, produced with- 
in the city, was of no longer duration than the 
alarm which produced it. As soon as the ex- 
ternal enemy withdrew, the parties within resu- 
med their disputes; but on a subject which was 
still more important than that which had recently 
employed them; and which, continuing to be 
moved at intervals, served to the last hour of 
the Republic as an object of popular zeal, or fur- 
nished a specious: pretence, which ambitious and 
designing men continually employed, to captivate 
the ears of the populace. ‘This was the most 
2 of all propositions—an equal division of 
and property, known by the name of the Agra- 
rian law. 

While the Romans were making their first 
acquisitions of territory, their conquests were 
understood to be made for the people, and were 
accordingly divided among them, or given to 
those who had not a sufficient provision for the 
subsistence of their families! But of late, during 
a considerable period, while the Republic barely 
withstood the attacks of the exiled king, or re- 
covered the losses sustained in the wars with the 
numerous enemies that supported him, she had 
either made few acquisitions of this sort, or, suit- 
ably to the growing disparity of ranks, which, 
though not necessary in very small republics, be- 
comes so in proportion as nations extend, suffered 
the conquered lands to pass by connivance, occu- 
pancy or purchase, into the hands of powerful 
citizens, who made use of these opportunities to 
appropriate estates to themselves. 

The tribunes had not yet begun 

U. C. 267. to make their complaints on this sub- 
ject, when they were anticipated 

by the consul Sp. Cassius, who, being already in 
high favour with the popular party, continued 
to flatter the passions of the inferior class, and is 
said to have aimed at an improper and danger- 
ous influence in the state. He affected great 
zeal for the rights of the people, and proportional 
indignation against their oppressors. He com- 
ea in particular, of the improper use which 
ad been recently made of the conquered lands, 
by suffering them to become the property of per- 
sons who were already too rich. Having him- 
self made some conquests, he showed how the 
lands of the Republic ought to have been disposed 


1 Dionys. Hal. lib. ii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION. 


[Bour Í. 


of, by making an equal division of his own ac- 
quisitions among the more indigent citizens.? 
He obtained an act of the people to appoint three 
commissioners to inquire into the abuses which 
had been committed in the disposal of lands ac- 
quired from the enemy, and to consider of the 
proper corrections. 

The senate, and the patricians in general, were 
greatly alarmed; most of them had possessions 
that seemed to fall within the object of this in- 
quiry. The popular party alleged, that con- 
quered lands being acquired by the joint labours, 
and at the common hazard, of all the people, 
should be equally divided among them. The 
patricians contended, that these levelling prin 
ciples led to confusion and anarchy; that, in a 
state of which all the territory was actually, and 
within a few centuries, acquired by conquest, 
these maxims could not be applied without the 
subversion of government, as well as of property. 

In this contest Cassius appeared to have the 
advantage of numbers on his side; and if he had 
confined his views to the division of lands, under 
which he was said to disguise a more dangerous 
intention, the senate and nobles must have at 
least devised considerable settlements for the 
people, in order to elude his demands. But 
while Cassius alarmed the rich with danger to 
their property, he at the same time alarmed 
every citizen with danger to his personal conse- 
quence, by offering the freedom of the city to 
every alien, who, at his summons, crowded from 
all the cantons of Latium to vote in the assem- 
blies of the Roman people. His colleague op- 
posed this measure, and the city, for the present, 
was saved from the intrusion of strangers. The 
attempt, however, gave offence to the people, as 
well as to the senate; and the unhappy author 
of it, in order to regain the favour of ie party, 
proposed a resolution, not only to make a gratuit- 
ous distribution of corn, but even to refund what 
had been formerly paid by any citizen at the pub- 
lic granaries. This proposal too was interpreted 
to his prejudice, and raised a suspicion that he 
meant, with the aid of aliens and of indigent 
citizens, to usurp the government.. On this sup- 
position all parties in the state combined against 
him, and he was:condemned to suffer the punish- 
ment of treason.. 

This appears to have been the first project af- 
ter the state began to have its demesne lands, and 
after private estates began to be accumulated, that 
was made to divide all territorial acquisitions in 
equal shares to the people. And though the au- 
thor of it perished in the attempt, the project it- 
self was entailed on the commonwealth, as a sub- 
ject of dissension, and became the source of re- 
peated demands on the part of the people. 

The tribunes had no sooner accomplished the 
ruin of Cassius, in which they concurred with 
the senate, than they insisted for the execution 
of the law he had framed, and for the nomination 
of three commissioners already resolved on, for 
the division of conquered lands. They protected 
the people in refusing to serve the state in its 
wars, until this demand should be granted. And 
having absolute and irresistible power to stop all 
proceedings in the city, they prevented all mili- 
tary levies within the walls, obliged the consuls, 
during a certain period, to erect their standard 


2 Liv. lib. ii. c. 41. 


Cuar. IL] 


ın the country, and there to force the herdsman 
and labourer to enlist, by driving away the cattle, 
and distraining the effects of those who were un- 
willing to obey them.3 

In these exertions of political strength, the 
parties at Rome learned by degrees to form their 
different plans, whether of administration or of 
opposition. 

he senate endeavoured to furnish the people 
with employment abroad, to amuse them with 
triumphal processions, to gratify them with par- 
tial settlements and allotments of lands; and, in 
order to stop the violence of their leaders, by the 
negative of some one of their own order, conti- 
nually endeavoured to divide the college of tri- 
bunes. 

The tribunes, in their turn, endeavoured, by 
oaths and private engagements, to secure the 
unanimity of their own body, or to bind the mi- 
nority to follow the decision of the greater num- 
ber. They taught the people to despise the par- 
tial settlements, which, to pacify or to suspend 
their importunities, were offered to them at a 
distance from Rome. They taught them to aim 
at a higher object—the political consequence of 
their order, and an equal share in the government 
of their country. The tribunes were honoured 
in proportion to the part which they took in sup- 
port of this popular cause; and plebeians were suc- 
cessively raised to this office, in reward of the ani- 
mosity they had occasionally shown to the senate, 
and from respect to the courage with which they 
had, in any case, withstood the authority of the 
magistrate. 

t every succession, accordingly, the new tri- 
bunes endeavoured to signalize their year by sug- 
gesting some advantage to the people; and, in 
the course of their struggles, obtained many re- 
gulations favourable to their interest as an order 
in the state. 

One law which has been already mentioned, 
and which is of uncertain date, they obtained—to 
substitute the assembly of the tribes for that of the 
curiz in the election of tribunes.4 

Another, to exclude the patricians 
U. C. 282. entirely from the assembly of the 
tribes.5 

The Agrarian law itself they frequently moved, 
in the interval of other claims and pretensions, 
or brought it forward along with such claims, in 
order to alarm the patricians, and to force them, 
under apprehension of this principal object of 
their fears, to a compromise, or to a compliance 
in some other demand. 

To the other circumstances, which tended fre- 
quently to revive these political flames, may be 
joined the arbitrary proceedings of the magis- 
trate, and the defect of judicial forms in the com- 
monwealth. The consuls had succeeded to the 
kings as sole officers of state, both civil and mili- 
tary; they had not sufficient forms or limitations 

rescribed to thein in the exercise of their power.® 
This defect, whichis common in the administration 
of rude governments, is for the most part supplied 
by degrees. Evils are corrected in proportion as 
they are felt, and the rational proceedings of one 
age are adopted as precedents to regulate the 
next. But, in the present instance, at Rome, 


3 Dionys. Hal. lib. viii. 
4 Dionys. Hal. lib. ix. 
ï Liv. lib. ii. c. 60. 

6 Liv, lib. iii. 0.9. Dionys. Halicar. lib. x. 


Ibid. No. 273 and No. 278. 
Liv. lib. ii. c. 56. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


19 


the popular party, it is said, demanded at once a 
system of jurisprudence and a complete body of 
laws. Being opposed by the patricians, they 
came to consider the measure as an object of par- 
ty ; and they pressed the acceptance of it, as much 
from animosity to the magistrates, as from a de- 
sire to secure public justice, or to regulate the 
forms of judicial procedure. The patricians con- 
sidered the project as an attack cn their power ; 
and however innocent or reasonable it may have 
been, endeavoured to elude the execution of it 
with all the arts of evasion and delay, which they 
had employed to prevent the division of the con- 
quered lands, or to frustrate any other the most 
factious purpose of their adversaries. 

In this contest the powers and artifices of both 
parties were fully exerted. Tothe great authority 
and address of the nobles, the people opposed an 
ardour that was not to be cooled by delays, to be 
discouraged by partial defeats, or restrained by scru- 
ples in the choice of means for the attainment of 
their end. From this, as from many other instan- 
ces, itmay beinferred, that the popular party, in the 
contest with their superiors, are apt to think, that 
the rules of veracity and candour may be dispen- 
sed with, and that the means of deceit and vio- 
lence may, without any scruple, be employed in 
their own favour. With less honour and dig- 
nity to maintain than their adversaries, they are 
less afraid of imputations that detract from either ; 
and their leaders, supported by the voice of the 
more numerous party, are less apprehensive of 
evil fame. In this contest, accordingly, fictitious 
plots and conspiracies were fabricated by the po- 
pular side, and fictitious designs against the liber- 
ties of the people were imputed to the patricians, 
iu order to render them odious, and to deter them 
from appearing in support of their real preten- 
sions.’ 

In the issue of these contests, the senate de- 
spairing of being able to divert the people from 
their purpose, agreed to the nomination of three 
commissioners, who should be sent into Greece 
to make a collection of such laws as, being found 
salutary in that country, might be transferred 
to Rome. Soon after the return of the commis- 
sioners, the senate approved their report, and 
concurred in the nomination of the famous de- 
cemvirs to compile a body of laws for the com- 
monwealth. 

The decemvirs were appointed 

U. C. 302. merely to make the draft of a new 
code, and to propose matter for the 
consideration of the senate and people, from whom 
alone the propositions could receive the authority 
of laws; yet the persons named for this purpose, 
as the history bears, had credit enough with the 
people to be vested with a temporary sovereignty, 
in which they superseded the authority of the 
senate, as well as that of the consuls, and had un- 
limited power over the lives and fortunes of their 
fellow citizens. Before their commission expi- 
red, they presented a number of laws, engraven 
‘on ten tables or plates, and containing a sum- 
mary of the privileges to be enjoyed by the people, 
of the crimes to be punished by the magistrate, 
and of the forms to be observed in all judicial 
proceedings. They at the saine time informed 
the people, that their plan was still incomplete, 
that many useful additions were yet to be made; 


7 Dionys. Hai. lib. x. 8 Ibid. No. 303. 


20 


and, upon the faith of these declarations, obtained 
for another year the renewal of their powers, with 
a change of some of the persons who were named 
in the commission, 

In this second year of the decemvirs’ appoint- 
ment, two more tables or plates were added to 
the former ten; a circumstance from which this 
part of the Roman law has derived its name. 
This supplement, as well as the former body of 
laws, was received with great avidity, and the 
twelve tables continued to be respected at Rome, 
as the ancient titles by which men are supposed 
to hold any vahzable rights are revered in all! na- 
tions.. No complete copy of them being trans- 
mitted to modern times, we cannot fully judge of 
their value; but, from the fragments remaining 
in authors that occasionally cite them,? this code 
appears, in some clauses, to have been a first draft 
of the regulations which are necessary in the es- 
tablishment of property, and in making private 
parties answerable to public judicatures in all their 
disputes.—T he property of land was established 
by a fair prescription of two years, and that of 
other effects by a prescription of one year.— Any 
controversy concerning the boundaries of land 
property was to be determined by arbiters or jury- 
men appointed by the magistrate.—Parties cited 
to a court of justice were not at liberty to decline 
attendance.—Judgment in capital cases was com- 
petent only to the assembly of the people in their 
centuries; but this supreme tribunal! might dele- 
gate its powers by a special commission. 

In considering this code as a record of ancient 
manners, the following particulars are worthy of 
notice: 

The distinction of patrician and plebeian was 
so great, that persons in these different orders 
were not permitted to intermarry. 

The father being considered as the absolute 
master of his child, had a right even to kill, or 
expose him to sale.3 


1 Livy calls the twelve tables Fons omnis publici pri- 
vatique juris. Tacitus calls them Finis equiguris. And 
Crassus, in the Dialogue of Cic. de Orat. is made to say, 
Bibhiothecas omninm philosophorum, unus mihi videtur 
tabularum libellus superare. De Orat. lib. i. c. 44. 

2 Vid. Gravini de Origine Juris Civilis. Pighii Anal. 

3 The clause in the twelve tables relating to the father’s 
power of sale, contains a singular limitation. Vendendi 
filium patri potestas esto. Si pater filium ter venundavit 
filius a patre liber esto. The father may sell his child, but 
if he has sold him three timesthe child shall be free. (Dio- 
nys. lib. ii. c. 27. p. 97.) This law, in its first appearance 
carriesan implication that, until this restriction was applied, 
fathers practised selling their children times without limit. 
Nolaw, it may be said, is made against crimes altogether un- 
known; and, in general, what people do, may be inferred 
from what they are forbid to do; and yet the clause, con- 
sidered in this light, is full of absurdity. ‘The child, to be 
repeatedly sold, must have repeatedly disengaged himself 
from slavery. After being twice sold, he must have put 
himself a third time in the father’s power; and to render 
such cases the object of law in any age or country what- 
ever, the great law of parental affection must have been 
strangely suspended. The «uestion therefore may be sub- 
mitted to civilians and antiguaries, whether it be not easier 
to suppose a mistake in the tradition or in the record, or 
an unnecessary precaution in the compilers of this code; 
than such a frequency of the circumstances presumed in 
this clause, as would make the offence a proper object of 
legislation in any age or nation whatever; and whether 
this law may not have been, in its original intention, what 
it became in the subsequent applications of it, a mere pre- 
caution in favour of the parent, that he should not be de- 
prived of his child by surprise, and that unless he had sold 
him three times, he was not supposed to have sold him at 
all. The form by which a Roman father emancipated his 
zou, consisted of a sale three times repeated. The father 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Book L 


The interest of money was lii ied to one per 
cent ;4 but bankruptcy was treated as a crime, and, 
without any distinetion of fraud or misfortune, ex- 
posed the insolvent debtor to the mercy of his 
creditors, who might put him to deuth, dissect or 
quarter him, and distribute his members among 
them. 

Mixed with laws that arose from superstition, 
there were others containing proofs of great na- 
tional wisdom. In private every family were free 
to worship the gods in their own way. And in 
public, though certain forms were required, yet 
there was not any penalty annexed to the omission . 
of them, as the punishment of offences in this 
matter was left to the offended god. 

The people were required to build their houses 
two feet asunder, to leave eight feet for the ordi- 
nary breadth of streetsand highways, and double 
this breadth at the turnings. 

They were forbid to dress or to polish the wood 
employed in funeral piles, or to express their sor- 
row for the dead by wounding their flesh, tearing 
their hair, or by uttering indecent or lamentable 
cries. 

Such are a few of the more singular and charac- 
teristical clauses which are mentioned among the 
fragments of the twelve tables. The ardour of 
the people to obtain this code, and the unlimited 
powers which they entrusted to the commission- 
ers appointed to frame it, had nearly cost them 
their liberty ; and thus ended the progress of their 
commonwealth. The two additional tables, as 
well as the first ten, having been posted up for 
public inspection, and having been formally enact- 
ed by the senate and people, the object of the de- 
cemvirs’ commission was obtained, and it was ex- 
pected that they were to abdicate their power; 


sold him and received his price. The buyer once and 
again re-delivered the child, and had his price returned. 
After the third purchase, the buyer manumitted him by a 
singular ceremony prescribed in the laws. 

4 Nam primo duodecim tabulis sancitum, ne quis unci- 
ario (1-12 per mon. or 1 per cent. per aun.) fenore amplius 
exerceret, cum antea ex libidine locupletium agitaretur < 
dein rogatione tribunitia ad semuncias redacta; postremo 
vetitæ usure; muliisque plebiscitis obviam itum fraudibus, 

uæ toties repressæ mitas per artes rursus oriebantur. 

acit. Ann. lib. vi. 

Montesquieu ventures to reject the authority of Tacitus 
in this instance, and supposes that the law whicli he as- 
cribes to the decemvirs had no existence until the year 
U. C. 398; when according to Livy, lib. vi. it was obtained 
by the tribunes M. Duellius and L. Menenius, in favour ot 
the people. Haud aque patribus læta, insequente anno 
C. Martio et Cn. Manlio Coss. de unciario fenore, a M. 
Duellio, L. Menenio, tribunis plebis, rogatio perlata. It 
is indeed probable that many antiqnated laws were refer- 
red to this legendary code of the twelve tables on no bet- 
ter authority than that of their antiquity. And so great a 
reduction of interest was more likely to come from tribunes 
acting in favour of the people, who were generally the 
debtors, and who soon after procured the entire abolition 
of the interest of money, tlan from the decemvirs, who, be- 
ing of the aristocratical faction, took part with the creditors. 

5 The clause in this code respecting insolvent debtors, 
is equally strange with that which respects the power of 
the father, and shows no less upon what atrocious ideas 
of what they were to permit, as well as of what they were 
to prohibit, the compilers of this code proceeded. Their 
ideas in either, it is probable, were never realized. Livy 
says, that debtors were nexi et traditi creditoribus. (Liv. 
lib. ii. c.23 & 27.) But it is affirmed with great probabi- 
lity of truth, that no creditor ever took the full benefit of 
this law against his insolvent debtor, (Aul. Gel. lib. 20. e. 
1.) Laws that result from custom, and are suggested by 
real occasions, are genuine proofs of the reigning man- 
ners; but laws enacted by special lawgivers or commis- 
sioners, only indicate what occurs to the fancy of the 
compiler, and what are the prohibitions he is pleased to 
suppose may be necessary. 


Cuar. II.) 


but the principal persons vested with this trust, 
having procured it with a view to usurp the go- 
vernment, or being debauched by two years un- 
controlled dominion in the possession of it, refu- 
sed to withdraw from their station, and boldly 
ventured to persist in the exercise of their power 
after the time for which it was given had elapsed. 
At Rome the power of the magistrate was sup- 
posed to determine by his own resignation, and 
the republic might suffer a peculiar inconveniency 
from the obstinacy of particular persons, who con- 
tinued to exercise the functions of office after the 
period assigned them by law was expired. 

The decemvirs took advantage of this defect in 
the constitution, continued the exercise of their 
power beyond the period for which it was given, 
took measures to prevent the restoration of the 
scnate and the assemblies of the people, or the 
election of ordinary magistrates, and, even with- 
out cmploying much artifice, got the people to ac- 
quiesce in their usurpation, as an evil which could 
not be remedied; and the usurpers, in this as in 
other instances, seemed to meet with a submission 
that was proportioned to the confidence with which 
they assumed their power. The wrongs of the 
state appeared to make little impression on parties 
who had an equal concern to prevent them; but 
a barbarous insult offered to a private family re- 
kindled or gave occasion to the breaking out of a 
flame, which injuries of a more public nature only 
seemed to have smothered. 

Appius Claudius, one of the usurpers, being 
captivated with the beauty of Virginia, the child 
of an honourable family, and already betrothed 
to a person of her own condition, endeavoured to 
make himself master of her person, by depriving 
her at once of her parentage and of her liberty. 
For this purpose, under pretence that she had 
been born in scrvitude, and that she had becn 
stolen away in her infancy, he suborned a person 
to claim her as his slave. The decemvir hunself 
being judge in this iniquitous suit, gave judgmeut 
against the helpless party, and ordered her to be 
removed to the house of the person by whom she 
was claimed. In this affecting scene, the father, 
under pretence of bidding a last farewell to his 
child, came forward to embrace her; and, in the 
presence of the multitude, having then no other 
means to preserve her honour, he availed himself 
of the prerogative of a Roman father, and stabbed 
her to the heart with a knife. A gencral indig- 
nation instantly arose from this piteous sight, and 

all parties concurred, as at the expul- 
U. C. 304. sion of the Tarquins, to deliver the 
Republic from so hateful a tyranny.6 

The senate and patrician administration being 
re-established by the cheerful concurrence of the 
plebeians, and the former government restored 
with the consent of all parties, a tide of mutual 
confidence ensued, which led to the choice of the 
most popular persons into the office of consul, and 
procured a ready assent from the nobles to every 
measure which tended to gratify the people, 

The danger which had been recently experi- 
enced from the exercise of uncommon discre- 
tionary powers, produced a resolution to forbid, 
under the severest penalties of confiscation and 
death, any person ever to propose the granting of 
any such powers. The consecration of the per- 


6 Liv. lib. iii. c. 37. Dionys. Hal. fine. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


21 


sons of the tribunes, which, under the late 
usurpation, had almost lost its eftect, was now 
renewed, and extended, though in a meaner de- 
gree, to the ediles and inferior officers, who were 
supposed to act under the tribunes in preserving 
the rights of the people. 

The patricians likewise consented to have the 
acts of the senate formally recorded, placed in the 
temple of Cercs, and committed to the care of the 
ediles.” This was in fact a considerable diminu- 
tion of the power of the consuls, who had been 
hitherto considered as the keepers and interpre- 
ters of the senate’s decrees, and who had often 
suppressed or carried into execution the acts of 
this body at pleasure. 

But the most striking effect, as- 
U. C. 304. cribed to the present unanimity of 
the citizens, was the ease with which 
the plebeian assemblies were permitted to extend 
the authority of their acts to all the different or- 
ders of the commonwealth. 

The comitia, or asscmblies of the Roman 
people, as may be collected from the past obser- 
vations, were now of three denominations; that 
of the curie, the centuries, and the tribes. In 
assemblies of the first and second denomination, 
all citizens were supposed to be present ; and laws 
were enactcd relating to the policy of the state in 
general, as well as to particular departments, and 
separate bodies of men. ‘The centuries disposed 
of civil offices, and the curie of military com- 
mands.8 In the assembly of the tribes, composed 
of plebeians alone, the tribunes were clected; and 
acts were passed to regulate the proceedings of 
their own order, beyond which, in the ancient 
times of the Republic, thcir authority did not ex- 
tend. But as the senate denied the right of the 
tribes to enact laws that should bind the comniu- 
nity, the plebeians, in their turn, disputed the 
legislative authority of the senatc. The centu- 
ries alone were supposed to enjoy the right of 
enacting laws for the commonwealth,’ 

This distribution, however, was partial, and 
tended to lodge tlic sovereignty of the state in the 
hands of the patricians, who, though no more 
than a part of the people, were enabled, by their 
undoubted majority in the assemblies of the centu- 
turics as well as in the senate, to give law to tlie 
whole. 

Equity and sound policy required that the ple- 
beians should have a voice in the legislature of a 
commonwealth of which they made so consider- 
able a part. This privilege appearcd to be neces- 
sary, in order to secure them against the partial 
influence of a separate order of men. ‘They ac- 
cordingly obtained it; but in a manner that tend- 
ed to disjoin, rather than to unite into one body, 
the collateral members of the state. Instead of 
a deliberative voice, by which they might concur 
with the senate and comitia of the centurics, or 
by which they might control and amend their 
decrees, they obtained for themselves a separate 
and independent power of legislation, by which, 
as a countcrpoise to the patrician acts, which 
might pass in the centuries without their concur 
rence, they could, on their part, and without thie 


7 Liv. lib. iii. 

8 Liv. lib. v. c. 52. Lib. ix. c. 38. Cic. ad Famil. lib. i. 
ep. 9. Lib. vi. c. 21. 

9 These were termed Leges; the resolutions of the 
senate were termed Senatus Consulta, and those of the 
tribes, Plebiscito 


22 


presence or consent of the nobles, 
U. C. 304. make plebeian acts that could equal- 
ly bind the whole community.! 

This rude and artless manner of communicating 
a share of the legislature to the inferior order of 
the people, tended greatly to increase the intricacy 
of this singular constitution, which now opened, 
in fact, three distinct sources of legislation, and 
produced laws of three different denominations; 
decrees of the senate,2 which had a temporary 
authority; acts of the centuries ;3 and resolutions 
of the tribes ;4 and by these means undoubtedly 
made way for much intestine division, distraction, 
and tumult. 

So far animosity to the late usurpation had 
united all orders of men in the measures that 
followed the expulsion of the decemvirs; but the 
spirit of cordiality did not long survive the sense 
of those injuries, and that resentment to a com- 
mon enemy from which this transient unanimity 
arose. The plebeians had removed some part of 
the establishment, in which the patricians were 
unequally favoured; but they bore wit the 
greater impatience the inequalities which remain- 
ed, and by which they were still condemned to 
act a subordinate part in the commonwealth. 
They were still excluded from the office of con- 
sul, and from that of the priesthood. They were 
debarred from intermarriage with the nobles by an 
express law, which had been enacted, lest the 
sexes from passion, forgetting distinctions, should 
in this manner unite their different ranks; but 
being now, in some measure, by the late act in 
favour of the comitia of the tribes, become joint 
or rival sovereigns of the state, they could not 
long acquiesce in these unequal conditions. 

A few years after the restoration 
U. C. 308. of the commonwealth, Canuleius, a 
plebeian, being one of the tribuues, 
moved the celebrated act which bears his name,°® 
to repeal the clause of the twelve tables whic 
prohibited the intermarriage of patricians and 
plebeians. ‘The other nine tribunes joined at the 
same time in a claim of more importance—that 
the office of consul should be laid open to all the 
different orders of the commonwealth, and might 
be held by plebeians, as well as patricians. ‘The 
senate, and the whole order of nobles, having for 
some time, by delays, and by involving the state, 
as usual, in foreign wars, endeavoured to suspend 
tiie determination of these questions, were at 
length obliged to gratify the people in the less 
material part of their pretensions, respecting the 
intermarriage of different ranks, in order, if pos- 
sible, to pacify them on the refusal of the more 
important claim, which related to their capacity 
of being elected into the office of consul. 

To elude their demands on this material point, 
it was observed, that of the sacrifices and other 
duties belonging to the priesthood, which, by the 
sacred laws of religion, could be performed only 
Ly persons of noble birth, many were to be per- 
formed by the consul, and could not, without 
profanation, be committed to any person of ple- 
beian extraction; and that, by this consideration 
alone, the plebeians must be for ever excluded 


1 Dionys. Hal. p. 306. Liv. lib. iii. c. 55. 
2 Senatus Consulta. 

3 Leges. 

5 Lex Canuleia. 
6 Dionys. Hal. 


4 Plebiscita. 
Liv. lib. iv. c. 1. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book 1. 


from the dignity of consul. Superstition, for the 
most part, being founded on custom alone, no 
change can be made in the custom, without appear- 
ing to destroy the religion that is founded upon it. 
This difficulty accordingly put a stop, for a while, 
to the hasty pace with which the plebeians ad- 
vanced to the consulate : but this obstruction was 
at length removed, as many difficulties are re- 
moved in human affairs, by a slight evasion, and 

by the mere change of a name. The 
U. C. 309. title of consul being changed for that 
of military tribune, and no sacerdotal 
function being included in the duties of this office, 
plebeians, though not qualified to be consuls, 
were allowed to offer themselves as candidates, 
and to be elected military tribunes with consular 
power. In this manner the supposed profanation 
was avoided, and plebeians were allowed to be 
qualified for the highest office of the state. ‘The 
mere privilege, however, did not, for a consider- 
able time, enable any individual of that order to 
attain to the honour of first magistrate of the 
commonwealth. The plebeians in a body had 
prevailed against the law which excluded them; 
but as separate candidates for office, still yielded 
the preference to the patrician competitor; or, if 
a plebeian were likely to prevail at any particular 
election of military tribunes, the patricians had 
credit enough to have the nomination of consuls 
revived in that instance, in order to disappoint 
their antagonists. 

Together with the separation of the military 
and sacerdotal functions, which took place on this 
occasion, another change, more permanent and of 
greater moment, was eflected. Ever since the in- 
stitution of the census, or muster, the enrolment 
of the people was become a principal object of 
the executive power. In the first ages it belonged 
to the king, together with all the other functions 
of state. In the sequel, it devolved on the con- 
suls; and they accordingly, at every period of five 
years, by the rules of this office, could dispose of 
every citizen’s rank, assign him his class, place 
shim in the rolls of the senate, or on that of the 
knights, or strike him off from either; and, by 
charging him with all the burdens of a subject, 
while they stripped him of the privileges of a 
citizen, deprive him at once of his political con- 
sequence,’ and of his state as a Roman.® 

‘These regulations were accordingly enforced, 
not held up into public view merely to awe the 
people. The magistrate actually took an account 
of the citizen’s estate, inquired into his character, 
and assigned him his place ; promoted him to the 
senate or to the knighthood ; degraded or disfran- 
chised, according as he judged the party worthy 
or unworthy of his freedom, of the rank which 
he held, or of that to which he aspired in the 
commonwealth,’ j 

So important a trust committed to the discre- 
tion of an officer elected for a different purpose, 
took its rise in the simplicity of a rude age; but 
continued for a considerable period without any 
flagrant examples of abuse. It was, nevertheless, 
that branch of the consular magistracy which the 
patricians were least willing to communicate or 
to share with the plebeians. While they admit- 


7 Liv. lib. iv. c. 24. l l 

8 The citizens who came under this predicament were 
termed Ærarii. 

9 Lis. ub. iv. R 


Cuar. IL) 


ted them, therefore, to be elected tribunes with 
consular power, they stipulated, that the charge 
of presiding in the census, or musters, should be 
disjoined from it; and that, under the title of 
censors, this charge should remain with persons 
of patrician birth.!0 They contend- 
U. C. 310. ed for this separation, not with a 
professed intention to reserve the 
office of censor to their own order, but under pre- 
vence that persons invested with the consular 
power, being so frequently employed in the field 
against the enemies of the commonwealth, could 
not attend to the affairs of the city, or perform all 
the duties of censor at their regular periods. 

But whatever may have been the real motive 
for separating the department of censor from that 
of consul, the change appears to have been sea- 
sonably made; and may be considered asa strikin 
example of that singular felicity with which the 
Romans, for some time, advanced in their policy, 
as well as in their fortunes. Hitherto the Roman 
consul, being a warrior, was chiefly intent on the 
glory he was to reap in the field, and to gain at 
the expense of the enemies of the state. He dis- 
dained to seize the advantages which he had in 
his power, in the capacity of a clerk or accountant 
entrusted with the census, or enrolment of his 
fellow-citizens ; nor does it appear that any pecu- 
liar attention was given to thie choice of consuls 

.on the year of the census, as being then vested 
with any dangerous measures of powcr. But 
considering the height at which party disputes 
were then arrived, and the great consequence of 
a citizen’s rank and place on the rolls, it was no 
longer safe to entrust in the same hands the civil 
rights of the soma and the executive powers of 
the state. T'he consul, being frequently raised 
to his station by party intrigues, and coming into 
power with the ardour of private ambition and of 
party zeal, might have casily; in the manner of 
making up the rolls of the people, gratified his 
own resentments, or that of his faction. The 
office of consul, in his capacity of military leader, 
was naturally the province of youth, or of vigour- 
ous manhood ; but that of tensor, when disjoined 
from it, fell as naturally into the hands of persons 
of great authority and experienced age ; to whom, 
in the saticty of brighter honours, the people 
might safely entrust the estimate of their fortunes, 
and the assignment of their rank. In such hands 
it continued, for a considerable period, to be very 
faithfully discharged; and by connccting the dig- 
nities of citizen, and the honours of the state, 
with private as well as public virtue, had the 
happiest effects on the manners of the people. 

The number of censors, like that of the con- 
suls, was limited to two; but that of the consular 
tribunes was left undetermined, and at successive 
elections was augmented from three to eight. 
This has given occasion to some historians, who 
are quoted by Livy, to ascribe the institution of 
this office, not to the importunity of the plebeian 
party, but to the exigencies of the state; which 
being assailed by numerous enemies, and not 
having as yet devised the method of multiplying 
commanders, under the titles of proconsul, were 
led to substitute officers of a different denomina- 
tion, whose numbers might be increased at dis- 
cretion. It is indeed probable, that, in the progress 
of this government, new institutions, and the se- 


e 


10 Liv. lib. iv. c. 8. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


23 


paration of departments, were suggested no less 
by the multiplicity of growing affairs, than by the 
pretensions of party, or by the ambition of sepa- 
rate pretenders to power. In the first of those 
ways, we are led to account for the institution of 
the plebeian ediles, already mentioned; for that 
of the præfectus annonæ, or inspector of the 
markets, together with the additions that were, 
in the course of these changes, continually made 
to the number of quæstors. 

The quæstors had been long established at 
Rome; they had charge of the public funds, and 
followed the kings and the consuls as commissa- 
ries or provisors in the field. During the busy 
period which we have been now considering, 
their number was augmented from two to four; 

and the places were filled, for the 
U. C. 333. most part, with patricians, though 
not limited to persons of this rank. 

The prefectus annonx, or inspector of the 
markets, was an officer occasionally named, on a 
prospect of scarcity, to guard against famine, and 
to provide for the wants of the people. Rome 
was in fact a place of arms, or a military station, 
often depending as much for subsistence on the 
foresight and care of its officers, as on the course 
of its ordinary markets. Without a proper at- 
tention to this particular on the part of the state, 
the people were exposed to suffer from scarcity. 
On the approaches of famine, they became mu- 
tinous and disorderly, and were ready to barter 

their freedom, and the constitution 
U. C. 313. of their country, for bread. During 
the famine which first suggested the 
separation of this trust from that of the ordinary 
officers of state, Sp. Malius, a Roman knight, 
being possessed of great wealth, engrossed great 
quantities of corn; and having it in his power to 
supply the wants of the poor, endeavoured to 
form a dangerous party among them, and by their 
means to raise himself to the head of the com- 
monwealth. ‘The senate took the alarm, and, as 
in the most dangerous crisis of the state, had re- 
course to the nomination of a dictator. Melius 
being cited to appear before him, and having re- 
fused to answer, was put to death. 

The care of supplying the people with corn, 
which had been at this time committed to L. 
Minucius, was from thenceforward entrusted to 
citizens of the first rank, and the office itself be- 
came necessary in the political establishment of 
the commonwealth. 

Hitherto we have considered the Roman Re- 
public as a scene of mere political deliberations 
and councils, prepared for contention, and seem- 
ingly unable to exert any united strength. The 
state, however, presented itself to the nations 
around it under a very different aspect, as a horde 
of warriors, who had made and preserved their 
acquisitions by force, and who never betrayed 
any signs of weakness in the foreign wars they 
had to maintain. 

In their transition from monarchy to republic, 
indeed, there scems to have been a temporary in- 
termission of natural exertions. Private citizens, 
annually raised to the head of the republic, did 
not with their elevation acquire the dignity of 
prices 3 they did not command the same respect 
rom their fellow citizens at home, nor had the 
same consideration from rival nations abroad. 
The frequent dissensions of the people seemed 
to render them an easy prey to their enemies. 


24 


During the life of Tarquin many powers united 
against them in behalf of the exiled king. They 
were stripped of their territory, confined to the 
walls of their city, and deserted by their allies.) 
The fortune of the state seemed to fall with its 
monarchy. The event, however, belied these 
appearances, and the power of the annual magis- 
tracy soon became more formidable abroad, though 
less awful at home, than that of the monarch. 
The republican government sought for respite 
from domestic trouble in the midst of foreign war, 
and the forces of the state, instead of being re- 
strained, were impelled into action by intestine 
divisions. The ambition with which the lower 
ranks of the people endeavoured to watch their 
superiors, the solicitude with which the higher 
order endeavoured to preserve its distinction, the 
exercise of ability which, in this contest, was 
common to both, enabled them to act against fo- 
reign enemies with a spirit that was whetted, but 
not worn out, in their domestic quarrels. 

The consuls annually elected, brought to the 
helm of affairs a fresh vigour of mind and conti- 
nual supplies of renewed ambition. Every ofti- 
cer, on his accession to the magistracy, was in 
haste to distinguish his administration, and to 
merit his triumph; and numerous as the enemies 
of the Republic appeared, they were not sufficient 
to furnish every Roman consul, in his turn, with 
an opportunity to earn this envied distinction. 
It was given only to those who obtained actual 
victories, and who killed a certain number of 
their enemies.? 

In‘this nursery of warriors, honours, tending 
to excite ambition or to reward military merit, 
were not confined to the leaders of armies alone : 
the victorious soldier partook in the triumph of 
his leader, and had subordinate rewards propor- 
tioned to the proofs he had given of his valour. 
“I bear the scars,’ said Dentatus (while he 
pleaded for a share in the conquered lands to 
himsclf and his fellow-soldiers,) “of five and 
forty wounds, of which twelve were received in 
one day. I have carried many prizes of valour. 
Fourteen civic crowns bestowed upon me by those 
I had saved in‘ battle. Three times the mural 
crown ; having been so often the first to scale the 
enemies’ walls. Eight times the prize of distinc- 
tion in battle. Many tokens of esteem and gra- 
titude from the hands of generals. Eighty-three 
chains of gold, sixty bracelets, eighteen lances, 
and thirty-five sets of horse-furniturc, from pri- 
vate persons, who were pleased to approve of my 
services,’’3 

Under the influence of councils so fertile in 
the invention of military distinctions, and in 
armies of which the soldier was roused by so many 
incentives to military ambition, the frequent 
change of commanders, which is commonly im- 
politic, proved a perpetual renovation of the ar- 
dour and spirit with which armies were led. In 
public deliberations on the subject of war, the 
vehement ambition of individuals proved a conti- 
nual incentive to vigorous resolutions, by which 
the state not only soon recovered the consequence 
which it secmed to have lost in its transition from 
monarchy, but was speedily enabled to improve 
upon all its formcr advantages, as head of the 
Latin confederacy; frequently to vanquish the 


1 Dionys. Hal. lib. v. 2 Five thousand in one field. 
3 Dionys. Hal lib. x. c. 36. vel p. 362. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


Sabines, the Hernici, the Volsci and Etruscans, 
and, in about a hundred years after the expulsion 
of Tarquin, to extend its dominion greatly be- 
yond the territories which had been in the ol 
session of that prince. In one direction, from 
Falerium to Anxur, about sixty miles; and in 

the other, from the summits of the 
U. C. 344. Appenines to the sea: and Rome, 

the metropolis of this little empire, 
was become, with a few competitors, one of the 
principal states of Italy. 

The first and nearest object of its emulation 
at this period was Veiæ, an Etruscan principality, 
of which the capital, situated about nine miles 
from Rome, was built on an eminencc, and se- 
cured by precipices. 

The Romans, even before the change of their 
government from the form of a principality to 
that of a republic, had been in possession of the 
Tiber and both its banks; but on the right of 
this river were still circumscribed by the Vei- 
æntes, with whom they had waged long and 
desperate wars; and, as may be supposed among 
rivals in so close a neighbourhood, with imminent 
danger to both. Veiæ, according to Dionysius, 
was equal in extent to Athens, and, like the other 
Etruscan cantons, was further advanced than 
Rome in the arts of peace, probably better pro- 
vided with the resources of war, but inferior in 
the magnanimity of its councils and in the courage 
of its people. ‘The Veientes being, after a vari- 
ety of struggles, beat from the field, they retired 
within their walls, suffered themselves to be in- 
vested, and underwent a-siege or blockade of ten 
years. The Romans, in order to reduce them, 
continued during those ten years in the field, 
without any interruption or distinction of sea- 
sons; made secure approaches, fortifying them- 

selves in the posts which they suc- 
U. C. 357. cessively occupied, and in the end 
entered the place by storm. 

In these operations, we are told, that they 
learned to make war with more regularity than 
they had formerly practised; and having, some 
little time before, appointed a military pay for 
such of their people as served on foot, they at 
this time extcnded the same establishment to their 
horsemen or knights ; imposed taxes on the people 
in order to defray this expense, and made other 
arrangements, which soon after enabled them to 
carry their enterprises to a greater distance, and 
to conduct them with more order and system: 
circumstances which, together with the accessions 
of territory and power, gained by the reduction 
of Veiæ, rendered this event a remarkable epocha 
in the history of Rome. 

The use which they proposed to make of their 
conquest was partly founded in the original policy 
of the state. The practice of incorporating van- 
quished enemies, indeed, with the Roman people, 
had been long discontinued: for even Tarquin, 
it is said, had introduced the custom of enslaving 
captives, and this fate the citizens of Veie un- 
derwent;4 but their lands, and the city itself, 
offered a tempting prize to the conquerors. And 
accordingly it was proposed to transplant into 
those vacant possessions and seats one half of the 
Roman senate and people.’ 

This proposal was-extremely acceptable to per- 
sons of inferior condition, who hoped to double 


~ 


4 Liv. lib. v. c. 22. 5 ibid. c. 24 


Cuar. IL] 


their possessions, and flattered themselves that 
they might double the power of the state: but it 
was strenuously opposed by the senate and nobles, 
as tending to divide and weaken the common- 
wealth, and as more likely to restore a rival than 
to strengthen themselves. It was eluded by a 
partial division of the Veizn territory, in which 
seven jugera, or about four English acres, were 
assigned as the lot of a family; and by these 
means the more indigent citizens were provided 
for, without any hazard of dismembering the state. 

But while the Romans were thus availing them- 
selves of the spoils of a fallen enemy, and pro- 
bably enjoying, on the extinction of their rival, a 
more than common degree of imagined security, 
they became themselves an example of the insta- 
bility of human affairs; being assailed by a new 
and unlooked-for enemy, who came like a stroke 
of lightning on their settlement, dispersed their 
people, and reduced their habitations to ashes. 

‘The Gauls, who are said to have passed the 
Alps in three several migrations, about two 
hundred years before this date, being now mas- 
ters of all the plains on the Po, and of all the 
coasts of the Adriatic to the banks of the river 
Sena, where they had a settlement, which, from 
their name was called Sena Gallia; and being 
still bent on extending their possessions, or shift- 
ing their habitations, fad passed the Appenines, 
and laid siege to Clusium, the capital of a small 
nation in Paay The inhabitants of this 
p made application to the Romans for succour; 

ut could obtain no more than a deputation to 
intercede with the Gauls in their behalf. The 
deputies who were sent on this business, and 
commissioned to act only as mediators, having 
appeared in arms on the side of the besieged, the 
auls complained of their conduct as a breach of 
faith, and as a departure from the neutrality which 
the Romans professed : and being denied satisfac- 
tion on this complaint, they dropped their design 
on Clusium, and turned their arms against these 
mediators, who had violated the laws of war. 
They advanced on the left of the Tiber, found 
the Romans posted to receive them on the Allia, 
a small river which was the limit of the Roman 
territory, in the country of the Sabines, about ten 
miles from Rome; and, with the same impetuo- 
sity which hitherto attended them, they passed 
the Allia on the right of the Roman army, drove 
them into the angle that is formed by the conflu- 
ence of the two rivers, put all who withstood 
them to the sword, and forced the remainder into 
the Tiber, where numbers perished, or, being cut 
off from their retreat to Rome, were dispersed in 
the neighbouring country. 
This calamity is said to have so 
U. C. 363. much stunned or overwhelmed the 
Roman people, that they made no 
farther attempt to defend their city. All the 
youth that were fit to carry arms retired into the 
capitol. The weak or infirm, whether from sex 
or age, fled as from a place condemned to de- 
struction, or suffered themselves to be surprised 
and cut off in the streets. 

The Gauls, having employed three days in the 
pursuit and slaughter of those who fied from the 
ficld of battle, on the fourth day advanced to- 
wards the walls of Rome. But being alarmed at 
first by the general desertion of the battlements, 


6 Liv. lib. v. c. 35, &c. 
D 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


25 


which they mistook for an ambuscade or an ar- 
tifice to draw them into a snare, they examined 
all the avenues with care before they ventured 
to enter the gates. ‘The more effectually to dis- 
lodge every enemy, they set fire to the city, re- 
duced it to ashes, and took post on the ruins, in 
order to besiege the capitol, which alone held 
out.’ In this state of affairs, the republic, already 
so formidable to all its neighbours, was supposed 
to be extinguished for ever. The fame of its 
ruin reached even to Greece, where Rome began 
to be considered at this time as a rising and pros- 
perous commonwealth.8 
The Gauls remained in possession of the ruins 
for six months; during which time they made a 
fruitless attempt to scale the rock on which the 
capitol was built; and being repulsed by Man- 
lius, who, for his vigilance and valour on this oc- 
casion, acquired the name of Capitolinus, they 
continued to invest and block up the fortress, in 
hopes of being able to reduce it by famine. The 
Romans, who were shut up in the capitol, still 
preserved the forms of their commonwealth, and 
made acts in the name of the senate and people. 
Sensible that Camillus, under whose auspices 
they had reduced the city of Veiæ, and triumphed 
over many other enemies, now in exile on the 
score of an invidious charge of embezzling the 
spoils he had won at that place, was the fittest 
person to retrieve their affairs; they absolved him 
of this accusation, reinstated him in the qualifi- 
cation to command their armies ;? and, in order 
that he might assemble their allies and collect the 
remains of their late army, which was dispersed 
in the neighbouring country, vested him with the 
ower of dictator. In this extremity of their 
ortunes, he overlooked his wrongs, procured 
numbers to resort to his standard, and hastened 
to arm for the preservation of his country. He 
came to the relief of the capitol at a critical mo- 
ment, when the besieged, being greatly reduced 
by famine, had already capitulated, and were 
paying a ransom for themselves and their re- 
maining effects, Before this transaction was com- 
pleted, he surprised the besiegers, obliged them 
to relinquish their prize, and atterwards, in a de- 
cisive battle that was fought in the neighbourhood 
of Rome, revenged the disaster which his country- 
men had suffered on the banks of the Allia.!0 
Whatever may have been the true account of 
this famous adventure, the Romans have given 
it a place in their history, retained a deep impres- 
sion of their danger from the Gauls, and trom 
thence dated the origin of some particulars in 
their policy, which seem to have arisen from such 
an impression. They set apart particular funds 
in the treasury, to be spared in all other possible 
exigences of the state, and reserved for a resource 
in case of a Gaulish invasion. ‘They subjected 
the magistrate to certain general restrictions, but 
allowed an exception in case of an invasion froin 
the Gauls; and it is likely that, in the age in 
which they took these alarming impressions, they 
had not yet acquired those advantages of disci- 
pline and military skill, in which they were after- 
wards so much superior to the Gauls and other 
barbarous neighbours.!! 


7 Plutarch, in vit. Camilli. 8 Ibid. 

9 Ln. lib. v. c. 32. 10 Ibid. c. 43, &c. 

11 The establishment of the Legion, and the improve- 
ment nade in the choice of its weapons and manner of 
array, are mentioned as subsequent to this date: and the 


26 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


Although historians have amply supplied the] yet entire for our reception ?” 


Boon F 


To this specicus 


detail of history before this event, they neverthe- | argument might have been opposed the considera- 


less acknowledge, that all prior evidence of facts 
perished in the destruction of Rome; that all re- 
cords and monuments of what the Romans had 
formerly bcen, were then to be gathered from the 
ruins of cottages, which had becn for several 
months trodden under foot by a barbarous enemy; 
that the laws of the twelve tables, the People’s 
Charters of Right, and the Forms of the Consti- 
tution, were to be collected in fragments of plates 
which were dug from the rubbisli of their former 
habitations; and that nothing remaining to mark 
the former position of Rome, besides the capitol, 
raised on its rock, and surrounded with ruins, 
the people deliberated whether they should at- 
tempt to renew their settlement on this ground, 
or transfer it to Veiæ. It had been formerly pro- 
posed to remove to that place one half of the se- 
nate and people. It was then proposed, that they 
should choose that as the proper ground on which 
to restore the name and the seat of thcir common- 
wealth. “ Why,” said the promoters of this de- 
sign, “attempt, at a great expensc, and with so 
much labour, to clear out the wretched ruins of 
a fallen city, while we have another, provided 
with private and public buildings of every sort, 


tion of the many advantages of their former situa- 
tion; its place on a navigable river, its command 
of the passage from Latium to Etruria, and cf 
the navigation of the Tiber from the descents of 
the Appenines to the sea. But motives cf su- 
perstition and national pride were suppescd to 
be of greater weight. ‘Would you,” said Ca- 
millus, “abandon the seats of your ancestors? 
‘Would you have Veie restored, and Rome te 
perish for ever? Would you relinquish the altars 
of the gods, who have fixed thcir shrines in these 
sacred places; to whose aid you are indebted for 
so many triumphs, and to whom you owe the 
conquest of those habitations for which you now 
propose to forsake their temples?” 

Convinced by this argument, the Romans, dc- 
termined to remain in their ancient situation, 
proceeded to restore their habitations, and, in the 
course of a year, accomplished the work of re- 
building their city. An era from which, as from 
a second foundation, may be dated the rise of the 
commonwealth, and the beginning of a period, 
in which its history, though still controverted in 
some particulars, is less doubtful than before, or 
less disfigured with fable.! 


CHAPTER HI. 


Scene of Foreign War and Domestic Dispute opened with reviving Rome—F action or Conspt- 
racy of Manlius—Condemnation—FPlebeians elected into the Office of Consular Tribunes— 
Aspire to the Consulate— The first Plebeian Consul—Establishment of the Pretor—Patrician 
Ediles— The Plebeians qualified to hold all the Offices of State—The Measure of Roman 
Magistracy complete—Review of the Constitution—Iis seeming defects—But great successes— 
Policy of the State respecting Foreign or Vanquished Nations—Formation of the Legion— 
Series of Wars— With the Samnites, Campanians— The Tarentines—Pyrrhus—Sovereignty 
of laly—Different Footing on which the Inhabitants stood. 


THE Romans were not allowed to restore 
their community, nor to rebuild their habitations 
in peace. They were invaded by 

U. C. 365. the Equi, the Volsci, the Hernici, 
the Etruscans, and some of their 
own Latin confederates ;2 who dreading the re- 
establishment of a commonwealth, from which 
they had already suffered so much, and whose 
power was so great an object of their jealousy, 
made every effort to prevent it. During a pcriod 


Romans, it is confessed, made less progress in every other 
art than in thatof war. Their general Camillus, at his 
triumph for the victory obtained over the Gauls, made his 
entry into Rome, having his visage painted with red; a 
practice, says Pliny, which is yet to be found among na- 
tions of Africa, who remain in a state of barbarity, and 
which this natural historian was inclined to consider as a 
characteristic of barbarous manners. 

1 Some parts even of the history that follows, are doubt- 
ful. The names of dictators and of consuls, the reality 
of entire campaigus, as well as of single actions, are con- 
troverted, (Liv. lib. i. c. 5. & 26. lib. v. c. 55. lib. viii. c. 38. 
lib. ix. c. 15.) but that which preceded this date rests almost 
^s tradition alone, (Liv. lib. vi.c.1.) It serves, however, 
Mr noou as, what the Romans themselves believed; and 
ie therefore the best comment we can have on the genius 
and tendency, as well as the origin, of their political in- 
slitutions 

2 Liv lib vi. c. 2. & 16. 


of one hundred and seventeen years which fol- 
lowed, they accordingly had to encounter a suc- 
cession of enemies, in subduing of whom they 
became the sovereigns of Italy; while they con- 
tinued to undergo internal convulsions, which, 
as formerly, proved the birth of political institu- 
tions, and filled up the measure of their national 
establishment. 

During this period, the plebeians, far from be- 
ing satisfied with their past acquisitions, made 
continual efforts to extend their privileges. The 
tribunes, by traducing the senate, and by dis- 
playing in their harangues the severities of the 
patrician creditor, and the sufferings of the ple- 
beian debtor, still inflamed the animosity of their 
party; the republic itself was so feebly established, 
that ambitious citizens were encouraged, by means 
of factions raised among persons of the lower 
class, to have thoughts of subverting the govern- 
ment. In this manner Manlius, the famous 
champion ef the capitol, who, as has been ob- 
served, by his vigilance and valour preserved that 
fortress from the Gauls, formed a design to usurp 
the sovereignty. Presuming on his merit in this 
and other services, he thought himself above the 
laws; and endeavouring by his intrigues with 


Car. TL] 


the populace, to form a party against the state, 
he incurred, what was at Rome of all imputations 
the most detested, that of aspiring to be king. In 
opposition to this conspiracy, whether real or fic- 
titious, the Republic was committed to the care 
of a dictator; and Manlius being brought before 
him, endeavoured to turn the suspicion of malice 
and envy against his accusers. He produced four 
hundred citizens, whom he had redeemed from 
their creditors and released from chains. He 
produced the spoils of thirty enemies slain by 
himself in battle; forty badges of honour con- 
ferred on him by generals under whom he had 
served; rany citizens whom he had rescued from 
the enemy, and in the number of those he had 
saved, he pointed at Caius Servilius, second in 
command to the dictator, who now carried the 
sword of the state against the life of a person 
who had saved his own. And in the conclusion 
of his defence, “Such were the treasons,” he 
said, “by which the friends of the pedple were 


‘to be sacrificed to the senate.” 


His merits in the public service were great, 
and entitled him to any reward from the people, 
except a surrender of their liberties. His libera- 
lity to the more indigent citizens, if it proceeded 
from humanity, was noble; but if it proceeded 
from a design to alienate their affections from the 
public, or transfer them to himself, was a crime; 
and the most splendid services, considered as the 
artifices of a dangcrous ambition, were the ob- 
jects of punishment, not of reward. 

The people, it is said, while they had in thcir 
view the capitcl, which had been saved by the 
vigilance and bravery of this unfortunate crimi- 


nal, hesitated in their judgment; but their meet- 


ing being adjourned to the following day, and to 
a different place, they condemned him to be 
thrown from the rock on which he had so lately 
signalized his valour.3 

Such alarms to the gencral state of the com- 
monwealth, had their temporary effect in sus- 
pending the animosity cf parties; but could not 
reconcile their interests, nor prevent the periodi- 
cal heats which continually arese on the return 

of disputes. ‘The plebeians had been 
U. C. 366. now above forty years in possession 
of a title to hold the office of con- 
sular tribune, but had not been able to prevail at 
any election.4 The majority of the centuries 
were still composed of patricians; and when 
candidates of plebeian rank were likely, by their 
personal consideration, to carry a majority, the 
other party, in such particular instances, had in- 
fluence enough, as has been observed, to revive 
the election of consuls, a title from which the 
plebeians, by law, were still excluded. 

The plebeians, however, by the zeal of their 
party, by the assiduity and influence of indivi- 
duals who aspired to oflice, by the increase of 
their numbers in the first and second classes, by 
their alliance with the patrician families in con- 
sequence of marriage, at last surmounted these 
difäculties, obtained the dignity of consular tri- 
bune for one of thei own order, and from 

thenceforward began to divide the 
U. ©. 353. votes of the centuries with the pa- 
trician candidates. They were ac- 
cordingly raised in their turn to what was then 
the first office of the state, and in which nothing 


_- 


3 Liv. Jib. vi ¢. 27. 4 Ibid. c. 37. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 27 


was wanting but the title of consul. To thi: 
too they were soon led to aspire; and were urged 
to make the concluding step in the rise of their 
order, by the ambıtion of a female patrician; 
who, being married into a plebeian family, bore 
with impatience the mortifications to which she 
was exposed in the condition of her new rela- 
tions. She excited her husband, she engaged 
her own kindred among the patricians, she roused 
the whole plebeian party to remove the indigni- 
ties which yet remained affixed to their race, in 
being supposed unworthy to hold the consular 


dignity. 
U CiT 


Licinius Stolo, the husband of 
this lady, and Fublius Sextius, 
another active and ambitious ple- 
beian, were placed in the college of tribunes, in 
order to urge this point. ‘They began the exer- 
cise of their office by proposing three very im- 

ortant laws: the first intended for the rehef of 
insolvent debtors; by which all payments made 
on the score of interests, should be deducted from 
the capital, and three years be allowed to pay of 
the remainder. , 

A sccond law to limit the extent of estates in 
land, by which no citizen should be allowed to 
engross above five hundred jugera,$ or to have in 
stock above one hundred bullocks, and five hun- 
dred goats and sheep. 

A third law to restore the clection of consuls, 
in place of consular tribunes, with an express 
provision that, at least, one of the consuls should 
be of plebeian descent. 

The patricians having gained some of the tri- 
bunes to their party, prevailed upon them to dis- 
sent from their colleagues, and to suspend, by 
their negatives, all proceedings on the subject of 
these laws. ‘The tribunes, Licinius and Sex- 
tius, in their turn, suspended the usual election 
of magistrates, and put a stop to all the ordinary 
affairs of state. 

An anarchy of five years ensued,® during which 
time the Republic, bereft of all its officers, had no 
magistracy besides the tribunes of the people, 
who were not legally vested with any degree of 
executive power.’ Any alarm from abroad must 
have suspended the contest at home, and forced 
the parties to a treaty :. but they are said to have 
enjoyed, in this state of domestic trouble, unin- 
terrupted peace with their neighbours ; a cirewn- 
stance from which we may infer, that, in most 
of their wars, they were themselves the ageres- 
sors, and owed this interval of peace to the va- 
cancy of the consulate, and to their want of the 
prompters, by whom they were usually excited 
to quarrel with their nceighbeurs. 

In the several questions, on which the parties 
were now at variance, the patricians contended 
chiefly for the exclusion of plebcians from the 
office or title of consul; and, as an insuperable 
bar to their admission, still insisted on the sacri- 
legious profanation that would be ineurred, by 
suifcring the rites usually performed by the con- 
suls to pass into plebeian hands. This argument, 
instead of persuading the popular leaders to de- 
sist from their claim, only nade them sensible 
that it was necessary to remove this impediment 
by a previous operation, before they attempted to 
pass through the way which it was meant to 


5 About 300 English acres. 


6 From U. C. 377 to 382. 7 Liv. lib. vi. e. 35. 


28 


obstruct. They appeared then for a little to drop 
their pursuit of the consulate; they affected to 
respect the claim of the patricians, to retain the 
possession of places which had always been as- 
signed to their order. But they moved, that the 
number of ordinary attendants on the sacred 
rites should be augmented from two to ten; and 
that of these one half should be named of ple- 
beian extraction. 

While the patricians continued to reject this 
proposal, on account of the effect it was likely to 
have on their pretensions in general, they gave 
way successively; and, at the interval of some 
years, first to the acts that were devised in favour 
of insolvent debtors; next, to the Agrarian law, 
or limitation of property in land; and last of all, 
to the new establishment relating to the priest- 
hood, and to the communication of the consulate 
itself to persons of plebeian rank. 

The authors of the new regulations, knowing 
that the majority of the centuries was composed 
of patricians, or was still under the influence of 
that order, were not satisfied with the mere privi- 
lege of being qualified to stand for the consulate. 
They insisted, that at least one of the consuls 
should be a plebeian; and having prevailed in 
this, as in the other contested points, the plebeian 
party entered immediately on the possession of 

their new privilege, and raised Pu- 
U. ©. 387. blius Sextius, the tribune who had 

been so active in the cause of his 
constituents, to the office of consul. 

But while the patricians thus incurred a re- 
peated diminution of their exclusive prerogatives, 
they endeavoured, by separating the judicative 
trom the executive power of the consul, and by 
committing the first to a patrician officer, under 
the title of Pretor, to save a part from the gene- 
ral wreck. 

It was intended that the prætor should be su- 
bordinate, but next in rank, to the consul. He 
was attended by two lictors, and had his commis- 
sion in very general terms, to judge of all differ- 
ences that should be brought before him, and to 
hear the suits of the people until the setting of 
the sun. This unlimited jurisdiction, as we shall 
have occasion to observe, came to be gradually 
circumscribed by its own precedents, and by the 
accumulating edicts of successive pretors. One 
person at first was supposed able to discharge all 
the duties of this office ; but the number, in crder 
to keep pace with the growing multiplicity of 
civil affairs, was afterwards gradually increased. 

Another political change, by which the patri- 
clans procured some compensation for what they 
had now surrendered, was made about the same 
time. The care of the public shows and enter- 
tainments had hitherto belonged to the ediles of 
the people, The office of edile being at its first 
institution expensive, was likely to become gra- 
dually more so by the frequent additions which 
were made to the festivals, and by the growing 
demands of the people for shows and amuse- 
ments. ‘The plebeians complained of this charge 
as a burden on their order, and the opposite party 
offered to relieve them of it, provided that two 
officers for this purpose, under the title of Curile 
Ediles, should be annually elected from among 
the patricians.! 

By these institutions the nobles, while they 


1 Liv. lib. vi. c. 42, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION. 


{Boox I 


admitted the plebeians to partake in the dignity 
of consul, reserved to their own order the exclu- 
sive right to the offices of pretor and edile: by 
the last of which they had the direction of sports 
and public entertainments; a station which, in a 
state that was coming gradually under the go- 
vernnent of popular assemblies, became, in pro- 
cess of time, a great object of ambition, and a 
principal access to power. 

The design or the effect of this institution did 
not escape the notice of the plebeian party. They 
complained, that while the patricians affected to 
resign the exclusive titie to one cffice, they had 
engrossed two cthers, inferior only in name, equal 
in consideration and influence. But no exclusive 
advantage could be long retained by one order, 
while the other was occasionally possessed of the 
legislative and supreme executive power. All the 
offices, whether of pretor or edile, of dictator or 
censor, were, in process of time, filled with persons 
of either rank ; and the distinction of patrician or 
plebeian became merely nominal, or served as a 
monument of the aristocracy which had subsist- 
ed in former ages. ‘The only effect which it now 

had was favourable to the plebeians ; 
U. C. 417. as it limited the choice of tribunes 
to their own order, while, in com- 
mon with the patricians, they had access to every 
other dignity in the state. 
Such is the account which 
Review of the historians have given us of the 
constitution. origin and progress of the Ro- 
man, constitution. This horde, 
in the earliest account of it, presented a distinc- 
tion of ranks, under the titles of Patrician, Eques- 
trian, and Plebeian; and the state, though go- 
verned by a prince, had occasional or ordinary 
assemblies, by which it approached to the form 
of a republic. Assemblies to which every citizen 
was admitted were termed the Comitia: those 
which were formed of the superior ranks, or of a 
select number, were termed the Senate. Among 
those who had attained the age of manhood, to 
be noble and to be of the senate were probably 
synonymous terms. But after the introduction 
of the census, separate rolls were kept for the se- 
nate, the equestrian order, and the people. These 
rolls were composed by diflerent offices in succes- 
sive periods in the state. A senate was composed 
of a hundred members by Remuius.? This num- 
ber was augmented or diminished at pleasure by 
his successors. ‘The consuls succeeded in this 
matter to the prerogative of the kings; and the 
censors were appointed to exercise it, with the 
other duties of the census, as a principal part of 
their functions. It is remarkable, that, notwith- 
standing the great importance of the senate in 
the government of their country, so little precau- 
tion was taken to ascertain who were to be its 
constituent members, or to fix their legal num- 
ber. T'he body was accordingly fluctuating. In- 
dividuals were placed or displaced at the discre- 
tion of the officer entrusted with the muster, and 
the numbers of the whole increased or diminished 
indefinitely. The officers of state, though not 
enrolled, had access to the senate; but their ccn- 


2 Liv. lib.i.c. 8. According to Livy the senate con- 
sisted of no more than a hundred members at the death of 
Romulus; but, according to Dionysius, their numbers had 
been augmented by a popular election at the admission of 
the Sabines; some writers say to two hundred; others to 
one hundred and fifty. Dionys. lib. ii. c. 47. 


Cuap. II] 


tinuing members, after their year in office ex- 
pired, depended on the discretion of the censors. 
İt seemed to be sufficient for the purposes of this 
constitution, that the senate should be a meeting 
of the superior class of the citizens. 

As the noble and popular 
assemblies had their existence 
under the kings, the transition 
from monarchy té republic in so small a state, by 
substituting elective and temporary magistrates 
in place of the king, was easy. A sufficient occa- 
sion was given to it in the abuses which were 
felt in the last reign of the monarchy. The dis- 
orders incident to the shock of parties, who were 
set free from a former controul, required, on occa- 
sion, the remedy of a discretionary authority ves- 
ted in some person who might be entrusted with 
the public safety, and soon led to the occasional 
institution of a dictatorial power. ‘The high pre- 
rogatives claimed and maintained by one party, 
obliged the other to assume a posture of defence, 
and to place themselves under the conduct of 
seaders properly authorised to vindicate their 
rights. ‘These rights were understood, by de- 
grees, to imply equality, and, in the successive 
Institutions that followed, put every citizen in 
poan of equal pretension to preferment and 

onours; pretensions which were to he limited 
only by the great distinction which Nature has 
made between the capacities, merits, and cha- 
racters of men, and which are subject, in every 
community, to be warped by the effects of educa- 
tion and fortune. 

New departments of state, or additions to the 
number of officers employed in them, were con- 
tinually suggested by the increase of civil affairs; 
and while the territory of the Republic was but a 
small part of Italy, the measure of her political 
government was full, and the list of her ofiicers 
complete. Functions which, in the first or sim- 
plest ages, were either unknown or had been 
committed to the king alone, were now thrown 
into separate lots or departments, and furnished 
their several occupations to two consuls, one præ- 
tor, two censors, four ediles, and eight questors, 
besides officers of these different ranks, who, with 
the titles of proconsul, propretor and proquestor, 
and without any limitation of number, were em- 
ployed wherever the exigences of the state requir- 
ed their service. 

Yn this account of the Roman constitution we 
are come nearly to that state of its maturity? at 
which Polybius began to observe and to admire 
the felicity of its institutions, and the order of its 
administration, The plebeians were now recon- 
ciled to a government to which they themselves 
had access, and citizens of every rank made great 
efforts of industry in a state in which men were 
allowed. to arrive at eminence, not only by advan- 
tages of fortune, but likewise by personal quali- 
ties. The senate and assemblies of the people, 
the magistrates and select commissioners, had each 
their departments, which they administered with 
an appearance of sovereign and absolute sway, 
and without any interfering of interests or jea- 
lousy of power. 

The consuls were destined to the command of 
armies ; but, while at Rome, seemed to have the 
highest prerogatives in the administration of all 
civil and political affairs. ‘They had under their 


— < "ee 


Recapitulation. 


3 As it stood in the fifth and sisth centuries of Rome. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


29 


command all the other officers of state, except the 
tribunes of the people; they introduced all foreign 
ambassadors; and they alone could move the se- 
nate on any subject of deliberation, and put their 
acts or determinations in writing. ‘The consuls, 
too, presided with a similar prerogative in the as- 
sembly of the centuries, and in that of the curiae, 
proposed the question, collected the votes, declared 
the majority, and framed the act. In all military 
preparations, in making their levies as well as in 
the command of the army, they were vested with 
high degrees of discretionary power‘ over all the 
troops of the commonwealth, composed of Roman 
citizens or allies. ‘They commanded the treasury, 
as far as necessary to the service on which they 
were employed, and had one of its commissioners, 
or questors, appointed to attend their court, and 
to receive their orders. 

Thesenate, however, had the ordinary adminis- 
tration of the revenue, took account of its receipts 
and disbursements, and suffered no money to be 
issued without their own decree, or the warrant 
of the consul in actual service. Even the money 
decreed by the censors for the repair of public 
buildings, and the execution of public works, could 
not be issued by the questors without an act of 
the senate to authorise it. All crimes and disor- 
ders that were committed aniong the free inhabi- 
tants of Italy, or municipal allies of the state, all 
disputes of a private or public nature that arose 
among them, came under the jurisdiction and de- 
termination of the senate. All foreign embassies 
were received or despatched, and all negotiations 
were conducted, by this body. In such matters 
the people did no more than affirm or reverse 
what the senate, after mature deliberation, had 
decreed, and for the most part gave their consent 
as a matter of form; insomuch, that while 
persons, who observed the higli executive pow- 
ers of the consul, considered the state as mo- 
narchial; foreigners, on the contrary, who resort- 
ed on public business to Ronie, were apt to be- 
lieve it an aristocracy vested in the senate. 

The people, notwithstanding, had reserved the 
sovereignty to themselves, and, in their several as- 
semblies, exercised the powers of legislation, and 
conferred all the offices of state5 They like- 
wise, in all criminal matters, held the supreme 
jurisdiction. In their capacity of sovereign, they 
were the sole arbiters of life and death; and even 
in their capacity of subjects, did not subinit to 
restraints which, in every other state, are found 
necessary to government. 

A citizen, while accused of any crime, continu- 
ed at liberty until sentence was given against him, 
and might withdraw from his prosecutors at any 
stage of the trial, even while the last century was 
delivering its votes. A voluntary banishment 
from the forum, from the meetings of the senate, 
and the assemblies of the people, was the highest 
punishment which any citizen, unless he remain- 
ed to expose himself to the effects of a formal 
sentence, was obliged to undergo; and it was ex- 
pressly stipulated, that, even at Tibur or Pra- 
neste, a few miles from Rome, a convict who had 
withdrawn from judgment should be safe.6 


4 Vid. Zonar. No. 501. 
Val. Max. lib. ii. c. 7. 

5 In the centuries they enacted laws, and elected lhe 
officers of state. In the curiæ they appointed officers to 
military command. 

6 Thelaws of Publins, which gave the power of legisla- 
tion to the plebeian assemblies, and that of Valerius, which 


Frontini Stragemata, lib. iv 


30 


Parts so detached were not likely to act as one 
body, nor to proceed with any regular concert; 
and the state seems to have carried, in all its es- 
tablishments, the seeds of dissension and tumult. 
It was long supported, nevertheless, by the un- 
common zeal of its members in favour of a,com- 
monwealth in which they enjoyed so much free- 
dim, and in which they were vested with so much 
personal consequence. 

The several members of the constitution, while 
in appearance supreme, were in many respects 
dependent on each other. 

The consuls, while in office, had the meetings, 
and determinations of the senate and people, in 
a great measure, in their power; but they re- 
ceived this power from the people, and were ac- 
countable for the discharge of it at the expiration 
of their office. 

The senate could resolve, but they could not 
execute, until they had obtained from the people 
a confirmation of their acts, and were obliged to 
solicit the tribunes for leave to proceed in any 
matter which these officers were inclined to op- 
pose. 

The senate was constituted, or formed, at re- 
gular periods, at the discretion of the consuls or 
censors, officers named by the people. 

Te city, nevertheless, was over-awed by the 
senate and officers of state. On great and alarm- 
ing occasions, the people themselves were no lon- 
ger sovereigns than they were allowed by the 
senate and consuls to hold this character. The 
senate and consuls having it in their power to 
name a dictator, could at once transfer the sove- 
reignty of the state to a single person, and sub- 
ject every citizen to his authority. Every indi- 
vidual held his place on the rolls at the will of the 
censors, and his property at the disposal of courts 
that were composed of senators; the servants of 
the public in general, who aimed at lucrative 
commissions, depended on the senate, as adminis- 
trators of the treasury, and trustees in the collec- 
tion or disbursements of the public money;! and 
every Roman youth, when embodied in the legions, 
entrusted his honours and his life in the hands of 
the consul, or commander in chief.2 

‘The mass, however, was far from being so well 
compacted, or the unity of power so well estab- 
lished, as speculative reasoners sometimes think 
necessary for the order of government. > The se- 
nate and the popular assemblies, in their legisla- 
tive capacities, counteracted one another, The 
numbers required to constitute a legal assembly 


secured every citizen in the right of appeai to the people 
at large, after being repeatedly re-enacted, were now in 
full force. (Liv. lib. x. c. 8.) 

1 The influence which the senate possessed as adminis- 
trators of the public treasury, according to Polybius, was 
very great. They had a number of commissions to give, 
in the collection of various duties levied on the navigators 
of rivers, the entry to sea-ports, the produce of mines, and 
demesne or public lands, chiefly let out for pasturage. 
‘They had likewise considerable disbursements oa the re- 
pair of highwaysand public buildings, and in the execution 
of a variety of other works. In such transactions great 
numbers of people were concerned, as contractors, as part- 
ners with those who contracted with the senate, or as cre- 
ditors who advanced money to enable the contractors to 
perform their articles. In all these several capacities 
the parties depended on the will of the senate, and con- 
tinually attended at the doors of that asscmbly, soliciting 
commissions, pleading for an abatement of some condition, 
for delay in the execution of some article, or relief in the 
ease of unforeseen hardship or loss. 

2 Polyb. lib. vi. ¢. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book i, 


of the people, the qualification of a citizen, which 
entitled him to be considered as a member of the 
commonwealth, were still undetermined. Aliens 
settling at Rome were admitted on the rolls of 
the people, and citizens removing to the colonies 
were omitted. Laws, therefore, might be obtain- 
ed in a clandestine manner, when the people, not 
sufficiently aware of the consequence of such 
laws, did not attend; or the question might be 
determined by the voice of a single alien, as often 
as the division was nearly equal, and a designing 
magistrate chose to place any number of aliens on 
the rolls for this purpose.3 The state took its 
laws, not only from the assemblies, which were 
held, however irregularly, within the capital, but 
from military detachments and armies, when 


3 In the settlement of Romulus, recruits of every quality, 
whether outlaws, fugitives, or captives, were receivea 
without distinction.—In the first ages of the Republic, 
aliens settling at Rome were admitted as citizens, and 
even placed on the rolls of the senate.—The Tarquins, and 
the first of the Claudian family, were emigrants from the 
neighbouring cantons.—A ficr the cstablishment of the cen- 
sus, or periodical muster, the king,the consuls, and last ofall, 
the censors, made up the rolls of the senate and people at 
pleasure. They admitted upon it very readily every in- 
habitant of the city who claimed to be enrolled; but when 
a right of voting in ary of the popular assemblies at Rome 
came to be considered as a privilege of moment, the inha- 
bitants of Latium crowded to Rome in order to obtain it. 
They were sometimes put upon the rolls by one consul, 
and forbid the city by his colleague; and in every such 
case the negative, by a maxim of the Roman policy, pre- 
vailed.—Such as actually settled at Rome, sooner or later 
found means to be inserted in thetribes; and the towns of 
Latium complained, that they were deserted by numbers 
of their people, who resorted to Rome for this purpose, 
and that they were likely to be depopulated. They ob- 
tained a law, by which Latin emigrants were excluded 
from the rolls of the Roman people, except they had left 
offspring to replace them in the country towns they had left. 
And this seems to have been the first law enacted at 
Rome to regulate or restrain the naturalization of aliens. 
Some authors have affirmed, that, even while aliens were 
so easily admitted on the rolls of the people, Roman citi- 
zens, accepting of settlements in the colonies, forfeited 
their political rights. In this, however, it is probable, that 
the effects of mere absence have becn mistaken for an ex- 
press and formal exclusion. Whoever ceased to give in 
his name at the census, or whoever left his ward or tribe 
in the city to live at a distance, was not enrolled in the 
ward, nor placed in any class. It did not follow, however, 
that he had forfeited his right, or might not claim it as often 
as he attended the census. In this case he was upon a 
foot of equality with every other citizen, and in the same 
manner received or rejected at the will of the censor, or 
other officer who took the muster. 

In this account of the Roman colonies, writers have fol- 
lowed the account of Sigonius, whose opinion, in every 
circumstance relating to the Roman history, is of great 
authority. In this particular, however, it happens, that 
the principle passage he has quoted in support of his opin- 
ion, is by some accident strangely perverted. Livy relates, 
lib. xxxiv. c. 42. that the pcople of Ferentium, in the year 
of Romce five hnndred and fifty-seven, started a new pre- 
tension, by which all Latins who gave their names to 
be inscribed in any Roman colony should be considered as 
Roman citizens; but that the senate rejected this claim 
when offered by persons who werc annexed to the colonies 
of Putcoli, Salernum, and Buxentum. Novum jus eo anno 
a Ferentinatibus tentatum, ut Latini, qui in coloniam Ro- 
manam nomina dedissent, cives Romani essent. Puteolos, 
Salernumque et Buxentum adscrip ti coloni, qui nomina de- 
derunt quum ob id se pro civibus Romanis ferrent ; sena- 
tus judicavit non esse cos cives Romanos. There was a 
distinction between Roman colonies and colonies of Ro- 
man citizens. The first might be Latins, or other allies, 
planted under the authority of the Roman state. The 
second were probably citizens. And the whole amount 
of this passage was to prove, that Latins were not to be 
considered as Roman citizens, merely because they resided 
in some colony of Roman citizens. But the quotation of 
Sigonius is as follows, and gives a wonderful perversion te 
the passage in question: De antiquo Jure Italia, lib. ii. c. 3 


Cuar. HL] 


abroad in the field. Yet, under all these defects 
as we have repeated occasions to observe, they 
enjoyed the most envied distinction of nations, con- 
tinuzl prosperity, and an almost uninterrupted 
succession of statesmen and warriors unequalled 
in the history of mankind. 
In about one hundred years after 
U. C. 455. they began to restore their city from 
the ruins in which it was laid by the 
Gauls, they extended their sovereignty from the 
farthest limits of ‘Tuscany on the one side, to the 
sca of Tarentum and the straits of Messina on 
the other; and as the contest of parties at home 
led to a succession of political establishments, 
their frequent wars suggested the policy which 
they adopted respecting foreign nations, and the 
arrangement of their national force. 

They had for some time discontinued the prac- 
tice of admitting captives into the number of their 
people; but continued that of extending and se- 
curing their acquisitions, by colonies of their own 
citizeus, or of such allies as they could most se- 
curely trust. They exacted from the cantons of 
Italy which they vanquished, contributions of 
subsistence and clothing for the benefit of their 
armies; and they generally imposed some condi- 
tion of this sort as a preliminary to every negotia- 
tion or treaty of peace.6 

‘Their forces consisted of native Romans, and 

of their allies in Italy, nearly in equal 
U. C. 415. parts. The legion, says Livy, had 
f been formerly arrayed in a continued 
line, or compacted column ;? but in the course of 


“ Quare ascripti coloni nominc quidem erant cives Ro- 
mani, revero coloni. Testem postulatis ? non longe abiero. 
Presto est Livius qui scribit, lib. xxxiv. Puteolos, Saler- 
num et Buxentum civium Roman. Adscripti coloui, qui 
nomini dederant cum ob id se pro civibus ferrent; senatus 
judicasse non esse eos cives Romanos; et alio loco narrat 
Ferentinates novum jus tentasse, ut Latini quiin coloniam 
Romanam nomina dedissent, cives Romani essent.”” 

The perversion of this quotation is remarkable. Differ- 
ent clauses of the same sentence are quoted as separate 
passages in different parts of the author. ‘The order of the 
clauses is so placed, that the use of the first in explaining 
the second is lost, and the words civium Roman are in- 
serted. The passage in Livy, asserting that even Latins 
pleaded to be admitted as citizens, because they resided in 
some colony of citizens, proves the reverse of what Sigo- 
nius maintains, viz. that citizens removing to colonies were 
dis franchised. 

The fact is, that, in the time of Livy and other histo- 
rians, the distinction between Roman citizens, whether of 
the city or of the colonies, and the other inhnbitants of 
Italy, was become a matter of antiquity and of mere curi- 
osity; and therefore is not by them so fully and distinctly 
stated, as not to admit of dispute. The colonists ceasing to 
attend at elections, or in the assemblies of the people, and 
not giving in their names at the musters, subjected them- 
selves to all the effects of positive exclusion, although it is 
probable no such exclusion had taken place; for even ali- 
ens were not excluded by any positive law, and might be 
admitted on the rolls at the discretion of the officer who 
presided over the muster. Antiquarians, in search of an- 
cient constitutions, sometimes suppose that rules must have 
existed, in order to have the pleasure of conjecturing what 
they were. 

5 The consul C. Marcius, U. C. 393, being encamped 
at Sutrium in Etruria, assembled his army in their tribes, 
and passed a law to raise the twentieth penny on the price 
of every slave that should be manumitted. The scnate, 
being pleased with the tax, confirmed the act; but the tri- 
Dunes, alarmed at the precedent, obtained a resolution, 
by which it was declared for the future to be capital for 
any person to propose any law in such detached or partial 
assemblies of the people. (Liv. lib. vii. c. 16.) 

6 Liv. lib. viii. c. leet 2. Lib. ix.c. 43. Lib. x. c. 5. 
et 37. 

7 Liv. lib. viii. c. 8. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 3I 


the wars which led to the conquest of Italy, came 
to be formed in divisions, and had different orders 
of light and heavy-armed infantry, as well as 
cavalry. The light-armed infantry were called 
the Velites, and were supposed to ply in the front, 
on the flank, or in the rear of the army; and 
their service was, to keep the heavy-armed foot 
undisturbed by 1nissiles till they came into close 
action with the enemy. 

The heavy-armed foot consisted of three or- 
ders, called the Hastati, Principes, and Triarii; of 
whom each had its separate divisions or manipules ; 
and those of the different orders were placed in 
three different rows, and at distances from each 
other, equal to the front of the division. By this 
disposition the manipules of the first and second 
row could either act separately, or, by mutually 
filling up their intervals, could complete the line, 
leaving the Triarii, in time of action, as a body 
of reserve, to support the line, or fill up the place 
of any manipule that might be forced by the enc- 
my. And, in order to faciliate occasionally this 
change of disposition, the divisions of one row 
faced the intervals of the other. They were 
armed with the pilum, which was a heavy javelin 
or spear to be cast at the enemy, and witha short 
and massy sword fitted to strike or to thrust. 
They bore an oblong shield, four feet high by 
two and a half fect broad, with a helmet, breast- 
plate, and greaves. 

In the structure of these weapons and this de- 
fensive armour, the Romans consulted at once 
both the principal causes of courage in a soldier, 
his consciousness of the means to annoy his ene- 
my, and of a power to defend himself. And with 
these advantages they continued for ages to pre- 
vail in most of their conflicts, and were the model 


8 This account of the Roman legion is not without its 
difficulties. It appears irrational to break and disperse 
the strength ofa body in thisinanner ; and Cesar makes no 
mention of any such distinction of orders, of the manipules, 
of the rows in which they were formed, or of the intervals 
at which they fought. lis legion consisted of ten cohorts, 
formed trom right to left on a continued front. Polybius, 
however, one of the best military historians, and himself 
an eye-witness of the disposition of the Roman legion in 
action, as well as on the parade, is very explicit in his ac- 
count of it; refers to it in the description of the Roman 
march (Polyb. lib. vi. c. 38.) in the description of every battle 
(Polyh. lib. iti. c. 1, 2, 3, 4.) and (Polyh. lib. xv. c. 10.) in 
stating the comparative advantages of the Roman legion and 
Macedonian phalanx (Polyb. lib. xvii. c. 28.) ‘The phalanx 
being a column of indefinite depth, close ranks, and a Contin- 
ued front, with lances or spears, it was impregnable to tho 
short sword and loose order of the Romans, so long as it 
preserved its front entire, and the spear-man made no ope- 
ning for the Roman soldier to enter within the point of his 
weapon. à i 

It is observed that the Romans made their attack in se- 
parate divisions and at intervals, in order to bring on some 
irregularity in the front of the phalanx, and iu order to 
make some openings by which the Roman soldier could 
enter with his sword, and, once within the pointof his ene 
my’s spear, could perform great slaughter with little resist- 
ance (Plutarch in vit. P. Emilii. Liv.lib. xliv. c. 41. Neque 
ulla evidentior causa victoria fuit quam quod multa passim 
prælia erant qnæ fluctuantes; turbarant primo, deinde dis- 
jecerunt phalanges.) From this nccount then it is probable 
that the Romans did not divide their legion into orders and 
manipules, nor fight at intervals, until after they adopted the 
short stabbing sword, which is said to have been originally 
from Spain; and that they continued to make this dispo- 
sition so long only as they had to do with enemies who 
used the spear and continued front; that after the socinl 
war in Italy, and their own civil wars began, they discon- 
tinued the separate manipules, and sought to strengthen 
themselves against aa army like their own, by presenting 
a continued front. Livy accordingly marks the time at 
which the formation of manipules, at intervals, was 


32 


which other nations endeavoured to imitate! in 
the form of their armies and in the choice of their 
weapons. 

It is understood in the antiquities of this peo- 
ple, that when they were assembled for any pur- 
pose, whether of state or of war, they were termed 
the army. In their musters a plebeian was a foot 
soldier, the knight a horseman, and the legion a 
mere detachment of the whole, draughted for the 
year, or embodied for a particular service. ‘The 
men, as well as the officers, in the first period of 
the history of the Republic, were annually reliev- 
ed or exchanged; and even after it ceased to be 
the practice thus annually to relieve the private 
men, and aftcr the same He were employ- 
ed during a succession of some years, yet 
the people, to the latest period of the common- 
wealth, continued to form the armies of their 
country; and the officer of state was still under- 
stood to command in virtue of his civil ma- 
gistracy, or in virtue of a military qualification 
which never failed to accompany it. No citizen 
could aspire to any of the higher offices in the 
commonwealth, until he had been enrolled in the 
legions, either ten years if on horseback, or six- 
teen years if on foot; and, notwithstanding the 
special commissions that were occasionally given 
for separate objects of state or of war, civil and 
military rank were never disjoined. Equal care 
was taken to furnish the rising statesman and 
warrior with the technical habits of eithcr profes- 
sion; or rather to instruct him, by his occasional 
application to both, not to mistake the forms of 
office in either for the business of state or of war, 
nor to rest his pretensions to command on any 
accomplishment short of that superior knowledge 
of mankind, and those excellent personal qualities 
of penetration, sagacity, and courage, which give 
the person possessed of them an ascendant, as a 
friend or as an enemy, in any scene or depart- 
ment of human affairs. It may be difficult to 
determine, whether we are to consider the Roman 
establishment as civil or military; it certainly 
united, in a very high degree, the advantages 
of both, and continued longer to blend the pro- 
fessions of state and of war together, than we are 
apt to think consistent with that propriety of cha- 
racter which we require in each: but to this very 
circumstance, probably among others, we may 
safely ascribe, in this distinguished Republic, the 

reat ability of her councils, and the irresistible 
force with which they were executed.? 

During a period of about one hundred and twen- 
ty years after the rebuilding of Rome, the Ro- 
mans were engaged in a continual series of wars; 
first with the Latins and with their own colonies 
who wished to disengage themselves from so un- 
equal an alliance; and afterwards with the Etrus- 
cans on the one hand, and with the Samnites, 


adopted. Polybius marksthe continuance of it, and Cesar 
evidently marks the discontinuance of it. Itis extremely 
probable, that the last change was one of those made by 
Marius, and was introduced into the Roman armies in 
the social war. 

The three orders of hastati, principes, and triarii, were 
extremely proper to mark the distinction of classes subsist- 
ing among Roman citizens, who were nevertheless, all of 
them equally bound, on occasion, to serve in the condition 
of private soldiers; and this may be one reason to incline 
us to ascribe the discontinuance of this distribution to 
Marius, who was a great leveller of ranks. 

1 Polyb. lib. vi. c. 17—24. 

2 Polyb. ib. vi. c. 17. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox f. 


Campanians, and Tarentines on the other. 
They quarrelled with the Samnites first in behalf 
of the Campanians, who, in order to obtain their 
protection, made a surrender of themselves and 
of all their possessions. This act of surrender 
they afterwards had occasion to enforce against 
the Campanians themselves, who endeavoured, 
when too late, to recover their liberties. 

The Samnites were a fierce nation, inhabiting 
that tract of the Appenines which extends from 
the confines of Latium to those of the Apulia; 
and who, to the. advantages of their mountainous 
situation, joined some singular and even romantic 
institutions,? which enabled them, during above 
forty years, from the time at which their wars 
with the Romans began, to maintain the con- 
test,4 and to keep the balance of power in sus- 
pense. 

During the dependence of this quarrel, the 
Roman armies frequently penetrated into Lu- 
cania and Apulia, and before they had reduced 
the Samnites, were known as protectors and allies, 
or had forced their passage as conquerors to the 
southern extremities of Italy. And the state it- 
self, under a varicty of titles, was in reality the 
head, or held a species of sovereignty over all the 
nations who occupied that part of the peninsula. 

The city of Tarentum, the most powerful of 
the Greek settlements in this quarter, having ne- 
glected her military establishments in proportion 
as she advanced in the arts of peace, was alarmed 

at the near approach of the Romans, 
U. C. 473. and applied for protection to Pyrrhus 

the king of Epirus, at that time great- 
ly distinguished among the military adventurers 
of Macedonia and Greece. ‘They wished to em- 
ploy the military skill of this prince, without being 
exposed to fall a prey to his ambition; and invited 
him to come, without any army of his own, to 
take the command of their people, whose num- 
bers they magnified, in order to induce him to 
accept of their offer. But, like most foreign mili- 
tary protectors, he appears to have had, together 
with many schemes of ambition against those on 
whom he made war, some designs likewise on the 
state he was brought to defend. With this dou- 
ble intention he did not rely on the forces of Ta- 
rentum, but passed into Italy at the head of a nu- 
merous army, formed on the model of the Mace- 
donians, and accustomed to service in the wars of 
that country and of Greece. 

This is the first enemy whose forces can be 
considered as a known measure, with which to 
compare, or by which we cau estimate, the power 
and military attainments of the Romans. ‘They 
had been victorious in Italy, but the character and 
prowess of the enemies they had vanquished are 
unknown. This prince knew the arts of war a3 
they were practised in Macedonia and in Greece, 
and was reputed one of the first captains of that 
or any other age. He accordingly prevailed over 


3 Of this sort it is mentioned, that ten of the fairest of 
one sex were annually selected as prizes to be won by the 
bravest and most deserving of the other. Strabo, lib. v. 
fin. The Samnites furnished Roman generals with the 
subject of twenty-four unm bbs, but mixed with checks 
and disgraces more remarkable than any they had received 
in the course of their wars with any other nation. Florus, 
lib. 1. c. 16. 

4 hiv. lib. x. c. 31. 

5 Pyrrbus, itis said, was struck with the military aspect 
of the Romans and admired in particular the form of their 


Cuar. III] 


-he Romans in some of their first encounters; 
but found that partial victories did not subdue 
this people, nor decide the contest. Having vast 
schemes of ambition in Sicily and Africa, as well 
as in Italy, he suddenly suspended his operations 
against the Romans, to comply with an invitation 
he received from Syracuse, to possess himself of 
that kingdom in behalf of his son, who had some 
pretensions to it in the right of Agathocles, from 
whom he was descended. 

In order to pursue this object, he endeavoured 
to obtain a peace or cessation of arms in Italy; 
but was told, that, in ordcr to treat with the Ro- 
mans, he must evacuate their country and return 
to his own.6 With this answer he passed into 
Sicily; and after some operations which were 
successful, though not sufficiently supported by 
his partizans in that country to obtain the end of 
his expedition, he returned again into Italy for 
the defence of Tarentum; but found that during 
his absence the Romans had made a considerable 
progress, and were in condition to repay the de- 
feats thcy had suffered in the beginning of the 
war. Having brought this matter to the proof 
in several encounters, he committed the defence 
of Tarentum to one of his officers; and after 
this fruitless attempt to make conquests beyond 
the Ionian sea, in which he had employed six 
years, he returned to his own country. 

The Romans continuing the war 
U. C. 481. against Tarentum, in about two 
years after the departure of Pyrrhus 
from Italy, made themsclves masters of the placo. 
Here, it is mentioned, they found, for the first 
time, the plunder of an opulcnt city, containing 
the models of elegant workmanship in the fine 
arts, and the apparatus of an exquisite luxury. 
“Jn former times,” says Florus, “the victorious 
oe of Rome cxhibited in their triumplis 
erds of cattle driven from the Sabines and the 
Volsci, the empty cars of the Gauls, and broken 
arms of the Samnites: but in that which was 
shown for the conquest of Tarentum, the pro- 
cession was led by Thessalian and Maccdonian 
captives, followed with carriages loaded with pre- 
cious furniture, with picturcs, statues, plate, and 
other ornaments of silver and gold.? Spoils which, 
we may guess, in the first exhibition of them, 
were valucd at Rome more as the public trophies 
of victory, than felt as the baits of private ava- 
rice, or the objects of a mcan admiration. The 
Roman citizen as yet lived content in his cottage, 
furnished in the rudest manncr; and he subsisted 
on the simplest fare, the produce of his own la- 
bour. Curius Dentatus, the consul who obtained 
this triumph, having the offer of fifty jugera as 
a reward from the public for his services, would 
accept of no more than seven. This, he said, is 
the ordinary portion of a citizen, and that person 
must be an unworthy member of the common- 
wealth who can wish for more.® 


encampments. The Greeks always cndeavoured to avail 
themselves of natural strengths, and accommodated the 
disposition of their camp to the ground; but the Romans, 
trusting only to their artificial works, pitched on the plain, 
and always encainped in the same form. Plutarch in vit. 
Pyrrhi. 

6 Liv. Epitome, lib. xiii. 

7 Florus, lib. i. c. 18. 

8 A Roman citizen in this period might, by the law of 
Lucinius, have an estate of five hundred jugera, or about 
three hundred acres; hut the ordinary patrimony of a 
uoble family was probably far below this measure; and 
the lot of a citizen in the new colonies scldom exceeded 


Plutarch in vit. Pyrrhi. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


33 


From the reduction of Tarentum 
the Romans may be considered as 
the sovereigns of Italy, although 
their dominion was extremely ill defined, either 
in respect to its nature or to its extent. They 
but in a few instances laid claim to absolute sove 
reignty, and least of all over those who were 
most submissive to thcir power. It was their 
maxim to spare the obsequious, but to crush the 
proud; an artful profession, by which, under 
the pretensions of generosity and magnanimity, 
they stated themselves as the sovereign nation. 
Under this presumptuous maxim their friendship 
was to be obtained by submission alone; and 
was, no less than their enmity, fatal to those 
who embraced it. The title of ally was, for the 
most part, no more than a specious name, under 
which they disguised their dominion, and under 
which they availed themselves of the strength 
and resources of other nations, with the least 
possible alarm to their jealousy or pride. 

With the Latins they had early formed an 
alliance offensive and defensive, in which the 
parties mutually stipulated the number of troops 
to be furnished by each; the respective shares 
which each was to have in the spoils of their 
common enemies, and the manner of adjusting 
any disputes that might arise between them. ‘This 
was the league which the Latins were supposcd 
to have so frequently broken, and of which the 
Romans so often exacted the observance by force." 

In the first struggles which they made to rce- 
store their settlement destroyed-by the Gauls, and 
in the subsequent wars they had to maintain, 
during a hundred years, in support of their new 
establishment, different cantons of these original 
confederates, as well as many of thcir own colo- 
nies, had taken very different parts, and in the 
treaties which ensued, obtained, or werc sentenced 
to, different conditions; some were admitted to 
the freedom of Rome, and partook in the prero- 
gative of Roman citizens. A few were, by their 
own choice, in preference to the character of Ro- 
man citizens, permittcd to retain the independency 
of their towns, and were treated as allics. Others, 
ander pretence of being admitted to the freedom 
of Rome, though without the right of sufirage, 
were deprived of their corporation establishments, 
and with the title of citizens, treated as ecco 
A few were governed in form by a military 
power, and by a prefect or magistrate annualiy 
sent from Rome.!! 


U. C. 481. 


seven jugera. ‘The people were lodged in cottages and 
slept on straw, (Plin. lib. xviii. e. 3. Cicer, pro Rossio, 
Val. Max. lib. iv. c.3.) The Romans, till a little before 
the siege of Tarentum, had no coin but copper, and estis 
mated considerable sums more commonly hy the head of 
cattle than by money. They coined silver for the fist 
time U. C. 485. Gold was known as a precious material 
and was sometimes joined with oxen in the reward of 
distinguished services. Liv. jib. iv. c. 50. Ibid. Epi- 
tome, lib. xv. 

9 Parcere subjectis et debellare snperbos. 

10 Dionys. Hal. lib. vi. p. 415. Liv. lib. vi. c. 10. lib. 
ix. e. 43. 

11 The city of Capua, together with its district of Cam- 
pania, was the first example of a provincial government 
established by the Romans in any of their conquests. The 
Campanians, in order to be protected against the Sam- 
nites, had delivered themselves upto the Romans. But 
they soon after became sensible of their folly, in trusting 
their defence to any force but their own, or in resigning 
their power as a state, with a view to preserve any thing 
else. When they perceived this error, they endeavoured, 
in conjunction with some of their neighhours, to form a 
party against thcir new masters; and being detcated in 


34 THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION [Boox T. 


From this unequal treatment arose the variety | about 181 years after this date, when, as will be 
of conditions by which the natives of Italy were | mentioned in the sequel, the whole was put upon 
distinguished, as colonies, municipal towns, al- | the same footing by the general admission of all 
lies, prefectures, or provincial governments, until | the Italians upon the rolls of the Roman people. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Limits of Italy—Contiguous Nations—Ligurians—Gauls—Greek and Phenician Colonies of 
Gaul and Spain—Nations of Ilyricum—Of Greece—Achaean League—Thebans—Athenians 
—Asiatic Nations—Pergamus—Syria—Egypt—Carthage—The Mamertines of Messina— 
Occasion of the first War with Carthage—Losses of the Parties—Peace—State of the Romans 
— Political or Civil Institutions-—Colonies—Musters— Operation on the Coin—Increase of the 
Slaves— Gladiators— Different Results of the War at Rome and Carthage—Mutiny and In- 
vasion of the Mercenaries at Carthage—End of this War—Cession of Sardinia—War with 
the Illyrians—First Correspondence of Rome with Greece. 


coasts of the Hadriatic to Sencgallia, over what 
are now the states of Parma, Modena, Bologna, 
and Urbino. In this favourable situation they 
appear to have abated much of their native fero- 
city, though without acquiring, in any consider- 
able degree, the arts that improve the conveniences 
of life. They fed chiefly on the milk or the flesh 
of thcir cattle, and were occupied entirely in the 
care of their arms and of their herds. By these, 
and the ornaments of gold, of which they were 


AS the Romans, at the time to 
U. C. 481. which our last observations refer, 
were become the sovereigns of Italy, 
or, by their ascendant in so powerful a country, 
were enabled to act a distinguished part among 
the nations around it; itis proper in this place 
to carry our observations beyond the boundaries 
of that Peninsula, and enumerate the powers 
that were then established on different sides of 
it, or beyond the narrow scas by which it was 
surrounded. extremely fond, they estimated their riches. They 
Italy was not then supposed to comprehend | were divided into tribes or cantons, and lived in 
the whole of that tract which has in later times|cottages huddled together, without any form of 
been known under this name. Being bounded, | towns or of villages. The leader of every horde 
as at present, on the south and east by the seas|was distinguished by his retinue, and valued 
of Sicily and bay of Tarentum, it extended no|himself chiefly on the number of his followers. 
further to the north-west than to the Arnus on| They had made freauent encroachments on the 
the one hand, and to the Rubicon on the other. {states of Etruria and Umbria, but were met at 
Beyond these limits the western coasts were in-|last, and stopped in their progress, by the Ro- 
habited by a number of tribes, which, under the}mans. Such of them as were settled within the 
name of Ligurians, occupied the descents of the | Rubicon, and from thence to Senegallia, had, 
Appenines and the south of the Alps quite to|about three years before the arrival of Pyrrhus 
the sea-shore. On the other side of the Appe-|in Italy, been obliged to acknowledge the authonty 
nines, from Senegallia to the Alps, the rich andjof the Roman state.! 
extensive plains on both sides of the Po were in| The coasts of the Mediterranean, to the west- 
the possession of Gaulish nations, who were|ward of Italy, had been known to the nations of 
said, some centuries before, to have passed the|Greece and of Asia, and had received many co- 
mountains, and who were then actually spread|lonies from thence, which formed trading settle- 
over a fertile tract of more than twelve hundrced| ments, and remained re ee distinct from the 
miles in circumference. They consisted of ninejnatives. Such were the Greek colonies at Mar- 
different hordes, that were supposed to have|seilles, Emporia, Saguntum, and the Tyrian 
assed the Alps at different times. Of these the}colony at Gades on the coast of the ocean. On 
| Le Insubres, Cenomani, and Veneti oc-|the other side of Italy, and round the Hadriatic, 
cupied the northern banks of the Po, including} were settled a number of small nations, the Is- 
what are now the states of Milan, Venice, and|trians, Dalmatians, and Illyrians; of which, at 
other parts of Lombardy on that side of the|the time when the Romans became acquainted 
river, The Anianes, Boi, Ægones, and Se-|with the navigation of this gulf, the Illyrians, 
nones, were settled to the southward, from the{being the chief or principal power, extended 


Po to the descents of the Appenines, and on the | eastward to the confines of Macedonia. 
Alexander the Great had finished 


U. C. 421. the career of his victories about 

sixty years before this date. His 
hereditary dominions, as well as his personal con- 
quests, were dismembered, and become the patri- 
mony of officers, who had learned under him to 
affect the majesty and the power of kings. Ma- 
cedonia was governed by Antigonus Dozon, who, 


their attempts to recover their independence, were treated 
with the severity that is commonly employed against rebel 
subjects. Their senate and popular assembly, under pre- 
tence of suppressing seminaries of faction, were abolished, 
and a prefect or governor annually appointed (Liv. lib. 
ix. c. 20.) A similar course, under the same pretence, 
was soon after taken with Antium, (Liv. lib. ix. c. 21.) 
This had been the principal sea-port of the Volsci, and 
long the head of many formidable combinations against 
the Romans. 


1 Polyb, lib. ii. c. 17. 19. 29. 4 


Cuar. IV.] 


together with the principality of Pella, held un- 
der his dependence Epirus, Thessaly, and Greece, 
to the Isthmus of Corinth. He had contended 
with Pyrrhus, the late invader of Italy, for part 
of this territory; and, by the death of this adven- 
turer, was now in possession of the whole. 

On one part of the coast of the Ionian sea, 
and on the Gulf of Corinth, were settled the 
Etolians, who, during the prosperity of Greece, 
had been an obscure and barbarous horde; but 
had now, by the confederacy of a number of 
cantons, laid many districts around them under 
contribution, and acted a distinguished part in 
the wars and transactions that followed. 

On the other side of the Gulf of Corinth a 
similar confederacy was formed by the Achean 
league. The name of Achza, in the fabulous 
ages, was the most general denomination of 
Greeks. When other names, of Dorians and 
Jonians, of Athenians and Spartans, became 
more distinguished, the name of Achzans was 
appropriated to the tribes who occupied the sea- 
coast, or the Gulf of Corinth, from Elis to Sicyon. 
On this tract twelve little cantons, Dymæ, Phara, 
Tritea, Rhipes, Thasium, Patræ, Pellene, Ægi- 
um, Bura, Carynia, Olenos, and Hellice,? having 
changed their government from principalities to 
republics, formed themselves into a league for 
their common defence. Hellice had been, from 
time immemorial, the scat of their assembly; but 
this place having been overwhelmed by an inunda- 
tion of the sea, their mectings were transferred 
to Ægium. 

In the more famous times of Sparta, Athens, 
and Thebes, these little cantons being situated on 
a poor and rocky shore, without shipping and 
without harbours,? were of no consideration in 
the history of Greece; they took no part in the 
defence of that country from the invasions of 
Darius, or of Xerxes, or in the divisions that 
followed under the hostile banners of Sparta and 
of Athens. They began, however, to appear in 
support of the liberties of Greece against Philip 
the father of Alexander, and partook with the 
other Greeks in the defeat which they received 
from that prince at Cheronca, and in all its con- 
sequences. ‘T'heir league was accordingly dis- 
solved by the conqueror, and some of their cantons 
separately annexed to the Macedonian monarchy. 
But about the time that Pyrrhus invaded Italy, 
Dyma, Patre, Phare, and Tritaa, found an op- 
portunity to renew their ancient confederacy. 
‘They were joined in about five years afterwards 
by the canton of Ægium, and successively by 
those of Bura and Carynia. These, during a 
period of about twenty ycars, continucd to be the 
only parties in this famous league. They hada 
general congress, at which they originally clected 
two annual officers of state, and a common se- 
cretary. They afterwards committed the exe- 
cutive power to one officer ; and under the famous 
Aratus of Sicyon, united that republic, together 
with Corinth and Megara, to their league.‘ 

About the time when the Romans became 
masters of Tarentum, this combination was be- 
come the most considerable power of the Pelo- 
ponnesus, and affected to unite the whole of it 


z Pausanius, lib. vii. c. 6. 
3 Plutarch. in Vit. Arat. p. 321. 
4 Polyb. lib. ii. c. 3. and Pausanias, lib. vii. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


35 


under their banners; but Sparta, though greatly 
fallen from the splendour of her ancient disci- 
pline and power, was still too proud, or too much 
under the direction of her ambitious leaders, to 
suffer herself to be absorbed in this upstart con- 
federacy ; she continued for some time its rival, 
and was at last the cause, or furnished the occa- 
sion, of its fall. a 

The Thebans and Athenians, though still pre- 
tending to the dignity of independent nations, 
were greatly reduced, and ready to become the 
prey of any party that was sufficiently powerful 
to reach them, by breaking through the other 
barriers that were still opposed to the conquest 
of Greece. 

In Asia, a considerable principality was formed 
round the city of Pergamus, and bore its name. 
Syria was become a mighty kingdom, extending 
from the coasts of Ionia to Armenia and Persia. 
This kingdom had been formed by Seleucus 
Nicanor, a principal officer in the army of Alex- 
ander, and it was now in the possession of his 
son, Antiochus Soter. 

Egypt, in the same manner, had passed from 
the first Ptolemy to his son Philadelphus, who, 
upon the expulsion of Pyrrhus from Italy, had 
entered into a correspondence with the Romans. 
This kingdom included the island of Cyprus; 
and, having some provinces on the continent of 
Asia, extended from Ceelo-Syria, of which the 
dominion was still in contest with Antiochus, to 
the deserts of Lybia on the west and on the 
south. Beyond these deserts, and almost oppo- 
site to the island of Sicily, lay the famous repub- 
lic of Carthage, which was now possessed of a 
considerable territory, surrounded by the petty 
African monarchies, out of which the great king- 
dom of Numidia was afterwards formed. 

The city of Carthage is said to have been 
founded about a hundred years earlier than Rome, 
and was now unquestionably farther advanced in 
the commercial and lucrative arts, and superior 
in every resource to Rome, besides that which is 
derived from the national character, and which 
is the consequence of public virtue. 

In respect to mere form, the constitution of 
both nations was nearly alike. They had a se- 
nate and popular assemblies, and annually elected 
two officers of state for the supreme direction of 
their civil and military affairs ;> and even at Car- 
thage the departments of state were so fortunately 
balanced, as to have stood for ages the shock of 
corrupt factions, without having suffered any 
fatal revolution, or without falling into either ex- 
treine of anarchy or tyrannical usurpation, The 
frequent prospect, indeed, which the Carthagi- 
nians had, of incurring these evils, joined to the 
influence of a barbarous superstition, which re- 
presented the gods as delighted with hu:nan sa- 
crifices, probably rendered their government in 
so high a degree inhuman and cruel. Under the 
sanguinary policy of this state, oflicers were ad- 
judged, for mistakes or want of capacity, as well 
as for crimes, to expire on the cross, or were con- 
demned to some other horrible punishment equally 
odious and unjust.6 

The Carthaginians being, like Tyre, of which 
they were supposed to be a colony, settled on a 


5 Aristob. Polit. lib. ii. c. 11. 
6 Orosius, lib. iv. c..6 


36 


peninsula, and at first without sufficient land or 
territory to maintain any considerable numbers 
of people, they applied themselves to such arts 
as might procure a subsistence from abroad; and 
became, upon the destruction of Tyre, the prin- 
cipal merchants and carriers to- all the nations 
inhabiting the coasts of the Mediterranean sea. 
Their situation, so convenient for shipping, was 
extremely favourable to this pursuit ; and their 
success in it soon put them in possession of a ter- 
ritory by which they became a landed as well as 
a naval power. : They visited Spain, under pre- 
tence of giving support and assistance to the city 
of Gades, which, like themselves, was a colony 
from Tyre. They became masters of Sardinia, 
and had considerable possessions in Sicily, of 
which they were extremely desirous to seize the 
whole. From every part of their acquisitions 
they endeavoured to derive the profit of mer- 
chants, as well as the revenue of sovereigns. 

In this republic, individuals had amassed great 
fortunes, and estimated rank by their wealth. A 
certain estate was requisite to qualify any citizen 
for the higher offices of state; and, in the canvas 
for elections, every preferment, whether civil or 
military, was venal.” Ambition itself, therefore, 
became a principle of avarice, and every Cartha- 
ee in order to be great, was intent to be rich. 

hough the interests of commerce should have 
inculcated the desire of peace, yet the influence 
of a few leading men in the state, and even the 
spirit of rapacity which pervaded the people, the 
necessity to which they were often reduced of 
providing settlements abroad for a populace who 
could not be easily governed at home, led them 
frequently into foreign wars, and even engaged 
them in projects of conquest. But notwithstand- 
ing this circumstance, the community stifled or 
neglected the military character of their own ci- 
tizens, and had perpetual recourse to foreigners, 
whom they trusted with their arms, and made the 
guardians of their wealth. Their armies, for the 
most part, were composed of Numidians, Mauri- 
tanians, Spaniards, Gauls, and fugitive slaves 
from every country around them. ‘They were 
among the few nations of the world who had the 
ingenuity, or rather the misfortune, to make war 
without becoming military; and who could be vic- 
torious abroad, while they were exposed to be a 
prey to the meanest invader at home. 

Under this wretched policy, however, the first 
offices of trust and command being reserved for 
the natives, though the character of the people 
in general was mean and illiberal, yet a few, 
being descended of those who had enjoyed the 
higher honours of the state, inherited the charac- 
ters of statesmen and warriors; and, instead of 
suffering by the contagion of mercenary charac- 
ters, they derived some additional elevation of 
mind from the contrast of manners they were 
taught to despise. And thus, though the state, 
in general, was degenerate, a few of its members 
were qualified for great affairs. War, and the 
other objects of state, naturally devolved on such 
men, and occasionally rendered them necessary 
to a sedentary or corrupted people, who, in 
ordinary times, were disposed to slight their abi- 
lities, or to distrust their power. They became 
unfortunately a party for war in the councils of 


=. 


7 Polyb. lib. vi. c. 54 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book 1. 


their country, as those who were jealous of thern 
became, with still less advantage to the public, a 
party for peace; or, when at war, a party who 
endeavoured to embarrass the conduct of it; and, 
under the effects of misfortune, were ever ready 
to purchase tranquillity by the most shameful and 
dangerous concessions. 

Carthage being mistress of the sea, was already 
long known on the coasts of Italy: she had 
treaties subsisting with the Romans above two 
hundred years, in which they mutually settled 
the limits of their navigation, and the regulations 
of their trade. And de Romans, as parties in 
these treaties, appear to have had intercourse 
with foreign nations by sea, earlier than is stated 
in the other parts of their history. 

In the first of those treaties, 

U. C. 244. which is dated in the consulate of 

L. Junius Brutus and M. Hora- 

tius, the first year of the commonwealth, the Ro- 

mans engaged not to advance on the coast of 

Africa, unless they were forced by an enemy, or 

by stress of weather, beyond the Fair Promon- 

tory, which lay about twenty leagues to the west- 
ward of the Bay of Carthage. À 

It was agreed, that, even in these circumstances, 
they should remain no longer than five days, and 
supply themselves only with what might be ne- 
cessary to refit their vessels, or to furnish them 
with victims for the usual sacrifices performed at 
sea. But that in Sardinia, and even in Africa, 
to the west of this boundary, they should be at 
liberty to trade and to dispose of their merchan 
dise without paying any duties besides the fees 
of the crier and clerk of sale; and that the public 
faith should be pledged for the payment of the 
price of all goods sold under the inspection of 
these officers. 

That the ports of Sicily should be equally open 
to both nations. 

That the Carthaginians, on their part, should 
not commit any hostilities on the coast of Latium, 
nor molest the inhabitants of Ardea, Antium, 
Laurentium, Circeii, Terracina, or of any other 
place in alliance with the Romans; that they 
should not attempt to erect any fortress on that 
coast; and that if they should land at any time 
with an armed force, they should not, upon any 
account whatever, remain a night on shore. 

By a subsequent treaty, in which the states of 
Utica and Tyre are comprehended as allies to 
both parties, the former articles are renewed with 
additional limitations to the navigation and trade 
of the Romans, and with some extension to that 
of the Carthaginians. The latter, for instance, 
are permitted to trade on the coast of Latium, 
and even to plunder the natives, provided they 
put the Romans in possession of any strong-holds 
they should sieze on shore; and provided they 
should release, without ransom, such of the allies 
of the Romans as became their prisoners. 

Upon the arrival of Pyrrhus in 

U. C. 474. Italy, with an armament which 
equally alarmed both nations, the 

Romans and Carthaginians again renewed their 
treaties with an additional article, in which they 
agreed mutually to support each other against 
the designs of that prince, and not to enter into 
any separate treaty with him inconsistent with 
this defensive alliance: and further stipulated, 
that, in the wars which were expected with this 
enemy, the Carthaginians, whether as principals 


Guar. IV.] 


or auxiliaries, should furnish the whole shipping, 
both transports and armed gallies; but that the 
expense of every armament should be defrayed 
at the charge of that party in whose behalf it 
was employed.? 

In observance probably of the last of these 
treaties, and by mutual concert, though with con- 
siderable jealousy and distrust of each other, the 
forces of these nations combined in reducing the 
gariso which Pyrrhus had left at Tarentum. 

ach had their separate designs on the place; 
and when its fate was determined, from thence- 
forward considered the other as their most dan- 
gerous rival for dominion and power. Pyrrhus, 
even when they were joined in alliance against 
himself, is said to have foreseen their quarrels, 
and to have pointed at the island of Sicily as the 
first scene of their contest. 

The Carthaginians were already in possession 
of Lylibæum, and of other posts on this island, 
and had a design on the whole. The Romans 
were in sight of it; and, by their pessession of 
Rhegium, commanded one side of the Straits. 
The other side was occupied by thé Mamertines, 
a race of Italian extraction, who, being placed at 
Messina by the king of Syracuse to defend that 
station, barbarously murdered the citizens, and 
took possession of their habitations and effects. 

This horrid action was afterwards imitated by 
a Roman legion posted at Rhegium during the 
late wars in Italy: these likewise murdered their 
hosts, and seized their possessions; but were 
punished by the Romans, for this act of cruelty 
and treachery, with the most exemplary rigour. 
They were conductéd in chains to Rome, scourged 
and beheaded by filties ata time. The crime of 
the Mamertines was resented by the Sicilians in 
general with a like indignation; and the authors 
of it were pursued, by aie king of Syracuse in 

articular, with a generous and heroic revenge. 

hey were, at length, reduced to such distress, 
that they were resolved to surrender theinselves 
to the first power that could afford them protec- 
tion. But, being divided in their choice, one 
party made an offer of their submission to the 
Carthaginians, the other to the Romans. The 
latter scrupled to protect a crime of which they 
had so lately punished an example in their own 
people. And, while they hesitated on the pro- 
posal, the Carthaginians, favoured by the delay 
of their rivals, and by the neighbourhood of their 
military stations, got the start of their coimpeti- 
tors, and were received into the town of Messina. 

This unexpected advantage gained by a power 
of which they were jealous, and the danger of 
suffering a rival to command the passage of the 
Straits, removed the scruples of the Romans; and 
the officer who commanded their forces in the 
contiguous parts of Italy, had orders to assemble 
all the shipping that could be found on the coast 
from Tarentum to Naples, to pass with his army 
into Sicily, and endeavour to dispossess the Car- 
thaginians from the city of Messina. 

As soon as this officer appeared in the road with 
a force so much superior to that of his rivals, the 
party in the city, that favoured the admission of 
the Romans, took arms, and forced the Cartha- 
ginians to evacuate the place.4 


2 Polyb. lib. iii. c. 3. 
4 Ibid. lib. i. ¢. 12. 


3 Ibid. lib. i. c. 10. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


37 


Here commenced the first Punic, 
U. C. 490. war, about ten years after the depar- 
ture of Pyrrhus from Italy, eight 
years after the surrender of Tarentum, and in the 
four hundred and ninetieth year of Rome. In 
this war, the first object of either party was no 
more than to secure the possession of Messina, 
and to command the passage of the Straits which 
separate Italy from Sicily; but their views were 
gradually extended to objects of more importance, 
to the sovereignty of that island, and the domi- 
nion of the seas. 

The contest between them was likely to be ex- 
tremely unequal. On the one side appeared the 
resources of a great nation, collected from exten- 
sive dominions, a great naval force, standing 
armies, and the experience of distant operations. 
On the other, the ferocity or valour of a small 
state, hitherto exerted only against their neigh- 
bours of Italy, who, though subdued, were averse 
to subjection, and in no condition to furnish the 
necessary supplies for a distant war; without 
commerce or revenue, without any army but what 
was annually formed by detachments from the 
people, and without any officers besides the or- 
dinary magistrates of the city; in short, without 
any naval force or experience of naval or distant 
operations. 

Notwithstanding these unpromising appear- 
ances on the side of the Romans, the command- 
ing aspect of their first descent upon Sicily pro- 
cured them not only the possession of Messina, 
but soon after determined Hiero, the king of 
Syracuse, hitherto in alliance with the Cartha- 
ginians, to espouse their cause, to supply their 
army with provisions, and afterwards to join 
them with his own. Being thus reinforced by 
the natives of Sicily, they were enabled to recal 
part of the foree with which they began the war; 
continued, though at a less expense, to act on the 
offensive; and drove the Carthaginians from 
many of their important stations in the island.5 

While the arms of the Romans and of Hiero 
were Victorious on shore, the Carthaginians con- 
tinued to be masters of the sea, kept possession 
of all the harbours in Sicily, overawed the coasts, 
obstructed the military convoys from Italy, and 
alarmed that country itself with frequent descents. 
It was evident, that, under these disadvantages, 
the Romans could neither make nor preserve any 
maritime acquisitions; and it was necessary, 
either to drop the contest in yielding the sea, or 
to endeavour, on that element likewise, to cope 
with their rival. Though not altogether, as histo- 
rians represent them, unacquainted with shipping, 
they were certainly inferior to the Carthaginians 
in the art of navigation, and altogether unprovided 
with ships of force. Fortunately for them, neither 
the art of sailing, nor that of constructing ships, 
was yet arrived at such a degree of perfection as 
not to be easily imitated by nations who had any 
experience or practice of the sea. Vessels of the 
best construction that was then known were fit 
tobe navigated only with oars, or in a fair wind 
and ona smooth sea. They might be built of 
green timber; and, in case of a storm, could run 
ashore under any cover, or upon any beach that 
was clear of rocks. Such ships as these the Ro- 
mans, without hesitation, undertook to provide. 


5 Polyb. lib.i. 


38 


Having a Carthaginian galley, accidentally strand- 
ed at Messina, for a model, it is said, that, in sixty 
days from the time that the timber was cut down, 
they fitted out and manned for the sea one hun- 
dred gallies of five tier of oars, and twenty of 
three tier. Vessels of the first of these rates 
carried three hundred rowers, and two hundred 
fighting men. 

The manner of applying their oars from so 
many tiers, and a much greater number which 
they sometimes employed, has justly appeared a 
great difficulty to the mechanics and antiquari- 
ans of modern times, and is confessedly not well 
understood. 

The Romans, while their gallies were build- 
ing, trained their rowers to the oar on benches 
that were erected on the beach, and placed in the 
form of those of the real galley.! Being sensible 
that the enemy must be still greatly superior in 
the management of their ships and in the quick- 
ness of their motions, they endeavoured to de- 
prive them of this advantage, by preparing to 
grapple, and to bind their vessels together. In 
this condition the men might engage on equal 
terms, fight from their stages or decks as on so- 
lid ground, and the Roman buckler and sword 
have the same effect as on shore. 

With an armament so constructed, still infe- 


rior to the enemy, and even unfortunate in its | 
first attempts, they learned, by perseverance, to | 


vanquish the masters of the sea on their own 
element; and not only protected the coasts of 
Italy, and supported their operations in Sicily, 
but, with a powerful fleet of three hundred and 
thirty sail, overcame at sea a superior number of 
the enemy, and carried the war to the gates of 
Carthage.? . 

On this occasion took place the famous adven- 
ture of Regulus; who being successful in his 
first operations, gave the Romans some hopes of 
conquest in Africa: but they were checked at 

once by the defeat of their army, 
U. C. 498. and the captivity of their general. 
This event removed the seat of the 
war again into Sicily; and the Romans, still en- 
deavouring to maintain a naval force, suffered so 
many losses, and incurred so many disasters by 
storms, that they were, during a certain period 
of the war, disgusted with the service at sea, and 
seemed to drop all pretensions to power on this 
element. ‘he experience of a few years, how- 
ever, while they endeavoured to continue their 
operations by land without any support from the 
sea, made them sensible of the necessity they 
were under of restoring their shipping; and they 
did so with a resolution and vigour which en- 
abled them once more to prevail over the superior 
skill and experience of their enemy. 

In this ruinous contest both parties made the 
utmost efforts, and the most uninterrupted exer- 
tion of their forces. Taking the forces of both 
sides, in one naval engagement, five hundred 
os of five tier of oars, with two hundred and 

fty thousand men, and in another, seven hun- 
dred gallies, with three hundred and fifty thou- 
sand men, were brought into action ;3 and in the 
course of these struggles the Romans lost, either 
by tempests or by the hands of the enemy, seven 


1 Polyb. lib. i. e. 20, 21. 
3 Ibid. lib. i. c. 26. 


2 Ibid. lib. i. c. 27. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor I. 


hundred gallies; their antagonists, about five 
hundred.4 In the result of these destructive en- 
counters, the Carthaginians, beginning to balance 
the inconveniences which attended the continu- 

ance of war against the concessions 
U. C. 512. that were necessary to obtain peace, 
came to a resolution to accept of 
the following terms: 

That they should evacuate Sicily, and all the 
islands from thence to Africa: 

That they should not for the future make war 
on Hiero king of Syracuse, nor on any of his 
allies : 

That they should release all Roman captives 
without any ransom : 

And within twenty years pay to the Romans 
a sum of three thousand Euboic talents.5 

Thus the Romans, in the result of a war, 
which was the first they undertook beyond the 
limits of Italy, entered on the possession of all 
that the Carthaginians held in the islands for 
which they contended; and, by a continuation 
of the same policy which they had so successfully 
pursued in Italy, by applying to their new acqui- 
sitions, instead of the alarming denomination of 
subject, the softer name of ally, they brought 
Hiero, who was sovereign of the greater part of 
Sicily, into a state of dependence on themselves. 

Their manners, as well as their fortunes, were 
a perfect contrast to those of the enemy they had 
vanquished. Among the Romans, riches were 
of no account in constituting rank. Men became 
eminent by rendering signal services to their 
country, not by accumulating wealth. Persons 
of the first distinction subsisted in the capacity 
of husbandmen by their own labour; and, with 
the fortunes of peasants, rose to the command of 
armies, and the first offices of state. One consul, 
of the name of Regulus, was found by the officer 
who came to announce his election, equipped 
with the sheet or the basket, and sowing the seed 
of his corn in the field. Another, better known, 
of the same name, while he commanded in Africa, 
desired to be recalled, in order to replace the in- 
struments of husbandry, which, to the great dis- 
tress of his family, and the hazard of their want- 
ing food, a fugitive slave had carried off from his 
land. The senate refused his request, but order- 
ed the farm of their general to be tilled at the 
public expense.§ < ; + ; 

The association of pomp and equipage with 
rank and authority, it may be thought, 1s acci- 
dental, and only serves to distract the attention 
which mankind owe to personal qualities. It 
nevertheless appears to be in some measure un- 
avoidable. Superiority is distinguished, even in 
the rudest nations, by some external mark. 
Duillius had his piper and his torch, in honour 
of the first naval victory obtained by his country;? 
and the Romans acknowledged the external en- 
signs of state, although they were still rude in 
the choice of them. i A 

At this time, when the nation emerged with 
so much lustre beyond the boundaries of Italy 
the parties which divided the state, and whose 
animosity sharpened so much the pangs which 


4 Polyb. c. 63. 5 Ibid. c. 62, &c. 
6 Valer. Maxim. lib. iv. c. 4. Liv. Epitom. lib. xviii. 
Seneca ad Albinam. c. 12. Auctor de versibus illustribus, 


7 Liv. Epitom. lib. xvii. xviii. 


Ciar. IV.] 


preceded the birth of many of its public establish- 
ments, had no longer any object of contest. The 
officers of state were taken promiscuously from 
either class of the people, and the distinction of 
plebeian and patrician had in a great measure 
lost its eflect. A happier species of aristocracy 
began to arise from the lustre of personal quali- 
ties, and the honours of family, which devolved 
upon those who were descended from citizens 
who had borne the higher offices of state, and 
were distinguished in their country’s service. 

The different orders of men in the common- 
wealth having obtained the institutions for which 
they severally contended, the number of officers 
was increased, for the better administration of 
affairs, which were fast accumulating. Thus a 
second pretor was added to the original establish- 
ment of this office; and the persons who held it 
were destined to act either in a civil or military 
capacity, to hear causes in the city, or to com- 
mand armies in the field. They were assisted in 
the first of these functions by a new institution, 
that of the centumvirs, or the hundred, who were 
draughted from the tribes, and appointed, during 
the year of their nomination, under the direction 
of the pretors, to take cognizance of civil dis- 
putes. The number of tribes being now com- 
pleted to thirty-five, and three of the centumvirs 
being draughted from each, made the whole 
amount to a hundred and five.® 

The city, during the late destructive war, sent 
abroad two colonies, one to Castrum Innui, a 
village of the Latins, the other to Firmium in 
the Picenum, on the opposite side of the penin- 
sula, intended rather to guard and protect the 
coast, than to provide for any superabundance of 
the people, whose numbers at this time under- 
went a considerable diminution ;° the rolls having 
decreased in the course of five years, from two 
hundred and nincty-seven thousand two hundred 
and twenty-seven, to two hundred and fifty-one 
thousand two hundred and twenty-two. The 
revenue, to which citizens who were accustomed 
to pay with their personal service, had little to 
spare from their effects, and which was at all 
times probably scanty, being often exhausted by 
the expenses of the late war, brought the com- 
munity under the necessity of acquitting itself 
of its debts, by diminishing the weight, or raisin 
the current value of its coin. The ass, whic 
was the ordinary measure of valuation, being the 
libra, or pound of copper. stamped, and hitherto 
containing twelve ounces, was reduced in its 
weight to two ounces,!! 

The contribution now exacted from Carthage 
amounting to about two hundred and seventy- 


8 Liv. Epitom. lib. xx. 

9 Livy, in different places, mentions between thirty and 
forty Roman colonies subsisting in Italy in the time of the 
second Punic war. (Liv. lib. xxvii. c. 9 et ae) Velleius 
Paterculus reckons about forty planted in Italy after the 
recovery of Rome from its destruction by the Gauls. 
(Lib. i. c. xv.) And Sigonius, collecting the names of 
all the colonies mentioned by any Roman writer as planted 
in Italy, has made a list of about ninety. But this matter, 
which so much interests this very learned antiquarian and 
many others, was become, as we have mentioned, a sub- 
ject of mere curiosity, even in the times of the writers 
from whom our accounts are collected ; as all the Italians 
were by that time admitted on the roll of Roman citizens 
by the law of L. Julius Cæsar, and in consequence of the 
Marsic law, U. C. 663. 

10 Liv. Epitom. lib. xix. 

11 Plin. Hist. Nat. lib. xxxiii. c. & 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


39 


nine thousand pounds, together with the rents 
to be collected in Sicily, were likely to be great 
accessions of wealth to such a state, 

The spoils of their enemies, for the most part, 
consisted of prisoners who were detained by the 
captor as his slaves, or sent to market to be sold. 
They had made a prize of twenty thousand cap- 
tives in their first descent upon Africa; and the 
number of slaves in Italy was already become so 
great as to endanger the state.!? 

The favourite entertainments of the people 
were combats of armed slaves, known by the 
name of gladiators, derived from the weapons 
with which they most frequently fought. Such 
exhibitions, it is said, were first introduced in the 
interval between the first and second Punic war, 
by a son of the family of Brutus, to solemnize 
the funeral of his father. Though calculated 
rather to move pity and cause horror, than to 
give pleasure, yet, like all other scenes which 
excite hopes and fears, and keep the mind in 
suspense, they were admired by the multitude, 
and became frequent on all solemn occasions or 
festivals. 

In the circumstances or events which immedi- 
ately followed the peace between Rome and Car- 
thage, these nations showed the different tendency 
of their institutions and manners. The Romans, 
in the very struggles of a ae destructive 
contest, had acquired strength and security, not 
only by the reputation of great victories, but still 
more by the military spirit and improved disci- 
pline and skill of their people by sea and by land. 
Although their subjects in Italy revolted, and 
their allies withdrew their support, yet both were 
soon reduced, at the first appearance of those 
veteran soldiers who had been formed in the ser- 
vice of the preceding war. 

The Carthaginians, on the contrary, had made 
war above twenty years without becoming more 
warlike ; had exhausted their resources, and con- 
sumed the bread of their own people in main- 
taining foreign mercenaries, who, instead of being 
an accession of strength, were ready to prey on 
their weakness, and to become the most formid- 
able enemies to the state they had served. Their 
army, composed, as usual, of hirelings from 
Gaul, Spain, and the interior parts of Africa, 
estimated their services in the war which was 
then concluded at a higher value than the state 
was disposed to allow, and attempted to take by 
force what was refused to their representations 
and claims. Being assembled in the neighbour- 
hood of Carthage to receive the arrears of their 
pay, the senate wildly proposed, in consideration 
of the distressed condition of the public revenue, 
that they should make some abatement of the 
sums that were due to them. But the state, in- 
stead of obtaining the abatements which were 
thus proposed, only provoked men with arms in 
their hands to enter into altercations, and to mul- 
tiply their claims and pretensions. The merce- 
naries took offence at the delays of payment, rose 
in their demands upon every concession, and 
marched at last to the capital, with all the ap- 
pearances and threats of an open and victorious 
enemy. They issued a proclamation on their 
march, inviting all the provincial subjects of the 
commonwealth to assert their freedom, and, by 


12 Zonar. lib. ii. Orosius, lib. ii. o. 7. 


40 


the numbers that flocked to them from every 
quarter, became a mighty host, to which the city 
had nothing to oppose but its walls. To effec- 
tuate the reduction of Carthage, they invested 
Tunis and Utica, and submitted to all the disci- 
pline of war from the officers whom they them- 
selves had appointed to command. 

In this crisis, the republic of Carthage, cut off 
from all its resources and ordinary supplies, at- 
tacked with that very sword on which it relied 
for defence, and in a situation extremely deplor- 
able and dangerous, having still some confidence 
in the ability of their senators, and in the mag- 
nanimity of officers tried and experienced in 
arduous and perilous situations, was not alto- 
gether reduced to despair. Although the people 
had committed their arms into the hands of 
strangers, the command of armies had been still 
reserved to their own citizens; and now, by the 
presence and abilities of a few great men, they 
were taught to assume a necessary courage, to 
put themselves in a military posture, and to 
maintain, during three years, and through a scene 
of mutual cruelties and retaliations, unheard of 
in the contests of nations at war, a struggle of 
the greatest difficulty. In this struggle they 
prevailed at last by the total extirpation of this 
vile and outrageous enemy.! 

During the dependence of this odious revolt, in 
which a mercenary army endeavoured to subdue 
the state which employed them, the Romans pre- 
served that character for generosity and magnani- 
mity of which they knew so well how to avail 
themselves, without losing any opportunity that 
offered for the secure advancement of their power. 
They refrained from giving any countenance 
even against their rival to such unworthy anta- 
gonists. ‘They affected to disdain taking any 
advantage of the present distresses of Carthage, 
and refused to enter into any correspondence with 
a part of the rebel mercenaries, who, being sta- 
tioned in Sardinia, offered to surrender that island 
into their hands. They prohibited the traders of 
Italy to furnish the rebels with any supply of 
provisions or stores, and abandoned every vessel 
that presumed to transgress these orders, to the 
mercy of the Carthaginian cruisers which plied 
before the harbours of Tunis and Utica. Above 
five hundred Roman prisoners, seized by these 
cruisers, were detained in the jails of Carthage. 
At the termination, however, of this war, when 
the Carthaginians were far from being disposed 
to renew any quarrel whatever, the Romans fixed 
on this as a ground of dispute, complained of 
piracies committed against the traders of Italy, 
under pretence of intercepting supplies to the 
rebels; and, by threatening immediate war upon 
this account, obtained from the state itself a sur- 
render of the island of Sardinia, which they had 
refused to accept from the rebels, and got an ad- 
dition of two hundred talents to the sum stipu- 
lated in the late treaty of peace, to make up for 
their pretended losses by the supposed unwar- 
rantable capture of their ships.? 

Upon this surrender the Sardinians bore with 
some discontent the change of their sovereigns ; 
and, on the first prohibition of their usual com- 


1 Polyb. lib. i. c. 67—fine. 
2 Polyb. lib. i. c. 88. lib. iii. c. 10. Appian de Bell. 
Punic. p. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


merce with Carthage, to which they had beer. 
long accustomed, took arms, and endeavoured for 
some time to withstand the orders which they 
were required to obey. 

Soon after the Romans had reconciled these 
new acquired subjects to their government, had 
quelled a revolt in Tuscany, and vanquished some 
cantons of Liguria, whom it is said they brought 
to submit as fast as the access to that country 
could be opened, they found themselves at peace 

with all the world;? and, in token 
U. C. 519. of this memorable circumstance, 
shut the gates of the temple of Ja- 
nus; a ceremony wtih the continual succession 
of wars, from the reign of Numa to the present . 
time, had prevented, during a period of four hun- 
dred and thirty years; a ceremony, which, when 
performed, marked a situation as transient as it 
was strange and uncommon. 

Fresh disturbances in some of the possessions 
recently seized by the republic, and a quarrel of 
some importance that carried her arms for the 
first time beyond the Hadriatic, embroiled her 
anew in a succession of wars and military ad- 
ventures, 

The Illyrians had become of late a considerable 
nation, and were a party in the negotiations and 
quarrels of the Macedonians and the Greeks. 
Having convenient harbours and retreats for 
shipping, they carried on a piratical war with 
most of their neighbours, and, in particular, com- 
mitted depredations on the traders of Italy, which 
it concerned the Romans, as the sovereigns of 
this country, to prevent. They accordingly sent 
deputies to complain of these practices, to de- 
mand a reparation of past injuries, and a security 
from any such attempts for the future. The Il- 
lyrians at this time were under the government 
of Teuta, the widow of a king lately deceased, 
who held the reins of government as guardian to 
her son. This princess, in answer-to the com- 
plaints and representations of the Romans, de- 
clared, that in her kingdom no public commission 
had ever been granted to make war on the Ita- 
lians ; but she observed, that the seas being open, 
no one could answer for what was transacted 
there; and that it was not the custom of kings 
to debar their subjects from what they could seize 
by their valour. 'To this barbarous declaration 
one of the Roman deputies replied, that his 
country was ever governed by different maxims; 
that they endeavoured to restrain the crimes of 
private persons by the authority of the state, and 
should, in the present case, find a way to reform 
the practice of kings in this particular. The 
queen was incensed; and resenting these words 
as an insult to herself, gave orders to waylay and 
assassinate the Roman deputy on his return to 
Rome.‘ 

In revenge of this barbarous outrage, and of 
the former injuries received from that quarter, 
the Romans made war on the queen of Illyri- 
cum, obliged her to make reparation for the in- 
juries she had done to the traders of Italy, to 
evacuate all the towns she had occupied on the 
coast, to restrain her subjects in the use of armed 
ships, and to forbid them to navigate the Ionian 
sea with more than two vessels in company. 


3 Florus, lib. ii. c. 3. Eutrop. lib. ii. 
ii. c. 8. 


4 Polyb. hb 


Cuar. V.] 


The Romans, being desirous of having their 
conduct in this matter approved of by the nations 
of that continent, sent a copy of this treaty, to- 
gether with an exposition of the motives which 
had induced them to cross the Adriatic, to be read 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


4] 


at Corinth, where, in consideration of the signal 
service they had performed against the Illyrians, 
then reputed the common enemy of civilized na- 
tions, they had an honorary place assigned them 

at the Isthmian games; and in this 


in the assembly of the Achzan league. ‘They soon | U. C. 525. manner made their first appearance 


after made a ike communication at Athens and 


in the councils of Greece.5 


CHAPTER V. 


Progress of the Romans within the Alps— Origin of the second Punic War—March of Hanniba. 
into Italy—Progress—Action on the Tecinus—On the Trebia—On the Lake Thrasimenus— 
Battle of Canne— Hannibal not supported from Carthage—Sequel of the War—ZAn Italy—And 
Africa—Ncipio’s Operations— Balile of Zama—End of the War. 


THE city of Rome, and most of the districts 
of Italy, during the dependence of the last enu- 
merated wars which were waged at a distance 
and beyond the seas, began to experience that 
uninterrupted tranquillity in which the capital and 
interior divisions of every considerable nation re- 
main, even during the wars in which the state is 
engaged, They had indeed one source of alarm 
on the side of Cisalpine Gaul, which tlicy thought 
it neeessary to remove, in order to obtain that 
entire security to which they aspired. The 
country of the Senones, from Sena Gallia to the 
Rubicon, they had already subdued, even before 
the arrival of Pyrrhus in Italy; but the richest 
and most fertile tracts on the Po were still in the 
possession of the Gaulish nations; and it had 
been proposed, about four years after the conclu- 
sion of the first Punic war, to erect a barricr 
against the invasion of this people, by occupying 
with Roman colonies the country of the Senones, 
from Sena Gallia to the Rubicon. Although the 
inhabitants to be removed to make room for these 
settlements had been subject to the Romans above 
forty years, yet their bretliren on the Po con- 
sidered this act of violence as an insult to the 
Gaulish name, resolved to avenge it, and invited 
their countrymen from beyond the Alps to take 
part in the quarrel. 

In consequence of their negotiations and con- 
certs, in about eight years afer the Romans were 
settled on the Rubicon, a great army of Gauls ap- 
peared on the Roman frontier. These nations 
used to make war by impetuous assaults and in- 
vasions, and either at once subdued and oceupied 
the countries which they over-ran, or, being re- 
pulsed, abandoned them without any farther in- 
tention to persist in the war. Their tumultuary 
operations, however, were subjects of the greatest 
alarm at Rome, and generally produced a suspen- 
sion of all the ordinary forins of the common- 
wealth. On a prospect of the present alarm from 
that quarter, the senate apprehending the neces- 
sity of great and sudden exertions of all their 
strength, ordered a general account to be taken 
of all the men fit to carry aris, whether on foot 
or on hoseback, that could be assembled for the 
defence of Italy; and they mustered, on this 


5 Polyb. iib. ii. m Appian in Hlyr. 


famous occasion, above seven hundred thousand 
foot and seventy thousand horse.6 From this 
numerous return of men in arms, the state was 
enabled to make great detachments, which they 
stationed under the consuls and one of the prators 
separately, for the defence of the commonwealth. 
The Gauls, having penctrated into Etruria, where 
the prætor was stationed, attacked and obliged 
him to retire. The consuls, however, being ar- 
rived with their several armies in different direc- 
tions to support the prætor, renewed the conflict 
with united foree, and put the greater part of the 
Gaulish invaders to the sword. 
In the year following, the Romans 
U. C. 529. carried the war into the enemy’s coun- 
try; and in about three years more, 
passed the Po, and made themselves masters ot 
all the plains on that river quite to tle foot of the 
Alps. To secure this valuable acquisition they 
projected two colonies of six thousand men each, 
one at Cremona and the other at Placentia, on 
the opposite sides of the Po; but were disturbed 
in the execution of this projeet, first, by a revolt 
of the-natives, who justly considered these set- 
tlements as military stations, intended to repress 
and keep themselves in subjection; and after- 
wards, by the arrival of a successful invader, who, 
by his conduct and implacable animosity, ap- 
peared to he the most formidable eneiny that had 
ever attempted to shake the power, or to limit the 
progress of the Roman state. 

‘The Republic had now enjoyed, during a period 
of twenty-one years from the end of the first Pu- 
nie war, the fruits not only of that ascendant she 
had acquired among the nations of Italy, but those 
likewise of the high reputation she had gained, 
and of the great military power she had tormed 
in the contest with Carthage. The wars that 
filled up the interval of peace with this principal 
antagonist, were either trivial or of short duration ; 
and the city itself, though still rude in the form 
of its buildings, and in the manners of its people, 
probably now began to pay a growing attention 
to the arts of peace. Laws are dated in this pe- 
riod which have a reference to manufacture aid 
to trade. Clothiers are directed in the fabric of 
cloth, and carriers by water are directed in the 


6 Polyb. lib. ii. c. 22—24, &c. Liv. Epitom. lib. xxi. 


42 


size of their vessels.! Livius Andronicus and 
Nevius introduced some species of 
U. C. 513. dramatic entertainments, and founda 
favourable reception from the people 

to their farcical productions.? 
But whatever progress the people were now 


inclined to make in the useful or pleasurable arts. 


of peace, they were effectually interrupted, and 
obliged to bend the force of their genius, as ın for- 
mer times, to the arts of war, and to the defence 
of their settlements in Italy. 

The Carthaginians had been for some time 
employed in Spain, making trial of their strength, 
and forming their armies. In that country Ha- 
milcar, an officer of distinguished fame in the late 
war with the Romans, and in that which ensued 
with the rebel mercenaries, had sought refuge 
from that disgust and those mortifications which 
in the late treaty of peace, he felt from the ab- 
ject councils of his country. And having found 
a pretence to levy new armies, he made some ac- 
quisitions of territory, to compensate the losses 
which Carthage had sustained by the surrender 
of Sardinia and of Sicily. 

Spain appears to have been to the trading na- 
tions of Greece, Asia, and Africa, what America 
has been, though upon a larger scale, to the mo- 
dern nations of Europe—an open field for new set- 
tlements, plantations, and conquests. The na- 
tives were brave, but impolitic, and ignorant of 
the arts of peace, occupied entirely with the care 
of their horses and their arms. These, says a 
historian, they valued more than their blood.3 
‘They painted or stained their bodies, affected long 
hair with gaudy ornaments of silver and of gold. 
The men. were averse to labour, and subsisted 
chiefly by the industry of. their women. Their 
mountains abounded in mines of copper and of 
the precious metals; insomuch that, on some parts 
of the-coast,.it was reported that the natives had 
vessels: and utensils of silver employed in the most 
common uses. A fatal report! such as that 
which afterwards carried the posterity of this very 
people, with so much destructive avidity, to visit 
the new world; and is ever likely to tempt the 
dangerous visits of strangers, who are ready to 
gratify their avarice and their ambition at the ex- 
pense of nations to whose possessions they have 
no reasonable or just pretension. ‘The Spa- 
niards were at this time divided into many bar- 
barous hordes or small principalities, which could 
neither form any effectual concert to prevent the 
intrusion and settlement of foreigners, nor pos- 
sessed the necessary docility by which to profit 
py foreign examples, whether in the form of their 
policy or the invention of arts. 

The Carthaginians had made their first visits 
to Spain under pretence of supporting the colony 
of Gades, which, like themselves, was sprung 
from Tyre. They made a settlement under the 
name of New Carthage, in a situation extremely 
favourable to the communication of Spain with 
Africa, and in the neighbourhood of the richest 
mines. Hamilcar, after a few successful cam- 
paigns, in extending the bounds of this settle- 
ment, being killed in battle, was succeeded by his 
son-in-law, Hasdrubal, who continued for some 
years to pursue the same designs. 


1 Lex Metilia de Fullonibus. Lex Claudia lib. xvii. c. 21. 
2 Cicer. in Bruto, p. 35. A Gall. 
3 Justin, lib. xliv. c. 2. 4 Strabo, lib. iii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boon i 


The Romans, in the meau while, were occu* 
pied on the coast of Illyricum, or amused with. 
alarms from Gaul. They were sensible of the 
progress made by their rivals in Spain; but im- 
agining that any danger from that quarter was 
extremely remote, or while they had wars at once 
on both sides of the Hadriatic, being unwilling 
to engage at the same time with so many ene- 
mies, were content with a negotiation and a treaty, 
in which they stipulated with the Carthaginians 
that they should not pass the Iberus to the east- 


-ward, nor molest the city of Saguntum. This 


they considered as a proper barrier on that side, 
and professed for the inhabitants of that place the 
concern of allies. ‘Trusting to the effect of this 
treaty, as sufficient to linut the progress of the 
Carthaginians in Spain, they proceeded, in the 
manner that has been mentioned, to contend with 
the Gauls for the dominion of Italy, which hither- 
to, under the frequent alarms they received from 
this people, was still insecure.5 

Hasdrubal, after nine years’ service, being as- 
sassinated by a Spanish slave, who committed 
this desperate action in revenge of an injury 
which had been done to his master, was succeed- 
ed in the command of the Carthaginian troops 
in Spain by Hannibal, the son of Hamilcar. 
This young man, then of five and twenty years 
of age, had, when a child,§ came into Spain with 
his father, seemed to inherit his genius, and pre- 
served, probably with increasing animosity, his 
aversion to the Romans. Being reared and. 
educated in camps, and from his earliest youth 
qualified to gain the confidence of soldiers, he on 
the death of Hasdrubal, by the choice of the 
troops was raised to the command of that army, 
and afterwards confirmed in it by the senate of 
Carthage. 

The Carthaginians had now for some time 
ceased to feel the defeats and the sufferings which 
had induced them to accept of the late disadvan- 
tageous conditions of peace, and were sensible 
only of the lasting inconveniences to which that 
treaty exposed them. They had long felt, from 
the neighbourhood of the Romans, an insur- 
mountable bar to their progress. ‘They had felt, 
during above seventeen years from the date of 
their last treaty of peace, the loss of their mari- 
time settlements, and the decline of their navi- 
gation. They had felt the load of a heavy con- 
tribution, which, though restricted to a particular 
sum, had the form gf a tribute, in being exacted 
by annual payments; and they entertained sen- 
timents of animosity and aversion to the Romans, 
which nothing but the memory of recent sufter- 
ings and the apprehension of danger could have 
so long suppressed. A 

Hamilcar, together with a considerable party 
of the senate, were supposed to have borne with 
the late humiliating peace only that they might 
have leisure to provide for a subsequent war. 
“J have four sons,” this famous warrior had 
been heard to say, “whom fī shall rear like so 
many lions’ whelps against the Romans.” In 
this spirit he set armies on foot to be trained 
and accustomed to service in Spain, and had 
already projected the invasion of Italy from 
thence. p a 

Whatever may have been the military services 
which the Carthaginians devised, the execution of 


5 Polyb. lib. ii. c. 13. 6 At nine years of age. 


Cuar. V.] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


43 


them was secured by the coming of Hannibal | edly an act of hostility ; and this people incurred 


to the head of their army. He was well formed 
for great enterprise, and professed an hereditary 
aversion to the Romans. In the first and second 
year of his command he continued the operations 
which had béen begun by his predecessors in 
Spain; but during this time, although he made | 
conquests beyond the Iberus, he did not molest 
tne city of Saguntum, nor give any umbrage to 
the Romans. But, in the third year after his 
eppointment, his progress alarmed the Sagun- 
tines, and induced them to send a deputation to 
Rome to impart their fears, 

At the arrival of this deputation from Sagun- 
tum, the Romans had fitted out an armament 
under the command of the consul L. Emilius 
Paulus, destined to make war on Demetrius the 
prince of Pharos, a small island on the coast of 
illyricum. ‘his armament, if directed to Spain, 
might have secured the city of Saguntum against 
the designs of Hannibal; but the Romans still 
considered any danger from that quarter as remote 
and continued to employ this force in its first des- 
tination, ‘They paid so much regard, neverthe- 
less, to the representations of the Saguntines, as 
to send deputies into Spain, with orders to ob- 
serve the posture of affairs, and to inform the 
Carthaginian officer on that station, of the en- 
gagements which had been entered into by his 
predecessor, and of the concern which the Ro- 
mans must undoubtedly take in the safety of Sa- 
guntum, ‘The return which they had to this 
message gave sufficient intimation of an ap- 
proaching war; and it appears that, before the 
Roman commissioners could have made their re- 
port, the siege of Saguntum was actually com- 
menced by Hannibal. He had already formed 
his design for the invasion of Italy, and, that he 
might not leave to the Romans a place of arms 
and a powerful ally in the country from which’ 
he was about to depart, determined to occupy or 
destroy that place. He was impatient to reduce 
Saguntum before any succours could arrive from 
Italy, or before any force could be collected 
against him, so as to fix the theatre of the war in 
Spain. He pressed the siege, therefore, with 
great impetuosity, exposing his person in every 
assault, and exciting, by his own example, with 
the pickaxe and spade, the parties at work in 
making his approaches:? Though abundantly 
cautious not to expose himself on slight occasions, 
or from a mere ostentation of courage, yet in 
this siege, which was the foundation of his hopes, 
and the necessary prelude to the farther progress 
of his enterprise, he declined no fatigues, and 
shunned no danger, that led to the attainment of 
his end. He was nevertheless, by the valour of 
‘the besieged, which they exerted in hopes of re- 
lief from Rome, detained about eight months be- 
fore this place, and deprived at last of great part 

of its spoils by the desperate resolu- 
U. C. 534. tion of the citizens, who chose to pe- 

rish, with all their effects, rather 
than fall into the enemy’s hands. The booty, 
however, which he saved from thts wreck, en- 
abled him, by his liberalities, to gam the affec- 
tion of his army, and to provide for the cxecution 
of his design against Italy. 

The siege of Saguntum, being an infraction of 
the late treaty with the Romans, was undoubt- 


7 Polyb. lib. iii. 17. 


a censure of remissness, uncommon in their 
councils, by suffering an ally, and a place of 
such importance, to remain so long in danger, 
and by suffering it at last to fall a prey to their 
enemy, without making any attempt to relieve 
it. It is probable, that the security they began 
to derive from a fronticr, far removed from the 
seat of their councils, and covered on every side 
by the sea, or by impervious mountains, rendered 
them more negligent than they had formerly been 
of much slighter alarms. ‘They expected to go- 
vern by the dread of their power, and proposed 
to punish, by exemplary vengeance, the insults 
which they had not taken care to prevent. 

The attention of the Romans, during the de- 
pendence of this event, had been fixed on the 
settlements they were making at Cremona and 
Placentia, to keep in subjection the Gauls, and 
on the naval expedition which they had sent un- 
der the consul Emilius to the coast of Illyricum. 
This officer, about the time that Hannibal had 
accomplished his design on Saguntum, and was 
retired for the winter to his usual quarters at 
New Carthage, had succeeded iw his attack on 
Demetrius prince of Pharos, had driven him from 
his territories, and obliged him to seek for refuge at 
the court of Macedonia, where his intrigues pro- 
ved to be of some consequence in the sequel of 
these transactions. 

The people of Rome being amused with these 
events, and with a triumphal procession, which, 
as usual, announced their victory, proceeded in 
the affairs of Spain according to the usual forms, 
and agreeably to the laws which they had, from 
time immemorial, prescribed to themselves in the 
case of injuries received—sent to demand satisfac- 
tion; complained at Carthage of the infraction 
of treaties; and required that Hannibal with his 
army should be delivered up to their messengers ; 
or if this were refused, gave orders to denounce 
immediate war. The Roman commissioner, 
who spoke to this effect in the senate of Carthage, 
having made his demands, held up the lappet of 
of his gown, and, said “ Here are both peace and 
war; fate ye.” — He was answered, “ We choose 

that which you like best.’—‘Then 
U. C. 525. itis war,” he said; and from this time 
both parties prepared for the contest. 

Hannibal had been long devising the invasion 
of Italy, probably without communicating lis 
design even to the councils of his own country. 
The war being now declared, he made his dis- 
positions for the safety of Africa and Spain; 
gave intimation to the army under his command, 
that the Romans had required them to be deliver- 
ed up, as a beast which commits a trespass is de- 
manded in reparation for the damage he has 
done.’ If they felt a proper resentment of this 
indignity, he warned them to prepare for an ar- 
duous march. He was in the eight and twen- 
tieth year of his age when he entered upon the 
execution of this design; an undertaking which, 
together with the conduct of it has raised his re- 
putation for enterprise and ability to an equal, if 
not to a higher pitch, than that of any leader of 
armies whatever. 

The Romans, a few years before, had mus- 
tered near eight hundred thousand men, to whom 


8 Velut ob noxam sibi dedirunt tularet populus Ro 
manus. Jav. lib. xxi. €. 30. 


44 


the use of arms was familiar, to whom valour 
was the most admired of the virtues, and who 
were ready to assemble in any numbers propor- 
tioned to the service for which they might be re- 
quired: the march from Spain into Italy lay 
across tremendous mountains, and through the 
territory of fierce and barbarous nations, who 
might not be inclined tamely to suffer a stranger 
to pass through their country, or lose any oppor- 
tunity to enrich themselves with his spoils. 
From such topics as these, historians have 
magnified the courage of this celebrated warrior 
at the expense of his judgment. It is probable, 
however, that both were equally exerted in this 
memorable service. In the contest of nations, 
that country which is made the seat of the war, 
for the most part labours under great compara- 
tive disadvantage, is obliged to subsist the army 
of its enemy as well as its own, is exposed to 
devastation, to hurry, confusion, and irresolution 
of councils; so much that, in nations powerful 
abroad, invasions often betray great incapacity 
and weakness, or at least fix the whole sufferings 
of the war upon those who are invaded. Han- 
nibal, besides this general consideration, had 
with great care informed himself of the real state 
of Italy, and knew, that though the Roman 
musters were formidable, yet much of their sup- 
posed strength consisted of discordant parts; a 
number of separate cantons recently united, and 
many of them disaffected to the power by which 
they were cemented together. Most of the in- 
habitants of that country, being the descendants 
of different nations, and distinguished by various 
languages, still retained much animosity to each 
other, and most of all to their new masters. 
Those who had longest borne the appellation of 
Roman allies, even the colonies themselves, as 
well as the conquered nations, had occasionally 
revolted, and were likely to prefer separate es- 
tablishments to their present dependance on the 
Roman state. The Gauls and Ligurians, even 
the Etruscans, had been recently at war with 
those supposed masters of Italy, and were ready 
to resume the sword in concert with any success- 
ful invader. The Gauls on the Po were already 
in arms, had razed the fortifications which the 
Romans had begun to erect at Cremona and 
Placentia, and forced the settlers to take refuge 
at Mutina. Every step, therefore, that an in- 
vader should make within this country, was 
likely to remove a support from the Romans, and 
to add a new one to himself. The Roman 
power, composed of parts so ill cemented, was 
likely to dissolvé on the slightest touch. ‘Though 
great when employed at a distance, and wielded 
by a single hand, yet broken and disjointed by 
the presence of an enemy, it was likely to lose 
its strength; or, by the revolt of one or more of 
its districts, might furnish a force that could be 
successfully employed against itself. A few 
striking examples of success, therefore, for which 
he trusted to his own conduct, and to the supe- 
riority of veterans hardened in the service of 
many years, were likely to let loose the discon- 
tents which subsisted in Italy, and to shake the 
fidelity of those allies who composed so great a 
part of the Roman strength. Even with a less 
favourable prospect of success, the risk was but 
small, compared to the chance of gain. A single 
army was to be staked against a mighty state; 
and a few men, that could be easily replaced, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book I. 


were to be sacrificed in an enterprise which, it 
successful, was to make Carthage the mistress ot 
the world; or even if it should miscarry, might 
inflict on her enemy a deeper wound than she 
herself was likely to suffer from the loss. 

Hannibal collected together for this expedition 
ninety thousand foot and twelve thousand horse. 
In his march to the Iberus, he met with no in- 
terruption. From thence to the Pyrenees, bein 
opposed by the natives, he forced his way through 
their country; but apprehending some incon- 
venience from such an enemy left in his rear, he 
stationed his brother Hanno, with ten thousand 
foot and one thousand horse, to observe their 
motions, and to keep them in awe. After he 
had begun to ascend the Pyrenees, a considerable 
body of his Spanish allies deserted him in the 
night, and fell back to their own country. This 
example he had reason to believe, would prove 
contagious; and as the likeliest way to prevent 
its effects, he gave out, that the party which had 
left him being no longer wanted for the purposes 
they served on the march, were returned by his 
orders to their own country; that he meant to 
spare a few more of the troops of the same nation, 
as being unnecessary in the remaining parts of 
the service; and actually dismissed a considerable 
body to confirm this opinion. By these separa- 
tions, or by the swords of the enemy, his numbers, 
in descending the mountains, were reduced fror 
ninety to fifty thousand foot and nine thousand 
horse, with seven and thirty elephants.} 

This celebrated march took place 
U. C. 534. in the year of Rome five hundred 
and thirty-four, and in the consulate 
of Publius Cornelius Scipio and Tiberius Sem- 
pronius Longus. The Romans, as usual on 
such oecasions, raised two consular armies, and 
proposed, by immediate armaments directed to 
Spain and to Africa, to fix the scene of the war 
in the eneiny’s country. 

Sempronius assembled an army and a fleet in 
the ports of Sicily, and had orders to pass into 
Africa. Scipio embarked with some legions for 
Spain, and, touching on the coast of Gaul, first 
learned, that a Carthaginian army was marching 
by land into Italy. This intelligence determined 
hin to land his troops at Marseilles, and to send 
out a detachment of horse to observe the country, 
and to procure farther and more particular infor- 
mation of the enemy. 

Hannibal had arrived on the Rhone at some 

istance above its separation into two channels, 
and about four days’ march from the sea. In 
order to effect the passage of the river, he in- 
stantly collected all the boats that could be found 
on its extensive navigation. At the same time, 
the natives, being unacquainted with strangers 
in any other capacity than that of enemies, as- 
sembled in great numbers to dispute lis farther 
progress in their country. l 

Finding so powerful a resistance in front, he 
delayed the embarkation of his army on the 
Rhone, and sent a detachment up the banks of 
the river to pass it at a difierent place, and to 
make a diversion on the flank or the rear of the 
enemy who opposed ljm. À 

The division employed on this service, after a 
march of twenty-five miles, found the Rhone se- 
parated into branches by small islands, and at a 


1 Polyb. lib. iii. c. 33—42. 


Cuar. V.] 


convenient place got over on rafts to the oppo- 
site shore; and being thus in the rear, or on the 
right of the Gaulish army, hastened towards them 
in order to give an alarm on that quarter, while 
Hannibal should pass the river in their front. 

On the fifth day after the departure of this par- 
ty, Hannibal, having intelligence that they had 
succeeded in passing the Rhone, made his dispo- 
sition to profit by the diversion they were orderèd 
to make in his favour. The larger vessels, 
which were destined to transport the cavalry, 
were ranged towards the stream, to break the 
force of the current; and many of the horses were 
fastened to the stern of the boats. The smaller 
canoes were ranged below, and were to carry 
over a body of foot. 

The Gauls, sceing these preparations, left 
their camp, and advanced to meet the enemy. 
'They were drawn up on the banks of the river, 
when the Carthaginian detachment arrived on 
their rear, and lighted fires as a signal of their 
approach. Hannibal observing the smoke, not- 
withstanding the posture which the enemy had 
taken to resist his landing, instantly put off from 
the shore: both armies shouted; but the Gauls 
being thrown into great consternation by the re- 
port and effects of an attack which they little ex- 
pected on their rear, without resistance gave way 
to the Carthaginians in front, and were speedily 
routed. Hannibal, having thus lodged himself 
on the eastern banks of the Rhone, in a few days, 
without any farther interruption or loss, passed 
that river with his elephants, baggage, and the 
remainder of his army. 

Soon after the Carthaginian general had sur- 
mounted this difficulty, intelligence came that a 
Roman army had arrived on the coast, and was 
disembarked at Marseilles. T'o gain further and 
more certain information of this enemy, he, nearly 
about the same time that Scipio had sent a de- 
tachment on the same design, directed a party of 
horse to examine the country. These parties 
inet; and, after a smart engagement, returned to 
their several armies with certain accounts of an 
enemy being near, 

Scipio advanced with the utmost despatch to 
fix the scene of the war in Gaul; and Hannibal 
hastened his departure, being equally intent on 
removing it, if possible, into Italy. ‘The last, in 
order to keep clear of the enemy, directed his 
march at a distance from the sea coast, and took 
his route by the banks of the Rhone. After four 
days march from the place where he had passed 
this river, he came to its confluence with another 
river, which was probably the Isere, though by 
Polybius himself, who visited the tract of this 
march, the place seems to be mistaken for the 
confluence of the Rhone and Saone.2 Here he 
found two brothers contending for the throne of 
their father, and gained a useful ally by espousing 
the cause of the elder. Being, in return for this 
service, supplied with arms, shoes, and other ne- 
cessaries, and attended by the prince himself, 


2 In the manuscripts of Polybins, the river which falls 
into the Rhone at this place was called by a name unknown 
in that country. The first editors, to correct the mistake, 
changed this unknown name for that of the Arar. But it 
is extremely probable, that they ought to have made it the 
Isara, as the confluence of the Isere and the Rhone cor- 
responds much better with the distauces and marches men- 
tioned by Polybins. Four marches, for instance, from the 
place at which Tanmihal had passed the Rhone, and four 
more from thence to the sea. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


45 


who with a numerous body covered his rear, he 
continued his march during ten days, probably on 
the Isere; and, about a hundred miles above the 
place where he had passed the Rhone, began to 
make his way over the summit of the Alps; a 
labour in which he was employed with his army 
during fifteen days.3 

The natives, either fearing him as an enemy, 
or proposing to plunder his baggage, had occupied 
every post at which they could obstruet his march; 
assailed him from the heights, endeavoured to 
overwhelm his army in the gorges of the moun- 
tains, or force them over precipices, which fre- 
quently sunk perpendicular under the narrow 
paths by which they were to pass. 

Near to the summits of the ridge, at which he 
arrived by a continual ascent of many days, he 
had his way to form on the sides of frozen moun- 
tains, and through masses of perennial ice, which, 
at the approach of winter, were now covered with 
recent snow. Many of his men and horses, 
coming from a warm climate, perished by the 
cold; and his army having struggled, during so 
long a time, with extremes to which it was little 
accustomed, was reduced from fifty thousand foot 
and nine thousand horse, the numbers which re- 
mained to him in descending the Pyrenees, to 
twenty thousand foot and six thousand cavalry, a 
force, in all appearance, extremely disproportioned 
to the service for which they were destined.‘ 

The Roman consul, in the mean time, had, 


3 This famous route has been a subject of different 
opinions, and of some controversy. In a country that is 
raised into vast mountains, round whieh the way must be 
found by narrow valleys, and the channels of rivers, it is 
impossible to decide any question of this sort from the 
map. Polybius visited the ground, in order to satisfy him- 
self on the tract of this famous route; and, from this cir- 
cumetance, as well as froin his general knowledge of war, 
is undoubtedly the best authority to whom we can have 
recourse in this question. By his account, Hannibal, after 
four marches from the place at which he had passed the 
Rhone, eame to the confluence of this with another river, 
which is evidently the Isere. From thence, having con- 
tinued his route ten days onthe river, and marched abont 
a hundred miles, he began to ascend the summit, and was 
employed in that difficult work fifteen days. This account 
may incline us to believe, that Hannibal followed the 
course of the Isere from its confluence with the Rhone to 
about Conflans; that, having surmounted the summit, he 
descended into Italy by the channel of another river, or the 
Vale of Aoste. Such are the passages by which ridges of 
mountains, in every instance, are to be traversed. It is 
indeed asserted, or implicd in the text of Polybius, that 
Hannibal marched ten days on the Rhone after its conflu- 
ence with the Arar or Isara; but it is probable, that, in 
visiting a barbarous country, in which the Romans had 
yet no possessions, and with the language of which he waa 
unaequainted, he may have mistaken the Isere for the 
Rhone, and eonsequently the Rhone for the Arar or Saone 
The Rhone and Isere take their rise from the same ridge, 
and run pearly in the same directions. In this account of 
the course of the supposcd Rhone which he visited, he 
mentions nothing of the Lake of Geneva, which is scarce 
ly possible, if he had seen it. Polyb. lib. ni. e. 47. 

According to this conjecture, Hannibal having marched 
by the vale of Isere, Grenoble, Chamberry, and Mountme- 
lian and descended by the vale of Aoste, must have passed 
the summit at or near the lesser abbey of St. Bernard. 

As mountains are penetrated by the channels of rivers, 
it is probable that Hannibal, if he were himself to explore 
his passage, would try the course of the first considerable 
river he found on his right descending from the Alps, 
which was the Isere; but if, as is extremely probable, he 
had well-instructed guides, it is not likely that they would 
lead him so long a circuit as he must have made by the 
course and sources of the Rhone, when, in fact, he had 
oae equally practicable, and much nearer, by the Isere 
on one side of the Alps, and the Dorea Baltea on the other 

4 Polyb. lib. iii. e. 55. Liv. hb. xxi. 


46 


in search of his enemy, directed his march to the 
Rhone; and in three days after the departure of 
Hannibal, had arrived at tle place where he had 
passed that river, but was satisfied that any fur- 
ther attempts to pursue him in this direction, 
would only carry himself away from what was to 
be the scene of the war, and from the ground he 


must occupy for the detence of Italy; he returned: 


therefore without loss ot time to his ships; sent 
his brother, Cneius Scipio, with the greater part 
of the army, to pursue the objects of the war in 
Spain; and he himself with the remainder, set 
sail for Pisa, where he landed and put himself at 
the head of the legions which he found in that 
quarter; and which had been appointed to restore 
the settlements of Cremona and Placenti. With 
these forces he passed the Po, and was arrived 
on the Tecinus, when Hannibal came down 
into the plain country at some distance below 
Turin. 

The Carthaginian general, at his arrival in 
those parts, had moved to his right; and, to gra- 
tify his new allies the Insubres, inhabiting what 
is now the dutchy of Milan, who were then at 
war with the Taurini or Piedmontese, he laid 


siege to the capital of that country, and in three. 


days reduced it by force. From thence he con- 
tinued his march on the left of the Po; and, as 
the armies advanced, both generals, as if by con- 
cert, approached with their cavalry, or light troops, 
mutually to observe each other. They met on 
the Tecinus, with some degree of surprise on both 
sides, and were necessarily engaged in a conflict, 
which served as'a trial of their respective forces, 
and in which the Italian cavalry were defeated 
by the Spanish and African horse. ‘The Roman 
consul was wounded, and with much difficulty 
rescued from the enemy by his son Publius Cor- 
nelius, afterwards so conspicuous in the history 
of this war, but then only a youth of seventeen 
years of age, entering on his military service.! 

The Roman detachment, it seems, had an 
easy retreat from the place of this encounter to 
that of their main army, and were not pursued. 
Scipio, disabled by his wound, and probably from 
the check he had received sensible of the enemy’s 
superiority in the quality of their horse, deter- 
mined to retire from the plains; repassed the Po, 
marched up the Trebia, and to stop the progress 
of the Carthaginians, while he waited for ın- 
structions or reinforcements from Romé, took 
post on the banks of that river. While he layin 
this position, an alarming effect of his defeat, and 
of the disaffection of some Gauls who professed 
to be his allies, appeared in the desertion of two 
thousand horsemen of that nation, who went over 
to the enemy. 

The Roman senate received these accounts 
with surprise, and with some degree of conster- 
nation. An enemy was arrived in Italy, and 
had obliged the consul, with his legions, to re- 
tire. The forces which they had lately muster- 
ed were numerous, but consisted in part of doubt- 
ful friends or of declared enemies. They supposed 
all their late vanquishéd subjects on the Po to be 
already in rebellion, or to be mustered against 
them in the Carthaginian camp. And, notwith- 
standing the numerous levies that could have 
been made in the city, and in the contiguous colo- 


— a cow: 


1 Polyb. lib. x. c. 3. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


nies; notwithstanding the expediency of carry 
ing the war into Africa, as the surest way of 
forcing the Carthaginians to withdraw their for- 
ces frora Italy for the defence of their own country, 
they, with a degree of pusillanimity uncommon 
in their councils, ordered the other consul, Sem- 
pronius Longus, to desist from his design upon 
Africa; they recalled him with his army from 
Sicily, and directed him, without delay, to join 
his colleague on the Trebia, and if possible, to 
stop the progress of this daring and impetuous 
enemy. 

The consul Sempronius, therefore, after he had 
met ‘and defeated a Carthaginian fleet on the coast 
of Sicily, and was preparing for a descent on Af- 
rica, suddenly changed his course, and having 
turned the eastern promontories of Sicily and 
Italy, steered for Ariminum, where he landed; 
and, having performed this voyage and march in 
forty days, joined his colleague, where he lay 
opposed to Hannibal on the Trebia. 

By the arrival of a second Roman consul, the 
balance of forces was again restored, and the na- 
tives still remained in suspense between the two 
parties at war. Instead of a deliverance from 
servitude, which many of them expected to ob- 
tain from the arrival of foreigners to balance the 
force of the Romans, they began to apprehend, 
as usual in such cases, a confirmation of their 
bonds, or a mere change of their masters. When 
the contest should be ended, they wished to have 
the favour of the victor, and not to share in the 
fortunes of the vanquished. They had, there- 
fore, waited to see how the scales were likely to 
incline, and had not repaired to the standard of 
Hannibal in the manner, it is probable, he ex- 
pected; and this, with every other circumstance 
of the war, forced him to rapid and hazardous 
counsels. Being too far from his resources to 
continue a dilatory war, he hastened to secure 
the necessary possessions on the Po; and by the 
reputation of victory, to determine the waver- 
ing inhabitants to declare on his side. For 
these reasons he ever pressed on the enemy, and 
sought for occasions to draw them into action. 
He had been, ever since the encounter on the 
Tecinus, cautiously avoided by Scipio; who, 
even after he was reinforced by the other con- 
sular army, endeavoured to engage his colleague 
likewise in the same dilatory measures; but 
Sempronius, imputing this caution to the im- 
pression which Scipio had taken from his late 
defeat, and being confident of his own strength, 
discovered to the Carthaginian general an incli- 
nation to meet him, and to decide the campaign 
by a general action. Sempronius was farther 
encouraged in this intention by his success in 
some encounters of foraging parties, which hap- 
pened soon after he had arrived on this ground; 
and Hannibal, seeing this disposition of his 
enemy, took measures to bring on the engagement 
in circumstances the most favourable to himself. 

He had a plain in his front, through which 
the Trebia ran, and parted the two armics. He 
wished to bring the Romans to his own side of 
the river, and to fight on the ground where his 
army was accustomed to form. Here, besides 
the other advantages which he proposed to take, 
he had an opportunity to place an ambuscade, 
from which he could attack the enemy on the 
flank or the rear, while they should be engaged 
in front. It was the middle of winter, and there 


Cuar. V.] 


were frequent showers of snow. The enemy’s 
infantry, if they should ford the river, and after- 
wards remain any time inactive, were hkely to 
suffer considerably from the effects of wet and 
cold, Hannibal, to lay them under this disadvan- 
tage, sent his cavalry across the fords, with orders 
to parade on the ground before the enemy’s lines; 
and, if attacked, to repass the river with every ap- 
pearance of flight. He had, in the mean time, 
concealed a thousand chosen men under the 
shrubby banks of a brook, which fell into the 
Trebia beyond the intended field of battle. He 
had ordered his army to be in readiness, and to 
prepare themselves with a hearty meal for the 
fatigues they were likely to undergo. 

When the Carthaginian cavalry, passing the 
river as they had been ordered, presented them- 
selves to the Romans, it was but break of day, 
and before the usual hour of the first meal in the 
Roman camp. The legions were, nevertheless, 
hastily formed, and pursued the enemy to where 
they were seen in disorder to pass the river; and 
there, by the directions of their general, who 
supposed he had gained an advantage, and with 
the ardour which is usual in the pursuit of vic- 
tory, they passed the fords, and made a display 
of their forces on the opposite bank, Hannibal, 
expecting this event, had already formed his 
troops on the plain, and made a show of only 
covering the retreat of his cavalry, while he knew 
that a general action could no longer be avoided. 
After it began in front, the Romans were attacked 
in the rear by the party which had been posted in 
ambush for this purpose; and this being added to 
the other disadvantages under which they en- 
gaged, they were defeated with great slaughter. 

he legions of the centre, to the amount of 
ten thousand men, cut their way through the 
enemy’s line, and escaped to Placentia. Of the 
remainder of the army, the greater part either fell 
in the field, perished in attempting to repass the 
river, or were taken by the enemy. In this action, 
although few of the Africans fell by the sword, 
they suflered considerably by the cold and asper- 
ity of the season, to which they were not accus- 
tomed; and of the elephants, of which Hannibal 
had brought a considerable number into this 
pee only one survived the distress of this 

ay. 

In consequence of this victory, Hannibal 
secured his quarters on the Po; and by the 
treachery of a native of Brundusium, who com- 
manded at Clastidium, got possession of that 
place, after the Romans had fortified and fur- 
nished it with considerable magazines for the 
supply of their own army. In his treatment of 
the prisoners taken at this place, he made a dis- 
tinction between the citizens of Rome and their 
allies: the first he used with severity, the others 
he dismissed to their several countries, with as- 
surances that he was come to make war on tlie 
st is and not on the injured inhabitants of 

taly. 

The Roman consul, Sempronius, was among 
those who escaped to Placentia. He meant, in 
his despatches to the senate, to have disguised the 
amount of his loss; but the difficulty with which 
his messenger arrived through a country over-run 
by the enemy, with many other consequences of 
his defeat, soon published at Rome the extent of 


2 Polyb. lib. ili. c. 74. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


47 


that calamity. The people, however, rose in their 
ardour and animosity, instead of being sunk. As 
awakened from a dream of pusillanimity, in 
which they had hitherto seemed to confine their 
views to the defence of Italy, they not only com 
manded fresh levies to replace the army they had 
lost on the Trebia, but they ordered the consul 
Scipio to his first destination in Spain, and sent 
forces to Sardinia, Sicily, Tarentum, and every 
other station where they apprehended any defec- 
tion of their allies, or any impression to be made 
by the enemy.3 

The unfortunate Sempronius, being called to 
the city to hold the election of magistrates, 
escaped, or forced his way through the quarters 
of the enemy. He was succeeded by Caius 
Flaminius and Cn. Servilius; the first, being 
of obscure extraction, was chosen in opposition 
to the nobles, to whom the people imputed the 
disasters of the present war. e was ordered 
early in the spring to take post at Arretium, that 
he might guard the passes of the Appenines and 
cover Etruria, while the other consul was sta- 
tioned at Ariminum to stop the progress of the 
enemy, if he attempted to pass by the eastern coast. 

Hannibal, after his first winter in Italy, took 
the field for an early campaign; and being in- 
clined to counsels the most likely to surprise his 
enemies, took his way to Etruria, by a passage in 
which the vales of the Appenines were marshy, 
and, from the effects of the season, still covered 
with water. In a struggle of many days with the 
hardships of this dangerous march, he lost many 
of his ToN and much of his baggage; and 
himself, being seized with an inflammation in one 
of his eyes, lost the use of it. Having appeared, 
however, in a quarter where he was not expected, 
he availed himself of this degree of surprise with 
all his former activity and vigour. 

The character of Flaminius, who was raised by 
the favour of the people in opposition to the 
senate, and who was now disposed to gratify his 
constituents by some action of splendour and 
success, encouraged Hannibal to hope that he 
might derive some advantage from the ignorance 
and presumption of his enemy. He therefore en- 
deavoured to provoke the new consul, by destroy- 
ing the country in his presence, and to brave his 
resentment, by seeming, on many occasions, to 
expose.himself to his attacks. He even ventured 
to penetrate into the country beyond him withan 
appearance of contempt. In one of these move- 
ments he marched by the banks of the Lake 
Thrasimenus, over which the mountains rose 
with a sudden and steep ascent. He trusted that 
the Roman consul would follow him, and occu- 
pied a post from which with advantage to attack 
him, if he should venture to engage amidst the 
difficulties of this narrow way. Ou the day in 
which his design was ripe for execution, he was 
favoured in concealing his position on the ascent 
of the mountains by a fog which covered thie 
brows of the hills; and he succeeded in drawing 
the Roman consul into a snare, in which he 
perished, with the greater part of his army. 

The loss of the Romans in this action amount- 
ed to fifteen thousand men who fell by the sword, 
or who were forced into the lake and drowned. 
Of those who escaped by different ways, some 
continued their flight for fourscore miles, the dis- 


è 


3 Polyb. lib. iii. c. 75, 


48 


tance of this field of battle from Rome, and ar- 
rived in the city with the news of this disastrous 
event. On the first reports great multitudes as- 
sembled at the place from which the people were 
accustomed to receive a communication of public 
despatches from the officers of state; and the 
pretor, who then commanded in the city, being to 
inform them of what had passed, began his ac- 
count of the action with these words: “ We are 
vanquished in a great battle; the consul, with 
great part of his army, is slain.” He was about 
to proceed, but could not be heard for the conster- 
nation, and the cries which arose among the peo- 
ple: insomuch, that persons who had been present 
in the action confessed, they heard these words 
with a deeper impression, than any they had re- 
ceived amidst the bloodshed and horrors of the 
field; and that it was then only they became sen- 
sible of the whole extent of their loss. 

To increase the general affliction, farther ac- 
counts were brought, at the same time, that four 
thousand horse, which had been sent, upon hear- 
ing that Hannibal had passed the A ppenines, by 
the consul Servilius, to support his colleage; were 
intercepted by the enemy and taken. The senate 
continued their mectings for many days without 
interruption ; and the people, greatly affected with 
the weight of their mortifieations and disappoint- 
ments, committed themselves with proper docility 
to the conduct of this respectable body. In con- 
sidering the cause of their repeated defeats, it is 
probable that they imputed them more to the dif 
ference of personal qualities in the leaders, than 
to any difference in the arms, discipline, or cour- 
age of the troops. In respect to the choice of 
weapons, Hannibal was so much convinced of 
the superiority of the Romans, that he availed 
himself of his booty on the Trebia and the Lake 
Thrasimenus, to arm his African veterans in 
their manner.'! In respect to discipline and cour- 
age, although mere detachments of the Roman 
people were likely, in their first campaigns, to 
have been inferior to veterans, hardened in the 
service of many years under Hamilcar, Hasdru- 
bal and Hannibal himself, yet nothing is im- 
puted by any historian to this point of disparity. 
They are not said to have been backward in any 
attack, to have failed their general in the execu- 
tion of any plan, to have disobeyed his orders, to 
have been seized with any panic, or, in any in- 
stance, to have given way to the enemy until, 
being caught in some snare by the superiority of 
the general, they fought with disadvantage, and 
perished in great numbers on the field. 

The result of the senate’s deliberations was to 
name a dictator. This measure, except to dis- 
pense with some form that hampered the ordinary 
magistrate, had not been adopted during an inter- 
val of five and thirty years. ‘Che choice fell upon 
Quintus Fabius Maximus, who seemed to pos- 
sess the vigilance, caution, and vigour which 
were wanted in this arduous state of affairs. In 
proceeding to name him, the usual form which, 
perhaps, in matters of state, as well as in matters 
of religion, should be supposed indispensable, 
could not be observed. Of the consuls, of whom 
one or the other, according to ancient practice, 
ought to name the dictator, one was dead; the 
other, being at a distance, was prevented by the 
enemy from any communication with the city. 


1 Polyb. lib. iii. c. 415. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


The senate, therefore, to elude the supposed ne- 
cessity of his presence, resolved that not a dicta- 
tor, but a pro-dictator, should be named; and 
that the people should themselves choose this 
officer, with all the powers that were usually en- 
trusted to the dictator himself. Fabius was ac- 
cordingly elected pro-dictator, and in this capacity 
named M. Minutius Rufus for his second in 
command, or general of the horse. 

While the Romans were thus preparing again 
to collect their forces, Hannibal continued to pur- 
sue his advantage. He might, with an enemy 
more easily subdued or daunted than the Ro- 
mans, already have expected great fruit from his 
victories, at least he might have expected offers 
of concession and overtures of peace: but it is 
probable that he knew the character of this peo- 
ple enough, not to flatter himself so early in the 
war with these expectations, or to hope that he 
could make any impression by a nearer approach 
to the city, or by any attempt on its walls. He 
had already, by his presence, enabled the nations 
of the northern and western parts of Italy to 
shake off the dominion of Rome. He had the 
same measures to pursue with respect to the na- 
tions of the south. ‘The capital, he probably 
supposed, might be deprived of the support of its 
allies, cut off from its resources, and even de- 
stroyed; but while the state existed could never 
be brought to yield to an enemy. 

Under these impressions the Carthaginian 
gencral, leaving Rome at a great distance on his 
right, repassed the Appenines to the coast of 
Picenum, and from thence directed his march to 
Apulia. Here he proceeded, as he had done on 
the side of Etruria and Gaul, to lay waste the 
Roman settlements, and to detach the natives 
from their allegiance to Rome. But while he 
pursued this plan in one extremity of Italy, the 
Romans took measures to recover the possessions 
they had lost on the other, or at least to prevent 
the disaffected Gauls from making any consider- 
able diversion in favour of their enemy. 

For this purpose, while Fabius Maximus was 
assembling an army to oppose Hannibal in Apu- 
lia, the prætor, Lucius Posthumius, was sent with 
a proper force to the Po. Fabius having united the 
troops that had served under the consul Servilius, 
with four legions newly raised by himself, follow- 
ed the enemy. On his march he issued a procla- 
mation, requiring all the inhabitants of open 
towns and villages in that quarter of Italy to re- 
tire into places of safety, and the inhabitants of 
every district to which the enemy approached, to 
set fire to their habitations and granaries, and 
to destroy whatever they could not remove in 
their flight.2 Though determined not to hazard 
a battle, he drew near to the Carthaginian army, 
and continued from the heights to observe and to 
circumscribe their motions. ‘Time alone, he 
trusted, would decide the war in his favour, 
against an enemy who was far removed from any 
supply or recruit, and in a country that was daily 
wasting by the effect of his own depredations. 

Hannibal, after endeavouring in vain to bring 
the Roman dictator to a battle, perceived his de 
sign to protract the war; and considering inactior 
as the principal evil he himself had to fear, fre 
quently exposed his detachments, and even his 
whole army, in dangerous situations. ‘The ad 


2 Liv. lib. xxii. c, 1L. 


Crap. VJ 


vantages he gave by these acts of temerity were 
sometimes effectually seized by his wary antago- 
nist, but more frequently recovered by his own 
singular conduct and unfailing resources. 

n this temporary stagnation of Hannibal’s 
fortune, and in the frequent opportunities which 
the Romans had, though in trifling encounters, 
to measure their own strength with that of the 
enemy, their confidence began to revive. The 

ublic resumed the tranquillity of its councils, and 
foen round with deliberation to collect its force. 
The people and the army recovered from their 
late consternation, and took advantage of the 
breathing-time they had gained, to censure the 
very conduct to which they owed the returns of 
their confidence and the renewal of their hopes. 
They forgot their former defeats, and began to 
imagine that the enemy kept his footing in Italy 
by the permission, by the timidity, or by the ex- 
cessive caution of their leader. 

A slight advantage over Hannibal, who had 
too much exposed his foraging parties, gained by 
the gencral of the horse in the absence of the 
dictator, confirmed the army and the people in 
this opinion, and greatly sunk the reputation of 
Fabius. As he could not be superseded before 
the usual term of his office was expired, the se- 
nate and people, though precluded by law from 
proceeding to an actual deposition, came to a re- 
solution equally violent and unprecedented, and 
which they hoped might induce him to resign his 
power. ‘They raised the general of the horse to 
an equal command with the dictator, and left 
them to adjust their pretensions between them. 
Such affronts, under the notions of honour 
which in modern times are annexed to the mili- 
tary character, would have made it impossible for 
the dictator to remain in his station. But in a 
commonwealth, where, to put any personal con- 
sideration in competition with the public, would 
have appeared absurd, seeming injuries done by 
the state to the honour of a eitizen, only furnish- 
ed him with a more splendid occasion to display 
his virtue. The Roman dictator continued to 
serve under this diminution of his rank and com- 
mand, and overlooked with magnaninuity the in- 
sults with which the people had requited the ser- 
vice he was rendering to his country. 

Miuutius being now assoeiated with the dicta- 
tor, in order to be free from the restraints of a 
joint command, and from the wary counsels of his 
colleague, desired, as the properest way of adjust- 
ing their pretensions, to divide the army between 
them. In this new situation he soon after, by his 
rashness, exposed himself and his division to be 
entirely eut off by the enemy. But being rescued 
by Fabius, he too gave proofs of a magnanimous 
spirit, confessed the favour he had received, and 
committing himself, with the whole army, to the 
conduct of his colleague, he left this cautious 
officer, during the remaining period of their joint 
command, to pursue the plan he had formed for 
the war. 

At this time, however, the people, and even 
the senate, were not willing to wait for the effect 
of such seemingly languid and dilatory measures 
as Fabius was inclined to pursue. They resolved 
to augment the army in Italy to eight legions, 
which, with an equal number of the allies, 
amounted to eighty thousand foot and seven 


3 Plutarch. in vit. Fab. Max. 
Cr 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


49 


thousand two hundred horse ; and they intended, 
in the approaching election of consuls, to choose 
men, not only of reputed abilities, but of decisive 
and resolute counsels. As such they elected C. 
Terentius Varro, supposed to be of a bold ana 
dauntless spirit; and, in order to temper his ar- 
dour, joined with him in the command L. Emilius 
Paulus, an officer of approved experienec, who 
had formerly obtained a triumph for his victories 
in Illyricum, and who was high in the confidence 
of the senate, as well as in that of the people. 

In the autumn before the nomination of these 
officers to command the Roman army, Hannibal 
had surprised the fortress of Canne on the Aufi- 
dus, a place to which the Roman citizens of that 
quarter had retired with their effects, and at 
which they had collected considerable magazines 
and stores. This, among other circumstances, 
determined the senate to hazard a battle, and to 
furnish the new consuls with instructions to this 
effect. 

These officers, it-appears, having opened the 
campaign on the banks of the Aufidus, advanced 
by mutual consent within six miles of the Cartha- 
ginian camp, which covered the village of Canne. 
Here they differed in their opinions, and, by a 
strange defeet in the Roman policy, which, in 
times of less virtue, must have been altogether 
ruinous, and even in these times was ill-fitted to 
produce a consistent and well-supported series of 
operations, had no rule by which to decide their 
precedency, and were obliged to take the com- 
mand each a day in his turn. 

Varro, contrary to the opinion of his colleague, 
proposed to give battle on the plain, and with this 
intention, as often as the command devolved upon 
him, still advaneed on the enemy. In order that 
he might occupy the passage and both sides of the 
Aufidus, he encamped in two separate divisions 
on its opposite banks, having his larger division 
on the right of the river, opposed to Hannibal’s 
eamp. Still taking the opportunity of his turn to 
eonimand the army, he passed with the larger di- 
vision to a plain, supposed to be on the left of the 
Aufidus, and there, though the field was too nar- 
row to receive the legions in their usual form, he 
poe them together, and gave the enemy, if 
he ehose it, an opportunity to engage. To ac- 
commodate his order to the extent of his ground, 
he contracted the head and the intervals of his 
manipules or columns, making their depth greatly 
to exceed the front whieh they turned to the 
enemy.4 

He placed his eavalry on the flanks, the Roman 
knights on his right towards the river, and the 
horsemen of the allies on the left, 

Hannibal no sooner saw this movement and 
disposition of the enemy, than he hastened to 
meet them on the plain which they had chosen 
for the field of action. He likewise passed the 
Aufidus, and, with his left to the river, and his 
front to the south, formed his army upon an 
equal line with that of the enemy. 

He placed the Gaulish and Spanish eavalry on 
his left facing the Roman knights, and the Nu- 
midians on his right faeing the allies. 

The flanks of his infantry, on the right and 
the left, were composed of the African foot, arm- 
ed in the Roman manner, with the pilum, the 


4 Ioiswy ro Balos av tig Uereroxss [lsAkewraciey te’ 
gstarsu. Vide Polyb. 


50° 


heavy buckler, and the stabbing sword. His 
centre, though opposed to the choice of the Ro- 
man legions, consisted of the Gaulish and the 
Spanish foot, variously armed and intermixed 


ae, 

itherto no advantage seemed to be taken on 
either side. As the armies fronted south and 
north, even the sun, which rose soon after they 
were formed, shone upon the flanks, and was no 
disadvantage, to either. The superiority of num- 
bers was greatly on the side of the Romans; but 
Hannibal rested his hopes of victory on two cir- 
cumstances; first, on a motion to be made by his 
cavalry, if they prevailed on either side of the 
enemy’s wings; next, on a position he was to 
take with his centre, in order to begin the action 
from thence,. to bring the Roman legions into 
some disorder, and expose them,.under that dis- 
advantage, to the attack which he was prepared 
to make with his veterans on both their flanks.. 

The action accordingly began with a charge 
of the Gaulish and Spanish horse, who,. being 
superior to the Roman knights, drove them from 
their ground, forced them into the river, and put 
the greater part of them to the sword. By this 
event the flank of the Roman army, which might 
have been joined to the Aufidus, was entirely 
uncovered. 

Having performed this service, the victorious 
cavalry had orders to wheel at full gallop round 
the rear of their own army, and to join the Nu- 
midian horse on their right, who were still en- 
gaged with the Roman allies. By this unexpect- 
ed junction, the left wing of the Roman army 
was likewise put to flight, and pursued by the 
African horse; at the same time the Spanish 
cavalry prepared to attack the Roman infantry, 
wherever they should. be ordered,.on the flank or 
the rear.. 

While these important events took place on the 
wings, Hannibal amused the Roman legions of 
the main body with a singular movement that 
was:made by the Gauls and Spaniards, and with 
which he proposed to begin the action. ‘These 
came forward, not in a straight line abreast, but 
swelling out to a curve in the centre, without dis- 
joining their flanks from the African infantry, 
who remained firm on their ground. 

By this motion they formed a kind of crescent 
convex to the front. ‘The Roman manipules of 
the right and the left, fearing, by this singular 
disposition, to have no share in the action, hasten- 
ed to bend their line into a corresponding curve ; 
and, in proportion as they came to close with the 
enemy, charged them with a confident and im- 
petuous courage. The Gauls and Spaniards re- 
sisted. this charge no longer than was necessary 
to awaken the precipitant ardour with which 
victorious troops often, blindly pursue a flying 
enemy. And the Roman line being bent, and 
fronting inwards to the centre of. its concave, the 
legions pursued where the enemy led them. 
Hurrying from the flanks to share in the victory, 
they narrowed their space as they advanced, and 
the men who were accustomed to have a square 
of six feet clear for wielding their arms, being 
now pressed together, so as to prevent entirely 
the use of their swords, found themselves strug- 
gling against each other for space, in an inextri- 
cable and hopeless confusion. 

Hannibal, who had waited for this event, or- 
dered a general charge of his cavalry on the rear 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor É 


of the Roman legions, and at the same time an 
attack from his African infantry on both their 
flanks; by these dispositions and joint operations, 
without any considerable loss to himself, he ef- 

fected. an almost incredible slaughter 
U. C.-537.- of his enemies.. With the loss of 

no more than four thousand, and 
these chiefly of the Spanish and Gaulish infan- 
try, he put fifty thousand of the Romans to the 
sword.. 

The consul, Emilius Paulus, had been wound- 
ed in the shock of the cavalry; but when he saw 
the condition in which the infantry were en- 
gaged, he refused to be carried off, and was 
slam.! The consuls of the preceding year, with 
others of the same rank,. were likewise killed. 
Of six thousand horse only seventy troopers 
escaped with Varro. Of the infantry three thou- 
sand fled from the carnage that took place on the 
field of battle,.and ten thousand who had been. 
posted to guard the camp were taken. 

The unfortunate consul, with such of the 
stragglers as joined him in his retreat, took post 
at Venusia; and with a noble confidence in his 
own integrity, and in the resources of his coun- 
try, put himself in a posture to resist the enemy,- 
till he could have instructions and reinforcements- 
from Rome.? 

This calamity which had. befallen the Romans 
in Apulia, was accompanied with the defeat of 
the pretor Posthumius, who, with his army,.on: 
the other extremity of the country, was cut off 
by the Gauls. A general ferment arose through- 
out all Italy. Many cantons of Grecian extrac- 
tion, having been about sixty years subject to 
Rome, now declared for Carthage. Others, feel- 
ing themselves released. from the dominion of the 
Romans, but intending to recover their liberties,. 
not merely to change their masters, now waited 
for an opportunity to stipulate the conditions on 
which they were to join the victor. Of this- 
number were the cities of Capua, Tarentum; 
Locri, Metapontus, Crotona,. and other towns. 
in the south-east of the peninsula. In other 
cantons, the people being divided and opposed to- 
each other with great animosity, severally called 
to their assistance such of the parties at war as- 
they judged were most likely to support them 
against their antagonists. Some of the Roman 
colonies, even within the districts that were open 
to the enemy’s incursions,. still adhered to the 
metropolis; but the possessions of the republic 
were greatly reduced, and scarcely equalled what 
the state had acquired before the expulsion of 
Pyrrhus from Italy, or even before the annexa- 
tion of Campania, or the conquest of Samnium.. 
The allegiance of her subjects and the faith of 
her allies in Sicily were greatly shaken. Hiero, 
the king of Syracuse, who had some time, under 
the notion of an alliance, cherished his depend- 
ance on Rome, being now greatly sunk in the 
decline of years, could no longer answer for the 
conduct of his own court, and died soon after this 
event, leaving his successors to change the party 
of the vanquished for that of the victor. 

Hitherto the nations of Greece and of Asia 
had taken no part in the contest of those power- 

t 


1 He has received from the poet the following honour - 
able grave: Anime que magn® prodigum Paulum supet- 
ante Peno. Hor. Car. lib. i. Ode 12. 

2 Liv. lib. xxiii. 


Cuar. V.] 


ful rivals. But the Romans having already inter- 
fered in the affairs of Greece, and made their 
ambition be felt beyond the Adriatic and the 
Ionian Sea, the news of their supposed approach- 
ing fall was received there with attention: it 
awakened the hopes of many who had suffered 
from the effects of their power. Among these 
Demetrius, the exiled king of Pharos, being still 
at the court of Macedonia, and much in the con- 
fidence of Philip, who had recently mounted the 
throne of that kingdom, urging that it was im- 
possible to remain an indifferent spectator in the 
contest of such powerful nations, persuaded the 
king to prefer the alliance of Carthage to that of 
Rome, and to join with Hannibal in the reduc- 
tion of the Roman power; observing, that with 
‘the merit of declaring himself while the event 
was yet in any degree uncertain, the king of 
Macedonia would be justly intitled to a proper 
share of the advantages to be reaped in the con- 
quest. 

Philip accordingly endeavoured to accommo- 
date the differences which he had to adjust with 
the Grecian States, and sent an officer into Italy 
to treat with Hannibal, and with the Cartha- 
ginian deputies who attended the camp. In the 
negotiation which followed it was agreed, that the 
king of Macedonia and the republic of Carthage 
should consider the Romans as common enemies; 
that they should pursue the war in Italy with 
their forces united, and make no peace but on 
terms mutually agreeable to both. In this treaty 
the interest of the prince of Pharos was particu- 
larly attended to; and his restoration to the 
kingdom from which he had been expelled by the 
Romans, with the recovery of the hostages which 
had been exacted from him, were made principal 
articles.3 

Hannibal, from the time of his arrival in Italy, 
after having made war for three years in that 
country, had received no supply from Africa, and 
seemed to be left to pursue the career of his fate 
‘with such resources as he could devise fer him- 
self; but this alliance with the king of Macedo- 
nia, promised amply to make up for the deficiency 
-of his aids from Carthage; and Philip, by an 
easy passage into Italy, was likely to furnish him 
with every kind of support or encouragement that 
was necessary to accomplish the end of the war. 

The Romans were apprised of this formidable 
accession to the power of their enemy, as well as 
of the general defection of their own allies, and 
of the revolt of their subjects. Though taxes 
were accumulated on the people, and frequent 
loans obtained from the commissaries and con- 
tractors employed in the public service, their ex- 
penses began to be ill supplied. There appeared 
not, however, in their councils, notwithstanding 
all these circumstances of distress, the smallest 
disposition to purchase safety by mean conces- 
sions of any sort. When the vanquished consul 
returned to the city, in order to attend the nomi- 

nation of a person who, in this extremity of their 
fortunes might be charged with the care of the 
commonwealth, the senate, as conscious that he 
had acted at Canne by their own instructions, 
and had, upon the same motives that animated 
the whole Roman people, disdained, with a supe- 
rior army, to eel in awe of his enemy, or to 
refuse him battle upon equal ground, went out in 


3 Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 33. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


51 


a kind of procession to meet him; and, upon a 
noble idea that men are not answerable for the 
strokes of fortune, nor for the effects of superior 
address in an enemy, they overlooked his temer- 
ity and his misconduct in the action; they at- 
tended only to the undaunted aspect he preserved 
after his defeat, returned him thanks for not 
having despaired of the commonwealth; and 
from thence forward continued their preparations 
for war, with all the dignity and pride of the 
most prosperous fortune. They refused to ran- 
som the prisoners who had been taken by the 
enemy at Canna, and treated with sullen con- 
tempt, rather than severity, those who by an 
early flight had escaped from the field; being 
petitioned to employ them again in the war, 
“We have no service,” they said, “for men who 
could leave their fellow citizens engaged with an 
enemy.” They seemed to rise in the midst of 
their distress, and to gain strength from misfor- 
tune. They prepared to attack or to resist at 
once, in all the different quarters to which the 
war was likely to extend, and took their mea- 
sures for the support of it in Spain, in Sardinia 
and Sicily, as well as in Italy. They continued 
their fleets at sea; not only observed and ob- 
structed the communications of Carthage with 
the seats of the war, but having intercepted part 
of the correspondence of Philip with Hanmibal, 
they sent a powerful squadron to the coast of 
Epirus; and, by an alliance with the States of 
Etolia, whom they persuaded to renew their late 
war with Philip, found that prince sufficient em- 
ployment on the frontiers of his own kingdom, 
effectually prevented his sending any supply to 
Hannibal, and, in’the sequel, reduced him to the 
humiliating necessity of making a separate peace. 
In the ordinary notions which are entertained 
of battles and their consequences, the last victory 
of Hannibal at Canna, in the sequel of so many 
others that preceded it, ought to have decided the 
war; and succeeding ages have blamed this 
eneral for not marching directly to the capital, 
in order to bring the contest to a speedy termina- 
tion by the reduction of Rome itself. But his 
own judgment is of much more weight than that 
of the persons who censure him. He knew the 
character of the Romans and his own strength. 
Though victorious, he was greatly weakened by 
his victories, and at a distance from the means of 
a reinforcement or supply. He was unprovided 
with engines of attack; and, so far from being in 
a condition to venture on the siege of Roine, that 
he could not undertake even that of Naples, 
which, after the battle of Canna, refused to 
open its gates; and, indeed, soon after this date 
he received a check from Marcellus in attempting 
the siege of Nola.5 
The Romans, immediately after tleir disaster 
at Canne, prepared again to act on the offensive, 
formed a fresh army of five and twenty thousand 
men, which they sent, under the dictator Junius 
Pera, to collect the remains of their late van- 
quished forces, and to annoy the enemy wherever 
tey might find him exposed. 
annibal kept in motion with his army to pro- 
tect the cantons that were inclined to declare on 
his side; but together with the extent and multi- 


_ 4 In the famous and admired expression, Qui de repub- 
lica non desperaseet. 
5 Liv. lib. xxiii. c. 14, 15, 16. 


532 


plication of his new possessions, which obliged 
m to divide his army in order to occupy and to 
secure them, he became sensible of his weak- 
ness; and, with the accounts sent to Carthage of 
his victories, he likewise sent representations of 
his losses, and demanded a supply of men, of 
stores, and of money. He was indeed in his 
new situation so much in want of these articles, 
that, having in the three first years of the war 
upparenty raised the reputation of Carthage to 
tue greatest height, and procured to his coun- 
try more allies and more territory in Italy than 
were left in the power of the Romans, together 
with Capua, and other cities, more wealthy than 
Rome itself, and surrounded with lands better 
cultivated, and more full of resources, yet his af- 
fairs from thenceforward began to decline. 
Armies are apt to suffer no less from an opinion, 
that all the ends of their service are obtained, 
than they do from defeats, and from despair of 
success. The soldiers of Hannibal, now elated 
with victory, perhaps grown rich with the plun- 
der of the countries they had overrun, and of the 
armies they had defeated; and presuming that 
the war was at an end, or that they themselves 
ought to be relieved, or sent to enjoy the rewards 
of so glorious and so hard a service, became re- 
miss in their discipline, or indulged themselves in 
all the excesses, of which the means were to be 
found in their present situation. Being mere 
soldiers of fortune, without a country, or any civil 
ties to unite them together, they were governed 
by the sole authority of their leader, and by their 
confidence in his singular abilities. Although 
there is no instance of their openly mutinying 
against him in a body, there are many instances 
of their separately and clandestinely deserting his 
service. ‘I'he Spanish and Numidian horse, in 
particular, to whom he owed great part of his 
victories, upon some disappointment in their 
hopes, or upon a disgust taken at the mere stag- 
nation of his fortune, went over in troops and 
and squadrons to the enemy.! His hopes from the 
side of Macedonia were entirely disappointed, the 
power of that nation having full employment at 
home.? He found himself unable, without di- 
viding his forces, to preserve his recent conquests, 
or to protect the Italians who had declared for 
him. Some of his possessions, therefore, he aban- 
doned or destroyed; and the natives of Italy, be- 
come the victims of his policy, or left to the mer- 
cy of the Romans whom they had offended, be- 
came averse to his cause, or felt that they could 
not rely on his power to protect them. Moved 
by these considerations, he made earnest applica- 
tions at Carthage for reinforcements and supplies, 
-o enable him to continue the war. But the coun- 
cus of that republic, though abject in misfortune, 
Were insolent or remiss in prosperity. Being 
broken into factions, the projects of one party, 
however wise, were frustrated by the opposition 
of the other. One faction received the applications 
of Hannibal with scorn. “Do victories,” they 
said, “reduce armies to the want of reinforce- 
ments and of supplies, even against the very ene- 
mies they had vanquished? And do the acqui- 
sitions of Hannibal require more money and men 
to keep them than were required to make them? 


1 Liv. lib. xxiii. ¢. 46. 
Q Ibid. lib. xxvi-c. 28, 29. Lib. xxviii. e. 4. 
3 Ibid. lib. xxvii. c. 1 and 16. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox |. 


Other victorious generals are proud to display the 
fruits of their conquests, or bring home the spoils 
of their enemies to enrich their own country, in- 
stead of draining it to support a career of vain 
and unprofitable victories.” 

These invectives concluded with a motion, 
which, on the supposition that the advantages 
gained by Hannibal were real, was well-founded 
in wisdom and sound policy.: that the occasion 
should be seized to treat with the Romans, when 
the State had reason to expect the most advan- 
tageous terms. But this counsel either was, or 
appeared to be, the language of faction; and no 
measures Were adopted, either to obtain peace, or 
effectually to support the war. 

The friends, as well as the enemies of Hanni- 
bal, contributed to the neglect with which he was 
treated. In proportion as his friends admired him, 
and gloried in his fortune, they acted as if he 
alone were able to surmount every difficulty; and 
they accordingly were remiss in supporting him. 
The republic, under the effects of this wretched 
policy, with all the advantages of her navigation 
and of her trade, suffered her navy to decline, 
and permitted the Romans to obstruct, or molest, 
all the passages by which she could communicate 
with her armies in Spain and Italy, or her allies 
in Sicily and Greece.4 ‘They voted indeed to Han- 
nibal, ou the present occasion, a reinforcement of 
four thousand Numidian horse, forty elephants, 
and a sum of money. But this resolution appears 
to have languished in the execution; and the ar- 
mament, when ready to sail, was suffered to be 
diverted from its purpose, and ordered to Spain 
instead of Italy.5 

Notwithstanding these mortifications and dis- 
appointments, Hannibal still kept his footing in 
Italy for sixteen years ; and so long gave sufficient 
occupation to the Romans, in recovering, by slow 
and cautious steps, what he had ravished from 
them in three years, and by a few daring exam- 
ples of ability and valour. When the war had 
taken this turn, and the Romans, by the growing 
skill and ability of their leaders, as well as by the 
unconquerable spirit of their people, began to pre- 
vail, Hannibal, receiving no support directly from 
Africa, endeavoured to procure it from Spain by 
the junction of his brother Hasdrubal, to whom 
he recommended a second passage over the Alps, 
in imitation of that which he himself had accom- 

lished. Every attempt of this sort, however, had 
been defeated, during six years, by the vigoui and 
abilities of the two Scipios, Cneius and Pubnus, 
and afterwards by the superior genius of the young 
Publius Scipio, who succeeding the father and the 
uncle, as will be seen in the sequel, supported, 
with fresh lustre, the cause of his country. 

T he two Scipios, after some varieties of fortune, 
though, while they acted together, they were gen- 
erally successful, having, in the seventh year of 
this war, separated their forces, were both, within 
the space of forty days, betrayed or deserted by 
their allies, and cut off by the superior force of 
the enemy. 

The natives of aan had, by their want of 
union and military skill, as has been mentioned, 
suffered many foreign establishments to be made 
in their country; they had permitted the Cartha- 
ginians, in particular, to possess themselves of a 
considerable territory; but afterwards, in order to 


4 Liv. lib. xxviii. c. 4. 5 Ibid. lib. xxiii. c. 13 and 32. 


Ciar. V.] 


remove them from thence, accepted of the protec- 
tion of the Romans; and, in the sequel, occasion- 
ally applied to either of these parties for aid 
against the other, being, during the greater part 
of this war, the unstable friends, or irresolute 
enemies of both. 

A service of so much danger, so little in pub- 
le view, and at a distance from the principal 
scenes of the war, was not sought for as an op- 
portunity to accumulate fame. T'he young Scipio, 
fired with the memory of his father and of his un- 
cle, who had fallen in that service, and, instead of 
being deterred by their fate, eager to revenge their 
fall, courted a command, which every.other Roman 
is said to have declined. This young man, as 
has been observed, had begun his military ser- 
vices, in the first year of this war, on the Tecinus, 
whiere he had the good fortune to rescue his father. 
He was sites present at the battle of Canna, 
and was one of the few, who, from that disas- 
trous field, forced their way to Canusium. Being 
chosen commander by those who escaped to this 
plave, he prevented the effect of a desperate reso- 
lution they had taken to abandon Italy. Many 
of the severer forms of the commonwealth having 
been dispensed with in the present exigences of 
the state, Scipio had been chosen edile, though 
under the standing age, being only turned of 
twenty-four, one year younger than Hannibal 
was when he took the command of the army in 
Spain, and four years younger than he was when 
he marched into Italy. 

Such particulars relating to men of superior 
genius and virtue, are in the highest degree in- 
teresting to mankind. It is even pleasing to 
know, that this young man was, according to 
Livy, tall and graceful in his person, with a 
beautiful countenance and engaging aspect. 

The Romans had been hitherto preserved in 
all the extremities of their fortune by the superi- 
ority of their national character, and by means 
of political establishments, which, although they 
do not inspire men with superior genius, yet raise 
ordinary citizens to a degree of elevation approachi- 
ing to heroism; enabling the states they compose 
to subsist in great dangers, and to await the ap- 
pearance of superior men. They had not yet 
opposed to Hannibal an officer of similar talents, 
or of a like superiority to the ordinary race of 
mankind. Scipio was the first who gave indu- 
bitable proofs of his title to this character.6 Up- 
on his arrival in Spain, with a fleet of thirty gal- 
leys, and ten thousand men, he found the remains 
of the vanquished Romans retired within the 
Iberus, where, under the command of T. Fon- 
teius and Lucius Marcius, they had scarcely been 
able to withstand the further progress of the ene- 
my.? There he accordingly landed, and fixed 
his principal quarters fur the winter at Tarrago- 
na. By his information of the posture of the 
enemy, it appeared, that they had placed all their 
lnagazines and stores at New Carthage; and that, 
thinking this place sufficiently secured by a gar- 
rison of athousand men, they had separated their 
army into three divsions, and were gone in dif- 
ferent directions to extend their possessions, or to 
cover the territories they had acquired. Of these 
divisions, none were nearer to their principal sta- 
tion than ten days’ march. 

Upon these informations, Scipio formed a pro- 


€ Liv. liv. xxvi. c. 18, 19, &c. 7 Ibid. c. 19 and 20. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


53 


ject to surprise the town of New Carthage, 
though at a distance from Tarragona of above 
three hundred miles. He rested his hopes of 
success on the security of his enemies, and on the 
prospect of being able to accomplish the greater 
part of his march before his design should be 
suspected, or before any measures could be taken 
to prevent him. For this purpose he disclosed 
it to Lelius alone; and gave him orders to steer 
for that place with his fleet, while he himself 
made hasty marches by land. This city was si- 
tuated, like Old Carthage, on a peninsula, or neck 
of land, surrounded by the sea. Scipio took post 
on the isthmus, fortified himself towards the con- 
tinent, from which he had reason to expect some 
attempt would be made to relieve the place, and 
secured himself on that side, before he attacked 
the town. 

{n his first attempts on the ramparts he was 
repulsed; but observing, that at low water, the 
walls were accessible at a weaker place than that 
at which he made his assault; and having en- 
couraged his men by informing them that the 
god of the sea had promised to favour them, 
which they thought to be verified by the season- 
able ebb which ensued, he there planted his lad- 
ders, and forced his way into the town. Here 
he made a great booty in captives, money, and 
ships.8 

In this manner Scipio conducted his first ex- 
ploit in Spain; and having carried on the war 
with equal ability and success for five years, he 
obliged the Carthaginians, after repeated defeats, 
to abandon that country. He himself, while 
Hasdrubal attempted to join his brother Hanni- 
bal in Lucania, and Mago to make a diversion in 
his favour in Liguria, returned to Rome. He 
was yet under thirty years of age, and not legally 
qualified to bear the office of consul. But having 
an unquestionable title to the highest confidence 
of his country, the services which he had already 
performed procured a dispensation in his favour. 
Fle was accordingly raised to the consulate; and 
when the provinces came to be assigned to the 
officers of state, he moved that Africa should be 
included in the number, and be allotted to him- 
self: “ There,” he said, “the Carthaginians may 
receive the deepest wounds, and from thence be 
the soonest obliged for their own safety to recall 
their forces from Italy.” 

This motion was unfavourably received by the 
greater part of the senate; it seemed to be matter 
of surprise, that, while Rome itself lay between 
two hostile armies, that of Hannibal in Brutium, 
and that of Maga in Liguria or Gaul, the con- 
sul should propose to strip the republic of so great 
a force as would be necessary for the invasion of 
Africa.’ The fatal miscarriage of Regulus on 
that ground in a former war, the unhappy effects 
of precipitant counsels in the beginning of the 
present, were cited against him, and the desire of 
so arduous a station waseven accounted presump- 
tuous in so young a man. 

Among the difficulties which Scipio met with 
in obtaining the consent of the senate to the exe- 
cution of his plan, is mentioned the disinclination 
of the great Fabius, who, from a Ble o e in 
favour of that dilatory war, by which he himself 
had acquired so much glory; and by which at a 


8 Polyb. lib. x.c.9—15—17. Appian de Bell. Hispan 


9 Appian de Bell. Punic. p. 4. 


D4 
time when procrastination was necessary, he had 
retrieved the fortunes of his country, obstinately 
opposed the adopting of this hazardous project. 

It had been, for the most part, an established 
maxim in the counsels of Rome, to carry war, 
when in their power, into the enemy’s country. 
They had been prevented in the present case only 
by the unexpected appearance of Hannibal in 
Italy, and were likely to return to the execution 
of their first design as soon as their affairs at 
home should furnish them with a sufficient re- 
spite. We may, therefore, conceive what they 
telt of the difficulties of the present war, from this 
and other circumstances; that even after fortune 
had so greatly inclined in their favour, they did 
not yet think themselves in condition to retaliate 
on the enemy; or safe against the designs which 
Hannibal might form in Italy, if they should 
divide their forces, or detach so great a part of 
them as might be necessary to execute the project 
of a war in Africa. 

They concluded, however, at last, with some 
hesitation, that Scipio, while the other consul 
should remain opposed to Hannibal in Italy, 
might have for his province the island of Sicily, 
dispose of the forces that were still there, receive 
the voluntary supplies of men and of money 
which he himself might be able to procure; and 
if he found, upon mature deliberation, a proper 
opportunity, that he might make a descent upon 


Africa. Agreeably to this resolution, he set out, 
for the province assigned him, having a consider- | 


able fleet equipped by private contribution, and 
a body of seven thousand voluntcers, who em- 


barked in high expectation of the service in which. 


he proposed to employ them.! 

_ While Scipio, by his exertions in Spain, was 
rising to this degree of eminence in the councils 
of his country, the war, both in Sicily and in 
Italy, had been attended with many signal events, 
and furnished many proofs of distinguished abi- 
lity in the course of its operations, highly interest- 
ing to those who are qualified to receive instruc- 
tion from such examples of conduct, and from 
the experience of great events. But in the sum- 
mary account of the steps by which the Romans 
ascended to empire, we can only point out the 
tract by which they advanced; and, with a few 
general observations on the means, hasten to con- 
template the end which they attained. 


The fortunes of Hannibal, as we have already | 


remarked, had been some time on the decline. 
Capua and Tarentum, notwithstanding his ut- 
most efforts to preserve them, had been taken by 


the Romans. While the first of these places was 


besieged, he endeavoured to force the enemy’s 
lines: and being repulsed, made a feint, by a 
hasty march towards Rome itself, to draw off the 
besiegers. By this movement he obtained a 
sight of that famous city; but again retired with- 
out having gained any advantage from this in- 
tended diversion. His allies, in Sicily, were en- 
tirely overwhelmed by the reduction of Syracuse ; 
but that which chiefly affected his cause, by 
cutting off all hopes of future supplies or rein- 
foreements, was the fall of his brother Hasdru- 
tal. This officer had found means to elude the 
foices of Scipio in Spain; and attempted, by pur- 
suing the tract of his brother into Italy, to join 
him in that country. In this design he actually 


1 Appian de Bell. Punic, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book I. 


surmounted all the difficulties of the Pyrenees anu 
of the Alps, had passed the Po and the Rubicon, 
and advanced to the Metaurus before he met 
with any considerable check. There, at last, he 
encountered with the Roman consuls, M. Clau- 
dius Nero and M. Livius Salinator, and was de- 
feated with the loss of his whole army, amount- 
ing to fifty thousand men, of whom not one 
escaped being taken or slain.? 

On this occasion, the Romans, who had so 
long left their possessions in the country a prey 
to the enemy, began to enjoy some degree of se- 
curity, returned to their ruined habitations, and 
resumed the labours of the field. Hannibal, as 
overwhelmed with despair or affliction, confess- 
ed, that he could no longer be in doubt of the fate 
that awaited his country.3 From this time he 
contracted his quarters, withdrew his posts from 
Apulia, gave intimation to ail his allies in Italy, 
who had much to fear from the resentment of , 
the Romans, that they should retire under the 
covert of his army in Brutium. Here he himself 
remained on the defensive; and, as if sensible 
that his career in Italy was nearly at an end, 
erected those curious monuments which are 
cited by Polybius, and on which were recorded 
the particulars of his march from Spain to Italy, 
and the numbers of his army at different periods 
of the war. 

In the following year, Mago, as we have ob- 
served, being unable to effect any considerable 
service in Spain, had orders to make sail for Italy, 
and once more endeavour to reinforce the army 
of Hannibal. But, having lost some time ina 
fruitless attempt on New Carthage, and a report 
in the mean time having spread of Scipio’s inten- 
tion to invade Africa, he received a second order 
to land at Genua ; and, that he might distract or 
employ the forces of the Romans at home, endea- 
vour to rekindle the war in Liguria and Gaul. 

Such was the state of affairs when Scipio pro- 
posed to invade Africa, passed into Sicily, and 
employed the whole year cf his consulate in 
making preparations. In this interval, however, 
having access by sea to the coasts which were oc- 
cupied by Hannibal in Italy, he forced the town 
of Locri, and posted a garrison there, under the 
command of Pleminius, an officer, whose singu- 
lar abuses of power became the subjects of com- 
plaint at Rome, and drew some censure on Bci- 
pio himself, by whom he was employed, and sup- 
posed to be countenanced. 

Scipio was said, on this occasion, not only ve 
have connived at the outrages committed by Ple- 
minius, whom he had stationed at Locri, but to 
have been himself, while at Syracuse, abandoned 
to a life of effeminacy and pleasure, unworthy of 
a person entrusted with so important a command. 
It may appear strange, that this censure shoald 
arise from his having shown a disposition at Sy- 
racuse to become acquainted with the learning ot 
the Greeks. His enemies gave out, that he af- 
fected the manners of that people; that he passed 
his time among books, and in public places of 
conversation and exercise. Upon these surmises, 
a commission was granted to the peel of Sicily, 
with ten senators, two tribunes of the people, and 
one of the ediles, who had orders to join the 


2 Liv. lib. xxvii. c. 49. an p 
3 Agnoscere se fortunam Cartnaginis. Liv. lib. xxvii 


fine. eee 
4 Liv. lib. xxviii. fine. 


mar. V.J] OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 55 


this transaction, which procured to the Cartha- 
ginians one ally, lost them another; for this high- 
minded woman, who, instead of a dower, con- 
tracted for armies in defence of her country, had 
formerly captivated Massinissa, another Numi- 
dian prince, that, being deprived of his kingdom 
by Syphax, had received his education, and form- 
ed his attachments, at Carthage.6 Massinissa, 
while he had hopes of an alliance with the family 
of Hasdrubal, engaged all his partisans in Nu- 
midia in behalf of the Carthaginians; and he 
himself fought their battles in person. But, stung 
with his disappointment, and the preference 
which was given to his rival, he determined to 
court the favour of their enemies; had made ad- 
vances to Scipio, before his departure from Spain ;. 
and, now, hearing of the arrival of the Roman 
flect, hastened to Hippo, where Lælius had come 
to an anchor, and made offer of his assistance, 
‘with that of his friends in the kingdom of Nu- 
midia. 

Such was the state of parties in Africa, when 
this country was about to become the scene of 
war. The Carthaginians, still in hopes of divert- 
ing the storm, sent earnest instructions to both 
their generals to press upon the Romans in Italy, 
‘and to make every effort to distract or to occupy 
their forces, and to leave them no leisure for the 
invasion of Africa. They sent, at the same time, 
an embassy to the king of Macedonia, to remind 
him of the engagements into which he had enter- 
ed with Hannibal, and to represent the danger 
to which he and every other prince must be ex- 

osed from a people so ambitious as the Romans, 
if they were suffered to unite, by a conquest, the 
resources of Carthage with those of Rome. 

Philip, at the earnest entreaty of many Gre- 
cian states, who were anxious that the Romans 
should have no pretext to embroil the affairs of 
Greece, had, in the preceding year, made a se- 
parate peace first with the Etolians, and after- 
wards with the Romans themselves ;? and was 
now extremely averse to renew the quarrel.. 
The occasion, however, appeared to be of great 
moment; and he listened so far to the remon- 
strances of the Carthaginians, as to furnish them 
with a body of four thousand men, and a supply 
of money. ; 

By such measures as these, hastily taken om 
the approach of danger, the Carthaginians en- 
deavoured to make amends for the former remiss- 
ness of their counsels. Hitherto they appear’ 
to have considered the war with little concern, 
and to have left their exertions to the anubitiom 
of a single family, by whoin the state was enga- 
ged in this quarrel8 They neglected their 
strength at home, in proportion as they believed 
the enemy to be at a distance ; and were indif- 
ferent to national objects, while their private in- 
terests were secure. 

The harbour of Hippo, about fifty miles west 
from Carthage, and under the Fair Promontory, 
being seized by Lelius, furnished a place of re- 
ception for Scipio's fleet. This officer accord- 
ingly sailed from Sicily with fifty armed galleys, 
and four hundred transports. As he had reasou 
to expect that the country would be laid waste 
before him, great part of this shipping was em- 
ployed in carrying his provisions and stores. The 


prætor in that island. To these instructions 
were given, that if they found Scipio accessary 
to the disorders committed at Locri, or reprehen- 
sible in his own conduct, they should send him in 
arrest to Rome: but that, if they found him in- 
nocent, he should continue in his command, and 
be suffered to carry the war wherever he thought 
most expedient for the good of the commonwealth. 

The members of this formidable court of in- 
quest, having landed at Locri, in their way to 
Sicily, ordered Pleminius, with thirty of his of- 
cers, in chains to Rome: and from Locri, pro- 
ceeding to Syracuse, they reported from thence, 
that Scipio was no way accessary to the crimes 
committed by the troops in garrison at Locri: 
and that within the district of his own imme- 
diate command the allies were fully protected, 
and the troops preserved in such order and dis- 
cipline,> as, whenever they should be employed, 
gave the most encouraging prospect of victory. 

Such was the report in favour of this young 
man, who appears to have been the first Roman 
statesman or warrior, who showed any consider- 
able disposition to become acquainted with the 
literature and ingenious arts of the Greeks. In 
this particular, his Carthaginian rival is said to 
have advanced before him, having long studied 
the language and learning of those nations; and 
having in his retinue some persons from Greece 
to aid him in the use of their writings. 

Scipio, while he commanded the Roman army 
m Spain, having already conceived his design upon 
Africa, had with this- view opened a correspon- 
dence with Syphax, king of Numidia; and had 
actually made a visit in person to this prince, who, 
being at variance with Carthage, was easily pre- 
vailed upon to promise his support to the Romans, 
in case they should carry the war into that coun- 
try. The Roman general, now ready to embark 
with a considerable army, sent Lelius with the 
first division, probably to examine the coast, to 
choose a poe station at which to fix the assem- 
bling of his fleet, and to call upon the king of 
Numidia to perform his engagements. 

This division of the ficet, at its first appear- 
ance, was supposed to bring the Roman procon- 
sul, with all his forces, from Sicily ; and the Car- 
thaginians, whatever reason they might, for some 
time, have had to expect this event, were in a 
great measure unprepared for it. ‘They had 
their levies to make at home, and troops to hire 
from. abroad; their fortifications were out of re- 
pair, and their stores and magazines unfurnished. 
Even their fleet was not in a condition to meet 
that of the enemy. They now hastened to supply 
these defects; and, though undeceived with re- 
spect to the numbers and force of the first em- 
barkation, they made no doubt that they were 
soon to expect another; accordingly they con- 
tinued their preparation, and took every measure 
to secure themselves, or to avert the storm with 
which they were threatened. 

They had recently made their peace with Sy- 
phax, king of Numidia; and, instead of an ene- 
my in the person of this prince, had obtained for 
themselves a zealous ally. He had broke off his 
engagements with Scipio and the Romans, tempt- 
ed by his passion for Sophonisba, the daughter of 
Hasdrubal, a principal citizen of Carthage, who 
refused to marry hin on any other terms. But 


& Appian de Bell. Hispan. p. 275. 


§ Lav. lib. xxix. c. 20. 7 Liv. lib. xxix. c. 13. 8 The sons of Hamilcar. 


56 


numbers of his army are not mentioned. His 
first object was to make himself master of Utica, 
situated about half way between Carthage and 
Hippo, the place where he landed. He accord- 
ingly, without loss of time, presented himself be- 
fore it; but soon found himself unable to execute 
his purpose. The country, to a considerable dis- 
tance, was laid waste or deserted by the natives, 
and could not subsist his army. The Cartha- 
ginians had a great force in field, consisting of 
thirty thousand men, under Hasdrubal, the son 
of Gisgo, together with fifty thousand foot and 
ten thousand horse, under Syphax, king of Nu- 
midia, who now advanced to the relief of Utica. 

Scipio, on the junction and approach of these 
numerous armies, retired from Utica, took pos- 
session of a peninsula on the coast, fortified the 
isthmus which led to it, and in this station hav- 
ing a safe retreat, both for his fleet and his army, 
continued to be supplied with provisions by sea 
from Sardinia, Sicily, and Italy. But being 
thus reduced to act on the defensive in the pre- 
sence of a superior enemy, and not likely, with- 
out some powerful reinforcements from Italy, to 
make any further impression on Africa, he had 
recourse to a stratagem which, though amounting 
nearly toa breach of faith, was supposed to be 
allowed in war with an African enemy. 

The combined armies of Carthage and Numi- 
dia lay in two separate encampments, and, it be- 
ing winter, were lodged in huts covered with 
brushwood and the leaves of the palm. In these 
circumstances the Roman general formed a de- 
sign to set fire to their camp, and in the midst of 
the confusion which that alarm might occasion, 
to attack them in the night. In order to gain a 
sufficient knowledge of the ground, and of the 
ways by which his emissaries must pass in the 
execution of this design, he entered into a negotia- 
tion, and affected to treat of conditions for termi- 
nating the war. His deputies, under this pretence, 
being freely admitted into the enemy’s station, 
brought him minute information of their position, 
and of the avenues which led-to different parts 
of their camp. 

Scipio being possessed of these informations, 
broke off the treaty, advanced with his army in 
the night, and in many different places at once, 
set fire to Hasdrubal’s camp. The flames, being 
easily caught by the dry materials, spread with 
the greatest rapidity. The Carthaginians suppo- 
sing that these fires were accidental, and having 
no apprehension of the presence of an enemy, 
ran. without arms to extinguish them: and the 
Numidians, with still less concern, left their huts 
to gaze on the scene, or to lend their assistance. 
In this state of security and confusion Scipio at- 
tacked and dispersed them with great slaughter ;! 
and being, in consequence of this action, again 
inaster of the field, he returned to Utica, and 
renewed the siege or blockade of that place. 

In such a surprise and defeat as the African 
armies had now received, they were likely to 
have lost their arms and their baggage, and to 
have nowhere sufficient numbers together to with- 
stand an enemy; on this supposition, it had been 
already proposed at Carthage to have recourse to 
their last resort, the recalling of Hannibal from 
Italy. But this motion, upon a report from Has- 
drubal and Syphax, that they were again arming 


1 Polyb. lib. xiv. e. 5. Liv. lib. xxx. c. 6. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor I. 


and assembling their forces, and that they were 
joined by a recruit of four thousand men, newly 
arrived from Spain, was for some time laid aside. 
These hopes, however, were speedily blasted by 
a second defeat which the combined army receiv- 
ed before they were fully assembled, and by a re-. 
volution which ensued in the kingdom of Numi- 
dia, where Syphax, pursued by Massinissa and 
Lelius, was vanquished and driven from his 
kingdom, which from thenceforward became the 
possession of his rival, and a great accession of 
strength to the Romans. On this calamity Has- 
drubal being threatened by the populace of Car- 
thage with vengeance for his repeated miscar- 
riages, and being aware of the relentless and san- 
guinary spirit of his countrymen, durst not trust 
himself in their hands; and in a species of exile, 
with a body of eight thousand men that adhered 
to him, withdrew from their service. 

In this extremity there was no hope but in the 
presence of Hannibal; and expresses were ac- 
cordingly sent both to Mago and himself, to 
hasten their return into Africa, with all the 
forces they could bring for the defence of their 
country. : 

Hannibal, it is probable, had for some time 
been prepared for this measure, having trans- 
ports in readiness to embark his army; yet he is 
said to have received the order with some expres- 
sions of rage. ‘They have now accomplished,” 
he said (speaking of the opposite faction at Car- 
thage,) “what, by withholding from me the ne- 
cessary supports in this war, they have long en 
deavoured to effect. They have wished to destroy 
tlie family of Barcas; and rather than fail in thei? 
aim, are willing to bury it at last under the ruiny 
of their country.’’? s 

While the Carthaginians were thus driven ta 
their last resource, Scipio advanced towards their 
city, and invested at once both Tunis and Utica, 
which, though at the distance of above thirty 
miles from each other, may be considered as bas- 
tions ou the right and the left, which flanked and 
commanded the country which led to this famous 
place. His approach gave the citizens a fresh 
alarm, and seemed to bring their danger too near 
to suffer them to awajt the arrival of relief from 


Italy. It appeared necessary to stay the arm of 


the victor by a treaty; and thirty senators were 
accordingly deputed to sue for pece, The depu- 
ties, in their address to the Roman proconsul, 
laid the blame of the war upon Hannibal, su ppor- 
ted, as they alleged, by a desperate faction who 
had adopted his wild designs. They entreated 
that the Romans would once more be pleased to 
spare a republic which was again brought to the 
brink of ruin by the precipitant counsels of a few 
of its members. 7 

In answer to this abject request, Scipio men 
tioned the terms upon which he supposed that 
the Romans would be willing to treat of a peace. 
A cessation of arms was agreed to, and a nego- 
tiation commenced; but if was suddenly inter- 
rupted and prevented of its final effect by the 
arrival of Hannibal. This general, after many 


changes of fortune, having taken the necessary 


recautions to secure his retreat, in case he should 
be called off for the defence of Carthage; now in 
the seventeenth year of the war, and after he had 
supported himself sixteen years in Italy, by the 


Bm luiv.. lib. axx. c. 20. 


Cuar. V.] 


sole force of his personal character and abilities, 
against the whole weight, institutions, resources, 
discipline, and national character of 
the Romans, transported his army 
from thence, landed at Hadrumetum, 
at a distance from any of the quarters occupied 
by the Romans, and drew to his standard ail the 
remains of the lately vanquished armies of Car- 
thage, and all the forces which the republic was 
yet in a state to supply. 

This event produced a change in the counsels 
of Carthage, and inspired the people with fresh 
presumption. They now slighted the faith 
which they had lately engaged to Scipio, and 
seized on all the Roman vessels, which, trusting 
to the cessation of arms, had taken refuge in their 
bay. ‘They even insulted the messenger whom 
the Roman general sent to complain of this out- 
rage; and thus hostilities, after a very short truce, 
were renewed with redoubled animosity and ran- 
cour on both sides. ' 

The people of Carthage, under dreadful appre- 
hensions of becoming a prey to the Romans, 
sent a message to Hannibal, then at Hadrumc- 
tum, to hasten his march, requesting him to at- 
tack the enemy, and at any hazard to relieve the 
city from the dangers and hardships of a siege. 
To this message he made answer, that in affairs 
of state the councils of Carthage must decide; 
but in the conduct of war, the general who com- 
mands must judge of his opportunity to fight. 

The forcing of Hannibal to evacuate Italy was 
a victory to Scipio; as this was the first fruit 
which he ventured to promise from the invasion 
of Africa. With this enemy, however, in his 
rear, it was not expcdient to continue the attack 
of ‘Tunis or Utica. He withdrew his army from 
both these places, and prepared to- contend for 
the possession of the field. v 

The Carthaginian leader, having collected his 
forces at Hadrumetum, marched to the west- 
ward, intending to occupy the banks of the Ba- 
grada, and from thence to observe and counteract 
the operations of his enemy. Scipio, intending 
to prevent him, or to occupy the advantageous 
ground on the upper Bagrada, took his route to 
the same country; and while both directed their 
march to Sicca, they met on the plains of Zama. 

When the armies arrived on this ground, nei- 
ther party was in condition to protract the war. 
Hannibal, whose interest it would have been to 
avoid any hazardous measures, and to tire out his 
encmy by delays, if he were in possession of his 
own country, or able to protect the capital from 
insult, was in reality obliged to risk the whole of 
its fortunes, in order to rescue it from the hands 
of the enemy, or to prevent their renewing the 
blockade. 

Scipio was far advanced in an cnemy’s coun- 
try, which was soon likely to be deserted by its 
natives, and exhausted of every means of sub- 
sistence; he was far removed from the sea, the 
principal and only secure source of any’ lasting 
supply; surrounded by enemies; a great army 
under Hannibal in his front; the cities of Utica, 
Carthage, and Tunis, with all the armed: force 
that defended them, in his rear. 

In such circumstances both parties probably 
saw the necessity of immediate action; and the 
Carthaginian general, sensible of the unequal 
stake he was to play, the safety of his country 
against the fortune of a Beale army, whose loss 


USC., 55m 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


57 


would not materially affect the State from whence 
they came, chose to try the effect of a negotiation, 
and for this purpose desired a personal interview 
with Scipio. 

In compliance with this request, the Roman 
general put his army in motion, and the Cartha- 
ginians advancing at the same time, they halted 
at the distance of thirty stadia, or about three 
miles from each other. ‘The generals, attended 
by a few horse, met on an eminence between 
their lines. Hannibal began the conference, by 
expressing his regret that the Carthaginians 
should have aimed at any conquests beyond their 
own coasts in Africa, or the Romans beyond those 
of Italy. “We began,” he said, “with a contest 
for Sicily; we proceeded to dispute the posses- 
sion of Spain, and we have each in our turns 
seen our native land overrun with strangers, and 
our country in danger of becoming a prey to its 
enemies. It is time that we should distrust our 
fortune, and drop an animosity which has brought 
us both to the verge of destruction. This lan- 
guage indeed may have little weight with you, 
who have been successful in all your attempts, 
and who have not yet experienced any reverse of 
fortune; but I pray you to profit by the expe- 
rience of others. You now behold in me a per- 
son who was once almost master of your country, 
and who am now brought, at last, to the defence 
of my own. I cncamped within five miles of 
Rome, and offered the possessions round the 
forum to sale. Urge not the chance of war too 
far. I now offer to surrender, on the part of 
Carthage, all her pretensions to Spain, Sardinia, 
Sicily, and every other island that lies between 
this continent and yours. I wish only for peace 
to my country, that she may enjoy undisturbed 
her ancient possessions on this coast; and I think 
that the terms I offer you are sufficiently advan- 
tageous and honourable to procure it.” 

o this address Scipio replied, “ That the 
Romans had not been aggressors in the present 
or preceding wars with Carthage: that they 
strove to maintain their own rights, and to pro- 
tect their allies; and that, suitably to these 
righteous intentions, they had been favoured by 
the justice of the gods: that no one knew better 
than himself the instability of huinan affairs, nor 
should be more on his guard against the chances 
of war. The terms,” he said, “ which you now 
propose might have been accepted of, had you 
offered them while yet in Italy, and had proposed, 
as a prelude to the treaty, to remove from thence ; 
but now, that you are driven from every post, you 
propose to surrender; and are forced, not only to 
evacuate the Roman territory, but are stripped of 
part of your own. ‘These concessions are no 
longer sufficient; they are no more than a part 
of the conditions already agreed to by your coun- 
trymen, and which they, on your appearance in 
Africa, so basely retracted. Besides what you 
now offer, it was promised on their part, that all 
Roman captives should be restored without ran- 
som ; that all armed ships should be delivered up ; 
that a sum of five thousand talents should be 
paid, and hostages given by Carthage for the per- 
formance of all these articles. 

“On the credit of this agreement we granted 
a cessation of arms, but were shamefully betrayed 
by the councils of Carthage. Now to abate an 
part of the articles which were then stipulated, 
would be to reward a breach of faith, and to in 


58 


struct nations hereafter now to profit by perfidy. 
You may therefore be assured, that I will not so 
much as transmit to Rome any proposal that does 
not contain, as preliminaries, every article for- 
merly stipulated, together with such additional 
concessions as may Induce the Romans to renew 
the treaty. On any other terms than these, Car- 
thage must vanquish, or submit at discretion.”! 

Krom this interview both parties withdrew 
with an immediate prospect of action; and on the 
following day, neither having any hopes of advan- 
tage from delay or surprise, came forth into the 
plain in order of battle. 

Hannibal formed his army in three lines with 
their elephants in front. 

Scipio drew forth his legions in their usual di- 
visions, but somewhat differently disposed. 

Hannibal had above eighty elephants, with 
which he proposed to begin the action. Behind 
these he formed the mercenary troops, composed 
of Gauls, Ligurians, and Spaniards. In a second 
line he placed the Africans and natives of Car- 
thage ; and in a third line, about half a quarter of 
a mile behind the first, he placed the veterans who 
had shared with himself in all the dangers and 
honours of the Italian war. He placed his cavalry 
in the wings opposite to those of the enemy. 

Scipio posted Lelius with the Roman cavalry 
on his left, and Massinissa with the Numidian 
horse on his right. He placed the manipules, or 
divisions of the legions, not as usual, mutually 
covering their intervals, but covering each other 
from front to rear. His intention in this disposi- 
tion was to leave continued avenues or lanes, 
through which the elephants might pass without 
disordering the columns. At the head of each 
line he placed the Velites, or irregular infantry, 
with orders to gall the elephants, and endeavour 
to force them back upon their own lines; or, if 
this could not be effected, to fly before them into 
the intervals.of the heavy-armed foct, and, by the 
ways which were left open between the manipules, 
to conduct them into the rear. It being the na- 
ture of these animals, even in their wild state, to 
be the dupes of their own resentment, and to follow 
the hunter by whom they are galled into any 
snare that is prepared for them;? the design thus 
formed by Scipio to mislead them, accordingly 
proved successful. As soon as the cavalry began 
to skirmish on the wings, Hannibal gave the sig- 
nal for the elephants to charge. ‘They were re- 
ceived by a shower of missile weapons from the 
Roman light infantry, and, as usual, carried their 
riders in different directions. Some broke into 
their own line with considerable disorder, others 
fled between the armies and escaped by the flanks, 
and many, incited with rage, as Scipio had fore- 
seen, pursued the enemy that galled them through 
the intervals of the Roman divisions quite out of 
the action; and ina little time the front of the two 
armies was cleared of these animals, and of all the 
irregulars who had skirmished between them in 
the beginning of the battle. ; 

In the mean time the first and second line of 
Hannibal’s foot had advanced, to profit by the im- 

ression which the elephants were likely to make. 

The third line still remained on its ground, and 
seemed to stand aloof from the action. 3 

In this posture, the first line of the Carthagi- 
nian army, composed of Gauls and Ligurians. 


1 Polyb. lib. xv.c.6,7,8. 2 Vid. Buff. Hist. Nat. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox Í. 


engaged with the Roman legions; and, after a 
short resistance, were forced back on the second 
line, who, having orders not to receive them, nor 
allow them to pass, presented their arms. The 
fugitives were accordingly massacred on both 
sides, and fell by the swords of their own paity,. 
or by those of the enemy. 

The second line, consisting of the African and 
native troops of Carthage, had a similar fate; 
they perished by the hands of the Romans, or by 
those of their own reserve, who had orders to re- 


‘ceive them on their swords, and turn them back, 


if possible, against the enemy. 

Scipio, after so much blood had been shed, find- 
ing his men out of breath, and spent with hard 
labour, embarrassed with heaps of the slain, 
scarcely able to keep their footing on ground be- 


come slippery with mud and gore, and in these 


circumstances likely to be instantly attacked by a 


fresh enemy, who had yet borne no part in the 


contest, he endeavoured, without loss of time, to 
put himself in a posture to renew the engagement. 
His cavalry, by gocd fortune, in these hazard- 
ous circumstances, were victorious on both the 
wings, and were gone in pursuit of the enemy.. 
He ordered the ground to be cleared; and his 
columns, in the original form of the action, hav- 
ing been somewhat displaced, he ordered those of 
the first line to close to the centre; those of the 
second and third to divide, and, gaining the 
flanks, to form in a continued line with the front. 
In this manner, while the ground was clearing 
of the dead, probably by the ¥ahies or irregular 
troops, he, with the least possible loss of time, and 
without any interval of confusion, completed his 
line to receive the enemy. An action ensued, 
which, being to decide the event of this memor- 
able war, was likely to remain some time in sus- 
pense; when the cavalry of the Roman army, 
returning from the pursuit of the horse they had 
routed, fell on the flank of the Carthaginian in- 
fantry, and obliged them to give way. | 
Hannibal had rested his hopes of victory on 
the disorder that might arise from the attack of 
his elephants, and if this should fail, on the steady 
valour of the veterans, whom he reserved for the 
last effort to be made, when he supposed that the 
Romans, already exhausted in their conflict with 
the two several lines whom he sacrificed to their 
ardour in the beginning of the battle, might be 
unable to contend with the third, yet fresh for 
action and inured to victory. He was disap- 
pointed in the effect of his elephants, by the pre- 
caution which Scipio had taken in opening his 
intervals, and in forming continued lanes for their 
passage from front to rear; and of the effect of 
his reserve, by the return of the enemy’s horse. 
while the action was yet undecided. Having 
taken no measures to secure a retreat, nor to save 
any part of his army, he obstinately fought every 
minute of the day to the last; and when he could 
delay the victory of his enemy no longer, he 
quitted the field with a small party of horse, of 
whom many, overwhelmed with hunger and fa- 
tigue, having fallen by the way, he arrived witha 
few, in the course of two days and two nights, at 
Hadrumetum. Here he embarked and proceeded 
by sea to Carthage. His arrival convinced his 
countrymen of the extent of their loss. Seeing 
Hannibal without an army, they believed them- 


O ee 


3 Polyb. lib. xv. c. 18. 


Cuap. V.} 


selves vanquished; and, with minds unprovided 
with that spirit which supported the Romans 
when overthrown at Thrasimenus and Canne, 
were now desirous, by any concessions, to avert 
the supposed necessary consequences of their fate. 
The riotous populace, that had so lately pur- 
seed with vengeance, and threatened to tear 
asunder the supposed authors of peace,4 were now 
silent, and ready to embrace any terms that might 
be prescribed by the enemy. Hannibal, knowing 
how little his countrymen were qualified to con- 
tend with misfortune, confessed in the Senate, 
that he was come from deciding, not the event of 
a single battle, but the fate of a great war, and 
advised them to accept of the victor’s terms.5 
"Chey accordingly determined to sue for peace. 
In the mean time the Roman army,.in pursuit 
of its victory, was returned to the coast; and 


having received from Italy a large supply of 


stores and military engines, together with a rein- 
forcement of fifty galleys, was in a condition, not 
only to resume the siege of Utica and Tunis, but 
likewise to threaten with a storm the capital it- 
self; and, for this purpose, began to invest the 
town and block up the harbour. 

Scipio being himself embarked, and conducting 
the fleet to its station, was met by a Carthaginian 
vessel that hoisted wreaths of olive and other en- 
signs of peace. This vessel had ten commission- 
ers on board, who were authorized to declare the 
submission of Carthage, and to receive the victor’s 
commands. 

The ambition of Scipio might have inclined 
him to urge his victory to the utmost; that he 
might carry, instead of a treaty, the spoils of Car- 
thage to adorn his triumph at Rome. 


and of the preceding year endeavoured to snatch 
from his hands the glory of terminating the war, 


may, with other motives, have induced him to re-' 


ceive the submission of the vanquished upon the 
first terms that appeared sufficiently honourable, 
and suited to the object of the commission with 
which he had been entrusted. 

In allusion to this circumstance, he was heard 
to say, that Claudius, by his impatience to sup- 
plant him in this command, had saved the repub- 
lic of Carthage.6 But men seldom act from any 
single consideration; and Scipio is, in all proba- 
bility, justly supposed to have had other and 
nobler motives than this jealousy of a successor. 
He is even said to have spared the rival of his 
‘country, in order to maintain the emulation of 
courage and of national virtue. This motive 
Cato, who had served under him in the capacity 
of questor, and who was not inclined to flatter, 
did him the honour to assign in a speech to the 
senate.? 

Scipio, having appointed the Carthaginian 
commissioners to attend him at Tunis, prescribed 
the following terms : 

That Carthage should continue to hold in Af- 
rica all that she had possessed before the war, and 
be governed by her own laws and institutions: 

‘That she should make immediate restitution 
of all Roman ships or other effects taken in vio- 
lation of the late truce: 

Should release or deliver up all captives de- 


4 Appian de Bell. Punic. p. 31. 
5 Polyb. lib.xv.c.4—17, Liv. lib. xxx. c. 31. 
6 Appian de Bell. Punic. p. 36. 7 Ibid. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


But the. 
2mpatience with which the consuls of the present. 


59 


serters, or fugitive slaves, taken or received dur. 
ing any part of the war: 

urrender the whole of her fiect, saving ten 
gallies of three tier of oars: 

Deliver up all the elephants she then had in 
the stalls of the republic, and refrain from taming 
or breaking any more of those animals: 

That she should not make war on any nation 
whatever without consent of the Romans: 

That she should indemnify Massinissa for all 
the losses he had sustained in the late war: 

And, to reimburse the Romans, pay a sum of 
ten thousand talents,® at the rate of two hundred 
talents a year for fifty years: 

That the state should give hostages for the 
performance of these several articles, such as 
Scipio should select from the noblest families of 
Carthage, not under fourteen, nor exceeding 
thirty years of age: 

And that, until this treaty should be ratified, 
they should supply the Roman forces in Africa 
with pay and provisions. 

When these conditions were reported in the 
senate of Carthage, one of the members arose, 
and, in terms of indignation, attempted to dis- 
suade the acceptance of them: but Hannibal, 
with the tone of a master, interrupted and com- 
manded him silence. This action was resented 
by a general cry of displeasure ; and Hannibal, in 
excuse of his rashness, informed the senate, that 
he had left Carthage while yet a child of nine 


| years old; that he was now at the age of forty- 


five; and, after a life spent in camps and military 
operations, returned for the first time to bear his 
part in political councils; that he hoped they 
would bear with his inexperience in matters of 
civil form, and regard more the tendency than the 
manner of what he had done; that he was sensi- 
ble the proposed terms of peace were unfavour- 
able, but he knew not how else his country was 
to be rescued from her present difficulties; he 
wished to reserve her for a time in which she 
could exert her resolution with more advantage. 
He hoped that the senate would, in the T 
extremity, accept, without hesitation, and even 
without consulting the people, conditions which, 
though hard, were, notwithstanding, less fatal to 
the commonwealth than any one could have 
hoped for in the night that followed the battle of 
Zama.’ 

The conditions were accordingly 
accepted, and deputies were sent to 
Rome with concessions, which in 
some measure wea the republic of her sove- 
reignty. The ratification of the treaty was re- 
mitted to Scipio, and the peace concluded on the 
terms he had prescribed. 

Four thousand Roman captives were instantly 
released: five hundred galleys were delivered up 
and burnt: the first payment of two hundre 
talents was exacted, and, under the execution of 
this article, many members of the Carthaginian 
senate were in tears. Hannibal was observed to 
smile, and being questioned on this insult to the 
public distress, made answer, That a smile of 
scorn for those who felt not the loss of their 
country, until it affected their own interest, was 
an expression of sorrow for Carthage. 


Uc. SBR. 


8 Near two millions sterling. 
9 Polyb. lib. xv. c.18. Liv. lib. xxx. c. 37. 


60 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Slate of Rome at the Peace with Carthage—Wars with the Gauls—With the Macedonians— 


Battle of Cynocephale—Peace—F'reedom to 


Greece— Preludes to the War with Anttochus— 


Flight of Hannibal to that Prince—Antiochus passes into Europe—Dispositions made by the 
Romans—Flight of Antiochus to Asia—His Defeat at the Mountains of Sipylus—Peace and 
Settlement of Asia—Course of Roman Affairs at Home, d*c. 


IN the course of the war, which terminated in 
so distinguished a superiority of the Roman over 
the Carthaginian republic, the victors had ex- 
perienced much greater distress than had, even in 
the last stage of the conflict, fallen to the share of 
the vanquished. The greater part of their terri- 
tory, during a series of years, lay waste; was 
ruined in its habitations, plundered of its slaves 
and its cattle, and deserted of its people. The 
city itself was reduced to a scanty supply of | 
provisions that threatened immediate famine.! 
Among other modes of taxation devised at this 
time, the monopoly of salt was established or re- 
newed; but every public fund that was consti- 
tuted in the ordinary way being insufficient, the 
state had recourse to the voluntary contribution 
of its members, and called for their plate and other | 
ornaments of silver and gold to defray the ex- 
penses. ‘They debased their silver coin by a great 
mixture of alloy, and farther reduced the copper 
Ass from its late coinage at two ounces to one.? 
‘The numbers of the people on the rolls, either by 
desertion or by the sword of the enemy, uncom- 
monly fatal in such a series of battles, were re- 
duced from two hundred and seventy thousand 
to nearly the half.3 

In the musters and levies, no less than twelve 
colonies at once withheld their names, and re- 
fused their support. Yet, proof against the whole 
of these sufferings, the Romans maintained the 
conflict with a resolution which seemed to imply, 
that they considered the smallest concession as 
equivalent to ruin. In the farther exertion 
of this unconquerable spirit, when the pressure 
of this war was removed, their fortunes rose to a 
flood of prosperity and greatness, proportioned to 
the low ebb to which they seemed to have fallen 
in the course of it. 

They joined, in Sicily, to their former posses- 
sions, the city of Syracuse, and the whole king- 
dom of Hiero. In Spain, they succeeded to all the 
pras one to all the claims and pretensions of 

arthage, and became masters of all that had 
been the subject of dispute in the war. They 
brought Carthage herself under contribution, and 
reduced her almost to the state of a province. 

On the side of Macedonia and lllyricum, in 
their treaty with Philip and his allies, they re- 
tained to themselves considerable pledges, not 
only of security, but of power; and began to be 
considered in the councils of Greece, as the prin- 
cipal arbiters of the fortunes of nations. 

In Italy, where their progress was still of 
greater consequence, they became more absolute 
masters than they had been before the war.— 


1 Polyb. Excerptz Legationes. 

2 Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. iil. c. iii. 

3 These were probably the citizens, fit to carry arma, 
residing in the city; for it was not yet the practice to enrol 
those who did not offer their names at Rome. 


The cantons, which, in so general a defection of 
their other allies, had continued faithful to them, 
were fond of the merit they had acquired, and 
were confirmed in their attachment by the habits 
of zeal which they had exerted in so prosperous 
a cause. ‘Those, on the contrary, who had re- 
volted, or withdrawn their allegiance, were re- 
duced to a state of submission more entire than 
they had formerly acknowledged; and the sove- 
reignty of this whole country being, till now, 
precarious and tottering, derived, from the very 
storm which had shaken it, stability and force. 

But, notwithstanding the splendour of such 
rapid advancement, and of the high military and 
political talents which procured it, if by any ac- 
cident the career of the Romans had been stopt at 
the present era, their name, it is probable, would 
never have appeared on the record of polished 
nations, nor they themselves been otherwise 
known than as a barbarous dynasty, that fell a 
prey to some more fortunate pretenders to domi- 
nion and conquest. 

The Romans, being altogether men of the 
sword, or of the state, made no application to let- 
ters or sedentary occupations. Cato is introduced 
by Cicero as saying, ‘That it had been anciently 
the fashion at Roman feasts to sing heroical bal- 
lads in honour of their ancestors: but that this 
custom had been discontinued in his own time, 
and it is probable, from the great change which 
their language underwent in a few years, that 
they had no popular or established compositions 
in writing, or even in vulgar tradition, by which 
the uniformity of language has, in other instances, 
been longer preserved.— They had hitherto no 
historian, poct, or philosopher; and it was only 
now, that any taste began to appear for the coin 
positions of such authors. Fabius, Ennius, and 
Cato, became the first historians of their country, 
and raised the first literary monuments of genius 
that were to remain with posterity.‘ 

The inclination which now appeared for the 
learning of the Greeks was, by many, considered 
as a mark of degeneracy, and gave rise to the 
never-ending dispute, which, in this as in other 
nations, took place between the patrons of ancient 
and modern manners. ‘lhe admirers of ancient 
times, being attached to what they received from 
their ancestors, were disposed to reject every new 
improvement, and seemed willing to stop the 
progress of ingenuity itself, ‘The gay, and the 
fashionable, on the other hand, liked what was 
new; were fond of every change, and would ever 
adopt the latest invention as the model of pro- 
priety, elegance, and beauty. 

To the simplicity of the Roman manners in 
other respects, and to the ability of the most ac- 
complished councils of state, was joined a very 


4 In the sixth century of Rome 


Cuar. VL] 


gross superstition, which led to many acts of ab- 
surdity and cruelty. Jn this particular it appears, 
that the conceptions of men are altogether uncon- 
nected with their civil and political, as well as 
military character; and that the rites they adopt, 
cven when innocent, and the most admissible ex- 
pressions of worship, do not deserve to be record- 
ed for any other purpose, than to show how far 
they are arbitrary; and how little, in many in- 
stances, they are directed, even among nations 
otherwise the most accomplished, by any rule of 
utility, humanity, or reason. 

A little time before the breaking out of the late 
war, the Roman senate, upon the report of a pro- 
phecy that the Gauls and the Greeks were to 
possess the city, ordered a man and a woman of 
each of those nations to be buried alive in the 
market-place; supposing, we may imagine, that, 
py this act of monstrous injustice and cruelty, 
they were to fulfil or elude the prediction.6 They 
attended to the numberless prodigies that were 
annually collected, and to the charms that were 
suggested to avert the evils which those prodi- 
gies were supposed to presage, no less than they 
cid to the most serious affairs of the common- 
wealth. They frequently seemed to impute 
their distresses more to the neglect of supersti- 
tious rites, than to the misconduct of their offi- 
cers, or to the superiority of their enemies. Fa- 
bius, who, by perseverance and steadiness, had 
the merit of restoring their affairs, was no less 
celebrated for his diligence in averting the effect 
of prodigies and unhappy presages, than he was 
for the conduct and ability of a cautious and suc- 
cessful commander.? Even Scipio is said to have 
been influenced by his dreams, and to have pre- 
tended to special revelations. 

From such examples as these, we may learn 
the fallacy of partial representations of national 
character, and carefully to guard against drawing 
any inference from the defects or accomplishments 
which a people may exhibit of one kind, to estab- 
lish those of another. 

The peace with Carthage was introduced with 
some popular acts in favour of those who had 
suffered remarkably in the hardships and dangers 
of the war. Large quantities of corn that had 
been seized in the magazines of the enemy, were 
sold in the city at a low price, and a considerable 
distribution of land was made to numbers of the 
people in reward of their long and perilousservices, 

These precedents, however reasonable in the 
circumstances from which they arose, were the 
sources of great abuse; private citizens, in the 
sequel, were taught to rely on public gratuities, 
and were made to hope, that, in the midst of sloth 
and riot, they might subsist without care, and 
without industry. Soldiers were taught to expect 
extraordinary rewards for ordinary services; and 
ambitious leaders were instructed how to transfer 
the affection and the hopes of the legions from 
the republic to themselves. , 

The treaty with Carthage, while it terminated 
the principal war in which the Romans were en- 
gaged, left them at leisure to pursue a variety of 
quarrels, which still remained on their hands, 
rather than bestowed entire peace. The Insu- 
bres, and other Gaulish nations on the Po, al- 
though they had not ‘taken the full advantage 


Jutarch in Vit. Marcell. 


P 6 Vide Liv. passim. 
Plutarch. in Vit. Fab. Max. 


5 
7 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


61 


which the presence of Hannibal in Italy might have 
given them against the Romans, were unable to 
reinain at peace, and were unwilling to acknow- 
ledge the sovereignty of any nation over their 
own. Having a Carthaginian exile, of the name 
of Hamilcar, at their head, they attempted again 
to dislodge the colonies of Cremona and Flacentia; 
and on that side, with various events for some 
years, furnished occupation to the arms of the re- 
public. 

Philip, notwithstanding the treaty of peace, 
which, about three years before, he had concluded 
with the Romans, had lately supplied the Car- 
thaginians with an aid of four thousand men, and 
a sum of money. Of the men he had sent to the 
assistance of Carthage, many had been taken at 
the battle of Zama, and detained as captives. 
Trusting, however, to the authority of his crown, 
he sent, during the dependence of the treaty be- 
tween the Romans and Carthaginians, a message 
to demand the enlargement of those Macedonian 
captives. To this message the senate replied with 
disdain, that the king of Macedonia appeared tu 
desire a war and should have it. 

The people, nevertheless, wearied and exhaust- 
ed with the late contest, engaged in this war with 
uncommon reluctance. The senate, they thought, 
was directed by the ambition of a few members, 
who never ceased to seck for new subjects of tri- 
umph, and for fresh occasion of military honours. 
But notwithstanding their aversion to enter into 
a war upon these motives, they were persuaded 
to give titer consent upon a representation of the 
= progress which was makıng by the king of 

acedonia, and the supposed necessity of carry- 
ing the war into his own country, in order to 
check or prevent his designs upon Italy. 

Philip, from being the head of a free confede- 
racy, in which the Achæans, and many other 
states of Greece, were united, aspired to become 
the despotic sovereign of that country; and, 
either by insinuation or force, had made himself 
master of most places of consequence round the 
Egean sea, whether in Europe or Asia. Upon 
the death of Ptolemy Philopater, and the succes- 
sion of an infant son of that prince to the throne 
of Egypt, Philip had entered into a treaty with 
Antiochus, king of Syria, to divide between them 
the possessions of the Egyptian monarchy; and 
in order to be ready for his more distant operations, 
was busy in reducing the places which still held out 
against him in Greece, and in its neighbourhood. 

For this purpose he sent an army with orders 
to take possession of Athens, and was himself 
employed in the siege of Abydos. The Atheni- 
ans sent a message to Rome to sue for protection. 
“It is no longer a question,” said the consul Sul- 
picius, in his harangue to the people, “whether 
you will have a war with Philip, but whether 
you will have that war in Macedonia or in Italy. 
If you stay until Philip has taken Athens, as 
Hannibal took Saguntum, you may then see him 
arrive in Italy, not after a march of five months, 
and after the passage of tremendous mountains, 
but after a voyage of five days from his embarka- 
tion at Corinth.” 

These considerations decided the resolution of 
the Roman people for war; and the officers, yet 
remaining in Sicily at the head of the sea and the 
land forces that had been employed against Car. 
thage had orders, without touching on Italy, to 
make sail for the coast of Epirus. 


The consul Sulpicius was des-} 
tined to command in that country. 
He found, upon his arrival, that 
Attalus, the king of Pergamus, and the republic 
of Rhodes, had taken arms to oppose the progress 
of Philip. In concert with these allies, and in 
conjunction with the Dardanians and other can- 
tons who joined him on the frontiers of Macedo- 
nia, the Roman consul was enabled to relieve and 
to protect the Athenians. But the other states 
of Greece, though already averse to the preten- 
sions of Philip, and impatient of his usurpations, 
even the Etolians, though the most determined 
opponents of this prince, seemed to be undecided 
on this occasion, and deferred entering into any 
engagement with the Romans. The reputation 
of the Macedonian armies was still very high; 
and it was doubtful, whether these Italian inva- 
ders, considered as an upstart and a barbarous 
iua might be able to protect the states that 

eclared for them against the vengeance of so 
great a king.1 

The two first years of the war elapsed with- 
out any decisive event. Philip took post on the 
mountains that separate Epirus from Thessaly, 
and effectually prevented the Romans from- pe- 
netrating any farther. But, in the third year, 
Titus Quintius Flamininus, yet a young man 
under thirty years of age, being consul, and des- 
tined to this command, brought to an immediate 
issue a contest which, till then, had been held in 
suspense. 

The Roman legion, except in its first encoun- 
ters with Pyrrhus, had never measured its force, 
or compared its advantages with any troops form- 
ed on the Grecian model, and, to those who rea- 
soned on the subject, may have appeared greatly 
inferior to the Macedonian phalanx. One pre- 
sumption, indeed, had appeared in favour of the 
legion, that both Pyrrhus and Hannibal thought 
proper to adopt its weapons, though there is no 
account of their having imitated the line of battle 
or form of its manipulés. 

The phalanx was calculated to present a strong 
and impenetrable front, supported by a depth of 
column, which might he varied occasionally to 
suit with the ground. The men were armed 
with spears of twenty-one or twenty-four feet in 
Jensth. The five first ranks could level and 
carry their points to the front of the column. 
‘The remainder rested their spears obliquely on 
the shoulders of those that were before them; 
and in this posture, formed a kind of shed to in- 
tercept the missiles of the enemy; and, with their 
pressure, supported, or urged, the front of their 
own column. 

In the shock of the phalanx and legion, it is 
computed, that every single man in the front of 
the legion, requiring a square space of six feet in 
which to ply his weapons, and acting with his 
buckler and sword, had ten points of the enemy’s 
spears opposed to him:? nevertheless, the strength 
of the phalanx being entirely collected in front, 
and depending on the closeness of its order; when 
attacked on the flank or rear, when broken or 
taken by surprise, and unformed, it was easily 
routed, and was calculated only for level ground, 
and the defence of a station accessible only in one 
direction. 


UG 552. 


1 Plutarch in Vit. Flamin. p. 407. 


2 Polyb. lib. 
KVii..c, 23, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox Í. 


The Roman legion could act on its front, ils 
flank, or its rear. Each division, or manipule, 
and even the men that composed it, could act 
apart; and, if they had space enough to ply their 
weapons, could scarcely be taken by surprise, or 
be made to suffer for want of a determinate order. 
It was serviceable, therefore, upon any ground, 
and, except on the front of the phalanx, had an 
undoubted advantage over that body. 

In its ordinary form, the legion made its attack 
by separate divisions, at considerable intervals; - 
and this mode of attack had a tendency to break 
and disjoin the front of the phalanx. _ The divi- 
sions of the second line were made to face the in- 
tervals of the first, in order to take advantage of 
any disorder that might arise from the impression 
made on the enemy, whether they repulsed and 
pursued, or gave way to the divisions that attack- 
ed them. À 

Such are reasonings which occurred to military 
men, at least after the events of the present war. 
In the mean time the Romans, in whatever de- 
gree they comprehended this argument, had sufñ- 
cient confidence in their own weapons, and in 
their loose order, to encounter the long spear and 
compacted force of their enemy. 

hen Flamininus arrived in Epirus, Philip 
received him in a rugged pass, where the Aous 
bursts from the mountains that separate Epirus 
from Thessaly. ‘This post was strong, and could 
be defended even by irregular troops; but the 
phalanx, in this place, had none of its peculiar 
advantages ; the Romans got round it upon the 
heights, and obliged the king of 
U. C. 555. Macedonia to retire. He fled 
through Thessaly, and, to incom- 
mode the enemy in their attempts to pursue him, 
laid waste the country as he ‘passed. 

The flight of Philip determined the Etolians 
to take part in the war against him; and the 
Roman general, after the operations of the cam- 
paign, being to winter in Phocis on the gulf of 
Corinth, found, that the greater part of the 
Achæan states were likewise disposed to join him. 
He took advantage of this disposition, and got pos- 
session of all the towns in the Peloponnesus, ex- 
cept Corinth and Argos, which hitherto had been 
in alliance with the enemy. 

In the following spring, Philip, having with 
great industry collected and disciplined the forces 
of his kingdom, received Flamininus in Thessaly. 
The armies met in the neighbourhood of Phere ; 
but the country, being interspersed with gardens, 
and cut with plantations and hedges, the king 
declined a battle, and withdrew. Flamininus, 
knowing that he had magazines at Scotusa, sup- 
posed that he was gone towards that place, and 
followed by a route that was separated from that 
of the king by a ridge of hills. In the first day’s 
march, the Romans and Macedonians were hid 
from each other by the heights; on the second 
day they were covered by a thick fog, which 
hindered them from, seeing distinctly even the 
different parts of their own armies. 

The scouts and advanced parties on both sides, 
chad, about the same time, ascended the heights, 
to gain some observation of their enemy. They 
met by surprise, and could not avoid an engage- 
ment. Each party sent for support to the main 
body of their respective armies. The Romans 
had begun to give way, when a reinforcement 
arrived, that enabled them. in their turn, to press 


Ciar. VEJ 


ox the enemy, and to recover the height from 
which they had been forced. Philip was deter- 
mined not to hazard his phalanx on that unfa- 
vourable ground, broken and interspersed with 
little hills; which, on account of their figure, 
were called the Cynocephalz.? He sent, never- 
theless, all his horse and irregular infantry to ex- 
tricate his advanced party, and to draw them off 
with honour. Upon their arrival, the advantage 
came to be on the side of the Macedonians; and 
the Roman irregulars were forced from the hills 
in the utmost disorder. ‘The cry of victory was 
carried back to the camp of the king. His cour- 
tiers exclaimed that now was the time to urge a 
flying enemy, and to complete his advantage. 
The king hesitated, but could not resist the 
general voice. He ordered the phalanx to move ; 
and he himself at the head of the right wing, 
while his left was marching in column, had ar- 
rived and formed on the hill.—On his way to this 
ground, he was flattered with recent tracts of the 
victory which had been gained by his troops. 

Flamininus, at the same time, alarmed at the 
defeat of his light infantry, and seeing a kind of 
panic likely to spread through the legions, put the 
whole army in motion, and advanced to receive 
his flying parties. In that point of time the fog 
cleared up, and showed the right of the Macedo- 
nian phalanx already formed upon the height. 

Flamininus hastily attacked this body, and be- 
ing unable to make any impression, gave up the 
day, on that quarter, for lost. But, observing 
that the enemy opposite to his right were not yet 
come to their ground, he instantly repaired to that 
wing, and, with his elephants and light infantry, 
supported by the legions, attacked them before the 
phalanx was formed, and put them to flight. 

In this state of the action, a tribune of the vic- 
torious legion, being advanced in pursuit of the 
enemy, as they fled beyond the flank of their own 
phalanx on the right, took that body in the rear; 
and, by this fortunate attenipt, in so critical a mo- 
ment, completed the victory in all parts of the field. 

Thus Philip, if his phalanx had any advantage 
over the legion of the Romans, had not, in two 
successive encounters, been able to avail himself 
of it; and it may well be supposed, that, in the 
movements of armies, which often require them 
to act on varieties of ground, the chances were 
greatly in favour of the more versatile body.4 

From this field the king of Macedonia fled with 
a mind already disposed not to urge the fate of 
the war any farther. He retired to the passes of 
the mountains that surround the valley of Tempe, 
and from thence sent a message to the Roman 
general with overtures of peace. 

It was a fortunate circumstance in the manners 
and policy of the Romans, that the same motives 
of ambition which urged the rulers of the state to 
war, likewise, on occasion, inclined the leaders of 
armies to peace, made them admit from an enemy 
the first offers of submission, and embrace any 
terms on which they could for themselves lay 
claim to a triumph. 

The prayer of the republic, in entering on a 
war, included three objects, safety, victory, and 
enlargement of territory. Every general endea- 
voured to obtain these ends for his country; but, 


on Pn) 
3 The name implies, that these hills resembled the head 
of a dog. 


4 Polyb. lib. xvii. c. 2% $ Liv. lib. xxxi. c. 5. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


63 


in proportion as he approached to the completion 
of Me wishes, he becaine jealous of his successor, 
and desirous to terminate the war before any other 
should come to snatch out of his hands the tro- 
phies he had won. This people appeared, there- 
fore, on most occasions, willing to spare the van- 
quished, and went to extremities only by degrees, 
and urged by the ambition of successive leaders, 
who, each in his turn, wished to make some ad- 
dition to the advantages previously gained to his 
country. At the same time, the state, when fur- 
nished with a fair pretence for reducing a province 
to subjection, made the most effectual arrange- 
ments to accomplish this purpose. 

Flamininus, on the present occasion, encourag- 
ed the advances that were made to him by Philip, 
granted a cessation of arms, gave him an oppor- 
tunity to continue his applications for ea at 
Rome, and forwarded the messenger whom he 
sent on this business. The senate, on being in- 
formed that the king of Macedonia cast himself 
entirely on the mercy and justice of the Romans, 

named ten commissioners to be joined 
U. C. 557. with Flamininus, and to determine, 
in presence of the other parties con- 


‘cerned in the war, what were to be the terms on 


which peace should be granted. 

The time was not yet come for the Romans to 
lay hold of any possessions beyond the sea of 
Ionia. They had passed into that country as the 
protectors of Athens, were now satisfied with the 
title of deliverers of Greece; and, under pretence 
of setting the republics of that quarter free, de- 
tached them from the Macedonian monarchy ; 
but, in this manner, made the first step towards 
conquest, by weakening their enemy, and by strip- 

ing him of great part of that power with which 
e had been able to resist them in the late war. 

They obliged the king of Macedonia to with- 
draw his garrisons from every fortress in Greece, 
and to leave every Grecian city, whether of Eu- 
rope or Asia, to the full enjoyment of its own in- 
‘a and separate laws. 

o secure the eficcts of this treaty, they obliged. 
him to surrender all his ships of war, except one 
galley, on which, it was said, were mounted six- 
teen tier of oars, requiring a height above the 
water, and dimensions in every part, more fitted 
for ostentation than wieldiness or use. 

They made him reduce his ordinary military 


‘establishment to five hundred men, and forbade 


him entirely the use of elephants. 

For themselves, they desired only to have the 
Reman captives restored, deserters delivered up, 
and a sum of one thousand talents to reimburse 
the expense of the war.6 

By this treaty the Romans not only weakened 
their enemy, but acquired great accessions of 
reputation and general confidence. They an- 
nounced themselves as protectors of all free na- 
tions; and in this character took an ascendant, 
which, even over the states they had rescued 
from foreign usurpations, by degrees might rise 
into sovereignty and: a formal dominion. 

To give the greater solemnity to the gift of 
liberty which they made to the Grecian states, 
they had this act of splendid munificence pro- 
claimed at the Isthmus of Corinth, in presence of 
great multitudes from every part of Greece met 
to solemnize the ordinary games; and, in return, 


6 Liv. hb. xxxiii. c. 5L 


61 


were extolled by the flatterers of their power, or 
the dupes of their policy, as the common restorers 
of freedom to mankind. 

The Romans hastened the completion of the 
treaty, by which they disarmed the king of Ma- 
cedonia, upon having received information that 
Antiochus, king of Syria, was in motion with a 


mighty force, and, without declaring his inten-, 


tions, made sail towards Europe. This prince 
succeeded to the kingdom of Syria a few years 
before Ptolomy Philopater began to reign in 
Egypt, or Philip in Greece; and was nearly of 
the same age with those princes. In his youth he 
waged war with the kingdom of Egypt for the 
possession of Celo-Syria, and with the Satraps 
or governors of his own provinces, who attempted 
to render themselves independent, and to dismem- 
ber his kingdom. His success in reuniting all the 
members of his own monarchy, put him in pos- 
session of a great empire, which reached from the 
extremities of Armenia and Persia to Sardis and 
the seas of Greece. The splendour of his fortunes 

rocured him the title of Antiochus the Great. 

he crown of Egypt had been, for somme time, 
the principal object of his jealousy and of his 
ambition. He had made an alliance with Philip, 
in which the common object of the parties was to 
avail themselves of the minority of Ptolomy: 
but he was not aware, in time, how much the 
king of Macedonia stood ın need of his support 
against the Romans; or how much it was his 
interest to preserve that kingdom as a barrier 
against the encroachments of an ambitious peo- 
pe, who now began to direct their views to the 

ast. He advanced, however, though now too 
late, by the coast of Asia to the Hellespont, with 
a fleet and an army rather destined for observa- 
tion, than for any decided part in a war which 
was brought to a conclusion about the time of his 
arrival in those parts. 

At Lysimachia, the Roman deputies, who 
were charged with the adjustment and execution 
of the late treaty, met with Antiochus, and re- 
monstrated against some of his proceedings on the 
coast of Asia, as affecting the possessions both of 
Philip and of Ptolomy. They complained of his 
present invasion of Europe with a hostile force. 
“The Romans,” they said, “had rescued the 
Greeks from Philip, not to deliver them over to 
Antiochus.” They demanded a restitution of all 
the towns he had taken from Ptolomy, and en- 
joined him to refrain from any attempts on the 
freedom of Greece. 

To these remonstrances and requisitions the 
king of Syria with scorn replied, That he knew 
the extent of his rights, and was not to be taught 
by the Romans: that they were busy in setting 
bounds to the ambition of other states, but set no 
bounds to their own; advised them to confine 
their views to the affairs of Italy, and to leave 
those of Asia to the parties concerned. 

During the conferences which were held on 
these subjects, each of the parties, without com- 
municating what they heard to the others, received 
report of the death of Ptolomy, the infant king of 
Egypt; and they separated from each other, in- 
tent on the evils to be apprehended, or the benefits 
to be reaped, from this event. s 

This report, in which both parties were soon 
after undeceived,! occasioned the return of Antio- 


1 Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 41. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor Í. 


chus into Syria, and suspended for some tıme the 
war which he was disposed to carry into Europe 

Under pretence of observing the motions of this 
prince, the Romans, although they had professed 
an intention to evacuate ae Greek cities, still 
kept possession of Demetrias, a convenient sea- 
pee in Thessaly, and of Chalcis on-the straits of 

ubeea; and Flamininus, under pretence of re- 
straining the violence of Nabis, the tyrant of 
Lacedemon, and of restoring the tranquillity of 
that country,? still remained with an army in the 
Peloponnesus. 

While the Romans were carrying their for- 
tunes with so high a hand in this part of the world, 
and defeating armies hitherto deemed invineible, 
they received a considerable check in Spain. 

That country had been recently divided into 
two provinces; and though now possessed by the 
Romans, without the competition of any foreign 
rival, it continued to be held by a very diffictlt 
and precarious tenure, that of force, opposed to 


‘the impatience and continual revolts of a fierce 


and numerous people. 

Spain had already furnished to Italy its princi- 
pal supplies of silver and gold. At every triumph 
obtained in that country, the precious metals were 
brought in considerable quantities to the treasury 
of Rome; but were purchased for the most part 
with the blood of her Jegions, and led her into a 
succession of wars, in which she experienced 
defeat as well as victory. About the time that 
Flamininus had terminated the war in Macedonia, 
the Proconsul Sempronius, in the nearer province 
of Spain, was defeated with the loss of many 
officers of rank. He himself was wounded in 
action, and soon after died; 

Even the Roman possessions in Italy were not 
yet fully recovered from the troubles that had 
arisen in the time of the late war with Carthage. 
The Gaulish nations on the Po still continued in 
a state of hostility. The slaves, of which the 
numbers had greatly increased in Etruria, and 
other parts of the country, being mostly captives 
taken from enemies inured to arms and to vio- 
lence, interrupted their servitude with frequent 
and dangerous insurrections. Having persons 
amony them, who had been accustomed to com- 
mand as well as to obey, they often deserted from 
their masters, formed into regular bodies, and 
encountered the armies of the republic in battle.’ 

The ridge of the Appenines beyond the con- 
fines of Etruria and the Roman frontier, still ha1- 
boured fierce and numerous tribes known by the 
name of Ligurians and Gauls, who not only often 
and long defended their own mountains and 
woods, but likewise frequently invaded the terri- 
tory of the Romans. Here, or in Spain, during 
the recess of other wars, there was a continual 
service for the consuls and pretors, and a continual 
exercise to the legions. The state, nevertheless, 
though still occupied n this manner with petty 
enemies and desultory wars, never lost sight of 
the great objects of its jealousy, from whom were 
to be apprehended a more regular opposition, 
and better concerted designs against its power. 
Among these, the Carthaginians were not likely 
to continue longer at peace than until they re- 
covered their strength, or had the prospect of 
some powerful support.— Antiochus, possessed 
of all the resources of Asia, was ready to join with 


2 Liv. lib. xxxiii. c. 43. 3 Ibid. lib. xxviii. c. 36 


Cuar. VL] 


this or any other state that was inclined to check 
the advancement of the Roman power. 

About a year after the conclusion 
U. C. 558. of the war with Philip, the Romans 
received intelligence, that the Car- 
thaginians had entered into a correspondence with 
Antiochus; and as their supposed implacable 
enemy, Hannibal, was then in one of the first 
offices of state at Carthage, it was not doubted 
that the secret intrigues of those parties were hos- 
tile to Rome. It was determined, therefore, to 
send a proper commission into Africa, under pre- 
tence of an amicable mediation, in some difter- 
ences that subsisted between Massinissa and the 
people of Carthage; but with injunctions to the 
commissioners to penetrate, if possible, the de- 
signs of the Carthaginians; and, if necessary, to 
demand that Hannibal, the supposed author of 
a dangerous conspiracy against the peace of both 
the republics should be delivered up. 

This great man, from the termination of the 
late war, had acquitted himself, in the political de- 
partments, to which he had been appointed, with 
an integrity and ability worthy of his high repu- 
tation as a soldier; but his reformations 1n a cor- 
rupted state had procured him enemies at home, 
not less dangerous than those he had encountered 
abroad.4 Upon the arrival of the Roman depu- 
ties, he suspected that the commission regarded 
himself, and made no doubt that a faction whose 
ambition he had restrained, and many particular 
persons whom he had recently incensed by the 
reformation of certain abuses in whicli they were 
interested, would gladly seize that opportunity to 
rid themselves of a powerful enemy, and from 
fear or some other motives, prevail on a corrupted 
people to deliver him upto the Romans. It is 
said, that he had been long prepared for an emer- 
gence of this sort, and, without any embarrass- 
ment, appeared, upon the arrival of these messen- 
gers, in all the functions of his public character; 
but at night withdrew to the coast, and set sail 
for Asia He was received by Antiochus at 
Ephesus, and treated as a person worthy to direct 
the councils of a great king; an office too much 
exposed to envy for the favourites of a court, or 
even for the prince himself long to endure. 

From this time forward the king of Syria, sup- 
aly to be governed by the counsels of Hanni- 

al, became the principal object of attention and 
of jealousy at Rome; and though he seemed to 
remain in tranquillity during about three years 
after the acquisition of this formidable counsellor, 
vet it was not doubted that the first violent storm 
was to burst from that quarter. 

Flamininus had, during the greater part of this 
interval, remained in Greece; ial been occupied 
in settling the affairs of that country, and in observ- 
ing the Etolians, who, being dissatisfied with the 
late peace, endeavoured to raisea spirit of discontent 
against the Romans. He made war at the same 
time against Nabis the tyrant of Lacedemon; and 
though he failed in his attempt to force this fa- 
mous usurper in his own capital, he obliged him 
to evacuate Argos, and to cede all his possessions 
on the coast. By these means he removed all the 
dangers with which any of the states of the 
Achean league had been threatened, and restored 
them to the full possession of their freedom. 

To leave no ground of jealousy or distrust in 


4 Viv. lib. xxxiii. c. 48—49. 5 Ibid. c. 46—49. 


I 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


65 


Greece, Flamininus persuaded the Roman com- 
missioners to evacuate Demetrias, Chalcis, and 
Corinth, which they were disposed to retain in 
the prospect of a war with Antiochus; and hav- 
ing thus concluded the aftairs that were entrust- 
ed to him, he returned into Italy, and made his 
entry at Rome in a triumphal procession, which 
lasted three days, wìth a splendid display of spoils, 
captives, and treasure.6, 

All the troubles of Greece, at the departure of 
Flamininus, seemed to be composed; these ap- 
pearances, however, were but of short duration. 
Nabis was impatient under his late concessions ; 
and flattering himself that the Romans would 
not repass the sea merely to exclude him from the 
possession of a few places of little consequence on 
the coast of the Peloponnesus, began to employ 
insinuation, corruption, and open force, in order 
to recover the towns he had lost. In this design 
he was encouraged by the Etolians, who flattered 
him with the hopes of support, not only from 
themselves, but likewise from Antiochus, and 
even from Philip; all of whom had an evident 
interest in repressing the growing power of the 
Italian republic. ‘The Etolians had expected, 
at the close of the war with Philip, to come into 
the place of that prince, as the head of all the 
Grecian confederacies, and to have a principal 
share in the spoils of his kingdom. They urged 
the Roman commissioners to the final suppression 
of that monarchy; and, being disappointed in all 
their hopes, complained of the Romans, as bestow- 
ing upon others the fruits of a victory which had 
been obtained chiefly by their means, and as hav- 
ing, under the pretence of setting the Greeks at 
liberty, reduced that country into a weak and dis- 
jointed state, which might in any future period 
render it an easy prey to themselves. 

Flamininus accordingly liad, in all his mea- 
sures for the settlement of Greece, found from 
this people a warm and obstinate resistance. He 
found them endeavouring to form a powerful con- 
federacy against the Romans, and for this pur- 
pose engaged in intrigues with Nabis, Philip, and 
Antiochus; applying to each of thein in terms 
suited to the supposed injuries they had severally 
received in the late war, or in the negotiations 
that followed. 

At the conclusion of the peace with Philip, 
Antiochus thinking himself by the effect of that 
treaty aggrieved, in respect to the freedom grant- 
ed to some cantons in Thrace, on which he deri- 
ved a claim from his ancestors, sent an embassy 
to Rome with remonstrances on that subject. 
The Romans made answer, in the capacity which 
they had assumed of the deliverers of Greece, that 
they would oppose every attempt to enslave any 
Grecian settlement ; and as they had no designs 
on Asia, they expected that the king of Syria 
would not intermeddle in the concerns of Europe. 
While they gave this answer to the — en ol 
of Antiochus, they resolved under pretence of 
treating with the king, to send commissioners, in 
their turn, to observe his motions. 

The famous Scipio Africanus is mentioned by 
some historians as having been of this commission, 
and as having had some conversations with Han- 
nibal, which are recorded to the honour of both, 
Livy, however, seems to reject these particulars 
as fabulous, while he admits that the apparent in- 


6 Liv. jib. xxxiv. c. 52. 


65 


timacy of Hannibal with the Roman commission- 
ers, very much diminished the part which this for- 
midable counsellor held in the confidence of the 
king.! 

t this time it became known that Antiochus 
was meditating the invasion of Italy as well as 
of Greece; that the first of these objects was to 
be committed to Hannibal, who undertook to pre- 
vail on the republic of Carthage to take a princi- 
Fa share in the war; and that, for this purpose, 

e had sent a proper person to concert measures 
with his party at Carthage; but theintrigue being 
discovered, the Carthaginians, in order to excul- 
pate themselves, sent an account of it to Rome. 

Before this intelligence had been received, the 
Roman commissioners were set out for Asia, and, 
according to their instructions, passed through 
Pergamus to consult with Eumenes the sovereign 
of that kingdom, who having reason to dread the 
power of Antiochus employed all his credit to en- 
page the Romans in a war with that prince. 

hey had an audience of the king of Syria at 
Apamea, and a conference afterwards, on the 
object of their commission, with a principal officer 
of his court at Ephesus. This minister made no 
scruple to charge the Romans with the real de- 
signs of ambition, which they endeavoured to 
disguise under the pretence of procuring the liber- 
ties of Greece. “ Yourconduct,” he said, “where 
you are in a condition to act without disguise, is 
a much better evidence of your intention, than 
any professions you may think proper to make in 
Greece or in Asia, where, by assuming a popular 
character, you have so many parties to reconcile 
to your interest. Are not the inhabitants of Na- 
ples and of Rhegium Greeks, as well as those 
of Lampsacus and Smyrna? You are extremely 
desirous to set the Greeks at liberty from the do- 
minion of Antiochus and Philip, but have no re- 
morse in subjecting them to your own.” 

The deputies of the cities whose interest was 
m question were present at these conferences, 
and each pleaded the cause of his country; but 
without any other effect than that of convincing 
the parties concerned, that a war could not long 
be avoided. The Romans, alarmed by the intel- 
ligence received from Carthage during the depend- 
ance of this conference, had already begun to 
prepare for hostilities; and upon the report of 
their commissioners from Asia, still continued to 
augment their forces by sea and by land. Under 
e of repressing the violences committed by 

abis, they ordered one army into Greece, and 
stationed a second on the coast of Calabria and 
ee order to support the operations of the 

rst. 

The Romans had reason to consider the Eto- 
lians as enemies, and even to distrust the inten- 
tions of many of the republics lately restored to 
their liberty, who began to surmise, that under 
the pretence of being relieved from the dominion 
of Philip, they were actually reduced to a state 
of dependance on Rome. 

To obviate the difficulties which from these 
surmises might arise among the Grecian repub- 
lics, the Roman senate sent a fresh commission 
into that country, requiring those who were 
named in it to act under the direction of Flamini- 
nus, the late deliverer of Greece. These commis- 
sioners found the principal cities of that country 


1 Liv. lib. xxxv. c. 14. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox 1. 


variously affected: a general meeting of the States 
being called to receive them at Demetrias, they 
were, by some of the parties present at this 
meeting, reproached with a design, under pre- 
tence of restoring the Greeks to their liberties, of 
separating them from every power that was fit to 
protect them; and they were likewise reproached 
with a design of establishing their own tyranny, 
under pretence of opposing that of every other 
state. 

This species of blasphemy, uttered against a 
power which the majority of those who were pre- 
sent affected to revere, raised a great ferment in the 
council ; and the persons who had thus ventured 
to insult the Romans being threatened with vio- 
lence, were forced to withdraw from Demetrias, and 
to take refuge in Etolia. The remaining deputies 
of Greece endeavoured to pacify the Roman com- 
missioners, or at least entreated them that they 
would not impute to so many different nations, ’ 
what was no more than the frenzy of a few indi- 
viduals. 

The Etolians had already invited Antiochus to 
pass into Europe. The measure was according- 
ly under deliberation in the council of this prince. 
Hannibal warmly recommended the invasion of 
Italy as the most effectual blow that could be 
struck at the Romans. “ At home,” he said, 
“their force is still composed of disjointed mate- 
rials, which will break into pieces when assailed 
by the immediate touch of an enemy; and the 
most effectual power that can be raised up against 
them, is that which may be formed from the ruins 
of their own empire. But if you allow them to 
remain in quiet possession of Italy, and to stretch 
out thearms of that country to a distance, their re- 
sources are endless, and their strength irresistible.” 
He made an offer of himself for this service, de- 
manding a hundred galleys, ten thousand foot, and 
a thousand horse. With this armament he propo- 
sed to present himself on the coast of Africa, and 
from what further reinforcements or supplies he 
could derive from Carthage, to effect his descent 
upon Italy. 

These counsels, however, were given in vain. 
Hannibal, as a person likely to reap all the glory 
of every service in which he bore any part, was 
become an object of jealousy to the court of An- 
tiochus, and to the king himself. His advice 
being received with more aversion than respect, 
served to determine the king against every mca- 
sure he proposed... “Such a monarch,” it was 
said by the courtiers, ‘ could not be under any ne- 
cessity to employ foreign aid or direction:—his 
own force was sufficient to overcome the Ro- 
mans in any part of the world :—the recovery of 
Greece must be the first object of his arms :—the 
people of that country, whenever his galleys ap- 
peared, would crowd to the shores to receive him: 
—the Etolians were already in arms for this pur- 
pose:—Nabis was impatient to recover the pos- 
sessions of which he had been stripped by the 
Romans :—Philip must eagerly fly to his standard, 
and embrace every opportunity to revenge the 
mdignities which had been lately put upon him- 
self and his kingdom.’ 

Flattered with these expectations, 


U. C. 562. Antiochus set sail for Europe with 


ten thousand foot, some elephants, 
and a body of horse. He was received at De- 


2 Liv. lib. xxx¢. c. 18. et 42. 


Cuar. Vi] 


metrias with acclamations of joy; but soon after, 
in the sequel, came to understand that his allies 
in that country had sent for him to bear the bur- 
den of the war, and were devising how they 
should reap for themselves the advantages that 
might be made to arise from it. 

he Etolians, at whose instance Antiochus 
had come into Greece, were still divided. One 
party among them contended for peace, and al- 
leged that the presence of the king of Syria was 
a fortunate circumstance, as it might give them an 
opportunity to negotiate with greater advantage. 
Another party contended for immediate war; in- 
sisting that force alone could obtain any equitable 
terms from such a party as that they had to do 
with. 

Flamininus was present in the assembly of 
Etolia when these debates took place relating to 
the resolution for peace or war with the Romans. 
He observed to the party who contended for war, 
that, before they proceeded to this extremity, they 
ought to have made their representations at 
Rome, and to have waited for an answer from 
thence. “ We shall make our representations, 
and demand our answer,” said a principal person 
in the assembly, still thinking of a descent upon 
Italy, to be effected by Hannibal, “ perhaps where 
we are least expected, on the banks of the Tiber.” 

The resolution for war with the Romans was 
accordingly taken in this assembly, and Antiochus 
was declared head of the confederacy to be formed 
for mutual support in the conduct of it. ‘This 
prince endeavoured to obtain a declaration to the 
same effect from the Achzans and Beeotians; but 
being disappointed in his application to those 
states, he left part of his forces at Demetrias, and 
he himself having negotiated his admission at 
Chalcis on the Straits of Eubcea, retired, as if 
he had come to act upon the defensive, behind the 
Euripus, and established his court at that place for 
the winter. 

Mean time the Romans prepared themselves as 
for a struggle of great difficulty, and probably of 
long duration.4 ‘They considered the abilities of 
Hannibal, employed to conduct the forces of Asia, 
as a sufficient ground of alarm. Their first ob- 
ject was to guard Italy and their other possessions. 
An army of observation was for this purpose sta- 
tioned at Tarentum. A numerous fleet was or- 
dered to protect the coast. ‘The pretors and other 
officers of state, with proper forces under their 
command, liad charge of the diflerent districts of 
Italy that were suspected of inclining to the 
enemy, or of being disaffected to the common- 
wealth. The instructions given to these oflicers, 
were, to observe what was passing in the several 
quarters to which they were sent, but to avoid 
every occasion of animosity or tumult that might 
open a way for the admission of an enemy, or 
show an invader where to direct his attack. 

Having made these dispositions for their own 
security, they proceeded to form an army which 
was to act offensively, and to fix the scene of thé 
war in their enemy’s country. Bebius, a prætor 
of the preceding year, under pretence of opposing 
Nabis, who had renewed the war in the Pelopon- 
nesus, had already passed into Epirus with a 
considerable force. Acilius Glabrio, one of the 
consuls of the present year, to whose lot this 
province had fallen, was understood to have in 


3 Liv. lib. xxxv. ¢.33. 4 Appian Syriauce, p. 95. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


67 


charge the farther preparations that were making 
for a war in that country, and hastencd the as- 
sembling of an army and fleet suffrient to dis- 
concert the measures of the parties that were 
supposed to be forming against the Romans. 

The usual tithes of corn were ordered from 
Sardinia, and double tithes from Sicily, to supply 
the army in Epirus. Comimissaries likewise were 
sent to Carthage and Numidia, in order to pur- 
chase supplies from thence. And with sucha 
sense of its importance did the Romans enter on 
this war, that the consul Cornelius issued an 
edict, prohibiting al] senators, and all those who 
were entitled to be admitted into the senate, to 
absent themselves from Rome above one day at a 
time, and requiring that no more than five sena- 
tors should on the same day be absent frem the 
city. 

The equiqment of the fleet was retarded by a 
dispute that arose with eight of the maritime 
colonies or sea-ports, who pretended to a right of 
exemption from the present service. But their 
plea, upon an appeal to the tribunes, and a re- 
ference from them to the senate, was over-ruled. 

Antiochus passed the winter at Chalcis in a 
manner too common with princes of a mean ca- 
pacity, who put every matter of personal caprice 
on the same footing with the aflairs of state. 
Being enamoured of a Grecian beauty, he em- 
ployed the attention of his court on feasts and 
processions, devised for her entertainment, and to 
enhance his pleasures. His reputation declined, 
and his forces made no progress either in num- 
bers or discipline. 

In the spring he lost some time in forming con- 
federacies with petty states, which are ever under 
the necessity of declaring themselves for the pre- 
vailing power, and who change their side with 
the reverses of fortune. Having traversed the 
country from Beeotia to Arcania, negotiating trea- 
ties with such allies as these, he had passed iuto 
Thessaly, and had besieged Larissa, when the 
Roman pretor began to advance from Epirus. 

After the contending parties had thus taken 
the field, and the armies of Rome and of Syria 
were about to decide the superiority on the fron- 
tiers of Macedonia, Philip seemed to remain in 
suspense, having yet made no open declaration to 
which side he inclined. He had felt the arms of 
the Romans, and had reason to dread those of 
Antiochus, 

The princes who divided the Macedonian em- 
pire were not only rivals in power, they were in 
some degree mutual pretenders to the thrones 
which they severally occupied; Philip, probably 
considering Antiochus, in this capacity, as the . 
principal object of his jealousy, took luis resolu- 
tion to declare for the amet and having ac- 
cordingly joined the pretor on the confines of 
Thessaly, their vanguard advanced to observe the 
position and motions of the euemy. 

Antiochus, upon the junction of these forces, 
thought proper to raise the siege of Larissa.— 
From this time forward he seemed to have drop- 
Be all his sanguine expectations of conquest in 

urope, was contented to act ou the defensive, 
and when the Roman consul arrived in Epirus, 
and directed his march towards Thessaly, he 
took post at the Straits of Thermopylæ, intend- 
ing to shut up this passage into Greece; but be- 
ing dislodged from thence, his army was routed, 
the greater part of it perished in the flight, and he 


68 


nimself, with no more than five hundred men, 
escaped to Chalcis, his former retreat in Euboea, 
from whence he soon after set sail for Asia. 

Upon the flight of Antiochus, the Etolians 
alone remained in the predicament of open ene- 
mies to the Romans. ‘They were yet extremely 
irresolute and distracted in their councils. After 
ne brought the king of Syria into Europe, 
they had not supported him with a sufficient 
force; and now, upon his departure, being sensi- 
ble. of their danger from the Romans, a powerful 
enemy whom they had greatly provoked, they 
endeavoured to persuade the king to return; re- 
presenting to him how much he was concerned to 
furnish that arrogant people with a sufficient oc- 
cupation in Greece, to prevent their passing into 
Asia. They at the same time made offers of 
pacification and of submission to the Romans, 
but were received in a manner which gave them 
no hopes of being able to palliate the offence 
they had given. he consul advanced into their 
country, laid siege to Naupactus, and having re- 
duced that place and the whole nation to great 
distress, agreed to a cessation of arms, only while 
they sent deputies to Rome to implore forgiveness 
and to make their peace with the senate. Such 
was the posture of affairs when Lucius Cornelius 
Scipio, being elected one of the consuls for the 
ensuing year, was destined to succeed Acilius 
Glabrio in Etolia; and, with his brother Publius, 
the victor in the battle of Zama, who was to act 
as second in command, had orders to prosecute 
the war against the kingdom of Syria. 

These leaders being arrived in Greece, and in- 
tent on the removal of the war into Asia, wil- 
lingly accepted of the submission of all the towns 
that had incurred any suspicion during the stay 
of Antiochus in Europe; and leaving the dif- 
ference which remained to be settled with the 
Etolians in a state of negotiation, they proceeded 
without delay, by the route of Macedonia and 
Thrace, towards the Hellespont. 

In passing through these countries, they were 
conducted and furnished with all the necessary 
supplies of provisions and carriages by Philip. 

The fleets of Asia and Europe, during this 
march of the Roman army, contended for the 
command of the seas. That of Europe, which 
was joined by the navy of Rhodes, and even by 
that of the Carthaginians, who, to vindicate 
themselves from any blame in the present war, 
had taken part with their rival, after various en- 
counters, obtained the victory in a decisive battle, 
which made them entire masters of the sea, and 
opened all the ports of Asia to the shipping of the 
Romans. 

The king of Syria had fortified Sestos and 
Abydos on the Hellespont, and Lysimachia on 
the isthmus of Chersonesus, with an apparent 
resolution to dispute the march and passage of the 
Scipios at all these different stations, but on the 
total defeat of his navy, he either considered 
those places as lost, or, fearing to have his forces 
separately cut off in attempting to defend them, 
he withdrew his garrisons trom Lysimachia, 
Sestos, and Abydos; and while he thus opened 
the way for his enemies to reach him, gave other 
signs of despondency, or of a disposition to sink 
under adversity, making overtures of peace, and 
offering to yield every point which he had for- 
merly disputed in the war. In reply to these 
offers he was told, That he must do a great deal 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


| more; that he must submit to such terms as the 
Romans were entitled to expect from victory.— 
But as he continued to assemble his forces, he 
chose rather to stake his fortune on the decision 
of a battle; and having in vain endeavoured to 
make himself master of Pergamus, the capital of 
Eumenes, he fell back on Thyatira, and from 
thence proceeded to take post on the mountains 
of Sypylus, where he meant to contend for the 
empire of Asia. 

In the mean time the Scipios advanced to the 
Hellespont, and without any resistance passed 
the Strait. ‘This was the first time that any 
Roman army set foot on Asia; and being met by 
the deputies of the king with the overtures of 

eace that have been mentioned, sent accounts to 
ome of their arrival, and made a halt for some 
days. 

This descent was considered by the Romans 
as an epoch of great renown; and the messenger 
who brought the accounts of it was received with 
processions and solemn rites. Supplications and 
prayers were offered up to the gods, that this 

first landing of a Roman army in 
U. C. 562. Asia might be prosperous for the 
commonwealth. 

Publius Scipio, the famous antagonist of Han- 
nibal, soon after his arrival in Asia, was taken 
ill; or, what may be supposed for his honour, be- 
ing desirous not to rob his brother of any share 
in the glory which he perceived was to be easily 
won against the present enemy, he affected indis- 
position, and remained at a distance from the 
camp. Lucius, thus left alone to command the 
Roman army, advanced upon the king, attacked 
him in the post he had chosen, and in a decisive 
victory, dispersed the splendid forces of Asia, 
with all their apparatus of armed chariots, horses, 
and elephants, Need with gold. 

The king himself fled with a few attendants, 
passed through Sardis in the night, and con- 
tinued his flight to Apamea in Fisidia, where he 
expected to be out of the reach of his pursuers. 

Thyatira, Sardis, and Magnesia soon after 
opened their gates to the Romans; and the king 
himself by a messenger from Apamea, again 
made haste to own himself vanquished, and to sue 
for peace. ; 

The Romans, to display a moderation which 
they frequently affected in the midst of their vic- 
tories, renewed the same conditions which they 
had prescribed on their arrival in Asia; anda 
cessation of arms being granted, officers from 
Antiochus, and from all the other parties con- 
cerned in the approaching treaty, repaired to 
Rome, in order to receive the final decision of the 
senate and people, on the future settlement of 
their affairs. ; 

Eumenes, the king of Pergamus, on this occa- 
sion, attended in person, and, together with the 
republic of Rhodes, who had distinguished them- 
selves by their zeal and faithful services in the 
late war, became the principal gainer in the 
treaty. Da 

It was agreed by the senate, that the prelimi- 
nary articles already prescribed by the consul 
should be confirmed: i È 

That, according to these articles, Antiochus 
should resign all his pretensions in Europe, and 
contract the boundaries of his kingdom in Asia 
within the mountains of Taurus : 

That he should pay to the Romans, at succes- 


Cuar. VI.) 


sive terms, five thousand talents to reimburse the 
expense of tle war: 

To Eumenes four hundred talents on the score 
of a debt that had been due to his father. 

And, for the performance of these conditions, 
should give twenty hostages, such as the Romans 
should name. 

In the farther execution of this treaty, the Ro- 
mans again appeared to be solicitous only for the 
interest of their allies, and required no more than 
indemnification for themselves. They appointed 
ten commissioners to repair into Asia, and there 
to determine the several questions that might arise 
relating to the settlement of that country. In the 
mean time they published to all parties the fol- 
lowing instructions, as the basis on which the 
commissioners were to proceed : 

That the preliminaries of the peace with An- 
tiochus already offered: should be ratified : 

That all the provinces which he was to evacu- 
ate, except Caria and Lycia, were to be assigned 
to Eumenes : 

That these provinces, bounded by the Meander 
on. the east, soul be given to the republic of 
Rhodes : 

That all the Greek cities which had been 
tributary to Eumenes should continue so, and all 
which had been tributary to Antiochus should be 
set free.? 

A settlement was accordingly soon after made 
in Asia in these terms; and the Ronians, while 
they were hastening to universal dominion, ap- 
peared to have no object beyond the prosperity of 
their allies: they were merciful to the vanquished, 
and formidable only to those who presumed to 
resist their arms. In the midst of their conquests, 
they reserved nothing to themselves besides the 
power of giving away entire kingdoms and pro- 
vinces; or, in other words, they reserved nothing 
but the power of seizing the whole at a proper 
time, and, for the present, the supreme ascendant 
over all the conquered provinces that were given 
away, and over those who received them. 

The Etolians were now the only parties in 
Greece who pretended to hold their liberties, or 
their possessions, by any other tenure than that 
of a grant from the Romans. 

During the dependance of the war in Asia, the 
Etolians were making continual efforts to recover 
their own losses, and to preserve the city of Am- 
bracia, then besieged by the Romans; but, upon 
the defeat of Antiochus, the Ambraciots surren- 
dered at discretion, and the Etolians sued for 
peace. 

Ambracia had been the capital of Pyrrhus, and 
now furnished the captor with a plentiful spoil of 
statues, pictures, and other ornaments to adorn 
his triumph. The Etolians, at the intercession of 
the Athenians, were allowed to hope for peace on 
the following terms.? 

That they should not allow to pass through 
their country the troops of any nation at war with 
the Romans: 

That they should consider the allies of Rome 
as their allies, and the enemies of Rome as their 
enemies : 

That they should make instant payment of two 
hundred talents in silver, the standard of Athens; 
and of three hundred more at separate instal- 
ments within six years: 


7 


1 Polyb. Excerpte Legationes, c. 35. 2 Ibid. c. 28. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


69 


That if they chose to make these payments in 
gold rather than silver, the proportion should be 
one of gold to ten of silver; and that they should 
give hostages for the performance of these several 
articles.3 

While the Etolians were on these terms con- 
cluding a peace, or rather obtaining a pardon, the 
Consul Manlius, who had succeeded the Scipios 
in Asia, willing, if possible, to bring back into 
Italy, together with the victorious legions, some 
pretence of a triumph for himself, led his army 
against the Galatians. These were the descend- 
ants of a barbarous horde, which had, some ages 
before, migrated from the north of Europe, visited 
Italy and Greece in their way, and stopped on the 
Halys in the Lesser Asia, where they made a 
settlement, round which they levied contributions 
quite to the shores of the Euxine, the Mediter- 
ranean, and Egean Seas. Their forces had lately 
made a part in the army of Antiochus, and they 
had not yet acceded to the peace which that prince 
had accepted. By these means they furnished the 
Roman Consul with a pretence for invading their 
country ; and being unable to resist him, submit- 
ted at discretion. In thus extinguishing the re- 
mains of every hostile combination, the Romans 
took care to satisfy the world that it never was 
safe to take part against them in any confederacy, 
and that, while they never abandoned any ally of 
their own, they were in condition to compel the 
powers, with whom they were at war, frequently 
to abandon theirs, 

Thus ended the first expedition of the Romans 
into Asia: in the result of which, without seem- 
ing to enlarge their own dominions, they had 
greatly reduced the powers both of the Syrian 
and Macedonian monarchies; and by restoring, 
whether from inclination or policy, every state to 
its independence, they had balanced a multitude 
of parties against each other, in such a manner, 
as that no formidable combination was likely to be 
formed against themselves ; or if any one, or a few 
parties, shoul presume to withstand their power, 
many others were ready to join in the cry of in- 
gratitude, and to treat any opposition that was 
made to them as an unworthy return to those 
who had so generously espoused the cause of 
mankind. 

The pacification of Asia and Greece left the 
republic at leisure to manage its ordinary quarrels 
with nations unsubdued on the opposite frontier. 
In the west, hostilities had subsisted without in- 
terruption, during the whole time that the state 
was intent on its wars in the East; and triumphal 
processions were exhibited by turns from those 
opposite quarters. ; 

In Spain the comraanders were, for the most 
part, annually relieved, and the army ee Hf 
recruited from Italy. The variety of events whic 
are mentioned, and the continuance’ of the war 
itself, are sufficient to evince that no decisive vic- 
tories were obtained, or conquests finally made. 
On the coast of Spain there were many Greek or 
African settlements established for commerce. Of 
these the Romans, either as having supplanted 
the Carthaginians, formerly their masters, or as 
having subdued the natives, were still in posses- 
sion. But the interior parts of the country were 
occupied by many hordes, who appear to have 
been collected in townships and fortified stations, 


3 Polyb. Excerpte Legationes, c. 28, 


70 


from which they assembled to oppose the Roman 
armies in the field, or in which they defended 
themselves with obstinate valour. Though often 
defcated, they still renewed the contest. ‘Tiberius 
Sempronius Gracchus, in the year of Rome five 
hundred and seventy-four, about ten years after 
the peace with Antiochus, is said to have received 
the submission of one hundred and three towns 
of that country.! The troubles of Spain were, 
nevertheless, renewed under his successors, and 
continued to occupy the Roman arms with a 
repetition of similar operations, and a like variety 
of events. 

The war in Liguria was nearly of the same 
description with that in Spain; continued still to 
occupy a certain part of the Roman force; and, 
both before and after the late expedition to Greece 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox 1. 


and Asia, was for-some ycars the principal em- 
ployment of both the consuls. Here, however, the 
Romans made a more sensible progress towards 
an entire conquest than they made in Spain. 
They facilitated their access to the country by 
highways across the mountains; they reduced the 
numbers of the enemy by the sword and by the 
ordinary distresses of war; and, after the experi- 
ence of many pretended submissions and repeated 
revolts of that people, who seemed to derive the 
ferocity of their spirit, as well as the security of 
their possession, from the rugged and inaccessible 
nature of their country, it was determined te 
transplant the natives to some of the more acces- 
sible parts of Italy, where the lands, being waste 
from the effect of former wars, were still unoc- 


cupied and at the disposal of the republic,? 


CHAPTER VII. 


State of Italy—Character of the Roman Policy—Death of Scipio and of Hannibal—Indulgence 
of the Romans to the King of Macedonia—Complainis against Philip— Succession of Perseus, 
and Origin of the War—Action on the Peneus—Overtures of Peace—Progress of the War— 
Defeat of Perseus at Pidna, by Paulus Emilius—His Flight and Captivity—Settlement of 
Macedonia and Ilyricum— Manners of the Romans. 


BY the methods above related the Romans 
some to extend their dominion over all the 

istricts around them, and either brought to their 
own standard, or disarmed, the several nations 
who had hitherto resisted their power. While they 
were about to accomplish this end, the Trans- 
alpine Gauls, still having their views directed to 
the southward of the mountains, made some at- 
tempts at migration into Italy, in one of which 
they settled a party of their people at Aquileia. 
The Romans were alarmed, and ordered these 
strangers to be dislodged and reconducted across 
the Alps. 

This circumstance suggested the design of 
securing the frontier on that side by a colony; 
and for this purpose a body of Latins was accord- 
ingly sent to Aquileia, a settlement which nearly 
completed the Roman establishments within the 
Alps. The country was now, in a great measure, 
occupied by colonies of Roman and Latin ex- 
traction, who, depending on Rome for protection, 
served, wherever they were settled, to carry the 
deepest impressions of her authority, and to keep 
the natives in a state of subjection to her govern- 
ment, | 

The domestic policy of the state, during this 
period, appears to have been orderly and wise 
beyond that of any other time. The distinction 
between patrician and plebeian was become alto- 
gether nominal, The descendants of those who 
had held the higher offices of state, were, in con- 
sequence of the preferments of their ancestors, 
considered as noble. Instead of a title of nobility, 
the son named his father and grandfather, who 
had been vested with public honours. And as the 
plebeians now found no difficulty in obtaining the 
offices of state, they were continually opening the 
way of their posterity to the rank of nobles. 
“Thus I,” said Decius Mus,’ while he pleaded to 


1 Liv. lib. xl. c. 50. et passim. 
3 Vid. B. i. c. 3. 


2 Liv. lib. xl. c. 38. ' 


have the priesthood, joined to the other honours 
which the different orders of the people enjoyed 
in common, “can cite my father In the rank of 
consul; and my son can cite both his grandfather 
and me.’4 The plebeians were entitled by law to 
claim one of the consul’s seats, and frequently 
occupied both. 

The authority of the senate, the dignity of the 
equestrian order, and the manners of the people, 
in general, were guarded, and, in a great measure, 
preserved, by the integrity and strict exercise of 
the censorial power. ‘The wisest and the most 
respected of the citizens, from every condition, 
were raised into office; and the assemblies whe- 
ther of the senate, or the people, without envy, 
and without jealousy, suffered themselves to be 
governed by the counsels of a few able and virtu- 
ous men. It is impossible otherwise to account 
for that splendour with which the affairs of this 
republic, from the time of the first Punic war to 
that of the last wars with Macedonia and Car- 
thage, though committed to hands that were con- 
tinually changing, were, nevertheless, uniformly 
and ably conducted. ; ’ 

The spirit of the people was in a high degree 
democratical; and though they suffered them- 
selves to be governed by the silent influence of 
personal authority in a few of their citizens, yet 
could not endure any species of uncommon pre- 
eminence; even that which arose from the lustre 
and well-founded pretensions of distinguished 
merit. ; . 

The great Scipio, with his brother Lucius, ox 
their return from Asia, encountcred a prosccu- 
tion, unworthily supported by a popular clamour; 
which brought them to trial on a formal charge 
of secreting part of the treasure received from 
Antiochus. It is likely, from the manner in which 
Publius Scipio disdained to answer this charge, 
that he carried his personal spirit too high for 


er 


4 Liv. lib. x. c. 8. 


Cuar. VIL] 


democratical government, whieh can allow no 
private merit to come in competition with the 
rights of the people to sovereignty, and of indi- 
viduals to equal attention in the state. At his 
first citation on the libel which was brought 
against him, seeming not to hear the person who 
accused him, he reminded the people, that this 
was the anniversary of that day on whieh they 
had gained the victory at Zama; and desired that 
they would follow him to the temples, in whieh 
he was to return thanks to the gods for that im- 
portant event. He was followed accordingly by 
the whole multitude, and the accuser for that time 
was deserted. At his second citation, he called 
for the paper of accounts, on which he had en- 
tered all the sums he had received in Asia; and, 
while the people expected that he was to satisfy 
them by a state of particulars, he tore the scroll in 
their presence; and, taking the privilege of a 
Roman eitizen, retired, without deigning to give 
any answer, and went as an exile into a country 
village of Italy, where he soon after died. 

The.same year likewise terminated the life of 
his antagonist Hannibal. This great man, him- 
self a sufficient object of jeaiousy to nations, was, 
by an article in the late treaty of peace with An- 
tiochus, to have been delivered up to the Romans ; 
and had, in order to avoid that danger, retired 
into Crête. From thence he took refuge with 
Prusias, king of Bithynia, where the enmity of 
Rome still pursued him, and where an embassy 
was sent to demand that he should be delivered 
up. . As soon as he knew that this demand was 
actually made, and that the avenues to his dwell- 
ing were seeured in order to seize him, he took 
poison, and died. 

The Romans had been so well satisfied with 
the part whieh was taken by Philip in the late 
war with Antioehus, that they released his son 
Demetrius, then at Rome, a hostage for pay- 
ment of the father’s tribute, of which they like- 
wise remitted a part. ‘They even connived at his 
reeovering some of his former possessions,and made 
no inquiry into the numbers of his troops, in which 
he greatly execeded the establishment prescribed 
by the last treaty. They continued in this dispo- 
sition during four years after the late peaee with 
the king of Syria; and, in this interval, permitted 
the kingdom of Maeedonia, by the improvement 
of its revenue, and the inerease of its people, in a 
great measure to recover its former strength. 

These eireumstanecs of prosperity, however, 
did not fail to exeite apprehension in the minds 
of all those who, holding independent possessions 
in that neighbourhood, were exposed to be the 
first victims of this reviving power; and repre- 
sentations, to awaken the attention of the Ro- 
mans on this subjeet, were aecordingly made at 
Rome, from Eumenes, the king of Pergamus, and 
from all the petty princes and small communities 
on the frontier of Maecdonia. 

On receiving these admonitions, the senate, in 
their usual form, sent to the country from whence 
they were alarmed, a select number of their mem- 
bers to make inquiry into the real state of affairs. 
Before a tribunal thus eonstituted, the king of 
Maeedonia was eited to appear as a private party, 
first at Tempe, to answer the eharge of the Thes- 
salians, and afterwards at Thessalonica, to an- 
swer that of Eumenes. After a discussion, suf- 
ficiently humbling to a sovereign, he received 
sentence, by whieh he was required to evacuate 
all the places he had occupied beyond the ancient ! 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


7I 


limits of his kingdom. This sentenee he reeeived 
with indignation and resentment, which were too 
unguardedly expressed, and whieh rendered him 
thenceforward an objeet of continual attention 
and of jealousy to the Romans. 

A second eommission was granted to see the 
sentence of the first put in exeeution; and as 
soon as it became publiely known, that the Ro- 
mans were willing to reccive eomplaints against 
Philip, and were disposed to protect every person 
who ineurred his displeasure, ambassadors from 
the princes of Asia, and persons of every condi- 
tion, from all the eities of Greeee, and from all the 
districts in the neighbourhood of Macedonia, re- 
sorted to Rome with eomplaints against the king, 
some of a private, and others of a public nature. 
The city was crowded with strangers, and the 
senate was occupied, from morning to night, in 
hearing the representations that were made by 
their allies on the subjeet of the usurpations and 
oppressions they had suffered. 

hilip, to divert the storm, had sent his younger 
son, Demetrius, to answer the several eharges 
which were expeeted to be ba against him; 
and, in the end, obtained a resolution of the se- 
nate to accommodate matters on an amicable foot- 
ing. This resolution was grounded on pretence 
of the favour whieh the Romans bore to Deme- 
trius, who had long resided as a hostage in their 
eity. ‘The king will please to know,” they said, 
“that he has done one thing extremely agreeable 
to the Romans, in trusting his cause to an advoeate 
so well established in their esteem and regard.”5 

This language of the Roman senate respecting 
Demetrius, together with dangerous suggestions 
from some of his own confidants, probably inspired 
the young man with thoughts, or rendered him 
suspected of designs, injurious to the rights of 
Perseus, his elder brother. This prince took the 
alarm, and never ceased to excite the suspicions 
already formed in the breast of the father, until 
he prevailed in seeuring his own succession by 
the death of his younger brother.6 

Philip, having ordered the execution of one son 
to gratify the jealousy of the other, lived about 
three years after this aetion, suflering part of the 
punishment that was due to him on that aeeount, 
in the most gloomy apprehensions of danger from 
his surviving son, and died in great solicitude for 
the fate of his kingdom. 

Perseus, nevertheless, in ascending the throne 
of Macedonia, gave hopes of a better and happier 
reign than that of his predeeessor. He was im- 
mediately aeknowledged .by the Romans; and, 
during a few years after his aecession, appeared 
to have no eause of disquietude from this people. 
Although he had adopted the measures of his 
father, and endeavoured by attention to his reve- 
nue, his army, and magazines; and by forming 
alliances with some of the warlike Thracian 
hordes in his neighbourhood, to put his Kingdom 
in a posture of defenee, and in condition to assert 
its independenee ; yet he appears to have exeited 
less jealousy in the minds of his neighbours. The 
progress which he made seems to “have eseaped 
the attention of the Romans; until, at last 
awakened by the report of a seeret correspondence 
which he earried on with the republic of Carthage, 
they thought proper to send a deputation into 
Macedonia, in order to observe his motions. 


5 Polyb. Excerpt. Legat. c. 46. Liv. lib. xxxix. 46, 17 
6 Liv. lib. xl. c. 24. 


72 


By the deputies employed in this service, the 
Romans obtained intelligence, that Perseus had 
made advances to the Achzans as well as to the 
Carthaginians, and to other states; and was likely 
to form a powerful party among the Greeks. 

From this time forward the leaders of the Ro- 
man councils seemed to have taken a resolution 
to remove this subject of jealousy, and to suppress 
the Macedonian monarchy. They renewed their 
attention to the state of parties in Greece, and 
endeavoured to reconcile all the differences that 
might incline any of those republics to oppose 
them in the execution of their design. ‘They 
encouraged the king of Pergamus, who after- 
wards appears to have repented of the part which 
he took in that matter, to state his complaints. 
They brought him to Rome in person, and cited 
him before the senate to give a complete detail of 
the circumstances that were alarming in the policy 
of Perseus. Eumenes, having been thus brought 
forward as a formal accuser, and being to return 
through Greece, in order to offer his devotions at 
the temple of Delphi, was assaulted and wounded 
by a party who meant to assassinate him; and 
this design, with some other acts of violence, be- 
ing imputed to Perseus, served as a pretence for 
the war which followed. 

The Roman senate had already granted two 
separate cominissions, the one of a deputation to 
visit Macedonia, and to observe the motions of 
Perseus; the other of an embassy into Egypt, to 
confirm their alliance with Ptolemy. On hearing 
of the attempt that had been made to assassinate 
Eumenes, they directed one of the pretors, 
Caius Sicinius, with a proper force, to pass into 
Epirus; and, in order to secure their access into 
that country, to take possession of Apollonia, and 
other towns on the coast. But a misunderstanding 
then subsisting between the consuls,and other prin- 
cipal men of the senate, caused some obstruction 
in the farther immediate prosecution of the war. 

Perseus however, alarmed by the arrival of a 
Roman force in his neighbourhood, sent an em- 
bassy to Rome with expostulations on the subject, 
and with offers, by every reasonable concession 
that the senate or the people could require, to 
avert the storm which threatened him. But the 
Romans, affecting resentment of the injuries they 
pretended to have received, ordered his ambassa- 
dor, without delay, to depart from Italy; and 
gave intimation, that, if for the future he should 
have any thing to offer, he might have recourse 
to the commander of the Roman army in Epirus. 

The interview, which Perseus soon after had 
with the Roman commissioners, terminated with 
the strongest signs of hostility on both sides.! 
The king, however, having taken minutes of 
what passed at their conference, sent copies to all 
the neighbouring states, in order to exculpate 
himself from any guilt in the approaching war; 
and as the event afterwards showed how much 
it was the interest of every state to support him, 
he being the only power that could give them 
any protection against the Romans; so numbers, 
already moved by this apprehension, were in- 
clined to favour his cause. The Rhodians, then 
a formidable naval power, though restrained by 
fear from an open breach with the Romans, yet 
gave sufficient evidence of this disposition, Eu- 
menes, likewise, though a principal instrument in 
fomenting the present quarrel, soon became averse 


1 Civ hb lanes zo. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox 1. 


to its consequences: The Beeotians and Epirots, 
as well as the Illyrians, openly declared for the 
king of Macedonia.? 

These circumstances were stated at Rome as 
additional grounds of complaint against the king ; 
and his endeavours to vindicate the part he had 
acted, were considered as attempts to form a hos- 
tile confederacy against the republic. 

Additional fleets and armies were accordingly 
assembled, and directed towards Epirus; and a 
declaration of war was issued in the form of an 
act of the Roman people. 

- The Romans had now, during about twenty- 
five years, borne a principal part among the na- 
tions that surrounded the Mediterranean sea. 
The ascendant they had gained in all their wars 
or treaties, had made them common objects of 
fear or respect to all the contiguous powers of 
Europe, Asia, and Africa. The Macedonians, 
however, as the latest conquerors of the world, 
still retained a very high reputation for military 
skill and valour. The events of the late war 
rather surprised mankind, than convinced them 
of any decided superiority on the part of the Re- 
man arms. The novelty of a new enemy, the 
mistakes or misconduct of the late king, might 
have accounted for his ill success. The kingdom 
had now been above twenty years exempted from 
any signal calamity, had re-established its armies, 
and filled its magazines and its coffers. The 
nuhtary establishment amounted to forty thousand 
men ; the greater part formed and disciplined upon 
the plan of the phalanx, and supported with nu- 
merous troops of irregulars from the warlike can- 
tons of Thrace. The king himself, in the vigour 
of manhood, sensible that the storm could not be 
diverted, affected rather to desire than to decline 
the contest ; and, under all these circumstances, 
nations seemingly least interested in the conse- 
quences, were intent on the scene that was about 
to be opened before them.. 

Eumenes, supposed to be incited by inveterate 
animosity to Perseus, and by recent provocations, 
prepared to fulfil his professions in behalf of the 
Romans. 

Ariarathes, the king of Cappadocia, equally 
inclined by policy to wish for a counterpoise to 
the Macedonian power, but having recently 
formed an alliance by marriage with the family 
of Perseus, determined to be neutral in the war. 

Ptolemy Philomater, who then filled the throne 
of Egypt, was a minor. Antiochus Epiphanes, 
who had lately succeeded his brother Seleucus, in 
the kingdom of Syria, having heen some time a 
hostage at Rome, affected in his own court the 
manners of a Roman demagogue; but was chiefly 
intent on his pretensions to Ceelesyria, which he 
hoped to make good under favour of the approach- 
ing conjuncture formed by the minority of Ptole- 
my, and by the avocation of the Roman forces in 
Greece. 

The Carthaginians, and the king of Numidia, 
while they severally preferred their complaints 
against each other before the Roman senate, vied 
likewise in their professions of zeal for the Ro- 
man republic, and in their offers of supply of 
men, horses, provisions, or ships. 

Gentius, the king of Illyricum, had incurred 
the jealousy of the Romans; but remained unde- 
termined what part he should take. 

Cotys, a. Thracian king, declared openly for 


2 Lolyb. Excepte Logationes, c. 64--67. 


Cnar. VIL] 


Perseus. The people of Greece, in their several 
republics, were divided among themselves. The 
popular parties in general, being desirous to ex- 
change the government of their own aristocracies 
for that of a monarchy, favoured the king of Ma- 
cedonia. ‘The leading men were either inclined 
to the Romans, or wished to balance the rival 
powers, so as to have, in the protection of the one 
some security against the usurpations of the other. 

The Romans had committed an error by send- 
ing a small force into Epirus, which the king of 
Macedonia might have cut off before it could be 
properly supported from Italy; but their commis- 
sioners, then in that country, had the address to 
amuse the king with a negotiation, and to divert 
him, during the first year of the war, from any 
attempt on Apollonia, or on any other station 
then in possession of the Roman troops. 

In the following summer, about seven years 
after the accession of Perseus to the throne of 
Macedonia, the war in that kingdom being com- 
mitted to the Consul Licinius, this general follow- 
lowed the army which had been transported to 
the coast of Epirus; and while the Roman fleet, 
with their allies, assembled in the straits of Eu- 
bæa, the armies on both sides began their opera- 
tions. The Macedonians encamped at Sycurium 
on the declivity of mount Ossa. The Roman con- 
sul penetrated into Thessaly; and, having passed 
the river Peneus, took post at Scea, twelve miles 
from the camp of the enemy. Here he was joined 
by Attalus, brother to the king of Pergamus, with 
four thousand men, and by smaller bodies collected 
from different states of Greece. 

Perseus endeavoured to lay waste the kingdom 
of Phere, from which the Romans drew the 
greatest part of their subsistence; and an action 
ensued, in which the whole cavalry and light 
infantry of both armies being engaged, the Ro- 
mans were defeated; and the consul, no longer 
able to support his foraging parties on that side 
of the Peneus against a superior enemy, decamp- 
ed in the night, and repassed the river. 

Although this victory had a tendency to raise 
the hopes of the king, it was by him wisely con- 
sidered as a fit opportunity to renew the overtures 
of peace; and, in order to bring on a negotiation, 
it was resolved, that the condition whieh, under 
the misfortune of repeated defeats, had been 
offered by his father, should be made the prelimi- 
naries of the present treaty. 

It appeared to the king, and to those with whom 
he consulted, that, in the sequel of a vietory, this 
would appear an act of moderation, not of fear; 
that all neutral powers, who dreaded the conse- 
quences of a decided superiority on either side, 
would favour the person who should propose to 
have peace re-established on moderate terms ; and 
that the Romans, being induced to terminate the 
war under the effects of a defeat, would from 
thenceforward respect the Macedonian mon- 
archy, and be cautious how they disturbed its 
tranquillity. 

But if in this manner the opportunity was per- 
ceived, and wisely laid hold of by the eouncils of 
Perseus, it by no means escaped the Roman 
council of war, which was assembled to receive 
the proposals of the king. 

The Romaus, whether from national spirit or 
policy at ail tines declined entering on negotia- 
tions or treaties in consequence of defeats. They 


3 Liv. lib. xlii. c. 29—30. 
IS 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


73 


spurned the advances of a victorious enemy, while 
they received those of the vanquished with con- 
descension and mildness. ‘They accordingly, in 
the present case, treated the concessions of Per- 
seus with disdain, haughtily answering, that he 
must submit at discretion.4 

This reply was received at the court of Per- 
seus with extreme surprise. But it produced still 
farther concessions ; and instead of resentment 
from the king, a repetition of his message with 
an offer to augment the tribute which had been 
paid by his father.s 

The remainder of the summer having passed 
in the operations of foraging parties, without any 
considerable action, the Romans retired for the 
winter into Beotia. On this coast the fleet, hav- 
ing met with no enemy at sea, had made repeated 
descents to distress the inhabitants who had de- 
clared for the king. The consul took possession 
of his quarters, without any resistance, in the 
interior parts of the eountry; and in this, with 
the progress that was made by the army em- 
ployed on the side of Illyricum in detaching that 
nation from Perseus, consisted the service of the 
first eampaign. 

Licinius, at the expiration of the usual term, 
was relieved by his successor in office, A. Hos- 
tilius Marcius. This commander, being defeated 
and baffled in some attempts he made to pene- 
trate into the kingdom of Macedonia, appears to 
have made a campaign still less fortunate than 
that of his predecessor; and the senate, at the 
end of the summer, having ordered him home to 
preside at the annual elections, sent a deputation 
to visit the army, and to inquire into the cause 
of their miscarriages, and the slowness of their 
progress. 

The Romans, although they had experienced 
disappointments in the beginning of other wars, 
particularly in their first encounters with Pyr- 
rhus and with Hannibal; and had reason to ex- 
pect a similai effect in the opening of the present 
war, appear to have been greatly mortified and 
surprised at this unpromising aspect of their 
enterprise. They were engaged with an enemy 
renowned for diseipline, who had made war a 
trade, and the use of arms a profession; while 
they themselves, it appears, for a considerable 
period after the present war, even during the 
most rapid progress of their arins, had no military 
establishment besides that of their civil and poli- 
tical constitution, no soldiers besides their citi- 
zens, and no officers but the ordinary magistrates 
of the commonwealth. 

If this establishment had its advantages,® it 
may have appeared, on particular occasions, like- 
wise to have had its defects. The citizen may 
have been too much a master in his eivil capacity 
to subject himself fully to the bondage of a sol- 
dier; and too absolute in his capacity of military 
officer to bear with the control of political regula- 
tions. As the obligation to serve in the legions 
was general and without exeeption, many a citi- 
zen, at least in the ease of any distant or unpro- 
mising service, would endeavour to shun his duty. 
And the officcr would not always dare to enforce 
disagreeable duty on those by whom he himself 
was elected, or on whom he in part depended for 
farther advancement. 

At the beginning of this war, the legious were 


4 In adversis vultum secunde fortune gerere, mode- 
rari animos in secundis. Liv. lib. Mii. e. 62. 
od Polvb. Eacerpt. Legat. c. 69. 6 Vid. Boi. c. 3. 


74 


„augmented from five thousand two hundred foot 
and two hundred horse, to six thousand foot and 
three hundred horse ;! and, probably, to raise 
the authority of the consul more effectually into 
that of a commander-in-chief, he was commis- 
sioned to name the tribunes, as well as the cen- 
turions of the army, that were to serve under 
his orders: but, upon a complaint that this ex- 
tension of the consul’s powers did not, by en- 
forcing the discipline of the army, serve the 
purpose for which it was made, the people re- 
sumed their right of election in the appointment 
even of inferior officers. The deputies, now sent 
into Macedonia, by the senate, reported, that the 
legions employed in that country were extremely 
incomplete, numbers both of the lower officers 
and private men being, by the dangerous indul- 
gence of their leaders, suffered to absent them- 
selves from their colours.2 
apprehend to have been frequent in a service 
that was to be performed by citizens who had 
the choice of their own commanders. And from 
speculative ideas on the subject, if we were not 
bound to be governed by experience as the pre- 
ferable tutor, we should be apt to reject, as an im- 
proper mode of forming armies, that establishment 
by which the Romans conquered the world. 

It is probable, that not only the defect of sub- 
ordination in the beginning of every war, but 
that of skill, likewise, in the use of their peculiar 
weapons, made, in the Roman armies, a great 
disparity between raw and veteran troops. 

The use of the buckler and sword required great 
skill, agility, and muscular strength; all of them 
the effect of exercise and of continued practice. 

The experience of the soldier who survived 
many actions tended to confirm his courage, be- 
eause his escape was in a great measure the 
effect of his skill, or of his strength; and upon a 
return of similar dangers, gave him confidence 
in himself. 

In battles the strong and the skilful escaped, the 
weak and the awkward were likely to perish ; and 
every action not only exercised the arms of those 
that survived, but made a selection of the vigorous 
and skilful to be reserved for future occasions. 

Hence, probably, in the Roman armies, much 
more than in those of modern Europe, the prac- 
tised soldier had a great superiority over the 
novice; and citizens, when brought into the field 
by rotation, had much to Jearn in the course of 
every campaign. 

In the present contest, the checks of the first 
and the second year of the war, though extremely 
mortifying to the Romans, were received without 
any signs of irresolution, or change of their pur- 
pose. In the third year after hostilities com- 
menced, the command of the army in Macedonia 
devolved on Q. Marcius Philippus, who, being 
chosen oue of the consuls, drew his province as 
usual by lot. ‘This officer had been employed in 


one of the late deputations that were sent into | 


Greece; had shown his ability in the course of 
negotiations which preceded the war; and now, 
by his conduct asa general, broke through the 
line by which the king had endeavoured to secure 
the passes of the mountains, and to cover the 
frontier of his kingdom. But, when he had 
penetrated into Macedonia, he found himself at 
the end of the season, and for want of proper sup- 
plies of provisions on that. side of the mountains, 


1 Liv. lib. xliii. c. 12. 2 Fbid. c. 11. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


This abuse we may | 


[Boox 1. 


unable to pursue the advantage he had gained 
Here, therefore, he staid only to deliver his army 
to Emilius Paulus, who had been named to suc 
ceed him. This was the son uf that Paulus, 
who, being one of the consuls who commanded 
the Roman army at Canna, threw away his life 
rather than survive that defeat. The. son was 
now turned of sixty ;3 and by the length of his 
service, and the variety of his experience in 
Liguria and Spain, was well acquainted with 
the chances of war. 

Emilius Paulus, upon his election, in order 
that he might not be liable to answer for the 
faults of his predecessors, moved, that deputies 
should be sent into Macedonia to review the 
army, and to make a report of its state before he 
entered upon the command. His speech to the 
people, when about to depart for his province, 
carries a striking allusion to the petulant freedom 
with which, it seems, unsuccessful commanders 
were censured, or traduced in the popular con- 
versations at Rome, and carries a defiance with 
which he proposed to silence the blame that 
might afterwards be cast on himself. ‘ Let such 
as think themselves qualified to advise the gene- 
ral,” he said, “now accompany me into Mace- 
donia. They shall have a passage on board my 
ship; and, in the field, be welcome to a place in 
my tent and at my table; but if they now decline 
this offer, let them not afterwards pretend to 
judge of what they neither see nor understand. 

or let them set up their own opinion against 
that of a fellow-citizen, who is serving the pub- 
lic to the utmost of his ability, and at the hazard 
of his life and of his honours.” 

Emilius, upon his arrival in Macedonia, found 
the king entrenched on the banks of the Enipeus, 
with his right and left covered by mountains, on 
which all the passes were secured.—A fter some 
delay, during which he was employed in observ- 
ing the enemy’s disposition, or in improving the 
discipline of his own army, he sent a detachment 
to dispossess the Macedonians of one of the sta- 
tions which they occupied on the heights, with 
orders to the officer who commanded in this ser- 
vice, that, if he succeeded in it, he should fall 
down on the plain in the rear of the enemy; he 
himself, in the mean time, made a feint to attack 
them in front. y 

The post on the heights being forced, Perseus 
relinquished his present disposition, and fell back 
towards Pydna on the banks of the Aliacmon. 
Here it became necessary for him, either to 
hazard a battle, or, on account of the nature of 
the country behind him, to separate his forces. 

He preferred the first, and made choice of a 
plain that was fit to receive the phalanx, and was 
skirted with hills, on which his light troops could 
act with advantage. 

Here too the Roman consul continued to press 
upon him, and was inclined to seize the first 
opportunity of deciding the war. Both armies, 
as by appointment, presented themselves on the 
plain in order of battle, and Emilius Paulus 
seemed eager to engage; but, as he himself used 
to confess, having never beheld an appearance 
so formidable as when the Macedonians levelled 
their spears, he thought proper to halt.4 Though 
much disconcerted, he endeavoured to preserve 
his countenance, and would not recede from his 


3 Plutarch in Vit. Einil. p. 157. 
4 Polyb. Fragment. vol. ini. p. 243. 


Cuar. VIL] 


ġ{ound; and that he might encamp his army 
where they now stood, ordered the first line to 
femain under arms, and ready to attack the 
enemy, while those who were behind them be- 
gan to intrench ; having in this manner cast up 
a breast-work of considerable strength, he re- 
tired behind it, and under that cover completed 
the fortifications of a camp in the usual form. 

In this position he waited for an opportunity to 
raw on an engagement, when the enemy should 
be less prepared to receive him, or not have time to 
avail themselves so much of that formidable order 
which constituted the strength of the phalanx. 

This occasion soon afterwards seemcd to be 
offered by a skirmish which happened in the 
fields between the two armies. A horse, having 
broke loose from the camp of the Romans, fled 
towards that of the Macedonians, was followed 
by the soldiers from whom he escaped, and met 
by their enemy from the opposite camp. These 
parties engaged, and each being joined by num- 
bers from their respective armies, brought on at 
last a general action. The ground was favour- 
able to the phalanx; and the Macedonians, 
though hastily formed, still possessed against the 
Romans the advantage of their weapons, and of 
their formidable order. They filled up the plain 
in front, and could not be flanked. They had 
only to maintain their ground, and had no oc- 
casion to discompose their ranks, in time of the 
action, by any change of position. ‘They ac- 
cordingly withstood with ease the first shock of 
the Roman legions; but were broken and dis- 
jointed in the sequel by the seemingly irregular 
attacks which were made at intervals by the 
maulipules, or the separate divisions of the Ro- 
man foot. The parts of the phalanx that were 
attacked, whether they were pressed in, or came 
forward to press on their encmy, could not keep 
in an exact line with the parts that were not at- 
tacked. Openings were made, at which the 
Roman soldier, with his buckler and short sword, 
could easily enter. Emilius, observing this ad- 
vantage, directed his attack on those places at 
which the front of the phalanx was broken ; and 
the legionary soldier, having got within the point 
of his antagonist’s spear, pierced to the heart of 
the column, and in this position made a havoc 
which soon threw the whole into disorder and 
general route.5 

Twenty thousand of the Macedonians were 
killed in the field, five thousand were made pri- 
soners in their flight; and six thousand that seit 
themselves up in the town of Pydna were. obliged 
to surrender at discretion.6 

After this defeat, the king of Macedonia, with 
a few attendants, fled to Pella, where, having 
taken up his children and the remains of his 
treasure, amounting to ten thousand talents, or 
about two millions of pounds sterling,’ he con- 
tinued his flight to Amphipolis, and from thence 
to Samothracia, where le took refuge in the 
famous sanctuary of that island. 

Emilius pushed on to Amphipolis, receiving the 
submission of all the towns and districts as he 
passed. The prætor, Octavius, then command- 
ing the Roman fleet, beset the island of Samo- 
thracia with his ships; and, without violating the 
sanctuary, took measures that effectually pre- 
vented the king’s escape. 


5 Plutarch in Vit. Emil. p. 173. 
6 Liv. lib. xliv. c. 42. 7 Justin. lib. xxxiii. c. 1. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


| 


79 


This unfortunate prince, with some of his 
children, delivered themselves up to the pretor, 
and were conducted to the camp of Emilius. 
The king threw himself on the ground, and 
would have embraced the victor’s knees, when 
the Roman general, with a condescension that is 
extolled by ancient historians, gave him his hand, 
and raised him from the ground, but reproached 
him as the aggressor in the late contest with the 
Romans; and with a lesson of morality, which 
tore up the wounds of the unfortunate monarch, 
bid the young men who were present look on 
this object as an example of the instability of 
fortune, and of the vicissitude of human affairs. 

While the war in Macedonia was coming to 
this issue, that in Illyricum had a like termina- 
tion, and ended about the same time in the cap- 
tivity of the king. 

News of both were received at Rome about 
the same time, and filled the temples, as usual, 
with multitudes who crowded to perform the 
public rites of thanksgiving that were ordered by 
the senate. Soon after which, embassies arrived 
from all the kings and states of the then known 
world, with addresses of congratulation on so 
great an event. The senate proceeded to forn a 
plan for the settlement of Macedonia. 

It was resolved to extinguish the monarchy, 
to divide its territory into four districts, and in 
each to establish a republican government, ad- 
ministered by councils and magistrates chosen by 
the people. ‘This among the Greeks, could bear 
the interpretation of bestowing absolute liberty. 
Ten commissioners were named to carry this 
plan into execution in Macedonia, and five were 
appointed for a similar purpose in Illyricum. 
Emilius was continued in his command, and the 
army ordered to remain in Macedonia until the 
settlement of the province should be completed. 

The commissioners, agreeable to their instruc- 
tions, fixed the limits of the several districts, and, 
probably to perpetuate the separation of them, or 
to prevent any dangerous communication between 
their inhabitants, prohibited them to intermarry, 
or to hold any commerce in the property of land, 
from one division to another. 

To some other restrictions, which had more a 
tendency to weaken or to dismember tliis once 
powerful monarchy, than to confer freedom on 
the people, they joined an act of favour, in con- 
siderably diminishing their former burdens, re- 
ducing their tribute to one half of what they had 
usually paid to their own kings ; and, to facilitate 
or to secure the reception of the republican form 
which was devised for them, they ordered all the 
ancient nobles, and all the retainers of the late 
court, as being irreconcileable with the cquality 
of citizens under a republic, to depart from the 
kingdom, and to choose places of residence for 
themselves in Italy. ; 

A like plan was followed with respect to Illyri- 
cum, which was divided into three districts ; and 
the kings both of Macedonia and of this country, 
with many other captives, were conducted to 
Rome to adorn the triumph of their conquerors, 

Perseus is said to have lived as a prisoner at 
Alba, about four years after he had been exhi- 
bited in this procession. Alexander, one of his 
sons, had an education calculated merely to pro- 
cure him subsistence, and was afterwards, as a 
scribe or a clerk, employed in some of the public 
offices at Rome. 


While the event of the Macedonian war was 


76 


yet undecided, and no considerable advantage, 
either of conduct or fortune, appeared on the side 
of the Romans; they still preserved the usual 
arrogance of their manner, and interposed with 
the same imperious ascendant in the affairs of 
Greece, Asia, and Africa, that they could have 
done in consequence of the most decisive victory. 
It was at this time that, by the celebrated message 
of Popilius Lenas, they put a stop to the con- 
quests of Antiochus Epiphanes in Egypt. ‘This 
prince, trusting to the full employment with 
which the Roman forces were engaged, had ven- 
tured to invade this kingdom, and was in posses- 
sion of every part of it, except the city of Alexan- 
dria, He was occupied in the siege of this place 
when Popilius arrived and delivered him an order 
of the senate to desist. The king made answer, 
That he would consider of it. “Determine be- 
fore you pass this line,” said the Roman, tracing 
a circle with the rod which he held in his hand. 
This people, however, had occasion, during the 
dependence of the Macedonian war, to observe 
that few of their allies were willing to support 
them in the extremes to which they seemed to be 
inclined. The Epirots had actually declared for 
the king of Macedonia. The Rhodians had 
offered their mediation to negotiate a peace, and 
threatened hostility against either of the parties 
who should refuse to accept of it. Even Eumenes 
was suspected of having entered into a secret con- 
cert with Perseus, although the fall of that prince 
prevented any open effects of their treaty. 

The Romans, nevertheless, disguised their re- 
sentment of these several provocations, until their 
principal enemy, the king of Macedonia, was 
subdued; after they had accomplished this end, 
they proceeded against every other party, with a 
severity which was then supposed to be permitted 
in the law of nations, and no more than propor- 
tioned to their supposed offence. They gave 
orders to Emilius, in passing through Epirus, to 
lay that country under military execution. Se- 
venty towns were accordingly destroyed, and a 
hundred and fifty thousand of the people sold for 
slaves. 

The senate refused to admit the ambassadors 
of Rhodes, who came to congratulate the Roman 
people on their victory at Pydna. They stripped 
those islanders of the provinces which had been 
granted to them on the continent by the late 
treaty with Antiochus, and ordered them to dis- 
continue some duties levied from ships in passing 
through their sound, which made a considerable 
part of their revenue. 

While Eumenes was coming in person to pay 
his court to the senate, they resolved to forbid the 
concourse of kings to Rome. Their meaning, 
though expressed in general terms, was evidently 
levelled at this prince; and they ordered, that 
when he should arrive at Brundusium, their re- 
solution should be intimated to him, to prevent 
his nearer approach. 

They in reality, from this time forward, though 
in the style of allies, treated the Grecian republics 
as subjects. 

Such was the rank which the Romans assumed 
among nations; while their statesmen still re- 
tained much of their primeval rusticity, and did 
not consider the distinctions of fortune and equi- 
wage as the appurtenances of power or of high 
command. Cato, though a citizen of the highest 
rank, and vested successively with the dignities 
of consul and of censor, used to partake in the 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book I. 


labour of his own slaves, and to feed with them 
from the same dish at their meals.! When he 
commanded the arniies of the republic, the daily 
allowance of his household was no more than 
three medimni, or about as many bushels of 
wheat for his family, and half a medimnus, or 
half a bushel of barley for his horses. In sur 
veying his province he usually travelled on foot, 
attended by a single slave who carried his bag 
gage? 

These particulars are mentioned perhaps as 
peculiar to Cato; but such singularities in the 
manners of a person placed so high among the 
people, carry some general intimation of the 
fashion of the times. 

A spirit of equality yet reigned among the 
members of the commonwealth, which rejected 


, the distinctions of fortune, and checked the admi- 


ration of private wealth. In all military dona- 
tions the centurion had no more than double the 
allowance of a private soldier, and no military 
rank was indelible. ‘The consul and commander- 
in-chief of one year served not only in the ranks, 
but even as a tribune or inferior officer in the 
next; and the same person who had displayed 
the genius and ability of the general, still valued 
himself on the courage and address of a legionary 
soldier. id 

No one was raised above the glory to be reaped 
from the exertion of mere personal courage and 
bodily strength. Persons of the highest condition 
sent or accepted a defiance to fight in single com- 
bat, in presence of the armies to which they be- 
longed. Marcus Servilius, a person of consular 
rank, in order to enhance the authority with 
which he spoke when he pleaded for the triumph 
of Paulus Emilius, informed the people that he 
himself, full three and twenty times, had fought 
singly with so many champions of the enemy, 
and that in each of these encounters he had slain 
and stripped his antagonist. A eombat of the 
same kind was afterwards fought by the younger 
Scipio, when serving in Spain. 

The sumptuary laws of this age were suited 
to the idea of citizens who were determined to 
contribute their utmost to the grandeur of the 
state ; but to forego the means of luxury or per- 
sonal distinction. Roman ladies were restrained, 
except in religious processions, from the use of 
carriages any where within the city, or at the dis- 
tance of less than a mile from its walls; and yet 
the space over which they were to preserve their 
communications extended to a circuit of fourteen 
miles, and began to be so much crowded with 
buildings or cottages, that, even before the reduc- 
tion of Macedonia, it was become necessary to 
restrain private persons from encroaching on the 
streets, squares, and other spaces reserved for 
public conveniency. In a see of this magni- 
tude, and so stocked with inhabitants, the female 
sex was also forbid the use of variegated or party- 
coloured clothes, or of more than half an ounce 
of gold in the ornament of their persons. This 
law being repealed, contrary to the sentiments ot 
Cato, this citizen, when he came, in the capacity 
of censor, to take account of the equipages, clothes 
and jewels of the women, taxed each of them 
tenfold for whatever was found in her wardrobe 
exceeding the value of one thousand five hundred 
denarii, or about fifty pounds sterling.? 


i Plutarch. in Vit. Catonis, p. 330. 
2 Ibid. p. 335 and 338. 
3 Liv. lib. xxxiv. c, 1—6. 


Cuap. VIL] 


The attention of the legislature was carried 
into the detail of entertainments or feasts. In 
one act the number of the guests, and in a sub- 
sequent one the expense of their meals, were 
limited. By the Lex Tribonia, enacted about 
twenty years after the reduction of Macedonia, 
a citizen was allowed, on certain high festivals, 
to expend three hundred ases, or about twenty 
shillings sterling; on other festivals of less note, 
one hundred ases, or about six shillings and 
eight pence; but during the remainder of the 
year, no more than ten ases, or about eight 
pence; and was not allowed to serve up more 
than one fowl, and this with a proviso that it 
should not be crammed or fatted.4 

Superstition made a principal article in the cha- 
racter of the people. It subjected them continually 
to be occupied or alarmed with prodigies and 
ominous appearances, of which they endeavoured 
to avert the effects by rites and expiations, as 
strange and irrational as the presages on which 
they had grounded their fears. Great part of their 
time was accordingly taken up with processions 
and public shows, and much of their substance, 
even to the whole annual produce of their herds, 
was occasionally expended in sacrifices, or in the 
performance of public vows. The first officers 
of state, in their functions of the priesthood, per- 
formed the part of the cook and the butcher ; and, 
while the senate was deliberating on questions of 

reat moment, examined the entrails of a victim, 
ìn order to know what the gods had determined. 
“ You must desist,” said the Consul Cornelius, 
entering the senate with a countenance pale and 
marked with astonishment; “I myself have visit- 
ed the boiler, and the head of the liver is con- 
sumed.”’6 

_ According to the opinions entertained in those 
times, sorcery was a principal expedient employed 
by those who had secret designs ou the life of their 
neighbour. It was supposed to make a part in the 
statutory crime of poisoning; and the same imagi- 
nation which admitted the charge of sorcery as 
credible, was, in particular instances, when any 
erson was accused, easily convinced of his guilt ; 
insomuch that some thousands were at times con- 
victed together of this imaginary crime.’ 

_ The manners of the people of Italy were at 
times subject to strange disorders, or tlie magis- 
trate gave credit to wild and improbable reports. 
The story of the Bacchanals, dated in the year 
of Rome five hundred and sixty-six, or about 
twenty years before the conquest of Macedonia, 
may be considered as an instance of one or the 
other.8 A society, under the name of Bacchanals, 
had been instituted, on the suggestion of a Greek 
pretender to divination? The desire of being 
admitted into this society prevailed throughout 
Italy, and the sect became extremely numerous. 
As they commonly met in the niglit, they were 
said at certain hours to extinguish their lights, 
and to indulge themselves in every practice of 
horror, rape, incest, and murder; crimes under 
which no sect or fraternity could possibly subsist, 
but which, in being imputed to numbers in this 
es o a E oe 

4 Plin. lib. x. c. 50. 

5 The Ver Sacrum was a general sacrifice of all the 
young of their herds for a whole year. 

6 Liv. lib. xli. c. 15. 


7 Ibid. lib. xxxix. c. 41. 


8 Tbid.c. 8. and 
9 Venificium. l and sequen 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. TT 


credulous age, gave occasion to a severe inquisi- 
tion, and proved fatal to many persons at Rome, 
and throughout Italy. 

The extreme superstition, however, of those 
times, in some of its effects, vied with genuine 
religion; and, by the regard it inspired, more 
especially for the obligation of oaths, became a 
principle of public order and of public duty, and 
in many instances superseded the use of penal or 
compulsory laws. 

When the citizen swore that he would obey 
the call of the magistrate to enlist in the legions; 
when the soldier swore that he would not desert 
his colours, disobey his commander, or fly from 
his enemy; when a citizen, at the call of the cen- 
sor, reported on oath the amount of his effects; 
the state, in all those instances, with perfect con- 
fidence relied on the good faith of her subjects, 
and was not deceived. 

In the period to which these observations refer, 
that is, in the sixth century of the Roman state, 
the first dawning of literature began to appear. 
It has been mentioned that a custom prevailed 
among the primitive Romans, as among other 
rude nations, at their feasts to sing or rehearse 
heroic ballads which recorded their own deeds or 
those of their ancestors.!0 This practice had been 
some time discontinued, and the compositions 
themselves were lost. They were succeeded by 
pretended monuments of history equally falla- 
cious, the orations which, having been pronounced 
at funerals, were, like titles of honour, preserved 
in the archives of every noble house, but which 
were rather calculated to flatter the vanity of 
families, than to record the truth.!! 

The Romans owed the earliest compilations of 
their history to Greeks; and in their own first 
attempts to relate their story employed the lan- 
guage of that people.!2 Nevius and Ennius, 
who were the first that wrote in the Latin 
tongue, composed their relations in verse. Livius 
Andronicus, and afterwards Plautus and Te- 
rence, translated the Greek fable, and exhibited 
in the streets of Rome, not the Roman, but Gre- 
cian manners. The two last are said to have 
been persons of mean condition ; the one to have 
subsisted by turning a baker’s mill, the other to 
have been a captive anda slave. Both of them 
had probably possessed the Greek tongue as a 
vulgar dialect, which was yet spoken in many 
parts of Italy, and from this circumstance, be- 
came acquainted with the elegant compositions 
of Philemon and Menander.'3 Their comedies 
were acted in the streets, without any seats or 
benches for the reception of an audience. But 
a nation so little studious of ordinary conveni- 
ences, and contented to borrow their literary 
models from neighbours, to whom, being niere 
imitators, they continued for ages inferior, were, 
however, in their political and military character, 
superior to all other nations whatever; and, at 

this date, had extended 2 dominion, 
U. C. 586. which originally consisted of a poor 

village on the Tiber, to more empire 
and territory than is now enjoyed by any king- 
dom or state of Europe. 


10 Cic. de Claris Oratoribus, c. 19. 

11 Ibid. p. 394. 12 Dion. Hal. lib. i. p. 5. 

13 The people of Cume, about this time, applied for 
eve to have their public acts, for the time, expressed 
in Latin. 


THE 


HISTORY 


” OF 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


OF THE 


ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


BOOK II. 


CHAPTER I. 


State, Manners, and- Policy of the Times—Repeated Complaints from Carthage—Hostile Dispo- 
sition of the Romans— Resolution to remore Carthage from the Coast—Measures taken for this 
Purpose—Carthage besieged— Taken and destroyed— Revolt of the Macedonians— Their 
Kingdom reduced to the Form of a Roman Province—Fate of the Achean League— Opera- 
tions in Spain—Conduct of Viriathus—State of Numantia— Blockade of Numantia—Its De- 
struction—Revolt of the Slaves in Sicily—Legal Establishments and Manners of the City. 


THE reduction of Macedonia was in many | this date, was found to contain, in bars of gold 
respects a remarkable era in the history of Rome. | and silver, and in coin, not much more than half 


Before this date Roman citizens had been treated 
as subjects, and permitted themselves to be taxed. 
They were required at every census to make a 
return of their effects upon oath, and, besides 
other stated or occasional contributions to the 
public, paid a certain rate on the whole value of 
their property. But upon this event they assumed 
more entirely the character of sovereigns; and, 
having a treasury replenished with the spoils of 
that kingdom, exempted themselves from their 
former burdens. 

The accession of wealth, said to have put them 
in this condition, is variously reported. Livy 
quotes Valerius Antias as stating it at millies 
ducenties, or about a million sterling; Velleius 
Paterculus states it at double this sum, and Pliny 
at somewhat more.! But the highest of these 
computations scarcely appears adequate to the 
effect supposed. It is more likely that the ordi- 
nary income of the treasury, consisting of the 
sums so frequently deposited at the triumphs of 
victorious leaders, the tributes received from Car- 
thage and Syria, the rents of Campania, the 
tithes of Sicily-and Sardinia, with the addition 
of the revenue recently constituted in Macedo- 
nia, put the Romans at last in condition to ex- 
empt themselves from taxation; an effect which 
no perishing capital placed at once in their cof- 
fers could be supposed to produce. The Roman 
treasury, when examined about ten years after 


1 Velleius, lib. 1. ¢. 9. 


= 
a 


Plin. lib. xxxiii. c. 3. 


a million sterling :2 a sum which, without a pro- 


per and regular supply, must have been soon ex- 
hausted. 

From the conclusion of the war with Perseus, 
the Romans for twenty years, do not seem to 
have been engaged with any considerable enemy; 
and their numerous colonies, now disperscd over 
Italy, from Aquileia to Rhegium, probably made 
great advances, during this period, in agriculture, 
commerce, and the other arts of peace. Among 
their public works are mentioned, not only tem- 
ples and fortifications, particulars in which men 
attain to magnificence even in rude ages, but 
likewise aqueducts, market-places, pavements, 
highways, and other conveniences, the preludes 
or attendants of wealth and commerce. 

Cato, in pleading against the repeated election 
of the same person into the office of consul, ex- 
claimed against the luxury of the times, and 
alleged, that so many citizens could not support 
their extravagance by any other means than that 
of draining the provinces by virtue of their re- 
peated appointments to command. ‘“ Observe,” 
he said, “their villas, how curiously built, how 
richly furnished with ivory and precious wood. 
Their very floors are coloured or stained in the 
Punic fashion.’ 


2 Plin. lib. xxxiii. c. 3. In gold 16,810 Æ. in silver 
22,070 Æ. and in coin 620,854,000 TI. S. Arbuthnot 
on Ancient Coins. 

3 Vid. Pompeium Festum. 


Cuar. !.] 


The Romans had formerly made 
laws to fix the age at which eiti- 
zens might be chosen into the different offices of 
state.4 And on the oceasion on which Cato made 
this speech, they excluded the same person from 
being repeatedly chosen. They likewise made 
those additions to former sumptuary laws which 
have been already mentioned. ‘The eensus, or 
enrolment of the people, began to be made with 
more eare than formerly: even the Latin allies, 
though migrating to Rome, were excluded from 
the rolls;5 and the people generally mustered 
from three to four hundred thousand men. 

While the Romans had no war to maintain 
with the more regular and formidable rivals of 
their power, they still employed their legions on 
the frontier of their provinces in Spain, Dalmatia, 
Liguria, and on the deseents of the Alps. ‘They 
opened, for the first time, an intereourse with the 
Transalpine nations, in a treaty of allianee with 
the republic of Marseilles; in consequence of 
whieh, they protected that mereantile settlement 
from the attaeks of fierce tribes, who infested them 
from the maritime extremities of the Alps and 
Appenines. 'They were in general the umpires 
in the differences of nations, gave audience in all 
their eomplaints, interposed with their forces as 
well as authority, and disposed of provinces and 
kingdoms at their pleasure. They kept a vigi- 
lant eye on the conduet and policy of all the dif- 
ferent powers with whom they were at any time 
likely to be embroiled, and generally conducted 
their transactions with independent nations as 
they adjusted the first settlement of their own 
acquisitions, by commission and deputations sent 
from the senate to decide, with the least possible 
delay, on sueh matters as might arise in the place 
to which their deliberations referred. 

The number of commissioners employed in 
these serviecs, for the most part, was ten. These 
took informations, formed plans, and made their 
reports for the final decision of the senate, and, 
by the frequency of these appointments, it ap- 
aa that the members of the senate, in rotation, 

ad an opportunity of becoming acquainted with 
that world which they were destined to govern. 

The senate itself, though, from its numbers 
and the emulation of its members, likely to em- 
barrass affairs by debate, delay, and the rash pub- 
lication of all its designs, in reality possessed all 
the advantages of deeision, secreey, and despateh, 
that could be obtained in the most select exceu- 
tive eouneil. This numerous assembly of Roman 
statesmen appeared to have maintained, during a 
long period, one scries of consistent and uniform 
design; and kept their intentions so seeret, that 
their resolutions, for the most part, were known 
only by the execution. The king of Pergamus 
made a journey to Rome, in order to excite the 
Romans to a war with his rival, the king of Ma- 
eedonia. Fle preferred his complaints in the 
senate, and prevailed on this body to resolve on 
the war; but no part of the transaction was pub- 
lie till after the king of Macedonia was a prisoner 
at Rome.§ 


Lez Annalis. 


4 It appears that, by this law, being questors at thir- 
ty-one, they might rise to the consulate at forty-three. 

5 P utarch, in the 'ife of Flaminimus, mentions a law 
by which the censors were obliged to enrol every free- 
man that offered. The Latins complained, that their 
towns were depopulated by emigrations to Rome. Liv. 
hb xli. c. & 6 Valer. Maxim. lib. ii. c 2. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION, &. 


v9 


During the present respite from any eonsider- 
able war, the Romans balanced the kingdoms of 
Pergamus, Bithynia, and Cappadocia against eael 
other, in such a manner as to be able, at plea- 
sure, to oppress any of those powers that should 
beeome refraetory or formidable to their interest. 

They made the kingdom of Syria devolve on a 
minor, the son of Antiochus; and, under the 
pretence of this minority, sent. a commission to 
take charge of the kingdom. But their commis- 
sioners were, with the connivance of the eourt, 
assaulted in a riotat Antioch; some of them were 
killed, and others forced to fly from the country. 

Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, who ought to 
have suceeeded to his father in the monarchy of 
Syria, being, at the death of that prince, a hos- 
tage at Rome, had been supplanted by his younger 
brother, the father of that minor prinee who was 
now acknowledged by the Romans. 

Upon the insult that had been thus offered to 
the Roman commission at Antioch, Demetrius 
thought it a favourable opportunity to urge his 
elaim, and to prevail on the senate to restore him 
to the suecession of his father’s erown : but these 
crafty usurpers, notwithstanding the offence they 
had received from those who were in possession 
of the monarchy, preferred the advantages which 
they had over a minor king, to the precarious 
affection or gratitude of an active spirited prince, 
educated at Rome, and taught by their own ex- 
ample to know his interest ; and they aeeordingly 
denied his request. 

Demetrius, however, made his cscape from 
Rome, and, by the death of the minor and his 
tutor, got unrivalled possession of the kingdom of 
Syria. To pay his court to the Romans, as one 
of the first acts of his reign, he sent the murderer 
of their late commissioner, Oetavius, in ehains,to be 
punished at their discretion. Butthe senate dis- 
dained to wreek their public wrongs on a private 
eriminal; or, having cause of eomplaint against 
the nation itself, wcre not to be satisfied with the 
punishment of a single person. They suffered 
the prisoner, as beneath their atteution, to depart. 

As patrons of the kingdom of Egypt, they pro 
moted the division of that country between the two 
brothcrs, who were then joined in the sovereignty, 
and rivals for the sole posscssion of the throne.’ 

During the dependence of these transaetions, 
the senate had repeated complaints from A friea, 
which ended in a war that proved fatal at last to 
the ancient rivals of their power. In the eonduct 
of this war, being now less dependent than for- 
merly on the opinion of the world, they, eontrary 
to their usual pretensions to national generosity 
and liberality, sacrificed, without reserve, entire 
nations to the ambition, or to the meanest jcal 
ousy, of their own republic.é 

The province cf Emporia, a district lying on 
the coast, and the richest part of the Carthaginian 
territory, had been violently seized by Gala king 
of Numidia, and father of Massinissa. It had 
been again restored by Syphax, when he sup- 
planted the family of Gala on the throne of that 
kingdom; but uow again usurped by Massinissa 
on recovering the crown by the power of the Ro- 
inans, to whose favour he trusted; and the Car- 
thaginians, preeluded by the late treaty from 
making war on any ally of the Romans, had re- 
course to complaints and representations, which 


7 Polyb. Excerpta Legationes. 8 Ibid No. 142 


80 THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION [Boox II. 


they made at Rome, both before and after the re- | serve their effects, and to purchase tranquillity by 
duction of Macedonia. The Roman senate had, | the lowest concessions. But as the measure now 
for five and twenty years, eluded these complaints, | proposed by the Roman senate amounted to adepri- 
and, during this time, was in the practice: of | vation of all that property which is vested in houses 
sending commissioners into Africa, under pre- | or public edifices, and an entire suppression of all 
tence of hearing the parties in this important | those local means of subsistence which could not 
dispute, but with instructions or dispositions to | be easily transferred, it was not supposed that their 
favour Massinissa, and to observe, with a jealous | consent could be easily obtained, and it was ac- 
eye, the condition and the movements of their | cordingly resolved to keep the design a secret, until 
ancient rival.! effectual means were prepared for its execution. 
The Carthaginians, yet possessed of ample re-| The consuls, without any declaration of war, 
sources, and, if wealth or magnificence could con- | were instructed to arm, and to pass with their 
stitute strength, still a powerful nation; being | forces into Sicily. As their arrival on that island, 
weary of repeated applications, to which they | which was then in a state of profound peace, evi- 
could obtain no satisfying answer, took their re- | dently implied a design upon Africa, the people 
solution to arm, and to assert by force their claim | of Utica, that they might have the merit of an 
to the territory in question. early declaration in favour of the Romans, sent a _ 
They were met in the field by the army of | deputation to make them a tender of their port 
Massinissa, commanded by himself, though now | and town, as a harbour and place of arms for the 
about ninety years of age, and were defeated.? j accommodation of their. forces. The Carthagi- 
This unfortunate event disappointed their | nians were distracted with opposite counsels. 
hopes, and exposed them to the resentment of the | They laid the blame of the war with Massinissa 
Romans, who considered the attempt they had | on Hasdrubal and his abettors, whom they or- 
made to do themselves justice, as a contravention | dered into exile; but, without coming to any 
of the late treaty, and a departure from the arti- | other resolutions, sent a deputation, with full 
cles of peace between the two nations. powers to conclude as circumstances might seem 
The expediency of a war with Carthage had | to require, and agree to whatever they should 
been for some time a subject of debate in the Ro- | find most expedient for the commonwealth. These 
man senate. Deputies had been sent into Africa, | deputies, on their arrival at Rome, finding no dis- 
to procure the information that was necessary to | position in the senate totreat with them upon equal 
determine this question. Among these, Cato, | terms, resolved to arrest, by the most implicit sub- 
being struck with the greatness, wealth, and | mission, the sword that was lifted up against their 
populousness of that republic, and with the | country. They accordingly confessed the impru- 
amazing fertility of its territory, when he made | dence of their late conduct, and implored forgive- 
his report in the senate, carried in his lap a par- | ness. ‘They quoted the sentence of banishment 
cel of figs which he had brought from thence. | passed upon Hasdrubal and his party, as an evi- 
“These,” he said, “are the produce of a land that | dence of their contrition for the hostilities lately 
is but three days’ sail from Rome. Judge what | offered to Massinissa; and they made a formal 
Italy may have to fear from a country whose | surrender of their city and its territory to be dis- 
produce is so much superior to its own. That | posed of at the pleasure of the Romans. 
country is now in arms; the sword is drawn| In return to this act of submission, they were 
against Massinissa; but when thrust in his side, | told, that the Romans approved their behaviour, 
will penetrate to you. Your boasted victories have | and meant to leave them in possession of their 
not subdued the Carthaginians, but given them | freedom, their laws, their territory, and of all their 
experience, taught them caution, and instructed effects, whether private or public: but, asa pledge 
them how to disguise, under the semblance of | of their compliance with the measures that might 
peace, a war which you will find marshalled | be necessary to prevent the return of former dis- 
against you in their docks and in their arsenals.” | putes, they demanded three hundred hostages, 
This, and every other speech on this subject, | the children of senators, and of the first families 
Cato concluded with his famous saying, “ That |in Carthage. This demand being reported in 
Carthage should be destroyed.”"3 the city gave a general alarm; but the authors of 
Scipio Nasica, another speaker in this debate, | these counsels were too far advanced to recede. 
contended for peace. He represented the forces | They tore from the arms of their parents tke 
of Cartliage.as not sufficient to alarm the Ro- | children of the,first families in the commonwealth; 
mans; or, if really greater than there was any | and, amidst thie cries of affliction and despair, em- 
reason to suppose them, no more than were re-| barked those hostages for Sicily. Upon this 
quisite to exercise the virtues of a people already, | island they were delivered over to the Roman 
for want of proper exertion, begun to suffer some | consuls, and were by them sent forward to Rome. 
abatement in their vigilance, discipline, and valour.| The commanders of the Roman armament, 
In this diversity of opinions, it appeared soon | without explaining themselves any further, con- 
after, that the senate took a middle course; re- | tinued their voyage, and, by their appearance on 
solved not to destroy, but to remove the inhabit- | the coast of Africa, gave a fresh alarm at Car- 
ants of Carthage to a new situation, at least ten | thage. Deputies from the unfortunate inhabit- 
miies from the sea.4 ants of that place went to receive them at Utica, 
The Carthaginians, after their late unfortunate | and were told, that they must deliver up all their 
adventure with Massinissa, were willing to pre- | arms, ships, engines of war, naval and military 
ee t—“‘“‘(RCNR | Stores Even these alarming commands they 
1 Polyb. Excerpt. Legat. c. 118. Liv. lib. xl.c. 17. | received as the strokes of fate, which could not be 
al Epitome, lib. ee ee ene hae Punic, | avoided. ‘ We do not mean,” said m of the 
ee: ae ee oe Cola ae deputies, “to dispute your commands; but we 
4 Appian in Punicis. Plutarch in Vit. Catonis. Zo- Entiat you to earns to what a helpless state 


naras, lib. ix. c. 26. Oros. lib. iv. c. 22. Velleius, Jib. =, 
e 13. Potyb. Exverptie Legationes, No. 143, ‘you are about to reduce an unfortunate people, 


~ 


Cuar. L] 


who, by this hard condition, will be rendered 
unable to preserve peace among their own citi- 
zens at home, or to defend themselves against the 
meanest invader fromabroad. We have banished 
Hasdrubal in order to reeeive you: we have de- 
clared him an enemy to his country, that you 
might be our friends: but when we are disarmed, 
who can prevent this exile from returning to oe- 
cupy the city of Carthage against you? With 
twenty thousand men that follow him, if he comes 
into the direction of our government, he will soon 
oblige us to make war on you.”5 in answer to 
this piteous expostulation, the Roman generals 
undertook the proteetion of Carthage, and ordered 
commissaries to receive the several articles that 
were to be delivered up, and to see the arsenals 
and the doeks destroyed. 

It is reported, that there were delivered up 
to these commissaries forty thousand suits of 
armour, twenty thousand katapulte, or large 
engines of war, with a plentiful store of darts, 
arrows and other missiles. 

So far the Romans proceeded with eaution, 
well knowing the veneration which mankind en- 
tertain for the seats and tombs of their ancestors, 
with the shrines and consecrated temiples of their 

ods; and dreading the effects of despair, as soon 
as the Carthaginians should pereeive how much 
they were to be affected in their private and pub- 
lie property. But now, thinking their object 
secure, they proceeded to deelare their intentions. 
The consul called the Carthaginian deputies into 
his presence, and beginning with an exhortation, 
that they should bear with equanimity what the 
neeessity of their fortune imposed, intimated, the 
definitive resolution of the Roman senate, that 
the people of Carthage should relinquish their 
present situation, and build on any other part of 
their territory, not less than eighty stadia, or 
about ten miles, removed from the sea. ‘The 
amazement and sorrow with whieh these orders 
were received, justified the preeautions whieh the 
Romans had taken to seeure the execution of 
them. The deputies threw themselves upon the 
ground, and endeavoured, from motives of pity, 
or of reason, to obtain a revoeation of this cruel 
and arbitrary decree. They pleaded the merit 
of their implicit submission, their weakness, their 
inability any longer to alarm the jealousy of 
Rome, circumvented, disarmed, bound to their 
duty by hostages the most precious blood of their 
commonwealth. They pleaded the faith which 
was plighted by the Roinans, the hopes of pro- 
teetion they had given, and the reputation they 
had justly acquired, not only for national justiee, 
but for elomency and generosity to all who sued 
for mercy. They pleaded the respect which all 
nations owed to the shrines and the eonseerated 
temples of their gods; the deplorable state into 
which numbers of their people must be reduced, 
expelled from their habitations and immoveable 
possessions, the principal artieles of their property, 
and the hopeless eondition of others, who, inured 
tosubsist by the advantages of a maritime situation, 
were entirely disqualified to support themselves 
or their children at a distance from the sea. 

The Roman eonsul replied by repeating the 
express orders of the senate, and bid the Cartha- 
ginians remember, that states were composed of 
men, hot of ramparts and walls. That the Ro- 


5 Polyb. Excerpt. Legat. c. 142. 
L 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


81 


man senate had promised to spare and protect the 
republie of Carthage ; and that they had fulfilled 
this engagement by leaving the people in posses- 
sion of their freedom and their laws. That the 
sacred places should remain untouched, and that 
the shrines of the gods would still be within the 
reach of their pious visits. That the distance to 
whieh it was proposed to remove Carthage from 
the sea was not so great as the distanee at which 
Rome herself was situated from it; and that the 
Romans had taken their resolution, that the peo- 
ple of Carthage should no longer have under 
their immediate view that element which opened 
a way to their ambition, had tempted them first 
into Sicily, afterwards into Spain, and last of all 
into Italy, and to the gates of Rome; and which 
would never cease to suggest projects dangerous 
to themselves, and inconsistent with the peaee of 
mankind. “ We go, then,” said the deputies of 
Carthage, “to eertain death, which we have 
merited by having persuaded our fellow-citizens 
to resign themselves into the hauds of the Ro- 
mans. But if you mean to have-your commands 
obeyed, you must be ready to enforee them; and 
by this means you may save an unfortunate people 
from exposing themselves, by any act of despair, 
to worse sufferings than they have yet endured.” 
The deputies accordingly, being followed at a 
distance by twenty galleys of the Roman fleet, 
set sail for Carthage. ‘They were received on 
the shore by multitudes, who crowded to hear the 
result of their negotiations; but the silence they 
preserved, under pretence that it was necessary 
to make their report first to tle senate, spread a 
general dismay. A the senate their message was 
received with eries of despair, whicli soon con- 
veyed to the people in the streets a knowledge of 
the conditions unposed upon them. And this 
nation, who, about forty years before, had con- 
sented to hetray their principal citizen into the 
hands of their enemy, and who had lately resign- 
ed ail the lionours and pretensions of a free state, 
now kindled into rage at the thoughts of being 
obliged to forego so great a part of their wealth, 
and to remove their habitations. They burst into 
the place where the senate was assembled, and 
laid violent hands on all the members who had 
advised or borne any part in the late degrading 
submissions, or who had centributed to bring the 
state into its present helpless condition. ‘They 
took vengeance, as is common, witli a eorrupted 
populace, on others, for faults in whieh they them- 
selves had freely eoncurred; and, as awake to 
new sentiments of honour, they reviled the spirit 
of their own commonwealth, ever ready to barter 
national eharacter for profit, to purchase safety 
with shameful concessions, and to remove a pre- 
sent danger, by giving up what is the only secu- 
rity of nations against any danger, the reputation 
of their vigour, and the honour of their arms. 
While the multitude indulged themselves in 
every species of riot, a few had the preeaution to 
shut the gates, to stretch the chain which pro- 
tected the entranee of the harbour, and to make a 
colleetion of stones on the battlements, these 
being the only weapons they had left to repel the 
first attaeks of the Romans. The remains of 
the senate, too, without refleeting on the desperate 
state of their affairs, resolved on war. Despair 
and frenzy succeeded in every breast to dejection 
| and meanness. 
| Assemblies were called to reverse the sentence 


82 


of banishment lately pronounced against Hasdru- 
bal, and against the troops under his command. 
"These exiles were entreated to hasten their return 
for the defence of a city bereft of arms, ships, 
military and naval stores. The people, in the 
mean tiine, with an ardour which reason, and the 
hopes of success during the prosperity of the 
republic could not have inspired, endeavoured to 
replace the arms and the stores which they had 
so shamefully surrendered. They demolished 
their houses to supply the docks with timber. 
They opened the temples and other public build- 
ings to accommodate the workmen ; and, without 
distinction of sex, condition, or age, became 
labourers in the public works, collected materials, 
furnished provisions, or bore a part in any labour 
that was thought necessary to put the city in a 
state of defence. ‘They supplied the founders 
and the armourers with the brass and iron of their 
domestic utensils; or, where these metals were 
deficient, brought what they could furnish of sil- 
ver and gold. ‘They joined, with the other ma- 
terials which were used in the roperies, their hair, 
to be spun into cordage for the shipping, and 
into braces for their engines of war. 

The Roman consuls, apprised of what was in 
agitation, willing to await the returns of reason, 
and to let these first ebullitions of frenzy subside, 
for some days made no attempts on the city. 
But, hearing of the approach of Hasdrubal, they 
thought it necessary to endeavour, before his 
arrival, to possess themselves of the gates. Hav- 
ing in vain attempted to scale the walls, they 
were obliged to undergo the labours of a regular 
siege; and, though they made a breach, were 
repulsed in attempting to force the city by storm. 

Hasdrubal had taken post on the creek which 
separated the peninsula of Carthage from the 
continent, maintained his communication by 
water, and supplied the inhabitants with provi- 
sions and arms. ‘The Romans, seeing that they 
could not reduce tlie city while Hasdrubal retain- 
ed this post, endeavoured to dislodge him, but 
were defeated, and obliged to raise the siege. 
They had already spent two years in this enter- 
prise, changed their commanders twice, but with- 
out advancing their fortunes. They began to 
incur the discredit of having formed against a 
neighbouring commonwealth an invidious design 
which they could not accomplish. Enemies in 
every quarter, in Greece, Macedonia, and Spain, 
were encouraged to declare against them; and 
even Massinissa, unwiliing to see their power 
substituted for that of Carthage, and jealous of 
the avidity with which they endeavoured to be- 
come masters in Africa, and to snatch from his 
hands a prey in which he thought himself enti- 
tled to share, withdrew his forces, and left them 
singly to contend with the difficulties in which 
they began to be involved. l 

But the Romans were animated by those mor- 
tifications which are apt to discourage other na- 
tions. They imputed the miscarriage of their 
troops to the misconduct of their generals; and 
they clamoured for a better choice. Scipio, by 
birth the son of Emilius Paulus, and by adoption 
the grandson of Scipio Africanus, having distin- 
guished himself in Spain and in Africa, and 
being then arrived from the army to solicit the 
office of edile, was thought worthy of the su- 
preme command; but being about ten years 
under the legal age, the law was suspended in 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox Il. 


his favour, and his appointment to the province 
of Africa, in preference to his colleague, was de- 
clared without the usual method of casting lots. 

The Carthaginians were now reinstated in 
their consideration, and in their rank among na- 
tions, and had negotiations with the neighbour- 
ing powers of Mauritania and Numidia, whose 
aid they solicited with alarming reflections on the 
boundless ambition, and invidious policy of the 
Romans. They even conveyed assurances of 
support to the Achzans, to the pretended Philip, 
an impostor, who, about this time, laid claim to 
the throne of Macedonia; and they encouraged 
with hopes of assistance the subjects of that 
kingdom, who were at this time in arms to re- 
cover the independence of their monarchy. 

The mere change of the commander, and bet- 
ter dicipline in the Roman army, however, soon 
altered the state and prospects of the war. The 
first object of Scipio was to cut off the communi- 
cations of the Carthaginians with the country, 
and to intercept their supply of provisions and 
other articles necessary to withstand a siege. 

Carthage was situated at the bottom of a spa- 
cious bay, covered on the west by the promontory 
of Apollo, on the east by that of Hermes, o1 
Mercury, at the distance of about fifteen leagues 
from each other. ‘The city stood on a peninsula 
joined to the main land by an isthmus about 
three miles in breadth, and covering a bason 01 
harbour, in which their docks and their shipping 
were secured from storms and hostile attacks 
The Byrsa, or citadel, commanded the isthmus, 
and presented at this only entrance to the town 
by land, a wall thirty feet thick and sixty feet 
high. ‘The whole circumference of the place was 
about twenty miles.! l 

The besiegers, by their shipping. had access to 
that side of the town on which the walls were 
washed by the sea; but were shut out from the 
harbour by a chain which was stretched across 
the entrance. Hasdrubal had taken post on the 
bason over against the town, and by these means 
still preserved the communication of the city with 
the country. Scipio, to dislodge him from this 
post, made a feint at a distant part of the fortifi- 
cations to scale the walls, actually gained the 
battlements, and gave an alarm which obliged the 
Carthaginian general to throw himself into the 
city. Scipio, satisfied with having obtained his 
end, took possession of the post which the other 
had abandoned; and being now master of the 
isthmus, and the whole continental side of the 
harbour, advanced to the walls of the Byrsa. Tn 
his camp he covered himself as usual with double 
lines ; one facing the fortifications of the enemy, 
consisting of a curtain twelve feet high, with 
towers at proper intervals, of which one in the 
centre was high enough to overlook the ramparts, 
and to afford a view of the enemy’s works. The 
other line secured his rear from surprise on the 
side of the country; and both effectually guarded 
the isthmus, and obstructed all access to the town 
by land. 

The besieged, however, still received some sup- 
ply of provisions by sea; their victuallers took the 
benefit of every wind that blew fresh and nght 
into the harbour, to pass through the enemy’s 
fleet, who durst not unmoor to pursue them ; and 
Scipio, to cut off this rescurce, projected a mole 


1 Orosius, lib. iv. c. 22. Liv. Epitome, lib. lu, 


Caar. L] 


from the main land to the point of the peninsula 
aeross the entrance of the harbour. He began 
to throw in his materials on a foundation of 
ninety feet, with an intention to eontraet the 
mound as it rose to twenty-four feet at the top. 
The work, when first observed from Carthage, 
was considered as a vain undertaking ; but when 
it appeared to advanee with a sensible progress, 
gave a serious alarm. 

The Carthaginians, to provide against the evils 
which they began to foresee from this obstruetion 
at the entrance of their harbour, undertook a 
work more ditieult, and more vast than even that 
of the besiegers, to eut aeross the peninsula within 
their walls, and to open a new passage to the sea; 
and this they had actually aeeomplished by the 
time that the other passage was shut. Notwith- 
standing the late surrender of all their shipping 
and stores, they had at the same time, by incredi- 
ble efforts, assembled or construeted a navy of 
sixty gallies. With this force they were ready to 
appear in the bay, while the Roman ships lay 
unmanned and unrigged, secure against any dan- 
ger from an enemy whom they supposed shut up 
by impenctrable bars; and in these circumstances, 
if they had availed themselves of the surprise with 
which they might have attacked their enemy, 
must have done great execution on the Roman 
fleet. But having spent no less than two days in 
clearing their new passage after it was known to 
be open, and in preparing for action, they gave 
the enemy likewise full time to prepare. On the 
third they engaged, fought for the whole day 
without gaining any advantage; and, in their 
retreat at night, suffered greatly from the enciny, 
who pressed onethcir rear. 

While the besiegers endeavoured to obstruet 
this new eommunication with the sea, the be- 
es made a desperate attempt on their works 
by land. A numerous body of men, devoting their 
lives for the defence of their eountry, without any 
arms, and provided only witl: matches, crossed 
the harbour, and, exposing themselves to certain 
death, set fire to the engines and towers of the 
besiegers; and, while they werc surrounded and 
put to the sword, willingly perished in the execu- 
tion of their purpose. 

In such operations the summer elapsed; and 
Seipio, with the loss of his engines, and a renewal 
of all the diffieulties whieh he had formerly to 
encounter at sea, contenting himself with a bloek- 
ade for the winter, diseontinued the siege. 

His command being -prolonged for another 
year, he resumed his attaek in the spring; and 
finding the place greatly reduced by despair and 
famine, he forced his way by one of the docks, 
where he observed that the battlements were low 
and unguarded. His arrival in the streets did not 
put him in possession of the town. The inhabit- 
ants, during six days, disputed every house and 
every passage, and sueeessively set fire to the 
buildings whenever they were obliged to abandon 
them. Above fifty thousand persons of different 
sexes, who had taken refuge in the eitadel, at last 
accepted of quarter, and were led captive from 
thence in two separate divisions, one of twenty- 
five thousand women, and another of thirty thou- 
sand men. 

Nine hundred deserters, who had left the Ro- 
man army during thie siege, having been refused 
the quarter whieh was granted to the others, took 
post in a temple idk stood on an eminence, 


a 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 53 


with a resolution to die with swords in their 
hands, and with the greatest effusion of blood to 
their enemies. To these Hasdrubal, followed by 
his wife and his children, joined himself; but nct 
having the eourage to persist in the same purpose 
with these deserters, he left the temple, and ae- 
cepted of quarter. His wife, in the mean time, 
with more ferocity or magnanimity than her hus- 
band, laid violent hands en her children, and, 
together with the dead bodies, threw herself into 
the flame of a burning ruin. The deserters, too, 
impatient of the dreadíul expectations whieh they 
felt, in order to hasten their own fate, set fire to 
the temple in whieh they had sought a temporary 
cover, and perished in the fames. 

The city continued to burn during seventeen 
days; and all this time the soldicrs were allowed 
to seize whatever they could save from the flames, 
or wrest from the hands of the dying inhabitants, 
who were still dangerous to those who approached 
them. Scipio, in beholding this melancholy scene, 
is sald to have repeated from Homer two lines 
containing a propheey of the fall of Troy. “To 
whom do you now apply this prediction?” said 
Polybius, who happened to be near him; “To 
my own country,” he said, “for her too I dread 
in her turn the reverses of human fate.”? 

Scipio’s letter to the senate is said to have con- 
tained no more than these words: “ Carthage is 
taken. The army waits for your further orders.” 
The tidings were reeeived at Rome with uneom- 
mon demonstrations of joy. ‘The victors, recol- 
lecting all the passages of their former wars, the 
alarms that had been given by Hannibal, and the 
irreconcilable antipatiry of the two nations, gave 
orders to raze the fortifieations of Carthage, and 
even to destroy tlie materials of whieh they were 
built. 

A commission was granted by the senate to 
ten of its members to take possession of territories 
which were thus deprived of their sovereign, to 
model the fori of this new provinee, and to pre- 
pare it for the reception of a Roman governor. 
And thus Carthage, the only instance in whieh 
the human genius ever appeared greatly distin- 
guished in Afriea; the model of magnificenee, the 
repository of wealth, and one of the principal 
states of the ancient world, was no more. ‘The 
Romans, ineited by national animosity, and an 
exeess of jealousy, formed a design more cruel 
towards their rival than at first view it appeared 
to be, and in the exeeution of it became actors in 
the scene of horror far beyond their original in- 
tention. By the milder law aud practice of modern 
nations, we are happily exempted from the dan- 
ger of ever seeing such horrid examples repeated, 
at least in any part of the western world. 

While the event of this mighty siege was still 
in dependenee, the Romans had other wars to 
maintain on the side of Maeedonia and Greece, 
where the natural progress of their policy, suited 
to the measures which they had taken with other 
nations, now ended in the open and avowed 
usurpation of a sovereignty which they had long 
disguised under the specious titles of alliance and 
proteetion, 

Maeedonia being ill fitted to retain the repub- 
liean form into whieh it had been cast by the 
Romans, after some years of distraction, and an 


2 For the history of the destruction of Carthage sce 
the authors above cited, p. 80. 


84 


attempt at last in favour of a pretended son of 
the late king, to recover its independence and its 
monarchy, underwent a second conquest. 
Andriscus, an African of uncertain extraction, 
being observed to resemble the royal family of 
Macedonia, had the courage, under the name of 
Philip, to personate a son of that unfortunate 
monarch, and to make pretensions to the crown. 
With this object in view he went into Syria to 
solicit the aid of Demetrius, but was, by this 
prince, taken into custody, and transported in 
chains to Rome. The Romans paid little regard 
to so contemptible an enemy, and even allowed 
him to escape. After this adventure, the same 
impostor appeared a second time in Macedonia, 
and, with better fortuine than he had in the first 
attempt, drew to his standard many natives of 
that country and of Thrace. In his first encounter 
he even defeated Juventius the Roman prætor, 
and was acknowledged king; but soon after fell a 
prey to Metellus, and furnished the Romans with 
an obvious pretence for reducing the kingdom of 
Macedonia to the ordinary form of a province. 
The states of the Achæan league, at the same 
time, being already on the decline, hastened, by 
the temerity and distraction of their own councils, 
the career of their fortunes to the same termination. 
The Romans, even while they sufiered this 
famous republic to retain the show of its inde- 
pendence, had treated its members in many par- 
ticulars as subjects. At the close of the war with 
Perseus, they had cited to appear at Rome, or 
taken into custody as criminals of state, many 
citizens of Achaia, who had, in that contest, ap- 
peared to be disaffected to the Roman cause. Of 
these they had detained about a thousand in dif- 
ferent prisons of Italy, until, after a period of 
seventeen years, about three hundred of them, 
who survived their confinement, were set at 
liberty, as having already suffered enough; or as 
being no longer in condition to give any umbrage 
to Rome.! Polybius being of this number, ac- 
quired, during his stay in Italy, that knowledge 
of Roman afiairs which appears so conspicuous 
in the remains of his history. When at liberty, 
he attached himself to Scipio, the son of Emilius, 
and being well versed in the active scenes which 
had recently passed in his own country, and being 
entirely occupied with reflections on matters of 
state and of war, no doubt contributed by his in- 
structions in preparing this young man for the 
eminent services which he afterwards performed. 
The Romans, while they detained so many 
Greek prisoners in Italy, in a great measure 
assumed the administration of affairs in Greece, 
disposed of every distinction, whether of fortune 
or power, and confined these advantages to the 
advocates of their own cause, and to the tools of 
their own ambition.2 They received appeals from 
the judgments of the Achzan council, and en- 
couraged its members, contrary to the express 
conditions of their league, to send separate em- 
bassies to Rome. ‘The steps which followed are 
but imperfectly marked in the fragments of his- 
tory which relate to this period. It appears that 
the Spartans, having been forced into the Achzan 
confederacy, continued refractory in most of its 
councils. By some of their complaints at Rome, 
they obtained a deputation, as usual, from the 


1 Pau-anias in Achaicis. 
? Polyb. Excerpt. Legat. e. 103. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


senate to hear parties on the spot, and to adjust 
their differences. The Achæan council, incensed 
at this insult which was ofřered to their authority 
without waiting the arrival of the Roman depu- 
ties, proceeded to enforce their own decrees against 
the republic of Sparta, marched an army into 
Laconia, and defeated, with some slaughter, at the 
gates of Lacedemon, the inhabitants of that city 
who ventured to oppose them. The Roman com- 
missioners arriving after these hostilities had com- 
menced, summoned the parties to assemble at 
Corinth, and, in name of the senate, gave sen- 
tence, that Lacedemon, Corinth, Argos, Hea, 
and Orchomenos, not having been original mem- 
bers of the Achæan confederacy, should now be 
disjoined from it; ánd that all the cities which 
had been rescucd from the dominion of Philip, 
should be left in full possession of their freedom 
and independency. 

Multitudes from all the different states of the 
league being on this occasion assembled at Co- 
rinth, a great riot ensued. The Roman deputies 
were insulted and obliged to leave the place; and 
in this manner commenced a war in which the 
Romans, because they hoped to establish their 
sovereignty in Greece without any convulsion, 
and had full employment for their forces in A frica, 
Spain, and Macedonia, engaged with great re- 
luctance. They renewed their commission, and 
named other deputies to terminate the disputes in 
Achaia; but the states of the Achzan league, 
imputing their conduct in this particular to fear, 
and to the ill state of their affairs in Africa, while 
Carthage was likely to repel their attack, thought 
that they had found an opportunity to exclude for 
ever from their councils the overbearing influence 
of this arrogant nation. They were encouraged 
with hopes of support from Thebes, Eubæa, and 
other districts of Greece, where the people were 
averse to the dominion of the Romans;-and they 
therefore assembled an army to assert their com- 
mon rights, and to enforce their authority over the 
several members of their own confederacy. 

Unfortunately for their cause, Metellus had 
then prevailed in Macedonia, and was at leisure 
to turn his forces against them. He accordingly 
moved towards the Peloponnesus, still giving the 
Acheaiis an option to avert the calamities of war, 
by submitting to the mandates of the Roman 
senate. These, he said, were no more, than that 
they should desist from their pretensions on 
Sparta, and the other cantons who applied for 
the protection of Rome. 

But the Acheans thought it safer to resist, than 
to be disarmed under these stale pretences; they 
took the field, passed through tlie isthmus of 
Corinth, and, being jeunes by the Thebans, 
marched to Thermopyle with a view to defend 
this entry into Greece. In this, however, they 
were disappointed, being either prevented from 
seizing the pass, or driven from thence by Metel- 
lus. They were afterwards intercepted in their 
retreat through Phocis, where they lost their 
leader Critolaus, with a great part of his army.4 
Diæus, who succeeded him as head of the con- 
federacy, assembled a new force, consisting of 
fourteen thousand foot and six thousand horse, 
took post on the isthmus of Corinth, and sent 
four thousand men for the defence of Megara, a 


= 


3 Polyb. Excerpt. Legat. c. 144. 
4 Orosius, lib. v. c. 3. Pausanias in Achaicis. 


Cuar. L] 


aai which still nade a part in the expiring con- 
ederacy of independent Greeks. 

Metellus, who after his victory had made him- 
self master of Thebes, advanced to Megara, dis- 
lodged the Achæans from thence, and continued 
his march to the isthmus. Here he was super- 
seded by Mummius, the consul of the present 
year, who, with the new levies from Rome, made 
up an army of twenty-three thousand foot and 
three thousand five hundred horse. The enemy, 
having gained an advantage over his advanced 
guard, were encouraged to hazard a battle under 
the walls of Corinth, and were defeated. The 
greater part fled into the town, but afterwards in 
the night withdrew from that place. Their general 
Dizus fled from the field of battle to Migalopolis, 
whither he had sent his family; having killed his 
wife, to prevent her falling into the hands of the 
enemy, he himself took poison, and died. 

Such are the imperfect accounts which remain 
of the last efforts made by the Greeks to preserve 
a freedom, in the exercise of which they had 
acted so distinguished a part. As they never 
were surpassed by any race of men in the vigour 
with which they supported their republican esta- 
blishments, so they appeared to retain their inge- 
nuity and their skill in many arts, after they had 
Jost the military and political spirit which con- 
stitutes the strength and security of nations; and 
in this latter period, which preceded their extinc- 
tion, as the Achean league was dissolved on 
having incurred the resentment of the Romans, 
so the unhappy remnant of the Spartan republic 
perished in having accepted their protection. The 
enmity and the friendship of the Romans being 
equally fatal, these and every other state or re- 
public of Greece, from this time forward, ceased 
to be numbered among nations, having fallen a 
prey to a power, whose force nothing could equal 
but the ability and the cunning with which it 
was exerted. 

Such, at least, is the comment which we are 
tempted, by the conduct of the Romans, on the 
present occasion, to make on that policy, with 
which about fifty years before this date, Fla- 
mininus, to detach the Grecian cities from Philip, 
proclaimed, with so much ostentation at the isth- 
mus of Corinth, general independence, and the 
free exercise of their own laws to all the republics 
of Greece. That people, when they meant to in- 
gratiate themselves, surpassed every state in gene- 
rosity to their allies, they gained entire confidence, 
and taught nations, who were otherwise in con- 
dition to maintain their own independence, to 
rely for protection on that very power from which 
they had most to fear for their liberties; and in 
the end, under some pretence of ingratitude or 
affront, stripped of every right those very states 
who had most plentifully shared in their bounty. 
In this policy there were some appearances of a 
concerted design, which was at one time liberal 
and generous beyond example, at another time 
cruel and implacable in the opposite extreme, 
equally calculated to gain or to terrify, in the 
cases to which either species of policy was suited. 
It is, however, probable, that they were led by the 
changing state of their interests, and followed the 
conjuncture without any previous design. In 
this sort of conduct the passions are wonderfully 
ready to act in ss ae of the judgment; and we 
may venture to admit, that the Romans some- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


85 


employ, and of which the belief was so favourable 
to the success of their affairs. In a different con- 
juncture, in which they were no longer equally 
obliged to manage the temper of their allies, they 
became more impatient of contradiction, and 
gave way to their resentment on any the slightest 
occasions, or to their ambition without control. 
Their maxim, to spare the submissive, and to re- 
duce the proud,’ whether founded in sentiment 
or cunning, was a principle productive of the ex- 
tremes of generosity and arrogance observed in 
their conduct; it led them by degrees to assume 
a superiority in every transaction, and as their 
power increased, rendered this power propor- 
tionably dangerous to other nations. - 

On the third day after the action which hap- 
pened in the isthmus of Corinth, the victorious 
general entered the city; and considering that 
the inhabitants had a principal part in the late 
insult offered to the Roman commissioners, de- 
termined to strike a general terror into all the 
members of the league by the severities to be exe- 
cuted against this people. Mummius, though, 
with the rest of his countrymen of this age, ill 
qualified to distinguish the elegant workmanship 
of the Grecian artists, of which great collections 
had been made at Corinth, ordered all the statues 
and pictures to be set apart for his triumph; and, 
with this reserve, gave the town, abounding in all 
the accommodations and ornaments of a wealthy 
metropolis, to be pillaged by the soldiers. He 
razed the walls, and reduced the city to ashes. 

Thus Corinth perished in the same year with 
Carthage. The fortifications of Thebes, and of 
some other towns disaflected to the Romans, 
were at the same time demolished; and the ar- 
rangements to be made in the country of Greece 
were committed to deputies from the Roman 
senate, By their order, the Achæan league was 
dissolved, and allits conventions annulled. The 
states which had composed it were deprived of 
their sovereignty, subjected to pay a tribute, and 
placed under the government of a person annually 
sent from Rome with the title of the Pretor of 
Achaia.” 

The Romans now appeared openly, perhaps 
for the first time, in the capacity of conquerors. 
The acquisition of revenue in Macedonia, which, 
about twenty years before this date, had first 
taught them to exempt themselves from taxatio: , 
excited from thenceforward an insatiable thirst of 
dominion : and their future progress is marked 
by the detail of wars which they maintained on 
their frontier, not in defence of the empire, but 
for the enlargement of possessions already tou 
great. 

In Spain, where they still met with resistance, 
they had acted in all the different periods of their 
wars, either on the offensive or defensive, accord- 
ing as the state was, or was not, at leisure froy 
the pressure of their enemies, or according as tls 
generals she employed were ambitious or pacific 

On the conclusion of the peace with Philiy 
the Roman territory in Spain had been divided 
into two provinces, and furnished the stations of 
two separate commanders annually sent from 


5 Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos. 

6 He delivered them to the masters of ships, wilh 
his famous threat, that if any of these curiosities were 
lost, they should be obliged to replace them. 

7 Pausanias, lib. vii.c. 16. Polyb Excerpte de Vir 


times felt the generosity which they professed to | tutibus et Vitiis. 


86 


Rome. On the renewal of the war in Macedo- 
nia, and during the continuance of it, three pro- 
vinces were again united under one government. 
But upon the defeat of Perseus, and the reduction 
of Macedonia, they were separated for ever. 

From that time the ambition of the Romans 
seems to have operated in Spain with the same 
effect as in other parts on the boundaries of their 
empire. They pressed upon the natives, not 
merely to secure their own territory from inroad 
and depredation, but to gain new accessions of 
dominion and wealth. ‘They advanced to the 
‘Tagus, endcavoured to penetrate the mountains 
beyond the sources of that river; and on that side 
involved themselves in a continual struggle of 
many years’ duration, with the Lusitanians, Gal- 
licians, and Celtiberi. 

In these wars, the Roman officers were actu- 
ated by their avarice, as well as by their ambition, 
and were glad of occasions to quarrel with an 
enemy, amongst whom the produce of rich mines 
of silver and of gold were known to abound, and 
where plentiful spoils were so likely to reward 
their services. 

The theatre of the war in Spain was not so 
conspicuous, nor the conduct of generals so strictly 
observed, as they were in Africa, Asia, or Greece ; 
and such as were employed in that service, 
therefore, the more to hasten their conquests, 
ventured upon acts of treachery or breach of 
faith with the cantons around them, which the 
senate did not commonly avow; and they also 
ventured upon acts of extortion and peculation in 
their own governments, which gave occasion to 
the first complaints of this sort that were brought 
to Rome. 

The proconsul Lucullus, having accepted of 
the surrender of a town, and being received into 
it in consequence of a capitulation, nevertheless 
put the inhabitants to the sword and carried off 
their effects. Galba, commanding in Lusitania, 
or the western province of Spain, soon afterwards 
circumvented, by a like act of perfidy and cruelty, 
some of the inhabitants whom he could not other- 
wise reduce. ‘These examples probably retarded, 
instead of forwarding, the progress of the Roman 
arms, and confirmed that obstinate valour with 
which the natives of Spain disputed every post in 
defence of their country; and with which they 
maintained the contest against a succession of 
Roman generals, prætors, or consuls, who were 
employed to subdue them. This contest they 
continued or renewed, at short intervals, with 
various success, from the first expedition of the 
Scipios to the last of Augustus, 

At the beginning of the last war with Car- 
thage, the Lusitanians, incensed by the act of 
treachery which was committed by the Roman 
general Galba, reassembled in numerous parties 
under Viriathus, who had himself escaped from 
the massacre on that occasion, and who enter- 
tained an implacable resentment to the authors 
of it. This leader, according to the Roman his- 
torians, had heen originally a herdsman, after- 
wards a chief of banditti, and last of a!l the com- 
mander of an army which had often defeated the 
legions of Rome, and threatened their expulsion 
from Spain. He seems to have known how to 
employ the impetuous valour of a rude people 
against troops not less valiant than his own 
countrymen, though more depending on disci- 
nline; and ta have possessed what the Spaniards 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


retained, even down to the days of Cesar, the 
faculty of turning the want of order to account 
against an enemy so much accustomed to order, 
as, in a great measure, to rely upon it in most of 
their operations. With him an apparent rout 
and dispersion of his followers was the ordinary 
prelude to a violent attack; and he commonly 
endeavoured, by pretended {lights and disorderly 
movements, to draw the enemy into rash pursuits 
or precipitant marches, and seized every advan- 
tage which they gave him with irresistible ad- 
dress and valour. He continued about ten years 
to baffle all the attempts which the Romans made 
to reduce Lusitania. Tle had projected a league 
and defensive confederacy with the other free na- 
tions of Spain, when he was assassinated, as he 
lay asleep on the ground, by two of his own fol- 
lowers, supposed to be in concert with the Roman 
general. 

The Romans, upon this event, found the 
western and northern parts of Spain open to 
their inroads. In little more than a year after- 
wards, a Roman army under Brutus passed the 
Duero,! and penetrated quite to the coast of Gal- 
licia, from which they reported, with more than 
the embellishments and exaggerations of tra- 
vellers, that the sun was seen from this distant 
region, when he set in the evening, to sink and 
extinguish himself with a mighty noise in the 
Western Ocean. 

The natives of this country, however, did not 
think themselves subdued by being thus overrun. 
They retired, with their cattle and effects, inte 
places of strength; and, when required to pay 
contributions, replied, That their ancestors had 
left them swords to defend their possessions, but 
not any gold to redeem them. 

Such were the occupations of the Roman arms 
in the western division of Spain, while they 
were equally engaged in the eastern province, 
under Cato the elder, Tiberius Gracchus, and 
others, who endeavoured to secure what the state 
had aiready acquired, or to extend its limits.—— 
These generals obtained their several triumphs, 
and joined to the Roman possessions on the coast 
considerable acquisitions in the inland part of the 
country. ‘Their progress, however, on this side 
had been greatly retarded by the obstinate valour 
of the Numantians, and other cantons of the 
Celtiberi, who had maintained the contest during 
fifty years, and at last had formed a general con- 
federacy of all the interior nations of Spain, to be 
conducted by Viriathus, when their measures were 
broken by the death of that formidable leader. 

Numantia was the principal strong hold, or, 
as we may conceive it, the capital of a small na- 
tion. Their lodgment, or township, was con- 
tained within a circumference of about three miles, 
situated among the mountains of Celtiberia, or 
Old Castile, and at the confluence of the Durius 
with another river, both of which having steep 
banks, rendered the place, on two of its sides, of 
very difficult access. It was fortified on the third 
side with a rampart and ditch. 

The people could muster no more than eight 
or ten thousand men ; but these were greatly dis- 
tinguished by their valour, reputed superior in 
horsemanship to every other nation of Spain, and 
equal to the Romans in the use of the shield and 
the stabbing sword. They had already gained 


1 Durias. 


Cuar. L] 


many victories over the Roman armies which had 
been employed to reduce them. They had obliged 
Pompey, one of the Roman generals, contrary to 
the practice of his country, to accept of a treaty, 
while the advantage of fortune was against him. 
They obliged the consul Mancinus to save his 
army by a capitulation.? Neither of those trea- 
ties indeed were ratified by the Roman senate. 
To expiate the breach of the last, the consul Man- 
cinus, who concluded it, together with Tiberius 
Gracchus, his questor, were ordered to be deli- 
vered up to the hands of the enemy, and to suffer 
in their own persons for the failure of engage- 
ments which they could not fulfil. ‘Tiberius 
Gracchus appealed to the people, was saved by 
their favour, and from this time is supposed to 
have received that bias which he followed in the 
subsequent part of lis political conduct. Man- 
cinus acquiesced in the sentence of the senate, 
was presented naked and in fetters at the gates of 
Numantia, asa sacrifice to the resentment of that 
nation, for the breach of a treaty which the Ro- 
mans determined not to observe. But the victim 
was nobly rejected, and the Numantians insisted 
on the conditions they had stipulated, saying, 
that a public breach of faith could nct be expiated 
by the suffering of a private man.3 

These transactions passed about ten years af- 
ter the destruction of Carthage, and the Romans, 
mortified with the length and ill-success of the 
war with Numantia, had recourse again to the 
services of Scipio. 

They had formerly dispensed, in his favour, 
with the law that required a certain age as a 
qualification for the office of consul; and now, in 
order to employ him a second time, they were 
obliged to suspend another law, which prohibited 
the re-election of the same person into that office. 

Upon the arrival of Scipio in Spain, it is said 
that he found the Roman army, discouraged by 
repeated defeats, withdrawn into fortified stations 
at a distance from the enemy, detesting the hard- 
ships of a military camp, indulging themselves 
in all the vices of a disorderly town, and subject 
to panics on the slightest alarm. it is said that 
the cries, the aspect, the painted visage, and the 
long hair of the Spaniard were become objects 
of terror.4 

Among the reformations which Scipio made 
to restore the vigour of the army, he cleared the 
camp of its unnecessary followers, amongst whom 
are mentioned women, merchants, and fortune- 
tellers; he restricted the quantity of baggage, re- 
duced the furniture of the kitchen to the spit and 
the pan; and the tables of officers to plain food, 
roasted or boiled. Je prohibited the use of bed- 
steads in camp, and set the example himself of 
sleeping on a straw mat; likewise restrained the 
infantry from the use of horses on the march, 
and obliged them to carry their own baggage. 

Though possessed of superior numbers he de- 
clined a battle, and avoided every route on which 
the enemy were prepared to receive him; took 
advantage of a superior address in managing his 
resources, and damped the ardour of a fierce peo- 
ple by slow operations; he laid waste the country 
around them, and by degrees obliged them to re- 
tire within their own ramparts, and to consume 
what was raised or provided within the circuit of 
their walls. 


2 Euvropius, lib. iv. c. 8. 


3 Appian de Bell. Hispan. p. 302. 4 Florus. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


87 


Scipio had been joined on his march to Nu- 
mantia by Jugurtha, the grandson of Massinissa, 
who, on their service, made his first acquaintance 
with the Romans, and brought a reinforcement 
of twelve elephants, with a considerable body of 
horse, of archers and slingers. At its arrival the 
army amounted to sixty thousand men. But 
Scipio did not ee to storm the town ; he took 
a number of posts which he successively fortified, 
and, by joining them together, completed a double 
line cf circumvallation, equal in a to the 
walls which were opposed to him. He had his 
curtains, his towers, his places of arms correspond- 
ing to those of the place; and he established an 
order of service and a set of signals, in case of 
alarm by day or by night, which resembled more 
the precautions of an army on its defence, than 
the operations of a siege. His intention was to 
reduce the Numantians by famine, an operation 
of time, during which, from so warlike a nation, 
he might be exposed to surprise, or to the effects 
of despair. 

The place besieged being at the confluence of 
rivers navigable with small vessels, which de- 
scended with great rapidity on the stream, or 
which could, with the favour of proper winds, 
even remount in the sight of the enemy, the peo- 
ple, for a while, precured some supplies by water. 
Numbers of them swimming with great address, 
and diving at proper places, to avoid being scen 
by the besiegers, still passed through the lines, 
and preserved a communication with the country, 
until the rivers also were barred across their chan- 
nels by timbers, that were armed with sword- 
blades and spikes of iron. 

The Numantians were still in hopes of suc- 
cour from their allies. Five aged warricrs un- 
dertook, each with his son for a second, to pass 
through the lines of the enemy, and to sue for 
relief from the neighbouring nations. They suc- 
ceeded by night in the first part of their attempt, 
cut down the Roman guard, threw the camp into 
some confusion, and escaped before the occasion 
of the alarm was known. But their cause was 
become desperate, and too likely to involve in cer- 
tain ruin any friend who embraced it. Their 
suit, nevertheless, was attended to at Lutia, the 
head of a small canton, forty miles from Nu- 
mantia. 

The young men of this place took their reso- 
lution in favour of the injured Numantians; but 
Scipio had notice of their intention time enough 
to prevent its effect. He hastened to the place, 
and having accomplished this march of forty 
miles in eight hours, surprised the inhabitants, 
had four hundred young men delivered up to him, 
and ordered their right arms to be struck eff. 
By this dreadful act of severity, he secured him- 
self from any danger on that quarter, and im- 
pressed the other states of that neighbourhood 
with terror. 

The Numantians, in the mean time, were 
pressed with famine, and having no hopes of re- 
lief} sent a deputation to try the clemency of their 
enemy. ‘ What was once a happy state,” they 
said, “content with its own possessions, and se- 
cure in the valour of its citizens, is now reduced 
to great distress, for no other crime than that of 
having maintained their freedom, and of having 
defended their wives and their children. 

“For you,” they continued, addressing them- 
selves to Scipio, “ who veurself are said to posscss 


68 


so many virtues, it would become you to espouse 
the cause of this injured nation, and procure to 
them terms which they could with honour pre- 
fer to their present distresses. Their expecta- 
tions are moderatc, for they have felt the reverses 
of fortune. It is now in your power to receive 
their submission under any tolerable conditions, 
or to see them perish in some act of despair, 
which may prove fatal to many of their enemies, 
as well as to themselves.” 

Scipio replied, That he could not grant them 
any terms ; that they must surrender at discretion. 

Upon the return of this answer they resumed 
their former obstinacy, and held out until they 
had consumed every article of provision within 
their walis; endeavoured to turn their shields 
and other utensils of leather into food, devoured 
the dead bodies, and even preyed on each other. 

The end of this piteous scene is variously re- 
ported. By some it is said, that, in the last stage 
of despair, the Numantians sallied forth to pur- 
chase death by the slaughter of their enemies; 
that, in the execution of this purpose, thcy for 
some time exposed themselves with the most 
frantic rage, till the greater part being slain, a few 
returned into the town, set fire tothe houses, and, 
with their wives and children, perished in the 
flames.1 

By others it is said, that they agreed to surren- 
der on a certain day, but that when this day 
came they begged for another; alleging, that many 
of their people, yet fond of liberty, had dcter- 
mined to die, and wished for one day more, that 
they might the more deliberately execute their 
purpose. Such was the aversion to surrender at 
discretion, which the fear of captivity, and that 
of its ordinary consequences among ancient na- 
tions, had inspired. T'he few of this high-minded 

eople who survived the effects of despair, falling 
into the enemy’s hands, were stripped of their 
arms. Fifty were reserved, as a specimen of the 
whole, to adorn the victor’s triumph. The re- 
mainder were sold for slaves, and the walls of 
their strong hold were Icvelled with the ground. 
The prisoners, even after they had laid down 
their arms and submitted to mercy, retained the 
ferocity of their looks, and cast on their victors 
such glances of indignation and rage, as still kept 
the animosity of enemies awake, and prevented 
the returns of pity. As these particulars strongly 
mark the defects which still subsisted in the sup- 
posed law of war among ancient nations, the 
reader will probably bear with the shock that is 
given to his feelings of compassion, for the sake 
of the picture which it is necessary to give of the 
manners of the times. 

If we judge of Numantia from the resistance 
it made to the Roman arms, it having been one 
of their most difficult conquests, we must consi- 
der it as a state of considerable power. Its reduc- 
tion gave immediate respite from war in Spain. 
Scipio and Brutus returned nearly together from 
their provinces in that country, and had their 
separate triumphs in the same year. 

‘These operations against Numantia, Carthage, 
Macedonia, and Greece, were accompanied with 
a revolt of the slaves in Sicily, and with a num- 
ber of other wars less considerable in Illyricum, 
Thrace, and Gaul. Of these the revolt of the 
slaves merits the greater attcntion, on account of 


1 Orosius. lib, v. & 7. Florus, lib. ii. c. 18. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Book II. 


the view it gives of the state of the countries now 
under the immediate jurisdiction of Rome. The 
island of Sicily having been the tirst acquisition 
which the Romans made beyond the limits of 
Italy, had been for some time in a state of domes- 
tic tranquillity, and undisturbed by any foreign 
enemy. Its lands were become the property of 
Roman citizens, who here, as on their estates in 
Italy, cultivated plantations to supply with corn, 
wine, and oil, the markets and granaries of Rome. 
The labour was performed by slaves. ‘These 
were led in chains to the fields, or confined in 
vaults and fortified workhouses at the several 
tasks they were employed to perform. As the 
proprietors of land had many reasons to prefer 
the labour of slaves to that of freemen, who were 
distracted by their political engagements, and 
subject to be called upon or pressed into the mili- 
tary service, the number of slaves continually in- 
creased. They were, for the most part, prisoners 
of war; and some of them being of high rank, 
unused to submission, and animated with fierce 
passions of indignation and scorn, were ready, 
upon every favourable opportunity, to take arms 
against their masters, and often to shake the state 
itself with a storm which was not foreseen until 
it actually burst. 

About ten years after the destruction of Car- 
thage, and four years before that of Numantia, 
this injured class of men were incited to revolt in 
Sicily by Eunus, a Syrian slave; who, at first 
under pretence of religion, and by the fame of 
miracles he was supposed to perform, tempted 
many to break from their bondage ; traversed the 
country, broke open the vaults and prisons. in 
which his fellow-sufferers were confined, and 
actually assembled an army of seventy thousand 
men. With this force, in four successive cam- 
paigns, he madc a prosperous war on the Roman 

pretors, and often stormed the entrenchments of 
the Roman camp. : 
This leader, however, being ill-qualified to im- 
prove his victories, and having no concerted plan 
for the government or subsistence of his followers, 
in a country that was gradually ruined by theit 
own devastations, was at length, by the caution. 
and superior conduct of Perperna, or Publius 
Rutilius, gradually circumscribed in his depreda- 
tions, defeated, and obliged to take refuge in En- 
na, a fortified place, where about twenty thou- 
sand of his followers were put to the sword, and 
the remainder, as an example, to deter slaves from 
the commission of a similar offence, were nailed 
to the cross, near the most frequented highways, 
and in the most conspicuous parts of the island. 
While the Roman armies were thus employed 
in the provinces, or on the frontier of their exten- 
sive conquests, Italy itself had long enjoyed a 
perfect. security, the lands were cultivated, and 
the country stocked with people, whether aliens 
or citizens, freemen or slaves. From about three 
hundred thousand,? which, in this period, were 
the ordinary return of the census, the citizens 
soon after augmented to above four hundred 
thousand ;3 and Scipio, under whose inspection 
as censor this return was made, hearing the crier 
repeat the prayer which was usual at the closing 
of the rolls, “ That the republic might increase 


| 


| 2 Three hundred and twenty thonsand. 
| 3 Four hundred and twenty-eight thousand threes 
| hundred and forty-two. 


Cuar. LJ 


in the numbers of its people, and in the extent of 
its territory ;” bid him pray that it might be pre- 
served, for it was aiready great enough, It is 
probable that, in the view of this sagacious ob- 
server, the marks of corruption already began to 
appear in the capital; and a tree, which still con- 
tinued for a century to make such vigorous shoots 
from its branches, already bore some marks of 
decay in its trunk. 

The offices of state, and the government of 
provinces, to which those who had filled them 
succecded, began to be coveted from avarice, as 
well as from ambition. Complaints of peculation 
and extortion, which were received about this 
time from Spain and Macedonia, pointed out the 
necessity of restraining such oppressions, and 
suggested some penal laws, which were often, 
and in vain, amended and revived. 

An action was instituted in favour of the pro- 
vinces, against governors, or their attendants, who 
should be accused of levying money without the 
authority of the state, and an ordinary jurisdiction 
was granted to one of the pretors, to hear com- 
plaints on this subject. The penalty at first was no 
inore than restitution, and a pecuniary fine; it was 
gradually extended to degradation, and exile. 

These reformations are dated in 


No. 604. the time of the last war with Car- 
Let Culpur- thase, and are ascribed to the motion 
nia de Repe- C : : 
ndis. of Culpurnius Piso, then one of the 
Questiones tribunes. Before this time all juris- 
perpetue. diction in criminal matters belonged 


to the tribunal of the people, and 
was exercised by themselves in their collective 
capacity, or occasionally delegated to a special 
commission. Few crimes were yet defined by 
statute, and ordinary courts of justice for the trial 
of thein were not yet established. In these cir- 
cumstances criminals of state had an opportunity 
not only todefend themselves after a prosecution 
was commenced, but likewise to employ intrigue, 
or exert their credit with the people, to prevent 
or evade a trial, 

To supply these defects, a list of statutory 
crimes now began to be made, and an ordinary 
jurisdiction was established. Besides extortion 
in the provinces, which had been defined by the 
aw of Culpurnius,’ murder, breach of faith, rob- 
bery, assault, poisoning, incest, adultery, bribery, 
false judgment, fraud, perjury, &c. were succes- 
sively joined to the list; and an ordinary juris- 
diction for the trial of such crimes was vested in 
a jury of senators, over whom the prætor, with 
the title of quesitor, presided. 

The number of pretors, corresponding to this 
and other growing exigencies of the state, was 
now augmented to six; and these officers, though 
destined, as well as the consvés, to the command 
of armies and the government of provinces, began, 
during the terin of their magistracy, to have full 
occupation in the city, On this account it was 
not till after the expiration of the year for which 
they had been elected, that they drew lots for a 
province, A like policy was soon after adopted 
in the destination of consuls, and all the other 
officers of state, wlio, being supposed to have suf- 
ficient occupation in Italy and Rome during the 
year of their appointment, were not destined to 
any foreign service till that year was expired. 


4 Parricidium, vis publica, latrocinium, injuria, ve- 
hificium, incestus, adulterium, capt pecuniz corrupti, 
judicii falsi, perjurium. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


1 


89 


With these establishments, calculated to se- 
cure the functions of office, the use of the ballot 
was introduced, first in clections, and afterwards 
in collecting opinions of judges in the courts of 
justice :> a dangerous form of proceeding in con- 
stitutions tending to popular license, and where 
justice is more likely to suffer from the unawed 
passions of the lower people, than from any im- 
proper influence of superior rank; and where the 
authority of the wise, and the sense of public 
shame, were so much required, as principal sup- 
ports of government. 

An occasion for the commission of new crimes 
is frequently taken from the precautions which 
are employed against the old. From the facility 
with which criminal accusations now began to be 
received, a new species of crime accordingly arose. 
Calumny and vexatious prosecutions commenced 
by disappointed competitors against persons in 
public trust, became so frequent as to require the 
interposition of laws. On this account it was 
enacted, upon the motion of Memmius, that all 
persons in office, or appointed to command in the 
provinces, might decline answering a criminal 
charge until the expiration of their term, or until 
their return from the service to which they were 
destined ;° and persons of any denomination might 
have an action of calumny against the author of 
a false or groundless prosecution. Whoever was 
convicted of this offence was to be branded in the 
face with the initials of his crime. 

By these establishments the city of Rome, long 
resembling a mere military station, made some 
progress in completing the system and applica- 
tion of her laws. Literary productions, in some 
of tlicir forms, particularly in the form of dramatic 
compositions, as hath been already observed, be- 
gan to be known. The representation of fables 
was first introduced under pretence of religion, 
and practised as a sacred rite to avert the plague 
or some public calamity. This entertainment 
was fondly received by the people, and therefore 
frequently presented to them by the ediles, who 
had the charge of such matters. Literature, how- 
ever, in some of its less popular forms, was 

checked, as a source of corruption. 
U. C. 592. In the year of Rome five hundred 
and nincty-two, that is, about eight 
years after the reduction of Macedonia, the Ro- 
man senate, upon a report from M. Pomponius, 
the pretor, that the city was frequented by phi- 
losophers and rhetoricians, resolved, that this 
officer, agreeably to his duty to the republic, should 
take care to remove all such persons in the man- 
ner his own judgment should direct ;? and, in 
about six years after this date, an embassy having 
come from Athens, composed of scholars anc 
rhetoricians, who drew the attention of the youth 
by the display of their talents, au uncommon 
despatch was given to their business, that they 
might not have any pretence for remaining too 
long in the city. 

A proposal which was made during this pe- 
riod, to erect a tlicatre for the accommodation of 
the spectators at their public shows, was rejected 
with great indignation, as an attempt to corrupt 
the manners of the people. "The materials which 
had been collected for this work were publicly 
sold, and an edict, at the same time, was pub- 


5 Lex Gabinia Tabellaria. ‘ ) 
6 Lex Meminia de reis postulandis. Lex Cassia 
Tabellaria. 7 A. Gellius, lib, xv. c. 11 


90 


lished, that no one should ever resume this design, 
or attempt to place any bench or seat for the ac- 
commodation of the spectators at any theatrical 
entertainment in the city, or within a mile of its 
walls.! Tt was thought an act of effeminacy, it 
seems, for the Roman people to be seated; and 
it is undoubtedly wise, in matters of small mo- 
ment, however innocent, to forbid what is consi- 
dered as an evil, and, in remitting established 
severities, to let the opinion of innocence at least 
precede the induigence. 

The sumptuary laws already mentioned, re- 
specting entertainments and household expenses, 
were, under the name of Didius, the person who 
proposed the renewal of them, revived ;? and, 
with some alterations, extended to all the Roman 
citizens dispersed over Italy. 

Such was the antidote which the policy of 
that age provided, in the capital of a great empire, 
against luxury and the ostentation of wealth; 
distempers incident to prosperity itself, and not 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox If. 


to be cured by partial remedies. 
the Romans ‘Ges knew better how to accomplish 
the celebrated problem of Themistocles, in mak- 
ing a small state a great one, than they knew 
how to explain the effects of its greatness) com- 
monly imputed to some particular circumstance, 
or accidental event. Tothe spoils of Tarentum, 
they said, and of Asia,? to the destruction of our 
principal rivals, the Carthaginians; tothe mighty 
show of statues, pictures, and costly furniture, 
which were brought by Mummius from Corinth, 
we owe this admiration of finery, and so prevailing 
a passion for private as well as for public wealth. 
In this manner they explained the effects of a 
progress which they themselves had made in the 
acquisition of so many provinces; in the growin 
security and riches of a mighty city, from whic 
all foreign alarms were far removed ; and to which 
the wealth of a great empire, either in the form 


They were by 


of private fortune or of public treasure, began to 


flow with a continued and increasing stream.4 


CHAPTER II. 


Extent of the Roman Empire—Political Character of its Head— Facility with which it continued 
to advance—Change of Character, Political as well as Moral—Character of the People or Com- 
mons—Dangerous Humours likely to break out—Appearance of Tiberius Gracchus—His project 
to revive the Law of Licinius—Intercession of the Tribune Octavius— The Republic divided— 
Disputes in the Comitia— Deposition of the Tribune Octavius— Commissioners appointed for the 
Division of Lands— Tiberius Gracchus sues to be re-elected Tribune—His Death— Immediate 
Consequences—Proceedings of Carbo—Embassy of Scipio—Foreign Affairs— Violence of the 


Commissioners— Domestic Affairs. 


EN the manner that has been summarily stated 
in the preceding chapters, the Romans completed 
their political establishment, and made their first 
and their greatest advances to empire, without de- 
parting from the policy by which they had been 
preserved in the infancy of their power. They 
were become sovereigns of Macedonia, Greece, 
Italy, part of Africa, Lusitania, and Spain; yet, 
even in this pitch of greatness, made no distinc- 
tion between the civil and military departments, 
nor gave to any Citizen an exemption from the 
public service. They did not despise any enemy, 
neither in the measures they took, nor in the ex- 
ertions they made to resist him: and as the fatal 
effects which they and all the other nations of 
the ancient world were long accustomed to ex- 
pect from defeats, were no less than servitude or 
death, they did not submit to any enemy in con- 
sequence of any event, nor under the pressure of 
any calamity whatever. 

Other nations were accustomed to rise on vic- 
tories, and to sink under defeats; to become in- 
solent or mean with the tide of their fortunes. 
The Romans alone were moderate in prosperity, 
and arrogant when their enemies expected to 
force their submission. 

Other nations, when in distress, could weigh 
their sufferings against the concessions which 
they were required to make; and, among the 
evils to which they were exposed, preferred what 
appeared to be the least. The Romans alone 
spurned the advances of a victorious enemy ; 
were not to be moved by suilerings; and, though 
they cautiously avoided difficulties that were 


ł Val. Maxim. lib. ii.c. 4. 2 Lex Didia. 


likely to surpass their strength, did not allow it 
to be supposed that they were governed by fear 
in any case whatever. They willingly treated 
with the vanquished, and were ready to grant the 
most liberal terms when the concession could not 
be imputed to weakness or fear. By such free 
and unforced concession, indced, they established 
a reputation for generosity, which contributed, no 
less than their valour, to secure the dominion 
they acquired. 

With the same insinuating titles of allies or 
protectors, by which they had, in the infant state 
of their policy, brought all the cantons of Latium 
to follow their standard; they continued to take 
the ascendant over nations whom they could not 
have otherwise subdued. But as they were libera. 
in their friendships, so, after repeated provocations 
seemed to justify a different conduct, they were ter- 
rible in their resentments, and took ample compen- 
sation for the favours they had formerly bestowed. 

By thcir famous maxim in war, already men- 
tioned, That the submissive were to be spared, 
and the proud to be humbled, it became necessary 
for them, in every quarrel, to conquer or to perish ; 
and, when these were the alternatives proposed 
by them, other nations were entitled to consider 
them as common enemies. No state has a right 
to make the submission of mankind a necessary 
condition to its own preservation; nor are many 
states qualified to support such pretensions. Some 
part of this political character, however, is neces- 
sary to the safety, as well as to the advancement, 


3 Asia primum devicta luxuriam misit in Italiam. 
Plin. lib. xxxiii. c. 11. i 
4 Liv. lib. xxxix. c. 6 Plin. lib. xxxvii. c. 1. 


Caap. I].] 


of nations. No free state or republic is safe under 
uny other government or defence than that of its 
own citizens. No nation is safe that permits any 
ally to suffer by having espoused its cause, or 
that allows itself to be driven, by defeats or mis- 
fortunes, into a surrender of any inaterial part of 
its rights. 

The nieasure of the Roman conquests, in the 
beginning of the seventh century of Rome, though 
great, was yet far from being full; and the people 
nad not hitherto relaxed the industry, nor cooled 
in the ardour with which prosperous nations ad- 
vance, but which they frequently remit in the 
height of their attainments and of their power. 

The constitution of the commonwealth still 
afforded a plentiful nursery of men for both the 
civil and military departments; and this people 
accordingly continued for some time to advance 
with a quick pace in the career of their conquests. 
They subdued mighty kingdoms with as great, or 
greater facility, than that with which they had 
formerly conquered villages and single fields. 

But the enlargement of their territory, and the 
success of their arms abroad, became the sources 
of a ruinous corruption at home. The wealth of 
provinces began to flow into the city, and filled 
the coffers of private citizens, as well as those of 
the commonwealth. The offices of state and the 
command of armies were become lucrative as well 
as honourable, and were coveted on the former 
account. In the state itself the governing and the 
governed felt separate interests, and were at vari- 
ance, from motives of avarice, as well as ambition; 
and, instead of the parties who formerly strove for 
distinction, and for the palm of merit in the ser- 
vice of the commonwealth, factions arose, who 
contended for the greatest share of its spoils, and 
who sacrificed the public to their party-attach- 
ments and animosities, 

Two hundred and thirty years had elapsed 
since the animosities of patrician and plebeian 
were extinguished by the equal participation of 
public honours. This distinctiozi itself was in a 
great measure obliterated, and gave way to a new 
one, which, under the denomination of nobles and 
commons, or illustrious and obscure, without in- 
volving any legal disparity of privileges, gave rise 
to an aristocracy, which was partly hereditary, 
founded in the repeated succession to honours in 
the same family; and partly personal, founded in 
the habits of high station, and in the advantages of 
education, such as never fail to distinguish the con- 
ditions of men in every great and prosperous state. 

‘These circumstances conferred a power on the 
nobles, which, though less invidious, was not less 
real than that which had been possessed by the 
ancient patricians. The exercise of this power 
was lodged with the senate, a body which, though 
by the emulation of its members too much dis- 
posed to war, and ambitious of conquest, was pro- 
bably never surpassed in magnanimity, ability, or 
in steadiness, by any council of state whatever. 

The people had submitted to the senate, as 
possessed of an authority which was founded in 
the prevailing opinion of their superior worth ; 
and even the-most aspiring of the commons al- 
lowed themselves to be governed by an order of 
men, amongst whom they themselves, by proper 
efforts and suitable merit, might hope to ascend. 
The examples of preferment, and the rise of in- 
dividuals, from the lowest to the highest ranks of 


the commonwealth, though for the most part re- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


ol 


ceived with some degree of jealousy by those who 
were already in possession of the higher condition, 
were nevertheless frequent, and extinguished all 
appearance of an exclusive pretension to the ho- 
nours of the state in any order or class of the people. 

The knights, or the equestrian order, bemg 
persons possessed of estates or effects of a certain 
valuation,! formed between the senate and the 
people an intermediate rank, who, in consequence 
of their having a capital, and being less engaged 
than the senators in affairs of state, became 
traders, contractors, farmers of the revenue, and 
constituted a species of moneyed interest in the 
city, and in the provinces. 

Such, during the latter part of the period of 
which the events have been already related, was 
the distribution of rank in this commonwealth. 
But circumstances which appear to be fixed in 
the political state of nations, are often no more 
than a passage in the shifting of scenes, or a transi- 
tion from that which a people have been, to what 
they are about to become. The nobles began to 
avail themselves of the high authority and ad- 
vantages of their station, and to accumulate pro- 
perty as wellas honours. The country began to 
be occupied with their plantations and their slaves. 
The number of great landed estates, and the 
multiplication of slaves, kept pace together. This 
manner of stocking plantations was necessary or 
expedient in the circumstances of the Romans: 
for if the Roman citizen, who possessed so much 
consequence in his military and political capacity, 
had been willing to become a hireling and a ser- 
vant, yet it was not the interest of masters to 
entrust their affairs to persons who were liable to 
be pressed into the legions, or who were so often 
called away to the comitia and assemblies of the 
people. 

Citizens contended for offices in the state as the 
road to lucrative appointments abroad ; and when 
they had obtained this end, and had reigned for a 
while in some province, they brought back from 
their governments a profusion of wealth ill ac- 
quired, and the habit of arbitrary and uncontrolled 
command. When disappointed in the pursuits of 
fortune abroad, they became the leaders of dan- 
gerous factions at home; or when suddenly pos- 
sessed of great wealth, they became the agents of 
corruption to disseminate idleness, and the love of 
ruinous amusements, in the minds of the people. 

The seclusion of the equestrian order from the 
pursuit of political emolument or honour, and the 
opportunities they had, by contracts and by farm- 
ing the revenue, to improve their fortunes ina 
different way, confirmed them in the habits of 
trade, and the attention to lucrative considerations. 

The city was gradually crowded with a popu- 
lace, who, tempted with the cheap or gratuitous 
distribution of corn, by the frequency of public 
shows, by the consequence they enjoyed as mem- 
bers of the popular assemblies, or perhaps dis- 
lodged from the country by the engrossers of land, 
aa the preference which was given to the labour 
of slaves over that of freemen, flocked from the 
colonics and municipal towns to reside at Rome. 

There they were corrupted by idleness and indi- 
gence, and the order itself was continually debased 
by the frequent accession of emancipated slaves. 

The Romans, who were become so jealous of 
| their prerogative as citizens, had no other way of 


1 400,000 Roman money, or about 3,000. 


92 


disposing of a slave, who had obtained his free- 
dom, than by placing him on the rolls of the peo- 
ple; and from this quarter accordingly the numbers 
of the people were chiefly recruited. The emanci- 
pated slave took the name of his master, became a 
client, and a retainer of his family; and at fune- 
rals and other solemnities, where the pomp was 
distinguished by the number of attendants, made 
a part of the retinue. This class of men accord- 
ingly received continual additions, from the vanity 
or weakness of those who chose to change their 
slaves into dependent citizens; and numbers who 
had been conducted to Rome as captives, or who 
had been purchased in Asia or Greece, at a price 
proportioned to the pleasurable arts they possessed, 
became an accession to that turbulent populace, 
who, in the quality of Roman citizens, tyrannized 
in their turn over the masters of the world, and 
wrecked on the conquerors of so many nations 
the evils which they themselves had so freely in- 
flicted on mankind.! 

Citizens of this extraction could not for ages 
arrive at any places of trust, in which they could, 
by their personal defects, injuré the common- 
wealth; but they increased, by their numbers and 
their vices, the weight of that dreg, which, in 
great and prosperous cities, ever sinks, by the 
tendency of vice and misconduct, to the lowest 
condition. ‘They became a part of that faction 
who are ever actuated by envy to their superiors, 
by mercenary views, or by abject fear; who are 
ever ready to espouse the cause of any leader 
against the restraints of public order; disposed to 
vilify the more respectable ranks of men; and by 
their indifference on the subjects of justice or 
honour, to frustrate every principle that may be 
employed for the government of mankind, besides 
fear and compulsion. 

Although citizens of this description were yet 
far from being the majority at Rome, yet it is 
probable that they were in numbers sufficient to 
contaminate the whole body of the people; and, 
if enrolled promiscuously in all the tribes, might 
have had great weight in turning the scale of 
political councils. This effect, however, was hap- 
pily prevented by the wise precaution which the 
censors had taken to confine all citizens of mean 
or slavish extraction to four of the tribes. These 
were called the tribes of the city, and formed but 
a small proportion of the whole.? 

Notwithstanding this precaution, we must sup- 
pose them to have been very improper parties in 
the participation of sovereignty, and likely enough 
to disturb the place of assembly with disorders 
and tumults. 

While the state was advancing to the sove- 
reignty of Italy, and while the territories succes- 
sively acquired were cleared for the reception of 
Roman citizens, by the reduction and captivity 
of the natives, there was an outlet for the redun- 
dancy of this growing populace, and its overflow- 
ings were accordingly dispersed over Italy, from 
Rhegium to Aquileia, in about seventy colonies. 
But the country being now completely settled, 
and the property of its inhabitants established, it 
was no longer possible to provide for the indigent 


1 Velleius, lib. ii. c. 4. 

2 Liv. lib. ix.c. 46. When this precaution was taken 
by Fabius Maximus, the tribes amounted to thirty-one. 
See the successive additions by which the tribes were 
brought up to this number, Liv. lib. vi. c. 5. ib. vii. c. 
15. lib. viii. c. 17. lib. ix. c. 29. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


citizens in this manner; and the practice of set- 
tling new colonies, which had been so useful in 
planting, and securing the conquests which were 
made in Italy, had not yet been extended beyond 
this country, nor employed as the means of secur- 
ing any of the provinces lately acquired. Mere 
colonization, indeed, would have been an improper 
and inadequate measure for this purpose; and in 
time of the republic never was, in any consider- 
able degree, extended beyond sea. The provinces 
were placed under military government, and were 
to be retained in submission by bodies of regular 
troops. Roman citizens had little inclination to re- 
move their habitations beyond the limits of Italy; 
and if they had, would. have been unable, in the 
mere capacity of civil corporations and pacific set- 
tlements, to carry into execution the exactions of 
a government which they themselves, now become 
inhabitants and proprietors of land in those pro- 
vinces, would have soon been interested to oppose: 
for these reasons, although the Roman territory 
was greatly extended, the resources of the poorer 
citizens were diminished. ‘The former discharge 
for many dangerous humours that were found to 
arise among them, was in some measure shut up, 
and these humours began to regorge on the state. 

While the inferior people at Rome sunk in 
their characters, or were debased by the circum- 


stances we have mentioned, the superior ranks, 


by their application to affairs of state, by their 
education, by the ideas of high birth and family- 
distinction, by the superiority of fortune, began to 
rise in their estimation, in their pretensions, and 
in their power; and they entertained some degree 
of contempt for persons, whom the laws still re- 
quired them to admit as their fellow-citizens and 
equals. n 

In this disposition of parties so dangerous in a 
commonwealth, and amidst materials so likely to 
catch the flame, some sparks were thrown that 
soon kindled up anew all the popular animosities 
which seemed to have been so long extinguished. 
We have been carried, in the preceding narration, 
by the series of events, somewhat beyond the date 
of transactions that come now to be related. 
While Scipio was employed in the siege of 
Numantia, and while the Roman officers in Sicily 
were yet unable to reduce the revolted slaves, 
Tiberius Gracchus, born of a plebeian family, but 
ennobled by the honours of his father, by his de- 
scent on the side of his mother from the first 
Scipio Africanus, and by his alliance with the 
second Scipio, who had married his sister, being 
now tribune of the people, and possessed of all the 
accomplishments required in a popular leader, 
great ardour, resolution, and eloquence, formed a 
project in itself extremely alarming, and in its con- 
sequences dangerous to the peace of the republic. 

Like other young men of high pretensions at 
Rome, Tiberius Gracchus had begun his military 
service at the usual age, had served with reputa- 
tion under his brother-in-law, Scipio, at the siege 
of Carthage, afterwards as questor, under Man- 
cinus in Spain, where the credit of his father, 
well known in that province, puinted him out to 
the natives as the only person with whom they 
would negotiate in the treaty that ensued. The 
disgrace he incurred in this transaction gave him 
a eee to the military service, and to foreign 
affairs. When he was called to account for it, the 
severity he experienced from the senate, and the 
protection he obtained from the people, filled his 


Cuape. IL] 


breast with an animosity to the one, and a pre- 
possession in favour of the other. 

Actuated by these dispositions, or by an idea 
not uncommon to enthusiastic minds, that the 
unequal distribution of property, so favourable to 
the rich, is an injury to the poor; he now pro- 
posed in part to remedy or to mitigate this sup- 
posed evil, by reviving the celebrated law of 
Licinius, by which Roman citizens had been re- 
strained from accumulating estates in land above 
the value of five hundred jugera,4 or from having 
more than one hundred of the larger cattle, and 
five hundred of the lesser. 

In his travels through Italy, he said, he had 
observed that the property of land was beginning 
to be engrossed by a few of the nobles, and that 
the country was entirely occupied by slaves, to 
the exclusion of freemen: that the race of Ro- 
man citizens would soon be extinct,5 if proper 
settlements were not provided to enable the poor 
to support their families, and to educate their 
children; and he alleged, that if estates in land 
were reduced to the measure prescribed by law, 
the surplus left would then be sufficient for this 
purpose. 

Being determined, however, as much as possi- 
ble, to prevent the opposition of the nobles, and 
to reconcile the interest of both parties to his 
scheme, he proposed to make some abatements in 
the rigour of the Licinian law, allowing every 
family holding five hundred jugera in right of 
the father, to hold half as much in the right of 
every unemancipated son; and proposed, that 
every person who should suffer any diminution 
of his property in consequence of the intended re- 
form, should have compensation made to him; 
and that the sum necessary for this purpose should 
be issued from the treasury. 

In this manner he set out with an appearance 
of moderation, acting in concert with some lead- 
ing men in the state and members of the senate, 
such as Appius Claudius, whose daughter he 
had married, a senator of the family of Crassus, 
who was then at the head of the priesthood, and 
Mutius Scevola, consul. 

To complete the intended reformation, and to 
prevent for the future the accumulation of estates 
in land, the sale or commerce of land was from 
thenceforward to be prohibited; and three com- 
missioners were to be annually named, to ensure 
the execution and regular observance of this law. 

This project, however plausible, it is probable, 
was extremely unseasonable, and ill suited to the 
state of the commonwealth. The law of Licinius 
had passed in the year of Rome three hundred 
and seventy-seven, no more than fourteen years 
after the city was restored from its destruction by 
the Gauls, and about two hundred and fifty years 
before this date; and though properly suited toa 
small republic, and even necessary to preserve a 
democracy, was, in that condition of the people, 
received with difficulty, and was soon trespassed 
upon even by the person himself on whose sug- 
gestion it had been moved and obtained: that it 
was become obsolete, and gone into disuse, ap- 
peared from the abuses which were now com- 
plained of, and to which its renewal was proposed 
as a remedy. It was become in a great measure 


3 Cicero de Claris Oratoribus, c. 27. 
4 Little more thau half as many acres. 
Ə Pintarch. in Tib. Graech. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


93 


impracticable, and even dangerous in the present 
state of the republic. The distinctions of poor 
and rich are as necessary in states of considerable 
extent, as labour and good government. The 
poor are destined to labour, and the rich, by the 
advantages of education, independence, and lei- 
sure, are qualified for superior stations. The 
empire was now greatly extended, and owed its 
safety and the order of its government to a re- 
spectable aristocracy, founded on the possession 
of fortune, as well as personal qualities and public 
honours. The rich were not, without some 
violent convulsion, to be stript of estates which 
they themselves had bought, or which they had 
inherited from their ancestors. The poor were 
not qualified at once to be raised to a state of 
equality with persons inured to a better condition. 
The project seemed to be as ruinous to govern- 
ment as it was to the security of property, and 
tended to place the members of the common- 
wealth, by one rash and precipitate step, in situa- 
tions in which they were not at all qualified to act. 
For these reasons, as well as from motives of 
private interest affecting the majority of the no- 
bles, the project of ‘Tiberius was strenuously op- 
posed by the senate; and from motives of envy, 
interest, or mistaken zeal for justice, as warmly 
supported by the opposite party. At the several 
assemblies of the people which were called to de- 
liberate on this subject, Tiberius, exalting the 
characters of freemen contrasted with slaves, dis- 
played the copious and pathetic eloquence in 
which he excelled. All the free inhabitants of 
Italy were Romans, or nearly allied to this people. 
He observed how much, being supplanted by the 
slaves of the rich, they were diminished in their 
numbers. He inveighed against the practice of 
employing slaves, a class of men that bring per- 
petual danger, without any addition of strength 
to the public, and who are ever ready to break 
forth in desperate insurrections, as they had then 
actually done in Sicily, where they still occupied 
the Roman arms in a tedious and ruinous war.6 
In declaiming on the mortifications and hard- 
ships of the indigent citizen, he had recourse to 
the arguments commonly advanced to explode 
the inequalities of mankind. ‘ Every wild beast,” 
he said, “in this happy land has a cover or place 
of retreat. But many valiant and respectable 
citizens, who have exposed their lives, and who 
have shed their blood in the service of their 
country, have not a home to which they may re- 
tire. They wander with their wives and their 
children, stripped of every possession, but that of 
the air and the light. ‘To such men the com- 
mon military exhortation, to fight for the tombs 
of their fathers, and for the altars of their house- 
hold gods, is a mockery and a lie. They have 
no altars ; they have no monuments. They fight 
and they die to augment the estates, and to pam- 
fe the luxury of a few wealthy citizens, who 
ave engrossed all the riches of the common- 
wealth. As citizens of Rome, they are entitled 
the masters of the world, but possess net a foot 
of earth on which they may rest.”’7 
He asked, whether it were not reasonable to 
apply what was public to public uses? whether 
a freeman were not preferable to a slave, a brave 
man to a coward, and a fellow-citizen to a stranger? 


~ 6 Appian. de Bell. Civ. 
7 Plutarch. in Vit. Tib. Gracch. 


94 


Heexpatiated on the fortune, and stated the future 
eel of the republic. Much, he said, she 

ad acquired, and had yet more to acquire ; that 
the people, by their decision in the present ques- 
tion, were to determine, whether they were, by 
multiplying their numbers, to increase their 
strength, and be in a condition to conquer what 
yet remained of the world ? or, by suffering the 
resources of the whole people to get into the 
hands of a few, they were.to permit their num- 
bers to decline, and to become unable, against 
nations envious and jealous of their power, even 
to maintain the ground they already had gained ? 

He exhorted the present proprietors of land, 
whom the law of division might affect, not to 
withhold, for the sake of a trifling interest to 
themselves, so great an advantage from their 
country. He bade them consider whether they 
would not, by the secure possession of five hun- 
dred jugera, and of half as much to each of their 
children, be sufficiently rewarded for the con- 
cessions now required in behalf of the public; 
put them in mind that riches were merely com- 
parative ; and that, in respect to this advantage, 
they were still to remain in the first rank of their 
fellow citizens.! 

By these and similar arguments he endeavoured 
to obtain the consent of one party, and to inflame 
the zeal of the other. But when he came to pro- 
fees that the law should be read, he found that 

Is opponents had availed themselves of their 
usual defence; had procured M. Octavius, one 
of his own colleagues, to interpose with his nega- 
tive, and to forbid any farther proceeding in the 
business. Here, according to the forms of the 
constitution, this matter should have dropped. 
The tribunes were instituted to defend their own 
party, not to attack their opponents; and to pre- 
vent not to promote innovations. Every single 
tribune hada negative on the whole. But Tibe- 
rius, thus suddenly stopped in his career, became 
the more impetuous and confirmed in his purpose. 
Having adjourned the assembly to another day, he 
prepared a motion more violent than the former, in 
which he erased all the clauses by which he had 
endeavoured to soften the hardships likely to fall 
on the rich. He proposed, that, without ex- 
pecting any compensation, they should absolutely 
cede the surplus of their possessions, as being ob- 
tained by fraud and injustice. 

In this time of suspense, the controversy he- 
gan to divide the colonies and free cities of Italy, 
and was warmly agitated wherever the citizens 
had extended their property. The rich and the 
pour took opposite sides. ‘They collected their 
arguments, and they mustered their strength. The 
first had recourse to the topics which are com- 


monly employed on the side of prescription, - 
urging that, in some cases, they had possessed | 


their estates from time immemorial; and that the 
lands they possessed were become vaiuable, only 
in consequence of the industry and labour which 
they themselves had employed to improve them: 
that, in other cases, they had actually bought 
their estates: that the public faith, under which 
they were suffered to purchase, was now engaged 
to protect and secure their possession: that, in 
reliance on this faith, they had erected, on these 
lands, the sepulchres of their fathers; they had 
pledged them for the dowries of their wives and 


1 Appian de Bell. Civ 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox H. 


the portions of their children, and mortgaged them 
as security for the debts they had contracted : that 
a law regulating or limiting the farther increase 
or accumulation of property might be suffered ; 
but that a law, having a retrospect, and operating 
in violation of the rights, and to the ruin of so 
many families, was altogether unjust, and even 
impracticable in the execution. 

The poor, on the contrary, pleaded their own 
indigence and their merits ; urged that they were 
no longer in a capacity to fill the station of Ro- 
man citizens or of freemen, nor in a condition to 
settle families or to rear children, the future hopes 
of the commonwealth: that no private person 
could plead immemorial possession of lands which 
had been acquired for the public. They enu- 
merated the wars which they themselves, or their 
ancestors, had maintained in the conquest of those 
lands. ‘They concluded, that every citizen was 
entitled to his share of the public conquests ; and 
that the arguments which were urged to support 
the possessions of the nobles, only tended to show 
how presumptuous and insolent such usurpations, 
if suffered to remain, were likely to become. 

This mode of reasoning appears plausible ; but 
it is dangerous to adopt by halves even reason 
itself. If it were reasonable that every Roman 
citizen should have an equal share of the con- 
quered lands, it was still more reasonable, that 
the original proprietors, from whom those lands 
had been unjustly taken, should have them re- 
stored. If, in this, the maxims of reason and jus- 
tice had been observed, Rome would have still 
been a small community, and might have acted 
with safety on the principles of equality which 
are suitcd to a small republic. But the Romans, 
becoming sovereigns of a great and extensive ter- 
ritory, must adopt the disparities, and submit to 
the subordinations, which mankind universally 
have found natural, and even necessary, to their 
government in such situations. 

Multitudes of people from all parts of Italy, 
somc carnestly desirous to have the law enacted, 
others to have it set aside, crowded to Rome to 
attend the decision of the question; and Gracchus, 
without dropping his intention, as usual, upon 
the negative of his colleague, only bethought hins- 
self how he might surmount, cr remove this ob- 
struction. 

Having hitherto lived in personal intimacy with 
Octavius, he tried to gain him in private; and 
having failed in this attempt, he entered into ex 
postulations with him, in presence of the public 
assembly; desired to know, whether he feared to 
have his own estate impaired by the cflects of the 
law; for if so, he offered to indemnify him fully 
in whatever he might suffer by the execution of 
it: and being still unable to shake his colleague, 
who was supported by the countenance of the 
senate and the higher ranks of men in the state, 
he determincd to try the force cf his tribunitian 
powers to compel him, laid the state itself under 
a gencral interdict, sealed up the doors of the 
treasury, suspended the proceedings in the courts 
of the pretors, and put a stop to all the functions 
of office in the city. 

All the nobility and superior class of the people 
went into mourning. ‘Tiberius, in his turn, en- 
deavoured to alarm the passions of his party ; and 
believing, or pretending to believe, that he himself 
was in danger of being assassinated, had a num- 


| ber of persons with arms to defend his person. 


Cuar. IL] 


While the city was in this state of suspense 
and confusion, the tribes were again assembled, 
and Tiberius, in defiance of the negative of his 
colleague, was proceeding to call the votes, when 
many of the people, alarmed by this intended vio- 
lation of the sacred law, crowded in before the 
tribe that was moving to ballot, and seized the 
urns. A great tumult was likely to arise. The 

opular party, being most numerous, were crowd- 
ing around thcir leader, when two senators, Man- 
lius and Fulvius, both of consular dignity, fell at 
his feet, embraced his knees, and beseeched him 
not to proceed. Overcome with the respect that 
was due to persons of this rank, and with the 
sense of some impending calamity, he asked, 
“W hat they would have him todo?” ‘The case,” 
they said, “is too arduous for us to decide; refer 
it to the senate, and await their decree.” 

Proceedings were accordingly suspended until 
the senate had met, and declared a resolution not 
to confirm the law. Gracchus resumed the subject 
with the people, being determined either to remove, 
or to slight the negative of his colleague. He pro- 
posed, that either the refractory tribune, or him- 
self, should be immediately stripped of his dignity. 
desired that Octavius shou!d put the question 
, Whether Tiberius Gracchus should be de- 
graded? This being declined as irregular and 
vain, he declared his intention to move in the as- 
sembly, on the following day, That Octavius 
should be divested of the character of tribune. 

Hitherto all parties had proceeded agreeably to 
the laws and constitution of the commonwealth ; 
but this motion, to degrade a tribune, by whatever 
authority, was equally subversive of both. The 
person and dignity of tribunes, in order that they 
might be secure from violence, whether offered by 
any private person, public magistrate, or even by 
the people themselves, were guarded by the most 
sacred vows. Their persons, therefore, during 
the continuance of their office, were sacred; so 
long their character was indelible, and, without 
their own consent, they could not be removed by 
any power whatever. 

The assembly, however, being met in conse- 
quence of this alarming adjournment, Tiberius 
renewed his prayer to Octavius to withdraw his 
negative; but not prevailing in this request, the 
tribes were directed to proceed. The votes of 
seventeen were already given to degrade. In taking 
those of the eighteenth, which would have made 
a majority, the tribunes made a pause, while Ti- 
berius embraced his colleague, and, with a voice to 
be heard by the multitude of the people, beseeched 
him to spare himself the indignity, and others the 
regret, of so severe, tllough necessary, a measure. 
Octavius shook: but, observing the senators who 
were present, recovered his resolution, and bid 
Tiberius proceed as he thought proper. The 
votes of the majority were accordingly declared, 
and Octavius, reduced to a private station, was 
dragged from the tribunes’ bench, and exposed to 
the raze of the populace. Attempts were made on 
his life, and a faithful slave, that endeavoured to 
save him, was dangerously wounded; but a num- 
ber of the more respectable citizensinterposed, and 
Tiberiushimself wasactivein favouring his escape. 

This obstacle being removed, 

Ler Sempronia. the act so long depending, for 
making a more equal division 

of lands, was passed; and three commissioners, Ti- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


95 


law, and his brother Caius Gracchus, then a youth 
serving under Publius Scipio at the siege of Nu- 
mantia, were named to carry the law into execution. 
This act, as it concerned the interest of almost 
every inhabitant of Italy, immediately raised a 
great ferment in every part of the country. Per- 
sons holding considerable estates in land were 
alarmed for their property. ‘The poor were elated 
with the hopes of becoming suddenly rich. If 
there was a middling class not to be greatly affect- 
ed in their own situation, they still trembled for 
the effects of a contest between such parties. ‘The 
senate endeavoured to delay the execution of the 
law, withheld the usual aids and appointments 
given to the commissioners of the people in the or- 
dinary administration of public trusts, and waited 
for a fit opportunity to suppress entirely this ha- 
zardous project. Parties looked on each other 
with a gloomy and suspicious silence. A person, 
who had been active in procuring the Agrarian 
law, having died in this critical juncture, his death 
was alleged to be the effect of poison administered 
by the opposite party. Numbers of the people, 
to countenance a report to this purpose, went into 
mourning ; even Gracchus, affecting to believe a 
like design to be forming against hiniself, appear- 
ed, with his children and their mother, as sup- 
pliants in the streets, and implored the protection 
of the people. Still more to interest their passions 
in his safety, he published a list of the acts which 
he then had in view, all tending to gratify the 
people, or to mortify the senate. Attalus, king of 
Pergamus, having, about this time, bequeathed 
his dominions and his treasure to the Romans, 
Gracchus procured an act to transfer the admin- 
istration of this inheritance from the senate to the 
people ; and to distribute the money found in the 
treasury of Pergamus to the poorer citizens, the 
better to enable them to cultivate and to stock the 
lands whith were now to be given them. He ob- 
tained another act to circumscribe the power of 
the senate, by joining the equestrian order with 
the senators in the nomination to juries, or in 
forming the occasional tribunals of justice. 
These, with the preceding attempts to abolish 
or to weaken the aristocratical part of the go- 
vernment, were justly alarming to every person 
who was anxious for the preservation of the state. 
As the policy of this tribune tended to substitute 
popular tumults for sober councils and a regular 
magistracy, it gave an immediate prospect of an- 
archy, which threatened to produce some violent 
usurpation. The sacred office which he so much 
abused, had served, on occasions, to check the 
caprice of the people, as well as to restrain the 
abuse of the executive power. The late violation 
it had suffered, was likely to render it entirely 
unfit for the first of these purposes, and to make 
the tribune an instrament to execute the momen- 
tary will of the people, or to make the con- 
tinuance of his trust depend upon his willingness 
to serve this purpose. ‘Tiberius heard himself ar- 
raigned in the forum, and in every public assem- 
bly, for the violation of the sacred law. “If any 
of your colleagues,” said Titus Annius (whom 
he prosecuted for a speech in the senate, ) “should 
interpose in my behalf, would you have him also 
degraded ?” 
he people in general began to be sensible of 
the enormity they themselves had committed, and 
Tiberius found himself under a necessity of 


berius Gracchus, Appius Claudius, his father-in- + pleading for the measure he had taken, after it 


96 


had been carried into execution. The person of 
the tribune, he observed, was sacred; because it 
was consecrated by the people, whom the tribunes 
represented ; but if the tribune, inconsistent with 
his character, should injure where he was ap- 
pointed to protect, should weaken a claim he was 
appointed to enforce, and withhold from the peo- 
ple that right of decision which he was appointed 
to guard, the tribune, not the people, was to 
lame for the consequences, 

“ Other crimes,” he said, “may be enormous, 
yet may not destroy the essence of the tribunitian 
character. An attempt to demolish the capitol, 
or to burn the fleets of the republic, might excite 
a universal and just indignation, without render- 
ing the person of the tribune who should be ac- 
cused of them less sacred. But an attempt to take 
away the power by which his own office subsists, 
and which is centred in himself only for the bet- 
ter exertion of that power, is a voluntary and 
criminal abdication of the trust. What is the tri- 
bune but the officer of the people? Strange! that 
this officer may, by virtue of authority derived 
from the people, drag even the consul himself to 
prison, and yet that the people themselves cannot 
depose their own officer, when he is about to an- 
nul the authority by which he himself is appointed. 

_ ‘Was ever authority more sacred than that of 
king ? It involved in itself the prerogatives of every 
magistrate, and was likewise consecrated by hold- 
ing the priesthood of the immortal gods. Yet did 
not the people banish Tarquin? and thus, for the 
offence of one man, abolish the primitive govern- 
ment, under the auspices of which the founda- 
tions of this city were laid. 

_“ What more sacred at Rome than the persons 
of the vestal virgins, who have the custody of the 
holy fire? Yet are they not for slight offences 
sometimes buried alive? [mpiety to the gods being 
supposed to cancel a title which reverence to the 
gods had conferred, must not injuries to the peo- 
ple suppress an authority which a regard to the 
people has constituted ? 

“ That person must fall, who himself removes 
the base on which he is supported. A majority 
of the tribes creates a tribune; cannot the whole 
depose ? What more sacred than thethings which 
are dedicated at the shrines of the immortal gods ? 
yet these the people may employ or remove at 
pleasure. Why not transfer the tribunate, as a 
consecrated title, from one person to another? 
May not the whole people, by their sovereign au- 
thority, do what every person in this sacred office 
is permitted to do, when he resigns or abdicates 
his power by a simple expression of his will ?” 

‘These specious arguments tended to introduce 
the plea of necessity where there was no feunda- 
tion for it, and to set the sovereign power, in 
every species of government, loose from the rules 
which itself had enacted. Such arguments ac- 
cordingly had no effect where the interest of the 
parties did not concur to enforce them. Tiberius 
saw his credit on the decline, He was publicly 
menaced with impeachment, and had given suf- 
ficient provocation to make him apprehend that, 
upon the expiration of his oflice, some violence 
might be offered to himself.! His person was 
guarded only by the sacred character of the tri- 
bune. The first step he should make in the new 
character he was to assume, as commissioner for 


1 Orosius, lib. v. €. 8. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox If. 


the division of lands, was likely to terminate his 
life. He resolved, if possible, to take shelter in 
the tribunate another year, and, to procure this 
favour from the people, gave further expectations 
of popular acts; of one to shorten the term of 
military service, and of another to grant an ap- 
peal to the people from the courts of justice lately 
established, 

The senate, and every citizen who professed a 
regard to the constitution, were alarmed. This 
attempt, they said, to perpetuate the tribunitian 
power in the same person, tends directly to ty- 
ranny. The usurper, with the lawless multitude 
that supports him, must soon expel from the pub- 
lic assemblies every citizen who is inclined to mo- 
deration; and, together with the property of our 
lands, to which they already aspire, make them- 
selves master of the state. Their leader, it seems, 
like every other tyrant, already thinks that his 
safety depends upon the continuance of his power. 

In this feverish state of suspense and anxiety, 
great efforts were made to determine the elections. 
The time of choosing the tribunes was now fast 
approaching: Roman citizens, dispersed on their 
lands throughout Italy, were engaged in the har- 
vest, and could not repair to the city. On the day 
of election the assembly was ill attended, espe- 
cially by those who were likely to favour ‘Tihe- 
rius. He being rejected by the first tribes that 
moved to the ballot, his friends endeavoured to 
amuse the assembly with forms, and to protract 
the debates, till observing that the ficld did not 
fill, nor the appearance change for the better, 
they moved to adjourn to the following day. 

In this recess ‘Tiberius put on mourning, went 
forth to the streets with his children, and, in be- 
half of hapless infants, that might already be con- 
sidered as orphans, on the eve of losing their pa- 
rent in the cause of freedom, implored the pro- 
tection of the people; gave out that the party of 
the rich, to hinder his being re-elected, had deter- 


‘mined to force their way into his house in the 


night, and to murder him. Numbers were af- 
fected by these dismal representations : a multi- 
tude crowded to his doors, and watched all night 
in the streets. 

On the arrival of morning and the appreach of 
the assembly, the declining appearance of his af- 
fairs suggested presages; and the superstition of 
the times has ence history with the omens, 
by which himself and his friends were greatly 
dismayed. He, nevertheless, with a crowd of his 
partizans, took his way to the capitol, where the 
people had been appointed to assemble. His at- 
tendants multiplied, and numbers from the assem- 
bly descended the steps to meet him. Upon his 
entry a shout was raised, and his party appeared 
sufficiently strong, if not to prevail in their choice, 
perhaps by their violence to deter every citizen of 
a different mind from attending the election. 

A chosen body took post round the person of 
Tiberius, with direction to suffer no stranger to 
approach him. A signal was agreed upon, in case 
it were necessary to employ force. Mean time 
the senators, on their part, were hastily assembled 
in the temple of faith, in anxious deliberations on 
the measures to be followed. 

When the first tribe delivered their votes, a 
confusion arose among the people. Numbers 
from the more distant parts of the.assembly be- 
gan to press forward to the centre. Among 
others, F'ulvius, Flaccus a senator, yet attached to 


Crap. IL] 


Tiberius being too far off to be heard, beckoned 
with his hand that he would speak with the tri- 
bunes. Having made his way through the mul- 
titude, he informed Tiberius, that a resolution 
was taken in the senate to resist him by force; 
and that a party of senators, with their clients and 
slaves, was arming against his life. All who were 
near enough to hear this information, took the 
alarm, snatched the staves from the officers that 
attended the tribunes, and tucked up their robes 
as for immediate violence. The alarm spread 
through the assembly, and many called out to 
know the cause, but no distinet account could be 
heard. Tiberius having in vain attempted to 
speak, made a sign, by waving his hand round his 
head, that his life was in danger. This sign, to- 
gether with the hostile and menacing appearances 
that gave rise to it, being instantly reported in the 
senate, and interpreted as a hint given to the peo- 
ple, that it was necessary he should be crowned, 
or that he should assume the sovereignty, the sen- 
ate immediately resolved, in a forin thas was usual 
on alarming occasions, that the consul should pro- 
vide for the safety of the state. This resolution 
was supposed to confer a dictatorial power, and 
was generally given when immediate execution or 
summary proceedings were deemed to he neces- 
sary, without even sufficient time for the formali- 
ties observed in naming a dictator, The consul 
Mucius Scevola, who had been in concert with 
Tiberius, in drawing up the first frame of his law, 
but who probably had left him in the extremes 
to which he afterwards proceeded; on the pre- 
esnt occasion, however, declined to employ force 
against a tribune of the people, or to disturb the 
tribes in the midst of their legal assembly. “If 
they shail come,” he said, “to any violent or il- 
legal determination, I will employ the whole force 
of my authority to prevent its effects.” 

In this expression of the consul there did not 
appear to the audience a proper disposition for 
the present occasion. The laws were violated : 
a desperate party was prepared for any extremes : 
all sober citizens, and even many of the tribunes, 
had fled from the tumult: the priests of Jupiter 
had shut the gates of their temple; the laws, it 
was said, ought to govern; but the laws cannot 
be pleaded by those who have set them aside, and 
they are no longer of any avail, unless they are re- 
stored by some exertion of vigour, fit to counteract 
the violence that has been offered them. ‘ The 
consul,” said Scipio Nasica, “deserts the repub- 
lic; let those who wish to preserve it, follow me.” 
The senators instantly arose, and moving ina 
body, which increased as they went, by the con- 
course of their clients, then seized the shafts of 
the fasces, or tore up the benches in their way, 
and, with their robes wound up, in place of 
shields, on their left arm, broke into the midst of 
the assembly of the people. 

Tiberius, surrounded by a numerous multi- 
tude, found his party unable to resist the awe 
with which they were struck by the presence of 
the senate and nobles. The few who resisted 
were beat to the ground. He himself, while he 
fled, being seized by the robe, slipped it from his 
shoulders and continued to fly ; but he stumbled 
in the crowd, and while he attempted to recover 
himself, was slain with repeated blows. His 
body, as being that of a tyrant, together with 
the killed of his party, amounting to about three 
hundred, as accomplices in a treasonable design 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


97 


against the republic, were denied the honours of 
burial, and thrown into the river. Some of the 
most active of his partisans that escaped, were 
afterwards cited to appear, and were outlawed or 
condemned. 

Thus, in the heats of this unhappy dispute, 
both the senate and the people had been carried 
to acts of violence that insulted the laws and con- 
stitution of their country. This constitution was 
by no means too strict and formal to contend 
with such evils; for, besides admitting a general 
latitude of conduct scarcely known under any 
other political establishment, it had provided ex- 
pedients for great and dangerous occasions, which 
were sufficient to extricate the commonwealth 
from greater extremities than those to which it 
had been reduced in the course of this unfortu- 
nate contest.. 

The people, when restrained from their object 
by the negative of one of their tribunes, had only 
to wait for the expiration of his office, when, by a 
new election, they might so model the college as 
to be secure of its unanimous consent in the par- 
ticular measures to which they were then in- 
clined. The precipitant violation of the sacred 
law, a precedent which, if followed, must have 
rendered the tribunes mere instruments of popu- 
lar violence, not bars to restrain oppression, filled 
the minds of the people with remorse and horror, 
and gave to the senate and nobles a dreadful ap- 
prehension of what they were to expect from a 
party capable of such a profane and violent ex- 
treme. 

The policy of “Tiberius Gracchus on the other 
hand, the laws he had obtained, his own re-elec- 
tion to secure the execution, and the sequel of 
his plan, seemed to threaten the republic with 
distraction and anarchy, likely to end in his own 
usurpation, or in that of some more artful dema- 
gogue. But even under those gloomy expecta- 
tions the senate could, by naming a dictator, or 
by the commission which they actually gave to 
the consul, have recourse to a legal preventive, 
and might have repelled the impending evil by 
measures equally decisive aud powerful, though 
more legal than tliose they employed. But tie 
consul, it seems, was suspected of connivance 
with the opposite party, had received lis own 
commission coldly, and could not be entrusted 
with the clioice of a dictator: 

In these extreniities, the violent resolution that 
was taken by the senate appears to have been 
necessary; and probably for the present saved 
the republic; preserved it indeed, not in a sound, 
but in a sickly state, and in a fever, which, with 
some intermissions, at every return of similar 
disorders, threatened it with the dissolution and 
ruin of its whole constitution. 

The disorders that arise in free states which 
are beginning to corrupt, generally furnish very 
difficult questions in the casuistry of politicians, 
Even the struggles of virtuous citizens, because 
they do not prevent, are sometimes supposed to 
hasten the ruin of their country. The violence 
of the senate, on this occasion, was by many coi- 
sidered with aversion and horror. ‘lhe subver- 
sion of government, that was likely to have fol- 
lawed the policy of Gracchus, because it did not 
take place, was overlooked; and the restitution 
of order, effected by the senate, appeared to be a 
tyraliny established in blood. T'he senators them- 
selves were struck with some degree of remorse, 


gR 


and, what is dangerous in politics, took a middle 
course between the extremes. They were cau- 
tious not to inflame animosities, by any immode- 
rate use of their late victory, nor by any imme- 
diate opposition to the execution of the popular 
law. ‘They wished to atone for the violences 
lately committed against the person of its author ; 
they permitted Fulvius Flaccus and Papirius 


Carbo, two of the most daring leaders of the: 


popular faction, to be elected commissioners for 
the execution of the Agrarian law, in the room 
of Tiberius and Appius Claudius, of whom the 
latter also died about this time; and, in order 
to stifle animositics and resentments, consented 
that, under pretence of an embassy to Pergamus, 
Scipio Nasica should be removed from Rome. 
In consequence of this commission, this illus- 
trious citizen, the lineal descendant of one of the 
Scipios who perished in Spain in the time of the 
second Punic war, himself an ornament to the 
republic, died in a species of exile, though under 
an honourable title. . 

In the midst of such agitations, foreign affairs 
were likely to be much overlooked. ‘They pro- 
ceeded, however, under the conduct of the officers 
to whom they were entrusted, with the usual 
success; and the senate, having the reports made 
nearly about the same time, of the pacification of 
Lusitania, the destruction of Numantia, and the 
reduction and punishment of the slaves in Sicily, 
named commissioners to act in conjunction with 
the generals commanding in those several ser- 
vices, in order to settle their provinces. 

Brutus and Scipio had their several triumphs; 
one with the title of Galaicus, for having reduced 
the Gallicians; the other, still preferring the title 
ef Africanus to that of Numantinus, which was 
offered to him for the sack of Numantia. 

The arrival of this respectable citizen was 
anxiously looked for by all parties, more to know 
what judgment he might pass on the late opera- 
tions at Rome, than on account of the triumph 
he obtained over enemies once formidable to his 
country. He was the near relation of Gracchus, 
and might, under pretence of revenging the death 
of that demagogue, have put himself at the head 
of a formidable party. He was himself personally 
respected and beloved by numbers of the citizens, 
who had carried arms under his command, who 
were recently arrived in Italy crowned with vic- 
tory, and who might possibly, under pretence of 
vindicating the rights of the people, employ their 
arms against the republic. But the time of such 
criminal views on the commonwealth was not yet 
arrived. Scipio already, upon hearing the fate 
of Gracchus, had expressed, in some words that 
escaped him, his approbation of the senate’s con- 
duct. “So may every person perish,” he said, 
“who shall dare to commit such crimes”! Soon 
after his arrival from Spain, Papirius Carbo, the 
tribune, called upon him aloud, in the assembly 
of the people, to declare what he thought of the 
death of Gracchus. “I must think,” he said, 
“that if Gracchus meant to overturn the govern- 
ment of his country, his death was fully merited.” 
This declaration the multitude interrupted with 
murmurs of aversion and rage. Upon which 
Scipio, raising his tone, expressed the contempt. 
under which it seems that the populace of Rome 
had already fallen. “I have been accustomed,” 


1 Plutarch, in Vit. Tiberii Gracchi 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Book ll. 


he said, “to the shout of warlike enemies, and 
cannot be affected by your dastardly cries.” ‘Then, 
alluding to the number of enfranchised slaves 
that were enrolled with the tribes of the city, 
upon a second cry of displeasure, he continued, 
“ Peace, ye aliens and step-children of Italy.? 
You are now free, but many of you I have 
brought to this place in fetters, and sold at the hal- 
bert for slaves.” Some were abashed by the truth, 
and all by the boldness of this contemptuous re- 
proach, and showed that popular assemblies, 
though vested with supreme authority, may be 
sometimes insulted, as well as courted, with 
success. . 

The part which Scipio took on this occasion 
was the more remarkable, that he himself was 
to be reckoned among the poorer citizens, and 
might have been a gainer by the rigorous execu- 
tion of the Licinian law. His whole inherit- 
ance, according to Pliny, amounted to thirty-two 
pounds, or three hundred and twenty ounces of 
silver, whiĉh might be now valued at about two 
hundred and eighty pounds sterling. 

Papirius Carbo spent the year of his tribunate 

in fomenting the animosity of the 
Let Papia people against the senate, and in pro- 
Tabellaria moting dangerous innovations. He 
Tertia. obtained a law, by which the votes 
of the people, in questions of legisla 
lation as well as election,? and the opinions of the 


judges in determining causes, were to be taken 


by ballot. 

He was less successful in the motion he made 
for a law to enable the same person to be repeat 
edly chosen into the office of tribune. He was 
supported in this motion by Caius Gracchus; 
opposed by Scipio, Lelius, and the whole autho- 
rity of the senate, who dreaded the perpetuating 
in any one person a power, which the sacredness 
of the character, and the attachment of the popu- 
lace, rendered almost sovereign and irresistible. 

While the interests of party were exerted in 
these ‘several questions at home, the state was 
laying the foundation of new quarrels abroad, 
and opening a scene of depredation and conquest 
in what was then the wealthiest part of the 
known world. Soon after the death of Attalus, 
king of Pergamus, who had bequeathed his king- 
dom to the Romans, Aristonicus, his natural 
brother, being the illegitimate son of Eumenes, 
made pretensions to the throne of Pergamus, and 
was supported by a powerful party among the 


people. ‘The Romans did not fail to maintain 
their right: Crassus, one of the con- 
U. C. 622. suls of the preceding year, had been 


sent with an army into Asia for 
that purpose, but in his first encounter with 
Aristonicus, was defeated and taken. He was 
afterwards killed while a captive in the hands of 
the enemy; having intentionally provoked one 
of his guards to lay violent hands on him, and 
thus ended a life which he thought was dis- 
honoured by his preceding defeat. 

The following year, the consul Perpenna being 
sent on this service, and having, with better for- 
tune than Crassus, defeated and taken Aristoni- 
cus, got possession of the treasure and kingdom 
of Attalus, but died in his command at Perga- 
mus. From this time the Romans took a more 


2 Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii. c. 4. 
3 Cic. de Legibus lib iia. 4 Cre. de Amicitia. 


Cuar. Il] 


particular concern than formerly in the affairs of 
Asia. They employed Scipio Emilianus, with 
Sp. Mummius, and L. Metellus, on a commis- 
sion of observation to that country. We are told 
that the equipage of Scipio upon this occasion 
consisted of seven slaves; and this, as a mark or 
characteristic of the times, is perhaps more inte- 
resting than any thing else we could be told of 
the embassy. The object of the commission 
appears to have related to Egypt as well as 
to Asia,5 though there was not any power in 
either that seemed to be in condition to alarm the 
Romans. Ptolemy Euergetes had succeeded to 
the throne of Egypt, but was expelled by the 
people of Alexandria. Antiochus, king of Syria, 
had been recently engaged in a very unsuccessful 
war with the Parthians; and it had not yet ap- 
peared how far it concerned the Romans to ob- 
serve the king of Pontus, or to consider of the 
measures to be taken against him for the security 
of their possessions in Asia. 

In whatever degree the Roman embassy found 
worthy objects of attention in the state of the 
Asiatic powers, matters were hastening in Italy 
to a state of great distraction and ferment, on ac- 
count of the violence with which the Agrarian 
law was put in execution by Papirius Carbo, 
Fulvius Flaccus, and Caius eee ee the com- 
missioners appointed for this purpose. As the 
law authorized them to call upon all persons pos- 
sessed of public lands to evacuate them, and sub- 
mit to a legal division; they, under this pretence, 
brought into question all the rights of property 
throughout Italy, and took from one and gave to 
another as suited their pleasure; some suffered 
the diminution of their estates with silent rage ; 
others complained that they were violently re- 
moved from lands which they had cultivated, to 
barren and inhospitable situations; even they who 
were supposed to be favoured, complained of tlie 
lots they received. Many were aggrieved, none 
were satisfied. 

Moved by the representations which were made 
of these abuses, Scipio, at his return from Asia, 
made an harangue in the senate, by which he 
drew upon himself an invective from Fulvius, 
one of the commissioners. He did not propose 
to repeal the law, but that the execution of it 
should be taken out of the hands of so pernicious 
a faction, and committed to the Consul Sempro- 
nius 'T'uditanus, who remained in the administra- 
tion of affairs in Italy, while his colleague Aqui- 
lius had gone to Asia to finish the transaction in 
the conduct of which Perpenna died. 

It is mentioned that Scipio, in this speech to 
the senate, complained of insults and threats to 
his own person, which induced all the members, 
with a great body of the more respectable citizens, 

to attend him in procession to his own 
U. C. 624. house. Next morning he was found 

dead in his bed; and, notwithstand- 
ing the suspicions of violence transmitted by dif- 
ferent authors, nothing certain appears upon re- 
cord; and no inquest was ever made to discover 
the truth of these reports. This illustrious citi- 
zen, notwithstanding his services, had incurred 
so much the displeasure of the people, that he 
had not the honours of a public funeral. If he had 
not died at this critical time, the senate, ıt was 
supposed, meant to have named him dictator, for 


5 Val. Max. lib. iv ec. 3. 6 Cic. de Amicitia. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


99 


the purpose of purging tle state of the evils with 
which it was now oppressed. 

The occasion, however, was not sufficient to 
make the senate persist in their intention to name 
a dictator} nor is there any thing material record- 
ed as having happened during a few of the fol- 
lowing years. Quintus Cecilius Metellus Ma- 
cedonicus, and Quintus Pompeius, were censors ; 
both of plebeian extraction; of which this is 
recorded as the first example. Metellus, at the 
census, made a memorable speech, in which he 
recommended marriage, the establishment of fa- 
milies, and the rearing of children. ‘This speech 
being preserved, will recur to our notice again, 
being read by Augustus in the senate, as a lesson 
equally applicable to the age in which he lived. 

The people who were fit to carry arins, as ap- 
peared at their enrolment, amounted to three 
hundred and seventeen thousand eight hundred 
and twenty-three. But what is most memorable 
in the transactions of this muster, was the dis- 
grace of Caius Attinius Labeo, who, being struck 
off the rolls of the senate by Metellus, afterwards 
became tribune of the people; and, by the diff- 
culty with which the effect of his unjust revenge 
came to be prevented, showed the folly of making 
the will of any officer sacred, in order to restrain 
the commission of wrongs. 

Metellus, in returning from the country, about 
noon, while the market-place was thin of people, 
found hinself suddenly apprehended by this vin- 
dictive tribune, and ordered to be threwn imme- 
diately from the Tarpeian rock. The people 
assembled in crowds, were sensible of the tri- 
bune’s breach of the sacred trust reposed in hin; 
and, accosting Metellus by the name of father, 
lamented his fate; but, unless another tribune 
could be found to interpose in his favour, there 
was no other power in the commonwealth that 
could, without supposed profanation, interrupt a 
tribune even in the commission of a crime. Me- 
tellus struggled to obtain a delay, was overpow- 
ered and dragged through the strects, while the 
violence he suffered made the blood to spring from 
his nostrils. A tribune was with difficulty found 
in time to save his life; but Attinius ti, 
with a lighted fire and other forms of consecra- 
tion, devoted his estate to sacred uses, it is alleged 
that he never recovered it.’ 

Such was the weak state to which the govern- 
ment was reduced by the late popular encroach- 
ments, that this outrageous abuse of power was 
never punished ; and such tle moderation of this 
great man’s family, that though he himself lived 
fifteen years in high credit after this accident, 
saw his family raised to the highest dignitics, and 
was carried to his grave by four sons, of whom 
one had been censor, two had triumphed, three 
had been consuls, and the fourth, then pretor, 
was candidate for the consulate, which he obtain- 
ed in the following year; yet no one of this pow- 
erful family chose to increase the disturbances of 
the commonwealth, by attempting to revenge the 
outrage which their father had suflered.® 

Caius Attinius is mentioned as 
Lex Attinia. being the person who obtained the 
admission of the tribunes, in right of 

their office as members of the senate.” 


7 Plin. lib. vii. c. 44. Cicero, in pleading to have his 
house restored to him, though devoted to sacred uses, 
states the forin of consecration in the case of Metellis 
but denies the effect of it. Pro domo sna, c. 47. 

@ Phin Wh vie H. 9 A. Gellins, lib. xiv. c. £. 


100 


The Consul Sempronius, though authorized 
by the senate to restrain the violence of the com- 
missioners who were employed in the Agrarian 
law, declined that hazardous business, and chose 
rather to encounter the enemy in the province of 
Istria, where he made some conquests and ob- 
tained a triumph. 

In the same turbulent times lived Pacuvius, 
the tragic poet, and Lucilius, inventor of the sa- 
tire. The latter, if we suppose him to be the 
same whose name is found in the list of questors, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


was a person of rank, and moved in the line of 
political preferment. 

Historians mention a dreadful eruption of 
Mount Etna, the effect of subterraneous fires, 
which, shaking the foundations of Sicily and 
the neighbouring islands, gave explosions of 
flame, not only from the crater of the mountain, 
but likewise from below the waters of the sea, 
and forced sudden and great inundations over 
the islands of Laparé and the neighbouring 
coasts. 


CHAPTER III. 


State of the Italian Allies, and the Views which now began to be conceived by them—Appearance 
of Caius Gracchus—Resolution to purge the City of Aliens—Consulate and factious Notions of 
Fulvius Flaccus—Conspiracy of Fregelle suppressed—Caius Gracchus returns to Rome— 
Offers himself Candidate for the Tribunate—Address of Cornelia— Tribunate and Acts of Caius 
Gracchus—Re-election——-Proposal to admit the Inhabitants of Italy on the Rolls of Roman 
Citizens—Popular Acts of Gracchus and Livius—The Senate begin to prevaitl— Death of 


Caius Gracchus and Fulvius. 


THE eruption of Mount Etna, and the other 
particulars relating to the natural history of Italy, 
with the mention of which we concluded our last 
chapter, were considered as prodigies, and as the 
presages of evils which were yet to afflict the re- 
public. At this time indeed the state of Italy 
seemed to have received the seeds of much trou- 
ble, and to contain ample materials of civil com- 

bustion. ‘The citizens, for whom no 
U. C. 627. provision had been made at their re- 

turn from military service, or who 
thought themselves partially dealt with in the 
colonies, the leaders of tumult and faction in the 
city, were now taught to consider the land-pro- 
perty of Italy as their joint inheritance. They 
were, in imagination, distributing their lots, and 
selecting their shares, 

In the mean time, the inhabitants of the mu- 
nicipia, or free towns, and their districts, who, 
not being citizens, served the state as allies, had 
reason to dread the rapacity of such needy and 
powerful masters. They themselves likewise 
began to repine under the inequality of their 
condition. ‘They observed, that while they were 
scarcely allowed to retain the possessions of their 
ancestors, Rome, aided by their arms, had gained 
that extensive dominion, and obtained that terri- 
tory, about which the poor and the rich were 
now likely to quarrel among themselves. “ The 
Italian allies,’ they said, “must bleed in this 
contest, no less than they had done in the foreign 
or more distant wars of the commonwealth.” —- 
They had been made, by the professions of 'Ti- 
berius Gracchus, to entertain hopes that every 
distinction in Italy would soon be removed, that 
every freeman in the country would be enrolled, 
as a citizen of Rome, and be admitted to all the 
powers and pretensions implied in that designa- 
tion. The consideration of this subject, therefore, 
could not be long delayed, and the Roman senate, 
already struggling with attacks of their fellow- 
citizens, had an immediate storm to apprehend 
from the allies. 

The revolutions of the state had been so fre- 


quent, and its progress from small beginnings to , ° 


to which men are exposed, and the exertions of 
which they are capable, no where appear so con- 
spicuous, or are so distinctly marked. 

In the first ages the political importance of a 
Romian citizen appears not to have been felt or 
understood. Conquered enemies were removed 
to Rome, and their captivity consisted in being 
forced to be Romans, to which they submitted 
with great reluctance. It is not to be doubted 
that every foreigner was welcome to take his 
place as a Roman citizen in the assembly of the 
people, that many were admitted into the senate,! 
and somié even on the throne.2 It is likely, also, 
that the first colonies considered themselves as de- 
tached from the city of Rome, and as forming can- 
tons apart; for we find them, like the other states 
of Italy, occasionally at war with the Romans. 

But when the sovereignty of Italy came to be 
established at Rome, and was there actually ex- 
ercised by the collective body of the people, the 
inhabitants of the colonies, it is probable, laid 
claim to their votes in elections, and presented 
themselves to be enrolled in the tribes. They felt 
their consequence and their superiority over the 
municipia, or free towns in their neighbourhood, 
to whom, as a mark of distinction and an act of 
munificence, some remains of independence had 
been left. Even in this state, the rolls of the 
people had been very negligently compiled, or 
preserved. The kings, the consuls, the censors, 
who were the officers, in different ages of the 
state, entrusted with the musters, admitted on the 
rolls such as presented themselves, or such as they 
chose to receive. One consul invited all the free 
inhabitants of Latium to poll in’ the assemblies 
of the people; another rejected them, and in time 
of elections forbid them the city—But notwith- 
standing this prohibition, aliens that were brought 
to Rome on a foot of captivity, were suffered by 
degrees to mix with the citizens. The inhabit- 
ants of the free towns, removing to Rome upon any 


1 The Claudian family were aliens. 

2 Tarquinius Priscus was.of Greek extraction and 
n alien om Tarquinii. 

3 This happened particularly in the case of the Caim- 


a great empire had been so rapid, that the changes | panian 


Cumar. IIL] 


creditable footing, found easy admission on the 
rolls of some tribe. ‘The towns complained they 
were depopulated. The Romans endeavoured 
to shut the gates of their city by repeated scruti- 
nies, and the prohibition of surreptitious enrol- 
ments: but in vain. The practice still continued, 
and the growing privilege, distinction, and emi- 
nence of a Roman citizen, made that title become 
the great object of individuals, and of entire can- 
tons. It had already been bestowed upon districts 
whose inhabitants were not distinguished by any 
singular merit with the Roman state. In this 
respect all the allies were nearly equal; they had 
regularly composed at least one-half in every 
Roman army, and had borne an cqual share in 
all the dangers and troubles of the common- 
wealth; and, from having valued themselves of 
old on their separate titles and national distinc- 
tions, they began now to aspire to a share in the 
sovereignty of the empire, and wished to sink for 
ever their provincial designations under the gene- 
ral title of Romans. 

Not only the great power that was enjoyed in 
the assembly of the people, and the serious privi- 
leges that were bestowed by the Porcian law, but 
even the title of citizen in Italy, of legionary sol- 
dier in the field, and the permission of wearing 
the Roman gown, were now ardeutly coveted as 
marks of dignity and honour. The city was fre- 
quented by persons who hoped separately to be 
admitted in the tribes, and by numbers who 
crowded from the neighbouring cantons, on every 
remarkable day of assembly, still flattering them- 
selves, that the expectations which Gracchus had 
raised on this important subject might soon be 
fulfilled. 

In this state of affairs, the senate 


U. C. 627. authorized Junius Peunus, one of 
Consuls : M. the tribunes, to move the people for 
Emilius Le. aN edict to prohibit, on days of clec- 
pidus,L.Au- tion or public assembly, tlis con- 
a Ores- course of aliens, and requiring all the 
és. 


country towns to lay claim to their 
deuizens, who had left their own corporations 
to act the part of citizens at Rome. 

On this oceasion, Caius Gracchus, the brother 
of the late unfortunate tribune, stood forth, and 
made one of the first appearances, in which lic 
showed the extent of his talents, as well as the 
party he was likely to espouse in the common- 
wealth. This young man, being about twenty 
years of age when the troubles raised by his clder 
brother had so much disturbed the republic, and 
when they ended so fatally for himself, lad re- 
tired upon that eatastrophe from the public view, 
and made it uncertain whether the fate of Tibe- 
rius miglit not deter him, not only from embracing 
like dangerous counscls, but even from entering 
at all on the line of political affairs. His retire- 
ment, however, he spent in such studies as were 
then come into repute, on account of their impor- 
tance, as a preparation for the business of courts 
of justice, of the senate, and of the popular assem- 
blies; and the first appearance he made gave evi- 
dence of the talents he had acquired for these 
several departments. His parts seemed to be 
quicker, and his spirit more ardent, than that of 
his elder brother; and the people conceived hopes 
of having their pretensions revived, and morc 
successfully conducted, than under their former 
leader. The cause of the country towns, in 


which he now engaged, was specious, and tended i 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


101 


to form a new, a numcrous, and a formidable 
party in Italy, likely to join in every factious at- 
tempt which might throw the public into disorder, 
and make way for the promiscuous admission of 
aliens on the rolls of the people. This cause, 
however, was fraught with so much confusion to 
the state, and tended so much to lessen the po- 
litical consequence of those who were already 
citizens, that the argument in favour of the reso- 
lution to purge the city of aliens prevailed, and 
an act to that purpose accordingly was passed‘ in 
the assembly of the people. 

It deserves to be recorded, that amidst the in- 
quiries set on foot in consequence of this edict, or 
about this time, Perpenna, the father of a late 
consul,5 was claimed by one of the Italian corpo- 
rations, and found not to have been a citizen of 
Rome. His son, whom we have already men- 
tioned, having vanquished and taken Aristonicus, 
the pretended heir of Attalus, died in his com- 
mand at Pergamus; and he is accordingly said 
to have been a rare example of the caprice of for- 
tune, in having been a Roman consul, though 
not a Roman citizen. This example may con- 
firm what has been observed of the latitude which 
officers took in conducting the census. 

The fires of sedition which had sometime preyed 
on the commonwealth were likely to break out. 

with increasing force upon the pro- 


U. C. 628. motion of Fulvius Flaccus to the 
dignity of first magistrate. This 

M. Plautius factious citizen had blown up the 
ipsius, „M flame with Tiberius Gracchus, and 
Tus having succeeded him in the com- 


mission for executing the Agrarian 
law, never failed to carry the torch wherever 
matter of inflammation or general combustion 
could be found. By his merit with the popular 
party le had attained his present eminence, and 
was determined to preserve it by 
continuing his services. He be- 
gan the functions of his office b 
proposing a law to communicate the right of citi- 
zens to the allies or free inhabitants of Italy; a 
measure which tended to weaken the power of 
the senate, and to increase the number of citizeus 
greatly beyond what could be assembled in one 
collective body. Having failed in this attempt, 
he substituted a proposal in appearance more 
moderate, but equally dangerous, that whoever 
claimed the right of citizen, in case of being cast 
by the censors, who were the proper judges, 
might appeal to the people.6 Tis would have 
conferred the power of naturalization on the popu- 
lar leaders; and the danger of such a measure 
called upon the senate to exert its authority and 


Leges Fulvie. 


‘influence in having this motion also rejected. 


When tlic consul appeared to be fairly entered 
on his career, and, by uniting the power of the 
suprenie magistracy with that of a commissioner 
for dividing the property of lands, was likely to 
break through all the forms which had hitherto 
retarded the execution of the Agrarian law, he 
was with difliculty persuaded to assemble the 
senate, and to take his place. ‘The whole body 
joined in representations against these dangerous 
measures, and in a request that he would with- 
draw his motions. To these applications he made 


4 Sextus Pompeius Festus in voce Republica. Cicero 
in Bruto in Officiis, lib. iii. 

5 Valerius Maximus, lib. iti. c. 4. 

6 Appian. de Bell. Civ lib.i. 


102 


no reply ,! but an occasion soon offered, by which 
the senate was enabled to divert him from his 
purpose. A deputation arrived from Marseilles, 
then in alliance with Rome, to intreat the sup- 
port of the republic against the Salyii, a neigh- 
bouring nation, who had invaded their territories. 
The senate gladly embraced this opportunity to 
find a foreign employment for the consul, decreed 
a speedy aid to the city of Marseilles, and ap- 
pointed M. Fulvius Flaccus to that service. Al- 
though this cident marred or interrupted for 
the present his political designs, yet he was in- 
duced, by the hopes of a triumph, to accept of the 
command which now offered, and, by his absence, 
to relieve the city for a while from the alarms 
which he had given. Caius Gracchus, too, was 
gone in the capacity of proquestor to Sardinia; 
and the senate, if they could by any pretences 
have kept those unquiet spirits at a distance, had 
hopes of restoring the former order of the com- 
monwealth. 

In this interval some laws are said to have 
passed respecting the office and conduct of the 
censors. The particulars are not mentioned ; but 
the object probably was, to render the magistrate 
more circumspect in the admission of those who 
claimed to be numbered as citizens. Such was 
likely to be the policy of the senate, in the ab- 
sence of demagogues, who, by proposing to admit 
the allies on the rolls of the people, had awakened 
dangerous pretensions in every corner of Italy. 
It soon appeared how seriously these pretensions 
were adopted by the country towns; for the in- 
habitants already bestirred themselves, and were 
beginning to devise how they might extort by 
force what they were not likely to obtain with 
consent of the original denizens of Rome. A 
suspicion having arisen of such treasonable con- 
certs forming at Fregelle, the pretor Opimius 


had a special commission to inquire into the mat- 


ter, and to proceed as he should find the occasion 
required. Having summoned the chief magis- 
trate of the place to appear before him, he received, 
upon a promise of doing no violence to his per- 
son, full information of the combinations that had 
been forming against the government of Rome. 
So instructed, he assembled such a force as was 
necessary to support him in asserting the authority 
of the state; and thinking it necessary to give a 
striking example in a matter of so dangerous 
and infectious a nature, he ordered the place to 
be razed to the ground.? 

By this act of severity, the de- 


U. C. 629. signs of the allies were for a while 
O Ousus suspended, and might have been 
Longinus, entirely suppressed, if the factions 
a E at Rome had not given them fresh 


encouragement, and hopes of suc- 
cess or impunity. This transaction was scarcely 
past, when Caius Gracchus appeared in the city 
to solicit the office of tribune; and, by his pre- 
sence revived the hopes of the allies. Having 
observed, that the proconsul Aurelius Cotta, un- 
der whom he served as proquestor in Sardinia, 
instead of being recalled, was continued in his 
command, and furnished with reinforcements and 
supplies of every sort, as for a service of long du- 
ration; and suspecting that this measure was 


1 Wal. Max. lib. ix. c. 5. 
2 Liv. lib. Ix. Velleius Obsequens. 
Inventione; De Finibus v. Ibid. 


Cie. lib. ii. De 
Rhetorius, lib. iv. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox 1I. 


pointed at himself, and proceeded from a design 
to keep him at a distance from the popular assem- 
blies, he quitted his station in Sardinia, and re- 
turned without leave. He was called to account 
by the censors for deserting his duty; but de- 
fended himself with such ability and force, as 
greatly raised the expectations which had already 
been entertained by his party.? 

The law, he said, required him only to carry 
arms ten years, he had actually carried them 
twelve years; although he might legally have 
quitted his station of questor at the expiration of 
one year, yet he had remained in it three years. 
However willing the censors may have been to 
remove this pest from the commonwealth, they 
were too weak to attempt any censure in this 
state of his cause, and in the present humour 
of the people. They endeavoured, in vain, to 
load him with a share in the plot of Fregelle; 
he still exculpated himself: and, if he had pos- 
sessed every virtue of a citizen, in proportion to 
his resolution, application, eloquence, and even 
severity of manners, he might have been a power- 
ful support to the state. In a speech to the peo- 
ple, on his return from Sardinia, he concluded 
with the following remarkable words: ‘The 
purse which I carried full to the province, I have 
brought empty back. Others empty the wine 
casks which they carry from Italy, and bring 
them from the provinces replenished with silver 
and gold.”4 l 

Jn declaring himself a candidate for the office 
of tribune, Caius Gracchus professed his inten- 
tion to propose many popular laws. The senate 
exerted all their influence to disappoint his views ; 
but such were the expectations of the popular 
party throughout all Italy, that they crowded to 
the election in greater numbers than could find 
place in the public square. ‘They handed and 
reached out their ballots at the windows and over 
the battlements; and Gracchus, though elected, 
was, in consequence of the opposition given te 
him, only fourth in the list.5 

Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi, who, ever 
since the death of her son Tiberius, lived in re- 
tirement in Campania, upon hearing of the career 
which her son, Caius, was likely to run, alarmed 
at the renewal of a scene which had already oc- 
casioned her so much sorrow, expostulated with 
him on the course he was taking; and, in an 
unaffected and passionate address, spoke that ar- 
dent zeal for the republic, by which the citizens 
of Rome had been long distinguished. 

This high-minded woman, on whom the en- 
tire care of her family had devolved by the death 
of her husband, whilst the children were yet in 
their infancy, or under age, took care, with un- 
usual attention, to have them educated for the rank 
they were to hold in the state, and did not fail 
even to excite their ambition. When Tiberius, 
after the disgrace of Mancinus, appeared to with- 
draw from the road of preferments and honours, 
“How long,” she said, “shall I be distinguished 
as the mother-in-law of Scipio, not as the mother 
of the Gracchi?” This latter distinction, how- 
ever, she came to possess; and it has remained 
with her name, but from circumstances and events 
which this respectable personage by no means ap- 


3 Plutarch. in C. Graccho. 
4 A. Gellius, lib. xv. c. 12. 
5 Plutarch, Appian, Orosius, Eutrop. Obsequens. 


- 


Cnap. III.] 


veared to desire. In one fragment of her letters 
to Caius, which is still preserved, “ You will tell 
me,” she said, “that it is glorious to be revenged 
of our enemies. No one thinks so more than Í, 
if we can be revenged without hurt to the repub- 
lic; but if not, often may our enemies escape. 
Long may they be safe, if the good of the com- 
monwealth requires their safety.” 
letter, which appears to be written after his in- 
tention of suing for the tribunate was declared, 
she accosts him to the following purpose: “1 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


103 


An act to regulate the conditions of the military 
service,!! by which no one was obliged to enter 
before seventeen years of age, and by which Ro- 
man soldiers were to receive clothing as well as 
pay ;!2 possibly the first introduction of a uniform 
into the Roman legions : a circumstance which, in 
modern times, is thought so essential to the cha- 


In another |racter of troops, and the appearance of an arny. 


By the celebrated law of Porcius, which allow- 
ed of an appeal to the people, every citizen had a 
remedy against any oppressive sentence or pro- 


take the gods to witness, that, except the persons | ceeding of the executive magistrate ; but this did 


who killed my son Tiberius, no one ever gave me 
so much affliction as you do in this matter. You, 
from whom I might have expected some consola- 
tion in my age, and who, surely, of all my chil- 
dren, ought to be most careful not to distress me! 
I have not many years to live. Spare the repub- 
lic so long for my sake. Shall | never see the 
madness of my family at an end? When I am 
dead, you will think to honour me witha parent’s 
rites: but what honour can my memory receive 
from you, by whom I am abandoned and disho- 
noured while I live? But, may the gods forbid 
you should persist! if you do, I fear the course 
you are taking leads to remorse and distraction 
which will end only with your life.” 6 

These remonstrances do not appear to have 
had any effect. Caius, upon his accession to the 
tribunate, proceeded to fulfil the expectations of 
his party. The Agrarian law, though still in 
force, had met with continued interruption and 
delay in the execution. It was even falling into 
neglect. Caius thought proper, as 
the first act of his magistracy, to 
move a renewal and confirmation of 
it, with express injunctions, that 
there should be an annual distribution of land to 
the poorer citizens.’ To this he subjoined, in the 
first year of his office, a varicty of regulations 

tending either to increase his popu- 
Lez frumen- larity, or to distinguish his adminis- 
taria. tration. Upon his motion, public 
granaries were erected, and a law 

was made, that the corn should be issued from 
thence monthly to the people, two parts in twelve 
under the prime or original cost.8 

‘This act gave a check to industry, which is the 
best guardian of manners in populous cities, or 
wherever multitudes of men are crowded together. 

Caius likewise obtained a decree, by which the 
estates of Attalus, king of Pergamus, lately be- 
queathed to the Romans, should be let in the 
manner of other lands under the inspection of the 
censors; but the rents, instead of being made 
part of the public revenue, should be allotted for 
the maintenance of the poorer citizens.2 

Another, by which any person deposed from an 
office of magistracy by the people, was to be deem- 
ed for ever disqualified to serve the republic in any 
other capacity.!0 ‘This act was intended to operate 
against Octavius, who, by the influence of Ti- 


Lex, Sempro- 
nia agraria. 


not appear to Gracchus a suflicient restraint on 
the officers of state. He proposed to have it 
enacted, that no person, under pain of a capital 
punishment, should at all proceed against a citi- 
zen without a special commission or warrant from 
the people to that effect. And he proposed to give 
this law a retrospect, in order to comprehend Fo- 
pilius Lænas!3 who, being consul in the year after 
the troubles occasioned by Tiberius Gracchus, had, 
under the authority of the senate alone, proceeded 
to try and condemn such as were accessary to that 
sedition. Lænas perceived the storm that was 
gathering against him, and chose to avoid it by a 
voluntary exile. This act was indeed almost an 
entire abolition of government, and a bar to the 
exercise of such ordinary powers as were neces- 
sary to the peace of the commonwealth. A popu- 
lar faction could withhold every power, which, in 
their apprehension, might be employed against 
themselves; and in their most pernicious designs 
had no interruption to fear from the dictator 
named by the senate and consuls, nor from the 
consul armed with the authority of the senate for 
the suppression of disorders; a resource to which 
the republic had frequently owed its preservation. 
As we find no change in the proceedings of the 
state upon this new regulation, it is probable that 
the absurdity of the law prevented its eflect. 

While Gracchus thus proposed to make all the 
powers of the state depend tor their existence on 
the occasional willof the people, he meant to ren- 
der the assemblies of the people themselves more 
democratical, by stripping the higher classes of 
the prerogative, = or influence they pos- 
sessed, in leading the public decisions. T'he cen- 
turies being hitherto called to vote in the order of 
their classes, those of the first or highest class, b 
voting first, set an example which was often fol. 
lowed by the whole. By the statute of Grac- 
chus, the centuries were required, in every ques- 
tion, to draw lots for the prerogative, and gave 
their votes in the order they had drawn. 

Under this active tribune, much public busi- 
ness, that used to poss through. the senate, was 
engrossed by the popularassemblies. Even in the 
form of these assemblies, all appearance of re- 
spect to the senate wag laid aside. T'he rostra, or 
platform on which the presiding magistrate stood, 
was placed in the middie of an area, of which one 
part was the market-place, surrounded with stalls 


berius, had been degraded trom the oflice of tri-| and booths for merchandize, and the courts of jus- 


bune; and the act took its title from tle name of 
the person against whom it was framed. 


6 Fragmenta Corn. Nepotis ab Andrea Scotto col- 
secta, edita cnm scriptis Corn. Nepotis. 

7 Liv. lib. Ix. Velleius, ib. ii. Hyginus de Limiti- 
nus. Appian, de Viris IHustribus. 

8 Semisse et tricenti, for a half and a third, &e. Liv. 
Plutarch. Appian. ibid. 

9 Florus, lib. iii. c. 15. Cicer. in Verrem. 

10 Privilegium in Octavjum, 


tice; the other part, ealled the comitium, was 
open to receive the people in their public asseni- 
blies; and on one side of it, fronting the rostra, or 
bench of the magistrates, stood the curia, or sen- 
ate-house. ‘The people, when any one wasspeak- 

11 De militum commodis. 

12 Plutarch. in C. Graccho.—Lex Scnipronia de 
bertate civimn. 

13 Cicer. in Cluentio; pro Rabino; pro domo sv 

l4 The first century was called the prerogativa 


104 


ing, stood partly in the market-place, and partly 
in the comitium. ‘The speakers directed their 
voice to the comitium, so as to be heard in the 
senate. This disposition, Gracchus reversed ; and 
direeting his voice to the forum, or market-place, 
seemed to displace the senate, and deprive that 
body of their office as watchmen and guardians 
of the public order in matters that came before 
the popular assemblies.! 

At the time that the tribune Caius Gracchus 
engaged the minds of his contemporaries, and fur- 
nished history chiefly with these effects of his fac- 
tious and turbulent spirit, it is observed, that he 
himself executed works of general utility ; bridges, 
highways, and other public accommodations 
through Italy. And that the state having carried 
its arms, for the first time, over the Alps, happily 
terminated the war with the Salyii, a nation of 
Gaul, whose territory became the first province of 
Rome in that country. And that Caius Sextius, 
eonsul of the preceding year, was authorized to 
place a colony in the neighbourhood of the hot 
springs, which, from his name, were called the 
Aque Sextig, and are still known by a corruption 
of the same appellation.2 

From Asia, at the same time, it was reported, 
that Ariarathes, the king of Cappadocia, and ally 
of the Romans, was murdered, at the instigation 
of Mithridates, king of Pontus, whose sister he 
had married; that he had left a son for whom 
Mithridates affected to secure the kingdom; but 
that the widowed queen having fallen into the 
hands of Nicomedes, king of Bithynia, this prince, 
in her right, had taken possession of Cappadocia, 
while Mithridates, in name of his nephew, was 
hastening to remove him from thence. On this 
subject a resolution was declared in the assembly 
of the people at Rome, that both Nicomedes and 
Mithridates should be required immediately to 
evacuate Cappadocia, and to withdraw their 
troops. This resolution Caius Gracchus opposed 
with all his eloquence and his credit, charging his 
antagonist aloud with corruption, and a clandes- 
tine correspondence with the agents, who, on dif- 
ferent sides, were now employed at Rome in so- 
liciting this affair. ‘None of us,” he said, “stand 
forth in this place for nothing. Even I, who de- 
sire you to put money in your own coffers, and to 
consult the interest of the state, mean to be paid, 
not with money indeed, but with your favour and 
a good name. They who oppose this resolution 
likewise covet, not honours from you, but money 
from Nicomedes; and they who support it, expect 
to be paid by Mithridates, not by you. As for 
those who are silent, they, I believe,.understand 
the market best of all. They have heard the story 
of the poet, who being vain that he had gota 
great sum of money for rehearsing a tragedy, was 
told by another, that it wag not wonderful he had 
got so much for talking, when I, said the other, 
who it seems knew more than he was wished to 
declare, have got ten times as much for holding my 
tongue. ‘There is nothing that a king will buy 
at so great a price, on occasion, as silence.’’ 

Such, at times, was the style in which this po- 
pular orator chose to address his audience.  1n- 
dividuals are won by flattery, the multitude by 
buffoonery and satire. From the tendency of this 


1y airo dé Re Rustica, lib. i. c. 2... Cte. de Ane 


citia. Plutarch. in vit. Caii Gracchi. 


2 At Aix, in Provence. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


3 A. Gellius, lib. ii. c. 10. | 


[Boox II. 


| speech, it appears to have been the opinion of 


Gracchus, not that the Romans should sequester 
the kingdom of Cappadoeia for the heirs of Ari- 
arathes, but that they should seize it for them- 
selves. The question, however, which now arose 
relating to the succession to this kingdom, laid the 
foundation of a tedious and bloody war, of which 
the operations and events will occur in their place. 

Graechus, on the approaeh of the 
U. C. 639. election of consuls, employed all 
C. Fannius, his credit and influence to support 
Cn. Domitius Caius Fannius, in opposition to 
Ahenobarbus. Opimius, who, by his vigilance and 
activity in suppressing the treason- 
able designs of the allies at Fregelle, had incurred 
the displeasure of the popular party ; and Fannius 
being accordingly chosen, together with Cn. Do- 
mitius Ahenobarbus, Gracchus proceeded to offer 
himself as a candidate to be re-elected into the 
office of tribune. In this he followed the example 
of his brother Tiberius in a step, which, being 


‘reckoned illegal as well as alarming, was that 


which hastened his ruin. An attempt had been 
since made by Papirius Carbo to have the legality 
of such re-eleetions acknowledged; but this 
having failed, Caius Gracchus, with great ad- 
dress, inserted in one of his popular edicts, a clause 
declaring it competent for the people to re-elect a 
tribune, in case he should need a continuation of 
his power in order to fulfil his public engage- 
ments. To avail himself of this clause, he now 
declared, that his views in behalf of the people 
were far from being accomplished. Under this 
pretence he obtained a preference to one of the 
new candidates, and greatly strengthened the tri- 
bunitian power by the prospect of its repeated re- 
newals, and duration for an indefinite time. 
Upon his re-election, Caius, continuing his ad- 
ministration upon the same plan of animosity to 
the senate, obtained a law to deprive that body of 
the share which his brother had left them in the 
courts of justice; and ordaining, that the judges, 
for the future, should be draughted from the 
equestrian order alone, a class of men, who, being 
lett out of the senate, and of eourse not compre- 
hended in the laws that prohibited 
Lex Sempro- commerce, had betaken themselves, 
nia Judicia- as has been observed,‘ to lucrative 
ria. professions, were the farmers of the 
revenue, the contractors for the army, 
and, in general, the merchants who conducted the 
whole trade of the republic, ‘Though they might 
be considered as neutral in the disputes of the 
senate and people, and therefore impartial where 
the other orders were biassed, there was no class 
of men more likely to prostitute the character of 
judges for interest or actual hire. ‘This revolution 
in the courts of justice aceordingly may have 
contributed greatly to hasten the approaching 
corruption of manners, and the disorders of the 
government. ; 
The next ordinance paapaa by 
Ler de Pro- Gracchus, or ascribed to him, re- 
vinciis ordi- lated to the nomination of officers to 
nandis. govern the provinces ; and, if it had 
been strictly observed, might have 
made some compensation for the former. ‘Lhe 
power of naming such officers was committed to 
the senate, and the arrangements were to be an- 
nually made before the election of consuls. This 


4 Page 91. 


Cuap. lII] 


continued to be law, but was often overruled by 
the people. 

In the same year, the boldest and most dan- 
gerous project that had ever been formed by any 
of the popular leaders, that for admitting the 
Italian allies upon the rolls of the Roman peo- 
ple, already attempted by Fulvius Flaccus, was 
again renewed by Caius Gracchus; and, upon 
the utmost exertion of the vigilance and authority 
of the senate, with great difficulty prevented. 

The rumour of this project having brought 
multitudes to Rome, the senate thought it neces- 
sary to give the consuls in charge to clear the 
city, on the day that this important question was 
expected to come on, of all strangers, and not to 
suffer any aliens to remain within four miles of 
the walls. During the dependence of this ques- 
tion, Gracchus flattered the poorer citizens with 
the prospect of advantageous settlements, in cer- 
tain new colonies, of six thousand men each, 
which he proposed to plant in the districts of Cam- 

ania and Tarentum, the most cultivated parts of 

taly, and in colonies, which he likewise proposed 
to send abroad into sonie of the richest provinces. 
Such settlements had been formerly made to oc- 
cupy and secure recent conquest; they were now 
calculated to serve as baits to popular favour, and 
as a provision made by the leaders of faction, for 
their own friends and adherents. 

The senate, attacked by such popular arts, re- 
solved to retort on their adversaries; and for this 
purpose instructed Marcus Livius, another of the 
tribunes, to take such measures as should, if pos- 
sible, supplant Gracchus in the favour of the 
people. Livius, professing to act in concert with 
the senate, proposed a number of acts: one to 
conciliate the minds of the allies, by giving them, 
while they served in the army, the same exemp- 
tion from corporeal punishment which the Ro- 
man citizens had enjoyed. 

Another, for the establishment of 
Jex Livia de twelve different colonies, each of 
Tergo Civi- three thousand citizens. But what, 
um Latini possibly, had the greatest effect, be- 
Nominis. Cause it appeared to exceed in muni- 
ficence all the edicts of Gracchus, 
was an exemption of all those lands, which should 
be distributed in terms of the late Sempronian 
law, from all quit-rents and public burdens, which 
had hitherto, in general, been laid on all posses- 
sions that were held from the public.6 It was 
proposed to name ten commissioners to distribute 
lands thus unincumbered to the people; and 
three colonies are mentioned, Syllaceum, Taren- 
tum, and Neptunia, as having been actually sent 
abroad this year, and probably on these terms. 
About the same time it was de- 
Lex Rubria. creed, that the city of Carthage might 
be rebuilt for the reception of a colony 
of six thousand Roman citizens. This decree 
bears the name, not of Sempronius or of Livius, 
but of Rubrius, another tribune of the same year. 

The senate readily agreed to the settlement of 
these colonies, as likely to carry off a number of 
the more factious citizens, and to furnish an op- 
portunity likewise of removing from the city, for 
some time, the popular leaders themselves, under 
pretence of employing them to conduct and to 


5 Florus, lib. iv. c. 13. Sallust. de Bell. Jugurth. No. 
621. Cicero de Provinciis Consularibus. 
6 Plutarch. Paulus _—" de Legibus Romanis. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


105 


settle the families destined to form those esta- 
blishments. Accordingly, Caius Gracchus, and 
Fulvius Flaccus, late consul, and now deeply 
engaged in all these factious measures, were 
destined to take charge of the new colonists, and 
to superintend their settlement.’ 
In the mean time, the senate, in 
U. C. 632. the election of Opimius to the con- 
_ sulship of the following year, carried 
Coat Opi- an important object to the reputation 
Q: Fab: ME- and interest of their party, and con- 
ceived hopes of being able, by the 
authority of this magistrate, to com- 
bat the designs of Gracchus more effectually than 
they had hitherto done.. He was accordingly re- 
tained in the administration of affairs in Italy, 
while his colleague, Fabius, was appointed to 
command in Gaul.. Caius Gracchus, having the 
presumption to offer himself a third time candi- 
date for the office of tribune, was rejected, and 
had the mortification to find, that the authority 
of the senate began to prevail; and, as they had 
credit enough to procure his exclusion from any 
share in the magistracy, so they might be able to 
frustrate or reverse many of the acts he had ob- 
tained in favour of his party. 

By the repulse of Gracchus and his associates, 
the aristocratical party came to have a majority, 
even in the college of tribunes.. Questions of 
legislation were now likely to be determined in 
the assembly of the centuries; and this circum- 
stance alone, while the senate was able to retain 
it, Was equal to an entire revolution of the govern- 
ment. ‘The centuries, under the leading of an 
active consul, were likely to annul former reso- 
lutions with the same decision and rapidity with 
which they had been passed. Much violence was 
expected, and the different parties, recollecting 
what had happened in the case of Tiberius 
Gracchus, took measures not to be surprised by 
their antagonists; for the most part came to the 
place of assembly in bands, even under arms, 
and endeavoured to possess the advantage of the 
ground as in the presence of an enemy. 

Minucius, one of the tribunes, in consequence 
of a resolution of the senate, pretending that he 
was moved by some unfavourable presages, pro- 
posed a repeal or amendment of some of the late 
popular acts; and particularly, to change the 
destination of the colony intended for Carthage, 
to some other place. This motion was strenu- 
ously opposed by Fulvius Flaccus, and by Caius 
Gracchus, who treated the report of presages 
from Africa as a mere fiction, and the whole de- 
sign as proceeding from the inveterate hatred of 
the nobles to the people. Before the assembly 
met, in which this question was to be decided, 
these popular leaders attempted to seize the capi- 
tol, but found themselves prevented by the con- 
sul, who had already with an armed force secured 
that station. 

In the morning after they had received this 
disappointment, the people being assembled, and 
the consul being employed in offering up the cus- 
tomary sacrifices, Gracchus, with his party, came 
to their place in the comitium, One of the at- 
tendants of the consul, who was carrying away 
the entrails of the victim, reproached Gracchus, 
as he passed, with sedition, and bid him desist 
from his machinations against the government 


imus. 


7 Plutarch Appian. Orosius. 


106 


of the commonwealth. On this provocation, one 
of the party of Gracchus struck the consul’s offi- 
cer with his dagger, and killed him on the spot. 
The cry of murder ran through the multitude, 
and the assembly began to break up. Gracchus 
endeavoured to speak, but could not be heard for 
the tumult; and all thoughts of business were 
laid aside. The consul immediately summoned 
the senate to meet; and having reported what 
had happened in the comitium, and what appear- 
ed to him the first act of hostility in a war, which 
the popular faction had prepared against the 
state, he received the charge that was usual on 
perilous occasions, to provide, in the manner 
which his own prudence should direct, for the 
safety of the commonwealth. Thus authorized, 
he commanded the senators and the knights to 
arm, and made proper dispositions to secure the 
principal streets. Being master of the capitol and 
forum, he adjourned the assembly of the people 
tothe usual place on the following day, and cited 
the persons accused of the murder to answer for 
the crime which was laid to their charge. 

In consequence of this adjournment, and the 
consul’s instructions, numbers in arms, repaired 
to the comitium at the hour of assembly, and 
were ready to execute such orders as they might 
receive for the public safety. Gracchus and Ful- 
vius refused to answer the citation, and the capi- 
tol being secured against them, they took post, 
with a numerous party in arms, on the Aventine 
hill, which was opposite to the capitol, and from 
which they equally looked down on the forum 
and place of assembly. Being again cited to ap- 
pear at the tribunal of the Roman people, they 
sent a young man, one of the sons of Fulvius, to 
capitulate with the consul, and to settle the terms 
on which they were to surrender themselves. 
Upon this message they were told, in return, that 
they must answer at the bar of the assembly, as 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book H. 


criminals, not pretend to negotiate with the re- 
public, as equals; that no party, however nume- 
rous, was entitled to parley with the people of 
Rome: and to this answer the messenger was 
forbid, at his peril, to bring any reply. The party, 
however, still hoped to gain time, or to divide 
their enemies; and they ventured to employ young 
Fulvius again to repeat their message. He was 
seized by the consul’s orders. Gracchus and Ful- 
vius, with their adherents, were declared public 
enemies; and a reward was offered to the person 
who should kill or secure them. They were 
instantly attacked, and after a little resistance, 
forced from their ground. Gracchus fled by the 
wooden bridge to the opposite side of the river, 
and was there slain, either by his own hand, or 
by that of a faithful servant, who had undertaken 
the task of saving him in his last extremity from 
falling into the power of his enemies. Fulvius 
was dragged to execution from a bath where he 
attempted to conceal himself. The heads of both 
were carried to the consul, and exchanged for the 


. promised reward. 


In this fray the party of the senate being re- 
gularly armed and prepared for slaughter, cut off 
the adherents of Caius Gracchus and Fulvius 
in greater numbers than they had done those of 
Tiberius; they killed about three thousand two 
hundred and fifty in the streets, and confined 
great numbers, who were afterwards strangled 
in the prisons. The bodies of the slain, as the 
law ordained, in the case of treason, being denied 
the forms of a funeral, were cast into the river, 
and their estates confiscated.! 

The house of Fulvius was razed to the ground, 
the area laid open for public uses; and, from 
these, beginnings, it appeared that the Romans, 
who, in the pursuit of their foreign conquests, 
had so liberally shed the blood of other nations, 
might become equally lavish of their own. 


CHAPTER IV. 


State of Order and Tranquillity which followed the Suppression of the late T'umults—Appear- 
ance of Caius Marius—Foreign Wars—Complainis against Jugurtha—Appearance of the 
Cimbri— War with Jugurtha—Campaign and Treaty of Piso—Jugurtha comes to Rome 
with a Safe-Conduct—Obliged to retire from thence— Campaign of Metellus—Of Marius— 
Jugurtha betrayed by Bocchus—His Death, after the Triumph of Marius— This General re- 
elected, in order to command against the Cimbri. 


THE popular party had, in the late tumults, 
carried their violence to such extremes, as dis- 
gusted and alarmed every person who had any 
desire of domestic peace; and in their ill-advised 
recourse to arms, but too well justified the mea- 
sures which had been taken against them. By this 
exertion of vigour, the senate and ordinary ma- 
gistrates, recovered their former authority ; affairs 
returned to their usual channel, and the most per- 
fect order seemed to arise from the late confu- 
sions. Questions of legislation were allowed to 
take their rise in tie senate, and were not car- 
ried to the people, without the sanction of the 
senate’s authority. The legislative power was 
exercised in ae yasembly of the centuries, and 
the prohibitory ov defensive function of the tri- 
bunes, or repr text atives of the people, was such, 
as to prever; s nuses of the executive power 


in the hands of the aristocracy, without stopping 
the proceedings of government, or substituting a 
democratical usurpation in its place. Even the 
judicative power, vested in the equestrian order, 
promised to have a salutary effect, by keeping a 
balance between the different ranks and distinc- 
tions of men in the republic. 

The aristocratical party, notwithstanding the 
ascendant they had recently gained, did not at- 
tempt to rescind any of the regular institutions 
of Gracchus; they were contented with inflict- 
ing punishments on those who had been acces- 
sary to the late sedition, and with re-establish- 
ing such of the nobles as had suffered by the 
violence of the popular faction. Popilius Lænas, 


1 Appian. Plutarch. Orosius, lib. v. c. 12. Florus, 
lib. iii. c: 15. Auctor de Viris Ifustribus, c. 65. 


Cuar. IV.] 


driven into exile by one of the edicts of Grac- 
chus, or by the persecution to which it exposed 
him, was now recalled upon the motion of Cal- 
purnius Piso, one of the tribunes.? 

As the state of parties was in some measure 

reversed, Papirius Carbo thought 

U. C. 633. proper to withdraw from the po- 
pula®ide; and, by the credit of 
paii iia those now in possession of the go- 
Papirius Carbo, ernment, was promoted to the sta- 
tion of consul, and yielded the first 

fruits of his conversion by defending the cause of 
his predecessor Opimius, who, at the expiration 
of his consulate, was brought to trial for having 
put Roman citizens to death without the forms 
of law. Carbo, though himself connected with 
those who suffered, now pleaded the justice and 
necessity of the late military executions; and, 
upon this plea, obtained the acquittal of his client. 

This merit on the part of Carbo, however, did 
not so far cancel his former offences as to prevent 
his being tried and condemned in the following 
yea as an accomplice in the sedition of Gracchus. 

e was supposed to have been accessary to the 
death of Scipio; and his cause not being warmly 
espoused by any party, he fell a sacrifice to the 
imputation of his heinous crime. Tt is said, that, 
upon hearing his sentence, he killed himself.’ 

Octavius, one of the tribunes of thc present 
year, moved an amendment of the 
law obtained by Gracchus, re- 
specting the distribution of corn 
from the public ee re probably 
to ease the treasury in part of that burden ; but 
the particulars are unknown. 

About this time the celebrated Caius Marius 
began to appear in the public assemblies of the 
people. He was a person of obscure birth, and 
rustic manners, formed amidst the occupations.of 
a peasant,’ and the hardships of a legionary sol- 
dier, but of a resolute spirit, and insatiable ambi- 
tion. He was‘a native of Arpinum, and without 
any other apparent title than that of being a 
denizen of Rome, laid claim to the honours of tlic 
state. He is remarkable for having suffered morc 
repulses in his first attempts to be elected into 
office, and for having succeeded more frequently 
afterwards, than any othcr Roman citizen during 
the existence of the commonwealth. 

Marius, after being disappointed in his first 
canvass for the office of tribune, succeeded in the 
following year. The acts which were passed 
under his tribunate, and which bear his name, do 
not carry any violent cxpressions of party-spirit, 
nor give intimation of that insatiate ambition with 
which he afterwards distressed his country ; the 
first related to the conduct of clec- 
tions, and provided some remedy 
for an evil which was complained 
of in the manner of soliciting votes. 
The space between the rails, by which the citi- 
zens passed to give in their ballots, was so broad 
as to admit, not only those who came to vote, but 
the candidates likewise, with their adherents and 
friends, who came to importune and to overawe 
the people in the very act of delivering their votes. 
Marius proposed to put an end to this practice, 
and to provide for the entire freedom of the people, 
by narrowing the entrance, so that only the voters 


Ler Octavia 
Frumentaria. 


Ler Maria de 
Suffragiis. 


2 Cicero in Bruto. 
3 Valerius Max. lib. ili. ce. 7. Cicero in Bruto. 
4 Juvenal. Sat. viii. Plin. lib. xxxiii. c. 11. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


107 


could pass. A party of the nobles, with Aure- 
lius Cotta the consul at their head, not knowing 
with what a resolute spirit they were about to 
contend, being averse to this reformation, prevailed 
on the senate to withhold its authority, without 
which any regular question on this subject could 
not be put to the people. But Marius, in the 
character of tribune, threatened the consul with 
immediate imprisonment, if he did not move to 
recall this vote of the senate. The matter being 
reconsidered, Lucius Metellus, who was first on 
the rolls, having given his voice for affirming the 
first decree, was ordered by Marius into custody; 
and there being no tribune to intercede for him, 
must have gone to prison, if the dispute had not 
terminated by the majority agreeing to have the 
matter carried to the people, as Marius pro- 
posed, with the sanction of the senate’s authority. 

In another of the acts of Marius, the republic 
was still more indebted to his wisdom and courage, 
in withstanding an attempt of one of his col- 
leagues to flatter the indigent citizens at the ex- 
pense of the public treasury, by repealing the 


recent regulation of Octavius, and lowering the 


terms on which corn was distributed from the 
granaries. This was an ordinary expedient of 
tribunitian faction. Marius opposed it as of dan- 
gerous consequence. And his conduct in this 
matter marked him out as one not to be awed by 
any party, and a person who, into whatever party 
he should be admitted, was destincd to govern. 
The times indeed werc likely to give morc im- 
portance to his character as a soldier than a citi- 
zen; and in that he was still farther raised above 
the malice of those who were inclined to revile 
or undervaluc what were called his upstart pre- 
tensions.5 
From the timc that the Romans first passed 
into the Transalpine Gaul, as auxiliaries to the 
republic of Marseilles, they had kept on foot in 
that neighbourhood a military force; and, by 
planting colonies at convenient stations, showed 
their intention of maintaining possessions on that 
side of the Alps. Betultus, or Betultich, a prince 
of the country, who was supposed able to raise a 
force of two hundred thousand men, attempted to 
expel these intruders, but was defeated, first by 
the proconsul Fabius, afterwards by Domitius 
Ahcnobarbus, and furnished these generals with 
the subjects of their respective triumphs. This 
prince himself became a captive to Domitius, and 
was carried to Rome, where he was led in pro- 
cession, distinguished by his painted arms and 
his chariot of silver, the equipage in which it was 
said he usually led his army to battle.6 
It appears that the Romans had 
U. C. 633. employed elephants in the first wars 
they made in Gaul; for the victory 
of Domitius is attributed to the effect that was 
produced by these animals.’ a 
Quintus Marcus succeeded Domitius in the 
command of the forces which were employed in 
Gaul; and continued to gain ground on the na- 
tives, who appeared from different cantons suc- 
cessively to resist his arms. He planted a colony 
at Narbo, to strengthen the frontier of the newly- 
acquired province on one side; and as the Ro- 
mans had hitherto always passed by sea into 


5 Plutarch. in Mario. 

6 Velleius Pater. Ammianus Marcell. lib. xv. fine 
Padionusin Verrinam Secundam. Val. Max. lib. v.c. 9 

7 Suetonius in Vita Neronis. 


108 


that country, he endcavoured to open a passage 
by the Alps in order to have a communication by 
land with Italy on the other. In the course of 
these operations the Steni, an Alpine nation that 
opposed him, were entirely cut off. 

About this time the Roman generals obtained 
their triumphs on different quarters, in the Ba- 
leares and in Dalmatia, as well as in Gaul; and 
the republic did not meet for some years with an 
enemy able to resist her power, except on the 


side of Thrace and the Danube, wherc the pro-’ 


consul Cato was defeated; and where a resistance 
was for some years kept up by the natives. 

But of the foreign affairs which occupied the 
attention of the Romans, the most memorable 
was the contest of pretcnders to the crown of 
Numidia, which, by the death of Micipsa, the 
son and successor of Massinissa, came to be dis- 
posed of about this time. The late king had two 
sons, Adherbal and Hiempsal. He had likewise 
adopted Jugurtha, the natural son of his brother 
Manastabal, whom he had employed at the head 
of his armics, thinking it safer to gain him by 
good offices, than to provoke him by a total ex- 
clusion from favour. He had formed a project, 
frequcntamong barbarous and despotic sovereigns, 
but always ruinous, to divide his territories; and 
he hoped that, while he provided for his own 
sons, he should secure to them, from motives of 
gratitude, the protection and good offices of Ju- 
gurtha, whom he admitted to an equal share with 
them in the partition of his kingdom. The con- 
sequences of this mistaken arrangement soon 
appeared in the distractions that followed, and 
which arose from the ambition of Jugurtha, to 
make himself master of the whole. For this pur- 
pose he formed a secret design against the lives of 
both the brothers, of whom the younger, Hiemp- 
sal, fell into his snare, and was assassinated. 
Adherbal, being more cautious, obliged his crafty 
enemy to declare himself openly, took the field 
against him with all the forces he could raise, but 
was defeated, and obliged to take refuge in the 
Roman province, and from thence thought proper 
to pass into Italy, in order to lay his complaints 
before the senate and people of Rome. 

Massinissa, the grandfather of this injured 
prince, had given effectual aid to the Romans in 
their wars with Carthage; and, upon the final 
reduction of that republic, was rewarded with a 
considerable part of its spoils. From this time 
forward the Romans expected, and the king of 
Numidia paid to them, a deference like that of a 
vassal or tributary prince to his sovereign lord. 
Upon the faith of this connection, Adherbal now 
carried his complaints to Rome; and Jugurtha, 
knowing how ready the Romans were, in the 
character of arbitrators, to consider themselves as 
the sovereigns of other nations, thought proper to 
send deputies on his part, to counteract the repre- 
sentations of his rival. 

This crafty adventurer had served under Scipio 
at the siege of Numantia, where he had an op- 
portunity of observing the manners and dis- 
cipline of the Romans, and accommodated him- 
self to both. He was equally distinguished by 
his implicit submission to command, as by his 
impetuous courage, and by the ability of his con- 
duct in every service. He had even then probably 
directed his views to the succession of Numidia, 
and saw of what consequence the Romans might 
prove in deciding his fortunes. He had studied 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


their charactcr, and had alrcady marked out the 
line he was to follow in conducting his affair: 
with that people. They appeared to be a num 
ber of sovereigns asscmbled together, able in 
council and formidable in the field; but, in com- 
parison to the Africans in general, undesigning 
and simple. With the pyde of monarchs they 
began, he imagined, to feche indigence of cour- 
ticrs, and were to be moved by considerations of 
interest rather than force. His commissioners 
were now accordingly furnished with ample pre- 
sents, and with the means of gratifying the prin- 
cipal persons at Rome in a manner that was 
suited to thcir respective ranks and to their in- 
fluence in the commonwealth. 

In the choice of this plan Jugurtha, like most 
politicians that refine too much, had formed a 
system with great ingenuity, and spoke of it with 
a specious wit; but had not taken into his ac- 
count the whole circumstances of the case in 
which he engaged. Rome, he supposed, was a 
city to be sold. He forgot that, though many 
Romans could be bought, no treasure was sufti- 
cient to buy the republic; that to buy a few, 
made it necessary for him to buy many more; 
that as he raised expectations, the number of ex- 
pectants increascd without limit; that the more 
he gave, the more he was still expectcd to give ; 
that in a state which was broke into parties, if he 
gained one by his gifts, that alone was‘sufficient 
to rouse the other against him. And accordingly, 
after lavishing his money to influence the coun- 
cils of Rome, he was obliged to have recourse to 
arms at last, and to contend with the forces of the 
republic, after he had exhausted his treasure in 
attempting to corrupt her virtue. 

Although Jugurtha had many partizans at 
Rome, such was the injustice of his cause, or the 
suspicion of corruption in those who espoused it, 
that they durst not openly avow their wishes. 
They endeavoured to suspend the resolutions 
which were in agitation against him, and had the 
matter referred to ten commissioners who should 
go into Africa, and in presence of the parties 
settle the differences which subsisted between 
them. There indeed he practised his art on the 
Roman commissioners with better success than 
he had experienced with the senate and people. 
He prevailed upon them to divide the kingdom, 
and to favour him in the lot which should he as- 
signed to himself: knowing that force must ulti- 
mately decide every controversy which should 
arise on the subject, he made choice, not of the 
richest, but of the most warlike division; and 
indeed had already determined that, as soon as 
the Romans left Africa, he should make an end 
of the contest by the death of Adherbal; trusting 
that, by continuing to use the specific which it 
was said he had already applied, he might prevail 
on the Romans to overlook what they would not, 
on a previous request, have permitted. 

He accordingly, soon after the departure of the 
Roman commissioners, marched into the territo- 
ries of Adherbal, shut him up in the town of 
Cirta; and, while the Romans sent him repeated 
messages to desist, still continued the blockade, 
until the mercenaries of Adherbal, tired of the 
hardships they were made to endure, advised, 
and, by their appearing ready to desert, forced 
him to commit himself to the mercy of Jugurtha, 
by whom he was immediately put to death. 

By these events, in about seven years from the 


~ Cuar. IV.) 


death of Micipsa, Jugurtha had attained to the 
object of his highest desires; but the arts which 
procured him a crown, likewise rendered his state 
insecure. He was disappointed in his expecta- 
tion to pacify the Romans. The money he dealt 
went into the coffers only of a few, but his crimes 
roused the indignation of the whole people. Prac- 
tised statesmen or politicians are seldom roused 
by mere feelings of indignation on the subject of 
private wrongs. They have, or pretend to have, 
reasons of state to suppress the consideration of 
individuals. The greater part of the Roman senate 
accordingly, whether T on maxims of policy, 
or won by the presents of Jugurtha, received the 
complaints which were lodged against him with 
indifference; but the assembly of the people, 
moved by the cries of perfidy and murder which 
were raised by the tribunes, received the repre- 
sentations of his conduct with indignation and 
rage. These passions were inflamed by opposi- 
tion to the nobles, who were supposed to favour 
the murderer. Neither the most deliberate states- 
man nor the most determined partizan of Jugur- 
tha durst appear in his cause, nor propose té de- 
cline a war with that prince, although it was 
likely to be attended with considerable difficulties ; 
and was to be undertaken at a time when a cloud 
hung over Italy on the side of Gaul, a quarter 
from which the Romans always expected, and 
often experienced, the most terrible storms. 
About the time that Adherbal 
U. C. 640. laid his complaints against Jugur- 
tha before the senate of Rome, a 
new enemy had appeared. The north of Europe, 
or of Asia, had cast off a swarm, which, migrat- 
ing to the south and to the west, was first descried 
by the Romans on the frontier of Illyricum, and 
resently drew their attention to that side. The 
forte was said to consist of three hundred thou- 
sand fighting men, conducting their families of 
women and children, and covering the plains 
with their cattle. The consul Papirius Carbo 
was ordered to take post in Illyricum, to observe 
the motions of this tremendous host. He was 
alarmed with their seeming to point towards the 
district of Aquileia; and putting himself, with 
too little precaution, in their way, could not with- 
stand their numbers, and was overwhelmed as by 
a tempest. 

This migrating nation the Romans have called 
by the name of Cimbri, without determining from 
whence they came. It is said that their cavalry 
amounted to no more than fifteen thousand ; that 
it was their practice to despise horses, as well as 
the other spoils of their enemies, which they 

enerally destroyed: and from this circumstance 
it may be argued, that they were not of Scythian 
extraction, nor sprung from those mighty plains 
in the northern parts of Asia, where military 
force has from time immemorial consisted of 
cavalry, where horses were valued above every 
other species of acquisition or property ; and that 
they must have been bred amongst mountains 
and woods, where this animal is not equally use- 
ful. On their helmets, which were creat with 
plumes of feathers, they carried the gaping jaws 
of wild beasts. On their bodies they wore breast- 
plates of iron, had shields painted of a conspicu- 
ous colour; and carried two missile javelins or 
darts, and a heavy sword. ‘They collected their 
fighting men, for the most part, into a solid 
square, equally extending every way : in one of 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


109 


their battles it was reported that the sides of this 
square extended thirty stadia, or between three 
and four miles. The men of the foremost ranks 
were fastened together with chains locked to their 
girdles, which made them impenetrable to every 
attack, and gave them the force of a torrent, in 
sweeping obstructions before them. Such were 
the accounts with which the Romans were 
alarmed on the approach of this tremendous 
enemy. í 
Although, by the defeat of Carbo, Italy lay 
open to their devastations, yet they turned away 
to the north and westward, and keeping the Alps 
on their left, made their appearance again on the 
frontier of the Roman province in Narbonne 
Gaul, and from thence passed into Spain, where 
they continued to alarm Roman settlements, and 
kept Rome itself in suspense, by the uncertainty 
of the tract they might afterwardschoose to pursue. 
Such was the state of affairs, 
U. C. 642. when the popular cry and generous 
indignation of the Roman people 


Pub. Corne- forced the state into a war with 
lius, Scipio Jugurtha. The consul Piso was 
Nasica. 2 : ee. 
L. Calpur- appointed to command in Numi- 
nius, Piso, dia. The necessary levies and sup- 
Bestia. 


plies for this service were ordered, 
and Jugurtha could no longer 
doubt that the force of the Roman republic was 
to be employed against him; yet, in hopes to 
avert the storm, he sent his son with two proper 
assistants, in the quality of ambassadors to Rome, 
chiefly trusting to the arts of insinuation he had 
hitherto practised, and to the distribution of pre- 
sents and of money. Their arrival being reported 
to the senate, a resolution of this body passed, 
that unless they brought an offer from Jugurtha 
to surrender his person and his kingdom at dis- 
cretion, they should be required in ten days to 
depart from Italy. 

This answer being delivered to the son of Ju- 
gurtha, he presently withdrew, and was followed 
by a Roman army, which was prepared to em- 
bark for Africa. The war was conducted at first 
with great vivacity and success: but Jugurtha, 
by offering great public concessions or private 

ratifications, prevailed on the consul to negotiate. 

t was agreed, that, upon receiving a proper 
hostage on the part of the Romans, the king him- 
self should repair to their camp, in order to con- 
clude the treaty. In the articles that were made 
public, the king agreed to surrender hiniself at 
discretion, and to pay a large contribution in 
horses, corn, elephants, and money; but in secret 
articles, whicli were drawn up at the same time, 
the consul engaged that the person of the king 
should be safe, and that the kingdom of Numidia 
should be secured to him. 

During these transactions the time of the ex- 
pipyon of Piso’s command drew near, and he 

imself was called into Italy to preside at the ap- 
proaching elections. His report of the treaty 
with Jugurtha was received with suspicion, and 
the cry of corruption resumed by the popular 
party. “ Where is this captive ?” said the tribune 
emmius; “if he have surrendered himself, he 
will obey your commands; send for him; ques- 
tion him in respect to what is past. If he refuse 
to come, we shall know what to think of a treaty 
which brings impunity to Jugurtha, princely for- 
tunes to a few private persons, ruin and infamy 
to the Roman republic.” Upon this motion the 


110 


pretor Cassius Longinus, a person of approved 
merit and unshaken integrity, was hastened into 
Africa, with positive instructions to bring the 
king of Numidia to Rome. By the safe conduct 
which Cassius brought on the part of the repub- 
lic, and by his own assurances of protection, Ju- 
surtha was prevailed on to commit himself to the 
faith of the Romans. He laid aside his kingly 
state and attendants, set out for Italy, and detèr- 
mined to appear as a suppliant at Rome. Upon 
his arrival, being called into the public assembly, 
Memmius proposed to interrogate him on the 
subject of his supposed secret transaction with 
certain members of the senate; but here Bebius, 
another of the tribunes, interposed his negative ; 
and, notwithstanding that the people exclaimed, 
and even menaced, this tribune persisted. And 
before this bar to the farther examination of Ju- 
gurtha could be removed, an incident took place, 
which occasioned his sudden departure from Italy. 
Massiva, the son of Gulussa, being the grand- 
son and natural representative of Massinissa, and 
the only person besides. Jugurtha who remained 
of the royal line of Numidia, had been persuaded 
by Albinus, the consul elected for the ensuing 
year, to state his pretensions before the Roman 
senate, and to lay claim to the crown. Jugurtha, 
though at Rome, and in the power of those who 
were likely to resent his crimes, gave a specimen 
of the bold and sanguinary counsels to which he 
was- inclined, employed against this competitor 
the ordinary arts of his court, and had him assas- 
sinated. The crime was traced to its author, but 
the safe conduct he had received could not be 
violated; and he was only commanded, without 
delay, to depart from Italy. On this occasion he 
left Rome with that memorable saying; “ Here 
is a city to be sold, if any buyer could be found.” 
The consul Albinus soon fol- 


U. C. 643. lowed Jugurtha, to take the com- 
M. Minucius mand of the Roman army in Afri- 
Rufus & Post- ca; and being eager to perform 


hum. Alhinus. some notable action before the ex- 


piration of his year, which was fast approaching, 
he urged the king of Numidia, with all the forces 
he could assemble in the province; but found that 
he had to do with an enemy who had the art to 
elude his impetuosity, and from whose apparent 
conduct no judgment could be formed of his real 
designs. This artful warrior often advanced with 
a seeming intention to hazard a battle, when he 
was most resolved to decline it ; or he precipitantly 
fled, when he meant to return upon his enemy, 
and take advantage of any disorder he might incur 
in a too eager pursuit. His offers of submission, 
or his threats, were equally fallacious; and he 
used, perhaps in common with other African 
princes, means to mislead his enemy, which Eu- 
ropeans, ancient as well as modern, have in gene- 
ral condemned. He made solemn capitulations 
and treaties with a view to break them, and con- 
sidered breach of faith, like a feint or an ambush, 
as a stratagem licensedin war. ‘The Europeans 
have always termed it perfidy to break the faith 
of a treaty, the Africans held it stupidity to be 
caught in the snare. 

By the artifices of Jugurtha, accordingly, or by 
the remissness of his antagonist, the war was 
protracted for another year, and the consul, as 
the time of the election drew near, was recalled, 
as usual, to preside in the choice of his successor. 
At his arrival the city was in great agitation. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox II. 


The cry of corruption, which had been raised 
against many of the nobles, on account of their 
supposed correspondence with Jugurtha, gave an 
advantage to the popular party, and they deter- 
mined to improve it, by raising prosecutions to 
the ruin of persons, either odious to the people, or 
obnoxious to the equestrian order, who then had 
the power of judicature in their hands Three 
inquisitors were accordingly named by speciai 
commission to take cognizance of all complaints 
of corruption that should be brought before them ; 
and this commission was instantly employed to 
harass the nobility, and to revenge the blood 
which had been shed in the late popular tumults. 
Lucius Calpurnius, Piso, Bestia, C. Cato, Spu- 
rius Albinus, and L. Opimius, all of consular 
dignity, fell a sacrifice on this occasion to the 
popular resentment. The tribune Mamilius, 
upon whose motion this tribunal had been erected, 
with his associates, apprehending that, upon the 
expiration of their trust, the heat of the prosecu- 
tions might abate, moved the people that they 
might be continued in their office; and, upon 
finding themselves opposed by the influence of 
the senate and all the ordinary powers of the state, 
they suspended, by virtue of their tribunitian 
power, the election of consuls, and for a whole year 
kept the republic in a state of absolute anarchy. 

In this interval Aulus Albinus, left by his 
brother, the late consul, in the command of the 
army in Africa, determined to improve the occa- 
sion by some honourable action. He left his 
quarters in the winter, and marched far into the 
country, hoping that by force or surprise he might 
possess himself of the Numidian treasures or 
magazines. Jugurtha encouraged him in this 
design, affected fear, retired with precipitation 
wherever the Romans presented themselves ; and, 
to’increase the presumption of their general, sent 
frequent messages to implore his pity. He at 
the same time endeavoured to open a correspon- 
dence with the Thracians and other foreigners, 
then serving in the Roman camp. Some of 
these he corrupted; and when he had drawn the 
Roman army into difficult situations, and pre- 
pared his plan for execution, he suddenly ad- 
vanced in the night to the Roman station; and 
the avenues being entrusted, as he expected, to 
the Thracians and Ligurians whom he had cor- 
rupted, and by whom he was suffered to pass, he 
surprised the Romans in their camp, and drove 
them from thence in great confusion to a neigh- 
bouring height, where they enjoyed, during 
night, some respite from the enemy; but without 
any resource for subsistence, or hopes of recover- 
ing their baggage. 

In the morning Jugurtha desired to confer 
with the prætor; and representing how much 
the Romans, stripped of their provision and equi- 
page, were then in his power, made a merit of 
offering them quarter, on condition that they 
would conclude a treaty of peace, and in ten days 
evacuate his kingdom. 

These terms were accordingly accepted : but 
the capitulation, when known at Rome, gave oc- 
casion to much indignation and clamour. It was 
voted by the senate not to be binding, and the 
consul Albinus, in order to repair the loss of the 
public, and to restore the credit of his own family, 
made hasty levies, with which he proposed to re- 


1 Cicero de Claris Oratoribus. Sallust. in Bell. Jugurth. 


Cuar. IV.] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


lli 


new the war in Numidia, but not having the | snare he had laid for them. With the advantage 
consent of the tribunes to this measure, he was f of the ground and of numbers, he maintained, 


obliged to leave his forces behind him in Italy, 
and joined the army without being able to bring 
any reinforcement. He found it in no condition 
to face the enemy, and was contented to remain 
in the province till a successor should be named. 

’ Resentment of the disgraces in- 


U. C. 644. curred in Africa, and fear of inva- 

sion from the Cimbri, who, having 
Q. Cecilius traversed Spain and Gaul, were 
queens still on their march, appear to have 
Tidus, calmed for a little time the ani- 
Silanus. mosity ` of domestic. factions at 


Rome. The consular elections 
were suffered to proceed, and the choice of the 
people fell on Quintus Cæcilius Metellus and M. 
Junius Silanus; the first was appointed to the 
command of the army in Numidia, the second to 
observe the motions of the Cimbri on the fron- 
tiers of Gaul, and to turn them aside, if possible, 
from the territory of Rome. About this time 
those wandering nations had sent a formal mes- 
sage to the Romans, desiring to have it under- 
stood on what lands they might settle,? or rather, 
over what lands they might pass in migration 
with their herds. This request being refused by 
the senate, they opened a passage by force, over- 
came in battle the consul Silanus, and, probably 
without intending to retain any conquest, con- 
tinued to move wherever the aspect of the country 
tempted their choice. 

Metellus proceeded to Africa with a consider- 
able reinforcement; and, having spent some time 
in restoring the discipline of the army which had 
been greatly neglected, and in training his new 
levies to the duties and hardships of the service, 
he directed his march to the enemy’s country, 
and in his way, had frequent messages. from Ju- 
gurtha, with professions of submission and of a 
pacific disposition. 

When the Roman army entered on the territo- 
ry of Numidia, they accordingly found the coun- 
try prepared to receive them in a friendly manner; 
the people in tranquillity, the gates of every city 
left open, and the markets rcady to supply them 
with necessaries. 

These appearances, with the known character 
of Jugurtha, creating distrust, only excited the 
vigilance of Metellus. ‘They even provoked him 
to retort on the Numidian his own insidious arts. 
He tampered with Bomilcar, and the other mes- 
sengers of Jugurtha to betray their master, and 
promised them great rewards if they would de- 
liver him into the hands of the Romans, either 
living or dead. 

Jugurtha, not considering that his known cha- 
tacter for falsehood must have destroyed the crc- 
dit of all his professions, even if he should at any 
time think proper to make them sincere, and trust- 
ing to the effect of his submissive messages in ren- 
dering the enemy secure, made a disposition to 
profit by any errors they should commit, and hoped 
to circumvent and destroy them on their march. 
For this purpose he waited for them on the de- 
scents of a high mountain, over which they were 
to pass in their way to the Muthul, a river which 
helped to form the situation of which he was to 
avail himself. He accordingly lay concealed by 
its banks, until the enemy actually fell into the 


2 Florus, lib. i, Liv. lib. lxv. 


during the greater part of the day, a contest with 
troops who possessed, against his irregulars, a 
great superiority of order, discipline, and cou- 
rage; but not having found the Remans, as he 
expected, in any degree off their guard, he was, 
in the event of that day’s action, obliged to fly 
with a few horse to a remote part of his kingdom. 

This victory obtained over Jugurtha appeared 
to be an end of the war. His army was dispersed, 
and he was left with a few horsemen, who at- 
tended his person, to find a place of retreat, and 
to choose a station at which to assemble new 
forces, if he meant to continue the war. 

The Numidians were inured to action. The 
frequent wars of that continent, the wild and un- 
settled state of their own country, made the use 
of horses and of arms familiar: but so void was 
the nation of military policy, and its people so 
ignorant of order, that it was scarcely possible 
for the king to fight two battles with the same 
army. If victorious, they withdrew with their 
plunder; if defeated, they supposed all military 
obligations at an end: and in either case, after 
an action, every one fled where he expected to be 
soonest in safety. 

Metellus, after the late engagement, finding no 
enemy in the field, was for some time uncertain 
to what part of the kingdom Jugurtha had di- 
rected his flight. But having intelligence that 
he was in a new situation assembling an army, 
and likely to form one still more numerous than 
any he had yet brought into the field, tired of 
pursuing an enemy on whom defeats had so little 
effects, he turned away to the richer and more 
cultivated parts of the kingdom, Here the plun- 
der of the country might better repay his labour, 
and the enemy, if he ventured to defend his ter- 
ritory, might more sensibly feel his defeats. Ju- 
gurtha perceiving his intention, drew his forces 
towards the same quarter, and soon appeared in 
his rear. 

While Metellus was endeavouring to force the 
city of Zama, Jugurtha pierced into his camp, 
and, though repulsed from thence, took a post, 
by which he made the situation of the Romans, 
between the town and his own army, so uneasy, 
as to oblige them to raise the siege. 

This the Numidian prince thought a proper 
opportunity to gain some credit to his pacific 
professions. He made an offer accordingly to 
surrender at discretion, and actually delivered up 
great part of his arms and military stores; but 
this purpose, if ever sinccre, he retracted, and 
again had recourse to arms. 

The victory which had been ob- 
U. C. 645. tained in Africa, flattered the vanity 
of the Roman people, and procured 


Bes colle to Metellus, in the quality of pro- 
Q. Horten. | consul, a continuation of his former 
sius Nepes, command. The troops he had post- 
‘Marcus Au- ed in Vacca being cut off by the in- 
ween Scau- habitants, he made hasty marches 


in the night, surprised the place, 
and, without having allowed the authors of that 
outrage morc than two days to enjoy the fruits of 
their perfidy, amply revenged the wrong they had 
done to the Roman garrison. 

But the success of Metellus did not hasten the 
ruin of Jugurtha so fast as his own misconduct, 
in the jealous and sanguinary measures which he 


112 


took to suppress plots and conspiracies, either real 
or supposed to be formed against his life, by per- 
sons the most in his confidence. 

Bomilcar, still carrying in his mind the offers 
which had been made by Metellus, and willing 
to have some merit with the Romans, into whose 
hands he and all the subjects of Jugurtha were 
likely soon to fall, formed a design against his 
master, and drew Nabdalsa, a principal officer in 


the Numidian armies, to take part in the plot. 


They were discovered in time to prevent the exe- 
cution of their design, but they made Jugurtha 
from thenceforward consider the camp of his own 
army as a place of danger to himself, rendered 
him distrustful, timorous, and unquiet ; frequently 
changing his company and his quarters, his 
guards and his bed. Under these apprehensions, 
by which his mind was considerably disordered 
and weakened, he endeavoured, by continual and 
rapid motions, to make it uncertain where he 
should be found; and he experienced at last, that 
private assassination and breach of faith, although 
they appear to abridge the toils of ambition, are 
not expedient even in war; that they render hu- 
man life itself, for the advantages of which war is 
undertaken, no longer eligible or worthy of being 
preserved. Weary of his anxious state, he ven- 
tured once more to face Metellus in the field, and 
being again defeated, fled to Thala, where he had 
left his children and the most valuable part of 
his treasure. This city too, finding Metellus had 
followed him, he was obliged to abandon, and, 
with his children and his remaining effects, fled 
from Numidia, first to the country of the Getuli, 
barbarous nations, that lived among the moun- 
tains of Atlas south of Numidia, and whom he 
endeavoured to arm in his cause. From thence 
he fled to Bocchus, king of Mauritania, whose 
daughter he had married; and having persuaded 
this prince to consider his quarrel with the Ro- 
mans as the common cause of all monarchies, 
who were likely in succession to become the prey 
of this arrogant and insatiable power, he prevailed 
on the Mauritanian to assemble his army, and to 
attempt the relief of Numidia. 

Jugurtha, in conjunction with his new ally, 
directed his march to Cirta, and Metellus per- 
ceiving his intention, took post to cover that place. 
But while he was endeavouring, by threats or 
persuasions, to detach the king of Mauritania 
from Jugurtha, he received information from 
Rome that he was superseded in the command 
of the army; and from thenceforward protracted 
the war, under pretence of messages and nego- 
tiations, and possibly inclined to leave it with all 
its difficulties entire to his successor. 

Marius, having served under Metellus, had 
with great difficulty, and not without some ex- 
pressions of scorn on the part of his general, ob- 
tained leave to depart for Rome, where he meant 
to stand for the consulship. He accordingly ap- 
peared in the capacity of candidate for this honour, 
and by vaunting, instead of concealing, the ob- 
scurity of his ancestors; by inveighing against 
the whole order of nobility, their dress, their city 
manners, their Greek learning, their family 
images, the stress they laid on the virtue of their 
forefathers to compensate the want of it in them- 
selves; but more especially by arraigning the 
dilatory conduct of Metellus, and by promising a 
speedy issue to the war, if it should be entrusted 
to himself; a promise, to which the force and 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IL. 


ability he had shown in all the stations he hau 
hitherto filled, procured him some credit ; he so 


far won upon the people, that he was chosen con- 


sul, in opposition to the interest of the nobles, and 
to the influence of all the leading men of the 
senate. His promotion was in a particular man- 
ner galling to Metellus, whose reputation he had 
attacked, and to whose station in Africa, by an 
express order of the people, in contempt of the 
arrangement which had been made by the senate, 


he was now to succeed. 


Upon the nomination of Marius, 


U. C. 626. the party who had opposed his pre- 

, ferment did not attempt to withhold 

z Cassius the reinforcements which he asked 
onginus, n : 

C. Marius. for the service in which he was to 


command. ‘They even hoped to in- 
crease his difficulties by suffering him to increase 
the establishment of his province. The wealthier 
class of the people alone were yet admitted into 
the legions; and being averse to such distant 
services, were likely to conceive a dislike to the 
persons by whom they were forced to enlist. 
Marius in this capacity might lose some part of 
the popular favour which he now enjoyed, and 
become less formidable to his rivals in the state. 
But this crafty and daring politician, by slighting 
the laws which excluded the necessitous citizens 
from serving in the legions, found in this class of 
the people a numerous and willing supply. They 
crowded to his standard, and filled up his army 
without delay, and even without offence to those 
of a better condition, who were pleased with re- 
lief from this part of their public burdens. 

This was a remarkable and dangerous innova- 
tion in the Roman state, and may be mentioned 
among. the steps which hastened the ruin of the 
commonwealth. From this time forward the 
sword began to pass from the hands of those who 
were interested in the preservation of the republic, 
into the hands of others who were willing to make 
ita prey. ‘The circumstances of the times were 
such, indeed, as to give warning of the change. 
The service of a legionary soldier was become too 
severe for the less indigent order of citizens, and 
now opened to tte necessitous the principal road 
to profit, as well x; honour. Marius, to facilitate 
his levies, was willng to gratify both; and thus 
gave beginning tc the formation of armies who 
were ready to fig\t for or against the laws of 
their country, and tho, in the sequel, substituted 
battles for the bloo less contests which hitherto 
had arisen from the visions of party. 

The new consul, turivalled in the favour of 
the people, obtained watever he required; and, 
being completely provided for the service to which 
he was destined, emba ked for Africa with a 
great reinforcement, and in a few days arrived at 
Utica, Upon his arriva, the operations of the 
war were resumed, and ca:-i into the wealthiest 
provinces of Numidia, where he encouraged his 
army with the hopes of spoil. ‘The new levies, 
though composed of persons wicherto excluded 
from the military service, were fe~med by the 
example of the Top already in the field, and 
who were now well apprised of then əwn supe- 
riority to the African armies. Bocchus and Ju- 
gurtha, upon the approach of this enemy, thought 
proper to separate, and took different routs into 
places of safety in the more difficult and inacces- 
sible parts of the country. 

This separation was made at the suggestion of 


Curae. LV. | 


Jugurtha, who alleged that, upon their appear- 
ing to despair, and to discontinue all offensive 
operations, the Roman general would become 
more secure and more open to surprise. But 
Marius, without abating his vigilance, pressed 
where the enemy gave way, over-ran the coun- 
try, and took possession of tle towns they had 
left. To rival the glory which Metellus had 
gained in the reduction of Thala, he ventured on 
a like enterprise, in the face of similar difficulties, 
by attacking Thapsa, a place surrounded with 
deserts, and in the midst of a land destitufé of 
water, and of every resource for an army. f Ha- 
ving succeeded in this design, he ventured, in 
his return, to attack another fortress, in which, it 
being supposed impregnable, the royal treasures 
were lodged. This strong hold was situated on 
a rock, which was every where, except at one 
path that was fortified with ramparts and towers, 
faced with steep and inaccessible cliffs. The 
garrison permitted the first approaches of the Ro- 
mans with perfect security, and even derision. 
After some fruitless attacks, Marius, with some 
imputation of folly in having made the attempt, 
was about to desist from the enterprise, when a 
Ligurian, who had been used to pick snails on 
the cliffs over which this fortress was situated, 
found himself, in search of his prey, and by the 
growing facility of the ascent, led to a height 
from which he began to have hopes of reaching 
the summit. He accordingly surmounted all the 
difficulties in his way; and the garrison being 
then intent on the opposite side of the fortress to 
which the attack was directed, he returned un- 
observed. This intelligence he carried to Marius, 
who without delay orde-ed a detachment of cho- 
sen men, with an um., sual number of trumpets 
and instruinents of alarm, to follow the direction 
of this guide. He himself, to divert the attention 
of the besieged, and to be ready, on receiving the 
proposed signal from within, to make a vigorous 
and decisive assault, advanced tothe walls. The 
Ligurian, with much difficulty, endeavoured to 
effect his intentions. The soldiers who followed 
him were obliged to untie their sandals and thcir 
helmets, to sling their shields and their swords, 
and, at difficult parts of the rock, could not be per- 
suaded to advance until their guide had repeat- 
edly passed and repassed in their sight, or had 
found stuinps and points of* the stone at which 
they could fasten cords to aid their ascent. ‘The 
summit was to be gained at last by the branches 
of a tree which, being rooted in a cleft of the rock, 
grew up to the edge of the precipice. By the 
branches of this tree the whole party passed, and, 
climbing near to its top, landed at last on the 
summit. They instantly sounded their trumpets 
and gave a sudden alarm. The besieged, who 
had been drawn to the walls to resist the enemy 
who attacked them in front, were astonished with 
this sound in their rear, and soon after, greatly 
terrified with the confused flight from behind 
them of women, children, and men unarmed, and 
being at the same time vigorously attacked at 
their gates, were no longer able to resist, suffered 
the Romans to force their way at this entrance, 
and in the end to become masters of the fort. 
Whilst Marius was engaged in the siege of 
this place he was joined by the questor Sylla, who 
had been left in Italy to bring up the cavalry, 
which were not ready to embark at the departure 
of the consul. This young man was of a pa- 
P 


AS 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


113 


trician and noble family, but which had not, for 
some generations, borne any of the higher offices 
of state. He himself partook in the learning 
which then spread into Italy, from a communi- 
cation with the Greeks, and had passed the early 
part of his life in town-dissipation or in literary 
studies, of which the last were considered at this 
time at Rome as a species of corruption almost 
equal to the first. He was yet a novice in war, 
but having an enterprising genius, soon became 
an object of respect to the soldiers, and of jealousy 
to his general, with whom he now laid the foun-_ 
dation of a quarrel more fatal to the commonwealth 
than that which had subsisted between the pre- 
sent and preceding commander in this service. 

The king of Numidia, stung by the sense of 
what he had already lost, and expecting no ad- 
vantage from any further dclays, determined, in 
conjunction with Bocchus, to make a vigorous 
effort, and to oblige Marius, who was then mov- 
ing to his winter quarters, yet to hazard a battle 
for the preservation of what he had acquired in 
the preceding campaign. The king of Maurita- 
nia had been inclined to remain neutral, or to 
enter on a separate treaty with the Romans; but 
being promised a third part of the kingdom of 
Numidia, in case the Romans were expelled 
from thence, and the war should be brought to a 
happy conclusion, he once more brought: for- 
ward his army, and joined Jugurtha. 

The prosperous state of the Romans, undis- 
turbed for some time by the opposition of any 
enemy in the field, inspired them with some de- 
gree of negligence or security, by which they 
were exposed to surprise. About an hour before 
the setting of the sun, their march was interrupt- 
ed by the attack of numerous parties, wlio, with- 
out any settled order, occupied the fields through 
which they were to pass, and seemed to intend, by 
assailing them on every side, to begin the niglit 
with a scene of confusion, of which they might 
afterwards more effectually avail themselves in the 
dark. In an action begun under these disadvan- 
tages, it was supposed, that the Roman army might 
be entirely defeated, and in a country with which 
tley were not acquanited, and in circumstances 
for which they were not at all prepared, being 
unable to effect a retreat, surrender at discretion. 

Jugurtha, with his usual intrepidity and con- 
duct, profited by every circumstance which pre- 
sented itself in his favour. tle brought the 
troops, of which his army was composed, whether 
Getulians or Numidians, horse or foot, to harass 
the enemy in their different ways of figliting, and 


‘where they could easiest make their attacks. 


Wherover a party was repulsed, he took care to 
replace it; and sometimes affected to remit his 
ardour, or to fly with every appearance of panic, 
in order to tempt the Romaus to break from their 
ranks. Marius, notwithstanding, with great 
dexterity aud presence of mind, niaintained the 
form of his march; and, before night, got pos- 
session of some heights on which he could secure 
his army. He himself, with the infantry, chose 
that which had the steepest ascent, and ordered 
Sylla, with the cavalry, to take his post on a 
smaller eminence below. ‘That his pos.tion might 
not be known to the enemy, he prohibited the 
lighting of fires, and the usual sounding of truu- 
pets at the different watches of the night. The 
Numidians had halted on the plain where night 
overtook them, and were observed at the break 


Lit 


of day, reposing in great security, and without 
any secming apprehension of danger from an 
enemy, who was supposed to be flying, and who, 
on the preceding day, had, with some difficulty, 
escaped from their hands. I/larius resolved to 
attack them in this situation, and gave orders, 
which were communicated through the army, 
that at a general sound of the trumpets, every 
man should stand to his arms, and with a great 
shout, and beating on his shield, make an impe- 
tuous attack on the enemy. ‘The design, ac- 
cordingly, succeeded. ‘The Numidians, who had 
often anected to fly, were driven into an actual 
rout. Great numbers fell in the flight, and 
many ensigns and trophies were taken. 

After this victory, Marius with his usual pre- 
cautions, and without remitting his vigilance, on 
a supposition that the enemy was dispersed, di- 
rected his march tothe towns on the ccast, where 
he intended to fix his quarters for the winter. 
Jugurtha, well apprised of his route, proposed 
again to surprise him before he should reach the 
end of his journey ; and, for this purpose, avoided 
giving him any premature or unnecessary cause 
of alarm. , He prepared to attack the Roman 
army in the neighbourhood of Cirta, which was 
to be the end of their labours, and near to which 
he supposed that they would think themselves 
secure from any further attempts of their enemy. 
In the execution of this design, he, with the 
greatest ability, conducted his troops to the place 
of action, and there too made every-effort of con- 
duct and resolution. But the match being un- 
equal, he was obliged to give up the contest, 
and, with his sword and armour all bathed in 
blood, and almost alone, is said to have left the 
field, in which, for the first time, he had taken no 
precautions for re-assembling his army, and on 
which his Numidians were accordingly routed, 
to rally no more! 

Upon these repeated defeats, Bocchus des- 

paired of the fortunes of Jugurtha, 
U. C. 647. and sent a deputation to Marius, re- 
questing a conference with himself, 
C. Attilius or with some of his officers. He 


Scrannus. obtained an interview with Sylla and 
Quintus : 5 : 

Servilius Manlius; but, upon their arrival, had 
Catico. taken no fixed resolution, and was 


still kept in suspense, by the persua- 
sion of those of his court who favoured the in- 
terest of Jugurtha. Marius, being continued in 
his command, resumed the operations of the war, 
and was about to attack the only place which yet 
remained in the hands of the enemy. When 
the king of Mauritania, alarmed by this circum- 
stance, took his resolution to sue for peace, he 
sent a deputation of five chosen persons, first to 
the quarters of Marius, and, with this general’s 
permission, erdered them to proceed from thence 
to Rome. ‘These deputies, being admitted into 
the senate, made offers of friendship in the name 
of their master; and were informed, in return, 
that he must give proofs of his friendly disposi- 
tion to the Romans, before they could believe his 
professions, or listen to any terms of peace. 
When this answer was reported to Bocchus, he 
was not at a loss to understand that the Romans 
wished him to deliver up the king of Numidia 
into their hands; and seems to have conceived 
the design of purchasing peace, even on these 
terms. Sylla being already personally known to 
him, he made choice of this officer as the person 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox [kL 


with whom he would treat, and desired he might 
be sent to his quarters. ‘The Roman questor 
accordingly set out with a small party. On the 
way he was met by Volux, the son of the king 
of Mauritania, with a thousand horse: him he 
considered as of doubtful intention, whether come 
as a friend or an enemy; but coming with pro- 
fessions of friendship from the king his father, 
and with orders to escort the Roman questor, 
they proceeded together. On the second day 
after this junction, Volux came in haste to the 
quarters of Sylla, and informed him, that the ad- 
vanced party had discovered Jugurtha posted on 
their route, with a considerable force, and ear- 
nestly pressed the Romans to endeavour to make 
their escape in the night. 

Sylla could no longer command his suspicions, 
and, sensible that he had imprudently, without 
hostage or other security, ventured too far on the 
faith ofan African prince, proudly refused to alter 
his march; desired that the Mauritanian prince, 
if he thought proper, should depart; but inform- 
ing him at the same time, that the Reman people 
would know how to avenge the injury done to 
their officers, and would not fail to punish the 
perfidy of the king his father. Wolux made pro- 
testations of his innocence; and as the Roman 
questor could not be prevailed on to save himself 
by flight, this prince insisted to remain, and to 
share in his danger. ‘They accordingly kept on 
their way, passed through the troops of Jugurtha, 
who, though disposed to offer violence to the Ro- 
mans, had yet some measures to observe with the 
king of Mauritania, whose son was in the com- 
pany; and while, contrary to his usual character, 
he remained undecided, the prey escaped hin, 
and got out of his reach. 

Jugurtha sent persons of confidence immedi- 
ately to counteract the negotiations of Sylla at 
the court of Bocchus; and each of these parties 
solicited the king of Mauritania to betray the 
other. The Numidians endeavoured to persuade 
him, that, with such a hostage as Sylla in his 
hands, he might still expect some honourable 
terms from the Romans; and Sylla, on the other 
part, represented, that, as the king of Mauritania 
had offended the Romans, by abetting the crimes 
of Jugurtha, he must now expiate his guilt by 
delivering him over to justice. It was the inch- 
nation of this prince to favour Jugurtha; but it 
was his interest, as well as his intention, to gain 
the Romans. While he was still in suspense, he 
gave equal encouragement to both parties; and, 
without being finally determined what he should 
do, appointed the Roman questor and the king 
of Numidia to meet him without any escort, or 
number of men in arms, reserving to the last mo- 
ment the power of determining against the one 
or the other. He had placed a body of his own 
troops in ambush, and, soon after the parties 
were met, gave a signal, which his men under- 
stood to be for seizing Jugurtha. T'he Numi- 
dians, who attended their king, were slain; he 
himself was put in chains, and delivered up to 
the Roman questor. Sylla with the exultation 
of a hunter, received this lion in his toils; and, 
though he lived to perform much greater actions, 
still appears to have valued himself most on the 
success of this commission. He boasted somuch 
of his prize, that he became from that moment, 
an object of jealousy to Marius, and was con- 
sidered as a person advancing too fast in the 


Saar. TV.) 


» ame careerof renown.! It was understood among 
» 1e Romans, that the commander-in-chief, upon 


any service, in any division or province of the 


empire, enjoyed the triumph for victories gained, 


even in his absence, by his lieutenants, or by 
those who served under his command; and Ma- 
rius probably thought that Sylla took more to 


himself than was due upon this occasion. The 
desire of being the person who put the finishing 
hand to any service, however accomplished, was 
not peculiar to these officers. It was an effect of 
the Roman policy in making the rewards of 
honour depend so much on events, without re- 


gard to the means which were employed to pro- 
Fron this circumstance, the citizens 
of this republic were as desirous of having the 
reputation of successful adventures aflixed to their 


duce thean. 


names, as courtiers in modern Europe are de- 


sirous to have titles of nobility, or badges of their 


sovereign’s favour. : 

The war being thus at an end, Marius ap- 
pointed a thanksgiving; and, while he was of- 
fering the customary sacrifices, the news arrived 
from Rome that the people had dispensed with 
the law in his favour, and again had made choice 
of him for consut of the following year. ‘This 
choice was deterinined by the great alarm which 
the Romans had taken on the approach of the 
barbarous nations, who, like a meteor, had, for 
some years, traversed the regions of Europe, and, 
with uncertain direction, were said to destroy 
wherever they moved. The Romans had re- 
peatedly stood in their way, and had provoked a 
resentment, which these barbarians were sup- 
posed, in haste, to wreck upon Italy. ‘They 
were at first heard of under the name only_of 
Cimbri: but were now known to consist of many 
nations, under the appellations of Ambrones, 
Teutones, Tectosagi, and others; and had gained 
accessions of force by the junction of the Tigu- 
rini, and other Gaulish nations, who, either by 
choice or compulsion, were made a part in this 
mighty host, whose movements the Romans con- 
sidered as chiefly directed against themselves. 

Besides the armies commanded by the consuls 
Carbo and Silanus, who had fallen victims to this 

barbarous enemy, other considerable 


U. C. 618, bodies, under Scaurus and Cassius, 
P. eas had perished by their hands; and 
Rufus, Cn. Other misfortunes, from the same 
Malilius. quarter, were coming apace. At the 


time that Marius had finished the 
war with Jugurtha, Quintus Servius Cepio, 
having the former year commanded in Gaul, 
where he destroyed or pillaged the city of Tolosa, 
and made a great booty, consisting, according to 
Justin, of one hundred thousand pounds weight 
of gold, and one million five hundred thousand 
pounds weight of silver, was now, in his turn, to 
meet with this enemy; the consul Mallius or 
Manilius had orders to join him; and all the 
troops they could assemble were thought neces- 
sary to withstand the barbarians. These generals 
united their forces on the Rhone, but without a 
proper disposition to act in concert; they were 
accordingly defeated in battle; eighty thousand 
Romans, amongst whom were the two sons of the 
consul Manilius, were killed in the action ; forty 
thousand attendants of the army were massacred 
in cold blood. Both camps were taken. 


1 Plutarch, in Mario et in Sylla. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


115 


After this victory the lords of the Cimbri, be- 
ing assembled in council, called before them Au- 
relius Scaurus, formerly a Roman consul, lately 
second in command to one of the vanquished ar- 
mies, and now a prisoner. They questioned him 
with respect to the forces in Italy, and the route 
to be taken across the Alps: to these questions 
he made answer, that it would be in vain for 
them to invade that country : that the Romans on 
their own territory, were invincible. And, in re- 
turn to these words, it is said, that a barbarian 
struck the prisoner with his dagger to the heart. 
It is further said of this barbarous council, that 
they came to a resolution to spare no prisoners, to 
destroy the spoils of the slain, to cast all the trea- 
sures of gold and silver into the nearest river, to 
destroy all horses with their saddles and furniture, 
and to save no booty whatever; and it must be 
confessed, that in this their résolutions were 
guided by a pohcy well accommodated to the man- 
ner of life they chose to maintain. Wealthy posses- 
sions frequently disqualify even scttled nations for 
the toils of war, but to migrating tribes, they would 
be certain impediments and the means of ruin.2 

These accounts of the character of an encmy, 
and of the fate of Roman armies which ventured 
to encounter them, were received at Rome with 
amazement and terror. ‘The citizens changed 
their dress and assumed the military habit. a 
tilius, the consul, who had remained in the ad- 
ministration of affairs in Italy, had instructions 
from the senate to array every person that was fit 
to bear arms. No one who had attained the military 
age was exempted. It is mentioned, that the son of 
the consul himself was turned into the ranks of a 
legion. ‘There was little time to train such levies; 
and the usual way was thought insuflicient. The 
fencing-masters, employed to train gladiators for 
the public shows, were brought forth, and distri- 
buted to instruct the citizens in the use of their 
weapons? But the expedient, on which the peo- 
ple chiefly relied for deliverance from the dangers 
which threatened them, was the nomination of 
Marius to command against this terrible enemy. 

This officer, upon hearing of his re-election, set 
out for Italy, and, with his legions and their cap- 
tives, entered Rome in triumph; a spectacle, of 
which Jugurtha, in chains, with his unfortunate 
children, were the principal figures. When the 
procession was over, the captive king was led toa 
dungeon, under orders for his immediate execu- 
tion. As he was about to he stripped of his or- 
naments and robes, the executioner, in haste to 
pluck the pendants from his ears, tore away the 
flesh, aud thrust him naked into a dungeon 
below ground. He descended into this place with 
a sinile, saying, “What a cold bath is kere?” 
He pined about six days, and expired. A kind 
and an able commander, would, in such a situa- 
tion, have been an object of respect and of pity, 
if we did not recollect, that he was the murderer 
of Adherbal and Efiempsal, the innocent children 
of his benefactor. And if we did not receive some 
consolation from being told, that his own chil- 
dren, who were likewise innocent, were exempted 
from the lot of their father, and honourably en- 
tertained in Italy. 

Marius, in this triumph, is said to have brought 
into the treasury three thousand and seven 


2 Orosius, lib, v. c. 16. Eutrop. lib. v. 
3 Valer. Max. lib. ii. c. 3. 


116 


pounds, or thirty thousand and seventy ounces of 
gold, and fifty-seven thousand seven hundred and 
fifty ounces of silver; and in money, two hun- 
dred and eighty-seven thousand denarii.! He en- 
tered the senate, contrary to custom, in his trium- 
phal robes, probably to insult the nobles, who 
used to despise him as a person of obscure ex- 
traction, born in a country town, and of a mean 
family : but finding that this was considered as an 
act of petulance, and generally condemned, he 
withdrew and changed his dress. 

The kingdum of Numidia was dismembered ; 
part was put into the possession of Bocchus as a 
reward for his late services; and part reserved for 
the surviving heirs of Massinissa. 

As the law respecting the consulate now stood, 

no one could be elected in absence, 


U. C. 649. nor re-elected into this office, till af- 
Consuls; c, ter an interval of ten years. Both 
Marius 2do. clauses were dispensed with in fa- 
C. Flavius vour of Marius, under pretence of 
Fimbria. 


continuing him at the head of the 
army, but as he might still have re- 
mained at the head of the army, and have ren- 
dered the same services to the state in the quality 
of proconsul, his re-election may be ascribed to 
his own ambition, and to his jealousy of other 
rising men in the state. Being considered as head 
of the popular party, his elevation was an object 
of zeal to the tribunes, and was intended to mor- 
tify those who affected the distinctions of ancient 
family. Contrary to the usual form, and without 
casting lots, he was preferred to his colleague in 
the appointment to command in Gaul. Having 
his choice of all the armies at that time in Italy, 
he took the new levies, lately assembled and dis- 
ciplined by Rutilius, in preference to the veterans, 
who had served in Africa under Metellus and 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


himself. It is probable that he was determined in 
this choice, more by desire to gratify the veterans 
who wished to be discharged, than by the consi- 
deration of any supposed superiority in the dis- 
cipline to which the new levies had been trained.? 

Upon the arrival of Marius in his province it 
appeared, that the alarm taken for the safety of 
Italy Was somewhat premature. The barbarians 
in their battles only meant to maintain the repu- 
tation of their valour, or to keep open the tract of 
their migrations. They had found the lands from 
about the higher parts of the Danube and the 
Rhine, through Gaul and across the Pyrennees 
into Spain, and to the ocean, convenient for thei 
purpose, and sufficiently extensive. They had yet 
meditated no war with the Romans, or any other 
nation; but did not decline the encounter where 
they met with resistance. At present they con- 
tinued their migrations to the westward, without 
any intention to cross the Alps, or to visit the na- 
tions who inhabited within those mountains. 

We have nothing recorded in history concern- 
ing the movements of these wandering nations, 
during the two subsequent years, except what is 
related of their adventure with Fulvius, a Roman 
pretor, probably in Spain, who, in return for hos- 
tilities committed in his province, having made a 
feint to draw the attention of their warriors, sur- 
prised and sacked their camp. Under the appre- 
hension, however, of their return towards Gaul 
and Italy, Marius continued to be elected consul, 
and was repeatedly named to the command of the 
army that was destined to oppose them. His 
party at Rome had, at this time, besides the exi- 
gency which justified their choice, many other 
advantages against their antagonists, and main- 
tained the envious quarrel of the lower people 
against the nobility with great animosity and zeal. 


CHAPTER V. 


Review of the Circumstances which revived the popular Party—Farther Account of Laws and 
Regulations under their Administration—State of the Empire—Fourth Consulate of Marius— 
Continued Migrations of the Barbarous Nations— Defeated by Marius at Aque Sertie— By 


Marius and Catulus in Italy. 


THE senate had, for some time after the sup- 
pression of the troubles which were raised by Ful- 
vius and the younger Gracchus, retained its au- 
thority, and restrained the tribunes of the people 
within ordinary bounds; but by the suspicions 
which arose against them, on the subject of their 
transactions with Jugurtha, and by the miscar- 
riages of the warin Numidia, they again lost their 
advantage. It is difficult to ascertain the real 
grounds of these suspicions. Sallust seems to ad- 
mit them in their utmost extent, and represents 
the whole order of nobility as mercenary traders, 
disposed to sell what the republic entrusted to 
their honour. ‘That the presents of Jugurtha 
were sometimes accepted, and produced some 
effect, is not to be doubted ; but that the aristo- 
cracy of Rome, during its short reign, was so 
much corrupted, is scarcely to be credited. Such 
a measure of corruption must have rendered the 


1 About 10,0007. 


state a prey to every foreign power that was in a 
condition to mislead its councils, and is not con- 
sistent with that superiority which the Romans 
then generally possessed in their negotiations, as 
well as in their wars. ‘The charge itself savours 
too much of that envy with which tlie lower class 
of the people at all times interpret the conduct of 
their superiors, and which was greatly coun- 
tenanced by the partizans of Cesar, at the time 
when Sallust wrote, in order to vilify and reduce 
the senate. "We cannot, however, oppose mere 
conjecture to the positive testimony of Sallust, 
corroborated by some suspicious circumstances in 
the transactions of the times. Among these we 
may recollect the patronage which Jugurtha met 
with at Rome, contrary to the professions of the 
Romans, in behalf of justice, and the uncommon 
number of senators degraded at that time, by au- 
thority of the censors, Q. Cecilius Metellus and 


2 Frontius de Stragemat. lib. iv. c. 2. 


Cuar. V.] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


117 


Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus,3 which has been al- | bunes, declared, in consequence of that sentence, 


ready mentioned in its place. 

Whatever may have been the real occasion of 
the cry then subsisting against the nobles, we have 
seen that the popular party, availing themselves of 
it, and giving it all manner of countenance, found 
means to recover great part of their lost power. 
The tribunes, having obtained the establishment 
of a special commission for the trial of all those 
who had received bribes from Jugurtha, made the 
people consider their own act in constituting a 
court of inquiry, as sufficient to evince the reality 
of the crime. The prosecutions which continued 
to be carried on for two years, upon this supposi- 


tion, served more than the subject of any former. 


dispute to alienate the minds of men from each 
other, and from the public. Questions were 
more of a private than of a public nature, and 
occupied the worst of the human passions, envy, 
malice, and revenge. One party learned to che- 
rish falsehood, subordination, and perjury ; the 
other lived in continual fear of having such en- 
gines employed against themselves. 

The people, in their zeal to attack the nobility 
under any pretence, made no distinction between 
errors and crimes; and, contrary to the noble 
spirit of their ancestors, treated misfortune, inca- 
pacity, or treachery, with equal rigour. One tri- 
bune had extended the use of the secret ballot to 
the trial of lesser crimes ;4 another, upon this oc- 
casion, took away all distinctions, and introduced 
it in the trial of capital crimes also:5 so that the 
judge, without being accountable, indulged his 
secret malice or partial favour.® 

Laws were made to promote the interest, as 
well as to gratify the animosity of the lower peo- 

le. By the Agrarian law of Gracchus, certain 
imits were set to estates in land; but, in order 
to render the excess of lands, in the hands of any 
particular person, immediately useful to the peo- 
ple, it was permitted, by an amendment made 
during the low state of the aristocratical party, 
that persons in possession of more than the legal 
measure of land, might retain thcir estates, but 
subject to a rent to be collected for the benefit of 
the poorer citizens; and thus it was proposed, 
that without any trouble in taking possession of 
lands, or removing from the city, the favourites 
of the party should be accommodated, and reap 
the fruits of sedition and idleness unimpaired.’ 
It was proposed by the consul 


U. C. 617. Servilius Capio, that the senate, 
Lex Servilia Whose members were personally 
de Judiciis. So much exposed to prosecutions, 


should have their share likewise in 
composing the juries, a privilege of which, by the 
edict of Gracchus, they had been deprived? In 
whatever degree this proposal was adopted, it 
Was again expressly repealed upon the motion 
of Servilius Glaucia. And Cæpio soon after ex- 
perienced, in his own person, tle animosity of 
the popular faction, being tried for miscarriage in 
his battle with the Cimbri. He was condemned 
by the judges, and afterwards, in virtue of a re- 
gulation obtained by Cassius, one of the tri- 


3 It is already mentioned, that thirty-two senators 
were struck off the rolls by these magistrates. 

4 Lex Cassia Tabellaria. 

5 Lex Celia Tabellaria, 

6 Cieer. de Legibus, lib. iti. 

7 Appian de Bell. Civ. lib. i 

8 Valer. Max. lib. v. ¢. 9. 


disqualified to hold a place in the senate.9 

Besides the transactions already mentioned, the 
following particulars, overlooked in the hurry of 
recording military operations and events, may 
serve still farther to characterize the times. M. 
Junius Silanus was tried for misconduct against 
the enemy; M. Emilius Scaurus, first on the 
roll of the senate, was brought to trial for con- 
tempt of religion; but both acquitted. The 
ardour for these prosecutions, and popular regu- 
lations, continued until the second consulate of 
Marius, when M. Marcius Philippus, one of the 
tribunes, moved to restore the law of Tiberius 
Gracchus, respecting the division of estates in 
land; and in his speech in support of this mo- 
tion, affirmed, that there were not two thousand 
families in Rome possessed of any property in 
land whatever.!0 This motion, however, was 
withdrawn. 

Among the crimes which the populace were 
now so eager to punish, fortunately that of pecu- 
lation or extortion in the provinces was one. To 
facilitate complaints on this subject, not only per- 
sons having an immediate interest in the case, 
but all to whom any money or effects injuriously 
taken might have otherwise come by inheritance, 
were entitled to prosecute for this offence; and 
any alien, who convicted a Roman citizen of this 
crime, so as to have him struck off the rolls of 
the people, was himself to be inrolled instead of 
the citizen displaced.!! 

Domitius, one of the tribunes, attacked the 
aristocratical constitution even of the priesthood, 
and endeavoured to transfer the right of election 
from the order itself to the people; but supersti- 
tion, which continues to influence the bulk of 
mankind after reason has failed, here stood in his 
way. The custom was against him; and, in 

such matters, religion and custom 
Lex Domjtia are the same. The people, there- 
de Sacerdotiis. fore, it was confessed, could not in- 

terfere without profanation; but a 
certain part of the people might judge of the can- 
didates, and instruct the college of priests whom 
they were to choose.!2? The same artifice, or ver- 
bal evasion, had been already adinitted in the 
form of electing the Pontifex Maximus, now 
chosen by seventeen of the tribes who were drawn 
by lot.!3 

During this period, a just alarm was taken on 
the subject of private as well as public corruption. 
Liberty was conccived to imply a freedom from 
every restraint, and to justify licence and con- 
tempt of the laws. ‘The-aids which were given 
to the people to enable them to subsist in profu- 
sion and idleness; the wealth that was passing to 
Rome in the hands of traders, contractors, and 
farmers of the revenue, as well as provincial ofli- 
cers, by whoin the profits of a first appointment 
were lavished in public shows, fights of gladiators, 
and baiting of wild beasts, to gain the people in 
theircanvass for farther preferments; tliese seve- 
ral circumstances tended in the highest degree, to 
corrupt the people, and to render them unworthy 
of that sovereignty which they actually possessed 
in the prevalence of the popular faction. 


9 Asconius Pedianus in Corneliana Ciceronis. 

10 Cicer. de. Officiis, lib. ii. 11 Cicero in Balbiana 
{2 Asconins in Corneliana Ciceronis. P 
13 Cicero de Lege Agraria. 


118 


The severities which were practised in certain 
cases, the suinptuary laws which were provided 
to restrain luxury, were but feeble aids to step 
such a source of disorder. It is mentioned, as an 
instance of such severity, that some vestals were 
questioned at this time for a breach of that sacred 
obligation to chastity, under which they were 
held up as a pattern of manners to the Roman 
women; that three of them were condemned, 
and, together with Roman knights, the supposed 
partners in their crimes, suffered extreme pu- 
nishment. A temple was on this occasion erect- 
ed to the goddess Venus under a new title, that 
of the Reformer ;! and prayers were to be offered 
up in this temple, that it might please the ged- 
dess to guard the chastity of Romen women.? 

The term luxury is somewhat ambiguous; it 
is put for sensuality or excess in what relates to 
the preservation of animal life; and for the effect 
of vanity, in what relates to the decorations of 
rank and fortune. The luxury of the Romans, 
in the present age, was probably of the former 
kind, and sumptuary laws were provided, not to 
restrain vanity, but to govern the appetites for 
mere debauch. About the time that Jugurtha 
was at Rome, the sumptuary law of Fannius re- 
ceived an addition, by which Roman citizens 
were not only restricted in their ordinary ex- 
pense, but the legal quantities and species of food 
were prescribed to them. ‘The whole expense of 
the table was restricted to thirty asses? a day, 
and the meat to be served up, to three or four 
pounds, dried or salted. ‘There was no restric- 
tion in the use of herbs or vegetables of any 
sort.4 
ted, on certain days, an expense of a hundred 
asses; on wedding days, two hundred. It is 
remarkable, that this law continued to have its 
effect on the tables of Roman citizens after Ci- 
cero was a man.5 The epicures of this time were 
obliged to make up, in the cookery of their vege- 
table diet, what was defective in that species of 
food. ; 

About the time of the commencement of the 
Numidian war, the people, according to the cen- 
sus, amouuted to four hundred and three thou- 
sand four hundred and thirty-six citizens, fit to 
carry arms. At this time it was that the censors, 
Quintus ,Cecilius Metellus, and Cn. Domitius 
Ahenobarbus, expelled thirty-two members from 
the senate. 

While the Romans were intent on the war 
which subsisted in Africa, they were assailed by 
enemies in some of the other provinces. In 
Spain, hostilities, at intervals, were still renewed. 
In endeavouring to quell one of the revolts of the 
natives, the Roman prætor was killed; in another 
encounter, the forces employed against them were 
cut off; and a fresk army was transported from 
italy to secure the Roman possessions. 

Hostilities were likewise continued on the 
frontier of Macedonia, by the Scordisci, Triballi, 
and other Thracian uations; and the proconsul 
Rufus, by his victories in this quarter, obtained a 
triumph. 

During this period, in the consulship of Atti- 
lius Serranus, and Q. Servilius Cepio, the year 


1 Venus Verticordia. } 

2 Orosius, lib. v. ce. 15. Jul. Obsequens. Ovid. 
Fast. lib v. 3 About two shillings. 

4 Macrobius Satur. lib. ii. c. 17. 

5 Epist. ad Familiar, lib. vii. ad Gallum. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


According to A. Gellius, the law permit- 


[Boox Il. 


after the first consulship of Marius, were born 
two illustrious citizens, M. Tullius Cicero, and 
Cneius Pompeius Strabo, afterwards distinguish- 
ed by the appellation of Pompey the Great. And 
we are now to open the scene in which the per- 
sons on whom the fate of the Roman empire was 
to depend, made their several entries into life, or 
into public business, and began to pass through 
an infancy or a youth of danger, to an old age or 
extreme trouble, which closed with the subver- 
sion of that constitution to which they were born. 

Marius having, without any me- 
morable event, passed the ycar of 
his second consulship on the fron- 
tier of Narbonne Gaul, was, by the 

eople, still under the same appre- 

ension of the Cimbric invasion, 
re-elected into the same office, and 
destined for his former station. This year like- 
wise the barbarians turned aside from his pro- 
vince, and left the republic at leisure to contend 
with enemies of less consideration, who appeared 
in a diflerent quarter. Athenio, a slave in Sicily, 
having murdered his master, and broken open 
the prisons or yards in which slaves were com- 
monly confined at work, assembicd a number 
together, and being clothed in a purple robe, with 
a crown and a sceptre, affected a species of roy- 
alty, invited all the slaves of the island to assume 
their freedom under his protection. He acquired 
strength sufficient to cope with Servilius Casca, 
the Roman pretor, and actually forced him in 
his camp. He likewise defeated the succeedin 
prætor, Licinius Luculus;§ and was in the. third 
year of the insurrection, with great difficulty, re- 
duced by the consul Aquilius. ‘his revolt was at 
its height in this year of the third consulship of 
Marius, and it was quelled in the second year after 
it, the rebels being surrounded in their strong 
holds, and obliged to surrender for want of pro- 
visions.’ The whole is mentioned now, that it 
may not recur hereafter to interrupt matters of 
more moment. 

About the same time the Romans had been 
obliged to equip a naval armament under Marcus 
Antonius, known by the appellation of the ora- 
tor, against the Cilician pirates, who had lately 
infested the seas. All that we know of this ser- 
vice is, in general, that it was performed with 
ability and success.® 

From Macedonia, Calpurnius Piso reported, 
that the victory he had gained over the Thra- 
cians had enabled him to penetrate to the moun- 
tains of Rhodope and Caucasus. 

Such was the state of the empire when Caius 
Marius returned from his province in Gaul, to 
preside at the election of consuls. He was again, 
by the voice of the people, called upon to resume 
his former trust; but he affected, trom modesty, 
to decline the honour. His partizans were pre- 
pared for acting this part, and were accordingly, 
by their importunities, to force him into an oftice 
which he so modestly seemed to decline. Among 
these, Apuleius Saturninus, at this time himself 
candidate for the office of tribune, charged Ma- 
rius with treachery to his country in proposing to 
desert the republic in times of so much danger: 
and with his reproaches prevailed so far as to 
render him passive to the will of his fellow-eiti 


U. C. 650. 


Caius Marius 
3tio, L. Aure- 
lius Orestes. 


6 Florus, lib. iii. c. 19. 
e ibid. lib. iii. c. 6. 


7 Florus, lib. iv. c. 19. 
Cicero de Orator. lib. i. 


Cuar. V.J] 


zens, who wished to replace him? again in his 
former station. 

In this fourth consulate, the 
courage and military skill of Ma- 
rius came to be actually exerted in 
this province. The barbarous na- 
tions, after their return from Spain, 
began to appear in separate bodies, 
caclı forming a numerous and for- 
midable army. In one division the Cimbri and 
Tectosages had passed through the whole length 
of Gaul to the Rhine, and from thence proceeded 
by the Danube to Noricum or Austria, and were 
pointing towards Italy by the valley of Trent. 
‘The Consul Lutatius Catulus was stationed near 
the descent of the Alps to observe the motions of 
this body. 

In another division, the Ambrones and the 
Teutones hung on the frontier of the Roman 
province in Gaul, between the Garonne and tke 
Rhone, and gave out, that they meant, by the 
most ordinary route of the mountains, to join 
their allies in Italy. 

Upon the approach of this formidable enemy, 
Manus took post on the Rhone at the confiuence 
of that river with the Isere, and fortified lis cainp 
in the most effectual manner. The barbarians 
reproaching hiin with cowardice for having takeu 
these precautions, sent, agreeably to their own 
notions of war, a forinal challenge to mect them 
in battle; and having had for answer from Ma- 
rius, That the Romans did not consult their ene- 
mies to know when it was proper to fight, they 
were confirmed in the contempt which they 
already entertained of his army, ventured to leave 
them behind, and procecded in separate divisions 
towards Italy. Marius followed; and, with rapid 
marches, overtook them as they passed over tlic 
country without any precaution; some of them 
near to the Roman colony of Sextius,” and far 
removed from cach other. Having found them 
under such disadvantage, and in such confusion 
as exposed them to slaughter, with scarccly any 
power of resistance, he put the greater part to 
the sword. ‘Thus part of the hordes, who had 
for many years been so formidable to the Romans, 
were now entircly cut off. Ninety thousand pri- 
soners, with ‘Teutobochus, one of their kings, 
were taken, and two hundred tliousand were said 
to be slain in the ficld.! 

T'he news of this victory arriving at Rome, 
while it was known that another division of the 
same enemy, not less formidable, was still in the 
field, it was not to be doubted that the command 
and office of consul would be continued to Marius. 
The populace, incited by some of the factious tri- 
bunes, joined, with the other usual marks of their 
attachment to his person, that of disrespect and 
insolence to those who were supposed to be his 
opponents and rivals, Of these, Metellus Nu- 
midicus, whom he had supplanted in the coim- 
mand of the army against Jugurtiia, was the 
clef. ‘This respectable citizen, being uow in 
the office of censor, one Equitius, an impostor of 
obscure and slavisl extraction, ofiered himself to 
be enrolled as a citizen, under the popuiar desig na- 
tion and name of Caius Gracciius, the son of 
Hibenus. ‘the censor, doubting his title, called 


U. ©. 651. 


Caius Marius 
Ato, L. Luta- 
tius Catulus. 


9 Plutarch in Mario. 10 Now Axx, in Provence. 
11 Plutarch in Mario. Orosins, lib. v. c. 16. Florus, 
lab. iii c. 3. Velleius. Eutropius. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


119 


upon Sen:pronia, the sister of Gracchus, to testify 
what she knew of this pretended relation; and, 
upon her giving evidence against him, rejected his 
claim. T'he populace, ill-disposed to Metellus, 
on account of his supposed diference with Ma- 
rius, took this opportunity to insult him ın the 
discharge of his office ; attacked his house, and 
obliged himtotake refugeinthe capitol. Even there 
the tribune Saturninus would have laid violent 
hands on his person, if he had not been protected 
by a body of the Roman knights, who had assem- 
bled in arms to defend him. This tumult was 
suppressed, but not without bloodshed. 

While the popular faction were 


U. C. 653. indulging in these marks of their 
; dislike to Metellus, they proceeded 
Caius Ma- to bestow the honours which they 


intended for Marius, and chose him 
fora fifth time consul, in conjunc- 
tion with M. Aquilius. His late splendid suc- 
cess against one division of the wandering barba- 
rians justified this choice, and pointed hiin out as 
the fittest person to combat the other, which was 
still expected from the side of Noricum to attempt 
the invasion of Italy. Catulus, the late colleague 
of Marius, commanding the troops that werc sta- 
tioned ou the Athesis, to cover the access to Italy 
from the valley of Trent, was destined to act in 
subordination te the consul, who had given or- 
ders to hasten the march of his victorious army 
from the Rhone. 

Catulus had taken post above Verona, thrown 
a bridge over the Athesis, and, in order to com- 
mand the passage of that river, had fortified sta- 
tions on both its banks. While he was in this 
posture, aud before the junction of Marius, the 
enemy arrived in his neighbourhood. The amazing 
works which they performed fully served to cou- 
firm the report of their numbers. ‘hey obstructed 
with mounds of timber and earth the channel of 
the river, so as to force it to change its course ; 
and thus, instead of passing the river, they threw 
it behind them in their march. ‘They continued 
to float such quantities of wood on the stream 
above the bridge which Catulus had built, that 
the passage of the water being stopped, the bridge, 
with all the timber which was accumulated be- 
fore it, was entircly carried off The Roman 
army, on sceing such evidence of the numbers 
and strength of their enemy, were seized with a 
panic. Many deserted their colours, some fled 
even to Rome without halting. The procousul 
thought proper to order a retreat; and thus, by 
scenug to authorise what he could uct prevent, he 
endeavoured to save in part the credit of his army. 

‘Lhe level country on the Po was in this man- 
ner laid open to the iacursions of the barbarians. 
The inhabitants of Italy were greatly alarmed : 
and the Roman people passed an act of attaindcr 
against all those who had abandoued their colours. 
Marius, who continued at Rome while the le- 
gions advanced on their march from Gaul, sus- 
peuded the triumph which had been ordered him 
by the scnate, went to receive his anny at the 
foot of the Alps, and to lasten its junction with 
Catulus. 

Upon the junction of the two armies, those 
who had lately fled recovered their courage, and 
the generals determined, without loss of time, to 
hazard a battle. lt is said that the barbarians of 
this d.vision were still ignorant of the disaster 
which ird befallen their allies on the other side 


M. Aquilius. 


120 


of the Alps, and had sent a defiance ora challenge 
to fight ; but that being informed of this calamity 
when they were about to engage, they made their 
attack with less than their usual ferocity and con- 
fidence. Catulus received them in front. Marius 
madc a movement to assail them in flank; butas 
they were hid by the clouds of dust which every 
where rose from the plain, he missed his way, or 
could not engage till after the enemy had been 
repulsed by Catulus, and were already put to 
flight. The rout was extremely bloody ; a hun- 


dred and fifty thousand were said to be slain; | 


sixty thousand submitted to be taken prisoners. 
The remainder of this mighty host, even the 
women and children, perished by their own 
hands; and the race of barbarous nations who 
had migrated through Europe, perhaps for ages 
before they encountered with the Romans, now 
appear to have been entirely extirpated.! 


THE. PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


On receiving the news of this victory at Rome 
the city resounded with joy, and the people, ir 
every sacrifice they offered up, addressed them- 
selves to Marius asa god. He had been con- 
stantly attended in this war by Sylla, who, though 
already an object of his jealousy, still chose tc 
neglect the preferments of the city, and to serve 
in the camp. In the late victory Marius was no 
more than partner with Catulus. Upon the arri- 
val of the armies at Rome, he did justice to 
Catulus in this particular, and admitted him to 
partake in-his triumph. In this procession there 
were no carriages loaded with gold, silver, or any 
precious spoils of any sort; but, instead of them, 
the shattered armour and broken swords of an 
enemy; the surer marks of an honour justly 
won, and of a more important service performed. 
These were transported in loads, and piled up in 
the capitol. 


CHAPTER VI. i 


Character and immoderate Ambition of Marius— Death of Nonius—Re-election of the Tribune 
Saturninus—His Sedition and seizing the Capitol—Death of Saturninus— Reverse in the State 
of Parties— Recall of Metellus— Violent Death of the Tribune Furius—Birth of Caius Julius 
Cesar—Lex Cacilia Didia— Blank in the Roman History—Sylla offers himself Candidate for 
the Office of Pretor—Edict of the Censors against the Latin Rhetoricians— Bullion in. the 
Roman Treasury—Present of a Groupe in golden Figures from the King of Mauritania— 
Acts of Livius Drusus—Revolt of the Italian Allies—Policy of the Romans in yielding to the 
Necessity of their Affairs— The Laws of Plautius. 


UPON the extinction of the wandering na- 
tions which had now for some time molested the 
empire, there was no- forcign enemy to endanger 
the peace of Italy. The wars in Thrace and in 
Spain had no effect beyond the provinces in 
which they subsisted. ‘The insurrection of the 
slaves in Sicily, by the good conduct of Aquilius 
the consul, to whom that service had been com- 
mitted, was near being quelled. 

Marius, being now returned to the city, might 
have quitted the paths of ambition with uncom- 
mon distinction and honour, An ordinary con- 
sulate, after his having been so often called upon 
in times of danger, as the person most likely to 
save his country, could make no addition to his 
glory. His being sct aside in times of security 
and leisure, would even have been the most 
honourable and flattering comment that could 
have been made on his former elections. 

But immoderate thirst of power, and extreme 
animosity to his rivals, not elevation of mind, 
were the characteristics of Marius. His ambi- 


tion had hitherto passed for an aversion to aristo-, 


cratical usurpations. But his contempt of family 
distinctions, the offspring of a vanity which made 
him feel the want of such honours, by clashing 
with the established subordination of ranks in his 
country, became a source of disaffection to the 
state itself. He formed views upon the consulate 
yet a sixth time; and instead of the moderation, 
or the satiety of honours with which he pretended 
to be actuated when he hoped to be pressed into 
office, he employed all his influence, even his 
money, to procure a re-election ; and accordingly 


1 Plutarch. in Mario & Sylla. Orosius, lib. v. c. 16. 
Florus, lib. iii.c.3. Velleius. Eutrop. Appian in Celtica. 


prevailed, together with Valerius Flaccus. He 
had warmly espoused the interest of this candi- 
date against Metellus, more from animosity to 
the competitor, whose great authority, placed in 

opposition to himself, he dreaded, 


U. C. 653. than from any regard or predilec- 

i _ tion for Flaccus. Being chosen, in 
cars aagus order the more to strengthen him- 
Flaccus. Self in the exercise of his power, 


he entered into concert with the 
Tribune Apuleius Saturninus, and, it is probable, 
agreed to support this factious demagogue in his 
pretensions to remain in office for another year ; 
a precedent which had taken place only in the 
most factious times of the republic, and which 
was in itself more dangerous than any other re- 
election whatever. The person of the tribune 
being sacred, his will was absolute, there was no 
check to his power besides the fear of being called 
to account at the expiration of his term; and if 


‘this fear were removed by the perpetuity of office, 


it was a power yet more formidable than that of 
the dictator, and to be restrained only by the di- 
visions which might arise among those who were 
joined together in the exercise of it. 

The faction that was formed by Marius and 
the tribune Saturninus, with their adherents, was 
farther strengthened by the accession of the prætor 
Glaucia. This person, while in office, and as he 
sat in judgment, had received an affront from Sa- 
turninus, in having his chair of state broken 
down, for presuming to occupy any part in the 
attention of the people, while an assembly called 
by the tribune was met. He nevertheless chose 
to overlook this insult, in order to be admitted a 
partner in the consideration which was now en- 
joyed by these popular leaders. 


Cuar. VL] 


Upon the approach of the tribunitian elections, 
the senate and nobles exerted themselves to pre- 
vent the re-election of Saturninus; and nine of 
the new candidates were, without any question, 
declared to be duly elected in preference to him. 
The tenth place too was actually filled by the 
election of Nonius Sufenas, whom the aristocracy 
had supported with all its influence. But the 
party of Apuleius, enraged at their disappoint- 
ment, had recourse to violence, forced Nonius, 
though already vested with the sacred character 
of tribune, to take refuge in a work-shop, from 
whence he was dragged by some of the late sol- 
diery attached to Marius, and slain. The assem- 
bly broke up, and sober persons, though reputed 
of the popular party, retired under the strongest 
impressions of affliction and terror. 

Marius had reason to apprehend some violent 
resolution from the senate, and was in no haste 
to assemble that body. Mean time Glaucia, in 
the night, with a party armed with daggers, took 
possession of the capitol and place of assembly, 
and, at an early hour in the morning, having 
gone through the forms of election, announced 
Apuleius again tribune, in the place that was 
vacated by the murder of Nonius. This furious 
demagogue was accordingly reinstated in the sa- 
cred character, which, though recently violated 
by himself, was still revered by the bulk of 
the people. He was continually attended by 
a new set of men who infested the streets, free- 
men of desperate fortune, whom Marius, con- 
trary to the established forms of the constitution, 
had admitted into the legions, and who were 
grown fierce and insolent, as partners in the vic- 
tories of that general, and who were made to 
expect that, in case the popular party should pre- 
vail, they themselves should have estates in land 
and comfortable settlements. 

Under the terror of so many assassins, who 
considered the nobles as enemies to their cause, 
Marius with his faction were become masters of 
the commonwealth. The better sort of the people 
were deterred from frequenting the public assem- 
blies, and no one had courage to propose, that 
any inquiry should be made into the death of the 
tribune Nonius, in whose person the sacred law 
was again set at nought.? 

Apuleius hastencd to gratify his 
party by proposing popular laws. 
One to seize in the name of the 
se those lands on the Po which had lately 

een dcsolated by the migrations of the barbarous 
nations, and to distribute them in lots to the 
poorer citizens.’ 

Another, by which it was resolved, that in the 
province of Africa a hundred jugera a man should 
be distributed to the veterans :* that new settle- 
ments should be made in Greece, Macedonia, and 
Sicily: and that the money taken from the tem- 
ple at Tolosa should be employed in the pur- 
chase of lands for a like purpose: that wherever 
these colonies should be planted, Marius should 
have a power to inscribe at each of the settle- 
ments, three aliens into the list of 
citizens.6 That the price, hitherto 
paid for corn by the people at the 


Lez Agraria. 


Tex Fru- 
mentaria. 


2 Appian de Bell. Civil. lib. 1. Plutarch in Mario, 
tib. Ixix. Valer. Max. lib. ix. c. 7. Orosius, lib. v. ©. 57. 
Florus, lib. ili c. 16. 3 Appian de Bell. Civ. lib. i. 

4 Auct. de Viris [llustribus in Saturnino. 

5 Now Thoulouse. 6 Auct. de Vir Illus: in Sat 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


12h 


public granaries, should be remitted, and that 
corn should be distributed gratis. 

Upon the intention to obtain the last of those 
laws being known, Q. Servilius Cepio, one of 
the questors, represented, that if such a law 
should pass, there would be an end of industry, 
good order, and government; and that the trea- 
sury of Rome would not be sufficient to defray 
the expense. He exhorted the senate to employ 
every measure to defeat the motion. And this 
body accordingly made a resolution, that whoever 
attempted to obtain the law in question should be 
deemed an enemy to his country. But Apuleius 
was not to be restrained by the terrors of this re- 
solution. He proceeded to propose the law in 
the usual form, and had planted thetrails and 
balloting urns for the people to give their votes, 
when Cepio, with a body of his attendants, had 
the courage to attack the tribune, broke down the 
steps, and overset the balloting urns; an action 
for which he was afterwards impeached upon an 
accusation of treason, but by which, for the pre- 
sent, he disappointed the designs of the faction.7 

Apuleius, to extend the power of the popular 
assemblies, and to remove every impediment from 
his own designs, brought forward a nuinber of 
new regulations. One to confirm a former statute, 
by which the acts of the tribes were declared to 
have the force of laws. Another, declaring it to 
be treason for any person to interrupt a tribune 
in putting a question to the people. A third, 
obliging the senate to confirm every act of the 
tribes within five days after such act had passed, 
and requiring every senator, under pain of a fine, 
and of being struck off thie rolls, to take an oath 
to abide by these regulations. While these mo- 
tions were in debate, some one of the party who 
opposed them, in order to stop the career of this 
factious tribune, observed, that it thundered; a 
circumstance which, upon the ordinary maxims 
of the Roman augurs, was sufficient to suspend 
any business in which the people were ans sed, 
aud to break up their assembly. “If you be not 
silent,” said Apuleius to the gt, who observed 
that it thundered, “ you will also find that it hails.” 
The assembly accordingly, without being deterred 
by this interposition’of the auspices, passed acts 
to these several purposes. ‘The power of the 
senate was entirely suppressed, their part of the 
legislature was reduced to a mere form, and even 
this they were.not at liberty to withhold. Ma- 
rius called them together, and proposed that they 
should consider what resolution they were to take 
with respeet to a change of so much importance, 
and particularly with respect to the oath which 
was to be exacted from the members. ‘The old 
warrior is said, on this occasion, to have practised 
an artifice by which he imposed on many of the 
members, and which afterwards furnished him 
with a pretence for removing his enemy Metcllus 
from their councils. He declared himself with 
great warmth against taking the oath, and by his 
example led other senators to express their senti- 
ments. Metellus, in particular, assured the as- 
sembly, that it was his own resolution never to 
come under such an engagement. 

While the senators relied on the concurrence 
of Mariusin refusing the oath, the time appointed 
for administeriug it nearly approached ; and this 
consul, after the third day was far spent, assen:- 


7 Auct. Rhetoricorum ad Herenniun. 


122 


bled the senate, set forth the dangerous state of 
the commonwealth; at the same time expressed 
his own fears of the disturbances that might arise 
if the senate refused to gratify the people in this 
matter ; and while multitudes were assembled in 
the streets to know the issue of their councils, he 
required that the oath should be administered. He 
himself took it, to the astonishment of the senate, 
and the joy of the populace assembled by Apuleius, 
who sounded applause through every part of the 
streets. Metellus alone, of all who were present, 
refused to comply, and withstood all the intreaties 
of his friends, who represented the danger with 
which he was threatened. ‘If it were always 
safe to do right,” he said, “who would ever do 
wrong? But good men are distinguished, by 
choosing’ to do right even when it is least for 
their safety to do so.” 

On the following day the tribune Saturninus 
entered the senate, and, not being stopped by the 
negative of any of his own colleagues, the onl 
power that could restrain him, dragged Metellus 
from his piace, and proffered an act of attainder 
and banishment against him, for having refused 
the oath which was enjoined by the people. 
Many of the most respectable citizens offered 
their aid to defend this illustrious senator by 
force, but he himself declined being the subject 
of any civil commotion, and went into exile. 

While the act, which afterwards passed for 
his banishment was preparing, he was heard to 
say, “If the times should mend, I shall recover 
my station; if not, it is a happiness to be absent 
from hence.” He fixed his abode at Smyrna, 
conducted his retirement with great dignity dur- 
ing his exile, and probably felt as he ought that 
any censure inflicted by men of a vile and profli- 
gate character was an honour. 


in these transactions elapsed. the second year |. 


in. which Apuleius filled the office of tribune; 
and;. being favoured by a supineness of the oppo- 
site party, contracted in a seeming despair of the 
republic, he prevailed yet a third time in being 
vested with this formidable power. T'o court the 
favour of the people, he affected to credit what 
was alleged concerning the birth of Equitius; 
and under the name of Caius Gracchus, son of 
Tiberius, had this impostor associated with him- 
self in the office of tribune. ‘The name of Grac- 
chus, in this station, awakened the memory of 
former hopes and of former resentments. ‘The 
party had destined Glaucia for the consulate, and 
appear to have left Marius out of their councils. 
This will perhaps account for the conduct with 
which he concluded his administration in the pre- 
sent year. , 

At the election which followed, the interest of 
the nobles was exerted for Marcus Antonius and 
C. Memmius. The first was declared consul, 
and the second was likely to prevail over Glau- 
cia; when, in the midst of the crowds that were 
assembled to vote, a sudden tumult arose; Mem- 
mius was beset and murdered; and the people, 
alarmed at so strange an outrage, were seized 
with a panic, and fied. 


In the night, Glaucia, Saturninus, and the | 


questor Saufeius, being known to be met in secret 
eonference, all the citizens who yet retained any 
regard for the commonwealth, crowded together, 
in fear of what so desperate a faction might at- 
tempt. All the voices were united against Sa- 
turninus, the supposed author of se many disor- | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


fBoox II. 


ders and murders. It was proposed, without 
delay, to seize his person, either living or dead - 
but being put on his guard, by the appearance of 
a storm so likely to break on his head, he thought 
proper, with the other leaders of his party ana 
their retainers in arms, to seize the capitol, and 


‘there to secure themselves, and to overawe the 
rassembly of the people. It was no longer to be 


doubted that the republic was in a state of war.— 
Marius, who had fomented these troubles from 
aversion to the nobles, now remained undeter- 
mined what part he should act. But the senate 
being assembled, gave the usual charge to him- 
self and his colleagues to avert the danger with 
which the republic was threatened; and both 
these officers, however much they were disposed 
to favour the sedition, being in this manner armed 
with the sword of the commonwealth, were obliged 
to employ it m support of the public peace. The 


senators, the knights, and all the citizens of rank 


repaired in arms to their standard. Antonius, 
consul elected for the following year, in order te 
hinder the partizans of the faction from resorting 
to the city, was stationed in the-suburbs with an 
armed force.! The capitol was invested in form, 
and appears to have held out some days; at the 


end of which, in order to oblige the rebels to sur- 


render, the pipes that supplied them with water 
were cutoff. ‘This had the intended effect. They 
submitted to such terms as were proposed to them 

and Marius,still inclined totreat them with favour 


‘had them confined to the hall of the senate till 


farther orders. In the mean time a great party 
of citizens, who were in arms for the defence of 


the republic, impatient of delay, and thinking i‘ 
‘dangerous to spare such daring offenders, beset 


them instantly in their place of confinement, and 
put the whole to the sword.? 

It was reported, though afterwards questioned 
upon a solemn occasion,? that Caius Rabirius, a 
senator of distinction, having cut off the head of 
Apuleius, carried it as a trophy, agreeable to the 
manners of those times, and had it presented for 


‘some days at all the entertainments which were 


given on this occasion, and at which he wasa guest. 

This was the fourth tribunitian sedition raised 
to a dangerous height, and quelled by the vigour 
and resolution of the nobles. Marius, who had 
been obliged to act as the instrument of the senate 


_on this occasion, saw his projects baffled, and his 


credit greatly impaired. Plutarch relates, that 
he soon after chose to leave the city for some time, 
on pretence of a desire to visit the province of 
Asia, where his active spirit formed the project 
of new wars, for the conduct of which he was 
much better qualified than for the administration 


‘of affairs in peace. 


Upon the suppression of this dangerous sedi- 
tion, the commonwealth was restored to a state 
which, compared to the late mix- 

U. C. 652. ture of civil contention and military 
j execution, may have deserved the 

name of public order. One office 
of consul was still vacant; and 
the election proceeding without 


M. Antonius, 
A. Posthumius 
Albinus. 


1 Cicero pro C. Rabirio. 

2 Plut. in Mario. Appian de Bell. Civil. lib. i. Oros. 
lib. v.c.17. Flor. lib. in. Auct.de Viris Ilust. Cicero 
in Sextiana, in Catal]. lib. i. Philip. lib. viii. et pro 
Caio Rabirio. 

3 At the trial of Rabirius, when, some years after- 
wards, he was accused of having killed Saturninus. 


Cuar. VI] 


disturbance, Posthumius Albinus was joined to 
Antonius. Most of the other elections had also 
been favourable to the nobles; and the majority 
even of the tribunes of the people were inclined 
to respect the senate and the aristocracy, as prin- 
cipal supports of the government. 

The first effect of this happy recovery was a 
motion to recall Metellus from banishment. In 
this motion two of the tribunes, Q. Pompeius 
Rufus and L. Porcius Cato concurred. But Ma- 
rius having opposed it with all his influence, and 
Publius Furius, another of the tribunes, having 
interposed his negative, it could not at that time 
‘be carricd into execution. Soon after, however, 
the same motion being renewed by the tribune 
Callidius, and Furius having repeated his nega- 
tive, Metellus, son of the exile, in presence of the 
people, threw himself upon the ground, and em- 
bracing the tribune’s knees, beseeched him not 
to withstand the recallof his father. The young 
man, from this action, afterwards acquired the 
simame of Pius; and the tribune, insolently 
spurning him as he lay on the ground, served his 
cause by that act of indignity perhaps more effec- 
tually than he could have done by lending a fa- 
vourable ear to his request. The people, ever 
governed by their present passions, were moved 
with tenderness and with indignation. They 
proceeded, without regard to the negative of Fu- 
rius, under emotions of sympathy for the son, to 
recal the exiled father. The messenger of the 
republic charged with the intimation of this reso- 
lution to Metellus, found him at Tralles in Ly- 
dia, among the spectators at a public show. When 
the letters were delivered to him, he continued to 
the end of the entertainment without opening 
them; by this mark of indifference, treating the 
favour of a disorderly populace with as much con- 
tempt as he had shown to their censure. 

The senate, now become the supreme power at 
Rome, by the distaste which all reasonable men 


had taken to the violence of the opposite party, 


were gratified, not merely with the test of supe- 
tiority they had gained in the recall of Metellus, 
but likewise in the downfall of some of the tri- 
bunes who had been active in the late disorders. 
Publius Furius, now become an object of general 
detestation, fell a sacrifice to the law of Apuleius, 
which declared it treason to interrupt a tribune in 
putting a question to the people. Being accused 
by Canuleius, one of his colleagues, of violating 
this law, he was by the populace, who are ever 
carried by the torrent, and prompt for execution, 
prevented from making his defence ; and, though 
a tribune, put to death. Decianus, another of the 
tribunes, in supporting the charge against Furius, 
nappened to speak with regret of the death of 
Saturninus, a crime for which he incurred a pro- 
secution, aud was banished.4 So strong was the 


tide of popularity now opposite to its late direc- | 


tion, and so fatal even to their own cause fre- 
quently are the precedents or rules by which 
violent men think to obtain discretionary power 
to themselves. ‘Che murder of Nonius was a 
precedent to justify the execution of Apuleius, 
and both were followed by that of Furius. The 
law which made it treason to interrupt the pro- 
ceedings of Apuleius, was employed to prevent 
any interruption to the operations of his enemies 
against himself and his faction. 


—— 


4 Val. Max. lob. viii. c. 1. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


123 


Amidst these triumphs of the aristocratical par- 
ty, Sextus Titius, one of the tribunes, still had 
the courage to move a revival of the Agrarian 
law of Gracchus. The proposal was aeceptable 
in the assembly of the people.’ And the edict 
was accordingly. passed ; but it was observed, that 
while the people were met on this business, two 
ravens fought in the air above the place of as- 
sembly, and the college of augurs, on pretence 
of this unfavourable omen, annulled the decree.® 
Titius, the author of it, was soon after condemn- 
ed for having in his house the statue of Satur- 
ninus.? 

The consul Aquilius returned from Sicily-; 
and having had an ovation or procession on foot 
for the reduction of the Sicilian slaves, was on the 
following- year brought to trial for extortion in 
his province. He called no exculpatory evidence, 
nor deigned to court the favour of his judges, 
But when about to receive sentence, M. Anto- 
nius, who had pleaded his cause, tore open the 
vest of his client, and displayed to the court and 
the audience the scars which he bore in his breast, 
and which were the marks of wounds received in 
the service of his country. Upon this spectacle, 
a sudden emotion of pity or respect decided 
against the former conviction of the court, and 
unfixed the resolution, which a few moments be- 
fore they had taken to condemn the accused. 

Among the events which distinguished the con- 
sulate of M. Antonius and A. Posthumius Albi- 
nus, may be reckoned the birth of Caius Julius 
Cesar, for whose ambition the seeds of tribuni- 
tian disorder now sown were preparing a plenti- 
ful harvest. This birth, it is said, was ushered 
in with many presages and tokens of future 
greatness. If indeed we were to believe, that 
nature in this manner gives intimation of impend- 
ing events, we should not be surprised that her 
most ominous signs were employed to mark the 
birth of a personage who was destined to change 
the whole face of the political world, and to lay 
Rome herself, with all the nations she had con- 
quered, under a perpetuated military government. 

Antonius and Albinus were succeeded in of- 

fice by Q. Cecilius Metellus and 


U. C. 655. Titus Didius. The war still con- 
Q. Cecilius tinued in Spain, and fell to the 
Metellus Nepo, ‘ot of Didius. Upon his arrival 
T. Didius. in the province, Dolabella, the 


proprætor, set out on his return 
to Rome, and, for his victories in Spain, obtamed 
a triumph. Metellus remained in the adminis- 
tration of affairs in Italy. 

“T'he administration of the present year is dis- 
tinguished by an act. in which 
both consuls concurred, and which 
is therefore marked in the title 
with their joint names. The Ro- 
man people had frequently experienced the defect 
of their forms in the manner of enacting laws. 
Factious tribunes had it in their power to carry 
motions by surprise, and to pass in the same law 
a variety of clauses; and, by obliging the people 
to pass or reject the whole in one vote, frequently 
obtained, under the favour of some popular 
clauses, acts of a very dangerous tendency. To 
prevent this abuse, it was now enacted, upon the 
joint motion of the consuls Cecilius and Didius, 


Lex Cecilia 
Didia. 


6 Cicero de Legibus, lib. ii. 


5 Julius Obsequens. L 
Ibid. de Orator. lib. it. c 28 


7 Ibid. pro C. Rabirio. 


124 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book Il. 


that every proposed law should be made public ; liberty, where this blessing was not forfeited by 


three market days before it could receive the 
assent of the people: that all its different clauses 
should be separately voted: and that it should be 
lawful for the people to pass or reject the whole 
or any part of it.! 

This law had a salutary tendency; and, though 
far from sufficient to prevent a return of the late 
evils, it served for a time to stop the current of 
tribunitian violence; but while the source was 
open, any mere temporary stagnation could only 
tend to increase the force with which it occa- 
sionally burst over every impediment of law or 
good order that was placed in its way. And the 
inefficacy of measures taken upon the suppres- 
sion of any dangerous sedition to eradicate the 
evil, shows the extreme difficulty with which men 
are led, in most cases, to make any great and 
thorough reformation. 

It is somewhat singular, that about this time, 
in the midst of so much animosity of the people 
to the senate and nobles, this superior class of the 
citizens were the patrons of austerity, and con- 
tended for sumptuary laws, while the popular 
tribunes contended for license. ‘ What is your 
liberty,” said the tribune Duronius to the people 
(while he moved for a repeal of the sumptuary 
law of coe “if you may not consume what 
is your own; if you must be restrained by rule 
and measure; if you must be stinted in your 
pleasures? Let us shake off, I pray you, these 
musty remains of antiquity, and make free to en- 
joy what we and our fathers have gained.” 

For the petulance of these expressions, this 

tribune was, by the judgment of 


U. C. 656. the censors, on the following year, 
Cn. Cornelius @Xpelled from the senate; and he 
Lentulus. took his revenge by prosecuting 
P. Licinius the censor Antonius for bribery in 
Crassus. 


canvassing for his office, 

Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and Publius Licinius 
Crassus being raised to the office of consul, the 
latter was appointed to relieve Didius in Spain, 
and the other to succeed Metellus in Italy. ‘here 
is, during some years, a considerable blank in the 
materials from which we collect this history ; 
little more is recorded than the succession of con- 
suls with the number of years, and a few particu- 
lars that ill supply the interval in our accounts 
of what passed in the city, or in the series of im- 

ortant aflairs abroad. No far as these particu- 
ars, however, can be referred to their respective 
dates, it will be proper, while we endeavour to 
mark the lapse of time, to record them in the or- 
der in which they are supposed to have happened. 

In the present year are dated two remarkable 

acts of the senate; one to condemn 
U. C. 656. the use of magic, another to pro- 
hibit human sacrifices; 3 the first 
proceeding, perhaps, from credulity in the au- 
thors of the law, the other implying some re- 
mains of a gross and inhuman superstition, 
which was still entertained by the people though 
rejected by the government.4 

In the following consulate the kingdom of 
Cyrene was bequeathed to the Romans by Pto- 
lemy Apion, the late king. But, as this people 
protessed themselves to be the general patrons of 


ie Cic. Philip. v. Pro domo sua. Epist. ad Atticum, 
ib. ii. 

2 Val. Max. lib ii.c. 9. 3 Plin. lib. xxx.c. 1. 

4 Dion. Cassius, lib, xlii. p. 226. 


some act of ingratitude or perfidy in their allies, 
they did not avail themselves of this legacy, leav 
ing the subjects of Cyrene to retain for some time 
the independence of their nation with a species 
of popular government; and in this form they 
were allowed to remain as a separate state, until, 
in a general arrangement niade of all the depen- 
dencies of the empire, they came to be reduced 

to the form of a province, 
The following consuls gave its name and its 
date to an act of the people nearly 


U. C, 658, of the same tenour with some of 

inmi those formerly sed for th a 
L. Licinius 3 rly passed lor the ex 
Crassus,Q. clusion of aliens. The inhabitants 


Mucius Sce- 
vola. Lex Li- 
cinia Mucia 
de Civibus re- 
gendis. 


of Italy still continued the practice 
of crowding to Rome, in expecta- 
tion of obtaining in a body the 
prerogative of citizens, or at least 
of intruding themselves, as many 
of them separately did, into some of the tribes, by 
which persons of this description, from voting at 
elections, came themselves by degrees to be elected 
into the higher offices of state. - 

Times of faction were extremely favourable to 
this intrusion of strangers. Different leaders con- 
nived at the enrolment of those who were likely 
to favour their respective parties. And the fac- 
tious tribunes, in whatever degree they may have 
favoured the general claim of the allies to be ad- 
mitted as Romans, treated the subject as matter 
of opposition to the senate. They expected to 
raise the storm of popular animosity and tumult 
with the more ease, in proportion as the numbers 
of the people increased. By the act of Licinius 
and Mucius, nevertheless, a scrutiny was set on 
foot, and all who, without a just title, ventured 
to exercise any privilege of Roman citizens, were 
remitted to their several boroughs.® 

In this consulate is likewise dated the trial of 
Servilius Cepio, for his supposed misconduct 
about ten years before in his command of the 
army against the Cimbri. He had exasperated 
the popular: faction, by opposing the act of Sa- 
turninus for the gratuitous distribution of corn, 
and his enemies were now encouraged to raise 
this prosecution against him. ‘The people gave 
sentence of condemnation, and violently drove 
from the place of assembly two of the tribunes 
who ventured to interpose their negative in his 
favour. Authors, according to Valerius Maxi- 
mus, have differed in their accounts of the sequel ; 
some affirming that Cepio, being put to death in 
prison, his body was dragged through the streets 
as that ofa traitor, and cast into the river ; others, 
that he was, by the favour of Antistius, one of 
the tribunes, rescued, or enabled to make his 
escape.® 

C, Norbanus, who was said to be author of the 
riot which occasioned the condemnation of Cæpio, 
and the supposed cruel execution of that citizen, 
was on the following year brought to trial him- 
self for mal-administration and sedition in office; 
but, by his own popularity, and the address of 
the orator Antonius, who pleaded his cause, was 
acquitted.’ 

The war in Spain still continued; and the 
Romans, having gained considerable victories, 
sent ten commissioners, to endeavour, in concert 
with Crassus and Didius, to make such arrange- 


5 Ascon. in Orat. pro Cornelio Majest. reo. 
6 Val. Max. lib. iv. c. 7. 7 Cicero de Orator. lib. ii. 


Cuar. VL) 


ments as might tend to the future peace of those 
provinces: but in vain; hostilities were again 
renewed in the following year. 

L. Cornelius Sylla, who had 


U C. 660. been questor in the year of Rome 
C. Val. Flac. SİX hundred and forty-six, now, 
cus, M. Hier. after an interval of about fourteen 
reanius. years, and without having been 

edile, stood candidate for the office 
of prætor. Whether his neglect of political hon- 


ours, during this period, proceeded from idleness, 
or from want of ambition, is uncertain. His 
character will justify either construction, being 
equally susceptible of dissipation, and of the dis- 
dain of ordinary distinctions. T'he people, how- 
ever, refused to gratify him in his desire of passing 
on to the office of prætor without being edile; as 
they were resolved to be gratified with the mag- 
nificent shows of wild beasts, which his supposed 
correspondence with the king of Mauritania en- 
abled him to furnish. But to remove this objec- 
tion to his preferment, he gave out, that as prætor 
he was to exhibit the same shows which were 
expected from him as edile: and having, in the 
following year, persisted in his suit, he was ac- 
cordingly elected, and fulfilled the expectations 
of the people; insomuch, that he is said to have 
let loose in the circus a hundred maned or male 
lions, and to have exhibited the method of bait- 
ing or fighting them by Mauritanian huntsmen.® 
Such was the price which candidates for prefer- 
ment at Rome were obliged to pay for public 
favour. 

In this variable scene, where so many particu- 
lar men excelled in genius and magnanimity, 
while the state itself was subject to the govern- 
ment of a capricious and disorderly multitude, P. 
Rutilius, late questor in Asia, exhibited a spec- 
tacle sufficient to counterbalance thc lions of Syl- 
la; and, if it were permitted in any case whatever 
to treat our country with disdain, an instance to 
be applauded of the just contempt with which 
the undeserved rescntments of corrupt and ma- 
licious men ought to be received. Having reform- 
ed many abuses of the equestrian tax-gatherers 
in the province which he governed, he was him- 
self brought before the tribunal of an equestrian 
jury, to be tried for the crime he had restrained 
in others. In this situation he declined the aid 
of any friend, told the judges he would make no 
defence; but stated the particulars by which he 
had offended his prosecutors, left the court to de- 
cide, and, being condemned, retired to Smyrna, 
where he ever after lived in great tranquillity, and 
could not be prevailed on, even by Sylla in the 
height of his power, to return to Rome.2 Great 
as the state and republic of Rome was become, 
unmerited disgrace was certainly a just object of 
contempt or indifference. 

The proconsuls, Didius and Crassus, were per- 
mitted to triumph for victories obtaincd in Spain, 
but had not been able to establish the peace of 
that country. The war which broke out afresh 
in one of the provinces was committed to Va- 
lerius Flaccus, and the care of the other to Per- 
penna, one of the consuls. Flaccus, near the town 
of Belgida, obtained a great victory, in which 


8 Plin. lib. viii. c. 16. 

9 Val. Max. lib. vi. c. 17. Liv. lib. Ixx. Orosius, 
lib. v. c. 17. Cic. de Orator. et in Bruto. Pdianus 
in Divinationem. Velleius, lib. ii. i 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


125 


were slain about twenty thousand of the enemy ; 
but he could not prevail on the canton to submit. 
Such of the people as were inclined to capitulate, 
deliberating on terms, were beset by their fellow- 
citizens, and the house in which they were assem- 
bled being set on fire, they perished in the flames. 

The war having been likewise 


U.C.661. renewed with the Thracians on the 
C. Claudius frontiers of Macedonia, Geminius, 
Pulcher, who commanded there in the qual- 


M. Perpenna. ity of propretor, was defeated, and 
the province over-run by the enemy. 

The pretor Sylla, at the expiration of his of- 
fice, was sent into Asia with a commission to re- 
store Ariarathes to the kingdom of Cappadocia, 
which had bcen seized by Mithridates, and to 
restore Pylamenes ‘o that of Paphlagonia, from 
which he had been expelled by Nicomedes king 
of Bithynia. The prætor having successfully 
executed both these commissions, continued his 
journey to the Euphratcs, where he had a con- 
ference, and concluded a treaty with an ambas- 
sador from Ariarathes king of the Parthians,!0 

From an edict of the censors, Cn. Domitius 
Ahenobarbus and Cn. Licinius Crassus,condemn- 
ing the schools of Latin rhetoric,!! it appears that 
the Romans, during this period, still received with 
reluctance the refinements which were gradually 
taking place in the literary as well as in the other 
arts. “ Whereas information,” said the censors 
in their edict, “has been lodged before us that 
schdols are kept by certain persons, under the title 
of Latin rhetoricians, to which the youth of this 
city resort, and at which they pass entire days in 
frivolity and sloth; and whercas our ancestors 
have determined what their children should learn, 
and what exercises they ought to frequent : these 
innovations on the customs and manners of our 
forefathers being, in our opinion, offensive and 
wrong, we publish these presents, that both mas- 
ters and scholars, given to these illicit practices, 
may be duly apprised of our pleasure?’!2 Cicero 
being now fourteen years of age, and employed 
in learning that eloquence for which he became 
so famous, was probably involved in this censure, 
as frequenting the schools which, by this formal 
edict of the magistrate, were condemned. 

In the consulate of Marcus Philippus and 
Sext. Julius Cesar, according to Pliny, there 
were in the Roman treasury sixteen hundred and 
twenty eight thousand eight hundred and twenty- 
nine pondo!3 of gold!4 or- between sixty and 
seventy or eighty millions sterling. In the same 
year a present sent from the king of Mauritania 
had nearly produced a civil war in the common- 
wealth, and greatly inflamed the passions from 
which that calamity soon after arose. Bocchus, 
in order to remind the Romans of the merit he 
had acquired by delivering Jugurtha into their 
hands, had caused this scene to be represented in 
a groupe of images of gold, containing his own 
figure, that of Jugurtha, and that of Sylla, to 
whom the unhappy prince was delivered up. 
Marius, under whose auspices this transaction 
had passed, being provoked at having no place in 
the representation of it, attempted to pull down 


10 Plutarch, in Sylla. Appian. in Mithridatico. Jus 
tin. lib. xxxiii. Strabo, lib. xii. 

11 Cicer. de Orator. lib. iii. c. 24. 

12 A. Gellius, lib. xv. c. 11. 

13 The Roman pondo of ten ounces. 

14 Plin. Harduem, lib. xxxiii. c. 3. 


126 


the mages after they had been erected in the 
place of their destination in the capitol. Sylla 
Was equally solicitous to have them remain; and 
the contest was likely to cnd in violence, if mat- 
ters of greater moment had not arisen to occupy 
the ardent and vehement spirit of these rivals. 
The expectations of all partics at Rome, and 
throughout Italy, were now raised by the projects 
of Livius Drusus, an active tribunc, who, in order 
to distinguish himself, brought forward many sub- 
jects of the greatest concern to the public. He 
acted at first in concert with the leading men of 
the senate, and was supported by them in order 
to obtain some amendment in the law as it then 
stood with respect to the courts of justice. The 
equestrian order had acquired exclusive posses- 
sion of the judicature. The sena- 
Lex de Judi- tors wished to recover at least a share 
ciis. in that prerogative; and Drusus, in 
order to gratify them, moved for an 
act of which the tendency was, to restore the ju- 
dicative power of the senate : to prevent opposi- 
tion from the equestrian order, he proposed, at 
once, to enrol three hundred knights into the sen- 
ate: and that the senators, who appear at this 
time to have amounted to no more than three 
hundred, might not withstand this increase of 
their numbers, he left to each the nomination of 
one of the new members, proposing, that from the 
six hundred so constituted the lists of judges 
should be taken.! Many of the knights were re- 
conciled to this arrangement, by the hopes of be- 
coming senators; but the order, in general, seem to 
have considered it as a snare laid to deprive them 
of their consequence in the government of their 
country; and individuals refused to accept of a 
place in the senate, at the hazard of so great and 
so sudden a change in the condition of their own 
order, and of the constitution of the state.? 
This tribune likewise proposed 
Lex Numma- an act to debase the silver coin, by 
via. ` mixing an eighth of alloy. But the 
part of his project which gave the 
greatest alarm, was that which related to the in- 
digent citizens of Rome, and to the inhabitants 
of Italy in general. 
With a view to gratify the poorer 
Lex de Colo- citizens he proposed, that all the new 
niis. settlements, projected by the law of 
Caius Gracchus, should now be car- 
ried into ‚execution. The consul, Marcus Per- 
penna, having ventured to oppose this proposal, he 
was, by order of the tribune, taken into custody ; 
and so roughly treated in the execution of this 
order, that, while he struggled to disengage him- 
self, the blood was made to spring from his nostrils. 
“ It is no more than the pickle of the turtle-fish;”3 
said the tribune, a species of delicacy, in which, 
it seems, among other luxuries of the table, this 
consul was supposed frequently toindulge himself. 
For the allies of Italy, Livius 
Lex de Civi- Drusus proposed to obtain the fa- 
tate Sociis vourite object on which they had 
danda. been so long intent, the privileges 
and powers of Roman ‘citizens. In 
all his other proposals, he had the concurrence of 
some party in the commonwealth, and by persua- 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. i. 
tribus, c. 66. Cicero pro Clientio. 

2 Ibid. 

3 Ex turdis maria. Auct. de Viris Illustribus, in L. 
Drus. Val. Max. lib. ix.c.5. Florus. 


Auct. de Viris Illus- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox Il. 


sion, or force, had obtained his purpose; but in 
this he struck at the personal consideration of 
every citizen, and was opposed by the unanimous 
voice of the whole people. 

This tribune used to boast, that he would ex- 
haust every fund from which any order of men 
could be gratified, and leave to those who came 
after him nothing to give, but the air and the 
earth.4 The citizens in general, however, were 
become tired of his favours, and the pcople of 
Italy were ill-disposed to requite the merit of a 
project which he had not becn able to executc. 
Soon after the motion, which he made in favour 
of the Italians, had been rejected, Drusus was 
suddenly taken ill in the public assembly, and 
Papirius Carbo, another of the tribunes, made a 
short speech on the occasion, which, among a 
people prone to superstition, and ready to execute 
whatever they conceived to be awarded by the 
gods, probably hastened the fate of his falling col- 
league: “O Marcus Drusus!” he said, “the 
father I call, not this degenerate son ; thou who 
usedst to say, The commonwealth is sacred, who- 
ever violates it is sure to be punished. ‘The te- 
merity of the son has evinced the wisdom of the 
father.” A great shout arose in the assembly, 
and Drusus,’ being attended to his own house by 
a numerous multitude, received in the crowd a 
secret wound of which he died.6 All his laws 
were soon after repealed, as having passed under 
unfavourable auspices. But the inhabitants of 
Italy were not to be appeased under their late dis- 
appointment, and discontents were breaking out 
in every part of the country, which greatly alarm- 
ed the republic. 

In this state of public uneasiness, some prose- 
cutions were raised by the tribunes, calculated to 

ratify thcir own private resentments, and tend- 
ing to excite animosities. Q. Varius Hybrida 
obtained a decree of the people, directing, that in- 
quiry should be made by whose fault the allies 
had been made to expect the freedom of the city. 
In consequence of an inquest set on foot for this 
purpose, L. Calphurnius Bestia, late consul, and 
M. Aurelius Orator, and other eminent men, 
were condemned.’ Mummius Achaicus was 
banished to Delos. Emilius Scaurus, who had 
long maintained his dignity as princeps, or first 
on the roll of the senate, was cited on this occa- 
sion before the people as a person involved in the 
same guilt. Quintus Varius, the tribune, who 
accused him, being a native of Spain, Scaurus 
was acquitted upon the following short defence : 
“Q. Varius, from the banks of the Sucro, in 
Spain, says, That M. Emilius Scaurus, first in 
the roll of the senate, has encouraged your sub- 
jects to revolt; Varius maintains the charge; 
Scaurus denies it; there is no other evidence in 
this matter; choose whom you will believe.’ 

The year following, Varius himself was tried, 
and condemned agreeably to his own act; and 
while the prosecutions suspended all other civil 
affairs, and even the measures required for the 
safety of the public, the inhabitants of Italy 
were forming dangerous combinations, and were 
ready to break out in actual rebcllion.. ‘They were 


4 Florus, lib. iii.c.17. 5 Cicero in Bruto, p. 63. | 

6 Velleius, lib. ii. c. 13, 14. Appian. Florus, lib 
iii c. 17. 

7 Appian. Val. Max. lib. viii. c. 6. Cicero in Bruto 

8 Cicero pro M. Scauro filio. Auct. de Viris Illus- 
tribus, c. 72. Quintilian, lib. v. c. 12. Val. Max 
lib. iii. c. 7 


Cuar. VLJ] 


exasperated with having their suit not only re- 
fused, but in having the abettors of it at Rome 
considered as criminals. They sent deputies to 
meet at Corfinium, and to deliberate on a plan of 
operations. ‘Their deputies were to form a sen- 
ate, and to choose two executive officers, under 
che denomination of consuls. 

The Romans took their first suspicion of a de- 
sign in agitation among their allies, from ob- 
serving that they were exehanging hostages 
among themselves. The proconsul Servilius, 
who commanded in the Picenum, having intelli- 
gence to this purpose from Asculum, repaired 
thither, in order, by his presence, to prevent any 
commotion; but his coming, in reality, hastened 
she revolt. His remonstrances and his threats 
made the inhabitants sensible that their designs 
were known, and that the execution of them 
could no longer in safety he delayed. ‘They ac- 
cordingly took arms, and put to the sword the 
proconsul Servilius, with his lieutenant, and all 
the Roman eitizens who happened to be in the 
place. The alarm immediately spread through- 
out all the towns that were concerned in the plot; 
and, as upon a signal agreed, the Marsi, Peligni, 
Vestini, Marcini, Picentes, Ferentane, Hirpini, 
Pompeiani, Venusini, Apuli, Lucani, and Sam- 
nites, took arms, and sent a joint deputation to 
Rome to demand a participation in the privileges 
of Roman citizens; of whieh they had, by their 
serviees, contributed so largely to increase the 
value. 

In answer to this demand they were told by 
the senate, that they must diseontinue their as- 
semblies, and renounce their pretensions; other- 
wise, that they must not presume to send any 
other message to Rome. 

War being thus declared, both 
U. C. 663. parties prepared for the contest. 
L. Julius Ce- The allies mustered a hundred 
sar, P. Ruti- thousand men, in different bodies, 
lius Lupus. and under different leaders. The 
Romans found themselves in an 
instant brought back to the condition in which 
they had been about three hundred years before ; 
reduced to a few miles of territory round their 
walls, and beset with enemies more united, and 
more numerous than ever had assailed them at 
once on the same ground. But their city was 
likewise enlarged, their numbers increased, and 
every individual exeellently formed to serve the 
state, as a warrior and a citizen. All of them as- 
sumed, upon this occasion, the sagum, or mili- 
tary dress; and being joined by such of the 
Latins as remained in their allegianee, and by 
sueh of their colonies, from different parts of 
Italy as continued to be faithful, together with 
some mercenaries from Gaul and Numidia, they 
assembled a force equal to that of the allies. 

The consuls were placed at the head of the 
two prineipal armies; Lucius Julius Cesar, in 
the country of the Samnites,” and Rutilius, in 
that of the Marsi.!0 They had under their com- 
mand the most celebrated and experienced officers 
of the republie; but little more is preserved to fur- 
nish out the history of this war than the names 
of the Roman commanders, and those of the per- 
sons opposed to them. Rutilius was attended by 
Pompeius Strabo, the father of him who after- 
wards bore the title of Pompey the Great ; Cæpio, 


9 Now part of the kingdom of Naples. 
10 Contiguous part of the ecclesiastical stat 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


127 


Perpenna, Messala, and Caius Marius, of whem 
the last had already so often been consul. Cesar 
had, in the army which he commanded, Lentulus, 
Didius, Crassus, and Marcellus. They were op- 
posed by T. Afranius, P. Ventidius, Marcus 
Egnatius, Q. Pompedius, C. Papius, M. Lam- 
ponius, C. Judacilius, Hircus, Assinius, and Ve- 
tius Cato, at the head of the allies. The forces 
were similar in discipline and in arms. The Ro- 
mans were likely to be inferior ın numbers and in 
resourees, but had the advantage in reputation, 
authority, and in the fame of their leaders, inured 
to command in the highest stations. But so well 
had the allies taken their measures, and with so 
much animosity did they support a quarrel, which 
they had been meditating for some years, that 
the Romans appeared at first unequal to the con- 
test, and were surprised and overeome in many 
encounters. 

The detail of these operations is imperfectly 
recorded ; and does not furnish the materials of a 
relation either interesting or instructive. We 
must therefore content ourselves with a list of 
actions and events, and with the general result. 

One of the consuls, Lucius Cesar, in the first 
encounter of the war, was defeated by Vetius 
Cato near Esernia, and had two thousand men 
killed in the field. The town of Esernia was 
immediately invested, and some Roman officers 
of distinction were obliged to make their escape 
in the disguise of slaves. ‘Two Roman cohorts 
were cut off at Venafrum, and that colony fell 
into the hands of the enemy. The other consul, 
Rutilius, was likewise defeated by the Marsi, 
and fell in the field, with eight thousand men of 
his army. His colleague was called to the city 
to preside at the election of a successor; but be- 
ing necessarily detained with the army, the office 
continued vacant for the remainder of the cam- 
paign, while the army acted under the direction 
of the late consuls, Marius and Cepio. 

The corpse of Rutilius, and of other persons 
of rank, being brought to public funeral at Rome, 
so alarmed and sunk the minds of the people, that 
the senate decreed, that, for the future, the dead 
should be buried where they fell. 

In the mean time, Lucius Cesar, obtained a 
victory in the country of the Sammites; and the 
senate, in order to restore the confidence of the 
people, as if this vietory had suppressed the revolt, 
resolved, that the sagum, or military dress, should 
be laid aside.!! 

The usual time of the consular elections being 
come, Cn. Pompeius Strabo and Porcius Cato 
were named. A 

Pompey gained a complete victory over the 

Marsi; and notwithstanding an ob- 


U. C. G64. stinate defence, redueed the city of 
4 Aseulum, where hostilities at first 
Strabo E ad commenced, and where the Ro- 
Porcius Cato. Mans had suffered the greatest out- 


rage. The principal inhabitants of 
the place were put to death, the remainder were 
sold for slaves. ‘The other consul, Cato, was 
killed in the attack upon the entrenchments of 
the Marsi; and although Marius and Sylla, in 
different quarters, had turned the fortune of the 
war against the allies, yet the event still con- 
tinued to be extremely doubtful. 
The Umbrians, Etruscans, and inhabitants of 


11 Liv. lib. Ixxiv. Appian. 


Orosius, lib. v.c. 18 
Florus, lib. iii. c. 18. Velleius. i 


Eutropius. 


128 


other districts of Italy, who had hitherto hesitated 
in the choice of their party, took courage from 
the perseverance and success of their neighbours, 
and openly joined the revolt. ‘The more distant 
parts of the empire were soon likely to seize the 
contagion: they were already, by the obstruction 
they met with in carrying supplies of provisions 
or revenue, severed from the capital, and the alle- 
giance they owed as conquered provinces, when- 
ever they saw their opportunity to withdraw it, 
was likely to vanish like a dream or ideal existence. 

Mithridates, the king of Pontus, did not ne- 
glect the occasion that was offered to him; he 
put all his forces in motion, expelled Nicomedes 
from Bithynia, and Ariobarzanes from Cappa- 
docia, and made himself master of the greater 
part of the Lesser Asia. 

In this extremity it appeared necessary to 
comply with the demands of the allies; but the 
senate had the address to make this concession 
seem to be an act of munificence and generosity, 
not of weakness or fear. 

The Latins, who had continued in their alle- 
giance, were, in consideration of their fidelity, 
admitted to all the privileges of Roman citizens. 
The Umbri and Tuscans, who either had not yet 
declared, or who had been least forward in the war, 
were next comprehended ; and the other inhabit- 
ants of Italy, observing, that they were likely to 
obtain by favour what they endeavoured to ex- 
tort by force, grew remiss in the war, or withdrew 
from the league, that they might appear to be for- 
ward in the general return to peace. © 

The Marsi, Samnites, and Lucanians, who 
had been the principal authors of the revolt, or 
who had acted with most animosity in the con- 
duct of it, continued for some time to be excluded 
from the privilege of Romans. But the civil war, 
which soon after broke out among the citizens 
themselves, terminated either in the extirpation 
of those aliens, and in the settlement of Roman 
colonies in their stead, or gave them an opportu- 
nity, under favour of the party they espoused, 
of gaining admittance to the privilege to which 
they aspired: so that, in a few years, all the in- 
habitants of Italy, from the Rubicon to the straits 
of Messina, were become citizens of Rome; and 
a constitution of state, which had been already 


overcharged by the numbers that partook of its 


sovereignty, was now altogether overwhelmed ; 
or if this change alone were not sufficient to de- 
stroy it, was not likely long to remain without 
some notable and fatal revolution. Assemblies 
of the people, already sufficiently tumultuary, 
being now considered as the collective body of all 
the Italians, were become altogether impractic- 
able, or could be no more than partial tumults 
raised in the streets of Rome, or the contiguous 
fields, for particular purposes: insomuch that 
when we read of the authority of the senate be- 
ing set aside by an order of the people, we may 
venture to conceive all government suspended at 
the instance of that party, who had then the 
populace of Rome at their call. 

Licinius Crassus and L. Julius Cesar were 
chosen censors, in order to make up the new rolls 
of the people. This, it is likely, was found to be 
a difficult and tedious work. It became necessary 
to scrutinize the rolls of every separate borough, in 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


-de Vi. 


[Boox II. 


order to know who were entitled to be added te 
the list of Roman citizens ; and this difficulty was 
farther increased in consequence of a law deviseu 
about this time by Papirius Carbo, in which it 
was enacted, that not only the natives and ancient 
denizens of Italy, but all who should, for the fu- 
ture, obtain the freedom of any Italian borough, 
if they had ‘a residence in Italy, and had given in 
their claim to the pretor sixty days, should, by 
that act, become citizens :! so that the prerogative 
of the Roman people continued to be in the gift 
of every separate corporation as well as in that of 
the state itself. 

The number of the aliens admitted on the rolls, 
at this muster, is not recorded; but it was pro- 
bably equal to that of the ancient citizens, and 
might have instantly formed a very powerful and 
dangerous faction in the state, if effectual mea- 
sures had not been taker to guard against the 
effect of their influence. For this purpose, they 
were not mixed promiscuously with the mass 
of the people, but confined to eight particular 
tribes ;2 by this means they could only influence 
eight votes in thirty-five ;3 and the ancient citi-. 
zens were still possessed of a great majority. But 
this artifice did not long escape the attention of 
those who were aggrieved by it, and became the 
subject of a new dispute. 

While the Romans were meditating, or actu- 
ally making this important change in the state 
of the commonwealth, they found leisure for mat- 
ters of less moment, in which they endeavoured 
to provide for the peace of the city, and the ad- 
ministration of justice. 

Plautius, one of the tribunes, ob- 

Lex Plotia tained a new law for the selection of 
de Judiciis. judges, by which it was enacted, That 
each tribe should annually elect fif- 

teen citizens, without any distinction of rank; 
and that, from the whole so named, the judges in 
all trials that occurred within the year should be 
taken.4 This law appeared to be equitable, as it 
gave, with great propriety, to all the different 
classes of men in the state, an equal right to be 
named of the juries; and to every party con- 
cerned, an equal chance of being tried by his 
peers. 

The same tribune likewise obtain- 
ed a law for the preservation of the 
public peace, by which it was de- 
clared capital to be seen in public 
with a weapon, or instrument of death; to oc- 
cupy any place of strength in the city; to 
offer violence to the house of any person, or to 
disturb any company ; to interrupt any meeting 
of the senate, assembly of the people, or court of 
justice. To these clauses Catulus subjoined an- 
other, in which he comprehended persons sur- 
rounding the senate with an armed force, or 
offering violence to any magistrate.’ 


Lex Plotia 


1 Cicero pro Archia Poeta. 

2 Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii. c. 20. 

3 Historians mention this particular, as if eight new 
tribes were added to the former thirty-five; but the 


continual allusion of Roman writers to the number 


thirty-five, will not allow us to suppose any aug- 
mentation. Cicerode Lege Agraria, 2da, c. 8. 

4 Pedianus in Cornelianam Ciceronis. 

5 Cicero pro Celio, et Aruspicum Responso. 


Cuar. VIL] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


129 


CHAPTER VII. 


Triumph of Pompeius Strabo—Progress of Sylla—War with the King of Pontus— Rise of that 
Kingdom—Appointment of Sylla to Command—Policy of the Tribune Sulpicius—Sylla’s 
Commission recalled in Favour of Marius—His March from Campania to Rome—Exzpels 
Marius and his Faction from the City—His Operations in Greece—Siege of Athens—Baitle 
of Cheronea—Of Orchomenos— Transactions at Rome—Policy of Cinna— Marius recalled— 
Cinna flies, and is deprived—Recovers the Possession of Rome— Treaty of Sylla with Mithri- 
dates—He passes into Italy—Is opposed by numerous Armies— Various Events of the War in 
Italy—Sylla prevails—His Proscription, or Massacre—Named Dictator—His Policy—Resig- 


nation—and Death. 
r 

THE social war, though far from being suc- 
cessful, concluded with a triumphal procession ; 
and the senate, though actually obliged to yield 
the point for which they contended, thought pro- 
per, under pretence of advantages gained on some 
particular occasions, to erect a trophy. They 
singled out Pompeius Strabo for the pageant in 
this ceremony ; either because he had reduced 
Asculum, where the rebellion first broke out, or 
because a victory obtained by him had immedi- 
ately preceded the peace. But the most remarkable 
circumstance in this procession was, its being, in 
show, a triumph of the old citizens over the new, 
but in reality a triumph of the latter. Ventidius 
Bassus, being a prisoner in the war, and led as 
such in the present triumph, came in the form 
of a captive to share in the prerogatives of a 
Roman; he was, in the sequel, promoted to all 
the honours of the state; and himself, in the ca- 
pacity of a victorious.general, led a procession of 
the same kind with that in which he made his 
first entry at Rome as a captive.® 

Sylla, by his conduct and his successes wher- 
ever he had borne a separate command in this 
war, gave proof of that superior genius by which 
he now began to be distinguished. By his mag- 
nanimity on all occasions, by his great courage in 
danger, by his impcrious exactions from the enc- 
my, and by his lavish profusion to his own troops, 
he obtained, in a very high degree, the confidence 
and attachment of his soldiers; and yet in this, 
it is probable, he acted froin temper, and not from 
design, or with any view to what followed. With 
so careless and so bold a hand did this man 
already hold the reins of military discipline, that 
Albinus, an officer of high rank, and next in 
command to himself, being killed by the soldiers 
in a mutiny, he treated this outrage as a trifle, 
saying, when the matter was reported to him, 
That the troops would atone for it when they 
met with the enemy? 

With the merits he had recently 


U. ©. 665. displayed in this war, he repaired 
ee pote the city, laid claim to the con- 
ia ures. sulate, and was accordingly chosen 


in conjunction with Quintus Pom- 
peius Rufus, 

It was thought necessary still to keep a proper 
force under arms in Italy, until the public tran- 
quillity should be fully established. ‘The anny, 
which had acted under Cneius Pompeius Strabo, 
consul of the preceding year, was destined for 
this service; and Quintus Rufus was appointed 
to the command of it, 

The war with Mithridates, king of Pontus, 


Rufus, Cons. 


§ Vat. lib. vi.c. 9. Gellius, lib. xv.c. 4. Phin. bb. 
7 & 43. Dio Cassius, 43. call 7 Plutarch m Syla. 
» 

v 


however, was the principal object of attention ; 
and this province, together with the army then 
lying in Campania, fell to the lot of Sylla. 

The monarchy of Pontus had risen upon the 
ruins of the Macedonian establishments in Asia; 
and, upon their entire suppression, was become 
ann of the most considerable kingdoms of the 

ast. 

Mithridates had inherited from his ancestors a 
great extent of territory, reaching in length, ac- 
cording to the representation of his own ambas- 
sador in Appian twenty thousand stadia, above 
two thousand miles. He himself had joined to it 
the kingdom of Colchis, and other provinces on 
the coasts of the Euxine sea. His national 
troops amounted to three hundred thousand foot, 
and forty thousand horse, besides auxiliaries from 
Thrace, and from that part of Scythia which lies 
on the Meotis and the Tanais, countries over 
which he had acquired an ascendant approach- 
ing to a sovereignty. He had pretensions like- 
wise on the kingdoms of Bithynia and Cappa- 
docia, which he had hitherto relinquished from 
respect to the Romans; or of which he had de- 
ferred the effect until he should be prepared to 
cope with this formidable power. Al his preten- 
sions, indeed, like those of other monarchs, were 
likely to extend with his force, and to receive no 
limitation but from the defect of his power. And 
such were his resources, and his personal charac- 
ter, that, if he had encountered on the side of Eu- 
rope with an enemy less able than the Romans 
were to withstand his progress, it is probable that 
in his hands the empire of Pontus might have 
vied with that of the greatest conquefors. 

About the time that the soeial war broke out 
in Italy, Cassius Longinus, Marcus Aquilius, 
and C. Oppius were, in diflerent characters, sta- 
tioned in the province of Asia, and took under 
their protection every power in that country 
that was likely to oppose the progress of Mith- 
ridates. 

Nicomedes, who had been recently restored to 
the crown of Bithynia, made hostile incursions 
under the encouragement of these Roman gene- 
rals, even into the kingdoin of Pontus. Mithri- 
dates, having made fruitless complaints to them 
on this subject; and thinking that the distracted 
state of Italy furnished him with a favourable 
opportunity. to slight their resentment, he sent 
his son Ariarathes into Cappadocia with a force 
to expel Ariobarzanes, though an ally of the Ro- 
Inans, and to possess that kingdom. He took the 
field himself, and sent powerful armies, under his 
generals, against Nicomedes, and against the Ro- 
mans, Who had assembled all the force of their 
province and of their allies, to the amount of a 
hundred and twenty thousand men, in different 


130 


podies, to defend their own frontier, or to annoy 
their enemy. 

Mithridates fell separately upon the several 
divisions of his énemies’ forces; and having de- 
feated Nicomedes, and afterwards Marcus, obliged 
the Roman officers, with their ally, to retire ; Cas- 
sius to Apamea, Marcus towards Rhodes, and 
Nicomedes to Pergamus. His fleet, likewise, 
consisting of three hundred gallies; opened the 
passage of the Hellespont, took all the ships 
which the Romans had stationed in those straits ; 
and he himself soon after in person traversed 
Phrygia and the Lesser Asia, to the sea of Cili- 
cia and Greece. In all the cities of the Lesser 
Asia, where the people now openly declared their 
detestation of the Roman dominion, he was re- 
ceived with open gates. He got possession of 
the person of Oppius, by means of the inhabi- 
tants of Laodicea, where this general had taken 
refuge with a body of mercenaries. ‘The merce- 
naries were allowed to disband ;. but Oppius him- 
self was conducted as a prisoner to the head- 
quarters of Mithridates, and, in mockery of his 
state as a Roman governor, was made to pass 
through the cities in his way, with his fasces or 
ensigns of magistracy carried before him. 

arcus Aquilius likewise fell into the hands 
of the enemy, and was treated with similar scorn ; 
and with a barbarity which nothing but the most 
criminal abuse of the power he lately possessed 
could have deserved or provoked. Being carried 
round the cities of Asia on an ass, he was obliged 
at every place to declare, that his own avarice 
was the cause of the war; and he was at last put 
to death by the pouring of melted gold into his 
throat. 

While Mithridates thus overwhelmed his ene- 
mies, and was endeavouring to complete his con- 
quest of Asia by the reduction of Rhodes, he 
ordered his general Archelaus to penetrate by 
the way of Thrace and Macedonia into Greece. 

Such was the alarming state of the war when 
the Romans, having scarcely appeased the trou- 
bles in Italy, appointed L. Cornelius Sylla with 
six legions that lay in Campania, to embark for 
Greece, in order, if possible, to stem a torrent 
which no ordinary bars were likely'to withstand. 

But before Sylla or his colleague could depart 
for their provinces, disorders arose in the city, 
which, without waiting the approach of foreign 
enemies, brought armies to battle in the streets, 
and covered the pavements of Rome with the 
slain. 

Publius Sulpicius, tribune of the people, with 
a singular boldness and profligacy, ventured to 
tamper with the dangerous humours which were 
but ill suppressed in the event of the late trou- 
bles ; arid, as if the state had no experience of civil 
wars and domestic tumults, lighted the torch 
anew, and kindled the former animosity of the 
popular and senatorian parties. The severe mea- 
sures hitherto taken by the senate and magis- 

rates against the authors of sedition had, in some 
-nstances, been effectual to snatch the republic 
out of the hands of lawless men, and to suspend 
for a while the ruin of the commonwealth; but 
he examples so given, instead of deterring others 
from a repetition of the same crimes, appear only 
to have admonished the factious leaders to take 
proper precautions, and to make the necessary 
preparations before they embarked in designs 
against the state. They accordingly improved 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox Il. 


and refined by degrees on the measures which 
they successively took against the senate; and 
when the tribune Sulpicius began to act, he 
made his arrangements equal to a system of 
formal war. This tribune, according to Plu- 
tarch, had three thousand gladiators in his pay, 
and in despite of the law of Plautius, had ever at 
his back a numerous company of retainers, arm- 
ed with daggers and other offensive weapons; 
these he called his anti-senate ; and retained to 
support him in an attempt, which he was at no 
pains to disguise, against the authority of the 
senate itself. He moved the people to recall from 
exile all those who had fled from the city on oc- 
casion of the former disorders, and to admit the 
new citizens and enfranchised slaves to be enroll- 
ed promiscuously in all the tribes without regard 
to the late wise limitation of the senate’s decree, 
by which they were restricted to four. By the 
change which he now proposed, the citizens of 
least consideration might come to have a majority, 
or è great sway in the public deliberations. The 
tribunes would become masters in every ques- 
tion, and fill up the rolls of the people in the 
manner that most suited their interest. 

This presumptuous man himself undertook to 
procure the freedom of the city for every person 
that applied to him, and boldly received premiums 
in the streets for this prostitution of the privi- 
leges and powers of his fellow-citizens. 

The more respectable citizens, and the magis- 
trates, in vain withstood these abuses. ‘They were 
overpowered by force, and frequently driven from 
the place of assembly. In this extremity they 
had recourse to superstition, and by multiplying 
holy-days, endeavoured to stop or to disconcert 
their antagonists. But Sulpicius, with his party, 
laid violent hands on the consuls, in order to 
force them to recall these appointments. Young 
Pompey, the son of the present consul, and son- 
in-law to Sylla, was killed in the fray. Sylla 
himself, who had withdrawn from the tumult, 
feeling that he was in the power of his enemies, 
and being impatient to get into a situation in 
which he could more effectually resist them, 
chose for the present to comply with their de- 
mands,! 

In the midst of these violences, the city being 
under an actual usurpation of tyranny, Sylla re- 
paired to the army in Campania, with a resolu- 
tion to pursue the object of his command in Asia, 
and to leave the tribunitian storms at Rome to 
spend their force. But soon after his departure, 
it appeared, that Marius was no stranger to the 
councils of Sulpicius; and that he hoped, by 
means of this tribune, to gratify an ambition 
which outlived the vigour of his faculties and the 
strength of his body. His first object was to 
mortify his rival Sylla, in revoking, by a decree 
of the people, the appointment of the senate, and 
to supersede him in the command of the army 
against Mithridates.. A decree to this purpose 
was accordingly with ease obtained by Sulpicius, 
in one of those partial conventions, which took 
upon them to represent the people of Italy in the 
streets of Rome; and Marius, now appointed 
general of the army in Campania, sent the pro- 
per officers to intimate his appointment to Sylla, 
and to receive from him, in behalf of his succes 
sor, the charge of the army, and the delivery of 


1 Plutarch in Mario; p. 526. edit. Londin, 4to. 


Cuap. VIL] 


the stores. Sylla had the address to make the 
troops apprehend that this change was equally 
pencil to them as to himself; that Marius 
had his favourite legions, whom he would natu- 
rally employ; and that the same act of violence, 
by which he had supplanted the general, would 
bring other officers and other men to reap the 
fruits of this lucrative service in Asia. This per- 
suasion, as well as the attachment which the 
army already bore to their general, produced its 
effect.2 

The officers, who intimated the appointment 
of Marius, on declaring their commission, found 
that violence could take place in the camp as 
well as in the city. Their orders were received 
with scorn. A tumult arose among the soldiers ; 
and citizens vested with a publie character, for- 
mally commissioned to intimate an order of the 
Roman people, and delivering their commands to 
this purpose, were slain in the camp. In return 
to this outrage some relations and friends of Sylla 
were murdered in the city, and such retaliations 
were not likely soon to end on either side.? 

Faction is frequently blind, and does not see 
the use that may be made of its own violent pre- 
cedents against itself. Although Sylla is said to 
have hesitated, yet he was not a person likely to 
shrink from the contest, in which his own ene- 
mies, and those of the state, had engaged him. 
Stung with rage, and probably thinking that 
force would be justified in snatching the republic 
out of such violent hands, he proposed to the 
army that they should march to Rome. The 
proposal was received with joy; and the army, 
without any of the scruples, or any degree of that 
hesitation which is ascribed to their commander 
in adopting this measure, followed where he 
thought proper to lead them. 

On this new and dangerous appearance of 
things, not only Marius and Sulpicius, with the 
persons most obnoxious on account of the in- 
sults offered to Sylla and other respectable citi- 
zens, were seized with consternation; but even 
the senate and the nobles were justly alarmed. 

A faction, it is true, had assumed the authority 
of the Romay people, to violate the laws, and to 
overawe the state; but armies, it was thought, 
are dangerous tools in political contests; and no 
good intention on the part of their leaders, no 
magnanimity or moderation in the execution of 
their intentions, can compensate the ruinous ten- 
dency of a precedent which brings foree to be 
employed as an ordinary resource in political 
divisions. Ewen the present state of the republic 
did not appear so desperate as to justify such a 
measure. 

The senate accordingly sent a deputation to 
Sylla, with entreaties, and with commands, that 
he would not advance to the city. ‘This deputa- 
tion was received by him within a few miles of 
the gates. He heard the remonstrance that was 
made to him with patience, and scemed to be 
moved. He gave orders, in the hearing of the 
deputies, that the armies should halt; sent the 
proper officers to mark out a camp, and suffered 
the commissioners to return to their employers, 
full of the persuasion that he was to comply with 
their request. But as soon as he thought this in- 
telligence had reached the city, and had lulled his 


2 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. 1. 
3 Plutarch. in Mario, edit. Londin. p. 526. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


131 


antagonists into a state of security, he sent a de- 
tachment close on the heels of the deputies, with 
orders to seize the nearest gate; and he himself, 
with the whole army, speedily followed to support 
them. 

The gate was accordingly seized. The people, 
in tumult, endeavoured to recover it; Marius se- 
cured the capitol, and summoned every man, 
whether freemen or slaves, to repair to his stan- 
dard. His party, as they assembled, were drawn 
up in_the streets. Sylla, in the mean time, at 
the head of his army, rushed through the gate, 
which his vanguard still maintained against the 
multitudes by whom they were pressed. He 
was greatly annoyed from the battlements and 
windows as he passed, and might have been re- 
pulsed by the forces which Marius had assembled, 
if he had not commanded the city to be set on 
fire, in order to profit by the confusion into which 
the people were likely to be thrown in avoiding 
or extinguishing the flames. By this expedient 
he drove Marius from all the stations he had oc- 
cupied, forced him to abandon the city, and obliged 
his adherents to separate. 

While the army was distributed in different 
quarters of a city, deformed with recent marks 
of bloodshed and fire, their general assembled the 
senate, and desired thein to deliberate on the 
present state of affairs. Among the measures he 
suggested on this occasion, was a law by which 
Marius, with his son, and twelve of his faction, 
who had seercted themselves, were declared ene- 
mies of their country. This sentence was accom- 
panied with a public injunction to seize or kill 
them wherever they could be found. The reasons 
upon which this act of attainder was granted 
were, that they had violated the laws of the re- 
public, and seduced the slaves to desert from their 
masters, and to take arms against the state.‘ 

While the officers of justice were dispersed in 
execution of this deeree, and many others were 
busy in search of their private enemics, thus laid 
at their merey, the tribune Sulpicius, having fled 
to the marshes on the coast near Laurentum, was 
dragged from thence and slain. His head, se- 
vered from the body, as that of a traitor, who had 
surpassed every leader of faction in the outrages 
done to the laws and the government of his 
country, was exposed on one of the rostra; 
an example afterwards frequently imitated, and 
which, though it could not inake any addition 
to the evil of the times, beeame an additional ex- 
pression of the animosity and rancour of parties 
against each other. 

Marius, upon his expulsion from Rome, retired 
to his own villa at Salonium; and, being unpro- 
vided for a longer flight, sent his son to the Cn 
of one Mutius, a friend in the neighbourhood, to 
procure what might be necessary for a voyage by 
sea. The young inan was discovered at this 
place, and narrowly escaped in a waggon loaded 
with straw, which, the better to deceive his pur- 
sucrs, was ordercd to take the road to Rome. ‘The 
father fled to Ostia, and there embarked on board 
a vessel which was provided for him by Nume- 
rius, who had been one of his partizans in the 


4 Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib. i. p. 387. The names 
mentioned in this act of attainder or outlawry, were 
Sulpicius, Marius, father and son, P. Cethegus, Junius 
Brutus, Cneius and Pub. Granii, Albinovanus, Marcus 
Suetonius. 

5 Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii. e. 19. 


132 


late troubles. Having put to sea, he was forced 
by stress of weather to Circeii, there landed in 
want of every necessary, and made himself 
known to some herdsmen, of whom he implored 
relief. Being informed of the parties that were 
abroad in pursuit of him, he concealed himself 
for the night in a neighbouring wood. Next day 
as he was within a few miles of the town of 
Minturne, he was alarmed at the sight of some 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


assembly of the tribes ;4 and Sylla, before he left 
the city, thought proper to despatch the election 
of consuls for the following year, but did not em- 
ploy the power, which he now possessed, to make 
the choice fall on persons who were both of the 
senatorian party. ‘Together with Octavius, who 
had the authority of the senate at heart, he suf- 
fered Cinna, though of the opposite faction, to be 
chosen, and only exacted a promise from him not 


horsemen, ran with all the speed he could make | to disturb the public peace, nor, in his absence, 


to the shore, and, with much difficulty, got on 
board of a boat which was passing. ‘The per- 
sons with whom he thus took refuge resisted the 
threats and importunities of the pursuers to have 
him delivered up to them, or thrown into the 
sea; but having rowed him to a supposed place 
of safety, at the mouth of the Liris, they put him 
on shore, and left him to his fate. Here he first 
took refuge in a cottage, afterwards under a hol- 
low bank of the river, and, last of all, on hearing 
the tread of the horsemen, who still pursued him, 
he plunged himself to the chin in the marsh ; 
but, though concealed by the reeds and the depth 
of the water, he was discovered and dragged from 
thence all covered with mud. He was carried to 
Minturne, and doomed by the magistrates of the 
place to suffer the execution of the sentence 
which had been denounced against himself and 
his partizans at Rome. He was, however, by 
some connivance, allowed to escape from hence, 
again put to sea, and, at the island /Ænaria, 
joined some associates of his flight. Being after- 
wards obliged to land in Sicily for a supply of 
water, and being known, he narrowly escaped 
with the loss of some of the crew that navigated 
his vessel. From thence he arrived on the coast 
of Africa; but, being forbid the province by the 
Pretor Sextilius, continued to shift his abode 
among the islands or places of retirement on the 
coast. 

Marius was ín his seventieth year when he 
made this attempt to overturn the Roman repub- 
lic by means of popular tumults, and when he 
strove to obtain the command of an army in the 
busiest and most arduous service which the’ Ro- 
man empire had then to offer. Being forced, by 
his miscarriage in this attempt, into the state of 
an outlaw, he still amused the world with adven- 
tures and escapes, which historians record with 
the embellishments of a picturesque and even 
romantic description. A Gaulish or German 
soldier, who was employed at Minturne to put 
him to death, overawed by his aspect, recoiled 
from the task; and the people of the place, as if 
moved by the miracle, concurred in aiding his 
escape.2 The presence of such an exile on the 
ground where Carthage had stood, was supposed 
to increase the majesty, and the melancholy of 
the scene. “Go,” he said to the lictor who 
brought him the orders of the prætor to depart, 
“tell him that you have seen Marius sitting on 
the ruins of Carthage.’? 

The senate, thus restored to its authority, and, 
by the suppression of the late sedition, masters 
of the city, took the proper measures to prevent, 
for the future, such violations of order introduced 
for popular government. They resolved that no 
question of legislation should be agitated in the 


1 Plutarch. in Mario, edit. Lond. p. 534. 
2 Velleius Pater. lib. ii. c. 19. 
3 Plutarch. in Mario. 


to attempt any thing derogatory of his own 
honour.5 
Having in this manner restored the common 
wealth, Sylla set out with his army for their des- 
tination in Greece. Quintus Rufus, the other 
consul of the preceding year, at the same time 
repaired to his province in the country of the 
Marsi, where, as has been mentioned, he was’ to 
succeed Cn. Strabo in the command of some 
legions ; but being less agreeable to these troops 
than his predecessor, the soldiers mutinied upon 
his arrival, and put him to death. Cn. Strabo, 
though suspected of having connived with them 
in this horrid transaction, was permitted to profit 
by it in keeping his station. So quick was 
the succession of crimes which distressed the 
republic, that one disorder escaped with impu- 
nity, under the more atrocious effects of another 
which followed it. 
When Sylla was about to depart 
U. C. 666. from the city, Virgilius, one of the 
tribunes, moved an impeachment 
against him for the illegal steps he 
had lately taken. But the state of 
the war with Mithridates was ur- 
gent, and Sylla took the benefit of the law of 
Memmius, by which persons named to command 
had a privilege to decline answering any charge 
which should be brought against them, when go- 
ing on the service to which they were appointed. 
The king of Pontus, notwithstanding he had 
been disappointed in his attempt upon Rhodes, 
was become master of the Lesser Asia, had fixed 
his residence at Pergamus, and employed his offi- 
cers, with numerous fleets and armies, to carry on 
the war in different quarters, making rapid ac- 
quisitions at once on the side of the Scythian 
and Thracian Bosphorus in Macedonia and in 
Greece. His general, Archelaus, had reduced 
most of the Greek islands, and was hastening to 
make himself master of the Grecian continent. 
Delos had revolted, and thrown off the yoke of 
Athens, at the time that it fell into the hands 
of this general. The king proposed to make use 
of it as a decoy to bring the Athenians them- 
selves under his power. For this purpose he pre- 
tended a desire to restore the island, with the 
treasure he had seized there, to its former mas- 
ters; and sent Aristion, a native of Athens, but 
now an officer in his own service, with an escort 
of two thousand men, to deliver this treasure into 
their hands. Aristion, being, under this pretence, 
received into the Pireus, continued to hold this 
place, with the. city of Athens itself, for Mithri- 
dates, and, by means of the forces he assembled 
in Attica, soon after overran Beeotia, Achaia, and 
Laconia. 
To these powerful encroachments on the Ro- 
man territory, and to the personal injuries done 


L. Corn. Cin- 
na, Cn. Octa- 
vius, Cons. 


4 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. 1. BS 
5 L. Florus, lib. iji. c.21. Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. 1 


Cuap. VIL] 


to sueh of their generals as had fallen into his 
hands, Mithridates had joined a barbarous out- 
rage, that roused, in the highest. degree, the re- 
sentinent of the Roman people. tHe had sent 
orders to all his eommanders in every town and 
station in Asia, on a day fixed, to begin a massa- 
cre of the Roman eitizens that were any where 
settled in that country, and to publish a reward 
for the slaves of any Roman who should sueeeed 
in destroying their master. This order was exe- 
cuted with marks of insult, in whieh the instru- 
ments of cruelty are often apt to exceed their in- 
structions. It is partieularly mentioned, that at 
Ephesus, Pergamus, and other eities of Asia, en- 
tire families, taking refuge in the temples, and 
embracing the altars, infants with their parents, 
und without distinetion of sex or age, were drag- 
ged from thenee and murdered. The number of 
persons that perished in this massaere, if ever 
known, is no where mentioned.6 

The resentment whieh was natural on this oc- 
casion, together with the real danger that threat- 
ened the empire, fully justified the eontempt with 
whieh Sylla treated the impeaehment of Virgilius, 
and the eelerity with whieh he left the eity of 
Rome. Having transported to Dyrachium an 
army of six legions, he took the route of Thes- 
saly and /Etolia; and having raised in these 
eountries eontributions for the pay and subsist- 
enee of his army, he received the submission of 
the Beotians, who had lately been obliged to de- 
clare for Mithridates, and advaneed to Athens, 
where Aristion in the eity, and Arehelaus in the 
Pireus, were prepared to make a vigorous resist- 
ance. Mithridates, who was master of the sea, 
eolleeted together, all the troops whieh he had 
distributed in the islands, and ordered a great 
reinforeement from Asia to form an army on the 
side of Beotia for the relief of Athens. 

Sylla, to prevent the enemy, hastened the siege 
of this plaee. He first made an attempt to foree 
his way into the Piræus by scaling the walls; 
but being repulsed, had recourse to the ordinary 
means of attaek. He erected towers, and raised 
them to the height of the battlements, got upon 
the same level with the besieged, and plied his 
missiles from thence. He shook the walls with 
battering engines, or undermined them with 
galleries, and made places of arms for his men, 
near to where he expected to open a breaeh. 
But the defence of the plaee was vigorous and 
obstinate, and so well condueted, that he was 
obliged, after many fruitless efforts, to turn the 
siege into a bloekade, and to await the effects 
of famine, by which the city began already to be 
pressed. . 

It was in a little time brought to the last ex- 
tremity. Those who were eonfined within the 
walls had eonsumed all the herbage, and killed 
all the animals that were to be found in the 
place; they were redueed to feed on thie imple- 
ments of leather, or other materials that could be 
turned into sustenanee, and eame at last to prey 
upon the carcases of the dead. The garrison 
was greatly diminished in numbers; and of those 
who remained, the greater part was disp and 
weak: but Aristion, expecting for himself no 
quarter from the Roman general, still showed no 
desire to eapitulate; when Sylla, knowing the 
weak state to which the besieged were redueed, 


6 Appian. de Bell. Mithrid. p. 585, 586 . 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


133 


made a vigorous effort, stormed and forced the 
walls with great slaughter. Aristion, who had 
retired into the Aeropolis, was soon afterwards 
taken and slain. 

Archelaus, likewise greatly distressed in the 
Pireus, found means to escape by water, and 
hastened to join the army that was forming on the 
side of Thessaly; leaving the post he abandoned 
to fall into the hands of Sylla, who razed its for- 
tifieations to the ground. 

The army of Mithridates advanced into Beo.- 
tia. Every part of it was sumptuously provided 
with all that was necessary for subsistence or 
parade. There was a numerous eavalry richly 
caparisoned; an infantry of every description, 
variously armed, some to use missile weapons, 
others to engage in elose fight; a large train of 
armed chariots, whieh, being winged with scythes, 
threatened to sweep the plains. The whole army 
amounted to about a hundred and twenty thou- 
sand men. But their master, with all his ability, 
it appears, relied, in the manner of barbarous na- 
tions, more on their numbers than he did on their 
order, or on the conduct of their officers. Sylla 
was to oppose them with thirty thousand men. 

On this inferior enemy Archelaus continually 
pressed with all his forces, and endeavoured to 
bring on a general action, whieh Sylla cautiously 
avoided; waiting for an opportunity that might 
deprive the enemy of the advantage they had in 
the superiority of their numbers. ‘I'he armies be- 
ing both in Beotia, Archelaus inadvertently took 
post near Cheronea, on the ascent of a steep hill 
that was formed into terraces by ledges of rocks, 
and whieh terminated at last in a peak or narrow 
summit. On the face of this hill he had crowded 
his infantry, his cavalry, and his chariots, and 
trusted that, although the ground was unfavour- 
able to sueh an army, it was still inaccessible, and 
eould not be reached by an enemy. 

While Arehelaus believed himself secure in 
this position, Syllaeontinued to observe him from 
the post he had fortified at a little distanee ; and 
was told by some natives of the country, that the 
hill whieh the enemy had occupied might be as- 
cended in their rear, and that any part of his 
army might be safely conducted to the summit. 
Upon this information he made a disposition to 
engage, plaeed his main body against the enemy 
in front, and, that he might throw them into con- 
fusion by a double attack, sent a powerful de- 
tachment, with proper guides, to seize on the 
heights above their eneampment. 

The unexpeeted appearance of Sylla’s detach- 
ment in the rear produeed the alarm that was in- 
tended. Their impetuous descent from the hill 
drove in confusion all who eame in their way 
from thence to the camp. The rear fell down on 
the front. A great uproar and tumult arose in 
every part. And in this eritieal moment Sylla 
began his attack, and broke into the midst of 
enenlies who were altogether unprepared to re- 
ceive him. They were crowded in a narrow 
space, and mixed without any distinetion of se- 
parate bodies of officers or men; and, under the 
disadvantage of their ground, eould neither resist 
nor retire. In the centre, numbers being trod 
under foot by those who erowded around them, 
perished by violenee or suffocation; or, while 
they endeavoured to open a way to escape, were 
slain by eaeh other’s swords. Ofa hundred and 
twenty thousand men, scarcely ten thousand 


134 


place to which Archelaus directed his flight. Of 
the Romans, at the end of the action, only fifteen 
men were missing, and of these two returned on 
the following day.! 

Archelaus, even after this rout of his army, 
being still master at sea, drew supplies from Asia 
and from the neighbouring islands; and, being 
secure in his retreat in Eubcea, made frequent. 
descents on the neighbouring coasts. While 
Sylla endeavoured to cover the lands of Beeotia 
and Attica from these incursions, Mithridates 
made great efforts to replace his army in that 
country; and in a little time had transported 
thither eighty thousand fresh troops under Do- 
rilaus, to whom Archelaus joined himself with 
those he had saved from the late disaster. ‘The 
new army of Mithridates, consisting chiefly of 
cavalry, was greatly favoured by the nature of the 
ground in Beeotia, which was flat and abounding 
in forage. Sylla, though inclined to keep the 
heights on which he was least exposed to the 
enemy’s cavalry, was obliged, in order to cover 
the country from which he drew his subsistence 
and forage, to descend to the plains in the neigh- 
bourhood of Orchomenos. ‘There he took post 
amon 
himself with deep ditches against the enemy’s 
horse. While his works were yet unfinished, 
being attacked by the Asiatic cavalry, not only 
the labourers, but the troops that were placed 
under arms to cover the workmen, were seized 
with a panic, and fled. Sylla, having for some 
time in vain endeavoured to rally them, laid hold 
of an ensign, and rushed in despair on the 
enemy. “To me,” hesaid, “it is glorious to fall 
in this place: but for you, if you are asked 
where you deserted your leader, you may say, at 
Orchomenos.” Numbers who heard this re- 
proach returned to the charge with their general; 
and wherever they presented themselves, stopped 
the career of the enemy, and put them to flight. 
The Roman army at length recovered itself in 
every part of the field; and Sylla remounting his 
horse, took the full advantage of the change of 
his fortune, pursued the eneny to their camp, and 
forced them to abandon it with great slaughter. 

After the loss of this second army, Mithridates 
appears to have despaired of his affairs in Greece ; 
he suffered Sylla to enter into quiet possession of 
his winter quarters in Thessaly, and authorised 
Archelaus to treat of peace. 

Both parties were equally inclined to a treaty ; 
the king of Pontus urged by his losses, and the 
Roman proconsul by the state of affairs in Italy. 
Sylla, though commanding in Greece by autho- 
rity from the Roman senate, had been degraded, 
and declared a public enemy by a resolution of 
the people at Rome. An officer had been sent 
from Italy to supersede him; and a Roman army, 
independent of his orders, was actually employed 
in the province. Mithridates, too, while he had 
sustained such losses in Greece, was pressed by 
the other Roman army in Asia, under the com- 
mand of Fimbria, who, with intentions equally 
hostile to Sylla as to Mithridates, advanced with 
a rapid pace, reduced several towns on the coast, 
and had lately made himself master of Pergamus, 
where the king himself had narrowly escaped 


oa For this fact Plutarch quotes the Memoirs of 
sylla. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


could be assembled at Chalcis in Eubcea, the | 


the marshes, and endeavoured to fortify’ 


[Boox II. 


falling into his hands. In these circumstances a 
treaty was equally seasonable for both. 

Sylla had been absent from Rome about two 
years, during which time, having no supplies from 
thence, he had supported the war by the contri- 
butions which he had raised in Greece, A“tolia, 
and Thessaly, and with the money he had coined 
from the plate and treasure of the Grecian tem 
ples.2 The republic, in the mean time, had been 
in the possession of his enemies, and the autho- 
rity of the senate was, in a great measure, sup- 
pressed. Soon after he left the city, Cinna, not 
withstanding his engagements to Sylla, revivee 
the project of keeping the more respectable citi- 
zens in subjection, under pretence of a govern: 
ment placed in the hands of the people. 

The designation of the popular party was the 
same with that which had distinguished the fol- 
lowers of Tiberius and Caius Gracchus; but the 
object was changed, and the nominal popular fac- 
tion itself was differently composed. Formerly this 
faction consisted of the populace of Rome and of 
the poorer citizens, opposed to the noble and the 
rich. The objects for which they at that time 
contended, were the distribution of corn, new 
settlements, or the division of lands. At present 
the parties consisted of the inhabitants of the 
country towns lately admitted, or still claiming to 
be admitted, on the rolls of the people on one 
side, and of the senate and ancient citizens on the 
other. ‘The object to which the former aspired, 
was a full and equal participation in all the pow- 
ers that belonged to the Roman people. They 
were far from being satisfied with the manner of 
their enrolment into a few particular tribes, and 
laid claim to be admitted without distinction 
among the ancient citizens, and to have conside- 
ration and power proportioned to their numbers. 
In this they were supported by Cinna, who made 
a motion in their favour in the assembly of the 
people, and at the same time proposed torecall 
Marius and the other exiles of that party from 
their banishment. The consul Octavius, with the 
majority of the senate and ancient citizens, op- 
posed these propositions; but Cinna was likely to 
have a powerful support in the new people that 
flocked to him from the country towns, and in 
the friends of the exiles. On the day of assembly, 
multitudes of the new citizens took pessession of 
the place of meeting, and were observed to be 
armed with daggers or short swords. Octavius 
was attended at his house by a numerous assem- 
bly of the ancient citizens, who were armed in 
the same manner, and waited to take such mea- 
sures as the necessity of the case might require. 
Being told that the tribunes who had forbidden 
the question were violently attacked, and likely 
to be forced from the assembly, they came forth 
into the streets, and drove their antagonists, with 
some bloodshed, through the gates of the city. 
Cinna endeavoured to make head against lhis 
colleague, and invited the slaves, under a promise 
of liberty, to his standard. But finding it impos- 
sible within the city, that was occupied by his op- 
ponents, to withstand their force, he withdrew to 
the country towns, and solicited supplies from 
thence. He passed through Tibur and Preneste 
to Nola, and openly implored the inhabitants te 
aid him against their common enemies, On this 
occasion he was attended by Sertorius, and by 


2 Plutarch. in Sylla et Lucullo. 


Cuar. VII] 


some other senators who had embarked in the 
same ruinous faction. Their solicitations at any 
other time might perhaps have been fruitless ; but 
now, to the misfortune of the republic, a number 
of armies were still kept on foot in Italy, to finish 
the remains of the social war. Cn. Strabo com- 
manded one army in Umbria, Metellus another 
on the confines of Lucania and Samnium, and 
Appius Claudius a third in Campania. These 
armies consisted chiefly of indigent citizens, be- 
come soldiers of fortune, were very much at the 
disposal of their leaders, in whose name they had 
been levied, to whom they had sworn the military 
oath, and on whom they depended for the settle- 
ments and rewards which they were taught to 
expect at the end of their services. They were 
inclined to take part in the cause of any faction 
that was likely, by the expulsion and forfeiture 
of one part of the city, to make way for prefer- 
ments and fortunes to the other. 

Cinna distrusted Pompey and Metellus; but 
hoping for a better reception from Appius Clau- 
dius, he repaired to the camp of this general, and 
had the address to gain the troops who were un- 
der his command. 

Mean time the senate, without 

Octavius and entering into any particular discus- 

Merula. sion of the guilt which Cinna had 

“incurred in the late tumult at Rome, 

found that, by having deserted his station, he had 

actually divested himself of his office as consul, 

and they obtained the election of L. Cornelius 
Merula in his place. 

Marius, being informed that one of the armies 
in Italy, with a Roman consul at its head, was 
prepared to support him, made haste from his 
exile in Africa: he landed in Tuscany, was 
joined by numbers, and had an offer of being 
vested with the ensigns of proconsul. But intend- 
ing to move indignation or pity, he declined every 
privilege of a Roman citizen, until the sentence 
of attainder or banishment, which had been pro- 
nounced against him, should be reversed. In the 
manner practised by suppliants, with a mean 
habit and ghastly figure, to which he was re- 
duced by the distress of his exile, he presented 
himself to the people; but with a countenance, 
says his historian, which, being naturally stern, 
now rather seemed terrible than piteous.? He 
implored the protection of the country towns, in 
whose cause he too pretended to have suffered, 
and whose interests were now embarked on the 
same bottom with his own. He had many par- | 
tizans among those who had composed the legions 
which formerly served under his orders. He had 
reputation and authority, and soon assembled a 
considerable ‘force, with which, in concert with 
Cinna, with Sertorius and Carbo, he advanced 
towards Rome. 

They invested the city in three separate di- 
visions, Cinna and Carbo lay before it, Serto- 
rius took post on the river above, and Marius be- 
low it. The last, to prevent supplies from the 
sea, made himself master of the port of Ostia; 
the first had sent a detachment to Arminium, to 
prevent any relief from the side of Gaul. 

In this extremity the senate applied to Metel- 
lus, requesting that he would make any accom- 
modation with the Italian allies, and hasten to 
the relief of the city. The delays whicli he made 


3 Plutarch. in Mario. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


135 


in the execution of these orders enabled Cinna 
and Marius to prevent him in gaining the allies, 
The inhabitants of Italy at this time had it in 
their option to accept the privileges they claimed 
from either party; and, having chosen to join 
themselves with the popular faction, they threw 
their weight into that scale. 

Metellus, however, advanced into Latium; 
and, being joined by the consul Octavius, took 
post on the Alban hill. Here they found that 
their troops, being inclined to favour their ene- 
mies, deserted apace. Metellus, being reduced 
toa few attendants, despaired of the cause, and 
withdrew into Africa. Octavius returned to his 
station in the city. 

The army lately commanded by Pompeius 
Strabo, was now deprived of its general; he hav- 
ing been killed by lightning in his camp. And 
the senate was not inclined to repose any confi- 
dence in his men. He himself had some time 
hesitated between the parties; and the troops, 
at his death, were prepared to choose the side 
which was most likely to favour their interest. 
With so uncertain a. prospect of support, the 
senate thought it safer to enter into a treaty with 
Cinna and Marius than to remain exposed tothe 
necessity of being obliged to admit them by furce. 
They offered to reinstate Cinna in the office of 
consul, and to restore Marius, with the other 
exiles, to their condition of Roman citizens; only 
stipulating that they would spare the blood of 
their opponents, or proceed against them accord- 
ing to the laws of the commonwealth. While 
this treaty was in dependance, Marius, afiecting 
the modesty of a person whom the law, accord- 
ing to his late sentence of banishment, had dis- 
qualified to take any part among citizens, observ- 
eda sullen and obstinate silence. Even when the 
treaty was concluded, and the gates were laid 
open to himself and his followers, he refused to 
enter until the attainder under which he lay 
should be taken off, and until he was replaced in 
his condition asa Roman. The people were ac- 
cordingly assembled to repeal their former decree. 
But Marius, proposing to take his enemies by 
surprise, did not wait for the completion of the 
ceremony. While the ballots were collecting, 
he entered the city with a band of armed men, 
whom he employed in taking vengeance on all 
those wlio had concurred in the late measures 
against him. The gates, by his orders, were se- 
cured, but most of the senators escaped. Sylla’s 
house was demolished, many who were reputed 
his friends were slain, others assisted his wife 
and his children in making their escape. Among 
the signals by which Maritus directed the execu- 
tion of particular persons, it was understood that 
if he did not return a salute which was offered 
him, this was to be considered as a warrant for 
immediate death. In compliance with these in- 
structions, some citizens of note were laid dead at 
his feet. And as the meanest retainers of his 
party had their resentments as well as himself, 
and took this opportunity to indulge their pas- 
sions, the city resembled a place that was taken 
by storm, and every quarter resounded with the 
cries of robbery, murders, and rapes. ‘This hor- 
rid scene continued without intermission five days 
and five nights. 

The following are the names of a few of the 
principal senators who suffered: the consul Oc- 
tavius was murdered in his robes of office, and in 


136 


presence of his lictors; two senators of the name 
of Cesar, Caius and Lucius; two of the name 
of Crassus, the father and the son, who, attempt- 
Ing to escape, but likely to be taken, fell by their 


own hands; Attilius Serranus, Publius Lentu- 


lus, C. Numitorius, M. Bebius, whose bodies, 
fastened on a hook, were dragged by a rope 
through the streets; Marcus Antonius, one of 
the first Roman senators, who had betaken him- 
self entirely or chiefly to civil arts, and is known 
therefore by the name of the Orator; this sena- 
tor being discovered in a place of concealment, 
was killed by assassins sent for the purpose. 
The heads of the others were exposed on the 
rostra; that of Antonius was placed on the table 
of Marius, who bore him, it seems, a peculiar 
degree of animosity and rancour. Catulus, once 
the colleague of Marius in the consulate, partner 
in his last and most decisive victory over the 
Cimbri, and without question one of the most 
respectable senators of the age, was included in 
the warrant for general execution. Marius being 
solicited in his favour, made answer, He must die. 
And this victim, choosing to avoid by a voluntary 
death the insults likely to be offered to him by 
his enemies, having shut himself up, with a bra- 
sier of burning coals, in a close chamber which 
was recently plastered, perished by suffocation. 

Merula, the Flamen Dialis, whose name, with- 
out his own knowledge, had been inscribed con- 
sul in place of that of Cinna, now likewise, willing 
to maintain the dignity of his station, opened his 
arteries at the shrine of Jupiter, whose priest he 
was, sprinkled the statue of the god with his 
blood; on feeling the approach of death, he tore 
from his head the apex or crest of the order, 
which, by the maxims of religion, he always car- 
ried while alive, but with which on his head it 
would have been impious and ominous to die, and 
took those who were present to witness of the 
exactness with which he performed this duty. 

Cinna himself became weary of the murders 
which were committed to gratify the avarice of 
mean and needy adventurers, or the rancour 
even of fugitive slaves against the masters they 
had deserted; he wished to terminate so horrid 
a scene, but it seems could not stop it otherwise 
than by the death of those who were employed 
init. Hecaused great numbers of them accord- 
ingly to be surrounded and put to the sword. 
He proposed, in concert with Marius, to give 
some form or title to their government, by assum- 
ing the consulate: and although there is no doubt 
that they could have easily obtained the sanction 
of an ordinary election, yet they chose to usurp 
the ensigns and powers of consul without any 
such pretence.! Marius, while he took the title 
of consul, continued to act like a chief of banditti, 
connived at the disorders that were committed b 
his military retainers, and continued still to su- 
perintend the execution of the orders which he 
had given on his first entry into the city, to put 
his opponents to death. 

In the midst of these crimes, however, the 
name of Sylla, and the fame of his victories in 
Greece, gave continual presage of a just retribu- 
tion. Marius was agitated with nocturnal fears, 
and gave signs of a distracted mind. Some one, 
he imagined, in the words of a poet, continually 


sounded in his ears, “ Horrid is the dying lion’s | 


1 Livy, Epitome, hh. viii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


den; which being applied to himself, seemed to 
announce his approaching dissolution. He took 
to the excessive use of wine, contracted a pleurisy, 
and died on the seventh day of his illness, in the 
seventeenth day of his last or seventh consulate, 
and in theseventieth year of his age; leaving the 
tools he had employed in subverting the govern- 
ment of his country, to pay the forfeit of his 
crimes. 

Livy, it appears,? had made it a question, 
whether Marius had been most useful to his 
country as a soldier, or pernicious as a citizen. It 
has happened unfortunately for his fame, that he 
closed the scene of life with examples of the latter 
kind. In what degree he retained his genius or 
abilities cannot be known. His insatiable thirst 
of power, like avarice in the case of other persons, 
seemed to grow with age. His hatred of the no- 
bles, contracted in the obscurity of his early life, 
remained with him after he himself had laid the 
amplest foundations of nobility in hisown family. 
And he died in an attempt to extinguish all just 
or regular government in the blood of those who 
only were qualified or disposed to sustain it. 

.Upon the death of Marius, the government 
still continued to be usurped by Cinna. Many 
of the senators, and other citizens, obnoxious to 
the prevailing party, took refuge with Sylla. 
This general himself was declared a public ene- 
my; his effects were seized; his children, with 
their mother, having narrowly escaped the pur- 
suit of his enemies, fled to the father in Greece. 

Upon this occasion Sylla did not change his 
conduct in the war, nor make any concessions to 
the enemies of the state. He talked familiarly 
every day of his intention to punish his enemies 
at Rome, and to avenge the blood of his friends, 
but not till he had forced Mithridates to make 
reparation for the wrongs he had done to the Ro- 
mans and to their allies in Asia. 

Alarmed by these threats, Cinna took measures 
to strengthen his party ; assumed, upon the death 
of Marius, Valerius F'laccus as his colleague in 
the office of consul; and, having assigned him the 
command in Asia, with two additional legions, 
trusted that with this force he might obtain pos- 
session of the province. 

But Flaccus, upon his arrival in Thessaly, 
was deserted by part of the army, which went 
over to Sylla; and passing through Macedonia in 
his route to Asia with the remainder, a dispute 
arose between himself and his lieutenant Fimbria, 
which ended in the murder of the consul Flac- 
cus, and in the succession of Fimbria to the com- 
mand. So little deference or respect did citizens 
pay, in the disorder of those unhappy times, even 
to the government they professed to serve. 

Fimbria, with the troops he had seduced to his 
standard, after he had assassinated their general, 
made a rapid progress in Asia, and hastened, as 
has been observed, the resolution to which Mith- 
ridates was come, of applying for peace. To this 
crafty prince, urged by the necessity of his own 
affairs, the conjuncture appeared to be favourable, 
when so much distraction took place in the coun- 
cils of Rome. He had experienced the abilities 
of Sylla; he knew his eager desire to be gone for 


2 Livy, Epitome, lib. viii. Appian. de Bell. Civil. 
lib. i. Plutarch. in Mario. Florus, lib. iii. c. 21 
Velleius Pater. lib. ii. c. 19. &c. Dio Cass. in Frag- 
| mentis. 


Gite. VILJ 
Italy, and to be revengeù of his enemies; and he 
expected to gan him by proffering assistance in 
the war he was about to wage with the opposite 
party at Rome. 

Upon a message from Archelaus, Sylla readily 
agreed to an interview in the island of Delos; and 
here being told, in the name of Mithridates, that 
he should have money, troops, and shipping to 
make a descent on Italy, provided he would enter 
into a confederacy with the king of Pontus, and 
make war on the Romans, by whom he was now 
proscribed, Sylla, in his turn, proposed to Arche- 
laus to desert Mithridates, to deliver up the fleet 
and the army which was under his command, 
and to rely for protection and reward on the faith 
of the Romans. They will speedily seat you, he 
said, on the throne of Pontus. Archelaus having 
rejected this proposal with horror, “ And you,” 
says Sylla, “the slave, or (if you prefer that title) 
the friend of a barbarous tyrant, will not betray 
your trust, and yet to me have the presumption 
to propose an act of perfidy. The fields of Che- 
ronea and Orchomenos should have made you 
better acquainted with the character of the Ro- 
mans.” 

Upon this reply Archelaus saw the necessity 
of purchasing the treaty he was instructed to 
make, and accordingly made the following con- 
cessions : 

‘That the fleet of Pontus, consisting of seventy 
galleys, should be delivered up to the Romans. 

That the garrisons should be withdrawn from 
all places which had been seized in the course of 
ihis war. 

That the Roman province in Asia, together 
with Paphlagonia, Bithynia, and Cappadocia 
should be evacuated, and the frontier of Pontus, 
for the future, be the boundary of Mithridates’s 
territory. 

That the Romans should receive two thousand 
talents, to reimburse their expense in the war. 

That prisoners should he restored, and all de- 
serters delivered up. 

While these articles were sent to Mithridates 
for his ratification, Sylla in no degree relaxed the 
measures he had taken to secure and facilitate 
the passage of his army into Asia. He sent Lu- 
cullus! round the maritime powers of the East 
tv assemble a fleet; and, after having made some 
incursions into Thrace, to gratify his army with 
the spoil of nations who had often plundered the 
Roman province, he continued his route to the 
Hellespont, and was met in his way by the mes- 
sengers of Mithridates, who informed him that 
their master agreed to all the articles proposed, 
except to that which related to the cession of 
Paphlagonia; and at the same time made a merit 
of the preference he had given to Sylla in this 
treaty; as he might have obtained more favour- 
able terms from Fimbria. “That is a traitor,” 
said Sylla, “ whom I shall speedily punish for his 
crimes. As for your master, I shall know, upon 
my arrival in Asia, whether he chooses to have 
peace or war.” 

Being arrived at the Hellespont, he was join- 
ed by Lucullus with a fleet which enabled him 
to pass that strait. Here he was met by another 
message from Mithridates, desiring a personal 
interview; which was accordingly held in the 
presence of both armies, and at which the king 


3 About 386,000. 


Io Plutarch. in Lucullo. 


ON THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


137 


of Pontus, after some expostulations, agreed to 
all the conditions already mentioned. In this he 
probably acted from policy, as well as from the 
necessity he felt in the present state of his affairs. 
He still hoped, in consequence of this treaty, to 
turn the arms of Sylla against the Romans, and 
trusted that the peace he obtained for himself in 
Asia was to be the beginning of a war in Italy, 
more likely to distress his enemies than any efforts 
he himself could make against them. With this 
reasonable prospect he retired into his own king- 
dom of Pontus; and there, strengthening him- 
self by alliances and the acquisition of territory 
on the northern coasts of the Euxine, he prepar- 
ed to take advantage of future emergencies, and 
to profit by the state of confusion into which the 
affairs of the Romans were hastening. 

Sylla, having brought the Mithridatic war to 
an issue so honourable for himself; and having 
every where gratified his army with the spoils o 
their enemies, being possessed of a considerable 
sum of money and a numerous fleet, and being 
secure of the attachment of the soldiers, who had 
experienced his liberality, and rested their hopes 
of fortune on the success of his future enterprizes, 
prepared.to take vengeance on his enemies, and 
those of the republic in Italy. He proceeded, 
however, with great deliberation and caution ; 
and, as if the state at Rome were in perfect tran- 
quillity, staid to reduce the army of Fimbria, to re- 
settle the Roman province, and to effect the resto- 
ration of the allies, Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes, 
to their several kingdoms of Cappadocia and 
Bithynia. 

Fimbria being required by Sylla to resign a 
command lid he had illegally usurped, re- 
torted the charge of usurpation, and treated Sylla 
himself as an outlaw: but upon the approach of 
this general, being deserted by his army, he fled 
to Pergamus, and there put an end to his life by 
the hands of a slave, of whom he exacted this ser- 
vice. To punish the province of Asia for its 
defection to Mithridates, Sylla obliged the inhab- 
itants to pay down a sum equal to five years’ 
ordinary tax. He sent Curio to replace on their 
thrones the kings of Cappadocia and Bithynia, 
who had persevered in their alliance with Rome, 
and sent an account of these particulars to the 
senate, without taking any notice of the edict by 
which he himself had been stripped of his com- 
mand, and declared an enemy.’ Before he set 
sail, however, for Italy, le thought proper to 
transmit to Rome a memorial, setting forth his 
services and his wrongs, as well as the injury 
done to many senators who had taken refuge in 
his camp, and concluding with menaces of me 
against his own enemies and those of the re- 
public, but assuring the citizens in general of 
protection and security. This paper being read 
in the senate, struck many of the members with 
dreadful apprehensions; expedients were pro- 
posed to reconcile the parties, and to avert the 
evils which the republic must suffer from their 
repeated contentions. A message was sent to 
pacify Sylla, and earnest intreaties were made to 
Cinna, that he would suspend his levies until au 
answer could be obtained from the other. But 
Cinna, in contempt of these pacific intentions, 
U. C. 669 took measures to prosecute the war; 
core" divided the fasces with Cn. Papirius 


5 Appian. de Bell Mithridat. Plutarch. in Syll 


138 


_ Carbo, whom without any form of 
h Cornelius election, he assumed for his colleague 
inna Ato, ° ; SE 
Cn. Papirius N Consulate; and in the partition of 
Carbo. provinces, retained for himself the 
administration in Italy, while he as- 
signed to Carbo the command in the neighbour- 
ing Gaul. These titular magistrates, with all the 
adherents of their faction, applied in great haste 
to the raising of men, and securing the fidelity of 
the towns within the several divisions which they 
had received in charge. 

Carbo exacted hostages for their good beha- 
viour from all the towns in his district; but as 
he had not authority from the senate for this 
measure, he found himself unable to give it effect. 
To Castricius, the chief magistrate of Placentia, a 
person of great age, who refused to comply, he 
said, “ Have not I your life in my power?” “And 
have not I,” said the other, “already lived long 
enough ?”! 

Cinna, however, having mustered a consider- 
able force, intended to make head against Sylla 
in Thessaly, through which he was expected to 
pass in his way to Italy, and determined to trans- 
port his army thither. But the troops being 
averse to embark, he himself, endeavouring to 
force them, was killed in a mutiny. A general 
disorder and anarchy infected the whole party. 
‘The election of a successor to Cinna was twice 
interrupted by supposed unfavourable presages, 
and Carbo remained sole consul. 

At this time an answer arrived from Sylla to 
the proposals made by the senate towards a re- 
conciliation of parties; in which he declared, 
«That he never could return into friendship 
with persors guilty of so many and such enor- 
mous crimes. If the Roman people, however, 
were pleased to grant an indemnity, he should 
not interpose, but would venture to affirm, that 
such of the citizens as chose, in the present disor- 
ders, to take refuge in his camp, would find 
themselves safer than in that of his enemy’s.” 
He had embarked his army at Ephesus, and in 
three days reached the Pireus, the port of Athens. 
Here he was taken ill of the gout, and was ad- 
vised to use the hot baths at Adipsus; at which 
he accordingly passed some time with great ap- 
pearance of ease, amusing himself with buffoons 
and ordinary company, as if he had no affair of 
any consequence in contemplation. His fleet, in 
the mean time, consisting of twelve hundred 
ships, coasted round the Peloponnesus, and took 
on board the army which had marched by Thes- 
saly to Dyrachium. Being apprehensive that 
some part of the legions, upon landing in Italy, 
and with so near a prospect of returning to their 
homes, might desert, or, trusting to their conse- 
quence in a civil war, might become disorderly 
and distress the inhabitants, he exacted a special 
oath, by which every man bound himself, upon 
his arrival in Italy, to abide by his colours, and 
to observe the strictest order in his march through 
the country. The troops, wishing to remove all 
the remains of a distrust which had suggested this 
precaution, made a voluntary offer of a contribu- 
tion towards the support of the war; and Sylla, 
without accepting the favour, set sail with the 
additional confidence which this proof of attach- 
ment in the army inspired. 

He had, according to Appian, five Roman le- 


eo 


1 Val. Max. lib. vi.c. 2. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


gions, with six thousand Itahan norse, and con 
siderable levies from Macedonia and Greece, 
amounting in all to about sixty thousand meu. 
With this force he landed in Italy, in the face of 
many different armies, each of them equal or su 
perior in number to his own. The opposite party 
were supposed to have on foot at different sta 
tions, above two hundred thousand men. 

L. Cornelius Scipio and C. Junius Norbanus, 
who were its leaders, being in pos 


U. C. 670. session of the capitol and of the 
= ne place of election, were named for 
Po C an. consuls. Norbanus, in the name of 
Nerbanus. the republic, commanded a great 


army in Apulia; Scipio, another 
on the confines of Campania. Sertorius, young 
Marius, with Carbo, in the quality of proconsul, 
and others (as Plutarch quotes from the memoirs 
of Sylla,) to the number of fifteen commanders, 
had each their armies, amounting in all to four 
hundred and fifty cohorts ;? of these different bo- 
dies none attempted to dispute the landing of 
Sylla, nor for some days to interrupt his march. 
He accordingly continued to advance as in a 
friendly country, and in the midst of profound 
peace. The inhabitants of Italy, considering 
the Roman nobility, in whose cause Sylla 
appeared, as averse to the claim they had made 
of being pvoniiscuously enrolled in the tribes 
of Rome, were likely to oppose him, and to fa- 
vour the faction which had for some time pre- 
vailed in the state. To allay their animosity, o1 
to prevent their taking an active part against 
him, Sylla summoned the leading men of the 
country towns as he passed, and gave them as- 
surances that he would confirm the grants which 
had been made to them, if they did not forfeit 
these and every other title to favour, by abetting 
the faction which had subverted the government. 
On his march he was joined by Metellus Pius, 
who, as has been observed, after a fruitless at- 
tempt, in conjunction with the consul Octavius, 
to cover Rome from the attack of Marius and 
Cinna, had withdrawn to Africa; and being 
forced from thence by Fabius, returned into Italy. 
Being in Liguria, where he still retained the 
character of proconsul, he endeavoured to keep 
some forces on foot, and to sustain the hopes of 
his party, when so great a change was made in 
their favour by the arrival of the army from 
Greece. 
Sylla was likewise, about the same time, joined 
by Cneius Pompeius, son to the late consul 
Pompeius Strabo, who, though too young for any 
public character, had assembled a considerable 
body of men to make himself of consequence m 
the present contest. Being now only about nine- 
teen years of age, he was remarked for engaging 
manners, and a manly aspect, which procured 
him a general favour and an uncommon degree 
of respect.3 This distinction being unsought for, 
was possibly considered by him as his birth-right, 
and gave him an early impression of that supe- 
riority to his fellow-citizens which he continued 
to assume through the whole of his life. He had 
served in those legions with which Cinna intend- 
ed to have carried the war against Sylla into Asia 
or Greece; but, being averse to the party, he 
withdrew when the army was about to embark, 
and disappearing suddenly, was supposed to have 


3. Plutarch. in Mario 


a 


2 About 225,000 men. 


Cuar. VIL] 


been murdered by the order of Cinna, a suspicion, 
which, among other circumstances, incited the 
soldiers to that mutiny in which the general was 
killed. Sylla appears himself to have been won 
by the promising aspect of this young mau, and 
received him with distinguishing marks of regard. 

Numbers of the senate and nobles, who had 
hitherto remained exposed at Rome to thie insults 
of their enemies, now repaired to the camp of 
Sylla. The consul Norbanus, being joined by 
Pia Marius, lay at Canusium. Sylla, while 

e was preparing to attack them, sent an officer 
with overtures of peace; these they rejected with 
marks of contempt. This circumstance had an 
effect which Sylla perhaps foresaw and intended. 
It roused the indignation of his army, and, in the 
action which followed, had some effect in obtain- 
ing a victory in which six thousand‘ of the enemy 
were killed, with the loss of only seventy men to 
himself, | 

Norbanus, after this defeat, retreated to Capua; 
and, being covered by the walls of that place, 
waited the arrival of Scipio, who intended to join 
him with the army under his command. Sylla 
marched to ‘Teanum to prevent their junction ; 
and, on the approach of Scipio, proposed to ne- 
gotiate. The leaders, with a few attendants, 
met between the two armies, and were nearly 
agreed upon terms of peace; but Scipio delayed 
his final consent until he should consult with 
Norbanus at Capua. Sertorius was accordingly 
despatched to inform Norbanus of what had 
ig and hostilities were to be suspended until 

is return; but this messenger, probably averse 
to the treaty, broke the truce, by seizing a post at 
Suessa which had been occupied by Sylla; and 
the negotiation had no other effect than that of 
giving the troops of both armies, as well as their 
leaders, an opportunity of conferring together; a 
circumstance which, in civil wars, is always dan- 
gerous to one or other of the parties. In this case 
the popularity of Sylla prevailed; and the sol- 
diers of his army, boasting of the wealth which 
they had acquired under their general, infected 
his enemies, and seduced them to desert their 
leader. Scipio was left almost alone in his camp; 
but Sylla, receiving the troops who deserted to 
him, made no attempt to seize their general, suf. 
fered him to escape, and, with the accession of 
strength he had acquired by the junction of this 
army, continued his march towards Rome. Nor- 
banus at the same time evacuated Capua, and, by 
forced marches in a different route, endeavoured 
to prevent him. 

About this time, Sertorius, who, before the 
war broke out, had, in the distribution of pro- 
vinces, been appointed propretor of Spain, de- 
spairing of affairs in Italy, in which probably he 
was not sufficiently consulted, repaired to his 
province, and determined to try what the genius 
of a Roman leader could effect at the head of the 
warlike natives of that country. 

The chiefs of the Marian party, who remained 
in Italy, made efforts to collect all the forces they 
<ould at Rome. Carbo, upon hearing that the 
army of Scipio was seduced to desert their gene- 
ral, said, “ We have to do with a lion and a fox, 
uf which the fox is probably the more dangerous 
enemy of the two.” 

Norbanus, soon after his arrival in the city, 


= 


4 Pintarch. in Syll. edit. Londin. p 83 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


the pay of the supposed consular armies. 


139 


procured an edict of the people, by which Me- 
tellus, and the others who had joined Sylla, were 
declared enemies to their country. About the 
same time a fire broke out in the capitol, and the 
buildings were burned to the ground. Various 
suspicions were entertained of the cause; but as 
no party had any interest in this event, it was 
probably accidental, and served only to agitate 
the minds of the people, prone to superstition, 
and apt to find alarming presages in every un- 
common event. 

The remainder of the season was spent by 
both parties in collecting their forces from -every 
quarter of Italy, and the term of the consuls in 
office being nearly expired, Carbo procured his 

own nomination to succeed them, 


U. C. 671. and inscribed the name of Marius, 
C. Marius, scarcely twenty years of age, as 
oe Pap. Car- his colleague. This young man 
0. 


is by some said to have been the 
nephew, by others the adopted 
son, of the late celebrated C. Marius, whose 
name had so long been terrible to the enemies, 
and at length not less so to the friends, of Rome. 

At this time the senate consented to have the 
plate and ornaments of the temples = k> 

y 
were, however, notwithstanding this act of ob- 
sequiousness, believed to incline to the opposite 
party, and not to be trusted in case the city were 
attacked. The members being assembled together 
by orders of tke prætors, Damasippus and Brutus, 
the most suspected, were taken aside and put to 
death ; of this number, Quintus Mucius Scævola, 
Pontifex Maximus, flying to the temple in which 
he was accustomed to discharge his sacred office, 
was killed in the porch. 

The military operations of the following spring 
began with an obstinate fight between two con- 
siderable armies commanded by Metellus and 
Carinas. The latter being defeated with great 
loss, Carbo hastened to the scene of action, in 
order to cover the remains of the vanquished army. 

In the mean time Sylla, being encamped at 
Setia, and having intelligence that the young Ma- 
rius was advancing against him, put his army in 
motion to meet him, forced him back to Sacri- 
portum, near Præneste, where an action soon af- 
ter ensued, in which Marius was defeated. 

The routed army having fled in disorder to 
Preneste, the first who arrived were received into 
the place; but as it was apprehended the enemy 
ae likewise enter in the tumult, the gates 
were shut, and many, being excluded, were 
slaughtered under the ramparts. Marius himself 
escaped, by a rope which was let down from the 
battlements to hoist him over the walls. 

In consequence of this victory Sylla invested 
Preneste ; and as great numbers were thus sud- 
denly cooped up in a town, which was not pre- 
pared to subsist them, he had an immediate pros- 
pect of seeing them reduced to the necessity 
of surrendering at discretion. Committing the 
charge of the blockade to Lucretius Offella, he 
himself, with part of the army, proceeded to 
Rome. Metellus, in a second action, had defeated 
the army of Carbo, and Pompey that of Marius 
near Sena; and the party of Sylla being victori- 
ous in every part of ye the city was plone! 
to receive him as soon as he appeared at the gates. 
The partizans of the opposite faction withdrew 
and left him master of the capital. 


140 


Sylla having posted his army in the field of 
Mars, he himself entered the city, and calling an 
assembly of the people, delivered an harangue, in 
which he imputed the disorder of the times to the 
injustice and cruelty of a few factious men, who 
had overturned the government, and sacrificed 
the best blood of the republic to their ambition and 
to their personal resentments. He exhorted all 
well-disposed men to be of good courage, and as- 
sured them that they should soon sce the repub- 
lic restored. In the mean time, he gratified his 
army with the spoils of the opposite party, de- 
claring the effects of all those to be forfeited who 
had been accessary to the crimes lately committed 
against the state. After this first specimen of 
his policy in the city, leaving a sufficient force to 
execute his orders, he hastened to Clusium, 
where Carbo, being joined by a considerable rein- 
forcement from Spain, was preparing to recover 
the metropolis, or to relieve his colleague Marius, 
who was reduced to great distress in Preneste. 

The events which followed the arrival and 
operations of Sylla in Tuscany were various, but 
for the most part unfavourable to Carbo, whose 
force, by desertions and the sword, was declining 
apace. The issue of the war seemed to depend 
on the fate of Preneste, and the whole force of 
the party was therefore directed to the relief of 
that place. The Lucanians and Samnites, who 
had espoused the cause of Marius, and who, by 
his favour, had obtained the freedom of Rome, 
apprehending immediate ruin to themselves, in 
the suppression of a party by whom they had 
been protected, determined to make one great ef- 
fort for the relief of Marius. 

They were joined in Latium by a large detach- 
ment sent by Carbo, under Carmas and Marcius, 
and made an attempt to force the lines of the be- 
siegers at Preneste, and to open the blockade of 
that place. But having failed in this design, 
they turned, with desperation, on the city of 
Rome, which was but slightly guarded by a small 
detachment which had been left for that purpose. 
Sylla being informed of their intention, with 
hasty marches advanced to the city, and found 
the enemy already in possession of the suburbs, 
and preparing to force the gates, 

It was about four in the afternoon when he ar- 
rived, after a long march. Some of his officers 
7 that the troops, being fatigued, should 

ave a little time to repose themselves; and that, 
for this purpose, they should remain on the ram- 
parts until the following day. Sylla, however, 
proposing, by his unexpected presence, and by 
coming to action at an unusual hour, to surprise 
the enemy, gave orders for an immediate attack. 
The event for some time was doubtful ; the wing 
that was led by himself gave way, or was forced 
from its ground; but the other wing under Cras- 
sus had a better fortune, put the enemy to flight, 
and drove them to Antemne. 

The action, though thus various in the differ- 
ent parts of it, became, in the event, completely 
decisive. Eighty thousand of the Marian party 
were killed in their flight, and eight thousand 
taken. Carbo, in despair of the cause, fled into 
Sicily. The troops that were blocked up in 
Preneste, having no longer any hopes of relief, 
surrendered themselves, and the whole party was 
dispersed or cut off. Marius attempted to escape 
by the galleries of a mine, and being prevented, 
killed himself.. His head was carried to Svlla, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


‘Book II. 


and by his order exposed in the market-place. 
“That boy,” he said, “should have learnt to 
row before he attempted to steer!” 

Sylla being now master of the republic, all men 
were in anxious expectation of the sequel; nor 
was it long before they had a specimen of the 
measures he was likely to pursue. About six or 
eight thousand of those who were supposed to be 
the vilest instruments of the late usurpations and 
murders, being taken prisoners in the war, or 
surprised in the city, were, by his direction, shut - 
up in the circus, and instantly put to death. 

While this horrid scene was acting, he had as- 
sembled the senate, at a little distance, in the 
temple of Bellona; and as most of the members 
then present had either favoured, or at least 
tamely submitted to the late usurpation, he made 
them a speech on the state of the republic, in 
which he reproached many of them as accessary 
to the late disorders, and admonished them, for 
the future, to respect the legal government and 
constitution of their country. In the midst of 
these admonitions, the cries of those who were 
slaughtered in the circus, reaching their ears, the 
assembly was greatly alarmed, and many of the 
members started from their seats. Sylla, with a 
countenance stern, but undisturbed, checked 
them as for an instance of levity. “Be com- 
posed,” he said, “and attend to the business for 
which you are called. What you hear are no 
more than the cries of a few wretches, who are 
suffering the punishment due to their crimes.” 
From this interruption he resumed his subject, 
and continued speaking till the massacre of these 
unhappy victims was completed. 

In an harangue which he afterwards delivered 
to the people, he spoke of his own services to the 
republic, and- of the misdemeanour of others, in 
terms that struck all who heard him with terror. 
“The republic,” he said, (if his opinion were 
followed,) “should be purged; but whether it 
were so or no, the injuries done to himself and 
his friends should be punished.” He accordingly 
ordered military execution against every person 
who had been accessary tothe late massacres and 
usurpations; and while the sword was yet reek- 
ing in his hands, passed great part of his time, as 
usual, in mirth and dissipation with men of hu- 
mourous and singular characters. He deigned 
not. even to inquire into the abuses that were 
committed in the execution of his general plan. 
The persons who were employed in it, frequently 
indulged their own private resentment and their 
avarice in the choice of victims. Among these, 
Catiline, then a young man, had joined the vic- 
torious party; and he plunged, with a singular 
impetuosity, into the midst of a storm which now 
overwhelmed a part of the city. He is said, 


among other persons to whom he bore an aver 


sion, or whose effects he intended to seize, to 
have murdered his own brother, with strange 
circumstances of cruelty and horror. 

While these dreadful murders, mixed with 
many examples of a just execution, were perpe- 
trated, a young man, C. Metellus, had the cou- 
rage to address himself to Sylla in the senate, and 
desired he would make known the extent of his 
design, and how far these executions were to be 
carried? “ We intercede not,” he said, “ for the 
condemned; we only intreat that you would re- 
lieve out of this dreadful state of uncertainty all 
those whom in reality you mean to spare.” 


Crap. VII] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


141 


Sylla, without. being offended at this freedom, | hopes that the shedding of blood could be stopped 


published a list of those he had doomed to de- 
struction, offering a reward of two talents for the 
head of each, and denouncing severe penalties 
against every person who should harbour or con- 
veal them. Hence arose the practice of publish- 
ing lists of the persons to be massacred, which, 
under the odious name of proscription, was after- 
wards imitated with such fatal effects in the sub- 
sequent convulsions of the state. 

The present proscription, although it promised 
some security to all who were not comprehended 
in the fatal list, opened a scene, in some respects, 
more dreadful than that which had been formerly 
acted in this massacre. The hands of servants 
were hired against their masters, and even those 
of children against their parents. The merce- 
nary of every denomination were encouraged, by 
a great premium, to commit what before only the 
ministers of public justice thought themselves 
entitled to perform; and there followed a scene, 
in which human nature had full scope to exert 
all the evil of which it is susceptible, treachery, 
ingratitude, distrust, malice, and revenge; and 
would have retained no claim to our esteem or 
commiseration, if its character had not been re- 
deemed by contrary instances of fidelity, generosi- 
ty, and courage, displayed by those who, to preserve 
their friends and benefactors, or even to preserve 
i phi who took refuge under their protec- 
tion, hazarded all the dangers with which the 
proscribed themselves were threatened. 

In consequence of these measures, about five 
thousand persons of consideration were put to 
death, among whom were reckoned forty senators, 
and sixteen hundred of the equestrian order. 

From these beginnings the Romans had rea- 
son to apprehend a tyranny, more sanguinary 
perhaps than any that ever afflicted mankind. 
“If in the field you slay all who are found in 
arms against you,” said Catulus,! “and in the 
city you slay even the unarmed; over whom do 
you propose to reign ?” 

These reproaches were by Sylla received as 
jests; and the freedom and ease of his manners, 
as well as the professions he made of regard to 
the Seali were imputed to insensibility, 
and to a barbarous dissimulation, which rendered 
his character more odious, and the prospect of his 
future intentions more terrifying. 

In comparing the present with the late usurpa- 
tions, men recollected, that Marius, from his 
infancy, had been of a severe and inexorable 
temper; that his resentments were sanguinary, 
and even his frowns were deadly; but that his 
cruelties were the effect of real passions, and had 
the apology of not being perpetrated in cold 
blood ; that every person on whom he looked with 
indifference was safe; and that even when he 
usurped the government of the state, as soon as 
his personal resentments were gratified, the sword 
in his hand became an innocent pageant, and the 
mere ensign or badge of his power. But that 
Sylla directed a massacre in the midst of compo- 
sure and ease : that as a private man he had been 
affable and pleasant, even noted for humanity and 
candour ;? that the change of his temper having 
commenced with his exaltation, there were no 


1 Probably the son of him who perished in the ty- 
ranny of Marius. 
2 Plutarch. in Sylla. 


while he was suffered to retain his power. His 
daring spirit, his address, his cunning, and his 
ascendant over the minds of men, rendered the 
prospect of a deliverance, if not desperate, ex- 
tremely remote. The republic seemed to be ex 
tinguished for ever ; and if the rage of blood, after 
the first heat of the massacre, appeared to abate, 
it was stayed only for want of victims, not from 
any principle of moderation, or sentiment of 
clemency. 

Such was the aspect of affairs, and the grounds 
of terror conceived even by those who were in- 
nocent of the late disorders ; but to those who had 
reason to fear the resentment of the victor, the 
prospect was altogether desperate. Norbanus, 
having fled to Rhodes, received at that place an 
account of the proscriptions, and, to avoid being 
delivered up, killed himself. Carbo, being in Si- 
cily, endeavoured to make his escape from thence, 
but was apprehended by Pompey, and killed. All 
the ordinary offices of state were vacated by 
the desertion or death of those who had filled or 
usurped them. 

Sylla had hitherto acted as master, without any 
other title than that of the sword; and it was 
now thought necessary to supply the defect. He 
retired from the city, that the senate might as- 
semble with the more appearance of freedom. 
To name an interrex was the usual expedient 
for restoring the constitution, and proceeding to 
elections in a legal form after the usual time had 
elapsed, or when by any accident the ordinary 
succession to office had failed. Valerius Flaccus 
was named. To him Svlla gave intimation, that, 
to resettle the commonwealth, a dictator, for an 
indefinite term, should be appointed, and made 
offer of his own services for this purpose. These 
intimations were received as commands. Flac- 
cus, having assembled the people, moved for an 
act to vest Sylla with the title of dictator, which 
gave him a discretionary power over the persons, 
fortunes, and lives of all the citizens. 

No example of this kind had taken place for a 
hundred and twenty years preceding this date. 
In the former part of this period, the jealousy of 
the aristocracy, and, in the latter part of it, the 
negative of the tribunes, had always prevented a 
measure from which they severally apprehended 
some danger to themselves. It was now revived 
in the person of Sylla with unusual solemnity, 
and ratified by an act of the people, in which they 
yielded up at once all their own claims to the 
sovereignty, and submitted to monarchy for an 
indefinite time. Sylla having named Valerius 
Flaccus for his heutenant or commander of the 
horse, returned to the city, presenting a sight that. 
was then unusual, a single person, preceded by 
four-and-twenty lictors, armed with the axe and 
the rods; andit was not doubted that these ensigns 
of magistracy were to be employed, not for pa- 
rade, but for serious execution, and were speedily 
to be stained with the blood of many citizens, 
whom the sword had spared ‘The dictator, being 
attended likewise by a numerous military guard, 
in order that the city, in all matters in which it 
was not necessary for himself to interpose, might 
still enjoy the benefit of the usual forms, he di- 
rected the people to assemble, and to fill up the 
ordinary lists of office. 

Lucretius Offella, the officer who had com- 
manded in the reduction of Preneste, presuming 


142 ` 


on his favour with the dictator, and on his con- 
sequence with the army, offered himself for the 
consulate. Being commanded by Sylla to desist, 
he still continued his canvass, and was, by order 
of the dictator, put to death, while he solicited 
votes in the streets. A tumult immediately arose ; 
the centurion, who executed this order against 
Offella, was seized, and, attended by a great con- 
course of people, was carried before the dictator. 
Sylla heard the complaint with great composure, 
told the multitude who crowded around him, that 
Offella had been slain by his orders, and that the 
centurion must therefore be released. He then 
dismissed them, with this homely but menacing 
apologue. “ A countryman at his plough, feel- 
ing himself troubled with vermin, once and again 
made a halt to pick them off his jacket; but be- 
ing molested a third time, he threw the jacket, 
with all its contents, into the fire. Beware,” he 
said, “of the fire; provoke me not a third time.”! 
Such was the tone of a government, which, from 
this example, was likely to be fatal to many who 
had concurred in the establishment of it, as well 
as to those of the opposite party. 

Sylla, soon after his elevation to 


U. C. 672. the station of dictator, proceeded to 

> make his arrangements and to new- 
T ee model the commonwealth. ‘The ar- 
Cin. O my? appeared to have the first or 
Dolabella. preferable claim to his attention. He 


accordingly proposed to reward them 
by a gift of all the lands which had been forfeited 
by the adherents of the opposite party. Spoletum, 
Interamna, Preneste, Fluentia, Nola, Sulmo, 
Volaterra, together with the countries of Sam- 
nium and Lucania, were depopulated to make 
way for the legions who had served under him- 
self in the reduction of his enemies. In these 
new inhabitants of Italy, whose prosperity de- 
pended on his safety, he had a guard to his person, 
and a sure support to his power. By changing 
their condition from that of soldiers to land- 
holders and peasants, he dispelled, at the same 
time, that dangerous cloud of military power, 
which he himself or his antagonists had raised 
over the commonwealth, and provided for the 
permanency of any reformations he was to intro- 
duce into the civil establishment. The troops, 
from soldiers of fortune, became proprietors of 
land, and interested in the preservation of peace. 
In this manner, whatever may have been his in- 
tention in this arbitrary act of power, so cruel to 
the innocent sufferers, if there were any such, 
the measure had an immediate tendency to ter- 
minate the public confusion. Its future conse- 
quences, in pointing out to new armies, and to 
their ambitious leaders, a way to supplant their 
fellow-citizens in their property, and to practise 
usurpations more permanent than that of Sylla, 
were probably not then foreseen. 

The next act of the dictator appears more en- 
tirely calculated for the security of his own person. 
A body of ten thousand men, lately the property 
of persons involved in the ruin of the vanquished 
party, having their freedom and the right of citi- 
zens conferred on them, were enrolled promis- 
cuously in all the tribes; and as the enfranchised 
slave took the name of the person from whom he 


1 Appian. in Bell. Civil. lib. i. Plutarch.in Sylla. 
2 It appears that Livy reckoned forty-seven legions, 
Epitome, lib. 1xxxix. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox I. 


received his freedom, these new citizens became 
an accession to the family of the Cornelii, and in 
every tumult were likely to be the sure partizans 
of Sylla, and the abettors of his power. They 
had received a freedom which was connected 
with the permanency of his government, and 
foresaw, that, if the leaders of the opposite party, 
in whose houses they had served, should be re- 
stored, they themselves must return into the con- 
dition of slaves; and they accordingly became an 
additional security to the government which their 
patron was about to establish. 

So far Sylla seemed to intend the security of. 
his own person, and the stability of his govern- 
ment; but in all his subsequent institutions, he 
had a view to restore the aristocracy in its legis- 
lative. and judicative capacity, to provide a pro- 
per supply of officers for conducting the accumu- 
lated affairs of the commonwealth, to furnish 
hands for every department, and to guard against 
the growing depravity of the times, by extend- 
ing and securing the execution of the laws. He 
began with filling up the rolls of the senate which 
had been greatly reduced by the war, and by the 
sanguinary policy of the parties who had prevail- 
ed in their turns. He augmented the number 
of this body to five hundred; taking the new 
members from the equestrian order, but leaving 
the choice of them to the people. 

The legislative power of the se- 
nate, and the judicative power of its 
members were restored. The law 
that was provided for the last of 
these purposes consisted of different clauses. By 
the first clause it was enacted, that none but sen- 
ators, or those who were entitled to give their 
opinion in the senate,? should be put upon any 
jury or list of the judges.4 By the second, that, 
of the judges so selected, the parties should not 
be allowed to challenge or reject above three. 

By a third clause it was provided, that judg- 
ment, in trials at law, should be given either by 
ballot, or openly, at the option of the defendant ; 
and by a separate regulation, that the nomination 
of officers to command in the provinces, with the 
title of proconsul, should be committed to the 
senate. 

During the late tribunitian usurpation, the 
whole legislative and executive power had, under 
pretence of vesting those prerogatives in the as- 
sembly of the tribes, been seized by the tribunes. 
But Sylla restored the ancient form of assembling 
the people by centuries, and reduced the tribunes 
to their defensive privilege of interposing by a 
negative against any act of oppression; and he 
deprived them of their pretended right to propose 
laws, or to harangue the people. He moreover 
added, that none but senators could be elected into 
the office of tribune; and, to the end that ne 
person of a factious ambition might choose this 
station, he procured it to be enacted, that no one 
who had borne the office of tribune could after- 
wards be promoted into any other rank of the 
magistracy. i 

With respect to the offices of state, this new 
founder of the commonwealth revived the obso- 
lete law which prohibited the re-election of any 
person into the consulate, till after an interval of 


` 


Ler de Ju- 
diciis. 


3 All the officers of state, even before they were pu 
upon the rolls, were entitled to speak in the senate. 
4 Tacit. Annal. lib. xi. Cic. pro Cliento. 


Cuar. VIL] 


ten years; and enacted, that none could be elect- 
ed consul till after he had been questor, edile, 
and prætor. He augmented the number of præ- 
tors from six to eight ; that of questors to twenty ; 
and, to guard against the disorders which had 
recently afflicted the republic, declared it to be 
treason for any Roman officer, without the au- 
thority of the senate and people, to go beyond the 
limits of his province, whether with or without 
an army, to make war, or to invade any foreign 
nation whatever. 

He repealed the law of Domitius relating to 
the election of priests, and restored to the college 
the entire choice of their own members. 

He made several additions to the criminal law, 
by statutes against subornation, forgery, wilful 
fire, poisoning, rape, assault, extortion, and for- 
cibly entering the house of a citizen ; anda statute 
making it penal to be found with deadly weapons 
of any sort. To all these he added a sumptuary 
law, of which the tenor is not precisely known ; 
but it appears to have regulated the expense at 
ordinary’ meals and at funerals, and to have like- 
wise settled the price of provisions. 

These laws were promulgated at certain inter- 
vals, and intermixed with the measures which 
were taken to restore the peace of the empire. 
In order to finish the remains of the civil war, 
Pompey had been sent into Sicily and Africa, 
and Č. Annius Luscus into Spain. In this pro- 
vince, Sertorius had taken arms for the Marian 
faction ; but being attacked by the forces of Sylla, 
and ill supported at first by the Spaniard, lie 
fled into Africa. From thence, hearing that tle 
Lusitanians were disposed to take arms against 
the reigning party at Rome, he repassed the sea, 
put himself at their head, and in this situation 
was able, for ‘some years, to find occupation for 
the arms of the republic, and for its most experi- 
enced generals. 

Soon after the departure of Sylla from Asia, 
Murena, whom he had left to command in that 
province, found a pretence to renew the war 
with Mithridates; and, having ventured to pass 
the Halys, was defeated by that prince, and af- 
terwards arraigned as having infringed the late 
treaty of peace. Sylla listened to this accusation, 
lara the conduct of Murena, and sent 
first A. Gabinius, and afterwards Minucius Ther- 
mus, to supersede him in the province. 

Mean time Sylla himself exhibited a splendid 
triumph on account of his victories in Asia and 
Greece. ‘The procession lasted two days. On 
the first, he deposited in the treasury fifteen 
thousand pondo of gold, and a hundred and fif- 
teen thousand pondo of silver ;7 on the second 
day thirteen thousand pondo of gold,® and seven 
thousand pondo of silver.? There was nothin 
that had any reference to his victory in the civi 
war, except a numerous train of senators, and 
other citizens of distinction, who, having resorted 
to his camp for protection, had been restored by 
him to their estates, and their dignities, and now 
followed his chariot, calling him father, and the 
deliverer of his country. 

Upon the return of the elections, Sylla was 
again chosen consul, together with Q. Cacilius 


5 Gellius, lib. ii c. 24. 

6 Reckoning the pondo at ten ounces, and 42. an 
ounce, this willmake about 600,0007. 

7 About 287,5007. 8 About 520,0002. 

9 About 140,0007. Plin. lib. xxxiii. initio. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


143 


U. ©. 673. Metellus. The latter was destined 
L. Corn. Sylla, at the expiration of his office, to 
Q. Cecil. Me- command against Sertorius in Spain. 
tell. Pius. Sylla himself still retained the dic- 

tatorial power, and was employed 
in promulgating some of the acts of which the 
chief have been mentioned. 

Pompey having, in the preceding year, by the 
death of Carbo, and the dispersion of his party, 
finished the remains of the civil war in Sicily, 
was now ordered by the senate to transport his 
army into Africa. There Domitius, a leader of 
the opposite faction, had erected his standard, 
assembled some remains of the vanquished party, 
and received all the fugitives who crowded for 
refuge to his camp. Pompey accordingly depart- 
ed from Sicily, leaving the command of that island 
to Memmius, and embarked his army, consisting 
of six legions, in two divisions; one landed at 
Utica, the other in the bay of Carthage. Having 
come to an engagement with Domitius, wlio had 
been joined by Jarbas, an African prince, he ob- 
tained a complete victory over their united forces, 
and afterwards penetrated, without any resis- 
tance, into the kingdom of Numidia, which, 
though dependant on the Romans, had not yet 
been reduced to the form of a province. 

The war being ended in this quarter, Sylla 
thought proper to supersede Pompey in the pro- 
vince, and ordered him to disband his army, re- 
serving only one legion, with which he was to 
wait for his successor. The troops were greatly 
incensed at this order; and, thinking themselves 
equally entitled to settlements with the legions 
who were lately provided for in Italy, refused to 
lay down their arms. They earnestly intreated 
their general to embark for Rome, where they 
~~ to make him master of tle government. 

his young man, with a moderation which he 
continued to support in the height of his ambi- 
tion, withstood the temptation, and declared to 
the army, that, if they persisted in their purpose, 
he must certainly die by his own hands ; that he 
would not do violence to the government of his 
country, nor be the object or pretence of a civil 
war. If in reality, he had encouraged this mu- 
tiny, it was only that he might have the honour 
of reclaiming i soldiers, and of rejecting their 
offer. ‘The ambition of this singular person, as 
will appear from many passages of his life, led 
him to aim at consideration more than power. 

While Pompey was endeavouring to bring the 
troops to their duty, a report was carried to 
Rome, that he had actually revolted, and was 
preparing, with his army, to make a descent upon 
Italy. “It appears to be my fate,” said Sylla, 
“in my old age, to fight with boys; and he 
was about to recall the veterans to fg standard, 
when the truth was discovered, and the part 
which Pompey had acted was properly represent- 
ed. The merit of this young man on that occa 
sion was the greater, that he himself was unwill- 
ing to i the army before they should return 
into Italy to attend a triumph, which he hoped to 
obtain; and that the resolution he took to com- 
ply with his orders, proceeded from respect to the 
senate, and the authority of the state. 

Sylla, won by the behaviour of Pompey on 
this occasion, was inclined to dispense with his 
former commands, and, accordingly, moved the 
assembly of the people, that the legions serving in 
Africa might return into Italy. 


144 


This motion was opposed by C. Herennius, 
tribune of the people, who ventured to employ 
the prerogative of his office, however impaired, 
against the power of the dictator. But Sylla per- 
sisted; obtained a law to authorize Pompey to 
enter with his army into Italy; and when he 
drew near the city, went forth with a numerous 
body of the senate to receive him. On this occa- 
sion, it is said, that, by calling him the Great 
Pompey, Sylla fixed a designation upon him, 
which, in the Roman way of distinguishing per- 
sons by nicknames, whether of contempt or re- 
spect, continued to furnish him with a title for 
life. The times were wretched when armies 
stated themselves in the commonwealth as the 
partizans of their leader, and when the leader, by 
not betraying his country, was supposed to per- 
form a great action. 

Pompey, upon this occasion, laid claim to a 
triumph. Syila at first opposed it as being con- 
trary to the rule and order of the commonwealth, 
which rescrved this honour for persons who had 
attained to the rank of consul or pretor; but he 
afterwards complied, being struck, it is said, with 
a mutinous saying of this aspiring young man, 
bidding him recollect, that there were more per- 
sons disposed to worship the rising than the 
setting sun. 

In the triumph which Pompey accordingly ob- 
tained, he meant to have entered the city ona 
carriage drawn by elephants; but these animals 
could not pass abreast through the gates. His 

»donation to the troops falling short of their expec- 
tation, and they havmg murmured and even 
threatened to mutiny, he said, the fear of losing 
his triumph should not affect him; that he would 
instantly disband the legions, rather, than com- 
ply with their unreasonable demands. This 
check, given to the presumption of the army by 
an officer so young and so aspiring, gave a gene- 
ral satisfaction. P. Servilius, a senator of ad- 
vanced age, said, upon this occasion, “ That the 
young man had at last deserved his triumph and 
his title.” 

Pompey, by his vanity in demanding a triumph 
contrary to the established order of the common- 
wealth, had impaired the lustre of his former ac- 
tions; by this last act of magnanimity, in re- 
straining the insolence of the troops, he forfeited 
the affections of the army ; and in both these cir- 
cumstances together, gave a complete specimen 
and image of his whole life. With too much 
respect for the republic to employ violent means 
for its ruin, he was possessed by a vanity and a 
jealousy of his own personal consideration, which, 
in detail, perpetually led him to undermine its 
foundations. 


U. C. 674. 


P. Servilius, 
Appius Clau- 
dius. 


Upon the return of the elections, 
Sylla was again destined for one of 
the consuls; but he declined this 
piece of flattery, and directed the 
choice to fall on P. Servilius and 
Appius Claudius. Soon after these 
magistrates entered on the discharge of their 
trust; the dictator appeared, as usual, in the 
forum, attended by twenty-four lictors; but, in- 
stead of proceeding to any exercise of his power, 
made a formal resignation of it, dismissed his 
retinue, and having declared to the people, that, 
if any one had any matter of charge against lim, 
he was ready to answer it, continued to walk in 
the streets in the character of a private man, and 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox I. 


afterwards retired to his villa near Cumæ, where 
he exercised himself in hunting.! 

This resignation throws a new light on the 
character of Sylla, and leads to a favourable con- 
struction of some of the most exceptionable parts 
of his conduct. When, with the help of the 
comment it affords, we look back to the esta- 
blishments he made while in power, they appear 
not to be the acts of a determined usurper, but 
to be fitted for a republican government, and for 
the restoration of that order which the violence 
and corruption of the times had suspended. 

That he was actuated by a violent resentment 
of personal wrongs, cannot be questioned; but it 
is likewise evident, that he felt on proper occa- 
sions for the honour and preservation of his coun- 
try, in the noblest sense of these words. In his 
first attack of the city, with a military force, his 
actions showed, that he meant to rescue the re- 
public from the usurpations of Marius, not to 
usurp the government himself. When he re- 
turned into Italy from the Mithridatic war, the 
state of parties already engaged in hostilities, and 
the violence done to the republic by those who 
pretended to govern it, will abundantly justify his 
having had recourse to arms, For the massacre 
which followed, it may be shocking to suppose 
that the evils of human life can require such a 
remedy; but the case was singular, exposed to 
disorders which required violent remedies, beyond 
what is known in the history of mankind, a 
populous city, the capital of a large country, 
whose inhabitants still pretended to act in a col- 
lective body, of whom every member would be 
a master, none would be a subject, become the 
joint sovereigns of many provinces, ready to spurn 
at all the institutions which were provided for the 
purposes of government over themselves, and at 
all the principles of justice and order which were 
require to regulate their government of others 
Where the gangrene spread in such a body, it 
was likely to require the amputation-knife. Men 
rushed into crimes in numerous bodies, or were 
led in powerful factions to any species of evil 
which suited their demagogues. Whatever may 
have heen Sylla’s choice among the instruments 
of reformation and cure, it is likely that the 
sword alone was that on which he could rely; 
and he used it like a person anxious to effect its 
purpose, not to recommend his art to those on 
whom it was to be practised. 

In his capacity of a political reformer, he had 
to work on the dregs of a corrupted republic; and 
although the effect fell short of what is ascribed 
to fabulous legislators and founders of states, yet 
to none ever were ascribed more tokens of mag 
nanimity and greatness of mind. He was supe- 
rior to the reputation even of his own splendid 
actions; and, from simplicity or disdain, mixed 
perhaps with superstition, not from affected mo- 
desty, attributed his success to the effects of his 
good fortune and to the favour of the gods. 
While he bestowed on Pompey the title of 
Great, he himself was content with that of For 
tunate. He was a man of letters, and passed the 
early part of his life in a mixture of dissipation 
and study. He wrote his own memoirs, or a 
journal of his life, often quoted by Plutarch, and 
continued it to within a few days of his death. A 
work possibly of little elegance, and even tainted, 


1 Appian. Bell Civ. lib. i. 


Cuar. VIL] 


as we are told, with superstition; but more curi- 
ous surely than many volumes corrected by the 
labours of retired study. 

When tired of his youthful amusements, he 
sued for the honours of the state; but with so 
little appearance of any jealous or impatient am- 
bition, that, if he had not been impelled by pro- 
vocations into the violent course he pursued, it is 
probable that he would have been contented with 
the usual career of a prosperous senator; would 
have disdained to encroach on the rights of his 
fellow-citizens, as much as he resented the en- 
croachments that were made on his own, and 
never would have been heard of but on the rolls 
of the consuls, and in the record of his triumphs. 
But fortune destined him for a part still more 
conspicuous, and in which, it may be thought, 
although none ever less studied the unnecessary 
appearances of humanity or a scrupulous mo- 
rality, none ever more essentially served the per- 
sons with whom he was connected. : 

With respect to such a personage, circum- 
stances of a trivial nature become subjects of at- 
tention. His hair and eyes, it is said, were of a 
light colour, his complexion fair, and his counte- 
nance blotched. He was, by the most probable 
accounts, four years old at the time of the sedition 
of Tiberius Gracchus, and seventeen at the death 
of Caius Gracchus; so that he might have per- 
ceived at this date the effect of tribunitian sedi- 
tions, and taken the impressions from which he 
acted against them. He served the office of 
questor under Marius in Africa at thirty-one; 
was consul for the first time at forty-nine or 
fifty ;2 was dictator at fifty-six; resigned when 
turned of fifty-eight; and died, yet under sixty, 
in the year which followed that of his resignation. 

There remained in the city, at his death, a 
numerous body of new citizens who bore his 
name: in the country a still more numerous body 
of veteran officers and soldiers, who held estates 
by his gifts: numbers throughout the empire, 
who owed their safety to his protection, and who 


— 


2 Vel. Pater. lib. ii, c. 17. 
T 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


145 


ascribed the existence of the commonwealth itself 
to the exertions of his great ability and courage: 
numbers who, although they were offended with 
the severe exercise of his power, yet admired the 


!magnanimity of his resignation. 


When he was no longer an object of flattery, 
his, corpse was carried in procession through 
Italy at the public expense. The fasces, and 
every other ensign of honour, were restored to 
the dead. Above two thousand golden crowns 
were fabricated in haste, by order of the towns 
and provinces he had protected, or of the private 
persons he had preserved, to testify their venera- 
tion for his memory. Roman matrons, whom it 
might be expected his cruelties would have affect- 
ed with horror, lest every other sentiment in that 
of admiration, crowded to his funeral, and heap- 
ed the pile with perfumes. His obsequies were 
performed in the Campus Martius. ‘The tomb 
was marked by his own directions with the fol- 
lowing characteristical inscription: “ Here lies 
Sylla, who never was outdone in good offices by 
his friend, nor in acts of hostility by his enemy.’4 
His merit or demerit in the principal transactions 
of his life may be variously estimated. His hav- 
ing slain so many citizens in cold blood, and with- 
out any form of law, if we imagine them to have 
been innocent, or if we conceive the republic to 
have been in a state to allow them a trial, must 
be considered as monstrous or criminal in the 
highest degree: but if none of these suppositions 
were just, if they were guilty of the greatest 
crimes, and were themselves the authors of that 
lawless state to which their country was reduced 
his having saved the republic from the hands of 
such ruffians, and purged it of the vilest dreg that 
ever threatened to poison a free state, may be 
considered as meritorious. To satisfy himself, 
who was neither solicitous of praise nor dreaded 
censure, the strong impulse of his own mind, 
guided by indignation and the sense of necessity, 
was probably sufficient. 


3 Appian.de Bell. Civ. lib. i. Plutarch. in Sylla. 


4 Plutarch.in Sylla, fine. 


THE 


HISTORY 


OF 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


OF THE 


ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


BOOK III. 


CHAPTER I. 


State of the Commonwealth and Numbers of the People—Characters of Persons who began to 
appear in the Times of Sylla—Faction of Lepidus—Sertorius harbours the Marian Party in 
Spain—lIs attacked by Metellus and Pompey—His Death, and final Suppression of the Party— 
First Appearance of C. Julius Cesar— Tribunes begin to trespass on the Laws of Sylla— Pro- 
gress of the Empire—Preparations of Mithridates—War with the Romans—Irruption into 
Bithynia—NSiege of Cyzicus—Raised—Flight of Mithridates—Lucullus carries the War into 
Pontus—Rout and Dispersion of the Army of Mithridates—His flight into Armenia— Conduct 


of Lucullus in the Province of Asia. 


THE public was so much occupied with the 
contest of Sylla and his antagonists, that little 
else is recorded of the period in which it took 
place. Writers have not given us any distinct 
account of the condition of the city, or of the 
number of citizens. As the state was divided into 
two principal factions, the office of censor was be- 
come too important for either party to entrust it 
with their opponents, or even in neutral hands. 
The leaders of every faction, in their turn, made 
up the rolls of the people, and disposed, at their 
pleasure, of the equestrian and senatorian dig- 
nities. 

At a survey of the city, which is mentioned by 
Livy,! preceding the admission of the Italians on 
the rolls of the people, the number of citizens was 
three hundred and ninety-four thousand three 
hundred and thirty-six. At another survey, which 
followed soon after that event, they amounted, 
according to Eusebius, to four hundred and sixty- 
three thousand :? and it seems that the whole 
accession of citizens from the country made no 
more than sixty-eight thousand six hundred and 
sixty-four. The great slaughter of Romans and 
Italians, in which it is said that three hundred 
thousand men were killed, preceding the last of 
these musters, and the difficulty of making com- 
plete and accurate lists when the citizens were so 
much dispersed, will account for the seemingly 
small increase of their numbers. 

In this period were born, and began to enter 


1 Liv. lib. ee 2 Euseb. in Chronico. 


a 


on the scene of public affairs, those persons whose 
conduct was now to determine the fate of the re- 
public. Pompey had already distinguished him- 
self, and was a person of real consequence. He 
had been educated in the camp of his father, and, 
by accident, at a very early age; and before he 
had attained to any of the ordinary civil or poli- 
tical preferments, commanded an army. Cicero, 
being of the same age, began to be distinguished 
at the bar. He pleaded, in the second consulate 
of Sylla, the cause of Roscius A merinus, in which 
he was led to censure the actions of Chrysogonus 
and other favourites of the dictator, and, by his 
freedom in that instance, gained much honour to 
himself. 

Cesar, now connected with the family of Cinna, 
whose daughter he had married, and being nearly 
related to the elder Marius, who had married his 
aunt, narrowly escaped the sword of the prevail- 
ing party. Being commanded to separate from 
his wife, he retained her in defiance of this order, 
and for his contumacy was put in the list of the 
proscribed. He was saved, however, by the in- 
tercession of some common friends, whose re- 
quest in his favour Sylla granted, with that 
memorable saying, “Beware of him: there is 
many a Marius in the person of that young 
man.” A circumstance which marked at once 
the penetration of Sylla, and the early appear- 
ances of an extraordinary character in Cesar. 

Marcus Porcius, afterwards named Cato of Utica, 
was about three years younger than Cesar, and 
being early an orphan, was educated in the house 


Cuar. I.] 


of an uncle, Livius Drusus. While yet a child, 
listening to the conversation of the times, he 
learned that the claim of the Italian allies, then 
in agitation, was dangerous to the Roman com- 
monwealth. Pompedius Silo, who managed the 
claim for the Italians, amusing himself with the 
young Cato, pressed him with caresses to inter- 
cede with his uncle in their behalf; and, finding 
that he was not to be won by flattery, likewise 
tried in vain to intimidate him by threatening to 
throw him from the window. “If this were a 
man,” he said, “I believe we should obtain no 
such favour.” In the height of Sylla’s military 
executions, when his portico was crowded with 
persons, who brought the heads of the proscribed 
to be exchanged for the reward that was offered 
for them, Cato being carried by his tutor to pay 
his court, asked, if “no one hated this man enough 
_ to killhim?’ “ Yes, but they fear him still more 
_ than they hate him.” “ Then give me a sword,” 
said the boy, “and I will kill him.” Such were 
the early indications of characters which after- 
wards became so conspicuous in the common- 
wealth. 

With the unprecedented degradation of the tri- 
bune Octavius, and the subsequent murder of 
Tiberius Gracchus, began among the parties at 
Rome, a scene of injuries and retaliations, with 
intervals of anarchy and violent usurpation, which 
must have speedily ended in the ruin of the com- 
monwealth, if the sword had not passed at last 
into hands that employed it for the restoration of 
public order, as well as for the avenging of pri- 
vate wrongs. 

It is indeed probable, that none of the parties 
in these horrid scenes had a deliberate intention 
to subvert the government, but all of them treated 
the forms of the commonwealth with too little re- 
spect: and to obtain some revenge of the wrongs 
which they themselves apprehended or endured, 
did not scruple in their turn to violate the laws 
of their country. But to those who wished to 
preserve the commonwealth, the experience of 
fifty years was now sufficient to show, that at- 
tempts to restore the laws by illegal methods, and 
to terminate animosities by retorted injuries and 
provocations, were extremely vain. The excess 
of the evil had a tendency to exhaust its scurce, 
and parties began to nauseate the draught of 
which they had been made so plentifully to 
drink. There were, neverthcless, some dregs in 
the bottom of the cup, and the supplies of faction 
which were brought by the rising generation, 
were of a mixture more dangerous than those of 
the former age. The example of Sylla, who 
made himself lord of the commonwealth by means 
of a military force, and the security with which 
he held his usurpation during pleasure, had a 
more powerful effect in-exciting the thirst of do- 
minion, than the political uses which he made 
of his power, or his magnanimity in resigning it, 
had to restrain or to correct the effects of that 
dangerous precedent. Adventurers accordingly 
arose, who, without provocation, and equally in- 
different to the interests of party as they were to 
those of the republic, proceeded, with a cool and 
deliberate purpose, to gratify their own ambition 
and avarice, in the subversion of the government 
of their country. 

While Sylla was yet alive, Æmi- 
U. C. 675. lius Lepidus, a man of profligate 
ambition, but of mean capacity, sup- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


147 


M. JEm. Lepi- 
dus, Q. Lut. 
Catulus, Cons. 


ported by the remains of the popu- 
lar faction, stood for the consulate, 
and was chosen, together with Q. 
Lutatius Catulus, the son of him who, with Ma- 
rius, triumphed for their joint victory over the 
Cimbri, and who afterwards perished by the or- 
ders of that usurper. 

Pompey had openly declared for Lepidus, and 
was told upon that occasion by Sylla, that he was 
stirring the embers of a fire which would in the 
end consume the republic. After the death of 
Sylla it appeared, from a mark of disapprobation 
well known to the Romans, that of not being 
mentioned in his will, that Pompey had lost his 
esteem. This prudent young man, however, in 
opposition to Lepidus and others, who wished to 
insult the memory of Sylla, was among the first 
in recommending and performing the honours 
that were paid to his remains. 

Lepidus, upon his accession to the consulate, 
moved for a recall of the proscribed exiles, a resti- 
tution of the forfeited lands, and a repeal of all 
the ordinances of the late dictator. This motion 
was formally opposed by Catulus ; and there en- 
sued between the two consuls a debate which 
divided the city. But the party of the senate pre- 
vailed to have the motion rejected. 

In the allotment of provinces the Transalpine 
Gaul had fallen to Lepidus; and, upon his mo- 
tion being rejected in tlie assembly of the people, 
although it had been for some time the practice 
for consuls to remain at Rome during their con- 
tinuance in office, he prepared to leave the city, 
in order to take possession of his province. This 
resolution, as it implied great impatience to be at 
the head of an army, gave some jealousy to the 
senate, who dreaded the designs of a consul desi- 
rous to aan military power with his civil autho- 
rity. hey recollected the progress of sedition 
which began with the Gracchi and Apuleius 
raising popular tumults, and ended with Marius 
and Sylla leading consular armies in the city, 
and fighting their battles in the streets. And in 
this point the decisive spirit of Sylla, although it 
may have snatched the commonwealth from the 
flames by which it began to be consumed, yet 
showed the way to its ruin in the means which 
he employed to preserve it. The senators were 
willing that Lepidus should depart from the city ; 
but they had the precaution to exact from him an 
oath, that he should not disturb the public peace. 
This oath, to avoid the appearance of any par- 
ticular distrust in him, they likewise pate from 
his colleague.‘ 

Lepidus, notwithstanding his oath, being ar- 
rived in his province, made preparations fur war ; 
and, thinking that his oath was binding only 
while he remained in office, determined to remain 
in Gaul at the head of his forces until the term 
was expired. The senate, in order to remove him 
from the army, appointed him to preside at the 
electign of his successor. But he neglected the 
summons which was sent to him for this purpose, 
and the year of the present consuls was by this 
means suffered to elapse, before any election was 
made. 

The ordinary succession being thus interrupted, 
the senate named Appius Claudius, as interrex, 
to hold the elections, and at the same time de- 
prived Lepidus of his command in Gaul. Upon 


3 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. i. 4 Ibid. 


148 


this information he hastened to Italy with the 
troops he had already assembled, and greatly 
alarmed the republic. The senate gave to Ap- 
pius Claudius, and to Catulus, in the quality of 
proconsul, the usual charge to watch over the 
safety of the state. These officers accordingly, 
without delay, collected a military force, while 
Lepidus advanced through Etruria, and publish- 
ed a manifesto, in which he invited all the friends 
of liberty to join him, and made a formal demand 
of being re-invested with the consular power. In 
opposition to this treasonable act of Lepidus, the 
senate republished the law of Plautius, by which 
the pretors were required, in the ordinary course 
of justice, to take cognizance of all attempts to 
levy war against the state, and joined to it an ad- 
ditional clause or resolution of their own, obliging 


those magistrates to receive accusations of trea- | 


son on holy-days, as well as on ordinary days 
of business. 


Mean time Lepidus advanced to the gates of | 


Rome, seized the Janiculum and one of the 
bridges that led to the city. He was met by Ca- 
tulus in the Campus Martius, repulsed and rout- 
ed. All his party dispersed; he himself fled to 
Sardinia, and soon after died. His son, a young 
man, with part of the army, retired to Alba, and 
was there soon after taken, and suffered for a 
treason in which he was engaged by his father. 
Marcus Brutus, the father of him who, in the 
continuation of these troubles, afterwards fell at 
Philippi, having joined with Lepidus in this rash 
and profligate attempt against the republic, was 
obliged at Mantua to surrender himself to Pom- 
pey, and, by his orders, was put to death. But 
the most considerable part of the army of Lepi- 
dus penetrated, under the conduct of Perpenna, 
into Spain, and joined Sertorius, who was now 
become the refuge of one party in its distress, as 
Sylla had formerly been of the other. In this 
province accordingly, while peace began to be 
restored in Italy, a source of new troubles was 
opening for the state. The prevailing party in 
the city was willing to grant an indemnity, and to 
suffer all prosecution, on account of the late of- 
fences, to drop; the extreme to which Sylla had 
carried the severity of his executions, disposing 
the minds of men to the opposite course of in- 
dulgence and mercy. 
efore the arrival of Lepidus with his army in 
Italy, Mithridates had sent to obtain from the 
senate a ratification of the treaty he had con- 
cluded with Sylla: but upon a complaint from 
Ariobarzanes, that the king of Pontus had not 
himself performed his part of that treaty by the 
complete restitution of Cappadocia, he was di- 
rected to give full satisfaction on this point before 
his negotiation at Rome could proceed, He ac- 
cordingly complied; but by the time his ambas- 
sador brought the report, the Romans were so 
much occupied by the war they had to maintain 
against Lepidus and his adherents, that they had 
no leisure for foreign affairs. This intelligence 
encouraged Mithridates to think of renewing the 
war. Sensible that he could not rely on a per- 
manent peace with the Roman republic, he had 
already provided an army, not so considerable in 
respect to numbers as that which he formerly 
had, but more fcrmidable by the order and dis- 
cipline he had endeavoured to introduce on the 
model of the legion. He flattered himself that 
the distraction under which the Romans now la- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II]. 


boured at home, would render them unable to 
resist his forces in Asia, and give him an oppor- 
tunity to remove the only obstruction that re- 
mained to his own conquests. He avoided, in 
the time of a negotiation, and without the pretext 
of a new provocation, to break out into open 
hostilities; but he encouraged his son-in-law Ti- 
granes, king of Armenia, to make war on the 
Roman allies in his neighbourhood, and thereby 
laid the foundation of a quarrel which he might 
either adopt or decline at pleasure. ‘This prince 
accordingly, being then building a city, under the 
name of Tigranocerta, for which he wanted in- 
habitants, made an incursion into the kingdom of 
Cappadocia, carried off from thence three hundred 
| thousand of the people to replenish his new set- 
| tlement. 
Soon after this infraction of the peace, Mith- 
| ridates, in order to have the co-operation of some 
| of the parties into which the Roman state was 
divided, entered into a treaty with Sertorius, and 
| wished, in concert with this general, to execute 
| the project of a march, by a route afterwards 
| practised by the barbarians who invaded the Ro- 
man empire. From the shores of the Euxine it 
appeared easy to pass over land to the Adriatic, 
and once more to repeat the operations of Pyrrlius 
and of Hannibal, by making war on the Romans 
in their own country. 

Sertorius, who had erected the standard of the 
republic in Spain, gave refuge to the Roman ex- 
iles from every quarter, and was now at the head 
of a formidable power, composed of Italians as 
well as natives of that country. By his birth and 
abilities he had pretensions to the highest prefer- 
ments of the state, and had been early distin- 
guished as a soldier, qualified either to plan or to 
execute. He was attached to Marius in the 
time of the Cimbric war, and became a party 
with this leader in his quarrel with Sylla. His 
animosity to the latter was increased by the mu- 
tual opposition of their interests in the pursuit of 
civil preferments. At the beginning of the civil 
war, Sertorius took an active part, but showed 
more respect to the constitution of his country, 
and more mercy to those who were opposed to 
him, than either of his associates Marius or Cin- 
na. When his party were in possession of the 
government, he was appointed to command in 
Spain, and after the ruin of their affairs in Italy, 
withdrew into that province. He was received 
asa Roman governor; but, soon after the other 
party prevailed in Italy, was attacked on their 
part by Caius Annius, who came with a proper 
force to dislodge him. He had established posts 
on the Pyrenees for the security of his province ; 
but the officer to whom they were entrusted be- 
ing assassinated, and the stations deserted, the 
enemy had free access on that side. Not in con- 
dition to maintain himself any longer in Spain, 
he embarked with what forces he had at Car- 
thagena, and continued for some years, with a 
small squadron of Cilician galleys, to subsist by 
the spoils of Africa and the contiguous coasts. 
In this state of his fortunes he formed a project 
to visit the Fortunate Islands, and if a settlement 
could be effected there, to bid farewell for ever to 
the Roman world; to its factions, its divisions, 
and its troubles. But while he was about to set 
sail in search of this famous retreat in the ocean, 
he received an invitation from the unsubdued 
natives of Lusitania to become their leader. At 


Cuar. I.] 


heir head his abilities soon made him conspicu- 
ous. He affected to consider the Lusitanians as 
the senate and people of Rome, treating the 
establishment of Sylla in Italy as a mere usurpa- 
tion. He himself took the ensigns of a Roman 
officer of state, selected three hundred of his fol- 
lowers, to whom he gave the title of senate, and 
in all his transactions with foreign nations, as- 
sumed the name and style of the Roman repub- 
lic. In treating with Mithridates he refused to 
cede the province of Asia, or to purchase the 
alliance of that prince by any concessions in- 
jurious to the Roman empire, of which he af- 
fected to consider himself and his senate as the 

legal head. 
While Sertorius was acting this farce, the re- 
hee of his formidable power, the late accession 
e had gained by the junction of some of the 
Marian forces under the command of Perpenna, 
and his supposed preparations to make a descent 
upon Italy, gave an alarm at Rome. Metellus 
had been some time employed against him in 
Spain; but being scarcely able to keep the field, 
his opposition tended only to augment the repu- 
tation of his antagonist. ‘The con- 


U.C.676. suls lately elected were judged un- 
D. Junius © {ual to this war, and the thoughts 
Brutus, ~ of all men were turned on Pom- 
Mam. Emtti- pey, who, though yet in no public 
as Livia- character, nor arrived at the legal 


age of state preferments, had the 
address on this, as on many other occasions, to 
make himself be pointed at as the only person 
who could effectually serve the republic. He was 
accordingly, with the title of proconsul, joined to 
Metellus in the conduct of the war in Spain! It 
no doubt facilitated the career of this young man's 
pretensions, that few men of distinguished abili- 
ties were now in view to sustain the fortunes of 
the republic. Such men, of whatever party, had 
always, in their turns, been the first victims of 
the late violent massacres ; and the party of Sylla, 
which was now the republic, when considered as 
a nursery of eminent men, had some disadvan- 
tage, perhaps in the superiority of its leader, who 
was himself equal to all its affairs, and taught 
others to confide and obey, not to act for them- 
selves. Pompey was not of an age to have suf- 
fered from this influence. He came into the party 
in its busiest time, and had been entrusted with 
“separate commands. He had already obtained 
for himself part of that artificial consideration 
which, though it cannot be supported without 
abilities, often exceeds the degree of merit on 
which it is founded; and this consideration to the 
end of his life he continued to augment with 
much attention and many concerted intrigues. 
He had a genius for war, and was now about to 
improve it in the contest with Sertorius, an ex- 
cellent master, whose lessons were rough but in- 
structive. 

Pompey, having made the levies destined for 
this service, passed the Alps by a new route, and 
was the first Roman general who made his way 
into Spain through Gaul and the Pyrenees. Soon 
after his arrival, a legion that covered the fora- 
gers of his army was intercepted and cut off by 
the enemy. Sertorius was engaged in the siege 
of Laura. Pompey advanced to relieve it. Ser- 


_ 1 Claudius, in making this motion, alluding to the 
insignificance of both consuls, said, that Pompey 
should be sent pro consulibus. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


149 


torius, upon his approach, took post on an emi- 
nence. Pompey prepared to attack him, and the 
besieged had hopes of immediate relief. But Ser- 
torius had made his disposition in such a manner, 
that Pompey could not advance without exposing 
his own rear to a party that was placed to attack 
him. “I will teach this pupil of Sylla,” he said, 
“to look behind as well as before him ;” and Pom- 
pey, seeing his danger, chose to withdraw, leaving 
the town of Laura to fall into the enemy’s hands, 
while he himself continued a spectator of the 
siege, and of the destruction of the place. After 
this unsuccessful beginning of the war, he was 
obliged to retire into Gaul for the winter.? 

The following year, Cn. Octa- 


U. C. 677. vius and C. Scribonius Curio be- 
Cn. Octavius, ig consuls, Pompey still remained 
C. Scribonius in his command; and, having re- 
Curio. passed the Pyrenees, directed his 


march to join Metellus. Sertorius 
lay on the Sucro,3 and wished to engage him be- 
fere the junction ; and Pompey, on his part, be- 
ing desirous to reap the glory of a separate victory, 
an action ensued, in which the wing on which 
Poinpey fought was defeated by Sertorius; but 
the other wing had the victory over Perpenna. 
As Sertorius was about to renew the action on 
the following day, he was prevented by the ar- 
rival of Metellus. “If the old woman had not 
interposed,” he said, “I should have whipt the 
boy, and sent him back to his schools at Rome.” 

This war continued about two years longer 
with various success, but without any memorable 
event, until it ended by the death of Sertorius, 
who, at the instigation of Perpenna, was betrayed 
and assassinated by a few of his own attendants. 
Perpenna, having removed Sertorius by this base. 
action, put himself at the head of the army, and 
endeavoured to keep them united, at least until 
he should be able to purchase his peace at Rome. 
He was, however, deserted by nunibers of his 
own people, and at last surprised by Pompey, and 
slain. He had made offers to disclose the secrets 
of the party, and to produce the correspondence 
which inany of the principal citizens at Rome 
held with Sertorius, inviting him to return into 
Italy, and promising to join him with a formidable 
power. ‘The letters were secured by Pompey, 
and, without being opened, were burned. So 
masterly an act of prudence, in a person who 
was yet considered as a young man, has been 
deservedly admired. It served to extinguish all 
the remains of the Marian faction, and reconciled 
men, otherwise disaffected, to a situation in 
which they were assured of impunity and con- 
cealment. 

While Pompey was thus gathering laurels in 
the field, C. Julius Cæsar, being about seven years 
younger, that is, twenty-three years of age, was 
returned from Asia; and to make some trial of 
his parts, laid an accusation against Dolabella, 
late proconsul of Macedonia, for oppression and 
extortion in his province, Cotta and Hortensius, 
appearing for the defendant, procured his acquit- 
tal. Cicero says, that he himself was then re- 
turned from a journey he lad made into Asia, 
and was present at this trial. The following year 
Cesar lett Rome, with intention to pass some time 
under a celebrated master of rhetoric at Rhodes. 


2 Plutarch. in Pompeio et Sertorio. Appian. Liv 
Obsequens. Frontinus Stratageni. lib. ii. c. 5. 
3 The Xucar, which falls into the Bay of Valentia. 


150 


In his way he was taken by pirates, and detained 
about forty days, until he found means to procure 
from Metellus a sum of fifty talents,! which was 
paid for his ransom. He had frequently told the 
pirates, while yet in their hands, that he would 
punish their insolence; and he now told them to 
expect the performance of his promise. Upon 
being set on shore, he assembled and armed some 
vessels on the coast, pursued and took his cap- 
tors. Leaving his prisoners where he landed, he 
hastened to Junius Silanus, the proconsul of 
Bithynia, and applied for an order to have them 
executed; but being refused by this officer, he 
made his way back with still greater despatch, 
and, before any instructions could arrive to the 
contrary, had the pirates nailed to the cross. 
Such lawless banditti had long infested the seas 
of Asia and of Greece, and furnished at times no 
inconsiderable employment to the arms of the re- 
public. Servilius Vatia, who afterwards bore the 
title of Isauricus, had lately been employed against 
them, and after clearing theseas, endeavoured like- 
wise to destroy or secure their ports and strong- 
holds on shore. They, nevertheless, recovered this 
blow, and continued to appear at intervals in new 
swarms, and to the great interruption of commerce | 
bysea, and of allthe communications in the empire. | 
Under the reformations of Sylla, which, by dis- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


arming the tribunitian power, in a great measure 
shut up the source of former disorders, the re- 
public was now restored to some degree of tran- 
quillity, and resumed its attention to the ordinary 
objects of peace. The bridge on the Tiber, which 
had been erected of wood, was taken down and 
rebuilt with stone; bearing the name of /Emi- 
lius, one of the questors under whose inspection 
the fabric had been reared; and as a public work 
of still greater consequence, it is mentioned, that 
a treatise on agriculture, the production of Mago 
a Carthaginian, and in the language of Carthage, 
was, by the express orders of the senate, now 
translated into Latin. At the reduction of Car- 
thage, the Romans were yet governed by hus- 
bandmen, and, amidst the literary spoils of that 
city, this book alone, consisting of twenty-eight 
rolls or volumes, was supposed to merit public 
attention, and was secured for the state. A 
number of persons, skilled in the Punic language, 
together with Silanus, who had the principal 
charge of the work, were employed in translat- 
ing it.? 

The calm, however, which the republic en- 
joyed under the ascendant of the aristocracy, was 
not altogether undisturbed. In the consulate of 
Cn. Octavius‘ and C. Scribonius Curio, the tri- 
bune Licinius made an attempt to recover the 
former powers of the office. He ventured, in 
presence of both the consuls, to harangue the 
people, and exhorted them to reassume their an- 
cient rights. As acircumstance which serves to 
mark the petulant boldness of these men, it is 
mentioned that the consul Octavius, on this occa- 
ston, being ill, was muffled up, and covered with 
a. dressing which brought flies in great numbers 
about him. His colleague Curio, having made 
a vehement speech, at the close of it, the tribune 
called out to Octavius, “You never can repay 
your colleague’s service of this day; if he had not 
been near you, while he made this speech, and beat | 
the air so much with his gesticulations, the flies 


1 Near to 10,0002. 2 Phin. lib. xvili.c. 3. 


[Boor IIT 


must by this time have eaten you up.’? The 
sequel is imperfectly known ; but the dispute ap 
pears to have been carried to a great height, and 
to have ended in a tumult, in which the tribune 
Licinius was killed. 

Upon a review of Sylla’s acts intended to re- 
store the authority of the senate, it may be ques- 
tioned, whether that clause in the law relating to 
the tribunes, by which all persons having accept- 
ed of this office were excluded from any further 
preferment in the state, may not have had an ill 
effect, and required correction. It rendered the 
tribunate an object only to the meanest of the 
senators, who, upon their acceptance of it, ceasin 
to have any pretensions to the higher offices o 
state, were, by this means, deprived of any inter- 
est in the government, and exasperated against 
the higher dignities of the commonwealth. Au- 

relius Cotta, one of the consuls that 


U. C. 678. succeeded Cn. Octavius and Curio, 
LOR: moved perhaps by this consider- 
C. Aurelius. ation, proposed to have that clause 
Cotta. repealed, and was warmly support- 


ed by the tribune Opimius, who, 

contrary to the prohibition lately enacted, ven- 
tured to harangue the people ; and for this offence, 
at the expiration of his office, was tried and con- 
demned.4 

By the defects which the people began to ap- 
prehend in their present institutions, or by the 
part which their demagogues began to take 
against the aristocracy, the Roman state, after 
a very short respite, began to relapse into its for- 
mer troubles, and was again to exhibit the curious 
spectacle of a nation divided against itself, broken 
and distracted in its councils, which nevertheless 
prevailed in all its operations abroad, and gained 
continual accessions of empire, under the effect 
of convulsions which shook the commonwealth 
itself to its base; and, what is still less to be par- 
alleled in the history of mankind, was to exhibit 
the spectacle of a nation, which proceeded in its 
affairs abroad with a success that may be imputed 
in a great measure to its divisions at home. 

War, in the detail of its operations, if not even 
in the formation of its plans, is more likely to 
succeed under single men than under numerous 
councils. The Roman constitution, though far 
from an arrangement proper to preserve domestic 
peace and tranquillity, was an excellent nursery 
of statesmen and warriors. To persons brought, 
up in this school, all foreign affairs were com- 
mitted with little responsibility and less control. 
The ruling passion, even of the least virtuous 
citizens, during some ages, was the ambition of 
being considerable, and of rising to the highest 
dignities of the state at home. They enjoyed 
the condition of monarchs in the provinces; bu 
they valued this condition only as it furnished 
them with the occasion of triumphs, and contri- 
buted to their importance at Rome. They were 
factious and turbulent in their competition for 
power and honours in the capital; but, in order 
the better to support that very contest, were faith- 
ful and inflexible in maintaining all the preten- 
sions of the state abroad. Thus Sylla, though 
deprived of his command by an act of the opposite 
party at Rome, and with many of his friends, 
who escaped from the bloody hands of their per- 


3 Cicero de Claris Oratoribus. _ ; 
4 Cicero, 3tio, in Verrem, et Pædianus, ibid 


Cuar. L] 


secutors, condemned and outlawed, still main- 
tained the part of a Roman officer of state, and 
prescribed to Mithridates, as might have been 
expected from him in the most undisturbed exer- 
cise of his trust. Sertorius, in the same manner, 
acting for the opposite faction, in some measure 
preserved a similar dignity of character, and 
refused to make concessions unworthy of the 
Roman republic. Contrary to the fate of other 
nations, where the state is weak, while the con- 
duct of individuals is regular ; here the state was 
in vigour, while the conduct of individuals was 
in the highest degree irregular and wild. 


The reputation, as well as the arms of the 


Romans, procured them accessions of territory 
without labour, and without expense. Kingdoms 
were bequeathed to them by will; as that of Per- 
PES formerly, by the will of Attalus; that of 
yrene by the will of Ptolemy Apion; and that 
of Bithynia, about this time, by the will of Nico- 
medes. To the same effect, princes and states, 
where they did not make any formal cession of 
their sovereignty, did somewhat equivalent, by 
submitting their rights to discussion at Rome, 
and by soliciting grants from the Romans of 
which the world now seenied to acknowledge 
the validity, by having recourse to them as the 
basis of tenures by which they held their posses- 
sions. In this manner, the sons of the last An- 
tiochus, king of Syria, stated themselves as sub- 
jects or dependents of the Roman people, having 
passed two years at Rome, waiting decisions of 
the senate, and soliciting a grant of the kingdom 
of Egypt, on which they. formed some pretensions. 
In es by these means, the Roman empire 
advanced on the ruin of those who had formerly 
opposed its progress. ‘The Macedonian line, in 
the monarchy of Syria, was now broke off, or 
extinct. The kingdom itself, consisting of many 
rovinces, began to be dismembered, on the de- 
eat of Antiochus at Sipylus, by the defection of 
provincial governors and tributary princes, who, 
no longer awed by the power of their former 
master, entered into a correspondence with the 
Romans, and were by them acknowledged as 
sovereigns. In this manner the states of Arme- 
nia, long subject to the Persians, and afterwards 
to the Macedonians, now became the seat of a 
new nionarchy under Tigranes. And, to com- 
plete this revolution, the natives of Syria, weary 
of the degeneracy and weakness of their own 
court, of the irregularity of the succession to the 
throne of their own kingdom; weary of the fre- 
quent competitions whieh involved them in blood, 
invited Tigranes to wield a sceptre which the 
descendants of Seleucus were no longer in con- 
dition to hold. This prince, accordingly, ex- 
tended his kingdom to both sides of the Euphrates, 
and held Syria itself as one of its divisions.5 
In these circumstances, the Romans were left 
undisturbed to re-establish their province in the 
Lesser Asia: and under the auspices of Servilius, 
who, from his principal acquisition in those parts, 
had the name Isauricus, were extending their 
limits on the side of Cilicia, and were hastening 
to the sovereignty of that coast, when their pro- 
gress was suddenly checked by the re-appearance 
of an enemy, who had already given them much 
trouble in that quarter. 


= 


ð Strabo. lib. xi. fine. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


I51 


Mithridates, king of Pontus, who appears to 
have revived in his own breast the animosities of 
Pyrrhus and of Hannibal against the Romans, 
had never ceased, since the date of his last mor- 
tifying treaty with Sylla, to devise the means of 
renewing the war. Having attempted in vain 
to engage Sylla in a league with himself against 
the Romans, he made a similar attempt on Ser- 
torius in Spain. Affecting to consider this fu- 
gitive, with his little senate, as heads of the 
republic, he pressed for a cession of the Roman 
province in Asia in his own favour, and in re- 
turn offered to assist the followers of Sertorius 
with all his forces in the recovery of Italy. In 
this negotiation, however, he found, as has been 
already remarked, that whoever’ assumed the 
character of a Roman officer of state, supported 
it with a like inflexible dignity. Sertorius re- 
fused to dismember the empire, but accepted of 
the proffered aid from Mithridates, and agreed to 
send him Roman officers to assist in the forma- 
tion and discipline of his army. 

The king of Pontus, now bent on correcting 
the error which is common in extensive and bar- 
barous monarchies, of relying entirely on num- 
bers, instead of discipline and military skill, pro- 

osed to form a more regular army than that 
which he had assembled in the former war; and, 
however little successful in liis endeavours, meant 
to rival his enemy in every particular of their 
discipline, in the use of their weapons, and in the 
form of their legion. With troops beginning to 
make these reformations, and amounting to one 
hundred and twenty thousand foot, and sixteen 
thousand horse, he declared war on the Romans, 
and, without resistance, took possession of Cap- 
padocia, and Phrygia, beyond the bounds they 
had set to his kingdom. As he was to act both 
by sea and by land, he began with customary 
oblations to Neptune and to Mars. To the first 
he made an offering of a splendid carriage, drawn 
by white horses, which he precipitated and sunk 
in the sea; to the other he made a sacrifice, 
which, as described by the historian,® filled the 
imagination more than any of the rites usually 
practised by ancient nations. The king, with 
his army, ascended the highest mountain on their 
route, formed on its summit a great pile of wood, 
of which he himself laid the first materials, and 
ordered the fabric to be raised in a a, 
form to a great height. The top was loaded with 
offerings of honey, milk, oil, wine, and perfumes. 
As soon as it was finished, the army around it 
began the solemnity with a feast, at the end of 
which the pile was set on fire, and in proportion 
as the heat increased, the army extended their 
circle, and came down from the mountain. ‘The 
flames continued to ascend for many days, and 
were seen, it is said, at the distauce of a thousand 
stadia, or above a hundred niles.’ 

After this solemnity was over, Mithridates en- 
deavoured to animate and to unite in a common 
zeal for his cause the different nations that were 
collected from remote parts of the empire, to form 
his army. For this purpose he enumerated the 
successes by which he had raised his kingdom to 
its’ present pitch of greatness, and represented 
the numerous vices of the enemy with whom he 
was now to engage, their divisions at home ana 


6 Appian. 7 Ibid. de Bell. Mithridat. 


152 


their oppression abroad, their avarice; and insati- 
able lust of dominion. 

The Romans were some time undetermined 
whom they should employ against this formidable 
enemy. Pompey, being still in Spain, saw with 
regret this service likely to fall to the share of 
another; and he had his partizans at Rome who 
would have gladly put off the nomination of any 
general to this command, until he himself could 
arrive with his army to receive it. He accord- 
ingly about this time wrote a letter to the senate, 
complaining, in petulant terms, of their neglect, 
and of the straits to which the troops under his 
command were reduced for want of pay and pro- 
visions, and threatening, if not speedily supplied, 
to march into Italy. The consul Lucullus, ap- 
prehending the consequence of Pompey’s pre- 
sence in Italy, at the head of an army, and wish- 
ing not to furnish him with any pretence for 
leaving his present province, had the army in 
Spain completely supplied, and, at the same time, 
took proper measures to support his own preten- 
sions to the command in Asia. From his rank 
as the consul in office, he had a natural claim to 
this station ; and from his knowledge of the coun- 
try and of the war! with this very enemy, in 
which he had already borne some part under Syl- 
la,2 was entitled to plead his qualifications and 
his merits. 

‘When the provinces came to be distributed, the 
difficulties which presented themselves in Asia 
were thought to require the presence of both the 
consuls. The kingdom of Bithynia, which had 
been lately bequeathed to the Romans, was in 
danger of being invaded before they could obtain 
a formal possession of this inheritance; at the 
same time that the enemy, by whom they were 
threatened, was not likely to limit his operations 
to the attack of that country. Of the consuls, 
Cotta was appointed to seize on the kingdom of 
Bithynia, and Lucullus to lead the army against 
Mithridates wherever else he should carry the 
war. Cotta set out immediately for his province. 
Lucullus, being detained in making the necessary 
levies, followed some time afterwards; but before 
his arrival in Asia, the king of Pontus had already 
invaded Bithynia, defeated the forces of Cotta, 
and obliged him to take refuge in Chalcedonia. 
The king of Pontus, being superior both by sea 
and by land, over-ran the country in the neigh- 
bourhood of this place; and, having broke the 
chain which shut up the mouth of the harbour, 
he entered and burnt some Roman gallies, which 
were stationed there. Not thinking it advisable 
to attack the town of Chalcedonia, he turned his 
forces against Cyzicus, a port on the Propontis, 
blocked up the place both by sea and by land; 


A Vide Ciceronis in Lucullo, c. 1 & 2. 

e man. in Lucull. initio. edit. Lond. 4to. vol. iii. 
p. 137. “ 

Cicero is often quoted to prove that Lucullus, at this 
time, was a mere novice in war, and owed the know- 
ledge by which he came to be distinguished, to specu- 
lation and study, not to experience. It is observed by 
lord Bolingbroke, that Cicero had an interest in hav- 
ing it believed, that great officers might be formed in 
this manner; and it is probable, that he affected to 
consider the part which was assigned to Lucullus by 
Sylla, as mere civil employment. He is mentioned as 
having charge of the coinage with which Sylla paid 
his army, and of the fleet with which he transported 
them into Asia: but it is not to be supposed, that 
these were the only operations confided by Sylla toa 
lieutenant of so much ability. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


and, being well provided with batterin engings 


to surrender, he continued the siege. 


[Boox III. 


and the other necessaries of a siege, he had hopes 
of being soon able to reduce it by storm. The 
inhabitants, nevertheless, prepared for their de- 
fence, in expectation of being speedily relieved by 
the Romans. 

Such was the state of affairs when Lucullus ar- 
rived in Asia; and having joined his new levies 
to the legions which had served under Fimbria, 
and to the other troops already in the province, 
he assembled an army of about thirty thousand 
men, with which he advanced to re-establish 
Cotta in his province, and to relieve the town of 
Cyzicus. ‘The king of Pontus, being elated by 
his successes, and by the superiority of his num- 
bers, gave no attention to the motions of Lucul- 
lus, suffered him to get possession of the heights 
in his rear, and to cut off his principal supplies 
of provisions and forage. ‘Trusting, however, 
that his magazines would not be exhausted be- 
fore he should have forced the town of Cyzicus 
But his 


engines not being well served, and the defence 


being obstinate, his army began to be distressed 


for want of provisions, and it became necessary 
to lessen his consumption. For this purpose he 
secretly moved away part of his cavalry. ‘These 
were intercepted by the Romans on their march, 
and cut off or dispersed; and the king being re- 


|duced with the remainder of his army to the 


greatest distress, embarked on board one of his 
gallies, ordered the army to force their way to 
Lampsacus, while he himself endeavoured to 
escape with his fleet. The army being attacked 
by Lucullus, the greater part of them perished in 
passing the Asopus and the Grannicus. The 
king himself, having put into Nicomedia, and 
from thence continued his voyage through the 
Bosphorus to the Euxine, was overtaken on that 
sea by a storm, and lost the greatest part of his 
fleet. His own galley being sunk, he himself 
narrowly escaped in a barge. 

The whole force with which the king of Pon- 
tus had invaded Bithynia, being thus dispelled 
like a cloud, Lucullus employed some time in re- 
ducing the towns into which any of the troops of 
Mithridates had been received; and having ef- 
fectually destroyed the remains of the vanquished 
army, took his route by Bithynia and Galatia 
towards Pontus. At his entrance into this king- 
dom was situated the town of Amysus, a con- 
siderable fortress on the coast of the Euxine, into 
which the king had thrown a sufficient force to 
retard his progress, Mithridates, under favour 
of the time he gained by the defence of this place, 
assembled a new army at Cabira, near the fron- 
tier of Armenia. Here he mustered about forty 
thousand foot, and a considerable body of horse, 
and was soliciting the Scythians, Armenians, 
and all the nations of that continent to his aid. 
Lucullus, in order to prevent, if possible, any fur- 
ther reinforcements to the enemy, committed the 
siege of Amysus to Murena, and advanced with 
his army into the plains of Cabira. On this 
ground the Roman horse received repeated checks 
from those of the enemy, and were kept in con- 
tinual alarm, until their general, having time to 
observe the country, avoided the plains, on which 
the king of Pontus, by means of his cavalry, was 
greatly superior. ‘Though very much straitened 
for provisions, Lucullus kept his position on the 
heights until the enemy should be forced to a 


Cuar. L] 


general action. The skirmishes which happened 
between the foraging parties drew considerable 
numbers from the respective armies to engage; 
and the troops of Mithridates, having been routed 
in one of these partial encounters, the king took 
a resolution to decamp in the night, and remove 
to a greater distance from the Romans. As soon 
as it was dark, the equipage and the attendants 
of the leading men in the cainp, to whom he had 
communicated this resolution, began to withdraw ; 
and the army, greatly alarmed with that appear- 
ance, was seized with a panic, and could not be 
restrained from flight. Horse and foot, and 
bodies of every description, crowded in disorder 
into the avenues of the camp, and were trod un- 
der foot, or in great numbers perislied by each 
others hands. Mithridates himself, endeavour- 
ing to stop and to undeceive them, wae carried 
off by the multitude. 

The noise of this tumult being heats w a great 
distance, and the occasion being kne~u in the 
Roman camp, Lucullus advanced with his army 
to take advantage of the confusion, in which the 
enemy were fallen, and by a vigorous attack put 
many to the sword, and hastened their dispersion. 

The king was, by one of his servants, with 
difficulty mounted on horseback, and must have 
been taken, if the pursuing party had not been 
amused in seizing some plunder, which he had 
ordered on purpose to be left in their way. A 
mule, loaded with some part of the royal trea- 
sure, turned the attention of the pursuers, while 
he himself made his escape. 

In his flight he appeared to be most affected 
with the fate of his women. The greatest num- 
ber of them were left at the palace of Pharnacea, 
a place that must soon fall into the hands of the 
enemy. He therefore despatched a faithful eunuch 
with orders to put them to death, leaving the choice 
of the manner to themselves. A few are particu- 
larly mentioned. Of two, who were his own sis- 
ters, Roxana and Statira, one died uttering exe- 
crations against her brother’s cruelty, the other 
extolling, in that extremity of his own fortune, 
the generous care he took of their honour. Mo- 
nimé, a Greek of Miletus, celebrated for her 
beauty, whom the king had long wooed in vain 
with proflers of great riches, and whom he won 
at last only by the participation of his crown, and 
the earnest of the nuptial rites, had ever lamented 
her fortune, which, instead of a royal husband 
and a palace, had given her a prison, and a bar- 
barous keeper. Being now told, that she must 
die, and that the manner of her death was left 
to her own choice, she unbound the royal fillet 
from her hair, and, using it as a bandage, endea- 
voured to strangle herself. It broke in the at- 
tempt: “ Bauble,” she said, “it is not fit even for 
this!” then stretching out her neck to the eunuch, 
bid him fulfil his master’s purpose. Berenice of 
Chios, another Grecian beauty, had likewise been 
honoured with the nuptial crown; and, having 
been attended in her state of melancholy clevation 
by her mother, who, on this occasion, likewise 
resolved to partake of her daughter’s fate; they 
chose to die by poison. The mother intreated 
that she might have the first draught; and died 
before her daughter. The remainder of the dose 
not being sufficient for the queen, she put herself 
likewise into the hands of the executioner, and 
was strangled. By these deaths, the barbarous 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


153 


jealousy of the king was gratified, and the future 
triumph of the Roman general deprived of its 
principal ornaments. 

Lucullus, after his late victory, having no ene- 
my in the field to oppose him, passed through the 
country, and entered without molestation into 
many of the towns in the kingdom of Pontus. 
He found many palaces enriched with treasure, 
and adorned with barbarous magnificence; and, 
as might be expected under such a violent and 
distrustful government, every where places of con- 
finement crowded with prisoners of state, whom 
the jealousy of the king had secured, and whom 
his supercilious neglect had suffered to remain in 
custody even after tite jealousy was allayed. 

Mithridates, from his late defeat, fled into Ar- 
menia, and claimed the protection of Tigranes, 
who, being married to his daughter, had already 
favoured him in his designs against the Romans. 

This powerful prince, now become sovercign 
of Syria as well as Armenia, still continued his 
residence in the last of these kingdoms at Tigra- 
nocerta, a city he himself built, filled with inha- 
bitants, and distinguished by his own name. On 
the arrival of Mithridates to sue for his protection, 
Tigranes declined to see him, but ordered him a 
princely reception in one of the palaces. 

Lucullus continued his pursuit of this flying 
eneiny only to the frontier of Armenia, and 
from thence, sending Publius Clodius, who was 
his brother-in-law, to the court of Tigranes, with 
instructions to require that Mithridates should be 
delivered up as a lawful prey, he himself fell back 
into the kingdoin of Pontus, and soon after re- 
duced Aimysus, together with Sinope, and other 
places of strength, which were held by the troops 
of the king. 

The inhabitants of these places had been ori- 
giually colonies from Greece, and having been 
subdued by the Persians, were, on the arrival of 
Alexander the Great, from respect to their origin, 
restored. to their freedom. In imitation of this 
example, and agreeably to the profession which 
the Romans ever made of protecting the liberties 
of Greece, Lucullus once more declared those 
cities to be free. Having now sufficient leisure 
to attend to the general state of the Roman pro- 
vinces in Asia, fie found, that the collectors of 
the revenue, under pretext of levying the tax 
imposed by Sylla, had been guilty of the greatest 
oppressions. That the inhabitants, in order to 
pay this tax, borrowed money of the Roman offi- 
cers and merchants at exorbitant interest; and, 
when the debts became equal to their whole 
effects, were then distrained for payment, under 
pain of imprisoninent and even tortures: that 
private persons were reduced to the necessity of 
exposing their children to sale, and corporations 
of selling the pictures, images, and other orna- 
ments of their temples, in order to satisfy these 
inhumane creditors. Willing to restrain, or cor- 
rect these abuses, the proconsul ordered, that 
where the interest exacted was equal to the capi- 
tal, the debt should be e m and in other 
cases, fixed it at a moderate rate. These acts of 
beneficence or justice to the provinces were, by 
the farmers of the revenue, represented as acts 
of oppression and cruelty to themselves, and 
were, atnong their connexions, and the sharers 
of their spoils at Rome, stated against Lucullus 
as subjects of complaint and reproach, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox Il 


CHAPTER II. 


Escape and Revolt of the Gladiators at Capua—Spartacus—Action and Defeat of Lentulus the 
Roman Consul—And of Cassius the Preior of Gaul—Appointment of M. Crassus for this Ser 
vice— Destruction of the Gladiators— Triumph of Metellus and Pompey—Consulship of Pom- 
pey and Crassus—Tribunes restored to their former Powers—Consulate of Metellus and 
Horiensius—War in Crete—Renewal of the War in Pontus and Armenia—Defeat of Ti- 
granes—Negotiution with the King of Parthia—Mutiny of the Roman Army—Complaints of 
Piracies committed in the Roman Seas—Commission proposed to Pompey—His Conduct 
against the Pirates—His Commission extended to Pontus—Operations against Mithridates— 
Defeat and Flight of that Prince—Operations of Pompey in Syria—Siege and Reduction of 


Jerusalem—Death of Mithridates. 


SOON after the war, of which we have thus | 


stated the event, had commenced in Asia, Italy 
was thrown into great confusion by the acciden- 
tal escape of a few gladiators from 


U. C. 680. the place of their confinement at 
Capua. These were slaves trained 
h up to furnish their masters with a 
Cass. Varus. Spectacle, which, though cruel and 
barbarous, drew numerous crowds 
of beholders. It was at first introduced asa spe- 


cies of human sacrifice at funerals, and the vic- 
tims were now kept by the wealthy in great 
numbers for the entertainment of the people, and 
even for private amusement. The handsomest, 
the most active, and the boldest of the slaves and 
captives were selected for this purpose. They 
were sworn to decline no combat, and to shun no 
hardship, to which they were exposed by their 
masters; they were of different denominations, 
and. accustomed to fight in different ways; but 
those from whom the whole received their desig- 
nation, employed the sword and buckler, or tar- 
get; and they commonly fought naked, that the 
place and nature of the wounds they received 
might the more plainly appear. 

“ven in this prostitution of valour, refinements 
of honour were introduced. ‘There were certain 
graces of attitude which the gladiator was not 
permitted to quit, even to avoid a wound. There 
was a manner which he studied to preserve in 
his fall, in his bleeding posture, and even in his 
death. He was applauded, or hissed, according 
as he succeeded or failed in any of these par- 
ticulars. When, after a tedious struggle he was 
spent with labour and with the loss of blood, he 
still endeavoured to preserve the dignity of his 
character, dropped or resumed the sword at his 
master’s pleasure, and looked round to the spec- 
tators for marks of their satisfaction and applause.! 

Persons of every age, condition, and sex, at- 
tended at these exhibitions; and when the pair 
who were engaged began to strain and to bleed, 
the spectators, being divided. in their inclinations, 
endeavoured to excite, by their cries and accla- 
mations, the party they favoured ; and when the 
contest was ended, called to the victor to strike, 
or to spare, according as the vanquished was sup- 

osed to have forfeited or to have deserved his 
life.2 With these exhibitions, which must create 
so much disgust. and horror in the recital, the 
Romans were more intoxicated than any popu- 
lace in modern Europe now are with the baiting 
of bulls, or the running of horses, probably be- 


L Cicer. Tusculanarum, lib. ii. c. 17. 
2 Cicero pro Sexto, c. 27. Tusctl. Quest. Sparta- 
cus, lib. ii. c. 17. 


cause they were more deeply affected, and more 
violently moved. 

Spartacus, a Thracian captive, who, on ac- 
count of his strength and activity, had been 
destined. for this barbarous profession, with about 
seventy or eighty of ‘his companions, escaped 
from their place, of confinement, and arming 
themselves with such weapons as accident pre- 
sented to them, retired to some fastness on the 


‘ascent of Mount Vesuvius, and from thence 


harassed the country with robberies and murders. 
“If we are to fight,” said the leader of this despe- 
rate band, “let us fight against our oppressors, 
and in behalf of our own liberties, not to make 
sport for this petulant and cruel race of men.” 
Multitudes of slaves from every quarter flocked 
to his standard. The prefect of Capua armed 
the inhabitants of his district against them, but 
was defeated. 

This feeble and unsuccessful attempt to quell 
the insurrection, furnished the rebels with arms, 
and raised their reputation and their courage. 
Their leader, by his generosity in rejecting his 
own share of any booty he made, by his conduct 
and his valour, acquired the authority of a legal 
commander; and, having named Crixus and 
Oenomaus, two other gladiators, for his subordi- 
nate officers, he formed the multitudes that re- 
sorted to him into regular bodies, employed a 
certain number to fabricate arms, and to procure 
the necessary accommodations of a camp, till at 
length he collected an army of seventy thousand 
men, with which he commanded the country to a 
great extent. He had already successively de- 
feated the pretors: Clodius, Varinus, and Cossi- 
nius, who had been sent against him with con- 
siderable forces, so that it became necessary to 
order proper Jevies, and to give to the consuls the 
charge of repressing this formidable enemy. 

Spartacus had too much prudence to think 
himself fit to contend with the force of the Roman 
state, which he perceived must soon be assembled 
against him. He contented himself, therefore,, 
with a more rational scheme of conducting his 
army by the ridge of the Appenines, till he should 

ain the Alps from whence his followers, whe- 

ther Gauls, Germans, or Thracians, might sepa- 
rate, each into the country of which he was a 
native, or from which he had been. originally 
brought. 


U. ©. 681. 
L. Gell. Pop- 


While he began his progress by 
the mountains, in order to execute 
this project, the consuls, Gellius and 
Lentulus, had already taken the 


sola, w field against him. They at first 
Clodianus. surprised and cut off a considerable 


body under Crixus, who had fallen 


«HAP, IT.) 


cywn from the heights in order to pillage the 
coantry. But Lentulus afterwards pressing hard 
upon Spartacus, who led the main body of the 
rebels, brought on an action, in which the consu- 
lar army was defeated with considerable loss. 
Cassius, too, the prætor of Cisalpine Gaul, having 
advanced upon him with an army of ten thousan 
inen, was repulsed with great slaughter. 

In consequence of these advantages, Spartacus, 
might no doubt have effected his rctreat to the 
Alps; but his army being elated with victory, 
and considcring themselves as masters of Italy, 
were unwilling to abandon their conquest. He 
himself formed a new project of marching to 
Rome; and for this purpose destroyed all his use- 
less baggage and cattle, put his captives to death, 
and refused to receive any more of the slaves, 
who were still in multitudes resorting to his 
standard. He probably expected to pass the 
Roman armies without a battle, and to force the 
city of Rome itself by an unexpected assault. In 
this he was disappointed by the consuls, with 
whom he was obliged to fight in the Picenum ; 
and, though victorious in the action, he lost hopes 
of surprising the city. But still thinking himself 
in condition to keep his ground in Italy, he only 
altered his route, and directed his march towards 
Lucania. 

The Romans, greatly embarrassed, and thrown 
into some degree of consternation, by the unex- 
pected continuance of an insurrection which had 
given them much trouble, exposed their armies 
to much danger, with little prospect of honour ; 
not being courted, as usual, for the command, 
they imposed it on Marcus Crassus, then in the 
rank of prætor, and supposcd to be a person of 
consequence, morc on account of his wealth than 
of his abilities; though in this service, after 
others had failed, he laid the foundation of a more 
favourable judgment. They at the same time 
sent orders to Pompey, who had finished the war 
in Spain, to hasten into Italy with his army ; and 
to the proconsul of Macedonia, to embark with 
what forces could be spared from his province. 

Crassus assembled no Icss thai six legions, 
with which he joined the army which had been 
already so unsuccessful against the revolt. Of 
the troops who had misbehaved hc is said to have 
executed, perhaps ouly decimated, four thousand, 
as an example to the new levies, and as a warn- 
ing of the severitics they were to expect fur any 
failure in the remaining part of the service. 

Upon his arrival in Lucania he cut off ten 
thousand of the rebels who were stationed at a 
distance from the main body of their army, and 
he endcavoured to shut up Spartacus in the pen- 
insula of Brutium, or head of land which ex- 
tends to the Straits of Messina. The gladiators 
desired to pass into Sicily, where their fellow- 
sufferers, the slaves of that island, were not yet 
entirely subdued, and where great numbers at all 
times were prepared to revolt; but. they were 
prevented by the want of shipping. Crassus at 
the same time undcrtook a work of great labour, 
that of intrenching thc land from sea to sca with 
a ditch fifteen feet wide, and as many dcep, ex- 
tending, according to Plutarch, three hundred 
stadia, or above thirty miles. Spartacus endea- 
voured to interrupt the execution of this under- 
taking ; but being repulsed in every attack, his fol- 
lowers began to despond, and entertained thoughts 
of surrendering themselves In order to supply 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 155 


by despair what they lost in courage, he put them 
in mind that they fought not upon equal terms 
with their enemies; that they must either con- 
quer or be treated as fugitive slaves: and, to 
enforce his admonitions, he ordered one of his 
captives to be nailed to the cross in sight of both 
armies. “ This,” he said to his own people, “ is 
an example of what you are-to suffer if you fall 
into the enemy’s hands.” 

Whilst Crassus was busy completing his line, 
Spartacus prepared to force it; and, having pro- 
vided faggots and other materials for this purpose, 
filled up the ditch at a convenient place, and 
passed it in the night with the whole body of bis 
followers. He directed his march to Apulia, but 
was pursued, and greatly harassed in his flight. 

Accounts being received at once in the camp 


of Crassus and in that of Spartacus, that fresh 


troops were landed at Brundusium from Mace- 
donia, and that Pompey was arrived in Italy, and 
on his march to join Crassus, both armics were 
equally disposed to hazard a battle; the gladia- 
tors; that they might not be attacked at once by 
so many enemics as werc collecting against them; 
and the Romans under Crassus, that Pompey 
might not snatch out of their hands the glory of 
terminating the war. Under the influence of 
these different motives, both leaders drew forth 
thcir armies; and when they were ready to en- 
gage, Spartacus, with the valour rather of a gla- 
iator than of a general, alighting from his horse, 
and saying aloud, in the hearing of his followers, 
“If I conquer to day, I shall be better mounted; 
if not, I shall not have occasion for a horse;” he 
plunged his sword into the body of the animal. 
With this carnest of a resolution to conquer or 
to dic, he advanced towards the enemy ; directing 
the division in which he himself commanded te 
make their attack where he understood the Ro- 
man general was posted. He intended to decide 
the action by forcing the Romans in that quarter; 
but, after much bloodshed, being mangled with 
wounds, and still almost alone in the midst of 
his encmies, he still continued to fight till he was 
killed ; and the victory of course declared for his 
enemy. About a thousand of the Romans were 
slain; of the vanquished the greatest slaughter, 
as usual in ancient battles, took place after the 
flight began. The dead were not numbered ; 
about six thousand were taken, and, in the man- 
ner of executing the sentence of death on slaves, 
they were nailed to the cross in rows, that lined 
the way from Capua to Rome. Such as escaped 
from the field of battle, being about five thousand, 
fell into the hands of Pompey, and furnished a 
(ew to his flatterers for ascribing to him the 
1onour of terminating the war. 

The mean quality of the enemy, however, in 
the present case, precluded even Crassus from 
the honour of a triumph; he could have only an 
ovation or military procession on foot. But in- 
stead of the myrtle wreath, usual on such occa- 
sions, he had credit enough with the senate to 
obtain the laurel crown.! 

Pompey too arrived at the same time with new 
and uncommon pretensions, requiring a dispen- 
sation from the law and established forms of the 
commonwealth. The war he had conducted in 
Spain being of the nature of a eivil war against 
Roman citizens or subjects, with a Roman general 


1 A. Gellius, lib. v. 


156 


at their head, did not give a regular claiin to a 


triumph: Pompey himself was yet under the 


legal age, and had not passed through any of the 
previous steps of questor, edile, and pretor; yet 
on the present occasion he not only insisted on a 
triumph, but put in his claim likewise to an im- 
mediate nomination to the office of consul. 

It now became extremely evident, that the es- 
tablished honours of the state, conferred in the 
usual way, were not adequate to the pretensions 
of this young man: that he must have new and 
singular appointments, or those already known 
bestowed ou him in some new and singular man- 
ner. His enemies observed, that he avoided 
every occasion of fair competition ; that he took 
a rank of importance which he did not submit to 
have examined; and that he ever aspired to stand 
alone, or in the first place of public consideration 
and dignity. His partizans, on the contrary, 
stated the extraordinary honours which had been 
done to him, as the foundation of still farther dis- 
tinctions.'! In enumerating his services upon his 
return from Spain, they reckoned up, according 
to Pliny, eight hundred and seventy-one towns, 
from the Pyrennees to the extremities of that 
country, which he had reduced; observed that he 
had surpassed the glory of all the officers who 
had gone before him in that service; and, in con- 
sequence of these representations, though still in 
a private station, he was admitted to a triumph, 
or partook with Metellus in this honour. 

Pompey had hitherto, in all the late disputes, 
taken part with the aristocracy ; but not without 
suspicion of aiming too high for republican go- 
vernment of any sort. While he supported the 
senate, he affected a degree of pre-eminence 
above those who composed it, and was not con- 
tent with equality, even among the first nobles 
of his country. He acquiesced, nevertheless, in 
the mere show of importance, without assuming 
a power which might have engaged him in con- 
tests, and exposed his pretensions to too near an 
inspection. Upon his approach at the head of an 
army from Spain, the senate was greatly alarmed; 
but he gave the most unfeigned assurances of his 
intention to disband his army as soon as they 
should have attended his triumph. ‘The senate 
accordingly gave way to this irregular preten- 
sion, and afterwards to the pretension, still more 
dangerous, which without any of the previous 

conditions which the law required, 


U. C. 683. he made to the consulate. Crassus, 
M. Licin. who had been prætor in the pre- 
Crassus Cn. Ceding year, now stood for the same 
Pomp. Mag- office, entered into a concert with 
NUS. 


Pompey, and, notwithstanding their 
mutual jealousy of each other, they 
joined their interests, and were elected together. 

Under the administration of these officers some 
important laws are said to have passed, although 
most of the particulars have escaped the notice of 
historians. It appears that Pompey now began 
to pay his court to the people; and, though he 
professed to support the authority of the senate, 
wished to have it in his power, on occasion, to 
take the sense of what was called the assembly 
of the people against them, or in other words, 
to counteract them by means of the popular tu- 
mults which bore this name. 

The tribunes Quinctius and Palicanus, had 


eel 


1 Vid. Cic. pro. Lege Manilia. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox III, 


for two years successively laboured to remove th 

bars which had, by the constitution of Sylla, bee1 

opposed to the tribunitian power. They haa 
been strenuously resisted by Lucullus and others, 
who held the office of consul, during the de- 
pendence of the questions which had arisen on 
that subject By the favour of Pompey and 
Crassus, however, the tribunes obtained a resti- 
tution of the privileges which their predecessors, 
in former times of the republic, had so often 
abused ; and, together with the security of their 
sacred and inviolable character, and their nega- 
tive in all the proceedings of the state, they were 
again permitted to propose laws, and to harangue 
the people; a dangerous measure, by which 
Pompey at once rendered fruitless that reforma- 
tion which was the only apology for the blood so 
lavishly shed, not only by Sylla, but likewise by 
himself. Caius Julius Caesar, at the same time, 
having the rank of legionary tribune conferred 
upon him by the choice of the people, was ex - 
tremely active in procuring those popular acts; 
a policy in which he was more consistent with 
himself than Pompey, and only pursued the 
course of the party with which he embarked in 
his youth.2 

Under this consulate, and probably with the 
encouragement of Pompey, the law of Sylla, re- 
specting the judicatures was, upon the motion of 
the prætor, Aurelius Cotta, likewise repealed; 
and. it was permitted to the pretors to draught 

the judges in equal numbers from 
Lex Aurelia the senate, the knights, and a certain 
Judiciaria. class of the people, whose descrip- 

tion is not clearly ascertained. ‘This 
was, perhaps, a just correction of Sylla’s partiality 
to the nobles; and if it had not been accom- 
panied by the former act, which restored the tri- 
bunitian power, might have merited applause. 

In the mean time, corruption advanced among 
all orders of men with a hasty pace; in the lower 
ranks, contempt of government; among the 
higher, covetousness and prodigality, with an ar- 
dour for lucrative provinces, and the opportunities 
of extortion and flagrant abuse. As the offices 
of state at Rome began to be coveted with a view 
to the appointments abroad, with which they 
were followed, Pompey, in order to display his 
own disinterestedness, with an oblique reproof to 
the nobility who aspired to magistracy with such 
mercenary views, took a formal oath in entering 
on his consulate, that he would not, at the ex- 
piration of his office, accept of any government 
in the provinces; and by this example of genero- 
sity in himself, and by the censure it implied of 
others, obtained great credit with the people, and 
furnished his emissaries, who were ever busy in 
sounding his praise, with a pretence for en- 
hancing his merit. lt may, however, from his cha- 
racter and policy in other instances, be suspected, 
that he remained at Rome with intention to 
watch opportunities of raising his own considera- 
tion, and of obtaining, by the strength of his 
party, any extraordinary trust or commission of 
which the occasion should arise, 

Pompey, in the administration of his consul- 
ate, had procured the revival of the censors’ 
functions. ‘These had been intermitted about 
sixteen years, during great part of which time 
the republic had been in a state of civil war; and 


2 Sueton. in C. Jul. Cesar, lib. i. 


3 Tribuni Erarii. 


Cuar. If.] 


the prevailing parties, in their turns, mutually 
had recourse to acts of banishment, confiscations, 
and military executions against each other. In 
such times, even after the sword was sheathed, 
the power of censor, in the first heat of party-re- 
sentment, could not be safely intrusted with any 
of the citizens ; and the attempts which were now 
made to revive it, though in appearance success- 
ful, could not give it a permanent footing in the 
commonwealth. The public was arrived at a 
state in which men complain of evils, but cannot 
endure their remedies. 

L. Gellius Poplicola and Cn, Cornelius Len- 
tulus, being intrusted, in the capacity of censors, 
to make up the rolls of the people, mustered 
four hundred and fifty thousand citizens, They 
purged the senate with great severity, having ex- 
punged sixty-four from the rolls, and among those 
©. Antonius, afterwards consul, assigning as their 
reason, that he, having the command on the coasts 
of Asia and Greece, had pillaged the allies, and 
mortgaged and squandered his own estate. But 
what most distinguished this censorship was 
an incident, for the sake of which, it is likely, 
the solemnity of the census had been now revived. 

It was customary on those occasions for the 
knights to pass in review, each leading his horse 
before the censors. They were questioned re- 
specting their age, their services, and the persons 
under whose command they had served; and if 
they had already served the ten years prescribed 
by law, they received an exemption from future 
services, and were vested with the privileges 
which were annexed to this circumstance. At 
this part of the ceremony the people were sur- 
prised to see their consul, Pompey the Great, de- 
scending into the market-place, leading his horse 
in quality of a simple knight, but dressed in his 
consular robes, and preceded by the lictors. Be- 
ing questioned by the censors, whether he had 
served the stated number of years, he answered 
that he had, and all of them in armies commanded 
by himself. ‘This farce was reccived with loud ac- 
clamations of the people; and the censors having 
granted the customary exemption, rose from their 
seats, and, followed by a great multitude, attended 
this equestrian consul to his own house.4 

It is observed that Crassus and Pompey, al- 
though they entered on office in concert, yet dif- 
fered in the course of their adininistration on sub- 
jects which are not particularly mentioned. As 
Crassus was in possession of great wealth, he en- 
deavoured, by his liberalities, to vie with the im- 
posing state and popular arts of his colleague. 
He gave an entertainment to the whole pcople at 
ten thousand tables, and distributed three months’ 
provision of corn. To account for his being able 
to court the people in this manner, it is said that 
he inherited from his father a fortune of three 
hundred talents, or near sixty thousand pounds ; 
that he increased it, by purchasing at a low price 
the estates of those who were proscribed in the 
late troubles, and by letting for hire the labour of 
a numerous family of slaves, instructed in various 
arts and callings; and was become so rich b 
these means, that when, some time atter this 
date, he was about to depart for Asia, and conse- 
crated the tenth part of his estate to Hercules, 
he was found to possess seven thousand one hun- 
dred talents, or about one million three hundred 


4 Plutarch. in Pompeio. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


157 


and seventy thousand and three hundred pounds 
sterling.4 
Pompey at the expiration of his year in the 
consulship, in observance of the oath he had 
taken, remained at Rome in a private station ; 
but, agreeably to the character he formerly bore, 
maintained the reserve and stateliness of a person 
raised above the condition of a citizen, or even 
above that of the first senators of consular rank. 
Other candidates for consideration and public 
honours endeavoured, by their talents and elo- 
quence, to make themselves necessary to these 
who had affairs to solicit with the public, or even 
to make themselves feared. They laboured to 
distinguish themselves as able advocates or for- 
midable accusers at the bar, and to strengthen 
their interest by procuring the support of those 
to whom their talents either were or might re- 
come of importance. Pompey, on the contrary, 
stating himself as an exception to common rules, 
avoided the courts of justice and other places of 
ordinary resort, did not commit his talents to the 
public judgment, nor present his person to the 
public view; took the respect that was paid to 
him as a right; seldom went abroad, and never 
without a numerous train of attendants.6 He 
was formed for the state of a prince, and might 
have stolen into that high station even at Rome, 
if men, born to equality, could have suffered an 
elevation which was not supported by adequate 
abilities ; or had been willing, when troubled with 
faction, to forego their own importance, in order 
to obtain peace and the comforts of a moderate 
government. The pretensions of Pompey, how- 
ever, were extremely disagreeable to the senate, 
and not otherwise acceptable to the people, than 
as they tended to mortify the pride of that order 
of men. 
The consulate of Crassus and Pompey was 
succeeded by that of Q. Horten- 


U. C. 684. sius and Q. Cecilius Metellus. 
Q. Hortensius, IN the distribution of provinces, 
Q. Cecil. Me- Crete, with the command óf an 
tellus Creti- armament to be sent into that 
cus. 


island, fell to the lot of Hortensius ; 
but this citizen, having acquired 
his consideration by his eloquence in pleading tl.e 
causes of his friends, and being accustomed to the 
bar, perhaps in a degree that interfered with his 
military character, declined to accept of this go- 
vernment; leaving it, together with the command 
of the army that was to be employed in the re- 
duction of the island, to his colleague Mctellus, 
who afterwards received the appellation of Creti- 
cus, from the distinction he acquired in this service. 

The Cretans, and most of the other seafaring 
people on the confines of Asia and Europe, had 
in the late war taken an active part against the 
Romans. ‘They had, by the influence of Mith- 
ridates, and by their own disposition to rapine 
and piracy, been led to prey upon the traders, and 
upon the carriers of the revenue that were fre- 
quently passing from the provinces to Rome. 
‘The desire of sharing in the profits that were 
made by this species of war, had filled the sea 
with pirates and freebooters, against whom the 
Romans sent forth a succession of officers. with 


5 Plutarch. in Crasso. As the interest of money 
was prohibited at Rome, under the denomination of 
usury, but in fact was unlimited, the annual returr-; 
from snch a capital must have been immense. 

6 Plutarch. in Vit. Pomp. 


158 


extensive commands, on the coasts both of Asia 
and Europe. Among others, M. Antonius had 
been employed in this service, and was accused 
of abusing his power, by oppressing the Sicilians 
and the people of other maritime provinces, who 
were innocent of the crimes he was employed to 
repress. Ina descent on the island of Crete he 
was defeated and killed,! and left the Romans 
engaged with the people of that island in a war 
which was thought to require the presence of one 
of the consuls. The lot, as has been observed, 
fell on Hortensius, but was transferred to his col- 
league Metellus. 

Such was the state of affairs, and 


U. C. 685. such the destination of the Roman 

officers, when Lucullus received 

Z. Cac. Me- from Tigranes a return to the 
ping a demand which he made of havin, 

iain Mithridates delivered up as his pri- 
soner. This prince, at the arrival of Clodius, 


who bore the message, had made a progress to 
the coasts of Pheenicia, and to the farther extre- 
mities of his empire. To verify the state and title 
which he assumed of King of Kings, he affected, 
when he mounted on horseback, to have four 
captive sovereigns to walk by his stirrup, and 
obliged them, on other occasions, to perform every 
office of menial duty and servile attendance oh 
his person. Lucullus, instead of the style which 
was affected by this prince, had accosted him in 
his letter only with the simple title of king. His 
messenger, however, was admitted to an audience, 
and made his demand that Mithridates, a van- 
quished prince, whose territories were already in 
the possession of the Romans, should be delivered 
up to adorn the victor’s triumph. This, if refus- 
ed, said the bearer of the message, the Roman 
general would be entitled to extort by force, and 
would not fail, with a mighty army for that pur- 
pose, to pursue his fugitive wherever he was re- 
ceived and protected. ‘Tigranes, unused even 
to a plain address, much less to insult and threats, 
heard this demand with real indignation; and 
though, with an appearance of temper, he made 
offer of the customary presents and honours to 
the person who delivered it, he took his resolution 
against the Romans, and, from having barely 
permitted Mithridates to take refuge in his king- 
dom, determined to espouse his cause. He gave 
for answer to Clodius, that he would not deliver 
up the unfortunate king, and that, if the Romans 
invaded his territories, he knew how to defend 
them. He soon afterwards admitted Mithridates 
into his presence, and determined to support him 
with the necessary force against his enemies. 
Upon receiving this answer from Tigranes, 
Lucullus resolved without delay to march into 
Armenia. He chose for this expedition two 
legions and a body of horse, on whom he pre- 
vailed, though with some difficulty, to enter on 
a new war at a time when they flattered them- 
selves that their labours were ended, and that the 
rewards they expected were within their reach. 
With hasty marches he arrived on the Euphrates, 
and passed that river before the enemy were 
aware of his approach. Tigranes treated the 
first reports of his coming with contempt, and 
ordered the person who presumed to bring such 
accounts tobe punished. But being assured, be- 
yond a possibility of doubt, that an enemy was 


1 Pedianus in Orat. in Verrem 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox III. 


actually on his territories, he sent Metrodorus, 
one of his generals, at the head of a considerable 
force, with orders to take alive the person of Lu- 
cullus, whom he was desirous to see, but not to 
spare a man of the whole army besides. è 

With these orders, the Armenian general set 
out on the road by which the Romans were sup- 
posed to advance, and hastened to meet them. 
Both armies, on the march, had intelligence of 
each other. Lucullus, upon the approach of the 
enemy, halted, began to intrench, and, in order 
to gain time, detached Sextilius, with about three 
thousand men, to observe the Armenians, and, 
if possible, without risking an action to amuse 
them till his works were completed. But such 
was the incapacity and presumption of the enemy, 
that Sextilius, being attacked by them, gained an 
entire victory with but a part of the Roman army ; 
Metrodorus himself being killed, his army was 
put to the rout with great slaughter. 

After this victory Lucullus, in order the more 
effectually to alarm and to distract the Armeni- 
ans, separated his army into three divisions. 
With one he intercepted and dispersed a body of 
Arabs, who were marching to join the king; 
with another he surprised ‘Tigranes himself, in 
a disadvantageous situation, and obliged him to 
fly with the loss of his attendants, equipage, and 
the baggage of his army. At the head of the 
third division he himself advanced to 'Tigrano- 
certa, and invested that place. 

After these disasters ‘Tigranes made an effort 
to assemble the force of his kingdom; and bring- 
ing into the field all the troops of his allies, as 
well as his own, he mustered an army of one 
hundred and fifty thousand heavy-armed foot, 
fifty-five thousand horse, and twenty thousand 
archers and slingers. He was advised by Mith- 
ridates not to risk a battle, but to lay waste the 
country from which the Romans were supplied 
with provisions, oblige them to raise the siege 
of 'Tigranocerta, and repass the Euphrates, with 
the disadvantage of having an enemy still in force 
to hang on their rear. ‘This counsel of Mithyi- 
dates, founded in the experience he had so dearly 
bought, was ill suited to the presumption of the 
king. He therefore advanced toward the Ro- 
mans impatient to relieve his capital, and the 
principal seat of his magnificence. Lucullus, 
trusting to the specimens he had already seen of 
the Armenian forces, ventured to divide his army, 
and, without raising the siege, marched with one 
division to meet this numerous enemy. In the 
action that followed, the Armenian horse being 
in the van, were defeated and driven back on the 
foot of their own army, threw them into confu- 
sion, and gave the Romans an easy victory, in 
which, with very inconsiderable loss to them- 
selves, they made a great slaughter of the enemy, 
The king himself, to avoid being known in his 
flight, unbound the royal diadem from his head, 
and left it to become a part in the spoils of the 
day. 
iene who commanded in Tigranocerta 
hearing of his master’s defeat, and fearing a re 
volt of the Greeks and other foreigners, who hac 
been forced to settle at that place, ordered then 
to be searched and disarmed. This order they 
looked on as the prelude to a massacre, and 
crowding together, defended themselves with the 
staves and other weapons they could seize. ‘They 
surrounded a party that was sent to disperse 


Cuar. Ii} 


them, and having by that means got a supply of 
arms, they took possession of a tower which com- 
manded one of the principal gates, and from 
thence invited the Romans to enter the place. 
Lucullus accordingly seized the opportunity, and 
became master of the city. The spoil was great ; 
Tigranes having collected here, as at the princi- 
pal seat of his vanity, the wealth and magnificence 
of his court. 

Mithridates, who had been present in the late 
action, met the king of Armenia in his flight; 
and, having endeavoured to re-establish his equi- 
page and his retinue by a participation of his 
own, exhorted him not to despair, but to assem- 
ble a new force, and to persist inthe war. They 
agreed, at the same time, on an embassy to the 
king of Parthia, with offers of reconciliation on 
the part of Tigranes, who, at this time, was at 
war with that prince, and of satisfaction on the 
subjects in contest between them, provided the 
Parthians would join in the confederacy against 
the Romans. They endeavoured to persuade the 
king, that he was by no means an unconcerned 
spectator in the present contest; that the quarrel 
which the Romans now had with the kings of 
Armenia, and Pontus, was the same with that 
which they formerly had with Philip and with 
Antiochus; and which, if not prevented, they 
would soon have with Arsaces, and was no other 
than his being possessed of a rich territory, which 
tempted their ambition and avarice. ‘Those re- 
publicans, they said, originally had not any pos- 
sessions of their own, and were grown rich and 
great only by the spoils of their neighbours. 
From their strong hold in Italy, they had extend- 
ed their empire on the west to the coast of the 
ocean; and, if not stopped by the powerful 
monarchies that lay in their way, were hastening 
to reach a similar boundary on the east. The 
king of Parthia, they added, might expect to be 
invaded by these insatiable conquerors, and must 
now determine whether he would engage in a 
war joined with such powerful allies, of whom 
one by his experience, the other by his resources, 
might enable him to keep the danger at a distance 
from his own kingdom,? or wait until these pow- 
ers being overthrown, and become an aceessioll 
to the Roman force, he should have the contest 
to maintain in his own territory singly and un- 
supported from abroad. To these representations 
Arsaces seemed to give a favourable ear, agreed 
to the proposed confederacy, on condition that 
Mesopotamia, which he had formerly claimed, 
was now delivered up to him. At the same time 
he endeavoured to amuse Lucullus with offers of 
alliance against the king of Armenia. 

In this conjuncture it probably was, that Lu- 
cullus, in the apprehension of being superseded 
and deprived of the honour of terminating the 
war, made his report that the kingdom of Mith- 
ridates was now in his possession, and that the 
kingdom of Tigranes was also in his power ; and 
therefore, that the senate should, instead of a 
successor, send the usual commission to settle the 
form of the province, and to make a proper esta- 
blishment to preserve the territories which he had 
already subdued. But after these representations 
were despatched, it became apparent that the king 
of Parthia had deceived him with false profes- 
sions, while he actually made great progress in 


2 Letter of Mithridates in the Fragments of Sallust. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


154 


his treaty with the kings of Armenia and Pon 
tus, and meant tosupport them with all his force 
In resentment of this act of treachery, and to pre- 
vent the effects of it, Lucullus proposed to carry 
the war into Parthia; and, for this purpose 
ordered the legions that were stationed in Pontus 
to march without delay into Armenia. 

These troops, however, already tired of the 
service, and suspecting that they were intended 
for some distant and hazardous enterprise, broke 
out into open mutiny, and refused to obey their 
officers. his example was soon afterwards fol- 
lowed by other parts of the army; and the gene- 
ral was obliged to confine his operations to the 
kingdom of Armenia. He endeavoured, by pass- 
ing the mountains near to the sources of the 
Euphrates and the Tigris, to penetrate as far as 
Artaxata, the capital of the kingdom. By this 
march he forced Tigranes once more to hazard a 
battle, and obtained a victory ; but his own army, 
notwithstanding their success, were so much dis- 
couraged with the change of climate, which they 
experienced in ascending the mountains of Ar- 
menia, and with the early and severe approach 
of winter in those high lands, that they again 
mutinied, and obliged their general to change the- 
plan of his operations. He turned his march to 
the southward, fell down on Mesopotamia, and, 
after a short siege, made himself master of Nisi- 
bis, a rich city in that territory, where, with other 
captives, he took Guras, brothas to the king, who 
commanded in the place. 

Here, however, the mutinous spirit still con- 
tinuing to operate in the Roman army, it began 
to appear, that the general, who had so often 
overcome the kings of Pontus and Armenia, was 
better qualified to contend with an enemy, than 
to win or to preserve the good-will of his own 
troops. A report being spread that he was soon 
to be recalled, he, from that moment, lost the small 
remains of his authority; the legions deserted 
their colours, and treated, with contempt or in- 
difference, all the attempts he made to retain 
them. 

This mutiny began in that part of the army, 
which, having been transported into Asia, under 
the command of Valerius Flaccus, had murdered 
this pe, to put themselves under the com- 
mand of Fimbria, and afterwards deserted their 
new leader to jom with Sylla. Such crimes, 
under the late unhappy divisions of the republic, 
either remained unpunished, or were stated as 
merits with the party in whose favour the crime 
was committed. ‘I'hese legions, however, were, 
by Sylla, who was not willing to employ such 
instruments, or to intrust his own, or the fate of 
the commonwealth in such hands, left in Asia, 
under pretence of securing the province; and 
they accordingly made a considerable part in the 
armies successively commanded by Murena and 
by Lucullus. ‘he disposition whieh they now 
showed, and that. of the whole army, to disorder 
and mutiny, was greatly excited by the factious 
spirit of Publius Clodius, the relation of Lucul- 
lus, who, having himself taken offence at the 

eneral, gave this specimen of his future conduct 
in the state, by endeavouring to stir up rebellion 
among the troops. ‘“ We who have alias un- 
dergone so many hardships,” he said, “are still 
kept on foot to escort the camels that carry the 
treasures of our general, and made to pursue, 
without end, a couple of barbarous princes, that 


160 


lead us over deserts, or uncultivated wastes, 
while the soldiers of Pompey, after a few cam- 
paigns in Spain, or in Italy, are enjoying the 
fruits of their labour in comfortable settlements, 
procured by the favour of their leader.” 

Lucullus was so much aware of the decline of 
his authority, that he did not choose to expose it, 
hy attempting to effect even a mere change of 
position. He hoped, that while he issued no 
orders of any moment, the resolution of his army 
not to obey him might remain a secret to the 
enemy. This state of affairs, however, soon 
became known to Mithridates, and filled him 
with hopes of being able to recover his kingdom. 
That he might not suffer the opportunity to és- 
cape him, he fell back into Pontus, with what 
troops he had then under his command, and, by 


his authority and influence over his own sub-, 


jects, soon augmented his force, penetrated among 
the scattered quarters of the Romans, who were 
left to occupy the country, and separately sur- 
prised or destroyed considerable bodies of their 
troops. Among these, he attacked and defeated 
Fabius, the officer who was trusted with the 
general command in that kingdom; and though 
now turned of seventy, exposed his own person 
in the action, and received a wound which stop- 
ped him in the pursuit, and by that means pre- 
vented the full effect of his victory. 

Lucullus, being informed of what had passed 
in Pontus, had influence enough with the army 
to put them in motion towards that kmgdom 
with some appearance of order; but before his 
arrival, Mithridates had shut up Fabius in Ca- 
bira, and defeated Triarius with considerable 
slaughter. Here again the old man was wound- 
ed; and, to satisfy the army that he was not 
dead, was raised up into view, and remained in 
sight of the army while his wound was dressed. 
In this last defeat the Romans lost twenty-four 
legionary tribunes, one hundred and fifty centu- 
rions, and seven thousand men. 

It was not doubted, however, that Lucullus, 
on his arrival, if the army had been disposed to 
act under him, would have been able soon to re- 
trieve his affairs: but he was at this time super- 
seded; and it was known in the army, that Aci- 
lius Glabrio was set out from Rome to assume 
the command. The legions, therefore, under pre- 
tence that Luculius was no longer their general, 
and that they themselves, by a decree of the peo- 
ple, had received their dismission, refused to obey 
him; and the men of his army,in great num- 
bers, actually took the route of Cappadocia on 
their return to Italy. 

‘This was the state of affairs when the com- 
missioners, who, upon the report of Lucullus, had 
been sent by the senate to settle the kingdom of 
Pontus in the form of a province, actually arrived. 
They found the proconsul destitute of power 
in his own camp, and Mithridates whom they 
believed to be vanquished, again master of his 
own kingdom, and joining to the experience of 
old age all the ardour and enterprise of youth.! 

The Roman army in Asia, as a prelude to 
their present defection, had been taught to up- 
braid the parsimony of their own general by a 
comparison with the liberality and munificence of 
Pompey, and in this comparison showed a dispo- 


1 Appian. Bell. Mithridat. Plutarch. in Lucullo. Dio 
Cassius. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox III. 


sition to change their leader, which, it is not 
doubted; Pompey, by his intrigues, and with the 
aid of his agents, greatly encouraged. He could 
in reality ill brook the private station to which, 
by his late oath, in entering on the consulate, he 
had bound himself. He studied to support the 
public opinion of his importance, and wished for 
an occasion to derive some advantage from it; 
but nothing had occurred for two years that was 
worthy of the high distinction to which he as- 
pired. The command in Asia he coveted the 
more, that it was secured to Lucullus by the 
splendour of his own successes, and by the una- 
nimous judgment of the senate and nobles, who 
knew his faithful attachment to their order, and 
his fidelity to the aristocratical part of the con- 
stitution. The difficulties in that service were 
over, and nothing but the glory of terminating 
the war remained. Pompey, either from envy to 
Lucullus, or from a design to open a way to this 
glory for himself, contributed to the nomination 
of Glabrio, and to the nomination of the pretors, 
who were sent with separate commands into the 
provinces of Asia and Bithynia. If, upon, this 
change, the war should become unsuccessful, or 
languish, he had hopes to be called for by the 
general voice of the people, as the only person fit 
to bring it to a happy conclusion. Meantime a 
project was started, which was likely to place him 
near to this scene of action, and to facilitate his 
removal, if judged expedient, to the command of 
the army in Pontus. 

The pirates still continued to infest the seas, 
and were daily rising in their presumption, and in- 
creasing in their strength. They received con- 
tinual accessions of numbers from those, who, by 
the unsettled state of Asia, were forced to join 
them for subsistence. ‘The impunity which they 
enjoyed during the distractions of the Roman 
commonwealth, and the profits they made by 
their depredations, encouraged many who fre- 
quented the seas to engage in the same way of 
life. ‘They had been chased, and numbers of 
them taken by M. Antonius, the orator, by Ser- 
vilius Isauricus, and, last of all, by C. Antonius, 
the father of him who, in the capacity of trium- 
vir, is to become so conspicuous in the sequel of 
this history. But they had their retreats; and, 
upon the least remission of vigilance in the Ro- 
man officers, they again multiplied apace, put to 
sea in formidable squadrons, and embarked such 
numbers of men, as not only enabled them to 
scour the seas, but likewise to make descents on 
the coasts, to enter harbours, destroy shipping, 
and pillage the maritime towns. They even ven- 
tured to appear off the mouth of the Tiber, and 
to plunder the town of Ostia. All the coasts of 
the empire were open to their depredations. The 
Roman magistrates were made prisoners in pass- 
ing to and from their provinces; and citizens of 
every denomination, when taken by them, were 
forced to pay ransom, kept in captivity, or put to 
death. The supply of provisions to Italy was 
rendered extremely difficult, and the price in pro- 
portion enhanced. Every report on these sub- 
jects was exaggerated by the intrigues of Pompey, 
who perceived, in this occasion of public distress, 
the object of a new and extraordinary commis- 
sion to himself. 

Frequent complaints having been made, and 
frequent deliberations held on this subject in the 
senate, Gabinius, one of the tribunes, at last pro- 


ta 


Cuar. ÍI] F 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


161 


posed, that some officer of consular rank should | a civil nature, which checked the license of fac- 
be vested, during three years, with absolute pow- | tion.? 


ers, in order to put an effectual stop to these out- 
rages, and to eradicate the cause of them, so as 
to secure for the future the inhabitants of the 
coast, as well as to protect the navigation of the 
seas. As Gabinius was known to be in concert 
with Pompey, the design of the proposition was 
inanifest ; and it was received in the senate with 
great aversion. ‘For this,” it was said, “ Pom- 
pey has declined the ordinary turn of consular 
duty upon the expiration of his office, that he 
might lie in wait for extraordinary and illegal ap- 
pointments.” Gabinius being threatened with 
violence if he should persist in his motion, thought 
=. to withdraw from the assembly. i 
report was immediately spread in the city, 
that the person of the tribune Gabinius had been 
actually violated; multitudes assembled at the 
doors of the senate-house, and great disorders 
were likely to follow; it was judged prudent for 
the senate to adjourn; and the members dread- 
ing some insult from the populace, retired by 
separate ways to their own houses. Gabinius, 
without farther regard to the dissent of the senate, 
prepared to noT motion to the people; but 
the other nine tribunes were inclined to oppose 
him. Trebellius and Roscius, in particular, pro- 
mised, by their negative, to put a stop to any far- 
ther proceedings on that business. Pompey, in 
the mean time, with a dissimulation which con- 
stituted part of his character, affected to disap- 
prove of the motion, and to decline the commis- 
sion with which it was proposed to vest him. He 
had recourse to this affectation, not merely as the 
fittest means on the present occasion to disarm 
the envy of the nobles, and to confirm the people 
in their choice; but still more as a manner of 
proceeding which suited his own disposition, no 
less desirous to appear. forced and courted inte 
high situations, than solicitous to gain and to hold 
them. He thus provoked the citizeus of his own 
rank, no less by the shallow arts which he prac- 
tised to impose on the public, than by the state 
which he assumed. He could scarcely expect to 
find a support in the order of nobles, and least of 
all among those who were likely to become the 
personal rivals of his fortune in the common- 
wealth: and yet it is mentioned, that Julius 
Cesar, now about two-and-thirty years of age, 
and old enough to distinguish his natural antago- 
nists in the career of ambition, took part with 
the creatures of Pompey on this occasion. He 
was disposed to court the people, and to oppose 
the aristocracy ; either of which principles may 
explain his conduct in this instance. He had 
himself already incurred the displeasure of the 
senate, but more as a libertine than as a disturber 
of the state, in which he had not hitherto taken 
any material part. In common with the youth 
of his time, he disliked the senators, on account 
of the remaining austerity of their manners, no 
less than the inferior people disliked them on ac- 
count of their aristocratical claims to prerogative. 
But whatever we may suppose to have been his 
motives, Cæsar, even before he seemed to have 
formed any ambitious designs of his own, was 
ever ready to abet those of every desperate adven- 
turer who counteracted the authority of the se- 
nate, or set the orders of government at nought; 
and seemed to be actuated by a species of instinct, 
which set him at variance with those forms of 


On the day on which the question on the mo- 
tion of Gabinius was to be put to the people, 
Pompey appeared in the Comitium; and, if we 
may judge from the speech which is ascribed to 
him, employed a dissimulation and artifice some- 
what too gross even for a popular assembly. He 
took occasion to thank the people for the honours 
he had so often received; but complained, that, 
having already toiled so much in the public 
service, he still should be destined for new labours. 
“ You have forgotten,” he said, “the dangers I en- 
countered, and the fatigues I underwent, while 
yet almost a boy, in the war with Cinna, in the 
wars in Sicily and in Africa, and what I suffered 
in Spain, before I was honoured with any magis- 
tracy, or was of age to have a place in the senate. 
But I mean not to accuse you of ingratitude; on 
the contrary, I have been fully repaid. Your 
nomination of me to conduct the war with Ser- 
torius, when every one else declined the danger, 
I consider as a favour; and the extraordina-y 
triumph you bestowed in consequence of it, as 
a very great honour. But I must entreat you to 
consider, that continued application and labour 
exhaust the powers of the mind as well as those 
of the body. ‘Trust not to my age alone, nor ima- 
gine that I am still a young man, merely because 
my number of years is short of what others have 
attained. Reckon my services and the dangers 
to which I have been exposed; they will ex- 
ceed the number of my years, and satisfy you, 
that I cannot longer endure the labours and cares 
which are now proposed for me. But if this be 
not granted me, I must beg of you to consider 
what leads of envy such appointments are likely 
to draw upon me from men, whose displeasure, 
I know you neither do, nor ought to regard, 
although to me their envy would be a great mis- 
fortune: and I confess, that, of all the difficul- 
ties and dangers of war, I fear nothing so much 
as this. To live with envious persons; to be 
called to account for miscarriage, if one fails in 
public affairs; to be envied, if one succeeds; who 
would choose to be employed on such conditions ? 
For these, and many other reasons, I pray you 
to leave me at rest; leave me to the care of my 
family, and of my private affairs. As for the pre- 
sent service, I pray you to choose, among those 
who desire the employment, some ae person ; 
among so many, you cannot surely be at a loss. 
I am not the only person that loves you, or that 
lias experience in military affairs. There are 
many, whose names, to avoid the imputation of 
flattery, I will not mention.” 

To this speech Gabinius replied; and, affect- 
ing to believe the sincerity of Pompey’s declara- 
tions, observed, that it was agreeable to the 
character of this great man, neither to desire 
command, nor rashly to accept of what was 
pressed upon him. ‘They who are best able to 
surmount difficulties,’ he said, “are likewise 
least inclined to engage in them. But it is your 
business, fellow-citizens, to consider, not what is 
agreeable to Pompey, but what is necessary to 
your own affairs; not to regard those who court 
you for offices, but those who are fit to discharge 
the duties of them. I wish we had many persons 
of this description, besides the man I have pro- 


2 Zonoras, An. hb. x. c. 3 


162 THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION [Boox III. 


posed to your choice. Did we not all wish for 
such persons likewise, when we searched among 
the young and the old for some one whom we 
could oppose to Sertorius, and found none but 
himself? But wishes cannot avail us; we must. 
take men as they are; we cannot create them.. 
If there be but one man formed for our purpose, 
with knowledge, experience, and good fortune, 
we must lay hold of him, and seize him, if neces- 
sary, even by force. Compulsion here is expe- 
dient and honourable for both parties; for those 
who employ it, because it is to find them a person 
who can conduct their affairs; for him who suf- 
fers it, because he is to have an opportunity of 
serving his country, an object for which no good 
citizen will refuse to expose his person, or to 
sacrifice his life. 

“ Do you think that Pompey, while yet a boy, 
was fit to command armies, to protect your allies, 
to reduce your enemies, to extend your empire ; 
but that now, in the prime of life, ripe in wisdom 
and experience, he can serve you no longer? 
You employed the boy, you suffer the man to be 
idle. When a private citizen of equestrian rank, 
he was fit for war and affairs of state : now he is 
a senator, he is fit for nothing! Before you had 
any trial of him, you made choice of him for the 
most important trust; now that you have expe- 
rience of his ability, of his conduct, and of his 
success, you hesitate. Is the present occasion less 
pressing than the former? Is the antagonist of 
Sertorius not fit to contend with pirates? But 
such absurdities cannot be received by the Roman 
people. As for you, Pompey, submit to the will 
of your fellow-citizens. For this you were born, 
for this you were educated. I call upon you as 
the property of your country; I call upon you as its 
defence and safe-guard; I call upon you to lay 
down your life, if necessary. This I know, if your 
country require it, you will not, you cannot refuse. 

“ But it is ridiculous to accost you in this man- 
ner; you, who have proved your courage and your 
love to your country in so many and such arduous 
trials. Be ruled by this great assembly. Despise 
the envy of a few, or study the more to deserve 
the general favour. Let the envious pine when 
they hear of your actions, it is what they deserve. 
Let us be delivered from the evils that surround 
us, while you proceed to end your life as you be- 
gan it, with success and with glory.” 

When Gabinius had finished his speech, Tre- 
bellius, another of the tribunes, attempted to re- 
ply; but such a clamour was immediately raised 
by the multitude that he could not be heard. He 
then, by the authority of his office, forbad the 
question ; and Gabinius instantly proposed to have 
the sense of the tribes, whether Trebellius had 
not forfeited the character of tribune? Seven- 
teen tribes were of this opinion, and the eighteenth 
would have made the majority, when Trebellius 
thought proper to withdraw his negative. Ros- 
cius, another of the tribunes, intimated by signs 
(for he could not be heard) that a second should 
be joined with Pompey in this commission. But 
the clamour was renewed, and the meeting likely 
to end in riot and violence. Then all opposition 
to the motion was dropped. In this state of af- 
fairs, Gabinius, trusting that, in the present hu- 
mour of the people, no man would dare to oppose 
the measure, and wishing to increase the honour 
of Pompey’s nomination, by the seeming concur- 
rence of” some of the more respectable citizens, 


called upon Catullus, who was then first on the 
roll of the senate, to deliver his opinion, and led 
him up into the rostra for this purpose. 

This citizen, by the equability of his conduct, 
and by his moderation in support of the aristo- 
cracy, had great authority even with the opposite 
party. He began his speech to the people with 
professions of public zeal, which obliged him to 
deliver with plainness what he thought was con- 
ducive to their good, and which entitled him toa 
deliberate hearing, before they should pronounce 
on the merits of what he was about to deliver. 
“If you listen,” he said, “something may still 
be offered to inform your judgment; if you break 
forth again into disorders and tumults, your ca- 
pacity and good understanding will avail you 
nothing. I must begin with declaring my opi- 
nion, that powers so great, and for so long a time, 
as are now proposed for Pompey, should not be 
committed to any single citizen. 

“The precedent is contrary to law, and in itself, 
in the highest degree, dangerous to the state. 
Whence came the usurpations of Marius, but 
from the habit of continued command;3. from his 
being put at the head of every army, entrusted 
with every war, and no less than six times re- 
elected consul in the space of a few years. What 
inflamed to such a degree the arrogant spirit of 
Sylla, but the continual command of armies, and 
the continual power of dictator? Such is hu- 
man nature, that, in age as well as in youth, we 
are debauched with power; and if inured for 
any time to act as superiors, we cannot submit 
afterwards to the equal and moderate station ot 
. citizens. 

“I speak not with any particular reference to 
Pompey; I speak what the law requires, and 
what I am sure is for your good. If high office 
and command be an honour, every one who had 
pretensions should enjoy them in his turn; if 
they be a load or a burden, every one ought to 
bear his part. ‘These are the laws of justice and 
of republican government. By observing them, 
republics have an advantage over every other 
state. By employing many men in their turns, 
they educate and train many citizens for the pub- 
lic service, and have numbers amongst whom 
they may choose the fittest to serve on every par- 
ticular emergence. But if we suffer one or a few 
to engross every office of public service or public 
trust, the list of those who are qualified for any 
such trust will decrease in proportion. If we 
always employ the same person in every public 
service, we shall soon have no other person to 
employ. Why were we so much at a loss for 
experienced commanders when Sertorius appear- 
ed to threaten Italy with an invasion? Because 
commants for a considerable time before that pe- 
riod, had been engrossed by a few, and those few 
alone had any experience. Although, therefore, 
I have the highest opinion of Pompey’s abilities 
for this service, I must prefer to his pretensions 
the public utility and the express declaration of 
the laws.. 

‘You annually elect consuls and pretors: to 
what purpose ? to serve the state? or to carry for 
a few months the ensigns of power? If to serve 
the state, why name private persons with unpre- 
cedented commissions to perform what your ma- 
gistrates are either fit to perform, or are not fit to 
have been elected ? 

“If there be any uncommon emergency that 


Cuar. IL] 


requires more than the ordinary exertions of go- 
vernment, the constitution has provided an expe- 
dient. You may name a dictator. The power 
of this officer has no bounds, but in respect to the 
place in which it is to be exercised, and to the time 
during which it is to last. It is to be exercised 
within the limits of Italy, where alone the vitals 
of the state can be exposed to any great or press- 
ing attack ; it is limited to six months, a sufficient 
period in which to remove the cause of any sud- 
den alarm. But this unlimited power, which is 
now proposed for so long a time, and over the 
whole empire, must end in calamities, such as 
this and other nations have suffered from the am- 
bition and usurpation of arbitrary and seditious 
men. 

“If you bestow unlimited power by sea and 
by land on a single man, in what manner is he to 
exercise his power? Not by himself in person, 
for he cannot be every where present; he must 
have lieutenants or substitutes who act under his 
orders. He cannot even attend to what is passing 
at once in Egypt and in Spain, in Africa, Syria, 
and in Greece. If so, then why may not those 
who are to act be officers named by you, and 
not by any intermediate person; accountable to 
you, and not to another; and in the dangers 
they run, animated with the prospect of honour 
to themselves, not to a person who is unnecessa- 
rily interposed between them and their country ? 
Gabinius proposes to invest this officer with au- 
thority to name many lieutenants; I pray you 
consider, whether these officers should depend 
upon any intermediate person, or upon yourselves 
alone? and whether there be sufficient cause to 
suspend all the legal powers, and to supersede all 
the magistrates in the commonwealth, and all the 
governors of provinces in every part of your em- 
pire, in order to make war on pirates?” 

So much of what Catullus is supposed to have 
delivered on this occasion is preserved among the 
fragments of Dion Cassius. It is mentioned by 
others, that the audience expressed their good- 
will and respect for this senator in a compliment 
which they paid to him, probably near the close 
of his speech, when urging some of his former 
arguments, he asked, “ If this man to whom alone, 
by thus employing him in every service, you give 
an opportunity of learning the profession of a 
statesman or soldier, should fall, to whom will 
you next have recourse?’ The people answered, 
with a general acclamation, To yourself.! They 
revered, for a moment, the candour and ability 
of this eminent citizen, but could not withstand 
the arts of Pompey, and the tide of popularity, 
which then ran so much in his favour. 

This day being far spent in debate, another 
day was appointed in which to collect the votes, 
when a decree passed to vest Pompey with the 
supreme command over all the fleets and armies 
of the republic, in every sea without distinction 
or limit, and on every coast within four hundred 
stadia, or fifty miles of the shore. This commis- 
sion took place in Italy, and extended throughout 
every province, during three years from the time 
of — the edict. 

às Pompey owed these extraordinary powers 
entirely to the tribune Gabinius, he intended to 
have employed him next in command to himself; 
put the law which excluded the tribunes from 


1 Cicero pro Lege Manilia. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


163 


succeeding to any such commands, in the first 
year after the expiration of their office, stood in 
the way of this choice; and Pompey did not per- 
sist In it. 

Upon the publication of an edict investing an 
officer of such renown with so high powers for 
restoring the navigation of the seas, corn and 
every other article of importation at Rome, con- 
siderably fell in their price. The friends of Pom- 
pey already triumphed in the success of their 
measure, and he himself soon after, notwithstand- 
ing the meanness of the enemy opposed to him, 
gained much credit by the rapid, decisive, and 
effectual measures he took to obtain the end of 
his appointment. Although it was the middle 
of winter, a season too rough, even in the Medi- 
terranean, for such shipping as was then in use, 
he gave orders to arm and put to sea as many 
vessels as could be collected on every part of the 
coast. In a little time he had returns of two hun- 
dred and seventy gallies fit for service, one hun- 
dred and twenty thousand foot, and four thousand 
horse embodied on the coasts to which his com- 
mand extended. That the pirates might be every 
where attacked at once, and find no refuge bv 
changing their usual places of retreat, he divided 
the maritime parts of the empire into separate 
districts, appointed lieutenants with full powers 
in each, assigned their stations, and allotted their 
quotas of shipping and troops. He himself, with 
a squadron of sixty ships, proposed to visit every 
quarter, and to give his presence where it should 
be most required. He began with the coasts of 
Spain and Gaul, and the seas of Sardinia and 
Corsica; and in passing from thence, while the 
fleet coasted round the peninsula of Italy, he 
himself went on shore, and travelled by land to 
meet them at Brundusium. In this journey, upon 
his approach to Rome, he enjoyed, in all respects, 
the state of a great Merl was received with 
acclamations by the people, and was courted by 
multitudes of every condition who went forth to 
receive him. All his complaints and representa- 
tions were received as commands. The consul 
Piso, being supposed not to forward his levies 
with sufficient alacrity, would have been degrad- 
ed, if Pompey himself had not interposed to pre- 
vent a motion which the tribune Cemit in- 
tended to make for this purpose. 

The fleet being arrived at Brundusium, Pom- 
pey hastened to join it, and from thence passed 
by the stations of his several lieutenants in the sea- 
ports of Macedonia and Greece, to the coasts of 
Pamphylia and Cilicia, which were the principal 
resort of the pirates. Such of these banditti as 
he took in his way, were treated with mildness ; 
and this circumstance, together with the great 
preparations which were reported from every 
quarter to be making against them, with the small 
hopes they had of being able to escape, induced 
them, in great numbers, to surrender themselves. 
In the bay of Cilicia he found a squadron of their 
ships assembled, and ready to cover the harbours 
at which they had been accustomed to collect 
their stores, and to lodge their booty. They sepa- 
rated, however, upon his appearance, took refuge 
in different creeks of that mountainous coast, and 
afterwards surrendered at discretion, deliverin 
up all the forts they had erected, with all their 
stores of timber, cordage, and sails, of which they 
had made a considerable provision. 

By these means the war was finished about 


164 


the middle of summer, six months after the no- 
mination of Pompey to this command. In that 
time seventy-two gallics were sunk, three hundred 
and six were taken, anda hundred and twenty 
piratical harbours or strong-holds on shore were 
destroyed. ‘Ten thousand of the pirates were 
killed in action, and twenty thousand, who had 
surrendered themselves, remained prisoners at the 
end of the war. These Pompey having sufficiently 
deprived of the means of returning to their former 
way of life, transplanted to different parts of the 
eontinent, where the late or present troubles, by 
thinning the inhabitants, had made room for 
them. Upon this occasion he repeopled the city 
of Soli in Cilicia, which had been lately laid 
waste, and forcibly emptied of its inhabitants 
by Tigranes, to replenish his newly established 
capital of ‘Tigranocerta in Armenia. After this 
re-establishment of Soli, the place, in honour of its 
restorer, came to be known by the name of Pom- 
pelopolis.! 

Whilst Pompey was thus employed in dispos- 
ing of the pirates on the coast of Cilicia, he re- 
eeived a message from Lappa in the island of 
Crete, now besieged by Metellus, intimating that 
the people of this place, although they held out 
against Metellus, were willing to surrender to 
Pompey. This sort of preference, implying esti- 
mation and popular regard, was one of the tempt- 
ations which Pompey was supposed unable to 
resist; he accordingly, without consulting with 
Metellus, sent an officer to receive the surrender 
of Lappa. 

Metellus had now been near two years in the 
island of Crete, had almost entirely reduced it, 
and had a near prospect of that triumph, which 
he afterwards actually obtaincd, with the title of 
Creticus, on account of this conquest. Pompey’s 
commission, as commander-in-chief of all the sea 
and land forces of Rome, within fifty miles of the 
coast, no doubt extended to this island; but it 
was justly reckoned invidious to interfere in the 
province of a proconsul, whose appointment pre- 
ceded his own. And this step revived all the 
former imputations against him, that he consi- 
dercd himself as every one’s superior, strove to 
suppress every growing fame, and threw his per- 
sonal consideration as a bar in the way of every 
rising merit. Metellus, stung with resentment, 
and trusting to the support of the scnate, ven- 
tured to contemn his orders, even after Octavius, 
who had been sent by Pompey to take the inha- 
bitants of Lappa under his protection, had entered 
the town, and in his name commanded Metellus 
to desist from the attack of a place already in 
possession of the Romans. He nevertheless con- 
tinued the sicge, forced the town to surrender, 
and threatening to treat Octavius himself as a 
rebel, obliged him to leave the island. The senate, 
without otherwise deciding the eontroversy which 
was likely to arise on this subject, afterwards 
acknowledged Metellus as the conqueror of Crete, 
and decreed him a triumph in that capacity.? 

The disputc, however, at this time might have 
led to disagreeable consequences, if Pompey, 
while he was preparing to pass into Crete against 
Metellus, had not found another object of more 
importance to his plan of greatness. Lucullus 


1 Dion Cassius, lib. xxxvi. c. 2U. 
2 Liv. Epit. Plutarch. in Pompeio. Dion Cass. lib. 
XXXV. 3 Dion Cass. lib. xxxvi. c. 28. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II. 


had always appeared to him a more formidable 
rival in power and eonsideration than Metellus, 
and the war in Pontus and Armenia likely to 
furnish a more ample field of glory than the de- 
struction of pirates. 

Mithridates, though once nearly vanquished, 
was, by means of the distractions which, com- 
municating from the popular factions at Rome, 
had infected the army of Lucullus, enabled to re- 
new the war with fresh vigour. Knowing that 
the Roman general was no longer obeyed, he not 
only returned, as has been mentioned, into his 
own kingdom, but, together with Tigranes, be- 
gan to act on the offensive, and made excursions 
even into Cilicia. Acilius Glabrio, the procon- 
sul appointed to succecd in the command of the 
Roman army, hearing the bad state of affairs, 
stopped short in Bithynia, and even refused to 
furnish Lucullus with the reinforcements he had 
brought from Italy. In these circumstances the 
province of Asia, likely to become a principal 
source of revenue to the commonwealth, was in 
imminent danger of being wrested. from their 
hands. The friends of Pompey seized the op- 
portunity to obtain a farther enlargement of his 
powers. Manilius, one of the tribunes, in con- 
cert with Gabinius, moved the people to extend 
his commission to the provinces of Phrygia, Bi- 
thynia, Cappadocia, and Pontus; and of course 
to commit the war in Armenia and Pontus to his 
direction. This motion was strenuously opposed 
by Catulus, Hortensius, and all the principal 
members of the senate. It was supported by 
Marcus Tullius Cicero and by Caius Julius 
Cesar, who both intended on this occasion, to 
court the popular party, by espousing the cause 
of a person so much in favour with the people. 

Cicero was one of the first of the Romans who 
rested his consideration entirely on civil accom- 
plishments, and who became great by the services 
he was qualified to render his friends in a civil 
eapacity, without any pretensions to the merit of 
a soldier. The character of a pleader was become 
one of the most powerful recommendations to 
public notice, and one of the surest roads to con- 
scquence and civil preferments. Cicero, with a 
fine genius and great application, was supposed 
to excel all who had gone before him in this line 
of pursuit. His talents were powerful instru- 
ments in his own hands; they rendered him ne- 
cessary to others, and procured him the courtship 
of every party in its turn. He was understood 
to favour the aristocracy, and was inclined to 
support the senate, as the great bulwark of the 
state, against the licence of the populace, and the 
violence of factious leaders. But being now preto1 
with a near prospect of the consulatc, he sacri- 
ficed much to his ambition in the pursuit of pre- 
ferments, which were new in his family, and 
which the ancient nobility were disposed to envy 
him. His speech, upon the motion of Manilius, 
was the first he had ever made in a political cha- 
racter ; it is still extant, and does more honour to 
his talents as a pleader, than to his steadiness in 
support of the constitution and government of his 
country.4 He turned aside, by artful evasions, 
the wise councils of Hortensius and Catulus; 
and, under pretence of setting forth the merits of 
Pompey, and of stating precedents in his favour, 
dazzled his audience, by enumerating the irregular 


4 Cicer. Orat. pro Lege Manilia. 


Cuar. ÍL] 


honours which they themselves had already con- 
ferred on this object of their favour. 

With such able advocates, in a cause to which 
the people were already so well disposed, the in- 
terest of Pompey could not miscarry; and an 
addition was accordingly made to his former com- 
mission, by which he became in reality sovereign 
of the fairest part of the empire. Upon the ar- 
rival of this news in Cilicia, where he then was, 
he affected surprise and displeasure. ‘“ Are my 
enemies,” he said, “never to give me any respite 
from war and trouble?’ He had talents un- 
doubtedly, sufficient to support him in the use of 
means less indirect; but a disposition to artifice, 
like every other ruling passion, will stifle the 
plainest suggestions of reason, and seems to have 
made him forget, on the present occasion, that 
his own attendants at least had common penetra- 
tion, They turned away from the farce which 
he acted with shame and disgust ;5 and he him- 
self made no delay in showing the avidity with 
which he received what he thus affected to dis- 
like; laid aside all thoughts of other business ; 
immediately despatched his orders to all the pro- 
vinces that were now subjected to his power; 
and, without passing his mandates through the 
hands of Lucullus, summoned Mithridates, theu 
with an army of between thirty and forty thou- 
sand men on the frontier of Pontus, to surrender 
himself at discretion. ‘This prince, being then 
in treaty with Phraates, who had lately succeeded 
his father, Arsaces, in the kingdom of Parthia, 
and being in expectation of a powerful support 
from that quarter, refused to listen to this impe- 
rious message; being disappointed in his hopes 
of assistance from the Parthians, and finding that 
Phraates had joined in a league with his ene- 
mies, he at first endeavoured to pacify the Roman 
general; but finding that his advances for this 
purpose had no eflect, he prepared for a vigorous 
resistance. 

Pompey set out for Pontus, and in his way had 


an interview with Lucullus, who was then in. 


Galatia. ‘They accosted each other at first with 
laboured expressions of respect and of compli- 
ment on their respective services, but ended with 
disputes and sharp altercations. Pompey accused 
Lucullus of precipitation, in stating the kingdom 
of Pontus as a Roman province, while the king 
himself was alive and at liberty. Lucullus sus- 
pected that the late mutiny had been fomented by 
the emissaries of Pompey, to make way for his 
own succession to the command. He persisted 
in maintaining the propriety of the report which 
he had made to the senate, and in which he had 
represented the kingdom of Pontus as conquered, 
and in which he had desired that commissioners 
should be sent as usual to secure the possession ; 
observed, that no province could be kept, if the 
troops stationed to preserve it refused to obey 
their general; that if such disorders were made 
the engine of politics in the competition of candi- 
dates for office, the republic had worse conse- 
quences to fear than the loss of any distant 
province; that although the fugitive king had 
taken advantage of the factions at Rome and in 
the army, to put himself again at the head of 
some forces, he had not yet recovered any con- 
siderable portion of his kingdom, nor been able 
to disturb the commissioners of the senate, who 


5 Plutarch in Pompeio. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


165 


were employed in settling the province ; that there 
was nothing left for a successor, but the invidious 
task of snatching at the glory which had been 
won by another. 

From this conference Pompey entered on the 
command with many indications of animosity to 
Lucullus; he suspended the execution of his or- 
ders; changed the plan of his operations; remitted 
the punishments, and recalled the rewards he 
had decreed to particular persons, in a manner 
which seemed to justify the suspicion of his hav- 
ing encouraged the late disorders, suffering them 
to pass with impunity; and treating with the 
usual confidence even the legions which had re- 
fused to obey the orders of their general. His 
own authority, however, seemed to be secured by 
the animosity of the army to their late commander, 
and by their desire to contrast their own conduct, 
and the success of the war under their present 
leader, with that which had taken place under 
his predecessor. Finding himself, therefore, at 
the head of numerous and well-affected forces, 
both by sea and by land, he lined the whole coast 
of the Egean and Euxine sea with his galleys, 
and, at the head of a great army, advanced in 
search of the enemy. 

Mithridates, upon the approach of Pompey, 
continued retiring before him towards the Lesser 
Armenia, laid waste the country through which 
the Roman army was to pass, and endeavoured 
to distress them by the want of provisions and 
forage. 

For several days successively the armies en- 
camped in sight of each other. Mithridates 
chose his stations, so that he could not be safely 
attacked; and as his object was to pass the Eu- 
phrates without being forced to a battle, he gene- 
rally decamped in the night, and, by his superior 
knowledge of the country, passed through ways 
in which the Roman army could not hastily fol- 
low without manifest danger of surprise. Pom- 
pey, sensible that, upon this plan of operations, 
the king of Pontus must effect his retreat, took a 
resolution to pass him by a forced march, not in 
the night, but in the heat of the day, when the 
troops of Asia were most inclined to repose. If 
he should succeed in this design, and get between 
their army and the Euphrates, he hoped to force 
them to a battle, or oblige them to aa their 
route. He accordingly, on the day he had chosen 
for this attempt, doubled his march, passed the 
enemy’s camp at noon-day unobserved, and was 
actually posted on their route, when they began 
to decamp, as usual, on the following night. In 
the encounter which followed, having all the ad- 
vantages of a surprize, and in the dark, against 
an ariny on its march, and little accustomed to 
order, he gained a decisive victory, in which he 
cut off or dispersed all the forces on which the 
king of Pontus relied for the defence of his 
kingdom. 

Mithridates escaped with a few attendants ; 
and, in this extremity, proposed to throw hiniselt 
again into the arms of ‘Vigranes; but was re- 
fused by this prince, who was himself then at- 
tacked by a rebellion of his own son. Upon this 
disappointment he fled to the northward, passing 
by the sources of the Euphrates to the kingdom 
of Colchis, and from thence, by the eastern coasts 
of the Euxine, to the Scythian Bosphorus, now 


6 Dio Cass. lib. xxxvi. c. 32. 


166 


the Straits of Cossa, in order to take refuge in 
the Chersonesus, or Crim Tartary, at Pantica- 
pea, the capital of a kingdom which he himself 
had acquired, and which he had bestowed on 
Machares, one of hissons. Upon his presenting 
himself at this place, he found that Machares had 
long since abandoned his father’s fortunes; and, 
upon hearing of the ill state of his affairs on his 
first flight from Lucullus into Armenia, had sent, 
as an offering of peace, a golden crown to that 
general, and sued for the protection of the Ro- 
mans. The father, highly provoked with this 
act of pusillanimity or treachery, assembled a 
force among his Scythian allies, and, deaf to all 
ofiers of submission or entreaties of this undutiful 
son, dragged him from the throne, and either or- 
dered him to be put to death, or made his situation 
so painful, that he thought proper to put an end 
to his own life. 

In this manner Mithridates entered anew on 
the possession of a kingdom, in which he had not 
only a safe retreat, but likewise the means of 
executing new projects of war against his ene- 
mies. By the maxims of the Romans, no king- 
dom was supposed to be conquered, till the king 
was either killed, taken, or forced to surrender 
himself; and Pompey, by this flight of the king 
of Pontus, found himself under a necessity either 
of pursuing him into his present retreat, or of 
doing what he had blamed in Lucullus, by mak- 
ing his report of a conquest before it was fully 
completed. While he was deliberating on the 
measures to be taken in these circumstances, he 
was invited by ‘Tigranes, son to the king of Ar- 
menia, then in rebellion against his father, to 
enter with his army into that kingdom, and to 
give judgment on the differences subsisting be- 
tween the father and the son. 

In consequence of this invitation, Pompey 
marched into Armenia, joined the rebel prince, 
and, under pretence of supporting the son, was 
about to strip the father of his kingdom, when 
this monarch, with an excess of meanness, pro- 
portioned to the presumption with which he had 
enjoyed his prosperity, now resolved to cast him- 
self entirely upon the victors mercy. For this 
purpose he desired to be admitted into Pompey’s 


presence, and, with a few attendants, presented | 


himself for this purpose. Being told, at the en- 
trance of the camp, that no stranger could pass on 
horseback, he dismounted, and was conducted on 
foot to the general’s tent. Still bearing the dia- 


dem on his head, he tvok it from thence, and 


offered to lay it on the ground at Pompey’s feet; 
but was told with great courtesy, that he might 
resume it; that, by submitting himself to the 
generosity of the Romans, he had not lost a king- 
dom, but gained a faithful ally.. At the same 
time, under pretence of reimbursing the expense 
of the war, a sum of six thousand talents, or 
about one million one hundred and twenty-eight 
thousand pounds sterling, was exacted from hin; 
and he himself, to this great sum which was paid 
to the state, added a gratuity to the army of a 
talent? to each of the tribunes, ten ming? to each 
of the centurions, and half a mina‘ to each pri- 
vate man. 

Pompey, in disposing of the two Armenias, 


1 Dio. Cass, lib. xxxvi.c.35. Plutarch. in Pompeio. 
2 931. līs. 3 320. Ss. 10d. 
4 WW.1%s.3id. Vid. Arbuthnot of Ancient Coins. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IIL. 


which were now in his power, allotted Sophene, 
or the Lesser Armenia, on the right of the Eu 
phrates, to Tigranes the son, reserving Syria ana 
Pheenicia, to which Antiochus, the last represen- 
tative of the Macedonian line, had been restored 
by Lucullus, together with Cilicia and Galatia, to 
the disposal of the Romans. 

Tigranes the father with great submission ac- 
quiesced in this partition ; but the son, who pro- 
bably expected to have been put in the possession 
of the whole of his father’s kingdom, was greatly 
discontented, and, while Pompey was yet in Ar- 
menia, entered into a correspondence with the 
king of Parthia, and solicited his assistance to 
overturn this establishment. On account of these 
practices, whether real or supposed, the son was 
taken into custody, carried into Italy, and made 
a part in the ornaments of the victor’s triumph.* 

The Roman general, having in this manner 
disposed of the kingdom of Armenia, and secured 
the permanency of his settlement by the con- 
finement of the rebel prince, resumed the thoughts 
of pursuing Mithridates into his present retreat. 
For this purpose he left Afranius in Armenia, 
with a force sufficient to secure his rear, and to 
prevent any disturbance on this side of the Eu- 
phrates. He himself passed the Araxes, and 
wintered on the Cyrus, or the Cyrnus, on the 
confines of Albania and Iberia. In the following 
summer, having defeated the natives of those 
countries in repeated encounters, he advanced to 
the mouth of the Phasis, where he was joined by 
his fleet, then plying in the Euxine sea, under the 
command of Servilius. Here he appears to have 
deliberated, whether he should attempt to pursue 
Mithridates any farther; but upon considering 
the difficulties of the voyage, and of the march 
along a coast and a country entirely unknown, 
unfurnished with any safe harbour tor his ships, 
or even with any means of subsistence to his 
army by land, he took his resolution to return, 
and to avail himself, in the best manner he was 
able, of the possessions which had been abandon- 
ed to him by the flight of the king.6 With this 
resolution he directed his march, by the coast, 
back into the kingdom of Pontus; and, finding 
no resistance, took-all his measures as in a con- 
quered province. At one place he found a con- 
siderable treasure, which Stratonice, one of the 
concubines of the king, by whom he had a son 
named Xiphares, disclosed to him, on condition 
that, if the chance of war should throw Xiplhares ~ 
into the hands of the conqueror, his life should 
be spared. But this unhappy son was exposed to 
other dangers besides those the mother appre- 
hended. Mithridates, upon hearing of the price 
which was paid for his life, ordered him to be 
slain. “That woman,” he said, “should have 
likewise bargained with me in favour of her son.” 
At other places the Roman army found the ves- 
tiges of great magnificence, joined to monuments 
of superstition and of cruelty. ‘They found some 
productions of an art, in which the king was 
supposed to be master, relating to the composition 
of poisons, and of their antidotes, and some re- 
cords of dreams, together with the interpreta- 
tions, which had been given by his women. 

From Pontus, Pompey, having made a proper 


5 Plutarch. in Pompeio, ad p. 458. 

6 Dio. Cas. lib. 37. ¢.3. Plutarch. in Pompeio. Ap 
pian. in Mithridat. A 

7 Plutarch. in Pompeio, p. 462. 


Cuar. IL] 


disposition of the fleet in the Euxine, to cover the 
coast from any attempts which Mithridates might 
make from the Bosphorus and opposite coasts, set 
out for the kingdom of Syria, which he now de- 
termined to seize in behalf of the Romans. Lu- 
cullus had already, agreeably to the policy of his 
country, and under pretence of setting the Sy- 
rians free, separated their kingdom from the other 
possessions of Tigranes: but the pretence upon 
which he acted in this matter being sufficient to 
prevent his seizing upon Syria as a Roman pro- 
vince, he was content with restoring it to An- 
tiochus, the last pretender of the Macedonian 
line, who had lived eighteen years in the greatest 
obscurity in Cilicia. Pompey now proposed to 
complete the transaction, by seizing for the Ro- 
mans themselves, what the other affected only to 
restore to the lawful owner ;® and this intended 
owner now pleaded in vain against the Romans 
that right of descent from the Macedonian line, 
which Lucullus had employed with so much force 
to supplant Tigranes.9 

On the march into Syria, Pompey, either in 
person or by his lieutenants, received the submis- 
sion of all the principalities or districts in his way, 
and made the following arrangements. ‘The Les- 
ser Armenia, once intended for Tigranes the son, 
he gave to Dejotarus, king of Galatia, who 
afterwards was long continued on the frontier of 
the empire as a faithful dependant, and with 
possessions which served as a barrier against hos- 
tile invasions from that quarter. Paphlagonia 
was given to Attalus and Pylamenus, who were 
ikewise liberal tributaries to the Roman officers, 
and vigilant guards on the frontiers of the em- 
pire. Upon his arrival at Damascus, he had 
many applications from the late subjects or de- 
pendants of the Syrian monarchy ; among others, 
from Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, two brothers 
contending for the sovereignty of Judea, wlio now 
lepaired to him for judgment, and requested the 
interposition of his power in behalf of the party 
he should be pleased to favour. 

Of these rivals, who were the sons of Alex- 
ander, late high priest of the Jews, Hyrcanus the 
elder had succeeded to his mother Alexandra, 
whom the father had left his immediate successor 
in the throne; but was dispossessed by his 
younger brother Aristobulus, who, being of a 
more active spirit, had formed a powerful taction 
among the people. 

Hyrcanus took refuge among the Arabs, and 
prevailed upon Aretas, the chieftain of some 
powerful tribe of that people, to support him with 
an army, in recovering the sovereignty of the 
Jews. In conjunction with this ally, he accord- 
ingly laid siege to Jerusalem, but was disappoint- 
ed of his object by Scaurus, one of Pompey’s 
lieutenants, who being then in Syria, at the re- 
quest of Aristobulus, trom whom he received a 
present of three hundred talents, or about fifty- 
seven thousand and nine hundred pounds ster- 
ling, interposed, and obliged the Arabs to raise 
the siege. Upon the arrival of Gabinius, whom 
Pompey had sent before him into Syria, Aristo- 
bulus thought proper to make him likewise a 
present of fifty talents, and by these means re- 
mained in possession of the sovereignty at the 
arrival of Pompey. 


8 Justin. lib. xl. c. 1 and 2. 


9 Appian. in Mithridat. p. 244. 10 Eutrop. lib. vi. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


167 


It is alleged that each of the contending par- 
ties made their presents to the general himself; 
Hyrcanus in particular, that of a beautiful piece 
of plate, admired for its workmanship and weight, 
being the imitation of a spreading vine, with its 
leaves and fruit in massy gold ;!! and these cir- 
cumstances merit attention, as they furnish some 
instances of the manner in which great riches, 
now in so much request at Rome, were amassed 
by Roman generals in the course of their services. 
Besides what they gained in this manner, it is 
likely that every conquest they effected, every 
revolution they brought about, and every protec- 
tion they granted, were extremely profitable. 

Pompey, on hearing the merits of the question 
between the two brothers, declared for Hyrcanus, 
and advanced towards the city, to execute the 
decree he had passed. Upon his approach he was 
again met by Aristobulus, who made fresh offers 
vf submission, and of a public contribution in 
money; and Pompey sent forward Gabinius to 
take possession of the place, in terms of this sub- 
mission. But upon a report that the gates were 
still kept shut by the party of Aristobulus, who 
yet remained in his camp, he ordered this prince 
into confinement, and advanced with his army. 

The citizens being divided, those who espoused 
the cause of Hyrcanus were willing to receive 
the Romans; the others, who were attached to 
Aristobulus, retired into the temple, and broke 
down the bridge by which this edifice was joined 
to the streets, and made every other preparation 
to defend themselves to the last extremity. 

The gates of the city, in the mean time, were 
thrown open by the party of Hyrcanus; and the 
Romans being admitted, took possession of all the 
principal stations within the walls, and prepared 
to attack the temple. This building had all the ad- 
vantages of a citadel, built on a height, surround- 
ed with natural precipices, or with a deep ditch, 
overhung with lofty battlements and towers. 
Pompey sent for battering engines to Tyre, and 
cut down all the woods in the neighbourhood to 
furnish materials for fillmg up the ditch, raising 
his mound of approach,!? and erecting his towers. 
All his works were with great obstinacy coun- 
teracted by those who had taken refuge in the 
temple. He observed, however, in the course of 
his operations, that the people within, although 
they defended their persons when attacked on the 
Sabbath-day, yet they did not labour, either in re- 
pairing any of their own defences, or in opposing 
or demolishing the works of the besiegers. He 
accordingly took advantage of this circumstance, 
made no assaults on that day, but carried on his 
attack in filling up the ditch, and carrying on his 
approach. In this manner his towers, without 
interruption, were raised to the level of the battle- 
ments, and his engines playing from thence, made 
pru havoc among the besieged. The Jews, 

owever, even under the discharge of the enemy’s 
missiles, still continued at the altar to perform 
their usual rites. While they were engaged in 
these holy exercises they took so little precaution 
against the dangers to which they were exposed, 
that numbers perished in oftering up the sacri- 
fices, and mingled their blood with that of the 
victims. 

In the third month after the siege began, one 
of the towers of the temple was brought in ruin 


11 Joseph. Antiq. lib. xiv. c. 2. 12 The Agger. 


168 


to the ground; and Faustus, the son of Sylla, 
with two centurions at the head of the divisions 
they commanded, entered the breach, and putting 
all whom they met to the sword, made way for 
more numerous parties to follow them, and co- 
vered the avenues and porches of the temple with 
the slain. The priests, who were even then em- 
ployed in the sacrifices, waited for the enemy with 
great composure, and, without discontinuing their 
duties, were slain at the altars. Numbers of the 
people threw themselves from the precipices; and 
others, setting fire to the booths in which they had 
lodged under the walls of the temple, were con- 
sumed in the flames. About twelve or thirteen 
thousand perished on this occasion, without any 
proportional loss to the besiegers, or to those who 
conducted the storm. 

Pompey, being master of the temple, and struck 
with the obstinate valour with which the people 
had devoted themselves to its preservation, was 
curious to see the interior recess. This place, 
into which no one was ever admitted besides the 
high priest, he supposed to contain the sacred em- 
blems of that power who inspired his votaries with 
so ardent and so unconquerable a zeal. And he 
ventured, to the equal consternation and horror of 
his own party among the Jews, as of those who 
opposed him, to enter with his usual attendants 
into the Holy of Holies. He found it adorned 
with lamps, candlesticks, cups, vessels of incense, 
with their supports all of solid gold, with a great 
collection of the richest perfumes, and a sacred 
treasure of two thousand talents, or about three 
hundred and eighty-six thousand pounds sterling. 

Having satisfied his curiosity, it is mentioned 
that he respected the religion of the place so 
much as to have left every part of this treasure 
untouched, and to have given directions that the 
temple itself should be purified, in order to expi- 
ate the profanation of which he himself had been 
guilty. He restored Hyrcanus to the priesthood 
or sovereignty of the kingdom, but charged him 
with a considerable tribute to the Romans, and 
at the same time stripped the nation of all those 
possessions or dependencies in Palestine and Ce- 
lesyria, which had been acquired or held in sub- 
jection by their ancestors. Such were Gadara, 
Scythopolis, Hyppus, Pella, Samaria, Marissa, 
Azotus, Jamana, Arethusa, Gaza, Joppa, and 
Dora, with what was then called Strato’s Tower, 
and afterwards Cesarea. Under pretence of re- 
storing these several places to their liberties, they 
were detached from the principality of the Jews, 
but in reality annexed to the Romar province of 
Syria.! 

Pompey now recollecting that he had formerly 
carried his arms to the shores of the Atlantic, 
and to the boundaries of Numidia and of Spain; 
that he had recently penetrated to the coasts of 
the Euxine, and to the neighbourhood of the 
Caspian Sea; to the end that he might not leave 
any part of the known world unexplored by his 
arms, now formed a project to finish this round 
of exploits, by visiting the shores of the Asiatic 
or Eastern Ocean: a circumstance which was to 
complete the glory of his approaching triumph, 
and raise him, as his flatterers were pleased to 
observe, to a rank above every conqueror of the 
present or any preceding age.? 


1 Joseph. de Bell Jud. lib. i. & vii. & Ant, lib. xiv.c. 6. 
2 Plutarch. in Pom. p. 463. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox IL. 


: But while Pompey was employed in the settle- 
ment of Syria, in the reduction of Jerusalem, and 
meditating these farther conquests, Mithridates 
was busy in making preparations to renew the 
war. Having heard of the extremities to which 
the citizens of Rome had been frequently reduced 
by the invasion of the Gauls and of Hannibal, 
and by the insurrections of their own subjects 
and slaves, he concluded that they were weakest 
at home, or might be attacked with the greatest 
advantage in Italy. He again, therefore, resumed 
the project of marching an army of Scythians by 
the Danube and the Alps. He visited all the 
princes in his neighbourhood, made alliances with 
them, which he confirmed by giving to some of 
them his daughters in marriage, and persuaded 
them, by the hopes of a plentiful spoil, to jom with 
him in the project of invading Europe. He even 
despatched his agents into Gaul, to secure the 
co-operations of nations on that side of the world, 
and trusted that, on his appearance in Italy, many 
of the discontented inhabitants would join him as 
they had joined Hannibal; and that the slaves, 
so lately at open war with their masters, would 
likewise be a plentiful supply of recruits to his 
army. 

These projects, however, appeared to his own 
nation too hazardous and vast. They were suited 
to the state of a king who wished to perish with 
splendour ; but not to that of subjects and follow- 
ers who had humbler hopes, and who chose to be 
governed by more reasonable prospects of success. 
The king himself, while he meditated such exten- 
sive designs, being confined by an ulcer in his 
face, had been for a considerable time concealed 
from public view, and had not admitted any per- 
sor to his presence besides some favourite eunuchs. 
The minds of his subjects, and of his own family 
in particular, were much alienated from him by 
some late acts of barbarous severity against Ma- 
chares and Xiphares, two of his children, who 
with some others, as we have mentioned, had in- 
curred his resentment. 

Pharnaces, another son, attended the father; 
and, though disposed to betray him, was still 
much im his confidence. The people of Phana- 
goria, a town on the shore of the Bosphorus, op 
posite to the fortress at which the king now 
resided, together with the inhabitants of the coun- 
try, pretending a variety of provocations, revolted 
against him; and the army, during his confine- 
ment, losing the usual awe of his person, muti- 
nied, and acknowledged Pharnaces for king. 
They assembled round the fort in which Mithri- 
dates was lodged, and which he had garrisoned 
with a chosen body of men. When he appeared 
on the battlements, and desired to know their de- 
mands: “To exchange you,” they said, “for 
Pharnaces; an old king for a young one.” Even 
while he received this answer, and while many 
of his guards deserted him, he still hoped that, if 
he were at liberty, he might retrieve his affairs. 
He desired, therefore, by repeated messages, to 
know whether he might have leave to depart in 
safety? But none of the messengers he sent 
with this question being suffered to return, he 
apprehended that there was a design to deliver 
him up into the hands of the Romans. Under 
this apprehension he had recourse to his last re- 
sort, a dose of poison, which, it is said, he always 
carried in the scabbard of his sword. Being to 
employ this sovereign remedy of all his evils, he 


Cuar. II] 


dismissed, with expressions of kindness and gra- 
titude, such of his attendants as still continued 
faithful to him; and being left with two of his 
daughters, who earnestly desired to die with their 
father, he allowed them to share in the draught, 
and saw them expire. But the portion which he 
had reserved for himself not being likely to over- 
come the vigour of his constitution, or, as was 
believed in those credulous times, being too pow- 
erfully counteracted by the effect of many anti- 
dotes he hađ taken against poison, he ordered a 
faithful slave who attended him, to perform with 
his sword what was in those times accounted the 
highest proof, as it was the last act, of fidelity in 
a servant to his master. 

Accounts of this event was brought to Pom- 
pey, while his army was encamped at the distance 
of some days’ march from the capital of Judea, in 
his way to Arabia. The messengers appeared 
carrying wreaths of laurel on the points of their 
spears; and the army, crowding around their ge- 
neral to learn the tidings, were informed of the 
death of Mithridates. ‘This they received with 
acclamations, and immediately proceeded to make 
all the ordinary demonstrations of joy. Pompey, 
having now accomplished the principal object of 
the war, dropped his design on Arabia, and di- 
rected the march of his army towards Pontus. 
Herc he received the submission of Pharnaces, 
and, with many other gifts, was presented with 
the embalmed corpse of the king. ‘The whole 
army crowded to see it, examined the features 
and the scars, testifying, by these last effects of 
their curiosity, the respect which thcy entertained 
for this extraordinary man. He had, with short 
intervals, occupied the arms of the Romans dur- 
ing forty years; and, though he could not bring 
the natives of Asia to match with the Roman 
legions, yet he frequently, by the superiority of 
his own genius, stood firm in distress, or rose 
from misfortune with new and unexpected re- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC 


169 


sources. He was tall, and of a vigorous consti- 
stution, addicted to women, and, though superior 
to every other sort of seduction, to this his ardent 
and impetuous spirit made him a frequent and 
an easy prey. He appears to have loved and 
trusted many of that sex with boundless passion. 
By some of them he was followed in the field; 
others he distributed in his different palaces ; had 
many children, and entertained more parental 
affection than commonly attends the polygamy 
of Asiatic princes; yet even towards his own sons, 
as well as towards every one else, on occasions 
which alarmed the jealousy of his crown, he was 
sanguinary and: inexorable. 

Pompey proceeded to settle the remainder of 
his conquests; and, besides the arrangements 
already mentioned, annexed the kingdom of Pon- 
tus to the province of Bithynia, gave the Bos- 
phorus to Pharnaces, and put the province of 
Syria, extending to the frontier of Egypt, under 
the government of Scaurus. He had now, from 
the time of his appointment to succeed Lucullus, 
for about three years, had the sole direction of 
the affairs of the Romans in Asia;! and had ex- 
changed with the king of Parthia provoking mes- 
sages, which, in a different conjuncture, might 
have led toimmediate war, But the cirumstances 
were not yet ape for such a measure, and Pom- 
pey had provided sufficient materials for a tri- 
umph, without attempting to break through those 
boundaries on which so many Roman generals 
were doomed to disappointments, and on which 
the progress of the empire itself was destined to 
stop. 

Without entertaining any farther projects for 
the present, he set out with two legions on the 
route of Cilicia towards Italy, having Tigranes, 
son to the king of Armenia, together with Aris- 
tobulus, late usurper of the Jewish throne, with 
his family, two sons and two daughters, as cap- 
tives to adorn his triumph.? 


CHAPTER III. 


Growing Corruption of the Roman Officers of State—'Fhe Love of Consideration changed for 
Avarice, Rapacity, and Prodigality—Laws against Extortion—Catiline a Candidate for the 
Consulship—Conspiracy with Autronius—Competition for the Consulate—E lection of Cicero 
and Antonius—Condition of the Times—Agrarian Law of Rullus— Trial of Rabirius— 
Cabals of the T'ribunes—Of Catiline—His Flight from the City— Discovery ‘of his Accom- 


plices— Their Execution. 


ABOUT the time that Pompey obtained his 
commission to command with so extensive a pow- 
er in the suppression of the pirates, the tide be- 
gan to run high against the aristocratical party. 

T'he populace, led by some of the 


U. C. 686. tribunes, were ever ready to insult 

the authority of the senate; and 
ae the vices of particular men gave 
M. Aul. Qla- frequent advantages against the 
brio. whole order of nobility. Corrup- 


tion and dangerous faction prevailed 
at elections, and the preferments of state were 
generally coveted, as steps to the government of 
provinces, where fortunes were amassed by every 
species of abuse, oppression, and violence. Envy 


and indignation ei in rousing the people | 


against these abuses. Cornelius, 

Lez Cornelia one of the tribunes, proposed a se- 
de Ambitu. vere law against bribery, by which 
> persons convicted of this crime 
should be disqualified for any oflice of state. 
The senate wished to soften the rigour of this 
law, by limiting the penalty to a pecuniary fine ; 
and the consul, Calpurnius Piso, moved for an 
edict to this purpose, in order to anticipate and 
to preclude the more violent law of Cornelius. 
But the tribune prevailed, and obtained an act 
imposing the severer penalty. He likewise, by 
another decree of the people, attacked the discre- 


1 Dion Cass, lib. xxxvii. c. 6. 
2 Joseph. de Bell. Jud. lib. i. c. 7. 


170 


tionary jurisdiction of the pretors,! obliged them 
to be more explicit in the edicts they published, 
and to observe them more exactly. 

The crime of extortion in the provinces, how- 


ever, was the great disgrace of the Romans. To 


have found an effectual remedy for this evil, 
would have done more honour to the common- 
wealth than they had derived from all their con- 
quests. Severe laws were accordingly enacted, 
complaints were willingly received, and prosecu- 
tions encouraged. Candidates for popularity and 
public favour generally began with endeavouring 
to bring some offender under this title to public 
Justice; but the example of this state, after all, 
has left only this piece of instruction to mankind: 
That just government over conquered provinces 
is scarcely to be hoped for, and least of all where 
republics are the conquerors. 

Manilius, one of the tribunes of the people, in 
order to strengthen the inferior class of his con- 
stituents, had obtained by surprise an act,? by 
which the citizens of slavish extraction were to 
be promiscuously inrolled in all the tribes. ‘This 
act, having drawn upon him the resentment of 
the senate, compelled him to seek for security 
under the protection of Gabinius and Pompey. 
With this view he moved his famous act, in 
which Cicero concurred, to vest Pompey with 
the command in Asia. This motion procured 

him a powerful support, and, on 
Ler Manilia. some occasions, the general voice 

of the people in his favour. Soon 
after this transaction, being prosecuted for some 
offence at the tribunal of Cicero, who was then 
prætor, and being refused the usual delays, the 
prætor was obliged to explain this step in a speech 
to the people; in which he told them, that he 
meant to favour Manilius, and that, his own 
term in office being about to expire, he could not 
favour him: more effectually, than by hastening 
his trial, and by not leaving him in the power of 
a successor, who might not be equally disposed 
in his favour. Such were the loose and popular 
notions of justice then prevailing at Rome.3 

At the election of consuls for the following 
year, there occurred an opportunity to apply the 
law against bribery. Of four candidates, Publius 
Autronius Petus, Publius Cornelius Sylla, L. 
Aurelius Cotta, and L. Manlius Torquatus, the 
majority had declared for the former two; but 
these being convicted of bribery, were set aside, 
and their competitors declared duly elected. 

About the same time L. Sergius Catilina, 
who has been already mentioned as one of the 
most violent executioners of Sylla’s proscriptions, 
having returned from A frica, where he had served 


in the capacity of prætor, and intending’ to stand. 


for the consulate, was accused of extortion in his 
province, and stopped in his canvass by a prose- 
cution raised on this account. In his rage for this 
disappointment, he was ripe for any disorder; 
and, being readily joined by Autronius and Piso, 
formed a conspiracy to assassinate their rivals,‘ 
to massacre the senate, to seize the ensigns of 
Eee and, with the aid of their faction, to lay 

old of the government. Julius Cesar and 
Crassus are mentioned by Suetonius as accom- 
plices in this plot. Crassus was to have been 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xxxvi. c. 23. 
Q Ibid. lib. xxxvi. 

3 Plutarch. in Vit. Cicer. 

5 Dion, lib. xxxvi &c. 


4 Cic. in Catil. i c. 6. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II 


named dictator, and Cesar his general of the 
horse.6 Cæsar was to have given the signal for 
the execution of the massacre, by uncovering his 
shoulders of his gown; but Crassus having re- 
lented, absented himself from the senate on the 
day appointed, and Cesar, though present, omit- 
ted to give the signal, by which means the whole 
was disconcerted. Sylla was tried some years after 
as an accessory, and was defended by Cicero. 
Many of those who, by their birth and distinc- 
tion, were destined to run the career of political 
honours, found their fortunes, by the extravagant 
expence of public shows, and ^ gratuities to the 
people, by bribes to private persons, as well as by 
their own debauchery and prodigality, ruined 
before they attained their end. They sought to 
repair their ruin by any unwarrantable means,’ 
and were ready to engage in any dangerous de- 
sign. The state appears to have apprehended 
an increase of this danger from the number of 
foreigners, who, from every quarter, crowded to 
Rome, as to the general resort of persons who 
wished to gratify their own extravagance, or to 
prey upon that of others. Under this apprehen- 
sion, an edict was: obtained, upon the motion of 
C. Papius, tribune of the people, to oblige all 
strangers to leave the city: but it is 
Let Papia de likely, that the state was in greater 
Peregrinis. danger from natives than foreign- 
ers. Catiline, having prevailed upon Clodius, 
by the consideration of a sum of money, to drop 
the prosecution, which had been intended against 
him, was left to offer himself a candidate for the 
consulate of the following year.8 
T he office of censor had been revived inthe per 
sons of Catulus and Crassus; but these officers 
found that its authority, so powerful in former 
times, was now of little effect. They scarcely 
ventured to give it a trial within the city; and, 
having differed about the enrolment of citizens 
residing beyend the Po, and about some other 
particulars, they resigned their power.? Censors 
were again named in the following year, but 
with no greater effect; some of the tribunes, 
fearing to be degraded from the senate, forbade 
them to proceed in making up the roll.!° 
In the next consulate, Caius Ju- 
U. C. 689. lius Cesar, at this time thirty-five 
ears of age, entered on his career 
C Lees if popularity and ambition. Being 
gulus. edile, together with Marcus Bibu- 
lus, he not only concurred with his 
colleague in all the expensive shows that were 
given to the people, but gave separate entertain- 
ments on his own account. The multitudes of 
gladiators he had assembled on this occasion 
gave an alarm to the magistracy, and he was 
ordered not to exceed a certain number. In the 
administration of his office as pretor,. he took 
some steps that were likely to revive the animo- 
sity of the late parties of Marius and Sylla; and, 
notwithstanding the act of indemnity which had 
passed, ‘raised prosecutions on a charge of assas- 
sination, against all those who had put any citizen 
to death in execution of Sylla’s proscription." 
From this time, Suetonius observes, that Cicero 
dated the beginning of Cesar’s project to subvert 


6 Sueton. in Cesar. 7 Plutarch. in Vit. Ciceronis 
8 Cicero de Auruspicum Responsis. 

9 Dion, lib. xxxvi. Plutarch. in Crasso. 

19 Thid Phat. 11 Sueton. in Vit C. J. Cesaris. 


Dear. HI] 


the republic, and to make himself master of the 
state.!? 

What has most distinguished this consulate, 
however, is the competition of candidates for the 
succession to that office on the following year, 
and the consequences of the election which fol- 
lowed. The candidates were M. Tullius Cicero, 
C. Antonius, son of the late celebrated orator, 
L. Sergius Catilina, P. Sulpitius Galba, and L. 
Cassius Longinus, Quintus Cornificius, and Li- 
cinius Sacerdos. 

Cicero was the first of his family who had ever 
resided, or enjoyed any honours, at Rome. He 
was a native of Arpinum, a country-town of 
Italy, and was considered as an obscure person 
by those who were descended of ancient families, 
but had great consideration on account of his 
eloquence and the consequences of it, to all such 
as had any interests at stake before the tribunals 
of justice. Being solicited by Catiline to under- 
take his defence on a trial for malversation in 
Sicily, he did not at once reject the request, nor 
always deny his aid to the factious tribunes in 
support of their measures. He was undoubtedly, 
like other ambitious men at Rome, disposed to 
court every party, and willing to gain indivi- 
duals ;'3 and had of late, in particular, considera- 
bly strengthened his interest, by having supported 
the pretensions of Pompey, and by having joined 
the popular tribunes, in what they proposed in 
behalf of that officer. He was, notwithstanding, 
probably by his aversion to appear for so bad a 
client as Catiline, saved from the reproach of 
having espoused his cause; and by his known 
inclination in general to support the authority of 
the senate, he disposed the aristocratical party to 
forgive the occasional part which he took with 
the tribunes in particular questions, not imme- 
diately supposed to affect their government. 

In the course of this competition for the con- 
sulship, Antonius and Catiline jcined interests 
together, and spared no kind or degree of corrup- 
tion. Cicero complained of their practices in the 
senate, and moved to revive the law of Calpur- 
nius against bribery, with an additional penalty 
of ten years’ banishment." Catiline considered 
this measure as levelled against himself; and 


incited by this provocation, as well as by the 
animosity of a rival, was then supposed to have 


formed a design against Cicero’s life, and to have 


expressed himself to this purpose, in terms that 


gave a general alarm to the electors, and deter- 
mined great numbers against himself. He had 
drawn to his interests many persons of infamous 
“haracter and desperate fortune, many youths of 

ood family, whom he debauched or encouraged 
in their profligacy. 
ings, was full of indignation at the unequal and 
supposed unjust distribution of fortune and pow- 
er. “All the wealth of the state, all authority,” 
he said, “is engrossed by a few, while others of 
more merit, are kept in poverty and obscurity, 
and oppressed with debts.” He professed his 
intention, when in office, to remove these griev- 
ances, to cancel the debts of his friends, to enrich 


12 Sueton. Vit. C. J. Ces. c. ix. Suetonius supposes, 
that Cicero alluded to the conspiracy of Autronius and 
Sys, in which Crassus, as well as Cesar, was said 
to be engaged. 

33 Ep. ad Atticum, lib. i. ep. 2. 

14 Dio. lib xxxvii. c. 39. 


= 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


His language, at their meet- 


171 


them by oe divisions of land, and to place 
them in the highest stations. 

These declarations, being: made to a numerous 
meeting, were ill concealed. Curius, one of the 
faction, boasted to Fulvia, a woman of rank, 
with whom he had a criminal correspondence, 
that a revolution must soon take place, and spe- 
cified the particular hopes and designs of their 

arty. This woman mentioned the subject to 
p own confidents, but concealed the author of 
her information. In the mean time, Catiline 
was considered as a person of the most dangerous 
designs, and was opposed in his election by all 
who had any regard to public order, or to the 
safety of thecommonwealth. Cicero, at the same 
time, being supported by the senate, was elected, 
together with Caius Antonius. The latter stood 
candidate upon the same intcrest with Catiline, 
and was preferred to him only by a small majority. 
By this event the designs of Cati- 

U. C. 680. line were supposed to be frustrated ; 
M. Tuli but the consuls were nct likely to 

. Tullius : oa ? 
Citero, enter on a quiet administration. 
C. Antonius. The tribunitian power, from the 
time of its restoration, was gradually 
recovering its force, and extending its operations. 
Every DE that could give any public disturb- 
ance, that could annoy the senate, or mortify 
any of its leading members; every one that had 
views of ambition adverse to the laws, or who 
wished to take part in scenes of confusion and 
tumult; every person oppressed with debt, who 
wished -to defraud his, creditors; every person 
who, by his profligacy or crimes, was at variance 
with the tribunals-of justice, was coinpreliended 
under the general denomination of the popular 
party. ‘The Roman people had once been divid- 
ed into patrician and plebeian, next into noblemen 
and commoners; but now they took sides with 
little regard to former distinctions against or for 
the preservation of public order. In the assembly 
of the centuries, as well as in that of the tribes, 
the disorderly and the profligate began to prevail ; 
and as it was impossible that the collective body 
of the people could meet, the comitia, for the most 
part, was but another name for such riotous as- 
semblies, as were made up of the persons who 
haunted the streets of Rome. The minds of 
sober men were full of fear and distrust, alarmed 
with surmises of plots, and various combinations 
of desperate persons, who united their influence, 
not to carry elections or attain to preferments, 
but to overturn the government, or to share in its 
spoils.'s 

One of the tribunes of the present. 

Ler Servilia year, Servilius Rullus, soon after his 
Agraria. admission into office, under pretence 
of providing settlements for many of the citizens, 
penne the heads of an Agrarian law, which 
e carried to the senate and the people. The 
subject of former grants was now in a great mea- 
sure exhausted, and all Italy was inhabited by 
Roman citizens. This tribune proposed a new 
expedient to open settlements for the indigent, 
uot by conquest, but by purchase. It was pro- 
posed that all estates, terntories, or possessions of 
any sort, which belonged to the republic, should 
be sold ; that all acquisitions of territory recently 
made, and the spoils taken from any enemy 
should be disposed of in the same nianner; that 


15 Cicero de Lege Agraria. 


17% 


the inoney arising from such sales should be em- 
ployed in purchasing arable and cultivable lands, 
to be assigned in lots tothe needy citizens; and 
that, to carry this law into execution, ten com- 
missioners should be named in the same manner 
in which the pontiffs were named, not by the 
whole people, but by seventeen of the tribes select- 
ed by lot: that these commissioners should be 
judges, without appeal, of what was or was not 
public property ; of what was to be sold, of what 
was to be bought, and at what price; that they 
were toreceive and judge of the accounts of every 
consul, or other officer, except Pompey, com- 
manding in any province, where any capture was 
made, or new territory acquired: and in short, 
that they should, during five years, which was 
the intended term of their commission, be the 
sole masters of all property within the empire, 
whether public or private. 

On the day that the new consuls entered on 
their office, when they returned in procession 
from the capitol, and gave the first meeting to 
the senate, Rullus had the presumption to pro- 
pose this law, and to move the conscript fathers, 
that they would be pleased to give it the sanction 
of their approbation and authority in being car- 
ried to the people. Upon this occasion, Cicero 
made his first speech in the character of consul. 
‘The former part of it is lost ; the remainder may 
be reckoned among the highest specimens of his 
eloquence. In this and the two speeches he de- 
livered to the people, on the same subject, he 
endeavoured to demonstrate (if we may venture 
to imitate his own expressions) that, from the 
first clause of this law to the last, there was 
nothing thought of, nothing proposed, nothing 
done but the erecting, in ten persons, under the 
pretence of an Agrarian law, an absolute sove- 
reignty over the treasury, the revenue, the pro- 
vinces, the empire, the neighbouring kingdoms 
and states; and, in short, over all the world as 
far as it was known to the Romans. He painted 
in such lively colours the abuses which might be 
committed by Rullus, and by his associates, in 
judging what was private and what public pro- 
perty, in making sales, in making purchases, in 
planting the colonies; and so exposed the impu- 
dence of the cheat, by which it was proposed to 
surprise the people into the granting of such pow- 
ers, the absurdity and the ruinous tendency of the 
whole measure, that it was instantly rejected, 
and its author hissed from the assembly, and 
treated as an object of ridicule and scorn. 

The splendour of the consul’s eloquence, on 
this occasion, appeared with great distinction, and 
the spirit of the times continued to furnish him 
with opportunities to display it? Roscius Ame- 
rinus, having been tribune of the people a few 
years before, had, by the authority of his office, 
set apart some benches in the theatre for the 
equestrian order. ‘This gave offence to the peo- 
ple, so that Roscius was commonly hissed when 

e appeared at any of the vublic assemblies. On 
some one of these occasıons the consul interposed ; 
and, in a popular harangue, secured the attach- 
ment of the knights to himself, and reconciled the 
peopl:: to the distinction which had been made in 
favour of that body. 


1 Jt is probable that Cicero did not write in order 
to speak, but wrote after he had spoken, for the use of ` 
sus friends, Epist. ad Atticuin, lib. ii.c. 1. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boo 11. 


There happened under the same consulate a 
business of greater difficulty, being a motion to 
restore the sons of the proscribed to the privilege 
of being chosen into the offices of state, of which 
they had been deprived by an ordinance of Sylla. 
Their fate was undoubtedly calamitous and se- 
vere. Many of them who had been too young 
to have incurred the guilt of their party, were now 
come of age, and found themselves stript of their 
birthright, and stigmatized with this mark of dis- 
honour. lt was proposed, in their behalf, to take 
away this cruel exclusion. But Cicero, appre- 
hending that this proposal tended to arm and to 
strengthen persons, who, from long use, had con- 
tracted an habitual disaffection to the established 
government, powerfully opposed the motion, and 
succeeded in having it rejected.? 

Though the orations on the two subjects last 
mentioned have perished, great part of that which 
he spoke on the trial of C. Rabirius still remains. 
This man, of a great age, a respectable senator 
at the distance of six-and-thirty years, was 
brought to trial as an aecomplice in the death of 
Apuleius Saturninus, the factious tribune, who, 
as has been related, having seized the capitol, 
was, by the consuls Marius and Valerius Flac. 
cus, acting under the authority of the senate, and 
attended by all the most respectable citizens in 
arms, forced from his strong-hold, and put to 
death as a public enemy. 

Titus Atius Labienus, one of the tribunes, 
was the declared prosecutor of ©. Rabirius ; but 
historians agree, that this tribune acted at the in- 
stigation, and under the direction, of C. Julius 
Cesar. The intention of the popular party was, 
by making an example of this respectable person 
in so strong a case, where the authority of the 
senate, and the.commands of the most popular 
consul, where even the prescription of so old a 
date should have repelled every danger, effec- 
tually, for the future, to deter every person from 
acting in support of the senate, or from opposing 
foxe to the designs of factious tribunes, however 
turbulent or dangerous. 

The senate, and all the friends of government, 
were greatly alarmed, and united in defence of 
Rabirius. ‘The popular party, as already de- 
scribed, the ambitious, the profligate, the bank- 
rupt, who were earnest to weaken the hands of 
government, and in haste to bring on scenes of 
confusion and trouble, took the oppusite side. 

The prosecutor laid his charge ior treason of 
the most heinous kind, and destined the accused 
to die on the cross, the ordinary manner of exe- 
cuting the sentence of death on the slaves. ‘‘ The 
executioner stalks in the forum,” said Cicero, 
“and the cross is erected for a Roman citizen in 
the field of Mars.” The accusation was first 
brought before the pretor, who possessed the 
ordinary jurisdiction in such cases, ‘This magis- 
trate empannelled two judges, who were to deter- 
mine in this mighty cause. These were Caius 
Julius and Lucius Cesar. At this court the 
defendant was condemned ; and with appearances 
of animosity, on the part of Caius Cesar, that 
greatly increased the alarm. ‘This rising citizen 
had always courted the populace, and was strongly 


} supported by them. ‘That he should aim at ho- 


nours and power, it was said, is common; but 
that he wished to provide impunity for the dis- 


— e —— ae 


2 Pin. lib. vii. c. 30 


oar. LML] 


‘arbers of the commonwealth, was alarming. 
Che crime of Rabirius, even if he could be con- 
victed of it, had been committed the vear before 
Cæsar was born. In the person of the accused 
every circumstance, even on the supposition of 
a true charge, pleaded for compassion and even 
for respect: the fact, at the same time, was de- 
nied, and a positive evidence was brought, that 
another had received a reward for killing Saturn- 
mus: but the policy of the faction required this 
victim; and the sentence must have been exe- 
cuted, if the condemned had not fled, by appeal, 
to the judgment of the people, where indeed his 
cause might be reckoned more desperate than if 
it had been before a select court. The parties 
attended this trial with great.ardour. Horten- 
sius conducted the appeal and defence. Cicero 
pleaded in behalf of justice and government ; 
painted the age, the infirmities, the forlorn state 
of the defendant, who had survived his relations 
and his friends. He pointed out the danger to 
government and-to order from this precedent, in 
terms that must have melted every heart, not 
callous from ambition, faction, or profligacy of 
manners: but in vain. Even in the assembly 
of the centuries, the majority was hastening to 
affirm the sentence, when Q. Cecilius Metellus 
Celer, then prætor, and one of the augurs, hasten- 
ed to the Janiculum, and tore down the ensign 
which was planted there as a sign of peace. A 
silly piece of superstition stopt the proceedings of 
those whom neither justice nor compassion, nor 
regard to government could restrain. 

It was established, as has been formerly no- 
viced,? that the assembly of the centuries could 
not proceed without this signal in view. In the 
drst ages of Rome, theenemy were always at the 
a. While the people were assembled in the 

eld on one side of the city, they were in danger 
of being assailed on the other. Vhen they as- 
rembled, therefore, in the field of Mars, a guard 
was always posted on the Janiculum, and an 
ensign displayed. If any enemy appeared, the 
ensign was taken down, the assembly dismissed, 
and the people took to their arms. 
mony, like many other customs both of supersti- 
tion and law, remained after the occasion had 
ceased ; and it was held illegal or impious in the 
people to proceed in any aflair mpu the en- 
sign in view. By this means the frial was put 
off, and the prosecutors, despairing of being able 
to work up the people again into an equal degree 
of violence, dropt the prosecution. ‘I'he cause 
still remained undecided, and the power -of the 
senate to defend its own authority, continued in 
a state of suspense. 

The tribune Labienus laid aside all thoughts 
of renewing the prosecution, in order to pursue 
the object of some other popular acts; one in 
particular, to repeal the almost only remaining 
ordinance of Syila; that which related to the 
election of priests. The right of election was 
again taken from the college, and, according to 
the law of Domitius, given to seventeen of the 
tribes that were to be drawn by lot. This change 
was intended to open the way of Caius Julius 
Cesar into that office; and he was accordingly 
promoted to it in the following year. 

Others of the tribunes likewise endeavoured to 
distinguish themselves by acts of turbulence and 


3 See book i c. 1 


OF THE ROMAN REPUOLIC. 


This cere-. 


173 


sedition, Metellus Nepos endeavoured to repeal 
that clause of the act against bribery and cor- 
ruption, which declared the party convicted to 
be disqualified for any of the offices of state. 
This tribune, though sufficiently disposed to dis- 
orderly courses, had many connections ainong 
the most respectable citizens, and was persuaded, 
in this instance, to drop his design. 

But among the several confederacies into which 
the popular party was divided, none was mere 
desperate, nor supposed more dangerous, than 
that of Catiline, the late disappointed candidate 
for the consulship. His rival Cicero had intima- 
tion, before the elections, of a design formed by 
this desperate faction against his own person, 
and still continued to observe them. He entered 
into a correspondence with Fulvia, who had 
given the first hints of a dangereus conspiracy ; 
and, by means of this woman, procured the con 
fidence of Curius, who gave him minute informa 
tion of all the proceedings of the party. 

In public, Catiline again professed himself a 
candidate for the office of consul, in competition 
with Servius Sulpicius, P. Murena, and J. Si- 
lanus. He boasted of support from Antonius; 
but Cicero to divert his colleague from this dan- 

erous connection, made him every concessicn. 
es in drawing lots for the provinces of Gaul 
and Macedonia, drawn the latter, which was 
thought to be preferable, he yielded it up to An- 
tonius; and by this, and every other means in 
his power, persuaded him to value the secure 
possession of dignities and honours, lawfully ob- 
tained, in preference to expectations formed on 
the projects of a few desperate men. 

In secret, Catiline encouraged his adherents 
by professing to have many resources, and to be 
supported by numbers who were ready to take 
arms at his command. Ina numerous meeting 
of his party in October, a few days before the 
consular elections, he opened the whole of his 
design; and in the speech which he made on 
that occasion, is said to have used expressions to 
the following purpose: ‘The distressed can rely 
for relief only on those who have a common cause 
with singel Whoever, in his own fortune, 
is at ease, will not regard the misery of others. 
If you would know how I stand affected to the 
parties which now divide the commonwealth, rich 
creditors and needy debtors, recollect what every 
one knows, that | have no safety bnt in the de- 
struction of the one, and in the relief of the other 
that my interest is the same with yours, and that 
I have courage to attempt what may be necessary 
for vour benefit.” i 

From the strain of this passage, the description 
of a party to whom it was with propriety ad- 
dressed, may be easily collected. Cicero, who 
had frequently taxed Catiline with dangerous 
designs, now determined to lay the whole of his 
intelligence before the senate; and for this pus- 
pose deferred the consular elections, which were 
to have been held on the eighteenth of October, 
toa future day, and assembled the senate. Cati- 
line having with the other members attended, and 
heariug the charge, did not pretend to deny or 
to palhate his words. “There are,” he said, “in 
this republic, two parties; one weak both in its 
members and head; the other, strong in its men, 
bers, but wanting a head: while I have the 
honour of being supported by this party, it shall 
have a head.” Upon these words, a general cry 


gat 


of indignation arose in the senate; but no resolu- 
tion was taken. Many, who were there present 
as members, were pleased to see the senate itself 
insulted; and Catiline, as if in condition to brave 
all his enemies, was, in all his expressions, equally 
unguarded in the streets and in the senate. To 
Cato, who, in the public forum, some days before 
this meeting, had threatened him with a prosecu- 
tion: ‘ Do,” he said, “but if you light a flame in 
my fortunes, I will extinguish it under the ruins 
of the commonwealth.” 

A prosecution was actually raised against him 
in the name of Lucius Paulus, a young man of 
distinction, for carrying arms against the public 
peace. On this occasion, however, he thought 
proper to dissemble his thoughts, and offered to 
commit his person to custody till his innocence 
should appear. ‘ Noone,” he said, “who knows 
my rank, my pretensions, and the interest I have 
in the preservation of the commonwealth, will 
believe, that its destruction is to be apprehended 
from me, and that its safety is to come from a 
native of Arpinum.”2 He offered to commit 
himself to the custody of Cicero, of Metellus, or 
of any other magistrate, till this injurious asper- 
sion were removed. 'To this offer the consul 
replied, That he who did not think himself safe 
within the same ramparts with Catiline, would 
not receive him into his house.’ 

By one effect of the unparalleled freedom now 
enjoyed by Roman citizens, persons accused of 
the most dangerous crimes were at liberty, during 
the dependence of their trial, either to proceed in 
perpetrating their crime, or to withdraw from jus- 
tice. This effect was derived from the laws of 
Valerius and Porcius, which secured against 
violence or the power of the magistrate, the per- 
son of every citizen, until he were finally con- 
demned by the people. in support of this privilege, 
which was salutary, when the abuse of power in 
the magistrate was to be dreaded more than the 
license of crimes in the subject, the Romans per- 
sisted even after vice was become too strong for 
tLe laws, and when exemption from every just 
restraint was fatally mistaken for liberty. ‘Lhe 
state had now been thrown, on many occasions, 
into the most violent convulsions, because there 
was no ordinary or regular method of preventing 
disorders, or of suppressing them on their first 
appearance. , 

Catiline, soon after the elections, at which, by 
he preference given to Murena and Silanus, he 
received a fresh disappointment in his hopes of 
the consulship, sent Mallius, or Manlius, an ex- 
perienced soldier, who had served with himself 
under Sylla, to prepare for an insurrection in the 
istrict of Etruria. This officer, in the end of 
Jctober, under pretence of giving refuge to debtors 
irom the oppression of their creditors, had actually 
assembled a considerable body of men.4 Ac- 
sounts at the same time were received, that 
Publius Sylla was making a large purchase of 
gladiators at Capua, and insurrections were ac- 
cordingly apprehended on the side of Campania 
and Apulia. In this state of affairs, continual 
nformations being brought of Catiline’s designs, 
ne senate gave in charge to the consuls to watch 


1 Cicero Orat. pro Murena. 

2 The town of which Cicero was native. 
3 Cicer> in Catilinam, i.c. 3. 

4 Ibid 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINA'LVION 


{Buor Ill. 


over the safety of the state; and these officers 
accordingly put chosen bodies of men under arms, 
and secured all the posts of consequence in the 
city. Metellus, the conqueror of Crete, who 
still remained without the walls in hopes of a 
triumph, was appointed to command on the side 
of Apulia. The prætor Metellus Celer was sent 
into Cisalpine Gaul, in order to secure the peace 
of that province ;5 and the consul Antonius was 
destined to suppress the insurrection of Mallius 
at Fesule.6 

Catiline meanwhile remained in the city, and 


had frequent consultations for the preparation 


and the execution of his plot. Ata meeting of 
the party, held in the beginning of November, in 
the house of M. Porcius Lecca,” a general mas- 
sacre of the principal senators was projected. 
The conspirators severally chose their stations, 
and undertook their several parts. ‘Two in par- 
ticular, who were familiar in Cicero’s house, un- 
dertook next morning, under pretence of a visit, 
to surprise and assassinate the consul. But he 
being the same night apprised of his danger by 
Fulvia, gave the proper orders, and the intended 
murderers, upon their appearance at his door, 
were refused admittance. He immediately after 
assembled the senate in the temple of Jupiter. 
Catiline presented himself with his usual pre- 
sumption ; and Cicero, as appears from an oration 
which he then delivered, instead of laying the 
matter in forin before the senate, accosted Cati- 
line in a vehement invective, urging him to be 
gone from the city, where all his steps were mi- 
nutely observed, where his meaning was under 
stood, and precautions taken against all his de- 
signs. ‘‘T told you,” said the consul, “that your 
emissary Mallius would be in arms by the first 
of November; that you intended a massacre of 
the senators about the same time. I now repeat 
the memorable words you made use of when you 
were told, that many of the senators had with 
drawn from the city. You should be satisfied, 
you said, with the blood of those who remained. 
‘Were you not surrounded, hemmed in, and beset 
on every side by the guards posted to watch you? 
Did your intention to surprise Preneste, on the 
night of the first of November, escape me? Did 
you not find precautions taken that argued a 
knowledge of your design? ‘There is nothing, in 
short, that you do, that you prepare, that you 
meditate, which is not heard, which is not seen, 
which is not felt by me in every circumstance. 
What of last night? Were you not at the house 
of Porcius Lecca? Deny it! I have evidence. 
There are here present persons who were of your 
company. But where are we? What manner 
of government or republic is this? The enemies 
and destroyers of the commonwealth make a part 
in its highest councils! We know them, and 
yet they are suffered to live! But, be gone. The 
time of enduring you is past. ‘The world is con- 
vinced of your guilt. Stay only till there is not 
a single person that can pretend to doubt of it; 
till your own partizans must be silent, and till 
the clamour, which they would willingly raise 
against every necessary act of government, be 
suppressed.” 

This being the general tendency of the consul’s 
speech, fraught with such <larming matter, and 


5 Cicero in Catilinam, c. 12. 
6 Now Florence. 7 Cicero pr. Pub. Sylla, e. 16 


— = 


Snap {iat 


urged with so much confidence, the audience was 
seized with terror, and numbers, who happened 
to be on the same bench with Catiline, withdrew 
from his side. He himself arose, and attempted 
to vindicate his character, but was silenced with 
a general cry of indignation; upon which he left 
the senate; and, after concerting farther mea- 
sures with those of his party, not thinking that a 
longer stay in the city could be of any use to his 
affairs, he withdrew in the night, leaving letters 
behind him to some of the senators, in which he 
complained, that, by a combination of his ene- 
mies, he was driven into exile; and that, rather 
than be the occasion of any disturbance in the 
commonwealth, he was willing to retire. While 
these letters were handed about in the city, he 
took his way, preceded by the ushers and ensigns 
of a Roman proconsul, straight for the camp of 
Mallius, and entered into a state of open war. 
The features of this man’s portrait are probably 
exaggerated by the vehement pencils and lively 
colourings of Cicero and of Sallust. He is re- 
os as able to endure hardships of any 

ind, and as fearless in any danger; as, from his 
youth, fond of discord, assassinations, and blood- 
shed; as having, under pretence of Sylla’s pro- 
scription, murdered his own brother to possess 
his estate ; as having murdered his own child, to 
remove the objection made to him by a woman 
who refused to marry him with the prospect of 
being astep-mother. He is represented as rapa- 
cious, prodigal, gloomy, impetuous, unquiet, dis- 
sembling, and perfidious; a description, of which 
the horrors are probably amplified ; but for which 
it cannot be doubted there was much foundation, 
as he far exceeded in profligacy and desperation 
all those who, either in this or the former age, 
were, by their ambition or thcir vices, hastening 
the ruin of the commonwealth. 

Cicero always professed to have particular in- 
telligence of the progress of Catiline. This, 
according to Sallust, he owed to Fulvia, by whose 
means he obtained a correspondence with Curius; 
but he himself, in none of his orations, gives any 
intimation of the manner in which he obtained 
his information. It is probable that Curius in- 
sisted on being concealed, that he might not be 
exposed to the rage of the conspirators as an in- 
former anda traitor. On this account the consul, 
although he was minutely apprised of particulars, 
was obliged to adopt the plan he hitherto followed, 
to urge the conspirators into open hostilities, and 
a full declaration of their purpose. He had suc- 
ceeded with respect to Catiline; but his accom- 
plices were yet very numerous in the city, and 
were taking their’ measures to co-operate with 
those who were if arms. 

In this state of affairs, Fabius Sanga, a Roman 
eitizen of distinction, came to the consul, and in- 
formed him, that the ambassadors of the Allo- 
broges, a people then inhabiting what is now 
called the territory of Geneva, and part of Savoy, 
whose patron he was, had made him privy to a 
very momentous affair; that, upon being dis- 
appointed in a suit, on which they had been em- 

oyed to the senate, they had been carried by P. 

mbrenus to Publius Cornelius Lentulus, the 
pretor, who condoled with them on the subject 
of the wrong they had received, assured them of 
redress if they would merit the favour of a party 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


175 


upon their return to the: cwn country, prevail 
on their nation to march an army, for this pur. 
pose, into Italy. Cicero immediately laid hold of 
this intelligence, as affording means to bring the 
plot to hght, and furnish a sufficient evidence to 
convict the conspirators. He desired Sanga to 
encourage the correspondence, to advise the am- 
bassadors to insist on proper credentials to be 
shown to their countrymen, to procure a list of 
the Roman citizens who, in case they should rise 
in rebellion against the Romans, were to become 
bound to protect them ; and when they should be 


‘thus provided, and about to depart, he instructed 


Sanga to bring him intimation of their motions, 
that they might be secured, with their writings, 
and other evidence of the facts to be ascertained. 
Sanga, having instructed the ambassadors ac- 
cordingly, gave notice of their motions to the 


consul. In the evening before they were to de- 


par Cicero ordered the prætors, L. Flaccus and 
. Pontinus, to march by different ways, and in 
small parties, after it was dark, a sufficient armed 
force to intercept the ambassadors of the Alo- 
broges. The parties were stationed on different 
sides of the river, at the bridge called Milvius, 
without knowing of cach other, and without 
having any suspicion of the purpose for which 
they were placed, farther than arose from their 
having been told that they were to seize any per- 
son who should attempt to pass. About three 
o’clock in the morning the ambassadors entered 
on the bridge with a numerous retinue ; and be- 
ing challenged, and commanded to stop by the 
party that was placed to intercept them, they 
endeavoured to force their way ; and some blood 
was shed. But on the appearance of the prztors, 
with their ensigns of office, the ambassadors 
ceased to resist. Their despatches were secured. 
Volturcius, a Roman citizen, who was found in 
their company, was taken and searched. Letters 
were found upon him, in different hands, and 
under different seals, addressed toCatiline. These, 
together with the prisoners, were immediately 
carried back to the city. 

The consul being apprised of the success which 
attended this part of his design, sent, before any 
alarm could be taken by the party, messages to 
Gabinius, Statilius, Cethegus, and Lentulus, de- 
siring to see them at his own house. The three 
former came with the messenger; but Lentulus 
was newly gone to bed, and, by his delay, gave 
some cause to suspect that he was aware of his 
danger. He too, however, came; and the house 
of Cicero was presently crowded, not only with 
numbers of the equestrian order that were in 
arms for the defence of his person, but likewise 
with many senators whom he desired to be pre- 
sent. The ambassadors of the Allobroges, now 
prisoners, were likewise conducted thither, and 
the letters found upon them were produced un- 
opened. Cicero declared his intention to assemble 
the senate without delay, in order to lay the 
whole matter before them. Many of the com- 
pany were of opinion, that the letters should be 
first opened, in order to see whether they con- 
tained any matter of so much moment, as to 
require assembling the senate, at a time when so 
par an alarm was likely to be taken. Cicero, 

owever, having no doubt of the contents of the 
letters, and of the importance of the matter, over- 


that was soon to have the ascendant at Rome; | ruled those scruples, and the senate was accord. 
and proposed that they should, immediately | ingly called. Meantime the Allobroges dropped 


176 


some expressions which implied, that arms were 
concealed in the house of Cethegus. This occa- 
sioned a search being then made, and a consider- 
able quantity of daggers and swords were accord- 
ingly found. 

At the meeting of the senate, Volturcius was 
first examined; he denied his knowledge of any 
treasonable designs, but appeared disconcerted ; 
and, upon being reminded of the reward that had 
been offered for the discovery of any plot against 
the state, and of the danger to which he himself 
would be exposed in prevaricating, he confessed, 
that the letters seized in his custody were sent by 
the prætor Lentulus and others: that he had be- 
sides a verbal message to Catiline, informing 
him that the plan was now ready for execution ; 
that the station of every person was assigned ; 
that some were appointed to set fire to the city in 
different places, and some to massacre their ene- 
mies in the midst of the confusion that was likely 


to be occasioned by the fire; and desiring that 


Catiline, in order to support his friends, and to 
profit by the diversion they were to make in his 


favour within the walls, should issue a proclama- 


tion to arm the slaves, and that he himself should 
march directly to Rome. 

The deputies of the Allobroges being next 
introduced, acknowledged, that they had been 
charged by Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, and 
Cassius, with assurances of support to the coun- 
cil of their nation, confirmed by oath, accompa- 
nied with directions, without delay, to march a 
hody of horse into Italy, where they should be 
joined by a humerous infantry, and receive pro- 


per directions in what manner they should far- 


ther proceed; that, to encourage them, Lentulus 
quoted a prophecy, found in the collection of the 
Sybils, by which he. himself was pointed out as 
the third of the Cornelii,! destined to arrive at the 
sovereignty of Rome: that the conspirators had 
differed about the time of executing their design. 
Lentulus was of opinion it should be deferred to 
the holy-days in December; that Cethegus, not- 
withstanding, and the others, were impatient, and 
desired a nearer day. 

The supposed conspirators were next called in 
their turns; and the letters, with the seals un- 
broken, were exhibited before them. Cethegus, 
being the first examined, persisted in denying his 
knowledge of any conspiracy; accounted for the 
arms that were found in his house, by saying, He 
was curious of workmanship of that nature, and 
always bought what he liked. He maintained 
his countenance well, till his letter was produced, 
and then fell into great confusion, as the seal was 
immediately known to be his. 

Lentulus next, with great confidence, denied 
the charge; affected not to know either Voltur- 
ċius or the ambassadors; asked them upon what 
occasion they ever could pretend to have been ad- 
mitted into his house? He, however, owned the 
seal affixed to the letter that was now produced 
against him. It was the head of his grandfather. 
But the letter being opened, was found to be 
unsigned, and in the following general terms: 
‘The bearer will inform you whol am. Fear 
nothing. Remember where you stand; and ne- 
glect nothing. Call in every aid, even the mean- 
est.” While he persisted in his denial, some 
one asked him, If he had never quoted the 


1 The former two were Cinna and Sylla. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II 


Sybiline oracles to these Gauls? Confounded 
with this question, he forgot his disguise, and 
confessed. 

Gabinius too was at last brought to own his 
guilt; and in this manner the conspiracy was 
fully laid open. L. Julius Cesar, the consul of 
the former year, in the presence of Lentulus, whe 
was married to his sister, gave his opinion, that 
this unhappy man should be immediately put to 
death. “This,” he said, “is no unprecedented 
measure. My grandfather, Fulvius Flaccus, was 
slain by order of the consul Gabinius. His son 
was taken into custody and put to death in pri- 
son.” Inthe mean time Lentulus was ordered t« 
divest himself of the office of prætor, and, to- 


gether with his accomplices, was committed te 


close imprisonment. This Cornelius Lentulus 
was distinguished by the name of Sura. He had 
been consul about eight years before, and was af- 
terwards, for his debaucheries, struck off the rolls 
of the senate. He had now again condescended 
to accept of the office of prætor, in order to re- 
cover, in the eapacity of a magistrate, his seat in 
the senate.. 

A proclamation was issued to apprehend M. 
Ceparius, who had heen sent to raise an insur- 
rection in Apulia, together with P. Furius, Ma- 
gius Chilo, and P. Umbrenus, who had first in- 
troduced the Gaulish ambassadors to Gabinius, 
The senate voted thanks to the consul Cicero for 
his great vigilance, and for the consummate abi- 
lity he had shown in the discovery and suppres- 
sion of this treasonable design; to the preetors, 
for the faithful execution of the consul’s orders - 
and to Antonius, his colleague, for having de- 
tached himself from men with whom he was 
known to have been, formerly connected. A pub- 
lic thanksgiving to the gods was likewise decreed 


‘in honour of the consul, and in consideration of 


this deliverance of the city from fire, of the peo- 
ple from massacre, and of Italy from devastation 
and war. -~ 

An assembly of the people being called, Cicero 
gave this account of the proceedings in a speech 
which is still extant,? and early on the following 
day assembled the senate to deliberate on the 
farther resolutions to be taken with respect to the 
prisoners. An agent had been busy in the night 
to raise some disturbance in favour of Lentulus; 
but the design of setting fire to the city struck 
the people in general with so much horror, that 
not only such as were possessed of property, but 
every inhabitant trembled for his own person, and 
for the safety of his house. The avenues to the 
senate, the capitol, the forum, all the temples 
in the neighbourhood, by break of day, were 
crowded with armed men. The consul had sum- 
moned the equestrian order in arms to protect the 
senate, and citizens of every rank came forth to 


-strengthen the hands of the magistrates. 


W hen the senate met, the members differed in 
their judgment. Junius Silanus, one of the con- 
suls-elect, being called up first in order, declared 
himself for a sentence of death. Tiberius Nero 
differed from him, and proposed perpetual im- 
prisonment. The majority, however, joined Si- 
lanus, until Caius Julius Cæsar spoke. This able 
advocate declared against the opinion of Silanus, 


not as too severe, but as contrary to law; and in 
sisted on the danger of a precedent which might 


er rt er 


2 In Cati? 7. 


yar. LiL] 


set the life of every citizen at the mercy of a vote 
in the senate. Death, he said, was the common 
destination of all men; what no one could avoid, 
and what the wise frequently coveted. It was not, 
therefore, a punishment ; and he did not propose 
to mitigate, but to increase, the severity of the 
sentence in this case: He proposed, therefore, 
that the estates of the prisoners should be con- 
fiscated ; that their persons should be committed 
for life to the keeping of the most secure and best 
affected towns in Italy; and that it should be de- 
clared treason for any one hereafter to move the 
senate or the people for any mitigation of their 
punishment. j 

Cæsar might be considered as uttering what 


the popular faction were to urge, and as laying 


the ground upon which the i a of the 
senate, and the conduct of each particular mem- 
ber, might be afterwards arraigned before the 
people. The terrors of the Porcian and Sem- 
pronian laws, when likely to be urged by so 
powerful an advocate, alarmed the greater part of 
the senate. Silanus is said to have retracted his 
opinion. The consul submitted the question to 
the judgment of the senate, and declared his wil- 
lingness to execute any decree they should form. 
He treated Cesar with great respect, and laid 
hold of the severe terms in which he spoke of the 
conspiracy, as a pledge of his future conduct, in 
case the proceedings of government, with respect 
to the matter now before them, should hereafter 
be questioned or brought under review. ‘‘ The 
senate,” he observed; “had no cause to dread the 
imputation of cruelty. It was mercy to prevent, 
in the most effectual manner, a crime to be per- 
petrated in so much blood. If this crime were 
not prevented, they were to see that city, the re- 
sort of nations, and the light and ornament of 
empire, perisli at one blow. ‘They were to see 
heaps of her citizens unburied, and lying in their 
blood; to see the fury of Cethegus let loose in 
murder; to see Lentulus become a king, Catiline 
commanding an army, and every where to hear 
the cries of mothers, to see the flight of children, 
and the rape of virgins. If the father of a fa- 


mily,” he continued, “should spare a slave who 


had shed the blood of his children, who had mur- 
dered his wife, and set fire to his dwelling, how 


should such a father be considered—as cruel, or 


as void of affection? 

“He desired them not to regard what was 
given out, of their not being in condition to at- 
tempt any thing vigorous against those men. He 
himself, as first magistrate, had not neglected the 
necessary precautions; and the general ardour 
with which all ranks of men concurred in the 
defence of their families, their properties, and the 
seat of empire, rendered every resolution they 
could take secure of the utmost effect. ‘The fo- 
rum is full, all the temples in its neighbourhood 
are full, all the streets and avenues to this place 
of assembly are full of citizens of every denomina- 
tion, armed for the defence of their country. He 
requested that the senate would issue their orders 
before the sun went down, and seemed to appre- 
hend dangerous consequences, if these matters 
were left undetermined, and the city exposed to 
the accidents of the following night. For him- 
self, he professed to have taken his resolution. 
Although he felt the occasion full of personal 
danger, he would execute the orders of the con- 
script fathers,’ he said; “but, if he fell in the 

Z 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 177 


attempt, implored their protection for his wife 
and his children.”3 

Al this appears to have passed in debate before 
Cato spoke. This virtuous citizen, then about 
thirty-three years of age, had, in the former part 
of his life, taken a very different course from the 
youths of his own time, and, both by his temper 
and education, was averse to the libertine prin- 
ciples which had crept into the politics and the 
manners of the age. He spoke chiefly in answer 
to Caius Cesar, who, he observed, seemed to mis- 
take the question. “We are not inquiring,” he 
said, “ what is the proper punishment of a crime 
already committed, but how we may defend the 
republic from an imminent danger with which it 
is threatened. It is proposed to send the prisoners 
to safe keeping in the country. Why into the 
country? Because perhaps the faction of profli- 
gate citizens is more numerous in Rome, and 
may rescue them. Is Rome the only place to 
which profligate men may resort, or are prisoners 
of state most secure where the force of govern- 
ment is least? This proposal is surely an idle one, 
if the author of it professes to entertain any fear 
of these men. But if,in this general alarm ofall the 
city, he and such persons be not afraid, so much 
the more cause have we to be on our guard. We 
are beset with enemies, both within and without 
the walls. While Catiline with fire and sword is 
hastening to your gates, you hesitate, whether you 
will cut off or spare his associates, that are i 
with the torch in their hands and the dagger at 
your breast! You must strike those who are now 
in your power, if you mean to intimidate those 
who are coming to support their designs. The 
remissness or the vigour which you now show will 
be felt in the camp of Catiline, and will be at- 
tended with suitable effects. I am therefore of 
opinion, that we order these men, agreeably to 
the practice which our ancestors followed in a!l 
cases of treason and of open war against the 
commonwealth, to immediate death.” 

Such is said to have been the speech of Cato, 
by which the senate was determined jn the very 
momentous resolution which was taken on the 

resent occasion; and however little we may be 
inclined to consider such compositions in man 
parts of ancient history as records of fact, aR 
credit is due to this representation, as it is given 
by a person who himself became a partizan of 
Casar, and as the speech itself must have been 
offered to the P A many who were present 
at the delivery of it.4 The execution of the pri- 
soners was accordingly determined, and Cornelius 
Lentulus, in the beginning of the following night, 
was, by order of the consul, committed to a vault- 
ed dungeon under ground, and strangled. His 
accomplices had the same fate; and the minds of 
men, though somewhat quieted of their fears, 
were nevertheless stunned with the scene, and 
beheld with amazement a patrician of the Cor- 
nelian family, of the first rank in the common- 
wealth, who himself lad been consul, suffering, 
without any formal trial, by the hands of the 
common executioner of justice.$ 

While these things were in agitation at Rome 

3 Cicero in Catilinam, orat. iv. 

4 The more credit is due to this account of Cato’s 
speech, that the speech which is ascribed to Cicero by 
the same historian, is a faithful extract from the ora. 


tion which still remains. i ’ 
5 Sallust. Bell. Catil. Cur ergo in sententiam Ca. 
tonis? quia verbis luculcntioribus ct pluribus, rem 


178 


Catiline was endeavouring to augment his force 
in the field. He found about two thousand men 
under Mallius. These he formed into two le- 
gions, and as his party increased he completed 
their numbers. He refused for some time to en- 
rol his fugitive slaves, of whom many took refuge 
in his camp; thinking it would discredit and 
weaken his cause to rest any part of it on this 
support. But the freemen that joined him being 
ill armed, he was obliged to keep in the neigh- 
bourhood of the mountains, and frequently to 
change his ground, to avoid an engagement with 
the consul; and he endeavoured to gain time, in 
hopes that the intended blow being struck at 
Rome, a general defection of the opposite party 
would ensue. But when accounts came that his 
design had failed in the city, and that his principal 
associates were no more, those who were inclined 
to his cause were discouraged, and numbers who 
had already joined him began to fall off, he de- 
termined to remove to a distance from his ene- 
mies; and for this purpose directed his march to 
a pass in the Apennines, by which he might 
escape into Gaul. This design the Pretor Me- 
tellus had foreseen, made a forced march to pre- 
vent the effect of it, and Catiline at last, finding 
himself beset on every quarter, determined to 
hazard a battle. Of the armies that were in the 
field against him he chose to face that of An- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book IIT. 


tonius; either because it lay on his route to Rome, 


and, if defeated or removed, might open his way 
to the city, or because he hoped to meet in the 
commander of it some remains of inclination in 
his favour. In whatever degree these hopes were 


fat first reasonably conceived, they ceased to have 


any foundation ; as Antonius, being taken ill had 
left the army under the command of Petreius. 
With this commander Catiline engaged in battle, 
and, after many efforts of valour and of conduct, 
fell with the greater part of his followers, and 
thus delivered the state from a desperate enemy, 


whose power was happily not equal to his de- 


signs, and who has owed much of his celebrity to 
the orator and the historian, who have made him 
the subject of their eloquent compositions. Sal- 
lust appears to have been so intent on raising and 
finishing particular parts of his work, that he ne- 
glected the general order of his narrative. I have, 
therefore, in most parts of the relation, preferred 
the authority of Cicero to his. This great man 
was undoubtedly best informed, and he rested so 
much of his reputation on this transaction, that 
he loses no opportunity of returning to it, and in 


„different parts of his writings, when collected, 


has furnished a pretty full narration of circum- 
stances respecting the origin and termination of 
this wild and profligate attempt to subvert the 
government of the republic. 


CHAPTER IV. 


Character of the Times—-Philosophy— Opposite Tenets and Votaries—Proceedings of the 
Senate— Tribunate of Metellus, Nepos, and of Cato—Proposal to recal Pompey at the Heaa 
of his Army frustrated—His arrival in Italy—And Triumph. 


IT may appear strange, that any age or nation 
should have furnished the example of a project 
conceived in so much guilt, or of characters so 
atrocious as those under which the accomplices 
of Catiline are described by the eloquent orator 
and historian,! from whose writings the circum- 
stances of the late conspiracy are collected. The 
scene, however, in this republic, was such as to 
have no parallel, either in the past or in the sub- 
sequent history of mankind. There was less 
government, and more to be governed, than has 
been exhibited in any other instance. The peo- 
ple of Italy were become masters of the known 
world ; it was impossible they could ever meet in 
a fair and adequate convention. They were re- 
presented by partial meetings or occasional tu- 
mults in the city of Rome ; and to take the sense 
of the people on any subject was to raise a riot. 
Individuals were vested with powers almost dis- 
cretionary in the provinces, or continually aspired 
to such situations. The nominal assemblies of 
the people were often led by profligate persons, 
impatient of government, in haste to govern. 
Ruined in their fortunes by private prodigality, 
or by the public expense in soliciting honours; 
tempted to repair their ruins by oppression and 
extortion where they were entrusted with com- 
mand, or by desperate attempts against the go- 


eandem comprehenderat. Cicer. ad Atticum, lib. xii- 
epist. 21. 


1 Cicero in Sallust. 


oree- 


vernment of their country if disappointed in their 
hopes. Not only were many of the prevailing 
practices disorderly, but the law itself was erro- 
neous ;? adopted indeed at first by a virtuous peo- 
ple, because it secured the persons and the rights 
of individuals, but now anxiously preserved by 
their posterity, because it gave a license to their 
crimes. 

The provinces were to be retained by the forces 
of Italy ; the Italians themselves by the ascendant 
of the capital; and in this capital all was confu- 
sion and anarchy, except where the senate, by 
its authority and the wisdom of its counsels, pre- 
vailed. It was expedient for the people to restrain 
the abuses of the aristocratical power; but when 
the sovereignty was exercised in the name of the 
collective body of the Roman people, the anarchy 
and confusion that prevailed at Rome spread from 
one extremity of her dominion to the other. The 
provinces were oppressed, not upon a regular 
plan to aggrandize the state, but at the pleasure 
of individuals, to enrich a few of the most out- 
rageous and profligate citizens. The people were 
often assembled to erect arbitrary powers, under 


2 Lex Valeria et Porcia de tergo Civium lata. Liv. 
lib. ij. c. 8. lib. iii. c. 55. lib. x. c. 9. By these laws a 
Roman citizen could not be imprisoned, any more than 
suffer punishment, before conviction; he might stop 
any proceeding against him by an appeal to the people 
at large; and, being at liberty during trial, might with- 
draw whenever he perceived the sentence likely to be 
given against him. 


Cuap. IV.) 


the pretence of popular government. The pub- 
lic interests and the order of the state were in 
perpetual struggle with the pretensions of single 
and of profligate men. In such a situation there 
were many temptations to be wicked ; and in such 
a situation, likewise, minds that were turned to 
integrity and honour had a proportionate spring 
to their exertions and pursuits. The range of 
the human character was great and extensive, 
and men were not likely to trifle within narrow 
bounds; they were destined to be good or to be 


wicked in the highest measure, and, by their | 


struggles, to exhibit a scene interesting and in- 
structive beyond any other in the history of man- 
kind, 

Among the causes that helped to carry the 
characters of men in this age to such distant ex- 
tremes, may be reckoned the philosophy of the 
Greeks, which was lately come into fashion, and 
which was much affected by the higher ranks of 
men in the state.’ Literature being, by the diffi- 
culty and expense of multiplying copies of books,* 
confined to persons having wealth and power, it 
was considered as a distinction of rank, and was 
received not only asa useful, but as a fashionable 
accomplishment. The lessons of the school were 
considered as the elements of every liberal and 
active profession, and they were practised at the 
bar, in the field, in the senate, and every where 
in the conduct of real affairs. Philosophy was 
considered as an ornament, as well as a real 
foundatién of strength, ability, and wisdom in 
the practice of life. Men of the world, instead 
of being ashamed of their sect, affected to employ 
its language on every important occasion, and 
to be governed by its rules so mueh as to assume, 
in compliance with particular systems, distinc- 
tions of manners and even of dress. They em- 
braced their forms in philosophy, as the sectaries 
in modern times have embraced theirs in re- 
ligion; and probably in the one case honoured 
their choice by the sincerity of their faith and 
the regularity of their practice, much in the same 
degree as they have done in the other. 

In these latter times of the Roman republic 
the sect of Epicurus appears to have prevailed ; 
and what Fabricius wished, on hearing the tenets 
of this philosophy, for the enemies of Rome, had 
now befallen her citizens. Men were glutted 
with national prosperity; they thought that they 
were born to enjoy what their fathers had won, 
and saw not the use of those austere and arduous 
virtues by which the state had increased to its 
present greatness. The votaries of this sect as- 
cribed the formation of the world to chance, and 
denied the existence of Providence. They re- 
solved the distinctions of right and wrong, of 
honour and dishonour, into mere appellations of 
pleasure and pain. Every man’s pleasure was 
to himself the supreme rule of estimation and of 
action. All good was private. 
a mere imposture, that might be successfully em- 
ployed, perhaps to defraud the ignorant of their 


3 Vid Cicero’s Philosophical Works. 

4 The grandees had their slaves sometimes educated 
to serve as secretaries to themselves, or as preceptors 
to their children. 

5 See Plutarch. in Pyrr. The philosopher Cyneas, in 
the hearing of Fabricius, entertained his prince with 


an E sunen, to prove that pleasure was the chief 
good. 


might long entertain such tenets. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


The public was | 


Fabricius wished that the enemies of Rome 


179 


private enjoyments, while it furnished the con- 
veniencies of the wise.6 To persons so Instructed, 
the care of families and of states, with whatever 
else broke in upon the enjoyments of pleasure 
and ease, must appear among the follies of human 
life. And a sect under these imputations might 
be considered as patrons of licentiousness, both 
in morality and religion, and declared enemies to 
mankind. Yet the Epicureans, when urged in 
argument by their opponents, made some conces- 
sions in religion, and many more in morality. 
They admitted the existence of gods, but sup- 
posed those beings of too exalted a nature to have 
any concern in human affairs. They owned 
that, although the value of virtue was to be mea- 
sured by the pleasure it gave, yet true pleasure 
was to be found in virtue alone; and that it might 
be enjoyed in the highest degree even in the 
midst of bodily pain. Notwithstanding this de- 
cision on the side of morality, the ordinary lan- 
guage of this sect, representing virtue as a mere 
prudent choice among the pleasures to which men 
‘are variously addicted, served to suppress the spe- 
cific sentiments of conscience and elevation of 
mind, and to change the reproaches of criminali- 
ty, profligacy, or vileness, by which even bad men 
are restrained from iniquity, into mere imputations 
of mistake, or variations of taste. ‘ 
Other sects, particularly that of the Stoics, 
maintained, almost in every particular, the re 
verse of these tenets. They maintained the 
reality of Providence, and of a common interest 
of goodness and of justice, for which Providence 
was exerted, and in which all rational creatures 
were deeply concerned. They allowed, that in 
the nature of things there are many grounds upon 
which we prefer or reject the objects that present 
themselves to us, but that the choice which we 
make, not the event of our efforts, decides our 
happiness or our misery; that right and wrong 
are the most important and the only grounds 
upon which we can at all times safely proceed in 
our choice, and that, in comparison to this differ- 
ence, every thing else is of no account; that a 
just man will ever act as if there was nothing 
good but what is right, and nothing evil but 
what is wrong; that the Epicureans mistook hu- 
man nature when they supposed all its principles 
resolvable into appetites for pleasure, or aversions 
to pain; that honour and dishonour, excellence 
and defect, were considerations which not only 
led to much nobler ends, but which were of much 
greater power in commanding the human will; 
the love of pleasure was grovelling and vile, was 
the source of dissipation and of sloth; the love 
of excellence and honour was aspiring and noble, 
and led to the greatest exertions and the highest 
attainments of our nature. They maintained 
that there is no private good separate from the 
public good ; that the same qualities of the under- 
standing and the heart, wisdom, benevolence, and 
courage, which are good for the individual, are so 
likewise for the public ; that these blessings every 
man may possess, independent of fortune or the 
will of other men; and that whoever does possess 
them has nothing to hope, and nothing to fear, 
and can have but one sort of emotion, that of 
satisfaction and joy; that his afiections, and the 
maxims of his station, as a creature of God, and 
as a member of society, lead him to act for the 


G Cicero in Pisonem. 


180 


good of mankind; and that for himself he has 
nothing more to desire, than the happiness of 
acting this part. These, they said, were the tenets 
of reason leading to perfection, which ought to be 
the aim of every person who means to preserve 
his integrity, or to consult his happiness, and 
towards which every one may advance, although 
no one has actually reached it. 

Other sects affected to find a middle way be- 
tween these extremes, and attempted, in specula- 
tion, to render their doctrines more plausible; that 
is, more agreeable to common opinions than either; 
but were, in fact, of no farther moment in human 
life than as they approached to the one or to the 
other of these opposite systems. 

Cæsar is said to have embraced the doctrines 
of Epicurus; Cato those of Zeno. The first, in 
compliance with fashion, or from the bias of an 
original temper. The other, from the force of 
conviction, as well as from the predilection of a 
warm and ingenuous mind. When such cha- 
racters occur together, it is impossible not to see 
them in contrast. When Sallust writes of the 
a of the senate, in the case of the Cati- 
ine conspiracy, he seems to overlook every other 
character, to dwell upon these alone. Cæsar, at 
the time when this historian flourished, had many 
claims to his notice;! but Cato could owe it to 
nothing but the force of truth. He was distin- 
guished from his infancy by an ardent and affec- 
tionate disposition. This part of his character is 
mentioned on occasion of his attachment to his 
brother Cæpio, and the vehement sorrow with 
which he was seized at his death. It is mention- 
ed, on occasion of his visit to the dictator Sylla, 
when he was with difficulty restrained by the 
discretion of his tutor from some act or expression 
of indignation against this real or apparent vio- 
lator of public justice. He had from his infancy, 
according to Plutarch, a resolution, a steadiness, 
and a composure of mind not to be moved by flat- 
tery, nor to be shaken by threats. Without 
fawning or insinuation, he was the favourite of 
his companions, and had, by his unaffected gene- 
rosity and courage, the principal place in their 
confidence. ‘Though in appearance stern and 
inflexible, he was warm in his affections, and 
zealous in the cause of innocence and justice. 
Such are the marks of an original temper affixed 
by historians as the characters of his infancy and 
early youth. So fitted by nature, he imbibed 
with ease an opinion, that profligacy, cowardice, 
and malice, were the only evils to be feared; 
courage, integrity, and benevolence, the only good 
to be coveted; and that the proper care of a man 
on every occasion is, not what is to happen ,to 
him, but what he himself is to do. With this 
profession he became a striking contrast to many 
of his contemporaries; and to Cesar in particu- 
lar, not only a contrast, but a resolute opponent ; 
and though he could not furnish a sufficient 

2 : 
counterpoise, yet he afforded always much weight 
to be thrown into the opposite scale. ‘They were 
both of undaunted courage, and of great penetra- 
tion; the one to distinguish what was best; the 
other to distinguish the most effectual means for 

he attainment of any end on which he was bent. 
It were to mistake entirely the scene in which 
they were engaged, to judge of their abilities from 


1 Sallust attached himself to Cesar, and was em- 
ployed by him in the civil wars. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book IHl. 


the event of their different pursuits. Those of 
Cato were by their nature a series of struggles 
with almost insurmountable difficulties : those of 
Cesar a constant endeavour to seize the advan- 
tages of which the vices and weaknesses of the 
age, except when he was resisted by persons 
bent on the same purpose with himself, gave him 
all easy possession. Cato endeavoured to pre- 
serve the order of civil government, however des- 
perate, because this was the part it became him 
to act, and in which he chose to live and to die. 
Cesar proposed to overturn it; because he wished 
to dispose of all the wealth and honours of the 
state at his own pleasure. 

Cesar, as Versatile in his gentus as Cato, was 
steady and inflexible, could personate any cha- 
racter, and support any cause; in debate he 
could derive his arguments from any topic; from 
topics of pity, of which he was insensible ; from 
topics of justice and public good, for which he 
had no regard. His vigour in resisting personal 
insults and wrongs appeared in his early youth, 
when he withstood the imperious commands of 
Sylla to part with his wife, the daughter of Cinna, 
and when he revenged the insults offered by the 
pirates to himself; but while his temper might 
be supposed the most animated and warm, he 
was not involved in business by a predilection for 
any of the interests on which the state was di- 
vided. So long as the appetites of youth were 
sufficient to occupy him, he saw every object of 
state, or of faction, with indifference, and took no 
part in public affairs. But even in this period, by 
his application and genius, in both of which he 
was eminent, he made a distinguished progress in 
letters and eloquence. When he turned his mind 
to objects of ambition, the same personal vigour 
which appeared in his youth, became still more 
conspicuous; but, unfortunately, his passions 
were ill directed, and he seemed to consider the 
authority that was exercised by the senate, and 
the restraints of the law on himself, as an insult 
and a wrong. 

Cesar had attained to seven-and-thirty years 
of age before he took any part as a member of 
the commonwealth. He then courted the popu- 
lace in preference to the senate or better sort of 
the peuple, and made his first appearance in sup- 
port of the profligate, against the order and au- 
thority of government. With persons of desperate 
fortune and abandoned manners, he early bore 
the character of liberality and friendship. They 
received him as a generous patron, come to rescue 
them from the morose severity of those who 
judged of public merits by the standard of public 
virtue, and who declared against practices, how- 
ever fashionable, which were inconsistent with 
public safety. Himself, a person of the greatest 
abilities, and the mast accomplished talents, hav- 
ing an opportunity to live on terms of equality 
with the greatest men that have yet appeared in 
the world, he chose to start up as the chief among 
those who, being abandoned to every vice, saw 
the remains of virtue in their country with dis- 
taste and aversion. When he emerged from the 
avocations of pleasure, or from the sloth which 
accompanies the languor of dissipation, his ambi- 
tion or desire to counteract the established govern- 
ment of his country, and to make himself master 
of the commonwealth, became extreme. To this 
passion he sacrificed every sentiment of friend- 
ship or animosity, of honour, interest, resentment, 


Cuar. IV.] 


or hatred. The philosophy which taught men 
to look for enjoyment indiscriminately wherever 
it pleased them most, found a ready acceptance in 
such a disposition. But while he possibly availed 
himself of the speculations of Epicurus to justify 
his choice of an object, he was not inferior to the 
followers of Zeno, in vigorous efforts and active 
exertions for thc attainment of his ends. Being 
about seven years younger than Pompey, and 
three years older than Cato; the first he occa- 
sionally employed as a prop to his ambition, but 
probably never ceased to consider him as a rival ; 
the other, from a fixed animosity of opposite na- 
tures, and from having felt him as a continual 
opponent in all his designs, he sincerely hated. 

Cato began his military service in the army 
that was formed against the gladiators, and con- 
cluded it as a legionary tribunc, under the prætor 
Rubrius, in Macedonia, while Pompey remained 
in Syria. He was about three-and-thirty years 
of age when he made his speech relating to the 
accomplices of Catiline; and by the decisive and 
resolute spirit he had shown on this occasion, 
came to be considered as a principal support of 
the aristocracy, or of the authority of the senate.? 
To this body, as usual, every flagrant disorder 
repressed was‘a victory. The discovery of a de- 
sign so odious as that of Catiline, covered under 
popular pretences, greatly weakened their antago- 
nists. One of the first uses they proposed to 
make of their advantage, was to have Cato elected 
among the tribunes of the subsequent year. His 
services were likely to be wanted in opposition to 
Metellus Nepos, then atrived from the army of 
Pompey, with recommendations from his general 
to offer himself a candidate for the same office ; 
and, as was expected, to start some new gratifi- 
cation to the ambition or vanity of this insatiable 
suitor for personal consideration. 

It had not yet appeared what part Pompey was 
to take in the disputes that were likely to arise 
on the legality or expedience of the late mea- 
sures; but it is not to be doubted, that he wished 
to hold the balance of parties, and that he would 
come prepared for the part that was most likely 
to promote his own importance. Metellus was 
sent on before him to be supported by his friends 
in the canvass for the office of tribune, and 
with instructions to take such measures as were 
likely to favour the pretensions of his general. 
The leading men of the senate were now, for 
some time, aware of the intrigues of Pompey, and 
bore, with indignation, the personal superiority 
which he affected even to the first and most re- 
spected of their order. They took occasion, in 
the present crisis, to mortify him by admitting 
Lucullus and Metellus Creticus to the triumphs 
to which, by their victories in Pontus and in 
Crete, they wcre long entitled. Hitherto thcir 
claims had been overruled by the popular faction, 
either to annoy the senatorian party, to which 
they were attached, or to flatter Pompey, who 
was supposed to be equally averse to the honours 
of both. ‘They had waited in Italy about three 
years, and, in the manner of those who suc for a 
triumph, had abstained froin entering the city, 
and still retained the fasces or ensigns of their 
late command.? 

Lucullus, having obtained the honour that was 


2 Plutarch. in Caton. edit. Londin p. 238. 
3 Cicero in Lucullo. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. e 


181 


due to him, seemed to be satisfied with the ac- 
knowledgment of his right; and, as if merely to 
show with what sort of enemy he had fought, he 
entered the city with a few of the Armenian 
horsemen cased in armour, a few of the armed 
chariots winged with scythes, and about sixty of 
the officers and courtiers of Mithridates, who 
were his captives. He ordcred the spoils he had 
gained, the arms and cnsigns of war, the prows 
of the gallies he had taken, to be displayed to 
public view in the great circus, and concluded the 
solemnity with giving a feast to the people. The 
senate hoped for his support against the ambition 
of Pompey, and the factious designs of the popu- 
lar leaders; but he was disgusted, and scarcely 
ever after took any part in the affairs of state. 
The triumph of Metellus Creticus did not take 
place till after the accession of the following con- 
suls, P. Junius Silanus and Lucius Murena, 
after whose election, Cicero, before he had va- 
cated his own office of consul, had occasion to 
defend his own intended successor, Muræna, 
against a charge of corruption brought upon the 
statute of Calpurnius, by Servius Sulpicius, one 
of his late competitors, supported by Cato and 
others. The oration of Cicero on this occasion is 
still extant, andis a curiousexample of the topics, 
which, under popular governments, enter even 
into judicial pleadings. Grcat part of it consists 
in a ridicule of law terms; because Sulpicius, one 
of the prosecutors, was accustomed to give coun- 
sel to his friends who consulted him in matters 
of law; and in a ridicule of the stoic philosophy, 
because Cato, another prosecutor, was supposed 
to have embraced the doctrines of that sect. 
Cato made no other remark on this pleading, but 
that the republic was provided with a merry con- 
sul. The argument appeared sufficiently strong 
on the side of Murena, and he was acquitted. 
At the close of this trial, Cicero, about to re- 
sign his power with the usual asseveration, upon 
oath, that he had faithfully, and to the best of 
his abilitics, discharged his trust; he proposed, at 
the same timc, to harangue the people, but was 
ordered by Metcllus, already elected, and acting 
in capacity of tribunc, to confine himself to the 
terms of his oath. He accordingly refrained from 
speaking ; but instead of swearing simply, that he 
had been faithful to his trust, he took an oath 
that he had preserved the republic.4 It was on 
this occasion, probably, that Cato, now another 
of the tribunes, in a speech to the people, alludin 
to the suppression of the late conspiracy, calle 
Cicero the father of his country ;> and from this 
time entered upon an opposition to his colleague, 
Metellus, which was not likely to drop while they 
continued in office. 
Soon after the accession of the new magistrates, 
a storm began to gather, which, 
U. C. 691. though still aimed at the party of 
, the senate, burst at last in a personal 
Pe attack upon the late consul, who had 
ilanus, L. Š 
Murena. been the author or instrument of 
the senate in the summary proceed- 
ings against the accomplices of Catiline. Mc- 
tellus Nepos seems to have come from Asia, and 
to have entered on the officc of tribune, with a 
particular design to bring about the introduction 
of Pompey with his army into Rome; and he 
was joined in this project by Caius Julius Cæsar, 


4 Plutarch.in Cicerone. 5 Cicer. in Pisonem, c. 3. 


182 


now in the office of pretor,! who chose to support 
the tribune, as an act of hostility to the senate, if 
not as the means of disembarrassing himself from 
the present forms of the commonwealth. 

In consequence of a plan concerted with Cesar, 
the tribune Metellus moved in the senate, as had 
been usual in the times of its highest authority, 
for leave to propose a decree in the assembly of 
the people, recalling Pompey from Asia at the 
head of his forces; in order to restore the consti- 
tution of the commonwealth, which, in the terms 
he afterwards employed to the people, had been 
violated by the arbitrary administration of Cicero. 
This was the first attempt of the party to inflame 
the minds of the people on the subject of the late 
executions; and Pompey was, in this manner, 
offered to the popular party as their leader, to 
avenge the supposed wrongs they had received. 
Cato, when the matter was proposed in the 
senate, endeavoured to persuade Metellus to drop 
it, reminded him of the dignity of his family, 
which had been always a principal ornament and 
support to thestate. This treatment served only 
to raise the presumption of Metellus, and brought 
on a violent altercation between the tribunes. 
The senate applauded Cato, but had not autho- 
rity enough to prevent the motion which was 
proposed from being made to the people. 

Metellus, apprehending an obstinate resistance 
from his colleague, endeavoured to fill the place 
of assembly with his own partizans; and, on the 
evening before the meeting, in order to intimidate 
his opponents, paraded in the streets with a nu- 
merous attendance of men inarms. The friends 
and relations of the other tribunes earnestly be- 
seeched them not to expose themselves to the 
danger with which they were threatened. But, 
on the following day, the other party being al- 
ready assembled by Metellus, at the temple of 
Castor, and the place having been in the night 
accupied by persons under his direction, armed 
with sticks, swords, and other offensive weapons,? 
Cato went forth attended only by Minucius Ther- 
mus, another of the tribunes, and a few friends. 
‘They were joined by numbers in the streets, who 
could not accompany them to their place, being 
prevented by the multitude of armed men that 
already crowded the avenues and the steps of the 
temple. But they themselves, from respect to 
their office, being suffered to pass, dragged along 
with them through the crowd, as an aid, in case 
any violence were offered, Munatius, a citizen 
much attached to Cato. When they came to the 
bench of tribunes, they found that Metellus, with 
the pretor Julius Cesar, had taken their places 
there; and that, in order to concert their opera- 
tions in the conduct of this affair, they were 
closely seated together. Cato, to disappoint this 
intention, forced himself in betwixt them, and, 
when the ordinary officer began to read the in- 
tended decree, interposed his negative, and. for- 
bade him to proceed. Metellus himself seized the 
writing, and began to read; but Cato snatched it 
out of his hands. Metellus endeavoured to re- 
peat the substance of it from his memory. Ther- 
mus clapped his hand to his mouth. A general 
silence remained in the assembly, till Metellus, 
having made a signal for his party to clear the 
comitium of their enemies, a great tumult and 


1 Sueton. in Jul. Ces. c. 16. 
2 Plutarch. in Catone, edit. Londin. p. 241, &c. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox II]. 


confusion arose; and the tribunes who opposed 
Metellus were in imminent danger. The senators 
had met in mourning, to mark their sense of the 
evils which threatened the commonwealth ; and 
now, under the apprehension of some signal ca- 
lamity, gave a charge to the consuls to watch 
over the safety of the state, and empowered them 
to take such measures as might be necessary to 
preserve or to restore the public peace.’ 

In consequence of this charge, the consul Mu- 
ræna appeared with a body of men in arms, had 
the good fortune to rescue Cato and Minucius 
Thermus; and probably by this seasonable inter- 
position effaced any remains of misunderstandin 
which might have subsisted between Cato an 
himself, on account of the prosecution for bribery 
which followed the late elections.‘ 

Metellus, after the tumult was composed, 
having again obtained silence, began to read the 
proposed decree; but the senatorian party, head- 
ed by the consuls, being then in the comitium, 
he found it impossible to proceed; and, together 
with the pretor Caius Julius Cesar, retired from 
the assembly. From this time, these officers made 
no attempt to resume their motion, but complain- 
ed that the government was usurped by a violent 
faction, under whom even the persons of the tri- 
bunes were unsafe; and Metellus, as if forced to 
break through the rules which obliged the tri- 
bunes to constant residence at Rome, abandoned 
the city, even left Italy, and fled to the camp of 
Pompey in Asia, from which he was lately ar- 
rived.6 Fie had already threatened his opponents 
at Rome with the resentment and military power 
of his general, and now endeavoured to excite 
the army and their commander to follow the ex- 
ample which had been set to them by Sylla and 
his legions, when oppressed citizens, a description 
in which he now comprehended himself, fled to 
them for protection and revenge. 

It may well be supposed, that Cesar, remem- 
bering his own escape from the ruin of the Ma- 
rian faction, and considering Pompey as the head 
of an opposite interest, and a principal obstacle to 
his own ambition, must look upon him with some 
degree of personal dislike and animosity; but his 
conduct on this occasion sufficiently showed how 
little he was the dupe of any passion or senti- 
ment which had a tendency to check his pursuits, 
Meaning for the present only to weaken the 
senate, and to step in before them in the favour 
of Pompey; he undertook the cause even of a 
rival, and would have joined the populace, in de- 
livering the commonwealth into his hands, rather 
than remain under a government which he hated. 
But if he really meant to overthrow the senate 
by force, he mistook his instrument. Pompey, 
no doubt, aspired to the sovereignty of the em- 
pire, and wished to reign in the city with a mili- 
tary power; but even this he desired to receive 
as the fruit of consideration and personal respect, 
and he ever hoped to make the people bestow it, 
and even force him to accept of it as their gift. 
For this purpose he encouraged so many agents 
and retainers to sound his praise; and for this 
purpose he had recently sent Metellus Nepos 
from his camp to take upon him the functions of 
a popular tribune; but having failed of his object, 
he by no means could think of extorting it by 


3 Plutarch. in Catone, edit. Londin. p. 241, &c. 
4 Plutarch. ibid. 5 Dio, Cass. bb xxxvii. €. 43 


Cuap. IV.] 


force. No one ever courted distinction with a 
more incessant emulation to his rivals; but he 
was entirely dependent on the public opinion for 
any satisfaction he enjoyed in the possession of 
power. Trusting to this last part of his character, 
Cesar, though himself of unbounded ambition, 
was not yet alarmed at the elevation of Pompey, 
and thought that he was safe even in offering 
him the dominion of the state. Pompey was, at 
this conjuncture, with his army moving towards 
Italy, and his coming was matter of great solici- 
tude to the friends of the commonwealth, who 
feared that, in return to the affront of his not 
being invited to come with his army, upon the 
motion of Metellus, he would employ it in person 
to enforce his commands. Upon his arrival at 
Brundusium, however, as formerly upon his re- 
turn from Africa, he dispelled those fears by an 
immediate dismission of the troops, with instruc- 
tions merely that they would attend at his tri- 
umph. He himself came forward to Rome with 
the single equipage of his proconsular rank. Mul- 
titudes of every condition went forth to receive 
him, and with shouts and acclamations recom- 
pensed the moderation with which he acquiesced 
in the condition of a citizen. 

Cesar, from whatever motive he acted in re- 
gard to Pompey, gave every other sign of disaf- 
fection to the senate, and employed the name of 
this rising favourite of the people, to mortify such 
of the members in particular as were objects of 
personal animosity to himself. The repairs or 
rebuilding of the capitol being finished about this 
time, the honour of dedicating the edifice, and of 
being named in the inscription it was to bear, had, 
by a resolution of the senate, been conferred on 
Catulus, under whose inspection the work was 
executed. But Cesar, affecting to procure this 
honour for Pompey, alleged that Catulus had 
embezzled the money allotted for this service; 
that much yet remained to be done; and moved, 
that the inscription of Catulus should be erased ; 
that the completion of the work being left to 
Pompey, should carry an inscription with his 
name. Here he probably acted as much from 
antipathy to one, as from an intention to flatter 
the other. But the design being extremely odi- 
ous to the whole body of the nobles, who saw, 
with indignation, in that proposal an attempt to 
affront a most respectable citizen, in order to flat- 
ter the vanity of one person, and to gratify the 
profligate resentments of another, Cæsar was 
obliged to withdraw his motion.? 

It was probably during this year in which 
Cesar was prætor, and before the arrival of Pom- 
pey from Asia (although historians refer it to an 
earlier date,) that Cesar promoted, as has been 
already mentioned, prosecutions upon a charge 
of assassination against some persons concerned 
in the execution of Sylla's proscriptions. The 

retors were appointed by lot to carry particular 
aws into execution. The law respecting assas- 
sination appears to have been the lot of Cesar; 
and he was entitled in virtue of his office, the 
jurisdiction of which was still very arbitrary, to 
extend, by his edict or plan of proceeding for the 
year, the description of the crime under his cog- 
nizance to any special case. 

While he seemed to have formed so many de- 


6 Sueton. in Jul. Cesare, c. 15. 
7 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvii. c. 44. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


183 


signs against the peace of the commonwealth, and 
in the capacity of pretor supported them with 
the authority of a magistrate, the senatorian party 
made a powerful exertion of their influence to 
have him suspended, and actually obtained a de- 
cree for this purpose. He affected at first to 
slight their authority; but finding that a power 
was preparing to enforce it, perhaps at the hazard 
of his life, he laid aside for some time the robes 
and badges of magistracy, dismissed his lictors, 
and abstained from the functions of pretor, until, 
having rejected an offer of the people to restore 
him by force, he was, with proper marks of re- 
gard, for this instance of moderation, reinstated, 
by an act of the senate.® 

The aristocratical party, at the same time, to 
confirm and perpetuate the evidence on which 
they proceeded against the accomplices of Cati- 
line, continued their prosecutions on this subject, 
and obtained sentence of condemnation, in par- 
ticular, against a citizen of the name of Vergun- 
teius, and against Autronius, who, about two 
years before, faving been elected consul, was set 
aside upon a charge of bribery; and who, from 
the disgust which he took tothe senate upon that 
occasion, had connected himself with the more 
desperate party. Publius Sylla, in the same pre- 
dicament with Autronius, was tried; but, being 
defended by Cicero, in an eloquent harangue 
which is still extant, was acquitted. 

Cesar likewise was accused by Vectius as ac- 
cessary to the conspiracy of Catiline; but it is 
not likely that he was concerned farther than by 
the general encouragement he gave to every par- 
ty at variance with the senate. Opposition to 
this body was called the interest of the people, 
and was adopted by every person who had any 
passions to gratify by crimes of state, or wha 
wished to weaken the government, to which 
they themselves were accountable. Among the 
supporters of this interest, Crassus also was ac- 
cused, but probably on no better grounds than 
Cesar. 

The whole of these proceedings, however, were 
suspended by the approach of Pompey. This 
leader had now drawn the attention of all men 
upon himself, was quoted in every harangue as 
the great support of the empire, and courted by 
multitudes, who, without inquiry, affected to be 
classed with his admirers and friends. ‘The con- 
tagion spread like a fashion among the vulgar of 
every description. He himself affected indiffer- 
ence to this mighty tide of renown, though not 
without much dignity and state, which he temper- 
ed with affability, employing the greatness he pos- 
sessed to give the more value to his condescensions. 
Flis manner, though acceptable tothe people and 
the army, was disagreeable tothe senate. Having 
peer sent Piso, one of his lieutenants, before 

im to stand for the consulate, he had the pre- 
sumption to desire that the senate would defer 
the elections until he himself could be present to 
canvass for his friend. The senate, according to 
Dio, complied with his desire ; but, according to 
Plutarch, rejected the proposal with disdain. This 
author imputes the resolution, which they took 
upon this occasion, to Cato, and subjoins, that 
Pompey endeavoured to gain this opponent by a 
proposed marriage with one of his near relations ; 
and that Cato declined the connection, saying, 


8 Sueton. in Jul. Cesare c. 16. 


184 


that he should not be caught in a female snare. 
Piso, however, was elected together with Vale- 
rius Messala, and entered on his office before the 
triumph of Pompey. 

This solemnity followed soon af- 


U. C. 692. ter; and, though continued for two 

__ days, could not make place for all 
ight in ; the magnificent shows that had 
M. ee Mas- been provided for it. The list of 
sala Niger. | conquests exceeded that which had 


ever heen produced at any other 
triumph. Asia, Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, 
Paphlagonia, Medea, Colchis, Iberia, Albania, 
Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Pheenicia, Judea, 
Arabia, Scythia, Crete,! with the sea in all its 
coasts. Among the people or potentates subdu- 
ed, were the Basterni, Mithridates, and Tigranes. 
Among the captures, a thousand fortresses, nine 
hundred cities reduced, eight hundred galleys 
taken, above two millions of men in captivity. 
Towns repeopled, not less than three hundred 
and ninety-nine. To this pompous list, it was 
subjoined by his friends, that, this being his 
third triumph, he had been round the known 
world, and had triumphed over all the three parts 
of the earth, Africa, Europe, and Asia. 

After rewarding the soldiers, of whom none 
received less than fifteen hundred denarii,? he 
carried to the treasury twenty thousand talents.3 
He led, among his principal captives, besides 
the chief pirates, Tigranes, son to the king of 
Armenia, with his wife and his daughter,— 
Zozimé, the queen of Tigranes,—the father of 
Aristobulus, king of the Jews,—a sister of 
Mithridates, with five sons, and some Scythian 
women; the hostages of the Iberii, and the Com- 
mageni; together with trophies: for every battle 
he had fought, making in all a mote splendid 
exhibition than any that was to be found on the 
records of the state. 

The triumphal processions of Pompey merit 
more attention than those of any other person, 
because they contained a public evidence of his 
character. Others took the benefit of an estab- 
lished practice to publish and to ratify the honours 
they had acquired; but Pompey, it is likely, would 
have invented the triumph, even if it had not been 
formerly thought of; and it is not to be doubted, 
that he over-ran some provinces in which the 
enemy were subdued, or in which they were so 
weak, as not to be able to make any resistance, 
merely to place them in the list of his conquests ; 
and that f made some part of his progress in 


1 Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. vii. c. 26. 
2 About 502. 3 About 3,860,000. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox 1f. 


Asia to collect curiosities and ornaments for this 
pompous scene. , , . . 

The triumph, in its ordinary form, contained 
only such exhibitioris as had a reference to the 
service in which it was obtained; the captives 
and spoils of the enemy, with effigies and repre- 
sentations where the originals, by any accident, 
could not be displayed. But in these solemnities, 
executed for the honour of Pompey, were admitted 
whatever could distinguish or signalize the occa- 
sion. Among these, according to the record 
transcribed by Pliny,4 there were many costly 
ornaments of gold and of precious stones, which 
were fabricated on purpose to be shown. Tables 
or plates, used for some species of play, made of 
one entire crystal; a representation of the moon 
in gold, weighing thirty pondo; tables, utensils, 
statues, crowns, models of different sorts in gold 
and precious stones, with the representation of a 
mountain in gold, having lions, deer, and other 
animals upon it: and what serves as an evidence 
that these exhibitions were not limited to the 
spoils actually taken in war, there is mentioned 
an image of Pompey himself incrusted with 
pearls. ‘The whole conducted with more arrange- 
ment and order, than were necessary, perhaps, 
in the disposition of any of the battles which the 
triumph was intended to celebrate. 

Among the images, representations, and me- 
morials which were carried before the victor on 
this occasion, there was held up to view a state 
of the public revenue, from which it appeared, 
that, before Pompev’s time, it amounted to no 
more than fifty millions ;5 and that the addition 
which he alone brought to it amounted to eighty- 
five millions.§ 

Soon after this pomp was over, an assembly of 
the people was called in the circus Flaminius, to 
receive the address of this victorious general; but, 
from the extreme caution not to offend any party, 
the speech which he made, upen this occasion, 
was acceptable to none. “It gave no hopes,” 
says Cicero,’ “to the poor; no flattery to the rich; 
no satisfaction to the good; no encouragement to 
the profligate.’ Pompey was suffered to possess 
the highest place in the consideration of the pub- 
lic, merely because he assumed it; and he pre- 
served his dignity, by never committing his 
reputation without being prepared, and havin 
concerted a variety of arts by which it might be 
supported. 


4 Nat. Hist. lib. xxxvii. c. 2. 

5 416.666.. 

6 708,3337. Plutarch in Pompeio, edit. Lond. p 479 
7 Cicer. ad Atticum, lib. i. ep 14. 


Crap. V.) 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


185 


CHAPTER V. 


Transactions at Rome, and in the Provinces—Julius Cesar appointed in the Quality of Propre- 
tor to his first Province of Lusitania— Trial of Clodius—Proposed Adoption into a Plebeian 


Family to qualify him for the 
The Triumvirate of Cesar, 
toconfer on Cesar, for Five 
Cesar to Calpurnia— Plot 

Attack made upon Cicero—His Exrilė. 


POMPEY, at his departure from Syria, left 
that province with two legions under the com- 
mand of Æmilius Scaurus, one of his lieutenants. 
This officer occupied the country from the Eu- 
phrates to the frontier of Egypt, and continued 
the war which his predecessor had begun with 
the Arabs, ; 

Caius Antonius, the late colleague of Cicero 
in the consulate, soon after the defeat of Catiline, 

rocecded to the province of Macedonia, of which, 
by the arrangements of the year, he had been 
appointed governor. He entered his province 
with the ensigns of victory, which had been ob- 
tained by the defeat of Catiline; but these he 
soon forfeited by his misconduct in a war against 
the Thracians, and by the disgrace which he 
otherwise incurred for the mal-administration of 
his province. Complaints were exhibited against 
him for extortion. On this occasion it had been 
reported by himself, or by some of his family, 
that, having agreed to divide the profits of his 
government with Cicero, part only was exacted 
on his own account, This allegation, Cicero, in 
a letter to Atticus, mentions with indignation ; 
and, being asked to undertake his defence, ques- 
tions whether he can decently do so under this 
imputation. But as he soon afterwards under- 
took the cause of Antony, and employed his in- 
terest to have him continued in his command, it 
is probable that this imputation cither gained no 
credit, or was entirely removed.? 

The Allobroges, though deprived of the sup- 
port they were made to expect from the party of 
Catiline, nevertheless took arms, and invaded the 
Roman province of Gaul. After a variety of 
events, they were repulsed by Pontinius, who 
then commanded the Pe sin forces in that quar- 
ter, and forced to retire into their own country.!0 

About the same time, Caius Julius Cæsar, 
upon the expiration of his term in the office of 
pretor, obtained his first military command, being 
appointed by lot to the government of Lusitania, 
where, under different pretences, he found an 
opportunity to quarrel with the natives, to show 
his capacity for war, and tolay some ground for 
his claim to a triumph. In pushing hie way to 
the preferments which he now held in the state, 
he had ruined his fortune by largesses, public 
shows, and entertainments to the people, by his 
lavish bounty in private to needy and profligate 
citizens, and in supporting every desperate cause, 
against the senate and the government; and is 
reported to have said of himself, that he needed 
one hundred and fifty millions Roman money, or 
one million two hundred thousand pounds ster- 


a 


8 Vid. Cicero ad Atticum, lib. v. ep. 12. 

9 Ad Familiar. lib. v. ep. 5. 

10 Dio. lib. xxvii. 11 Dio. c. 52, &c. 
2A 


Office of Tribune—Cesar a Candidate for the Consulship - 

Pompey, and Crassus— Consulship of Cesar— Motion of Vatinius, 
Years, the Command in Gaui—Marriage of Pompey to Julia— Of 
of Vettius—Consulate of Lucius Calpurnius and A. Gabinius— 


ling, to be worth nothing.!2_ When about to de- 
part from the city, he was pressed by his creditors, 
and had recourse to Crassus, who became his 
surety for great sums.!3 

A person who, in any other state, than that of 
Rome, could suppose such a fortune reparable, 
must have thought of means alarming to the state 
itself; but Cesar had now quitted the paths of 
pleasure for those of ambition ; and, in an empire 
which extended over so many “igh provinces, 
could easily proportion his wealth to the extent of 
his power. Although the province into which 
he was then sent was none of the richest, and 
was only a step to somewhat farther, more con- 
siderable, and more likely to supply him with the 
means of pursuing the objects of his ambition, he 
was nevertheless reported to have supplied his 
own wants, and to have enriched his army." 

In passing the Alps, on his way into Spain, at 
a village on the way, one of his company ob- 
served, that “ Here too there were probably par- 
ties and contests for power.” “ Ay,” said Cesar, 
“and I would rather be the first man in this 
place than the second at Ronie.6” Upon his ar- 
rival in Lusitania, he made the necessary aug- 
mentation of the army, and soon overran all the 
districts that were disposed to resist his authority. 
With the same ability with which he conducted 
his military operations, he supported the dignity 
of a Roman governor, no less in the civil than in 
the military department. Historians, upon an 
idea which occurred to them, that the disorder in 
his own affairs might have rendered him partial 
to insolvent debtors, are at pains to acquit hic of 
any such charge, and observe that he gave proofs 
of the contrary, and for the most part ordered two 
thirds of the debtor’s effects to be sequestrated 
for the use of his creditors.'6 

While these things passed in the provinces, 
the city was occupied with ordinary alba and 
suffered an increase of the political distempers 
with which the public had been for some time 
infected. ‘The expense and dissipation attending 
the public shows, 1m particular, were augmented 
to a great degree. Lucius Domitius Ahenobar- 
bus exhibited the baiting of a hundred bears by 
African huntsmen;!? and whereas such enter- 
tainments had formerly ended at one meeting, 
they were now continued through many acts,!® 
and were intermitted only while the people retired 
to their meals. 

The office of censor, as appears from the trans- 
actions which are mentioned relating to the farms 


12 Appian. de Bell. Civ. Jib. ii. p. 715. 
13 Ibid. About 160,0007. Plutarch in Cesare, 
14 Plutarch. in Cesare, edit. Lond. p. 111. 

15 Ibid. 16 Isid. p. 112. 

17 Plin. Nat. Hist lib viii. c. 36. 

18 Dio Cass. lib. xxxvii. c. 47. 


186 


of the revenue and the rolls of the senate, was in 
being at this time, although the names of the 
persons by whom it was exercised are not re- 
corded. ‘The censors are said to have let the 
revenues of Asia at a rate, of which the farmers 
afterwards complained, alleging, that their own 
avidity in grasping at the profits to be made in 
this new province had misled them.! They like- 
wise put upon the rolls of the senate all who had 
ever held any office of magistracy, and by this 
addition increased the number of members be- 
yond the former and ordinary rate.? 

About the same time happened the memorable 
trial of Publius Clodius, for the scandal he had 
given by profaning the sacred rites in Cesar’s 
house. This debauchee was supposed, for some 
time, to have sought for an epportunity of a cri- 
minal correspondence with Pompeia, Cæsars 
wife; but to have been prevented, if not by her 
own discretion, at least by the attention and vigi- 
lance of her family.2 In these circumstances, in 
the preceding year, it fell to the lot of Pompeia, 
as being wife to one of the pretors in office, to 
celebrate, at her house, the festival of a certain 
female deity,4 worshipped by the Romans; and 
at whose rites women alone were admitted. Every 
male domestic, even the husband was obliged to 
absent himself from home while the rites were 
administered. Clodius took this opportunity to 
carry on his intrigue; he put himself in a female 
dress, and, being young and of an effeminate 
aspect, expected to pass fora woman.> Pompeia 
was supposed to be apprised of the design, and 
to have stationed a female slave to receive and 
conduct her paramour through the apartments. 
Being met, however, by another slave who was 
not in the secret, his voice betrayed him. A cry 
of amazement and horror was immediately raised, 
communicated through all the apartments, and 
the occasion of it discovered to the matrons, who 
were met to celebrate the rites. Clodius escaped, 
but not without being known. The college of 
pontiffs made a report, that the sacred rites had 
been profaned. The senate resolved, that inquiry 
should be made into the grounds of the scandal; 
and that the people should be moved to authorise 
the pretor to select, without drawing lots, proper 
judges for the trial of the accused. 

Clodius, by the suspicion of an incestuous 
commerce with his own sister, the wife of Lucul- 
lus; by his perfidy in seducing the troops of that 
general to mutiny, and by his profligacy on every 
occasion, had incurred a general detestation ; and 
many of the senators combined, as the likeliest 
way of removing him from the commonwealth, 
in urging the prosecution against him. 

He himself, foreseeing this storm, had taken 
refuge in the popular party, and endeavoured to 
silence the voice of infamy, by professing extra- 
ordinary zeal for the people, and vehement oppo- 
sition to the senate. ‘These parties accordingly 
became interested in the issue of his cause. e 
popular leaders endeavoured to preserve him as a 
useful instrument, and the senate to remove him 
as a vile and dangerous tool from the hands of 
their enemies. Even Cesar, though personally 
insulted, and so far moved by the scandal which 


1 Cicer. ad Atticum. lib. i. ep. 17. 

2 Dio. lib. xxxvii. ©. 46. 

3 Plutarch. in Cesare, edit. Lond. p. 109. 
4 Called the Bona Dea. 

š Cicero ad Atticum. lib i. 12. 13. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox Ill. 


had been given in his own house as to part with 
his wife, still affected to consider as groundless 
the charge that was brought against the accused; 
and being asked, why he had parted with a wo- 
man who, upon this supposition, must appear to 
be innocent, said, that his wife must not only be 
innocent, but above imputation. Pompey, to 
avoid giving offence, declined to favour either 
party; but being called upon in the assembly of 
the people to declare his opinion, whether this 
trial should proceed according to the decree of the 
senate; made a long speech, full of respect to the 
nobles, and of submission to the senate, whose 
authority, in all questions of this sort, he said, 
shou'd ever with him have the greatest weight. 
He afterwards, in the senate itself, being called 
upon by Messala the consul, delivered himself to 
the same purpose; and when he had done, whis- 
pered Cicero, who sat by him, that he thought he 
had now sufficiently explained himself; intimat- 
ing probably, that he meant to comprehend, ir 
this declaration, his judgment with respect to alf 
the acts of the senate which had passed relating 
to the accomplices of Catiline.6 

The consul Piso was instructed to carry to the 
people, for their assent, an act for the better con- 
duct of the trial of Clodius, dispensing with the 
usual mode of draughting judges by lot, and au- 
thorising the pretor to select them, that he mie 
name the more respectable persons. On the day 
on which this motion was to be made, a numerous 
party of young nobility appeared for the defend- 
ant. His hirelings and retainers crowded the 
comitium. Even Piso, who moved the question, 
dissuaded the people from passing the law, and 
allowed the friends of Clodius to put a ridiculous 
trick on the assembly, by distributing to the peo- 
ple, as they came forward to vote, two ballots, 
which, instead of being, as usual one negative 
and the other affirmative, were both negative. 
This trick being observed, Cato suspended the 
ballot, and strongly remonstrated against the pro- 
ceeding of the consul.? He was supported by 
Hortensius and Favonius. ‘The assembly broke 
up, and the affair again returned to the senate. 
The members were importuned by Clodius, who 
cast himself at their feet as they entered; they, 
nevertheless, confirmed their former resolution by 
a majority of four hundred to fifteen.® 

Hortensius, however, having proposed that, 
instead of the motion which the consuls had been 
instructed to make for the selection of the judges, 
the tribune Fusius should move the people to 
grant commission for the trial, leaving the judges, 
as usual, to be drawn by lot; an edict was framed 
and passed to this effect. Hortensius, who con- 
ducted the trial, was confident that no jury could 
acquit the accused. The court accordingly, in all 
their proceedings, seemed at first inclined to se- 
verity. ‘They even applied for a guard to protect 
their persons against the partizans of the criminal ; 
but the majority, nevertheless, suffered themselves 
to be corrupted, and took money in the course of 
the trial. Of fifty-six judges that were inclosed, 
twenty-five gave their voice to condemn, and 
thirty-one to acquit. Catulus, on this occasion, 
asked the majority to what purpose they had de- 
sired a guard? “ Was it,” he said, “to secure the 
money you expected to receive for your votes ?” 

6 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. i. epist. 13, 14. 16. 


7 lbid. 8 Ibid. ep. t4. a. 
9 Dio. Cas. lib. xxxvii. c. 46. Cic. ad Att. lib.i. ep. 16 


Cuar. V.] 


Soon after this judgment the senate resolved 
that inquiry should be made concerning those 
judges who had been corrupted in the trial. And 
by this resolution gave a general offence to the 
equestrian order, who considered it as an imputa- 
tion on their whole body." ; 

Pompey, in the course of this transaction, had 
been obliged to declare himself for the senate ; but 
his object was to be on good terms with all par- 
ties, and to manage his interest, by having some 
of his creatures always chosen into the highest 
offices of state. He offered, as candidate for the 
consulate of the following year, Afranius, one of 
his dependants, who is represented by Cicero as 
a person of mean character, and who, having no 
personal dignity, nor any credit with the people, 
was to be supported in his canvass by money 
alone. Pompey himself, and the consul Piso, 
openly employed bribery in obtaining votes in his 
favour.!! 

A variety of resolutions were obtained in the 
senate to restrain these practices. Two of them 
were proposed by Catoand Domitius. The first 
was levelled against the consul Piso, and gave 
permission, on the suspicion of illicit practices 
respecting elections, to visit the house even of a 
magistrate. By the other it was declared, that all 
those who were found distributing money to the 
people should be considered as enemies to their 
country.!2 

The senate, at the same time, encouraged 
Lurco, one of the tribunes, to propose a new 
clause to corroborate the laws against bribery. 
By this clause promises of money made to the 

eople, if not performed, did not infer guilt; but, 
if performed, subjected the guilty person from 
thenceforward to pay to each of the tribes an an- 
nual tax of three thousand Roman money, or 
about twenty-four pounds sterling; and there 
being thirty-five tribes, this tax amounted in all 
to about eight hundred and forty pounds of our 
money. That the tribune might not be inter- 
rupted in carrying this law, the senate farther re- 
solved, that the formalities or restrictions of the 
Lex Ælia and Fufia! should not be opposed to 
him.!4 It appears, however, that the liberality of 
Pompey prevailed against these precautions, as 
Afranius was elected, together with Q. Cacilius 
Metellus Celer. 

Soon after the election of these officers, the 
farmers of the revenue of Asia, supported by the 
whole equestrian order, complained, as has been 
mentioned, of the terms of their contract, in 
which they alleged that they had greatly exceeded 
what the funds of that province could afford, and 
made application to the senate for relief. Their 
plea was contested for some months with great 
animosity on both sides.!5 

Upon the accession of the new consuls, several 
other matters, tending to innovation and public 
disturbance, were introduced. Metellus Nepos, 
late tribune, being now in the office of prætor, 
procured a law to abolish the customs payable at 
any of the ports of Italy. The Romans, as has 
been observed, upon the accession of wealth de- 


10 Cicero ad Att. lib. i. ep. 17. 

12 Cicero ad Att. lib i. ep. 16. 

13 These were formalities and restrictions provided 
to check the precipitate passing of laws. 

14 Cicer. ad Atticum, lib. i. ep. 16. 

16 Ibid. lib. i. ep. 17, 18. lib. xxvii. c. 51. 


11 Ibid. ep. 16. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


187 


rived from Macedonia, had exempted themselves 
from all the ancient assessments, and they now 
completed the exemption of all the Italians from 
every tax besides that of quit-rents for public 
lands, and the twentieth penny on the value of 
slaves when sold or emancipated. They were 
become the sovereigns of a greatempire, and as 
such, thought themselves entitled to receive, not 
obliged to pay, contributions. '6 

The tribune Herennius, at the same time, 
made a motion for an act to enable Publius Clo- 
dius to be adopted into a plebeian family, which, 
though an act of a more private nature than any 
of the former, tended still more to embroil the 
parties of the senate and the people. This fac- 
tious and profligate person had entertained great 
resentments against many of the senators on ac- 
count of the prosecution he had lately incurred, 
and against Cicero in particular, who, having 
been called as an evidence on his trial, gave a 
very unfavourable account of his character. The 
summary procecdings against the accomplices of 
Catiline, in which Cicero presided as consul, ex- 
posed him to the resentment of the popular fac- 
tion; and Clodius now proposed to qualify him- 
self to be elected tribune of the people, in order to 
wreak his vengeance on that magistrate in par- 
ticular, as well as on the other abettors of the 
senatorian party. The motion, however, for the 
present was rejected, though not finally dropt, by 
Clodius meci nor by the popular faction, whose 
cause he professed to espouse.!? 

Two other motions were made in which Pom- 
pey was deeply interested : one, to ratify and con- 
firm all his acts in the province of Asia: another, 
to procure settlements for the veterans who had 
served under his command. The first, as it im- 
plied a reflection on Lucullus, many of whose 
judgments Pompey had reversed, roused this 
statesman from the care of his household and his 
table, to that of the republic.'8 He opposed this 
motion with vigour, and insisted that the acts of 
Pompey should be separately examined, and not 
confirmed in a single vote. In this he was sup- 
ported by Catulus, by Cato, by the consul Me- 
tellus, and by the senate in general. Afranius, 
though vested with the consulate, and acting 
almost as the agent of Pompey, had neither dig- 
nity nor force to support such a measure; and 
Pompey, finding it rejected by the senate, de- 
clined carrying it to the pase 

The other proposal, relating to the provision to 
be made for the soldiers of Pompey, was, by L. 
Flavius, one of the tribunes, moved in the as- 
sembly of the people, under the title of an A gra- 
rian law. In this act, to prevent the imputation 
of partiality to any particular description of men, 
certain gratuities were projected for the indigent 
citizens in general ;# and, to enable the common- 
wealth to extend its bounty, it was proposed first 
of all to revoke the conveyance of certain lands, 
which, having belonged to the public in the con- 
sulate of P. asie and L. Calpurnius, were 
sold by the senate; and that the price should be 
restored to the purchasers. It was proposed like- 
wise to seize certain lands which had been con- 
fiscated by Sylla, but not appropriated; and to 


16 Ibid. lib. ii. ep. 16." Dio. Cass. 

17 Dio. Cass. liv xxxvii. c. 51. 

18 Plutarch. in Lucullo, edit. Lond. p. 197. 

19 Dio. lib. xxxvii. c. 49. 20 ibid. lib. 50. 


188 


allot, during five years, the revenues of the late 
conquests in Asia to purchase lands, which 
should be distributed in terms of this act.! 

The consul Metellus Celer, supported by the 
senate, strenuously opposed the passing of this 
law. The tribune persisted with great obstinacy, 
and, to remove the obstruction he met with, com- 
mitted the consul to prison. ‘The whole senate 
would have attended him thither, and numbers 
accordingly crowded to the place, when the tri- 
bune, vested with the sacred defences of his per- 
son, to bar their way, planted his stool or chair of 
office in the doer of the prison ; and, having seated 
himself upon it, “This way,” he said, “you 
cannot pass; if you mean to enter, you must 
pierce through the walls.”? He declared his re- 
solution to remain all night where he sat. The 
parties were collecting their strength, and matters 
were likely to end in greater extremities than 
suited the indirect and cautious conduct of Pom- 
pey. This politician, although he engaged all his 
friends to support the motion of Flavius, affected 
to have no part in the measure, and now probably 
instructed the tribune to rernove from the doors 
of the prison. Flavius accordingly withdrew of 
a sudden, saying, he had done so at the request of 
the prisoner, who begged for his liberty.’ 

It is supposed that Pompey, on this occasion, 
severely felt the checks which his ambition re- 
ceived from the senate; that he regretted for a 
moment the dismission of his army, and wished 
himself in condition to enforce what his craft or 
his artifice had. not been able to obtain. The 
error he had committed in resigning the sword, 
if he conceived it as such, might have still been 
cotrected by recovering the possession of some 
considerable province, which would have given 
him the command of an army and of proper re- 
sources to support his power. He, nevertheless, 
appears to have preferred the scene of intrigue in 
the city and the capital of the empire; a choice 
in which he was probably confirmed by Cesar, 
who professed great attachment to him, and who 
was about this time returned from the govern- 
ment which he held as propretor in Lusitania. 

This officer, according to Dio, had found sorme 
pretence for a war with the nations on the fron- 
tier of the Roman province; had obliged them to 
take refuge in some of the islands on the coast, 
and afterwards reduced them in that retreat. His 
object was to return to Rome with the reputation 
of victory, to obtain a triumph, and to offer him- 
self as a candidate for the consulship of the fol- 
lowing year. For this purpose he quitted his 
province without waiting for a successor, and, 
upon his arrival at Rome, halted as usual with 
the ensigns of his military command at the gates 
of the city, applied for a triumph, and, at the same 
time made interest for votes at the approaching 
election.4 The senate, and the friends of the re- 
public in general, were become extremely jealous 
of his designs, and of his credit with the people. 
From a libertine he was become an ardent politi- 
cian, seemed to have no passion but ambition or 
animosity to the senate; without committing 
himself he had abetted every factious leader 
against them, and seemed to be indifferent to 
consideration or honours, except so far as they led 


1 Cicero ad Att. lib. i. ep. 19. 
2 Dio. lib. xxxvii. p. 50. 


3 Dio. Cas. lib. xxxvii p. 50. 4 Ibid. c. 50, &c. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boor if}. 


to power. Cicero and Cato were at this time the 
principal, or most conspicuous, members of the 
senate. The first was possessed of consular rank, 
great ingenuity, wit, and accomplished talents « 
the other, possessed of great abilities and an in- 
flexible resolution, embraced the cause of the re- 
public with the same ardour that others engaged 
In pursuing the object of their own ambition, 
their pleasures, or personal interests. He had 
penetration enough to perceive in Cesar, long 
before the senate in general was alarmed, a dis- 
position to vilify the aristocracy, and, in conjunc- 
tion with needy and profligate citizens, to make a 
prey of the republic. Under this apprehension 
he opposed him with a degree of keenness. which 
Cesar endeavoured to represent as a personal 
animosity. x 

The senators in general, now aware of their 
danger from Cæsar, were disposed to resist his 
applications, whether made for honours or for 
public trust. They, on the present occasion, 
disputed his pretensions to a triumph : and, while 
he remained without the city in expectation of 
this honour, refused to admit him on the list of 
candidates for the office of consul. But the day 
of election being fixed, Cæsar, without hesitation, 
preferred the consulate to the triumph, laid down 
the ensigns of his late military command, assumed 
the gown, and entered the city as a candidate for 
the consulship.§ 

The people were at this time divided into a 
variety of factions. Pompey and Crassus dis- 
trusted each other, and both were jealous of Cæ- 
sar. Their divisions strengthened the party of 
the senate, and furnished that body with the 
means of thwarting separately many of their am- 
bitious designs. This Cesar had long perceived, 
and had paid his court both to Pompey and Cras- 
sus, in order to hinder their joining the senate 
against him. The expedience of this precaution 
now appeared more clearly than ever, and he is 
supposed to have separately represented to these 
rivals the advantage which their enemies derived 
from their misunderstanding, and the ease with 
which, if united, they might concert among them- 
selves all the affairs of the republic, gratify every 
friend, and disappoint every enemy. Upon this 
representation Pompey and Crassus were recon- 
ciled, and agreed to act in concert with Cæsar, 
and to support him in his pretensions, at the ap- 
proaching elections.§ 

This private- combination, which remained 
some time a secret, was afterwards, by a kind of 
mockery, alluding to the ordinary names of pub- 
lic office, taken from the number of those who 
were joined in them,’ called the triumvirate. In 
the mean time, these supposed leaders of opposite 
factions, in abating their violence against each 
other, took a favourable appearance of modera- 
tion and candour. They paid their court sepa- 
rately to persons whom they wished to gain, and 
flattered them with hopes of being able to heal 
the divisions of their country. This sort of court 
they paid in particular to Cicero; and by their 
flatteries, and real or pretended admiration of his 
talents, seemed to have got entire possession of 
his mind. Pompey affected to place the merits 


———— a al 
5 Sueton. in Cesare, c. 18. Dio. lib. xxxvii. €. 54. 
6 Dio. Cass. lib. xxxvii. c. 54, 55. Plutarch. in 
Pompeio, Cesare,et Crasso. 
7 As the Decemvirs, Septemvirs, &c. 


Cuap. V.] 


of Cicero greatly above his own. “T, indeed,” 
he said, “have served my country, but this man 
has preserved it.”8 The senators, with whom 
Cicero had hitherto acted, were alarmed; and it 
appears that Atticus, about this time, had taxed 


-him with leaving his party, to commit himself 


into the hands of their enemies. In his answer 
to this imputation, he seems to have flattered 
himself that he had made acquisition of Pompey, 
not surrendered himself into his power; at least, 
that he had reclaimed or diverted him from the 
dangerous projects in which he had been lately 
engaged, and that he thought himself likely to 
succeed in the same manner with Cesar: so 
much, that he triumphed in the superiority of 
his own conduct to that of Cato, who, by his 
austerity and vehemence, had alienated the minds 
of men otherwise well disposed to the republic,’ 
“ while I,” he said, “bya little discretion, reclaim, 
or even disarm its enemies.’”! 

Few persons were naturally possessed of more 
penetration than Cicero, although it will after- 
wards appear how egregiously he was mistaken 
on this occasion; but he chose not to see what 
checked his vanity, or prevented his enjoying the 
court which was paid to him by Pompey and 
Cesar. His own glory intercepted every other 
object from his view, and made him the dupe of 
every person who professed to admire him, and 
secretly displeased with every one who did not 
pay him, on every occasion, the expected tribute of 

raise; a description under which Cato, though 
[is most sincere well-wisher and friend, appears 
at this time to have fallen. 

Cæsar, to the other arts which he employed to 
secure his election, added the use of money, which 
he obtained by joining his interest, in opposition 
to Bibulus with that of Lucceius, another of the 
candidates possessed of great wealth. He him- 
self having squandered his fortune, as has been 
observed, was still greatly in debt, and Lucceius 
willingly furnished the money that was given to 
the people in the name of both. This illegal pro- 
ceeding, together with the menacing concerts of 
which he began to be suspected with Pompey 
and Crassus, greatly alarmed the friends of the 
republic. They determined to support Bibulus 
against Lucceius; and, in order to give Cæsar a 
colleague who might occasionally oppose his dan- 
gerous intentions, they even went so far as to 
contribute sums of money, and to bid for votes as 
high as their opponents. In this crisis, even Cato 
owned it was meritorious to bribe.!! 

During the dependence of this contest, the 
senate, by the death of Lutatius Catulus, was 
deprived of an able member, and the people of a 
fellow-citizen of great integrity, moderation, forti- 
tude, and ability; a model of what the Romans 
in this age should have been, in order to have 
preserved their republic, He partook with Cato 
in the aversion which Cesar bore to the most re- 
spectable members and best supporters of the 
senate, and would probably have taken part with 


8 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. ii. epist. 1. 

9 Alluding to the opposition which Cato gave to 
the farmers of the revenue, in their petition for an 
abatement of their rent. But Cato followed his judg- 
ment in this matter; and there is no reason to prefer 
the judgment of Cicero to his. 

10 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. ii, epist. 1. 

11 Sueton. in Caio Cesare, c. xix. Appian. de Bell. 
Civil. lib. ii. | 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


189 


him likewise in the continual efforts he made to 
preserve its authority. The aristocratical party, 
notwithstanding this loss, prevailed in carryin 
the election of Bibulus against Lucceius; an 
though they could not exclude Cæsar from the 
office of consul, they hoped, by means of his col- 
league, to oppose and to frustrate his designs.!? 
sesar, well aware of their purpose, opened his 

administration with a speech praising unanimity, 
and recommending good agreement between those 
who are joined in any public trust. While he 
meant to vilify the senate, and to foster every dis- 
orderly party against them, he guarded his own 
behaviour, at least in the first period of his con- 
sulship, with every appearance of moderation and 
candour, paid his court not only to leaders of fac- 
tion, but to persons of every description, and 
while he took care to espouse the popular side in 
every question, was active likewise in devising 
regulations for the better government of the em- 
pire: so that the senate, however inclined to coun- 
teract his designs, as calculated to raise himself 
on the ruins of the commonwealth, could scarce- 
ly, with a good grace, oppose him in any particu- 
lar measure. He set out with a project for the 
relief of indigent citizens having numerous fami- 
lies, including the veterans and disbanded soldiers 
of Pompey; proposing to settle them on some of 
the public lands in Italy. He gave out that he 
expected the concurrence of Cicero in this mea- 
sure, sent him a message by Balbus,!3 with assur- 
ances that he meant to consult with Pompey and 
himself in all matters of importance, and that 
he had hopes of bringing Crassus into the same 
mind: words, from which it is manifest that the co- 
alition of these persons was not yet publicly known. 
“What a fine prospect I have before me,” says 
Cicero to Atticus; “a perfect union with Pom- 
pey, even with Cesar if I please; peace with my 
enemies, and tranquillity in my old age.” But 
his heart misgave him; the honours of his former 
life recurred to his mind. With his great talents, 
he was destined to transmit a more honest fame 
to posterity, and to become the lamented victim 
of his country’s betrayers, not the detested asso- 
ciate of their crimes,'4 

This consulate is distinguished by the passing 
of many laws, particularly this, mich was de- 
vised for the settlement of citizens on certain pub- 
lic lands; and therefore known by the title of the 
Agrarian law. On this act Cæsar was to rest his 
popularity, and his triumph over the senate. He 
gave out that he was to make a provision for 
twenty thousand citizens, without any burden to 
the revenue, But he well knew that his antago- 
nists would perceive the tendency of the law, and 
not’suffer it to pass without opposition; and he 
affected great moderation in the general purpose, 
and in framing every part of his plan; affecting 
solicitude to obtain the consent of the senate; 
but, in reality, to make their opposition appear 
the more unreasonable and the more odious to the 
people. He declared, that he did not mean to 
strip the revenue of any branch that was known 
to carry profit to the public, nor to make any par- 
tial distribution in favour of his friends; that he 
only meant to plant with inhabitants certain un- 


12 Plutarch. Appian. Dio. Sueton. &c. 

13 Dio. Cass. lib. viii. initio. Plutarch. in Cesare. 
In Pompeia, Pompeio, Lucullo, Catone, &c. &c¢ Se- 
ton. in Cesare. Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib. ii. 

14 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. ii. ep. 3. 


190 


profitable wastes, and to provide for a number 
of citizens, who, being indigent and uneasy in 
their circumstances, filled the city itself with 
frequent disorders and tumults; and that he 
would not proceed a step without consulting the 
senate, and persons of credit and authority in the 
state. 

In a way to save these appearances, and with 
these professions, Cesar formed the first draught 
of an act which he brought to the senate for their 
approbation, and the support of their authority 
in proposing it tothe people. It was difficult to 
find topics on which to oppose a measure so plau- 
sible, and conducted with so much appearance 
of moderation and candour. But the tendency 
of the act itself was evidently not to promote the 
peace of the commonwealth, but to constitute a 
merit in the party that procured it, and to give 
power to those who were to be entrusted with its 
execution. 

In great and populous cities indigent citizens 
are ever likely to be numerous, and would be 
more so, if the idle and profligate were taught to 
hope for bounties and gratuitous provisions, to 
quiet their clamours, and to suppress their disor- 
ders. If men were to have estates in the country 
because they are factious and turbulent in the 
city, it is evident that public lands, and all the 
resources of the most prosperous state, would not 
be sufficient to satisfy their claims. 

The commissioners appointed for the distribu- 
tion of such public favours, would be raised above 
the ordinary magistrates, and above the laws of 
their country. They might reward their own 
creatures, and keep the citizens in general in a 
state of dependence on their will. The authors 
of such proposals, while they were urging the 
state and the people to ruin, would be considered 
as their only patrons and friends “It is not this 
law I dread,” said Cato; “it is the reward ex- 
pected for obtaining it.” 

Odious as the task of opposition on such difi- 
cult ground might appear to the people, this sena- 
tor did not decline it. Being asked his opinion 
in his turn, he answered, That he saw no occa- 
sion for the change that was now proposed in the 
state of the public lands; and entered on an ar- 
gument with which he meant to exhaust the 
whole time of the sitting of the senate, and to 
prevent their coming to a question. He was en- 
titled, by his privilege as a member in that assem- 
bly, to speak without interruption, and might, if 
he chose to continue speaking, persist until all 
the members had left the house. Cesar suspect- 
ing his design, and finding it impossible otherwise 
to silence him, ordered him into custody. The 
whole senate instantly rose in a tumult. “ Whither 
go you before the meeting is adjourned?” said 
Cæsar to Petreius, who was moving from his side. 
“I go,” said the other, “into confinement with 
Cato. With him a prison is preferable to a place 
in the senate with you.” ‘The greater part of 
the members were actually moving away with 
Cato, and Cesar felt himself at once stripped of 
the disguise of moderation he had assumed, and 
dreaded the spirit which he saw rising in so nu- 
merous a body of men, who, on former occasions, 
had maintained their authority with becoming 
vigour. He had relied on their want of decision, 
and on their ignorance of their own strength. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor III. 


among the tribunes to interpose ; but Cato, seeing 
him embarrassed, and the senate engaged in the 
cause, went off in the custody of the lictor with- 
out any signs of reluctance. Cæsar immediately 
recollecting himself, and never hurried too far by 
any passion, despatched a tribune of his own 
party, with secret directions to rescue the prison- 
er; and this being done, the senators again re- 
turned to their places. “I meant,” said Cesar, 
“to have submitted this law to your judgment 
and correction; but if you throw it aside, the 
people shall take it up.” 

Cesar, upon this occasion, increased his own 
popularity, and diminished that of his enemies 
in the senate, who were supposed in this, as in 
some other instances, to withstand with keenness, 
every measure that was devised for the comfort 
of the people. ‘The imputations cast out against 
him by Cato and others, were supposed to proceed 
from malice or cynical prejudices. He found him- 
self strong enough to extend his bounty to the 
people, so as to comprehend the lands of Campa- 
nia, which were hitherto considered as unalien- 
able, and the richest demesne of the public, 
together with a valuable district near the conflu- 
ence of the Vulturnus and the Sabbatus, formerly 
consecrated to pious uses. In these valuable tracts 
of land there was sufficient subject for an ample 
provision for the soldiers of Pompey, and for the 
retainers of those who, together with Crassus and 
Cesar himself; were proposed to be commission- 
ers for carrying this act into execution. 

At the first assembly of the people, Cæsar 
proposed his scheme to impropriate the lands of 
Campania, with the above additions; and first of 
all called on his colleague Bibulus to declare his 
mind on the subject. Bibulus spoke his dis- 
sent; and in vehement terms declared, that no 
such alienation of the public demesne should be 
made in his consulate. Cesar next called upon 
Pompey, though in a private station; and the 
audience, ignorant of the concert into which these 
leaders had entered, were impatient to hear him 
on the subject of a measure which was likely to 
elevate a supposed rival so high in the favour of 
the people. ‘To the surprise of all who were pre- 
sent, Pompey applauded the general design, and, 
in a speech of considerable length, discussed all 
the clauses of the act, and with great approbation 
of each. When he had done speaking, Cesar, 
alluding to what had dropped from his colleague, 
and affecting to fear the interposition of force; 
‘Will you support us,” he said to Pompey, “in 
case we are attacked ?”—“ If any one,” said the 
other, “shall lift up a sword against you, I shall 
lift up both sword and shield.” 2 Crassus being 
called upon, spoke to the same purpose. The 
concurrence of these leaders portended the unani- 
mous consent of all parties; and a day being 
fixed for putting the question, the assembly for 
the present adjourned. 

To oppose a measure so popular, and from 
which such numbers had great expectations, no 
means remained so likely to succeed as supersti- 
tion. To this aid Bibulus accordingly had re- 
course, and by virtue of the authority with which 
he was vested, proclaimed a general fast, and a 
suspension for the present year of all the affairs 


a 
1 Dio. lib. xxxviii. c. 1,2, 3. Plutarch. Sueton. Ap- 
ian, &c 


But his rashness broke the charm. He wished | P’ Gicero ad Att. lib. ii. Piutarch. in Pompeio. Dio 


that the prisoner would procure some friend 


Cass. lib. xxxviii ¢ 5. 


Cuar. V.] 


of state. The design of this suspension, and the 
extravagant length of time to which it was ex- 
tended, probably enabled his colleague to treat it 
with contempt, and to proceed in the design of 
oli his question, as if no such proclamation 

ad been issued. The assembly was accordingly 
summoned in the temple of concord. Cesar, 
early in the morning, secured all the avenues 
and the steps of the portico with an armed force ; 
had Vatinius, one of the tribunes of the people, 
who was entirely devoted to his interest and even 
in his pay,? stationed with this party, in order to 
take the odium of all violent measures on himself. 
Bibulus, however, attended by numbers of the 
senate, and three of the tribunes, who were pre- 
pared, by their negative, to put a stop to every 
proceeding, came into the place of assembly with 
a firm countenance; he protested against the le- 
gality of any meeting to be formed in a time of 
general fast; but the opposite party being in 
possession of the temple, forced him" from the 
steps, broke the ensigns of the lictors, wounded 
the tribunes that interposed in his defence, and 
effectually removed all farther obstruction to their 
own designs. The question then being put, the 
law passed without opposition, including a clause 
to oblige every senator, under pain of exile or 
death, to swear to the observance of it. 

This oath was probably a snare laid by Cæsar 
for the most resolute of his opponents, like that 
which was formerly laid by Marius, on a like oc- 
casion, for Metellus Numidicus, and by which 
that virtuous citizen was actually for some time 
removed from the commonwealth.4 

Metellus Celer, the late consul, together with 
Cato and Favonius, were likely to have fallen 
into this snare. They at first declared their reso- 
lution not to swear to the observance of any such 
ruinous law; but on maturer consideration, they 
became sensible that in this they were serving the 
cause of their enemies. “ You may have no need 
of Rome,” said Cicero to Cato, “and may go into 
exile with pleasure ; but Rome has need of you. 
Give not such a victory to her enemies and your 
own.” Upon these considerations it was deter- 
mined to comply.5 

Bibulus, on the day following that of his violent 
expulsion from the assembly of the people, as- 
sembled the senate, complained of the outrage he 
had received, and submitted the state of the re- 
public to their consideration. But even this 
assembly, though consisting of above six hundred 
of the most powerful citizens of Rome, not desti- 
tute even of courage, were declined in their spirit, 
and became averse to exertions of vigour. ‘They 
were occupied with their villas, their equipages, 
and the other appurtenances of wealth and of 
high rank. “' They appear,” says Cicero upon 
this occasion, “to think that even if the republic 
should perish, they will be able to preserve their 
fish-ponds.” 

The consul Bibulus, even Cato, though far re- 
moved from any ambiguity of conduct, saw no 
possibility of resisting the torrent. The first re- 


3 Cicero in Vatinium. Cæsar was reported to have 
said at Acquileia, some time after this date, when 
Vatinius was disappointed of the edileship, that he 
had no business with honours, being intent on money 
only ; and that he was paid for all his services in the 
tribunate. 

4 See book ii. c. 6. 

5 Plutarch. in Catone. Appian. de Bell.Civil. lib. ii. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


191 


tired to his own house, and from thence forward 
during the remainder of the year, did not appear 
in any public place. Cato absented himself from 
the senate.® 

While Cesar engrossed the full exercise of the 
consular power, Bibulus was content with issuing 
his edicts or manifestos in writing, containing 
protests, by which he endeavoured to stop all pro- 
ceedings in public affairs on account of the reli- 
gious fast, or continuation of holidays, which he 
had instituted to restrain his colleague. In these 
writings he published violent invectives against 
Cesar, in which, among other articles, he charged 
him with having had a part in the conspiracy of 
Catiline.? The tribune Vatinius, in return, 
issued a warrant to commit the consul Bibulus to 
prison; and, in order to seize him, attempted to 
break into his house; but in this he was foiled, 
and the parties continued, during the remainder 
of this consulate, in the same situation with re- 
spect to each other. 

In dating the year, instead of the consulate of 
Cesar and Bibulus, it was called by some wag 
the consulate of Julius and Cæsar.8 This able 
adventurer, though suspected of the deepest de- 
signs, went still deeper in laying his measures for 
the execution of them than his keenest opponents 
supposed. He found means to tie up every hand 
that was likely to be lifted up against himself; as 
those of Pompey and Crassus, by their secret 
agreement, of which the articles were gradually 
disclosed in the effect. He confirmed to Pom- 
pey all the acts of his administration in Asia, and, 
by putting him on the commission for dividing 
the lands of Campania, and for settling a colony 
at Capua, gave him an opportunity, which the 
other earnestly desired, of providing for many ne- 
cessitous citizens of his party. He flattered Cras- 
sus sufficiently, by placing him on the same 
commission, and by admitting him to a supposed 
equal participation of that political consequence 
which the triumvirs proposed to secure by their 
union. He gained the equestrian order, by grant- 
ing a suit which they had long in dependence, 
for a diminution of the rents payable by the re- 
venue farmers in Asia? These he reduced a 
third; and with that order of men acquired the 
character of great liberality and candour. He 
himself was ite only person who in appearance 
was not to profit by these arrangements. He 
was occupied, as his retainers pretended, in serv- 
ing the republic and in promoting his friends; 
was the general patron of the distressed and the 
indigent, and had nothing to propose for himself. 

With his consent od under his authority, 
Fufius, one of the pretors, and Vatinius, one of 
the tribunes, obtained two laws, both of them 
equitable and salutary: the first relating to the 
use of the ballot in the comitia, or assembly of 
the people : the other, relating to the challenge of 
parties in the nomination of judges or juries. 
The introduction of the ballot in political ques- 
tions had greatly weakened the influence of the 
aristocracy over the determinations of the people; 
and resolutions were frequently carried in this 
manner, which no party, nor any particular or- 
der of men, were willing to acknowledge as their 


6 Cicero pro Sextio. Plutarch. in Catone. 

7 Sueton. in C. Cesare. 

8 Ibid. ¢. 20. Dio. Cass. lib. xxxvii. ¢. 6. 8. 

9 Cicero ad Att. lib. ii.ep. 1. Appian. de Bell. Civi 
lib. ii p. 435. 


192 


measure. The nobles imputed the absurd deter- 
minations to the majority that was formed by 
the people, and these sometimes retorted the im- 
putation. To leave no doubt in such matters for 
the future, Fufius proposed that the orders of 
Patrician, Equestrian, and Plebeian, should ballot 
apart.! This regulation had some tendency to 
restore the influence of the superior classes. 

Vatinius proposed that in criminal actions, 
when the judges were drawn by lot, the defend- 
ant and prosecutors might, in their turns, chal- 
lenge, or strike off from the list, persons to whom 
they took a particular exception.? 

Cesar himself was busy in devising new regu- 
lations to reform the mode of elections, and toim- 
prove the forms of business in some of the public 
departments. By one of his acts the priests were 
to be elected agreeably to the former laws of 
Atius and Domitius, with this difference, that 
candidates might be admitted even in absence. 
By another of his acts, regular journals were to 
be kept in the senate and in the assemblies of the 
people, and all their proceedings recorded for the 
inspection of the public. By a third, persons con- 
victed of treason were subjected to new penalties, 
and governors of provinces to additional restraints 
in the exercise of their power. Such officers 
were not allowed to receive any honorary gift 
from their provinces, until their services being 
considered at Rome, were found to have entitled 
them to a triumph. They were restrained from 
encroaching on the right of any state or princi- 
pality beyond the limits of their province. They 
were obliged to leave copies of their books and of 
their acts at two of the principal towns in their 
government,4 and immediately upon their ar- 
rival at Rome, to give in a copy of the same 
accounts to the treasury. ‘They were doomed to 
make restitution of all subjects received in extor- 
tion, not only by themselves, but by any of their 
attendants.’ 

With these acts Cæsar adorned his consulate, 
and in some measure discountenanced the party 
which was disposed to traduce him. He is, 
nevertheless, accused of having stolen from the 
treasury, to which he had access in the capacity 
of consul, bars of gold weighing three thousand 
pondo, and of having concealed the theft by sub- 
Roing brass gilt, and of the same form, in its 

ace. 

Whatever foundation there may have been for 
this report, it soon appeared that Cæsar had ob- 
jects of a more serious nature, could copy, on 
occasion, the example of Pompey, and, in his 
manner, cause what was personal to himself to 
be proposed by others, whom he might he free to 
support or disavow according to the reception 
which his proposal met from the public. It can- 
not be doubted that he now conceived the design 
of bringing a military force to support his pre- 
tensions in the city. Hitherto kingly power be- 
ing odious at Rome, whoever had aspired to it 
had always perished in the attempt, and the 
mere imputation, however supported, was fatal. 


1 Dio. lib. xxxviii. c. 8. 2 Ibid. Appian. 

3 Cicero ad Att. lib. v. ep. 16. et lib. vi. ep 7. 

4 Cicero ad Famil. lib. ii. ep. 17. et lib. v. ep. 20. 

5 Ibid. in Vatinium pro Sext. 

6 Sueton. in Jul. c. 54. Cesar is said to have sold 
the gold bullion he brought from Spain at 3000 H. S. 
or about 25/. of our money. ‘This will make his sup- 
~ posed theft about 75 0002 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Book II 


The most profligate party among the populace 
were unable or unwilling to support their dema- 
gogues to this extent; and the people in genera. 
became jealous of their most respectable citizens, 


when it appeared that merit itself approached to | 


monatchical elevation. Marius, by the continued 
possession of the highest offices, and by the su- 
preme command of armies, had acquired a spe- 
cies of sovereignty which he knew not how to 
resign. Cinna came into partnership with Ma- 
rius, and wished to govern after his decease. 
Sylla, to avenge his own wrongs and those of his 
friends, to cut off a profligate faction, and restore 
the republic, took possession of the government. 
He led his army against usurpers, and had the 
power to become himself the most successful 
usurper, as he was put in possession of a so- 
vereignty which he no doubt might have retained. 
So far he was a model to every ambitious adven- 
turer, and pointed out the only means which 
could insure to a single person the sovereignty of 
Rome. Catiline, with his accomplices, Lentulus 
and Cethegus, had vainly attempted to overturn 
the state, or to usurp its government, by means 
of a profligate party among the populace or citi- 
zens of desperate fortune.” Cæsar was become 
head of the same party ; but an army like that of 
Sylla, a convenient station, and the resources of 
a great province, were necessary to support the 
contest, and to carry it against his rivals, as well 
as against the republic itself, to a favourable issue. 

The republic had taken many precautions to 
prevent the introduction of military power at 
Rome. Although the functions of state and of 
war were entrusted to the same persons, yet the 
civil and military characters, except in the case of 
a dictator, were never united at once in the same 
person. The officer of state resigned his civil 
power before he became a soldier, and the soldier 
was obliged to lay aside his military ensigns and 
character before he could enter the city; and if 
he sued for a triumph in his military capacity, 
must remain without the walls till that suit was 
discussed. ‘The command of armies and of pro- 
vinces in the person of any officer was limited to 
a single year at a time, at the end of which, if it 
were not expressly prolonged, it was understood 
to expire, and to devolve on a successor named 
by the senate. 

That no leader of a party might have an army 
at hand to overawe the republic, no military sta- 
tion was supposed to exist within the limits of 
Italy. The purpose, however, of this precaution 
was in some measure frustrated by the near situ- 
ation of a province in which an army was kept 
within the Alps. Italy was understood to extend 
only from the sea of Tarentum to the Arnus and 
the Rubicon: beyond these boundaries, on the 
northwest, all those extensive and rich tracts on 
both sides of the Apennines, and within the Alps, 
which now make the dutchies of Ferrara, Bo- 
logna, Modena, Milan, the states of Piedmont 
and Venice, with the dutchy of Carniola, and 
the whole of Lombardy, were considered, not as 
a part of Italy, but as a province termed the 
Cisalpine Gaul, and, like the other Roman pro- 


7 Speaking of the imaginary danger to a state of 
being overturned by the rabble; we might as much 
fear, said a witty writer of the present age, that a city 
would be drowned by the overflowing of its own ken 
nels. 


Cnap. V.] 


vinces, was to be held by a military officer, sup- 
ported by an army. í 

This then was the most commodious station 
at which a political adventurer might unìte the 

reatest advantages, that of. having an army at 
fe command, and that of being so near the capi- 
tal as to be able, by surprise, to occupy the seats 
of government whenever his designs were ripe 
for such an attempt. 

Sylla had an army devoted to his pleasure; 
but, having the seas of Asia and Ionia to pass in 
his way to Italy, could not, without giving an 
alarm from a great distance, and without putting 
his enemies on their guard, approach to the city. 
He therefore, when he had this object in his view, 
made no secret of his purpose. 

-Cæsar had formed a design on the common- 
wealth, and acted from his original disposition, 
and a deliberate intention to make himself master 
of it; not urged, like Sylla, by great provoca- 
tions, and the suggestion of singular circum- 
stances. Hearranged his measures like the plan 
of a campaign, which he had the ability to digest, 
and the patience to execute with the greatest de- 
liberation. He proposed to make himself master 
of an army at the gates of Rome, and to have the 
resources of a province contiguous to the capital. 
He secured the possession of these advantages by 
an unprecedented prolongation of the usual ap- 
pointments for five years; so that the people 
themselves could not, without a breach of faith, 
recal their grant upon any sudden alarm of the 
improper use he might propose to make of their 
favours, 

The Cisalpine Gaul, or that part of Italy 
which lay from the Rubicon to the Alps, was 
peculiarly suited to the purpose of Cesar. But 
the distribution of the provinces was still within 
the prerogative of the senate; and the provincial 
governments were filled by their appointment, 
in pursuance of an express regulation ascribed 
to Caius Gracchus, and known, from his name, 
by the title of the Sempronian law, Cesar had 
ever been at variance with the greater part of the 
senate. In the office of prætor he had been sus- 
pended by their authority. In his present office 
of consul he had set them at open defiance. He 
had no prospect of being able to obtain from them 
the choice he had made of a province; and the 
proposal to put him in possession of the Cisalpine 
Gaul for a term of years, joined to the preceding 
parts of his conduct, aol have given a general 
alarm, and opened at once the whole extent of 
his design, 

It was necessary, therefore, in order to obtain 
this object, to set aside the authority of the senate, 
and to procure his nomination by some degree of 
surprise, The tribune Vatinius accordingly, 
upon a rumour that the Helvetii, or the nations 
inhabiting from mount Jura to the Alps, were 
likely to cause some commotion on the frontier 
of Gaul, moved the people to set aside the law of 
Sempronius, and, by virtue of their own supreme 
power, to name Cesar as proconsul of the Ci- 
salpine Gaul and Illyricum for five years with an 
army of three legions. The senatorian party, as 
might have been expected, were greatly alarmed 
at this proposal. ‘They vainly, however, hoped 
to evade it by substituting another appointment 


Sn 


8 Lex eee vid. b. ii, c. 3. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


193 


for Cæsar in place of this province. It was pro- 
posed to make him superintendant of the public 
forests throughout the empire ; a charge which, 
though not, in our acceptation of the word, a 
province, however, like every other public depart- 
ment in that empire, known by this name. ‘This 
substitute for the government of the Cisalpine 
Gaul was thought to be the better chosen, that it 
neither implied nor required the command of an 
army, and was to withhold the engine of militar 
power from a person sq likely to abuse it, This 
weak attempt, however, against so able an adver- 
sary, only tended to expose the meaning of those 
by whom it was made, and by showing to the 
senate their awn weakness, hurried them into 
concessions which perhaps might have been 
otherwise avoided. In order that Cesar might 
not owe every thing to the people and nothing to 
them, they extended his command at once to both 
sides of the Alps. On the one side pf these 
mountains he had a station from which to over- 
awe the city: on the other, he had a great extent 
of territory, and a theatre of war on which he 
might form an army and inure them to service. 
The senate, seeing he had already, by a vote of 
the people, obtained the first with an army of 
three legions for five years; and imagining that 
it was no longer of any use to oppose him; or 
hoping to occupy his attention, or to wear out the 
five years of his command in wars that might 
arise beyond the Alps, they joined to his province 
on the Po that of the Transalpine Gaul, with an 
additional legion. In this manner, whether from 
these or any similar reasons, it Is affirmed by 
some of the historians,’ that the senate even out- 
ran the peaple in concessions to Cesar; and to 
this occasion js referred the memorable saying 
of Cato: Now you have taken to yourselyes a 
king, and have Pai him with his guards in 
your citadel,”10 

Cesar at the same time, on the motion of the 
tribune Vatinius, was empowered to settle a Ro- 
man colony on the lake Larius at Novum Co- 
mum, with full authority to confer the privilege 
of Roman citizens on those who should settle in 
this place, Having obtained the great object of 
his consulate, in his appointment for a term of 
years to the command of an army within the 
Alps, he no longer kept any measures with the 
senate, nor allowed them any merit in the advan- 
tages he had gained. He was aware of their 
malice, he said, and had prevailed in every suit, 
not by their concession, but in direct opposition 
to their will. Though capable of great com- 
mand of temper, and of the deepest dissimula- 
tion when in pursuit of his object, he appears, on 
this and other occasions, to have had a vanity 
which he indulged, in braving the world when 
his end was obtained," As he insulted the senate 
when no longer depending on their concurrence 
for any of his objects, so he no longer disguised 
his connexion with Pompey and Crassus, or the 
means by which in his late measures, the con- 
currence of these rivals had been obtained. 

As such combinations and cabals generally 
have an invidious aspect to those who are ex- 
clyded from them, the triumvirate, for so it be- 
gan to be called in detestation and irony, not- 


9 Sueton. in Jul. Cesare, c. 22. 

10 Plutarch.in Catone. Dio. Cass. lib. xxxviii. Ap 
pian. de Bell. Civil. lib. in. i 

1l Sucton. in Casare, lib. ii. c. 32. 


194 


withstanding the popularity or influence enjoyed 
by those who had formed it,! became an object of 
aversion and general abuse.2 They were re- 
ceived at all public places with groans and ex- 
pressions of hatred.. ue actor, performing on the 
public theatre, applied to Pompey a sentence of 
reproach, which occurred in the part he was act- 
ing. The application was received with peals of 
applause, and called for again and again.? 

The edicts that were published by Bibulus in 
opposition to Cesar were extolled, and received 
with avidity. The places of the streets at which 
they were posted up were so crowded with multi- 
tudes assembled to read them, that the ways were 
obstructed. Cesar and Pompey endeavoured to 
lessen the effect of these edicts in speeches to the 
people, but were ill heard. Pompey lost his temper 
and his spirit, and sunk in his consideration as 
much as Cesar advanced in power. It became 
manifest even to the people, that Cæsar had pro- 
eured their conjunction for his own conveniency ;4 
but Pompey himself probably felt that he was too 
far advanced to recede. 

The senate, and all the most respectable citi- 
zens of Rome, though unanimous in their detes- 
tation of the design that was formed by Cesar, 
Pompey, and Crassus, to dispose of the republic 
at their pleasure, yet either were, or believed 
themselves, unable to cope with the power of so 
many factions united. Cesar, in order to hold by 
force what he gained by artifice, and by some de- 
gree of surprise, filled the streets with his re- 
tamers in arms, and showed, that, in case of any 
attempt to recal what had been so weakly given 
up to him, he was in condition to resist, and to 
lay the city in blood. If he were driven from 
Rome, he had provided within the Alps an army 
of two or three complete legions, with which he 
could maintain his province, or even recover his 
possession of the city. Every one censured, com- 
plained, and lamented ; but there was little con- 
cert, and less vigour, even among the members of 
the senate. 

Cato, with his declared disapprobation of the 
late measures, was reduced to the single expedient 
of assisting Bibulus in drawing up the edicts or 
manifestos against the proceedings of Cesar, 


which were, at this time received with so much 


avidity by the people. 

Cicero now declined taking part in any affair 
of state; but being known for an advocate, was 
courted in this capacity by many citizens, who 
had affairs in dependence before the courts of 
justice, and apprehending an attack which was 
likely to be made upon himself, on account of the 
transactions of his consulate, he avoided, as much 
as possible, giving offence to any of the parties 
which divided the commonwealth. ‘The storm 
was to be directed against him by Publius Clo- 


1 The titles of duumvirs, triumvirs, and so on, were 
the designations of legal commissions at Rome acting 
under public authority; such title was given to the 
private coalition of these adventurers in mere irony. 

2 Cicer. ad. Att. lib. ii. ep. 16. 

3 “To our misfortune thou art great.” He was 
called upon to repeat these words again and again in- 
numerable times. ‘The time will come when thou 
shalt rae this state ;” likewise repeated with peals of 
applause, &c. Cicero ad Att. lib. ii. epist. 19. Val. 
Max. lib. vi. c. 2. 

4 One of the sentences, so much applauded in its 
application to him at the theatre, was, ‘ Eandem 
virtutem tempus veniet oum gravitor gemes.” 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IIL. 


dius, under whose animosity to the governmen 
of the nobles, and to Cicero in particular, it was 
perceived for some time to be gathering.5 

This bustling profligate having, in the former 
year, in order that he might be qualified for tri- 
bune of the people, got himself adopted into a 
plebeian family, could not obtain the necessary 
ratification of the deed of adoption in the assem- 
bly of the curiæ, until his cause was espoused by 
Cesar, who seems to have taken his part, in re- 
sentment of some insinuations thrown out against 
himself by Cicero, in pleading for M. Antonius, 
his late colleague in the consulate. Antonius 
being, as has been mentioned, on account of his 
administration in Macedonia, accused of extor- 
tion, was defended by Cicero, who took that oc- 
casion to lament the state of the republic, brought 
under subjection as it was by a cabal which ruled 
by violence, and in contempt of the law. Cesar 
was greatly provoked: ‘This person,” he said, 
“takes the same liberty to vilify the reputation 
of others, that he takes to extol his own;” and 
upon those expressions, considered as a warning 
of the part which Cicero was likely to take in his 
absence, he determined not to leave him at the 
head of the senatorian party to operate against 
him. His destruction might be effected merely 
by expediting the formality of Clodius’s adoption 
into a plebeian family, to qualify him for tribune 
of the people ;§ and Cesar, on the very day in 
which he received this provocation from Cicero, 
permitted the act of adoption to pass in the as- 
sembly of the curia. 

Pompey likewise concurred in executing this 
deed of adoption for Clodius, and assisted in the 
quality of augur to carry it through the religious 
forms. Clodius, in the mean time, gave out, that 
he had no design on the tribunate, but was solicit- 
ing an embassy to Tigranes king of Armenia. 
Cicero was so much blinded by this pretence, 
that he was merry in his letter to Atticus on the 
absurdity of Clodius, in having himself degraded 
into a plebeian, merely to qualify him to appear 
at the court of Tigranes. He was merry like- 
wise with his not being put on the commission of 
twenty for the execution of Cesar’s Agrarian 
law. “Strange!” he said, “that he who was 
once the only male creature in Cesar’s house, 
cannot now find one place among twenty in this 
list of his friends.”’? 

The more effectually to impose upon Cicero 
and his friends, Cesar affected to believe, that the 
intention of Clodius was against himself, and 
taken up with the animosity of a person who had 
already attempted to dishonour his house ;° and 
he pretended to dispute the validity of his adop- 
tion, and of consequence, his qualification to be 
elected a tribune. Pompey joined in the same 
vile artifice. ‘ Nay,” says Cicero, upon hearing 
of their pretended opposition to Clodius, ‘this is 
perfect tyranny. Only send the proper officers to 
me, and I will give my affidavit, that Pompey told 
me himself he had assisted as augur in passing 
that decree.’’? 

With these transactions the year of Cesar’s 


5 Cicero ad Att. lib. ii. epist. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 

6 Dio. Cass. lib. xxxviii c. 10. &c. Plutarch. in 
Cicerone. Cicero pro domo sua, de Provinciis Con- 
sularibus, &c. 

7 Cicer. ad Att. lib. ii. epist. 7. 

8 In the intrigue with Cesar’s wife. 

9 Cic ad Att. epist. 10. Vul. 12. 


Cuar. V.] 


consulate drew to aclose. He ratified his treaty 
with Pompey, by giving him his daughter Julia in 
marriage. During the former part of the year, 
this lady had been promised to Servilius Czpio, 
and had been of great use to her father, by se- 
curing the services of Cepio against Bibulus. 
Servilius, on his disappointment, was pacified by 
the promise of Pompey’s daughter. Cæsar him- 
self married the daughter of Calpurnius Piso, 
who, together with Gabinius, the creature of 
Pompey, was destined to succeed in the consu- 
late, and who was, by this alliance, secured in the 
interest of Cesar. ‘Provinces, armies, and 
kingdoms,” said Cato on this occasion, “are 
made the dowries of women, and the empire 
itself an appendage of female prostitution.” 

In this situation of affairs, and among parties 
who dealt in impositions and artifices, as well as 
in open and daring measures, some particulars 
are recorded, which, to gain our belief, require 
some acquaintance with the manners of the times. 
Vettius, a citizen of some note, who had been 
employed by Cicero in the time of his consulship 
to gain intelligence of the Catiline conspiracy, 
now himself appeared as the author of a plot, of 
which the origin and the issue were matter of 
various conjecture. Knowing that Curio, a young 
man of high rank, anda declared enemy of Cæ- 
Sar, was on bad terms likewise with Pompey, he 
told him in confidence, that he himself had deter- 
mined to assassinate Pompey, and proposed to 
Curio to join with him in that design. The young 
man communicated the matter to his father, and 
the father to Pompey, who laid it before the senate. 
Vettius being examined in the senate, at first de- 
nied any intercourse with Curio, but afterwards 
confessed, that he had been drawn into a con- 
spiracy with this young man, with Lucullus, 
Brutus, Bibulus, and some others, who had 
formed a design on Pompey’s life. 

It was strongly suspected, that Cæsar had em- 
ployed Vettius to frame this imposture, in order 
that he might engage some of those persons in a 
criminal correspondence; and that it was in- 
tended, as soon as hé had laid some foundation 
for an imputation of guilt against thein, that he 
should, with a party of slaves, armed with dag- 
gers, put himself in the way of being taken; that 
he should at first deny the plot, but afterwards 
suffer himself to be forced, by degrees, to confess, 
and to declare his pretended accomplices; that 
this plan was disconcerted by the early intima- 
tion which Curio gave to his father, before all the 
circumstances intended to give it an air of proba- 
bility were in readiness. 

It was scarcely possible, however, that Cæsar 
should have committed his reputation to the 
hazard of detection in so infamous a project. He 
laid hold of it indeed with some avidity, and en- 
deavoured to turn it against his opponents. After 
Vettius had been examined before the senate, 
and was committed to prison for farther examina- 
tion, Cesar presented him to the people, and 
brought him into the rostra, to declare what he 
knew of this pretended bloody design. The 
prisoner repeated his confession, but varied in 
the account of his accomplices, particularly in 
leaving Brutus out of the list; a circumstance 
likewise, in the scandal of the times, imputed to 
the partiality of Cesar, and considered as proof 


J0 Plutarch. in Catone. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


195 


of his clandestine relation to this young man. 
Vettius was remanded to prison, and a process 
commenced against him on the statute of in- 
tended assassination. A trial must have proba- 
bly disclosed the whole scene, and for this reason 
was said to have been prevented, by the sudden 
death of Vettius, who was supposed to have been 
strangled by order of Cesar 1n prison." 

By the influence of Pompey and 


U.C. 695. Cæsar, Gabinius and Piso were 
LaGotpun: elected consuls ; and, by their con- 
nius Piso Ce. nivance, Clodius became tribune of 
sonianus, the people. The ascendant they 
4. Gabinius had gained, however, was extreme- 
Nepos. 


ly disagreeable to many of the other 
officers of state, and even to some 
of the tribunes. L. Domitius Ahenobarbus and 
C. Memius Gemellus joined in an accusation 
against Cæsar, late consul, for proceedings in office 
contrary to law and religion. Cæsar, for some 
time, affected to join issue with him on these 
questions, and to submit his cause to judgment; 
but apprehending delay and trouble, without any 
advantage from such an enquiry, he pleaded his 
privilege as a person destined for public service; 
and accordingly, without staying to answer this 
charge, withdrew from the city, and continued to 
make his levies, and to assemble his army in the 
suburbs of Rome. 

In this posture of affairs, one of the questors, 
who had served under Cesar in his consulship, 
was convicted of some misdemeanor;!? and the 
opposite party, as if they had of a sudden broke 
the chains in which they were held, commenced 
suits against all the tools that had been employed 
by him in his late violent measures. Gabinius 
had been charged with bribery by Caius Cato, 
then a young man. But the prætor, whose lot it 
was to exercise the jurisdiction in such cases, 
being under the influence of Pompey, evaded the 
question. Caius Cato complained to the people, 
and, having said that Pompey usurped a dicta- 
torial power, narrowly escaped with his life.!3 

Vatinius was accused before the pretor Mem- 
mius, who willingly received the accusation; but 
all proceedings were suddenly stopped by the in- 
terposition of Clodius in the capacity of tribune; 
and the attention of the people and of the senate 
soon came to be more entirely occupied with the 
designs of this factious adventurer. 

he ruin of Cicero appears to have been the 
principal object which Clodius proposed to him- 
self in entering on the office of tribune ; and this, 
though affecting to be of the popular party, he 
pursued chiefly from motives of personal ani- 
mosity and resentment. Cicero had given evi- 
dence against him on his trial, and afterwards in 
the senate made him the object of his wit and in- 
vective.4 He is generally represented by Cicero 
as effeminate and profligate, void of discretion or 
prudence. On the present occasion, however, he 
seems to have managed with considerable steadi- 
ness and address. He acted evidently in concert 
with Cæsar, Pompey, and Crassus; but proba- 
bly had not from them any particular direction in 
what manner he was to proceed. 

Ever since the summary proceedings which 


11 Cicero ad Att. lib. ii. epist. 24. Sueton. in Ca- 
sare, c. 20. 

12 Sueton. in Nerone, c. ii. et in Cesare, e. 23. 

13 Cicero ad Quint, Frat. lib. 1. epist. 2. 

14 Cicer. ad Att. lib. i. 


196 


wert employed against the accomplices of Cati- 
line, the danger of this precedent was a favourite 
topic with the popular faction. Clodius professed 
that the object of his tribunate was to provide a 
guard against this danger. He began with pay- 
ing his court to different parties and different or- 
ders of men in the républic; by proposing acts fa- 
vourable to each; and he stated his motion for the 
better securing of the people against arbitrary 
executions, which he meant in the end to apply 
to Cicero, as but one of many regulations intended 
by him for the benefit of the public, and which he 
joined with some acts of gratification to private 
persons. He gained the present consuls by pro- 
curing them lucrative appointmehts, at the ex- 
piration of their year in office; to Piso, Macedo- 
nia including Achaia; to Gabinius, Syria with a 
considerable addition beyond the usual bounds of 
the province.! He gained the indigent part of the 
people by an act to remit all the debts which were 
due for corri at the public granaries; and by or- 
dering, for the future, the distributions from thence 
to be made gratuitously. He, at the same time, 
procured another act extremely agreeable to many 
of the citizens, for restoring and increasing the 
number of corporations which had been abolished 
about niné yéars before, on account of the trou- 
bles to which they gave rise. > 
The meeting of corporate bodies, in a city so 
much addicted to faction and tumult, had been 
the catise of frequent disorders. As persons, af- 
fecting to govern the state, endeavoured to gain 
the people, by indulging their passions for idle- 
ness and pleasure, with games, theatrical enter- 
tainments, combats of gladiators, and the baiting 
of wild beasts; so the head of every corporate 
body, though upon a smaller scale, had his feasts, 
his entertainments, and shows, forming his party 
of retainers, on occasion, to maintain his preten- 
sions by force. The rénewal, therefore, of such 
establishments, a measure which carried to every 
tradesman in his stall the feeling arid consequence 
of a Crassus, a Pompey, and a Cæsar, affecting 
to govern the world in their respective ways, was 
greedily adopted by the lower people. And Clo- 
dius took the opportunity of the first popular meet- 
ings to awaken and to direct their zeal to his own 
urpose.2 He even gained a considerable party 
in the senate by affecting to circumscribe the dis- 
cretionary power of the censors over this body. 
Many of the members had reason to dread the 
censorial animadversions, and were pleased with 
an act which he obtained to provide, that for the 
future, no one could be struck off the rolls of the 
senate without a formal trial, and the concurrence 
of both the censors.4 
Joined to so many arts practised to reconcile 
different parties to the measures he affected to 
take for the security of the people’s liberties, Clo- 
dius promulgated his law of provision against ar- 
bitrary executions, and gave it a retrospect which 
was undoubtedly meant to comprehend the sum- 
mary proceedings which had been held against 
Cethegus and Lentulus in the consulate of Ci- 
cero. While the subject was in dependence, he 
thought of two circumstances that might operate 


1 Plutarch. in Cicerone. 

2 Pedianus in Pisoniana. Dio. lib. xxxviii. Cicero 
pro Domo sua. 
_ 3 Dio. Hib. xxxviii. c. 13. Cicero in Pisone, c. 4. et 
Ascanius, ibid. ; 
_ 4 Ibid. See a summary of these acts. Cicero pro | 
#extio, from e. 15 toc. 28. Í 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox III. 


against him, and which he was therefore deter 
mined to prevent. One was, the practice of re- 
curring to the celestial auspices by which the 
proceedings of the people were sometimes sus- 
pended ; and the other was, the opposition which 
he might expect from Cato, who was likely to 
consider the cause of the senate and the republic 
as involved in that of the magistrate, who had 
preserved the state by executing their decrees. 
To secure himself against the first, he procured 
an edict to prohibit all persons from observing the 
heavens. while the people were deliberating on 


any affair of state; and tö obviate the second, he. 


thought of a pretence for a temporary removal of 
Cato from Rome. 

In the preceding consulate, Cato, though armed 
as he was solely with the reputation of integrity, 
unable to prevent the progress of a ruinous fac- 
tion affecting popular measures, yet by his un- 
remitted opposition, he forced them, on occasion, 
to show what Pompey in particular was ex- 
tremely desirous to conceal, that they prevailed 
by corruption and force; not by what they pre- 
tended, the free choice of their fellow-citizens: 
Clodius foreseeing a like opposition, and possibly 
a disappointment in his design against Cicero, if 
Cato continued at Rome, devised a commission to 
employ him in foreign service. Ptolomy, king of 
Cyprus, had puta personal affront on Clodius, 
by refusing to pay his ransom when taken by pi- 
rates on the coast of Asia near to that island. 
He now took an opportunity to be revenged on 
him, by procuring an act to forfeit his kingdom 
and his treasure; and by making Cato the in- 
strument of his revenge, he proposed to free him- 
self at the same time from the interruption which 
this citizen was likely to give to his projects at 
Rome.® 

At an interview with Cato, Clodius had the 
impudence to pretend great admiration of his vir- 
tue; told him, that the commission to reduce Cy- 
prus into the form of a province was solicited by 
many; but that he knew of none who, by his 
faithfulness and integrity, was so well qualified 
for the trust as Cato, and that he meant to propose 
him to the people. “ That,” said Cato, “ I know is 
a mere artifice; not an honour, but an indignity in- 
tended to me.” “Nay,” said Clodius, ‘if you do 
not go willingly, you shall go by force;” and on 
that very day moved and obtained his nomination 
from the people. Lest the affair of Cyprus should 
not detain him a sufficient time, he was farther 
charged in his commission to repair to Byzantium 
to restore some exiles, and to quiet some troubles 
which had arisen at that place. : 

Cesar and Pompey likewise concurred in pro- 
curing this commission to Cato, in order to re- 
move a powerful support from the pretors Mem- 
mius and Domitius, whose proposal to repeal all 
the acts of Cesar was yet in dependence. 

The storm was now prepared to fall upon the 
magistrate who had presided in the suppression 
of Catiline’s party, and no man had any doubt 
of its direction. Cato, before he left Rome, see- 
ing Cesar in possession of the gates with an 
army, and ready, in the event of any tumult, 
under pretence of quieting disorders, to enter 
the city by force, and to seize on the government ; 
and apprehending, that the cause in dependence, 
however just, was altogether desperate, earnestly 


SE R 
5 Cicero pro Sextio. 


Cuar. V.] 


exhorted Cicero, rather to yield and to withdraw 
from the city, than to bring matters to extremi- 
ties in the present state of the republic.§ 

Cicero, however, was for some time undecided. 
Having secured the support of L. Ninius Qua- 
dratus, one of the tribunes, he proposed to ob- 
struct the proceedings of his enemy, and to give 
a negative to all his motions. Afterwards, upon 
assurances from Clodius, that the purpose of the 
act was altogether general, and had no special 
relation to himself, he was prevailed on not to 
divide the college of tribunes, or to engage his 
friends in the invidious task of giving a negative 
to a law, that was intended merely to guard the 
people against arbitrary proceedings.” 

Clodius, having obtained this advantage, no 
longer made any secret of his design against 
Cicero, and boasted of the concurrence of Cesar 
and Pompey. In this neither of these professed 
friends of Cicero denied the imputation ;8 but ex- 
cused themselves in private by pleading, that 
while their own acts of the preceding year were 
still questioned by the prætor, it was necessary 
for them to keep terms with so violent a tribune ;9 
but Pompey, together with this apology for his 
present conduct, gave Cicero the strongest assur- 
ances of future protection. “This tribune,” he 
said, “shall kill me before he injure you.” Itis 
not credible that Pompey then meant to betray 
him; it was sufficiently basé that, in the sequel, 
he did not keep his word. On the contrary, 
when his aid came to be most wanted by his in- 
jured friend, he retired to the country, under 
pretence of business; and being at his villa near 
Alba, where Lentulus, Lucullus, and many of 
the most respectable senators repaired to him 
with the warmest entreaties in behalf of a person 
to whose eloquence and panegyric he owed so 
many of his honours, he coldly referred them to 
the ordinary officers of state for protection, say- 
ing, that as a private citizen he could not contend 
with a furious tribune at the head of an armed 
people.!? : 

In the mean time, the consul Gabinius, though 
under the absolute direction of Pompey, promoted 
the attack against Cieero, and checked every 
attempt that was made in his favour. When 
the equestrian order, together with numbers of 
the most respectable citizens from every quarter 
of Italy, crowded in mourning to Rome, and pre- 
sented a memorial to the senate in his behalf; 
and when the members proposed to take mourn- 
ing, and to intercede with the people, Gabinius 
suddenly left the chair, broke up the meeting, 
went directly from thence to the assembly of the 
people, where he threw out injurious insinuations 
against the senate, and mentioned the meetings 
which had been held by the equestrian order, as 
riotous and scditious tumults; said, that the 
knights ought to be cautious how they revived 
the memory of that part which they themselves had 
acted in the violent measures which were now 
coming under review, and which were so likely 
to meet with a just retribution from the people. 

In this extremity Cicero attempted to see Pom- 
pey in person at his country-house; but while 
the suppliant was entering at one door, this 


6 Plutarch. in Catone. 7 Dio. lib. xxxviii.c. 14. 
8 Cicero post Redituin in Senatum. 

9 Ibid. pro Sextio, c. 17 et 12. 

20 Cieero in Pisonem. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


197 


treacherous friend withdrew at another.u No 
longer doubting that he was betrayed by a per- 
son on whom he had so fully relied, he began to 
be agitated by a variety of counsels and projects. 
He was invited by Cæsar to place himself in the 
station of lieutenant in his province of Gaul; and, 
in that public character abroad, to take refuge 
from the storm that was gathering against him 
in Italy. But this, from a person who had so 
much contributed to raise the storm, was sup- 
posed to procced from a design to insult or betray 
him; or at best to reduce him to a state of de- 
pendence on himself. Being attended by a nu- 
merous body of citizens, chiefly of the equestrian 
order, who had taken arms in his cause, he some- 
times had thoughts of defending himself by force ; 
at other times, he despaired of his fortunes, and 
as appears from his letters, proposed to kill him- 
self; and was diverted from this intention only 
by the entreaties and anxious care of his friends. 

Such was the state of affairs, when Clodius 
assembled the people to pass the act he had fram- 
ed against arbitrary executions. He had sum- 
moned them to meet in the suburbs, that Cesar, 
who on account of his military command was 
then excluded from the city, might be present. 
This artful politician being called upon among 
the first to deliver his opinion; with an appear- 
ance of moderation and unwillingness to bear 
hard on any person to whom the law might ap- 
ply, referred the people to his former declarations; 
said, that every one knew his mind on the sub- 
ject of arbitrary executions; that he approved the 
act which was now proposed, as far as it provided 
against such offences for the future; but could 
not approve of its having a retrospect to any 
transaction already passed. 

While Cesar thus, in delivering his own opi- 
nion, affected to go no farther than consistency 
and a regard to his former conduct seemed to 
require, he permitted or directed his party to go 
every length with Clodius, and meant either to 
ruin Cicero, or force him to accept of protection 
on the terms that should be preseribed to him. 

When the general law had passed, there was 
yet no mention of Cicero; and his enemies might 
have still found it a difficult matter to carry the 
application to him; but he himself, in the anguish 
of his mind, anticipated the accusution, went forth 
in mourning to the streets, and implored mercy 
of every citizen with an aspect of dejection, which 
probably did not encourage any party to espouse 
his cause. He was frequently met in this con- 
dition, and insulted by Clodius, who walked in 
the streets, attended by an arined rabble ; and he 
deterinined at last to abandon the city. Being 
escorted by a company of his friends, he passe 
through the gates in the middle of the night on 
the first of April, took the road of Lucania, and 
intended to have made his retreat into Sicily, 
where the memory of his administration in the 
capacity of questor, and the continued effects of 
his patronage at Rome, were likely to procure 
him a favourable reception.!2 But Clodius, im- 
mediately upon his departure, having carried a 
special attainder, by which, in the language of 
such acts, he was interdicted the use of fire and 
water; and by which every person within five 
hundred miles of Italy was forbid, under severe 


11 Plutarch. in Cicerone. 
12 Vid. Actionem in Verrem. 


198 


penalties to harbour him; Virgilius, the prætor 
of Sicily, though his friend, declined to receive 
him. He turned from thence to Brundusium, 
passed into Macedonia, and would have fixed his 
residence at Athens; but apprehending that this 
place was within the distance prescribed to him 
by the act of banishment, he went to ‘Thessalo- 
nica in his way to Cyzicum. Here he had let- 
ters that gave him intimation of some change in 
his favour, and entertaining some prospect of 
being speedily recalled, he accordingly determined 
to wait the issue of this hope. 

We have better means of knowing the frailties 
of Cicero, than perhaps is safe for the reputation 
of any one labouring under the ordinary defects 
of human nature. He was open and undisguised 
to his friends, and has left an extensive corres- 
pondence behind him. Expressions of vanity in 
some passages of his life, of pusillanimity in others, 
escape him with uncommon facility. Being at 
least of a querulous and impatient temper, he 
gives it full scope in his exile, perhaps not more 
from weakness, than from design to excite his 
friends to redouble their efforts to have him re- 
stored. He knew the value of fortitude as a topic 
of praise, and might have aspired to it ; but would 
it not, he may have questioned, encouraged his 
party to sleep over his wrongs? In any other 
view, his complaints resemble more the wailings 
of an infant, or the strains of a tragedy composed 
to draw tears, than the language of a man sup- 
porting the cause of integrity in the midst of 
undeserved trouble.—“ I wish I may see the day,” 
he writes to Atticus, “in which I shall be dis- 
posed to thank you for having prevailed upon 
me not to lay violent hands on myself; for it is 
certainly now matter of bitter regret to me that I 
yielded to you in that matter.”1 

In answer to the same friend, who had chid 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox III. 


he says, “do I not endure? Did ever any per- 
son fall from so high a state? in so good a cause? 
with such abilities and knowledge ? with so much 
public esteem? with the support of such a re- 
spectable order of citizens? Can I remember 
what I was, and not feel what I am? Stript of 
so many honours, cut off in the career of so much 
glory, deprived of such a fortune, tore from the 
arms of such children, debarred the view of such 
a brother, dearer to me than I was to myself, yet 
now debarred from my presence, that I may spare 
him what he must suffer from such a sight, and 
myself what I must feel in being the cause of 
so much misery to him. I could say more of a 
load of evils which is too heavy for me to bear; 
but I am stopped by my tears,’’2 

From the whole of this correspondence of Ci- 
cero in his exile, we may collect to what degree 
the unjust reproaches which he had suffered, the 
desertion of those on whom he relied for support, 
the dangers to which he left his family exposed, 
affected his mind. ‘The consciousness of his in- 
tegrity, even his vanity forsook him; and his fine 
genius, no longer employed in the forum or in 
the senate, or busied in the literary studies which 
amused him afterwards? in a more calamitous 
time of the republic, now, by exaggerating the 
distress of his fortunes, preyed upon himself. It 
appeared from this, and many other scenes of his 
life, that although he loved virtuous actions, yet 
his virtue was accompanied with so insatiable a 
thirst of the praise, to which it entitled him, that 
his mind was unable to sustain itself without this 
foreign assistance; and when the praise which 
was due to his consulate was changed into ob- 
loquy and scorn, he seems to have lost the sense 
of good or of evil in his own conduct or character ; 
and at Thessalonica, where he fixed the scene of 
his exile, sunk or rose in his own esteem, as he 


him for want of fortitude, “ What species of evil,” | seemed to be valued or neglected at Rome.‘ 


CHAPTER VI. 


Cesar takes Possession of his Province—Migration of the Helvetii— Their Defeat— War with 
Ariovistus—Return of Cesar for the Winter into Italy—Great Concourse of Citizens to his 
Quarters—Motion to recal Cicero—Disorders that followed upon it—Consultations of Pompey 
and Cesar—Augmentation of the Army in Gaul—Second Campaign of Cesar— Operations 
on the Aisne—On the Meuse and Sambre—Batile with the Nervii—Successful Attempt for 
the Restoration of Cicero— Controversy Relating to his House—Repeated Riots of Claudius— 


Trial of Milo. 


WHILE the transaction which terminated in 
the exile of Cicero was still in dependence, Cæ- 
sar, although, by assuming the military character, 
he had disqualified himself to take any part in 
civil affairs, had actually gone from the city and 
embodied his legions, yet he still remained in the 
suburbs of Rome to observe the issue of that 
business, and to direct the conduct of his party. 
He thought himself too much interested in the 
event to leave it entirely under the direction of 
Pompey, with whom his own connexion was 
precarious, and might be of short duration. He 
was inclined to ruin, if he could not gain, a per- 
son whose talents and character made him of so 


1 Cicero ad Att. lib. iii. epist. 3. 


much consequence to the parties who contended 
for power in the state. Having failed in his at- 
tempt to gain him as a dependent, and to carry 
him as part of his own retinue into Gaul, he se- 
cretly promoted the designs of Clodius, and em- 
ployed his own retainers and friends against him, 
until he saw the purpose accomplished. 

The provinces of which Cæsar had obtained 
the command, comprehended, as has been observ- 
ed, under the denomination of the two Gauls, 
considerable territories on both sides of the Alps. 
Cisalpine Gaul, which was joined to Italy, ex- 
tended to Lucca, not far from Pisa on one side 


2 Ibid. epist. 10. 
3 See the Book of Tuscular Questions. 
4 Vid. Cicero ad Att. lib. iij. i 


—— or SC 


Canar. VL] 


of the Apennines, and to the Rubicon, not far 
from Ariminum on the other. Beyond the Alps, 
the whole territory from the Mediterranean to 
the Rhine and the Meuse, was known by the 
name of Gaul. A part of this tract, which was 
bounded by the Rhone, the mountains of Au- 
vergne, the Garonne, and the Pyrenees, was 
already a Roman province, ineluding, together 
with Languedoc and Dauphiné, what, from its 
early subjection to the Romans, is still named 
Provence. 

The remainder of the eountry was divided into 
three principal parts, occupied by the Aquitani, 
the Celtes, and the Belgæ, nations differing in 
language, establishments, and customs. The first 
division extended from the Pyrenees to the Ga- 
ronne; the second from the Garonne to the Seine; 
and the third from thence to the Meuse and the 
Seheld. 

In each of these tracts there was a multiplicity 
of separate cantons and independent eommunities, 
of which Cæsar had occasion to enumerate no 
less than four hundred. Even the smallest of 
these communities, by his aceount, was broken 
into parties and factions, who had separate ob- 
jeets, and were engaged in opposition to eaeh 
other. The people, in general, were held in a 
state of dependence by two separate orders of 
men, whose condition and character may account 
for the manifold divisions and animosities that 
took place in their country. One order was eeele- 
siastieal, composed of the Druids, who, by their 
profession, had the keeping of such mysteries, 
and the performance of such rites as were then 
in use; and, having over their fellow-eitizens the 
claim toa hierarchy, had, among themselves, in 
the various pretensions to preferment and rank 
in their own order, continual objects of competi- 
tion, jealousy, and quarrels. 

The other order was entirely military, and 
consisted of persons whose principal distinetion 
arose from the number of their armed adherents; 
and who, therefore, vied with each other in the 
multitude of their retainers, or in the foree of their 
parties. 

The country, we learn, in general, was inter- 
spersed with what are called towns, and what 
were, in reality, safe retreats, or places of strength. 
It abounded in corn and cattle, the resourees of a 
numerous people; armies were eolleeted, and po- 
litieal assemblies were statedly, or oecasionally 
called: but how the people were aceommodated, 
or in what degree they were supplied with the 
ordinary produetions of mechanie or commercial 
arts, is no where described. 

In these particulars, however, as they were 
probably less skilful than the Italians, so they 
surpassed the Germans, to whom they yielded in 
the reputation of valour; and they were now in 
reality on the eve of becoming a prey to the ra- 
pacity and ferocity of the one, or to the ambition, 
refined policy, and superior arts of the other. 

Among parties, who were already so numerous, 
and likely to be divided indefinitely by family or 
personal jealousies, Cæsar was about to find the 
occasions, whieh he undoubtedly sought for, of 
raising his reputation in war, of enriching himself 
and his dependents, and of forming an army 
inured to serviee, and attached to himself. While 
he was yet in Italy, he had intimation of a 


3 Cesar de Bell. Gall. lib. vi. c. 10—20. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


199 


wonderful project formed by the Helvetii, natives 
of the tract which extends from the Jura to the 
Alps, and of the valleys which divide those 
mountains, to quit their own country in order to 
exehange it for a better settlement, in a less in- 
clement region, on the lower and more fertile 
plains of Gaul. 

They had taken, for this purpose, an exact ac- 
count of their own numbers in every eanton, anci 
mustered no less than three hundred and fifty- 
eight thousand souls, of whom ninety-two thou- 
saud were warriors, or men fit to bear arms. To 
put this multitude in motion, a great apparatus of 
provisions, of horses, and of carriages was neces- 
sary ; and they allotted two years for the necessa- 
ry preparations. This time was now elapsed, 
and the swarm began to dislodge on the twenty- 
fifth of March of the year in which Cesar was 
to take possession of his provinee. On receiving 
the alarm, he set out from Italy, and with hasty 
journeys arrived at Geneva, where to prevent 
surprise, he broke down the bridge of the Rhone, 
and took other measures to preclude the aceess 
of strangers to his province. 

In the mean time the Helvetians sent a pacific 
message, desiring, that they might be allowed to 
pass the Rhone, and giving assuranees that they 
would abstain from every sort of hostility on their 
march through the Ronan province. Cesar, in 
order to gain time, affected to take their request 
into consideration, promised to give them an an- 
swer by the middle of April; and in this manner 
amused them, while he assembled the legion, that 
was dispersed in different parts of the provinee, 
and ordered new levies to be made with the great- 
est despateh. At the same time, he fortified the 
banks of the river, from the Lake of Geneva, to 
the narrow passô at which the Rhone enters be- 
tween the Jura and the Vuache, and from thence 
running under eliffs, and steep mountains, ren- 
ders the access from Helvetia to Gaul either im- 
practicable or easily obstructed. 

Being thus prepared for his defenee, he, on the 
return of the Helvetian deputies, gave them for 
answer, That the Romans never allowed strangers 
to pass through their country; and that if any 
attempt were made on his province, he should 
repel it by force, Upon receiving this answer, 
the Helvetians, though too late, endeavoured to 
effect the passage of the Rhone, and made re- 
peated attacks, either where the tiver was ford- 
able, or where it admitted the use of rafts or of 
boats, but were repulsed in every attempt, and 
were at last obliged to turn to the right, where, 
by the consent of the Sequani, their neighbours 
in that part of the country, they passed over the 
Jura into Gaul. 

Cesar, probably not more alarmed for the safety 
of his province, than desirous to render it a scene 
of action, determined to observe the migrations of 
this enemy, and to seize the occasion they fur- 
nished him of forming his troops to service. For 
this purpose he himself, in person, repassed the 
Alps, and without any regard to the limitations 
of his commission, which restricted his military 
establishment to three legions, ordered additional 
levies, and with the forces assembled near Aqui- 
leia, returned to his northern province. In this 
march he met with opposition from the inhabit- 
ants of the mountains, who endeavoured to ob- 


6 Fort l'Ecluse. 


» 


200 


struct his way : but he had traversed the country 
of the Allobroges, and passed the Rhone above its 
confiuence with the Soane,! when he had intelli- 
gence, that the Helvetii, having cleared the passes 
of Jura, and marched through the country of the 
Sequani, were arrived on the Soane; and although 
they had hitherto, agreeably to their stipulations 
with the natives, abstained from hostilities, that 
they threatened the nations inhabiting beyond 
this river with fire and sword. 

Upon application made to him for protection 
from the natives inhabiting between the Soane 
and the Loire, this willing auxiliary continued 
his march; and being informed, that of the Hel- 
vetii, who had moved in four divisions (this being 
the number of their cantons,) the three first had 
already passed the Soane; and that the fourth 
division being to follow, yet remained on the 
nearer bank of the river, he marched in the night 
with three legions, surprised this rear-division ; 
and, having put many of them to the sword, 
forced the remainder to take refuge in the neigh- 
bouring woods. 

As soon as the main body of Cesar’s army ar- 
rived on the Soane, he constructed a bridge, and 
passed that river in his way to the enemy. The 
Helvetians, sensible of their loss in the late ac- 
tion, and alarmed at the rapidity of his motions, 
he having executed in one day the passage of a 
river which had detained them above ninety days, 
sent a deputation to treat with the Roman pro- 
consul, and to obtain, if possible, his permission 
to execute their project of a new settlement on 
amicable terms. ‘They offered, in case they were 
allowed to sit down in quiet, to leave the choice 
of the place to himself; bidding him remember, 
at the same time, that “the arms of the Helvetii 
had, on former occasions, been felt by the Ro- 
mans. That the recent fate of a single canton 
taken by surprise ought not to flatter him too 
much; that the Helvetians had learned from their 
fathers to rely more on valour than on artifice or 
on negotiation; but that they did not wish to 
have their present migration signalized with any 
massacres, nor their new settlement stained with 
Roman blood.” 

To this message, Cesar replied, “That he 
could recollect to have heard of insults which had 
been offered to the Romans by their nation, and 
to which they now probably alluded: that he 
likewise had more recent provocations which he 
knew how to resent; nevertheless, if they meant 
to comply with his demand, to repair the injuries 
they had done to the Allobroges? and to the Edui’, 
and to give hostages for their future behaviour, that 
he was willing to grant them peace.” 

Upon this reply the Helvetian deputies with- 
drew, saying, That it was the practice of their 
countrymen to receive, not to give hostages; and 
both armies moved on the following day: the 
Helvetians, in search of some quarter where they 
might settle without interruption; and Cesar, to 
observe their motions, and to restrain them from 
plundering the country of his allies. Both continu- 
ed on the same route during fifteen days, with no 
more than an interval of five or six miles between 
the front of one army and the rear of the other. 


1 Then the Arar. 
2 Inhabitants of what is now the territory of Gene- 
va, and part of Savoy. 
ry: Occupying the country between the Soane and the 
oire. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IIL. 


On this march Cesar’s cavalry, having rashly 
engaged themselves on unfavourable ground, re- 
ceived a check; and he himself, being obliged to 
follow the course of the Soane, by Phish he re- 
ceived his provisions, was likely to lose sight of 
the enemy, when he had intelligence, that they 
had taken post at the foot of a hill, about eight 
miles in his front, and seemed to have formed a 
resolution to receive him, in that position, if he 
chose to attack them. Having examined the 

round on which they were posted, and observ- 
ing, that the height in their rear was not by na- 
ture inaccessible, nor sufficiently secured against 
him, he despatched Labienus in the night at the 
head of two legions, with orders to possess him- 
self of the eminence, and to fall down from thence 
on the enemy’s rear whenever he saw them at- 
tacked by himself in front. Labienus accordingly 
got possession of the hill, and Cæsar advanced 
towards the foot of it to occupy the attention of 
the enemy, and to attack them in front. But the 
purpose of this disposition was frustrated by the 
misinformation of an officer of horse, who, being 
advanced before the army, reported, that the ene- 
my still appeared on the height, and that Labi- 
enus probably had failed in his attempt to seize it. 
Cæsar, disconcerted by this information, made a 
halt, in which he lost so much time as to give the 
enemy an opportunity to decamp, and to retire in 
safety. He nevertheless continued his pursuit 
for one day longer, and at night encamped about 
three miles in their rear. But being obliged, on 
the following day, to alter his route in order to 
receive a supply of provisions, the enemy be- 
lieved that he was retreating, and began to pur- 
sue in their turn. He halted on a rising ground 
to perceive them, placed his new levies with the 
baggage on the higher ground, and the choice of 
his army on the declivity towards the plain. 
Here the enemy advancing to attack him, after 
an obstinate engagement which lasted from one 
in the afternoon till night, were defeated with the 
slaughter of about two hundred thousand of their 
people ; and the remainder, amounting to no more 
than one hundred and thirty thousand souls, re- 
duced to despair by the sense of their losses, and 
the want of subsistence, surrendered at discre- 
tion. Cesar ordered them back into their own 
country, charging the Allobroges to find them 
subsistence, until they should be able to provide 
for themselves. The Boii, however, a part of 
this unfortunate migration, were received by the 
Edui, who, to gain this accession of people, al- 
lotted part of their own lands to accommodate 
these strangeis.4 

At the end of this first operation of Cesar, 
while great part of the summer yet remained, 
another service on which to employ his army soon 
presented itself The nations who inhabited the 
banks of the Soane and the Loire, being sensible 
of the deliverance they had received from a storm, 
which, by the uncertainty of its direction, alarm- 
ed every quarter of Gaul, sent deputies to con- 
gratulate the Roman general on his late victory, 
and to propose that they might hold, under his 
protection, a general convention of all their states. 
The object of their meeting, as it soon appeared, 
was to obtain some relief from the common op- 
pression they underwent from the tyranny of 


4 Ces. de Bell. Gal. lib. i. c- 28, 29. 


Ciar. VI.) 


Ariovistus, a German chief, who, when the Gauls 
were at war among themselves, had been invited 
as an auxiliary to one of the parties; and had ob- 
tained the victory for his allies: but took for the 
reward of his services possession of one third of 
their territory, which he bestowed on his own 
people, and assumed for himself the sovereignty 
of the whole. His force was daily augmented by 
the continual arrival of more emigrants from 
Germany; so that, from fifteen thousand men, 
with whom the chief had arrived; his followers 
had multiplied toa hundred and twenty thou- 
sand. To accommodate this numerous people, 
he had recently made a demand of another third 
of the territory of the Sequani, and was extend- 
ing his possessions from the neighbourhood of the 
Rhine to the Soane. Most of the nations on this 
tract had been obliged to submit to a contribution 
levied by these strangers, and to give hostages for 
the regular payment of it. 

The unfortunate nations who, by trusting to 
the protection of a barbarous prince, had exposed 
themselves to this calamity, now applied for re- 
lief to another power, whose pretensions in the 
end were likely to be equally dangerous to their 
freedom. Sensible of the hazard to which they 
exposed their hostages by cntering into any open 
concert against the Germans, they made their 
application to Cesar in secret, and found him 
sufficiently willing to embrace every opportunity 
of rendering his province a theatre of action to 
his army, and of renown to himself; He sent 
without delay a message to Ariovistus, desiring 
to have a conference with him on affairs that 
concerned the general interests of Gaul. This 
haughty chieftain replied with disdain, “ That if 
the Roman general meant to have an interview 
with him, his place of residence was known; that 
he neither could trust himself in the quarters of 
Cesar, without an army, nor would be at the ex- 
pense of assembing one, mercly for the satisfac- 
tion of a conference with him.” 

Cesar renewed the message with an express 
requisition that the hostages of the Edui should 
be restored; that Ariovistus should abstain from 
hostilities against this people, or against any 
other ally of the Romans; and that he should 
not suffer any more of his countrymen to pass 
the Rhine. 

To this message Ariovistus replied, That he 
had conquered the possessions which he held in 
Gaul, and that he knew of no power who had a 
right to direct him in the use of his conquests ; 
that whoever attacked him should do so at his 
peril; and that Cesar, if he thought proper, might. 
try the spirit of his people; they were ready to 
receive him, and had not for fourteen years slept 
under any cover. 

Cesar, not to seem backward in accepting this 
challenge, and in compliance with a maxim 
which he often observed with success, That his 
blows should anticipate his threats, and outrun 
the expectations of his enemy, advanced upon the 
Germans before they could think him in con- 
dition to act against them. For this purpose, 
without communicating his design to any person 
of his own army, he repassed the Soane, and 
ascended by the course of the Douse to Vesontio, 
now Besançon, a place of strength, which he un- 
derstood Ariovistus meant to seize, as the prin- 
cipal resort of his forces. 

Here, for the first re his intention of mak- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


201 


ing war on the Germans began to be suspected in 
his own army; and the legions, taking their ac- 
court of the strength and ferocity of that enemy 
from the report of the Gaulish auxiliaries, were 
greatly alarmed: Many citizens of distinction 
who had crowded to the standard of Cæsar, as to 
a place of victory and honour, now, under various 
pretences, applied for leave to retire. ‘Their ex- 
ample spread a kind of panic in the army, and 
both men and officers muttered their resolution 
not to obey, if they should be ordered upon what 
they were pleased to consider as a service so un- 
reasonable and wild. 

Cesar being thus called upon to exert that 
undaunted courage and masterly eloquence by 
which he was distinguished on many occasions, 
assembled all the officers of his army, and repri- 
manded them for attempting to penetrate the de- 
signs of their general, or for pretending to ques- 
tion the propriety of his motions. ‘The matter in 
dispute with Ariovistus, he said, might be termi- 
nated in an amicable manner. ‘This chieftain 
had very lately made advances of friendship to 
the Romans, had been favourably received, and 
there was no reason to believe that he would now 
wantonly provoke their resentment. “ But if he 
should, of whom are you afraid: Of a wretched 
remnant of the Cimbri or Teutones, already van- 
quished by Marius? Ofa people confessedly in- 
ferior to the Helvetians, whom you have sub- 
dued? But some ef you, I am told, in order to 
disguise your own fears undcr the affectation of 
wisdom; talk of difficultics in the ways by which 
you are to pass, and of the want of provisions 
which you are likely to suffer. I am not now to 
learn from such persons as you what I owe to my 
trust, nor to be told that an army must be sup- 
plied with provisions. But our allies are ready to 
supply us in greater quantities than we can con- 
sume, and the very country we are to pass is co- 
vered with ripe corn: As for the roads you shall 
speedily see and judge of them: I am little af- 
fected with what I hear of a design to abandon 
me in ease I persist in this expedition. Such in- 
sults, I know, have been offered to commanders, 
who, by their avarice or by their miscarriages, 
had forfcited the regard or the confidence of their 
troops ; what will happen to mea little time will 
discover. I meant to have made a longer halt at 
this plaec, but shall not defer giving you an op- 
portunity to show, whether regard to your duty, 
or the fear of a supposed enemy, is to have the 
greatest effect on your minds. I ican to-morrow, 
at two in the morning, to decamp, and shall pro- 
ceed, if no other part of the army follows me, 
with the tenth legion alone.” 

This speech had à very sudden effect. The 
tenth legion, having been formerly distinguished 
by thcir general, felt this expression of confi- 
derce as an additional motive to deserve it, and 
sent a deputation of their officers to return their 
thanks. The whole army soon vied in excuses 
for their late misbehaviour, and in assurances of 
their resolution to support their general in any 
service on which he might be pleased to employ 
them. He aceordingly decamped at the hour 
appointed; and making a circuit of forty miles, 
to avoid some difficulties which lay on the direct 
road, after a continual march of seven days, in 
which he was eonducted by Divitiacus, a native 
of Gaul, he arrived within twenty-four miles of 
the German quarters, 


202 


_Upon this unexpected arrival, Ariovistus, in 
his turn, thought proper to desire a conference 


with Cæsar. He proposed that they should meet 


on horseback, and be attended only by cavalry. 
in this part of his army, which was composed 
chiefly of Gaulish horse, Cæsar was weak. But, 
not to decline the proposal that was made to him, 
he mounted his supposed favourite legion on the 
horses of the Gauls, and with this escort came to 
the place appointed for the conference. 

It was an eminence in the midst of a spacious 
plain, about half-way between the two armies. 
Ihe leaders, each attended by ten of his officers, 
met at the top of the hill. Their escorts drew 
ss at the distance of two hundred yards on each 
side. 

Cæsar began the conference, by reminding 
Ariovistus of the honours recently bestowed upon 
him by the Roman senate, who ordered him the 
usual presents, and gave him the title of king. 
‘The Edui,” he said, “were the allies of the 
Roman people; they had formed this connexion 
in the height of their prosperity, and when they 
were supposed to be at the head of the Gaulish 
nations; that it was not the custom of the Ro- 
mans to let nations suffer by their alliance, but to 
render it in every instance, to the party who em- 
braced it, a source of prosperity and honour. He 
therefore renewed his former requisition, that 
Ariovistus should not make war on the Edui, or 
on any nation in alliance with Rome; that he 
should remit their tribute, and release their hos- 
tages; and, if he could not send back into their 
own country such of the Germans as were al- 
ready on this side of the Rhine, that he should at 
least prevent the arrival of any more from that 
quarter.” 

In answer to these propositions, Ariovistus re- 
plied, That he had been invited into Gaui by the 
natives of this country; that he had done them 
services, and had exacted no more than a just re- 
ward; that, in the late quarrel betwixt them and 
himself, the Gauls had been the aggressors, and 
had suffered no more than the usual consequences 
of a defeat; that to indemnify him for his losses, 
they had subjected themselves to a tribute, and 
had given hostages for the regular payment of it.. 
« Am not I too,” he said, “by your own account, 
in alliance with the Romans? Why should that 
alliance, which is a safeguard and an honour to 
every one else, be a loss and a misfortune to me? 
Must I alone, to preserve this alliance, resign the 
advantage of treaties, and remit the payments 
that are due to me? No; let me rather be con- 
sidered as an enemy than as an ally upon these 
conditions. My countrymen have passed the 
Rhine, not to oppress the Gauls, but to defend 
their leader. If strangers are to be admitted here, 
the Germans, as the first occupiers, have a right 
prior to that of the Romans. But we have each 
of us our province. What do Roman armies on 
my territory? [ disturb no possession of yours. 
Must I account to you likewise for the use which 
l make of my own?” 

To this pointed reply Ariovistus subjoined a 
reflection, which showed that he was not unac- 
quainted with the state of parties at Rome. “I 
know,” he said, “that the Romans are not in- 
terested in this quarrel, and that, by cutting you 
off, I should perform an acceptable service to 
many of your countrymen. But I shall take no 
part in your internal divisions. Leave me; make 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor III. 


war where you please; I shall not interpose in 
any matter which does not concern myself.” 
Cesar continued to plead the engagements 


| which the Romans had contracted with many of 


the nations who now claimed their protection. 


. “If conquest could give any right to possession,” 


he said, “ we are the first conquerors. We have 
long since subdued the Arverni; but it is not 
our practice to enslave every nation we vanquish, 
much less to forsake those we have once patro- 
nised.” While he yet spoke the German horse 
had advanced, and even began to throw darts, 
which made it expedient for Cesar to break up 
the conference. He accordingly withdrew, giving 
strict orders to his people not to return the in- 


‘sults of the enemy. 


In a few days after this conference, the Ger- 
man chieftain proposed another personal inter- 
view, or, if that were declined, desired that some 
person of confidence should be sent with whom 
he might treat. Being gratified in the second part 
of this alternative, but intending no more by this 
request than a mere feint to lull the enemy into 
some degree of security, he pretended to take 
offence at the quality of the persons who were 
sent to him, ordered them into custody, and on 
the same day put his army in motion upon a real 
design, which showed that, barbarian as he was, 
he understood the.plan, as well as the execution, 
of military operations. Observing that the Ro- 
mans derived their subsistence from the country 
behind them, he made a movement, by which he 
passed their camp, took a strong post about eleven 
miles in their rear, and by this means intercepted 
their ordinary supply of provisions. 

Cesar for many days successively endeavour 
ed, by forming on the plain between the two 
armies, to provoke the enemy to a battle; but 
having failed in this purpose, he was obliged to 
divide his army, and to place it in separate posts, 
which he fortified, in order to recover a commu- 
nication with the country behind him. He learned 
that the Germans had borne with great impa- 
tience the defiances he had given them; but that 
they were restrained from fighting by the predic- 
tions of their women, who foretold that their own 
people would be defeated, if they should hazard a 
battle before the change of the méon. 

The Germans, notwithstanding the awe in 
which they stood of this prediction, endeavoured 
to dislodge one of the divisions of Cesar’s army, 
and, having failed in that attempt, were afterwards 
attacked by the Romans in their camp, and de- 
feated with great slaughter. Ariovistus himself, 
with the remains of his followers, fled to the 
Rhine, about fifty miles from the field of battle, 
passed that river in a small canoe ; numbers of 
his people perished in attempting to follow him, 
and the greater part of those who remained were 
overtaken, and put to the sword by Cæsar’s ca- 


 valry. 


In this manner Cesar concluded his first cam- 
paign in Gaul; and laid the foundation of his 
future conquests in that country, by stating him- 
self as the protector of its native inhabitants 
against the Helvetii and the Germans, two pow- 
erful invaders who were likely to subdue it. He 
placed his army for the winter among the nations 
whom he had thus taken under his protection, and 
set out for Italy, under pretence of attending to the 
affairs of his province on that side of the Alps; 
but more probably to be near to Rome, where he 


Cuar. VL] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


203 


had many political interests at stake, friends to | the brother-in-law of Clodius, though always in- 
support, and enemics to oppose, in their canvass | clined to favour the popular faction, could not in 


for the offices of state. His head quarters were 
fixed at Lucca, the nearest part of his province 
to Rome; and that place began to be frequented 
by numbers who were already of his party, or 
who desired to be admitted into it, and with 
whom he had previously made his own terms in 
stipulating the returns they were to make for the 
several preferments in which he undcrtook to 
assist them. 

At the election of consuls for this year, P. Cor- 
nelius Lentulus Spinther was joined with Q. 


Cecilius Metellus Nepos, of whom the latter had, | 


in the capacity of tribune, distinguished himself 
as an instrument of the most dangerous factions. 
Lentulus had lately attached himself entirely tc 
Pompey, and, by the influence of this patron, 
=. now prevailed in his election. He had 
en edile in the consulate of Cicero, and had 
taken a vigorous part in those very measures for 
which Cicero was now suffering in exile! He 
was likely to favour the restoration of that in- 
jured citizen, and upon this account was now 
the more acceptable to Pompey, who, having an 
open rupture with Clodius, was disposed to mor- 
tify him by espousing the cause of his enemies. 
Clodius, soon after his late victory over Cicero, 
greatly rose in his presumption, and, forgetting 
that he prevailed more by the connivance of 
Pompey and Cæsar, and by the support of their 
friends, than by any influence of his own, ven- 
tured to set Pompey himself at defiance, to ques- 
tion the validity of his acts in the late settlement 
of Asia, to set the young Tigranes, still the pri- 
soner of Pompey, at liberty,? and proposed to re- 
store him again to his kingdom. In the debates 
which arose on these mcasures in the assembly 
of the people, Pompey had the mortification to 
find that the sarcasms of Clodius were reccived 
by the audience in general with applause, as 
well as by the partizans of the senate, in particu- 
lar, with marks of satisfaction. Chiefly governed 
by vanity, and impatient of obloquy, he absented 
himsclf from the public assemblies during the re- 
mainder of Clodius’s term in office, and was 
ready to embrace every measure by which he 


might be revenged of that factious tribunc, or’ 


regain his own credit with the more respectable 
€lass of the citizens.3 

Encouraged by this division among their ene- 
mies, the majority of the senate, who justly con- 
sidered the cause of Cicero as their own, had 
ventured, on the twenty-ninth of October, while 
Clodius was yet in office, to move for his recall. 
Eight of the tribuncs concurred in urging this 
motion, and it was rejected only in consequence 
of the negative of Ælus Ligur, one of the college 


whom Clodius had prepared to act this part, and | 


whom he was ready to support by force, if the 
opposite party should persist in their motion.4 
pon the election of the new consuls and tri- 
bunes for the following year, better hopes of 
success were entertained by the friends of Cicero. 
Lentulus declared that the restoration of this 
exile should be the first object of his administra- 
tion; and that he would not fail to move it on 
the day that he entered on office. Mctellus too, 


1 Cicero ad Att. iii. lib. ep. 22. 

2 Vid. Ascon. Padian. in Orat. pro Milone. 
3 Plutarch. in Vit. Cicer. p. 475 et 476 

4 Cicero ad Att. lib. iii. ep. 23. 


this matter set himself in opposition to Pompey 
and declared his intention to concur with the 
consul. Milo, Sextius, and six more of the tri- 
bunes, with all the pretors except Appius Clau- 
dius, the brothcr of Publius, declared their inten- 
tion to take an active part in forwarding this 
measure. 

Encouraged by these appearances, Cicero left 
his retreat at Thessalonica, and arrived at Dir- 
rachium, before the twenty-fifth of November, to 
be at hand to consult with his friends on the 
steps that were to be previously taken. Mean- 
time the consuls-elect had their provinces assign- 
ed. Lentulus was destined to command in Cilicia 
and Cypress, and Metellus in the farther pro- 
vince of Spain. Both were amply gratified in 
every article of their appointments, in order to 
confirm them in the intercst of the senate; but 
Cicero expressed great anxiety lest these conces- 
sions should be found premature; and, being 
made before the new tribuncs entered on office, 
or could have their voice in these destinations, 
was afraid lest it might alienate their aflections 
from his party, and render them less zealous to 

move for his recall. ‘The consul, 
U. C. 696. Lentulus, notwithstanding, kept his 
word ; and, on the first of January, 
the day of his centering on office, 
moved the senate to resolve that Ci- 
cero should be immediately recalled 
from banishment; that all persons 
opposing his return should be declared enemies to 
their country; and that if the people should be 
disturbed by violence in passing this decree, it 
should, neverthcless, be lawful for the exile to 
avail himself of it.6 

This motion was reccived in the senate with 
general applause. Eight of the tribunes were 
zealous in support of it. On the contrary, two 
members of the college, Numerius and Serranus, 
were gained by Clodius to oppose it. Serranus, 
however, could venture no farther at this mecting 
than to plead for a delay. But he was prevailed 
upon, during the intervening night, to interpose 
his negative, and the motion accordingly could 
proceed no farther in the senate. 

It was resolved, notwithstanding, to propose a 
law to the people for Cicero’s restoration ; and a 
day was fixed for this purpose. Early in the 
morning of that day Fabricius, one of the tri- 
bunes in the interest of the exile, cndeavoured to 
occupy the place of assembly with an armed 
force, but found that Clodius, with a numerous 
troop of gladiators, was there before him. A 
conflict ensued, in which Fabricius, together with 
Cispius, another of the tribunes who came to his 
assistance, with all the party of the senate, were 
driven from the forum. 

Clodius, at the head of his gladiators, with 
swords already staincd in blood, pursued his vic- 
tory through the streets. The temple of the 
nymphs, in which were kept some public records 
which he wished to destroy, was set on fire ;7 the 
houses of Milo and Cecilius the prætor were at- 
tacked. “The streets, the common sewers, the 


P.Cor. Lentu- 
lus Spinther, 

Q. Cecil, Me- 
tell. Nepos. 


5 Cicero ad Att. ljb. iii. ep. 24. 

6 Cicero ad Att. lib. iii. ep 26. et in Orat. post re- 
ditum. 

7 Cicero pro Milone, 27 Parad 4 d. 


Haruspicum 
Responsio 27. j 


204 


river,” says Cicero, “ were filled with dead bodies, 
and all the pavements were stained with blood.” 
No such scene had been acted since the times of 
Octavius and Cinna, when armies fought in the 
city for the dominion of the empire.! 

Quintus Cicero escaped by hiding himself 
under the dead bodies of his own servarits; who 
were slain in defending his house. The tribune 
Publius Sextius actually fell into the hands of his 
enemies, received many wounds, and was left for 
dead among the slain. This circumstance, how- 
ever, alarmed the party of Clodius not less than 
it alarmed his opponents. The odium of having 
murdered, or even violated the person of a tri- 
bune, was likely to ruin their mterest with the 
people ; and they proposed to balance this out- 
rage by putting to death Numerius, another tri- 
bune, who, being of theirown side, should appear 
to be killed by the opposite party; but the in- 
tended victim of this ridiculous and sanguinary 
artifice, receiving information of their design, 
avoided being made the tool of a party at the ex- 
pense of his life, and made his escape.” 

After so strange a disorder, parties for some: 
months, mutually afraid of each other, abstained 
from violence. ‘The tribune Milo commenced a 
prosecution against Clodius fer his crimes ; but it 
was for some time eluded by the authority of 
Appius Claudius, brother of the accused, who 
was now in the office of pretor; and the courts, 
when actually called, were repeatedly dispersed 
by the armed party of gladiators, with which Pub- 
lius Ciodius himself infested every public place. 
az was vain to oppose him without being prepared 
to employ a similar force, and Milo accordingly 
had recourse to this method. He purchased a 
troop of gladiators, and of bestiarii, or baiters of 
wild beasts, and the remainder of those who had 
been employed by the ediles Pomponius and 
Cosconius, and who were now in the market for 
sale. He ordered the bargain to be secretly 
struck, concealing the name of the buyer, lest the 
Opposite party, suspecting the design, should in- 
terpose to prevent him. 

So provided, Milo ventured to encounter with 
Clodius. Their parties frequently engaged in 
the streets, and the populace, fond of such shows, 
enjoyed the spectacle which was presented to 
them in every corner cf the city.? 

While the disorders which thus arose from the 
disputes relating to Cicero’s restoration were daily 
augmenting, he himself fell from the height of his 
hopes to his former pitch of dejection and sorrow. 
The attempt which had been made in his favour 
might have succeeded, if Pompey had been fully 
prepared to concur in it. But all the measures 
of the triumvirate, being concerted at the quar- 
ters of Cesar, Pompey was obliged, after declaring 
his own inclinations on the subject, to consult his 
associate, and found him by no means inclined to 
restore a citizen who was likely to be of so much 
consequence, and who was to owe the favour of 
his restoration to any other than himself. ‘The 
tribune Sextius, before the late dissolution, had 
made a journey into Gaul, to obtain the consent 
of Cesar to this measure, but could not prevail ; 
and it is probable that this artful politician was 
unwilling to restore an exile who was likely to 


J Orat. pro Sext. c. 35, 36. 38. 
2 Cicero pro Sextio. — 
3 Cicero ad Att. lib, iv. ep. 2 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


(Boor IIL 


ascribe the principal merit of that service to Pom- 
pey, and, by his own inclinations in favour of the 
senate; to become an accession te a party which 
Cesar wished to degrade and to weaken by every 
means in his power. It was to strengthen him- 
self against the senate that Cæsar made his coali+ 
tion with Pompey and Crassus; and from ani- 
mosity to this body, he wished to crush every 
person of consequerice to their party, and to fa- 
vour the pretensions of every ambitious citizen 
who ventured to act in open defiance of their 
government. 

Pompey, inthe mean time, though committing 
himself as a tool into the hands of Cæsar, was 
flattered with the appearance of sovereignty which 
he enjoyed in the city, and willingly supported 
Cesar in every measure that seemed to fix his 
attention abroad, consented to the repeated aug- 
mentations of the army in Gaul, and approved 
of every enterprise in which their leader was 
pleased to employ them. 

In this year, which was the second of Cæsars 
command, two more additional legions were by 
his orders levied in Italy ; and under pretence of 
an approaching war with the Belge, a nation 
consisting of many cantons in the northern ex- 
tremities of Gaul, this reinforcement was made 
to pass the Alps to the northward in the spring. 
As soon as the forage was up, he himself fol- 


i lowed in person, took the field, and, im the usuak 


spirit of his conduct, endeavoured by the rapidity 
of his motions, to frustrate or to prevent the de- 
signs of his enemies. 

His force now consisted of eight Roman le- 
on besides numerous bodies of horse and foot 
rom different cantons in Gaul, archers from 
Crete and Numidia, and slingers from the Bale- 
arian islands; so that it is likely the whole may 
have amounted to about sixty thousand men. 
The greater part of his army had wintered on the 
Soane* and the Douse,5 as protectors, not as mas- 
ters of the country, being received only in the 
character of allies. Cesar having now taken 
numbers of their people into his army as auxilia- 
ries or as hostages, and having spent twelve days 
in preparing for his mareh, took his route to the 
northward, under pretence of carrying the war 
into the enemy’s country, or of preventing them 
from gaining, to their supposed confederacy 
against the Romans, any of the nations in the 
southern parts of Gaul. 

His way lay through the high, though level, 
countries, now termed Burgundy and Cham- 
Ragne, in which the Soane, the Moselle, the 

euse, and the Seine, with so many other con- 
siderable rivers, that run in different directions, 
have their source. After a march of fifteen days, 
he arrived in the canton of the Remi,6 where he 
found a people, though of the Belgic extraction, 
disposed to receive him as a friend, and to place 
themselves under his protection. l 

From this people he had a confirmation of his 
former intelligence relating to the designs of the 
Belgic nations, and an account of the forces 
which they had already assembled, From the 
track of country that is watered by the rivers, 
which are now called the Oise, the Scheld and 
the Meuse, he understood that no less than three 


4 Anciently named the Arar. 
5 The Dubis. À 
6 Now the district of Rheima. 


——- e 


Cuap. VL] 


hundred and fifty thousand men could be mus- į 


tered, and were actually assembled, or preparing to 
assemble, against him. T'o prevent the junction 
of this formidable power, or to distract part of its 
force, he detached part of his Gaulish auxiliaries 
to make a diversion on the Oise, while he him- 
self advanced to the Aisne,’ passed this river and 
fortified a station on its northern bank. Having 
a bridge in his rear, he left six cohorts properly 
intrenched before it, to secute his communication 
with the country behind him. l 

While he remained in this post, the Belgæ ad- 
vanced with a great army, attacked Bibrax, a 
place of strength about eight miles in his front; 
and having spent many hours in endeavouring to 
reduce it, were about to renew their assault on 
the following day. But Cesar having in the 
night thrown into the garrison a considerable re- 


inforcement of archers and slingers, the appear-. 


ance of this additional strength on the battlements 
induced the enemy to desist. ] 

They nevertheless continued to advance, laid 
waste the country, and came within two miles of 
his camp. They had a front, as appeared from 
their fires, extending about eight miles. 

Cesar, considering the numbers and reputation 
of this enemy, thought proper to proceed with 
caution. He observed them for some days from 


his entrenchments, and made several trials of | 


their skill in partial encounters before he ven- 
tured to offer them battle. But being encouraged 
by the event of these trials, he chose a piece of 
sloping ground that lay before his camp, and was 


fit to receive his army. As the enemy’s front. 


was likely to extend farther than his, he threw 
up entrenchments on the right and left to cover 
his flanks; and with this security, to prevent his 
being surrounded, drew forth his army. ‘The 
Belge too were formed on their part; but the 
ground between the two armies being marshy, 
neither thought proper to pass that impediment 
in presence of the other; and after a few skir- 


mishes of the horse and irregular troops, the Ro- | 


mans re-entered theircamp. ‘The enemy, upon 
this event, disappointed in their expectations of 
a battle, took their way to the fords of the Aisne,® 
in order to pass the river, and get possession of 
the bridge in the rear of the Romans. Cesar 
had intelligence of this movement from the officer 
who was stationed to guard that post; and 
marching instantly with all the cavalry, archers, 
and slingers of the army, he arrived in time to 
overtake them, while yet entangled in the fords, 
and obliged them to retire. 
The B 


4 


elge, having made these successive at- 


tempts with much impetuosity, but without pro- | 


per foresight, soon appeared to be all qualified to 
maintain 2 permanent war with such an enemy. 
They eoigacheartened by their disappointments, 
and alarmed by the rumour of a diversion which 


Cesar had caused to be made in a part of their | 
They had exhausted their pro- 


own country, 
visions, and found themselves under the necessity 
to break up theircamp. It was theretore resolved 
in their general council, that their forces, for the 
present, should separate; and if any of their 
cantons should be-afterwards attacked by Cæsar, 
that the whole should assemble again for their 
common defence. 


7 Jasara and Axona. 
8 Axona. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


205 


With this resolution they decamped in the 
night, but with so much noise and disorder that 
Cesar suspected a feint, or an intention to draw 
him into a snare. He therefore remained in his 
lines till the morning, when it appeared that they 
were actually gone, and were seen at a distance 
on the plain moving in the greatest disorder, and 
as in a total rout, striving who should soonest 
get_beyond the reach of their enemies. He pur- 
sued them with his cavalry so long as it was day, 
and, though with great bravery resisted in his 
attacks on their rear, made considerable havoc. 
At the approach of night he discontinued the 
pursuit, and withdrew again to the camp he left 
in the morning. On the following day he moved 
with his whole army, and, that the enemy might 
not have time to re-assemble their forces, deter- 
mined to penetrate into the heart of their country. 
In the beginning of his march he followed the 
course of the Aisne, and in his way reduced the 
Suessones and Bellovaci, two cantons that lay on 
the right and the left, near the confluence of this 
river with the Oyse. From thence, being him- 
self to march to the northward, to visit the banks 
of the Sambre and the Meuse, he detached the 
young Crassus, with a considerable force, towards 
the sea coasts, to occupy those cantons which 
now form the provinces of Normandy and Bre- 
tanny. 

Part of the country through which the Meuse 
and the Sambre passed, now forming the dutchy 
of Hainault, was then occupied by the Nervi, 
one of the fiercest of the Belgic nations, who, 
having heard with indignation of the surrender 
of the Bellovaci and Suessones, their neighbours, 
prepared for resistance, sent such of their people 
as, by their sex or age, were unfit to carry arms 
into a place of security, assembled all their wart- 
riors, and summoned their allies to a place of 
general resort. ‘They took post on the Sambre, 
where the heights on both sides of the river being 
covered with woods, enabled them to conceal their 
numbers and their dispositions. ‘They had in- 
telligence that Cesar, except in presence of an 
eneiny, usually moved his legions with intervals 
between them, which were occupied by their bag- 
gage; and they made a disposition to surprise 
him on the march, and under this disadvantage. 
For this purpose they chose their ground on the 
Sambre, and agreed that the van of the Roman 
army should be suffered to pass unmolested, but 
that the appearance of the first colunm of bag- 
gage should be the signal for a general attack to 
be made at once froni all the diflerent stations in 
which their parties were posted. 

Cesar, in the mean time, about three days 
after he had marched from Samarobriva, now 
supposed to be Amiens, being apprised that he 
was come within ten miles of the river, on the 
banks of which the enemy was posted, altered 
the form of his march, placed six legions, clear 
of incumbrance, in the van of his army, next to 
these the whole of his baggage, and in the rear 
the two legions that were last levied in Italy. 
When he entered the open grounds on the Sam- 
bre, a few parties of horse appeared, but were 
soon driven into the woods by his cavalry. The 
legions that came first to their ground began, as 
usual, to intrench, and received no disturbance 
till the column of baggage came in sight. At 
this signal multitudes of the eneiny presented 
themselves on every side, drove in the cavalry 


206 


that were posted to cover the working parties, 
and in many places were close in with the main 
body of the army before the infantry had time to 
uncover their shields, or to put on their helmets. 
The Roman soldier, nevertheless, ran to his co- 
lours, and, without waiting for the orders of his 
general, from whose abilities, on this occasion, he 
could derive no advantage, endeavoured to join 
his companions in the order to which they were 
accustomed. 

The event of this tumultuary action was vari- 
ous in different places. The Nervii, in one part 
of the action, forced the imperfect works of the 
Roman camp: but in another part of it were 
themselves forced from their ground, and driven 
in great numbers into the river. Some of the 


Roman legions were broken, lost the greater part | 


of their officers, and when Cesar arrived to rally 
them, were huddled together in confusion. 


soldier, and, with a shield which he took from 
one of his men, joined in the battle, and in this 
manner, by his presence and by his example, 
kept the enemy at bay, until he was relieved by 
the arrival of two legions of the rear-guard, and 
of two others, that were sent by Labienus to sup- 
port him. 

This seasonable relief, where the Romans 
were most distressed, changed the fortune of the 
day; and the confusion, which in the beginning 
of the action had been turned to so good account 
by the Nervii, now became fatal to themselves. 
The greater part of them fell in heaps on the 
ground where they first began the attack. The 
few who attemptcd to fly were met at every 
opening of the woods by parties of the enemy, by 
whom they were forced into the thickets or put 
to the sword; and as they fell in the end with 
little resistance, many became a prey to the fol- 
lowers of the legions, who put themselves in arms 
and bore a part in the massacre. Of four hundred 
chiefs only three escaped; and of an army of 
sixty thousand men, no more than five hundred 
jeft the field of battle. The piteous remains of 
this nation, consisting of superannuated men, of 
women, and of children, sent, from the marshes 
in which they had been concealed, a message to 
implore the victor’s mercy ; but it does not appear 
in what manner he disposed of them. 

Another enemy yet remained in the field. ‘The 
Attuatici, descendants of the Cimbri and ‘Teuto- 
nes, the late terrors of Gaul, of Spain, and of 
Italy, being settled below the confluence of the 
Sambre and the Meuse, had been on their march 
to join the Nervii, when they heard of this un- 
fortunate action; and then withdrew to their own 
country. Being pursued by Cesar, they shut 
themselves up in their principal fortress. Here 
they made a voluntary submission; and being 
commanded to lay down their arms, threw such 
a quantity of weapons from the battlements, as 
almost filled up the ditch to the height of the 
ramparts. But Cesar, having delayed taking 
possession of the place till the following day, the 
besieged, whether they only meant to deceive him, 
or repented of their surrender, took arms again 
in the night, and in a sally endeavoured to sur- 
prise the Roman army. But four thousand of 
them being killed in this desperate attempt, and 
the remainder being forced into the town, were, in 
consequence of their former breach of faith, to the 
amount of fifty thousand persons, sold for slaves. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


He. 
was reduced to act the part of a mere legionary 


[Boox IIT. 


Thus Cæsar having, in the second year of his 
command, penetrated to the Meuse and the 
Scheld, and being master of the eastern frontier 
of Gaul as far as the Rhine, and even from be- 
yond that river having received some offers of 
submission ; being master too of several cantons 
in Normandy and Bretanny, which had submit- 
ted to the young Crassus, placed his army for 
the winter in the midst of these conquests, and 
himself, as at the end of the former campaign, 
set out for Italy and the neighbourhood of Rome. 

Here the principal point which he left in con- 
test between the parties, relating to the restora- 
tion of Cicero, had been for some time determined. 
Clodius had found a proper antagonist in Milo, 
and, as often as he himself, or any of his party, 
appeared in the assemblies of the people, or in 
the streets, was every where namic with his 
own weapons. 

Every one agreed, that if the laws could not 
give protection to the citizens who were most 
willing to be governed by them, they should not 
by their formalities screen the disorderly and 
profligate in the practice of every species of crime. 

Clodius had now for some months lain under 
an impeachment from Milo, and had declared 
himself candidate for the office of edile, endeavour- 
ing by violence, and by the artifices of his brother, 
to put off the trial till after the elections, when, 
if he should be vested with any public character, 
he might be able to screen himself under the 
privilege of his office. His own credit, however, 
and the fear which citizens entertained of his 
armed banditti, who were now in a great measure 
restrained by Milo, had abated so much, that the 
party of the senate determined to make another 
vigorous effort for the restoration of their exiled 
member. 

This business was accordingly again moved in 
the senate; and about the beginning of June a 
decree was passed in the fullest terms for the re- 
storation of Cicero. ‘The consul was charged 
with the farther conduct of this measure as of 
the utmost consequence to the commonwealth, 
This officer accordingly issued a proclamation, in 
terms employed only on the greatest occasions, 
requiring all who had the safety of the republic 
at heart to support him in the execution of this 
decree. ‘There was, in consequence of this pro- 
clamation, a great concourse of citizens from all 
parts of Italy. The enemies of the measure 
shrunk and withdrew their opposition. ‘The act 
passed in the assembly of the people on the fourth 
of August. Cicero had been so confident of this 
event, that he on the same day sailed from Dyr- 
rachium, and on the following arrived at Brun- 
dusium. On the eighth day, being still at this 
place, he had intimation of the act being passed, 
set out for Rome, and continued his journey 
through multitudes of people, who were assem- 
bled on the roads to testify their joy upon his 
return : he entered the city on the fourth of Sep- 
tember. 

Next day he addressed the senate in a ha- 
rangue, which is still extant, composed of lavish 
panegyric or vehement invective, corresponding 
to the demerit or merit of parties in his late dis- 
grace and restoration, The multitudes that were 
assembled on this occasion, their impatience to 
see him, their acclamations and wonderful una- 
nimity, raised him once more to his former pitch 
of glory, and appeared to repay all the services 


—— CU 


Cuar. VL] 


fe had rendered to the public, and to compensate 
all the sorrows of his late disgrace. ‘The whole 
matter was, to persons of reflection, an evidence 
of that weakness with which this ingenious man 
suffered himself to be affected by popular opinion, 
and of the levity with which multitudes run into 
different extremes. 

During these transactions Cæsar was at a great 
distance, in the northern extremities of Gaul, 
engaged with fierce and numerous enemies, and 
involved in difficulties, concerning which there 
were various reports, and of which the issue, 
with respect to himself and his army, was sup- 
posed to be uncertain. In these circumstances, 
however willing Pompey may have been to per- 
severe in the measures conccrted with Cesar, it 
is probable that he found himself unable to re- 
sist the force of the senate, which was now ex- 
ertcd to obtain the restoration of a person who 
had taken so distinguished a part in their mea- 
sures. 

It is possible likewise, that in these circum- 
stances Pompey may have taken upon him to act 
independently of Cæsar, though he afterwards, 
in trying to gain Cicero to the party of the tri- 
umvirate, affected to give Cæsar equal merit with 
himself in procuring his recall, and he appealed 
to Quintus, the brother of Marcus Cicero, for 
the truth of this assertion.! Cicero himsclf, how- 
ever, was not disposed to give Cesar any credit 
upon this account; and, though both Cesar and 
Crassus, after the matter was decided, affected to 
concur in it, yet he does not seem to have believed 
them sincere. He imputes to Cesar an active 
part in the injury he had received, but none in 
the reparation that was done to him.? 

Pompcy, not the less jealous of Cesar for their 
perended union, and sensible of the advantage 

e had gained in a military command of so long 
a duration at the gates of Romc, now wished to 
propose for himsclf some appointment of equal 
importance. ‘The moment of cordiality in the 
senate on thcir recovering a favourite member, 
and the first emotions of gratitude in the breast 
of Cicero, whom he had obliged, appeared to form 
a conjuncture favourable for such a proposition ; 
and he laid, with his usual address and appear- 
ance of unconcern, the plan of a motion to be 
made for this purpose. 

The importation of corn into Italy had lately 
miscarried, and a great scarcity and dearth had 
followed. ‘The populace being riotous upon this 
complaint, had in the theatre attacked with me- 
naces and violence numbers of the wealthy citi- 
zens who were present, and even insulted the 
senate itself in the capitol. A report industriously 
raiscd by the enemies of Cicero was propagated, 
to make it be believed that the distress arose from 
his engrossing for some time the attention of the 
state; and it was represented, in opposition to 
this clamour, that the late corn act of Clodius, 
and the misconduct of one of his relations, in- 
trusted by him with the care of the public grana- 
rics, was the cause of this distress, It was in- 
sinuated by the adhcrents of Pompcy, that no 
man was fit to relicve the people besides himself; 
that the business should be committed to him 
alone; and Cicero was called upon, as he entered 
the senate, to make a motion to this purposc, as 


1 Cicero ad Familiar. lib. i. ep. 9. 
2 Orat. in Senat. post Redituin, c. 15. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


207 


bound to procure some relief to the people, in re 


turn to their late cordiality in his cause. 


Cicero had probably owed his recall to the de- 
clarations of Pompey in his favour; and, however 
little reason he had to rely on his friendship, it 
was convenient to appear on good terms with 
him. He suffered himself, therefore, to be car- 
ried by the stream that seemed to run in favour 
of this fashionable leader. As if the necessity 
of the case had suggested the measure, he moved 
the senate that a commission, with proconsular 
power over all the provinces, should be granted 
to Pompey to superintend the supplies of corn 
for the city. The senate, either of themselves 
disposed to grant this request, or won by the elo- 
quence of their newly recovered member, in- 
structed the consuls to frame a resolution to this 
purpose, and carry it to the assembly of the peo- 
ple for their assent. 

Here C. Messius, one of the tribunes, proposed 
to enlarge the commission, and to comprehend 
the superintendcncy of the revenue, with an al- 
fotment of fieets and armies suited to the extent 
of this unpreccdented trust. Pompey, pei 
that this additional clause was ill received, denic 
his having any share in proposing it, and affected 
to prefer the appointment intended for him in 
terms of the act which had been proposed to be 
drawn up by the consuls. His partizans, how- 
ever, still pleaded for the extension of the com- 
mission as proposcd by Messius, but in vain. 
The extravagance of the proposal gave a general 
alarm, not only to the scnate, but even to the 
party of Cesar, who wished to employ Pompey 
against the senate; but not to arm him witha 
military force, or to give him in reality that so- 
vereignty of which he so much affected the ap- 
pearanccs. 

The extraordinary commission, now actually 
granted to Pompey, although it was exorbitant 
in respect to the influence it gave him over all 
the producers, venders, buycrs, and consumcrs 
of corn throughout the whole empire; yet, as it 
did not bestow the command of an army, fell 
short of the consequences which Cesar principal- 
ly dreaded in his rival; and thougft probably the 
cause of some jealousy, did not produce any im- 
mediate breach between them. 

Pompey, being entitled by this commission to 
appoint fifteen licutenants, put Cicero at the 
head of the list; and this place was accepted of 
by him, on this express condition, that it should 
not prevent his standing for the office of censor, 
in case an election took place on the following 
year He was now in the way of recovering 

is consideration and his dignity, but was likely 
to meet with more difficulty in respect to his pro- 
perty, which Clodius had taken care to have for- 
feited, having cven demolished his house, and 
consecrated the ground to pious uses. This last 
circumstance had placed a bar in his way, which 
could not be removed without a formal decree of 
the pontiffs. 

The college met on the last of September to 
hear parties in this cause. A violent invective 
having been pronounced by Clodius against his 
antagonist, Cicero replied in that oration, which 
is still extant among his works on the subject of 
his house.4 The question was, Whcethcr the 


3 Cicero Orat. in Senat. post Redit. c. 13. ad Att. 
4 Pro Domo sua 


208 


ground on which Cicero’s house had formerly 
stood, being formally consecrated, could be again 
restored to a profane or common use? The pon- 
tiffs appear to have been unwilling to give any 
explicit decision. ‘They gave a conditional judg- 
ment, declaring, that the consecration of Cicero’s 
ground was void, unless it should be found that 
this act had been properly authorized by the peo- 
ple. Both parties interpreted this judgment in 
their own favour; and the senate was to deter- 
mine, whether, in the act, of consecration, the 
consent of the people had been properly obtained. 

The senate being met on the first of October, 
and all the parties who were members of it being 
present, Lucullus, in the name of the pontiffs, 
his colleagues, reported, That they had been una- 
nimous in their judgment to revoke the act of 
consecration, unless it should be found, that the 
magistrate, who had performed that ceremony, 
had been properly authorized by the people; but 
that this was a question of law now before the 
senate. A debate ensued, in which Lentulus 
Marcellinus, consul-elect for the following year, 
gave his opinion against the legality of the con- 
secration: he was followed by numbers, and the 
judgment of the senate was likely to be on that 
side. Clodius, to put off the question, spoke for 
three hours, and would have prevented the se- 
nate’s coming to any resolution, if the members, 
becoming impatient, had not silenced him by their 
interruptions and clamours. 

A resolution being moved for in the terms that 
had been proposed by Marcellinus: the tribune 
Serranus, who had formerly suspended the de- 
cree for the recall of Cicero, now again interposed 
with his negative. The senate, nevertheless, pro- 
ceeded to engross the decree, in which it was re- 
solved, that the ground on which Cicero’s house 
had formerly stood, should be again restored to 
him in property; that no magistrate should pre- 
sume to contest the authority of the senate in this 
matter; and if any interruption were given in the 
execution of this decree, that the tribune, who 
now interposed with his negative, should be ac- 
countable for the consequences. Serranus was 
alarmed. His relation, Cornicinus, to give him 
the appearance of greater importance, and an op- 
portunity to recede with dignity, laid himself on 
the ground at his feet, and besought him, by his 
intreaties, to say, that he would not insist for the 
present on the negative he had given; but he 
begged the delay of a night to consider of the 
matter. The senate, recollecting the use which 
he formerly made of such a delay on the first of 
January, was disposed to refuse it, when, upon 
the interposition of Cicero himself, it was grant- 
ed; and he having thought proper to withdraw 
his negative entirely, the act accordingly passed 
on the second of October. Cicero was allowed 
two millions Roman money! to rebuild his house 
in town; five hundred thousand? to rebuild his 
villa at Tusculum, and two hundred and fifty 
thousand? to rebuild that at Formie. The first 
sum he seems to have considered as adequate to 
his loss, but complains of the other two.4 He 
proceeded, without delay, to take possession of 
his ground, and to employ workmen in rebuilding 
his house. He had made some progress, when 


1 About 16,1457. 16s. ed. 
3 About 2,0187. 4s. 6d. 
4 Ad Alticum, lib. iv. epist. 2. 


2 About 4,0367. 5s. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox 1I. 


Clodius; on the third of November, came with 
an armed force, dispersed the workmen, and at; 
tacked the house of Quintus Cicero that was ad- 
joining, set it on fire, and kept a guard of his 
retainers in the streets till it was burnt to the 
ground. By this act of violence, Clodius had 
rendered his cause, in the criminal prosecution 
which still hung over him, in a great measure 
desperate. His safety required the actual de- 
struction of his enemies, and he had no scruple 
to restrain him from the most violent extremes. 
He accordingly attacked Cicero as he passed in 
the streets on the eleventh of November, attended 
by a company of his friends, forced them into a 
walled court, where they with difficulty defended 
themselves, Clodius, in this attack, had frequent- 
ly exposed his own person, and might have been 
killed; but Cicero was now become too cautious 
for so bold a measure. “I have put my affairs,” 
he writes to Atticus, “under a gentle regimen; 
and, in all the cures I am to Page for the future, 
have renounced the use of the surgeon’s knife.” 

Clodius, upon this occasion, being disappoint- 
ed of his design upon Cicero’s life, came into the 
streets on the following day, which was the 
twelfth of November, with a number of slaves 
provided with lighted torches, and escorted by a 
party armed in form with shields and swords. 
They made directly for a house belonging ta 
Milo, with intention to set it on fire; took pos- 
session of that of P. Sylla, in its neighbourhood, 
as a fortress in which to defend themselves, and 
to keep off all assistance, till the house they were 
to set on fire should be burnt to the ground. 

While they were about to execute this pur- 
pose, a number of Milo’s servants, led by one 
Flaccus, sallied forth against the incendiaries, 
killed several of the most forward, put the rest 
to flight, and would not have spared Clodius 
himself, if he had not availed himself of the re- 
treat, which, in entering on this design, he had 
prepared for his party, 

On the following day, Sylla made his appear- 
ance in the senate, in order to exculpate himself; 
but Clodius still remained shut up in his own 
house. It appears scarcely credible, that a state 
could subsist under such extreme disorders; yet 
the author of them had been long under prosecu- 
tion for crimes of the same nature; and it was’ 
still a question, whether the charge against him 
should be heard, or whether he should not be al- 
lowed to take refuge in one of the offices of state, 
to which he was sure of being named by the peo- 
ple, provided the elections were allowed to pre- 
cede his trial. 

Marcellinus, the intended consul of next year, 
moved the senate to hasten the prosecution, and 
to join the late disorders committed by the crimi- 
nal to the former articles of the charge which lay 
against him. But Metellus Nepos, one of the 
present consuls, and the relation of Clodius, hav- 
ing formerly found means to put off the trial, was 
now determined to prevent it altogether, by hast- 
ening the election of ediles, in which Clodius was 
candidate, He endeavoured to prevent any im- 
mediate determination of the senate by prolong- 
ing the debate. But the majority of the members 
were greatly exasperated, and resolved, that the 
trial of Clodius for these repeated acts of violence 
and outrage should precede the elections. The 
consul Metellus, notwithstanding, was determined 
to give him a chance to have refuge from this 


Caar. VIL] 


prosecution in the public office to which he as- 
pired, and would have brought on the elections on 
the ninetcenth of November, if he had not been 
prevented by Milo, who in the middle of the pre- 
ceding night, had, with an armed force, occupied 
the place of assembly, and was prepared to ob- 
serve the heavens, and to announce some of the 
celestial presages of unfavourable events, in case 
other methods to suspend the elections should not 
have prevailed. 

Metellus, and the two brothers, Appius the 
pretor, and Publius Clodius, being apprised of 
this intention, and of the power with which it was 
supported, did not make their appearance in the 
field, and Milo kept his station till noon, when he 
withdrew with the general applause of the senate, 
and of the more orderly citizens. 

The meeting, or assembly of the people, being 
adjourned to next day, Metellus, in order to lull 
the vigilance of Milo, assured him, that there was 
no occasion to occupy posts in the dead of the 
night; that he meant to do nothing before it was 
day; that if any one meant to suspend the elec- 
tion, he should, in the morning, be found in the 
market-place, and there submit to the forms which 
any one was legally entitled to plead against his 
proceeding. Milo, accordingly, at break of day, 
repaired to the market-place, where he expected 
to be joined by the consul; but soon afterwards 
was told, that Metellus had deceived him, was 
hastening to the field of Mars, where the elec- 
tions were commonly held, and would instantly 
begin to call the votes, when it would be too late 
to interpose even under the pretence of religion, 
Upon this information, he immediatcly pursued 
and overtook him before the election began; and, 
by declaring his intention to observe thc heavens, 
once more frustrated the designs of the faction, 

On the twenty-first, the people could not as- 
semble by reason of the public market ; and their 
meeting being called for the twenty-third, Milo 
again took possession of the field with an armed 
force; and Cicero, who concludes a letter to At- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


209 


no doubt of Milo’s success. What passed on this 
day is uncertain; but it is known, that Clodius 
at last prevailed; that, being elected ædile, he 
was, by the privilege of his office, screened from 
the prosecution that was intended against him; 

and being himself safe, did not. fail, 


U_ Cre. upon the expiration of Milo’s tri- 
Cn. Corn. bunate, to retort the charge upon 
Lentulus his prosecutor; and accordingly 
pa ee d brought him to trial on the second 
lippus. Of February, for acts of violence 


and breach of the peace, 

Pompey, as well as Cicero, appeared in de- 
fence of Milo; and they succeeded in having 
him acquitted, while they incurred a torrent of 
reproach and invective on the part of the prose- 
cutor. ‘The market-place was crowded with the 
partizans and retainers of Clodius: he had in- 
structed them to reply to his interrogations, and 
to direct all their abuse on Pompey. ‘ Who 
starves the people for want of corn? Pompey. 
Who wants to be sent to Alexandria? Pumpey.” 
This farce greatly disturbed the concerted dignity 
of this politician. His principal object was con- 
sideration, and he could not endure contempt. 
He was on bad terms with the senate; and they 
listened to the invective of his personal enemies 
with apparent satisfaction, e complained to 
Cicero that the people were alienated trom him ; 
that the nobility were his enemies ; that the se- 
nate was adverse, and the youthin general ill dis- 
posed to him. He had indeed submitted to be- 
come the agent of Cesar at Rome ; and, with the 
friends of the republic, incurred the odium of their 
joint measures, while the other was rising every 
day jn military reputation, and was forming an 
army almost at the gates of Rome, with which 
he held every party in the repyblicin awe, Pom- 
pey, on this occasion, really did, or affected to be- 
lieve, that a design was formed against his own 
life; he assemblcd a numerous party of his re- 
tainers from the country, and abscnted himself, 
during some time from the senate and from the 


ticus with describing this state of affairs, made | assemblies of the people. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Return of Cato from Cyprus—His Repulse at the Election of Prators—Arrival of Ptolemy 
Auletes at Rome— Visit of Pompey and Crassus to Cæsars Quarters at Lucca— Renewal of 
their Association— Military Operations in Casar’s Province— Violent Election of Crassus and 
Pompey—Provinces—Of Crassus in Syria—Of Pompey in Spain for five years—Crassus 


departs for Syria. 


THE particulars we have related in the last 
chapter have led us on to the middle of February, 
in the consulate of Lentulus Marcellinus and L. 
Marcius Philippus. The first was attached to 
the forms of the republic, and was a strenuous 
partizan of the senate. His election was proba- 
bly a continuation of the victory which this part 
had obtained in the restoration of Cicero. Phi- 
lippus was now nearly related to Cæsar, having 
married his niece, the widow of Octavius; and 
possibly owed his preferment in part to that con- 
nexion. He was, by this alliance, become the 
step-father of young Octavius, now a boy of ten 
yen of age, brought up by his mothcr in the 

ouse of her sccond husband. ‘This appears to 


2D 


have been a man of great moderation, 10 way 
qualified to be a party in the designs or usurpa- 
tions of the family with which he was now con- 
nected. 

Some time before these consuls entered on office, 
in the end of the preceding year, Marcus Cato 
arrived from having executed lis commission to 
Byzantiuin and Cyprus. ‘The business upon 
which he had been sent to the first of these 
places, was to restore some exiles who had been 
driven from their country in the violence of fac- 
tion. At the second he was to seize the treasure 


— 


5 Cicero ad Att. lib. iv. epist. 3. 
6 Cicer, ad Quint. frat. lib. ii. epist. 3. 


210 


and the other effects of Ptolemy, and to reduce 
his kingdom to the form of a Roman province. 
This measure, by all accounts, was unjust, and 
she office highly disagreeable to Cato; but he 
was determined to perform it with the punc- 
tuality and respect due to all the orders of the 
state. While he himself went to Byzantium, he 
sent forward Canidius to Cyprus, to intimate the 
commands of the Roman people, and to exhort 
the king to submission. Upon his return to 
Rhodes, in his way to Cyprus, he had intelli- 
gence, that this prince, unable to bear the ruin 
of his fortunes, had in despair, killed himself. 
His treasure was seized, and his effects sold: the 
whole yielded to the treasury about seven thou- 
sand talents of silver. Upon the approach of 
Cato to Rome, the magistrates, the senate, and 
multitudes of the people went forth to receive 
him. ‘The senate thought proper in this manner 
to distinguish their friends, and to favour them 
with some marks of consideration, in order to 
balance, if possible, the public honours that were 
frequently lavished on their enemies. For the 
same purpose likewise they resolved to insert the 
name of Cato among the pretors of this year; 
but this honour he himself rejected as unprece- 
dented and illegal. The year following, however, 
when he stood candidate for this office in the or- 
dinary form, he was rejected; and Vatinius, the 
well-known tool of Cæsar, who had been em- 
ployed by him in all measures that were too mean 
for himself to acknowledge, was chosen.! 

Cesar, as has been observed on different occa- 
sions, had a serious antipathy to Cato, considered 
him as a determined and resolute opponent; and 
accordingly employed all his influence to exclude 
him from the offices of state, and probably had a 
particular pleasure in procuring him a repulse, 
by the preference of so mean an antagonist as 
Vatinius, who had the present majority of votes 
against him. But, in mentioning this event, 
Valerius Maximus is pleased to reverse the form 
of expression, usual in speaking of disappointed 


candidates, saying, “ That the list of preetors for 


this year had not the honour of Cato’s name.?’? 

Cato, in the execution of his late commission, 
had taken exact inventories of all the effects sold 
at Cyprus; but his books being lost, or burnt ina 
vessel that took fire on the voyage, Clodius fre- 
quently threatened him with a prosecution to 
account for the sums he had received; and in 
this he was seriously instigated by Cesar, who 
from his winter quarters at Lucca, watched all 
the proceedings at Rome. 

From this station, the proconsul of Gaul, al- 
though he could not attend in person, sent his 
agents to the city, took part in every transaction 
of moment that related to his adherents or to his 
enemies. It appeared to be his maxim, that no 
man should be his friend or his enemy without 
feeling the suitable effects. Memmius, who had 
been pretor with Domitius Ahenobarbus, and 
who had joined his colleague in the prosecution 
that was commenced against Cesar at the ex- 
piration of his consulate, having since been prætor 
of Bithynia, and accused of misconduct in his 
province, was attacked by him in a memoriai 
which he drew up to be employed in support of 
the charge. Memmius, in defending himself, re- 


1 Plutarch. in Vit. Catonis, et Cicero in Vatinium. 
2 Val. Max. lib. vii. c. 5 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor III. 


criminated, and spared no kind of invective; and 
in the issue of this matter had the good fortune to 
escape from the resentment of his enemy. 

The power of Cesar, aided by his influence in 
so important a station, was daily increasing ; and 
as he spared no pains to crush those whom he 
despaired of gaining, so he declined no artifice to 


gain every one else. All the spoils of his pro- 
. vince were distributed in gratuities at Rome. He 


knew the state of every man’s family, and where 
he could not reach the master, paid his court to 
the mistress, or to the favourite slave. While in 
his winter quarters at Lucca, many senators re- 
sorted from Rome to pay their court;of these no 
less than two hundred were said to have been 
present at one time; and so many of them in 
public characters, that the lictors, who paraded at 
the entrance of his quarters with the badges of 
office, amounted to one hundred and twenty.? 

During this winter, a question relating to the 
restoration of Ptolemy Auletes to the throne of 
Egypt, gave rise to warm debates in the senate. 
This prince had been dethroned by his subjects ; 
and, conceiving that he had sufficient credit with 
many persons at Rome, who had experienced his 
bounty, he repaired thither to solicit his own re- 
storation. In his way he had an interview with 
Marcus Cato at Cyprus, and was advised by him 
to return to Egypt, and to accept of any terms 
from his own people, rather than to enter on such 
a scene of anxiety and mortification, as he should 
find every suitor for public favour engaged in at 
Rome. The giddiness of the multitude, the vio- 
lence of the parties of which one was sure to 
oppose what the other embraced, the avarice of 
those who might pretend to be his friends, and 
whose rapacity the treasures of his kingdom 
could not assuage, were sufficient to deter the 
king from proceeding on his voyage. But the 
importunity of his attendants, who wished to 
have him restored without any concessions to his 
subjects, confirmed him in his former resolution. 
He accordingly proceeded to Rome; and, to the 
great encouragement of his hopes, was favourably 
received by Pompey, who was then possessed of 
the reigning influence in the city, and who con- 
sidered this as a proper opportunity to have a 
military commission joined to the civil one of 
which he was already possessed. 

In the mean while the people of Alexandria, 
not knowing to what place their king had with- 
drawn, imagined that he was dead, and put his 
daughter Berenice in possession of the kingdom. 
Being afterwards informed, that he had steered 
for Italy, and was likely to engage the Romans 
against them, they sent a deputation to counteract 
his solicitations in the Roman senate. But these 
deputies being intercepted, and murdered by his 
order, he proceeded, without opposition, in his 
application at Rome, and obtained a decree for his 
restoration to the crown. - 

The king of Egypt, by having procured an 
act in his own favour, yet made but a small pro- 
gress in the business on which he was come. 
New difficulties arose in the choice of a person 
to carry the decree of the senate into execution, 
which greatly retarded its effect. 

Soon after this decree had passed, Lentulus 
Spinther, consul of the present year, being des- 
tined at the expiration of his magistracy in the 


— 


3 Plutarch. in Cesare. 


Cuap. VIL] 


city to command in Cilicia and Cyprus, had in- 
serted the business of restoring the king of Egypt 
as a part of his own commission. But after Len- 
tulus was gone for his province, this part of the 
commission, probably by the influence of Pom- 
pey, who had views on that expedition, as the 
object of a military command for himself, was re- 
Cea. A strong party of the nobles, however, 
being jealous of the state which Pompey affected, 
and of his continual aim at extraordinary powers, 
conceived an expedient to disappoint him on this 
occasion, or to render the commission unworthy 
of his acceptance. In visiting the books of Sybils, 
verses were said to be found, containing an in- 
their friendship from a king of Egypt soliciting 
their protection, but “to beware how they at- 
tempted to restore him with a military force.” 
The authenticity of this oracle was acknow- 
ledged, or declared by the augurs ; and the tribune 


Caius Cato, who was averse to the cause of | 


Ptolemy, availed himself of it, to suspend the 
effect of the resolution which had been already 
taken in favour of that prince. 
people were divided in their opinions. One party 
urged that Pompey should be appointed to re- 
store the king of Egypt to his throne; others 


agreed that he might be appointed, provided that | 


he undertook the commission, as proconstl, at- 
tended by two lictors, and, in the terms of the 


oracle, without any military force.4 Pompey him-. 


self affected to think, that the business should 
have becn left as it was in the department of 
Lentulus the proconsul of Cilicia and Cyprus; 
but his retainers, so long as they had any hopes 
of rendering this a military commission, or of 
making it a pretence for placing their patron 
again at the beni of an army, never ceased to 
urge that he should be employed in it. 

tolemy himself likewise wished to have this 
business devolve upon Pompey, as the most 
likely person to command the force of the com- 
monwealth, and to employ it effectually in his 
favour. But both despairing at last of success, 


Ptolemy retired to Ephesus; and, fearing the re- 


sentments he had provoked in the contest with 
his own people, and in the late murder of their 
deputies, he took refuge in the temple of Diana ; 
a retreat from which he was conducted, about 
two years afterwards, by Gabinius, and replaced 
on his throne.5 

Pompey was disgusted with his disappointment 
in not being named to this service, ielecaivably 
more by the little respect that was paid to him by 
all parties while he lay under the lash of con- 
tinual invectives from Clodius, and from Caius 
Cato. Having obtained, on the fifth of April, a 
grant of some money towards executing his office 
of general surveyor of corn for the people; and 
having heard his own and Cesar’s embezzlement 
of the public treasure, especially in the alienation 
of the revenues of Campania, severely censured 
in the senate, he left Rome on pretence of ap- 
plying the sums with which he was now en- 
trusted for the purchase of corn in Sardinia and 
Sicily. In his way ke passed by Lucca, and, to- 
gether with Crassus, augmented the number of 


4 Dio. lib. xxxix. c. 12—16. Cicero ad Lentulum. 
Epist. ad Familiares, lib. vii. 

5 Liv. Epitom. Decad. xi. lib. 5. 

6 Cicero ad Quint. frat. lib. ii. ep. 5 et 6. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


junction to the Romans, not indeed to withhold 


The senate and 


21l 


attendants who paid thcir court at the quartera 
of Cæsar. 

At an interview of these three leaders they re 
newed their former confederacy; and it bein 
known that Domitius Ahenobarbus was to stan 
for the next election of consuls, Cæsar, considering 
how much a citizen so determined in opposition 
to himself, instigated by Cato, and supported by 
the party of the senate, might attempt or execute 
against him in his absence, proposed, that the op- 
position to this candidate should not be committed 
to any person of inferior consideration in their 
party; but that Pompey and Crassus should 
themselves enter the lists, in order to exclude 
Domitius from the consulate.’ 

It was agreed likewise, at this conference, that, 
upon the expiration of the term for which they 
were to hold this office, Pompey should have the 
province of Spain, Crassus that of Syria, each 
with a great army: that Cesar should be con- 
tinued in his present command, and have such 
additions to the establishment of his province as 
might enable him to support an army of eight 
Roman legions, with the usual accompaniments 
of auxiliaries and irregular troops. Bch was 
already the state of his forces,* including a legion 
of native Gauls; he having, contrary to the ex- 
press limitation of his commission, by which he 
was restricted to three legions, made this enor- 
mous augmentation. ‘This convention, like the 
former, was for some time kept a secret, and 
only began to be surmised about the usual time 
of the elections. 

Soon after these matters were settled, Crassus 
being to remain in Italy, Pompey proceeded on 
his voyage to Sardinia, and Cesar repaired to 
his army in Gaul, where the war in different 
places had been renewed in his absence. Among 
the dispositions he had made for the winter, the 
young Crassus was left to command on the coasts 
of the British channel; and Galba, another of 
his lieutenants, was posted among the Alps to 
protect the traders of [aly at a principal pass of 
these mountains. This officer had dislodged the 
natives from many of their strong holds, whence 
they were accustomed to infest the highways, 
and to lay such as passed into Italy under con- 
tributions; and he took hostages for their good 
behaviour for the future. He fixed his quarters, 
during the winter, at Octodorus, now supposed to 
be the village of Martinach in the Vallé, situated 
at the foot of the mountains over which travellers 
pass in the route of the greater abbey of St. Ber- 
nard. Here he remained for some time in quiet 
possession of his post; but the natives observing, 
that the legions under his command had been 
greatly reduced by the services of the preceding 
campaign, and by the detachments which he ha 
recently made from his quarters, formed a design 
to surprise and to cut him off. For this purpose, 
the inhabitants of the village in which he was 


quartered suddenly withdrew from him, and soon 


after appeared with multitudes of their country- 
men on the neighbouring mountains. From 
thence they made a furious attack on the Roman 
entrenchment, continually sending fresh numbe ə 
to relieve those who became fatigued, or who had 
exhausted their weapons. 

The Romans, on the first prospect of this at 


7 Suet. in Crsare, c. 24. 
8 Ibid. 


919 


(ack, had deliberated, whether they should not 
abandon their post; but had resolved to maintain 
it, and were now become sensible that they must 
perish, if they could not, by some impetuous 
Sally, disperse the numbers that were assembled 
against them. For this purpose, they determined 
to break from their lines, and to mix with the 
enemy sword in hand; a manner of fighting, in 
which by the superiority of the Roman shield 
and sword, they always had a great advantage. 
They accordingly sallied from their entrench- 
ment, and, with the slaughter of ten thousand of 
the enemy, who began the attack with thirty 
thousand, obliged them to retire. Galba, never- 
theless, not thinking it prudent to remain in a 
situation in which he had been exposed to so 
much danger, retired, for the remainder of the 
winter, to the neighbourhood of Geneva. 

The war had broke oüt at the same time in the 
quarters of Crassus, at the other extremity of the 
province Sore nations, who had made their 
submission, arid given hostages at the end of the 
preceding campaign, repented of this step, and 
entered into a concert to recover their liberties. 
They begai with seizing the Roman officers who 
had been stationed among them as commissaries 
to provide for the subsistence of the army, and 
they detained them as pledges for the recovery of 
their own hostages. 

The principal authors of this revolt were the 
inhabitants of what is now termed the coast of 
Britanny, between the rivers Vilaine and Blavet. 
They trusted to the strength of their situation on 
small islands, or peninsulas, that were joined to 
the continent only by somé narrow beach or 
isthmus, which the sea, at high water, over- 
flowed. They depended likewise on the strength 
of their shipping, in the use of which, by the 
practice of navigation on that stormy sea, and by 
their frequent voyages even to Britain, they were 
extremely expert. They supplied the want of 
canvass and hempen cordage with hides and 
thongs of leather, and the want of cables with 
iron chains, to which they fastened their anchors. 

Cesar, having received intelligence of this 
enemy, while he remained in his quarters at 
Lucca, sent orders to build as many ships as pos- 
sible upon the Loire, and to assemble mariners 
from the neighbouring coasts. Apprehending, at 
the same time, a general defection of the province, 
and perhaps a descent from the Germans, that 
were ever ready to profit by the distress or di- 
visions of their neighbours, he sent Labienus 
with a large body of horse to the Moselle, at 
once to awe the Belgic nations, and to guard the 
passage of the Rhine. He sent also Titurius 
Sabinus with a proper fotce into Normandy, 
where the natives were already in arms; and the 
young Crassus to the Garonne, to give the natives 
of Gascony sufficient occupation in their own 
country, and to prevent their junction with the 
authors of this revolt. 

He himself made haste to join the troops that 
were stationed in Britanny, and ordered Decimus 
Brutus to assemble his fleet, and to make sail 
‘without loss of time for the bay of Vannes. 
After his arrival on the coast, he met with all the 
difficulties which he had reason to expect from 
the nature of the country, and from the disposition 
and skill of its inhabitants. The enemy had re- 
tired from the continent to their strong holds on 
the premontories or head-lands, in which they 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boog III. 


were periodically surrounded by the sea. Being 
attacked at one station, they withdrew in their 
boats to another; and by their situation seemed 
to be sécure from ary enemy, who was not in a 
condition to make his attack; at once, both by sea 
and by land. ‘They eluded a land attack by em- 
barking on board of their vessels; and an attack 
from the sea, by landing from their boats, which 
they drew up on the beach. 

Cesar, to decide the event of this singular con- 
test, was obliged to wait the arrival of his shipping. 
As soon as it appeared, the natives, sensible that 
their fate depended on the event of a sea-fight, 
embarked the most expert of their warriors, got 
under sail with all their force, amounting to two 
hundred and twenty vessels, and steered directly 
for their enemy. While the fleets drew near to 
each other, the shores were crowded with specta- 
tors; and the army with Cesar himself came 
forth on the heights, from which they could be- 
hold the scene. . 

The Romans being inferior to their enemy in 
the use of their sails, as well as in the strength of 
their vessels, endeavoured to supply their defect, 
as usual, by an effort of address and unexpected 
contrivance. They had provided themselves with 
scythes, fastened to shafts of a proper length, in 
order to cut the enemy’s rigging, and let loose or 
discompose their sails; and having thus, in the 
first encounter, disabled many of their ships, they 
a with them, and boarded them sword in 

and. 

The Gauls, seeing a great part of their fleet 
thus irrecoverably lost, would have escaped with 
the remainder; but were suddenly becalmed, 
and being, from ten in the morning till night, 
continually exposed to the attack of the Romans, 
were all either taken or destroyed; and the na- 
tion thus bereft of its principal strength and the 
flower of its people, surrendered again at discre- 
tion. 

Under pretence that they had violated the law 
of nations, in seizing the persons of officers whe 
were stationed among them in a public character, 
their leaders were put to death, and their people 
sold for slaves. 

The inhabitants of the lower banks of the 
Seine, at the same time having been defeated by 
Titurius, returned, agreeably to what was said 
to be the character of Gaulish nations, to their 
former submission, with the same levity with 
which they had thrown it aside. 

The nations inhabiting the banks of the Ga- 
ronne were still inclined to resist the approaches 
of Crassus to their country. To the advantage of 
numbers, they joined a lively courage, of which 
the Romans themselves had frequently felt the 
effects. Every chief was attended by a number 
of followers, whom he called his soldurii, and 
who had devoted themselves to his service. 
While the chieftain lived, the soldurii fared in 
every thing alike with himself ; but if he perished 
by violence, they too must die, and there was no 
instance of their failing in this part of their en- 
gagement. 

rassus being arrived on the Garonne, and 
warned by the example of other Roman officers, 
who had fallen or miscarried in this service, de- 
ferred passing the river till he had augmented 
his force by the junction of some troops from 
Toulouse, and other parts of the Roman province, 
Being thus reinforced, he proceeded against the 


Caap. VII.) 


natives who were divided into many little hordes, 
of which Cesar has, on this occasion, enume- 
rated twelve, jealous of each other, and unwilling 
to join even in their common defence. They 
accordingly, notwithstanding their valour, fell 
separately into the hands of the Romans, and 
in the end were vanquished, or made their sub- 
mission. 

By these conquests, the former acquisitions of 
Cesar on the Seine and the Marne, had a direct 
communication with the districts of ‘Toulouse 
and Narbonne, or what was already called the 
Roman province of Gaul. Cesar himself, hav- 
ing re-established peace in those tracts which are 
now termed Britanny and Normandy, closed the 
campaign with a march northward, where he 

enetrated through the marshes and woods into 
thant but being stopped by heavy rains, and 
the approach of winter, he returned on his route, 
without making any settlement; and having put 
his army into winter quarters among the nations 
who had lately revolted, he set out as usual for 
Italy. There his presence was greatly wanted 
by Pompey and Crassus, who, on the approach 
of the elections, were likely to meet with unex- 
pected difficulties in executing the plan lately 
concerted between them. 

At Rome, the spring and part of the summer 
had passed in disputes between persons connected 
with the opposite parties. Clodius had attacked 
Cicero in his own person, in his effects, and in 
the persons of his friends. P. Sextius, who, in 
the character of tribune, had been so active in the 
recall of this injured exile, and who had exposed 
his life in the riots to which that question gave 
tise, was now accused, and brought to trial for 
supposed acts of violence committed by him in 
the course of those contests. He was defended 
with great zeal by Hortensius, and with a proper 
gratitude by Cicero; and by their joint endea- 
vours was, on the twelfth of March, acquitted by 
the unanimous verdict of his judges.! 

After this trial was over, a piece of superstition, 
curious as it forms a picture of the age, gave oc- 
casion to a fresh dispute between Cicero and his 
enemy Clodius. Upon a report, that horrid 
noises and clashing of arms had been heard un- 
der ground in one of the suburbs, the senate 
thought proper to take the subject under consi- 
deration, and they referred it for interpretation 
to the college of Aruspices. This body delivered 
in judgment, that the gods were offended, among 
other things, by the neglect and profanation of 
the holy rites, and by the prostitution of sacred 
places to profane uses. This response Clodius 
endeavoured to apply to the case of Cicero’s house, 
once consécrated and set apart for religion, and 
now again profaned by being restored to his 
former owner. Cicero endeavoured to remove the 
charge of profanation from himself to Clodius, 
by reviving the memory of his fanious adventure 
in Cesar’s house. “If I quote any more recent 
act of impiety,” says he, “this citizen will recall 
me to the former instance, in which he intended 
no more than adultery.” He proceeded, how- 
ever, to apply the response of the Augurs toa 
late intrusion of Clodius in rushing into the the- 
atre with an armed rabble, while the games were 
celebrating in honour of the great goddess. 

The senate for two days together listened to 


1 Cicero ad Quin. Frat. lib. ii. epist. 4. Orat. pro Sext. | 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


213 


the mutual invectives of both parties, and were 
entertained with their endeavours to surpass each 
other in declarations of zeal for religion. Cicero, 
however, by the goodness of his cause, the force 
of his admirable talents, and perhaps still more 
by the aid of the triumvirate, whose favour he 
earnestly cultivated, prevailed in the contest. 

This martyr in the cause of the senate, ever 
since his return from banishment, courted the 
formidable parties, whose power, at least to hurt, 
he had experienced. He committed, or affected 
to commit, himself entirely into the hands of 
Pompey ; and, with a declaration of much attach- 
ment also to Cæsar, composed a flattering pane- 
gyric, which this leader received with great plea- 
sure,2 probably more on account of the breach it 
was likely to make among his opponents in the 
senate, than on account of the satisfaction he re- 
ceived from it, or of any real accession of strength 
it gave him in the pursuit of his designs. By 
this conduct Cicero disgusted his former friends, 
and felt his situation in the city so painful, that 
he absented himself, during great part of the 
summer, from Rome; a circumstance which in- 
terrupted the course, or changed the subject, of 
those letters to which we are indebted for the 
best record of the times, 

We have indeed great reason to regret any in- 
terruption of materials from which the history of 
this consulate might be collected. The republic 
seems in part to have recovered its dignity by the 
able and resolute conduct of Marcellinus, and by 
the tacit concurrence of his colleague Philippus, 
who, though connected with Cesar, did not co- 
operate in the execution of his designs.3 By the 
influence of these consuls, the applications made 
to the senate by Gabinius, now commanding in 
Syria, for certain customary honours were re- 
‘jected.4 This refusal was intended to mortify 
Pompcy, who protected Gabinius, and who him- 
self was commonly treated by Marcellinus with 
great freedom and severity. The aristocratical 
party recovered their courage, and Domitius 
Ahenobarbus, by their influence, was in a fair 
way to succeed in his election for consul of the 
following year. 

The tribunes, excited chiefly by Caius Cato, 
espoused the opposite interest, and proposed many 
resolutions to the people, in order to favour their 
designs. The consul Marcellinus endeavoured 
to interrupt them by the appointment of fasts and 
holidays, in which it was not lawful to transact 
affairs in the assembly of the people. The tri- 
bunes, in their turn, suspended the election of 
consuls, and in this were encouraged by Pompey 
and Crassus, who feared the effect of a choice to 
be made under the direction of Marcellinus, and 
had not even openly declared their own inten- 
tions to offer themselves. Their late interview 
with Cesar, and the part they since took, had 
created suspicion of their views. Marcellinus 
put the question to Pompey in the senate, whe- 
ther be desired the consulate for himself? And 
this politician, long unaccustomed to make plain 
declarations, answered indirectly, That if there 
were no ill-disposed citizens in the common- 
wealth, he should have no such desire. Crassus, 
to the same question, made a like evasive reply, 
That he should be governed by what he judged 


2 Cicero ad Att. lib. iv. ep. 5. 


3 Cic. ad Quint, Frat. lib. ii, ep. 6. 4 Ibid £P. 7 


214 


best for the state. Both appear to have perceived 
that they were to rely for success chiefly on popu- 
lar tumults; and as these would come to be em- 
ployed with great disadvantage against such an 
able and resolute magistrate as Marcellinus, they 
took measures to defer the elections until the term 
of the present consuls in office should expire.! 

They found the tribune Caius Cato, a proper 
instrument for their purpose, secured his nega- 
tve, and employed it repeatedly to suspend the 
elections. The republic, upon the approach of 
the new year, being to lose its former magis- 
trates, without any succession of new ones, was 
likely to fall into a state of great confusion. The 
senate went into mourning, and discharged every 
member from assisting at any of the public diver- 
sions. In this state of suspense and public alarm, 
Publius Clodius, who had for some time been at 
variance with Pompey, as 1f gained by the sym- 
pathy of measures on this occasion, was recon- 
ciled to him, and attacked Mareellinus with con- 
tinual invectives. 

In this manner the year was suffered to elapse 
without any election of consuls. The fasces 
dropped from the hands of Marcellinus and Phi- 
lippus, and an interregnum ensued. Pompey 
and Crassus then openly appeared as candidates 
for the vacant offices of state. Young Crassus 
came from the army in Gaul, attended by a 
numerous body of citizens then serving under 
Cesar: they brought a considerable accession of 
votes to the party of their general, and were 
themselves not likely to be outstripped by their 
opponents in acts of sedition and the use of force. 
Domitius Ahenobarbus alone, supported by the 
councils of his kinsman Marcus Cato, had the 
courage to persist in a contest with these power- 
ful and dangerous antagonists. ‘The time of elec- 
tion being fixed, he went before break of day to 
occupy his place in the field of Mars, but found 
his way already obstructed by a disorderly popu- 
lace, and even by men in arms. ‘The slave who 
carried a light before him was killed. Some of 
his friends, particularly Marcus Cato, was wound- 
ed;? and his adherents not being in condition to 
dispute the ground with the force that was as- 
sembled against them, retired to their own houses, 
leaving Pompey and Crassus to be named with- 
out opposition. 

In the same manner the faction of the trium- 
virate overruled every other election, procured 
the preference, which has already been mention- 
ed, of Vatinius to Cato, and filled every office 
with their own creatures. ‘They carried the ap- 
pointment of ediles by actual force, and at the 
expense of the lives of some of those who op- 
posed them. Pompey himself having been en- 
tangled in one of these tumullts, retired to change 
his clothes, which were stained with blood. ‘They 
were disappointed in the nomination only of two 
of the tribunes, Publius Acquilius Gallus and 
Ateius Capito, who were of the opposite party. 

These events, however, were, by 

U. C. 698. the contest which arose on every 

_ question, deferred for all the months 

Cn. Pompeius of winter and spring. The offices 
Magnus, 2do ; ro Q 

“M. Licinius ` Of prætor were not filled up by the 

Crassus. middle of May.? The elections had 


- 


1 Dio. lib. xxxix. c. 37. 
2 Plutarch in Crass. Pompeio, &c. 
3 G@rer. ad Quint. Frat. lib. ii. ep. 9. 


YHE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book III. 


begun for this purpose some time before; but 
it being observed that Marcus Cato had the 
first centuries, Pompey, under a pretence, al- 
lowed by the Roman superstition, that he was to, 
observe the heavens, interposed to suspend the 
ballot. The faction employed the time which 
they obtained by this delay in procuring votes, 
and were so unguarded in giving money, that 
they laid themselves open to a criminal prosecu- 
tion, and had reason to apprehend that whatever 
election they made would be disputed at law. To 
prevent this consequence, Afranius, a person en- 
tirely under the direction of Pompey, moved in 
the assembly of the people for a dispensation 
from the statute of bribery in the case of elections 
then depending for the office of prætor ; and having 
obtained this extraordinary indulgence, secured 
to the party the fruits of their influence and of 
their money.4 

Among the acts of Pompey and Crassus, in 
their second consulate, are mentioned some regu- 
lations respecting the courts of justice by which 
the juries, though taken in equal numbers from 
the senate, the equestrian order, and the mass of 
the people, were nevertheless limited to persons 
of considerable property. There are likewise 
mentioned some resolutions then passed to enforce 
the laws against murder, and to amend those 
against bribery by additional penalties, together 
with a sumptuary law to check the extravagance 
and prodigality of the age. “So willing were 
these magistrates,” said Hortensius, “to compen- 
sate by their acts for the defects of their practice, 
that they made laws even to limit the expense of 
the table.” Such professions to reform the age 
were probably intended to retrieve the character 
which the popular leaders had lost by the violence 
and bare-faced corruption of their recent canvass, 
and to mark their administration with some mea- 
sures that might seem to disprove the imputations 
commonly laid to their charge. 

Pompey, at the same time, had an opportunity 
to signalize his consulate, by opening, during the 
present year, the magnificent theatre which he 
himself, or his freedman Demetrius, had erected 
for the accommodation of the people at their pub- 
lic shows. At this solemnity were exhibited 
many dramatic performances and entertainments 
of every sort. Among these, in the course of 
five days, no less than five hundred lions were let 
loose and killed by African huntsmen; and the 
whole concluded with the baiting of eighteen ele- 
phants, animals that seemed to have sagacity 
enough to be conscious of the indignity and the 
wrang which they suffered. By their piteous 
cries they moved compassion in the breasts even 
of that barbarous rabble, for whose entertainment 
they were slain.5 

The allotment of provinces, which was the 
principal object of this consulate, was for some 
time kept from the view of the people. Pompey 
continued to profess that he did not intend to 
accept of any province whatever. But the pub- 
lic gave no credit to such declarations on his part ; 
and his own partizans were accustomed to press 
upon him what he affected to decline.6 Every 
one, therefore, in all conversations, endeavoured 
to accommodate him in a province, some with 


4 Cicer. ad Quint. Frat. lib. ii. ep. 9. 

5 Dio. lib. xxxix. Cicero ad Familiar. lib. vii. Plin. 
lib. viii. c. 7. 

6 Cicero ad Att. lib. iv. ep. 9. 


Cuar. VIL] 


Syria, others with Spain and Africa; to all 
ich suggestions, or officious projects, he af- 
fected indifierence, or even aversion. Trebonius, 
however, at this time tribune of the people, made 
a motion, which was soon understood to be the 
real mind of Pompey, and the actuat result of his 
counsels: that the province of Syria should be 
assigned to Crassus; that of Spain, together with 
Africa, to himself; each in imitation of Cesar’s 
appointment in Gaul, to continue for five years, 
with such establishments of men and of money 
as the necessity of the service during that period 
might require. This motion was made in exe- 
cution of the original plan concerted with Cesar, 
and it served to bring to light the object of their 
late conference at Lucca, which had so much 
alarmed the friends of the republic. 

On the day that this motion was made in the 
assembly, Marcus Cato, by means of the tribunes 
Atteius Capito and Acquilius Gallus, obtained 
leave to address the people. He endeavoured to 
disappoint the purpose of the meeting, by occu- 
pying so much of their time as to prevent their 
coming to any decision. Being commanded si- 
lence, and persisting to speak, he was ordered by 
Trebonius into custody, In this manner, how- 
ever, the first day was spent, and the assembly 
adjourned to the next morning. 

The tribunes Atteius and Gallus, suspecting 
that means might be used to exclude them from 
the assembly which was then to be held, took 
measures to secure their admission. For this 
aed Gallus remained all night in the senate- 

ouse, which fronted the Comitia or place of as- 
sembly. But this device was turned against 
himself; the opposite party having placed a guard 
to confine him in that place during the greater 
part of the following day, His colleague A tteius, 
with Cato, Favonius, and some others, eluded the 

rties that were placed to intercept them, and 
ound their way to the place of assembly. When 
the question was put, Cato, being lifted up into 
view by those of his friends who were about him, 
gave an alarm that it thundered; an intimation 
ever held by the religious customs of the Romans 
to be ominous, and sufficient to suspend their 
po in any business of state. He was, 
nowever, on this occasion forced from the comi- 
tium with the slaughter of some of his fricnds, 
who resisted the force that was employed against 
them. About the same time the tribune Acqui- 
lius was wounded in forcing his way from the 
senate-house, and a great concourse of people 
was forming round him as he stood bleeding in 
the streets. Violence to the person of a tribune 
was still considered with religious horror, and 
the consuls, in whose behalf this tumult had been 
raised, fearing the conscquence of suffering such 
a spectacle to remain in the view of the people, 
ordered the multitude to withdraw, and removed 
the tribune, still bleeding of his wounds, from the 
public view. 

In the sequel of these operations, Pompey and 
Crassus obtained the provinces in question, and 
in the terms proposed; they proceeded to fulfil 
their part of the late engagement to Cesar, by 
moving that his command should be continued 
during an additional term of five ycars more. 
“ Now, indeed,” said Cato, addressing himself to 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


215 


Pompey, “the burden is preparing for your ow 
shoulders. It will one day fall on the republic, 
but not till after it has crushed you tothe grougd.” 
These arrangements being made, the officers 
thus appointed proceeded to take charge of the:r 
trust. Pompey, the newly named proconsul of 
Spain, under pretence of a war subsisting with 
the Vaccei, raised the establishment of his pro- 
vince to four legions, two of which Cesar soon 
after, under pretence of more urgent service in 
Gaul, had the address to borrow from him. 
Pompey cither had not yet begun to perceive 
what Cato suggested to him, that the greatest 
difficulty he had to fear, in prescrving the emi- 
nence to which he aspired, was the emulation of 
Cæsar; and that the sword must determine the 
contest between them; or he flattered himself 
that, like the person who stays at the helm, he 
was to command the vessel; and by remaining 
at the seat of government, while his associates 
and rivals accepted of appointments at a distance, 
that he continued to preside as sovereign, and 
supreme dictator of the whole. Under the influ- 
ence of these conceptions, although his proper 
station was Spain, he cither procured, or at least 
availed himself of, a motion that was made by 
some of the tribunes to detain him in Italy; and 
fancied, while he sent his own licutenants, A fra- 
nius and Petreius, as private agents for himself 
into that province, that even Cesar and Crassus, 
though in a more public character, were however 
to act in a subordinate station to himself. 
Crassus ever considered riches as the chief 
constituents of power, and he expected, with the 
spoils of Asia, to equal the military or political 
advantages that were likely to be acquired by his 
rivals in Europe. From the levies and other pre- 
parations which he made for his province, it soon 
appeared that he intended a war with the Par- 
thians, the only antagonists which the Roinans 
had left on the frontier of Syria. Observing that 
he was likely to meet with an opposition to this 
design from the scnate and from the tribunes, 
who exerted thcir powers to interrupt his prepa- 
rations, and took measures to detain faa at home, 
he became the more impatient to set out for his 
province, and left Rome before the cxpiration of 
the year for which he was elected into the office 
of consul, The tribune Atteius endeavoured to 
stop him, first by his tribunitian negative, next 
by actual force, and last of all by solemn impre- 
cations, devoting the consul himself, and all who 
should follow him on that service, to destruction. 
While Crassus passed through the gates of 
Rome, on his intended departure for Asia, this 


‘tribune, with a lighted fire, the usual forn of 


devoting a victim to the infernal gods, denounced 
a curse, which greatly alarmed many of the fol- 
lowers of Crassus. This piece of superstition he 
might, in his own mind, have justly contemned : 
but it was imprudent to slight the effects of it on 
the minds of the people, and on the minds of his 
own army. In the apprehension of both he was 
by this forin doomed to destruction, and proceeded 
in the war at the head of troops ill prepared to 
ward off calamitics, which they were thus made 
to believe hung over them, in consequence of im- 
precations of which they did not qucstion the 
efficacy. 


THE 


HISTORY 


OF 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


OF THE 


ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


BOOK IV. 


CHAPTER I. 


State of the Commonwealth—Administration of the Provinces—Operations of Cesar in Gaul, 
Germany, and Britain—State of Pompey at Rome—Progress of Crassus into Syria—King- 
dom of Parthia—Invasion of Crassus beyond the Euphrates—Second Invasion of Cesar in 


Britain. 


THE provincial appointments of Pompey and 
Crassus, with that which was at the same time 
prolonged to Cesar, seemed to dismember the 
empire, if not to expose the republic itself to great 
danger. 

Of these three adventurers, Pompey and Cesar, 
apart from the evil particularly apprehended in 
any of their measures, were in themselves sub- 
jects of a very dangerous character: neither 
possessed that dignity of mind which fits the citi- 
zen for the equality of persons in a republican 
state ; neither could acquiesce in the same mea- 
sures of consideration or power which other sena- 
tors had enjoyed before him; neither could be at 
ease where he did not command as master, or ap- 

ear at least as the principal object in every scene 
in which he was employed. 

This paltry ambition, some ages before, might 
have been held in contempt by the meanest of 
the people, or must have shrunk before that noble 
elevation of mind by which the statesman con- 
ceived no eminence besides that of high personal 
qualities employed in public services, or before the 
austere virtue which confined the public esteem 
toacts of public utility, supported by unblemished 
reputation in private life. But in the present 
age, there was a fashion which set such antiquated 
notions at defiance, controlled the authority of 
the state itself, and bestowed on private adven- 
turers the attachment which belonged to the 
commonwealth, and the deference which was due 
to its legal head. 

In the progress of this republic the character 
of parties has already repeatedly changed, and 
the danger to be apprehended from them accord- 
ingly varied. 

216 


In the first periods of its history, citizens were 
divided on the supposed distinctions of birth; and, 
in the capacities of patrician or plebeian, strove 
for prerogative or privilege with much emulation, 
as separate orders of men in the commonwealth, 
but with little jealousy of personal interests. 

In a subsequent period, when the invidious 
part of the former distinction was removed, citi- 
zens having no longer the same subject of ani- 
mosity, as being born to different pretensions, 
they entered more fully on the competition of in- 
dividuals, and the formation of separate factions. 
They strove for the ascendant of aristocratical or 
democratical government, according to the inte- 
rest they had formed to themselves in the preva- 
lence of either. They were ready to sacrifice the 
peace and honour of the public to their own pas- 
sions, and entered into disputes accordingly, 
which were in the highest degree dangerous to 
the commonwealth, ‘They thought personal pro- 
vocations were sufficient to justify public dis- 
orders; or, actuated by vehement animosities, 
they signalized their victories with the blood of 
their antagonists. But, though sanguinary and 
cruel in their immediate executions, they formed 
no deliberate plans of usurpation to enslave their 
country, nor formed a system of evils to continue 
beyond the outrage into which they themselves 
were led by their supposed personal wrongs or 
factious resentments. 

We are now again once more to change the 
scene, and to have under our consideration the 
conduct of men who were in reality as indifferent 
to any interest of party as they were to that of 
the republic, or to any object of state; who had 
no resentments to gratify, or who easily sacrificed 


——— a 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


Crap. I.] 


those whieh they felt to the purposes of a cool 
and deliberate design on the sovercignty of their 
country. Though rivals, they could occasionally 


enter into combinations for mutual support, fre- į 


quently changed their partizans, and had no per- 
manent quarrel hut with those who uniformly 
wished to preserve the republic. ‘They were sur- 
rounded by persons who admired the advantages 
of wealth or of power which were gained at the 
expense of their country, and who indeed were 
ready to extol the virtues of any adventurer who 
led a numerous list of retainers to share in the 
spoils of the commonwealth. 

Peace had now, for some years, exeept in that 
part where Cæsar commanded, been established 
throughout the empire. Instead of military ope- 
rations, the state was oceupied in directing the 
farms of the revenue, in hearing complaints of 
oppression from the provinces, and in appointing 
the succession of military governors. Besides 
the disputes which have been mentioned relating 
to the provincial appointments of Crassus and 
Cesar, there arose a question on the subject of 
provinces to be assigned to their immediate pre- 
decessors in the eonsulate, Marcellinus and Phi- 
lippus. It was strongly urged that Piso, Gabinius, 
and even Cesar should be reealled to make way 
for officers who were entitled to similar command 
im their turns: This measure was supported in 

art by Cicero, who vehemently contended, that 
Piso and Gabinius should be superceded; but 
urged the continuance of Cæsar in his station, a 
eircumstance for which this able adventurer had 
taken suflicient precaution not to leave it in 
hazard from the issue of this debate. 

Piso, the nearer relation of Cæsar, in the event 
of these deliberations, was actually recalled, and, 
upon his return to the eity, complained to the 
senate, in terms of great asperity, of the injury 
done to his character. Cicero had ever treated 
Piso and Gabinius; though in reality but the in- 
struments of Pompey and Cesar, as the princi- 
pal authors of his late calamities; and, upon the 
present occasion, had pronounced against Piso 
that violent invective which still remains among 
his works, and wliich the subsequent conduct of 
the person against whom it was direeted in a great 
measure disproved. 

Gabinius had for some years enjoyed the go- 
vernment of Syria, and during this time had 
ventured to employ the foree of his province in 
a manner, whieh, together with some other 
offences; drew upon hiin, at his return to Rome, 
the animadversion of the senate. 

It has been mentioned that Ptolemy Aulectes, 
king of Egypt, in exile from his kingdom, had 
applied to the Romans for aid in reeovering his 
crown; that his suit had been granted, but ren- 
dered ineffectual by the regard which was paid to 
a supposed: oracle, which forbade his being rein- 
stated with a military force; that he had with- 
drawn to Ephesus, and taken sanctuary in the 
temple, where he waited for some change of for- 
tune in his favour. Lentulus, the governor of 
Cilicia, to whom the business of restoring him, 
though without military foree, had been eom- 
mitted by the senate, deliberated whether he 
should not venture to disregard the restriction 
imposed upon him; march with an army to re- 
store the king of Egypt; possess hintself of the 
wealth which was to be found in effecting such 
a revolution, and trust to the influence of his 


Q17 


friends at Rome ix procuring his pardon from the 
senate, and even their apprubatien of what he 
shouid have done. 

Upon this question, Cicero advised Lentulus, 
if he had a force sufficient to undertake the enter- 
prise, not to lose an opportunity of performing a 
service which, though not authorised, could be 
afterwards vindicated. But the business still re- 
mained in suspense, when Gabinius arrived in 
Syria, and probably, by an advice from Pompey 
to the same purpose with that of Cicero to Len- 
tulus, undertook, in opposition to a deerce of the 
senate and of the augurs, the restoration of this 
exile to his throne. Having reecived or bar- 
gained for a great sum of money in return for 
this service, he advanced with a fleet and an army 
towards Egypt, passed through Palestine, and on 
his way raised a contribution in that country. — 

Berenicé, the daughter of Ptolemy, now 1n 
possession of the crown, had married Archelaus ; 
and, in order to strengthen her hands against her 
father, had assumed her husband as a partner in 
the throne. But the forces of these associated 
sovercigns were defeated by Gabinius, and Ptole- 
my was restored to hiskingdom. Gabinius, with 
the treasure amassed on this occasion, hoped to 
be seeure against the attacks which, at his re 
turn to Rome, were likely to be made upon him, 
for his contempt of the senate, and of the oracle, 
and for the extortion of which he was accused at 
the same time in Palestine, a part of his own 
province 

In this busy time of Cesar's faction at Rome, 
he himself upon an alarm of an invasion from 
Germany, had beer ealled to defend the northern 
extremity of Gaul. Two separate hordes, the 
Tenchteri and Usupetes, pretending to be driven 
by superior force from the usual tract of their 
migrations, had united together, and presented 
themselves on the banks of the Rhine. The 
native inhabitants of the right of that river in- 
stantly abandoned their habitations, and collect- 
ing all the boats that could be found on it to the 
opposite side, made a disposition to stop the pas- 
sage of these invaders. 

‘T'he Germans, observing the precautions which 
were taking against them, aftected to lay aside 
the design of passing the Rhine; and, by chang- 
ing their course; made a feint to divert the attention 
of their antagonists. In execution of this pur- 
pose, they eontinued for three days to retire from 
the river. At the end of this time, supposing 
that their opponents would be off their guard, 
and returned to their ordinary way of lite, they 
suddenly turned thetr whole cavatry, and in one 
night repassed the ground over which they had 
marched on the three preceding days, surprised a 
sufficient number of boats with which to accom- 
plish their passage, dislodged the natives of the 
country on the left of the river before them, and 
from thence continued their migrations betwixt 
the Rhine and the Meuse, over what is now 


-called the dutchies of Juliers, of Limburg and 


Luxeniburgh. 
These invaders amounted, by Cesar’s account, 


to upwards of four hundred thousand souls;! a 


number which exceeds that of the mbhabitants of 
any city in Europe, besides London and Pari 
and which may perhaps raise sonie suspicion o 


1 Cæsar de Bell. Gall. lib. iv. e. 15: 


218 


error in copying the text, or of exaggeration in 
the commentary, which was itself intended to 
raise the character of Cesar at Rome. On the 
question relating to the probability of so great a 
number, it may be observed, that those migrating 
nations, certainly unacquainted with many of the 
arts which are practised to supply and accom- 
modate populous cities, were likewise exempt 


from the want of such supplies, and acquiesced’ 


in what was necessary to mere subsistence. Such 
nations have less skill and industry than the 
manufacturer and the trader in a settled and well 
regulated city ; but they have less waste and less 
misapplication of labour to superfluous and un- 
profitable purposes than take place in great cities. 

The German nations of this age, although they 
had opportunities to observe among their neigh- 
bours the advantages of land property, and of 
agriculture supported by skill and industry, yet 
frequently preferred the state of migration, and 
from policy declined making any permanent set- 
tlement, lest the care of property, and the study 
of unnecessary accommodation, should corrupt or 
enervate their people. ‘Their favourite occupation 
was hunting, which they considered as a prepa- 
ration for war. They traversed the woods and 
pasture lands, with numerous herds, and subsist- 
ed chiefly by milk, flesh, and game. They like- 
wise knew the use of corn, of which they some- 
times took a crop from favourable lands; but 
without remaining any longer than one season 
to cultivate any particular portion of ground. _ 

They moved in great and numerous bodies, 
that must to a great extent have covered the face 
of the country over which they passed; but the 
body thus moving together were distinguished 
into separate clans and fraternities, led by their 
headmen or chiefs, who kept order in their seve- 
ral divisions. ‘They allowed private parties to 
make war beyond the limits of their own coun- 
try, and to choose their leaders for this purpose. 
In peace, the separate clans had no hand of con- 
nexion. If they had at any time a general 
government which comprehended the whole of 
their tribes, it was but a temporary expedient, to 
which they had recourse in war, and on other 
pressing occasions. 

Under such equality of condition, every indi- 
vidual, who was of a proper age, was obliged to 
labour for himself, and to subsist by what he 
procured; and he employed his labour only in 
procuring what was necessary, In these circum- 
stances, it was not likely that commodities should 
accumulate; but the numbers of the people, if 
we may rely on the testimony of Cesar in this 
place, or on the evidence of ancient history in 
general, was certainly great.! 

The Suevi, before whom the present invaders 
of Gaul had retired, were said to consist of a 
hundred cantons, each furnishing annually a 
thousand men for war, and a like number for 
the care of their herds and domestic concerns. 
Such clouds gathering on the frontiers of Casar’s 
province, required his presence. He accordingly 
assembled his army, and advanced between the 
Rhine and the Meuse. 

The Germans, in general, were accustomed to 
despise the Gauls, and the present invaders ex- 
pected no formidable opposition on this side of the 


1 Cesar de Bell. Gall. lib. iv. vi. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


; with the Romans. 
: Juries with the sword, not to elude them by ne- 


[Boox IV. 


Rhine; they had ventured to divide their forces, 
and had sent the great body of their horse upon 
an excursion beyond the Meuse to scour the lower 
parts of the country, and upon Cesar’s approach, 
they offered to treat with him. “They neither 
sought (they said) nor would they decline a war 
It was their way to repel in- 


gotiation. But in the present case, they should 
nevertheless condescend so far as to assure the 
Roman general, that they had passed the Rhine 
from necessity, and not with any intention to in- 
vade his province. That if he were pleased to 
receive them as friends, they were in condition 
to merit this title, should be content with the 
ground they had gained, or accept of any other 
which he might choose to assign them.” Cesar 
replied, “' That while they remained in Gaul, he 
could not consider them as friends. That if they 
repassed the Rhine, he had allies in Germany, 
with whom he should endeavour to join them in 
a league of defence against the common enemy, 
by whom they had been thus forced to relinquish 
their usual bounds.” 

Having received this answer, the German de- 
puties, to make their report, and to receive the 
command of their nations, desired a cessation of 
arms for three days. But Cesar suspecting that 
they only meant to amuse him, and to gain time 


' for the junction of all their forces, refused to com- 


ply with this request, and continued his march. 
Being arrived within twelve miles of their camp, 
he was again met by their deputies, with fresh 
intreaties that he would advance no farther, at 
least, that he would give to the cavalry, who made 
the vanguard of his army, orders to abstain from 
hostilities for three days: that in this time, they 
might have an answer from the German nations 
mentioned in their last conference, and know 
whether such a league could be formed, as was 
then proposed, to give them some prospect of 
safety in returning to their usual haunts. 

Cesar, upon this occasion, seems to have 
granted a cessation of arms; though on account 
of what afterwards happened, he is willing to 


‘diminish the extent of his own engagement, and 


to impute the breach of faith which followed to 
his eneniies. He agreed to advance no farther 
than four miles for the convenience of water, and 
sent an order to his vanguard to abstain from 
hostilities. This order, however, had no effect. 
His advanced guard, consisting of five thousand 
horse, had an encounter with eight hundred of 
the enemy. 

‘When this encounter happened, the Germans 
were not yet joined by the great body of their 
horse. They had earnestly sued for a cessation 
of hostilities; it was not likely that they would 
have begun the attack. Yet Cæsar accused them 
of a design, with this small party, to surprise the 
whole of his cavalry. 

On the day which followed this skirmish of 
the cavalry, the leaders and principal men of the 
Germans leaving their own camp unfurnished 
with officers, in perfect security, came in great 
numbers to that of Cesar to exculpate them- 
selves, to convince him of their pacific disposi- 
tions, and to prevent the farther progress of his 
army. This he thought a favourable opportunity 
to cut off, by a complete surprise, this enemy en- 
tirely, and to finish the war. Having accordingly 
secured the persons of their leaders, who had thus 


Cuar. L] 


ut themselves in his hands, he advanced with 

is whole army directly to their camp, easily over- 
came the few that took arms to oppose him, and 
without distinction of sex or age, put the whole 
to the sword. The country, over all the ways 
by which they endeavoured to escape from the 
camp, at which the slaughter began, to the con- 
fluence of the Rhine and the Meuse, was strewed 
with the slain.? 

The Roman people, though seldom sparing of 
the blood of their enemies, were shocked at the 
recital of this extraordinary massacre; and when 
Cæsar, on account of this victory, applied for a 
thanksgiving, and for the usua! honorary decrees 
of the senate, he was charged with having wan: 
tonly invaded the nations of Gaul, and of having 
dishonoured, by an act of treachery, the arms of 
the Republic. It was proposed to deliver up his 


person to those injured nations, that he might. 


expiate, by his own sufferings, so many acts of 
injustice and impiety, which the gods might 
otherwise avenge on his country. 

The German herse, that by their absence had 
escaped this calamity which befel their country- 
men, appear soon after to have repassed the 
Rhine, and to have taken refuge with some of 
the hordes who lived near the sources of the 
Roer and the Lippe. Thither Cesar, to spread 
the terror of his arms, soon afterwards pursued 
them; and passed the river, not in boats and by 
surprise, as the Germans were accustomed to do, 
but in a manner which he seems to have chosen, 
as better suited to the dignity of the Roman state; 
he projected a bridge, which was executed in ten 
days, with much ingenuity, and some ostentation 
of his power and skill. This work being finished, 
he placed proper guards at both its extremities, 
and advanced with the main body of his army 
into the contiguous parts of Germany, where, on 
account of the reception given in that quarter to 
the cavalry who had escaped the late massacre on 
the Meuse, he laid the country under military 
execution. 

Cesar, from the place at which he had passed 
the Rhine, appears to have gone up the eastern 
side of the river, where he visited the Ubii, a na- 
tion inhabiting over against what are now the 
cities of Bonne and Cologn. Here he had in- 
telligence, that the Suevi, a nation consisting, 
as has been observed, of a hundred cantons, and 
mustering two hundred thousand warriors, who 
were divided into two squadrons that took the 
field, and conducted the domestic affairs of the 
mation by turns, were preparing to oppose him; 
that they had actually sent their wives, children, 
and superannuated men into places of safety, 
and had assembled their warriors to meet him. 
This nation, having an ascendant over all the 
cantons of Germany, considered it as a proof of 
their valour, that no nation could pretend to settle 
on the tract of their migrations, or within reach 
of their excursions; and that the country, toa 
great distance around them, was accordingly 
waste. In their own movements, they never 
halted above a year to raise a single crop from 
fields, which, to keep up the martial spirit of 
their ration, and to preclude the desire of pro- 
perty, with the other passions that accompany 
settlement, they successively abandoned. 


2 That branch of the Rhine which falls into the 
Meuse, changes its name for that of Wall. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


219 


Cesar, not being prepared to enter on a war 
with such an enemy, and being sensible that a 
defeat might expose his army to ruin, while even 
a victory could procure him no adequate advan- 
tage, having remained eighteen days on that side 
of the Rhine, and employed no more than twenty- 
eight days in the whole service, chose, while he 
still had the reputation of victory unimpaired, to 
repass that river, and to break down his bridge. 

This singular man, whose abilities were equal 
to any task, and who had no occasion to court 
the public admiration by measures concerted on 
purpose to obtain it, was, nevertheless, not abeva 
ostentation, and gave way to it not only where 
it might contribute to impose on an enemy, but 
even where it would do no more than gratify his 
own vanity, or increase the fame of iis actions 
at Rome. To this motive we may venture to 
impute the design, which, at an advanced season 
of the year, and at the end of the same summer 
in which he had, between the Meuse and the 
Rhine, vanquished the nuinerous army of the 
Tenchteri and Usepetes, in which he had passed 
the Rhine, and insulted the warlike nations of 
Germany, even on their own ground, he now 
projected the invasion of Britain, though sur- 
rounded by the ocean, and untouched by the 
arms of any foreign invader. To carry this de- 
sign into immediate execution, as soon as he had 
repassed the Rhine, he continued his march 
through the low countries, and collected his 
forces in the neighbourhood of the Portus Itius 
and Gesoriacum.3 While we perceive the fea- 
tures of vanity in the leader, we must admire 
the hardiness and vigour of the troops who could 
accomplish these services. 

The extent of this island, the numbers and 
character of its people, were then unknown on 
the continent. Cesar having in vain endeavoured 
to procure information in these particulars, sent 
a galley with orders to explore the coast, and to 
observe the countenance of the natives. He or- 
dered all his shipping, and even those vessels 
which he had employed the preceding year 
against the Veneti,4 to sail round the Cape of 
Britanny into the British channel, and repair to 
the straits which separate this island from the 
continent. 

On the report of these preparations, which 
evidently pointed at Britain, some of the natives, 
willing to avert by negotiation the storm which 
threatened them, sent to the Roman proconsul a 
submissive message, and offered to come under 
his protection. 

Cesar, founding a claim to the possession of 
the island on these advances which were made to 
him, proceeded with more boldness to the execu- 
tion of his enterprise. That the natives of the 
country he was leaving might not create any 
trouble in his absence, T obliged them to give 
hostages, and made a proper disposition of his 
oom to keep them in awe. He had assembled 
at the most convenient haven on the Gaulish 
side, now supposed to be the Wissan, between 
Calais and Boulogne,’ eighty transports or ships 
of burden, with a number of galleys to accommo- 
date the officers of rank, and their equipage. 
The remainder of his shipping was yet detained, 


3 Calais and Boulogne. 
4 In the Bay of Biscay, about Vannes. 
5 See Danville’s Geography of ancient Gaul, 


220 THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION {Boox IV, 


by contrary winds, in a creek at some miles dis-| must perish for want of provisions; and tha 
tance, supposed to be Boulogne; thither he sent | they would, by the example of so vain and ca- 
his cavalry, with orders to „embark on board the | lamitous an attempt, deter every stranger for the 
ships where they lay. He himself went on board, | future from invading their island. 
with the infantry of two legions, at the former} Cæsar, in the mean time, while he employed 
haven, and having found a favourable wind and | all his workmen with the greatest diligence in 
moderate weather, weighed about ten at night, repairing his ships, endeavoured to collect some 
and. reached the coast of Britain, on the following provisions, and to form a magazine. The na- 
day, at ten in the morning. The cliffs, where | tives assembled in great bodies to intercept his 
he first came near to the shore, were high and | foragers, and obliged him to cover them with the 
stvep, and the hills were covered with numerous | whole force of his army: The legions were at 
bodies of foot, of men on horseback, and even in | first greatly disconcerted by the unusual effect of 
wheel carriages, from which the natives of this} the British chariots, and by the want of their 
country were accustomed to make war. It being | own cavalry; but as they prevailed in every 
impossible to land under such difficulties, and in | close fight, the Britons were soon obliged to rè- 
the face of this opposition, he bore away, as it is | new their former submission, and became bound 
probable, to the northward about eight miles, with | to deliver double the number of hostages they 
a favourable wind, to some part of the flat shore! | had formerly stipulated. But Cesar not think- 
which surrounds the Downs; and here, in the | ing it proper, with shattered vessels, at the mercy 
manner of ancient debarkations, for which the | of autumnal winds and stormy seas, to await the 
shipping of those times was built, ran his trans- | performance of this article, ordered the hostages to 
ports aground, and prepared to land. be sent after him into Gaul, re-embarked with his 
In the mean time the Britons, who in their | army, and with the first favourable wind repassed 
march on the hills had kept pace with the Ro-|to the continent. At his arrival, he found that 
man galleys, came down to the strand, and ad- | the Gauls, upon the report of his late misfortunes, 
vanced even some way into the water to oppose | had revolted; that one of his transports, with 
the descent. As the surf on that shore usually | three hundred men on board, having parted with 
runs high, and the Romans, from where their | the fleet, and landing at a separate place, were 
vessels struck, had some way to wade in water | attacked; and that it was necessary to send the 
that was too deep to allow them the free use of | remains of his cavalry to their relief. The Mo- 
their weapons, they remained on board, and durst | rini, inhabiting what are now the districts of 
not meet the enemy under such disadvantages. | Calais and Dunkirk, with other nations of the 
Cesar seeing his men unusually backward, did | low countries, had taken arms against the officers 
not think proper in these circumstances to urge | he had stationed tu keep them in awe. The 
them farther; but ordered some of the lightest | campaign therefore concluded with the operations 
vessels, which were mounted with missile en-| which were necessary to quell this revolt. La- 
gines, or manned with archers and slingers, | bienus subdued the Morini. Quintus, Titurius, 
to row as near to the shore as they could on the | Sabinus, and Lucius Cotta having laid waste 
right and the left of the landing-place, and from | great part of the low countries, fell back to the 
thene to gall the enemy. This disposition suc- | coast. 
ceeded so well, that the beach close to the water| The Roman army was soon after put into win- 
was presently cleared, and the Romans were left | ter quarters: and Cesar, as if sensible that he 
to descend from their ships, and to wade undis- | had made his attempt on Britain with too small 
turbed to the land. a force, and whatever representation he might 
The Britons, seeing their enemy in possession | give ef particulars, had incurred the imputation 
of the shore, offered to surrender, and were about | of a miscarriage, gave orders to refit his fleet, 
to deliver their hostages, when an accident hap-| and to add, during the winter, as many more 
pened, which encouraged them again to take | ships as possible, built upon a construction more 
arms. On the fourth day after the Roman in- | fit for that service, broader, and more capacious 
fantry had landed, a second division of ships, |in the hull, for the reception of men and horses, 
with the cavalry, appeared in sight; but before | and lower in the gunwale, for the convenience of 
they could reach the land, were dispersed by a} landing. The timber was probably taken from 
violent storm; part was driven back on the coast | the neighbouring forests; but the materials of 
of Gaul, part carried down the British channel, | his rigging, it is said, were brought from Spain. 
and cast in distress on the contiguous shores. ] Having taken these measures to enable him at a 
Even the shipping, from which the legions had | more convenient season to renew his expedition 
disembarked, lying aground in the surf, or at an- | into Britain, he set out as usual for Italy, and for 
chor in a high sea and spring-tide, with which the | the neighbourhood of Rome. 
Italians were unacquainted, were set adrift, or| Here he found Pompey and Crassus employed, 
filled with water, many of them beat to pieces or | as has been already related, in obtaining for them- 
greatly shattered, and rendered unserviceable. selves, and for him, the Preach they had 
By these misfortunes, Cæsar, although he had | severally in view. Crassus had fixed his thoughts 
made no provision to subsist for the winter in | on the treasures of the est, and projected the sale 
Britain, was in danger of being obliged to remain | of kingdoms, of which he hoped to have the dispo- 
in it for want of shipping. The natives retracted | sal in that part of the world. Pompey too was na 
their late submission, began to drive away the ] tified in his wishes, had got the command of an 
cattle, and to lay waste the country within reach | army and the patronage of a great province, 
of the Roman camp. They flattered themselves | while he continued at Rome to enjoy his con- 


that the enemy would be obliged to depart, or] sideration, and was vested with a species of 
-— | monarchy, in wielding the united powers of the 


party. Cæsar had provided, what he knew in 
the end was to decide every controversy, a great 


1 Planum et apertum littus. See Cesar’s Commen- 
tarles. 


Cuar. L] 


army, inured to service, and in a station which 
gave an easy access to Italy, and the command 


of Rome. As if secure of their interests, they 

permitted the election of consuls to 
U. C. 699, proceed without disturbance; and 

suffered Lucius Domitius Aheno- 
ce. barbus, a professed partizan of the 
bus, App. Senate, together with Appius Clau- 
Claud. Pul- dius, to be elected consuls; Marcus, 
cher. Cato, and Milo, to be placed in the 


_ listof pretors; and several citizens, 
well affected to the senate, to be admitted into 
the college of tribunes. 

The winter and spring, however, wete inac- 
tive on the part of the aristocracy. Cato, proba- 
bly, did not see any public object in which to en- 
sage with advantage beyond the duties of his 
office, in which he endeavoured to restrain by 
his authority, and by his example, the extrava- 
vance and luxury of the age. The dangerous 
powers which had been recently granted to per- 
sons, from whose ambition the republic had much 
to fear, no doubt greatly alarmed the senate ; but 
this body, though led by Demitius, one of the 
consuls, by Cato and Milo, two of the prætors, 
and supported by many of the tribunes, did not 


think themselves entitled to dispute the validity | 


of those grants, nor to attempt the revocation 
of what had been so recently confirmed by the 
people. f 

Pompey, now master of Spain and part of 
Africa, with an adequate army, still under the 
pretence, as has been mentioned, of lis com- 
mission to furnish the public granarics with corn, 
remained in Italy, and passed the greater part of 
his time among his country villas, executing the 
duties of general purveyor with the assistance of 
his lieutenants, and managing his intrigues in 
the city by means of his agents and friends. He 
was attended by numbers of every rank and 
condition, who resorted to him with the assiduity 
of real courtiers, and with a servility, which, in 
a republic, implied the utmost corruption of man- 
ners. He even maintained the appearances of 
royalty in the state which he assumed, as well 
as in the influence he acquired. While he 
himself affected reserve and moderation, in order 
to appear worthy of his rank, his retainers ever 
treated him as a great prince, and with his con- 
nivance fomented disorders tending to shake the 
government of the senate; to the end that the 
republic might be foreed to rely on him for 
support, while he himself aflected to decline the 
burden. 

In the management of these intrigues, and in 
the full hopes of their success, Pompey was now 
left by Crassus, as well as by Cesar. ‘The first, 
in his impatience to take possession of his govern- 
ment, had broken through all the impediments 
that were placed to hinder his departure from 
Rome, made haste to Brundusium with his army, 
embarked, notwithstanding the unfavourableness 
of the season, and with considerable loss, both of 
men and of shipping in a storm, made his pas- 
sage into Macedonia. The prohibition of the 
prætor still sounded in his ears. He dreaded a 
vote of the senate or people to recall his com- 
mission, It appears, that soon after his departure, 
a motion liad been actually made for this purpose; 
and that Cicero, though formerly on ul terms 
with Crassus, being taught by his late sufferings 
te court the favour of those who could either hurt 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


221 


or protect him, appeared on this question in his 
favour, and claimed a share in the merit of ob- 
taining the decision that was given to confirm 
his commission.2 

But without attending to the state of these de- 
liberations at Rome, Crassus continued his march 
by Macedonia and the Hellespont into Asia. In 
passing through Galatia, finding Dejotarus, sove- 
reign of that principality, then of an advanced 
age, occupied in a work that is becoming at every 
age, building a new city, and making a settle- 
ment for more people; he is said to have ob- 
served to the prince, that it was somewhat too 
late, at his age, to form projects of new settle- 
ments; “nor are you very early,” replied the 
other, “in your undertaking the conquest in 
Parthia.” 

Crassus was turned of sixty, and having ever 
considered riches as the surest means of arriving 
at eminence and power, now joined, to the ra- 
pacity of a youthful ambition, the avarice of age. 
Upon his arrival in Syria, he pillaged the temple 
of the Jews, and laid hold of treasure wherever 
else he could find it. He made a pretence of the 
military levies to be made in the provinces for ex- 
torting money; and afterwards, reserving the 
money he had raised for his own use, neglected 
the levies. He required of the different districts 
of his province, and of the neighbouring allies, 
large quotas of men, and military stores, merely 
that they might buy exemptions with proportional 
sums of money.3 In the same spirit of avarice 
and rapacity, he invaded the Parthians without 
any authority from the state, and even without 
the pretence of a quarrel. 

The Parthians, like other dynasties which be- 
fore or since have arisen in that part of the world, 
or in the neighbourhood of the Euphrates and 
the Tigris, were of Scythian extraction. On the 
decline of the Macedonian power, about two 
hundred years before the present date, a swarm 
from the north had migrated to the lower banks 
of the Tigris, overran the country round Ctesi- 
phon, continued to harass the neighbourhood by 
their depredations ; and, at last, being commanded 
by Arsaces, the founder of this new kingdom, 
took possession of an extensive country, and 
though under a new name, in fact restored the 
monarchy of Persia.4 

The Parthian, or new Persian monarchy, 
being yet in its vigour, was the miost formidable 
power that now any where appeared within 
reach of the Roman arms. Its forces consisted 
alinost entirely of horse. Part intended for regu- 
lar charges, cased in heavy armour, and using 
the lance; part mounted in a lighter manner for 
expedition and swiftness, and using the bow. 
While in the field they were attended by herds of 
spare horses, which they pastured, or drove in the 
rear of their armies. With this supply, upon any 
occasional loss, they new-mounted their cavalry, 
or, having reliefs of fresh horses, performed 
amazing marches, and frequently presented them- 
selves to their enemies, where it was not expected 
they could appear. ‘They had different notions 
of victory and defeat from other nations; they 
always counted it a victory, when, by their flights, 
they drew an enemy into straits by hasty and 


2 Cicero ad Famil. ib. v ep. 8. ad Crassum. 
3 Plut. in Crasso, 11. Dio. Cass. lib. iv. c. 13. 
4 Justin. lib. Ixi. Dio. Cass. lib. xl, xli. 


222 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor 1V. 


unguarded pursuits,! and often enjoyed the great- | who, being jealous of each other, made their sub- 


est advantage when they seemed to be routed and. 


to fly. 

When Crassus advanced to the Euphrates, 
Orodes king of Parthia, then engaged in a war 
with Artabazes, on the side of Armenia, sent a 
deputation to expostulate with the Roman gene- 
ral on the cause of his hostile approach ; Crassus 
made answer, that he would give the reasons of 
his coming when he arrived at Seleucia, “ here,” 
said one of the Parthian messengers (showing the 
palm of his hand,) “hair will grow before you 
shall arrive at Seleucia.” Crassus proceeded in 
his march, passed the Euphrates, and ravaged 
Mesopotamia without any resistance. Having 
continued his operations until the end of the 
season, he returned for the winter into Syria.? 
Upon his arrival in this province, he was joined 
by his son Publius, who had served some years in 
a considerable rank in the army in Gaul, and was 
now detached by Cesar with a thousand horse, 
and many marks of honour, to act under his 
father in Syria. 

This invasion of Mesopotamia, after the season 
had become far spent, served only to alarm and 
provoke the enemy, without procuring any ad- 
vantage to the arms of the Romans; and hostili- 
ties were likely to proceed in the spring with 
great animosity, when Crassus was to prosecute 
the war which he had thus commenced on such 
dangerous ground. 

Cesar, in the mean time, found continual occu- 
pation for his troops in Gaul, or in the neighbour- 
hood of that province. He himself, with his usual 
activity, having been in Italy in the-beginning of 
winter, and having conferred with the persons 
with whom he entrusted the management of his 
affairs at Rome, proceeded to Illyricum, upon a 
report, that this part of his province was infested 
by the incursions of the Pyrustæ, a warlike tribe 
on the frontier. Upon bis arrival, the invaders 
withdrew, and were disowned by their nation. 
The state denied, that they had ever given a 
commission to make war on the Roman province, 
became bound for the future to restrain the depre- 
dations of private adventurers, and gave hostages 
for the observance of this article. 

Early in spring, Cesar returned from this ex- 
pedition to the quarters of his army in the low 
countries, and found, that in consequence of the 
-orders he had given at the end of the preceding 
campaign, no less than six hundred transport 
vessels, and twenty-eight galleys, were actually 
built in different harbours from Ostend to Bou- 
‘longe, and in a few days might be ready for sea. 
He accordingly ordered them to be launched, and 
-directed the whole to assemble at the same port 
from which he sailed on the preceding year, in 
order to receive the army on their intended inva- 
sion of Britain. But, before his departure, being 
informed that certain nations on the Moselle 
were meditating a revolt, and were soliciting the 
Germans to come over the Rhine to their assist- 
ance, to the end that he might not leave any ene- 
my on foot in his rear, and that he might <ecure 
the peace of Gaul in his absence, he marched to 
the Moselle with four legions and eight hundred 
horse. Upon his arrival he had the good fortune 
to find the people divided between two leaders, 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xl. c. 15. 
2 Dio. lib. xl. Plut. in Crasso. 


mission separately, and gave the necessary hos- 
tages as a pledge for their future behaviour. 

With these securities, Cæsar returned to the 
coast, found all his armed galleys and five hun- 
dred and sixty of his transports actually assem- 
bled; the other forty transports had been put 
back by contrary winds, and were still retained 
at the port at which they had been built. The 
force intended for this expedition to Britain con- 
sisted of five legions, amounting possibly, on the 
probable supposition that they were not complete, 
to about twenty thousand men,? together with a 
body of Gauls, including many of their chiefs, 
whom Cæsar chose to retain with his army, ra- 
ther as hostages for the fidelity of their country- 
men, than as auxiliaries in the war. The fleet 
consisted of five hundred and sixty transport ves- 
sels, twenty-eight armed galleys, with many ten- 
ders and small craft, provided by officers for their 
own conveniency, and for the reception of their 
equipages; in all eight hundred sail. 

The wind being northerly for five-and-twenty 
days‘ after ‘the fleet was assembled, the troops 
still remained on shore, At the expiration of this 
time the wind changed, and the troops began to 
embark, but were suddenly: interrupted by the 
desertion of a Gaulish chief, who, being averse to 
the service, thought this a favourable opportunity 
to disengage himself with his followers. Cesar 
considered this desertion as a declaration of war, 
and being sensible of the danger he might incur 
in case of any disaster, by having such enemies in 
his rear, suspended the embarkation, and sent a 
party of horse in pursuit of the fugitive, who, 
being overtaken, was killed in attempting to de- 
fend himself. His followers were brought back 
and obliged to embark for Britain. 

On the return of the party employed in this 
service the embarkation proceeded, and being 
completed at sunset of the same day, the wind 
being still fair, the fleet weighed, and got into the 
channel; but the wind soon after having failed, 
or shifted more to the west, and the tide being 
set to the northward, they were carried a consider- 
aple way in that direction past the port for which 
they had steered. At day-break, they saw the 
land of Britain on their left, and seemed to leave 
some conspicuous part of the island, probably the 
south foreland, astern: but with the turn of the 
tide, and the help of their oars, they arrived at 
noon ata convenient part of the coast not far dis- 
tant from the landing-place of the former year, 
but less exposed to the sea. This place we may 
suppose to have been Pigwell Bay, beyond tne 
mouth of the Stour, or the entry to Sandwich 
Haven.5 


i 3 The legions, at the end of this campaign, were te- 
duced to 3.500. 
4 See Cæsar’s Commentaries. i 
5 Mr. d’Anville, on a supposition that Cesar must 
have passed into Britain by the shortest possible line, 
fixes upon Hith, about eight miles west of Dover, as 
the place of his landing in his first invasion of Britain, 


‘and, consequentlyyon some other contiguous part as 


the place of his landing in the second invasion; but 
this does not agree, either with the description of the 
coast, being planum et apertum littus, or with the se- 
quel of the story, which places some such river as 
the Stour to be passed in his march, about twelve 
miles from the shore. The coast at Hith, though not 
altogether inaccessible, is steep and hilly, and would 
have exposed Cesar to difficulties in his first opera- 


Cuar. l] 


The Britons had assembled as formerly to op- 
pose the descent of the Romans; but, on the 
appearance of so great a fleet, were intimidated, 
and withdrew from the coast. 

Cæsar, flattering himself that he had found a 
safer road for his ships than that at which he had 
stationed them in the preceding year, left his fleet 
at anchor, and guarded against any attempts of 
the natives by a body of ten cohorts and three 
hundred horse, that were properly entrenched on 
the shore. Being informed that the Britons had 
their forces assembled on a small river (probably 
the Stour), at the distance of ten or twelve miles 
from his landing-place, he put his army in motion 
in the night, and at break of day came up with 
them, dislodged them from their post, and obliged 
them to withdraw to a place of retreat in that 
neighbourhood, which, on occasion of their own 
wars, had been fortified in their manner with a 
moat, and ramparts of wood. ‘To reduce them in 
this strong hold, he erected some works, and made 
regular approaches; but as he had not invested 
the place, the only effect of his attack was, to 
force the enemy to abandon it, and to continue 
their retreat. He had taken his resolution to 

ursue tlem on the following day, and had begun 
his march in three divisions, when it appeared, 
that the element which is the safeguard of Bri- 
tain, though not always sufficient to keep its ene- 
mies at a distance, yet is subject to accidents 
which render the attempt of invaders very diffi- 
cult, and their condition, even when on shore, 
sufficiently hazardous. ‘To this purpose a mes- 
senger overtook Cæsar on his march with tidings, 
that all his ships, in a storm which arose in the 
preceding night, had been driven from their an- 
chors, had run foul of each other, that many of 
them were stranded and wrecked, and all of them 
greatly damaged. 

Cæsar, on this report, suspended his march, 
and, having fixed the main body of his army in 
a well-fortified camp; he himself, with a proper 
escort, returned to the coast. At his arrival, he 
found that forty of his ships were irrecoverably 
lost; but that the remainder, though greatly da- 
maged, might be refitted. For this purpose he 
gave orders in his army, that all who had been 
instructed in the trade of a carpenter should re- 
pair to the sea-port to be employed in refitting 
the fleet; he called many workmen likewise froin 
Gaul, and gave directions for building a number 
of new vessels on different parts of that coast; 
and to guard, for the future, against such acci- 
dents as had lately befallen his ships, he ordered 
that they should be drawn on shore. In this 
work the army was incessantly einployed for ten 
days, and without intermission even in the night. 
The fleet, at length, being in this manner secured 
from the dangers of the sea, and covered by an 
entrenchment on the side of the land, he returned 
to his camp, and resumed the operations of his 
army. 

It appears that the natives of Britain, being 
divided into many small cantons, or separate 
principalities, and, as usual in such cases, fre- 
quently at war among themselves, had been ac- 
tually at variance when Cesar arrived; but, 
during the short respite which the disaster that 
had befallen his fleet had given them, that they 


tions on shore, which he could not possibly have omit- 
ted to mention 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


223 


had agreed to suspend their own quarrels, and 
were assembled in greater numbers than formerly, 
under Cassivelaunus, a chieftain of Middlesex, 
or, as Cesar describes him, a prince residing on 
the northern banks of the Thames, and at about 
seventy or eighty miles from the sea. 

This chieftain brought into the field a nume- 
rous army of infantry, of horsemen, and armed 
chariots. His knowledge of the woods enabled 
him to harass the Romans on their march, and, 
following the tracts that were clear of underwood, 
not only to gall them with missiles from the 
thickets, but to charge them likewise with his 
horsemen and chariots, even in places where the 
ground seemed least fitted for the movement of 
such bodies. Encouraged with his success in 
this species of warfare, he ventured to attack the 
whole cavalry of the Roman army, which, being 
on a foraging party, were supported by an entire 
legion. But the Britons being, in this attempt, 
defeated with great slaughter, their chief lost 
courage, or was deserted by his followers, and 
never more attempted to face the Romans. 

Cesar, finding this enemy remit his ardour, 
advanced with a quicker pace. From his silence 
on the subject of any difficulty in passing the 
Medway, we must suppose him to have followed 
the vale of the Stour to Ashford, and from thence 
to have kept on the plains to Maidstone, near to 
which place the river Medway is everywhere 
naturally fordable; and from the length of his 
march, being about cighty miles from the sea, 
when he came upon the banks of the Thames, 
we may suppose him to have arrived on that river 
at the reach which runs from south to north, 
somewhere between Kingstone and Brentford. 
There he observes, tha®the only ford in the river 
was fenced and guarded; that a row of sharp 
stakes was driven under water; that the opposite 
bank was lined with a palisade, and manned by 
a numerous body of the natives. He neverthe- 
less proceeded to force his way, and by the im- 
petuosity of his attack, drove the enemy from 
their post, and, without any loss, effected his 
passage, although his men were obliged to wade 
up to the chin. 

Cassivelaunus had, for some time, made no 
attempt to resist the Roman army; he had con- 
tented himself with observing their motions, and 
with endeavouring to strip the country before 
them of every particular by which they could 
profit on their march. Cesar, on his part, ad- 
vanced with the precautions necessary against 
such an enemy, and, as they had destroyed what 
could be of immediate use to his army, he de- 
stroyed what was left, in order to force the na- 
tives to submission. In this state of the war, 
having leisure and opportunity to observe the 
condition of the country and the manners of the 
people, he gives the following account of both: 
“That on the coast there were colonies from the 
neighbouring continent, still distinguished by the 
names of the countries from whence they had 
come; that these colonies being possessed of agri- 
culture, and well stocked with cattle, were ex- 
tremely populous; that they had money made of 
iron or brass; the first of which metals, with great 
quantities of tin, were found in their own island ; 
the other metal was imported from abroad; that 
the winter was milder here than in Gaul; that 
the woods of Britain furnished the same timber 

| with those of Goul, except the firand the beech ; 


224 


and that the houses were built in the same man- 
ner in’ both countries.” From this account of 
the coast he proceeds to observe, “ That the in- 
land parts were occupied by the original natives, 
who, with little corn, subsisted chiefly by milk 
and the other produce of their herds; that, by a 
pangs superstition, although possessed of 

ares, of geese, and other fowls, they were forbid 
to eat of these animals; that they were curious in 
the ornaments of the person; affected to have 
bushy whiskers, and long hair; that they stained 
or painted their bodies of a blue colour, and had 
no clothes besides the skins of beasts; that they 
associated in small clubs or fraternities of ten or 
a dozen in number.” Andadds a circumstance 
im which, if he were not deceived, as is common 
enough to foreigners, by some appearances which 
were not sufficiently explained to him, he givesa 
striking example of the diversity which takes 
place among mankind in settling the canon of 
external actions. The brothers, the father, and 
the son, though separately married, and reputed 
the parents of children, brought forth by their 
respective wives, yet, without jealousy or im- 
putation of evil, lived with those wives in com- 
mon.! 

Cesar, being on the left of the Thames, made 
an alliance with the Trinobantes, suppesed to 
have been the inhabitants of Essex and Suffolk. 
The sovereign of this canton having, in some 
quarrel with his own people, been expelled from 
his dominion, had taken refuge with Cesar 
in Gaul, and was now, by force of the Roman 
arms, restored to his kingdom. Five other prin- 
cipalities made their submission at the same time. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox IV. 


Cassivelaunus retired to kis principal fortress, 
which, consisting of a palisade and a ditch situated 
in the least accessible part of the woods, was by 
the natives, as Cæsar is pleased to express him- 
self, called a town, and was in reality, in case of 
alarm, a place of retreat for themselves and their 
cattle. On the approach and attack of Cesar on 
one side, Cassivelaunus retired by an outlet on 
the other, leaving some herds of cattle, and many 
of his men, to fall into the enemy’s hand. . 

After this defeat, the British prince endeavoured, 
as a last resource, to give Cesar some trouble in 
his rear; and for this purpose sent an order to 
the four princes of Kent, to assemble their people, 
and endeavour to force the Roman station, and 
destroy the Roman shipping, where they lay on 
the coaste They accordingly attacked the in- 
trenchment, but were repulsed ; and Cassivelaunus 
himself, reduced to despair by the defection of so 
many of his countrymen, and by his repeated de- 
feats, determined to make his submission. The 
season of the year being far advanced, and Cesar, 
desirous to retire with honour from a country in 
which he was not prepared to make any settle- 
ments, accepted this on easy terms. 

A certain tribute was imposed on the nations 
inhabiting the banks of the Thames, hostages 
taken for the payment of it, and the invaders, 
with a numerous assemblage of prisoners, then 
the only or principal spoils of this island, retired 
to their ships, which, not being sufficient to re- 
ceive them at one embarkation, were obliged to 
return for a second; and in this way succes- 
sively, without any material accident, transported 
the whole of the Roman army into Gaul. 


CHAPTER II. 


Death of Julia the daughter of Cæsar and the wife of Pompey— Trial of Gabinius— Detection 
of an infamous Transaction of Memmius and Ahenobarbus—Revolt of the Low Countries— 
Military Execution against the Inhabitants of the Country between the Rhine and the Meuse— 
Operations of Crassus in Mesopotamia—His Death—Competition for the Consulate—Death of 
Clodius—Riot in the City—Pompey sole Consul— Trial ef Milo. 


WHILE the Roman army was in Britain, 
there happened, by the death of Julia, the daugh- 
ter of Caesar and the wife of Pompey, a great 
change in the discontinuance of the relation 
which subsisted between them, and in the sepa- 
ration of their supposed political interests. The 
connection which then came to be dissolved, had 
been devised as a bond of confederacy between 
= whose interfering objects of ambition must 

ave otherwise, on many occasions, excited their 
mutual jealousy. Neither the father-in-law, nor 
the son, was likely to sacrifice his ambition to 
mere aflection, but each may have expected, that 
the other should be, in some degree, the dupe of 
his relation, and should abate a little of the jea- 
lousy to which he was, by his situation and his 
objects, so naturally inclined. This passion, 
however, we may believe was far from having 
been extinguished in the mind of either. ‘The 
choice which Pompey made of Spain for his pro- 
vince, with a military command fora term of five 


1 See Cesar’s Commentaries on his last expedition 
to Britain. 


years, probably proceeded from a desire to retain 
his superiority over Cæsar; and to have in his 
power, tn case of a breach between them, a pro- 
vince, though less contiguous to Italy than that 
which was held by Cesar, not less fitted to fur- 
nish formidable armies and the resources of war. 

Notwithstanding these effects of jealousy, while 
the familiar relation of father-in-law and son sub- 
sisted between Cesar and Pompey, and while 
Crassus continued to hold a species of balance in 
their councils, they seemed to acquiesce in a par- 
ticipation of consequence and power. But the 
death of Julia, and that likewise of the child of 
which she had been delivered only a few days 
before her death, put an end, not only to any 
real cordiality in this connection, but even to any 
semblance of friendship, and rendered them, from 
this time forward, mutually jealous of the advan- 
tages they severally gained, whether in respect 
to force in the provinces, or to state and popu- 
larity at Rome. T 

It is observed, that, from this date, Cæsar be- 
came more than formerly attentive to reports 
from the city, and more careful of his intelligence 


Cuar. Il] 


from thence ;2 and that he endeavoured to gain 
every person who might be of consequence in de- 
ciding the contest which he perceived must arise. 
Among these he paid his court in particular to 
Cicero, who was likely, about this time, to devote 
himself to Pompey, and whom he wished, at 
least, to keep in suspense between them : for this 
urpose, as appears from their correspondence, 
A applied, as usual, to his vanity, and, while he 
was piercing the woods of Britain in pursuit of 
Cassivelaunas and his painted followers,’ affected 
to read and to admire verses which were sent to 
him by a person much more esteemed for his 
prose than his poetry. i 

The Roman army had been tempted into Britain 
by the hopes of finding mines of silver, but were 
disappointed; for, besides slaves, they found no 
booty in that island. Such probably likewise 
were the principal spoils of Gaul; yet we find 
their gencral, in consequence of his conquests in 
that country, enabled to expend great sums in 
supporting his influence at Rome. While Pom- 
pey procured his own appointment to the com- 
mand of an army, in order to keep pace with 
Cesar in the provinces, Cesar, in his turn, 
projected public works at Rome to vie with the 
magnificence of Pompey, and with that of other 
citizens, who made such works a part of their 
policy, to gain the people. For this purpose 
Cesar proposed to build a Basilica,4 and to 
enlarge the forum, at an expense of six millions 
Roman money, or about fifty thousand pounds ; 
to rail in the field of Mars with marble ballis- 
ters, and to surround the whole with a colonade 
or portico extending a thousand paces, or about 
a mile. 

In these several works Cæsar affected to con- 
sult or to employ Cicero in a manner which flat- 
tered his vanity, and renewed his hopes of being 
able also to direct his councils,5 in what related to 
matters of state. 

In the mean time, parties in the city, though 
engaged on the side of different competitors for 
office at the approaching elections, were likewise 
intent on the cause of Gabinius. This officer, 
while yet in his province, had heen impeached 
for disobeying the orders of the senate, and for con- 
tempt of religion in his expedition to Egypt. But 
having, by the influence of Pompey, and of Cæsar, 
eluded his first attack, he set out for Rome in 
great confidence, and, on his journey, gave out, 
that he was to demand a triumph. But, upon 
his approach to the city, hearing in what manner 
the senate and people were affected towards him, 
he thought proper to make his entry in the night; 
and being arrived, on the eighteenth of Septem- 
ber, did not even venture to appear in the senate 
for ten days. No less than three prosecutions 
were preparing against him; for treason, for ex- 
tortion in his province, and for other crimes. 
The first day on which he presented himse'f in 
the senate, the consuls, when he would have 
withdrawn, commanded him to stay. And, hav- 
ing called the farmers of the revenue from Syria, 
who attended with a complaint from the province, 
bid them state their charge. 


2 Cicero ad Quint. frat. lib ii. ep. 15. et lib. iii. ep. F. 
3 Ibid. Jib. ii. ep. ult. Ad Atticuin, lib. iv. ep. 16. 
4 What the Romans called a Basilica or palace, was 
a kind of exchange, containing porticoes for mer- 
chants, and other public accommodations. 
5 Cicero ad Att. lib. iv. ep. 16. 
2K 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


` were so strongly tempted to commit. 


225 


An altercation ensued, in which Cicero, mind- 
ful of the injuries he had received trom Gabinins, 
took a principal part against him, and pronounced 
an invective, which the other returned with the 
abusive appellation of fugitive, in allusion to his 
late exile.6 Yet, soon after, when this criminal 
was brought to trial for extortion in his province, 
Cicero, as will afterwards be mentioned, under- 
took, at the solicitation of Pompey, to appear in 
his defence. 

Before this trial for extortion took place, C. 
Memmius, one of the tribunes, on the ninth of 
October delivered to the people, with great force, 
a charge of treason against Gabinius.? The 
judgment of the tribes being called, and sentence 
of condemnation likely to pass, while the lictors 
were preparing to scize their prisoner, his son, a 
young man, with much filial piety, a virtue highly 
esteemed by the Romans, threw himself at the 
feet of the tribune, and being rudely spurned on 
the ground, happened to drop his ring, the badge 
of Roman nobility; the spectators were moved ; 
Lelius Balbus, another of the tribunes, interposed, 
and, with the general approbation of the people, 
commanded the process to stop.8 

The other prosecutions nevertheless were con- 
tinued against Gabinius. One before the prætor 
Alfius, in which, though the majority of the 
judges voted to acquit, there were twenty-two, 
out of seventy, who voted guilty. Another be- 
fore Cato, on a charge of depredation in his pro- 
vince, to the amount of quater millies, four 
hundred millions Roman money, or about three 
millions sterling ; in this last was condemned, and 
forced into exile. At this trial, Pompey and 
Cesar continued to employ their influence in his 
favour. And Cicero, althongh he had hitherto 
treated Gabinius as the author of his own exile, 
being reconciled to Pompey and Cesar, no longer 
continued at variance with a person, who had 
heen no more than their tool or instrument in 
procuring his misfortunes, and condescended, ou 
this occasion, though ineffectually, to plead his 
cause, !0 

The approaching elections gave rise to compe- 


_titions and intrigues more connected with the 


state of the republic, and more an indication of 
the manners which then prevailed. ‘Che poorer 
citizens came to depend for their subsistence on 
the distributions of corn and other gratuities, 
which were made or procured by those who 
courted popularity, or who aspired to the offices 
of state. Corruption became every day more 
flagrant and less disguised ; and the laws against 
bribery were losing their force for want of per- 
sons to prosecute a crime, of which so many 
either wished to reap the benefit, or which many 
Tosupply 
this defect, Cato moved in the senate, that every 
one clected into office should be subjected to an 
inquest, evén if uo one should prosecute ;!! and 
actually obtained an edict, requiring the ordinary 
judges, that were named for trials within the 
year, to take cognizance of the means by which 
candidates succeeded to office; and to set those 
aside who were found to have incurred the penal- 


6 Cicero ad Quint. frat. lib. iii. 

8 Val. Max. lib. viii. c. 1. 

9 Cicero ad Att. lib. iv. ep. 16 

10 Dio. lib. xxxix. c. 63. Cicero ad Quint. frat. 
lib. iii. ep. 1 et 3. 

11 Plutarch. Cicero ad Att. lib. iv. <p. 16. 


7 Ibid. 


A 


226 


ties of corruption.! The tribunes interposed their 
negative, or suspended the effect of this resolu- 
tion, until an act of the people should be obtained 
to confirm it. ‘The proposal gave great offence 
to the parties concerned; and Cato, being at- 
tacked by the populace, narrowly escaped with 
his life. He afterwards, in a full assembly of the 
more respectable citizens, was favourably heard 
on this- subject. But Terentius, one of the tri- 
bunes, still persisting in his negative, this at-. 
tempt to restrain the corrupt practices of those 
who canvassed for office had no effect. 

The candidates: themselves, in the mean’ tıme, 
if each could have trusted the laws for restraining 
others, as well as himself, from the practice of 
ae money; or if any number of them could 
nave relied upon an agreement to be entered into 
among themselves to refrain from it, would, it is 
probable, have been glad to be relieved from an 
abuse which rendered their pretensions so ex- 
pensive and so precarious. oved by these con- 
siderations, candidates for the office of the tribune 
entered into an agreement not to bribe, and deposit- 
ed each a sum of money? in the hands of Cato, to 
be forfeited by any person who should be found 
acting in contravention to their treaty. One of 
them, however, was detected in giving money, 
and accordingly forfeited his pledge. 

In. the competition for the consulate, corruption 
was carried to the greatest excess. An office 
was opened, at which the candidates dealt out 
money to the people, who came in the order of 
their tribes to receive it.4 A gratuity of ten mil- 
lions of sesterces,5 was offered to any person who 
should secure the vote of the first century, or, as 
it was called, the Prerogativa. The demand for 
money to be employed in this species of traflic 
became so great, that by the first of July, interest 
rose from four to eight per cent.6 All the four 
candidates, Memmius, M.. Scaurus, Cn. Domi- 
tius, and M. Messala, mutually raised prosecu- 
tions for bribery against each other; and in the 
course of these transactions, it appeared that Caius 
Memmius, once a vehement partizan of the senate, 
had made his peace with Cesar, and was now 
supported by his party at Rome. 

Meminius, it may be remembered, having been 
prætor at the expiration of Cæsars consulate, |. 
brought a charge of high misdemeanour in office 
against him. And Cesar appeared for some time 
to resent this attack; but was in reality as little 
to be diverted from his purpose by resentment, as 
he was by affection, and knew how to choose his 
friends from among those who had the resolution 
to provoke, as well as from among those who in- 
clined to serve him. Cesar accordingly made 
use of this opportunity to separate Memmius 
from the rest of his enemies, and by his means 
brought to light a scene of corruption, in which 
Memmius himself, with other professed sup- 
porters of the senate, had been concerned, and 


which furnished Cesar, and the supposed popular | 


party, with a great triumph against these pre- 
tenders to purity and public virtue. 7 
It appeared that, among other irregularities at 


ł Cicero ad Att. hb. iv. ep. 16. 

2 Quingena, 500,090 Roman money, abont 40007, 

3 Plutarch. Cicero ad Att. lib. iv. ep. 15 ad Quint. 
frat. lib. ii. c. 12. 

4 Ad Att. lib. iv. ep. 17. 5 About 80,0002. 

6 Ad Qiint. frat lib ii. ep. 15. Idibus quintilibus | 


fenus fuit bessibus ex tricite. | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor IV 


Rome in the administration of government, even 
laws, and supposed'acts of the senate or people, 
could be forged or surreptitiously obtained. The 
present consuls, Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, 
and Ap. Claud. Pulcher, entered into a compact 
with those two who were candidates to: succeed 
them, Caius Memmius and C. Domitius Calvi- 
nus: the two first, to secure their own nomina- 
tion to lucrative provinces at the expiration of 
their consulship: the two others now standing 
for this office, to secure their elections. The 
parties agreed to furge an edict of the senate and 
of the: people, fixing’ the consular provinces. And 
a sum of money was deposited by the candidates 
in the hands of the consuls, to be forfeited, if they 
did not support this forgery, with the evidence of 
three augurs, who should vouch for the passing 
of the law in the assembly of the people, and two 
senators of consular dignity, who should swear 
they were present when this allotment of pro- 
vinces was confirmed by the senate, although it 
was notorious that no meeting of the senate had 
been held for this purpose. 

Memmius being gained by the parties of Cæ- 
sar and Pompey, was persuaded to sacrifice his 
own reputation in order to ruin that of Domitius 
Ahenobarbus. He laid this strange agreement, 
which had been drawn up in writing, together 
with the bonds which had been granted upon it, 
before the senate. Appius Claudius braved the 
detection ; but Ahenobarbus, professing himself 
to be of a party which contended for purity and 
reformation of manners, incurred mak disgrace 
and reproach. 

From this transaction it should appear, not 
only that the assemblies of the people were ex- 
tremely irregular and tumultuary, and might be 
made up of such persons as were by any party 
purposely brought to the comitium; but that even 
the meetings of the senate might be packed ; that 
their proceedings were carelessly recorded, and 
might be easily forged. The numbers required 
to form a comitium or assembly of the people not 
being fixed, any convention of persons brought 
from any part of Italy, occupying the usual place 


~ 


of assembly, might take upon them the designa- 


tion and powers of the Roman people; and as the 
fluctuating sovereignty of the people by this 
means passed from one party to another, its or- 
ders were often surreptitious and contradictory, 
and every law might be considered: as the mandate 
ofa party or faction, not as the will of the commu- 
nity.” Great as these disorders were, there were 
at all times numerous parties who had an interest 
in the continuance of them; and the age, though 


‘suffering under the most grievous abuses, was 


still more averse to the necessary reformations. 

The infamy of this recent transaction produced 
a delay of the elections, until the term of the 
present consuls in office was expired. An inter- 
regnum accordingly ensued. ‘The partizans of 
Pompey hinted the necessity of naming a dicta- 
tor. He himself affected great reserve, in expec- 
tation that when the present troubles came to 
their height, the powers necessary to suppress 
them would, by general consent, be pressed into 
his hands. 

In the mean time, Cesar, whose councils had 
so great a share in determining these events, was 
detained in the northern parts of Gaul, and was 


- 


7 Dion. Cassius, lib. xxxix. c. 65. 


Ouar. IL] 


9bliged, contrary to his usual practice, to pass the 
whole winter on this side of the Alps. On his 
return from Britain, finding that the harvest in 
Gaul had been unfavourable, he was tempted, in 
order to facilitate the subsistence of his army, to 
extend his quarters much farther than had been 
his ordinary practice. Labienus, with one divi- 
sion, was sent to the Moselle; Titurius Sabinus, 


with another, to the neighbourhood of the Meuse, : 


near to what are now the districts of Liege and 
Maestricht. Quintus Cicero was posted on some 
of the branches of the Scheld or the Sambre, in 
the county of Hainault. And the whole army, 
by this disposition, extended from the Seine to 
the Meuse, about Maestricht, and from the sca 
to the neighbourhood of Treves. The distance 
at which the posts were placed from each other 
being observed by the natives, who still bore with 
impatience the intrusion and usurpation of these 
strangers, tempted them to form a design against 
each of these quarters apart, and by cutting them 
off, to rid their country for ever of these imperious 
and insatiable guests, who acted as proprictors 
in every territory on which they were received, 
and branded every act of resistance to their unjust 
pesiation with the name of defection and rebel- 
ion. 

In execution of this design, Ambiorix, leader 
of the nations which were situated in the angle, 
above the confluence of the Meuse and the 
Rhire, and round the quarters of Sabinus, which 
are supposed to have been at a place which is 
now called Tongres, suddenly presented himself 
with a numerous body before the Roman station, 
and endeavoured to force the intrenchment; but 
being repulsed, had recourse to an artifice in 
which he succeeded. Affeeting a great regard 
for the Romans, he desired that he might have 
an opportunity to communieate to their general 
a matter of the most serious importance. An 
officer being sent to him upon this request, he 
pretended to disclose, with the utmost regret, a 
secret design formed by the Gauls to cut off the 
Romar army; gave notice that a great body of 
Germans had already passed the Rhine to join 
ín the execution of this design; that he himself 
had been very much averse to the project; but 
had been obliged to give way to the popular im- 
petuosity of his countrymen, which he could not 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


227 


The natives, thus encouraged by the success of 
their first operation, pushed on to the quarters of 
Quintus Cicero, armed and assembled the coun- 
try as they passed, and arrived with such expe- 
dition, that they intercepted all the parties which 
were abroad in search of wood, provisions, or 
forage, and made so unexpected an attack on the 
Roman station, as left Cicero scareely time suffi- 
cient to man his entrenchments. They renewed 
the artifice which they had practised with .so 
much success against Sabinus. But Cicero, 
though unacquainted with tae manner in which 
that officer had been betrayed, determined to re- 
main in his camp, and as soon as possible to give 
intimation of his danger to Cæsar. For this pur- 
pose he strengthened his post with additional 
works, and published a reward to the first person 
who should succeed in carrying intelligence to 
the nearest quarter of the Roman army. 

The enemy being about sixty thousand men, 
formed a circle, faciug to the centre, quite round 
the Roman intrenchment; and, the more effec- 
tually to cut off all communication of supplies or 
intelligence from without, effected a line of eir- 
cumvallation, consisting of a ditch fifteen feet 
wide, and a breastwork eleven feet high, extend- 
ing over a circumference of fifteen miles.8 In this 
work, being unprovided with intrenching tools, 
they were obliged to cut the turf with their swords, 
But having begun it by a sufficient nuinber of 
hands in all its parts at onee, they, according to 
Cesar’s account, completed the whole in three 
hours. 

From this line, which they formed by the di- 
rection of some Italian deserters, they made regu- 
lar approaches to the Roman intrenchment ; and 
having pushed their turrets quite up to the ditch, 
threw, by means of their slings, red hot bullets 
and burning darts into the thatch with which the 
huts of the camp were covered ; set them on fire ; 
and, in the midst of the confusion which arose 
from this circumstance, endeavoured to scale the 
palisade and the parapet. 

While Cicero continued, with great ability and 
courage, to withstand these attacks, the persons 
who endeavoured to carry the tidings of his situa- 
tion to Cæsar were repeatedly intercepted, and 
cruelly tortured, to deter others from renewing 
the same attempt. The intelligence, however, 


resist; that all he could do was to warn the Ro- | by means of a native Gaul, who, availing himselt 


mans of their danger, to the end that they might, 
in the most effectual manner, consult their own 
safety. If they chose, while it was in their power, 
to withdraw, and to gain the nearest station of 
their own people, he had influence enough to 
hinder their being molested on the march: but 
if they should hesitate for any time, or wait till 
the Germans arrived, it would no longer be in 
his power to avert the storm with which they 
were threatened, 


This admonition, even from an enemy, after a 
long debate in the council of war, determined: 
Sabinus to quit his present situation. He ac-: 
cordingly began a march of fifty miles towards. 


the quarters of Quintus Cicero. And falling into 
a snare, which the treacherous chieftain had laid 
for him, perished, with an entire legion and five 
cohorts, of whom the greater part were put tothe 
sword. Some got back to the station they had 
left, but finding no security in that place, killed 
themselves in despair, A’ very few escaped, by 
the woods, to Labienus on the Moselle. 


of the dress, manners, and language of his coun- 
try passed unobserved through the lines of the 
enemy, was at last carried to the head quarters 
of the Roman army. 

Cesar, as usual, trusting more to despatch and 
rapid execution than to the numbers of his men, 
left a legion-at Samarobriva? to guard his stores, 
magazines, and baggage, and with two other le- 
gions, not exceeding seven thousand men, being 
all that, without hazarding an improper delay, he 
could assemble, hastened his march to the quar- 
ters of Cicero, He despatehed two messengers, 
one to Labienus, with orders, if possible, to put 
the troops under his command in motion towards 
the Meuse, and another to Quintus Cieero him- 
self, with hopes of assurances of immediate relief. 
The first messenger found Labienus beset with 
a numerous army of Gauls, and therefore unable 
to move; the other, having come to the foot of 


eee 


8 Cesar de Bell. Gallico, lib. v. c. 42. 
9 Amiens, 


228 


Cicero’s intrenchment, cast the billet which con- 
tained the intelligence, wound up on the shaft of 
a dart, against one of the towers, where it stuck, 
and hung for some days unobserved; but being 
found at last, it was carried to Cicero, and gave 
notice of Cæsars approach. At the same time 
the fire and the smoke of his camp began to ap- 

ear on the plain, and gave both parties equal 
intimation of his coming. 

The Gauls, without delay, got in motion with 
all their force, and having abandoned their lines 
of circumvallation, advanced to meet Cesar. Ci- 
cero sent him intelligence of this movement of the 
enemy. ‘The armies arrived nearly at the same 
time on the opposite sides of a brook running in 
a hollow track between steep banks, which nei- 
ther party in the presence of the other could ven- 
ture to pass. 

Cesar, supposing that the great inequality of 
his numbers might inspire the Gauls with con- 
tempt, endeavoured, by exceeding his usual cau- 
tion, to feed their presumption. He affected to 
choose a ground that was fit to secure his camp; 
and contracting its limits, crowded both his le- 
gions within the dimensions which were usually 
occupied by one. In this posture he meant to 
await the effects of the enemy’s temerity, or, if 


they declined passing the brook, to avail himself | 


of the security they were likely to feel, and to 
attack them in their own camp by surprise. 
The event justified Cesar in his expectation. 
The Gauls, trusting to the superiority of their 
numbers, thought they had nothing to dread but 
the escape of their enemy; and they accordingly 


passed the rivulet, with intention to force his: 


lines. Instead of defeuding his camp, he poured 
forth his army at once from all its avenues, and, 
with the advantage of a surprise upon those who 
came to attack him, and by the great superiority 
of the Romans, when mixed sword in hand with 
an enemy, routed, dispersed, or forced to lay 


down their arms, the greater part of this multi- | 


tude which came to attack him with so much fe- 
rocity and confidence. 

By this victory Cesar not only relieved Quin- 
tus Cicero, whom he joined the same evening, 
but likewise dispelled the cloud which hung over 
the other quarters of his army, of which many 
had been at the same time invested by the natives. 
These insurrections, however, which kept all the 
inhabitants of the low countries in motion, even 


in the most unfavourable season, gave him the’ 


prospect of an early and a busy campaign, and 
so much disconcerted the plan which he had 
formed for the winter, that he was hindered from 
making his usual journey across the Alps. 
During this necessary stay in Gaul, it does not 
appear that the interests which Cæsar commonly 
studied were suffering in any considerable degree 
at Rome. The civil government in the city was 
hastening fast to its ruin, and the longest sword 
was soon likely to decide the sovereignty of the 
empire. The office of consul was unoccupied, 
and continued to he so from the beginning of 
January to the middle of July. In all this time 


there was no administration of justice,! nor any ; 


exercise of magistracy, besides that of the inter- 
rex, who, during the five days of his appoint- 
ment, was supposed to have no other object be- 
sides the elections of consuls. This object was 


1 Plutarch. in Pompeio, p. 483. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


(Boor IV. 


vainly attempted by every successive interrex 
The popular tumults were fomented by the tri- 
bunes who were in the interest of Pompey; and 
some prodigy, or unfortunate presage, was con- 
tinually alleged, to prevent the elections. The 
senate striving to put an end to these disorders, 
even ventured to commit to prison Q. Pompeius 
Rufus, a tribune, who seemed to be most active 
in disturbing the public peace. The occasion 
seemed ripe for the execution of Pompey’s de- 
sign; and accordingly another tribune, Lucceius 
Hirrus, known to be in the secret of Pompey’s 
intrigues, moved that he should be named dicta- 
tor.2 He himself; as usual on such occasions, 
absented himself from the assembly, and still 
kept it in his power to avow or disown the mea- 
sures of his creatures. 

This motion was strongly opposed by Cato, 
and appeared to be extremely disagreeable to all 
the principal members of the senate.3 Pompey 
therefore thought proper to disclaim it, denied his 
having encouraged the tribune to make it, and 
even refused to accept of the dictatorship ; adding, 
That he had been called to the exercise of great 
powers earlier than he himself had expected ; 
and that he had always resigned his powers 
earlier than had been expected by any one else.4 
In this was expressed the great object of Pom- 
pey’s ambition ; he preferred this point of estima- 
tion to the possession of power. The odium of the 
proposed measure fell upon Lucceius Hirrus, the 
tribune who moved it, and had nearly brought 
upon him a deposition or degradation from his 
office. Cato, willing to gain Pompey, or to con- 
firm him in the virtue he assumed, pronounced an 
encomium on this act of moderation, recommend- 
ed the republic to his care, and encouraged him in 
the resolution he had taken, to prefer the esteem 
of his fellow-citizens even to the power of dis- 
posing of their lives and fortunes at his pleasure. 
Pompey from thenceforward joined with the 

senate in bringing on the elections; 
U. C. 709. and accordingly, after seven months 
interval of confusion and anxiety, 
o Pia wy, C2: Domitius Calvinus and M. Va- 
Val Messala lerius Messala were chosen and en- 
Coss. ’ tered on office in the month of July 

While Pompey was endeavouring, by his in 
trigues in the city, to make a species of monarchy 
in his own person appear to be necessary, Cæsar 
was ia fact providing himself with the only 
means which, in so distracted a state, ean either 
acquire or preserve such a power. He was join- 
ing three additional legions to the establishment 
of his province; and, under pretence of his late. 
loss on the Meuse, or of his fears of a general de- 
fection in Gaul, he had the address to bring into 
his own service a legion which had been recently 
formed in Italy under the commission of Pompey. 
These he now borrowed, and either actually de- - 
bauched, or rendered of doubtful fidelity, if ever 
it should be proposed to recall or employ them 
against himself. 

While he took these measures for the augment- 
ation of his forces, and before the end of winter, 
having intelligence that the Nervii, or the inha- 
bitants of the county of Hainault, held frequent 
consultations together, and were about to take 


2 Plutarch. in Pompeio. D. Con. Cicero epist, ad 
Quint. frat. lib. iii. ep. 9. p > n 
3 Ibid. 4 Plutarch. in Vit. Pompeii. 


Cuar, IL} 


arms, he determined to prevent them; and for 
this purpose, with four legions drawn from the 
nearest quarters, he marched into their eountry, 
and, without meeting with any opposition, de- 
stroyed their habitations, moved away their cattle, 
and made many prisoners. He continued these 
severities until the natives, reduced to great dis- 
tress, implored his mercy, and gave hostages for 
their future submission. 

Having, in the course of this winter, called the 
nations of Gaul to a general convention at an 
island in the Seine,’ he began the operations of 
the following summer by punishing some of the 
cantons,® who had absented themselves from that 
assembly, and who, by this act of disrespect, had 
incurred his resentment, or given him suspicion 
of hostile intentions. The principal object of the 
campaign, however, was the punishment of Am- 
biorix and his countrymen, by whom, as has been 
related, Sabinus, with a legion and five cohorts, 
had been circumvented and cut off in the begin- 
ning of the preceding winter. 

As the Romans scarcely appear to have con- 
ceived that any people had a right to withstand 
their invasions, and treated as rebellion every 
attempt a nation once vanquished made to reco- 
ver its liberties, Cesar states it as necessary for 


the credit of the Roman army, for the security: 


of their quarters, and for preventing such acts of 
supposed perfidy for the future, that the subjects 
of Ambiorix should suffer an exemplary punish- 
ment. To secure this effect, he projected two 
expeditions; one to the right and the other to 
the left of this enemy’s country, with intention 
to preclude them from any retreat or assistance 
on either side. He penetrated into the woods and 
marshes of Brabant, or on the left of the Meuse, 
and obliged the inhabitants to come under en- 
gagements not to assist or harbour his enemies. 

From thence, still avoiding to give any alarm 
to the nation which was the principal object of 
these operations, and having formerly sent his 
baggage under an escort of two legions to the 
Moselle, he now followed in the same direction 
with the whole army; and finding that Labienus 
had, by a recent victory, vanquished all his ene- 
mes in that quarter, he continued his march to 
the Rhine, constructed a bridge on that river a lit- 
tle way higher up than the place at which he had 
formerly passed it, and once more set foot upon 
German ground. 


The Suevi, and other great migrating nations | 
to the cast- ' 


of that continent, having move 
ward, leaving nothing behind them but deserts, 
on which no army could subsist, he contented 
hinself with exacting hostages from the Ubii 
and other contiguous nations, to secure their 
neutrality, or rather to make sure of their con- 
currence in the future operations of the war. 
AnJ with these pledges here passed the Rhine, 
broke down part of his bridge, and left a guard 
of twelve cohorts properly intrencied to secure 
the remainder. 

Fron thence he sent forward his cavalry, with 
orders to make quick and silent marches into the 
countries between the Rhine and the Meuse, 
and himself followed with the infantry. Hitherto 
Ambiorix and his countrymen, who were the 
principal objects of all these operations, had taken 
no alarm, and had enjoyed such perfect security, 


5 Now Paris. 6 The Scnones and Carnutes. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


229 


that the leader himself, upon the arrival of Cæ- 
sar’s horse, narrowly escaped, and had no more 
than time, by a general intimation, to warn his 
people to consult their own safety. ‘They accord- 
ingly separated, part hid themselves in the con- 
tiguous marshes, others endeavoured to find 
refuge with some neighbouring nations, or fled 
to the islands that were formed at the confluence 
of the Meuse and the Rhine. 

Cesar, as if he had been forming a party of 
hunters, separated his army into three divisions; 
sent Labienus with one division to pursue those 
who had fled to the confluence of the two rivers; 
Tribonius with the second up the course of the 
Meuse; and he himself, in pursuit of Ambiorix, 
directed his march to the Scheld. His orders 
were, that each division should put all they met 
to the sword, and calculate their time so as to re- 
turn to the place of general rendezvous in seven 
days. 

To render this execution the more complete, 


J all the neighbouring nations were invited to par- 


take in the spoils of a country that was doomed 
to destruction. Among the parties who were 
allured by this invitation, two thousand Ger- 
man horse had passed the Rhine, and continued 
to ravage all before them ina body. Cesar, in 
making a disposition for his present march, had 
lodged the whole baggage of his army at the 
station, (supposed to be T'ongres) which in the 
preceding winter had been fortified for the quar- 
ters of Sabinus. Here the works being still entire, 
he left a guard with his baggage under tiie com- 
mand of Quintus Tullius Cicero. 

The Germans, in the present instance, know- 
ing no distinction of friend or enemy, ceased to 
plunder the natives of the country, and turned 
all their thoughts on seizing the baggage of the 
Roman army. ‘Their coming was so Tittle ex- 
pected, that the traders and suttlers who had 
erected their stalls and displayed their merchan- 
dise, as usual, without the intrenchment, had no 
tiine to save their effects. Numbers of Cicero’s 
baggage-guard were abroad in search of forage. 
The remainder with difficulty manned the ave- 
nnes of their post, and must have been forced, if 
the foragers, upon hearing the noise with which 
the Germans began the attack, had not returned 
to their relief, and forced their way through the 
enemy, who, mistaking them for the vanguard of 
Cesar's army, thought proper to consult their 
own safety by an immediate flight. 

Cesar, upon his return tothe post at which he 
had left his baggage, censured the officer com- 
manding the guard for having divided his party, 
and for having omitted, on the supposition of any 
degree of security whatever, any part of the pre- 
cautions usual upon such a duty. He proceeded 
to complete the revenge he had projected against 
the unhappy followers of Ambiorix, with sending 
parties in every direction to burn every house, 
and lay waste every field that had been formerly 
spared or overlooked; and this being done on the 
approach of winter, made the destruction com- 
plete, as the few who escaped the sword were 
certain to perish by famine, or by the asperity of 
the season. 

Cesar having in this manner made an exam- 
ple, which he supposed was to overawe all the 
nations of that neighbourhood, he withdrew with 
his army from a country in which he had made 
it impossible for any numbers of men to subsist ; 


230 


and having stationed two of his legions on the 
Moselle, and the remainder on the Mimie; on the 
Seine, and the Loire, he himself hastened into 
Italy, where all his views and preparations ulti- 
mately centred, The scene of political intrigue, 
in which Crassus had hitherto bore a part with 
Pompey and himself, was now, in consequence of 
recent events on the other extremity of the empire, 
about to undergo a great change, that was likely 
to affect the conduct of all the parties concerned. 

In the spring, Crassus had taken the field on 
the frontier of Syria, with seven legions, four 
thousand horse, and an equal number of light or 
irregular troops. With this force he passed the 
Euphrates, was joined by an Arabian chieftain, 
who is mentioned by historians under different 
names, of Acbarus! or Ariamnes, in whom, on 
account of his supposed knowledge of the coun- 
try, the Roman general had placed great confi- 
dence. Here he expected likewise to have been 
joined by Artabazes, king of Armenia; but 
Orodes, now on the throne of the Parthians, pre- 
vented this junction, by invading the kingdom of 
Armenia in person, while he left Surena, a young 
warrior of great reputation, in Mesopotamia, to 
oppose the Romans. 

Crassus intended to have followed the course 
of the Euphrates to where it approaches nearest 
to Seleucia and Ctesiphon, the capital of the Par- 
thian kingdom; but was dissuaded by Ariamnes, 
who prevailed on him to direct his march east- 
ward on the plains to meet Surena, as not in a 
condition to oppose him. Some parties too, that 
were advanced to examine the country, reported 
that they had been on the tract of departing ca- 
valry, but that no enemy was any where to be 
seen. Thus Crassus was induced to quit the 
Euphrates, and agreeably to the directions of his 
guide, took the rout of Carre eastward. This 
place he fortified in his way, and occupied with a 
garrison. From thence, in a few marches, he 
arrived in sandy and barren plains, without trees, 
herbage, or water. hile the army, though dis- 
couraged by these appearances, still continued its 
march, a few horsenien belonging to the advanced 
guard returned to the main body with signs of 
terror, and brought an account that their division 


had been surrounded by numerous bodies of horse, ; 


and to a few cut off; that the enemy were ad- 
vancing apace, and must soon appear. Crassus 
at first fearing to be outlined by the enemy, ex- 
tended his front as far as he possibly could; but 
recollecting that the Parthians were all on horse- 
back, and by the rapidity of their motions might 
easily gain either or both his flanks, so that it was 
proper to present a front in every direction, he 
changed his disposition from a line to a square, 
having his cavalry on the angles. 

The Roman army being thus compacted, the 
Parthians appeared on every side, came within 
reach of an arrow shot, and galled them without 
intermission. The weapons of the Romans in 
this situation availed them nothing; even the 
shield could not cover them from arrows, that 
showered from every quarter, and in many dif- 
ferent directions. ‘They stood, however, in their 
place with some degree of courage, in hopes that 
the quivers of the Parthians must soon be ex- 
hausted, and that this enemy would be obliged 
either to join them in close fight, or to retire. 


1 Plutarch. et Dion. Cass. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boor IV. 


But they found themselves deceived in this ex 
pectation, observing that the enemy had a herd 
of camels in their rear, loaded with arrows, and 
that the quivers of those in the front were con- 
tinually replenished from thence. At the same 
time Ariamnes, the Arabian, deserted, and was 
perceived to go over to the enemy. The deser- 
tion of this traitor, by discovering that his pre- 
tended attachinent, and his counsel, which had 
been unhappily followed, was only a piece of bar- 
barous treachery to draw the army into its pre- 
sent situation, completed the general discourage- 
ment which the Romans had already begun to 
feel. They crowded together in despair, and 
oppressed with heat and thirst, or stifled with dust, 
they continued for a while, like beasts caught in 
a snare, to present an easy prey to their enemies. 

In this extremity, Crassus determined to make 
an effort with his cavalry to drive the enemy so 
far off, as not to be able to reach his infantry with 
their.arrows. Hisson Publius accordingly formed 
the Roman horse into one body, and made a 
general charge. The Parthians gave way in 
seeming disorder. The young man advanced 
with great impetuosity as against a flying enemy, 
and in hopes of completing his victory: but the 
Parthians, under cover of the dust which every 
where arose, instead of flying before him, as he 
supposed, were actually turning on his flanks, 
and even falling behind him to encompass his 
rear. ‘The legions at the same time, happy to be 
relieved from the attack of the enemy, quitted 
their ground, and fora little resumed their march, 
which enabled the Parthians the more effectually 
to surround the horse; but the father, recollect- 
ing the danger to which he exposed his son, 
again prevailed on them to halt. In this situa- 
tion, a few of the horse arrived, with accounts 
that they had been surrounded, that Crassus, the 
son, was slain, and the whole cavalry eut off, ex- 
cept a few who escaped to the father with these 
melancholy tidings, 

Night, however, was fast approaching, and the 
Parthians, on a sudden, withdrew, sensible that 
their way of fighting would expose them to many 
disadvantages in the dark. It was always their 
practice to retire at night to a considerable dis- 
tance from the enemy whom they had harassed 
by day, and upon these oceasions they generally 
fled like an army defeated, until they had removed 
so far as to make it safe for them to pasture their 
horses, and to store up their arms. Crassus, ap- 
prised of this practice, took the benefit of the 
night to continue his retreat, and abandoning the 
sick and wounded of his army, made a consi- 
derable march before it was day. But the ad- 
vance he had gained, was not sufficient to hinder 
his being overtaken by the same enemy, and again 
involved in the same distress. Having his de- 
feats and his flights renewed on every succeedin 
day, he arrived at last at the post which he ha 
fortified at Carrs, and there found some respite 
from the attacks of the enemy. At this place, 
however, it was not possible to make any con- 
siderable stay, as the whole provisions of the 
army were lost or consumed, and such supplies 
as the country around might have furnished, were 
entirely in the power of the enemy. Nor was it 
convenient to depart immediately. The moon 
was then at the full, and night was almost as 
favourable to the Parthians as day. In these cir- 
cumstances, it was determined to wait for the 


Cuar. IlL] 


wane of the mgon, and then, if possible, to elude 
the enemy again by marches in the night. 

In this interval, the army mutinied against 
Crassus, and offered the command to Caius Cas- 
sius; but he, although desired even by Crassus 
himself, declined to accept of it.2 The troops of 
consequence no longer obeyed any command, and 
separated into two bodies. The first went off by 
the plains on the nearest way into Syria: the 
other took the route of the mountains ; and if they 
could reach them before the enemy, hoped to 
escape into Cappadocia or Armenia. The first 
division was accompanied or commanded by Cas- 
sius, who, though with considerable loss, fed 
them back to Syria. ‘The other, with Crassus, 
himself, was pursued by Surena, and harassed on 
every ground where the Parthian horse could 
ply on their flank or their rear. Being exposed 
to frequent losses, they suffered a continual di- 
minution of their numbers, and were not likely 
to be long in conditfon to avoid the enemy, or 
make any resistance. 

Surena, apprehending that these remains of the 
Roman army might gain the mountains before 
he could force them to surrender, sent a deputa- 
tion to Crassus, proposing at some intermediate 
place, between the two armies, a conference, to 
which each should bring a stipulated number of 
attendants. While this message was delivering, 
Surena himself appeared at a little distance onan 
eminence, waved with his hand, and in token of 
peace, unbent his bow. Crassus distrusting the 
faith of this barbarous enemy, who was supposed 
to hold perfidy lawful, as a stratagem of war, de- 
clined the conference; but his troops, weary of 
continual fatigue and danger, and flattering them- 
selves that by an accommodation an end might 
be speedily put to their sufferings, expressed such 
a desire of the conference, as their general, in 
this situation, could not safely withstand. He 
put himself, therefore, with a few friends, under 
the direction of Surena’s messengers, and sub- 
mitted to he led to their general ; but on the way, 
finding himself treated as a prisoner, he refused 
to proceed, and having made some resistance, 
was slain. ‘The army separated into sundry di- 
visions, a few escaped into Armenia or Syria, the 
greater part fell into the enemy’s hands. 

Thus died Crassus, commonly reputed a rare 
instance of ambition, joined with avarice, and a 
mean capacity. It is not to be doubted, that in 
point of ambition he even rivalled Pompey and 
Cesar; and it is probable, therefore, that his 
avarice was merely subservient to this passion. 
It is quoted, as a saying of his, that no man who 
aspired to a principal place in the republic should 
be reputed rich, unless he could maintain an 
army at his own expense.4 Such was the use 
of wealth, which, in place of equipages, horses, 
and dogs, occurred to a rich man of that age at 
Rome. Of his capacity we cannot form a high 
opinion, either from the judgment of his contem- 

»oraries, or from his own conduct.5 It appears, 
1adeed, that he owed his consequence more to his 
wealth, than to his genius or personal qualities 
of any kind. On account of his wealth, proba- 


2 Dio. lib. iv. c. 28. 

3 Dio. Cass. lib. xl. Plutarch. in Crass. 

4 Cicero de officiis, lib. i. c. 8. 

5 Is igitur mediocriter, a doctrina instructus; au- 
gustius etiam a natura, &c. Cicero de claris oratori- 
buas, c. 66. Ad Atticum, lib. iv. ep. 13. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


231 


bly, he was considered by Cesar and Pompey as 
a person, who, if neglected by them, might throw 
a weight into the scale of their enemies; and he 
was admitted into their councils, as a person fit 
to witness their transactions, and on occasion to 
hold the balance in suspense between them 
These circumstances placed him among the com- 
petitors for the principal influence at Rome, and 
makes his death an era in the history of those 
factions which were hastening to overwhelm the 
republic. By this event, his associates Cesar 
and Pompey, already disjoined by the dissolution 
of their family connection, were left to contend 
for the superiority, without any third person te 
hold this species of balance between them. 

The calm which had succeeded the late elec- 
tion of consuls was but of short duration. The 
time of electing their successors was fast ap- 
proaching, and the candidates Scipio, Milo, and 
Hypseus, were already declared. Clodius, at the 
same time, stood for the office of pretor. Scipio 
was by birth the son of Metellus Pius, adopted 
into the Cornelian family by Scipio Nasica. His 
daughter, in consequence of this adoption, bear- 
ing the name of Cornelia, the widow of young 
Crassus, was recently married to Pompey, who, 
upon this connection, supported Scipio, his fa- 
ther-in-law, in his pretensions to the consulate. 
Milo had a powerful support from the senate, in 
whose cause he had retorted the arts and violence 
of the seditious demagogues against themselves, 
Clodius had great interest with the populace, and 
from inveterate animosity to Milo and to his 
party; joined all his interest with Scipio and 

ypsæus against him. 

Ít is in the nature of human things to advance, 
in accumulating the good or evil to which they 
tend. These competitors, in contending for the 
streets and the usual places of canvassing the 
people, joined to the former arts of distributing 
money, and of exciting popular tumults, the use 
of an armed force, and a species of military 
operations in the city. Three parties in arms 
every day paraded in different quarters of the 
town, and wherever they encountered, violence 
and bloodshed generally followed. The opposite 
parties of Hypsæus and Milo had fought a battle 
in the Via Sacra; many of both sides were 
killed, and the consul Calvinus was wounded in 
attempting to quell the riot. 

These disorders so long obstructed the elec- 
tions, that the term of the present consuls in 
office expired, before the nomination of any suc- 
cessors; and every legal power in the comimon- 
wealth being suspended, the former state of 
anarchy, with accumulated distractions, again en- 

sued. The senate and the other 
U. C. 701. friends of Milo, would gladly have 

hastened the elections, but were hin- 
dered by the partizans of the other candidates, 
The populace too, enjoying this season of gratui- 
ties, of entertainments, and of public shows, in 
which the competitors continued to waste their 
fortunes, were glad to have the canvass pro- 
longed.§ 

When the senate proposed to have recourse to 
the remedy usual in such disorders of the state, 
by naming an interrex, the only title under which 
any person could preside in restoring the magis- 
tracy by an election of consuls, they were forbid 


6 Pedianus in Argument. Orat. pro Milone. 


232 


by the tribune Munatius Plancus, who was sup- 
posed to co-operate with Pompey in some design, 
to be favoured by deferring every measure that 
was proposed for the restoration of order. 

In the midst of this scene, which kept the 
minds of men in fear of some general calamity, 
an accident happened which brought the disor- 
der to a height, and forced every party to accept 
of a remedy. On the 13th of the kalends of 
February, or the 20th of January, Milo going to 
Lanuvium, a town about fifteen miles from Rome, 
of which he was chief magistrate, about three 
o'clock in the afternoon, met with Clodius re- 
turning from his country seat at Aricia, Milo 
was in a carriage with his wife Fausta, the 
daughter of Sylla, and a friend Fusius, He had 
a numerous escort, amounting to some hundreds 
ef servants in arms, and, in particular, was at- 


tended by two noted gladiators, Eudamus and 


Birria. Clodius was on horseback, with a reti- 
nue of thirty servants likewise in arms. It is 
likely that this encounter was altogether acciden- 
tal; for the companies continued on their way 
without any disturbance, till Birria, the gladiator, 
unwilling to pass without giving some specimen 
of his calling, as he straggled a little behind his 
party, quarrelled with some of the followers of 
Clodius. A fray ensued: Clodius himself re- 
turned to quell it, or to punish the authors of it; 
but meeting with little respect among the gladia- 
tors, received a wound in the shoulder, and was 
carried to be dressed in the inn at Boville, near 
to which place the disturbance began. Milo be- 
ing told of what had passed, likewise returned to 
the place ; and thinking it safer to end their quar- 
rels there, than await the revenge of an enemy 
thus provoked, who would not fail, at the head 
of his faction in the city, to rouse the fury of the 
populace against him, encouraged his people to 
pursue their advantage; they accordingly forced 
their way into the inn, dragged Clodius from 
thence, and having killed him, and dispersed all 
his followers, left him dead of many wounds in 
the highway. 

Sextus Tedius, a senator, happening to pass, 
put the body into his own carriage, and sent his 
servants with it to Rome. They arrived before 
six at night, and proceeding directly to the house 
of the deceased, which stood on the palatine hill 
over the forum, laid the corpse in the vestibule. 

The servants of the family, and multitudes 
from the streets, immediately crowded to sce this 
spectacle. Fulvia, the wife of Clodius, stood 
over the body, and with loud lamentations un- 
covered and pointed out the wounds of her de- 
ceased husband. The crowd continued to in- 
crease all night, and until break of day, when 
Q. Munatius Plancus, and Q. Pompeius Rufus, 
tribunes of the people, likewise repaired to the 
sane place, and gave orders to carry the dead 
body naked to the market-place, and there to 
eave it exposed to public view on the rostra ; and 
at the same time accompanied this spectacle with 
inflammatory harangues to the people. 

Sextus Claudius, kinsman of the deceased, 
soon after removed the body from the market- 
place to the senate-house, meaning to reproach 
the order of senators as accessory to the murder. 
The populace, who still followed in great num- 
bers, burst into the place, tore up the benches, 
and brought into a heap the materials, with the 
tıbles and desks of the clerks, the journals and 


~ 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV. 


records of the senate, and bavingpset the whole 


on fire, consumed the corpse on this’extraordinary 


pile. The fire soon reached the roof, and spread 
to the contiguous buildings. The tribunes, Plan- 


cus and Rufus, who were all this while ex 


horting the people to vengeance, were driven 
from the rostra by the flames which burst from 
the buildings around them. The senate-house, 
the porcia basilica, and other edifices were re- 
duced to ashes. 

The same persons, by whom this fire had been 
kindled, repaired to the house of M. Lepidus, 
who, upon the first alarm of an insurrection, 
had been named interrex, forced into the hall, 
broke down the images of the family ancestors, 


‘tore from the looms the webs, in weaving of 
which the industry of Roman matrons was still 


employed, and destroyed what else they could 


teach. From thence, they proceeded to attack 
the house of Milo, but there met with a more 


proper reception. This house, during the riots, 
in which the master of it had borne so great a 
part, was become a kind of fortress, and among 
the other provisions made for its defence, was 
manned with archers, who plied those who at- 
tacked it with arrows from tle windows and ter- 
race, in such manner as soon obliged them to 
withdraw. 

The rioters being repulsed from the house of 
Milo, crowded to the temple, in which the con- 
sular fasces, during the interregnum, were kept, 
seized them by force, and carried them to the 
houses of Scipio and Hypseus, the present popu- 
lar candidates for the consulate; these, without 
any other form of election, they pressed to as- 
sume the ensigns of consular power. But not 
having prevailed in this proposal, they proceeded 
to the house of Pompey, saluting him with mixed 
shouts of consul or dictator, according as they 
wished him to assume the one or the other of 
these titles or dignities. 

From this time, for some days, an armed po- 
pulace, mixed with slaves, continued, under 
pretence of searching for Milo and his adherents, 
to pillage every place they could enter.! And 
the partizans of the candidates, Hypsxus and 
Scipio, thinking they had Milo at a disadvautage, 
beset the house of the interrex; and, though it 
was not customary for the first in this nomina- 
tion to proceed to the electicns, they clamoured 
for an immediate assembly of the people for this 
purpose. The party of Milo, though professing 
likewise to join the same clamour for an imme- 
diate election, came to blows with their opponents, 
and protected the house and the person of the 
interrex from farther violence. 

Milo, himself, who was at first supposed to 
have fled or gone into exile, hearing of the ex- 
cesses committed by the opposite party, and of 
the general inclination of the more sober part of 
the citizens to check and disappoint their vio- 
lence, ventured again to appear in the city, and at 
the head of his friends renewed his canvass. A 
succession of officers, with the title of interrex, 
continued to be named at the expiration of every 
usual term of five days; but such was the con- 
fusion and distraction of the scene, that no elec- 
tion could be made. The senate, under the great- 
est alarm, gave to the interrex, and to the 
tribunes of the people, to whom they joined 


1 Appian de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 


Cuar. IL] 


Pompey, who, by virtue of his proconsular com- 
mission as purveyor of corn for the people, held a 
public character in the state, the usual charge 
given to the consuls, to watch over the safety of 
the republic. ‘They even recommended to Pom- 
ey to make tle necessary levies throughout 
taly, and to provide a military force to act for 
the commonwealth, in repressing the disorders 
which were committed by the candidates for 
office. 

Under the protection of such temporary ex- 
pedients, to restrain the violence with which all 
parties endeavoured to do themselves justice, 
soine applied for redress, in the way of prosecu- 
tion and civil suit. The two Claudi, nephews 
of the deveased Publius Clodius, demanded that 
the slaves of Milo, or those of his wife Fausta, 
should be put to the torture, in order to force a 
discovery of the manner in which their uncle was 
killed. The two Valerii, Nepos and Leo, with 
Lucius Herennius Balbus, joined in the same 
demand. On the opposite party, a like demand 
against the slaves of the deceased Publius Clo- 
dius was male by Cælius, one of the tribunes; 
and a prosecution for violence aud corruption 
was entered by Manlius Cenianus against Hyp- 
seus and Scipio, the competitors of Lilo, for the 
office of consul. 

Milo, in answer to the demand that was made 
to have his slaves put to the torture, pleaded that 
the persons, now demanded as slaves, were ac- 
tually freemen, he having manumitted them as a 
reward for their-faithful services in defending his 

erson against a late attempt inade by Clodius on 
hi life. It was alleged, on the other hand, that 
they were manumitted to evade the law, to pre- 
serve them from the torture, and to screen him- 
self from the evidence which they might in that 
manner be obliged to give. M. Cælus and Man- 
hus Cenianus being tribunes, and disposed to fa- 
vour Milo, had ventured to vindicate him to the 
people, and to load Clodius as the aggressor, and 
the intended assassin in the fray which cost him 
his life. Cicero too, with great zeal and courage, 
while the friends of Milo were yet unsafe in the 
strects, maintained the same argument in the 
senate, and before the people.2 iho, however, 
would have been glad to make a composition ; 
and as Pompey hall all along, in the competition 
for the consulate, favoured not only Scipio but 
likewise Hypsæus against him, he offered to drop 
his pretension in favour of those candidates, if 
Pompey would agree to suppress the prosecutions 
that were commencing against him. ‘Te these 
proposals Pompey refused to listen. He proba- 
bly thought the election secure for his friends, 
and by affecting a zeal for justice, hoped to in- 
crease his authority with the people. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


233 


To avoid the title more than the power of dicta- 
tor, Bibulus moved in the senate, that all the 
present candidates for the consulate should be set 
aside, and that the interrex should assemble the 
people for the election of Pompey sole consul. 
Cato, to the surprise of every body, seconded this 
motion. He observed, that any magistracy was 
preferable to none, and that if the republic must 
be governed by a single person, none was so fit 
for the charge as the person now proposed. Pom- 
pey being present, thanked Cato for this declara- 
tion of his esteem, and said he would accept of 
the charge, in hopes of being aided by his coun- 
sel. Cato made answer, in terms, meant to be 
literally interpreted, but which in other instances 
of the same kind, under an aspect of sullenness, 
have been intended to flatter, that he meant no 
favour to Pompey, and deserved no thanks froin 
hin: that his intention was to serve the republic. 

It was resolved, in terms of this motion, that 
Pompey should be presented to the people as sole 
candidate for the office of consul, and that after 
two months were elapsed, he might propose any 
other candidate to be joined in this office? with 
himself. ‘he election was aecordingly brought 
on by the interrex Servius Sulpitius, on the 
twenty-fourth of Iebruary, and Pompey de- 

clared sole consul,4 with a commis- 
Pompey sole sion from the senate to arm, if ne- 
Consul. cessary, the inhabitants of Italy, for 

the better establishment of order 
in the city, 

The first object of Pompey, in the high and 
unprecedented dignity which was now conferred 
upon him, appears to have been the framing of 
some laws to restrain for the future such disorders 
as had lately prevailed, and to bring criminals to 
justice. For this purpose, he obtained an act to 
enforce the laws which already subsisted against 
violence and corruption; and to regulate the 
form of proceeding in trials on such criminal 
acensations. 

By the regulations now suggested by Pompey, 


| every trial was to end in four days. The examin- 


[and obliged to attend the trial. 


The partizans of Pompey, in the midst of this | 


wild and disorderly state of affairs, were busy in 
renewing the cry which they had raised in the 
former interregnum, that he should be named 
dictator, for the re-establishment of order, and 
the restoration of the public peace. Such an 
extraordinary power had never been at any time 
more wanted in the republic; but the times, in 
waich it might be safely applied, were no more. 
The uame of dictator recalled the memory of 
Sylla’s executions, and it appeared to be uncer- 
tain against whom they might now be directed, 


ee 


2 Ascon. Pedian. in Argument. Orat pro Milone. 


2G 


ation of evidence might occupy the three first ; 
the hearing of parties, and the judgment, the 
fourth, ‘ihe prosecutor was allowed two hours 
to support his charge, and the defendant three 
hours to make his defence. The number of ad- 
vocates was restricted, and the use of commenda- 
tory characters prolubited.5 T'he quesitor, or 
Judge criminal, was to be chosen irom among 
those who had held the office of consul, and 
eighty Judges or jurors were to be impannelled, 
After the evi- 
dence and plerciags were heard, the parties were 
then allowed cach to challenge or reject fifteen of 
the jury or judges, or five from each of the orders 
of which they were eemposed: and the court 
being thus reduced to filly-one, they were to be 
inclosed and to give judginent.6 

Corruption was become so frequent, and so 
mich a necessary art in conducting elections, 
that it was difficult to find any one willing to 
prosecute this crime. To remedy this defect, a 
clanse was enacted in the law of Pompey, by 
which any person formerly convicted of bribery, 
inight obtain a remission of the penalties he had 


3 Plutarch. in Vit. Pomp. et Catonis, Dio. lib. xl. 
4 Ascon. PeJian. in Arguinent. Orat. pro Milone. 
5 Div. Cass. lib. xl. ¢.53. 6 Ascon, Pad. ibid. 


234 


incurred by convicting any one other person of a 
crime equal, or by convicting two persons, though 
of a crime less heinous than his own. By these 
means, it was proposed that one conviction should 
produce still more in succession. That convic- 
tion, in every instance, should be attended with 
infamy; but that the pains of law should ulti- 
mately rest on such a person as could not find 
another on whom to shift the burden from 
himself.! 

These regulations were made with a particular 
view to the trial of Milo, now arraigned on the 
statutes both of corruption, and of violence or as- 
sassination. ‘The passing of these laws was op- 
posed on this account by the friends of the ac- 
cused, who alleged, that they were not acts of 
legislation, but acts of attainder, having a retro- 
spect to the case of a party concerned in a past 
transaction. Celius the tribune, and Cicero, 
maintained this argument. Pompey replied with 
impatience, that if he were hindered to proceed in 
a legal way, he should employ force.? He ap- 
peared to entertain some animosity against Milo, 
such at least as they who love to govern, have to 
others who appear not to be easily governed. He 
either had, or affected to have, apprehensions of 
danger to his own person, confessed or affected 
this apprehension in the senate, and retired, as for 
safety, to his own house in the suburbs: there he 
retained, for the guard of his person, a party of 
armed men; and there too, under the same af- 
fectation of withdrawing from violence, he caused 
the assemblies of the senate to be held. 

The aristocratical or senatorian party was 
much interested in the prescrvation of Milo: 
they had been frequently assailed by the popular 
rioters, who set the laws at defiance; and as the 
laws had not always been of sufficient force to 
protect their persons, it was their interest to pro- 
tect those who, on occasion, had sct aside the 
.aws in their defence. ‘The argument, in equity, 
indeed was strong on the side of Milo. Durin 
the late suspension of government, the factions 
were rather separate parties at war, than subjects 
enjoying the protection, and amenable to the 
jurisdiction of any civil power whatever. They 
who procured or prolonged this state of anarchy, 
were alone chargeable with the consequences. 
In this contest, which could not be maintained 
without force or violent measures, the friends of 
the republic and of the senate were badly cir- 
cumstanced. ‘They contended for laws, and a 
constitution which might be turned against the 
very irregularities which had been necessary to 
their own preservation, while the opposite faction, 
if defeated, might claim the protection of forms, 
which they had endeavoured to subvert. 

It would have been just, perhaps, to have closed 
the late scene of confusion with a general indem- 
nity, and to have taken precautions for the regular 
uninterrupted exercise of government in future. 
This, however, would not have calmed the re- 
sentments of those who were aggricved, and 
Pompey determined to signalize his government 
by a more specious appearance of justice. Donii- | 
tius Ahenobarbus was chosen commissioner for | 
the trial of Milo, on the charge of murder; and | 
the other judges, taken froin among the most re- 
spectable of each order in the commonwealth, 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xl. c. 52. 
2. Ascon. Pedian. in Argument. Orat. pro Milone. 


THE’ PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV, 


were impannelled in terms of the late statute. 
The criminal was cited to answer this charge on 
the fourth of April; and on the sanie day, to 
answer a charge of corruption brought against 
him in the ordinary court of the prætor Manlius. 
Marcellus appeared for him at the bar of the præ- 
tor, and procured a delay until the other trial 


: should be ended. 


The court, it appears, was assembled in the 
forum or open inarket-place. There was ‘a tri- 
bunal or bench railed in for the judges. The 
whole space was crowded with multitudes of 
people. The prosecutors began with examining 
Cassintus Schola, who had been in company with 
Clodius when he was killed. This witness gave 
direct evidence to the fact, and exaggerated the 
atrocity of the crime. Marcellus would have 
cross-questioned him; but the populace, and many 
others who assembled in the crowd, who favoured 
the prosecution, raised a menacing ery, which 
alarmed the accused and his counsel so much, 
that they claimed the protection of the court. 
They were accordingly received within the rails, 
and the judge applied to the consul, who had ta- 
ken his station near to the place of assembly, in 
order to restrain, by his presence, any disorders 
that might arise at the trial. Pompey, who was 
then attended only by his lictors, was himself 
likewise alarmed by that disorderly shout, and 
said, that for the future, a proper force should be 
provided to keep the peace. He accordingly, on 
the following day, filled every avenue, which led 
to the forum, with men under arms; and, upon 
some tuniult among the populace, gave an order 
that the place should be cleared. In the execu- 
tion of this order numbers were killed. 

Under the impression made by this vigorous 
exertion of power, the witnesses continued to be 
examined for two days without any disturbance. 
Among these the inhabitants of Bovillæ, the fa- 
mily and relations of Clodius, and his wife Ful- 
via, were examined on the several circumstances 
that fell within their knowledge, and left no 
doubt remaining with respect to the fact. The 
minds of men every day became more intent on 
the issue: so that, on the fourth day, when the 
parties were to plead, all other business was sus- 
pended in the city; the shops and offices were . 
shut. 

There appeared for thc prosecutors Appius 
Claudius, M. Antonius, and Valerius Nepos. 
They began at eight, and spoke till ten. For the 
defendcr appeared Q. Hortensius, M. Marcellus, 
M. Calidius, Faustus Sylla, M. Cato, and M. 
T. Ciccro, of whom the last only attempted to 
spcak. Some were of opinion, that, as the fact 
was undeniable, it ought to be justified on the 
plea of necessity and public expedience. Cicero 
himself thought this too bold a plea, and there- 
fore chose that of self-defence, alleging that Clo- 
dius was the aggressor, and intended to assassi- 
nate Milo. It is remarked of this celebrated 


orator, that he began all his orations under con- 


siderable solicitude and awe of his audience. On 
this occasion, when he stood up to speak, the par- 
tizans of Clodius, who were likewise inveterate 
enemies to hiinself, endeavoured to disconcert 
him with clamours and menacing crics. The 
unusual sight of military guards, commanded by 
an officer, who was supposed to be prejudiced 
against his client, it is said, so far overcame and 
sunk his spirit, that he spoke fecbly, and con- 


Cuar. IHI.) 


cluded abruptly; and that what he actually de- 
livered was far short of that masterly oration 
which he composed, and afterwards published 
under the title of Milo’s defence. 

The accused, however, even in this alarming 
scene, stood at the bar with an undaunted coun- 
tenance; and while every one else, in imitation 
of the senators, appeared in mourning, he alone 
appeared in an ordinary dress. When judgment 
was given, and the ballots inspected, it appeared 
that, of the senators, twelve condemned, and six, 
or perhaps rather five, acquitted; of the knights, 


thirteen condemned, and four acquitted; of the | 


Tribuni Ærarii, or representatives of the plebeian 
order, thirteen condemned, and three or four ac- 
quitted. And Milo, upon the whole, was con- 
demned by thirty-eight against thirteen. 

Before sentence was pronounced, being still at 
liberty to withdraw, he retired into exile, and 
fixed his residence at Marseilles. Thither Cicero 
sent him a copy of an oration in his defence, 
composed at leisure, as an effort of his eloquence, 
and a specimen of what could be urged in the 
cause. The packet containing this writing, it 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


235 


seems, was delivered to read to Milo while he sat 
at dinner. “How lucky it was,” he said, “that 
this oration was not actually spoken, I should not 
now have been eating these excellent fish at Mar- 
seilles.’3 These marks of indifference make a 
striking contrast to the figure which Cicero him- 
self had exhibited in his exile. Jf he could have 
thus trifled with apparent or unmerited disgrace, 
that single addition of constancy and foree to his 
character would have undoubtedly placed him as 
high in the order of statesmen, as, by the other 
parts of his character, he stands in the list of in- 
genious men and virtuous citizens. 

Milo was likewise soon after condemned, in 
absence, by the pretor, upon a charge of bribery 
and corruption. Some of his competitors, par- 
ticularly Hypseus and Scipio, were brought to 
trial for the same offence. The tribune Muna- 
tius Plancus and Pompeius Rufus were, at the 
expiration of their office, tried and condemned 
for the share they had in the fire which con- 
sumed the senate-house, and in the assault which 
was committed on the house of M. Lepidus the 
interrex. 


CHAPTER III. 


Character of Pompey in Capacity of sole Consul—Privilege of Cesar to be admitted as Candi- 
date for the Office of Consul, without resigning his Province—General Revolt of the Gauls— 
Operations in that Country—Blockade and Reduction of Alesia—Distribution of Caesar's 


Army in Gaul. 


POMPEY in his dignity of sole consul, hav- 
ing joined a legal authority to the personal eleva- 
tion which he always affected, possessed much 
of the influence and consideration of a real mo- 
narch; and it would have been happy, perhaps, 
for the state, if he could have made such a digni- 
ty hereditary, and a permanent part of the con- 
stitution, or given to the commonwealth that 
reasonable mixture of kingly government, of 
which it appears to have stood so greatly in need. 
In his present elevation he rose for a while above 
the partialities of a factious leader, and appeared 
to adopt that interest which the sovereign ever 
has in the support of justice. He even seems to 
have personated the character of a prince, or to 
have considered himself as above the rank of a 
citizen. Among other instances to this purpose, 
is mentioned his haughty saying to Hypsæus, 
late candidate for the consulate, now under pro- 
secution for bribery, who, as Pompey passed from 


the bath to supper, put himself in his way to 


implore his protection, “ Detain me not,” he said, 
“ you only make supper too cool for no purpose.” 
In the midst of the solicitations of his courtiers 
and flatterers, he even ventured to dispense with 
his own regulations. Contrary to the rule he 
himself had laid down for the direction of crimi- 
nal trials, he furnished Munatius Plancus, when 
brought to the bar, with a commendatory testi- 
mony, “I cannot prefer this writing of Pompey,” 
said Cato, “to the law of which he himself is the 
author.” On account of this saying, Plancus, 


3 Asconius Pedianus et Argument. et Notis in 
rat. pro Mil. Dio. Cass. lib, xl. Plut, in Pompeio, 
Catone, &c. 

4 Val. Max. lib. ix. c. 5. 


when the judges came to be inclosed, thought 
proper to reject Cato: the accused was neverthe- 
less condemned.§ 

Besides the measures taken to punish past of- 
fences, it was thought necessary to devise some 
laws to prevent for the future, or to lessen the 
temptation to the commission of such dangerous 
crimes. The principal source of the late disor- 
ders appeared to be the avidity of candidates for 
those offices of state, which led immediately ta 
the government of lucrative provinces. To remove 
this temptation, it was ordained, at the suggestion 
of Pompey, that no man could be appointed to a 
province till five years after the expiration of that 
office, whether of consul, prætor, or questor, in 
virtue of which he claimed a proportionate station 
in the provinces. 

Before the enacting of this law, however, Pom- 
pey had the address to procure for himself a pro- 
longation of his government in Spain for five 
years. ‘This circumstance, which continued to 
him the command of an army abroad, while 
he likewise bore the highest civil office in the 
state at home, set a very dangerous precedent for 
the commonwealth. 

Cesar’s command in Gaul was soon to expire ; 
and, according to the laws then in force, he must 
even resign it before he could aspire to the con- 
sulate, or pretend to cope with his rival in civil 
preferments. It had been wisely ordained by the 
laws, that the persons offering themselves as can- 
didates for the office of consul, should appear in 
person to sue for it; and that no man, without 
resigning his conunand aud dismissing his army, 


5 Plutarch. in Pompeio, p. 484. 


236 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV. 


could enter the city, or even go beyond the limits | this very question; he condemned the indiséreet 


of the province in which he had governed. By this 
regulation it was intended to prevent the con- 
junction of civil power in the state with the com- 
mand of an army. Pompey, however, though 
vested with such a command in Spain, had con- 
trived to be exempted from the observance of this 
law; and, under pretence that his office of gene- 
ral purveyor of corn for the Roman people did 
not confine him to any station, and in reality ex- 
tended to the whole empire, or had a particular 
reference to Italy, still continued to reside in the 
city of Rome. 

Cesar, to keep pace with his rival, openly 
aspired to the same privilege with Pompey, and 
claimed, as a mere instance of equal treatment, 
what the other had obtained; but what, if be- 
stowed on himself, with his other advantages, 
must have given him a great and immediate superi- 
ority. The army he commanded was already in 
the most advantageous situation. The addition 
of consular power at Rome, to that of general in 
both the Gauls, was joining Italy itself to his 
provinces, and putting him at once in possession 
of the empire. Any opposition made to his an- 
thority as consul would be construed as rebellion 
against the state itself. Pompey would be driven 
at once from the helm of affairs to the command 
.of a distant province, in which he, at most, could 
only defend himself; but not entertain any de- 
signs on the sovereignty of Italy, which would 
be covered from his attempts by the Pyrenees and 
the Alps, and the great armies of Gaul. 

With these objects in his view, Cesar in- 
structed his partizans among the tribunes to 
move, that, being continually engaged in a ha- 
zardous war, which required his presence, and 
being necessarily detained abroad in the service 
of his country, he might be exempted from the 
law, which required the candidates for office to 
attend their canvass in person, and might there- 
fore be elected into the consulate without present- 
ing himself to the people for that purpose. 

This proposition was sufficiently understood 
by the leading men of the senate, and by the few 
who joined with them in support of the common- 
wealth. It was known to be intended that Cesar 
should have a privilege of being elected consul, 
without resigning his province, or dismissing his 
army; and they withstood the motion as of the 
most dangerous consequence. But Pompey, who 
ought likewise, for his own sake, to have been 
alarmed at the progress of Cesar, and at the un- 
common advantage at which he now aimed, was 
either lulled into security by the artifices of his 
rival, or thought himself sufficiently raised above 
any danger from this or any other quarter. He 
had accepted, in his own person, many unprece- 
dented honours, and was possibly unwilling to 
contend for forms which, at some future period, 
might limit his own pretensions. Cato loudly 
renewed his suspicion of Cesar’s designs. Cicero 
could not be neutral in any dispute that should 
arise between Cesar and Pompey. He had been 
banished by the one, and restored by the other. 
Besides the personal consideration he owed to 
Pompey on this occasion, his natural bias was 
on the side of the senate, and for the support of 
the forms which were provided for the safety 
of the commonwealth. He nevertheless suffered 
pimseli to be dazzled with the court which Cæsar 
aad paid to him for some time, with a view to 


zeal of Cato, who, in his opinion, was ruining the 
cause of the republic by setting both Cesar and 
Pompey at defiance, while he himself, by tempo- 
rising, and by managing the inclinations of these 
parties, had secured them both in its interests, 
He stated the danger of a quarrel with Cesar at 
this time, supported as he was by a powerful 
army, and in the bowels of Italy; but did not 
consider that he was then giving up, without a 
quarrel, all that any quarrel could extort. _ 

The army of Cesar was not then so well pre- 
pared to follow him against his country, nor he 
himself furnished with the same colours of jus- 
tice, under which he afterwards made war on the 
commonwealth. Ifa civil war were to be dread- 
ed, to temporise, in this instance, was to give a 
delay which proved favourable to the enemy, or 
rather, in effect, to deliver up the republic, with- 
out a contest, to that fate which the prudent 
counsels in question were intended to remove. 
Under colour of this prudence, nevertheless, Ci- 
cero, as well as Pompey, supported the tribunes 
in their motion, and obtained for the proconsul 
of Gaul the dispensation he desired, to retain his 
army, while he offered himself a candidate for 
the highest office of the state at Rome. 

Cesar, immediately upon his arrival on that 
side of the Alps in the beginning of winter, ob- 
serving the distractions which took place in the 
city upon the murder of Clodius, affected much 
zeal for the laws which had been so grossly vio- 
lated in that instance; and, under pretence of 
furnishing himself with the means of supporting 
the state against those who were inclined to dis- 
turb it, ordered new levies in every part of his 
provinces, and made a considerable addition to 
his army; but, contented for the present with the 
privilege he had obtained of suing for the consu- 
late, without quittmg his province, or resigning 
his military power, he left the state, as before, ap- 
parently in the hands of Pompey; and, in the 
middle of winter, on the report of a general de- 
fection of all the Gaulish nations, repassed the 
Alps. 

Most of the nations that lay beyond the moun- 
tains of Auvergne, the original limits of the Ro- 
man province, roused by the sense of their present 
condition, or by the cruel massacre lately exe- 
cuted in a part of their country, were actually in 
arms. ‘They had submitted to Cæsar, or were 
separately gained by him, under the specious 
pretence of alliance or protection against their 
enemies; and with the title of ally, suffered him 
to become their master. But the violence with 
which he had threatened the canton of the Car- 
nutes,! for absenting themselves from the con- 
vention which he had assembled on the Seine, 
and the merciless severities executed by him 
against the unfortunate natives of the tract be- 
tween the Rhine and the Meuse,? convinced all 
the nations of Gaul that they were reduced to the 
condition of slaves ; and that every exertion they 
made for liberty was to. be punished as a crime. 
They saw the folly of their former dissentions, 
and suspended all their animosities to enter into 
a general concert for their common safety. The 
occasion, they said, was favourable for the reco- 


| very of their country. The Romans were dis- 


LD 


1 Now Chartres. 
2 Now chiefly Liege and Guelderland. 


< 


Kene ML 


tracted at home, and Cæsar had sufficient occu- 
pation in Italy. His army could not act in his 
absence. The present time, they concluded, 
was the favourable opportunity to shut out the 
Romans for ever beyond the Cevennes, or even 
to force them to retire within the Alps. 

All the nations on the Seine, the Loire, and 
the Garonne, quite round to the sea-coast, re- 
ċeived these representations with joy. They 
held private meetings, and instead of exchanging 
hostages, which would have been too public a 
measure, and have led to a discovery of their de- 
signs, they plighted their faith by a more secret 
form, commonly practised among them on great 
occasions, that of pressing their banners together. 

The people of the Carnutes? undertook to be- 
gin hostilities; and accerdingly, on a day fixed, 
surprised the town of Genabum,/ where they put 
many Roman traders, together with the com- 
missary-general of the army, to death. 

It was the custom of the Gauls to convey in- 
timation of such events by means of a cry which 
they raised at the place of action, and repeated 
wherever the voice was heard, till, passing almost 
with the velocity of sound itself, it gave the 
specdiest information of what was done. In this 
manner, intelligence of what had been trans- 
acted at Genabum at the rising of the sun, was, 
before night, propagated in every direction to the 
distance of a hundred and sixty miles, and put 
all the nations within this compass in a ferment. 
Its first and principal effects, however, were pro- 
duced in the country of the Arverni.6 Here 
Vercingetorix, a youth of heroic spirit and great 
capacity, assembled his retainers, took possession 
ef Gergovia, now Clermont, the capital of his 
country, and from thence sent messengers in 
every direction to urge the execution of the mea- 
sure lately concerted for the general freedom of 
Gaul. He himself, in return for his zeal, being 
chosen the common head of the confederacy, in 
this capacity, fixed the quota of men and of arms 
to be furnished hy each separate canton, and took 
hostages for the regular observance of the condi- 
tions to which the several parties had agreed. 

Vercingetorix having assembled a considerable 
army, sent a part of his ferce to act on the Ga- 
ronne, and to harass the frontiers of the Roman 
province, while he himself moved to the Loire, in 
order to rouse the nations of that quarter, who 
appeared to be too secure; and he accordingly 
brought to his standard all the warriors of those 
cantons that lay on the left of that river. His 
party on the Garonne, at the same time, were 
joined by all the nations of Aquitania, and, in 
formidable numbers, threatened with immediate 
destruction the cities of Thoulouse and Nar- 
bonne, or such part of their districts at least as 
were open to invasion. 

Thither Cesar, with all the forces he could 
assemble upon his arrival from Italy, immediately 
repaired; and, having put the province of Nar- 
bonne in a condition not to be insulted, proceeded 
to give the enemy an alarm in their own country. 
His object was, if possible, to put himself at the 
head of the legions which he had left on the 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


237 


self, with the force under his command, to pene- 
trate through so many enemies as lay in his way 
to join them. It was yet winter, and the moun- 
tains were deeply covered with snow. This cir- 
cumstance, which increased his difficulties, as it 
was likely to render the enemy secure, still en- 
couraged him to make his attempt. He accord- 
ingly passed the mountains® which lay in his 
way, at a time when the snow, in many places, 
being six feet deep, must be removed with sho- 
vels, and when that passage was supposed to be 
entirely impracticable. After he had surmounted 
this difficulty, his object being to draw the atten- 
tion of the prince of the Arverni to his own 
country, he sent his cavalry abroad in numerous 
| parties to destroy with fire and sword the people 
with their habitations and possessions. When 
he thought the alarm was sufficiently spread, and 
must have reached the Gaulish army on the 
Loire, he pretended, that his presence was re- 
quired in the province behind him, gave the com- 
mand of the troops in Auvergne to Decimus 
Brutus, then a young man; giving him orders 
at the same time to keep his parties abroad, and 
to continue to harass the country as he himself 
had done. 

Having taken these measures to fix the atten- 
tion of the enemy in one quarter, Cesar, with a 
few attendants, made haste to pass in a different 
direction to Vienna on the Rhone, where he was 
received by a party of horse, which he had ap- 
pointed at that place to wait his orders; and, 
under this escort, without halting by day or by 
night, he passed by Bibracte’ and the country of the 
Lingones,® to the nearest quarter of his army on 


| the Seine, and while he was yet supposed to be 


in Auvergne, had actually assembled his legions 
which had been distributed on the course of that 
river. 

Vercingetorix having notice that Cæsar, ir 
this manner, lad passed him, and that the Ro- 
man army on the Seine wasin motion, perceived 
that the invasion of his own country had been no 
more than a feint, and that the chief force of the 
enemy was to be expected from a different quar- 
ter, he resumed the operations which he had in- 
termitted on the Loire, and endeavoured to possess 
himself of a post in the territory of Bibracte, 
where the people still professed themselves to be 
in the alliance of the Romans. 

Cæsar, notwithstanding the difficulty of pro- 
curing provisions and forage so early in the sea- 
son, thought himself under a necessity of oppos- 
ing the progress of the enemy. For this purpose 
he left his baggage, under the guard of two le- 
gions, at Agendicum ;9 and from thence, with the 
remainder of the army, proceeded to Genabum,!0 
leaving Trebonius by the way to take possession 
of a town which the natives, after a little show of 
resistance, had surrendered. 

Upon his arrival before Genabum, the Gauls, 
who were in arms at that place, resolved to aban- 
don the town; and shutting the gates against the 
Romans on one side, endeavoured to escape by 
the bridge of the Loire on theother. But Cesar, 
having notice of their design, forced open their 


northern frontiers of his new acquisitions. He | 
did not choose that those legions should move in | 
his absence so far as to expose themselves to be | 
cut off by the natives. Nor was it easy for him- 


gates, and overtook them, while crowded to- 
gether in the entrance of the bridge, and in the 


6 The Cevennes. 
7 Afterwards Augustudonum, now Autun. 
8 Langres. 9 Sens. 10 Orleans. 


3 Chartres 4 Orleans. > Auvergne. 1 


238 


narrow streets which led to it, put the greater 
part to the sword, and, under the pretence of re- 
venging the massacre of the Roman traders, who 
had been cut off at this place, ordered that the 
town should be destroyed. From thence he pene- 
trated into the country of the Bituriges,' on the 
left of the Loire; and, on his way towards Ava- 
ricum,? the capital of that district, forced every 
place that opposed his passage. 

Vercingetorix, observing the rapid progress of 
the Romans, and knowing that the Gauls, being 
without order or discipline, could not withstand 
them in battle, declined an engagement, but en- 
deavoured to distress the enemy by delays and 
want of provisions. He had authority enough 
with his own people to persuade them to lay their 
country waste every where within many miles of 
Cesar’s route. Twenty towns of the Bituriges 
were burnt in one day. Avaricum alone, con- 
trary to the opinion of Vercingetorix, and at the 
earnest request of its inhabitants, who undertook 
to defend it to the last extremity, was spared. 

Thither, accordingly, Cesar advanced as to the 
only prize that was left. He attacked the place, 
under great disadvantages, in the midst of a 
country that was entirely laid waste, and trusting 
for the daily subsistence of his army to the Ædui 
beyond the Loire, who, notwithstanding their 
professions, were far from being hearty in his 
cause, or diligent in sending their supplies of 
provisions to his camp. Such as they sent were 
intercepted by Vercingetorix, who had occupied 
a strong post with his army, and infested the 
highways with his parties. In these circum- 
stances, Cesar’s army was sometimes reduced to 
great distress, he himself, to pique the resolution 
of his soldiers, affected a willingness to raise the 
siege, whenever they were pleased to intimate, 
that they could endure it no longer; “ We are 
got into a difficult situation,” he used to observe; 
“if the troops are discouraged, I shall withdraw.” 
To this affected tenderness for the sufferings of 
his men, he was every where answered, with in- 
treaties that he would not dishonour them, b 
supposing that any hardships could oblige them 
to forfeit the character they had acquired ie the 
labour of so many successful campaigns. He ac- 
cordingly continued the attack of Avaricum under 
all his discouragements. 

The place was covered on two sides by a river 
anda morass, and was accessible only on the third. 
The walls of the town were ingeniously con- 
structed with double frames of wood, having com- 
partments or pannels filled up with masonry and 
large blocks of stone. The masonry secured the 
timber from fire, and the frames preserved the 
masonry against the effects of the battering ram, 
which could act only on the stones contained 
within a single pannel or division of the frame, 
without ruining at once any considerable part of 
the wall, or effecting a breach. The Roman ar- 
my approached to this. wall by the most laborious 
pnd difficult methods which were practised. 
They began, in the ancient form of attack, at a 
proper distance, and on a breadth of eighty-three 
feet, to lay a sloping mound,’ which rising by de- 
grees on the plain, formed, as it advanced, an easy 
ascent to the level of the battlements. The earth 
on the sides of this mound was supported by 
timbers, hurdles, and faggots, and the workmen 


1 Now Berri. 2 Bourges. 3 The Agger. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book 1V. 


in front were covered with mantlets and moveable 
penthouses. The besieged, that they might still 
overtop the besiegers, raised their walls by addi- 
tional frames of wood, which they covered with 
raw hides, as a security against the burning ar- 
rows and shafts which were darted against them. 

In this contest the works on both sides were 
raised about eighty feet, and the besieged endea- 
voured to keep the advantage of superior height, 
not only by raising their own walls, but likewise 


| by undermining and sinking the mound of the 


besiegers. They made galleries under the foun- 
dation of their own wall to the bottom of the 
enemy’s mound, by which they endeavoured to 
remove the earth and other materials from below, 
as fast as they were accumulated above. They 
came from their sally-ports on different sides of 
the mound, and endeavoured to set fire to the 
wood by which the earth was supported. In all 
these particulars showing that they possessed the 
arts of defence in common with ancient nations.4 
Vercingetorix, in the mean time, continued to 
harass the Roman army from without, intercepted 
their supply of provisions, and, by means of the 
river and the morass, maintained his communica- 
tion with the town, and sent in frequent relief. 

Notwithstanding all these difficulties, Cæsar 
by degrees brought forward and raised his mound 
of approach to the height of the battlements; so 
that by a single assault he might determine the 
fate of the town. And while both parties were 
preparing for a last effort, he took the opportunity, 
as he frequently did, of a heavy rain to make his 
attack. The besieged, as he supposed, had taken 
shelter from the weather, and were in that instant 
put off their guard. He got possession of the 
battlements with little resistance, and drove the 
parties who manned them before him from the 
walls. The inhabitants formed in the streets, and 
the Romans who had entered, extending their line 
to right and left along the ramparts, were about 
to occupy the battlements over the whole circum- 
ference of the place, when the garrison, observing 
their danger, began to escape by the gates. In 
the confusion that followed, the town was sacked, 
and could make no resistance. Of forty thousand 
persons who had taken shelter in it, no more than 
eight hundred escaped. This massacre was joined 
to that lately performed at Genabum, under the 
pretence of completing the vengeance which was 
due for the murder of the Roman traders who 
were put to death at the breaking out of the 
present revolt. 

The Gauls, as usual on every calamitous event, 
were greatly disheartened, and were about to de- 
spair of their cause, when their leader reminded 
them, that, contrary to his judgment, they had re- 
served this place from the general devastation, 
and had themselves undertaken to defend it; that 
what they suffered was the consequence of a mis- 
take, and might be retrieved by abler conduct. 
His authority as usual rose on the ill-success of 
counsels which he had not approved, and brought 
an accession of numbers to his standard. 

Cesar, finding a considerable supply of stores 
and provisions at Avaricum, remained some days 
to relieve and to refresh his army. The country 
around him, however, being entirely laid waste, 
or occupied by parties of the enemy, it became 


4 Cesar de Bell. Gall. lib. vii. c. 22, &c. 
cidid. lib. ii. in the siege of Platæa. 


Vid. Thu 


Cuar. IIL] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


239 


necessary for him to repass the Loire, and to open | on the opposite bank. From thence he sent or- 


his communication with a country of which the 
inhabitants still professed to be in alliance with 
the Romans, and having had their possessions 
covered by the river from the incursions of the 
enemy in their late devastations, were still in 
condition to supply his camp. As in this move- 
ment he seemed to retire and to give up the 
ground he had disputed with the prince of the 
Arverni, he pretended that he was called to set- 
tle a dispute which had arisen among the Ædui, 
relating to the succession of the chief magistrate, 
or head of their canton. Having repassed to the 
right of the Loire without any loss, he made a 
demand on his allies of that side for ten thousand 
men on foot, and all the horses they could furnish. 

He now had enemies on every quarter, and it 
was good policy to keep them divided, and to oc- 
cupy them separately. For this purpose he sent 
four legions towards the Seine; while he himself 
took the route of Noviodunum,5 at the confluence 
of the Loire and Allier; and there leaving his 
money, spare horses, and unnecessary baggage, 
he continued his march on the banks of the Alier, 
with intention to pass that river, and to invade 
the Arverni, from whom this revolt had originated, 
and whose chief was now at the head of it. This 
prince, knowing that the river Allier is never 
fordable till autumn, and till the melting of snows 
on the Cevennes begin to abate, ordered all the 
bridges upon it to be demolished, and hoped to 
prevent the Romans from passing it during the 
greater part of summer. As scon as Cesar 
marched from Noviodunum, he presented himself 
on the opposite bank of the river, and regulated 
his motions by that of the enemy. ‘The two ar- 
mies commonly decamped, marched and encamp- 
ed again in sight of each other; and Cæsar never 
affected to elude the vigilance of the Gauls, till he 
saw an opportunity to do so with advantage, 

It happened that one of the bridges of the 
Allier had been but imperfectly destroyed ; most 
of the piles were yet fast in the ground, and ap- 
peared above water; sothat a passage miglit be 
effected in a few hours. The country around 
was woody, and furnished cover, or a place of 
ambush, to any number of men. From these 
circumstances Cesar conceived the design to 
over-reach the enemy. He put his army in mo- 
tion as usual, but himself remained with a suf- 
ficient detachment in the neighbourhood of the 
ruined bridge, which he meant to repair. In order 
that the Gauls might not be led to suspect that 
any part of his arniy was left behind, he ordered 
that those who were to move should divide, and 
present the same number of separate bodies, the 
same distinction of colours and standards, which 
they were accustomed to show on a march of the 
whole army; at the same time, as he knew that 
the Gauls would endeavour to keep pace with his 
people, in order to hasten and increase their dis- 
tance, he ordered them to make a quicker and a 
longer march than usual. When he supposed 
that this feint or stratagem had taken its full 
effect, he began to work on the piles which were 
left in the river, and in a few hours repaired the 
bridge so effectually, that he passed with a di- 
vision of the army he had reserved for this pur- 
pose, and instantly fortified a post to cover them 


5 Nevers. 


ders to recall the main body ; and before the ene- 
my were apprised of his design, had re-united all 
his forces on the left of the river. 

Vercingetorix, as soon as he had intelligence 
that the Romans had passed the Allier, fell back 
to Gergovia,® the capital of his own principality, in 
order to take measures for the safety of that place. 
It being situated on a height having an ascent. 
of above a mile from the plain, and surrounded 
by other hills, which made part of the same ridge, 
he ordered a stone wall to be built six feet high 
about half way up the ascent to the town, and 
encamped as many as the space could contain 
within the circuit of this wall. He occupied the 
other hills at the same time with separate bodies, 
having communications with each other and with 
the town. By this disposition Cesar found all the 
approaches of the place commanded, and no pos- 
sibility of investing the whole by lines of circum- 
vallation, or by any chain of posts. He pitehed 
his camp at some distance from the foot of the 
hill, and from thence ina few days got possession 
of a height in his way to the town, on which he 
posted two legions, with a line of communieation, 
fortified on both its flanks, leading from this ad- 
vanced station to his main encampment. 

In this posture Cesar foresaw, that all the 
heights in his neighbourhood being in possession 
of the enemy, while he pressed upon the town, 
he himself might be hemmed in, and cut off from 
all the supplies necessary for the support of his 
army. To preserve his communieation, there- 
fore, with the Allier and the Loire, he ordered 
his allies from the opposite side of these rivers to 
advance with the forces he had formerly required 
of them, to occupy the country in his rear, and to 
cover his convoys. They aeeordingly took the 
field; but their leaders having been for some time 
inclined to favour the general eause of the Gauls, 
they thought this a favourable opportunity to 
declare their intentions. Being arrived within 
thirty miles of Cesar’s army, they halted; and, 
upon a report which was industriously spread 
amongst them, that he had murdered some of 
their countrymen who were already in his camp, 
they put all the Romans in their company to 
death, and took measures to join their country- 
men who were assembled for the defence of 
Gergovia. They had not yet moved to execute 
this resolution, when Cæsar had notice of what 
was intended, and with his usual diligence ar- 
rived, after a mareh of thirty miles, with four le- 
gions and all his cavalry, in time to prevent its 
effects. He presented himself as a friend; and 
thinking it safest for the preseut to disguise his 
resentment, he produced into public view all the 
persons who were said to have been killed by his 
orders, convinced such as had been deceived of 
their error, and brouglit them, with the seeming 
cordiality of allies, to his camp. 

Cesar made a merit with the /Edui of this act 
of clemency towards their people; but found that 
the spirit of defection was not confined to these 
detachments; that it had pervaded the nation; 
that the violence committed in the camp was an 
eflect of the resolutions adopted by the whole 
people; that, in pursuance of the saine ineasures, 
his purveyors and comniissaries had been assault- 


6 Now supposed to be the neighbourhood of Clor 
mont. 


240 


ed and pillaged even where they thought them- 
selves secure, as in a friend’s country; and that 
he could no longer rely on the affections of any 
nation in Gaul. 

The leaders of the Ædui, however, on hearing 
of the lenity that was shown to such of their peo- 
ple as were in the power of Cesar, pretended to 
return to their duty ; and Cæsar, not to break at 
once with the only supposed ally which remained 
to him beyond the Cevennes, affected to consider 
the late disorders as the effect of a mere popular 
tumult, and declared himself willing to rely on 
the wisdom of the state itself for the reparation 
of wrongs which a few ill-advised persons of 
their country had committed. 

This able commander appears, on many occa- 
sions, to have trusted greatly to the superiority 
of the Roman soldiers, as well as to that of his 
own reputation and conduct asa general. His 
confidence in both was required in the highest 
degree to support him in continuing, or even in 
attempting, a siege under his present difficulties, 
beset by numerous enemies, who were in appear- 
ance ably conducted; while he himself was de- 
serted by those who were reputed his friends. 

In his last march to repress the defection of his 
allies, he had left his camp exposed to the attacks 
of the enemy, and defended only by two legions 
against the whole force of so many nations as 
were assembled for the defence of Gergovia. 
These seized their opportunity in his absence, 
made a vigorous attack, and must have prevailed, 
if he had not returned with the utmost celerity to 
relieve his camp. 

‘With the same confidence in the superiority 
of his men, Cesar soon afterwards made an at- 
tempt to force the wall, which, as has been men- 
tioned, the Gauls had built on the ascent of the 
hill which led to the town; and having made a 
feint on the opposite side with part of his horse, 
joined by the followers of the army mounted on 
horseback, who showed themselves at a distance 
to appear like cavalry, he drew the enemy from 
the place he meant to attack, actually passed the 
wall, and made himself master of part of their 


camp. A few of his men penetrated even into | 


the town; but not being supported were sur- 
rounded and slain; even those who had succeeded 


at first under favour of the feint by which he had į 


drawn off the enemy, were, upon the return of 
the Gauls to the defence of their camp, repulsed 
with considerable loss. In consequence of this 
defeat, it was no longer doubtful that Cæsar 
would be under the necessity of raising the siege. 

In order to begin his retreat without any ap- 
pearance of fear, he formed his army two days 
successively on the plain before his entrenchment, 
and offered the enemy battle. On the third day 
he decamped; and, with the credit he derived 
from this species of defiance or challenge, in three 
days he arrived at the Allier, repaired his bridge, 
and repassed undisturbed by the enemy. His 
passage, of the same river, a short time before, 
was esteemed as a victory, and his return, with- 
out having gained any advantage, and merely for 
the safety of his army, was undoubtedly consi- 
dered as a defeat. The low state of his fortunes, 
checked and baffled by a Gaulish leader, yet a 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV 


they carried off or rifled the treasure he kept for 
the pay of his army, and seized all the spare horses 
and baggage which he had left at Noviodunun,! 
as at a piace of security at the confluence of the 
Allier and the Loire. 

He himself was yet inclosed between these 
two rivers, having enemies on every side, and no 
magazines or stores for the supply of his army. 
He deliberated whether he should not fall back 
on the province of Narbonne; but the danger to 
which he must expose Labienus, commanding a 
division of the Roman army on the Semne, the 
difficulty of passing the mountains of Auvergne, 
then occupied by his enemies, and the discredit 
which his arms must incur from such a retreat, 
prevented him. He determined, therefore, to ad- 
vance; passed the Loire by a ford above its con- 
fluence with the Allier; found a considerable 
supply of provisions and forage in the country of 
the Ædui, and continued his march from thence 
to the Seine. 

Labienus, with the troops he commanded in 
that quarter, had besieged Lutetia, the original 
germ from which the city of Paris has grown, 
then confined to a small island in the Seine, and 
had made some progress in the siege, when he 
heard of Cesar’s retreat from Gergovia, of the de- 
fection of the Ædui, and of preparations which 
were making by the nations on his right against 
himself. In these circumstances, he laid aside his 
design on Lutetia, and ascended by the left of the 
Seine to the country of the Senones, through 
which Cesar was now advancing to meet him. 
In passing the river at Melodunum,? he was at- 
tacked by the enemy, but obtained a considerable 
victory; and, with the credit of this event in his 
favour, continued his march to a place which is 
now called Sens, near to which he was soon af- 
terwards joined by Cesar. 

While the Romans were thus re-uniting their 
forces on the Seine, Vercingetorix had passed the 
Loire, and held a general convention of the Gaul- 
ish nations at Bibracte. He was attended by de- 
puties of all the cantons from the Moselle to the 
Loire, except the Treviri, Remi, and Lingones.? 
The first stood in awe of the Germans, who 
kept them in continual alarm. The two last 
professed an attachment to the Romans, who 
were still masters of the field in their neighbour- 
hood 

The leader of the. Gaulish confederacy being 
at this meeting confirmed in his command, made 


.a requisition for an augmentation of force, chiefly 


of cavalry, and accordingly increased this part of 
his army to fifteen thousand. To the end that 
he might give the Romans sufficient occupation 
in their own defence, he projected two separate 
invasions of the province of Narbonne: one to 
be executed by the nations which lay between 
the Rhone and Garonne, towards ‘Thoulouse 
the other, from the Soane and the upper parts of 
the Loire, towards Geneva and the left of the 
Rhone. He himself, theugh still determined to 
avoid any general action, was to harass the enemy 
in their movements, and to cut off their supplies 
of provisions. 

Cesar, on his part, wished to open his com- 
munication with the Roman province, that he 


youth, and unexperienced, encouraged the na- |! might have access to cover it against the designs 


tions on the right of the Loire, even while he was 
advancing towards them, to declare for the liber- 


ties of Gaul; and as a coramencement of hostility, | 


1 Nevers. 2 Now Melun. 
3 Now Treves, Rheims, and Langre. 


Guar. III] 


of the enemy, and to avail himself of its resources 
far the subsistence of his army. For this pur- 

ose, it was necessary for him to return, by the 
TE and the Rhone, through a level] country 
which was in possession of the enemy, to whom 
he was greatly inferior in cavalry. He sent into 
Germany for a reinforcement of horse; and the 
natives of that part of the continent being al- 
ready sensible, that wherever they were admitted 
to act as soldiers of fortune, they were qualifying 
themselves to act as masters, without scruple be- 
stowed their services for or against any cause ; 
two thousand of them joined Cesur, but so ill 
mounted that he was obliged to supply them with 
horses, by borrowing such as belonged to his 
officers of infantry, and as many as could be 
spared from his cavalry. To compensate their 
defect in horse, the men were brave, and, in 
many of the operations which followed, turned 
the event of battles, and determined the fate of 
the war. 

The Roman army being thus reinforced, Cesar 
began his march to the southward; and having 
passed the heights at the sources of the Seine, 
found the Gauls already posted in three separate 
divisions, contiguous to the different routes he 
might take, with numerous flying bodies of horse, 
ready to harass him in any movement he should 
make in their presence. By continuing his march, 
he soon gave their leader an opportunity to try 
his fortune in a sharp encounter, in which the 
whole cavalry of both armies caine to be engaged. 
The Gauls were routed chiefly by the valour and 
address of the Germans, to whom Cesar im- 
puted his victory. This event was decisive in 
respect to the cavalry, that part of both armies 
on which it was supposed that the fate of the 
war must turn. And Vercingetorix, not to ex- 
pose his infantry to the necessity of a general 
action, instantly retired to the heights from which 
the Seine, and a number of other rivers which 
mix with it before its confluence with the Marne, 
have their source. Cesar, no longer apprehen- 
sive of the enemy’s horse, resumed the confidence 
with which he always pursued his advantages, 
and followed his flying enemy into this retreat. 

Vercingetorix, with his very numerous army, 
took post at Alesia, a place raised on a hill at the 
confluence of two rivers; the point on which it 
stood being the termination of a ridge which se- 
parated the channels by which these rivers dc- 
scended to the plain. The fields on one side were 
level, on the other mountainous. The Gauls 
were crowded together on the declivity of the 
hill of Alesia, under the walls of the town, and 
in that position thought themsclves secure from 
any attack. But not aware of the resources, en- 
terprise, and genius of their enemy, while they 
endeavoured to rendcr themselves inaccessible, 
they had got into a place in which they might 
be cooped up; and Cæsar immediately began 
to surround them, making a proper distribution 


of his army, and employing working parties | 


at once on a chain of twenty-thrce posts and 
redoubts, 

Vercingetorix, though too late, perceiving the 
enemy’s design, sent his cavalry ta collect what 
provisions could be found in the neighbouring 
country ; but tliese troops, in consequence of their 
late defeat, not being able to keep the field against 
the Roman and German horse, he proposed to 
diminish the consumption within his lines by 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


241 


dismissing them altogether, giving them instruc- 
tions to make the best of their way to their seve- 
ral cantons, and there to represent the situation 
in which they had left the army, and the necessi- 
ty of making a great and speedy effort from every 
quarter to relieve it. He had eighty thousand 
men under his command, and might be able to 
subsist them for thirty days, and no longer. 

Cesar, from the enemy’s having sent away 
their cavalry, concluded that they meant to act 
on the defensive, and to remain in their present 
situation until they should be relieved. With little 
apprehension of disturbance, therefore, from with- 
in his lines, he proceeded te execute amazing 
works; at once to secure his prey and to cover 
himself against any attempts which might be 
made to rescue them, This great commander 
owed many of his distinguished successes to the 
surprising works which he executed; so far ex- 
ceeding the fears or apprehensions of his enemy, 
that they found themselves unexpectedly forced 
into difficulties with which they were not prepared 
to contend. 

The Roman armies in general, and those 
which served under Cesar in particular, had 
learned to make war with the pick-ax and the 
shovel, no less than with the javclin and the 
sword, and were inured to prodigies of labour as 
well as of valour. In the present case they were 
made to execute lines of circumvallation and 
countervallation over an extent of twelve or four- 
teen miles, They began with digging, quite 
round the foot of the hill, a ditch twenty feet 
wide, with perpendicular sides, in order to pre- 
vent any surprise from the town. At the dis- 
tance of four hundred feet from this ditch, and 
beyond the reach of the enemy’s missiles, was 
drawn the linc of countervallation, consisting of 
a ditch fifteen wide, and a rampart twelve feet 
high, furnished, as usual, with a palisade. Ata 
proper distance from this first linc which fronted 
the town, so as to leave a proper interval for the 
lodgement and forming of his army, he drew 
another line, consisting of the same parts and di- 
mensions, fronting the field. From the nature 
of the ground, part of these works were upon 
the hills, and part in the hollows or valleys; and 
the ditches, wherever the level permitted, or 
could not earry off the water, were allowcd to be 
filled, 

As he had reason, at least after the distress of 
a blockade began to be felt, to expect from a gar- 
rison, which execeded his own army in numbers, 
the most vigorous sallies from within; and, by 
the unitcd exertions of all the Gaulish nations in 
behalf of their friends, every cflort that could be 
made from without ; and as his own army, con- 
sisting of no more than sixty thousand men, 
could not equally man, in every place, works of 
such extent, he thought it necessary to cover his 
lines with every species of outwork then practised 
in the art of attack or defence, the cippi, lilie, 
and the stimuli. 

The first were forked stakes, or large branchcs 
of trees planted in rows in the bottom of a ditch 
five feet wide, bound together to prevent their 
being pulled up separately, and cut short and 
pointed to wound the enemy who should attenipt 
to pass them. 

Ihe second, or liliæ, consisted of single stakes 
sharpened and made hard in the fire, planted in 
the bottom, of tapering or canical holes, of which 


242 


there were many rows placed in quincunx; so 
that a person who had passed in the interval of 
any two must necessarily fall into a third. ‘This 
device was commonly masked or concealed with 
slender brushwood covered with earth. 

The last, or the stimuli, were wooden shafts 
set in the ground and stuck thick with barbed 
hooks, to fasten or tear the flesh of those whe 
attempted to pass them in the night, or without 
the necessary precautions. 

All these several works, it appears, the Roman 
army completed, considerably within the thirty 
days for which Vercingetorix had computed that 
his provisions might last. Both parties concern- 
ed in this blockade, without any attempt to hasten 
the event, seemed to wait for the several circum- 
stances on which they relied for the issue. Cesar 
trusted to the effects of famine, and the Gauls to 
the assistance of their friends, who were in reality 
assembling in great numbers from every quarter 
to effect their relief. They are said to have mus- 
tered at Bibracte! no less than two hundred and 
forty thousand foot, with eight thousand horse. 
But if these numbers are not exaggerated, they 
may be considered as a proof how far those na- 
tions were ignorant of the circumstances on which 
the fortunes of armies really turn. The supreme 
command of this multitude was given to Comius, 
a chieftain of one of the northern cantons, who 
having some time made war in conjunction with 
the Romans, owed the rank which he held in his 
own country to the favour of Cesar, but could 
not resist the contagion of that general ardour 
with which his countrymen now rose to recover 
their freedom. 

While this great host was assembling, the un- 
happy garrison of Alesia received no tidings of 
relief. Their provisions being near exhausted, 
they began to despair of succour. A council was 
held to deliberate on their conduct, and to form 
some plan of escape. Some were of opinion 
that they ought to surrender themselves, and to 
implore the victor’s mercy. Others, that they 
should make a general sally, endeavour to cut 
their way through the enemy, and escape or pe- 
rish with swords in their hands. Critognatus, a 
warrior of rank from the canton of the Arverni,? 
treated the opinion of those who proposed to 
surrender as mean and dastardly; that of the 
second, as brave rather in appearance than in 
reality. ‘Bravery,’ he said, ‘does not consist 
in sudden efforts of impatience and despair, but 
in firmly enduring for any length of time what 
the circumstances of war may require. Shall we 
think merely, because we have no communication 
with our friends, that they have deserted us, and 
do not intend to make any effort to save us? 
Against whom do you think Cesar hath con- 
structed so many works in his rear? Against 
whom does he man them in your sight with so 
much care? He has intelligence, although you 
have not, that a powerful army is preparing to 
relieve you. Take courage, and wait the coming 
of your friends. Even if your provisions should 
fail, the example of former times will point out a 
resource. Your ancestors, being surrounded by 
the armies of the Cimbri and the ‘Teutones, 
rather than surrender themselves, fed on the 
bodies of those who were unserviceable in the 
war; and by this expedient held out till the ene- 


1 Autun. 2 Auvergne. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV. 


my was obliged to retire. And yet, on that oc- 
casion, our ancestors had less cause than we have 
to make every effort of constancy and fortitude. 
Their enemies were passing, and meant only to 
plunder a country which they were soon to aban- 
don; our enemies come to bind us in perpetual 
chains, and to establish a dominion at which hu- 
man nature revolts.” 

The Gauls kept their resolution to hold out, 
but rejected the means that were proposed to 
supply their necessities, or reserved them for a 
time of greater extremity. The proposition of 
Critognatus is, by Cesar, who was himself the 
unprovoked author of so much distress, and who 
continued, without remorse, to gratify his ambi- 
tion at the expense of so much blood, mentioned 
with horror as an act of nefarious cruelty.2 So 
much are men affected with appearances which 
shock the imagination more than with the real 
measure of what is hurtful to mankind. What 
followed, however, was prebably no less cruel on 
the part of the Gaulish army than it was on the 
part of Cesar; the first, to lessen the consump- 
tion of food, turned out the women, children, and 
unarmed inhabitants of the town to the mercy of 
the enemy; and Cesar, in order to accumulate 
the suffermgs of the besieged, would neither re- 
lieve nor suffer them to pass. From these cir- 
cumstances we may presume, although it is not 
mentioned, that they must have perished a specta- 
cle of extreme anguish and suffering in the pre- 
sence of both armies. 

In the midst of these extremities, Comius, with 
the united force of the Gaulish nations, at last 
appeared for the relief of Alesia, and with their 
multitudes covered the neighbouring hills. Being 
favoured by the nature of the ground, they were 
enabled to advance within five hundred paces, or 
less than half a mile, of Casar’s lines. On the 
following day the cavalry on both sides began to 
act. The Gaulish horse, trusting to their supe- 
riority in number, or to the defensive plan which 
the Romans were likely te follow on the present 
occasion, drew forth on the plain below the town, 
and proposed to encourage their friends by braving 
the enemy. Cesar thought it necessary to repel 
this species of insult, and sent his cavalry to ac- 
cept the challenge. An action began about 
noon, and lasted till the setting of the sun, when 
the Gaulish horse, who till then had maintained 
the fight with great obstinacy and valour, being 
taken in flank by the Germans tn Cesar’s service, 
were obliged to give way. Both sides, on this 
occasion, had mixed parties of infantry with 
their horse; and the Gaulish foot, who were en- 
gaged in this action, being now abandoned to the 
swords of the enemy, fled in the utmost confusion 
to the rear of their own army. 

After this action nothing passed for a day and 
a nicht; but it appeared that, during this time, 
the Gaulish army in the field were collecting fag- 
gots and hurdles to fill up the trenches of Cæsar, 
and preparing graplings to tear down the pali- 
sade and the parapet; and that they only waited - 
till these preparations should be finished to make 
a vigorous attempt to raise the siege. ‘They ac- 
cordingly came down in the middle of the night, 
and, with a great shout, the only signal they sup- 
posed could be understood by their friends in 
(‘_ ee ee 


3 Nec pretereunda videtur oratio Critognati propter 
ejus singularem ac nefariam crudelitatem. De Bell. 
Gall lib. vil. c. 76. 


Cuar. LL] 


town, gave a general assault on Cesar’s line of 
circumvallation, as far as their numbers could 
embrace it, and without any choice of place. 

Cesar had assigned to every legion and sepa- 
rate body of men their station, and had repeat- 
edly, to render them familiar with his disposition, 
given the alarm, and taught them to repair to 
their posts; he had placed Mark Antony and 
Trebonius, with a body of reserve, to succour 
any part of the lines that might be in danger of 
being forced. So prepared, he now received, with- 
out any surprise, the general assault of the Gauls. 
Elis men suffered considerably from the first 
shower of missiles that came from so numerous 
an enemy; but as soon as the assailants ad- 
vanced to the outworks, and felt themselves en- 
tangled in the snares which had been laid for 
them, and against which they had taken no pre- 
caution, they were sensible that they fought at a 
great disadvantage, and desisted at once from this 
rash and inconsiderate attempt. 

The besieged, in anxious expectation of what 
was to pass in the field, hearing the shout that 
was raised by their friends, returned it to make 
known their intention to co-operate in every 
attack, and instantly begun to employ the pre- 
parations which they likewise had made to fill up 
the trenches, or force the lines. ‘They continued, 
during the greater part of the night, to cast such 
materials as they could throw into the broad 
ditch at the foot of the hill; but, when day ap- 
peared, seeing that their friends had retired, with- 
out making any impression on the exterior line, 
they too, not to expose themselves in an attempt 
in which they were not to be seconded, withdrew 
to their station on the hill. 

From this disappointment the Gauls, both 
within and without the blockade, were sensible 
of their error in having made an attack before 
they had examined the enemy’s works. To cor- 
rect this mistake, they visited the whole circum- 
ference of Cæsars lines. ‘They observed, in a 
particular place, that the exterior line was inter- 
rupted by a hill which it could not embrace with- 
out making a great circuit. That Cesar, to 
avoid so great an addition to his labour, and so 
much outline to defend, had encamped two le- 
gions in that place with their usual entrench- 
ment, which formed a kind of fortress on the 
summit of the hill, trusting to this camp as a re- 
doubt that would connect his defences on that side. 

This place was chosen by the Gauls for a se- 
cond and better concerted attempt than the first ; 


and they determined, instead of the night to make | 


their attack at noon-day, when the enemy were 
most likely to be off their guard. Five-and-fifty 
thousand men were selected for this service; and 
they began their march early in the night, ar- 
rived at their ground before break of day, and lay 
concealed under a ridge of hills till noon. At 
this time they came forward, furnished not only 
with grappling irons to tear down the palisade, 
which was formed on the parapet, but with hur- 
dles and faggots to fill up the ditch, and to smo- 
ther the stimuli from which they had suffered so 
much in their former attacks. 

Cesar, though not thrown off his guard, either 
by the time of the day, or by his former success, 
was sensible, that he was now attacked in his 
weakest place. He ordered Labienus instantly, 
with six cohorts, to support the legions that were 
posted in that station; and as he had reason to 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


243 


expect, at the same time, a general assault, both 
from within and from without his lines, to fa- 
vour this principal attack, he ordered every sepa- 
rate body to its post of alarm; and he himself, 
with a considerable reserve, took a station from 
which he could best observe the whole, and be 
ready to sustain any part that was pressed. He 
had given Labienus instructions, in case he found 
that the lines could not be defended, to sally 
forth, and to bring the action to an issue, in 
which the Romans were generally found to have 
an advantage by mixing with the enemy sword 
in hand. 

The Gauls, who were shut up on the heights 
of Alesia, only waiting to second the attempts of 
their friends in the field, began the action on 
their part nearly about the same time; and the 
Romans, being alarmed with hostile cries and 
shouts, at once both in their front and in their 
rear, were in danger of being seized witha panic, 
from which the best troops, on occasion, are not 
exempted. 

Labienus was so much pressed where the 
Gauls made their principal effort, that Cesar de- 
tached two several parties from his reserve to 
sustain him. First, a body of six cohorts under 
Decimus Brutas, and afterwards a body of seven 
cohorts under Fabius. At length, upon receiv- 
ing information that Labienus had not been able 
to prevent the enemy from passing the intrench- 
ment, but that he meant, with all the troops who 
had joined him from different stations, amount- 
ing to nine-and-thirty cohorts, to make a general 
sally according to his instructions, and to mix 
with the enemy sword in hand; he himself in- 
stantly moved to support him. 

Cesar had, by this time, observed, that the 
enemy, by a gross misconduct, had made no feint 
or no attempt on any other part of the lines to 
favour their principal attack; and he therefore, 
with those he still retained as a body of reserve, 
not only left the post of observation he had taken 
in the beginning of the action, but ventured even 
to unfurnish some other parts of the line as he 
assed, and advanced with great rapidity to join 
in the sally which Labienus was about to attempt. 
In his coming he was known from afar by the 
conspicuous dress which he generally wore in 
time of battle ; and his arrival, on this occasion, 
with the reinforcement which he brought, greatly 
animated that part of his army, which had begun 
to despair of the event. He had, in this criticat 
moment, with his usual genius and presence of 
mind, ordered his cavalry to get out of the lines; 
and, while the foot were engaged iu front, to take 
the enemy in flank or in the rear, If the event 
had been otherwise doubtful, this movement alone, 
it is probable, must have secured it in his favour. 
The Gauls, although in the attack they had acted 
with ardour; yet ost courage when pushed to 
defend themselves; and, upon the appearance of 
Cesar’s cavalry in their rear, took to flight, and 
were pursued with great slaughter. 

This flight at once decided the fate of both 
attacks ; of the Gauls, who were shut up in 
Alesia, and of their countrymen, who had come 
to their relief. During the night, those in the 
field, discomfited by their repulse, were sepa- 
rating, leaving their chieftains, and dispersing in 
different directions. Many fella prey to the par- 
ties who were sent in pursuit of them. Those 
from within the lines, who had suffered so long a 


244 


blockade, now seeit y all their hopes of relief at 
an end, were no lor: ‘er disposed to contend with 
their fate. Vercing torix having assembled the 
leaders together, told them, That, as he had un- 
dertaken this war, not from motives of private 
ambition, but from an earnest desire to recover, 
if he could, the freedom of his country, so he was 
now ready to become a sacrifice to the safety of 
his countrymen, and in any manner they thought 
proper to dispose of him, whether dead or alive, 
was willing to be made the means of appeasing 
the victor’s revenge. 

At this consultation it was determined to sur- 
render; and Vercingetorix suffered himself to be 
delivered up. With respect to the treatment he 
received, Cæsar is silent; but it is probable, that, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor IV. 


like other captive chiefs, on such occasions, he 
was destined to grace the future triumph of his 
conqueror; though, upon a fair review of the 
parts they had severally acted, likely to furnish a 
comparison not altogether to his advantage, and 
in some respects fit to obscure his glory. 

The other prisoners also, except those who be- 
longed to the cantons of the Ædui and Arverni, 
underwent the ordinary fate of captives; and, in 
this capacity, were exposed to sale, or divided as 
plunder among the troops. Cesar reserved the 
prisoners of the Ædui and Arverni, on this occa- 
sion, to serve him as hostages in securing the 
submission of their respective cantons, and in 
obtaining from thence an immediate supply of 
provisions, 


CHAPTER IV. 


Cesar remains in Gaul— Pompey assumes Piso into the office of Consul—Succession of Servius 
Sulpicius and M. Claudius Marcellus—Arrangement for the Provinces—Motion to recall Cæ- 
sar— Continued Debates in the Senate— Operations of Cesar in Gaul—Intrigues in the City— 
Affairs in the other Provinces—Campaign of Cicero—Succession of Consuls—State of Parties 
in the City and in the Senate—Arrival of Cesar in Italy in the Spring—Return to Gaul— 
Parts with two Legions to Pompey and the Senate—Alarm of Cesar’s March—The Consul 


Marcellus commits his Sword to Pompey. 


_ THE seventh and the most difficult campaign 
of the war in Gaul being now at an end, Cesar 
sent Labienus, with two legions beyond the 
Soane;! Caius, Fabius, with two more, to the 
heads of the Marne and the Meuse; other offi- 
cers with separate bodies, amounting in all to 
three legions, into different stations beyond the 
Loire and towards the Garonne; Quintus Tul- 
lius Cicero, with some other officers, to a station 
allotted them on the Soane, to superintend the 


formation of magazines and the supply of pro- 


visions, which were chiefly transported by the 
navigation of that river, 
Cesar himself having now no other object of 


equal importance with that of securing the pos- | 
session of a country so populous and of so great: 


extent, from which he might draw such resources 
of men and of revenue, as must put him on the 


foot of a great monarch, determined to pass the | 


winter on this side of the Alps. He had obtained 
a dispensation from the law which excluded him 
from the consulate, so long as he retained his 
army; but as it was not yet time to avail himself 
of his privilege, he resolved, by remaining at a 
distance, as much as possible to shun the notice 
of such parties at Rome as were known to ob- 
serve his proceedings, and to state them as matter 


of general alarm. He nevertheless did not suffer | 
any thing of moment to pass in the city without | 


taking some part by means of his agents and par- 


tizans, and was continually employed in gaining | 
to his interests all those who were likely to come | 
into office, or who, by their personal consideration, . 


were of any importance in the state, and ever 
strove to exclude from office such as were disin- 
clined to himself, or who could not be gained. 
Pompey had now, for some months, exercised 
the office of sole consul. In that time he had, in 


1 The Arar. 


e 


some measure, restored the authority of govern- 
ment, and had exercised it with moderation. He 
had shown himself qualified to act the part of an 
excellent prince, though ill qualified to endure 
the equality which is claimed by the citizens of a 
commonwealth. His continual desire of unpre- . 
cedented honours was one of the evils that dis- 
tressed the republic. This evil, however, was 
partly mitigated by the facility with which he 
parted with power. Havıng enjoyed his present 
dignity from the first of March to the beginning 
of August, he took for colleague his father-in- 
law Metellus Scipio, suspending the prosecution 
under which he then lay, for bribery, in soliciting 
votes at a preceding election. 

The newly elected colleague of Pompey, desir- 
ous to signalize his administration by some act of 
reformation, moved and obtained the repeal of the 
act in which Clodius had so greatly circumscribed 
the power of the censors; and he attempted to 
revive the authorityof this magistracy, but in vain. 
Few citizens, now in public view, could bear the 
rigorous inspection of this once awful tribunal, as 
few had the courage to undertake or to exercise 
its trust. The institution accordingly had fallen 
into disuse, because it was not fitted to the times. 
And there being few of the people that were fit 
either to censure, or that could bear to be cen- 
sured, it was not in the power of laws to revive 
what the general sense and manners of the age 
had abolished. _ 

Disorders arising from the weakness of go- 
vernment had come to that extreme at which 
states must either correct themselves, or undergo 
some fatal change. The example of punish- 
ments inflicted, and of prosecutions still carried on 
against persons lately in office, for the illegal. me- 
thods employed at elections, deterred many from 
offering themselves for any of the offices of state ; 
and the late law, excluding consuls, pretors, and 
other magistrates from any provincial appoint- 


— = 


Cuar. IV.] 


ments for five years after the expiration of their 
term, removed one powerful motive by which 

citizens were induced to seek for such honours. 
At the elections for the ae year only three 
candidates appeared; M. Marcellus, Servius Sul- 
picius, and M. Cato: all of them supposed to be 
of the senatorian party ; but very differently con- 
sidered by those who now endeavoured to rule the 
state. Marcellus had, in fact, recommended him- 
self to Pompey; and Sulpicius, as afterwards 
appeared, had been gained by Cæsar; and both 
were warmly espoused by those powerful patrons 
in the present contest in opposition to Cato, 
whose success might have proved a considerable 
obstruction to Cesar’s designs. 
It is observed of this competition, that it was 
carried on without bribery or tumult. As the 
competitors were supposed to be all of the sena- 
torian party, the senators thought their interest 
secure whichever of the candidates should pre- 
vail. And as the senatorian party divided upon 
the occasion, the influence of Cesar and Pompey 
easily cast the balance on the side of Sulpicius 
and Marcellus. Cato, during the competition, 
continued in the same habits of friendship as 
usual with both; and when the choice was de- 
cided in their favour, instead of withdrawing 
from public view, as was common under suc 
disappointments, he went to the field of Mars as 
usual from the assershlies of the people, stript 
and went to exercise, and continued from thence 
forward to frequent the forum in his common 
undress. To those who condoled with him, or 
pressed him to continue his suit for another 
year, as he had done when first disappointed of 
the preztorship, he made answer, That he thought 
it was the part of a good man to undertake the 
ublic service, whenever he was intrusted with 
t, and to make his willingness known, but not to 
court the public for employments as a favour to 
himself. ‘The people,” he said, “at the time 
that they refused me the pretorship, were under 
actual violence: in this case, they have made a 
free choice, and it appears that I must either 
violate my own mind, or renounce their good- 
will, My own mind is of more consequence to 
me than their favour; but, if I retain my charac- 
ter, I shall not be so unreasonable as to expect 
consideration from persons to whom it is not 
agreeable.’’2 
When the new consuls were re- 


U C: 702. ceived into office, their immediate 
Gee: varinis predecessors being by the late act 
Claud. ee. precluded for five years from hold- 


ing any provincial governinent, it 
became necessary to fill stations of 
this sort with those who had formerly been in 
office, and who hitherto had not been appointed 
to any command in the provinces. Accordingly 
Bibulus, who had been the colleague of Cesar in 
his consulate, was appointed to the government 
of Syria, vacant by the death of Crassus. Cicero 
was named to succeed Appius Claudius in Cilicia 
and Cyprus, Accius Varus was appointed pretor 
in Africa, and P. Cornelius Spinther in Achaia. 
Pompey, who had hitherto enjoyed a dispensation 
from the law, in continuing to hold by his lieu- 
tenants the government and command of the 
army in Spain, while he filled the office of con- 
sul in the city, now professed au intention to 


cellus, Coss. 


2 Plutarch. in Canton, p. 268. 


5I 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


245 


take possession of his province in person, and he 
actually set out from Rome for this purpose ; but 
was induced to suspend his journey by a motion, 
which was made in the senate by Marcellus, 
soon after his accession to the office of consul. 

Cæsar was now in possession of a very im- 
portant privilege, which entitled him to sue for 
the consulate, without resigning the command 
of his army. His view in coveting this privilege ; 
his continual augmentation of the troops in his 
province; his address in attaching the army to 
himself; his insinuation; his liberality; his as- 
siduity to gain every person that could be won, 
and to preclude from power every one likely to 
oppose himself: the whole tendency of his con- 
duct, and the enormous power he had acquired, 
began to be observed, and gave a general alarm. 
What Cato had so often represented to no pur- 
pose, began to be generally perceived; and per- 
sons, formerly the least attentive to the warnings 
they received, would now have been glad to re- 
move Cæsar from the post of advantage they had 
given him. 

The greater part of the senate had become re- 
miss in their‘attendance, and regardless even of 
their own political interests. The few who ex- 
erted themselves, were distracted with personal 
jealousies and distrust of each other. Cicero in 
particular, who before his banishment had been 
strenuous on the side of the aristocracy, now 
grown timorous from the sufferings he had in- 
curred, was chiefly attentive to his own safety, 
which he studied by paying his court to the pre- 
vailing powers. ‘There was no bar in Cesar’s 
way, beside the great consideration and the jea- 
lousy of Pompey, who had assisted him in pro- 
curing his privilege to stand for the consulate in 
absence; but now saw its tendency, and wished 
to recall it. It was probably, therefore, with the 
approbation of Pompey, though after his depart- 
ure from Rome, that the consul Marcellus, while 
the senate was deliberating on the other removes 
and appointments in the provincial governments, 
proposed that, the war in Gaul being finished, 
Cesar should be recalled; or, if his friends in- 
sisted on his being continued in his command, 
that he should not be admitted on the list of can- 
didates for the consulate, until he presented him- 
self personally for this purpose. 

This motion gave rise in the senate to warm 
debates, which were frequently adjourned, and as 
often resumed. ‘The consul Sulpicius, supported 
by numbers of the tribunes who were in the in- 
terest of Casar, opposed the proceeding. Pom- 

ey himself, under pretence that he waited the 
issue of these debates, stopped short in his jour- 
ney to Spain, passed some time at Ariminum in 
reviewing the new levies which were destined to 
reinforce the troops of his province ; and at last, 
being summoned to attend the senate on the fif- 
teenth of August, to consider of the provincial 
arrangements,’ he returned to Rome. 

On this day, Pompey affected to censure the 
violence with which it had been proposed to re- 
call, before the expiration of his term, an officer 
legally appointed. He acknowledged his opinion, 
that Cesar ought not to unite the government of 
a province, and the command of an army, with 
the dignity of consul; but dissuaded the senate 
from taking an immediate resolution on that 


Dio 


3 Cicer. Epist. ad Familiar, lib. viii. ep. 4. 


. Cass. Jib. iv. c. 58, 59. 


246 


head. The debate was adjourned to the first of 
Septemver.. Then no meeting of the senate 
could be formed; but as soon as the subject was 
again resumed, the late consul Cornelius Scipio, 
the father-in-law to Pompey, proposed, that on 
the first of March, when the persons destined to 
succeed the present consuls must have entered 
on office, a day should be fixed to consider of the 
province of Gaul, and moved that this question 
should be resumed in preference to every other 
business.? Marcellus accordingly prepared, and 
laid before the senate, a decree for this purpose on 
the last of September. By the first clause of this 
decree, the consuls elected for the following year 
were required, on the first of March, to move in 
the senate the consideration of the consular pro- 
vinces, to admit no other business to precede or to 
be joined with this, and to suffer no interruption 
in the meetings of the senate, even on account of 
the assemblies of the people. By the same clause, 
it was resolved, That the three hundred senators, 
appointed judges for the year, might be called off 
from their sittings in the courts to attend the 
senate on this business; and if it should be ne- 
cessary to make any motion on this subject in the 
assemblies of the people at large, or of the Ple- 
beians? separately, that the consuls Sulpicius and 
Marcellus, the pretors, the tribunes, or suck of 
them as shall be agreed upon, should move che 
people accordingly. 

To this clause were prefixed, in the usual fc “m, 
the names of twelve senators, as the author; or 
movers of it, 

By a second clause, bearing the same names, a 
caution was entered against any obstruction to be 
given in this business by persons empowered to 
control the senate’s proceedings; and it was re- 
solved, that whoever should put a negative on this 
decree, should bé declared an enemy to his coun- 
try; and that the senate, notwithstanding any 
such negative, should persist in recording its own 
decree, and in carrying its purpose into execution. 
In the face of this resolution, the tribunes C. 
Celius, L. Venicius, P. Cornelius, C. Vibius 
Pansa, interposed their negatives. 

By another clause, the senate resolved, that on 
the same day, the case of the armies of the re- 
public should be taken into consideration, and all 
who claimed their dismission, either on account 
of the length of service, or any other considera- 
tion, should be heard; and that this likewise 
should be entered as a decree of the senate, not- 
withstanding any negative interposed to the con- 
trary. Here the tribunes C. Celius and C. Pansa, 
again forbad the decree. The last clause related 
to the mode of carrying into execution the pur- 
pose of the Pompeian law, with respect to the 
nomination of propretors to the province of Ci- 
icia, and the other eight pretorian provinces; 
and on this clause likewise, the two last mention- 
ed tribunes entered their negative.4 

Thus the resolutions of the senate, though pre- 
served in their own records, were, by the continual 
interposition of the tribunes, prevented from hav- 
ing any real effect. And Cesar, from the disputes 
which had arisen on his account, had sufficient 
warning, if this had been necessary, to prepare 
himself for an approaching conflict. It is indeed, 


1 Cicero ad Familiar, lib. viii. ep. 9. 
2 Ibid. 3 Ad Populum Plebemve ferrent. 
4 Cicero ad Familiar. lib. viii. ep. 8. 


Ibid. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


(Book IV. 


likely, that though in action the principal cha- 
racters of his mind were decision and rapidity, 
yet no man ever laid his designs more deep, 
looked forward to consequences more remote, or 
waited with more patience the proper time for the 
execution of his purpose. He had now, by the 
unremitted application of eight years, acquired 
the advantage, for the sake of which he had co- 
veted the command in Gaul; he was at the head 
of a numerous army, which he had gradually 
augmented from two or three legions, the esta- 
blishment of his province, to twelve, well inured 
to service, and attached to his person. He was 
in possession of a privilege to stand for the con- 
sulate, without disbanding his army; and when. 
he should unite the first civil and political autho- 
rity in the state, with an army at the gates of the 
capital, there is no doubt that he might be con- 
sidered as sovereign of the empire. His apparent 
right to the advantages he had gained was such, 
that the resolutions of the senate against him, 
however necessary to the preservation of the 
commonwealth, might have the semblance of in- 
justice, and were likely to engage both his own 
army and the populace of Rome in his quarrel. 
He himself prepared for the issue, by removing 
every cause of embarrassment in his province, 
and by paying fresh court to the legions under 
his command with gratifications and bounties, 

He had dispersed or destroyed all the great 
armies, which the utmost efforts of the Gaulish 
nations, in the preceding campaign, had been 
able to assemble against him; but he had not 
reconciled the spirits of that people, nor inured 
them to his government. He had a plausible 
ground, therefore, from which to refute the alle- 
gations of the senate, who proceeded in their re- 
solutions against him, on a supposition, that the 
war in his province was ended; and at the same 
time, had a fair pretence to gratify his army with 
the spoils of the country. For these purposes, 
soon after he had placed his army in winter quar- 
ters, he had intelligence, or affected to believe, 
that the war was likely to break out afresh in 
different cantons; and under this pretence, took 
occasion to carry his legions successively into ac- 
tion. Leaving M. Antony to command at Bi- 
bracte® on the right of the Loire, he himself, with 
the eleventh and twelfth legions, passed that river, 
took the canton of the Binuiies by surprise, 
plundered their habitations, carried many of the 
people into captivity, and continued to lay waste 
the country, until they and ail the neighbouring 
cantons on the left of the Loire, to avert these 
calamities, surrendered themselves at discretion. 

From this expedition, in which he spent forty 
days, he returned to his quarters, and ordered 
the two legions, which had been thus employed, 
a gratuity of two hundred sestertti, or about thirty 
shillings a man to the private soldiers; and of 
about two thousand sestertii, or sixteen pounds, 
to the centurions. ‘This money, it is observed 
by the historian,6 was not immediately paid; but 
was retained by Cesar asa pledge in his own 
hands, or remained as a debt due to the army, 
giving to every individual a special interest in the 
safety and success of his general. 

About eighteen days after this first division of 
the army was brought back to its quarters, other 


5 Afterwards Augustodunum, now Autun. 
6 Hist. de Bell. Gallico. 


Cuar. IV.] 


two legions were employed on a like expedition 
between the Loire and the Seine.” The inhabit- 
ants of this tract were to suffer military execu- 
tion, upon a complaint that they infested the 
newly acquired subjects of Cæsar beyond the 
Loire. He accordingly marched to protect his 
new allies; and being arrived in the country, 
from whence they were said to be invaded, found 
the supposed enemy, by the devastations of the 
preceding campaign which had ruined their towns 
and villages, reduced to live in temporary huts, 
in which they withstood with difficulty the in- 
clemency of the season, and were rather objects 
of pity than of hostile resentment. On the ap- 
proach of the Romans, they fled to the woods, 
where they perished in great. numbers, from the 
effects.of famine and cold. To force them to an 
immediate surrender, or to cut off all hopes of 
advantage from delay, Cesar made a disposition 
to prevent their having any respite from their 
present sufferings. He ordered the ruins of 
Genabum® to be repaired as a place of arms, 
quartered his legions there, and kept the horse 
and light infantry in the field to pursue the na- 
tives, to seize their persons, and to multiply the 
evils to which they were exposed. In this ser- 
vice too, it was likely that the army was rewarded 
by the distribution of captives, the only spoils of 
such an enemy, and came to have a demand on 
Cæsar for gratuities equal to those which had 
been granted to the eleventh and twelfth legions. 

These operations led on to the spring, when a 
more real service took place on the frontiers of the 
low countries. From that quarter, the people of 
the Remi nad given information, that the Bello- 
vaci, or inhabitants of what is now called the 
Beauvais, with other cantons on the right of the 
Oise, were actually arming, and meant to make 
war on the Romans and their allies. 

On this intimation, Cesar thought proper again 
to call forth the eleyenth legion into service ; and 
it is remarkable that this legion, though now in 
its eighth campaign, is expressly said to have 
been thus employed out of its turn, in order to 
improve a discipline, in which, when compared 
to the other legions, they were deemed to be still 
defective. The eighth and ninth legions, the 
one from the station of Fabius, and the other 
from that of Labienus, were ordered to join them 
in the country of the Sucsones,!® near ile conflu- 
euce of the Oise and the Aisne. With this force 
Cesar passed the Oise; but arrived too late to 
surprise his enemy. The Bellovaci,!! with some 
of their neighbours, apprehending, from the fate 
of the nations on the Loire, that they could not 
rely for safety ou their innocence, nor on the 
care which they had taken to avoid giving offence 
to the Romans, had taken arms for their own sc- 
curity, and had retired with all their effects to a 
strong post. They had a hill in their front, be- 
yond which there lay a morass, and in that situ- 
ation they thought themselves sufficiently secure 
without any artificial work. 

Cesar posted himself in their neighbourhood ; 

` and supposing that the superiority of their num- 
vers would inspire them with confidence, took 
neasures to augment their presumption, and to 
derive some advantage from the errors they were 


rr a ce 


7 To the country of the Carnutes. 
8 Now Orleans. 


9 Rheims. 10 The Soissons. 11 TheBeauvais. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


247 


likely to commit, under the effects of this disposi- 
tion. He affected unusual caution, fortified his 
camp with uncommon care, scarcely ventured 
abroad to cover his foragers, and seemed to be en- 
tirely occupied in securing himself. 

The enemy, however, continued to avoid any 
general action, and were satisfied with the suc- 
cessful war they were suffered to make on the 
foraging parties which were sent from the Roman 
camp. Being joined by five hundred German 
horse, they attacked and destroyed the cavalry, 
which had come to the assistance of Cæsar from 
the cantons of the Remi and Lingones,!? and on 
which he chiefly relied for covering the avenues 
to his camp. By this loss he miglit have been in 
a little time reduced to great distress, or even 
forced to retire, if he had not procured a speedy 
reinforcement, by ordering Trebonius, with the 
two legions lately stationed at Genabum,!3 and a 
third from Avaricum,” to join him without delay. 

The Gauls, on hearing of this great accession 
of strength to their enemy, and recollecting the 
fatal blockade and ruin of their countrymen at 
Alesia, determined to change their ground. They 
began to execute this resolution in the night, by 
removing their sick, wounded, and baggage; but 
had made so little progress at break of day, that 
their intention was discovered, and Cæsar, be- 
fore they began their march, had time to pass the 
morass, and to take possession of the rising ground 
in their front. ‘This he did with the greatest de- 
spatch ; and though he did not think it expedient 
to attack them in their present position, he had it 
in lis power to take advantage of any movement 
they should make, and continued to awe them 
and to keep them in suspense. 

The Gauls, therefore, instead of being able to 
depart, as they expected before day-light, were 
obliged to continue to front the enemy, in order 
to cover the retreat of their baggage. They still 
flattered themselves, that Cæsar before night 
would be obliged to retire to his camp; but ob- 
serving, that while the greater part of his army 
continued in readiness for action, he began to 
entrench himself where lic stood, they bethought 
themselves of a stratagem to elude his design. 
They brought forward the wood and straw, 
which remained, as usual, on the ground of their 
late encampment, laid them in a continual train 
along the front, and having set them on fire, 
produced such a line of smoke, as darkened the 
whole fields between the two armies. Under 
this cover, they began their retreat, and before 
Cesar could venture to penetrate the cloud of 
smoke in pursuit of thein, had gained a consider- 
able distance. On the first sight of this uncom- 
mon appearance, he suspected their design, and 
began to advance; but the precautions, which he 
was obliged to take, in order to guard against an 
ambuscade or surprise, gave the Gauls the time 
they wanted to eflect the first part of their retreat 
undisturbed. 

Before night they halted again, about ten miles 
from their former station, and recurred to the 
same means they had hitherto employed to dis- 
tress the Roman army. They succeeded in most 
of their attempts on the parties that were sent 
abroad by Cesar to procure him provisions; and 
having reduced him to the necessity of depending 
entirely for the subsistence of his army on what 


12 Rheims and Langres. 13 Orleans. 14 Bourges. 


248 


a particular district could supply, they formed a 
design, with the choice of their army, to surround 
and cut off the parties, which they expected he 
must employ on that service. Cæsar had intelli- 
gence of their design, and prepared, in his turn, 
to counteract them. He placed his army in a 
proper position to surprise the great detachment 
they had made; and having thus taken or de- 
stroyed the flower of their army, obliged the re- 
mainder, who were thrown into despair by so 
great a loss, to surrender themselves at discre- 
tion; in consequence of this surrender, he got 
een of all the cantons in that neighbour- 
100d. 

The Belgic nations being thus finally subdued, 
and Cesar having no longer any enemy to oppose 
him in the field, except a few desperate bands 
from different parts of the country, who, either 
from fear of his severity, or aversion to his go- 
vernment, had deserted their settlements, he de- 
termined to act against them in different quarters 
at once, and to cut off the retreats, which, in case 
of distress, this remnant of the nations who lately 
opposed him mutually gave to each other. He sent 
C. Fabius, with twenty-five cohorts, to act on the 
left of the Loire; the twelfth legion towards the 
sources of the Garonne, with orders to cover the 
approaches to Narbonne from the incursions of 
any stragglers, whom his intended severities 
might force upon desperate attempts on that side. 
He himself, with Labienus and Mark Antony, 
proceeded to the Meuse, where the territories of 
the late unfortunate Ambiorix,! beginning to be 
re-peopled, and the nation reinstated under its 
former leader, were become again the object of 
his vengeance. To convince this unhappy peo- 
ple, that they were not to enjoy peace under the 
government of a prince who had presumed to 
circumvent and to destroy a part of the Roman 
army, he renewed his military execution against 
them, issuing his orders, as in the former instance, 
to spare neither sex nor age. 

While Cesar himself was employed in this 
manner, C. Fabius being arrived at the place of 
his destination, between the lower parts of the 
Loire and the Garonne, found a considerable 
force in arms against Caninius Rebilus, the Ro- 
man officer, who was stationed in that quarter. 
The natives had laid siege to a fortress that was 
in possession of the Romans; but alarmed by the 
approach of Fabius, they withdrew, and endea- 
voured to pass the Loire to the northward. ln 
this attempt, being intercepted in their march, 
and obliged to fight the Roman detachment, they 
were defeated with great slaughter. After this 
calamity, about five hundred, who escaped from 
the field under Drapes, a prince of that country, 
formerly distinguished in the war against the 
Romans, took their flight in the opposite direction, 
and proposed to attack the Roman province of 
Narbonne, in order to compensate their losses 
with its spoils. 

Fabius in consequence of his victory, received 
the submission of all the nations from the Loire 
to the Seine, and quite down to the sea coast ; 
and having taken measures to secure his con- 
quest, followed Drapes to the southward, over- 
took him beyond the Garonne, and obliged him, 
being no longer in condition to make any attempt 
on the Roman province, to take refuge at Uxello- 


1 Now Liege, Juliers, and Guelderiand. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor IV. 


dunum,? a place of strength, situated on a steep 
rock, at the confluence of some of those streams, 
which, falling from the Cevennes, form the Ga- 
ronne by their junction. 

Here Caninius and Fabius having joined their 
forces together, made dispositions to invest their. 
enemy; but before their works were completed, 
Drapes, while he had yet access to the fields, 
willing to spare the magazines which he had 
made up in the town, ventured abroad with a de- 
tachinent, at the head of which he was surprised 
and taken. The natives, however, who remained 
in the place, being supplied for a considerable 
time with provisions, resolved on a vigorous de- 
fence; and, by keeping the Roman army for 
some time at bay, began to raise up anew the 
hopes and expectations of the nations around 
them. Cesar thought the reduction of this place 
an object that required his own presence. Having 
therefore sent Labienus to the Moselle, and 
having left M. Antony to command ın the low 
countries, he himself, with his usual despatch, 
crossed great part of Gaul, and appeared on the 
Garonne, equally unexpected by his own people, 
and by the enemy who were besieged in the town 
of Uxellodunum. 

The place being strong by nature, and in no _ 
want of provisions, could be forced only by cutting 
off its access to water. For this purpose Cesar 
lined the banks of the river with archers and 
slingers, and effectually prevented the besieged 
from supplying themselves from thence. He 
proceeded next to exclude them from the use of a 
spring which burst from the rock in the approach 
to their town; for having got the command of 
the ground, he pushed a mine to the source from 
which the water came, diverted it from its former 
direction, and, by depriving the besiegers of this 
last resource, obliged them to lay down their 
arms and trust to his mercy. In this, however, 
they experienced what the author,? from whom 
these accounts are taken, considered as more than. 
the usual severity of ancient war. Cesar, ac- 
cording to this historian, having given proof of 
his clemency, bethought himself now of an ex- 
ample of justice; and for this purpose ordered 
such as had carried arms in defence of Uxello: 
dunum to have their hands struck off4 And 
this refined act of cruelty being joined to the 
many barbarous executions with which the con- 
quest of that country had been achieved, thus 
ended the war in Gaul. 

The usual time of putting the troops Into win- ` 
ter quarters not being arrived, Cesar thought 
proper to visit the nations upon the Adour, or 
what is now called Gascony ; the only part of 
his new conquests in the acquisition of which he 
had not acted in person. He marched through 
this country at the head of two legions, and was 
every where received with the most perfect sub- 
mission. From thence he repaired to Narbonne, 
the capital of his original province, held the usual 
meetings for the despatch of civil affairs, and 
made a disposition for the quarters of his army 
during the winter. By this disposition two le- - 


2 Supposed to be Cadenau. 

3 Hist. de Bell. Gall. lib viii. c. 44. 

4 Cæsar quum suam lenitatem cognitam omnibus 
sciret.—Omnibus qui arma tulerant manus precidit. 
Vitam concessit quo testator esset pena improborum 
De Bell Gall. lib. viii. c. 44. 

5 Aquitania. 


Cuar. IV.) 


gions were stationed in the high country, from 
which spring the Garonne and the Loire; or in 
the territories of the Limovaci and Arverni;6 
two at Bibracté between the Soane and the 
Loire; two between the Loire and the Seine ;7 
and the remaining four under the command of 
Trebonius, Vatinius, and Quintus Tullius Ci- 
cero, in different parts of the low countries. To 
this extremity of his new conquests he himself 
repaired, and fixed his quarters at Nemetocenna,® 
in the centre of his northern stations. 

By this distribution of his army, Cæsar formed 
a kind of chain from the frontier of his original 
province, quite through the heart of his new acqui- 
sitions to the Meuse and the Scheld. And by his 
seeming anxiety for the safety of the northern 
extremities of his province, and still more by his 
own distance from Italy, he probably lulled for a 
while the vigilance or jealousy of his principal 
opponents at Rome. His own attention, how- 
ever, to the state of politics was never less re- 
mitted. 

Mark Antony, a person profligate and dissi- 
pated, but when the occasion required exertion, 
daring and eloquent, destined to be frequently 
mentioned in the sequel of this history, now be- 
gan to be employed by Cesar in the affairs of the 
city; and, under pretence of standing for the 
priesthood, was sent from Gaul, where he had 
tecently served in the army, to bear a principal 
part among the agents and emissaries of his gene- 
ral. These agents were continually busied in 
Inagnifying his services, and in gaining to his in- 
terest every person of consideration who could 
in any degree advance or obstruct his designs. 
In the conquest of Gaul, they alleged that he 
added to the patrimony of the Roman people a 
territory of no less than three thousand miles in 
circumference, and a revenue of forty millions 
Roman money. They took care at the same 
time, in his name and by his directions, under 
the pious pretence of celebrating the memory of 
his daughter, thc late wife of Pompey, to cajole 
the people with public entertainments and feasts ; 
and proceeded to execute, at a great expense, the 
splendid works which Cesar had formerly ar- 
dered. 

He himself, at the same time, was careful to 
secure the affections of the army ; doubled their 
pay, and was lavish in all the other articles 
which were derived from his bounty. Besides 
his occasional liberality to the legions in time of 
the war, he gave, or engaged himself to pay, to 
each particular soldier, what to persons of that 
condition was a considerable object. In the city 
he even entered into the secrets of every family, 
and, as has been mentioned, gained the master 
by courting the mistress or favourite slave. His 
purse was ever open to gratify the covetous with 
presents, to relieve the necessitous, and to silence 
the creditors of those who were oppressed with 
debt. He encouraged the prodigal to squander 
their patrimonies, and freely lent them the aids 
which their extravagance rendered necessary to 
them. He kept a correspondence at the same 
time with dependant and foreign princes; and 
took upon him the protection of provincial towns, 


6 Limoges and Auvergne. 7 At Tours and 
Chartres. 8 Supposed to be Arras. 

9 Plutarch. in Vit. Catonis, p. 268. Sueton. in Jul. 
Ces. c. 25. Between about three and four hundred 
thousand pounds. 

-) 


oe 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC 


249 


in order to secure their affection and their con- 
fidence. 

While Cesar was thus extending his influence 
in the empire, he had amused Pompey by as- 
signing to him, in all their arrangements, what 
was apparently the place of honour and of import- 
ance at the head of affairs at Rome; as he had 
gratified Crassus likewise by leaving him to 
choose the most lucrative government, while he 
himself submitted to be employed as a mere pro- 
vincial officer, to explore a barbarous country, 
and to make war with its natives. But by thus 
yielding the supposed preference of station to his 
rivals; he actually employed them as the willing 
tools and ministers of his own ambition. The 
former; with all his disposition to emulation and 
jealousy, and perhaps for some time the dupe of 
these artifices, imagined that Cesar advanced by 
his permission, and that the present state of par- 
ties was the fruit of his own address. As he 
himseif, for the most part, endeavoured to obtain 
his ends by means indirect and artificial, he was 
the more easily duped by those who affected to 
be deceived by him, and who were able to over- 
reach him. Although it was impossible for him 
now to remain any longer insensib!e to the supc- 
riority which Cesar had acquired, or to those 
still more important objects at which he was 
aiming, yet he had not hitherto taken his part 
openly nor directly against him, but contented 
himself with employing others in ill-concerted 
and ineffectual attacks, which he sometimes dis- 
owned, and always feebly supported. At last, 
and in the prosecution of the measures of which 
we have observed the beginning in the senate, he 
hazarded the whole authority of that body against 
Cesar, without having provided any military 
power to enforce their commands. 

Pompey himself, while most under the in- 
fluence of ambition, and when he had it most in 
his power to trample on the civil constitution of 
his country, had shown a respect for the coni- 
monwealth, which kept him within bounds that 
were consistent with this species of government ; 
and he imagined that no man could presume to 
surpass himself in pretensions to rise above the 
ordinary level. In the course of debates relating 
to the present state of aflairs, he generally spoke 
ambiguously, or affected to disbclicve the designs 
that were imputed to Cesar; but finding, on the 
last motion which was inade to recall him from 
Gaul, that the eyes of the whole senate were 
turned upon himself, he was forced to break si- 
lence; and, with soine degree of embarrassment, 
said, that although it was his opinion, that the 
proconsul of Gaul could not, in consistence with 
justice, be instantly recalled, yet that after the 
first of March he should have no difficulties on 
the subject. “ But,” says one of the senators, 
“what if this motion should then have a nega- 
tive put upon it?’ “1 shall make no distinc- 
tion,” replied Pompey, “between Cesar’s refusing 
to ohey the order of the senate, and his procuring 
some one here to forbid that order.” “But what 
if he persist in demanding the consulate while he 
retains his province and his army? “ What,” 
replied Pompcy, “if my own child should offer 
me violence ?”!! 

After the attempt which had been made to fix 


10 Sueton. in Jul. Cas. c. 2%, 27, 28. 
1] Cicer. Epist. ad Familiares, lib. viii. ep. 8. 


250 THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION [Boox 1V 


semblies at Rome than for the field, possessed 
abilities to qualify him for any station, put him- 
self at the head of an army, and prepared for the 
defence of his province. He had set out from Rome 
in May; and having had a conference with Pom- 
pey at Tarentum, arrived at Brundusium on the 
twenty-first of that month.? 

The military establishment of Cilicia being no 
more than twelve thousand foot and two thou- 
‘sand horse, Cicero applied for an augmentation 
‘of it, and on the fourth of June was still at 
Brundusium, waiting for an answer to this ap- 
plication. But finding that his request, having 
been opposed by the consul Sulpicius,3 was un- 
successful, he set sail from that place, arrived at 
Actium on the fifteenth of that month, and, 
| passing through Athens, reached his province on 
the last of July. Here he found the troops, in 
consequence of a mutiny: which had recently 
broke out among them, separated from their offi- 
cers, dispersed in places of their own choosing, 
the men of entire cohorts absent frem their 
colours, and considering themselves as exempt 
from any authority or government whatever. 
Trusting to the respect that was due to the name 
and commission of proconsul, he ordered M. 
Annius, one of his lieutenants, to assemble as 
many as he could of the mutinous troops, and to 
encamp at Iconium in Licaonia. There he joined 
them on the twenty-fourth of August; and having 
intelligence of the Parthian invasion, took mea- 
sures for the security of his province ; marched, 
without loss of time, to Cybistra, on the frontier 
of Cappadocia; took under his protection the 
king Ariobarzanes, who was then threatened by 
a powerful faction in his own kingdom, and by 
receiving him as a prince in alliance with the 
Romans, dispelled the storm that had been ga- 
thered against him. He accepted, at the same 
time, of the offer that was made by Dejotarus, to 
join him with all his forces; and being in this 
situation when he received accounts that the 
Parthians had presented themselves before An- 
tioch, he supposed that his presence might be 
wanted to cover his own frontier on the side of 
Syria. He accordingly moved to that quarter, in 
order to secure the passes of the mountains. 
Here, however, he learnt, that the storm had 
blown over; that the enemy had retired, and had 
sustained a considerable loss in their retreat; and 
that Bibulus was then at Antioch. This intel- 
ligence he communicated to Dejotarus, intimat- 
ing, at the same time, that his assistance was no 
longer necessary. 

The province of Cilicia had been for some 
years subject to the Romans ; but the inhabitants 
of the mountainous parts had never acknow- 
ledged their authority, nor even that of their own 
uational sovereigns. Cicero, on his arrival in the 
neighbourhood of their country, finding that the 
people had retired to their strong holds, and were 
still determined to oppose his authority, formed a 
design to surprise them; and, for the better exe- 
cution of his project, made a feint to withdraw to 
Epiphania, where he halted for a day, as if to re- 
fresh his troops. On the day following, which 


the question of Cesar’s recall for the first of 
March, Pompey being at Naples, was taken ill, 
and supposed to be in danger. His recovery 
gave a general satisfaction, of which he had after- 
wards very flattering proofs in his progress 
through Italy. He was every where met by 
processions, found the ways strowed before him 
with flowers, and was received by multitudes, 
who appeared to be frantic with joy for the re- 
turn of his health. ; 

Whatever part Pompey himself or his emissa- 
ries may have had in procuring these demonstra- 
tions of respect and affection, it is probable he 
was highly flattered with them, and either mis- 
took them himself, or hoped that others should 
mistake them, as the proofs of a consideration and 
power which no attempt of his rival could overset 
or impair. 

The principal attention of all parties, during 
this summer and autumn, as has been men- 
tioned, had been turned to the affairs of Cesar, 
and the dangerous tendency of the course he pur- 
sued : and they were bret for a little while diverted 
from this object by an alarm on the side of Syria. 
The Parthians, encouraged by their late success 
against Crassus, passed the Euphrates with a 
great army, commanded by Pacorus, son to 
Orodes, under the direction of Osaces, a veteran 
and experienced leader. ‘They had, during the 

receding winter, made an alliance with the 

ing of Armenia, and were to be joined by his 
forces in this invasion. The disaster of Crassus 
had rendered the Parthian name terrible at Rome; 
and this intelligence struck a momentary panic 
in the city, as if an enemy were already at the 
gates. Some proposed to give Pompey the com- 
mand in Syria; some to send Cesar thither; 
and others, to send both the present consuls to 
the army with a proper reinforcement.! 

But before these measures could be determined, 
or before any reinforcement could be ready to 
join the army in Syria, the people were relieved 
of their fears by Caius Cassius, the general then 
commanding in that province, who had obliged 
the Parthians to withdraw from Antioch ; in their 
retreat attacked them, and made great slaughter. 
Osaces in that action received some wounds, of 
which, in. a few days afterwards, he died, and the 
Parthian army continued in their retreat during 
the following year beyond the Euphrates; sen- 
sible, in their turn, that a war carried over the 
wastes of that desolated frontier might be ruinous 
to any power by which it was attempted. 

Bibulus, the present proconsul of Syria, soon 
after the retreat of the Parthians, arrived in his 
province, and, according to the established prac- 
tice of the Romans, laid his pretensions to a 
triumph for the victory which, under his aus- 
pices, though before his arrival, had been obtained 
by his lieutenant. 

This invasion of Syria, as well as some dis- 
turbances in his own province, furnished Cicero, 
at the same time, with the occasion of some 
military operations, of which we have a particu- 
lar account, in his letters, and which, though not 
material to the military history of the times, are : 
not unworthy of notice, as they relate to this| was the eleventh of October, in the evening, he 
eminent personage. He had taken possession of | put his army again in motion towards the moun- 
his command in Cilicia, and liowever better fitted | tains, and before morning arrived in the midst of 
by his habits for the forum and the political as- | his enemies, who by this time had returned to 


J Cicer. Epist. ad Familiares, lib. viii. ep. 10. 2 Cicero af Familiar. lib. iii. ep. 3. 3 Ibid, 


Cuar. IV.} 


their usual habitations; cut them off separately, 
pursued such as fled, forced their strong holds, 
and in about sixty days reduced some towns and 
a considerable tract of country, which had never 
before acknowledged the Roman government. 
The troops, on this occasion, saluted Cicero 
with the title of imperator; which, being usually 
iven to victorious leaders,4 was commonly un- 
aerator as the suffrage of the army for obtaining 
a triumph. He himself, accordingly, on this cir- 
cumstance, together with the service which gave 
occasion to it, afterwards grounded his claim of 
that honour. This claim he scarcely scems to 
have seriously entertained ; he even treats it as a 
jest in some of his letters; yet the triumph being 
in these latter times considered rather as the 
means of acquiring a certain rank in the com- 
monwealth, than as the just reward of military 
merit, he submitted his claim to the senate, and 
urged his friends to support it. His conduct as 
governor of a province, at a time when this sta- 
tion was supposed to give a license to every spe- 


cies of rapine and oppression, did honour to his | 


own disposition, and to those literary studies, in 
which he was taught to choose the objects of his 
ambition and his habits of life. In this character 
he declined, both for himself and for his attend- 
ants, all those presents, contributions, and even 
supplies of provisions, of which custom or law 
had authorised the Roman governors, in passing 
through the provinces, to avail themselves. In 
his command he distinguished himself by his 
humanity, condescension, and disinterestedness ; 
was easy of access and hospitab"s; 
ticular to all persons of literary merit and in- 
genuity, whom he entertained without ostenta- 
tion. In such situations other Roman generals, 
though of great merit, indulged themselves in 
what was the custom of their times ; they drained 
the provinces to accumulate their own fortunes, 
or placed their money there at extravagant in- 
terest. He was governed by different maxims, 
and wished to rise above his contemporaries by 
the fame of his disinterestedness, as well as of his 
ingenuity and civil accomplishments. Other 
citizens might possess greater steadiness, and 
force or elevation of mind; but his fine genius, 
his talents, and fair disposition, of which his 
weakness indeed often prevented the full effect, 
still rendered him an important acquisition to 
either of the parties in the commonwealth. And 
as they endeavoured to gain, so they even seemed 
to acquire, his support in their turns. 

Whilst the affairs of the respective provinces 
were thus administered by the commanders to 


whom they were intrusted, the usual time of | 
elections at Rome being arrived, L. A‘ milius. 


Paulus, and C. Claudius Marcellus were elected 
to succeed to the consulate for the following year. 
Soon after these elections attempts were made, 
though without effect, to carry ‘into execution 
some of the regulations devised by Pompey, in 
his late administrations, to check the corruption 
af the times. Calidius had been engaged in the 
Jast competition, and immediately upon his disap- 
pointment was brought to trial for illegal means 
employed in his canvass. He was acquitted ; and, 
in resentment, retorted the charge on Marcellus, 
in order, if possible, to annul his election; but 
failed in the attempt. 


4 Cicero ad Familiar. lib. xv. ep. 4. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


open, in par-: 


251 


Of those who were now elected consuls, Caius 
Marcellus, as well as his relation and immediate 
predecessor Marcus Marcellus, was understood 
to be in the interest of Pompey. A: milius Pau- 
Jus, a senator of rank, and of course interested in 
the preservation of the republic, the honours of 
which he was so well entitled to share, was ex- 
pected to support the measures of the senate, and 
adhere to the established forms. ‘Together with 
internal tranquillity, the government seemed to 
recover its ancient severity. Appius Claudius, 
late proconsul of Cilicia, and Calpurnius Piso 
were chosen censors, and appeared to have au- 
thority enough to carry into execution the pow- 
ers lately restored to this office by the ordinance 
of Scipio. It was expected that these censors 
would hold an even balance between the factions. 
Appius favoured Pompey, and Piso, from his re- 
lation of father-in-law to Cesar, was necessarily 
disposed to check the partiality of his colleague. 
The hopes of the senate were likewise consider- 
ably raised by the unexpected nomination of 
Caius Scribonius Curio to be one of the tribunes. 
Servius Pola, after being elected into this office, 
had been convicted of bribery, the election was set 
aside, and Curio substituted in his place. This 
young man was of an honourable family; and 
possessing talents which qualified him for the 
highest preferments, naturally set out on a foot of 
independence, and joined those who were for 
maintaining the freedom of the commonwealth, 
and their own equal pretensions to honour and 
power. Being active and bold, as well as elo- 
quent, the senators were fond of a partizan who 
was likely to take upon himself much of that fa- 
tigue and danger which many of them were wil- 
ling, even where their own estates and dignities 
were concerned, to devolve upon others. 

The new magistrates accordingly entered on 

office with high expectations that 
U. C. 703. the dangerous pretensions of ambi- 
ge tious citizens, particularly those of 
hat ae Cesar, would be effectually check- 
C. Claudius ed. The consuls were possessed 
Marcellus. of a resolution of the senate, re- 
quiring them to proceed to the busi- 
ness of Cæsars province by the first of March. 
This resolution wanted only the consent of the 
tribunes to render it a formal act of the executive 
power, of which this branch was by the constitu- 
tion lodged in the senate. But one of the tri- 
bunes having forbid the decree, M. Marcellus, 
late consul, moved that application might be 
made to this officer to withdraw the negative, 
which prevented the effect of what the senate 
had resolved. But the motion was rejected by a 
majority® of the senate itself; and many other 
symptoms of Cæsar’s great influence, even over 
this order of men, soon after appeared. 

This able politician, probably that he might 
not seem to have any views upon Italy, had fixed 
his quarters, and that of his army, in the low 
countries, and at the extremity of his recent con- 

uests. But instead of seizing every pretence, as 
ormerly, for making war on the natives of Gaul, 
he endeavoured to quiet their fears, and to con- 
ciliate their affections; and while he kept the 
whole province in a state of profound tranquillity, 
collected money, provided arms, and completed 


5 Cicero ad Familiar. lib. viii. ep. 13. 
6 Hist. de Bell. Gall. lib. vill. c. 49, 


252 


his legions, as if preparing for a dangerous and 
important war. His distance from Italy lulled 
the jealousy of his opponents, and enabled him to 
carry on his operations unobserved. He spared 
no expense in gaining accessions to his interest ; 
and when promises were accepted, seemed to 
make them with unbounded confidenee in the 
means on which he relied for the performance of 
them. In this he acted as on the eve of a great 
revolution, the event of which was to raise him 
above the want of resources, or above the neces- 
sity of a scrupulous faith with private persons. 
He actually remitted at this time great sums of 
money to Rome; and no less than fifteen hun- 
dred talents, or about 289,500/, to the manage- 
ment of the consul A. milius alone, who was sup- 
posed to expend this money in erecting public 
buildings for the use of the city. But not bein 
superior to corruption, at least not to that whic 
was addressed to his vanity, in being made agent 
and trustee for so popular a leader as Cesar, he 
disappointed the hopes of his friends, and in all 
the contests which arose during his consulate,! 
became an active partizan for the person who had 
honoured him with so flattering a trust. 

It was likewise very early observed in these 

debates, that the zeal of Curio, who set out with 
violent invectives against Cesar, began to abate ; 
that he for a while endeavoured to divert the at- 
tention of the public to other objects ;? and at 
last fairly withdrew himself from the support of 
the senate, and espoused the interest of Cesar in 
every question, 
_ This interest was now likewise strengthened 
by the accessions brought to it in consequence of 
the disputes of the censors. ‘These magistrates 
concurred in expurging from the rolls of the 
senate such as were of servile extraction, and 
many even of noble family, on account of some 
infamy or blemish in their character. But Ap- 
pius, having carried his affectation of zeal beyond 
what the age could bear, and being suspected of 
partiality to Pompey’s friends, gave offence to 
Piso, who, by protecting many citizens who were 
stigmatized by his colleague, gained them to the 
interest of Caesar. From these several causes 
this party became very numerous even in the 
senate, and continued to suspend any decrees 
that were proposed to deprive Cesar of his com- 
mand, or to recall the extraordinary privilege 
which had formerly been granted to him. 

It was afterwards discovered, in thé sequel of 
these transactions, that Curio, some time before 
he openly declared himself for Cesar, had been 
actually gained by him, This young man, like 
the youth of that age in general, had dissipated 
his fortune, and contracted immense debts. His 
popularity was the effect of his profusion; and 
the load of his debts made him a very uncertain 
friend to povernment, and to laws which support- 
ed the just claims of his creditors against him. 
He readily listened to Cesar, who offered to relieve 
him of this burden, and actually paid his debts to 
a great amount ;3 according to some reports, to the 
amount of ten millions Roman money ;4 accord- 
ing to others, of six times that sum.5 


1 Appian. Plutarch. 

2 Cicero ad Familiar lib. viii. ep. 6. 

3 Plutarch. Dio. Sueton. Appias. 

4 Velleins, lib. 11. c. 48.—80,7294. See Arbuthnot’s 
Tables. 

5 Valerius Maximus, lib. ix. c. 1. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boos IV. 


Curio, after he took his resolution to join Cæ- 
sar, continued to speak the language of his former 
party, and to act in concert with them, until he 
should find a plausible excuse for breaking with 
them Such a pretence he sought by starting 
many subjects of debate without consulting them, 
and by making proposals in which he knew that 
the leading men of the senate would not concur. 
To this effect he devised a project for the repara- 
tion of the highways, offering himself to have 
the inspection of the work for five years. And 
when much time had been spent in fruitless de- 
bates on this subject, he insisted, that a consider- 
able intercalation should be made to lengthen the 
year, to give him sufficient time to ripen his pro- 
jects. Being opposed in this by the college of 
Augurs,’ he employed his tribunitian power to 
obstruct all other business, and separated himself 
entirely from his friends in the senate. 

Curio, having in this manner withdrawn him- 
self from his former party, did not at once openly 
join their opponents; but, with professions of in- 
dependence, affected to oppose the errors of both; 
and, by this artful conduct, seemed to have re- 
eeived the instructions, or to have imitated the 
policy of his leader, When the great question 
of Cæsars recall was revived, he inveighed, as 
formerly, against the exorbitant powers which 
had been committed to this general, and urged 
the necessity of having them revoked; but sub- 
joined, that the powers granted to Pompey were 
equally dangerous, and proposed, that both should 
be ordered to disband their armies, and return to 
a private station. The partizans of Pompey in- 
sisted, that the term of his commission was not 
yet expired; nor that of Cesar’s, replied Curio. 
If either is to be disarmed, it is proper that both 
should be so; if only one army be disbanded, we 
are certainly the slaves of that which remains. 

There were probably now three parties in the 
state; one devoted to Cesar, another to Pom- 
pey, and a third that meant to support the re- 
public against the intrigues or violence of either. 
The latter must have been few, and could not 
hope to be of much consequence, except by join- 
ing such of the other two, as appeared by the 
character of its leader least dangerous to the 
commonwealth. Cesar had shown himself in 
his political course, a dangerous subject, and an 
arbitrary magistrate. In the capacity of a subject, 
he had supported every party that was inclined 
to commit disorder in the state, or to weaken the 
hands of government. In that of a magistrate 
he spurned every legal restraint, acted the part 
of a demagogue, ‘supporting himself by popular 
tumults, and the credit of a faction, against the 
laws of his country; and it was the general opi- 
nion of considerate persons, that his thirst of 
power and emolument was not be satiated with- 
out a total subversion of government: that if, in 
the contest which seemed to impend, his sword 
should prevail, a scene of bloodshed and rapine 
would ensue, far exceeding what had yet been 
exhibited in any calamity that had ever befallen 
the republic. The description of his adherents,® 
and the character of persons that crowded to his 
standard, justified the general fear and distrust 
which was entertained of his designs. All who 
had fallen under the sentence of the law, all who 

6 Dio. Cass. lib. xl. c. 61. Appian de Bello Civile. 


7 Cicero ad Fainiliar. lib. viii. ep. 6. 
8 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. vil. ep. 7. 


Cuap. IV.] 


dreaded this fate, all who had suffered any dis- 
grace, or were conscious they deserved it; young 
men who were impatient of government; the 
populace who had an aversion to order; the bank- 
rupt, to whom law and property itself were ene- 
mies; all these looked for his approach with 
impatience, and joined in every cry that was 
raised in his favour. 

Pompey, the leader of the opposite party, had 
never ceased to embroil the state with his in- 
trigues, and even invaded the laws by his impa- 
tience for extraordinary and unprecedented ho- 
neurs; yet, when possessed of power, he had 
employed it with moderation, and seemed to 
delight in receiving these singular trusts by the 
free choice of his country ; not in extorting them, 
not in making any illegal use of them, nor in 
retaining them beyond the terms prescribed by 
his commission. It appeared, that in nothing he 
had ever injured the commonwealth so deeply, 
as in caballing with Cesar while he rose to his 
present elevation, from which he was not likely 
to descend, without some signal convulsion in 
the state.? 

This comparison of the parties which were 
now to contend for power at the hazard of the 
republic, made it easy for good citizens to choose 
their side. But they nevertheless naturally wished 
to prevent the contest from coming to extremities ; 
as in the event of the war, which they dreaded, 
it was scarcely possible to avoid a military go- 
vernment. They considered the proposal of 
Curio as a mere pretence to justify Cesar in 
keeping possession of his army ; but they saw that 
there was no force in the republic sufficient to 
resist him. They wished to arm Pompey for 
this purpose; but were prevented, either by the 
confidence which he still gave them of his own 
superiority, or by their fear of precipitating the 
state into a civil war, by seeming to take any 
precautions against it. 

Cæsar would have considered every attempt to 
arm the republic as a declaration against himself; 
and was ready to commence hostilities before any 
such measure could be carried into execution. 
The proposal for disarming at once both Cæsar 
and Pompey, in the mean time, was extremely 
acceptable to the popular party, who perpetually 
sounded the cry of liberty against the senate, 
and lately too against Pompey himself, who, on 
account of the spirit of his administration when 
last in office, and the severity of his prosecutions 
against bribery and other offences, which are not 
odious to the vulgar, was become in a consider- 
able degree unpopular, and supposed to aim at a 
tyranny. With such powers as Pompey already 
possessed, it was reckoned an effort of courage 
to oppose him. And Curio, in ceming from the 
senate, with the lustre of having acted so bold a 
part, was received by the populace with shouts 
and acelamations, was conducted to his house 
over ways strewed with flowers, and, like a victor 
in the cireus, presented with chaplets and gar- 
lands, in reward of his courageous, patriotic and 
impartial conduct. This happened about the 
time that Pompey, as has been observed, was 
making a show of his great popularity in the 
country towns, where he was received with feasts, 
processions, and acclamations, on occasion of his 
recovery from a supposed dangerous illness. Cæ- 


9 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. vii. ep. 3. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


253 


sar too had a like reception in the towns of the 
Cisalpine Gaul; but it is likely, that of these 
three pretenders to popularity, Pompey was 
most elated with his share of the public favour, 
and the most likely to mistake these appearances 
of consideration for the stable foundations of 
power. Under this mistake probably it was, that 
when one of his friends asked him, with what 
force he was to oppose Cesar if he should march 
into Italy with his army? “In Italy,” he an- 
swered, “I can raise forces with a stamp of my 
foot.” He was, however, greatly alarmed by the 
motion which had been made by Curio, and by 
the reception it met, both in the approbation of 
the senators, and in the acclamations of the peo- 
ple. He wrote a letter, on this occasion, to the 
senate, in which he acknowledged the services of 
Cesar, and mentioned his own. “ His late con- 
sulate,” he said, “was not of his seeking; it was 
pressed upon him to save the republic in the 
midst of great dangers; the command he then 
bore had devolved upon him in consequence of 
his having been consul, and was given for a term 
of years, yet far from being expired; but he was 
ready, nevertheless, without waiting for the ex- 
piration of his term, to resign with alacrity what 
he had accepted with reluctance.” He continued, 
on every occasion, to repeat the same professions, 
adding, “ That he made no doubt his relation and 
his friend Casar would cheerfully make a like 
sacrifice to the fears and apprehensions of his 
fellow-citizens ; and that, after many years of hard 
struggle with warlike enemies, he would now 
hasten to retire in peace, and to solace himself in 
the midst of domestic repose.” 

Pompey, for the most part, chose to dissemble 
his sentiments, and advanced to his purpose by 
indirect means; he was, therefore, like most art- 
ful men, easily over-reached by persons who per- 
ceived his designs; and probably, on the present 
occasion, was the only dupe of his own artifices, 
or of those that were employed against him. 
Curio, in the senate, openly attacked this part 
of his character, insisting that actions, and not 
professions, were now to be regarded: that the 
army of Cesar was, to the republic, a necessary 
defence against that of Pompey; that nevertlie- 
less, both should be ordered to disband, under 
pain of being declared, in case of disubedience, 
enemies to their country; and that an army should 
be instantly levied to enforce these orders. “ Now,” 
said he, “is the time to reduce this assuming and 
arrogant man, while you have a person who can 
dispute his pretensions, and who can wrest those 
arms out of his hands, which he never would have 
willingly dropped.” 

The friends of Cesar, in the senate, offered to 
compromise the dispute; and provided Pompey 
retired to his province, and Cæsar were allowed 
to retain the Cisalpine Gaul with two legions, 
they proposed, in his name, to disband the re- 
mainder of his army, and to resign the other 
part of his provinces. ‘‘ Observe the dutiful citi- 
zen and good subject,” said Cato, * how ready he 
is to quit the northern parts of Gaul, if you only 
put him in possession of Italy and of the city; 
and how ready to accept of your voluntary sub- 
mission, rather than employ your own army 
against you to enforce it.’’! 

In the result of these debates, the senate, upon 


10 Plutarch. in Catone. 


254 


the motion of the consul Marcellus, came to a 
vote on the following questions, which were se- 
parately stated, relating to the appointments both 
of Cesar and of Pompey. On the first question, 
Whether Cesar should disband his army? the 
Ayes were general throughout the house. On 
the second, relating to Pompey, the Noes greatly 
ptevailed. Curio and M. Antony insisted, that 
the questions were not fairly put; and that they 
did not collect the sense of the senate; that the 
majority might be of opinion, that both should 
di; and that both, therefore, should be in- 
cluded in the same question. To this purpose, 
accordingly, a third question was put; and the 
senate having divided, a majority of three hun- 
dred and seventy Ayes appeared against twenty- 
two Noes.! Whether these proceedings of the 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


senate were annulled by any informality, or were ` 


deprived of effect by any other circumstance, does 
not appear. The onlyimmediate consequence they 
seem to have produced, was an order to Pompey 
and Cesar, requiring each of them to marcha legion 
to reinforce the army in Syria, where the Parthi- 
ans, though repulsed from Antioch in the preced- 
ing year, had wintered in the Cyrrhestica, a dis- 
trict of that province, and threatened to repeat 
their invasion in the present spring and summer; 
and this appears to have been no more than a 
feeble attempt to strip Cesar of two legions, of 
which, when it came to be executed, he well 
Knew how to disappoint the effect. 

While the subject of Cesar’s appointments 
occupied all parties at Rome, he himself, with his 
army, passed a quiet winter in Gaul; and at the 
end of it, or early in the spring, set out for Italy. 
He employed, as a pretence for this journey, the 
clection to a vacant place in the college of augurs, 
which was fast approaching; and for which his 
friend Mark Antony was a candidate. Many 
votes were to be procured in the colonies and free 
cities bordering on that part of his province which 
was beyond the Alps; and he made his journey 
with uncommon speed to secure them: but being 


informed, on the road, that the election of augurs | 


was past, and that his friend Antony had pre- 
vailed, he nevertheless continued his journey, and 
with the same diligence as before he had received 
this information, saying, It was proper he should 
thank his friends for their good offices, and re- 
quest the cuntinuance of their favour in his own 
competition for the consulate, which he proposed 
to declare on the following year. He alleged, as 
a reason for his early application, that his ene- 
mies, in order to oppress him, or to withstand his 
just pretensions, had placed C. Marcellus and P. 

entulus in the magistracy of the present year, 
and had rejected the pretensions of Galba, though 
inuch better ‘founded. 

He was met in all the provincial towns and 
colonies of Cisalpine Gaul with more than a 
kingly reception, with sacrifices and processions 
every where made by innumerable crowds, which 
were assembled to see and admire him. Having 
made the circuit of this province, and sounded 
the dispositions of the people, he returned with 
great despatch to his quarters at Nemetocenna,? 
in the low countries, where he likewise wished to 
know the disposition as well as the state of his 
army ; and, for this purpose, ordered the whole 
to assemble on the Moselle. He foresaw, that 


1 Appian de Bello Civ. jib. ii. Plutarch in Cæsar 
. 134. 2 


p Arras. 


[Boor IV. 


the senate might possibly pass a decree to super- 
sede him; and that he must then depend upon 
the attachment of his legions, and make war, or 
submit, as he found them inclined ; in this, how- 
ever, itis probable he was in a great measure re- 
solved, or had no doubt of their willingness to be- 
come his partners in a military adventure for the 
sovereignty of the empire. 

In this state of affairs he assigned to Labienus 
his station within the Alps; and seeming to have 
conceived a suspicion of this officer, or rather 
apd top he was not disposed to follow him, 
in case his commission should be withdrawn by 
the senate, nor to co-operate in any act of hos- 
tility against the republic, he wished to prevent 
the disputes which might arise on such an occa- 
sion, and to avoid the difficult task of determin- 
ing how he should deal with a citizen, who being 
an offender against himself, was nevertheless in 
his duty to the state, and who either, by his im- 
punity or by his sufferings, might start dan- 
gerous questions, and divide the opinions and 
affections of the soldiers. He dismissed him, 
therefore, from the army in the northern Gaul, 
to command on the Po, a station from which he 
could easily quit the province, and join the forces 
of the republic; and by this means rid him at 
once of a person on whom he could not rely, and 
whom he would scarcely dare to punish for de- 
fection. But in whatever manner we understand 
this separation, it is noticed, that while Cesar 
himself remained with the army upon the Mo- 
selle, and made frequent movements merely to 
exercise the troops and to preserve their health, a 
rumour prevailed, that his enemies were solicit- 
ing Labienus to desert him, and to carry off the 
troops that were under his command, At the 
same time it was reported, that the senate was 
preparing a decree to divest Cesar of his govern- 
ment, and to disband his army. ‘These insinua- 
tions he affected to treat as groundless, observing, 
that he could not believe such an officer as La- 
bienus would betray his trust; and that for him- 
self, he was at all times ready to submit his cause to 
a free senate. The proposals of Curio, and his 
other friends, he said, had been so reascnable, 
that the senate would have long ago accepted of 
them, if that body had not been under the im- 
proper influence of his enemies. 

About the same time, Cæsar received the 
famous order of the senate to detach a legion 
from his army to be transported into Syria, and 
employed in the Parthiangwar; and likewise to 
restore that legion which he had borrowed from 
Pompey. Itis probable, that he had desired the 
last might be sent to him merely to take off a 
part of his rival’s force; and though he now, 
with seeming cheerfulness, complied with the 
requisition to restore them, yet he afterwards 
complained of this measure respecting the two 
legions in question, as a mere artifice to turn his 
own forces against him. In compliance with the 
senate’s order, he sent the fifteenth legion, then 
upon the Po, and relieved it by one from his pre- 
sent camp. In dismissing the soldiers of Pom- 
pey, he was, under pretence of gratitude for past 
services, most lavish of his caresses and thanks; 
and as an earnest of future favour, ordered each 

rivate man a gratuity of two hundred and fifty 
enarii.? By this artful conduct, while he parted 
with the men, he took care to retain ther aticc- 


3 About oi. E 


? 
Cuar. V.} 


tions, and sent them, together with his own le- 
gion, as at~best but an uncertain and dubious 
accession of strength to his enemies.4 

The officers who were sent to make these de- 
mands, and to conduct the troops into Italy, 
brought to their employers a very flattering report 
of the state and dispositions of Cæsar’s army: 
that they longed to change their commander; had 
a high opinion of Pompey; and, if marched into 
Italy, would surely desert to him; that Cesar 
was become odious on account of the hard ser- 
vice in which he had so long employed them, 
without any adequate reward, and on account of 
the suspicion that he aimed at the monarchy.5 
It is in the highest degree probable, that their 
crafty leader employed proper persons to hold 
this language to the commissicners of the senate, 
and to the officers of Pompey ; and to utter com- 
plaints of their commander, and of the service, on 
purpose that they might be repeated in Italy. His 
own preparations were not of more importance 
to him than the supine security into which he 
endeavoured, by this and every other measure, to 
lull his enemies. 

On the approach of winter he conducted his 
army back to their quarters in the low countries, 
and the interior parts of Gaul. Trebonius was 
stationed with four legions on the Scheld and 
the Meuse, and F'abius, with other four, between 
the Soane and the Loire, in the canton of Bi- 
bracte, now Autun. This disposition, like that 
of the former winter, was calculated to avoid 
giving any alarm to his opponents in Italy. He 
himself intended to winter within the Alps, but 
had no troops on that side of the mountains that 
could occasion any suspicion ; only one veteran 
legion is mentioned, the thirteenth, which he had 
sent to replace the fifteenth ; that, upon pretence 
of the Parthian war, had been called away from 
his province. Upon hisarrival in Italy he affected 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


255 


demanded from him had not been sent into Asia, 
but were kept in Italy, and put under the com 
mand of Pompey. He complained, that he was 
betrayed; that his enemies meant to disarm and 
circumvent him. “But while the republic is 
safe, and matters can be made up on amicable 
terms, I will bear,” he said, “ with any indignities, 
rather than involve the state in a civil war.” 6 

While the factions that were likely to divide 
the empire were in this situation, C. Marcellus, 
now third of this name in the succession of con- 
suls, together with Publius Lentulus, were chosen 
for the following year. Before they entered cn 
office a rumour arose, that Cesar, with his whole 
army, was actually in motion to pass the Alps, 
Marcellus, consul of the present year, assembled 
the senate; laid before them this report, and 
moved, that the troops then in Italy should be 
prepared to act, and new levies should be ordered. 
A debate ersued, in which Curio contradicted 
the report, and, by his Tribunitian authority, 
forbade the senate to proceed in any resolution 
upon this subject. 

On this interposition of the tribune, the consul 
dismissed the assembly, using, together with 
other expressions of impatience, the words follow- 
ing: That if he were not supported by the senate, 
in the measures which were necessary for the 
preservation of the commonwealth, he should put 
the exercise of his power into hands more likely 
to make the state be respected: then, together 
with Lentulus, one of the consuls elected for the 
ensuing year, he repaired to the gardens where 
Pompey resided; this officer being obliged, on 
account of his military command, to remain with- 
out the city; and presenting his sword, bid him 
employ it for the defence of his country, and with 
it to assume the command of the forces then in 
Italy. To this aldress, Pompey, with an air of 
modesty, made answer, “ If nothing better can be 


surprise upon hearing that the two legions lately | devised for the commonwealth.” 


CHAPTER V. 


Return of different Officers from their Provinces— Decree of the Senate to supersede Casar— 
Forbidden by the Tribunes—Commission to the Consuls and to Poinpey— Their Resolutions— 
Flight of the Tribunes Antony and Quintus Cassius—Speech of Cesar to the Legion at Ra- 
venna—Surprise of Ariminum—March of Cesar—Flight of Pompey and the Senate, g-c.— 
Approach of Cesar—Embarkation and Departure of Pompey from Brundusium—Return of 
Cesar to Rome— Passes by Marseilles into Spain—Campaign on the Segra—Legions of 


Pompey in Spain conducted to the Var. 


IN this posture of affairs, the officers, who had 
been sent in the preceding year to the command 
of provinces, were returned to Rome, and some 
of them remained with their ensigns of magis- 
tracy in the suburbs, to solicit the military To 
nours to which they thought themselves entitled 
by their services. Bibulus, though not present 
in the action in which Cassius defeated the Par- 
thians, yet being then governor of the province, 
and the advantage gained, with the number of 


4 Appian. de Bello Civile, lib. ii. Plutarch. in Vita 
Pompeii, p. 435. 


5 Plutarch. in Vita Cesaris, p. 133, et in Vita Pom- 
ii. p. 486. 
6 Hirtus de Bello Gallico, lib. viii. c. 46. 


the enemy slain, coming up to the legal descrip- 
tion of those services for which the triumph was 
obtained, he entered his claim: and was accord- 
ingly, upon the motion of Cato, who probably 
wished him this consolation for the mortifications 
he had received in his consulate, found to be en- 
titled to this honour. It had been long appro- 
priated as the specific reward of victories, obtained 
by the slaughter of a certain number of ene- 
mies, and would have been preposterous in the 
case of any other merit: Cicero, nevertheless, now 
likewise applied for a triumph, partly in emula- 
tion to Bibulus, of whom he expresses some 
jealousy ; and partly, that he might have a pre- 
tence for his stay in the suburbs, and for absent- 
ing hunself from the senate, and from the assem- 


256 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book IV. 


blies of the people, being very much perplexed | other senator, was at stake, did not seem disposed 
how to steer between the parties of Cesar and | to act, until all the powers that were wanting te 


Pompey, who had both applied to him by letters 
to join them in the present dispute.! He had, 
some time before his departure from Cilicia on 
his return to Rome, sent an account of his mili- 
tary operations to Cato, and to some others of 
his friends, with an earnest request, that a thanks- 
giving might be appointed for the victory he had 
obtained. Such an appointment was reckoned 
one of the greatest honours which a Roman offi- 
cer could receive in absence, and might lead to a 
triumph. Cato replied in terms that were polite; 
hut carrying some degree of indirect reproof for 
the improper ambition which Cicero betrayed in 
this request, intimating that his merit was not so 
much that of a general, as that of a humane, up- 
right, and able magistrate ; that he had’ moved 
the senate to pass a decree to this purpose in his 
favour, as thinking it more honourable than a 
thanksgiving, which always had a reference to 
some event, depending on chance or the valour 
of an army; but that, since Cicero had chosen 
to put his services on the last footing, he had a 
double satisfaction, that of having done what he 


thought incumbent on himself, and that of find- | 


ing that the desire of his friend was gratified.? 
Cicero at first received this declaration of Cato 
as a proper expression of friendship, and in the 
highest degree honourable to himself;3 but on 
hearing of the military honours which were de- 
creed to Bibulus upon Cato’s motion, he was 
greatly provoked, and considered this conduct 


as partial to his rival, and invidious to himself.4 | 
He was instigated or confirmed in these senti- | 


ments by Cesar, who gladly seized the opportu- 
nity to incite him against Cato. ‘‘ Observe,” he 
said, in one of his letters, which is quoted by 
Cicero on this subject, “the malice of the man, 
he affects to give you the commendations of 
clemency and integrity, which you did not desire, 
and withholds a piece of common respect, which 
you had asked. This conduct,” continues Ci- 
cero to Atticus, “ bespeaks the envy from which 
it proceeds, It is not sufferable, nor will I en- 
dure it. Cæsar, in his letter to me, has not 
missed the proper remarks.” Such were the 
concerns that distracted the mind of this inge- 
nious but weak man, even while he himself 
foresaw a conflict, in which the republic itself, 
and all the honours it could bestow, were pro- 
bably soon to perish.. 

In the present situation of affairs, every reso- 
lution which the friends of the republic could 
take was fraught with danger, and every day in- 
creased their perplexity. To leave Cesar in pos- 
session of his army, and to admit him with such 
a force to the head of the commonwealth, was to 
submit, without a struggle, to the dominion he 
meant to assume. To persist in confining him 
to one or other of these advantages, was to fur- 


nish him with a pretence to make war on the re- | 


public.. The powers which were necessary to 
enable Pompey to resist Cesar, might be equally 
dangerous to the republic in the possession of the 
one, as they were in that of the other. This 
person, on whom the state was now to rely, even 
while his own consideration, with that of every 


1 Cicero ad Att. lib. vii. ep. 1. 
2 Cicero ad Familiar. lib. xv. ep. 5. 
4 Cicero ad Att. lib. vil. ep. 2 


3 Ibid. ep. 6. 


gratify his ambition should be put into his hands, 
With an appearance of ease and negligence, he 
went upon parties of pleasure through Italy, 
while every one else apprehended that Rome it- 
self, as well as Italy, must soon become a scene 
of blood. At an interview with Cicero, whom, 
on his way to the city, he met near Naples, he 
himself spoke of a civil war as unavoidable.’ 
Upon his return to Rome, on the twenty-sixth 
of December, he even seemed averse to any ac- 
commodation. He declared his mind openly 
that if Cesar should obtain the consulate, even 
upon laying down his arms, the state must be 
undone ; that in his opinion, whenever a vigorous 
opposition appeared, Cesar would choose to re- 
tain his army, and drop his pretensions to the con- 
sulate: but, continued he, if Cesar should pro- 
ceed headlong, and bring matters to the decision 
of the sword, how contemptible must he appear, 
a mere private adventurer against the authority 
of the state, supported by a regular army under 
my command. 

To justify this security, or presumption on the 
part of Pompey, it must be remembered that 
while Cesar was forming an army in Gaul, 
Pompey, by means of his lieutenants, likewise 
formed a great army of six complete legions, and 
many auxiliaries, in Spain; and that if Cesar 
should make any attenipt upon Italy, it is proba- 
ble he intended that his army should pass the 
Pyrennees as fast as that of Cesar passed the 
Alps, occupy his province, cut off his resources, 
and while Pompey himself received him with the 
forces of Italy, that the Spanish army should 
press upon his rear,and place him at once be- 
tween two attacks. It ought likewise to be con- 
sidered, that although few troops were then 
actually formed: in Italy, yet this was the great 
nursery of soldiers for the whole empire, and 
multitudes could, on any sudden emergency, be 
embodied in every part of that country.6 

Pompey, with these securities in his hands for 
the final success of his views against Cesar, suf- 
fered this rival to run his career, leaving the 
senate exposed to the dangers which threatened 
them; and under the influence of apprehensions, 
which he expected would render them more 
tractable, and more ready in every thing to com- 
ply with his own desires, than he had generally 
found them in times of greater security. 

In the same strain of policy, Pompey had fre- 
quently ventured to foment or to connive at the 
growing troubles of the republic, in order to ren- 
der himself the more necessary, and to draw from 
the senate and the people offers of extraordinary 
trust and power. By the address of Cato, and of 
other active men in the senate, he had been 
obliged on a late occasion, when he aimed at the 
powers of dictator, to be content with those of sole 
consul. It is probable, that he had entertained 
the same views on the present occasion, and per- 
mitted the evils to accumulate, until the remedy 
he wished for should appear to be necessary. He 
continued aceordingly with votes and resolutions 
of the senate to combat Cesar, who was at the 
head of a numerous army, ready on the first 
plausible pretence to fall upon Italy, to seize the 


5 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. vii. ep. 8. 
6 Cic. ad Familiar. lib. xvi. ep. 12. 


Caap. V.] 


seats of government, and avail himself of that 
name and authority of the republic, on which 
Pompey himself so greatly relied. 
Mean time, the new year com- 
U C. 704. menced,and C. Claudius Marcellus 
C. Claudius with L. Cornelius Lentulus, entered 
Marcellus et ON their office as consuls. Both 
L. Cornelius parties were prepared for a decisive 
Lentulus: resolution on the subject of Cesar’s 
claims. He himself for some years 
had wintered near to the northern extremity of 
his provinces. He was now at Ravenna, the 
nearest station of his army to Rome; but without 
any troops, besides what appear to have been the 
usual estabiishment of the Cisalpine province; 
that is, the thirteenth legion, which had been sent 
thither to supply the place of a legion, with which 
he had been required to reinforce the army of 
Syria, and three hundred horse, making in all 
between five and six thousand men.” Soon after 
his arrival at Ravenna, he had been visited by 
Curio, who, at the expiration of his tribunate, 
made this journey to receive his directions in 
respect to the future operations of the party ; and 
after their conference, returned to Rome with a 
letter from Cæsar, addressed to the senate, which 
was presented on the first of January, at the ad- 
mission of the new consuls into office.® 
The consul Lentulus moved, that prior to any 
other business, the state of the republic, and that 
of the provinces, should be taken under con- 
sideration; and alluding to the resolutions which 
were already on record, relating to Cæsar’s pro- 
vince, said, that if the senate stood firm on this 
occasion to their former decrees, his services 
should not be wanting to the commonwealth. 
He was seconded by Scipio, and was applauded 
by the general voice of the senate; but Cesar 
had procured the admission of Mark Antony 
and of Quintus Cassius, two of his most noted 
and determined partizans, into the college of tri- 
bunes. These could make riots, or furnish the 
pretence of violence in the city, whenever the 
military designs of their patron were ripe for 
execution: they were to be the executors of what 
had been concerted with Curio, or whatever else 
should be thought proper to promote Cesar’s de- 
signs. ‘They began with threatening to stop all 
proceedings of the senate, until Cesar’s letter 
was read; and prevailed on this meeting to begin 
with that paper. It was expressed, according to 
Cicero, in terms menacing and harsh,’ and con- 
tained in substance a repetition of the proposals, 
which Cesar had been all along making through 
Curio, and his other adherents at Rome, “That 
he should be allowed to retain the honours, 
which the Roman people had bestowed upon 
him; that he should be left upon a foot of equality 
with other officers, who were allowed to juin civil 
office at Rome with military establishments in the 
provinces; and that he should not be singled out 
as the sole ohject of their distrust and severity.” 
This letter was considered as an attempt to 
prescribe to the senate, and unbecoming the re- 
spect due to their authority. It was by many 
treated as an actual declaration of war. The 


7 Appian. de Bello Civil. lib. ii. p. 447. Plut. in: 
Cesare. 

8 Dio. Cassus, lib. xli. c. 1. 

9 Cicero ad Familiar. lib. xvi. ep. 12. 

10 Suetonius in Casare, e. 29 


cd 


2K 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


257 


'debates were renewed on this subject for some 
days successively, from the first to the seventh of 
January. On the last of these days, a resolution 
was framed, ordering Cæsar to dismiss his army, 
and by a certain day to retire from his provinces, 
or in case of disobedience, To ata an 
enemy to his country. The tribunes, Mark An- 
tony and Quintus Cassius, interposed with their 
negative. I < 

‘The hands of the senate being thus tied up by 
the prohibition or interdict of the tribunes, it was 
moved that the members should put on mourning, 
in order to impress the people with a deeper sense 
of the calamity which was likely to ensue from 
the contumacy of these factious officers. This 
likewise the tribunes forbad ; but the senate being 
adjourned, all the members, as of their own ac- 
cord, returned to their next meeting in habits of 
mourning, and proceeded to consider in what 
manner they might remove thie difficulty which 
‘arose from this factious interposition of the tri- 
bunes. In the conclusion of this deliberation, it 
was determined to give to the consuls and other 
magistrates, together with Pompey, in the charac- 
ter of proconsul, the charge usual in tke most 
dangerous conjunctures; fo preserte the com- 
monwealth by such means as to their discretion 
should appear to be necessary. 

This charge suggested to the minds of the 
people, what had passed in the times of tke 
Gracchi of Saturninus and of Catiline. The 
tribunes, who had occasioned the measure, either 
apprehended, or affected to apprehend, immediate 
danger to their own persons: they disguised 
themselves in the habit of slaves, and, together 
with Curio, in the night fled from Rome in hired 
carriages.' The consuls repaired to Pompey in 
the suburbs; and, agreeably to the order of the 
senate, claimed his assistance in discharging the 
important duties with which they were jointly 
intrusted. It was agreed, in concert with him, 
that they should support the authority of the 
senate with a proper military force, that they 
should proceed to make new levies with the 
greatest despatch; and in order to give effect to 
these preparations, that Pompey should have the 
supreme command over the treasury, and all the 
forces of the republic, in every quarter of the 
‘world. ; 

Winter was now set in, or fast approaching. 
The season, although nominally in the month of 
January, being only about fifty davs past the au- 
tumnal equinox, or about the twelfth of Noven- 
ber, Cæsar had few troops on the side of Italy ; 
the force of his army was yet beyond the Alps, 
and the officers now entrusted with the safety of 
the commonwealth, flattered themselves that much 
time might be found to put the republic in a state 
of defence, before his army at this season could 
pass those mountains, even if he should be so 
desperate as to make war on the commonwealth; 
which Pompey did uot even, iun this state of af- 
fairs, appear to have believed. 

When Cesar received accounts of the senate’s 
resolution, he drew forth the troops then at Ra- 
venna, and in a harangue enumerated the wrongs 
which for some years he alleged had been done to 

(hunself; complained that his enemics had now 
found means to excite against him even Lom pey, 


1 11 Appian. de Bello Civili, lib. ii. Dio. Cass. lib. xli. 
1c. 3. Cicero ad Familiar. ib. xvi. ep. 19. 


258 


a person whose honour he had always promoted 
with the warmest affection ; that the interposition 
of the tribunes, in behalf of the army and of him- 
self, had been defeated by means of threats and of 
actual force; that their sacred persons had been 
violated, in order to oppress him; that resolutions, 
which had never been taker but in the most dan- 
gerous and threatening conjunctures, to prevent 
ruinous laws from being carried by insurrection 
and violence, were now formed against peaceable 
magistrates, and in times of profound tranquillity ; 
le therefore exhorted the army to maintain the 
honour of an officer, under whom they had now, 
for nine years, faithfully served the republic; 
under whom they had gained many victories in 
Gaul and in Germany, and reduced a most war- 
like province into a state of absolute submission. 
He was answered with a shout of applause, and 
a general acclamation from the ranks, that they 
were ready to avenge the injuries done to their 
general, and to the tribunes of the people. 

On receiving these assurances from the troops 
then present, Cæsar immediately despatched an 
express to the quarters of the twelfth legion, 
which, from the time at which it afterwards 
joined him, appears to have been already within 
the Alps with orders to march. The remainder 
of his army being supposed in the low countries, 
orin the heart of Gaul, it would not have appear- 
ed to an ordinary capacity, that even in case of 
hostilittes any decisive operation could take place 
before the spring. At that season, indeed, the 
measures now taken by both parties seemed to 
threaten a dangerous convulsion; but it is not to 
be doubted that Cæsar had foreseen, or prepared, 
many of the most important circumstances of the 
present conjuncture; that he had brought his 
affairs into that posture, at which he intended 
hostilities should commence; and that the seem- 
ing neglect with which he suffered himself to be 
taken with so small a force on the side of Italy, 
was probably the best concerted preparation he 


could have made for the war. While he brought | 


no alarming force towards Rome, his antagonists 
continued secure, and made noeffectual provision 
to resist him. He apprehended more danger 
from the legions which Pompey had formed in 
Spain, than from any force then subsisting in 
Italy, and he made his disposition against those 
legions, by placing the strength of his army be- 
tween the Pyrennees and the Alps. There the 
army formed in Gaul, served him sufficiently in 
his design against Italy, by securing him from 
any interruption on that quarter. When the 
war broke out, being well aware that the effects 
of surprise are often greater than those of force, 
even if he had wished for more troops in Italy, 
it is probable that he would not have awaited 
their coming. 4 

On the very day that he delivered the harangue 
just mentioned to the legion that was quartered 
at Ravenna, he ordered a chosen body of men, 
in the manner of stragglers roving for pleasure 
through the country, and armed only with swords, 
to take the road separately, and without any ap- 
pearance of concert, to Ariminum, the first forti- 
tied place of Italy beyond the Rubicon, which 
was the limit of his province, there to remain, 
und at a certain time of the night to seize upon 
one of the gates. He likewise ordered a party of 
horse to parade at some distance from Ravenna, 
and there to wait for an oficer who was to deli- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor lV, 


ver them orders. He himself passed the day, as 


| usual, in forming combats of gladiators, and in 


attending the exercises of the legion; at night he 
went to supper at the usual hour, and after he 
had taken his place, pretending business, or some 


. slight indisposition, which called him away from 


the company, he mounted a carriage that waited 


. for him, drove through a gate opposite to that of 
: Arinirum, and having travelled for a little time 


in that direction, turned into. the road on which 
he had posted the party of horse, and having 
joined’ them, marched about thirty miles before 
break of day, entered Ariminum by a gate which 
the party he had sent before him kept open; and 
pe without any resistance took possession of the 
place. 

It was of importance, that the first report of 
hostilities at Rome should carry an account of 
his success; not merely of his having made an 
attempt. This circumstance may justify the 
measures which he took to surprise a place 
which, without so many precautions, might have 
been easily reduced, though at the hazard per- 
haps of delay for a few days. He himself, indeed, 
in his Commentaries, makes no mention of any 
such measures, nor of the doubts and hesitations 
under which he is said to have halted on the 
banks of the Rubicon, by the passing of which 
he entered into a state of war with the common 
wealth. 

At Ariminum his little army, on the following 
day, arrived from Ravenna, and the tribunes, 
Mark Antony and Quintus Cassius, joined him 
from Rome. He presented them to the army in 
the disguise in which they affected to have 
escaped from the violence of a tyranny then 
established in the city. ‘ Observe,” he said, “to 
what extremities persons of noble birth, vested 
with the sacred character of tribunes are reduced, 
for having supported their friends, and for having 
pleaded the cause of an injured army.” The 
occasion was suited to popular eloquence; and 
this eminent master of every art did not neglect 
the opportunity. He is said to have acted his 
part with great vehemence ; to have torn open his 
vest from his breast, and to have shed tears; fre- 
quently held up to view the hand on which he 
wore his ring, the common ensign of noble birth 
among the Romans, and declared, that he would 


| sacrifice all the honours of his rank to reward 


those who were willing to support the public 
cause, and who: adhered to himself on the pre- 
sent occasion. From these signs, where he was 
not distinctly heard, it was supposed that he pro- 
mised the honours of nobility, and a large sum 
of money to every soldier in his army.? 

Lucius Cesar and the pretor Roscius, who, 
while the decree against Caius Cesar was de- 
pending in the senate, made offer of their good 
offices to treat with him, and bring matters to an 
amicable accommodation, were now come with- 
out any public commission, probably to hinder 
their friend from taking any desperate resolution. 


' They brought at the same time, a private mes- 


sage from Pompey, with some. expressions of 
civility, and an apology, taken from the necessity 
of the public service, for the hardship which he 
supposed himself to have put upon Cesar. Pom- 
pey, in this message, protested, “ That he had 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civile, lib. ii. 
2 Sucton. in Ces. c. 33. 


Crap, V.) 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


259 


always preferred the public to private considera- |a dream, he seemed to perceive the whole was 


tions;” and subjoined, “that he hoped Cesar 
would not suffer any passion to carry him into 
measures hurtful to the state, nor, avenging him- 
self of his private enemies, stretch forth his hand 
against the republic.” 

Such professions had little credit with Cesar ; 
but if they were to be of any weight with the 
public, he was not likely, in his turn, to fail in 
the use of them. He desired those persons, by 
whom Pompey had favoured him with this mes- 
sage, to carry for answer, “ That the republic had 
always been to him dearer than his fortune er his 
life; but that he could not suffer the honours 
which the Roman people had bestowed upon him 
in public, to be contemptuously torn away by his 
private enemies. His commission, he said, would 
have expired in six months; his enemies, in their 
eagerness to degrade him, could not bear even 
with this delay, but must recall him immediately. 
The Roman people had dispensed with his at- 
tendance at the elections, yet he must be dragged 
to town at that time to gratify private malice. 
These personal insults he had patiently borne for 
the sake of the public; and being resolved to dis- 
arm, requested the senate only that others should 
disarm as well as himself; that even this was re- 
fused, and new levies were ordered throughout 
Italy ; that.two legions which had been called off 
from his own army, under pretence of the Parthian 
war, were now retained against him; that the 
whole state was in arms; for what purpose but 
for his destruction; that, nevertheless, he would 
suffer any thing for the good of the common- 
wealth. Let Pompey repair to his province; let 
all parties disband, and no army whatever be as- 
sembled in Italy; let no one pretend to overawe 
the city; let the assemblies of the people and of 
the senate be free; and in order the more speedily 
to terminate these disputes, let the parties meet 
and confer together; let Pompey say where he 
will be waited on, or let him neme a proper place 
of meeting; at a friendly conference every diffi- 
culty will be soon removed.’’s 

From this time forward, Cæsar affected, on 
every occasion, to have no object in view but to 
prevail on his enemies, by some reasonable ac- 
commodation, to save the republic from a ruinous 
war, and to stop the effusion of innocent blood.4 
He continually repeated his proposals of peace, 
while he urged his military operations with un- 
common rapidity. He ordered new levies at 
Ariminum, and sent Antony to occupy Arreti- 
um,5 a pass in one of the branches of the Flami- 
nian Way through the Apennines; and as fast 
as the troops could march he seized Pisaurum,® 
Faunum, Auximum, with the town of Ancona, 
and all the places necessary to give him the com- 
mand of that district, or to open his way to Rome. 

A general consternation spread over all the 
country before him; the people fled from their 
habitations, and communicated the alarm, with 
every sort of exaggeration, to the city. Pompey 
had relied much on the name and authority of the 
commonwealth, and no less on his own. Others 
thought themselves secure while this renowned 
and experienced commander gave them assur- 
ances of safety. Now, like a person awake from 


3 Cesar. de Bell. Civil. Jib. i. 
4 Cesar. Appian. in lib viii. Ad Attium, post ep. 13. 
5 Arrego. 6 Pisaro, Feno, and Osimo. 


illusion. Cæsar paid no regard to the authority 
of the senate, nor stood in awe of the state. He 
was at hand, with the reputation of a general 
equal to Pompey, at the head of troops fresh 
from service, and inured to blood. The republic 
was but a name; and they who composed it, 
though respectable at a distance, were, on the ap- 
proach of an enemy, irresolute, disunited, and 
incapable of the exertions which such an occa- 
sion required. Orders had gone forth to raise 
troops in every part of Italy ; but no great pro- 
gress in so short a time could yet have been made 
in that service. Besides the two legions which 
had served so long under Cesar himself, there 
were not any forces embodied in the country. 
These were justly suspected of inclining to their 
former general; and, instead of enabling Pompey 
to meet the danger whicn threatened the com- 
monwealth, furnished him, at the head of such 
troops, with particular reasons for his keeping at 
a distance from the enemy. Ina letter to Domi- 
tius Ahenobarbus, “I sent you word,” he writes, 
“that with these two legions I did not choose to 
be near Cesar.’ If I should retreat, therefore, at 
his approach, be not surprised.’’® 

Domitius had been appointed to succeed Cesar 
in the government of Gaul; and, with same other 
officers in the Picenum,’ had made some progress 
in raising troops. ‘Pheir numbers, perhaps, sur- 
passed those of Casar. If Pompey, therefore, 
had thought it possible to defend the city, le must 
have hastened to that quarter, and have put him- 
self at the head of those troops. But he was 
timorous in hazarding his own reputation, a 
weakness from which Cesar was altogether ex- 
empt, and which was unworthy of the great mili- 
tary talents of either. Pompey seldom committed 
his fame where the prospect was unfavourable, or 
events extremely uncertain. Cæsar, on such oc- 
casions, never chose to trust his affairs in any 
other hands than his own. 

Pompey, acting under these motives, assembled 
the senate, and informed them that it was neces- 
sary to abandon Rome; that he would meet them 
again at Capua, where he proposed to assemble 
lus forces ; that he should consider all those who 
remained in the capital to countenance or to wit- 
ness the viviences of Cæsar as equally guilty with 
those who should be found in his camp. 

It being unlawful for the officers of the repub- 
lic to absent themselves from the city, the senate 
passed an act to dispense with their attendance 
at Rome, and to enable them to exercise the 
powers of magistracy wherever the necessities of 
the state might require their presence. ‘These 
preparations for dislodging the government, to- 
gether with the actual flight of Pompey, damped 
all the courage that remained in any order or 
class of the people. It made Cæsar appear at once 
more odious and more terrible.!° It was generally 
expected"! that he would exceed cither Cinna or 
Sylla in rapacity and cruelty ;!2 and that the city, 
if he should surprise his opponents there, w 
become a scene of blood. The consuls, and most 


7 Meaning probably that he did not choose to give 
them an opportunity to desert. 

8 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. viii. ep. 2. Ad Domitium. 

9 March of Anconia. 

10 Cicero ad Att lib. vi.ep. 11. 

11 Ibid. ep. 12. 22. 

12 Ibid. lib vii. ep. 7. 


250 


of the other officers of state, set out with their 
ensigns of power. All night the gates were 
crowded with senators and other persons of rank 
who fled on this occasion; some with their fami- 
lies and most valuable effects, others alune, and 
distracted by the general panic, without knowing 
whither they were to retire, or to what fate they 
were leaving their families. 

Cesar, in the mean time, making a rapid march 
through Umbria, or what is now the dutchy of 
Urbino,! and the Picenum, or March of Anco- 
na,? not only took possession of every place as 
he passed, but gained daily accession of strength 
by the junction of the new levies that had been 
raised to oppose him. Soldiers are averse to the 
losing side; and Pompey’s flight put an end to 
his military power in Italy. 
mus had, with five cohorts, amounting, if com- 
pee to twenty-five hundred men, taken post at 

guvium,3 among the Apennines, on the Flami- 
nian Way. Observing that Pompey’s party in 
general was retreating, and that Curio was ad- 
vancing towards him with a part of Cæsars 


forces, he resolved to abandon his post; but as | 


soon as he began to execute this purpose, and 
was on the road to Rome, the troops deserted 
him on the march, returned to the post from 
which he had removed them, and declared for 
Cesar. 

The dispositions of the towns of which Cesar 
had got possession, made it unnecessary for him 
to leave any garrison behind him, and permitted 
him to advance with all his forces. Auxinum? 
declared for him before his arrival, and obliged 
Accius Varus, who held that post forthe republic, 
to abandon it, This officer was overtaken by 
Cæsars advanced parties, and, like Thermus, 
was deserted by his people. 

At Cingulum in the Picenum, Cesar was 
joined by the twelfth legion, to which, on his 
tirst motion from Ravenna, he had sent orders 
to march. With this accession of force, he ad- 
vanced to Asculum’ on the Fronto; and having 
dislodged from thence Lentulus Spinther, who 
commanded ten cohorts, the greater part of these 
troops deserted to him. The remainder put them- 
selves under the command of Vibullius, who was 
just arrived from Pompey to support the hopes 
of the cause in that quarter. 3 

As Cæsar made his principal push on the Adri- 
atic side of the Apennines, the troops that were 
suddenly raised for the republic were, without 
any well-concerted plan, drawn together upon 
that coast. And Pompey himself had not yet 
openly laid aside the design of making head 
against Cæsar in those parts, Vibullius having 
assembled in all about fourteen cohorts, fell back 
to the Aternus, now called the Piscara, and joined 
L. Domitius Ahenobarbus at Corfinium, a pass 
ın the Apennines that commanded the Valerian 
way to Rome. This officer having assembled 
twenty-five cohorts, meant to have joined Pom- 
pey wherever he should be found, and had or- 
dered Thermus to follow with five cohorts more ;ê 
but imagining probably that Pompey still intend- 
ed to cover Rome from the incursions of Cesar, 
and that Corfinium was an important post for 
this purpose, he determined to observe the mo- 
tions of the enemy from that place. 


i 1 Umbria, 2 Picenum. © ` 3 Gubio. 
4 Osimo. 5 Oscule. 
& Pomp. ad Cicer. in lib, ad Att. post ep. 11. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


The prætor Ther- 


[Bo a IV. 


Pompey by this time had moved frere Capua 
to Luceria, and seemed to have taken the resolu- 
tion not only ofabandoning the posts that covered 
the access to Rome, but even all Italy, to Cesar. 
The consuls, the greater part of the magistracy, 
and the senate, had followed him to Capua. 
Here was received the message which Cesar had 
given to Roscius and to L. Cesar. It contained 
several reflections and insinuations in the highest 
degree provoking to Pompey ; and to this circum- 
stance Cesar probably trusted, that he should not 
be bound by any of the offers he had made, and 
that the odium of rejecting the peace would fall 
upon his enemies. But the friends of the com- 
monwealth, deeply impressed with the necessity 
of their own affairs, gladly listened to any terms 
of accommodation. ‘They objected indeed to the 
proposed interview between Pompey and Cæsar, 
remembering the dangerous concerts which at 
their meetings had been formerly entered inte 
against the commonwealth. 

Pompey himself was so sensible of the disad- 
vantage at which he was taken, that he dissem- 
bled his resentment of the personal reflections 
cast on himself, and consented to conditions 
which he had hitherto rejected with disdain. 
It was agreed accordingly that he should repair 
to Spain, and that, his province being in profound 
peace, he should reduce his military establish- 
ment. Cesar, on his part, besides the conditions 
he himself had offered, was required to evacuate 
all the towns which he had lately seized in Italy ; 
and it was proposed that the consuls, magistrates, 
and senators, should return to the city, and from 
the usual seat of government give all the sanction 
of public authority to these arrangements. From 
such appearances it was not doubted that an ac- 
commodation must follow. And in this belief 
Cato, though appointed to command in Sicily, 
chose to abide by the senate while the treaty re- 
mained in dependence. And Cicero thought the 
agreement almost concluded. “The one,” he 
wrote to his friend Atticus, “ begins to repent of 
his precipitation, and the other is sensible he has 
not a force sufficient to support such a war.”? 

Ceesar therefore was likely to be caught in the 
snare he laid for his enemies, or obliged to lay 
aside the disguise which he had assumed in affect- 
ing such earnest desires for peace. To avoid 
either of these inconveniences, he objected te 
some of the conditions which the opposite party 
had subjoined tő his proposals, and complained 
of the silence which they kept on others, as pro- 
ceeding from a deliberate purpose to circumvent 
and betray him, “Pompey will repair to Spain,” 
he said, “but when? I am required to evacuate 
all the towns of Italy, while Pompey and the 
whole senate continue in arms against me, and 
while my enemies not only make new levies, but 
employ for my destruction legions which they 
have actually taken away from my own army, 
If Pompey be sincere in desiring a peace, why 
does he decline the personal interview which has 
been proposed for that purpose ?” 

Casar had by this time, advanced with hasty 
marches to Corfinium, drove in a detachment 
from the garrison, which he found breaking down 
a bridge about three miles from the town, sat 
down under the walls, and employed three days 
in fortifying bis camp, and in filling the maga- 


7 Ad. Att, lib. vii. ep. 14 


r 


Cuar. V.] OF THE ROM 
zines with corn from the neighbouring country. 
Being joined by the eighth legion and twenty- 
two cohorts of the new levies from Gaul, with 
three hundred auxiliary horse, he ordered proper 
posts to be seized on every side of the town, and 
effectually shut up those who were within froin 
any relief, or from any communication with their 
friends. When his works began to appear 
against the place, Domitius published a reward 
to any who should carry letters to Pompey. 
Different messengers were despatched for this 
purpose, and brought for answer, that Ponipey 
disapproved of his having allowed himself to be 
invested by Cesar, had foretold him the bad con- 
sequences of this measure, and now earnestly ex- 
horted him, if possible, to extricate himself; for 
that it was not in his power with these doubtful 
legions, which had been so lately drawn from 
‘Cæsar’s army, or with new levies, to force the 
hardy and veteran troops of the enemy.® 

This answer Domitius endeavoured to conceal 
from his army; encouraged them with hopes of 
a speedy relief from Pompey, and seemed intent 
on the defence of the place, while he was actually 
taking measures to get off in person, without any 


hopes of preserving the forces he had assembled | 


for the commonwealth. This design being sus- 
pected, the troops surrounded his quarters 1n the 
night, took him prisoner, and to pay their court, 
while they delivered up their general and surren- 
dered the town, made offer of their own services 
to Cesar. 

Upon this surrender, Cesar took possession of 
the gates, manned the walls, and gave orders that 
ho person whatever from his army should enter 
the place before it was day. He knew, that be- 
sides Domitius and Vibullius, there were many 
senators and Roman knights now shut up in the 
town. ‘These he ordered in the morning to be 
brought before him, expostulated with them on 
the subject of their enmity to himself, and their 
precipitation in liurrying the state into this un- 
natural war. He then dismissed them with the 
respect that was due to Roman citizens of their 
rank ; and being told that a considerable sum of 
money, amassed at Corfinium for the support of 
the troops, had been seized by his people, to eoni- 
plete this scene of unexpected moderation, by an 
exhibition of disinterestedness, as well as of cle- 
uaency, he ordered this money to be restored to 
Domitius. ‘The fame of this wonderful mildness 
and generosity, as he expected, was every where 
diffused; and though, by over-acting his part in 
abstaining from the public money, he furnished 
every thinking person with a sufficient comment 
on the other parts of his conduct; yet many were 
happy to understand, that, in this alarming con- 
test, their lives and properties were, from any 
inotives whatever to be spared. 

Rome was now open to Cesar; but he thought 
the possession of it of no moment, until he had 
suppressed the military arrangements that were 
making in the country, and had decided who was 
to have the possession of Italy. He therefore, 
on the very day on which he became master of 
Corfinium, detached to Sicily, under the com- 
mand of Curio, the troops that deserted to himin 
making this conquest.2 He hiniseli set out for 


8 Pompeius ad Domitinm, lib. viii. Et ad Atti- 
cin, post ep 12. Cas. de Bell. Civ 


Yy Uusar. de Belle Civ lib.i c. 25. 


AN REPUBLIC. 261 

Apulia, and, before sunset, accomplished a con 
siderable march; but while he thus urged the 
war with the greatest rapidity, sent messengers 
before hin to the leaders of the opposite party, 
with professions of friendship and overtures of 
peace. 

Immediately after the reduction of Corfinium, 
Balbus, an officer in Cesar’s army, was de- 
spatched with a message to the consul Lentulus, 
containing earnest entreaties, that this magis- 
trate would return to Rome, and prevent the dis- 
orders that were likely to arise from the suspension 
of government. To induce him to comply with 
this request, Balbus had secret instructions to 
assure the consul of a proper appointment in the 
provinces at the expiration of his year in office. 
‘Che bearer of this message declared, that Cesar 
desired nothing so much as to join Poinpey, and 
to make peace with him on any equitable terms. 
And the father of this young man, one of Cesar’s 
retinue, wrote, at the same time, to Cicero, that 
Cesar had no object but to enjoy peace and se- 
curity under Pompey. But while the fame of 
his clemency at Corfinium, and of this wonder- 
ful disposition to peace was spread throughout 
Italy, and reconciled the minds of many to whom 
he had been till then an object of terror;!! while 
he hoped to amuse his enemies, and to relax the 
diligence of their military preparations, he ad- 
vanced with so inuch rapidity, that, in order to 
avoid him, they had no more than the time that 
was necessary to cross the mountains from Ca- 
pua to Luceria, to fall back from thence to Canu- 
sium, and from this last place, without a halt, to 
Brundusium. 

Pompey, while he moved in this direction, 
having sent Metullus Scipio, and his own son 
Cnus into Syria, to provide and assemble the 
necessary shipping to embark his army ;!? his in- 
tention to abandon Italy began to be suspected, 
and shook the great authority which he still de- 
rived from his military reputation. His officers 
were every where deserted on the march by the 
new levies, who returned to offer their services 
to Caesar. His own presence kept the other 
parts of the army together, and brought them 
safe to the port from which it was suspected they 
were to take their departure from Italy. Soon 
after his arrival at this port he eflectually verified 
these suspicions, embarking a great part of his 
army with the consuls, while he himself, not 
having sufficient shipping to transport the whole, 
remained with a second division to wait for the 
return of his ships. 

Such was the posture of Pompey, when Cesar, 
with six legions, four of veteran troops, and two 
newly raised or completed from: those who came 
over to him on the march, arrived at the gates of 
Brundusium. Even here, he never dropt the 
project uf amusing his enemy with proposals of 
peace. Cn. Magius, an officer in the service of 
the commonwealth, having been taken on the 
march, was dismissed with great courtesy, and a 
inessage to Pompey containing a request, that 
he wouid admit Cesar to an interview; aud ob- 
serving, that differences are soon made up at a 


10 Cicer. ad Att. lib. viii. ep. 9. 

11 ibid. ep 13. Si mehercule neminern occidet, nec 
cuiquam quicquam ademerit, ab his qui eum ma xime 
tprerant, maxime diligetur. 

| 2 Platarci in Pompeio, 


a 


262 


conference, which otherwise might occasion many 
journeys and messages to no purpose. 

This pacific message, as in other instances, 
only constituted a part in the military plan of 
Cesar, and was accompanied with effectual pre- 
parations for a blockade and a siege. It did not 
as yet appear, whether Pompey meant to trans- 
port all his troops, and to abandon Brundusium, 
or to keep possession of this post, in order to re- 
tain a passage into Italy, and to command both 
sides of the gulf. Cesar, to try his intentions, 
and either to shut him up, or to hasten his de- 
parture, observing, that the entrance of the har- 
bour was narrow, and might be shut up, began 
an alarming work for this purposc. He em- 
ployed numerous partics to throw stones, earth, 
and other heavy materials into the passage be- 
tween the two moles, and expected, in a little 
time, to be able to join them, and thus effectually 
to exclude all communication with the sea. 

In this work the hesiegers advanced, for some 
time, with great rapidity; but being come into 
deeper water, where the materials they threw in 
were absorbed or unsettled, and displaced by the 
motion of the sea, they found it necessary to 
change their plan, and endeavoured to shut up 
the harbour by means of floating rafts and hulks 
firmly anehored in the passage. In executing 
this project they were disturbed by a continual 
discharge of arrows, stones, and other missile 
weapons from vessels in the mouth of the har- 
bour, on which proper engines were mounted for 
this purpose. 

While the parties were thus, without inter- 
mission, engaged at the entrance of the port, 
Cesar again made a show of proposing a treaty. 
As he had received no answer to his former mes- 
sage by Magius, he affected to despair of mak- 
ing any progress by direct applications to Pompey, 
and sent into the town Caninius Rebilus, one of 
his licutenants, who, being in great intimacy 
with Scribonius Libo, had directions to make 
application to him, and, in Cesar’s name, to in- 
treat his good offices in bringing on a negotiation; 
particularly, if possible, in procuring an interview 
betwcen Pompey and himself. Representing to 
Libo, that if an interview were obtained, some 
way might be discovered to stop the issues of 
blood, a blessing which, in that case, would for 
ever be mentioned as the effect of so essential a 
service performed by Scribonius Libo to his 
country. 

Pompey, upon receiving these proposals, which, 
though addressed to Libo, were carried directly 
to himself, made answer, that, in the absence of 
the consuls, he could not treat. In this instance, 
he perceived, no doubt, the insincerity of Cesar’s 
pacific declarations, and was not tempted to re- 
mit the vigilance of his defence, or the ardour 
with which he now at last prepared for the con- 
test: yet he could not altogether prevent one ad- 
vantage which Cesar mcant to reap from these 
repeated professions of raoderation and desire of 
peace, that of appearing in the eyes of the peo- 
ple, not the author of the war, but a person forced 
to these extremities by the violence and obstinacy 
of his enemies. 

After the works at the mouth of the harbour 
of Brundusium had been continued three days, 
and had made considerable progress, the trans- 
ports which had carried the first division of Pom- 
pey’s army returned from Dyrrachium, and as 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boorg IV. 


the passage at the mouth of the harbour was 
still open, he prepared to embark with the re- 
mainder of his forces. The inhabitants of the 
town, being disaffected to him, werc likely to 
cig intelligence to Cæsar of all his motions; and 

e made no doubt that as soon as he should with- 
draw his guards, they would throw open their 
gates; and expose him to be attacked in hbis rear, 
and possibly to lose such part of his army as 
might be overtaken on shore. 'To provide against 
this event, and to retard Cæsar’s cntry into the 
town, he built up the gates with solid mortar and 
stone, and traversed the streets with walls and 
large ditches, replenished with sharp stakes, which 
were masked, or hid with a slight covering of 
brushwood and earth. 

When the legions began to move towards the 
harbour, the rear guard still endeavoured to pre- 
sent the usual appearances on the ramparts, by 
occupying every post with archers, slingers, and 
other light troops. These being to remain in 
their post while the main body was embarking, 
had orders, at a signal given, to abandon the 
walls, and to repair on board the transports which 
were ready to receive them. 

The troops in Brundusium thus began to em- 
bark in the night, and Cesar, having immediate 
intelligence of it from the town, brought forward 
his scaling ladders, and, as soon as the ramparts 
appeared to be deserted, began to ascend them in 
several places at once, and effectcd one part of 
his purpose, by gaining the battlements without 
opposition; but when he was about to descend 
from thence into the streets, having notice of the 
snares and obstructions which were placed in his 
way, he was obliged to halt, or to advance with 
so much precaution, that the enemy had time to 
put off from the mole, and get under sail. Only 
two transports, that struck, and were aground on 
the banks which had been formed or begun at 
the mouth of the harbour, fell into his hands. 
The remainder, with the greatcr part of the 
senate, attended by the officers of state and the 
ensigns of magistracy, proceeded in thcir passage 
to Epirus; thus leaving Cesar in possession of 
Italy and of the seats of government, from which 
the world could searcely disjoin, in their idea, the 
right to command, À ; 

Cæsar having, in this manner, surprised the 
republic, and in sixty days obliged all his oppo- 
nents to evacuate Italy, and to leave him sole 
master of the forces which began to be mustered 
against him, it is probable, notwithstanding the 
question he states relating to the expedience of 
following his enemy into Epirus, that he had 
already taken his resolution to consider the re- 
duction of Spain as the next object of conse- 
quence to that of Italy. In that province, which 
was full of rescurces, a regular army of seven or 
eight legions had been for some time formed, with 
an evident purpose to keep him in awe. He was 
threatened, therefore, with the most immediate 
danger from thence. Some arrangements too 
were yet wanting for the security of Italy. ‘The 
professions which he had made of pacific disposi- 
tions, and of zeal for the republic, were to be con- 
firmed by showing a proper respect to the forms 
of the constitution, and by endeavouring to re- 
store a government which he had actually over- 
thrown. 

For these reasons, Cæsar contented himself. 
for the present, with having ordered shipping ts 


Cuar. V.] 


be provided at the port of Brundusium, that he 
might amuse the enemy with appearances of his 
intending to continue the war on that side, or 
that he might be actually ready to do so, when he 
had elsewhere accomplished the purpose on which 
he was bent. Notwithstanding his pacific decla- 
rations, and his ostentation of clemency un every 
occasion, the people still trembled when they saw 
almost every citizen of reputation and honour 
obliged to fly from the seats of government, and, 
in their place, collected from different quarters of 
Italy, every bankrupt, every outlaw, and every 
person of infamous character.! These being at 
variance with the laws of their country, had 
flocked to Cesar, and were received by him un- 
der the denomination of the injured and the op- 
pressed citizens, whose wrongs he was come to 
redress. 

With this company, still multiplying around 
him, having given orders to secure Brundusium 
from the sea, and posted there, and at Sipontum 
and Tarentum, each a legion ; and having order- 
ed ships from every part of the coasts of Italy and 
Gaul, he set out for Spain, intending, while the 
troops, with whom he had overrun Italy, took 
some repose in quarters, and while those who 
were destined for the service in Spain were on 
the march, that he himself should visit Rome, 
and observe the aspect of his party. His father- 
in-law, Calpurnius Piso, although, by his relation 
to Cesar, hindered from following Pompey, yet 
would not countenance his son-in-law so far as to 
remain i: the city to receive him. Marcus Le- 
pidus, then pretor, was the officer of highest 
rank who continued in his place; and beside 
the tribunes who had been the instrumer:ts in 
kindling this war, was the only magistrate who 
resigned himself entirely to the victor’s disposal. 
Among the tribunes, Cæcilius Metellus, though | 
disposed to have followed the senate, being de- 
tained in the city by the sacred duties of his func- 
tions, had taken his resolution to employ the 
negative with which he was intrusted, in restrain- 
ing the violations of law and government, which 
were to be expected in such a scene as was now 
to be opened at Rome. 

Cicero, upon the commencement of hostilities, 
having still the ensigns of proconsul, was ap- 
pointed to inspect the levies and other affairs of 
the republic on the coasts of Campania and La- 
tium. Upon Pompey’s retreat, he remained in 
this station with a mind overwhelmed with per- 
plexity and irresolution. He affected respect and 
gratitude to Pompey, though he surely owed him 
no obligation, bore him no real affection, and 
blamed him highly for his flight from Italy; but 
in the last perhaps he only meant to justify him- 
self for not having immediately joined him in his 
retreat, and for not having embarked with more 
decision in the cause. He sincerely lamented the 
state of the republic, of which he now certainly 
despaired, and only wished to steer a course, the 
safest he could for his own reputation and his 
person. 

Cæsar, in the beginning of this contest, had 
tontributed much to perplex the resolution of 
Cicero, who generally saw so many objects in 


1 Cicer. ad Att. lib. ix. ep. 19. Cave autem putis 
juemquam hominem in Italiam turpem esse, qni 
hinc absit. Vidiipse Formiis universos, &c.; et Ci- 
eer. ad Att. lib. ix. ep. 1. qui hic potest se gerere non 
perditi vita mores ante facta ratio suscepti negotii, 
tocil, &¢. - 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


263 


every question of state, that it was difficult for 
him to decide between them. He had been kept 
undetermined by means of a flattering corres- 
pondence, in which Cæsar made repeated appli- 
cations for his good offices towards preventing 
the present troubles. Being now in the way of 
Cæsar from Brundusium to Rome, he was ho- 
noured with a personal interview ; at which, says 
Cicero to his friend Atticus, I shall study rather 
to appear an object of his respect than of his 
liking. He accordingly, on that occasion, re- 
sisted his flattery, and withstood his entreaties to 
attend a meeting of the senate, which Cesar had 
ordered to be assembled by a messenger despatch- 
ed from Formi. Cæsar appeared to be piqued 
at this refusal: “It will be supposed you con- 
demn me,” he said, “and others will be led by 
your example.” Cicero replied, “that his case 
was different from that of others who had less 
connection with Pompey.” “Come, then,” con- 
tinued Cesar, “and treat of an accommodation 
with Pompey.” “Shall I be at liberty to do so 
in my own way?’ “ Who will restrain you ?’ 
“ Shall I move the senate then, that the war shall 
not be carried into Spam, nor into Greece ? 
Shall I lament the treatment which Pompey has 
received?’ ‘That, indeed,” said Cesar, “I 
shall not like to have said.” “I thought so,” re- 
plied the other, “and choose to absent myself.” 
At parting, Cesar desired him to consider of the 
matter. “If you desert me,” he said, “I must 
have recourse to other counsels, and know not 
what I may be forced to do.” 2 

Upon the arrival of Cesar in the suburbs of 
Rome, such of the senators as were in the city, 
or in the neighbourhood, assembled at his sum- 
mons. He opened the mecting by enumerating 
‘he wrongs he had received, and by loading his 
opponents with the guilt of the present war. 
“ He never had aspired,” he said, “to unprece- 
dented honours. ‘The office of consul was now 
again open to’ him by the laws of the common- 
wealth; and the Roman people had dispensed 
with his personal attendance in suing forit. An 
act to this purpose,” he said, “had been obtained 
in the fairest and most constitutional manner 
Ten tribunes had concurred in proposing it. His 
enemies, particularly Cato himself, had been 
heard at full length against it, and had practised 
his usual artifice for disappointing the senate or 
the people, by prolonging the debates. Pompey 
himself was consul when this act was passed. If 
he disapproved of the act, why did he not oppose 
it then? If he approved of it, why rob him now 
of the privilege it bestowed? He reminded this 
meeting of the moderation with which he himself 
had offered to resign his command, while others 
were so tenacious of theirs; or while they imposed 
conditions on him, to which they themselves 
would not submit, and chose to throw the state 
into confusion, rather than abate the least of their 
own pretensions. He observed, that lis enemies 
had made use of a false pretence to call off two 
legions from his army ; that they had violated the 
sacred character of the tribunes, who were guilty 
of no offence, but that of protecting him against 
the oppression of his enemies; that they had re- 
jected all offers of an accommodation, or even of 
a conference. 

“ He now exhorted the senate not to desert the 


2 Cicer. ad Atticuin, lib. 1x. ep. 18. 


261 


commonwealth, nor to oppose such as, in concert 
with him, might endeavour to restore the govern- 
ment; but if they should shrink in this arduous 
task, he should not press it upon them. He 
knew how to act for himself. If his opinion were 
followed, deputies should be now sent from the 
senate to Pompey, with entreaties, that he would 
spare the republic. He knew, that Pompey had 
formerly objected to his having any such deputa- 
tion sent to himself, considering such advances as 
a concession of right in him to whom they were 
made, or of fear in those who made them. These,” 
he said, “were the reflections of a narrow mind ; 
for his own part, as he wished to overcome his 
enemies in the field, so he wished to excel them 
in acts of generosity and candour.” 

Such were the colours in which this artful 
man endeavoured to disguise his cause; and 
while he took effectual measures to maintain it 
by force, employed likewise an insinuation, and 
an eloquence not less dangerous than his sword. 
The proposals of a treaty were received in this 
meeting with joy; but no man was willing, after 
having assisted at such a meeting of the senate, 
to hazard his person in Pompey’s camp. 

While Cesar, to reconcile all men to his cause, 
affected clemency even to those who were taken 
in arms against him, Pompey, supposing himself 
entrusted with the powers and severities of the 
law, had threatened to employ those powers and 
severities to the utmost extent against every per- 
son who staid behind him at Rome. Proscription 
and massacre of those who abandoned the com- 
monwealth were the ordinary language at his 
quarters.| He proposed to operate in this case 
by fear alone, and had forgotten, that legal go- 
vernment itself, on certain occasions, with all its 
authorities and powers, stands in need of in- 
sinuation and of popular arts. 

Cæsar, in taking the opposite tone, and in af- 
fecting to commit jie affairs to the issue of a fair 
negotiation and treaty, relied on the difficulties 
that were likely to occur in the conduct of any 
nogotiation ; or he presumed upon these difficul- 
ties in making offers which he did not wish his 
enemies to accept. His intention was to load his 
antagonist with the blame of a war which, it is 
probable, he had a long time been devising. If 
he had really meant to renew his former concerts 
with Pompey, he would have employed again the 
same concealed methods by whicn those: concerts 
had been formerly obtained, and would not have 
intrusted the mediation to the senate, a body 
which, however composed, had a natural claim to 
authority, and might have carried their negotia- 
tions farther than he proposed. He had ever 
entertained a serious aversion to the name and 
pretensions of the senate. Being altogether in- 
different to public interests of every sort, the me- 
diocrity of parts, that must ever appear in the 
majority of such a body, was to him an object of 
contempt. He had espoused the cause of every 
- faction, of every tumult, of every criminal against 
them; and, at one time, rather than be subject to 
their authority, had proposed, that Pompey him- 
self should transport his army from Asia to usurp 


the government. Even the few senators, who, ` 


upon the former occasion, from indifference to 
ee questions, or from a disposition to favour 
his cause, had remained in the city, became the 


1 Cicer. ad Atticum, lib. viii. ep. 11. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book IV. 


objects of his disgust. Many of them, though 
willing to be his instruments, were not yet 
formed for his purpose. When he affected to 
treat them with respect, they received his ad- 
dresses as matter of right; when he proposed any 
measure, they took the matter into serious consi- 
deration, and affected to deliberate of what was 
to be done. ‘ He detests the senate,” said Cu- 
rio to Cicero, “now more than ever; he will 
leave them no authority. I meant to have held 
my commission by a fictitious decree of that body : 
but he said, I should hold it of himself; and that 
every honour, and every power should be derived 
from him.” 2 

Cesar, however, meant to make this remnant 
of a legal assembly the tools of every ungracious 
or improper measure he had occasion to execute, 
and, in particular, to avail himself of their au- 
thority in seizing the public money. Pompey, 
before he left Rome, had been authorised to draw 
from the measures of the commonwealth what- 
ever money he wanted for the service. At his 
departure, he ordered the whole to be removed ; 
and the consul Lentulus was about to execute 
this order, when a sudden alarm of Cæsars ap- 
proach obliged him to desist, and left him time 
only to carry away the keys of the public reposi- 
tories. Cæsar now moved the senate, that the 
doors should be opened: and that the public 
money should be issued from thence to defray the: 
expense of the war. To this motion the tri- 
bune Metellus Celer opposed his negative; and 
Cæsar, disdaining any longer to wear a mask 
which subjected him to the observance of insig- 
nificant forms, proceeded to the treasury, and or- 
dered the doors to be forced. The tribune had 
the boldness to place himself in the way, and was 
about to reduce Cæsar to the disagreeable alter- 
native of being disappointed of his purpose, or of 
rendering himself the object of popular detesta- 
tion, by violating the sacred person of a tribune, 
from a veneration to which, he himself professed 
to have undertaken the war. On this occasion, 
contrary to his usual character, he appeared to 
have lost his temper, and threatened Metellus 
with immediate death. “This,” he said, “is 
easier for me to execute than to utter.’ It was 
thought, that if the tribune had persisted, not 
only this officer, but numbers of the senators, 
and many of the more respectable citizens, whon1 
he considered as enemies and promoters to the 
tribune’s contumacy, would have been involved in 
a general massacre. ‘Think not,” said Curio, 
in relating these particulars to Cicero, “that his 
clemency proceeds from temper, or is secured to 
you by any real disposition of his mind. It isa 
mere effect of his policy; he is naturally indif- 
ferent to blood, and, if he is provoked, will make 
it to run in the kennels.”4 

The tribune Metellus, however, when matters 
were coming to this extremity, suffered. himself 
to be removed. The doors were forced open, all 
the money was taken from thence,.even the sa- 
cred deposit, supposed to have remained from the 
time of the rebuilding of Rome after its destruc- 
tion by the Gauls, and still kept as a resource for 
the utmost exigency of public affairs, was now 
carried off. I have subdued the Gauls, said 


2 Cicero ad Att. lib. x. ep. 4. 
3 Dio. Cassius, lib. xli. c. 17 et 18. 
4 Cicero ad Atticum, lib. x. ep. 4. 


Cuar. V.] 


Cesar, and there is no longer any need of such 

provision ayainst them, He is said, on this oc- 

casion, to have carried off in bars, 25,0002b.5 of 
old, 35,000/6.¢ of silver, and in coin, 40,000,000 
oman muney.’ 

After this act of violence, it appears that 
Cesar distrusted the affections of the people. 
He had proposed to harangue them in a public 
audience, which had been appointed for that pur- 
pose; but apprehending that he might be exposed 
to insult from some one in the crowd, he declined 
that solemnity, even avoided the public view al- 
together, and having passed but a few days at 
Rome, set out for Spain sullen and displeased. It 
was no longer a doubt, that his victories led to 
the subversion of the republic, and of every spe- 
cies of civil government whatever.® 

Marcus Emilius Lepidus, who, as has been 
observed, was at this time pretor, and the officer 
of highest rank then at Rome, was left to govern 
the city. Mark Antony had the command of 
Cesar’s forces in Italy; and by the use which he 
made of his power, treating persons of the most 
respectable condition with great insolence, and 
indulging himself in all the extravagance of de- 
bauch, for which his genius appears to have heen 
peculiarly fitted, increased the dismal apprehen- 
sions of the public. He is said to have travelled 
through Italy himself in an open litter, with 
Citheride, a celebrated actress, followed by seven 
other carriages replenished with courtezans, and 
even attended by his wife Fulvia, the widow of 
the late famous Clodius, who, to enjoy her hus- 
band’s state, and partake with him in the license 
of his military power, connived at his infidelitics, 
and inade a part in this scandalous train.9 The 
whole, a lively specimen of the purpose for which 
the accomplices of Catiline, a many of the fol- 
lowers of Cesar wished to be masters of the re- 
public, and a foretaste of the wanton caprice with 
which this overgrown republic, so long a prey to 
outrageous faction, was now likely to be made tlie 
subject and the sport of a military usurpation. 

Soon after hostilities had commenced, Cotta 
had been sent to command for the republic in 
Sardinia, and Cato to command in Sicily. Cesar, 
when about to carry the war into Spain, thought 
it necessary, if possible, to get the possession of 
these islands, as well as to reduce Pompey’s 
forces in every other part of the empire. Having 
stationed Dolabella, with C. Antonius, on the 
coast of Illyricum, he ordered Valerius, with a 
proper force, into Sardinia, and Curio, with three 
legions, to attack Cato in Sicily. 'The Sardinians, 
hearing that one of Cæsars officers was appoint- 
ed, in his name, to take possession of their island, 
declared for his interest, took arms against Cotta, 
and obliged him to fly into A frica, where he join- 
ed Accius Varus, who had occupied that province 
in the name of the republic. 

Cato, some time after his nomination to com- 
mand in Sicily, and while there were any hopes 
of a negotiation, remained at Capua, then the 


rt ara 
According to Arbuthnot, ch. I8. 
5 £672,125 0 0 
6 94,937 10 0 
7 322,916 13 4 Vid. Plin. lib. xxxiii. c. 3. 


ee 


£1,095,982 3 4 


8 Cic. ad Att. lib. x. a 9 Ibid. lib. x. et xiii. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


| possessions. 


265 


ance in forming an accommodation, the least 
ruinous that could be obtained for the common- 
wealth. On Pompey’s retreat into Apulia, he 
went into Sicily, and the province being unpro- 
vided with every means of defence, he gave or- 


(ders to repair, and to build ships in all the ports 


of the island, and in those of the neighbouring 
coast of Italy. He had likewise ordered all the 
towns to furnish their quota of troops ; but had 
not been able to assemble any force, when Curio 
landed at Messina, with the two legions destined 
by Cesar to take possession of the island. Sen- 
sible that any attempts to resist this force would 
only expose the lives of a few well-affected citi- 
zens or subjects, who might on this occasion be 
disposed to support him as an oficer of the re- 
public, he discontinued his military preparations, 
and withdrew from the island. 

This officer had often disapproved of Pompey’s 
conduct; and on this occasion, complaincd par- 
ticularly of the defenceless state in which he had 
suffered the republic to be surprised in all its 
Cesar, who no doubt wished to 
have the suffrage of such a citizen, and of hisown 
enemy against Pompey, represents Cato as com- 
plans that he was betrayed, that the senate 

ad been deceived, and that the war itself was 
unnecessary. The conduct of Pompey, not only 
as a citizen, but as an officer of state and as a 
soldier, has been censured in many parts of this 
memorable contest; and it is indeed easy to spy 
faults after the event, and when experience has 
exposed them to view. Cæsar himself is said to 
have censured him for abandoning Italy; and it 
is probable would have respected him more, if in 
executing this resolution, instead of passing into 
Macedonia, he had gone to the head of his army 
in Spain. His celebrated saying, in leaving 
Brundusiuin, when he was about to carry the war 
into that country, implied an opinion to this pur- 
pose, “ We go,” he said, “from this gencral who 
has no army, to an army that has no general.” 

Cesar's own disposition of his forces, as has 
been already mentioned, in assigning what ap- 
peared to have been the reason of his conduct, 
had been made with the greatest ability; and the 
more, that they gave him the appearance of a 
person acting without design, and suddenly 
forced to the measures which he embraced. In 
talking of ordinary men, we may err in imputing 
too much to design and concert; but with re- 
spect to Cæsar, the mistake to be feared, is not 
perceiving the whole extent of his foresight and 
plan, He at once armed himself with a military 
force, and artfully guarded the appearances under 
which he wasto use it. When the senate passed 
their resolution against him, he seemed to he 
caught unprepared to resist; but the senate was 
still less prepared to attack. He had artfully 
avoided giving them any cause of suspicion, hy 


any unnecessary assemblage of forces on the side 


of Italy, while he had suthcient strength to take 


) j j ‘the full benefit of the consternation into which 
quarters of Pompey, in order to give his assist-| 


they were thrown by his first alarm. Though 
long meditating the invasion of Rome with an 
army, he contrived an incident, in the flisht of 
the tribunes, to make it appear the effect of a 
sudden provocation, and of his zeal in a popular 
cause. When we consider that Mark Antony 


(was the tribune who furnished this pretence, 


eS Se 
10 Ces. de Bell. Civ. lib. xxx. 


265 


there is no doubt that Cesar had his choice of the 
time at which it should be presented to him. 

At this conjuncture, the greater part of his 
army still remained beyond the Alps, and in the 
precise situation in which they were most likely 
to be wanted to encounter the first considerable 
difficulty that would probably arise in the war, 
from the veteran legions which had been levied 
for Pompey, and which were stationed under 
Afranius and Petreius in Spain." If these legions 
hac attempted to pass the Pyrennees, the army 
of Cesar was stationed in Gaul to intercept 
them, and he was accordingly secure of being 
able to finish the war in Italy, without any in- 
terruption from thence. When this service was 
effected, his army in Gaul remained in the most 
advantageous position, from which to enter upon 
what was likely to become the second object of 
his enterprise, thc reduction of Spain. 

The antagonists of Cesar, without any appre- 
hension of these dispositions, and perfectly secure 
before hostilities commenced, were completely 
surprised, overwhelmed, and routed in every 
quarter on which they attempted to make any 
defence. Armies indeed had been formed in 
Italy, according to the saying of Pompey, at the 
stamp of his foot; but they were armies that 
served the purpose of his enemies, not that of the 
republic, or his own; and though raised to secure 
Italy against Cæsar, became in the reduction of 
Italy itself an accession to his force, and were 
ready to be sent in separate divisions to occupy 
different provinces of the empire in his name; 
insomuch, that while Cesar himself, with the 
strength of the veteran legions with which he 
had conquered Gaul, hastened into Spain to re- 
duce what was the most formidable part of his 
rival’s power, his officers were detached with 
separate bodies of these newly acquired troops, 
into Sardinia, Sicily, and Africa. 

Pompey, although he had never visited his 
government in person, nor sought for occasions 
of war, as Cæsar, in ordcr to form his army and 
inure them, to service, had done in Gaul, had 
nevertheless formed a great military establish- 
ment, consisting of seven Roman legions, with 
five thousand horse, and eighty cohorts of pro- 
vincial infantry, equal in number to eight legions 


more; and Cesar had reason, to believe, that this | 


reat force, if the war could have been protracted 
in Italy, would have come upon his rear, cut off 
his resources in Gaul, or obliged him to defend 
himself on the north of the Alps. He accord- 
ingly, instead of bringing into Italy the legions 
that lay in the low countries, or the interior parts 
of his province, had moved them only to the 
neighbourhood of Narbonne, to be near the con- 
fines of Spain, from which this storm was to be 
dreaded; and meant, if the success of his affairs 
in Italy should admit of it, that these legions 
should cross the Pyrennees, and fix the scene of 
the war amidst his rival’s possessions. 

Spain had been formerly divided into two 
provinces, under two separate Roman governors; 
but the whole being united under Pompey, was 
committed by him to three lieutenants, Varro, 
Petreius, and Afranius. The first commanded, 
from the river Guadiana westward to the ex- 


1 See pages 255, 257, the preceding parts of this | 


chapter. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV. 


tremities of Lusitania? and Gallicia; the second, 
from the Guadiana eastward to the mountains 
of Murcia; and the third, from thence to the 
Pyrennees. 

Soon after the war broke out in Italy, Pompey 
sent Vibullius into Spain, with orders to these 
officers to assemble their forces, and to prepare 
for the defence of their province. Varro affectcd 
indifference in the quarrel, or an equal regard to 
the opposite parties concerned in it. An accident, 
he said, had placed him under the command of 
Pompey ; but he had an equal attachment to Cæ- 
sar. The other two, from regard to the common- 
wealth, or from fidclity to their commander-in 
chief, engaged with more zeal in the cause. They 
determined, in concert with Vibullius, to leave 
Varro in the western province, while they them- 
selves drew the principal part of their force 
towards the eastern frontier; and by occupying 
the passes of the mountains, or some strong post 
on the Ebro, endeavoured to defend the country 
intrusted to their care, until Pompey should either 
arrive in person to take the command on himself, 
or until, having rallied his forces in Macedonia, 
he should bring the scene of the war again into 
Italy. For this purpose, they took post at Ilerda,3 
a place of strength on the Segro, and about 
twenty miles above the confluence of this river 
with the Cinca; Afranius with three legions, 
Petreius with two more, together with five thou- 
sand horse, and eighty cohorts of provincial in- 
fantry. 

Such were the dispositions that were making 
in Spain, when Cesar, having expelled his rivat 
from Italy, took possession of Rome, and having 
passed a few days in that city, in the manner 
above related, set out for his army in the province 
of Narbonne. 

Being to pass by Marseilles, he intended to take 


possession of that city ; but the inhabitants were 


already disposed to favour his antagonists, and 
shut their gates against him. This ancient Greek 
colony, after having long defended their settlement 
against the rude tribes in their neighbourhood, 
had placed themselves at last under the protection 
of the Romans; but with a reserve of all their 
immunities, and an exemption from all the bur- 
dens of a Roman province. Cesar proposed to 
have entered their city as a neutral place, and to 
prevail on the citizens to receive him, cited the 
examples of Rome itself, and of all the other 
cities of Italy, who had opened: their gates, and 
given a passage to his army, without taking any 
part in the present disputes. To this proposal, 
the people of Marseilles made answer, That in 


every case where the Romans were divided among 
| themselves, every ally in their situation must so 
: far preserve their neutrality, as not to receive the 


forces. of either party within their walls, and that 
in the present case particularly, they lay under 
such high obligations to the leaders of both par- 
ties, that they must carefully avoid giving offence 
to either. . 

It soon after appeared, however, that this plau- 
sible answer was intended merely to gain time. 
Vibullius had passed by Marseilles in his way to 
Spain, and had dclivered to the people of that 
place a message from Pompey, with assurances 
of support; on which they fully relied. The 
receipt of this message, was followed by a reso- 


2 Portugal. 3 Now called Lerida. 


Cuar. V.} 


lution to admit the officers and men of Pompey’s 


party into their town, and to exclude his anta-. ‘ 
| service, and were to be followed by a body of ca- 


gonists, 

Domitius Ahenobarbus, after he had been dis- 
missed from Corfinium, no ways affected by the 
ostentatious clemency of Cesar, had, in pursu- 
ance of the senate’s appointment to the govern- 
ment of Gaul, repaired to that province, raised 
some troops, with which he was expected to take 
possession of Marseilles, and actually, in a few 
days after this answer was given to Cesar, en- 
tered the harbour of that place with seven ships, 
aud some land forces on board. Upon his arrival, 
the people of this republic called in to their assist- 
ance the force of some neighbouring cantons from 
the mountains; repaired their fortifications; re- 

lenished their magazines; employed many hands 
in fabricating arms; and took every other pre- 
caution that was necessary, in case they should 
be attacked, to enable them to make a vigorous 
defence. s 

Cæsar being greatly provoked, invested the 
town with an army of three legions; and having 
ordered some ships to be built on the Rhone, pre- 
pared to assail it at once by sea and by land. He 
committed the attack by land to Trebonius; and 
that from the sea to Decimus Brutus. While he 
was making these preparations, a report prevailed 
that Pompey was passing the seas into Africa, 
and intended, with the troops which were in that 

rovince, and a body of Numidian cavalry, to re- 
inforce, and to take the command of his army in 
Spain. It is probable that Cesar, in like cir- 
cumstances, would have even taken a shorter 
road to the head of his army. He appears at 
least to have believed this report of his enemy, or 


to have thought it extremely probable, and to have : 


been somewhat alarmed. As if the prospect of 
meeting with Pompey, having under his direction 
a well-appointed and regular force, had rendered 
him doubtful of the affections of his own men, 
he mentions an artifice practised by himself on 
this occasion, which may be considered as a spe- 
cimen of his address, and of the influence which 
he employed with his army. He borrowed mo- 
ney from the officers, and gave it in gratuities to 
the soldiers; thus taking a pledge for the fidelity 


of the one, and purchasing that of the others by | 


his bounty. 

While Cæsar was yet employed in opening the 
siege of Marseilles, he ordered Fabius, who com- 
manded his forces at Narbonne, to advance into 
the Pyrennees; and if the passes were open or 


slightly guarded, te penetrate into Spain, and 


occupy some advantageous station on the frontier 
of that country. This officer accordingly, having 
forced the passes of the Pyrennees, penetrated to 
the Segra, or, as it was then called, the Sicoris; 
and took post on the right of this river, in the 
front of the united armies of Afranius and 
Petreius, who were encamped near the town of 
Ilerda. 

Fabius, not to be interrupted by occasional 
floods in his communication with the country 
through which he had passed, and to keep open 
the ordinary route from Gaul, laid two bridges 
upon it, at the distance of four miles from each 
other. By these communications, he was chiefly 
supplied with provisions; and as the Spanish 
army had an easy access by the bridge of Ilerda 
to intercept his supplies, it was necessary to cover 


every Convoy and toraging party with numerous ! 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


267 


and powerful escorts. Two entire legions, under 
the command of Plancus, had marched on this 


valry. After the infantry had passed the river, 
and the cavalry was entered on the bridge, it broke 
down, and deprived those who were already over, 
of any communication with the camp. The tim- 
ber and wreck of the bridge floating by the town 
of lerda, gave the enemy intimation of what had 
happened, and suggested the design to scour the 
country on the left of the Segra, with a powerful 
detachment, in order to intercept any parties who 
might by this accident be cut off from the main 
body of the army. For this purpose, Afranius 
marched with four legions, and might have taken 
or destroyed those who remained under Plancus 
on the left of the river, if this officer had not re- 
tired to a height, on which he was able for some 
time to resist the superior numbers of his enemy. 
In the mean while, Fabius suspecting the dan- 
ger to which his detachment was exposed, de- 
spatched two legions more by the other bridge to 
support the former. On the appearance of this 
reinforcement, Afranius, whose plan in the pre- 
sent campaign was altogether defensive, thought 
proper to retire, without hazarding an action, in 
which he might be exposed to a too hasty decision 
of the cause. 

Two days after this adventure, Cesar, with 
an escort of nine hundred horse, arrived in the 
camp of Fabius. Having examined the situa- 
tion of both armies, and ordered the bridge on the 
Segra to be rebuilt, he proceeded as usual to act 
on the offensive, and to occupy the enemy’s at- 
tention with successive operations against them, 
by which he left them no leisure to form any de- 
signs of their own. It was his fortune, indeed, 
in this and other periods of the present war, to 
need a speedy decision, which made him take 
measures that forced his enemies to remain on the 
defensive, and inspired his men with a notion of 
their own superiority; an opinion which, after 
it has been some time received, seldom fails to 
verify itself, 

In a few days after his arrival, he advanced 
with his army in three divisions to the foot of the 
hill on which the Spanish army was encamped, 
and while they centinued to observe, and endea- 
voured to penctrate his intentions, he began to 
break ground, and to make a lodgement for him- 
self in that place. That his purpose might not 
be known, until the work was considerably ad- 
vanced, he kept the first and second lines under 
arms, and ordered the third, without raising a 
parapet, or planting their palisades, to sink a. 
ditch fifteen feet wide, and of a sufficient length 
to cover his front. This being done, he retired 
with his whole army behind it, and ordered thena 
to lie upon their arms all night. Under cover ef 
this temporary entrenchment, be on the following 
day completed the usual fortifications of his camp, 
and brought ferward the tents and baggage of his 
army, which till then had remained under a pro- 
per guard on his former ground. 

Being now in possession of a post within four 
hundred paces, or less than half a mile of the 
enemy’s lines; and having a view of the ground 
which lay between their camp and the town of 
Nlerda, extending about three hundred paces, and 
mostly plain, with a small height in the middle 
of it, he formed a project to seize the height; and 
knowing that the enemy lodged their magazines 


o 


258 


and stores in Ilerda, proposed to cut off their 
communication with the town. In this view, he 
drew up a body of three legions in a proper posi- 
tion, frum which to execute his purpose; and or- 


dered the front rank! from one of those legions to’ 


start from their colours, and with the utmost 
speed to gain the height which he intended to 
occupy. ‘lhe sudden movement of this body ex- 
plained his design to the enemy, arid they in- 
stantly put all the piquets and extraordinary 
guards of their camp in motion to prevent its 
effects. Having a nearer way, and the advan- 
tage of the ground, they prevented Cesar’s party; 
and being in possession of the height before they 
came up, repulsed and beat them back to their 
main body. Here too, they pursued their advan- 
tage; and as they rushed with little regard to 
order, but with an appearance of undaunted 
courage, on the flanks as well as the front of the 
legions which Cesar had advanced, they put the 
whole in some degree of confusion, and forced 
them back to the heights in their rear. 

While the leaders of the Spanish army pro- 
bably committed an error in not redoubling their 
blow, or remained in suspense, Cesar issued 
from his camp with a fresh legion to support the 
flving division of his army, obliged the enemy 
to retire in their turn, and having overtaken 
them before they could reach their camp, obliged 
them to take refuge under the walls of the 
town. 

Tlie ground at the foot of these walls was steep, 
and the access to it was by lanes and narrow ways. 
Thither the troops, with whom Cesar had re- 
newed the action, flushed with victory, had fol- 
lowed the enemy, and got into a situation in 
which they could not gain any advantage, nor 
retire without loss. The parties, however, con- 
tinued to skirmish during five hours, and being 
continually reinforced from their respective ar- 
mies, a general engagement was likely to ensue 
on ground extremely unfavourable to Cesar. 

In order to extricate himself with the least 
possible appearance of disgrace, he ordered a 
general charge, and having drove his antagonists 
before him to the foot of the wall, he sounded a 
retreat from thence, and brought off his men, 
before the enemy could rally or return to the 
pursuit. ; 

In this manner, Cesar retired to his camp 
with considerable loss, and foiled in his design ; 
but on account of the last impression he made on 
the enemy, with some pretensions to a victory, of 
which to support the courage of his troops, he 
cid not neglect to avail himself. 

In a few days after this miscarriage, the army 
of Cesar suffered a worse and more alarming ca- 
lamity. The summer being far advanced, and 
the snow on the Pyrennees melting, all the rivers 
which are supplied from thence, rose on a sudden 
to their greatest height. ‘The Segra carried off 
both the bridges erected by Fabius, and baffled 
all the endeavours that were used to restore them. 
As often as any attempt was made for this pur- 
pose, the work was interrupted by the enemy 
fiom the opposite bank, or the materials were 
swept away by the flood. Neither the Segra nor 
the Cinca were passable, and the country be- 
tween them, though extending in breadth about 


en 


q1 Unius Legionis Antesignuános. Cæsar. de Bell. 
Civil. lib. i. c. 43. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor LV. 


thirty miles, being exhausted, could no longer 
furnish any supply of provisions to Cesar’s camp: 

About the time that the army began to feel 
their distress, a convoy which arrived from Gaul, 
consisting of many carriages, escorted by a large 
body of Gaulish horse, and accompanied with 
many officers and persons of distinction, who 
came to witness the glories of this campaign, 
the whole, together with their attendants and 
equipage, amounting to about six thousand men, 
were attacked by Afranius, and with great loss 
obliged to take refuge in the neighbouring moun- 
tains. 

In consequence of this disaster, and under the 
sense of the present, and apprehension of the 
future distress, the modius? of corn sold in Cæ- 
sar’s camp for fifty denarii, or at the rate of thirty 
shillings a peck: All their attempts to procure a 
supply were frustrated by the difficulties of their 
situation, or by the vigilance of the enemy. As 
the height of the floods was a permanent effect 
of the season, in swelling every river which de- 
scends from mountains that retain their snow in 
the summer, and as the enemy were plentifully 
supplied from their magazines in the town of 
Ilerda, or had, by the bridge of that place, an 
open communication with the fertile country 
which is now named Catalonia on their right, 
Cesar could have no immediate prospect of re- 
lief. The Spanish army accordingly triumphed 
in their good fortune, and sent exaggerated ac- 
counts of their advantage to all parts of Spain, to 
Italy, and to Macedonia. Many persons, who 
had hitherto hesitated in the choice of their party, 
were now determined. Varro began to exert 
himself in his province, and levied two entire new 
legions in the name of Pompey. Many hastened 
from Italy into Macedonia, to be the carriers of 
such agreeable tidings, or to have the merit of 
declaring themselves of the party of the republic, 
while the issue of the war yet remained in any 
degree of suspense. 

The triumphs, however, which anticipate 
events are often deceitful; and, by the overween- 
ing security and confidence which they inspire, 
give an able enemy great advantage, even in his 
distress, or facilitate the changes of fortune in 
his favour. Afranius and Petreius, while they 
trusted to the ordinary course of the seasons, 
were not sufficiently upon their guard against the 
superior resources of so able an adversary. ‘They 
suffered him to build, unobserved, a number of 
boats, upon a construction which his workmen 
had learned in'Britain; having a keel in the or- 
dinary form, and some timbers of strength on the 
sides; but, instead of plank, finished between 
these timbers with basket-work, and covered with 
hides. These vessels being of easy carriage, 
were transported by land about twenty miles 
above Ceesar’s camps and in a first embarkation 
ferried over a party sufficient to make a lodge- 
ment on the opposite bank. Cæsar continued to 
reinforce this party, until, having an entire legion 
intrenched on that side, he ventured to employ 
his carpenters openly in constructing a bridge, 
which they began at once from both sides of the 
river. This work was completed in two days, 
and again gave him access to the left of the Se- 
gra, where he surprised some of the enemy’s 


2 Little more than a peck. 


Ciar. V.] 


parties, and procured immediate relief by a sup- 
ply of provisions to his own camp. 

About tne time that Cæsar had effected this 
change in the state of his army, he had news of 
a naval fight on the coast of Gaul, in which his 
fleet, under Decimus Brutus, had defeated that 
of the enemy, and given a speedy prospect of the 
reduction of Marseilles. This report, together 
with the disappointment he had recently given to 
the hopes of his enemies, had at once all the ef- 
fects of victory, and made him appear more for- 
midable than he was supposed to be, even before 
the distresses which he had lately experienced. 
His antagonists, from a state of sanguine expec- 
tation, sunk into a proportional degree of despon- 
dency, and became so much in awe of his superior 
conduct, that they abandoned the country on the 
left of the Segra to his foragers, and never ven- 
tured, except in the night, to go abroad for the 
necessary supplies of their own camp. These 
events affected the natives of the country ina 
still higher degree, and brought them from every 
quarter to make a tender of their services in sup- 

lying Cesar with provisions, or in seconding 
in in his military operations. 

In conjunction with the natives, who were now 
become his allies, Cæsar again found himself in 
condition to act on the offensive, and to devise 
new alarms for the enemy. His first object was 
to render the passage of the river at all times 
practicable; and as he had failed in his purpose 
of separating the Spanish army from the town 
of Ilerda, he now proposed to extend his com- 
mand of the country, and to form a chain of 
posts, by which he might circumscribe the town 
itself, together with the enemy’s camp, which de- 
pended upon it. 

The bridge which he had lately built was at 
too great a distance, and he experienced the in- 
security of such communications over torrents, 
which came with such force and so much in- 
equality from the mountains. Instead, therefore, 
of attempting to erect any more bridges, he pro- 
posed to render the river fordable, by separating 
its course into many different channels; and for 
this purpose made a number of cuts, of about 
thirty feet deep, through the plain, to receive as 
much of the waters of the Segra as might sufti- 
ciently drain the principal stream. 

The enemy, as soon as they understood the 
purpose of these operations, were greatly alarmed. 
They foresaw that Cæsar, having the passage of 
the river secured, might command its opposite 
banks below, as well as above the town of Ilerda, 
block up the bridge of that place, and, with the 
aid of the country around him, which, since the 
late defection of its inhabitants, was ready to sup- 
port him ın all his designs, might have it in his 
power to prevent their supplies, and distress 
them, in their turn, for want of provisions. 

To remove from a situation in which they 
were exposed to so many evils, they resolved in- 
stantly to abandon their present station, and to 
retire beyond the Ebro, where the people, either 
from fear or affection, were still in their interest. 
They proceeded to the execution of this purpose 
with much seeming precaution and foresight. 
Having fixed upon a proper place at which to 
lay a bridge over the Ebro, they ordered all the 
boats, within a certain distance on that river and 
on the Segra, to be collected together for that 
purpose. ‘They placed a proper garrison in Iler- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


269 


da, to check the motions of the enemy in their 
rear, or if he attempted to reduce that place, to 
employ his forces until they themselves should 
have effected their retreat, and made their ar- 
rangements in the new position they intended to 
take. 

As their first movement in filing off from tneir 
present encampment, and in passing through the 
town of Ilerda, encumbered with all their bag- 
gage, was likely to detain them some time in 
presence of the enemy, and exposed them to the 
attacks of his cavalry and light troops, they in- 
tended no more on the first ey, than to file off 
by the bridge ; and they fixed on a post at which 
they might halt on the left of the Segra, and 
make the proper dispositions to continue their 
march. This post they sent two legions before 
them to occupy and to securé. 

Having taken these preparatory steps, they 
decamped, defiled without molestation throug 
the town of Ilerda, and came to the ground on 
which they had taken care to secure their recep- 
tion; here they halted until the middle of the 
night, when they again were in motion. They 
had a plain of some miles before them, bounded 
by a ridge of hills, which they were to pass in 
their way to the Ebro. They might be exposed 
to Cesar’s light troops in crossing this plain ; but 
as soon as they reached the mountains, they 
could, by securing the passes in their rear, effec- 
tually prevent any farther attack from the enemy, 
Thither they accordingly directed their march; 
but Cesar, who had observed their intentions, 
and who had so far succeeded in his operations on 
the river as to be able to ford it with his horse, 
sent the greater part of his cavalry, in the begin- 
ning of the night, with orders to hang upon the 
rear of the enemy, and by all possible means te 
retard their progress. 

This service the cavalry performed with so 
much success, that at break of day the Spanish 
army, in consequence of the frequent interrup- 
tions they had received, were still to be scen from 
Cæsars camp. The cavalry, as often as the 
enemy got in motion, were observed to attack 
them, but when the enemy halted, appeared to 
stop or retire, and were pursued in their turn, 
The army of Cesar being spectators of this scene 
became extremely impatient, and with the great- 
est ardour pressed to be led against the enemy. 
Even officers crowded to their gencral, and beg- 
ged they might be allowed to try the ford; they 
observed of what consequence it was, that an ene- 
my who had been driven with so much labour 
from one post, should uot be suffered to retire in 
safety to another situation, fron: which they might 
renew the war. 

Cesar, affecting to be moved by these repre- 
sentations, and to he prevailed upon to do what 
it is probable he earnestly desired, instantly made 
his dispositions to pass the river. He selected 
the least firm and vigorous men of every cohort 
for the guard of the camp; placed lines of horse 
in the river above and below the ford, to break 
the force of the stream, and to save those who 
might be overpowered by the strength of the cur- 
rent; in this manner he passed his infantry be- 
tween the double lines of cavalry without the loss 
of a man. They had a circuit of six miles to 
make, in order to avoid the town of Ilerda; but 
notwithstanding this delay, and the advantage 
which Afranius and Petreius had gained by be- 


270 


ginning their march at midnight, and by their 
not being discovered until it was day, such were 
the interruptions given by the cavalry, and the 
speed with which the legions of Cesar advanced, 
that they overtook the enemy’s rear about three 
in the afternoon, and occasioned at once a gene- 
ral halt inevery part of their column. 

Petreius and Afranius, stunned by the unex- 
pected arrival of Cæsar at the head of his whole 


army, formed on a rising ground to receive him; 


and both armies seemed to prepare for immedi- 
ate action. But Cesar, knowing the necessity 
which the enemy were under of pursuing their 
retreat, and the prospect he had of increasing his 
advantage on the march, did not think it neces- 


sary to attack them when in order of battle; he 


took his ground, however, so near them,! that he 
could profit by every advantage they gave him, 
and in every attempt they should make to change 
their situation, could push them into all the dis- 
ordets of a general rout. 

In this position of the two armies, the Spani- 


ards having some time remained in order of bat- | 


tle, again attempted to resume their march; but 
having soon experienced the difficulties of that 
attempt with an enemy so near them, and being 


faint with hunger and the fatigue of so many te- 


dious and fruitless operations, they determined to 
halt and wait for the return of night. They had 
now no more than five miles to pass on the plain, 
and hoped, by a rapid motion in the night, to 
traverse this space before Cesar could overtake 
them, or before he could oblige them to halt any 
where short of the mountains, where they looked 
for a perfect security. 

Both parties appeared to be fixed on their 
ground for the night, when some prisoners that 
were brought to Cesar gave information that the 
enemy were in motion, and must in a little time 
be so far advanced as to reach the hills before he 
could give them any effectual trouble. On this 
sudden emergence, although his army was by no 
means ready to march, he ordered every trumpet 
to sound, as if he were actually in motion. This 
feint, however slight, had its effect, the enemy 
believed that they were to be instantly attacked, 
or closely pursued on the march, when disordered 
and encumbered with baggage; they desisted 
from their intention, and gave the signal to halt. 

Afranius and Petreius, thus baffled in the exe- 
cution of the first part of their plan, which had 
deen so reasonably formed, began to lose courage, 
and remained on this ground all night, and the 
following day perplexed with irresolution and 
various counsels, So far, however, they deter- 
inined, that before so vigilant an enemy it was 
safer to march by day than by night; and in this 
mind they remained yet a second night in the 
present position. 

In this interval Cesar, having leisure to visit 
the country over which they were to pass, found 
it practicable to turn their flank and get to the 
hills before them. He accordingly moved in the 
night, and at break of day, before the enemy 
judged it safe to decamp, he appeared on their 
right; but seeming to retire, and to leave them at 
liberty to continue their retreat. So long as his 
march had this appearance, they were pleased to 


1 The want of cannon or fire-arms enabled a supe- 
rior army to remain almost in contact with that it 
intended to harass. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boor IV. 


think that he had moved for want of provisions, 
and applauded themselves for having patiently 
aliel so joyful an event. But as soon as he 
had got a sufficient way to his left, he changed 
his direction, and marched with all possible speed 
to reach the mountains. They were no longer 
at a loss to perceive his design, or the danger 
with which they themselves were threatened. 
And they instantly, without striking their tents 
or packing their baggage, moved in the greatest 
haste to prevent him. 

In this operation, Cæsar was now become cer- 
tain of one or other of two great advantages ; 
either that he should reach the pass of the moun- 
tains before the enemy, and so cut off their re- 
treat; or, if they got there before him, that he 
should be left in possession of their camp and 
their baggage. He prevailed, however, in the 
trial of speed, got the first of these advantages by 
being before them at the ascent of the mountains, 
where he found a ledge or terras that was suffi- 
ciently capacious to receive his army, and which 
gave him entire command of the pass. 

Afranius, on seeing Cesar in possession of this 
ground, sent a considerable party to try the ascent 
of the mountains at a different place, and to gain 
the summits behind him; in hopes that, if this way 
was practicable, he might follow with his whole 
army, and descend from thence to the Ebro. But 
the party he employed on this service was, in 
presence of both armies, surrounded by Cesar’s 
horse, and put to the sword. The rest of the 
army, without making any attempt to rescue their 
friends, beheld this scene with a kind of torpid 
dejection. They dropped their arms, and stag- 
gered in their ranks. The troops of Cesar, who 
well understood these signs of extreme terror, 
became to a degree of mutiny impatient for action ; 
and he himself was sensible that the enemy might 
in that moment be attacked with the greatest ad- 
vantage; but as he now thought himself sure of 
being able to reduce them without a blow, he was 
unwilling to give them an opportunity, however 
unlikely to avail them, of making their escape by 
the chance of a battle. While he endeavoured 
accordingly to restrain the unseasonable ardour 
of his own men, the leaders of the Spanish army 
had time to retire with theirs, and led them back 
to the camp which they had left in the morning, 
and to the melancholy possession of tents and of 
baggage, which they had been willing to abandon, 
in order to effect their escape. 

Cesar having left proper guards to secure the 
passes of the mountains, followed the enemy, and 
took post, as before, so near them, that they could 
not move without being exposed to his insults. 

In this position of the two armies, the senti- 
nels and advanced guards had an opportunity to 
talk together; they mutually regretted the un- 
happy quarrel in which. they were engaged, and 
both officers and men becoming by degrees more 
familiar, met between the lines, and even ex- 
changed visits in their opposite camps. Officers 
of the Spanish army proceeded so far as to talk 
of an accommodation, and got over their scruples in 
treating without proper authority from their 
generals, by proposing to stipulate some honour- 
able terms for them in the peace which they pro- 
posed to conclude. 

Cæsar was apprised of this correspondence, 
and, however irregular, connived at a circum- 
stance which he hoped his superior popularity 


Cuar. V.] 


and the splendour of his fortune, would turn to 
his own account. He flattered himself, that as 
he had been able to seduce the troops of Pompey 
in Italy, so he might now deprive his antagonists 
of the army they had formed in the field to op- 
pose him. 

The Spanish generals, being intent on a work 
they were executing to secure their access to 
water, remained for some time unapprized of the 
disorderly correspondence subsisting between the 
two armies; and Afranius, when he came to the 
knowledge of what was passing, seemed to ob- 
serve it with great indifference; but Petreius was 
greatly alarmed, ran with the officers and the 
guard who usually attended his person to the 
space between the lines, dispersed all those who 
were found in conference together, and put all 
the soldiers of Cæsars army who fell in his way 
to the sword. From thence he went through the 
camp, and with tears exacted from every legion 
apart fresh oaths of fidelity to Pompey. He af- 
terwards assembled the whole at the usual place 
of audience, before the general’s tent; and in a 
speech composed of insinuation and reproach, 
endeavoured to confirm them in their duty; and, 
to the end that he might effectually cut off all 
hopes of conciliation, ordered all the soldiers of 
Cæsars army that could be found within his in- 
trenchments to be brought before him and slain. 

Cæsar, at the same time, having many officers 
and men of the Spanish army in his camp, might 
have retaliated these acts of severity; but he 
chose rather to contrast the character of clemency 
he himself had assumed, with the austere and 
merciless policy of his enemies ; and for this pur- 
pose gave their freedom to such officers or men 
as chose to return to their own party, and re- 
warded with preferments and honours such of 
them as were inclined to remain in his service. 

Afranius and Petreius, by the timely discovery 
of these irregular practices, having escaped the 
disgrace of being delivered up to the enemy, to 
be treated at his discretion, or to be spared only 
as objects of pity at the intercession of their own 
army, continued their plan of operations; but by 
persevering in their resistance, they only enabled 
their adversary to give still more evident proofs 
of his superior skill and address. They were 
sensible that their present post could not be long 
maintained ; it had been taken, in their haste to 
reach the mountains, from necessity, as an im- 
mediate respite from the attacks of an enemy who 
annoyed their march; and, besides other incon- 
veniences, had a difficult access to water, the brook 
or river from which they were to be supplied be- 
ing exposed to the discharge of arrows, darts, and 
other missiles from the enemy, Their bread, 
which they had calculated to serve them on the 
whole route to the Ebro was near exhausted, and 
they had no immediate prospect of supply. They 
entered therefore into anxious deliberation on the 
choice of a retreat, by which they might soonest 
get beyond reach of an enemy who pressed them 
with such unremitted alarms. They hesitated 
whether they should return to Ilerda, where they 
still had some magazines, or should attempt to 
reach Tarraco? on their left, at the distance of 
about fifty miles. The length and difficulty of 
the way, in which they would be exposed to Cæ- 
sar’s attacks, determined them against the last ; 


2 Tarragona. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


271 


and they chose the first, as promising the nearest 
and most immediate relief from their present 
distresses. They accordingly, without any pre- 
caution, decamped, and directed their march to 
Jlerda. 

The Spanish infantry were now more exposed 
than they had been on any of their former 
marches; for their cavalry had been so often dis- 
comfited, and had lost courage se much, that they 
could not be kept to their place in the column, 
and were now actually received for safety into 
the centre of the infantry; the rear was there- 
fore cruelly annoyed by Cesar’s horse, supported 
by the whole force of his legions. In ascending 
the heights, which were frequent in their way, 
they had the better of the enemy, by throwing 
their javelins and darts on those who attempted 
to pursue them from below; and with this su- 
periority they made a stand on every ascent, to 
force their pursuers back to some distance; but 
in descending the hills, the same advantage being 
taken against themselves, they generally ran in 
great disorder to the plains. And in this manner, 
the ground being uneven, their march consisted 
of alternate steps and precipitate flights, ex 
tremely fatiguing, and likely to end in a general 
rout. 

The leaders of the retiring army, to prevent 
this fatal consequence, thought proper again to 
form upon a rising ground, and attempted a 
stratagem to amuse the enemy, and to gain some 
advance on the march before him. For this pur- 
pose, affecting to make some permanent lodg- 
ment in the place where they halted, they threw 
up a breast-work, but neither pitched their tents 
nor unloaded their baggage, and were ready to 
depart the moment their pursuer gave them an 
opportunity, by quitting the order of march, 
Cesar, trusting to the effects of his late attacks, 
and to the appearances which the enemy pre- 
sented, had no suspicion of their purpose, gave 
orders to pitch, and even suffered tie cavalry to 
separate in parties to forage. This was nosooner 
observed from the Spanish army, than they in- 
stantly resumed their march. It was then about 
noon, and they made some way undisturbed. 

Cesar seeing himself over-reached, instantl 
put his legions in motion, without striking their 
tents or packing their baggage, and leaving orders 
for the cavalry to follow him as soon as they could 
be assembled, endeavoured to keep close to the 
enemy’s rear. He was in this situation when the 
cavalry rejoined him, and, by renewing with 
double ardour their former operations, obliged the 
Spanish army again to suspend their amc} and, 
in despair, to take some respite from the continual 
attacks with which they were harassed, by halt- 
ing again in a field, which they had no time to 
examine, and in which they were accordingly 
wn much exposed. 

n this ground Cæsar had again a fair oppor- 
tunity to attack them, and, with little doubt of the 
event, to terminate the war by a battle; but he 
persisted in his purpose of forcing this unfor- 
tunate army to surrender without any loss or 
hazard to himself. In this mind he continued to 
observe them with a degree of insulting indif- 
ference. They soon became sensible of the great 
disadvantage of the position in which they had 
halted, and endeavoured to change it, without 
exposing themselves to the enemy, who was so 
near as to be able to disturb them in every mo- 


3712 


tion they attempted to make; for this purpose 
they broke ground for a new intrenchment in 
their rear, and retiring as besiegers advance in 
the attack of a fortress, changed their situation 
under the cover of works which they successively 
raised.? i 

In these slow and toilsome operations they per- 
sisted all the night and the following day, and got 
a new position, in which they were less exposed 
to the enemy; but subject to a fresh inconve- 
niency, till then unobserved, in the great distance 
tu which they were removed from water. 

As soon as this defect was perceived, which 
was probably not till after the soldier had con- 
sumed what he commonly carried in his flask, 
they discontinued their fatiguing operations; but 
no man ventured abroad for water, and they re- 
mained all night under dreadful apprehensions 
of what they might suffer from this distress. 

On the following day the Spanish army ad- 
vanced in array to the watering-place, and, at the 
hazard of a general action, proceeded to supply 
themselves with this necessary article. ‘They 
were suffered to avail themselves of this tempo- 
rary relief; but none attempted to procure any 
food, and they soon after, in order to supply their 
own immediate wants, and to lessen their con- 
sumption of water and forage, killed all the beasts 
of burden in their camp. While they endea- 
voured, by means of these temporary expedients, 
to await the event of any change that might offer 
in their favour, Cesar formed a design to cut off 
all their hopes at once by a line of circumvalla- 
tion. In conducting or covering this work, his 
legions were commonly under arms. And the 
enemy, sensible of the extremity to which they 
were soon likely to be reduced, advanced in front 
of their camp to interrupt him; and there might 
have decided their fate by an action upon equal 
terms. But they had no courage left; the habit 
ef acting upon the defensive had impressed them 
with a sense of inferiority, and their frequent 
miscarriages had made them distrust the conduct 
of their officers. 'Though now im a state of suf- 
fering, from which nothing but vietory could ex- 
tricate them, or which nothing but the blood of 
their enemies could avenge, they, without making 
any effort for either purpose, retired again within 
their intrenchment. 

In that situation, however, their distresses in 
a little time became entirely insufferable. After 
four days had passed in their camp without water 
or sustenance of any sort, their leaders desired an 
interview with Cesar; and, not to expose them- 
selves in so humbling a state to the troops of 
either army, begged that their meeting might be 
held apart from both. The conference was ac- 
cepted; but Cæsar would not allow it to be held 
in any private place: he insisted that Afranius 
and Petreius should meet him in the space be- 
tween the two armies; and having previously de- 
manded, as an acknowledgment of his victory, 
that the son of Afranius should be delivered up 
as an hostage, he came to the place of meeting, 
surrounded by multitudes who crowded from both 
armies to witness the scene. 

Afranius pleaded in behalf of the troops he 
commanded, that they had done no more than 
their duty to Pompey, and no more than the ser- 
sice of the province in which they had been sta- 


1 Cæsar, de Bell. Civil. lib. i. c. 81. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor IV. 


tioned required; but acknowledged the distresses 
to which they were reduced, and implored the 
victor’s clemency. 

Cæsar, in return, upbraided the leaders of tnat 
army with their obstinate animosity to himself, 
and with their late cruelty to innocent men, whe 
had committed no cther offence than that of 
having embraced their fellow-citizens as friends, 
and that of being desirous to terminate this un- 
natural quarrel in an amicable manner. “That 
army,” he said, “had been raised and kept on 
foot for the sole purpose of making war upon 
him. For this purpose numerous fleets had been 
equipped in times of profound peace, and seven 
entire legions, under able and experienced officers, 
had been kept in this peaceable province, where 
there was not the least pretence of a war; that 
every measure was concerted for his destruction ;. 
that in order to raise one citizen to uncommon 
honours and powers, a new species of arrange- 
ment had taken place, by which a person re- 
maining at the gates of Rome, governing in the 
city and in every district of Italy, might likewise 
have the command in two warlike provinces, and 
be allowed a great military establishment in time 
of profound peace; that, on the contrary,.in order 
to distress himself, the ordinary rules of the ser- 
vice had been set aside ; and that to him alone 
had been denied, what had always been granted 
to every citizen who faithfully served the republic, 
the privilege of retiring, if not distinguished with 
honours, at least without. being loaded with in- 
juries and affronts ;. that he had borne these in- 
dignities, however, with patience, and mentioned 
them now, not as a prelude to any severities 
which he meant to inflict, no: as an excuse for 
any singular advantage he meant to take of their 
present distresses ; that he demanded no more 
than peace; his antagonists should go unhurt, 
provided they left the province, and became bound 
not to serve his enemies for the future against 
him; that no one should. be forced to take any 
active part on his side;. that all who committed 
no injury against him should be considered as his 
friends; and that every man now in his power 
should be at liberty,.without any other conditions 
than these.” 

It is difficult to determine whether the sword 
or the tongue of this singular man were most 
dangerous to the state he attacked. It is probable 
that many of his present audience were as much 
convinced by his eloquence, as they had been 
subdued by his military skill, and thought him a 
person no less forced to his present extremities by 
the wrongs he had suffered, than able to do him- 
self justice by the force of his arms. His speech 
was received by the late partizans of his rival 
with evident signs of pleasure. To be discharged 
after a certain period of the most faithful services 
was all that a Roman soldier, in the ordinary 
times of the republic, could claim. To receive 
this favour at the hands of a victorious enemy, by 
whom they expected to be treated. as captives, 
gave sudden and unexpected joy. 

After the material articles were adjusted in 
this manner, some questions arose with respect 
to the time and place in which the vanquished 
army should be dismissed from their colours. 
Numbers of them, though Roman citizens, had 
been enlisted in Spain, and were natives or set- 
tlers in that province; others had been trans- 

ported from Italy, and wished to return to thei: 


Ganar. VL] 


country. It was determined, therefore, that the 
first should be disbanded immediately ; the others 
march to the Var; and there be set free, and not 
he subject to be pressed into any service what- 
ever. Cæsar undertook to supply them with 
provisions on their march. He ordered their 
effects, if any were found in his camp, to be 
restored to them. He paid his own soldiers a| 
high price for what they were in this manner | 
desired to restore. By this measure he gained 
several advantages; he lightened his baggage ; 
he made a gratification to his own men, without 
the imputation of bribery ; and he gained his late 
enemies by an act of generosity. ‘The vanquish- 
ed army accordingly came to Cesar with all 
their complaints, and appealed to him even 
from their own officers. It was impossible for 
mankind to resist sa much ability, insinuation; 
and courage. 

About a third of the captive army were dis- 
missed from their colours im Spain; the remain- 
der passed the’ Pyrennees, preceded by one part 
of Cesar’s army, and followed by the other ; who, 
being thus separated to the van and the rear, and 
always encamping close to their prisoners, led 
them, in terms of the capitulation, to the frontiers 
of Cisalpine Gaul.? 

While the main body of Cæsars army thus 
conducted the remains of the Spanish legions to 
the place of their destination, Varro yet remamed 
in the western province of Spain; and Cesar, in 
order either to effect a conjunction which had 
been concerted between them, or to force him to 
surrender, sent Quintus Cassius with two legions 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


273 


to that quarter, and himself followed with an 
escort of six hundred horse. Upon the report of 
his approach, the natives, as usual, having taken 
their resolution in favour of the successful party, 
declared for the victor. One of the legions of 
Varro that lay at Gades? advancing in form with 
their colours, came forward to Hispales to receive 
him, and made offer of their services. Varro 
himself agreed to surrender the forces he com- 
manded, both by sea and by land, and was re- 
ceived at Corduba. Here Cesar held a general 
convention of the province; and having mre 
the people for the favours they had shown to his 
cause, he remitted the contributions, and with- 
drew all the burdens which Varro, acting under 
the authority of Pompey, had imposed upon 
them. In this, as in other examples, he endea- 
voured to dispel the fears which his enterprise at 
first had occasioned, and secured the attachment 
of the provinces by a sense of the ease and the 
freedom which his success had procured them. 
The fleets and armies which joined him upon 
every conquest he made, enabled him to station 
troops for the security of every new acquisition, 
without dividing the forces on which he was to 
rely for the future operations of the war. He 
accordingly, in the present instance, left under 
the command of Quintus Cassius, five legions, 
consisting chiefly of the troops which had been 
levied by Varro; and he himself embarking on 
board a fleet which had been fitted out for his 
enemies, went by sea to Tarraco, now Tarra- 
gona, and from that place by land to Narbonne 
and Marseilles, 


CHAPTER VI. 


The Siege of Marseilles continued—Its Surrender—Casar named Dictator—Return to Rome— 


Mutiny at Placentia—Cesar with Servilius 


Isauricus Consuls— Forces and Disposition of 


Pompey— Departure of Cæsar to Brundusium— Transports the first division of his Army to 
Acroceraunus— Message to Pompey, and their several Operations— T'he Lines of Dyrrachium 
— Cesar baffled in his attempt to invest Pompey—Action and Defeat of Cesar—His Retreat— 
March of both Armies into Thessaly— Battle of Pharsalia. 


THE city of Marseilles had not surrendered 
to the forces which Cæsar had left under the 
command of Trebonius and Decimus Brutus to 
besiege it. Brutus, according to the dispositions 
which had been made to block up the place by 
sea, as well as by land, was stationed under the 
island at the mouth of the bay. His squadron 
consisted of twelve ships, but so hastily built, that 
no more than thirty days had: elapsed from the 
felling of the timber to the launching of the ves- 
sels. They were manned, however, with the 
choice of Cæsar's legions; and, in order to frus- 
trate any advantage which fheir antagonists 
might have’ in the construction or management 
of their ships, they were furnished with contri- 


vances to grapple and make fast their gunwales | 


to those of the enemy, in order to decide the con- 
test with their swords. 

The Marseillians had equipped ten galleys, of 
which the greater number, though not all, were 
decked. These they joined under the’ command 
of Domitius, who had been nained by the senate 


2 Crs. de Bell. Civ. lib. i 3 Now Cadiz. 
2N 


to succeed Cesar in Gaul, with the seten ships 
which this officer had brought into their harbour ; 
and having manned them with mariners from the 
neighbouring coasts, they came abroad into the 
bay, in order to force Brutus from his station, and 
to open their communication with the sea. In 
the beginning of the action, the Marscillians be- 
ing superior to Cæsars fleet in the number of 
their ships, and in the skill of their mariners, had 
a considerable advantage. But as soon as they 
suffered themselves to be entangled by the grapple, 
the Gaulish sailors, though of a very hardy race, 
could not withstand the arms and discipline of 
the legionary soldiers, and were defeated with the 
loss of nine of their ships. 

This was the victory already mentioned, and 
which contributed so much to the reputation of 
Cesar’s arms, while he lay before Ilerda; and 


which, joined to the other circumstances of his 


good fortune, procered him the alliance of so 
many nations in Spain. 

While Brutus thus kept his station in the bay 
of Marseilles, Trebonius practised all the usual 
methods of attack to reduce the city. This place 


274 
being covered on three sides by water, and on the ! 
fourth only accessible by an isthmus or neck of 
land, which was defended by walls and towers of 
a great height; he opened two separate attacks, 
probably on the right and the left of the isthmus, 
and at each of these attacks, appears to have em- 
ployed the sloping mound or terrace,! which, in 
the sieges of the ancients, where the defence de- 
pended on the height of the battlements, corres- 
ponded to the sap of the moderns, and was 
calculated to conduct the besiegers, by a gradual 
ascent, to the top, as the other conducts them to 
the foot of the walls. This work was supported | 
on the sides: chiefly with timber, and built up 
with fascines, hurdles, and earth, rising in the 
present case to an elevation of eighty feet, and in 
breadth, as was formerly observed in that em- 
ployed against the Bituriges,? probably no less 
than three hundred and fifty feet, so as to receive 
a proper column of infantry in front, and to em- 
brace a proper extent in the walls. ‘The work- 
men employed in the front of this laborious 
approach were covered with screens, mantlets, 
and penthouses of great length; and such was 
the consumption of timber in the construction of 
the whole, that the neighbouring country is said 
to have been cleared of its woods. 

A mere trading city, long disused to war, or 
accustomed to rety on foreign protection, we may 
suppose to have been ill provided, either in the 
state of its arsenals, or in the spirit of its citizens 
for such an attack. But this little republic, still 
bearing the character of an independent state, be- 
ing in the neighbourhood of mountains inhabited 
by fierce nations, who looked upon its wealth as 
a tempting prize, and owing its safety to the 
strength of its walls, and the state of its arsenals, 
was still suitably provided for its own defence ; 
and the people, although long inured to peace, 
still kept in mind the duties which the necessi- 
ties of war might oblige them to. render to their 
country. They were now supported by the pre- 
sence of the Roman proconsul, and had hopes of 
a:speedy relief from Pompey, whom, in opposition 
to Cesar, who. was in rebellion against the legal 
government of his country, they considered as 
head of the commonwealth.. They accordingly 
of their wall; and by a continual discharge from 
the battlements, and by frequent sallies, in which 
they set fire to the works of the besiegers, greatly 
retarded the progress of the siege. They had 
darted arrows of a monstrous size and weight, be- 
thick, and pointed with iron, which none of tke 
approaches, could resist ; and Trebonius was ac- 
his timbers and penthouses, and the thickness of 
his parapets, fascines, and: earth, on his terrace, 

While such efforts were made on both sides at 
sidius with sixteen galleys from the coast of Ma- 
squadron had entered the straits of Messina by 
ship which belonged to Curio’s fleet, proceeded 
on their destination to the coast of Gaul. Being 


exerted great perseverance and. valour in defence 
engines of a peculiar force, from which they 
ing beams twelve feet long, and proportionally 
screens or coverings, usually employed in.making |. 
cordingly obliged to proportion the strength of 
to the weight of these enormous weapons. 

this memorable siege,. Pompey had detached Na- 
cedonia to endeavour the relief of Marseilles, This 
surprise, and, having cut out of the harbour a 


1 Agger. 2 Bourges. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV 


arrived in the bay of Tauroentum, now La 
Ciotat, in the neighbourhood of Toulon, they 
sent intimation of their coming, in order to con- 
cert operations with those in the harbour of Mar- 
seilles, 

The besieged were greatly animated with these 
hopes of relief; and having already drawn from 
their docks as many ships as supplied the place 
of those they had lost in the late engagement, 
they now manned them with the choice of their 
citizens, and determined once more to try their 
fortune at sea. When this fleet was about to 
depart, numbers of women, and many citizens, 
who, on account of their age, could not take part 
in the service, crowded to the shore, and with 
tears exhorted the soldiers and mariners to be 
mindful of their own and their country’s ho- 
nour, on the eve of becoming a prey to their ene- 
mies. Multitudes of people, at the same time, 
drew forth in procession, and crowded to the 
temples with prayers and supplications for the 
success of this last effort they were to make in 
defence ef their commonwealth. 

This oustle in the streets of Marseilles, with 
the motion of the shipping in the harbour, being 
observed from the camp of Trebonius, which was 
situated upon a height, and which had a view 
into the town, gave sufficient intimation of what 
was intended; and Brutus was warned to be on 
his guard: but the Marseillians, having found a 
favourable wind, had the good fortune to clear 
the bay, and, without any interruption from his 
squadron, joined Nasidius at Tauroentum.. Here 
an action soon after ensued;.in which the Mar- 
seillians made great efforts of valour; but were 
ill supported by Nasidius,. who, unworthy of the 
command with which he had been entrusted, 
withdrew at the beginning of the action, and 
fled to the coast of Spain. The Marseillians, 
being left to sustain the contest alone,. lost nine 
of their ships, of which five were sunk, and four 
were taken. 

These tidings were received at Marseilles with 
inexpressible sorrow ; but did not alter the resolu- 
tion of the inhabitants to persevere in their de- 
fence, and in the use of every possible method 
that could be employed to protract the siege, and 
to give Pompey time to devise more effectual 
means for their safety. They accordingly, with 
great vigour and success, counteracted the ordi- 
nary operations of the siege, burning and demo- 
lishing a considerable part of the works which 
were raised up against them,. and obliging the 
besiegers frequently to renew their labours. 

The first attack, against which the besieged’ 
were not able to find an adequate defence, came 
from a work which had not been a part in the 
original plan of the siege, but had been devised 
by the soldiers who had succeeded each other on 
the guard of the agger, or mound of approach, as 
a lodgment or cover to secure themselves from 
surprise. It was at first no more than a square 
of ten yards, enclosed with a brick wall five feet 
thick; but so situated, that if it were raised to a 
proper height, it might cope with the battlements, 
and greatly annoy the besieged. To give it this 
consequence, masons were employed to raise it, 
and great efiorts of ingenuity were made to pro- 
tect them in their work. A moveable penthouse, 
of great thickness in the roof, and screened in 
the front and sides with net-work made of cables, 
or the strongest ropes, was raised on beams or 


Cuar. VL} OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. -5 


orders in the harbour. FIaving the opportunity 
of a high and favourable wind, which made it 
unsafe for the squadron of Brutus to weigh, or 
to quit their anchors in pursuit of him, he en- 
deavoured to escape from the bay. In this at- 
tempt two of his vessels were taken, the third, 
with himself on board, got off, and reserved him 
to take that share which yet remained for him ip 
the growing misfortunes of his party throughout 
this disastrous war. 

Such was the state of affairs when Cesar ar- 
rived from Spain, and expecting, in the present 
contest for empire, to profit as much by the re- 
putation of his clemency, as by the terror of his 
arms, listened to the supplications of the people 
of Marseilles, and took possession of the town 
without any act of resentment or severity what- 
ever. While he was yet at this place, ‘he had 
accounts from Rome, that his party in the city 
had procured an act of the people to vest him 
with the power of dictator. The ceremony of his 
nomination had, in the absence of both consuls, 
been performed by Marcus Æmilius Lepidus, 
then prætor in office, who, though a person of 
mean capacity, was, by the chance of his situa- 
tion, involved in many of the greatest affairs that 
followed ; and, though but a single accomplice in 
the crimes of this guilty age, escaped its violences, 
to hecome almost the only example of an igno- 
miny and disgrace, which so many others had 
merited no less than himself. 

Cesar, being thus raised, though by an irregu- 
lar step, to a legal place in the commonwealth, 
hastened to Rome, in order te be invested, for 
the first time, with the character of dictator. In 
his way he was stopped at Placentia by some 
disorders which threatened a mutiny among the 
troops who were assembled at that place. The 
legions, elated by victory, and filled with a sense 
of their own importance, in a contest for the so- 
vereignty of the empire, were become impatient 
of discipline, and in haste to avail themselves of 
that military government they were employed to 
establish. pa entering Italy they treated Roman 
citizens as their subjects, and the country as their 
property. Being restrained, they resented the 
severities which were practised against them, en- 
tered into cabals, and even talked of abandoning 
Cesar, and of declaring for Pompey. Here, 
however, the usual courage and ability of this 
singular man supported him. He brought the 
mutinous troops, under arms, before him, and put 
them in mind how much he had ever coveted, 
and been anxious to obtain the affections of the 
soldiers ; but assured them, that it was no part of 
his intention tu earn those affections by making 
himself an accomplice in their crimes. “Sha! 
we,” he said, “who profess to be tlie deliverers of 
our country from oppression, become ourselves 
the greatest oppressors? Shall I, who am in- 
trusted with the command of a Roman army, be- 
come the patron of licentiousness, and in order 
to indulge for a moment the passions of my sol- 
diers, suffer them to ruin their own fortunes for 
ever? What should induce me?—The fear of 
violence to my person, or the danger to which 
my life may be exposed ?7—If my life were at- 
tacked, there are enow to defend it. But what 
is life eompared to the honour of a Roman of- 
ficer, which I am concerned to maintain? There 
are persons who have said, that they will desert 
my cause, and go over to Pompey. Jet tiem, 


rafters of a proportional strength, and contrived 
to be hoisted up by machinery, to keep pace with 
the building, and to cover the workmen as they 
rose on the successive courses of masonry which 
they laid. With these precautions, a tower was 
gradually raised on the foundation of the original 
brick wall, to the height of six stories; and being 
furnished with ports or embrasures on every floor, 
gave the besiegers, by means of their missiles, the 
command of all the space from thence to the 
ramparts. They accordingly, under the cover 
of engines, that made a continual discharge from 
this tower, filled up the ditch, and pushed up a; 
gallery to the foot of the wall. In this position, 
notwithstanding all the efforts of the besieged, by 
a continual discharge of heavy stones from the 
battlements, to destroy ot overwhelm the Eee 
of their gallery, they undermined the foundation: 
of the rampart, and brought some part of it in 
ruin to the ground. 

The inhabitants, greatly alarmed at the sight’ 
of a breach, which might soon be enlarged to ad- 
mit of being stormed, made some signals of 
truce, and sent to beseech Trebonius that he 
would suspend his operations, and wait for the 
arrival of Cesar, in whose clemency they hoped 
to find some protection against the fury of 
troops, who had already threatened the inhabit- 
ants with a massacre. 

"Trebonius, accordingly, moved by these ín- 
treaties, and by the instructions he had received 
from Cesar, not to deliver up the town, in case 
it fell into his hands, to the rage of the soldiers, 
suspended his operations, and supposing the pe- 
tition of the inhabitants equal to an offer of sur- 
render on their part, entrusted his works to. 
slender guards, who, in their turn relying on the 
submissive professions of the people, were pro- 
portionally remiss in their duty. The citizens, 
tempted by the opportunity which was thus of- 
fered them to strike an important blow, and to 
throw back to a great distance, all the posts of 
the enemy, made a vigorous sally from the town, 
and being favoured by a high wind, which blew 
directly on the works of the besiegers, set ‘the 
whole on fire, and reduced to ashes, in a few 
hours, what had been the labour of many months 
to erect. 

As Trebonius had already exhausted the great- 
er part of the materials which the country around 
him could furnish, it appeared difficult for him to 
resume the attack. But he himself, as well as the 
troops under his command, being greatly exaspe- 
rated by the late breach of faith in the town, 
made every effort of ingenuity and courage to 
repair their losses. They substituted brick work 
for timber in supporting the sides and galleries 
of their terrace; and advanced with so rapid a 
progress in their new approach, that the besieged, 
now greatly spent with toil, and disappointed in 
their hopes of relief, were struck with fresh and 
more alarming apprehensions of what they might 
expect from the resentment of troops whom they 
had incensed with a recent and just provocation ; 
and they returned to their suit for mercy, with 
more humble and more sincere intentions of sub- 
mission. 

While messages were passing to this effect, 
Domitius Ahenobarbus, sensible that he could 
no longer serve the cause of his party at this 
place, embarked with his attendants and friends 
on board of three galleys which still waited his 


S76 


They shall soon have an opportunity to do so. 
If Pompey be my enemy, what is there I should 
more earnestly wish than to find his cause en- 
trusted with such men? men who make war on 
their friends, and disobey their officers. He had 
been slow,” he said, “in proceeding to the fatal 
extremes which were now become necessary. 
The guilty,” he continued, “had been long 
known to him; but he had endeavoured to con- 
ceal their offences, in hopes that remorse and 
shame, or the fear of justice, would ave made 
the actual application of punishment unnecessa- 
ry; but that he must now, though with the great- 
est reluctance, proceed to the last of remedies.” 
In order that he might not involve the whole 


of those who were present in the same desperate | 


cause, he affected, in this harangue, to treat the 
offence he was to punish as the crime of a few. 
They were now to be set apart, he said, and 
their punishment should purge the army, and 
retrieve its honour. In pursuance of this plan, 
he affected to believe, that the ninth legion were 


the principal authors of this mutiny. He ordered | 


a few of them for immediate execution, and 
boldly dismissed the whole of the legion from his 
service, The remainder of the army, having 
thus obtained an implied exculpation, in token 
of their own innocence, vied with each other in 
applauding the justice of their general. Even 
the legion, which was dismissed from the ser- 
vice, detesting as a punishment on themselves, 
what they had threatened to execute as an act of 
resentment against their commander, beset him 
with humble and earnest intreaties, that he might 
be pleased to receive them again into his service. 
He affected great difficulty in granting this re- 
quest; but, after much solicitation, suffered 
himself to be gained by their professions of 
penitence.! 

With a considerable accession of authority, 
acquired by his success in quelling this mutiny, 
Cesar proceeded to Rome, where he assumed 
the title and ensigns of dictator; being the first 
example of any person, since the abdication of 
Sylla, entrusted with this alarming power. It 
was said to be conferred upon him, however, 
merely in compliance with form; and that there 
might be a proper officer, in the absence of both 
the consuls, to preside at the elections. His own 
object, at the same time, being to gain to his 
ee, the authority of legal government, and, in 

is conduct, to give proofs of clemency and mo- 
deration, without any intention, for the present, 
to perpetuate or even to exercise any of the high 
powers of dictator, he proceeded to hold the elec- 
tions, and was himself, together with Servilius 
Isauricus, chosen consul for the following year. 
In the interval that followed, before their installa- 
tion, he continued to assemble the people in the 
character of dictator, and obtained some laws 
respecting the times, and the distracted state of 
public affairs, Credit and trade were at an 
alarming stand; he procured an act to facilitate 
the recovery of debts, by delivering the effects 
of the debtor to be divided among his creditors, 
upon ån estimate of what the different subjects 
might have heen sold for at the time that the war 
broke out. 


ree a eee 


4 Dio. Cass. lib. xli. c. 27—35. Appian. de Bello 
Jiv. Hib. ii. p. 547. Sueton. in Cas, e. 69. Lucan, lib. v. 
ui. 


p. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


| Boor LV. 


Many being supposed to hoard great sums of 
money, as the only means of preserving it from 
the violence of the times, or being unwilling to 
lend on such securities as were then to be had, 
Cesar procured another act, by which any per- 
son was forbid to have in his possession, at once, 
above sixty thousand Roman money.? 

He obtained a general act of indemnity, from 
which Miloalone was excepted, restoring persons 
of every denomination, who, at the breaking out 
of the war, lay under the censure of the law, and 
were in exile for corrupt practices in the state ; 
and, in pursuance of this measure, procured 2 
pardon for all the disorders which had been com- 
mitted in opposition to the late government; but 
for none of the irregular efforts that had been 
made in support of it. He opened the city at 
once to all the inhabitants of the Cisalpine Gaal, 
and by a single vete gave them a title to be en- 
rolled with the people of Rome as members of the 
republic. In these, and in other affairs of less 
moment, while his troops were in motion through 
Italy, he employed a few days in the city, and 
being ready to depart, resigned the power of dic- 
tator. This resignation, made by a person pos- 
sessed of a military force, and hitherto victorious, 
was considered as an evidence of his moderation, 
and served to dispel the fears of those who ex- 
pected to see the immediate establishment of a 
military government. He was now about to as- 
sume the office of legal magistrate, and to appear 
in the character of Roman consul against those 
who, lately trusting tothe name and authority of 
the republic with which they were vested, had 
treated himself and his adherents as rebels; but 
who now, in their turn, might appear to incur 
all the disadvantages of that imputation which he 
was about to retort upon them; and with the ad- 
ditional charge of an attempt to dismember the 
empire, and to arm so many of the provinces 
against the sovereignty of the state, 

The competitors in this famous contest were 
in, or but a little past the prime of life; Pompey 
was fifty-seven, and Cæsar fifty, The first had 
been early distinguished as an officer, and for 
many years had enjoyed a degree of considera- 
tion, with which that of any other Roman citizen 
was not allowed to compare. His reputation, 
however, in some measure, had sunk, and that 
of Cesar rose on the first shocks of the present 
war; but the balance was not yet absolutely set- 
tled, and the minds of many were held in anxious 
suspense, Cæsar, wherever he had acted in per- 
son, had always prevailed ; but where he was not 
present, his affairs wore a less promising aspect. 

His forces under Curio had acquired an easy 
possession of Sicily ; and this officer, encouraged 
by his first success, transported two legions into 
Africa, found Yarns encamped near Utica, 
obliged him to retire into the town, and was pre- 
paring to besiege it, when he received intelligence 
that Juba, king of Numidia, was advancing te 
its relief with all the powers of his kingdom. 
This prince had been induced to take part in the 
war by his attachment to Pompey, and by his 
personal animosity to Curio, who, in his tribun- 
ate, had moyed for an act to deprive him of his 
kingdom, 


2 About 5002. 
| 3 Dio. Cass. lib. xli. c. 35,37, 38. Cms. de Bell. Civ. 
t lib. iii. 


Ciar. Vi] 


Curio, upon this intelligence, wisely withdrew 
from Utica to a strong post in the neighbourhood, 
and sent orders into Sicily to hasten the junction 
of the troops he had left behind him in that island. 
While he waited their coming, some Numidian 
deserters arrived at his camp, and brought ac- 
counts that Juba, with the main body of his army, 
had been recalled to defend his own dominions ; 
and that only Sabura, one of his generals, with a 
small division, was come to give what support he 
could to the party of Pompey in Africa. 

Upon this information, Curio formed a design 
to intercept the Numidian general before he could 
be joined by Varus; and for this purpose, leaving 
a guard in his camp, he marched in the night to 
attack the enemy, where he was informed that 
they lay on the banks of the Bagrada. His ca- 
valry being advanced, fell in with the Numidian 
horse, and put them to flight. Encouraged by 
this advantage, he hastened his march to com- 

lete the victory ; and Sabura, by whose art the 
fs intelligence had been conveyed to him, like- 
wise, after a little resistance, fled before him. By 
this means, Curio was gradually ensnared into 
the midst of Juba’s forces, was surrounded, and 
attacked on every side. He attempted, in vain, 
to take refuge on a height which he had in view, 
and, with the greater part of his army, Was put 
to the sword. The few who escaped, with those 
who had been left in the camp, endeavoured to 
find a passage into Sicily, and, being disappointed, 
surrendered themselves to Varus, by whom they 
were treated with clemency ; but being observed, 
and distinguished by Juba, who arrived at Utica 
on the following day, were claimed as his cap- 
tives, and put to death. 

About the same time, Dolabella, to whom Cæ- 
sar had given the command both of his sea and 
Jand forces on the coast of Illyricum, was, by 
Marcus Octavius and Scribonius Libo, expelled 
from thence; and Caius Antonius, attempting to 
support Dolabella, was shut up ina small island, 
and, with his party, made prisoners.4 

The principal storm, however, with which the 
new government was threatened, appeared on 
the side of Macedonia. In this country, Pom- 

ey himself was now at the head of a great force. 
He had transported five legions from fils, and, 
since the middle of March, when his last division 
sailed from Brundusium, he had been in the quiet 
possession of Greece, Macedonia, and all the 
eastern part of the empire. He had sent his 
father-in-law, Cornelius Scipio Metellus, into the 
provinces of Asia and Syria, to collect the forces 
and the revenues of those opulent countries; and 
despatched his own sen Cneius with instructions 
to assemble all the shipping that could be found 
on that coast. He likewise sent general orders 
to all the Roman oflicers in different parts of the 
empire, and to the allies or dependants of the Ro- 
man people, to jein him with every power the 
could raise, Seven thousand citizens of ran 
had fellewed him from Italy.6 Numbers of vete- 
rans, who had been settled in Thessaly, repaired 
to his standard. He was joined by one legion 
from Sicily, another from Crete, and two from 
Asia. He had two legions under Scipio in Syria, 
had assembled three thousand archers, and as 
many slingers; had hired, in the neighbourhood 


4 Dio. Cass. lib. xli. c. 41 and 42. 
5 Plutarch in Ponpeio, 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 277 


of Macedonia, two thousand foot and seven thou- 
sand cavalry. Dejotarus sent him six hundred 
horse; Ariobarzanes five hundred; Cotus, a 
Thracian prince, five hundred ; the Macedonians 
furnished two hundred; five hundred being the 
remains of Gabinius’s army, had joined him ; his 
son brought eight hundred from his own estates ; 
Tarcundarius three hundred; Antiochus Com- 
magenes two hundred: amounting to fifty-five 
thousand legionary troops, eight thousand irregu- 
lar infantry, and ten thousand six hundred horse. 
In all seventy-three thousand six hundred. 

He had likewise assembled a numerous fleet; 
one squadron from Egypt, of which he gave the 
command to his son Cneius; another from Asia, 
under Lelius and Triarius; one from Syria, un- 
der Caius Cassius; that of Rhodes, under Caius 
Marcellus and Coponius; that of Achaia and 
Liburnia, under Scribonius Libo and M. Oeta- 
vius; the whole amounting to above eight hun- 
dred galleys, of which Bibulus had the chief 
command, with orders to guard the passage from, 
Italy to Greece, and to obstruct the communica- 
tions of the enemy by the Ionian sea. 

Pompey had likewise formed large magazines 
of corn from Thessaly, Asia, Egypt, Crete, and 
Cyrene. The principal resort of his land forces 
was at Berrhæa, on the fertile plains between the 
Axius and Haliacmon, that run into the Bay of 
Therme. The Roman senate was represented 
at Thessalonica by two hundred of that body, 
who, together with the two.consuls, held their as- 
semblies, and assumed all the functions of the 
Roman state. The Roman people were like 
wise represented by the concourse of respectable 
citizens, who repaired to the army or to this 
place.” But though so many members of the 
government, thus violently expelled from Rome, 
considered themselves as the real constituents of 
the commonwealth, they suffered the usual time 
of elections to elapse, and did not attempt to pre- 
serve in their retreat the succession of officers, in 
opposition to the elections that were made at 
Rome. Claudius Marcellus and L. Cornelius 
Lentulus, at the expiration of their year in office, 
took the several commands allatted to them, as 
usual, under the title of proconsul. l 

The general had been extremely active in 
forming, as well as in assembling this powerful 
armament. He intended, early in the spring, to 
take possession of Dyrrachium, Apollonia, and 
the other towns on the coast, probably with a 
view to fall upon Italy, with a weight which now 
appeared suflicient to ensure the high reputation 
as a commander, which his successes, on other 
occasions, had procured him. 

Cesar, on his part, had drawn all his army to 
the coast in the neighbourliood of Brundusium ; 
but it was not likely that he would attempt to 
pass a sea which was commanded by the enemy’s 
fleet, or venture upon a coast where he had not 
a single port, and in the face of a superior army, 
now completely formed and appointed, under the 
command of an officer, whom no man was ever 
supposed te excel. The formality of entering on 
the office of consul, to which he had been elected, 
it was supposed, might detain him at Rome till 
after the first of January; and Pompey according 
ly made no haste in taking his intended stations 


6 Cesar. de Bello Civile, lib. iii. 
7 Dio. Cass. lib. xli. 43. 


278 


on the coast of Epirus, from which he might 
either act on the defensive, or invade Italy as the 
occasion might require.! 

It was difficult, however, to foresee what such 
an enemy as Cesar might attempt. Having 
staid no more than eleven days at Rome, while 
he acted in the character of dictator, and obtained 
his election as consul, without waiting for his 
admission into office, he set out in December for 
Brundusium. At this place twelve legions and 
all his cavalry were already, by his order, assem- 
bled. He found the numbers of his army con- 
siderably impaired by disease, being come from 
the more healthy climates of Spain and Gaul to 
pass the sickly season of autumn in Apulia. In 
any other hands than his own, an army so re- 
duced would have scarcely been fit for the defence 
of Italy against such forces as were assembled to 
invade it; and his march to Brundusium would 
have appeared altogether a defensive measure, 
and intended to counteract the operations of his 
enemy from beyond the seas. ‘The season too 
appeared extremely unfavourable to any hostile 
attempts on Greece. Cesar, however, had de- 
termined to prevent the designs of his enemy, and 
to keep him involved in all the disadvantages of 
a defensive war. 

No more transports were collected in the har- 
bour of Brundusium than were sufficient to re- 
ceive about twenty thousand foot and six hundred 
horse. Cesar, nevertheless, immediately on his 
arrival, informed the troops of his intentions to 
embark, and of his resolution to fix the scene of 
the war in Greece. He cautioned them not to 
occupy transports with unnecessary baggage and 
horses, and exhorted them to rely on the conse- 
quences of victory, and on his own generosity, 
for a full reparation of any loss they might sus- 
tain by leaving their effects behind them. He 
embarked seven legions in the first division, and 
with these he himself sailed on the fourth of Fe- 

bruary. He turned from the usual 


U. C. 705. course, and steering unobserved to 
C. Julius the right, arrived next day where 
Cesar, P. the enemy, if they had really been 
Servilius apprised of his embarkation, were 
fsauricus. 


least likely to expect him, on what 
was reputed a very dangerous part 
of the coast, under a high and rocky promontory, 
that was called the Acroceraunus. 

As soon as the fleet had come to an anchor, 
Cesar having Vibullius Rufus, one of Pompey’s 
officers who was taken in Spain, till now detained 
as a prisoner, he dismissed him with a message 
to his general in the following terms: “That both 
parties had already carried their obstinacy too 
far, and might learn, from experience, to distrust 
their fortunes; that the one had been expelled 
from Italy, had lost Sicily, Sardinia, and Spain, 
with one hundred and thirty cohorts (or thirteen 
legions) ;? that the other had sustained the loss 
of an army in Africa, cut off with its general,3 
and had suffered no less by the disasters of his 
party in Illyricum; that their mutual disappoint- 
inents might instruct them how little they could 
rely on the events of war; that it was time to 
consult their own safety, and to spare the repub- 
lic; that it was prudent to treat of peace while 


1 Appian. de Bello Civile, lib. ii. 


2 The armies of Afranius, Petreius, and Varro, &c. | 


3 The army of Curio and C. Antonius. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox IV. 


the fortunes and the hopes of both were nearly 
equal; if that time were allowed to elapse, and 
either should obtain a distinguished advantage, 
who could answer that the victor would be equal- 
ly tractable as both were at present ? 

“ But since all former endeavours to procure a 
conference, or to bring on a treaty between the 
leaders themselves, had failed, he proposed, that 
all their differences should now be referred to the 
senate and people ; that, in the mean time, each 
of them should solemnly swear, at the head of 
their respective armies, That, in three days, they 
should disband all their forces, in order that, be- 
ing disarmed, they might severally be under a 
necessity to submit to the legal government of 
their country; that he himself, to remove all diffi- 
culties on the part of Pompey, should begin with 
dismissing all the troops that were under his com- 
mand, whether in garrison or in the field.” 4 

It appears that Cesar, if these declarations had 
been accepted, might have been somewhat em- 
barrassed for evasions; but equally bold in all his 
measures, he risked this event, or rather foresaw 
it could not happen, as he was sure that this offer 
of peace, like the former, would be rejected; and 
the rather, that it would be considered as an effect 
of his weakness, and of the danger into which he 
had fallen by his rash debarkation with so small 
a force. At any rate, there is no doubt that his 
message was intended, in the usual strain of his 
policy, to amuse his enemy, or to remove the 
blame of the war from himself. As he nsually 
accompanied such overtures of peace with the 
most rapid movements and the boldest resolutions, 
the moment Vibullius set out, he disembarked his 
troops, and in the night despatched the transports 
on their return to Brundusium to bring the re- 
mainder of his army. 

His landing on the coast was the first intima- 
tion received by the enemy of his intention to 
pass a sea, which they supposed sufficiently 
guarded by their fleets, and of his purpose to 
carry the war into a country, in which they 
thought themselves secure by the superiority of 
their numbers, and of their other resources. Bi- 
bulus, upon this alarm, put to sea, and came in 
time to intercept about thirty of the empty trans- 
ports on their return to Italy. These he burned ; 
and, sensible of his own remissness in suffering 
so great a body of the enemy to pass, he dis- 
tributed his ships along the coast, and deter- 
mined, for the future, to keep the sea in the face 
of every difficulty, and under every distress. 

In the mean time, Cesar marched directly to 
Oricum, where Lucius Torquatus, on the part 
of Pompey, was posted, with orders to defend 
himself to the last extremity. But Cesar, as 
soon as he appeared in the character of Roman 
consul, preceded by the ensigns of office, pre- 
vailed on the garrison to desert their commander, 
and to surrender the place. Without stopping 
here, he proceeded to Apollonia, was received in 
the same manner by the inhabitants, in opposi- 
tion to the officer who coramanded for Pompey. 
In consequence of these examples he was ac- 
knowledged by all the towns of Epirus, and 
continued his march with the greatest despatch 
towards Dyrrachium, where Pompey had col- 
lected his stores, and formed his principal maga- 
zines. By his unexpected arrival he had hopes 


4 Cws. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 


Cuar. VL] 


of being able to surprise that important place, 
and to make himself master of it, before a suffi- 
cient foree could be assembled to eover it. 
Pompey, in exeeution of the plan he had form- 
ed, was on his march from Maeedonia towards 


the coast of Epirus, when he was met by Vibul-. 


lius, and received from him the first intelligence 
of Cæsars landing. He was not amused with 
the message which this officer brought him, nor 
did he attempt to retort the artifice, hy affeeting 
o be deceived. He even expressed himself in 
terms harsh and impolitic, “That he neither 
chose to return to his country, nor to hold his life 
by the coneession of Cesar; and, without: re- 
turning any answer, detaehed some parties to- 
wards the coast where the enemy was landed, 
with orders to lay waste the eountry, break down 
bridges, destroy the woods, and block up the 
highways with the timber they felled.5 He sent 
expresses to Scipio, with an account of Cesar’s 
arrival in Epirus, and with orders to hasten his 
passage into Europe, with all the forces he had 
been able to assemble in Asia. He himself ad- 
vaneed with great diligenee; and being informed 
ou the march, that Orieum and Apollonia had 
already fallen into the enemy’s hands, he has- 
*tened to save his magazines and stores at Dyrra- 
chium, and without stopping, night or day, 
marched in sueh disorder, that many deserted 
as from a eause already ruined or desperate. He 
arrived, however, in time to prevent the designs 
of Cesar on Dyrraechium; eneamped under the 
walls, sent a squadron of ships immediately to 
retake or block up the harbour at Orieum, and 
ordered such a disposition of the flect as was most 
likely to prevent the passage of a second embark- 
ation from Italy. 

Cesar, finding himself prevented at Dyrra- 
ehium, halted on the Apsus; and, in order to 
cover Epirus and wait for the second division of 
his troops from Italy. prepared to intreneh him- 
self on the banks of that river. Having aceord- 
ingly secured the main body of his army in this 
post, he himself returned with a single legion to 
reeeive the submission of the towns in his rear, 
and to provide for the supply of his camp. 

In the mean time Bibulus, on the part of 
Pompey, blocked up the harbour at Oricum, and 
commanded the passage from Italy with his fleet. 

Calenus, on the part of Cæsar, who had or- 
ders to lose no opportunity of transporting his 
army from Brundusium, actually embarked and 
put to sea; but being met by a packet from 
Cesar, with intelligence of the dispositions which 
had been made by the enemy to intereept him, he 
returned, suffering one of the vessels that had 
accompanied his fleet to keep on her way, in 
order to earry an aecount of his motions; but she 
was taken by the enemy and destroyed. 

Bibulus, who commanded the fleet which lay 
before Oricum, being preeluded from the land by 
the parties which Cæsar had posted along the 
shore, foreed to bring his daily supplies of wood, 
water, and. other necessaries at a great disadvan- 
tage from Corcyra, and reduced to great distress, 
endeavoured, under pretence of a negotiation, to 
obtain a cessation of arms. But Cesar, who 
came in person to Orieum, on hearing of this 
| aaki supposing that the design of Bibu- 
us was to find an opportunity, under cover of 


5 Appian. lib. ii. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


pO a SEAGE S ree PREA 


279 


the truce, to procure some supply of provisions 
and water, rejeeted the offer, and returned to his 
camp on the Apsus. 

Pompey had advanced from Dyrrachium, and 
took post on the opposite bank of that river. 
Dion Cassius and Appian agree that he made 
some attempt to pass the Apsus, and to force 
Cesar in this post; but that he was me by 
the breaking of a bridge, or by the difficulties of 
a ford. According to Cesar’s own account, the 
armies continued to observe each other, and the 
troops, separated only by a narrow river, had fre- 
quent conferences from the opposite banks. It 
was understood that in these interviews no hos- 
tilities should be offered. Of the two parties, 
that of Cesar was the more engaging to soldiers ; 
notwithstanding his own affeetation of regard to 
the eivil constitution of the republic, his military 
retainers still hoped to remain in possession of 
the government. He therefore encouraged the 
eommunication of his men with those of the op- 
posite party. On this oceasion Vatinius, by his 
direetion, went forward to the bank of the river, 
and raising his voiee, complained of the harsh 
treatment lately offered to Cesar, in the contempt 
shown to all his overtures and advances to peace. 
May not one citizen, he said, send a message to 
another, when he means only to prevent the 
shedding of umocent blood? He proceeded to 
lament the fate of so many brave men as were 
likely to perish in this quarrel ; and was listened 
to with profound silenee by many of both armies, 
who crowded to the place. 

These remonstranees on the part of Cesar, de- 
livered by an officer of high rank, and appearing 
to make so deep an impression, on both armies, 
when reported at Pompey’s quarters, seemed to 
be too serious to be slighted. An answer, there- 
fore, was given by the direction of Pompey, that 
on the following day A. Varo should be sent to 
any place that should be agreed upon as safe be- 
tween the two armies, and there receive the pro- 
positions that should be made to him. The 
parties accordingly met at a place appointed, and 
multitudes from both armies crowded around 
them. Pompey, considering the whole as an ar- 
tifice to gain time, or to find an opportunity to 
debauch his men, probably gave instructions to 
break up the conference, in a way that for the 
future should keep the troops at a greater dis- 
tance from each other. Soon after the officers 
met, some darts, probably by his directions, were 
thrown from the crowd. Both sides being alarmed 
by this circumstanee, they instantly parted, and 
withdrew under a shower of missiles, in which 
numbers were wounded. 

The fate of the war seemed to depend on the 
vigilanee of the fleet, and on the difficulties with 
whieh Cæsar had to contend in bringing any 
reinforeements or supplies from Italy. Bibulus, 
from thie effect of fatigue, was taken dangerously 
ill; but eould not, upon any aceount, be per- 
suaded to leave his station, and died on shipboard. 
There being nobody appointed to sueceed him 
in the command at sea, the leader of each of the 
separate squadrons aeted for himself without any 
eoneert. Seribonius Libo, with fifty galleys, set 
sail from the coast of Epirus, stecred towards 
Brundusium, where he surprised and burnt some 
trading vessels, one in particular laden with corn 
for Cæsars camp. Encouraged by these sue- 
cesses, he anchored under the island which co 


239 


vered the mouth of the harbour: from thence he 
kept the town in: continual alarm, landed in the 
night parties of archers and slingers, with which 
he dispersed or carried off the patroles which the 
enemy employed on the shore; and thus, master 
of the port of Brundusium, expected fully to ob- 
struct that outlet from Italy, and to awe the 
neighbouring coast. To this purpose he wrote 
to Pompey, that the other divisions of the fleet 
might go into harbour; that his squadron alone, 
in the post he had taken, was sufficient to cut off 
from Cesar all reinforcements and farther sup- 
plies. But in‘ this he presumed too much on the 
first effects of his own operations. Antony, who 
commanded: the troops of Cesar in the town of 
Brundusium, by placing numerous guards at every 
landing-place on the contiguous shore, effectually 
excluded the squadron of Libo from any supply 
of wood or water, of which his ships, for want of 
stowage, could not have at any one time a consi- 
derable stock ; and he reduced them to such dis- 
tress for want of these articles, that they were 
obliged to abandon their station, and to leave the 
harbour again open to the sea. 

In the mean time, pressing orders arrived from 
Cesar to hasten the embarkation of the’ troops. 
Dion Cassius and Appian relate, thet he himself 
being impatient of delay, embarked alone in dis- 
guise on board of a barge, with intention to pass 
to Brundusium;. that, after he had been some 
time at sea, the weather became so bad, as to de- 
termine the master of the vessel to put back; but 
that being prevailed upon by the intreaties of 
Cesar, he continued to struggle with the storm 
for many hours. ‘They farther relate, that the 
mariners being likely to faint, the passenger at 
last discovered himself, and encouraged them to 
persist, by telling them that they carried Cesar 
and his fortunes; that, nevertheless; he was 
forced to give way, and afterwards entrusted his: 
orders to a messenger; but that he returned to 
camp before it was known that he had: been ab- 
sent. He himself says, that some months being 
past, and the winter far advanced, he suspected 
that some opportunities of effecting the passage 
of his second division had been lost ; that he was 
become highly impatient, and wrote to hasten the 
embarkation; informing his officers, that they 
might run ashore any where between Oricum 
and Apollonia; as the enemy’s fleet, having no 
harbour in those parts, were frequently obliged, 
by stress of weather, to depart from the coast. 

Upon these orders, the troops with great ar- 
dour began to embark. They consisted of four 
legions and eight hundred: horse, under the com- 
mand of Mark Antony and Calenus.. The wind 
being. at south, and no enemy appearing in the 
channel, they set sail, and steered for the coast of 
Epirus, but were drove to the northward ; and on 
the second day passed Apollonia, and were dis- 
covered: by the enemy from Dyrrachium. As 
they were far to the leeward: of that part of 
the coast on which Cesar had instructed: them to 
land ; and as it was vain for them with this wind 
to attempt getting to the southward, they chosc 
to give way at once, and steer for some conve- 
nient harbour, northward 'of all Pompey’s stations, 
But im folowing this course, as they passed by 
Dy-:rachium they were instantly chased by Quin- 
tus Coponius, who commanded Pompey’s squad- 
ron at that place, chiefly consisting of Rhodian 
galleys. The wind at first was moderate, and 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox IV 


Coponius expected easily to weather the head. 


lands that were to leeward of his post; and, | 
| 
| 


though it rose considerably after he set sail, he 
still continued to struggle against it. As soon as 
Antony observed this enemy, he crowded sail 


-and made for the nearest harbour ; being in the 


bay of Nympheus, about three miles beyond Lis- 
sus, on the coast of Dalmatia. This bay opened 
to the south, and was very accessible, though not 
secure with the present wind. He chose, how- 
ever, to risk the loss of some ships, rather than 
fall into the enemy’s hands; and made directly 
for this place. Soon after he entered the har- 
bour. the wind shifted to the south-west, from 
which his ships were now sufficiently covered, 
and he debarked without any loss. At the same 
time the wind, in consequence of this change, 
blowing more directly on the land, ant more vio- 
lently, bore hard on Coponius; forced him upon 
the shore, where the greater part of his galleys, 
being sixteen im number, were stranded and 
wrecked. 

Such of Antony’s transports as got safe into 
the bay of Nympheus landed three veteran le- 
gions, with one of the new levies, and eight 
hundred horse. Two of his transports, one with 
two hundred and thirty of the new raised troops ;'* 
the other, with somewhat less than two hundred 
veterans, being heavy sailers, fell astern; and it 
being night before they arrived, mistook their way, 
and, instead of the bay of Nympheus, came to an 
anchor before Lissus. Ottacilius Crassus, who 
was stationed with a body of horse in that place 
to observe the coast, manned some small boats, 
surrounded these transports, and offered the 
troops who were on board: favourable terms if 
they would agree to surrender. Upon this sum- 
mons the new levies accordingly struck; but the 
veterans ran their vessels ashore, and having 
landed, fought their way, with the loss of a few 
men, to. Nympheus, where they joined the main 
body of their army that was landed with Antony. 

The colony of Lissus had been settled by Cæ 
sar, as a part of the province of Illyricum, ang 
now appeared to favour his cause; Ottacilius 


therefore thought proper to withdraw with his . 


garrison ; and Antony having stationed some of 
the transports at this place to enable Cesar to 
embark his army for Italy, if, as was reported, 
Pompey should attempt to remove the scene of 
the war into that country; and having sent the 
remainder back for the troops which were still 
left at Brundusiun, he despatched messengers to 
Cesar with the particulars of his voyage, and: air 
account of the place at which he had landed. 
The fleet, with this division of the army un- 
der Antony, had been seen on the coast, from the 
stations both of Pompey and of Cesar, steering 
to the northward ; but it was not known for some 
days what was become of them. Upon the arri- 
val of the intelligence, that they had effected a 
landing to the northward, both parties determined 
to move to that quarter. Pompey decamped in 
the night, and knowing the route which Antony 
was likely to take, placed himself in his way, 
giving. orders that the army, without lighting 
fires or sounding their trumpets, should remain 
in profound silence. Antony, however, having 
intelligence of this disposition of the enemy, did 
not advance. Cesar, in the mean time, to favour 


1 Ces. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. c. 26. 


: 


Crap. VL) 


his junction, was obliged to make a considerable 
circuit, ascended on the banks of the river Apsus 
to a ford at which he passéd; from thence con- 
tinucd his march to the northward, and seemed to 
advance on Pompey’s right, while Antony re- 
mained in his front. In this situation, Pompey, 
apprehending that he might be attacked on dif- 
ferent sides at once by Cesar and by Antony, 
thought proper to quit his station ; and leaving 
their armies to join, fell back to Asparagium, a 
strong post about a day’s march from Dyrrachium. 

Cesar having obtained this great reinforce- 
ment, was no longer so anxious as he had hitherto 
been for the preservation of his possessions upon 
the coast. His enemies, by the superiority of 
their fleets, could prevent his receiving any regu- 
lar supply of provisions from the sea. It was 
necessary for him, therefore, in order that he 
might have some other resource, and he in con- 
dition to act on the offensive, to extend his quar- 
ters by land, and to cover some tract of country 
from which he could subsist his army. For this 
purpose he removed from Oricum the legion that 
was stationed at that place; taking such precau- 
tions as were necessary to secure his shipping in 
the port from any surprise by sea.- He drew the 
greater part of the vessels on shore, sunk one in 
the mouth of the harbour, and placed another at 
anchor near it, mounted with a considerable 
tower, and manned with a proper force. Being 
thus secured on the coast, he sent numerous de- 
tachments in different directions: L. Cassius 
Longinus, with a legion of new levies, into 
Thessaly; C. Calvisius Sabinus, with five co- 
horts and a party of horse, into Ætolia; Cn. 
Domitius Calvisius, with two legions, the eleventh 
and twelfth, into Macedonia ; giving strict charge 
to each of these officers, that they should collect 
all the forage and provisions which those or the 
neighbouring countries could furnish. 

As Pompey had relied much on the authority 
of government, with which he was vested at the 
beginning of the war, and which he believed gave 
his party a dispensation from the exercise of those 
popular arts, with which Cesar thought proper 
to recommend his cause, he threatened to punish 
the refractory more than he encouraged or re- 
warded the dutiful; and he often therefore ex- 
torted services from the provinces, neglecting the 
necessary attention to conciliate their affections ; 
and such were the effects of this conduct, that the 
detachments which now appeared on the part of 
Cesar were every where favourably received. 
Sabinus made himself master of Aétolia. Lon- 
ginus found the people of ‘Thessaly divided, and 
was joined by one of the parties. Calvisius, 
upon his arrival in Macedonia, had deputations 
from many towns and districts of the province, 
with assurances of favour and submission; and 
by these means the possessions of Cesar, even in 
those countries on which his antagonists had 
chiefly depended, began to be equal to theirs. 

It was thought an unpardonable error in Pom- 
pey, thus to suffer his quarters to be overrun by 
an enemy who had but recently acquired a foot- 
ing on the coast, and whose army was, in nuni- 
ber of cavalry and light infantry, as well as of 
regular foot, greatly inferior to his own. Pom- 
pey, however, knowing the interest which Cæ- 
sar had in bringing the contest to a speedy de- 
cision, did not choose to divide his forces, and he 
relied for the security of the southern and inland 

2N 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


2al 


provinces; on the legions which were soon ex- 
pected fo land from Asia on the eastern shores 
of Macedonia or Thessaly. 

Scipio, being the father-in-law of Pompey, bad 
been employed in assembling the forces of Asia, 
and had, by severe exactions, availed himself of 
the resources of that opu ent province. He was 
still occupied in this service at Ephesus, when he 
received from Pompey an acceunt of Cesur’s 
arrival in Epirus, and an order witkout delay to 
transport his army into Europe. He accordingly, 
soon after the arrival of Cesar’s detachments at 
their several places of destination, debarked in 
the bay of Therme, or of Thessalenica, and 
penetrated into Macedonia, directing his march 
towards the quarters of the two legicns which 
Cesar had sent thither under the command of 
Domitius Calvisius, and gave a general alarm cn 
his route; but being arrived within about twenty 
miles of Domitius, he turned on a sudden into 
Thessaly, as thinking Longinus, who was sta- 
tioned in that country with one legion of raw 
troops, might be mace an easier prey. 

To lighten his march, he left his baggage un- 
der a guard of eight cohorts, commanded by Fa- 
vonius on the Haliacmon, a river which separates 
Macedonia from Thessaly, and j:roceedéd with 
great despatch towards the quarters of Longinus. 
This officer, greatly alarmed at his sudden ap- 
proach, and mistaking, at the same time, for an 
enemy a body of Thracian horse which were 
coming to his own assistance, hastily withdrew 
by the mountains, and continued his retreat to 
Ambracia. Scipio was about to pursue Longinus 
on the route he had taken, when he was recalled 
by earnest representations from Favonius, the 
officer he had left to guard his baggage; inform- 
ing him, that his post was in the utinest danger 
of being forced by Calvisius, who was on his 
march through Macedonia for that pury ose, 
Scipio accordingly returned with all possible de- 
spatch to the Haliacmon, and arrived at the post 
of Favonius, after the dust which arose frem the 
march of the enemy had appeared on the plain; 
and thus came barely in time to sustain bis party, 
and to rescue his baggage. 

The armies continued to occupy the opposite 
banks of the Haliacmon; and as Scipio, by the 
flight of Longinus, was become master of all 
Thessaly, Calvisius continued in possession of 


‘Macedonia, and from thence secured a consider- 


able source of supply to Cesar’s ariny. 

It would have been of great moment to Pom- 
pey’s affairs, and not inconsistent with the dila- 
tory plan he had formed for the conduct of the 
war, to have risked an action between these se- 
parate bodies on the Haliacmon, rather than to 
have suffered his enemy to retain the command 
of so many posts of consequence; and Scipio ac- 
cordingly passed the river with a view to bring on 
an engagement; but after some stay on the plain, 
finding no opportunity to attack the enemy with 
any hopes of success, he repassed the river, and 
having occupied his former station, there passed 
some partial encounters between such as were 
advanced on the different sides, but without any 
considerable event. 

While so many large bodies, detached from 


‘the principal armies, were thus contending in 


Thessaly for the possession of the country, Fom- 
pey remained to cover the ground, which was of 
greater importance to him, in the neighbourhood 


282 


of the sea, and the port of Dyrrachium. Having, 
at the distance of about a day’s march in his 
rear, this town and harbour as a place of arms, 
at which he had deposited his magazines and 
stores, and from which he received his ordinary 
supply of provisions, he had taken his measures 
to protract the war; and trusting to his own su- 
perior resources, both by sea and by land, did not 
doubt that by waiting until the countries which 
Cesar had occupied should be exhausted, he 
might force him to retire from the contest without 
the risk of a battle. T'o hasten this event, he en- 
deavoured every where to straiten his quarters in 
the country, and to block up or destroy all the 
harbours he had on the coast. 

Cneeus, the eldest of Pompey’s sons, command- 
ing the Egyptian ficet, in execution of this plan 
which had been laid to harass the enemy, with- 
out exposing their cause to a general hazard, at- 
tacked Cesar’s principal naval station at Oricum, 
raised the vessel that had been sunk at the mouth 
of the harbour, forced the armed galley that was 
stationed before it, and carried off or destroyed all 
the ships that were laid up in the port. From 
thence he proceeded to Lissus, burnt thirty tran- 
sports which Antony had left in the harbour; 
but having made an attempt on the town, was 
repulsed with loss. 

Cæsar, on the opposite part, sensible of the in- 
terest which he had in bringing the war to a 
speedy decision, advanced upon Pompey, forced a 
place of some strength that covered his front, and 
encamped in his presence. The day after he 
arrived in this position, either to bring on a 

eneral action, or to gain the reputation of brav- 
ing his antagonist, he formed his army on the 
plain between the two camps; but as Pompey 
continued firm or unmoved by this insult, and 
as the recent losses which Cesar had sustained 
in his shipping, and on the coast, rendered his 
prospect of future supplies or reinforcements 
every day less secure, he projected a movement, 
by which he proposed either to force an engage- 
ment, or to- preclude the enemy from all his re- 
sources in the town and harbour of Dyrrachium. 

For this purpose, and that Pompey might the 
Tess suspect any important design, he decamped 
in the day, and having a large circuit to make, 
directed his march at first from Dyrrachium, and 
was thought to retire for want of provisions; but 
in the night he changed his direction, and with 

teat diligence advanced to the town. Pompey 

aving intelligence of the change which Cæsar 
had made in his route during the night, perceived 
his design; and having a nearer way to Dyrra- 
chium, still expected by a rapid march to arrive 
before him. But Cæsar having prevailed on his 
men, notwithstanding the great fatigues of the 
preceding day, to continue their march with little 
tnterruption all night, was in possession of the 
only avenue to the town, when the van of Pom- 
pey’s army appeared on the hills, 

Pompey thus shut out from Dyrrachium, 
where he had placed his magazines and stores, 
and from the only harbour he had on the coast, 
was obliged to take possession of the Petra, a 
small promontory which covered a little creek or 
bay not far from the town, and there endeavoured 
to supply the loss of the harbour, by bringing ships 
of burden to unload, and by procuring supplies 
‘n boats from his magazines and stores in the 
town; and in this manner was still in condition 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV. 


to avoid any immediate risk of his fortunes in a 
single action. 
Cesar, on the other hand, being disappointed 
in the design he had formed to exclude the enemy 
from their magazines in the town of Dyrrachium, 
and seeing no likelihood of being able to bring 
the war to a speedy decision, his own communi- 
cation: with Italy being’ entirely cut off, and the 
fleets he had ordered from thence, from Sicily, 
and from Gaul, having met with unexpected de- 
lays, sent an officer, named L. Canuleius, into 
Epirus, with a commission to draw into maga- 
zines all the corn that could be found in that or 
the neighbouring’ districts, and to secure them at 
proper places for the use of his army. This, 
however, in a country that was mountainous and 
barren, itself commonly supplied with corn from 
abroad, and lately on purpose laid waste by the 
enemy, was not likely to furnish him with any 
considerable supply, or to enable him for any 
time to support a dilatory war. His genius was 
therefore at work by some speedier course to 
harass his enemy, and to hasten the end of the 


‘contest. 


In these circumstances, however, he did net 
neglect his usual artifices to amuse and distract 
his antagonists with great professions of modera- 
tion, and with overtures of peace. On hearing 
of Scipio’s arrival im Europe, affecting to have 
despaired of obtaining’ peace by any farther direct 
applications to Pompey himself, and willing to 
appeal to the reason of the father-in-law against 
the obstinacy of the son, he sent Clodius, their 
common friend, with letters and instructions, to 
inform Scipio of the great pains he had taken to 
obtain an equitable accommodation, “ all which, 
he presumed, had hitherto failed, through the 
unhappy timidity of those he entrusted with his 
messages, and from their not having courage to 
deliver them properly to their general. But sub- 
joined that, through the mediation of Scipio, 
who could deliver himself with so much freedom, 
who could advise with so much authority; and 
who, being at the head of a great army attached 
to his person, could even enforce what was just, 
he might expect a different issue to propositions 
so fair and so reasonable. And that in this event 
Scipio would have the honour of oe the re- 
storer of tranquillity and good order to Italy, of 
peace to the provinces, and of prosperity to the 
whole empire?” Clodius was received with re- 
spect; but on delivering his message, it appears 
that all farther communication was refused him 
as a person who came to insult or amuse with 
false pretensions. Cesar, indeed, was. himself, 
as usual, so far from trusting to the effect of 
these propositiuns, or so far from remitting his 
own operations in order to confirm his pacifi¢ 
professions, that he even redoubled his efforts in 
that very quarter which was entrusted to Scipio; 
and as he had already possessed himself of Epi- 
rus, Acarnania, and /Etolia, he carried his views: 
still farther on that side, and sent Fusius Calenus 
to be joined by Longinus and Sabinus, and to 
endeavour, by the isthmus of Corinth, to pene- 
trate into Achaia. i 

He himself at the same time engaged in a pro- 
ject, which to. those who do not recollect the 
amazing works which were frequently executed 
by Roman armies, particularly by that of Cæsar 
himself, will appear so vast, and even romantic, 
as to exceed belief; this project was no less than 


Cuar. VL] 


to invest Pompey in his camp, though at the 
head of an army superior to his own, and oblige 
him to recede from the coast, or submit to be 
invested with lines, and completely shut out 
from the country. For this purpose he occupied 
several hi'ls in the neighbourhood of Pompey’s 
camp, strengthened them with forts, joined those 
forts by lines of communication across the val- 
leys, and soon appeared to have projected a com- 
lete chain of redoubts, and a Tine of circumval- 
ation. 5 
Pompey, to counteract this daring project, took 
possession of some heights in his turn, fortified 
and joined them in the same manner, and while 
the one endeavoured to contract, the other en- 


deavoured to enlarge, the compass of their works. 


The archers and slingers on both sides, as in the 
operations of a siege, were employed to annoy 
the workmen. The armies lay under arms, and 
fought in detail for the possession of advan- 
tageous grounds. When forced from one height 
which they attempted to occupy, they seized 
upon another that was contiguous, and still con- 
tinued their line, though obliged to change its 
direction. r 

In these operations, a campaign that began in 
January with the landing of Cæsar on the coast 
of Epirus, already drew on to the middle of sum- 
mer, and both parties had undergone great la- 
bour, and were exposed to peculiar distress. 
Cesar’s army, already inured at the blockade of 
Alesia, and the sieges of Marseilles and of Ava- 
ricum, to toils like those in which they were now 
engaged, flattered themselves with a like glorious 
issue to their present labours, They were in 
want of bread, and obliged to substitute in its 
place a kind of root boiled up with milk; but 
were comforted under this hardship with the 
prospect of fields which were replenished with 
gipening corn, and which gave the hopes of a 
plentiful harvest. They not only continued their 
countervallations with ‘incredible toil, but turned 
or interrupted all the rivulets or springs that 
formerly watered the grounds on which the ene- 
my were now encamped. 

Pompey’s army, on their part, were less inured 
to such toilsome operations. They had plenty 
of bread, which came to them with every wind, 
from the different eoasts that were still in their 
possession, but were in great distress for want 
of water and forage: many of their horses had 
died; the men, tee long confined to the same 
ground, and to the same air, which was infected 
with filth, and the exhalation of putrid carcases, 
being reduced to the use of bad water, were be- 
come extremely sickly. 

Pompey, nevertheless, held his enemy at some 
disadvantage by the superiority of his numbers, 
and by the extent of line which he obliged him 
to form and to defend; and it appears that he 
availed himself of these advantages with all those 
abilities of a great officer, which he was justly 
supposed to possess. He not only forced Cæsar, 
without hazarding a general action, to recede 
from many of the heights which he attempted to 
occupy, and obliged ‘him, with great labour, to 
widen the compass of his lines; but likewise 
alarmed him by various attacks on the works 
which he had already completed, and in some 
places forced open the bars which the enemy had 
placed in his way, and recovered his own com- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


283 


But as Cæsar could present his whole army in 
many places to cover the works he was execut. 
ing, it was impossible, without risking a general 
action, which Pompey avoided, entirely to stop 
his progress. 

In the course of these operations, it appears, 
from the text of Cæsars Commentaries, though 
incomplete, that the armies changed the ground 
of their principal encampments as well as the 
disposition of some separate posts, and mutually 
harassed each other with frequent surprises and 
alarms. And Cesar mentions no less than six 
capital actions which happened in one day at the 
lines of circumvallation, or under the walls of 
Dyrrachium; and in most of them it is probable 
that Pompey had the advantage, as he acted on 
the string, or smaller circumference, while his an- 
ognari moved on the bow, or the wider circle. 

ompey completed his own line of circumvalla- 
tion to a circuit of fifteen miles, having a chain of 
four-and-twenty redoubts on the different hills 
over which it was carried. By this work he 
obliged Cesar to recede half a mile beyond him, 
and to extend his compass to about seventeen 
miles in circumference. 

The extremities of both their works termi- 
nated on the shore; and Cesar having no boats 
or ships to oppose to the numerous craft of his 
enemy, ought, perhaps, by the consideration of 
this very circumstance, to have been diverted at 
first from his project. But as he sought merely 
for occasions of action, he was contented with the 
hopes of finding them even under such disadvan- 
tages, While he was obliged to remain with the 
strength of his army at that end of his line which 
was nearest the town of Dyrrachium, in order to 
— the access of Pompey to his magazines, 

e proposed to fortify the other extremity of it 
with double works, and had already thrown up, 
at the distance of two hundred yards from each 
other, two entrenchments, consisting of a parapet 
ten feet high, and of a ditch fifteen feet wide ; one 
facing the lines of Pompey, the other turned to 
the field, in order to guard against any surprise 
from parties which, coming by water, might land 
in his rear. He was likewise about to join these 
entrenchments by a traverse or flank, to cover 
him from the sea. 

Before this work was completed, Pompey made 
a disposition to force him at this extremity of his 
lines, and of consequence to open a way to his 
rear over the whole extent of his works. For 
this purpose he brought in the night six entire 
legions, or sixty cohorts, to that part of his own 
works which faced this place. e embarked a 
numerous body of archers, slingers, and other 
light troops, having their helmets and shields for- 
tified, as it seems was the custom, with basket 
work, to break the force of the stones which were 
likely toshower fromthe enemy’s parapets, and fur- 
nished with great quantities of fascines and other 
materials proper to fill up the ditch. This em- 
barkation was effected in the night; and the of- 
ficer who commanded it had its to land part 
of the troops in the rear of both Cesar’s en- 
treachments, and another part between them 
where the work was still incomplete. These 
separate divisions were to be supported by the 
whole force of the legions in front, who were to 
take advantage of any effect which the missiles 
from their boats might produce on the flank or 


munication anew with the country before him. | the rear of the enemy. 


384 


These attacks were accordingly made at day 
break, in three different places at onee, and had 
all the consequences of a eomplete surprise. 
They fell with the greatest effect upon the sta- 
tion of the ninth legion, of which the piquets 
and other guards being instantly routed, the 
whole legion was put under arms to support 
then; but soon infected with the panic, was 
carried off in the flight. 
the nearest station on the heights, appearing in 
that instant with twelve cohorts, and a better 
countenance, stopped for a while the pursuit of 
the enemy, and furnished a retreat to the troops 
that were routed. 

The alarm was conveyed to Cesar himself, by 
fires lighted on all the hills, and he hastened to 
the ground with as many cohorts as could be 
spared from the posts in his way; but he came 
too late, Pompey had already forced the entrench- 
ments, had burst from his confinement, and was 
beginning to encamp in a new position, where, 


without losing his communication with the sea, | 


he rendered abortive for a long time Cesar’s pur- 
pose of excluding him from the supplies of neces- 
saries or conveniences which were to be derived 
from the land, and was now in a posture to com- 
mand a free access to water and forage, from the 
want of which he had been chiefly distressed in 
his late situation. 

Thus Cesar, far from reaping the fruits which 
he expected from the labour of so many months, 
began to incur the censure of a visionary pro- 
jector, who presumed to practise on the ablest 
captain of the age the arts with which he had 
succeeded against ignorant barbarians, or, at 
most, against generals of mean capacity, 

These circumstances, however, probably made 
no impression on Cæsar himself, nor greatly 
altered the confidence of his army: he presented 
himself again before the enemy in their new 
position, and pitched his camp in their presence, 
still determined to act on the offensive, even in 
the sequel of attempts in which he had failed. 
An action accordingly followed, of which the re- 
sult is evident, although it is difficult, from the 
imperfect text of his Commentaries, to ascertain 
the detail. It appears that both armies had 
changed the ground which they had taken imme- 
diately after the last action; that in this remove 
Pompey had taken possession of the eamp which 
Cesar bad left; and as his armiy, being more 
numerous, occupied more ground than that of 
Cesar had done, he made a second entrench- 
ment, quite round that which had been formerly 
occupied by Cæsar. This camp was covered by 
a wood on one side, and by a river, at the distance 
of four hundred paces, on the other. 

While Pompey lay in this position, he had 
thrown up a Hine of communication from the 
flank of his camp to the river, in order to cover 
his access to water. But after he had taken this 
precaution, he thought proper to change his 
ground, and had moved about the distance of 
half a mile on his march to occupy a new situa- 
tion, when, for some purpose that is not ex- 
plained, he thought proper to send back a legion, 
or large detachment of his army, to resunie the 
possession of the camp he had so recently deft. 

Cesar, on his part, being occupied in fortifying 


acamp in the last situation he had taken, and. 


‘observing this detachment sent off from the ene- 


my, thought it gave him a favourable opportunity, | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


Antony, who occupied : 


{Boox IV. 


by cutting it off, to recover part of the credit he 
had lost in the late action. While, to amuse the 
enemy, he ordered his men to continue the work 
in which they were engaged, he himself marched 
with twenty-three cohorts, in two divisions, un- 
der cover of the wood, came to the ground unob- 
served, and with the division which was led b 
himself, mixed with the enemy, who had already 
taken possession of the exterior lines, and drove 
them from thence to the interior intrenchment, 
with great slaughter. The other division being 
in the mean time to attack the same works at a 
different place, mistook the line of communication 
which covered the access from the camp to the 
river for the entrenchment of the eamp itself, and 
before they perceived their mistake, had run along 
this line to a great distance in search of an en- 
trance; when observing, at last, that the line 
along which they ran was not defended, the in- 
fantry went over it first, and were followed by all 
the cavalry ; but the time which they had lost by 
their former mistake gave Pompey an opportunity 
to come to the relief of his detachment. As soon 
as he appeared, Cesar’s cavalry, finding them- 
selves entangled between the line of communica- 
tion, the entrenchment of the camp, and the river, 
began to retire with great precipitation, and were 
followed by the foot, who fell into great confusion. 
That part of Pompey’s detachment, which, in the 
beginning of the action, had been defeated by 
Cesar, seeing themselves likely to be supported, 
rallied in the reat-gate of the camp; and the party 
which Cæsar himself commanded against them, 
observing the precipitant retreat of the other di- 
vision, saw dangers and difficulties accumulating 
ol every side. Imagining that they were about 
to be surrounded, or shut up within the enemy’s 
works, they betook them to flight, crowded back 
to the ditch, and, in attempting to repass it, were 
killed in such heaps, or were trodden under foot 
in such numbers, that the slain filled upthe ditch, 
and made a passage for those that followed. 

In this state of general confusion and terror, 
the presence and authority of Cesar, which, on 
other occasions, used to be of so great effect, were 
entirely disregarded. ‘The bearer of a standard, 
upon Cesar’s catching it, and endeavouring to 
stop him, quitted his hold, and continued to run 
without it; a rider, whose horse he had seized 
by the bridle, dismounted, and ran offon foot. The 
rout was complete; but the ditches and works, 
amongst which the action began, as they embar- 
rassed the flight of the one party, so they retarded 
the pursuit of the other; and Pompey, who did 
not expect such a victory, remained in suspense. 
He mistook the flight of Cesar’s army for a feint, 
to draw him into some ambuscade, In this he 
was governed, probably by the high estimation 
for discipline and valour to which Cæsars army 
was so justly entitled; but which no troops can 
uniformly support at all times: and if it be true, 
asis probable, that the flight of an army in actual 
rout may be always distinguished from a con 
certed retreat, he on this day committed an un 
pardonable errors and Cesar, who may be inclined 
to exaggerate the oversights, though not the ad- 
vantages, of his enemy, owns that he himself lost 
about a thousand men, with above thirty stand- 
ards or colours, and owed the preservation of his 
army to the excessive caution or incapacity of 
Pompey. He himself acted indeed like a person 
defeated, instantly abandoned all his famous lines 


Suar, VL] 


ef Dyrrachium, and all his outposts; and to 
make head against the victor, brought all the 
scattered parts of his army together. 

Pompey, in the mean time, lost the decisive 
moment, or was not sensible of his advantage till 
after the time for improving it was past. But 
this victory, although it had not been perceived 
in the precise moment in which a signal advan- 
tage could have been made of it, was presently 
atterwards greatly exaggerated. Pompey had 
from his own army the usual salutations of tri- 
umph, or received the title of Imperator, which 
he continued to assume, and sent his accounts of 
the action, by expresses, to every part of the 
empire; but had the moderation to abstain from 
the practice that was usual in the case of victo- 
ries obtained over foreign enemies, that of bind- 
ing his fasces and his despatches with laurel. 

Cesar, by carrying the war into Macedonia, 
had put himself in a very arduous situation. He 
had passed over a sea on which the enemy were 
masters, and had invaded a country of which 
they were in possession, with forces greatly supe- 
rior to his own : but this daring adventure, which, 
even in its first successes, excited astonishment, 
now exposed him to censure, and his attenipt to 
invest so great an officer as Pompey, at the head 
ef an army superior to his own, appeared altoge- 
ther wild and extravagant. The merit of all his 
former campaigns, as is common, began to be 
questioned by those who, after the event, can in- 
struct and correct every general; and the glory 
he had gained in the former part of the war was 
entirely obscured. He was even said to have 
a" the Spanish army by corruption, and to 

ave purchased with money the surrender which 
he pretended to have forced by his address and 
his sword. People returned to their first appre- 
hensions, that Pompey was the greatest general 
which any age or nation had ever produced; that 
he had effectually put an end to the present con- 
test, and had left nothing for his party to do but 
to reap the advantages of the victory he had ob- 
tained for them. 

Some time before this event, and while the 
minds of men were yet in suspense, Cato, in one 
of the councils which had been summoned by 
Pompey, observed that Cæsar had acquired much 
popular favour by his ostentation of mercy, and 
by the hopes of protection which he held out to 


every man who did notactually take arms against . 


him; while Pompey and his followers, by pub- 
lishing threats against all who did not actually 
espouse their cause, had rendered the army of 
the republic an object of terror; he therefore 
moved that a proclamation should be issued, con- 
taining assurances, that every town not actually 


in arms should be protected, and that no blood 


should be shed but in the field of battle. A re- 
solution to this purpose had been accordingly 
published ;! -but in the present exultation of vic- 
tory was forgotten. ‘The times were said to re- 
quire exemplary justice, and to justify executions 
and forfeitures, not only of those who were ac- 
tually in arms against their country, but of those 
likewise who had betrayed its cause by a mean 
and profligate neutrality. The favourites of 
Pompey already, in imagination, sated ‘their re- 
venge, and gratified their avarice, at the expense 


1 Plutarch. in Vita Pompeii, p. 494. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


255 


of the opposite party and of its abettors.? Every 
one considered the use which he himself was to 
make of the victory, not how it might be secured 
or rendered complete. 

The shock which Cæsar had received in so 
critical a time and situation, was, not without 
reason, supposed to be decisive; he had abandoned 
his lines, and called in all his out-posts, His 
army appeared to sink under the weight of their 
misfortunes. Inferior to the enemy in numbers, 
greatly reduced by their losses, and fallen in their 
own estimation, they were not soon likely to re- 
cover courage enough to contend for the field 
again with so renowned and so superior an ad- 
versary. 

Cesar, however, was not overwhelmed by 
these appearances; he knew what was the force 
of an army which had been taught, by the expe- 
rience of many years, to repose the utmost con- 
fidence in themselves and in their general, and 
which was not likely to sink, without hopes of 
recovery, under any singleevent. He considered 
their apparent dejection as a symptom of indigna- 
tion, and of rage more than of fear or debasement ; 
and, instead of blame or reproach, soothed them 
with consolation, and with the apologies which 
he industriously framed for their late miscarriage. 
He bid them recollect their former actions, and 
not be dismayed by a single accident which befel 
them in the midst of a career sustained with a 
spirit so much superior to that of every enemy 
they encountered: “If fortune has crossed us 
for once,” he said, “we must retrieve our losses 
by diligence and resolution. Difficulties only 
excite the brave, and awaken their ardour; you 
have formerly experienced difficulties, and every 
soldier who was at Gergovia will remember the 
effects of perseverance and courage.” 

He was sensible, however, that some particu- 
lar officers had set a shameful example; and he 
supposed that by singling out these for punish- 
ment, he might seem to exculpate the soldiers, 
and reinstate them in their own esteem. For 
this reason he dismissed, with infa.nyv, some 
bearers of standards, who, he alleged, had misled 
the troops, whose object it is never to part from 
their colours. By these means the sullen dejec- 
tion of the legions was changed into rage, and 
an ardent impatience to retrieve their honour. 
They did not presume to importune their gene- 
ral to be entrusted so soon again witli his for- 
tunes; but they imposed voluntary tasks, by way 
of penance, on themselves, saying, that they had 
deserved to be loaded with hardships. Many of 
the superior officers gave it as their opinion to 
Cesar, that whatever resolution he might have 
taken for the future plan of the war, so faveur- 
able a disposition in the army, and so fair an op- 
portunity of yet ending the contest. with honour 
on the very ground on which they had incurred 
their late disgrace, sheuld not be neglected, nor 
suffered to escape. Cesar, however, did not 
choose to stake his fortunes on the chance of a 
feverish ardour, which still had some mixture of 
consternation, nor to rely on a fury which had 
more of despair than of rational confidence, 
against the impetuosity of a superior ariny recent- 
ly flushed with victory. Nor was he sate to re- 
main in his present situation, without any posts 


2 Cwa. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. c. 88. 3 Ibid. 


286 


m his tear to secure his communication with the 
country, and without any immediate prospect of 
supply for the subsistence of his army. 

Fot these reasons, Cesar determined, without 
loss of time, to decamp and to remove to some 
distance from the enemy.! In the first night 
aftet this resolution ‘was taken, and as soon as it 
was dark, the sick and wounded, with all the 
baggage, under the escort of a legion, were sent 
of with orders that they should not halt till they 
reached Apollonia, being a march of about thirty 
miles, At three inthe morning the main body 
of the army, observing a profound silence, turned 
out of the camp by different gates, and took the 
same route. ‘I'wo legions yet remained for the 
rear-guard. These, after a proper interval, being 
ready to depart, sounded the usual march to 
make the enemy believe the van of the army was 
then only beginning to move, and the whole being 
thus already on their way, and without any in- 
cumbrance, they soon gained a considerable dis- 
tance from the enemy,. who was likely to pursue 
them. 

Pompey, as soon as he was apprised of this 
retreat, drew forth his army, and followed with 
Simi expedition. After marching a few miles 

e overtook, with his cavalry, the rear of Cæsar’s 
army at the passage of the river Genusus; but 
being received by thesenemy’s horse, interlined 
with infantry, could make no impression, and 
saw them effect the passage of the river without 
any considerable loss. 

Cæsar, having completed an ordinary march, 
took possession of the lines which he had formerly 
eccupied at Asparagium; but not intending to 
remain on this ground, gave orders to the legions 
to rest on their arms, e sent forth his cavalry 
by the front fee in sight of the enemy, as if with 
intention to forage ; but with orders to turn round 
the camp, and enter it again by the rear. Pom- 
pey supposing, from these appearances, that 

æsar had concluded his march, and that the 
‘business of the day was over, followed his exam- 
ple pitched in the same lines, which he likewise 
had formerly occupied at this place, and suffered 
his men to stray in search of forage and wood; 
many also who, in the hurry with which they 
decamped in the morning, had left their baggage 
behind them, were now allowed to lay down 
= arms, and returned to Dyrrachium in search 
of it. 

Cesar, who waited only until the halt he had 
made should produce this effect in the camp of 
the enemy, again put his army in motion about 
noon, and without interruption on the same day 
completed a second march of eight miles; while 
Pompey’s army, having already laid aside their 
arms and encamped, were not in condition to 
follow. Cesar continued his retreat during some 
of the subsequent days in the same order, having 
his baggage advanced some hours before him: 
and Pompey, having lost some ground by the 
delay of the first day, and having harassed his 
army in attempting to regain it, on the fourth 
day entirely discontinued the pursuit. 

This respite gave both parties leisure to con- 
sider the plan of their future operations. Cesar 
repaired to Apollonia to lodge his sick and 
wounded, to pay off the arrears of his army, and 
to make a proper disposition for the security of 


1 Ces. de Rell. Civ. lib. iii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor IV. 


the places he held on the coast. And having 
already one cohort at Lissus, placing three at 
Oricum, and fout at Apollonia, he continued his 
route from thence to the southward. He pro- 
posed, without delay, to penetrate into Thessaly, 
and to occupy, for the subsistence of his army, as 
much as he could of that fertile country. He 
flattered himself, that if Pompey should follow 
him thither, to a distance from his magazines and 
his supplies by sea, the war might be continued 
between them upon equal terms. If he attempted 
to retake Oricum and the towns on the coast, he 
must expose Scipio and the body under his com- 
mand, in the eastern parts of Macedonia, to be 
separately attacked; or, if he wished to preserve 
Scipio and his army, he would te obliged to quit 
his design upon Oricum in order to support them. 
If he should pass into Italy, it was proposed to 
follow him by the coasts of Dalmatia. And this 
last alternative of carrying the war into Italy, 
from the difficulties, the delays, and the discredit 
to which it might have exposed Cesar’s cause, 
appears to have been the preferable choice for 
Pompey. It was accordingly debated in council, 
whether, being master of the sea, and having 
abundance of shipping, he should not transport 
his army, recover the possession of the seat of 
government, and strip Fie antagonist of that au- 
thority which he derived from this circumstance? 
or, whether he should not stay to finish the re- 
mains of the war in Macedonia? The advan- 
tages likely to result from his return to Rome in 
the capacity of victor, after he had left it with 
some degree of disgrace, were obvious. But the 
war appeared to be so near its conclusion, that it 
was reckoned improper to leave any part of it 
unfinished. It was argued, that, by quitting the 
present seat of the war, Cæsar would be left to 
recover his forces in a country yet full of resources, 
and would only exchange the western part of 
the empire for the east, from whence Sylla had 
been able, and from whence Pompey himself was 
now about to recover the city and the possession 
of Italy. 

But what weighed most of allin these delibera- 
tions, the safety of Scipio required the presence 
of Pompey in Mecetlonia, If he should remove 
his army from thence, this officer, with the forces 
recently arrived from Asia, would fall a sacrifice 
to the enemy. 

Upon these motives both armies, having their 
several detachments in Thessaly, and separate bo- 
dies to support or torescue from the dangers which 
threatened them; the generals determined to 
march into that country, and calculated their re- 
spective movements, so as to cut off the chon 
parties, or to sustain their own. Cæsar, by his 
march to Apollonia, had been turned from his 
way; and having the discredit of a defeat, and 
being supposed on his flight, was harassed or ill 
received by the country as he passed. ‘The mes- 
sengers, whom he had despatched to Domitius, 
were intercepted ; and this officer, while both ar- 
mies were advancing, having made some move- 
ments in Macedonia in search of provisions, and 
having, with the two legions he commanded, 
fallen into Pompey’s route, narrowly escaped, 
and only by a few hours, being surprised and 
taken. 

Cesar, having arrived in time to rescue Domi- 
tius, and being joined by him as he passed the 
mountains into Thessaly, continued his march to 


Cuar. VI] 


Gomphi. The people of this place having re- 
fused to admit him, he scaled the walls, gave the 
town to be pillaged; and, intending, by this ex- 
ample, to deter others from retarding his march 
by fruitless resistance, he put all the inhabitants 
to the sword. When he arrived at Metropolis, 
the people, terrified by the fate of Gomphi, threw 
open their gates ; and Cesar, to contrast this with 
the former example, gave them protection. From 
thence to Larissa, where Scipio, having fallen 
back from the Haliacmon, then lay with a consi- 
derable army, the country was open, and Cæsar, 
or his parties, were every where received without 
opposition. te ca ate all the lesser rivers 
which fall into the Penius, he took post on the 
Enipeus, which runs through the district of Phar- 
salia. Here he commanded extensive plains, co- 
vered with forage and with ripening corn ; had a 
very fertile country to a great distance in his rear; 
and being joined not only by Domitius, but pro- 
bably likewise by the legion which Longinus 
commanded in /&tolia, in all amounting to ten 
legions, he was in a condition to renew his offen- 
sive operations. 

Pompey directed his motions likewise towards 
the same quarter; but although he had the more 
direct route, and was every where received as 
victor in the late action, was still on his march. 
Scipio advanced from Larissa to receive him; 
and being joined, they took post together on a 
height near Pharsalus, and in sight of Cesar’s 
station, at the distance of thirty stadia, or about 
three miles.” The armies being some time fixed 
in this position, Casar drew forth, in the front of 
his intrenchment, to provoke his antagonist. It 
was evidently not Pompey’s interest to give an 
enemy, whom he had brought. into considerable 
straits, an opportunity of relief by the chance of 
a battle. But as this was a defiance, and had 
some effect on the minds of the soldiers, it was 
proper to return it; and both sides, during man 
days, continued to turn out in the front of their 
respective lines. Cæsar advanced, on each suc- 
cessive day, still nearer to Pompey’s ground ; but 
there were some difficulties in the way of his far- 
ther approach, in which he did not choose to en- 
gage himself in the presence of an enemy, nor 
did Pompey choose to quit the eminence on which 
he had hitherto formed his line of battle. 

The summer being far spent, and all the forage 
and corn of the neighbouring plains being con- 
sumed, Cæsar began again to suffer for want of 
provisions, and having no hopes of bringing the 
enemy to a battle on this ground, he determined 
to change it, for some situation in which he could 
more easily subsist his own army, or by moving 
about, harass the enemy with continual marches, 
and oblige them perhaps to give him an opportu- 
nity to fight them on equal terms. Having re- 
solved on this plan, and having appointed a day 
on which the armies should move, the tents being 
already struck, and the signal to march given, 
while the van was passing through the rear-gate 
of the camp, it was observed that Pompey’s army, 
being formed according to their daily practice, 
had advanced farther than usual before their 
lines. Cæsar immediately gave orders to halt, 
saying to those who were near him, “ The time 
we have so earnestly wished for is come; let us 
see how we are to acquit ourselves.’ He imme- 


2 Appian. de Bello Civ. lib. ii. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


„railed at the conduct of t 
' courage by urging him to fight, whilst in reality 


287 


diately ordered, as a signal of battle, a purple en- 
sign to be hoisted on a lance in the centre of the 
camp. Appian says, that he likewise ordered 
the pales to be drawn, and the breast-work to be 
levelled in the front towards the enemy, that his 
army might not hope for a retreat, not even be- 
hind their intrenchments.4 

It was evidently Pompey’s interest to avoid a 
battle, and to wait for the effect of the distresses 
to which Cæsar’s army must have been exposed 
on the approach of winter. But this is the most 
difficult part in war, requiring great ability in the 
general, together with tried courage and discipline 
in the troops. A general may be qualified to fight 
a battle, but not eer: to avoid an enemy 
who presses him; an army may have that spe- 
cies of courage which impels them in action, but 
not that degree of constancy which is required to 
support them long unemployed in the presence 
ofan enemy. In whatever degree Pompey him- 
self was qualified fur the part which the service 


-required of him, he was attended by numbers of 


senators and persons of high rank, who, thinkin 
themselves in a civil or political capacity, eal 
with their general, bore the continuance of their 
military subordination with pain. ‘They said, he 
was like Agamemnon among the kings, and pro- 
tracted a war that might have been ended in a 
day, merely to enjoy his command. Nursed in 
luxury, and averse to business, petulant in safety, 
useless in danger, impatient to be at their villes 
in the country, and their amusements in the 
town; and anticipating the honours and suc- 
cessions to office which they imagined due to 
their high merits in the present service, they 

bei general, affected 


they only wished to terminate the suspense and 
anxiety of a campaign, which they had not the 
resolution to endure. Many of the allies, then 
also present in the army, who were princes of 
high state in their own dominions, were impa- 
tient of longer delay; and the troops of every 
description, 1n imitation of so many respectable 
examples, were loud in their censures of so much 
caution in their general. 

Pompey, urged by the clamours of his army, 
thought himself under a necessity to come to a 
speedy decision, and had prepared for battle on 
the morning of that very day on which Cæsar 
was about to decamp. Although he was sensible, 
that in this conjuncture, it was not his interest to 
hazard a battle, it is probable, that he did not 
think the risk was great. He too, as well as 
others of his party, became elated and confident 
upon his late success.5 His numbers greatly sur- 
passed those of Cesar, especially in horse, archers, 
and slingers; and he trusted, that, by this part 
of his army, he should prevail on the wings, and 
carry his attack to the flank, and even to the rear 
of the enemy. Having the Enipeus, a small 
river with steep banks, on his right, which suffi- 
ciently covered that flank, he drew all the ca- 
valry, amounting to seven thousand, with the 
archers and slingers, to his left, expecting that 
the event of the battle would be determined on 
this wing. He himself, therefore, took post to 


3 Plutarch. in Vita Pompei. 

4 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 

5 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. vii. ep. 3. 
6 Appian. de Bello Civile, lib. iii. 


288 


second the operations of the cavalry, at the head 
of the two famous legions which he had called 
off from Cesar at the beginning of the war. 
Scipio was posted in the centre, with the legions 
from Syria, having the great body of the infantry 
divided on his right and his left. The right of 
the whole was covered by a Cilician legion, and 
the remains of the Spanish army which had 
joined Pompey under Afranius. The whole 
amounted to one hundred cohorts, or about forty- 
five thousand foot, drawn up in a line of ten 
men deep.! 

Cesar, observing this disposition, formed his 
army in three divisions; the left was commanded 
by Antony, the right by Sylla, and the centre by 
Cn. Domitius. ‘The tenth legion was posted on 
the right, and the ninth on the left of the whole. 
He had eighty cohorts in the field ; but these so 
incomplete, as not to exceed above twenty-two 
thousand men. He saw the disparity of his 
horse and irregulars on the right, having no more 
than a thousand horse to oppose to seven thou- 
sand of the enemy. In order to reinforce and 
sustain them, he draughted a cohort from each 
of the legions in the right to form a reserve, which 
he placed in the rear of his cavalry with orders to 
sustain them, or to repel the enemy’s horse, when 
they should attempt as he expected, to turn his 
flank. This body formed a fourth division of his 
army, not placed in the same line with the other 
divisions; but facing obliquely to the right, in 
order to receive the cavalry that was. expected to 
turn the flank, and to fall obliquely on: the rear. 
He himself passed along the front of the right 
wing, and earnestly entreated- them not to engage 
till they got the signal from himself. He re- 
minded them of his continual attention to the 
welfare of the army, desiring them to recollect 
with what solicitude he had. endeavoured to bring 
on a treaty, in order to save both armies to the 
republic; and how far he had always been from 
any disposition wantonly to shed the soldiers’ 
blood. He was answered with shouts that ex- 
pressed an impatience to begin the action. Pom- 
pey had directed the cavalry and archers assembled 
on his left to begin the attack; and instructed 
them, as soon as they had driven Cesar’s horse 
from the plain, to fall upon the flank and the 
rear of his infantry. 

These dispositions being completed, a solemn 
pause and an interval of silence ensued. The 
same arms, and the same appearances presented 
themselves on the opposite sides. When the 
trumpets gave the signal to advance, the sounds 
were the same; many are said to have shed 
tears.? Being so near, that they had only space 
enough in which to acquire that rapid motion 
with which they commonly shocked, Cesar’s 
army began to rush forward, while Pompey’s 
agreeable to the orders he had. given them, re- 
mained in their places, expecting that the enemy, 
if they were made to run a double space in com- 
ing to the shock, would be disordered, or out of 
breath. But the veterans, in Cesar’s line, sus- 
pecting the intention of this unusual method of 
receiving an enemy, made a full stop; and, hav- 
ing drawn breath, came forward again with the 
usual rapidity. They were received with perfect 
order, but not with that resistance and equal force 


1 Frontinus de Stratagematis. 
2 Dio. Cassius, lib. xli. c. 58. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


_awaited the issue.? 


[Boox IF. 


which motion alone could give. The action be 
came general near about the same time over the 
whole front. Pompey’s horse, as was expected, 
in the first charge, put Cesar’s cavalry to rout, 
and, together with the archers and slingers, were 
hastening to turn the flank of the enemy. But 
as soon as they opened their view to the rear, be- 
ing surprised at the sight of a body of infantry 
which was drawn up to oppose them, and being, 
probably, from their confidence of victory, negli- 
gent of order ;: in their attempts to recover it they 
were thrown into the utmost confusion, and, 
although there was not any enemy in condition 
to pursue them, fled tothe heights. The archers 
and slingers, being thus deserted by the horse, 
were put to the sword. And Pompey’s left, on 
which he expected the enemy could not resist 
him, being flanked by the cohorts who had de- 
feated his cavalry, began to give way. ` Cesar, in 
order to increase the impression he had made,. 
brought forward fresh troops to. the front of his 
own line; and while his reserve turned upon the 
flank, made a general charge, which the enemy 
no longer endeavoured to withstand. 

Poinpey, on seeing the flight of his cavalry, an 
event he so little expected, either thought himself 
betrayed, or despairing of the day, put spurs te 
his horse, and: returned into camp. As he en- 
tered: the pretorian gate, he called to the guards. 
to stand to their arms, and to provide for the 
worst. “Igo the rounds,” he said, “and visit 
the posts.” It is likely that surprise and morti- 
fication had unsettled his mind. He retired to 
his tent in the greatest dejection, and yet he 
His army, in the mean time, 
being routed,. fled in confusion through the lanes 
of their own encampment. It was noon, and the 
victors,.as well as the vanquished, were greatly 
fatigued; but Cæsar seldom left any refuge to a 
flying enemy, not even behind their intrench- 
ments. He ordered Pompey’s lines to be stormed, 
met with some little resistance from the guards 
that were placed on the parapet, but soon pre- 
vailed. The rout and the carnage continued 
through the streets and the alleys of the camp, to 
the rear-gate and passages through which the 
vanquished crowded to recover the fields, and 
from which, without any attempt to rally, they 
continued their flight to the neighbouring hills. 

When Pompey’s army drew forth to battle, 
their tents were left standing, as in full confi- 
dence of victory; and the plate, furniture, and 
equipage of the officers were still displayed, as if. 
intended for show. Notwithstandmg this cir- 
cumstance, Cesar had authority enough to re- 
strain his troops’ from plunder,-and continued the 
pursuit. Seeing crowds of the vanquished had 
oceupied a hill in the rear of their camp, he made 
haste to surround them, and to cut off their 
farther retreat. But they themselves having ob- 
served, that the place was destitute of water, 
abandoned it before they could be surrounded, 
and took the road to Larissa. Cesar having or- 
dered. part of the army to keep possession of the 
enemy’s camp, another part to return to their 
own, he himself, with four legions, endeavoured 
to intercept the fugitives in their way to Larissa, 


3 Cass. de Bello Civ. lib. iii. c. 94. 

4 The spoils of an enemy were commonly secured 
by the Romans in a regular manner, to be equally di- 
vided. 


Cuar. VIIL] 


He had the advantage of the ground; so that 
after a hasty march of six miles, he got before 
‘hem; and, having thrown himself in their way, 
obliged them to halt. They took possession of a 
height over a stream of water, from which they 
hoped to be supplied. Night was fast approach- 
ing, and the pursuers were spent with fatigue ; 
but Cesar yet prevailed on his men to throw up 
some works to prevent the access of the enemy 
to the brook. When overwhelmed with fatigue 
and distress, these remains of the vanquished 
army offered to capitulate; and while the treaty 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 955 


senators and persons of rank, withdrew in the 
night, and made their escape; the rest surrender 
edat discretion. Fersons of distinetion, who had 
been formerly prisoners, and who had been set at 
liberty, were now put to death. Some were 
spared at the intercession of their friends, to 
whom Cesar permitted that each should save one 
of the prisoners. The private men took oaths 
of fidelity to the victor, and were enlisted in his 
army. Cesar, having ordered such of his men, 
as had been on service all night, to be relieved 
from the camp, he himself marched with a fresh 


was in dependence many among them, who were | body the same day to Larissa. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Comparative Loss on the different Sides in the late Action—Pompey's Flight— His Death—Ar- 
rival of Cæsar at Alerandria—Cato, with the Fleet and Remains of the Army from Pharsa- 
lia, steers for Africa—State of Italy and of the Republican Party—Adventures of Cæsar in 
Egypt— Victory over Pharnaces—Arrival in Ialy— Mutiny of the Legions—Casar passed into 
Africa—His Operations and Action with the Horse and Irregulars of the Enemy—FPost at 
Ruspina—Siege of Uzita—Battle of Thapsus—Death of Cato. 


IN the famous battle of Pharsalia, Cæsar, by 
his own account, lost no more than two hundred 
men, among whom were thirty centurions, of- 
ficers of distinguished merit. He killed of the 
enemy fifteen thousand, took twenty-four thou- 
sand prisoners, with a hundred and eighty stand 
of colours, and nineteen Roinan eagles and le- 
gionary standards; and on this occasion he cut 
off many senators and many of the equestrian 
order, the flower of the Roman nobility, who 
were the most likely to bear up the sinking for- 
tunes of the commonwealth. 

Pompey, when he was told that Cxsar’s troops 
had already forced his intrenchments, changed 
his dress, mounted on horseback, and having 
en through the rear gate of the camp, made 

is escape to Larissa. On the road he fell in 
with about thirty horsemen who joined him. At 
the gates of Larissa he received what he wanted 
for his journey, but declined entering the town, 
saying, That he would do nothing to make a 
breach betwixt the inhabitants of that place and 
the victor.? From thence he passed by the valley 
of Tempe to the coast, and rested only one night 
in a fisherman’s cottage. Next morning he put 
off from the shore in a small boat, with a few 
of his attendants, and coming in sight of a trading 
vessel, made signals, and was taken on board. 
In this ship he steered to Amphipolis, came to an 
anchor before that place, and, probably to conceal 
his farther intentions, issued a proclamation ad- 
dressed to all the districts of Macedonia, and re- 
quiring new levies to be made, and all the youth 
of the province to assemble forthwith at this 
place. But having received some supplies of 
money, he remained only one night at Ainphi- 
polis. His wife Cornelia, and Sextus the young- 
est of his sons, were at Mitylene, in the island of 
Lesbos; thither he proposed to sail, and, without 
having settled his plan any farther, was anxious 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. xli. c. 62. 
6 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 
% Dio. Cass. lib. xlii. e. 2. 


20 


to save this part of his family froin falling® nto 
the hands of his enemies. Having taken them on 
board, and being joined by some galleys of the 
fleet, after a delay of some days, occasioned by 
contrary winds, he set sail, continued his voyage 
to the coast of Cilicia, anid from thence to Cy- 
prus. He meant to have landed in Syria; but 
being informed that the people of Antioch, upon 
the news of his defeat, had published a resolutien 
to admit none of his party, he dropt that intention, 
and contented himself with what aids and rein- 
forcements he obtained on the coasts of Cilicia 
and Cyprus. He seized the money which was 
found in the coffers of the farmers of the revenue; 
and having borrowed, or otherwise procured, con- 
siderable sums, he armed two thousand men, and 
having shipping sufficient to transport them, con- 
tinued his voyage to Egypt. 

The late king, Ptolemy Auletes, had been in- 
debted to the Romans and the patronage of Pom- 
pey; and the kingdom being now on a respect- 
able footing, having a considerable military force 
in the field; this Roman leader, though of a van- 
quished party, flattered himself, that in the grati- 
tude of the Egyptian court he might find some 
means to reinstate his affairs. 

On the death of Ptolemy, who had been re- 
stored to his throne by Gabinius, two factions had 


„arisen in Egypt. The king leaving four children, 
Ptolemy the elder, Cleopatra, Arsinoe, and Pto- 
-lemy the younger, had hy his will bequeathed his 


crown to Ptolemy the eldest of his sons, together 
with Cleopatra the eldest daughter. This brother 
and sister being by the laws permitted to marry, 
were in the capacity of husband and wife asso- 
ciated on the throne. But the council of the 
young king proposed to set aside the will by ex- 
cluding Cleopatra. ln execution of this design, 
having obliged her to leave the kingdom, and to 
fly for protection into Syria, they had taken post 
with a great army at Pelusium to prevent her re- 
turn, she being said to have assembled a numerous 


# Crear, Appian, Plutarch. 


290 


force in Asia for that purpose! Pompey observ- 
ing this army upon the shore, concluded that the 
king was present, came to anchor, and sent a 
message with intimation of his arrival, and of his 
desire to join his forces with those of Egypt. 

The council of Ptolemy consisted of three per- 
sons, Achillas, who commanded the army; Pho- 
tinus, a eunuch, who had the care of the finances ; 
and 'Theodotus of Samos, who was the preceptor 
or literary tutor of the young king. ‘These coun- 
sellors, knowing that the Romans had been 
named executors of the late king’s will,? and in 
this capacity might restore Cleopatra to her share 
in the throne, and that Pompey, in name of the 
republic, might assume the supreme direction in 
Egypt, were greatly alarmed upon receiving his 
message, and came to a resolution to put him to 
death. By this atrocious action they expected to 
rid themselves of one dangerous intruder, and to 
merit the favour of his rival, who by this decisive 
stroke was to become the sovereign of the empire, 
and fully able to reward those who took a season- 
able part in his quarrel. 

With this intention Achillas, with a few of his 
attendants, came on board in a small boat, de- 
livered a message from Ptolemy, inviting Pompey 
toland. In the mean time some Egyptian gal- 
leys, with an intention to secure him, drew near 
to his ship; and the whole army, with the king at 
their head, were drawn out on theshore to receive 
him. The size of the boat, and the appearance 
of the equipage which came on this errand, 
seemed disproportioned to the rank of Pompey ; 
and Achillas made an apology, alleging, that 
deeper vessels could not go near enough to land 
him on that shallow part of the coast. Pompey’s 
friends endeavoured to dissuade him from accept- 
ing of an invitation so improperly delivered; but 
he answered by quoting two lines from Sopho- 
cles, which implies, that whoever visits a king, 
though he arrive a free man, must become his 
slave. ‘Two of his servants went before him into 
the boat to receive their master; and with this 
attendance he put off from the ship. His wife 
Cornelia, and Sextus the youngest of his sons, 
with some other friends, remained upon deck, 
sufficiently humbled by the preceding strokes of 
fortune, anxious for the future, and trembling 
under the expectations of a scene which was act- 
ing before them. Soon after the barge had left 
the ship, Pompey looking behind him, observed 
among the Egyptian soldiers a person whose 
countenance he recollected, and said to him, 
Surely, fellow soldier, you and I have somewhere 
served together. While he turned to speak these 
words, Achillas beckoned to the other soldiers, 
who understanding the signal to put the Roman 
general to death, struck him with their swords. 
Pompey was so much prepared for this event, that 
he perceived the whole of his situation at once, 
and sunk without making any struggle, or utter- 
ing one word? This was done in the presence of 
the king of Egypt, and of his army, who were 
ranged on a kind of amphitheatre formed by the 
shore. The vessel in which the unhappy Cor- 
nelia with her family was left, and the little 
squadron which attended it, as if they had re- 
ceived a signal to depart, cut their cables and fled. 


eee 


1 Cesare, de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 2 Cesare, ibid. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV. 


Thus died Pompey, who for above thirty years 
enjoyed the reputation of the first captain of his 
age. The title of Great, originally no more than 
a casual expression of regard from Sylla, con- 
tinued, in the manner of the Romans, to be 
given him as a mark of esteem, and a name of 
distinction. He attained to more consideration, 
and enjoyed it longer than any other Roman 
citizen; and was supplanted at last, because, for 
many years of his life, he thought himself too 
high to be rivalled, and too secure to be shaken 
in his place. His Jast defeat, and the total ruin 
which ensued upon it, was the consequence of an 
overweening confidence, which left him altogether 
unprepared for the first untoward event. The 
impression of his character, even after that event, 
was still so strong in the minds of his enemies, 
that Cæsar overlooked all the other remains of 
the vanquished party to pursue their leader. 

The accounts which Cesar received at Larissa 
made him believe that Pompey must have passed 
into Asia; and he accordingly, on the third day 
after the battle of Pharsalia, set out in pursuit of 
him with a body of horse, ordering a legion to 
follow. In passing the Hellespont, he was sa- 
luted by some galleys which guarded the Straits, 
under Lucius Cassius. These surrendered them- 
selves, and, with their leader, made offer of their 
service to the victor. From thence he continued 
his march by the coast of Ionia, receiving the 
submission of the tewns in his way. And being 
come into Asia, he had intelligence of Pompey’s 
operations in Cyprus, of his departure from 
thence, and of his continuing to steer for the 
coasts of Egypt. In order to be in condition to 
follow him hither, he put into the island at 
Rhodes, where he provided transports sufficient 
to embark the legion which he ordered to follow 
him from Thessaly, and another from Achaia, 
with eight hundred horse. 'To these he joined a 
convoy of ten armed galleys of this island, and 
some Asiatic ships.‘ 

With this force Cesar set sail for Alexandria, 
and arrived, after a passage of three days.5 Here 
he learned the catastrophe of Pompey’s life; and 
had presented to him by the courtiers of Ptolemy, 
who were impatient to recommend their services, 
the head of the deceased severed from the body, 
with his seal, which was known throughout the 
empire, being that with which his signature was 
put to al! letters, acts, and public writings: but 
Cesar either really was, or aflected. to be, seized 
with a momentary compunction ; is said to have 
turned away from the sight, and to have wept.6 
This able actor probably had tears, as well as 
words, at command; and could sanctify, under 
the most specious appearances, the evils which his 
ambition had produced. From this event, how- 
ever, which he thus affected to regret, and no 
sooner, he became secure, and seems to have 
dated the termination of the war, He accord- 
ingly landed without precaution, and being de- 
tained at first by the usual periodical winds of 
the season, became entangled in difficulties, or 
engaged in pleasures, which occasioned a very 
unaccountable stay, suspended the expectations 


4 Ces. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. ; 

5 App. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. The two legions which 
he led in this service amounted only to three thousand 
two hundred men; so much had the army in general 


3 App. de Bell, Civ. lib. ii. Plut.in Pomp. ae at in their late campaigns. 


epitome, lib. exii. 


6 App ibid, 


Cuap. VIL] 


of the whole empire, and gave to those of the 
opposite party leisure to consult their safety in 
different ways. 

Cato, upon the march of Pompey into Thes- 
saly, had been left to command on the coast of 
Epirus; and his quarters, after the battle of 
Pharsalia, became a place of retreat to many 
who escaped from the field, or who, at the time 
of the action, had been detached on different ser- 
vices. He assembled great part of the fleet at 
Corcyra; and, with his sea and land forces united, 
still preserved the aspect of a vigorous party. 
Cicero, Cneus the eldest son of Pompey, Afra- 
nius, Labienus, and other persons of distinction 
had joined him. Among these Cicero, as being 
the first in rank, was offered the command; and 
having declined it, narrowly escaped with his 
life from the fury ef young Pompey, who consi- 


dered his refusal as a desertion of the cause, and ` 


as an act of perfidy to his father, whose fate was 
yet unknown.’ Cicero, being protected by Cato 


and others, who were present, escaped into Italy; 


and declining the command of an army, re- 
served, for scenes in which he was better quali- 
fied to act, talents which had been, on former 
occasions, of so much use to his fellow citizens. 
Ít appeared that Cato had even disapproved of 
his having joined either party in this war, and 
wished him to have devoted his life and his abi- 
lities entirely to those services which he was 
better qualified to render to his country, in the 
senate, and in the popular assemblies, than in 
the field. 

It is probable that Cato had already taken his 
own resolution not to submit to Cesar, nor to 


survive the fall of the commonwealth; but he 
treated with great candour such as chose to 


make their peace, and to retire from the storm. 
Having staid a sutficient time at Corcyra, to 
receive on board such of the vanquished army as 
those to take refuge in the fleet; and having af- 
terwards put into Patra, near the mouth of the 
Gulph of Corinth, for the same purpose, he still 
gave every one his option to continue in arms, or 
to retire. He seems to have supposed that Pom- 
pey was gone into Egypt, and he determined to 
follow him; hoping, that after the junction of 
this great reinforcement, he might, either there 
or in the province of Africa, renew the war with 
advantage. 
arrived in the African seas, but west of the fron- 
tier of Egypt, he met the unhappy Cornelia, with 
the young Sextus Pompeius, who had recently 
beheld the death of the husband and the father 
near the shore at Pelusium. The account which 


he received of this event determined him not to | 
continue his voyage any farther to the eastward; 


but to return towards the Roman province of 
Africa, where the friends of the republic under 
Varus, in consequence of the defeat of Curio, and 
the alliance of Juba, still kept the ascendant, and 
aately received an accession of strength by the 
junction of Scipio and of Labienus, who had 


escaped from Pharsalia. But the periodical winds: 
which about the same time began to detain Cæsar ' 


at Alexandria, made it impossible, or at least 
dangerous, for him to continue his voyage along 
a coast that was covered to a great extent by the 
famous shoals and sand-banks of the Syrtes. 


7 Plutarch. in Vit. Ciceronis. 
c. 10—12. 


Dio. Cass. lib. xlii. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


Being, in pursuance of this design,- 


291 


For these, perhaps, and other reasons which are 
not mentioned, Cato landed at Berenicé: and 
from thence conducting his army, then consisting 
of ten thousand men, in small divisions, through 
the deserts of Barca, and round the bay of the 
Syrtes; and having, during thirty days, encoun- 
tered with many difficulties from the depth of 
the sands and the scarcity-of water, he effected 
his march tothe frontier of the Roman province.8 

Cesar, when he passed into Macedonia, had 
left Italy and the western provinces in a state not 
likely, in his absence, to create any trouble. But 
the uncertain, and even unfavourable aspect of 
his affairs, for some time after his landing in Epi- 
rus, had encouraged those who were discontented 
to question the validity of his acts, and to disre- 
gard his arrangements. The army in Spain hav- 
ing mutinied, deserted from @. Cassius, and put 
themselves under the command of M. Marcellus 
/Eserninus, who, however, did not openly declare 
himself for either party, till after the event was 
decided in favour of Cesar. 

At Rome, it is probable that few had remained 
besides those who were inclined to Cesar’s party, 
or at least such as were indifferent to both; and 
that some persons, even of the last description, 
thought they had an interest in his success, as 
being their only safety against the menacing de- 
clarations of his adversary, who, in all his procla- 
mations, treated neutrality between the parties as 
treason to the commonwealth. But the uncertain 
state of his fortunes, while the event of the war 
remained in suspense, and still more after his de- 
feat at Dyrrachium, encouraged or tempted num- 
bers, even in the city of Rome, to declare for 
Pompey. Marcus Celius, who, in the preceding 
year, had, upon disgust, or hopes of promoting 
his own fortune, gone with Antony and Cuno to 
join Cesar, and who was now, by the influence 
of the prevailing party, elected one of the præ- 
tors; being moved by afresh disgust from the par- 
ty he had joined, or by its apparent decline in the 
field, openly declared himself against Cesar’s mea- 
sures, offered protection to debtors against the 
execution of his laws relating to bankrupts, drove 
his own colleague Trebonius by force from the 
preetor’s tribunal, and gave such an alarm, that 
the senate thought themselves under the necessity 
of giving the consul Isauricus the usual charge to 
guard the commonwealth as in times of extreme 
danger. Upon this decree the consul took arms 
to preserve the peace, and Celius was obliged to 
leave the city. About the same time Milo, who 
still lay under sentence of banishment, ventured, 
at the head of an armed force, to land on the 
coast, and attempted to make himself master of 
Capua. While he was engaged in this enter- 
prise he was joined by Celius; but both were 
soon after surrounded and cut off by the forces 
which Cesar had left for the pratection of Italy.9 

These disturbances, and every appearance of 
Opposition to the party of Cesar, were again 
easily suppressed upon the news of his victory 
at Pharsaha. The populace, who generally range 
themselves on the victorious side, and who are 
equally outrageous in every cause they espouse, 
celebrated the occasion, by pulling down the 
statues of Pompey and of Sylla. There was 


8 Strabo, lib. xvii. p. 836. 
9 Liv. Epitome, lib. cxi. 
Pe. 22. 26. 


Dio. Cassius, Jib. xlii. 


ð 


293 
either no senate, and no assembly of the people 
to resist the torrent with which fortune now ran 
on the side of military government, or the names 
of senate and people were; without debate or dif- 
ference of opinion, put to decrees, by which the 
supreme power of life and death over the sup- 
posed adherents cf the vanquished party was 
committed to the victor. By these decrees, the 
power of making war or peace, and of naming 
commanders and governors in all the provinces, 
was committed to Cesar. He was, by a new 
and unheard-of resolution, made consul for five 
years, dictator for twelve months, and vested 
with the sacred character of tribune for life. He 
alone was appointed to preside in all public as- 
semblies, except those of the tribes, in which the 
other tribunes bore an equal part with himself. 
When these decrees were presented to Cæsar, 
then in Egypt, he assumed the erisigns and power 
of dictator, and appointed Antony, who com- 
manded in Italy, general of the horse, or second 
to himself in the empire. The reputation of 
Cæsars clemency had encouraged many, who 
had recently opposed him, to lay down their 
arms, and to return to their habitations, trusting 
to this character of the victor, or to other consi- 
derations more particularly applicable to them- 
selves. Cicero returned to Italy, and waited for 
Cesar in the neighbourhood of Brundusium. 
Caius Cassius, who had commanded the fleet 
which had been assembled for Pompey from the 
coasts of Syria and Cilicia, having sailed to 
Sicily, while the army yet lay in Pharsalia, sur- 
prised and burnt the shipping, amounting to 
thirty-five vessels, of which twenty were decked, 
which Cesar had assembled at Messina, and 
was ahout to have forced the town to surrender, 
when he was informed of the defeat of Pompey 
in Thessaly, and set sail for the coast of Asia. 
Here he waited for Cesar at the mouth of the 
Cydnus, without being determined, whether he 
should attempt to destroy or submit to the victor. 
From the correspondence of Cassius with Cicero, 
it appears, that, like this distinguished senator, 
he was about to withdraw from the ruins of a 
party which he could no longer support. Cicero, 
nevertheless, afterwards ascribes to him a design 
of killing Cesar at this place, if the prey had 
not escaped him by going to a different side of 
the river from where he was expected to land. 
Upon this disappointment Cassius made his sub- 
mission, and delivered up his fleet.! Quintus 
Cicero went to Asia, to make his peace with 
Cesar; and many, expécting him in Italy, re- 
sorted thither on the same errand. In this num- 
ber, it was reported that Cato and L. Metellus 
neant to present themselves as persons who had 
done no wrong, and who came openly to resume 
their station in the commonwealth. Cesar fore- 
saw the difficulties that might arise to himself 
from the presence of such men; that they would 
greatly embarrass his government by opposing it, 
or, in order to rid himself of such troublesome 
guests, reduced him to the necessity of pulling off 
the mask of moderation and clemency, which he 
had hitherto assumed. For these reasons, he chose 
rather to prevent their coming, than to contend 
with them after they were come; and sent posi- 
tive orders to Antony, to forbid Cato, Metellus, 
and every other person, to whom he had not 


1 Caesar. de Bello Civil. lib. iii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMI NATION 


( 
i 


{Boox IV. 


given express permission, to set their foot in 
Italy.2 

Such was the state of affairs at 
the end of the year of Rome 705, 
and beginning of the following year, 
which is dated in the dictatorship of 
Caius Cesar. While he himself 
still remained in Egypt, the goveri- 
ment of Italy continued in the hands 
of Antony. All orders of men vied, 
in demonstrations of jey, for the success of the 
victor, and for the ascendant which his party had 
gained. They still probably hoped to have the 
form of the republic preserved, while no more 
than the administration of it should pass from 
the ruined party to those who were now in power : 
but in the first steps of the present government 
they found themselves disappointed. The usual 
election of magistrates, which, even in the height 
of the war had never been omitted, now at the 
end of it, atid when no enemy any where ap- 
peared to alarm the party, were all of them, ex- 
cept that of the tribunes, entirely suspended or 
laid aside; All government centred in the per- 
son of Antony, and the administration was alto- 
gether military. He himself, immersed in de- 
bauch, past the greatest part of his time in the 
company of buffoons and prostitutes; frequently 
shifted the scene of his frolics from the town to 
the country, and travelled through Italy with a 
field equipage, and a numerous train of carriages, 
filled with courtezans and their retinue. In these 
processions he himself is said to have sometimes 
appeared in a carriage that was drawn by lions.3 
In this tide of success, as he was ungracious and 
arrogant to citizens of the highest rank, so he 
was indulgent to the troops, and deaf to all the 
complaints that were made of their violence and 
rapine. Being equally apt to set the example of 
disorder and license in his own practice, as he 
was to indulge them in others, his retainers fre- 
quently alarmed the city with rapes, robberies, 
and murders, and made the pacific inhabitants of 
Italy expect, with the arrival of Cesar, a con- 
tinual increase of such disorderly masters to sport 
on the ruins of the commonwealth. 

The worst men, as usual, were the most for- 
ward in paving their court to the party in power. 
The nearest relations became spies or informers 
against each other. Fears or complaints uttered 
were reported as crimes. A general silence and 
distrust ensued, and all parties wished or dreaded 
the arrival of Cæsar, according as they expected 
to lose or to gain by the fall of the common weaith, 
In this interval of expectation, men discovered 
their gloomy apprehensions, by propagating 
strange fictions of ominous appearances, or by 
magnifying things natural into alarming presages 
and prodigies.4 i 

The daily expectation of Cæsars arrival for 
some time, suspended all the usual factions in 
the city, and suppressed the hopes and designs 
of his opponents in all parts of the empire: but 
his unexpected stay at Alexandria, and the un- 
favourable reports of his situation, which were 
sometimes brought from thence, began to turn 
the tide of popularity at Rome, and encouraged 
the remains of the late republican party, now 


U. C. 706. 


Č. Julius 
Cesar Dict. 
Iterum M. 
Antonius 
Mag. Eq. 


Cæsar. de Bello Civil. lib. iii. ep. $ et 7. 
Pilut. in Vita Antonii, p. 74, 75. 


2 
3 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. xlii. c. 26. 


Crap. VIL) 


forced to take refuge in Africa, again to lift up 
its head.§ 

Dolabella, a young man of patrician extrac- 
tion, observing the roads which others had taken, 
by becoming tribunes of the people, to arrive at 
power in the commonwealth, procured himself, in 
imitation of Clodius, to be adopted into a plebeian 
family, to thè end that he might be legally quali- 
fied to hold this office; and having accordingly 
succeeded in this design, revived the wild projects 
by which the worst of his predecessors had endea- 
voured to debauch the lower ranks of the people. 
He proposed an abolition of debts, and a reduc- 
tion of house-rents. Being opposed by Trebonius, 
one of his colleagues, their several retainers fre- 
quently, as usual, proceeded to violence in the 
streets ; and although the senate passed a decree 
to suspend every question or subject of debate 
until the arrival of Cesar, these tribunes con- 
tinued to assemble the people, kept them in a 
ferment by opposite motions, and filled the public 
places with tumult and bloodshed.6 Mark An- 
tony, second in command to Cesar, under pre- 
tence that such disorders could not be restrained 
without a military force, took possession of the 
city with an army; and while he somctimes 
favoured one party, and sometimes the other, 
continued to govern the whole at discretion. 7 

The troops about the same time became muti- 
nous in their quarters; and these disorders rose 
or fell according to the reports that were propa- 
gated from Asia or Egypt relating to the state of 
Cesar’s affairs. The spirits and hopes of the 
late republican party, which yet had some foot- 
ing in Africa and Spain, likewise fluctuated in 
the same manner. It is highly probable, that if 
Cesar had pursued the other remains of this 
party with the same ardour with which he pur- 
sued Pompey in person, or if he could have re- 
turned to the capital immediately on the death of 
his rival, they never would have attempted, or 
would have been able to renew the contest; but 
the leisure which he left them, and the ill aspect 
ef his own affairs, for some time encouraged and 
enabled them to recover a strength, with which 
they were yet in condition to dispute the domi- 
nion to which he aspired. 

Cato, who, with the remains of the republican 
party from Epirus, had arrived on the coast of 
Africa, being informed that Varus still held the 
Roman province on this continent in the name 
of the republic, that Scipio was there, and that 
the king of Numidia persisted in his alliance 
against Cesar, determined to join them. At his 
arrival, Scipio and Varus being on bad terms, he 
received an offer of the command from the gene- 
ral voice of the army; but his acceptance being 
likely to increase, rather than to appease animo- 
sities, and the preference being constitutionally 
due to Scipio as of consular rank, Cato had no 
doubts in declining it. Neither Pompey nor 
Scipio ever considered him as their personal 
friend; his services they knew were intended to 
the republic, and would turn against them when- 
ever tney came to make that use of their advan- 
tages to which it is likely they were both inclined. 
Pompey was accordingly ever jealous of Cato, 
and in the last part of the campaign in Thessaly 


5 Cicero ad Attic. lib. xi. ep. 16. 
G Eight hundred citizens were killed in these frays. 
7 Die. Cass. lib xlii. c. 2). 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


| publicly avowed or rewarded by him. 


| 


‘ 


293 


chose to leave him behind on the coast. Scipio 
adopted the same conduct with respect to this 
partizan of the commonwealth, and joined to the 
motives of jealousy, which actuated Pompey, a 
distrust of the inclination recently shown by the 
army to prefer him in the command. In order 
that he might not interfere in his counsels, he 
assigned or suffered him to take a separate station 
at Utica, where he continued to be the principal 
support of the cause. The inhabitants of this 
place were obnoxious to Pompey’s party; and 
having formerly received Curio with the forces 


of Cesar, and ever favoured his interest, were 


now doomed to destruction, but saved at the in- 
tercession of Cato, who, in this extremity of po- 
litical evils, wished not to increase the sufferings 
of mankind by unnecessary acts of revenge and 
cruelty. 

The spirit of the republic thus reviving in 
Africa, and the party being in condition to re- 
ceive all who fled to them for protection, and 
having the alliance of Juba, the most powerful 
prince of that continent, soon became formidable 
both by sea and by land; and if they had chosen 
to invade Italy in the absence of Cesar, were in 
condition to have regained the capital of the em- 
pire. Young Pompey having, at the same time, 
passed into Spain, was favourably received by 
his father’s adherents and clients in that province, 
and profiting by the misconduct of Quintus 
Cassius in those parts, was likely to assemble a 
considerable force. 

Gabinius, who commanded for Cæsar on the 
coast of Illyricum, atteinpting to penetrate by 
land into Macedonia, was cut off by Octavius, 
who had assembled a reninant of Pompey’sarm 
on the confines of that kingdom. Domitius Cal. 
visius, whom Cæsar had appointed to command 
in Bithynia, had received a defeat from Phar- 
naces the son of Mithridates; and in general, 
the state of his affairs in other parts of the empire 
was such, while he himself continued unheard of 
in Egypt, as to raise a suspicion of some misfor- 
tune, supposed to be the only way of accounting 
for his long stay in that country, and for the 
seeming neglect of alt the advantages he had 
gained by a conduct hitherto in every instance 

ecisive and rapid. Pompey had fallen by treache- 
ry in Egypt, and so might Cæsar. [t was now 
the middle of June, and there was no intimation 
received in Italy of the time at which he might 
be expected to return. He had written no let- 
ters since the middle of December, nor had an 
one come from him at Alexandria since the at 
dle of March.8 

The imperfect accounts which remain of what 
passed in Egypt during this interval, are as fol- 
lows: Cæsar, at his arrival, had found the young 
king under the direction of Pothinus; and Arsi- 
not, the sister of the king, in the keeping of 
Ganimedes, two eunuchs who had the care of 
their education. From his manner of receiving 
the present of Pompey’s head, these officers con- 
jectured that they had gained nothing by the 
murder of one of the rivals, who were engaged 
in this contest for the Roman empire; and that 
this action, although it freed Cesar of an enemy 
whom he respected and feared, was not to be 


They 


8 Cicer. ad Att. lib. xi ep. 16 et 17. 


294 


dreaded the interposition of this dangerous man 
in their affairs, more than they had dreaded even 
that of Pompey. 

The troops now in Egypt, were the remains 
of that army with which Gabinius had restored 
the late king, and which he left to secure his 
establishment. They were recruited by desert- 
ers from the Roman provinces, and by banditti 
from Syria and Cilicia. They retained the form 
ofthe Roman legion; but had precluded them- 
selves from any prospect of return to the Roman 
service by a mutiny, in which they had murdered 
the two sons of Bibulus, then proconsul of Syria. 
Numbers of the men were married, and had fami- 
lies in Egypt; they were in the practice of dis- 
posing of the lives and properties of the people, 
of the offices at court, and of the crown itself at 
their pleasure. A party of this insolent rabble, 
then in garrison at Alexandria, and in the cha- 
racter of guards to the person of the king, took 
offence at the parade with which Cesar landed, 
and were offended with the number and show of 
his lictors, by which he secmed to encroach on 
the majesty of their sovereign. Frequent tu- 
mults arose on this account, and numbers of Cæ- 
sar’s attendants were murdered in the streets. 
The westerly winds were then set in, and he 
finding himself detained in a place where he was 
exposed to so much insult, ordered a reinforce- 
ment of troops from Asia, and employed Mithri- 
dates of Pergamus to bring all the forces he could 
assemble there to his relief. The party of Cleo- 
patra applied to him for his protection; she her- 
self, being still in Syria, ventured to pass into 
Egypt, came to Alexandria by sea, and is said to 
have been carried, wrapped up in a package of 
carpet, to the presence of Cesar. 

In this manner, it is pretended that Cesar be- 
came acquainted with the person of this celebrated 
woman, then in the bloom of youth, and possessed 
of those allurements by which she made different 
conquerors of the world, in their turns, for a 
while renounce the pursuits of ambition for those 
of pleasure. She is supposed at this time to 
have become the mistress of Cesar, and to have 
made him, though turned of fifty years, to forget 
the empire, the republic, the factions at Rome, 
and the armies which in Africa and Spain were 
assembling against him. Under the dominion of 
his passion for Cleopatra, he took a resolution to 
carry into execution the destination made by the 
date king, and in the quality of Roman consul 
and representative of the Roman people, to whom 
this office had been entrusted by the will, he 
commanded both partics to lay down their arms, 
and to submit their claims to his own arbitration. 

Pothinus, fearing the total exclusion of the 

oung king, his pupil, in favour of Cleopatra, 
called Achillas with the army to Alexandria, in 
order to defeat Cæsar’s purpose, and obliged him 
to leave the kingdom. This army consisted of 
twenty thousand men inured to bloodshed and 
violence, though long divested of the order and 
discipline of Roman troops. Cesar hearing of 
their approach, and not being in condition to 
meet them in the field, seized and fortified a 

uarter of the town, in which he proposed to de- 
end himself. The young Ptolemy being in his 
power, was prevailed on to despatch two persons 
of distinction with a message to Achillas, signify- 
ing the king’s pleasure that he should not ad- 
vance; but the bearers of this message, as being 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Booz IV | 


supposed to betray the interest of their master, in 
whose name they appeared, were by the orders 
of Achillas seized and slain. Cæsar, however, 
being still in possession of Ptolemy’s person, re- 
presented Achillas as a rebel and an outlaw, an 
still, in the name of the king, issued repeated 
orders and proclamations against him. 

Achillas being arrived at Alexandria, entered 
the city, and endeavoured to force Cæsars quar- 
ters; but being repulsed, took possession of that 
part of the town which was open to him, and 
blocked up the remainder both by sea and land. 
The city being thus divided, the Egyptians and 
Romans fought in the streets, and from the 
houses which they severally occupied. Cesar, 
as he despaired of being able to receive any suc- 
cours by land, endeavoured to keep open his 
communication by sea, and sent pressing orders 
to Syria, Cilicia, Rhodes, and Crete, for reinforce- 
ments of men and of ships. Having early dis- 
covered that Pothinus, who was still in his power, 
cortesponded with the enemy, he ordered him to 
be put to death, continued to strengthen his di- 
vision of the town by additional barriers; and in 
order to prevent surprise, demolished and cleared 
away many of the buildings adjoining to his 
works. Achillas, finding so much unexpected 
resistance, sent for reinforcements, and a supply 
of stores and warlike engines, from every part of 
the kingdom. He traversed, with breast works, 
the streets leading to Cesar’s quarters, and de- 
molishing the houses in his way, effected a chain 
of works parallel to those of Cesar, consisting of 
a parapet and frequent towers. He exhorted the 
Egyptians to exert themselves for the indepen- 
dency of their kingdom; represented to them, 
“That the Romans were gradually assuming 
the sovereignty of Egypt; that Gabinius had 
come as an auxiliary, but acted as a master; that 
Pompey on being defeated in Thessaly, came 
into Egypt,! as to a property which he had a 
right to employ in repairing his ruined fortunes; 
that Pompey had fallen in vain, if Cesar were 
tamely suffered to succeed him; that if this intru- 
der were allowed to keep possession of the city, 
until his succours should arrive from Asia, all 
Egypt for the future must expect to be the slaves 
of the Romans.” 

The danger to which Cesar was exposed, 
arose no less from the remains of the republican 
party now assembling against him in Africa than 
it did from the force with which he was actually 
assailed in Egypt. If Scipio had been apprised 
of his condition in that country, he might ina 
few days have sailed to Alexandria, and in con- 
junction with the Egyptians, who would now 
have accepted of any assistance against Cesar, 
have recovered the fall of their party at Pharsa- 
lia ; but the best opportunities are sometimes lost, 
because it is not supposed that an euemy could 
be so rash as to furnish them. 

The scene in Egypt was frequently changing 
by the intrigues and the treachery of different 
parties in the court. Ganimedes who had the 
charge of the young princess, Arsinoé, being hi- 
therto lodged in the quarters of Cesar, found 
means to make his escape, together with his 
ward ; and finding the troops disposed to lay hold 
of Arsinoé, as a branch of the royal family, em- 


1 Hirtius de Bello Alexandrino. 


Cuap. VII.) 


loyed assassins to put Achillas to death; and, 
A name of the princess, took on himself the 
command of the army. His abilities as an officer, 
which were very considerable, and his bounty, 
secured to him the affection of the soldiers. -He 
tontinued the attack on Cesar’s quarters, in all 
ihe ways which were already begun by his pre- 
Jecessor. The town being furnished with water 
ay subterraneous passages from the neighbouring 
heights, he uncovered the conduits which led to 
Cesar’s division of the town; ard, to render 
these conduits unserviceable, forced into them 
great quantities of brine from the sea. The loss 
however was soon supplied from wells, in which, 
at a moderate depth, the besiegers found plenty 
of fresh water. 

While Cesar thus counteracted the arts which 
were employed to distress him, the eighteenth le- 
gion, with a considerable supply of provisions, 
military stores, and engines of war, being arrived 
on the coast, but unable to reach Alexandria on 
account of the winds, he thought proper to em- 
bark and put to sea, in order to cover this rein- 
forcement, while they made for the port. On this 
occasion he was attacked by the Egyptian fleet ; 
but gained a victory, destroyed a great part of the 
eneniy’s ships, and brought his own reinforce- 
ment safe into harbour. The Egyptians, with 
great ardour, set to work in all the docks on the 
Nile, to repair the loss they had now sustained, 
and were soon masters of a fleet, consisting of 
twenty-two vessels of four tire of oars, five of five 
tire, and many of smaller dimensions. Cesar 
had to oppose them, nine galleys from Rhodes, 
eight from Pontus, five from Lycia, and twelve 
from the coast of Asia. Five were of five tire of 
oars, and ten of four tire. The remainder were 
smaller dimensions, and most of them open. 
With these forces, having once more engaged 
off the mouth of the harbour, the Egyptians 
were again defeated, with the loss of one galley 
of five tire of oars, another of two tire taken, and 
three sunk. The remainder retired under cover 
of the mole, and of the towers of Pharos. 

Soon after this action at sea, Cesar attacked 
the Pharos, forced the enemy to fly from thence, 
most of them swimming across the harbour, killed 
many, and took six hundred prisoners. He forced 
them at the same time to abandon the tower, 
which commanded the entrance of the mole on 
that side. As he pursued them in their flight, 
and as the mole itself became crowded with his 
soldiers, who advanced to push the attack, or who 
eame unarmed from the ships, and all the stations 
around, to witness this scene; the Egyptians see- 
ing these crowds, laid hold of the opportunity, 
mounted the mole, threw those who were upon it 
into confusion, forced them over the quay into 
the water, or into their boats. Cæsar himself en- 
deavoured to escape in this manner, and finding 
that the boat into which he went, being aground 
and overloaded, could not be got off, he threw him- 
self into the water, and swam toa ship. In this 
tumult, he lost four hundred men of the legions, 
and an equal number of the fleet. The Egyptians 
recovered all the ground they had lost, got pos- 
session again of the tower at the head of the mole, 
and of the island which secured their ships. 

In such operations, with various events, the 
parties in Egypt passed the winter and spring. 
Casar still retained the person of Ptolemy in his 
possession, and made use of his name to coun- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


295 


| tenance his own cause, or to discredit that of his 


enemies ; but the king being extremely averse to 
this use being made of his authority, and desirous 
to recover his liberty, entered into a concert with 
some officers of his army, to find a pretence for 
his release. In pursuit of their design, they con- 
veyed secret intimation to Ceesar’s quarters, that 
the troops were greatly disgusted with Ganimedes, 
and that if Ptolemy should make his appearance 
in person, they would certainly submit to his or- 
ders, and commit the whole settlement of the king- 
dom to the arbitration of Cesar. The king was 
instructed to affect a great dislike to this proposal, 
and with tears intreated that he might be allowed 
to remain in the palace. Cesar, either being de- 
ceived by these professions, or believing the name 
of the king to be of little consequence, consented 
to let him depart; but this artful boy, as soon as 
he was at liberty, laid aside his disguise, laughed 
at the supposed credulity of those he had deceived, 
and urged the attack on the Roman quarters 
with great animosity. 

While affairs at Alexandria were in this situa- 
tion, accounts were brought that Mithridates of 
Pergamus, whom Cesar had sent to procure suc- 
cours from Asia, was actually arrived at Pelusium 
with a considerable force; that he had reduced 
that place, and only waited for instructions from 
Cesar how to proceed. These accounts were 
brought to both parties about the same time, and 
both determined to put their forces in motion, 
Ptolemy leaving a proper guard on his works, 
embarked his ariny on the Nile, having a con- 
siderable navigation to make by the different 
branches of that river. Cæsar, at the same time, 
put his army on board in the harbour, and having 
an open course by the coast, arrived at Pelusium 
before the king; and being joined by Mithridates, 
was in condition to take the field against the 
5 army. Ptolemy, to prevent the return 
of Cesar by land to Alexandria, had taken a 
strong post on one of the branches of the Nile ; 
but here, after a few skirmishes, he was attacked, 
defeated, and driven from his station. Endeavour- 
ing to make his escape by water, the barge? 
which carried him being overloaded sunk, and 
himself, with all his attendants, perished. 

Iinmediately after this action, in which the 
Egyptian army was routed and dispersed, Cæsar, 
escorted by a small party of horse, returned to 
Alexandria, and having received the submission 
of the inhabitants, made such arrangements as he 
thought proper in the succession to the kingdom, 
He placed Cleopatra on the throne, in conjunc- 
tion with her younger brother, and to remove any 
farther occasion of disturbance to this settlement, 
he ordered her sister Arsinoé to be transported 
to Rome. He left great part of the army to 
support this new establishment in Egypt, and 
he himself, after this singular interlude, in 
the midst of the conquest of the Roman empire, 
marched with the sixth legion by land into Syria. 
At Antioch, he received such reports of the state 
of affairs, as required his presence in different 
quarters. Nine months were elapsed, since any 
orders or directions had been received from him. 
During this time, the factions of the city, the re- 
laxation of discipline in the army, and the threats 
of invasion from Africa, had placed his affairs in 


2 Hirt. de Bello Alex. 


296 


such a state of hazard, as to urge his immediate 
appearance in Italy and at Rome; but he thought 
it of consequence to his authority to leave no 
enemy behind him in the field,! nor to suffer the 
remains of disorder in any of the provinces 
through which he was to pass. Pharnaces, the 
son of Mithridates, to whom Pompey had as- 
signed the kingdom of the Bosphorus, imagining 
that the civil wars, in which the Romans were 
engaged, made a favourable opportunity for the 
recovery of his father’s dominions, had passed 
with an army into Pontus, and from thence in- 
vaded the lesser Armenia and Cappadocia, which 
had been: separately allotted by the Romans to 
Dejotarus and to Ariobarzanes. At the instances 
of these princes, Domitius Calvisius, who had 
been despatched by Cesar after the battle of 
Pharsalig with three legions to receive the sub- 
mission of the Asiatic provinces, hitherto in the 
interest of Pompey, despatched to Pharnaces a 
messenger, requiring him instantly to withdraw 
his troops from Armenia and Cappadocia; and, 
in order to give the more weight to this message, 
he himself at the same time took the field with 
one Roman legion, together with two: legions that 
had been formed by Dejotarus in the Roman 
manner, and two hundred: Asiatic horse. He at 
the same time ordered Publius Sextius and C. 
Pretorius to bring up a legion which had been 
lately raised in Pontus, and Q. Patisius to join 
him with some light troops from Cilicia. 

These forces being assembled at Camana in 
Cappadocia, the messeuger, who had been sent to 
Pharnaces, returned with an answer, that the 
king was willing to evacuate Cappadocia; but 
that, having a just claim to Armenia, in right of 
his father, he would keep possession of that pro- 
vince until the arrival of Cæsar, to whose de- 
cision he was willing to submit his pretensions. 
Domitius, not being satisfied with this answer, 
put his: army in motion towards Armenia. While 
he advanced, Pharnaces endeavoured to amuse 
him with negotiations, and to put him off his 
guard, by permitting the country to receive hiin 
with all the appearances of peace and security. 
Being arrived at Nicopolis, the capital of Arme- 
nia, he there received. orders from Cesar to march 
into Egypt; but being unwilling to quit his sup- 
posed prey, risked a battle with the forces of Phar- 
naces, was defeated, and obliged to fly with the 
remains of his army, by the route of the moun- 
tains which separated Armenia from the Roman 
province. 

Elated with this victory, Pharnaces, at the time 
of Cæsars departure from Egypt, had returned 
into Pontus, had taken possession of the principal 
towns, and with great severity exercised the so- 
vereignty of the kingdom. About the middle of 
July, Cesar, having despatched Trebonius from 
Antioch with an account of his own operations, 
and with instructions to those who commanded in 
Italy,? went himself by sea to Tarsus, where he 
received, as has been mentioned, the submission 
of Caius Cassius, who waited for his coming ; 
and who, according to the account of Cicero, till 
then was undetermined, whether he should make 
his peace with the victor, or attempt to assas- 
sinate him. 

At Tarsus, Cesar held a convention of the 


1 Hirt. de Bello Alex. 
2 Cicer. ad Attic. lib. xi. ep. 23. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATICN 


{Boor IV. 


principal inhabitants of Cilicia, and from thence 
marched into Cappadocia, stopped at Comana to 
make the necessary arrangements in that pro- 
vince, and continued his route to the frontiers of 
Galatia and Pontus. Hither Dejotarus, who had 
espoused the cause of Pompev, who had fought 
under his banners in Pharsalia, and who, by 
the gift of that unfortunate officer, still re- 
tained the sovereignty of Galatia, came to make 
his submission. He laid down his diadem, and 
the ensigns of royalty ; and, presenting himself 
in the habit of a suppliant, pleaded, that, in the 
late war, the eastern’ part of the empire, being 
subject to Pompey, the princes of that quarter 
had not been free to choose their party; that he 
was himself not qualified to decide in a question 
on which the Roman people was divided ; that he 
thought it his duty to follow the Roman standard 
wherever it was erected, without considering by 
whom it was carried. Cesar, rejecting the plea 
of ignorance or incapacity, insisted, that any 
prince in alliance with the Romans could not be 
ignorant who were consuls in the year that suc- 
ceeded the consulate of Lentulus and Marcellus, 
and who.were actually in the administration of 
the state at Rome; that they could not be ignorant 
who was at the head of the republic, and in pos- 
session of the capital, and of the seat of empire; 
and who of consequence was vested with the au- 
thority of the commonwealth. But that he him- 
self, in the capacity of a private man, was willing, 
in consideration of this prince’s age, his charac- 
ter, and the intercession of his friends, to forgive 
the part which he had taken against him. He 
desired him, therefore, to resume the crown and 
other ensigns of royalty, and to keep possession of 
his kingdom, reserving the discussion of the title, 
by which he held any particular territory, to a 
future day. 

Being joined by a legion which Dejotarus had 
lately formed in the Roman manner, Cæsars 
force now consisted of this, together with the re- 
mains of the two legions that escaped with Do- 
mitius from Nicopolis, and of the sixth, which 
had accompanied himself from Egypt, now re- 
duced by the sword, and by the fatigues of ser- 
vice, to no more than a thousand men. With 
this army he advanced towards Pontus. Upon 
his approach, Pharnaces sent forward a messen- 
ger to present him, in honour of his late victories, 
with a crown of gold, and made offers of sub- 
mission, expecting to appease him, or to fill up 
the time until Cesar should be obliged, by the ne- 
cessity of his aflairs, to give his presence else- 
where. “Come not against me,” he said, “as an 
enemy: I never took part with Pompey, nor de- 
clared war against Cesar. Let me not be treated 
with more severity than Dejotarus, who did 
both.” Cesar replied, that he would listen to 
Pharnaces when he had acted up to his profes- 
sions; that he had forgiven Dejotarus, and many 
others, with pleasure, the injury done to himself; 
but that he could not so easily overlook insults 
which were offered to the Roman state; and that 
he did not pardon wrongs done in the provinces 
of the Roman empire, even by those of his own 
party. “ Your not having joined with Pompey,” 


.| he said, “has saved you from being a partner in 


his defeat, but was not the cause of my victory.” 
With this reply to the messages of Pharnaces, 
Cæsar demanded the instant surrender of the 
kingdom of Pontus, and full reparation of all the 


Crap. VIL] 


damages sustained by any Roman citizen settled 
in that province. Pharnaces professed an inten- 
tion to cumply with these demands; but under 
various pretences delayed the performance of his 
ee fle had fixed on a hill in the neigh- 

ourhood of Ziercla, a place that became famous 
by the victory which his father Mithridates had 
there obtained over a Roman army, under the 
command of Triarius: and in order to secure 
himself, repaired his father’s lines, and seemed to 
be determined to maintain this post. 

Cesar, having lain for some days within five 
miles of the enemy, advanced to an eminence 
separated from the camp of Pharnaces only by 
a narrow valley sunk between steep banks. He 
came upon this ground in the night, and began 
to intrench himself as usual, having a party un- 
der arms to cover the workmen. As at break of 
day the greater part of his army appeared to be 
at work, this seemed to be a favourable opportu- 
nity to attack them; and Pharnaces began to form 
for this purpose, Cesar, imagining that he only 
meant to give an alarm, and to interrupt his work- 
men; even after he was in motion, did not order 
the legions to desist from their work, nor to arm: 
but seeing him descend into the valley, and at- 
tempt to pass it in the face of his advanced guard, 
he soundzd to arms, and was scarcely formed 
when the enemy had passed both banks of the 
vale to attack him. 

The troo)s of Pharnaces began the action with 
an ardour that was suited to the boldness with 
which they had advanced; and Cæsars contempt 
ef their designs had nearly exposed him to a de- 
feat. But the action, which was doubtful every 
where e!se, was decided by the veterans of the 
axth legion, before whom the enemy began to 

ive way, hurried with precipitation down the 
Feativity, and fell into a general ront. Phar- 
naces fled with a few attendants, and narrowly 
escaped being taken. This victory gave Cesar 
an opportunity to compare his own glories with 
those of Sylla, of Lucullus, and of Pompey; and 
was on this account, probably, regarded by him 
with singular pleasure. ‘“ How cheap is fame,” 
he said, “ when obtained by fighting against such 
an enemy ?™4 And in the triumphs which he 
afterwards led in the sequel of these wars, the 
trophies of this particular victory were distin- 
guished by labels, containing these words, “I 
came, I saw, I vanquished.’ 

From the peculiar ostentation of the ease with 
which this victory was obtained, appearing to 
Cesar as a measure of his own superiority to 
Sylla and Pompey, we may suspect that vanity, 
not less than ambition, was the spring of that 
emulation from which he had raised such a flame 
ia the empire.6 Having, by this defeat, extin- 
guished all the hopes and pretensions of Phar- 
naces, he restored Domitius Calvisius to his com- 
mand in that quarter, and to a general inspection 
of affairs in Asia. This province, which had 
furnished a principal supply to the public reve- 
nue of the state, as well as to the private fortune 
of Roman adventurers, was now made to pay 
large contributions in name of arrears of what 


as amt 


Liv. 


3 Ilirtius de Bello Alex. Velleius. Florus. 
Epitome, &c. m. 

4 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib ii p. 185. 

5 The famous words, Veni, vidi, vici. 


6 Sueton. in Vit. Cesaris, c. 47. 
oa 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


297 


had been promised to Pompey, or of forfeiture 
for offences committed against the victorious 
party. 

Cesar, having issued his orders for the contri- 
butions to be levied in Asia, set out by Galatia 
and Bithynia towards Greece, in his way to 
Italy ; he landed at Tarentum, having been near 
two years absent from Rome. Many citizens had 
waited near twelve months at Brundusium, in 
anxious expectation of his coming, and under 
great uncertainty of the reception they were to 
meet with. Cicero, being of this number, set 
out for Tarentum as soon as he heard of Cesar’s 
arrival, and met him on the road. When he 
presented himself, Cæsar alighted from his car- 
riage, received him with marks of respect, and 
continued to walk and to discourse with him 
aside for some time. There is no particular ac- 
count of what passed between them in this con- 
versation. On the part of Cicero, probably, were 
stated the reasons which he assigns, in a letter 
to Atticus, for his conduct before the battle of 
Pharsalia, bearing, that he had been averse to the 
war, that he thought the republic had nothing to 
gain by the victory of either party, and that he 
joined Pompey, more influenced by the opinion 
of others, than decided in his own.? Under these 
impressions, though courted by Cesar, who 
wished to have the credit of his name in support 
of the measures now to be taken at Rome, he 
chose to withdraw to a life of retirement, and de- 
voted his tine to literary amusements aid studies, 
At this time he probably composed most of his 
writings on the suhject of eloquence, as he did 
some time afterwards those which are termed his 
philosophical works.® 

Cesar arrived at Rome in the 


U. C. 796. end of the vear seven hundred and 
O. Faw cath six of the Roman era, in which he 
M. JEmiliugs Bad been named a second time dic- 
Lepidus. tator. ‘This year, as has been re- 

lated, he had passed chiefly in 
Egypt. Being elected, together with M. Æmi- 


lius, consul for the following year, he applied 
himself, for a little time, in the capacity of civil 
magistrate, to the affairs of state; endeavuured to 
restore the tranquillity of the city, which had 
been disturbed in his absence, and to wipe away 
the reproach which the levities of Antony had 
brought on his party. He stifled the unreason- 
able hopes of a general abolition of debts, with 
which Dolabella find flattered the more profligate 
part of the community. He told the people, on 
this occasion, that he himself was a debtor; that 
he had expended his fortune in the public service, 
and was still obliged to borrow money for the 
same purpose. With respect to the general policy 
of the city, and the case of insolvent debtors, he 
revived the laws which he himself had procured, 
about two years before, in his way from Spain to 
Epirus. But while he appeared to be intent on 
these particulars, his thoughts were chiefly oc- 
cupied in preparing to meet the war which the 
remains of the ancient senate and of the republi- 
can party were resuming against him in Africa. 

This province, in which Varus, supported by 
the king of Numidia, had been hitherto able to 
keep his station as an officer of the common- 
wealth, was now become the sole or the principal 


7 Cicer. ad Att. lib. xi-ep. 14. 
& Ibid. lib. xv. ep. 13. 


298 


refuge of the republican party. Three hundred 
citizens, many of them senators, and exiles from 
Italy, as well as settlers in that province, had as- 
sembled at Utica, and considering every other 
part of the empire as under the influence of a 
violent usurpation, stated themselves as the only 
free remains of the Roman republic; held their 


meetings in the capacity of senate and people;. 


authorized, under these titles, the levies that were 
made in the province, and contributed largely to 
supply the expense of the war. Many officers 
of lame and of rank, Labienus; Afranius, Pe- 
treius, as well’ as Scipio and Cato, with all the 
remains they had saved from the wreck at Phar- 
salia, were now ready to renew the war on this 


ground. The name of Scipio was reckoned 


ominous of success in Africa, and that of Cato, 
even if the origin or occasion of the present con- 
test were unknown, was held a sufficient mark 
to distinguish the side of justice, and the cause 
of the republic. 

These leaders of the republican party having a 
considerable force at sea, and having access to 
all the ports, not only of Africa, but likewise of 
Sicily, Sardinia, and Spain, had furnished them- 
selves plentifully with all the necessaries for war.! 
They had mustered ten legions, which, accord- 
ing to the establishment of that time, may have 
amounted to fifty thousand Roman foot. They 
had twenty thousand African horse, a great body 
of archers and slingers, with a hundred and 
twenty elephants, 
by the king of Numidia, who, to the established 
character of his countrymen. for stratagem and 
valour,. joined: the- glory of his late victory over 
Curio; and was supposed to muster, at this 
time, besides numerous bodies.of horse, of arch- 
ers, of slingers, and a great troop of elephants, 
thirty thousand foot, armed and. marshalled, for 
the most part, in the manner of the Roman le- 
gion.? 

The army already in Africa, as well as the re- 
mains of the sea and land forces of Pompey, 
who were: lately arrived from Macedonia, were 
willing, as has been mentioned, to have placed 
Cato at their head. But the established order 
of the commonwealth, for which all the party 
contended; requiring that Scipio, who was. of 
consular rank, should have the preference, Cato, 
who had no more than the rank of pretor, and 
who could not be accessary to the infringement 
of any established or constitutional form, declined 
the command. By this circumstance we are de- 
prived of an. opportunity to judge how far the 
military abilities of this great man kept pace with 
his integrity, judgment, and courage, in civil and 
political affairs. 

Scipio. being. the officer of highest rank in the 
republican. party, and. having the supreme com- 
mand of their forces, notwithstanding that the 
coasts of Italy were exposed’ to his attempts, and 
notwithstanding that the condition. of Cesar 
himself, if his situation at Alexandria. had. been 
known, gave sufficient opportunities for enter- 
prise, took all his ineasures for a defensive war. 

Such was the state of affairs in Africa when 
Cesar, who, with all his military character and 
authority, frequently experienced the difficulty 


1 Dio. Cass. lib, lxii. c. 5. 
2 Appian. de Bello Civile, lib. ii. 
African. 2 


Hirt. de Bello 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


They expected to be joined. 


[Boox IV. 


of commanding mere soldiers of fortune, taught 
to divest themselves of civil principle, or regard 
to public duty, was likely to perish in a mutiny 
of his own army, and to end his career by the 


‘swords which he himself had whetted against 


the republic.. 

The legions, which after the defeat of Pompey 
had been: ordered into Itaiy, becoming insolent in 
the possession of a military power which they 
saw wasto be formed on the ruins ef the com- 
monwealth, and feeling their own importance, 
especially in the absence of their leader, would 


‘not be commanded by subordinate officers; nor 


did they, on the return of Cæsar himself, discon- 
tinue habits of disorder and license which they 
had some time indulged. Being stationed in the 
neighbeurhood of Capua, from whence it was 
expected they should embark for Africa, they 
decamped without orders, and marched towards 
Rome; paid no regard to the authority of Sallust, 
who, in the capacity of prætor, with which he 
had been vested by Cæsar, endeavoured to stop 
them, killed many officers and persons of rank 
who ventured to oppose them, and threw the city 
into great consternation. On the approach of 
this formidable body, Cæsar himself is said to 
have wavered in his resolution. He had some 
troops attending his person,.and there was a le- 
gion which Antony had stationed in the city on 
occasion of the late commotions. With these he 
at first proposed. to meet and resist the mutiny ; 
but he recollected, that even these troops might 


‘be infected with the same spirit of disobedience, 


and that if he were not able to command by his 
authority, and were forced to draw the sword 
against his own army, the whole foundations of 
the power he had erected must fail. While he 
was agitated by these reflections, he sent an of- 
ficer with orders to inquire for what purpose the 
mutinous legions advanced? This officer was 
told, “That they would explain themselves to 
Cesar.’ Having this answer, and expecting: 
their arrival at the gates, he chose that they 
should appear to do by his permission, what they 
were likely to do without it; he therefore sent 
them another message, informing them that they 
had his leave to enter the city with their arms. 
They accordingly came in a body, and took pos- 
session of the field’ of Mars.. ‘There,. contrary 
to the advice of his friends, they were received by 
Cesar himself in person. Being raised on a con- 
spicuous place, they crowded around him; and, 
from many different quarters at once, complained 
of the scanty rewards which they had received,3 
enumerated their services and the hardships they 
had suffered, and with one voice demanded their 
instant discharge.. Cæsar. knowing that the 

only meant to extort some concessions. hich 
they hoped the consideration of the war, which 
was still impending in Africa, would oblige him 
to make; that they were far from wishing to be 
dismissed, or to resign those arms to which they 
owed their own consequence, and on which they 


grounded. their present presurnption, affected to 


comply with their request, owned that their de- 
mand was highly reasonable; adding, that the 
service for which they had been hitherto retained 
was now at an end, and that he was sensible 
they were worn out, and unfit to contend with 
new fatigues. 


3 Dio. Cass. c. 31—55. 


. 


Cuar. VIL] 


Cæsar, in concluding a speech which he made 

to this purpose, employed the appellation of 
Quirites, or fellow citizens; and observed how 
proper it was, that all who had served out the le- 
al time should receive the accustomed dismission. 

n speaking these words, he was interrupted bya 

general cry, that they were no Quirites, but sol- 
diers, willing to serve. It is alleged, that the 
name of Roman citizens,4 though the most re- 
spectable form of address in the political assem- 
blies of the people, carried contempt to these 


military adventurers, and insinuated a state of de-. 


gradation frem that in which they affected to 


stand. An officer whe was prepared for the oc- | 


casion, or who wished to improve this sentiment 
in favour of Cæsar, desired to be heard; made 
an apology for what was past, and offered to 


pledge himself for the duty and future obedience | 


of the troops. He was answered by Cesar, 
That the services of this army were now of little 
moment to him; that as they desired their dis- 
mission, while by their own confession they were 
yet in condition to serve, he had taken his resolu- 
tion, and should instantly dismiss them with the 
usual rewards. ‘No man,” he said, “ shall com- 
plain that in time of need I employed him, and 
now at my ease forget the reward that is due to 
him. Such as continue in the service until the 
public tranquillity is fully restored shall have set- 
tlements in land ; such as have received promises 
of money at any time during the war, shall be 
paid now, or in a little time hereafter with in- 
terest.” He concluded, however, with saying, 
** That as he asked no man to remain in the ser- 
vice, so he should not reject the duty of those who 
were willing to abide by their cvlours; that he 
owed this indulgence to their present requests, 
and to their merit on former occasions.” The 
whole with one voice desired to be comprehended 
in this act of indulgence, and went headlong into 
all the extremec of submission, as they had lately 

one into every excess of disorder and insolence. 

æsar was thus again in full possession of his 
power; but he did not venture to punish the au- 
thors of the mutiny. It was safer to reward such 
as were conspicuous in any particular merit; he 
therefore selected a few to he distinguished by 
immediate effects of his bounty, and put the re- 
mainder in motion towards Africa, where they 
might have an opportunity of earning future re- 
wards and the pardon of past offences; and where 
they might spend against enemies that fury which, 
at every interval of leisure to recollect their pre- 
tensions and their consequence, they were so 
likely to turn against their leader.‘ 

The year was now, according to the vulgar 
computation at Rome, and in consequence of the 
usual intercalations being neglected, nominally 
advanced to the middle of December, but was in 
reality little past the autumnal equinox,® or was 
in the end of September, when Cesar, having 
made the proper arrangements in the city, and in 
the manner related, appeased the mutiny which 


threatened to deprive him of his army, was again. 


in motion to carry the war into Africa. ‘The 
season which was thought unfit for opcrations at 
sea, and which had actually forced his antagonist’s 
ships into port, gave him the opportunity he wished 


4 Quirites, Roman citizens. 
5 Dio. Cass. lib. xlii. c 51—55. 
6 Plut. in Vita Cresaria, p. 154. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


299 


for to effect his passage into that province. He 
knew that the enemy’s fleet could not continue 
to cruize for any time to observe his motions; and 
that he might escape them with the advantage of 
a favourable wind, he had chosen the same oppor- 
tunity, and in the same season, two years before, 
to transport his army into Macedonia against 
Pompey, who trusting to the numbers and vigi- 
lance of his fleet, suffered himself to be surprised, 
and to be dispossessed of a country which he oc- 
cupied with so superior a force. Cæsar having 
gained so much on that occasion, by the rapidity 
of his motions, now made war with many accu- 
mulated advantages of reputation and power, 
which increased his boldness, and facilitated his 
success, 

Having ordered troops and shipping from dif- 
ferent quarters of Italy to assemble at Lillybeum, 
from whence he had the shortest passage to 
Africa, he himself arrived there on what was no- 
minally the seventeenth of December, but in 
reality no more than the thirtieth of September ; 
and although he found no more of his army ar- 
rived than one legion, or five thousand men, of 
the new levies, and six hundred horse, he ordered 
these, notwithstanding, to embark on board such 
ships as were then in the harbour; and if the 
wind had served, would have instantly sailed, 
even with this small force, trusting that he might 
be able to surprise some port on the opposite 
shore, and prepare a safe landing-place for the 
troops that were to follow. But while he con- 
tinued wind-bound at Lillybezum, he was joined 
successively by a number of legions, which he 
ordered to einbark as fast as they arrived ; and, 
that they might be ready to put to sea with the 
first fair wind that served, sent the transports to 
lie under an island near the mouth of the harbour. 

Being in this state of readiness with six le- 
gions, or about thirty thousand foot, together 
with two thousand horse ; and the wind coming 
fair on the twenty-eighth of December, or, as it 
is computed, on the twelfth of October, he him- 
self went on board, and leaving orders for the 
troops that were still in motion towards Lilly- 
bæum to follow him without delay, he set sail for 
the nearest land in Africa. Not knowing of any 
port to which he might securely repair, could 
not, as usual, assign a place of general resort in 
case of separation, and only gave orders to the 
fleet to keep close together; and deferred the 
choice of a landing-place till after he should have 
observed the coast, and seen in what part of it the 
enemy were least guarded against a descent 
Soon after he got to sea a storm arose, which 
dispersed the fleet; he himself, with the ships 
that still kept him company, after being tossed 
four days in a passage of no more than twenty 
leagues, got under the land of the promontory of 
Mercury, and fram thence, to avoid the forces of 
the enemy, which were stationed near Utica and 
round the bay of Carthage, steered to the south- 
ward. 

The coast of Africa, from this cape or promon- 
tory to the bottom of the great Syrtes, over three 
degrees of latitude, or about two hundred miles, 
extends directly to the south. It abounds with 
considerable towns, which, on account of their 
commerce, were anciently called the Emporiz; 
and by their wealth, tempting the rapacity both 
of the Numidians and of the Carthaginians, 

i were long a subject of contention between these 


300 


powers. Adrumetum lay on one side of a spa- 
cious hay, bounded by the head of Clupea on the 
north, and that of Vada on the south. The 
southern coast of this bay contained, hesides 
Adrumetum, the following seaports: Ruspina, 
Leptis, and Thapsus; the bay itself extending 
from the first of these places to the last about 
thirty-six miles. Scipio had secured Adrumetum 
and Thapsus, being the extremity of this line, 
with considerable forces. Tn order to render the 
ales unfit for the reception of an enemy, he 
ad laid waste the country, and had collected all 
the provisions and forage into these and other 
places of strength for the use of his own army. 

Considius being stationed at Adrumetum with 
two legions, and Virgilius with a proper force at 
Thapsus, the ports of Ruspina and Leptis, as 
well as many of the inland towns, were entrusted 
to the keeping of their own inhabitants. But 
these, on account of the general devastations 
lately committed by order of Scipio, were ex- 
tremely disaffected to his party, and inclined to 
favour any enemy against him. 

Cato was stationed at Utica as the last retreat 
of the Roman senate, the centre of all their re- 
sources, and the seat of their councils. 

Scipio had collected the main body of his army 
near to the same place, supposed to be the prin- 
cipal object of any attempt that might be made 
from Italy. Ë 

Labienus and Petreius had separate bodies, at 
proper stations, to guard the inlets of the coast 
round the bay of Carthage; and were so disposed 
of, that they could easily join and cross over land 
to the bay of Adrumetum upon any alarm of an 
enemy, from that side. 

Varus had the direction of the fleet. He had 
kept the sea during summer and on the approach 
of autumn, but had then withdrawn to Utica, 
and laid up his ships for the stormy season. 

Cæsar, however, according to his custom of 
taking opportunities when his enemies were likely 
to be off their guard, venturing to sea, even in 
this season, seems to have had no information to 
direct him on his approach to the coast, besides 
the general report that the enemy were strongest 
and most to be avoided in the bay of Carthage. 
in this belief he passed the headlands of Clupea 
and Neapolis, and stood ia to the bay of Adru- 
metum. Being seen from the shore, he was fol- 
lowed by Cn. Piso from Clupea, with three thou- 
sand Numidian horse, and was received at Adru- 
metum by Considius, with a force greatly superior 
to that which he himself had brought to the coast. 
But so little had he attended to the strength of 
the enemy, or so much was he determined to 

brave it, that he landed near Adru- 

N.C. 6. metum on the nominal first of Janu- 
Jul Cesar TY, or about the middle of October, 
Dictat. 3tio With three thousand foot anda hun- 


M. init. dred and fifty horse. This hazard- 
Lepidus, M. ous step his high reputation seemed 
Tile to require or to justifv. The enemy 


might not be apprised of his present 
weakness, ft being occasioned by the accidental 
separation of his tieet. They were likely to be 
awed by his name, and to remain at a distance 
long enough to let him be joined by the remainder 
of his army. In the mean time he supported the 
courage of his own people, by proceeding against 
the enemy with his usual confidence. 
The garrison of Adrumetum, upon this sud- 


‘THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor IV. 


i den appearance of a force which came to attack 
them, were thrown into some confusion, and 
Considius, instead of taking measures to crush 
so inferior an enemy before he should receive any 
reinforcement, thought of nothing but how to 
secure himself from surprise; shut his gates, 
manned his walls, and placed all the troops under 
his command at their posts of alarm. Cesar, to 
confirm him in this disposition, sent him a sum- 
mons to surrender at discretion; and afterwards, 
at the suggestion of Plancus, who had been in 
habits of intimacy with Considius, endeavoured 
to corrupt or to gain him by an insinuating mes- 
sage; but this officer, being more a man of in- 
tegrity than he had shown himself to be an able 
general, ordered the bearer of the message to be 
put to death, and sent the letter unopened to 
Scipio. 

Cæsar having received no return to his mes- 
sage, and suspecting that his attempt to corrupt 
the commander of the forces at Adrumetum 
might betray his weakness, after only one night’s 
stay in this dangerous situation, determined, on 
the day after he landed, to remove to some place 
of greater security. With this view he niarched 
to the southward, and though harassed in his 
rear by the enemy’s horse, continued his march 
without any considerable interruption or loss. 
As he advanced to Ruspina, a deputation from 
the inhabitants of that place came forward to 
meet him, with offers of every accommodation it 
was in their power to supply, and of an imme- 
diate reception into their town. He encamped 
one night under their walls; but being inclined 
to see more of the coast, and not being in con- 
dition to divide his little force, he proceeded with 
the whole to Leptis, Here he was received with 
equal favour; and having entered the town, took 
measures to protect the inhabitants from the li- 
eentiousness of his own people. 

This was a convenient post for the reception 
of his transports ; and a few of them accordingly, 
having some cohorts of foot and troops of horse 
on board, it being now the third day after he him- 
self had debarked, or about the twentieth of Oc- 
tober, put in to the harbour of Leptis. By the 
report of persons who came in these ships he 
learnt, that numbers of the fleet, after they had 
parted company, appeared to be steering for 
Utica; a course by which they must either run 
into the hands cf the enemy, or lose much time 
before they could correct their mistake, or recover 
their way to the southward. 

In a state of anxious suspense, occasioned by 
these circumstances, Cesar seems to have deli- 
berated, whether it were not proper for him again 
to embark ; and in consequence of his doubts, 
probably, though under pretence of the want of 
forage, he still kept his cavalry on board, and 
with great difficulty continued to supply them 
with fresh water from the Jand. But as soon as 
he determined to keep his footing in Africa, he 
landed his cavalry, and took the necessary mea- 
sures to procure supplies of provisions by sea. 
He sent back the empty transports to receive any 
troops that might be arrived at Lillybeum, and 
ordered ten galleys from the harbour at Leptis to 
cruize for tue missing ships of his last embarka- 
tion. He despatched expresses to Sardinia and 
other maritime provinces, with orders to hasten 
the reinforcements of troops and the supplies of 
provisions which were expected from thence; 


Crap. VIL] 


and having intelligence that the enemy had some 
magazines in the island of Cercina, near the 
coast of Africa, he sent thither Crispus Sallustius, 


the celebrated historian, now serving in hisarmy, 


to endeavour to secure those magazines for his 


use. 

Being determined to keep both the ports of 
Ruspina and Leptis, which the eneiny seemed 
to have abandoned to him, he was now, by the 
arrival of the cohorts which joined him at Leptis, 
in condition to garrison the town with three 
thousand men, while he himself returned with 
the remainder of those who were landed, to keep 
his possession, at the same time, of Ruspina. 
This place being unprovided of every necessary 
for the support of a garrison, he determined to 
try what provisions could be found in the neigh- 
bourhood to subsist his troops till they could be 
otherwise supplied, or enabled to penetrate far- 
ther into the country. For this purpose he ad- 
vanced with the whole of his little army to forage, 
followed by all the carriages that could be assem- 
bled, and had them loaded with corn, wood, and 
other necessaries, to form some species of maga- 
zine for the troops he intended to place in the 
town. As soon as he had effected this service, 
it appeared that he had taken the resolution to 
£0 in person in search of the transports, on board 
of which the greater part of his army was dis 
persed. And with this view having posted ten 
cohorts at Ruspina, he himself, with the seven 
others, that made the whole of his strength now 
on shore, went down to the harbour, which was 
about two miles from the town, and embarked in 
the night. 

The troops that were to be left at Ruspina, 
without the leader, in, whom their confidence was 
chiefly reposed, were aware of their danger; so 
few, surrounded with numerous armics who 
were likely to assemble against them. They had 
now been three days on shore, and the enemy 
had full time to be apprised of their situation and 
of their weakness. ‘The presence of their gene- 
ral had hitherto supported their courage; they 
relied on his abilities to repair the effects whether 
of mistake or temerity; but in his absence they 
lost all hopes, and expected to become an easy 
prey to their enemies. 

Cesar, however, fully determined to put to 
sea, having past. the night on board, still continued 
at anchor; when at break of day being about to 
weigh, some vessels came in sight, and were 
known to be a part of the fleet which he so anx- 
iously looked for. ‘These were soon followed by 
other ships which appeared successively, and 
brought him the greater part of the six legions 
with which he had originally sailed from Lilly- 
beum. Being thus prevented in his intended 
excursion, he returned to Ruspina, and took post 
between the town and the shore. 

In the mean time it appears, that Labienus 
and Petreius, commanding the horse and light 
troops of Scipio's army, in the angle that is formed 
by the promontory of Clupea, between the bays 
of Carthage and Adrumetum, having intelli- 
gence that Cesar was landed, with the utmost 
diligence asseinbled their forees, and inarched to- 
wards the coast from which they had received 
the alarm. 

Cesar had taken a defensive station behind the 
town of Ruspina, the place which he chose for 
the resort -i safe reception of his convoys and 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


301 


reinforcements by sea ; but he was far fromJimit- 
ing his plan of operations to the defence of this 
place. On the fourth or fifth day after his land- 
ing, although by his own account he had yet no 
intelligence of the enemy’s motions, he thought 
proper to continue the alarm he had given, and 
marched from Ruspina with a body of thirty co- 
horts, or about fifteen thousand foot, and four 
hundred horse, to penetrate into the country to 
observe its situation, or to extend the source of 
his supplies. After he had begun his march for 
this purpose, and was about three miles from his 
camp, the parties that were advanced before him 
fell back on the main bedy, and informed him 
that they had been in sight of an enemy. Soon 
after this report clouds of dust began to rise from 
he plain, and about noon an army appeared in 
o: ler of battle. To observe them more nearly, 
Cesar, after he had made the signal for the co- 
horts to form, and to be covered with their hel- 
mets, went forward with a small party to view 
the enemy. He saw bodies of cavalry in every 
part of the field; and from the imperfect view 
which could be had of them, as the air was 
clouded with dust, he supposed their line to con- 
sist entirely of horse. He thought himself secure 
against such an enemy, provided he could sufti- 
ciently extend his front and cover his flanks; and 
for this purpose he divided his small body of 
horse to the right and the left ; and that he might 
not be outlined, diminished the depth to increase 
the length of his ordinary column. In making 
this disposition, however, he had mistaken the 
enemvy’s force; it did not censist, as he supposed, 
entirely of cavalry, but of troops of horse inter- 
spersed at intervals with bodies of foot, and he 
had not observed that considerable detachments 
were sent under cover of the hills to turn his 
flanks, and fall upon his rear. 

Under these disadvantages on the part of Cæ- 
sar, the action began in front hy a scattered 
charge of the Numidian horse, who came in 
squadrons from the intervals at which they were 
placed among the infantry, and advancing at 
full gallop, threw their javelins and darts, and 
presently retired to their former situation. In 
this retreat, under cover of the infantry whose 
intervals they occupied, they instantly rallied, 
and prepared to repeat the charge. 

While Cesar’s infantry was occupied in front 
with this unexpected mode of attack, his horse 
were defeated on the wings; and the enemy, in 
consequence of the disposition they had made, 
were already on his right and left, even ioe 3 to 
close on his rear, and, by the superiority of their 
numbers, were enabled to continue the impres- 
sion they made on every side; his men giving 
way, to shun the arrows and darts of the enemy, 
were pressed from the flanks to the centre, so that 
they were forced into a circle, without any dis- 
tinction of front or rear, and were galled with a 
continual discharge of missiles, which did great 
execution! 

Cesar, who so far had suffered himself to be 
surprised and overreached, in this difficult situa- 
tion, took the benefit of that confidence which his 
known ability and presence of mind ever pro- 
cured- him from his troops. Recollecting that 
the enemy must have weakened their line in 


1 Cesaris copiis in orbem compulsis, intra cancellos 
omnes conjecti pugnare cogebantur. 


302 


every part, by attempting to stretch it over so 
great a circumference, he prevailed on his legions 
again to extend their ranks, ordered the colitis 
to face a:ternately to the right and the left, and 
making a front in both directions, charged the 
enemy on the opposite sides, and drove them in 
both ways to a distance from the ground. With- 
out attempting, however, to improve his advan- 
tage, or to urge the pursuit, he took the opportu- 
nity of the enemy’s flight to effect his own retreat, 
and fell back to the camp behind Ruspina, from 
which he had moved in the morning. 

The speedy march of Labienus and Petreius, 
from a distance which could not be less than 
eighty or a hundred miles, accomplished by the 
fourth or fifth day after the arrival of Cesar, and 
their disposition on the day of battle, to avail 
themselves of their numbers and manner of fight 
ing, was able and spirited. But the eventis suf- 
ficient to show that the use of mere missile 
weapons in the open plain, against troops who 
are armed and disciplined for close fight, although 
it may harass and distress an enemy, cannot 
have any decisive effect. 

In about three days after this encounter, Cesar 
had intelligence that Scipio himself was advanc- 
ing with the whole force of his infantry, consist- 
ing of eight legions, or about forty thousand men, 
and four thousand regular horse: an army which 
he was not in condition to oppose in the field, 
and which obliged him, contrary to his usual 
age to adopt a plan of defence. Ruspina 
ay along the coast, and at the distance of two 
miles from the shore. As his army lay behind 
the town; covering part of the space between it 
and the sea with the fortifications of his camp, he 
threw up an intrenchment from his camp on one 
side, and from the end of the town on the other, 
quite to the shore: so that, by means of the town 
in front, the fortifications of his camp and these 
lines in flank, the whole space between Ruspina 
and the sea was covered with works. And the 
harbour was thus secured from any attempts of 
the enemy. In order to man and defend these 
fortifications, he landed his engines from the gal- 
leys, and brought the mariners to serve them on 
shore. 

The choice of this situation, cooped up in a 
narrow place, exposed to be deprived of any com- 
munication with the country, might, in case the 
enemy had seized their advantage, or in case the 
reinforcements which Cesar had expected from 
the sea, had by any accident been long delayed, 
have exposed him to the greatest calamities. He 
himself would not have neglected to hem in an 
enemy so posted with a line of circumvallation ; 
but the undertaking was too vast for those who 
were opposed to him, and he was suffered in safety 
to wait the arrival of his reinforcements, and to 
collect soine immediate supply of provisions from 
the neighbouring country, as well as to receive 
convoys which he had ordered from every mari- 
time province. 

While Cæsar remained in this post, Scipio ar- 
rived at Adrumetum, and having halted there a 
few days, joined Labienus and Petreius in the 
station they had chosen, about three miles from 
the town of Ruspina. Their cavalry immediately 
overran the country, and interrupted the supplies 
which Cesar derived from thence. ‘The space 
he had inclosed within his entrenchments being 


about six square miles, was soon exhausted even | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox 1V, 


of forage or pasture, and his horses reduced to 
feed on sea weed, which was steeped in fresh 
water, in order to purge it as much as possible of 
its salt. 

To encourage the hopes which Scipio enter- 
tained from all these circumstances, the king of 
Numidia, with a powerful army, was on the 
march, and likely to join him before Cesar could 
receive any considerable addition to his present 
force; but whatever might have been the conse- 
quence of this junction, if it had really taken 
place, it was delayed for some time by one of 
those strokes of fortune to which human foresight 
cannot extend. Publius Sitius, a Roman citizen, 
who had been an accomplice with Catiline in 
his designs against the republic, and who, on this 
account, had fled beyond the reach of the Roman 
power, had assen:bled a band of warriors or law- 
less banditti, at the head of which he made him- 
self of consequence on the coasts of Africa, and 
was admitted successively to join the forces of 
different princes in that quarter. Being now in 
the service of Bogud, king of Mauritania, and 
being disposed to court the favour of Cesar, or 
hoping to make his peace at Rome by means of a 
person so likely to be at the head of the Roman 
state, he persuaded -the king of Mauritania tu 
take advantage of Juba’s absence, and with such 
troops as he had then on foot, to invade the king- 
dom of Numidia. Juba being about to join 
Scipio near Ruspina, when the news of this in- 
vasion of his own country overtook him, found 
himself obliged not only to return on his march, 
but to call off from his allies great part of the 
Numidian light troops, who were already in their 
camp. 

Seg though thus disappointed of the great 
accession of force which he expected to receive 
by the junction of Juba, and though even some- 
what reduced in his former numbers, still con- 
tinued to act on the offensive; and in order to 
brave his enemy, and to receive some species of 
triumph from supposed offers of battle, repeatedly 
formed his army on the plain between the two 
camps. In repeating these operations, he ad- 
vanced still nearer and nearer to Cæsars en- 
trenchments, and seemed to threaten his camp 
with an attack, In return to this insult, or to 
take off its effects, Cesar, knowing the strength 
of his works, affected to hear of the enemy’s ap- 
proach with indifference, and without moving 
trom his tent, gave orders for the ordinary guards, 
which lay without the intrenchments, not to be 
discomposed, but assoon as the enemy approached 
them, to retire behind the parapet with the ut- 
most deliberation; and Scipio, upon this recep- 
tion, when seemingly most bent on assaulting the 
lines, being satisfied as usual with this display of 
his superiority, returned to his camp. 

During these operations, and while Juba was 
still detained in Numidia by the diversion which 
Sitius had occasioned in his kingdom, Cesar had 
frequent deserters from the African army, and 
received deputations from different parts of the 
country, with professions of attachment to him- 
self as the relation of Marius, whose memory 
was still recent and popular in that province. 
Among these advances, which were made to him 
by the natives of the country, he had a message 
from the inhabitants of Acilla, a place situated 
about ten miles from the coast, and equally dis- 
tant from Adrumetum and from Ruspina, offer- 


Cuar. VIL] 


img to come under his protection, and inviting 
him to take possession of their town. The peo- 
ple of this place, like most other towns of the 
province, were extremely disaffected to Scipio 
on account of the severities which he exercised, 
by laying waste their possessions on the approach 
of Cesar ; and as they dreaded a repetition of the 
same measure, they were desirous to put them- 
selves in a posture of defence against him. Cesar 
accepted of their offer, and sent a detachment of 
his army, who turning round the enemy's flank, 
after a long night’s march entered the town with- 
out opposition, Considius having intelligence 
of what was in agitation at Acilla, sent a detach- 
ment at the same time from Adrumetum to se- 
cure the place; but coming too late, and finding 
that the enemy had already entered the town, 
brought forward some more forces on the follow- 
ing day, and endeavoured, but in vain, to dis- 
lodge them. 

While Cesar was thus endeavouring to ex- 
tend his quarters in Africa, and to enlarge the 
source of his subsistence, Crispus Sallustius suc- 
ceeded in the design upon which he had been 
gent to the island of Cercina, and was able to 
furnish a considerable supply of provisions from 
thence. There arrived at the same time from 
Allienus, at Lillybeum, a large convoy and flect 
of transports, having on board two entire legions, 
the thirteenth and fourteenth, together with eiglit 
hundred Gaulish cavalry, a thousand archers and 
slingers, and a large supply of provisions. As 
soon as these troops were landed, the transports 
were sent back to Lillybeum, in order to receive 
the remainder of the army which was still ex- 
pected from thence. These supplies and rein- 
forcements at once relieved Cesar’s army from 
the distress which they suffered ; and by so great 
an accession of strength, amounting to twelve 
thousand men, put him in condition to break 
from the confinement in which he had some time 
remained, and to act on the offensive. 

The first object upon this change in his affairs, 
was to seize upon some rising grounds in the 
e ae of Ruspina, which Scipio had 
neglected to occupy, and from thence to pursue 
such advantage as he might find against the ene- 
my. For this purpose, he decamped after it was 
dark, on the supposed twenty-sixth of January, 
or tenth of November, and turning by the shore 
ruund the town of Ruspina, arrived in the night 
on the ground which he intended to occupy. 
This was part of a ridge, which runs parallel to 
the coast, at a few miles distance from the shore, 
and which, on the north of Ruspina, turns in 
the form of an amphitheatre round a plain of 
about fifteen miles extent. Near the middle of 
this plain stood the town of Uzita, on the brink 
of a deep marshy tract, which is formed by the 
water of some rivulets that fall from the moun- 
tains, and spread upon the plain in that place. 
Scipio had posted a garrison in the town, and 
had occupied the ridge on one side of the am- 
phitheatre beyond the marsh, but had neglected 
the heights, of which Cesar now took possession. 
It seems, that on these heights there remained a 
number of towers, or a species of castles con- 
structed by the natives in the course of their own 
wars. In these Cesar was furnished with a num- 
ber of separate lodgments, which he joined by lines, 
in order to continue his communication with the 
camp he had left, and with the port of Ruspina. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


303 


He had, in one night, made a considerable 
progress in these works, and being observed at 
day-break, Scipio, in order to interrupt him, 
advanced into the plain, and formed in order of 
battle, about a mile in the front of his own en- 
campment. Cesar, notwithstanding this move- 
ment of the enemy, did not at first think it neces- 
sary to interrupt his works; but Scipio seeming 
to come forward with intention to attack him, 
while so great a part of his army was at work, 
he ordered the whole under arms, still keeping 
the advantage of his ground on the heights. Some 
parties of cavalry and light troops came near 
enough to skirmish between the two armies, and 
Labienus being advanced on the right beyond 
the main body of Scipio’s forces, Cesar sent a 
detachment round a village to attack him, and 
obliged him to fly in great disorder, after having 
natrowly escaped being entirely cut off. This 
flight of Labienus spread so great an alarm over 
Scipio’s army, that the whole, with precipitation, 
retired to their camp. Cesar returned to his post, 
and without any farther interruption, continued 
to execute the works he had already begun. As 
soon as these were finished on the following day, 
he again formed in order of battle, to return the 
defiance which the enemy had so often given him, 
while he lay in the lines of Ruspina; and ob- 
serving that Scipio remained in his camp, he 
marched on to the town of Uzita, which lay be- 
tween the two armies. Scipio being alarmed for 
the safety of this place, at which he had de- 
posited some part of his magazines, advanced to 
sustain the troops he had posted in the town; 
and Cesar, believing that an action was likely to 
follow, made a halt, with the town of Uzita be- 
fore his centre, having both his wings extended 
beyond it to the right and the left. Scipio, not 
to extend his front beyond the walls of the town, 
drew up his army in four lines, consisting of 
many separate bodies interspersed with elephants ; 
but as Cesar did not choose to attack the town, 
supported as it was by Scipio’s army, neither did 
Scipio choose to expose any part of his line by 
advancing beyond it. Both armies having re- 
mained in this posture till sun-set, returned at 
night to their respective camps. 

Cesar still persisting in his design to oblige the 
enemy to hazard a battle in defence of Uzita, pro- 
jected double lines of approach from his present 
camp to the town. As the place was accessible 
to the enemy, and when their army should be 
drawn up in order of battle, might be made a 
part of their line, it was impossible for Cesar to 
invest the town, or even to approach the walls 
without hazard of betng attacked on his flanks 
from the field, as well as in the centre from the 
town itself. In order to cover the approach which 
he intended to make to the walls, he carried on 
from his camp on the hills two intrenchments on 
the right and the left, forming a lane of sufficient 
breadth to embrace the town. Between these 
parallel lines his troops advanced to the walls 
with perfect security, and under cover from any 
attacks that might be made on their flanks. As 
soon as this lane was effected to within the ne- 
cessary distance of the walls, he threw up in front 
a breast work opposite to the ramparts of the 
town, and from thence began to construct the 
works that were usually employed in the reduc- 
tion of fortified places. 

During the dependance of this siege, both par 


304 


ties received great reinforcements. Scipio was 
joined by the king of Numidia, who having re- 
pelled the enemy who attempted to invade his 
own kingdom, now came with three bodies of 
regular infantry, formed in the manner of the 
Roman legion, eight hundred heavy armed or 
bridled cavalry, with a great multitude of light or 
irregular troops. Cesar’s army, on the appear- 
ance of this new enemy, were much discouraged; 
but on seeing that Scipio, even after he was 
joined by the king of Numidia, still remained 
on the defensive, they resumed their former con- 
fidence, and were themselves soon after rein- 
forced by the arrival of two more legions, the 
ninth and the tenth, who on their first approach 
to the coast, mistook for an enemy some galleys 
which Cesar had stationed off the harbour of 
Thapsus, and under this mistake stood off again 
to sea, where they suffered many days from sick- 
ness, want of provisions, and of water. 

These legions having been the principal an- 
thors of the late mutiny in Italy, are said to have 
now come without orders, intending to evince 
their zeal, and to court their general’s favour at 
a time when their service might be not only ac- 
ceptable, but necessary to his safety. ‘The prin- 
cipal historian of this war,' however, relates only, 
that Cesar having observed tribunes and centu- 
rions of these legions to have occupied entire 
transports with their own equipage, to the ex- 
clusion of the troops which were then so much 
wanted for the service, he took this opportunity 
to execute a piece of justice, which he had 
thought proper to remit, or to defer on a former 
occasion. ‘That he dismissed several officers of 
these legions from the service, with the following 
terms of reproach: “For you, who have incited 
the troops of the Roman people to mutiny against 
the republic, who have plundered the allies, and 
been useless to the state; who, in place of soldiers, 
have filled transports with your servants and 
horses; who, without courage in the field, or mo- 
desty in your quarters, have been more formidable 
to your country than to her enemies, I judge 
you unworthy of any trust in the service of the 
republic, and therefore order you forthwith to be 

one from the province, and to keep at a distance 
from all the stations of the Roman army.” 

The other incidents, which are dated by histo- 
rians during the dependence of the siege of Uzita, 
do not serve to make us acquainted with its pro- 
gress, or with the detail of its operations. ‘The 
season we are told was stormy, and Casar’s army, 
in order to crowd the more easily on board of the 
transports, had left great part of their equipage 
behind them in Sicily, and were now without 
any covering besides their shields, exposed to 
heavy rains and hail, accompanied with thunder 
and appearances of fire, which, to their great 
amazement, instead of the ordinary flashes of 
lightning, became stationary, and for a sensible 
time continued to flame on the points of their 
spears. While this storm continued, the ground 
upon which they lay was overflowed with water, 
or washed with continual torrents from the hills. 
Cæsar, nevertheless, persisted in the attack of 
Uzita, and seemed still to flatter himself that the 
defence of this place would lay the enemy under 
some disadvantage, which might furnish him with 


1 Hirtius. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox IV. 


an opportunity to decide the war. The armies 
were accordingly often drawn out in order of bat- 
tle, and were present at partial engagements 
of their cavalry or irregular trocps, but without 
any general action. 

In the midst of the great expectations which 
must have attended the operations of this siege, 
Cesar had one of the many occasicns, on which 
he was ever so ready to commit his genius, his 
reputation, and his life, in acts of seeming teme- 
rity, which persons of inferior ability may admire, 
but never can safely imitate. Varus, with a fleet 
of fifty galleys, had surprised and burnt the greater 
part of his shipping at Leptis, and was in chase 
of Acquila, who, with an inferior squadron, was 
flying before him to the southward, Cesar ap- 
prehended that the enemy, in consequence of 
this advantage, if not speedily checked, must 
soon be masters of the sea, so as to cut off all his 
supplies and reinforcements from the coasts. He 
knew that reputation gained or lost on small oc- 
casions, often decides the greatest affairs; and 
that adverse circumstances, which if suffered to 
accumulate, may obscure the brightest fortnne, 
can, if seasonably encountered, by daring efforts 
of resolution and courage, be actually turned to 
advantage. He instantly, therefore, went in per- 
son to Leptis, from whence he put off in a barge, 
and having overtaken his own squadron, which 
was flying before the enemy, he ordered them to 
put about, and steer direetly against their pur- 
suers. Varus was struck with this unaccount- 
able change in the conduct of his enemy, and 
supposing them to have come in sight of some 
powerful support, he fled in his turn, and crowd- 
ing sail, steered forthe port he had left. Cæsar 
gave chase, overtook some of the heaviest sailers 
that fell astern, and forced the remainder to take — 
refuge in the harbour of Adrumetum. Here he 
presented himself with an air of defiance; and 
having given this turn to the state of his affairs 
at.sea, and left peremptory orders to his fleet not 
to resign the adam tage which they had gained 
by the enemy’s flight, he returned to the attack 
of Uzita, In sith actions the fortunate often 
succeed, because the attempt appears to be im- 
possible; and men of great ability may no doubt 
venture into the midst of difficulties, with which 
persons of inferior capacity are by no means fit to 
contend. 

Cesar, notwithstanding that by this stroke of 
fortune he preserved his communication with the 
sea, and received considerable supplies from thence, 
as well as from the country around him, in which 
he was favoured by the natives ; yet being greatly 
circumscribed by the superiority of the enemy’s 
light troops, he suffered considerably in his camp 
from scarcity of provisions; and being in his pre- 
sent operations against Uzita, to fight with a nu- 
merous army, in detail, behind the walls of a 
fortified town, without being able to engage them 
upon equal terms in any decisive action, he took 
his resolution to discontinue the siege, and to re- 
move to a more advantageous station; or to un- 
dertake some enterprise, in which he was more 
likely to succeed. He accordingly decamped in 
the night, set fire to the wood and straw that was 
amassed upon the ground, left the lanes he had 
fortified with so much Jabour, and marching by 
the shore, placed his baggage between the co- 
lumn of the army and the sea, and thus covered 
it from the enemy, who he expected were to fol- 


Crap. VIL) 


low him by the ridge of hills which overlooked 
the line of his march. 

The retreat of Cæsar was sufficient to confirm 
the leaders of the republican party, in the hopes 
they had formed of being able to wear him out 
by a dilatory war. They followed him accord- 
ingly by the heights, and having observed that 
he stopped at Agar, a town which he held by 
the affections of the natives, they took post on 
three several heights, at the distance of about six 
miles from his camp. In this position, they were 
not able to hinder him from making in the con- 
tiguous villages and fields a considerable acqui- 
sition of provisions and forage, which greatly 
relieved his army; but, to prevent his farther 
excursions into the country, and. to secure its 
produce to their own use, they sent two legions, 
under the command of Caius Mutius Reginus, 
with orders to take possession of the town of Zeta, 
which lay about twenty miles from Agar, and on 
the right at some distance beyond their present 
camp. Cesar had intelligence from the natives, 
that these troops were frequently employed abroad 
in collecting provisions and forage, and that they 
might eastly be cut off, and the town be surprised. 
He accordingly formed a design for this purpose ; 
and with a view to the execution of it, removed 
from the plain of Agar, and fortified a strong 
camp on a height nearer to the enemy. Here 
leaving a sufficient guard for his lines, he put the 
remainder of the army in motion in the night, 
passed by the enemy’s stations, and surprised 
the town of Zeta, which he entered by break of 
day, while the greater part of the garrison had 
left the place in perfect security, and were scat- 
tered in foraging parties over the neighbouring 
country. Having placed a sufficient detachment 
to secure this new acquisition, he set out upon 
his return, eile a disposition, not to pass the 
enemy unobserved, which was no longer practi- 
cable, but to force his way through any impedi- 
ment they might oppose to his march. The night 
could no longer be of any advantage to him; he 
set out, therefore, by day, leading the governor 
of Zeta, with P. Atrius, who belonged to the 
association of Utica, his prisoners, together with 
some part of Juba’s equipage, and a train of 
camels, loaded with plunder which he had taken 
in the place. 

The enemy were by this time apprised of his 
motions. Scipio was come out of his lines ; and, 
not far from Cesar’s route, had posted himself in 
order of battle. Labienus and Afranius, with a 
great power of cavalry and light infantry, had 
taken possession of some heiglits under which he 
was to pass, and were preparing to attack him on 
his flanks, and on his rear. Casar was aware 
of these difficulties ;*it was nevertheless neces- 
sary to encounter them. He trusted, that the 
head of his column must force its way; and he 
placed his whole cavalry to cover the rear of his 
march. When he came abreast of the cnemy, 
being assailed, as usual, by the African cavalry 
with peculiar efforts of agility and cunning, he 
made a halt; and in order, by some great exer- 
tion, if possible, to clear his way, and procure to 
his people some respite in pursuing the remain- 
der of their march undisturbed, he ordered the 
legions to lay down the loads which they usually 
carried, and to charge the enemy. They accord- 
ingly put all the Africans to flight ; but no sooner 
resumed their march, than me were again at- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


303 


tacked, and repeatedly forced to renew tke same 
operations. They had already been detained 
four hours in passing over a hundred paces, or 
less than half a quarter of a mile, from the place 
at which they were first attacked. The sun was 
setting, and the enemy were in hopes of being 
able to oblige them to halt for the night on a 
field, which was destitute of water. Scipio, for 
this purpose, still kept the position which he had 
taken in the morning, and from thence observed, 
and occasionally supported, the operations of the 
light troops. 

Cesar perceived the danger to which he must 
be exposed, if he should halt on this ground, and 
saw the necessity of continuing his march ; but 
observing, that as often as the cavalry in his rear 
was engaged, whether they repulsed or gave way 
to the enemy, he was obliged to stop in order to 
support them, or to wait till they had recovered 
their station, he thought proper to change his dis- 
position, brought forward the horse to the head 
of his column, and substituted a chosen body of 
foot in the rear, who although under an inces- 
sant discharge from the enemy, continued to 
move, and enabled him, though stowly, to effect 
his retreat with a regular and uninterrupted pace. 
In this manner, notwithstanding the great dan- 
= to which he had been exposed, he regained 

is camp, near Agar, with a very inconsiderable 
loss. 

Having thus got possession of Zeta, a post on 
the flank or rear of the enemy, Cesar formed 
successive designs on Vacca, Sarsura, and Tys- 
dra, places sinularly situated round the scene of 
the war. His design on the first of these places 
was prevented by the Numidians, who, having 
intelligence of his coming, entered before him, 
and reduced the town to ashes. Both armies be- 
ing in motion for some days, he forced Sarsura ; 
but advancing to Tysdra, with the same inten- 
tion, he thought proper, upon observing the 
strength of the place, not to make any attempt 
against it; and, on the fourth day, having re- 
turned to his station near Agar, the enemy like- 
wise resumed their former position. 

While Cæsar remained at this post, he re- 
ceived a reinforcement of four thousand men, con- 
sisting chiefly of the sick, who had been left 
hehind the army in Italy, and who now joined 
their legions, together with a body of four hun- 
dred horse, and a thousand archers and slingers. 
With this accession of strength, he formed a de- 
sign on Tegea, which was occupied by a detach- 
ment of the enemy, supported by the whole of 
their army, encamped at the distance of a few 
miles behind the town; and having advanced, in 
hopes to force or surprise it, about eight miles on 
the plain, he was observed by Labienus and 
Scipio, who came forward at the same time, 
about four miles beyond their own station, in or- 
der to sustain their detachment. These consist- - 
ing of four hundred horse, divided themselves on 
the right and the left of the town; and the main 
armies being formed in order of battle, with this 
post between them, Cæsar gave orders, that the 
party of horse, which ventured to show them- 
selves without the walls of ‘Tegea, should be 
attacked. The events which followed this first 
encounter, brought into action several detached 
bodies, both of horse and of foot, that were sent 
from the different sides to sustain the parties en- 
gaged, but did not lead to any general or decisive 


306 


action; and both armies retired at night to their 
respective lines. 

In many of these partial engagements which 
happened in this campaign, Cesar’s cavalry gave 
way to that of the Africans. In one of their 
flights Cesar met an officer, who was running 
away with his party, and affecting to believe him 
under a mistake, took hold of his bridle, “ You 
are wrong,” he said, “ for it is this way you must 
go to the enemy.” Even the legions stood greatly 
in awe of the Numidian irregulars, by whom 
they were, on many occasions, surprised with 
some new feat of agility or cunning; and they 
were considerably intimidated by the number and 
formidable appearance of the elephants, which 
they knew not how to withstand. 'To fortify the 
minds of his men, and to prepare them to meet 
such antagonists, Cæsar had a number of ele- 
pees brought to his camp, armed and harnessed 
ike those of the enemy. He exercised his horses 
in presence of these animals, taught his men in 
what places to strike, where the beast was vul- 
nerable, and how to elude their fury. He like- 
wise made some change in the usual exercise of 
the legion, such as might the better qualify his 
men to baffle or repel the artful and desultory at- 
tacks of the Numidians; and as he frequently 
employed his regular troops in foraging parties, 
he inured them by degrees to depart from their 
usual forms, without losing their courage, and to 
recover from any casual disorder into which they 
might be thrown. To show his own confidence 
in the superiority of his men, he frequently made 
an offer of battle on equal ground; and, in the 
manner that was, in their turns, common to both 
parties, drew a species of triumph from his ene- 
my’s declining to fight. 

In these operations the campaign drew on to 
the middle of February, and had lasted about five 
months; during this time Cesar had surmounted 
very great difficulties, arising from the dispersion 
of his fleet, the uncertainty of his communication 
with Italy, and the scarcity of provisions in a 
country laid waste or possessed by his enemies. 
He was now become master of many towns on 
the coast, and ofa considerable extent of territory; 
but from the many objects which required his at- 
tention in different parts of the empire, he re- 
mained under great disadvantage in supporting a 
dilatory war, in which it appeared that Scipio 
and Labienus were resolved to persist. In order, 
if possible, to break their measures, he formed a 
design upon Thapsus, their principal garrison 
and sea-port on the southern boundaries of the 
province. With this view he decamped in the 
night from his station near Agar, and directing 
his march to the southward, arrived before Thap- 
sus on the following day. As he had formerly, 
in order to secure his convoys against any at- 
tempts from thence, blocked up the harbour with 
his ships, he now seized all the avenues which 
led to the town, and invested it completely from 
the land. 

Scipio and Juba, greatly interested to preserve 
a place of so much consequence, put their armies 
in motion, and, to counteract that of Cesar, fol- 
lowed him by the route of the hills. Seeing him 
invest Thapsus, they took their first posts on two 
separate heights, about eight miles from the 
town. Cesar, with his usual industry and des. 
patch, executed lines both of circumvallation and 
of countervallation. 


“THE, PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


By these lines, which were | 


[Boog 1V. 


in the form of a crescent, terminating at both 
ends in the sea, he embraced the town, and pro- 
posed to encamp his army between them. Scipio 
was sufficiently acquainted with the ground, to 
know, that there was near the harbour a narrow 
channel, or salt-pit, separated from the sea, by a 
second beach or sand-bank, which it was possible 
the enemy might not have observed, and by 
which he might still have an entry to the town, 
or be able to throw in his succours. He there- 
fore advanced with his whole army; and while 
he made a feint to interrupt Cesar in the works 
he was carrying on, sent a party to occupy the 
sand-hank, or to throw themselves into the town 
of Thapsus by that communication. Cesar, 
however, had already taken possession of this 
passage, and shut it up with three several in- 
trenchments or redoubts, so placed as to secure it 
at once against any sallies from the garrison, as 
well as attacks from the field. 

The combined army, on being thus disap- 
pointed of any communication with the town of 
Thapsus, remained all the day under arms, and 
gave the enemy an opportunity, which he often 
affected to desire, of terminating the war by a 
battle. But Cesar, either because he had not 
sufficiently fortified his intrenchments to secure 
his rear from the town, or because he would not 
choose that moment to fight, when the enemy 
was prepared to receive him, made no advances 
to engage on that day. 

Scipio, remaining on the same ground all night, 
took his resolution to encamp, and at break of 
day appeared to be forming the usual intrench- 
ments. Cesar had then probably completed his 
own works; and thinking the opportunity fair, 
or being determined not to suffer the enemy to 
effect a lodgment in his presence, he made the 
usual signal to prepare for action ; and leaving a 
proper force to man his intrenchments against the 
town, drew out the remainder of his army to the 
field, ordered part of his fleet to get under sail, to 
turn a head-land in the rear of the enemy; and 
as soon as the action began in front, to alarm 
them with shouts, or a feint to land and to attack 
their rear. Having made these dispositions, he 
put his army in motion, and betng come near 
enough to distinguish the posture of the enemy, 
observed, that their main body was already in 
order of battle, with the elephants disposed on the 
wings; and that numerous parties were still at 
work on the lines, within which they meant to 
encamp. He halted and made a disposition suit- 
able to that of the enemy. His centre consisted 
of five legions, his wings each of four; the tenth 
and second legions composed the right wing, the 
eighth and ninth composed the left. Five co- 
horts, together with the cavalry, were selected to 
support the archers and slingers that were to be- 
gin the attack on the enemy’s elephants. Cæsar 
himself went round every division on foot, ex- 
horted the veterans to be mindful of the high 
reputation which they had to support, and recom- 
mended to the new levies to take example from 
those who were already possessed of so much 
glory, and who were instructed by long expe- 
rience in the arts to be practised in the day of 
battle against an enemy. 

While Cesar was thus employed, the legions 
of Scipio appeared to reel; they at one time re- 
tired behind their imperfect works, again changed 
their purpose, and came back to their ground. 


Cuar. VIIL) 


Many of Cesar’s officers, and many of the vete- 
ran soldiers, well acquainted with this sign of 
distraction and irresolution, called aloud for the 
signal of battle. But he himself, possibly to 
whet their ardour, as well as to keep them in 
breath, again and again halted the whole line. 


In this situation of the two armies, Cæsar is | 


said to have been seized with a fit of the epilepsy, 
to which he was subject; a disease which, al- 
though it attacks the seats of understanding and 
of sense, and suspends, for a time, all the exer- 


cises of them in the most alarming manner, does ; 


not appear from this example to impair the facul- 
ties, nor to be inconsistent with their highest 
measures, and their ablest exertions. The report, 
however, is not consistent with the narration of 
Hirtius This historian, although he allows that 
the troops, in the last part of their motion to en- 
gage, acted without any orders ; and while Cesar 
wished them to advance more deliberately, that 
they forced a trumpet on the right to sound the 
usual charge, and that the whole line, without 
any other signal, overwhelming by force all the 
officers who ventured to oppose them, continued 
to rush on the enemy: yet he observes that 
Cesar, instead of being out of condition to act, 
took his resolution to excite an ardour which he 
could not restrain; and, in order that he might 
bring his whole army at once with united force 
into action, commanded all his trumpets to sound, 
and himself, mounting on horseback, rode up 
with the foremost ranks. The battle began on 
the right, where the enemy’s elephants being 
galled with a shower of arrows and stones, reeled 
back on the troops that were posted to sustain 
then, trod part of the infantry under foot, and 
broke over the unfinished intrenchments in their 
rear. 

The left of Scipio’s army being thus routed, 
the main body soon after gave way; and the 
whole fled to the camp which they had formerly 
occupied; but in their flight, being thrown into 
the utmost confusion, and separated from their 
officers, they arrived at the place to which they 
fled, without any person of rank to rally or com- 
mand them. In this state of consternation they 
threw down their arms, and attempted to take 
refuge in the camp of their Numidian ally. But 
this being already in possession of the enemy, 
they continued their flight to the nearest heights; 
and being without arms, awaited their fate in a 
state of a despair. When they saw the 
troops that pursued them advance, they made 
signs of submission, and saluted the victors with 
a shout; but in vain. They were instantly’at- 
tacked by the victorious army of Cæsar, who, 
though affecting clemency on former occasions, 
now seemed to be actuated with a paroxysin of 
rage and thirst of blood; contrary to the orders 
and entreaties of their general, they put the whole 
of this unarmed and defenceless multitude to the 
sword. ‘They are said, on this occasion, to have 
seized the opportunity of satiating their revenge 
on some of their own officers who had offended 
them. One was actually murdered, another, 
being wounded, fled to Cesar for protection ; and 
many persons of distinction, senators and Roman 
knights, observing their danger, thought proper 
to withdraw to some place of concealment, till the 
present fury of the troops should abate. 

In the beginning of this memorable action, the 
garrison of ‘Thapsus had sallied, but were re- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


307 


pulsed with loss. "When the contest was over, 
Cesar, to induce the town to surrender, displayed 
the trophies of victory; but had no answer. On 
the following day, he drew up his army under 
the walls of the town; and in that place pro- 
nounced his thanks to the legions for their beha- 
viour, and, without any reproach for the disorder 
and cruelty of the preceding day, declared what 
were to be the rewards which he intended, at a 
proper time, for the veterans; and, by some im- 
mediate mark of his favour, distinguished a few 
who had signalized themselves. He appointed 
Caius Rubellius, with three legions, to continue 
the siege of Thapsus, and Cn. Domitius with two 
others to reduce Tysdra; and having sent for- 
ward M. Messala, with a body of horse on the 
toad to Utica, he himself followed with the re- 
mainder of the army.! 

At Utica were assembled from every part of 
the empire, all who were obnoxious to Cæsar, or 
who, from a zeal for the republic, had refused to 
submit to his power. On the third day after the 
battle, towards night, a person who had escaped 
from the field of battle coming to Utica, this un- 
happy convention of citizens was struck with the 
greatest alarm. Under the effects of their con- 
sternation, they met in the streets, ran to the 
Pes and again returned to their habitations. 

hey crowded together in the public places, and 
separated by turns, and passed the night in ex- 
treme confusion. Cato represented to them, that 
the accounts they received might be exaggerated, 
and endeavoured to compose their fears. As 
soon as it was day he called them together, and 
laid before them a state of the place, or the works, 
military stores, provisions, arms, and numbers of 
men; and having commended the zeal, which 
they had hitherto shown in defence of the repub- 
lic, exhorted them now to make the | use 
of the means they had still of defending them- 
selves, or at least of making their peace in a body: 
declared, that if they were inclined to submit to 
the victor, he should impute their conduct to ne- 
cessity ; but if they were determined to resist, he 
should reserve his sword forthe last stake of the re- 
public, and share with them in the consequences of 
a resolution, which he should love and admire. He 
contended, that they were now toconsider them- 
selves as assembled, not in Utica, but in Rome; 
“ that the force of the republic was yet great, and 
might still, as on former occasions, rise again from 
its ruins; that the forces of Cesar must still be 
distracted or separate, to make head against ene- 
mies who were appearing in different parts of 
the empire; that in Spain his own army had 
deserted from him, and the whole province had 
declared for the sons of Pompey; that Rome, the 
head of the commonwealth, was yet erect, and 
would not bend under the yoke ofa tyrant; that 
his enemies were multiplying while he seemed to 
destroy them; that his own example should in- 
struct them; or rather, that the courage which he 
exerted in the paths of guilt and of infamy, should 
animate those who were about, either tu die with 
honour, or to secure for their country blessings 
in which they themselves were to share.” At 
this assembly, a resolution was accordingly taken 
to defend the city of Utica, and numbers of 
slaves, who were set free by their masters for this 
purpose, were armed and inrolled. But it soon 


1 Hirt. de Bello Af. 


308 


appeared, that the assembly consisted of persons 
unable to persist in this resolution, and who were 
preparing separately to merit the favour of the 
conqueror by an entire and early submission. 
They soon made a general profession of this de- 
sign, expressed their veneration of Cato; but 
confessed, that they were not qualified to act 
with him in so arduous a scene; assured him, 
that if they were permitted to send a message to 
Cesar, the first object of it should be to intercede 
for his safety ; that, if they could not obtain it, 
they should accept of no quarter for themselves. 
Cato no longer opposed their intentions; but said, 
that he himself must not be included in their 
treaty; that he knew not of any right Cesar had 
to dispose of his person; that what had hitherto 
happened in the war only served to convict Cæ- 
sar of designs which were often imputed to him, 
and which he always denied. He will now, at 
least, own, he said, that his opponents had reason 
for all the suspicions they suggested against him. 

While matters were in this state, a party of 
Scipio’s horse, which had escaped from the field 
ef battle, appeared at the gates of the town, and 
‘were with difficulty, by Cato’s intreaties, hindered 
from putting every Roman, who.offered to sub- 
‘mit to Cesar, as well as the inhabitants of the 
place, to the sword. Being diverted from this 
act of violence, and furnished with some money 
for their immediate subsistence, they continued 
their retreat. Most of the senators, who were 
present, teok shipping and escaped. Laucius 
Cesar undertook to carry to his kinsman a peti- 
tion from such of the Roman citizens as remained; 
-and said to Cato, at parting, that he would gladly 
fall at the victor’s feet to make his peace. To 
which Cato answered, “If I were disposed to 
make my peace with Cesar, I should repair to 
him in person; but I have done him no wrong, 
iam not an object of his pardon, and shall not 
‘request what it were insolence in him to offer me 
-as a favour.’ He, however, on this occasion, ob- 
served to his own son, that it would not become 
him to leave his father. “At a fit time,” he 
said, “ you will put yourself on the victor’s mer- 
cy, but do not take part in public affairs: the 
times do not afford a station in which it would 
be proper for you to act.’ “And why,” said 
the young man, “ will you not take the benefit 
of the victor’s clemency for yourself, as well as 
for me? “I was born to freedom,” he said, 
* and cannot, in my old age, be reconciled to ser- 
vitude. For you these times were destined ; and 
‘t may become you to submit to your fate.” 
Having passed the day in aiding his friends to 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION, &c. 


[Booz IV 


procure the means of their escape, he went te 
the bath, and supped as usual, without any marke 
of dejection or affectation of ease; and being re- 
tired to his chamber, after some time which he 
employed in reading, he killed himself. His at- 
tendants, upon hearing a noise which alarmed 
them, burst open the door, and would have dressed 
the wound, but he tore it up with his hand, and 
expired in making this effort! Every one, 
through the day, had been anxious to know what 
was the design which Cato covered under the 
appearance of so much concern for others, and 
of so little care for himself. On the first report 
of his death, multitudes crowded to the door of 
his quarters, and gave the most unfeigned demon- 
strations of dejection and sorrow. ‘The colony 
of Utica, though originally hostile to his cause, 
and still in the interest of Cæsar, ordered a pub- 
lic funeral, and erected his statue in the place of 
interment, 

Cato died in the vigour of life, under fifty ; he 
was naturally warm and affectionate in his tem- 
per; comprehensive, impartial, and strongly pos- 
sessed with the love of mankind. But in his 
conduct, probably became independent of passion 


of any sort, and chose what was just on its own 


account. He professed to believe, with the sect 
whose tenets he embraced, that it might or might 
not, in particular circumstances, be expedient for 
a man to preserve or lay down his life; put that, 
while he kept it, the only good or evil competent 
to him consisted in the part which he took, as a 
friend or an enemy to mankind. He had long 
foreseen the dangers to which the republic was 
exposed, and determined to live only while he 
could counteract the designs that were formed 
against it.? The leader of the successful party 
thought proper to apologize for himself, by decry 
ing the virtues of Cato; but the bulk of mankind, 
in his own and the subsequent ages, were equally 
pleased to extol them; and he is a rare example 
of merit, which received its praise even amidst the 
adulation that was paid to his enemies ;? and 
was thought, by the impartial, equally above the 
reach of commendation or censure. 


1 Dio. Cass. Appian. Plutarch. 
Africano. 

2 Sed verè laudari ille vir non potest, nisi hac orna- 
ta sunt; quod ile ea, que nunc sunt, et futura viderit, 
et ne fierent contenderit, et facta ne videret, vitam re- 
liquerit. Cicer. ad Att. lib. xii. ep. 4. 

3 See the writings of Virgil and Horace. 

4 Cujus glorie neque profuit quisquam laudando, 
nec vituperando quisquam nocuit, quum utrumque 
summis præditi fecerint ingeniis. Frag. Livii ex 
Hieronym. Prolog. lib. xi. in Oscam. 


Hirtius de Bello 


> THE 


HISTORY 


OF 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


OF THE 


ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


BOOK V. 


CHAPTER I. 


Arrival of Caesar at Utica—Wreck of the Republican Party—Servility of the Roman People— 
Magnificence and Administration of Cesar—His last Campaign in Spain—Death of the 
elder of Pompey’s Sons—Cesar’s Return, Triumphs, Honours, and Policy in the State— 
Spirit of the times—Source of the Conspiracy against Cesar—Its Progress—Death of Cesar. 


WHEN Cesar was informed, on his march 
from Thapsus, that of all the principal men of 
the opposite party, Cato alone remained at Utica 
to receive him, he was at a loss to interpret his 
conduct, and possibly might have found it difficult 
to determine how he should deal with an antago- 
nist, whom he neither could reconcile to his usur- 
pation, nor treat as a criminal. The character 
of generosity towards his enemies, which Cesar 
al assumed, laid him under some obligation, in 
point of consistency, to treat the person of Cato 
with respect; and the opportunity he would have 
had, in that instance, of exercising his clemency 
with so much lustre, could not have escaped hiin. 
In the busiest scene of his life he had not any 
po object, or any party quarrel to maintain ; he 
þad repeatedly sacrificed personal animosity to 
ambition; and when he took the field against the 
republic, he had few private resentments to grati- 
fy: he knew that an affectation of reluctance in 
shedding the blood of Roman citizens, the reverse 
of what remained so much an_object of horror in 
the memory of Sylla, was the likeliest means to 
cover the effects of this destructive war, and to 
reconcile the people to his government. In the 
bulk of his fellow citizens he had found either 
rubbish to be removed from the way of ambition, 
or tools with which he might work in removing 


it; they were the dupes of his policy, or open to` 


the imputations of sinister designs or unreason- 
able obstinacy which he cast on his opponents. In 
Cato, perhaps, alone, he found a measure of esti- 
mation, which, with all his abilities and pros- 
perous fortune, he could not neglect, and a pene- 
tration which, without management for his per- 


devised for the ruin of the commonwealth. Cato 
therefore alone, of all his antagonists, he possibly 
hated beyond the possibility of a reconciliation.§ 

Cesar was in reality, according to the repre- 
sentation of his friend Curio, neither sanguinary 
nor scrupulous of blood, but in the highest degree 
indifferent to both, and ready to do whatever was 
most likely to promote his designs. As he had 
already sufficiently provided for the reputation of 
clemency, he now made a freer use of his sword, 
and in proportion as he approached to the end of 
the war, or saw the means of extirpating those 
who were most likely to disturb his government, 
he dipped his hands with less scruple in the blood 
of his enemies. As he pursued Pompey into 
Egypt, under a certain impression that the death 
of this rival was material to the establishment of 
his power in Italy, so it is likely that he now 
hastened to Utica as a place at which he might 
crush the remains of the republic. On hearing 
of the death of Cato, however, he made use of an 
expression which served to discover the resolution 
he had taken with respect to him. “I must be 
allowed,” he said, “to envy this man the splen- 
dour of his death, as he has refused me the honour 
of preserving his life.” Having passed through 
Uzita and Adrumetum, which surrendered to 
him on his march, and being met by numbers 
who came to make their submission, he arrived 
at Utica in the evening, and continued all night 
without the gates. 

Marcus Messala had already taken possession 


5 Et cuncta terrarum subacta preter atrocem ani 


-son, treated his politics as a system of villany | mum Catonis. 


9 


310 


of the town. Cesar entered on the following 
day; and having ordered the people to attend 
him, made a speech, in which he thanked the 
colony of Utica for their faithful attachment to 
his cause; but spoke of three hundred Roman 
citizens, who had contributed to support the war 
against him, in terms which sufficiently showed 
that he was no longer to court the reputation of 
mercy. Appian says, that as many of them as 
fell into his hands were by his order put to death. 
Hirtius relates, that he only confiscated their 
effects, and that this sentence was afterwards 
changed into a limited fine, amounting in all to 
two hundred thousand sestertia, or about a mil- 
lion and a half sterling, to be paid in three years, 
at six separate payments. l . 
From this general wreck of the republican 
arty in Africa, the leaders continued their flight 
in different directions. Many who surrendered 
themselves were spared; but most of those, who, 
in their attempts to escape, fell into the enemy’s 
hands, either killed themselves, or by Cesar’s 
order were put to death.! Afranius and Faustus 
Sylla having joined a party of cavalry that fled 
by Utica from the field of battle, were intercepted 
by Sitius, and defending themselves, with the 
loss of many of their party, were taken. In a 
few days after this event, these prisoners, under 
pretence of a riot in the camp, were put to death. 

Scipio, with Damasippus, T'orquatus, and 
Plætorius Rustianus, endeavoured to escape by 
sea into Spain. After being tossed some days 
with contrary winds, they ventured to put into 
Hippo, on the coast of Numidia, where they met 
with a squadron of Cæsar’s fleet, commanded by 
Sitius. Their vessel being boarded, they were 
asked with impatience, where is the general? 
Scipio himself made answer, the general is well; 
and in uttering these words stabbed himself, and 
went headlong into the sea. 

Juba, with Petreius, having escaped from the 
field of battle at Thapsus, lay concealed by day, 
and continued their flight in the night towards 
Zama, a place which, at the breaking out of the 
war, the king of Numidia had fortified, and made 
the residence of his women, and the repository of 
his treasure and most valuable effects He knew 
that if he should be taken captive by a Roman 
general, the consequence was being led in tri- 
umph, and possibly afterwards put to death. He 
had therefore provided this retreat in case of an 
unfortunate issue to the war ; intending it merely 
as a place at which he might die in state. With 
this intention he had raised, near to the royal 
palace, a pile of wool on which he meant to con- 
sume whatever could mark or adorn the victor’s 
triumph; and it was his purpose, while he set 
these materials, and with them the whole city, on 
fire, to commit himself and his women to the 
flames. 

The inhabitants of Zama had some intimation 
of this design, and, upon the approach of the 
king, not choosing to celebrate by such an offer- 
ing the exit of a vanquished prince, shut their 
gates and refused him admittance. They like- 
wise had the humanity to refuse sending the 
women to him, on a supposition that he meant 
they should be a sacrifice to his jealousy, or be 
involved in his ruin. 


om. 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xliii. c. 12, Appian. de Bello Civili, 
tib. ii. Florus, Eutropius, Hirtius. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


„Juba finding himself thus disobeyed, even by 
his own subjects, retired to one of his country 
seats; and having ordered a splendid entertain- 
ment, at the close of it he and Petreius fell to- 
gether by their own swords. The kingdom of 
Numidia was converted into a Roman province, 
and the government of it was committed to Sal- 
lust the historian. The son of the king, yet an 
infant, was reserved to make a part in the pro- 
cession of the victor’s triumph.2 The furniture 
and ornaments of his palaces were sold, and pro- 
duced a considerable sum of money. Great con- 
tributions were raised at the same time in those 
parts of Africa which had been already subjected 
to the condition of a Roman province. The in- 
habitants of Thapsus were made to pay fifty 
thousand Roman sestertia ;3 those of Adrumetum, 
eighty thousand; those of Leptis and Tysdra 
paid the quotas exacted from them in corn and 
oil. 

Cesar having, in this manner, closed a scene 
in which he had destroyed fifty thousand of his 
opponents, who might be supposed to be the most 
obstinate adherents of the republican party, and 
having joined to the empire a territory which, by 
the report afterwards made in the assembly of 
the people, was fitted to yield an annual tribute 
of three hundred thousand medimni of grain, 
and three hundred thousand weight of oil,4 he 
embarked at Utica, on the fifteenth of June, and 
in three days after he sailed from thence, arrived 
in the island of Sardinia : a part of his dominions, 
said Cicero, which he had not hitherto seen. 
Before his departure from Africa he had made 
necessary arrangements respecting the army ; and, 
although he had recently availed himself of the 
services of the legions who had mutinied in Italy, 
and seemed to have forgotten their offence, yet 
he took the benefit of the present prosperous 
state of his affairs to indulge his resentment; and 
that they might not communicate with factious 
spirits in Italy, have leisure to over-rate their ser- 
vices, or to set an example to the rest of the army 
of exorbitant demands, he ordered them to be 
broke and disbanded in Africa. The remainder 
of the troops who had given him the victory in 
that country, he ordered, after receiving the ne- 
cessary refreshments, to proceed in the voyage to 
Spain, where he had still some resistance to ap- 
prehend from the sons of Pompey. 

Leaving the army therefore to pursue this 
course, Cesar himself took shipping again in the 
island of Sardinia on the twenty-ninth of June; 
and, being some time detained by contrary winds, 
arrived at Rome on the twenty-sixth of the fol- 
lowing month ;5 having since the time of his de- 
parture from Italy, on the expedition to Africa, 
in which he had so many difficulties to surmount, 
spent no more than six months. 

The news of Cesar’s victory had been some 
time received. The principal supports of the re- 
public had fallen at ‘Thapsus and at Pharsalia ; 
and as the sons of Pompey, though favourably 
received by their late father’s adherents in Spain, 
were not yet supposed to be in condition to resist 
the victor, the revolution in his favour seemed to 
be complete, and every part of the Roman em- 
pire subjected to his power. Nothing now re- 
mained, but that he should take possession of 


ne 


2 Plut. in Ces. 3 About 400,000. 
4 Plut. in CEs 5 Hirtius de Bell. Afr. e. 86. 


Caar. L.f 


that sovereignty to which he aspired, and in 
which, it soon after — that to him there 

s a charm, even in the court that was paid to 
as well as in the possession of power. 
atever distress the surviving members of 

a commonwealth may have suffered on the loss 
their relations and friends, who had fallen in 
e late bloody transactions of this war, or what- 
ever mortification they may have felt on the loss 
of their own political consequence, as partners in 
the empire of the world, no symptoms of aversion, 
or unwilling submission, appeared on the part of 
the people; all orders of men hastened to pay 
their court to the victor, and, by their servile adu- 
lations, to anticipate the state of degradation into 
which they were soon to be reduced. 

In the name of the senate and people, a conti- 
nual thanksgiving of forty days was decreed for 
the late victory at Thapsus. The power of dic- 
tator was conferred on Cesar for ten years, and 
that of censor, which gave the supreme disposal 
of honours and rank in the commonwealth, and 
which, on account of the abuse to which it was 
subject, had been some time abolished, was now 
der a new title, that of Prefectus Morum, re- 
stored in his person. At the same time the no- 
mination of some of the officers of state, formerly 
elected by the people, was committed to him. He 
was, in the exercise of these powers, to be pre- 
ceded by seventy-two lictors, triple the number 
of those who used to attend the dictators, and he 
was to enjoy, for life, many of the inferior pre- 
rogatives, which, under the republic, served to 
distinguish the first officers of state ; such as that 
of giving signals for the horses to start, or for 
the other sports to begin at the games of the cir- 
cus; and that of delivering his opinion before any 
one else in the senate. It was likewise ordered, 
that he should have in the senate a gilded chair 
of state, placed next to that of the consul; and, 
as if it were intended to join ridicule with these 
extraordinary honours, it was decreed that as the 
conqueror of Gaul, in his triumphs he should be 
drawn by white horses, to put him on a foot of 
equality with Camillus, to whom this distinction 
had been given, as the restorer of his country 
from its destruction by the ancestors of that na- 
tion; that his name should be inserted, instead 
uf that of Catullus, as the person who had re- 
built the capitol; that a car, like that of Jupiter, 
should be placed for him inthe same temple, and 
near to the statue of the god himself; and that 
his own statue, with the title of a demi-god, 
should be erected on a globe representing the 
earth. 

It is said that Cæsar refused many of the ho- 
nours which were decreed to him; but in these, 
which he no doubt encouraged, or favourably re- 
ceived, he sufficiently betrayed a vanity which 
but rarely accompanies such a distinguished su- 

eriority of understanding and courage. Though 
In respect to the ability with which he rendered 
men subservient to his purpose; in respect to the 
choice of means for the attainment of his end; in 
respect to the plan and execution of his designs, 
he was far above those who were eminent in the 
history of mankind; yet in respect to the end 
which he pursued, in respect to the passions he 
had to gratify, he was one merely of the vulgar, 
and condescended to be vain of titles and honours, 
which he has shared with persons of the meanest 
capacity. Insensible to the honour of being 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


my conduct.§ 
the more I will endeavour to use them properly. 
} 


311 


deemed the equal in rank to Cato and Catullus, 
to Hortensius and Cicero, and the equal in repu- 
tation to Sylla, to Fabius, and to the Scipios, he 
preferred being a superior among profligate men, 
the leader among soldiers of fortune, and to ex- 
tort by force from his fellow citizens a deference 
which his wonderful abilities must have made 
unavoidable, even if he had possessed the mag- 
nanimity to despise it. 

Cesar, soon after the distinctions now men- 
tioned were bestowed upon him, addressed him- 
self to the Roman senate and people, in a speech 
which, being supposed to proceed from a master, 
was full of condescension and lenity, but from a 
fellow citizen was fraught with insult and con- 
tumely. A speech delivered on so remarkable an 
occasion was likely to be in substance preserved ; 
and under the government of his successors, by 
whom he was numbered with the gods, it was 
not likely to get abroad but with a view to do 
him honour. ‘ Let no man,” he said, “imagine 
that, under the favour of my exalted situation, I 
am now to indulge myself in acts, or even in ex- 
pressions, of severity; or that I am to follow the 
example of Marius, of Cinna, of Sylla, or of most 
others, who, having subdued their enemies, dropt, 
in the height of their fortune, that character of 
moderation, under which they had formerly en- 
ticed men to their party. I have appeared all 
along in my true character, and now, in the 

| height of my power, have no change to make in 
The more my fortunes advance, 


My sole object, while I endeavoured to rise above 
my enemies, was to secure for myself a situation 
in which I might exercise virtue with dignity 
and safety; and I shall not now imitate the ex- 
amples which I myself often have condemned, nor 
sully the splendour of my victories by an improper 
use of my power. 

“ Asthe favours of fortune are won by vigour, 
so they are preserved by moderation, and should 
be most carefully preserved by those who enjoy 
the greatest share of them. I covet sincere afiec- 
tion and genuine praise; not the adulation that 
springs from fear and hatred. These are my 
serious thoughts, confirmed on reflection ; and 
you shall find me governed by them in all the 
actions of my life. I do not mean to be your lord 
or your tyrant, but your chief and your leader. 
When the state has occasion for my authority, 
you shall find in me a dictator and a consul; but 
on ordinary occasions, no more than a pnivate 
man. 

“I have spared many who were repeatedly in 
arms against me. Ihave shut my ears to the in- 
formations of the hidden designs of others, and 
have destroyed all letters and papers which could 
lead to a detection of my secret enemies. To 
most of you I can have no resentment; and I do 
not incline to raise prosecutions against those 
who may think the lore incurred my displea- 
sure. ings Tipton with me from this time 
forward in confidence, as children with their fa- 
ther. l reserve to myself the power of punishing 
the guilty, as far as justice requires; but will pro- 
tect the innocent, and reward the deserving. 

“ Let not these appearances of military force 


alarm you. The troops which are quartered in 


6 Dio. Caere. lib. xliii. e. 13 


312 


the city, and which attend my person, are des- 
tined to defend, not to oppress the citizens ; and 
they will know, upon every occasion, the limits 
of their duty. 


“ Uncommon taxes have lately been levied in: 


the provinces and in Italy, but not for my private 
use. I have in reality expended my fortune, 
and contracted immoderate debts in the public 
service; and, while I myself have borne so great 
a part of the burden, am likewise made to bear 
the blame of what others have exacted.” He 
concluded with assurances, that the arrears which 
were due to the troops, and the other debts of 
the public,! should be paid with the least possible 
inconvenience to the people. 

In this speech was conveyed, not the indignant 
and menacing spirit of Sylla, who despised the 
very power of which he was possessed; but the 
conscious state and reflecting condescension of a 
pane who admired and wished to recommend 

is greatness. The Roman people, in former 
instances of usurpation, had experienced sanguin- 
ary and violent treatment, and they now seemed 
to bear with indifference the entire suppression 
of their political rights, when executed by hands, 
that refrained from proscriptions and murders. 
But as Cesar seemed to think his present eleva- 
tion the highest object of human wishes, there 
were some who thought their present subjection 
the lowest state of degradation and misery. 
“ What should I do in such times?” says Cicero 
to his correspondent, ‘‘books cannot always amuse 
me. I go into any company, affect to be noisy, 
and laugh, to conceal my sorrow.’’2 

The populace were gratified with shows, pro- 
cessions, and feasts, and with the gratuities that 
were given them in money. Cesar had four 
separate triumphs in one month. The first for 
his conquest of Gaul, at which Vercingetorix, 
the prince of the Arverni, by a custom cruel and 
odious in all its parts, was led in chains, and 


afterwards put to death. The second for his. 


victory in Egypt, at which Arsinoé, the sister of 
the queen, was exhibited in fetters, and by her 
youth and beauty excited a general compassion, 
which preserved her life. A third for the defeat 
of Pharnaces, where the trophies, as has already 
been mentioned, were marked with the words, 
Icame, 1 saw, I vanquished. The last for the 
overthrow of the king of Numidia, in which the 
infant son of that prince was carried in procession. 
This captive having received a literary education 
at Rome, became afterwards, according to Plu- 
tarch, an historian of eminence.’ 

Although triumphs were not obtained for the 
defeat of fellow citizens, and nothing in these 
processions had reference to Pompey, yet the 
effigies of many considerable senators, who had 
fallen in the civil war, were carried before the 
victor’s chariot. 

In these processions, Cesar is said to have 
carried to the treasury, in all, sixty thousand ta- 
lents in money ;4 two thousand eight hundred and 
twenty two chaplets or crowns of gold, weighing 
twenty thousand four hundred and fourteen 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xliii. c. 15. &c. 

2 Cic. ad Familiar. lib. ix. ep. 26. Miraris tam ex- 
hiliratam esse servitutem nostram. Quid ergo fa- 
ciam ?—ibi loquor quod in solum ut dicitur, et gemitum 
in risus maximos transfero. 

3 Plut. in Cas. Dio. Cass. 4 About 10,000,0002. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boog V. 


pounds.šS He at the same time distributed to 
each private man of the army, five thousand de- 
narfi or drachmas, about one hundred and sixty 
one pounds sterling: to each centurion, double: 
to the tribune, quadruple :. to the people, an attic 
mina of a hundred drachmas, or about three 
pounds four shillings and seven pence a man.6 

The soldiers, who walked in these processions, 
in chaunting their ballads and lampoons, took the 
usual petulant liberties with their leader, alluded 
to the disorders of his youth and to the crimes of 
his age; and showed that they were not deceived 
by the professions which he made of a zeal for 
the rights of the people. “If you observe the 
laws,” they said, “you shall be punished ; but if 
you boldly transgress them all, a crown is your 
reward” These appearances of freedom in the 
troops, perhaps, flattered the people with some 
image of the ancient familiarity of ranks: which 
subsisted in times of the republic; but the license 
of mere soldiers of fortune brings too often the. 
reverse of freedom to the people ; and in whatever 
manner those of Rome were qualified to judge 
of their own situation, it is likely that the pa- 
geants, which now entertained them,. were part 
of the means which Cesar employed to reconcile 
them to his usurpation, and to divert their 
thoughts from the prospect of a military govern- 
ment with which they were threatened.. Farther 
to secure these effects, he continued to multiply 
shows and pyblic diversions. He himself, at the 
close of his triumphs, walked in procession at 
the opening of magnificent edifices he had built, 
and in his return at night from this ceremony, 
attended by multitudes of the people, was lighted 
by torches borne on elephants.” At the same 
time he erected theatres, and exhibited dramatic 
performances in different parts of the city,.and 
amply indulged the taste of the populace for en- 
tertainments of every sort.. He introduced not 
only gladiators to fight in single combat, but par- 
ties on foot and on horseback to engage in con- 
siderable numbers on opposite sides, and to 
exhibit a species of battles. Among these he 
showed the manner of fighting from elephants, 
having forty of these animals properly mounted, 
and the manner likewise of fighting at sea, hav- 
ing vessels on a piece of water which was formed 
for the purpose. In most of these shows, the 
parties who were engagéd, being captives or 
malefactors condemned to die, gave a serious ex- 
hibition of the utmost efforts they. could make in 
real fight. 

Among the other articles of show and expense 
which composed the magnificence of these enter- 
tainments, are mentioned the blinds or awnings 
of silk, a material then of the highest price, which 
were spread over the public theatres to shade the 
spectators from the sun, and to enable them un- 
disturbed, from under these delicate coverings, to: 
enjoy the sights of bloodshed and horror which 
were presented before them, Two human sacri- 
fices, we are told, were at the same time offered. 
up in the field of Mars, by priests specially named 
for this service. Of this. shocking exhibition, the 
historian does not explain the occasion. The. 
whole was attended by a feast, to which the 


5 The Roman pondo consisted of ten ounces, about 
800 0002. 

6 Appian. Sueton. 

8. Dio. Cass. lib. xliii.. c. 24 


7 Dio. Cass. Suetonius. © 


Char. 1.) 


people were invited, and at which twenty thou- 
sand benches or couches were placed for these 
numerous guests.? So great was the concourse 
from the country to this entertainment, that mul- 
titudes lay in the streets, or lodged in booths 
erected for the occasion. Many were trampled 
under foot, and killed in the crowds. Among 
those who perished in this manner, two Roman 
senators are mentioned. 

This method of gaining the people, by flatter- 
ing their disposition to dissipation and idleness, 
was already familiar at Rome. It had heen em- 
ployed under the republic in procuring favour, 
and in purchasing votes by those who aspired to 
the offices of state. It was now intended by 
Cesar to effect the revolution he had in view, 
and to reconcile the populace of Rome, who had 
for some time governed the empire, to the loss of 
their political consequence, in being deprived of 
a a which they were no longer worthy to 
hold. It is probable, that the arms of Cæsar 
were not more successful in subduing those who 
opposed him in the field, than these popular arts 
were in gaining the consent of his subjects to the 
dominion he was about to assume. 

From this time forward, Cesar took upon him- 
self all the functions of government, and while he 
suffered the forms of a senate and popular asseni- 
blies to remain, availed himself of their name and 
authority without consulting with either, affixing 
without scruple the superscription of particular 
senators to the decrees or edicts, which he sent 
abroad into the provinces.!0 “ My name,” says 
Cicero, “is often prefixed to public deeds which 
are sent abroad, as having been moved or drawn 
up by me, and which come back from Armenia 
or Syria as mine, before I have ever heard of 
them at Rome. Do not imagine I am in jest; 
for I have letters from persons, whose names | 
never heard of before, thanking me for the ho- 
nour I have done them in bestowing the title of 
king.” u 

qually absolute in the city as in the provinces, 
Cæsar placed whoever he thought proper on the 
rolls of the senate ; and, without regard to birth, 
declared some to be of Patrician rank. He re- 
called some who had been driven into exile for ille- 
gal practices, and reinstated in their ranks man 
whom the censors had degraded.!2_ In all the elec- 
tions, he named half the magistrates, or in a man- 
date, addressed to the tribes, took upon him to di- 
rect the people whem they were to choose.'3 In the 


9 Plut. in Ciesar. 

10 It is well known, that the senatiis consulta bore 
the names of the senators by whom they were pro- 
posed. 

11 Ante audio senatiis consultum in Armeniam et 
Syrian esse perlatum, quod in eain sententiam fac- 
tuin esse dicatur, quam omnino mentionem ullam de 
ea re esse factam. Atque hoc noliin me jocare putes, 
nam mihi scito jam, a regibus ultimis allatas esse li- 
teras, quibus mihi gratias agant, quod se mea senten- 
tia reges appellaverins; quos ego non mado reges 
appellatos, sed omnino nato nesciebam. Cicero ad Fa- 
mihares, lib. ix. ep. 15. 

12 At this time, he with much difficulty was per- 
suaded, at the intercession of the senate, to permit tlie 
return of Caius Marcellus, who at Athens, on his way 
into Italy, was, upon motives which have not been ex- 
plained, assassinated hy one of bis own attendants. 
This Marcellus was consul, U. C. 703. 

13 The words of Casar’s mandate were, “ Cæsar 
dictator tribui, &c. &c. commendo vobis illum, &c. &c. 
ut vestro suffragio suam dignitatem teneat. Sueton. 
in Cesar. 

2R 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


313 


exercise of so much power, he became reserved and 
difficult to access, familiar only with persons 
whom he himself had raised, and who had talents 
amusing or serviceable, and without any preten- 
sions to alarm his jealousy.!4 Nevertheless, if the 
Romans could have overlooked what was offen- 
sive in his manner, or illegal in the powers which 
he had thus usurped, many of his acts were in 
themselves, as might have been expected from so 
able a personage, worthy of a great prince, and 
tending to reform abuses, as well as to facilitate 
the summary proceedings of the despotical power 
he had assumed. 

Among the first acts of Cesar’s reign, the law 
of Sylla, by which the children of the proscribed 
had been excluded from holding any office in the 
state, was repealed. The judiciary law, which 
had undergone so many alterations, and which 
in its latest form, admitted some of the inferior 
class of the people!s on the roll of the judges or 
jurymen, was now reformed, so as to limit the 
exercise of the judicature to the senators and 
knights. A scrutiny was made into the titles of 
those who had been in the practice to receive 
corn at the public granaries, and their numbers 
were greatly reduced.'6 Of the corporations 
which had been multiplied for factious purposes, 
many were abolished, and the origina! compa- 
nies of the city alone were permitted to remain. 
Many punishments, for the better restraining of 
crimes, were increased. To the ordinary punish- 
ment of murder, was joined the confiscation of 
the whole estate; to that of some other crimes, 
the confiscation of one half. The kalendar was 
reformed upon the principles established by the 
Egyptian astronomers. he reckoning by lunar 
months, and the use of irregular intercalations, 
which had been frequently made for party and 
political purposes, had so deranged the terms, that 
the festivals to be observed by reapers did not 
happen in harvest, or those of the vintage in 
autumn. To restore them therefore to their pro- 
per dates in the kalendar, no less than an inter- 
calation of sixty-seven days, or above two months, 
was required. This intercalation was made in 
the present year, between the months of Novem- 
ber and December, so that the name of Decem- 
ber was transferred from the time of the autumnal 
equinox, to that, where it still remains, of the 
winter solstice. 

Under the government of Cesar, sumptuary 
laws were framed to restrain the expense of the 
table; and he himself expressed a great zeal to 
correct the abuse which prevailed in this article. 
Being sensible that Italy was greatly depopulated 
by the distractions cf the commonwealti, and b 
the devastation: of the late civil war, he too 
measures to restore the numibers of the people, 
both by detaining the natives of Italy at home, 
and by inviting foreigners to settle. He gave 


14 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib.iv. ep 9. Ib. lib. vi. ep. 14 

15 The tribuni Ærarii. 

16 The leaders of faction under the republic, and no 
one probably more than Cesar hiinself, in order to in- 
crease the numbers of their partizans. had augmented 
this list.and it was undoubtedly become a great abuse. 
Dion. Cassius says, it was atthis lime reduced by 
Cesar to one half Suetonius specifies the number 
from three hundred and twenty thousand to one hun- 
dred and fifty thousand. Plutarch and Appian state 
the reduction, 80 as to be understood of the numbers 
of the whole people, in comparing the muster taken 
before the civil war with the one now made. 


3st 


premiums to those who had families : he ordered, 
that no citizen above twenty nor under ten, ex- 
cept cael to the army, should remain out of 
Italy above three years at a time; and that the 
sons of senators, except in the family or retinue 
of the public officers, should not go abroad; 
that all landholders in Italy should employ no 
Jess than one third freemen on their lands; 
that all practitioners of liberal arts, particularly 
foreign. physicians settling at Rome, should be 
admitted on the rolls- of the people; and at the 
same time he extended the privilege of Romans 
to whole cities and provinces in different parts of 
the empire," by these means increasing the num- 
ber of Roman citizens, or at least increasing the 
number of those who were to hear this title. 
Sensible that he himself had become dangerous 
to the republic, by having his power as a provin- 
cial officer improperly prolonged, he took mea- 
sures to prevent a similar danger to the govern- 
ment, of which he himself had now acquired the 
possession, limiting the duration of command in 
the provinces, if with the title of propretor to one 
year, or with that of proconsul to two years; a 
regulation in which he showed how well he un- 
derstood the nature of the ladder by which he 
himself had: mounted to his present elevation, and 
how much he desired to withhold the use of it 
from any one else who might be disposed to tread 
in his steps, or to dispute his continuance in the 
height he had gained. 

While Caesar, on a supposition that he himself 
was to hold the reigns of government, was pro- 
viding for the security of the power he had esta- 
blished in the capital, and on a supposition that 
he had no enemy left in the field, or that the re- 
mains of the adverse party in the provinces might 
be extinguished by his officers, was betaking him- 
self to civil affairs and to popular arts, he had re- 


ports from Spain which. convinced him, that his | 


own presence might still be necessary to repress 
a party, which began to resume its vigour under 
the sons of Pompey. He had sent Didius, with 
the fleet and army, from Sardinia, to secure the 
possession of Spain; but this service was found 
to be more difficult than was at first apprehended. 
He had himself, in appearance, reduced this pro- 
vince ;. but many humours had broke out in it, 
while he was afterwards so much occupied in 


other parts of the empire. Even the troops. which |, 
had joined his standard, mutinied during the un- 


certain state of his fortunes in Thessaly and 
Egypt; and though, upon the death of Cassius 
Longinus, and the succession of Trebonius, their 
discipline was in appearance restored; yet con- 
sciousness of the heinous offence they had com- 
mitted against Cesar made them doubt of his 
forgiveness ; and, joined with the inclination and 
respect which they yet entertained for the family 
of Pompey, determined them to take part against 
him. ‘They had opened a secret correspondence 
with Scipio, while he was yet at the head of a 
powerful' army in Africa, and encouraged him to 
send a proper officer- into Spain to take the com- 
mand of such forces as could be raised in the pro- 
vince. 

Young Pompey was sent for this purpose. In 
his way, he put into the island of Majorca, and 
was there some time detained by sickness, or re- 
mained in expectation that he might prevail on 


1 Dio. Cass. Sueton. Appian. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V. 


the natives to espouse his cause. The troops on 
the continent, in the mean time, even before 
Pompey arrived to take the command of them, 
declared themselves openly against Cesar, atl 
erased his name from their bucklers. The 
obliged his lieutenant Trebonius to fly from their 
‘quarters, and owned T. Quintus Scapula and 
Q. Apronius for their generals. 

In this posture of affairs, young Pompey ar 
rived in Spain, took the command of this army, 
and either received or forced the submission of 
the eos towns. He was likewise strength- 
ened by the accession of all the Roman settlers in 
the province who retained any zeal for the re- 
— and by the remains of former armies who 

ad been levied by his father, especially such of 
that army which had served under Afranius on 
the Segra, as were left in Spain; and by many 
officers of rank, who, having escaped from Thes- 
saly or Africa upon the late calamities of their 


party, had taken refuge in this country. Among 


these, Labienus and Varus, with as many as 
could be saved from the massacre at Thapsus, 
were assembling anew under the standard of 
Pompey. The two brothers, Cneusand Sextus, 
were joined together, and supported by the name 
of their father, which was still in high veneration ; 
they had assembled thirteen legions. Among 
these, were two legions of native Spaniards, whe 
had deserted from ‘l'rebonius;? one that was raised 
from the Roman colonists; and a fourth which 
had arrived from Africa, with the elder of the 
‘two brothers. 

Q. Fabius Maximus and Q. Pedius or Di- 
dius,3 the officers of Cesar, being unable to make 
head against this force, remained on the defen- 
sive, and by the reports which they made to their 
commander, represented the necessity of his own 
presence in the province. 

The continuance of the dictatorial power. im 
Cesar’s person, had superseded the usual suc 
cession in the offices of state. Lepidus still re- 
mained in his station of general of horse; and, 
with a council of six or nine prefects being left 
to command at Rome, Cesar set out in the 
autumn for Spain. He ordered troops from Italy 
to reinforce those already employed in this ser- 
vice, and, in twenty-seven days after his depart- 
ure from Rome, arrived at Saguntum.4 

Upon the news of. Cæsars- approach, Cneus 
‘Pompeius had assembled all his force on the 
Beetis, posted his brother Sextus with a proper 
garrison at Corduba, and himself endeavoured to 
reduce Ulia, a town which still held out against 
him in that neighbourhood. Cesar’s first object, 
upon his arrival in Spain, was to preserve this 
place from falling into the enemy’s hands. For 
this purpose, he detached eleven cohorts under 
the command of L. Julius Paciecus, with orders; 
if possible, to throw themselves into the town. 
The night in which they marched for this pur- 
pose, being stormy and dark, they passed the first 
posts of the besiegers unnoticed. When near 
the gates, they were challenged; but the officer 
who led the van, having answered in a low voice, 
that they were a detachment ordered to the foot 
of the wall in search of some entry, by which, 
under the cover of the night, they might surprise 


————————$—————— 


2 Hirtius de Bell. Hisp. 3 Dio. Cass. ibid. c. 31. 
4 App. de Bell Civil. lib. 11. or as Strabo writcs, at 
Obulio, lib. iii. p. 160. 


Cuar. LJ 


the garrison, they were suffered to pass, and pre- 
senting themselves at one of the gates, upon a 
signal that had been agreed upon, they were ad- 
mitted into the town. 

While Cesar thus reinforced the garrison of 
Ulia, he himself, to make a diversion in their fa- 
vour, marched up to Corduba, cut off a party that 
had been sent from thence to observe his motions, 
and threatened the town with a siege. Sextus, 
who was in the place, being alarmed, sent press- 
ing representations to his brother, who accord- 
ingly abandoned his lines before Ulia, and march- 
ed to his relief. Both armies encamped on the 
Guadalquivirs The parties that were sent for- 
ward by them to scour the country, or to cover 

‘their quarters, were engaged in daily skirmishes. 
But the two brothers, being in possession of the 
principal stations, and in condition to protract the 
war, continued to act on the defensive. Cesar, 
en his part, made some movements in order to 
disconcert them, and to find, if possible, an op- 
ortunity of coming to action; but the country 
Eir hilly, and the towns generally built upon 
heights, every where furnished strong posts for 
the enemy, and prevented his making any pro- 
gress. The winter at the same time 

C. J. Cesar, approached, and exposed his army 
Bae to considerable hardships from the 

+ ee Le- ° 
pidus, severity of the season, and from the 
M. E. Coss. scarcity of provisions. Under these 
U.C. 708. disadvantages, he undertook the siege 

of Allegua, and on the twentieth of 
February, after an obstinate resist- 
ance, obliged that town to surrender.® 

Our acceunts of these operations, which are 
ascribed to Hirtius, and witch, with hie other 
performances ate annexed to Cesars Commen- 

taries, being less perfect than other parts of the 
collection, all we can distinctly learn from them 
is, that after a varicty of different movements, 
which gave rise to frequent skirmishes, the ar- 
mies in the month of March came to encamp in 
the plain of Munda, about five miles from each 
other; that Cæsar was about to leave his station, 
when ia the morning of his intended departure, 
he had intelligence, that the enemy had been 
under arms from the middle of the preceding 
night, and were meditating some attempt on his 
camp. This intelligence was followed by the 
sudden appearance of their army on some ele- 
vated grounds near the town of Munda; but as 
they showed no disposition to come into the 
plain, Cesar, after some hesitation, advanced to 
attack them. 

In the army of Pompey, together with the 
flower of a warlike people, the natives of Spain, 
were assembled many veterans of the Roman le- 
gions, inured to blood; many Roman citizens of 
rank, now pushed to despair, or warned, by the 
fate of their party at Thapsus, not to expect 
safety from ‘the mercy of a victorious enemy, 
and not to have any hopes, but in their swords. 
Under these impressions, they waited for Cesar’s 
approach with a proper countenance, and en the 
first onset repulsed and put to flight .thetroops by 
whom they were attacked. In this extremity, 
Cesar ran into the ranks of his own men; said, 
they were delivering him over to boys; laid hold 
of a sword and a shield, and calling out that this 


5 The Betis. 6 Hirtius de Bell Hisp. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


315 


then should be the last day of his life, and of 
their services, took a place in the ranks as a 
mere legionary soldier. In this manner he re- 
newed the action, and being reduced to the ne- 
cessity of animating his men with the example 
of his own personal valour, committed his for- 
tune and his life to the decision of a contest, in 
which his ability as an officer could no longer 
have any share; but while the event was still in 
suspense, Bogud, an African, commanding a 
body of horse in his service, having made an at- 
tempt to pierce into Pompey’s camp, drew La- 
bienus from his post in the field to coverit. This 
accident turned the fortune of the day. The 
troops, who till then valiantly sustained Cæsars 
attack, ‘believing that Labienus deserted them, 
instantly fled in disorder. The slaughter from 
thence forward turned as usual entirely against 
those who fled. Thirty:thousand fell upon the 
field, and among them three thousand Roman 
citizens of high condition, with Labienus and 
Accius Varus at their head. Seventeen officers 
of rank were taken, with thirteen Roman eagles 
or legionary standards. 

Cæsar acknowledged, that having on other 
occasions fought for victory, he had now been 
obliged to fight for his life. He had a thousand 
men killed, and five hundred wounded, before 
the enemy gae way. Part of the vanquished 
army retired into the town of Munda, part into 
the camp, and in their respective posts prepared 
to defend themselves to the last extremity. Cæ- 
sar, on the approach of night, took possession of 
all the avenues by which either might escape; 
and it is said, that the troops he employed in this 
service, instead of traverses of earth or stone to 
obstruct the highways, raised up mounds of the 
dead bodies. 

Early in the morning of the following day, 
Cesar having left the town of Munda in this 
manner blocked up or invested, set out for Cor- 
duba, which Sextus, the younger of the two 
brothers, upon the news of the battle, had al- 
ready abandoned. 

Cnezus, on seeing the rout of his own army, 
fled with a small party of horse on the road to 
Carteia.’ Here he had collected most of his 
shipping and naval stores; but the news of his 
defeat having arrived before him, the people were 
divided in their inclinations, Part had already 
sent a deputation with an offer of their services 
to Cesar; part still adhered to the family of 
Pompey, and from these opposite dispositions 
had proceeded to actual violence and bloodshed 
in the streets. Pompey himself was wounded in 
one of their scuffles, and expecting no safety in 
a place, in which so many of the inhabitants had 
declared against him, he took ship, and put to 
sea with thirty galleys. He was pursued by 
Didius, who commanded Casar’s squadron at 
Gades; and being obliged in a few days to stop 
for a supply of water, of which he had been i!l 

rovided at his sudden departure from Carteia, 
be was -overtaken, most of his ships destroyed, 
and he himself obliged to seek for safety on shore. 
Soon after he landed, he dismissed his attend- 
ants, or was deserted by them; and falling into 
the hands of the enemy, though greatly weakened 
by his wounds and loss of blood, he continued to 


7 Now Gibraltar. 


316 


defend himself, until he was overpowered and 


slain, His head, according to the barbarous 
custom of the times, was sent to the conqueror, 
and exposed at Hispalis. 

In the preceding transactions of the war, every 
circumstance contributed to the fall of the re- 
public, and to the success of Cesar. In the very 
outset of the contest, half the nobility, ruined by 
prodigality and extravagance, had been desirous 
of anarchy and confusion. Citizens high in civil 
rank, and with fortunes entire, were generally 
glad to forego their political consequence in ex- 
change for ease and safety. Even the arms 
which should have protected the commonwealth, 
were in the hands of mere soldiers of fortune, 
who were inclined to favour that side from which 
they looked for the establishment of military 
government; they fought to procure great power 
and estates for themselves, not to preserve laws 
which gave property and the security of wealth 
to others. Many of the senators indeed per- 


ceived the impending ruin, and were prevailed 


upon to make some efforts for the preservation 
of the state, but on most occasions too hastily 
despaired of their cause. Jt was not thought 
honourable or safe for a citizen to survive his 
freedom. Upon this principle, the friends of the 
republic, while ‘they escaped from the enemy, 
perished by their own hands. 

Soon after the action at Munda, Scapula, one 
of the officers lately at the head of the republican 
party in Spain, turned the practice of suicide into 
a kind of farce. Having retired to Corduba 
from the field of battle, he ordered a magnificent 
pile of wood to be raised and covered with car- 

ets ; and having given an elegant entertainment, 
and distributed his money among his attendants 
and servants, he mounted to the top of this 
fabric, and while one servant pierced the master 
with his sword, another set fire to the pile. 
Thus the victories of Cæsar were completed by 
his enemies; and while he gained a fresh step at 
every encounter, they who opposed him went 
headlong, and abandoned their country to its 
ruin. 

The province of Spain, under a proper con- 
duct of its force and resources, if it had not been 
able to stop at once the career of Cesar’s victo- 


ries, was surely sufficient to have given him more : 


trouble than any other part of the empire. Its 
natives brave, and addicted to war, were inferior 
to the Romans only in policy and discipline. 


They had been averse to the party of Cesar, and | 


would not, even in its highest prosperity, prefer it 
to the cause they had originally espoused. Being 
mixed with the remains of Roman armies which 
had been broken and dispersed in the field, they 
still maintained every place of defence against 
the conqueror; and, within the walls of cities to 
which they retired, defended themselves to the 
last extremity. 

Cesar, having been employed part of the 
spring and the following summer in subduing 
this scattered enemy, prepared to leave the pro- 
vince. He assembled the principal inhabitants 
at Hispalis; and having upbraided them with 
their animosity to himself and to the Roman 
people, he put them in mind of his early con- 
nexion with their country, as questor and as 
pretor, and of his repeated good offices in the 
capacity of senator and magistrate; having made 


a proper establishment for the government of the 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V 


province, he set out for Italy;! and arrived at 
Rome in October.2_ Although it was contrary to 
the practice of former ages to admit of triumphs 


| where the vanquished were fellow-citizens, he 


took a triumph for his late victory at Munda; 
and the more to amuse the people who, whatever 
be the occasion, are captivated with such exhibi- 
tions, he appointed separate triumphs, on the 
same account, to Q. Fabius Maximus, and to 
Didius, who had acted under him in that service. 

These triumphs, over the supposed last de- 
fenders of the public liberty, and over the perish- 
ing remains of the family of Pompey, so long 
respected at Rome, instead of the festivity which 
they were intended to inspire, were attended 
with many signs of dejection. But none took 
upon him to censure, or was qualifred to stem, 
the torrent of servility by which all orders of men 
were carried. The same succession of games 
and entertainments were ordered as in the aoe 
year. The senate and people indeed had no 
longer any concessions to be added to those al- 
ready made to the conqueror, and it was difficult 
to refine on the language of adulation, which 
they had so amply employed in former decrees; 
but something to distinguish the present situation 
of affairs, to show the ardour of some to pay 
their court, and to disguise the discontent and 
the sorrow of others, was thought necessary on 
the present occasion. A thanksgiving was ap- 
pointed, and ordered to continue for fifty days. 
The anniversary of the twentieth of April, the 
day on which the news of the victory at Munda 
was received at Rome, was ordered to be for ever 
celebrated with games of the circus. Even they 
who felt a secret indignation at the elevation of a 
single person to act as lord of the commonwealth, 
concurred, in appearance, with these resolutions 
in honour of Cesar.4 They thought that the 
full cup was most likely to nauseate, and that ex- 
treme provocation was most likely to rouse the 
spirits of free men, if any yet remained. 

In the concessions which were made to Cesar, 
whether suggested by his friends or by his ene- 
mies, there was no attempt to preserve any ap- 
pearance of the republic, or to veil the present 
usurpation. The senate, in presenting their 
several decrees, waited upon him in a body as 
subjects to acknowledge their sovereign; were 
received by him on his chair of state, and in all 
the form of a royal ceremony, stretching forth his 
hand to each as they approached. While he 
carried the external show of his elevation to this 
height, Pontius Acquilla, one of the tribunes, 
being seated in the exercise of his office, had suf- 
fered him, in one of his processions, to pass, 
without rising from his place. This he greatly 
resented. “Maust I,” he said to those who at- 
tended him, “refer the government to this 
tribune!” And for some days, in granting re- 
quests or petitions, he affected to guard his an- 
swers ironically, by saying, “ Provided that Pon- 
tius Acquilla will permit.”5 ‘The cunsulate was 


1 Antony had set out from Rome to meet Cesar, 


‘but to the great surprise and alarm vf every body, re- 


turned unexpectedly to Rome. Cicero ad Att. xii. 18. 

It was known afterwards, that Antony returned 
under the surprise of an order given by Cæsar to oblige 
him to pay for houses, &c bought at Pompey’s sale 
Cicer. Phil. 11.29. Ibid. xxxi. 29. 

2 Velleius Paterculus. 3 Dio. Cassius. 

4 Plutarch. in Ces. 5 Sueton. in Ces. e. 7% 


b 


Cuap. L) 


offered to him for ten years, but he declined it, as 
he destined this and the other offices of state for 
tke gratification of his friends. He himself had 
assumed the title of consul in his late triumph, 
and immediately after resigned it toQ. Fabius 
Maximus. 

Such, from henceforward, was to be the man- 
ner ot conferring honours under the monarchy 
or Rome. Families had become noble in conse- 
quence of being admitted into the senate, or in 
consequence of having borne any of the higher 
offices of state, such as that of consul or pretor. 
Instead of titles, they recited the names of an- 
cestors who had been in these offices, and instead 
of ensigns armorial, erected the effigies or images 
of such ancestors. Cesar, that he might have 
more frequent opportunities to gratify his retain- 
ers, paid no regard to the customary establish- 
ment of the senate, and increased its numbers at 
pleasure, by inserting in the rolls persons of every 
description, to the amount of nine hundred. He 
augmented the number of pretors to fourteen, 
and that of questors to forty ; and even, without 
requiring that his friends should pass through 
these offices, rewarded them at pleasure with the 
ttular honours of consular, pretorian, patrician, 
&ec. * and extended his munificence likewise to 
the provinces, by admitting aliens separately, or 
in collective bodies, to the privilege or appellation 
of Roinan citizens. 

In the midst of appearances, which seemed to 
throw a ridicule on the ancient forms of the re- 
public, as well as to substitute a military govern- 


ment in their stead, Cesar named himself, to- 


ala with Mark Antony, as consuls for the 
ollowing year. This compliment paid to the 
civil establishment, by condescending to bear the 
name of legal office, though very illegally as- 
sumed, flattered the citizens with hope that he 
meant to govern under some form of a republic.’ 
Nothing, however, followed from these appear- 
ances; the state which he affected, his dress, his 
laurel wreath, the colour and height of his bus- 
kins, the very seal which he chose to make use 
of, being the impression of a Venus armed, in 
ostentation of his supposed celestial extraction ; 
the numerous guards and retinue, exceeding two 
thousand men, with which he was constantly 
attended ;8 the satisfaction with which he seemed 
to receive the forced servility of those whom his 
sword had subdued, betrayed a mind which, 
though possessed of real superiority, had not 
sufficient elevation to disdain the false appear- 
ances of it. 

On the last day of the year, Q. Fabius Maxi- 
mus, who had been a few months consul, died 
before he had vacated the office ; and about noon 
of the same day, Cesar, who had assembled the 
tribes, ordered them to take the form of the 
centuries, and to elect Caninius consul for the re- 
mainder of the day. Plutarch says, that Cicero 
exhorted the people to be speedy in paying their 
court to this new consul: “for this magistrate 
may he out of office before we can reach him.” 
Cicero himself, referring to this farcical election, 
writes in a letter to one of his friends, ‘ we have 
had a consulate, during which no one either ate 
or drank, and yet nothing extraordinary happen- 
ed; for so great was the vigilance of this er 


6 Dio. Cass. lib. xliii. c. 47. 
8 Vicer. ad Att. lib. xiii. ep. 52. 


7 Appian. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIO. 


317 


that he never slept all the time he was in office. 
You may laugh at these things,” he says; “but 
if you were here, you would cry.”9 

On the following day, Cesar, 


U. C. 703. with all the powers and ensigns 
C.J. Cesar Of dictator, took possession of the 
Dict. 4to. ' consulate in conjunction with An- 
M. E. Lepi- tony. He intended, after having 
dus, M. E. C. held this office for a few days in 
Octavius, hi : A 

Mag. Eq. is own person, to resign it in 
Cn. Domitius favour of Dolabella, though a 
Calvisius young man, still far short of the 


in sequentem 
annum desig- 
natus non 
iniit, 


legal age. The execution of this 
intention, however, was some time 
delayed at the request of Mark 
Antony, who, being jealous of 
Dolabella, endeavoured to obstruct his prefer- 
ment. 

Cesar himself passed the winter in assiduous 
application to civil affairs, and in forming pro- 
jects to embellish the capital, and to aggrandize 
the empire. He made some regulations for the 
better government of the city. Under this title 
may be reckoned his prohibitiag the use of letters, 
of purple, and of pearls, except to persons of a 
certain rank, and to them only at great festivals, 
and on remarkable occasions ; together with his 
reviving the ancient sumptuary laws respecting 
the expense of the table. For the better execution 
of these laws, he appointed inspectors of the 
markets, with orders to seize all illicit articles of 
provision; and if any thing of this sort were 
known to escape the inspectors, he sent officers 
to seize them from the tables on which they were 
served. To check the luxury of the times in 
other articles, he imposed duties on the importa- 
tion of foreign commodities, 

Under the ordinary pretence, that the laws 
were become too voluminous, he ordered them to 
be digested into a code, with a view to simplify 
and to reduce them into a narrower compass; in 
this measure attempting a reformation which nian- 
kind, in certain situations, generally wish for, but 
which no man can accomplish without the pos- 
session of absolute power. 

In the same spirit of despotical government, 
with which Cesar abridged the laws, he acted at 
once as legislator and as a judge. As instances 
of his severity in the latter capacity, it is men- 
tioned, that he annulled a marriage, because it 
had been contracted no more than two days after 
the woman had parted from a former husband; 
and to this he joined his panging senators for 
extortion in the provinces, by expulsion from the 
senate. 

His mind, at the same time, entertained pro- 
jects of great variety and extent. To drain the 
great marshes which rendered the air so un- 
healthy, and so much land unserviceable in the 
neighbourhood of Rome; to cut across the isth- 
mus of Corinth, to erect moles, and form har- 
bours on the coast of ltaly; to make highways 
across the Apennines; to build a new theatre 
that should exceed that of Pompey ; to erect pub- 
lic libraries, and inake a navigable canal from the 
Anio and the Tiber to the sea at Teracina; to 


9 Cicero ad Familiar. lib. vii. ep. 10. Ita Caninio 
consule scito, nemine prandisse. Nihil tainen eo con- 
sule mali factum est. Fuit enim mirifica vigilantia 
qui toto suo consulatu somnum non viderit Hiec tibi 
ridicula videntur: non enim adis. Que si videris la- 
chrymas non teneres. 


318 


build a magnificent temple to Mars. These 
projects are justly mentioned as meritorious in 
the sovereign of a great empire; and it must be 
confessed, that power would be but a wretched 
possession, if there were not something of this 
sort to be done after the toils of ambition were 
over. 

The measure which of all others contributed 

most to the honour of Cesar, did we suppose 
him entitled to the powers he assumed, was the 
a indemnity which he granted to all who 
iad opposed him. Some he even employed in 
the administration of government, and promoted 
in the state. He placed Caius Cassius and 
Marcus Brutus, for this year, on the list of 
pretors, and entrusted them with the higher 
jurisdiction of the city. To the widows of many 
who died in opposition to himself, he restored 
their portions, and gave their children part of 
tneir patrimony.! He replaced the statues of 
Sylla and of Pompey, which the populace, in 
flattery to himself, had thrown down; “and by 
this means,” says Cicero, “he firmly established 
his own. 

It appeared, on many occasions, that Cæsar 
meant to contrast his own conduct with that of 
Sylla;? his own clemency with the bloody exe- 
cations performed by the other. The comparison, 
no doubt, is curious, and must occur to evcry 
person who reads their story. Sylla had been 
excited, by extreme provocations, to turn his 
arms against a party in possession of the capital, 
and he drew his sword to punish injuries donc 
no less to the republic than to himself. While 
he was master of the state, he acted indeed like 
a person who did not care how odious he rendered 
despotical power, for he did not mean to retain it. 
But he mixed with the resentment of a personal 
enemy, the high views of a noble citizen, who 
preposed to reform the state by clearing it of 
many corrupted and dangerous members. When 
lie had accoinplished this purpose, he disdained 
the pageantry of high station, was above receiv- 
ing the adulation which proceeds from servility, 
ær wishing to enjoy a continual precedence in the 
smanagement of affairs, which requires no extra- 
ordinary capacity. Embarked by fortune on a 
tempestuous sea, when he had conducted the 
vessel safe into port, he quitted the helm; and 
after having been master, was not afraid to place 
himself among his countrymen as a fellow-citi- 
zen; and in ale state of equality his greatness 
of mind sccured to lim a distinction, which no 
degree of precedcncy, and no measure of prero- 
-gative, could have bestowed. 

To this charactcr that of Cesar, in many par- 
ticulars, may be fairly considered as a contrast. 
He himself had stirred up the disorders which 
. produced the civil war in which he engaged. He 
had no injuries either public or private to resent; 


his alfected clemency, in sparing a few captives, 


in the beginning or in the course of his opera- 
tions, was belied by the wantonness with which 
ke entered on a war, in which the blood of many 
thousands of his fellow-citizens was to be unne- 


1 Sueton. Dio. lib. xliii. 

2 Quonium reliqui crudelitate odium effugere non 
potuerunt neque victoriam diutius tenere, preter unum 
L. Syllam quem imitaturus non sum. Hee nova sit 
-Fatio vincen'li, ut misericordia et liberalitate nos mi- 
Riamas. Cicer. ad Att. bb. ix. ep. 7. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


cessarily shed? If he had been teluctant in. the 
shedding of blood, his mercy would have appear. 
cd, in avoiding so destructive a contest, not im 
ostentatiously sparing a few of the many whose 
lives his wanton ambition brought into hazard. 
His clemency should have appeared at the Rubi- 
con, not at Corfinium; in leaving his country to 
enjoy its liberties, not mereiy in sparing those 
whom no man in his senses would destroy, a peo- 
ple who were willing to submit, and whom he 
desired to govern. 

Cesar used to ridicule the resignation of Sylla 
as an act of imbecility,4 and ins hence fond of 
precedence as well as of power. The degree of 
vanity which he is said to had indulged, in ac 
cepting the frivolous honours which were now 
conferred upon him by acts of the senate, is in- 
deed scarcely credible. Among these is men- 
tioned a decree that he should have precedenc 
of all magistrates, and the privilege of being al- 
ways dressed in the triumphal robes; of having 
a gilded chair of state, and a place of distinction 
at all the public games; that he should be allow- 
ed to deposit a suit of armour in the temple of 
Jupiter Feretrius, an honour appropriated to 
those who, like Romulus, had killed, with their 
own hands, a leader of the encmy; that his lic- 
tors should have their fasccs always bound with 
laurel; that himself, in coming from the Latin 
festivals, should enter the city on horseback ; that 
he should have the title of Father of his Country, 
and be so designed on the coins; that the anni- 
versary of his birth-day should be kept as a festi- 
val; that statues should be erected to him in all 
the towns of Italy, and in the temples of the city ; 
that the statues, without any consideration of his 
titles to these honours, should be adorned with the 
civic and obsidionary crowns; the first a badge 
worn by those who had saved a fellow-citizen in 
battle, the second by those who had delivered the 
city itself from a siege.5 

The senate and people, observing that these 
distinctions were agreeable to Cesar, subjcined, 
that his robes should be cut in imitation of that 
of the ancient kings of Rome; that he should 
have an escort of knights and senators; that it 
should be permittcd to swear to his destiny; that 
all his decrces, without exception, should be ra- 
tified; that, at the end of five years, a festival 
should be held in honour of him, as of a person 
of divine extraction; that an additional college of 
priests should be established to perform the rites 
which were instituted for that occasion; that ia 
all gladiatorian sports, whether at Rome or in the 

rovincial towns, one day should be dedicated to 
cS. that a crown of gold set with gems, like 
those of the gods, should be carried before him 
into the circus, attended with a thensus or car 
like that on which the idols of the gods were 
carried; that he should have the title of Julian 
Jove—have a temple erected for himself, in con- 
junction with the goddess of Clemency—and, to 
complete the ridicule of these institutions, that 
Mark Antony should be appointed the priest of 
this sacred fane.6 ; ‘ 

From these particulars, which, to characterise 


3 It is said that 400,000 Romans perished in this 


contest. — . 
4 Syllam nescisse literas qui dictaturam depc-uerit. 
Sveton. in Jul. Ces. lib. Ixxvii. 
5 Dio. Cass. lib. xliv. c 4. 6 Thid. e. 6. 


Cuar. LJ 


the ambition of the person to whom they refer, 
and the manners of the age, are selected from 


those mentioned by the original historian,’ it 


was no longer to he doubted, that Cæsar wished 
to establish a monarchy on the ruins of the re- 

ublic. He himself was extremely arrogant in his 

haviour, and so unguarded in his expressions 
as to say, That the republic was but a name, 
that his words should be carefully observed, for 
that he meant every word should have the force 
of a law. 

To so much arrogance and affectauon of king- 
ly state, joined to absolute power, nothing was 
wanting but the title of King. This Cesar him- 
self evidently appeared to have the vanity to de- 
sire. His retainers and flatterers, on different 
occasions, endeavoured to surprise the people into 
a concession of it; but notwithstanding the pow- 
ers of sovereignty, which he exercised without 
control, and the honours of divinity, which were 
decreed to him by general consent, his influence 
was not sufficient to reconcile the Roman people 
to the name of King. One of his emissaries, 
willing to suggest the propriety of bestowing 
this title, or to insinuate Cesar’s purpose of 
assuming it, had bound the head of one of his 
statues with a royal fillet. The tribunes Marul- 
lus and Cesetius, affecting great zeal for the 
honour of Cesar, as well as for the majesty of 
the Roman state, made inquiry after the author 
of an insinuation so derogatory to both; and re- 
ceiving information of the guilty person, in order 
to check such insinuations for the future, sent 
him to prison. This officious interposition of the 
tribunes, though pretending to vindicate Cæsar 
himself from so odious an imputation, he received 
with marks of displeasure; and hearing these 
officers extolled as the restorers of the public 
liberty with the appellation of the Bruti, “ Brutes 
indeed,” he said they were; but took no farther 
notice of the matter. ; 

Soon after this incident, some one, or a few in 
the assembly of the people, saluted him with the 
title of king. But on hearing, instead of accla- 
mations, a general murmur of dislike, he silenced 
this unreasonable piece of flattery, saying, That 
his name was Cesar, and not king. Here too 
the tribunes again interposed, and raised prose- 
cutions against the authors of such treasonable 
expressions. But in this instance Cesar lost his 
patience, and complained in the senate that fac- 
tious men, under the pretence of discharging 
the public office of magistracy, propagated insinu- 
ations injurious to his character, and tending to 
alarm the people with false apprehensions. Such 
offences, he said, merit capital punishment ; but 
he should be satisfied with degradation froin of- 
fice. This sentence was accordingly inflicted ; 
and from thenceforward it was not doubted, that 
Cesar aspired to the title, as well as the power 
ofa monarch. 

This opinion was still farther confirmed, when 
on the sixteenth of February,§ at the Lupercalia 
(a festival, which being continued down from 
barbarous ages, served as a monument of prime- 
val simplicity and rudeness), the same piece of 
flattery, in making tender of a crown, was re- 
newed by Antony, then in the office of consul, 
and the chief confidant of Cæsar. 


7 Dio. Cass. lib. xliv. c. 6. 
8 Cicer. Philip. ii. ¢.-34. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


_Cesar by my hands.” 


319 


Tt was the custom in this festival of the Luper- 
calia, for the first officers of state, and the first of 


‘the nobles to present themselves naked in the 


streets, carrying thongs of undressed hide, with 
which they ran through the crowd, and struck 
at those ais happened to be placed within their 
reach. The stroke was thought a remedy, in 


particular, for barrenness in women ;. and nuni- 


bers of this sex crowded in the way to receive it. 
In the ceremony now to be performed, Mark 
Antony bore his part as consul; and Cesar sat 
on his gilded chair of state in his triumphal robes 
to behold the spectacle. Antony stopped. before 
him, and presented him with a royal crown, say- 
ing, “ This crown the Roman people confer upon 
A few of the spectators 
seemed to applaud; but Cesar, perceiving that 
the people in general, by their silence, gave signs 
of displeasure, pushed away the crown with his 
hand; and upon this action, received from the 
people, by an universal shout of applause, an un- 
questionable explanation of their former silence. 
To try the effect of a moderation which was so 
much applauded, Antony threw himself upon 


‘the ground at Cesar’s feet, repeated his offer of 


the crown, and hoped that the people might join 
him in pressing the acceptance of what was so 


¡modestly refused; but with no better success 


than in the former attempt. 

That the merit of this refusal, however, might 
not be ghee or that the offer might be held 
equal to the actual investiture of the crown, an 
entry was made in the Fasti or public records, by 
the directions of Antony, “That the consul 
having, by the order of the Roman people, pre- 
sented a crown, and oflered to confer the majesty 
of king on Caius Julius Cæsar, perpetual dicta- 
tor, he had declined to receive it.’’9 

The Roman republic had, for some time, sub- 
sisted in a very disorderly state; the people 
having dominion over many other nations, scarce- 


ly admitted any species of government among 
‘ thernsel ves. 


The inhabitants of Rome, assum- 
ing the prerogatives of the collective body of Ro- 
man citizens, who now not only extended over 
all Italy, but were dispersed throughout the em- 
pire, generally sale in tumults, whose pro- 
ceedings nothing but force could regulate, and at 
every convulsion gave an immediate prospect of 
military government. All who wished to pre 
serve the republic, endeavoured to extend the 
prerogatives of the senate, and to prevent, as 
much as possible, these ill-formed assemblies of 
the people from deliberating on matters of state; 
and it might, no doubt, have been still better for 
the empire, if the spirit of legal monarchy could 
at once have been infused into every part of the 
commonwealth; or if, without Teher pangs or 
convulsions, the authority of a prince, tenipered 
with that of a senate, had been firmly established. 
But men do not at once change their habits and 
opinions, nor yield their own pretensions upon 
speculative notions of what is suited to the state 
of their country. Cæsar aspired to dominion in 
order to gratify his personal vanity, nut to correct 
the political errors of the times; and’ his contem- 
poraries born to the rights of citizens, still con- 
tended for personal independence and equality, 
however impossible it might be longer to preserve 


9 Cicer. Philip. it. e. 34. 


320 


any species of republic at the head of such an 
empire. 

Ever since the expulsion of Tarquin, the name 
ef king had been odious at Rome. The most 
popular citizens, as soon as they became sus- 
pected of aspiring to kingly power, became ob- 
jects of aversion, and were marked out as a prey 
to the detestation of their country. Thus fell 
Manlius Capitolinus, the Gracchi, Apuleius, and 
others who were loaded with this imputation. 

The Romans, accustomed to see vanquished 
kings the sport of popular insolence, led in tri- 
umph, put todeath; or if suffered to live, made to 
languish in poverty and neglect—accustomed to 
see kings, who were their own allies, submitting 
their cause to the judgment of the Roman peo- 
ple, or suing for favour, considered monarchy 
itself as an appurtenance of servility and barba- 
rism; and the project to give a king to the Ro- 
mans as an attempt to degrade them into barba- 
rians and slaves. 

The maxim, which forbids assassination in 
every case whatever, is the result of prudent re- 
flection, and has a tendency to allay the jealousy, 
and to mitigate the cruelty of persons who, by 
violent usurpations, which laws cannot restrain, 
have incurred the resentment of mankind. Even 
tyrants, it is supposed, are cruel from fear, and 
become merciful in proportion as they believe 
themselves secure; it were unwise, therefore, to 
entertain maxims which keep the powerful in a 
continual state of distrust and alarm. This pru- 
dential morality, however, was entirely unkuown 
in the ancient republics, or could not be observed, 
without surrendering the freedom for which the 
citizens contended. Amongst them the people 
were obliged to consider, not what was safe, but 
what was necessary; and could not always de- 
fend themselves against usurpations, neither by 
legal forms, nor by open war. It was thought 
allowable, therefore, to employ artifice, surprise, 
and secret conspiracy against an usurper; and 
this was so much the case at Rome, that no 
names were held in greater veneration, than those 
of citizens who had assassinated persons suspected 
of views dangerous to the commonwealth; or 
who, by any means whatever, rendered abortive 
the projects of adventurers who attempted to arm 
any party against the legal constitution of their 
country. 

Cesar, having attempted to join the title of 
king with the powers of perpetual dictator, had 
reason to distrust a people who were actuated by 
such conceptions. He was an object of private 
as well as of public resentment, having usurped 
the government over those whom he had cruelly 
injured; over the fathers, the brothers, and sons 
of those who had fallen by his sword. He ac- 
cordingly, for some time, had the- precaution to 
keep a military guard attending his person ; but, 
grown familiar with those he had offended, and 
secure in his personal courage, he dropt this pre- 
caution, and began to reign with the confidence 
of a lawful monarch. Although he had incurred 
so much resentment, he disdained to stand in 
awe of it, and ventured to join the confidence of 
innocence with the highest measures of guilt. 
This conduct indeed was uncommon, and the 
effect of a daring courage, but unworthy of the 
penetration and skill with which he had hitherto 
conducted his affairs. It may serve to confirm, 
what has been already observed, that, amongst | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boor V. 


the many accomplishments which he possessed. 
and together with the abilities which rendered 
him superior to every direct opposition, he was 
‘actuated by a vanity which bordered on weak- 
ness. Misled, perhaps; by this passion, he per 
sisted in his emulation to the glory of Sylla, and 
would show to the world, that he who had not 
resigned his power could walk the streets of 
‘Rome, unattended, with as much’ safety as the 


; other, who had the magnanimity to restore the 


constitution of his country ; joined to this weak 
ness, he had too mean am opinion of those who 
composed: the commonwealth, greatly sunk in- 


deed in their political characters, but not fallere 


into that state of personal weakness,. which his 
security and contempt of. them seemed to imply- 
Above sixty citizens of noble extraction were 
‘found, who thought their late condition as mem- 
bers of the repwhlic could still be recovered. Some 
had been stunned with their fall, but not quite 
overwhelmed; others, who, on specious pretences, 
had assisted in obtaining the victories of Cesar, 
‘detested’ the monarchy which he was pleased to 
assume. In the first period of the civil war many 
imagined, that the contest was to end’ in substi- 
tuting one party for another, not in the entire 


“subversion of the republican government; and 


they were inclined, as soon as fortune should de- 
clare in favour of either party, to be reconciled 
with those that prevailed.: But when it evident- 
ly appeared, that Cesar, by suppressing the last. 
remains of opposition to himself in every part of 


‘the empire, meant to establish a monarchy in his. 


own person, a secret indignation filled the breasts. 
of those who, upon a foot of family consequence, 
or personal ability, had any pretensions to politi- 
cal importance. To such persons the dominion: 


|of an equal appeared insufferable. Many of 


them affected servility, in conferring the extrava-. 


‘ gant honours which had been deereed to Cesar, 


-as the mask of a sullen displeasure, which, con- 
scious of a tendency to betray itself, took the dis- 
guise of the opposite extreme.. 

_ The question respecting: the expedience of 

: monarchical government did not enter into the 
deliberations of any one. If it had been urged: 
that a king was necessary; it would have been 
asked, Who gave the right to Cesar? If the 

people in general were corrupt, were the bank- 
rupts, and outlaws, and soldiers of fortune that 
formed the court of Cæsar unblemished? If the 

‘great, the able, and experienced citizens, who. 
were qualified to support the republic, were now 
no more, by whose sword: had they perished ? or 
who was to blame for the ruin.that had befallen the 
commonwealth? If the corrupt arts, the trea- 
sons, the murders, encouraged or executed by 
Cesar, had made a change of government neces~ 
‘sary, the first act of that new government, for the 

‘instruction of mankind. ought to have been to 
punish the author of so many disorders and 
crimes, not to reward him with a crown.. 

Many of Casar’s officers, and the nearest to. 
his person, were as much in this mind as any 
other citizens; and on this supposition, so fami- 
liar was the thought of proceeding to the last ex- 
tremities against him, that, when Antony came 
to meet Cesar, on his return from Spain, Trebo- 


1 Cicero ad Familiar. 
2 Cicer. Philip. lib. ii, c. 14. 


Cuar. I.} 


nius ventured to sound his inclinations respect- 
ing a design on Cesar’s life. Although Antony 
did not adopt the measure, he did not betray Tre- 
bonius, nor did he appear to he surprised at the 
proposal. It was afterwards suggested, that An- 
tony should he invited to a share in the conspira 
cy; and the proposal was dropt only on account 
of the refusal which he had already given to 
Trebonius; so readily was it believed, that every 
noble Roman would rather share in the govern- 
ment of his country, as an independent citizen, 
than asa retainer to the most successful usurper. 

It is well known, that a conspiracy accordingly 
was, at this time, formed against the life of Cæ- 
sar, although the first steps and the consultations 
of the parties are no where minutely recarded. 
The principal authors of it were Caius Cassius 
and Marcus Brutus, then pretors in the city; 
Decimus Brutus and Trebonius, who had both 
served in high rank under Cesar himself, and of 
whom the first was destined by him to the com- 
mand in Cisalpine Gaul, and to the consulate in 
the following year. 

Caius Cassius was early noted for a high and 
impetuous spirit. It is observed, that being a boy 
when Sylla was at the height of his power, he 
struck the son of the dictator for having said, 
That his father was the master of the Roman 
people. The tutor of young Sylla having carried 
a complaint to Pompey, the boys were called, and 
questioned on the subject of the quarrel, “ Do 
but repeat your words again,” said Cassius; 
“and in this presence I will strike you.” He 
had distinguished himself in Syria, by collecting 
the remains of the unfortunate army of Crassus, 
with which he repelled the attempt of the Par- 
thians on that province. He followed Pompey 
in the civil war, and commanded a squadron of 
the fleet on the coast of Sicily at the time of the 
battle of Pharsalia. From thence he went into 
Asia, with a professed intention to wait for the 
arrival of the victor from Alexandria, and to 
drop all farther opposition against him; but 
even then, according to Cicero, would have put 
Cesar to death, if he had not debarked on a 
different side of the Cydnus, from that on which 
he was at first expected to land.4 

Marcus Brutus was the nephew of Cato by his 
sister Servilia; and so much the favourite of Cæ- 
sar, who was said to have hadan intrigue with his 
mother, that he was by some supposed to be his 
som. The father of Brutus, in the civil wars of 
Sylla, had been on the side of Marius, and having 
fallen into Pompey’s hands, was by him put to 
death. The son retained so much resentment on 
this account, that he never accosted or saluted 
Pompey till after the civil war broke out; when, 
thinking it necessary to sacrifice all private con- 
siderations to the public cause, he joined him in 
Macedonia, and was received with great marks 
of distinction. This young man, either on ac- 
count of his uncle Cato, or om account of the ex- 
paca generally entertained of himself; was 

eld in the highest estimation. Being taken 
prisoner at the battle of Pharsalia, he was not 
only protected by the victor, but sent into the 
province of Cisalpine Gaul with the title of 
governor; where, during the war in Africa 
against Scipio and the king of Numidia, he re- 


3 Cicer. Philip. lib. ii. 3% 4 Ibid. e. 11. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


221 
mained, perhaps, rather under safe custcdy than 
in high confidence with Cesar. He was this 
year, together with Caius Cassius, who married 
his sister, promoted to the dignity of prætor; and 
though of less standing than Cassius, had the 
precedence by the partiality af Cesar. This cir- 
cumstance was supposed, at the time that Brutus 
and Cassius were actually framing their con- 
spiracy, to have occasioned a breach between 
them, 

Cassius is reputed to have been the prime 
mover in the design against Cesar’s life; and to 
have been the author of anonymous calls to vin- 
dicate the freedom of Rome, which were’ posted 
up or dropped in public places; and which, from 
the prevailing spirit of discontent, found a ready 
acceptance, Labels were hung upon the statues 
of the ancient Brutus, and billets were dropped, 
in the night, upon the judgment-seat of the præ- 
tor of this name, exciting him to imitate his an- 
cestors, by restoring the republic; “ You sleep, 
you are not Brutus;” and on the statues of his 
suppose ancestor, the elder Brutus, was written, 
“Would vou were alive!’ These expressions 
of a secret disaffection, and prognostics of some 
violent design, either escaped the attention of 
Cesar, or were despised by him; but were easily 
understood by persons who looked for a deliver- 
ance from the indignities to which they felt them- 
selves exposed. While Cassius and Marcus 
Brutus entered into a formal concert on this sub- 
ject, numbers pined under the want of that con- 
sideration to which they thought themselves 
born; many were provoked by particular in- 
stances of vanity or arrogance in the present 
dictator ;> and upon the least hint of a design 
against him, were ready to join. ‘I am sorry 
you should be ill at so critical a time,’ said 
Brutus to Legarius. “I am not ill,” said the 
other, “if you have any intentions worthy of 
yourself.’’6 

Great numbers daily acceded to the plot, of 
whom the following, besides Brutus and Cassius, 
are the principal names upon record; Ceciljus, 
and Bucolianus, two brothers; Rubrius Rex, Q. 
Ligarius, M. Spurius, Servilius Galba, Sextius 
Naso, Pontius Acquila. These had ever been om 
the side of the senate, or adherents of Pompey. 
‘The following had acted in the war under Cæsar; 
Decimus Brutus, C. Casca, Trebonius, Tullius 
Cimber, Minucius, and Basilus;7 tliey are said in 
all to have amounted to sixty.8 Cicero was known 
to detest the usurpation of Cæsar; to mourn over 
the fall of the commonwealth, over the humilia- 
tion of the senate, and the diminution of his 


5 Cesar had ahout this time, a visit from the queen 
of Egypt, who lived with him at his gardens on the 
Tiber. (Cicer ad Attic. lib. xiv.) Many who overlqoked 
his usurpation, and the violence he did to the corsti- 
tution of his country, were scandalized at the intimacy 
in which he lived with this woman. Being accustomed 
to the distinctions of a court, and considering Cesar 
as the monarch, she treated the citizens, who were 
still admitted to him ona foot of equality, as depena- 
ants and subjects He himself, with all his state, was 
polite. As an apology for having made Cicero wait 
too long in hs anti-chainber, he accosted him with 
saying, “ How can Į hope to be tolerated, when even 
Mareus Tullius Cicero is made to wait? If any one 
could forgive it, he would; but the world must delest 
me.” Cleopatra, it is probable, made no such apology 
When she gave canse to complain of her arrogance. 


6 Sueton. in Cesare. 
7 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. il. 8 Sueton m Cwsrr. 


322 


own political consequence ; but he was not con- 
sulted in this design. The authors of it relied on 
his support, in case they should be successful ; 
but they knew too well his ingenuity in suggest- 
ing scruples and difficulties, to bring him into 
their previous deliberations on so arduous an en- 
terprize. 

The conspirators, in forming their project, 
generally sounded the minds of persons. before 
they made any formal or direct proposal. Brutus 
being in company with Statilius, Favonius, and 
Labio, proposed, among other problematical 
questions, some doubts concerning the expedi- 
ency of assassinating tyrants. Favonius observed, 
that such actions led to civil war, and that this 
was worse than usurpation. Statilius said, that 
no wise man would engage in so hazardous an 
enterprise to serve a parcel of knaves and fools. 
Labio contended warmly with both; and Brutus 
changing the subject, thought no more of Stati- 
fius or Favonius, but communicated the design 
to Labio, who immediately embraced it. 

As so many were concerned, and as they re- 
mained some time in suspense as to the proper 
time and place for the execution of their purpose, 
it is singular that the conspiracy should have 
come to:such a height undiscovered. But Cesar 
did not encourage informers; his great courage 
preserved him from the jealousies by which others 
in less dangerous situations are guided. He 
trusted to his popularity, to his munitience, to the 

rofessions of submission which were made to 

im, and to the interest which he supposed many 
to have in the preservation of his life. He had 
not only dismissed the guards, which at his return 
to Rome had attended him; and was commonly 
preceded only by his lictors and the usual retinue 
of his civil rank ; but had suffered the veterans to 
disperse on the lands which had been assigned to 
them, unfurnished Italy of troops, and had trans- 
ported the greater part of the army into Mace- 
donia, reserving only a small body under Lepidus 
in the suburbs of Rome. His own mind, though 
fond of appearance of superiority, it is probable, 
was easily satiated with the pageantry of state. 
His thoughts became vacant and languid in the 
possession of a station to which he had struggled 
through so much blood; and his active mind still 
urged him to extensive projects of war and con- 
quest.! He accordingly planned a series of wars 
which were not likely to end but with his life. 
He was to begin with revenging the death of 
Crassus, and redncing the Parthians. He was 
next to pass by Hyrcania and the coasts of the 
Caspian Sea into Scythia; from thence, by the 
shores of the Euxine Sea, into Sarmacia, Dacia, 
and Germany ; and from thence, by his own late 
conquests in Gaul, to return into Italy ;? for this 
purpose he had already sent forward into Mace- 
donia seventeen legions and ten thousand horse.3 

As Cesar was likely, whatever may have been 
the extent of his projects, to be employed some 
time in the execution of them, he thought proper 
to anticipate the election of magistrates at Rome, 
and to arrange, before his departure, the whole 
succession to office for some years. Dion Cassius 
says, that his arrangement was made for three 
years; Appian, for five years. It is certain, that 


1 Dio. Cass. Appian. Plutarch. 
2 Plutarch. in Cæsare. 
3 Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib. ii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V. 


he fixed the succession to office for two subse- 
quent years. Hirtius and Pansa were destined 
to the consulate in the first; Decimus Brutas 
aud Plancus, in the second.4 He continued to 
increase the number of magistrates, that he might 
have more opportunities to gratify his retainers 
and friends. The questors, as has been men- 
tioned, he augmented to forty, the zdiles to six, 
the prætors to sixteer. Among the latter he 
named Ventidius, a native of Picenum, who had 
been taken and led in triumph, while the people 
of that district, with the other Italians, on account 
of their claim of being enrolled as citizens, were 
at war with Rome. Ventidius had subsisted by 
letting mules and carriages. In the pursuit of 
this business he had followed the army of Cesar 
into Gaul; and becoming known to that general, 
was gradually trusted and advanced by him. His 
career of preferment continued up to the dignity 
of consul, and he himself, as has been formerly 
observed, came at last to lead, in the capacity of a 
victorious general, a procession of the same kind 
with that in which he had made his first entry at 
Rome as a captive. 

This arrangement, in which Casar, by an- 
ticipating the nomination of magistrates, pre- 


‘cluded the citizens from the usual exercise of their 


rights of election, made the subversion of the re- 
public more felt than any of the former acts of 
his power, and gave the leaders of the conspiracy 
a great advantage against him. The prospect of 
his approaching departure from Rome, which was 
fixed for the month of March, urged the speedy 
execution of their purpose. The report of a 
response or prediction, which some of the flat- 
terers of Cesar had procured from the college of 
Augurs, bearing that the Parthians were not to 
be subdued but by a king,5 appeared to be the 
prelude of a motion to vest him, in his intended 
expedition against the Parthians, with the title, 
and with the ensigns of royalty, to be borne, if not 


in the city, at least in the provinces.® 


A meeting of the senate being already sum- 
moned, for the Ides, or fifteenth, of March, the 
proposal to bestow on-Cesar the title of king, asa 
qualification enjoined by the Sybils to make war 
on the Parthians, was expected to be the prin- 
cipal business of the assembly. This circum- 
stance determined the conspirators in the choice , 
of a place for the execution of their design.. They 
had formerly deliberated, whether to pitch upon 
the Campus Martius, and to strike their blow in 
the presence of the Roman people assembled, or 
in the entry to the theatre, or in a street through 
which Cesar ofte passed in the way to his own 
house? But this meeting of the senate seemed 
now to present the most convenient place, and 
the most favourable opportunity. ‘The presence 
of the senate, it was supposed, would render the 
action of the conspirators sufficiently awful and 
solemn; the common cause would be instantly 
acknowledged by all the members of that body 3 
and the execution done would be justified under 
their authority. If any were disposed to resist, 
they were not likely to be armed; and the aflair 
might be ended by the death of Cesar alone, or 
without any effusion of blood beyond that which 
was originally intended. 

— O O O O O i 
4 Cicero ad Attic. lib. xiv. ep. 6. 
5 Dio. Cass. lib. xliv c. 15. 


6 Zonaras, lib. x. c. 14. 
7 Sueton. in Cwsare. 


Crap. L] 


It was at first prdposed that Antony, being likely 
to carry on the same military usurpations which 
(‘æsar had begun, should be taken off at the 
same time; but this was overruled. It was sup- 
posed that Antony, and every other senator and 
citizen, would readily embrace the state of in- 
dependence and personal consideration which 
was to be offered to them; or if they should not 
embrace it, they would not be of sufficient num- 
bers or credit to distress the republic, or to overset 
that balance of parties in which the freedom of 
the whole consisted. 
moment Cesar fell, there would not be any one 
left to covet or to support a usurpation which had 
been so unfortunate in his person. “If we do 


any thing more than is necessary to set the Ro- 


nians at liberty,” said Marcus Brutus, “ we shall 
be thought to act from private resentment, and to 
intend restoring the party of Pompey, not the 
republic.’”® 

The intended assembly of the senate was to 
be held in one of the recesses of Pompey’s thea- 
tre. It was determined by the conspirators, that 
they should repair to this mecting as usual, either 
separately, or in the retinue of the consuls and 
pretors; and that, being armed with concealed 
weapons, they should proceed to the execution of 
their purpose as soon as Cesar had taken his 
seat. To guard against any disturbance or tu- 
mult that might arise to frustrate their intentions, 
Decimus Brutus, who was master of a troop of 
gladiators, undertook to have this troop, under 
pretence of exhibiting some combats on that 


day to the people, posted in the theatre, and ready | 
| tioned to this person no more than Casca’s inten- 


at his command for any service® 

During the interval of suspense which preccded 
the meeting of the senate, although in public 
Brutus seemed to perform all the duties of his 
station with an unaltered countenance; at home 
he was less guarded, and frequently appeared to 
have something uncommon on his mind. His 
wife Porcia suspected that some arduous desifn 
respecting the state was in agitation; and when 
she questioned him, was confirmed in this appre- 
hension, by his eluding her inquiries. Thinking 
herself, by her extraction and by her alliance, en- 
titled to confidence, she bore this appearance of 
distrust with regret ; and, under the idea that the 
secret which was withheld from her, must be 
such as, upon any suspicion, might occasion the 
torture to be employed to force a confession ; and 
supposing that she herself was distrustcd more 
on account of the weakness than of the indiscre- 
tion of her scx, she determined to make a trial 
of her own strength, before she desired that the 
secret. should be communicated to her. 
purpose she gave hcrself a wound in the thigh, 
and while it festered, and produced acute pain 
and fever, she endeavoured to preserve her usual 
countcnance, without any sign of suffering or 
distress. Being satisfied with this trial of her 
own strength, she told her husband the particu- 
lars, and with some degree of triumph added, 
“ Now you may trust me; Iam the wife of Bru- 
tus and the daughter of Cato; keep me no longer 
in doubt or suspense upon any subject in which 
I too must be so deeply concerned.” The cir- 
cumstance of her wound, the pretensions which 
she otherwise had to confidence, drew the secret 


8 Dio. Cass. lib. xliv. c. 15. 9 Ibid. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


It was supposed that the. 


For this | 


323 


from her husband, and undoubtedly from thence- 
forward, by the passions which were likely to 
agitate the mind of a tender and affectionate 
woman, exposcd the design to additional hazard 
of a discovery and of a failure. 

But the morning of the Ides of March, the day 
on which this conspiracy was to be executed, ar- 
rived, and there was yet no suspicion. The con- 
spirators had been already toycther at the house 
of one of the pretors. Cassius was to present 
his son that morning to the people, with the cere- 
mony usual in assuming the habit of manhood ; 
and he was, upou this account, to be attended by 
his fricnds into the place of assembly. He was 
afterwards, together with Brutus, in their capa- 
city of magistrates, employed as usual, in giving 
judgment on the causes that were brought be- 
fore them. As they sat in the prator’s chair 
they received intimation that Cesar, having been 
indisposed over night, was not to be abroad ; and 
that he had commissioned Antony, in his name, 
to adjourn the senate to another day. Upon this 
report, they suspected a discovery; and while 
they were deliberating what should be done, Po- 
pilius Lenas, a scnator whom they had not en- 
trusted with their design, whispered them as he 

assed, “I pray that God may prosper what you 
fee in view. Above all things despatch.” Their 
suspicions of a discovery being thus still farther 
confirmed, the intention soon aftcr appeared to 
be public. An acquaintance told Casca, “ You 
have concealed this business from me, but Brutus 
told me of it.” They were struck with surprise ; 
but Brutus presently recollected that he had men- 


tion of standing for edile, and that the words 
which he spoke probably referred only to that 
business; they accordingly determined to wait 
the issuc of these alarms.!° 

Jn the mean time Cesar, at the persuasion of 
Decimus Brutus, though once determined to 
remain at home, had changed his mind, and 
was already in the streets, being carricd to the 
senate in his litter. Soon after he had left his 
own house, a slave came thither in haste, desired 
protection, and said he had a secret of the greatest 
moment to impart. He had probably over- 
heard the conspirators, or had observed that they 
were armed; but not being aware how pressing 
the time was, he suffered himsclf to be detained till 
Cesar’s return. Others, probably, had observed 
circumstances which led to a discovery of the 
plot, and Cesar had a billet to this eflect given 
to him as he passcd in the streets; he was in- 
treated by the person who gave it instantly to 
read it; and he cndeavoured to do so, but was 
pens by the mukitudes who crowded around 

im with numberless applications; and he stil] 
carried this paper in his hand when he entered 
the senate. 

Brutus and most of the conspirators had taken 
their places a little while before the arrival of 
Cesar, and continued to be alarmed by many 
circumstances which tended to shake their reso- 
lution, Porcia, in the same moments, being in 

reat agitation, exposcd herself to public notice. 
She listened with anxiety to every noise in the 
streets; she despatched, without any pretence of 


}0 Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib, ii. 


32k 


business, continual messages towards the place. 


where the senate was assembled ; she asked every 
person who came from that quarter if they ob- 
served what her husband was doing. Her spirit 
at last sunk under the effect of such violent emo- 
tions; she fainted away, and was carried for dead 
into her apartment. A message came to Brutus 
in the senate with this account. He was much 
alfected, but kept his place! Popilius Lenas, 
who a little before seemed, from the expression he 
had dropped, to have got notice of their design, 
appeared to be in earnest conversation with Ce- 
sar, as he lighted from his carriage. This left 
the conspirators no longer in doubt that they 
were discovered; and thev made signs to each 
other, that it would be better to die by their own 
hands than to fall into the power of their enemy, 
But they saw of a sudden the countenance of 
Lænas change into a smile, and perceived that 
his conversation with Cesar could not relate to 
such a business as theirs. 

Cesar’s chair of state had been placed near to 
the pedestal of Pompey’s statue. Numbers of 
the conspirators had seated themselves around it. 
Trebonius, under pretence of business, had taken 
Antony aside at the entrance of the theatre. 
Cimber, who, with others of the conspirators, 
met Cæsar in the portico, presented him with a 
petition in favour of his brother who had been ex- 
cepted from the late indemnity ; and in urging the 
prayer of this petition, attended the dictator to his 
place. Having there received a denial from Cesar, 
uttered with some expressions of impatience at 
being so much importuned, he took hold of his 
robe, as if to press the intreaty. Nay, said Cesar, 
this is violence. While he spoke these words, 
Cimber flung back the gown from his shoulders ; 
and this being the signal agreed upon, called out 
to strike. Casca aimed the first blow. Cæsar 
started from his place, and in the first moment 
of surprise, pushed Cimber with one arm, and 
laid hold of Casca with the other. But he soon 
perceived that resistance was vain: and while 
the swords of the conspirators clashed with each 
other, in their way to his body, he wrapped him- 
self up in his gown, and fell without any farther 
struggle. It was observed, in the superstitjon of 
the times, that in falling, the blood which sprung 
from his wounds sprinkled the pedestal of Pom 
pey’s statue. And thus having employed the 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


with whom it would have been a much greater 
honour to have been able to live on terms of 
equality, he fell in the height of his security, a 
sacrifice to their just indignation; a striking ex- 
ample of what the arrogant have to fear in tri- 
fling with the feelings of a free people, and at the 
same time a lesson of jealousy and of cruelty to 
tyrants, or an admonition not to spare, in the ex- 
ercise of their power, those whom they may have 
insulted by usurping it. 

When the body lay breathless on the ground, 
Cassius called out, that there lay the worst of 
men.2 Brutus called upon the senate tu judge 
of the transaction which had passed before them, 
and was proceeding to state the motives of those 
who were concerned in it, when the members, 
who had for a moment stood in silent amazement, 
rose on a sudden, and began to separate in great 
consternation. All those who had come to the 
senate in the train of Cesar, his lictors, the or- 
dinary officers of state, citizens, and foreigners, 
with many servants and dependants of every sort, 
had been instantly seized with a panic; and as if 
the swords of the conspirators were drawn against 
theniselves, had already rushed into the streets, 
and carried terror and confusion wherever they 
went, The senators themselves now followed. 
No man had presence of mind to give any ac- 
count of what had happened, but repeated the 
cry that was usual on great alarms for all persons 
to withdraw, and to shut up their habitations and 
shops. This cry was communicated from one 
to another in the streets. The people, imagining 
that a general massacre was somewhere begun, 
shut up, and barred all their dvors as in the dead 
of night, and every one prepared to defend his 
own habitation. 

Antonv, upon the first alarm had changed his 
dress, and retired to a place of safety. e be- 
lieved that the conspirators must have intended 
to take his life, together with that of Cæsar; and 
he fled in the apprehension of being instantly pur- 
sued. Lepidus repaired to the suburbs, where 
the legion he commanded was quartered; and un- 
certain whether C æsar’s death was the act of the 
whole senate, or of a private party, waited for an 
explanation, or an order from the surviving con 
sul, to determine in what manner he should act. 
In these circumstances a general pause, and ap 
interval of suspense and silence, took place over 


greatest abilities to subdue his fellow-citizens, | the whole city, 


CHAPTER II. 


General Consternation on the Death of Cesar—Tumultuary Assembly of the People— Declara 
tions of Cinna and Dolabella—Appearance of Brutus and Cassius in the Forum— Their return 
to the Capitol— Meeting and Debate in the Senate—Act of Oblivion—Speech of Brutus to the 
People—Funeral of Casar—Insurrection of the People—Policy of Antony— Appearance of 


Oztavius—His Difference with Anton 


y— Both have recourse to Arms—Aspect of Things— 


Antony proceeds to expel Decimus Brutus from the Cisalpine Gaul. 


IN the general consternation, occasioned by | 


the death of Cesar, the authors of this important 
event appeared to be no less at a loss what to do, 
than the other members of the senate, on whom 


T Plut. in Bruto. : : 
2 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. xii. ep. 1. Nequissimum occi- 
HRA ease, 3 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 


it was brought by surprise. The danger of exe- 
cuting the first part of their design had appeared 
so great, that they looked no farther, or they im- 
agined that with Cæsars life every difficulty 
would be ended; and that the senate and people, 
restored to their authority and privileges, would 
| naturally recur to their usual forms. Finding 


Cuar. IL] 


themselves deserted in the senate, and not know- 
ing to what dangers they might still be exposed, 
they wrapped up the left arın in their gowns; a 
preparation which the Romans, in the habit of 
using a shield, generally made when alarmed 
with any prospect of violence. 

The conspirators thus in a body, with their 
swords yet stained with blood, went forth to the 


streets proclaiming security and liberty, and invit-. 


mg every one to concur with them in restoring 
the Commonwealth. They were joined by many 
who, though not accessary to the eenspiracy, 
chose to embark with them in the present state 
of their fortunes. Of these are particularly men- 
tioned Lentulus Spinther, Favonius, Acquinas, 
Dolabella, Murcus, Peticus, and Cinna. But 
observing that the people in general did not show 
any hearty approbation of their cause ; and know- 
ing that, besides the legion which Lepidus com- 
manded in the suburbs, there were in the city 
multitudes of veterans, who having received grants 
of land from Cesar, either had not yet gone to 
take possession of them, or having been at their 
settlements, had returned to pay court to their 
patron before his departure from Rome; and sus- 
pecting that Antony, now the sole consul and 
supreme Officer of state, was likely to exert the 
powers of a magistrate against them; and being 
on every side beset with dangers of which they 
knew not the extent, they determined to take re- 
fuge in the capitol, and with the gladiators of 
Decimus Brutus, who had already taken posses- 
sion of that fortress, to wait the issue of this ge- 
neral scene of suspense. 

‘Multitudes ef the people, observing that the 
persons who had occasioned this general alarm 
were themselves on the defensive, and no way 
inclined to extend the effusion of blood, ventured 
forth into the streets, and many crowded to- 
gether in the forum or ordinary place of resort.4 
The first person that took any public part upon 
this occasion was Cinna, the son of him who had 
been a leader uf the Marian party, brother-in-law 
of Cesar, and now, by his nomination, advanced 
to the dignity of prætor. This relation of the 
deceased, to the surprise of every one, tore the 
pretor’s gown from his own shoulders ; declared 
that in this act he then abdicated his office, as 
having been unwarrantably obtained by the no- 
mination of an usurper; and he proceeded to 
make a harangue to the people, in which he re- 
presented Cæsar as a tyrant, extolled the con- 
spirators as the restorers of liberty to their coun- 
try, and proposed that they should have the 
proper safeguards to their persons, and be invited 
to assist in the assembly of the people. 

Dolabella, whe had been nominated by Cesar 
to succeed in the office of consul, which he him- 
self was about to vacate, thinking that the in- 
tended succession was now open to him upon 
Cesar’s death, reversed the first part of Cinna’s 
conduct, by assuming the robes and ensigns of 
consul, to which he had no title; but joined with 
the abdicated pretor in applauding the authors 


4 Appian says, that the friends of the cunspirators, 
by distributing money, endeavoured to form a party 
among the populace. The necessity of this expedient, 
if real, is sufficient to show how desperate the attempt 
was of restoring democratical government to the in- 
habitants of Rome, composed of the refuse of Italy, 
and of the provinces collected to enjoy the rewards of 
adleness and faction. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


323 


of Cesar’s death, expressed his wish that he him- 
self had been a partner in the glory of their ac- 
tion, joined with Cinna, in proposing that these 
restorers of liberty should be invited to the assem- 
bly of the people, and that the anniversary of the 
present day should be observed for ever, as a fes- 
tival sacred to the restoration of the common- 
wealth. 

The partizans of Cesar, yet unacquainted with 
the extent of their own danger, had absented 
themselves, and the assembly consisted chiefly of 
persons to whom these proposals were agreeable, 
The notions that were now made by the late 
prætor and the supposed consul accordingly pre- 
vailed, and the leaders of the conspiracy were in- 
vited to descend from the capitol. But of this 
invitation only Marcus Brutus and Cassius took 
the benefit. Having joined the assembly, they 
severally addressed themselves to the multitude 
with an air of dignity and consciousness of merit, 
as being the procurers of that liberty which the 
people were now to enjoy, and by which they 
were enabled to judge for themselves. They 
contrasted the late usurpation of Cesar with the 
free constitution of the republic; observed, that 
with respect to themselves, unsupported as they 
were by any military force, they could have no 
intention to supplant the usurperin the possession 
of his power, and could have no object besides the 
restoration of the laws and the freedom of their 
country. And they exhorted the audience, in 
terms rather popular, than really applicable to 
the present state of aflairs, to make the same use 
of their deliverance froin an usurped and violent 
domination which their ancestors, at the expul- 
sion of Tarquin, had made of a similar event, 
They specified the merit which many persons 
had in this enterprise, particularly that of Deci- 
mus Brutus, who had furnished the coinpany of 
gladiators, which, in entering on this business, 
made the principal part of their strength; and 
observed, that, notwithstanding the splendid for- 
tune to which Decimus Brutus might have as- 
pired under Casar’s influence, he had preferred 
the rights of his fellow-citizens and the restora- 
tion of the commonwealth. They turned the 
attention of the audience on the case of Sexteius 
Pompeius, the only surviving son of the great 
Pompey, now unjustly deemed an outlaw and a 
rebel.6 “In the person of this young man,” they 
said, “ you have the last of a noble family, who, 
in the contest for freedom, have sacrificed them- 
selves for the republic, even he is still beset b 
the emissaries of the late usurper, who, pretend- 
ing public authority, are armed for his destruc- 
tion with swords, yet red with the blood of his fa- 
ther and of his brother.” They moved the people, 
that so unjust a war should be instantly sus- 
pended, and that this young man should be re- 
stored to the rights of his ancestors; that the 
tribunes Cesetius and Marullus, being unjustly 
degraded by Cesar, in violation of that sacred 
law, which he himself, upon much less grounds, 
had made his pretence for a civil war, should now 
be restored to all their diguities. 


5 Appian. de Bello Civili, lib. ii. Dio. Cass. lib. xliv. 
Core 

6 This young man having absconded for some time 
after the defeat and death of his brother at Munda, 
had again appeared in Spain at the head of a consi- 
derable force. and defeated Asinius Pollio, who had 


| been employed by Casar against him. 


326 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


In these fond anticipations of freedom, the | and had secured an immense sum of money, 


authors of this attempt to restore the republic, 
enjoyed for once the fruits of their labour, and 
spoke to a numerous assembly of the Roman 
people, seemingly unrestrained and unawed by 
military force. The city, however, had not yet 
recovered from the consternation with which the 
people was seized; the present assembly was not 


sufficiently attended by persons, on whom the | 


conspirators could rely for their safety. It was 
thought most prudent, therefore, that Brutus and 
Cassius should return to their friends in the ca- 
pitol, and that from this place they should treat 
of an accommodation with Antony, and with the 
other leaders of the opposite party. 

On the following day, Antony, seeing that the 
restorers of the commonwealth remained in the 
capitol, and abstained from violence against any 
of the supposed friends or adherents of Cesar, 
ventured abroad from his lurking place, and re- 
sumed the dress and ensigns of consul. In this 
capacity he received a message from the conspi- 
rators, desiring a conference with himself and 
with Lepidus. Antony, though, in times of re- 
laxation and security, extravagant, dissipated, 
and in appearance incapable of serious affairs ;! 
yet in arduous situations he generally belied 
these appearances, was strenuous, cautious, and 
able. He did not yet perceive how far the party 
of Cesar was or was not extinguished with its 
leader. The only military force in Italy was at 
the disposal of Lepidus, of whom he was jealous. 
In his answer, therefore, he assumed an appear- 
ance of moderation and regard for the common- 
wealth, and referred every question to the senate, 
which he had already summoned to assemble. 

In expectation of this meeting of the senate, all 
parties were busy in consultations, and in solicit- 
ing support to their interest. The friends of the 
conspirators were in motion all night visiting the 
senators, and preparing measures for the follow- 
ing day. The veterans of Cesar, both officers 
and legionary soldiers, apprehending that the 
grants of land lately made to themselves might be 
recalled, went to and fro in the streets, and made 
application wherever they had access, with repre- 
sentations and threats. They even provided 
themselves with arms, and prepared to overawe 
the senate by their numbers. 

In the course of the same night, Lepidus had 
marched into the city with the legion he com- 
manded, and took possession of the forum. To 
the ‘people who assembled around him he la- 
mented the death of Cesar, and inveighed against 
the authors of this unexpected event. By this 
declaration, he encouraged the partizans and re- 
tainers of the late dictator to come abroad, and 
rendered the streets and passages exceedingly 
dangerous for those who were supposed to be of 
the opposite party. Cinna, who, to evince his 
zeal for the reviving republic, had resigned the 
office of prætor conferred upon him by Cæsar, 
was attacked on his way to the senate, and nar- 
rowly escaped with his life. 

Antony, in that busy niyht, had, by his credit 
with Calpurnia the widow of Cesar, got posses- 
sion of all his memorials and of all his writings, 


1 If [ ain not mistaken, says Cicero upon this occa- 
sion, he minds eating and drinking even more than 
mischief. (Cicero ad Attie lib. xiv. ep. 3. quem qui- 
dem ego epularum magis arbitror rationem habere, 
Quam quidquam mali cogitare.) 


e e a aaae a ~ a a 
re a e a a a 


which had been deposited by him in the temple 
of Ops.? 3 

On the following day, being the eighteenth day 
of March, the senate assembled, as soon asit waa 
light, in the temple of the Earth. The veterans 
beset the doors.3 Dolabella presented himself 
ushered in by the lictors, and took possession of 
one of the consuls chairs. Anteny being seated 
in the other, moved the assembly to take into 
consideration the present state of the common- 
wealth. He himself professed great zeal for the 
republic, and a disposition to peace.4 The greater 
part of those who spoke after Antony justified or 
extolled the act of the conspirators, and moved 
that they should have public thanks and rewards 
for their services. This they supported by a 
charge of usurpation and tyranny against Cesar. 
Upon this point, however, Antony thought pro- 
per to interpose; reminded the senators how 
nearly many of them were concerned in this ques- 
tion. “They who are to vote in it,” he said, 
“will please to observe, that if Cesar shall be 
found to have acted with legal powers, his acts 
will remain in force ; if otherwise, all the proceed- 
ings that teok place during his administration 
must be erased from your records ; and his kody, 
as that of a traitor and a tyrant, made fast on a 
hook, must be dragged through the streets, and 
cast into the Tiber. This sentence would affect 
the remotest parts of the empire, or would extend, 
in its application, farther perhaps than we should 
be able to enforce it by our arms. Part indeed is 
in our power. Many of us hold offices, or are 
destined by Cesar’s nomination to offices, either 
at home or abroad. Let us begin with divesting 
ourselves of what we now hold; and with re- 
nouncing our expectations for the future. After 
we have given this proof of our disinterestedness, 
our allies abroad will listen to us, when we speak 
of recalling the favours granted to them by the 
late dictator.” 

By this artful turn, which was given by An- 
tony to the subject now under deliberation, many, 
who in the late arrangements made by Cesar, 
held places in the senate or magistracy, or, who 
were by his appointment destined to succeed to 
high offices at home or abroad, were greatly dis- 
concerted. Some of those who were actually in 
office, as retainers of the late usurpation, resigned 
their powers, and laid down the ensigns of ma- 
gistracy on the steps where they sat; but Dola- 
bella, who, in consequence of a destination made, 
though not fulfilled by Casar, had recently as- 
sumed the consular robes, and who, being under 
the legal age, had no hopes of being re-elected by 
the free voice of the people, notwithstanding his 
declaration in favour of the authors of Cesar’s 
death, pleaded for the necessity of sustaining all 
the acts and decrees of that usurper. 

While the senators were engaged in debate on 
the terms of their first resolution, relating to the 
act of the conspirators and the death of Cesar, 
the peop!e, who had assembled in great multi- 


2 Cicero says, septies Millies H. S. abont six mil- 
lions sterling. Philip ii. c. 37. 4000 talents. Plut. in 
Anton. | : 

3 Cicer. ad Att. lib. xiv. ep. 14. Nonne omni ratione 
veterani qui, armati aderant, cum presidii nos nihil 
haberemus. defendendi fuerunt ? 

4 Thid. Philip i.c 1 


Cuar. IE] 


tudes in the market-place, became impatient to 
know what was passing, and pressed on the doors 
of the temple where the senate was met, with 
some attempts to force or break them open. On 
this occasion, Antony and Lepidus thought pro- 
per to go forth, under pretence of appeasing the 
tumult; but with a real intention to observe what, 
in this critical state of affairs, was the prevailing 
disposition of the people, with a full resolution to 
be governed in their own measures, by what 
seemed to be the will of the multitude. Finding 
the humour of the majority, and the disposition 
of the troops such as they desired, menacing and 
sanguinary against the conspirators, they endea- 
voured to infame their passions, employing signs 
and gestures of inilignation, rather than words, 
which could not be heard. Among other ex- 
pressions of this nature, Antony laid open his 
bosom, to show the armour with which he had 
thought necessary, in the senate, and amidst so 
many concealed enemies, to guard his life. By 
this, and other signs which he made, he insinu- 
ated that Cæsar had fallen in consequence of his 
excessive confidence, and of the clemency with 
which he had spared those who became his mur- 
derers, 

From this scene, which passed in the streets, 
Antony returned to the senate; and the debate 
being resumed, Dolabella alleging the confusion 
which must arise from a general suspension of 
magistracy, and the disorders attending gencral 
elections at so critical a time, insisted, that all 
magistrates now in office should continue. Ci- 
cero pleaded for a general amnesty and oblivion 
for the past ; enumerated the evils which had been 
brought on the republic, by the contentions and 
by the vindictive spirit of party ; proposed that 
none should be questioned for Cesar’s death, nor 
any one be called to account for violence committed 
under his authority; that the arrangements made 
by Cesar should remain; that every one destined 
to office, should in his turn succeed according to 
that destination; and that all the provisions made 
for the army should be fully secured to them.7 

After some opposite opinions on the question 
had been delivered, Antony concluded the debate 
with a tone of more authority than he had hither- 
to assumed. “ While you deliberated,” he said, 
“on the conduct which you were to hold with 
respect to the conspirators, I chose to be silent; 
but when you changed the question, and pro- 
posed to condemn the dead, I ventured only to 
make one objection, which being removable by 
yourselves, ought to have been the least of all 
your difficulties. And yet I find it is sufficient 
to stop all your proceedings! What are we to 
think of the remaining objections? The whole 
fabric of the empire rests at this moment on esta- 
blishments made by Cesar; at home on the 
arrangements he has made in the succession to 
office ; abroad on the grants of possessions or im- 
munities made by him to princes, cities, corpora- 
tions, and provinces, and on the several condi- 
tions he has, in return, stipulated with them on 
behalf of the Roman people. Imagine then, upon 
the subversion of what he has establislied, what 
scenes of confusion must follow. It is true, con- 
fusion at a distance may not affect you; but the 
scene in Italy will be sufficient to occupy your 


5 Appian. de Bello Civ. lib. ii. 6 Ibid. 


7 Dio. Cass. lib. xliv. €. 34. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


a 
32 


utmost attention. Will the veterans, do you 
think, who have not yet laid down their arms, or 
not lost the use of them, of whom many thou- 
sands are now in this city, will they allow them- 
selves to be stripped of the grants which were 
made to them in reward of long, dangerous, and 
faithful services? You have heard their voice 
last night in the streets. You have heard their 
menaces against the authors of our present dis- 
tresses. Will they behold with patience the 
body of their favourite leader dragged with igno- 
miny in the streets? Will they bear with an 
indignity, which, though done to his memory, 
must involve a forfeiture of all that they themselves 
have received, or a disappointment of all they ex- 
pect in reward of their services? Will the Ro- 
man people in general submit to have the princi- 
pal author of their present greatness stigmatised 
by your decrees as a criminal, and to have his 
assassins rewarded with honours ?—The propo- 
sal to me, in all its parts, appears wild and im- 
practicable. Let the conspirators, if you will, 
escape with impunity, provided they are sensible 
of the favour that is shown to them; but talk not 
of rewards to them; nor, under pretence of cen- 
suring the conduct of your late dictator, wildly 
open ascene of confusion, by subverting all your 
present establishments. My opinion is, that the 
acts of Cesar, without exception, should be rati- 
fied, and that all affairs should be suffered to 
move on in the channels in which he has left 
them. On these preliminary conditions I will 
submit to an accommodation, and agree that we 
think no more of the past.” 

In delivering this speech, Antony having per- 
ceived so powerful a support in the legion which 
now had possession of the forum, in the veterans, 
and in the promiscuous multitudes of people who 
were assembled round the doors of the senate, 
expressed himself with assurance and great ve- 
hemence. A decree was accordingly passed, by 
which all prosecutions, on account of Cesar’s 
death, were prohibited ; all his acts, for the sake 
of peace, were confirmed; all his plans ordered 
to be carried into execution ; and all the grants of 
land, which had been made by him to the vete- 
rans, specially ratified 8 

This decree being to he carried to the people 
for their assent on the following day, and the 
accommodation of parties being so far advanced, 
the conspirators intimated an inclination to ad- 
dress themselves to the people; and were instant- 
ly attended by great numbers, who assembled to 
hear them on the ascent of the capital. Brutus 
spoke from the steps. He explained the motives 
upon which his friends and himself had thought 
proper to betake them to their present retreat ; 
and, in speaking on this subject, complained of 
the outrage which had been offered to Cinna, 
who, though not concerned in the death of Cæ- 
sar, was attacked, for having been supposed to 
approve of what they had done. He enumerated 
the distresses which had afHicted the common- 
wealth, from the time at which Cesar commenced 
hostilities to the present hour; “ A period, du- 
ring which the best blood of the republic,” he 
said, “was continually shedding, in Spain, in 
Macedonia, and in Africa, to gratify the ambi- 
tion or vanity of a single man. ‘hese things 


8 Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib. ii. 
9 Cicer. ad Attic. lib. xv. ep. 1. 


328 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION. 


{Boor V. 


however,” continued he, “ we consented to over- | moderation, resolved to confirm Cæsars will and. 
fook, and in suffering Cesar to hold the higher! to ratify all his acts, both public and private; 


offices of state, became bound, by our oath of 
fidelity, not to call any of his past actions in ques- 
ton. If we had likewise sworn to submit our- 
selves to perpetual servitude, our enemies might 
have some colour for the accusation of perjury, 
which we are told is nowlaid to our charge ; but the 
pagno! of any such engagement we should 
ave rejected with indignation, and we trust that 
every Roman citizen would have done so also. 
Sylla, after having gratified his revenge against 
many who were no doubt his own enemies, at 
the same time that they were enemies of the 
public, at last restored the commonwealth ;. but 
Cesar, without any pretence, besides the gratifi- 
cation of his own ambition, continued, in the 
city and in the provinces,.to usurp all the powers 
of the empire. The treasury he treated as his 
property, and the magistrates of Rome as his 
creatures, to be placed or displaced at his pleasure. 
One of the last acts of his life, in preparing for 
his departure from Rome, was to fix the succes- 
sion of magistrates for several years; in order 
that in his absence you might not, by choosing 
your own officers, recover the habit of exercising 
that freedom, and of enjoying those rights, of 
which he meant to deprive you for ever.” 
From this account of Cæsars usurpation, 
Brutus proceeded to speak of the grants which 
had been made to the veterans, ‘ He acknow- 
ledged the long and faithful services which those 
men had performed against the enemies of the 
commonwealth in Gaul, in Germany, and in 
Britain; approved of the provision which had 
been made for them, and assured then of his 
concurrence in carrying this provision into full 
execution. At the same time he lamented the 
sufferings of those who had been stripped of their 
ancient possessions, to make way for those new 
grants; proposed that they should have a com- 
pensation from the treasury, and hoped that the 
justice of the commonwealth would be employed 
in equally protecting the rights of every citizen.” 
This speech was received with applause ; and 
on the following day the act of oblivion being 
confirmed by the people, and the children of An- 
tony having heen sent! as hose to the capitol, 
the conspirators came down from thence, and 
were received with loud acclamations. After 
parties had saluted each other with mutual con- 
gratulations and. expressions of friendship, Cas- 
sius retired to sup with Antony,.and Brutus with 
Lepidus. The republic appeared to be thoroughly 
re-established. ‘The nobles in general expressed 
their satisfaction in the present situation of af- 
fairs, and extolled the authors of Cesar’s death 
as the restorers of freedom: to their country. 
Many, however, who had shared in the late 
usurpation, having tasted of military power, and 
being unable to acquiesce in the condition of 
mere citizens, however dignified, or to accommo- 
date themselves to the restraints and formalities 
of legal government, were likely to prove bad 
members of the reviving republic. Antony in 
particular considered hiniself as the successor of 
Cesar, and could not for a nioment cease to think 
how he might grasp the sovereignty, and dispose 
of all the dignities and emoluments of the state. 
The senate had weakly, under the show of 


1 Cicer. Philip. i. ¢. 1. 


they had decreed that the remains of Cesar should 
be honoured with a public funeral, which was to 
be conducted in the manner which his friends: 
should think proper. 

Antony was prepared to take advantage of 
these circumstances, towards preserving the party 
of Cesar beth in the army and in the city, not 
doubting that, while this party remained, he him- 
self should remain at its head. For this purpose, 
he published Cesar’s will, in which he knew that 
there were many clauses likely to gratify the 
people, and to inflame their minds against his 
assassins. Among these, were a legacy of mo- 
ney to be distributed to the inferior citizens, at 
the rate of twenty-five attic drachmas, about two 
pounds ten shillings a man;? or, according to 
Octavius, quoted by Dion Cassius, 300 H. S. 
about the same sum; together with an assign- 
ment of his gardens on the river, as public walks 
for the service and pleasure of the people. Many 
legacies were likewise bequeathed to private per- 
sons. The inheritance with the name of Cesar, 
was devised to Octavius, grandson to his sister 
Julia. The succession, in case of the failure of 
this young man, was devised to Decimus Brutus, 
who, at the same time, together with Mark An 
tony, was made guardian to the young Cesar, 
and executor of the will. y ' 

Upon the publication of this will, the partizans 
of Antony took occasion to extol the munificence 
and gencrosity of Cesar towards the Roman 
peuple, to blacken the conduct of the conspirators, 
representing that of Decimus Brutus, in particu- 
lar, as equal to parricide; and Antony, in this 
manner having secured the public attention and 
favour, proceeded to celebrate the funeral with 
all the honours that were due to a public benetac- 
tor, and to a common parent of the people. 

Cesar’s body, in the general consternation, had 
been left for some hours on the spot where it fell. 
lt was at last borne on a litter by a few slaves to 
his own house. In this confusion, one of the 
arms, all over blood, was left hanging over the 
side of the litter; and this circumstance, though 
at the time in appearance unnoticed, yet remained 
with a deep impression on the minds of those 
who beheld it. On- examining the body, there 
were found twenty-three wounds sufficiently 
ghastly, although no more than one or two were 
mortal, Antony determined to exhibit this spec- 
tacle to the people, accompanied with that of the 
robes, which were pierced and torn in the strug- 

le with which Cesar fell, and all over stained 
with his blood. He likewise ordered a solemn 
dirge to be performed, with interludes of music, 
agreeable to the practice at Roman funerals, and 
suited to that particular occasion. He himself 
prepared to speak the oration; and: a day being 
fixed for the solemnity, a pile was raised in the 
Campus Martius, near to the tomb of Julia, the 
daughter of the deceased, and the wife of Pom- 


peye Although it was intended that the body 


should be consumed on this pile in the Campus 
Martius, the funeral oration was to be spoken 
from the rostra in the forum, and a couca was 
placed there adorned with ivory and gold, on 
which was laid the corpse with au effigy of the 
deceased, covered with purple, aud over it a tro- 


2 Appian. de Besl. Civili. lib. ii. 


Cnap. Il] 


shy, on which was to be hung the robes in which 
he was killed. The whole of this pageant was 
vovered up, and adorned with a gilded canopy of 
state: In bearing it to the forum, the pall was 
carried by magistrates then in office, or by per- 
sons who had passed through the highest stations 
of the commonwealth. But in the procession, 
the streets were so crowded, that no order could 
be kept, and multitudes who ought to have passed 
in regular procession, hurried by the shortest 
ways to the place at which the obsequies were to 
be performed.3 n 

Antony began the funeral oration, with an 
apology for intruding on the patience of many, 
who possibly took no particular concern in the 
catastrophe of Cæsar’s life. “Had Cæsar been 
a private man,” he said, “I should have pro- 
ceeded to his fúneral in silence ; but one who has 
died in the first station of the republic, is entitled 
to public notice. And my own station as consul, 
were I qualified for the fask, would have imposed 
on me a special duty on this occasion; but in 
this instance, the eulogium of the dead must pro- 
ceed from a higher authority than mine. The 
senate and the people of Rome have spoken, and 
they have left to me only the task of repeating 
what they have said.” After these words, he 
read over the decrees of the senate and people, 
enumerating the titles, dignities, honours, and 
powers which had been conferred on Cesar. He 
spoke of the lustre of his family, the graces and 
accomplishments of his person, and of his singu- 
lar abilities ; gave a general account of the wars 
in which he had been engaged; his splendid suc- 
eesses and the accession of glory and of empire 
he had procured to the Roman state: and when 
he had gained so far on the attention of his audi- 
ence, he addressed himself to the popular part in 
particular. ‘“ When you were oppressed,” he 
said, “ by a faction that engrossed all the powers 
and dignities of the commonwealth, Cesar gene- 
rously interposed in your behalf. When this 
faction had withdrawn themselves from the alle- 
giance that was due to'the government of their 
country ; and when they had actnally armed first 
the provinces of Spain, afterwards Macedonia, 
Greece, Asia, Africa, and all the eastern parts of 
the empire against you, he braved the storms of 
winter and the superior force of the enemy ; he dis- 
fer the cloud which had gathered cver your 

eads; he carried the glory of your arms into 
Asia, Africa, Egypt, and yet a third time into 
Spain. His enemies every where experienced 
his valour in battle, and his clemency in victory. 
He pardoned many who were repeatedly in arms 
against him; and when he dreaded the effects of 
an excessive lenity towards those who appeared 
to be incorrigible, he sought for pretences to par- 
don his enemies under the show of gratifying his 
friends. 

“On the subject of his administration in the 
state, I need’ not make any observation tu you. 
You were witnesses of his conduct. Descended 
of your ancient kings; he had more glory in re- 
fusing a’ crown that was offered to’ him, than 
they had in wearing it with all its honours.— 
You loved him—you set him at the head of your 
ne aan the head of your army—at the 

ead of the republic;—you declared his person 


3 Sueton, in Cesar. 
21 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


329 


sacred as that of your tribunes—-you declared him 
the father of his country—you showed him to the 
world, adorned with the ensigns of sovereign 
power—your dictator, your guardian, and the 
terror of your enemies. But he is no more !— 
This sacred person is now breathless before you. 
The father of his country is dead: not, alas! of 
disease— not of the decline of years—not by the 
hands of foreign enemies—not far from his own 
country—but here within your walls, and in the 
Roman senate, in the vigour of health, in the 
midst of ali his designs for your prosperity and 
glory. He who often repelled the swords of his 
enemies, has fallen by the hands of treacherous 
friends, or by the hands of those whom his cle- 
mency had spared.—But what availed his ¢le- 
mency? what availed the laws with which he so 
anxiously guarded the lives of his fellow-citizens ? 
His own he could not guard from traitors. His 
mangled body, and his gray hairs clotted with 
blood, are now exposed in that forum which he 
so often adorned with his triumphs; and near to 
that place of public debate, from which he so 
often captivated the peuple of Rome with his 
eloquence.’’* 

At this passage, it is said that Antony began 
to change the tone of lamentation into that of 
rage; that he raised his voice to indignation and 
threats, but that he was checked by a general 
murmur of the senators; and that he thought 
proper again to soften his expressions, ‘ The 
gods,” he said, “are masters of the fortunes of 
men. Itis our part to forget the past, to look 
forward to the future, to cultivate peace amon 
ourselves, and to accompany this hero with 
songs of praise to the mansions of the blest.” — 
Having spoke these words, he tucked up his 
robe, and disengaged his arms as for some vehe- 
ment action; and standing over the bier in which 
the ethgy was laid, uncovered it; but, as starting 
from the sight, or struck into silence, he held up 
the torn and bloody garment to view, sunk again 


‘into a sorrowful tone, and prayed that it were 


possible for him to redeem that precious life with 
his own. Being interrupted with a general cry 
of lamentation from the people, he made a pause 
to hear the interlude. Ata passage of the song, 
in which Cesar was personated in the sllowing 
words, “ For this I spared, that they might mur- 
der me ;” a general cry of indignation burst from 
the multitude + and, at the same time, the effigy 
of the dead, with all its wounds and stains of 
blood, being raised to view, the people could no 
longer be restrained. Part ran to avenge his blood 
on the persons of the conspirators, and part tore 
up the benches and tribunals of the magistrates, 
dismantled the senate-house, brought into heaps 
the spoils of the supposed enemies of Cæsar, and 
forgetting the preparations which had been made 
for a funeral pile in the field of Mars, brought 
the most precious combustible materials they 
could find to light a fire in the ferum, on which 
to consume the body of the dead. 

From this beginning, the people continued 
during the’ whole night to bring fresh materials. 
The officers who had attended the procession, 
stripped off the robes in which they were dressed, 
and cast thein in the flames. Women crowded 
to the pile, and threw upon it, as a sacrifice to 


4 Dio. Case. lib. xliv. e. 49. 


330 


the manes of the dead, the ornaments of their 
own persons, the gorgets and the prætextas of 
their children. The people, in general, appeared 
to be seized with an epidemical phrensy, of which, 
neither the degree of their attachment to Cæsar 
ìn his life-time, nor the manner in which they 
had received the first accounts of his death, had 


given any adequate expectations: they ran. 


through the streets denouncing vengeance on his 
enemies, and proceeded to violence against every 
person who was represented as such. Helvius 
Cinna being mistaken for Cornelius of the same 
name; who, on the preceding day had declared his 
approbation of the conspiracy, was put to death 
by the populace, his body torn in pieces, and his 
head carried in procession on the point of a spear.! 
‘Fhe perpetrators of this murder being led by tie 
retainers and dependants of Cæsars family, 
snatched lighted brands from the funeral pile, 
and attacked the houses of Brutus, Cassius, and 
the other conspirators. They even attempted to 
demolish Pompey’s theatre, in which Cesar had 
been killed, and lighting many fires at once in 
different parts of the city, threatened the whole 
with immediate destruction. 

In these riots, though projected by Antony, the 
public disorder was carried to a greater height 
than he had wished or foreseen. His intention 
was to incite a popular cry against the authors of 
Cæsars death, and to check the senate in any 
opposition they were likely to give in the execu- 
tion of his own designs. But when the crimes 
which were committed began to reflect dishonour 
on the party of Cesar, and when all persons of 
property were alarmed, and the city itself was 
threatened with ruin, he found himself obliged, 
with the authority of magistrate, to interpose and 

ut an end to tumults of so dangerous a nature. 

or this purpose, in concert with Dolabella, he 
issued an edict, prohibiting the populace to as- 
semble in. arms on any pretence whatever, and 
posted guards in different parts of the town to 
secure the observance of it. 

Antony having by these means restored the 
peace of the city, and dispersed all the crowds 
which had assembled, except that which still re- 
mained at the place of Cesar’s funeral, where 
the populace continued for some time to feed the 
pile, he made a journey to the country, and re- 
mained in Campania great part of A pril and May. 
During this time he was assiduous in his visits 
to the quarters and new scttlements of the vete- 
rans, on whom he was for the future to rely for 
support in the pretensions, which it is probable 
he had already conceived, and which were much 
too high for the safety of the commonwealth. 
In his absence, one Ematius, who had formerly 
assumed, the name of Marius, and under this 
popular designation had been busy in disturbing 
the public peace, and who, upon this account, 
had by the late dictator himself been driven from 
the city, now again appeared, affected to lead in 
the riotous honours wliich were paid to the me- 
mory of Cesar, and, attended by the populace, 
erected an altar or monument on the spot where 
the corpse had been burnt, and drew multitudes 
thither as to a place of devotion. On this occa- 
sion, Dolabella, who had offended many of the 
more respectable citizens, by assuming, without 
any regular authority, the dignity of consul, now 


L Sueton. in Ces. Piut. Ibid. Appian. Dio. Cass. &c. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boog V. 


recovered their favour by a vigorous exercise of 
his power against this impostor, gave orders that 
Ematius should be put to death, many of his ac- 
complices thrown from the Tarpeian rock, and 
the montmient or altar they had erected should 
be razed to the ground.? 

By these executions, the peace of the city 
seemed to be established, and even the commorts- 
wealth itself in some measure restored. Both 
the consuls affected the character of ordinary 
magistrates, showed a proper deference to the 
senate, and in all things endeavoured to give sa- 
tisfaction to the friends of the republic. Antony 
upon his return to the city, consulted the prin- 
cipal senators upon every motion which he pro- 
posed to make, and referred the determination of 
every question to the free discussion of that body. 
He affected to have no secrets; and though em- 
powered by the late act of the senate to carry 
into execution the different articles of Cæsars 
will, and to complete all his intended arrange- 
ments, he did not, under this description, propose 
any measure but what was generally known and 
approved.3 

In pursuance of this system of moderation, it 
was proposed by Antony, that Sextus, the re- 
maining son of Pompey, who under the authority 
of the late dictator had been declared an out-law, 
should be restored to his country, and have a 
compensation in money for the losses which had 
been sustained by his family: and, to provide 
likewise for the future safety of the common- 
wealth, as well as for that of private persons, it 
was proposed that a law should be enacted to 
abolish for ever the name and power of dictator. 
At the same time, all the honorary votes which 
had passed in favour of Brutus and Cassius, and 
every act which had a tendency to mitigate the 
animosity of Cesar’s party,.to pacify the veterans, 
and to incline them, without any farther disturb- 
ance, to settle on the lands which had been aliot- 
ted to them, had his concurrence. 

The senate, in order to terminate as soon as 
possible every occasion of public uneasiness or 
alarm, although they greatly disapproved of the 
reward that was given to the army, for having, 
in a manner, subdued the republic, and had rea- 
son to dread the precedent, yet hastened to the 
performance of all Cesar’s engagements, in order 
to deprive the veterans of any pretence for mul- 
tiplying their demands, or remaining together in 
arms. 

These circumstances had a very favourable as- 
pect, and the storm which threatened the city and 
the commonwealth appeared to be laid. Many 
had foretold that the permission of a public funeral 
to Cæsar would have dangerous consequences ; 
and during the late tumults and riots thought 
themselves sufficiently justified in these predic- 
tions. But their apprehensions now appeared te 
have been groundless, and the authors of tle late 
moderate counsels, in which the senate was n- 
duced to temporise, and to make concessions in 
such matters as were of less moment, in order to 
appease the animosity of parties, and to obtain 
their consent in matters of more consequence, 
were now highly applauded. : 

All the conspirators, in the height of the late 


2 Dio. Cass. lib. xliv. c. 50 et 51. 
lib. ii. 
3 Cicero Philip. lib. i. c. 1. 


App. de Bell. Cix 


Cuap. Il] 


disorders which arose on account of Cesar’s fune- 
ral, had withdrawn from the city, and, under dif- 
ferent honourable pretences which were furnished 
them by the senate, continued to absent them- 
selves from Rome. Many of them had been 
formerly named to the government of provinces, 
and now proceeded to take possession of their 
lots. Decimus Brutus, in this capacity, repaired 
to the Cisalpine Gaul, Trebonius to Asia, and 
Tullius Cimber to Bythinia. 

Marcus Brutus had been appointed to the go- 
vernment of Macedonia, and Cassius to that of 
Syria; but the two last. being actually in office as 
pretors, could not take possession of provinces 
until the expiration of their year, nor could they 
regularly absent themselves from the city, with- 
out some decree from the senate to dispense with 
their attendance as officers of state. Under the 
present favourable aspect of public affairs, and 
after the consuls had given such evident proofs 
of their respect for the commonwealth, it was 
supposed that the authors of the late revolution 
might now return in safety to the capital; and 
Cicero himself, on this occasion, was so confident 
of the perfect restoration of peace to the republic, 
that in writing to Atticus, he assures him, that 
“ Brutus may now walk the streets of Rome with 
a crown of gold on his head.” in this, however, 
with all his penetration, he had overrated the 
professions, and mistaken the designs of Antony. 
This profligate adventurer, the more dangerous 
that he was supposed by his debaucheries dis- 
qualified for any deep or arduous design, had as- 
sumed the disgtiise of moderation and deference 
to the senate, merely to conceal his intentions, 
until he had formed a party on which he could 
rély. He had so far imposed on the public, by 
pres to be alarmed with danger to his own 
person from the riots which he was employed to 
suppress after the funeral of Cæsar, that the se- 
nate permitted him to arm his friends; and suf- 
fered him, under their own authority, to assemble 
a powerful body of men, amounting to some thou- 
sands, chiefly composed of officers who had served 
under the late dictator, and who now submitted 
to act as the guards of Antony’s person.’ Being 
thus strengthened, when the return of Brutus 
and Cassius was mentioned to him, he betrayed 
the falsehood of his former professions, “ They 
cannot be safe,” he said, “in the midst of so 
many.of Cæsars retainers and friends.” 

Antony was greatly awed by the abilities of 
Brutus and Cassius, by the respect which was 
paid them by the public, by their credit with the 
senate, and by their determined resolution to 
maintain its authority. Im order, therefore, to 
fortify himself against them, he maintained a 
continual correspondence with the veterans of the 
late Cesar’s army, courted their attachment, and 
stated himself as their protector and leader. In 


this capacity, he made-liis visit to their settlements: 


in Campania, where, it has been observed, he 
passed the greater part of the months of April 
and May. At his return, he endeavoured to 
strengthen himself still more, by entering into a 
concert with Lepidus, who, in the quality of 
second in command to Cesar, or general of the 
horse to the dictator, remained at the head of all 
the military forces in Italy. He engaged himself 


4 Appian. de Bell Civ. lib. i. 
5 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib xi. ep. 1. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


331 


to obtain for Lepidus the dignity of chief pontiff; 
and, in order to cement the union of their fami- 
lies, proposed a marriage of his own daughter 
with the son of this officer. He had been averse 
to the promotion of Dolabella; and, at the death 
of Cæsar, would have opposed his assuming the 
dignity of consul, if he had not been prevented 
at first, by the uncertainty of his own situation, 
and afterwards by tlie countenance whicn this 
intruder into public office began to receive from 
the senate. In these circumstances, to dispute 
the accession of Dolabella, would be to throw 
him entirely into the hands of the republican 
party; he thought proper, therefore, to disguise 
his inclinations, and took measure to gain him, 
or at least to set him at variance with the authors 
of the late conspiracy. For this purpose, he 
made a tender of his services to procure him an 
appointment to command in any of the more ad- 
vantageous provincial situations. 
Notwithstanding that Cassius was. already 
appointed to the government of Syria, Antony, 
according to agreement, undertook to support the 
pretensions of Dolabella, and to aid him in sup- 
planting Cassius at the meeting of the senate, 
which was to be held on the first of June. 
Having in this manner, with great industry and 
application, strengthened himself by his coalition 
with Lepidus and Dolabella, the one at the head 
of the army, the other his own colleague in the 
principal office of the state; and having secured 
the attachment and support of the veteran soldiers 
recently settled in Italy, he no longer kept anv 
terms with the senatorian party, or with the 
friends of the republic. Having formerly ob- 
tained a resolution of the senate to confirm all 
the acts, and ‘to maintain the arrangements 
which had been devised by Cesar, and being 
master of the papers and memorials in which 
these were contained, he brought extracts and 
quotations from them in support of his several 
proposals, without producing the originals; and 


In this form commenced, in the name of the 


dead, a reign more arbitrary than that of the 
living Cæsar had been. As he had never com- 
municated to any one the papers or memorials 
from which these authorities were drawn, he 
expunged or he inserted whatever he thought 
proper, or even, without taking this trouble, 
framed his quotations on every subject to the 
purpose which he meant to serve. He made 
Cesar’s memorials to teem with intended laws 
and acts of the senate, and of the people; with 
grants and forfeitures of lands; with the pardon 
of crimes aud recalls from banishment; with or- 
ders for levying contributions from princes, states, 
and private persons; with compositions to he ex- 
acted from towns and corporations ; for the ran- 
som of their possessions, liberties, and franchises ; 
and even with distinct resolutions and decisions 
relating ‘to matters which took their rise after 
Cesar’s death.6 His wife Fulvia, the widow of 
Clodius, likewise availed herself of this valuable 
mine, and sold offices and commissions, together 
with entire provinces and kingdoms,’ to those 
who were willing to pay her price. 

Among the acts of Antony, during this con- 
sulate, is mentioned, a change which he made in 
the judiciary law, by which he obtained, that a 


6 Cicer. Philip. fi. c. 38. 
7 Ibidem ad Atticum, lib. xiv. ep. 12. 


353 


certain number of centurions should be entered 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Eoox V. 


About this time‘, and alarmed by these vio- 


on the rolls of the judges, in place of the revenue | lences, Cicero, who had hitherto maintained 
officers! whom Cesar had excluded. Relying on i some degree of neutrality or moderation between 


this and other artifices, which procured him the 
support of the army, he rose every day in his 
presumption; and while he incited Dolabella to 
persist in supplanting Cassius im the province of 
Syria, he himself proposed to supp'ant Brutus in 
his nomination to the government of Macedonia. 
By this appointment, he meant to place himself 
at the head of the army, which Cesar, to be in 
readiness for his Asiatic or Parthian expedition, 
had transported into Macedonia ; and it appeared 
afterwards to be his design, as soon as he had 
obtained the command of this army, to procure 
an appointment to supersede Decimus Brutus in 
the province of Cisalpine Gaul, and, under pre- 
tence of expelling him from thence, to transport 
this army again into Italy. 

In order to obtain acts for so much of these 
purposes as he was then about to execute, he 
summoned all the members of the senate? to as- 
semble on the first of June. He had brought 
into the city, to overawe this assembly, great 
numbers of the veterans, on whom he himself, 
besides confirming the settlements which had 
been assigned to them by Cesar, had bestowed 
considerable favours. At this meeting of the 
senate, few of the members, who were inclined 
to oppose the consul, thought that they them- 
selves could with safety attend. Even Hirtius 
and Pansa, though named for the consulate of 
the following year, and protected by the dignity 
which belonged to that destination, thought 
proper to absent themselves.? 

At a call of the senate, so ill attended, An- 
tony obtained for himself, without opposition, 
the government of Macedonia, with the com- 
mand of the army which had been destined for 
Asia, but which, from Cesar’s death, had re- 
mained in that province. He at the same time 
obtained for Dolabella the province of Syria to 
the exclusion of Cassius; and by these several 
acts stated himself and his colleague as in open 
enmity with the leaders of the republican party, 
whom they had lately affected to court, but whom 
they now proceeded to strip of the preferments 
and honours which had been assigned to them 
by the commonwealth. 

Under pretence of making compensation to 
Cassius and Brutus for the loss of the provinces 
of Macedonia and Syria, of which they were 
now deprived, Antony procured them appoint- 
ments which they considered as an additional 
jnsult; that of Brutus to inspect the supplies of 
corn from Asia; and that of Cassius, to super- 
intend the supplies of the same kind which were 
brought from Sicily. 

While the senate complied with Antony in his 
demands on these several subjects, they endea- 
voured to restrain his abuse of the supposed will 
and memorials of Cesar, For this purpose they 
appointed a committee of their own number to 
inspect the contents of those papers, and to attest 
the reality of such notes and instructions as were 
to be carried into execution under the authority 
of the senate. Antony, however, paid no regard 
to this appointment, nor even suffered the com- 
mittee to meet in discharge of the duty for which 
they were named. 


3 Tribuni Ærarii. 2 Cicero ad Attic. lib xv ep. 6. 
' 3 Ibid. Philip. i. c. 3. 


the parties, departed from Rome. He had, before 
the death of Cæsar, intended to withdraw into 
Greece, under pretence of superintending the 
education of his son at Athens, and had obtained 
Cesar’s consent, and the leave of the senate for 
that purpose. On Cæsar’s death, having hopes 
that the republic was about to revive, he took 
his resolution to remain in the city; but being 
now satisfied that these hopes were vain; or, in 
his own terms, observing, “that, although the 
tree had been cut down on the ides of March, 
its roots were yet entire, and made vigorous 
shoots,” he resumed his former design of absent- 
ing himself; and instead of applying to the 
senate for leave, accepted from Dolabella, the 
newly appointed governor of Syria, a commission 
of lieutenancy, which he was to employ as a 
pretence for crossing the Ionian sea. In execu- 
tion of this design he arrived on the twenty-sixth 
of June at Antium, where he found Brutus, with 
his wife Porcia, and mother Servilia, with other 
persons of distinction. He gave it as his opinion, 
that Brutus and Cassius should accept of the 
commissions assigned to them as inspectors of 
the supplies of corn from Sicily and Asia, and 
should repair to their several provinces for that 
purpose, While the company were yet de- 
liberating on this subject, they were joined by 
Cassius, who, upon Cicero’s repeating what he 
had said, answered, with a stern countenance, 
that he would not go into Sicily, nor accept as a 
favour, what was intended as an affront. He 
complained, that opportunities had been lost of 
rendering effectual the first and principal step 
which had been taken to deliver the common- 
wealth, and was inclined to blame Decimus 
Brutus for some part of this neglect. Cicero 
censured the conduct of the whole party, for not 
having secured the completion of a business that 
was so successfully begun. “You ought,” he 
said, “immediately, upon the death of Cesar, 
to have assumed the government, to have called 
the senate by your own authority, and to have 
taken advantage of the spirit that was generally 
raised among the people for the recovery of their 
legal constitution.” 

In the result of this conference, Brutus and 
Cassius, as well as Cicero, took their resolution 
to depart from Italy; and the two former, with 
so much resentment of the indignity which they 
had suffered in their appointment to inspect the 
importation of corn, that they engaged Servilias 
to employ her influence in having this appoint- 
rent expunged from the public acts or records of 
the senate. Before their departure, they wrote a 
joint letter to Antony, conveyed in expressions 
that were guarded and polite; but demanding an 
explanation of the terms in which they stood 
with him, and of the purposes for which he had 
assembled the veterans of Cesar in such num- 
bersat Rome. Some time after this letter was sent 
they drew up a joint edict or manifesto, settin 
forth the cause of their absence from the capital, 
and protesting against the violence which was 
daily offered to the constitution of the republic. 

In answer to this letter, and to the paper with 
which it was followed, Antony issued a manifesto 

_ 


ot 


4 The middle of June. 
5 The mother of Brutus 


Coan. 


full of inveezive and contumely, and which he 
transmitted, under a formal address, to the pre- 
tors Brutus and Cassius, accompanied with a 
letter in the same style. The originals of these 
several papers are lost; but in reply to the last, 
we find addressed to Antony, and signed by Bru- 
tus and Cassius, the following original preserved 
among the letters of Cicero: 


“Brutus and Cassius, pretors, to Antony, 
consul, &c. 


“We have received your letter, which, like 
your manifesto, is full of reproach and of threats, 
and very improper from you to us. We have 
done you no injury; and if we were inclined to 
hostilities, your letter should not restrain us, But 
you know our resolutions, and you presume to 
threaten us, to the end that our pacific conduct 
may be imputed to fear. 
preferments and honours which are consistent 
with the freedom of the commonwealth. We 
have no desire to quarrel with you; but we value 
our liberties more than we value your friendship. 
Consider well what you undertake, and what you 
can support. Do not be encouraged so much by 
the length of Cesar’s life, as warned by the short 
duration of the power he usurped. We pray to 
God, that your designs may be innocent; or, if 
they be not innocent, that they may be as little 
hurtful to yourself as the safety of the common- 
wealth can permit.” 5 

These altercations led to an open breach. The 
pretors wrote to Decimus Brutus, Trebonius, 
and Cimber, to put their several provinces in a 
state of defence, and to make what farther pro- 
vision they could of men and money as for a 
certain war.’ Cicero, in continuing his voyage to 
Greece, had arrived on the sixth of August at 
Leucopetre, beyond Rhegium; and had set out 
from thence; but being put back, was met hy 
some citizens at Rhegium, just arrived from 
Rome, who brought him copies of the edicts or 
manifestos issued by Cassius and Brutus, with a 
report, that a full meeting of the senate was ex- 
pected on the first of September ; that Brutus and 
Cassius had sent circular letters requesting the 
attendance of all their friends; that Antony was 
likely to drop his designs; that the cause of the 
republic, having so favourable an aspect, his own 
departure was censured, and his presence was 
earnestly wished for. 

Upon these representations, Cicero took his 
resolution to return to Rome, and arrived again 
at Pompeii, on the nineteenth of August.® Here, 
among the accounts of what had passed in the 
senate on the first of that month, he was informed 
that Piso, the father of Calpurnia, and father-in- 
law of the late Cesar, had, notwithstanding this 
connection and his interest in the remains of the 
late usurpation, vigorously opposed the measures 
of Antony; and, on that occasion, had acquired 
great distinction as a manof ability, and.as an up- 
right citizen; but that not being properly sup- 
ported in the senate, he had declined any farther 
struggle, and had absented himself on the follow- 
ing day. 

Cicero, though not greatly encouraged by these 
reports, continued his journey to Rome; and 


6 Cicer. ad Fam. lib, ii. ep. 3 Dated 4th of August. 
# Cicer. ad Att. lib. xvi, ep. 7. & Ibid. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


We wish you all the | 


333 


having arrived, on the last of August, found that 
the expectations which he had been made to en- 
tertain of Antony’s intentions were void of foun- 
dation; and that the outrages he was likely te 
commit were such, as to make it extremely un- 
safe for any distinguished friend of the republic 
to come in his power. For this reason, Cicero, 
on the first of September, sent an excuse to the 
senate, pleading the ill state of his health, which 
obliged him to remain shut up in his own house. 
Antony considered his absence from the senate as 
an affront to himself, or as giving too much coun- 
tenance to the suspicions which were entertained 
of his violent intentions.. Under this impression 
he burst into rage, and sent an officer to require 
the attendance of Cicero, threatening, if he per- 
sisted in his supposed contumacy, to pull down 
his house about his ears: the ordinary method 
of forcing those to submission, who shut them- 
selves up, or took refuge in their dwellings from 
the sentence of the law. He was dissuaded, how- 
ever, from any attempt to execute his threat ; and 
being himself absent from the senate on the fol- 
lowing day, Cicero ventured to take his seat, and, 
in the absence of the consul, delivered that ora- 
tion which is entitled the first Philippic. ln this 
speech he accounted for his late retirement from 
the capital, and for his present return, in terms 
strongly reflecting on the conduct and adminis- 
tration of the present consul. 

Antony, in his turn, greatly exasperated by 
the accounts he received of Cicero’s speech, pre- 
pared to reply at a subsequent meeting of the 
senate; and delivered himself accordingly with 
great acrimony against his antagonist. These 
mutual attacks, thus made in the absence of the 
parties, produced from Cicero that famous oration 
which is entitled the second Philippic; a model 
of eloquence in the style of ancient invective ; but 
which, though put in the form of an immediate 
reply to imputations supposed to be made in his 
presence, never was at all delivered, and is to be 
considered as a mere rhetorical pleading in a fic- 
titious case. The offence, however, which was 
given by the publication of this invective, made a 
principal part in the quarrel, which the parties 
never ceased to pursue, till it ended with Cicero’s 
life. 

While the consul Antony in this manner threw 
off the mask of a legal magistrate, and acted in 
some measure as a person who succeeded to the 
militury usurpation erected by Cesar, a new ac- 
tor appeared on the stage of public affairs, from 
whose youth nothing important, it was thought, 
could, for some time, be expected. This was 
Caius Octavius, the grand nephew of Julius 
Cesar, by his niece Attia, and the son of Octa- 
vius, who, in the course of state preferments, had 
arrived at the dignity of prætor ; and in this rank, 
having governed the province of Macedonia, died 
suddenly on his return from thence. His widow 
the mother of this young man, married Philippus, 
a citizen of moderate parts, but upright inten- 
tions. In the house of Philippus the young Oc 
tavius was brought up, and passed his early 
years, while his grand-uncle was engaged in the 
most active parts of his life, and while he was in. 
sinuating himself by intrigues, or forcing his way 
at the head of armies to the sovereiguty of the 
Ronian empire. Elevated by his connection with 
this relation to a high situation and to higher 

| views, he had followed him in the late campaign 


334 


against the sons of Pompey in Spain, and was 
intended, though a minor, to succeed Lepidus, 
under the dictator, as general of the horse. 

Upon the return of Cesar into Italy, and after 
the army destined for the war in Asia had been 
transported into Macedonia, the young Octavius 
was sent to Apollonia, as a place at which he 
might continue his studies, and his military ex- 
ercises, and be in the way to join the army, and 
to attend his uncle in the projected expedition to 
the East. 

After Octavius had been about six months at 
Apollonia, a messenger arrived in the beginning 
of the night with accounts of Cesar’s death, 
bearing, that he had fallen in the senate; but 
without determining whether he fell by the hands 
of a few, or in the execution of a general resolu- 
tion of the whole body. The young man was 
greatly dejected and perplexed in his thoughts. 
The military men then about him advised him to 
repair to the quarters of the army in Macedonia, 
and to put himself at their head. But his step- 
father Philippus, and his mother Attia, in their 
letters, had cautioned him against this or any 
other ambitious resolution ; they advised him to 
return into Italy in the most private manner, and 
warned him to avoid giving any umbrage to the 
partizans of the republic, who had now got the 
ascendant at Rome, and would not allow any 
person whatever to tread in the dangerous steps 
of his late uncle. 

Octavius accordingly embarked for Italy; and 
as he knew not what inight be the disposition of 
the troops who were then stationed at Brundu- 
sium, he chose to land at Lupia, a place at some 
little distance, and on the same coast. Here he 
received farther accounts from Rome, with par- 
ticulars of the conspiracy; the proceedings of the 
senate; accommodation of the parties; the tu- 
inults that arose at Cesar’s funeral; the will, and 
his own share in it: but his friends still persisted 
in recommending a private station, and advised 
him even to drop his pretensions to the name and 
inheritance of Cesar. But this young man, 
though only turned of eighteen, took upon him | 
to decide for himself in this matter. He sent an 
officer to sound the disposition of the garrison at 
Brundusiun; and finding that they were in- 
clined to revenge the death of their late favourite 
leader, and that they resented the other proceed- 
ings of the republican party, he proceeded in per- 
son to Brundusium in the most public manner, 
and was met at the gates by the troops, who re- 
ceived him with all the honours thought due to 
the son of Cesar. 

From this time forward, Octavius assumed the 
name and designation of his late uncle. He was 
soon after attended by persons of all ranks from 
the neighbourhood of Brundusium, and sent for- 
ward to Rome with a retinue, to which, as he 
passed on the way, he received continual acces- 
sion of numbers. The veterans, in general, who 
had grants of land, flocked to him; complained 
of the remissness of Antony. in suffering the 
assassins of his own friend and benefactor to go 
unpunished, and declared their resolution to be 
revenged as soon as any person appeared to lead 
them. Octavius thanked them for their grateful 
respect to his father’s memory, but exhorted 
them to moderation and subinission, He wished 
to know the state of parties more exactly before 
he should declare himself; awl on his journey to | 


a e e e e oo r au 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


Rome, young as he was, employed all the caution 
and wariness of age for the security of his person, 
lest any disguised enemies should have insinuated 
themselves among a multitude of professed friends, 
who were yet generally unknown to him. At 
Terracina, about fifty miles from Rome, he re- 
ceived a report, that the consuls had superseded 
Brutus and Cassius in the provinces of Macedo- 
nia and Syria, and had assigned them inferior 
stations, by this account, at Cyrene and Crete ; 
that many exiles were recalled, particularly Sex- 
tus Pompeius; and that, under pretence of exe- 
cuting the intentions of Cesar, many new mem- 
bers were admitted into the senate.! 

Octavius, upon his arrival at Rome, found his 
step-father and his mother under great apprehen- 
sions from the power of the senate, and from the 
general dispositions which appeared in the late 
act of indemnity that was passed in favour of 
those who had borne an active part in Cesar’s 
death. And these apprehensions were strongly 
confirmed by the neglect of Antony, who took 
no notice of his arrival, and did not pay that at- 
tention which might be thought due to the name 
of Cesar; but he neither desponded nor exposed 
himself by any hasty act of presumption. He 
said, “ T'hat, being so young a man, and ina pri- 
vate station, he could not expect that the first 
advances should be made to him frointhe Roman 
consul; that he would soon convince the senate 
of his dutiful intentions towards them; that all 
the world must applaud in him the endeavours 
he should make to bring the authors of his father’s 
death to justice; that the act of indemnity, in fa- 
vour of the assassins, had passed when there was 
no one to oppose it; but that a charge of murder, 
when directly brought,2 could not be slighted by 
the senate, by the Roman people, nor even by 
Antony himself: that to decline the inheritance 
which was left him, would be disrespectful to the 
memory of Cæsar, and injurious to the Roman 
people, in whose behalf he was made executor of 
his father’s will. Cæsar,’ he said, “has distin- 
guished me, and honoured me; and I had rather 
die, than appear unworthy of such a father.” 
His friends were silenced by the appearance of 
so much discretion and resolution. ‘They broke 
off the conference with an advice which already 
appeared to be unnecessary, That he should de 
nothing rashly, nor embrace violent measures, 
where prudence might equally gain his purpose. 

Next morning this young man, attended by @ 
numerous company of his friends, repaired to the 
forum, and presented himself before the prætor 
C. Antonius, in order to declare in form his ac- 
ceptance of the inheritance of his late uncle, and 
in order to be invested with the name of Cesar. 
From thence he went to Pompey’s gardens, where 
Antony then resided; and after being made to 
wait, for some time, in a manner that sufficiently 
expressed, on the part of Antony, a dislike to his 
visit, he was admitted to a conference. 

The young Octavius, having been educated as 
the nearest relation to Cesar, and destined to in- 
herit his fortunes, had conceived the extent of 
his own importance from the height of Cesar’s 
power ; he considered the sovereignty of the em- 
pire, in some measure, as his birthright, and his 
own interest as the central point to which all 
public transactions should tend. In thi» confer- 
EE aaa T 

1 Appian. de Bello Civile, tib. ii. 2 Ibid, 


Crap. IL] 


ence with Antony, he is said to have betrayed 
more of this character than suited his present 
condition, or than could be reconciled with the 
discretion with which he had acted on other oc- 
casions. He entered with the consul on a review 
of his conduct as an officer of state, from the 
death of Cesar to the present moment; thanked 
him for the regard he had in some things shown 
to his father’s memory, and with equal confidence 
censured and arraigned him in others. “You 
did well,” he said, “in opposing the thanks which 
the senate was about to decree to the murderers 
of my father and of your own benefactor and 
friend; and you did well in depriving Brutus and 
Cassius of the important provinces of Macedonia 
and Syria; but why preclude my just resent- 
ments by an act of indemnity? Why assign 
any provinces at all to those assassins? Why 
suffer Decimus Brutus, in particular, with so 

reat a force to keep possession of Gaul? This 
is not only to spare but to arm them against me.” 
He concluded by demanding restitution of the 
money which Antony had seized in the temple of 
Ops,3 to the end that he might, without delay, 
pay off to the Roman people the legacies þe- 
queathed to them by Cesar. 

Octavius, in this first specimen of his boldness 
and address, although he ventured to insult the 
Roman consul, paid court to the army and to the 
people ; and perhaps wished for the reputation of 
having quarrelled with Antony on the subject of 
his remissness in avenging the death of Cesar, 
and of his own impatience to pay off the contents 
of his will. Antony, being surprised and piqued 
at the arrogance of his speech, and of his preten- 
sions, endeavoured to check his ambition, by put- 
ting him in mind, that although he was named 
the heir of Cæsar’s estate, he must not pretend to 
inherit his dignities ; that the Roman constitu- 
tion acknowledged no hereditary powers; that he 
ought to remember in whose presence he stood ; 
that the Roman consul must be equally indiffer- 
ent to his approbation, or to his censure. “ To 
me,” he said, “it was owing that your uncle was 
not declared a usurper and a tyrant; conse- 
quently, to me it is owing that you have any 
ather inheritance by him besides the disgrace of 
being related to a traitor, whose body had been 
dragged through the streets, and cast into the 
Tiber. As to any money which may have been 
lodged in the treasury, of that,” he said, “ Cæsar 
had already diverted too mnch to his own private 
uses; that when his receipts came to be examined 
and the sums not accounted for to be claimed, 
much public money might be found among his 
effects; that Cæsar himself, if living, could not 
refuse to make up his accounts; and that a pro- 
posal was actually in agitation to have them 
stated and examined.” 

From these altercations, Octavius and Antony 
parted on very ill terms, and were publicly known 
to have quarrelled. Octavius, from an affected 
zeal to put the people in possession of the legacy 
hequeathed to them by his father, brought his 
own effects to sale. Antony, on his part, pro- 
moted the inquiry into the applications of public 
money, and gave out, that the heirs of the late 
dictator would have ‘great sums to refund, and 
little reversion. These heirs, in return, pleaded 
the late decree of the senate and people, ratifying 


3 Plut. in Antonio. Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 


OF THE ROMAN RZPUBLIC. 


335 


all Cæsar’s acts, and consequently precluding all 
inquiries into this, or any other part of his admi- 
nistration ; but as Antony could fabricate acts of 
Caesar, when wanting, to his purpose, so he 
could set aside or evade real acts when they stood 
in his way. 

In the mean time the friends of the republic 
rejoiced at a breach which seemed to weaken 
their enemies, and gave them hopes, that a com- 
petition for the succession to Cesar’s power 
would divide the army, and shake the foundation 
on which that power was supported. In this 
contest Antony, by his age, his authority, and by 
his great influence in the commonwealth, having 
so much the advantage, they thought it safest to 
promote the interest of his antagonist, who was 
in a private station, a minor, under the direction 
of relations inclined to moderation, and strongly 
possessed with deference to the senate. Antony, 
by his arrogance, and the public contempt with 
which he treated the heir of Cesar, gave offence 
to the party from which he hoped for support. 
Having already obtained all the ends which he 
proposed to himself in courting the senate, he 
pulled off the mask, and set them at defiance. 
Octavius, on the contrary, while he endeavoured 
to supplant his antagonist in the favour of the 
people, affected great deference to the senate and 
regard to the commonwealth. He even changed 
his language in public respecting the conspira- 
tors, and to their friends affected a desire to be 
reconciled with them. Being at the country- 
house of Philippus, near to that of Cicero, he, 
took this opportunity to pay his court to a person 
of so much consideration in the republican party ; 
accosted him with the title of father, and men- 
tioning his friends of the conspiracy with respect, 
affected to put himself entirely under his protec- 
tion.4 Cicero being either the dupe of these 
artifices, or willing to encourage Octavius against 
Antony, seemed to listen to his professions; not- 
withstanding that Philippus, who was irfterested 
to save the republic, at the same time informed 
him that he did not believe this artful boy was 
sineere.§ 

While the young Cesar thus strove to ingra- 
tiate himself with the party of the senate, his 
chief reliance was on the people. He opened an 
office for the payment of the late dictator's legacy 
to every one who claimed a share of it; and as 
these liberalities were ascribed to the deceased, 
and could not be made a charge of corruption 
against himself, he did not scruple to extend thenr 
beyond the letter of the will. He e+deavoured 
at the saine time to make it be belies} that by 
the oppressions of Antony he was struitened for 
means to perform his duty in this respect to the 
people ; recommended to his agents to hasten the 
sale of his own effects at any price, and continu- 
ally brought new articles to the market in order 
to raise money. Being introduced by one of 
the tribunes, he delivered a harangue to the peo- 
ple, in which he declared his intention to exhibit 
shows and theatrical entertainments in honour of 
his late father’s memory.” He proposed to have 
seated himself at the theatre in his chair of state; 


4 Cic. ad Attic. lib. xiv. ep. 11. Modo venit Octavius 
in proximam villam Philippi, mihi totus deditus. 

5 Ibid. lib. xii. ep. 15. 

6 Appian. de Bell. Civ lib. ti. 

7 Cicer. ad Attic. lib xv. en. 1. 


339 


but in this particular had the' mortification of 
being forbid by the tribunes.! 

Although the senators in general promoted the 
claims of Octavius, and considered him as a zea- 
lous confederate against Antony, who was the’ 
principal object of their fears, the conspirators 
saw in him the representative of their late ene- 
my and the leader of Cæsars army. They en- 
deavoured to put their friends on their guard 
against him, and by all means in their power to 
counteract his popular arts. For this purpose 
the public entertainments, which were this year 
to have been given by Brutus in the quality of 
pretor, were provided and exhibited in his ab- 
sence with great splendour. These entertain- 
ments, from animosity to the family of Cesar, 
rather than from a regard to Brutus, were con- 
ducted by C. Antonius, the brother of the pre- 
sent consul, who presided in the place of his 
colleague the absent prætor, and who was desirous 
on this occasion to divide with Octavius the po- 
pular favour even in behalfof Brutus, with whom 
he’ was not on good terms.? 

As such entertainments were intended by the 
Roman officers to ingratiate themselves with the 
people, so the reception they met with was con- 
sidered as an indication of their success or disap- 
potntment in any object they had in view. On 
the present occasion the Tereus of Accius being 
brought on the stage, and every sentiment of 
liberty applicable to the times being greatly ap- 
plauded, this was considered as an intimation of 
popular favour to the deliverers of their country, 
and to Brutus in particular, the giver of the feast. 
His friends thought this- a favourable opportunity 
to make trial of their strength; and‘as the Roman 
people, still supposed to be the sovereigns of the 
world, were accustomed, like other despotical 
masters, to decide on the greatest affairs as mat- 
ters of private passion, and in the midst of their 
pleasures, the aristocratical party raised a cry, 
that the restorers of public liberty should be re- 
called to their country. This cry was not re- 
turned by the audience, and the performance 
itself was stopped by the clamours of the opposite 
party, until the proposal now made in favour of 
the conspirators should be withdrawn. 

Brutus and Cassius finding their party among 
the people so little able to support them, saw no 
security but in the possession of provinces which, 
in case of an open attack from their enemies, 
might supply them with money and arms for 
their defence. They determined, therefore, not- 
withstanding the late arrangements, by which 
they were superseded, to repair to the provinces 
of which the command had been originally in- 
tended for them; Cassius to Syria, and Brutus-to 
Macedonia and Greece. They were encouraged 
in the pursuance of this resolution by the divi- 
sions and quarrels which arose in the opposite 
party; observing that the adherents of the late 
Cesar were ranged on different sides. with Octa- 
vius or with Antony, and that the army itself, 
though extremely averse to disputes which tended 
to disturb their possession of the government, 
were likely to balance or hesitate in the choice of 
their leader, they left Italy with some hopes, that 
the republic might revive in the dissension of its 
enemies. 


1 Cicer. ad Attic. lib: xv. ep: 2. 
2 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 
3 Cicer. ad -ittic. ib. xvi. ep: 2. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boos YV, 


The officers whonr Antony had assembled as 
a guard to his person, ventured to expostulate 
with him on a breach which was so likely to re- 
duce their force, and they exhorted him to act in, 
concert with Octavius, at léast until they had 
obtained a just revenge against the assassins of 
Cesar. On this occasion Antony entered into’ 
the reasons of his past conduct, and accounted for 
the concessions which he had made to the senate, 
as necessary to obtain the conditions on which 
the present flourishing state of the party de- 
pended. He reminded his friends that it was by 
his means that Cæsars acts had been ratified; 
that it was by his means that, notwithstandin, 
the late act of indemnity, the conspirators had 
been expelled from the city, and stripped of their 
provinces, 

For the future, he assured them, that being 
possessed of a proper force, he would appear un- 
disguised, and give sufficient proof of his regard 
to Cæsar’s memory, and tothe interest of his sur- 
viving friends. k A 

Antony, in compliance with the intreaties 
which were now made to him af this conference, 
had an interview with Octavius; at which they 
were, in appearance, reconciled: to each other: 
but their pretensions were far from being suffi- 
ciently adjusted to render the agreement of lon 
continuance. Octavius aspired to a degree of 
consequence which Antony by no means thought 
necessary to admit in so young a person. His 
undoubted title to the inheritance of Cesar, and 
the attachment of Cæsars personal friends, made 
Antony consider his advancement as altogether 
incompatible with the success of his own designs. 
Effects: of their jealousies and animosities accord- 
ingly soon after appeared, such as rendered- an 
open breach again unavoidable. 

A vacancy having happened in the college of 
tribunes,4 Octavius, though far short of the legal 
age, was presented by his friends as a candidate 
for this station, Antony, without declaring him- 
self openly against them, published an edict, 
threatening with prosecution any person’ who 
should make a proposition to the people contrary 
to law; and by these means prevented their far- 
ther proceeding in this design. 

Soon after this act of authority, on the part of 
Antony, to check the ambition of the young Cæ- 
sar, men armed as for an assassination were dis- 
covered in the consul’s house. ‘They were not 
brought to any public examination; but it was 
given out that they had been suborned by Octa- 
vius. Whether this plot was fabricated, in order 
to load him with the odium of it, and to justify 
the measures which Antony himself meditated.to 
take against a person supposed: to have atmed at 
his life, or whether it was by Antony actually 
beleved to be real, is uncertain. It occasioned a 
considerable ferment in-the city, and. the parties 
reasoned. upon it as they were severally inclined. 
The friends of Antony persisted in accusing 
Octavius, and others recriminated, urging as a 
proof of Antony’s design on the life of Cesar, his 
having recourse in this manner to a forgery, 
which was evidently intended to exasperate the 
army and the people against his antagonist, and 
to justify the violence which he himself, with the 
first opportunity, meant to employ.5 Cicero, 


4 Appian de Bollo Civil, lib. ik 5 Ibid. 


Canar IL] 


however, says, that people of judgment believed 
the plot on the part of Octavius to have been 
real, and that they approved of it.6 , 

Ir the late interval of military usurpation, the 
senators in general, though willing to resume the 
government, were actually unable to bear the 
foad which it was likely to lay on their shoulders. 
They rejoiced at the breach between Octavius 
and Antony ; but if these adventurers should con- 
tinue to quarrel about the spoils of the cormmon- 
wealth, the greater part of those who had any 
interest in defending it were no more than a prey 
to the conqueror. Clouds hung over their coun- 
cils on every side. The officers who had served 
under Cesar in the late civil war, were posted at 
the head of armies in the most advantageous sit ua- 
tions. Asinius Pollio had the command in the 
farther province of Spaln, Lepidus in the nearer; 
Plancus commanded in Gaul, and Antony in 
Macedonia. The veterans remained in the 
neighbourhood of Rome with swords in their 
hands, anxious for the settlements which had 
been latcly assigned to them by Cesar. These 
they did not believe to be secure, without the de- 
struction of every law and of every form which 
could be cited to favour the claims of the former 
proprietors. E, s A 

Antony made rapid advances to the military 
usurpation he had some time projected. Having 
availed himself so far of his nomination to the 
government of Macedonia, as to get possession 
of the numerous and respectable army which 
Cesar, on their way to the Parthian war, had 
transported thither, he proceeded to exchange 
that province for the Cisalpine Gaul; and, un- 
der pretence of expelling Decimus Brutus from 
thence, had ordered the army of Cæsar to be 
transported back into Italy. Soon after the de- 
tection of the supposed plot of Octavius he de- 

arted from Rome, and set. out for Brundusium. 
The troops which he had ordered from Macedo- 
nia were already arrived at that place; and as he 
had intelligence that Octavius had his emissaries 
employed to seduce them, he hastened to prevent 
the effect of this design, and to secure his own 
authority. He professed to employ this army 
merely in gaining possession of the province 
which had lately been decreed to him by the peo- 
ple. But in the desire of occupying, with an 
army, that very station from which Cesar had so 
successfully invaded the republic; and which, 
according to the expression of Cato on the nomi- 
nation of Cesar to that province, was im reality 
the citadel or commanding station which gave 
possession of Rome, he sufficiently evinced the 
designs which he had formed against the republic, 
and no less alarmed the heir of Cesar, who ex- 
pected to be the first victim of his power, than it 
threatened the senate with a new and dangerous 
usurpation, 

Under these impressions, while Antony tool 
the road to Brundusium, Octavius repaired to 
Campania, and, by large donations’ in money, 
pia the veterans who were scttled at Cala- 
tia, Casilinum, and Capua, to declare for himself. 
With this powerful support, he published his in- 
tention to withstand the consul, and took measures 
to'procure the authority of the senate against their 
common enemy. He professed great zeal for the 


6 Cicero ad Famil. lib. xii. ep. 23. 
T Five hundred Denarii, i.e. about 162 
2U 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


337 


cause of the republic, and affected to put himself 
entirely under the direction of Cicero, now the 
most respectable member of the senate that was 
left. He intreated this experienced counsellor to 
favour him with an interview at Capua. “Once 
more,” he said; in his letter upon this occasion, 
“save the republic.” At their conference it was 
deliberated whether Octavius should: throw him- 
self into Capua with three hundred veterans who 
had joined him, and there stop Antony’s march: 
to Rome; or should cross the Apennines, to give 
the legions, who were marching from Brundusi- 
um, an opportunity to executé the project of de- 
fection, which he believed they were meditating 
in his favour. In this question he affected to be 
determincd entirely by Cicero, who advised hint 
to move with all the force he could assemble 
towards Rome.® 

In compliance with this advice, Octavius hav- 
ing assembled ten thousand men, without waiting 
to array, or even to have them completely armed, 
advanced by hasty marches to prevent Antony, 
who about the same time had marched from 
Brundusium, and was hastening to advance in 
the same direction.9 

The city was thrown into a great alarm by 
this unexpectcd approach of two hostile armies. 


‘Some expressed their fears of Antony, others of 


Octavius, and some of both, It was uncertain 
whether they advanced in concert to oppress the 
republic, or in competition to contend for its 
spoils. Many appearances favoured the latter 
supposition ; and the late reconciliation gave some 
credit to the former. 

Octavius, having the advantave of a shorter 
march, arrived before his antagonist; and being 
within two miles of the city, was received by 
Canutius, one of the tribunes, whom he soon af- 
ter sent back. into the city, with assurances, that 
he had assembled his party not to-second, but to- 
oppose the designs of Antony; and that his: pur- 
pose was to employ all the force he could raise 
for the defence of the commonwealth. The tri- 
bune Canutius, in reporting what passed with 
Octavius, exhorted all who wislied to preserve the 
republic to lend their assistance in execution of 
this design, 

Upon these assurances, delivered by a tribune 
of the people, the gates were thrown open to 
Octavius, and he entered the city, though not 


‘ina military form, yet followed by a numerous 


i 


band of attendants, who concealed their weapons. 
With this company he took possession of the 
temple of Castor and Polux, and prepared to 
explain himself to a numerous concourse of peo- 
ple, who were hastening into the area or court 
before the temple. Being introduced by the tri- 
bune into this assembly, as a person who had 
matters of great moment to communicate respect- 
ing the state of the republic and the designs of 
Antony, he began his speech by.commeiorating 
the merits of his late adoptive father, and the in- 
gratitude and injustice of Antony; declared, that 
although he had assembled his friends merely in 
his own defence, he was ready to employ them in 
the service of his country, and submitted himself 
entirely to such directions as he should receive 
from the powers established by law in the com- 
mon wealth ; observed, that they could not possi- 


gt eh 


8 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 
9 Cicero ad Att. lib. xvi. ep. 8 


338 


bly doubt of his inclination to be employed at least 
against his personal enemies. 

It was probably in this speech, that Octavius, 
being to make a solemn asseveration, pointed to 
the statue of Julius Cesar, with these words, 
“So may I arrive at my father’s honours”! He 
had two opposite and irreconcilable parties to 
please on this occasion, and had not learned that 
the only safe course in such cases is silence. He 
offended the partizans of the republic by the vene- 
ration he expressed for Cesar, and by his wish to 
tread in his steps; and in this, perhaps, commit- 
ted the only public indiscretion with which he is 
chargeable in any part of his conduct. But what 
was in reality a more dangerous effect of this 
error, he offended the military part of his audi- 
ence by the regard he affected to entertain for the 
civil government of the state, and by his open 
declaration of war against Antony. By this de- 
claration, military men found themselves not in- 
vited to enter, as they expected, on the secure 
posisie of the rewards and honours which 

ad been promised to them; but called upon to 
fight for empire against their late fellow-soldiers, 
commanded by an officer from whom they had 
ligh expectations as a friend, and much to fear 
as an enemy. -> 

Soldiers of fortune being thus disappointed of 
the spoils which they expected to seize, and of 
the rewards which were now become due for 
former services, some of them absolutely re- 
nounced the party of Octavius; others, under 
pretence of providing arms and necessaries for 
the field, or pleading various excuses, desired 
Jeave to return to their own habitations. The 
greater part of the veterans actually withdrew: 
but Octavius, young as he was, did not sink un- 
der this untoward state of his affairs. He had 
ordered levies in Etruria, and in the district of 
Ravenna. These levies, upon the reputation of 
the ascendant he had gained in the city, succeed- 
ed apace, and induced military adventurers from 
every quarter to espouse his cause. 

Many who had served under Julius Cesar, 
being accustomed to the life of a soldier, though 
settled as landholders in Italy, were not yet rooted 
in the condition of citizens, or in that of husband- 
men. They had yet fresh in their memories the 
license and the spoils of war. They saw them 
offered anew under the auspices of a leader who 
hore the name of Cesar, and whose munificence 
was known. Many, therefore, who had recently 
left Octavius, being unwilling that others should 
reap the harvest in which they themselves had 
been invited to partake, again repaired to his 
standard; and, as fast as they arrived, were sent 
to Etruria, into different quarters, to be armed, 
arrayed, and furnished with all necessaries for the 
field.2 

Octavius from thenceforward conducted him- 
self between the parties with great address: to the 
veterans he talked of avenging Cesar’s death: to 
the friends of the republic he set forth the dan- 
gerous designs of Antony, affected to sacrifice all 
private resentment to his zeal for the common- 
wealth,? even promoted the election of Casca into 
the colleague of tribunes,‘ and affected in all things 
to be governed by the senate. 


1 Cicer. ad Att. lib. xvi. c. 15. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V 


‘What hopes, in the mean time, could be formed 
for the state? Could senators entrust the age or 
the intention of this crafty boy, nursed, as they 
observed, in the midst of usurpation; and who, 
by arming himself without any legal authority, 
had given evidence of an assuming and audacious 
spirit? They stood in awe of Antony, and were 
afraid to provoke him by~-an open declaration 
Octavius did not yet appear to be in condition to 
cope with the Roman consul; and if he were in 
condition to do so, would be likely to form designs 
equally dangerous to the commonwealth. Anto- 

ny, with a numerous army, had all the authority 

of government in his hands. The dispositions 
of Pansa and Hirtius, the consuls named by Cæ- 
sar for the ensuing year, were yet unknown.— 
Although many things were transacted in name 
of the senate, this order of men scarcely ventured 
to resume their ordinary functions, and shook 
under the red which Cesar had lifted. over them, 
even while it hung in suspense between different 
divisions of his remaining party.5 Piso, the fa- 
.ther-in-law of Cesar, had ventured to oppose 
Antony. Cicero and Publius Servilius after- 
wards followed this example. “But all that we 
have gained,” said Cicero, “is no more than this, 
that the Roman people may perceive, that who- 
ever contends for liberty is not safe at Rome.” 
These senators, therefore, together with L. Cotta, 
L. Cesar, and L. Sulpicius, had in despair, upor 
seeing Antony put himself at the head of an 
army, absented themselves from the public as- 
semblies. 

It was evident from every circumstance, that 
the fate of the empire was tu be determined by 
the sword. The troops feeling their consequence, 
affected indifference to every interest but their 
own, and: presumed to treat with equal contempt, 
in their turns, the different persons who assumed 
the command of them. Of the five legions which 
had been quartered im Macedonia, four were land- 
ed at Brundusium when Antony arrived at that 
place. They turned out on his coming, but did 
not receive him with the usual acclamations and 
shouts. They closed in profound silence round 
the platform from which he was to speak, as hav- 
ing suspended their judgment, until they should 
know what gratuities they were to receive in re- 
ward of their services. When he mentioned 
four hundred sestertii, or between three and four 
pounds a man.6 This being far short of the re- 
wards that were expected for giving a new mas- 
ter to the commonwealth, he was auswered with 
signs of derision. In return to this insolence, 
Antony assumed a tone which tended rather to 
exasperate than to overawe his audience. He 
reproached these legions with ingratitude for the 
favour he had recently done them, in changing 
their destination from Parthia to the Cisalpine 
Gaul; and with treachery, in having suffered to 
remain among them the emissaries, whom he 
knew that a presumptuous boy had employed to 
debauch them from their duty. “ 'These,” he 
said, “shall not escape me; in the mean time 
prepare yourselves to march into the province 
which is allotted for your station.” 

Antony, while he yet continued to speak, had 
the mortification to see entire cohorts, with their 


5 Cicer. ad Att. lib. xiv. ep. 5et6. Ibid. ad Dolabel- 


2 Dio. Cass. lib. xlv-c. 13. App. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. | lam, post 17. 


3 Cicer. ad Att. lib. xv. ep. 12. 
4 Ibid. lib. xvi ep. 15. 


| 6 Dio. Cass. lib..xlv.c. 13. or according to Appian 
| 100~ 16s. : 


Cuar. IL] 


officers, withdraw from his presence, uttering 
words of contempt and of scorn. Seeing the de- 
sertion likely to become general,’ and being 
greatly provoked, he dismissed the audience, sen- 
tenced three hundred officers and private men to 
immediate death, and stood by while they perish- 
ed under the hands of the executioners. Fulvia, 
who had attended him in his journey to Bruudu- 
sium, is said to have been present likewise at this 
scene, and to have satiated her revenge of the in- 
sults offered to her husband, with so near a view 
of the executions, as to have her clothes stained 
with blood.8 

The offence that was taken at these cruelties 
gave ample encouragement to the agents of Oc- 
tavius, who, notwithstanding the threats of An- 
tony, still continued to negotiate in the quarters 
of his army. Papers were dropt and handed 
about, containing a contrast of Antony’s parsi- 
mony with the lherality of Octavius. A search 
was made for the authors of these libels; but the 
bad success with which it was attended, served 
only to show the general disaffection of the army. 
The accounts, at the same time, which were 
brought of the progress which Octavius made in 
the settlements of the veterans, and of his recep- 
tion at Rome, gave Antony a just sense of his 
danger, and made him change his tone. In a 
second address to the army, he made an apology 
for his late severities. They knew, he said, his 
character, that it was neither sordid nor severe; 
that the sums he had mentioned were no more 
than a present to signalize their mecting, and an 
earnest of his future munificence. He did not, 
however, at this time, make any addition to his 
former bounty, lest it should appear to be extorted 
from him by fear. 


The soldiers, in appearance, satisfied with these | 


declarations, accepted with respect the sum which 
had been offered to them; submitted to the 
changes which had been made among their of- 
ficers, and marched off in divisions by the coast 
of the Adriatic towards Ariminum. Antony 
himself, with an escort of cavalry and infantry, 
xomposed of men the bravest and most attached 
to his person, whom he had selected from the 
whole army, set out for Rome. At his arrival, 
the horse were quartered in the suburbs; he him- 
self, attended by a body of foot, entered the city, 
had a regular guard mounted in the court of his 
own house, ordered centinels to be posted, gave 
the parole, and made every disposition to prevent 
surprise, as in a military station. Being still 
vested with the office of consul, he summoned 
the senate to meet on the twenty-fourth of Sep- 
tember; and, in the proclamation or suinmons, 
declared, that if any senator absented himself on 
that day, he should be deemed an aecessary to 
the plot against the consul's life, which had been 
lately discovered, and an accomplice in the other 
wicked designs known to be in agitation against 
the republic. 

_Notwithstanding this pompous threat, Antony 
himself did not attend at the time appointed; 
but, by another proclamation, he again summoned 
the senate to meet on the twenty-eighth of the 
same month. He intended, on this day, to ob- 
tain a decree against Octavius; whom, in all his 
manifestos, he qualified with the name of Spar- 


7 Cicer ad Att. lib. xvi.ep 8. | 
8 Ibid. Philip. iii. c. Zet 4. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


339 


tacus; as having, without any legal authority, 
resumed to levy war against the state ;? but, as 
he entered the porch of the senate-house, a mes- 
senger arrived with accounts that the Legio 
Martia had deserted with its colours to Octavius. 
Before he had recovered this shock, another mes- 
senger came with a like account of the fourth 
legion. He entered the senate, but very much 
disconcerted, and unprepared to act in circun.- 
stances so diflerent from those with which he laid 
his account. He avoided the mention of Octa- 
vius; and pretending to have called the assen- 
bly, without any particular busmess, he made a 
short speech and adjourned. From this meeting, 
hearing that one of the revolted legions had taken 
post at Alba, he instantly repaired to that place, im 
hopes of reclaiming them; but was received with 
a discharge of arrows and stones from the battle- 
ments, and obliged to retire. Fearing that the 
remainder of the ariny would follow this example, 
he ordered them an additional gratuity of five 
hundred sestertii, or about four pounds a man. 
And, to give them an immediate prospect of ac- 
tion, which is often the most effectual means of 
stifling dangerous humours in any army, he de- 
clared his intention to make war on Decimus 
Brutus, in order to dislodge him from the pre- 
vince of Gaul. In pursuance of this intention, 
he ordered his equipage for the field, and set up 
his standard at Tibur, to which place he expected 
that all his friends and adherents would repair. 

Antony, being joined by the last of the troops 
from Macedonia, had still three legions belonging 
to that army; and these, together with tlie vete- 
rans settled in the neighbourhood of ‘Tibur, who 
came with their ensigns and colours to offer their 
services, amounted in all to four legions, besidcs 
the ordinary attendance of irregular troops, and 
the crowds of people that flocked to his standard. 
With this formidable power, having for a a few 
days overawed the city, and drawn around him 
the greatest part of the senate, and of the eques- 
trian order, with many of the people who had so 
lately declared for his rival, and who, in the con- 
tests of such parties, ever yield to the present 
power, and are the property of him who can best 
work on their fears; he sct out on his march to 
Ariminum, the last place of Italy on the frontier 
of Gaul. 

Octavius, at the same time, had assembled his 
forces at Alba, consisting of the two legions who 
had lately come over to him from Antony, one 
legion of new levies, together with two of the 
veterans lately embodied, which, not being full, 
were completed with the choice of his new-raised 
men. He made a report to the senate of the 
number and description of the troops he liad thus 
assembled, and received their thanks and congra- 
tulations. It is nevertheless probable, that his 
services were received by this body with great 
distrust of their own situation, and of his desigus. 

Had the senate been free to choose on whose 
swords they were to rely fur the defence of their 
cause, those of Cassius and Brutus, with the 
other conspirators, originally drawn in behalf ef 
the republic, must have appeared the preferable 
choice. Uncertain, however, of the effect of auy 
direct or public resolution in favour of those whu 
were the authors of Cæsars death, they left the 
correspondence to be maintained with them to 
private persons ; and senators accordingly wrote 


— ae 


| 9 Cirer, Philip. iji. c. 8. 


340 


in their private capacity, to recommend perse: 
verance and the utmost exertion of their zeal. 
“Such is the state of the republic,” says Ciceró 
to Cassius; “even in the calmest times, scarcely 
able to support itself What must it be in the 

resent storm? All our hopes are in you. But 
if you have withdrawn yourselves merely for 
your own safety, we cannot have hopes, not even 
in you. If you intend any thing worthy of your 
own character, I wish I may live to seë the effect. 
The republic, at any rate, must revive under 
your efforts.”! He adjured Decimus Brutus, 
by the example of Octavius, who, though ina 

rivate station, raised armies for the state; he ad- 
jured him by the example of the faithful legions 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V. 


who deserted from Antony, to stand by the com: 
monwealth; and in the present crisis to exert 
himself to the utmest, without waiting for the 
orders of the senate.2 

Cicero had already proclaimed his animosity to 
Antony, and besides his zeal for the republic, ha 
a particular interest in abetting any party that 
was formed against this dangerous enemy. Hear- 
ing that he was gone from the city, and that all 
the forces in its neighbourhood had declared for 
Octavius or for the senate, he himself ventured, 
on the ninth of December, to return to Rome,3 
and proposed in the senate that they should de- 
cide on the plan they were to follow in this ax- 
duous state of their affairs. 


CHAPTER IIÍ. 


Situation and Address of Octavius— Meeting of the Senate—Progress of Antony—His march 
into Gaul— Message of Octavius to Decimus Brutus—New Consuls Hertius and Pansa— 
Meeting of the S2nate—Deputation to Antony—His Answer—Declared an enemy—Advance 
of Hirtius and Octavius to raise the siege of Mutina—Brutus and Cassius confirmed in the 
command of all the Eastern Provinces—Progress of the War in Gaul—Siege of Mutina 
raised—Junction of Antony and Lepidus—Consulate of Octavius. 


WHEN Antony left Rome to take possession 
of the Cisalpine Gaul, Octavius was in arms at 
the gates of the city, and, though a mere youth 
under age, was furnished with every art which 
age itself could bestow, to qualify him for the 
part he was to act. He had gained upon the 
army by donations and promises; upon the 
senate by public professions of duty and of zeal 
for the republic ; and, ón particular members, by 
‘attentions and flattery. The legions, which had 
lately come over to him from Antony, having ex- 
hibited a mock fight, he ordered them, on that oc- 
casion, a special gratuity of five hundred sexter- 
tii, or four pounds a man; saying, that as this 
was but the representation of a battle, the reward 


was proportional; but if he should ever have - 
occasion to employ them in real fights, they | 
In this situa- | 


should have as many thousands.‘ 
tion, it became necessary for the senate, either to 


authorise and to avail themselves of this ultrane- į 


ous support; or, by refusing it, to drive the vete- 
rans, and all the military party which still revered 


the name of Cæsar, into measures immediately | 


fatal to the republic. 
Upon the march of Antony towards Gaul, 


Octavius had already sent a message to Decimus | 


Brutus’ with assurances of his aid in defending 
that province, and of his co-operation every 


where else in supporting the authority of the. 
Hitherto men stood in awe of Antony, | 
as being vested with the authority of consul, and ; 


senate. 


threatening to treat his opponents as rebels to the 
commonwealth. Even Hirtius and Pansa, des- 
tined to succeed him in the consulship, it was 
supposed, would scarcely venture to take posses- 
sion of the office without his consent, and the 
usual form of his abdication; but the prospect of 
a vigorous support from Octavius, relieved many 


————eeee——eee eee re 
1 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. xii. ep. 2. 
2 Ibil. lib. xi. ep 7. 3 Ibid. ep 5. 
4 Appian de Ball. Civ. lib. ii. 
5 Dio, Cass. lib. xiv. c. 15. 


from their fears of Antony, and determined them 
on the part they were to act. 

The senate, under pretence of taking measures 
that the succeeding consuls might enter on their 
office in safety, being assembled by one of the 
tribunes on the nineteenth of December, a mani- 
festo was produced from Decimus Brutus, of 
which no copy remains, but probably stating his 
right to the province of Gaul, and representing 
the injustice of Antony in attempting to dis- 
lodge him by force. Octavius was av the same 
time introduced by the tribune, and pronounced a 
panegyric on Brutus.6 Cicero, in a speech which 
is still extant, extolled the conduet of the young 
Cesar in arming the veterans, as a generous 
effort made at the hazard of his own life, and of 
his private fortune, to defend the republic. He 
applauded the two legions who had lately de- 
serted from Antony; and warmly urged the 
senate to support Decimus Brutus in his pro- 
vince. He moved, that thanks should be given 
to these officers, and to the troops who adhered 
to them; and that the consuls, on the first of 
January, should move the senate farther to con- 
sidet of the rewards that were due to the army, 
for the faithful services which they had rendered 
to the commonwealth. These public propositions 
he blended with a continual and vehement in- 
vective against Antony.” He obtained decrees 
of the senate to the several effects he had pro- 
posed; and having carried those decrees to the 
comitia or assembly of the people for their appro- 
bation, there likewise he supported them with a 
repetition of the same topies, and with the usual 
force of his eloquence* 

In the mean time, Antony, being arrived on 
the frontier of Gaul, despatched an officer to De- 
cimus Brutus, with a copy of his own commission 
from the Roman people, and with an order to 
evacuate the province. 'To this message he had 


6 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. xi. ep. 6. Ibid. Philip. iii. e. 3. 
7 Cicer. Philip. 1i. 8 Ibid, Phitip. iv. 


Cuar, IL] 


for answer, that Decimus Brutus held his com- 
mand by authority of the Roman senate, who 
alone, by the laws, were entitled to dispose of the 
rovinces ; and that he would not surrender what 
the laws of his country had enjoined him to de- 
fend. Antony, after having to no purpose ex- 
changed repeated messages on this swbject, con- 
tinued his march into the province, and forced 
Brutus, with two legions and some new levies, 
that were under his command, to throw himself 
into Mutina, where he had formed some maga- 
zines from the stores and provisions he was able 
to collect in the neighbourhood, and where he 
proposed to wait for the succours which he was 
made to expect from Rome. Antony advanced 
to Bononia and Claterna, took possession of 
these places, and having invested Mutina, began 

to besiege it in form. 
Such was the posture of affairs 


U. C. 710. in the end of December, about 
C. Vibius ten months after the death of 
Pansa. C. Hir- Cesar.2 On the first of January, 
tius, both the consuls Pansa and Hirtius, 


killed. Octa- 


being to enter on the exercise of 
vius succecded 


their office, proceeded to the se- 


hl) h 

eae nate from the temple, whete they 
tion, C. Cari- had offered the usual ‘sacrifices ; 
nus succeeded and agreeably to the order of the 
Octavius. @- nineteenth of December, moved 
Pedius suc- 

e A this aSsembly to take under con- 
tus. Fenti- sideration the present state of the 
dius succeeded republic.!0 Pansa having stated 
Ped us, who 


the subject, called upon his father- 
in-law, Q. Fusius Calenus to de- 
liver his opinion. This senator 
being disposed to favour Antony advised, that 
they should not rashly, take any violent resolu- 
tion; that they should send a deputation to the 
late consul, with instructions from the senate to 
lay down his arms, and to return to his duty. 
This motion was vehemently opposed by Cicero, 
who, in a speech still extant,!! insisted that An- 
tony was already in effect declared an enemy, and 
ought to be reduced by force, not gained by ne- 
gotiation and treaty. He recounted the violences 
committed by him in his late consulate, particu- 
larly the acts which he promulgated under the 
pretence of Cæsar’s memorials and will. *“ From 
the foundation of Rome to this present hour,” 
he said, “ Antony alone has had the iunpudence 
to present himself in this assembly, escorted by a 
military force. The kings never attempted it. 
The boldest adventurers, and they who were most 
forward to revive the kingly power, never ven- 
tured so far. I remember Cinna; | have seen 
Sylla; and last of all, Cæsar. These were the 
persons, who since the expulsion of Tarquin, 
made the greatest advances to kingly power. I 
do not say that they were unattended in the se- 
nate; or that their retinue were always unarmed; 
‘they were followed only by a few, and with con- 
ealed weapons. But this daring assassin paraded 
in the streets with a military power, moving in 
cohorts under arms, with ail the forms of a regu- 
lar march. He posted a body of archers with 
their quivers full, and even chests of spare ar- 
rows for immediate and continued action, on the 
very steps by which senators were to ascend into 
the temple of Concord; you have ordered pub- 


died in office. 


9 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ii. 
11 Cicer. Philip. v. 


10 Ibid. lib. iii. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


341 


lic thanks to the troops that have drawn their 
swords against him; you have extolled the gene- 
rous magnanimity of a young man, who, without 
waiting for your commission, brought a hasty 
power to cover the city from his violence; and 
are you now deliberating whether you are to 
soothe his fury with negotiation, or to meet it 
with force?!2_ Jf you send deputiesto his camp, ne 
matter with what message, you will appear to sur 
render; vou will appear todistrust your own cause; 
you will damp the ardour of your own troops; 
and you will shake the faith of the provinces.” 

Such was the purport of Cicero’s speech re- 
specting the conduct of Antony, the merits of 
Decimus Brutus, of Lepidus, of Octavius, of the 
legions, and of the veterans; and of L. Egnatu- 
leius the tribune, who led the Legio Martia in the 
late choice of their party. In the close of the 
speech, he moved, That suitable honours should 
be decreed to each; that the senate should ratify 
all the proceedings of Brutus in defending the 
province of Gaul; that Lepidus should have a 
statue erected to him; that Octavius should have 
the rank of propretor, be confirmed in his present 
command, and be entitled to sue for the offices 
of state before the legal age; that three years of 
the age appointed by law, should be dispensed 
with in behalf of Egnatuleius; that the veterans, 
who had taken arms under Octavius, and the 
legions, who had deserted from Antony to join the 
standard of the commonwealth, should have the 
gratuities that were promised to them by Octa- 
vius; and at the end of the present war should 
have grants of land, and a perpetual exemption 
to themselves and their children from every mili 
tary service. In his encomium on Brutus, he in- 
sinuated the praise that was due to him, as a 
partner in the conspiracy against Casar; but, 
not to offend the partizans of Octavius, declined 
entering fully on that subject. He pledged him- 
self for the future behaviour of Octavius. “ This 
admirable young man,” he said, “having once 
tasted of true glory, having found himself held 
forth by the senate, by the people, and by all or- 
ders of men as a citizen dear to his country, and 
as the guardian of the commonwealth, never can 
place any other species of distinction or honour 
in competition with this. If Julius Cesar had 
found himself, at so early a period of life, in such 
an illustrious point of view, he never would have 
sought for preferment by courting the populace, 
nor have betaken himself to measures incompati- 
ble with the satety of his country. ‘The mind of 
this young man is perfectly known to me. Love 
of the republic, respect to the senate, deference to 
good men, the desire of real glory are his ruling 
passions. I will therefore venture to pledge my 
honour in the most positive assurances to you, 
to the Roman people, and to the commonwealth. 
I promise, I undertake, I engage that C. Cesar 
will continue towards the republic this conduct 
which he now holds, and that he will always be 
what you wish, and what you would ehoose that 
he should be.” 

Octavius, we may suppose, had, in some mea- 
sure, blinded Cicero with his flattery; yet in this 
panegyric there was probably more of what the 
orator wished to recommend to Octavius, than of 
what he believed to be his original intention; but 
this designing young man was not to be caught 


12 Cicer. Philip. v. 


H3: 


in such snares. He knew too well how to retort 
these artifices, even at an age, when others 
scarcely knew that such arts are practised; and 
the experienced Cicero, with all the penetration 
and wit for which he was eminent; was the dupe 
of a youth who possessed the deepest of all artifices, 
that of suffering himself in appearance to be de- 
ceived, while in reality he employed the cunning 
of others to his own purpose.! 

L. Piso, with a considerable party in the senate, 
inclined to moderate the resolutions that were 
proposed against Antony. He contended that 
no Roman citizen could be condemned unheard ; 
that the senate could do no more than appoint 
him a day of trial, and cite him to answer for 
himself. The time of the first meeting being 
already spent in this debate, the senate adjourn- 
ed; and the subject being resumed on the follow- 
ing day, it is said? that Fusius Calenus, with a 
torrent of abuse and reproach, retorted on Cicero 
the invective which, on the preceding day, he had 
pronounced against Antony. He reproached 
him with the obscurity of his birth, and accused 
him of a presumption, which was supported only 
by a talent for declamation, often employed by 
him against the best citizens, never in bringing 
real criminals of state to punishment. ‘ What 
have you done,” he said, accosting Cicero, 
“either at home or abroad, to merit the high de- 
gree of consideration to which you lay claim? In 
what war have we ever prevailed under your 
auspices? What accession of territory have you 
ever gained tothe Roman state ? Even in respect 
to your boasted talent for speaking, you do but 
impose upon the world the labours of retirement 
for the prompt effusions of eloquence; aud you 
publish harangues, which you had neither the in- 
vention to conceive, nor the courage to deliver in 
the face of any public assembly, or in the midst 
of any real affairs.” He accused Cicero of having 
forced Catiline into rebellion, and of having put 
to death, without anv trial, Cornelius Lentulus, 
and other Roman citizens of rank; of having 
lighted the fire of dissension among the leaders of | 
the present unhappy divisions that continued to | 
tear the republic, and of having blown up the 
flames which still continued to consume the state ; 
of having meanly abandoned the cause of Pom- | 
pey upon his defeat at Pharsalia, and of having 
instigated assassins to take away the life of Cesar, 
even after he himself had implored his mercy, 
and accepted of his protection. He reproached | 
him with a fresh instance of ingratitude, in this | 
attempt to turn the arms of the republic against 
the late consul, to whose clemency he himself was 
indebted for his life. Having mixed this invec-| 
tive with the defence, and even with the praises 
of Antony, he concluded with calling upon the 
senate to consider how absurd it would be to de- | 
clare war upon a magistrate, who acted by com- 
mission from the Roman people, at the head of 
an army, of which they had given him the com- 
mand, and in the very province which they had 
committed to his government; and this merely in 
support of a young man who had presumed, with- 
out any public authority, to levy war against a 
Roman officer of the highest rank, and in favour 
of a rebel who had presumed forcibly to retain a 

rovince, which the Roman people had ordered 
im to surrender. ‘‘Such men,” he said, “ were 


1 Cicer. Philip. v. 2 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


indeed the enemies of the republic; but he did 
not move for any formal declaration against then. 
The times,” he observed, “ will not suffer us to do 
all that ought to be done.’ He moved only that 
messengers should be instantly despatched to all 
the parties at war in this unfortunate contest; 
that all of them should be required to lay down 
their arms, and to submit to the decisions of the 
senate ; that if any one of them should disobey, it 
would then be full time to declare him a public ene- 
my, and to give to the consuls the usual and regular 
powers to guard the safety of the commonwealth, 
and to reduce disorderly subjects to their duty.3 

Such are the abuses of an admired art, as vile 
and odious in its falsehoods, as in the genuine 
effusions of truth it is noble and respectable ; and 
this speech, compared with some of the former,” 
which were delivered relating to the same per- 
sons, may serve to exhibit the variety of colours 
with which the same subjects and characters may 
be covered in debate, and by which public assem- 
blies may be perplexed in their councils. The 
majority of the senate were aware however of An- 
tony’s designs, and knew the danger of suffermg 
him to’ get a military establishment, and the pos- 
session of a formidable army within the Alps; 
and they would probably have come to a severe 
resolution, if one of the tribunes had not inter- 
posed for that day, and forbid their proceeding 
any farther on the subject. 

The senate was again adjourned until the next 
moruing, and in the mean time the relations and 
family of Antony, his mother, his wife, his chil- 
dren, and intimate friends went into mourning, 
passed the night in visiting the principal mem- 
bers, or in waiting for the people, as they passed 
in the strects, to implore their protection. When 
the senate was ahout to assemble, this company 
of suppliants took their station on the steps of the 
temple, and embraced the knees of the members 
as they passed. 

This solemn council, when met, on coming to 
the question, took, as is common on such occa- 
sions, a middle course between the extremes which 
were pointed out to them. They so far treated 
Antony as a friend, as to order a deputation of 
their own members to attend him in his camp; 
but the message which they sent by this deputa- 
tion, sounded more like a declaration of war, than 
an overture of reconciliation or of a peace.4 They 
commanded him* not to disturb in his government 
Decimus Brutus, whom they qualified with the 
appellation of consul-elect; not to lay siege to 
Mutina; not to lay waste the province; not to 
make any levies of forces, or to presume to con- 
tinue in arms against the authority of the senate. 

L. Piso, Philippus, and Servius Sulpicius, be- 
ing deputed to carry these orders, had farther in 
charge to signify to Decimus Brutus, and to the 
troops under his command, the entire approbation 
of the senate, and the high esteem and honour® in 
which they were held on account of their conduct, 
The senate at the same time entered, on their 
own records, the honorary decrees which had 
been passed in favour of Decimus Brutus, Octa- 
vius, Egnatuleius, and the army, in terms that 
had been proposed by Cicero ; and resolved, that 
ee Ee 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. xlv. c. 18. lib. xlvi. c. 28. 

4 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. xii. ep. 24. 

5 Decimus Brutus was already destined to succeed 
in the consulate of the following year 

6 Cicer, Philip. vi. 


Cuap. IIL] 


the gratuities already-paid by Octavius to the 
veterans, and to the legions who had lately come 
over from Antony, should be refunded from the 
treasury; that lands should be allotted, and a 
continual exemption be given to them from all 
military service after the present war. 

When the deputies were gone with the mes- 
sage which they had reccived from the senate, the 
party of Antony at Rome endeavoured to alarm 
the people, and to load his enemies with all the 
consequences that were likely to follow from the 
late resolutions. They extolled the happy effects 
of moderation and peace, observed that Antony 
was a person of a daring and impetuous spirit, 
and ought not to have been incensed; that his 
party was strong; and in case of a rupture, would 
be joined by numbers of profligate men, for 
whom no attenipt was too arduous, and against 
whom the friends of the republic could not be too 
much on their guard.” 

While men were amused with such discourses 
at Rome, Servius Sulpicius, one of the three de- 
puties on whom the senate chiefly relied for the 
effect of their commission, died on the journey. 
The other two were kindly received by Antony, 
and admitted without any jealousy or distrust to 
visit the approaches he lad made, and the works 
he had erected, against the town of Mutina. 

While the siege was continued without inter- 
ruption, the commissioners were reccived with 
affected subinission to the orders of the senate ; 
were told that Antony would evacuate the pro- 
vince, disband his army, and return to a private 
station; that he would forget the past, and agree 
to a sincere reconciliation, provided that the le- 
gions then under his command, that his cavalry 
and his guards were properly rewarded and ac- 
commodated with grants of land, and put upon the 
same footing in all these respects with the troops 
of Octavius; provided that the arrangement of 
the provinces, which had been made in conjunc- 
tion with Dolabella, should be confirmed; that 
the acts taken from the will and memoirs of his 
late colleague should be ratified; that no account 
should be required of the money which he had 
taken from the temple of Ops; that the septem- 
viri, or commissioners of the treasury, should not 
suffer for what they had done in delivering it into 
his hands: that a general indemnity should pass 
in favour of all his adherents; that his act relat- 
ing to judicatures should not be repealed; that 
upon these conditions he would evacuate the 
Gallia Togata,® but retain the Comata,? with six 
legions, to be completed with draughts’from the 
troops now under Decimus Brutus; that he 
should have this force as long as Marcus Brutus 
and Caius Cassius should remain under arms; 
and that, at any rate, he should retain his division 
of the province for five years. 

In this plan of accommodation, Antony en- 
deavoured to frustrate the principal articles, by 
means of the conditions which he took care to 
subjoin ; and, in order entirely to defeat the pur- 
pose of his antagonists, he sent to Rome, in the 
company of the deputies of the senate, his ques- 
tor, of the name of Cotyla, with orders to solicit 
his interest, and to intrigue with the senators and 
principal citizens. Complaining of the ascend- 
ant his enemies had gained in the senate, “ With 


7 Cicer. Philip. vii. 
9 Beyond the Alps. 


.8 Within the Alps. 
10 Cicero. Philip. viii. | 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


4 
i 


313 
what countenance,” he said, “can they arraien 
the administration of Cæsar, while they submit 
to that of Cicero? If they allege that Cæsar wag 
an usurper, what is this Cicero, who pretends to 
dictate to the Roman senate, and to suspend the 
orders of the Roman people? Let him know 
that I claim the province of Gaul, in consequence 
of an appointment from the highest authority in 
the state, and he may be assured that I shall treat 
Decimus Brutus as a rebel, if he persist in with- 
holding it from me. The life of this traitor shall 
atone for that noble blood which he sled in the 
senate-house, and shall expiate that guilt in which 
Cicero is fast involving the senate iiself.”1 

Antony, in this commission to his questor, 
and in his public declarations, joined with the in- 
solence of the matter, affected expressions of sub- 
mission to the senate; and made a variety of 
proposals, either to gain time, or to curry favour 
with the army, whose interest he pretended tc 
have greatly at heart. The deputies, who had 
been employed on this unsuccessful business, in- 
curred much public censure. Jt was unworthy 
of L. Piso and of L. Philippus, it was said, to 
hold any intercourse with a rebel, who refused to 
comply with the orders that were sent to him.!? 
Under this sense of the matter, at a meeting of 
the senate, it was moved, that war should be de- 
clared against Antony, and that every senator 
should assume the military habit. This motion 
was agreed to even by Lucius Cesar, uncle to 
Antony; a decree was framed upon it, and pass- 
ed without opposition, by which the army under 
his conimand were required, by a certain day, to 
lay down their arms.!3 

Upon this resolution, obtained by those who 
strove for the preservation of the commonwealth, 
great rejoicings were made over all Italy, and it 
did not then appear from whence any real dan- 
ger could arise to the authority of Jaws, which 
were so properly supported. The consuls, it was 
observed, acted with great vigour; the senate, 
the middling class, and the citizens in general, ex- 
pressed great zeal.'4 The peonle crowded to have 
their names enrolled in the levies that were or- 
dered.'5 The reputation which Cicero gained in 
bringing public affairs into this situation, set him 
at the head of the commonwealth; but while it 
placed the whole administration of the state in his 
hands, it made him an object of great animosity 
to the opposite party, and of some envy to many 
persons of principal eonsideration in his own. It 
was under the impression of these circunistances, 
he complained that senators of the first rank were 
lukewarm, were timid, or ill affected to the cause 
of the republic.'6 

The conduct of the war was comniitted to the 
consuls, and, jointly with them, to Octavius, in 
the capacity of propretor. Orders were likewise 
despatched to Lepidus and to Plancus, to co- 
operate with these officers. ‘The first was yet on 
his march into Spain, through the province of 
Narbonne ; the other was posted on the Rhone.” 
The treasury being so much exhausted by the 
late embezzlements, that there was not money 
sufficient for the immediate service, it was agreed 


11 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. isi. 

12 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. xii. ep. 4. 

13 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. ¢ 29, 30. Cicer. Philip. viii. 
14 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. xii. ep. 4. 

15 Ibid. lib. xi. ep. 8. 16 Ibid. 
17 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 39. 


that all citizens should pay the five and twentieth 
‘part of all their effects; that the senators should 
ay, over and above, a certain rate for all the 
Fiiss or tenements they either possessed or let 
to tenants, and that in afd of these supplies, re- 
quisitions of money and of arms should be made 
through all the towns of Italy. - 

In the mean time, Octavius, without waiting 
for the authority with which the senate had lately 
invested him, had followed Antony across the 
Apennines, and took post with his army at the 
Forum Cornelii,! on the road from Ariminum 2 
to Mutina.” The messages which passed be- 
tween the senate and Antony, as well as the de- 
lays which the consuls, under the pretence of 
winter, made in advancing with their forces, gave 
him some degree of uneasiness. Pansa was em- 
ployed at Rome in conducting the new levies. 
Hirtius, though destined to take the feld, and to 
join Octavius, was still detained by indisposition.4 
Antony continued the siege of Mutina without 
interruption. 

Octavius, after having sent many pressing 
messages to hasten the march of the consul, was 
at last joined by him at the Forum Cornelii, and 
they advanced together; forced the posts which 


fm} 


Antony had established at Claterna and Bono- 


nia, and encamped at the latter of these places.5 |; 


Here they were still separated by the Rhenus 
and Lavinius from the army of Antony, which 
covered the siege of Mutina, and were precluded 
from any communication with the town. They 
endeavoured, however, to give notice of their ap- 
proach to the besieged; and for this purpose,.the 
country being flat, they hoisted lights on the 
highest trees; but not relying entirely on these 
signals, they employed a dexterous swimmer, 
who undertook to pass into the town by the 
channel of the river, and to carry the intelligence 
of their arrival engraved on a plate of metal. 

Upon this information, Brutus was confirmed 
in his-resolution of defending the place to the last 
extremity, and prevailed on the garrison, under 
the hopes of a speedy relief, to persevere in the 
toils and dangers of their present service.6 

The senate, notwithstanding that they consi- 
dered the preservation of the republic as the com- 
mon cause of all those who could’ hope to partake 
in its honours, and believed that the present con- 
suls, Hirtius and. Pansa, were sincerely embarked 
in its cause; and notwithstanding the confidence 
they placed in Octavius as opposed: to Antony, 
they still relied chiefly on those who had:taken 
an active part against the late usurpation of 
Cesar,.and looked to Brutus and Cassius for a 
principal support against the remains of that«mili- 
tary faction. On thisaccount, they had:annulled 
the proceedings of Antony relating to the distri- 
bution of the eastern provinces, reinstated Marcus 
Brutus in the government of Macedonia, and 
Cassius in that of Syria; and, by these ap- 
pointments, placed the whole resources of the 
commonwealth, from the Adriatic to the ut- 
most boundary of the empire, under their au- 
thority.7 

Marcus Brutus and Cassius had left Italy in 


1 Imola. 2 Rimini. 3 Now Modena. 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 35, 36. 

3 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. xii. ep. 3. 

6 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 35, 36. 


7 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


the preceding Autumn. Brutus had passed 
through Lucania. Thither Porcia accompanied 
him, with the melancholy prospect of parting, 
perhaps for ever. While she endeavoured to. 
conceal her grief, she was betrayed into tears by 
the sight of a picture, which represented the 
parting of Hectorand Andromaché. One of the 
company, without observing the distress which 
Porcia seemed to feel, repeated from Homer the 
lines from which this picture was taken. My: 
father, my brother, and my husband are, Hec- 
tor, all in thee ‘But I cannot reply,” said 
Brutus, “in the words of: Hector, go to thy maids,. 
and mind thy loom ; for although Porcia is defi- 
cient in strength of body, in her mind’ she is- 
formed to great: affairs.” 9 

Brutus, having embarked at Elea, sailed into 
Greece, where he was received with every mark 
of respect. Here he seemed to devote himself. 
entirely to study; but had his agents employed 
to provide what was necessary against the storm, 
which he had reason to expect.. He sent Heros- 
tratus into Macedonia to sound the disposition of” 
the troops in-that province, and drew about him- 


-self all the young Romans who were then at 
Athens, attending the different schools which 


still supported the reputation of that place. 

While Brutus remained in Greece, a body of. 
‘troops, under the command of an officer, named 
Apulcius,® with a sum of money amounting to 
sixteen thousand talents,.collected from the reve- 
nue of Asia, were delivered up to him. The 


-troops who had served lately under Vatinius in 


Illyricum, being. then at Dyrrachium, deserted 
from their. commander to join him.!! Those un- 
der Caius Antonius, at Apollonia, followed this 
example.. Part of Dolabella’s forces, who were 
marching under Cinna into Asia, likewise left’ 
their party to join that of the republic.!2 As 
Brutus was considered in Macedonia and Thes- 
saly as reviving the party of Pompey, many who 
had served under that leader, and were yet dis- 


‘persed in those parts, flocked to his standard, so 


that the new levies he had ordered, were soon 
completed to the amount of four legions and five 
hundred horse. A great convoy, with spare arms, 
which Cesar had provided for the Parthian war, 
and which, by the order of Antony, were then to 
be again returned into Italy, were intercepted by 
him at Demetrias. Upon the order of the senate 
to put him in possession of Macedonia, the greater 
‘part of the province, then under the command of 
Hortensius, acknowledged his authority. At his. 
departure from Athens, many of the young Ro- 
man nobility made a part of his retinue, and 
-among these,.the son of Marcus Tullius Cicero, 
who,.though with a genius for letters inferior to 
that of his father, became nevertheless distin- 
guished as a soldier in the course of the war.!3 
Cassius, at the same time, had gone with the 
utmost despatch into Syria, to prevent Dolabella, 
who was sent by the opposite party to take pos- 
session of that province. He had received some 
supplies of men and of money from Trebonius, 
then commanding at Smyrna, and prevailed with 


8 Exroe, wrx TV MtO ETT’ RLT LLE TOTVER MNTHO, 
"HS xariyvyTog, Iliad. lib. vi. v. 439. 

9 For these particulars, Plutarch quotes young Bi- 
bulus, the son of Porcia by a former husband, who was 
present. Plutarch. in Bruto. 

10 Cicer. Philip. xiii. 11 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvii. e. 27. 

12 Phitarch. in Bruto. 13 Ibid. 


d 


Cuap. HL) 


part of the cavalry of Dolabella, on their march 
through the province of Asia, to abandon their 
leader. With these forces, he advanced into Ci- 
licia, reduced the city of Tarsus, and continued 
his march, with a respectable appearance, into his 
intended province. . 

At the arrival of Cassius, the forces of Syria 
were divided, and the opposite parties had actu- 
ally committed hostilities against each other. The 
troops which had been stationed there by Julius 
Cesar, had even, before his death, mutinied, and 
had put Sextus Julius, a young man who com- 
inanded them, to death. ‘They submitted them- 
selves to the command of Cecilius Bassus, one 
of Pompey’s officers, who, having escaped from 
Pharsalia, then lay at Tyre, and in this change 
of their leader, declared for the party of the re- 
public. They defeated Statius Murcus, whom 
Cesar had ordered, with three legions, to reduce 
them, and made it necessary to bring against 
them a reinforcement of three legions more from 
Bythinia, under Marcus Crispus. This officer 
had accordingly brought these forces, and was 
actually engaged in the siege of Apamea, to 
which Bassus had retired when Cassius arrived 
in Syria. 

There werc now in this province, engaged on 
apposite sides, no less than eight legions. Upon 
the arrival of Cassius, the two legions under 
Bassus declared for him; and soon after the other 
six, moved by the authority of his commission 
from the senate, or gained by his personal cha- 
racter and address, followed thisexample. Four 
more legions, who, intending to join Dolabella, 
were marching from Egypt through Palestine," 
were intercepted, and forced to receive his orders 
as governor of Syria. His army, by these diller- 
ent accessions, amounted to twelve legions. 

Upon the first suspicion that Brutus and Cas- 
sius intended to possess themselves of these im- 
portant provinces, Dolabella, to whom, by the. 
influence of Antony, the command in Syria had 
been assigned, sct out from Rome, and with all 
possible diligence joined some troops that were 
placed to reccive him on the side of Macedonia, 
passed the Hellespont, and continacd his route 
tothe east. ln passing through the province of 
Asia, he had an interview at Smyrna with Tre- 
bonius, professed a friendship for him, affected 
great respect for his associates in the conspiracy 
against Cesar, and a zeal for the restoration of 
the commonwealth. After this conference with 
the governor of the province, he put his army in 
mcetion with the most pacific appearances on the 
route to Ephesus; and having by these means put 
Trebonius off his gaard, he returned in the night, 
surprised the city of Sinyrna, seized on the per- 
son of the governor, and, with many insults, put 
him to the torture,'* continuing him under it for 
some days, in order to extort a discovery of the 
treasure which he supposed to be hid in some 
repository of the province; but on the third day, 
Dolabella having satiated his mind with these 
cruelties, gave orders that Trebonius should be 
strangled, his head severed from the body, and 
exposed on the point of a spear, while the limbs 
were dragged through the streets. 

This murder, being cominitted on the person 
of a Roman officer, within the very province in 
which he was appointed to céminand, raised a 


14 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvii. c. 26,27 28. 15 Ibid. c.29. | 
2X 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


| public enemy by the senate. i 
| war against him was committed to Caius Cassius, 


345 
gencral indignation. Dolabella was declared a 
The conduct of the 
who was now at the head of the armiesin Svria, 
and who, together with Marcus Brutus, was au- 
thorised by bral decrees to retain all the forces 
they had asseinbled, and all the resources of 
which they were possessed, and to employ them 
according to their own judgment, where the ser- 
vice of the republic seemed most to require their 
exertions.!6 

Thus the flames of war, which were already 
lighted in Italy, began to extend, and were soon 
communicated to every part of the empire. The 
opposite armies before Mutina continued during 


tthe winter to observe each other, and in their at- 


tempts to give or to withhold relicf from the be- 
sieged, had frequent skirmishes and partial 
engagements. T'he chief direction of affairs at 
Rome, in the mean time, had devolved on Cicero, 
who incited the senate and the people, with all 
the powers of his eloquence ayainst Antony. 


|The soldiers in general, with their officers, were 


notwithstanding inclined to favour this declarea 
enemy of the commonwealth. Ventidius in par- 
ticular, who professed to range himself under 
Octavius, was in reality warmly attached to his 
rival ; and, in order to serve him, formed a design 
to surprise Cicero, and the other heads of the re- 
publican party. For this purpose, he assemblea 
a body of vetcrans in the neighbourhood of Rome, 
and advanced towards the city; but his design 
being suspected, and the persons against whoin it 
wus directed having taken the alarm, and with- 
drawn to places of safety, he turned away to Pice- 
nuin, and there waited the issue of the campaign.” 

The senate, during the dependance of these 
operations, as in full possession of the republic, 
devised laws, to prevent for the future those 
abuses which had given rise to the present disor- 
ders. ‘They resolved, that no extraordinary com- 
inission of any kind should be given to any sin- 
gle person, or any provincial appointment pro- 
longed beyond a year.!8 While they were thus 
employed, separate addresses were presented to 
them from Lepidus and from Plancus, warmly 
recommending an aeeon:modation with Antony.!9 
Cicero made his observations on this conduct, in 
a letter to Plancus‘of the thirteenth of the kalends 
of April, or twenticth of March; but he delivers 
himself to Lepidus on the same subjeet with more 
warmth, alluding to some recent honours which 
had been received by this ofheer, and for which 
he negleeted to make the proper acknowledg- 
ments. “Iam glad,” he said, “that you wish 
to reconcile your fellow-citizens to each other. If 
you could procure them peace without slavery, 
you would perform a must aceéptable serviee to 
your country; and acquire much honour to your- 
self; but if, under the title of peace, we are again 
to become the slaves of a profligate villain, be as- 
sured that every man in his senses will prefer 
death. In my opinion, therefore, it will be wise 
in you to desist from a proposal, which neither 
the senate, the people, nor any good man can 
approve.” 


16 Cicer. Philip. xi. 

I7 Ibid. xii. Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. x. ep. 16. 
18 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. ¢ 39. 

19 Cicer. Philip. xii. 

20 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. x ep 6 -27 


316 


Notwithstanding these sentiments, publicly 
declared by a person, then supposed to be at the 
head of the republic, numbers in the city and in 
the senate espoused the cause of Antony. Piso, 
at whose house the wife and children of this sup- 
posed public enemy were entertained, openly 
corresponded with him. The consul Pansa pro- 
posed a fresh deputation to him with overtures of 
peace, and his party in the senate insidiously of- 
fered to devolve the honour of this deputation 
upon Cicero himself, who rejected the offer, with 
proper animadversion on the danger to which his 
life must be exposed in the camp of his enemy, 
and discussed’ with his usual eloquence the 
weakness of the council itself, as well as the 
great impropriety of his being employed in it. 

While this measure was in agitation, Hirtius 
and Octavius appear to have sent a joint message 
to Antony, informing him of what had been pro- 
posed in the senate, and desiring a cessation of 
arms, with liberty to convey some supply to the 
garrison of Mutina, until the event of the senate’s 
deliberations should be known. Antony replied 
in terms calculated to insinuate himself into the 
favour of the late Cesar’s party, and to gain the 
affection of the army ; but full of reproach and 
contumely against those who pretended to es- 
pouse the cause of the commonwealth, and 
against the authors of the present councils at 
Rome. These had recently procured a decree 
of the senate, full of indignation against the mur- 
derers of Trebonius, and had furnished Marcus 
Brutus and Caius Cassius with a commission 
and warrant to execute public justice against Do- 
labella on this account. In reference to these 
eircumstances, “I know not (said Antony, in his 
answer to Hirtius and Octavius) whether I 
should receive more satisfaction from the death 
of that villain Trebonius, than I feel indignation 
at. the unjust sentence passed against Dolabella. 
That the Roman senate should value the life of 
that vile fellow Trebonius, more than they did 
that of Cesar himself, the father of his country, 
is surely provoking enough; but what must I 
feel, when I see you Hirtius, whom Cesar has 
raised and adorned so much, that I am persuaded 
you scarcely know yourself; and when I see you, 
young man, who have no. pretence to considera- 
tion besides the name of Cesar, which you have 
boldly assumed, contributing all in your power to 
blast the memory of Cæsar, and when | see you 
both endeavouring to oppress his friends, com- 
mitting yourselves, with all the powers of the 
commonwealth, into the hands of Marcus Brutus 
and of Caius Cassius, who were his murderers ; 
and when I see you joined against me to rescue 
from justice this assassin, Decimus Brutus, who 
had so aggravated a part in the same crime? But, 
the camp and the head quarters of Pompey it 
seems are to be formed anew, and to bear the 
name and the authority of a Roman senate, and 
the exile Cicero is to be set up at the head of this 
reviving party. 

“You are employed in avenging the death of 
Frebonius, I am employed in avenging that of 
Cæsar; we, who were once the friends of Cesar, 
are like a troop of gladiators to part, and from 
opposite sides to fight and to cut one another’s 
throats under the direction of Cicero, who is be- 
come master of the show! But for me, I have 
taken my resolution, and will neither suffer the 
veterans to be stripped of their just rewards, nor 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V. 


the wrongs which are intended to myself and to 
my friends, to be carried into execution. If in 
this I am supported, and succeed, life will be 
sweet; if I fall, the thought of what you are to 
suffer, from the very party you are now endea- 
vouring to raise up against me, will even then bo 
some consolation. If the faction of Pompey be 
so insolent in its ruin, I choose that you rather 
than I, should experience the effect of its recove- 
ry, and of its return to power.” 

Antony, in all his discourses, affected to he in 
good understanding with Lepidus and with 
Plancus, who, he insinuated, were in concert 
with himself, and embarked in the same cause.? 
But whatever secret correspondence these officers 
may have held together, they and’ Pollio likewise 
professed the highest duty to the senate, and af- 
fection to the commonwealth. Plancus having, 
for some time after the commencement of the 
war, declined any open declaration, now informed 
the senate in a public address, That he had hi- 
therto been taking measures to render the decla- 


-ration he should make of real moment to the 
‘republic ;. that he had remained silent so long, not 


from any hesitation in the choice of his party, but 
from a desire more effectually to serve that party 
which he had long since embraced; that before 
he declared himself, he had secured the co opera- 
tion of his officers, the affections of his army, and 
of the whole province in which he was stationed ; 
that he was now at the head of five complete le- 
gions well affected to the republic, and, in conse- 
quence of his ltberalities, attached to himself; 
that the whole province was unanimous in the 
same cause; that the people, with a zeal which a 
concern for their own freedom or safety could not 
surpass, had taken arms in support of the Ro- 
man republic; that he was ready to obey the or- 
ders of the senate, either to retain his command, 
or to resign it to any person they should appoint 
to receive it from him; that he would remain in 
his post, or advance upon the enemy; and by 
the last of these measures, if it should be thought 
expedient, draw upon himself the whole weight 
of the war; that provided he could, by any means, 
re-establish the commonwealth, or defer its ruin, 
the manner of doing it was indifferent to him. 
Others, he said, had declared themselves for the 
senate, while that body, being greatly alarmed, 
was lavish of its commendations and of its re- 
wards; but that if he had missed the time in 
which his services were likely to have been most 
highly valued, he had chosen the occasion which, 
promised from them the greatest benefit to the: 


‘commonwealth, a consideration which should be 


to him a sufficient reward for the highest service 
he could perform.? 

Pollio, at the same- time, wrote to Cicero, ex- 
pressing a violent detestation of Antony’s party, 
and of the designs of their leader. ‘To be con- 
nected with such a person in any cause, he said, 
would be grievous; even to have acted under Ca- 
sar, being contrary to his disposition and to his. 
principles, was, notwithstanding the circum- 
stances which obliged him to it, now become suf- 
ficient matter of regret. The experience of his 
condition under that usurper had made him more 
sensible of the value of freedom, and of the misery 
of dependence and. servitude. “If any one for 


} Cicer. Philip. xiii. 2 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. x. ¢.8, 


Guar. IIL] OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 347 


the future,” he continued, “shall pretend to|turn, into the same snare which he himself, a 
usurp such powers, he shall find in me an open | few hours before, had so successfully laid for his 
and declared enemy. There is no danger to | enemy, was accordingly surprised and defeated 
which I will not expose myself in the cause of | with great slaughter, and with the loss of the 
feerdom.”? eagles or standards of both the legions, and of 

While the party of the senate appeared to gain | sixty ensigns of the cohorts. After this disaster, 
such accessions of strength by the declaration of | he himself, having fled with the cavalry, arrived 
so many military officers in the different pro- | about ten at night in his camp about Mutina,‘ 
vinces, Decimus Brutus was reduced to great | from thence sent detachments abroad to collect 
straits at Mutina; and waited, under many cir- | the remains of his scattered party, or to facilitate 
cumstances ef distress, for the opening of a cam- | their retreat.$ 3 4 

aign, in which he expected that his own fate, | Pansa having been carried to Bononia on ac- 

and that of the republic, might soon be deter- | count of the wounds he had received, Hirtius 
mined. On the approach of the -= season, | took the command of his division of the army, 
the consul Pansa, with the levies he had made, | and effected its junction with his own, and with 
amounting to four legions, marched towards Gaul, | that of Octavius. s < i 
and being arrived at Bononia on the fourteenth| In this state of affairs, Antony being consider- 
of April, was next day to have joined his col- | ably weakened by his loss in the late action, and 
league, who had taken post with Octavius, to ob- | the enemy greatly reinforced by their junction, 
serve and to impede the progress of the siege. he determined to keep within his lines, to con- 
To facilitate their junction, Hirtius had detached | tinue the blockade of Mutina, and to await the 
the legion which was called the Martia, with two | effect of the distress into which he had already 
pretorian bands, to occupy the passes, and to | reduced the besieged. The danger to which De- 
strengthen the van of Pansa’s army, in case they | cimus Brutus, with the garrison, were exposed, 
should be disturbed on their march. Antony, at | at the same time hastened the endeavours of Hir- 
the same time, having intelligence of their route, } tius and Octavius to force the besicgers to battle. 
marched in the night with two chosen legions, | For this purpose, or in order to relieve the town, 
the second and third, two pretorian cohorts, | they made a feint to throw in succours on a side 
being veteran and experienced troops, with a nu- | which the besiegers had deemed inaccessible, and 
merous body of irregulars and horse. He took which, on this account, they had but slightly 
post at a village, which was called the Forum Gal- guarded. Antony, alarmed by this attempt to 
lorum, and posting the horse and irregulars in render abortive all the labours he had sustained 
open view in the field, at some distance from the | in the preceding blockade, drew forth his army 
village, he placed the legions and irregular infan- to. oppose them, and by this movement exposed 
try in ambuscade under the cover of the houses. | himself to the hazard of a general engagement. 

When Pansa’s army, led by the detachment | While he was making his disposition to receive 
which Hirtius had sent to receive them, came | the enemy in the field, his lines were attacked by 
in sight of Antony’s horse and irregulars, they | a sally from the town, and it became necessary to 
could not be restrained until the posture and | divide his forces. He himself, with that part 
strength of the enemy were examined. They } of his army which remained with him to make 
broke from their ranks, and without waiting till | head against Hirtius and Octavius, was defeat- 
the village should be visited, they rushed through | ed, fled to his camp, and, being pursued thither, 
a defile in a wood or morass to intercept the ene- | continued to give way, until the action ended by 
my, who, appearing to consist of horse and light | the death of the consul Hirtius, who, after he 
infantry alone, could, as they apprehended, have | had forced the intrenchments of the enemy, was 
no hopes of safety but by endeavouring to escape, | killed, and fell near to the prxtorium or head- 
which it was necessary by an immediate attack | quarters of their general. 
to prevent. As the foremost of Pansa’s army | Upon this event, Octavius, not having the 
were passing in the most disorderly manner from | qualitics of a soldier which were necessary to 
this defile, in pursuit of their supposed prey, An- | replace the consul, suffered the victorious ariny, 
tony, with the legions, placed himself in their | thus checked by the loss of their commander, to 
way, and forced them to fly with great slaughter. | be driven back from the ground they had gained, 
Pansa himself was dangerously wounded, and | and left Antony again in possession of his works. 
his army obliged to take refuge in the camp from The vanquished party, however, feeling all the 
which they had marched in the morning. Here ! effects of a defeat, and not being in condition to 
too Antony attempted to force them, but was re- | continue the siege, resolved to decamp in the 
pulsed; and fearing that his own retreat might | night; and they executed this resolution unol- 
be cut off, took his resolution to retire, and en- | served and unmolested by their enemies, either 
deavoured, without loss of time, to rejoin the | from the town of Mutina or the camp. Octavius 
main hody of his army which lay before Mutina. | had a courage and ability more fit for the council 

Antony was soon justified in his apprehensions | than for the field; and Decimus Brutus, though 
of the danger to which the farther pursuit of his | at break of day he observed that the lines of the 
victory over Pansa might have exposed him; for | besiegers seemed to be evacuated, yet, as lie had 
Hirtius, having intelligence of the movement he | no intelligence from the camp, remiained all that 
had made in the night, though too late to prevent | day in suspense. Even after he had received 
its effects, had left ae camp with twenty cohorts | information of what had passed, of the various 
of veterans, arrived at the Forum Gallorum, and | events of the action, and of the consul’s death, 
was in possession of the very ground on which | and found, that he was from thenceforward te 
Pansa had been defeated, when Antony, return- | depend on Octavius for support and co-operation 
ing from thes pursuit of his victory, fell, in his} — ~~~ 


4 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. x. ep. 30. 


3 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. x. ¢. 31. 5 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. jii. 


345 


in the war, being greatly alarmed by the neglect 
which this young man had shown in not joining 
him the moment the communication between 
them was open; and not being in condition to 
act alone, having neither cavalry nor baggage- 
horses, and the troops being greatly reduced by 
the hardships they had suffered, he was obliged 
to remain inactive while the enemy continued 
their retreat undisturbed.! 

On the second day after the battle, Decimus 
Brutus, being sent for by Pansa to Bononia to 
concert the future operations of the war, he 
learned, on his way, that this consul was dead 
of his wounds. 

By these delays, Antony had got two days 
march a-head, and, without halting, reached the 
fens of Sabatta on the coast of Liguria. Here 
the country being of difficult access he thought 
himself secure, and made a halt, to consider of 
his future operations. At the same time Venti- 
dius, who, upon the news of the defeat of his 
friend at Mutina, had passed the Apennines by 
hasty marches, followed and joined him at this 
place.? 

In the first accounts of Antony’s defeat that 
were carried to Rome, it was reported, that his 
army had been entirely routed; that he himself 
had escaped from the field of battle with only a 
few broken remains of his infantry unarmed ; 
and that to recruit his numbers, he had broken 
open the work-houses, and set loese and enlisted 
the slaves.’ 

Upon these representations the senate were 
greatly elated; and, amidst the acclamations of 
the people, ordered a feast of thanksgiving, which 
was to last for sixty days, and renewed the pro- 
clamation in which Antony, and all who had 
served under his command, were declared to have 
forfeited all the rights of citizens, and to be ene- 
inies of their country.4 

The commonwealth being deprived of its legal 
head by the death of both the consuls, Decimus 
Brutus, as next in succession, according to the 
arrangement which had been made for the en- 
suing year, became the principal object of con- 
sideration with the senate; and being supposed 
most deeply interested in the preservation of the 
republic, was the person on whom they chiefly 
relied for the support of their cause. The sena- 
tors, accordingly, seemed to drop at once the 
high regard which they had hitherto paid to Oc- 
tavius, and overlooking his pretensions and his 
influence over the army, gave to Brutus the 
command of all their forces, whether in Italy or 
in Gaul. 

Thus ended the connexion of the young Cæ- 
sar with the friends of the republic,—an alliance 
which had, on both sides, probably been equally 
insincere. The young man, pretending to have 
his eyes opened by this conduct of the senate, 
and supposing that the party of Artony was less 
hostile to himself than that which had now 
gained the ascendant in the commonwealth, he 
slighted the instructions which were sent to him 
to take his orders from Brutus, retained the com- 
mand not only of the troops which had followed 
his own standard, but the command likewise of 
‘a legion which had been raised for the republic 


2 Ibid. 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi.c. 29. | 


1 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. xi. ep. 13. 
3 Ibid. ep. 10 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V. 


by Pansa. He refused to co-operate with Deci- 
mus Brutus in pursuing the late victory against 
Antony, and had influence enough with dif- 
ferent bodies of the army, particularly with the 
fourth legion and the Martia, to hinder their 
obeying the orders they had received from 
Rome.6 

In this manner, as the respect which was paid 
to Octavius hy the senate vanished with the oc- 
casion which they had for his services; so all the 
professions he made of concern for the republic, 
and of zeal for its restoration, disappeared, with 
the interest which led him to make those profes- 
sions. And Decimus Brutus, the person now 
acknowledged by the senate as consul-elect, and 
head of the republic, for whose relief Octavius 
affected to have assembled his forces, was left by 
him to finish the remains of the war against 
Antony, at the head of such troops as had any 
degree of attachment to the cause of the re- 
public. 

Decimus Brutus, when the war broke out, had 
a military chest of forty thousand sestertia, about 
three hundred and twenty thousand pounds; but 
the whole was now expended, and his own credit 
likewise exhausted. He was, from this time for- 
ward, ill supported at Rome, all motions made in 
his favour being opposed by the party of Octavius, 
as well as by that of Antony. The troops that 
adhered to him amounted to seven legions; these 
he subsisted by such resources as he himself 
could command. He advanced to Dortora on 
the fourth of May ; and from thence continuing 
his march till within thirty miles of the enemy, 
he received intelligence, that Antony, in a speech 
to his army, had declared his intention to pass 
the Alps, and to cast himself entirely on the 
friendship of Lepidus, in whose disposition he 
professed to have great confidence ; that this pro- 
posal being disagreeable to the army, they had 
declaret their resolution to remain in Italy, and 
exclaimed, That there they would conquer or 
perish ; that Antony had been disconcerted by 
this declaration, and had continued a whole day 
undetermined as to his future operations; but 
in order to conform himself to the inclination 
of the army, and, if possible, to keep his footing 
in Italy, he was about to surprise Pollentia, a 
fortified place on the Tenarus, and had de- 
tached Trebellius with a body of cavalry for this 
purpose. 

Decimus Brutus, upon this intelligence, sent 
forward three cohorts to prevent the design on 
Pollentia; and these having effected their march 
in time to secure the place, the enemy, by this 
disappointment, notwithstanding their late reso- 
lution to remain in Italy, were under a necessity 
of passing the Alps.8 They undertook this diffi- 
cult march so ill provided with every necessary, 
that, according to Plutarch, they lad no subsist- 
ence but what was found on the route, consisting 
chiefly of wild herbs, fruits, and animals not 
commonly used for human food; but Antony 
himself discovered a patience and a force of 
mind which no man, judging by his usual way 
of life, could have expected from him; and, by 
his own example, supported the spirits of his mer. 
through the greatest distresses.® 


-= 


5 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. xi. ep. 20. 
6 Ibid. ep. 10. 19. 7 Ibid. cp. 10. | 
8 Ibid. ep. 13. 9 Plut.in Antonio. 


dL 


Cuar. IIL] 


Lepidus, in consequence of the senate’s instruc- 
tions, or of his own desire to be at hand to take 
such measures as the state of the war in Italy 
might require, had discontinued the march of his 
army into Spain, and returning through the pro- 
vince of Narbonne, had passed the Rhone at its 
confluence with the Soane; and now, hearing of 
Antony’s march, descended on the left of these 
rivers, and took a situation to intercept him, not 
far from the coast at the Forum Vocontium, on 
a small river called the Argenteum, which emp- 
ties itself into the sea at Forum Julii.' 

In the mean time Antony had passed the Alps, 
and on the fifteenth ef May arrived with the first 
division of his army at Forum Julii, four-and- 
twenty miles from the station of Lepidus. ` Ven- 
tidius having followed about two days’ march in 
the rear of Antony, and having again joined him 
at this place, their forces consisted!! of the second 
legion entire, with a considerable number of men, 
but without arms; the broken remains of many 
legions, together with a body of cavalry, of which, 
this part of the army having suffered least in the 
late action, Antony had still a considerable force. 
But in this position many deserted from him, and 
his numbers were daily diminishing ; Silanus and 
Culco, two officers of rank, were among the de- 
serters. 

Such was the posture of affairs, on the twenty- 
first of May, when Lepidus gave to Cicero the 
strongest assurances!? of zeal for the common- 
wealth. Plancus, at the same time, had taken 
post on the Isere,!3 had thrown a bridge over that 
river, and waited for the arrival of Decimus Bru- 
tus, whom he expected to join him by the most 
ordinary passage of the Alps :!4 but while he lay 
in this position he received a message from Lepi- 
dus, informing him of Antony’s approach, and 
expressing great distrust of many in his own 
army, whom he suspected of a disposition to join 
the enemy. Upon these representations, Plan- 
cus marched on the twentieth of May, as appears 
from his despatches to Rome of this date, expect- 
ed to join Lepidus in eight days, and hoped, by 
his presence, to secure the fidelity of the army, 
which began to be questioned. He wrote, with 
great confidence, of the zeal and affection of his 
own troops, and was pleased to say, that he him- 
self, unsupported by any other force, should be 
able to overwhelm, as he expresses himself, the 
broken forces of Antony, though joined by the 
followers of that muleteer Ventidius. 

In the mean time, the armias of Antony and 
Lepidus remaining in sight of each other, fre- 
quent messages passed between the leaders; and 
as no hostilities were committed, the soldiers con- 
versed freely together, though without any ap- 
parent effect.'© Lepidus still professed to govern 
himself by the orders of the senate, and to employ 
his army in support of the commonwealth. But. 
while he preserved these appearances, he sent an 
order to countermand the junction of Plancus; 
and having convened his own army, as usual, 
around the platforin,!? from which it was the 
custom to harangue the troops, he addressed 


10 Frejus. 

12 Ibid. 13 Isura. 

14 Probably by Mount Ceuis, or the channels of the 
Dorea Baltea and the Isere. 

15 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. x. ep 13. 

A6 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 

47 The suggestuin, most commonly raised of turf. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


11 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. x. ep. 17. 


349 


them in a speech, in which he repeated his pro- 
fessions of duty to the republic, and urged a 
vigorous exertion in the war. It had not yet ap- 
peared to what point these professions were tend- 
ing, when he was answered with exclamations, 
which he probably expected, from some leading 
persons among the soldiers, in which they de- 
clared the wishes of the army for peace. Two 
Roman consuls, they said, had been already 
killed in this unnatural quarrel. ‘The best blood 
of the republic had been spilt, and the most re- 
spectable citizens declared enemies of their coun- 
try; that it was time to sheath the sword; “for 
our parts,” they said, “we are determined that 
our arms, from henceforward, shall not be em- 
ployed on either side.”!8 From this audience the 
army of Lepidus proceeded tu invite Antony inte 
their camp, and presenting him to their general 
as a friend, terminated the war between them by 
a coalition, in appearance forced upon Lepidus, 
but probably previously concerted with himself. 

Antony was now joined with Lepidus in the 
command of the army which had come to oppose 
him, and by his popularity, or superior ability, 
soon got the ascendant of his colleague. He found 
himself again at the head of a great force, com- 
posed of the remains of his late defeat, three le- 
gions that had joined him under Ventidius, and 
seven of which the army of Lepidus consisted.!9 

Plancus, being still upon his march, persisteu 
in his intention to join Lepidus notwithstanding 
he had received an order or instruction from hiin- 
self to the contrary; but having, at last, received 
positive information of his defection, and con- 
sidering the danger to which he himself must be 
exposed with an inferior force against two armies 
united, he returned to his post on the Isere, and 
sent pressing instances to hasten the march of 
Decimus Brutus, and of other succours from 
Italy. 

Lepidus, even after the reception of Antony 
into his camp, addressed the senate in a solemn 
declaration, still asserting his affection to the com 
monwealth, and representing the late change of 
his measures as the effect of necessity imposed 
upon him by the troops, who, in a mutinous 
manner, refused to make war on their fellow- 
citizens, While he made these professions, he 
recommended to the senate the example of the 
army, exhorted them to drop all private animosi- 
ties, to make the public good the rule of their 
conduct, and not to treat as a crime, the humane 
and merciful disposition which fellow-citizens 
had exercised towards each other,” 

At the same time despatches arrived from 
Plancus and Decimus Erutus, both treating the 
pretended mutiny of the army in Gaul as a 
mere artifice of their general to conceal his own 
defection. The city was greatly alarmed, even 
the populace, affecting a zeal for the authority of 
the senate, demolished the statues which had been 
lately erected to Lepidus. The senators, incensed 
not only at his treachery, but at the false profes- 
sions with which he presumed to address them 
on the subject, proceeded to declare him a public 
enemy, aud resolved, that all his adherents, who 
did not return to their duty before the first o 


18 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. x. ep. 21. . 
19 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii, 
20 Cic. at Famil. lib. x. ep. 21. 


21 Ibid. ep. 35. 22 Ibid. 


350 


September, should be involved in the same sen- 
tence. Private instructions were sent, at the 
same time, to Marcus Brutus, and to Caius Cas- 
sius, urging them to hasten the march of their 
forces for the defence of the capital.! 

During these transactions, Octavius remained 
inactive on the frontiers of Italy. The demise 
of the two consuls opened a new scene to his 
ambition. This event came so opportunely for 
his purpose, and his own character for intrigue 
was so much established, that he was suspected 
of having had an active part in procuring the 
death of those officers. It was said, that he em- 

loyed some emissaries to despatch Hirtius in the 
ha of battle; and that Pansa’s wound, not be- 
ing mortal, he suborned the person who dressed 
it, to render it so by an injection of poison. A 
surgeon named Glyco was actually taken into 
custody on this account; the suspicion remained 
against Octavius till the last moment of his life, 
and even made a part in the grievous reproaches 
with which his memory continued to be loaded 
after his death.2 It was rejected, however, at 
the time, even by Marcus Brutus, who warmly 
interceded with Cicero in behalf of Glyco, as a 

erson who was himself a great sufferer by 
—_ death, and who bore such a reputation 
for probity as ought to have secured him against 
this imputation. The testimony of Marcus 
Brutus, when given in favour of Octavius, must, 
no doubt, be admitted as of the greatest authority, 
and may be allowed, in a great measure, to re- 
move the whole suspicion. 

Octavius himself gave out, that Pansa, when 
dying of his wounds, desired to see him in pri- 
vate, gave him a view of the state of parties, and 
advised him no longer to remain the tool of those 
who meant only to demolish the party of Cesar, 
in order that they themselves might rise on its 
ruins. But from the detail of what passed in the 
interval between the battle of Mutina and the 
death of Pansa, of which Decimus Brutus sent 
an account to Cicero, it does not appear that Oc- 
tavius could have seen Pansa. And it is proba- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


ble, that this pretended advice of the dying corn- | 
sul was fabricated afterwards, to justify the part | know, the whole authority of government, and 


which Octavius took against the senate.4 The 
supposed admonition of Pansa, at any rate, was 
probably not necessary to dissuade Octavius from 
continuing to support the republic longer than 
his own interest required. ‘his was the great 
tule of his conduct, and if, until that hour, he 


continued to believe, that the senate intended to | 


raise him on the ruin of Antony’s party, in order 
that he might become their own master and 
sovereign of the commonwealth, he fancied surely 
what was not probable, and what they never pro- 
fessed to be their intention. The restoration of 
the republican government, and of the senate’s 
authority, implied, that individuals were to be 
satisfied with receiving the honours of the re- 
public in their turn; and with this prospect, Oc- 


l 
| 


tavius himself affected to be satisfied, so long as it | 


suited with the state of his fortunes, to act the 
part of a republican. 

The commonwealth undoubtedly sustained a 
great loss in the death of the two consuls. 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 

2 Tacit. Annal. lib. i. c. 10. 

3 Cicer. ad Brutuin, ep. 6. edit. Olivet. tom. 9. 
4 Cicer. ad Familias. lib. xi. ep. 13. 


[Boox V. 


Though trained up under Cesar, and not pos- 
sessed of any remarkable share of political virtue, 
they were men probably of moderate ambition, 
tenacious of the dignities to which they them- 
selves and every free citizen might aspire, but not 
covetous of more. They were likely, therefore, 
to acquiesce in the civil establishment of their 
country, and by the dignity of their characters, 
to overawe the more desperate adventurers, whese 
views and successes were inconsistent with the 
safety of the commonwealth. 

If the consuls, Hirtius and Pansa, had lived 
even with such abilities as they possessed, they 
might have kept Lepidus within the bounds of 
his duty, they might have prevented Antony from 
recovering the defeat which he had lately received 
at Mutina, and obliged Octavius, if not to drop 
his ambitious designs, at least to defer the execu- 
tion of them toa more distant period. But, imme- 
diately after the death of these magistrates, it 
became evident, that this young man was dissa- 
tisfied with his situation and with his party, he 
not only kept at a distance from Decimus Brutus, 
but seemed determined not to take any part in 
the farther operations of the campaign. The 
prisoners that were in his hands he treated as 
friends, and by suffering them, without any ex- 
change or ransom, to join their own army, gave 
hopes that he was ready to treat on reasonable 
terms of a reconciliation with their general. He, 
at the same time, took steps with the senate that 
seemed to prognosticate a rupture, made applica- 
tion for a triumph, in which neither his age, his 
rank, nor his share in the late action, or in the 
victory obtained over Antony, in any degree sup- 
ported him; and having failed in this attempt 
he declared his intention to sue for the office o. 
consul. 

Octavius, when he offered himself as a candi- 
date for the consulate, according to Dion Cassius 
affected to insist that Cicero’ should be associated 
with him in the office, and should take the whole 
administration on himself. For his own part, he 
said, that, in this association, he aspired only to 
the title of magistrate; that all the world must 


all the glory to be reaped in the public service 
would redound to his colleague; that, in this re- 
quest, and in that he had made for a triumph, 
he had ne object but to gain a situation in which 
he might lay down his arms with honour, as 
having such a public attestation in behalf of his 
services.? 

Cicero, according to the testimony of the same 
historian, fell into the snare that was laid for him 
by this artful boy, supported his pretensions, and 
was willing to become the colleague and the tutor 
of this reviving Cesar. 

Octavius afterwards boasted of the artifice he 
had employed in this piece of flattery to Cicero, 
as the only means he had left, at that time, to se- 
cure the continuance of his military command.® 
But the senators, and the partizans of the conspi 
rators, in particular, were greatly exasperated. 
The proposition appeared so strange, that no tri- 
bune, no person in any office, not even any private 
citizen, could be found to move it? The ani- 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 42. 
6 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 
7 Cicer. ad Brutum, ep. 10. 
9 Cicer. ad Prutum, ev. 18. 


8 Plut. in Cicer. 


Cuar. IIL] 


mosity of Cicero to Antony had already, they 
thought, carried him too far in supporting the 
pretensions of this aspiring young man. If he 
should prevail on the present occasion, all that the 
senate had hitherto done to restore the constitu- 
tion would be fruitless. A person, who presumed 
to claim the office of consul at an age so impro- 
per, and so far short of that which the law pre- 
scribed, was likely, when possessed of this power, 
to set no bounds to his usurpations. In order, 
therefore, to elude his requisition, they were 
obliged to defer the elections, and, in the mean 
time, appointed ten commissioners under pretence 
of inquiring into the abuses committed in Anto- 
ny’s administration, and of distributing to the 
army the gratuities, and of executing the settle- 
ments devised for their late services, but probably 
with a real intention to vest these commissioners 
with the chief direction of affairs, until it could 
be determined who should succeed in the office 
of consul, and who should be intrusted with 
the safety of the republic. The partizans of 
the commonwealth were now, in appearance, 
superior to their enemies, but far from bein 
secure in possession of the superiority they had 
gained.10 

The senate, in order to exclude Octavius from 
this commission, without giving him any particu- 
lar reason to complain of their partiality, at the 
same time left out Decimus Brutus; and by this 
equal exclusion of persons at the head of armies 
from the management of affairs, in which the 
armies were so much concerned, they enabled 
Octavius to fill the minds of the soldiers with dis- 
trust of the civil power, and to state the interests 
of the civil and military factions as in opposition 
to each other.!! He no longer, therefore, dis- 
guised his aversion to the senate; complained, 
that they treated him disrespecttully, called him 
a boy, who must be amused,'? decked out with 
honours, and afterwards destroyed.'3 “Tam ex- 
cluded,” he said, “from the present commission, 
not from any distrust in me, but from the same 
motive from which Decimus Brutus is also ex- 
cluded, a general distrust of every person who is 
hkely to espouse the interests of the army; and, 
from these exclusions, it is evident what they in- 
tend with respect to the claims of the veterans, 
and with respect to their expectations of a just 
reward for their services.”’!4 

Upon the junction of Antony with Lepidus, 
the senate felt the necessity of paying a little 
more attention than they had lately done to the 
interest of Octavius. Instead of appointing him 
to act under Decimus Brutus, as they at first in- 
tended, they joined him in the commaud of the 
army; and in this new situation required him to 
co-operate iu defending Italy against the united 
forces of Antony and Lepidus. 

Octavius instantly communicated to the army 
these orders of the senate, with insinuations of 
the hardships which they were now to undergo 
on being sent on a fresh service, before they had 
received the rewards which were promised and 
due to them for the former ; and he proposed, that 


10 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 

11 Cicer. ad Familiar. lib. xi. ep 20. 

12 Ibid. ep. 21. 

13 Laudandum adolescentem, ornandum, tollendum. 
—This last word is ambiguous. This saying was im- 
puted to Cicero, but is peremptorily denied. 

ł4 Sueton, in Octavio, c. 12. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


351 


they should send deputies to the senate with pro- 
per representations on this subject. 

A number of centurions were accordingly se. 
lected to carry the mandate of the army to Rome. 
As they delivered their message in the name of 
the legions, without any mention of Octavius, 
this was thought a favourable opportunity to ne- 
gotiate directly with the troops, without consult- 
ing their leader; and the senate accordingly sent 
a commission for this purpose, with the hopes 
that they might be able to detach the whole 
army from their general, or that at least they 
might be able to engage, in their own cause, 
those legions in particular, who had deserted 
from Antony, with professions of zeal for the 
commonwealth. 

Octavius, to counteract this design before the 
commissioners employed in the execution of it 
arrived, drew forth his army, and in a speech 
complained of this and of the former injuries he 
had received from the senate: ‘ Their intention,” 
he said, “is to cut off separately all the leaders 
of Cesar’s party. When they have accomplished 
this purpose, the army too must fall at their feet.!5 
They will recall the grants of land which have 
been made to vou, and will deprive you of the 
just reward of all your faithful services. They 
charge me with ambition; but what evidence is 
there of my ambition? Have I not declined the 
dignity of prætor, when you offered to procure it 
for nie?—My motive is not ambition, but the 
love of my country; and for this 1 am willing to 
run any hazard to which I myself may be ex- 
posed; but cannot endure, upon any account, 
that you should be stripped of what you have so 
dearly borght by your services mn the public 
cause. Itis now become evident, that in order 
to prevent the most dangerous powers from 
coming into the hands of your enemies, and in 
order to ensure the rewards to which you are so 
justly entitled, it is necessary that your friends 
should be raised to the head of the comnion- 
wealth. In the capacity of consul I shall be able 
to do justice to your merits ; to punish the mur- 
derers of my father, to be revenged of your ene- 
mies, and at last to bring these unhappy domestic 
dissensions to an end.” l6 

This harangue was returned with acclama- 
tions of joy, and a second deputation, to be 
escorted by four hundred nien, was instantly ap- 
pointed from the army, demanding the consulate 
for their general. The officers employed in this 
service were repeatedly admitted to audiences in 
the senate.!? In answer to tlie objections which 
were drawn from the defects of their general’s 
age and title, they urged former precedents; that 
of Scipio, of Dolabella, and the special act relating 
to Octavius himself, in whose favour ten years 
of the legal age were already dispensed with. 
One of the officers, in this singular deputation, 
while the senate proposed a delay in order to de- 
liberate on the matter, is said to have shown the 
hilt of his dagger ; aud some one of the party who 
escorted the deputies, in resuming lis arms at the 
door of the senate-house, was heard to say, in 
girding the belt of his sword, Zf you will not con- 
fer the consulate on Octavius, this shall. To 
these menacing insinuations, Cicero, who had 
jokes imputed to him, on occasions that were 


15 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 16 Ibid. 


17 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 42. 


352 


equally serious to himself and to the republic, is 
said to have replied, Nay, if you pray in that 
language, you will surely be heard. 

While the senate delayed giving any direct 
answer to this military demand, they again sent 
a deputation of their own members with money 
to be distributed to the legions, hoping, by this 
means, to divert them from the project which 
they had formed in favour of their general. But 
Octavius being secretly apprised that a sum of 
inoney was sent to corrupt his army, and observ- 
ing that the soldiers were impatient at having no 
immediate return to their own message, chose 
not to await the trial of this dangerous experi- 
ment, separated the legions into two columns, 
marched directly to Rome; and on his way being 
met by the deputies of the senate, he commanded 
them, at their peril, not to approach the army, or 
to interrupt its march. 

Upon the news of his approach, the city was 
thrown into great consternation. The senate, 
believing they had erred in offering too little 
money to the troops, ordered the former bounty 
to be doubled.! They resolved that Octavius 
should be admitted to the consulate; or, accord- 
ing to Dion Cassius, that he should have the 
title and ensigns of consul, but without the actual 
power; that he should have a place inthe senate 
among those who had been consuls; that he 
should be pretor at the first elections, and con- 
sul at the following.2 And thus having done 
enough to show their fears, but not to disarm, or 
to lull the ambition of this presumptuous young 
man, they sent new deputies, with every symp- 
tom of trepidation and alarm, to intimate these 
resolutions. 

Soon after this deputation from the senate was 
despatched, two legions, lately transported from 
Africa, and ordered for the defence of the city, 
having arrived at the gates, the senators, with 
their party among the people, resumed their 
courage: they were even disposed to recall their 


late concessions, and began to exclaim, that it- 


were better to perish in defending their liberties, 
than, without any struggle; to fall a prey to their 
enemies. Persons of every description assumed 
the military dress, and ran to their arms, 

There were now at Rome three legions, with 
a thousand horse; one legion having been left 
there by Pansa when he marched towards Gaul. 
These troops were posted on the side from which 
the enemy was expected, on the Janiculum and 
the bridge which led from thence to the city. 
Galleys were ordered to be in readiness at Ostia, 
to convey the public treasure beyond the sea, in 
case it should become necessary to take this mea- 
sure to save it: and it was determined to seize 
the mother and sister of Octavius, who were 
then supposed to be at Rome, and to detain them 
as hostages. But this intention was frustrated 
by the timely escape of these women, who, appre- 
hending some danger, had already withdrawn 
from the city. Their flight, or the early precau- 
tion which they themselves, or their friends, had 
taken in this matter, was considered as the evi- 
dence of a long premeditated design on the part 
of Octavius. 

Under this impression, and that of the supe- 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 
2 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 41. 
3 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib iii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V. 


rior force with which it was known Octavius 
was prepared to assail them, the senators again 
lost hopes of being able to resist; but they flat- 


tered themselves, that the resolution they had 


taken to defend the city, would not be known in 
time to prevent their first message to the army 


' from being delivered. Their concessions were 


accordingly published among the troops; but ap- 
pearing to be forced, were received with contempt, 
and served only to encourage the presumption of 
the soldiers, and to hasten their march. As the 
army drew near to the city, all the approaches 
were deserted by those who had been placed to 
defend them, and the advanced guard of Octa- 
vius passed to the Mons Quirinalis, without be- 
ing met by any person in the quality either of 
friend or of enemy. But, after a little pause, num- 
bers of his own party among the people having 


gone forth to receive him, the streets were in- 


stantly crowded with persons of all ranks, who 
hastened to pay their court.4 

Octavius having halted his army during the 
night in the first streets which they entered; on 
the following day, with a proper escort, and 
amidst the shouts and acclamations of the multi- 
tude, took possession of the forum. The troops 
who had been assembied to oppose him, at the 
same time left their stations, and made an offer of 
their services. Cornutus, one of the officers who 
commanded those troops, having in vain endea- 
voured to prevent this defection, killed himself. 
Cicero is said to have desired a conference with 
his young friend; but when he. seemed to pre- 
sume on his former connection, was coldly an- 
swered, that he had been slow iu his. present 
advances. 

In the following night a rumour was spread, 
that the Martia and the fourth legion, which 
made a part in the army of Octavius, but sup- 
posed to be particularly attached to the senate 
on account of the late honorary decrees which 
had passed in their favour, had declared against 
the violent measures of their leader; that they 
offered to protect the senate and people in their 
legal assemblies, and in any resolutions they 
should form on the present state of the republic. 
Numbers of senators believed this report, and 
were about to resume their meetings. Crassus, 
one of the prætors, set out for the Picenum, where 
he had considerable influence, in order to assemble 
what forces he could raise to secure the success 
of this design; but before morning this report 
wes known to be groundless, and all orders of 
men returned to their former dejection and sub- 
mission, 

At break of day Octavius removed the army 
from the streets of Rome into the Campus Mar- 
tius. He did not suffer any acts of cruelty to be 
committed, or make any inquiry after those who 
had been forward in opposing his claims. He 
affected the clemency of. his late uncle ; but like 
him too, without any scruple, laid his hands on 
the public treasure, made a distribution to the 
army of the sums which had been first decreed to 
them; and engaged for himself, soon after, to add 


‘from his owu estate what had been successively 


promised. Having ordered that the election 


fof consuls should immediately proceed, he with- 


drew with the army, affecting to leave the people 


4 Appian. de Bello Civ. lib. iii. 


Cuar. IV.] 


to a free choice. And being himself elected, 
together with Q. Pedius, whom, without any 
mention of Cicero, he had recommended for this 
purpose, he returned in solemn procession to 
offer the sacrifices usual on such occasions, and 
entered on his office on the twenty-first of Sep- 
tember, the day before he completed his twen- 
tieth year.’ 

On this occasion the young Cesar, in the ca- 
pacity of consul, made a speech to the troops, 
acknowledging their services; but avoided im- 

uting to their interposition the honours which 
he had recently obtained in the city. For these 
honours he returned his thanks to the senate, 
and to the assemblies of the people. These he 
accosted as the sovereigns of the empire; and 
was answered by an affected belief of his sin- 
cerity. 

In the same spirit of servility with which so 
many honours had been decreed to Julius Cesar, 
it was enacted, that Octavius should for ever take 
rank of every consul, and the command of every 
general, at the head of his own army; that he 
should have an unlimited commission to levy 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


353 


troops, and to employ them where the necessities 
of the state might require ;6 that his adoption into 
the family of Cesar should now be ratified in the 
most solemn manner by the assembly of the Cu- 
rie ; a form which the laws of the republic re- 
quired in every such case, and in which he had 
been formerly prevented by the intrigues of An- 
tony; that the act declaring Dolabella an enemy 
of his country should be repealed, and an inquest 
set on foot for the trial of those who had been 
concerned in the death of Julius Cesar. 

In consequence of this establishment, numbers 
were cited, and upon their non-appearance were 
condemned. Amonz these were Marcus Brutus 
and Caius Cassius. In giving sentence against 
them, the judges affected to show their ballots; 
and a citizen, of the name of Silicius Coronas, 
being of the number, likewise held up his ballot 
into public view ; but, in the midst of this tide of 
servility and adulation, had the courage to acquit 
the accused. His courage for the present passed 
without animadversion, but he was reserved, with 
silent resentment, as an object of future punish- 
ment,’ l 


CHAPTER IV. 


Proceedings of the new Consul—State of the Eastern Provinces—Interview of Octavius, Antony, 
and Lepidus, with their Coalition— The Proscription or Massacre—Death of Cicero—Sequel 
of the Wassacre—Succession of Consuls—Severe Exaction of Taxes—State of Sextius Pom- 
peius— Movements of Antony and Octavius respectively— Both bend their course to the Easi— 
Posture and Operations of Brutus and Cassius— Their arrival and progress in Europe— 
Campaign at Philippi—F'irst Action and Death of Cassius— Second Action and Death of Brutus. 


THE republic, of which Octavius was now, 
in appearance, the legal magistrate, had declared 
open war against Antony and Lepidus; and, in 
consequence of this declaration, the forces of De- 
cimus Brutus and of Plancus, as has becn men- 
tioned, had advanced to the Rhone and the Isere, 
but had heen obliged again to retreat, in order to 
avoid coming to action with a superior enemy. 
It was considered, thercfore, as the first object of 
the consul to reinforce that army of the republic, 
and to carry the decrees of the senate into execu- 
tion against those who presumed to dispute thcir 
authority. Ele accordingly marched from the 
city as upon this design; but it soon after ap- 
peared, that he had been some time in corres- 
pondence with these supposed enemies of their 
country ; that he intended to join them against 
the senate, and, with their forces united, to resist 
the storm which was gathering against them in 
the east, under the governors of Macedonia and 
Syria. 

While the siege of Mutina was still in depend- 


ance, Marcus Brutus had drawn his forces to- | 


wards the coast of Epirus, with intention to pass 
into Italy ; but having received a report that Do- 
labella, then in the province of Asia, had trans- 
ported a body of men from thence to the Cher- 
sonesus, 8 and that he seemed to intend the 
invasion of Macedonia, he was obliged to return 


5 Vell. Paterculus, lib. ii. c. 65. 
6 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 39. 

7 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iii. 
8 Cicer. ad Brutum, ep. 2. 


d 


for the defence of his own province; and from 
thenceforward, by the state of the war in Syria 
was hindercd, during some time, from taking any 
part in the affairs of the west. 

Dolabella, in consequence of his appointment 
to the government of Syria, after the murder of 
Trebonius, had assembled a fleet on the coast, to 
accompany the march of his army by land, and 
to dispute the possession of that province with 
Cassius. His operations, however, began in 
that quarter with his receiving a great check to 
his hopes in the defeat of his fleet; his galleys 
having been dispersed, and all his transports ta- 
ken by Lentulus, who had served undcr Trebo- 
nius, and who now commanded the ficcts of 
Brutus and Cassius in those seas.!¢ Notwith- 
standing the defeat of his forces at sea, he advanced 
by land into Cilicia; and while his antagonist lay 
in Palestine, to intercept the legions that were 
coming to join him from Egypt, he made consi- 
derable levies, took possession of Tarsus, reduced 
the party which Cassius had left at Æga, and 
proceeded to Antioch; but finding the gates of 
this town were shut against him, he continued 
his march to Laodicæa, where he was admitted ; 
being determined to make a stand at this place, 
he again assembled the remains of his fleet, in 
order to bring his supply of stores and provisions 
by sea.!! Having encamped and intrenchced his 
army close to the walls of Laodicwa, he threw 


9 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. xii. ep, 12. 


10 Ibid. ep. 13. 
11 Dio. Case. lib. xlvii. e 30 


354 


down part of the ramparts, to open a communi- 
eation between his camp and the town.! 
Cassius, having intelligence of this progress 
made by Dolabella in Syria, and of his disposi- 
tions to secure Laodicea, prepared to dislodge 
him from thence. For this purpose he advanced 
to Pallos, at the distance of twenty miles from the 
enemy’s station, and took measures, by cutting 
off his. supplies both. by sea and. by land, to reduce 
him by famine. In execution of this design, he 
endeavoured to procure shipping from every part 
of the coast, extending from Rhodes to Alexan- 
dria; but found that most of the maritime states 
of Asia were already drained by his enemy, or 
were unwilling to declare themselves for either 
party. The port of Sidon was the first that fur- 
nished him any supply of vessels; but the officer 


who commanded them having ventured to appear. 


before Laodicea, was unable to cope with the 
navy which Dolabella had collected. trom his late 
defeat; and, though he defended: himself with 
great obstinacy, and with great slaughter of the 
enemy, after many ships were sunk on both 
sides, suffered a capture of five galleys with all 
their crews. Notwithstanding this check, Cas- 
sius was soon after joined by squadrons from 
Tyre, Aradus, and even from Cyprus. The go- 
vernor of this island, contrary to the orders of 
Cleopatra, his sovereign, who had assembled her 
fleet to support Dolabella, ventured to change 
their destination, and to take part with Cassius.? 

With this accession of force, Cassius being 
again in condition to block up the harbour of 
Laodicea, presented himself for this purpose, and 
two engagements followed’; in the first of which 


the advantage was doubtful; in the second, the | 


victory declared for Cassius, and rendered him 
master of the coast. Holding his enemy, there- 
fore, blocked up by sea, he continued to press 
upon the town from the land, and, by the fifth of 
June, had reduced the besieged to great distress ; 
but while he seemed to rely entirely on the effects 
of this circumstance,? he carried on a corres- 
pondence with the garrison, and, on a day con- 
certed with the officer on duty, was admitted into 
the place. l 

Dolabella, finding that the town was delivered 
up, chose to fall by the sword of one of his own 
men, of whom he requested the favour to save 
him, by this last act of duty, from falling into the 
hands of his enemies. The troops who had served 
under him acknowledged the authority of his ri- 
val, and took the oath of fidelity usual in ranging 
themselves under a new general. Cassius seized 
what money he found in the public treasury, 
or in the temples at Laodicza, laid the citizens 
under a heavy contribution, and put some of 
those who had been most forward in saving his 
enemy to death.4 

Such was known, some time before the battle 
of Mutina, to be the event of affairs in Asia; 
and the fortunes of Marcus Brutus and Cassius, 
they being supposed to have twenty legions under 
their command, with all the resources of the 
Eastern empire, were still in a thriving condition, 
when Octavius, soon after his nomination to the 
office of consul, under pretence of urging the war 
against Antony and Lepidus, had taken his de- 


1 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. xii. ep. 13. 
2 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. ini. 
3 Cicer. ad Famil. lib. xii. ep. 13. 
4 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib, iii. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


(Boos V. 


parture from Rome, leaving his colleague, Pedius, 
in the administration of the city. To him he had 
given instructions to obtain, as of hts own aceord, 
the revocation of the acts by which Antony and 
Lepidus had been declared public enemies. He 
incited the army, at the same time, to demand a 
reconciliation of parties, and administered an oath 
to them, in which they swore not to draw their 
swords against any of the troops who had ever 
served under Cesar. As. Pedius made no men- 
tion of his. colleague in making his motion in 
favour of Antony and Lepidus, the senate, not 
knowing how far it might be agreeable to Oeta- 
vius, referred the whole matter to himself; and, 
upon his having signified his approbation, pro- 
ceeded to revoke their former decree of attainder.§ 
By these means Octavius, without appearing 
-himself as the author of this change, transferred 
the imputation of treason from Antony and Le- 
pidus to Brutus and Cassius, with their adhe- 
‘rents in the late conspiracy against the life of 
Cesar. 

As soon as the state of parties was thus trans- 
formed, Octavius congratulated the senate on. the 
wisdom of their measures, and from thencefor- 

ward treated with Antony and Lepidusas friends, 

| corresponded with them on the subject of the 
commonwealth, and invited them, without loss of 
time, to return into Italy. 

Under pretence of this revolution in the go- 
vernment, Plancus withdrew his forces from the 
army of Decimus Brutus, and espoused the cause, 
which the republic itself, under the authority of 
the consuls, appeared to avow. Pollio likewise 
followed this example. 

In consequence of these separations, Decimus 
Brutus was left singly to withstand the force of 
‘ so many enemies who were united, and now sup- 
ported against him with the authority of the state 
itself. He still had ten legions, of which the 
four with which he had defended the city of Mu- 
tina during the preceding winter, were not yet 
recovered from the suflerings of that service. 
With the other six, being raw and undisciplined 
troops, he did not think himself in condition to 
continue the war against so many enemies; and 
he determined, therefore, to withdraw by IIlyri- 
cum into Macedonia, and to join himself with 
the forces which were raised for the republic in 
that province. But in the execution of this de- 
sion he found, that in civil wars armies are not 
easily retained on the losing side, and had occa- 
sion to observe, that they are never hearty in 
behalf of civil ‘institutions against a professed in- 
tention to establish military government. On 
pretence of the hardships of the proposed march, 
he was deserted first by the new levies, and after- 
wards by the veterans, with all the irregulars, 
who, except a few Gaulish horse, went over with 
their colours to the enemy. Of those who re- 
mained, he, under the deepest iunpressions of 
despair, allowed as many as chose it to depart; 
and with only three hundred horsemen who ad- 
hered to him, set out forthe Rhine, intending to 
make his intended retreat through Germany. 
But, in proportion as difficulties multiplied on his 
way, the little troop which attended him greatly 
diminished ; and being reduced to ten, he ima- 
gined that, with so few in his company, he might 
even pass through Italy undiscovered. He ac- 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 44. 


Cuar. IV.] 


cordingly disguised himself, and returned to 
Aquileia; but being there seized, though un- 
known, as a suspicious person, and being con- 
ducted to an officer of the district who knew hin, 
he was, by the orders of Antony, put to death.6 
Thus, while all the military powers of the east 


were assembled under Mareus Brutus and Cas- | 


sius, with a professed design to restore the re- 
public, those of the west were equally united for 
a contrary purpose. Antony and Lepidus having 
passed the Alps, descended the Po, and advanced 
towards Mutina. Octavius being already in that 
neighbourhood with his army, they met, with 
five legions of each side, on the opposite banks of 
the Lavinus, not far from the scene of their late 
hostile operations against each otlier. The leaders 
agreed to hold a conference in a small island 


formed by the separation and re-union of two. 


brancees of the river. To the end that they 
might have equal access to this island, bridges 
were laid on the divisions of the Lavinus by 
which the island was formed. The armies drew 
up on the opposite banks ; and as the recent ani- 
mosities of Antony and Octavius still left some 
remains of distrust between them, Lepidus first 
entered alone into the place that was intended for 
their conference; and having seen that no snares 
were laid by either party, he made the sicnal 
agreed on, and was joined by the other two with- 
out any attendants. 

Octavius now mst with Antonyin a character 
more respectable than that in which he had for- 
merly appeared to him, and, with the dignity of 
‘the Roman consul in office, had the place of ho- 
nour assigned to him. They continued their con- 
ference during this and the two following days ;7 
and at the expiration of this time made known 
to their armies, that they had agreed on the fol- 
lowing articles: That Octavius, in order to di- 
vest himself of every legal advantage over his 
associates, should resign the consulate ; that the 
three military leaders, then upon an equal foot- 
ing, should hold or share among them, during 
five years, the supreme adininistration of affairs 
in the empire; that they should name all the 
officers of state, magistrates, and governors of 
provinces; that Octavius should have the exclu- 
sive command in Africa, Sardinia, and Sicily, 
Lepidus in Spain, and Antony in Gaul; that 
Lepidus should be substituted for Decimus Bru- 
tus in the succession to the consulate for the fol- 
lowing year, and should have the adininistration 
at Rome, while Octavius and Antony pursued 
the war against Brutus and Cassius in the east; 
that the army, at the end of the war, should have 
settlements assigned to them in the richest dis- 
tricts and best situations of Italy. Among the 
last were specified Capua, Rhegium, Venusia, 
Beneventum, Nuceria, Ariminum, and Vibona. 

To ratify this agreement, the daughter of Ful- 
via, the wife of Antony, by Clodius her former 
husband, was betrothed to Octavius. He was 
said to have already made a different choice, and 
consequently to have had no intention to fulfil 
this part of the treaty ;° but the passions, as well 
as the professions, of this young man, were al- 
readv sufficiently subservient to his interest.9 

While the ariny was amused by the publica- 
tion of these several articles, the circumstances 


6 Appian. de Bell. Civ lib. iii. 7 Ibid. lib. iv. 
8 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. c. 54, 55, 56. 9 Ibid. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


355 


which chiefly distinguished this famous coalition, 
was the secret resolution, then taken, to extin- 
guish at once all future opposition to the Cesa- 
rian party, by massacring all their private and 
public enemies. They drew up a list, of which 
the numbers are variously reported, comprehend- 
ing all those who had given them private or pub- 
lic offence, and in which they mutually sacrificed 
their respective friends to each other’s resentment. 
Antony sacrificed his uncle Lucius Cesar to the 
resentment of Octavius; who, in his turn, sacri- 
ficed to that of Antony, Cicero, with Thoranius, 
his own guardian, and his father's colleague in 
the office of prætor.0 Lepidus gave up his own 
brother L. Paulus; and all of them agreed to join 
with these private enemies every person supposed 
to be attached to the republican government, 
amounting in all to three hundred senators and 
two thousand of the equestrian order, besides 
many persons of inferior note, whose names they 
deferred entering in the list until their arrival at 
Rome. ‘They meant, as soon as they should be 
in possession of the.capital, to publish the whole 
list for the direction of those who were to be em- 
ployed in the execution of the massacre. But 
as there were a few whose escape they were par- 
ticularly anxious to prevent, they agreed that the 
murders should begin, without any warning, by 
the death of twelve or seventeen of their most 
considerable enemies, and among these by the 
death of Marcus Tullius Cicero." They ratified 


the whole-by mutual oaths; and having publish- 


ed all the articles, except that which related to 


the massacre, the plan of reconciliation between 


| 


the leaders was received by the armies with 
shouts of applause, and was supposed to be the 
beginning of a period in which military men 
were to rest from their labours, and to enjoy 
undisturbed the most ample reward of thcir ser- 
vices. 

This celebrated cabal, known by the name of 
the Second Triunivirate, having thus planned 
the division or joint administration of an empire 
which each of them hoped in time to engross for 
himself, they proceeded to Rome with an aspect 
which, to those who composed the civil establish- 
ment of the commonwealth, was more terrible 
than that of any faction which had been hitherto 
formed for its destruction. 

In former times, individuals rose to the head 
of parties or factions, and brought armies to their 
standard by the natural ascendant of superior 
abilities; and cither disdained the advantages of 
usurped dominion, or knew how to employ their 
powers in exertions not unworthy of human 
reason. But in this instance, persons obscure, 
or only known by their profligacv, were followed 
by armies who conceived the design of enslaving 
their country. ‘The spirit of adventure pervaded 
the meanest rank of the legions, and every sol- 
dier grasped at the fruits that were to be reaped 
in subduing the commonwealth. If no person 
had offered to put himself at ‘their head, they 
themselves would have raised up a leader whom 
they might follow in seizing the spoils of their 
fellow-citizens. 

Lepidus, noted for his want of capacity, being 
in the rank of pretor when Cesar took posses- 
sion of Rome, and being the only Roman officer 


10 Sueton. in Octav. c. 27. : 
11 Appian. de Bell. Civil. lib. iy, 


358 


of state who was willing to prostitute the dig- 
nity of his staticn, by abetting the violence 
which was now done to the constitution, was en- 
trusted with power, and the command of an 
army, merely because he brought the name and 
authority of a magistrate to the side of the usur- 
pation. The use of his name had been likewise 
convenient to Antony in the late junction or 
coalition of their armies; and was now neces- 
sary or convenient to both the other parties in 
this famous association, as he held a kind of ba- 
lance between them, and was to witness transac- 
tions in which neither was willing to trust the 
other. 

Antony, possessed of parts which were known 
chiefly by the profligate use which he made of 
them, seeking to repair by rapine a patrimony 
which he had wasted in debauch; and some- 
times strenuous when pressed by necessity, yet 
ever relapsing in every moment of ease or relax- 
ation into the vilest debauchery or dissipation. 

Octavius, yet a boy, only known by acts of 
perfidy and cunning above his years ; equally in- 
different to friendship or enmity, apparently de- 
fective in personal courage, but followed by the 
remains of Cesar’s army, as having a common 
cause with themselves in securing the advantages 
which they severally claimed by virtue of his au- 
thority. He was now about the twentieth year of 
his age, had been already two years at the head 
of a faction, veering in his professions and in his 
conduct with every turn of fortune; at one time 
reconciled with the authors of Cæsar’s death, and 
courting the senate, by affecting the zeal of a 
citizen for the preservation of the commonwealth: 
at another time, courting the remnant of his late 
uncle’s army, by affecting concern for their inte- 
rests, and a solicitude for the security of the 
grants they had obtained from Cesar: at variance 
with Antony on the score of personal insults and 
incompatible pretensions, even charged with de- 
signs on his life; but reconciled to him, in ap- 
pearance, from considerations of interest or pre- 
sent conveniency. He had already, in the 
transactions of so short a life, given indications 
of all the vilest qualities incident to human na- 
ture, perfidy, cowardice, and cruelty; but with 
an ability or cunning which, if suffered to con- 
tinue its operations, was likely to prevail in the 
contest for superiority with his present rivals in 
the empire. 

Such was the received description of persons 
who had now parcelled among themselves the 
government of the world, and whose vices were 
exaggerated by the fears of those who were likely 
to suffer by the effects of their power. Under 
the dominion of such a junto, if any one were 
left to regret the loss of public liberty, or to feel 
the state of degradation into which citizens were 
fallen; if any one could look forward from the 
terrors of a present tyranny to the prospect of fu- 
ture evils; to them surely a scene of expectation 
was opening the most gloomy that ever had pre- 
sented itself to mankind; persons, apparently 
incapable of any noble or generous purpose, 
coveting power as a license to crimes, supported 
by bands of unprincipled villains, were now ready 
to seize and to distribute, in lots among them- 
selves, all the dignities of the state, and all the 
patrimony of its members. 

In human affairs, however, the prospect, whe- 
ther good or bad in extreme is seldom verified | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V. 


by the end; and human nature, when seemingly 
driving to the wildest excess, after a series of 
events and struggles, settles at last in some sort 
of mediocrity, beyond which it never is pushed 
but by occasional starts and sallies. The first 
entry of this triumvirate on the scene of their 
government, indeed, was such as could scarcely 
be supported in the sequel of any tyranny ot 
usurpation whatever. 

T he triumvirs being on their way to Rome, their 
orders for the immediate execution of seventeen 
of the principal senators had been received before 
their arrival, and several were accordingly sur- 
prised and murdered in their houses, or in the 
streets. The first alarm appearing the more 
terrible, as the occasion of these murders was 
unknown, strtick all orders of men with a gene- 
ral amazement and terror. The streets were 
presently deserted, and hushed in silence, excey:t 
where armed parties skulked in search of their 
prey, or by the cries which they raised, gave 
mutual intimation of the discoveries they made. 
Persons who found themselves pursued, at- 
tempted to set the city on fire, in order to faci- 
litate their own escape. Pedius, the consul, 
continued all night in the streets, endeavouring 
to prevent the calamity of a general fire. In 
order to quiet the minds of those who were not 
aimed at-in this execution, he published the 
names of the seventeen, with assurances that the 
executions were not to proceed any farther.! Jt 
has been supposed, that the design was no farther 
communicated to this magistrate, and that he 
would have opposed the extremes to which it was 
carried; but, on the following night, he died cf 
the fatigue he had incurred on this occasion, and 
the public assurances he had given were attended 
with no effect. 

The triumvirs marched separately towards the 
city, and inade their entry on three several days. 
As they arrived in succession, they occupied 
every quarter with guards and attendants, and 
filled every public place with armed men, and 
with military standards and ensigns. In order 
to ratify the powers they had devised for them- 
selves, they put the articles of their agreement 
into the hands of the tribune Publius Titius, with 
instructions, that they should be proposed and 
enacted in the public assembly of the Roman 
people; and put in the form of a legal commission, 
or warrant, for the government they had usurped. 
By the act which passed on this occasion, the 
supreme power or. sovereignty of the republic, 
during five years, without any reserve or limita- 
tion, was conferred on Octavius, Antony, and 
Lepidus; anda solemn thanksgiving being or- 
dered for the events already passed, which led to 
this termination, the citizens in general, under 
the deepest impressions of terror and sorrow, 
were obliged to assume appearances of satisfac- 
tion and joy. 

As the first act of this government, two lists 
or proscriptions were delivered to the proper of- 
ficers of the army, and posted in different parts 
of the city ; one a list of senators, the other a list 
of persons of inferior rank, on whom the troops 
were directed to perform immediate execution. 
In consequence of these orders, all the streets, 
temples, and private houses, instantly became 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. P 
2 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. Appian. lib. iv- 


Cuar. IV.) 


scenes of blood.2 At the same time, there ap- 
peared on the part of the triumvirs a manifesto, 
in which, having stated the ingratitude of many 
whom Cesar had spared, of many whom he had 
promoted to high office, and whoin he had even 
destined to inherit his fortunes, and who, never- 
theless, conspired against his life, they alleged 
the necessity they were under of preventing the 
designs of their enemies, and of extirpating a 
“dangerous faction, whom no benefits could bind, 
and whom no considerations, sacred or profane, 
could restrain. “Under the influence of this 
faction,” they said, “the perpetrators of a horrid 
murder, instead of being called to an account, 
are entrusted with the command of provinces, 
and furnished with resources of men and money 
to support them against the efforts of public jus- 
tice, and against the indignation of the Roman 
people. Some of these murderers,” they con- 
tinued, “we have already chastised ; others, being 
at the head of powerful armies, threaten to frus- 
trate the effects of our just resentment. Having 
such a conflict to maintain in the provinces, it 
would be absurd to leave an enemy in possession 
of the city, and ready to take advantage of any 
unfavourable accident that may befall us in de- 
fence of the commonwealth. For this reason, 
we have determined to cut off every person who 
is likely to abet their designs at Rome, and to 
make this desperate faction feel the effects of that 
war which they were so ready to declare against 
us and our friends. 

“We mean no harm to the innocent, and shall 
molest no citizen, in order to seize his property. 
We shall not insist on destroying even all those 
whom we know to be our enemies; but the most 
guilty, it is the interest of the Roman people, as 
well as ours, to have removed, that the republic 
may no longer be torn and agitated by the quar- 
rels of parties who cannot be reconciled. 

“ Some atonement is likewise due to the army 
insulted by the late decrees, in which they were 
declared enemies to the commonwealth. 

“We might,” they continued, “ have surprised 
and taken all our enemies without any warning, 
or explanation of our conduct; but we chose to 
make an open declaration of our purpose, that the 
innocent may not, by mistake, be involved with 
the guilty, nor even be unnecessarily alarmed.” 
They concluded this fatal proclamation, with a 
prohibition to conceal, rescue, or protect any per- 
son whose name was proscribed; and they de- 
clared, that whoever acted in opposition to this 
order, should be considered as one of the number, 
and involved in the same ruin. They declared, 
thit whoever produced the head of a person 
proscribed, if a free inan, he should receive 
twenty-five thousand Attic drachms or denarii, 
and if a slave, should have his liberty, with ten 
thousand of the same money; and that every 
slave killing his master, in execution of this pro- 
scription, should have his freedom, and be put on 
the rolls of the people in the place of the person 
he had slain. 

At the time that this proclamation and the 
preceding lists were published, armed parties had 
already scized on the gates of the city, and were 
preparcd to intercept all who attempted to escape. 
Others began to ransack the houses, and took 
their way to the villas and gardens in the sub- 


— 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvi. Appian. lib. iv. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


357 


urbs, where it was likely that any of the pro. 
scribed had retired. By the disposition they 
made, the execution began in many places at 
once, and those who knew or suspected their own 
destination, like the inhabitants of a city taken 
by storm, were on every side surrounded hy ene- 
mies, from whom they were to receive no quarter. 
To many, it is observed by historians, that their 
own nearest relations were objects of tetror, no 
less than the mercenary hands that were armed 
against them. The husband and the father did 
not think himself secure in his concealment, 
when he supposed it to be known to his wife or 
to his children. The slaves and freedmen of a 
family were become its most terrible enemies. 
The debtor had an interest in circuinventing his 
creditor, and neighbours in the country mutually 
dreaded each other as informers and spies. ‘The 
money which the master of a family was sup- 
posed to have in his house, was considered as an 
additional reward to the treachery of his domes- 
tics. The first citizens of Rome were prostrate 
at the feet of their own slaves, imploring protec- 
tion and mercy, or perished in the wells or com- 
uon sewers, where they attempted to conceal 
themselves. 

Persons having any private grudge or secret 
malice, took this opportunity to accomplish their 
ends. Even they who were inclined to protect 
or conceal the unhappy, were terrified with the 
prospect of being involved in their ruin. Many, 
who themselves, contrary to expectation, were 
not in the list of the proscribed, enjoyed their 
own safety, in perfect indifference to the distress 
of their neighbours; or, that they might distin- 
guish themselves by their zeal for the prevailing 
cause, joined the executioners, assisted in the 
slaughter, or plundered the houses of the slain. 

There were killed, in the beginning of this 
massacre, Salvius, one of the tribunes of the peo- 
ple, together with Minucius and Annalis, both 
in the office of pretors. Silicius Coronas; a per- 
son already mentioned, who being one of the 
judges at the citation of Marcus Brutus and 
Caius Cassius for the murder of Julius Cesar, had 
ventured, in the presence of Octavius, to hold up 
into view the ballot by which he acquitted them, 
and. who, a'thoagh at that time in appearance 
overlooked, now perished among the proscribed. 

Many tragic particulars, in these narrations, 
seem to be copied from former examples of what 
happened under Marius Cinna and Sylla, of per 
suns betrayed by their servants, their confidants, 
and nearest relations, and with a treachery and 
cruelty, which seemed to increase with the cor- 
ruptions of the age; but yet not without instances 
of heroic fidelity and generous courage, of which 
human nature itself ever appears to be capable, 
even in the most degenerate times. 

The slave of one of the proscribed, seeing sol- 
diers come towards the place where his master 
lay concealed, took the disguise of his clothes, 
and presented himseif to be killed in his stead. 
Another slave agreed to personate his master, 
and being carried in his litter, was killed, while 
the inaster himself, acting as one of the bearers 
of the litter, escaped. Another having been for- 
merly branded by his master for sonie offence, 
was casily suspected of a desire to seize this op- 
portunity of being revenged; but he chose the 
opposite part. While his master fled, he put 


| hunself in the way to stop his pursuers, produced 


358 


a head, which he had severed from a dead body | in search of this prey, arrived at the villa. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boor V. 
Pe- 


in the streets, and passing it for that of his mas-} pilius had received particular obligations from 


ter, procured him the means of escape. 

The son of Hosidius Geta saved his father by 
giving out that he was already killed, and by ac- 
tually performing a funeral in his name. The 
son of Quintus Cicero, though, in the former 
part of his life, often on bad terms with his father 


and with his uncle, and often undutiful to both, | 


ended his days in an act of magnanimity and filial 
affection; persevering in the concealment of his 
father, notwithstanding that the torture was ap- 
plied to force a discovery, until the father, who 
was within hearing of what was in agitation, 
burst from his concealment, and was slain, toge- 
ther with his son.! 

Quintus Cicero, who perished in this manner, 
was for some time in concealment with his bro- 
ther Marcus, having been in the country, or 
having escaped from the city on the first alarm 
of these murders. The brothers are mentioned 
as being at Tusculum together, and as setting 
out from thence for Astura, another of Ciccro’s 


villas on the coast, intending to embark for Greece; | 
but as Quintus was entirely unprovided for the | 
voyage, and his brother unable to supply him, | 
they parted on the road in agonies of grief. In| 


a few days after this parting, Quintus having put 
himself under the protection of his own son, re- 
ceived, though in vain, that striking proof of his 
filial affection and fidelity, which has just been 
mentioned. 

Marcus Cicero having got safe to Astura, em- 
barked, and with a fair wind arrived at Circeii. 
W hen the vessel was again about to set sail, his 
mind wavered, he flattered himself that matters 
might yet take a more favourable turn ; he landed, 
and travelled about twelve miles on his way to 
Rome :? but his resolution again failed him, and 
he once more returned towards the sea. Being 
arrived on the coast, he still hesitated, remained 
on shore, and passed the night in agonies of sor- 
row, which were interrupted only by momentary 
starts of indignation and rage. Under thesc 
emotions, he sometimes solaced himself with a 

rospect of returning to Romein disguise, of kill- 
ing himself in the presence of Octavius, and of 
staining the person of that young traitor with the 
blood of a man, whom he had so ungratefully 
and so vilely betrayed. Even this appeared to 
his frantic imagination some degree of revenge; 
but the fear of being discovered before he could 
execute his purpose, the prospect of the tortures 
and indignities he was likely to suffer, deterred 
him from this design; and, being unable to take 
any resolution whatever, he committed himself 
to his attendants, was carried on board of a ves- 
sel, and steered for Capua. Near to this place, 
having another villa on the shore, he was again 
landed, and being fatigued with the motion of the 
sea, went to rest; but his servants, according to 
the superstition of the times, being disturbed with 
prodigies and unfavourable presages, or rather 
being sensible of their master’s danger, after a 
little repose awaked him from his slcep, forced 
him into his litter, and hastened again to embark. 
Soon after they were gone, Popilius Lenas, a 
tribune of the legions, and Herennius, a centu- 
rion, with a party who had been for some days 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvii. Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. 
2 Plut. in Cicerone. 3 Ibid. 


Cicero, having been defended by him when tried 
upon a criminal accusation; but these were times, 
in which bad men could make a merit of ingrati- 
tude to their former benefactors, when it served 
to ingratiate them with those in power. This 
officer, with his party, finding the gates of the 
court and the passages of the villa shut, burst 
them open; but missing the person they sought 
for, and suspecting that he must have taken his 
flight again to the sea, they pursued through an 
avenue that led to the shore, and came in sight 
of Cicero’s litter, before he had left the walks of 
his own garden. 

On the appearance of a military party, Cice- 
ro perceived the end of his labours, ordered the 
bearers of his litter to halt; and having been hi- 
therto, while there were any hopes of escape, 
distressed chiefly by the perplexity and indecision 
of his own mind, he became, as soon as his fate 
appeared to be certain, determined and calm, In 
this situation, he was observed to stroke his chin 
with his left hand, a gesture for which he was 
remarkable in his moments of thoughtfulness, 
and when least disturbed. Upon the approach 
of the party, he put forth his head from the litter, 
and fixed his eyes upon the tribune with great 
composure. ‘The countenance of a man so well 
known to every Roman, now worn out with fa 
tigue and dejection, and disfigured by neglect of 
the usual attention to his person, made a moving 
spectacle even to those who came to assist in his 
murder. They turned away, while the assassin 
performed his office, and severed the head from 
his body. 

Thus perished Marcus Tullius Cicero, in the 
sixty-fourth year of his age. Although his cha- 
racter may be known from the part which he 
bore in several transactions, of which the accounts 
are scattercd in different parts of this history, yet 
it is difficult to close the scene of his life, without 
some recollection of the circumstances which 
were peculiar to so distinguished a personage. 
He appears to have been the last of the Romans, 
who rose to the highest offices of state by the 


‘force of his personal charactcr, and by the fair 


arts of a republican candidate for public honours, 
None of his ancestors having enjoyed any con- 
siderable preferments, he was upon this account 
considered as a new man, and with reluctance 
admitted by the nobility to a participation of ho- 
nours. It was however impossible to prevent his 
advancement, so long as preferincnts were distri- 
buted according to the civil and political forms of 
the republic, which gave so large a scope to the 
industry, abilities, and genius of such men. Un- 
der those forms, all the virtues of a citizen were 
allowed to have some effect, and all the variety ot 
useful qualifications were supposed to be united in 
forming a title to the confidence of the public ; the 
qualifications of a warrior were united with those 
of a statesman, and even the talents of a lawyer 
and barrister, with those of a senator and conn- 
sellor of state. The law required,‘ that the same 
person should be a warrior and statesman, and it 
was at Icast expedient or customary, that he 
should be also a barrister, in order to secure the 


4 Ten or fifteen years military service was required 
as a qualification for the higher offices of state. Vid 
Polyb. ubi supra. 


Canar. IV] 


pubtic favour, and to support his consideration | 
with the people. 

Cicero was by no means the first person at 
Rome, who with peculiar attention cultivated the 
talents of a pleader, and applied himself with ar- 
cour to literary studies. He is nevertheless uni- 
versally acknowledged, by his proficiency in these 
studies, to have greatly excelled all those who 
went before him, so much as to have attaincd the 
highest preferments in the commonwealth, with- 
eut having quitted the gown, and to have made 
his first campaign in the capacity of Roman pro- 
consul, and above ten years after he had already 
exercised the supreme executive power in the 
state. 

To the novelty of this circumstance, as well as 
to the novelty of his family-name in the list of ; 
officers of state, was owing some part of that ob- 
loquy which his enemies empioyed against him; 
and it may be admitted, that for a Roman he was 
too much a mere man of the robe, and that he 
possibly may have been less a statesman and a 
warrior, for having been so mucha man of letters, 
and so acconiplished a pleader. 

Cicero, whether we suppose him to have been 
governed by original vanity, or by a habit of con- 
sidering the world as a theatre for the display of 
his talents, and the acquisition of fame, more than 
as a scene of real affairs, in which objects of se- | 
rious consequence to mankind were to be treated, | 
was certainly too fond of applause, courted it as 
a principal object even in the fairest transactions 
of his life, and was too much dependant on the 
opinion of other men to possess himself sufficient- 
ly amidst the difficulties which occur in the very 
arduous situation which fell to his lot. Though 
disposed, in the midst of a very corrupt age, to 
merit commendation by honest means, and by 
the support of good government, he could not 
endure reproach or censure, even from those 
whose disapprobation was a presumption of inno- 
cence and of merit ; and he felt the unpopularity 
of his actions, even where he thought his conduct 
the most meritorious, with a degree of mortifica- 
tion which greatly distracted his mind, and shook 
lus resolution. Being, towards the end of his 
life, by the almost total extirpation of the more 
respectable citizens and members of the senate, 
who had laboured with him for the preservation 
of the commonwealth, left in à situation which 
required the abilities of a great warrior, as well as 
those of the ablest statesmen, and in which, even 
such abilities could not have stemmed the tor- 
rent which burst forth to overwhelm the republic, 
it is not surprising that he failed in the attempt. 

Antony, at the same time that he gave orders 
tor the death of Cicero, gave directions that not 
only his head, but his right hand likewise, with 
which he had written so many severe invectives 
against hiinself, should be cut off,5 and brought to 
him as an evidence of the execution. 3 

In the course of these murders, the heads of 
the slain were usually presented to the triumvirs, 
and by their orders set up in conspicuous places, 
while the bodies were cast into the river, or suf- 
fered to be exposed in the streets. Antony 
having more resentments to gratify than either 
of his colleagues, had the heads of his enemies | 
brought to hiin in great numbers, even as he lay | 


5 Plut.in Cicerone. | 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


359 


on his couch at his meals. That of Cicero was 
received by him with the joy of "NIY ; he gazed 
upon it with singular pleasure, and ordered it, 
together with the hand, to be exposed on the ros- 
trum from which this respectable citizen had so 
often declaimed, and where these mangled parts 
of his body were now exposed to the view of a 
multitude, that used to crowd to his audience.§ 
Fulvia too had her enemies on this occasion, and 
received the bloody tokens of their execution 
with a savage avidity and pleasure, which to 
those who judge of propriety from modern cus- 
toms, or who form their opinions of the sex from 
the manners of modern times, will scarcely ap- 
pear to be credible. "When the head of Cicero, 
in particular, was brought to her toilet, with a 
peculiar and spiteful allusion to the eloquence, by 
which she herself, as well as her present and for- 
mer husbands, had been galled, she is said te 
have ferced open the jaw, and to have pricked 
and tore the tongue with the point of a bodkin, 
which she took from her hair. 

In this horrid scene of revenge and cruelty, 
rapacity too had its share, many persons were 
proscribed, merely that their estates might be 
brought into the ecoflers of the triumvirs; and 
many persons were threatened, to induce them 
to ransom’ their lives with money. The list re- 


| ceived frequent additions, and underwent many 


alterations, some names being scratched out, and 
others inserted, a circumstance, by which persons 
of any considerable property, as well as those 
who were obnoxious to any of the persons in 
power, were kept in the most anxious state of 
suspense and uncertainty. Many who were 
spared by the public usurpers of government, fell 
a sacrifice to the resentment of their private ene- 
mies, or to the avarice of those who wished to 
possess themselves of their property ;® and the 
names of many persons who had been thus slain, 
without any public authority, were afterwards 
inserted in the list of the proscribed, in order to 
justify the murder. 

The troops were sensible of their own import- 
ance on this occasion, and set no bounds to their 
pretensions, They solicited grants of the houses 
of persons reputed to be of the opposite party ; or, 
being the only buyers at the frequent sales which 
were made of forfeited estates, obtained the pos- 
session of them by a kind of fictitious purchase. 
Not satisfied with the price which was paid them 
for the blood of the proscribed, or with the extra- 
vagant gratuities which they frequently received, 
they were, under various pretences, hastening to 
seive every subject that tempted their avarice, 
They intruded themselves into every family, and 
laid claim to every inheritance; they plundered 
at discretion the houses of the rich, or murdered 
indiscriminately those who offended them, or who 
stood in their way to the possession of wealth; 
they encouraged, by their example, fugitive 
slaves, and disorderly persons of every description, 
who, forming themselves into bands in the dis- 
guise of soldiers, engaged in the same practices, 
and perpetrated the same crimes, 

The triumvirs, whose principal object it was 
to secure the government, though noways inter- 
ested in these extreme disorders, which far ex- 


6 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. 
7 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvii. } 
8 Ibid. e. 12. Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. 


369 


ceeded what they originally projected, not daring 
to restrain the military violence, lest it should 
recoil on themselves, left for some time the lives, 
as well as the properties of the people, entirely at 
the mercy of the troops; and citizens, who were 
reputed to have any effects in reserve, were fain 
to adopt some soldier as a son, in order to obtain 
his protection. 

Such are the particulars which are recorded of 
this famous transaction, which, however mon- 
strous in those who gave rise to it, far exceeded 
the bounds of their original design. When the 
evil had in some measure spent its force, its au- 
thors were willing to divert the attention of the 
public, or to efface the melancholy impressions 
which remained. For this purpose, Lepidus and 
Plancus being about to enter on the office of 
consul for the following year, on some slight pre- 
tence of a victory gained by the army in Gaul, 
entered the city in procession; but suspecting 
that the people were more inclinable to dejection 
than triumph, they directed the public, by a pro- 
clamation, to give on that day the demonstrations 
of joy which generally made part in the recep- 
tion that was given to victorious generals.! 

The soldiers indeed were not wanting, as usual, 
in the petulant sarcasms and familiar abuse, in 
which they availed themselves of their present 
consequence: they sung, in their procession, 
scurrilous ballads, alluding to examples of parri- 
cide as well as murder committed by their chiefs 
in the late proscription ; by Lepidus and Plancus, 
that of their own brothers; by Antony and Octa- 
vius, that of their nearest relations and friends.? 
But at the disposal of such masters as these, every 
citizen who was likely to frown on their crimes, 
every person whose countenance gave signs of 
dejection, or sorrow, every possessor of land, 
and every father of a family, had reason to trem- 
ble for their persons, their possessions, and the 
safety of their children. 

Such was the aspect of affairs in Italy; but 
there were still some rays of hope, which shone 
from a distance. Not only Brutus and Cassius, 
in their provinces of Macedonia and Syria; but 
Cornificius in Africa, and Sextus Pompeius in 
Sicily, still held up the standard of the republic, 
and offered places of refuge to its friends. Sex- 
tus Pompeius stationed ships on the coast to re- 
ceive them, and published rewards for the rescue 
or protection of his father’s party, and of those 
unfortunate remains of the commonwealth.? Pau- 
lus, the brother of Lepidus, though abandoned 
to destruction, was suffered to escape by the sol- 
diers of the army, from a respect to himself or to 
their general. Lucius Cesar was protected by 
his sister, the mother of Antony. Messala es- 
caped to Brutus. Many others, whose names 
only are known, took refuge with one or other of 
the leaders, who were in condition to contend for 
the republic, or for the sovereignty of the empire. 

Lepidus and Plancus being en- 
U. C. 711. tered on the office of consul, had in 
charge from the triumvirs, as the first 


L. M. Plan- : 3 : a. 
hare VE object of their magistracy, the raising 
Lepidus. | of money to supply the farther exi- 


gencies of the war. Great sums had 
been expected to arise from the sale of the estates 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. 
2 De Germanis non de Gallis triumphant Consules. 
3 Appian. ut supra. Dio. Cass. lib. xlvii. c. 12. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


4 


[Book Y. 


of the proscribed; but the purchase of such 
estates was justly reckoned invidious among e 
certain class of the people, who declined being 
partakers in the spoils of innocent and respectable 
citizens; and it was dangerous for an ordinary 
citizen to appear to be rich, or in condition to 
buy: insomuch, that they who murdered the 
owner, were almost the only buyers of estates 
that were exposed to public sale ; and the money 
which arose from these sales, fell greatly short of 
the expectations which had been entertained from 
them. 

It was computed, that two hundred millions, 
Roman money, were yet wanting to supply the 
expense of the war.4 In order to make up this 
deficiency, the male sex chiefly having hitherto 
suffered by the public exactions, a contribution 
was levied from such women related to the oppo- 
site party as were supposed to be rich. At the 
same time persons of every description whose 
estates exceeded one hundred thousand’ Roman 
money, were commanded to give an account of 
their effects, that they might pay a tax equal to 
a fiftieth of their stock, and one year’s income of 
their ordinary revenue.§ 

To enforce these exactions, hitherto unusual in 
Italy, much violence was necessary. The rents 
of houses in the city, and the produce of lands in 
the country were sequestrated, leaving only one 
half for the subsistence of the owners. In this 
manner, great sums of money were levied from 
the peaceable part of the commonwealth ; but as 
the triumvirs had incurred a very heavy debt in 
their military operations, and in bounties to se- 
cure the troops in their interest, and had in pros- 
pect an arduous and expensive war against Bru- 
tus and Cassius, armed with the torces, and 
supported by the treasures of the east, the first 
sums which came in were far from being suffi- 
cient for their purpose. Additional exactions 
were made, under the denomination of fines or 
forfeitures, from those who were alleged to have 
given in a false state of their effects. 

In imitation of the late sanguinary proscrip- 
tions, the consuls published lists of all who had 


‘incurred this penalty, and ordered their effects 


accordingly to be seized. ‘The inhabitants of 
the towns were obliged to find subsistence for the 
troops that were quartered on them, and the 
country was pilla&ed, under pretence of a search 
that was made for the effects of rebels. The pay 
of the soldiers accumulating in the hands of their 
leaders, was considered, together with the advan- 
tages which they expected at the end of tlie war, 
as a pledge of their attachment and perseverance 
in the cause.” 

Although few men were now left in Italy, who 
could forget their own fears so far as to think of 
the commonwealth, or who could be suspected of 
any design to restore the ancient government, 
yet this was made the ordinary ground of suspi- 
cion against those whom the triumvirs wished to 
oppress; and the desire to remove it, led all or- 
ders of men to aflect a veneration for the memory 
of Cesar, and to vie in their zeal to avenge his 
death. The anniversary of this event was made 
a day of mourning. A shrine was erected on the 


4 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. 

5 About eight thousand pounds. 
6 Appian. ut supra. 

7 Dio, Cass. lib. xlvii. œ 14 18 


Cram IV.) 


place of his funeral, and was declared to be a 
public sanctuary, and place of refuge even to 
criminals. The divine or monarchical honours 
which were thus paid to the inemory of the dead, 
preserved in the minds of the people that disposi- 
tion to endure a inaster which was thought fa- 
vourable to the living usurpers, and which the 
division of power betwecn them might have other- 
wise diminished.8 

Agreeably to the model of Julius Cesar’s ar- 
rangements, preparatory to his intended expedi- 
tion into Asia, the triumvirs, before the departure 
of Octavius and Antony on the service to which 
they were destined, fixed the succession to all the 
offices of state for some years. They had under 
their command an army of forty legions, which 
they now separated into two divisions.? The one, 
under the direction of Antony, was assembled on 
the eastern coast to be in readiness to cover Italy 
on that side, or to pass into Macedonia, and to 
carry the war against Brutus and Cassius into | 
that province. ‘Ihe other was destined to re- 
main in Italy, in order to secure the head of the 
empire, an‘! oppuse any attempts of the opposite 
party by sea from Sicily or Africa, which were 
still in their possession. 

Sextus Pompeius, the last of the family of the 
great Pompey, in consequence of the resolutions 
passed in his favour soon after Cæsar’s death, had 
set out from Spain as adiniral of the Roman navy, 
an fixing his station in Sicily, had a numerous 
fleet, and mustered considerable land forces.!0 
Wita these, in the war which iminediately fol- 
lowed, he wished to co-operate with the com- 
bined armies of the two consuls, Hirtius and 
Pansa; but was prevented by a doubt which 
arose, whether the veterans of Cæsar, who com- 
posed great part of that army, would act in con- 
cert with a son of Pompey ?!! Upon the coalition 
of Octavius with Lepidus and Autony, he again 
became an exile, but continued in possession of 
Sicily, a province, which, by the present division 
of the empire, was comprehended in the lot of 
Octavius. 

Cornificius, by commission from the Roman 
senate, still held the province of Africa, and re- 
fused to surrender it to Sextus, an olficer who 
had been sent by Octavius, in consequence of 
the same distribution, to take possession of it in 
his name. The dispute being likely to end in a 
war, the opposite parties applied to the neigh- 
bouring princes for aid; but the lieutenant of 
Octavius having his commission from the su- 
preme authority then established at Rome, or 
being known to represent the triumphant party, 
was acknowledged by most of the African powers 
in alliance with the Romans. Being joined by 
their forces, he came to an action with his anta- 
gonist near Utica, and obtained a victory, in 
which Cornificius was killed. Lelius and Ros- 
cius, two officers of rank in the vanquished army, 
perished by their own hands.'2 As many as 
could find shipping, escaped to Pompey in the 
island of Sicily, 

Soon atter this event, Octavius, being desirous 
to dislodge the remains of the republican party 


8 Dio. Cass lib. xliv. c. 18 et 19. 
9 Appian. ut infra. 10 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. e. 17. 
J1 Cicer. Philip. xiii. 
12 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. p. 622, &e. Dio. 
Cass. lib. xlviil. c. 2}. 
2 Z 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


2G! 


from an island of so much consequence, cent 
Salvidienus with a fleet towards the straits of 
Messina, while he himself marehed hy lard to 
Rhegiuin, A sea fight scen afler ensued, from 
which the fleets retired with equal less. Salvi- 
dienus put into the harbcur of Balanus to refit; 
and Octavius, being arrived at Rhegium, was 
meditating 2 descent upon Sicily, when he re- 
ceived pressing instances from Antony to join 
him at Brundusium, that they might endeavcur 
to repel the storm which was guthering frem the 
east, and which seemed to threaten tl.cir esta- 
blishments in Italy with the greatest hazard.'3 

Marcus Brutus, after fortune seen ed to have 
declared for the republican party at Mutina, 
thinking himself at liberty to attend to the affairs 
of the east, and to support Cassiusin his struggle 
for the possession of Syria, had passed with his 
army into Asia, in order to cut off all supplies 
from Dolabella, and to avail himself of the re- 
sources, for the pay and subsistence of the army, 
which were still to be found in that opulent pro- 
vince. While he was employed in the executicn 
of this design, the important events already men- 
tioned took place in that quarter, Cassius had 
prevailed in Syria, got entire possession of tho 
province, was acknowledged as general by all the 
armies which had been assembled by either party 
bevond the boundaries of Cilicia; and Le was 
meditating an expedition into Egypt, to punish 
Cleopatra for the part she had taken against him 
in his contest with Dolabella, and to raise a con- 
tribution in her country for the farther support 
of the war, 

The victory obtained at Mutina, though by an 
army which till then was reputed on the side of 
the cominonwealth, made a great change to its 
prejudice, giving an opportunity to its enemics to 
declare themselves, and to unite their forces; in- 
somuch, that by the coalition of Cctavius and 
Lepidus with Antony, all the remaining armies 
of the west were joined, not only to sutdue the 
capital, but to carry the war into Macedonia and 
Asia, the last retreat of the republican interest, 

Brutus being informed of these circumstances, 
and of the late proscriptions, sent a message to 
Cassins, with pressing instances to divert him 
from his project against Egypt, and to turn his 
forces to the rescne of the commonwealth from the 
hands of tvrants, and to avenge the innocent blood 
which had been so copiously shed in Italy. 

Upon these representations, Cassius, having left 
a lesion to secure the possession of Syria, marched 
to the westward, and in his way raised large 
contributions for the support of the war. Among 
the other measures which he took for this purpose, 
he surprised Ariobarzanes in his palace, and 
obliged him to deliver up the money then in his 
treasury. He pillaged the city of ‘Tarsus; and, 
upon account of the support which the inha- 
hitauts of that place had given to Dolabella, sub- 
jected them for the future to a heavy tribute.!4 

About the middle of winter, Brutus and Cas- 
sius, with their armies, joined at Smyrna, These 
restorers of the republic had parted some months 
hefore at Pireus, one bound for Syria, the other 
for Macedonia; but more like exiles than Roman 
officers of state, without any men, shipping, or 
money, and under great uncertainty of their suc- 
ecss, 1n obtaining possession of the provinces on 


13 Appian. ut sapra. M Ibid. 


362 


which they had their several pretensions. Their 
affairs now bore a different aspect; they had a 
numerous fleet, and a mighty land force, large 
sums of money already amassed, with the re- 
sources of a territory the most wealthy of any 
part in the Roman empire.! Brutus proposed 
that they should, without delay, transport their 
forces into Europe, and prevent the triumvirs 
from getting any footing in Macedonia or Greece; 
but Cassius contended, that they had yet enemies 
or allies of doubtful fidelity in Asia, and that it 
would be imprudent to leave any such behind 
them, or to forego the treasure which they might 
yet command in that country, and which would 
enable them to reward and to encourage their 
armies. 

Brutus determined by these considerations, 
accordingly marched into Lycia, while Cassius 
proceeded to execute a project he had formed for 
the reduction of Rhodes. His fleet being on 
their way to turn the Capes of Asia, in order to 
support him in this design, the Rhodians, trust- 
ing to their superior skill and reputation as mari- 
ners, assembled all the ships they could muster, 
and, near to the harbour of Lindus, ventured to 
engage those of Cassius; but being inferior in 
number and weight of ships, they were defeated 
with considerable loss. Cassius beheld the en- 
gagement from a high land on the continent, 
and as soon as the ships could be again refitted,? 
ordered the fleet to Loryma, a fortified har- 
bour ın the continent, over against the island of 
Rhodes; from thence he embarked his army. 
He himself, with eighty galleys, escorted the 
transports in their passage, landed on the island, 
and besieged the capital both by sea and by land. 

The Rhodians having trusted entirely to the 
defence of their shipping, were unprovided of all 
things necessary to withstand a siege. Cassius, 
by surprise, or by the treachery of a party within 
the walls, soon became master of the place, laid 
it under a severe contribution; and having left 
an officer of the name of Varus to command in 
the island, he returned to the continent with a 
great accession of reputation and wealth. 

Brutus at the same time had forced the passes 
of the mountains, leading into Lycia, and ad- 
vancing to Xanthus, summoned the town to sur- 
render. This place had acquired much fame by 
the obstinate resistance of its inhabitants, or by 
the desperation they had shown, when forced, on 
former occasions, by Harpalus, the general of 


Cyrus, and by Alexander in his way to the con-. 


quest of Persia.3 Upon the approach of Brutus, 
they razed their suburbs, and removed every 
building which might cover the advances of an 
enemy. The walls were surrounded by a ditch 
fifty feet deep; and this being the first impedi- 
ment which Brutus had to encounter, he began 
the attack with a continual labour to fill it up, 
and to effect a passage for his engines to the foot 
of the rampart. Having accomplished this ob- 
ject, he proceeded to cover his workmen with 
galleries, and to erect the engines usually em- 
ployed in making a breach. e was opposed by 
the besieged in repeated sallies, in the last of 
which his works were set on fire, and reduced to 
ashes. 

In the mean time, two thousand men of the 


1 Pilut. in Bruto 


2 Appian. ut supra. 
3 Ibid. lib. iv. m á 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V. 


Roman army, pursuing the party who had made 
this sally, entered the city Ae with them, and 
not being properly supported, suffered the gates 
to be shut, and themselves to be cut off from all 
relief. Being instantly surrounded by the inha- 
bitants, numbers of them were killed, and the 
remainder forced into a temple, where they en- 
deavoured to defend themselves. 

This circumstance produced the most vigorous 
efforts on the part of the besiegers, to force the 
walls, that they might rescue their friends, or 
make a diversion in their favour. They applied 
scaling-ladders to the battlements, and forcing 
engines to the gates; and having at last made 
their way into the town, that they might at once 
terrify the inhabitants, and give notice of ap- 
proaching relief to their own party, they raised a 
mighty shout as they entered the streets, and 


continued to urge their fury, in every direction, 


with fire and sword. The inhabitants, unable to 
resist this storm, retired to their houses, and 
there, determined to maintain their ancient fame, 
chose rather to perish by their own hands, than 
submit to the enemy. The father of every fa- 
nily, beginning with the slaughter of his wife 
and children, proceeded to kill himself. 

While the people of Xanthus were employed 
in the execution of this purpose, Brutus hearing 
the cries of desperation and of murder, supposed 
that his troops had refused to give quarter, and 
were killing the wretched inhabitants of the place, 
without distinction of sex or age. In order to 
put the speediest stop to so horrid a scene, his 
first thought was to bring off the troops, by 
sounding a general retreat; but being informed 
that the people were perishing, not by the cruelty 
of his army, but by their own desperation, he or- 
dered to be proclaimed a general freedom and 
protection to all the inhabitants; but so long as 
any considerable number of the citizens remained, 
the othcers who came near them, even with an 
offer of quarter, were answered with threats, or 
with showers of darts and of arrows, obliged to 
keep at a distance. The temples and public 
buildings were, with great difficulty, saved from 


fire; but none of the inhabitants could be rescued, 


besides a few women and slaves. 

Brutus, greatly afflicted with this piteous ca- 
tastrophe, marched with reluctance towards Pa- 
tara, where the inhabitants were supposed to be 
infected with the same desperate spirit ; and, to 
prevent the necessity of such fatal extremities, 
sent a message to prevail on the people to surren- 
der, and to accept of his protection. The ex- 
ample of Xanthus appeared much too atrocious 
to be followed; and they submitted to pay the 
contributions which were exacted from them. 

Lentulus, at the same time, who commanded 
the fleet which had been employed in transport- 
ing the army of Cassius into the island of Rhodes, 
forced his way into the harbour of Andriaca, the 
port of Myra, by breaking the chain which was 
stretched across the entrance; and this place 
being reduced, the inhabitants of Lycia sent offers 
of submission and of their services in the war, 
agreed to pay a certain tribute, and to join the 
fleet with their galleys. Lentulus, being ae- 
cordingly reinforced with a great accession of 
ships, set sail for Abydus, the shortest passage 
into Europe, where he was ordered to wait the 
arrival of the land forces. 

At the same time, Murcus, commanding an- 


Cav. V.] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


363 


other squadron belonging to Brutus and Cassius, , enumerated their resources with the other advan- 


upon a report that Cleopatra, with a numerous 
fleet, was at sea, to effect a junction with Octa- 
vius and Antony, had been stationed at the Cape 
of Tenarus to intercept her; but being informed 
that the Egyptian flect was dispersed, or had suf- 
fered much in a storm, he weighed from Tenarus, 
and steered for Brundusium, took possession of 
an island at the mouth of the harbour, and from 
thence intended to prevent the transportation of 
any troops from Htaly to Macedonia or Greece. 
He had however arrived too late to effect the 
whole of this purpose. Great part of Antony’s 
army was already transported, and he himself, 
with the remainder, waited for favourable winds 
to run or pass unnoticed in the night. 

In this state of the war, Brutus and Cassius, 
having accomplished the services in which they 
had been severally engaged, again assembled their 
forces on the right of the Meander. It is said, 
that they began their conference on bad terms, 
the effect of a jealousy which had been indus- 
triously raised between them; but there did not 
appear any consequences of a misunderstanding ; 
and their joint forces, without delay, began to 
move towards Europe, in order to check the ad- 
vances which the enemy were already making in 
Macedonia. Having passed the Hellespont, they 
marched, by the isthmus of Cardia, to the coast 
of the bay of Melanus ; here they made a halt for 
some days, to muster and to review their forces. 

“he army of Cassius consisted of nine legions, 
that of Brutus of cight, amounting to about 
eighty thousand men, formed in the manner of 
the Roman infantry. Brutus had four thousand 
Gaulish and Lusitanian horse; two thousand 
cavalry, made up of Thracians, Illyrians, Par- 
thians, and Thessalians. Cassius had two thou- 
sand Gauls and Spaniards, and four thousand 
Parthian archers mounted on horseback. ‘They 
were followed likewise by some princes of Ga- 
latia, at the head of their respective forces. The 
while, by this account, amounted to near a hun- 
dred thousand men. Many of the legions had 
been formed under Cesar, and could not be re- 
‘tained in their present service, without frequent 
liberalities, and without a prospect, at the end of 
the war, of settlements, not inferior to those which 
were enjoyed or expected by the troops of the op- 
posite side, The wealth of Asia, however, having 
put their leaders in condition to perform what 
was at present expected from them; all former 
engagements were now fulfilled, as the best earnest 
that could be given of future gratuities. 

At the close of this muster, Cassius and Bru- 
tus, with all the officers of senatorian rank, who 
were then present, being assembled on a plat- 
form, raised as usual to some height from the 
ground, were surrounded by the army, who 
crowded to hear the speech of their leaders; and 
it was supposed, that what they were to deliver 
should have the effect of a manifesto or procla- 
mation, respecting the cause in which they were 
engaged. Cassius spoke for himself, for his col- 
Jeague, and the body of senators who attended 
them ; addressing this motley assemblage of na- 
tive Romans and aliens, of citizens and soldiers 
of fortune, coliccted from different parties, as an 
assembly of the Roman people deliberating on 
their public rights. He mentioned the mutual 
confidence that was natural between officers and 
men engaged, as they were, in a common cause ; 


tages they possessed, and took notice of the punc 
tual discharge of all former engagements, as the 
best security which could be given of a fixed in- 
tention to make a suitable provision for every sol- 
dier who should contribute to bring the war to a 
favourable issue. ‘The unjust reproaches of 
our enemies,” he said, “ we could easily disprove, 
if we were not, by our numbers, and bv the 
swords which we hold in our hands, in cundition 
to despise them. “While Cesar led the armies of 
the republic against the enemies of Rome, we 
took part in the same service with him, we obey- 
ed him, we were happy to serve under his com- 
mand. But when he declared war on the com- 
monwealth, we became his enemies; and when 
he became an usurper and a tyrant, we resented, 
as an injury, even the favours which he presumed 
to bestow upon ourselves. Had he been to fall a 
sacrifice to private resentment, we should net 
have been the proper actors in the execution of 
the sentence against him. He was willing to 
have indulged us with preferments and honours; 
but we were not willing to accept, as the gift of a 
master, what we were entitled to claim as free 
citizens. We conceived, that, in presuming to 
confer the honours of the Ronian repubtic, he en- 
croached on the prerogatives of the Roman people, 
and insulted the authority of the Roman senate. 
“ Cæsar cancelled the laws, and overturned the 
constitution of his country; he usurped all the 
powers of the commonwealth, set up a monarchy, 
and himself affected to be a king. This our an- 
cestors, at the expulsion of Tarquin, bound them- 
selves and their posterity, by the most solemn 
oaths, and by the most direful imprecations, ne- 
ver to endure. The same obligation has been 
entailed upon us asa debt by our fathers; and we, 
having faithfully paid and discharged it, have 
performed the oath, and averted the consequences 
of failure from ourselves, and from our posterity. 
“In the station of soldiers, we might have 
committed ourselves without reflection to the 
command of an officer, whose abilities and whose 
valour we admired; but, in the character of Ro- 
man citizens, we have a far different part to sus- 
tain. J must suppose, that I now speak to the 
Roman people, and to citizens of a free republic ; 
to men who have never learned to depend upon 
others for gratifications and favours, who are not 
accustonied to own a superior, but who are them- 
selves the masters, the dispensers of fortune and 
of honour, and the givers of all those dignities 
and powers by which Cæsar himself was exalted, 
and of which he assumed the entire disposal. 
Recollect from whom the Scipios, the Pompeys, 
even Cesar hunsclf derived his honours: froin 
your ancestors, whom you low represent, and 
from yourselves, to whom, according to the laws 
of the republic, we, who are now your leaders in 
the field, address ourselves as your fellow-citizens 
in the commonwealth, and as persons depending 
on your pleasure for the just reward and retribu- 
tion of our services. Tappy in being able to 
restore to you what Cesar had the presumption 
to appropriate to himself, the power and the dig- 
nity of your fathers, with the supreme disposal 
of.all the offices of trust that were established for 
your safety, and for the preservation of your 
freedom; happy in being able to restore to the 
tribunes of the Roman people the power of pro- 
tecting you, and of procuring to every Roman 


331 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VY. 


citizen that justice which, under the late usurpa- | route from that which the enemy had occupied. 
tion of Caesar, was withheld, even from the sa- | Under this zuide they marched three days among 


cred persons of those magistrates themselves. 

“ An usurper is the common enemy of all good 
citizens; but the task of removing him could be 
the business only of a few. The senate an4 the 
Romin people, as soon as it was proper for them 
to declare their judsinent, pronounced their ap- 
probation of those who were concerned in the 
death of Casu, by the rewards and the honours 
which they bestowed upon them; and they are 
now becone a prey to assassins and murderers ; 
they bleed in the streets, in the temples, in the 
məst secret retreats, and in the arms of their fa- 
milies; or they are dispersed, and fly wherever 
they hope to escape the fury of their enemies.— 
Miny are now present before you, happy in your 
protection—hapoy in witnessing the zeal which 
you entertain for the commonwealth, for the 
rights of your fellow-citizens, and for your own. 
T nese respectable citizens, we trust, will soon, by 
your means, be restored to a condition in which 
they can enjoy, tozether with you, all the honours 
ofa free people, concur with you in bestowing, 
and partake with you in receiving, the rewards 
which are due to such eminent services, as you 
are now enzageil to perform.”! 

Such is the substance of what we receive as 
the speech of Cassius on this memorable occasion, 
anf, although we may not consider these com- 
positions as the genuine record of what was 
spoken, yet a3 they contain the ideas and rea- 
sonings of times so much nearer than ours to the 
date of the transactions to which they refer, it is 
undoubtedly fit, and often instructive, to retain: 
the argument on which they are founded. At 
the close of this speech, it is said that Cassius 
resumed the comparison of the forces and re- 
sources of the opposite parties, stated to his army 
their own equality by land, and their superiority 
by sea; the facility with which they were to be 
supplied with all necessaries; and that he con- 
cluded, with a promise to pay an additional gratu- 
ity of fiiteea hundred sesterces to each man.2 

After this solemnity, the army again began to 
advance; and while they marched in small divi- 
sions by the route of Ænos and Doriscus, Cim- 
ber, with a squadron of galleys, having a legion 
anl a consilerable detachment of archers on 
board, sailed towards the coast of Macedonia, 
with orders to search for a proper station within 
the mountains of Panzeus, a rilze which, stretch- 
iaz from Vhrace southward, terminited in the 
bay of Strymon, opposite to the island of Thasus. 
The generals, upon their arrival on the river 
Nessus, found that the usual passage of the 
mountains at Symbolus was already seized by 
Saxı anl Norbinus, who, with the first division 
of Antoay’s fores from Italy, had traversed Ma- 
eedoain, an! histened to possess themselves of 
this piss, in order to stop the farther progress of 
their ene:nies in Europe. 

Here the eastern armies were accordingly stop- 
ped, and were likely to end their career in lhrace, 
while their antagonists continued in possession 
of Mized nia, anl preserved the most convenient 
retreat for their shipping in the bay of Strymon. 
They were relieved, however, from this appre- 
hension by Ruszopolis, a Thracian prince, who 
attended thein, and who pointed out a different 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. iv. 2 About 127. 


the mountains, and having crossed the summit, 
descended in the track of a river towards Philip- 
pi, situated on the eastern boundary of the plains 
of Amphipolis. This march carried them inte 
the rear of the enemy’s station, and would have 
enabled them to cut off their retreat, if inteli- 
gence had not been carried to Saxa and Norha- 
nus time enough to enable them to withdraw, 
These officers accordingly abandoned their post, 
fell back forty or fifty miles? to Amphipolis; and 
having put this place in the best posture they 
could for defence, determined to await the arrival 
of Octavidsand Antony. 

Brutus and Cassius took post at Philippi, on 
the declivity of the mountains, near to the pass 
which Saxa and Norbanus had lately abandoned. 
They encamped about two miles4 from the town 
on two separate eminentces, about a mile’ asun- 
der. On their right was Philippi, covered by 
the mountains; on the left an impassable marsh, 
which reached about nine miles from their cam 
to the sea.6 In their front the country from Phi- 
lippi, westward to Amphipolis, extending about 
forty or fifty miles, was flat and subject to floods 
and inundations of the rivers. The fleet was in 
harbour at Neapolis, near where the marsh, which 
covered the left of Cassius’s camp, terminated in 
the seas and Cimber had fixed on that place as 
the port to which all their convoys should repair, 
and by which they expected to be plentifully sup- 
plied with necessaries from Asia, and tlhe coasts 
of the Egean sea. They formed, at the same time, 
a magazine in the island of Thasus, out of the 
reach of the enemy, at which to lodge in safety 
the surplus of their provisions and stores. 

Antony and Octavius had been employed, du- 
ring the winter, in transporting their forces into 
Macedonia; and having effected their passage, 
notwithstanding the vigilance of the enemy’s 
fleet, their army advanced by rapid marches to 
the river Strymon, in order to preserve Amphi- 
polis, and to carry the scene of the war as far as 
they could from Italy. Octavius had been taken 
ill, and remained behind at Dyrrachium. An- 
tony, upon his arrival at Amphipolis, having 
found the town iñ a posture of defence, fixed 
upon it as a place of arins, for the security of his 
heavy baggage and stores. From thence he ad- 
vanced upon the flat country, through a march 
of some days, and pitched in sight of Philippi, 
within a mile of the enemy’s stations. 

It was the object of the triuinvirs to bring the 
war to a speedy issue, as they foresaw the diffi- 
culty of being long able, without any supply of 
provisions from the sea, to maintain so numerous 
an army by the sole resources of the neighbour- 
ing country. Brutus and Cassius, on the con- 
trary, perceived their own advantage, and were 
determined to protract the war. ‘I'hey tortitied 
their camps with great care, ard joined them to 
each other; and tu the town of Philippi on the 
one side, and to the morass on the other, with 
such works as formed a continued chain to cover 
their communication, for about twelve miles from 
the town of Philippi, to the port of Neapolis. 

Antony’s eamp being on the plain, and in a 
low situation, was overlooked by the enemy, and 


4 Eighteen stadia. 
6 Seventy. stadia. 


3 350 stadia. 
5 Eight stadia. 


Crap. IV.) 


subject to be overflowed by the torrents which 
fell from the hills. He made every possible ef- 
fort to bring his antagonists to action, and by his 
forwardness in pressing them toa battle, raised 
the courage of his own troops, and assumed, as 
is common with those who act offensively, the 
appearance of supcrioritv. While he yet conti- 
nued in this posture, Octavius, though nat en- 
tirely recovered fram his illness, joined him from 
Dyrrachium. They took two separate stations 
opposite to those of the enemy; Octavius oppo- 
site to Brutus, and Antonv to Cass.*s. The 
number of legions, on both sides, weree al; but 
those of Antony and Octavins were not cc lete. 
In cavalry they were unequal; that of x ‘utus 
and Cassius amounting to twenty thousand, 
while that of Octavius and Antony was no more 
than thirteen thousand. 

Antony and Octavius, in order to force their 
antagonists to a battle, or to cut off their com- 
munication with the sea, formed a design to 
pierce the inorass, and to seize upon the heights 
beyond it on the left of Cassius’s camp. In the 
work which they carried on for this purpose, they 
were covered by the reeds, which grew to a great 
heizht in the marsh; and in ten days, without 
being observed, by means of timbers, hurdles, 
ani earth, which they sunk as they advanced, ac- 
complished a passage, and sent in the night a 
party of the r army to occupy the opposite heights, 
to make lodzments, and to intercept the commu- 
nication of their antagonists with Neapolis, from 
which they received their daily supplies. 

As soon as Brutus and Cassius perceived this 
advantige gained by the enemy, they took mea- 
sures to recover it, and to open their own access 
again to the sea. For this purpose they, in their 
turn, traversed the morass in a line which crossed 
the passage which the enemy had made, and 
pierced their highway with a deep and impass- 
able ditch. Having in this manner cut off the 
enemy’s parties that had passed the morass from 
any succours or supplies from their main body, 
they were about to force them, when Octavius 
anıl Antany endeavoured to recover their passage; 
and to divert the attention of the enemy from 
what they were doing in the marsh, drew forth 
their armies on the plain. 

While Octavius was still confined by sickness, 
his lieutenant, or next in command, took his 

lace in this movement, and advanced toward the 
Intrenchment of Brutus. ‘The light troops began 
to skirmish on the ascent of the hill. And, not- 
withstanding it was the resolution of both leaders 
in the republican army not to hazard a battle, 
except in defence of their own intrenchments, the 
legions of Brutus observing, from their parapet, 
what passed between the advanced parties in 
front, were soanimated or incensed, as not to be 
restrained. They accordingly quitted their lines, 
attacked the wing on which Octavius was sup- 
posed to command, drove them back to their 
ground, and continuing their pursuit, even forced 
them in their camp. Octavius himself, having 
been carried from his bed to a litter, narrowly 
escaped falling intothe enemy’s hands. 

On the other wing Antony likewise had ad- 
vanced towards the camp of Cassius; but as he 
was observed, at the same time, beginning to 
work in the morass, this movement of his army 
was considered as no more than a feint to favour 
the other design. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


em ee a oa em RR 


Cassius, to divert him from his ! 


365 


operation in the marsh, drew forth his army like- 
wise; and having greatly the advantage of the 
ground, did not suppose that the enemy, in such 
circunistances, would venture upon a general ac- 
tion. In this however he was disappointed. An- 
tony, seeing Cassius expose his front, discontinued 
his work in the morass, mounted the height in 
his presence, forced him to retire, even tock and 
pillaged his camp; and thus showed, in his turn, 
what are the effects of an impetuous attack upon 
an enemy who are disposed to think themselves 
secure, 

These separate actions, or the preparations 
which were made for them, had filled up the 
greater part of the day. It was already dusk, 
and the field, for the most part, was covered with 
clouds of dust; so that no one could see to a dis- 
tance. Those who commanded on the right in 
both armies, having put those who were opposed 
to them to flight, thought that the event was de- 
cisive in their own favour. But Brutus and An- 
tony heing informed of what had passed on the 
other wings of their respective armies, neither 
attempted to keep the advantage he had gained. 
Disqualified by fatigue or surprise from renewing 
the contest, they passed each other on the plain, 
and hastened back to their former stations. ~ 

Cassius, after the rout of his division, with a 
few who adhered to him, had halted on an emi- 
nence, and sent Titinius to the right, with orders 
to learn the particulars of the day on that side. 
This officer, while vet in sight, was met by a 
party of horse emerging from the clouds of dust 
on the plain. This party had been sent by Bru- 
tus to learn the situation of his friends on the 
left; but Cassius, supposing tliem to be enenties, 
and believing that Titinius whom he saw sur- 
rounded by them, was taken, he instantly, with 
the precipitant despair, which, on other occasions, 
had proved so fatal to the cause of the republic, 
presented his breast to a slave to whom he had 
allotted, in case of any urgent extremity, the of- 
fice of putting an end to his life. Titinius, upon 
his return, imputing this fatal calamity to his 
own neglect in not trying sooner to undeceive 
his general by proper signals, killed himself, 
and fell upon the body of his friend.” Brutus 
soon after arrived at the same place, and seeing 
the dead body of Cassius, shed tears of vexation 
and sorrow over the effects of an action so rash 
and precipitant, and which deprived the republic 
and himself, in this extremity, of so necessary 
and so able a support. ‘This, he said, is the last 
of the Romans. 

The surviving leader of the republican party, 
in order to prevent the impression which the 
sight of a funeral so interesting was likely to 
make on the army, ordered the body of Cassius 
to be carried to the island of Vhasus, and there 
privately interred. He himself spent the night 
in re-assembling the troops who had been dis- 
persed, formed both arinies into one body, and 
drew the whole into one camp. He still kept his 
ground at Philippi, and endeavoured to support 
the courage of the troops, and to replace the ac- 
tivity and military skill of his unfortunate col- 
league. In his addresses to the army, he set forth 
the advantages they had gained as more than suf- 
ficient to compensate their losses. He represented 
the distressed condition of the enemy, who, hav- 


7 Dio Cass. lib. xlvii. c. 34. Appian. lib. in 


355 
ing already exhausted the province of Macedonia 
in their rear, were obliged to bring their provi- 
sions from Thessaly, which was at a greater 
distance, and not likely to supply them so long. 
“The sea-ports,” he observed, “being every where 
blocked up, and their convoys intercepted by a 
fleet of above two hundred and sixty sail, the 
prospect of what they must speedily suffer will 
make them impatient for action. They will 
provoke,” he said, “they will attempt to insult 
you; but this appearance of courage is a mere 
effect of despair. Only wait the result of these 
circumstances, and perseverance will render your 
victory easy.’ He supported these exhortations 
with giving the army full satisfaction in all their 
claims and pretensions, and with an additional 
gratuity of a thousand sesterces to each man.! 

The leaders of the other side, at the same time, 
were equally employed in what was necessary to 
palliate the sufferings, or to raise the hopes of 
their own army. ‘Though not equally in condi- 
tion to make present donations, they amply sup- 
plied this defect with expectations and promises. 
‘They declared their intention of giving an addi- 
tional gratuity of five thousand sesterces to each 
private man,? five times as much to the centurion, 
and the double of this sum to the tribune. “Judge 
ye,” said Antony, in his address to the army, 
“ who has suffered most by the mutual pillage of 
yesterday? You, who have left all your effects 
behind you in Italy, or the enemy, who came to 
their ground loaded with the spoils of Asia? 
Their own general, by killing himself, has pro- 
claimed your victory. We declare you victo- 
rious, by bestowing upon you the rewards of 
valour to which you are entitled. If the enemy 
choose to dispute your claim to these rewards, let 
them meet us again in the field. ‘They shall 
have an opportunity to-morrow, and for some 
days to come; if they shrink and remain behind 
their entrenchments, I shall leave you to deter- 
mine who is vanquished in the trial of force 
which we have had.” 

Antony and Octavius accordingly drew forth 
their army for many days successively, and were 
greatly embarrassed with the resolution which 
appeared to be taken by the enemy, not to hazard 
a battle. ‘They began to suffer greatly for want 
of provisions, and felt the approach of winter, 
which, in a marshy situation, threatened them 
with growing inconveniences, Brutus, to hasten 
the effects of the season, had turned the course 
of a river from the hills, and laid under water 
part of the plain on which they encamped? At 
the same time a recent calamity, which befel 
them at sea, increased these distresses, and di- 
minished their hopes of relief. 

On the same day on which the late battle was 
fought at Philippi, Domitius Calvisius had sailed 
from Brundusium, having on board of transports 
two legions, of which the Martia was one, with 
two thousand men of the pretorian bands, and a 
body of horse, convoyed by some galleys, or ships 
of force. Being met at sea by'the fleet of Brutus, 
consisting of a hundred and thirty sail, under 
Murcus and Ahenobarbus, a few of the headmost 
and best sailing ships escaped ; but the remainder 
being surrounded had no resource but in the va- 
lour of the troops, who endeavoured to defend 


1 About &i. 
3 Zonarus, e. 19. p. 385. 


2 About 402. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V 


themselves with their swords, grappling ane 
lashing their transports to the ships of the ene- 
my; but in this attempt, being alle with mis- 
siles from the armed galleys, particularly with 
burning darts, by which some of the transports 
were set on fire, the others, to avoid the flames, 
were obliged to keep at a distance; and the 
greater part of them suffering extremely without 
being able to annoy the encmy, were sunk or 
destroyed. Calvisius himself, having heen five 
days at sea, with difficulty escaped to Brundu- 
sium. 

These tidings had their effect in both armies. 
In that of Brutus they inspired an unseasonable 
ardour, and a disposition to commit the cause of 
the party to the hazard of a battle; in that of 
Antony and Octavius, they impressed the neces- 
sity of a speedy decision. These leaders, to 
amuse their own troops, and to provoke the ene- 
my, had seized, in the night, a post on the decli- 
vity below the ground which was lately occupied 
by Cassius. They were suffered to make a 
lodgment upon it by Brutus, who had not any 
apprehension that he could be annoyed from a 
situation that was so much lower than his own. 
On the following day it appeared, that their in- 
tention in seizing this post was to cover a move- 
ment, which they proposed to make to the right 
on the edge of the morass; which they accord- 
ingly executed, and pitched again in two separate 
encampments. In this new position they were 
observed to sound the morass, and either intend- 
ed a feint, or had a real design, by effecting a 
communication with the opposite side, again to 
cut off every intercourse of Brutus with his ships. 
But finding that all the heights on the opposite 
side were now secured against them by intrench- 
ments, they dropped that intention, and endea- 
voured, by frequent alarms, and by exposing 
their own parties on the plain, to engage their 
antagonist in a general action. 

Brutus, in the mean time, having secured his 
own communication with Neapolis, by a proper 
disposition of posts from his present encamp- 
ment to the sea; and trusting that his enemies 
must, upon the approach of winter, be obliged to 
evacuate Macedonia, or to separate their arnty for 
the convenience of finding subsistence, persisted 
in his resolution to protract the war. In this 
conjuncture he wrote to his friend Pomponius 
Atticus in the following terms: ‘ My object is 
secure; for either I shall, by my victory, rescue 
the Romans from the servitude into which they 
are fallen, or perish in the attempt, and by dying 
myself escape from slavery. I have done m 
part, and wait for the issue in which public free- 
dom or death is to follow. As for Antony, who 
has chosen to become the retainer of Octavius, 
rather than a sharer with us in the equal rights 
of a citizen, he has a different alternative, either 
now to perish with this young man, or, being the 
dupe of his artifices, to become hereafter the sub- 
ject of his government.’’4 

The troops of Brutus, however, could not be 
reconciled to this dilatory plan; they began to 
complain that a victorious army should be cooped 
up behind intrenchinents, and should be insulted 
like women ; even the officers, pretending to rea- 
son on the state of the war, censured their general 
for losing the opportunity, which so great an 


ar 


4 Plutarch. in Bruto. 


Cuap. IV.} 


ardour in the army gave him of deciding the con- 
test at a blow. They alleged, that even if the 
attempt should prove unsuccessful, he might still 
return to the execution of his defensive and dila- 
tory operations. 

Brutus was aware that the army, now under 
his command, having been trained up as mere 
soldiers of fortune, had no principle of attach- 
ment to either side; that it was necessary to 
consult their inclinations, as well as to flatter 
their hopes. He remembered that Cassius had 
been obliged, in many things, to abate the usual 
rigour of his discipline; and being himself of a 
mild and indulgent nature, he yielded to those 
who were under his command; or not being able 
to stem the torrent which daily increased, he suf- 
fered the impatience of his own men to hurry him 
into a risk of all his fortunes. In about twenty 
days after the former action, overcome by mere 
importunities, he drew forth his army on the de- 
clivity before his camp; the enemy, at the same 
time, according to their usual practice, were 
forming upon the plain; and both sides foresaw 
the approach of a general engagement. 

Historians introduce their accounts of the last 
action at Philippi, with a detail of forms and so- 
lemnities, which, on other occasions, they have 
either omitted to mention, or which were not 
equally observed. As soon as the parole or word 
for the day was given over the different divisions 
of the respective armies, a single trumpet sound- 
ed the signal of battle; and was followed by a 
numerous band, which played an air, while the 
legions were dressing their ranks, and while the 
men were trying and handling their arms. 

Brutus, being on horseback, passed along the 
lines of his own army, and exhorted his men not 
to quit the advantage of the ground on which they 
stood, by advancing too far to meet the enemy. 
“You have promised mea victory,” he said, “you 
have forced me to snatch it now, rather than to 
wait for a more secure possession of it hereafter. 
It is your business to fulfil your own expectations 
and mine.” 

On the other side, Antony and Octavius were 
happy in having their fortunes, hitherto desperate, 
brought to the chance of a battle. They put their 
army in mind, that this was what all of them 
wished: “ You are poor and distressed,” they 
said, “but in the enemy’s camp you will find an 
end to your sufferings, and the beginning of 
riches and plenty. From us, who are our Tet 
ers, you may expect the rewards which are due 
to valour, and every effect of a disposition in us 
which is sufficiently liberal, but which victory 
alone will give us the power to indulge in the 
manner that we wish.” 

In these preparations the day being far spent, 
and noon about three hours already past, the 
trumpets on both sides having sounded a general 
charge, made a sudden pause, and sounded again, 
while both armies being in motion, struck upon 
their bucklers, advanced with a mighty shout, 
and, under a shower of missile weapons of every 
sort, closed with their swords. They continued 
long with all the fury that kindles in the use of 
short weapons, to struggle on the same spot. 
The places of those that fell in the first rank 
were continually supplied from the ranks behind 
them ; and the place of action began to be choked 


§ Plutarch. in Bruto. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 367 


up with heaps of the slain. No stratagem is said 
to have been practised, or any accident to have 
happened, to determine the fate of the day on 
either side; but, after a severe contest, the army 
of Brutus began to give way, at first slowly, and 
almost insensibly ; but being pressed with grow- 
ing violence, they were thrown into some confu- 
sion, and gave up the day without hopes of re- 
covery. In the disorder that followed, numbers, 
who fled to the camp, finding the entrances ob- 
structed by the crowds that struggled for admis- 
sion, despaired of safety there, and passed on to 
the heights in its rear. Octavius advanced to 
the enemy’s camp to secure, or to keep in awe 
those who had taken refuge within it. Antony 
pursued those who were dispersed on the heights, 
and, at the approach of night, made the necessa- 
ry dispositions to hinder those who were within 
the intrenchment, or those who were in the field, 
from rallving or assembling again; and employed 
parties of horse all night to scour all the avenues 
in search of prisoners. 

Brutus himself being cut off from the camp 
and closely followed, Luci, one of his com- 
pany, to give him time to escape, affecting to 
personate his general, and falling behind, was 
taken. This captive, supposed to be Brutus, the 
leader of the republican army, being conducted to 
Antony, to whom he was known, met with a re- 
ception not unworthy of his generous artifice. 
“You intended,” said Antony, to those who 
brought the prisoner, with a politeness which 
seemed to refute some of the imputations on his 
character, “to bring me an enemy, but you have 
brought me a friend.’’6 

Brutus, in the mean time, having in the dark 
passed a brook that ran between steep and rocky 
banks covered with wood, made a halt, with a 
few friends, on the opposite side, as in a place of 
safety. Being yet uncertain of the extent of his 
loss, he sent an officer to observe the field, and 
with orders, if any considerable body uf the army 
were yet together, to light a blaze as a signal or 
token of its safety. ‘This officer accordingly 
made his way to the camp, and finding it still in 
the possession of his friends, made the signal; but 
lest it should not be observed, he attempted to re- 
turn to his general, fell into the enemy’s hands, 
and was slain. 

As, from the signal now made, it appeared to 
Brutus and the small company who attended him, 
that the camp was still in possession of their 
own people, they thought of making their way 
thither; but recollecting that the greater part of 
the army were dispersed, they doubted whether 
the lines could be defended until they could 
reach them, or even if they should be maintained 
so long, whether they could furnish any safe re- 
treat. While they reasoned in this manner, one 
of their number, who went to the brook fur water, 
returned with an alarm that the enemy were 
upon the opposite bank; and saying, with some 
agitation, “ We must fly.” “ Yes,” replied Bru- 
tus, “but with our hands, not with our feet.” 
He was then said to have repeated, from some 
poet, a tragic exclamation in the character of 
Hercules: “O Virtue! I thought thee a sub- 
stance, but find thee no more than an empty 
name, or the slave of Fortune.’ The vulgar, in 
their traditions, willingly lend their own thoughts 


6 Plutarch in Bruto. 


to eminent men in distress; those of Brutus are 
expressed in his letter to Atticus already quoted : 
“I have done my part, and wait for the issue, in 
which death or freedom is to follow.’ If he 
had ever thought tliat a mere honourable inten- 
tion was to ensure him success, it is surprising 
he was not sooner undeceived. Being now to 
end his life, and taking his leave of the company 
then present, one by one, he said aloud, ‘* That 
he was happy in never having been betrayed by 
any one he had trusted as a friend.’ Some of 
them, to whom he afterwards whispered apart, 
were observed to burst into tears; and it appear- 
ed that he requested their assistance in killing 
himself; for he soon afterwards executed this 
purpose, in company with one Strato and some 
others, whom he had taken aside. 

This catastrophe, as usual, set the imaginations 
of men to work; and many prodigies and pre- 
sages were believed to have preceded it. A spectre, 
it. was said, had presented itself in the night to 
Brutus, when he was about to pass the Kielis 
pont, told him it was his evil genius, and was to 
meet him again at Philippi; that here it accord- 
ingly again appeared on the eve of the late action. 

rutus was then about thirty-seven or forty 
years of age.! Next to Cato, he, of all the Ro- 
mans, was supposed to have acted from the purest 
motives of public virtue. Cassius had too much 
elevation of mind to endure a master ;: but Bru- 
tus was likewise too just to have usurped on the 
rights of his fellow-citizens, even if they had been 
in his power. His character, however, in some 
respects, is questionable; and we may not, 
through the disguise of manners so different from 
our own, be able to ascertain the truth. Cicero, 
who is at once the principal author of his fame 
and of the exceptions which are taken against it, 
charges him with an uncommon degree of arro- 
gance, and complains of the tone which, while 
yet a young man, he took even with himself.? 
He likewise relates some particulars of a loan 
which one Scaptius had transacted for Brutus in 
the island of Cyprus, and of which the payment 
was exacted under the proconsulate of Cicero, 
with circumstances of uncommon avarice and 
cruelty ; and that in this he even presumed to 
demand that the Roman proconsul should sup- 
port hin with all his authority. The loan was 
usurious, and, in exacting the payment of it, the 
senate of Salamis, in the island of Cyprus, had 
been surrounded by a party of cavalry, and shut 
up from the use of food. Cicero writes of this 
proceeding to Atticus, with every expression of 
blame and indignation; and yet Brutus, then a 
young man, continued to be held in the highest 
veneration and esteem by persons who were ac- 
quainted with these particulars. “If you should 
have no other advantage,” says Atticus, in writing 
to Cicero, “ from your present government, but 
the opportunity of gaining the friendship of Bru- 
tus, this alone wiil be enough.” And Cicero 
himself frequently mentions Brutus, after this 
transaction, with peculiar expressions of admira- 
tion and love. So that we must either suppose 


1 Liv. Epitome, lib. exliv Vel. Paterculus, c. 72. 


2 \d Attic lib. v.ep. 21, et lib. vi. ep 1. Ad me 
autem etiam cum rogat aliquid, contumaciter, arro- 
ganter, x420v ovytws, solet scribzre. 

3 Vid. lib de Claris Oratoribus, cap. 3. &c. &c. 
This book is expressly dated after the return of Cicero 
from Cilicia 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boog V. 


Brutus to have been innocent of this extortion 
and cruelty committed by his agent in Cyprus, 
or that such proceedings, though contrary to law, 
were so much authorized by the practice of the 
times, as to stain the manners of the age much 
more than the characters of individuals. Of 
these conjectures, perhaps, both are in part to be 
admitted: the law of the republic forbidding the 
interest of money under the denomination of 
usury, inflamed, rather than prevented, the evil. 
Under this prohibition, the necessitous borrower 
was made to pay for the risk and obloquy which 
the lender incurred by transgressing the law, as 
well as for the use of his money. lt was impos- 
sible to prevent what is necessary in the common 
course of things; persons having occasion for 
money must borrow ; and persons having money 
will lend, in order to reap the benefit of it. It 
appears to have been customary with towns in 
the provinces, with corporations, and with de- 
pendent princes, to borrow money at exorbitant 
interest from the rich at Rome; and probably to 
employ that money in making presents to gain 
the powerful.4 Pompey had great sums owing 
to him in Asia, and likewise received great pre- 
sents from thence. These we must admit to have 
been great abuses ; but individuals are not always 
accountable for the abuses of their age, even 
where they have not corrected them in their own 
practice. 

Brutus and Cassius, the last unsuccessful 
leaders of the republican party, even after it be- 
came a crime to mention their names with re- 
spect, were revered in secret by every person who 
had any memory or conception of the ancient re- 
public, and will, in every age, he held in estima- 
tion by those who conceive inerit as independent 
of fortune. Even Antony, it is said, when the 
death of Brutus was reported to him, expressed 
the highest respect for his memory, covered his 
remains with the imperial rohe which he himself 
wore in the field, and ordered bis obsequies to be 
performed with the highest marks of distinction 
and honour ;§ in this instance, probably acting 
from policy, or, under all the vices of dissipation 
and profiigacy with which he was charged, know- 
ing how to seize the occasion of gaining the 
public esteem, by splendid pretensions to gene- 
rositv and candour. 

Octavius, who far excelled his colleague in the 
ordinary arts of discretion and policy, is repre- 
sented as greatly inferior to him in his behaviour 
on the present occasion. It is said that he or- 
dered the head of Brutus to be carried into 
Italv, and exposed on Cesar’s tomb; and, among 
other proofs of insolence and cruelty which he 
gave inthe present prosperous tide of his fortunes, 
that having among his prisoners a father and son 
of the name of Florus, he ordered that one of 
them should be put to death, and that they should 
cast lots, or fight, to determine which should be 
spared. Under this cruel sentence, the father in- 
treated that he himself might die. Octavius at» 
tended to see the execution ; and, after the death 
of the father, likewise witnessed that of the son, 
who killed himself. 

That part of the vanquished army which fled 


4 Cicer. ad Attic. lib v. ep. 21. 
5 Plut. in Antonio et Bruto. 


| 6 Sueton. in Octav. c. 14. Dio. Cass. dates this par- 
ti 


cular after the battle of Actium. 


Cnap. V.I 


to the heights, being about fourteen thousand 
men, hearing of the death of the last of their 
leaders, surrendered themselves, and were equally 
divided between Octavius and Antony. Those 
who remained in the camp, or at any of the out- 
posts of the army, likewise laid down their arms. 
Of the persons of rank who partook in the wreck 
of their party at Philippi, some escaped by sea, 
and joined. Sextus Pompeius in Sicily, now the 
sole refuge of those who adhered to the common- 
wealth. Others killed themselves, or in the late 
:ction had refused quarter, and fought till they 
were slain. Among the first were Livius Drusus, 
the father of Livia, afterwards the wife of Octa- 
vius. Among the second were two young men 
cf distinguished names; Cato, the son of him 
who died at Utica, and Lucius Cassius, nephew 
of the late general. Labeo, with great delibera- 
tion, prepared a grave for himself in his tent, 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


369 


wrote to his family at Rome, gave directions 
about his affairs, and then submitted himself to a 
person whom he had retained to put an end to 
his life. 

It appears to have been a point of honour 
among the Romans of this age, to perish by their 
own hands rather than by that of their antago- 
nists, otherwise they could have easily, when for- 
tune appeared to have declared against them, 
forced the enemy to bestow that death which 
they afterwards obtained with great reluctance 
from their friends; and perhaps, in forcing mat- 
ters to this extremity, they might have turned the 
fortune of battle. Cæsar seems to have owed his 
victory, on some oceasions, to efforts of this 
sort, and his party in general prevailed by their 
perseverance under checks and difficulties, as 
much as by the advantage they took of their vic- 
tories.” 


CHAPTER V. 


Immediate Consequences of the Event at Philippi—New Partition of the Empire made by Octa- 
vius and Antony— Their Separation— Progress of Octavius at Rome—His Friends Macenas 
and Agrippa—Alarm and Distress in Italy on the Dispossession of the Inhabitants to make 
way for the T’roops—Jealousy of Fulvia and Lucius Antonius—Blockade and reduction of 
Perusia— Progress of Antony in Asia—His Stay at Alexandria—Return to Italy— Accommo- 
dation with Sextus Pompeius—Return of Octavius and Antony to Rome— Their Policy. 


AMONG the immediate consequences of the 
late event at Philippi, is mentioned the death of 
Porcia, the wife of Brutus, and the daughter of 
Cato. Being suspected of an intention to kill 
herself, watched by her servants, and anxiously 
precluded from the ordinary means of effecting 
that purpose, she swallowed burning coals, and 
expired. This was said to have happened on 
hearing of her husband’s death; but Plutarch 
cites a letter of Brutus, extant in his own time, 
from which it appeared that this catastrophe pre- 
ceded the death of Brutus, and was imputed to 
the negligence of her servants, who attended her 
in the delirium of a fever.’ 

By the battles which had been fought in diffe- 
rent parts of the empire, by the late massacre in 
Italy, and by the event of the war at Philippi, | 
the last pillars of the commonwealth seemed to | 
be removed, or but a few of its members were left 
who had any zeal for its preservation. Octavius 
and Antony, upon the total and decisive victory 
they had gained, without paying any regard to 
the pretensions of Lepidus, made a new partition 
of the empire. Octavius, to his former lot, had | 
an addition of Spain and Numidia; Antony that | 
of the farther Gaul and the province of Africa. 
It was agreed between them, that Antony should 
prosecute the remains of the war in the east, and 
raise the necessary contributions to enable them 
to fulfil their engagements to the army: that Oc- 
tavius should return into Italy, conduct the war 
against Sextus Pompeius, repress the designs of 
Lepidus, in case he should be dissatisfied with 
the present arrangement, and in proper time set- 
tle the veterans on the lands which had been al- 


7 See the History of the Campaigns on the Segra at 
Dyrrachium, and in Africa. 
8 Plat. in Bruto. 9 Dio Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 1. 
3A 


lotted to them.—These articles were committed 
to writing, and the ratifications exchanged, An- 
tony having received from Octavius a reinforce- 
ment of two legions, departed for Asia, and 
Octavius set out on his return to Rome. 

When accounts of the final action at Philippi 
were received in the city, a thanksgiving was 
ordered; and, instead of being limited to fifty or 
sixty days, as in the late decrees which had 
passed in honour of Julius Cesar, this festival 
was now to be continued for an entire year. In 
P a to the approaches which the repub- 
ican party made to its entire extinction, the few 
who remained of it carried an affectation of joy 
that kept pace with their real sorrow. Their 
fears broke forth in profuse expressions of pre- 
tended attachment and zeal for the honour of 
those whom they dreaded. 

Under such an aspect of gladness, covering 
extreme anxiety or terror, the pacific inhabitants 
of Italy looked for the arrival of an army which 
was to be gratified with their richest possessions. 
They remembered what had passed at former 
military entries into Rome, and they anticipated 
the sufferings which were to be expected from a 
young man who had, during some time, and from 
mere policy, assumed an air of moderation, and 
employed every artifice to forward his purpose; 
but in proportion as he became secure of his end, 
he threw off his original mask, and concurred in 
usurpations the most bloody of any that had 
been known in the history of mankind,—Octa- 
vius being detained by sickness on his way to the 
city, these gloomy apprehensions gained force 
from delay. lt was supposed that he deferred 
his arrival only while he adjusted his plan or took 
measures to render its effects more certain. Every 
one exaggerated the evil, but no one thought of a 
remedy. Such was the present state of a help- 


370 


less nobility and people, the remains of a common- 
wealth, long accustomed to dominion, retaining 
their haughtiness while they lost their vigour, 
long desirous of power, but unable to sustain the 
weight of a free constitution. 

Octavius gave notice to the senate, that his 
coming was delayed by sickness, accepted the 
decree of a continued thanksgiving for the late 
victory obtained at Philippi, but desired it might 
be understood, that this honour was conferred on 
account of the exemplary justice he had done on 
the assassins of his father. The cunning with 
which he occasionally dropt this pretence, or with 
which he resumed it, as the motive of all his pur- 
suits, forms a striking part in his character. He 
at one time co-operated with the conspirators, and 
declared it to be his‘intention, in conjunction with 
them, to restore the republic. He accordingly 
promoted the resolutions which were taken at 
Rome in favour of Decimus, as well as Marcus 
Brutus and Cassius, he promoted the election of 
Casca into the office of tribune ; he raised an ar- 
my to support them against Antony, and took 
into his councils the most vehement partizans of 
the senate. “ Hven Servius Galba, holding tie 
very dagger wilh which he murdered Cesar,” 
said Antony to him, in his letter during the siege 
of Mutina, “is now employed in your camp.”! 
As he often, however, on former occasions, 
courted the army, by affecting a picus intention 
to avenge his father’s'death, so he now recurred 
to the same pretence, as the most likely to coun- 
terbalance the favour that was paid to the memo- 
ry of Brutus and Cassius, and the general regret 
which attended the catastrophe of the last scene 
that was acted in behalf of the commonwealth. 

About this time, Octavius was 
U. C. 712. known to have in his service two 
L. Antonius, officers of distinguished’ merit, Mar- 
P. Servilius, cus Vipsanius Agrippa, and Cains 
rins, COE Cilnius Mæcenas; both well qualified 
in their respective parts to support 
him in the pretensions he had formed: on the 
empire. The first, by his courage and military 
abilities, was qualified to supply or to conceal his 
defects as a soldier; the second, by his industry, 
his temper, his choice of friends, and his fitness 
to soften the manners of the times, by diverting 
the minds of men from objects of public distress 
tothe elegant and amusing occupations of literary 
genius, well qualified to smooth all the difficul- 
ties in the way of his civil administration. Al- 
though it had not yet appeared in what degree 
Octavius was to commit his affairs to such able 
hands, his discernment in choosing them might 
be considered as the presage of a fortune not de- 
pending on accidents, but founded on a real 
ascendant of understanding and judgment. 

Upon the arrival of the young Cesar at Rome, 
he gave assurance to the senate of his intention 
to avoid all unnecessary acts of severity.2 But 
the first object of his administration being to set- 
tle the veterans on the possessions which they 
had been made to expect at the end of the war, 
he was very soon led into a scene of extreme 
violence, and involved in great difficulties. 

At the formation of the triumvirate the army 
had been flattered with the hopes of being settled 
on the most fertile lands, or in the wealthiest ci- 


l Cicer. Philip. Antony to Octavius and Hirtius. 
2 Dio Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 3. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V. 


ties of Italy. In order to fulfil these expectations, 
it was necessary to dispossess the ancient inhabi- 
tants; and as this was to be done without any 
pretence of forfeiture, or delinquency of an¥ sort, 
the unhappy sufferers pleaded, that the lands in- 
tended for the army should be taken by lof, or in 
equal proportions, and in every part of the em- 
pire. But the soldiers were absolute, and not to 
be satisfied but by immediate possession of the 
lots which had been actually assigned as the re- 
ward of their services. A general order was ac- 
cordingly signed for the present occupiers of those. 
lands to remove. The victims of this severity 
repaired to Rome in entire families; persons of 
every sex, age, and condition crowded the streets, 
took shelter in the temples and other places of 
public resort, and filled the city with complaints 
and lamentations. ‘The ancient inhabitants 
of Italy, citizens. of Rome,’ they said, ‘ were 
stripped of their possessions, and turned out to 
perish with their children, to make way for ad- 
venturers who had subverted the laws of their 
country, and who were to perpetuate the military 
usurpation they had established. The same vio- 
lent hands which had stripped the Roman peo- 
ple of their sovereignty, were now to be let loose 
on their property. ‘The innocent, who had taken 
no part in the late troubles, were to be sacrificed, 
merely because their possessions suited the con- 
veniency of those who had already brought so 
many evils on the commonwealth. They had 
been promised protection from this party; but 
were now to suffer, from their pretended protect- 
ors and friends,. greater evils than any conquered 
province had ever endured from the worst of its 
enemies.” 

To these complaints both the army and: its 
leaders: were equally insensible,. and: proceeded, 
in particular instances, to acts of violence, whick 
the execution of their general: purpose did not re- 
quire. They kept the minds of the people in 
suspense by their indecision in choosing their 
lots; by quitting those which were at first as- 
signed, in order to exchange them for others;. and, 
by leaving particular persons without any regu- 
lar grant or assignment, to make free with such 
lands as suited their conveniency.. ‘The leaders 
were obliged to connive at what they could not 
restrain, and gave way to a violence to which 
they owed: the possession of their power.‘ 

‘The army now considering the lands of Italy 
as their property,. looked upon every person in- 
clined to protect the ancient inhabitants as their 
enemy, resented every delay that was made in 
gratifying their desires; and were equally insolent 
to their own officers as they were to the people. 
A party being assembled in the Campus Martius 
to receive their dismission and: their assignments 
of land; and having some time waited: for Octa- 
vius, from whom they expected satisfaction m 


3 Publius Virgilius Maro is said to have been of this 
injured train. Having had a small property in land , 
near Mantua, he was stripped of it to make way for an 
officer of the legions; a wrong to which he so tenderly 
alludes in his eclogue (Nos patriw fines et dulcia lin- 
quimus arva, nos patriam fugimus.) But being re- 
commended to Mæcenas by Asinius Pollio, who coni- 
manded in that part of Italy, he obtained, from the re- 
spect that was due to his fine genius, a protection which 
humanity and justice owe equally to every other per- 
son that was involved in this calamity.—Appian. de 
Bell. Civ. lib. v. 

4 Appian. lib. v. 


Cuap. V.] 


these particulars, became impatient and clamor- 
ous, laid violent hands on Nonius, a centurion, 
who endeavoured to pacify them, and even'threw 
him into the river, where he perished. ‘They 
afterwards dragged the dead body on shore, and 
placed it on the way by which their general was 
to pass, asa warning, that he bimself should not 
slight their displeasure. Octavius being informed, 
‘before he came abroad, of this menacing insult 
which had been offered to his authority, saw the 
necessity of not appearing to be moved. He 
passed the dead body without seeming to observe 
it, made the intended distribution of land to the 
troops; and affecting to consider the murder of 
Nonius as the effect of a private quarrel, in 
which he was to take no part, left this dangerous 
meeting with an exhortation, that they should not 
weaken their own cause by quarrelling among 
themselves. 

The cohorts which Octavius retained for the 
ordinary guard of his own person, treated him, 
on occasion, with equal disrespect. As an in- 
stance of this sort, it is mentioned, that one of 
their body having, at the publie theatre, seated 
himself on the Equestrian bench, and the audi- 
ence being seandalized at this act of presumption, 
the soldier was removed by order of his general; 
but his eompanions ‘being made to believe that 
he was carried away to be put to death, piaced 
theniselves in the way of Octavius, as he passed 
from ‘the theatre, and, with clamours and threats 
of instant revenge, demanded their fellow-soldier 
‘to be restored. ‘Having prevailed inthis partieu- 
lar, they called upon him to declare what usage 
he had received; and when they were told by 
‘himself that no violenee had been offered to him, 
they alleged that he was hired to eonceal the 
truth, and to betray the honour of the army, and 
were scarcely to be appeased by his repeated as- 
severations to the contrary. 

In these dangerous times, enormities which 
‘were committed by disorderly persons of any de- 
seription being imputed to the soldiers, were suf- 
fered to pass with impunity. Robbery and mur- 
ders became frequent, and the city of Rome 
itself, as well as the provineial towns, was infest- 
ed by persons who, either from necessity, or from 
the license of the times, subsisted by rapine. No 
property was safe, and the eondition of persons 
of all parties equally inseeure. At Rome the 
rent of houses fell to a fourth, and whole streets 
appeared to be deserted.§ 

In this distraeted scene, nevertheless, there 
were persons who envied Octavius the hateful 
pre-eminence which he seemed to enjoy. Among 
these Manius, the person entrusted with the 
affairs of Mark Antony, Lueius his brother, 
now in the office of consul, and Fulvia his wife, 
aspiring to a share of the government, became 
impatient of an administration from which they 
thought themselves unfairly excluded. Not only 
L. Antonius, in the capaeity of consul, but the 
others also, in right of the absent triumvir, 
thought themselves entitled to more consideration 
than they now enjoyed. 

The power of distributing the lands and other 
rewards to the army, it was observed, gave Octa- 
vius a signal advantage over his colleague, and 
fixed the expectations of all men upon him alone. 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 9 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


| 


| 


371 


By these means he filled Italy with his own re- 
tainers and friends; and Fulvia complained that 
Mark Antony should be thus deprived -of the 
fruits of a victory, which had been obtained 
chiefly by his conduct and valour. She appealed 


to the legions, presented herself at their quar- 


ters, and, with her children in her arins, implored, 
what she was pleased to call, a matter of right 
in behalf of her husband. 

In this manner, persons representing the ab- 
sent triumvir endeavoured to divide the party, 
and to add to the scene of political eonfusion 
already subsisting, a breach and opposition of 
interest among those who commanded the army. 
The country, at the same time, suffered from the 
interruption that was given by the fleets of Do- 
mitius Ahenobarbus and Sextus Pompeius, from 
the opposite ports of Illyricum and Sicily, to the 
importation of corn and other necessaries; and 
this circumstance, joined to the uncertainty of 
property, and the other causes which interrupted 
industry, completed the :distresses of Italy. 

The people, although they were willing to sub- 
mit to any government, were not likely to be long 
able to endure their present sufferings. The 
friends of Antony endeavoured to load Octavius 
with the ‘blame of these evils, and thought this:a 
favourable opportunity to wrest the government 
out of his hands. They found fault with the pro- 
vision he had made for the army as too scanty ; 
and they joined in the eomplaints that were 
made by the sufferers, who were dispossessed of 
their property to make way forthe soldiers. They 
affected a design to restore the republie; and 
Lucias Antonius, in the character of Roman 
consul, ealled upon the remaining friends of the 
commonwealth to appear in support of their legal 
magistrate. He professed his intention to make 
war even on his own brother, as well as on Oe- 
tavius, if he should persist in his present usurpa- 
tions, or should attempt to obstruct the restoration 
of the laws. But, notwithstanding his profes- 
sions to this purpose, he himself, afleeting to be- 
lieve that his person was in danger, put his 
attendants under arms, and paraded the streets 
at the head of a military force; a measure that 
was ever considered at Rome as the intimation 
of a design to usurp the government. 

Oetavius, greatly provoked by these attacks 
whieh were made upon him by the representa- 
tives of Antony, repudiated the daughter of Ful- 
via, whom, at the formation of the triumvirate, 
he had betrothed merely to serve a political pur- 
pose, and whom he now returned to her family, 
with express declarations of his never having 
had any commerce with her as his wife. Fulvia, 
affocting to consider this insult as a prelude to 
greater Injuries, appealed to |e in behalf of 
his absent eolleague, and withdrew to Prenesté, 
whither great numbers of all ranks and condi- 
tions, both civil and military, flocked to her 
standard. Here she put herself at the head of 
an army, held regular eouncils, and, with a 
sword by her side, gave the parole, and frequently 
harangued the troops, 

In these hasty advances to a rupture, repre- 
sentations to Antony, and preparations for war, 
were equally made on both sides. It was yet 
uncertain how the army might divide between 
the parties. Octavius was likely, by his presence, 
to command the superior number; but great 
part of the forces now in Italy had been levied in 


372 


the name of Antony, and still, according to the 
custom of those armies, bore his name on their 
shields. The two legions which were to have 
been transferred to Octavius, to replace those 
which he had given to Antony in Macedonia, 
were still retained by Lucius Antonius for his 
brother. The provinces of Gaul, with consider- 
able armies,. ready to march into Italy, were 
under the government of Ventidius, of Plancus, 
and of Asinius Pollio, who were the adherents 
of Antony, and likely to espouse his cause. An- 
tony himself, by the superiority of his military 
character, had, in the course of his joint opera- 
tions with Octavius, greatly surpassed him, and 
had acquired a high degree of reputation with 
the troops. It was, therefore, necessary for his 
rival to proceed with great caution, and not 
rashly to draw upon himself, in this quarrel, the 
weight of his colleague’s authority, nor to disgust 
the army, by appearing to be the aggressor in a 
war between their leaders. 

Such disputes were certainly in general disa- 
greeable to the army, who, having subdued the 
republic, hoped, now at their ease, to divide its 
spoils. It was necessary, therefore, for Octavius, 
ii a war should ensue, to make it appear to be 
the work of his enemies. For this purpose he 
formed at Rome a council of the principal ofh- 
cers; proposed that they should make inquiry 
into the grounds of the present dissension, and 
oblige those who were in fault to submit to their 
decrees. 

Fulvia and her partizans called this military 
convention by a ludicrous name, which we may 
translate the ammunition senate,! and refused to 
submit their cause to so new a tribunal. 

The army in general was alarmed at the pros- 
ee of seeing the civil war renewed. ‘Two 
egions that had first served under Cesar, and 
afterwards under Antony, being now ouartered 
at Ancona, sent a deputation to Rome, with in- 
treaties that the parties would avoid a rupture. 
They were referred by Octavius to L. Anto- 
nius, who, he said, was the aggressor; and pro- 
ceeding, attended by a great concourse of people 
to Prenesté, where.the heads of the opposite 
party were assembled, beseeched them to spare 
the republic, already too much afflicted with 
civil dissensions. They were told for answer, 
that “Octavius was the aggressor; that while 
his colleague was raising money for the benefit of 
the army, he was artfully changing the inhabi- 
tants of Italy, and occupying all the important 
stations of the empire with his own retainers and 
creatures; that the money, which, under pre- 
tence of supporting the war against Sextus Pom- 
peius, had been taken from the treasury, was by 
Octavius diverted from its use, and employed in 
carruptias the troops of his friend; that the es- 
tates of the proscribed, under the pretence of 
sales, at which, besides the creatures of Octavius, 
there was no man to purchase, had been actually 
employed by him for the same purpose; that, if 
he really meant to avoid a rupture, he ought to 
do nothing without consulting the friends of his 
colleague, who were equally entitled with him- 
self to share in the fruits of their common victory 
obtained at Philippi. But I know,” said Lucius 
Antonius, “the falsehood of Octavius; while he 
amuses you with the hopes of a negotiation and 


1 Senatus Caligatus. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Booz V 


treaty, and with professions of having nothing at 
heart besides your interest, he is arming himself 
with the utmost diligence, and has reinforced the 
garrison of Brundusium, with an evident purpose 
to obstruct the return of his colleague, and your 
principal friend, into Italy.” 

Octavius being in possession of the capital, in 
order that he might appear to have, not only the 
authority of government, but the countenance 
likewise of all the more respectable citizens of 
Rome on his side, called an assembly of the 
senate, at which he invited the Equestrian order 
to attend. He represented to this assembly the 
calamities that were now impending over Italy 
from the jealousy and restless ambition of a few 
persons, who called themselves the friends of 
Mark Antony, and he exhorted them with one 
accord to join him in averting these evils. He 
accordingly obtained a deputation to be sent to 
Prenesté, where the heads of the opposite party 
were still assembled, to remonstrate against their 
procedure. ‘This measure however had no other 
effect besides that which Octavius proposed by 
it, that of transferring to his enemies the blame 
of all the evils which were expected to follow. 

An expedient was proposed, more likely to 
prevent these evils, by a conference to be held by 
the military officers of the opposite sides, who, 
perceiving themselves about to be involved ina 
quarrel, were extremely averse to risk all the ad- 
vantages they had already obtained, without any 
prospect of gain. This expedient of a military 
congress was suggested by the officers themselves, 
and was readily embraced by their leaders. Gabit 
being half way from Prenesté to Rome, was 
fixed upon as the place at which they should 
meet; but on the day on which they were to 
open their conference, parties of horse having 
been, from some remains of distrust, without any 
concert, sent forward on both sides to escort their 
deputies, and mutually to observe each other, 
they. met unexpectedly on the highway, and 
coming to blows, numbers were killed or wound- 
ed, and the intended convention was dropped. 

Each of the parties, in consequence of this 
accident, published a manifesto, and began to 
assemble in a hostile manner. Lucius Antonius 
had ordered new levies, and with these, joined to 
the troops already on foot, under the authority 
of his brother, and who were now stationed in 
the nearer province of Gaul, under Calenus, he 
proposed to assemble an army of eleven legions. 

Octavius ordered six legions under Salvidienus, 
from Spain; and having already four in Italy, 
with a considerable body of troops, which, under 
the designation of Pretorian bands, made the 
ordinary guard of his person, he took the field to 
prevent the designs of his enemies. a 

The nobility and citizens of rank were divided ; 
but the greater part, who had yet any hopes of 
seeing the civil government restored, thought 
themselves safer in the party of the consul Lu- 
cius Antonius, than in that of Cesar; and ac- 
cordingly repaired to his camp. 

Sextus Pompeius, on the eve of a contest thus 
likely to divide his enemies, might have made 
himself of considerable consequence, or might 
have obtained advantageous terms from either 
party. His forces had been seen greatly aug- 
mented by the accession of two legions, the re- 
mains of the wreck at Philippi, that had escaped 
with Murcus. Fle might have got a footing in 


Cuar. V.] 


Italy, and, by the favourable disposition of many 
who felt the oppression of the present govern- 
ment, or dreaded the future effects of its tyranny, 
might have held the balance between the con- 
tending parties. He, nevertheless, either under 
the notion of leaving his enemies to waste their 
strength against each other, or not having a 
sufficient genius for such arduous enterprises, 
suffered the opportunity to escape, and contented 
himself with endeavouring to secure his posses- 
sion of Sicily and Sardinia, which he hoped to 
retain as a patrimony independent of Rome. 

Ahenobarbus, the other remaining leader or re- 
ptesentative of the republican party, who was 
still hovering on the opposite coast of Italy with 
the remains of the fleet, which he had conimand- 
ed under Brutus and Cassius, made frequent 
descents, and plundered the recent settlements of 
the veterans. He even forced his way into the 
harbour of Brundusium, took some galleys be- 
longing to Octavius, and laid waste the adjacent 
country; but, while he was acting in a manner 
equally hostile to both parties, the forces of the 
triumvirs, indifferent to every external enemy, 
began to assemble against each other. Lepidus 
declared for Octavius, and these two having left 
the city together, Lucius Antonius presented 
himself at the gates, and was admitted. Having 
assembled the people, he declared that his inten- 
tion was to restore the republic. His brother, he 
said, for the future desired no illegal powers, and 
was ready to join in calling Octavius and Lepi- 
dus to account for the tyranny they had lately 
exercised against the ancient inhabitants of Italy. 

In the mean time, the event of this contest 
appeared to depend on the movements that were 
making on the side of Spain and Gaul. Salvi- 
dienus being on his march to join Octavius, Asi- 
nius and Ventidius hung on his rear. Agrippa, 
on the part of Cesar, passed the Po in order to 
join Salvidienus; and having succeeded in this 
design, they obliged Asinius and Ventidius to 
remain on the defensive, expecting the arrival of 
Lucius Antonius, who was on his march to sup- 
port them. 

When Antonius came to a pass of the Apen- 
nines, on the Flaminian way, he found the gorges 
of these mountains already occupied by Agrippa 
and Salvidienus; not attempting to force them, 
he fell back to Perusia, and sent orders to Venti- 
dius to join him by some other route; but Oc- 
tavius having got possession of Sentinum and 
Nursia, two posts on the opposite sides of the 
mountains, effectually prevented the junction of 
his enemies, assembled all his forces in the neigh- 
bourhood of Perusia, and invested Antonius in 
that place. He drew a line of circumvallation, 
extending about fifty stadia, or six miles, and 
placed his army between two parallels, equally 
strong, against any attempts that were likely to be 
made from the garrison, or from the field. 

Lucius Antonius being thus shut up in Peru- 
sia during the autumn, and part of winter, and 
all the efforts of Fulvia, Asinius, Ventidius, and 
Plancus, to succour him being ineffectual, he was 
reduced, from want of provisions, to the greatest 
extremities, and offered to capitulate. 

Octavius, in accepting this offer, with his usual 
address, took measures to divide his enemies, or 
to sow the seeds of future jealousy among them. 
He affected to distinguish the regular troops, 
which had been formed to serve under his col- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


373 


league Mark Antony, from the Roman citizens, 
or rather supposed disorderly persons, who had 
taken a part in this insurrection. The first, 
from pretended respect to their leader, he allowed 
to withdraw with honour; the others he required 
to surrender at discretion. In complying with 
this requisition, L. Antonius himself set the ex- 
ample, went forth in person to receive the victor’s 
commands, and being courteously treated, alleged 
his duty as a civil magistrate, and his desire to 
restore the commonwealth, as an apology for his 
conduct, and implored mercy for those who had 
embarked with him in the same design. Octa- 
vius replied, “ That as his*enemies had surren- 
dered themselves at discretion, he should make 
no remarks on the truth of their plea, nor talk of 
conditions, where he was not to be bound by a 
treaty; that he must now consider not only what 
his enemies had merited, but what was due to 
himself.” Having found among his prisoners 
some of the veterans who had served under Cæ- 
sar, he was disposed to have ordered them all to 
be executed; but observing that this measure 
was extremely offensive to his own army, he 
confined his severities to the Roman citizens, 
who, he pretended, had on this occasion acted 
with equal animosity to the army, and to him- 
self. To avenge the supposed injury that was 
done to the army, all persons of the civil descrip- 
tion, found under arms, were put to death. Of 
these, Cannutius, C. Flavius, Clodius, Bythini- 
cus, and others, are mentioned by Appian.? This 
Cannutius is said by Dion Cassius to have been 
the tribune, who presenting Octavius to his first 
audience from the people, contributed so much 
to the rise of his fortunes. 

The greater part of the executions were per- 
formed in the presence of Octavius, and in the 
manner of sacrifices to the manes, or to the divi- 
nity, of Julius Cesar. In this form, however 
detestable, they were supposed, in that age, to 
carry an aspect of piety, which sanctified the 
cruelty with which they were ordered, and with 
which Octavius himself witnessed the scene. 
Four hundred of the senatorian and equestrian 
order are said, by Dion Cassius aud Suetonius, 
to have perished in this manner.3 The magis- 
trates and council of Perusia, being separately 
ordered to execution, implored for mercy, but had 
one general answer, You must die’ The place 
itself, whether by the desperation of its inhabi- 
tants, or by the outrage of those who were now 
become masters of it, was set on fire, and burnt 
tu the ground. The country around being de- 
serted, or laid waste with fire and sword, and 
cleared of its former possessors, became a prey to 
such followers of the ariny as chose to occupy it.5 

At the date of this odious transaction, Octavius 
was no more than twenty-three years of age; 
and though, in former examples of cruelty, his 
youth may have been overruled or misled by the 
party-rage of his colleagues, yet, in this instance, 
he himself betrayed a merciless nature, in the 
effects of which he had no man to share, or to 
divide the blame ;6 and the world began to dread 
more from the separate power which he was 
about to establish, than they did from the joint 


2 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. 

3 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 14. 

4 Sueton. in Octav. c. 15. 

5 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 14 et 15. 
6 Livii Epitome, lib. cxxvi. 


374 


“usurpation, Ín which he bore a part, with per- 
sons, of whom the one was contemned for want 
of capacity, and the other detested for his profli- 
gate manners, 

Before the breaking out of this 


U. C. 713. war in Italy, Domitius Calvinus 

and Asinius Pollio had been des- 
p tined consuls; and the year fol- 
Pollio. lowing that, in which these trans- 


actions passed, is accordingly dated 
or inscribed with their names. ‘They were 
prevented, however, by this breach between the 
adherents of Antony and of Cesar, from taking 
the formal possession of their office. 

Pollio, holding his commission from Mark 
Antony, although he had no opportunity to act, 
was understood to join with the brother in the 
late division of their parties. While the war. 
continued, being stationed in his province in the 
district of Venetia, he carried on a correspond- 
ence with Ahenobarbus, and representing Lucius 
Antonius, with his title of Roman consul, as 
legal head of the republic, endeavoured to engage 
that officer on his side; but, in the event of the 
war, this correspondence was broke off, and the 
military adherents of Antony being dispersed or 
cut off, his relations and retainers fled in different 
directions. 

Fulvia, escorted by three thousand horse, took 
the road to Brundusium, and from thence, with 
Plancus and some other attendants, under the 
convoy of five galleys, sailed to Greece? Julia, 
the aged mother of Antony, took refuge with 
Sextus Pompeius in Sicily. Thither hkewise 
fled Tiberius Claudius Nero, with his wife Li- 
via Drusilla, and her infant son, persons often to 
‘be mentioned in the sequel of this history, as 
principal sharers in that power which now 
seemed to be raised on the ruin of their fortunes. 
Others had recourse to the protection of Aheno- 
‘barbus on the coast of Apulia. 

While the relations of Antony in Italy were 
engaged in this unfortunate contest, he himself 
had passed from Greece through Asia into 
Egypt, where, believing all his difficulties were 
at an end, he indulged his natural disposition to 
pleasure and dissipation, At Ephesus he had 
assembled the principal inhabitants of the pro- 
vince of Asia, proposed a contribution, and re- 

resented the occasion which obliged his col- 
eagues and himself to make a demand for money. 
“They were about to disband the army,” he 
said, ‘‘consisting of no less than twenty-eight 
legions, to whom were due great arrears of pay, 
together with deserved rewards and gratuities for 
past services. One of my colleagues,” he con- 
tinued, “is gone into Italy to provide settlements 
for this numerous army, or rather to remove all 
the inhabitants of that country, in order to make 
way for them. The task of finding supplies of 
money lies upon me, and [ am persuaded you 
will own we are very moderate, when we demand 
no more than you gave to our enemies. Neces- 
sity, however, obliges us to exact, in one year, 
what Brutus and Cassius levied in two.” “ You 
will please then to order,” said one of the audi- 
ence, “two summers and two harvests in this 
wonderful year; for you, who can command us to 
pay the tax of two years in one, can likewise order 
the fruits of both years to be gathered in one.”? 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. 2 Ibid. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V. 


Antony, who paid more regard to wit than to 
the considerations either of humanity or justice, 
was pleased with this answer, and agreed that 
the proposed subsidy should be levied in two 
years, instead of one.3 From Ephesus, he travel- 
led by the coast towards Syria, laid heavy con- 
tributions, disposed of lands and country seats, 
of which he made gifts to his retainers and fol- 
lowers. He received frequent applications for 
such favours from those who attended him, under 
pretence that the estates, which they coveted, 
were either deserted or occupied by an enemy. 
To his cook, in particular, he is said to have given 
the grant of a large possession, for having pleased 
him in the dressing of a supper. In his own be- 
haviour, he exhibited that dissipation and extra- 
vagance, to which he ever returned in the mo- 
ments of triumph and relaxation, and showed, in 
the gayety and festivity of his court, a perfect 
contrast to the melancholy with which the inha- 
bitants of every province were seized on his 
approach.4 He had probably seen Cleopatra in 
Italy, during her intimacy with Julius Cesar; 
and now, supposing himself come in place of that 
successful adventurer, as head of the empire, he 
thought of this prize as the reward of his labours, 
and possibly considered her as the principal ob- 
ject of his journey to the east. In order to 
heighten the scene of their meeting, with a farce 
to consist of a supposed quarrel and reconcilia- 
tion, he affected to believe a report of her having 
ordered her fleet from Cyprus to join that of Cas- 
sius in the late war, and he sent her a formal 
summons to meet him in Cilicia, and to give in 
her answers to this heavy charge. 

Cleopatra accordingly appeared on the Cydnus 
on board a galley, with a splendid retinue, and 
dazzled the Roman triumvir with the profusion 
of her ornaments, the elegance of her equipage, 
and the charms of her person. She was now 
about nine and twenty years of age, and be 
acquainted with the languages and manners o 
different nations, particularly instructed in the 
literature of the Greeks, and being in the matu- 
rity of wit and beauty, she joined the arts of a 
coquet, with all the accomplishments which be- 
came the birth and the high condition of a queen. 
Being invited to sup with Antony, she pleaded 
that he should begin with accepting her invita- 
tion, At their first entertainment, observing that 
his raillery savoured of the camp, she humoured 
him in this manner, and even surpassed him in 
the freedom of her conversation. 

From thenceforward Antony laid aside all 
business, followed the queen of Egypt to her 
kingdom, leaving his own provinces exposed to 
an enemy, by whom they were soon after as- 
sailed and overrun; and while this storm was 
raging in the east, and his brother, with his 
other adherents in Italy, were struggling for his 
share in the government of the empire, and 
obliged to fly or submit to his rival, he passed the 
winter at Alexandria in frolic and dissipation.$ 
To gratify the jealousy of Cleopatra, he ordered 
Arsinoë, her sister and competitor for the throne, 
who had hitherto been confined at Miletus, to be 
put to death. In every other particular, he suf- 
fered himself to be governed by her caprice, and 
with the ensigns and attendance of a Roman con- 
sul, and first officer of the state in the empire, 


3 Plut. in Antonio. 4 Ibid. 5 Ibid. 


Crap. Vv.) 


lived like a boy under the influence of his first 
amour. The course of his pleasures; however; 
was ina little time effectually interrupted, by a 
teport of the state of his affairs in Syria and the 
Lesser Asia. 

Pacorus, the son of the king of Parthia, had 
passed the Euphrates with a great army, had 
overrun Syria, and was making hasty advances 
in Cilicia. He was conducted in this expedition 
by Labienus; a Roman officer,$ who, on the part 
of Brutus and Cassius, had resided at the court 
of Parthia while the fate of the empire yet re- 
mained in suspense at Philippi, and who now 
persuaded the Parthians to attempt the conquest 
of opulent provinces in their neighbourhood, 
which, together with the Roman republic itself, 
_ were become the possession of mere adventurers, 
unacknowledged and unsupported by the laws of 
the commonwealth. 

Upon this alarm, Antony had assembled the 
naval forces of Asia and of Egypt, and had set 
sail with two hundred galleys for the coast of 
Pheenicia; when the misconduct and distress of 
his relations in Italy were reported to him, and 
showed him the necessity of directing thither the 
armament which he had fitted out against the 
Parthians, in order to re-establish his interest, 
and to save the remains of his power.’ Having 
committed the command of his forces in Asia 
therefore to Ventidius, he steered for Greece. 
Upon his arrival at Athens, he was received by 
Fulvia, whose salutations were probably less 
flattering than those to which he had been lately 
accustomed in Egypt. The husband and the 
wife, on this occasion, were mutually disposed to 
blame and to recriminate. He complained of 
the flame which had been so unseasonably raised 
m his affairs in Italy, and she of his notorious 
infidelities to her bed, and of his remissness in 
the care of his interest. She was supposed, in 
fomenting the late quarrel with Octavius, to 
have acted so much from jealousy of Cleopatra, 
as to have industriously created troubles in Italy, 
in order to hasten the return of her husband from 
Egypt. 

At Athens, Antony was likewise met by Scri- 
bonius Libo, the father-in-law of Sextus Pom- 
peius, who, under pretence of conducting his 
mother Julia in safety to her son, brought over- 
tures of an alliance, and proposals to form some 
concert for the conduct of their operations on the 
Opposite coasts of Italy against Octavius. To 
this prape however, Antony made no decisive 
reply. Iu the late partition of the empire, Italy 
was not made a part in the separate lot of any 
of the triumvirs ; but being equally open to all of 
them, Antony professed being on his way thither, 
not as an enemy of Octavius, but as his colleague 
in the government, equally interested with him- 
seif to preserve the capital of the empire undis- 
turbed. In answer to Libo, therefore, he ac- 
knowledged his obligation to Sextus Pompeius, 
for the honourable manner in which he had 
treated his relation, assured him, that if an op- 
portunity offered, he should be happy to return 
the favour; and that if he were obliged to make 
war on Octavius, he should be glad of Pompey’s 


6 Supposed to be the son of him who served under 
Julius Cesar, in the reduction of Gaul, and afterwards 
against him in the civil war. 


7 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. Plut in Antonio. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


375 


assistance; or; in case matters were accommoda- 
ted otherwise, should not neglect his interest in 
adjusting the treaty. 

Octavius being informed of this interview, 
seized the opportunity which it gave him of 
raising suspicions against Antony in the minds 
of the veterans. He published the intelligence 
he had received of his correspondence with the 
head of the Pompeian faction, and represented it 
as a ptelude to some scheme for restoring the ene- 
mies of the late Cæsar, for re-establishing the 
ancient possessors of land in Italy, and, conse- 
quently, for dispossessing the veterans of the set- 
tlements recently made in their favour. By 
spreading these reports in the army, he took 
measures to strengthen himself, in case he should 
find it necessary to refuse his colleague a free ad- 
mission into any of the ports of Italy. 

Soon after the reduction of Perusia, Calenus, 
who commanded a considerable body of Antony’s 
forces at the foot of the Alps, dying, Octavius 
repaired to the quarters of those troops, gaincd 
them over to his own interest, and, in order to 
secure their fidelity, made the necessary change 
of their officers. By these means, after he had 
supplanted the party of his rival in all the towns 
which they held in Italy, he now dispossessed 
them of the Cisalpine Gaul, for which their leader 
had so long contended against the senate. 

At the arrival of Antony in Greece, Octavius 
could muster a land force greatly superior to any 
that could be formed against him, even by the 
junction of his rival with Ahenobarbus and Sex- 
tus Pompeius; but he was so much inferior in 
shipping, that if their fleets should unite, they 
must be masters of the coast, and prevent all the 
importations by which Italy was supplied from 
abroad. T'o sow the seeds of some jealousy be- 
tween them, or to counteract the intrigues of 
Antony with Seribonius Libo and with Sextus 
Pompeius, he made offers of marriage to Scribo- 
nia, the sister of Libo, and aunt of Pompey’s 
wife; and this proposal being favourably received 
by the brother, he sent Mucia, the mother of 
Sextus Poinpeius, with an honourable retinue, to 
engage her son likewise to promote the intended 
alliance. By these means, he heped to amuse, 
or to soften, the animosity of that fainily against 
himself; or at least, by these appearances of a 
friendly correspondence with Sextus Pompeius, 
in his turn, to alarm Antony, and thus to discon- 
cert any plan which his rival, in the prospect of 
a breach with himself, might have formed fora 
coalition with the remains of the republican party. 
This marriage with Scribonia, was the second 
project of the same kind which Octavius had 
formed before the age of twenty-four, merely to 
lull the vigilance, or to blunt the animosity of his 
antagonists, while he himself continued to pursue 
his principal object with unremitting attention 
and ardour. 

Antony, in every comparison with Octavius, 
not only had the advantage of years, but was 
reckoned the better soldier; and having had the 
principal share, if not the whole honour of the 
victory at oo had great authority in the 
army, and was likely, wherever he appeared, to 
be favourably received by all the troops who had 
any where served under his command. These, 

| however, upon his approach to Italy, under vari- 
ous pretences, were sent by his crafty rival into 
| the A provinces. Lepidus too, although he 


376 


had hitherto acquiesced ın the late partition of 
the empire, by which he had been stripped of his 
equal share in the power of a triumvir; yet, as 
he was suffered to retain the title, and might 
throw his weight into the scale of either of the 
other parties, or furnish a pretence for some part 
of the army to follow him, it was thought proper, 
on the present occasion, to remove him to a dis- 
tance. For this purpose, the government of 
Africa was assigned to him, and he himself, with 
six legions of doubtful inclinations, was dismissed 
to take possession of that province. 

While Octavius was thus strengthening him- 
self in Italy, or removing every object of distrust 
from that country. Antony, with a less pacific ap- 
pearance than he had hitherto preserved, set out 
from Athens, and leaving Fulvia ill at Sicyon, 
joined at Corcyra his fleet, which had come round 
the Peloponnesus, and from thence sailed with 
two hundred galleys for the coast of Italy. He 
was joined by Ahenobarbus in his passage, and 
steered directly for Brundusium. As there 
was no declared quarrel betwixt himself and 
Octavius, he expected to be admitted into this 

ort; but being disappointed in this expectation, 
he landed at some distance from the harbour, and 
invested or blocked up the town by sea and by 
land. Having thus committed hostilities, he no 
longer hesitated in accepting the alliance of Sex- 
tus Pompeius against Octavius, and proposed to 
him to make a descent some where on the oppo- 
site coast of Italy, to distract the forces of their 
common enemy, while he himself continued the 
siege of Brundusium. 
extus Pompeius accordingly, notwithstanding 
that the marriage of his relation Scribonia with 
Octavius had taken place, not suffering himself 
to be imposed upon by this artifice, landed at 
Thurio, in the bay of Tarentum, made himself 
master of that place, and of the country from 
thence to Consentia. He, at the same time, 
sent Meenas, one of his admirals, into Sardinia, 
who got possession of that island, and gained to 
his party two legions that were stationed there. 

Octavius sent Agrippa to oppose Pompey, 
while he himself advanced for the relief of 
Brundusium, but in a manner which confirmed 
the former suspicions of his personal courage. 
Being taken ill on the march, he stopped short 
at Canusium, and suffered Brundusium to fall 
into the hands of his rival. Agrippa acted with 
more vigour; pressed upon the enemy who had 
landed near Tarentum, obliged them to abandon 
their conquests, and to take refuge in their ships. 

After Antony had got possession of Brundu- 
sium, it soon appeared that ‘this unprofitable 
quarrel was equally disagreeable to the armies 
on both sides, and each of the leaders, in order 
to exculpate himself to the troops, endeavoured 
to load his antagonist with the blame. Antony 
complained that, without any offence on his part, 
the ports of Italy had been shut up against him. 
Octavius recriminated, by alleging the corre- 
spondence of Antony with the Pompeian party, 
and excused his own conduct, in the order he 
had given to shut the port of Brundusium, al- 
leging, that this precaution was taken, not 
against Antony or the troops in his service, but 
against Ahenobarbus, one of the assassins of 
Cesar, whom Antony had engaged to make war 
upon Italy. 

In whatever manner these representations 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V 


were received, as the troops had frequent inter 
course, their mutual inclinations to peace be- 
came known to each other; and officers, who 
had access to both their leaders, made formal 
proposals to effect a reconciliation between them. 
Antony, to evince his willingness to spare the 


blood of the legions, dismissed Ahenobarbus, un- 
der pretence of employing him to execute a com- 
mission in Bithynia, and at the same time sent 
instructions to Sextus Pompeius to withdraw 
from the coast. 


In this disposition of the parties, accounts were 


received of the death of Fulvia, an event which 


greatly facilitated the negotiation for peace, as it 
gave hopes of cementing the alliance of parties 
by a family connexion. It was accordingly pro- 
posed, that the sister of Octavius, and the widow 
of Marcellus, should be married to Antony : and, 
upon this basis, a treaty was framed, including a 
new partition of the empire, by which all the 
east, from the Euphrates to Codropolis on the 
coast of Illyricum, was assigned to Antony. 
The west, from thence to the ocean and the 
British channel, was assigned to Octavius. Italy, 
as the seat of government, and the principal nur- 
sery of soldiers for the support of their armies, 
was to be equally open to both. Lepidus was 
suffered to remain in the possession of Africa. 
Ahenobarbus was included in this treaty, and 
declared at peace with the heads of the empire; 
but Sextus Pompeius, notwithstanding his late 
confederacy with Antony, and his newly con- 
tracted relation with Octavius,' was still to be 
treated as an enemy. He was to be opposed by 
Octavius, while the war with the Parthians was 
supposed sufficient to occupy the forces of An- 
tony. 

Upon the conclusion of this treaty, the leaders 
gave mutual entertainments, and the troops, re- 
leased from the unprofitable task of making war 
on each other, returned to the more agreeable 
occupation of receiving the rewards of their ser- 
vices. ‘They understood, that Antony had gone 
into Asia to raise the money, which was wanted 
to pay off their arrears, and to satisfy their claims: 
they had manifold scores, in which they stated 
the rewards and gratuities which they had been 
made to expect on different occasions, and they 
now became clamorous, in particular, for the 
sums which had been so liberally promised them 
before the battle of Philippi. The same violence 
which they had been taught to employ against 
the civil government of their country, they were 
ready at times to turn against their own leaders. 
They addressed their demands, on the present 
occasion, chiefly to Antony. From him they 
required an account of the money he had col- 
lected in Asia; and surrounding him in a mu- 
tinous manner, would not have abstained from 
violence to his person, if they had not been 
pacified by Octavius, who, having been the in- 
strument of former liberalities, had credit enough 
with the army to make them acquiesce in the 
apology which was made for the delay of their 
payment, and in the fresh assurances, which 
were now given, that all the promises which had 
been formerly made to them should be faithfully 
performed. 

All discontents for the present being suspend- 


oe 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. 
lib. v. 


c. 28. Appian. de Bell. Civ 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 877 


Crap. V.) 


éd, the legions submitted to be sent into different | Rome, although they had suffered themselves to 
quarters, and the leaders, with every appearance | be stript of their political consequence as Roman 


of a perfect reconciliation, set out for Rome. 
They made their entry into the city together, on 


horseback, and dressed in triumphal tobes; they 


were received by the people, of every rank and 
condition, with demonstrations of joy, which, un- 


der the sense of a deliverance from the prospect 


of a civil war, that had so recently threatened the 
inhabitants of Italy, was very general and very 
elncere: 


The pacific appearances, with which the joint 


sovereigns of the empire made their entry at 
Rome, were confirmed by the actual marriage 
of Antony with Octavia; and it was expected, 
taat the late rivals, now become brothers, by this 
marriage, were to govern for the future with much 
cordiality and mutual confidence. Antony, to 
evince the sincerity of this intention on his own 
part, put Manius, the confident of his brother 
and of Fulvia, to death, as being the supposed 
author of the late tunults in Italy ; and probably, 
the more fully to show how far he was willing to 
sacrifice every consideration to his present con- 
nexion, he betrayed a secret correspondence, 
which Salvidienus, an officer serving under Oc- 
tavius, had maintained with himself during the 
siege of Brundusium, This officer, in conse- 
quence of the detection, being condemned for 
treachery, killed himself.? 

Upon the faith of these public renunciations 
of all partial attachments, Octavius and Antony, 
in tue character of collegiate sovereigns, passed 
the remainder of the present year, and the whole 
of the following, at Rome, with great appearance 
of concord. ‘This circumstance was in some 
measure ascribed to the discretion of Octavia, 
who, during the same period, was delivered of a 
child to Antony, and by the birth of this new 
relation, gave an additional pledge for the con- 
tinuance of their union; but, notwithstanding 
these flattering appearances, Italy still sulfered 
under the distresses of a war, subsisting with 
those who were in possession of Sicily and Sar- 
dinia. 

Sextus Pompeius, exasperated by the treatment 
he had received from both parties in the late 
quarrel and reconciliation, and now possessed of 
a considerable naval force, blocked up the ports 
of Italy, and prevented the usual importation of 
corn. ‘The inhabitants of the towns were re- 
duced to great distress. ‘Those of the metro- 
polis, in particular, became outrageous, and, in 
contempt of the military force by which they 
were governed, rose in tumults, pulled down the 
houses of persons to whom they imputed their 
sufferings, and even attacked the triumvirs with 
reproaches and violence. Having furnished 
themselves with arms, they resisted the troops 
that were employed to quell them, and, in their 
frequent conflicts, covered the streets with the 
slain. 

The triumvirs were inclined to end these trou- 
bles, by urging with vigour the war against Pom- 
pey, in order to oblige him to open the seas; but 
for this purpose, a great reinforcement of shipping 
was necessary, and a tax was imposed, in order 
to defray the expense of a fleet. A public bur- 
den coming so unseasonably, greatly increased 
the general discontent. The inhabitants of 


2 Liviti Epitome, lib. cxxvii. 
3B 


citizens, still felt the wants of nature, and were 
provoked by exactions that affected their property; 
they took courage from the disorders of the times, 
and yentured to censure a usurpation, which 
they had not dared to resist. ‘Italy, the head 
of the empire,” they said, “long used to exemp- 
tion from all taxation, was not only torn by do- 
mestic wars, but impoverished by an extortion 
that was practised to support quarrels, not with 
foreign enemies, but with Romans, and to gratify 
the vanity or emulation of fellow-citizens, who 
exhausted all the strength of the commonwealth, 
metely to appropriate the government of it to 
themselves ; for this, so many respectable citizens 
had been proscribed ; for this, sword and famine 
were still permitted to rage, and the children of 
the first families in Rome, in order to revenge 
their personal wrongs, and even to procure their 
subsistence, were forced to act the part of ban- 
ditti and of pirates.” 

The populace of Rome, instigated by these re- 
presentations, tore down the proclamation, in 
which the new tax was imposed ; and seeming to 
recover their former consequence, though now 
under the government of inilitaty force, they be- 
came more riotous and dangerous than they had 
been in the utmost abuse of their civil liberty, and 
in the height of their democratical power. 

It became necessary, on account of the riots, 
and the growing scarcity of bread, to open a ne- 
gotiation with Sextus Pompeius, as the specdiest 
means of relief frem the present distress. Octa- 
vius once more availed limself of the relation he 
had acquired tothe family of Pompey, by his mar- 
riage with Scribonia, invited Libo to a visit in 
Italy, and by his means proposed an interview 
between the parties, to be held at Puteoli in the 
bay of Baie. 

Sextus Pompeius having agreed to this pro- 
posal, came with his flect upon the coast. An- 
tony and Octavius went to Puteoli by land, 
attended by many of the principal citizens, and a 
numerous military escort. In order that the 
parties night mect in safety, it was proposed 
that each should have a separate platform, erecte 
on piles to be driven in the sea, reaching, on the 
one side, from the shore, on the other, from Pom- 
pey’s ship, so as to bring the parties sufficientl 
near to hold their conference, though still wit 
such a space or interval between them, as might 
mutually secure them from any insult or violence, 

These preparations being made, the fleet of 
Sextus Pompeius ranged itself on the one side, 
and the land army of the triumvirs on the other. 
As the interests of all men were involved in the 
issue, theit expectations were greatly raised. The 
shores, the cliffs, the high lands were covered 
with spectators, who gazed on the scene, and 
anxiously waited for the event. At the first con- 
ference, the triumvirs offered Pompey a safe re- 
turn to Rome, with an equivalent for his father’s 
estate. He demanded admission into the trium- 
virate, instead of Lepidus, who appeared in effect 
to be already excluded. As they parted without 
any agreement, a general dissatisfaction appeared 
among their adherents and followers on both sides. 
Pompey feared the defection of many who had 
hitherto followed him; and as he had lately put 
Murcus, a principal officer of his party, to death, 
from a jealousy of this sort, he was inclined to 


378 


believe that many of his party were disposed to 
accept of any terms, and to treat for themselves, 
The distresses of Italy, on the other hand, 
strongly urged the triumvirs to make the neces- 
sary concessions; and both parties came to a se- 
cond interview, with better inclinations to adjust 
their differences. Jt was accordingly agreed, 
that Pompey should remain in possession of Si- 
cily, Sardinia, and Corsica ; that the Peloponne- 
sus should likewise be ceded to him, and a sum 
of money be paid in compensation for the losses 
of his family ;' that all the exiles now under his 
protection, except such as were concerned in the 
death of Cesar, should be restored to their coun- 


try, and to a fourth part of their former estates ;. 


that the navigation of the seas of Italy should be 
free, and vessels immediately suffered to pass 
from Sicily, and all the neighbouring countries, 
which were accustomed to supply the Italians 
with corn. 

This treaty being ratified, was transmitted to 
Rome, and committed to the keeping of vestal 
virgins. Every cause of hostility or distrust be- 
tween the parties being thus done away, their 
platforms were joined by a bridge of planks, and 
they embracel each other. ‘Those, who were 
near enough to see this signal of peace, raised a 
shout, which was returned from the multitudes 
which crowded the ships and the neighbouring 
shores. Every one took a part in the joy that 
was occasioned by the present event, as having 
suffered under the distresses and hardships which 
were now brought to an end. 

Historians, seeming to feel for those who were 
concerned in this transaction, have exerted their 

enius in describing it; and among other particu- 
ars, have recorded, that friends and relations, who 
had been long separated, being to meet in peace, 
crowded with great ardour to the strand; that 
persons who had no such particular motive, being 
seized with the general contagion, pressed to have 
a nearer view of the scene; that numbers were 
suffocated in the crowd ; that many from the boats 
and ships leapt into the sea, and waded or swam 
to land, and were met from the shore by others 
who expected to recover their relations and 
friends; that shouts of joy, or cries of despair, 
were raised, according as they were severally 
successful or disappointed in this expectation: 
that parents and children, disappointed in the 
hopes of meeting each other, tore their hair, and 
fell into agonies of grief; the whole exhibiting, 
though in a supposed termination of public cala- 
mities, a lively expression of the distress which 
the late troubles had occasioned, and striking 
marks of the wounds which were recently open, 
and bleeding in the vitals of the commonwealth, 
and in the bosom of every private house.? 

At the close of this scene, the leaders mutually 
invited each other to a feast. Pompey, by lot, 

ave the first entertainment on board his ship; 
e made an apology for the want of accommoda- 
tion, and playing on the word carina, which sig- 
nified a ship, and likewise was the name of his 


. 


1 15,500,000 drach. or denarii, about’ 500,0007. Zo- 

`“ noras, lib. x. p. 283. €. 21. : 

~~. lib. xlviii. c. 37. Appian. de Bell. Civ. 
v. i ; 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V. 


late father’s villa and garden in the suburbs of 
Rome, which were occupied by Antony, “ This,” 
he said, “is now my carine.” While the com- 
pany were yet on board, Menas, once the slave 
of the great Pompey, but now emancipated, and 
the first sea officer in the fleet of his son, whis- 
pered him, that then was the time to revenge the 
death of his father and of his brother, and to re- 
cover the rank of his family, by despatching these 
authors of all their calamities. “Let me cut the 
cable,” he said, “and put to sea; I promise you 
that none of them shall escape.” “This might 
have been done by Menas, without consulting 
me,” said Sextus; “but my faith is sacred, and 
must not be broken.” 

The guests accordingly were suffered to de- 
part, without having, in any way, been made 
sensible of the danger they ran, and they gave 
entertainments in their turns. At these feasts 
additional articles were thought of to confirm the 
treaty, and to regulate the measures of the future 
administration, To strengthen the coalition of 
parties, the daughter of Sextus Pompeius was 
betrothed to Marcellus, the nephew of Octavius, 
and now the step-son uf Antony. The succes- 
sion tu the consulate was fixed for four years. 
Antony and Libo were named consuls for the 
first year, Cæsar and Pompey were to follow, 
next Ahenobarbus and Sosius, and last ofall An- 
tony and Cesar. Under the administration of 
these last, it was supposed that the public order 
and public tranquillity might be so well restored, 
for this was the language which the triumvirs 
still affected to hold, that the republic would no 
longer need the interposition: of extraordinary 
powers, and might be left to run its usual course. 

Sextus Pompeius set sail for Sicily ; the colle- 
giate sovereigns of the empire set out on their 
return to Rome; and, in their entry to the city, 
passed through multitudes, who, on the present 
occasion, gave very sincere demonstrations of joy. 
The people flattered themselves, that they were 
now to experience no more of their late distresses 
—no more civil dissensions—no more tearing of 
the father from his family, to serve in the wars— 
no more oppression and cruelty from the licen- 
tiousness of armies—no more desertion of slaves 
—no more devastation of their lands—no more 
interruption of agriculture—no more famine. 
In the return of exiles, who lately fled from the 
swords of their fellow-citizens, but who were now 
restored to the enjoyment of peace and security, 
they might perceive, it was said, the surest evi- 
dence of a general act of oblivion for all offences, 
and a termination of all party animosities and 
disputes. . 

Octavius and Antony, during the remainder 
of their continuance together at Rome, passed 
their time in literary amusements, and in the 
fashionable pastimes of the age, cock-fighting and 
quail-fighting.2 They conducted affairs of state 
with so much concord and silence, that no pub- 
lic transaction is mentioned, besides the complet- 
ing of the aqueducts projected by Julius Cesar, 
and the celebration of the festivals, which had 
been vowed for the destruction of those who had 
couspired against his life.‘ 


3 Plutarch. in Antonio. 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 32, 33. 


Cuar., VI.) 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


379 


CHAPTER VI. 


Alarm of the Parthian Invasion of Syria—Arrangements of Octavius and Antony— Departure 
of the latter, and Residence at Athens—State of the Commonwealth—Marriage of Octavius 
with Livia— War with Sextus Pompeius—Actions near the Straits of Messina— Agrippa suc- 
ceeds to the Command of Octavius’ Fleet—His Victory at Sea—Flight of Sextus Pompeius— 


Breach between Octavius and Lepidus, 


SUCH was the state of affairs at Rome, when 
the accounts which lad been successively re- 
ceived from Syria, made the presence of Antony 
appear to be necessary in that part of the empire 
which had been specially committed to his care. 
His lieutenant Desidius Saxa, in opposing the 
Parthians under Pacorus and Labienus, had re- 
ceived a defeat, and being unable to brook his 
misfortune, had killed himself. In consequence 
of this catastrophe, the province of Syria was 
over-run by the enemy. ‘Tyre, and all the prin- 
cipal towns on the coast were already in their 
hands, and the province of Cilicia lay open to 
their inroads. 

Upon this report, Antony sent forward Ven- 
tidius, to collect such forces as yet remained in 
the province of Asia, and to give some present 
check to the immediate progress of the Parthians, 
while he himself proposed to follow, and to con- 
duct the war in person. Before his departure, 
he obtained from the senate and people the form 
of an act to confirm all the arrangements which 
the triumvirs had made respecting the revenue, 
or any other department of the state. In con- 
cert with his colleague he made up the roll of 
the senate, and marked out the succession of con- 
suls and other titular magistrates for eight years. 
In their choice of persons for these several ho- 
nours, each was careful to balance the nomina- 
tion of his rival with an equal number of his own 
dependants, clients, and persons over whom he 
had entire influence; and in this competition for 
power, they named for the offices of state mere 
aliens, soldiers of fortune, persons who had re- 
cently obtained their freedom, or confidential 
slaves manumitted for this purpose. 

These arrangements being made, Antony, at- 
tended by his wife Octavia, set out for Athens. 
Here he learned that the war in Syria was in a 
great measure at an end; that Pacorus, the son 
of the king of Parthia, with Labienus, having 
attacked Ventidius in his camp, were repulsed ; 
that their forces had been afterwards routed in 
different encounters, and dispersed ; that Pacorus 
himself was killed ;6 that Labienus had fled, in 
disguise, into Cyprus, was discovered, taken, and 
put to death; that the Parthians had abandoned 
all their conquests in Syria and in Palestine, and 
were hastening to repass the Euphrates. 

Antony, upon the termination of a war, which 
so much alarmed his division of the empire, pro- 
bably would have been inclined to return into 
Egypt; but as the presence of Octavia rendered 
a visit to Cleopatra improper, he determined to 
take his residence at Athens. From thence he 


5 One Maximus being in the nomination for the 
office of quvstor, was claimed and adjudged to be a 
slave; another person of the same condition was dis 
covered in a high Station, and, as a punishment due 
for his presumption, was thrown from the Tarpeian 
rock. Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 34 

6 Plut. in Antonio. 


distributed to his officers their several stations 
and provinces, and disposed of kingdoms on the 
frontier to princes who solicited his protection: 
that of Pontus he bestowed on Darius the son 
of Pharnaces, and grandson of Mithridates; that 
of the Jews and Samaritans, on Herod; that of 
Pysidia, on Amyntas; and that of Cilicia, on Pole- 
mon. During the winter he had dropped all the 
retinue of a Roman officer of state, resigned him- 
self to ease, domestic pleasures, and the conversa- 
tion of the learned.’ 

In the intervals of relaxation, some species of 
extravagance and dissipation ever make a part 
in the history of Antony’s life. The reports, 
however, which remain of his behaviour at 
Athens, may, in a great measure, he considered 
as a part of the reproach, which his enemies, to 
justify their own cause, have thrown upon his 
memory; and which they have been able, by be- 
coming the victorious party, to fix upon his name 
for ever. He is said, at some of his entertain- 
ments, to have personated Bacchus the young 
and irresistible conqueror of the world, and to 
have carried this extravagance so far, that the 
Athenians were encouraged to pay their court, 
by proposing a marriage between himself and 
their goddess Minerva. But to show that he 
carried some reason in his madness, he accepted 
the match, under condition that the bride should 
be accompanied with a suitable portion; and in 
this jest turned the servility of his flatterers to 
profit, by exacting ten millions of drachmas.8 

But in whatever manner Antony passed his 
supposed leisure at Athens, Octavius, whose 
conduct, on most occasions, is a manifest contrast 
to that of his colleague, did not fail to avail him- 
self of the advantages of his situation in Italy, 
the supposed head of the empire, and of the bent 
ĝf the times to monarchy, by uniting, as much as 
possible, all the channels of influence in his own 
person. 

The concerts of the first Cesar with Pompey 
and Crassus, though named a triumvirate, were 
the mere effects of a private combination to over- 
rule the public councils, and to dispose of every 
preferment, or place of emolument or trust. But 
the powers now excrcised by Octavius, Antony, 
and Lepidus, though extorted by force, had at 
least the nominal sanction of a legal appointment, 
and were of the nature of those extraordinary 
commissions which had been frequently given in 
every age of the republic, and which were not 
improperly calculated for any uncommon emer- 
gellce, or arduous state of affairs. A commission 
of triumvirate, in so great an exigency of the 
state, professedly given to restore its tranquillity, 
and re-establish public order, if it liad been freely 
granted, was well enough suited to former pre- 
cedents, and preserved the analogy of Roman 


ee 


7 Appian. de Bell. Civ. p. 714. 
& About 300,000". Dio Cass. lib xlviii c. 38 


880 


forms, insomuch, that if the people had been less 
corrupted, the government of the republic might 
have been easily restored. 

The titles of senate and people, of consul, 
prætor, and other magistrates or officers of state, 
were still retained, and preserved the appearance 
of ancient formalities, whether in the legislature, 
or in the exercise of executive power. The same 
members which formed the ancient political body 
were supposed to exist, though much debilitated, 
and sunk in disease. The senate consisted of 
persons willing to submit to, or known to favour, 
the present usurpation; such persons only were 
now to be found. ‘Those of a different descrip- 
tion had fallen in the civil wars, or perished in 
the late executions and massacres; and if they 
had still remained, would not have been suffered 
to take a part in the government of the state by 
those who, under the title of triumvirs, had en- 
grossed all its functions. Even the pretended 
comitia were no longer those overbearing con- 
ventions, in which multitudes assembled in a 
tumultuary manner, assumed the prerogatives 
of the Roman people, disposed of elections, or 
carried their own mandates into execution with 
irresistible force, This part of the republican 
constitution was become a mere name, employed 
to ratify the acts of the triumvirs, and to confirm 
their nomination of persons to office. The forms 
of their meeting, however, as well as those of the 
senate, were retained to give a sanction to deeds 
which might not be supposed of permanent au- 
thority, without the well-known initials of the 
senate and pesple of Rome.! 

As the supreme power, and the exercise of 
every public function, both at Rome and in the 
provinces, were now vested in this pretended 
com:nission, the ordinary offices of state were 
filled up merely for the sake of form, or rather 
that there might be an opportunity to oblige par- 
ticular persons in their advancement to public 
honours. The titles of pretorian and consular 
rank, retained by those who had filled those of- 
fices in the commonwealth, were come to resemble 
the titles of honour by which the nobles are dis- 
tinguished in monarchies; and men had, for some 
time, begun to covet the office, not on account 
of the power it conferred, but for the sake of the 
titte it was to leave behind, with the persons By 
whom it had once been possessed. 

For this reason the ancient denominations of 
office were not likely to be discontinued at Rome, 
even upon the establishment of monarchy. The 
regular terin of a year indeed was already no 
longer annexed to the idea of magistracy. The 
honour of having been consul or prætor for a few 
months, for a few days, or even for a few hours, 
gave the precedency that was wished for; and 
many, as soon as they had taken possession of 
the office, were removed to make way for others 
to whom the same favour was intended. 

In this manner, during the joint-residence of 
Octavius and Antony at Rome, Asinius Pollio, 
and Domitius, holding the consulate, were made 
to resign it, in order that two others might be 
admitted for a few days, of whom one was L. 
Cornelius Balbus, a native of Gades in Spain, 
and the first of his family that ever had a place 
on the rolls of the people as a citizen of Rome. 
But this new citizen had followed Julius Cesar, 


18.P.Q.R 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox V. 


and amassed a considerable fortune in his ser- 
vice. To others, the dignity of pretor and of 
edile, vacdted on purpose, was transferred for a 
few hours. These preferments gave no claim, 
as in the former times of the republic, to the 
government of provinces; they gave no influence, 
and scarcely prescribed any function in the city, 

In this general abuse of the civil institutions; 
now reduced to mere titles and forins, the tri- 
bunes of the people, by means of the stpersti- 
tious regard that was paid to their persons, still 
retained a part of their consequence; and Octa- 
vius, instead of attempting to reduce it, affected 
to revere this sacred repository of the people’s 
rights, in defence of which Julius Cesar made 
war on the senate; and instead of attempting to 
remove the defences with which these officers 
were provided against violence, he procured his 
own name to be inscribed in their list, and took 
part in a sacred character which he could not 
destroy ; in this, as in many other particulars, 
discovering an admirable discernment of the 
means that were necessary to palliate a recent 
usurpation; and seeming to profit by the experi- 
ence of his late uncle, who, after he had overcome 
every serious resistance, fell a sacrifice to trifles, 


and to the security and ostentation with which. 


he assumed the state of a monarch. 

About this tine is dated a considerable alter- 
ation made in the Roman law, by the addition 
of a rule respecting the effect of last wills. This 
rule is ascribed to Falcidius,2 one of the col- 
leagues of Octavius in the college of tribunes. 
Hitherto Roman citizens were free to bequeath 
their fortunes at pleasure, and to divide them in 
any proportion among their friends or acquaint- 
ance, whether relations or strangers; and pro- 
perty held a course in its passage, by succession, 
from one generation to another, which excluded 
no person whatever from the hopes of inheritance, 
provided he could obtain the regard of his fellow- 
citizens, As it was the practice of every testator, 
even when he had no motive for disinheriting his 
nearest relations, to give some testimony in his 
will to the merit of every friend who survived 
him, it was reckoned an honour to be mentioned 
in many wills, and persons who had not the ordi- 
nary opportunities to amass fortunes, either in 
the government of provinces, or in the farm of the 
revenues, might nevertheless become rich by an 
extensive and well-supported course of good of- 
fices in the city. ‘This practice is possibly less 
suited to monarchy, than it is to republics, and 
least of all to despotical governments, where the 
master wishes to leave no will independent of his 
own. He can awe the living, but the dying 
escape from his influence. This feeling perhaps 
already began to take place in the minds of the 
rulers at Rome, and in the minds of those who 
courted their favour; and it may have suggested 
the law of Falcidius, by which testators were 
suffered to dispose, by will, of no more than 
three fourths of their effects; the other fourth 
was assigned to the heir at law. 

While Antony yet resided at Athens, Octa- 
vius passed into Gaul on a progress to review his 
armies, and to make the proper disposition of his 
force in the provinces; and it began to appear, 
that the late treaty, which had been concluded 
with Sextus Pompeius, was no more than a 


2 Lex Falcidia. 


Crap. VL) 


temporary expedient to procure relief to the in- 
habitants of Italy from the distresses with which 
they had been lately afflicted. The articles were 
never fully performed by either party. The 
family alliance, which Octavius contracted with 
Sextus Pompeius in his marriage with Scribonia, 
hy whom he had issue, a daughter 
U. C. 715. afterwards so famous by the name 
d of Julia, was likewise, about this 
dp Claudius time, broke off to make way for 
C Norbanus his marriage with Livia, a name 
Flaceus. already mentioned, and to be often 
repeated in the subsequent parts 
of this history. 

Marriage had hitherto appeared to Octavius 
merely as the means of obtaining some political 
end; and he had already, in difficult transac- 
tions, twice availed himself of this expedient, 
although it is remarked by historians, as an evi- 
dence of his youth, that, until his marriage with 
Livia, his beard was not sufficiently grown to 
need the use of the razor. In this alliance, how- 
ever, he seems to have had a different object ; and 
was so far from being led by utility alone, that he 
not only overlooked the want of it, but likewise 

ot over many other difficulties which stood in 
is way. 

Livia Drusilla was the daughter of Livius 
Drusus, a citizen who had been in open enmity 
with Octavius and his party; and who, in de- 
spiir, after the battle of Philippi, with other 
adherents of the republic, had fallen by his own 
hands. The daughter had been married to Ti- 
berius Claudius Nero, who also was a declared 
enemy of the Cesarean faction; and who, in 
the late contest of parties in Italy, put himself at 
the head of the ejected land-holders of Campania. 
joined Lucius Antonius, and, as has been men- 
tioned on the reduction of Perusia, fled with his 
family into Sicily, where he took refuge with 
Sextus Pompeius. Being included in the treaty 
of reconciliation which was framed at Bais, he 
returned to Rome. His wife had already born 
him a son, afterwards well known by the name 
of Tiberius, and was again with child, and six 
months gone in her pregnancy, when it was pro- 

osed, that she should part from her present hus- 

and, and bring forth the child, of whom she was 
then pregnant, in the embraces of Cæsar. The 
priests being consulted on the legality of this 
marriage, desired to know, whether the preg- 
nancy of Livia was well ascertained; and being 
informed that it was certain, made answer, That 
as there could arise no doubt concerning the pa- 
rentage of her offspring, her separation from 
Tiberius Claudius, and her marriage with Octa- 
vius, were lawful. 

The change which now took place in the fa- 
mily of Octavius, by his repudiating Scribonia, 
was considered as the prelude to a war with Sex- 
tus Pompeius. Many articles of the late treaty 
had never been carried into execution. The Pe- 
Joponnesus, under pretence of the time which 
was necessary to recover some arrears that were 
said to be due to Antony in that province, had 
not, according to agreement, been delivered to 
Pompey. In justification of other infractions of 
the treaty, it was urged against him, that, con- 
trary to the faith he had given, he continued to 
augment his fleet, and suffered his cruizers to 
commit depredations on the traders of Italy. 
Some pirates being taken, and threatened with 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


381 


the torture, alleged, in their own vindication, that 
they acted under his orders. ‘The confessions of 
these men being published, with complaints and 
remonstrances, an altercation ensued that was 
likely to end in hostilities and open war. 

After these complaints had become mutual þe- 
tween Octavius and Sextus Pompeius, the rup- 
ture was hastened by the defection of Menas, 
one of Pompey’s officers, the same person who 
proposed to carry off Antony and Octavius, by 
cutting the cable while they were at dinner on 
board his master’s ship. This officer, being in- 
trusted with the command of a fleet in the ports 
of Sardinia, upon some disgust to his master, en- 
tered into a correspondence with Octavius, made 
offer of his service, and proposed to surrender the * 
island. This act of perfidy became known only 
by the acceptance and execution of the offer. 
Octavius obtained the possession of Sardinia, and 
received Menas with sixty galleys into his ser- 
vice, rewarded his treachery by employing him in 
the same rank which he possessed under Sextus 
Pompeius, and by conferring upon him the gold 
ting, the well known badge of nobility at Rome.3 

As this transaction took place while the treaty 
was yet supposed to be in force, Pompey de- 
manded that the traitor should be delivered up to 
him, and the island of Sardinia restored; but 
was answered that he himself had been the ag- 
gressor, in giving refuge to deserters and fugitive 
slaves. 

Pompey, on receiving this answer, proceeded 
to immediate hostilities.4 He sent Menecrates, 
who succeeded Menas in the chief command of 
his fleet, to the coast of Campania, with orders to 
make reprisals, and to plunder Vulturnus, and 
some other places of that neighbourhood. 

Octavius, on his part, had been some time en- 
deavouring to supply his want of shipping, had 
built some vessels in the ports of Italy, which, 
with the addition of those he received by the de- 
sertion of Menas, put him in condition to enter 
on the war with advantage. He had ordered his 
equipments at two separate stations; the one at 
Tarentum, the other on the coast of Etruria ; 
and being now to make war on Sicily, he pro- 
posed to bring his naval forces together at Rhe- 
gium, in the straits of Messina. Thither he 
likewise directed a powerful land army to march, 
in order to invade the island, and to begin the 
war, by expelling Pompey from the principal seat 
of his power. Fle himself came round to Rhe- 
gium with that division of his fleet which had been 
fitted out at Tarentum. Calvisius commanded 
the other division, and made sail from the coast 
of Etruria to the same place. 

Sextius Pompeius, having natice of this dispo- 
sition that was made to attack him, likewise di- 
vided his forces. He himself took post at Messina 
to observe Octavius, and sent Menecrates to in- 
tercept Calvisius, and to prevent the junction of 
their fleets. 

Menecrates accordingly came in sight of his 
enemy in the evening of the same day, lay that 
night under the island Ænaria, while Calvisius 
came to anchor near Cuma. Next morning, at 
break of day, both fleets got under sail; but Cal- 
visius, having orders to bring his division safe to 
the general rendezvous at Rhegium, was desirous 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. xlvjij. c. 45. Orosius. Appian, &¢. 
4 Zonaras, lib. x. c. 23. 


382 


to avoid an engagement, and kept under the 
land. Menecrates, steering the same course, 
kept abreast of the enemy, till perceiving their de- 
sign to avoid him, by tying close to the shore, he 
too stood in with the land to attack them. 

Calvisius, finding an action unavoidable, and 
thinking himself inferior in the skill of his mari- 
ners, determined to bring his ships to anchor 
under the land, where they could not be sur- 
rounded, and where his men, if attacked, having 
smooth water, might use their swords as on solid 
ground; and he accordingly formed a line close 
to the shore, turning the prow and the beak of 
his ships to the sea. 

In this vosition the squadron of Octavius re- 
ceived the shock of the enemy, and on the right, 
where Calvisius himself commanded, made a 
good defence, but in the centre, many of the 
ships were forced from their anchors, and strand- 
ed or burnt. Menecrates, in coming to engage, 
distinguished the galley of Menas, his ancient 
rival, and the traitor to their common master, 
bore down upon him, and, in the shock broke 
away the beak of his galley; but, in passing 
along his side, as the vessel brushed, lost all the 
oars of his own ship. They afterwards grappled, 
and fought till both the commanders were wound- 
ed; and Menecrates, finding himself disabled, 
and in danger of being taken, went headlong into 
the sea. His galley- instantly struck, and was 
towed off by the enemy. This event, although 
the advantage was otherwise greatly on the side 
of Pompey, dispirited the whole squadron; and 


Demochares, who succeeded Menecrates in the 


comniand of Pompey’s fleet, neglecting the ad- 
vantage he might have reaped from the situation 
and loss of the enemy, withdrew to the island 
fEnaria, and from thence, on the following day, 
set sail for Sicily. Calvisius, having endeavoured 


to repair his damage, continued his voyage, under 


the land, towards Rhegium. 

Octavius, at the same time, not knowing of 
this action, but being impatient to effect the 
junction of his fleets, made sail from Rhegium, 
and stood to the northward through the straits. 
When the greater part of the fleet had passed 
the port of Messina, he was observed by Sextus 
Pompeius, who put to sea, and attacked his rear. 
He nevertheless continued on his way through 
the gut, and would have declined an action, if it 
could have been avoided; but finding himself in 
danger of suffering an absolute defeat from the 
enemy, who, taking advantage of his course, 
pressed on his rear as in actual flight, he made 
a signal to halt; and from the same motives 
which determined Calvisius to form under the 
land, making a like disposition, he hoped, that, 
by being at anchor, his meu might engage on 
equal terms.with an enemy who were greatly su- 
perior in the management of their ships. In the 
event, however, he was much more unfortunate 
than Calvisius, and had great part of his fleet 
either stranded or burnt. He himself, while his 
ships were still engaged, left Cornificius to con- 
tinue the fight, got on shore, and with a number 
of men, who had escaped from the wrecks, took 
refuge on the neighbouring hills. 

At the approach of night, the lieutenant of 
Octavius, while the enemy still pressed upon him, 
seeing the danger of having all his ships forced 
on shore before morning, made a signal for the 
semains of the squadron to cut their cables, and 


9 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


stand out to sea. 
own galley grappled with that of Demochares, 
and having disabled her, obliged the commander 
to move into another ship. At this instant the 
other division of Octavius’s fleet, commanded by 


[Book V. 


In making this movement, his 


Calvisius, appeared to the northward ; being seen 
first from the enemy’s fieet, occasioned a sudden 


pause in the action. 


Pornpey, believing this to be a fresh enemy, 
whom, after so much loss and fatigue, he was not 
in condition to engage, took his resolution, to the 
great surprise of the squadron he had vanquished, 
to relinquish his prey, and retire to Messina. 

Cornificius again came to anchor in the place 
of action, and being joined by Calvisius, passed 
the night in taking an account of his damage, in 
saving such ships as could be got off, or in re- 
moving the baggage and stores from such as were 
ashore. Octavius, at the same time, made fires 
on the hills to assemble the stragglers who had 
escaped from the wrecks, of whom many were 
found without arms or necessaries of any sort. 

Towards morning, a gale of wind arose from the 
south, and rolled a great sea through the straits. 
It continued to blow all day and the following 
night; during which time, Menas, being an ex- 
perienced mariner, had not only originally come 
to an anchor with his division, as far as he could 
from land, but continued all night to ease his 
anchors, by plying against the wind with his 
oars. Of the rest of the fleet, such ships as were 
near the land having drove in the night, many 
perished on the rocks. At break of day the wind 
abated; but, from the effects of the storm which 
had blown in the night, the strand was covered 
with dead bodies, and with the fragments of ships. 
The vessels that were still afloat, being about one 
half of the fleet, having stopped for a little time 
to save as many as they could from the wrecks, 
set sail in a very shattered condition for Vibo. 
Here they arrived without any molestation from 
the enemy, who were contented to have remained 
in safety at Messina. Octavius himself having 
beheld the wreck of so many of his ships, took the 
route of Campania by land, and made the neces- 
sary dispositions to frustrate any attempts which 
Pompey might make on the coast. 

This summer having been spent in these un- 
decisive operations, botli parties prepared for a 
vigorous renewal of the contest in the following 
spring. Pompey himself continued to alarm the 
coast of Italy during the winter, and sent Apol- 
lophanes, one of his officers, to make a descent 

upon Africa. Octavius gave orders 

U. C. 716. to repair the loss of his ships, and to 

; recruit his land-forces. He had re- 

7 P course to the assistance of Antony, 

Gallus, T, Who had hitherto expressed a dislike 

Statilius. to the war, and was probably jealous 

of the accessions of power which Oc- 

tavius was likely to gain by the destruction of 
Sextus Pompeius. » 

Antony, however, upon this requisition from 
his colleague, set sail from Greece, and appeared 
at Tarentum with a fleet of three hundred ships, 
though still undetermined, it is supposed, which 
side he should take in the present contest. But 
Octavia, who had accompanied her husband to 
Tarentum, had the address to turn ihe scale in 
favour of her brother. She undertook to be the 
mediator of their differences, went on shore, and 
procured an amicable interview between them. 


Cuar. VI.) 


At this meeting they made an exchange of sea 
and land forces. Antony gave to Octavius a 
hundred and twenty ships, and had in return 
twenty thousand legionary soldiers. To confirm 
the removal of all their suspicions, Julia, the in- 
fant daughter of Octavius by Scribonia, was, on 
this occasion, betrothed to Antyllis, one of the 
sons of Antony by Fulvia; and the daughter 
of Antony was betrothed to Domitius. These 
schemes of alliance, projected in the infancy of 
the parties, never took effect, but were among the 
artifices with which the parents endeavoured to 
amuse each other. 

Octavius and Antony now agreed, with very 
little hesitation, that Pompey had forfeited the 
consulate, the priesthood, and all the other ad- 
vantages which had been yielded in his favour by 
the late treaty; and they made new arrange- 
ments respecting the succession to office, in 
behalf of themselves and their friends. The 
principal object in these arrangements was the 
gratifying their adherents with titles of rank. In 
the preceding year, no less that: sixty-seven per- 
sons had passed through the office of prætor. 
This dignity, as well as that of consul, was fre- 
quently, for the sake of the title, taken up and 
resigned in the same day. The office of AEdile, 
which used to be of so much consequence under 
the republic, as it gave an opportunity to court 
the favour of the people with entertainments and 
shows, being now of no value on this account, 
and being the lowest in rank, though still expen- 
sive, was generally declined.! 

The period for which the pretended commis- 
sion of the triumvirs had been granted by the 
Roman senate and people being now about to ex- 
pire, Octavius and Antony, without having re- 
course to the same form, resumed the exercise of 
their power for five years longer. And having, 
in appearance, amicably settled the several points 
in dispute between themselves, they separated in 
pursuit of their respective objects; Octavius be- 
ing intent on the war with Sextus Pompeius, 
and Antony on that with the Parthians. But, to 
the great danger of their future agreement, the 
last was no longer attended by Octavia, who had 
hitherto served as a bond of union between them, 
and had checked the jealousies and extravagances 
of her husband. She had borne him a child, and 
was again pregnant, and being unable to attend 
him in the dangers to which he was likely to be 
exposed in the Parthian war, chose to remain in 
Italy, and to fix her residence at Rome.? 

In the respect of the approaching campaign, 
Agrippa was recalled from Gaul, where he had 
been employed by Octavius in the preceding 
sumper, and during the miscarriages on the 
coast of Italy. This officer, although of mean 
extraction, rose to the highest honours which 
could, in this state of his country, be attained by 
a citizen. As he was not born to the dignity and 
pretensions of a Roman senator, he cannot be ac- 
cused, with others, of having betrayed that cha- 
racter; but coming forward amidst the ruins of 
the republic, and after the extinction of those 
virtues which were necessary to its preservation, 
he was the first person who understood and 
possessed the habits and accomplishments which 


"1 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 43—53. 
2 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. 
e. 46, d&e. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. | 


383 


are required in support of a monarchy ; submis. 
sion without servility or baseness, application, 
fidelity, and courage ; estimating honours by his 
nearness to his prince, and merit by the degree 
in which he could promote his service.? He had 
in the preceding summer obtained some victories 
on the Rhine, and was the first Roman, after 
Julius Cesar, who had passed that barrier of the 
German nations. Upon his arrival at Rome he 
might have had a triumph on account of these 


services; but preferring the respect that was due 


to his master, to the sense of his own personal 


consequence, hv said, that it did not become him 
to triumph while the affairs of Cæsar were not in 


prosperity. 
Agrippa was by his genius qualified for the 


execution of magnificent works, as well as for the 
steady and able conduct of military operations. 


Observing, that the disasters of the preceding 


year were to be imputed, in some measure, to the 


want of harbours and proper retreats for shipping 
on the western coast of Italy, he made it his first 
object to supply this defect, by opening a commu- 
nication from the sea to the Mies of Cuma, 
which were spacious basins, and when thus ren- 


dered accessible by navigable entries, might fur- 


nish every conveniency for the reception and 


construction of fleets. In describing the masonry 


which was necessary in the formation of these 
communications, mention is made of the peculiar 
advantage derived from the use of burnt earth 
taken from the neighbouring mountains; and 
which being used for sand in the composition of 
mortar, at an excellent cement for buildings 
that were to remain under water.4 

While the summer passed in the execution of 
these works, and in the equipment of a proper 
fleet to encounter that of Pompey, Menas, re- 
penting of his late desertion, entered into a cor- 
respondence with his former master; and being 
assured of pardon, withdrew with seven ships 
from the fleet of Octavius, then under the com- 
mand of Calvisius, and returned to his former 
service. Octavius took this occasion to supersede 
Calvisius, upon an imputation of neglect, and 
appointed Agrippa to succeed himin the conduct 
of the war. 

About a year was spent in the 
U. C. 717. equipment of ships, and in training 
L. Gellius the mariners, which, for the conve- 
Poplicola, nience of harbours and docks, was 
L. Munatius — 
Plancus executed as before, at two separate 
M. Cocceius stations; one at Tarentum, under 
Nerva, P. Statilius Taurus, where the ships 
Sulpicius which had been furnished by Antony 
Querinus. still remained; the other in the new 
harbour at Puteoli, under Agrippa. 

Lepidus, to second the operations of Octavius, 
had assembled his forces on the coast of Africa, 
and it was concerted that Sicily should be in- 
vaded in three places at once; at Lilybæum, the 
nearest part to Africa, by Lepidus; at Mylæ, on 
the northern side of the island, by Agrippa; and 
at Taurominium, on the eastern coast, by Stati- 
lius Taurus. It was projected, that the arma- 
ments equipped for these different services, should 
be at their places of destination as nearly as pos- 
-ible about the first of July. 


3 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 79. 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. e. 48—52. 


384 


While these preparations were making, Octa- 
vius, residing chiefly at Tarentum or at Cuma, 
left the administration of civil affairs at Rome in 
the hands of Mæcenas, who, though not vested 
with any office of magistracy, or any other pub- 
lic character besides that of a person in the confi- 
dence of his master, possessed a supreme authority. 
Octavius himself, when the plan of the war was 
ripe for execution, joined that division of his 
forces which was led by Agrippa, and sailed from 
Puteoli at the appointed time; but after he had 
crossed the bay of Baia, to the promontory of 
Minerva, he met with a storm, by which many 
of his ships were damaged, and forced to put 
back into the port he had left. 

This accident was likely to disconcert the ope- 
rations of the campaign, or to delay the invasion 
of Sicily for another season. But the complaints 
of the people of Italy, suffering under the ob- 
struction that was given by Pompey to the im- 
portation of corn, required an immediate relief. 
Some of the projected operations of the campaign 
were already begun, and required to be supported. 
Lepidus had sailed with the first division of his 
army, and had landed in the neighbourhood of 
Lilybeum, and Statilius Taurus had advanced 
from Tarentum to Leucopetre, opposite to Tau- 
rominium, the place at which he was ordered to 
make his descent. Urged by these considera- 
tions, Octavius, with such repairs as he could 
accomplish, in about thirty days after he had been 
put back into port, again put out to sea. At 
Strougylé he learnt that Pompey, with the 
greater part of his fleet, lay off Myle to guard 
that access to the island. Thinking this, there- 
fore, a favourable opportunity to push his other 
attack from Leucopetre to Taurominium, he 
himself returned to the coast of Italy, landed at 
Vibo, went from thence by land to Leucopetre, 
and put the squadron from that place in motion 
for their intended descent on Sicily. 

While Octavius was thus employed at the 
other extremity of the Straits, Agrippa had come 
to an action with Pompey’s fleet off the harbour 
of Mylz, and obliged them to put back into port 
with the loss of thirty ships.! ‘Thiscircumstance 
still farther confirmed Octavius in his intention 
to pass with his army into Sicily; and he accor- 
dingly, without meeting with any obstruction, ar- 
- rived at Taurominium, and landed his forces. 

Sextus Pompeius, in the mean time, having 
had intimation of this design, soon after the ac- 
tion at Myla, had withdrawn in the night to 
Messina; and having put fresh men on board his 
ships, steered for ‘l'aurominium, and came in 
sight of the harbour soon after the enemy had 
disembarked. By the unexpected appearance of 
a fleet much superior to his own, Octavius was 
greatly alarmed; and leaving the command of 
the forces he had just landed, to Cornificius, he 
ordered his ships to slip their cables, and make 
what sail they could to recover the harbour of 
Leucopetre. He himself went on board a small 
pinnace, in order the better to escape the pursuit 
of the enemy, and with a very few attendants 
sanded in a creek on the coast of Italy. His ships 
were dispersed, part taken, and many stranded 
on the opposite shores ; but he himself made his 
way in the night to Leucopetre, where a division 
of the army, under Messala, waited for the return 


1 Orosius, lib. vi. p. 966. 


————— OO EE 
ee ee tee a o 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox V. 


of the ships in which they were to follow the for 
mer embarkation. 

Octavius, without being disconcerted by this 
disaster, or by a consciousness of the part which 
he himself had acted, and which served to con- 
firm all the former imputations of cowardice, 
without loss of time sent immediate despatches 
to all the stations of his troops, to intimate his 
safe arrival in the camp of Messala. Before he 
shifted his wet clothes, or took any food, he made 
all the necessary arrangements ; sent a pinnace to 
Cornificius, whom he had left in the command 
of the army in Sicily, with orders to defend him 
self to the last extremity ; and another to Agrip- 
pa, with instructions to move as soon as he could, 
by sea or by land, to his relief. And he ordered 
Carinas, who with three legions lay embarked at 
Vibo, to sail without loss of time, and to join 
Agrippa at Liparé, 

While Pompey passed with his fleet along the 
coast from Messina to Taurominium, he had or- 
dered a great body of horse on the shore to keep 
pace, as nearly as possible, with the motion of 
his ships; and as they approached to Tauromi- 
nium, while he himself should block up the har- 
bour, to lay waste the country, or to restrain the 
foraging parties of the enemy. 

Cornificius, whom Octavius had left in the 
command of his forces at this place, finding him- 
self in danger of being surrounded, took his re- 
solution to depart from the coast, and, if possible, 
to join Agrippa, who, he had reason to believe, 
might by this time have effected his landing at 
Myle, on the opposite side of the island. He 
accordingly endeavoured to convey intelligence 
of his design, and requested A grippa to come for- 
ward to meet him with a proper force, and with 
the necessary supplies, to give relief to his army, 
and to favour his junction. 

The route by which Cornificius was most 
likely to avoid Pompey’s stations, led by the 
skirts of Mount Etna, and over barren tracts 
that were still covered, instead of soil, with pumice 
and lava, which had been discharged from the 
mountain, and which were not any where sup- 
plied with vegetation or water. His way over 
this species of soil lay through difficult passes, 
occupied by the natives, who either harassed his 
rear, or disputed his passage in front. But after 
having undergone great labour and distress, and 
having lost a considerable part of his army by fa- 
tigue and famine, he was met by Laronius, with 
a reinforcement of troops and supply of provisions 
from Agrippa; and, upon the appearance of this 
relief, was suffered by the enemy to continue the 
remainder of his march undisturbed. 

Thus the two separate divisions of the army 
of Octavius, with which he intended at once to 
have attacked the opposite sides of the island, 
were assembled together on the northern coast. 
Hither he himself soon after repaired, and began 
his operations by land at the head of twenty-one 
legions, twenty thousand horse, and above five 
thousand light or irregular infantry. 

Pompey was yet strong in the neighbourhood 
of Messina, or in that angle of the island which 
pointed towards Italy. The ground being rug- 
ged and mountainous in the interior parts, form- 
ing a ridge from Mount Ætna to the head of 
Pelorus, his quarters were accessible only, or 
chiefly, by the roads on the coast, leading from 
Myla on the one hand, and from Taurominium 


i 


t 


Cmar. VL] 


on the other, to Messina. Of these communica- 
tious he was still master, by means of the for- 
tresses which he possessed at Mylæ, and at Tau- 
romjnium. As he supposed that Lepidus, from 
the side of Africa, would attempt to co-operate 
with the forces of Octavius from Italy, he had 
stationed at Lilybeum a part of his flect, and a 
considerable body of troops, commanded by Plen- 
nius, to oppose the descent and advances of the 
enemy on that quarter. The officer who had 
charge of his fleet on tlis station, had suffered the 
first embarkation of Lepidus to escape and to 
effect their landing ; but being so fortunate as to 
intercept the second, he in a great measure dis- 
concerted the intended operation on that side. 

Lepidus, with that part of the army he had 
landed in Sicily, remained inactive in the neigh- 
bourhood of Lilybeum, until having accounts 
that Octavius was arrived in the island, had 
united the different divisions of his army at My- 
læ, and had obliged Sextus Pompeius to collect 
all his force in the neighbourhood of Messina, he 
supposed that the country from thence might be 
open to hin; and he accordingly, notwithstand- 
ing that Plennius, with a considerable body of 
Pompey’s forces, remained behind him at Lilly- 
beum, marched from one end of the island to 
the other; and having effected his junction with 
Octavius, they determined to press upon Pompey 
at once with their united forces both by sea and 
by land. 

In execution of this plan, Agrippa made a 
feint to land at the head of Pelorus; and having 
drawn the attention of the enemy to that quarter, 
favoured the design of Octavius, who, in the 
mean time, surprised and took the fortress of 
Mylæ. The combined army having gained this 
important advantage, continued to press upon 
Pompey, made movements which threatened to 
invest Messina, and to cut off the communications 
of his fleet and army with the country in the 
neighbourhood of that city. In order to avoid 
these inconveniences, Pompey found himself 
under a necessity to hazard a battle either by sea 
or by land, or wherever his antagonists presented 
an opportunity the most likely to procure him 
relief. He himself relied chiefly on his naval 
force; and accordingly, without seeking for any 
advantage of situation or surprise, presented him- 
self to the enemy near to Naulochus, between 
the promoutories of Mylex and Pelorus, and was 
there met by Agrippa. 

The fleets which were now to engage, con- 
sisted of about three hundred ships on each side. 
When formed in order of battle, their lines were 
nearly of equal extent. The construction of ships 
was the same, and they advanced deliberately on 
smooth water, without any circumstance that 
appeared to prognosticate the victory on either 
side. ‘The armies, at the same time, were drawn 
upon the shore, and in sight of the scene which 
was to be acted before them. After an obstinate 
fight, in which the fleet of Pompey already suf- 
fered considerably, seventeen of his ships at once 
withdrew from the action, and stood away for 
the straits of Messina. ‘T'hose that were nearest 
the land ran upon the shore, and were wrecked 
or taken; the remainder being farther at sea, and 
cut off from their own harbours, struck, and de- 
livered themselves up to the enemy. 
mine EA of the action at sea was accom- 
panied from the land ees shouts and acclama- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


385 


tions on the one side, and with silent affliction, 
or with cries of despair, on the other. Twenty- 
eight ships of Pompey’s fleet were sunk; above 
two hundred and fifty, being the whole that re- 
mained besides the seventeen that fled to Messina, 
were stranded, taken, or burnt.2 Octavius lost 
only three ships. 

Pompey perceiving the extent of his calamity, 
was seized with despair; and, without having 
given any orders in camp, made haste to Messina, 
The army he had left in the field, seeing them- 
selves deserted by their leader, went over to the 
enemy. He himself, at Messina, made a feint 
of mustering his forces as for an obstinate defence, 
He called in all the ships that any where re- 
mained on the coast, and all the forces that could . 
be found on the island. But, in the midst of 
these pretended arrangements for a vigorous re- 
sistance, he had taken a resolution to depart from 
Sicily; and having a vessel prepared for his re- 
ception, accordingly embarked, with his daughter, 
and a few persons whom he had chosen to attend 
him in his flight. 

As soon as the vessel, on board of which it was 
known Pompey had embarked, appeared under 
sail, all the ships which were then in the harbour 
put to sea, with intention to follow the same 
course; but without any orders or intimation of 
a place at which to re-assemble, in case of se- 
paration. The unfortunate leader observing, 
among the ships that followed him, some that 
were commanded by officers in whom, in the 
present state of his fortunes, he could not con- 
fide, wished to separate from them, and gave out 
that he meant to avoid the coasts; and, in order 
to deceive them in the night, extinguishing his 
lights, rowed close to the shore of Italy, and 
turning round the head-lands till he was oppo- 
site to Corcyra, he stood over for that island, 
from thence to Cephalonia, and last of all to 
Lesbos, where he landed at Mytilené, a place at 
which he had resided with his mother Cornelia, 
during the campaign between his father and the 
first Casar in Thessaly, and from whence he 
had been carried about twelve years before this 
date, to witness the catastrophe of his father’s 
fortunes on the coast of Egypt. At Mytilené, 
notwithstanding the memory of these discourag- 
ing circumstances, and the low state of his own 
affairs, he met with a hospitable reception, and 
passed the winter in humble expectation of pro- 
tection from Antony, to whose generosity he in- 
fended to commit himself. 

Octavius, in the mean time, suspecting that 
Pompey must have taken refuge in some part of 
the provinces which were in the jurisdiction of 
his colleague, was cautious not to awaken his 
jealousy by presuming to violate his sanctuary, 
or by pretending to anticipate the resolutions he 
might be inclined to take on the subject of this 
suppliant.4 

After the head of the Pompeian party had 
made so wretched an exit from Sicily, Plen- 
nius, who, soon after the departure of Lepidus 
from the neighbourhood of Lilybeum, had set 
out with six legions to join his commander, and 
who had come too late to be comprehended in 
the surrender of the army at Naulochus, threw 


2 Orosius, lib. vi. c. 18. | 
3 Appian. de Bell Civ. lib. v. 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. xlix. c. 18. 


386 


himself into Messina, more with an intention to 
obtain favourable terms. for the troops under his 
command, than: with: any hopes to retrieve the 
affairs of his master. 

At this time Lepidus being near to Messina, 
while Octavius still remained: at Naulochus, m- 
vested the place, and, without consulting: his col- 
league, granted the terms which were asked by 
Plennius, took possession of the town, and incor- 
porated the troops that had served under that 
officer with his own army. In concluding this 
treaty, and in taking the advantage of it to 
strengthen himself, without the concurrence or 
participation of Cæsar, he had earnest remon- 
strances made to him by Agrippa, who had come 
with his victorious fleet to Messina; but it soon 
after appeared that Lepidus not only thought 
himself entitled to decide im that mstance, but, 
upon the accession of strength which he now 
gained, began to form much higher pretensions. 
He now reckoned under his own standard 
twenty-two legions, with a numerous body of 
horse, and proposed not only to keep possession 
of Messina, but to claim the whole island of 
Sicily, as an appendage of his province in Africa. 
He accordingly sent detachments to secure the 
principal towns. 


Octavius, already provoked at the precipitation: 


with which Lepidus had granted a capitulation 
to the troops at Messina, without his concurrence, 
loudly complained of the measures which he took 
to appropriate the island of Sicily to himself, 
without the consent of his associates in- the em- 
pire; alleged that he had been called thither as a 
mere auxilrary, and had borne no part of the ex- 
pense incurred in the war. Lepidus, on his part, 
complained of the injustice which had: already 
been done to him in withholding Spain, his 
original lot in the partition of the provinces ; and 
said, if it were supposed that Africa and Sicily 
were more than equivalent for Spain, he was 
willing to surrender them both in exchange for 
that province. 

This dispute being likely to end in a serious 
quarrel, the ordinary intercourse between the 
two camps was discontinued, and precautions 
were taken by their respective officers, as in the 
presence of an enemy. Both armies saw with 
dislike the symptoms of an open rupture and of 
a fresh war, in which soldiers, without any pros- 
pect of advantage, even to the victors, were mutu- 
ally to imbrue their hands in blood, to decide a 
question of mere jealousy or emulation between 
their leaders. 

In comparing the character and prospects of 
the chiefs to be engaged in this quarrel, the pre- 
ference, ir the esteem of both armies, was certain- 
ly due to Octavius. To his possession of Spain 
and the two Gauls, he joined that of Italy, with 
the metropolis, or seat of the empire. He bore 
the name of Cesar, and was at the head of that 
formidable military power, which had broken the 
force of the republic, and extinguished the au- 
thority of the senate. By his means the retain- 
ers of Cæsar had obtained the preferable lots in 
the late distribution of settlements and military 
rewards. 

Lepidus, on the contrary, without any party 
attached to his person, and without any high re- 
putation, had been placed in the command of 
armies by the appointment or sufferance of others. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V. 


consisted in prostituting the dignity of prætor 
to his first usurpations in the city, was an act of 
baseness. His place from thenceforward, in the 
military arrangements which ensued, was matter 
of course, or due merely to his rank, without any 
regard to his abilities or merit. His being ad- 
mitted as a third in the present division of the 
sovereignty, proceeded solely from the mutual 
jealousies of the other two, who wished for a 
person to witness their transactions, and to hold 
some species of balance between them. In the 
choice which they made of Lepidus, his want of 
any pretensions, that could interfere with either 
in the design which they severally entertained 
of possessing the empire, was a principal recom- 
mendation. 

In this comparison, Octavius was conscious of 
a superiority, in the opinion even of the troops 
who were enlisted to serve under the command 
of his rival. He accordingly thought this a fa- 
vourable opportunity, while Antony was at a 
distance, and no enemy existing, either in Sicily 
or Italy, to avail himself of the weakness and 
incapacity of Lepidus, to strip him of his share 
in the empire, and to seize upon the province of 
Africa, and the army now in Sicily, as an acces- 
sion to his own strength. For this purpose he 
employed proper agents in the camp of Lepidus, 
gained many of his principal officers by presents, 
and by the expectation of greater rewards. Hav- 
ing much contempt for the character of their 
leader, and thinking the way sufficiently pre- 
pared for an open declaration, he presented him- 
self with a party of horse in the front of the 
camp, entered with a few attendants, as into the 
midst of his own army; and mounting an emi- 
nence, from which he might be heard by the 
crowds. that assembled around him, he complain- 
ed of the steps which had been taken by their 
general toward a rupture between the two armies, 
and expressed. his sincere desire that all differ- 
ences might be removed, without engaging in 
new scenes of blood so many valiant men who 
had deserved so well of their leaders. 

It appears that numbers of officers and soldiers 
in the camp of Lepidus were prepared for the 
part they were to act on this occasion ; they ap- 
plauded the concern which Octavius expressed 
for the armies, and declared themselves willing 
to obey his commands. Others, though not in 
the concert, followed this example, ran to their 
arms, and hastened to present Octavius with 
their colours, in token that they received him as 
their general. 

Lepidus, to whom this visit and its conse. 
quences were altogether unexpected, being roused 
by such an alarm, ran forth to the streets of the 
camp, sounded to arms; and, as many of the 
troops from mere habit obeyed his command, 
without considering who was their enemy, at- 
tacked Octavius, obliged him to repass through 
the gate at which he had entered, and to place 
himself under cover of the cavalry, who were 
waiting to receive him, and whose protection 
was now necessary to conduct him in safety to 
his own camp. 

In this manner the design of Octavius, on the 
oint of being executed, appeared to be defeated. 
ut his declaration had made too deep an im- 

pression to be so slightly removed. The doubts 


which it raised, and the choice now to be made 


The origin of his merit with Julius Cæsar, which | of a leader, was generally decided in favour of 


Cuar. VIL] 


Cæsar. The effect of this decision accordingly 
appeared in a great desertion from the camp of 
Lepidus, either then, or during the subsequent 
night. The legions, lately come over from the 
service of Sextus Pompeius, beginning to leave 
him in a body, he threw himself, with the usual 
guards of his person, in the way to stop them. 
But finding that the very body with which he 
expected to prevent this desertion joined those 
who were going over to the enemy, he mixed en- 
treaties and threats, laid hold of an ensign-staff, 
and attempted by force to stop the officer that 
was carrying it to his rival. “Dead or alive,” 
said the bearer, “you shall quit your hold.” 
The cavalry at the same time mounted their 
horses, and without leaving their ground, sent a 
message to Octavius, desiring to know, whether 
he chose that Lepidus should be secured or put 
to death? Having for answer, that Octavius had 
no design upon the life of their general, they 
moved away without any farther notice of him. 
Lepidus, seeing the desertion of his army 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


387 


retinue to attend his person, laid aside his impe 
rial robes, and, in the ordinary dress of a citizen, 
walked towards the camp and the tent of his 
rival. Multitudes followed ‘him, -to gratify their 
curiosity, in seeing what was to pass in so new 
a scene. A person who, the moment before, had 
been at the head of ‘a great army, and reputed 
a third in the sovereignty of the empire, was now, 
by the sudden desertion of his own troops, rė- 
duced to the condition of a private.man, and was 
to appear as a suppliant before an antagonist 
whom he had recently set at defiance. ‘To.com- 
plete the scene of his humiliation, in entering the 
presence of Octavius, he would have thrown 
himself on the ground, but was prevented by 
the -courtesy of his rival, who, content to strip 
him of his command, and of his personal conse- 
quence, would not accept this mark of abase- 
ment, and gave him leave to return into Italy, 
where he lived afterwards equally unobserved by 
those against whom he had been made the in- 
strument of injustice, and by those who had 


complete, and having no longer any friends or! made him their tool. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Forces of Octavius after the Acquisition of Sicily, and the Junction of the Armies of Sextus Pom- 
peius and Lepidus—Mutiny and Separation of these Forces—Arrival of Octavius at Rome— 
His Reform of the Army—Expedition of Antony against the Parthians—His Retreat— The 
Death of Sextus Pompeius—Open Breach between Octavius and Antony— Progress of Antony 
and Cleopatra towards Greece— Operations of Antony and Octavius on the Gulph of Ambracia 
— Battle of Actium—Flight of Antony—Immediate Arrangements of Octavius after his Vic- 


tory—Death of Antony—And of Cleopatra. 


IN consequence of the events which had taken 
place in Sicily, Octavius found himself at once 
at the conclusion of a hazardous war, and master 
Pac llticatccahighihad beeaversplored init, | 
whether as friends or as enemies. His ficet now 
consisted of near six hundred galleys with store- 
ships and transports; his land army of forty-five 
legions, which, though supposed to be incomplete, 
may have amounted to above two hundred thou- 
sand men. To these he joined above fifteen | 
thousand horse and twenty thousand irregular 
infantry. They had been levied for different 
masters and in different parts of the empire, were 
persons of different descriptions ; originally slaves, 
as well as freemen; natives of Spain, Sardinia, 
Sicily, and Africa, mixed with Italians and Ro- | 


man citizens; adherents of Cæsar and of Pom- 
pey, of Antony, of Octavius, or Lepidus. It was 
very difficult to dispose of an assemblage consist- 
ing of such various and discordant parts. The 
troops that came over from Sextus Pompeius or 
Lepidus were to be retatned by indulgence and 
favours, and those who had been the original 
support of Cesar’s fortunes had peculiar merits ; 
all were sensible of their ewn consequence, and 
even of a power to dispose of the empire. 
Octavius saw the necessity of separating such 
an army into different quarters before any cabals 
should be formed, and before any mutinous spi- 
rits had leisure to work on their minds, or to fill 
them with dangerous hopes or pretensions. ‘That 
they might part in good humour, he made a dis- 


for recent services; and promised a great deai 
more. But what he now gave appeared to be 
contemptible, when compared with the reward 
which had been formerly given at Mutina and at 
Philippi, and still more, when compared with the 
settlements lately made for the veterans of Cæsar 
in Italy. These were minutely recorded, as the 
standard by which every legion had formed its 
expectations; and a gencral dissatisfaction was 
apparent in every rank and description of men. 
Octavius for some time affected to be ignorant of 
their discontent, and would have proceeded to 
make the arrangements he had planned for sepa- 
rating them, and for placing the legions in quar- 
ters remote from each other; but he had ‘Treason 
to doubt that his orders would not be obeyed, and 
still remained in suspense. When his'knowledge 
of the mutinous spirit that prevailed in the army 
could no longer be dissembled, he endeavoured to 
soothe ‘the most ‘clamorous by edditional marks 
of his favour, consisting chiefly of public honours, 
badges of military service tothe men, and tlie title 
of senators bestowed on many of the officers. In 
distributing these favours, he asseinbled the army, 
and made a speech, setting forth the nature of 
the honours which he now conferred, and his 
farther intentions respecting the rewards which 
he meant to bestow. “ These are baubles,” said 
a tribune named Offilius, interrupting him ; “ chil- 
dren only are amused in this manner ;! but men 


1 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. Dio. Cass. lib. xlix. 


tribution of some money, in token of his gratitude | c. 13, 14. 


388 


who have exposed themselves in the services of 
their general, expect to be rewarded with lands 
and settlements.” This tribune was seconded 
by the clamours of the whole army. Octavius 
retired from the audience in some disorder; and, 
sensible of the danger to which he had exposed 
himself, from this time forward never ventured to 
meet these troops in a body, but employed secret 
arts in removing the heads of the mutiny. 

The tribune Offilius, who had dared to inter- 
rupt his oe in such mutinous terms, whether 
won by favour, or taken off by violence, was se- 
cretly disposed of. The legions who had served 
at Mutina and Philippi, amounting to twenty 
thousand men,! were separately appeased by do- 
nations and promises; were prevailed upon to 
accept of their discharge from the service, and, 
without any farther disturbance, to depart from 
the island. 

When this party of the army was removed, 
Octavius affected to consider those who were 
gone as the sole cause of the late discontents, and 
the guilty, he said, being thus separated from the 
innocent and from the deserving, he made an ad- 
ditional present in money to those who remained, 
and held out the hopes of convenient settlements, 
and of plentiful fortunes, at the final expiration 
of their time in the service. By these artifices, 
and prudent measures, he efiected the proposed 
separation, and extricated himself from a danger 
which frequently arises in the sequel of civil wars, 
and threatens the victor with an overthrow, from 
that very engine which he had employed to raise 
his fortunes. 

Octavius, before his departure from Sicily, or- 
dered a contribution to be levied of sixteen hun- 
dred talents ;? and being no way disposed to follow 
out the plan of Lepidus, in the annexation of 
Sicily to the province of Africa, he appointed 
separate governors to each. Having dismissed 
the ships which Antony had furnished in the 
war, with instructions to wait at Tarentum for 
the orders of their own superior, he himself passed 
into Italy. 

The messengers who had been sent with ac- 
counts of the victories obtained by Octavius in 
Sicily being arrived before him at Rome, all ranks 
of men vied with each other in the applause 
which they bestowed on his conduct, and in cele- 
brating the occasion with demonstrations of joy. 
In the name of the senate and people, who had 
no longer any real political concessions to make, 
a variety of flattering proclamations were issued, 
ordering, in honour of the victor, statues, trium- 
phal arches, processions, wreaths of laurel, anni- 
versary rejoicings, and immediate thanksgivings 
to be prolonged beyond any former time assigned 
to such festivals. When he approached to the 
city, multitudes of every rank, adorned with chap- 
lets, went forth to receive him, and conducted 
him in solemn procession to the temple, in which 
he was to perform the sacrifice of thanksgiving 
for his safe return. 

Octavius, on the day after his arrival, pro- 
claimed the peace which was obtained by the re- 
duction of Sicily ; and in two separate harangues, 
of which he gave copies in writing, one addressed 
to the senate, the other to the people, lie gave an 
account of his whole conduct, from the time that 
he first assumed the administration of the govern- 


1 Orosius, lib. v1. 2 About 175,0007. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V. 


ment, to the present time. And, agreeably to 
the dictates ofthat masterly judgment with which 
he now, at least, began to conduct the interests 
of his ambition, he chose this time of victory and 
prosperity in which to exhibit the effects of his 
clemency, of his moderation, and of his disposi- 
tion to spare those who, being supposed disaf- 
fected to him, were now in his power. He 
remitted all the arrears of taxes that were any 
where due within his jurisdiction, either by 
farmers of the revenue or by private persons. Of 
the honours that were decreed to himself he made 
choice of a few, and declined such as were in any 
degree invidious and burdensome to the people. 

The inhabitants of Italy, and Roman citizens 
in general, having, among other evils, suffered 
greatly during the civil war, by the desertion of 
their slaves, who were readily received, and taken 
into the levies that were continually forming by 
different parties; Octavius took this opportunity, 
as far as it was in his power, at once to repair 
the loss which had been sustained by the master 
in the desertion of his slave, and to purge the ar- 
my of a dangerous class of men, by whom it was 
overcharged and contaminated. In order to re- 
move them in a manner that should prevent any 
disturbance on their part, he sent to every legion 
a sealed order, to be opened on a certain day, 
bearing, that all who had been in the condition 
of slaves should be secured; that as many as 
were claimed should be restored to their masters; 
and that the remainder should be put to death. 
According to this order, it was reported that 
thirty thousand were remitted to servitude, and 
six thousand killed.’ 

The author of this severe, but well concerted 
reform, now in the twenty-eighth year of his age, 
had, by accommodating himself, on every occa- 
sion, to his circumstances, and by successively 
availing himself of the support of different parties, 
more especially by courting the military retainers 
of his late uncle, set himself above the civil con- 
stitution of his country; and now, by affecting a 
regard to property, to civil rank, and to the peace 
of his fellow-citizens, he was about to make the 
army itself dependent on his will. From the real 
impression which he made by this policy, as well 
as from adulation and fear, the people were still 
farther incited to load him with public honours, 
and had his effigy carried at Rome, and in every 
country-town of Italy, among the idols of the 
tutelar gods. 

The advantage now gained by Octavius, in 
the acquisition of armies and provinces lately be- 
longing to Lepidus, were sufficient to have 
alarmed the jealousy of his remaining colleague 
and rival in the empire, if he had not been en- 
gaged, at this time, in a very hazardous enter- 
prise beyond the frontier of his own province. 

Antony during his stay in Italy or Greece, 
while he was chiefly attentive to the event of af- 
fairs in the western provinces, had entrusted the 
Parthian war to his lieutenant Ventidius. This 
officer acquitted himself with great honour in 
the discharge of his trust, recovered the province 
of Syria, which had been overrun by the Par- 
thians, and drove them back beyond the Euphra- 
tes. Upon this account, he was judged worthy 
of a triumph, and came into Italy to receive this 
honour. 


3 Orosius, lib. vi.c. 18 


Cuar. VIL} 


In the mean time, Antony was eager to gather 
the laurels waich yet remained in this field, or 
was supposed to be jealous of the victories gained 
by his lieutenant over an enemy, who, till then, 
scarcely had yielded any advantage to the Roman 
arms. After his last visit to Italy, he had in the 
winter passed to Corcyra, and so far was attended 
by Octavia, but parted with her there, in the 
prospect of this arduous service; carly in the 
spring he continued his voyage. Upon his arri- 
val in Asia, notwithstanding the respect that was 
due to his alliance with Octavia and her brother, 
it soon appeared that he was still under the do- 
minion of former passions. He already had two 
children by the queen of Egypt, who were named 
Alexander and Cleopatra, but whom the mother 
likewise distinguished, by the pompous appella- 
tions of the Sun andthe Moon. Being prevented 
by the urgency of the service, at this season, from 
inaking a visit at Alexandria, he sent an officer 
of rank, Fonteius Capito, thither, to conduct 
Cleopatra from her own kingdom into Syria ; and 
having received her in that province, in his way 
to the Euphrates, among other marks of his libe- 
rality, and of his passion, instead of trinkets and 
tokens of love, he made her a present of Pheeni- 
cia, Ceelesyria, Cyprus, and some part of Cilicia 
to be annexed to her kingdom. It was concerted 
between them, that at the end of the campaign 
he should pass the winter in Egypt; and they 
parted with mutual expressions of impatience for 
the return of this happy season. 

The army, now mustered by Antony, con- 
sisted of sixty thousand Roman infantry, ten 
thousand Spanish and Gaulish cavalry, thirty 
thousand irregulars, being an assemblage of horse 
and foot, and of different nations. While he ad- 
vanced with this force towards the Euphrates, he 
made his demand, that the Parthians should re- 
store the captives and military ensigns taken with 
Crassus.4 This was become a point of national 
honour among the Romans, and, joined to the 
late provocation, was made the ground of the 
present quarrel. 

The Roman general had undertaken this in- 
vasion of the Parthians, in concert with the king 
of Armenia; and finding, at his arrival on the 
Euphrates, all the passages of the river, coutrary 
to his expectation, strongly guarded, he continued 
his march, having the Euphrates on his right. 
When he arrived in the ae Armenia, the 
season was too far advanced to effect the service 
he had planned against the Parthians; but hav- 
ing intelligence that the Medes, or people of the 
Greater Armenia, had joined the enemy against 
him in the preceding part of the war, he formed 
a design on Praaspa or Phraata,5 the capital of 
their country ; in expectation of taking this place 
by surprise, he passed the Euphrates, leaving his 
heavy baggage and engines, with a guard of two 
legions, under the command of Statianus. With 
the remainder of the army he penctrated into the 
kingdom of the Greater Armenia, and presented 
himself at the gates of the capital. 

This was a place of great strength, and every 
necessary precaution had been taken for its safety. 
Antony found that it could not be taken by 
assault, and the Parthians, although they hasten- 
ed to its relief, knowing that the Roman army 


4 Plut.in Antonio. 
5 ibid. Dio. Cass. lib. xlix. c. 26, 27, 28. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


389 


had come altogether unprepared for a siege, suf- 
fered them at first to remain before it undisturbed. 
They directed their whole force against Sta 
tianus, whom, with the two legions he com 
manded, they surprised and cut off, and by this 
means made themselves masters of all the equi- 
page and baggage of the Roman army. 

Antony, upon the first alarm of the enemy’s 
intention to attack Statianus, having left the 
greater part of his forces before Praaspa, marched 
with a strong detachment to support him; but 
coming tvo late, found the field covered with the 
slain of the Roman legions, without either friend 
or enemy in sight. He understood that Arta- 
vasdes, the king of Armenia, to whose alliance 
he trusted in the present war, had remained an 
unconcerned spectator of this disaster, and he 
made no doubt that he was betrayed by this 
prince ; but thought proper for the present todis- 
guise his resentment. The loss he had sustained 
made it necessary for him to think of extricating 
his army from its present situation. Being alarmed 
for the safety of that part of it which he had left 
before Praaspa, he, with hasty marches, returned 
to its relief; but, at his arrival, finding no enemy 
near, and still flattering himself that the town 
might be obliged to surrender, and that it might, 
by its spoils, make up for the loss of his baggage, 
he lay before it, until he had exhausted all the 
provisions and forage that was to be found in the 
neighbouring country ; and, in proportion as the 
other difticulties of his situation increased, began 
to feel himself harassed with the sallies of a pow- 
erful garrison, and the frequent attacks of nume- 
rous parties of Parthians in the field, who began 
to act against him from every quarter, and made 
it equally difficult for him to decamp, or to sub- 
sist on his present ground. 

Under these difficulties, the Roman general 
was frequently obliged to divide his forces; and 
leaving part to awe the town, marched with the 
remainder to cover his foragers, and the providers 
of his camp. As the enemy pressed upon him, 
in order to diminish the range from which he re- 
ceived his provisions, he saw the necessity of 
hazarding a battle; and for this purpose, marched 
from his camp with ten legions, three pretorian 
cohorts, and all his cavalry. The Parthians af 
fected to abide his attack, but gave way at the 
first onset, and fled with every appearance of 
rout and confusion; they were pursued by the 
Roman infantry for fifty stadia, or about six 
miles, and by the cavalry over a hundred and 
fifty stadia, or about eighteen miles. 

In this action, Antony flattered himself that 
he had put an end to his troubles from the Par- 
thians ; but, on numbering the prisoners and the 
slain, he found that only eighty of the enemy 
were killed, and thirty mu and, on returning 
to his camp before the town of Praaspa, he found, 
that without being at all disconcerted by what 
had happened to them, they were returned to 
their former stations, and took measures, as be- 
fore, to harass his camp, and to circumscribe his 
foraging parties. From this specimen of a vic- 
tory over the Parthians, he learned to despair of 
being able to gain any advantage over an enemy, 
whose defeats were more pernicious to their an- 
tagonists than they were to themselves.6 To 


6 Among the Romans who were seized with the 
passion of making ouflensive war on the Parthians, 


390 


complete his mortifications, he found that the 

arrison of Praaspa had made a powerful sally in 

is absence, driven his guards from their ap- 
proaches, and destroyed all the works he had 
constructed against the town! Judging it vain 
to renew his attack, or to remain any longer in 
his present situation, he sent a deputation to 
Phraates, probably rather to conceal his intended 
purpose of flight, than with hopes to obtain any 
reasonable terms of peace. 

The king of Parthia received the message of 
Antony, seated on a golden throne, and holding 
in his hand a bended bow, the emblem of war. 
In order to sound the intentions of the Roman 
general, he proposed, as a preliminary to peace, 
that he should raise the siege of Praaspa. An- 
tony was prepared to decamp, as soon as his mes- 
sengers should be out of the hands of the enemy, 
but affected reluctance in agreeing to this condi- 
tion, hoping that by these means he might con- 
ceal his intention, gain a few marches a-head, 
and reach the frontier of the Lesser Armenia, 
before the Parthians could take any advantage of 
his flight ; but the king being equally refined in 
his artifices, perceived, in the affected reluctance 
of Antony to agree to what he knew to be neces- 
sary, an intention to fly, without waiting the re- 
sult of a treaty, and, in this apprehension, he had 
his cavalry already prepared to pursue him, dis- 
Paii every pass, hung upon his rear and upon 

is flanks, occupied the springs of water, and 
laid waste the country before him. 

Many of the Roman army, overcome by fa- 
mine and fatigue, expired on the march; others 
had laid down their arms, and submitted to the 
enemy. But those who had surrendered them- 
selves, being cruelly treated, served, by their 
example, to check the inclination of others to sue 
for quarter, and taught the soldier to look for 
safety only in perseverance, and in the use of his 
arms. Antony himself, in every encounter, was 
prepared for the last extremity, and had a person 
retained, with orders, in case of his being likely 
to fall into the enemy’s hands, to end his life; or, 
in case he were killed in battle, to disfigure his 
body, that it might not be known. But he pass- 


Julius Cæsar is mentioned. And it is a problem, 
which never can be solved, in what manner this able 
statesman and warrior would have acquitted himself in 
so arduous a task. The Parthians had their haunts 
beyond the Tigris; and besides leaving no means on 
the frontier, by which an enemy could subsist in ap- 
proaching them, probably presented no hold by which 
they could be seized, even in their own country. As 
they had no ground which it was absolutely necessary 
for them to defend, so there was no ground on which 
an invader could be secure from their attacks. They 
gave way while an enemy advanced, and reckoned it 
an advantage to draw him far from his resources and 
supports. They waited with patience, till time, hard- 
ships, disease, or want of provisions had rendered him 
an easy prey, or ripe for destruction; and they then 
pressed upon him with a ferocity and ardour, which 
abundantly corrected any belief of their cowardice 
that might have been taken from their manner of re- 
ceiving his first attacks. 

If Cesar had not already conceived some new or un- 
common means of reducing them, it is probable, that 
his first observations would have satisfied him, that 
he could not conquer such a people, although he might, 
in time, have settled a new nation on the Tigris to 
supplant them; and it is probable that he would have 
availed himself of some of their ordinary flights, to lay 
claim to a victory, and thus, with more ability than 
others of his countrymen, finish the war with a tri- 
umph at Rome. 

1 Plat. in Antonio. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox V. 


ed through all these difficulties, as usual, with 
uncommon constancy and valour, making, in 
twenty-one days, a march of three hundred miles,? 
under a continual attack of the enemy, in which 
it is reckoned that his army was eighteen times 
engaged in battle.3 At the end of this march, in 
reviewing the legions, with which he began to 
retreat, it was found, he had lost about a fourth 
of their number ;4 or, as Plutarch states his loss, 
twenty thousand foot, and four thousand horse. 

It appears that Antony, upon his arrival in 
the Lesser Armenia, left a considerable body be- 
hind him in that country, to check the farther 
pursuit of the enemy,’ and with the remainder of 
the army, proceeding from thence with great pre- 
cipitation, and under great hardships trom the 
season, by which he added eight thousand men 
more to his former losses, he arrived at Comi, a 
small sea-port, between Berytus and Sidon, on 

the coast of Syria. At this place, 

U. C. 718. he was received by Cleopatra on 

_.... board her fleet, and with her effected 

foul oer cits his passage by sea to Alexandria, 

peius. where he endeavoured to conceal 

his losses, and to efface the memory 

of his sufferings in the midst of dissipation and 
pleasure. 

During the dependence of these events, the 
state of the war in Asia had been variously re- 
ported in the western parts of the empire. It 
was believed for some time, that the Roman 
army in Armenia, with its leader, had perished. 
On this supposition, Sextus Pompeius, who still 
remained in the island of Lesbos, began to re- 
sume his pretensions. He was not without hopes, 
that on the demise of Antony, the armies of Asia 
might declare for himself, and during some time, 
affected to receive every person who repaired to 
him, as the head of a party that was still of some 
consideration in the empire. He even proceeded 
to solicit the alliance of all the princes of the east, 
from Thrace to Pontus, and the banks of the 
Euphrates.6 But upon the report of Antony’s 
return into Syria, he laid aside his ambitious 
thoughts, and sent a message to sue for protec- 
tion. Among other particulars, he set forth, that 
he had committed himself to the justice and cle- 
mency of Antony, not from despair, or from any 
sudden impulse whatever, but from previous 
thought and mature deliberation. He might 
have had a safe retreat, and a powerful support, 
he said, in Spain, where the friends of his father 
were yet numerous, and full of zeal; but from a 
thorough conviction, that the interests of Antony 
were the same with his own, he had preferred 
his alliance to any other. “Octavius,” he con- 
tinued, “ will soon have the same quarrel with 
you, that he has lately had with me, and after- 
wards with Lepidus. He considers the empire 
as his property, and cannot endure a partner. 
His open force is not so dangerous, as the insi- 
dious professions, and the artful disguises with 
which he hides his designs. I make you an offer 
of a friendship that is sincere,.and of a faith that 
is yet unbroken. I made you the same offer while 
I was master of Sicily and Sardinia, and in the 
height of my fortune. By accepting of it, you 


——— TTF 0800000 OOO 


2 Liv. Epitome, lib. exxix, &c. 

3 Plut. in Antonio. 4 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 82 
5 Dio. Cass. lib. xlix. c. 30. 

G Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. və 


Cuar. VIL] 


will save the remains of a family, yet respected 
by the Roman people, and, by joining with me, 
you will gain the accession of a party, whom 
even adversity has not made to abandon their 
leader.” 

While Sextus Pompeius addressed himself to 
Antony in these terms, he endeavoured to pre- 
serve the appearance of an armed force, and ho- 
vered about with some ships on the coast of Ionia. 
Being pursued by Titius, who had orders from 
Antony to observe his motions, he sailed up the 
Propontis, and put into the harbour of Nicome- 
dia. Here he again offered to negotiate ;7 but 
being told that he must surrender at discretion, 
he set fire to his ships, and attempted to escape 
by land. Having got into Phrygia, he was taken 
ın his flight, and soon after, by order of Antony, 
was put to death. 

This event being known at Rome, Octavius 
ordered public rejoicings. Among these was a 
solemn procession, led by two carriages or chariots 
of state; in one of them Octavius himself appear- 
ed; by the other, he marked the place that was 
due to Antony. Still farther, to soothe the 
jealousy of his colleague in the empire, he gave 
orders that a statue should be erected to him in 
the temple of Concord, aud that he should have a 
share in the honours which had been recently 
decreed to himself. This indecent triumph over 
the last of a family, which had been so long in 
high estimation at Rome, was far from being ac- 
ceptable to the people. ‘The misfortunes of the 
young man himself, who from his earliest years 
had been an exile, and stript of his inheritance, 
the memory of his father and of the republic, 
filled the minds of men with secret indignation, 
and with a tender melancholy which they could 
not disguise; and though Octavius himself es- 
caped on this occasion without any public insult, 
yet Titius some time afterwards exhibiting public 
shows in the theatre of the great Pompey, was, 
on account of the part whichile had taken in the 
murder of the son, driven from thence by the 
execrations of the people.’ 

The forces of the empire were now parcelled 
in two separate lots, under the direction of mas- 
ters, who were soon to entertain the views and 
the jealousies of separate monarchs. Octavius 
was become the sovereign of Rome, and occupied 
chiefly in removing obstructions to his govern- 
ment, and in consolidating the arrangements he 
had made in the state. He had taken measures 
to repress many disorders, the dregs of the civil 
wars, which still afflicted the city and the con- 
tiguous provinces. He had brought his armies 
under tolerable discipline, and even in a great 
measure reconciled the people to the loss of their 
political consequence, and of their liberties. He 
took care to destroy, with much ostentation, all 
papers and records from which those, who had 
acted against himself, might fear being drawn 
into trouble. He retained the usual names, and 
the forms of office; and wherever he himself was 
to exercise any uncommon power, he talked of 
it as a mere temporary expedient to obviate the 
disorders of the times, and spoke of his inten- 
tion, in concert with Antony, to discontinue 
every irregular mode of administration, as soon 
as the war with the Parthians should be brought 


7 Dio. Cass. lib. xlviii. c. 18. 
8 Vell. Pater. lib ii. c. 79. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


tion of a desire to conceal what she felt. 


39t 


to a period. He even sent Bibulus into the east, 
with open and public instructions to concert with 
his colleague, the manner and time of their resig- 
nation.’ 

But Antony, acting as sovereign of the eastern 
empire, appeared on his part to be altogether in- 
tent on the entertainments of the court at Alex- 
andria, on the renewal of the war which he 
affected to meditate against the Parthians, or on 
his project against Artavasdes, the king of the 
Lesser Armenia, who he thought had betrayed 
him in his late expedition. He was encouraged 
in his designs on that quarter, by the offers of a 
league, which were made to him from the king 
of Medea, who thinking his services, during the 
late invasion, ill requited by the Parthians, was 
now disposed to take arms against them. 

Antony having accepted of this alliance, formed 
the project of a new invasion of Armenia, chiefly 
intent on his design to get the person of Arta- 
vasdes into his power; but he was, for one sea- 
son, diverted from the execution of his purpose, 
by an incident, which brought into the scale of 
public councils the weight of passions and of mo- 
tives at all times powerful; and at a time when 
the world was to be governed by the humours 
of a few persons, scarcely to be balanced by any 
other consideration whatever. 

Octavia was become impatient of the neglect 
with which she was treated by her husband, and 
jealous of the preference which he gave to Cleo- 
patra. Hearing that he was to leave Alexandria 
on a new Parthian expedition, she determined to 
place herself in his way as he passed through 
Syria. To enhance the pleasure of their meet- 
ing, she was furnished with a variety of presents, 
and, among the rest, attended by a body of two 
thousand chosen men, clothed and accoutred in 
the manner of the pretorian bands, which had 
been formed by her brother for the guard of his 
own person, and which he now sent as a token 
of friendship to Antony. She was arrived in 
Greece with this attendance when her intention 
became known in Egypt.!° 

On hearing of this journey of Octavia, Cleo- 
patra being greatly alarmed, had the address to 
appear sunk under a weight of affliction, which 
she affected to bear with fortitude; but was 
sometimes surprised in tears, which she endea- 
voured to dry up, and either increased the an- 
guish of real passion, or gave more appearance 
of sincerity to her dissimulation, by her affecta- 
Her 
health, in appearance, declined, and it was whis- 
pered, that her life was in danger. She herself 
continued obstinate in her silence; but her con- 
fidents insinuated that the fear of losing Antony 
was the cause of her distress, and that the day he 
left Alexandria, would probably be the last of her 
life. Thus, with a mixture probably of artifice 
and real passion, not uncommon in cases of this 
sort, the Queen of Egypt had the address to re- 
tain Antony at Alexandria, and prevailed on 
him to send a peremptory order to Octavia, not 
to advance in her intended progress to the east. 
He excused himself at the same time, from even 
excepting the presents which she brought from 
her brother.!! 


9 Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. 
10 Dio. Cass. lib. xxxiii. Plut.in Antonio. 
11 Ibid. 


393, 
Upon the return of Octavia to Rome, under 
all the circumstances of this affront, her brother 
proposed that she should renounce her connec- 
tion with Antony, and remove from his house; 
but if in this he wished her to act from resent- 
ment, her own conduct, though proceeding from 
a different motive, was better calculated to unite 
the people in avenging her quarrel. Being will- 
ing to await the return of her husband’s inclina- 
tions, she remained at the head of his family, 
continued to manage his affairs, and acted in 
every particular as the mother of his children, 
even of those by a former marriage, and under- 
took the protection of such adherents and friends 
as came to solicit their affairs in the capitol.! 

The unworthy treatment which Octavia re- 
ceived in return for so much duty, as it interested 
the public in her favour, so it gave an immediate 
prospect of a breach between the leaders, who 
now divided the empire. Antony and Octavius 
had been rivals for the succession of Cesar’s 
power, had frequent quarrels, which were sus- 
pended from time to time by apparent and am- 
biguous reconciliations. Even the marriage of 
Octavia was no more than a mere expedient to 
put off to a more convenient time a final breach, 
which, between parties of sach opposite preten- 
sions, must in the end be deemed unavoidable. 

It is probable that Octavius, in all the vicissi- 
tudes of his connection with Antony, or with any 
other party, had never lost sight of the expecta- 
tions he had formed from his earliest youth, not 
only as the heir of Julius Cesar, but as the suc- 
cessor likewise to his power in the common- 
wealth. He united or broke with different par- 
ties, according to the state of his affairs, and 
procured these breaches or coalitions in the pre- 
cise conjunctures that were most favourable to 
himself. He at one time joined with the senate, 
and the assassins of his uncle, to pull down the 
power of Antony; he afterwards jomed with 
Antony to reduce the senate, and to destroy the 
republic. He courted Antony occasionally, to 
prevent his forming any dangerous combination 
with Sextus Pompeius or with Lepidus, and, in 
general, kept terms with him, while either of 
these leaders continued to be formidable, or could 
cast the balance by uniting against him. 

This refined politician, upon becoming sole 
master of Italy, and of the western provinces, 
was now better enabled, than formerly, to brave 
the power of his remaining competitor in the em- 
pire; and he prepared for the contest, which 
could not be long avoided. He had greatly re- 
duced his military establishment, by purging his 
armies of improper subjects, not only the armies 
which had come over to him from his antago- 
nists, Sextus Pompeius and Lepidus, but those 
likewise which had been levied in common be- 
tween Antony and himself. But even, after he 
had thus dismissed such as were of deubtful 
faith, and reduced his establishment to that mea- 
sure which he wished to maintain, he had still 
remaining a greater number than his present oc- 
casions seemed to require, and he sought for pre- 
tences, under which, in the present state of tran- 
quillity to which his division of the empire was 
reduced, he might avoid giving any alarm to his 
rival, and justify his maintaining so great a mili- 
tary force. For this purpose probably it was, 


1 Plut. in Antonio. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


that he formed the project of a war first in 
Africa, in the execution of which, he actually 
passed into Sicily; and being there some time 
detained by contrary winds, he changed his ob- 
ject, and sent the army destined for Africa to the 
opposite side of Italy, beyond the Hadriatic, to 
make war on the Japydes, Savi, Pannonii, and 
other nations on the side of Illyricum, who were 
more likely than the Africans to furnish his 
troops with the experience of real service, as well 
as himself with a plausible pretence for keepin 
them on foot. ‘They accordingly penetrated, Ł 
his orders, beyond the frontier of the empire ct 
that side, and were employed to gather laurels 
at the expense of the barbarians, by whom, he 
alleged, that his provinces had been often infested. 
In the mean while, according to 
U. C. 719. the arrangements that were made 
L. Scribonius T¢!ating to the succession of consuls, 
5 ORUS : ° 
Libo,M.Anto- Antony was elected into this office, 
nius absens. and though not present in person on 


L. Sempre- the first of January, had his name 
A “4tratt- entered on the record. In accepting 
Ex Kal Juli; Of this nomination, he meant no 
Paul. Æmi- more than to ascertain his right to 
lius, C. Me- dispose of the cousulate, and had 
(sh ee given a commission, by which, on 
M Heren. the very day of his admission, he 
nius. vacated the office in favour of an- 


other, and brought forward a number 
of his friends in the course of the year. 
wished by these means to make known, that 
although Octavius was pleased to occupy the 
seats of government; yet he was not to engross 
for his friends and retainers the ordinary honours 
that were enjoyed in the state. 

Octavius, probably, treading as nearly as he 
could in the steps of his late uncle, still sought 
for occasions to keep his armies in service; and 
although he was not inclined to make war abroad, 
or make new acquisitions of territory to the em- 
pire, yet he affected to have many designs which 
required the possession of a military force. 
Among these, he projected an enterprise for the 
reduction of Britain, made the necessary prepa- 
rations, and proceeded himself to the northern 
parts of Gaul. Here, however, his attention was 
again diverted to a different quarter. Having 
an army employed on the side of Illyricum, in 
separate divisions, under Agrippa and other offi- 
cers, Messala and Geminus, whose names only 
are known: it was reported, that the division, 
under Geminus, acting in Pannonia, had received 
a check, and been obliged to retire from some 
parts of the country they had formerly occupied. 
Upon this alarm, Octavius himself thought pro- 
per to lay aside his design upon Britain; but 
finding, upon his arrival in Illyricum, that the 
supposed loss was already repaired, the enemy in 
different encounters defeated, and the former 
ground of his army recovered, he himself joined 
Agrippa, who was employed against the Dal- 
matians, and continued for some months to 
take a part in the campaign with this favourite 
officer.? 

Antony, at the same time, as if equally dis- 
posed to have an army inured to service, sought 
likewise for occasions of war; and having quieted 
the jealousies of Cleopatra, by a seemingly irre- 
concilable breach with her rival, was permitto“ 


2 Dio. Cass. lib. xix. c. 39. 


He © 


— ee 


Cuar. VII.) 


to form projects of enterprise beyond the limits 
of Egypt. He renewed his designs against the 
kings of Armenia and Parthia. In the spring, 
he advanced to Nicopolis, a place so named, from 
the victory of Pompey over Mithridates; and 
supposing that the treachery of Artavasdes, in 
betraying Statianus, would justify any measures 
he could take against him, he sent Tepeated mes- 
sages, under pretence of friendship, desiring a 
conference; but with a real intention of seizing 
his person. The more effectually to remove all 
suspicions of any such design, he proposed a 
marriage between Alexander, one of his own 
sons by Cleopatra, and the daughter of that 
prince; but not succeeding in this artifice, he 
advanced into the heart of Armenia, and threat- 
ened to lay the kingdom waste with fire and 
sword. The king being unprepared for defence, 
took his resolution at last to try the sincerity of 
Antony’s professions, and was actually taken. 

The first advantage which the Roman general 
proposed to make of this capture, was exacting a 
ransom; and for this purpose, the king, being 
carried round the fortresses of his kingdom in 
which the royal treasure had been deposited, was 
made to demand great sums of money under this 
pretence; but the officers, to whom this demand 
was addressed, knowing that their sovereign was 
a prisoner, shut their gates against him, and re- 
fused to comply. ‘The army of Armenia at the 
same time assembled, and considering the throne 
as vacant, placed upon it Artaxes, the eldest son 
of their captive king. Being led by this young 
prince into immediate action with the Romans, 
they were defeated, and he himself was obliged 
to take refuge with the Parthians. 

Antony contented with this victory, which 
gave him possession of the country, put his army 
into winter quarters in the Lesser Armenia, and 
entered into a defensive treaty with the king of 
Media, whose daughter, upon that occasion, was 
betrothed to the same son of Cleopatra, whose 
proposed marriage with the daughter of Arta- 
vasdes had been employed as a snare to betray 
that prince. 

At the conclusion of these transactions, An- 
tony set out on his return to Egypt, and meditating 
a triumphal procession into the city of Alexan- 
dria, destined his captive for a part in the scene, 

ave orders that he should be conducted thither 
in chains; and accordingly, upon the arrival of 
the troops and the equipage which were to form 
his retinue, he made his entry with all the parade 
of a Roman triumph, repeated all the forms 
which were usual on such occasions at Rome, 
made a speech to the people, and ordered a pub- 
lic feast. In these several particulars, seeming to 
place the inhabitants of Alexandria upon a foot 
of equality with the Roman people, and prosti- 
tuting a solemn institution of the Romans to thie 
vanity of a barbarous court, he gave much scan- 
dal and offence at Rome. Every circumstance 
being exaggerated by his enemies, his own extra- 
vagance gained a ready belief to every report that 
was circulated against him. 

It has been observed, on different occasions, 
that Antony, although he stemmed the current 
of adversity with vigour and ability, was generally 
carried by prosperity into every excess of sensual- 
ity, extravagance, and dissipation. In this time 
of festivity, he assumed, in the midst of his de- 
bauch, not only the Tm dress, and all the 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


393 


badges of royalty, but likewise’ the attire and de- 
signation of a god; wore the buskins, the golden 
crown, and the chaplet of ivy belonging to Bac- 
chus, held the Thyrsus in his hand, and was 
drawn through the streets of Alexandria on a car 
like those which were employed in the processions 
of the gods.4 It was said, that Cleopatra at the 
same time assumed the dress of Isis; that being 
seated together on thrones of gold, elevated on a 
lofty platform, Antony presented Cleopatra to 
the people, as gueen not only of Egypt and Cy- 
prus, but likewise of Africa and Celesyria, and 
that he associated with her in these titles Casa- 
tion, her supposed son by Julius Cesar. To his 
own son Alexander, in these drunken assigna- 
tions of empire, it was reported that he allotted 
Armenia, Media, and Parthia, which, though not 
in his possession, he considered as a certain con- 
quest : to Ptolomy, another of his sons, Pheenicia, 
Syria, and Cilicia,5 and presented each of them 
to the people in the dress, and with the ensigns 
and the retinue suited to the several destinations; 
Alexander, with the Persian tiara; and Ptolomy, 
with the dress and diadem worn by the princes 
of Macedonia. 

This mock distribution of the eastern king- 
doms was executed in formal deeds or writings, 
of which copies were ordered to Rome to be de- 
posited in the records of the temple of Vesta, and 
in the keeping of the virgins. And as Octavius 
looked forward to an immediate quarrel with An- 
tony, the whole circumstances with which these 
acts had been soleinnized at Alexandria, were in- 
dustriously published at Rome to his prejudice. 
The writings, however, not being actually brought 
to the city before the subsequent year, in which 
Domitius and Sosius were consuls, part of the 
scandal was for some time secreted by the influ- 
ence of these magistrates, who were inclined to 
favour Antony against Octavius in the impend- 
ing contest for empire. 

Vhile Antony indulged him- 


U.C. 720. self in these extravagancies at 
Imper. Cesar Alexandria, Octavius, with L. 
uC y Volcatius Tullus, assumed the 
L. Volcatius . , 

Tullus. title of consuls at Rome ; but the 


first, at his admission, thought 


P. Autronius proper to follow the example that 


Paetus. i : 
T te: «86S lately set to him by Antony; 
E on the first of January, vacated 

L. Flavius. é ? 
the office, and substituted another 
Ex Kal, Jul. ìn his place. By like successive 
C. Fontius. substitutions, he communicated 


the course of the year to six dif- 


The office of xdilc, which had 


this dignity in 
ferent persons. 


M. Acilius. i 
Aviola been gencrally declined on ac- 
Ex. Kal. Sept count of the expenses which at- 


L. Vinucius. tended the discharge of it, and 


which had been for some time 
discontinued, was now revived in 
the person of Agrippa, who, 
though he had been already of a higher rank, 
and in the station of consul, voluntarily under- 
took the dutics of ædile ; and, at his own expense, 
applied himself to the more serious objects of the 
trust, by constructing highways, erecting public 
works, and cleansing the common sewers, works 
of great antiquity, that seemed to exceed the 


P 


Er. Kal. Oct. 
L. Lavonius. 


3 Florus, lib. iv. c. 11. Dio. Cass. lib. l. c. 5. 
4 Vel. Pat. lib. ii. c. 83. 5 Dio. Cass. lib. xlix.c.41. 


894 


force of the times to which they were referred.1 
He at the same time repaired the circus, made 
new regulations for conducting the entertainments 
of that place, and himself exhibited magnificent 
shows. 

Under this magistracy of Agrippa, the people 
were gratified with presents, as well as with 
pastimes. Articles of finery, trinkets, and even 
sums of money were distributed by a species of 
lottery. Counters or billets, entitling the bearer 
to certain prizes, which were marked’ upon each, 
were thrown out by handfuls to be scrambled for 
in the crowd. Public baths, furnished with all 
the usual apparatus, were provided, and attended 
with keepers and dressers at the public expense ;2 
acts of munificence and popularity, in which it 
was thought proper to cultivate the public favour. 

Octavius at the same time, on so near a pros- 
pect of a quarrel with Antony, who was to em- 
ploy half the forces of the empire against him, 
had the good fortune to disengage himself from 
foreign wars. Those which he carried on in 
Dalmatia, terminated’ in the submission of that 
ee in their giving hostages for their good be- 

aviour, and in their restoring the eolours which 
had been taken from a Roman army they had de- 
feated under the conduct of Vatinius. ‘These he 
hung up in a portico, which bore his own name; 
but a triumph being decreed to him, he declined 
or deferred accepting of it; on this, as on many 
other occasions, discovering a mind, though fond 
of dominion, indifferent to pomp, and the exterior 
appearances of power. 

Antony passed the summer at the head of his 
army in Syria, without having made any attempt 
against the Parthians. He renewed his defen- 
sive alliance with the king of Media; and the 
parties in this treaty, being to name the powers 
against whom they respectively wished, in the 
event of a war, to secure an alliance, the king of 
Media made particular mention of the Parthians; 
and Antony named’ Octavius. At the end of this 
negotiation, they mutually made an exchange of 
some troops.? 

Thus Antony made no secret of the distrust 
which he conceived of his colleague in the em- 
pire, or of a breach, which, from their mutual 
jealousies and provocations, was gradually widen- 
ing. He affected to treat Cesarion, the reputed 
son of Julius Cesar by Cleopatra, as the legiti- 
mate heir of the Julian family. He likewise re- 
torted on Octavius, the artifice which had been 
practised against himself, by professing an inten- 
tion to resign the power of triumvir. He com- 

lained of the violence which had been done to 

epidus; but asked, if Lepidus were justly de- 
posed, why he himself was not adinitted to his 
share in the provinces? He complained of his 
being excluded from a share in the spoils of Sex- 
tus Pompeius, as well as of Lepidus; and of his 
being excluded from Italy, which was the com- 
mon seat of government to the whole empire, 
and which Octavius had not any right to appro- 
priate to himself. 

To these complaints Octavius replied, That 
Antony, without making any compensation to 
his colleagues in the western provinces, had seized 
on the kingdom of Egypt; that he had unwar- 
rantably put Sextus Pompeius to death; that he 


J Piinius, lib. xxxvi. c. 15. 


2 Dio. Cass. lib. xlix. c. 43. 3 Ibid. e. 44. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


had dishonoured the Roman name by his breach 
of faith with the king of Armenia, and had given 
no account at Rome of the spoils of that kingdom; 
that he had presumed to dismember the Roman 
empire in behalf of Cleopatra, and of her children ; 
and that he supported her in an attempt to in- 
trude into the family of Cesar one of her spurious 
progeny.* 

‘These mutual complaints were publicly made, 
and supported at Rome. Neither of the parties 
professed any intention of going to war; but, 
under various pretences, colleeted money, and. 
augmented: their forces. ‘They held a continual 
correspondence by agents'and messengers, merely 
to have an epportunity of observing each other's 
motions; and soon involved in their disputes and: 
jealousies, not only their own immediate retainers. 
and friends, but such as now composed the senate 
and assemblies of the people, who could not re- 
main unconcerned spectators in a difference be- 
tween persons who were likely again to involve 
the empire itself in a civil war. 

: Cneius Domitius Ahenobar- 


U. C. 721. bus, and Caius Sosius, having in 
Cn. Domitius consequence of preceding engage- 
a ee ments succeeded to the consulate, 
Er. Ral. Jui, and being attached to Antony, 
L. Cornelius. | openly espoused his cause.. So- 
Er. Kal. Nov. sius, on the first of January, in 
U. Valerius. 


entering upon his office, ventured 
to arraign the conduct of Octa- 
vius, enumerated the injuries which he had 
offered to Antony, and moved the senate for re- 
dress. 

Octavius, having previous intimation of what 
was to be moved by the consul,.and wishing to 
know the full extent of the charge -before he 
should be obliged to reply, on that day, absented 
himself from the senate; but took care to have 
Nonius, one of the tribunes of the people, pre- 


‘pared to watch over his interest, and to put a 


negative on any proceeding that might be at- 
tempted to his prejudice. At the next assembly 
of the senate, he appeared with a numerous body 
of armed men, seated himself between the con- 
suls, and from that place made his answer to the 
accusations, which in the former meeting had 
been stated against him, and retorted much blame 
on his enemies. He called. upon Antony, in 
particular, to return into Italy, and to resign the 
triumvirate, the period for which that temporary 
power was created being now expired.5 

To this defiance, on the part of Octavius, no 
reply being made by the friends of Antony, the 
assembly was adjourned for some days, during 
which time both the consuls thought proper to 
withdraw from the city ; and not supposing them- 
selves safe within the jurisdiction of a person 
against whom they had taken so hostile a part, 
continued their retreat into Asia, where Antony, 
whose cause they had espoused, had the means 
to protect them. , ‘ 

Octavius, pleased to find himself, by the flight 
of the ordinary magistrates, left master of the 
city, and freed from the necessity of employing 
immediate force against the forms of common. 
wealth, gave them no interruption, nor attempt- 
ed to prevent their escape. He even gave out, 
that these officers had withdrawn by his permis- 


4 Dio. Cass. lib. l.e. 1. 
5 Liv. Epitome, lib. exxxu. 


Guar. VIL] 


sion, and that every one else who was disposed to 
join his antagonist, might follow their example.® 

Antony, when he received an account of what 
was thus passing at Rome, being arrived in the 
Lesser Armenia, on his last expedition into that 
country, assembled all the senators of his party 
who were then with his army, laid before them 
his grounds of complaint against Octavius, re- 
nounced in form his marriage with Octavia, and 
declared war on her brother.” At the same time, 
he took a solemn oath, in which he bound him- 
self, at the end of six months, after he should 
have relieved Italy from the tyranny of Octavius, 
to restore the government entire to the senate 
and people, agreeably to the ancient constitution. 
Having taken this method to gain all those who 
wished for the restoration of the commonwealth, 
and having remitted great sums of money into 
Italy, to be dealt out in presents and gratuities to 
the army of his rival,® instead of pursuing the 
pretended object of the war in Armenia, he put 
his army in inotion westward. Having Canidius 
advanced with sixteen legions, he himself con- 
ducting the queen of Egypt, who was to have 
her share in the enterprise, took the route of 
Ephesus, where all his ships were ordered to as- 
semble. Of these he had eight hundred sail, of 
which Cleopatra furnished two hundred complete- 
ly equipped, together with twenty thousand ta- 
lents in money.’ 

The consuls Domitius and Sosius having join- 
ed Antony at Ephesus, and finding all his coun- 
cils governed by the caprice of Cleopatra, and all 
his measures made subservient to her vanity or 
interest, warmly recommended that the queen of 
Egypt should return into her own kingdom, and 
there remain until the war should be at an end; 
‘but she, dreading the loss of her influence, the 
restoration of Octavia, and a reconciliation of 
parties, to which her pretensions, interests, and 
passions must be the first sacrifice, employed all 
her artifice to defeat their counsel, and to main- 
tain her ascendant over Antony. For this pur- 
pose, with more care and assiduity than she 
mustered the forces of her allies, or collected the 
resources of her kingdom for the support of the 
war, she assembled from every quarter the means 
of dissipation and the instrumeuts of pleasure. 

Many Roman officers, who had hitherto em- 
barked their fortunes with Antony, disgusted by 
the appearances of levity and dissipation which 
attended hii on this occasion, withdrew from his 
cause, and threw themselves into the arms of his 
enemy. Plancus, in particular, with Titius, 
long dissatisfied with the influence and conduct 
of Cleopatra, deserted him. They brought with 
them into Italy particular accounts of Autony’s 
levity, and of Cleopatra’s insolent speeches, in- 
sinuating that she flattered herself with the hopes 
of becoming mistress of the Roman empire. 
They produced copies of Antony’s will, already 
mentioned as having been sent to the records of 
the Vestals, and which, by its extravagance, 
procured credit to every other report which was 
raised to his prejudice, so much as to make it be- 
lieved, that if he should prevail in the contest 
with Octavius, he meant to declare Cleopatra 
queen of the Romans, and to transfer the seat of 
the empire to Alexandria. 


6 Dio. Cass. lib. l. c. 2. 7 Ibid.c.3. 8 Ibid.c. 7. 
9 Plut. in Antonio, near three millions sterling. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


395 


These reports, tending to render Antony an ob- 
ject of ridicule, or of scorn, were propagated with 
great effect among the people. They were even 
introduced in the senate, and employed as the 
pretence for a motion that was made to divest 
him of his present command in the east, and of 
that share of the sovereignty which he held in 
the capacity of triumvir, and to declare him in- 
capable of holding the office of consul, to which 
he was destined for the ensuing year. 

Plancus, in support of the motion that was 
made to this purpose, urging, together with the 
reports now mentioned, the manifold disorders 
which were imputed to Antony, and the many 
offences he had committed against ‘the common- 
wealth, was answered with great courage and 
asperity, by persons who still ventured to espouse 
the cause of the absent triumvir. “ While you 
were of his councils,” said Coponius to Plancus 
on this occasion, “I doubt not but the conduct 
of Antony was sufficiently blameable.”! 

Octavius, however, being master at Rome, the 
motion was carried, and a decree was obtained, 
in consequence of it, to suspend Mark Antony 
in the exercise of all his powers. War at the 
same time was formally declared against the 
queen of Egypt, while Octavius, with his usual 
discretion, to avoid making enemies unnecessarily 
of those who must have been involved with An- 
tony in any personal attainder, did not include 
him in this declaration. A proclamation, how- 
ever, was published, “requiring all citizens to 
withdraw themselves from Antony, as being 
abandoned to the caprices of a stranger, and a 
woman, who, by a kind of fascination, led him in 
her train, and prevailed upon him to countenance, 
against his own country, a war which was to be 
conducted by the eunuchs Mardio and Pothinus, 
keepers of the palace of Alexandria; and by Ira 
and Charmion, the waiting women of Cleopatra, 
who hoped soon to reign in the capital of the 
Roman empire, as absolutely as they had for some 
time governed in the provinces of the East." 

In the sequel of these declarations, some taxes 
for the expense of the war were laid on the in- 
habitants of Italy ; an uncommon stretch of power, 
which, on the approach of an enemy who was 
likely to divide the people, appeared to be impoli- 
tic and dangerous. All freed slaves, having two 
hundred sestertia or upwards, were required to 
pay an eighth of their effects, free citizens wero 
required to pay a fourth of their yearly revenue; 
and these exactions being violently enforced, gave 
rise in many places to insurrection and blood- 
shed ;!2 and the minds of men being greatly agi- 
tated, reports of presages and prodigies were crr- 
culated as usual, in times of great alarm, and on 
the eve of important events. 

Antony, in the mean time, advanced with his 
fleet and army from Ephesus to Samos, and from 
thence to Athens, where, together with the queen 
of Egypt, he was received with a flattering pa- 
geantry, and with many complimentary addresses, 
in composing which, this people now exercised 
that ingenuity for which they were formerly cele- 
brated in conducting matters of state and of war. 
Cleopatra was admitted to the freedom of the city 
of Athens. Antony, being already a citizen, led 
the procession, in which the republic came to con- 


10 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 83. 
12 Dio. Cass lib. l. c. 10 


11 Plut.in Antonie. 


396 


fer this honour on the queen; and made her a 
speech in name of his fellow-citizens, the Athe- 
nian people. 

From thence Antony proceeded to the island 
of Corcyra, where all his forces assembled, and 
seemed to threaten Italy with an immediate inva- 
sion. He had undoubtedly got the start of his 
antagonist, might have surprised him, and di- 
vided the inhabitants of Italy, and other parts of 
the western empire. Of these, numbers were 
discontented on account of recent exactions, many 
were disposed to favour the absent party, or from 
animosity to a government, under which they 
had experienced oppression, were desirous of any 
change. 

With all these advantages in his favour, Anto- 
ny either never had the intention to invade Italy 
in the present season, or laid it aside, and deter- 
mined to pass the winter in Greece. He sent 
his fleet into the gulph of Ambracia, and quar- 
tered his army in the Peloponnesus, or round the 
gulph of Corinth, where, besides the ordinary 
resources of the country, they had continual 
supplies of every necessary by sea, from Asia 
and Egypt. 

By the last arrangement, which had been con- 


certed between Octavius and An- 
U. C. 722. tony, for the succession of consuls 
during eight years, of which this 
Imper. Ces. P 
‘Mar. Fal. was the last, they themselves were 
Messala Cor- now to have entered on the office ; 
sinus. Ex but Antony being set aside by a 


Kal. Mart. M. 
Mitius, ex 
Kai. Oct. Cn. 
Pompeius. 


public act of the senate and people, 
Octavius assumed for his colleague, 
Messala, already mentioned as the 
particular friend of Marcus Bru- 
tus. This almost only remaining partizan of the 
republic had been among the proscribed, but was 
afterwards taken into favour, and reconciled to 
the successor of Cesar,! 

Octavius now holding the office of Roman 
consul, endeavoured to sink, under this designa- 
tion of a legal magistrate, his pretensions as a 
military adventurer, and qualified the troops, 
which he employed against Antony, as the forces 
of the commonwealth, assembled to repel the at- 
tack of a foreiznenemy. Hedrew them together 
on the coast of Apulia, and while he stationed 
the greater part of his fleet in two divisions at 
Brundusium and Tarentum, sent Agrippa with 
a squadron to ply off the harbours of Greece, and 
to interrupt the naval communications of the 
enemy. 

By the vigilance and activity of Agrippa, many 
captures were made in the winter, and the con- 
veyance of corn, arms, and military stores from 
Asia, Syria, and Egypt, intended for the use of 
Antony’s fleet and army,? was rendered difficult 
and extremely precarious. To supply their ne- 
cessities, both his sea and land forces were obliged 
to plunder the country around them ; and, in the 
want of horses and carriages, drove the inhabit- 
ants like beasts of burden, laden with corn and 
other provisions, tothe seacoast. Antony, when 
he joined his fleet at Actium, being told that half 
his rowers had perished from scarcity and disease ; 
“ The oars,” he said, “ I hope are safe.’ 

In the mean time, Octavius brought his land 
forces to Brundusium and Tarentum; and either 


1 Dio. Cass lib. c. 10. 
3 Ibid. 


2 Oros. lib. vi. c. 19. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


(Boor V. 


to show the strength of his party, or to secure the 
persons of those of whose fidelity he entertained 
any doubt, summoned all the Roman citizens of 
note to attend him on the coast. From thence, 
in order to profit by Antony’s delay, and to fix 
the theatre of the war in Greece, he embarked 
with his army, and stood for the opposite coast of 
Epirus. He landed under the promontory of 
Acroceraunus, the same place at which Julius 
debarked in pursuit of the war with Pompey; 
and from this place, ordering the fleet to coast 
round the head lands, and the island of Corcyra, 
he marched with the army along shore towards 
the gulph of Ambracia. 

This gulph opens into the channel that sepa- 
rates the islands of Corcyra, Leucada, and Ce- 
phalonia. It is narrow at its entrance;4 but is 
wider within,’ and stretches eastward® about 
twenty or thirty miles, At its opening, on the 
southern shore, stood Actium, and opposite te 
this place stood Toryné, afterwards called Nica- 
polis. Antony had taken possessiun of Actium, 
and having a proper harbour in the gut, com. 
manded the whole navigation of the gulph. 

Octavius advancing with his fleet and army from 
the northward, and_ having no opposition made to 
him by the enemy, took possessio of Toryné, 
entrenched himself in a strong post on shore, 
and stationed his fleet behind him in a creek, 
which furnished a harbeur sufficiently safe. 7 

Antony, already posted on the opposite side of 
the gulph, either did aoe think himself in condi- 
tion to prevent the enemy from making this 
lodgement in his presence, or determined by some 
other motive, chose to act on the defensive; and 
thus the armies were stationed, Octavius in 
Epirus, and Anteny in Acarnania, on the op- 
posite sides of the entrance to the gulph of Am- 
bracia. 

The state of-the forces on each side is variously 
reported. Plutarch says, that in entering on the 
war, Antony had five hundred galleys, of which 
there were many mounting eight and ten tire of 
oars; that the land army, which had been trans- 
ported by his fleet, consisted of a hundred thou- 
sand infantry, and twelve thousand horse; that 
Octavius had two hundred and fifty galleys, 
eight thousand foot, and twelve thousand horse. 
Others place the superiority of numbers on the 
side of Octavius, but state them as more nearly 
equal.8 

As the Egyptian fleet still commanded the pas- 
sage of the gulph, Antony, after it was too late 
to disturb the enemy in making their lodgment, 
seized a post, with a considerable part of his 
army, on the side of Toryné, to restrain their ex- 
cursions, and to cut off their forage. Octavius, 
on his part, detached Agrippa, with a powerful 
squadron, to make descents on the coasts, to 
ravage the towns that were in the possession of 
Antony, and to cut off the supplies that were 
brought him by sea. i . 

According to these instructions, Agrippa took 
possession of Methone, on the coast of Messenia 
and of Patre, near the mouth of the gulph of 
Corinth, entered that gulph, and made a descent 
near the city of Corinth, afterwards took posses- 


4 About half a mile, or five stadia. 

5 One hundred stadia. 

6 Stretches in land three hundred stadia, 
8 


Polyb 
lib. iv. c. 63. 7 Plut. in Antonio. Ibid 


Cuap. VIL] 


sion of the promontory of Leucada, which lay in 
the course of Antony’s convoys,’ and obliged 
him, after a check he had received in the neigh- 
bourhood of Toryné, by the defeat of the cavalry 
he employed on that side, to abandon his ground 
in Epirus, and to repass the straits to Actium. 

In these operations passed the greater part of 
summer; but as nothing was decided, Domitius, 
who, in the preceding year, notwithstanding he 
was consul, had left his station in the city to join 
Antony, now disgusted with his conduct, went 
over to Octavius. A general distrust ensued in 
the party, ® and Antony, being distressed for want 
of provisions, saw the necessity of making his 
retreat, or of risking a general action. His fleet 
having suffered greatly in winter from scarcity | 
and from disease, he deliberated whether he 
should not abandon his ships, and rest his cause 
on the event of a battle on shore ;!! but Cleopatra, 
who governed all his councils, and who dreaded 
being deprived of a retreat by sea, urged him 
without delay to set sail for Alexandria. She 
proposed, tnat, to check the progress of the ene- 
my, proper detachments should be left to keep 
possession of all the strong-holds in Asia and 
Greece; that these detachments should be sup- 
ported from Egypt; and that Antony, in the 
mean time, should prepare the whole forces of 
that kingdom to contend for the empire of the 
world. 

The partizans of Cleopatra, in the council of 
Antony, contending for tnis plan of retreat which 
she proposed, among other arguments against 
risking a battie, urged many fatal presages and 
signs of impending calamity, sufficient to strike a 
panic in the troops, and to render the flight they 
advised, in some measure necessary. It was deter- 
mined, however, asa kind of middle course, that 
the fleet should put to sea; if permitted, with- 
draw from the enemy; but if attacked, give bat- 
tle. As it was observed, that many of the ships 
were ill manned, and in disrepair, and some alto- 
gether unserviceable; these being selected and 
burnt, the remainder prepared for the sea. 

When this resolution was taken, Antony 
called his officers together, put them in mind of 
the diligence with which he had made his prepa- 
rations for the present war, and referred for 
proof to the armament itself, which was then in 
their view.—In a war, which was to turn on the 
event of naval operations, they had an undoubted 
superiority, he said, either in the number or lofti- 
ness and strength of their ships.—He contrasted 
his own reputation, the maturity of his age, his 
experience, and his success, with the opposite 
circumstances in the description of his enemy. 
He put his officers in mind, and wished them to 
remind the army, that they were about to con- 
tend fer the empire of the world; that great as 
this object was, the loss of it, if they failed, was 
to be the least of their sufferings; that every in- 
dignity and insult was to be expected from an 
enemy,!? who on former occasions had shown 
himself sufficiently averse to mercy. Having 
addressed himself in this manner to the officers 
who were to be left on shore, he ordered on | 
board all those who attended him in the character 
of Roman citizens, or of whose inclination to the 


9 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 84. 
11 Plut. in Antonio. 
3% Dio. Cass. lib. 1. c. 15—22. 


10 Ibid. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


397 


enemy he had any suspicion, and reinforced his 
fleet from the land army with as many archers 


‘and slingers as could ply in the ships. 


Octavius, in the mean time, having intelligence 
of these deliberations and counsels, and seeing 
the bustle which the embarkation of so many 
men from the land, and the movements of ships 
to get in their stations, occasioned, he likewise 
prepared for action. In his address to the offi- 
cers of his fleet, he still affected to consider Cleo- 
patra as the principal party in the war. “ An- 
tony had condescended,” he said, “to become her 
dependent and follower, and was now preparing, 
not to fight, but to accompany the queen of 
Egypt in her flight.” In respect to the conduct 
of the action, he was inclined to let the enemy 
get under sail, and even to wait until they should 
have turned the promontory of Actium, thinking 
this would be the proper time for him to attack 
their rear, to pursue them in their retreat, and by 
these means to gain the advantage and reputa- 
tion of a victory, without the hazard of a battle; 
but being dissuaded from this design by Agrippa, 
he took his resolution to meet them at the mouth 
of the straits, and if he prevailed, was in. hopes 
he might put them out of condition to renew the 
war. For this purpose he reinforced his fleet 
with as many men from the land as could con- 
veniently act on board.!? 

After both fleets were in readiness, they were 
detained in their harbours four days by a storm, 
and a high sea which set into the gulph. But on 
the fifth day the wind having abated, and the sea 
becoming smooth, Antony’s fleet began to form 
in the straits. He himself, with Poplicola, em- 
barked with the first division on the right, Celius 
on the left, and an officer, whom Plutarch names 
Marcus Octavius, with M. Justeius in the cen- 
tre.'4 His ships being heavier and loftier, vat 
less active than those of Octavius, he hesitated 
for some time whether he should not remain in 
close order, and endeavour to bring on the action 
in the narrow entrance of the gulph, where his 
antagonists, for want of room, could not derive 
any great advantage from the superior agility of 
their vessels, or quickness of their motions, 

While Antony deliberated on this matter, Oe- 
tavius got under sail, turned the headland of 
Toryné, and formed in a line before the entry 
of the straits, about a mile from the enemy. 
The right division was commanded by M. La- 
rius, the left by Aruntius, the whole by Agrip- 
pa.'5 Both armies, at the same time, were drawn 
out on the shore to behold the event; but the 
fleets, for some time, did not make any move- 
ment, and it continued uncertain whether An- 
tony, being still in the road, might not return to 
his anchors; but about noon his ships began to 
clear the straits, and came forward where the 
sea-room was sufficient for their line. As in 
this movement the fleets came closer together, 
Agrippa began to extend his front, in order to 
turn the enemy’s flank; but Poplicola, on the 
other side, to keep pace with lim, stretching to 
tlie same side, the centre of both fleets was 
equally opened, and they engaged soon after, 
without any apparent advantage on either side. 

The contest, for some time, remained unde- 


13 Dio. Cass. lib. 1. c. 23—30. 
14 Plutarch. in Antonio. 
15 Vell. Pater. lib. ij. c. 5-4. 


398 


cided. In the beginning of the action, the queen 
of Egypts yacht had been near to the line, and 
she herself continued to look on the battle, till, 
overcome with anxiety, affright, and horror, she 
gave orders to remove her galley to a greater dis- 
tance, and being once in motion fled with all the 
sail she could make; her vessel being distinguish- 
ed by a gilded poop and purple sails, made her 
flight be conspicuous to the whole fleet,! and drew 
away from the line about sixty ships of the 
Egyptian squadron, who, under pretence of at- 
tending their mistress, withdrew from the action. 

Antony, apprehending the consequence of this 
defection, whether in despair of his fortunes, or 
in some hopes to rally those who fled, put on 
board of a quick sailing vessel, and endeavoured 
to overtake them. Being observed from Cleo- 

atra’s galley, he was taken on board; but no 
onger capable of any vigorous or rational pur- 
pose, he became the companion of her fight, 
without any attempt to rally her fleet. Although 
he quitted the chance of a victory to follow the 
object of his passions, he could not endure to be- 
hold her, turned his eyes aside, threw himself 
upon the deck, and continucd in the deepest an- 
guish of shame and despair. 

The flight of Antony, joined to that of Cleo- 
patra, an event so little expected, was not for 
some time observed, and the fleet, notwithstand- 
ing the desertion of their leader, continued the 
action till four in the afternoon, when they were 
overpowered; and many of them being greatly 
damaged in their oars and rigging, were not in 
condition either to resist or to escape, and fell an 
easy prey to the enemy. Three hundred ships 
were taken or sunk, and about five thousand men 
were killed.2 The strand was covered with 
wrecks and dead bodies. Octavius detached a 
squadron in pursuit of such of the enemy’s ships 
as had got to sea from the engagement, and him- 
self continued in the channel during the remain- 
der of the day, and the following night, to gather 
the fruits of his victory. 

The land army of Antony, having from the 
heights on shore beheld the ruin of their fleet, 
retired to their camp as with an intention to 
maintain it tu the last extremity. They flattercd 
themselves, that their general, though forced to 
yield to his enemy at sea, would make for the 
nearest port, and again show himself at the head 
of his legions. These, they said, he never should 
have left to commit his fortunes to an uncertain 
element, and a treacherous ally. In these hopes 
they remained for seven days unshaken in their 
duty, and rejected all the offers which Octavius 
made to induce them to change their party. 
Being satisfied, however, at last, that their hopes 
were vain, they consulted their safety in different 
ways. Some laid down their arms; Canidius 
himself, who commanded them, withdrew in the 
night ;4 others, remaining together in small par- 
ties, took the route to Macedonia; but, being 
pursued by the enemy, were separately over- 
taken, and forced or persuaded to surrender. All 
the Roman citizens, who had taken refuge in 
the eastern provinces, all the foreign allies and 


1 Florus, lib. iv. c. 11. 


2 Plut. in Antonio. Orosius says, 12,000 were killed | 


in battle, 6000 were wounded, of whom 1600 died under 
cure, lib. vi. 


7? “neton. in Octavio. 4 Plut. in Antonio. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Bocx V. 


princes, who made a part of the vanquished 
army, successively made their peace;> and the 
empire itself now seemed to be reduced under a 
single head. 

Antony having continued his flight by the 
coasts of the Peloponnesus to the head of Tena- 
rus, without appearing to recover his courage, 
made a halt at this place, rather from indecision 
and irresolution, than from any settled purpose 
respecting the conduct of his affairs. Here he 
was joined by some ships that remained in the 
action to the end of it; and being informed by 
them, that the fleet was entirely demolished, but 
that the army continued firm in their camp; he 
seemed to be revived by this last part of the ac- 
count, and despatched an order to Canidius to 
make the best of his way into Macedonia, and 
from thence to continue his march into Asia. 
Such of his friends as came up with him at Te- 
narius, he treated with his usual liberality, divided 
his plate and jewels among them, and gave them 
orders, for the supplies they might want, on the 
keeper of his treasure at Corinth. In performing 
these acts of munificence, he seemed to rccover 
his mind, and resumed some part of his usual 
manner, but returning at the same time to his 
former habits with Cleopatra, he suffered him 
self again to be governed by her councils; and, it 
compliance with her desire, steered directly for 
Egypt, without making any attempt to rally his 
forces in Greece, or to join his army, which, in 
reality, by this time, had been separated, or 
obliged to make their peace. 

The victor having entirely dispersed, or gained 
to his own party all the forces of his rival in Eu- 
rope, sent such a part of his army into Asia as 
was thought necessary to finish the remains of 
the war, and permitted the veterans, whose turn 
it was to be disbanded, to return into Italy. He 
himself, in order that he might be at hand to 
observe the motions of Antony, and to renew his 
operations in the spring, proposed to pass the 
winter at Samos.” From thence, being master 
of a country in which his rival had once been 
favourably received, he exercised his power in 
punishing those who had taken part against 
him. Many towns, by his order, were laid under 
heavy contributions, and deprived of their muni- 
cipal privileges. All the petty princes who held 
their territories by grant from Antony, except 
Archelaus® and Amyntas,2 were dispossessed. 
Alexander,!° the son of Jamblichus, was not only 
stript of his territories, but reserved in chains to 
make a part in the procession of the victor’s tri- 
umph; and when that ceremony should be over, 
was doomed to die. The principality of Lyco- 
medes!! was given to a certain Mede, who had 
deserted from Antony, and who had monan" 
with him a considerable body of the allies. T'he 
Cydonii!? and Lampæi, on account of their par- 
ticular services, were restored to their liberties. 

Of the Roman citizens of rank, who had es- 
poused the cause of Antony, some were pardoned, 
some laid under heavy fines, and others put to 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 1. 

6 Plut. in Antonio. J 

7 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 3, 4. Sueton. in Octavio, c. 17. 
8 King of Cappadocia. 

9 Of Galatia. Dio. Cass. lib. xlix. c. 32, 

10 A prince of Arabian extraction. 

11 On the frontier of Pontus. 

12 The people of certain towne of Crete. 


Cuar. VIL] 


death.!3 Among those who were pardoned, was 
Sosius the late consul, who had absconded for 
some time after the battle of Actium, and remain- 
ed in concealment, until, by the intercession of 
his friends, be made his peace. With him like- 
wise is mentioned M. Scaurus, the uterine bro- 
ther of Sextus Pompeius, who had been con- 
demned to die, but spared at the intercession of 
his mother. Among those who were put to death 
is mentioned Curio, the son of that Curio, who, 
in the steps which led to the civil war, acted for 
some time in support of the senate, but after- 
wards so effectually served the ambition of Julius 
Cesar.'4 

While Antony was still possessed of the king- 
dom of Egypt, or had any means of renewing 
the war, it was thought expedient that Octavius 
in person should reside in Asia. The adminis- 
tration in Italy was committed to Mæcenas and 
Agrippa; the first entrusted with the civil, the 
other with the military department; but acting 
under orders and instructions from Cæsar, which, 
though in form addressed to the senate, were 
previously submitted to these ministers; and, 
after having received such alterations and correc- 
tions as they: thought proper, were likewise in- 
trusted to their execution. 

Agrippa, as has been mentioned, having borne 
his part in the victory at Actium, returned into 
Italy with a particular charge of the veterans 
who were now entitled to their dismission, and to 
the reward of their services. He was chosen for 
this trust, as having sufficient authority to re- 

ress the nwtinous spirit which this order of men 
fat ever discovered as often as they were en- 
couraged by victory to state their pretensions and 
to overrate their merits, The task, however, was 
too arduous even for the daring courage and un- 
blemished reputation of this officer. The troops 
had been told, after the late action, that, on ac- 
count of the state of Cesar’s finances, the reward 
of their services must be deferred to the end of the 
war; such of them as were destined to act in 
Asia and Egypt, acquiesced in this delay, expect- 
ing to enrich themselves in the mean time with 
the spoils of those opulent countries.’ But 
those who were sent back into Italy, expecting 
such settlements in that country as the veterans 
had formerly received, upon their arrival laid 
claim to immediate satisfaction, and complained 
that Cesar, in employing his lieutenants to treat 
with them, meant to evade their just demands. 

In consequence of earnest representations from 
Maecenas and Agrippa, stating these discontents 
of the veterans as of the most dangerous ten- 
dency, Octavius, after he had determined to fix 
his residence at Samos for the winter, set sail for 
Italy in the most tempestuous season, and in his 
passage was twice exposed to great danger ; once 
in doubling the headlands of the Peloponnesus, 
and again near to the rocks of Acroceraunus. 
Being arrived at Brundusium, he was met by 
many of the principal citizens of Rome, with the 
senate and magistrates, who, having committed 
the government of the city to the tribunes, were 
come forward to receive him, and to pay their 
-ourt. He likewise found the discontented vete- 
rans still at the same place, and obstinate in their 
purpose of not suffering themselves to be dis- 


13 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 2. 
15 Ibid. e. 3, 4. 


14 Ibid. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


399 
banded, until they should have obtaincd their just 
gratification in money and allotments of land. 

Octavius, having occasion for all the arts in 
which he was already so well versed, now affect- 
ing to hasten what he alleged had been only 
delayed to a more convenient time, proceeded to 
make way for these mutinous troops, by dislodg- 
ing many possessors of land, on pretence that 
they had favoured the queen of Egypt in the late 
war; and, in order to provide the intended gra- 
tuities in money, he pretended to offer his own 
estate to sale, or proposed to pledge it as security 
fora loan. But no man having the courage to 
become either his creditor or the purchaser of 
his estate, he represented his having made the 
offer as a sufficient excuse to the army for the 
delay which he was still obliged to make in grati- 
fying their just requests. But the riches of 
Egypt, he said, now forfeited by Cleopatra, 
would be an ample fund for the gratification of 

those who forebore their demands 
U. C. 723. for the present, to have them more 
fully complied with hercafter.16 
Having, by these means, pacified 
tet- the clamours of those who were 
nius Crassus, : 
ex Kal. Jul, Most urgent; and having been, dur- 
C. Antistius ing his stay at Brundusium, vested 
Vitus, ex Id. a fourth time with the titles and 
ar M. Tul. ensigns of consul, he sct sail again 
tCETO, EX . e e . . 
Ral. Nov. L. for the coast of Asia, with intention 
Junius. to give Antony and Cleopatra as 
little time as possible to recollect 
themselves, or to reinstate their affairs. 

These unfortunate adventurers, whose arrival 
at the point of Tenarus has been mentioned, 
steered from thence for the coast of Africa, and 
parted from each other near to Paretonium, a 
sea-port of Lybia, which had been held by the 
kings of Egypt, asa barrier at some distance be- 
yond the western frontier of their kingdom. In 
the neighbourhood of this place, Antony ex- 
mo to be received by Pinarius Scarpus, whom 

e had placed at the head of his forces in that 
quarter.!? But this officer, from whatever person 
he may have received his appointment, or how- 
ever he may have been inclined, while the trium- 
virs divided the empire, was now, by the event 
of the battle of Actium, sufficiently determined 
in the choice of his party. He had declared for 
Octavius, and now ordered the messengers of 
Antony, and all the officers under his own com- 
mand, who were disposed to enter into any cor- 
respondence with the vanquished party, to be 
put to death. 

Upon this disappointment, Antony relapsed 
into his former melancholy, proposed to kill him- 
self, and was prevented only by the persuasion 
of a few friends, who earnestly entreated him to 
try his fortunes once more, at the head of the 
forces of Egypt.' 

Cleopatra, in order to outrun the news of her 
disaster, and to prevent the disorders that might 
attend the fall of her authority, made all possible 
haste into her owndominions. When her ships 
came in sight, she hoisted the ensigns of victory, 


Imp. Cres. 
4to. M. Lici- 


16 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 4. 

17 Ibid. c. 5. Plut.in Antonio, p. 136. Both these 
writers seem to understand that Pinarius Scarpus had 
belonged to Antony, and deserted from him on this 
occasion. 

18 Plut. in Antonio, p. 136, 4to. edit. Lond. ann. 
1724. Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 5. 


400 


and entered the harbour of Alexandria with 
shouts of joy and triumph. Upon her landing, 
she gave an order to cut off, or to secure, some 
persons of whose affections she was doubtful, 
and then acknowledging the event of her late 
unfortunate expedition, took measures for the 
defence of her kingdom. Under pretence of 
collecting money for this purpose, she seized the 
effects of corporations and of private persons, 
and stript the temples of their ornaments and of 
their treasures. But, having still upon her mind 
all the impressions of her late defeat, she rather 
looked for a retreat, to which she might fly with 
the money she amassed, than for a station at 
which to withstand her enemy. Under these 
impressions, she formed a project to have her fleet 
dragged over land, from the Nile to the gulph of 
Arabia, and ordered ships to be built in the ports 
of that sea, trusting that her enemy could not, 
for some time, be in condition to molest her with 
any naval armament in that quarter. 

After this project began, in part, to be exe- 
cuted, the Arabs, apprehending some danger to 
themselves, from the preparations which appear- 
ed to be making on their coasts, demolished the 
docks which the queen of Egypt had ordered 
to be fitted up, plundered her stores, and de- 
stroyed the ships which she had already built; 
so that she was reduced to the necessity of mak- 
ing her defence on the Nile, and of abiding the 
fate which threatened her country from this side.! 

She had heard of Cesar’s having gone back 
into Italy; and from this circumstance, as well 
as from the difficulties of a winter navigation 
round the coasts of Greece, both she and Antony 
thought themselves secure for that season. In 
this, however, they were disappointed by the 
activity and resolution of their enemy, who, 
having lost no time unnecessarily, had, in order 
to avoid the difficulties of the winter navigation, 
ordered some galleys to be dragged over land at 
the isthmus of Corinth; and by this means, 
while he was yet believed to be beyond the sea 
of Ionia, was actually well advanced in his voy- 
age to the Nile.? His plan was to invade the 
kingdom of Egypt on two sides at once; at Pa- 
retonium, on the side of Africa, by an army un- 
der the command of Cornelius Gallus; and at 
Pelusium, on the side of Syria, with an army 
which he himself was to command.? 

Antony, upon his return to Alexandria, with 
the mortification of having been rejected by the 
Roman legions that were stationed on the fron- 
tier of the province of Africa, thinking it might 
strengthen his own party against that of Octa- 
vius, to point out an immediate offspring of the 
Julian family, and a succession of leaders to the 
party of Cesar, declared Cesarion, the reputed 
son of Julius Cesar by Cleopatra, to be now of 
age, and qualified to enter upon the inheritance 
of his father. But while he exasperated Octavius 
by this species of personal insult, he appeared 
incapable of any rational plan of defence for 
himself or the kingdom he occupied. He even 
absented himself from the councils that were 
held on this subject, declined any share in the 
management of affairs, and withdrew from the 
palace. 

While Antony continued in this humour, he 


J Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 7. 


. Zonaras, lib. x. c. 33. 
2 Dio. Cass. Jib. li. c. 5. 


3 Orosius, lib. vi. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book V, 


was joined by Canidius, the late commander of 
his land forces at Actium. From this officer he 
had the melancholy account, that all his armies 
in Greece were dispersed ; that Herod, the king 
of Judea, had declared against him, and all the 
princes he had lately placed upon different 
thrones in Asia had either followed this example, 
or been displaced ; that he had not any possession, 
nor any certain friend beyond the limits of Egypt. 
Upon receiving this account, he seemed to re- 
cover from his melancholy, and acquired that 
species of ease which results from despair. He 
left his retreat, returned to the palace, and, with 
Cleopatra, gave himself up to dissipation, pro- 
fusion, and continual riot. ‘They formed parties 
of pleasure, consisting of such persons as pro- 
fessed their resolution to die rather than to fall 
into the hands of the enemy.4 Antony had an 
officer retained to put a period to his life in the 
supposed extremity in which this choice was to 
be made, and Cleopatra had a collection of 
poisons for the same purpose. 

In the midst of this seeming indifference to 
life, both the queen and her lover, however, sub- 
mitted at times to make advances to Cæsar, and 
to sue for mercy. ‘They despatched their mes- 
sengers together; but as Cleopatra sent, on her 
own account, presents of a crown, a sceptre, and 
a throne of gold, and privately instructed her 
agent to sound the disposition of Cesar with 
respect to herself, this crafty politician perceived 
that she wished to be considered apart from 
Antony, and encouraged her to hope for a sepa 
rate treaty. While he made no reply to Antony, 
and in public insisted that Cleopatra herself 


‘should surrender at discretion, he, in private, 


encouraged the queen to hope for better terms, 
and even to imagine what he supposed her will 
ing to believe, that she might still make some 
impression on his mind by the charms of her 
person. 

As Octavius had an agent at the court of 
Egypt to insinuate these hopes, and to cultivate 
the disposition which the queen had shown to a 
separate treaty, Antony became jealous of the 
frequent conferences to which this agent was 
admitted, and ordered him to be whipped, and 
expelled from the court. Sensible, however, of 
the enormity of this outrage, he wrote to Octa- 
vius soon after to make an apology. “ My misfor- 
tunes,” he said, ‘Shave made me peevish, and 
this fellow had provoked me; but you may take 
your revenge on the person of my agent, who is 
with you.” In the subsequent part of this letter 
he put Octavius in mind of their former inti- 
macy, of their near relation, of their parties of 
pleasure, or rather debaucheries; and observed, 
that his frolics with Cleopatra did not deserve to 
be more seriously treated, than affairs of the 
same kind in which they had passed some idle 
hours together. He, at the same time, delivered 
up P. ‘Turvilius, a Roman senator, who had 
been supposed accessary to the death of Julius 
Cæsar, and who had, for some time, been attach- 
ed to himself; and he concluded his letter with 
some expressions of magnanimity, saying, that 
he was willing to die, provided he could obtain 
any favourable terms for the queen of Egypt.$ 

Octavius, however, continued inexorable; and 
urging his military operations on both frontiers 


4 Plut. in Antonio. 5 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 9. 


Crap. VIL] 


of the kingdom of Egypt, got possession of Pe- 
lusium ait of Paretonium; of the first, it was 
said, in consequence of his intrigues with Cleo- 
patra, and by her connivance; of the second, by 
the entire defection of the troops which Antony 
had stationed for the defence of the place, and 
who now became an accession to the army of 
his rival. . e 

Cleopatra, as if sensible of the suspicions she 
had incurred on the surrender of Pelusium, and 
desirous to recover the confidence of Antony, 
doubled her attention to his person, kept the 
anniversary of his birth-day with unusual splen- 
dour; and, to remove any suspicion of her hav- 
ing connived at the loss of Pelusiam, delivered 
up the officer of the name of Seleucus, who had 
surrendered that place, that he might atone for 
his treachery by a suitable punishment. 

Antony, observing the progress which his 
enemy made on the frontiers of the kingdom, 
and being wcary of the project of ending his life 
ina riot, took a better resolution, and mustering 
what forees he could, both by sea and by land, 
was deterinined to try the fortune of a war, or 
to die, at least, sword in hand. When the 
enemy advanced to Alexandria, he attacked their 
cavalry, and put them to flight. Encouraged by 
his success in this encounter, he ordered all his 
forces to assemble on the first of August.6 On 
this day he proposed to bring the contest to a 
decision at once, both by sea and by land ;:? but 
the Egyptian fleet being ordered to begin the 
action, struck their colours, and surrendered 
hemselves without a blow. The cavalry, at the 
same time, deserted to the enemy; and the in- 
fantry being routed, fled into the city. 

Upon this dispersion of all his forces, Antony 
complained, that he was betrayed, and was heard 
to accusethe queen. This unhappy author of 
his misfortunes had taken refuge, during the 
action, with a few attendants, in the monument 
which, upon a plan of great magnificence, 
was then recently built for a royal sepulchre. 
Thither she had already transported all her 
jewels, money, and most valuable effects. The 
access of the place was contrived to be shut from 
within, in such a manner as not to be opened 
without great labour. It was given out, that 
‘he queen had retired in order to kill herself at 
he tomb, in which she was to be buried; and 
soon after, the report was spread that she was 
actually dead. 

Autony, being now arrived at the end of all 
his hopes, and of his efforts, made haste to follow 
the supposed example of the queen, and gave his 
sword, for this purpose, to Eros, a freed slave, 
who haul promised to use it when required in the 
last action of friendship to his master; but Eros 
unable to fulfil his proinise, instead of killing his 
master, plunged the sword into his own bosom. 
Antony then snatching the weapon, wounded 
himself; but not expiring immediately, he was 
told, as he lay bleeding, that Cleopatra was yet 
alive, and safe in the monument. Seeming to 
revive at these tidings, he gave directions that he 
should be carried to her presence. Upon his 
coming, she appeared on the battlements, but 
under pretence that she feared a surprise, refused 
to have the gates unbarred, and made it neces- 


7 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 10. 


6 Orosius, lib. vi. p. 268. 
8 Plut. in Antonio. 
JE 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


401 


sary to have him towed over the walls. Although 
she had wished to disengage herself from this 
unfortunate man, and had even submitted to be- 
tray him, now when she saw him laid at her feet 
expiring,? and covered with his blood, she beat 
her breast, and tore her hair in the agonies of 
real suffering, mixed with the affectation of pre- 
tended passion, = , 

Antony, having somewhat in his mind which 
he wished to express, called for wine, recovered 
strength enough to ntter a few words, and ex- 
pired :!© thus ending his life in the fifty-third, or, 
according .to others, in the fifty-sixth year of his 
age ;!! disposed even in the last scenes of it, to 
occupy the intervals of relaxation in riot and 
debauchery; and verifying, in all the steps of 
his manhood and age, the charge of extravagance 
and profligacy, which marked his youth, and his 
first appearances in public affairs. He was pos- 
sessed of talents for the council and the field, 
which he never exerted for any valuable purpose, 
or rather never exerted at all, except when he 
was pressed by the most urgent necessity of his 
situation. Under this pressure, indeed, he some- 
times repaired by his industry and vigour the 
breaches which were made bv his dissipation or 
neglect. Jn consequence of his connexion with 
Julius Cesar, and of the place he gained among 
the military factions, which endeavoured to en- 
gross or to divide his power, he was tempted to 
consider the Roman empire itself as the seene of 
his pleasures; and, in aiming at the sovereignty 
of the world, experienced those reverses which 
fully displayed the versatility and instability of 
his own character. But he fell, at last, deserted 
by every Roman citizen who had ever been at- 
tached to his interest; betrayed by that person 
to whose caprices chiefly he sacrificed his for- 
tunes, and under the fatal experience, that the 
utmost efforts of resolution, incited by the sense 
of extreme necessity, will nut always retrieve the 
errors of past dissipation and folly. 

When Antony gave himself the wound of 
which he died, one of his attendants, extracting 
the dagger from his body, ran with it to Octa- 
vius, who seeing the weapon stained with blood, 
and being told what had passed, perhaps in imi- 
tation of Julius Cesar, who is said to have wept 
for the death of Pompey, was observed to shed 
tears.!2 Suetonius reports, that he afterwards de- 
sired to see the body.!3 

Cleopatra, as soon as the scene in the monn- 
ment was over, and she had recollected herself, 
sent an intimation of Antony’s death to Cæsar, 
and then probably indulged her hopes, that the 
great obstacle to her peace heing removed, she 
might obtain that consideration for her separate 
interests, which Octavius, by insinuations, or 
expressions of civility, had given her cause to ex- 
pect. 

After the late contest was in a great measure 
decided, the victor continued to encourage the 
queen of Egypt to hope for a ies treaty ; 
and amused her with civilities, while he endea- 
voured to inform himself of her treasure, and to 
make sure of her as a captive to adorn his triumph, 
a circumstance esteemed of the highest import- 
ance at Rome; but he had avoided coming un- 


oe eee M a N 
9 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 10. 10 Zonar. lib. x. c. 30, 


11 Plut. in Antonio. 12 Ibid. 
13 Sueton. in Octav. c. 17. 


402 


der any engagements that should preclude him 
from the full use of his victory. Upon receiving 
her message, he sent Caius Proculeius, a Roman 
knight, and Epaphroditus, an emancipated slave, 
to sooth her fears, to administer comfort, and if 
possible, without stipulating any conditions,. to 
secure her person. 

What Octavius chiefly apprehended from the 
unfortunate queen, was some violent attempt on 
her own life. His emissaries, therefore, having 
suffered her, at her own earnest request, to re- 
main where she was until the funeral of Antony 
should be over, they made a strict search, in or- 
der to remove from her hands every weapon, or 
supposed instrument of death; and, under pre- 
tence of doing her honour, placed a guard en the 
monument. ‘They prevailed upon her after- 
wards to remove to the palace, where she was 
attended with the usual state and dignity of a 
sovereign! But being still kept at a distance 
from Cesar, and in suspense with respect to his 
intentions, she expressed great anxiety, and 
seemed to meditate some desperate purpose. In 
order to divert her from any fatal resolution, 
which might deprive Cesar’s triumph of a prin- 
cipal ornament, she was told, that he consented 
to see her, and was to make her a visit in her 
own apartments. Upon this intimation, she or- 
dered the chambers to be fitted up in the most 
elegant manner, and decorated, in particular, 
with the picture and bust of Julius Cesar.— 
When the expected visit of Octavius was to be 
paid, she took care to have bundles of the late 
Cesar’s letters and memorials before her. She 
herself was dressed in mourning, which she 
knew was supposed, at all times, to become her, 
and which, on this occasion, might give an ex- 
pression of tender melancholy that rendered her 
person and her state more affecting. When 
Octavius presented himself she rose from her 
couch; but as if overawed by his presence, with 
an air of modesty and dejection, fixed her eyes 
on the ground. In accosting him she called him 
Master. “To his father,” she said, “she owed 
all her fortunes, and now willingly resigned them 
to the son. The memory of the great Julius 
should be a sufficient comfort in all her afilic- 
tions; she would even consider him as revived 
in the person of his son. But would to God,” 
she said, bursting into tears, “that I had died 
before him, so should I have escaped the evils 
which his death, and the consequences of it have 
brought upon me!” Octavius bid her be of good 
courage; and assured her, that no hurt was in- 
tended her. But she, observing that he spoke 
these words with coldness, and turned his eyes 
away, threw herself upon the ground in agonies 
of despair. I neither wish,” she said, “ nor can 
I continue to live, I should have died when 
Cesar fell; and there is another now who calls 
upon me to follow him; suffer me to rest with 
him on whose account I die.”? 

This interview concluded with a request on 
the part of the queen, that she might be allowed 
to perform the obsequies of Antony, to which 
she proceeded with all the appearances of an af- 
fectionate widow in the deepest affliction; but, 


as there is no doubt that she had betrayed the | 


person whom she now appeared so much to la- 
ment, it is probable that her tears, though pre- 


] Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 10. 2 Ibid. xli. c. 12. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor V. 


tended to be shed on account of the dead, were, 
in reality, directed to move and to win his sur 
viving rival. She still trusted to the effects of 
her beauty, and was, in her present situation, 
what she had been in the most serious councils 
of state, a mere coquette, who being naturally 
disposed to violent passions, could personate any 
character, or turn her real passions to account 
in serving any disguised purpose of vanity or 
ambition, 

The scene which Cleopatra acted on the pre- 
sent occasion, in whatever degree she was pos- 
sessed by real or affected despair, had no other 
effect on Octavius, than to make him redouble 
his intention to prevent any attempt which she 
might intend to make against her own life. 
Epaphroditus had orders to watch her with 
great diligence; a circuinstance from which she 
had the sagacity to infer a fixed determination to 
carry her as a captive to Rome. She was soon 
confirmed in her suspicions ; having intelligence, 
that Octavius himself, being to march by land, 
had given orders that she, with her children, 
should be sent into Italy by sea. Equally anxious 
to avoid being led in triumph, as the victor was 
desirous to preserve her for this purpose, she in- 
stantly took measures to end her life. But in 
order to elude the vigilance of her keeper, she 
affected to be resigned to her fate, gave an inven- 
tory, and delivered up all her effects, reserving 
only a few jewels, which she professed an inten- 
tion to deliver with her own hands, in presents, 
to Livia and Octavia.. She even affected to dress 
in her usual gay and sumptuous manner; and 
pretending to have some business of consequence 
to communicate to Cesar, she gave Epaphroditus 
a letter, and charged him to deliver it with his 
own hands. It contained expressions of exulta- 
tion at having obtained her end, and having 
escaped froin her enemies. 

Octavius, on seeing this letter, instantly gave 
orders to prevent what he apprehended was her 
purpose; but the queen, at the arrival of the 
messenger, was already dead, and laid upon a 
couch of state. One of the women, who usually 
attended her, was likewise dead; the other was 
expiring; but while the messenger of Octavius 
was entering the chamber, observing that the 
crown had fallen from her mistress’s head, she 
made an effort, with what strength she had left, 
to replace it. No mark of violence appeared on 
the body of the queen, except a small puneture 
in her arm; and she was therefore supposed to 
have died of a venomous bite, or of a scratch 
with a poisoned instrument. ‘To render the last 
of these conjectures the more probable, it was 
said, that she always carried a pin in her hair 
the point of which was tainted with poison. 
She was now at the age of nine-and-thirty years, 
and of these had lived fourteen years with An- 
tony. ; ’ 

Octavius, being disappointed of his design to 
lead the queen of Egypt as a captive in his 
triumph, had her effigy, with an aspick fixed 
upon the arm, fabricated to supply her place in 
the procession. He no longer kept any measures 
with her family or kingdom. Cesarion, her son, 
supposed by Julius Cæsar, and of course a pre- 
tended heir to Cesar’s fortunes, had too high 
pretensions to be spared; endeavouring to make 
his escape into Ethiopia, he was taken in his 
flight, and killed, Antyllas, the son of Antony 


Cuar, VII.) 


by Fulvia, being of an age to receive impressions 
which might render him dangerous, was like- 
wise sacrificed to the safety of the conqueror. 
He had taken refuge at the shrine of Julius Ce- 
sar, but was forced from thence, and slain. 
The other children, whether of Cleopatra or of 
Antony, were spared, and honourably treated. 
Those of the latter, by Octavia, being near rela- 
tions of Cæsar, and afterwards intermarried with 
the reigning family, left a posterity who succeed- 
ed to the empire.! ; 

Among the partizans of the vanquished party 
who were ordered for execution, only two or 
three Romans of note are mentioned: Canidius, 
who had commanded the land forces of Antony 
at Actium, and who still adhered to him in the 


1 Sueton. in Octav. c. 17. Dio. Cass. lib. li. ¢. 19. 


Piut. in Antonio. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


403 


wreck of his fortunes; Cassius Parmensis, a 
man of letters and a poet, who had been attached 
to Brutus and Cassius, but, having employed his 
wit against Octavius, was received by Antony, 
and lived with him in great intimacy ; and Ovi- 
nius, who, having been a Roman senator, is said 
to have degraded himself by taking charge of the 
manufactures which were carried on in the pa- 


Jace of the queen of Egypt. 


In limiting the severity of his executions to 
these examples, Octavius appeared greatly to re- 
strain the cruelty which he had formerly exer- 
cised against his enemies; he, at the same tine, 
gave proofs of his munificence, by reeasing all 
those who were in custody at Alexandria, whe- 
ther as prisoners of state, as captives, or hostages 
from foreign nations,? 


2 Orosius, p. 269. Vell. Pater. lib. ii. e. 87 


THE 


HISTORY 


OF 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


OF THE 


ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


BOOK VI, 


CHAPTER I. 


The Merit or Demerit of Parties in the latter Period of the Roman Republic—Return of Octa- 
vius to Rome—His Triumphs and public Entertainments—Reform of the Army— Proposition 
to resign his Power— Consultation of Agrippa and Mecenas—Preludes to the pretended Re- 
signation of Octavius—His Speech in the Senate—His Consent to retain a part in the Govern- 
ment of the Empire—Distribution of the Provinces— Title of Augustus— The Establishment 


of Augustus. 
ALTHOUGH, in compiling this history, it 


has been intended to avoid expressions of mere 
praise and blame, other than are contained in the 
detail of facts and specification of characters ; and 
to state, in every instance, the transaction itself, 
rather than the judgment of the writer; yet it is 
hoped that where questions of merit or demerit 
are in any considerable degree problematical, and 
where readers are likely to take opposite sides, he 
too may be indulged in some general discussion. 
We may suppose the Roman republic to have 
been hastening to its ruin from the 


U. C. 620. sedition of Tiberius Gracchus, to 
the time on which we are now 
U. C. 723. entered. A great revolution has 


been so long in dependence, and 
more blood has been shed in an age of boasted 
learning and politeness, than perhaps has been 
known to flow in any equal period of the most 
barbarous times. 

In judging of those who were concerned in 
this transaction, we may form our opinions now 
upon speculative considerations, as they them- 
selves joined their party from motives of interest, 
ambition, or public virtue. Although it be al- 
Juwed that, in point of justice, we must give a 
preference to those who endeavoured to preserve 
the constitution of their country, and who acted 
merely in defence of themselves and their fellow- 
citizens ;. yet in this instance it will be alleged, 
that the event has had the effect of an experi- 
ment, to show that what they strove to perform 
was impracticable, and that notwithstanding the 


justice of their cause, the circumstances of the 


times were such as to have rendered their suc- 
cess not only: desperate, but in a great measure 
inexpedient. ‘They were born to a republic, it 
is true; but the people who were destined to 
govern in that republic could no longer be safely 
intrusted with government; and to contend for 
such a trust in behalf of men who were unwor- 
thy of it, was a dangerous error, for which the 
best intentions could not atone. Even the Ro- 
man senate itself could not supply all the exi- 
gencies of government over a dominion of such 
extent, and containing so many sources of cor- 
ruption. Its own members were degenerated, 
and fallen from the virtue of their ancestors. 
They were trained up in a luxury at home, 
which was to be supplied by the most cruel rapa- 
city abroad, in the provinces. Such an empire 
could be preserved only by the force and prompt 
executions of despotism. The change therefore 
from republic to monarchy, it may be alleged, 
was seasonable; and Cato, with Cicero, Brutus, 
and all the other partizans of the commonwealth, 
actuated by a mistaken, though commendable 
zeal for liberty, would have supported their fel- 
low-citizens in their pretensions to government 
after they were unworthy of it; in this attempt 
they fell a necessary sacrifice to their own errors 
and in their ruin made way for an establishment 
better fitted to the condition of the age, and to 
the character of the people, than that for which 
they contended and bled. 

In this manner of stating the subject, we lay 
the task of vindicating their own conduct on 
those who endeavoured to preserve, not upon 


Cuar. L] 


those who destroyed, the republic. But in judg- 
ing of the merits of men in so distant a scene, 
we must not proceed on conceptions drawn from 
the experience of subsequent ages, on our own 
predilection for monarchy in general, or even on 
our judgment of its expedience in that particular 
case; we must suppose ourselves in the situation 
of those who acted, and who, in the result of thìs 
contest, from the condition of equals, were to be- 
come master and servant, or lord and vassal. One 
party strove that they should be masters, the 
other that they themselves should not be slaves. 
The latter contended for the rights, whìch, to- 
zether with their fellow-citizens, they had in- 
fevited as Romans; they endeavoured to pre- 
gerve the manners, as well as the institutions, of 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


405 


| presented by Cicero, in some instances, as retain- 
ling his infiexibility, when some degree of com- 
pliance was more likely to preserve the republic. 
The same censure has been repeated by others ; 
but Cato was present to the scene, had no by- 
views to mislead him, and there is not any reason 
to prefer the judgment of those who censure him 
to his own. Cicero temporised, made the experi- 
ment of what compliance on some occasions 
could effect, and even flattered himself that he 
had gained the affections of Cesar and Pompey 
to the republic, by giving way to the arts which 
| they employed to destroy it. 
| The fellow-sufterers of Cato in the same cause 
of the republic, were persons of a different cha- 
racter from himself. To him virtue was the end, 


their conntry, against the destroyers of both. ; to them it was the means which they employed 


The other party, at first, under pretence of zeal 
for higher measures 2f popular government than 
those they enjoyed, endeavoured to corrupt the 
people whom they meant to ensiaye ; and having, 
upon plausible pretences, got. possession of the 
sword, they turned it against the established go- 
vernment of their country. Neither of those par- 
ties, probably, stated the speculative question 
which we may now be inclined to discuss, whe- 
ther republic or monarchy was best accommo- 
dated to the Roman state in the height of its 
dominion, and in the full tide of luxury ? 

The wise, the courageous, and the just alone 
are entitled to power; the innocent alone are en- 
titled to freedom. Butthey whoare not conscious 
of having forfeited their right to either, are un- 
doubtedly justifiable in persisting to maintain it. 
The virtuous who resign their freedom, at the 
same time resign their virtue, or at least yield up 
that condition which is required to preserve it. 
Citizens who were born to inherit this condition, 
and who had the courage to harbour and to 
cherish that elevation of mind which belongs to 
it, were entitled to maintain for themselves the 
post of honour to the last, and must for ever re- 
ceive from those who respect integrity and mag- 
nanimity the tribute of esteem, even of tender- 
ness, which is due to their memory. 

If ever there was a body of men fit to govern 
the world, it was the Roman senate, composed 
of citizens who had passed through the higher 
offices of state, who had studied the affairs of 
their country in the execution of its councils, and 
in the command of its armies; and it will for 
ever be remembered, in hehalf of those who 
wished to preserve its authority, that if their 
removal from the scene on which they acted was 
expedient or seasonable, it was so because that 
scene was become unworthy of their presence. 

Some of the characters, indeed, that appeared 
in this cause, may require a separate treatment. 
In that of Cato, virtue was the result of a deci 
sive and comprehensive reflection. ‘To hiin rec- 
titude of conduct was in itself, without regard to 
consequences, the supreme object of desire and 
pursuit. His penctration, as well as courage, in 
the early endeavours he made, and in the manly 
steadiness with which he persisted to oppose the 
designs of Cesar and Pompey, while others wa- 
vered, and either did not perceive their intention, 
or tamely submitted to them, gave him a striking 
superiority over his contemporaries.' He is re- 


1 The impression of Cato’s character remained so | 


deep with posterity, as well as with the immediate wit- 
aesses of his conduct, that uo authority on the part 


for the attainment of their end, and they mea- 
sured advantages by the success of their pursuits. 
Cato possessed independence in the courage and 
resolution of his own mind; they sought for itin 
the institutions of their country ; they wished to 
preserve their own rights, and would yield them 
to no individual or set of men whatever. This 
character is indeed in a high degree meritorious ; 
no more is required to form an excellent citizen, 
and no more was required but the prevalence or 
frequency of such a character at Rome to have 
preserved, and even to have reformed, that sickly 
and perishing constitution of government. 

The natural antidote of vice is restraint and 
correction; but in great disorders, and where the 
system itself is corrupted, what is applied for a 
remedy is sometimes an evil, as well as the dis- 
ease. They who peruse the history of Rome, 
under the continucd effects of a revolution, which 
is now accomplished or fast approaching, will 
find no cause to congratulate the world, on its 
having escaped from the factions of Clodius and 
Milo, to incur the evils that arose under Caius 
and Nero. 

The impossibility of preserving the republic, 
or its unfitness to remain at the head of so great 
an empire, is no doubt the most plausible excuse 
which is made for its subversion; but this apo- 
logy neither Cæsar nor Pompey was entitled to 
make for himself. Casar affected a zeal for 
popular government, and Pompey strove to in- 
flame all its evils, in order to render himself ne- 
cessary to the aristocracy. Cæsar fomented 
political troubles, in order to weaken the hands 
of the senate, or in order to find a pretence to 
make war upon them; and at last, under the 
show of releasing the people from the tyranny 
of that body, drew that sword with which he ac- 
complished the ruin of both. 

‘The senate indeed had many difficulties to e1- 
counter; that of protecting the provinces from 
oppression, in which many of their own mem- 
bers were concerned; that of restraining the 
tumults and disorders of a licentious people, led 
by different factions, desirous of change, or im- 


of those who wished to traduce him had any effect. It 
is remarkable, that even the authority of the Cesars 
did not silence those who in other instances submit- 
ted to flatter them, nor prevent their joining in the 
praises of Cato. Virgil and Horace, though courtiers, 
could not be restrained on this subject. Vid. Æneid. 
lib. viii. ver. 670. Hor. lib. i. od. 12. He was revered, 
it has been said, rather as a good than as a great man; 
but mankind do not revere without an opinion of 
| great ability, as well as benevolent intention. Vid 
Lord Bolingbrcke’s Patriot King. 


406 


patient of government ; and that of conducting a 
pretended popular assembly, in whom the legis- 
lation and sovereignty of the empire was nomi- 
nally vested. It is, however, difficult to judge 
now far so able a council, while they themselves 
remained in any degree uncorrupted, might not 
have found antidotes, or at least temporary expe- 
dients, to resist every other evil, if they had not 
been so ably attacked as they were by the first 
Cesar and Pompey, who joined interests together, 
to break down the defences of a fortress, which 
they afterwards severally intended to occupy. 

-The ordinary train of affairs at Rome; the sub- 
stitution of tumults for regular assemblies of the 
people ; the practice of committing the provinces, 
with so many resources, and the command of 
such armies, with so little control, to the discre- 
tion of ambitious citizens; the dangerous powers 
which accompanied the higher offices of state, 
without any check upon those who were inclined 
to abuse those powers, the easy recourse which 

ersons of dangerous pretensions, when rejected 

y the senate, had to popular riots, under the de- 
nomination of Comitia, or Assemblies of the 
People, made the destruction of the common- 
wealth in some measure necessary. 

With such citizens as the Gracchi, as Apulei- 
us, as Marius and Cinna, Clodius and Milo, it 
was difficult to preserve a republic; but with such 
citizens as Cesar and Pompey, it was altogether 
impossible; or rather the republic may be consi- 
dered as at an end from the time it was in their 
power to dispose of it. 

The first class of these adventurers were mis- 
led by their passions, or fell into the vices of their 
situation. ‘They endeavoured to rule by popular 
tumults or military force, and when they could 
not pervert the ordinary forms of the state to 
their purpose, employed violence to set them 
aside; but even in this, by their mutual opposi- 
tion, they preserved a kind of balance, in which 
the freedom of the commonwealth seemed to re- 
main. 

Pompey and Cesar promoted systematically 
all the evils to which their country was exposed. 
They had recourse to the populace for grants 
which the senate refused; they prolonged the 
term of provincial appointments, which were suf- 
ficiently dangerous, however short; they united 
together powers that were sufficiently dangerous 
when separate; united the command of armies 
in the provinces with the authority of office at 
Rome; and, instead of suspending the fate of the 
commonwealth by their mutual obstructions to 
each other, hastened its ruin by concerting toge- 
ther their measures against it; leaving the deci- 
sion of their respective claims, till after they had 
rendered the republic a necessary prey to the one 
or the other. 

Pompey for some time thought himself in ac- 
tual possession of the monarchy; Cesar, in the 
mean time, provided the most effectual means to 
ravish it from him. ‘To state the difficulty of 
preserving the republic in such hands, as an ex- 
cuse fer their having destroyed it, were to offer 
the character of criminals as an excuse for their 
crimes. When the highwaymen are abroad, the 
traveller must be robbed; but this is not an ex- 
cuse for the crime. Cæsar and Pompey are 
blamed, not because the republic had an end, but 
because they themselves were the evils by which 
it perished, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox VI. 


The necessity of submitting, at least for a 
time, to the government of single men, had been 
repeatedly experienced by the Romans, and was 
so in the highest degree at the times to which 
these observations refer; but this will not justify 
the pretensions of every profligate person who 
may affect to place himself in the station of so- 
vereign. If upon this ground Cato and Brutus 
were to be blamed for resisting the power of 
Cesar; the last, in his turn, must be blamed for 
resisting the power of Pompey and other citi- 
zens, in their respective ages, for rejecting the 
advances which were made by Marius, Cinna, 
Catiline, and other profligate adventurers, who 
attempted to place themselves at the head of the 
empire. ; 

Of the two Cæsars, the first possessed the ta- 
lent of influencing, of gaining, and employing 
men to his purpose, beyond any other person that 
is known in the history of the world; but it is 
surely not for the good of mankind that he should 
be admired in other respects. To admire even 
his clemency, is to mistake policy and cunning 
for humanity. The second Cesar, in the part 
which he acted against the republic, is in many 
respects more excusable than the first. He en- 
tered the scene when the piece was much farther 
advanced, when his countrymen had submitted 
to monarchy, under the title of a perpetual dic- 
tatorship, and when he himself was considered 
as the heir of a person who had possessed this 
pre-eminence. He was therefore at least nearer 
to the condition of an hereditary prince, who may 
be allowed to consider sovereignty as his birth- 
right, and who, however he may be disposed to 
promote the good of mankind, has a right to 
maintain his own station, and may be supposed 
to acquit himself sufficiently of his duty, by 
making a proper use of his power, without bein 
under any obligation to resign it, or to admit of 
improper encroachments upon the estate to which 
he is born. 

The first Cesar strove against those who en- 
deavoured to preserve their own rights and those 
of their country; the second, although he suc- 
ceeded to the same quarrel, and actually paid no 
respect to the republic, more than was necessary 
to cover his design against it, yet appears, more 
than the first, in the light of a person who strove 
only with the rivals of his own ambition, and 
with his competitors for the succession of his 
uncle and adoptive father, who, having declared 
him the heir of his fortune, gave him a pretence to 
support the pre-eminence he himself had gained. 

This apology, nevertheless, though more pow- 
erful in its application to the case of the second 
Cesar than to that of the first, is very imperfect 
in its application to either. If Octavius had 
been educated under any impressions of here- 
ditary right to the sovereignty of the Roman re- 
public, the fate of the person from whom he 
derived his supposed right, and the subsequent, 
though temporary, re-establishment of the com- 
monwealth, which he witnessed, and which he 
pretended to approve, were sufficient to have un- 
deceived him, and to have taught him the part 
which he had to act as a Roman citizen, and the 
modesty with which he ought to have waited for 
the legal age and the constitutional election, in 
order to obtain those offices of state to which, in 
common with the other citizens of Rome, his con- 
dition no doubt highly entitled him. 


Cuar. L] 


Octavius, however, is not perhaps to be tried 
so much in the capacity of a Roman citizen born 
to the republic, as in that of leader of a party, 
born at a time when the competition for superi- 
ority was general, and when sovereignty or death 
were the alternatives to be chosen by persons of 
such rank and pretensions as his own. In this 
capacity he affected what his grand-uncle and 
adoptive father had taught him to aim at; the 
suppression of civil government, and the removal 
of all his own competitors for power. 

As Pompey, with Cato and the principal sup- 
porters of the senate had sunk under the first 
Cesar, so Brutus, Cassius, and the other re- 
storers of the commonwealth, with the last of the 
family of Pompey, sunk under Octavius, Anto- 
ny, and Lepidus; and the two last, in their turn, 
having sunk under Octavius, this successful ad- 
venturer now remains sole commander of all the 
armies of the republic, and sole master of all 
its provinces, from the banks of the Euphrates 
to the sea of Britain. And the contest for this 
mighty sovereignty being now at least decided, 
it remains that we observe what new form the 
world is to receive under the dominion of its mas- 
ter, or what mighty harvest is to be reaped by 
him who is in possession of the field, and who is 
now enabled to gather what so many heroes liad 
sown or planted, and what so many pretenders 
to the same object would have ravished or torn 
from each other. 

This able adventurer having, in other situa- 
tions, conducted his affairs with so much dis- 
cretion, as well as enterprise, continued in his 
present elevation to exercise the same profitable 
virtues, In the severities which he had formerly 
practised against those who opposed him, there 
was sufficient evidence of a cruel and sanguina- 
ry nature,! and it were monstrous to suppose 
that the murders which were perpetrated by his 
order, or with his consent, could be justified by 
the necessity of affairs in which his engaging at 
all was criminal. But as the horror of Sylla’s 
cruelties, still remaining in the minds of the peo- 
ple, was a great bar to the success of any similar 
usurpation, and suggested to Julius Cesar, in the 
beginning of his career, an opposite course of 
clemency and inercy ; so the fate of this last ad- 
venturer, who, after having shown mercy to 
many of his opponents, fell at last by the hands 
of those he had spared, probably suggested to the 
triumvirate the necessity of securing themselves 
before they affected the reputation of mercy, and, 
as we shall see, suggested to this heir of Cesar 
the caution not to affront, so directly as the other 
had done, that republican spirit, whose effects he 
had occasion to dread. 

Octavius, though inferior to his uncle in the 
capacity of a soldier, being equally master of 
every necessary artifice, had recourse to the use 
of clemency when it suited the state of his affairs. 
His steps became gradually less bloody, from the 
first fatal proscription to the last victory which 
he obtained over Antony; and in this he reversed 
the order that was observed by the first Cesar, 
beginning to affect moderation in a period of the 
war, corresponding to that in which the military 


1 See the History of the Proscription, and his at- 
tendance at the sacrifices or executions done at Peru- 
sia. Sueton. in Octav. c. 15. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


407 


executions of the other were o’oserved to have 
become more decisive and bloody. 

In the whole management of the contest with 
Antony, Cctavius had conducted himself with a 
singular address. Stating himself as a Roman 
consul, merely, he discontinued the power of tri- 
umvir in his own person, in order to strip his 
antagonist likewise of that character. To avoid 
appearances which might divide any part of the 
Roman people against him, he overlooked Anto- 
ny entirely in the pretended quarrel witli the 
queen of Egypt, or he affected to consider him as 
a person under some fatal delusion, and in hazard 
of becoming a traitor to his own country, from his 
attachment to a stranger and an artful woman. 
The war was declared against the queen of 
Egypt alone, and, like any other foreign war, 
was undertaken by Octavius in the capacity of 
Roman consul, and with an observance of all the 
usual forms of the commonwealth, 

Octavius was remarkable for employing dis- 
guises, which, though too thin to conceal the 
truth, furnished his own party, at least, with a 
pretence for supporting lim, and considerably 
helped him forwards in the execution of all his 
designs. Affecting to be no more than consul, 
or ordinary magistrate, he exercised the power 
of a master, or military usurper, in the western 
provinces; and hastened, by the reduction of 
Egypt, and the suppression of his rivals who had 
taken refuge in that kingdom, to make himself 
equally sovereign in the east. In the absence 
of this consul the affairs of state in the capital 
were not permitted, as usual, to devolve on his 
nominal colleague, nor, in the absence of both 
consuls, to devolve on the officer that was next 
in rank; but were in the hands of Mæcenas, a 
person known for the minister or confidant of 
Octavius, without any other rank or title of of- 
fice in the commonwealth. These circumstances 
were sufficient to discredit the professions which 
he continued to make of his zeal for the consti- 
tution of the republic; but when it is convenient 
for parties to be deceived, they shut their eyes 
upon every circumstance which tends to expose 
the deception. 

It was not indeed necessary at present that the 
people sliould be imposed upon, in order to enable 
the head of the army to reign with an absolute 
sway in Italy and over all the western provinces. 
As the troops who were actually under arms 
looked forward to their general for future pro- 
visions and settlements, so the veterans then 
established in the country, looked up to him as 
the guardian of their property, and considered 
his power as the principal security of what they 
possessed. If it were necessary, in this case, to 
preserve the appearances of civil government, in 
order to conciliate the minds of the citizens, it 
was equally necessary to preserve the reality of 
absolute power, in order to gratify the army, and 
in order to continue to the veterans the principal 
security by which they held their lands. And 
this wary politician accommodated himself with 
uncommon discernment, to the feelings or preju- 
dices of both. 

The superior address of Octavius, in the con- 
test with Antony, gave continual presages of 
victory on his side; and from the beginning of 
the war to its final decision at Actium, and to 
the last close of the scene in Pgypt, partizans 
were continually passing from the losing to the 


408 


winning side. Upon the reduction of Egypt, the 
victor, though pretending to act in the capacity 
of Roman consul, did not, as in former times, re- 
fer to the senate the arrangements to be made in 
his conquest; nor did he wait the formality of a 
commission from Rome, authorising him to settle 
the provinces, He named a governor, and gave 
orders for the repair of all the public works, 
which, on account of their effect in distributing 
the inundations of the Nile, made, in that king- 
dom, a great and important object of state, and 
by their being neglected in the late troubles, had 
occasioned much distress. 

The kingdom of Egypt was a principal gra- 
nary for the supply of Italy, and it is probable 
that its consequence had been severely felt in the 
late interruption of its exports. Octavius there- 
fore took measures to secure his possession of a 
country, by which he observed that the state of 
Italy and the capital of the empire might be 
greatly affected. He deprived the Egyptians of 
all the forms of their monarchy; and, in order to 
efface the memory of their national indepen- 
dence, and to discontinue pretensions which the 
inhabitants of Alexandria used to support by 
tumults and revolts, he abolished all their public 
assemblies and national councils. He forbade 
the resort of Egyptian nobles to Rome, and of 
Roman senators to Egypt. Asthere was reason 
to apprehend that there might still exist, under 
the ruins of this late opulent monarchy, or under 
the remains of Antony’s party there, some sparks 
of fire which the ambition or intrigues of any 
considerable partizan might kindle into a flame, 
he chose for governor Cornelius Gallus, a person 
of equestrian rank and moderate pretensions, not 
likely to harbour ambitious designs; and made 
it a rule ta have similar qualifications in future 
governors, and to perpetuate the other parts of 
an establishment which he now made, for the 
preservation of so important a territory, and the 
government of so factious a people. 

While Octavius made these arrangements in 
Egypt, he secured a great treasure, of which a 
considerable part was found in the coffers of the 
late queen, and part arose from the contributions 
which he himself imposed on the city of Alex- 
andria and other parts of the kingdom. And 
being, from these funds, prepared to acquit him- 
self of the pecuniary engagements he had come 
under to the army, and enabled to make dona- 
tions to the populace of Rome, whose favour was 
necessary for him in the farther prosecution of 
his designs, he set out on his return to Italy; but 
having stopped in the island of Samos, while the 
army in separate divisions was moving to the 
westward, he passed the winter at this place, de- 
ferring his arrival at Rome until the troops should 
be assembled, and every other circumstance pre- 


pared for the triumphal entries he meant to make | 


into the capital. 
During his stay in Samos, the neighbouring 


towns and provinces vied with each other in de-| 
monstrations of submission to his person, and of | 
The inhabitants of Per-| 


zeal for his cause. 
gamus and Nicomedia made offer of divine ho- 
nours to himself, and petitioned for leave to erect 
a temple for the purpose of performing these 
honours. ‘Those of Ephesus and Nicza, as being 
more modest or more delicate in their flattery, di- 
rected this compliment to his adoptive father, the 
late Cesar, to whom, together with Roma, con- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


sidered as joint deities, they proposed to erect a 
shrine and a temple. 

In Italy, at the same time, similar or more im- 
portant tributes of adulation and servility were 
paid to the victor, At Rome, all the honours 
with which the republic had been accustomed to 
reward the eminent service of her citizens, had 
been for some time lavished on those who were 
most successful in subverting her government. 
and these honours were now heaped on Octa- 
vius with a profusion proportioned to the as- 
cendant he had gained by the suppression of all 
his competitors. The statues which had been 
erected to his rival Mark Antony were broken 
down, and the name of Marcus for ever forbid in 
that family : asif the extinction of this rival were 
an end of every war, notwithstanding that many 
hostile nations were yet in arms on the frontiers 
of the empire, the gates of Janus were ostenta- 
tiously shut, and Octavius declared to be the re- 
storer of peace to the world. A triumphal arch 
was erected at Brundusium, on the spot where 
it was supposed he was to set his foot on shore. 
The anniversaries of his birth and of his victo- 
ries were to be celebrated for ever as days of 
thanksgiving, and his name was to be inserted 
in the hymns or public prayers which were 
statedly sung, or offered up for the safety of the 
commonwealth. 

On the first of January, while Oc- 

U. C. 724. tavius was still at Samos, he being ad- 
mitted a fifth time into the office of 

ing Ka ie? consul, the senate and people took an 
Apuleius, ex oath of allegiance, or in words more 
Kal. Julii nearly corresponding to the terms of 
Polit. Valer. their language, took an oath to ob- 
i SOD serve his acts and decrees, They 
declared him tribune of the people for an unli- 


. mited time, and extended the powers of this office 


beyond the usual bounds of the city. They or- 
dained, that from thenceforward the appeals 
usually made to the people should be made to 
Cesar alone, and that in criminal judgments, 
what was called the vote of Minerva, an act of 
grace provided for the pardon of criminals when 
condemned only by a single vcte of majority, 
should from thenceforward be ascribed to him, 
and consequently be termed, the Mercy, or the 
Vote of Cesar.! 

The precipitancy with which the Roman se- 
nate and people now rushed into servitude, had 
probably no mixture of that sullen design with 
which the partizans of the republic had prepared 
the first Cæsar for his fate. ‘The retainers of the 
victorious party raised the cry of adulaticn, and 
they were followed, in expressions of servility, by 
persons who wished to recommend themselves 
in the most early advances, or who dreaded be- 
ing marked out for resentment in case they ap- 
peared to be tardy in expressing their zeal, But 
what, under established monarchy, may be con- 
sidered as the duty and the loyalty of subjects to 
their sovereign, and like filial affection, though 
sometimes partial and misplaced, is always a vir- 
tue, and salutary to mankind, in such rapid 
transitions, from the pretensions of citizens to 
the submission of slaves, is a mortifying example 


| of the weakness and depravity to which human 


nature is exposed. 
The apparent servility of all orders of men 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. xxxi. 


Crap. IP] 


under the usurpation of Julius Cesar, probably 
inspired the security which gave the conspira- 
tors such an advantage against him. The ex- 
ample, however, put Octavius, though less ex- 
posed, much more on his guard; and may serve 
to acconnt for many of the precautions he took, 
and for many of the forms he observed, in the 
sequel of his government. He had occasion, in- 
deed, to experience, 1n his own person, that his 
precautions were not altogether unnecessary. In 
the midst of the ‘ate demonstrations of joy for his 
victory, there were still a few who whetted their 
swords in secret. against him, as the cause of their 
publie degradation, and the author of their pri- 
vate wrongs, Lepidus, the son of the late de- 
graded triumvir, and nephew of Marcus Brutus 
by his sister Junia, incited probably by this do- 
mestic example, and by so many motives of a 
private and public natnre, had procured some ac- 
complices, and was preparing to cut short the 
usurpation of Octavius on his return to Rome. 
But tiis design, no way justified by any consi- 
derations of prudence or public utility, was de- 
feated by the vigilance of Mæcenas, and ended 
in the execution of the young Lepidus, and in 
the imprisonment of his mother Junia, who re- 
mained in confinement until she was admitted 
to bail, at the humble request of her husband, 
the late triumvir and associate in the empire with 
Octavius and Antony, and who, to the other 
marks of the humiliation which he now endured, 
joined that of being overlooked even by those 
who were supposed to have suffered by his 
tyranny ? 

Octavius having, by his stay in the island of 
Samos, disconcerted the effect of this conspiraey, 
and given sufficient time for the transportation 
of his army, and the other apparatus of his tri- 
umph into Italy, set out for that country, and in 
his way visited the scene of his late victory at 
Actium, Atthis place, Apollo being the prin- 
cipal object of worship, he had, immediately after 
the action, sclected from the captures a galley of 
each rate to be placed as an offering to the god; 
and at Toryné, on the opposite side of the straits, 
where his own army had been stationed before 
the engagement, he directed a city to be raised 
under the name of Nicopolis.3 

The conqueror, upon his arrival at Rome, was 
received by Politus, who had succeeded to the 
office of consul at the resignation of Apuleius, 
and who, though now his colleague, dropped the 
pretension to equality, and performed the saeri- 
fices of thanksgiving which had been appointed 
for his safe return. Octavius hitherto, either by 
the nature of the wars in which he had been 
engaged, or by the event of them, had not been 
entitled to a triumph; or being, by his temper 
and great caution, averse to ostentation, he had 
neglected to avail himself of this honour. But 


governed by vanity, something was due to the 
public opinion, to the wishes of those who had 
shared in the glories of his victories, and to the 
impressions which even pageantry makes on the 
minds of those who are to be governed. He 
therefore determined to exhibit three separate 
triumphal processions, The first for his victory 
over the Panonians, the Japydes, and the Dal- 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. li. e. 1. Sueton. in Octav. c. 18, 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


2 Vell. Pater. lib. ji. c. 88. Liv. Epitome, lib. cxxxv. 


409 


matians; the second for his victory at Actium; 
and the third for the conquest of Egypt. Inthe 
first of these triumphs, Carinus, by whom the 
war of Illyricum had been chiefly condueted, was 
admitted to partake with the commander under 
whose auspices the subject of triumph had been 
gained. In the third was exhibited a scene, 
which, for riches and splendour, greatly sur- 
passed any of the former, being enriched with 
the treasure he had amassed in Egypt, and with 
various trophies constructed from the spoils of 
that country. Among these were earricd the 
effigy of the late queen, having, in allusion to the 
supposed manner of her death, the aspick repre- 
sented on her arm. This pageant was followed 
by her surviving children, who were led as cap- 
tives. 

In these processions a circumstance was TC- 
marked, which indicated considerable innova- 
tion in the pretensions of the person by whom 
they were to be led. It had been usual for the 
officers of state to meet the triumphal march at 
the gates of Rome, and afterwards to advance 
before it into the city. In conformity with the 
first part of this custom, the consul and other 
magistrates met the procession at the gates; but 
suflering the conqueror to pass before them, fell 
behind, and foliowed in his train to the capitol. 
Here he deposited, in the temple of Jupiter, six- 
teen thousand pondo, or a hundred and sixty 
thousand ounces of gold, with fifty millions in 
Roman money, or above four hundred thousand 
pounds sterling ;4 and at the close of the cere- 
mony distributed a thousand sestertii, or above 
eight pounds of our money a man to the troops ; 
and this, to an army consisting of one hundred 
and twenty thousand men, amounted to a sum 
of near a million sterling. To the officers, be- 
sides his pecuniary bounty, he gave honorary 
rewards. To Agrtppa, in particular, he gave a 
blue ensign in token of his naval victories; to the 
people he made a donation of four hundred ses- 
tertii, or about three pounds five shillings a man, 
and doubled the usual allowance of corn from the 
public granaries; discharged all that he owed, 
remitted all the debts that were due to himself, 
and refused all the presents which were offered 
to him from the diflerent towns and districts of 
Italy. 

These aceumulations and distributions of 
foreign spoils at Rome, or the general expecta- 
tions of prosperous times, produced great or very 
sensible effects in raising the price of houses, 
lands, and other articles of sale, whether in Italy 
or in the contiguous provinces; a circumstance 
which, joined to the new and strange appear- 
ance of the gates of the temple of Janus being 
shut, as a signal of universal peace, made these 
triumphs of Octavius appear an era of felicity 


.and hope to the empire. 
though he himself, in appearance, was no way f 


They were followed by other magnificent 
ceremonies; the dedicating of a temple which 
had been erected to Minerva, and the opening of 
a great hall which had been inscribed with the 
name of Julius Cesar. In that hall was placed 
a noted statue of victory which had been brought 
from ‘Farentum; and there too were hung up 
the trophies whieh had been collected in Egypt. 
The statue of Cleopatra, in gold, was placed in 
the temple of Venus, and at the same time the 


— Coad 


4 Sueton. in Octav. c. xx. 


410 


shrine of Julius Cesar, as well as those of Jupi- 
ter, Juno, and Minerva, were decorated with 
any ensigns or badges of victory. 

On occasion of these solemnities, a variety of 
ca were exhibited: that of Troy, in particu- 
ar, was now instituted, being a procession fornied 
by youth of high rank, mounted on horseback, 
and led by Marcellus and Tiberius, the nephew 
and the stepson of Octavius. Races were run 
in chariots and on horseback, by persons of high 
rank ; and fights of giadiators were exhibited, in 
which, to the supposed disgrace of the times, it 
is remarked, that a Roman senator, of the name 
of Quintus Ventelius, was one of the combatants. 
Numerous parties of captives from the Daci and 
Snevi, ina form that might pass for real battles, 
were mide to fight for their liberty, that was pro- 
posed as the prize of the victors. Many exhibi- 
tions were made of hunting and baiting of wild 
beasts, in which were presented a rhinoceros and 
hippopotamos or sea horse, animals, till then, un- 
known at Rome. In the time of these enter- 
tainments, which continued many days, Octa- 
vius either really was, or pretended to be taken 

ill, and left the honour of presiding at the shows 
to some private senators, who, together with 
many other members of their body, to increase 
the solemnity, feasted the people in their turns.! 

Such had been the arts by which candidates 
for public favour, in the latter times of the re- 
public, maintained in the capital the considera- 
tion they had gained by their services on the 
frontiers of the empire; and the continuance of 
these arts had now the more effect, that the 
people, who still had a claim to this species of 
courtship, were become insensible to any other 
privilege of Roman citizens, and were ready to 
barter a political consequence, which they were 
no longer fit to enjoy, for a succession of sports 
and entertainments that amused their leisure, or 
for a distribution of bread, which, without the 
usual and hard conditions of industry or labour, 
helped to give them subsistence. 

It is observed, that in the preceding year, 
while the Egyptian war was yet in dependance, 
aconcourse of Roman citizens, assuming the 
powers of the people in public assembly, bestow- 
ed on Statilius Taurus by a formal decree, in 
return for his munificence, in exhibiting matches 
of gladiators and the baiting of wild beasts, the 
privilege of naming annually one of the pretors. 
So irregular and absurd were become the pro- 
ceedings of what were called the assemblies of 
the people; and the wary Octavius could not 
overlook the effect of these arts, in gaining their 
consent to the dominion he meant to establish. 
But while he indulged the people in their dispo- 
sition to amusement and dissipation, he gave the 
necessary attention to his military arrangements, 
and took measures to secure the possession of 
that principal support, on which sovereignty, in 
such an empire, must be founded. He had 
experienced the danger which may arise from 
arinies ill governed, and knew that a power may 
become insecure, by an abuse of the means by 
which it is gained. When to the troops, which 
he himself commanded in Sicily, were joined 
those of Lepidus and Sextus Pompeius, the 
engine, become too unwieldy for his manage- 
ment, and without any other principle of goveri- 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. li. c. 22, 23. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


ment, but fear, might baffle his skill to conduct í 
it. He learned, upon that occasion, that the 
considerations of civil justice, and the respect 
which is paid to some form of political subordi- 
nation, are necessary even to the discipline and 
order of a military establishment. 

Upon this account, Octavius, immediately 
after his victories in Sicily, had proceeded with 
great address, to reduce and to purge the legions, 
by dismissing strangers and fugitive slaves, and 
by ordering the levies from thenceforward to be 
confined to citizens of Rome. The denomina- 
tion of Roman citizen, indeed, was no longer ap- 
propriated to the descendants of the Alban or 
Sabin colony, nor even to the inhabitants of the 
municipal towns of Italy. It had been commu- 
nicated to many cities and provinces beyond 
these limits, and it was likely now, with much 
greater propriety than ever, to be extended to 
the free, or well-born and respectable class of 
the inhabitants in all parts of the empire. By 
limiting, however, the levies of the army to this 
name of respect and of real privilege, Octavius 
restored, in some degree, the connection between 
the civil and military honours, taught the soldier 
to value himself on his condition as a citizen, 
and the citizen to consider as an honour the 
name of a soldier. 

Upon this arrangement, the commander in 
chief of the army, as first magistrate of the 
commonwealth, had a double claim to obedience, 
and, joined to his military power, had an autho- 
rity, derived from a principle of justice and of 
civil right, without which armies are no more 
than companies of banditti, whose force may be 
occasionally turned against the person who leads 
them, as well as against his enemies. 

The legions assembled at Rome, on occasion 
of the late triumphal processions, were now to 
be distributed to what were intended as their 
ordinary stations in time of peace. Of these 
stations, the principal were on the Euphrates, on 
the Rhine, and or the Danube; but, before this 
distribution could be finally made, some troubles, 
which, notwithstanding the late signal of general 
peace, still subsisted in some parts of the empire, 
particularly on the Moselle and the Rhine, in 
the interior parts of Spain, and on the confines 
of Macedonia, required attention. To the first 
of these quarters, Nonius Gallus was sent to re- 
duce the Treviri,2 who, in concert with some 
German nations, made incursions into Gaul. 
Statilius Taurus was sent into Spain, against 
the Astures and Cantabri,3? and Marcus Crassus, 
from Macedonia, had orders to repress the incur- 
sions of the Daci and Bastarni, Scythian nations, 
who had passed the Danube and the mountains 
of Hemus, and who had taken possession of 
some districts in Thrace; but, upon the ap- 
proach of Crassus, they repassed those moun- 
tains, and left the Romans again in possession of 
the lands, which they had formerly occupied in 
that quarter.4 

The officers employed on these different ser- 
vices, were no longer, as formerly, supreme in 
their respective stations, and accountable only to 
the senate and people ; they were understood to 


2 The Bishoprick of Treves. 

3 The inhabitants of what is now called Asturia 
and Cantabria. 

4 Dio. Cass. lib. Ivii. c. 54—57. Tacit. An. lib. iv. 
e. 5. 


Cuar. L] 


be lieutenants of a superior officer acting as 
general governor over all the provinces, and com- 
mander in chief of all the armies in the empire. 
This supreme command Octavius held under 
the well known name of imperator, which was 
usually given in the field to victorious generals, 
and which he, contrary to former practice, now 
retained even in the city; and,as we shall have 
occasion to observe,’ gradually appropriated to 
himself and his successors. 

In the character which Octavius now assumed, 
he united, in support of his authority, the pre- 
rogatives of consul, censor, and tribune of the 
people; and thus, in divesting himself of the 
name of triumvir, he affected to re-establish the 
constitution of the republic, and to restore the 
ordinary magistrates and officers of state: but 
to a person, who valued safety no less than 
power, such an establishment was far from being 
sufficiently secure. The dignities of consul, 
censor, and tribune, being by the constitution of 
the republic separate and temporary, the unpre- 
cedented conjunction, and continuance of them 
in the same person, was a palpable imposition, 
which could be no longer safe than it was sup- 
ported by force; and depending on the army 
merely, without any plea of right, presented an 
object of aiffbition to every adventurer, who could 
bring an army in support of his claim. 

These considerations, probably, suggested 
to Octavius the necessity of endeavouring to 
strengthen his title. He had hitherto kept pos- 
session of the government under various pre- 
tences; but never declared any imtention to 
realize, or to perpetuate the sovereignty in his 
own person. For some tine, he had professed 
no more than a desire to avenge the death of his 
relation Julius Cæsar. Next, he pretended to 
remove some disorders which had crept into the 
commonwealth ; and, last of al!, to oppose the de- 
sisns of Antony, who, at the breaking out of the 
quarrel between them, he suggested, was likely 
to sacrifice the rights of the Roman people to the 
caprices of a stranger and a woman. 

These rivals, in their appeals to the judgment 
of the public, vied in their professions of zeal for 
the commonwealth, mutually challenged each 
other to resign their unconstitutional powers; 
and each retained his own power, under the 
single pretence that he was obliged to continue 
in arms, until he should have secured the re- 
public against the designs of lhis antagonist. 

This pretence being now removed, it was be- 
rome necessary that Octavius should more fully 
explain himself, and declare upon what footing 
he was to hold the government. The chief par- 
tizans of the republic had fallen by their own 
hands, or by the swords of their enemies. All 
his rivals were cut off, and the whole military 
force of the empire ceutred in himself; but he 
had experienced, in the repeated mutinies of the 
army, the precarious state of his authority over 
men, who were directed by mere caprice or per- 
sonal attachment, without any acknowledged 
title on the part of their leader. 

An open usurpation of kingly power was still 
odious at Rome; it appeared as a direct attack, 
not only upon the forms of the Roman republic, 
but likewise as an attack upon the private right 
of every citizen who pretended to consideration 
and power proportioned to the rank of his family 
or his personal qualities; and though the people 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


411 


in general were disposed to submission, yet the 
violence of a few, who might be willing to ex- 
pose themselves as the champions of the com- 
monwealth, was still to be dreaded. In this 
capacity, not only citizens having high preten- 
sions in the civil line, but military officers like- 
wise, might be dangerous to tlieir leader; and 
choosing rather to claim preferments and honours 
as their right, than as the gift of a master, might 
publicly spurn his authority, or employ against 
him the hands of some secret assassin, whom 
in any successful attempt the law would protect, 
and the public voice would applaud. 

Julius Cesar, whose personal qualities were 
sufficient to have supported him in any preten- 
sions, still found himself mistaken in relying on 
the attachment of his own officers, as much as 
on the submission of his fellow-citizens. He 
found persons of every condition, still animated 
with the spirit of republican government, com- 
bined for his destruction, and he fell a sacrifice 
to his excessive security, or rather to the vanity 
and ostentation with which he affected to held 
his power. His successor on the present occa- 
sion, as he was by nature more cautious and had 
less ostentation, so he was taught, by this alarm- 
ing example to disguise his ambition, or to pro- 
ceed less directly to his object. 

Octavius, therefore, having taken the most 
effectual measures to secure lhis power, still 
thought it necessary to affect a purpose of re- 
signing it, and of restoring the republican go- 
vernment. It is reported, that he even held a 
serious consultation on this subject with his 
principal advisers and confidents, Agrippa and 
Mecenas. This fact may be questioned; but in 
a character so entirely made up of artifice and 
design, it is not unreasonable to suppose that he 
wished to disguise his thoughts even to his most 
intimate couusellors, or to secure their approba- 
tion before he disclosed his real intentions. 

Agrippa and Maecenas are said to have been 
of dilterent opinions respecting the propriety of 
their master’s resignation; and the questian ac- 
cordingly, as it was supposed to be debated in 
this famous council, has furnished a curious 
theme to historians and rlretoricians. Agrippa 
encouraged Octavius to persist in lis supposed 
intention to resign liis power, and supported this 
opinion, by stating the advantages of republican 
government. “lt is the tendency of the re- 
public,” he said, “to multiply examples of great 
men; it is the tendency of monarcliy to diminish 
their numbers, and to sacrifice to one persan, 
the pretensions and the elevation of many. Un- 
der the first speeies of government, the Reman 
state has attained to its present greatness; under 
the second, it may languish, and sink to the level 
of other nations.” He put Octavius in nind of 
his duty to the senate, and to the Roman people, 
for whose rights, while he took arms against the 
murderers of Ins father, he had always professed 
the greatest respect :—bid hin beware of the re- 
proaches he must incur, if it should now appear, 
cither that he had formerly employed the pre- 
tence of filial duty as a cloak to his ambition ; or 
that, now finding the paste at his merey, he 
neglected their rights the moment it was tn his 
power to violate them with impunity.— He men- 
tioned the danger of attempting to reduce into 
servitude a people, who had been accustumed not 
only to freedom, but to dominion over other 


412 


uations ;—the difficulties that must arise in the 
government of so great an empire ;—the thorns 
that are for ever fastened in the pillows of kings; 
—the dangers to which he must be exposed, from 
ae who should feel themselves injured by 
tis seizing the government, or who should think 
themselves entitled to supplant him, and whose 
courage, in every attempt against his person, 
would be extolled as a noble effort of patriotism 
to restore the freedom of their country. 

Mæcenas took the opposite side, and contended 
for the necessity of a new species of government, 
in circumstances so different from those in which 
the republic had been formed. “So great an 
empire,” he said, ‘‘surrounded by so many 
enemies, required the authority and the secret 
counsels of a prince, aided; but not controlled, 
by the opinions of those who were qualified to 
serve him. 'The time, when the republic might 
rely on the virtue and moderation of the greater 
part of her citizens is now no mote; men are 
governed by ambition or interest, and if one per- 
son decline the sovereignty, many pretenders 
will arise, who will again tear the republic asun- 
der by their wars and contensions.’ He ob- 
served, that the fortune or destiny of Octavius 
had placed him at the head of the common- 
wealth ; that he ought not to despise its gifts, or 
to thiew the Roman people again into a state of 
confusion and anarchy, out of which he had 
been destined to save them. From these topics, 
he proceeded to consider the difficulties to be 
encountered in the adininistration of such a go- 
vernment, delivered maxims that contain the 
wisdom of monarchy, pointed at regulations 
calculated to preserve some species of civil con- 
stitution, yet depending on the will of the prince, 
and, according to the account which is given of 
his speech, suggested at this conference most 
parts of the plan which Octavius actually carried 
into execution.! 

In the result of this consultation, it is said, 
that not only Octavius, but Agrippa likewise, 
embraced the opinion of Ma:cenas; and that 
they, from thenceforward, considered the secure 
establishment of the monarchy as the common 
object of all their councils. They appear to 
have agreed, that Octavius should treat the se- 
nate as he had in this conference treated his 
friends; that he should propose to resign his 
power, affect to make his continuing to hold it 
the result of their own deliberations, and, by 
these means, obtain the sanction of a legal esta- 
blishment. ; 

To smooth the way to this end, some previous 
steps were yet to be taken. Much had already 
been done by Octavius to secure his power, to 
reconcile his new subjects, and, in case of any 
competition, to recommend himself to the public 
choice ; but some caution was still to be employed 
in bringing forward a question, relating to the 
continuance of the present government, or the 
restoration of the republic. The senate, on whose 
readily embracing and acting the part that was 
expected from them the whole depended, was to 
be scrutinized and purged of all members, who 
were by the love of republican government, or by 
any other circumstances, likely to mar the de- 
sign. A single voice in this assembly, given for 
receiving the demission, which Octavius was 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. lii. ce. 1—42. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox V1. 


about to offer, might have greatly disconcerted 
his project, obliged him to throw aside his dis- 
guise, and might have made it necessary for him 
to continue holding by force what he wished to 

receive by consent, or even to have 
U. C. 725. pressed upon him by the interests of 
rit all orders of men. In order to culti- 
Cesar vy, Vate the dispositions with which he 
M. Agrippa. already endeavoured to inspire the 

senate and the people, he hiniself, in 
conjunction with Agrippa, entered on the office 
of consul for the sixth time, divided the fasces 
with him, as usual in the purest times of the 
republic, and in all the exertions of their au- 
thority, or in the discharge of their common 
duties, knowing how little he had to apprehend 
from the pretensions of his colleague, affected 
to rank with him on the most perfect footing of 
equality, 

The new consuls, in proceeding to their prin- 
cipal object, which was to reform the senate, and 
to fill it with such members as were likely to co- 
operate in the design they had formed, of obtain- 
ing for Octavius the sovereignty by a formal 
consent, made a review or census, as usual, of all 
the diferent orders of the commonwealth; and 
having, in consequence of the late troubles, 
much property as well as public hon@rs in their 
power, they had an opportunity to enrich, as 
well as to promote those whom they wished to 
oblige; and accordingly made such a distribu- 
tion of estates and dignities, as plainly showed, 
that obsequiousness to the will of Cesar was the 
road to distinction a.t ‘ortune. 

At this census or review of the people, the 
Roman citizens were found to amount to four 
million one hundred and sixty-four thousand 
men fit to carry arms.? So much had their num- 
ber, without any increase of population, aug- 
mented by the continual admission of the free- 
men of entire towns and provinces, upon the rolls 
of the people. 

The senate had, during the devastations, and 
in the event of the civil wars, not only lost those 
who made its principal ornament, considered as 
a republican council, but had even undergone a 
great, if not an entire change of its members. It 
consisted now of persons occasionally intruded 
by the parties lately contending for superiority; 
many, in particular, named by Antony, and 
who, during the late struggles, endeavoured to 
support the cause of their patron. ‘These, more 
especially, it was the object of Octavius to re- 
move; but being desirous to court all orders of 
men, as Well as to set aside his enemies, he af- 
fected a reluctance in expelling particular per- 
sons, and recommended to those, who were con- 
scious of any disqualification, voluntarily to with- 
draw their names, 

In consequence of this intimation, fifty sena- 
tors retired, probably most of them conscious of 
a disaffection to the reigning power. One hur.- 
dred and forty more were struck off the rolls. In 
discharging this invidious service, Octavius was 
guarded by ten chosen senators, who surrounded 
his person with concealed weapons, and is said 
himself to have been cased in armour under his 
robe. He, at the same time, endeavoured to pal- 


2 The whole number of souls must have exceeded 
sixteen millions. Rusebii Chronicon, Cæsar Impera- 
tor VI. M. Agrippa, p. 163 


Cuar. J.]} 


liate the severity of his censures in different 
ways, suffering those, who were excluded from 
the senate, still to retain the dress of that order, 
and to enjoy, at the theatre, and other public 
places, the usual precedence of the senatorian 
rank, Under pretence of rendering the order 
itself more independent and more respectable, lie 
raised the money qualification of a senator from 
eight to twelve hundred thousand sesterces ;3 
and, without any personal imputation, affected 
to exclude some senators for the want of this 
new qualification ; others he contrived to gain by 
a very artful method of bribery, alleging, that 
the public should not be deprived of the services 
of worthy citizens merely by a deficiency in 
their fortune, he from his own coffers, made up 
the estates of several senators to the new quali- 
fication. A striking instance of the policy in 
which he excelled; at once the most effectual to 
obtain his purpose, and the most artful to pal- 
fiate or to conceal his design. 

By the forms which the present consuls, Oc- 
tavius and Agrippa, affected to observe in the 
discharge of their public duties, the republic 
seemed so much to revive, that one Quintus 
Statilius was tempted to offer himsclf as candi- 
‘date in free election for the office of tribune ; but 
in this instance, Octavius thouglit himself obliged 
to resume the character of master. Although le 
einployed the forms of the republic to reconcile 
the minds of men to his government, he knew 
how to distinguish what had a tendency to ravish 
that government out of his hands, or to embroil 
him in contests with the people: he therefore 
commanded this candidate for the office of tribune 
to witlidraw his pretensions, and not to awaken, 
by his unseasonable canvas, the turbulent dispo- 
sitions which had formerly so much afflicted the 
state, 

In the arts which were practised on the citi- 
zens of Rome, shows, processions, and public 
entertainuents always made a part, and they 
dperated on this people, perhaps operate on all 
mankind, with such powerful effects, as not to 
be overlooked without the danger of mistaking 
the circumstances which lead to the most inport- 
ant events. Octavius, aware of this circum- 
stance, on the present as well as on former oc- 
casions, having temples and other public works 
executed with great magnificence, celebrated the 
dedication, or the completion of them, with many 
pompous entertainments and shows ; he furnish- 
ed, at his own expense, the circus and theatres 
with continual entertainments, with the figlits 
of gladiators, and the baiting or hunting of 
wild beasts. While he thus encouraged the peo- 
ple in their usual vices of idleness and dissipa- 
tion, he avoided laying any new burdens, cancell- 
ed all arrears due to the treasury within tlie city, 
and increased fourfold the gratuitous distributions 
of corn. To these popular arts, he jeined a species 
of amnesty of all past offences and differences; 
repealed all the acts, which, during the late vio- 
lent tines, the spirit of a party had dictated ; and, 
to qaict the apprehensions of many, who were 
cousclous of having taken part with his enemies, 
he gave out that all papers or records seized in 
Egypt, upon the final reduction of Antony’s 
party, were destroyed; though in this Dion Cas- 
sius contradicts him, and alleges, that such pa- 


3 Krom about 70002. to 10,0004. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


413 


pers were preserved and afterwards employed ir 
evidence against persons whom he thought pro- 
per to oppress.4 
At the close of this memorable consulate, Oc- 
tavius laid down the fasces, and, agreeable to 
the forins of the republic, took the usual oath of 
declaration, that he had faithfully, and with 
his utmost ability, discharged the duties of his 
station. Being destined to the same 
U. C. 726. office of consul for the following year, 
he resumed the ensigns of power; 


ee and thinking the senate and people, 
M. Agrippa by the steps he had already taken, 
di sufficiently prepared for the subject 


he meant to bring under considera- 
tion, he, on the Ides, or thirteenth of January, 
surprised them with a direct and full resignation 
of all the extraordinary powers which he held in 
the empire. This solemn act he accompanied 
with a speech, which, according to his usual 
practice, having committed it to writing, he read. 
Being sensible that his sincerity would be ques- 
tioned, and that his having taken the most eflec- 
tual measures to obtain and to secure the govern- 
ment was but an ill indication of his intention to 
resign it, he employed a great part of his ha- 
rangue in removing suspicions, not merely by 
assurances of sincerity, but by arguments like- 
wise drawn from general topics of probability and 
reason. Tothis purpose, he observed, that many 
persons, who were themselves incapable of such 
intentions, might doubt his sincerity, and that 
many, who could not behold a superior without 
envy, would be disposed to misrepresent his ac- 
tions; but that the immediate execution of the 
purpose he had declared, would remove every 
doubt, would silence every atteippt of calumny, 
entitle him to credit, and to their just estecin, 

“That I have it in my power to retain the 
government,” he said, “no one will question. 
Of my enemies, some have suffered the just 
effects of their own obstinacy, and others having 
experienced my clemency, are fully reconciled. 
My friends are confirmed in their attachment, by 
the inutual exchange of goud offices between 
us, and by a participation in the management of 
affairs. Ihave no real danger to fear, and any 
alarm I might receive, would only hasten the 
proofs Iam in condition to give of my power. I 
have many allies, and numerous forces, well at- 
tached to my person; money, magazines, and 
stores of every description ; with what is of more 
consequence that all these put together, | am 
placed, by the choice of the senate aid people of 
Rome, at the head of the republic. 

“What I now do, l hope will explain my past 
actions, and silence those who impute my former 
conduct to ambition, or who suppose that I am 
not now sincere in the resignation which I pro- 
fess to inake. “Having the sovereignty at present 
in my possession, I renounce it, and deliver into 
your hands, the army, the state, the provinces, 
not merely in the condition in which I received 
them, but in a condition much improved by niy 
exertions. 

“ Let this action then evince the sincerity of 
the declarations 1 made, when, being engaged 
in the late unhappy contest, I professed that my 
intentions were to obtain justice against the 
murderers of my father, and some relief to the 


4 Lib. lii. œ 42, &c. 


414 


commonwealth from the evils with which it was 
afflicted. 

“J wish, indeed, that this task had never 
been imposed upon me; that the republic had 
never stood in need of my services, and that the 
fatal divisions we have experienced, had never 
taken place. But since the fates had otherwise 
decreed, and since the republic, young as I was, 
required even my assistance, I declined no la- 
bour, I shunned no danger, I made efforts above 
my years and my strength. Neither toil nor 
danger, the entreaties of my friends, the threats 
of my enemies, the tumults of the seditious, nor 
the fury of those who opposed me, could turn 
me aside from the pursuit of your good. I for- 
got myself; I hecame altogether yours. The 
event, with respect to you, is known; for my- 
self, the only reward I desire, is the sense of 
having delivered my country from the evils 
with which it was distressed, and of having 
restored you to the state of peace and tranquil- 
lity which you now enjoy. With these advan- 
tages, resume vour political trust, and the forms 
of your constitution; take charge of yonr pro- 
vinces, and the direction of your military forces ; 
conduet every part according tothe rules and pre- 
cedents which were laid down by your ancestors. 

“My conluct, in this resignation, will not 
appear unaccountable to those who have ob- 
served the moderation with which I have fre- 
quently declined the uncommon distinctions bv 
which you offered to raise me above the level of 
my fellow-citizens; nor to those who know the 
real value of human possessions, will it appear a 
folly, that having such an empire in my power, 
I choose to resign it. If I am supposed to have 
any regard to justice, what more just than that 
T should restore to you what is vour own? If 
I am supposed to be governed by prudence, 
what more prudent, than to withdraw from trou 
ble, from general envy, and from the snares of 
my enemies? If Í am supposed to aim at glory, 
the great object for which men have most wil- 
lingly exposed themselves to hazards and toils, 
what more glorious than to dispose of empire to 
others, and to rest secure myself in the honours 
of a private station ? 

“ Having the choice of many actions, which 
refiect honour on my father’s memory, and may 
do so on my own, these actions I prefer to any 
other; that he, being offered the sovereignty of 
his country refused to accept of it; and that I 
myself, being in actual possession of that sove- 
reiznty, have resigned it. To these actions, the 
conquest of Gaul, of Mysia, of Egypt and Pa- 
nonia, the victories obtained over Pharnaces, Ju- 
ba, Phraates, the passage of the Rhine, and of 
the British sea, though far exceeding the achieve- 
ments of former times, are yet of inferior ac- 
count: even the merit of having conducted to so 
glorious an issue the unhappy contest in which 
we have been engaged, the having overcome as 
enemies all who withstood our reformations, the 
having protected as friends all who were pacilic 
and well inclined to the commonwealth, the 
having by moderation and clemency stript civil 
war itself of many of its greatest evils, are not 
comparable to this; That being in a condition to 
reign, we have not been intoxicated with power: 
neither could he be seduced to accept of a crown 
which was offered to him, nor I to retain a do- 
minion which is actually in my hands. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox VI 


“I do not mention any past action from os- 
tentation, or with a view to profit by the advan- 
tage it gives me, but merely to show, that I know 
the value of my present conduct, and have made 
it my choice, because I think it more glorious 
than any other conduct I could hold. 

“I might, indeed, (not to drag any more the 
name of my father into this argument,) chal- 
lenge any one to compare with myself in the 
part which I now act. Being at the head of 
great and well appointed armies attached to my 
person; being master of the seas within the pil- 
lars of Hercules; of all the towns and provinces 
of this mighty empire, without any foreign ene- 
my, or domestic sedition to molest me; being 
cheerfully acknowledged and oheyed as sovereign 
in profound peace, I now willingly and of my 
own accord resign the whole, from a regard to 
my fellow-citizens, and from a respect for the 
laws of my country. 

“ What I have to apprehend, is not your in- 
sensibilitv to the merit of what I perform, but 
vour doubt of its reality, and of the sincerity of 
mv intention; but you give credit to illustrious 
examples recorded of former times. You admit 
that the Horatii and the Decii, that Mucius, 
Curtius, and Regulus exposed themselves to 
danger, even rushed upon certain destruction to 
establish for themselves a reputation after death, 
Why should not J, to enjoy, even during my 
lifetime, a fame far superior to theirs, perform 
the action which I now propose? Were the an- 
cients alone possessed of magnanimity ? or is the 
age hecome barren and unabled to bring forth 
such examples? 

“Think not, however, that T mean to revive 
the late public distractions, or propose to commit 
the government to an unruly and factious multi- 
tude. No; broken with toil. and overwhelmed 
with labour as I am, I should prefer death to 
such a desertion of the public cause. To you, 
my fathers, who possess wisdom and virtue 
equal to the trust, I resign this government. 
Weary with solicitude and care, 1l retire from 
that envy which the best of men cannot escape, 
and prefer the glories of a private life to the dan- 
gers of empire. ‘To your judgments and to that 
multiplicity of counsel which must in wisdom 
ever excel the reasun and understanding of any 
single person, I now commit the republic. [ 
therefore adjure vou, in consideration of any ser- 
vice which I may have rendered to my country, 
either in a civil or military capacity, that you 
will suffer me to retire in quiet, and give me an 
opportunity to evince, that [ know how to obey 
as well as how to command; and that, while in 
power, I imposed no condition upon others, with 
which, as a subject, I am not myself willing to 
comply. In this capacity, my conscience tells 
me, that unguarded and unattended I may rely 
for safety on your affection, and that | have no- 
thing to fear, either in the way of violence or in- 
sult. But, if there should be a danger from any 
secret enemy, (for what person ever passed 
through scenes like those, in which I have acted, 
without creating some private enemies?) it is 
better to die, than to purchase security by en- 
slaving my country. If the event should be fatal, 
posterity at least will do me the justice to own, 
that so far from seeking a kingdom at the ex- 
pense of the blood of other men, I have freely 
resigned one at the hazard of my own, Who 


Crap. L] 
ever wrongs me, will have the immortal ae and 
you for their enemies; they will perish, as the 


murderers of my father have perished, leaving 
their names as monuments of divine justice and 
wrath. In this, everv one has had his just re- 
tribution; mv father is placed among the gods, 
and is vested with eternal glory; his murderers 
have undergone the punishment due to their 
crimes. 

‘©All men are born to die; but he who dies, 
as well as lives with honour, in some measure 
disappoints his fate, and acquires a species of 
immortal hfe. I have lived, as I trust, with 
honour; the other and less arduous part of my 
task, I hope is likewise in my power. I now, 
therefore, restore to you the arms, the govern- 
ments, the revenue, and all the legal powers of 
the commonwealth. Be not dismayed by the 
greatness of the object on the one hand, nor re- 
ceive it too lightly on the other. My counsel, in 
what relates to matters of moment, shall be 
freely given. 

“ Let the law be the unalterable rule of your 
conduct. In the adininistration of government, 
a determinate order, though attended with some 
inconveniency, is preferable to fluctuation and 
frequent change, which, aiming at improvement, 
renders the condition of men precarious and un- 
certain. 

“In private, therefore, as well as in public life, 
comply with the laws; not as persons who aim 
at impunity merely, but as persons who aim at 
the rewards which are due to merit. 

“Commit the provinces, whether in peace or 
war, to men of wisdom and virtue; do not envy 
each other the emoluments that attend the public 
service; strive not for profit to yourselves, but for 
security and prosperity to the commonwealth ; 
reward the faithful, punish the guilty; not only 
consider the public property as too sacred to be 
invaded, but consider even your private posses- 
sions as a debt which you owe to the state. 
Manage well what is your own; covet not what 
belungs to others; wrong net your allies or sub- 
jects; do not rashly provoke any power to hos- 
tility, nor meanly stand in fear of those who are 
disposed to be your enemies. Be always armed, 
but not against each other, nor agulnst those 
who are ticlined to peace. Supply your troops 
regularly with what is appointed for their pay 
and subsistence, that they may not be tempted 
to supply themselves by invading the property 
of their fellow-citizens; keep them under strict 
discivline, that they may respect their duty as 
guardians of tie pubic peace, and not become, 
from a consciousness of their force, a school for 
vioience and the commission of crimes. 

“Such in general are the rules of your con- 
duct, of which it is not necessary to make the 
particular applications: these are sufficiently evi- 
dent. One thing only I will mention, before I 
conclude. If you conform yourselves to these 
rules, you will be happy, and you will owe thanks 
to ime, for having placed the administration in 
your hands; but, if you depart from them, you 
will make me to repent of what I now do, and 

ou will relapse into all the disorders froin which 
have so happily rescued the commonwealth.” 

Such is the purport of a speech, said to have 
been delivered by Octavius, in announcing his 
intention to resign the empire. The perforin- 
ance may not appear worthy of the person to 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


415 


whom it is ascribed, and, like other speeches 
recorded in ancient history, may have been 
framed by the historian.! The occasion, how- 
ever, was remarkable, and this speech having been 
committed to writing, may have been preserved 
in the records of the senate. The historian may 
have copied it from thence; or, if disposed to 
fabricate a speech, could not in this case, with- 
out detection, substitute any fiction for what 
was real. The composition indeed may have 
suffered in the first translation,? as well as in 
this extract or paraphrase of it; but the matter, 
though not such as might have been expected 
from the congueror of the. Roman empire on a 
serious occasion, and in the actual exertion of al 
his abilities, yet is such as we may suppose Oc- 
tavius to have employed in supporting an assumed 
character, and in proposing what he did not wish 
to obtain. 

The references which, in ushering in this pre- 
tented resignation, are made to the disorders of 
the late republic; the arguments which are made 
use of to prove the sincerity of a purpose to re- 
sign the government of it, aud the ostentation 
of great merit in making this sacrifice, are well 
enough suited to the part which the speaker was 
acting, and to the solicitude under which he 
spoke, nut to make too deep an impression, nor 
to be taken at his word. ‘The barefaced and pal- 
pable imposture in which he was engaged, did 
not admit of the dignity which might have been 
expected in so high a place; and, if the history 
of this pretended resignation were not confirmed 
by the united testimony of many writers, and 
sill more by the lasting effeets of it, in the forms 
and in the state of the empire, the want of dig- 
nity in other parts of this business, as well as in 
the tenor of this speech, might create a doubt of 
its veracity; but the same forms of resignation 
were again repeated, and great festivals? at cer- 
tain periods were held on this account. 

As soon as this speech was ended, notwith- 
standing the many evils which had heen recent- 
ly felt under the republic, it is probable, that if 
Octavius had appeared to be sincere in making 
it, his proposal to restore the commonwealth 
would have been received with joy. There were 
yet many whio revered the ancient constitution, 
and lamented the loss of their own political con- 
sequence, Some, who would have been glad to 
renew the competition for power and deminion 
which had been recently decided, and many 
who would have rejoiced to find so much conse- 
quence at once bestowed on the order of senators 
to which they themselves had beeu unexpectedly 
raised; but as much care had been taken in the 
nomination of senators, to fill this assembly with 
unambitious men, who were likely to prefer 
peace to every other object, or with men of a ser- 
vile cast, who would follow the cry when raised 
to confirm the emperor’s power, it ìs probable, 
that proper persons were prepared to lead the 
way in the part which the senate was to take on 
this occasion. 

The majority of the meeting indeed was sur- 
prised and perplexed. There could be no doubt, 
that Octavius wished to have his proposal re- 
jected; but it would have been an ilf manner of 
paying court, to appear to have penetrated his 


1 Dio. Cass. 2 From the Latin to Greek. 


3 The Decennalia. 


416 


design. It was necessary to affect implicit faith 
in the sincerity of his purpose, at the same time 
to withstand the execution of it in the most per- 
emptory manner. This ground being pointed 
out by those who were in the concert, or by 
those who had discernment enough to perceive 
it, was instantly seized by the whole assembly.’ 
They beseeched Octavius, as with one voice, not 
to abandon the commonwealth; observed, that 
services, still greater than those he had already 
performed, were yet due to the republic; that the 
fear of his intending to resign the government, 
had already filled the minds of the people with a 
cruel anxiety; that he alone could quict their ap- 
prenensions, by not only remaining at the head 
of the empire, but by accepting the government 
in such a forinal manner, as would give them as- 
surance of his continuing to hold it.? 

To this request, Octavius was inexorable; but 
he was prevailed upon not to lay the whole load 
of administration at once on the senate. He 
was willing to administer some part of the go- 
vernnient for a limited time, and to retain the 
command of the army for ten years; to continue 
his inspection over some of the most refractory 
provinces, such as were yet unsettled, such as 
were wild and uncultivated, such as had many 
inaccessible retreats, under the favour of which 
the people still continued unsubdued, or still in 
condition to rebel. He agreed to take charge of 
such provinces on the frontier, as, being contigu- 
ous to warlike and hostile neighbours, were ex- 
posed to frequent invasion; but such as were 
already pacific, and accustomed to civil forms, 
such as were reconciled to the tribute which they 
paid, he insisted that the senate, as the more easy 
and profitable part of the government, should 
take under their own administration; and that 
they should be ready to relieve him of the whole, 
or any part of his burden, at the expiration of 
the period to which he limited his acceptance of 
the military command. 

By this imaginary partition of the empire, the 
provinces which in Africa had formed the states 
of Carthage and Cyrene, with the kingdom of 
Numidia: in Europe, the more wealthy and pa- 
cific parts of Spain, the islands of Sardinia, 
Sicily, and Crete; with the different districts of 
Greece, Epirus, Macedonia, and Dalmatia; and 
beyond the Ægean sea, the rich province of 
Asia, with the kingdoms of Bithynia and Pon- 
tus, were committed to the jurisdiction of the 
senate. 

‘The emperor still retained, under his own im- 
mediate charge, the more warlike districts in 
Spain, in Gaul and in Syria, with the kingdom of 
Egypt, and all the great military stations and re- 
sorts of the legions on the Euphrates, the Da- 
nube, and the Rhine.2 Some time afterwards, 
under pretence of a war which arose in Dalma- 
tia, he accepted of this province, in exchange for 
the island of Cyprus, and the district of Narbonne. 

It was understood, that the emperor and the 
senate, in their quality of partners in the sove- 
reignty, should have the nomination of governors 
in their respective provinces; that those named 
by the senate should be civil officers merely, with 
the title of proconsul, but without the power of 
the sword or any military rank, and they were 


1 Zonar. lib. x.c.34. 2 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. c. 11. 
3 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. e. 12. Strabo, lib. xvii. fine. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox VI. 


not to remain in office longer than one year, that 
the officers to be named by the emperor were to 
have military rank, with the title of propretoyr, 
and were to act in the capacity of his lieutenants, 
accountable only to himself, and to hold their com- 
missions during his pleasure.4 

From the reformations which Octavius now 
made in the establishment of the provinces, it 
appeared that he himself clearly understced the 
circumstances by which those members of the 
empire had become too great fur the head, and 
by which the dependencies of the republic had 
hecome the means of its ruin; that he looked 
back to the steps, by which the first Cesar and 
himself had advanced to dominion, and wished 
to efface the track, in order that no one might 
follow it, or employ the same means to supplant 
himself, which Julius Cesar had employed to 
subvert the republic. 

The provinces of the Roman empire had heen 
hitherto not so much the demesne of the com- 
monwealth, as the property of private citizens, 
by whom they were conveved from one to an- 
other by quick succession. As they were reeeived 


‘in trust for the republic, without any particular 


assignment of a share in the profits, great part 
was diverted to private uses; or where great 
sums were to be aceounted for to the state, there 
was much extorted likewise to enrich individuals 
by peculation and oppression. 

From their stations abroad, the officers of the 
republic returned with the spoils of the provinces 
to purchase importance at Rome. If they were 
frequently changed, the empty hand was often 
held out with fresh rapacity, and the full one 
brought back with quicker succession to corrupt 
the city: if continued too long, they acquired the 
force of great monarchs, got possession of armics 
and of revenue, and had sufficient resources of 
men and money to enable them to make war on 
the state. Marius and Sylla showed what could 
be done with armies levied from the opposite fac- 
tions in the city of Rome; and Julius Cesar 
showed what use could be made of the extensive 
territory, entrusted for a continued term of years 
to the government of the same person. ‘The re~ 
public had often tottered- under the effect of 
disorders which arose in the capital, but fell irre- 
coverably under the blows that were struck from 
the provinces. 

It is evident, that the head of the empire, of 
whatever description, whether a commonwealth 
or the court of a monarch, could not be safe under 
this distribution of power and trust. Measures 
were accordingly now taken by Octavius to re- 
form the establishment, and to reduce the provin- 
cial officers to their proper state of subordina- 
tion and dependence. ‘The duties they were to 
levy, and their own emoluments, were clearly 
ascertained. The greater provinces were divided, 
and separate officers appointed to each division, 


4 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. c. 13. 

5 The provincial officers under the republic had no 
salary, nor public appointments. They were under- 
stood to subsist at the expense of the provinces; and 
in their journies were allowed to impress horses and 
carriages, and to demand every supply of provisions 
and forage for the numerous retinue or court that 
usually attend them. These powers being abused, it 
was proposed that the provincial officers should be 
supplied by contract; but the leaders of faction at 
Rome went forth to the provinces, with a power tha‘ 


! could not be restrained by any rules whatever. 


Cuar. IL) 


Neither men nor money were to be levied with- 
out authority from the emperor and the senate, 
nor was any officer, to whom a successor was 
appointed, to remain in his command, or to ab. 
sent himself from. Rome above three months.6 
To secure the observance of these regulations, 
and to accelerate the communication from every 
part of the empire, an institution, resembling that 
of the modern posts, was for the first time intro- 
duced in the ancient world. Couriers were 
placed at convenient stages, with orders to for- 
ward from one to the other the public despatches. 
{t was afterwards thought more effectual, for the 
purpose of intelligence, to transport the original 
messenger to Rome. 

In this establishment, the senate and the em- 
peror, in their respective civil and military cha- 
racters, had their several departments, and their 
revenue apart; what was collected in the pro- 
vinces of the senate, went to the Ærarium or 
public treasury ; what was collected in the pro- 
vinces of Cesar, went to his own coffers. The 
latter professed being no more than a servant of 
the public, appointed for a limited time; but, in 
being head of the army, he secured the sove- 
reignty, and meant to employ the senate only as 
an aid to retain the army within the bounds of 
their duty. In his proposal to divest himself of 
the government, there was sufficient reason to 
suspect his sincerity; but in this partial and 
supposed temporary resumption of government, 
the artifice was so obvious, as to become a spe- 
cies of insult upon the understandings of man- 
kind. The Romans, neverthelcss, on this memo- 
rable occasion had learned to be courtiers, could 
affect to want penctration and conceal their 
sentiments. 

The senate, in return to the emperor’s gra- 
cious acceptance of the government, proceeded to 
distinguish his person, and even the place of his 
residence, by many honorary decrees. They 
took into their serious consideration, by what 
title he should for the future be known. That 
of king had always been odious at Rome; that 
of dictator had been feared, ever since the san- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


417 


uinary exercise of its powers by Sylla, aud it 
A been formally abolished by law, soon after 
the demise of Julius Cæsar. ‘The name of Ro- 
mulus was proposed, and thought due to Octa- 
vius, as the second founder of Rome; but this 
name he himself rejected, not on account of the 
ridicule conveyed in it, but on account of the im- 
plication of kingly power. The title of Augustus 
was in the end accepted by him, rathcr as an 
expression of personal respect; than as a mark 
of any new or unpreccdented dignity in the 
commonwealth. 

While the senate bestowed on their emperor 
the title of Augustus, thcy ordered that the court 
of his palace should be for ever hung with laurel, 
the badge of victories that were ever fresh in the 
minds of the people, and with wreaths of cak, 
the usual distinction of those who had saved a 
fellow-citizen ; in token that the Roman people 
were continually preserved by his acceptance ef 
the sovcreignty, and by the wisdom of his admi- 
nistration. 

Octavius from henceforward came to be known 
by the name of Augustus. He had been some 
time the object of fear, and consequently of adu- 
lation to the people, and was now probably he- 
come the object of that fond admiration, with 
which the bulk of mankind regard those who are 
greatly elevated by fortune. Under the cflect of 
this sentiment, or supported by the prevalence of 
it, citizens of high rank devoted themselves to 
Augustus, as they were told that the vassal de- 
voted himself to his lord in some of the barbarous 
cantons of Spain and Gaul. They took an oath 
to interpose their persons in all his dangers, and 
if he must die, to perish with him. The dying, 
under pretence of bequeathing some legacy to 
Augustus, introduced his name in their wills, 
with a lavish encomium or flattering character 
Many appointed him sole heir, or, together with 
their children, the joint heir of all their fortunes. 
Some, on their deathbed, bequeathed particular 
sums to defray the expense of sacrifices to the 
gods for this signal blessing, that Augustus was 
stil living when they expired, 


CHAPTER II. 


State of the Emperor—Condition of the Empire—Amount of the Revenue unknown— 
Military Establishments, ¢-c. 


IN what degree the court which began to be 
pee to Augustus, and which continucd during 
lis reign, proceeded from design and servility, or 
respect and affection, we must endeavour to col- 
lect from a farther view of his life, and must sus- 
pend our judgment until the scene of his trial is 
passed. At the late formal establishment of the 
monarchy in his person, he was in the thirty-fifth 
year of his age, and had still the aspect of youth. 
His complexion is said to have been fair, his eyes 
bright, and his features regular and elegant. He 
was well made in his person, and though below 
the middling stature, had so much the propor- 
tions of a tall man, as, except when compared 
with some person who overlooked him, to appear 


6 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. c. 13. 
T 


above the ordinary size. ‘Two-and-twenty years 
of a life so little advanced, he had passed in the 
inidst of civil wars, and in the contest for empire, 
which was begun by his adoptive father, and 
maintained by himself. During seventeen of 
thosc years he had himself becn a leader of party, 
and veered in his professions and conduct with 
every turn of fortune; at one time courting the 
senate, by affecting the zeal of a citizen in behalf 
of the republic; at another time courting the 
veterans, by affecting concern for their interests, 
and a zeal to revenge their late gencral’s death. 
He opposcd himself to Antony, or joined with 
him as suited with the state of his affairs; made 
or broke concerts with the other leaders of faction, 
made and unmade treaties of marriage; even had 
intrigues of pleasure with women to forward 


418 


some political design ;! and at an age when other 
young men have scarcely any object but plea- 
sure, sacrificed every supposed private or public 
connexion, and every friend and every enemy to 
his ambition, or to the cool and deliberate con- 
sideration of his own conveniency. 

By such means as these Octavius became 
sovereign of the Roman empire at the age of 
three-and-thirty years, the same age at which 
Alexander, with the greatest efforts of ability and 
courage, which were afterwards marred by equal 
instances of intemperance and folly, effected the 
conquest of the Persian monarchy. Much, no 
doubt, in the fortunes of men, is to be imputed 
to accident. To this they owe, at least, great 
part of the occasions on which they act; but the 
use of the occasion, and sometimes the prepara- 
tion of it, is their own; and nothing besides the 
most consummate abilities can, through a great 
variety of scenes, retain the uniform appearance 
of a fortunate life. It is true, that Octavius, with 
the name of Cæsar, was become convenient or 
necessary to the military faction which he found 
already formed in the empire; that his youth, 
and other circumstances, prevented the alarm 
which might have led his enemies to take more 
effectual and earlier measures against him. But 
he did not fail to improve these advantages; af- 
fected, when necessary, to be the mere instru- 
ment of the army, or of the senate, for obtaining 
their respective purpuses; preserved the same 
discretion im every state of his fortunes; and, 
with the same address with which he supplanted 


every rival in the contest for power, continuing 


to avoid every offensive appearance in the inodel 
of his government, he still retained the forms of 
the commonwealth; and, besides the title of Au- 
gustus, did not introduce any new appellation of 
dignity or of office.? 

very possible power under the republic had 
been implied in the titles of consul, censor, augur, 
pontiff, and tribune of the people. Some of 
them could, even under that form of government, 
have been united in the same person, as that of 
augur and pontiff, with the office either of consul 
or censor; and there was no law to forbid the 
accumulation of such dignities in the hands of 
the same person, probably because it was deemed 
sufficiently difficult to arrive at any of them 
apart. ‘To constitute a despotic power, there- 
fore, provided that these titles could be united in 
the same person, it was not necessary to intro- 
duce any new forms of office, nor even to assume 
the name of dictator. It was more effectual to 
unite the prerogatives of separate stations in the 
person of one man, or to bestow them on persons, 
who would be content to employ them at the 
pleasure of a master: and this method accord- 
ingly being suited to the wary policy and affected 
modesty of Octavius, could not escape him in the 
choice of his model. 


1 Sueton. in Octav. c. 69. 

2 The title of Princeps had been usually given to the 
person whose name was first in the rolls of the se- 
nate, and Angustus assumed it in no other sense than 
this; that of Imperator had been given to every suc- 
cessful leader of an army, and in its application to 
Octavius, implied no pre-eminence above what other 
leaders had formerly enjoyed. These titles, indeed, by 
being from henceforward appropriated to the sove- 
reign, acquired, by degrees, their significance in the 
original language; and in our translation of them 
into Prince and Emperor, are applied only to royal 
persons, and the sovereigns of extensive dominion. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book VI. 


In the character of consul, the new emperor 
presided in the senate, and was first executive 
magistrate in the city. In the character of tri- 
bune he could not only suspend all proceedings, 
whether of administration, of public council, or 
of justice; but likewise could punish with in- 
stant death any breach of the peace, or any 
attempt that was made on his own person. In 
the capacity of censor, which was now compre- 
hended in the office of consul, he was the foun- 
tain of honour, could pry into every citizen’s 
private life, and could promote or degrade, at 
pleasure, every person who had courted his fa- 
vour, or incurred his dislike. In the capacity of 
augur and pontiff he could overrule the super- 
stition of the times; and, last of all, in the capa- 
city of imperator, or head of the army, he held, 
at his disposal, all the forces of the empire, boti 
by sea and by land. The republic, at the same 
time, retained most of its forms. There were 
meetings of the senate, and assemblies of the 
people ; there were laws enacted, and elections 
made ; affairs proceeded as usual in the name of 
the consul, the censor, the augur, and tribune of 
the people. ‘The only change which had hap- 
pened, and that which the emperor endeavoured 
to disguise, was, that he himself acted in all these 
capacities, and dictated every resolution in the 
senate, and pointed out every candidate who was 
to succeed in the pretended elections. 

In these appearances of republican govern 
ment, however, which were preserved by Octa 
vius, we are not to suppose, that there was any 


‘image of that mixed constitution, which subsists 


with so much advantage in some of the kingdoms 
of modern Europe. ‘The Roman senate, under 
the emperors, was no more than a species of privy 
council, of which the members were named or 
displaced by the prince ; and which, under some 
specious appearances of freedom in their speech, 
were actually the mere instruments of his will. 

The comitia, or assemblies of the people, had 
still less of their original dignity or power, We 
have had occasion to observe, that even under 
the republic, when the number of citizens, fit to 
array in the field of Mars, amounted to no more 
than four hundred thousand men; it was im- 
possible that any adequate number could be 
assembled for any purpose of legislation or elec- 
tion. In the present times, when the musters 
extended to four millions, and the Roman citi- 
zens were dispersed over the whole empire, the 
assembly of any proportionable number was still 
more impracticable. No precautions had ever 
been taken, even under the republic, to prevent the 
great irregularities te which the assemblies of the 
people were exposed, nor was it ever ascertained 
what numbers were necessary to constitute a le 
gal assembly. In consequence of this defect, in 
the latter times of the republic, any tumultuary 
meeting, however thinly or partially assembled, 
took the sacred name of the Roman people, and 
gave officers to the state, or laws to the common- 
wealth. Every faction which, by violence or 
surprise, could seize the place of the assembly,. so 
as to exclude their opponents, were masters of 
the elections, or sovereigns of the state. 

After Julius Cesar had taken possession of 
the city, he had no difficulty in commanding the 
elections, or the resolutions of the people; he 
even planned the succession that was to take 
place in his absence; and, being to set out for 


Cuap. IL] 


Asia, he named the officers of state for five years. 
The triumvirs, in like circumstances, fixed the 
succession for different periods of an equal and 
greater length ; and it was now understood, that 
the officers of state, though under the show of 
popular election, were actually filled up by the 
eniperor. > 

The apparent respect which, under the pre- 
sent establishment, was paid to civil forms im- 
plied no abatement of the military power. On 
the contrary, instead of weakening, it served to 
support, as usual, the authority of that govern- 
ment, under which these forms were observed. 
By flattering the people with an idea that their 
political consequence was still entire, this sem- 
blance of the ancient republic reconciled them to 
the state of degradation into which they were 
fallen. It vested the emperor himself witha spe- 
cies of civil character, and with a political consi- 
deration which he could employ in support, of 
his military power, and which, in some measure, 
secured him against the caprice of troops, who 
might think themselves entitled to subvert what 
they alone had established. It enabled him to 
treat their mutinies as acts of treason, and as 
crimes of state. He was no longer obliged to 


court their favour, or to affect condescension, in | 


order to obtain their obedience. He accordingly, 
in consequence of the late votes of the senate, 
changed the style of his address to the legions, 
called them Milites, not Commilitones; soldiers, 
not fellow-soldiers, as formerly. 

This was probably the whole amount of the 
political establishment now made by Octavius, 
and which he meant to employ as a stock on 
which to ingraft his military power. The senate 
and assemblies of the people were retained only 
in name, and were far from having the energy 
of collateral members in the government, such 
as could check or control the perpetual executive, 
which was now established in the empire: but 
we shall nevertheless be disappointed, if, upon a 
supposition of absolute power in the emperor, we 
expect, in his court, the splendour and magnifi- 
cence of a royal estate. 

Octavius still lived in the house of Horten- 
gius, a Roman senator, which he occupied with- 
out making any addition to it, either in point of 
dimension or ornament. The equipage, retinue, 
or accommodation of the imperial fanuly was not 
composed for show and magnificence, as in mo- 
narchies long established. Such an attempt in 
the eyes of a decayed republic might have had 
an improper effect, might have moved envy, and 
not procured respect.3 ‘The emperor indeed was 
attended with an armed guard; but this was in- 
tended for safety, and not for parade. He pre- 


served, in his own person, the exterior appear- ` 


ances of a citizen, was accosted by the simple 
name of Cesar, took his place in the senate, in 
the theatre, in the public assembly, in the bench 
of judges. At funerals he pronounced the ora- 
tion that was delivered in honour of the dead; 
and even at the bar appeared in behalf of his 
clients.4 The females of his house preserved the 
virtue of notable house-wives, and fabricated, 


3 We may read in the journal of a voyage made by 


Horace, in company with Mæcenas, that much reti- | 


nue, or equipage, did not accompany great power as 
they do in modern times, 
4 Dio Cass. lib. Iv. c. 4. 


Vid. Sat. lib. i. sat. 5. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


419 


with their own hands, the stuffs which he wore 
in his dress. 

In respect to manners, and appearance of state, 
the emperor, with his family, was not raised 
above the condition of citizens; but he had full 
compensation in the extent and arbitrary effects 
of his power. While he retained the appear- 
ances of an equal, he took care to be master ; and, 
with no higher pretensions than those of a citi- 
zen, was more than a king. While he suffered 
the senate and people to retain the ancient names 
and titles of sovereignty, he withheld from thein 
the substance of any privilege whatever. He 
personated the simple senator and the citizen 
with all the terrors of military power in his hands, 
and preserved the force of a tyrant, because he 
could not assume the precedence and authority 
of a legal monarch. 

If in this account of the sovereign’s person and 
state our expectations of grandeur are not ful- 
filled, his dominions will surpass the highest and 
most enlarged conception we can form of their 
greatness. The Roman empire contained within 
itself, and in a very entire and populous condi- 
tion, what had been the seat or territory of many 
famous republics and extensive empires, or what 
has since, in modern times, upon the revival of 
nations, furnished their possessions to no less 
considerable states and great monarchies. As it 
had swallowed up the states of Italy and Greece, 
Macedonia, the Lesser Asia, Syria, Egypt, 
Carthage, Numidia, Spain, and Gaul to the 
Rhine and the Danube; so there have sprung 
from its ruins many states now formed within 
the Alps, the kingdoms of Portugal, Spain, and 
France, with all the divisions of the Ottoman 
empire in Europe, Asia, and Africa. ‘These are 
its fragments, or shreds of the vast territory of 
which it was composed. 

This empire seemed to comprehend, within 
itself, all the most favourable parts of the earth ; 
at least, those parts on which the human species, 
whetker by the etlects of climate, or the qualities 
of the race, have, in respect to ingenuity and 
courage, possessed a distinguished superiority. 
It extended to a variety of climates, and con- 
tained lands diversified in respect to situation and 
soil, distributing the productions of nature and 
art, so as to render its different divisions mutually 
useful and subservient to each other. The eom- 
munication between these parts, though remote, 
was easy, and by a sea which, with the species 
of shipping then in use, and with the measure of 
skill which the mariner then possessed, could be 
easily navigated. 

The Mediterranean being reecived into the 
bosom of this empire, gave to the whole a greater 
extent of coast, and to the inland parts an easier 
access to navigation, than could be obtained by 
any different distribution of its land and water. 
In consequence of this circumstance, the coasts 
of the Roman empire, without measuring mi- 
nutely round the indentures of creeks and pro- 
montories, and even without including the outline 
of some considerable as well as many smaller 
islands, may be computed at thirteen thousand 
miles; an extent which, if stretched into a single 
line, would exceed half the circumference of the 
earth. Over this extensive coast, the empire 
was furnished with numerous seaports, and the 


| frequent openings of gulphsand navigable rivers 


to that, notwithstaading the great extent of its 


420 


territory, the distance of any inland place, the 
most remote from the sea, does nat appear to ex- 
ceed two hundred miles, 

In forming this mighty dominion, the republic 
had united, under its territories, all the princi- 
pal seats of industry then known in the western 
world, had come into possession of all the séa- 
ports the most famous for shipping, and for the 
residence of merchants, who had conducted the 
carrying trade of the world, Its subjects were 
possessed of all the profitablé arts, and having all 
the means and instruments of trade, might be 
expected to reap all the fruits of commerce. But, 
.m making these acquisitions, the capital of the 
empire had been a place of arms, and a mere 
nursery of statesmen and warriors, more occupted 
with the ideas of spoil and farther canquest, than 
with the attentions necessary to promate the in- 
dustry or the prosperity of the nations subjected 
to its power. And itis probable that the Romans, 
in reducing so many separate nations to the con- 
dition of provinces, greatly impaired the sources 
of wealth, at the same time that they suppressed 
the pretensions to independence and national 
freedom. i 

It might be hoped, that the peace now given 
to the empire, and the protection which every 
province was to receive against the avarice and 
rapacity of subordinate oppressors, would revive 
the pursuit of lucrative arts, and encourage the 
Roman traders to settle where the natives were 
not in capacity to pursue the advantages of their 
situation. “But even these circumstances, without 
the aid of a happier government than that which 
was now established, were not sufficient to repair 
the damage formerly sustained by the provinces 
in their reduction and subsequent oppression. 
So that although Carthage, with all its depen- 
dencies, Egypt, Syria, the Lesser Asia, and 
Greece, with all the trading establishments of 
Spain and Gaul, were united under one head, 
we are not to suppose, that the wealth of the em- 
pire ever equalled the sum of what might have 
been raised from the separate and independent 
states of which it was composed. 

The commercial policy of Rome was limited, 
in a great measure, to the supply of Italy, and to 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


the conveyance of what the provinces yielded to | 


the treasury of the empire. Both these objects 
were entrusted to mercantile companies, who 
farmed the revenue, and who made commerce 
subservient to the business of their own remit- 
tances and exclusive trade. 

It were, no doubt, matter of curiosity to know 
the whole amount of a revenue collected from so 
rich and so extensive a territory; but we are 
deprived of this satisfaction by the silence of 
historians, or by the loss of records in which this 
subject was stated. Vespasian was heard to say, 
That a sum, supposed equal to about three hun- 
dred and thirty millions sterling, was required 
annually te support the imperial establishment.! 
This emperor, however, being rapacious or 
severe in his exactions, might be supposed to 
exaggerate the necessities of the state; but as 
this sum is beyond the bounds of credibility, and 
must lead us to suspect a mistake in the num- 
bers, it will not enable us to form any probable 
conjecture of the truth. 

Under the republic, both the treasury cf the 


1 Sueton, in Vespas. e. 16. 


{Book VI. 


state, and the fortunes of individuals, were sup- 
plied, in a great measure, by the spoils of van: 
quished enemies, brought to the capital with 
great ostentation by every victorious general. To 
this source of revenue we may join the presents 
that were made by foreign princes and states, 
together with the military contributions that 
were exacted from thë provinces, 

Julius Cesar brought, at once, into the trea: 
sury, sixty-five thousand talents, or above twelve 
millions and a half sterling. As thé lustre of 4 
triumph depended very much on the sums that 
were carried in procession, and placed in the 
capitol, Roman officers were more faithful stew- 
ards of the plunder taken from their enemies, 
than they were probably of any other public 
trust. 

It had been, for some time, the practice of the 
Romans to lay every burden on the conquered 
provinces, and to exempt themselves. This 
policy is dated from the conquest of Macedonia, 
the spoils of which kingdom being joined to their 
former acquisitions, put them in condition to 
effectuate this exemption, It was, however, but 
of short duration. The practice of taxing citizens 
was resumed in time of the civil wars, and the 
privilege, or rather the mere designation of Ro- 
mans, heing extended to the inhabitants of many 
parts of the empire, all the burdens that were 
borne by any subjects were, at the same time, 
brought home into Italy, and all the former dis- 
tinctions gradually removed. 

Under the establishment now made by Au- 
gustus, conquests were discontinued, or became 
less frequent ; and the returns made to the trea- 
sury, from the spoil of enemies, failed in propor- 
tion; but the avidity of receiving presents, the 
worst form under which extortion can be exer 
cised was still indulged, and, as in every other 
despotical government, became a considerable 
engine of oppression.? 

The republic, for the most part, in the latter 
periods of her conquests, entered on the posses- 
sion of territories without any capitulation, and 
considered not only the sovereignty, but the pro- 
perty likewise of the land and of its inhabitants, 
as devolving upon themselves. ‘They, in some 
instances, seized on the persons as well as the 
effects of the vanquished, and set both to sale. 
They leased the lands at considerable quit-rents, 
or leaving them in the hands of the original 
proprietors, exacted, under the appellation of 
tithes, or fifths of corn, fruit, and cattle, a pro- 
portion of the produce. By diversifying the tax, 
the burden was made to fall upon different sub- 
jects, or was exacted from different persons, and 
by these means the whole amount was less easily 
computed, or less sensibly felt. The Romans, 
in continuing the taxes which they found already 
established in the countries they had conquered, 
or by imposing such new ones as suited their 
own character as conquerors, set examples of 
every species almost that is known in the history 
of mankind. They levied customs at sea-ports, 
excises on many articles of consumption, and a 
considerable capitation or poll-tax, in which they 


2 There being no rule by which to limit the extent 
of a present, the person who receives it, allowing the 
giver to proceed as far as his means, or his desire to 
pay court will carry him, still resents any imaginary 
defect, and employs terror and force to extort what he 
affects to receive as a gift, 


Canar. IL] 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


421 


made no distinction of rank or fortune. ‘These vessels destined to ply in all the gulphs and 


modes of taxation, already known under the re- 

ublic, and various in different provinces, now 
ewan to be regulated upon the maxims of a 
general policy, extending over the whole empire. 

Some of the burdens laid by Octavius, as that 
which was imposed on the value of goods ex- 

osed to sale, were charged directly for the 
os of the army as a fund for the discharge 
of their pay, or an immediate supply for their 
subsistence or clothing; and by this surt of im- 
propriation were unalterably fixed. The country, 
where any troops were quartered, was charged, 
for their use, with supplies of straw, forage, car- 
riages, corn, bread, provisions, and even clothing. 

From such particulars, we may form some 
tonception of the mode and tendency of Roman 
taxation, although we have no certain accounts, 
or even probable conjecture, of the amount of 
the whole. Under the present or preceding 
state of the Roman government, there was no 
principle operating in behalf of the subject, be- 
sides the spontaneous humanity or justice of 
those who exercised the =o and as the 
provinces under the republic had been ill-pro- 
tected against the rapacity of proconsuls and 
proprætors, they were now considered, together 
with the republic itself, as the property of a 
master; and the examples of taxation that were 
set by either, may instruct a sovereign how to 
profit by the wealth of his subjects, rather than 
admonish a free people how to constitute a 
xevenue with the least inconvenience to them- 
selves, or the least possible injury to the sources 
of wealth. 

The situation of Italy, and the distribution of 
land and water in its neighbourhood, had made 
navigation familiar to the Romans in the earliest 
ages of the republic. A considerable part of 
their force, in many of their wars, consisted in 
shipping. The battle of Actium, which decided 
the fate of the empire, was fought at sea; and 
although the Romans, at this date, had subdued 
every nation within reach of their seas, and had 
no enemy to fear on that element; yet the trans- 
port of armies, the safety of their navigation, 
and the suppression of piracies, by which the 
supply of corn, and the conveyance of the public 
revenue from the provinces, were often inter- 
rupted, made a naval force, and a proper distri- 
bution of guard ships, necessary to the peace and 
government of the empire. 

Three capital fleets were accordingly stationed 
by Augustus for the security of the coasts, one at 
Ravenna, near the bottom of the Hadriatic 
Gulph; one at Forum Julii, on the opposite side 
of the peninsula; and a third at Misenum, the 
paipa promontory or head-land of Campania. 

esides these, there were numbers of armed 


navigable rivers throughout the empire. 

The ordinary military establishment consisted 
of about five-and-forty legions, besides cavalry 
and city and provincial troops. The whole, 
reckoning each legion, with its attendants and 
officers, at six thousand men, and making a 
reasonable allowance for cavalry, may have 
amounted to three hundred thousand. Of the 
manner in which this army was distributed, the 
following particulars only are mentioned : on the 
Rhine, there were stationed eight legions; on 
the Danube, two; on the frontiers of Syria, 
four; in Spain, three; in Africa, in Egypt, in 
Mysia, and Dalmatia, each two legions; in the 
city were nine, or, according to others, ten co- 
horts, in the capacity of guards, or pretorian 
bands, to attend the person of the emperor ; and, 
together with these, three cohorts of a thousand 
men each, intended as a city watch, to be employed 
in preserving the peace, in extinguishing fires, 
and in suppressing any other occasional disorder.? 

For the farther security of the empire, consi- 
derable territories on the frontier, which might 
have been easily occupied by the Roman arms, 
were suffered to remain in the possession of 
allies, dependant princes, or free cities and repub- 
lican states, who, owing their safety to the sup- 
port of the Roman power, formed a kind of 
barrier against its enemies, were vigilant to ob- 
serve, and ready to oppose every attempt of 
invasion, and were prepared to co-operate with 
the Roman armies, and to support them with 
stores and provisions as oft as they had occasion 
to act in their neighbourhood. The republic had 
ever cultivated such alliances with powers that 
were contiguous to the place of their operations ; 
and frequently, after having made the defence 
of their ally the pretence of a war, and after 
having availed theinselves of his assistance, they, 
upon occasion of some breach or quarrel, joined 
the ally himself to the conquest which he had 
assistéd them to make, ‘This same policy which 
had been useful in acquiring the dominion of so 
great an empire, was still employed for its safety, 
In pursuance of this policy, the kings of Mauri- 
tania, of the Bosphorus, of the Lesser and Greater 
Armenia, of Cappadocia, Commagne, Galatia, 
and Pamphilia, with Paphlagonia, Colchis, and 
Judza, together with the republican states of 
Rhodes, Cyrene, Pisidia, and Lycia. acted under 
the denomination of allies, as advanced parties 
on the frontiers of the empire, and encouraged 
by the prospect of a powerful support, were 
ready to withstand every enemy by whom their 
own peace, or that of the Romans, was likely to 
be disturbed. 


3 Tacitus, lib. i. 


422 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox VI. 


CHAPTER III. 


The Family and Court of Augustus—His pretended Resignation of the Empire renewed— The 
exercise of his Power becomes less disguised—Death of Agrippa. 


IN tte Roman empire, thus subjected to a 
monarch, though planted with races of men the 
most famed for activity and vigour, it has been 
observed, that the materials of history became 
less frequent and less interesting than they had 
been in the times of the republic, while confined 
to much narrower bounds. Under the dominion 
of a single person, all the interesting exertions 
of the national, the political, and the military 
spirit over great parts of the earth, were sup- 
oe Even in the capital of the world, so 
ately agitated with every difference of opinion 
or interfering of interests, the operations of go- 
vernment itself were become silent and secret. 
Matters of public concern, considered as the 
affairs of an individual, were adjusted to his con- 
veniency, and directed by his passions, or by 
those of his family, relations, or domestics. The 
list of such persons accordingly, with their cha- 
racters, dispositions, and fortunes, make a prin- 
cipal part in the subsequent history of this 
mighty empire. 

Augustus still continued to employ Mæcenas 
and Agrippa as the chief instruments of his 
government. To their abilities and conduct, in 
their respective departments, he in a great mea- 
sure owed the prosperous state of his affairs. He 
likewise persevered in his attachment to Livia, 
whose separation from her former husband has 
been already mentioned. ‘Together with the 
mother, he received into his‘ family her two sons, 
Tiberius and Drusus. Of these Tiberius, born 
in the year of the battle of Philippi, was now 
about twelve years old; Drusus, of whom she 
was pregnant at the time of her marriage with 
Octavius, and whom she brought forth about 
three months afterwards, was now about seven 
years old. 

The emperor having no children by Livia, had 
offspring only a daughter, famous by the name 
of Julia, born to him by Scribonia, the relation of 
Sextus Pompeius, with whom he had contracted 
a marriage of political conveniency, and of short 
duration. Next to this daughter, in point _of 
consanguinity, were his sister Octavia, the widow, 
first of Marcellus, and afterwards of Antony, 
with her children by both her husbands. Among 
these were, by her first husband, Marcella, mar- 
ried to Agrippa, and the young Marcellus,! who 
being married to the emperor’s daughter Julia, 
was looked upon as the undoubted representative 
of the Octavian and Julian families, and heir to 
the fortunes of Cæsar. 

Such then are the persons to whom many parts 
in the immediate sequel of this narration will 
principally refer; and such are the outset and 
first considerable lines of a very long reign, of 
which the materials will not ee nor the 


1 In relation to this young man, Virgil, in flattering 
Augustus, has composed so many beautiful lines in 
he sixth book of the Æneid. 
Si qua fata aspera rumpas, 
Tu Marcellus eris, é&c. 


professed intention of this history require, a long 
or minute detail. 

The establishment now made by Augustus has 
nearly completed the revolution of which it was 
proposed to give an account. The despotism, 
though exercised under the name of republic, 
and in the form of a temporary and legal insti- 
tution, being in reality absolute, and without 
any qualification of mixed government, it could 
not be doubted that the same powers would be 
continued after the period for which they were 
now granted should expire, and that the empire, 
for the future, must for ever submit to the head 
of the army: but in what form of succession, or 
with what immediate effect on the character and 
condition of those who were subject to it, re- 
mains to be collected from the sequel of this and 
a few of the following reigns. Military govern- 
ment is almost a necessary result of the abuse of 
liberty, or, in certain extremities of this evil, ap- 
pears to be the sole remedy that can be applied.? 
But, in order to know with how much care the 
evil itself ought to be avoided, we must attend 
likewise to the full effects of the cure. 

It appears from the particulars which have 
been stated, relating to the first uses which Oc- 
tavius made of his power, that he was not to be 
caught in the snare into which many others 
have fallen in consequence of great success. In 
his prosperity he still retained his vigilance, his 
caution, and his industry, and relied upon these 
alone for the preservation of what he had gained, 
Though now secure by the pretended forms of a 
legal establishment, he continued attentive to 
what was passing in every part of the empire, 
frequently withdrew from the seats of adulation 
and pleasure in the city of Rome to visit the 
provinces; and, without any view to conquest, 
or purpose of ostentation whatever, gave his pre- 
sence where any affairs of moment were in de- 
pendence, merely to extend the effects of his 
government, and to realize the dominion he had 
planned. 

The peace which immediately followed the 
victories obtained on the coast of Epirus and in 
Egypt, was the circumstance on which Augus- 
tus chiefly relied for the recommendation of his 
government, and he seems, from inclination as 
well as policy, to have early entertained a maxim 
favourable to peace with foreign nations, and 
which he afterwards openly inculcated, That the 
bounds of the empire should not be extended, 
He himself had made some acquisitions in Dal- 
matia and in Panonia. But his object in making 
war in those countries, had been, rather to ex- 
ercise and prepare his army for the contest he 
expected with Antony, than for any purpose of 
extending his conquests; and he reduced Egypt 
to a province, merely to extirpate the last re- 
mains of his rival’s party, and to prevent farther 
molestation from that rich and powerful king- 


2 Non aliud discordantis patrie remedium futwse 
quam ut ab uno regeretur. ‘Tacit. lib. i. c. 9. 


Cuar. IIL] 


dom. In his first plan of operations communi- 
cated to the senate, he expressed his disposition 
to acquiesce in the present extent of the empire ; 
put it was necessary to secure the frontier from 
invasions, and to ascertain, though not to extend, 
its bounds. Soon after his new model of go- 
vernment was established, he took measures ac- 
cordingly to repress the disorder which subsisted 
in some of the provinces, and to reduce to obe- 
dience some cantons on which the state had 
already a claim of sovereignty, though not fully 
acknowledged. He proceeded to punish others, 
who, at the breaking out of the civil wars, had 
taken advantage of the general distraction of the 
empire to resume their independency, or to make 
war on the Roman settlements. He had exam- 
ples of both sorts to contend with in different 
parts; in Thrace, on the Rhine, and among the 
Alps, but chiefly in Spain. 

Of all the provinces that became subject to 
Rome, those of Spain had been the most diff- 
cult acquisition; insomuch that, after all the 
wars so frequently renewed in that country, 
there were still some warlike cantons who con- 
tinued to maintain their independence. Among 
these the Astures and Cantabri® being in actual 
rebellion, the emperor himself, at the head of a 
powerful army, still pretending a design to in- 
vade Britain, passed into Gaul, and there having 
fixed a rate of taxation for the province, turned 
into Spain. He obliged the rebels, upon his ap- 
proach, to quit their usual habitations, and retire 
to the mountains. But finding that they were 
likely to protract the war, and to engage him in 
a succession of tedious and indecisive operations, 
he fixed his quarters at Tarraco,’ and left the 
command of the army employed on this service 
to C. Antistius and Carisius. Soon after his 

arrival at Tarraco he entered on his 
U. C. 724. eighth consulate. From that place 
he sent Terentius Varro to quell a 
que T w rebellion of the Salassi and the other 
tus Taurus, Nations of the Alps, and sent M. 
August 2do. Vincius to punish some German 


JEtat. 36. tribes, by whom the Roman traders 
frequenting their country, or settled 
m [=] Ae) 
U. C. 7283. among them, had been massacred. 
Imperator He himself, while his generals were 
Cesar 9no. employed in these services, remained 
M Junius two years at his quarters in Spain; 
Silenus. and upon the elapse of his eighth 
Angust 3tio. l 5 
Etat. 37. consulate resumed that office for the 


ninth tine. 

During the resilence of Augustus in Spain, 
arrived the famous reference or appeal from the 
Parthians, submitting to his decision a contest 
for the throne of their kingdom.5 ‘The compe- 
titors were Phraates and Tiridates. The first 
having been in possession, was expelled by a 
powerful insurrection of the people in favour of 
his rival: but, after a little time, having assem- 
bled his forces and his allies, he attacked Tiri- 
dates, obliged him to fly in his turn, and to take 
refuge in the contiguous province of the Roman 
empire. This exile, having the son of his rival 
a prisoner, proceeded to Rome, and from thence 


3 Nations inhabiting the mountainous coasts of the 
Bay of Biscay. 

4 Tarragona. 

5 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. c. 22 et 25. Orosius, lib. vi. 
ce. 21. Velleius. Liv. Epitome, lib cxxxiv. Dio. Cass. 
lib. liii. c. 33. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


423 


to the quarters of theemperor in Spain. At the 
same time arrived an embassy from Phraates, 
then in actual possession of the throne, desiring 
that Tiridates should be delivered up to him, and 
that his son should be restored. Both parties 
offered honourable terms to the Romans, parti- 
cularly the restoration of all the captives, and of 
all the trophies taken either from Crassus or from 
Antony, in their unfortunate invasions of that 
kingdom. 

Augustus willingly accepted of these terms; 
but affecting to refer the Parthian dispute to the 
Roman senate, gave instructions that the son of 
Phraates should be restored to his father, but 
that Tiridates should not be delivered up to his 
enemy.6 

By this transaction, though a pacific one, the 
disgrace incurred by the Roman legions in Par- 
thia was supposed to be entirely effaced. And 
it being said that Augustus, on this occasion, 
had performed, by the authority of his name, 
what other Roman leaders had attempted in 
vain by force of arms, he had a variety of honours 
decreed to him by the senate. It passed, among 
other resolutions, that his name should be in- 
scribed among those of the gods in the address 
of the public hymns; that one of the Roman 
tribes should be named the Julian tribe, in 
honour of him; that he should wear the trium- 
phal crown at all public entertainments; that 
all Roman senators, who had been present at 
any of his victories, should attend his triumphs 
dressed in purple robes; that the anniversary of 
his return to Rome should be observed as a fes- 
tival; that he should have the nomination of per- 
sons to be hononred with the priesthood, and 
should fill up the list to any numbers he thought 
proper. From this time forward, accordingly, 
the number was supposed to be unlimited. 

Soon after the conclusion of this negotiation 
with the Parthians, the operations of the armies 
in Spain and Germany were brought to a suc- 
cessful period. Caius Antistius being attacked 
by the Cantabri, obtained a complete victory, 
and obliged that people again to take separate 
retreats in the woods and mountains, where 
numbers of them were reduced by famine, and 
others, being invested in their strong holds, and 
in danger of being taken, chose to perish by their 
own hands, 

Carisius was equally successful against the 
Asturi; obliged them to abandon their habita- 
tions, or to submit at discretion.” 

Terentius Varro, having invaded the Salassi 
or Piedmontese, on different quarters, made them 
agree to pay a cotribution, and, under pretence 
of levying it, sent an army in separate divisions 
into their country ; and thus having them at his 
mercy, exercised a cruelty of which too many 
examples are to be found in every period of an- 
cient history. He ordered, that all the children 
and youth of the nation, thus taken by surprise, 
should be put up for sale; the buyer being re- 
quired to come under engagements, that none of 
this unhappy people, thus sold for slaves, should 
be restored to freedom, or allowed to return to 
their own country, till after an interval of twenty 
years.8 


6 Justin. lib. xlii. c. 5. Dio. Cass. lib. liii. c. 33. 
Velleins Pater. lib. ii. c. 91. 


7 Dio. Cass. lib. liii.c. 25. 8 Ibid. 


424 ° 


About the same time Augustus received from 
the army the title of Imperator, and from the 
senate the offer of a triumph, on account of the 
victories gained by his lieutenants. The last of 
these honours he declined; but took occasion to 
exhibit games in Spain, in name of his nephew 
Marcellus and of his step-son Tiberius, whom 
he wished to recommend to the army by this act 
of munificence. He likewise distributed lands, 
both in Spain and in the Cisalpine Gaul, to the 
soldiers who were discharged from the legions, 
and on this occasion built the Augusta Emerito- 
rum'in Spain, and the Augusta Pretoria? on 
the descent of the Alps towards Italy. In con- 
formity with his general plan of dividing the 
provinces, he separated Spain into three govern- 
ments, the Beetica, Lusitania, and Taraconensis. 
The first was included under the department of 
the senate, the other two had been reserved to 
himself. 

Gaul was, at the same time, divided into four 
separate governments; the Narbonensis, Ac- 
quitania, Lugdunensis, and Celtica or Belgica. 
Upon this increase of the number of provinces, 
additional officers, particulariy in the capacity 
of questors, became necessary. All who had, 
for ten years preceding the date of these arrange- 
ments, held the office of questor in the city, 
without succeeding to any foreign employment, 
were now ordered to cast lots for the vacant 
stations. 

The general peace being again restored, by 
the successful operations of the army in different 
quarters of the empire, the gates of Janus once 
more were shut, and a column was erected on 
asummit of the Alps, bearing an inscription, 
with the names of forty-eight separate nations 
or cantons, who were now reduced to obedience 
under the auspices of Augustus.? 

; The emperor being on his return 
U. C. 723. to Rome, ai having accepted of 
Imper. Cesara tenth consulate, the ceremony of 


10mo, C. his admission into office was per- 
Norbanus formed before his arrival on the first 
Flaccus. ei A allot WH 
August. 4to, Of January, with a renewal o the 
JEtat. 38. oaths formerly taken by the people, 


that they would observe his decrees. 
The senate, at the same time, being informed 
that he intended to make a donation to the peo- 
ple, amounting to a hundred denarii for each 
person ; but that, from respect to the laws which 
gave them a negaiive on such donations, he 
meant to defer the publication of his intention 
until he had their consent; they immediately 
passed a decree, giving him full exemption from 
every law or form of the commonwealth, and 
empowering him‘ to govern in all matters accord- 
ing to his own will. This decree, of which the 
effect was not so much to vest hiin with any new 
powers, as to remove the veil from that power of 
which he was already possessed, it is probable, 
from his caution in other matters, he would have 
gladly avoided. At his return, after so long an 
absence, he was received by all orders of men 
with every demonstration of joy. Having al- 
ready been flattered in his own person with every 
mark of distinction and honour, he was now 
courted in the person of his favourite nephew 
Marcellus. This young man was admitted, by 


1 Now Merida. 
3 Plin. lib. xix.c. 1. 


2 Now Aosta. 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. c. 28. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book VI. 


a formal decree, to a place ın the senate amon 
the members of pretorian rank, and was allowe 
to sue for the consulate ten years before the legal 
age. Livia too had a share in these flatteries, by 
a like privilege bestowed on her son Tiberius, 
though in order to retain some distinction be- 
tween the favourite nephew and the step-son of 
the emperor, the decree in favour of ‘Tiberius 
only bore that he might sue for the consulate 
five years before the legal age. 

In the mean time Marcellus held the office of 
edile, and Tiberius that of questor. The first, 
to signalize his magistracy, ordered that that part 
of the forum or space in which the courts of jus- 
tice were held, which till then had been always 
uncovered and exposed to the open air, should 
be shaded with a covering or awning of cloths 

During the absence of the emperor, the plans 
which had been formed for the better government 
of the city, for adorning it with public buildings, 
and for repairing the highways throughout 
Italy, were carried into execution by Agrippa. 
The repair of the highways had been assigned, 
in separate lots, to such of the senators as were 
supposed able to defray the expense of it; and, 
among these, the Flaminian Way had been as- 
signed to Augustus himself. The town was di- 
vided into quarters or districts, under proper 
officers, annually chosen or taken by lot; and a 
watch was established, to prevent disorders, and 
to guard against fire. 

‘The channel of the river, in a great measure 
choked up with heaps of rubbish from the ruins 
of houses, that formed considerable banks and 
islands in the midst of it, and, at every flood, 
forced great inundations into the streets, was 
now effectually cleared.6 The Septa Julia, or 
place of assembly, called the Julian place, in ho- 
nour of the emperor, was repaired, adorned, and 
dedicated. A temple was erected to Neptune, 
in memory of the late naval victories. The por- 
tico of the pantheon was finished about this time; 
within was placed, among the images of the 
gods, a statue of Julius Cesar; in the vestibule, 
or portico, were placed those of Augustus and 
Agrippa.’ 

The emperor, upon his approach to the city, 
published, by virtue of the power lately conferred 
upon him by the senate, his intention fo distri- 
bute to the citizens a hundred denarii a man. In 
this it appears that the Roman people had still 
retained the worst and must corrupting part of 
their republican privileges, that of receiving 
gratuities in money and corn, as well as that of 
being frequently amused with expensive shows, 
By the first they were supported in idleness, 
and by the other taught dissipation, and made 
to forget the state of political degradation into 
which they were fallen. At the games exhibited 
in the preceding year.by the prætor Servilius, it 
is said, that three hundred bears, and an equal 
number of African wild beasts, were baited or 
hunted down.® 

-Tke restoration of peace being a principal 
point on which Augustus valued himself with 
the public, the gates of Janus, in a few of the 
first years of his reign, had been already three 


5 Quantum mutatis moribus Catonis censoriji qui 


| sternendum quoque forum muricibus censuerat. Plin. 


Nat. Hist. Jib. iii. c. 20. 
6 Sneton. in August. c. 29, 30. 


7 Dio Cass, lib. liii. c. 22 &c. &e. 8 Ibid. ¢. 27 


Crap. IIL] 


times repeatedly shut.? But on a frontier so ex- 
tensive, beset on the one hand by fierce nations, 
jealous of their liberties, and on the other, by 
armies, whose commanders were fond of oppor- 
tunities to distinguish themselves, it was not pos- 
sible long to avoid every species of war. Soon 
after the emperor had withdrawn from Spain; 
leaving the command in Lusitania to L. Æ mili- 
us, the Cantabri and Astuftes, still impatient of 
the dominion to which they had lately, in ap- 
pearance, made a perpetual submission, took a 
resolution again to shake off the Roman yoke: 
Propusing to give the first intimation of their 
design by a stroke of importance, they drew a 
considerable part of the Roman army i.. their 
country, under pretence of furnishing them with 
a supply of corn; and when they found them 
dispersed in small parties to receive the proposed 
distribution, they put the whole, or the greater 
part, to the sword. In revenge for this piece of 
treachery, Æmilius laid their country under 
military execution, and by a barbarous policy, to 
prevent feture revolts, cut off the right hands of 
the prisoners whose lives he spared." 

At the same time Augustus himself, though 
somewhat contrary to the general system of his 
reign, entertained a project of extending the Ro- 
man settlements, or at least of making discoveries 
on the side of Arabia, and on the coasts of the 
Indian seas: He was tempted, probably; by the 
prospect of getting access to the rare and costly 
commodities, which the Arabians were known to 
receive from India,!! and which they sold in the 
markets of Egypt and Asia at their own price. 
He expected to refund the expense of his arma- 
ment from the great treasures of gold and silver 
which the Arabians were supposed to possess. 

For this purpose Ælius Gallus, the proprator 
of Egypt, was entrusted with the conduct of an 
expedition to the Gulph of Arabia. This officer 
spent a considerable time in fitting out a fleet of 
armed ships, which he afterwards found to be 
unnecessary, as the Arabians were mere traders, 
and had no ships of force. In passing the gulph 
with one hundred and thirty transports, he, by 
the unskilfulness of his mariners aud pilots, sus- 
tained a great loss both in shipping and men, and 
in the delays which he afterwards incurred, or 
in attempting to penetrate the deserts of Arabia 
eastward; he lost a great part of his army, which 
perished by want of water, or by disease. And 
thus, after a fruitless attempt, in which he spent 
many months, returned to Alexandria with a 
small part of his army, without having gained 
any considerable advantage, or even obtained in- 
formation of the sources of wealth which he was 
sent to explore.!2 

While these transactions passed 


U. C. 739. in the provinces and on the frontier 
of the empire, Augustus, then re- 
ae | a siling at Rome, entered on an 
Tribunus eleventh consulate. His colleague, 
plebis. in the beginning of the year, was 
Terentius Terentius Varro Murena. But 
Varro Mu- this consul died in office, and was 
rena mort. ° 
C. Calpur. Succeeded for the remainder of the 
nius Piso. year by C. Calpurnius Piso. 


9 Sueton. in August. c 22. 10 Ebid. lib. liii. c. 29. 

11 Strabo mentions, that in the port of Nus there 
were above 100 ships from India. 

12 Dio. Cass. lib. lili: c. 29. Zonaras, lib. x. c. 33. 
Plin. lib. vi. c. 28. Str. lib, ii. p. 118. Lb. lib. avi. p. Zor. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


423 


Augustus himself, in this consul- 
ate was taken ill; and being sup- 
posed in danger, called his colieague, 
with a number of the principal senators, into his 
presence, to receive his last instructions relating 
to the empire. The title by which he affected 
to hold the government could not support him in 
pointing out a succession. He accordingly made 
no mention of any successor to himself, but de- 
livered to the consul Piso; as being first officer 
of state, the memorials he had drawn up relating 
to the revenue and other public establishments. 
He gave to Agrippa his ring, which was the 
badge of his nobility, and which, according to 
the ideas of the Romans, had an emblematical 
reference to his power. He seemed to overlook 
his nephew Marcellus, though at this time the 
first in his favour, and probably destined to in- 
herit his fortune. This circumstance, together 
with the general opinion of his dissimulation, 
made it be suspected that he had no real appre- 
hensions of dying; and that he called his friends 
to this solemn audience, merely to show, on a 
supposed death-hed, his respect for the common- 
wealth. To elude the penetration of those who 
suspected his arts, and whom he still continued 
to dread, after his recovery, he desired that the 
will which he had made on this occasion should 
be publicly read ; but the senate, already knowing 
the contents, and affecting to believe, without 
this evidence, the sincerity of his intentions to 
restore the republic; refused to comply: They 
appointed great rejoicings on account of his re- 
covery, and amply distinguished and rewarded 
the physician, to whose skill it was supposed that 
they owed the preservation of so valuable a life.!3 

Although the circumstance of Augustus not 
having mentioned his nephew Marcellus, and 
the honour he had done to Agrippa, were proba- 
bly not the effects of any serious design respect- 
ing the succession, they nevertheless became a 
subject of jealousy in the mind of the young 
man, and soon after occasioned the retirement of 
Agrippa from the court. This officer, under 
pretence of going into Syria, where he was ap- 
pointed to command, set out from Rome, but 
stopped at Mitylene in the island of Lesbos, 
where he lived in retirement, without taking any 
part in public affairs, 

During the stay of Agrippa at Mitylene, and 
in less than a year after his daparti from 
Rome, happened the death of Marcellus; an 
event which Livia was, by some, alleged to have 
hastened, in order to make way for the advance- 
ment of her own sons; but the sickliness of the 
seasun and the mortality at Rome, during the 
two preceding years, might have accounted for 
the death of Marcellus, without any supposition 
of unnatural means; and the event itself brought 
no immediate advantage to the sons of Livia. lt 
was fullowed by the recall of Agrippa, and by a 
new arrangement, which removed the Claudii 
still farther from the place to which the mother 
was desirous to raise them in the consideration 
and favour of the emperor. 

Augustus had now, for some years, without 
intermission, assumed and exercised the office of 
consul, but thinking its authority no longer ne- 
cessary to support his power, he divested hunself 
of the title, and gave a fresh proof of his modera- 


14 lbid. ¢. 32, 33. 


August. Sto. 
atat. 39. 


13 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. c. 31. 


426 


tion, by substituting in his place L. Sestius, one 
of the few who were still supposed to regret the 
fall of the republic. Sestius had been the friend 
of Marcus Brutus, adhered to the cause of the 
commonwealth in every period of the civil wars, 
and, though spared by the victors at Philippi, still 
ventured to retain the statue and picture of his 
friend. 

The magnanimity of Augustus, in getting 
over these objections to the character of Sestius, 
was not neglected by the flatterers of his court; 
nor was his declining the consulate overlooked 
by the senate, in their zeal to devise new honours 
and additional concessions. The character of 
tribune, which had been annually conferred on 
the emperor for some years, was, on the present 
occasion, rendered perpetual in his person, and 
the privilege of proposing matters for the consi- 
deration of the senate, hitherto appropriated to 
the consuls in office, was now likewise extended 
to him. As a compensation for the dignity of 
consul, which he now declined, he was declared 
perpetual proconsul, both at Rome and in the 
provinces, and empowered to supersede every of- 
ficer, even in his own government.! He was, at 
the same time, pressed to accept the title and 
power of dictator. 

The people, labouring under a 


U. C. 731. a plague or epidemic distemper, 
M. Claudius which, in the usual mode of their 
Marcellus superstition, they considered as a 
Arseninus, 


punishment inflicted by the gods 
for some public offence, and in par- 
ticular for their having suffered the 
emperor to divest himself of the con- 
sulate, proposed that he should instantly assume 
this or a higher dignity. While the senate was 
assembled, multitudes crowded together in a riot- 
ous manner, and with threats required that a 
decree should pass to vest Augustus with the 
style and powers of dictator. They collected 
twenty-four fasces, the number usually carried 
before this officer, and repairing to the emperor’s 
palace, called upon him to assume his power, 
and to rescue the people from their present cala- 
tities. 

Augustus, who had sufficiently provided for all 
the objects of his ambition, without the alarming 
name of dictator, took this opportunity to esta- 
blish his character for moderation. He intreated 
the people to desist from their purpose ; and when 


L. Aruntius, 
August. Gto, 
etat. 40. 


still pressed, he appeared to be greatly agitated, | 


tore his clothes,? and gave other signs of extreme 
distress. Being likewise pressed to accept of the 
office of perpetual censor, he, in the same man- 
ner, declined it, recommending, for the immedi- 
ate discharge of its duties, P. Æmilius Lepidus 
and Munatius Plancus. 

In acting this part, it is probable that Octavius 
guarded against the fate of Julius Cesar; that 
he preferred security to the ostentation of power, 
and relied more on the caution with which he 
avoided offence, than he did on the vigilance of 
his informers and spies, or on the terror of his 
arms. He could not, however, at all times, avoid 
having recourse to these means of defence. Dur- 
ing his present residence at Rome, he received 
information of a design formed on his life by 
Murena and Fannius Cepio, and brought them 
to trial. Velleius Paterculus, without any scru- 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. liii. €. 32. 2 Ibid. lib. liv. e. J. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


‘[Boox VI. 


ple, affirms the guilt of these supposed conspira- 
tors; but Dion Cassius insinuates, that the guilt 
of Murena, at least, was rather indiscretion, and 
an unguarded freedom of speech, with which he 
was accustomed to censure the conduct of his 
superiors, than any formed design of so criminal 
a nature. 

Murena was the brother-in-law of Maecenas, 
and himself appeared ‘to be in favour with Au- 
gustus, Upon the surmise of an intention to 
seize him, together with Fannius, both abscond- 
ed and fled. They were arraigned and tried in 
absence; but as the judges still enjoyed the pri- 
vilege of voting by secret ballot, they availed 
themselves of it to acquit the accused. 

The use of the secret ballot in criminal trials, 
when first introduced in the republic, as it dimi- 
nished the power of the aristocracy, which was 
so necessary for the preservation of public order, 
no doubt had a tendency unfavourable to public 
justice. But now, when it might have been 
salutary, at least in all state trials, it was, under 
pretence of the false judgment given in the case 
of Murzna and Cepio, so far abolished, that all 
persons who fled from trial, or who declined ap- 
pearance, were, by an express statute, deprived 
of the benefit of it;3 and this circumstance de 
serves to be mentioned as the first instance, per 
haps, in which the judicial forms of the republic, 
formerly partial to the interests of the people, be- 
gan to be changed in favour of despotism. This 
innovation was probably the more fatal in the 
sequel, that the emperor himself, under pretence 
of giving evidence, of urging prosecutions, or of 
appearing as an advocate for his clients, fre- 
quently attended the courts.4 And it cannot be 
doubted, that as often as he appeared,5 the part 
which he took, whether as a witness or as a 
pleader, must have had very great and improper 
influence in the cause. 

In the beginning of this reign, are dated some 
regulations calculated for the peace and generał 
order of the city. Among these, it is mentioned, 
that the number of pretors was reduced to ten; 
and that two of this number were appointed to 
inspect the public revenue ;° that some feasts, 
which had been customary, were probibited, and 
the expense of others restrained within moderate 
bounds; that the care of the public shows was 
entrusted to the pretors, with a competent allow- 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 3. 

4 Ibid. Sueton. in August. c. 56. 

5 Among the remarkable trials of this period is 
mentioned that of M. Prinius, who having the com- 
inand in Macedonia, was accused-of having, without 
orders, made war on the Odrysians, a Thracian na 
tion. He pleaded the orders of Augustus or of Mar 
cellus; but the emperor himself, attending the trial, 
denied his having ever given such orders, and the de 
fendant wascondemned He is said, at another time, 
to have appeared in behalf of his confidents Apulius 
and Mæcenas, who were arraigned of sonie undue in- 
fluence in protecting a person under prosecution for 
adultery. After the prosecutor began to open the 
charge, Augustus himself came into court, and com- 
manded him not to traduce his relations and friends; 
a stretch of power which, under legal government, 
ought to have given offence; bat in the present state 
of the Romans, only put the subject in mind how 
necessary it was for himself to court the imperial 
favour; and it was decreed accordingly, by the unani- 
mous votes of all the senators, that in memory of this 
gracious interposition of the emperor, an additional 
statue should be erected to him. 

6 Dio. Cass. lib. Hii. c. 32. 


Cuar. I.) 


nnce from the treasury to defray the expense of 
them, but under an express prohibition to add, as 
thev had been hitherto inclined to do, from am- 
bitious motives, above an equal sum from their 
own private estates. The shows of gladiators 
were subjected to the control of the senate, and 
the number of pairs to be exhibited, on any par- 
ticular occasion, restricted to sixty. The care of 
extinguishing and guarding against fire being in 
the department of the ediles, a body of six hun- 
dred men, destined to this service, was put under 
the command of these magistrates. Persons of 
rank having given cause of complaint, by pre- 
senting themselves as dancers or performers on 
the public theatre, such examples were strictly 
prohibited. 

As the emperor ever affected a desire to be en- 
tirely relieved of the government, he accompanied 
his most popular acts and regulations with a for- 
mal and ostentatious resignation of some partì- 
cular parts of his power. ‘lhe provinces of Nar- 
bonne and of Cyprus, which had been originally 
part of his trust, being in the first period of lus 
reign restored to peace, he formally resigned 
them into the hands of the senate. But while he 
was occupied with these pacific or popular mea- 
sures, the Astures and Cantabri, notwithstand- 
ing their former distresses, still passionately fond 
of their expiring liberties, having revolted yet a 
third time, were again reduced with great slaugh- 
ter. Most of those who escaped from the swords 
of the Roman legions, perished by their own 
hands? While this event, in appearanee, ter- 
minated all the troubles which subsisted in the 
western part of the empire, an alarm was re- 
ceived from Egypt, of a formidable enemy ap- 
pearing to intend the invasion of that kingdom. 
The Ethiopians, probably, encouraged by the 
low state to which, from the unfortunate expedi- 
tion of Gallus against the Arabians, they sup- 
posed the Roman forces on the Nile to have been 
reduced, had, by the time that the alarm had been 
communicated to Rome, actually entered the pro- 
vince; and, before any assistance could be sent. 
from other parts of the empire, were repulsed by 
Petronius, who succeeded to Gallus in the go- 
vernment of Egypt. 

But before these events were known, the em- 
peror had taken his resolution to attend to the 
defence of this kingdom in person, and was set 
out on his voyage. Having put into Sicily in his 
way, while he yet remained in this island, the 
usual election of consuls came on at Rome. 

He himself was named, together 


U. C. 732. with M. Lollius Nepos; but he de- 

clined accepting of the office, and 
Q. Emilius affected to leave the Roman people, 
pete ie as of old, to a free choice. This 
Nepos. novelty gave rise to a warm contest, 


August 9mo, in which Quintus Emilius Lepidus, 
Ætat. 41, and L. Silanus appeared as com- 

petitors, and were supported by 
numerous parties of their friends. 'The people 
began to recover the remembrance of their former 
power, and were encouraged or supported by the 
candidates in disorders or freedoms, from which 
they had for some time been restrained. Augus- 
tus himself was alarmed with these appearances 
of a reviving republic, summoned both the can- 
didates to attend him in Sicily; and having re- 


?7 Dio. Cass. lib. liv.c. 4 3 Ibid. c. 5, 6. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


427 


primanded them for the disturbances they gave, 
forbade them to appear at Rome, until the de- 
pending elections were passed. The competi- 
tion, nevertheless, was carried on with great 
warmth in their absence, and ended with much 
difficulty in favour of Lepidus. i 

This specimen of the supposed disorders to 
which the people were inclined, in the absence 
of an authority that was fit to restrain them, pro- 
bably induced the emperor to hasten the recall of 
Agrippa, as a person on which he could devolve 
the care of the city. The breach which had 


been some time made in his family, by the death 


of Marcellus, remained unrepaired ; and he seems 


to have hesitated in the choice of the person 


whom he was to place next to himself in power, 
and in succession to the government. His daugh- 
ter Julia, the widow of Marcellus, had yet 
brought no addition to his offspring. She was 
now to be disposed of in a second marriage, and 
was likely to bestow on her husband the character 
of heir apparent to the fortunes of her father. It 
is said, that Mecenas advised the emperor ty 
make choice of Agrippa. ‘ This man,” he said 
‘is already too high to remain where he is: he 
must be lifted up toa place yet higher, or be cast 
to the ground.” 9 

Agrippa was accordingly, about this time, 
made to part with Marcella, the niece of Augus- 
tus, to whom he had been some time married, in 
order that he might become the husband of 
Julia, and by this title the first in the family of 
Cesar. 

The emperor, while in Sicily, having bestowed 
on the city of Syracuse, and on other towns 
of that island, the privilege of Roman colonies, 
and having made some other arrangements for 
the better government of the province, continued 
his voyage from thence into Greece. As he 
passed through Sparta and Athens, he treated 
the inhabitants of those once eminent cities with 
marks of favour or displeasure, according to the 
part they had taken in the late divisions of the 
empire. 

The Spartans had, with proper hospitality, re- 
ceived Livia in her flight from Italy, and, in 
return, were now honoured with the presence of 
the emperor at one of the public meals, which 
they still affected to retain in memory of their 
ancient institutions. They likewise received a 
peni of the island of Cithera, which formerly 

ad belonged to their territory. 

The Athenians, on the contrary, it is said, 
were put in mind of their partiality to Antony 
and Cleopatra, and of the singular ostentation 
with which they admitted the queen of Egypt a 
citizen of Athens. In resentment of this be- 
haviour, they were deprived of their sovereignty 
in /Egina and Eretria, and forbid to receive any 
presents in return for the freedoin of their city, 
a distinction, which, it seems, was still earnestly 
courted, and from the sale of which they derived 
some revenue. 

From these visits to Sparta and Athens, the 
emperor procecded to Samos, where he remained 
for the winter.!0 Here he not only had a confirm- 
ation of the reports already mentioned, relating to 
the success of Petronius against the Ethiopians, 
but received an embassy from this people to sue 
for peace. They had addressed themselves to 


wees eee 


10 Thid, ¢ 7. 


9 Dio Caas. lih. liv. c. 6. 


428 


them to him. 


the place of his abode, we know not.” Bein 


conducted to Samos, on the route by which he 
was expected to arrive in Asia, they obtained a 
peace, without any of the submissions or unequal 


conditions by which the Romans were formerly 
nccustomed to prepare the way, in every treaty, 

for the farther extension of their conquests.! ` 
In the spring, Augustus passed from Samos to 
Bithynia, in which, though one of 


UeOr'33: the provinces that had been com- 
; mitted to the administration of the 

M. Apuleius, senate, he, by his own authority, 

P. Silius d 9 

Nese, made some reformations, and upon 

August. 8vo, % Complaint, that the people of Cyzi- 

JEtat. 42. cum had insulted with the rod, and 


put to death some Roman citizens, 
he stript them of several privileges which they 
had hitherto enjoyed. From thence, he continued 
his progress into Syria, and there likewise in- 
flicted some severities on the citizens of Tyre 
and Sidon, as a punishment of their seditions and 
disrespect to his government.? 

The Parthians had not yet restored the Roman 
captives, and the trophies of which they had 
got possession on the defeats of Crassus and An- 
tony. This was the condition, on which the 
king had obtained the release of his son. Bein 
now reminded of it, or alarmed by the ipproick 
of the Roman emperor to his frontier, he sent an 
embassy to perform this article. But of the Ro- 
man prisoners, many, soon after they were taken, 
perished by their own hands; others, being re- 
conciled by degrees to their condition, and having 
settled, were unwilling to remove. They con- 
cealed themselves from the persons who were 
sent to assemble and conduct them to the fron- 
tier, and but a few were recovered. These, 
together with the restored standards and other 
trophies, were conducted with great pomp to the 
city of Rome. 

Augustus had already received the congratu- 
lations of the senate and people, on the conclu- 
sion of his treaty with the Parthians, and know- 
ing how much it was become a point of honour at 
Rome to repair the disgrace which Roman armies 
had incurred on the Euphrates and the Tigris, 
he indulged, on the conclusion of this transac- 
tion, a degree of vanity, which was unusual with 
him on other occasions. He ordered the rites of 
thanksgiving that were appropriated to the great- 
est victories; gave instructions to erect a tri- 
umphal arch; and, upon his return to Rome, 
entered the city in triumph. 

The Romans, in conferring honours on those 
who performed any successful service, considered 
the advantage itself, more than the means by 
which it had been obtained, and indulged, with 
all the distinctions that military courage or per- 
sonal ability could claim, every officer, under 
whose auspjces they prospered, whether by arti- 
fice or valour. On this principle, Augustus, 
without having performed any military operation 
whatever, took occasion to triumph over an ene- 
my, before whom the armies of Antony and 
Crassus had perished. 

The object of the emperor’s journey to the 


1 Strabo, lib. vii. p 821. 


2 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 6 3 Ibid.e. 8. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


Petronius ; and being referred to the emperor, 
desired that they might have guides to conduct 
“This emperor,” they said, “or 


[Boor VL 


east having been obtained by the restoration of 
peace to Egypt, he did not proceed in his pro- 
gress beyond the province of Syria. From 
thence, in his letters to the senate, he declaimed 
every intention or wish to extend the bounds of 
the empire, and disposed of kingdoms on the 
frontier to the princes of Asia, who were consi- 
dered as confederates or allies of the Romans. 
Among these, he gave to Tarcondimotus a prin- 
cipality in Cilicia; to Archelaus, the Lesser Ar- 
menia; to Herod, over and above his own king- 
dom of Judea, the principality of Zenodorus, in 
its neighbourhood. He restored a prince, of the 
name of Mithridates, to the kingdom of Comma- 
gené, from which his father had been expelled; 
and, at the request of the people of Armenia, sent 
his step-son Tiberius Claudius Nero, now about 
twenty years of age, with a commission to remove 
Artabazus, then in possession of that kingdom, 
and to declare Tiridates, who was still at Rome, 
to be its sovereign. This revolution in Armenia 
however was, by the death of Artabazus, who fell 
by the hands of his own subjects, in part effected 
before the arrival of Tiberius. 

While the emperor was thus employed in the 
provinces, the ordinary succession of magistrates 
took place at Rome, and he himself being named 
consul, together with Caius Sentius, again de- 
clined the title, without recommending a substi- 
tute. Great animosities arose among the candi- 
dates for this honour. Agrippa had been called 
away into Gau!, upon an alarm received on the 
German frontier, and from thence into Spain, to 
quell another revolt of the Astures and Cantabri, 
In his absence the consul Sentius and the senate, 
unable tu repress the tumults, sent a deputation 
to the emperor, who was still in Asia, to know 
his pleasure respecting the election, and, in re- 
turn, had a fresh proof of his magnanimity and 
candour in the recommendation of Lucretius, a 
known partizan of the republic, and one of those, 
who being among the proscribed, had escaped 
from the massacre. 

Augustus, during his stay in Syria, had ac- 
counts of the birth of a grandson Caius, the 
eldest of the sons of Agrippa, by his daughter 

Julia, and had a copy of the decree, 
U. C. 734. by which the senate annexed the an- 
C. Sentius Piversary of this birth to the days of 
Saturninus, public rejoicing. On his way to 
Q. Lucretius Italv, he passed another winter in 
Vespello. Samos, where he received the ambas- 
pr pel ii sadors of many nations, and among 

these, an embassy fronı India, at- 


Vipsanius l l 
Agrippa. tended with a numerous retinue, and 
“August. Ino, charged with a variety of presents.4 
Etat. 43. i 2 y P 


But what probably most entertained 
the curious in the western world, was the exhi- 
bition of an Indian sage or Brahmin, who having 
taken his resolution to die, was ambitious to make 
his exit in presence of the Roman court. Being 
indulged in this desire, and fiattered with the at- 
tendance of a numerous crowd of speetators, he 
prepared a funeral pile, which he set on fire, and 
with much ostentation and gravity, threw him- 
self into the midst of it.5 His tomb was marked 


4 Among these are mentioned by Strabo a snake 
ten cubits long, though it appears from Suetonius, 
lib. xv. p.719, that a snake of a much greater length was 
exhibited in the public spectacles at Rome, fifty cnbite. 
Sueton. in August. c. 43. ‘ 

5 Dio. Cass. lib. liv.c.8. 10, 11. Vall. Pat. lib. ii. e. 32 


Cnap. IIL} 


with the following inscription. 
marus or T'armanochegas, an Indian of Bargosa, 
who, in the manner of his country, ended his 
days by a voluntary death.”® In such actions, 
we may perceive the powerful attraction of glory, 
from whatever sort of performance it be sup- 
posed to arise. á 

When the emperor’s intended return was an- 
nounced at Rome, many honours were decreed to 
him, all of which he declined, except that of hav- 
ing an altar erected on the occasion to Jupiter 
Redux, and that of having the day of his arrival 
inserted, under the title Augustalia, among the 
festivals of the kalendar. On his approach to the 
city, the magistrates and the people prepared to 
go forth in procession to meet him; but either 
from an aversion to pageantry, which he ever 
shunned, except when necessary to serve some 
purpose, or from a desire of procuring fresh enco- 
miums of moderation, he made his entry in the 
night to avoid this compliment. On the follow- 
ing day, he procured resolutions of the senate 
and people, promoting Tiberius, the eldest of the 
sons of Livia, to the rank of prætor, and bestow- 
ing on Drusus, the younger brother, the privilege 
of standing for any of the ancient honours of the 
commonwealth five years before the legal age. 
He himself, at the same time, accepted the office 
of censor, with a new title, that of inspector of 
manners,’ for five years. 

This new designation was annexed to the 
titles of Augustus, under pretence that such 
an authority was wanting to take cognizance of 
the disorders committed in the late canvass for 
the election of consuls; but, as the period was 
near approaching, at which he was to repeat the 
form of resigning the government, it is probable 
that he chose to be vested with the character of 
censor, in order to make the arrangements pre- 
paratory to this ceremony. 

Near ten years had elapsed since the rolls of 
the senate had been made up, and in this inter- 
val many reasons may have occurred for remov- 
ing some of the members, and for substituting 
others. The powers of censor, with which the 
emperor was now vested, enabled him, without 
any unprecedented stretch of authority, to eflect 
his purpose; but, notwithstanding this circum- 
stance, his usual caution led him to seek for pal- 
liatives, and to devise means to lessen or todivide 
the odium of so disagreeable a measure. He 
gave out, that the number of senators was be- 
come too great, and thus provided himself with 
an excuse for excluding many of them, without 
stating any personal objection. Fle at first pro- 
posed to take upon himself only the nomination 
of thirty members, and under a solemn oath, that 
he should name the most worthy. These thirty, 
under a like solemn oath, were directed each, to 
give in a list of five, which would have made up 
the number to one hundred and fifty. And these, 
if they had been agreeable tu the emperor, would 
have probably made the first part of the roll. But 
as he was in many instances disappointed and 
displeased with the choice that was made, he se- 
lected only thirty of the whole, to whom he gave 
the same directions as before, each to name five; 
but being equally dissatisfied with this new no- 
mination, he took the whole on himself; and 
alleging, that the oificer who collected the names 


6 Strabo, lib. xv. p. 720. 7 Prefectus Morum, 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


429 


“Here lies Tar-ihad made some mistakes, and that many, who 


were thus proposed to be members of the senate, 
had necessary avocations in the provinces, he 
undertook, by his own authority, to reform the 
list. This task, however, he performed under so 
much apprehension of danger to his person, that, 
as in the former instance of the same kind, he 
carried armour under his clothes, and had a guard 
of ten chosen senators, with concealed weapons, 
who had orders not to.admit above one person at 
a time to approach him.8 By his conduct in 
this matter, or by the severity of his censures, he 
was supposed to have made so inany enemies, or 
he himself at least took such impressions of 
jealousy and distrust as kept him in alarm, and 
occasioned some trials and executions, by which 
he proposed to counteract or prevent the conspi- 
racies which were forming against him.9 
Upon observing how much the emperor was 
alarmed, it was moved in the senate, as an ac- 
knowledgment of the danger to which he was 
exposed, that the members should take arms, and 
in certain numbers by turns pass the night in 
the palace. “I am unfortunately addicted to 
snore,” said Antistius Lubeo, who still possessed 
some remains of the republican spirit, “and am 
afraid, that I should be an unwelcome guest in 
the anti-chamber of the prince.” 10 
The period for which Augustus 
U. C. 735. had accepted the command of the 
armies, and taken charge of part of 
Peitume the provinces being about to expire, 
‘Marcellinus. he repeated the form of his resigna- 
Cn.Cornelius tion, and was prevailed upon to re- 


P. Cornelius 


entail, sume his trust, though but for a term 
ee R a of five years longer. Agrippa being 


now the son-in-law of the emperor, 
and the first in his favour, as well as his nearest 
relation, was joined with him for the same term 
of five years, in the character of tribune of the 
people. 

During the preceding part of the new esta- 
blishment, Augustus had affected to limit the 
exercise of his power to the military department, 
or to the provinces committed to his charge. In the 
city, or in civil aflairs, he acted in the name of 
the senate, or under the veil of some temporary 
office of magistracy. But in the period upon 
which he was now entering, he seemed to have 
thought himself safe in assuming a more direct 
authority. He accordingly received from the se- 
nate, an appointment of perpetual extraordinary 
consul, to be preceded in all public appearances 
by twelve lictors, and in the senate to have a 
chair of state placed between the ordinary consuls 
of the year. He likewise received unlimited au- 
thority to enact laws, to the observance of which, 
the senate offered to bind themselves by oath. 
In this, he took occasion to give a proof of his 
moderation, by preventing the oath to be admi- 
nistered ; but he proceeded from henceforward 
in the exercise of his power, with fewer dis- 
guises than he had formerly employed. 

Prerogatives, hitherto assumed under the name 
of some ordinary magistracy, were comnutted to 
officers, acting by the appointment of Cesar, anu 
by his sole authority. Among these, may be 
numbered the inspection of the public works; of 


8 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 13, 14, 15. 
9 Sueton. in August.c 35. 


10 Dio, Cars. lib. liv. 11 Ibid. c. 17, 


430 


the highways; the navigation of the river; the 
markets;! the public granaries; the preservation 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox VI. 


nution of it. They made laws to encourage mar- 
riage, when the advantages enjoyed by any 


of the peace, or government of the city, which | Roman citizen, as father of a family, were of 


was now committed to a military prefect or go- 
vernor. Other new institutions were made, to 
remedy evils of a recent date. 

From the time of the civil wars, Italy had re- 
mained subject to many disorders. The inha- 
bitants, alleging the dangers to which they had 
been exposed in their persons and properties, 
continued to form into bands, and taking arms, 
under pretence of defending themselves, employed 
those arms for lawless purposes; robbed, mur- 
dered, or by force confitied to labour in their 
workhouses many innocent passengers, whether 
freemen or slaves, whom they thought proper to 
question or violate, under the appellation of dis- 
orderly persons. To remedy this evil, guards 
were posted at proper intervals, and a species of 
military patrole established throughout the coun- 
try, with orders to protect travellers, to inspect 
the workhouses or receptacles of labouring slaves, 
and to suppress all associations, besides those of 
the ancient corporations.? 

- the same authority Augustus revived some 
obsolete laws, and gave instructions to put them 
in force: such as the laws limiting expense, re- 
straining adultery, lewdness, and bribery, to- 
gether with the laws which had been provided 
to promote marriage, or to discourage celibacy. 
The limitation of expense niay have had its pro- 
priety under a republic, where it is an object of 
state not to suffer the citizen by his manner of 
living, or by his affectation of magnificence, to 
ruin himself, or to aim at distinction above his 
equals; but the object of the sumptuary laws, 
now enforced, is not specially mentioned. It 
was probably the same with that of the laws re- 
vived by Julius Cesar, and consequently the 
same with that of the laws long since obtained, 
under the republic, by the tribune Licinius, and 
chiefly respecting the consumption of provisions. 

In limiting the excess of the table, Augustus 
was himself a striking example of sobriety, being 
extremely moderate and abstemious in the use of 
wine and of food ;3 and with respect to the other 
objects of his severity, although he himself was 
not equally free from imputation, he probably 
already experienced the necessity of certain re- 
straints in his own family, and very properly 
thought it became him, in the capacity of magis- 
trate, every where to watch over the purity of 
domestic manners. His zeal to recommend mar- 


riage, and to promote the settlement of families, | 


probably suggested the same measures.4 

The Romans, by means of the census, ob- 
tained a more regular account of the numbers of 
the people than any other nation, and they were 
exceedingly watchful of their population, even 
when they had least cause to apprehend a dimi- 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 17. 

2 Sueton. in Octav c. 32. 

3 In his ordinary diet, when he wanted nourish- 
ment, he eat a little bread, with some dried fruit, 
without observing any stated time for his meals. He 
ordered his table indeed to be regularly served; but he 
himself joined the company irregularly, often after 
they were set, and frequently left them before they 
were done, and insisted that he should not be disturb- 
ed in this freedom by any ceremony of waiting for him, 
or by any troublesome attention whatever. Sueton. 
in Octav. c. 72, 73. 76, 77. 

4 Sucton. in Octav. e. 69. 


themselves a sufficient encouragement. Augustus 
being to revive those laws, produced and read in 
the senate a speech at that time, still extant, 
which had been delivered by Metellus Numidi- 
cus on this subject, about a hundred years before 
the present date. 

Even so far back, under the republic, the de- 
cline of domestic manners may have begun to be 
felt. Licentiousness and want of economy may 
have already broke into the establishment of 
Roman families; disorders happening in the state 
of matrimony, may have deterred the single from 
embracing it. But if the effect of such circum- 
stances then began to appear, how much more 
may we suppose that the destructive civil wars, 
which followed; the removal of the ancient in- 
habitants of Italy, to make way for strangers and 
soldiers of fortune, must have operated to reduce 
the numbers of the people? These troubles end- 
ing in military government ; the uncertainty of 
every man’s condition depending on the will of 
a master; fear, melancholy, and dejection, felt 
aniidst the ruins of a fallen republic, may have 
completed the accumulation of e~ils, and the 
effect may have suggested to Augustus the ne- 
cessity of reviving the ancient laws of the repub- 
lic for the encouragement of population; inso- 
much, that the extension and application of them 
became a principal object of his reign. 

Suetonius, as usual in his manner, without 
regard to dates, brings into one view many par- 
ticulars of the policy of Augustus relating to 
this subject. Among these, it is mentioned that 
he augmented the rewards of marriage, and the 
penalties on celibacy. That he sometimes 
brought forward the children of his own family 
into the place of public assembly, and exhorted 
the people to profit by that example; but that 
his zeal in this matter was far from being ac- 
ceptable to the people. That he was frequently 
accosted in the theatres and places of public re- 
sort, with general cries of aversion ;—had repre- 
sentations from citizens of rank, that it was 
impossible to support the extravagance of women 
educated in high condition, and was obliged to 
correct many of the edicts he at first had pub- 
lished, and to abate much of their rigour ;—that, 
in order to facilitate the settlement of families, 
he permitted free and noble citizens to marry 


‘emancipated slaves ;6—that the law, nevertheless, 


was still eluded;—that pretended marriages 
were contracted with children or females under 
age, and the completion of course indefinitely de- 
ferred ;7 that to prevent such evasions or frauds, 
it was enacted that no marriage could be legally 
contracted with any female under ten years of 
age, nor the completion of any marriage be de- 
layed above two years after the date of the sup- 
posed contract.® ; : 

As it was proposed to multiply marriages, so 
it appeared likewise of consequence to render 
the dissolution of those already formed more dif- 
ficult, and to lay divorces and separations under 
proportional restraints.2 Under this wretched 
policy it seemed to be forgotten, that where man- 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. e. 16. 6 Ibid. me 
7 Sueton. in Octav. c. 34. 8 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 16. 
9 Sueton. in Octav. c 34. 


Crap. IIL] 


kind are happy, nature has provided sufficient 
inducements to marriage. The sovereign, who 
charged himself with the care of the people, 
seemed to consider a state into which mankind 
are powerfully led, by the most irresistible calls 
of affection, passion and desire, as a kind of 
workhouse into which they must be driven hy 
the goad and the whip, or a prison in which 
they must be detained under bars and fetters of 
iron. The people seemed to feel themselves be- 
coine the property of a master, who required 
them to multiply, in order to increase the num- 
ber of his subjects; and they resisted this part 
of his administration, more than any other cir- 
cumstance of the state of degradation into 
which they were fallen. 
Augustus, in this second period 
U. C. 736. of his reign, while he extended the 
exercise of his power, still endea- 
& Furnius, voured to disguise it under some 
C. Julius forms or regulations of the ancient 


inc OF 
Bee iio, constitution. For this purpose, he 
JEtut.45. revived the laws against bribery, 


those against taking fees for the 

pleading of causes, and the laws that were made 
to enforce the attendance of senators. In these 
particulars, we cannot imagine that he so far 
inistook the situation into which he had brought 
the people, as to revive laws against bribery, atter 
there ceased to be any free election; the laws 
against accepting of fees! for pleading of causes, 
after all the motives which formerly induced 
senators to lend their gratuitous protection, had | 
ceased to exist;'! the law imposing a fine upon | 
members of the senate coining too late to their 
places, after the proceedings of the senate, were 
reduced to a mere form, by which the emperor 
enforced his own decrees.!2_ In these instances, 
then, we must suppose that Augustus, in the 
usual strain of his policy, revived the laws of 
the republic, in order to make it be believed that 
the republic was still in existence. But not- 
withstanding his attention, by these and other 
methods, to conceal the extent of his usurpation, 
he could not escape the penetration of his sub- 
jects, nor even the animadversion of buffoons, to 
whom some degrees of freedom or of petulance 
are permitted, after they are withheld from every 
one else. Having banished a player of the name 
of Pylades, for a difference with another player 
of the name of Bathyllus, he afterwards, to 
ee the people, recalled Pylades; and giving 

in some admonition to be upon his good be- 
haviour for the future: “ That is a jest,” said 
the other, “for the more that the people are 
occupied with our quarrels, the better for you.”!3 

The emperor having remained at Roine about 
two years after the commencement of the second 
period of his reign, continued, or began to carry 
on many works for the ornament, magnificence, 
or convenience of the city. ‘To defray the ex- 
pense of such works, he laid persons, who had 
obtained a triumph, or any military honour, 
under a contribution of some part of their spoils ; 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


31 


from the enemy. He was supposed to be lavish 
of military honours, which in reality began to 
lose their value, or to change their nature, being 
mere badges of court favour, not as formerly, 
the evidence or record of signal services rendered 
to the state, and supported by the testimony of 
victorious armies, and the voice of the people. It 
may be observed, as an evidence, how much the 
triumph was fallen in its value, that, for some 
advantage gained over the Garamantes,!4 an 
obscure nation on the frontier of the Roman pro- 
vince in Africa, it was bestowed on Balbus, a 
native of Gades in Spain, and but newly ad- 
mitted a Roman citizen; while it was declined 
by Agrippa, to whom it was due for his eminent 
services, and who considered it as a piece of 
empty pageantry, which could add nothing to 
the consideration he already enjoyed.'s 

About this time ionic re- 


U. C. 736. ceived an accession to his family 
aig by the birth of another grandson, 
11 mo, tat. Of the name of Lucius, the second 
45. son of Agrippa, by his daughter 


Julia; and by adopting both the 
brothers, conferred upon them the names of 
Caius and Lucius Cesar, and, by the same act, 
published the destination of his fortunes. 

In the midst of festivals, which were instituted 
on this occasion, the attention of the emperor 
was called anew to the provinces by alarms 
which were received at once in many parts of 
the empire. 

Historians give us a list of par- 


U. C. 737. ticulars, exhibiting the troubles to 
L. Domitius Which so extensive a territory was 
Ahenobar- stili exposed. ‘The Commenti and 
bus, P. Cor- Venones, nations inhabiting the 
nelius Scipio. valleys of the Alps, were in arms. 
August. où U a A 

12mo, Atat. The Panoni and Norisci had at- 
46. tacked Istria. The Danthæleti 


and Scordisci had invaded Mace- 
donia. The Sauromate had passed the Danube. 
Some cantons, both of Dalmatia and Spain, had 
revolted. The Sicambri, Usupetes, and Tench- 
teri, German nations bordering on the Rhine, 
having seized on the Italian traders who fre- 
quented their country, in imitation of the Ro- 
man manner of punishing slaves, nailed them 
to the cross, and employing this insult as a de- 
claration of war, passed the Rhine, and made a 
descent upon Gaul. ‘They surprised and put 
to flight a party of horse which had been sent 
by Lollius to observe their motions. In pursuit 
of this advantage, they fell in with the main 
body, commanded by Lollius himself, equally 
unprepared to receive them, obliged him to re- 
tire with great loss, and with the disgrace of 
leaving the standard of one of the legions in the 
hands of his eneinies.!6 
These revolts of the frontier provinces, or in- 
cursions of barbarous neighbours, may be con- 
sidered as part of a war which lasted for ages, 
and terminated at last in the ruin of the empire. 


| The defeat of Lollius was indeed the first signal 


and by these means, perhaps, made some officers | calamity which had befallen the Roman arms 


pay for their vanity more than they had taken | under the auspices of the present einperor.!? 
| was supposed to have greatly aflected him, and 


It 


10 Lex Cineia. The offender was subjected toa | to have caused the resolution which he took t4 


fine, equal to double the fee he had accepted. 
U Under the republic, the character of an able 


pleader led to the highest preferments and honours of | 


the state. 


12 Div. Cass. hb, liv. c. 18. 13 Ibid. c. 17. 


l 


| pass the Alps, and to superintend, in person, the 


14 Plin. lib. v. c. 6. 15 Dio. Cass. Jib. liv. c. 11 
16 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 20. Vell. Pater. lib. 20. c. 9? 
17 Sueton in Octav. c. 33. 


432 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VE. 


measures that were necessary to repair this loss. | restore some cities which had gone to ruin in 
His departure from Rome, however, at this! different parts of the empire, and to plant new 


time, is likewise ascribed to other motives. He 
nad now, for about two years, been exposed in 
the city to the animadversion and censure which 
a people stil] petulant though not free, were 
ready, on so near a view; to bestow on his person 
and government; and it was part of his policy 
to withdraw, at proper intervals, from the obser- 
vation of such a people, in order to preserve that 
respect and authority which too much familiarity 
is apt to impair. He accordingly took occasion 
from these alarms, on the west and northern 
frontier, to absent himself from the city; and 
despatched Agrippa at the same time, into Asia, 
where a contest which had arisen respecting the 
succession of the kingdom of the Bosphorus re- 
quired his presence. 

The emperor, leaving the administration of 
affairs at Rome in the hands of Statilius Taurus, 
set out for Gaul, accompanied by Mecenas and 
Tiberius, now in the rank of pretor, who made 
a part of his court: At his arrival in Gaul, the 
people were relieved of the alarm they had 
taken on the approach of the German invaders, 
who, not being prepared’to make a continual 
war beyond their own boundaries, had repassed 
the Rhine. He proceeded, therefore, to receive the 

representations that were made to 
U. C. 738. him relating to the administration 
of the province. Among these are 


M. Livius : ; , : 
Drusus, mentioned complaints of extortion 
E. Calpur-  °on the part of the governor. This 
LLES PUSO officer, though now bearing a Ro- 
August. 


man name, that of Licinius, was 
himself a native of Gaul, and had 
been a slave in the family of Julius 
Cesar. Having become by the bounty of his 
master, a freeman and a Roman citizen, he was 
afterward gradually raised, by Augustus himself, 
to the height of his present cominand, in which 
he committed enormous oppressions. Being 
convicted of the crimes which were laid to his 
charge, it is said, that the money of which he 
had robbed the province was seized, but not re- 
turned to the owners.! 

While the Germans fled from Gaul upon the 
report of the emperor’s approach, the revolts of 
the Commenii and Venones, of the Panonii and 
Ligures Commati, were quelled at the same 
time by the different officers who had been em- 
ployed against them. The Rheti and Vendelici, 
nations inhabiting the valley of Trent, ‘aving 
been long in the practice of plundering the Ro- 
man traders, of making incursions into Gaul, 
and even into Italy, were attacked first by 
Drusus, the younger of the sons of Livia, and 
being forced from their own country, moved in 
a hostile manner into the Roman province, 
where they were received by Tiberius, at the 
head of æ considerable army ; and being pressed 
at once by both the brothers, were obliged to 
make their subinission, and to suffer the greater 
part of their men, able to carry arms, to be trans- 
planted into other countries.” 

The peace being thus established on the side 
of Germany, the emperor applied himself to 


13mo, /Etat. 
47. 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 21. 

2 Videre Rheti bella sub Alpibus. Drusum, Ge- 
rentem, et Vendelici, &c. Horat. Carm. lib. iv. Od. 4. 
Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 22. Vell. Pater. lib. ii. e. 95. 


colonies in Gaul and in Spain. Whether these 
were settlements provided for the veterans and 
Emeriti, by dispossessing the ancient inhabi- 
tants, or new plantations made in waste and 
unappropriated lands, is uncertain. Suetonius 
informs us, that no less than twenty-eight dif- 
ferent colonies were settled in Italy, towns built, 
and funds allotted to defray the expense of 
these newly established communities; and that 
persons, who had filled any office of magistracy 
in these colonies, were entitled to a vote in the 
elections at Rome. 

Among the acts of Augustus, during his pro- 
gress In Gaul, are mentioned the effects of his 
attention to the favourite object of encouraging 
population, with the premiums he gave, wherever 
he passed, to such persons as presented him with 
numerous families ‘of children ;3 it is mentioncdy 
that the city of Paphos being destroyed by an 
earthquake, he gave orders to have it rebuilt; 
and, as an earnest of his future patronage, gave 
the inhabitants leave to change the name to 

Augusta :* that he restored to the 
U. C. 739. people of Cyzicum in Bithynia, 
the privileges of which he himself 
had lately deprived them: that his 
orders, to re-establish the king of 
Pontus. in possession of the Bos- 
phorus, which had been usurped by 
a pretended descendant of Mithri- 
dates, being successfully executed 
by Agrippa, he received the report of this service 
without having it communicated to the senate. 
And this is said to have been the first instance 
in which this form was omitted. 

A triumph having been oflered to Agrippa, on 
this occasion, was again declined.§ 

Augustus had now passed above two years in 

Gaul, and obtained the end: for which 
U. C. 740. he went, whether of a temporary re 
cess from Rome, or of making the 


M. Licinius, 
Cn. Cornelius 
Lentulus. 
August. 
i4mo, Etat. 
48 


A necessary provision for the security 
eo of the province. Leaving Drusus, 
Quincelius the younger of the sons of Livia, to 
Varus. command on the Rhine, and to con- 
e M tinue the military services he had 
49. ‘lately begun among the Alps, he 


himself set out on his return to Italy. 
But, willing to avoid the crowds which usually 
advanced to receive him on his approach to the 
city, he made his entry in the night. The se- 
nate, however, not to lose any opportunity of 
paying their court, ordered to be erected, in the 
usual place of their assembly, an altar,on which 
to offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving for his safe 
return; and to signalize the occasion by some 
circumstance of a gracious nature, resolved, that, 
from this date, whatever criminal within the city 
presented his prayer for forgiveness to the empe- 
ror in person, should obtain his pardon, Both 
these flattering decrees, presented to him on the 
day of his arrival, he rejected. On the following 
day, he received the salutations of the people cn 
the Palatine Hill,§ ordered the baths to be thrown 
open to them, and the usual attendance at such 
places to be given at his own expense. From 


a’ 


3 Sueton. in Octav. c. 46. 
4 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. €. 23. 
6 The place of his own residence 


5 Ibid. 


Cuar. IL.) 


this ceremony he proceeded to the capitol, and 

oing up to the statue of Jupiter, stript the 
m from his fasces, and laid this badge of his 
victory at the feet of the pedestal. He then as- 
sembled the senate; but excusing himself from 
speaking, on account of a hoarseness, he delivered 
a paper to be read by his quæstor, containing a 
summary of his late operations in the provinces, 
and some new regulations, by which the army, 
for the future, were to be governed.? 

Augustus had gradually, since his accession 
tothe government of the empire, endeavoured 
to improve tlie discipline of the legions, and par- 
ticularly to restore the dignity of the military 
character, by forbidding the admission of slaves. 
From this rule he never departed, except either 
upon extraordinary occasions, which required 
sudden augmentations of the army, or in recruit- 
ing particular bodies of men, such as the city- 
watch, appointed to guard against fire and other 
disorders. And he sueceeded so far in restoring 
the discipline, which had been much relaxed in 
times of the civil war, that he had authority 
enough, on di:terent occasions, to dismiss, with- 
out any provision or reward, all such as pre- 
sumed to make any demands in a mutinous 
manner. He had entirely disbanded the tenth 
legion for mutiny. In urging the duties of the 
service, he generally decimated such bodies of 
men as gave way before an enemy, and punish- 
ed with death the desertion of a post, whether 
in officers or private men. Less offences he 
punished with some species of ignominy or dis- 
grace, as, by obliging the offender to stand a 
whole day unarmed before the general’s tent, 
with some mark or badge of disgrace. ` 

By the regulations now presented to the senate 
for their approbation, the term of military service 
was fixed, if in the pretorian bands, at twelve 
years; if in the legions, at sixteen years. After 
this term, it was admitted that a soldier might 
claim his discharge. 

It had been the practice in the course of the 
late civil wars to gratify the veterans, at their 
dismission, with grants of land ; a practice which 
taught the armies to covet the possessions of 
their fellow-citizens, and to seek for pretences 
against them, which, in reality, rendered that 
species of property extremely insecure. But 
Augustus now thought himself possessed of a 
sufhieient authority to reform this abuse, and to 
substitute, for these grants of land, a gratuity in 
money.? By publishing his regulation on this 
subject, he greatly quieted the fears and appre- 
hensions under which the pacific inhabitants la- 
boured in different parts of the empire. 

The utmost efforts of the emperor were like- 
wise required, on the present occasion, to pre- 
serve the mask under whieh he wished to con- 
duct his government. The senate, though 
maintained in all its formalities, was observed 
to have no power, and began to be deserted. 
The civil offices were shunned as a burden, or as 
a conspicuous servitude. Many families of sena- 
tors were gone to deeay, and those who were 
called into supply their places, either had not, 
or denied that they had the legal qualification. 
The titles of magistracy continued for some time 
to be coveted, on account of the rank which 


7 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 25. 8 Sueton. in Octav. c. 23. 
9 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 25. . 
awe 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


433 
t 
they were supposed to bestow ; but the frequency 
and prostitution of such honours now rendered 
them contemptible ;0 and, in some degree al- 
ready an object of that ridicule which is so well 
expressed by the satirist in writings of a later 
date. |! 

To relieve senators, in part, of the burdens 
which they alone were hitherto appointed to 
bear, the emperor, while yet in Gaul, gave direc- 
tions that the ten judges, who decided in all 
questions relating to public sales and confisca- 
tions, the three inspectors of the coin,!? the of- 
ficers who had charge of public executions,'? and 
the wardens of the streets and highways,!4 
should all, for the future, be taken from the 
equestrian order. It was now the practice to 
decline, not only servile or burdensome offices 
of this sort, but likewise what had been the 
highest stations under the republic; and it be- 
came necessary to force the aceeptance of them 
under actual penalties. At first, all who had 
been questors, if still under forty years of age, 
were draughted by lot for the superior offices ;!5 
all likewise who had been questors, and who 
were possessed of the legal estate, if not above 
thirty years of age, were obliged to enrol in the 
senate. 

From this forced enrolment or promotion, 
however, which may be considered as a general 
press for senators and officers of state, were ex- 
cluded all such as had any bodily deformity or 
blemish, or who wanted tlie legal estate. In 
ascertaining the fortunes of senators the parties 
themselves were examined, and other evidence 
was brought to investigate the truth. Such as 
appeared to have made any diminution in their 
paternal inheritance were obliged to specify the 
losses they had sustained, and to give an account 
of their own manner of Iife.'6 

In the sequel of these measures, which were 
intended to preserve the appearance of a com- 
monwealth, and to support the formalities of a 
civil institution, it is probable, although not 
mentioned by any of the historians, that Augus- 
tus accepted of a prolongation of his power for 
other five years;!? and again assumed Agrippa 
with himself into the office of tribune for the 
same term. ‘The ceremony of this resignation 
became, by degrees, a matter of form, and his 
resumption of the empire was made known hy 
sports and entertainments, which rendered the 
occasion extremely agreeable to the people. 

At this time a theatre, which had been begun 
by Mareellus, was finished and opened with 
great solemnity.. A procession of noble youth 
was led by Caius the son of Agrippa, and 
adoptive son of the emperor. Six hundred Afri- 
can wild beasts were baited in the cireus, and 
among them a tiger, it being the first time that 
this animal made its appearance at Rume.!8 


10 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 30. 

11 Perpetuo risu, pulmonem agitare solebat 
Democritus quanquai non essent urbibus illis, 
Prætextæ et Trabeæ, Fasces, Lectica, Tribunal. 

Juven. Sat. x. v. 33. 

12 Triumviri Monitales. 13 Triumviri Capitales. 

14 Viginti Viri. 15 Dio. Cass. lib. liv.c.26. 16 Ibid. 

17 His having accepted the empire for ten years, and, 

at the expiration of this period, his having accepted 
of it for five years, are mentioned; and again, it ia 
mentioned about his twentieth year. or five years after 
this date, that he accepted of it for ten years more. 

18 Plin. lib. viii. c. 17. 


434 


In continuation of these entertainments, Julus, 
he son of Antony, being pretor, celebrated the 
virth-day of Augustus with the most expensive 
shows, and in his public character entertained 
the senate, together with the emperor himself, 
at a feast in the capitol.} 

Tiberius, at the same time, in performance of 
a vow which he had made for the emperor’s safe 
return from his last excursion to the provinces, 
gave splendid entertainments. Having intro- 
duced Caius Cesar, the eldest of the emperor’s 
adoptive sons, and placed him by himself in the 
pretor’s chair at the theatre, he was received by 
the people with shouts of applause. 

The emperor, however, gave signs of displea- 
sure. “Such premature honours,” he said, 
“could only serve to inspire the mind of a young 
man with presumption and pride.”? 

About this time died the famous 
U. C. 740. triumvir M. Æmilus Lepidus, for- 
merly the associate or the tool of 


August. Octavius and Antony, in the execu- 
b JEtat. tion of their designs against the re- 


ublic. While he was subservient 
to the interest of these competitors, he was al- 
lowed, in appearance, to hold a third part of the 
empire ; but being unsupported by any real abili- 
ties or personal authority, he ceased to be of any 
consequence the moment he presumed to act 
for himself, and was too inconsiderable, even to 
bean object of resentment to those he had injured. 
Augustus had suffered this fallen rival to re- 
main, during his hfe, in the dignity of Pontiff, 
and, by keeping him in public view, deprived 
him of the consolation even of being forgotten.? 
The emperor, though himself desirous to hold 
this sacred character, and frequently pressed, by 
his flatterers, to supplant Lepidus, was too cau- 
tious to violate any supposed religious institution, 
and too politic to trifle with acknowledged rights, 
of which he meant, on occasion, to avail himself. 
But upon the death of Lepidus, he did not ne- 
glect to assume the only dignity which was 
wanting to complete the accumulation of prero- 
gatives united in his own person. 
Agrippa had returned to Rome, about the 
same time, with the emperor; but soon had oc- 
casion again to depart from Italy, 
U. C, 741. being sent to quell a rebellion that 
broke out in Panonia. Upon his 
M. Valerius arrival in this country, finding the 
Barbatus, |g, natives already subdued by the fear 
ESPNS ihis approach, he accepted of their 


Omilian in ee 10) Oh 
Mag. mort, submission ; and though still in the 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boog Vf. 


C. Pagius 
abdicavit, 
C. Caninius. 


depth of winter, set out on his return 
to Rome. After he had repassed 
the seas, on his way through Cam- 


August. pania, he was taken dangerously ill- 
pion JEtat. Augustus received the accounts of 


his danger, while he was exhibiting 
sports to the people in the name of 
his two sons, Caius and Lucius, and left the city 
immediately to attend his friend ; but came too 
late, and after he expired. 

This great man appears to have been worthy 
of the best times of the republic. He had mag- 
nanimity enough to have relied on his personal 
qualities alone for consideration and honour, and 
was fit to have been a citizen of Rome in its 
happiest age ; but from the necessity of the times, 
and the principles of fidelity to the friend who 
trusted him, he became a principal support of the 
monarchy. His great abilities being employed 
to maintain the government and authority of the 
prince, and his credit with the prince employed 
in acts of justice and moderation to the people, 
he was neither an object of jealousy to the one, 
nor of envy to the other. 

It was a singular instance of good fortune to 
have found such an officer, and a mark of under- 
standing and steadiness, without jealousy, and 
without wavering, to have persevered in the 
choice. In this, and in some other instances, 
Augustus showed that his talent was not mere 
cunning, but a principle of able conduct, which 
is tried in nothing more than in the choice and 
employment of proper men. He raised Agrippa, 
though not a flatterer, from a low condition, to 
command his forces, to preside in his councils, 
and, last of all, by the marriage of his daughter, 
to the highest place in his own family.. 

At the funeral of his friend, the emperor took 
upon himself the office of principal mourner, ac- 
companied the corpse from Campania to Rome; 
and having it brought into the forum, pronounced 
the funeral oration, having, while he spoke, a 
screen placed between himself and the dead 
body. In order to confirm and to increase the 
regard that was paid to the memory of the de- 
ceased, he not only ratified that part of the will, 
by which Agrippa bequeathed his gardens and 
his baths to the public, but in his name also made 
farther additions to the legacy. 

Julia, at the death of her husband, was again 
pregnant, and bore a third son, who, from the 
family of his father, and the circumstances of 
his birth, was known by the name of Agrippa 
Posthumus.* 


CHAPTER IV. 


Marriage of Julia with Tiberius—Death of Drusus—Death of Mzcenas—Disgrace of Julia— 
War in Panonia—Roman Legions cut off in Germany— Tiberius associated in the Empire— 


Death of Augustus. 


THE death of Agrippa made way for Tibe- 

rius Claudius Nero, then about twenty-eight 

ears of age, into a higher place 

U. C. 721. than he yet held in the family and 
confidence of the emperor. 


2 Ibid. c. 27. 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 25, 26. 
4 Ibid. c. 28 29. 


2 Ibid. c. 15. 


August. 
16mo, Ætat. 
50. 


Octavius had received this young 
man in the arms of his mother 
Livia, had observed the progress of 
his childhood and youth, and had given him no 
distinguished place in his favour during the lives 
of Marcellus or Agrippa, to whom he had suc- 
cessivelv married his daughter; but being de- 


Cuap. IV.) 
prived of both these supports, and his adopted 
children, Caius and Lucius being yet of tender 
age, he was led to receive Tiberius as a relation, 
the nearest to supply the place of those he had 
lost. 

Livia, by whose arts the emperor now began 
to be governed, was, according to the report of 
historians, and, as we may infer from her own 
eonduct, perfectly formed to the mind of her 
husband. In all matters, not only of business, 
whether private or public, but even in those af- 
fairs in which the sexes are least patient of each 
other’s failings, she preserved or affeeted the 
most implicit submission to his will. She is said, 
not only to have connived at his infidelities, but 
as often as he was inclined to diversify his plea- 
sures, even to have employed her sagacity and 
her knowledge of his choice in procuring him the 
means of indulging his fancy. Herself, the dupe 
of no passion which was likely to mislead her, 
she never lost an opportunity to advance her fa- 
mily, nor risked the miscarriage of her purpose, 
by hastening improperly the means of obtaining 
it. Favoured by the death of Agrippa, and the 
minority of the young Cæsars, she easily, with- 
out seeming to entertain any improper views for 
her son, procured his advancement. He was at 
first reeeived by the emperor as a temporary aid 
an the government, and afterwards as a person 
fit to become the third husband of Julia; and by 
this connexion to occupy a rank in his family, 
which had been hitherto considered as the near- 
est to his own. 

Tiberius, at the time that this resolution was 
taken in his favour, was already a husband and 
a father, having been married to Vipsania, the 
daughter of Agrippa, by whom he had a son 
named Drusus. He is said to have parted, with 
great reluctance, from Vipsania, then a seeond 
time pregnant, in order to make way for Julia, 
by whom he was to hold the second place in the 
enipire. 

Augustus had hitherto distinguished, by the 
marriage of his daughter, the person whom he 
meant to point out as his suceessor; but, his fa- 
mily being now become numerous, it does not 
appear that he had any thoughts of giving to this 
new son-in-law precedence of his adopted chil- 
dren, Caius and Lucius, who, bearing the name 
-of Cesar, already precluded any competition for 
rank in the empires This third marriage of Ju- 
lia, he probably intended for a purpose, which it 
did not by any means serve, that of restraining 
the disorders to which this unhappy person was 
inclined. 

Tiberius had begun his military services with 
some distinction in Gaul, and now coming into 
the place of Agrippa, was sent to repress a re- 
bellion, which, upon the report of that officer’s 
death, had again broke out in Panonia. Having 
succeeded in this service, he gave erders, that the 
youth of the vanquished nation should be sold 
into slavery, and that the buyer sliould come un- 
der an obligation to transport them far from their 
native country; a cruel action, but not to be im- 
puted merely to the personal character of this 
young man, as it did not exceed what was fre- 
quent in the history of the Romans. Upon this 
occasion Tiberius had the honour of a triumph 
conferred by the senate; but by the emperor's 
i | 

5 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 31. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


435 


directions, while he accepted of the triumphal 
robes, he declined to enter the city in proces- 
sion.§ 

About the same time Drusus, the younger 


brother of Tiberius, then stationed on the Rhine, 
had repulsed a body of Germans, passed the 


river in pursuit of them, and laid waste the con- 
tiguous country of the Sicambri and Usipetes, 
which, lying between the Lippe and the Issel, is 
now the bishopric of Munster, or the province 
of Zutphen. Having embarked his army, he fell 
down the Issel to the marshy lands inhabited by 
the Frisii and Chauci, probably what are now 
the provinces of Friesland and Groningen, ar 
rived without resistance at the sea, where the 
tides, to which his Italian mariners were unac- 
customed, leaving them sometimes ashore, and 
almost out, of sight of the sea, at other times 
threatening te overflow all the lands in their 
view, gavethem at frst considerable trouble ; but 
having learned to accommodate themselves to 
this alternate flux and retlux of the waters, they 
took the benefit of the floods to re-ascend the river, 
and returned to their station on the frontiers of 
Gaul.? 

Drusus, having thus explored the coasts of the 
northern ocean, set out for Italy; and, though 
already vested with the dignity of pretor, was 
made to accept of an inferior rank In the office 
of zdile; probably to set an example, encourag- 
ing others to comply with the forms of the re- 
public which were still kept up; but which were 
at this time very much neglected by persons of 
rank.8 

As the Roman armies had now, for some time, 
ceased to make offensive war, many of the bar- 
barous nations took courage from this circum- 
stance, and began to harass the provinees in their 
neighbourhood, passed the Rhine and the Da- 
nube in frequent incursions, and laid waste the 
frontiers of Gaul, Panonia, and Thrace; inso- 
much, that it appeared necessary, for the securi- 
ty of these provinees, to attack the enemy, and to 
furnish them sufficient occupation in the defence 
of their own country. 

In the spring of the following 
U. C. 724. year, Drusus accordingly having 


Q. i returned to his command on the 
pa ol frontiers of Gaul, passed the Rhine 
aulus Tre- ! ’ 

bius Max, overran the territory of the Chat- 
ti,° and penetrated to the Weser. 

August. In these operations, although the 


empcror’s object, on this and every 
y other service, was merely defensive, 
it appeared neeessary, not only to occupy both 
banks of the Rhine, but likewise to have fortified 
stations on the Lippe, from which to observe the 
Germans in their future preparations to pass the 
river for the purpose of invading Gaul. 

Drusus, for his services in this campaign, was 
saluted by the army, as had been customary in 
the times of the republic, with the title of Im- 
perator; but this designation having been, for 
some time, appropriated to the sovereign as head 
of the armies of the empire, was now, by him, 
refused to Drusus, The title of proconsul, with 
tlie triumphal robes, were decreed to him instead 
of the other. On his return to Gaul, the Ger- 
mans laid an ambuscade on the route by which 


i7mo, Etat, 
Jl. 


6 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 31. 7 Ibid. c. 32. 
8 Ibid. .9 Supposed to be that of Hesse, 


436 


he was to pass, and threatened his army with 
imminent danger; but lost the advantage of the 
disposition they had made, by discovering their 
posture too soon, and by giving the Romans an 
opportunity to extricate themselves by a vigorous 
attack, in which they gained a decisive victory. 

Upon the news of this event, which seemed 
to remove, for some time, the prospect of any 
farther trouble on the side of Germany, it was 
proposed, once more, to shut the gates of Janus.! 
But an irruption of the Daci, who passed the 
Danube on the ice, together with inroads made 
by the Thracians into Macedonia, and fresh in- 
surrections in Dalmatia, still kept the empire in 
a state of war. l 

Lucius Piso, formerly governor of Pamphilia, 
was employed in repressing the attempts of the 
Thracians; and Tiberius, in reducing the Dal- 
matians. The last of these territories, which, 
in the general partition of the empire, had been 
committed to the senate, was now, on account of 
its frequent revolts, taken under the immediate 
inspection of the emperor. 

‘While these operations took place, under the 
officers whom the emperor employed in the pro- 
vinces, he himself remained at Rome; and the 
few circumstances which are mentioned, relating 
to affairs of state in the capital, are characteristic 
of the times, but not otherwise interesting or im- 
portant. 

The emperor himself, in his capacity of inspec- 
tor of manners, took an account of the people, 
paying the highest regard to the distinctions of 
senator and knight, and to the honours which 
were constituted by titles of office, as those of 
pretor and consul. But these names of distinc- 
tion, which he affected to preserve, having no 
real consideration or power annexed to them, 
only served to remind the people of dignities 
which no longer existed. 

The senate itself, though filled with persons 
who bore the titles of pretorian and consular, 
and though, with affected respect, still preserved 
among the ruins of the commonwealth, being 
deprived of its ancient foundations, underwent a 
continual decay: and the honours to which citi- 
zens had formerly aspired, with so much ardour, 
were now neglected or shunned with disdain. 
The wealthy, fearing more the burdens to which 
they might be exposed, on the supposition of pos- 
sessing great riches, than coveting the honours to 
which the qualification of senator entitled them, 
came to the musters with reluctance, and even 
concealed their effects. 

To counteract this disposition, and to set an 
example of public duty, the emperor made a fair 
return of his own patrimonial estate, and, as far 
as was consistent with his sovereignty, endea- 
voured to raise the value of subordinate ranks, 
admitted members into the senate with lower 
qualifications than formerly; diminished the 
quorum, or number that was hitherto required to 
constitute a legal assembly: and, affecting great 
respect for the proceedings of the senate, ordered 
their journals to be regularly kept; and gave this 
matter in particular charge to the questors. _ 

In other respects, the servility of the times 
seemed to outrun the exactions of the sovereign. 
Some of the courtiers, in their desire to flatter, 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. liv. c. 36. ) 
2 Ibid. c. 34.. Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 98. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


(Boor VI. 


and others, under the fear of being suspected of 
disafiection, began the practice of contributing 
sums of money to erect statues to the emperor: 
and he himself, in consequence of some dream, 
or directed by some species of superstition, made 
it a practice, on certain days, to ask, as in chari- 
ty, from all who came in his way, some small 
pieces of money.3 As he was in his temper sufli- 
ciently liberal, neither of these practices brought 
him under any imputation of rapacity. What 
was contributed to erect statues for himself he 
employed in multiplying those of the gods, par- 
ticularly in erecting the allegorical images of 
Safetv, Concord, and Peace. What he received 
as a charity was returned twofold. 

The republican honours, though much faded 
on every other brow, still bore a considerable 
lustre among the emperor’s titles, made a part of 
his state, and an engine of his power. T hose of the 
priesthood, in particular, equally suited to every 
constitution of government, were easily brought 
in aid of his military power. For this reason 
the title of Flamen Dialis, or priest of Jupiter, 
was now added to the other dignities of the same 
kind which the emperor had recently assumed. 
It being deemed ominous, and presaging the 
greatest calamities, if a Flamen Dialis should die 
in office, this dignity formed an additional guard 
to the emperor’s person. It had been vacant 
about seventy years from the demise of Merula, 
who being consul when Cinna forced his wav 
into the city, and seeing no means of escape, in 
order to avert from his country the supposed 
evils which must have followed from his dying 
in the priesthood, divested himself, stripped the 
sacred crest or fillet from his hair, and being thus 
reduced to a private station, cut his own arte- 
ries, and sprinkled the altar of Jupiter with his 
blood. 

This ceremony, it was supposed, had averted 
the evils to which the republic, to expiate the 
death of this sacred person, would have been 
otherwise exposed; and the priesthood had, from 
reverence to this illustrious martyr, been suffered 
to remain vacant till a person could be found that 
was worthy to succeed him; a condition which 
was now supposed to be fulfilled in the person of 
Augustus. 


U. C. 743. 
Julius Anto 
nius Africa- 
NUS, 


About this date died Octavia, the 
widow of Marcellus and of Mark 
Antony. Her obsequies being per 
formed with great pomp, the empe- 


Q. Fabius ror himself pronounced the funeral 
Marimus. oration, having a screen, as at the 
pe Je, burial of Agrippa, to hide the body 
e. . Van 


from his view. 

Soon after this event, notwithstanding there 
was no recent alarm from the enemy on the 
Rhine, the emperor thought proper to change the 
place of his residence from Italy to the north of 
the Alps. Under pretence of observing the storms 
which still threatened the province of Gaul from 
the barbarous nations on its frontier, he took his 
station for the campaign at the confluence of the 
Soane and the Rhone, and from thence gave his 
instructions to the two brothers, Tiberius and 
Drusus, to whom the war was committed on the 
Save and the Rhine. Both having been suc- 
cessful in the services entrusted to them, joined 
the emperor at his quarters, and from thence ac- 


3 Sueton. in Vit. August c. 91. 


r 


Cuar. VL] 


companied him to Rome, where they partook in 
the honours which were paid to him for the suc- 
sess of his arms. 

In the following spring the two 
U. C. 744. brothers resumed their commands, 
and the emperor returned to his 


lds ll former residence on the Rhone. 
Q. Fabius Drusus passed the Rhine, overran 
Marimus. the country of the Chatti, and pence- 
sis ; ‘a trated to the Elbe, where he erected 


some trophies, and left some monu- 
ments of the progress he had made ; but on the 
approach of winter, being obliged to retire, he 
was taken ill on the march and died. 

Tiberius, who had been sent by the emperor 
on the first news of his brother’s illness, came in 
time tosee him expire. The funeral being to be 
performed in Italy, the corpse, during the march 
of the army to the Rhine, was carried by officers 
of the highest rank. From the Rhine it was 
conveycd on the shoulders of the principal inha- 
bitants, who received it on the confines of their 
respective districts, and bore it to the next. Au- 
gustus himself, on the occasion, repaired to Rome; 
but being then in a military character, or in the 
actual exercise of a military commission, and not 
permitted, by the ancient forms of the republic, 
to enter the city, he spoke a funeral oration in 
the circus Flaminius, which was without the 
walls. Tiberius followed the corpse to the fo- 
rum, and delivered another oration there. The 
obsequies were performed by persons of the 
equestrian and senatorian rank. The ashes 
were deposited in the tomb of Augustus. 

The title of Germanicus having been conferred 
on Drusus, it remained in his family. He had 
issue two sons and a daughter; the eldest known 
by the name of Germanicus Cesar, the younger 
by the name of Claudius, long neglected on ac- 
count of his imbecility ; and the daughter Livilla, 
hereafter to be mentioned as the wile of succes- 
sive husbands. 

Tiberius, soon after the funeral of his brother, 
entered the city in procession, to celebrate the 
success of his arms in Dalmatia. He gave a 
public feast to the people; and as in this enter- 
tainment only one of the sexes cou'd partake, 
Livia and Julia were allowed to entertain the 
other. 

The influence of Livia, and the elevation of 
her family, notwithstanding the hopes that were 
entertained of Caius and Lucius Cesar, were 
now apparent, and procured her flattering de- 
crees from the senate, that were offered in conso- 
lation for the loss of her son. Her statue was 
erected at the public expense, and she herself 
was vested with the privilege, reckoned so highly 
honourable at Rome, that of being the parent of 
three children.4 
In the beginning of the following 


U. C. 745. year Augustus again entered the city 
_ in a kind of triumphal procession, 
C. Marcius carrying his laurel to the temple of 
Censorinus, J. O : À 
C. Asinius Jupiter [erretrius, instead of that of 
Gallus. Jupiter Capitolinus. But he made 
aes Bee no rejoicings, atleging, that he had 
vital. . 


suffered more by the death of Drusus 
than he had gained by the success of his arms. 
The consuls, however, took charge of the so- 


lemnities usual on such occasions, and among the | 


4 Dio. Cass. lib. xxxv. c. 1,2 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


437 


public shows brought forth some captives, whom 
they obliged, for the entertainment of the people, 
to fight in the theatre.5 

The period for which Augustus, at his last 
pretended resignation, had consented to accept 
of the government, being expired, he affected a 
purpose, as formerly, to resign the empire; and 
was again prevailed upon to resume it for ten 
years more. The decline of the civil establish- 
ment, of which he still wished to preserve the 
appearances, occupied his principal attention. 
The senate, as has been observed, underwent a 
continual degradation, and its assemblies were 
neglected. ‘The members excused their neglect, 
by pretending, that the times of meeting being 
irregular, they had no proper intimation to at- 
tend ; and that they were frequently engaged in 
trials and other public bnsiness when the senate 
was Called. 

To obviate such excuses for the future, the 
emperor appointed ordinary assemblies of the se- 
nate on particular days of each month, and or- 
dered that those days should be kept clear of 
trials, or any other public business whatever, that 
might occupy the members. Having formerly 
reduced the number that was required to con- 
stitute a legal meeting, from four hundred to 
three hundred, he now directed, that in matters 
of less moment, even fewer might constitute such 
meetings, and that in fixing the quorum on any 
particular occasion, regard should be had to the 
importance of the business before them; that 
even without requiring the presence of any de- 
terminate number, the senate might form reso- 
lutions which, though not accompanied with the 
force of laws, should nevertheless be deemed of 
great authority. He, at the same time, ordered 
a list of the members to be published; increased 
the fine usually paid for absence, and, to facili- 
tate the ordinary course of their proceedings, ex- 
tended to the prators the privilege of making 
motions, which had been confined to the consuls 
or to himself, 

These several resolutions, before they passed 
into laws, were posted up in the senate-house, 
and every person was invited to offer his obser- 
vations and corrections.§ 

About the same time are dated other regula- 
tions ascribed to Augustus, of which some re- 
lated to the conduct of elections, and others to 
that of criminal trials. As to the first, although 
every office was filled by his own nomination, he 
afiected to preserve the ancient forms; and in 
order to give some appearance of reality to the 
right of election, which he affected to leave with 
the people, he prescribed rules, which were to be 
observed in the manner of collecting the votes, 
and in restraining corruption, Among these it 
is mentioned, that he ordered, as soon as any 
candidate had declared himself, he should deposit 
a certain sum of money, to be forfeited in case he 
were detected in procuring any suffrage by cor- 
rupt means. 

In respect to criminal trials, as the subject was 
more serious, the regulations now made by the 
emperor were of more effect. In this matter, be 
wished to set aside the forms of the republic, 
though by evasion, rather than by a formal repeal. 

So long as the people were sovereigns of the 
commonwealth, it was part of the security which, 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. Iv. c. 5. 6 Ibid. c. 3, 4. 


438 


in their collective capacity, they provided for them- 
selves, as individuals amenable to the laws, “that 
no slave could he tortured to give evidence against 
his master.” As this law, in the present state 
of the government, might obstruct prosecutions 
that were instituted even for the emperor’s safety, 
it was thought necessary to find some expedient 
by which to elude its force. For this purpose it 
was enacted, that such slaves as might be wanted 
in evidence against their masters should be con- 
veyed by a formal process of sale to the emperor, 
and that, being in his possession, they might be 
put to the question, or cited as witnesses, even 
against their former masters. 

This act is by Tacitus imputed to Tiberius, 
and in either emperor was considered as a dread- 
ful innovation.! But the consideration of the 
emperor’s safety was supposed to be a sufficient 
excuse for any deviation that was made from the 
forms of the republic. 

In whatever degree the present emperor em- 
ployed, in defence of his person, the severity of 
criminal prosecutions, and the fear of the execu- 
tioner, he appears to have relied for his safety 
more on the disguises under which he concealed 
his usurpation, and on the moderation and the 
ee of his manners. by the respect which 

e affected to pay to the senate and officers of 
state, he held up the forms of the republic as a 
kind of shield between himself and the zealots of 
the republican government. He endeavoured to 
gain the people by his affability, and frequently 
bore with familiarities from persons of the lowest 
condition. Asan example of the temper with 
which he endured the saucy or petulant remains 
of military or republican freedom,? it is mentioned, 
that being called upon to act as counsel in behalf 
of a soldier who was to be tried for some crime, 
and having, under pretence of some other en- 
gagement, named a friend to undertake the cause: 
«'This,” said the soldier, ‘is not a proper return 
tome. In your danger I did not employ a sub- 
stitute, but interposed myself.” He received 
with seeming indifference the reports of spies and 
informers. ‘To a person of this character, who 
accused Ai milius Ælianus of having frequently 
traduced him; “ Prove me this,” said he, “and 
I will show ÆĘ\anus, that I too in my turn can 
find faults in his character.” Tiberius having 
once written him a warm letter, with a complaint 
of the same kind, he bid him beware of the heats 
of youth. “It is enough,” he said, “that we can 
hinder people froin doing us any harm ;3 we may 
allow them to say what they please.” Yet in 
this he did not act from contempt of the public 
opinion ; for in some instances he even conde- 
scended to answer accusations that were publish- 
ed against his private or public character.4 His 
discretion and prudence prevented the occasions 
of much jealousy and resentment; and, in many 
parts of his reign, imitated the effects of gene- 
rosity and elevation of mind, if they did not 
amount to the real possession of these characters. 

Augustus having passed the winter at Rome, 
returned in the spring to his former station in 
Gaul, accompanied by Caius, the elder of his 
adopted sons, whom he now proposed to intro- 
duce to the military service; and by Tiberius, 
who, notwithstanding the rise of a new light in 


1 Tacit. Annal. 2 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 4. 
3 Sueton. in August. c. 56. 4 Ibid. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 
the person of the young Cæsar, who threatened 
to obscure his lustre, continued to receive fresh 
marks of the emperor’s favour, and was consi- 
dered as a principal support of his government. 
Being placed at the head of the army on the 
Rhine, he had charge of the war which had 
lately been committed to Drusus, his younger 
brother. But few particulars are mentioned of 
the campaign which followed in that quarter. 
He is accused, in one instance, of having violated 
the public faith, by having seized as prisoners, 
and sent in chains to different parts of the Ro- 
man pro**ces, the deputies of some Gernian na- 
tions, wh. came in a public capacity to treat of 
peace: and ot having laid waste the country in 
the neighbourhood of his province. 

The Germans, however, were probably rather 
incensed than subdued by these measures. Their 
deputies, who had been made prisoners, that they 
might not be employed against their own nations 
as hostages, put themselves to death; and their 
countrymen retained the most vehement purpose 
of revenge. But whatever may have been the 
result, it is mentioned, that Augustus received 
from the army the title of imperator, and gave 
this title likewise to Tiberius; that he put him 
in nomination for consul on the following year, 
and, at their return to Rome, permitted him to 
make his entry into the city in triumph, while 
he himself declined the honour. 

Soon after the emperor’s arrival in Italy, he 
suffered a great loss by the death of Meceznas. 
This event made a breach in the civil department 
of his affairs, not less than that which the death 
of Agrippa had made in the military. The pre- 
dilection of this minister for learning, and the in- 
timacy in which he lived with persons of the 
best and most elegant accomplishments, who 
were recommended to him merely by their merit, 
has made his name proverbial among those of the 
patrons of letters. His inclination in this mat- 
ter, if it did not form the taste of his master, 
happily concurred with it, and brought him ac- 
quainted with those elegant productions of genius 
which occupy the affections, as well as the fancy; 
and which, in a situation otherwise likely to in- 
still pride, jealousy, and distrust of mankind, 
served at once as an antidote to these evils, 
and opened the way to better dispositions, Me- 
cenas had served his prince with great fidelity, 
and, if not insensible to personal ambition, was 
at least satisfied with the elevation he had gained 
in the confidence of his prince. He retained the 
equestrian rank to which he was born, without 
endeavouring to accumulate the preferments or 
titles which were so much an object of ambition 
in the early part of this reign, and so easy an 
acquisition in the latter part of it.5 It is observed, 
however, that he experienced, as is common, 
some vicissitude in his master’s temper, and out- 
lived the high measure of favour which he en- 
joyed, but without any interruption of his duty. 
As he lived, when most in favour, without any 
public envy, so he escaped every public insult 
when supposed in disgrace. While he presented 
the emperor with a continual model of elegance, 
ingenuity, and good temper, he took the liberty 
to check his passions, and served him no less by 
the sincerity of his speech, than by the ability of 
his conduct. An instance of the freedom he took 


5 Tacit. Annal. lib. iii. c. 30. 


| 
| 
| 


Cuar. IV.] 


is mentioned on occasion of a trial in which Au- 
gustus himself, according to custom, sat in judg- 
ment on some criminals of state. Mecænas ob- 
serving him agitated with passion, and likely to 
pronounce some precipitant or cruel sentence, 
and being hindered by the crowd from reaching 
his ear, handed a billet to him, which contained 
no more than two words, which may be transla- 
ted into this homely expression, hangman, be- 
gone! The admonition, however, had its effect, 
and the emperor adjourned the ccurt. 

The minister left his whole estate, as was the 
fashion of the age, to the emperor’s disposal.” 

By the successive diminutions of the list of 
confidants, on whom Augustus relied for the ad- 
ministration of his government, the influence of 
Livia, and the fortunes of her son Tiberius, 

received a continual advancement. 


U. C. 746. The latter, after he had resumed 

Tiberius the military habit, in his capacity 

pene of commander of the armies on the 
ero, Cn. : i 

Calpurnius, Rhine, being to enter on the office 

_ Aug.2imo, Of consul, was received by the se- 

Ætat. 55. nate in the Curia Octavia, beyond 


the walls of the city. In his ad- 
dress to this assembly he spoke of the public 
works which he proposed to erect. Among these 
a temple of Concord, to be inscribed with his 
own name, joined with that of his brother; and 
of another temple, to be dedicated by himself, in 
conjunction with his mother Livia. He gave, 
in her name and in his own, upon this occasion, 
splendid entertainments to the senate, and to 
persons of distinction of both sexes. Having 
vowed an exhibition of public shows for the safe 
return of the emperor from his last campaign, he 
made all the necessary provision for the perform- 
ance of his vow; but being obliged to set out for 
the army, he trusted the discharge of this duty 
with Piso, his colleague in the consulate, and with 
Caius, the eldest of the emperor’s sons. 

This solemnity received a great addition from 
the sports and entertainments which were given 
at the same time by the emperor himself, to cele- 
brate the memory of Agrippa, at the opening 
of the portico, of the hall, and of the pleasure- 
grounds which had been bequeathed by that of- 
ficer to the Roman people.8 Gladiators were 
exhibited at first in simple pairs, afterwards in 
numerous parties, that fought as in real battles. 
Such was the ferocity of the Romans in the 
choice of amusements, even after the character 
of the people ceased to be military, and when the 

ublic entertainments, formerly perhaps in part 
intended as nurseries for soldiers, had no longer 
any other obiect than that of ministering to their 
pleasure. 

The Cesars, Caius and Lucius, though yet 
too young for business of state, began to feel the 
spur of ambition, and were alarmed at the ad- 
vancement of Livia’s family. Even their own 
step-father, Tiberius, they were taught to consi- 
der as a rival in consideration and power. And 
it is said, that, in order to keep pace with him in 
his advancement to public honours, the youngest 
of the two brothers made application to be vested 
with the dignity of consul. The proposal was 


6 Surge, Carnifex. 
7 The same year in which Mecenas died put a period | 
likewise to the life of Horace. That of Virgil ended | 
about ten years before. Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 7. 
8 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 8. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


| 9 Sueton. in Octav. c. 26. 


439 


received by the people with applause, but discou 
raged by the emperor, who reflecting, as he pre- 
tended, on the presumption of his own youth, or 
on the necessity of the tinies which lad brought 
himself forward into this station at an improper 
age, was pleased to say, “ That he hoped never 
again to see a time when the office of consul 
must be intrusted to a person under twenty.” 
To pacify the young man under this disappoint- 
ment, he was advanced to the dignity of the priest- 
hood, got admission into the senate, and had a 
place among the members of that body at the 

public theatre. 
Soon after this date Tiberius, probably in con- 
sequence of the jealousy he had 


U. C. 747. thus given to the emperor’s adopted 
D. Lelius sons, underwent a great and sud- 
Aai T den change in the state of his for- 
C. Antistius P 


Vetus. Aug, tunes. Upon his return from the 
22do, JEtat.56.campaign on the Rhine, he was 
vested with the character of tri- 
bune of the people for five years; and, under 
pretence of a war likely to arise on the Euphra- 
tes, from the defection of the king of Armenia, 
who was disposed to join the Parthians, he was 
appointed to command the armies in Syria; but 
it soon after appeared, that this preferment and 
change of station were devised to conceal a spe- 
cies of exile or removal from the court. At his 
departure from Rome, he passed into Asia; but 
instead of continuing his route to his pretended 
destination in Syria, he withdrew to the island 
of Rhodes, where, under pretence of study, he 
lived some years in retirement. 
The real cause of this retreat of 
U. C. 748. Tiberius, whether the jealousies of 
Imperator the young Cæsars, the misconduct 
Cesar 12mo. of Julia, or any other offence taken 
P. Cornelius, by the emperor himself, was never 


leaks known; and we are deprived of 
J#tat. 57. any light which might have been 
thrown by Dion Cassius, on this, or 
U. C. 749. the transactions of some of the suc- 
C. Calvinius, ceeding years, by a manifest breach 
Pea in the text of his history. This de- 
Mean "* fect is very imperfectly supplied 
Russus. y P y supp 
Aug Ato, from Xiphilinus, Zonaras, or any 
JEtat. 58. other of the abbreviators or copiers 
of this historian. 
U. C. 750. In collecting from such authors, 
L. Cornelius What is little more than the names 
Lentulus, of consuls, which serve to mark the 
je y — progress of dates, we learn that in 
Aur. Fie the first year after the retirement of 
Etat. 59, Tiberius, the emperor himself hav- 
ing persisted, for seventeen years 
U. C. 751. preceding this date, in rejecting the 
I ; office of ordinary consul, now en 
mperator 7 ? : 
Cesar 13tio accepted of it; that he intended, in 
Ab. M. Flau- this character, to solemnize the ad- 
tus Silanus, mission of his sons Caius and Lu- 
a cius to the age of manhood ;° that 
Gallus. : 
Aug. Gto. the ceremony was accordingly per- 
JEtat. 60. formed with respect to the eldest, 


who now assumed’ the ordinary 
dress of a man, was brought into the senate, and 
declared chief of the Roinan youth;!'? but with 
respect to the youngest, that it was deferred till 
about three years afterwards, when the emperor 
again appeared in the character of consul. 


10 Zonaras, lib. x. c. 35 


440 


In one of the years of this period, or about the 
year of Rome seven hundred and fifty-one, is 
fixed by the vulgar computation the commence- 
ment of our era at the birth of Christ; an event 
not calculated to have ai immediate influence on 
the transactions of state, or to make a part in the 
materials of political history, though destined to 
produce, in a few ages, a great change in the 
Institutions, manners, and general character of 
nations. . 

At this date, from the imperfect records which 
remain, we have scarcely any materials of histo- 
ry, besides the occurrences of the court, and the 
city of Rome; the public entertainments that 
were given, the occasions on which they were 
exhibited, and the provision that was made in 
the capital for the subsistence and pleasure of an 
idle and profligate populace. 

The emperor having again assumed the officc 
of ordinary consul, that he might preside at the 
admission of his younger adopted son, Lucius 
Cesar, to the age of manhood, continued to hold 
the office no longer than was necessary for this 
purpose. He exhibited magnificent shows as 
usual upon this occasion, and among otliers, one 
that is mentioned probably as a novelty, a shoal 
of six-and-thirty crocodiles of uncommon size, 
turned out to be hunted or fished in the bason of 
the circus Flaminius.! While the emperor gra- 
tified the people in their public diversions to a 
degree of debauch, he made some attempts to re- 
gulate the gratuitous distribution of corn, that 
other principal engine of abuse which the Roman 
citizens, though in other respects fallen from 
their sovereignty, still carefully retained among 
the relics of their democratical government. 

The people of Rome, so long as they could 
overawe the senate by their assemblies or tumults, 
and so long as they had the disposal of prefer- 
ments and honours, bartered their suffrages for 
sports and distributions of corn. For these too, 
they were now willing to sell their submission to 
the present establishment, and it was undoubted- 
ly more safe to have deprived them of every other 
prerogative, than to restrain them in these. The 
numbers that were accustomed to receive corn at 
the public granaries, as we may judge from the 
number of two hundred thousand, to which it 
was now proposed to reduce them, had increased 
to an immoderate height; and as the circum- 
stance of being subsisted gratuitously, encouraged 
idleness, so the very attendance required at thcse 
monthly distributions gave a considerable inter- 
ruption to labour. ‘The emperor endeavoured to 
apply some correction to both these evils, by re- 
ducing the number of pensioners, and by limit- 
ing the times of distribution to three particular 
terms in the year.? But in making this attempt 
he received so many complaints, that he was 
obliged to lay aside the design. 

-A populace thus supported in idleness must 
likewisc be amused, and thcy received, in this 
particular, from their masters, whether acting 
from choice or. policy, not only in the first period, 
but, in the subsequent ages of this monarchy, the 
most lavish indulgence. By Augustus in person, 
they were presented at different times with four 
capital exhibitions, consisting of all the entertain- 
ments in which they were known to delight, and 
with three-and-twenty great festivals, solemnized 


1 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 10. 2 Ibid. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


be) 


[Boog VI, 


in honour of some other persons, as of his father 
Julius Cesar, of his nephew Marcellus, of his 
friend Agrippa, and of his young relations now 
entering into manhood, and coming to the pos- 
session of public honours. 

The sports themselves, though fierce and irra- 
tional in many instances, were splendid, magni- 
ficent, and sometimes interesting. The presence 
of the Roman people, in vast spaces or theatres 
fitted up to receive them, was always awful and 
sublime, The precedence of rank at these en- 
tertainments, was considered, even under the 
republic, as a principal object of state. The firs$ 
benches were reserved for the senators; the next, 
at certain periods, had been allotted to the eques- 
trian order; and the question, whether this order 
should be mixed with the people, or separated 
from them, made a subject at different times of 
much dispute and contention. The female sex 
too had their places, though at the fights of gla- 
diators they were removed to a distance, being 
seated behind the other spectators; and from the 
athletic games were excluded altogether.? 

The coarseness, nevertheless, of those public | 
entertainments to which the Roman women were 
still admitted; the want of any interval, in their 
manners, between a rigorous severity, and the 
other extreme of an unbounded license, had, in | 
many instances, the worst effect on their conduct. 
The emperor himsclf had a distressing example 
of this effect in his own family, by the flagrant 
debaucheries of his daughter Julia, who, having | 
once quitted the reserve, and broke through the 
austerities of her father’s house, had no longer 
any restraints of decency or established propriety 
to regulate her behaviour. It was reported, that, 
without any pretence of seduction, affection, or 
choice, she multiplied her paramours indefinitely, 
and even frequented the places of public debauch. 

The emperor, though not supposed to be want- 
ing in the tenderness of a parent, upon the de- 
tection of these disorders, proceeded against his 
daughter more with the rigour of an offended 
magistrate, than with the reluctant severity of a 
father. In the first transport of his passion, 
he hastened to lay his accusation before the se- 
nate, and obtained from this assembly an act of 
banishment against her, by which she was re- 
moved to a small island on the coast, reduced to 
low diet, and forbid to receive any visits; a species 
of imprisonment, which became common in the 
sequel of this and the subsequent reigns. 

Scribonia, the mother of the unhappy exile, 
now arrived at a great age, and preserving in 
a state of separation from her husband, an un- 
blemished reputation, gave way to the fcelings 
of nature, and followed her child into this place 
of retreat or imprisonment, The father too, 
upon reflection, grievously lamented his rashness, 
in publishing, by a reference to the senate, the 
scandal of his own house, and bitterly regretted 
the severity by which he had empoisoned and 
rendered incurable the wounds of his own fami- 
ly. “If Agrippa or Mecznas had lived,” h 
was heard to say, “I should have been restrained 
from this act of imprudence.’4 

In the sequel of this transaction, he indulged 
his resentment with less struggle against th 
supposed partners of his daughter's guilt ; ordered 
Julius Antonius, with some other persons of 


3 Sueton. in Octav. c. 44. 4 Seneca de Ben. c. 32. 


Cuar. IV.) 


high rank involved in the same charge, to be put 
to death. With respect to one of these crimi- 
nals, who happened to be vested with the cha- 
racter of tribune, he affected a regard to the an- 
cient laws of the republic, and was pleased to 
respite the execution of the sentence, until the 
time of his office as tribune should expire. Be- 
ing told that Pheebe, the freed woman and con- 
fidant of Julia, when she heard of her mistress’s 
fate, had put herself to death; “I had rather be 
the father of Phoebe,” he said, “than of Julia.” 
Persons who were disposed to pay their court, 
ever ready to seize the opportunity, took occasion 
to flatter the emperor, even on occasion of this 
painful transaction. They hastened tu show 
themselves in a situation like that of the prince, 
and to offer him the consolation of fellow-sufferers, 
in the distress he endured ; made complaints in 
the senate of the license of their daughters and 
of their wives, and even raked up particulars of a 
very obsolete date. They too brought formal 
prosecutions, in order to obtain the interposition 
of law and public authority, to restrain the dis- 
orders of their children; but the emperor re- 
ceived this species of courtship with indifference, 
and refused to hear any accusation, of which the 
subject had preceded a fixed and very recent 


date.5 
U. C. 752 We are left at a loss for the sequel 
sees" of this history, during the two years 
Cussus Cor- that immediately followed; but in a 
is Len- period, of which these were the 
ulus L. Cal- 5d S 
purnius Piso. principal transactions, we can not be 
Aug.2%7mo. surprised that the chronicle is defec- 
JEtat.61. tive, nor indeed greatly regret the 
silence of a few years. 
The ordinary administration of Augustus, in 
pursuing the political, civil, and mili- 
U. C 753. tary forins, which he had established, 
no doubt was able and successtul; 


C. Cesar, but being once described, does not 
Aug. Nepos, admit of repetition, ‘The more in- 
L. Emilius . : e ; 

fs. teresting subjects of history, trans- 
Aug. ave. actions that rouse the passions, and 
Etat. (2. keep in suspense the expectations, 


the hopes, and the fears of men, were 
in this reign most carefully avoided. A powerful 
army was stationed on the Rhine, to keep the 
peace of that frontier. Even tlie court was lull- 
ed into perfect tranquillity by the want of any 
competition for the emperor's favour. This point 
being fully decided, by the place which was oc- 
cupied by the Cæsars, Caius and Lucius; their 
supposed rival Tiberius, who had been sacrificed 
to their jealousy, still remained in his exile at 
Rhodes. 

The defection of Armenia from the alliance 
of the Romans to that of the Parthians, the oc- 
casion upon which it had been pretended that 
Tiberius was destined to command in Asia, still 

subsisted ; but the command of the 
U. C. 754. armies in that part of the world, 
P. Vinucius with the charge of recovering the 


gale kingdom of Armenia to its former 
‘Aue. no. State of dependance on Rome, was 
VEtat.63. committed to Caius Cæsar, now first 


in the favour of the emperor, and 
highest in the expectations of the people. 
îe was thought proper, that both the brothers, 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 10. 
3K 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


44r 


about this time, should be sent to the command 
of armies; Caius to that of Syria, and Lucius to 
Spain ; and these removals of the young Cæsars 
from court were supposed to be devised or pro- 
cured by the empress Livia, because tLey made 
way, in a little tine afterwards, for the recall of 
her son.6 

But before any resolution taken at court in fa- 
vour of Tiberius was publicly known, Caius 
Cesar, in his way to the east, arrived in Greece, 
attended by a numerous train of officers. At 
Chios, he received a visit from Tiberius, profess- 
ing the most submissive respect to the prince 
himself, and to the officers of his court; and from 
thence continued his route through the province 
of Asia, every where received as the son of the 
emperor. 

The king of Parthia, upon the arrival of the 
young Cesar in his neighbourhood, desired to 
have a conference with him, and they met on 
the Euphrates in a small island, each having an 
equal number of attendants. They afterwards 
niutually accepted of entertainments from each 
other in their respective quarters. Phraates 
agreed not to support the Armenians, iu their 
defection from the alliance of the Romans, and 
Caius proceeded to take possession of their coun- 
try, as a province of Ronie. On his approach to 
Antagera, a place on the frontier of Armenia, the 
gates being shut against him, he presented him- 
self under the walls, and while he summoned the 
governor to surrender, was struck by an arrow 
from the battlements. ‘The wound he received, 
though in appearance not mortal, affected his 
health, and threw him into a state of dejection 
and languor, in which he desired to be recalled 
from his station, and expressed his disgust to 
affairs of state. 

. Caius being permitted to retire from 
U. C. 755. his command by the emperor, who 
L. lius Was mortified to find in him a pusil- 
Lamia, _ lanimity so unworthy of the son of 
M Servilius Agrippa, and of his own successor 
“iuz 30me. WaS carried to the coast in a litter, 
Jktut. 64. and there embarked for Italy; but 

having on his way put into a port of 
Lycia, he died at Lymira in that province. 

Lucius, the other grandson of Augustus, by 
his daughter Julia, Shed some time before at 
Marseilles, in his way to Spain ; and these deaths 
happening so opportunely for the family of Livia, 
laid this designing woman under suspicion of 
having been active in procuring them, The 
bodies of the deceased were borne through the 
provinces by officers of rank, and by the princi- 
pal inhabitants, to be entered at Rome. Their 
shields and lances, richly adorned with gold, 
being gifts made to them by the equestrian order, 
when they were admitted to the age of manhood, 
were hung up as monuments in the hall of the 
senate,’ 

About this time, the third period of ten years, 
for which Augustus had accepted of the govern- 
ment, being expired, he went through the form 
of laying down, and re-assuming his power. 

The people, at one of the entertainments 
which were given on this occasion, having ap- 
plied to the emperor an applauded passage of 


6 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 103. : 
7 Zonaras, lib. x.c. 36. Vell. Pater. lib. ii. e. 104 
103. Dio. Cass. lib. Iv. e. 11, 12. 


t3. 


some poet, with the title of “lord or master,” he 
gave signs of displeasure, and, on the following 
day, published a severe edict, forbidding the title 
of “master” being given to him by any person, 
or upon any occasion Whatever.! ‘ My name is 
Cesar,” he said, “and not master.” 

Augustus was now in the decline of life, had 
survived his principal confidants and friends, 
his nephew and grandchildren, on whom he had 
rested his hopes. He had been recently dishonour- 
ed iri the conduct of his daughter, and had bound 
himself, by a formal act of the senate, to persist 
in the rigour of his treatment towards her. In 
these circumstances, it was thought that inter- 
cessions in favour of a child must he flattering to 
the father, and many applications were accord- 
ingly made in her behalf; but he remained inex- 
erable, and being guided entirely by the in- 
fluence of Livia, cast himself upon her family as 
alast resource. Under these circumstances, and 
from the approach of old age, he was observed to 
anguish, and to lose much of his former vivacity. 

Tiberius had been recalled to Rome soon after 
the departure, and before the death of the two 
Cesars. Upon this last event, he was adopted 
by the emperor; but on condition, that he him- 
self, though a father, having a son already men- 
tioned of the name of Drusus, by his first wife 
Vipsania, should nevertheless adopt Germanicus 
Cesar, the son of his brother, who being elder 
than his own son, was intended to have the advan- 
tage of seniority in all their future pretensions. 

This successor to Agrippa and his 
U. C. 756. family, being now the adopted son 
Sext. Elius Of Augustus, and heir apparent of 


Catus, his fortunes, had every where a 
C. Sentius numerous attendance of persons who 
Saturnius. wished to pay their court. Being 
Aug. Ilmo. ° . : 

erat 65. appointed to his former station, at 


the head of the armies on the Rhine, 
his progress through the provinces to that fron- 
tier, was marked by the multitudes who flocked 
from all quarters to receive him. In his first 
campaign he penetrated to the Weser, and over- 
ran all the nations of that neighbourhood.? 

The emperor, relying upon his newly adopted 
son for the conduct of the war on the Rhine, 
remained at Rome, where he was employed 
chiefly in reforming the senate, and in rebuilding 
the palace which had been lately consumed by 
fire. In the last of these works, he had offers of 
assistance from many of the senators, and from 
persons of his court, who brought him consider- 
able sums in the way of voluntary contributions. 
Being unwilling, however, to let the burden thus 
fall entirely upon persons the most attached to 
himself, he laid a tax of twenty-five denarii on 
each corporation, and a capitation of one dena- 
tius on each private person; and having from 
this fund rebuilt the palace, which had hitherto 
been accounted a private property, he declared it 
for the future a public edifice, destined as a man- 
sion for the supreme commander of the army, 
and head of the empire? 

Ten commissioners being appointed to inspect 
the rolls of the senate, and to restore its dignity, 
the first measure proposed for this purpose was 
to take away all appearance of constraint, and 
to leave every member at- liberty to resign his 


1 Orosius, lib. vi. fine.” 2 Vell. Pater. lib. ij. c. 104. 
3 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 12, 13. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[B OOK Vi. 


seat; but the greater number, either fearing to 
be marked out as disaffected to the present go- 
vernment, or willing to partake in the bounty 
of Cæsar, who, in many instances, repaired the 
fortunes of senators that were gone to decay, 
still continued to hold their places, and affected 
zeal for the forms on which Augustus was pleased: 
to rest his authority. 

In this and other instanccs, it is instructive to 
observe with what care this sovereign of the em- 
pire endeavoured to flatter the vanity of Roman 
citizens, and to preserve the distinction of ranks, 
while in reality his policy was calculated to re- 
move all distinctions, to render all ranks equally 
dependant on himself; or,:if any distinction were 
suffered to remain, tended in the sequel, or under 
his successors, to render the most honourable 
conditions the least secure. 

Augustus had returns made of all the most 
respectable families in Italy, and of those who 
had a property of above two hundred sestertia.4 
He laid great restraints on the manumission of 
slaves; a practice by which he alleged, that the 
privileges of Romans were rashly prostituted 
to the refuse of all nations, and tu the meanest 
order of men. The Lex Ælia Sentia, which 
took its name from one of the consuls of this. 


| year, had, for its object, the reformation of this 


abuse. By this law was fixed the age at which 
a master should have the power of setting his 
slave at liberty, and the age of the slave at which 
he might be set free, together with the mutual 
rights and privileges of the patron or former 
master, and of the freed man, or emancipated 
slave.5 

As the present government began to have 
proscription, as well as expediency on its side,. 
every attempt on the emperor’s life had the crimi- 
nality of treason, and must have been condemn- 
ed upon every consideration which established 
monarchy can suggest. Whoever made such 
an attempt might be considered as a dangerous 
and ill-advised assassin, who attacked the com- 
munity itself in the person of its sovereign, and 
whose crime, in that particular instance, tended 
to involve the world anew in anarchy and blood- 
shed. 

The privileges or pretensions of citizens, under 
the republic, were long since effaced. But a very 
few were left who had enjoyed, or even could: 
remember the existence of them; yet private 
resentment, or the remains of republican zeal, 
and the supposed right of every person to repel 
usurpations, had produced some attempts of this. 
sort during the present reign. Even in this 
advanced period of it, a conspiracy was detected, 
in which Cornelius Cinna, a grandson of Pom- 
pey, and descended of that Cinna, who, together 
with Caius Marius, was once at the head of the 
popular faction, formed a design to suppress the 
present usurpation of Cesar, and to restore the 
republic, in which his ancestors had made so. 
conspicuous a figure. i 

Augustus was greatly perplexed on the disco- 
very of this plot; and having already, on like: 
occasions, exhausted the means of severity, was: 
now, it is said, persuaded by Livia to try the 
effects of clemency, and of a generous confi- 
dence. ‘ This conduct,” she observed, “ would. 
tend to disarm his eneinies, aud would interest 


4 About 16002 5 Dio. Caes. lib. lv. c. 13. 


Crap. IV.) 


numbers in his preservation by the ties of affec- 
tion and gratitude.” 

The emperor, being accordingly prevailed on 
to take this course, ordered that the conspirator 
should be introduced to his presence, gave him 
to understand, that his guilt, was discovered, and 
his accomplices known, remonstrated against an 
attempt so ungenerous and unprovoked, but re- 
lieved the young man of his fears, by seen 
tüm of pardon, and of every other species o 

rotection for the future. In these assurances 
he even went beyond what mere clemency re- 
quired, affected to upbraid the author of a design 
on his own life with false modesty, in not de- 
manding the honours to which he was justly 
entitled by his birth ; and concluded with saying, 
That, as he trusted they were from hencefor- 
ward to be friends, he should be glad to receive 
his applications in any matter by which he could 
‘contribute to his advancement or iriterest; and, 
in the mean time, named him for consul at the 

next succession to this dignity. 
In this year are dated, among 


U. C. 757. other measures, some regulations 
Cn. Cornelius Which were made by the emperor 
Ginie for the better government of the 
Magnus. army; and, what was scarcely less 
Z. Valerius, important in the opinion of the 
| times, for the conduct of entertain- 
‘Aue 32do. ments in the public theatres. The 
JEtat. 66. military establishment consisted of 


six-and-twenty legions, with nine 
or ten pretorian bands, composed of a thousand 
men each. Augustus, to restore the honours of 
the military character, had, from the beginning 
of his reign, made it a rule to exclude from his 
armies, as much as possible, all emancipated 
slaves. This exclusion, together with some re- 
formations which diminished the profits formerly 
enjoyed by military men, rendered it extremely 
ditficult, upon any sudden emergency, to com- 
plete the legions. Augustus found himself 
obliged to increase his bounty in order to recruit 
the army; but instead of giving more to those 
whe enlisted, or increasing his levy-money, he 
‘chose to engage them by the hope of future 
advantages, to be reaped after certain periods of 
diutiful service. In the pretorian bands, he made 
a regulation, that, after sixteen years’ service, the 
veteran should be entitled to his dismission, and 
a premium of twenty thousand sesterces.” In 
the legions, after twelve years’ service, that he 
should be entitled to twelve thousand sesterces ;® 


and, as a fund for these payments, it is probable : 


that the tax of a twentieth on all legacies be- 
queathed to strangere, heirs of choice, or to 
distant relations, was imposed about this time. 
This tax did not extend to the inheritance of 
the ordinary heir at law, nor to legacies? made 
to the poor, or to persons in indigent circum- 
stances. 

With respect to the publie entertainments, 
fresh regulations were made to keep places in 
the circus for senators and knights, apart from 
the commons, or lower class of the people. 

It being observed, that the office of ædile, 
which formerly included the care of all public 
entertainments, was avoided ; and that even the 


6 Dio. Cass. lib. Iv. c. 23. Tacit. Annal. lib. iv.e..5, | 


7 Abont 1601. 
9 Dio, Cass. lib. lv. © 24. 


8 About 1002, 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


443 


dignity of a vestal, which was wont to be so 
much desired by the most honourable families at 
Rome, ceased to be in request, it was decreed, 
that all the questors of any preceding year should 
cast lots for the office of edile; and that the 
rules restricting the choice of vestals to persons 
of the most noble extraction, should now be con- 
siderably relaxed, or dispensed with; so ‘that 
women, even descended from enfranchised slaves, 
might be admitted into this order: a very un- 
likely way ta engage persons of superior rank to 
adopt it. 

This year Agrippa Posthumus came of age, 
and assumed the dress of manhood ; but, though 
adopted, as his eider brothers had been, into the 
family of the emperor, he appears not to have 
been thought worthy to replace them; and being 
obscured ‘by the riper age and superior favour 
of Tiberius, he passed through this ceremony 
with fewer demonstrations of consideration or 
respect from ‘the people than had been paid to 
his brothers. 

The public was alarmed with earthquakes 
and inundations of rivers, which, however de- 
structive, were considered more as the presages 
of future calamities than as present evils, and 
their significance in that point of view was con- 
firmed by a famine, which immediately followed 
or accompanied these events. The inundation 
of the Tiber had overflowed the city for many 
days, so as to make it necessary to pass through 
the streets in boats. The markets could not be 
supplied; and this circumstance, joined to a real 
scarcity, which kept up the prices after the inun- 
dation subsided, occasioned a dearth which lasted 
for some years. 

During this time of distress, it 


U. C. 758. being thought impossible to find the 

usual supply of provisions, it was 
M. JEmilius judged necessary to lessen the usual 
Lepidus, consumption; and for this purpose 
L. Aruntius, all gladiators,” all slaves kept for 
of Kal. Jul. sale, and all foreigners, except phy- 
Caius Vibius. Sicilians and public teachers, were 
Aug. 33tie, ordered to be removed a hundred 
Ætat. 67. 


miles from the city. Even the 
servants and attendants of the 
court were dismissed in great numbers, and a 
vacation was proclaimed in the courts of justice, 
in order that as many as could possibly be spared 
from the city should depart. The attendance of 
senators was dispensed with, and the law requir- 
ing the presence of certain numbers of that body 


to give validity to their aete was suspended. 


Cemmissioners were named to inspect the mar- 
kets. All feasting, on the birth-day of the 
emperor, or on other days of rejoicing, was pro- 
hibited; and persons, wont to receive any part 
of their subsistence in corn from tbe public gra- 
naries, had double the usual quantity served out 
to them. 

Notwithstanding these measures taken for the 
relief of the people, their discontents breaking 
forth in libels and seditious complaints, rewards 
were published for discovering the authors, and 
some being detected, were hrought to trial, and 
punished.!? 

‘The emperor now willing, from the decline 
of his age, to be relieved of part of the ordinary 


10 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. ¢. 22. 


11 Sueton. in Ang. e 42. 
12 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 26. 


44 


business of state, intrusted the receiving of 
foreign ainbassadors to three persons whom he 
chose from the senate. At the same time he 
himself, with his ordinary council, continued to 
deliberate on all questions which arose relating to 
the internal government of the empire. He ap- 
pears to have committed himself, without any 
prospect of change, to the influence of Livia 
and her family ; and, to confirm him in this dis- 
position, had frequent visits from Tiberius, who, 
though generally stationed on the frontier of the 
empire, carefully attended to the state of his 
interests at Rome, as they stood both with the 
emperor and with the peuple. 

In the tide which was thus turned in favour 
of the Claudian family, the surviving Agrippa 
seemed to form an insurmountable bar; but this 
young man, being of a rude and brutal disposi- 
tion, gave his antagonist every advantage in their 
supposed competition. Having, about this time, 
pea some flagrant proof of this character in 
is behaviour to Livia, and even to the emperor 
himself, he was degraded from his place in the 
family of Cesar, and sent, under a military 
guard, to the island of Planasia, near to Corsica, 
where he remained a prisoner during the re- 
mainder of this reign.! 

From the disgrace of Agrippa Posthumus, 
it was no longer doubtful that Tiberius was des- 
tined to inherit the fortunes and power of Au- 
gustus. He alone was entrusted wherever 
great armies were to be assembled, and was 
employed in every service that was likely to end 
with lustre. Troubles on the frontier of Asia 
or Africa were entrusted to other hands; but 
the harder struggle with the Germans, Dalma- 
tians, and other fierce nations of Europe, was 
committed to him. After having penetrated, in 
his last campaign, to the Weser and the Elbe,? 
he was called off to support his nephew and 
adopted son Germanicus, who, commanding the 
army on the side of Dalmatia, found himself too 
weak to, execute the service on which he had 
been employed. 

The provinces east of the Hadriatic, and from 

thence probably to the Danube, 
U. C. 759. had formed the plan of a general 
A. Licinius Yevolt. It was reported, at this 
Nerva Ælia- time, that those nations could as- 
nus, Q. Czci- semble eight hundred thousand 
tius Metellus men, and that they had two hun- 
Creticus dred thousand foot properly armed, 
Ætat.68, With nine thousand horse. Being 

so powerful in point of numbers, 
they were enabled to divide their strength, and 
to carry on operations, at the same time, in dif- 
ferent places. They destined one part of their 
force to invade Italy, by Tergeste and Nau- 
portus ; another to take possession of Macedonia ; 


and a third to defend their own pessessions at | 


home. They had now joined to their own ferocity 
a considerable knowledge of the discipline and 
forms of the Roman legion, and conducted their 
present design with so much address as to escape 
observation until it was ripe for execution. ‘They 
gave the first intimation of their hostile inten- 
tions by a general massacre of the Romans, 
who, as provincial officers or traders, were settled 


in the country, and cut off all the military posts: 


which had been advanced to protect them. 


Dio. Cass. lib. ly. c. 32. 2 Ibid. c. 27—36. 


e 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


| year was allowe 


(Boox VL 


They entered Macedonia without opposition 
and with fire and sword laid waste all the pos- 
sessions and settlements of the Romans in that 

province.3 
Such was the beginning of a war with the 
barbarous nations of the northern 


U. C. 760. and eastern frontier of the empire, 
M. Furius Which, during some ages, was, at 
Camillus, intervals, interrupted and resumed, 
Sert. Nonius often put Italy itself upon the 
Countat defensive, was always formidable, 
Seme og and at last fatal to the sovereignty 


of Rome, 

The Romans, by the continual lahours of 
seveh centuries, had made their way from the 
Tiber to the Rhine and the Danube, through 
the territory of warlike hordes who opposed 
them, and over forests and rugged ways that 
were every where to be cleared at the expense 
of their labour and their blocd: but the ways 
they had made to reach their enemies were now 
open, in their turns, for enemies to reach them. 
The ample resources which they had formed by 
their cultivation increased the temptation to 
invade them, and facilitated all the means of 
making war upon their country. By reducing 
the inhabitants of their provinces, in every part, 
to pacific subjects, they brought the defence of 
the empire to depend on a few professional sol- 
diers who composed the legions. 

Under apprehension of these circumstances, 

Augustus was heard to say, on the 


U. C. 761. present occasion, that if proper 

measures were not speedily taken 
Q. Sulpicius for the defence of Italy, an enemy 
ys sada from the Danube and the Rhine 
Scie ex might, in ten days, be seen from 
Kal Jul. the battlements of Rome. New 
M. Papius levies were accordingly made, and 
eg He the order not to enlist emancipated 
a Sus slaves was suspended. The vete- 
Aug. 3¢te. rans, who had been discharged 
Atat. 70. from the legions, were again order- 


ed to repair to their colours; and 
citizens of every condition were reouired to fur- 
nish, in proportion to their estates or possessions, 
certain quotas ef inen for the service. 

While the people, under so many symptoms 
of trepidation, were made sensible of their dan- 
ger, Augustus seems to have thought it a proper 
opportunity to renew the part he had often acted 
in recommending population and marriage. He 
called together, in separate assemblies, first the 
married who had families of children, afterwards 
the barren and the unmarried; and finding the 
superiority of numbers on the side of the latter, 
expressed his concern in a public address to the 
people; enlarged on the consequences of popula- 
tion to the safety and prosperity of the common- 
wealth; revived the marriage-laws, and, by an 
act which took its name from Papius and Pop- 
pæus,4 consuls of this year, gave additional re- 
wards to the married, and laid new penalties on 
celibacy, with a considerable premium to the 
prosecutor by whom any person should be con- 
victed of this offence. 

Before these rerulations should be enforced, a 
to the unmarried to change 
their condition; and the rigour of former laws,$ 


LD 


3 Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii. c. 110. i 
4 Lex Papia Pcppra. 5 Lex Voconia. 


Gaar. IV.J 


fespecting the inheritance of women, which had 
hitherto been restricted to a hundred thousand 
sesterces,> was considerably abated. Females 
were allowed to inherit a larger sum; and, the 
better to testify the homage that was paid to fe- 
male virtue, the vestals were admitted to partake 
in the privilege of Roman parents having three 
children.” 

Inthe mean time, great efforts were made to 
keep the enemy at a distance, and to fix the seat 
of the war in their own country. Tiberius ad- 
vanced for this purpose into Dalmatia, and the 
emperor himself set out for Ariminum, that he 
might be nearer the scene of operation to receive 
reports, to profit by intelligence, and to give his 
directions. He had, for some time, empowered the 
senate to continue their proceedings in his ab- 
sence; as he ceased to attend the comitia or 
assemblies of the people, he made free with their 
privileges ; and, under pretence of disorders occa- 
sioned by the elections, took upon himself the 
nomination of magistrates, or signified his choice 
to the tribes by a writ of recommendation. Public 
prayers were now offered for his preservation ; 
and at his departure from the city, as if he were 
going on a service of great danger to his person, 
many vows were made, and sacrifices destined to 
be offered up in case of his safe return.’ 

Although the force of the empire was not yet 
fallen so low as to justify so much apprehension, 
the alarm nevertheless continued for three years.’ 

Tiberius upon his arrival in Dalmatia, found 
the barbarians, who had invaded that country, 
commanded by two leaders of the narnes of Bato 
and Pinetes. He formed his own army into 
three divisions, commanded by Germanicus, Syl- 
vanus Lepidus, and himself. By this disposition 
he began his operations in three different quar- 
ters at once. 

In the service which was committed to Sylva- 

nus Lepidus, he met with little re- 
U. C. 762. sistance. Where he himself com- 
manded, the Romans were long 


P. Cornelius detained in the blockade of a castle, 


Dolabella. : : ; 

C. Junius Si- Which being built on a rock, was 
lanus, ez. rendered inaccessible by the height 
Kal. Jul. ofits situation, and by the depths of 
Ser. Corne- the glens and gulleys that were 


gee 37mo. formed by the torrents with which 


Ætat. 71. it was surrounded. Bato had taken 

post in this place with a numerous 
body of his countrymen; and being provided 
with necessaries, endeavoured to tire out the ene- 
my. But he himself, in the end, being weary of 
his inactive and hopeless situation, found means 
to escape, and left the remains of his countrymen, 
worn out with wantand impatience, to surrender 
at discretion. 

Where Gerraanicus commanded, the enemy 
had taken refuge in Anduba, a fortress similarly 
situated with the former; but which, after re- 
peated attacks, was at last put into his hands by 
the dissension of the barbarians who defended it. 
These, having quarrelled, turned their swords 
mutually against each other. One of the parties 
set the quarters of their antagonists on fire, and 
both fell an easy prey to their enemies. Many 
of the women, to avoid captivity, threw them- 


6 About 8007. 


i 7 Dio. Cass. lib. lv. c. 1, 2. 10, 
8 Ibid. c. 34. 


9 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 114. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


445 


selves, with their children, into the flames.!® 
Bato soon after surrendered himself; and be- 
ing asked, what tempted him to make war upon 
the Romans ? made answer, “ You affect to treat 
every nation as your flocks and your property ; 
but you intrust the care of them to ravenous 
wolves, not to shepherds and their dogs.” 11 

At the close of the war, the title of imperator, 
with the triumphal ornaments, were decreed to 
Tiberius, and to his adopted son Germanicus ;!2 
but in the midst of the rejoicings which were 
made on this occasion, accounts of a different na- 
ture were received from the Rhine. 

The Romans, wishing to command the pas- 
sage of the river, had occupied, as has been ob- 
served, some country, and fortified some stations 
on the German side. By this disposition it was 
intended, in case the Germans should attempt a 
descent upon Gaul, that part of the Roman army 
should be so placed as to remain in their rear. 
And indeed while they kept possession of the 
navigation of the river, and of both its banks, 
they, in some measure, rendered every such at- 
tempt impracticable. In consequence of this dis- 
position, the Germans had, for some time, discon- 
tinued the practice of making incursions into 
Gaul. They were become familiar with the 
Roinan army that was stationed in their country, 
exchanged commodities with the Roman traders, 
and began to imitate their manners. 

Such was the state of the nations situated be- 
tween the Rhine and the Weser, when Quincti- 
lius Varus, who had been left by Tiberius in the 
command of the German frontier, began to con- 
sider the natives of the country around him, as 
ripe for the ordinary impositions which the Ro- 
mans laid on their subjects, and made some ex- 
actions for the supply of his army. 

Some chiefs or leaders of the neighbourhood, 
a Segimerus, prince of the Chatti, and 
nis son Armenius, had observed, with indigna- 
tion, these encroachments of the Roman general, 
and the gradual decline of their country into a 
Roman province. Being at the head of a power- 
ful canton, and much respected by all the nations 
of that quarter, they entered into a concert to 
cut off all the Romans that were posted on the 
German side of the Rhine; and to restore the 
independence of their people. They concealed 
their design by redoubling their attention to the 
Roman general ; took their residence in his quar- 
ters, and applied to him for decision in all the 
disputes which arose among the natives; made 
him acquainted with the weaknesses and the 
strengths of their country, and served him as 
guides in conducting the marches, and in fixing 
the stations of his army. 

While, by these artifices, Segimerus and Ar- 
minius lulled the Roman general into perfect 
security, they had their followers ready to assem- 
ble under arms, and brought all the chieftains of 
their neighbourhood under engagements to join 
them, as soon as their design should be ripe for 
execution. They proposed to draw the Roman 
general into a situation in which he could be at- 
tacked with advantage, while ae themselves, 
without giving him any alarm, should have a 
pretence for advancing towards him with all theic 
forces. 


10 Dio. Cass. lib. Ivi. c. 12. 14, 15. 
11 Ibid. lib. lv. e. 56. 12 Tbid. lib. lvi. c. 17. 


446 


To effect both these purposes, they procured 
an insurrection of some of the cantons over 
which Segimerus claimed a supremacy, and im- 
plored the assistance of the Roman army in sup- 
pressing the revolt. Varus, apprehending that 
the safety of the Romans, in all their possessions 
beyond the Rhine, depended on the support he 
should give to their allies, put his army in motion 
to quell this pretended rebellion, and advanced 
through difficult ways into the interior parts of 
the country. On this march he was attended by 
Segimerus and Arminius, and supplied with 
every requisite to promote the service, or to en- 
sure its success. These chiefs had assembled 
their forces, and brought forth the inhabitants of 
the neighbouring country, under pretence of 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


acting as irregulars to cover the march of the | 


Roman legions. In performing this service, they 
ervaded the marshes and woods in his front, on 
ie flanks, and his rear, and had actually sur- 
rounded him, when he came upon the ground on 
which they proposed to make their attack. 

Here the forests and marshes were extensive 
and impassable, except by a single tract. The 
Romans were crowded together, and entangled 
with their baggage; and being in this condition 
attacked from every quarter at once, were unable 
to resist or to escape. Varus succeeded in gain- 
ing an opening which appeared at some distance 
in the woods; and there, with as many as could 
follow him, attempted to intrench himself; but 
the greater part of the army fell by the hands of 
the enemy. At night, seeing no hopes of a re- 
treat, the general himself fell upon his own 
sword, and by his example induced many officers 
and soldiers to employ the same means of avoid- 
ing the cruelties or insults to which they were 
exposed. l 

A few having found means to retire under 
cover of the night, made their way to the Rhine. 
Here they were received by a party sent upon 
the first news of their disaster by Asprenas from 
Gaul, to favour their retreat. 


It had been concerted by the Germans, that on | 


the same day every Roman post in their country 
should be attacked. Lucius Ceditius, who com- 
manded at Aliso, now supposed to be Elsemberg, 
being surrounded by superior numbers, forced his 
way through the enemy, and, under the greatest 
distresses, arrived on the Rhine. Al the other 
posts were forced, and the troops who had occu- 
pied them taken or killed. Among the former, 
Caldus, an officer of rank, being a prisoner and 
in irons, upon some insult that was offered to 
him, struck himself on the head with his chains, 
and expired. 

The Romans, on this occasion, lost three entire 
legions, or about eighteen thousand foot, and a 
considerable body of horse. Asprenas having 
remained on the German side of the Rhine only 
until he had collected the remains of the Roman 
army which had escaped from this calamity, 
withdrew into Gaul, and made dispositions to 
prevent any commotions in that province. 

The first accounts of this disaster were re- 
ceived at Rome with the highest degree of con- 
sternation. ‘The victorious enemy having cut 
off what was considered as the strength of the 
empire on the Rhine, were supposed to be fol- 


{Boor VL. 


the fears of the people. A proclamation was — 
issued to suspend the changes usually made in 
the provincial appointments, and requiring every 
officer to continue in his present command until 
express orders were given to the contrary. ‘The 
sacred records were cousulted, to find what reli- 
gious processions or ceremonies had been per- 
formed on the invasion of the Cimbri, and on the 
breaking out of the Marsic war, and the same 
rites were now to be repeated. The emperor put 
on mourning, and for some months carried in his 
looks, and in the neglect of his person, every ap- 
pearance of distress.! It was given out that, in 
the first transport of grief, he struck his head on 
the wall of his chamber. The Germans and 
Gauls that were at Rome, were secured and sent 
into the islands on the coasts of Italy. All citi- 
zens were ordered to arm, and many disappeared 
from the streets, to avoid being pressed to serve 
in the legions. 

There remained a great army on the establish- 
ment of the empire; but this army being dispersed 
over an extensive frontier in Asia and Africa, it 
was not supposed that a sufficient force could be 
brought from thence in time to protect the capi- 
tal against an enemy who was believed to be 
hastening to its gates. Very violent means were 
therefore employed to form an army in Italy, and 
men were forced under arms by the terror of mili- 
tary execution. ‘The forces which were brought 
in this manner to the emperor’s standard were 
placed under the command cf Tiberius; and, as 
fast as they could be put into a regular form, be- 
gan to move towards Gaul. 

In these measures the Romans acted more 
from their own fears, than from a just apprehen- 
sion of what was to be expected from the enemy. 
The most active and vigorous conquerors can 
seldom act up to the fears of those they have van- 
quished ; and the Germans, on this occasion, 
content with having freed their own country 
from the presence of a Roman army, made no 
attempt to pursue their victory, and remained 
quiet in their own possessions.? 

In the following summer Tibe- 


U. ©. 763. rius and Germanicus, to recover the 

S credit of the Roman arms, having 
Tae passed the Rhine, laid waste the 
F. Statilius adjacent country, but not meeting 
Taurus, with an enemy, returned without 
ex Kal. Jul. having given occasion to any signal 
Pee event. They supposed that the 
Aug. 3evo. Natives were retired from the fron- 
JEtat. 72. tier, in order to tempt them to fol- 


low into the forests of that imper- 

vious country, and to engage them in difficult 

situations. But having done enough to enable 

the capital to recover from its panic, they brought 
back in autumn the Roman army into Gaul, 
and from thence themselves returned into Italy. 
In this year Drusus, the son of 

U. C. 763. Tiberius, acted in the capacity of 

usestor; sixteen pretors were em- 

Mie T À loyd In the year following, the 
number of these magistrates was 

reduced to twelve. It being alleged that gover- 
nors of provinces, to preclude the complaints 
which were often made against them upon their 
removal, extorted attestations and complimentary 


lowing at the heels of the messenger who brought | ——______________________-, 


the news. Guards were posted in different quar- 
ters of the city to prevent disorders, and to quiet 


| 


1 Sueton. in Octav. c. 23. — 
2 Dio. Cass. lib. Ivi. c. 23, 24. 


Crap. LV.) 


addresses from the people they had oppressed, it 
was enacted, that no governor should receive any 
honorary gift or attestation from his province, 
during the continuance of his power, nor sooner 
than six months after his return to Rome. 

The age of the emperor now led men to think 
of his successor; and predictions of his death 
were surmised abroad. ‘This probably gave 
occasion to the edict which forbade soothsayers 
to utter predictions relating to the life of any 
person whatever. Among the circumstances 
that characterise the manners of the times, it is 
said, that Roman Knights, or citizens of quality, 
had permission to exhibit themselves as gladia- 
tors.5 

Tiberius, at his return to Rome, 


U. C. 764. after the noted services he had per- 
Germanicus formed on the Save and the Rhine, 
` Cesar, had a triumphal entry. In ascend- 
C. Fonteius ing the capitol he dismounted from 
ait Ju bis carriage, and threw himself at 
C. Fesellius the feet of the emperor, who stood 
Varro. in the way to receive him.4 After 
“carey pee. the procession was over, shows were 


exhibited by Germanicus, in which 
two hundred lions were hunted down; and a 
portico which Livia had erected to the meinory 
of Caius and Lucius Cesar, being dedicated 
about this time, served to increase the solem- 
nity. 

OF the Claudain family, on whom the sove- 
reign power seemed already to devolve, Germa- 
nicus, the grandson of Livia by Drusus, the 
younger of her sons, was most in favour with 
the people. He was recommended by an ap- 
pearance of openness and candour in his man- 
ners, and by the facility with which he engaged, 
according to the custom of the ancient republic, 
in the defence of his clients, and in pleading 
their causes, whether before the emperor himself, 
or before the ordinary judges. ‘Tiberius, on the 
contrary, seemed to be of a dark and suspicious 
temper, and was supposed to cover, under the 
appearances of moderation, whicli he studied to 
preserve in public and in presence of the empe- 
ror, a jealous and cruel disposition. But Livia, 
who, in the present period of her husband’s life, 
had the entire government of him, preferred her 
son to her grandson, and employed all her influ- 
ence to make the choice of a successor fall on 
Tiberius. 

The emperor, in the mean time, pleased with 
the respite from trouble which these delegates 
of his power endeavoured to procure for him, 
reposed himself much on their care, and was 
pleased to be supplied with every change of 
amusement or pleasure for which it was known 
that he had any relish.§ He was attended by 
agreeable women, musicians, comedians, and 
even declaimers on favourite topics in philosophy, 
who made a part of the scene at the close of his 
ordinary meals, At his entertainments he 
treated the guests with presents of dresses, trin- 
kets, or money, and amused them with lotteries, 
in which they had chances that entitled them to 
prizes of different values, or with auctions of 
pictures, in which the back of the picture being 
turned to the company, they bid upon chance.6 


3 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. e. 120. Dio. Cass. lib. lvi. ¢. 25. 
4 Sueton. quoted by Piso. 


5 Sueton. in August. c. 71. 6 Ibid. c. 74, 75. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


447 
k 
Of these pastimes some were probably the 
amusements of the emperor’s old age, and mark- 
ed the decline of life. In his more vigorous 
vears, we may suppose him to have been suffi- 
ciently occupied with the business of state, and 
with the attention which he gave in person to 
every question that arose in the government of 
so extensive an empire. Every transaction was 
still communicated to him, and despatched in his 
name; but fromthe svmptoms which he gave 
of an inclination to retire from aflairs, it is pro- 
bable that his application was greatly abated. So 
long as he was accustomed to attend the senate 
in person, he generally received, on the days of 
their meeting, the compliments of the members 
at his own house or in the forum; from thence 
was conducted by them to the place of assembly, 
and, before they proceeded to business, commonly 
went round a circle of those who were present, 
and spoke somewhat obliging to each. This 
particular is mentioned, as a proof of his affabi- 
lity and condescension ; but was in reality the 
highest circumstance of state which he ever as- 
sumed, As a private person, in the vigour of 
life, he suffered himself to be treated as an equal, 
and inade one at the entertainments and parties 
of pleasure that were made by his friends; but 
in the decline of life, as he withdrew from the 
senate, so he desired to be excused from receiving 
the visits of the members, or even of his private 
friends; and, under pretence of being much 
occupied with the troubles which still subsisted 
on the frontiers of the empire, he declined going 
into company upon any occasion whatever. 
While the emperor thus, in a 


U. C. 765. great measure, withdrew from the 
C. Silius, public view, the fourth period of 
4, i = ten years, for which he had accept- 
Aug. 40mo. €l of the government, being about 
Ætat. T4. to expire, he again resumed his 


command with the usual forms, 
prolonged the tribunitian power in the person 
of Tiberius for other five years, and permitted 
his son Drusus from being quæstor, to be enter- 
ed on the list of consuls without passing through 
the rank of prætor. 

Augustus, in entering upon this new period 
of his government, in which he was no longer 
to attend the senate in person, received from this 
body, by a formal act, full powers, with the ad- 
vice of his ordinary council, to determine all 
questions of state, and, with the concurrence of 
his adopted children, to enact laws of equal 
authority with those he had formerly passed in 
the senate. These powers he had already ex- 
ercised; and we may suppose them to have been 
thus formally conferred upon him, chiefly that 
it might be made to appear how far the family 
of Livia, now included in the same act, were 
raised to an avowed participation of the imperial 
authority. 

The first consultations of this new legislature 
were employed on the subject of the penal laws, 
which having remained without any considerable 
change from the times of the republic, were still, 
in respect to the forms of trial, better calculated 
to protect the subject than to gratify the pas- 
sions of the sovereign. Banishment, by which, 
under the republic, criminals were at liberty to 
evade any sentence, and which, in reality, had 


7 Dio. Cass. lib. Ivi. c. 26. 


448 


nothing grievous besides the circumstance of 
their being obliged to travel from Rome, and to 
forego city preferments and honours, was, by a 
regulation now made, rendered more severe, and 
not suffered to remain, as the courtiers termed 
them, a mere elusion of justice. Under a sen- 
tence of banishnient, by this regulation, the exile 
was no longer at liberty to choose the place of 
his retreat, nor suffered to retain his effects. He 
might reside in any island surrounded by fifty 
miles of sea, and in some islands which were 
mentioned, as Cos, Rhodes, Lesbos, and Sar- 
dinia, though less remote; but He was entirely 
debarred from the continent. He was allowed 
to retain of his estate, if it amounted to so much, 
five hundred thousand sesterces,! and might 
have a ship of a thousand amphore,? and two 
boats with twenty servants or slaves; but was 
not at liberty to pass from one island to another, 
nor to change the place of his abode. 

So far the transition from the jealousy of the 
citizen against the severities of government, 
which isa part in the spirit of liberty, to the 
jealousy of the prince against the license of his 
subjects, which equally belongs to monarchy, 
was abundantly mild; but even this law, under 
the prospect of its immediate application, gave 
weight to the chains with which every citizen 
already felt himself loaded. ‘The subjects of 
prosecution that were likely to draw the animad- 
version of a despotic court, were not injuries 
to society and offences to human nature, which 
the ingenuous ever wish to shun, as well as to 
restrain; but rather want of submission or re- 
spect, libels, petulant freedoms, and even merit 
itself, if such as to excite the jealousy of supe- 
riors. The new law, indeed, by the directions 
contained in it to take cognizance of libels and 
defamatory publications, under the denomination 
of treason, seemed to point chiefly at this species 
of guilt; but it was not the law itself, so much 
as the arbitrary application of it, that was likely 
to deprive every Roman of that degree of secu- 
rity or personal freedom to which he still had 
pretensions.’ 

In the same year mankind had 


U. C. 796. still more reason to be alarmed; 
Tiberius was associated with Au- 

Sext. Pom- gustusin the government, and de- 

peius, Sext.  clared to have equal power with 

Apuleius. 2 5 

Aug. 41mo. the emperor himself in all the pro- 

Etat. 75. vinces within his department.4 On 


this occasion the new associate in 
the empire, to raise his consideration, and to 
amuse the people, exhibited no less than three 
separate triumphal processions; at the end of 
which, there being some disorders subsisting on 
the side of Dalmatia and Illyricum, which 
seemed to require his presence; and he being to 
set out for this province, Augustus was pleased 


1 About 40002. 

2 The amphora, according to Arbuthnot, contained 
about seven gallons. 

3 Dio. Cass. lib. lvi. c. 27, 28. Tacit. Ann. lib. i. c. 72. 

4 Vell. Pater. lib. ii. c. 121. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boor VI. 


to accompany him on the road to Beneventum, 
They went to Astura by land; but as Augustus, 
when the wind was favourable, always preferred 
going by water, they embarked at this place, and 
steered for the coast of Campania. On their 
passage, Augustus was seized with a dysentery, 
but continued, as on a party of pleasure, to visit 
the different islands in the bay of Naples. At 
Capre he passed some days with uncommon 
gayety, and without appearing to suffer much 
from his distemper. At Naples he attended the 
public sports which were given upon his arrival. 
From thence he continued his route to Beneven- 
tum, where Tiberius, being to embark at Erun- 
dusium, took his leave, and the emperor set out 
on his return to Rome. But finding his strength 
decline on a sudden, he halted at Nola, a place 
in which his family had originally some posses- 
sions, and at which his father died. From the 
time of his arrival at this place he refused to 
listen to any business.5 On the morning of the 
18th of August, he asked if his illness had 
caused any tumults or insurrections, called for 
a mirror, and desired to be dressed. He said to 
those who attended him, ‘“ What think you 
now? Have J acted my part. properly?” then 
repeated the form with which actors commonly 
end the representation of a play, desiring the 
audience, that if the piece was to their liking 
they should applaud.6 “I found,” he said, “a 
city of brick, and changed it into marble.” In 
this he alluded to his policy in the state, as well 
as to his buildings at Rome. 

Augustus died at three in the afternoon of the 
eighteenth of August, in the seventy-sixth year 
of his age. His body was transported from 
Nola to Bovillæ, carried by the magistrates of the 
several towns on the route. They moved in the 
night, and halted by day, to avoid the heat of 
the season. At Boville it was received and car- 
ried forward to Rome, by a numerous company 
of the equestrian order. 

The senate met to deliberate on the honours 
to be paid at the funeral; and the members vied 
with each other in the proposals they made to 
exalt the dead, and to express their own sorrow.? 
Some proposed, that the funeral procession 
should pass through a triumphal arch, preceded 
by the statue of Victory ; and that the ceremony 
should conclude with a solemn dirge, or song of 
grief, to be performed by the children of all the 
principal families in Rome. Others moved, that 
on the day of his funeral the noble Romans 
should exchange the gold ring, which was the 
badge of their rank, for one of iron; that the 
ashes should he collected from the funeral pile by 
the highest order of priests. 

At this funeral, in whatever form it was exe- 
cuted, two orations were pronounced; one by 
Tyberius, who had been recalled on the near ap- 
proach of the emperor’s death; the other by 
Drusus, the son of Tiberius, on whom the name 
and inheritance of Cesar had now devolved. 


5 Suet. in Aug. c. 100 6 Ibid. 7 Ibid 


p 


Cuar. V.) 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


449 


« 


CHAPTER V. 


The Will of Augustus—Review of his Reign—And of his Character— Tiberius returns to Nola 
—Issues without delay his orders throughout the Empire—In the Senate affects Reluctance to 
charge himself with the Government—Mutiny in Panonia—On the Rhine— Second Mutiny on 
the Arrival of Deputies from the Senate—Imposture of Clemens—Plot of Libo— Description of 
Tiberius—Death of Germanicus—And Trial of Piso. 


AUGUSTUS had made his will about six- 
teen months before he died, bequeathing two 
thirds of his estate to Tiberius, the other third to 
Livia, with an injunction to take the names of 
Julia and Augusta. In succession to Livia and 
her son he substituted the younger Drusus, the 
son of Tiberius, for a third; and overlooking 
Claudius, one of the sons of the elder Drusus, and 
grandson of Livia, he bequeathed the remainder 
to the brother, Germanicus Cesar, and his off- 
spring, already consisting of three sons and as 
many daughiers.8 To this numerous list of heirs 
he substituted an ostentatious catalogue of prin- 
cipal citizens and senators, But persisted so 
much in his severity to the unhappy Julia, as to 
forbid her a place in his monument. Asa legacy 
to be distributed to the Roman people, he be- 
queathed four miilions of sesterces; or about 
thirty-three thousand pounds sterling ; as a fund 
for the tribes or wards of the city, to defray their 
respective corporation expenses, he bequeathed 
three millions five hundred thousand sesterces, 
or about twenty nine thousand one hundred and 
sixty-six pounds sterling ; to the pretorian bands 
one thousand sesterces, or about eight pounds 
sterling a man; to the cohorts of the city five 
hundred, or about four pounds sterling a man ; 
to the legions three hundred, or about two pounds 
ten shillings a man.? These sums he ordered 
to be paid immediately; leaving money in his 
coffers sufficient for this purpose. Other legacies, 
of which some did not exceed a hundred and 
sixty, or a hundred and seventy pounds sterling, 
he directed to be paid at different times, and į 
alleged the scantiness of his estate, from which 
his heirs were not likely to draw above a hun- 
dred and fifty millions Roman money, or about 
one million three hundred thousand pounds ster- 
ling. The sums which he had received in lega- 
cies, amounting to about eleven millions sterling, 
he had expended in public works. 

After his will was read, four separate memo- 
rials were produced. The first contained in- 
structions for his funeral; the second, a list of 
the actions which he wished to have recorded on 
his tomb; the third, a state of the republic, in- 
cluding the military establishment, the distribution 
of the legions, the revenue, the public disburse- 
ments, the money actually lodged in the treasury, 
the arrears of taxes that were due, with a refer- 
ence tothe persons in whose hands the vouchers 
were to be found. 

The fourth memorial contained political in- 
structions or maxims, in which he dissuaded the 
people from the too frequent manumission of 
slaves, and from the too easy admission of fo- 


8 Tha three sons were Nero, Drusus, and Caius ol 
Caligula ; the three daughters Agrippina, Drusilla, and | 
Livia or Livilla. 

9 Dio Cass. lib. Ivi. c. 7 ii Annal. lib i.e 8 


reignets to the dignity of Roman citizens; atid 
recommended filling offices of state with persons 
of experience and reputation. The public ser- 
vice, he observed, never should be entrusted to a 
single officer, nor all the powers of the common- 
wealth be suffered to accumulate in the hands 
of any one person. Such exclusive trusts, he 
said, must lead to abuse, and end in a scarcity of 
persons fit to be employed. Such were the 
arguments of Catulus and Cato, wlen they 
pleaded against the exorbitant powers of Pompey 
and Cesar į; and the reasonings now ascribed to 
Augustus seems to be borrowed from theirs, and 
with too little regard to the difference of persons 
and times. 

It is said, that in this memorial the emperor 
concluded with an injunction not to attempt any 
farther conquest or any farther extension of the 
empire.3 

Such are the principal circumstances upon re- 
cord, from which we are able to collect the cha- 
racter of this celebrated reign. The immediate 
effects of it, in many parts, appear to have been 
splendid and salutary. Among these we are to 
reckon the cessation of wars, and reformation of 
government in the Roman provinces. Under 
this establishnient, instead of the consuls, who, 
being annually elected by the people, as often re- 
newed the passion of their country for war and 
conquest, there began a suceession of emperors 
who were addicted to sloth and sensuality, more 
than to ambition; or if disposed to war, who in 
youth, or in some particular period of life, ex- 
“austed their passion for military fame, and be- 
eanie from thenceforward a powerful restraint on 
the ambition of their own offieers. These they 
considered as rivals and objects of jealousy, or as 
dangerous instruments, ever ready to involve 
them in wars abroad, to disturb their government 
at home, or to divert their revenue from those 
pleasurable applications in which they wished 
to employ it. 

Whatever was lost to citizens of rank or high 
pretension at Rome, by the establishment of the 
monarchy, was gained to the other subjeets of 
the empire. The provinces, from being the 
temporary property of individuals, and stript to 
enrich a succession of niasters, beeame the con- 
tinued subjeets of a sovereign, who as often as 
he understood his own interest, protected them 
against the appression of his officers, and spared 
or nursed them as a continual source of revenue 
and of power to himself. 

While these desirable effeets naturally resulted 
from the new establishment, many circumstances 
of great lustre in the history of the age were 
ascribed to the sovereign. The seeds of inge- 
nuity and of liberal arts, which had been sown, 
and which were already sprung up with so mueh 
"SE oe a laa 

3 Dio. Cass. lib. Ivi. c. 32. Tacit. Annal. lib. i. c. 8. 


= 


£30 


vigour under the republic, now began to be 
reaped in a plentiful harvest. 

Literature, and all the more agreeable fruits 
of ingenuity, received under the first emperor a 
peculiar degree of attention and encouragement. 
Augustus was himself a proficient in letters, 
or, willing to be amused with the pursuits of the 
earned, read his own productions in the circle 
of his friends ; and, what is more difficult for an 
author, heard without jealousy the compositions 
of others, by which his own were probably far 
excelled. He had saved from the wreck of his 
enemy’s party, protected from the oppression of 
his‘own, and selected, as his favourites, the most 
ingenious men of the times.! By his munificence 
to these, his own name, as well as that of his 
minister, has become proverbial in the history of 


letters, and is deeply inscribed on monuments. 


which can never perish, except by some calamity 
fatal to mankind. 

The provinces greatly diversified in respect to 
situation, climate and soil, as well as in respect 
to the arts which they severally possessed, hav- 
ing the benefit of general peace, and the protec- 
tion of a common sovereign, reaped the advan- 
tage of an easy communication and a flourishing 
trade. All the surplus wealth of the more cultivated 
parts of the earth. being drawn to the capital, and 
being at the disposal of single men, was expend- 
ed in works of magnificence, and if not of 
utility, at least of splendid caprice. From this 
fund, were erected these magnificent fabrics, of 
which the ruins, still mark the place on which 
stood the capital of the western world. The 
empire, at the same time, in all its parts, received 
those improvements which are the ordinary at- 
tendants of opulence and peace. The lands 
were cultivated ; cities were built, adorned, or en- 
larged. 

The rough and vigorous hands by which this 
great empire was formed, had carried the balance 
and the sword of state before they could manage 
the tools of the more ordinary and inferior arts, 
and had given empire to their country, before 
they had provided for themselves the ordinary 
means of accommodation or pleasure. A Roman 
citizen was not an artist, but he was a man fit to 
command every artist. He was possessed of cou- 
rage, penetration, sagacity, and all the advan- 
tages which constitute the personal superiority 
of one man over another As a warrior and 
statesman, he was the reverse of those ingenious 
and feeble subjects, of whom each professes a 
particular part in the science or practice of hu- 
man affairs, but of whom none is qualified te di- 
rect the whole. . 

In proportion, however, as this nation of mas- 
ters forced into their service the industrious and 
the learned in different parts of the earth, the 
practitioners of every art, and the professors of 
every science flocked to the capital. Their pro- 
ductions, though spurned and rejected at first, 
were received by degrees, and in the reign of 
Augustus found the most ample rewards. By 
these means, the practice of every art was intro- 
duced at Rome, even Romans were taught to he- 
come artists and mechanics, and, by following a 


1 Horace was saved from the rout of the republican 
party at Philippi ; and Virgil, from among the suffer- 
ers ejected from their property, to make way for the 
army of Cæsar. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


(Boor VI. 


multiplicity of inferior pursuits and occupations, 
were taught to lower the haughty spirit of the 
conguerors of the world, to the level of the nations 
they had subdued. 

In the times immediately preceding the civil 
wars, foreign letters, though fondly received by 
many of the first citizens of Rome, were still 2 
novelty, and considered by the people as a fap- 
pish aflectation, Put the leaders in this fashion 
being the first officers and greatest men of the 
state, as Lucullus, Cicero, Cato, and Cesar; 
such illustrious examples soon removed every pre- 
judice, and engaged, in the pursuit of learning, 
every talent that could be diverted from the more 
violent pursuits of ambition or pleasure. 

The civil wars for some time rctarded the 
progress of letters; but when brought to an end, 


left the public in possession of the bias it had 


received. Octavius himself having, in his youth, 
received this bias, was probably, in his patronage 
of the learned, more led hy inclination, and less 
by mere policy, than he was in other parts of 
the conduct with which he gained the favour- 
able opinion of the world. He loved correctness 
and accuracy in all his compositions, and never 
delivered his mind on any serious matter, even 
in his own family, without memorials or written. 
notes. 

Although the effects of this reign, therefore; 
in many of the particulars we have mentioned, 
were the sequel of mere peace, and of the respite 
which the world began to enjoy from the disor- 
ders with which it had heen lately afflicted, much 
likewise may be ascribed to the personal charac- 
ter of the prince. After the secure establish- 
ment of his power, his government began to be 
distinguished by appearances of mederation and 
justice, supported, in this part of his life, with a 
regular and ordinary tenor, which does not war. 
rant any doubt of his sincerity, or any suspicion 
of any intention to impose upon the world, some 
purpose different from that which he proiessed ta 
have in view. 

In his character of legislator, he generally sub- 
mitted his intended acts to public inspection, en- 
couraged persons of every description to offer 
amendments, and sometimes adopted those which 
were offered to him.? In the exercise of the ex- 
ecutive power, he took the assistance of a chosen 
council, with whom he deliberated on the ordi- 
nary measures of state. In accepting of the ho- 
nours which were offered to him, he checked 


‘instances of extreme servility, and acquitted him- 


self with great liberality or moderation in the use 
of the powers, which the flattery of dying persons 
frequently gave him over their faunlies and 
estates. He became the guardian, rather than 
the co-heir, of the orphans, with whom he was 
joined in the father’s will, Sone he put in the 
immediate possession of the whole inheritance; 
others, while under age, he treated as his wards, 
and brought up with every advantage to the en- 
joyment of their fortunes, which they often re- 
ceived with considerable additions, made either 
by his care or by his bounty. 

But what is of all other circumstances most 
peculiarly characteristic of this reign, was the 
judgment and address with which the cmperor 
repressed the license of the inilitary, to whoin he 
owed his own elevation, the artful policy by 


ax. 


Q Tho. Cast. lib. liij. c. 2L 


Caap. V.) 


which he affected to restore some fragments of 
the civil government that he himself had broken 
down, and the caution with which he retained 
the character and profession of a civil magistrate 
and of a citizen, while he governed as master. 
Joined to these, we may reckon the able choice 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


which he made of officers fit to be trusted in the | 
dillerent departinents of the public service; the | 


constancy with which he persevered in employ- 
ing them, and the liberality with which he made 
them feel that the prosperity of his fortunes was 
their own. While he gave these indications of a 
great mind, and possessed these powerful sup- 
ports of a prosperous life, he dispensed with 
much of the flattery that is paid to princes, and 
in conversation encouraged the nianners of a free 
and equal society. 

How then are we to decide upon his character, 
marked by appearances of perfidy, cruelty, and 
even of cowardice in some parts of his life, dis- 
tinguished by modcration, clemency, and steadi- 
ness in other parts of it? Are we to suppose 
what the emperor Julian insinuates,4 that Octa- 
vius received in the later period of his life new 
lights, was hecome a new man; and that, by the 
lessons of Zeno, at an early period, this Came- 
leon might have fixed his colour, and been from 
the first, what he appeared to be in the last state 
of his fortunes, a real friend to mankind? The 
authority of Julian, no doubt, is highly respect- 
able; but if a person in youth carry the marks 
of a bad disposition, and deliberately commit atro- 
cions actions when his interest required them, 
we are still warranted to question the sincerity 
of his conversion, though, in a different state of 
his interest, even the whole tenor of his life should 
change. 

Octavius does not appear to have had from na- 
ture, inany high degree, those dispositions to bene- 
volence or malice which are the great distinguish- 
ing principles of virtue and vice. He seems to 
bave been indifferent to mankind; but desirous 
of consideration and power, as objects of interest 
to himself. His ruling passion was a desire to 
reign. In his way to this end, he committed 
many crimes; but having once effected his pur- 
pose, he had no other criminal dispositions to gra- 
tify : or, after he was sovereign, standing in awe 
of a free spirit which he durst not insult, he, either 
from inclination or policy, and probably in part 
from hoth, preferred, as it is surprising that every 
one else does not prefer, the proper use of his 
power to the abuse of it. 

Upon this principle, in a life so varied as that 
of Octavius, appearances of eryelty and of cle- 
mency, of caution and of enterprise, of violence 
and of moderation, may have equally found a 
place in the course of his actions, And in his 
person, we may read the same character of am- 
bitious design, when he affected to join the se- 
nate in restoring the republic, er when he signed 
a warrant for the murder of those who were in- 
clined to support that forin of government; when 
he courted the protection of Cicero against An- 
tony, or when he sacrificed the life of Cicero to 
the resentment of his enemy; when he made or 
broke off his treaties of marriage, and sought 
for aids to his ambition, even in the choice of his 
licentious amours; when he pardoned, and when 


è Dio. Caas. lib. Iv!.e. 43. 4 Vid. Cæsars of Julian, 


RR a RS pg Re a 


451 


he executed those who were detected in designs 
against his own life. 

If we state ourselves therefore as judges on the 
solemn appeal which Augustus on his death-bed 
made to the sense of the world, it is probable, 
that as he was in some degree able to redeem, in 
the administration of his sovereignty, the enor- 
mities which he had committed in obtaining it, 
we shall bestow upon him neither the epithets of 
reproach and of infamy, which he appears to 
have deserved in the early period of his life, nor 
those terms of encomium and praise, which he 
seems to have merited in the longer and more 
elevated parts of his reign. Neither the friend 
nor the enemy of mankind, he was, by his per- 
sonal and interested ambition, the cause of harm 
and of good; but upon the whole, if the history 
of the establishment made by him were to termi- 
nate with his own life; if the tranquillity of his 
reign be compared with the troubles of the pre- 
ceding period; it will furnish, to those who con- 
tend for the preference of despotical government, 
an occasion of triumph. 

Justice and peace are at all times the great ob- 
jects of attention and care to mankind; but the 
degree in which they can be obtained, and the 
means which may be employed to obtain them, 
are different in different circumstances; different 
on the supposition of small or extensive states, of 
poor or of rich nations; and, in some circum- 
stances, they mav no doubt be better obtained by 
the wisdom and discretion of a single person, than 
by any system of public councils or popular as- 
semblies, which the people to be governed are 
themselves fit to compose. When this is the case, 
it is fortunate that single men are found, who, 
without any criminal inclinations, are willing to 
undertake the government of nations. A suc- 
cession of such characters, indeed, is more than 
human nature, by any known rule of substitu- 
tion, whether by inheritance or by election, can 
continue to furnish. It is well, if, in a series of 
ages, where the government of the world is com- 
mitted to the discretion of an individual, the good 
in any degree compensate the bad. 

As Augustus had, to the last moment of his 
reign, aflected to huld the sovereignty by a mere 
temporary appointinent, he could not, in consist- 
ence with his own professions, either name a 
successor, or dispose of the empire as the inherit- 
ance of his family, At his death, therefore, some 
persons might hope to see the commonwealth re- 
stored; others might wish to see the late contest 
for dominion revived, and many questions might 
have arisen, that would have involved the empire 
in fresh trouble. These questions, however, with 
the projects or hopes that might be founded upon 
them, were in a great measure prevented, by the 
precaution which Livia had taken in having her 
son Tiberius, during the lifetime of the late 
emperor, associated with himself in the govern- 
ment, 

When Augustus was seized with his last ill- 
ness, Tiberius, in the capacity of his associate in 
the empire, as has been mentioned, set out for 
the armies in Dalmatia; but he received on his 
way, a message from his mother, intimating the 
last symptoms of approaching death in her hus- 
band. Upon this intimation, he returned to 
Nola, and arrived either before Augustus ex 
pired, or before his death was publicly known ; 
and having given out, that, in a conference with 


452 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox VI. 


hat experienced prince, he had received his last | only person who was qualified to undertake it, 


-nstructions for the government of the empire,! 
he took hold of the reins the moment the other 


was supposed to have dropped them, assumed | 


his usual imperial guards, and, by sending or- 
ders to all the provinces and military stations, 
took upon him to continue the same model of 
government, without any cessation or interval 
whatever.? 

The new emperor, with the usual precaution 
to stide competitors, ordered Agrippa, the sur- 
viving grandson of Augustus to be put to death, 
and took every other effectual measure to secure 
his own accession. At the same time, either in 
imitation of the cautious policy of the late em- 
peror, or in pursuance of that hypocrisy arid 
dissimulation to which he himself had been long 
accustomed, and to which he was naturally in- 


clined, he affected, in his correspondence with | 
the senate, to pay the utmost deference to their | 


authority, aud, im his letters, took care to employ 
all the modest expressions of a private citizen. 

Being tribune of the people, he ventured only 
in this capacity, he said, to call upon the senate 
to give their orders respecting the funeral of 
Augustus. 
place by the corpse of the deceased, and in no- 
thing else could take any public function upon 
him. The senate, he continued, would be pleased 
to order the guards that might be necessary to 
preserve the peace, and they would take every 
other precaution for the regular performance of 
this solemn duty. 

When the funeral was over, and the senate 
was assembled for the opening of the will and 
memorials of the late emperor, Tiberius delivered 
himself in a voice, interrupted with sighs and 
tears; he observed, that a heavy burden, by the 
death of the only person who was able to bear it, 


had now devolved upon them all; that having | 


himself been admitted to some share in the go- 
vernment, he had learned how arduous a task it 
was to be charged with the whole of it, and had 
learned to make a proper estimate of his own 
abilities ;3 but that in a state which could boast 
of so many illustrious men, they could not be 
limited in their choice, nor obliged to commit to 
one, what was sufficient to occupy the talents 
and abilities of many. 

While he spoke to this purpose, and observed 
the aspect of his audience, frowning particularly 
upon those who gave any sigus of assent, his 
known reputation for falsehood, the inconsistence 
of his actions with the professions which he now 
made, the murder of Agrippa, and the military 
guard which attended his person, effectually pre- 
served the members who were present from be- 
coming the dupes of a dissimulation, which it 
was equally dangerous to reject too abruptly, or 
to mistake for sincerity. 

Most of the members, though sufficiently 
trained in the school of Augustus, to know the 
part they were to act on such occasions, had not 
yet performed this part upon such dangerous 
ground. They affected to believe that Tiberius 
was sincere, lamented that there should be any 
reluctance to accept of the government in the 


J Sueton. in vit. Tiber. c. 21. 

2 Tacit. Annal. lib. i. c. 3. 

3 Varié dissercbat de magnitudine jmperii, sua mo- 
destia.—Tacrr, 


For his own part, he had taken his | 


| 


and thev beseeched him not to desert the repub- 
lic in this extremity. 

As the senators vied with each other in these 
feigned importanities, Tiberius seemed to be dis- 
tressed, though not persuaded ; and after he had 
remained some time undecided, in the end, as 
wearv and silenced, though not convinced, he 
withdrew without making any reply. or without 
waiting for any formal resolution of the senate. 
In passing through the crowd, he was heard to 
sav, ‘ That a heavy load indeed had been laid on 
his shoulders, but that it could not be expected 
he was to bear it for ever; that old age at least 
must soon entitle him fo respite’? At the same 
time, those who were supposed to be most in his 
confidence, gave out, that his concern for the 
public, and the intreaties of the senate, had pre- 
vailed upon him to accept of the government; 
but the ridicule, which it was not permitted the 
senators to observe, was seized by the people. 
“Few men,” it was said, “can perform a!l that 
they undertake; but this man, with a wonderful 
modestv, refuses to undertake even what he per- 
forms.’’4 

While Tiberius, with so much palpable and 
even unnecessary craft, acted this farce in the 
senate, his title to the sovereignty underwent a 
more serious discussion in the provinces. The 
legions which were posted in different stations, 
though long confined under the authority of an 
able reign to the strictest duties and ordinary ad- 
vantages of their profession, still retained the im- 
pression of their own importance, and of their 
power to dispose of the empire. They recolleted 
what some of them might have seen, and all of 
them had heard, of times in which they were 
courted by their leaders, retained with presents 
or gratuities, and rewarded at the expiration of 
their service with grants of land, and settlements 
in the richest and most cultivated districts of 
Italy. They had waited with impatience for an 
opportunity to give a new master to the world, 
and hoped, that, in performing this service, they 
might recover their consequence, and be entitled 
to rewards, such as military men had formerly 
received. 

It cannot be doubted, that if there had been 
any officer at the head of the principal armies on 
the Rhine or the Danube, prepared to avail him- 
self of this disposition in the army, the sword in 
the present, as in many other instances, must 
have decided who was to succeed in the throne 
of Cesar; but Augustus having, in the choice 
of provincial and military commanders, guarded 
against any danger to his own government, had 
by the same means provided for the security of 
his successor's. The persons he employed, be- 
sides those of his own family, who depended en- 
tirely upon himself, were, for the most part, men 
of moderate ambition or mean pretensions; so 
that there was not now any person of rank pre- 
pared to take part in the revolts of the army. 

Germanicus, the nephew and adopted son of 
Tiberius, might, by his popularity and by his 
pretensions, have become a formidable rival to his 
uncle, but was restrained by his moderation and 
the sense of his duty. A mutinous spirit never- 
theless broke out first in Panonia, where three 
legions were commanded by Junius Blesus ; and 


4 Sueton. in Tiber.c.24. Dio. Cass. lib. Ivii. e.-1. 


Cuar. V.] 


afterwards on the Rhine, where a great division 
of the Roman armies, consisting of eight legions, 
were distributed in different stations, under the 
chief command of Germanicus himself. 

The troops not having at any of their stations 
persons who were qualified to «direct their dis- 
contents against the succession of Tiberius, cla- 
moured only for an augmentation of pay, and an 
earlier discharge from the service, than, by the 
regulations of the former reign, they were allowed 
to expect. “ Doomed,” they said, “to drag out 
a life of hard service for thirty or forty years, and 
at the end, as their reward, to be banished to 
some barren mountain or sickly morass, which, 
under the name of a settlement or grant of land, 
they were required to cultivate or to drain, it was 
time that some regard should be paid to their 
merits, some relief provided for their sufferings.” 
They contrasted their own condition, for ever 
stationed in the presence of ferocious enemies, 
and subsisting on ten asses a day, with that of 
the pretorian bands, having double their pay, 
and placed at ease amidst all the comforts and 
pleasures of the capital. 

Excited by these considerations, the legions in 
Panonia refused to take the oath of allegiance to 
the new emperor, until their grievances should 
be redressed. ‘They secured their colours, set at 
liberty all those who were confined for any mili- 
tary crime, and ceased to obey their officers, or to 
pay any regard to the ordinary duties and forms 
of the service. 

Tiberius, though greatly alarmed, and sensible 
that this attack on his authority only needed a fit 
leader at the head of a few legions to reach him 
in the capital, and to supplant hiin in the empire, 
disguised his apprehensions, and proposing to 
soothe the discontents of the army, deputed to 
their quarters his own son Drusus, accompanied 
by Elius Sejanus, a young man already associated 
with his father Sejanus, in the command of the 
pretorian bands. 

These young men, in the capacity of commis- 
sioners, attended by many persons of rank and 
consideration from the city, escorted by two co- 
horts of chosen meu, together with the greater 
a of the pretorian cavalry and the German 

orse, which usually attended tle person of the 
emperor, set opt on their mission. ‘hey were 
furnished with a letter to be read at the head of 
the troops, but were empowered, without any 
specific instructions, to take such measures as the 
occasion might suggest. Having effected their 
march into Panonia, and approaching the station 
of the mutinous legions, they were received in 
the front of the camp by the whole body, but 
with an aspect rather of contumacy, than of re- 
spect or of duty. 

‘The son of the emperor was conducted to the 
platform, from which it was usual for the truops 
to receive the commands, and to hear the ad- 
dresses of their general. Having with some dit- 
ficulty procured silence, he produced the letter 
which he had brought from his father, and which 
he had in charge to be communicated to the le- 
gions. 

In this letter, Tiberius endeavoured to flatter 
and to soothe the discontents of the army; but 
to avoid committing hinself too far, spoke of his 
intentions in general and ambiguous terms. “He 
might assure these brave legions,” he said, “ with 
whom he himself had so often acted, that they 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC, 


| 


453 


were the principal objects of his care; that as 
soon as he should recover his mind from his pre- 
sent grief, he would move the senate to take their 
just pretensions under consideration ; that in the 
mean while he had sent his own son in order, 
without loss of time, to accommodate them in 
every thing that depended on hiniself; that many 
things must be referred to the senate, a wise and 
experienced council, who were not likely to with- 
hold the proper indulgence from those who re- 
mained in the discharge of their duty, or to fail 
in the necessary rigour to those who ventured 
to depart from it.” 

After this letter was read, a centurion, who 
had undertaken to answer for the legions, made 
a demand in their name, that their pay should be 
sixteen asses a day instead of ten, and that they 
should be entitled to their discharge at the end of 
sixteen years, without being obliged, in the usual 
way, after they were supposed disqualified for 
the ordinary fatigues of the service, still to re 
main with their colours. 

To these demands, Drusus declined giving any 
answer, “ The matter should be reported to his 
father,” he said, “and referred to the senate.” 
Upon this reply, a general clamour arose. 
“« Wherefore was he come, if not entrusted to 
relieve the army? He had no powers to relieve, 
but he had unlimited powers to distress, and to 
punish. So the father himself was accustomed 
to serve them, while he came to elude the prayers 
of the soldiers, by referring them to some one 
else, who was at a distance. Are we never,” 
they said, “to see the face of the emperor? 1s he 
to punish at discretion, but never to reward with- 
out consent of the senate? Our rewards, it 
seems, arc to be carefully weighed and considered; 
but our fatigues and our -punishments, are to be 
dealt without balance or measure.” 

In this disposition the assembly broke up, and 
the soldiers went roving about in disorderly par- 
ties, insulting their officers, and affecting to treat 
the authority of the emperor himself with con- 
tempt. Their presumption, however, was sud- 


'denly checked at night by an eclipse which took 


place in the moon, and which, in their supersti- 
tious way of interpreting natural appearances, 
formed an emblem of their own situation, and by 
its event was to prognosticate the sequel of their 
present attempts. ‘Their despondence, duriug 
the progress of the eclipse, kept pace with the di- 
minution of the moon's light; and, as at the 
time of the greatest obscuration, the sky itself 
was overcast with clouds, and every light sup- 
pressed in the total darkness of a stormy night, 
they received this event as a supernatural presage 
of their own fate, and in despair retired to their 
tents. ‘They were soon afterwards persuaded to 
restore the colours which they had removed from 
their place ; and in order to avert the evils with 
which they were threatened, to make seasonable 
offers of submission to the prince. 

It was therefore thought proper, that Drusus 
should instantly avail himself of this favourable 
change, and, as much as _pessilile, facilitate the 
return of the troops to their duty. For this pur- 
pose, he called them again to the place of au- 
dience, treated their mutiny as a transient fit of 
humour which was past and gave them to un- 
derstand, that although he was not to he awed 
by their threats, he was moved by their dutiful 
and submissive behaviour; that he should des 


454 


patch an officer with their requests to the empe- 
ror, and should join his own intreatics to procure 
them immediate attention, and to obtain every 
favour that might be consistent with the order of 
the service. 

After the departure of this messenger, the ex- 
pectations of the legions were fixed entirely upon 
the return he should bring, and on the effect of 
the young Cesar’s interposition in their favours. 
In the mean time, the officers having resuined 
their command, and being obeyed in all the ordi- 
nary duties and forms of the camp, proposed to 
exert their authority in stiding the remains of a 
mutinous spirit, which had so far subsided. They 
accordingly gave orders to seize, and to punish 
the principal authors of the late disorders. 

Under this exertion of power, the troops be- 
came as tame and submissive, as they had lately 
been refractory and ferocious. To signalize their 
zeal, some of the most guilty became the in- 
formers and instruments of justice against their 
own accomplices; and the humour from which 
this revolt proceeded, having sunk as it rose, 
without anv rational plan, the mutiny appeared 
to be so entirely suppressed, and the discipline of 
the legions so elfectually restored, that Drusus, 
with his company and the escort which attended 
them, departed for Italy, without waiting for the 
return of the officer he had despatched to the 
emperor.! 

These disorders, however, were not peculiar to 
the troops in Panonia; they broke cut with more 
violence, and a more dangerous tendency among 
those of the German frontier. On this side, eight 
legions were placed at two separate stations; one 
division under Cecina, on the borders of the low 
countries; the other under Caius Silius, on the 
Upper Rhine, both under the orders of Germa- 
nicus, who being adopted into the family of 
Cesar, had been vested by Augustus with the 
command of these armies, and with the presi- 
dency of Gaul. This young man had married 
Agrippina, the daughter of Agrippa and of Julia 
Augusta, by whom he had a numerous issue, a 
circumstance generally attended with great popu- 
lar favour among the Romans. He was now 
attended in his province hy his wife Agrippina, 
with Caius, afterwards better known by thie 
name of Caligula, the youngest of his three sons, 
now carried in the arms of the mother. He him- 
self being extremely acceptable to the army, and 
to the people of the provinces, it was not doubted, 
that if tie empire were to be disposed of, he 
would have had the wishes of mankind in his 
favour; and he became upon this account a prin- 
cipal object of jealousy to his adoptive father. 

The troops that were stationed on the borders 
of the low countries under Cecina, comprehended 
the legions which had been hastily levied, and 
which, in order the sooner to replace the army 
that perished with Varus in the unfortunate ex- 
pedition beyond the Rhine, had been formed 
without the usual selection. Being in a great 
measure composed of emancipated slaves, and 
other persons of mean condition, they had not 
yet imbibed the sentiments of national and inili- 
tary honour, which Augustus endeavoured to 
preserve in the legions, ‘Chey considered them- 
selves, at the death of that emperor, as discharged 
from their military oath. ‘They rose against 


1 Tacit. Annal. lib. i. ¢. 30. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor Vi. 


their officers, killed most of the centurions, and 
forced Cecina, with the tribunes, to withdraw 
from their rage. 

The authors of this revolt, probably flattered 
themselves that Germanicus, although he did not 
at first openly countenance their mutinv, might 
however give way to their desires, and suffer 
himself to be elevated by their means to the 
throne of Cesar. To preserve the appearances 
of order, until thev should receive his commands, 
they appointed officers to act in place of those 
they had killed, performed most of the usual mili- 
tary duties, mounted the ordinary guards, and 
took the stated precautions, as in the presence of 
an enemy, for the safety and peace of their camp. 

Germanicus, when the accounts of this alarm- 
ing transaction were brought to him, was occu- 
pied in the affairs of the province, and in admi- 
nistering the oaths of allegiance on the accession 
of Tiberius. Sensible that his own high preten- 
sions exposed him to be suspected of having en- 
couraged these disorders, he repaired without 
delay to the camp, from which Cecina had been 
obliged to fly. Upon his approach, he was met 
by the legions; but instead of the respectful si- 
lence that was usual in receiving their commander 
in chief, was saluted with cries of discontent, and 
a mixture of expostulation and insult. He was 
followed by a multitude in the utmost confusion, 
to that part of the camp at which it was usual to 
harangue the army. That he might observe the 
different parts of his audience, or, in case any 
insult were offered, that he might distinguish the 
division from whence it came, he gave the sig- 
nal for the whole to draw up in their legions and 
cohorts, and to display their colours. 

So long as he spoke of the veneration due to 
the memory of Augustus, and of the glories ace 
quired at the head of these very legions by the 
present emperor himself, he was heard with re- 
spect and attention; but when he touched on 
their want of duty, his voice could no longer be 
heard, and the whole presence was thrown into 
tumult. Some uncovered their sears, called for 
the rewards that were due to their services; 
others complained of the scantiness of their pay, 
of their toilsome marches, of their hard labour in 
forming entrenchments, and in rearing maga- 
zines of wood and of forage. ‘ We have follow- 
ed our colours,” said sume of the veterans, “above 
thirty years: Is death the only termination to be 
hoped for our labours?’ They called for the 
legacy, which they heard was bequeathed to 
them by Augustus; they invited the prince to 
declare himself sovereign of the empire, and 
offered to support his pretensions with their 
swords, 

On this proposal, Germanicus, as if seized with 
horror, came down from the platform on which 
he stood, and was hastening to retire, when 
numbers interposed to stop him. ‘My duty to 
the emperor,” he said, ‘is more precious to me 
than my life;? and at these words, drawing his 
sword, he turned the point of it towards his own 
breast. Some of those who were near, laid hold 
of his arm; others called out, let him strike ; 
and one, in particular, reaching his sword, said, 
take this ; it is sharper than your own, 

It is not to be questioned, that Germanicus 
might have led this army into Italy, and with a 
general consent placed himself at the head of the 
empire; but he seems to bave apprehended the 


Crap. V.] 


rights of succession in the present emperor, with 
all the respect and fidelity that accompany the 
sentiments of loyalty and dutv, under monarchies 
alrealy estiblishe 1. Being desirous to withdraw 
from the tumult, ant a way being inade for hin 

~ by the officers of his train, he retired to deliberate 
on the present alarming state of affairs. 

The leaders of this mutiny were about to 
open a correspondence with the legicns on the 
Upper Rhine. T'he enemy were in sight on the 
opposite banks of the river, and ready to take 
advantage of these distractions, Some of the 
officers present gave it as their opinion, that an 
army should be formed from the provincial co- 
horts to overawe the legions; but this was re- 
jectel by others, as likely to end in a civil war. 
Severity, it was observed by some, inight exas- 
perate ; concession, it was said by others, might 

reed insolence; and the service was equally 
exposed to suffer, whether the troops were in- 
dulged in all their demands, or in none. Tt was 
suggested at last, that by a little artifice, without 
committing the authority of the emperor, the 
demands of the army might be satisfied. For 
this purpose, it was proposed that a letter should 
be feigned, as from Tiberius, so dated, that in 
writing it he could not be supposed to know of 
the disorder which now took place; that in this 
letter, he should be personated, as declaring, by 
a voluntary act of goodness, lis intention to 
double the legacy bequeathed by Augustus; to 
fix the entire perio] of service at twenty years, 
and that of the ordinary duties at sixteen.? 

A letter to this purpose being accordingly pro- 
duced, the artifice was suspected, but the terms 
were agrecd to, provided that the legacies were 
instantly paid ; that those who had served twenty 
years should be discharged, and fhose who had 
served sixteen years, sliould be exempted as 
veterans from the ordinary duties of the camp. 
Many were accordingly discharged, and the 
more clamorous were paid up their share of the 
legacy, with such money as could be collected 
among the attendants of the prince. Others 
were persuaded to suffer a delay of payment. 
until they should come into quarters for the 
winter. 

From this station, Germanicus repaired to 
that of the Upper Rhine, where with less trou- 
ble, and by means of the same gratuities, he pre- 
vailed on the legions of that division to with- 
draw into quirters. A mutiny of the troops on the 
Weser had broke out at the same time; but was 
suppressed by the courage and ability of the 
officer at their head. 

It appears, that Tiberius, on hearing of these 
mutinies on the Rhine and the Weser, had re- 
cours? to the senate, and wished to avail him- 
self of their authority in restoring the discipline 
of the army. He probably meant, in the name 
of this hody, to inflict the necessary severities, 
while he reserved to himself the more popular 
office of granting indulgencies, or of making 
some gracious concessions. 

A committee of the senate, of whom one 
Munatius Plancus is inentioned as the head, was 
accordingly sent to the quarters of the army, 
and arrived at the Ara Ubiorum,? where Ger- 


2 A Romaa soldier, after he was exempted from the 
ordinary duties of the camp, was retained at his 
colours to encounter the enemy. 

3 In the Bishopric of Cologne. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


455 


manicus, with two legions, after quieting the 
late mutiny, was retired for the winter. As soon 
as it was known, that deputies were arrived froin 
the senate, to take cognizance of the state of the 
army, the soldiers apprehended that the late 
agreement was to he set aside; that the indul- 
gencies granted to them were to he recalled, and 
that something ungracious was intended, which 
the emperor chose fo execute in some other name 
than his own; for so the arts, bv which the em- 
pire had been governed near fifty vears, now 
began to be understood. In this persuasion, the 
soldiers, in a riotous manner, assembled round 
the quarters of thar general ; and asa signal, that 
they were not any longer to respect his authority, 
they tore the imperial standard from thence; and 
to deter civil officers, for the future, from inter- 
posing in their affairs, meant to have murdered 
Munatius Plancus, and the other deputies of the 
senate. These officers, however, took refuge at 
the colours of one of the legions, where, accord- 
ing to the practice of the Roman army, they 
had the protection of a sanctuary, and by this 
means escaped the fate that was intended for them. 

Germanicus being still accompanied in his 
quarters by his wife Agrippina and her infant 
son, the youngest of his children, and aopre- 
hending that they could not be safe in this place 
of disorder, determined to remove them to some 
other station, where the troops, remaining in their 
duty, were likely to afford them protection. At 
their departure, the soldiers seeing the wife and 
the infant child of their favourite leader, follow- 
ed by a numerous train of female attendants, fly 
from their camp, as from a place in which no 
respect was to be paid to sex, age, or rank, were 
struck with the effect of their own violence. 
Some crowded in the way of this melancholy 
train, and endeavoured to detain them; while 
others ran to the husband, and beseeched him to 
spare the legwns so cruel a reproach, as was 
implied, in his supposing that the wife of Ger- 
manicus, the daughter of Agrippa, and the 
grand-daughter of Cæsar, with her infant child, 
were obliged to fly for safety from their quarters. 

The prince, observing the disposition of the 
soldiers, seized the opportunity of regaining his 
authority; and making it a condition that the 
would return to their duty, complied with their 
request. 

In the first moment of zeal to signalize their 
affection, multitudes, without knowing the cause 
of the change, passed with the impetuosity of 
popular tumults, by a rapid transition, from one 
extreme to the other, called out for justice on 
those who had been leaders in the late mutiny ; 
and themselves became willing instruments in 
punishing such as were pointed out to them as 
authors of a guilt, in which the whole had been 
concerned. Germanicus and the principal offi- 
cers withdrew from the scene, leaving a centurion 
ov the platform to preside in this extraordinary 
conrse of justice. The prisoners that were 
brought to him, were hoisted up into view, and 
upon the verdict of the multitude, to spare or to 
punish them, were released, or thrown down 
froin the platform, and suffered immediate death 
from the hands of their fellow-soldiers. 

| The same disorders had broken out, and still 
liati at Vetera, the station of the fifth and 


| 4 Nearly opposite the Cleves. 


456 


twenty-first legions; but Germanicus being now 
in condition to enforce his authority, advanced 
at the head of a powerful army, sent his instruc- 
tions to Cecina, who was present with the mu- 
tinous troops, requiring that they should, of their 
own accord, bring the guilty to justice; and 
intimating, that if this were not done before his 
arrival, he was determined, without distinction 
of persons, to put the whole to the sword. 

On this intimation, a considerable number of 
the soldiers entered into a concert for executing 
the vengeance required of them, and at a time 
appointed, began the slaughter of those who were 
most forward in the mutiny. As the camp was 
soon thrown into confusion, it became impossible 
to make any distinction of persons, and the mas- 
sacre extended to all those who crowded in the 
way, and who were not apprised of the design. 
Germanicus, at his arrival, found the tents 
stained with blood, the passages strewed with 
heaps of the slain, and all the appearances of a 
camp surprised, and of an army put to the 
sword, Those who remained, affected for the 
present to pay respect to the authority of their 
leaders; but had shown themselves capable of 
the greatest extremes against their officers, as 
well as against their fellow-soldiers. 

These were the principal difficulties which 
Tiberius encountered in effecting his succession ; 
he had other alarms in the commencement of 
his reign, but of inferior inoment. Such were 
the troubles occasioned by the imposture of 
Clemens, who had been a slave in the service of 
the posthumous Agrippa, and the conspiracy of 
Scribonius Libo, who, being encouraged by his 
affinity to the highest names in the republic, had 
formed some visionary design on the empire. 

Clemens, upon the death of the late emperor, 
had gone to the place at which his master was 
detained in exile, meant to have conducted him 
to one of the armies in Gaul, where he made 
no doubt that the son of Agrippa, and the lineal 
descendant of Cesar, would have found a favour- 
able reception; but his design being prevented 
by the death of this unfortunate young man, 
he formed a project still more wild and romantic, 
founded in some resemblance which he himself 
bore to his deceased master, he took his name, 
and proposed to personate him, Pretending to 
have escaped from the cruelty of the usurper 
‘Viberius, he frequently changed his place, and 
affected concealment; but suflered himself to be 
seen by those who were likely to be imposed 
upon, and to afford him protection or support. 
He was accordingly favoured by many persons 
of consequence, who were either deceived, or 
willing to countenance any attempt that was 
made to disturb the present succession, Among 
his supposed abettors, however, he had unfor- 
tunately one person employed by the emperor 
himself, to seduce and to circumvent him. By 
this emissary affecting to believe his story, and 
to aid him in asserting his pretensions to the 
throne, he was delivered over into the hands of 
his enemies, and was put to death by order of 
Tiberius, who, it is said, had the barbarous 
curiosity to visit him, and to examine his like- 
ness to Agrippa before he was executed. 

The emperor was soon after rather amused 
than alarmed, by the informations he received of 
the practices of Scribonius Libo, his other com- 
petitor for the throne of Cesar. This young 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


man, being by his mother, the grandson of Pom- 
pey, and by his father, the nephew of Scribonia, 
who was the first wife of Augustus, was conse- 
quently the cousin of Julia, and of her children. 
His affinity to the sovereigns of the world in- 
spired him with thoughts and expectations above 
the condition of a subject, and laid him opén‘to 
the arts of false and designing men, whom the 
fashion of the times encouraged with the pros- 
pect of impunity, and even of rewards. 

Such men affecting zeal for the safety of the 
emperor, enticed the unwary to engage them- 
selves in some supposed treasonable practice, in 
order to have the merit of infurming against 
them. In this odious character, a senator of the 
name of Firmius Catus, practised upon the 
weakness of Libo, made him acquainted with 
professed magicians, astrologers, and interpreters 
of dreams, who flattered him with the hopes of 
empire; and after he was engaged in this idle or 
criminal correspondence, contrived, by means of 
one Flaccus Vesculanius, who frequented the 
court, to give secret information of the whole to 
the emperor. 

Tiberius, employing all his artifice against 
this feeble antagonist, refused to see the informer, 
but directed him to continue his intrigue, and to 
report the progress of it by the same channel. 
While he coneurred in laying this snare for the 
unhappy young man, he raised him to the dignity 
of prætor, treated him,,at the feasts and enter- 
tainments of the palace, with uncommon marks 
of distinction, and took the malicious pleasure of 
observing how far these flatterers joined to the 
hopes of empire that were given him, contributed. 
to swell his presumption. 

In the mean time, and possibly before the design 
of the emperor, and of his informers, was ripe 
for execution, Fulcinius. Trio, another noted in- 
former, having intimation. of the matter from. 
one of the astrologers, who had been consulted 
by Libo, proposing to snatch the prey from his 
original accuser, and to have a preferatle claim- 
to the reward, carried his discovery directly be- 
fore the senate; but the emperor being present 
when this information was delivered, did justice 
to the first informer, confirmed the charge, and 
with an odious accuracy, enumerated the piteous 
follies of which Libo had been guilty. The 
senators, pretending to be alarmed at such a 
treason, vied with each other in expressions of 
abhorrence, and many of them contended for the 
honour of conducting the prosecution which was 
to he formed against the criminal. 

The slaves of the accused, agreeably to a late 
innovation in the law, were transferred in pro- 
perty to the emperor, that they might be put to 
the question, or that they might be received in 
evidence against their master. 

Libo had.the first intimation of what had 
passed, by a party of armed men, who, with 
orders to seize his person, broke into his house.. 
Terrified by this appearance, he pleaded for 
mercy; or if this could not be obtained, im- 
plored that one of his own servants inight be 
allowed to put an end to his life; and being dis- 
appointed in both these requests, he took poison 
or wounded himself, and was in the agonies of 
death, when according to Dion Cassius, he was, 
in order to secure the confiscation of his estate, 
carried before the senate to receive his sentence. 
By the decree which was given, the name and 


` Crap. V.) 


family of Libo were consigned to infamy, and 
the astrologers, his accomplices; were expelled 
from Italy, or put to death. 

The emperor, when this sentence passed, af- 
fected regret for the unhappy young man, com- 
plained of his precipitancy in preventing the effects 
af mercy, and professed an intention to have 
spared his life. $ 

From the time at which the mutinies on the 
Rhine and Danube were suppressed, and from 
the conclusion of this formal proceeding against 
Scribonius, as a traitor to the lawful sovereign of 
the empire; we may date the accession of Tibe- 
rius to the throne of Cæsar. He was now in 
the fifty-sixth year vf his age ; is described in his 
person as tall, robust, and healthy ; erect in his 
walk; of a fair complexion, handsome counte- 
nance, large eye, but frowning; of few words, 
and slow of utterance; without any action or 
gesture while he spoke, besides a kind of involun- 
tary motion with his fingers. His manner, not- 
withstanding his figure, was so ungracious, that 
Augustus; in recommending him to the public 
favour, thought proper to make an apology for 
this defect in his appearance, observing that his 
ungracious looks were mere accidents in the out- 
ward form of his person, not expressions of vice 
in his temper.? In his youth, he was addicted 
to debauchery; but as he advanced to manhood, 
being in awe of the emperor, he learned in many 
things to disgutse his inclinations, and acquired 
a habit of reserve and hypocrisy. 

Augustus on all accasions seemed to receive 
Tiberius with some degree of repugnance; so 
that when he came into company, the emperor, 
if engaged in any pleasurable conversation, 
changed the subject, and altered his countenance. 
Though in some degree reconciled to him, or 
obliged from necessity to employ him in the con- 
duct of his affairs, and though observed some- 
times to speak of him even in terms of affection 
and confidence, yet he gave more frequently, 
with respect to him, signs of aversion and dis- 
trust; and it is not unlikely that he fluctuated 
to the last in his opinion concerning him. De- 
termined, however, by the influence and in- 
trigues of Livia, or by the relation subsisting 
between them, he left him in possession of the 
empire, which he had long intended for persons 
more nearly related in blood, and more in his fa- 
vour ; but whatever were the motives of his choice, 
such was the belief of a deliberate and selfish de- 
sign in all the actions of Augustus, that he was by 
nnny supposed to have chosen ‘Piberius, merely, 
that in the comparison of his own character with 
that of his successor, the preference night be 
given to himself. 

Before the events which have been mentioned 
had put Tiberius in full possession of the govern- 
ment, and while he yet affected to decline it, the 
consuls, the senate, and all the principal citizens 
at Rome, had taken the oath of subniission and 
allegiance. The whole army, and all the pro- 
vinces soon after followed their example, and the 
world looked with anxious expectation for the 
full display of a character, hitherto for the most 
part wrapped up in reserve, and justly suspected 
of cruelty. Among the first discoveries that 
were made of his temper, it appeared that even 
his mother Livia had mistaken his disposition, 


9 Sueton. in Tiber. c. k pa Annal lib. i. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


457 


or overrated her own ascendant over him. In 
procuring the empire to her son; she had joined 
to the zeal of a mother, a high degree of ambi- 
tion, and a desire to emerge from a species of 
obscurity, in which she had lived in the reign cf 
her husband. She flattered herself, that upon 
the accession of Tiberius, she was to possess a 
great part of the imperial power, or to exercise 
the whole in his name. Trusting to the defer- 
ence, which he had hitherto affected for all her 
opinions, or to the gratitude which he owed to 
her for the high obligations she had conferred 
upon him, she instantly assumed all the conse- 
quence she expected to reap from his greatness, 
laid aside the caution and reserve which she had 
ever preserved in the reign of Augustus, ad- 
vanced into public view, and, as if she had taken 
possession of the empire for herself, under pre- 
tence of bestowing it upon her son, took a princi- 
pal part in all matters of state, and appeared on 
solemn occasions with her lictors, and all the 
other ensigns or formalities of a public station.3 

The senate trusting to the mother’s supposed 
knowledge of her son’s inclinations, yielded to 
her in all the prerogatives she was pleased to as- 
sume, inserted her name with that of the empe- 
ror in all public acts, and, in the titles of Tibe- 
rius, styled him the son of Augustus as well as 
of Cesar. They were not however suffered long 
to remain in this error. They were told by the 
emperor with an alarming coldness of nianner, 
which left no doubt of his sincerity, “ That the 
ambition of women should be kept within proper 
bounds, and that he should always endeavour to 
prescribe such bounds to his own.”4 

From the time in which this declaration was 
made by the emperor, it appears that Livia en- 
tirely dropt her pretensions to any part in the 
government, and became no less reserved in the 
reign of her son, than she had been in that of 
her husband. 

As Augustus, in assuming the sovereignty, 
and in the whole of his reign was kept in awe 
by the republican spirit, which he supposed still 
to lurk with a dangerous violence in the minds 
of the people ; so ‘Tiberius, to the affectation of 
treading in the steps of his predecessors, joined a 
great measure of «distrust in the dispositions of 
the people towards himself, and in their predilec- 
tion for others, who might be supposed more 
worthy to reign. Among these, he looked upon 
Germanicus as the first or principal object of his 
Jealousy. He had adopted this young man, 
merely in compliance with the late emperor's 
will, and cousidered him not only, as he was be- 
come by this act of adoption, a rival to his own 
son, but as he was, by the affection of the people, 
by the attachment of the army, and the high 
pretensions of his wife Agrippina, a most dange- 
rous rival to himself, He could not forgive a 
person to whom the legions had made offers of 
tle empire; and who, fur having declined the 
offer, was deemed the more worthy of it. Al- 
though he endeavoured, under professions of the 
highest regard, to dissemble his feelings, and in 
making his report to the senate of the disorders 
which had lately taken place in the army, spoke of 
the cunduct of his two sons, Germanicus and 
Drusus, with equal tenderness and applause ; he 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. Ivii. e. 12. 
4 Tacit. Annal. lib. i. c. 14. 


Ibid. lib. Ivi. fine. 


458 


had nevertheless suffered the retainers of his 
court to see through this disguise, encouraged 
them to charge Germanicus with want of capa- 
city or courage on that occasion ; and hod taken 
his own resolution to remove him from a situation 
in which his popularity, the ambition of Agrip- 
ot or the presumption of the troops under 

is command, might, in a moment, engage him 
in some dangerous design on the ernpire. 

Upon these motives, therefore, it was pro- 
posed to remove Germanicus from the German 
station, and from the command of troops, by 
whom he was beloved, to the command of an 
army, inferior in point of character; and to which 
he was less known, or less an object of favour. 

While this resolution was taken at home, Ger- 
manicus, after the suppression of the late muti- 
nies, that he might not suffer the soldiers to brood 
over their grievances, gave them leisure to re- 
new their complaints, or leave them to languish 
for want of employment, projected an expedition 
beyond the Rhine, and passed this river with 
twelve thousand men of the legions, twenty co- 
horts of the provinces, and eight ale, or regiments 
of horse. By this sudden irruption, made before 
it was known that his troops were willing to 
obey him, he surprised a great body of barbarians 
assembled to take advantage of the disorder 
which they supposed to subsist in the Roman 
army, dispersed them with great slaughter, con- 
tinued his march to the famous ground on which 
Varus had been cut off with his legions; and 
finding the field still covered with the unburied 
bones of the slain, gave directions to have them 
collected and interred. In this pious office the 
prince himself mixed with the private men, and 
put his hand to the work ; a circumstance which, 
when reported at Rome, considerably increased 
the jealousy of the emperor. From thence he 
proposed to invade the territory of Arminius, and 
to punish that barbarian for his treachery to 
those unfortunate legions. In execution of this 
design, being provided with a thousand vessels, 
he embarked on the Ems, fell down this river to 
a considerable distance; and having landed on 
its eastern banks, and overrun the country from 
thence to the Weser, in his encounter with the 
natives obtained two considerable victories.. 

After these operations, Germanicus again re- 
turned to his ships in the Ems, and continued his 
navigation tothe sea. Supposing that the mouth 
of the Rhine was contiguous to that of the Ems, 
he proposed, by a short voyage on the coast, to 
pass from the one to the other; and without ex- 
posing hituself to be harassed in a march by 
land, to recover his former station on the frontier 
of Gaul. On this stormy coast, however, having 
met with difficulties with which neither his ves- 
sels nor his mariners were fit to contend, his fleet 
was dispersed ; many of his ships were cast away 
on the continent, others wrecked on the conti- 
alge islands, and some drove quite into Britain. 

e himself got on shore on the coast which is 
now called East Friezland, and saw with des- 
pair the apparent wreck of many vessels of his 
fleet, which seemed to be lost irrecoverably on 
the banks which were left by the sea at low 
water. From this disaster, however, he recover- 
ed the greater part of his forces. ‘The vessels 
that were in company with his own, got afloat 
on the return of the flood, and the troops from 
on board of them were landed without any con- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


siderable loss. By this escape of his army, he 
was still in condition to make head against the 
natives of the country, who, intending to profit 
by the losses he had recently sustained, were as 
sembled on the Weser ; but being surprised hy 
his sudden re-appearance, they fled before him, 
and separated to their different quarters, 
_Germanicus, upon his return from this expe- 
dition, and while he was meditating a renewal 
of such operations on the following year, had 
intimation of the emperor’s intention to remove 
him from his station on the Rhine. This inti- 
mation was accompanied with a message full of 
the most flattering commendation of his services. 
He was invited to Rome under pretence of cele- 
brating a triumph, which had been decreed to 
him for his late victories ; and for the purpose of 
assuming the consulate, to which he was destined 
on the approaching year as colleague to the empe- 
ror himself. As it was supposed, however, that, 
under an appearance of modesty, or unwilling to 
withdraw from a hazardous war in which the 
troops he commanded were still engaged, he 
might decline accepting of a mere honorary invi- 
tation, it was subjoined to these reasons of recall, 
that the remains of glory, if there were still any 


;to be reaped in that quarter, ought to be reserved 


for his brother Drusus, there being no other ene- 
my left from whom to collect his laurels. 

An invitation to court, accompanied with the 
last of these considerations, though veiled under 
so many flattering pretences, was sufficiently un- 
derstood to be a peremptory command, which 
Germanicus accordingly obeyed. On his arrival 
in Italy, only two cohorts or battalions were sent 
from Rome to receive him. But every circum- 
stance tended to augment the jealousy of the em- 
peror; the greater part of the pretorian bands, 
mingled with multitudes of the people of every 
sex, condition, and age, advanced of their own 
accord some miles from the city, and received 
him with uncommon acelamations of joy.! Hav- 
ing made his entry, as had been proposed, in 
triumph, he was, with the emperor himself, put in 
nomination for the consulate of the following year. 

The pepuluy of which Germanicus now 
appeared to be possessed in the city, was no less. 
mortifying to the emperor, than his power in the 
army was supposed to be dangerous. His pre- 
sence, if it did not obscure the lustre of the 
emperor himself, seemed to place him in a con- 
tinual state of competition with the other son of 
Tiberius ; and the interests of these two princes, 
the one by adoption, the other by birth, the son 
of the emperor, though supposed to be on the best 
terms with each other, had divided the court. 

Agrippina, the wife of Germanicus, inheriting 


‘the blood: of Augustus, and ever carrying in her 


haughty looks the pretensions of the Cesarian 
family, was become tw Livia, whom she consider- 
ed as a step-mother, no less an object of animo- 
sity, than she was to the emperor himself. Un- 
der these circumstances, the resolution to separate 
Germanicus from the German armies, and to 
place him in the command of the eastern pro- 
vinces, a situation apparently honourable, but in 
which he should be surrounded with persons. 
who might serve as a restraint, or as spies on his 
conduct, was now carried into execution. He 
was vested with a commission to restore the tran- 


1 Sueton. in Vita Caii. 


Cuar. V.) 


quillity of Asia, that was disturbed by some dis- 
mtes which had arisen on the succession to the 
ingdoms of Cappadocia and Armenia. 
Germanicus, in the end of the third year of 
the present reign, set out upon this apparently 
honourable commission. Having a supreme 
authority in the several provinces through which 
he was to pass, from the sea of Ionia to the ex- 
tremities of Egypt and of Syria, he visited, as 
chief in command, the cities of Greece, still re- 
vered as the principal seminaries of philosophy 
and literature; and upon his entry into Asia, pro- 
ceeded to execute the commission on which he 
was sent. He reduced Cappadocia and Com- 
magené to the form of Roman provinces, making 
some ahatement of the taxes formerly paid to 
their own princes,” and settled Zeno, son to the 


king of Pontus, on the throne of Armenia. He. 


afterwards ventured to continue his progress into 
Egypt, theugh contrary to an edict of the late 
emperor, which was still in force. On his return 
from thence he was taken ill, and died at An- 
tioch in the thirty-fourth year of his age, with 
some suspicions of having been poisoned by Cn. 
Piso, the prefect of Syria, not without the con- 
nivance or the direction of Tiberius himself. 

It is not to be doubted, that the emperor looked 
upon Germanicus with great distrust, and might 
have sought for opportunities to sacrifice him to 
his owa safety, or to that of his son Drusus; but 
it does not appear that he proceeded any farther 
on this occasion, than te remove him from a situ- 
ation in which he furnished the court with con- 
tinual occasions of mortification or jealousy, into 
one that was equally splendid in appearance, but 
tending to lessen his consequence in the empire ; 
and that he meant only to place him in the com- 
mand of armies over whom he had no personal 
influence, and who, if disposed to revolt, were 
less to be feared than the legions which were 
formed on the Rhine and the Danube. 

In sending Germanicus into Asia, great at- 
tention indeed was paid to place in his way, as 
governor of Syria, the province which contained 
an itself the principal resources of the east, a per- 
son more likely to thwart and counteract him in 
every measure, than to become subservient to his 
ambition, or to promote his greatness. This in- 
tention was rendered extremely evident by the 
removal of Creticus Silanus, with whom Germ ı- 
nicus was about to contract an alliance by tle 
intermarriage of two of their children, to mak : 
way for Piso, a man already unacceptable tu 
Germanicus, and, in general, distinguished by a 
temper harsh and intractable, or likely to disa- 
gree with every superior. 

It is likewise extremely probable, that Piso, ac 


well as his wife Plancina, might have learned by | 


their own penetration, that Germanicus and 
Agrippina had incurred the displeasure of Tibe- 
tius and Livia; ard that they would not meet 
with any cordial support at the court of the em- 
peror, in case of a disagreement with the officers 
who stood in their way in the provinces. 

Some effects of an insolence, founded upon 
this supposition, appeared in the behaviour of 
Piso and Plancina, while Germanicus was yet 
on his way to Asia. Piso, having overtaken the 
prince, and passing him on the route, without 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


459 


thenceforward seemed to set him at defiance, 
At their first interview in Syria, both were ex- 
tremely guarded, and showed no signs of cordi- 
ality or confidence. Piso afterwards endeavoured 
to pre-occupy the affections of the army in oppo- 
sition to Germanicus; and had the boldness to 
march in contempt of his orders, with a body of 
troops into Armenia. When the prince was 
taken ill, it was said, that Piso had spies to ob- 
serve the progress of his disease, and seemed to 
await the event, as likely to place himself at the 
head of all the forcesin Asia. Germanicus hav- 
ing recovered from his first fit of illness, had the 
conduct of Piso represented to him in such terms, 
that he ordered him into his presence, declared 
open enmity against him, and dismissed him the 
province. But, as he soon after relapsed, he ac- 
cused Piso of having practised against his life, 
and charged all his friends, who were present at 
his death, to bring the author of it to a severe and 
just retribution. 

Piso, hearing of the death of Germanicus, 
while he was yet on the coast of Asia, betrayed 
his animosity to the dead by public and indecent 
demonstrations of joy. He afterwards attempted, 
by force, to reinstate himself in the province of 
Syria, from which he had been ordered by Ger- 
manicas to depart ; but was repulsed by Sentius, 
who had been chosen by the officers of the prince's 
train to keep the possession of the province till 
the pleasure of the emperor should be known. 

Upon this event, Piso sent forward his own 
son to Rome, in order to prevent, as much as 
possible, the aspersions which were likely to be 
propagated against him in the city. He himself 
passed by Illyricum, to pay his court to Drusus, 
who was then in that province, and to implore 
his protection. Being received by this prince 
with coldness, though without prepossession, he 
from thence continued his voyage into Italy. 

Agrippina, arriving soon after at Brundusium 
with the ashes of her deceased husband, was, by 
order of the emperor, received bya great military 
escort and the honours of war. She passed in a 
kind of funeral procession through multitudes 
that were collected from every part of the countr 
to gaze upon her; and coming to Rome sufh- 
ciently impressed with the idea that her husband 
was poisoned, called for revenge upon tle sup- 
posed authors of his death. Numbers contended 
for the honour of carrying her complaints before 
the tribunals of justice, and of being the accusers 
of her husband’s murderers. 

A prosecution soon after commenced against 
Piso; in which all that was known to be excep- 
tionable in the preceding dife and behaviuur of 
the accused, was stated against him by Fulcidius 
Trio, the pereon already mentioned as having 
exercised the trade of informer in the case o 
Libo. The conduct of the accusation of poison- 
ing, and the other crimes imputed to Piso in his 
late command, was committed to Vitellius and 
Veranus, persons peculiarly attached to Gernia- 
nicus. ‘The trial having begun before the empe- 
ror hiniself, was afterwards transferred to the 
senate. Two days were allowed to the accusers 
to enforce their charge, and three to the accused 
to make his defence. The prosecutors brought 
sufficient evidence of Piso’s arrogance and extor- 


the customary marks of respect or attention, from | tion; of much undutiful behaviour to Germani- 


2 Tac. An. lib. ii. c. 58. 3 Suet. in Vit. C. ii. c. 1. 


cus himself in Asia: of disobeying his orders; 
of having made war beyond the limits of bis pro 


460 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


vince, but no sufficient evidence of his having | inscribed, and against whom they were supposed 


made any attempts by poison on the life of the 
prince. The charge indeed, as stated, or laid, 
was extremely incredible, that Piso should, at 
the table of Germanicus, and in the midst of ser- 
vants, attendants, and friends, venture to mix 
Poison in a dish from which numbers were to 
eat. To render this imputation still more im- 
probable, it was observed, that the dead body had 
been exposed to public view in the market-place 
at Antioch, and that no external marks or indi- 
cations of poison were found. 

The principal evidence that was produced of 
any criminal practice against the prince’s life 
consisted of a collection of human bones, some 
verses, pieces of lead marked with the name of 
Germanicus, and other supposed charms, which 
were found in his quarters, and which were 
considered as implements of sorcery, employed 
against the life of the person whose name was | 


to take effect if the poison should fail, 

The charge of murder, therefore, supported by 
such evidence, will appear to the modern readet 
entirely groundless, and must have been rejected 
even by the tribunal to which it was referred; 
but the accused, seeing that the torrent ran high 
against him, and probably to prevent the conse- 
quences of a formal sentence in the confiscation 
of his family estate, cut short the proceedings by 
a voluntary death; or, as was supposed by many, 
was secretly put to death by an order from the 
court, lest his public confession should appear to 
involve the emperor himself in the guilt. 

On either supposition, the death of Piso being 
considered as an act of self-condemnation, or as 
a precaution in Tiberius to prevent a discovery, 
confirmed the people in their suspicion, that they 
were jointly concerned in the murder of the fa- 
vourite prince. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Review of the first Period in the Reign of Tiberius—Applications of Penal Law—Disposition 
of Tiberius to a recluse Life—Place and Character of Sejanus— Death of Drusus, Son of the 
Emperor—Retirement of Tiberius tothe Island of Capree—Jealousy of the Emperor against 
Agrippina and her Children—Death of Livia Augusta—Design formed against Sejanus— 
His Death—Prosecution of his supposed Accomplices—Artifices— Old Age—and Death of T'i- 


berius. 


THE death of Germanicus is considered by 
_ some historians as a remarkable epoch in the 
present reign,! Before this event, Tiberius, as 
If conscious that he held the empire by his good 
behaviour, was popular in his manners, and 
guarded in his administration; declined the ex- 
travagant honours which were offered to him; 
was easy of access ; affected to live like a private 
citizen; returned visits, and accepted invitations 
to entertainments and feasts ; visited the sick, at- 
tended funerals, and delivered orations in praise 
of the dead.? He treated the titular magistrates 
of Rome with the same ceremonious respect that 
used to be observed in times of the republic ; rose, 
and stood, in the presence of the consul; took 
his place in the senate as a private member; was 
frequently seen in the courts of justice as an as- 
sessor, aS an advocate, as an evidence, or as a 
spectator. To a person who saluted him with 
the title of master, “Insult me not,” he said, 
“with that odious appellation. Iam the master 
of my slaves, general of the army, and no more 
than prince, or first in the ralls of the senate and 
people” He took the title of Augustus only in 

is correspondence with foreign powers. Ip all 
his addresses, whether to particular members of 
the senate, or to this body at large, he was in the 
highest degree respectful and courteous. When 
engaged in dehate, he endeavoured to qualify 
contradiction or difference of opinion with respect 
and regret. To a senator, named Haterius, on 
some such occasion, he said, “I hope you will 
forgive me, if, in my duty as a senator, I differ 
from you somewhat too freely.” Ata meeting 
of the senate, in referring some matter to their 


1 Dio. Case. lib. Ivii. c. 13. 2 Ibid. 


decision, he concluded with these words: “ I have 
formerly said, and now say, that it becomes the 
person you have intrusted with so large a share 
of the public affairs, to consider himself as the 
servant of this assemblv, as the servant of the 
people, and of every individual; nor do I repent 
me of this saving; for | have found you, and still 
find you, candid, indulgent, and kind masters.”3 
He affected a continual deference to ther judg- 
ment on every subject, whether of policy, reve- 
nue, or foreign correspondence; even seemed to 
wait for their orders in what concerned the com- 
mand of the army, and pretended to be displeased, 
when officers, employed in the provinces, made 
th: ir report directly to himself, without commu- 
ni ating the subject of their despatches first to 
tl » senate. 

With these popular arts, which the senators 
indeed did not mistake for a real acknowledg- 
ment of their authority, he joined an administra- 
tion in many things worthy of a wise and exem- 
plary prince, ndaiged the people in the freedom 
of speech to which they had been accustomed, 
saying, that “in a free country, the mind and 
the tongue should be free”? To those who 
brought him information of any slander spoken 
of himself; he affected indifference. “If you 
mind such accusations as these,” he would say, 
“there will be no end of them.” He gave a 
ready hearing and redress to all the complaints 


; that were made to him from the provinces, and 


carefully limited the exactions of his officers 
within the bounds of established and ordinary 
fees.4 To persons suffering by fire, earthquakes, 
or other public calamities, to the families of de- 


3 Sueton. in Tiber. c. 29. 
4 Tacit. Annal. lib. iv. e. 6, 7. 


Cuar. VL) 


cayed senators, to the children of those who had 
bequeathed him their estates by will, he was mu- 
nificent and liberal; took efiectual measures to 
suppress the banditti, which, from the time of the 
civil wats, still infested the country; and endea- 
voured to diminish that constant source of cor- 
ruption, the idleness which the people contracted 
in the too frequent repetition of shows and of 
public cntertainments. He gave an abatemeut of 
soine taxes which had been imposed by the late 
emperor, and in particular, eee the penalties 
which had been crroneowusly inflicted on celibacy. 

‘iberius seeined to have perceived that the se- 
verities employed by his predecessor, to enforce 
marriag ', served only to multiply the evils of the 
U.nes, without adutinistering anyetfectual remedy 
to that which was complained of. But what, in 
this enumeration of examples of his political con- 
duct, would have done him most honour, had he 
continued to support it in the subsequent part of 
his reign, was the equanimity with which he 
rejected many frivolous accusations which were 
brought against the unwary by his own flatter- 
ers, or by the mercenary informers who began to 
swarm in his time, 

In respect to criminal prosecutions, the change 
of government, which took place at Rome, had, 
without altering the legal forms, made a fatal 
change in the effect of the laws, and served to 
show, that the seeds of despotism may be laid in 
the freest establishments; and that when the cha- 
racters of men are changed, the worst abuse may 
procced from the best institutions.$ 

The securities of majesty, or the restraints pro- 
vided against treasonable practices, were principal 
objects in the laws of the republic. The crimes® 
against which those restraints were provided, 
were, in reality, a trespass on the majesty of the 
com:nonwealth, including rebellion, breach of 
public trust, betraying the forces of the state to 
its enemies, or violating the person of the magis- 
trate in the discharge of his office. These were 
justly reputed an invasion of the rights of the 
people, were public crimes, and might be prose 
cuted by any citizen, though not particularly in- 
terested in the issue of the trial. 

In the time of the republic the prosecution of 
public crimes was considered as a duty; and the 
character of an informer, bringing to light what 
o:fended the commonwealth, though in some in- 
stances invidious, was not reckoucd dishonour- 
able.’ In this character the most respectable and 
popular citizens sometimes braved the resentment 
of the most powerful offenders, or, when engaged 
in private enmities, sought their revenge, with- 
out incurring any dishonour as informers, by 
raising prosecutions on a public account.® 

‘The mere peruiission, however, to become a 
public accuser, and the credit annexed to this 
character, were not, in all cases, sufficient to ob- 
tain prosecutions, or to prevail upon persons, not 
called upon by some material interest, to engage 
in so arduous and often so dangerous a task, as 
that of urging to justice offenders, who were 
powerfully supported by their fortunes, tlicir 


5 Lex Majestatis.— Majestas est amplitudo et digni- 
“as civitatis. Cicero de Orat. lib. ii. c. 39. 

6 Public crimes. 

7 Private crimes or offences could not be prosecuted 
by any person besides the party aggrieved or some 
person having an interest in the case, ° 

8 Plutarch. in Lucullo, initio. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


ee A 


461 


rank, or the number oftheir adhcrents and fnends. 
In the latter times of the republic, therefore, as 
the ardour of zeal for the commonwealth was 
supposed to wax cold, and motives of ambition 
and interest were required in aid of public virtue, 
it was enacted, that whoever convicted a person 
of any public crime incurring degradation or for- 
feiture, should be entitled to succeed to the dig- 
nitv, whether of citizen, knight, or senator, from 
which the criminal was degraded. And lest even 
this consideration should not be sufficient to ex- 
cite prosecutors, it was enacted, that a fourth part 
of the estate of the person convicted should be 
joined to the reward. 

The office of an accuser, supported by a pure 
concern for the public safety, was commendable ; 
but proceeding, in any degree, upon mercenary 
motives, even under the republic, when the cause 
to be supported was the niajesty of the state it- 
self, must have become, in a high degree, odious 
and contemptible; but under the present govern- 
ment, when the object of the law, as well as the 
motive for the application of it, were so much 
changed, the character of a prosecutor, thoug!s 
disguised under the ancient forms and titles, was, 
in the highest degree, vile and detestable. 

Under the establishment of Augustus, the idea 
of majesty was transferred from the state itself 
to the emperor; and the principal object of the 
law being to guard his person, not only his safety 
and the authority of his government, but his 
most private concerns, made a part in the majes- 
ty which was to be preserved. Whatever implied 
disrespect, whatever alarmed his jealousy, or 1n- 
terfered with lis caprice, even intrigues of de- 
bauch with women of his family, were constructed 
as trcason. Under a continuation of this govern- 
ment, the evil was inflamed by the pretended 
zeal of spics and informers, who, partly to pay 
their court, and partly to merit tle rewards which 
were promised from the confiscation of estates, 


endeavoured to keep on foot a continual inquisi- 


tion, in which they brought to trial the most tri- 
vial indiscretions, as well as more real oflences, 
against the person, authority, or dignity of the 
prince. The swarms of such persons who haunt- 
cd tue steps of the unwary, and filled the senate 
and the courts of justice with cruel or frivolous 
prosecutions; in which, by interesting the pas- 
sions of the emperor, they endeavoured to make 
hin a party, was one of the most grievous cir- 
cumstances attending the late revolution uf go- 
verninent, 

Tiberius, notwithstanding this tendency of the 
establishment to which he succceded, and his 
own temper, which was sufficiently proinpt and 
sanguinary in preventing attempts un his person, 
or on his government, had the houour, during 
the first years of his reign, in some measure, to 
withstand this torrent, and to treat many {rivo- 
lous accusations with a proper degree of con- 
tempt. A senator of the name of Falenius, being 
accused of having included, with other furniture 
in the sale of his house, a statue of Augustus ;9 
another, of the name of Rubrius, being accused 


9 ft is sufficiently known, that, in the heathen my- 
thology, a place among the gods was sometinies Con- 
ferred on mortal men; that an apotheosis was little 
nore than canonization is in later times; an: that 
this honour having been conferred on Augustns, hie 


| name and his statue were ranked amoug those of tie 


3 


| gods. 


462 


of having taken a false oath by the name of Au- 
gustus; and Granius Marcellus being accused 
of having taken the head from a statue of that 
price, in order to substitute a head of Tiberius 
in place of it, a manner of paying his court rather 
tidiculous than ¢riminal; in these and other ìn- 
stances of the same kind, Tiberius either took 
no part, or gave his instructions to the senate in 
very liberal and manly terms. On the subject 
of the prosecution that was raised against Fale- 
nius, “ My father,” he said, ‘was deified, that 
his divinity might be a safeguard and a protec- 
tion, not a snare to the people. His image may, 
no doubt, be included, with those of the other 
gods, as part in the furniture of a house that is 
sold.” With respect to the supposed perjury of 
Rubrius, he observed, that “if any one swear, 
and is perjured, the crime is the same, whoever 
be the god whose name is profaned. Augustus 
is no more to be regarded, in this matter, than 
Jupiter; and either of these gods, if offended, 
can avenge himself.”! The third offence, or the 
shifting of heads from one statue to another,? 
being considered as a mockery of that adulation 
which was so easily transferred from one to an- 
other in the succession of princes, and as some 
degree of ridicule on the prince himself, was not 
so easily forgiven; though, for the present, over- 
looked, it was reserved as a subject of future re- 
sentment. ` 

To whatever motive we ascribe a conduct so 
popular, and in many particulars so worthy of 
empire, it is observed, that its effects on the minds 
of the people were not such as might have been 
expected, and did not procure to the emperor the 
favourable opinion or credit to which he aspired. 
His manner, even when he affected humanity 
and condescension, was ungracious and alarm- 
ing; and, notwithstanding any appearances to 
the contrary, his real character was supposed to 
be malicious and cruel. It is said, that in the 
midst of the hypocrisy and dissimulation by which 
he had endeavoured to disguise himself before his 
accession, he made some slips which betrayed the 
reality of this disposition; and that he had been 
surprised into acts of insolence and severity, in 
which, by mixing derision and sarcasm with 
eruelty, he had given the strongest proofs of a 
werciless nature. For the present it was ob- 
served, that his overacting the part of popularity, 
the ridiculous tyranny he exercised over the se- 
nate in requiring at once the affectation of freedom 
and the grossest servility ; that the farce of afiect- 
ing reluctance in accepting of a government 
which he had previously secured with the great- 
est care; the ridicule of dividing in the senate, 
or giving his vote with the minority, when a re- 
solution was to be taken in favour of himself, 
served to join mockery and insult to the weight 
of his usurpation; that even his affectation of 
popularity, for the most part, increased the ter- 
rors of his government; that his presence in the 
courts of justice took away all freedom of judg- 
ment; and that the discretionary power which 
he assumed, of mitigating or reverting sentences, 
and cf dispensing with Jaws, under pretence of 
correcting their general tendency by seasonable 
exceptions, only served to frustrate the preten- 
sions to civil government, which, in imitation of 
Augustus, he still affected to preserve. 


1 Deorum injurie Diis cure. 2 Tacit. l.i.c 73 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


But in whatever sense the favourable appear- 
ances, which presented themselves in the hegin- 
ning of this reign, were to be interpreted, they 
were no more than temporary, and, in the man- 
ners of this prince, gave way to the growing as- 
perity of age, or to the presumption which took 
place in his mind, upon the removal of a person 
whom he considered as a dangerous rival, and 
who, in case of any public discontent, might have 
been made the instrument of overturning his go- 
vernment. l 

Soon after the death of Germanicus, the temper 
of Tibenus, which had probably gained strength 
from restraint, broke forth in many cruel and 
alarming efiects. His vigilance, hitherto limited 
to one object, and his jealousy, directed against 
a single person, now found a multiplicity of sub- 
jects on which, with less disguise or reserve, tu 
exert their force. 

Among the particulars in which the emperor, 
in the first period of his reign, imposed the great- 
est violence on his own disposition, we may reckon 
the openness and accessibility which, with a 
temper naturally dark and reserved, he affected 
to maintain with the people ; and one of the prin- 
cipal circumstances, probably, in which he pro- 
posed to indulge himself, on his being relieved 
from his fears of Germanicus, was in retiring 
from the public view, and in eluding the observa- 
tion of persons whom he considered as spies on his 
actions. In the eighth year of his reign, and in the 
second year after the death of Germanicus, having 
associated his son Drusus with himself in the 
consulate, and leaving him in the administration 
of affairs in the city, he withdrew for some time 
into Campania, meditating, as Tacitus observes, 
a more entire and continued retreat. During the 
two first years after his accession he had confined 
himself to the walls of Rome, and remained in 
the city, as in the watch-tower, from whence he 
was to observe and prevent all designs that might 
be formed on his government. After those years 
were passed, he made some excursions to Anti- 
um,’ and other towns or villages on the same 
coast, but never to any greater distance. In or- 
der, however, that the provincial officers might 
not think themselves aitogether secure from his 
personal inspection, he frequently, even during 
this period, affected a purpose to visit the more 
distant parts of the empire; ordered his equi- 
pages, placed changes of horses and carriages, 
and permitted the usual sacrifices to be offered 
up for his safe return; but always, for some spe- 
cious reason, delayed the execution of his pre- 
tended design. After having, in this manner, for 
some time amused the world, and, by the repeti- 
tion of these and other artifices, furnished a key 
to the secret of his own conduct; his mysteries, 
for the most part, became extremely plain, and 
his true intentions easily perceived, merely be- 
cause he never spoke truth. 

But while the emperor thus endeavoured to 
debar the people from all access to his person, and 
to séclude himself from public view, he selected, 
as a proper instrument of his power, and, in ap- 
pearance, as an object of his most implicit confi- 
dence, Ælius Sejanus, who has been already 
mentioned, as accompanying his son Drusus on 
his mission to the mutinous legions in Panonia. 
This person, supposed to have no dangerous pre- 


eS 


3 About thirty miles from Rome. 


Chap. VI.] 


tensions, or though false to others, supposed true 
to his master, he had placed at the fade of his 
guards or prætorian bands, and distinguished him 
with a degree of affection and confidence hithcrto 
without example in any former part of his life. 
This being the first of his intimate connexions, 
whatever may have been its motive, it did not ad- 
mit of competition or participation, and rendered 
a person, who was dark and impenetrable to 
every one else, open and communicative to this 
favourite alone. 

Sejanus is described by Tacitus as of a hardy 
and indefatigable constitution of body ; of a bold 
spirit and an insatiable ambition, which he dis- 
guised under an affectation of modesty. He is 

escribed as a person possessed of great art in 
concealing his own vices, and of an insidious 
penetration in prying into those of others; versa- 
tile in his manners, and either careless and pro- 
fuse, or vigilant and severe, as suited the occasion; 
insolent to those over whom he had any advan- 
tage, but fawning where he was the inferior, or 
had an interest to gain. [n his youth he had 
attached himself to Cais Cesar, the adopted son 
of Augustus; and afterwards succeeding his own 
father, in the station which he now occupied at 
the head of the pretorian bands, scemed te im- 
prove the access which this situation gave him to 
the person of the emperor, into an ascendant over 
his mind. 

One of the first or most observable signs of the 
great elevation of Sejanus, was the proposed 
marriage of his daughter with the son of Clau- 
dius, the brother of Germanicus; a person, 
though at this time in a great measure ncglected 
at court, yet nearly related to the emperor; and, 
in the sequel of events, himself destined to ascend 
the imperial throne. 

Sejanus being thus pan out as favourite, 
by a mark of honour which tended to gratify his 
vanity, he took measures, at the same time, the 
most efficacious, to establish his power. For this 
pyese he employed his credit in filling up with 

is own creatures, as fast as vacancies happened, 
the pretorian bands, the legions, and every civil 
as well as military department in the state; 
knowing that where government rests its autho- 
rity on ae of reason and justicc, the ci- 
vilian, the senator, and the statesman are its 
principal instruments; but where it is founded 
entirely on force, its ministers are soldicrs of for- 
tune, and its powers rest chiefly with those mili- 
tary bodies who are in possession of the capital, 
or who surround the person of the prince. ‘This 
adventurer, therefore, being already at the head 
of this powerful department, studied cvery method 
to concentrate its force, and to secure in his own 
person the direction of it. ‘To this motive is im- 
puted the change which he now made in the 
manner of disposing of the pratorian bands. 
These troops were hitherto quartered on the 
citizens, or distributed in the villages round the 
walls of the city, apprehending, it is alleged, that 
they might, in that way of life, imbibe the preju- 
dices of the people, and become part of the fami- 
lies with whom they were mixed, he persuaded 
the emperor to detach them from that society ; 
and, under the ordinary pretence of having the 
cohorts together, and more under the eye of their 
officers, erected a citadel and barracks for their 
receptien ; in this manner establishing in Rome 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


200 


which he could command the city, and employ 
the professional prejudices of those who occupied 
this garrison, most effectually against every per- 
son that was supposed disaflected to his person. 
In this disposition, whatever may have been the 
object of it, there is no doubt that the pretorian 
bands became more detached from the people, 
and that the force and presumption of this for- 
midable body became more tremendous to the 
other parts of the empire, and even to the emperor 
himself. 

As Tiberius seemed to set: no bounds to his 
confidence in the minister, and enabled him to 
employ all the powers of the empire in support 
of his own elevation, the jealousies or resentments 
of the favourite became equally fatal with those 
of his master, and being more numerous, involved 
the government of the emperor in perpetual ani- 
mosities, prosecutions, and cruelties, which may 
have, for the present, gratified his severe and 
jealous temper, but which were in no way con- 
ducive to his interest. 

Under the influence of this connexion, joined 
to his own disposition, Tiberius gave a ready ear 
to that numerous tribe of informers, who brought 
accusations against persons in any degree ob- 
noxious or unacceptable to himself or to his fa- 
vourite. In this predicament, the descendants of 
the ancient nobility, persons eminent by their 
birth, popular favour, or personal qualities, and 
considered as rivals in the apprehension of either, 
were the principal sufferers. ‘The perpetual in- 
quisition to which they were cxposed, and which 
makes a principal article in the history of this 
and some of the succeeding reigus, must, by the 
frequent repetition of similar examples, become 
an object of disgust, as well as of indignation or 
pity. And it may perhaps have been true of 
this emperor, that even his character, though in 
itself sufficiently odious, may, for some time at 
least, have incurred additional detestation, from 
his having committed his administration into the 
hands of a servant, who multiplied the errors of 
his government, or gave them the directions of 
passions more numcrous or less liberal than even 
thosc of the master. 

As Sejanus was mest vigilant and eae in 
exacting observances, it became more dangerous 
to neglect the attention he required, than even 
that which was due to the prince. A courtship 
was accordingly paid to him by the retainers of 
the palace, by the senate, by the army, and by 
the people, more assiduous than even that whic 
they paid to the emperer. In private, every spe 
cies of flattery ; in public, honorary decrees, were 
invented to gratify his vanity. The anniversary 
of his birth was joincd to the festivals of the year. 
His name was inserted in the public prayers ; 
and when any deputation was sent with ad- 
dresscs of respect to the emperor from the senate, 
from the equestrian order, or from any other 
public description of men, compliments were at 
the same time sent to his favourite. The efligies 
of both were carried together among the ensigns 
of the Icgions, and their statues were grouped to- 
gether in the streets. Women of every rank 
thought themselves honoured by the addresses of 
this fortunate man, and became the tools of his 
ambition, or the prostitutes of his pleasure. By 
debauching the wife, he sometimes obtained in- 
telligence what were the designs or ordinary pur- 


itself, or contiguous to its walls, a fortress from | suits of the husband; and by encouraging the 


464 


zeal of spies and informers, who were now be- 
come the favourite retainers of the court, he was 
enabled to pry into the actions of every citizen, 
and to watch all the symptoms of disaffection to 
the emperor or to himself. Intoxicated with the 
extraurdinary circumstances of his fortune, it is 
probable that he thought himself placed within 
reach of the e npire, and measured his conse- 
quence with that of the persons who apparently 
stood before him in their pretensions to this ele- 
vation. The present emperor himself had suc- 
ceeded to the government, not by his birth, but 
merely by having survived every person on whom 
his predecessor could rely for support, or through 
whom, by any line of inheritance, he could trans- 
mit his power. Pointed out by mere accident to 
the choice of Augustus, he had heen first adopted 
into the family of Cæsar, and afterwards asso- 
ciated in the empire. 

Sejanus computed that he himself was already 
possessed of more favour with the reigning em- 
peror than Tiberius ever had enjoyed ith the 
person to whom he succeeded; and that there 
was nothing in the farther progress of his fortune 
too arduous or difficult for hiin to undertake. 
The conduct ‘of the young princes towards him 
had been provoking, and seemed to justify his re- 
sentment. ‘They bore with impatience the in- 
trusion of a rival into the emperors favour. 
Drusus in particular was frequently heard to 
complain, that his father had chosen a favourite 
to supplant his own son, and had made a stranger 
little less than a colleague in the empire; that 
the steps which remained for Sejanus to make to 
this elevation were not so many, nor so difficult, 
as those he had already made. “And we must 
rely,” he said, “on the modesty of this man for 
the bounds he may think proper to set to his far- 
ther pretensions.” É 

This favourite had already formed an intrigue 
with Livia, or Livilla, the sister of Germanicus, 
married to Drusus. By this intelligence with the 
wife, he had notice of what passed in the conver- 
sations of the husband; and, in concert with this 
abandoned woman, determined to remove a per- 
son from whom he had so much to fear. They 
took into their confidence, for this purpose, Eude- 
mus, a physician, who, under pretence of his 

rofession, had a frequent and a secret access to 

ivilla; and, after some hesitation, and frequent 
change of their counsels, they found means, by 
the hands of one Ligdus, a eunuch, to administer 
poison to the prince, of which he died. The 
cause of his death, and the circumstances of this 
daring crime, were not Known till about eight 
years afterwards, 

In the mean time Sejanus, encouraged by the 
success of his first attempt, flattered himself that 
he might step into the place of the prince whom 
he had thus removed out of his way ; and, in con- 
cert with Livilla, with whom he had already 
lived in habits of adultery, he waited for a decent 


interval to propose himself to the emperor as a | 


husband for the widow of his son. 

Tiberius, although he had, by his deceased son, 
a grandson of his own name; yet this young 
man being still under age, he thought proper, 
upon the breach which had recently been made 
in his family, to bring forward the two elder sons 
of Germanicus, Nero and Drusus, whom he pre- 
sented to the senate, as the great-grand-children 
of Augustus, and the future supports of the com- 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


monwealth. These,” he said, addressing him- 
self to the young men, “are your fathers. Such 
is the condition of your birth, that whatever con- 
cerns you, whether good or evil, must affect the 
empire.” It is however singular, that this speech, - 
made in behalf of the sons of Germanicus, ap- 
pears to have awakened the jealousy of the per- 
son who made it. Observing that the audience 
were moved with these expressions, and sup- 
posing that the tenderness which was shown to 
the sons, was a remainder of that popular esteem 
which, in the father, had given him so much un- 
easiness, he appeared to be suddenly embarrassed; 
and, as if he had been reproached with intrading 
himself irito a station which the world wished to 
have reserved for the parent of these young men, 
he proceeded to counteract his own apprehensions 
with his usual affectation of humility and mode- 
ration. “I beseech you,” he said to the senate, 
“that I nay be allowed, at a proper time, to re- 
sign the empire? And as he was always dis- 
trusted, and had the worst construction put on 
his words, these were supposed to be the expres- 
sions of mere embarrassment, and that he was in 
reality mortified with the demonstrations of joy 
which were given on this apparent restoration of 
the family of a favourite prince. 

Sejanus, who bore with great impatience the 
admission of new rivals in the way of his ambi- 
tion, improved these circumstances in the man- 
ner which he knew to be most effectual to 
awaken the emperor’s jealousy, and to inflame 
the animosity already subsisting betwixt the em- 
press Livia and Agrippina, the widow of Ger- 
manicus, and the mother of these young men. 
The effect of his artifices and insinuations ope- 
rating on the distrustful mind of the emperor 
first appeared in the destruction of many persons 
who had been attached to Germanicus, and who 
still adhered to his family ; and afterwards in the 
ruin of Agrippina herself, and in the death of 
the two elder of her sons. 

The passions of jealousy and distrust, by which 
the mind of ‘Tiberius was secretly devoured, but 
which he had endeavoured to conceal in the for- 
mer part of his life, instead of abating in propor- 
tion as he became secure, only became less 
disguised and more violent in their effects against 
those who happened to be the objects of them. 
He listened without reserve to every spy or in- 
former, and, under the pretence of treason, di- 
rected prosecutions against every person in any 
degree exposed to suspicion. 

Under such prosecutions the accused, having 
no hopes to escape from a charge in which the 
passions of the sovereign were engaged against 
them, endeavoured, for the most part, to prevent 
by a voluntary death the confiscation of their 
estates. And this direful necessity, frequently 
repeated, being imputed to the merciless policy 
or suggestion of Sejanus, instead of drawin 
upon him public marks of indignation or hatred, 

reatly increased the court whieh was paid to him, 
and multiplied the professions of public regard. 

The emperor, in the mean time, as he sought 
for security and peace of mind in a quarter in 
which they surely are not to be found, in the 
destruction of the most innocent objects of his 
suspicion, felt his odious passion of jealousy ripen 
into a general hatred of mankind, with a dishke, 
in particular, to those persons who had been the 
instruments of his distrust, and with an aversion 


oe aan 


tar. VL) 


to the very place at which he had multiplied its 
cruel effects. Conscious of what he endeavoured 
to conceal, and of what men were able to pene- 
trate, he was jealous of every prying look, and 
detested every person whom he thought qualified 
to distinguish truth from appearances. At one 
time, he received the crowd of informers who 
haunted his court, as the most acceptable mem- 
bers of it; at other times, le abhorred them as 
persons who penetrated his character, and who, 
to their own advantage, and to the disgrace of his 
government, were practising upon his weakness. 
After having resided constantly in the city for 
many years, he began to multiply aud to prolong 
his visits to some of his favourite retreats in the 
country, placed guards wherever he went, to keep 
the curious multitude at a distance, declined the 
attendance of those who wished to gpay their 
court, and was accessible only to his favourite 
minister. 

Sejanus, still appearing to rise in the confidence 
of his master on the ruin of every one else, ven- 
tured according to the agreement long since 
made with Livilla, to propose himself to the em- 
seror as second husband to the widow of his son. 
It was the practice of Tiberius to require, even 
from persons who had daily access to him, that 
every proposal they made should be put in writ- 
ing; and it was his practice likewise to give an- 
swers in the same form. Sejanus accordingly 

resented a memorial to the following purpose : 
“That he had been so long accustomed to look 
up to Augustus for protection, and to Tiberius 
for every effect of munificence and goodness, 
that his wishes and his prayers were carried to 
them more directly than even to the gods them- 
selves; that the splendour of high fortune had 
no charms for him; that his delights were in the 
cares and toils of a soldier stationed for the de- 
fence of the emnperor’s person ; that he had never- 
theless already attained to the highest honours in 
the alliance of his family with that of Cesar;! 
and from thence probably arose the farther hopes 
which he ventured to conceive. Augustus, when 
he deliberated on the marriage of his daughter, 
had condescended to think of a Roman knight. 
If a husband, therefore, should be thought of for 
Livilla, might he not presume to hope that the 
emperor would not overlook a person so pro- 
foundly attached to him, who coveted nothing, 
on this occasion, besides the honour of being cho- 
sen into this high connexion, and who had no 
ambition beyond the duties of his trust as a guard 
to the sacred person of his master. For himself 
he was willing to perish whenever the emperor 
should cease to protect him; but his family had 
many enemies, and needed to be raised into some 
such place of advantage, where they might be 
‘ess exposed to the haughty and imperious insults 
of Agrippina and her offspring.”2 

In answer to this memorial, the emperor ac- 
knowledged the merits of his favourite; but did 
not give him any encouragement on the subject 
of his request. “Princes,” he said, “were not, 
like private men, at liberty to follow their own in- 
clinations, but must consult the opinion of the 
world; and observed, that, under this restraint, 
he must, for the present, suppress what he was 


a a 


1 The marriage of his son with the daughter of | 

Claudius. | 

2 Tacit Annal. lib. iv. c. 39. | 
3N 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


165 


most inclined to reply. That Livilla might de- 
termine for herself, whether, having been the 
wife of Drusus, she was to accept of a second 
husband ; or if she had any doubts in the matter, 
she might consult her mother and her grand- 
mother, fitter counsellors on that occasion than 
he could pretend to be; that the marriage which 
Sejanus proposed for himself would not allay the 
malice of Agrippina, but rather inflame it, and di- 
vide the family of Cæsar into parties; that it 
would be impossible for hiin, if he should form 
this alliance, to remain in his present condition : 
that Augustus, in deliberating on the choice of 
a husband for his own daughter, because he 
wished for a son-in-law whose pretensions were 
not likely to disturb the public peace, had turned 
his thoughts on some persons of equestrian rank ; 
but that the example, nevertheless, was against 
Sejanus; for Augustus did not actually marry 
his daughter to a Roman knight, but first to 
Agrippa, and afterwards to himself.” He con- 
cluded with insinuatıng that he had other views 
for his friend; owned that there was nothing too 
high for his merits; and his opinion in this mat- 
ter, he said, he should in a proper time make 
known to the senate and to the peoplu.3 

Sejanus was alarmed by this intricate and am- 
biguous answer, and dreaded a change of his 
master’s disposition. He had hitherto excluded 
every competitor from the emperecr’s favour; but 
a temper su prone to suspicion, he knew could 
be easily turned against him, and would receive 
encouragement front numbers, as soon as they 
should see the first signs of distrust. For these 
reasons, he is said at this time to have formed the 
design of persuading Tiberius to remove from 
the city. When ata distance, he trusted that, 
by means of the guards, who were the bearers 
of all expresses and messages, he might be mas- 
ter of the emperor’s correspondence, and prevent 
the access of every suspicious person. With this 
view he exaggerated the troubles to which the 
sovereign was exposed at Rome; molested with 
trifles, and crowded, wherever he went, with 
multitudes of idle or importunate people ; magni- 
fying, at the same time, the pleasures of retirement, 
where free from the disgust and the avocation of 
inferior objects, he might bestow his attention on 
the conduct and result of aflairs that were worthy 
of his notice. 

Whatever effect we may suppose the repre- 
sentations of Sejanus to have had in kaii ie 
the emperor to retire from Rome, it 1s probable 
that, in forming this resolution, still more was 
owing to his own temper. Though deeply tinc- 
tured with pride, the inherent vice of his family,’ 
Tiberius had not any share of that vanity which 
leads men to display their furtunes and persons 
in the view of the world. Content with the gra- 
tification of his appetites, and joining hypocrisy 
with the worst species of sensuality, he could 
submit to obscurity ; and, although the resources 
of solitude were now diminished by the effects 
of age, yet a temper become more jealous of the 
world, and more averse to its notice, inclined him 
more to withdraw from the city, and to maintain 
from a distance that watch which he had hitherto 
kept over the actions, words, and even thoughts 
of its inhabitants. He accordingly, in the twelfth 


3 Tacit. Annal. lib. iv. c. 40. 
4 Insita Claudie familt-r superbia.—Tacir. 


466 THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION [Book VL. 


year of his reign, under pretence of dedicating 
in Campania a temple to Jupiter and another to 
Augustus, withdrew from Rome, and after this 
time, during the remainder of his life, under va- 
rious pretences, but with continual intimations 
of his intention to return, absented himself from 
the city. Having performed the ceremonies for 
which he had gone to Campania, he passed from 
thence to Capreæ, a small island under a head- 
land, which was called the promontory of Mi- 
nerva, making one side of the bay of Naples. It 
is probable that, after mature deliberation, he had 
fixed on this spot as a place of security and an 
agreeable retreat. It was covered by the high 
lands of Minerva from the northeast winds, and 
was open to breezes from the sea on the south- 
west. It was accessible only to very small ves- 
sels, and this only at a single place. The seas 
were open to his scouts, and no sail could ap- 
proach without his knowledge and permission. 
In this secession it appears, that he divided the 
guards, liaving one part in the island for the de- 
fence of his person, and the other at Rome to 
enforce the mandates of his government. 
Among the Romans who were admitted into 
this retreat are mentioned Sejanus, from whom 
the emperor was still inseparable, Curtius Atti- 
cus, a Roman knight, and Cocceius Nerva,! a 
senator of great dignity, who, possessing much 
knowledge in the laws and constitutions of the 
commonwealth, was still acceptable, or even ne- 
cessary in the councils of a prince, who, except 
where his own passions were concerned, still 
wished to be reasonable and just. This person, 
however, from whatever cause, soon after ended 
his days on this island by a voluntary death. 
Tiberius, in the latter part of his life, admitted 
likewise into his privacy at Caprese, Caius, the 
third son of Germanicus, better known by the 
name of Caligula. The society, however, in 
which he delighted most, was made up chiefly of | people, he fancied that the young men might not 
Greeks, professed men of letters, but more emi- | be disposed to defer the completion of their hopes, 
nent as flatterers and ministers of pleasure. For | until a natural event had bestowed a succession, 
such men he had no respect, but suffered them | which a daring attempt might accelerate. Nero 
to amuse him with their speculations, or rather} and Drusus, the two elder sons of this family, 
with a kind of literary buffoonery, in discussing | having without any authority from the emperor, 
ludicrous questions which he was pleased to pro- | been included by the senate in the forms of pub- 
pose; such as, who was the mother of Hecuba, | lic prayer, their names were again expunged by 
and what species of music was sung by the | his order, and with an admonition to the senate, 
Syrens?? These literary buffoons, however, no | not to inflame the ambition of youth with pre- 
less than the objects of his political jealousy, ex- | mature and exorbitant honours. 
perienced occasionally the effects of his capricious} This forward attempt to place the sons of Ger- 
disgusts.. One of them was banished to the island | manicus on the steps of the throne, was supposed 
Cynaria for hinting a joke on the Doric accent, j to proceed from the ambition of their mother 
which the emperor had acquired at Rhodes in | Agrippina, who appearing to carry in her high 
his pronunciation of Greek. Another, having | looks and vehement temper the pretensions of the 
found out that the emperor read books every | grand-daughter of Augustus, and the mother of 
morning, out of which he proposed his questions at | future emperors, ever seemed to reproach Tibe- 
night ; and observing the book which the emperor | rius with having usurped, and with continuing, 
had been reading, came so well prepared. to answer | to possess, what was due to herself and to her 
every question, that his trick was suspected. He | children. Sejanus did not neglect to cultivate 
was banished from the emperors company, and | the animosity of either party. He had informa- 
afterwards, by cruel usage, induced to lay violent | tions. conveyed to Agrippina, of a design that 
hands on himself. was hatching at Capree against her life, and ex- 
Were it established that ignominy could have | cited her by these means to give the emperor pro- 
no effect, nor the odious aspect of vice deter man- | voking marks of her caution and distrust, which 
kind from yielding to the vile considerations that | were easily interpreted as the symptoms of a 
lead to the practice of it, there would be no apo- | guilty mind in herself, and hastened the preven- 
logy for molesting the world with many particu- | tions on his part, which he thought proper to 
employ against her. _ 
As mutual provocations had passed between 
Agrippina and the emperor before his departure 


lars, either of the past or subsequent part of this 
detestable reign. But it is likely that ingenuous 
minds may arrive at what is just, by desiring te 
shun what is odious and vile, no less than by ad- 
miring and aiming at what is noble and worthy. 
Certain follies and vices sometimes gain strength 
from the fashion and the example of persons in 
high station. But it is established by the feel- 
ings of mankind through every age, that malice, 
jealousy, and cruelty, can receive no lustre even 
from the purple and the throne of Cesar, and 
Tiberius himself, considered as the monument 
of an infamy to be shunned, may be a teacher of 
humanity and of wisdom not inferior to Trajan 
or Aurelius. 

This tyrant, though now withdrawn from the 
resentment of those he injured, did not suffer his 
vigilant jealousy to sleep over the rumours and 
reports of his informers and spies, but rather, 
with a more open and unguarded severity, watch- 
ed over crimes which had no existence but in his: 
own imagination, or in his remembrance of the 
countenance and aspect of the persons he disliked. 
In his present retreat, he seemed to multiply the 
objects of his hatred, in proportion as he himself 
was secure; and in order to compensate the dis- 
tance to which he was removed, employed a pro- 
portional speed and decision to surprise, and to 
prevent those who were suspected of any designs 
against him. From Caprex, his mandates, for 
the most part, were carried to the senate, and to 
the military officers at Rome, nct as complaints 
against the supposed offender, or as instructions 
to the magistrate to make trial or inquiry into 
the guilt of the accused, but as warrants for their 
immediate execution. 

Agrippina and her sons, with their adherents, 
and those of Germanicus, were principal objects 
of the present emperor’s animosity and cruel dis- 
like. This family being high in the favour of the 


1 Tacit. Annal. lib. iv. ¢. 58, 
2 Sueton. in Tiber. c. 70 


Crap. VI.) 


from Rome, and as she was become a principal 
object of his dislike, it is extremely probable that 
he had then resolved upon the ruin of her family, 
at least upon her own; and that he took his sta- 
tion at Capree for the more safe execution of an 
unpopular act, which might occasion some tumult 
in the city, or even a defection of the army. He 
proceeded, however, by degrees, in the execution 
of his purpose, and before his departure from 
Rome, had made a trial of his power against 
some of her relations and friends. Under this 
description, he had ordered the execution of Sosia 
Galla and Claudia Pulchra, two women of noble 
birth, who were related to her by blood, and much 
in her confidence. 

Upon occasion of the last of these executions, 
Agrippina, who considered herself as aimed at in 
this cruel action, ventured, with a vehemence and 
impetuosity which made part of her character, to 
reproach the emperor with his tyranny, accosting 
him to this purpose, as he was engaged in his de- 
votions at the shrine of Augustus; “It ill becomes 
a person,” she said, ‘‘ who affects to worship the 
parent, to practise the ruin of his offspring. The 
spirit of him you adore, is not transferred into the 
inanimate marble which you worship, but into 
his living posterity whom you oppress, and whom 
you cause to live in continual mourning, and in 
sorrow. Pulchra must perish now for the same 
reason that was formerly fatal to Sosia, for her 


being the unhappy relation and friend of those. 
Tiberius replied 


you are deternrined to ruin.” 
in a Greek quotation, implying that she was hurt, 
because she was not allowed to reign;} and in 
these words, contrary to his usual dissimulation, 
betrayed the rancour of his mind.4 

After the retreat of Tiberius to Caprex, Se- 
janus, to gratify the passions of his master, and 
to make way for his own ambition, continued 
his practices against the family of Germanicus. 
He had spies placed about them, and received 
frequent informations, in writing, of what passed 
in their company. He had an account of all 
the actions and words of Nero, the eldest of the 
two sons, from Julia Drusilfa, the wife of this 
young man, who was engaged by her mother 
Livilla to betray her husband. He took measures 
to provoke both the brothers to angry and un- 
guarded expressions, and had these effects of 
his own provocations carefully reported to the 
emperor. He had emissaries, who insinuatin 
themselves into the favour and confidence of 
these young men, urged them to rash and despe- 
rate resolutions; such as that of calling upon 
the armies in Germany to support their rights, 
of taking refuge at the shrine of Augustus, and 
of appealing to the people. When these emis- 
saries could not actually engage the persons 
against whom they were employed in the crimes 
they suggested, they had instructions to accuse 
them to the emperor of having deliberated on 
such dangerous projects. 

While the sons of Agrippina were thus sur- 
rounded with snares, their most faithful retainers 
and friends were exposed to the same dangers, 
or actually fell, under the hands of the execu- 
tioner. Among these, Titius Sabinus had been 
distinguished by his affection to Germanicus, 
and remained still attached to his family. He 


——_ 


R Ideo lædi, quia non regnaret. 
4 Tacit. Annal lib. iv. c. 52. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


467 


j had been, upon this account, an object of tke 
emperor’s aversion, and likely to suffer under 
the first plausible pretence that could be found 
against him. Being selected, soon after the re- 
treat of Tiberius, by the sagacity of those who 


wished to pay their court, as a proper object on 
whom to display their zeal, he was attacked at 


once by four persons of senatorian rank, Latinius 


Latiaris, Porcius Cato, Politius Rufus, and M. 
Oppius, all of them already promoted to the dig- 
nity of pretor, and now aspiring to that of 
consul. T'hey agreed to pay their court, by some 
notable service, to the prince and his favourite. 
The first undertook, by insinuating himself into 
the confidence of Sabinus, to betray him into 
some criminal action or expression. The other 
three were to be placed within hearing of what 
should pass, in order to be cited as witnesses. 

A snare so artfully laid could scarcely be 
avoided. The injured, wherever they think 
themselves safe, are apt to complain: and Sa- 
binus, finding that his faithful attachment to the 
family of his late friend was warmly applauded 
by Latiaris, unwarily joined with the traitor in 
lamenting the iniquity of the times, and the 
cruelty of Sejanus and Tiberius. Conversations 
to this purpose being repeated at some supposed 
confidential interviews ; but in the hearing of the 
other three, who were posted as witnesses, it 
soon appeared, that there was sufficient matter 
against Sabinus; and the information was con- 
veyed to the emperor. 

The informers, as a specimen both of their 
zeal and of their ability, gave a particular account 
of their conduct in bringing the treasonable 
thoughts of Sabinus to light. The information 
was applauded by the emperor, transmitted to 
the senate, and by them considered as a warrant 
for the immediate death of the accused. Being 
found by the officers, commissioned to seize him, 
paying his devotion at some public altar, he was 
dragged from thence to iminediate execution. 
The particulars of the detection were published, 
in order to show with what zeal the empercr 
was served, and in order to restrain the disaf- 
fected, by a mutual distrust of each other, from 
entering into any such dangerous counsels. 

The tragical death of Sabinus, a person ge- 
nerally loved and respected; his being dragged 
by the executioner through the streets at noon- 
day in sight of the people, spread a general con- 
sternation in the city. All orders of men, under 
their first impressions, deserted the public places ; 
but presently recollecting that their flight might 
be imputed to a participation of guilt, or at least 
to some degree of sympathy with the person who 
suffered, they immediately returned to the places 
of public resort, and aflected their usual ease 
and tranquillity. But from thenceforward, for 
some time, it was observed, that a niclancholy 
silence took place, even in the most secret con- 
versations of relations and intimate companions, 
who, from this example, had learned to distrust 
each other. 

Tiberius, upon receiving the report of Sa- 
binus’s execution, thanked the senate for the 


justice they had done on this enemy of the com- 


roonwealth, and mentioned a danger to which 
his person was stil! exposed from other enemies, 
more formidable than those they had already de- 
stroyed. In this ominous insinuation, he was 


| supposed to point at Agrippina and her sons. 


468 


Asinius Gallus ventured to call for an explana- 
tion, by moving the senate to address the emperor, 
that he would be graciously pleased to make 
known the object of his apprehensions, and that 
he would accept of their services in the defence 
of his person. 

Gallus had married Vipsania, from whom Ti- 
berius was separated, when his marriage with 
Julia was determined. By this alliance, he be- 
came the relatien of Agrippina;! and, what was 
still more dangerous, had presumed to succeed 
the emperor himself in a connexion, of which 
he still was envious and jealous. This circum- 
stance rendered him, to the dark and vindictive 
mind of Tiberius, an object of deliberate malace. 
When his motion to address the emperor for an 
explanation of his fears was reported at court, it 
was considered as a saucy attempt to penetrate 
the secrets of government, as a contempt of 
authority, and a dangerous attack upon the ma- 
jesty of the prince. 

Tiberius would have seized this opportunity 
to execute his revenge against Gallus, if he had 
not been diverted from it by Sejanus himself, 
who wished rather to keep lis mind intent on 
the destruction of Agrippina and her two eldest 
sons, who were equally objects of jealousy to the 
minister as to the emperor. 

Such were the affairs which succeeded in the 
state, to the great political questions that formerly 
used to divide the senate and the people; and as 
the event of these affairs turned upon the caprice 
of individuals, they were very much affected by 
any alterations which happened at court. It 
being now the fourth year after the retreat of 
the emperor to Capreæ, a considerable change 
took place in the death of Livia Augusta, who, 
by her first marriage, was the mother of Tibe- 
rius, and by her second, the widow of Augustus, 
by whom she had no children. She appears to 
have been a woman of consummate address. Ac- 
cording to Tacitus, a fond and partial mother, 
an obsequious wife, and uuiting, in her own 
character, the abilities of her husband, with the 
duplicity of her son. Being asked, by what arts 
she had kept her place so long in the confidence 
of Augustus? “By the most scrupulous virtue,” 
she said; “by implicit obedience; by not med- 
dling in affairs of state; by overlooking his in- 
trigues with other women.”2 

‘The authority of Livia had been a consider- 
able restraint on the temper of her son; and 
being exerted to thwart him on some occasions, 
had contributed to the resolution he took of re- 
tiring from Rome, Both the mother and the 
son had their jealousies and their resentments; 
but as they seldom fixed on the same objects, 
such as were persecuted by the one, sometimes 
found a refuge with the other. ‘They concurred 
in their aversion to Agrippina, but might have 
been divided in their inc:inations towards her 
children. Livia, tainted with the rancour of a 
stepmother,’ and incited by personal jealousies, 
ever saw in the person of Agrippina an air of 
superiority which seemed to reproach her as the 
wife of Nero, and but an intruder into the family 
of Cesay. With respect to the widow of Ger- 


1 Vipsania was the daughter of Agrippa by a for- 


mer marriage, and consequently the half sister of 
Agrippina. 

2 Dio. Cass. lib. Iviii. c. 2. 

3 Noverecalibus odiis.—Ta aT. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


— 


[Boor VI. 


manicus, therefore, she was probably more im- 
placable even than the emperor; but with respect 
to his children, these being descended of herself. 
1t may be supposed that she could not possibly 
adopt the passions of Sejanus to their prejudice 
nor wish to renfove them, in order to make wa 

for the ambition of a stranger. The death of 


Livia was accordingly to those young men a 


fatal circumstance, and facilitated the execution 
of the designs, which the emperor or his favourite 
had formed against them, Soon after the funeral 
rites were performed, the storm which had been 
long impending over them accordingly broke out. 
A letter from the emperor was presented to the 
senate, accusing Agrippina, and Nero the eldest 
of her sons, not of any plot or conspiracy against 
the state, or of any breach of the public peace, 
but charging the voung man with lewdness, and 
the mother with haughty looks, and a stubborn 
heart. 

This letter was received in the senate with 
surprise, After some interval of consternation 
and silence, a motion was made to proceed in the 
matter to which it referred; but there being no 
specific charge, and no instructions to form a pro- 
secution, it was observed, that the emperor might 
have given way to his displeasure in angry ex- 
pressions, without intending any farther censure 
or judicial severities. Junius Rusticus, who had 
been appointed by Tiberius clerk or secretary cf 
the senate, ventured to advise a delay, in order 
that the emperor might have time to reconsider 
the subject, and to make the senate acquainted 
with his real intentions. 

In the mean time, the purport of this letter 
was rumoured abroad, and the senate was beset 
with multitudes of the people, who, carrying the 
effigies of Agrippina and her son, exclaimed 
that the letter in question must have been forged, 
that it was impossible the emperor could intend 
the destruction of his own family; and, after the 
senate broke up, there continued to be handed 
about in the streets invectives against Sejanus, 
alleged to be the speeches of members in that 
assembly. Š 

When these particulars came to be known at 
Capre, they were represented by Sejanus as an 
insult upon the senate, and as a contempt of the 
emperor’s authority, Libels, he said, were dar- 
ingly published; the people were assembled in 
disorderly tumults, and nothing was wanting to 
complete the rebellion, but arms, and the personal 
presence of those leaders who were already fol- 
lowed in effigy. 

Tiberius accordingly renewed his complaint 
to the senate, reprimanding them for not having 
proceeded on his former letter; but insinuated, 
that he did not aim at the life of Agrippina, nor 
at that of her son. In this, he seemed to require 
a sentence of exile or imprisonment; and the 
members, now as much decided as they had bcen 
lately perplexed and irresolute, were eager to 
distinguish their zeal. After four-and-forty ela- 
borate speeches had been delivered, all tending 
to prove the necessity of immediate severities, it 
was resolved that Agrippina, with the eldest of 
her sons, should be banished; the first into the 
island of Pandateria, the place where her mother, 
the unhappy Julia, had been confined; and the 
other to Pontia, another island on the same coast.‘ 


4 Sueton. in Tiber. c. 33, 34. 


z 


A 


Cnar. VL) 


The younger brothers were overlooked on the 
present occasion. Drusus, the second, being 
persuaded by Sejanus that the removal of his 
elder brother tended to his own advantage, by 
opening his way to the empire, took no part in 
the distresses of his family. He himself, however, 
was soon after put in confinement, and for some 
years kept a prisoner at Rome, in a secret recess 
of the emperor’s palace. 

Tiberius, in some instances, endeavoured to 
compensate the injustice which he practised 
against one set of persons, by acts of munifi- 
cence to others, whom he selected as objects of 
his bounty, or who were of too little consequence 
to incur his jealousy. He seized an opportunity 
of this kind about the time that Agrippina and 
her son experienced his vengeance, by relieving 
numbers who had suffered by a fire which had 
recently consumed some part of the city, and 
others, who had suffered by the fall of a theatre 
erected at Fidenæ; a disaster, by which, accord- 
ing to Tacitus, about fifty thousand persons 
were killed or hurt. Continuing, however, with 
respect to those who incurred lis aversion or his 
distrust, to exercise a cruelty which seemed to 
increase with age, or with the consciousness of 
his own demerit towards mankind, he proceeded 
against Asinius Gallus with singular marks of 
deliberate malice; took measures to prolong the 
sufferings of this favourite victim; wished to 
witness their effects, and to enforce the impres- 
sion of them with peculiar circumstances of 
insult and mockery. For this purpose, he pro- 
cured a deputation from the senate to be sent to 
Capree, and took care that Asinius Gallus should 
be one of the deputies. Upon their arrival, he 
received Gallus in a manner peculiarly gracious, 
adinitted him as a party in all his entertainments, 
and as anordinary guest at his table; but having 
in the mean time sent a complaint of treason 
against him to Rome, and directed that a war- 
rant from the senate should be sent to seize his 
person, he continued his former behaviour, and 
detained him at Caprez, under various pretences 
of kindness, until the warrant of the senate to 
seize him should arrive. He took care to be pre- 
sent when this warrant was executed, affected 
surprise, even pretended to be distressed, and, 
when the prisoner was removed, gave strict 
injunctions fhat no violence should be offered to 
him, nor any sentence passed against bim, until 
he himself should return to Rome. 

In this ambiguous injunction, Gallus was con- 
demned to a lingering state of suspense, and of 
suffering without the knowledge of his crime, or 
of the person by whom he was accused ; a species 
of refinement on cruelty which Tiberius had lately 
adopted, and, which he sometimes expressed. 
Having a petition presented to him, that one of 
his prisoners might be allowed to die: “ I am 
cpa he said, ‘sufficiently reconciled to him for 
that.” 

While Sejanus was considered as the author 
of most of these cruel acts, and was accordingly 
the general object of flattery as well as of terror, he 
was in reality the dupe of his master’s cunning, 
and at this very time was already dvomed to de- 
struction. 

Tiberius either moved by a mere change of 
caprice incident to unhappy men, or warned of 
some danger to his own person, from the height 
and from the views to which he had raised this 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


469 


favourite, had for some time secretly resolved on 
his ruin; but while he revolved this purpose in 
his own mind, and weighed the dangers to 
which he might be exposed in the execution of 
it, he redoubled the usual marks of his favour, 
and in all his despatches, in which he mentioned 
Sejanus to the senate, designed him, “My Se- 
janus, and the partner of my cares and my la- 
bours.” 

The public, as well as Sejanus himself, were 
imposed upon by these appearances. No honour 
was moved for the emperor, in which Sejanus 
was notincluded. Their statues still continued 
to be erected together, and were multiplied in 
every street; and when the emperor signified his 
pleasure that Sejanus should be named to the 
consulate, together with himself, the senate re- 
plied, by an act, vesting the prince and his fa- 
vourite with this dignity for five years. 

Hitherto, it is probable that Tiberius, well 
aware of the vigilance and penetration of his fa- 
vourite, and of the numerous spies he had em- 
ployed, had not confided his secret to any person 
whatever, and wished to remove him from his 
person, before he ventured to proceed any farther 
in his design. For this purpose he had chosen 
him for his own colleague in the consulate of the 
ensuing year; and, under pretence of deicgating 
tohim the whole functions of an office, which 
the emperor himself could not attend, he sent 
him to Rome. 

For some time after the arrival of Sejanus in 
the city, the usual executions for treason were 
continued, and persons who had incurred the 
suspicion either of the prince or his minister, 
porshe with their wives, and their children. 
Many of them, as usual, to prevent the effects of 
a formal sentence, laid violent hands on them- 
selves, and some exbibited this horrid spectacle 
even at the bar of the senate.’ 

While Sejanus thus seemed to wield the im- 
perial power, and to hold the lives of the people 
at his mercy, he was attended by multitudes, who 
pressed to his gate in such numbers, that the 
court of his palace could scarcely receive them. 
He slighted the attentions that were paid to him; 
but with unwearied jealousy remarked every ap- 
pearance of neglect, and doomed to destruction 
persons who gave any signs of impatience, under 
the state of servility and debasement to which 
they were reduced. 

In the mean time, Tiberius proceeded with 
great circumspection. He had accepted of the 
consulate merely to flatter his minister, and to 
increase his security, in being placed as the col- 
league of the emperor in that station. Being to 
destroy him, it was necessary that some one 
should be present, on whom the dignity ef con- 
sul might devolve. For this reason, he divested 
himself of the office, and substituted in his own 
place C. Memmius Regulus, who on the first of 
May, was admitted as the colleague of Sejanus. 
From thenceforward, the conduct of the emperor 
threw the favourite himself and the public in ge- 
neral, into great perplexity. In some of his letters 
to the senate, he spoke of his health as declining, 
and of himself as a dying person. In his next, 
he announced his recovery, and a design of 
speedily visiting the metropolis. He commended 
Sejanus in one letter, he censured him in another 


5 Dio. Cass. lib. Iviii c. 4. - 


479 


sometimes favoured none but his partizans and 
adherents, at other times affected to prefer his 
rivals. It is possible that in these inconsistencies, 
he himself actually wavered between hatred and 
fear; and apprehending the great intluence of 
Sejanus over the pretorian guards, hesitated in 
the execution of his purpose. It is likewise ex- 
tremely agreeable to his character, to suppose that 
he meant, by holding forth some signs of dis- 
pleasure, to urge the object of it to some act of 
indiscretion or insolence, which could be made 
the foundation of a plausible charge against him, 
and that he had spies on his conduct to lay hold 
of any pretence he should furnish for an im- 
peachment; but that, fearing to drive him to 
some dangerous act of despair, he retracted in 
one message the provocation he had given in a 
former. 

While Sejanus appeared, from some circum- 
stances in the conduct of the emperor towards 
him, to be out of favour, he was suddenly raised 
to the dignity of pontiff, together with Caius 
Cesar Caligula; and thinking this a favourable 
opportunity to recover his place about the per- 
son of his master, he desired leave to offer his 
thanks at Capree ; but was told that he might 
spare himself the trouble, for that the emperor 
was soon to be at Rome. 

To try the effect of a fresh mortification on 
the temper of this devoted favourite, Caius Cesar 
Caligula was declared successor in the empire. 
The popularity of the family of Germanicus, 
made this declaration be received with universal 
joy; and heing joined to other indications, that 
Sejanus no longer had tlie exclusive possession 
of the emperor’s favour, greatly diminished the 
court that was paid to him. 

From this time, it is probalie that Tiberius 
took into his confidence Matt an officer already 
of high rank in the pretorian bands, and whom 
he destined to succeed Sejanus in the command 
ofthat hody. With Macro, he concerted the man- 
ner of removing this dangerous man, and formed 
a plan, which was to be intrusted to his execution. 
Sejanus was to be flattered with new hopes; he 
was to be surprised in the senate, while the 
guards were to be amused with, what was a new 
circumstance in this reign, the distribution of a 
donative from the emperor. 

In proceeding to execute this design, in a 
manner which the emperor chose from his love 
of duplicity, or which, from his fear of the troops 
that were under the command of Sejanus, he 
thought himself obliged to contrive with so much 
circumspection, he intimated to the senate, and 
to Sejanus himself, that he speedily meant to 
vest him with the character of tribune, a dignity 
which rendered the person sacred, and which 
the Cesars had in some measure appropriated 
to themselves. While this intimation was sup- 
posed to lull Sejanus in perfect security, Macro 
was despatched to Rome, and took care to arrive 
at an hour, when the senate had been, by order 
of the emperor, appointed to assemble. He met 
vith Sejanus, just as he had posted his guard, 
and was entering at the door of the senate-house ; 
and being asked, what commands he had from 
the emperor, and what letters for himself? an- 
ewered, that he had brought his appointment to 
the tribunitian power, and was to lay it before the 
senate, 

Sejanus took his place, with the usual attend- | 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Book Vi. 


ance of persons who had accompanied him from 
his own house, and had the meinbers of the se- 
nate still crowding around him as usual, when 
Macro presented the mandate of the emperor, 
and retired. 

_ This paper was artfully drawn up, to gain 
time in the reading, and to keep all parties in 
suspense, while Macro should take his measures 
tosecure the guards. In the preample, the name 
of Sejanus was not at all mentioned ; in the sub- 
sequent parts of the paper, he was sometimes ex- 
tolled, and sometimes censured. Other affairs 
were intermixed with this, and the suspense 
which so long and so strange a performance oc- 
casioned in the minds of those who were present, 
amounted to some degree of stupefaction. But 
it concluded at last with a peremptory charge 
of treason against Sejanus; and the crowd of 
attendants instantly withdrew from the consul’s 
chair on which he was seated. His colleague 
in office, Regulus, called upon him by name to 
stand up; but so much was he distracted, and so 
little accustomed to this tone of voice, that upon 
a second call, he started from his seat, and asked, 
if the words were addressed to him? Surprise 
had qualified him to take any vigorous resolution; 
and when he began to recollect himself, the pre- 
cautions which had been taken by his enemies, 
rendered all his endeavours too late. 

Macro, as soon as he had delivered the empe- 
ror’s letter to be read in the senate, went to the 
guard which was posted at the doors, informed 
them that he brought a donative from the empe- 
ror, which they were then to share with their fel- 
low-soldiers in the barracks ; that for this purpose, 
they were immediately to be relieved by a party 
of the city watch. This being done, he ied them 
to the citadel, or what was called the camp of 
the pretorian bands,! distributed the emperor’s 
bounty, and at the same time taxed their com- 
mander with ingratitude to so kind a master; 
intimated his removal, produced his own commis- 
sion to succeed in that important station, and by 
his authority, as well as by these precautions, 
prevented any disturbance among that formidable 
body of men. 

Sejanus being deserted in the senate by those 
who had attended him into the house, and who 
a few moments before pressed to be first in his 
observation, was taken Into custody of the party 
which had relieved his own guard, and was 
treated as a person accused of the highest crimes, 
On the first motion for a commitment, he was 
ordered to prison, and persons of every descrip- 
tion began to give unfeigned or affected demon- 
strations of joy. From many who were present, 
the fear that was lately expressed in adulation 
and courtship, now burst forth in reproaches 
and insults. .In others, who were more nearly 
connected with the prisoner, or more likely to 
be involved in his fate, the terror with which 
they were seized, was disguised under the affec- 
tation of joy. The populace as he passed through 
the stréets, took their parts as usual in the storm 
which burst on this unfortunate man, and, that 
he might not have the consolation of passing un- 
seen, tore away the lappet of his gown, with 
which he endeavoured to cover his face. 

On the same day, the senate met again in a 
temple contiguous to the prison in which Se- 
i en EN er ooo 

1 Castrum Prætorium. 


Cuar. V1.] 


janus was confined, and, without any specific 
charge or evidence of guilt, gave sentence of 
death against him, whick was accordingly ex- 
ecuted, The dead body, as usual in the case of 
treason, being made fast on a hook, was dragged 
through the streets, and cast into the river, where 
it was thrown up, or continued afloat during some 
days, under the continual insults of a multitude 
of people. 

It is not easy to determine how far this minis- 
ter was accountable for a tyranny, which occa- 
sioned so vehement and so general a resentment. 
His crimes were undoubtedly great, and the envy 
of his fortune was not to be assuaged by com- 
mon sufferings. But as human nature is liable 
to error in the manner of- punishing crimes, as 
well as inthe commission of them, the rage which 
now animated the populace against Sejanus, 
mixed with a servile intention to pay their court 
to the emperor, led to an action as criminal and 
more odious than any of which he himself had 
been accused or suspected. The children of 
this unhappy man, a boy and a girl, though too 
young to partake in his guilt, or to furnish any 
subject of distrust or of jealousy to his eneinies, 
were included in the same fate with the father ; 
the girl with so much innocence, that she often 
asked the persons by whom she was seized, what 
she had done? assured them, with an infantine 
simplicity, that she never would do it again; 
begged that they would not carry her to prison ; 
said that she never was obstinate, and that a few 
strokes of the rod were enough to correct ler. 

It is subjoined to this piteous detail, that, in 
compliance with a vile superstition, which the 
consideration of innocence could not restrain, 
she was ordered to be ravished previous to her 
execution, because it was ominous of misfortune 
to inflict the punishment of death on a virgin.? 
The bodies of these innocents, in the same man- 
ner with that of their father, were dragged 
through the streets, and cast into the river. 

It is difficult to account, from any principles of 
human nature, for acts of such amazing depravity. 
Tyrants seldom exceed the bounds of resentment, 
jealousy, or fear; but the vile tools that are pro- 
cured by servility to execute their purpose, in 
order to ingratiate themselves, often outrun, in 
their affectation of zeal, what tyranny or cow- 
ardice itself could not suggest or perpetrate. 

Apicata, the widow of Sejanus, and the mo- 
ther of these unhappy children, having first dis- 
closed the conspiracy, by which Drusus, the son 
of ‘Tiberius, had been poisoned, laid violent hands 
on herself, and, by the discovery she inade, soon 
after brought on the ruin of the widow Livilla, 
with that of the other accomplices in that daring 
crime. 

It was reported, that the anxiety of Tiberius, 
whether real or affected, was such, during the 
dependence of his design on Sejanus, that he in- 
structed Macro, in case of any resistance from 
the guards, to bring forth Drusus, the son of 
Germanicus, then a prisouer in the palace, to 
assemble the citizens against them; that he had 
prepared shipping at Capree to wait himself, in 
case of necessity, to some of the military stations 
on the frontier; that he had formed a chain of 
posts from Rome to the nearest promontory of 
Campania, with orders to light fires, and to make 


2 Dio Cass. lib. lviii. c. 11. Tacit. Annal.lib v.c. 5. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


471 


other concerted signals, in case it should be ne- 
cessary for him to consult his safety by flight. In 
his letter to the senate, in order to make a suitable 
impression of the danger to which he wished the 
public to believe he was exposed from the designs 
of Sejanus, he concluded, with expressing his 
wishes to be again at Rome; but desired that the 
consul, who remained at the head of the com- 
monwealth, might come forth with the powers 
of the republic to conduct him in safety. His 
design however having succeeded to his wishes, 
Drusus was still retained a prisoner in the palace, 
and the consul being arrived in Campania, with 
his lictors, to give the emperor a safe conduct to 
Rome, was every where considered as an object 
of ridicule. 

After the execution of Sejanus, the city con- 
tinued in a ferment during many days. The 
people having been disposed, for some time, to 
impute to the minister the system of tyranny 
which had been lately pursued, rejoiced in his 
fall, applauded the severities which were executed 
on the partners of his guilt, and willingly pointed 
out, as accomplices in his crimes, his relations 
and friends, and all who had ever moved for any 
of the extravagant honours that were lately be- 
stowed upon himself; but, as in imputing the 
guilt of many cruel measures to Sejanus, they 
were too favourable to the emperor, so they pro- 
bably over-rated the influence of the minister, 
who was in fact more the dupe, than the director, 
of his master’s designs. 

As it soon after appeared, that the cruel 
jealousies of this reign did not terminate with the 
death of the favourite, tle people, as usual, ran to 
the opposite extreme, considered him as a mere 
instrument of his master’s tyranny, as a person 
employed while his services were convenient, but 
in the end betrayed with a degree of perfidy, 
which rendered the cruelty of the tyrant, in that 
case, more odious than even when it was prac- 
tised against the most innocent subjects.4 So 
prone are mankind, in particular instances, to 
suspect the falsehood, or to exaggerate the wick- 
edness of those, who, by general duplicity and 
malice, have incurred their detestation. 

The death of Sejanus was so far from intro- 
ducing any mitigation of the former tyranny, 
that it rather furnished a new set of pretences, 
under which to exert its force. Intimacy with 
the fallen minister, or a supposed participation of 
his guilt, involved greater numbers, than had 
been formerly questioned on account of any other 
species of treason. Persons of every sex and of 
every condition, were cast indiscriminately into 
the same prisons ; and the time of the senate was 
divided between the ordering of executions, and 
the appointment of honours, which were decreed 
tothe prince for his vigilance in this matter. ‘The 
title of father of liis country was again offered to 
lim; additional rejoicings were devised for the 
anniversary of his birth; a general thanksgiving 
was appointed to tle gods; and a new statue 
was to be erected to liberty. All persons were 
forbidden to wear mourning for Sejanus; the 
anniversary of his death was to be kept as a fes- 
tival, or celebrated with public entertainments 
aud sports; and it was resolved in the senate, 
that the extravagant lionours so profusely iavish- 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. Iviii. c. 13. 
4 Sueton. in Tiber. c. 55. 


472 


ed on that minister, should not be repeated in the 
case of any subject whatever. 

These decrees, Tiberius, so far as they were 
intended to confer honours on himself, rejected 
with disdain, and even refused to see the deputies 
who were separately sent from the senate, frora 
the equestrian order, and from the people, to con- 
gratulate him on this occasion. He despised the 
givers too much to be flattered with the gift, and 
was aware of their duplicity in pretending to 
offer him praise. Under this impression, at one 
of the last times he had attended the senate in 
person, he was observed to leave the assembly 
with scorn. “ What a collection,” he said, “of 
willing slaves.”! There is, it seems, a degree of 
good nature as well as of weakness, in wishing 
to be flattered. This prince was equally ex- 
empted from both. 

The senate, however, the more they were 
spurned, became the more sensible of their own 
degradation, and only endeavoured to vary the 
mode of their flattery. As Tiberius ever talked 
of his approaching return to Rome, and of his in- 
tended appearance in the senate, they passed a 
decree, that twenty of their own number, to be 
named by the emperor himself, should be armed 
with swords, and should have charge of his safety 
as often as lie took his seat in their meetings. 
When this resolution was intimated to him, he 
returned thanks for their zeal, and with soine de- 
rision desired to know, whether this senatorial 
guard should be young men or old men? whe- 
ther they should continue for life, or be taken in 
rotation? and whether they should arm only at 
the door of the senate-house, or pass in arms 
through the streets ?2 and concluded with saying, 
that, if his life was worth preserving, he should 
think himself sufficiently safe, when attended’ by 
Macro and some tribunes of his guards, whom 
he would take the liberty to bring into the senate. 

This reference to the guards had the effect of 
an admonition, and dréw from the senate an at- 
tempt to pay their court likewise to this formidable 
body of men. Bounties in money and honorary 
distinctions were decreed to them; such as, that 
the pretorian soldier, at the expiration of the 
time for which he enlisted, should be allowed a 
place at the theatre on the bench of the eques- 
trian order. In this, however, the compliment 
was not more successful than it had been in other 
instances, It was even resented by the emperor 
as an attempt to share the affection of the troops 
with himself. Junius Gallio, who had made the 
motion, was ordered intoexile, and afterwards com- 
mitted to prison in the city. And the senate, as 
a last effort to please this froward prince, seeing 
that the project to arin a part of their own num- 
ber in his defence was not acceptable, resolved, 
that every member, in entering the house, should 
be searched for concealed weapons, as a precau- 
tion for the safety of a person who probably never 
meant to intrust himself in their hands. 

In the midst of these servilities, the emperor 
met with some instances of a daring petulance, 
and with some even of a noble freedom, which 
he had the discretion to overlook, or to treat with 
affected respect. ‘The defects of his person, he 
being bald, foul-faced, and bent with age, were 
exhibited by actors on the stage; and the mon- 


J Dio. Cass. lib. Iviii. c. 13. 
2 Tacit. Annal. lib. vi. c. 2. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boox VI. 


ster, so represented, it was said, practised in 
secret the most detestuble vices; alluding to the 
manner in which the emperor passed his time at 
Capreæ. But with respect to such buffvoneries, 
he had the discernment to know, that a serious 
attempt to punish the authors, would only tend 
to confirm the application, and to increase its 
effects, 

Among the numbers that were questioned as 
partners in the guilt of the late minister, and of 
whom many perished by their own hands, or by 
that of the executioner, Marcus Terentius, a 
Roman knight, had the courage to acknowledge 
his guilt, and pleaded his cause in a manner that 
suspended the proceedings of the senate against 
him.’ “It were safer, perhaps, for me,” he said, 
“to deny, than to confess, my connexion with 
Sejanus. But whatever may be the event, I 
must own that I attached myself to that minister; 
that I desired to be reckoned among his friends, 
and was proud of this title. In him I saw the 
first officer of the army, the first minister of the 
state, and the colleague of Cæsar; a powerful 
patron, and an irresistible: enemy; one whose 
favour was preferment and honour, whose dis- 
pleasure was ruin and disgrace. It was not for 
me to penetrate the councils of iny prince, nor to 
decide on the reason of his conduct. It was my 
duty to honour whom he honoured ; and in this, 
as well as in every thing else, to acquit myself 
as a faithful subject, by a perfect compliance 
with my sovereign’s will. Please to recollect the 
period of this minister’s favour, as well as of his 
disgrace. My conduct in both, and my defence, 
is the same with those of many others. We 
adhered to him, while the sovereign commanded 
us to do so; we left him the moment he was sup- 
posed to be the enemy of our prince.” : Upon 
this defence, the absurdity of punishing in others 
an error of which the emperor himself had set 
the example, suspended, for a moment, the rage 
of prosecution ; and the prisoner, with consent 
of ‘Tiberius, was acquitted. 

An officer, named Lentulus Gentulicus, then 
at the head of the legions on the Upper Rhine, 
being some time afterwards accused as an ac- 
complice with Sejanus, had the boldness to write, 
that his connexion with that minister was pointed 
out to him by the emperor himself; that the 
mistake was common to both, and that what was 
deemed innocent in one person, ought not to be 
imputed as a crime to another. “ Ihave hitherto,” 
he said, “been faithful in the discharge of my 
trust, and mean to continue so; but the first at- 
tempt to supersede me, | shall consider as a 
warning tv defend myself. Matters, however, 
may remain in quiet; I am willing to acknow- 
ledge the emperor so long as | remain unmo- 
lested.” Tiberius, now far advanced in years, 
governing by his reputation, and by the infiuence 
of forins established in the reign of his prede- 
cessor and his own, did not choose to risk his 
authority against a person, who, being at the 
head of an army, had the cuurage to hold such 
language; and affected, from this time forward, 
to treat Gentulicus with particular marks of 
favour and respect.4 

Others were imprisoned, and carried to exeeu- 
tion in troops and companies; and the emperor 


3 Dio. Cass. lib. Iviii. c. 18. 
4 Tacit. Annal. lib. vi. c. 30 


Cnap. VL] 


at last, as if tired with the pursuit of offenders 
in detail, or in separate divisions, ordered the 
jails to be cleared by a general execution of all 
persons confined as accomplices in the treason of 
Sejanus. In consequence of this order, numbers 
of dead bodies of every sex, age, and condition, 
were cast forth into the streets, and lying scat- 
tered about, or collected in heaps, until they 
began to corrupt, were thrown into the river. 

Mystery and concealment being the favourite 
arts of Tiberius, as often as he believed himself 
to he observed, he becaine jealous of every pry- 
ing look, and detested such persons as seemed 
to be qualified to distinguish truth from appear- 
ances. At one time he received informers as 
the most acceptable members of his court; at 
other times, he appeared to detest them as per- 
sons who had detected liis vices, and were has- 
tening to make them known to the world. Dur- 
ing the prosecution of his design against Sejanus, 
he encouraged his spies with additional rewards, 
and even with public honours, But after he had 
assuaged his passion in the blood of so many 
victims, he turned his disgust and aversion 
against the instruments of his cruelties, and 
ordered the city to be cleared of informers by a 
general slaughter. 

In one of his letters to the senate, under the 
effects of disgust and aversion to measures which 
he had pursued for his own safety, but which 
he found to involve him in growing danger and 
ea he betrayed the distraction aud anguish of 

iş mind. “ May I perish,” he said, “under 
evils still worse than those [ endure, if I know 
what to write, or what I should not write.” 
These were probably the boils, ulcers, and sores, 
on the body of Tiberius, to which Julian alludes® 
in presenting him among his Cesars. 

In the memoirs which this emperor kept of the 
transactions of his reign, he stated the disgrace 
and execution of Sejanus, as a punishment in- 
flicted on him for his cruelties to the family of 
Germanicus; and yet these cruelties, which 
were afterwards carried to much greater heights 
by the emperor himself, had been only begun 
under the influence of that ininister. 

Agrippina, with two of her sons, Nero and 
Drusus, had, during the administration of Se- 
Janus, been taken into custody, or banished to 
some of the islands contiguous to the coast of 
Italy; but all of them perished after the death 
of Sejanus, either by the executioner, or by their 
own hands, urged to despair by the indignities 
they were made to suffer. 

The mother perished in one or other of these 
ways in the island Pandateria, the place of her 
exile ; and the eldest of her two sons was starved 
to death in one of the small islands called Pontia, 
to which he was confined. 

The second son perished in the same manner, 
some time afterwards, in a prison to which he 
had been committed inthe palace. A diary had 
been kept of all the expressions of impatience 
which, under this confinement, had dropt from 
him during some years; and the reproaches 
which were extorted frum him, by his sufferings, 
were stated as the crimes for which he suffered. 

A third son of Germanicus and Agrippina, 
Caius, better known by the name of Caligula, 


5 Tacit Annal. lib. vi. c. 19. 
6 Vid. Cæsars of Julian. 

Cal 

ə 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


473 


et remained, to convince the Roman people, 
that the fond expectations which are formed of 
princes who die prematurely, are not always well 
founded. This young man, whether recommend- 
ed to Tiberius by an early sympathy of their 
characters, or merely overlooked by him on ac- 
count of his youth, not only escaped the perse- 
cutions in which his family was involved, but 
was at last embraced by the emperor as a support 
to his age; and making a part of his court at 
Capree, next to Macro, enjoyed the second 
place in his favour. 

The emperor had a grandson by birth of the 
name of Tiberius; but Caius, who was his 
grandson by adoption, being elder, was pointed 
out by this circumstance of seniority, and by the 
favour which the people still bore to the family 
of Germanicus, as heir apparent to the empire. 

Caius was encouraged by the grandfather, to 
whom falsehood appeared to be a necessary in- 
gredient in every transaction, to expect the suc- 
cession, while it was really intended for Tiberius. 
The first, though not qualified by address to 
extricate himself from any difficulties, acted, 
perhaps from mere insensibility or fear, the part 
which was fittest in his place; and which con- 
tinued to render him sufferable at the court of 
Tiberius. He acquiesced in the fate of his 
mother and of his brothers, without uttering a 
single word of impatience or regret, regulated 
his own behaviour by the emperor’s looks; and 
whether his countenance were glooiny or gay, 
formed his own upon the same model, carrying, 
under the aspect of extreme servility, while a 
subject, that detestable profiigacy which rendered 
him afterwards so cruel a tyrant, and which 
gave occasion to the famous saying, “ That his 
accession to the empire spoilt a good slave to 
make a detestable master,’ 

The accounts which are given of the latter 
part of the reign of Tiberius, have more the ap 
pearance of invective than of history, Even 
this hateful monster, it is said, was addicted to 
pleasure; but of so vile a kind, as to excite de- 
testation and loathing, more than to increase the 
indignation which 1s felt at his cruelties and 
other criines. His procurers had authority to 
employ seduction, money, and force; and, in 
their endeavours to supply his caprice, spared 
neither condition nor sex. It is difficult to con- 
ceive, that a world, enlightened by the reason 
and experience of so many ages; that citizens, 
acquainted with the character and the rights 
transmitted to them from their ancestors; that 
military men, yet rivalling the reputation of the 
ancient Romans, and having no interest in the 
horrid use that was made in the capital of the 
imperial and military power which they them- 
selves bestowed and supported; should submit 
to be commanded for so many years by a super- 
annuated monster, retired from the world, and 
supposed to practise every species of private 
abomination, as well as of public oppression. 

In accounting for the patience of the Romans 
under this odious reign, we may observe, that, in 
the sense of a people who still retained the fero- 
city of their ancestors, though possessed of few 
of their good qualities, the cruelties which are 
mentioned had less effect than thev have on our 
feelings. They were practised chiefly against 


7 Tacit. Annal. e. 20. 


» 


474 


persons, who, being of the emperor’s family, or 
raised by himself to be objects of general envy, 
were easily abandoned by the public to his will. 

Senators of distinction at Rome, having no 
protection to expect from the populace, by whom 
they were hated, from the troops who were 
jealous of them, or from their own order, who 
were long since stript of every remnant of real 
ower, were abandoned to the mercy of the tyrant. 

he followers of his own court at Caprea, 
amongst whom the executioner made a principal 
personage, were still more in his power. They 
were commonly executed in presence of the em- 
peror himself, who assisted in the refinements 
of cruelty which were practised against them. 
It was a favourite sport to throw those, whom he 
doomed to destruction, from a precipice into the 
sea, where they were received by a party from the 
galleys, who, with buat-hooks and oars, despatch- 
ed such as were otherwise likely to escape. 

After such an account of the character of this 
emperor, it is painful, in accounting for the 
success of his government, to acknowledge that 
he was a man of considcrable ability ; and that. 
while he indulged his passions in the capital, or 
at his own court, yet in the provinces, where the 
consequences of an error might have been fatal 
or dangerous to his power, he held the reins 
with a steady and a well-directed hand. Having 
a of the empire by means of the army, 

e maintained his authority over this order of 
men by a well-placed application of discipline ; 
not by any extraordinary indulgence, or bounty, 
which often corrupt, and render ungovernable, 
those whom they are intended to gain. On this 
subject, it is observed that he never made any 
general donation beside that of doubling the 
legacy which Augustus had bequeathed to the 
troops ; and no particular one besides those which 
he made to the pretorian bands to secure their 
acquiescence in the fate of Sejanus ; and to the 
legions of the east, asa reward for their not 
having paid, to this favourite, in the height of 
his power, the honours which were done to him 
by all the other armies of the empire.! He pre- 
served his authority in the provinces bya jealous 
inspection of those who were entrusted with the 
administration of his affuirs; and in this was, 
no doubt, greatly assisted by his indifference to 
personal friendships, which, in princes better dis- 
posed than himself, have often the effect of per- 
nicious predilections and partialities. He checked 
all attempts at conspiracies, by the impression he 
gave of his vigilance, and by the mutual distrust 
with which he inspired his enemies, making 
their treachery to each other the road to pre- 
ferments, honours, and wealth. 

The ordinary rotation and succession to office 
and command, which Augustus, in continuation 
of the republican forms, had still maintained, 
Tiberius, by a very natural tendency of the 
monarchical spirit, in a great measure, or entirely, 
abolished. Such officers as were successful in 
keeping the peace of their provinces, he generally 
continued for many years, and sometimes for life. 
He avoided, as much as possible, the necessity 
of employing, at the head of armies, nien of 


enterprise, forward arnbition, or even superior | 


capacity. He left the disorders, or troubles, that 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


{Boox VI. 


arose in any distant province, to the effect of 
time, rather than be obliged to employ, in re- 
pressing them, men who were likely to eclipse 
his own glory, or to awaken his jealousy. But 
as such men were likely ill to endure the state 
of obscarity in which they were kept, he soothed 
their discontents, sometimes, by flattering them 
with extraordinary honours. He named them 
for stations of high command; but still under 
various pretences detained them at Rome, where 
they were allowed to appear with the ensigns of 
their public character, but never to enter on the 
possession of its powers. 

To these particulars we may join the advan- 
tages which Tiberius enjoyed by succeeding to 
Augustus, whose long and well-regulated govern- 
ment had left, throughout the empire, habits of 
submission and obedience, which could not be 
shaken by offences committed within the verge 
of the court, or in the capital, and against par- 
ticular descriptions of men, in whom the empire 
at large took little eoncern.. 

The ordinary residence of this emperor, dur- 
ing eleven years in the later period or his reign, 
was in the island of Capree. This he had chosen 
as a place of security against any sudden attempts 
which might be made on his life. He neverthe- 
less paid occasional visits to the continent of 
Italy, and made some stay at his villas situated 
in different parts of the country. In changing 
his abode, he kept the city of Rome in continual 
dread of his approach, sometimes presented him- 
self in the neighbouring villages, and in the 
suburbs, but never entered the gates. At one 
time, he came by water to the gardens of the 
Naumachia, and, feeling himself incommoded by 
the concourse of people, plaved guards to keep 
them at a distance, and soon after withdrew; at 
another time, in the last years of his reign, he 
advanced to the seventh mile-stone, and was in 
the sight of the battlements, but proceeded no 
farther. Being sensible of his decline and ap- 
proaching dissolution, he undertook these jour- 
neys to keep the Romans in awe, and to check 
the hopes they were apt to entertain of an ap- 
proaching deliverance from his tyranny. Fron 
the same motives, he prohibited the resort of the 
people to supposed oracles which he knew to be 
consulted with respect to the prospect of his own 
decease, and forbade all intercourse with astro- 
logers and magicians, a class of men in whose 
skill he himself, though a contemner of the 
established superstition, had much faith. 

On the approach of death, Tiberius, feeling 
his strength rapidly decline, strove to amuse the 
people with another voyage, in which he once 
more pretended an intention to visit Rome; and 
being attended by Caius, by Macro, and by his 
usual retinue of guards and parasites, he crossed 
the bay of Baie, to the head-land of Misenum, 
where he possessed a villa which had formerly 
belonged to Lucullus. At this place one of his 
physicians, under pretence of taking his leave 
for some days, pressed his hand, and took an op- 
portunity to feel his pulse. From this stolen 
observation, it is said, that he ventured to inform 
Caius and Macro, that the emperor could not 
survive many days. 

Tiberius being led by some appearances to 
penetrate their thoughts, or wishing to conceal 


1 In the armies of the west, the effigy of Sejanus the real state of his health, took his place, as 


was carried with the colours er ensigns of the legicn. 


è 


, usual, at table, affected to prolong the entertain- 


Caar. VIL] 


ment, and addressed himself, at parting, with 
some particular words of attention to every guest : 
but after an effort of this sort, being retired to his 
apartment, he fainted away, ‘and lay on his bed 
fordead. The report immediately ran from one 
end of the villa to the other. All the officers of 
the guards in attendance, and ali the members 
and followers of the court, repatred to Caius 
with congratulations on his supposed accession 
to the empire. But while they were thus em- 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. / 


475 


a servant arrived, and, in great consternation, 
announced that the emperor was revived, and 
called for assistance. The company, in a mo- 
ment, was dispersed; and Caius, with extreme 
terror, saw the ruin which threatened him for 
his premature acceptance of the court that was 
paid to him. But Macro retained his presence 
of mind, and put a sudden stop to the feeble 
efforts of returning life in Tiberius, by gathering 
up the coverlet ‘of his bed, so as to stop his 


ployed in paying their addresses to the successor, | breath until he was suffocated. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Succession of Caius to the Empire— The first Appearances of his Reign—Conclusion of the 
History— Observations on the Sequel— Accession of the Flavian Family— Vicissitudes of Cha- 
racter in the Emperors— Sources of Degradation in the Imperial Establishment—Its Preserva- 
tives—Its real and continual, though almost insensible, Decline. 


TIBERIUS died in the seventy-eighth year|ed on a supposed right of seniority, preferring 
of his age, and in the twenty-third year of his| Caiusto the throne of Cæsar. 


reign. By this event the imperial throne, for the 
first time since its establishment, became actually 
vacant. Men were left to form their conjectures 
of what was likely to happen, or, without any 
established rule of succession, to form their judg- 
ment of what was proper to be done on this 
emergency, Every question relating to the suc- 
cession had been prevented at the demise of Aù- 
gustus, by his having associated Tiberius in the 
government, a precaution by which the success- 
or instead of being left to rely on a controvert- 
ible title, was put in actual possession of the 
sovereignty. It is likely that ‘Tiberius would 
have followed this example, if his grandson by 
‘birth, for whom he intended the empire, had 
been of a proper age to assume the government ; 
but this young man was no more than seventeen 
years of age, while Caius, the grandson by adop- 
tion, was already five-and- twenty, had the better 
pretension, and was supported by the favour of 
the Roman people. 

In these circumstances, the dying emperor 
thought it dangerous to declare for his ‘grandson ; : 
but secretly drew up a will in his favour, of 
which he carefully lodged many copies, while he 
made the world believe, that he intended the 
succession for Caius. In this act of duplicity he 
chad concealed his real intentions, even from 
Macro, the commander of the pretorian bands, 
on whom the exccution of his purpose chiefly 
depended; and by these means rendered it en- 
tirely abortive. 

Macro, having been for some time past in ac- 
tual concert pe Caius on the measures that 
were necessary to secure the succession; and 
both being equally surprised to find, at the de- 
mise of Tiberius, a formal conveyance of the 
sovereignty in a different channel, their first in- 
tention was to cancel this deed ; ‘but they soon 
found, that the testator had made so many copies 
of his will, and lodged them so securely, as to 
render their design impracticable. It was deter- 
mined, therefore, : as more advisable, to refer the 
matter to the senate, and to obtain an act, found- 


By such an acknowledgment of right, the 
monarchy gained a new advantage, and “perhaps 
one of the greatest of which it was then suscepti- 
ble, that some rule of inheritance should be fol- 
lowed to prevent the ruinous contests which 
arise from an clective or disputed succession, and 
to give, if possible, together with a permanent 
right of the sovereign to lis high estate, a corres- 
ponding right of every citizen to his rank, to his 
privilege, and to his property. 

By this declaration in favour of Caius, it 
scemed to be admitted, that men were to look for 
a successor to the empire in the person who stood 
foremost, by birth or adoption, in the family of 
Cesar ; and the establishinent of the monarchy 
appeared to be complete. The titles of emperor 
and prinee,? or head of the army and of the se- 
nate, under which Augustus endeavoured to con- 
ceal the extent of his usurpation, caine, in the 
course of his own and the succeeding reign, to 
signify what, among the designations of sove- 
reignty and imperial power, they now actually 
import, and what, through a race of inen, bless- 
ed with virtuous or moderate dispositions, ‘might, 
as in other instances, have passed by hereditary 
succession to a very distant posterity ; but in the 
persons who immediately succeeded to the go- 
vernment, the transmission of this inheritance 
was accompanied with much violence and fre- 
quent interruption. 

Notwithstanding the acknowledgment now 
made in favour of | hereditary right, the example 
ofa formal resignation and resumption of the so- 
vereignty, set “by Augustus, and repeated hy 
Tibcrius, had entailed a kind of farce on the em- 
pire, to be acted, not only at the accession of suc- 
cessive masters, but in the same reign, at every 
period of ten years. At every such period the 
appointment of an emperor was supposed to be 
renewed : the occasion was attended with much 
solemnity, and the celebration of a great festival 
for the entertainment of the people. 


3 The Decennalia. - 


2 Imperator et Princeps. 


176 


Caius, therefore, while he was far from admit- 
ting any doubt of his right to the sovereignty, 
nevertheless, mimicked the caution or artifice 
with which Augustus and Tiberius proceeded to 
assume the reins of government. He repeated 
the same professions of respect and of zeal tor the 
commonwealth, the same expressions of personal 
modesty, the same unwillingness to undertake 
the government, the same reluctant compliance 
with the pressing requests of the senate and peo- 
ple, the same affectation of filial piety to his pre- 
decessor, and of indulgence or candour to those 
who had, in any way, obstructed his own ad- 
vancement. It was become the fashion to affect 
destroying all papers and records, from which 
any one could fear to have matter of accusation 
brought against him; but it was become the 
practice to preserve them with great care. 

While the new emperor passed from Misenum 
to Rome, he was attended on the highways by 
incredible numbers of people, who, animated by 
the affection which they bore to his father Ger- 
manicus, and by the hopes of exchanging a cruel 
and jealous tyrant fora youth of a noble and vir- 
tuous extraction, received him with acclamations 
of joy, calling him their propitious star, the child 
and the nursling of the Roman people, and 
bestowing upon him every other appellation 
of fondness and respect. It is scarcely to be 
doubted, as his mind was then elated with joy, 
for his deliverance from the insidious and cruel 
jealousy of his predecessor, and moved by the 
affection and cordiality with which his succes- 
sion was acknowledged by all orders of men, 
that he must have felt a real, however tempo- 
rary, gleam of good-will and affection of man- 
kind. When offciously told of some offences 
which had been committed against his person or 
his pretensions, he said, ‘That he had done 
nothing to merit the hatred of any one, and 
should be deaf to the whispers of informers or 
spies,” Affecting to follow the impulse of his 
own filial piety, and to be moved by the affec- 
tionate sympathy of the Roman people, he 
hastened to the island of Pandateria, where his 
mother Agrippina had suffered so loug a confine- 
ment under the tyranny of Tiberius, raked up 
the ashes of her funeral pile, embraced her re- 
mains, and ordered them to be carried with great 
ostentation to Rome, Although decency re- 
quired him to observe the forms, and to carry the 
aspect of mourning for his late adoptive father 
and predecessor, he complied with what he knew 
to be the wishes of the Roman people, affecting 
to reverse many orders that were established in 
the administration and policy of the preceding 
reign. 

Here then, if not before, we may date the 
final and irretrievable extinction of the Roman 
republic, not only in the subversion of its own 
institutions, and in the actual substitution of 
different forms, but in the acknowledgment of a 
right which made the succession to imperial 
power hereditary, as well as the extent of it far 
beyond what was consistent with the preroga- 
tives formerly enjoyed by the senate and people 
of Rome. At this termination, therefore, of the 
Roman republic, agreeably to the design of this 
history, the narration must cease or conclude, 
with a very general view of what befel the em- 
pire in the succession of masters, and in the re- 
sult of its own greatness, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


[Boor VI. 


Notwithstanding the favourable appearances 
which presented themselves at the accession of 
Caius, he not having, either in his understanding 
or dispositions, the permanent foundation of any 
good character, his personal vices soon broke out 
in one of the most brutal and sanguinary tyran- 
nies of which there is any example in the history 
of mankind. Having no choice of amusemem 
above that of the lowest people, he soon plunged, 


| together with them, into every species of dissi 


S a $ a A 


pation and debauchery ; remained whole days 
and nights in the theatres and in.the circus, en- 
tertained with the fights of gladiators, the baiting 
of wild beasts, and all the other species of shows, 
of which the Romans, once a warlike people, 
now a corrupted populace, were so immoderately 
fond, 

Ambitious citizens under the republic, and 
even the late emperors, with their court, had oc- 
casionally given their attendance at such enter- 
tainments, more to please the humour of the 
populace than to gratify their own: but this em 
peror himself, in respect to the qualities of his 
mind, was to be ranked with the lowest of the 
vulgar. He considered the circus as the princi- 
pal scene of his glory, and the number of shows 
he could procure as the measure of his greatness. 
That the scenes might not be interrupted, cr the 
spectators be obliged to retire to their meals, he 
fed them in the theatre. He promoted persons 
to office of state, or marked them out for disgrace 
or ruin, according to the ardour or indiflerence 
which they seemed to have for these entertain- 
ments. In the degree of extravagance to which 
he carried this matter, he incurred an immode- 
rate expense; and, besides applying to this pur- 
pose the ordinary revenue of the empire, squan- 
dered, within the year, a saving of about two-and- 
twenty millions sterling, left in the treasury by 
his predecessor. 

In the sequel of these vile misapplications of 
time, the satiety he experienced led him to indulge 
himself in the most scandalous and offensive de- 
bauch. A sense of the public hatred or contempt 
which he incurred, galled him with jealousy 
and disgust; and these passions soon ripened 
into a general enmity to mankind, Every species 
of brutal indulgence, qualified with the name of 
pleasure ; deliberate murders, under the pretence 
of the execution of justice, ordered without any 
formalities of trial, perpetrated in his own pre- 
sence, and attended with expressions of insult 
and scorn from himself, make up the sequel of a 
reign which began with some professions and 
propitious appearances of moderation and regard 
to the opinion of the world. But the degree to 
which human nature itself was disgraced and 
insulted, in these detestable abuses of power, 
hastened an attempt to relieve the empire from 
the dominion of this monster. He fell in about 
three years after he began to reign, in one of 
the passages of his own palace, by the hands 
of Cherea, an officer of his guard, who, with- 
out any intention to supplant or to succeed him 
in the empire, formed a conspiracy against his 
life. 

The senate, for a few hours after this event, 
flattered themselves in the belief that the govern- 
ment had devolved on themselves; and Cherea, 
hy whose hands the tyrant had fallen, fondly 
wished for the restoration of the republic; but the 
pretorian bands thought themselves entitled to 


Cuar. VILJ 


dispose of the empire. Before their officers had 
taken any measures for this purpose, a few strag- 
gling soldiers pervading the courts and recesses 
ofthe palace, seized upon Claudius, the brother 
of Germanicus, and uncle of Caligula, who, as 
a changeling devoid of ordinary understanding, 
had been long neglected or overlooked in the pa- 
lace, This being the person who seemed by his 
relation to the late emperors, to have the best 
claim to the name and succession of the Cesarian 
or Claudian families, they raised him on their 
shoulders, yet trembling with fear, lest he should 
be invajved in the fate of his kinsman Caligula, 
and hastening with their burden to the fortress 
or barrack, were received by their companions 
with shouts and acclamations, which announced 
to the senate and the people that a successor was 
given to the throne of Cesar, 

The inactivity of this new sovereign might 
have furnished the world with at least. an inno- 
cent master, if his want of capacity could have 
been supplied without committing his power into 
hands equally disposed to abuse it with the worst 
of his predecessors. Fit only to be a pageant in 
the ceremonies of a court, or a tool to be employ- 
ed by those who got possession of him, he caine 
at last into the hands of the second Agrippina, 
the daughter of Germanicus, and sister of Cali- 
gula, who, though his niece, became his wife, 
and prevailed upon him to adopt the voung Do- 
mitius Ahenobirbus, her son by a former hus- 
band; and by these means made way for his suc- 
cession to the empire under the appellation of 
Nero. 

This impetuous, severe, and profligate woman, 
equally ardent in the acquisition as in the abuse 
of power, mistook, for parental affection, the 
earnest passion with which she wished to govern 
in the name of her son. Having ability enough, 
however, where she was not misled by her pas- 
sions, to distinguish the proper instruments of 

overnment, she endeavoured to procure for him 
In the tutory of Burhus, who was placed by her 
means at the head of the pretorian bands, and of 
Seneca, who was by her means likewise recalled 
from banishment to his place in the senate, the 
most able or specious direction which the times 
could afford. 

Nero acting for some time what Burhus sug- 
gested, and speaking what Seneca dictated, ap- 

eared to be a prodigy of wisdom and ingenuity. 

ut his own personal disposition, making its 
way in a little time through the mask of sayings 
and of actions which were not his own, gave suf- 
ficient evidence, that the circumstance of having 
been the mere puppet, though actuated by the 
most able and ingenious hands, does not bestow 
ingenuity or ability, and that a direction, how- 
ever wise, received from others without discern- 
ment or knowledge of its value, cannot carry to 
the mind of those who submit to it the character 
of wisdom. 

The name of Nero, after the person who bore 
it had, during a few years in the beginning of 
his reign, been supposed the model of royal and 
philosophic virtue,! has become proverbial for 
caprice, folly, brutality, insolence, and cruelty. 
To the contempt of his subjects he at last joined 


1 The quinquennium Neronis, was a proverbial ex- 
pression for what proinised well, but turned out other- 
wise. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC 


477 


a contempt of that very dignity to which he him- 
self was raised as sovereign of so great an empire. 
Having a talent for music, he became, or believed 
himself to be, a distinguished performer, exhibit- 
ed his skill on the public theatres, and travelled 
through Greece in the character of an artist, to 
receive the applauses of a people supposed to ex- 
cel in discernment and taste. 

The contempt which Nero incurred in quitting 
the character of sovereign for that of musician, 
became more fatal to him than the general de- 
testation which he had formerly excited. A re- 
volt which took place at first in Gaul, was follow- 
ed by a defection of all the armies of the empire, 
and reduced him to the necessity of quitting, 
together with his life, a situation of which he 
proved so unworthy. Next to the fears which 
assailed him on the prospect of death, he was 
most affected, it is said, with surprise, that the 
world could submit to lose the hand of so great 
a performer, 

Such then, in the first period of this monarchy, 
was the progress of a sovereignty erected by the 
Cæsars with so much violence, bloodshed, and 
criminal address, According to our ideas of in- 
heritance, the succession did not once take place 
in the family of the first founder, but was pieced 
out by continual adoptions from the Octavian, 
the Claudian, and, last of all, from the Domitian 
family. 

The reign of Augustus has been generally ap- 
plauded, and may be considered as a model for 
those, who wish to govern with the least possible 
opposition or obstruction to their power. lt may 
serve likewise as a caution to those, who need to 
be told under what disguise the most detestable 
tyranny will sometimes approach mankind. ‘The 
wary design which marked the character of Au- 
gustus, was followed by worse principles in the 
breasts of those who succeeded him; and the do- 
minion he established, merely to subject the em- 
pire to his own power, without any disposition to 
abuse it, became, in the sequel, an instrument of 
the vilest tyranny, and brought upon the public 
stage of the world actors, whom their dispositions 
and characters must otherwise have condemned 
to obscurity, or exposed as a disgrace and a ble- 
mish to human nature. 

The manners of the imperial court, and the 
conduct of succeeding emperors, will scarcely 
gain credit with those who estimate probabilities 
from the standard of modern times. But the 
Romans were capable of much greater extremes 
than we are acquainted with. ‘They retained, 
through all the steps of the revolution which 
they had undergone, their ferocity entire, with- 
out possessing, along with it, any of those better 
qualities, which, under the republic, had directed 
their courage to noble, at least to great and na- 
tional, purposes. 

Augustus had established the military govern- 
ment with great caution, and even affected the 
appearances of a citizen, while he secured all the 
powers of a master. His successors retained in 
public the same familiarity of manners, without 
the same guard against its abuses, and affected 
to be popular in the city and in the camp, with- 
out the circumspection which preserved the first 
emperor from the contagion cf mean and degrad- 
ing examples. The state itself was just emerged 
from democracy, in which the pretensions to 
equality checked the ordinary uses which, under 


478 


monarchies, are made of fortune and superior 
condition. The distinctions of royalty, and with 
these the proprieties of behaviour, in high rank, 
were unknown. An attempt at elegant magni- 
ficence and courtly reserve, which, in established 
monarchies, makes a part of the royal state, and 
a considerable support of its dignitv, were avoid- 
ed in this fallen republic, as more likely to excite 
envy and hatred, than deference or respect. 

The Roman emperors, perhaps, in point of ex- 
pense, both public and private, exceeded every 
other sovereign of the world; but their public 
expenses consisted in the exhibition of shows 
and entertainments, in which they admitted the 
meanest of the people to partake with themselves. 
Their personal expenses consisted not so much 
in the ostentation of elegance or refined pleasure, 
as in a serious attempt to improve sensuality into 
a continual source of enjoyment; and their plea- 
sures consisted, of consequence, in the excesses 
of a brutal and retired debauch. This debauch 
was supported by continual endeavours to excite 
satiated appetite, to prolong its gratifications, and 
to supply the defects of inere animal pleasure, 
with conceits of fancy and efforts of buffoonery 
or low humour. 

The manners of imperial Rome are thus de- 
scribed in the remains of a satire,! as elegant in 
the style, as it is gross and disgusting in the mat- 
ter, and which we may suppose to be just in the 
general representation, whatever we may think of 
its application to any of the princes whose names 
and stwcession have been mentioned.? 

Although it would be absurd to imagine such 
a satire levelled at the corruptions of a modern 
court, whose principal weakness is vanity, and 
whose luxury consists in ostentation; we must 
not, therefore, reject every supposed application 
of it to the pollutions of a Roman barrack, or, 
what nearly resembled a barrack, the recesses of 
a Roman palace, where the human blood that 
was shed in sport, was sometimes mixed with 
the wine that was spilt in debauch.3 The re- 
presentations of Petronius may be applied, in 
some parts, to the court of Tiberius and Clau- 
dius, more properly than to that of Caligula or 
Nero, or may have been a general satire levelled 
at the corruptions of the times, without any such 
application. But with respect to one or other of 
those einperors, every part in the feast of ‘T'remal- 
chio miy have been a genuine thouzh disguised 
picture. 

Even in the court of the sober Augustus, plea- 
sure was but another name for debauch. Love 
was no more thin the ebullition of temperament, 
without the allurements of elegance, or the se- 
duction of affection or passion. In the license 
of the sexes, both of them alike resorted to the 
places of public debauch. Women of the highest 
rank affected the manners of prostitutes, and, to 
realize the evidence of their victories, collected 
the ordinary rewards of prostitution. Such was 
the debauch for which Julia, the daughter of 
Augustus, was infainous, and in which she ex- 
hibited, as has been observed, not the weakness 
of a mind misled by passion, or seduced by some 


1 That of Petronius. 

2 Mr. Voltaire has with contempt rejected its sup- 
posed application to the manners of a court. 

3 The Romans had combats of gladiators exhibited 
while they were at table, 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 


would be accompanied with certain ruin. 


. [Boor VI. 


partial affection, but the gross excess of an ap- 
petite unacquainted with decency and above re- 
straint. 

In this state of manners the first successors of 
Cesar, not having the habits of a courtly deco- 
rum to preserve them from the contagion of mean 
and degrading vices, and not considering their 
own elevation as any other than a mere post of 
advantage, from which they could indulge every 
caprice with impunity, after a few attempts in 
the beginning of a reign to prejudice the world 
in their favour, plunged into every species of ex- 
cess, that a vile disposition, set free from restraint, 
and exasperated by the sense of general aversion, 
could incur. Persons inclined to this course ge- 
nerally proceed in their vices, until they meet 
with some obstacle which necessity or fear pre- 
sents to them, and where they meet with no such 
obstacle, they preserve no bounds. 

A perfect freedom from all external restraint 
would be sufficiently dangerous for persons of 
the best dispositions ; but to those who are cursed 
with the worst, such a freedom from restraint 
It is 
indeed nowhere to be found; but the first suc- 
cessors of Cesar flattered themselves that they 
had found it; and as they supported the first of- 
fences which they committed against the rules 
of propriety, by setting reason itself and the sense 
of mankind at defiance, they came to apprehend 
a species of pleasure in braving the detestation 
which they incurred by their infamies4 ‘! hey 
pursued the first strokes of injustice and malice 
by a continual warfare of distrust, prevention, 
and revenge against those to whom they sup- 
posed that their persons or government were 
odious; and they persisted in this course until 
the extreme itself, being what nothing less than 
the possession of sovereign power could support, 
appeared characteristic of empire, and worthy of 
the descendants of Cesar. 

During this unhappy succession of Cæsars, 
the supreme power had been, for the most part, 
held or disposed of by the pretorian bands. 
These troops being posted in the capital, over- 
awed the senate and people, and though not fit 
to contend with the legions who were still em- 
ployed in actual service, they gave possession of 
the empire, at every vacancy, before the armies 
of the frontier had time to deliberate or to take 
part in the choice. 

This pre-eminence, however, of the pretorian 
bands had been impatiently sutlered by the legions 
of the Rhine and the Danube. They wished, at 
the death of Augustus, to have given a specimen 
of their consequence in naming a successor to 
the empire; but being then overruled by the 
dutiful spirit or moderation of Gerinanicus, they 
acquiesced in the government of ‘Tiberius, and 
remained in quiet under all the successions 
which followed; until, being excited by the de- 
fection of Gaul, which happened under Nero, 
and impatient of the mockery of sovereignty ex- 
hibited in the infamies of that unhappy person, 
they entertained, almost in every quarter of the 
empire at once, the project of giving a better and 
more respectable sovereign to the world. 

Within the compass of one year and a few 
months, after it was known that the province 


4 Magnitudo infamiz cujus apud prod gos novissima 
voluptas. 


: 
‘ 


Cuar. VIL] 


of Gaul had revolted from Nero, all the armies 
from the Rhine and the Danube, from Gaul, 
Svria, Sain, anl Britain, were for their march 
towards Italv, for the important purpose of giv- 
ing a sovereign to the empire. And it is remark- 
able, that this project did not originate with the 
leaders, or appear to be suggested by the anibition 
of genera!s, but arose fro a spirit of commotion 
which pervaded the troops. 

Every legionary soldier, excited by the desire 
of rapine, by the prospect of possessing the capi- 
tal, and of rioting in the riches and pleasures of 
Italy, conceived the design of pushing forward 
his general to the head of the empire. They 
burst at once from their quarters, and, consider- 
ing themselves as set free from every species of 
government, whether civil or militarv, set no 
bounds to their violence. Augmenting their 
fury by the consideration of the punishnients 
they incurred, in case they should fail in their 
attempt, they passed through every city and pro- 
vince in their wav, like a storm that wastes and 
destroys whatever is opposed to its course. With- 
in the short period we have mentioned, a motley 
assemblage of provincial troops, dressed in the 
garbof their diferent countries, with different 
arms an:l different languages, mixed with the 
Roman legions, who, now for many Vears stran- 
gers to each other, met on the Po and the Tiber 
to dispose of the empire. And, in the sequel of 
their contest, whether as victors or vanquished, 
whether moved by insolence or despair, did equal 
execution on the pacific inhabitants. 

These troubles, however, ended in the eleva- 
tion of a great and respectable officers to the 
throne of Cæsar, and in the substitution of the 
Flavian family to that of Claudius and of Julius. 
At the accession of Vespasian every army had 
tried its strength, and competitors from the court, 
the senate, and the camp had made trial of their 
fortune. The victors in this contest received a 
willing subniission from the pacific inhabitants 
of the provinces, who were ready to congratulate 
themselves on the return of public tranquillity. 

Fortunately the first emperors of the new 
family, Vespasian himself, and the eldest of his 
two sons, come from the school of experience, 
had learned the value of reason, humanity, and 
justice in the government of mankind ; and they 

ecordingly exhibited a character which, in some 
of its parts, was still new on the throne of 
Cesar: the character of wisdom, propricty, and 
humanity, assumeil, for its own sake, and with- 
out any intention to circuinvent the people, or to 
impose upon the world. But the fortunes of 
this second imperial family, like those of the 
first, soon devolved on a7 person equally unfit to 
sustain them, and equally unfit to be suffered by 
the patience of an abject court or a subinissive 
world. 

As mankind are known to run, occasionally, 
from one extreme to another, the evils which had 
been experienced in the characters of some of 
the preceding emperors, perhaps helped to direct 
the armies of the empire, at times, to think of 
tile opposite extreme; and they made a compen- 
sation, in some of their elections, for the mis- 
chiefs which they had brought upon the world in 
others. 


Amidst the variety of examples that were set | 


5 Vespasian. 6 Titus. 7 Domitian. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


479 


on the imperial throne, different emperors paid 
unequal degrees of respect to the civil forms 
which were handed down to them from the re- 
public, and which were still retained at least in 
name, But the characters of sovereign in the 
empire, and head of the army, were necessarily 
united in the same person; and, in proportion as 
the army itself came to te corrupted, the imperial 
establishment suffered, net an occasional and 
teninorarv abuse, hut a radical and irrecoverable 
decline of its character and force. 

The pretorian bands were early debauched 
by their residence in the capital, the principal 
seat of licentiousness; they were inspired with 
presumption from the access which they had to 
practise on the vices of their sovercign, and they 
outran all the armies of the empire in profiigacy 
insolence, and venalitv. They were, upen this 
account, broke or dishanded with indignation by 
Galba, the first provincial officer who was ad- 
vanced to the purple; but this reformation only 
made way for others, who being placed in the 
same school of disorder and vice, soon equalled 
their predecessors in all the evils which they had 
brought on the capital, and on the empire. 

The contagion of military arrogance gradually 
spread from the barrack or canip of the pratorian 
bands, to the legions of the frontier, and, tege ther 
with the hopes of raising a favourite leader to 
the head of the emyire, promised indulgence of 
crimes and exemption from every painful re- 
straint. The practice of disposing of the empire 
was followed by that of selling it for pecuniary 
bounties, and forima!ly capitulating with every 
new master for a relaxation of discipline and the 
impunity of crimes, 

In proportion as the character of Roman 
citizen lost its consideration and its consequence, 
the name was easily communicated to all the 
subjects or natives of any province. Eut this 
promiscuous adinission of every subject, under 
the same predicament of a Roman citizen, in- 
stead of raising the provincials to the dignity of 
Romans, sunk the latter to the level of provincial 
subjects; extinguished all the sentiments on 
which the legions of old were wont to value 
themselves, and, with their loss of self-estima- 
tion as Romans, probably diminished the interest 
they had in the preservation of the Roman name, 
They became by degrees, and at every succes- 
sion, wore mercenary and venal in the choice of 
their masters, more brutal in the exercise of their 
force avainst their fellow-subjects; and with a 
continual degradation from bad to worse, substi- 
tuted for the order, courage, and discipline of 
Roman legions, mere ferocity, and a disposition 
to rapine and mutiny. 

In composing such armies, the natives of the 
more rude and uncultivated provinces took the 
ascendant over those of the more civilized and 
pacific; and the empire itself sometimes received 
its master from its most barbarous extremities, 
and from the nurseries of brutality, ignorance, 
and violence. 

From such a general tendency to corruption, 
it is not surprising that an empire, though once 
of such mighty power, should, in process of time, 
verge to its ruin; it is rather surprising, that a 
fabric, mouldering so fast within, should have 
so long withstood the storm with which it was 
| naturally assailed from abroad. From the ac- 
| cession of Caligula to the admission of Alaric 


480 


into Rome, was a period of no more than about 
four hundred years; but from the same epoch to 
the reduction of Constantinople by the Turks 
was a period of one thousand four hundred and 
sixteen years. So long was it before the lights 
of civil, political, and military wisdom, erected 
by the Roman commonwealth, though struck 
out by the Goths and Vandals in the west, and 
continually sinking in the east, were entirely ex- 
tinguished. 

The fabric of the empire had many advantages 
to account for so long a duration, both in the 
nature of its materials and in the disposition of 
its parts, The provinces were conveniently 
situated for mutual intercourse ‘and for mutual 
support; and there was an easy access from the 
seat of dominion, to the farthest bounds of the 
empire. The order established by Augustus, 
and confirmed by Tiberius, remained unaltered, 
even by many of their successors. The worst 
of the Cesars suffered that order to subsist in 
the provinces, and never looked beyond the court 
and capital for the objects of their jealousy, and 
fit subjects of tyranny. Even in such hands the 
engine of empire continued to work, because the 
master neither pretended to understand, nor at- 
tempted to interpose in the operation of its dis- 
tant parts. And the authority of government 
continued high in the extremities of this vast 
dominion, while it sunk or was abused in the 
centre. 

Valour and discipline, the best preservatives 
of many other valuable qualities, being long in 
request, though sometimes impaired in the Ro- 
man legions, still formed examples of a noble and 
heroic virtue, whicli qualified some of those, who 
attained tothe more high and respectable stations 
in the military profession, to fill with advantage 
the imperial throne. 

The inhabitants of the empire in general 
were corrected of that ferocity, or reduced trom 
that national spirit which renders subjects re- 
fractory. They were addicted to pacitic arts, 
tractable, and easily retained within the hounds 
of their duty; and they acquiesced in any go- 
verninent, however negligent or incapable. Some 
of the emperors pronioted this orderly and pacific 
disposition, by the confidence which they taught 
the subject to have in the security of his person 
and of his property, and by the encouragement 
which they gave to pursuits awl applications 
which inspire the love of peace and tranquillity.! 

It may appear strange, but it is true, that even 
under the government of mere soldiers of fortune, 
the principles of law, founded in the maxims of 
the republic, though in some things perverted to 
the purposes of despotic power, was made the 
object of a select profession, and was studied as 
a rule of peace and of property. The civil law 
was thus not only suffered to remain in force, 
but received, from the pleadings of advocates, the 
decisions of judges, and the edicts of princes, 
continual accessions of light and authority, which 
has rendered it the great basis of justice to all 
the modern nations of Europe. 

Philosophy continued in repute from the times 


1 Vespasian gave salaries of about 8007. a year to 
masters of rhetoric at Rome. Marcus Aurelius gave 
salaries to many teachers of philosophy at Athens. 
Hadrian established the school of liberal arts, called 
the Atheneum. Dio. Cass. lib. Ixxi. c. 37. Sextus Au- 
relias Victor de Cesaribus. 


THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION 
of the republic far down in the empire, and the 


{Boox VI. 


doctrines of Epicurus, which had prevailed 
in the later times of the commonwealth, now 
gave way to those of Zeno and the Stoics, 
While men had rights to preserve, and hazard- 
ous duties to perform on the public scene, they 
had aflected to believe, with Epicurus, that plea- 
sure was the standard of good and of evil. But 
now, when the public occupations of state were 
withheld from them, and when personal safety 
was the highest object in their view, they return- 
ed to the’ idea, which seemed to have inspired 
the virtue of ancient times, that men were made 
happy by what they themselves were and per- 
formed, not by what they possessed. Under the 
discouragements of many a cruel and oppressive 
reign, men of education and of high descent 
accordingly had recourse to the philosophy of 
Zeno, as to a consolation and support: and 
although they were deprived of the opportunity 
to act upon their own ideas in any distinguished 
situation, they gave sufficient evidence of their ` 
sincerity, in the manly indifference with which 
they sometimes incurred the consequences of 
their independence and freedom of mind. 

From these materials, the law was sometimes 
furnished with practitioners, the senate with its 
members, the army with commanders, and the 
empire itself with its head; and the throne of 
Cæsar, in the vicissitudes to which it was exposed, 
presented examples as honourable to human 
nature in some instances, as they were degrad- 
ing and shameful in others. In these varieties, 
however, it is no disparagement to the good, to 
suppose that they were not able to compensate 
the bad, or to produce effects, to which the 
greatest abilities in a few individuals cannot 
extend. 

The wisdom of Nerva gave rise to a succes- 

sion, which, in the persons of Trajan and the 
Antonines, formed a counterpart to the race of 
Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero; and it 
must be admitted, that if a people could be happy 
by any other virtue than. their own, there was @ l 
period in the history of this empire, during which 
the happiness of mankind may have been sup- 
posed complete. This however is but a fond 
and mistaken apprehension. A people may re- 
ceive protection from the justice and humanity 
of single men ; but can receive independence, 
vigour, and peace vf mind only from their own. 
Even the virtues of this happy succession could 
do no more than discontinue, for a while, the 
former abuses of power, administrate justice, 
restrain the guilty, and protect the innocent. 
Many of the evils under which human nature 
was labouring, still remained without a cure; 
and the empire, alter having in the highest de- 
gree experienced the effects of wisdoin and good- 
ness, was assailed anew with all the abuses of 
the opposite extreme.? 


2 These extremes scarcely gain credit with the mo- 
dern reader, as they are so much beyond what his 
own experience or observation can parallel. Nero 
seems to have been a Demon, and Aurelius a Divi- 
nity; and these prodigies, whether in the extreme of 
good or of evil, exhibited, amidst the rnins of the Ro- 
man republic, are no longer to be found. Individuals 
were then formed on their specific dispositions to wis- 
dom or folly. In later times, they are more cast in a 
general mould, which gives a certain form independ- 
ent of the materials. Religion, fashion, and manners 
prescribe more of the actions of men, or mark a deeper 

| lract in which men are constrained to move. 


Cap. VIL] 


tinued to be defended, and the internal peace of 
the empire to be tolerably secure. Commerce 
flourished, and the land was cultivated; but 
these were but poor co:npensations for the want 
of that vigour, elevation, and freedom, which 
perished with the Roman republic itself, or with 
the political character of the other nations which 
had been absorbed in this ruinous abyss. 

The military and political virtues, which had 
been exerted in forming this empire, having 
finished their course, a general relaxation ensued, 
under which, the very furms that were necessary 


The maxims of a christian and a gentleman, the 
remains of what men were taught by those maxims 
in the days of chivalry, pervade every rank, have 
some effect in places of the least restraint; and if 
they do not inspire decency of character, at least awe 
the profligate with the fear of contempt, from which 
even the most powerful are not secure. Insomuch, 
that if human nature wants the force to produce an 
A nrelius or a Trajan, it is not so much exposed to the 
anfamuies of a Domitian or a Nero. 


OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. 


481 


For many ages, nevertheless, the frontier con- | for its preservation were in process of time neg- 


lected. As the spirit which gave rise to those 
forms was gradually spent, human nature fell 
into a retrograde motion, which the virtues of in- 
dividuals could not suspend; and men, in the ap- 
plication of their faculties even to the most ordi- 
nary purposes of life, suffered a slow and insen- 
sible, but almost continual decline. 

In this great empire, the fortunes of nations 
over the more cultivated parts of the earth, being 
embarked ona single bottom, were exposed to 
one common and general wreck. Human nature 
languished for some time under a suspension of 
national exertions, and the monuments of former 
times were, at. last, overwhelmed by one general 
irruption of barbarism, superstition, and igno- 
rance. ‘The effects of this irruption constitute a 
mighty chasm in the transition from ancient to 
modern history, and make it difficult to state 
the transactions and manners of the one, ina 
way to be read and understood by those whose 
habits and ideas are taken entirely from the other 


cd 


A 


Achaan League, 35. 

Actium, naval battle of, 397, 398. 

Adhertal attacked by Jugurtha, 108. Flies to the 
Romans, ib. Pnt to death by Jugurtha, ib. 

Adile of the People, office of, instituted, 17. Su- 
perseded by Patriciaa Ædile, 28. The office 
revived by Agrippa, 393. 

Aimilius. Sie Emilius. 

Atna, eruption of, 1C0. 

Afranius, appointed one of Pompey’s lieutenants 
in Spain, 206. Compelled to submit to Cæsar, 
212. 

Africa. See Carthaginians 
tha, &c. 

Agrarian Law, first proposed 18. Lex Licinia 
adopted, 27. Agrarian Law of Cæsar, 193. 

Agrippa hecomes the counsellor of Octavins, 370. 
His operations in Gaul, 382. Js appointed to 
conduct the war against Sextus Pompeius, 383. 
Defca's the fleet of Porupeius, 385. Undertakes 
the office of wdile, 393. Presides in the military 
depariment of Rome, 399. Encourages Octavius 
to resign the sovereignty, 411 Retires from pnb- 
lic service, 425. Is recalled, ib. Marries the 
danghter of Octavins, 427. Death and character, 
434. 

Agrippa Posthumus, 434. Comes of age, 443. Is 
degraded and banished, 444. 

Agrippina, the daughter of Agrippa, is married to 
Germanicus, 454. Perishes, with two of her 
sons, under the tyranny of Tiberins, 473. 

Ahenobarbus, Domitius, defends Marseilles against 
Cæsars army, but is at last obliged to sub- 
mit, 273—275. 

Alesia in Gaul, blockade and reduction of, 241— 
214. 

Alerandria, in Egypt, contest there, between Julius 
Cesar and the government of Piolomy, 391—393. 

Alps, passage of the, by Ikaimibal, 45. 

Ambiorir ensnares ana cuts off part of Cæsar’s ar- 
my, 227, 228. Is afterwards punished by Cæsar, 
220. 

Ambrones. See Cimbri. 

Andriscus claims the crown of Macedonia, 84. Is 
suppressed hy the Romans, ib. 

An’‘iochus, king of Syria, arrives in Greece with an 
arny, 64. Returns home, ib. Meditates the 
invasion of Greece and Italy, 65. The Romans 
prepare to repel him, 66. He arrives with an 
army at Demetrias, ib. Spends the winter at 
Chalcis, 67. His army routed near Thermopyke, 
ib. His fleet defeated by the Romans, 68. An- 
tiochus himself defeated by Lucius Scipio, ib. 
Makes peace with the Romans. ib. 

Antonius, Marcus, put to death by Marius, 135. 

—— Caius, is elected to the consulate, along 
with Cicero, 171. 

- Lucius, opposes the pretensions of Octa- 
vius at Rome, 371. Is shut up in Perusia, and 
obliged to capitulate, 373. 

Antony, Mark, serves in Gaul under Julius Cæsar, 
248. Is sent thence by Cæsar, to Rome, 249. Is 
appointed commander of Cæsar’s forces in Italy, 


Massinissa. Jugur- 


INDEX. 


Effects a junction with Cesar, 281. Is appointed 
second in conimand by Cesar, 292. Holds the 
rovernment of haly, i Is named consul by 
æsar, in conjunction with himself, 317. His 
speeches in the senate on the death of Cesar, 
326, 227. Presides at the obsequies oi Casar, 328. 
Pronounces the funeral oration, 329. Moderate 
administration for seme time, 320. He becomes 
arbitrary, 331. His frst conference with Octavius 
Cesar, 334; and dissension with him, 325. His 
journey to Brundusium, 337. Dissatisfaction of 
the troops there, and severities of Antony, 338 
He returns to Rome, 339. Two of lis l¢giors 
desert to Octavins, ib. He proceeds to expel 
Decimus Brutus from Cisalpine Gaul, 340 His 
message to Decimus, ib. Lays siege to Mutina, 
341. Is ordered to desist by the senate, 342. Af- 
fects to treat, 343. 1s declared a rebel, ib. Con- 
linues, notwithsianding, the siege, 346. Repels 
the army of Pansa, 347. Is worsted by Hirtius 
and Octavius, ib. Necessitated to pass the Alps, 
ib. Joined by Lepidus and his army, 348. The 
act of attainder against him reversed, 354. Forms 
a confederacy with Octavius and Lepidus, ib. 
Horrors of their proscriptions, 255. Antony re- 
ceives with joy the head and right hand of the 
murdered Cicero, 359. Transports part of his 
arnıy into Greece against Brutns and Cassius, 
363. Pitches his camp in view of the enemy, 
364. Is joined by Octavius, 35. Various opera- 
tions and skirmishes, ib., 366. His speech to the 
army after the death of Cassius, ib. Defeats the 
republican army, 367. Makes a new partition 
of the empire with Octavius, 3€9. Sets out for 
Asia, ib. Raises contributions m Ephesus, &e. 
374. Meets Cleopatra in Cilicia, and accompa- 
nies her into Egypt,ib. Hastens to Athens, 375- 
Sails with 200 galleys to Brundusium, and in- 
vests it, 376. Gets possession of il, ib. Is reconciled 
to Octavins, ib. Marries Octavia, ib. Concludes 
a treaty of peace with Sextus Pompeins, 378. 
Sets out for the East, 379. His residence at 
Athens, ib. Arrives at Tarentum, 3&2. Re- 
solves with Octavius to hold the consulate for 
five years longer, 383. Sets ont for Syria, ib. 
Cleopatra visits hiin, 389. His stores and bag- 
gage seized by the Parthians, ib. He treats with 
the king of Parthia for peace, 390; who declines 
it, and harasses him on his retreat, ib. [mbarks 
with Cleopatra for Egvpt,ib. Declines an inter- 
view with his wife, 391. Passes into Armenia, 
and is victorious there, 393. Returns to Alex- 
andria in trinmph, ib. [His extravagant behaviour 
there, ib. He declares war against Octavius, 
395. Is suspended in the consulship by the 
Senate, ib. Posts his army at the entrance of 
the gulph of Ambracia, 396. Addresses his offi- 
cers. in view ofa battle, 397. Battle of Actium, 
in which he is defeated, and flies with Cleopatra 
towards Egypt, 398. Attempts to juin the Ro- 
man legions, 400. Rejected by them, ib. His 
strange conduct at Alexandria, 1b. His fleet sur- 
renders to Octavius, and his army is routed, 401. 
Wounds himself; has an interview with Cleo- 
patra, and dies, ib. His character, ib. 


255. Follows Cesar to Epirus with additional | Appius Claudius attempts to procure Virginia, 21 


troops, 220. Lands in the Bay of Nvmphaus, ib. | Apulerus. 


153 


Sec Saturninus. 


dot 


Arabia, expedition into, under /Elius Gallus, 425. 
Unsuccessful, ib. 

Archelaus. See Mithridates. 

Ariovistus involved in a war with Cesar, 20]. 
Holdsa conference with him, 202. Is defeated th, 

Aristobulus usurps the Jewish throne, 167. Ls d.s- 
possessed by Pompey, 168. 

Armenia. See Tigranes. 

Asdrubal. See Hasdrubal. ; 

Asia, first expedition of the Romans into, 68. They 
interest themselves in its concerus, 99. See An- 
tony, Bithyna, Crassus, Lucullus, Mithridates, &c. 

Athens, siege and blockade of, by Sylla, 133. 

Altualic: reduced by Cæsar, 206: 

Augustus, title of. first bestowed on Octavius Cæsar, 

17 See Octavius. 

Autfeles, Ptolomy, the dethroned king of Egypt ar- 
rives in Rome, 210. Disputes about his restora- 
tion, ib. He is restored by Gabinius, 217. 

Avaricum, in Gaul, siege and reduction of, by Cæ- 
sar, 238, 239. 


B 


Bacchanals, society of, 77 

Ballot, secret, introduction of, in elections, &c. 89. 

Bankrupicy treated as acrime by the laws of the 
twelve tables, 20. 

Ba'hs, public, established at Rome by Agrippa, 394. 

Belge, reduced by Cæsar, 205. 

Bellutus, Sicinius, heads the Plebeian Mutiny at 
the Mons Sacer, 15. 

Bibulus, elected Consul along with Cesar, 193. Op- 
poses the agrarian law, 194. Is made Proconsul 
of Syria, 250. Commands the fleet of Pompey, 277. 
Blocks up the harbour of Oricum, 279. Dies, ib. 

Bihynia, bequeathed to the Romans, 151. Over- 
run by Mithridates, ib. 

Bocchus, King of Mauritania, at first assists Jugurtha, 
113. Afterwards delivers him up to the Romans, 
114. Sends to Rome a present of golden images, 
125. 

dribery in tl e elections at Rome, 226. 

?ritain, Cesar projects the invasion of, 219. Lands 
at the Downs, 220. His fleet shattered by a 
storm, ib. He re-embarks for the Continent, ib. 
Second invasion of Britain, 222. Landing-place 
probably Pigwell Bay, ib. The Roman fleet 
again shattered by a storm, 223. Cassivelaunus, 
a British chieftain, harasses Ceesar, ib.; but is de- 
feated, ib. Cæsar’s account of the inhabitants of 
Britain, ib. They submit to him, 224. 

~riltany, inhabitants of, defeated by Cæsar at sea, 
213 

F-undusium, port of, becomes the retreat of Pompey, 
261 Cesar arrives there, and takes possession 
of the port, 262. Brundusium is besieged and 
taken by Antony, 376. 

B: utus, Marcus, forms a conspiracy against Cesar, 
22]. Reveals the secret to his wife, 323. Death 
of Cæsar, 324. Brutus retires to the Capitol, 325. 
Appears in the Forum, ib. His speech to the 
people, 327, 328. Appointed to the government 
uf Macedonia, 331. Superseded by the Senate, 
332. Persists in setting out for his province, 335. 
Arrives in Greece, 344. Is well received in 
Macedonia, ib. Is condemned, in absence, for 
the murder of Julius Cæsar, 353. Prepares for 
war with Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus, 361. 
Reduces Xanthus in Lycia, 362. Joins Cassius, 
363. Marches westward, 364. Fs interrupted 
by Antony’s army, 1b. Encamps, with Cassius, 
near Philippi, ib. Operations and skirmishes, 
353. Death of Cassius, ib. Lndeavours to pro- 
tract the war, ib. Is totally routed, 367. His 
death and character, 368. 

~—-—, Decimus, is besieged in Mutina, 347. Rais- 
ing of the siege, ib. Is vested by the Senate 


INDEX. 


with the command of all their forces, 348. Is 
abandoned by his army, 354; seized at Aquileia 
and put to death by orders of Antony, 355. 


C 


Cepo, Q. Serv. opposes the tribune Saturninus, 
12]. Is condemned, 124. 
Cesar, Caius Julius, birth. of, 123. Is saved from 
proscription by Sylla, 146. is taken by pirates, 
whom he afterwards pursues and punishts, 150. 
Is suspected ofa hanc in the conspiracy of Cati- 
line, 170. Is elected Edile, ib. Opposes the exe- 
cution of Lentulus, 176. Character compared with 
that of Cato, 180, 181. His policy in supporting 
the pretensions of Pompey, 183. Is appointed to 
the government of Lusitania, 185. Returns to 
Rome, 188. Is refused atriumph,ib. Is elected 
Consul, 189 His violence in carrying through 
his agragnian law, 190, 191. Reforms introduced 
by him, 192. Appointed Proconsul in Gaul for 
five years, 193. His marriage to Calpurnia, 195. 
Arrives in his province, 199. Hinders the Hel- 
velil from passing the Rhone, 2C0. Defeats them 
on the Soane, 201. Resolves to make war upon 
Ariovistus, ib. Holdsa conference with him, 202. 
Defeats him, ib. Marches against the Belgic 
nations, 204, 205. Defeatsthe Nervii, 206. Re- 
duces the Attuatici, ib- Influences the transac- 
tions at Rome, 210. Is visited at Lucea by Pom- 
pey and Crassus, 211. Sets out for Brittany, 
and destroys a fleet there, 212. His command in 
Gaul renewed for other five years, 215. Cuts 
off two German hordes, 218, 219. Projects the 
invasion of Britain, ib. Landsat the Downs, 220. 
Re-embarks for the Continent,.ib. Second inva- 
sion of Britain, 222. Defeats Cassivelaunus, 223. 
Passes the Thames, ib. Receives the submission 
of Britain, and returns to Gaul, 224 Routs the 
Gauls, 228. Punishes Ambiorix, 229. Endea- 
vours to hold the consulate without resigning his 
province, 235, 236. Again advances against the 
Gauls, 237. Besieges and reduces Avaricum 
238. Crosses the river Allier, 239. Retreats, 240 
Is joined by Labienus, ib. Defeats the cavalry 
of Vercingetorix, 241; and finally routs him, 243, 
244. Operations in Gaul, in his eighth campaign 
246—248. Extends his influence in Rome, 249 
—252. Detaches one legion from his army, by 
desire of the Senate, 254; and restores to Pom- 
pey a borrowed legion, ib. Recalled by the Se- 
nate, arid ordered to dismiss his army, 257. Re- 
solves to march towards Rome, 258. Seizes on 
Ariminum, ib. Corfinium is delivered up to him, 
261. Proceeds to Brundusium, ib. Gets pos- 
session of it, 252. Prepares to march to Spain. 
ib. Has an interview with Cicero, 263. Visits 
Rome, ib. Seizes the public treasure, 264. Sets 
out for Spain, 266. Invests Marseilles, 267. Ar- 
rives in Spain, ib. Worsted in a skirmish with 
the enemy, 268. Throws a bridge over the Se- 
gra,ib. Pursues the army of Pompey, 269. He 
turns their flank, ib. Harasses them in their re- 
treat to Ilerda, 270. Receives their submission, 
72. Accession of Varro and his legions to Cæ- 
sar, 273. Takes possession of Marseilles, 275. Is 
named Dictator by the Senate at Romie, ib. Quells 
a mutiny in his army, 276. Arrives at Rome, 
and assumes the title of Dictator, ib. Is chosen 
Consul, ib. Sets sail for the coast of Greece, 277. 
Proposes peace to Pompey, 278 ; but continues 
his hostile exertions, ib. Is joined by a great re- 
inforcement under mark Antony, 281. Inter- 
cepts the direct communication of Pompey with 
Dyrrachium, 282. Repeats his propositions for 
peace, ib. Forms the project of investing Pom- 
pey in his station, 283. Is surprised by Pomp 
and suffers a partial defeat, ib. Attacks a detac 


~ 


ment of Pompey’s army with success, 284; but 

at last is obliged to abandon his lines, ib. Con- 

tinues to retreat, 236. Direets his march towards 

Thessaly, ib. Encamps near the village of Phar- 

salus, 237. Gatns the battle of Pharsalia, 288, 

239. Pursues Pompey, 290. Arrives in Egypt, 

and is presented with the head of his rival, 1b. 

Is decreed Consul for five years, Dictator for one 

year, and Tribune for life, 292. Remains in 

Egypt, 234. His passion for Cleopatra, ib. Is 

invested in Alexandria, ib. Twice defeats the 

Egyptian fleet, 295. Routs the Egyptians, ib. 

Marches against Pharnaecs, and gains a victory, 

297. Arrivesin Italy,ib. Proceeds to Rome, ib. 

Quells a mutiny in his army, 298, 299. Sets sail 

for Afsica, whither the republicans had retired, 

ib. Lands near Adrumentum, 300. Advanees 
from Ruspina, and encounters Labienus and Pe- 
treius, 301. Falls baek upon Ruspina, and forti- 
fies himself there, 302. Lays siege to the town 
of Uzita, 303. Raises the siege, 304. Surprises 

the town of Zeta, 305. Invests Thapsus, 306. 

Defeats Metellus Scipio, ib. Takes possession of 

Utiea, 310; whence he embarks for Sardinia, ib. ; 

and soon afler proceeds to Rome, ib. Is declared 

Dictator for tea years, and Censor, under the 

title of Prafectus Morum, &c., 311. His speech 

to the Senate and People, ib. His four succes- 
sive triumphs, 312. Amuses the populaee with 
shows and feasts, ib. His plan of government, 
313, 314. Sets out for Spain, where the sons of 
Pompey are in arms, ib. ‘Totally defeats them 
near Munda, 315. Names himself Consul along 
with Mark Antony, 317. Enforees sumptuary 
regulations, ib. His plans and policy, 318. His 
character eontrasted with that of Sylla, ib. He 
aspires to the title of King, 319. A conspiracy 
formed against him, 320. IIe reeeives, at Rome, 
a visit from Cleopatra, 321. (No:e.) He plans a 
series of wars, 322. Fixes the succession of office 
for two years, ib. Progress of the conspiracy 
against him, 322—324. He is killed in the Senate 
house, ib. His will, 328. His funeral, ib., 329. 
Comparison of his character with that of Octa- 
vius, 407. 

t æsar, Augustus. See Octavius. 

- —-— Germanicus. See Germanicus. 

~ —— Caius, born, 428. Admitted into the order 
of manhood, and declared chief of the Roman 
youth, 439. Appointed to the command of the 
army in Syria, 441. Wounded, ib. Dies on his 
way home, ib. 

— Lucius is refused the consulate, bnt ad- 
mitted into the pricsthood, 439. Admitted to 
the order of manhood, ib. Dies at Marseilles, 
441. 

Cesarion is proclaimed by Mark Antony heir to 
his father, 400. Killed by order of Octavius, 
402. 

Calenus, Fusius, defends Antony in the Senate, 341, 
342. 

Laliguia, Caius Cesar, admitted into the confi- 
dence of the Emperor ‘Tiberius, 466. Declared 
suecessor in the empire, 470. Succeeds Tibe- 
rius accordingly, 475. His government, 476. Is 
killed by Ch:erea, ib. 

Calvinus, Domitius, defeated at sea by the fleet of 
Brutus and Cassius, 356. 

Camillus defeats the invading Gauls, and relieves 
the Capitol, 25. 

Canne, battle of, 49, 50. 

Canuleius, the Tribune, proposes the repeal of the 
prohibition against the intermarriage of Patricians 
and Plebeians, 22. The repeal agreed to, ib. 

Capitol, the, besieged by the Gauls, 25. Held out | 
by Manlius, hence named Capitolinus, ib. Re- | 
lieved by Camillus, ib. 

Cappadocia, murder of the king of, 104. | 


INDEX. 


dou 

Capree, island of, becomes the residence of the 

mperor Tiberius, 466. 

Capua, and its district of Campania, the first pro- 
vincial government established by the Romans, 
34. (Nove.) 

Carbo, Papirius. eleeted Consul, 107. Defeated by 
the Cimbri, 169. His death, 107. 

— Cneius Papirius, Consul, opposes Sylla in 
Italy, 138. is afterwards killed by Pompey in 
Sicily, 141. 

Carthage, eity of, its antiquity, 35. Deseription of 
its local situation, 82. The city besieged, ib. ; 
redueed and burut, 83; ordered to be rebuilt ©r 
a Roman colony, 105. 

Carthagimian Republie, rise and progress of the 
39. The Carthaginians unite with the Romans. 
against Pyrrhus, 36, 37. The Romans forcibly 
disposscss them of Messina, whieh gives rise to 
the first Punic war, ib. The Romans defeat 
their fleet, 38. Land in Africa, and defeat their 
army ; but are routed iu their turn, by Xantippus, 
ib. Great naval engagements, ib. Carthagi- 
nians make eoneessions to obtain peace ; which 
ends the first Punic war, ib. Mutiny and in- 
vasion of the mercenaries at Carthage, 39. 
Carthaginians surrender the island of Sar- 
dinia to the Romans, 40. Second Punic war 
breaks out, 43. (See Hannibal. Scipio Africa- 
nus.) Battle of Zama, and end of this war, 58. 
The Carthaginians resolve to re-take Emporia, 
80. Are defeated by Massinissa, ib. Make a 
formal surrender of the city of Carthage, ib. 
Give up all naval and military stores, 81. Are 
required to abandon Carthage, ib. Prepare to 
repel the commands of the Romans, ib. Gaina 
partial advantage, 82; but are finally su!sdued by 
Scipio, 83. 

Casca, oue of the conspirators against Cesar, 321, 
321. Eleeted tribune, 338. 

Cassius, Sp Consul, courts popularity, 18. Con- 
demned on suspicion of treason, ib. 

- Caius, under Pompey, burns and de- 
stroys Cesar’s shipping at Messina, 292. Submits 
to Cesar, ib. Begins a conspiracy against Cæ- 
sar, 321. Appointed to the government of Syria, 
331. Superseded in favour of Dolabella, žb. 
Persists in tahing possession of the province, 336. 
Is supported by the Senate, 344. 1s condemned, 
in absence, for the murder of Julius Casar, 353. 
Blockades Dolabella in Laodicea, ib., 354. Be- 
comes master of Laodicwa, ib. Acquires the 
possession of Syria, 361. Marches with his army 
to Smyrna, and joins Brutus, ib. Reduces the 
island of Rhodes, 362. Returns, and again forms 
a junction with Brutus, 363. His speech to the 
united army, ib. His division is defeated by 
Antony, 365. Causes a slave to put an end to 
his life, ib. 

Catiline, Lucius Sergius, first appearance of, 140 
His conspiraey, 173, 174. His designs frustrated, 
ib., 175. Takes the field, 178. Is defeated and 
killed by Petreius, ib. 

Cato, the Censor, characteristic manners of, 76. His 
speech against the luxury of the times, 78. His 
eagerness for the destruction of Carthage, 80. 
Obtains a trinmph at Rome, 86. 

of Utica, aneedote of. while a boy, 146, 147. 

He urges the necessity of punishing capitally the 

Catiline conspirators, 177. Character, compared 

with that of Cæsar, 180, 181. He opposes the 

agrarian law, 190. Is sent on a commission to 

Cyprus, 196. His return from Cvprus, 209, 210. 

His repulsc at the election of Psetors, ib. He 

opposes Pompey and Crassus, 214. Is unsue- 

eessful as a candidate for the Consulship, 245. 

Is appointed to the command of Sicily, 265; but 

is necessitated to withdraw from it, ib. Sails 

into the African seas, 291. Lands at Berenics 


455 INDEX. 


and marches to the Roman province, ib. Takes 
his station at Utica, 293. Continues to encourage 
the Patriots against Cesar, 307, 308. Kills him- 
self, ib. His character, ib. ; also, 405. 

Cato, Caius, the tribune, interposes his negative to 
suspend the usual election of magistrates, 214. 
Calulus, L. Luctatius, Consul, obliged to fly before 
the barbarous nations, 119. Returns and routs 
them, 120. Pariakes in the triumph at Rome 

with Marius, ib. His death, 136. 

——_—— Luctatius, opposes Pompey’s pretensions, 
162, 163. His character and death, 189. 

Censor, office of; separated from that of Consul, 21. 
The office revived, 164. Becomes almost obso- 
lete, 244. Is revived in the person of Julius Cæ- 
sar, under the title of Prefectus Morum, 311. 
Held by Augustus, 429. 

Census, state of the classes and centuries at its 
establishment, 11. (Vole.) Account of the Cen- 
sus, 12. Numbers of the Roman people at the 
time of the Gracchi, and during the consulate of 
Pompey, 99, 157. 

Centumvirs, appointed to assist the prætor, 39. 

Centuries, account of this division of the citizens, 
11. State of the centuries at the establishment 
of the census, ib. (Note.) 

Cheronea, battle of, 133. 

Christ, birth of, 440. 

Cicero, Marcus Tullius, birth of, 118. Begins to 
be distinguished at the bar, 146. Lends his aid 
to the advancement of Pompey, 164. Stands 
candidate for the consulate, 17]. Is elected, ib. 
Pleads the cause of Rabirius, 172, 173. De- 
nounces Catiline, 174. Is warned of the conspi- 
racy of Lentulus, and detects it, 176,177. Sup- 
ports the pretensions of Pompey and Cæsar, 188, 
189. Is persecuted by the tribune Clodius, 195. 
Is abandoned by Pompey, 197. Leaves Rome, 
ib. Frailties in his character, 198. Recalled 
from exile, 203, 205. Arrives at Rome, ib. 
Pleads the cause of Milo, 234, 235. Appointed 
to the province of Cilicia, 245. His operations 
there, 250, 251. His return to Rome, 255. His 
irresolution upon the flight of Pompey, 263. Has 
an interview with Cæsar, ib. Retires for a time 
from Rome, 332. Upon his return, delivers his 
first philippic against Antony, 333. Is courted 
by Octavius, 335. Encourages Brutus and Cas- 
sius, and declares against Antony, 337. Has the 
chief direction of affairs at Rome, 343. Is in- 
cluded in the list of the proscribed, 355. Flies 
from Rome, 358. His death and character, ib., 
359. 

Cicero, Quintus Tullius, is besieged in his camp by 
Ambiorix, 228. Relieved by Cæsar, 229. 

Cilicia, province of, committed to Cicero, 245. Ope- 
rations there, 250, 251. 

Cimbri, (various barbarous nations under this 
name) defeat the Romans under Papirius Carbo, 
109. Again defeat them under the Consul Sila- 
nus, 111. Overcome two Roman armies on the 
Rhone, 115. One division routed by Marius, 119. 
The other division cut off by Catulus and Marius, 
ib., 120. 

Cinna, Cornelius, elected Consul, 132. Withdraws 
from Rome, 135. Is again reinstated in the con- 
sulship, ib. Massacre which follows, ib., 136; 
at last stopped by Cinna, ib. Prepares to oppose 
Sylla, 137, 138. Is kilied in a mutiny, ib. 

son of the former, joins himself to the party 
of Brutus, 325. 

Cippi, in the Roman outworks, what, 241. 

Cisalpine Gaul. See Gaul. 

Claudius, brother to Germanicus, his supposed im- 
becility, 437. Is raised to the sovereignty, 477. 
Clemens personates Agrippa Posthumus, and sets 
up a claim to the imperial throne, 455. Is put to 

death, ib. ` 


Cleopatra is excluded from her share of the throni 


Clients and patrous, original Romans divided inte 


Clodius, Publius, profanes the sacred rites. 186. Is 


Coin, Roman, operation on, 39. 

Colonies, Roman, number of, in Italy, 39. 

Column, or line of a Roman army, ten men deep’ 
Comitia, account of the, 28. 

Commons and nobles, distinction of, 91. 


Constitution, Roman, review of the, 28. 
Consul, office of, first established, 14. Extensive 


Corinth, reduced and burned by the Romans, 85. 
Coriolanus, Caius Marcius, proposes to abolish the 


Corn, gratuitous distribution of, first proposed, 18, 
Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi, her address to- 


Cornelius, Dolabella. 


——— Scipio. 
Cornificius maintains the province of Africa, 360. 


Crassus, Marcus, marches against the revolted 


Crete, inhabitants of, war with the Romans, 157. 


Critognatus, a Gaulish warrior, his speech to his 


259. She engages the affections of Julius Cesar, 
2934. Is placed, by Cesar, on the throne of Egypt, 
295. Pays a visit to Cesar at Rome, 321. (Noie.) 
Meets Mark Antony in Cilicia, 374. Pays him 
a visit in Syria, 39. Conveys him to Alexan- 
dria, 390. Accompanies him to Greece wiih her 
fleet, 395. Is defeated in the battle of Actium, 
and flies to Egypt, 398. Her policy ou arriving 
there, 400. Her last interview with Antony 
461. Receives a visit from Octavius, 462. She 
puts herself to death, ib. 


tried and acquitted, ib. Elected a tribune of the 
people, 195. Projects the ruin of Cicero, ib. His 
policy, ib., 196. Opposes a proposal to recai 
Cicero, 203. Procures his own election as edile 
209. Stands candidate for the office of prætor 
231. Is killed in a fray with Milo, 232. 


288. 


nature of, ib. Claimed by the Plebeians, 22 ;. 
yielded to them, under the title of Military Tri- 
bune, ib. Censor separated from the office of 
Consul, 23. Title of Consul claimed by the ple- 
beian order, 27. Yielded to them, 28. Power of 
the Consuls, 29. 


office of tribune, 17. Is obliged to fiy, ib. 
Joins the enemies of Rome, ib. 


Caius her son, 162, 103. 
daughter of Metellus Scipio, married to: 
Pompey the Great, 231. 
See Dolatella. 
See Lentulus. 
See Merula. 
See Sczepio. 


Lentulus. 
Merula. 


Is defeated and killed, 361. 


gladiators, 155; routs them, ib. Elected to the con- 
sulate, 156. His great private riches, 157. Se- 
cretly unites himself to Pompey and Cæsar, 188. 
Renews his confederacy with these leaders, 211. 
Again elected Consul, 214. Secures to himself 
the province of Syria for five years, 215. Sets 
out for his province, ib. His progress there, 221. 
Invades Mesopotamia, 222. Is partially defeated 
by the Parthians, 230. Is betrayed by Surena at 
a conference, and slain, 23]. 

Publius, son of Marcus, serves in Gaul. 
206. Is detached to the assistance of his father 
in Syria, 222. Is cut off by the Parthians, 230, 
231. 


Are reduced by Metellus, 164. 


army, 242. 


Curiæ, Centuries, and Tribes, Roman citizens d) 


vided into, 11. 


Curile Ædiles, (directors of the public amusements,} € 
office instituted, 28. < 


Curio, the tribune, supports Cæsar’s cause at Rome, 


252. Sent by him to Sicily, 265; of which he 
acquires possession, ib. Follows the party of 
Pompey into Africa, 276. Is overwhelmed by 
the Numidian allies, 277 


Cynocephale, battle of, 62, 63. 
Cyrene, kingdom of, becomes a Roman province, 
124. 


D 


Decemvirs vested with a temporary sovereignty, 19. 
Do not resign at the period of their commission, 
20. Are overturned, on occasion of the death of 
Virginia, 21. 

Dentatus, his many hazardous services, 24. 

Curius, the consul, reduces Tarentum, 33. 

Dictator, first nominated, 14. His powers, 15. Du- 
ration of his office, ib. 

Dolabella stirs up tumults in Rome, 293. Assumes 
the office of Consul, 325. Is appointed to super- 
sede Cassius in Syria, 332. Surprises Smyrna, 
345. Proceeds to Laodicsa, 353. Is there blocked 
up by Cassius, 354. Dies by the hand of a con- 
fidential follower, ib. 

Drama, progress of the, at Rome, 89. 

Drusilla. See Livia. 

Drusus, Livius, the tribune, proposes several im- 
portant laws, 126. Is assassinated, ib. 

(Germanicus,) explores the eoasts of the 

Northern Ocean, 435. 1s saluted by the army 

Imperator, ib. Defeats the German nations, 436. 

Penetrates to the Elbe, 437. His death, ib. 

,son of Tiberius, acts as Questor, 446. Is 
entered on the list of Consuls, 447. Sent to 
quell a mutiny in the army, 453. Poisoned by 
Sejanus, 464. 

Dyrrachium, armies of Pompey and Cesar encamp 
in the neighbourhood of, 279. Lines thrown up 
by Cesar at this place, 283, 284. 


E 


Edile. See Ædile. 

Egypt, state of, in the first ages of Rome, 35. 
State of Parties in, 289, 290. (See Cesar. Cleo- 
patra.) Becomes a Roman province, 308. 

Emilius Paulus. See Paulus. 

Epicureans, sketch of their principles, 179. 

ES rian order at Rome notice of the, 28. 

Etolians invite Antiochus to eome into Greece, 65. 
Are necessitated to sue for terms from the Ro- 
mans, 69; which they obtain, ib. 


F 


Falius Maximus, named Pro-dictator, 48. Saves 
the Roman army, 49. 

Fimbria assassinates Flaccus, and takes command 
of the army, 136. Puts an end to his life, 137. 

Flaccus, Fulvius, raised to the consulate, 101. 
put to death for sedition, 106. 

———— Valerius, assassinated by his lieutenant 
Fimbria, 136. 

Valerius, appointed lieutenant to Sylla 
the Dictator, 141. 

Flamen Dialis, or Priest of Jupiter, one of the 
titles of Augustus, 436. 

Flaminius, the Roman Consul, takes the command 
in Greece against Philip, 62. Defeats Philip, ib. 
Returns to Rome, and holds a triumph, 65. 

————, Caius, named Consul, 47. Engages 
Hannibal, and perishes, with great part of his 
army, ib. 

Fleet, 
Carthaginian fleet, 38. Overcomes the navy of 
Asia, 68. Three large fleets, part of the esta- 
blishment in the time of Augustus, 421. 

Fregeile, conspiracy at, suppressed, 102. 


Is 


INDEX. 


oman, first equipment of a, 37. Defeats the- 


487 


tavius, 371. Flies to Brundusium, and embarks 
fur Greece, 374. Her death, 376. 


G 


Gabimus, the tribune, his speech in favour of Pom 
pey’s pretensions, 161, 162. Is involved in Can- 
line’s conspiracy, 176. Holds the government 
of Syria, 217. kara Auletes to the throne of 
Egypt, ib. Tried for extortion, and forced into 
exile, 225. 

Galatians, the, reduced by the Romans, 69. 

Gallus, Asinius, persecuted by Tiberius, 468. 

Gaul, Cisalpine, first conquered, 41. Inhabitants 
of, admitted to the roll of Roman citizens, 276. 
Gauls, defeat the Roman army on the Allia, 25. 
Burn the city of Rome, ib. Are routed and dis- 
persed by Camillus, ib. Are again defeated, 41. 
Are routed by Hannibal,44. Further wars with 
the Romans, 61. (See Cesar, Caius Julius.) 
Gaul divided into four separate governments, 

424. See Brittany, Helvetti, &c. 

Germanicus, Cesar, birth of, 437. His marriage to 
Agrippina, 453. The army of Gaul offer to 
place him on the throne, ib. He rejects their 
proposal, ib.; and quells the Mutiny, 455. His 
operations in Germany, 458. Is sent to tranquil- 
lize the provinces of Asia, 459. Passes into 
Egypt, ib. Dies at Antioch, ib. 

Germans. ‘See Ariovistus. Cesar.) Two hordes 
invade Gaul, 217. Are cut off by Cesar, 218 
The Germans defeat the Romans, 446. 

Gladiators, first exhibition of, 39. Escape and re- 
volt of those at Capua, 154. They defeat the 
Roman Consuls, ib. Are finally suppressed by 
Crassus, 155. 

Gracchus, Tiberius, endeavours to revive the 
agrarian law, 93. Opposed by the tribune Octa- 
vius, 94. The law passed, 95. Attempts to pro- 
eure his re-election into the tribunate. 96. Is 
slain in the eapitol, 97. 

Caius, espouses the canse of the Italian 
‘allies, 101. Is eleeted a tribune, 102. Revives the 
agrarian law, 103. Is re-elected tribune, 104. 
Urges the admission of the Italian allies to the 
roll of eitizens, 105. Endeavours to get elected 
oe but is rejected, ib. Is killed in a fray, 

Greece. (See Pyrrhus. Achean League.) State 
of Greece, (U. C. 421,) 34, 35. Philip aspires to 
the sovereignty of, 61. The Romans expel him, 
63. The Greeks make an ineffectual struggle 
for liberty, 84, 85. 


H 


Hamilcar forms a settlement in Spain, 42. 

Hannibal succeeds Hasdrubal in commanding the 
Carthaginians in Spain, 42. Reduces Saguntum, 
43. Begins his march towards Italy, 44. Crosses 
the Pyrennees, ib. Passes the Rlione, 45. Crosses 
the Alps, ib. Defeats the Roman eavalry, 46. 
Defeats the Romans in a general engagement, 
47. Marches towards Arretium, ib. ; and defeats 
the Roman army under Flaminius, ib. Proceeds 
towards Apulid, 48. Gains the great battle of 
Cannæ, 50. Solicits his country in vain for sup- 
plies, 52. Is recalled from Italy, 56. Arrives 
with bis army at Hadrumetum in Africa, 57. 
Holds a personal eonference with Scipio, ib., 58. 
Is routed in the battle of Zama, ib. His great 
fidelity and ability, 65. He flies to Antiochus at 
Syracuse, ib. Endeavours to persuade Antio- 
chus to invade Italy, 66. Dies by taking poison, 


© . . . 7 
Furius, Publius, the tribune, violent death of, | Hasdrubal, son-in-law of Hamilcar, succeeds him 


123. 


Fudwa, wife of Antony, raises an army against Oc- | 


in the eommand of the Carthaginian settlement 
in Spain, 4% 


483 


Hasdrubal, the brother of Hannibal. See Hannibal. | Lentulus, Publius Cornelius, prætor, his conspiracy 


— the son of Gisgo, opposes Scipio in Africa, 
56. Is surprised and defeated, ib. Withdraws 
from the Carthaginian service,ib. Is recalled by 
the Carthaginians, 81. Defeats the Romans, 82. 

Has‘a‘i, first order in the original Roman legion, 31. 

Helvetii, propose to migrate to the plains of Gaul, 
199. Are hindered by Cesar from passing the 
Rhone, 200. Partially defeated by him, ib. ; and 
finally routed, 201. 

Hiero, king of Syracuse, attaches himself to the 
Romans, 37. : 

Hirtius, C. enters on the consulate, 341. Carries 
on the war against Antony, 346. Is killed, 347. 

Hyrcanus, high-priest of the Jews restored by Pom- 
pey, 167, 168. 


I 


Ilerda, town of, the armies of Cesar and Pompey 
encamp at, 267, 268. 

Illyrians, guilty of piratical depredations, 40. The 

omans make war on them, ib. ‘The Illyrians 

are subdued, 75. 

Imperator, title of, bestowed upon Octavins, 424. 

Insubres, Gaulish nation of the, attack the Roman 
colonies of Cremona and Placentia, 61. 

Interest of money, 1 per cent. only allowed, 20. 

fsola Farnese, probably the site of the capital of 
ancient Veiæ, 24. 

Italan allies, state of the,( U. C. 627.) 100. Claim to 
be enrolled as Roman citizens, 126, 127. 

Italy, how possessed during the first ages of the 
Rornan State, 9. Its limits in those times, 34. 
Romans become entire masters of, 60. 


J 


Janus, temple of, shut, 40, 407, 424, 

Jerusalem, city of, arrival of Pompey at, 167. Siege 
of the temple, ib. Its reduction, ib. Pompey 
enters the Holy of Holies, 168. 

Juba, king of Numidia, puts an end to his life, 310. 

Judea, Hyrcanus and Aristobulus contend for the 
sovereignty of, 167. Pompey subdues Judea, 
and restores Hyrcanus, ib., 168. See Jerusalem. 

Jugurtha joins the Romans against the Numantians, 

7. Aspires to the kingdom of Numidia, 108. 
Cuts off his brothers Hiempsal and Adherbal, ib. 
Js supposed to bribe the Roman Senate, 109. 
He endeavours to treat with them, ib. Appears 
as a suppliant at Rome, 110, [s dismissed from 
the city, ib. Surprises Aulus Albinus, ib. Is 
defeated by Metellus, 111. Flies to Mauritania. 
112. Is overcome by Marius, 114. Seized by 
Bocchus, and delivered up to the Romans, ib. 
Is brought to Rome, and left to perish in a dun- 
geon, 115. 

Julia, daughter of Julius Cæsar, is married to Pom- 
pey, 195. Her death, 224. 

- daughter of Octavius, is married, Ist, to Mar- 

cellus, 422; 2dly, to Agrippa, 427; and 3dly, to 

Tiberius, 434, Her debaucheries and exile, 440. 


K 


Kalendar, Roman, reformed, by direction of Julius 
Cesar, and hence called Julian Kalendar, 313. 


L 


Latins, or small states of Latium, account of the, 9. 

Laws of Ten Tables. See Decemvirs. 

Legion, Roman, account of the arrangement of the, 
31. Difference between the legion described by 
Polybius, and that of Cæsar, ib. (Note.) Com- 
fue with the Grecian Phalanx, 62. Augment- 


INDEX. 


in favour of Catiline, 175. Detected, ib., 176. 
Put to death, 177. 

Lepidus, M. Æmilius, elected consul, 147. Sets 
out for his province of Transalpine Gaul, ib. Ar- 
rives in Italy with his army; hut is routed, 148. 
Flies to Sardinia, where he dies, ib. 

Marcus Æmilius, names Cesar dictator 
275. Shares the fortunes of Antony, 331. Forms 
a coalition with him, 349. Is denounced as an 
enemy by the Senate, ib. The sentence revers- 
ed, 354. Forms a confederacy with Antony and 
Octavius, 355. Becomes the tool of these leaders, 
ib., 355. Is overlooked in a new partition of the 
empire, 369. Adheres to Octavius, 373. Issent 
to Africa, as governor, 376. Claims Sicily, 386. 
Is supplanted in the command of the army, ib. 
Retires to Italy, 387. His death, 434. 

Lex Canuleia passed, 22. - 

Licinia, first proposed, 27. Revived by Ti- 

berius Gracchus, 93. Carried into execution, 99. 

Tribonia adopted, 77. 

~——~ Sempronia passed, 95. Revived, 103. 

Sempronia judiciaria, 104. 

— Cecilia Didia, 123. 

Falcidia, 380. 

Jabo, Scribonius, entertains pretensions to the 
throne of Cesar, 456. 

Liciman law. See Ler Licinia. 

Licinius, the consul, sails to Epirus, to attack the 
Macedonians, 73. 1s partially defeated, ib. 

ie conquered by the Romans, 70. 

Lilie, in the Roman outworks, what, 241, 242. 

Line of the Roman army, 288. 

Literature, first dawning of, among the Romans, 77. 
Patronized by Mecenas, 370. 

Livia Drusilla, is married by the Emperor Augus- 
tus, 381. Her zeal for the advancement of her 
son Tiberius, 435, 444. Her death, 468. 

Livilla is married to Drusus, 464. Unites with Se- 
janus in poisoning her husband, ib. The crime 
discovered, 470. 

Lollius is defeated by the German nations, 431. 

Lucullus, consul, is opposed to Mithridates, 152. 
Defeats his army, ib. Totally routs him, 153. 
Marches into Armenia, and defeats Tigranes, 
158. Invests Tigranocerta, ib. Routs the Ar- 
menian army,ib. Takes the city,ib. A mutiny 
breaks out in the Roman army, 159. Lucullus 
superseded by Pompey, 164. Obtains a triumph 
at Rome, 181. 


——— - 


M 


Macedoma, conquered by the Romans, 75. The 
crown claimed by Andriscus, 84. Macedonia 
reduced to a Roman province, ib. See Perseus. 
Philip. 

Mecenas, Caius Cilnius, becomes of the council of 
Octavius, 370. Grants his protection to Virgil, 
ib. (Note. Presides in the administration at 
Rome, 399. Dissuades Octavius from resigning 
the sovereignty, 413. Death and character, 435. 

Melius, Sp. is put to death, 23. h 

Manlius (Capitolinus) defends the capitol against 
the Gauls, 25. Accused of aspiring to regal dig- 
nity, 26; and put to death, 27. ' 

the consul, reduces the Galatians, 69. 

Marcellus, Marcus Claudius, consul, defeats Han 
nibal at Nola, 51. 

Marcus Claudius, proposes to recall Cæsar 
from Gaul, 245. Again urges the recall, 251, 254 

Caius Claudius, elected to the consul- 
ship, 251. Delivers his sword, as consul, into 
the hands of Pompey, 255. 

sues for the consulate ten years before 
the legal age, 424. Holds the office of eedile, ib. 
His death, 425. 


i 


INDEX. 


Marius, Caius, his first appearance, 107. Is elected 
consul, 112. Admits necessitous citizens into 
the legions, ib. Prosecutes the war against Ju- 
gurtha, ıb. Defeats him, 114. Is re-elected con- 
sul, 115. Returns in triumph to Rome, ib. Sets 
out for Gaul, 116. Is elected consul a third 
time, 118; and a fourth time, ib. Routs one di- 
vision of the barbarians, 119. Is elected consul 
for the fifth time, ib. Assists Catulus in routing 
the barbarians, ib. Has a triumph along with 
Catulus, 120. Elected consul for the sixth time, 
ib. Unites his interest to that of the tribune Sa- 
turninus, ib. Acts in concert with Publius Sul- 

icius, 130. Leaves Rome upon the arrival of 
ylla, ib., 131. Returns, and joins himself to 
Cinna, 135. Is admitted into Rome, ib, 136. 
Horrid scenes of murder which follow, ib. He 
assumes the office of consul, ib. His death, 136. 

, the younger, opposes. Sylla, 138, 139. Is 
defeated at Preneste, ib. Kills himself, 140. 

Maro, Publius Virgilius. See Virgilius. 

Marseilles, city of, invested by Cesar, 245. Defeat 
of the Marseillian fleet, 269, 273. Progress of 
the siege of Marseilles, 374. Second naval de- 
feat, ib. The city yielded up to Cesar, 275. 

Massinissa joins the Roman army in Africa against 
the Carthaginians, 55. Dispossesses Syphax, and 
ascerids the Numididn throne, 56. Afterwards 
withdraws from the Roman interest, 82. 

Massacre ordered by Sylla, 140. By Octavius, 
Antony, and Lepidus, 356, 357. 

Memmius, Caius, forges an edict of senate, 226. 
Exposes the transaction, ib. : 

Merula, L. Cornelius, elected consul, 135. 

priest of Jupiter, his boldness in death, 136; 
also, 436. 

Mesopotamia. Sce Crassus. 

Messina, possession of, dispnted between the Car- 
thaginians and Romans, 37. 

Metellus Macedonicus, Quintus Cecilius, ordered 
by Labeo to be thrown from the Tarpeian rock, 
99. Saved by the interposition of another tri- 
bune, ib. ” = 

-——— Numidicus, Q. Cecilius. is elected consul, 
11). Defeats Jugurtha in Africa, ib. Opposes the 
faction of Marius and Saturninus, and is forced 
into exile, 122. Recalled by the Roman peo- 
ple, 123; and again elected to the consulate, ib. 

—-— Pius, Q. Cecilius, joins Sylla, 138. Defeats 
the army of Carbo, 139. Is elected consul, 143. 
Conducts the war against Sertorius, 149. The 
war successfully terminated, ib. Obtains a tri- 
umph, 156. l 

Creticus, Q. Cæcilius, is raised to the con- 

sulate, 157. Sets out for the island of Crete, ib. 

Reduces the Cretans, 164. Obtains a triumph 

at Rome, 181. 

Nepos, the tribune, proposes to invite Pom- 

pey and his army to Rome, 181. His motion 

overruled, 182. Flies to the camp of Pompey, ib. 

Cornelius Scipio. See Scipio, Metellus. 

Milo, tribune, prosecutes Clodius for his crimes, 
204. Opposes the election of Clodius as edile, 
209. Is accused by Clodius, but acquitted, ib. 
Is tried for tne murder of Clodins, 234. Is con- 
demned, and retires to Marseilles, 235. At- 
tempts to take possessioti of Capua, 291. 

Minutius Rufits opposes Hannibal, 49. 

Mithrida‘es, king of Pontus, involves himself in a 
war with the Romans, 129, 130. Orders a ge- 
neral massacre of the Roman citizens in Asia, 
133. His army defeated by Sylla, near Chzro- 
nea, ib.; and afterwards at Orcliomenos, 134. He 
treats with Sylla, 136, 137. Joins Sertorius, and 
prepares to make war on the Romans, 148. De- 
clares war, and takes possession of Cappadocia 
and Phrygia, 151. Overruns Bithynia. 152. Lays 
siege to the 30 of Cyzicus, ib. Hie army 16 


489 


destroyed or dispersed, ib. Collects a new ar- 
my, ib. Is totally routed by Lucullus, 153. Or. 
ders his women to be put to death, ib. His flight 
to Armenia, ib. Again makes head against the 
Romans, 1€0. Is routed by Pompey, 1€5. Forms 
lans to renew the war, 1€8. Puts a period to 

his life, ib. His character, 1€9. 

Mons Sacer, secession of a great body of Ple- 
beians to the, 15. 

Mummius, the Roman consul, reduces Corinth, E5 

Munda, battle of, 315. 

Mutina, siege of, by Antony, 336. Battle at, 347. 
Abandonment of the siege by Antony, ib. 


N 
Nabis, tyrant of Lacedemon, curbed by the Ro- 


mans, 64. 

Nasica, Scipio, overthrows the faction of Tiberius 
Gracchus, 97. 

Navy, Roman, origin of the, 38. 

Nero, Tiberius Claudius, retires into Sicily, 374 
Livia is separated from him, 381. 

Tiberius Claudius. See Tiberius. 

— Domitius Ahenobarbus, succeeds to the so- 
vereignty, 477. His weakness and folly, 1b., 
and death, ib. 

Nervii, the, one of the Belgic nations, resolve to op- 
pose Cesar, 205. Are routed by him, 206. 

Nobles and Commons, distinction of, 91. 

Nonius, Sufenas, elected tribune, but slain by the 
faction of Saturninus, 121. 

Norbanus, C. Junius, consul, defeated by Sylla, 139. 
Kills himself, 141. 

Numantia, in Spain, obstinate resistance made by 
the inhabitants against the Romans, 86. Siege 
of Ta stronghold, 87. Its reduction by famine, 
ib., 88. 

Numidia. (See Syphazr.) Contest for the crown 
of, 108. (See Jugurtha.) Numidia becomes a 
Roman province, 310. 


(0) 


Oaths, sacredness of, among the Romans, 77. 

Octavia, is married to Mark Antony, 377. She goes 
to Greece to meet her husband, 391. Antony 
forbids her advance, ib. Her prudent conduct 
392. Her death, 436. 

Octavius, M. the tribune, opposes the Licinian law 
94. Is degraded frorn the tribumate, 95. 

Caius, (Cesar Augustus,) grand-nephew 

of Julius Cæsar, his first public appearance, 333. 
Sets out from Apollonia for Italy, 334. Assumes 
Cesar’s name and designation, ib. Arrives at 
Rome, ib. Holds a conference with Antony, ib., 
335. Declares against him, 337. Advances to 
Rome, ib. His situation and address, 338. Named 
propretor, 343. Marches against Antony. 344 
Antony is defeated, 347. Sues for the office of 
consul, 350. A deputation of soldiers demand 
the consulate for him, 351. Itis granted, ib. He 
enters Rome with his army, 352. Enters on 
office, 353. Repeals the acts of attainder against 
Antony and Lepidus, 354. Has an interview 
with these leaders, and forms a ccalition with 
them, 355. They concert a list of proscriptions, ib. 
He passes into Greece against Brutus and Cas- 
sius, 364. Tries to provoke a general engage- 
ment, ib., 367. Totally defeats the republican 
army, ib. Makes a new partition of the empire 
with Antony, 369. Sets out for Rome, ib. His 
arrival, 370. Connives at the excesses of his sol- 
diery, ib., 371. ‘Takes the field against Antonius 
the consul, and Fulvia the wife of Antony, ib. 
Shuts up Antonius in Perusia, 373. Dreadfu! 
executions which follow, ib. Forms with Anie 
ny a new partition of the empire, 376. Con- 


490 


cludes a treaty of peace with Sextus Pompeius, 
377—379. Repudiates his wife Scribonia, and 
marries Livia Drusilla, 381. Renews the war 
with Sextus, ib. Is defeated by him, 382. 
Lands in Sicily with a part of his army, 383. 
His transports defeated and dispersed, 384. He 
takes Mylæ, 385. His fleet defeats that of 
Pompeius, ib. He becomes master of Sicily, 
1b. Strips Lepidus of his share of the sove- 
reignty, ib. Amount of his forces, 387. Mutin- 
ous spirit among them quelled, ib., 388. He 
returns to Italy, ıb. His masterly policy there, 
ib. Rupture with Antony, 394. Prepares for 
war, ib. Embarks for Greece with an army, 396. 
Takes his’ station in Epirus, ib. Prepares his 
fleet for action, 397. ‘Totally defeats Antony, 
398. Continues to reside some time in Asia, 399. 
Is met at Brundusium by the senate and magis- 
trates, ib. Sets out for Egypt, ib. Defeats the 
enemy, 401. Has an interview with Cleopatra, 
402. Returns to Rome, 409. His three tri- 
umphs, ib. Appropriates exclusively to himself 
the title of nperator, 411. Holds a consultation 
with Agrippa and Mæcenas about resigning the 
sovereignty, ib., 412. Purges the senate of ob- 
noxious members, ib. His pretended resignation 
of the sovereignty, 413—415. Agrees to con- 
tinue to hold a share of the government, 416. 
The senate bestow on him the title of Augustus, 
417. His political establishment as emperor, ib., 
418. His domestic establishment, 419. Extent 
of his empire, ib., 420. His family and court, 
422. Passes into Gaul, and afterwards resides 
some time in Spain, 423. His illness and- reco- 
very, 425. Sets out for Egypt, 427. Returns to 
Rome, 429. Reforms the list of senators, ib. Re- 
peas the farce of aresignation, ib. Revives the 
aw for encouraging marriage, 430,431. Spends 
two years in Gaul, 432. Returns to Rome, 433. 
Acts as principal mourner- at the funeral of 
Agrippa, 434. Assumes the title of Flamen Di- 
alis, or Priest of Jupiter, 436. Resumes the go- 
vernment for ten years more, 437. Makes inno- 
vations respecting criminal trials, ib., 438. Re- 
assumes the office of ordinary consul, 440. 
Banishes his daughter Julia, ib. Again resumes 
the government for ten years longer, 441. Begins 
to languish and decay, 442. Builds an imperial 
mansion on the Palatine hill, ib. Is thrown into 
alarm and dejection, 445, 446. His amusements 
in his old age, 447. Enters on a fifth period of 
ten years, ib. Assumes Tiberius as his associate 
in the empire, 448, Dies, ib. His will, 449. 
His character, 450, 451. 
Orchomenos, battle of, 134. 


P 


Palatium, the height on which the Romans first 
took post, 11. 

Pansa, C. Vibius, named to the consulate, 341. 
Marches towards Gaul, 347. Is wounded, ib. 
Dies, 348. 

Parthians, are invaded by the Romans under Cras- 
sus, 222. Partially defeat Crassus, 230. Pass 
the Euphrates, to expel the Romans from Syria, 
252. Are routed by Caius Cassius, ib. Again 
invade and overrun Syria, 379. Are defeated 
by Ventidius, ib. Cut off a part of the army of 
Antony, 389. Their uncommon method of car- 
rying on war, ib., 390. (Note.) They send a re- 
ference to the Romans respecting the succession 
to the throne of Parthia, 423. 

Patricians and Plebeians, division of the Roman 
people into, 11. ‘The Patricians become posgess- 
ed of a complete aristocracy, 14. Patricians and 
Plebeians frequently stood in the relation of cre- 
ditor and debtor, as well as of patron and client, 


INDEX. 


ib. (Note.) The Patricians necessitated to ad 
mit the Plebeians into several of their rights and 
privileges, until the distinction of Patrician and 
Plebeian becomes merely nominal, 16, 21, 22, 23, 
27, 28. See Plebeians. 

Patrons and Clients, distinctions among the origina’ 
Romans, 11. 

Paulus, L. Emilius, elected to the consulship, 49 
Takes the field against Hannibal, ib. Is slainat 
the battle of Cann, 50. 

Emilius, son of the former, elected consul, 

74. Prosecutes the war against Perseus, ib. De- 

feats him at Pydna, ib. 


Pedius, Q. named consul, 353. Moves and carries 


a repeal of the act of attainder against Antony 
and Lepidus, 354. Dies, 356. 

Peneus, action on the, 73. 

Perseus, son of Philip, ascends the throne of Mace- 
donia, 71. Prepares to assert the independence 
of his kingdom, 72. Partially defeats the Ro- 
mans, 73. Offers to treat with them ; but his ad- 
vances are rejected,ib. Is routed at Pydna, 75; 
and taken prisoner, ib. 

Perusia, in Italy, siege of, 373. 

Petreius, appointed one of Pompey’s lieutenants in 
Spain, 266. His fidelity and attachment, 271. 
He is obliged to capitulate to Cesar, 272. 

Petronius, his satire applicable to the court of the 
Roman Emperors, 478. 

Phalanz, Grecian, compared with the Roman le- 
gion, 62. 

Pharnaces invades Armenia, 296. Defeats Domi- 
ae Calvinus, ib. Attacks Cesar, but is routed, 

Pharsalia, great battle of, 288. Comparative loss 
on the different sides in the action, 289. 

Philip, King of Macedonia, unites with the Cartha. 
ginians against the Romans, 51. Makes peace 
with the Romans, 55; but furnishes assistance to 
the Carthaginians, ib. Attacks Athens, 6l. Is 
defeated near Phere in Thessaly, 62. Obliged 
to accept of the terms of the Romans, 63. Joins 
the Romans, 67. His death, 71. 

Philippi, battle of, 368. 

Pidna. See Pydna. 

Pirates, their numbers and audacity in the Italian 
seas, 160. Are dispersed and ruined by Pom- 
pey, 164 

Piso, Calpurnius, the consul, his campaign against 
Jugurtha, 109. His treaty with that prince, ib. 
His success in Macedonia, 118. 

appointed governor of Syria, 459. Is tried 
for the murder of Germanicus, ib. Puts himself 
to death, 461. 

Plancus marches to the support of Lepidus against 
Antony, 346. Retreats, 349. Joins the party of 
the Triumvirate, 354. Is named consul, 360. 


| Plautius, the tribune, obtains the enactment of se- 


veral useful laws, 128. 

Plebeians held in abject degradation by the Patri- 
cians, 14. They retire, in a body, to the Mons 
Sacer, 15. A treaty concluded, by which the 
tribunitian power is established, 16. They ex- 
tend their powers, 21. Are found entitled to 
enact laws, ib. Procure the abrogation of the 
law against their intermarriage with the nobles, 
22. Obtain a right to be elected Military Tri 
bunes with consular power, ib.; afterwards, to 
be elected consuls, 27; and, at last, fill all the 
offices of State along with the Patricians, 28. See 
Patricians. ` 

Pleminius, his great abuse of power at Locri, 54. 
Is ordered prisoner to Rome, 55. 

Policy of the Romans, 70, 85. 

Polybius, the historian, a prisoner in Italy for se- 
venteen years, 84. y. 
Pompey, Cneius, (surnamed the Great,) birth of, 

118.° Joins himself to Sylla, 138. Quells the 


INDEX. 


disturbances in Sicily, 141. Finishes the war in 
Africa, 143. Returns to Rome, and obtains a 
triumph, 144. Is pronounced the Great by Sylla, 
ib. His desire of personal consideration, ib. Is 
sent to Spain, 149. Is partially defeated, ib. But 
afterwards successfully finishes the war, ib. Ob- 
tains a triumph at Rome, 156.  Procures his 
election as consul along with Crassus, ib. His 
deportment as a private citizen, 157. His dis- 
simulation, 161. (See Catulus, Lutatius, Gabi- 
nius.) Is invested with the supreme command 
over all the fleets and armies of the Republic for 
three years, 163. Appointed to supersede Lu- 
cullus in Pontus, &c. 164, Routs the army of 
Mithridates, 165. Marches into Syria, 167. 
Takes possession of Jerusalem, ib., 168. Be- 
sieges and reduces the Temple, ib. Enters the 
Holy of Holies, ib. Sets out for Europe, 169. 
Arrives at Rome, 183. His splendid triumph, 
184. Political manoeuvres, 187, 188. Unites 
his interest to that of Cæsar and Crassus, ib. His 
marriage to Julia, 195 Is vested with procon- 
sular power, 207. Visits Cesar at Lucca, where 
these leaders renew their confederacy, 211. 
Elected to the consulate the second time, 214. 
Secures to himself the province of Spain for five 
years, 215. But remains in Italy, ib. His in- 
trigues at Rome, 220. Death of Julia, 224. Pro- 
posal to name him Dictator, 228. He marries 
Cornelia, 231. Is named sole consul, 233. His 
conduct, 235. Renewal of his government in 
Spain for other five years, ib. Assumes Metel- 
lus Scipio for his colleague in the consulate, 244. 
His jealousy of Cesar, 249. Is invested, by the 
Senate, with the supreme command over the 
treasury and forces of the Republic, 257. Re- 
tires to Canna on the approach of Cesar to Rome, 
259. Falls back to Brundusium, 261. Embarks 
for Epirus, 262. The army of Pompey in Spain 
is subdued by Cesar, 272, 273. Pompey gathers 
a large force in the East, 277; and collects a 
fleet, ib. Chooses a dilatory war, 281. Sur- 
pee and carries one of Cesar’s stations, 284. 

efeats him, 286. Directs his march towards 
Thessaly, ib. Encamps near the village of Phar- 
salus, 287. Is routed in the battle of Pharsalia, 
288, 289. Flies to Egypt, 290. 1s murdered by 
order of Ptoloiny the king, ib. 

Pompey, Cneus, eldest son of Pompey the Great, 
heads an army in Spain, in opposition to Cesar, 
314. Is defeated and slain, 315. 

-—-—— Sextus, younger son of Pompey the Great, 
holds out, in the province of Sicily, against the 
usurpalions of the second triumvirate, 361. Cal- 
culates on securing the possessions of Sicily and 
Sardinia, 373. Joins himself to Antony, 375. 


491 


Pretorian bands, first appointed, 421. Assume 
the disposal of the sovereignty of the empife, 
478. Are broke by Galba, but succeeded hy 
others, 479. 

Principles, second order in the original Roman le 
gion, 31. 

Proscription, origin of this name and practice, 141. 
Proscriptions of Sylla,ib. Of the second Trium- 
virate, Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus, 356—358. 

Publius Sextius, is the first plebeian consul, 28. 

Punic war, origin of the first, 37. Termination, 38. 
Origin of the second, 42. (See Hannital. Scipio 
Africanus.) Termination, 59. Commencement 
of the third, 80. Its conclusion, 83. 

Pydna, battle of, 75. 

Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, marches an army into 
Italy, 32. Gains some partial victories over the 
Romans, ib., 33. Leaves Italy, and returns 
home, ib. 


Q 
Quesitor, president of the criminal court at Rome, 
89. 
Questor, account of the office of, 23. 
R 


Rabirius, Caius, is active in suppressing the faction 
of Saturninus, 122. Brought to trial as an ac- 
complice in the death of Saturninus, 172. The 
trial put off, and the prosecution dropt, 173. 

Regulus, Atilius, the consul, is made a captive in 
Africa, 38. 

Religion, state of, among the original Romans, 12. 

Revolutions in the Roman state: change from a mo- 
narchy to a republic, 13. From a republic to an 
empire, 311—318. 

Rhodes, island of, is reduced by Cassins, 362. 

Rhone, passage of the, by Hannibal, 44, 45. 

Rome, city of—Extent of the city under the mo- 
narchy, 13. Immensity of the common sewers, 
ib. (Nole.) City burned by the Gauls, 25. Re- 
building of the city, 26. Streets first paved with 
stone, 76. Rome taken by Sylla, 131. The city 
invested by Cinna and Marius, 135; capitulates, 
ib. The Capitol accidentally burned down, 139. 
Julius Cæsar ornaments the city with various 
public works, 225. The aqueducts begun b 
Cæsar, completed by Antony and Octavius, 378. 
The great common sewers cleansed, and public 
baths established, 393, 394. The city adorned 
by many public buildings, 424. Is overflowed 
by inundation of the Tiber, 443. 

Rullus, Servilius, tribune, proposes his agrarian 
law, 171. Rejected, 172. 


Blocks up the ports of Italy, 377. Is invited to a | Rutilius, P. retires in extle to Smyrna, 125. 


ersonal conference with Octavius and Antony, 
ib.; which ends in a treaty of peace, 378. He 
returns to Sicily, ib. Prepares for war against 
Octavius, 381. Defeats him at sea, 382. Is de- 
feated in his turn by Agrippa, 384. Destroys the 
transports of Octavius, ib. His own fleet is to- 
tally defeated by Agrippa, 385. His flight to 
Lesbos, ib. Hesues for protection from Antony, 
390. Is refused, and put to death, 391. 
Pontus, kingdom of. See Mithridates. ` 
Porcia, the daughter of Cato, and wife of Brutus, 
her resolution and constancy, 323. Her death, 369. 
k ect, or governor of a province, first appointed, 


agers Annone, duties of this occasional officer, 
2 


Prator, institution of the office of, 28. Confined 
to the Patrician order, ib. A second prætor ap- 
pointed, 39. The number of prætors augmented 
to six, 89. Persons pass through the office, in 
order to acquire the hereditary title, 383 


S 


Sabinus, Titus, his death, 467. 

Saguntum, siege of, by Hannibal, 43. 

Sallustius, Crispus, made prætor, 298. Acts under 
Cæsar in a military capacity, 301. Is made go- 
vernor of Numidia, 310. 

Samnites, their character, 32. They maintain an 
arduous struggle against the Romans, ib. 

Sardinia, sovereignty of, is acquired by the Ro- 
mans, 40. 

Saturninus, Apuleius, the tribune, is elected to the 
office of tribune, 121. Proposes several popular 
acts, ib. Is elected tribune a third time, 122. 
lis death, ib. > 

Scipio, Publius Cornelius, the consal, marches 
against Hannibal, 45. Arrives at the Rhone, 
and embarks for Etruria, ib., 46. Meets Hanni- 
hal on the Ticinus, where his cavalry is defeated, 
ib. Ts joined by his colleague, Sempronius, and 


£32 


ws arrey ib The Romans defeated, 47. See 
Fhannirae 

Sea Atricanus, Publius Cornelius, son of the 
lurmer, makes his appearance, 52. Is appointed 
to the chief command of the army in Spain, 53. 
Takes New Carthage, ib. Applies himself to 
the study of Grecian literature, 55. Sails for 
Africa, and lands at Hippo, ib, Sets fire to the 
Carthaginian camp, and defeats the army, 56. 
Invests Tunis and Utica, ib. Raises the block- 
ade, and advances to the plain of Zama, 57. 
Holds a personal conference with Hannibal, ib. 
Gains a complete victory at Zama, 58; and dic- 
tates terms of peace to the Carthaginians, 59. 
Receives the title of Africanus, 65. Passes into 
Asia against Antiochus, 68. Defeats the forces 
et Asia, ib. Dies in a species of voluntary exile, 
l. 


Asiaticus, Lucius Cornelius, brother of 
Africanus, is elected consul, 68. Totally de- 
feats Antiochus in Asia, ib. 

——— Publius Æmilianus, son of Æmilius Paulus, 
and adopted grandson of Africanus, is appointed 
to the chief command against Carthage, 82. Re- 
duces Carthage, 83. Es set against the Numan- 
tians in Spain, 87. Subdues them. 88. Opposes 
the Licinian law, 97. His death, 99. 

——— Nasica. See Nasica. 

Cornelius Metellus, son of Nasica, becomes 
the collecgue of Pompey in the consulate, 214. 
Commands the main body of the army at Phar- 
salia, 288. Flies to Africa, 291. Commands the 
army of the republic there, 2933. Is defeaʻed by 
2 at Thapsus, 305, 397. He kills himself, 

10. : 

Segra, or Sicoris, campaign of Cæsar on the, 
2 56—273. 

Sgjanus, Ælius, his mission to the mutinous legions 
on the Danube, 4533. Becomes the confidential 
favourite of Tiberius, 463, 464. Applies to the 
Emneror for permission to marry the widow of 
Dr iss, 435. Is amused with an ambiguous an- 
swor, ib. Receives the highest marks of fayour 
from Tiberius, 459. The Einperor, however, re- 
solves on h's rain, ib. Denounces hiin to the 
Senate as guilty of treason, 470; who condemn 
him to death, 471. Cruel fate of his infant chil- 
dren, ib. 

Senorov-ets, Tiberinus Longus, the consul, joins his 
army to that of Scipio, in order to repel Hanui- 
bal, 45. Is defeated] by the Carthaginians, 47. 

—— ———. the Roman proronsl, defeated in 
Spain by the natives, 64. His death, ib. 

Senu'e, account of the, under the monarchy, 11. 
Un ler the aristocracy, 14. Restored afier the 
us aration of the decemvirs, 21. Review of the 
constitution of the Sena'e, 28. Extent of their 
powers, 23. Influence as adminis'rators of the 
treasury, 30. (.Vo’e.) Secrecy andl despatch of 
the Senate, 79. Character of 91. The Senate 
reduced to a mere form, 121. Regains the as- 
cendant, 123. Senate-house burned by the peo- 
ple, 232. The Sena‘e leaves Rome, 259. Is re- 
presented at Thessalonica, 277. Account of the 
Senate which met at Utica, 298. The Senate 
comes to be entirely modelled by Angustus, 429. 
Undergoes a continual decay, 433. Fines for 
non-attendance increased, 436. Complete de- 
gradation of the Senate, 472. 

Sertorius, harbors the Marian party in Spain, 
148. Defeats Pompey, 149. Is betrayed and as- 
sassinated, ib. 

Sewers, common, immensity of those at Rome, 
and conjectures respecting their antiquity, 13. 
( Note.) 

Sertus, Publius, the first plebeian raised to the 
dignity of consul, 28. 

Iwona See Segr. è 


INDEX. 


Sigonzus, correction of a passage in his treatise, 30 
(Note.) — i 
Sicily, revolt of the slaves in, 88. Another revolt 
118. Becomes the refuge of Pompeius Sextus, 

373. Campaign of Octayius jn, 384, 385. 

Silver, first coined by the Romans, (U. C. 485) 33. 

R ral Mountains of, 68. ; 

Sophonista, daughter of Hasdrubal, stipulates with 
the king of Numidia, to aid the Carthaginians, 55. 

Spain, ancient natives of, their character, 42. Ha- 
milcar forms a settlement in Spain, ib. (See 
Hannibal.) Sempronius the proconsul defeated 
in Spain, 64. Progress of the Romans in the 
conquest of Spain, 69, 70. Further progress, 86. 
Divided into Western and Eastern provinces, jb. 
Reduction of Lusitania, the western province, ib.; 
and of Numantia, a principal stronghold in the 
eastern province. 88. Pompey sent against Ser 
torius in Spain, 149. (See Sertorius.) State of 
Spain under the government of Pompey, 266. 
Several warlike cantons retain their indepen- 
dence, 423. Are reduced, ib. Spain is sepa- 
rated into three governments, 424. 

Spar‘acus, leader of the revolted gladiators, defeats 
the Roman consuls, 155. Is routed, and himself 
killed by Crassus, ib. 

Stimili, in Roman outworks, what, 242. 

Sloics, account of their principles, 179. 

Strabo, Cneius Pompeius, holds a triumph, 129. 

Sulpicius, consul, is sent to the relief of Athens, 62 

— Publius, tribune, his turbulent character, 
130. His death, 131. 

Sumpluary laws of the Romans, remarks on the, 
76. ‘These laws revived, 90. Further account 
of them, 118. Sumptuary regulations of Julius 
Cesar, 317. 

Sage ion of the ancient Romans, 6], 77. 

Sylla, the qivestor, prosecutes the war against Jn- 
gurilia, 113. Goes to the court of Bocchus, 114. 
Is elected prætor, 125. Is sent into Asia, ib. Is 
elected consul, 129. Prepares for war with Mi- 
thridates, ib. Is recalled, 130. Marches in a 
hostile manner to Rome, 131. Takes the city, 
ib. Sets out for Asia, 132. Takes Athens, 133. 
Defeats the army of Mithridates, near Cheronea, 
ib.; and again, at Orchomenos. 134. Receives 
the submission of Mithrida‘es, 137. Sets sail for 
Italy, ib. Defeats Norbanus the consul, 139 
Defeats the young Marius, ib. Enters the city, 
140. Routs the Marian party, ib. Orders a 
massarre, ib. Procures his nomination as dicta- 
tor, 141. His policy, 142. Reforms in the com- 
monwealth introduced by him, ib., 143. Holds 
triumphs, ib. Resigns the dicta‘orship, 144. His 
character, &c. ib. Death, 145; and obseqnies, 
ib. His character contrasted with that of Julius 
Cesar, 318. 

Syphax, king of Numidia, joins with the Carthagi. 
nians, 56. Loses his throne, ib. 

Sypylus, Mountains of. See Sipylus. 

Syria becomes a Roman province, 167. The de- 
pendencies of Judea and Celesyria annexed to 
it, 168, Is invaded by the Parthians, 379. They 
are defeated, ib, See Antiochus, Crassus. De- 
metrius. Gabinus. 


r 


Tes, twelve, of the Roman law, prepared by the 
decemvirs, 20. Remarks on the clause by which 
a father may sell his child, ib. (Note.) 

Tapsus, battle of. See Thapsus. : 

Tarentum, city of, applies to Pyrrhus for protection 
against the Romans, 32. Falls into their hands, ib 

Tecinus, action on the, 46. 

Tectosages. See Cimbri. | 

Temple at Jerusalem, besieged and reduced by 
Pompey, 167, 168 


INDEX. 


Teutones. See Cimbn. 

Thapsus, battle of, 306. 

Theatre at Rome, condemned, as likely to become 
a source of corruption, 89. Theatre of Pompey 
opened, 214. 

Thermopylæ, battle of, in which Antiochus is de- 
feated by the Romans, 67. 

Thessaly, campaign of Pompey and Cesar in, 
278—289. i 

Thrasimenus, lake, 47 - 

Tiberins, Claudius Nero, sues for the consulate, 
424. Holds the office of questor, ib. Is sent 
with a commission to Armenia. 428. Elected 
prætor, 429. is advanced in the confidence of 
the Emperor, 434; and marries his daughter 
Julia, ib. Retires to the island of Rhodes, 439. 
Is recalled ; and is adopted by the Emperor, 441. 
Reduces the barbarians in Dalmatia, 445. The 
tribunitian power prolonged in his person for 
five years, 417. Is associated with Augustns in 
the empire, 448. Assumes the reins of govern- 
ment, 452. Puts Agrippa to death, ib. Sends 
his son Drusus to Panonia, 453, 454. Character 
and manners of Tiberius, 457; also, 461—464. 
Becomes jealous and distrustful, ib., 465. Fixes 
his residence ın the island of Caprese, 466. Ac- 
cuses Agrippina and her eldest son Nero before 
the Senate, 468. The Senate hanish them, ib. 
Tiberius confers the highest marks of favour on 
Sejanus, 469; but effects his ruin, 470. His cru- 

lty, 472, 473 His odions life in private, ib. 
His death, 475. 

F'iberius Gracchus. See Gracchus. 

“igranes, king of Armenia, refuses to deliver up 
Mithridates to the Romans, 157. Is defeated by 
Lucullus, 158. Is again defeated, ib. Applies 
for aid to the king of Parthia, ib. Casts himself 
on the mercy of Pompey, 165. 

Treasury, public, directly under the administration 
of the Senate, 29. 

Trebia, battle of the, 47. 

Trials, Criminal, regulations respecting, 233, 234. 
Important innovation by Augustus, 437. 

Triarii, body of reserve, in the original Roman le- 

ion, 31. 

Tibes account of this division of the Roman citi- 
zens, 11. 

-——— of the city, notice of, 92. 

Tribune, the office of, first instituted, 16. Nature 
of it explained, ib. ‘The persons of the Tribunes 
held inviolable, ib. Their number fixed at ten, 
ib. , Great abuses take place in the exercise of 
the tribunitian power, 130. Restraints imposed, 
142. These remove! by Pompey, 156. 

Tribunes, Military, Plebeians admitted to be elect- 
ed, 22. 

Triumph, institution and nature of the, 12, 24. 

Trinmviraie, combination of Cæsar, Pomney, and 
Crassus, so called, 188. They renew their con- 


493 


federacy, 211. (See Cesar Crassus Pompey. 
Second Triumvirate, Octavius, Antony. and 
Lepidus, atrocity of the articles of their agree. 
ment. 354. Character of each, 356. (See Amo- 
ny. Lepidus. Octavius.) s 


U 


Utica, in Africa, becomes the station of Cato after 
the battle of Pharsalia, 293. Cæsar takes posses- 
sion of the town, 309. 

Uxellodunum, a fortress in Gaul, is besieged and 
reduced by Cesar, 248. 

Uzita, in Africa, besieged by Cesar, 303. The 
siege raised, 304. 


vV 


Valerius, Manius, is chosen Dictator, 15. 

Varro, C. Terentius, elected to the consulship, 49. 
Is eager to give the Carthaginians battle at Can- 
nz,ib. Is defeated, 50; yet honourably received 
at Rome, 51. 

appointed one of Pompey’s lieutenants in 
Spain, 266. 

Veia, city of, is besieged for ten years; reduced, 
and its citizens enslaved, by the Romans, 24. 

Velites, or light-armed infantry, their service, 31. 

ree name for the statutory crime of poison 
ing. 17. 

Ventidins, the heutenant of Antony, defeats the 
Parthians, and expels them from Syria, 379. Is 
honoured with a triumph at Rome, 3&8. 

Vercingetoriz heads the Gauls in opposing Cesar, 
237. His cavalry is routed by Cæsar, 241. He 
is surrounded and cooped up by the Romans at 
Alesia, 241, 242. Again routed by Cesar, 243. 
Is taken and put to death, 244, 312. 

Vespasian raised to the sovereignty, 479. 

Vellins, his supposed conspiracy against Pompey, 
195. His death, ib. 

Viriathus defends Lusitania for ten years against 
the Romans, but is at last assassinated, &6. 

Virgilius, Publius Maro, protected by Mæcenas, 
370. (Nole.) 

Virginia is killed by her own father, to prevent her 
dishonour by Appius Claudius, 21. 


X 


Xantippus, the Spartan, totally routs the Roman 
army in Africa, 38. 

Xanthus, storm of, by Brutus, 362. The inhabit 
ants perish by their own hande ib. 


Y 


Zama, great battle of, 58. 


THE END 


—- =~ 


— =- 


So L 
n ʻ 


J 


m o 


- 
DU 


| b 


il ini inv ope naw 


4 | ; à xj |] 
l 4 i ey A a i i 
Mil Ii ji n E si OMRU ai ui 
TE 
Aa he K M | A n. 
< I J bi: K IN " M i 


